OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 




INTRODUCTORY. 

A WINDOW IN THB SKY. 

|T happened^ according to the learned Drl 
Lempriere, who wrote in ancient days, long 
before the industrious William Smith fiad 
1»eg^ his never-ending but excellent compilations, 
or the magnanimous Anthon had determined^ with 
Transatlantic and auctorial boldness, to plunder all 
the British authors he could lay finger on, that 
Jupiter summoned his God-coimcil to examine a 
new work of his. ^Man. 

Thus our artists at the present degenerate age. 
for, as we all know, all ages, when present, have 
been and are degenerate . sunmion their Mends to 
debate, praise, criticise . ^but never to blame . ^the 



2 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOJTS. 

new picture thejr are about to send in to the Royal 
Academy EzliibitioiL 

With all their charmay yet, as being man-created, 
there ia something extremely earthy about the old 
mythologies^ although not so much so that any 
scholar would not regret their beauties being 
mauled and spoiled by the ruthless burlesque- 
writer ; but yet, in the times when Jupiter was 
king, and great Pan was no^dead, they who usurped 
hearen, in the wild imaginings of the poet, were 
so near to man himself that they might have been 
supposed to have spoken thus : . 

'* An't please your Majesty," said Neptune, with 
a rough voice, as if the waves and the sea-breezes 
had somewhat tried his kingship, " this Man of 
yours is a noble work, but he will never do for the 
sea. With the land, now, he may succeed. He 
can grub up the earth with those hands of his ; he 
can walk upon those shapely but somewhat thin 
legff there ; but as to living at sea, in sea, or on 
sea, why, a cap-full of wind would blow him to 
nothing, and a good sou'-wester would hurry him 
off the face of the waters. Avast there ! .ZElolus . 
what say you P" 

The monarch of the winds submitted that Jupiter 
had made a pretty toy, but that he was somewhat 



INTRODUCTORY. 3 

of his captain's opinion. ^' Captain^ or Admiral 
Neptune, indeed, would perhaps prefer a walrus, 
sea-horse, a whale, or even a shark ; but he, .^lus, 
liked the look of the man, only he was too much 
like a big bird with all his feathers blown o£P." 

"Or like a forked radish," cried Pan; "evi- 
dently weak and feeble, and not particularly good- 
looking. Why had he not horns like a bull or a 
goat, to defend himself P Of course, when he came 
to inhabit the earth, he must fight. He knew of 
a lion^ which all the beasts had elected king, and 
a good loud roar from him would make Man shake 
on the very soles of his feet. By the way, why did 
he have feet like the gods^ and not armed and 
covered with good horn hoo&, like the bull's and 
the goat's P" 

"Because," said Jupiter, "this forked radish, 
this bird without feathers, this animal Man, anima^ 
Hum Dux et Hex, is created for a higher destiny 
than that of the bulls and the goats, which he, 
man, should offei^up on grateful altars." And 
the king of gods and men sniffed with wide nostrils, 
as if the incense already rose to the blue ether, 
and roUed his eyes . ^large, blue, kingly, and 
eteme . with some contempt upon Pan and his 
friends. 

B 2 



'4 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Then stepped forth another of the Dii Majorum 
Gentium, with yet another by his side. They were 
Mars and Yulcan. Mars, whose armoar clanked 
as he walked on the crystal pavement of Jupiter's 
palace, said that Man was a braye fellow of his 
inches, and that he would teach him to war and to 
fight, and that, no doubt, in the after years, he 
would give some accoimt of his prowess. " Aha !" 
cried he, as Man's eyes sparkled at his gestures, for 
as yet Man understood not the large utterance of 
the gods . '' aha ! my friend, we shall drill you into 
ranks, and form you into the phalanx, and marshal 
you into armies, and you shall do glorious deeds in 
battle, and worship me." 

" Ay, ay," said Vulcan, with a short dry cough, 
as one burnt up from being at the forge, and with 
a live spark in his throat which all the nectar he 
had taken had failed thoroughly to put out . " ay, 
ay. Mars ; I will teach him something useful. 
You gods here are above me ; you will not soil 
your delicate fingers by examining the riches of 
the earth ; but I will teach Man rare secrets. He 
shall know where diamonds lie . whence the fresh- 
lets of water spring . ^where the red copper, and 
the pure white silver, and the yellow gold lie in 
countless treasures ; but, chief of all, I will give 



INTRODUCTORY. 5 

him two servants . Coal and Iron ; and with these 
he shall tame the earth, and travel the sea, and 
fight and subdue all your animals, Pan, weak as he 
is. I like your work, Jupiter . ^he is the last and 
beiBt ; and, by ihi^ way, while I am about it, I will 
just call my wife Yenus to look at him : like the rest 
of her sex up here, she is fond of something new." 

^'Last and best,'' said Jupiter, with a smile; 
''nor quite the last, nor quite the best. He wants 
a companion ; he must have a she-man about him, 
or, poor fellow! he will be miserable indeed. 
What say you, Begina et Conjtix ?^ 

" "Would you spake always so wisely, Jupiter ! 
I, too, will gift Man, but I will wait till his partner 
in earth's trials, sorrows, triumphs, and joys, such 
as they will be, is formed. But here is Mercury, 
your eloquent, expert, agile, and not over-con- 
scientious relation. Zeus hath spoken. Mercury, 
give your opinion." Upon this summons Hermes, 
son of Maia, sprang forward, delighted to have his say ; 
for, being eloquent, quick, and active-brained, the 
messenger of the gods had always a burning desire 
to deliver his opinion. He looked upon Man with 
pleasure, for he desired first to steal him, as he 
had stolen the sword of Mars, the hammer of 
Vulcan, and the very sceptre of Jupiter. '* Oh ! 



6 OTHER FE OP LIPS WINDOWS. 

Zeus," cried tlie god, using for the first time the 
Greek nomenclature, as he preferred afterwards 
Greek ways, and Greek trading and cheating . 
" you hare done well. I will teach your handy- 
work how to speak in the senate, and puzzle his 
clients in the forum. In later times I will dress 
him in a horsehair wig, and put an absurd black 
toga on him, and teach him to teU Kes, and make 
the worse appear the better reason." 

"Call you these valuable gifts?" said Mars, 
with a sneer. " You will make him a poltroon 
with your lying and thieving . 



1 your lyiiig" aiiu. imevmg 



And trading," said Mercury, with a smili 
"which indeed will lead him in a roundabout 
way to make war ; and so Vulcan will have some- 
thing to employ his smithy. Neptune will find 
him stealing along his watery kingdom on the 
outside, not like the whales and the sharks ; and 
you. Mars, will have work for Deimos and Phobos, 
or Terror and Fear ; and your gaunt sister Erys, 
whom future mortals wiU call Strife ; so that on 
many a battle-field . ^ay, even on the sea . shall 
Man's mimic thunders be heard. Blood shall be 

shed in ^" 

" Stop !" cried Athene, whom some call Minerva, 
advancing with imperial step and cold blue eyes ; 



INTRODUCTORY. 

" I will giye Man something whicli shall help to 
keep him free from such terrible folly ; and this 
shall be Wisdom/' She laid her cold hand on his 
forehead as she spoke, and Man held himself erect, 
and with proud aspiration in hi8 eyes looked more 
godlike than before. 

Next came forward Venus and the Graces, and 
gave Man Love; and Apollo, following closely 
upon the gracious Nine, promised to teach him 
Music, which would soothe, and Poetry, which 
would raise and elevate him, and make him sing 
worthily the deeds of the gods, and the noble 
doings of good men. And the teachings of the 
Sun-god, together with his promises, being ex- 
pressed in a language which Man understood.- 
for poetry is as universal as it is beautiful . so in- 
spired him that he looked more noble than before; 
and the goddesses, more generous than the gods, 
crowded round him, and told Jove that his work 
was well-nigh perfect, and that if Man could only 
beg of the Heaven King perpetual youth, he would 
be beautiful for ever. But the king of gods shook 
his ambrosial curls, and denied the gift ; and the 
hopeful eyes of Man were somewhat dimmed, 
even in youth, with the forthcoming, ever-present 
shadow of death. 



8 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

The praises of the goddesses set down all 
cavillers, and the council pronounced Jupiter's 
great work, Man, to be good, with one mocking 
exception : Momus . a kind of half-god . a father- 
less god, indeed . ^the son of Night, a carping 
critic of the worst sort, content to find fault and 
never to do. " I know all about it," he said . ^he 
had just been trying to find fault with Venus, but 
she was too beautiful; so he descended even to 
her golden sandals for abuse, and said that they 
made too much noise for the eternal quiet of the 
dwellings of the gods . " I know all about it ; 
Jupiter did not make this Man wholly; it was 
Vulcan who formed him out of clay, and Jupiter, 
who animated him, and gave him a soul, about 
which the poor fellow will dispute half his weary 
existence. Well, the creature's shaped well 
enough ; but nothing is perfect ; even Minerva's 
house, which was handsome externally and in- 
ternally, was not made moveable." Here Athene, 
the blue-eyed, looked upon the critic with a calm 
contempt. "Aha!" said Momus, seeing, even in 
that contempt, a triumph, " it is well. And this 
Man . ^let us examine him; the head and chest 
imperial, the port right royal, the arms muscular, 
the hands shapely and useful, but " 



INTRODUCTORY. 9 

For a moment the mocker stood dispirited, and, 
rubbing an obstinate and very prominent chin, 
confessed that Man was a fine work indeed. a 
very fine work. Here, again, he stopped, some- 
what puzzled. 

" But what P Son of Night !" said the indig- 
nant maker ; ** where's he imperfect P'' 

" Where does he think P" asked Momus. 

** In his brain,'' said Jove ; " whence, in my case, 
Minerva the Wise sprang forth." 

" IJmph 1" grunted Momus ; " and where does 
he feelP . ^where does he store up his hatred, 
or treasure his love P I see he has eyes ; they will 
be some indication of what is passing in his brain." 

'' He feels in his heart. What then P" said the 
king-god. 

" Jupiter, and how dull you are ! Did not 
Neptune make a bull so stupidly, that when he 
wishes to toss anybody on his horns, he is obliged 
to hold down his head, so that he cannot see whom 
he attacks ? and have you not done just as foolish 
a thing P Here you have given him a heart for 
love and hatred, two important feelings, especially 
hatred ; and by all that is beautiful, you have 
forgotten to put a window in that breast, so that 
his feelings may be discovered. Verily, even the 



10 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

King of Gods is not wise. What shall we say, 
then, O Jupiter P Shall we not cut a window in 
Man's breast, so that we may see the workings of 
his hearty and that we may make it impossible for 
him to do wrong ; for when he feels wrong, his 
fellows, seeing the tumult in his breast, shall cry 
out, as did afterwards Menander, *0 yap Oco^ 
fikerrei ae . ^Lo ! the God beholds thee !" 

Here the speech of Momus was cut short, for, 
as the story says, the whole council broke into 
derisiye laughter, and Jupiter was so incensed 
at the mocker that he turned him out of 
Olympus. 

Happily, with us, the old fables, beautiM in 
their wisdom, sweet in their hidden teachings, 
have long been overgrown by a purer, holier, 
nobler Faith. Pan is dead ! so Plutarch tells, in 
his De Oraoulorum Defectu. There is a tradition 
that, at the hour of the Saviour's agony, a great 
cry of " Pan is dead !" swept across the waves in 
the hearing of certain mariners ; and from that 
time the old oracles ceased. God had indeed re* 
assumed the reins of his power, and, writes Eliza- 
beth Barrett Browning, our greatest poetess, 
'' The vain, false gods of Hellas are silent ever- 
more ;'' yet she still adjures them : 



INTRODUCTORY, 11 

Bj your beantj, which confesBes 
Some chief Beantj conquering yon, . 
By our grand heroic guesses. 
Through your falsehood at the True, . 
He will weep not . . . . / earth shall roU 
Heir to each Gk)d's aureole . 

And Pan is dead. 

Earth outgrows the mystic fancies 
Sung beside her in her youth, 
And those d^bonnaire romances 

Sound but dull beside the truth. 

. . . . . 

Ohbist hath sent us down the angels, 
And the whole earth and the skies 
Are illumed by altar-candles 
Lit for blessed mysteries. 
Let us hold In Christian duty 
Trueit Truth the fairest Beauty I 

Pan, Pan is dead. 

But this fancy of Momus remains, and many of 
the wild stories of the gods and goddesses still 
linger, teaching us, in their way, beauty and love. 
And so it happens that the writer wishes to take 
advantage of that critical, carping, rascally fellow's 
suggestion, and to take the reader with him to 
peep into other people's windows I What shall 
we not see then ; as we look into the hearts of 
men, into their houses, into their ways and 
manners, all over this wide country and huge city? 



12 OTHER PJSOPZirS WIKDOWS. 

Something truly which will touch, amuse^ or im- 
proye us, no doubt. As we walk out early in the 
morning down pleasant Oxford Street, turning to 
the west, or returning eastward, when the sun 
lights up the healthy feces of city clerks, and the 
bright looks of the little work-girls who are going 
dieerf ully to their duty, trusting, let us hope, in 
Ood's protection, and haying humbly begged Sot 
their daily bread, earned by their daily toil ; when 
the sun lights these happy faces up, and not only 
those, but the care-beset brows of early city gen- 
tlemen, on whom the chain of gold coins hangs 
somewhat heayily . there is some pleasure for the 
thoughtful man to see the neatness with which 
Messrs. Smith's, Brown's, Robinson's, Jonson's, 
Jones', and Green's young men are dressing their 
raqpectiye windows. Shall we take a walk or so, 
reader, and peep into these windows in the day- 
time, or the cycling-time, or in the middle watches 
ot the night ? Truly, Momus had some scintilla- 
tion of wit and judgment in his cynical proposal. 
Much may be learnt eyen from our furtiye but 
obseryant glances into Other People's Windows. 



THE WINDOW WITH THE BLIND DOWN 13 




CHAPTER I. 

THE WINDOW WITH THE BLIND DOWN. 

IHERE is a window with "the blind down '' 
over the way in our street, and for some 
time the maid-servants have been diifided 
in their opinion as to whether a rich old gentleman 
has just died, or a poor young gentleman has just 
been bom. There is considerablemystery about both 
fiperations ; one the gate of death, the other that 
of life, the entrance and the exit of the poor player 
who will fret his hour upon the stage, and then 
will be seen no more. Lord Bacon thinks one 
operation just as troublesome to the subject as the 
other. Both are mysteries, hardly to be solved by 
the gossips of the street ; but, one of them haying 
already been undergone, and long forgotten by us, 
and the other being at a wide distance from all of 
us, as we think, we now and then talk about 
them* 

The mystery of the drawn blind was not long in 



14 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

being solved, notwithstanding the different and 
opposing accounts yery circumstantially delivered 
by the milkman and the greengrocer's boy, the 
first of whom inclined to the end, and the other to 
the beginning of the long journey. A cart-and- 
horse, conveying a quantity of tan, which was 
neatly spread in the street roadway before the 
house, solved the question. It was a birth after 
all« and not a death, as any one might have fore- 
told had he looked at the other windows, and at 
the white kid glove, which had before figured at 
some pleasant party, perhaps, with which, with an 
old-fashioned tenderness, the knocker had been 
muffled. 

Our opposite neighbours are Mr. and Mrs. 
Felix Straightways, a young married couple, who 
have been bold enough to face the world on less 
than the proverbial three hundred a year, and who 
have been hitherto very happy ; and the day has 
now come which no novelist cares to describe, 
ending his tale, cunning fellow, just as the lover 
is accepted, or the bride, blushing amidst her 
orange-blossoms, is given away at the altar. 

There came a time when the window of the 
room in which Felix Straightways and his bride 
slept was darkened in the daytime with a blind, 



THE WINDOW WITH TEE SLIND DOWN. 15 

through which at night-time the solitary light 
shone, calmly, quietly, and steadfastly; but not 
m(»re calmly or steadfastly than the love in the 
heart of Felix, which made him look up to that 
window and think on, and muse over, as well as 
pray for those within. 

The first time that the light burnt the long 
night through, Felix, who was nervous in the 
extreme during the whole evening, sat down in the 
dining-room with the doctor. How pale he turned 
when the latter was called away; how he knelt 
and prayed, yet scarcely so much prayed as that 
he formed fervent wishes when he was alone ; how 
he listened to the stealthy tread of the nurse 
above ; and how his ear, acutely sensible, made 
him &ncy it distinguished some cry of pain! 
Then he would start up, and be struck with the 
reflection of his own pale fieu^e in the glass, and 
would mark the lines of care and anxiety which 
seemed in their intensity to have worn themselves 
already in his cheek. 

At last, he heard the first sharp cry of his child, 
and knelt down, pressing his forehead on his 
hands, and praying with his whole heart for the wel- 
fare of the little being of which he was the father. 

The truth is . which, being plainly enough told, 



16 OTHER JPEOPLWS WINLOJFS. 

the reader has, with his usual acuteness, guessed 
already . the truth is, Mrs. Straightways had, in 
fulfilling that mission which young ladies who 
enter convents eschew, presented her husband with 
a son and heir, and that the receiver of this gift 
was going through that strange feeling which all 
family men at one period of their lives experience, 
and the best men perhaps the most acutely. 

The faint, shrill little cries were now hushed, 
the trampling overhead increased, and in a few 
moments Mr. Spatula entered the room and con^ 
gratulated Felix upon being the father of ** a fine 
boy,'' and detained him from rushing at onoe to 
hJ8 wife. 

^ But Lotty ! dear Lotty !'' he said. for the 
feeling of paternity was so strange that it found 
at present no resting-place in his breast-^** but 
dear Lotty ! how did she go through it ?'* 

"Bless you !" answered the doctor, " as they all 
do. like a heroine. Ah, sir, it's woman's pro- 
vince to suffer pain ; they beat us there. She had 
a capital time of it. But now sit down and make 
me a glass of grog. I shall stay here some little 
time ; the nurse will come and tell you when you 
may see Mrs. Straightways." 

Felix, with an intense feeling of relief, does as 



TEE WINDOW WITS TEE BLIND DOWN 17 

the good-humoured doctor bids him, and makes 
also a glads for himself; but he camiot drink it . 
he is nervous and excited. He scarcely knows 
what to do ; but he joins in the conversation with 
an absent air, till Mrs. Chitterling rings the bell, 
and the servant enters with the message that 
^' Nurse sends her compliments, and please, sir, 
you may come and see the baby.'* 

What author is there amongst us who shall 
rightly describe the feelings of one who, for the 
first time in his life, beholds his child P What 
memory is there so acute that it shall jot down 
every thick-thronging fancy, and note every 
impulse ? or what brain is there so cool that it 
shall count and analyse each pulsation of the 
heart? One cannot describe the indescribable^ 
We are, at best, but weak creatures ; some joys 
which we experience are too astounding . ^some 
griefs too sharp ; they go beyond the measure of 
humanity, and of them time bears little record . 
save where, perhaps, a deadening blank occurs. 

So we will let that pass, and watch Felix as he sits 
by the side of his wife, who holds, for the first 
time in her life, a little helpless thing, about to 
draw its life from her own bosom. 

Warm and gently breathing, with a little cap 



18 OTKER PJSOPLirS WINDOWS. 

of the finest muslin pressing round its silky Itair, 
and indenting even those soft plaits into its softer 
fleshy lies the little one upon its mother's arm. 
Andy as the father bends his head to gently touch it 
with his lips, to look upon it as a new wonder, the 
mother raises her eyes to his ; and when they 
meet, husband and wife thank God for the new 
bond of affection which has grown up between 
them. The long silken lashes of the young wife 
are wet with a new emotion . ^the deep gaze o| 
Felix full of a more softened love than ever yet 
beamed from it. 

All things considered, therefore, when Lotty, as 
she did immediately, fell asleep, clasping the little 
baby, and with the hand of Felix softly held within 
her own . ^fell asleep, I say, with a heart so full of 
calm, holy happiness . of comfort, relief, of peace, 
and joy, such as she had never felt before . ^it was 
hard that Mrs. Chitterling, the nurse, should turn 
him incontinently out of the room. " It was a 
great favour," she said, " to let him come in at 
all ; some gentlemen never saw their ladies at such 
times ; and so, sir, you must go." 

"Yes, but, nurse," said Felix, miserable at 
being ejected, " husbands see their wives, surely ?" 

It was all one to Mrs. Chitterling. The flattery 



TEE WINDOW.WITE THE BLIND DOWN. 19. 

dealt out by people of her class, in dropping the 
good old name of wife, and in substituting that of 
" lady/* which some people imitate in the reported 
marriages in the papers, Felix had attempted to 
satirise; but the satire fell harmless upon the 
ample folds which Mrs. Chitterling wrapped round 
her. The gentleman was therefore turned out, 
and Mrs. Ghitterling, establishing herself in a 
huge inyalid's chair> fell asleep by the side of her 
patient. 

It was at this period, while the blinds were down, 
that Felix passed the most comfortless period of 
his existence. He was by no means imhappy; 
that adjectiye being not only too strong, but per- 
fectly unfitted to express his feelings. He was 
comfortless. 

Mrs. Chitterling reigned supreme. It was she 
who prepared for him his breakfast, his solitary 
breakfast, taking charge of the keys of the 
mistress, and dealing out what tea she chose. It 
was she who, on the pretence that the servant had 
enough to do (and in truth she had, with Mrs. 
Chitterling in the house), would persist in sending 
him his toast, prepared by her own hands at the 
fire, which she would keep in all night, and which 
naturally got dull and sleepy in the morning. 

c 2 



20 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

Such toast! unhealthy yellow round the edges; 
hut, as if to compensate for that, with a deep black 
patch in the centre ! I^o wonder that he did not 
eat much at breakfast, and went away quite crest- 
fallen, when, after knocking at his wife's chamber 
door to bid her good morning, he was answered in 
a. cutting whisper that the '^ patient" was asleep. 
Oh! those cutting whispers! they were sharp 
Plough, but not more sharp than Mrs. Chitterling's 
sarcastic coldness and evident contempt for his 
ignorance babyward. The first time he attempted 
to hold a baby was such an egregious failure on 
his part, so said Mrs. Chitterling, that he never 
tried it again in her presence. It is but justice to 
say that he has since ^' got his hand in," to use a 
vernacular, but not very vulgar phrase, and that, 
in the opinion of Mrs. Felix, who ought to be an au- 
thority, few or none can nurse a baby so well as he. 
When the blinds are down for this cause in a 
man's house, the selfishness of the creature comes 
out very prominently. He goes like Felix to his 
business, and works with application, for he knows 
that he has an additional mouth to feed ; but when 
he comes home, then the feeling^of utter wretchedness 
commences. Where is now the bright smile, where 
where the twinkling candles? where the warm, soft 



TEE WINDOW WITS TKE BLIND DOWN 21 

hand, held out to catch his own, which would drag 
him indoors without giving him time to wipe his 
shoes P where the pert, happy tongue which would 
drive him out and scold him for not doing so ? He 
used . ^this poor Felix . to stand shivering at the 
door^ looking up to the blind with the faint light 
behind it, and think of these things. 

He stood at the door, to be sure, much longer 
than heretofore. Dreary, inexplicably dreary, was 
his tea when he got it ; and so lonely was the poor 
man that he formed a friendship with the cat, and 
grew amused and absorbed over the '^ Quarterly 
Keview.^^ The cat, like the husband, is a wanderer 
at such times ; for nurses have cats of their own 
at home, and love not the strange animals. There 
was no interchange of kindly thoughts at tea, no 
gossip or harmless banter about acquaintances, in 
which Felix used to mix his salve rather strong, 
because he loved to hear his wife take the part of 
the innocent. 

Helpless and reduced to a very small position in 
his house, looked at disdainfully as a somewhat 
useless appendage, even by the maid-servant, Felix 
would sometimes be tempted out to a Mend's 
house or a concert ; but he never failed to think 
himself guflty in going, nor, indeed, to hear of the 



22 OTKEE PEOPLira WmDOJTS. 

heartlessness of some men, in aplayM but cutting 
aside from Mrs. Chitterling. At times, when his 
'wife was vaguely said to be "improving," he 
would be allowed to sit and take tea in her bed- 
room. But the entertainment was a failure because 
of the jealous Chitterling, and the uttor helpless- 
ness of Lotty in such hands. K the unhappy 
husband tried to draw that dragon out, or to ask 
her opinion on the baby as upon something of 
which, from her great experience, she was an 
authority, he met with cutting rebu& on the 
ignorance of all his sex, except the doctor, and 
was sure to come to grief in some disastrous way, 
as a yoimg husband, and a nobody. Talk about 
the equaUty of woman; in the chamber with the 
blinds down their supremacy is utterly established. 
But now and then the pleasant time he spent 
with Lotty . who, though weakly, occasionally 
sat up, looking pretty and fresh in the fashionable 
cap in which young ladies at these periods delight 
to deck themselves . nearly compensated for the 
distraction he suffered under the heavy sway of 
Mrs. Chitterling, who indeed was only to be sub- 
dued by a much more heavily-armed vessel. 
Lotty's own mother. When that respected lady 
came, Felix felt as if he should fly the house. 



TSE WINDOW WITS THE BLIND DOWN 23 

Poor Lotty was brought to the bar of superior 
judgment^ sat upon, and morally crushed. The 
baby was commiserated, and even when he slept 
that calm deep sleep which healthy babies, bless 
them! now and then indulge in, the fear and 
tremors of Mrs. Lotty were generally aroused by 
the matrons, and the young mother was supposed 
to be as ignorant of the management of her own 
child as a girl of two would be of the dressing a 
court doll. Weary and puzzled, Lotty would look 
up to Felix for relief, but gained none from his 
unhappy face. But when the two elder women 
were away, wife and husband would fall talking 
happily enough of that time which would shortly 
come, when Lotty would be quite strong, and of 
the walks they would then take, when the baby, a 
very Moloch, to whom all their comfort was now 
sacrificed, should be asleep ; and again they would 
talk upon the duties which had fallen to them . 
duties at once so new, so grateful, and yet so 
strange. 

Then they would gossip about the time when 
he should grow up, and what they should do with 
him : how Felix would furbish up his Latin and 
Chreek, which of course he never did ; and how 
the mother dreaded the vices taught at schools ; 



24 OTHJER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS, 

and how their baby-boy should be a pure, beautiful 
thing, as white as unsmirched snow, whom no sin 
should touch ; and how the mother should herself 
be taught in teaching her boy. 

Alas ! the time has come and gone, but the boy 
is not there ; for, although FeHx carried down his 
wife in his own strong arms with much rejoicing, 
it pleased God, for his own good purpose, soon to 
take the child; and for hours the young wife 
thought and thought again of the deep mysteries 
of Life and Death, when she saw that life she 
would have given so much to save drifting slowly 
away from her . slowly, slowly, yet sure as death. 
And it was during a second illness of his wife that 
Felix saw again the light shine through the blind ; 
and recalls it again in after life, when he looks up 
in the long dismal street to some dimly-lighted 
window, and the past pain and sorrow return 
once more. 

But all this has long past. Our young friends 
have other children round them now ; sorrows have 
touched them but to still their hearts ; advancing 
years have taught them that the eager joys of youth 
are far less precious than those cahn feelings which 
a well-spent life enjoys in its progress to old age. 

So spring comes and goes with its bright day3 



TEE WINDOW WITS TSE BLIND DO WN. 25 

and gay flowers, and summer with its warmth, 
sunshine, and sweet birds' songs. But God ex- 
hausts not His treasures in one season of the year ; 
for autumn brings forth its fruits, and in winter, 
safely housed, we shall calmly mark the seasons 
we have passed, and look through hopefully unto 
that brighter year which will beam for all of us. 
Such thoughts fill the mind of Felix Straightways 
as, yet in the summer of his life, he remembers the 
troubles and trials he has passed ; and such the 
lesson which was taught him by the dim light 
shining through the blind. 



nriFWJi ^SOBL^^ TZTDQW^ 







for bis wf& ^ook »f»r dH jp p« ii B e ftr 



On. ciie tamxxssrr^ sAar i pumiiiig TiummTr aH day 



ofa 



senm of thesn. not^ xw^t ^ woalfl Iinrzy Iioiiie^ ib. 
tfae Bope of bezn^ iiaefid^ sod Ton^ apeodrhr fe*J 



wmTifrrfiillTwdl^ ami tj^ 3[r$> CIufctMrgitg w^g^ >H 

iSat: caalci be daared. ^Qir t^ narse wok Vt ho 



TEH AUTHOE 8 WINDOW. 27 

means ** all tliat could be desired.'' She was igno- 
rant^ sleepy, foolisUy officious, and dreadfully fussy. 
As she was never quite certain what she was about, 
she was exceedingly quarrelsome if questioned, and 
nervously anxious that everybody should suppose 
she knew everything. AU this, Lotty, with a 
woman's acuteness, knew ; and all this Felix saw 
through. And yet these Uttle deceits, gentle 
hypocrisies, kindly fallacies, and exceedingly 
white lies^ went on between husband and wife 
every day. 

<< Quite a trustworthy person, I suppose," said 
Felix, holding his wife's thin white hand in his, 
and thinking, as he looked at it, that a woman's 
hand never was prettier than in the sleeve of a 
night-dress, with the soft lace edging falling 
over it. 

^* Yes, dear ; Mrs. Chatterley, who came to see 
me to-day, in such a love of a lace bonnet, said 
that I had secured a treasure." 

" Umph," said Felix . " an opinion at second- 
hand." Then his wife pressed his hand gently, 
for she saw that his eye rested on the bright gold 
ring on the fourth finger, and that a noble fond- 
ness overspread his face. 

Umph!" repeated Lotty, archly; "oh, we 



(( 



28 OTHER PE0PLF8 WINDOWS. 

get on Tery well, darling. Does not it lookbrigbt 
now ? . ^not a scratch on it . as good as new/' 

'^A thousand times better, a million times 
dearer ; why, think what it has held, think what 
a symbol it is of the strong love between ns.*' 

"Yes, dear, go on," said Mrs. Lotty, just 
lifting up a comer of the coverlet and showing a 
soft miniature face full of sleep and happiness, 
but which even in its happy sleep pressed closer 
to its mother's breast ; " go on, there's a good 
Felix." 

That was her way. She was not an eloquent 
woman ; perhaps no woman is when she gets love 
made to her; for she likes love being made a 
dozen times more than the making it. So she 
said " go on," and settled herself down to listen 
between her husband and her child, the happiest 
woman in the world, nestling in her home joys 
as does a yoimg bird in its downy nest. 

Was it to be wondered at that Felix was silent 
as to Mrs. Chitterling, and eloquent as to his own 
feelings ? So, after a few moments of calm joy, a 
creaking is heard on the stairs, and Mrs. C, as 
she described herself in the third person, entered, 
softly at first, and then with a gush and a rustle, 
delicately reassuring to an invalid. Mrs. Chitter- 



TKE AUTS0E8 WINDOW. 29 

ling was of those who objected, as she said, to be 
'^ talked oyer/' and who fancied that all her em- 
ployer's occupation consisted in canvassing her 
noble self . a notion which seems to pervade persons 
of her class. 

" Yes, my dear, I know you were expecting of 
me ; my chicken, I would not be away from you 
one moment. It's my dooty, sir, all' us to be at my 
pet's side." 

Thus the nurse, with many voluble expressions 
of loyal service, and widi a watery smile spreading 
gradually over a flaccid face, would interrupt the 
happy commimion of the yoimg couple. 

" Bother the woman!" thought Felix : " I don't 
half like her." 

"Not for a moment," thought Lotty, recalling 
many a long hour of neglect in her husband's 
absence. 

'^ I should like to send her away to-morrow if 
I could, only my wife seems so thoroughly pleased 
with her," muttered Felix, as he drew on his gloves. 

*^ Ah ! I wish he could stay with me ; his 
company would do me more good than this spite- 
ful gossiping old woman,'^ thought Lotty. But 
a^moment afterwards she reflected that this spite- 
ful gossip was poor and old, had been employed 



30 OTKER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

for years as a gossip^ and had, no doubt, fitted 
her tongue to her customers. " If she goes away, 
what refuge has she but the workhouse P^' 

And so Mrs. Lotty was silent about nurse 
Chitterling, and that excellent lady delighted her- 
self in believing that she could "get up her 
sleeye," and that Lotty was a good, simple, foolish 
thing, and Felix a mere soft spoon. 

" Quite a spoon, I do assure you, Martha,'* said 
the nurse to her friend, "and as fond; oh, so 
fond. I hates men as are fond, I do. Always 
betokens weakness . softness in the upper story, I 
should say. But, lawks bless you ! what should 
we do without foolsP We live upon weaknesses, we 
do, Martha . don't us ?" 

" That we do," returned Martha, turning up her 
little finger in a way peculiar to washerwomen 
and cabmen, when the right hand has a glass in 
it . " That we do, Mrs. C, right you are ;'' and 
here she gave a wink as she swallowed down a 
glass of Sir Felix Booth's popular cordial : " weak* 
nesses is very pleasant sometimes." 

"Ah, I like a weakness that has plenty of strength 
in it, Martha. Lawks, I've known the insides of 
'undreds of houses, and it stands to reason as I 
should recognise a fool when I sees him. As 



THE A UTSOKS WIND OW. 31 

for Felix, as she calls 'im . ^what a queer name 
it is, isn't un P . he's a fool, a downright fool." 

The person upon whom Mrs. Chitterling was so 
positive about was just then debating what to do 
with himself, haying quietly settled that, if the 
nurse had not been poor and old, he would have 
packed her oflf. " I think," said he to his wife, 
" that I shall drop in over the way." 

"Oh, do," said Lotty, brightening up: **I shall 
know you are there ; and Mr. Carew is a great 
favourite of mine." 

So away went Felix, thinking himself a brute 
to feel so pleasantly about his jaunt. But, to tell 
the truth, with men a man friend is the one very 
delightful desideratum in life besides the wife; and 
George Carew, late of Sidney Sussex College, was 
a friend that anybody might have been proud of. 
As he sits behind that window, let us take a peep 
at him and his study before Felix enters. 

George Carew, bom of a family which might 
have been once noble, but had long ago been only 
respectable, was the son of a London solicitor, who 
had the pride of the family with very few of its 
other good qualities. Troubled with collecting a 
history of the house of Carew and keeping his own 
above his head, old Carew of Bed Lion Square 



32 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

lived pretty fairly as long as that square was cele- 
brated for lawyers, and sent his son to the Univer- 
sity, where he would have won honours if his 
father had there continued to keep him. But 
somehow, as the books and honours of the old 
family increased, and Carew himself increased in 
pride and hauteur, his clients decreased also ; the 
square decreased in respectability, the beadle fell 
into a state of dilapidation, and George Carew was 
taken from college and placed at the solicitor's 
desk, just as he would have really ornamented the 
family of which his father was so proud. 

The same difficulty which caused old Carew to 
take his son away from the University, prevented 
him from paying for his articles, which, as George 
said, was rather lucky than otherwise ; for he did 
not mind the blue bag, nor the meanness, nor the 
dirty office which he swept out, but he hated the law. 

" There are a confoimded set of lawyers whom 
the world would do well to throttle," said George, 
twirling his moustache with a fierce gesture ; " and 
the only thing I thank God for about it is, that 
the Gubemator was not successful. An honest 
lawyer . well, I won't say that exactly . ^but a 
(christian lawyer . mmt starve ; it is impossible 
that he should succeed." 



TRE AVTROISB WINDOW. 33 

''It's ctmi/ra naturam^** said Bagsley the barrister, 
who usually put the finishing touoh to his plain 
and easy Latin, by construing it . " it's against 
nature." 

" Ah !" said George, with a slight sneer, " did 
you go as far as Eutropius when you were at 
school, Bagsley ? that's a profound author." 

''Admirable!" returned Bagsley, withoutablush. 
" I remember reading him ; as profound as Plato, 
as eloquent as Cicero " 

" And as simple as Bagsley," concluded George^ 
with a laugh. 

Mr. Bagsley, who, being a barrister, affected the 
society of men of letters, felt that George Carew 
was too much for him, but said nothing. Mr. 
Bagdey was of an aspiring nature, and, having had 
some money left him when he was the most pro* 
minent of the young men at Messrs. Snape and 
Trimming's, had entered himself at the bar, eaten 
his terms, and had not been long called. He was 
a clever good fellow, honest as the day; but, haying 
mastered with difficulty a few Latin phrases, was 
only too anxious to show them off. 

^'Whether against nature or not . «nd I will 
not attempt to dispute with my learned brother . ^I 
must confess to an ignorant impatience of lawyers, 

D 



34 OmER PJSOPUSrS WINDOWS, 

Laws were made, I suppose, for uniyersal justice^ 
not to maintain in heartless existence and terribly 
hardening education a set of men who, it must 
be confessed, all flourish the better the worse man- 
kind is." 

Mr. George Carew had finished this sentence 
when Felix Straightways, who came from over the 
way, entered the room. 

** Here,'* said George, shaking his hands warmly, 
** is one of the best fellows in the world ; and the 
best fate I can wish him is, that he may never have 
anything to do with you, or the merry men who 
are waiting with their ctmning looks and their 
parchment faces to give you briefs." 

** Poor George I" returned Bagsley, as he rose and 
bowed somewhat stiffly to Felix, " how you must 
have suffered, with a father a solicitor, an uncle a 
solicitor, and yourself partly educated for that 
humanising rdle ! I declare to you, gentlemen of the 
jury, that it hurts my feelings to contemplate the 
wrongs my friend George must have suffered to 
entertain this lethal, that is deadly, hatred." 

Having thus delivered himself, Mr. Bagsley 
sat down, comfortably screwing himself into an 
antique arm-chair, of which there were many in 
the study, and gazing around as he smoked his 



TEJE AUTHOR'S WINDOW. 35 

cigar, with much complacency, for he thought that 
his little speech was not badly wound up. 

'^ Bagsley's sure to succeed ; practice makes 
perfect, and he is always addressing an ideal jury." 

" But other great lawyers have done it before 
him,'' said Felix. 

"Umph ! yes ; Bagsley thanks you with his eyes. 
Take a weed, Felix; I've done work for to-day, and 
let us smoke." 

He pushed his papers and desk away from him 
with a sigh, and sat down under a rack of pipes, 
throwing himself backwards in an easy chair, and 
filling from a very large collection a meerschaum 
coloured brown in the service of its master. 

Over George Carew's head was a pipe-rack 
carved in walnut wood, bearing on its central 
shield the motto, '' Man is hut dshes,^ which looked 
like, but was not, a quotation from the Rev. 
Erskine's " Tobacco Moralised ;" and above 
Gteorge's standing desk, at which he chiefly wrote, 
were two mottoes drawn on heraldic scrolls by 
George himself. One bore the words from Sidney, 
which our author said every newspaper man or 
writer of whatever kind should take to his soul, 
'* Looke in thy heart and write^' and the other, 
which balanced it, was of more homely and less 

d2 



OTHER PEOPLTS wrjOTDOWS, 



poetioJ maniiCKtiire, but was iio leas tmlj ueliil 
and good; it wbs this: '*Dm't mrrU ^amnt^." 
3ImiiT a gnTe poblialier bad bngfaed, and tbougbt, 
"Ah! what an eccentric fish is this fdiowP' as they 
looked aa George's motto. But Creorge was not 
eccentric, he was stiaightf(»iraid, persistent, oou- 
rageooSy and, <Hi the whole, a man of geninSy if a 
inan of limited genius. He was aboat thirty-fiTe, 
and had already won a good position in a career 
much more arduous and uncertain than either the 
bar or the church; Ids knowledge was multi- 
iarious, his perceptions acute, his style dear, 
flowing, and open, and lus industry so great that 
he made a Tery fair income, and maintained his 
widowed sister and his own two children as a 
l>:entleman should do. In the centre of his 
mottoes was the old crest of the Carews, sur- 
rounded by a garter bearing the motto assumed 
by poor old Carew of Red Lion Square, when the 
prosperity of the family flared up a little, to die 
down as quickly as it could. This was "JVl?e? 
Pluribm Impar" . Not unequal to many, as 
Bagsley construed it for the benefit of Felix. 

** Poor old boy ! dear old dad V said George, 
looking up at the demilion and the motto ; ** yes, 
that was his, and it was true of him : he had a 



TEE AUTHOR S WINDOW. 37 

heart of gold ; as good a man, I take it, consider- 
ing his surroundings, as ever trod between earth's 
floor and heaven's ceiling. But, Felix, you see I 
am not so ambitious; there is my motto; good 

English: 

' Patience and Faith.' 

I mean to have a clock made with a line round it . 
a grand line, though it is my own : 

' JPaiience and Faith alont can conquer IHme,* " 

George spoke with {uH appreciation of his own 
work ; but then he was a man who knew what 
was good, and was irritated by a somewhat long 
course of neglect or spite on the part of the 
critics. . 

" Capital !'* said Bagsley ; " I see it at once. 
Time, an old cove, has dropped his sceptre, and 
Patience, a demure lady, is urging on Faith, a 
beautiful but stem demoiselle, who is hitting the 
old cove a crack on the head with a cross.'' 

"Exactly," answered George, **only the old 
fellow Time, a ^ pesky old crittur,' must have a 
wheel, the felloes of which wiU form a capital 
place for the hours to be engraved on, and ther6 
you have the clock." 

" Hanged if I wouldn't go and sell the design 
to Dent or Frodsham," ejaculated Bagsley. 



38 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" Of course you would ; you are a barrister, and 
with a wig and gown on you would sell anything, 
even your own conscience." 

" One for you. And you sell your ideas ; you 
fellows sell cheap what is most dear, and ^ make 
yourself a motley to the view,' as William has it 
somewhere." 

" Ay, did he P make himself a motley ! Why, 
if all the judges that ever adorned the bench'were 
to stew down their solenm and grave charges, 
their weighty platitudes and ponderous nothings 
into one consomme of legal wisdom, the book would 
not equal one of the thirty-five plays of that im- 
mortal, really immortal, bard. I hate repeating 
generalities ; but this I must say, that Shakspere 
is the immortal one, and the word well fits 
him." 

" The idea is not a bad one," said Felix, " that 
of stewing down the charges. If judges * adorn 
the bench,* certainly the beauty and wisdom of 
their solemn charges should be apparent." 

" Adorn the bench !" said Carew, with a sneer; 
** now I hate that cut-and-dried flattery that we 
have . ^that newspaper flummery, in which a judge 
is praised because he is a judge, a general because 
he is a general, a parson because he is a parson. If 



tSE AtfTBOEB WINDOW. 39 

it were possible to corrupt and spoil Qt>d^]9 good 
men, you would do it by that means. You don't 
distinguish true from false, good from bad^ wise 
from stupid. You honour the place, not the 
man, which is just the way at once to snuff out 
and kiU the man. England is fest becoming a 
nation of dull mediocrities through that accursed 
system." 

« Dull mediocrities!" said Felix, laughing; « and 
yet she can produce these." 

As he said this, he pointed to a shelf of Carew's 
book-cases, with which three sides of the room 
were lined from top to bottom, which contained 
books, most of them neither rare nor costly, but 
each of which was priceless to the world, and not 
one of which was written by a dull mediocrity. 
As G-eorge had not classed them by any other rule 
than that of an approximation of size, one need 
not wonder if the lot was miscellaneous. 

There were there Southey's " Life of Wesley," 
Coleridge's **Table-Talk," his "Aids to Reflection" 
and "Notes Theological;" there were Butler's 
"Hudibras," Sterne's "Sermons," "Tristram 
Shandy," Ferrier's "Notes on Sterne," Bishop 
Berkeley's "Tracts," Milton's prose works, Gbove's 
"OKo," Sir Walter Raleigh's "Remains," Old- 



40 OTBER PEOFLirS WINDOWS. 

ham's " Satires/' Dryden's " Miscellanies," in ^ix 
Tolumes, Sir Thomas Browne's " Religio Medici," 
and a few others. Felix was quite right when he 
opposed these books to CareVs sweeping con- 
demnation of dull mediocrities. 
. " Quite right, old fellow, quite right," said the 
author, proudly. " It makes one's heart beat to 
fancy that, amongst that little lot, your obscure 
book may have been slipped, eh ! Ah ! my boy, 
when old Bagsley here has risen to the bench, 
expounded a villainous and ignorant law, grown 
gouty, been quizzed by the horsehair-wigged 
juniors, has retired my Lord Chief Baron, and 
died down, those books, the very life-blood and 
spirit of master-minds, will be doing their good 
work as freshly as ever." 

" 'Tis a noble career," said Felix, with admira- 
tion ; " and you, too, are doing good work." 

'^ Pish !" returned the author, emitting a volume 
of smoke. " I have worked for A., and B., and 
0." . here he mentioned three of the cleverest 
papers in England . "but I am tired of their heart- 
less cleverness, and I work now for the people. 
*Tis a noble career ; but how do we use it P Look 
through the whole list of papers, and mark how 
aobly the leaders are written; how fairly the 



THE AUTHORS WINDOW. 41 

reviews ; how the rich are reproved and the poor 
lifted ; how utterly they are marked by an absence 
of clique ; how expediency is never preached, and 
glittering nonsense and sensational stuff never, 
never put forward in leading articles. Here, old 
fellow, look in that cupboard : there's a bottle of 
G-lenlivat, and here's a glass and some cold water; 
let us pour out and wash down all this; I feel 
rather troubled with the smoke/' 

Carew's study was one of those delightful places 
in which one can do anything he Ukes. Hence it 
was rather too much frequented as a lounge by 
men who gossipped away the author's time and 
too often rewarded him by stealing his ideas. For 
George, generous, impidsive, and utterly unreticent, 
generally blurted out that which came uppermost* 

So, while Mr. Bagsley smoked or wandered from 
book to book, dipping into Montaigne, Suckling, 
Carew, Burton, or the modem novel with the 
author's dedicatory words written with his own 
hand, or her own hand, as the case might be, 
Felix and George talked. *^ And how is the dear 
old lady P" asked George. " I hope you told her 
how glad I was that it was all over." 
. The " dear old lady" was Mrs. Lotty ; but, then, 
all people whom he loved were old with George. 



42 OTHER PJEOPLE'S WINL0W8, 

" She*s getting on capitally, and looks prettier 
every day. By Jove ! George, I love her more 
and more ; I did not know that I loved her till 
now, when she is the mother of my child." His 
honest eyes blazed up into such an illumination 
that George Carew caught him by the hand and 
shook it warmly. 

"God bless you, old boy, for that sight, an 

honest face full of enthusiasm. Stick to that, my 

boy, swear by it, fight for it, die for it, but keep 

it for ever, that manly honest love. If ever 
I >* 

Here the tender manly face, with its thick shade 
of dark hair, and its lines of thought and tender- 
ness, grew darker, and the voice faltered and 
stopped. Felix saw it all : George was a widower, 
and something had struck upon the tender cicatrice 
and made the old wound bleed anew. 

" Something the matter with the pipe," he said ; 
" here, Bagsley, give me that water-cooler; essential 
oil is not very nice, and the worst of a meerschaum 
is, that it will foul." 

The cloud passed away, but not the feeling ; 
and Felix was as happily voluble as a woman, so 
that Bagsley, deep in a dictionary of Latin quota- 
tions, did not notice the interruption. 



TEE AUTHOR B WINDOW. 43 

" What a happy fellow you are, George !*' said 
Felix, ^' sarroiinded here with the literature that 
you love, working a good work, appreciated by all, 
invited out to great people's dwellings, made a 
lion oJ^ no doubt . ^to be inyited to the duchess of 
jfchis, and my lord that, and to talk brilliant re- 
partees, as they do in " Coningsby," or in Bulwer 
Lytton's . ^beg pardon. Lord Lytton's . ^best noTels ; 
I am sure ^" 

" No, you are not," said George, with a sad 
smile, shaking his locks like an old lion, and 
taking a puff at the unoffending pipe ; ^' no, you're 
not. If the public take from Mr. Disraeli and the 
noble Lytton their ideas of an author's life, all I 
can say is that my experience does not coincide 
with theirs. An author in England is nowhere ; 
in France or in America he is properly acknow- 
ledged. Here the common lot of an author is that 
he works himself out in producing fortunes for 
booksellers, and a fine crop of yexation for 
himself.'' 

" Nonsense !'' returned Felix ; " surely you must 
be appreciated by thousands, and have the consola- 
tion of having aided thousands by those sound, 
manly articles which " 

" Hold your tongue, yoimg one," said George, 



44 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

sternly ; '* I have the consolation of haying done 
my work ; that is all, and that is all-sufficient. I 
have the consolation too/' he added grimly, *' of 
haying my best ideas ridiculed when they are new, 
and adopted when they are old ; I haye the con- 
solation of belonging to a profession which requires 
more brainwork, more conscientiousness, more 
moral nerve and muscle than either the church or 
the bar, and yet is without a position ; the further 
consolation of knowing that Sir John Subchick, at 
the head of the Home Department, will adopt my 
notions on young criminals, and get so bepraised 
by the papers that he will ineyitably get a peerr 
age ; the extra satisfaction of reading critiques, 
made out of my book, perverted to show the 
skill of the operator, and of being dismissed with a 
patronising kick by a boy who has not read as 
many chapters as you haye yolumes ; the still 
further pleasure of knowing that while the author 
employs publishers, printers, machinists, paper- 
makers, and sets going a most important branch of 
commerce, the butterman who buys spoilt sheets of 
his reyiew or noyel will sooner realise a fortune^ 
and look down on him as he passes him on his 
way to court with a smile of greasy satisfaction ; 
nay, that while the speculator has been ruining 



TEE AUTHOKa WINDOW. 4& 

and corrupting, and the. author ennobling and 
strengthening the nation, the speculator will get 
made lieutenant of his county, and will dine with 
the Queen, while the author will not even be 
recognised by the patrons of the '^ great and good," 
and all that bosh, as an existing being. There is 
one man now living, known to all the world 
as having caused money, pleasurable feelings, 
honesty, and virtue, in fact, to circulate here, in 
America, in Australia, France, nay, half over the 
globe ; and where is he P It is true that he is rich 
by his own pen, and yet, much as he has been paid, 
he has not reaped a thousandth part of what he 
has sown. Well ! the hereditary donkey of a 
Scotch or Bedfordshire manor has more apparent 
honour than this great man ever had." 

** Bitter!" said Felix. " hallo ! there's Bagsley 
going ;" and certainly that gentleman, with an easy 
" Bye-bye," left the room, having noted a few 
choice sayings for his forensic speeches. 

^Tes, good-bye . see you again soon," cried Carew. 
*' Bitter I not half bitter, not half plain enough. 
And yet the press governs the world, and knows 
it, and the world knows it, and it dare not express 
an opinion. The cause of all this is cowardice on 
all sides. Of course in their hearts people do 



46 OTHER PEOPLE" a WINDOWS. 

honour us, and know all that I have said about 
Mr. Dickens ; but to him the result must look even 
worse than I have painted it." 

" But then, I suppose/' said Felix, still trying 
to paint Garew's picture from his own standpoint, 
'' I suppose that you have letters, and congratula- 
tions, and " 

"Letters from unknown friends P Yes," re- 
turned George, bitterly; "begging letters, horn 
people who want your autograph and half-a-orown 
for a charity ; others from ladies making up books of 
selections, who would like to reprint this poem or 
that chapter ; others from people whose particular 
case you have described, and who beg you to be 
their soul's doctor in a case of conscience the par- 
son don't, won't, can't indeed, possibly understand. 
I have to answer one such letter now. Here, you 
sit and smoke, and I'll do it ; and just pray, young- 
one, that God may put tho right feeling in my 
heart, and the right words on my pen." 

And away to his standing desk went the author, 
and wrote rapidly for a long time, while Felix 
surveyed the regiments of books, and thought of 
the long weary hours spent by George in that 
study. Not a book there but had been read and 
marked, not a paper biit had been noted. There> 



TKE AUTEOES WINDOW. 47 

too, lay the last weekly Review, with George^s 
article, acute, honest, earnest, manly, standing out 
like a fine healthy, flourishing tree against a back- 
ground of paper lanthorns, of flippancy, false bril- 
liancy, and gruming foUy, by writers of the pert 
school now so prevalent. 

** I'll be ready in a minute, Felix," said George ; 
''and then we will take a turn in the streets." 
And away scoured his pen over the sheets of paper. 
" 'Twill console the poor fellow," said he, as he 
thrust the letter into an envelope ; " and, egad, it 
has brightened me up in the effort. Here, you 
stay here while I wash." 

A hurry and a rush ; a plunging, as of a hippo- 
potamus in a basin ; a rough towelling and good 
hard brushing, and then George emerged, with 
clean collar and brilliant face, ready to go out, 
Felix put his arm in his and left the author's 
study, bidding good bye to it as an enchanted 
place, and muttering to himself, " Well, after all, 
an author, if he be a good one, is to be envied. If 
his . George's, that is . breast does not throb to^ 
the sense of duty nobly done, I am a nigger. 
Bless you, he walks like one of the lions, and is 
folly satisfied with himself, I know. Of course, 
everybody is proud of him." Felix, as they 



48 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

passed out, looked up to the window with the 
blinds down, and, linking his arm in that of the 
author, said, " George, my dear boy, what are you 
thinking of P* 

**I know what you are thinking of,*' said 
Carew ; " you are thinking, young *un, of that 
dear little woman up where the dim night-light 
shines through that blind ; and I, brute that I am,' 
am thinking just where is the best place for us ta 
have a good song, and discuss the merits of a hof 
potato and a mutton chop." 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 49 




CHAPTER III. 

MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 

HE two young men . ^for George Carew 
was young in spirit, and, when free from 
labour, as gay as a bird . ^walked rapidly 
onwards, down a short hill, past the leafy em- 
bowerings of one or two villas, and soon reached 
the heart of the town, where the ways were dusty 
and worn, and the streets had that tired-out look 
and down-trodden appearance which they always 
assume in a crowded town towards the late part of 
the evening. 

" Here we are," said George, as he threw away 
the end of his cigar, "in the little world of 
London." 

"I should call it the mammoth world," said 
Felix ; " it is bigger than great, and exhausts 
superlatives. Look at the swarms of people ; 
some hurrying home with a bright smile and 

E 



50 OTHER PJSOPZrS WINDOWS. 

hopeful faces, others with a down-hearted look 
enough/* 

"Great world, if you like," returned Carew, 
linking his friend's arm in his, as they turned 
down Museum Street. " The satirist, who begins 
by despising all people, and ends by thoroughly 
hating himself, calls it little. It is little if you 
think of the snares, pitfalls, follies, crimes, flatteries, 
meannesses, masquerades, pantomimes, beads, and 
red Indian paint in it ; great if you regard the 
ant-hill in clusters or in their wondrous heaps, 
each ant, with its microcosm of a brain, by itself." 

" Here's one ant that has not a very happy life," 
said Felix. 

He pointed to a baker, who, with his nightcap 
on and his face whitened, his chest exposed to the 
evening air, and his cadaverous appearance made 
somewhat more deadly and corpselike by a green 
light which fell on it from a doctor's round bottle 
in the next shop, had crept up from his bakery 
and was airing himself and looking at the crowd 
passing. 

" That's not a very merry life," continued Felix, 
"How happy ought we to be ! Consider the long- 
drawn and linked misery of such a man." 

" He's a jolly bird, I'd lay a wager," returned 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 51 

George, looking at him professionally, "and would 
make a very good character. He will enjoy him- 
self here now till the bread rises, and sleep away 
some part of his existence on the very staff of life. 
Still I am bound to acknowledge that the stupidity 
of some few . chiefly, I think, dyspeptic people who 
live in hotels, and who will eat those scientificaUy 
imwholesome things called hot rolls . condemns this 
man and his fellows to a worse than Egyptian 
darkness, a far more cruel than an Israelitish 
slavery; that it shortens his existence, makes 
him pale, consumptive, drunken, stupid; that 
it aUows him but one night's hoUday in the 
week, and stews away all vigour of thought from 
him; and aU this because some old dowagers 
prefer hot rolls of a morning. Else why should 
not the time of drawing the bread be five o'clock 
of the afternoon P" 

" Why not, indeed P" said Felix. 

**I never look on a baker," continued Carew, 
** but I think myself a guilty creature ; and, egad, 
I never look through a confectioner's window but 
I believe myself back in the wildest part of the 
dark ages . ^if such ever existed." 

" Well, society does frightfully oppress the poor 
fellows, certainly," added his friend. 

B 2 



52 OTHER PEOPLTS WIXDOWS. 

''T.»; whoeTCT heudof abakertoniiiigonta 
jsenius? Was there erer a baker poety eh P 

' Night is the time to watch 
O'er ocean's dark expanse^ 
To hail the Pleiades, or oakch 
The joong moon's earliest glance.' 

So wrote some flpooneypoet. By that mley bakers 
should have written wonderfiil things ; but they 
never did. The fact is, we are all wrong; night 
may do for meditation, bnt the day is for work, 
and for that yigorous thought which precedes all 
work. Now we haye plenty of tailors who are 
braye, self-reliant, and ready to fight anybody. A 
troop of tailor light horse, ndseddnring a strike, and 
just before the Peninsular war, distinguished itself 
by its exceeding smartness and bravery; a set of 
poets have arisen from the butchers ; and cobblers 
are notorious for the thoughtful learned men and 
scholars that they produce ; but as for bakers, they 
must be relegated to the lowest rank ; they pro- 
duce nothing. except those idiotic confections and 
hot rolls." 

" I do think," said Felix, laughing, « that, if 
you thoughtfully approach it, a wedding cake is 
the most senseless, barbaric, and abominable piece 
of work ever conceiyed, and I say this with a 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 53 

tender recollection of my own modest purchase in 
that way/' 

"You are quite right, young one/' returned 
Carew. " Now's the day and now's the hour ; 
everything thrives with an indignation meeting. 
Get up one in favour of the overworked bakers, 
and with the purpose of abolishing wedding cakes. 
How monstrous the things have grown ! how like 
a castle, a ship, a park, or a grove of trees ; a 
heathen temple or an Indian god-house! They 

have become most elaborate a&irs hallo ! 

here we are ; just let us see a little life here." 

JN^ot iLnwilling, under sage guidance, to see how 
the English people enjoyed themselves, Felix 
entered a place which externally looked no better 
than a public-house, but was blessed by having 
at its back a very large yard, which, having 
been artistically covered over by a clever architect, 
was made into a handsome concert-room. '' Look 
at it,'* said his conductor, after having entered, 
" and listen to the raison d^etre of these places. 

" The English people, the most quiet and sheep- 
like of all peoples, having only before their eyes 
the love of precedent, and the determination never 
to do anything that was not eminently conserva- 
tive, had found that places whereat a few boors 



64 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINBOWS. 

a«embkd to sing songs were thooglit to be amus- 
ing. These boon, with the natural Ioto of law 
which belongs to their race, had elected a chair- 
man and had sabmitted thonsehes to his roley and 
he, seated at the top of the table, was loud and 
anthoritatiye, and never so happy as when he could 
declare 'that Mr. Smithson will oblige with a 
song, gentl'm'n.' Under the rule of this Tyrannos 
the public-house prospered, and people came from 
far and near to hear Mr. Smithson, until that 
genius and the chairman were supplied, at first 
gratis, and with some liberality, with grog and 
strong waters, and lastly were paid, as an attrac- 
tion to the house and a lure to other men to come 
in and spend their time and money in listening 
to music. 

*' The great law of the selection of species, as 
laid down by that philosophic copyist of Lord 
Monboddo, Darwin, has done away with Smithson 
and the red-nosed chairman. Smithson's voice, a 
very sweet one, grew rough and ragged under a 
long course of gin-and-bitters, and the chairman 
was taken in hand by Death. Now others better 
than they have taken their place, and the free- 
and-easy has become a music-hall, destined, it may 
be, to supplant the theatres." 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 55 

« Bless me !" said Felix, opening his eyes and 
gazing round on the assembly. 

This assembly formed a very respectable body 
externally, and was somewhat closely packed, for 
the " Great Somebody'* had made a very large bid 
for popular favour, and "the following well-known 
artistes" had mustered in great force to do him a 
service. As the " Great Somebody/' in his turn, 
was expected to give his time and talent to the 
benefit of each of the said artistes, the " Great 
Somebody" did not, perhaps, in the long-run, make 
such a good thing of his own benefit ; but the hall 
was crammed. The adjuration, "Come early," had 
been obeyed, and, as there was yet some time to 
elapse before the curtain rose, Felix and his friend 
had space and leisure to observe the auditory, 
which occupied itself in cracking nuts and 
gossipping. 

Perhaps a full half of the room was parted ofi' 
for " reserved seats," an infraction on the "rights" 
of the audience which a few years ago would have 
created a riot, but which is now submitted to in 
every theatre, with a perfect appreciation of the 
fact that the first thing a manager has to do is to 
make his house pay. That being conceded, the 
public seemed to be very glad to take up with the 



56 OTEER PEOPLE'S TFINDOWS, 

worst part of the house, and to see others, who had 
paid more, lounge away in the more comfortable 
stalls. 

The " stalls," covering nearly half the haU, had 
each of them a table before them, with pipe-lights 
and spittoons in close approximation, so that the 
habitues could enjoy music and tobacco at the 
same time. The chairman, a middle-aged fellow, 
who looked young, notwithstanding the great 
wear and tear that his face must have had, was 
clean shaven and fairly dressed, and quite up to 
his business. He was surrounded by certain genial 
spirits, who either sang themselves, or admired 
those who did sing. They most of them had a 
fresh, half-coimtry appearance, as if the effects of 
good living had had a struggle with those of late 
hours, and had gained a victory. They were well- 
dressed, and fairly behaved, although there was 
evidently an intimacy between them and the 
singers, which was quite understood by our fresh 
and unsophisticated Felix when he saw the chair- 
man leave his throne and station himself behind 
the footlights, in order to give a melancholy reci- 
tative, which we shall afterwards speak of. 

" Hallo ! Carew ! Who would have thought of 
seeing you here ? Oh, you naughty boy I And 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 57 

who is the young fellow you have with you P Very 
young cousin from Oxford, eh f 

" From Oxford Street ! Why, he is the father 
of a family, and has come with me to study cha- 
racter. Just my luck : sure to meet somebody I 
know. Well, and how is Mrs. Scumble and the 
two young Scxmibles, Boadicea and Caractacus P" 

"Cart before the horse," returned the artist, 
bowing politely to Felix. " My great picture of 
Caractacus at Rome, crying out, when he saw the 
gorgeous palaces " 

" Oh, yes, we know all that. See the catalogue, 
passim, for the last century. It has been up just 
a himdred years, you know ; and you artists have 
never missed giving us Caractacus, Alfred, and 
Boadicea.'^ 

" Well, fact was," said Scumble, with a kind of 
blush, " the boy, the British boy following Carac- 
tacus . for I took the liberty to lump the two 
anecdotes . was the most beautiful little critter in 
the world, and when ours came Mrs. Scumble said 
'twas just like him. Non Anglm sed Angelus . 
you know the patter. Well,^e christened him 
Caractacus and the girl Boadicea, in remembrance 
of having sold my big picture to an art imion 
prize-holder from the Black Country." 



58 OTHER PEOPLE'S TTINDOTTS. 

" These are grateful memories. Now just sit 
down and pull that Guy Faux slouch hat off, if 
you don't want to be taken for an organ-grinder." 

So saying, Carew settled himself down to do as 
they did at Rome . that is, at the Alma singing 
saloon . ^he called for his pipe, and he called for 
his pot, and fiddlers three came trooping in in no 
time, and presently the entertainment began 

" Beastly vulgar, isn't it, George, my boy P*' said 
Scumble, drawing a delightful cloud out of his 
pipe and adjusting himself comfortably to his settee. 
"There's a little girl here that Madder Brown 
says I ought to paint : that's why I come." 

" You humbug ! " growled George, in high scorn ; 
" why, it's infinitely better, and more elevating 
too, than Ranelagh, or Vauxhall, or the Marybone 
Gardens, where all the nobs went. Did you ever 
read the songs they sang then . eh P Well, I 
have, and they have made my bronzed old cheek 
blush. No, but to smoke . you say. Well, does 
not the Grand Turk smoke when the dancing-girls 
come in ? Is a narghiUy more virtuous than a 
clay ? or vile Rakee any better than honest Bass 
or AUsopp P those motes and beams I now listen 
and perpend." 

To a lively tune, which had the merit of inter- 



iniBIC FOR THE MILLION. 59 

preting the words, such as they were, and with 
much vivacity, a young lady, in an evening dress 
fashionably and weU made, sang a stupid song, 
which, being but partially applauded, the chair 
made a louder noise than usual^ and said Miss 
Belville would oblige again. In a marvellously 
quick time up came Miss Belville with an entire 
change of dress, and sang a much less stupid song 
about a servant-of-all-work named "Sarah,'* in 
which the attempts at gentility of a young clerk 
and his wife, master and mistress of Sarah, were 
fairly satirised. The choruses, representing the 
continual bell-ringing and calling for Sarah, were , 
taken up in a perfect style by the audience, and 
in the midst of one of these Miss Belville vanished 
in a torrent of applause, at the very top of which, 
borne faintly like the sound of a signal-gun over 
the roar of the waters, the chairman announced 
that Miss B. would oblige again. 

Felix and his friends, amused in spite of them- 
selves, had scarce time to compare notes when the 
young lady appeared as a page in the time of one 
of the Henries . at least so she said, and no one 
appeared to contradict her. She was as gay as a 
prince in a burlesque, and sang and danced 
capitally and with great vigour, until, out of 



60 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS, 

breath and full of excitement^ she escaped again 
with unbounded applause, appearing a fourth time 
merely to bow her acknowledgments. 

'' That's a clever girl/' said Scumble, '^ and a 
fine one too ; now she'll go away to some other 
house and sing these songs over again, perhaps 
three times.'' 

'' Well, she ought to make money while the sun 
shines, for she is in a galloping consumption, I 
should say," said Felix ; " perhaps, too, she is 
working for others." 

" Yes," grumbled grim George Carew, "work- 
ing for us and our friends here, to amuse us. And 
what is she worse, for what we have heard, than 
those great artistes who exercise their diyine 
voices to please lords, viscounts, dukes, and the 
rich bankers, contractors, cheesemongers, lawyers, 
club-men, and rising barristers at Her Majesty's ? 
It's only a question of degree, not of kind. The 
staunch old Puritan preachers swore they were 
all children of the devil." 

" Hallo ! what's here P" ejaculated Felix, as the 
chairman, with much the look of a mute without 
gloves and with no hat on, came, and, twisting his 
jolly face into a most unhappy expression, began 
singing, " Come home, father," to a plaintive and 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 61 

not unpleasmg melody, while beldnd him a lime- 
light, projected from under the stage, threw a 
bright patch on the wretchedly-painted curtain, 
lighting up its hideousness until it was nearly un- 
bearable by the artistic eye of Mr. Scumble. The 
ditty purported to be the plea of a small child 
to its father, to leave the public-house and to come 
home> for Johnny was ill and mother was waiting 
for him ; and the recitative, solemn in rhyme and 
cadence, was fairly written and well given. When 
that finished, the curtain suddenly drew up and a 
thoroughly realistic tableau presented itself. 

It must have been the reflection of a scene only 
too familiar with dozens of the audience. A sot 
at a public-house, with the notices of Old Tom, 
a Goose Club, Billiards and Pool, and many of the 
low enticements familiar to the eyes of such men, 
maundered over his pipe and pot, while a pretty 
sailor-boy implored him to come home, and in an 
alto voice took up the recitative of the chairman ; 
then, suddenly, another scene at the back was dis- 
closed^ and the mother and child . ^the child sick 
even to dying, and the mother pale with watch- 
ing . ^were seen sitting in a wretched room. Still 
the drunken father remained, and the curtain fell. 
A second scene followed the chairman's second 



62 OTHER PEOPLE'S WIXDOWS. 

recitatiye, and tlie sick baby lay stiff and dead, 
laid out by the mother's hands, who knelt beside 
it. The picture was giyen with a terrible prsa- 
BaphaeUte vigour, realism, and ugliness. Any- 
thing more true it would have been impossible to 
see, save that the mother was cleaner than such 
sad mothers often are. So said Carew, who had 
visited many poor homes and seen the reality. A 
third scene followed: the brutal father endeavouring 
to strike the boy, but eventually coming home and 
falling prostrate, as the figure of the little child, in 
real bed-gown and false wings, rose like an angel 
at the back of the scene. When the curtain fell 
the applause was immense; wives urged their 
husbands to applaud, and applauded themselves ; 
and, indeed, the audience would not rest quiet 
imtil repentant father, natty little sailor-boy, 
mother, and child-angel, bowed their acknowledg- 
ments before the curtain. 

" Very low taste, isn't it. Scumble P'* said George, 
satirically. " You see, these poor people are not 
such fools after all. They teach themselves, and 
submit to teaching; the man sits down to a lesson 
from his own life. Would fine gentlemen dare to 
do so at the Haymarket, or the St. James's? If a 
new '' Marriage a la modCy^ a new story of demi^ 



MUSIC FOR THE MILLION. 63 

monde life, such as sensational novelists try to paint 
and never succeed in painting, were placed before 
the audience, what would they say P I do wish 
cant could be entirely banished. Here have I seen 
at music halls the vice of betting most vigorously 
exposed, satire administered to vanity, and such 
scenes as this only too often given. I maintain 
tiiat, of true morality . for all these scenic repre- 
sentations have a moral end . these working men 
and women demand and have a thousand per cent, 
more than the moral middle class has. Why, 
superfine sneering and superficial smartness haye 
got 80 much ahead that you eschew all plays 
with a moral, and have not intellectual back-bone 
enough to sit out Shakspere V 

Felix applauded these sentiments so much that 
George blushed ; and the chairman, fancying the 
noise proceeded from impatience, rang up the cur- 
tain and announced that the Great Bounce, or 
some one else equally great, would sing ; and, 
after a stupid song, the great one gave certain 
impersonations of kings, potentates, and great 
men, which, to say the least, were some very 
clever and some indifferent. In the midst of a 
ri-to-tum chorus, purporting that his Majesty the 
Sultan ** stood just so " . at which the great one 



64 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WIND0W8. 

poppod out dressed i la Grand Turk, and looked, 
at a distance, very like the photographic potentate 
. our little party left, and proceeded, not as they 
intended, to a tavern, but to Scumble's studio, 
where he assured them that his colour-grinder 
and general slave, a gentleman who had served 
her Majesty as a soldier and the regiment as bat^ 
man, and a variety of artists as a model, would 
cook them a chop each, and boil a pot of potatoes 
better than any club cook in the world. 

" But you've no fire,'' said Carew, withstanding 
the pressing Scumble. 

"Wonderful efiicacy that way in paint rags; 
gives a splendid taste to the chops. Come along ; 
BeHsarius wiU be going else." 

" Who is Belisarius ?'' asked Felix. 

" My man," said Scumble. "Splendid fellow a 
time ago ; but good living, stout, and kind treat- 
ment have spoilt him ; he is too old for Aristides 
and too fat for Belisarius." 

This our friends found when the door was 
opened, and the great Koman received his master 
with a military salute. However, the entertain- 
ment was perfect : Felix was delighted with the 
snug inside of the studio, and admired Scumble's 
new picture which he was preparing for the Boyal 



MUSIC FOR TEE MILLION. 65 

Academy. '' If I don't get made an Associate for 
that/' said the artist, 'Hhere is no justice amongst 
English artists." Whereupon Carew, who was 
taking a deep draught from a pewter cup of an 
antique form, gravely winked at Belisarius, and 
sent that brave man into an incontrollable fit of 
laughter. 



;<. 



66 OTSER PJSOPZirS WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER IV. 

IN THE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLB, R.A. (tn JuturO,) 

ELL, young one/' cried George Carew, to 
divert the attention of Scumble from his 
servitor's violent fit of laughter ; " is not 
this a jolly place P" 

Felix answered in the afErmative, and the 
reason why Carew winked so knowingly when he 
heard his friend Cimabue Scumble declare that if 
he were not made A.R.A. there was no justice, 
is lost to society. Perhaps it was because Belisarius 
and he had heard the remark before; perhaps 
some other artist, by whom Belisarius had been 
employed, had made the same remark in the hear- 
ing of the two. At any rate, the laugh ceased sud- 
denly, and Cimabue was by no means disconcerted. 

Felix looked round the studio and took notes. 
It was rather dusty, although Scumble's wife 
made predatory incursions into it, taking away 
Cimabue's money, which he kept in a tobacco jar, 



m TEE 8TUDI0 OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A, 67 

having the room scrubbed and the pictures wiped 
with a damp rag, and otherwise setting the place 
tidy : yet, on the whole, it was a model studio ; 
the earpet was good, the fire-place not wholly 
rusty and unconscious of black-lead, and the rag- 
shop of costumes not more than picturesquely 
shabby. 

On a dais opposite Felix stood a beautiful 
creature of the most wooden description . nothing 
less than a lay figure, but posed with such a 
yigour, and with such fury in her glass eyes, that 
Felix shuddered as he looked at her. 

" I'll ask Carew to tell you a story about that,' 
said the artist* ^' Most wonderful old figure that; 
belonged originally to Hilton, R.A." 

" What's she doing now,, my boy . something 
classical P^' asked Carew» 

" Te-e-s," drawled the artist, as if he had not 
made up his mind. ^Something classical, of 
course. I've been at Lempriere to-day about it ; it 
will be either * Queen Thorny ria receiving the Head of 
Cyru%y which she plunged, you will remember,, in 
a skin bag full of blood . I shall make it a golden 
bowl-. or, * Fulvia about to pierce tcith a bodkin the 
tongue of Cicero' . wonderful subjects, eh P" 

*' 'Twill do," answered the oracle. "Look at 

F 2 



68 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

those swords, Felix . ^real Andrew Ferrara tliat ; 
lias figured in a thousand fights on canyas. 
Observe those eighteenth century small-clothes; 
Dr. Primrose, the Vicar of Wakefield, has worn 
them in more than one exhibition. That armour 
belonged to the Black Prince in 1857, and was 
worn also by the Douglas when at the Suffolk 
Street Gallery, in 1861. That Scotch mull has 
been in the honoured hands of Belisarius here, 
when he sat for Jeannie Deans's father, and the 
plaid has been worn as an ornament by every 
British and Scotch character from Prince Vortigem 
to the Marquis of Montrose : 

* A painted vest Prince Vortigem had on, 
Whicli from a naked Pict his grandsire won,' " 

quoted the author, with mock solemnity. 

" Hang it ! none of your nonsense, Carew,*' said 
the artist "Come, Belisarius, bring out the 
materials, and then you can go home. Mind and 
be early to-morrow ; seven we will say ; I shall 
rise at six." 

Belisarius produced the materials from a Tudor 
chest elaborately carved, and silver spoons from a 
Morisco cabinet of wrought iron, and, having 
heated some water in a curious Japanese iron 
kettle, left the party to enjoy themselves ; silently 



IN TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 69 

they did so ; for sometimes Felix, looking at the 
intellectual fa6es of the two men, began to fancy 
that none in the world could be happier, " What 
a jolly life yours must be !" he said, " seeing your 
own creations grow beneath your hands; you, 
Carew, always ready to give your readers healthy 
occupation for their minds, and often noble and 
pure thoughts; you, Mr. Scumble, because you 
celebrate and perpetuate noble deeds, and are 
for ever striving nobly to represent the heroic. 
Your lives must have an elevation in them, which 
that of the city merchant, the mere money-grub, 
the solicitor, or the barrister cannot have. 
You '* 

"What an enthusiast the young one is !'* said 
Carew, brushing in to interrupt him. "Well, 
I dare say you are right. We are as happy as 
most people; should be perfectly happy but for 
three things.'* 

" What are they P" aaked Felix. 

" Why, the first two are small and unimportant. 
They are simply two things : critics for authors, 
and the hanging committee for artists. The third 
concerns us both : we are men, mere men. Per- 
haps we do appear,'' continued the satirist, with 
mock gravity, " something more than human to 



70 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

the young enthusiasts in the outside public, but 
the fact is the same nevertheless. However, the 
subject is getting personal. Cimabue here is the 
happiest of the lot, because an artist's work, like 
that of an architect, is always visible and easily 
appreciated, and the eye of the public is generally 
better informed than its mind; our black and 
white is more difficult of recognition, and v^y bad 
artists in my way are too often very popular. 
However, to change the subject, let me tell you 
Cimabue's story, and, to make it more life-like, 
fancy the good fellow forty miles in the country, 
and that you were reading this story out of a 
book." 



IN TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 71 




CHAPTER V. 

IN THE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, K.A. {in futuro)^ 

{Continued,) 

|RS. OROWSFOOT," said George Carew, 
commencing his narration by knocking 
the ashes out of his pipe, ''was in 
ecstasies of suspense . it was seldom indeed 
that she was in any other kind of ecstasies . ^but 
really the suspense into which she was 'thrown' 
equalled that of a penny-a-liner's 'neighbour- 
hood' when a murder takes place. Neighbour- 
hoods in which such ' coincidences' happen, and 
people of Mrs. Crowsfoot's temperament, are 
always 'thrown' into something. They never 
fall . ^they are ' thrown ;' and in this instance 
the respectable relict of Crowsfoot, of Putney, was 
' thrown' into a perfect lion's den of suspense. 

"Suspense . that is the word; other people 
might call it repressed curiosity . the widow termed 
it suspense. 



72 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINBOWS. 

^^ The trath is, that Mrs. Crowsfoot let famished 
apartments on the first, and nnfomished ditto 
upon her second floor. The windows of the latter 
(it had three) had a very pleasant and aiiy aspect, 
and also a strong north light, which was perhaps 
the reason that the rooms were selected by Mrs. 
Crowsfoot's tenant. The first floor was let to a per- 
fect Model, a man who always paid upon quarter- 
day, who never scolded the servants, who was ever at 
home at eight o'clock at night; and who, in return 
for his goodness . ^for these people know their 
value . expected the house to be kept as silent as 
the catacombs whilst he was at home. The Model 
had been allowed to have his way ; he was intensely 
selfish ; and, as the rooms suited him very well, he 
stayed, and his landlady quoted him, wondered at, 
and praised him. 

'' The second floor occupant, at the time I refer 
to, had been in Mrs. Crowsfoot's house but one 
quarter, and had paid, when he came, for two in 
advance. He had furnished his rooms himself . 
he had them cleaned by his own hand, or, at 
least, one of them, and never allowed either his 
landlady or her servant to enter his front room. 
To his bed-chamber, indeed, they were welcome 
to come and go ; but the adjoining room, wherein 



m THE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 73 

he spent most of his time, was a sanctuary hitherto 
unprofancd. Hence Mrs. Crowsfoot's suspense. 

''You suggest the keyhole^ That had flashed 
into Mrs. Crowsfoot's mind at an early stage of 
the process . ^minute observations had been made 
through it« The widow was as practised as an 
artilleryman^ and could take flying eye-shots at 
any angle with a precision which showed that she 
was an adept at the art ; but there was something 
in that room which puzzled her beyond everything. 
^There, in a chair, not far from the door, sat, night 
and day . ^for she had seen her . a female, beauteous 
in form, with a profusion of light brown hair, 
calm, and apparently in grief, bent forward and 
weeping . she had heard her sob and sigh, quietly, 
but deeply. Sometimes she was standings and 
sometimes she reclined. Mrs« Crowsfoot could 
see so far ; once^ indeed, when her lodger had gone 
for a walk, the widow had caught sight of a very 
beautiful face ; but the knock of the mysterious 
man who had paid for that Blue Beard chamber 
frightened the observer away. 

'' One thing was certain^ the incarcerated lady 
never left the house . ^nay, never stirred from that 
room; and Mrs. Crowsfoot was ready to swear, 
before any magistrate, that she had never legally 



74 OTHER people: 8 WTSDOWS. 

entered it. Not that Mr. Gmiabiie Scumble, 
lier mysterious friend, did not liaye yisitors; of 
these, it may be said that they formed part of Mrs. 
Crowsfoot's ' suspense ;' and that lady objected 
to them strongly ; but of what use was that, when 
two quarters' rent in advance had been demanded 
and paid ? These visitors were snch qneer people: 
two of them (the men) were for^gners ; the one, 
a huge fellow with a short cropped republican 
.head, and flowing beard and moustache; the 
other, a fair man, of less tremendous proportions, 
bnt whose light beard and hair were equally 
foreign, and, to her, repulsive. He was a German 
. * And,' said the landlady, ' what good ever came 
from Germany, except Prince Albert and the 
broom-girls ?' 

" Then the ladies, generally pretty, but with such 
a curious confident air; so loose in their gait and 
dress, without the slightest appearance of stays 
about them. Mrs. Crowsfoot was a perfect 
enthusiast for stays, and declared that the people 
who did not wear them could not possibly be of 
any good in the community. The way in which 
these ladies and gentlemen walked in and out of 
Mr. Scumble's sacred apartment, and stayed there 
for so long a time without having any refreshment 



IN TSE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 75 

excepting pots of half-and-half, offended the land- 
lady; there was something very wrong in the 
society which could tolerate such ways. And, 
gracious goodness !-^no, you will not believe it 
. ^the widow looked through the keyhole of the 

door, upon one day, and saw ^but I am not at 

liberty to write it. What she saw, or whom, shall 
be a secret for ever. 

"It may have occurred in your experience, 
that your landlady has made you a depositary of 
her secrets. So was it now with Mr. Cittichap, 
of the first floor, who was intrusted with the accu- 
mulated and still accumulating mystery. There had 
been, within two weeks of the arrival of the myste- 
rious lodger, a packing-case, just large enough 
to hold a human body, brought to the house ; it 
was heavy, very heavy, and at the top pierced 
with holes. Mrs. Crowsfoot did not hesitate to 
call these holes breathing-holes, and hinted . 
indeed, went much ftirther than hinting . ^that in 
that packing-chest the victim of her second floor 
lodger arrived. Poor creature! What things 
are done in London ! Here, within the heart of 
the metropolis, with policemen round and about 
her, was a tragedy going on, as deep as was that 
of the Iron Mask . a mystery as impenetrable as 



76 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

the identification of King Charles' executionery or as 
that of the writer of ' Junius' Letters.' 

'' Besides this, the lodger would persist in half- 
closing his windows all day. The shutters were 
half shut, so as to admit light only from the top ; 
nay, sometimes two out of the three were closed 
altogether, so as, in a manner, to baffle his land- 
lady, who thereon made friends with the opposite 
neighbour, and borrowed an opera glass to peep 
into them. ' Law bless me !' said the opposite 
neighbour ; ' I know what he is : he's a hartist.' 
' A hartist P' said Mrs. Growsfoot, * he's no 
hartist. I had one lived with me before, and he 
used to have lords and ladies visit him in coaches ; 
and used to paint wonderful; and, oh! such 
beautiful ladies they were; such 'eds of air, 
and such dresses; and then he had great men 
come in uniforms to be painted, and Scumble has 
none o' them. Oh, he's no hartist, you may rely 
upon it, mem.' And the opposite neighbour owned 
that, in this particular, Mrs. Crowsfoot was 
right. 

" Beside this window-closing, there was a screen 
in the room, which, being frequently drawn across 
the doorway, completely shut out any peeping. 
Sometimes it was more completely drawn round 



IN TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. IT 

than at others; sometimes^ but seldom, it was 
closed. What could he want with a screen? 
Was he a forger, and the wretched woman his 
wife P Was he a gambler, or a villain who had 
run away with some lady, who lived with him m 
dread and shame, apart from all P 

" * Oh, sir, what shall I do P' said the lady, in 
distress, to Mr. Cittichap ; ' my house is becoming 
a " Mystery of London/' ' 

" * Get rid of him as quietly as possible,'* was the 
answer ; ' do not make a row over it ; if the house 
is at all likely to be exposed through it, I must 
leave you, I must really ;' and the lodger glanced 
roimd his comfortable room, to every comer of 
which he had got used, with quite an air of dis- 
tress. * By the way,' said he, " have you corre- 
sponded with her P Is there no way of doing so P' 

** The widow had thought of it before . ^there was 
only one way, and that had been tried. She had, 
upon two occasions, poked letters \mder the door, 
couched in general terms, which she had hoped 
would have reached the prisoner, but they did not 
produce any result. 

*^ The truth is, about these letters, that they had 
fallen into the hands of the very person against 
whom they were written, and the lady, for whose 



7S OTSER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

advantage they were intended^ had never read 
them. In fact, Mr. Scumble himself had been 
seen coming down stairs one morning, reading a 
note, in a female hand, to this effect . 

" * Unfortunate Stranger, . ^Friends are at 
hand. They will relieve you. Communicate with 
us. If paper be denied you, use linen, or a plate. 
Trust in us. We can take measures for your 
immediate release from the perils which surround 
you. When unobserved, knock three times with 
the poker against the fourth scroll of the paper 
from the mantel-shelf. All will be well. 

" * Yours, &c., 

" ' A Friend in Need/ 

'' Alas ! each letter must in succession have 
fallen into Scumble's hands, for he was heard, in a 
satirically jocular way, to accuse his accomplices 
(the visitors aforenamed) of having written them, 
and of having dropped them in his chamber. It 
was when these visitors came, that Mrs. Crowsfoot 
tried to peep into the room, but a large screen was 
drawn before the door, which served effectually to 
block out any introvision as regards the chamber. 
And then the very windows were always blinded, 
the upper half of the shutters alone being left 



IN mE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, RJ. 79 

open, so as to shed a little light down upon the 
dark doings of Scumble. 

''Under these circumstances, the landlady, setting 
all personal interest afar from her, determined to 
penetrate into the mystery, or to part with her 
lodger. She would do this quietly . she would 
have no noise, but do it she would ; she could live 
in suspense no longer. 

" Mrs. Crowsfoot was polite to all her lodgers . ^it 
was her rule of life, of which she never repented, 
and by which she had once acquired a legacy. 
But people who are always polite are, somehow 
or another, generally the rudest people in creation. 
Nothing can be more insulting than a sarcastic 
politeness, and Mrs. Crowsfoot had achieved a 
manner which cut one to the bone, as sharply, 
certainly, and suddenly as a Javan kris. It was 
with this weapon upon the tip of her practised 
tongue, together with the defensive armour of a 
new silk gown and a widow's cap, that she hoped 
to attack and rout Mr. Scumble. She waited for 
him for a whole hour before he arose, and heard 
him whistling, splashing, puffing, and blowing in 
his shower bath, and hissing, as he rubbed himself 
dry, as if he were an hostler rubbing down a 
horse. . * A great vulgar fellow ! and to serve my 



80 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINLOWS. 

house as he has done !' said his landlady to herself. 
** I'll giro him notice this Terj day, that I will, 
and get him oat hy the quarter-day/' 

<< The nnoonscious Scumble next went to work 
with two hair-brushes upon his bushy black hair, 
and the enemy outside heard the '' rasp, rasp'' of 
bristle against bristle for some time. Then came 
a silence: the mysterious lodger was adjusting 
and tying his cravat. Mrs. Crowsfoot, bursting 
with impatience, listened and waited, and waited 
and listened. 

''At length boots were pulled on, the walking coat 
put on . a very loose affiur which buttoned to the 
chin and let the great Scumble beard (celebrated 
and well kndwn in Frith Street) fall upon the 
breast ; then a felt sombrero was tossed upon the 
head, and the manly stride of the lodger advanced 
to the chamber-door. He was in great glee, for 
he whistled, and sang, and chuckled, and said to 
himself, once or twice, that he thought it would 
*do.* His landlady caught the words. *0h, 
you're a nice gentleman, you are!' she said. 
' Do ! yes, I think it will do. I'll do for you, and 
no mistake.' 

''Nevertheless, her determination rather retired 
apace, when Scimible, walking, as Speed hath 



IN TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 81 

it, 'like one of the lions/ opened the door 
suddenly, and looked her full in the face. Her 
nefarious practice of peeping had rendered her 
guilty as to her feelings, and she felt that she 
might not be able to answer very well how she 
obtained this mighty secret. 'Truth/ said the 
widow, 'stands upon four legs . a lie upon one; 
therefore, I'll out with it . I will, at once . I'll 
speak out, I will . ^yes, that I will.' 

"She had retreated up four stairs when her 
lodger came out, so as to appear casually passing, 
and she had, therefore, to oyeortake him as he 
descended. She caught him just by the door of 
the quiet lodger ; that individual had begun his 
first egg. 

" 'Oh ! Mr. Scumble, sir,' cried the lady, in the 
most frigidly poKte tones. 

" ' Ma'am,' said the individual addressed, taking 
off his hat and bowing, ' ma'am, what is it P 

" ' I want to speak to you, sir,' said the widow, 
severely; 'I am grieved that you should have 
used my house as you have used it ; and I came, 
sir, to say that I give you warning.' 

" ' Warning !' said Sctmible, innocently ; * what 
do you warn me of?' 

" ' Oh, you . Sir,' answered the landlady, 

G 



82 OTHER PEOPLE'S WUVDOJFS. 

giving herself a severe check, * I give you notice 
to quit my house for ever. To think that I 
should ever be subject to what 1 have ; that my 
house should be mentioned in the papers !' 

" ' In the what, ma'am P' said Scumble. * What 
is all this about P Take care, woman, what you 
impute to me.' 

" * Woman !' shrieked the widow ; * woman ! 
and this to me ! Here, Mrs. Dander ! Mrs. 
Dander!' 

" Now Mrs. Dander was a worn-out old house^ 
keeper, who served Mrs. Crowsfoot as servant ; but 
that did not prevent the model lodger, who loved 
a row, from relinquishing his second egg, and 
popping upon the combatants with a vile pun. 

"*Egad, sir,' said Mr. Cittichap . *egad, sir,' 
and he nodded at Mr. Scumble, 'you must have 
insulted this lady very intensely to have fetched 
her Dander up so early.' 

"Mr. Scumble was standing with his face to 
Mrs. Crowsfoot, his eyes opened wide, and his nostrils 
dilated rather more with excitement than anger. 
His landlady, on the contrary, with her lips tightly 
closed, was pressing one hand upon her side and 
leaning with the other upon the balusters, her 
breath getting fast and short, and her whole figure 



IN TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 83 

swollen with rage. Mrs. Dander, in the mean- 
time, was waddling upstairs, puffing and blowing 
under the exertion ; for it was the peculiarity of 
this excellent creature's life, that she was daily 
being killed by * them stairs/ Once upon level 
ground, and she was equal to anything ; but * them 
stairs ' killed her. 

*' * Dander,' cried her mistress, addressing her 
by her surname as if she were an actress . and it 
is to be remarked that amongst the gentler sex 
only actresses, young ladies educated at the Aca- 
demy of Music, and milUners, dispense with the 
prefix, and talk to each other as we men do . 
* Dander, I appeal to you ; what did you 
see in this man's room . in my room, in my 
house ?' 

^' Dander was at her last gasp, and, although 
adjured, for that reason remained silent. 

" * Now, pray be composed, ma'am,' said Citti- 
chap, in a conciliatory tone ; * and Mr. Secondfloor 
' . ^I really don't know your name . what is all this 
about, sir P' 

** * What the deuce have you to do with it?' cried 
the astonished Scumble; 'perhaps you will be 
kind enough to be silent and shut up.' 

'' Cittichap shrank backwards, alarmed at the 

G 2 



84 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

fierce looks of Scumble ; and the landlady, turning 
to him with the sweetest smile, said . 

'' ' Thank you, sir ; I am sure I expected such 
behaviour from so proper a gentleman ; do not 
interfere . he might also behave as a ruffian. No 
words, sir ; don't speak to me' . ^this was addressed 
to Scumble. 

" ' Now, Mrs. Dander, what did you see in this 
person's room P' 

" * You,' gasped Dander, with her hand on her 
side . ' you see it as well.' 

*^ ' I know I did,' replied the landlady, majesti- 
cally. 

" * Through the keyhole,' added Dander ; * and 
you had a cold in your eye and the brow-ague for 
a fortnight afterwards.' 

" * Well, woman,' interposed Mr. Cittichap from 
behind his landlady, * well, what was it P' 

" * A woman,' said Dander. 

" ' Good gracious !' said Cittichap, ' you don't 
say that P' 

" * I do,' said Mrs. Crowsfoot ; * I say more ; 
and I say that for more than two months . ^yes, for 
ten weeks and for three days . that poor creature 
has been incarcerated in that ruffian's room, and 
has never stirred out I' 



IN TEE STUDIO OF 0. SCUMBLE, R.A, 85 

" * A monster !* said the model lodger. ' Why 
don't you call the police, and have his room 
searched ?' 

" * I will, sir ; thank you, sir, I will,' said the 
widow. * And now, sir, was I not right in for- 
bidding this person my house P' 

"The face of Scumble wore a grim smile; a 
savage look of satisfaction lighted up his face, and 
his eyes had even a merry twinkle in them ; such 
was his coolness and audacity. He advanced to- 
wards Mr. Cittichap, and said . 

" * A monster, am I P you shall pay for this.' 

* Police !' shouted Cittichap. 

* Don't, sir, don't,' cried Mrs. Crowsfoot ; 

* never mind him. Don't expose the house; it 
will get it into the papers. Now, Dander, what 
else did you see P Stand between him and the 
stairs, so that he don't run away.' 

" * I shall not attempt, ma'am,' said Cimabue, 
with the strange smile alluded to still upon his 
face ; and he leant against the wall composedly. 

** * I see,* said Dander, in answer to her mistress, 

* a lot of his friends, as he had got me to get 
porter f(»r, all arranging theirselves and a-stretch- 
ing theirselves, and a-busting theirselves; and 
every one on 'em was stripped to the waisteys, 



it 



86 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

und they was a making po^es pkuitieks of them- 
8clvcs all around of this unfortunate young lady as 
was still and mute with sorrow.* 

** * There, sir !' said the widow, with a triumph- 
ant and appealing look to Mr. Cittichap, * there, 
sir ! what do you think of that P' 

" The model lodger turned up his eyes, shut his 
tooth, and, after the manner of Mr. Charles Kean, 
muttered, * Beast !' 

" * What did you say, sir P' shouted Scumble ; 

* what P' And he sprang towards him ; but Mrs. 
Crowsfoot forestalled him, and defended her lodger 
by fulling in a fainting condition into the tatter's 
arms. 

" ' I'm your man, sir,^ cried Cittichap; *but I 
am at present engaged with this lady ;' and then 
ho shouted * Police !' with all his might. 

" ' Ay, we will have the police,' said Scumble, 
coolly. * Dander, run and fetch one.' 

** * No, don't : don't leave us,' said the Firstfloor> 
in an alarmed tone. 

" * I shall not touch you,' returned Cimabue. 

* Fetch one, Mrs. Dander, at once.* 

" The old woman did as she was bidden, and X 24 
walked in shortly afterwards. In the meantime, 
Mrs. Crowsfoot had revived^ and had said, in i^ 



IN TEE STUDIO OF 0. SCUMBLE, R.A. 87 

£aint yoice^ holding still tightly to the collar of 
her model lodger, 'Ah, sir, he had some reason 
for never letting me into his room ; but to think 
of my house . of our house. coming to this ;' and 
she squeezed Gittichap tightly. 

" * Woman V said Scumble, 'I had reason, which 
shall soon appear/ 

" * It shall ; indeed it shall, monster,* returned 
the landlady, again comfortably crumpling her 
widow's cap against Mr. Cittiehap's cheek. 

***Now, then,' said the policeman, who ap- 
proached the group with the gasping Dander . 
'noWj then, who is the householder here, and 
what am I wanted for P' 

" * To search my room, if you please,' said 
Scumble. ^I have something nefarious concealed, 
so my landlady says ; and so, perhaps you will all 
walk this way.* 

'^ So saying, he led the assembled people upstairs. 
The policeman, with an important step, followed 
him ; next came Mrs. Orowsfoot, supported by her 
model lodger ; and the excellent Dander, still out 
of breath, brought up the rear. 

''It was remarkable that, during this short 
transit, the guilty Scumble still wore upon his 
bearded face the same impenetrable smile. He 



88 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINBOWa. 

opened the door coolly and deliberately, and the 
whole cortege passed in. The room was bare, 
without a carpet, and certainly scarcely furnished. 
Upon an immense easel in the centre of the room 
stood a large historical picture, just finished ; the 
paint was yet wet, and luckily no dust had settled 
upon it. A moveable dais, with a tent-like struc- 
ture of red baize upon it, stood in the comer, and 
upon that, lying on her face, was stretched, in 
white garments, the victim of Oimabue Scumble, 
upon whom he had practised his nefarious de- 
signs. 

'' Mrs. Orowsfoot gave a shriek of horror, and 
cried, * We are too late I too late !* which was 
answered only by a hoarse roar of laughter from 
Scumble, when, after raising the victim, she let it 
drop stiffly to the ground, with the cry of ' Chad 
gracious^ it's only a dummy !^ 

"'There,' said Oimabue, *the murder is out. 
That figure is my lay figure. I have been long 
engaged upon this picture, and I did not think it 
necessary to tell my landlady about it ; and also, 
I did think it requisite to shut my door closely, 
and not to let these women kick up a dust here. 
Now, Mrs. What's-your-name, what have you to 
say to this P' 



IN TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, R.A. 89 



" The widow was nonplussed. * I . ^beg . ^yonr 
pardon/ she said. * I hope, sir, you won't * 

" Scumble did not let her finish the sentence, 
but turned to Cittichap. *And now, sir,' said 
he, *what have you to say to calling me a "beast" 
and a " monster " P' 

" * Why, a-hem,' said that gentleman, * that I 
was only defending a lady ; and you know, sir, 

that . a-hem . I'd better go and finish my 

breakfast; my third egg is as cold as a 
stone.' 

" * Don't go, sir. don't leave us yet,' said Mrs. 
Crowsfoot, faintly, * assist me down stairs.' 

"*With pleasure, ma'am,' replied the model. 
* And you, Mrs. Dander,' said he, turning on hei^ 
fiercely, since he could not visit his wrath else- 
where, * why did you mislead us, too, with your 
poses plastiques and ' 

" * There they are, sir,' said the artist, pointing 
with pride to a group of half-naked Britons. * We 
painters are obliged to have models, and don't 
generally, as people suppose, get it all " out of 
our own heads." ' 

" The group, policeman and all, turned to the 
magnificent production, which hath subsequently 
adorned the walls of the Academy, and expressed 



90 OTEER PEOPLES WINDOWS. 

their approbation in terms more warm, than 
judicious; so warm, that Gimabue, qnite ap* 
peased, declared that he was about to send the 
picture off that yery day, and that he would forget 
and forgiye all if Mr.Cittichap would giye a dinner 
in the yery room as an apology. Ue then put a 
shilling into the policeman's hand, and ran down 
stairs to get a yan to moye his work of art; 
and thus escaped the infliction of further apo- 
logies. 

''Mr. Cittichap did giye a dinner; and it 
was at that repast that I first learnt the storyy 
being inyited thereto by Cimabue ; and was wit- 
ness also of the offer of the model lodger's hand, 
he being in his cups at the time, to Mrs. Crowsfoot, 
who now owns that limb, without, indeed, the heart 
of the modeL 

"Of the picture, what shall be said? perhaps 
I had better read the notice of the ' Kit-Cat 
Journal' upon it. Scumble has got it here in his 
acrapbook. 

'* ^Boadictia karan^ia^ tAf loemi (So, 401). Ch 
mji'V^ S^-^mf^le, The ardst has hese oome out in 
full fon>e« The injuivd British Queen, with her 
two daughters si»u^ at her knees i^ maV^ng an 
impasdaned ^^eech to the assembled Britons. A 



m TEE STUDIO OF C. SCUMBLE, RA. 91 

Eoman prisoner, with steadfast look and raven 
beard, contrasts forcibly with the fair-haired and 
yellow-bearded aborigines of this favoured isle ; 
whilst the fair daughters of the Queen, the one in 
wild, and the other in passive grief, cannot fail to 
arrest the attention of the spectator. The costume 
is correct, the grouping excellent, and the drawing 
fine. Scumble is an adept at anatomy ; each figure 
is a study. We may object to the handling, 
which is too massive; and also to the flesh of 
the Britons, which is a little too pink ; but, 
upon the whole, it is a national picture, wor- 
thily painted. We predict great things from 
Scumble.' 

'' So said the critique. Has Scumble done great 
things P'* asked George Carew, looking with a 
smile at Felix, who had been absorbed in the 
story. " Well, perhaps not. He has not fulfilled 
his promise ; but how many a blossom upon the 
early summer fruit-trees, fair, beauteous, sound, 
and excellent in promise, will bring forth but sorry 
fruit ; how little of that fruit will ripen, how much 
fall by untimely frosts ; and, of that which ripens, 
how little will give forth seed to the world, which 
shall grow up for our children's uses into noble 
trees ! Scumble did not fulfil his promise, perhaps ; 



92 OTHER PEOPUFS WINDOTTS. 

who amongst us does P but he did do this : he 
stayed for many years with Mr. and Mrs. Citti- 
chap (late Crowsfoot), and that lady and Mrs. 
Dander have been often heard to say ^ that they 
never had a better friend than the Mysterious 
Lodger.' " 



FELIX BITS FOR HIS PORTRAIT 93 




CHAPTER VI. 

FELIX SrrS FOR HIS PORTRAIT. 

FTEB our friends had laughed heartily at 
Mr. Scumble's early adventures, and the 
artiet himself had rLonstrated in Btrong 
terms on the "chaff" with which Carew had 
interspersed his narration, Felix, feeling for his 
latchkey, shook hands with his new friend and 
declared that he would seek his home. 

" Very good,'* returned the author ; " as I live 
near you TU go with you. This fellow is a regular 
nightbird. He is up at aU hours of the night, and 
I'm sure does no good to himself." 

" Not so sure of that," returned Cimabue ; 
" however, good night now. I shall be very happy 
to see you, sir," he said to Felix . ^for he was a very 
simple respectful man, this little somewhat shabby 
genius . " and if you will come some of these days 
I'll paint your portrait in return for your sitting ; 
for I like your face." 



94 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Felix blushed, but did not feel at all angry with 
the good artist. " I'll come," said he ; " Mrs. 
Straightways would be delighted, I am sure, with 
my picture done by such an eminent hand. My 
holidays come on shortly, and, unfortimately for 
my wife, I can't exchange them. The head of our 
room is a terrible old boor, and as despotic as the 
Grand Turk." 

" Well, we'll help you to spend them, old boy," 
said George Carew. "I've been working too hard 
lately, and I mean to ' walk around,' as they say 
in America. A lovely coimtry that, Cimabue ! 
Why don't you rush over there and find out how 
art flourishes P Good night." 

" Good night," returned the painter, seeing 
his friends to the door ; then, lighting a fresh 
pipe, he sat down to read Sir Joshua Reynolds' 
Discourses^ and, having paid a fresh tribute 
to the genius of that great man, went to bed to 
dream of his art, and of the Prince of Wales 
visiting his studio, and graciously stooping to pick 
up his maulstick. He was full of romance and 
love for his art, and never for a moment thought 
of anything but that art. His life was therefore a 
happy one. Can a lawyer say so much P Does a 
divine, absorbed in theology or the active duties 



FELIX SITS FOR HIS PORTRAIT. 95 

of liis office, revert in his day and night dreams so 
frequently and so happily to his duties P Scumble 
thought of his art day and night ; he never saw a 
pretty child but he fancied how well it would suit 
such and such a picture ; no lady fell into a grace- 
fill attitude but Cimabue marked it, if he were 
present, and wished that, like Hogarth, he could 
take home a reminiscence of it on his thimib-nail. 
He was as constant a watcher of the heavens as an 
astrologer, but it was to mark the cloud-beauties 
of the sky ; he was learned in the cirrus and the 
nimbus, and would tell anyone who was with him 
what colours should be mixed to produce such and 
such an effect. He had . ^not unwisely, as some 
people affected to think . married one of his models ; 
and the lady, who perfectly understood him, and 
worshipped him and his art, used to look out fine 
faces for him, which, had she been richer and more 
highly bom and connected, she would perhaps have 
failed to do. 

" Cim,'' she would say, " I've found you such 
a beautifiil Briton, all flaxen hair, and such blue 
eyes, Cim ! oh, they are lovely, they are !*' 

" Have you P^' he would say, for a fine face put 
him in a good humour for all the day. " Where is 
it P Is it male or female, Bella P'' 



96 OTHER PEOPLE'S WZNDOWB. 

'' Oh, it's a girl, Cim, at a fdr-ahop in Oxford 
Street. ' Law bless me» miss !' thought I as she 
showed me some chinchillas^ * shouldn't I like to 
take you home in a cab, and pull off that muslin 
gown and wrap you up in those skins for my 
husband to paint 1 You must get her, my dear; 
you must. Such a lovely skin she's got ^" 

'' Bella, you're a trump ; you shall have the 
skin for a tippet and cu£b.'' 

" I mean her skin, Cim," returned Bella ; " it's 
lovely, all red and white ; and a perfect glow of 
beauty on the cheek . ^none of your Madame 
BAchel's abominations." 

And so this good creature did manage to get the 
young lady, whose face created quite a sensation 
when seen in one of Scumble's pictures in Suffolk 
Street. Bella was never a bit jealous, and, to tell 
the truth, looked out as often for a handsome male 
model as for one of the other sex. ^' When found 
make a note of," was her motto ; and perhaps it is 
to this generous behaviour of hers, that Scumble 
owes that reputation for freshness and variety 
which he has acquired. 

As Felix found Mrs. Lotty progressing very 
nicely with the baby, and as, too, his chief insisted 
upon some one of the office who could be relied on 



FULIX SITS FOR HIS PORTRAIT. 97 

taking his holiday at oncey so that an efficient 
representative should be found for her Majesty's 
Inland Sealing-wax Office during the chiefs 
absence, it fell out that for three weeks or a month 
Felix Straightways had his own time very much 
on his hands. 

** I shall not go out of town, Lotty,'* said he . 
determining in his mind that he would get 
Scumble to paint his portrait, and present it in a 
glorious gold frame to his wife, as a reward for 
well-doing, and a surprise when he should first 
carry her down-stairs. 

" Oh, my dear," said the little wife, " you must 
be pining for fresh air, I am sure. Take a run 
down to the South Coast now." 

" Pining !" returned the husband, exhibiting 
his browned and manly face ; " do I look like it ? 
No, my dear, I am going to visit Carew and some 
Mends he has introduced me to, and we are going 
to take our amusement by visiting the suburbs, and 
Greenwich, and the Zoological Gardens, and " 

Not a word about Scumble's promise did he 
say. 

"Are all Mr. Carew's friends literary men?" 
asked Lotty, somewhat dejectedly. 

** No ; some of them are artists, and, I can tell 

H 



98 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

you, wonderfully clever fellows too. Then, too, 
Carew is going to take a holiday with me ; you 
know his time is his own." 

** How nice !" said Lotty ; " but, my dear" . here 
she looked ruefully and put out her white hand to 
him . " but, my dear, are not these literary men 
and these artists terribly wild fellows ? You know 
what they say in society, and what my aunt. Lady 
Sanguine, said, who was once a great admirer of 
Doctor Lardner, you know, and you know, Felix, 
that the Doctor ran " 

" Bother Lady Sanguine, Lotty ! what good 
did she ever do to us except give us . or you . 
those splay-footed, antique, wretched ormo/^ candle- 
sticks for a wedding present P My dear Lotty, 
Carew is a noble fellow, fond of his children, fond 
of the memory of his wife. I declare I am 
ashamed of the way in which the world treats 
authors. It is ever ready to believe everything 
that is bad of them; ever ready to learn from 
their books, and yet to ignore the teachers. For 
shame ! for shame ! Why, Lotty, those very teachers 
must be hypocrites, or else, as they give us such 
true and noble thoughts, they must be noble men." 

" Dear Felix," said his wife, perfectly convinced, 
" I will believe your Mr. Carew is the noblest and 



FELIX SITS FOR HIS fORTRAIT. 99 

the best of them ; I am sure he must be good to 
like you, my dear, and no doubt he gives up 
plenty of grand offers of friendship and loads of 
invitations to great people. Lady Sanguine, you 
know, was specially fond of having an author at 
her feasts. Don't you, remember how she trotted 
out that great genius Mr. Simperly, M.P., who 
had made some wonderful translations from the 
Runic which the (Quarterly noticed ? Well, you 
may go ; and every evening, dear, when you come 
home . you must not be out late, you know . you 
shall come home and tell me what you have seen." 

So the thing was settled, and Felix, in great 
triumph, told George. blushing as he said it- 
how he had defended the authors. 

" Ho ! ho !^' laughed grim Carew, rubbing his 
unshaven beard with the back of his hand, and 
sticking his MSS. together; "that's just what 
many think, and she, poor little lamb, accepts the 
reflex of the world's opinions for her own. Loads 
of invitations . eh, sure ! that's about as true as 
our wickedness." 

"Ay; but, Carew," said Felix, tapping the 
mantelshelf and the looking-glass, in the side of 
which were sticking invitations to this learned 
society, to that exhibition, or to view this piece of 

H 2 



100 OTHER fEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

presentation plate whicli the great silyersmiths 
Burnish and Frost were making, '^ what do you 
say to these ?" 

" Ah ! Felix, my boy, you will learn in time that 
a man is not loved for himself, but for his place. I 
get these things because people know that I am 
connected with the press, and they want a notice. 
AVrite * Value received ' on every one of those, 
even on Mrs. Sherringford's grand ball there. 
Has not Dickens shown you what Mrs. Leo 
Hunter was ? Is not * Leo]' the Latin for * Lion,' 
and are not nous autres in some sense lions P" 

Felix opened his eyes, not so much at the words 
as at the bitter tone of the author. 

** Umph !" said George, after he had thus de- 
clared his creed. " I am not going to say any 
more. I shall make you just as selfish as myself. 
I am getting terribly so, old fellow. What should 
a boy of twenty-two summers, like you, know of 
the sentiments of a used-up old party like myself? 
The man of forty does not see things exactly in 
the same bright light as the youth of twenty," 
and the author hummed the tune of a song of 
Stranger's : 

** * Leste et joyeux je montais six stages, 
Dans xin grenier, quand j'etais a yingt annees.' 



FELIX SITS FOB BIS PORTRAIT. 101 

Come along, I suppose you are going over to 
Scumble's; and I can tell you he's waiting for you. 
He's never satisfied when he has seen a fine face 
until he has painted it; and, young one, your 
'mug' is worth remembering." 

Felix put his arm through that of the broad-shoul- 
dered author, and went out, nothing loath, to the 
painter's. They found Scumble up and doing. That 
eminent man found that the long and leggy designs 
now so prevalent in art paid him as well as the 
more ambitious works which he gttve to canvas ; and 
Belisarius, without whom Scumble was nothing, 
turned his gUttering eyes round to the two friends 
as they entered and saluted them with a familiar 
grin. He did nothing less ; for the Boman general 
was attired in a country coetume-an old brown 
shooting-jacket of Scimible's, a pair of leather 
spatter-dashes, and from a crooked stick over his 
shoulder depended a bundle in a handkerchief, 
while in his waist-belt was stuck a reaping-hook. 
The warrior was making a great stride forward, 
and stood with rigid muscles and set figure as stiff 
as a post. 

** Ah, I see," said Carew, nodding ; " making 
use of the old boss again." 

" Yes," returned Scumble ; " for one of those 



ioi> ornER jeEOPLirs windows. 

situpid, creamy, silly, moral stories in 'Cantwell's 
Magazine.' Of course we must be * goody,' and 
therefore there is no incident. How, now, is a 
fellow to illustrate a number in whicli the only 
lively sentence is this . reaUy the only sentence 
with motion in it . * Took his tmy over the fields to 
II diafant farm ' ? You perceive Belisarius is going 
to a distant farm ; and a capital farmer he makes. 
That will do ; I'll give you another turn in the 
evening. Boxley the woodcutter . engraver he 
calls himself . will be sending for the block to- 
morrow." 

" Capital magazine, Cantwell's P" asked Fe^ix, 
who was a simple soul. 

Then it was that George Carew made one of 
the most clever pantomimic faces ever seen, ex- 
pressive of sudden sea-sickness ; so expressive, 
indeed, that Belisarius and his master both burst 
out into a loud roar. 

" As good as other magazines, p'raps," said 
Carew. " Pays a lot of men for their names and 
starts fair ; falls into the respectable silly groove 
at last ; objects to its love being made too strong, 
and takes good care to be always moral ; is foild 
of small essays by clergymen which show that 
good people never starve, and by implication that 



FELIX SITS FOR HIS PORTRAIT. 103 

all they who are well to do and in comfortable 
circumstances are good people. Do you see that ? 
They publish . those people . a kind of tea-table 
philosophy, and * go in ' for what will sell/' 

" Ought we not to be very happy to think that 
what is good and harmless mil sell P" asked Felix. 

" Good and harmless," sneered Carew ; " 1 
demur to both adjectives. That which is untrue 
can never be either good or harmless." 

" Bravo, Boanerges ! I quite agree with you ; 
but in the meantime I make a livelihood in illus- 
trating tea-table literature." 

" Ah ! you are a base lot," said the author, 
laughing, but rather bitterly than heartily; 
"but, my poor fellow, if we authors and artists 
(mly knew our own power, how we might help on 
the glorious times that are to come ! The publisher 
does not sell the book ; it is what you and I give 
the public that sells the book ; and if we would 
only be true to ourselves we could reform the 
world." 

" And a pretty reform we should make of it," 
said Felix, "seeing that we ourselves are the 
world." ' 

^ " Ah, there's something in that, too," returned 
the author. " I tell you what it is, Straightways 



104 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

. you must be one of us : you are too clever for 
ordinary society." 

Felix, in the meantime, liad been looking over 
the studio, and saw beauties in it by daylight 
that he missed by gaslight. The lay figure, of 
which so terrible a story was told, looked, it is 
true, less lifelike, and the general accessories more 
shabby and ding}% but on the whole the studio 
was improved by its shabbiness, while the light 
brought into being a thousand beauties in the 
artist's sketches, begun and not finished, which 
lay about in profusion ; for, with that love of 
creation which underlies every true artist, Mr. 
Cimabuc Scxmible had expended much genius in a 
most prodigious number of sketches, each of which 
had promised to be the most beautiful ever done, 
and each in its turn had been laid aside with some 
degree of disappointment. 

At present Scumble was busily engaged with 
Belisarius in placing a Louis Quatorze chair on an 
estrade ready for Felix, and preparing the light 
so that he could present a fair subject for the 
painter. A fine kitcat size canvas, fresh and 
as yet imspoiled, as Care);^ said, was being 
placed on the eajsel ready to receive our hero's 
face. 



FULIX SITS FOR HIS PORTRAIT. 105 

"Hallo!" cried Felix, at last; "here's a sad 
little story here ; what is it ?*' 

" Oh, that," said Scumble, squeezing out some 
paint from a tube . " Oh, that . ^well, it has a long 
story connected with it, and if you will sit down 
in that chair I will tell it you." 

" A little lame boy in a mourning cloak and 
weepers standing near a shabby old maa. Why, 
I could make a story out of that myself," saidCarew. 

" Ah ! I dare say you could," returned the 
artist ; " but truth %b strange . stranger than fic- 
tion, as you did not say. How proud you would 
have been to have been quoted aU over England 
like the noble bard !" 

" Bother the noble bard ! let us come to the 
story. Sit, cousin Felix ; sit, good cousin Straight- 
ways. Will that do, Scumble P What a wonder- 
ful thing art is, is it not P Well, if the divine 
Urbino himself would transmit my mug to pos- 
terity, I should think the tnatter dear at the price, 
the pains and the penalties of sitting for it." 

"A little to the right; chin not so much 
elevated. Now don't look as if you were Ajax 
defying the lightning, but as if you were simply 
yourself . ^an honest, middle-class English gentle- 
man, and a good fellow, as you know you are. 



106 OTEER PE0PLIP8 WINDOWS. 

Ah! that gives you more confidence : don't laugh, 
please. Look over at Carew, there, and mark how 
carefully he fills his pipe. He always smokes after 
breakfast to compose his thoughts: that is why 
his leaders are so respectably heavy. Quite ready 
now P Belisarius, prepare some pale ale, bottled, 
and biscuits, behind that screen ; and now, while 
you have that interested look " 

** Catch, ere she fall, the Cynthia of this minute/' 

quoted Carew, cleverly sending a ring of smoke 
up to the rafters of the studio. 

" I will tell you the story of the sketch that 
interested you ; following the lead of our master in 
letters there, I will tell my tale as if it were out 
of a book." 



THE SEXTON" B WINBOW, 107 




CHAPTER VII. 

THE SEXTON^S WINDOW. 

HY a sexton," said Scumble, mixing some 
colours on his palette^ and gazing intently 
into the face of his sitter, as he com- 
menced his story, "should exist in a town wherein 
he is allowed to bury no man it is not for us to 
inquire. Suffice it that he so exists ; that his bell, 
with its little black wooden handle, hangs by a 
jointed bit of rusty wire just outside his window ; 
and in the porch of a church, around which roars 
hy day and night, now loud, now faint, now 
stirred to a wild frenzy, and then settling down to 
an indistinct and sullen noise, the ceaseless traffic 
of London. At some distance from the porch 
which leads to it is a tall, four-spired bell-tower, 
wherein hangs one of the most solemn bells in 
the world, to the sound of which, as it strikes 
eight in the mornings, sunny, or clouded with 
fog, or whitened by the thick-falling snow, some 



108 OTSER PEOPLE'S WINLOWS. 

hundreds of human beings have been brought out to 
die ; and once upon a time, if not now, the sexton 
had to toll the passing-bell for the poor wretches 
who, from the high scaffold, could see the grey 
stones of the church, the graveyard with its patch 
of green, and the clinging ivy which has crept up 
the walls and covered the spaces between the win- 
dows ; nay, in casting their eyes up to heaven as 
they passed out of the low door of the chief prison 
of the ancient city of which I am speaking, the 
condemned ones might have seen the heavens 
around the four spires of the church, which rears 
itself above the sexton's window, and have noted, 
with a glance quick as the lightning's flash, that 
the four vanes on the steeple-top pointed four dif- 
ferent ways ; *yea,' says Howel the traveller, *like 
unreasonable people hard to reconcile, who never 
looked all four upon one point of the heavens.' 

'* The little window looks upon a faded church- 
yard, on which the rain has fairly had its play, 
and, undisturbed by the sweet winds of heaven, 
has beaten the very life and soul out of the earth 
and the green things upon the earth, and formed 
nothing but splashed cups of soft mud. But a few 
trees, worthy of a better place, such as a paradise 
in soft Devonian wood or on breezy Sussex down, 



TEE SEXTOJTS WINDOW. 109 

struggle to add verdure to God's acre, though it 
be in a smoky city, and man's dead lie unheeded 
and forgotten with the roar of human seas aroimd 
them. Trees are affected by artificial light, and, 
a good old gardener teUs us, die for want of sleep. 
Do they ever want to go out of town ? Do they 
not dream, as they murmur in the hot summer 
air, of soft virgin mould and coimtry showers? 
Do they not sigh to shed, as do our town plane- 
trees, their sooty bark, and wrap themselves in 
green soft moss, and listen to the songs of birds . 
to the piping country larks, woodlarks . none of 
your town-bred skylarks, who sit perched upon 
their squares of turf like fat landed proprietors, 
but who, imlike some of those large-acred lords, 
peer through the iron bars of their cages, and, 
without repining, pour out full-throated songs in 
praise of the warm simshine, the blue sky, and 
heaven itself. 

" Inside this little window you may see the sexton 
in his room. He is an old man, with a bare head, 
nearly as naked as a billiard-ball, and looking like 
a long yellow egg somewhat out of shape. A few 
books, a dozen or so parochial notices, a hat 
turned up at one end of the brim, from a constant 
habit of its wearer of looking up at the bell- 



no OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

ropes; a cotton pocket-handkerchief, of a faded 
blue colour ; a stout, worn stick, with a large 
mud mushroom at the end, and yery shiny 
and crooked in the handle; and a little crutch 
. a child's crutch only . in the comer of the room. 
** Such things,'* continued the artist, after rising 
and looking intently into the eyes of his sitter, 
"the eye of any one will catch, as he looks into the 
room of Mr. Mathew Bohn, Sexton of St. Saviour's- 
at-Hill. Above the mantelshelf is a blunderbuss, 
with a brass barrel and a flint lock, with a priming- 
pan as big as a saltcellar ; and there, too, polished 
and kept as an ornament, is a bell of somewhat 
ancient date. If any one wishes to know more 
about that hand-beU, a tall black board outside the 
door will tell him that good citizen Dowe did 
leave, two himdred and fifty years ago, a sum of 
money, that the sexton might toll, in the still 
hour of night, this hand-beU as near as he could 
to the cell of the fast-dying man . a man dying in 
sound health, bethink you . and cry out a kind of 
doggerel warning him of his fate : . 

* All you that in the condemned hole do lie, 
Prepare yon, for to-morrow yon shall die ; 
And, when St. Saviour's bell to-morrow tolls, 
The Lord have mercy on your souls !' 



TKE SEXTON'S WINDOW. Ill 

*' In those good times how often . ^let us say at 
least every Monday morning . ^was some poor 
creature awakened by the rough suimmons of the 
beUman from the sleep which Nature had kindly 
given him, as a respite from the thoughts of 
wrong and cruelty, neglect and death, which 
racked his worn, tired brain. 'And many died 
innocent then, sir,' said the sexton to me. * Those 
were dreadful days. days of blood-money, days 
when Jonathan Wild, and some o' them awful 
men as wicked authors and publishers make 
heroes of, bred up their victims to the gallows, 
just as one breeds chickens for the spit/ True 
enough it is. * But, after all, they were good old 
times then,' added the old man, and he nodded 
his head, and began a low whistle, expressive 
chiefly, it may be, of his admiration for the 
times. 

" * Mr. Dowe, sir, he did a good thing, though,' 
said the sexton one day to me as I sat by him in 
his room near the porch. * He meant well, you 
see ; and them as means well cannot always go 
wrong anyhow. You see the High Toby Swells 
who died game . ^the Gentleman Jacks, and Jack 
Sheppards, and such people, did not die off there 
then ' (he nodded his head in the direction of the 



112 OTHER FEOPLira TFINDOJTS. 

city prison) ; * but there was crowds come early 
to see 'em brought out, and they followed 'em 
too : and some on 'em stepped boldly into the 
cart, and sat on their coffins ; and some hung down 
their heads and wept ; and them as was any way 
currish, the crowd, I've heerd, shouted at and 
jeered. Poor souls I a many of 'em hung for 
stealing of five shillings, maybe. But the lads 
that died game came out in a tarnished laced coat, 
and a cocked hat may be, with a lace scarf, 
bought by some women who loved 'em, for the last 
ride on to Tyburn. For you see, sir, that among 
the many things that men 'a got to thank God 
for is that women don't desert 'em at the last, 
whether they are as good as heaven's saints, or 
as bad as . ^them as is the opposite to such, the 
Lord forgive 'em. "Well, sir, to prepare 'em for 
that dreadful ride, my ancestor in this office, him 
as went before me long years ago, used to look 
over the yard wall, and cry out, " All good people, 
pray heartily for these poor souls who are going 
to their death !" ' 

"'Poor souls, indeed! Why, this place is 
thronged with memories,' said I, looking into 
the quiet wondering face of the speaker. 

" ' Yes, yes,' said the sexton. * Fp those wide 



TEE SEXTOIPS WmDOW. 113 

stairs that lead to our galleries, how many prayer- 
ful souls have mounted ! how few steps go up now ! 
We fill our galleries with charity boys, sir, and, 
as I sifc in my seat, I can look down on the young 
rascals flocking round the big organ, and looking 
staid and solemn enough in their faces, 'cos they 
fronts the master, but playing at odd and even 
behind his back, or suckin' away at physic bottles 
full of liquorice-water, which they thinks finer 
than champagne, I dare say. Boys will be boys, 
sir ; and in our City churches, which are not very 
full anyhow, it's lonesome like for children/ 

" ' It is indeed,' I answered. ' It would be well 
to have children's services, as we have children's 
story-books and magazines ; and in those litanies 
one could tell them all the love and beauty 
of the gentle faith, and give them the sweet- 
scented flowers of religion, without the thorns of 
doubt and the brambles of wickedness and error.' 

** ' Ay, ay, sir,' said the sexton, taking up the 
poKshed Kttle crutch and dandling it on his knee 
with evident affection ; ' that's just what little Jim 
said, years ago. He's a wise child, sir ; very wise 
indeed. You should hear him; it would do you 
good. He plays at parson sometimes, and reads 
me a solemn sermon, I can tell you.' 

I 



114 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINBOWS. 

" * How old is he now ?' I asked. 

" * The same as ever ; just rising eight/ answered 
the sexton, shaking his bald little head^ and look- 
ing dreamily in the fire. * They don't grow old 
there; there's no time, no day and night, no 
striking of the clock or tolling of the death-bell 
up in heaven. "Well, before little Jim became as 
he was, the very last grave as I opened here, on 
the north side of the church, was to put away 
Jim*8 mother, who went away from me as all the 
people go, and left me and Jim a- waiting. He 
was only six, and he stood in his black weepers 
and little cloak on the side of the cofi^, and said, 
quite calmly, "Mother won't come again." " No," 
says I, " Jim, my man, she won't," and I choked 
like ; " but she was obliged to go," says I, " because 
she was called ; but where she is she'll wait for 
us." " Oh," said the boy, looking bright and 
sensible, " that'll do then ;" and he never asked a 
word, but laid his little pale face aside of mine in 
the night, and when he woke up in his pain . ^for 
some drunken fool had thrown the child down and 
lamed hiTn long before . ^he said, " Mother waits 
for us, father ; when shall we two start ?" 

" * You must know that he was not sad, sir ; he 
was as merry as a bird, and hopped about the church- 



THE SEXTOITS WINDOW. 115 

yard on his Kttle crutch, calling it his garden. He 
didn't grow in his body, it was all in his mind, 
sir. He leamt his letters off the tombs, or out of 
the church books, and used to look up to the stone 
cherubs as his little brothers. I often wondered 
at that child . so wise, so thoughtful, looking, as 
he would sometimes, from the tower window . ^for 
I carried him up there on fine days. at the crowds 
of people going on, and never wanting to leave me 
to go out and play, " See, father," he would say, 
" there they all go past and leave us ; they never, 
never come and take us, for we wait for mother 
tiU we can go home there." 

" *He had no more doubt, sir, that that was home 
than I have now . ^now he's gone to it, and some- 
times comes to me. He used to think some of 
the verses on the tombstones very queer. " Afflic* 
tion sore long time I bore," he used to sing, 
as if it were a ftmny song ; for he said that if 
one tried to forget one's pains, and looked 
forward to goin' home, as the boys that came 
and played with him amid the grave-stones did 
to their holiday, one wouldn't mind it much. 
When the sun came roimd in the evenings, near 
to settin' like, it glinted from the west along the 
wall of the church, and fell upon the grave of his 

I 2 



116 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

mother, where Jim would go and sit. It was 
behind the church, for the wardens didn't allow 
such as me to have one of the best places. Yes, 
sir; tombs is like situations. I once took little 
Jim up to the big cemetery, for a treat . ^up at 
Eensal Green there . and there,' said he, * were the 
tombs all shoTing each other, and pressing into 
front ranks along the sides of the walks, shoulder 
to shoulder. ** Come, dress up there," says a big 
moniment, *' and you little graye-stone fall back to 
rear rank." Yes, sir, they sizes them just like they 
do the grenadier company in a regiment. Well, 
we've got one of the hinder ranks ; we are rather 
squeezed into a comer ; but when the last trump 
sounds, and they beat to arms up there, I dare 
say we shall be able to get out. You see I've 
been an old soldier, sir, and know all about it. I 
used to drill Jim with his crutch, and when he 
said (because we tried to grow flowers on the grave 
and for want of air they withered) . when he said 
as our bed was a little too backwarder, I told him 
that one of the manoeuvres in war was to change 
face, left half face, left half face again, or right 
about face at once ; and that then the front rank 
fell into the rear after aU. In summer evenings, 
when the old beUs about here chimed the evenin* 



THU SUXTON'8 WINDOW. 117 

hymn, little Jim came out to this comer hit, with 
his crutch and his milk, and looked to his flowers. 
He had great patience with 'em, but somehow 
they wouldn't grow. They looked beautiful and 
smelt sweet for, oh ! so short a time ; then grew 
spindly, and died ; and I couldn't find no comfort 
for Jim, but he found it for himself. Yes, sir, he 
thought it out in this ways : 

" ' Father,^ says he, one day, in the winter, 
looking up with an eye as bright as a young 
blackbird's, ' there's a many flowers we've put on 
mother's grave.' 

" * Yes, Jim,' I answered. 

" ' And none on 'em ever growed much to speak 
on,' says he. 

" * I can't say they did, Jim,' I returned, 
thoughtfully, for them flowers somehow mouldered 
down ; they tried to grow, they did, I'm thinking, 
but they was unsuccessful ; and when things are 
imsuccessful, somehow we blames 'em. 

" * You see,' says he, ' though it's a bed for 
mother and us, it's a grave for them poor things, 
brought all out of the country, may be out of the 
sweet fields and the scented hedgerows that I read 
about, and so, taking to their grave, they die, and 
go through that narrow gate to heaven. And in 



118 OTHER FEOFLirS WINDOWS. 

the fields up there, where mother's waiting for us, 
they grow, no doubt, larger and finer ; and the 
good thoughts and sweet sayings weVe had about 
her, and the flowers we've planted round her 
grave, don't all die, but spring up in all their 
glory to delight and please her in the fields of 
heaven/ 

"*Why, Jim,' says I, 'that's about as good 
doctrine as ever parson preached. There was a 
yoimg curate . ^young curates are flowery, sir . as 
did something like it, but not quite so good. 
' You've solved a mystery to me, my boy. Out of 
the mouths of babes ' 

" * Ah, father,' says he, with a sweet smile, * I'm 
going up there soon to look after that garden 
against you come. I feel very tired like, and 
weak, and my back does ache so, and my heart 
goes heavily, thimip, thimip, thimip . as heavily 
as my crutch along the aisle when people look 
at me as I go out of church on Simdays.' 

" * Jim said no more, sir ; that night he went 
away. Se was curled up, with one red spot in his 
white cheek, early in the morning lying awake, 
and he woke me. * Father,' says he, *I saw 
mother last night, and she spoke to me the first 
lines of that old hymn: "Teach me to live." 



TEE SEXTOJTS WINDOW. 119 

** Oh, I know that, mother,*' said I, " bed and the 
grave are one to me, for you are there . and 

now '* ' then a twitch of pain passed across him 

and made him open his sweet eyes-oh, so wide, 
with such a different look from that they ever bore 
while living ! and then it seemed to go, and he 
turned and kissed my hand, and laid his cheek upon 
it with a great sigh of relief, and smiled upon me 
ajs he went away. 

" * He sometimes comes again, sir, but he doesn't 
want a crutch now. He gives me good advice, 
and when I toll the bell for wicked men I see 
him looking sad and praying in the dark ; but 
most times he's radiant with love and smiles, as if 
he had long ago found out the flowers and the 
fields that grow in the sweet coimtry that lies 
beyond the grave/ " 



120 OTRER PEOPLirS TTUWOWS, 




CHAPTER VIII. 

SOME WIN1X)WS IN BOW STREET. 

HE three friends sat silent for some time 
after Scumble had concluded his story. 
At last, with a sigh, Felix said, " *Tis a 
great pity that poverty can't be done away with/* 
Upon which Carew, knocking the ashes fromhia 
pipe, arose, and said, with as much of a sneer as he 
ever allowed himself when any thought of Felix's 
merited castigation, " Is it not a great pity that 
the Devil is not banished at once, and that Dr* 
Cumming's millennium is not here ? What cowards 
we are getting ! Why, we can banish poverty if we 
like ; we can destroy all its evil and its sad effects ; 
we can make people better and teach them to be 
wise . if we can manage only to agree on: the way 
to set about it.*' 

" I tell you what,'* said Scumble, gravely ; " I 
have been poor, and still would be ; poverty is a 
most blessed condition. That poor little chap of 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW STREET, 121 

whom I have spoken had the best of it, and has 
not missed his heaven; whereas I and Carew 
there '' 

" Don't talk of us, you beggar,'' said the author. 
"We are to be pitied or made much of. 'Tis 
those rich ones, with their twenty thousand a year, 
who do nothing ; those are the men yrho will be 
pinched. Is it not so, Cimabue ? Don't we work 
with the sweat of our brains, and ought we not to 
enjoy all that we get ?" 

" Capital and labour," said Felix, sententiously. 

" Eh ! what have we to do with that ?" asked 
Carew. "Whenever a man is stumped in con- 
versation, he cries out something about capital and 
labour. You, Sir Oracle, what is it? Do you 
mean to say that we do not labour ?" 

Not by any means," answered his friend Felix ; 

you labour well, I believe, and to good ends . 
only you, and such as to whom God has given talent, 
are rich men, just as rich as those to whom He has 
given estates of several hundreds a year. And 
you'll have more to answer for, I can tell you ; for 
those poor people, who indeed are much to be 
pitied, who are J)om to large estates, great duties, 
a terrible disinclination to fulfil those duties, and 
a swarm of base sycophants about them, every one 






122 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

looking out to get money from them, have their 
hands much more hampered and their brains a 
good deal more muddled than yours." 

" Oh, they have, have they P" laughed Carew. 
" Hark to him, Cimabue : isn't he rich P Why, 
the young one is enough to delight a whole gallery- 
full of pressmen," 

" I don't know but what he is right, though, 
Carew. I know that I would rather be bom with 
a passion for art, and a capacity of earning money 
by my art, than to an estate of many thousands a 
year. But, look ye, don't let us talk in this way 
of apportioning faults. There are faults, grave 
faults among us, and every day the people . ^that is, 
the working people . are getting more and more 
impatient of them. I've seen that for a long time." 

" Ay, and I too," said Carew, looking gravely ; 
*' and I am sorry to see that almost universally, 
save in one or two noble instances, the press blinks 
the whole questito. But the Lords are awake to 
their danger, and so are the Commons . ^some of 
them. They are ready to yield anything at a 
moment's pressure, not because the demand is 
just, but because they fear that resistance would 
lead to an uprising. It seems somewhat absurd 
to predict a servile insurrection in England, does 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW STREET, 123 

it not P and yet, really and truly, I fear that we 
shall have a bad one nnless our laws are amended. 
But there is one comfort. The English put up 
with a great deal, and put up with it for a long 
time. Why, how long ago was it that Home 
Tooke cut the ground from imder the lawyers, by 
proving that they did not understand their own 
language P'* 

" If they do, they understand more than I do," 
said Cimabue. " I have just got a lease to my 
house, and I will be hanged if I comprehend it." 

" Yes," continued Carew, " Home Tooke abim- 
dantly proved that he was the victim of non-compre- 
hension on the part of his judges of * two preposi- 
tions and a conjunction.' And remember that the 
judges he convicted were men then and now 
honoured as Kghts of the law. There is a sen- 
tence of his that I have learned by heart, it is so 
tme and so fitted to warn any one who writes for 
the pubKc. ' Mankind in general are not aware 
that words without meaning, or of equivocal 
meaning, are the everlasting engines of fraud and 
injustice ; and that the grimgribher of Westminster 
Hall is a much more fertile and more formidable 
source of imposture than the ahracadabra of 
magicians.' " 



124 OTHER PJEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" I should think it was," said Felix; " but what 
did he mean by grimgribher ?" 

'* His editor makes a note of it ; all I can tell 
you is that Bentham uses it, and that I understand 
by it a confusing jargon. * It may be connected/ 
says the editor, * with gramaryey which is, probably, 
a corruption of grimoire, which signifies a con- 
juring book, in old French romances, if not the 
art of necromancy itself.' " 

Carew was about to add to this explanation, 
when Belisarius, who had gone down-stairs to 
answer a knock, returned with a card. 

" By Jingo ! twelve o'clock !" said Cimabue, 
looking at his watch and then at the card ; " why, 
I declare IVe forgotten my appointment with 
Lady Boulter. Show her up, Belisarius. Will 
you excuse me, Mr. Straightways ? I have a very 
sufficient reminiscence of your face, and I can 
finish it another time." 

"Lucky for our friend," said Carew, clearing 
away the pale ale, and hurrying with the pipes 
behind the screen. " I hope her ladyship won't 
smell the tobacco." 

" Bless you, she will not mind it ; she looks 
upon Bohemianism as a natural state for an 
artist. Here, light this pastille : mingled with the 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW STRJEET, 125 

scent of the tobacco and the smell of the paint, it 
will form a nice perfume. Good morning ; pray 
come again whenever you have time." 

So saying, Mr. Scumble rose and welcomed a 
charming lady, who was delightfiilly polite, and 
whom Carew and Felix saluted respectfully as 
they passed out. 

" Well," said Carew, " how lucky it was that 
Lady Boulter arrived ! I wanted to get away, 
for I am about to read a play at the Crow Street 
Theatre, and I've no doubt that you would like 
to go with me. We have plenty of time : let us 
stroll down Bow Street, and lounge about Covent 
Garden for a while." 

" Delighted, I am sure," returned Felix, who 
began to think that he should spend his holidays 
very pleasantly. "What a capital fellow your 
friend is!" 

" As good as gold," returned Carew : " they are 
simple honest fellows, the artists, when they are 
not spoiled by society." 

" Spoiled by society ?" asked Felix, looking up 
in wonder: " how can that be ?'' 

" Why, you see, many of them get very much 
asked out, and give themselves monstrous airs in 
consequence. In fact, artists are more appreciated 



126 OTHER PHOPLirS WINDOWS. 

than other men of genius^ partly because their 
works are more easily understood, but chiefly 
because they come more readily in contact with 
great people. Now you will see that Lady Boulter 
will ask Cimabue to one of her soirees, and he, 
silly fellow, will go." 

" Why is he silly, if he likes such company P" 

" Because he will be out of place there. Most 
of the people are stupid, and will stare at him as 
they would at a tumbler or saltambanqtie, and the 
others, who are not stupid, are too much engrossed 
by themselves, and their own fancied importance 
as big- wigs, to say anything. Besides this, doth 
of gold and cloth of frieze don't mix well 
together." 

"I am afraid you are a dreadful democrat," 
said Felix, with a smile. 

" Not a bit of it ; a true aristocrat, if our aris- 
tocracy were the Aristoi, the best and wisest. But, 
above all these reasons, a man of art has no call 
to waste his time in these frivolous assemblies 
which all people hate, and only give just to be in 
the fashion." 

By this time the two friends had reached a 
street celebrated enough in its way . one of the 
streets of the world, if there be such. It has its 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW STREET. 127 

name every day in the papers^ and its court news 
is of more true interest than that given with such 
loyal unction by the Court newsman. It is true 
this court is a police court; but matters apper- 
taining to life and death are debated therein^ and 
outside the door, beyond the guard of lounging 
police officers, whose stolidity seems to transcend 
the most stolid of the British nation, are broken 
men, dazed and anxious women, parents half 
maddened with the knowledge that the guilt and 
shame of their child will anon be published, wives 
whose red eyes and trembling hands attest the 
love they have for their fallen husbands, and 
beyond these the usual motley crowd of hangers- 
on, fldneurs, idlers, people who always have half- 
an-hour to spend, and prefer to spend it some- 
where where their feelings will be touched. 

" It's a wonderful street, this street," said George 
Carew, standing opposite the theatre, "and some 
wonderful people go up and down it. You will 
observe that it is always simny, when there is any 
sun to be seen, and that; lounging up and down 
and in and out these taverns, you see a tribe of 
men who are closely shaven, pale, cadaverous- 
looking, but yet with something of the air of 
genius about them." 



128 OTHER FEOFLIPS WINDOWS. 

" Yes ; who are they ? They are pale enough, to 
be sure. What fine eyes some of them have, and 
what lank cheeks!^' 

**Ay, ay," continued George, nodding familiarly 
to one of these gentry. " These are the actors ; 
most of them, too, I fancy, out of work. You see 
that there are several theatrical agents in this 
street, persons who are supposed to have great 
influence with country managers, and who can 
get young Thespians an engagement with fine 
pay and all that, at any time in the year. But 
these agents are, for the most part, fellows who 
promise much and do little." 

**Mere humbugs," said Felix, throwing in a word* 

"Well, I wonH say that. Some of them are; 
but, really, the theatrical profession, as its devotees 
call it, is so poor, so uncertain, and, to the crowd 
employed, so miserably disappointing, that one 
cannot wonder at its agents being sad fellows. 
Why, they send young fellows to learn their art 
down in the country to a wretched theatre, where 
the ghost never walks." 

" Ghost never walks ! Where they don't play 
' Hamlet,' I suppose you mean," said Felix, rather 
puzzled, but convinced that he had hit upon the 
true solution of the difficulty. 



SOME WINDOWS m BOW STREET. V2\^ 

**Not a bit of it. Theatrical slang, which I 
dare say seems very witty to adepts . ^like all slang, 
by the way . is essentially stupid to outsiders. 
Why they use such a phrase, I don't know, but 
the ghost's walk means the payment of their 
salaries. Does the ghost walk to-night ? is a 
question often asked with the most bitter serious- 
ness and the deepest concern by a heavy tragedian 
with, it may be, a sick wife and a large family of 
small children. But, here, don't let us talk about 
it : it is true that the profession has large prizes 
for some people, if they choose to sacrifice time, 
genius, peace of mind, and reputation too often, to 
the metier, but the realities of the profession are 
too stern and hard to be spoken of calmly by a 
man who has feeling. Why, sir, there are men 
of fifty, first-rate actors, scholars and gentlemen, 
who can't get a decent engagement at six pounds 
a week ; no, nor at half that sum." 

" Three hundred a year," said Felix. 

"Ay, if you take the year round," returned 
his friend : " but what actor is able to do that ? 
No one. Hallo, Belville, is it you ? What are you 
doing ?" 

This was addressed to a short brown man, with 
his face painfully shaven, and not without a certain 



130 OTHER PEOPLirS WmDOWS. 

dry humour about it, who came up in company 
with a taller man, also scraped and shaven up to 
his very ears, and behind and above his ears too. 

** Bobbish, my boy," said Belville. " So you've 
got it out at last, 'ave you ? Well, it will be a 
buccess, I can tell you/' Mr. Belville was one of 
those merry, sanguine men, who, enjoying good 
health and a fine digestion, are in a good humour 
with the world, and seem determined to make every- 
body else in a good humour with them and it too. 
He was always prophesying success to others, and 
sometimes was not mistaken ; he praised everybody, 
and never said an ill word of any one ; so that 
some people suspected him of being false, or, as 
they phrased it, a humbug. But Belville really 
thought that every -aspirant would turn out a 
Kean, and, with considerable appreciation of art, 
was so good-natured that he let his judgment too 
often fall asleep. 

The tall muscular man, his companion, he in- 
troduced to Carew as Tommy Milano, the clown . 
" the best clown," he said, " since Grimaldi," who 
apparently set the fashion of Italian names, for 
Mr. Milano was a John Bull to the backbone, and, 
although he was humorous enough on the stage, 
with a whitened face and triangular patches on his 



SOME WINDOWS m BOW STREET. 131 

cheeks, looked more Kke a stalwart sporting-man, 
with bronzed cheek, and a healthy appearance 
too often foreign to gentlemen of his profession. 

"Ain't he lookin' prime, sir?" said Belville. 
"Ay, he's a wonderful creetcher, he is; been 
playin' to full 'ouses at Margate, makin' 'is 
fortune." 

" 'Old yer tongue, 'Arry Belville," said the 
clown. " No such luck on the cards ; 'ouses 
pretty good, but we poor fellows don't make for- 
tunes nowadays." 

As he spoke, Mr. Milano, as well as Mr. Bel- 
ville, looked round for applause ; and the conscious 
strut of the one, and the looks of the other, testi- 
fied that they were quite ready to accept the 
flattering nptice of the urchins and little shop- 
girls and clerks who pointed them out, with a 
" There, that's 'im ; that's Tom," which was by 
far too frequent for Felix, who found himself one 
of four who suddenly became the centre of attrac- 
tion. 

" Well, now," said Mr. Belville, " what's up ? 
Your young friend, sir, 'as a nice face for light 
comedy. I want a good walking gent, as must be 
tip-top in 'is wardrobe ; and I can promise 'im 
thirty bob a week." 

K 2 



132 OTHER PJEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" Ah, that 18 not his forte," said Carew, with a 
smile. 

" Isn't it, now ? Well, p'raps I'm wrong ; but 
now I look, he wouldn't make a bad first old man, 
if he was mugged up a bit, you know." 

** Well, when he wants an engagement," said 
the author, drawing his friend's arm within his 
own, and moving onwards, "I'll apply to Mr. 
Harry Belville, theatrical agent. Good morning." 

*' Yes, that's it. I'm sure to fit 'im ; IVe several 
good jobs on. The old shop, recollect." And 
then, lapsing into a momentary forgetfulness of 
the shop, he asked, with an insinuating smile, 
" What are you goin' to stand P" 

Carew shook his head good-naturedly, and 
passed on. " Queer fellows, are they not ?" said 
he, when they were fairly out of ear-shot, and the 
great Tommy Milano . whom little boys looked at 
in the expectation that he would spring through 
one of the shop windows, and then appear at the 
first floor, with *' How are youP Here we are 
again !" his own familiar greeting . ^had turned up 
Crow Court to ascend to Mr. Harry Belville's 
offices. 

" Well, I don't feel flattered at being taken for 
an old man, first or second," returned Felix; 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW BTREET. 133 

*'and what the dickens did the man mean by 
being *. mugged up ' ? '' 

" Slang ! slang again ; the curse of society ; a 
mere shibboleth, which will eventually destroy our 
languaga You must understand that when one's 
fece is properly set to carry age and character, 
expression . such as wonder, sorrow, piety, anger 
. and painted, whitened, reddened, or wrinkled, 
it is 'mugged up.' The phrase may not be known, 
but the custom is well understood, in all kinds of 
life. I once knew two men, one a Stock-Exchange 
man, and the other a gentleman travelling for 
orders in the wine trade, who made as much in a 
week as I do in a month. They both used to set 
their faces for business ; the latter gentleman had a 
peculiar, bland, pleased, cheerftd expression quite 
foreign to the man, but which made his fortune." 

" Surely you are jesting." 

" Not a bit of it," said Carew ; " I study people 
and speak the truth, even what I see and observe. 
A friend of mine . indeed, a school and college 
fellow . is a ritualistic clergyman, and he walks in 
procession up the aisle of his church, following his 
acolytes and choristers. Sometimes I go with 
him into his vestry ; and let me tell you that he 
really sets his face and assumes a pious, beatific 



134 OTHUR PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

expression, not unlike that found in the works of 
the Spanish religious painters, which is greatly 
admired by his congregation. I don't say the 
man is not earnest, though I know him to be weak 
and foolish ; but I assert positively that he ^ mugs 
himself up ' for his holy office, and puts on an 
expression, just as he puts on the green and gold 
things which he was the first to assume/' 

" Oh, dear ! oh, dear !" said Felix, with a sigh 
. for Carew's conversation carried conviction with 
it . " what a world of masks it is !" 

*' Right you are," returned Carew, quoting the 
prevailing slang; "here you can see them all 
for nothing/' 

He swung his young friend round suddenly to a 
shop in which all kinds of masks were to be seen ; 
some grinning horribly, some with terrible and 
distorted faces, pink eyelids, green eyes, horrent 
mouths, noses full of pimples, and cheeks of a 
varied and blossomy character, which was enough 
to frighten any one into teetotalism . that is, if we 
suppose the masks to have been of the contrary 
economy. That ingenious artist Dyk Wynkyn 
had exhausted his ingenuity in devising these 
dreadful coverings for the human face divine: 
some were in the shape of owls, some of bears> 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW STREET, 135 

some of dogs ; and elephants, pigs, tigers, and 
lions were not absent. 

" Here," said the author, *' is part of the para- 
phemalia of a pantomime. Paraphernalia is a 
good word, is it not ?" 

" You ought to know," answered Felix ; " pretty 
good, I should think." 

" No, it is not ; I hate long and fine words ; 
and, moreover, it does not fit. Head-gear, or 
head-furniture, would do better. Why we sub- 
mit to the preliminary nonsense in masks, rhymes 
without reason, spoken through pasteboard, so as 
not to be heard, I donH know. All I can say is 
that every reasonable man can see a fine opening 
for a pantomime that should be beautiful and 
poetic, not nonsensical and monstrous; however, 
here we are, and there is some of the frippery of 
the stage. 

*^ Next door, you see,^' said Carew, passing on- 
wards, " is the celebrated Mr. March's shop, the 
costumier's. Mr. March can find you dresses for 
any period in the world's history, even that of 
Nebuchadnezzar, when he went on all fours and 
ate grass ; for he has some strange animal dresses. 
He will dress 'King John,' with four hundred super- 
numeraries, or ' Box and Cox/ with only thi^ee 



U6 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

characters, and, what is more, will furnish a dozen 
theatres at once. Here, look at his window. 
There are some fine shoe» and swords : those long 
lank pink things are what are called tights, 
literally hose . ^the calves are ingeniously stuffed 
with wool : there's a clown's gaberdine next to a 
king's dress ; here a knightly helmet, and there 
the headpiece of the Iron Mask : here is a bishop's 
mitre, and there a fool's beuble. Was there ever 
.such a levelling-place in the woiid? In this 
window, as in the grave, we lay down all digni- 
ties^ all paintings, patchings, heraldic devices, 
great state and titles, and all the lendings of 
the world. Come away^ and see what miore can 
be seen. 

" Here is our friend the barber's ; you may find 
all kinds of * thatch ' here, as a friend calls it, for 
any head. There is the wig of a wise judge, there 
the carroty poll of the fool; here is Hamlet's 
light hair, a la Mr. Fechter, who is, I apprehend, 
undoubtedly correct in that ; and here the black 
Charles II. locks, that Mr. Edmund Kean and 
the crew who copied him used to play it in ; 
here is Jack Sheppard^s coiffure, there the beauti- 
ful golden chestnut curls of Nell Gwynne . there 
the short curly * Brutus' of the noblest £.oman of 



SOME WINDOWS IN BOW STREET, 137 

them all. Look at the boys there . ^how they are 
devouring the contents of the next window. That 
is an armourer's ?" 

" An armourer's ? what does he have to do with 
the theatre ?" 

" A great deal ! Look at those guns . they are 
absolutely firelocks ; it will not do for our purists 
to arm the troops of Charles II. with the Snider 
rifle. Then, you see, there are swords of all times . 
from the double-handed sword of the Templar, worn 
at the back, to the Spanish rapier of Don Giovanni. 
Here are daggers galore, and hilts covered with 
precious stones, or what looks better, imitation, 
coloured glass with foil. There is a jeweller's 
farther on, where you can get all sorts of deco- 
rations and orders, and whose goods are really 
remarkable for their work and brilliancy. Beyond 
that, a little lower down, is a shop specially for 
lace spangles and ladies, at which you may dress 
up a fairy, a genie, or one of those gold-and-silver 
angels who look so glorious in the transformation 
scene, at a moment's notice. Hallo ! what's that?" 

"Is that yours, sir?" said a stalwart-looking 
working man, holding up Carew's silk handkerchief. 

" Yes, it is . I will thank you for it." 

" I thought so ; then you will please come along 



138 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

with me over the way. The magistrate's sitting, 
and we will make quick work of this. Come first 
into this office and enter it in the charge sheet." 

The policeman . ^for such he was, in plain clothes . 
held tightly grasped by the collar a greasy-looking 
boy, who had been making free with Carew's 
handkerchief while he was looking in at the 
window, and who, in the face of the crowd who 
assembled to see him, assumed a bold, swaggering 
expression, as if he were rather than otherwise the 
hero of the occasion. 

" But I didnH feel him do it," said Carew. 

" No one would. Look at them flippers." He 
held up the boy's hands, as soft and as delicate as 
a lady's. " And whose," he said, " is this little 
article ?" So saying, he held up to the astonished 
gaze of Felix a square purse worked with beads by 
his wife, which he very much prized, and which a 
few moments before he had in his trousers' pocket. 

" Why, that is mine ! How did he get it ? 1 
never felt anything." 

"Law bless you Now just move on, wonH 

yer ? What is there to see He's the cleverest 

one out. You look so simple, do you see ? that he's 
dodged yer ; you didn't feel him, but I saw him ; 
so come along with me, gents, if you please.'^ 



TSE P OLICE- CO URT WIND OW. 139 




CHAPTER IX. 

f 

THE POLICE-COURT WINDOW. 

T was lucky for our two friends that they 
had started early, and had yet some time 
before them, for they were forced to troop 
off in a motley procession to the police-court. 

It was lucky, too, that the passage from the 
armourer's window, at which our friends lost their 
property, was not very far from the police-court ; 
for the crowd, which increased every second, would 
have terribly annoyed and pressed them. 

Shrieks from coster- women, " Here, Davy, here's 
the game 'un's got took ;" cries from the wild 
London Arab to his associate, " Oh my ! 'ere, 
Billy, come 'ere ; 'ere's a cove as is in for it ;" and 
the like rang in their ears. One or two people 
asked plaintively why they didn't let the boy 
go, and many, who did not and could not imder- 
stand anything about it, volunteered an explana- 
tion to the crowd that surrounded them. 



140 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

At length, opposite the police magistrate's 
ofl&ee our friends found a body of four or five 
policemen lounging round the door in a half 
military, half ofl&cial way, who, when they saw the 
crowd approach, walked up to the vanguard of 
boys, pulled off their caps, threw them to a dis- 
tance, and otherwise, partly playfully and partly 
with cuffs, dispersed the ragged troop, which 
immediately re-formed on the flanks of the crowd, 
and saluted the " bobbies " with cat-calls and 
chaff. 

The diversion made by the police, however, 
enabled the game 'un and his two accusers safely 
to enter the sacred precincts wherein justice was 
administered ; and, suddenly passing from the outer 
light into inner darkness, Felix found himself, for 
the first time in his life, inside a police court. 

It was a queer, dirty place . stone and paint, 
without any attempt at ornament . when thronged 
by daily crowds of the poor and miserable, not 
giving much outward beauty even to the eye of 
the policemen. Passing through a long passage, 
and getting a glimpse of barred windows, through 
which a yard might be seen, surrounded by 
many little cells, Felix and Carew reached an 
office, wherein, behind a railed division, sat a young 



THE POLICE-COURT WINBOW. 141 

and good-looking inspector, at a charge-sheet. 
"Well/' said this officer to the policeman in plain 
clothes, "what ! here again; what have you now, 
BealesP' 

It was evident from this that Beales had been 
there before that morning, and that he was really 
an active and intelligent officer, as indeed he was, 
with a complete passion for thief-taking, which he 
studied by day, and upon which he meditated by 
night. 

" Well," said Beales, drawing in his breath . a 
habit that he had . and taking a leisurely survey 
of the office . not that he did not know it, but 
because he was in the habit of throwing his eyes 
round every apartment . " well, I've got him at 
last." 

As the criminal, who was nowise disconcerted, 
was not tall enough to be visible above the official 
railings, which were about the height of a tall 
man's chest, Mr. Inspector had risen, with his 
heels on the crossbar of his office stool, and looked 
over at the culprit.. "Why," said he with a 
pleased expression, " it's Pip, the game 'un." 

" Oh, yes, it's me, hofficer," said Pip: "but don't 
make no remarks; do your duty. Here's William 
Beales has bin an' took me ; and these two gents 



142 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

will be cruel enough to go an' swear as how some 
of their property 'as been found on me." Mr. Pip 
tried to look like a martyr, but did not succeed ; 
and in a very short time, and in a very business- 
like way, the charge was made out on the ruled 
and tabulated charge-sheet, and Mr. William 
Beales suggested to Pip that his little game 
was up, because his " flint" would be fixed now. 

'* You'll be in good time if you make haste," 
said the inspector, touching a bell and giving to 
an attendant satellite, in blue with pewter buttons, 
the charge-sheet. " The night charges were very 
few, and there is not much before his worship. 
Will you be so kind, gentlemen, as to follow the 
policeman ?" 

Felix, who had felt himself in a perfectly novel 
situation, which he did not at all like, and who 
would have been, perhaps, much more glad than 
Mr. Pip to have " bolted " directly he got out of 
the police station, here whispered Carew : " Must 
we prosecute this poor boy ? It would be better 
to lose the purse and the handkerchief, and to let 
him go. Say something." 

" It's of no use," answered his friend ; " it 
would be much easier for us to let the thing 
pass ofi*, but not much better. The boy is Vk 



TEE POLICE' CO URT WIND OTT. 143 

thoroughly accomplished thief, and we may make 
him better by punishment. Besides, you don't 
know anything of law ; when it once gets you in 
its clutches you can't possibly escape. We are 
fixed, I can tell you ; let us hope that it won't 
keep us long." 

"I'm sure I hope so," said Felix, gloomily; 
and then the two friends went out, and, crossing 
the road, emerged once more into the bright sun- 
shine, where a very large crowd was assembled 
round a dark omnibus-looking van, and watch- 
ing the depositing within that van of persons 
whose cases had been disposed of. But the sun- 
shine lightened them up but for a minute, for 
they at once entered a building very like the 
last, somewhat more dirty, and very much more 
crowded, and with two or three waiting-rooms on 
the right-hand side of the dirty corridor, into one 
of which Mr. William Beales, a plain-clothes man, 
commonly but erroneously called a detective, 
hurried his prisoner, and told Carew and Felix to 
wait till he came back. 

" I wish we had been a mile off," said Felix ; 
" I'm sure I don't want to convict that unhappy 
boy ; and waiting here will be a bore." 

'* You will see life, at any rate," rejoined Carew ; 



144 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

and as for waiting, it won't be for long ; for I've 
tipped the policeman, and lie will be here in a 
minute. I must assure him that I can't afford to 
lose my appointment, and give him an order for 
the theatre : these fellows like going to theatres ; 
they combine business and amusement very cun- 
ningly tl^ere, and, while they are laughing at a 
fiarce, may be watching a thief." 

So it was that, when the active and efficient 
officer returned, Mr. Carew arranged with him, 
that if the young pickpocket could not be at once 
brought up and dealt with in a summary manner, 
the case shoidd stand over. But the police- 
man was a fellow of some energy ; for in a short 
time he returned . having gone purposely into the 
court. and told our two friends that their case 
would be decided after the one then on ; he had 
in fact spoken to the usher of the court, who had 
arranged it with some other authority, and he 
gladly moved the two prosecutors, and a witness, 
who, being an English flaneur, was only too ready 
to run in and give his evidence, through a stone 
passage into a frowsy court, full of pews, like a 
church, in the middle, but with a small space for 
the public at one side, and a smaller, carpeted and 
with a tiny library of reference, at the other ; and 



THE POLICE- CO TJRT WIND OTT. 145 

thereat sat the magistrate, a shrewd and not an 
ill-humoured English barrister, who had been 
grinding away at this work for many years . ^for so 
many, indeed, that he believed all the men and 
women in the worid possible rogues, thieves, 
murderers, and such like, and regarded the people 
brought before him with a kindly conaideration 
that was quite touching to behold. 

It was indeed not without reason that Sir John 
Ohitty was called the worthy magistrate. He had 
been knighted; not on account of his services, 
which were many ; not on account of his honesty 
and integrity, his learning and industry, which were 
great, but for that detestable and inhuman reason 
which obtains at the English fountain of honour . 
because, forsooth, some hundred years ago a Bow 
Street magistrate was knighted by one of our dull 
German kings, and henceforward a precedent was 
established. Thus, too, it is the custom to make 
the Lord Mayor a baronet upon certain auspicious 
occasions, and we have to put up with a small 
hereditary nobility, descendants of successful 
grocers, or timber-dealers, ad irffinitum, or as long 
as the august lines will last. Far be it from any 
one to look down on a grocer or wood-dealer ; in 
their own line they are estimable and excellent, so 

L 



146 OTHER PE0PLJP8 WINDOWS. 

long as tbey don't cheat; but one most most 
seriously object to the fiMst that our present 
nobility is drawn too exclusiyely fixxm sucoessfbl 
grocers, tea-dealers, lawyers, and such peqde. 
No wonder that men of letters and men of genius 
refuse the Queen's favours in that way. 

Such were the reflections which Garew made 
afterwards to Felix, though at present he made 
none ; for directly they entered the foetid court, 
which had about it a too prevalent smell of fustian, 
the usher at the door gave a '^ hush," and several 
volunteers '' hushed '^ also ; so that Garew and 
Felix crept like a couple of guilty things towards 
a kind of pew set aside for reporters, and disap-> 
peared in its friendly gloom with much rapidity, 

''Hush !" said the usher again. 

The trial proceeded, and the court was convulsed 
with a peculiar merriment, in which Felix could 
see no fun. This, however, is not to be wondered 
at ; for every observer will have remarked that the 
jokes of barristers and judges are of the smallest 
possible size, and that yet reporters tell us that 
*' shouts of laughter " and " great laughter, which 
was with difficulty suppressed," greet them all. 
Perhaps the reason of this is, that the horsehair 
wigs, the solenm sliams, and general heaviness of 



THE POLICJS-COURT WINDOW. 147 

law cause such a depression that the lightest joke 
possible is seized on as an excuse for a burst of 
laughter, which flares up and dies out as suddenly 
as the fire in a wisp of straw. 

" Was it your barrow that she took, then P" 
asked the magistrate of an obstinate, puzzle-pated 
Irishman, who seemed to haye much delight in his 
position, and to take possession of the whole court 
with an Irish love for legal combativeness, 

Paddy entered into a rigmarole statement, by 
which it appeared, or rather from which it was eli- 
cited, that he and the accused had bought two bar- 
rows, and that the young woman had chosen to take 
the best, or rather the one upon which he, the Irish* 
man, had set his mind ; hence the charge of theft. 

Then the accused, a strong coster-girl in a glaring 
shawl and bonnet, her best . ^for she had dressed 
herself as well as she could to appear before the 
court . ^made her defence, and produced a sturdy 
English witness whose testimony cleared her, upon 
which the magistrate, who had made one or two 
notes, simmied up and gave advice to the people 
concerned to live peaceably, and dismissed the 
case, and the accused came down from the bar, and, 
surrounded by laughing and jeering friends, flocked 
out of court, 

L 2 



148 OTKER PEOPLirS WINBOWS. 

It was a strange sight, and a very novel one to 
Felix. He was struck with the Mendly feeling 
between the litigants and the magistrate; with' the 
commonplace way in which the oaths were admin* 
istered, and the want of tremor or of any fear in 
the accused ; with the easy way in which a ser- 
vant-girl, who next came up, submitted to a charge 
of theft fully made out ; with the carelessness with 
which she bade good-bye to her weeping mother ; 
and the want of horror with which crime was re- 
ceived by policemen, clerks, audience, and magis- 
trate. Here was one, blasted for life in reputation, 
setting off on the downward road with a sneer and 
a smile ; in ten or twenty minutes a life was, as 
Felix well saw, signed away in the report which the 
clerk wrote upon paper ; and, for the paltry loss of 
a cloak, a fine dress, five shillings, and an old 
bonnet . how dowdy and contemptible the bundle 
looked as it was produced and sworn to . a finely- 
grown, strong, and good-looking girl was made the 
companion of thieves, and accepted almost with 
a curtsy the stigma which would last for life. 
Puzzled and strangely moved, Felix watched the 
reporter, a gentleman of colour, whose experience 
taught him only to jot down such cases as would 
please the public, write down his arbitrary signs, 



TBE POLICJE-COURT WmDOW. 149 

or, shutting his notebook, talk and laugh with his 
companion. Everything seemed to pass with the 
speed of actions in a dream, and he hardly knew 
where he was when Mr. Pip was produced, popped 
into the square pew where the servant-girl stood 
but a moment before, and Mr. Beales the detective 
stood before the clerk, took the Book, and kissed it 
with somewhat of a smack, vowing to speak the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the 
truth. 

Pip the game 'un wets not very tall, and very 
little of him was visible above the pew, so that the 
magistrate bent his head and readjusted his spec- 
tacles to bring the prisoner in the right focus. 

" I'm here," said Pip : " here I am, your 
Worshup ;*' then he looked roimd with somewhat of 
the spirit of one who was in an exalted position, 
And, catching the familiar head of a policeman, 
nodded. « Nabbed at last, G No. 39," said he. 

Pip's was an easy case, and the magistrate 
listened with polite deference to the very little 
that Felix and his friend had to say. There the 
.handkerchief and purse were, and even Pip, who 
attempted with keen wit to cross-question Felix 
himself, could do nothing. Everything was 
plabi. The game 'un whispered to a grown-up 



150 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

friend who had somehow got near him^ that it was 
** no go," and indeed a ".gooser." 

The magistrate looked at the culprit, and then 
at the clerk. '' You're a bad boy/' said he^ '^ and 
have given ns much trouble. We shall get rid of 
you for some time now. Do you know anything of 
him, Harding P'' 

Harding the official, who took note of such 
matters, read from a list : conyicted at such a date, 
stealing from the person, from a shop, from the 
person again, and so on. Pip nodded and grinned, 
and did not deny it. In spite of his youth, the 
boy was an experienced thief. 

The magistrate whispered to the clerk, and was 
about to speak, when Carew rose and asked 
whether this case was not one for a reformatory ; 
and upon hearing this word Pip's countenance 
fell. The quick eye of the magistrate noticed it. 
" They are already crowded, sir, and we want now 
some one to pay something with the boy. Has he 
no parents, no friends P" 

The lonely little wretch looked round the court 
with a grin. He with a parent or friend I he dis- 
dained such a luxury ; kicked and cuffed, moTed 
on, and half starved, in the country and in town, 
t>n the streets or on race courses, he^ alone and 



THE POLICE-COURT WINDOW. 151 

unaided had kept up an independent war upon the 
pockets and property of the public. 

"No friends, guVnor," he said, with some 
pride. " No, I'm one of the all-alones. Come, 
give us six months' 'ard labour.'' Then he added, 
dropping a wink at his acquaintance, and deter- 
mined to keep up the character of the game 'un, 
" I'll do it on my 'ead." 

" The boy," said Carew, " does not know the 
nature of crime, your Worship, and should be sent 
to a reformatory to be taught it. He is healthy, 
and with plenty of intelligence " 

" Such as it is," said the magistrate, with a sad 
smile ; " we have no want of intelligence to com- 
plain of in his class . ^rather too much of it. The 
truth is, that if we send him to a reformatory, we 
must ask some benevolent person to pay eighteen- 
pence a week for the time he is there : . ^for two 
years." 

Mr. Pip looked blank at this proposal ; but he 
had great faith in the hard-heartedness of the 
world, and sniggered. "It's a little fortune," he 
said, " guVnor : no one '11 do it for a chap like me. 
You'd better give it me as you did before." 

Felix was not a rich man, and as for Carew he 
was one of those people who may be said to be 



152 OTHER PEOPLE'S WTNBOWS. 

always poor and never ricliy always licli and never 
poor. He had just as much as he wanted^ andhad 
indeed an inexhaustible fortune in a brain on which 
he often called and never called in vain. It is true 
that every now and then the physician warned 
him that he was working too hard or '^ living too 
fj^t/' spending both brain and energy ; but what 
of that ? " The time woidd come to him which 
came to all/' he said, '^ and there an end.'' So that, 
with the exception of a modest provision which he 
had made for his family, and which could be only 
available after his death, he had nothing. 

** Eh bieriy mon ami,'' said Carew, bending down 
to Felix, " I think I'll indulge in a luxury : I'll 
buy that boy." 

" I'll go shares," cried Felix ; " it's only nine* 
pence a week ; and one would spend as much as 
that in cigars. Speak out, George, my boy." 

George did speak out ; and the magistrate, with a 
kindly glitter about his eyes, was even more cour- 
teous tb the gentlemen. " There will be a preli- 
minary fee as to entrance," said he; "but I will 
do myself the pleasure of paying one-fourth of 
that, and the other fourth shall come from the 
poor-box. You will go with the officer outside, 
please^ and pay your first instalment, or give your 



TEE POLICE' CO UET WINDOW. 153 

address ; and I can assure you, gentlemen, that the 
money will not be thrown away, and that you wiU 
never miss it. Good morning/' 

Then turning to the clerk, he whispered some- 
thing, and to the disconsolate Pip said, " Through 
the kindness of the gentlemen whom you have 
robbed, a kindness which you will one day under- 
stand, though you don't now, you will not be taken 
to prison, but be removed to the House of Deten- 
tion, there to be talked to by the chaplain, and 
then on Tuesday next be delivered to the Master 
of the Reformatory at Kedhill, and you will be kept 
there at instruction and labour for two years." 

** Next case!" bawled the crier, while Mr. Beales, 
adroitly putting his hand in the bar, dock, or 
wooden pew, picked out young Pip as one would 
pick out a periwinkle from its shell. 

Two years ! Two whole years away from his 
beloved hunting-grounds in Drury Lane, away 
&om the excitement of being chased by the 
** Crushers," " Bobbies," or " Bluebottles "; away 
even from the triumph of being lugged off by a 
peeler, and exchanging pleasant words with a 
magistrate the next morning ; away from winter 
quarters in the House of Correction, and the still 
more pleasant game of dodging the warders, and 



154 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

commimicatiiig in some ingenious way with his 
fellow prisoners ; all these were dear to Pip the 
game 'un, and the blow was sudden. It need not 
therefore surprise our readers to be told that Pip 
was game no longer, and, when he was removed 
from the sight of his benefactors and the public, 
set up a piteous yell, at which the whole court, 
police and all, laughed. 



TEE STAGE WmDOW. 155 




CHAPTER X. 



IN WHICH FELIX, WITH THE READER, IS INTRODUCED 
TO A " PRACTICABLE '* OR STAGE WINDOW. 



HEN Felix and his friend came from the 
dark Avemus of the police-court, they . 
attracting some little attention for a few 
dozen steps from the court . ^wore faces serious 
enough. But they felt some relief, as if they had 
done eft good action ; indeed, each had paid his 
guinea towards Mr. Pip's further maintenance, 
and everybody in the court, from the worthy 
magistrate himself to a sweep who had been found 
mysteriously concealed in the wrong chimney, and 
whose case was to be next heard, had been polite 
to, and interested in them. 

"I am sure I don't know why we laughed," 
said Felix, thinking over and giving himself up 
to a habit he had of analysing his feelings. 

" 'Tis a matter of contrast," ejaculated Carew, 
^*this laughter, as well as a sudden feeling of 



156 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

superiority. We are like that hackneyed sea 
passenger in Lucretius, who, finding himself on 
shore, is somewhat delighted to see other people 
struggling in the waves. Moreover, not to be too 
ill-natured with regard to mankind . a diabolical 
mistake, let me tell you, and stupid too, as sugges- 
tions of the devil always are. everybody in the 
court knew that the best that could be done would 
be done with that boy, and that therefore all his 
* boo-boo-booing ' was utterly out of place and 
ridiculous; so they laughed." 

Felix again laughed too, as Carew unfolded the 
reason so plainly, and George, who loved young 
and simple natures, and in truth was young and 
simple himself in heart and mind, joined in the 
laughter. 

" Well, you are merry, gents," said a small, 
bright-looking man who stepped out of a some- 
what shabby brougham, and shook hands with 
Carew ; " glad to see laughter anywhere, although 
I have spent my life in trying to make persons 
cry, and have only succeeded in making myself 
melancholy. Tragedy does not pay now-a-days ; 
here is my friend Spindler; he rides in his 
brougham, and has given me a lift. Tragedy, sir, 
can't afford even an omnibus." 



TSE 8TAGE WINDOW. 167 

" Glad to see you, Mr. Carew," said Mr. Spindler, 
emerging from the brougham and drawing him- 
self up. Then, turning to the coachman, he said, 
'' Stage door at two," and linked his arm in that 
of the author ; '' and what has Sam been saying ?'^ 
said he, '' grumbling as usual ?" 

^^ All I said, Spindler, was that tragedy could 
not keep a brougham, and that comedy . and here 
I am complimenting you. could. If Garrick were 
again alive, he would not long hesitate between 
the laughing and the crying muse." 

"*Spect he never did," said the comedian; 
" comedy always drew more money, and money 
David Garrick loved. People like to be made to 
laugh, and, the dolts, some of them are ashamed 
to cry. All I can say, Mr. Garthwaite, is this, 
that I would rather earn half my salary in tragedy 
or serio-comedy than I would the whole of it in 
farce ; for I too am an actor.'' 

"And a very good one too, Spindler," returned 
Carew ; " though why you and half-a-dozen other 
comedians will always try to persuade the public 
that in reality tragedy is their forte, is to me one 
of the mysteries of your profession." 

"It is simply ridiculous," said Garthwaite, 
" although comedy very often treads on the heels 



158 OTHER FEOFLWB WINBOWS. 

of tragedy ; and the reverse is also the case some- 
times. The souls of this generation " 

^' Using generation in the sense of the play- 
goers of to-day P" interposed Carew. 

" Exactly so . are too frivolous to be filled with 
a mighty tragic passion for a whole evening. 
They laugh it away with a farce immediately 
afterwards . a most inartistic and silly method. 
Tragedy might be prefaced with a piece of 
simple comedy, if possible pastoral, accompanied 
with music. Afterwards let 'gorgeous tragedy 
come sweeping by/ as Milton has it ; and that being 
sufficing, exciting, noble, and ftdl of fine thoughts, 
let the hearers go home to their beds fancy-bound 
in grand meditation. That is my idea of play- 
going; the theatre, imder proper control and 
teaching, might be a grand school.'^ 

" Ay, a good notion too ; but surely, Mr, 
Garthwaite, you pitch your requirements a note 
too high. People ^ant to be amused in this 
work-a-day world. When the author, the painter, 
or the actor thinks only of teaching, he starves, 
or nearly so. The world is all too full of teachers, 
and there are so few learners . so very few.*' 

Chatting thus in friendly mood our two Mends 
with their companions came to the stage-dooir of 



THE STAGE WnTDOW, 159 

the Crow Street Theatre Royal . ^they are all royal 
theatres now-a-days . and the four gentlemen en- 
teredy FeUx being ushered in by his friend Carew. 
Passing by a solemn man in a cloth cap,, who was 
carefully finishing the remains of an Irish stew, 
and who glanced at each one who entered with a 
significant look, he being the hall porter, the little 
company stayed for a moment while the porter 
reached down from a rack a couple of letters for 
Messrs. Garthwaite and Spindler, and, puUing a 
string, let them suddenly pass into what the trage- 
dian called the '' bowels of the land ;" that is, into 
the back parts of the mimic world, where they 
found themselves in a kind of visible darkness, 
feebly lighted by a jet or so of gas, which, while 
it was a great deal too dull for the eyes, made 
itself only too apparent to the nostrils. Threading 
their way amongst scenes and flats, they soon 
found themselves on the stage, where FeUx was 
quietly deposited at a side- wing to marvel at the 
strange scene before him. 

Bare and grim, and covered with dingy brown 
holland cloths, the empty theatre yawned, dreadful 
to the unaccustomed eyes of Felix. The glass 
drops of the chandelier looked dirty, dull, and 
dead, like strings of human eyes in the kingdom 



160 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

of Dahomey ; the pit a black gulf crossed with 
bare forms ; the boxes, when they could be peeped 
into, so many black cupboards ; the whole place 
deserted and solitary, save that the footlights were 
burning dimly, and in the centre of the stage an 
iron standard shed a flaring light upon the group 
gathered together. Under the standard a worn- 
out and seedy-looking gentleman, the prompter, 
stood, and, with a manuscript in his hand, fur- 
nished words to several ladies and gentlemen who 
seemed to be much in need of his aid ; and these, 
at certain words . ends of speeches, to which 
each actor and actress seemed very ready to get . 
woidd cross to right or left, and stand in a 
a certain position, generally the wrong one, if one 
might judge from the stage manager, an excitable 
person, who every now and then emitted such 
phrases as these . 

" Now, Mrs. Belmore, you are really quite 
wrong there; a little more pronounced, if you 
please. ' Then, Frank, if there is to be no friend- 
ship between uls, no confidence, no trust, no 
love'. cross to right centre at *love,' if you 
please ^^ 

" Pray let me do as I like, Mr. Spangles," the 
lady returned; " *no confidence, no trust, no love;' " 



TKE STAGE WIKDOW. 161 

this she said in the weakest possible voice, and the 
jeune premier^ a stout gentleman of forty-five, 
grunted out. 

" Oh, well, I do hope you will put a little more 
fire in it on the stage ;" and then, walking up to 
the lady in the most nonchalant style, he said, 
" Love is my cue, I think P" 

" No confidence, no trust, no love," echoed the 
prompter, in a voice which long service in draughty 
theatres, and many colds caught in the service^ 
had torn to rags. 

" * Oh, Julia,' continued the tragedian, * how 
easily you women talk of love ! Love is the most 
ecstatic bliss ' . ^and so on, I think, Mr. Blackwood, 
down to ' India, adieu I ' " 

" Yes ; but a man don't go to Lidia in that cool 
way ; do put a little more life and go into it." 

But life there was none. Every now and then, 
hearing the magic cue, some one concerned in the 
piece would dash into the centre, mutter a few 
words, and then retire. Now and then, but at 
long and weary intervals, two interlocutors seemed 
to have studied and to know their parts and give 
an intelligible reading. The ladies and gentlemen 
were, moreover, but dingily dressed, not caring, 
perhaps, to trust fine morning dresses and broad- 
id 



162 OTHER PEOPLE'S WISBOWS. 

clotli to the dirty jBTcmctB of the Croir Street 
Theatre ; and, as eTenrthmg takes scMiie ooloiir from 
its sarronndings, the solemn dingmess of the 
theatre lent a shabby sombre to the scene, lighted 
up with the flaring cresset, and exhibited deep 
and horrid shadows that were melancholy and 
depressing in the extreme. 

"Well, my yomig phflosopher/' said 6e(»rge 
Carew, coming to his friend and laying his hand 
upon his shoulder, " what do you think of this 
gay and festive scene ? Is it not entrancing ? is it 
not wonderfully intoxicating ? quite a tairj palace, 
an enchanted bower, is it not P" 

" Never saw anything so dull in my life," said 
Felix, rubbing his eyes as if he could not quite 
understand what he saw. 

" Why, you are not half awake to its beauties," 
answered the author, with a grim humour. " That 
which you have heard, and which I am afraid you 
do not appreciate, is one of the most sparkling, 
brilliant, and witty comedies of the day . a comedy 
of manners, I can assure you. Mrs. Buckingham, 
there, is the sweetest actress ever seen on any stage: 
vide the public prints ; Mr. Stemdale is, and has 
been for the last twenty years, the best representa- 
tive of juvenile tragedy, or high comedy, that we 



TKE STAGE WINDOW. 163 

can produce. I assure you that some of the young 
fellows of Cambridge, Oxford, or the West End 
clubs, would think you *no end of a lucky fellow' . 
that is their charming phrase . ^if they knew that 
you had been behind scenes while Mrs. Bucking-* 
ham was rehearsing." 

" Are you joking, Mr. Carew P" asked Felix, 
simply. 

" Joking I" returned George ; " no, Mr. 
Straightways, I am not : are you ? What is it 
you want P Does not all the light literature of 
the day, and do not the novels of that popular 
lecturer, Ernest Brown, assure you that the 
wildest orgies are carried on behind scenes, and 
that youing men of fortune throw away their gold 
on this magic ground P The fact is, you are dis- 
appointed; you now see for yourself, and the 
illusion is dispelled." 

** I wish people, when they write, would try to 
convey truth. An immense deal of harm must 
have been done by those nonsensical novels that 
pretend to describe life as it is." 

*' Undoubtedly ; but Truth ! why, Felix, it is 
not every man who twirls a pen who can see 
Truth ; think of that, and be charitable to the 
poor fellows* Perhaps they really do believe that 

M 2 



164 OTEER PEOPLE^S WINDOWS. 

comic singers are better company than noblemen 
and gentlemen^ and tbat an actress in plain 
clothes speaks with all the brilliance and wit of 
the comedy writer who has racked his brains to 
produce the mental fireworks she lets off. How- 
ever, you are imder my guidance ; here you see 
things as they are." 

" And surely they are dull enough," said Felix. 
" Well, I am glad of it ; I like to rub off my 
illusions." 

** Oh, you silly yoimg fellow !" said Carew ; 
** keep them as long as you can ; believe that every 
woman is an angel, and every man a patriot. 

Look here ^" The author took his yoimg 

friend a little forward, and pointed out a cottage 
window, close, perhaps too close, indeed, to the 
door, around which roses and honey-suckles 
appeared to cling in natural and sweet profusion. 
In colour the " flat" was beautiful, and, indeed, 
it had been touched in with so masterly a hand 
that even at the little distance at which the young 
man stood it looked charming. 

" Stand there," whispered Carew, as he " posed" 
Felix; " there, now the light shines on it, is it not 
pretty P Give your imagination full rein ; fancy 
yourself amid scenes of rural innocence, miles 



TEE STAGE WINBOW. 165 

away in the country* On the right stretch wide 
fields of waving com, to the left there are wood- 
lands and Rrassy deUs, and at the back a trout 
stream h Jes L spLrkles down, siaging o.er 
its pebbly bed, from the spring whence it rises in 
the blue hills in the far distance. In this cot- 
tage, my dear young friend, dwells the gem . no, 
a gem does not dwell . ^the beauty, the fairy of 
this romantic tale. We will call her Phoebe May- 
flower. Let me peep through this window; I will 
open the lattice ; yes I there she is." 

Carew spoke so naturally, and described the 
scene so well, that FeUx, having something of the 
imagination of a poet, foimd himself carried away, 
and for the moment beHeved that some fair girl 
was within the cottage. 

Gently his friend opened the practicable casement 
and peeped within; then, still keeping up the 
illusion, he said, '^ Ah, no ! she is not here ; let us 
seek her in the next room;'^ and, opening the 
creaking door, drew his friend within. A dim 
light from a distant jet lighted up the back of the 
wooden framework on which the canvas was 
nailed. Part of the door had been painted and 
turned, and represented a sea-piece with the 
waves upside down ; part of the cottage wall had 



166 OTJBOER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

been a terrace, interlaced with flowers ; and there 
were shreds of gold from a pantomimic fairy 
bower standing near ; and the lattice from which 
Phoebe May-flower should have looked through 
was unglazed, and made of rough laths, which, 
however well they appeared at a distance, were 
ridiculously unreal when seen too closely. 
"There," said Carew, laughing; "now is your 
illusion destroyed P Is this dirt, this apparent dis- 
order, this tinsel, at all to your liking P Take my 
advice, and don't love the stage nor anything con* 
nected with it, except, perhaps, the noblest and 
the very best actors . and they are such rare birds 
that I need scarcely warn you against them." 

" But,'' said Felix, " I have heard you speak of 
Shakspere as if he were a prophet." 

" So he was," returned the author ; " but one 
may admire the drama without loving the stage, 
just as one eats a pastry-cook's supper without 
inquiring too nearly into the ingredients." 

Just as Felix was about to answer his friend, 
the prompter came and told George Carew that 
everything was ready in the green-room ; and the 
author then explained to his young friend that, if 
he were very quiet and sat still, he should hear 
hin^ read a new comedy, which had been accepted 



TKE STAGE WINBOTT. 167 

by the management, and in wliich Mrs. Bucking- 
ham and the other members of the corps drama- 
tique would shortly appear ; and, only too glad to 
see and hear something so novel, Felix hurried 
away, and found himself quietly seated in a comer, 
near a sallow young gentleman who employed 
himself for the most part in sucking the end of 
his cane. 

The green-room of the Crow Street Theatre was 
large and commodious, with two very large look- 
ing-glasses at each end, and stuffed couches or 
rout-seats aroimd it. But the papering, the 
hangings, and the gilding were shabby and worn- 
out; the striped satin of the couches was torn, 
greasy, and patched; and the carpet from the door 
to the fire-place was worn bare of pUe or worsted 
by the hasty st^s of the tragedians and come- 
dians who came in to glance at themselves just as 
they were called. 

In the centre of the room a table had been 
placed, and a decanter of water and a glass stood 
ready for the author, who was supposed to be 
overwhelmed with a modest thirst when reading 
his own work. Two candles illuminated the page 
of genius, as well as the gas lights, which burnt 
on each side of the looking-glasses, for the benefit 



168 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

of tliose who necessarily inspected themselves very 
frequently therein. 

The actors and actresses were seated round the 
green-room, more than one of them looking at 
their watches, and expressiilg a not unnatural 
wish to be out of the theatre ; and the lessee, a 
middle-aged gentleman with a bald head and a 
very mild expression in his eyes . ^neither of which 
prevented him from being a very queer customer 
indeed . was sitting down in earnest conversation 
with Mrs. Buckingham. 

*' Dear Mr. Oarew," said that lady, stretching 
out a gloved hand in a very friendly manner, but 
without rising, " I hear you have a charming part 
for me. Now I hope I shall not be disappointed." 

" Nor I," chimed in the second lady. And the 
rest of the company followed in chorus. 

Carew, who was a man of few words, but 
whose manner was quite as charming as even that 
of Mrs. Buckingham, bowed politely, and, asserting 
plainly that he could say nothing of his own play 
but that Mr. Tottenham the lessee had accepted 
it, sat down to the table^ cleared his voice, and 
began reading. 

It astonished Felix to find how eagerly every- 
body listened to the parts that he or she knew 



THE STAGE WINDOW. 169 

would fall to his or her share^ and how careless 
they were of the caustic and clever writing which 
fell to the share of any other actor or actress. But 
this was no new thing to George Garew ; and as 
he read very finely^ and gave proper emphasis to 
every pointy the comedy. one of modem life . 
appeared short and satisfactory, iull of sharp hits 
and acute teachings to one person, who happened 
indeed to be the only one not personally interested 
in its success. 

When the reading was concluded all the actors 
were silent. Mr. Tottenham, who had good taste, 
and had himself purchased the play, emitted 
certain murmurs of applause; then the general 
company applauded, and finally each actress and 
actor, Mrs. Buckingham leading off, commenced a 
series of particular deduction from thp general 
merit of the piece, by which' it would appear that 
the play, which a moment before had been charm- 
ing and iull of wit, was as full of faults as a poor 
piece well could be. Mrs. Buckingham hinted 
that her part, which was that of a young lady full 
of heart and of a romantic nature, opposed to the 
worldly counsels of her guardian, was not often 
enough on the stage, although there were very 
few scenes without her. Mr. Stemdale, the premier 



170 OTHER PEOPLirS WINBOWS. 

jeune h<nnme, believed that his part was, on the 
contrary, the weakest ; and the comic gentleman, 
who represented a bagman in the hardware Une, 
who fell suddenly into a huge fortune . ^which in 
the end proved to belong to Edith (Mrs. Bucking- 
ham) . asserted that he had not half enough to do 
or to say. 

" Look here, Mr. Carew," said he, drawing the 
author skilfully away from the contending great 
ones. " Let me touch it up, you know ; very 
prime it might be made. Let me get up a steeple- 
chase at Brummagem House . that's my new park, 
you know . and come in dressed as a jockey, 
walking with about four stone round my waist to 
get my weight down. A running patter up and 
down the stage, by me and a lot of my fine friends, 
all ready to eat me up for my money, would be a 
fine thing." 

" I'll make a note of it,'' said Carew ; " and, 
gentlemen and ladies, I must hurry away down to 
the office of the Daily Cemor ; if you don't be good 
I'll cut off all dramatic criticism for a fortnight 
at least. I will make notes of all your sugges- 
tions. Good morning." 

"The parts will be copied out and delivered 
into your hands, ladies and gentlemen," said the 



TSE STAGE WINBOTT. 171 

lessee, " by Monday. We will rehearse the comedy, 
if you please, on the "Wednesday following." 

A general chorus of " Oh Mr. Tottenham !'* and 
a reference to study, then broke out amidst the 
departing company, when the author and his 
friend withdrew, not without oyerhearing very 
vivid expressions from some who held minor 
characters, that the piece was "rot" i.e.^ worth 
just nothing. 

" Never mind them^^ said Carew ; ** they know 
nothing. An actor knows of the merit of a play 
about just as much as a publisher does of the merit 
of a book . and that amounts to little." 

*' But they pass their lives with plays and play- 
writers, in reading or producing dramatic works," 
urged Felix. 

"That's just the reason why," said George 
Oarew, as they emerged from the dark theatre and 
blinked at each other in the broad sunshine. 
"They have seen plays of which they thought 
little succeed; plays of which they thought nothing 
triumph ; plays of which they were proud come to 
grief; and they only wonder, most likely, at the 
stupidity of the public, and caress their own 
wisdom more and more. When the public has 
pronounced its yerdict unequivocally, then you 



172 OTKER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

will hear what the actors will say. If the play- 
takes, Mrs. Buckingham will have always pro- 
phesied success, and Mr. Templemore will urge 
that his part was not a line too short nor too 
long.'' 

*' But what about that jockey P just like the 
fellow's impudence to suggest such folly to an 
author.'* 

Carew laughed. " Oh my dear innocent young 
friend," said he ; " ever since the days of Le Sage, 
and that famous scene in 'Gil Bias,' the author has 
been nothing, the actor something, in the theatre. 
Out of it the world speaks differently. And as 
for the public, I don't know whether to be angry 
with or laugh at it. From time immemorial it 
has suffered comic actors to do anything they like. 
Farce is always exceptional art, if art at all; 
Shakspere was led away by conventionalities, aud 
no doubt put in much against the grain . ^that is, 
if his sweet and modest nature ever cared a pin 
for what he had produced, or for posthumous fame 
at all. But here am I near to my destination ; 
I shall leave you to find your way home, and 
hope to meet you at Mr. Scumble's to-morrow. 
Till then, adieu." 



AT A " CHIRURQEON BARBER Sr 173 




CHAPTER XI. 

WHEREIN GEORGE CAREW RELATES HIS EXPERI- 
ENCE, AND RETAILS THE SUBSTANCE OF HIS 
OBSERVATIONS AT A " CHIRURGEON BARBER's." 

|HE remainder of the day Felix spent, to 
his own and his wife's great delight, at 
home, the nurse having felt "dispoged " 
to take a holiday, and having, with that fetcility 
which is not unknown to persons of her class, 
imagined a dying relative wJbo had sent to say 
that she could not close her eyes until her dearly 
beloved friend had come to see her, and that then 
she should die in peace. 

Felix very naturally made the obvious sugges- 
tion, that, if the nurse desired her friend to live, 
she should keep away from her for a few days ; 
but in this his ancient friend did not agree. 
"How cruel it would be, to be sure, sir,** said she, 
" to keep the poor thing out of her grave!** 
Although the "poor thing** was a fiction, there 



174 OTKER PJSOPZirS WINBOWS. 

was true meaning in the nurse's saying. " How 
curious it is," said Felix to himself, " that these 
people seem to regard the grave as a friend, and 
death as a kind of relief !" And in good truth it is 
the case. It is with very little regard that our 
poor people look at death. It has no terror to 
them. In the poor court, with its many in- 
habitants, where the nurse lived, there was always 
some one dead ; and the old woman herself, who 
passed her life in bringing some persons into the 
world and watching while others passed out, had 
mastered the philosophy of Bacon without his. 
teaching, and regarded one as little as the other. 

"Pray let her go," whispered Lotty. "The 
servant can attend to me. Mary Anne is a very 
good girl ; and it will be quite a relief, I can tell 
you." 

So it was agreed on; and with writing and 
reading . reading till Lotty fell asleep with a 
happy smile on her face, utterly regardless of the 
fine poetry which Felix, in a modulated voice, was 
trying his utmost to do justice to . the time passed 
pleasantly enough. 

When Lotty awoke, there was the baby to 
dress, its sweet little hands and its feet to admire, 
and its beautiful pure eyes, like wood- violets, to 



AT A '' CKIRURQEON BARBEK &r 175 

examine. Alas! how soon those eyes will be 
dimmed with real tears of sorrow, and how soon 
those little feet may become tired, and those little 
hands soiled, thought the fi^ther. But the mother 
thought of none of these things, but was full of 
present joy with her husband and child near her. 

The next morning Felix, who was enjoying his 
holidays immensely, went to sit to Mr. Scumble, 
and found that artist quite ready to receive him, 
with the canvas upon which was his partly- 
finished face on the easel. As it had a red dab 
under one eye, a forehead of a pink hue, and two 
staring and unfinished eyes, it presented, said 
Scumble, such an unfinished appearance that he 
could not allow the sitter to examine it ; this was 
a wise determination, and one to which the artist 
adhered firmly. 

So, Mr. Cimabue Scumble, humming a tune, 
and now working at his canvas, now dodging his 
head from behind his easel to get a better view of 
the sitter, and with great quickness and yet care, 
dashing in his work, the two new friends passed 
a pleasant morning, until BeHsarius announced 
the arrival of their friend Carew, and, at the same 
time, as a natural consequence, received an order 
to bring some of Bass's pale ale. 



176 OTEJER PEOPLE'S JFINDOJFS. 

The author entered in good spirits, broke through 
Cimabue's rule by rushing behind the easel and 
pronouncing the portrait first-rate, and then sat 
down to light his pipe. 

" Why, George," asked the painter, " what on 
earth have you been doing with your hairP The 
back view presents a very accurate representation 
of a new and stiff blacking-brush." 

" Just so," answered Carew, holding out his 
hand to receive from Belisarius a glass of Bass, 
clear as amber and covered at the top with cream- 
coloured foam. " The truth is, I've been worried 
about my play, teased with some reviews, and, as 
an anodyne, I have availed myself of my usual 
resource. I have had my hair cut and my head 
brushed and shampooed ; that, together with the 
soft and sleepy conversation of the great artist 
who officiates, generally subdues all irritation." 

"Who is the barber who performs such a 
miraculous cure P He should publish his name, 
and set up as a curative agent, like the Zouave 
Jacob." 

" You go on with your work ; and I, in order 
to keep your sitter still, (I see he is ready now to 
jiunp out of his chair, and destroy his pose, merely 
to watch a couple of flies or any such silly delasse' 



\ 



AT A " CHIRURGEON BARBER Sr 177 

ment), will tell you all about it, like tlie story- 
telling queen in the * Arabian Nights/ " 

The two friends were equally ready to hear 
George's pastime; and the last, clearing his 
throat, and assuming a "narrative voice,*' spoke 
as follows : . 

"Amongst the innumerable instances of bad 
taste in youth of both sexes is, I believe," asserted 
George Carew, "a deep passion for haunting 
barbers' windows ; sadly, too, all of us have had 
it, owing mostly, it may be, to the wax dummies 
therein . ^the celebrated military officers and 
duchesses, which those stearine simulacra^ in 
copper-lace, artificial pearls, and cotton velvet, 
represent. We sigh about our boyhood's days 
pretty deeply, like mimics as we are. Would we 
go back to those days when a wax thing, with 
glass eyes, a straight nose, nostrils stuffed with 
red pigment, a feeble mouth, and widely-sown 
eye-brows, was our ideal . our Lady Clara Vere 
de Vere, our own sweet one P The supposition is 
preposterous: let us content ourselves with our 
state as men, and being fully alive to the dummies. 
Schoolgirls who are of this class are objectionable ; 
nobody loves them ; they have arrived at a debate- 
able time of life, in which, I verily believe, they 



178 OTSER PJEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

rather than otherwise, are unpleasant to them- 
selves. We love girl-babies, and young ladies 
of nineteen or . say twenty. The intermediate 
periods oflFer but silly things, redolent of bread- 
and-butter, with their fingers clammy and cold 
with practising the * Battle of Prague' and 
Weber's last waltz. One of the loves of the school- 
girl is, shame be it said, the dummy, the barber's 
dummy ! 

" Now, if there be anything utterly objection- 
able, in a harmless way, to me, it is a big wax doU. 
If I only knew the Italian artist who made them, 
I should, probably, assault him. Being a thorough 
Iconoclast, I hate images of all sorts, but especially 
of the waxen sort. Madame Tussaud's would be to 
me a prison ; a barber's shop, with its three or 
five smirking inhabitants, looking as hard as stone 
in winter, and as soft as lard in summer, I fly 
from. I agree substantially with those early 
zealots who burnt the images, especially the waxen 
dolls. They come too near nature to be pleasant ; 
they are like and imlike, flattering yet insulting ; 
hypocrites, with a fair outside merely, and the 
inside . ^what is it ? . wool and sawdust. 

"The dummy which turns roimd, and bends 
her neck fantastically ; the dummy which, having 



AT A " CHIRURQEON BARBER' Sr 179 

a loose wig, changes the fashion of its hair at 
least once a month, sometimes, too, being seen 
naked, and not ashamed . ^helplessly bald in the 
early morning ; the dummy which has dyed one 
half of its hair yellow and the other black . these, 
and other monstrosities, are odious ; but the male 
dummy exceeds them all. Those female effigies 
have still some paradisiac recollections or associa- 
tions about them ; they are intended to represent 
women. The other eflfeminate things are not 
worthy of being men-milliners ; they have all the 
smirking prettiness of Mantilini ; their hair ex- 
hibits vast culture and attention ; their looks are, 
to say the least of it, very bold ; they are guiltless 
of blushing, and have as little self-conscious 
modesty as the young men of the day ; they are 
odiously well satisfied with themselves. But, 
even in these, there are degrees of baseness. The 
young images are bad enough ; but the old ones, 
wrinkled, not by time, but art, with their wigs 
sprinkled with grey, and wider and thinner in the 
^natural skin' partings, with the same lively, im- 
abashed look as the young ones, and with preter- 
naturally bright eyes . can any one look on them 
without feeling his choler rise? There was a 
middle-aged creature of this sort, particularly well 

N 2 



180 OTHER PHOPLirS WIKDOJrS. 

shaven, and blue about the chin, as an actor should 
be, made up after Charles Kean, with a woman's 
collar round its waxy neck, a star just imder its 
arm-pit. having, like aU dummies, but a short 
supply of chest . and a scant black cotton- velvet 
Hamlet cloak on, that was such an insult to the 
immortal bard that I felt mighty indignant when 
I saw the shop. And yet I cannot tell you how 
many young ladies in the neighbourhood were in 
love with that waxen image which M. Cheveux 
'had set up. The manly intellect of Dash, the 
soaring eloquence of Blank, the piety and poetry 
of Asterisk, and the fervid bravery of Stars, were 
nothing beside the hectic and romantic prettiness 
of that waxen dummy. 

"Barbers," continued Carew, taking a long 
draught from some of the pale ale which Belisarius 
had brought up for him, " are strange creatures. 
They are supposed . ^I don't know why, but pro- 
bably with some justice . to be badly fed, and 
their clerks are proverbially ill-paid, because they 
keep none, having a ready-money business. That 
credit in commerce is ruin, is disproved by barbers: 
they are paid at once, or . in the case of those 
bold fellows, whereof Mr. Thackeray was one, who 
subscribe by the year or quarter for unlimited 



AT A " CKIRURGEON BARBER &r 181 

hair-clippings . ^beforehand; and yet no barber 
ever made a fortune. They are good citizens, and 
are a mild, gentle, and eflFeminate race, smelling 
of a faint compound of smells, over which hair-oil 
predominates. They are celebrated, too, for always 
having their hair in good order, and, probably, 
when young men in a large establishment . say 
Bruce's, of Bond Street . ^practise hair-cutting on 
themselves. They dare not smoke, and seldom 
drink ; when they do, it is weak gin-and- water. 
If they speculate, they join building societies, 
which too often fail ; when they grow rich, which 
is only by a rare chance, they live at Glapham, 
and make an abortive attempt at a military ap- 
pearance ; but in this they are outdone by tailors. 
When poor, they take to singing-birds, and are 
clever at breeding canaries, the birds evidently 
delighting in the soft warmth of the shop and the 
chatter of the customers. The music of these 
birds is, perhaps, a Shakespearian relic, for in 
the Elizabethan times the worn and well-thumbed 
guitar was as necessary to the barber's shop as a 
shaving-basin. Douglas Jerrold has represented 
one of this fraternity as having political feelings, 
and keeping a barber's chair whence his customers 
emitted some extraordinary political notions ; 



182 OTHER PEOPLIPS WINDOWS. 

but at present few barbers have any : bearing so 
much on all sides, they are of none, and show best 
policy in assenting to everything that a customer 
says." 

" Who amongst these gentlemen, who were 
once hangers-on to a science, and called them- 
selves chirurgeons, introduced the notion that 
bears' grease made the hair grow?" asked the 
painter, working away carefully at the portrait of 
Felix. 

"His great name . great for a barber . ^has 
perished, but his swindle survives," answered 
Carew. " All sorts of execrable dodges are under- 
taken behind those dreadful dummies, to persuade 
people that hair will grow upon the baldest head. 
How all of us are deceived at one time by this 
miserable fallacy, it is humiliating, but necessary, 
to relate. How the insidious operator introduces 
his ' Taurus Marrow ' and his * TIrsa Major 
Cream ;' how he extols certain * balms,* and de- 
clares that one trial will prove the fact; how 
beardless boys write to female swindlers, who 
assert that, for six stamps, they will cause the 
beard to grow thickly in six weeks . ^is known to 
all. How this preparation is applied secretly, and 
how the smooth cliin is nervously watched night 



\ 



AT A '' CHIRURGEON BARBER' Sr 183 

and morning, one can imagine. Of course, Nature 
is not coaxed out of her way by ' Balm of 
Moldavia,' nor can a man grow a beard like a 
muff by bathing his chin in * Wallachian Wash.' 
I have said barbers are harmless: not so. De- 
ception by hair-washes and bears' gretise is their 
cardinal sin. 

" Let us take a peep into the window of Mr. 
Wigsby, one of the last of those vestiges of creation 
who, having a weak faith in bears, goes so far as 
to keep one, and indeed looks upon him as his 
stock-in-trade. How so many pots get filled with 
the fat of so small an animal is a mystery never 
explained. Mr. Wigsby declares that it is 
because he is so ' worry fat,' and that grease goes 
a long way, which assertions, to some extent, are 
true. 

"The quarter in which Mr. Wigsby and his 
bear reside, was, in good truth, once not only a 
quarter, but the better half of the town ; and Mr. 
Wigsby himself recollects, with a sigh, in which 
pride has a struggle with regret, and gets the 
worst of it, when carriage ladies by the score used 
to send for him to * dress their 'air before goin' to 
court.' 

" Those days are passed : days in which we had 



184 OTSER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

dandles and dandizettes, and gentlemen paid such 
attention to their 'air . and airs, indeed . that 
sometimes a 'fine 'ead was a fortune to 'em.' 
Now-a-days the degenerate young fellows, what 
with having it cut close off behind, and * letting it 
grow on their chins quite awful,' says Wigsby, do 
not pay that attention to the subject which my 
informant thinks it demands. 

"I quite concede Wigsby 's premisses, and agree 
with him in a nonchalant way ; for. I, being 
fond of having my hair cut and brushed " . here 
the narrator paused, and passed his hand over the 
back part of his head, as a proof positive that such 
was the fact . "manage to get an extra half-hour's 
b;rushing and cleansing, and thereby avoid the 
necessity of having any machinery employed on 
the outside of my head. In the days of which 
Mr. Wigsby speaks, I can just remember that 
beards and moustaches were so scarce that any 
man who ' sported ' one was at once put down as 
one of three things . things, by the way, which 
thrive into remarkable vigour and liveliness upon 
British ground . that is to say, a foreigner, a 
nobleman, or a swindler. I remember, too, that, 
in the works of an author whose acute and accurate 
observation has never been doubted, a handsome 



AT A '' CWLRURGEON BARBER' Sr 185 

hero will be met with who supported himself in a 
very respectable position upon a fine head of hair 
and a beard, to which ornaments he added a pair 
of moustaches, and who was enabled to marry a 
lady with a competency, and, if we believe him, 
to slight and reject *two countesses and a dow- 
ager.' 

" Mr. Wigsby is a little, old, shabby man, with 
a pride in his art, and in a taU, mild son. a good 
man, and one who has had his trials and worries. 
Almost all hairdressers, as we have before noticed, 
are soft, good-natured fellows, as if they were 
suckled on Balm of Columbia, and tried their milk 
teeth on somebody's * Emollient.' Wigsby is ex- 
tra soft and pliable. He never addresses any one 
. not even his sweep, I believe . without one 
' sir ;' and when he is attending to a customer 
whom he respects, he treats him with as 
many * sirs ' as Johnson did Boswell and Boswell 
Johnson. 

" Mild as Wigsby is, his son . a young man 
who once had a hope which budded early and was 
nipped by the frost . is comparatively milder. 

" ' He wouldn't 'urt a fly, sir ; no, sir. John is 
as soft as salad oil, sir, and as kind. You can't 
quarrel with him, sir, nor turn his edge, sir, any 



186 OTHER PHOPLirS WINDOWS, 

more than you could that of a good razzur, sir. 
They've all on 'em turned out bad, sir, very bad, 
sir ; boys and girls, and all ; and have left me 
and my fallen fortunes, and hemigrated.' 

"Emotion, and nothing mope, as we shall at 
once explain, makes Wigsby ever aspirate any- 
thing ; he is too mild for the smallest aspiration. 

" ' Well, sir,' he continued, ' my eldest one 
. that's Robert, you know . I'll take jest a little 
from over the right ear, sir . 'as gone an bin to 
Australia, as I well know, 'aving fitted on him 
hout.' Wigsby breathes hard again. 'Well, I 
wrote to him, to say that me and his poor mother 
weren't at all well ; and trade was dull, and the 
Glistener did not move a pot.' 

" ' The what, Mr. Wigsby ?' I inquired. 

" ' The Glistener, sir . ^made after the recipe of 
an eminent physician, Sir Benjamin Bowlers, sir ; 
the 'Air Glistener, sir . warranted to make every- 
body's 'ead as soft and natural as a child's, sir. 
You see, sir, when the cares and troubles of this 
world don't rub your 'air all off, sir, which, as is 
well known, is a frequent result, why, they turn 
'em all rough and wiry like. All old men's 'air 
is very like wires, sir . I don't know whether you've 
observed . and blunts the scissors awful. Some on 



AT A'^CmnVRGEON BARBEESr 187 

*em are so hard eis they quite flies up in your face 
when you cuts 'em, and one had need of spectacles, 
I am sure/ 

" * And the Glistener softens their hair, I sup- 
pose?' 

" * Of course it do,' said Mr. Wigsby . * just a 
leetle more off behind, I think, sir . ^and puts a 
glosh on it, sir, quite a glosh. You know as how 
it becomes very dull like too, howing ' . here he 
got a little out of breath and caught himself up . 
' howing, sir, to roots a-perishing, sir. Sir Ben- 
jamin, when I gave 'im 'is ten guineas for the 
Glistener, sir, magnified a root of 'air, sir, a 
regular bunch of 'em all a- growing together, 
somethin' like leeks or bamboo-canes, or crab-tree 
walking-sticks, all knobby all the way up, sir; 
curus, isn't it, sir ?' 

" * Yes, it is ; but how about your son Robert ?' 

" ' Oh, sir, he was 'artless . 'artless did I say ? 
he had an 'art, sir, and so says Mrs. Wigsby, his 
poor mother, and a precious woman, sir . sech a 
favourite with my greet customers of Russell 
Square, sir . says she, a-stirring up a pot of the 
Glistener, sir, she says, " Robert 'as got a 'art, and 
so 'as a turnip, a cabbage, or a brickbat. He 
don't take after his father, Wigsby." 






188 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" ' " No," says I, " my dear ; neither do he 
take after his mother." 

* " As to his sperrit, Wigsby, he do," she says. 
I was always reckoned a woman of a deal of 
sperrit, and Kobert 'as much the same ; but as to 

his 'art ^" But it's o' no use repeatin' to you 

his mother's obserwations. Mothers know most of 
their own children ; and when they are indooced 
to speak bad on 'em, why, bad they must be. Yes, 
sir, Robert absolutely says that I was an old fool 
to stay where I was . ^to come over there and make 
my fortime; and that he wouldn't send me an 
oimce a gold . ^no, not if he foimd a nugget as big 
as St. Paul's ; and that, if I wanted money, I was 
to sell the bear ! ' 

*' Wigsby piped shrilly as he said this, and a 
lively old canary, which looked knowingly out of 
his cage, as if he was listening to the old boy 
singing a plaintive song, which was manifestly the 
idea the bird had, gave a peculiar chirp, as much 
as to say, 'Hallo! that's a fresh note, Wigsby; 
try it again.' 

" Mr. Wigsby's scissors trembled so against my 
left ear, the hair round which he was finishing o£F, 
that I, to encourage him, sympathised with him. 
* Sell the bear, indeed !' said I ; * where is it P' 



AT A " CHIRURGEON' BARBER Sr 189 

" ' Oh, it's close by, sir ; close by. John, draw 
up the blind, and let the gentleman see our bear. 
It's one of the sights of the neighbourhood, sir. 
And when it's been killed, sir, and hung up dead- 
like by the shop door, sir, with all its insides 
turned outside, all a-bustin' with fat, sir, we have 
such a crowd, sir, as one can't pass . specially 
children, sir. And great ladies, sir, sends their 
nursemaids all the way, sir, from Peckham and 
Belgravia to see the bear. Leastways, they 
did,' said the little man with a sigh, parting my 
hair with a trembling hand ; * but those days is 
past.' 

" * I'll come and finish off the gentleman, father,' 
said John Wigsby : * you're agitated, I see.' 

" John Wigsby took the soft brush, as soft as 
the old barber himself, out of his father's hand, 
and continued the operation; and Wigsby sat 
down, not without many apologies, and pointed 
out the caged Ursa minima to me. 

"If Wigsby was mild, and John milder, the 
bear reached the superlative degree of mildness. 
There she lay, blinking at us from a small cage 
about big enough for a Newfoundland dog, which 
was rigged up at the end of a yard, in which the 
unhappy . or happy . animal passed its indolent 



190 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

existence. So far as I could see, it was suffering 
from an attack of indigestion; and lay there, 
doubled up, like the Cornwall lunatic when found 
by Doctor Bryne, and looking like a small heap of 
brown mops unfinished and without the handles. 

"'You am't afraid, sir?' said Wigsby, with 
some grandeur ; ' as for me, sir, I'm used to him, 
I am.' 

" * 'Umph !* said I, looking curiously at him, 
whilst Wigsby Junior gave a forward brush at 
my hair; *and where does that creature come 
from?' 

" ' The docks, sir,' said Wigsby ; * we buys 'em 
at the docks. Sailors bring 'em over and make 
pets on 'em aboard ship, sir, and then sells 'em. 
It breaks their 'arts partin' with 'em, but Jack 
ain't got no room for 'em when ashore, you see, and 
they eats such a precious lot, they do, sir.' 

" * Ay, and what do you feed them on ?' said I, 
getting interested ; * I suppose this individual is 
the last of a long line ? ' 

" * Yes, sir/ said John Wigsby ; ' this is the 
ninety-ninth bear I've had. At nmnber one 
himdred I stop ; the business won't keep us both, 
that's a fact. They eat, sir, four times a day, a 
huge bowl of rice and molasses ; and very fat it 



AT A '* CHIRURGEON BARBEESr 191 

makes them. They are never savage when their 
beUies is full, and generally good-natured sort o' 
fellows by the time I gets them. It q[uite grieves 
me to kill 'em; we kill 'em and eat 'em too, 
Sir. 

" I looked at the little man with some wonder ; 
could he be a bear slayer and eater ? * Yes,' I 
said, inquiringly, ' I have heard that bear's hams 
are good.' 

" ' Too good for us,' said old Wigsby, with mild- 
ness ; ' we sell 'em ; the paws is beautiful, beau- 
tiful, sir, they tell me, and so the bear thinks, for 
he sucks 'em often enough. No, sir,' he continued, 
with a sigh, * we don't eat 'em, nor we don't kill 
'em. A Mr. Clayton, sir,' here he mentioned a 
celebrated artist, * gives me half-a-sovereign, sir . 
he used to give me a whole one . ^to shoot him, sir ; 
he brings his musket, gets as far off as he can, and 
pop . and the bear is dead. He never wants to 
shoot twice. Your hat, sir; sixpence, yes, sir, 
pay in the shop, sir ; glad you're so much in- 
terested in my bear, sir.' The little man gave 
his usual sigh, whiffed, with a worn-out hat-brush, 
a few specks of hair from my coat, and bowed me 
out of his shop ; past the dummies, turning yellow 
with age and with a faded grandeur ; past a small 



192 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOJFS. 

mean row of pomatum pots, that were dummies, 
too ; and left me to meditate on the ezistence passed 
in mean services meanly rewarded, but yet not 
imillumined with the sunshine of honest duty and 
true affection." 



A EAR VEST HOME. 193 




CHAPTER XII. 

AT A FARM HOUSE . CIMABUE DESCRIBES A HARVEST 
HOME IN THE MODERN ENGLISH STYLE. 

MUST make a note of that barber's resi- 
dence. Where is it, CarewP I must have 
my hair cropped even on purpose to in- 
spect the bears. Happily, authors and artists are 
allowed to do any eccentric thing ; and so, if I were 
to shave my head as smooth as a billiard-ball, or 
wear a King Charles the Second's wig, it would 
make little diflference. My butcher and my baker 
would regard me with exactly the same respect as 
they do now/' 

" That is with none at all/' said Carew, gruffly. 
" No offence, you know." 

" My dear boy,'' returned the painter, " I am 
qxdte aware of the, to me, not unpleasant truth. 
Butchers and bakers and candlestick-makers have 
very little respect for any one who is not a Lord 

o 



194 OTHUR PEOPLE'S WIJWOWS. 

Major, or a rich citizen, and no more respect an 
author than does his own publisher." 

" That is quid pro quo, Mr. Carew," said Felix, 
who at a sign from the artist rose and stretched 
himself with infinite relief. He found sitting 
tedious, and for the last five minutes had been 
divided in his mind as to how queens and great 
people fared when bored by celebrated artists to sit 
for their portraits. 

" Oh no, he means it in sober earnest,'* returned 
the author. "When Mr. Murray . he is dead now 
. ^paid his £15,000 to Lord Byron for some very 
noble but some very ragged and contemptible 
verse, he wondered, no doubt, why the public 
bought his lordship's poems, and regarded the 
poet not as a deserving person, but as one who by 
a lucky fluke had succeeded in tickling the public. 
I should like to write a series of imaginary conver- 
sations, from publishers' back parlours, concerning 
poets and authors. The poet represents himself, 
to himself and to others, as a very great fellow, 
with more trouble on his hands and more devilry 
at his beck and call than most people. He is a 
Michael Scott, a Faust, a Festus ; he is more 
powerful, sinful, and melancholy than others. 
The very gods up in heaven hold council about 



A BjLR vest home. 1 96 

the poet who down on earth is so distinguished, 
and who, as he says, is . 

' Dowered with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn.' 

But how do the poet^s friends, or his intimates, or 
his enemies regard him ? Pope represents poets in 
his day, starving and begging, or stabbing each 
other for the sake of gain ; only able to get out 
on Simdays, because so poor . 

' Then from the Mint forth stalks the man of rhyme, 
Happy to catch me . just at dinner time.' 

And I am sure their publishers think less of them. 
There is a dead poet who pleaded for the poor, 
and who died with the love and admiration of the 
people resting upon him. I won't mention his 
name, for I would not lift a dead rose leaf from 
that sweet memory. But I remember how I was 
hurt and horrified when a publisher, a just man 
methinks in trade, showed me an entry in his big 

. 

ledger : * Paid to Mr. (the poet) £50 which 

he claims, and which I do not owe him. Thank 
God, I am rid of a rapacious, dishonest man." 

"I hope it was written in rage, and was not 
meant," said Felix, who was anxious that his 
illusions should not disappear. 

" On the contrary, the publisher used to show 

o 2 



196 OTBER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

that entry, and tell his story . ^by wHcli it appeared 
that our poet certainly had robbed him . years 
after his death ; and to be just and honest . ^two 
great qualities, my boy, which all men should 
Strive to possess . some publishers have been 
terribly imposed upon by authors." 

" And vice versd, I suppose," said Felix, anxious 
to stick up for the honour of the craft. 

" Well, I don't know that. You see, if you strike 
a debtor and creditor account, you will find that 
not more than three books out of twelve pay well ; 
of the others, perhaps four more clear their ex- 
penses ; and on the others the publishers lose. 
Successful authors must not complain if they are 
mulcted for the unsuccessful ones." 

" Yes, they must," said Cimabue. " What a 
good-natured fellow you are, Carew ! absolutely 
unjust to yourself. Let every tub stand on its 
own bottom, and publishers be more careful in 
accepting books, and then those who write good 
ones will be better paid." 

" Dear me," interrupted Felix, who had been 
looking out of window, how it rains 1" In truth 
the rain had set in quietly, unheard by those who 
were talking, and at the time he spoke a steady 
downpour was quietly washing the dirty pave- 



A SAR F£ST HOME. 197 

ment clean, and making the Londoners look 
gloomy and disgusted as they hurried past, 
discontented enough with the wet which was 
cleansing and purifying their city, save when here 
and there an errand-boy, rejoicing in the oppor- 
tunity of getting wet and clammy, dashed past at 
full whistle. 

"There will be no leaving just yet," said 
Cimabue ; " so you will please to stay and have 
lunch with me. Here, Belisarius, clear the table 
and bring out the Cheddar and bottled stout ; and, 
gentlemen, sit down and try to make your miser^ 
^ble lives happy." 

Belisarius was quick-handed at his work, and 
in a few minutes the three friends sat down to a 
frugal meal. The conversation turned naturally 
enough upon autumn holidays, and Felix gathered 
from Cimabue that his holidays were spent chiefly 
in the pleasant occupation of sketching, and that 
he went far a-foot into the country on such ex- 
peditions. 

" You must see life very pleasantly," said the 
author. " Do you never make notes of what you 
see?" 

" Oh, yes ; notes in my sketch-book and in my 
diary too." 



198 OTHER FE0PLW8 WINDOWS. 

" Let us hear some of these," urged Felix ; 
" they will beguile us while the rain lasts, at least 
if . which I am sure they will . they do not 
instruct us/' 

" Yes, Cimabue," said George, only too ready 
to listen whilst he smoked ; " do spin a yam about 
something. I and Felix have set our minds upon 
peeping into other people's windows. Cannot we 
use your eyes and take a glance at the country ?" 

" With all my heart," said the good-natured 
painter, as he jumped up and commenced search- 
ing for his note-book. " Oh, here it is. Last 
summer I was down in Oxfordshire, near the 
Chiltem Hills, and, having an ambition to contri- 
bute a paper to some miagazine " 

" They mil write, these painters," interrupted 
Carew ; " I wonder what they woidd say if we 
took to painting." 

" I put it down in this form," continued Mr. 
Sciraible, not noticing the interruption; "and 
here it is, entirely at your service. It has at 
least this merit, that it has no exaggeration in it. 
The sketch may be weak, but it is painted from 
the life;" and without further preface he read 
thus : . 

" Dwellers in London, Birmingham, and Man- 



A HARVEST HOMJE. 199 

cheater, or other manufacturing towns . men whose 
eyes are feasted upon an endless meal of bricks . 
denizens of the counting-house, habitues of the 
counter, strollers down Regent Street, people to 
whom Holloway is the country, Hampstead is 
mountainous, and Tumham Green a beau ideal of 
rural felicity, would you like to be taken out of 
the tiirmoil of a populous city, and, without stir- 
ring from your fireside, attend an English Harvest 
Home ? If so, come along with me. 

'"The first thing you must do is to disabuse 
your minds of their existing prejudices. You have 
prejudices about harvest homes; you remember 
certain rural scenes from Hone's 'Every Day 
Book ;' you entertain ideas of English rustics 
dancing in a Neapolitan way, and with a graceful, 
agile skip, utterly beyond the powers of our pea- 
sants' calves (we allude to those nearly extinct 
appendages of their legs), advancing before a 
loaded waggon, called by Hone a *wain,' and 
singing a certain refrain about ' a merry harvest 
home.' Besides these fictions, you have dim re- 
collections of the ' Harvest Home ' in which Mr* 
Toole, the excellent successor of Mr. Wright, 
figures at the Adelphi Theatre, where, as a certain 
Brassy Popjoy, a cockney sportsman, he assumes 



200 OTHER PEOPLE* S WINDOWS. 

a Highland garb, and makes himaelf sapiemely 
and comically ridiculous. Ton may remember, 
too, how a real horse and cart, in that play, are 
produced on the stage to receive three real trusses 
of strain, supposed, indeed, to be sheaves of wheat; 
and that, upon driving away, previous to unload- 
ing at the wings of the theatre, somebody declares, 
'Wool, lad, it be th' laast load.' This must all 
be forgotten ; for the present writer is bound to 
declare that, in the many harvest homes he has 
attended, he never met with any one half so vulgar 
as Brassy Popjoy, nor so interestingly romantic 
as Madame Celeste ; so fat or absurd as Mr. Paul 
Bedford, or so villainous as the late O. Smith in 
the same drama, when they used, stib comuk 
Planco, to play it together. Alas! those times 
are gone. A new Adelphi, with new actors, and 
new faces, and new Adelphi ' screamers,' and real 
' hits ' assure us that whilst we write we speak 
not of to-day, but of yesterday. 

''Besides, it is not always necessary that the last 
load should be carried. The harvest is, of course, 
nearly at an end; but if it suits the convenience of 
the farmer, the feast may be a few days after or 
before. Nor do we declare that all harvest homes 
are like the one we are about to describe; several 



A BAR VEST SOME. 201 

farmers dispensing with them altogether, and 
appearing to think that their people should be 
always at work, without any relaxation, and that 
the only rejoicing should be when the money comes 
home into their pockets. 

^' Be that as it may ; we will, with the reader, 
go to see one. To that aim we take our places in a 
railway carriage, and arrive at a certain town- 
sman, cleanly, and cheerful ; but, being too late to 
proceed some few miles into the interior of a 
pastoral country that nigK we make friends with 
a hospitable landlord, and deliver to the pretty 
chambermaid . a neat-handed PhilUs, with auburn 
hair, ne% retrom^^ and a charming look of simpli- 
city . our umbrella and carpet-bag. We are 
Englishmen . we travel with our umbrella. 
' Englishmen/ writes a lively Parisian, ' English- 
men sometimes desert their wives, but never their 
umbrellas.' To which scandal we, a writer of 
not so lively a turn, reply that Frenchmen mar- 
vellously soon get tired of both, and throw them 
away in a very reprehensible manner. 

" No ; we are not going to describe the ' hos- 
telrie ;' it, in fact, is not an ' hostelrie,' nor does 
it belong to those fictitious houses current in the 
pages of romantic literature. It is marvellously 



202 OTRER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

like GFoldsmith's life-pictures; it lias a parlour 
with . 

' A sanded floor, wHcli grits beneath the tread ;' 

the usual number of Windsor chairs, &c., down- 
stairs, and a more modem sitting-room up-stairs, 
with loud carpet and coloured prints to match. 
It is not an hotel . it is an inn. We prefer inns 
generally to hotels : we like the sand and the 
Windsor chairs better than the loud carpet and 
the stuffed horsehair. We therefore eat our 
supper, like an Arab in the desert, in the midst 
of ' the sand which is under our feet,' and beg to 
say that if you read those words quickly, an old 
joke will be discovered. We insert it here, because 
a commercial traveller, addicted to his brandy-and- 
water, and his Bradshaw's ' Railway Guide,' re- 
peated it to us, and then sank into silence. It is 
our opinion that that traveller remained in. the 
room on purpose to retail the joke ; for afterwards 
he is silent, and devours Bradshaw. We, who 
were attracted there tmder the idea that he was a 
character which we hoped to study, are disgusted, 
and very properly retire to bed. 

" Up in the morning early . ^before the neat- 
handed Fhillis, before the host, before the 



A HARVEST HOKE. 203 

snoring commercial gent, who is dreaming Brad- 
shaw . up, in fact, before anybody but a drowsy 
half-boots half-ostler . ^up, and with scant break- 
fast, hoping to astonish your friend by an early 
visit, away ! . far into the coimtry, through the 
quiet, sleeping town, without even a policeman in 
its streets. Away! under the old market-place, 
through the churchyard, glancing at the clock, 
which is asleep, and has stopped at five and twenty 
minutes to three. We, perchance, have learnt 
the reason of that deserted, unrepaired old church. 
The old sad story . a non-resident vicar, a hard- 
working but incapable curate, abundant dissenters, 
and a lost battle about church-rates. The parson, 
thereon, refuses to wind up the clock, and thus 
marks his indignation ; the people get used to the 
silent chimes, and perhaps wish the parson and Ma 
chimes silent too. 

"Away we trudge, carpet-bag, constant um- 
breUa, and heavy coat, our companions ; past a 
sluggish, sleeping stream ; past a silent water* 
mill; past roadside public-houses, addicted to 
early closing; past sleepy cattle and wakeful 
old crows, who are illustrating the proverb about 
the early bird catching the worm. The morning 
itself is heavy, and does not seem quite awake ; 



204 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

there is a thick mist falling; the atmosphere is 
dose, and decidedly not invigorating ; presently a 
puff of wind blows away the mist, and we see a 
fresh and bold landscape ; we are upon rising 
ground . our way in this journey b^g like most 
people's way in life, rather up-hill work. Some 
few people going to their daily toil are now to be 
seen ; and, halloo ! what is this ? why, of all 
things in the world, a country*looking dray, con- 
taining a round, fat old man, and four fat barrels 
of Weller's fine ales . ^Weller being a noted brewer 
of that part, and not a creature of Mr. Dickens's 
brain . ^walking rather fieust, at the rate of four 
miles per hour at least. We overtake the dray, 
and draw forth the remark from the sleepy 
driver, that it is a * muggy momin', sir.' We 
acquiesce, in our usual bland style, and the driver 
is encouraged to ask whether we will get up and 
ride . ^the very thing we wanted. That draymau 
is a character ! We are acquainted with some 
London individuals of his profession, who chiefly 
occupy themselves in rolling butts of beer down 
impossible cellars ; but we do not know a coimtry 
drayman. We fraternise, therefore, at once, and 
he lays a horsecloth and a clean sack over a barrel, 
whereupon we deposit our carpet-bag and um- 



A HARVUST HOMJE. 205 

brella, and in a few moments are, like Baccliiis, 
astride of a cask ; the first thing we venture to 
ren^ark being that, if our friend * could shove the 
mare along a little quicker it would be better/ 
Our thick-set Mend does shove the mare along, 
into a shambling trot, and away we are. 

"Trot, trot, trot! jog, jog, jog! astride of a 
barrel, past fields of outlying wheat, not yet 
carried ; past bams and homesteads, past hills and 
uplands, and on to a ridge whence we looked down 
upon a panorama of 'smiling' fields. By the 
way, I use that last adjective at random : /never 
saw a field smile . did you P 

" We talk, of course we talk, and about the topic of 
the day. There has been a fight in India ; and does 
not our friend know a man in the Bucks militia P 
Was not his friend reviewed the other day in 
Lord Backstair's park P and did not that friend 
read the papers, and retail the conversation of a 
recruiting sergeant P ' There be,* he says, * some 
main hard fightin' goin* on thereabouts, and there 
be a many of our men out there. They fights 
well, sir, they do. Why, the sergeant told us of 
a man thereaway, o' the name of Davis ; a main 
bould-'arted man he wor, to be sure.' 

" We declare that we have no doubt about it. 



206 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

and roll forward on our barrel, to catch our Mend's 
talk. 

" ' Well/ he continues, ^ this bould-'arted man, 
I've heard tell, was in the Crimyean war, and 
arter slewing a great lot o' Eushuns a ball came 
and took'd his arms clean off. Lord Raglan so 
pitied of him . seeing as he was sich a bould-'arted 
man . ^that he gets him a pair o' steel arms made, 
so that he could feel hisself all over, like ; and he was 
to have a pension o' four shillings a-day, and the 
Queen gave him four shillings more ; so that he 
was a gentleman, like.' 

" * But,' we say, ' not licensed to bear arms I' 

" The small joke is not heeded. 

" ' But,' returns our friend, ^ he couldn't do 
nothin' with hisself without arms, and so he took 
to drinkin', and half of his pension was took off ; 
but he has enough now to live like a gentleman 
a'most ; and he can feel hisself all over with his 
steel arms.' 

" Many such legends do we hear before we part 
with our friend ; but, having ascertained that he 
goes but a very small part of our way, we leave 
him half studied, and, bidding him 'Good morning,' 
part from him with a cheery * Good-bye.' 

" On we go through a wood, at the top of a long 



A HARVUST HOME. 207 

hilly where the dripping from the trees sounds 
like a continual rain ; and where the damp smell 
of rank vegetation puts you in mind of certain 
swamps in America. Ferns and brambles grow 
in wild luxuriance on each side of you ; and in the 
warm autumnal morning the wood reeks again. 
There are some bad things^ no doubt, about 
London fogs ; but this steam-like atmosphere so 
forcibly reminds you of agues and cramps, that 
you at once begin to shiver, and do not get 
thoroughly warm till you have been out of it at 
least a mile, which distance brings you to the 
residence of your friend Fobbles, who, surrounded 
by his olive branches, is, when you find him, in- 
dulging in a very substantial breakfast . a repast 
at which, answering the dictates of an enormous 
appetite, and the most pleasing welcome from 
Mrs. Fobbles you can possibly have, we at once 
join, and do wonders. 

" Having brought the reader to Fobbles, and 
just let him peep in at the house, we don't see any 
reason why we should make Fobbles a character 
and put him in a book. It must be confessed that 
it is easy to do so ; but, sacred friendship forbid ! 
untouched by this pen, all friends of mine are 
free. Why should I disturb Fobbles and his wife, 



208 OTHER PEOPLKS WINDOWS. 

and get the name of a desperately satirical crea* 
tnre P Why should I invade the priyacy of that 
charming lady P Why should I drag the innocent 
young Fobbles into public view, at such a tender 
age P Procul, ! procul, Ac, which means, that 
I will not do it. Nor will I emulate George 
Bobins, and describe the park-like grounds . ^the 
wide-stretching walks . ^the parterres, gay with 
flowers of every hue, which surround the mansion. 
Nay ; nor the house itself, with its noble dining- 
room, in which Fobbles shone to an intensely 
bright degree, and poured out libations of old 
Falemian in a manner which did honour to his 
honest heart. I do not see why I should take an 
inventory of these people's goods. I am not a 
fashionable novelist, and therefore do not possess 
those prying, insolent qualities necessary for such 
work. 

" We will therefore not describe how the day 
was spent, except to say that, by way of contrast 
to the jollities of the night, our friend insists upon 
driving us to a meeting of poor-law guardians of 
a certain Union, comprising no less than thirty- 
seven parishes. The 'Union' is palatial in ite 
aspect, and far exceeds, in architectural dignity, 
the place of the Marquis Doolittlci in the same 



A KARVE8T HOME. 209 

county. Moreover, the paupers have the same 
washed-out, colourless appearance which the Lon- 
don paupers have . an appearance strongly con- 
trasting with the rubicimd look of the chairman 
of the board. But there is much more freedom 
and kindliness between the two classes than in 
town, and the paupers salute ^' the Board '' with no 
abject cringing ; whilst the latter dispenses with 
the Bumble-kind of dignity which is so often seen 
with Londoners. Moreover, the master, overseers, 
and officers of the establishment seem uniformly a 
better and kindlier class of persons than with us ; 
but, at the same, Fobbles, who looks over the diet- 
table with you, points out an extraordinary fact. 
viz., that, once admitted to the workhouse, the 
health and appearance of the pauper improves 
very much ; and also that children of the labourers, 
under the pauper regimen, grow fatter and 
stronger. A strange fact, Fobbles ! if, in thy 
country, the labours of honest industry can only 
purchase for the labourer and his family a diet less 
generous than that of the workhouse ! 

*' Home again and to dinner ; after which, at 
half-past six precisely, the supper begins*^ An 
old bam, big enough for a country church, forms 
the supper-chamber ; and tables, set in the Roman 

p 



210 OTHER FEOPLE'8 WTBTDOWS. 

fiuhkn, £9rm the llnee ndet of an oblong, between 
two of wlikJi thote idio ta-re bring fresh fapplie» 
and retire. At llie taUes are aeated neaily one 
hundred and fifty nien^ women, and diildren* At 
die top place of honour is the host, in his elonent, 
but at present obscured by an immense round of 
beef^ which he is earring with wonderfol celerity « 
The tables do not abscdntely groan with the weight 
of the feast, bat they Tery nearly do so ; and on 
all sides rise a din of knife and fork, and a con- 
fused joyous gosrap, which tell of satisfied eaters 
and happy hearts. Who would not be happy 
who indulged in heayy field-work, and had such 
an opportanity of thoroughly quenching an in- 
satiable and healthy appetite ? They come to eat 
.of course they do ; Fobbles would be offisnded if 
they did not. He is in his g^ry now, and cuts 
away yigorously. We, who only serre certain 
Tegetables, wonder, ' with a foolish fiu^ of praise,' 
at the dexterity of his elbow, and the strength of 
his arm. Away go large slices of beef . pieces of 
fat, lean, underdone, or brown, mixed together; 
away fly the vegetables and plum pudding. He 
will soon be done now. Ah! what is that vigorous 
shout in the comer P . ^has some one cut himself ? 
if o ; he has plunged into a mutton pie (a huge 



A EAR VEST EOME. 21 1 

affair, which takes in his knife up to the buckhom), 
and he finds it good. A dozen plates immediately 
wait on him ; and the empty dish soon marks the 
public approval. But another and another is 
found . indeed, mutton pies and plum puddings 
are stuck about everywhere ; and the onslaught is 
continued. In the meantime, Fobbles, who is 
getting out of breath, is slightly relieved by the 
diversion ; but such a trifle as a large plate of rich 
mutton-pie does not keep away our Oxfordshire 
friends from again tackling the beef. The pie 
was good ; but the beef . ah I they ' mil take 
another plate. Thankee, sir.' 

"You can see Fobbles more plainly now; he 
has cut down to the third button of his waistcoat, 
and, from behind the much-diminished beef, looks 
benevolently at his guests. 

'^ * Will old Sarah have some more P "Would 
Will Flail send up his plate for the third 
timeP' 

" Will does ; and others yet, and others. At 
length the last plateful is absorbed, just as two 
boys rush frantically in for more . alas ! too late. 
Fobbles throws himself back in his chair, grati- 
fied, but exhausted. Let us fancy, then, the 
plates cleared away, the dishes emptied, and the 

V 2 



212 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

guests both Jaxati et satiatu The force of eating 
can no farther go ; they are fall at last. ' Come, 
ho ! and wake Diana with a hymn/ Singing is to 
commence; and, grateful to Oxfordshire gullets, 
the ' strong ale ' is to come in. 

" * Strong ale !' we say to our neighbour, who, 
though an old fellow, has been exhibiting the 
voracity of a young tiger, and seems capable of 
drinking like an alligator; 'then you have few 
teetotalers here P' 

" ' Sum 'un may be,' is the reply ; * but not 
many now. They had some percessions a few 
year agone, and I met 'um, and told 'imi to beware 
o' the teapot, and not to scald 'umselves; and 
since they've not had many.' 

" No doubt the victory has been complete ; for, 
behold the strong ale ! Mugs are filled with it ; 
it is tasted, and even smelt, in a way which shows 
that there are connoisseurs in that bam ; it is pro- 
nounced good. Pipes are produced . clean, white 
specimens, aldermanic in their length of stem, and 
in no ways resembling the disgusting little black 
fellows which the gents of London smoke. ' And 
now, master, give us a song.' 

" Fobbles strikes up in a deep voice. It don't 
strike us that the song had anything to do with 



A EAR FUST HOME. 213 

the harvest; it did neither expressly allude to 
Ceres nor to Bacchus ; but it had a rattling good 
chorus, and, as Fobbles let his hand fall on the 
oaken table, such a choir of voices joined in that 
the old rafters rung again. Women, children, 
maidens, and matrons all sing and feel intensely 
gratified; but the first chorus is not quite loud 
enough for the habitues. ' Dang it,' they say, ' we 
had 'un louder last 'ere. Why don't the wimniin 
open their throats a bit P' Thus adjured, to it we 
go . ' Sing away, crack your voices, lads ; 'tis only 
once a year ; sing away for the bare life !' 

" The longest chorus must have an end. The 
applause subsides, and Fobbles, as in duty bound, 
proposes a toast. A right grateful, good toast it 
is . such as should be drunk by a master. It is, 
* The health of all his people there. of all men, 
women, and children who have helped him in his 
harvest.' With com up to eighty shillings a 
quarter, harder hearts than that of our friend may 
feel grateful; but Fobbles does do so in right 
earnest. He tells his people that, without their 
exertions, he should have nothing ; that, if he has 
directed them, it is yet their labour and their 
industry which have sown the field and filled the 
bam ; and, warming with his theme, he makes a 



214 OTHER PJSOPUS 8 WINDOWS. 

manly sensitiye speech, and drinks before fhem 
like an old Saxon Thane might have done. 
^Drinkhael! icaieshaeU* was the cry then; so it 
is now. 'Your health, my good fellows/ and 
' Yours, master ;' and down the brown ale goes, 
merrily, joUily. Ah! who, with such a host, 
could be a teetotaler P 

" Of course there is a response to this. of course 
Fobbles has his health drunk with three times three* 
We, who are always very bad hands on such occa- 
sions, make a speech on our friend ; for it is to be 
the last time that they will gather round that 
board, or feast with that master. We say some- 
thing plain, and, we hope, to the point. We pray 
that he may find as good friends wherever he goes, 
and sit down with a hearty * God bless him*' 
And, after the prayer, the old refrain, which hafi 
ecW ... .. JJny f^. .g, .d .^ .p 
to the rafters . 

* For he's a jolly good fellow, 
For he's a jolly good fellow/ &c. 

Ay, so he is . that he is: we wish there were 
more like him. Another toast . 'Mrs. Fobbles 
and the children/ Whereat the women shout, 
and the men are rapturous. Then comes another 



J SARVEST SOME. 215" 

Bong, intended to be complimentary to the ladies, 
but rudely satirical . declaratory to the effect that 
the duties of the wives are to give the husbands 

' Three good meals a-day, 
And let 'am lie warm at night/ 

and otherwise representing the husbands as mon*' 
sters of selfishness. Then the Queen's health is 
dnmk . ' the good little Queen ;' after which, the 
evening sets in with a perfect torrent of songs. 
Some are sentimental, some comic . some, indeed, 
highly improper ; but all are relished by the 
audience. Parsons seem to be objects of ridicule 
and aversion; and a certain comic fellow, who 
sticks a cabbage-leaf in a straw hat, and puts on a 
pair of spectacles, sings a capital song about 
* Parson Brown '. - 

' My father, he stole the Parson's sheep, 
So we shall have mutton enou' for a week,' 

. ^which relates how Parson Brown's sheep was 
stolen ; how the clerical gentleman. probably a 
Hertfordshire incumbent ! . ^heard the boy singing 
these two lines ; how he bribed the boy to repeat 
them in church next Sunday, before the congrega- 
tion ; how, tutored by his mother, the boy (after 



216 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOTTS. 

the parson Ixad prefaced the speech with a declara^ 
tion that what he was about to say was as true as 
gospel) substituted a wicked and scandalous tale, 
which brought the parson to shame, and saved his 
fiftther from the consequences of stealing the 
clerical sheep. All this, which conveys but lax 
morality, is applauded to the skies . or, rather, to 
the bam roof. 

'^ One of the women next sings. Of course it is a 
love song. If you were to ask a lady of Timbuctoo, 
of Kamschatka, or of Pekin, to sing a song, she 
would, like this one present, sing of love:-. A 
lonely damsel is met by a youth, when her 

' Oottage is a long mile away,' 

and the youth, being of an engaging disposition 
and pleasing manners, so entertains her with his 
discourse that she wishes that her cottage was 

' Seven long mile away.' 

That is all. It is neither better nor worse than 
. Will you love me then as now P' 

or than any of the fantastical melodies on the 
subject, which we shall hear to-morrow, from Miss 
Jones's voice and piano, in Baker Street. 



A EARVUST SOME. 217 

''Why, what's this P An old London Mend J a 
yeritable nigger melody. And this ! . 

' OH, a rare old plant is the cabbage green. 

With his heart so white and sound ; 
And it's werry good stuff with bacon I ween.' 

Why, it*8 a Cockney parody on an early song of 
Mr. Dickens's^ which has taken fast root in 
Oxfordshire. And, hallo ! Why, here's " ViUi- 
kins and his Dinah,' and the ' Sed, White, and 
Blue I ' Fie on it, oh, fie ! has not this place 
escaped the contagion of London stupidity P But, 
succeeding these, comes a ballad about ' a drawer ' 
(e>., a tapster) and a ^ merchant's lady,' which is 
quite as old as the age of Queen Elizabeth, and 
which Kit Marlow might have written or roared 
out; and, following it, a production illustrating 
the fickleness of woman: . ^A sailor comes from 
sea, and, wishing to try his true loye, passes him- 
self off as very poor. * Will you,' he asks of his 
Dulcinea . 



(I 



* Will you marry me P' 

' Oh, no,' ses she, wi' a cruel frown, 

. I never will wed wi' a sailor brown, 

A sailor brown, 
' I never will wed wi' a sailor brown.' 



218 OTEHB, PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

** Then he called up a face quite bold. 
And out he pulled a purse of gold ; 
And then she ses, wi'out ere a frown, 
' Oh, yes ; I'm in jest ; wi* a sailor brown, 

A saQor brown, 
Oh, I will wed wi' a sailor brown,' 

** * If you were in jest,' ses he, * I were in fun, 
And now, young 'oman, you are dun ; 
I won't have you, wi* smile or frown. 
You never shall wed wi' a sailor brown, 

A sailor brown, 
You never shall wed wi' a sailor brown.' 

"As another proof that there is some old enmity 
between the rustic population, or, as Mr. Horace 
Mann would call them, Hhe agricultural interest/ 
and the clergy, we find a jovial-looking fellow, first 
premising that we ' want a good song wi' a choorus,* 
giving vent to the following bit of enthusiastic 
rusticity : . 

'* Your hay it is mow'd, and your com is reap'd ; 
Your bams will be fall, and your trusels heaped. 

Come, my boys, come ; 

Come, my boys, come ; 
And merrily roar out Harvest Home ! 

Harvest Home, 

Harvest Home, 
And merrily roar out Harvest Home ! 

*' We've cheated the paarson, we'll cheat 'un agen, 
For why should a blockhead have one in ten. 



A HARVEST SOME. 219 

One in ten. 
One in ten; 
For why should a blockhead hare one in ten, 
At Haryest Home P 
Etc,^ etc. {the * roaring out* being continued,) 

'* For prating so long like a book . ^learned sot, 
Till pudden and dumpling bum to pot, 
Bum to pot, 
Bum to pot ; 
Till pudden and dumpling bum to pot. 

Da Capo. 

** Well toss off our ale till we cannot stand ; 
An' hoigh for the honour of old England, 

Old England, 

Old England ; 
And hoigh for the honour of old England ! 

' That strain again ;' it certainly came over us like 
remembered music^ or, rather, remembered words. 
There was a swing about it which betokened a 
master hand. We had read it somewhere ; but, 
when found, we did not, as Notes and Queries^ 
speaking in Cap*n Cuttle's words, adjures, ' make 
a note of it.' Some months afterwards we foimd 
it in Dryden's ' King Arthur.' It is quoted by 
Bobert Bell in bis 'Songs of the Dramatists,' 
and, as he tells us, it is sung by Gomus and the 
peasants. The introduction of Gomus, Bell says, 
is as anomalous as the allusion to tithes. It was 



220 OTHER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

written in 1691, and must have travelled down 
into Oxfordshire a hundred years ago at least. 

'^ Another, also, with a satirical look at 'the 
gentleman from Lunun,' sings a song which 
describes the terrors of that place, but of which I 
only remember a verse and a half. A country-^ 
man, who seems to be of Irish extraction, gets up 
to London and calls on a friend, and relates thai . 

^'He show'd me through streets, lanes, and alleys so grand 
Till my bones were so sore I scarcely could stand ; 
He show'd me fine houses, that were built up so high, 
And a man made of stone, reaching up to the sky : 
But the name of those places went out of my brain, 
But one, and they call it sweet Petticoat Lane. 

''Conyenient to Petticoat Lane there*8 a place. 
And as we passed through it we could get no peace ; 
The shops were all full of fine clothes, black and blue. 
And the fellows outside nearly tore me in two : 
One pulled me this way, to buy a good frieze, 
Another had a corduroy breeches my size ; 
One chap bawled out, when I wouldn't remain, 
Show him up to the 'Change in Petticoat Lane. 

The moral is, that every one gets terribly served 
out in London/ that it be ' a main wicked place ;' 
and no doubt it is. happy swains of Oxford- 
shire, if you only knew your felicity ! 

" Thus the night goes on, till it wears apace. 
A fiddle is produced, the songs being exhausted, 



A HAR VEST EOME. 221 

and some rude attempts at dancing, worthy of the 
figures of Teniers or Ostade, take place. I find 
one lady, who knows a bit of the polka, and off we 
go, but are soon floored and cast aside, tumbling, 
with a great crash, over a board, which, supported 
on sacks of wheat, forms part of one side of the 
long table ; besides which, the time for departure 
draws nigh. There is a shaking of hands and a 
general break up. The women and boys, many 
of whom have been asleep, troop off; and, a cor- 
dial ' Good night ' given, the master departs to 
bed, leaving a few joUy topera yet in the bam, 
under the charge of a wakeful head man, who 
undertakes that they do not carry any pipes away, 
lest, by some accident, they should set fire to the 
wheat stacks in returning from *The Harvest 
Home.' " 



222 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER XIII. 

IN WHICH FELIX RELATES HIS EXPERIENCE OF AN 
INCURSION TO THE COUNTRY. 

|HAT would make/' said Carew, lookiiig 
approvingly at the painter, " a very decent 
article for a London magazine." 

^' It would serve as ' padding/ as the Saturday 
2Jm>ff calls it/* answered the painter, modestly. 

^' Umph! the name is not a bad one, but it is too 
ill-natured. Some of the very best papers and 
essay's form the padding of our magazines, and for 
them the thoughtful readers buy them, while, no 
doubt, the serial stories forming the chain or con- 
necting links between each number serve to bind 
them together. It is a pity that our writers, who 
live so much in London, deal solely almost with 
London themes . ^there is so much matter to be 
gleaned in the country, and an occasional study 
therein would save writers from becomiug merely 



AN INCURSION TO TEE COUNTRY. 228 

Cockney scribes . a bad fault, of which some critics 
are only too ready to accuse them/* 

" They are too ready to accuse them of anything 
bad, poor fellows. There seems to me a great 
want of kindness among critics. It is so easy to 
be ill-natured/' 

" And ill-nature, young one,*' answered Carew, 
looking kindly at Felix, who was the last speaker, 
'' is so often mistaken for smartness. But oh ! my 
dear boy, just think what fine hearts have been 
pained, and what fine minds rendered morose, by 
ill-timed censoriousness and yulgar critical as- 
sumption ; and then, if ever you wield a pen. . 
and young writers easily fall into the employment 
of critics . ^you will be kind, and try rather to point 
out beauties than to espy faults. That old heathen, 
Horace, who knew more of the critical metier 
than all our new writers put together, lays down 
a sensible rule enough . ^not to be offended with a 
few faults where there be one or two beauties in 
the page to compensate for them/' 

It had not escaped the author's eye, which was 
a quick one, that during his speech, especially 
when he alluded to the possibility of Felix 
wielding a pen, that the young fellow blushed, and 
it will not astonish the reader that, following up 



224 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

this tell-tale hint, Garew suggested that, as the 
rain still fell, it might be as well if Felix added 
to the amusement of the company . an illustrious 
one of a painter and an author . by relating some* 
thing about some window he had peeped into. 

Felix blushed somewhat, but answered modestly 
that he would do what he could. He could t«ll a 
story, he said : he had told some when at schooL 

** Not a few, in one sense, I suppose," said Carew. 

'^And therefore he would tell something of 
his last holiday trip into the country, when he 
paid a visit to a very honest schoolfellow, ' a poore 
persoim of the town," who, after a brilliant college 
career, was, having vacated his fellowship by 
marriage, vegetating on a college living, and, in a 
very imclerical way, longing to get into a wider 
sphere, and of course a larger stipend." 

"Beastly word that !" said Carew ; "don't use it 
again, Felix : I see it slipped out. By the way,. I 
don't know that your friend's fault is at all im- 
clerical. I know many clergy, and a contented 
one is a somewhat rare animal, I can tell you. 
Perhaps content is of all virtues the rarest^ and 
surely it is the wisest." 

" Not always," urged the painter ; " it is the dis- 
contented man who pushes forward and makes the 



AN INCURSION TO THE COUNTRY. 225 

great man. A man too easily contented does 
nothing/' 

" Nay, that I doubt," said Carew. " Discontent 
may make a man rich, but it does not make him 
great. Contented people sometimes grow poor, but 
they are very blessed ; nay, it is not the content 
after all that impoverishes our friends the Irish. 
Besides, surely a man may be contented with his 
farm or property, and yet do aU he legitimately 
can to improve it. If he wants to change it, I 
should call him discontented." 

'^Everything depends on the meaning of 
words," said Scumble, in answer. " No one need 
dispute with another if the two would agree to 
define the words they quarrelled about, previous 
to the battle royal." 

"Unless they fell out about the definitions," 
said FeUx, with a smile. 

" Bravo ! you have me there ; and now, as a 
punishment, tell us your story." 

" Shall I quote for the hundred-thousandth time 
the needy knife-grinder, and tell you that I have 
none to tell, sir P . ^no, I will refrain and commence 
at once. As we pursue our plan of meditating 
upon windows, let mine be one view, and that a 
poor one, of ' the Church Window.* 

Q 



22^ OTHER FE0FLIP8 WINDOWS. 

" Far away in the leafy country/' commenced 
Felix, blushing a little as he spoke . for the yonng 
fellow still retained some of his youthful modesty 
. ^' where an eternal quiet reigns, and not even 
the scream of the all-pervading railway is heard, 
the reader will find the windows I am about to 
describe. 

'' When he has crossed a great and celebrated 
park, celebrated for unfortunate crime, and crime 
most successful and cunning, and therefore re^ 
warded in this world, he will come upon the 
deserted high-road which leads to the village 
wherein the church, decc^ated by this window, is 
situated. 

'' The park is full of soft thin grass, softer than 
a velvet carpet, and old trees . ^memorial trees^ 
which have figured for himdreds of years in the 
leases of the grand estate, and amid which are built 
up lodges, wherein the keeper will hide to take 
aim at the stag of prime, or to shoot the pricket 
as he dashes past with his eye so full of life, his 
frontlet raised high, and nostril dilated with the 
sweet breath of life; for does not my lord duke wish 
to return certain members for his borough, closely 
adjacent to the once royal park, and will not 
many a fawn and many a head of deer have to 



AN mCURSION TO TEE COUNTRY. 227 

fall and to be carried round to certain tenantry 
and voters as presents from the duke P 

" Far away the lovely landscape stretches over 
hill and dale, where clumps of trees are set in 
order like regiments of soldiers in a great battle^ 
and where battalions of oaks seem marching up in 
double-quick time to the relief of a few mixed 
squadrons of beech and elm which are somewhat 
hotly engaged. The deer and fawns lift up their 
antlered or unhorned heads, and gaze at the 
passers-by. 

" Now these passers-by/' said Felix, " you will 
understand, are I and my friend the parson." 

" Of course/' grunted Carew ; ** we quite know 
that. Go on." 

"Past many a sweet dell, and over a bridge 
which spans a large artificial lake they journey, 
till they pass out of the great duke's park into a 
close copse, where the rabbits fly, startled, to their 
holes, and the pheasant rises whirring from the 
bracken. And then they cross again the winding 
coach-road, and over a common where the turf has 
been cut by peasants^ and stands packed to dry 
like so many soldiers' huts, dwarfed indeed, bu^t 
looking bigger in the autumn twilight. 

" * We are now in the village of Stretton Longa } 

Q 2 



228 OTHER PEOPLITS WINBOWS. 

rightlj indeed called Umg,^ said the paraon to the 
other traTeller. 

** * Wide waa hia core, the hooaea tar aaunder/ 
ejaculated his guest, with a quotatioii. 'Far 
^loo^ apart, and bat poorl j inhabited.' 

** So it seemed. Little fellows with their skins 
burnt brown, and their flaxen hair bleached, came 
out to look at the stranger who passed by. The 
boys gare a slow pull at their forelocks, and the 
girls dropped a curtsy. Then the two friends 
leapt a dwarf stile, and passed orer one or two 
fields with stone fences, and came to the back of a 
churchyard. 

*' * A quaint old church,' said the guest ; ' early 
English, I suppose ?' 

** * Tes ; it dates back to the timeof Henry III. 
Stretton Magna, Parra, and Longa must have 
been populous Tillages then ; but the long wars 
which ensued, and the making of that big park, 
and, perhaps, the superior attractions of trade and 
manufactures, have rendered our population thin 
and sparse.' 

" The speaker sighed as he said this. He was 
a clergyman who wished for a larger sphere, and 
hoped to work and do good, perhaps, in a town " 

'* Tou said that before, in your prefatory 



AN INCURSION TO THE COUNTRY. 229 

matter/' interrupted Carew, critically, Felix did 
not heed him, but went on. 

" Or, it may be, in the chief city itself, where 
he could grapple with the questions of the day, 
with sin and sorrow brought face to face with him. 
But Providence had ordained it otherwise; and 
here, in this quiet Tillage, without, as he said, 
hardly one of his congregation who could under- 
stand him, he was bound to wear out the best por- 
tion of his life in his little daily round of duties . 
duties which he thought insignificant. He had a 
busy brain and literary tastes ; had been a Fellow 
of his college, and had published a volume of 
poems, as well as one of sermons. 

" * You must not think that none can under- 
stand you,' said his friend. * Of course, no man 
. at least, not every man . fully appreciates his 
own position ; and perhaps the greatest cause of 
misery in this world is the non-realisation of our 
exact place and duties. A man highly educated 
may feel lost in a village like this ; but, if he 
remember that education is entirely for himself (in 
one view of it) . ^that it is to strengthen, uphold, 
and widen his mind, as well as to help him to per- 
form his duties to the world,' he will not repine. 
How many men, wearied and worn with London 



.iilO OTHER PEOPLE'S WnTDOWE. 

work, tired to death with trying to jocm dofwn tb» 
evor-growing crop of tares and thistles which the 
d4)vil MOWN, would be glad to exchange for a time 
with you this sweet security of peace and cafan 
rotirtnuout !' 

** ^ All ! the key is in the west door/ said the 
{MirHon. And then he added, with a sighy 'It's 
uU vory woU, but you don't know what it is to liye 
uuuMigtit tho UoDotiuns/ 

**^TtHich Home of the young ones; fit them to 
gi> ul)i*oml in tho world and work.' 

** * To go ubroud in the world and Mghten the 
viH»W(» ; thttt is what they do with their boys down 
\\s>\\\ You hardly can realise how the narrow 
lutmuH of j>overty tie down our agriculturists. 
INn*hu(M it i» lH>st so. What else could so well fit 
thou\ tW their sorry lives as being hardened at the 
U^giuuiug y But come^ we must not talk like this; 
wo uuiHt Ih> ooivtent> in church at least. I want you 
to iHv our wi>st window/ 

^' 8vi stiyiug> my old friend and schoolfellow 
eutt>i\^ thi> little old church> which was Tory dry 
Mud Yt>ry white iQside> with an old open roctf, 
whUt^w^iHl> of course> and plastered up so as to 
)viwtu\t tht> oold wind firom Uoning dovn on the 
KvH^d^ of the coiugregation. The little chaDcd, 



AN mcmsioN TO tjsjB vomrTRY. 231 

witliin wUch was a dilapidated communion-table, 
covered with a, decent cloth. then turned up . 
boasted of two chairs, although the parson never 
had any help, but went boldly through the whole 
service with a painful idea of monotony ; and 
two or three dwarf forms on each side showed 
where the little boys and girls sat, and shuf- 
fled, and yawned the sermon through, under 
the superintendence of my friend's wife, a lady 
born and bred, and fitted for society, and who, to 
say the truth, took very unwillingly to her part of 
the bargain of life. When we were in the church, 
she came up and shook hands with the visitor, and 
welcomed him. 

" * I am come to make everything neat,' said 
fihe, turning down the communion-cloth: ^at 
least, as neat as it can be. Is not the church 
dilapidated P^ 

"'Well, it is rather naked,' said the person 
appealed to ; ' cannot you make your parishioners 
subscribe to renovating it P Is it not shameful to 
have a church in this state P Surely some one 
ought to take care of God's house ;' then seeking 
for something more cheerful to say, he asked, 
*and pray, Mrs. Courtenay, which is your pew . 
this, I suppose P' 



232 OTSER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

" * Oh, no/ said the lady. * By the way, I wish 
you could, with due reyerence, wear hats as we 
wear bonnets ' 

^^ ^ Because of the angels,' interrupt^ the clergy- 
man, with a little bit of clerical learning. ' Don't 
you see, my dear? because the angels. messengers 
or missionary preachers . should not be distracted 
by the beautiful faces and glorious hair, and^ no 
doubt, gorgeous head-ornaments, of some of their 
hearers.' 

" * Don't I Imow ?. of course I do. Have you 
not often explainedit before? NojMr.Straightways, 
that is not our pew ; that belongs to the Honour- 
able Colonel Vavassor, the late duke's brother- 
he was then earl only ; and this next pew, com- 
fortably lined with baize, belongs to the servants 
of the great house. So I go and sit among the 
boys and girls ; on the whole, I prefer the girls, 
because, although they do sing dreadfully out of 
time, and in a pitch excruciatingly high, yet they 
are not so dreadfully smelly as are the boys, 
especiaUy in summer-time, when the afternoons 
are close and warm.' 

"Poor lady! educated for a society in which 
Italian music, French dresses, and the finest 
English perfumes were a necessity, no wonder she 



Air INCURSION TO TSE COUNTRY. 233 

found the new corduroy and fustian trousers of the 
little ploughboys * smelly.' 

^'The guest smiled^ as he thought this oyer, 
sadly enough, but he answered cheerily, 'Well, 
I shall sit in the free seats to-morrow ; I fancy 
one is as nemr heaven there as in the finest 
pew in Christendom. Why, Courtenay, what a 
fine old font you have ! why do not the Vavassors 
restore this church P What a little jewel it would 
beP 

"'Why did you not say bijou?* said Mrs. 
Courtenay, with a smile. 

" * Because I prefer my own language to French, 
as infinitely more expressive, and because, more- 
over, I would not use that fine-lady term to a 
church, however decorated. There is a fitness in 
things.' 

" * Yes, so there is, and a fitness for things in 
some men and families; so, if you knew the 
Vavassors, you would not ask why they do not 
repair the church. There, that is their doing, and 
that is about all we shaU get from them.' 

" Mrs. Courtenay pointed to the west window, in 
which three pallid saints, each with his golden 
aureole floating in a circular ring above his head, 
stood long, thin, and angular, and with their eyes 



234 OTEER PE0PLIP8 WINDOWS. 

cast up, as if praying for tlie souls of the deceased 
y avassorsy three of whom the window was erected 
to commemorate. 

''^Ye8>' said the guest, Hhese windows are 
fashionable now, and are haj^ily contrived a 
double debt to pay ; they ornament the church, 
and they serve for a splendid monument-^-splen- 
did, indeed, for they shine with more than the 
brilliancy of gold or of the Tyxian dye. of certain 
of our deceased. Does not this remind you of 
Keats's '* casement high and triple-arch'd," 
wherein were panes . 

"' Inniimerable of stains and splendid dyes. 
As are the tiger-moth's de^ damask wings; 
And in the midst, 'mong thousand heraldries. 
And twilight saints, and dim emblazonings, 

A shielded scutcheon blush'd with blood of queens 
and kings"?' 

^^ * Yes, it does,' answered the lady. * And how 
do you like the window ?' 

" * It seems out of place in this bare old church,' 
interposed the Rev. Mr. Courtenay ; " too much 
like a great blazing carbuncle and gold brooch 
stuck in the stomacher of a plain and godly 
Quakeress.' 

*' ' Yes,' mused his friend ; * not a bad simile ; 



AN INCURSIOir TO TSE COUNTRY. 236 

not quite suited to us ;^ and then he put by the 
question with a sudden excursus into family his- 
tory. * There is the dragon's head erased of the 
Yavassors ; three of them ; sable, on a field gules; 
a simple shield, a fine old family. Pride even 
survives the grave/ 

" * Oh, no, it does not,* said the parson. * You 
see the people who put up that window are not 
buried yet. For those who sleep below reck little 
whether the simulance of twilight saints are 
praying over them, or the sea- wind sweeps and 
moans above the liquid and motive grave which 
holds them in a perpetual state of ebb and flood 
till the judgment day.' 

''^I should like to die at sea,' said the 
lady. 

" * So should not I,* answered the guest ; * give 
me the firm warm mother earth, and let not my 
bones be washed white, and my flesh devoured by 
.t^ng. fche.. Le. me re»L in.o »y nattvl 
elements, the ever-fecund, all-producing red loam 
of which Adam was made.' 

" ' I remember,' said the parson, with a smile. 
for he was about to reprove the hyperbole of his 
guest " 

« Yery properly so, too/' interrupted George 



aao OTHER PEOPLJPS WISImOWS^ 



Onrow ; ** how could yoa utter 
to {iluiiMo Mm. Courtenay, I 

** ' Whon I wus out with a radm^ W^ ^ 
(3iH}itior. it IN very cohl there <m the coaal» bol 
Vtsry qiiiot. that the body of a poor sailor wlio 
WUM (liH)WUiMl wus washed ashore, and it was c uicml 
with thouHundi of shrimps and prawns.' 

^* ' Horrid I' said the lady; ^I shall never eat 
thorn ttKc^in.* 

« < WoU/ answorod her husband, ' you see that 
is ono of tho ways in which we get back to the 
boMom of our common mother. We are resolved 
ill various ways into our elements by the wonderful 
ohomistry of nature.' 

" * To change the subject, Mr. Straightways/ 
.aid t}ic lady, * and to get back to our coat- 
armour and saints, these Yavassors are not the 
YavasMors, you must know. Our family, the 
Oourtenays, are much older than they are, and 
my family, the JoUiffes, are older jstilL You see 
the old grandfather was a Brownjohn, a London 
merchant, who took the name of Yavassor ; and 
so much for their ooat-armour.' 

*^ * Oh, vanity of vanities !' said the guest 
* And now, since you ask me, I must say that I 
don't think much of their saints. I believe that 



AN INCURSION TO TSE COUNTRY. 237 

the angxilaF treatment is false and not pretty, that 
the art is not an art but a manufacture, that the 
step is retrogressive ' '* 

"Bravo, and spoken like a true artist, Mr. 
Straightways,'' said Gimabue, with enthusiasm. 
** If we do have painted windows, we should have 
a style of our own, and not copy the old ones.'* 

Felix continued : " and that Saints Paul and 
Barnabas up there would have demurred to their 
elevation, especially as they did, and that loudly, 
and coupling their ejaculations with manual force, 
object to being worshipped ^hile in the flesh. 
Moreover, these windows exclude the light, and 
force passages of arms and disputation upon us 
that lead to nothing. If you will have a painted 
window, fill it with holy sentences and scrolls pro- 
perly disposed, but then only put it in the chancel, 
say, where they want colour. Here, in this open 
country, with the blue or sunny sky without, and 
the trees waving their green branches in the 
summer, or frosted and snow-laden in winter, 
what want we of mediaeval saints and questionable 
coats of arms P Have you read that capital little 
poem of the ' Painted Window,' Mrs. Courtenay, 
in which the poet complains that the heavens 
now ' are darkened by each intercepting saint ' P 



238 OTEER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

That's a fine Protestant thought, is it not? 
Again, he says that in church the dreaming boj 
could watch the changing sky, and think of God's 
power . the window 

" with the splendonr 

Of heaven's radiance Kt . 
A window beautiful indeed, 
For God had painted itl'^ 

Finally, the poet refuses, and I think rightly, 
upon this subject of adornment, to look up to 
painted saints, or, .as he says . 

** To bound my soul's perc^tiona 
By their humanity ! 
To gaze upon God's sainted 
Where God was wont to be !'* 

The thought is rery logical and close, and Mr. 
Sawyer's poem deseyves study by all who think 
upon this ever-recurring question.' 

"*Ye8, yes,' said Mrs. Courtenay, *you shall 
lend me the book, and I'll read it ; or, better still, 
you shall read it aloud. But we catch cold here, 
and tea is ready. Come and look at our study 
window, and you and I will debate the matter 
while Herbert writes his sermon.' 

« And so the friends went to tea, and at no late 



AN INCURSION TO TSE COUNTRY. 239 

hour, after short family prayers, to bed, in which 
the guest's dreams were troubled with the wan 
and worn-looking old church . not unlike its 
mother of England, troubled and beaten within 
and without . wd the new gorgeous stained 
window fuU of coat-armour and saints." 



240 OTHJER PEOPLIT 8 Wim) WS. 




CHAPTER XIV. 

IN WHICH THE FRIENDS RESORT TO DINNER. 

N the best book which he has written . 
at least it is so in many respects . ^Mr. 
Thackeray> describing the warm criticism 
which F. Bayham produces in the Pall MaU 
Gazette, on the paintings of his friends, hints 
that it was somewhat too warm. Thus, when 
Olive gets his pictures exhibited for the first time 
. not his grand historical picture, but his simple 
sketches . F. B. shouts, lo triumphe ! so loudly 
that all the world is made aware of the fact that 
Mr, Clive Newcome has got an admiring, if not a 
judicious friend, at his back. "F. Bayham's 
criticism on this performance," says the amiable 
satirist, surely writing of himseK, for he had been 
educated as an artist, and had worked as an art 
critic, "it need not be said, was tremendous. 
Since the days of Michael Angelo yon would have 
thought there never had been such drawings. In 



TSE JEATING'EO USK 241 

facty F. B., as some other critics do, clapped his 
friends so boisterously on the back, and trumpeted 
their merits with such prodigious energy, as to 
make his friends themselves somewhat uneasy." 

The gentlemen to whom Felix related his first 
little essay were as warm, but more judicious 
critics than that good-natured Irishman, Frederic 
Bayham, Esq. "Ton my word," said Carew, 
pulling down one end of his moustache, " yours is 
a very pretty modest style, young fellow, and I 
know one or two publishers who ought to be ready 
to give you some money for your little amuse- 
m.ents in that way. But I shall not encourage 
you. Don't turn author by profession. 'Tis an 
ignoble career for many of us,'* 

" You ought not to say so," said Felix, firing 
up ; " you, who have carried comfort, manly advice, 
honest thought, and religion without cant, into so 
many houses." 

" Bravo ! very much bravo !" echoed Scumble ; 
" no profession can be ignoble that is nobly carried 
on. It is part of George's cant that he says so . 
not his own cant, but professional cant, which he 
has caught up and does not know how to get rid 
of. I wish he would not try to pass it off upon 
us, that's all." 

R 



242 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

"Truly it would be better/' returned Felix; 
" only allow me to say that our friend has really 
none of that quality about him. What it is is 
this : he has a quantity of humility inherent in 
him which will break out. He does not let it 
evaporate out at the proper place, and there- 
fore he vents it out of place now and then upon 
us/' 

" Do as you like with me, gentlemen ; the rain 
has ceased, and I can escape from you," said the 
author. 

" And the time has passed ; it is five o'clock I" 
said Felix, with wonderment ; " I must run home 
and have tea." 

" Tea ! why, we have not dined. Just take a 
oup with your wife and come back to my study. 
Wash and adorn yourself by putting on a clean 
iH>llar : for a publisher has paid me some money 
for a second edition, and I am determined to stand 
treat* Come down to the Strand, you two, and 
w^> will have a Uttle dinner, ckez our German 
fHend. Herr Kilner.'* 

AH tho endeavours of Felix could not persuade 
iVrt^w to ior^^> his treat. Oeorge was one of 
tho!^ whw having made up their mind to anything, 
k^'p rij^idly to it, and he took a pleasure in the 




THE EATINQ'HOUSE. 243 

society of Felix, and was glad to have him of his 
company. No wonder, then, that the latter yielded, 
and that in due time the three friends found them- 
selves in the Strand, at the hospitable house of 
Mr. Xilner, a house which never revises its 
harbour, and a very comfortable one it is, to people 
who have money to pay for it. 

There are eating-houses in London in galore 
. ^plenty of houses to eat at, but little thereat 
to eat, if we credit some grumblers. There is the 
low eating-house, which has always an abundance 
of steam about it, and which boasts a great deal of 
pudding and vegetable, but very little meat ; one 
of the mysteries of this class of house being that 
the mutton bone, denuded of all the meat, which 
lies a ghastly object in the pewter dish, apparently 
projects as much steam as does the huge joint of 
beef which is formed of a dozen layers of fat 
and lean cunningly skewered together, and which 
is never seen by any chance at a gentleman's 
table, but always on thq counter of a cook- 
shop. 

Before the windows of such an eating-house as 
this, hungry boys are seen flattening their turn- 
up and low-bred noses, poor things ! against the 
glass, apparently with but one desire in the world, 

B 2 



244 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

whicli is, to be able to walk in and eat as mucli 
pudding as their elastic stomaclis can contain. 
When the careful but too generous mechanic 
hurries to this shop about half-past twelve o'clock, 
he finds a little crowd of these children around 
the windows, and most likely relieves them, imless, 
indeed, he remembers that the boys are habitues 6l 
the grating, and gain their living by their hungry 
looks. Some of these restaurants tempt their 
customers by extraordinary advertisements. " A 
loaf of bread and a plate of leg-of-beef soup for 
fourpence," are freely offered ; and one proprietor 
gravely assures the public, in the most conspicuous 
type, that he will give the " Best dinner in London 
for ninepence." Not far from this enterprising 
man is one who offers the "Acre dinner for eight- 
pence;" for which small sum the less fastidious 
mechanics of somewhat small appetites may de- 
light in a plate of meat, vegetables, pudding, and 
bread. 

" Time was," said Carew, pointing out these 
places, with the cruel intention, as Felix averred, 
of taking away the appetites of his two friends, 
"when eightpence would have bought a large 
dinner in Long Acre for two authors. Dr. John- 
son, indeed, learned to live on fourpence-half- 



TRE EATINQ'EO USE. 245 

penny a day ; and do you recollect that famona 
dinner in the cellar . for they cooked and ate in 
cellars then . of Strap and EoderickEandom, and, 
moreover, the smoking ox cheek from the eating- 
house over the way, of Beau Sibbs, in Goldsmith's 
Essays P'' 

"Ay!" said Felix, "how delighted one is, 
when hungry, to call up visions of those feasts of 
which literature is only too full, from the suppers of 
Lucullus, given in the Apollo chamber, and those 
wild orgies described in Juvenal and Persius, to 
the little dinner at the Summins's, described so 
well by Thackeray/' 

"Who knew how to feed," added Carew. 
" You have forgotten the feasts in Homer. The 
old boys knew that they must live to eat, though 
they did feed in rather a rough style." 

" The feast which pleases me the best of all," 
said the artist, " is that grand one in the island of 
Barataria, in which poor Sancho's appetite is 
teazed by a hundred dainties of which he is not 
allowed to taste one. Imagine, if you can," con- 
tinued Scumble, laughing, " one's own state under 
the same circumstances." 

"He admires that episode," urged George 
Carew, " because in a score of Academy exhibitions 



246 OTHER PEOPLES WINDOWS. 

he has seen it painted. But I confess it is a rich 
scene which can scarcely be done justice to. Poor 
Sancho^ after having been denied fruit and fish, 
fixes on a dish of roast partridges, which he fancies 
can do him no manner of harm. ' Hold !' cries 
the doctor, *my lord governor shall not eat them 
while I live to prevent it.' * Why not P' cries 
Sancho. * Because,' rattles the doctor, * our great 
Northern star of medicine, Hippocrates, says, 
*' Omnis saturatio mala, perdicia autem pessimal* ' 
and away the partridges fly." 

" But partridges were not for him," said Felix, 
taking up the theme, and, fresh from the Quixote, 
thereby enabled to compete with the extensive 
memory of George Carew. "He was not dis- 
appointed so much by their loss as of that of the 
olla-podrida. 'What think you, master doctor,' 
cries he, * of that huge dish smoking hot, which I 
take to be an olla-podrida P for among the many 
things contained in that mass I may be sure to 
light upon something toothsome.' " 

"A good sentiment," said George, " like that of 
the Scotsman, who said a sheep's head was a con- 
fused mass of good eating. What says the 
governor to the olla-podrida, yoimg one P you 
have it all at your fingers' ends." 



TEE EATINO'EOUSE. 247 

** ^Absit !* cries the doctor, * far be such a 
thought from us ! Olla-podrida ! there is no 
worse dish in the world ; leave them to prebends 
and rectors of colleges^ or lusty feeders at country 
weddings ; but let them not be seen on the tables 
of governors/ " 

" Ah, what rich humour Cervantes had !" inter- 
rupted Carew ; " how gentle and how genial too. 
We laugh at the passages now, but let us imagine 
the writer in his gloomy prison, shattered in 
health, neglected, with little hope, and with two 
grim companions, old age and poverty, and we 
shall the better appreciate the noble heroism of 
the man. But, hallo ! here we are at Herr 
Kilner's, and in capital time. At six o'clock he 
has a fresh relay of hot joints ; let us enter, and 
may good digestion wait on appetite." 

An officious waiter who knew Carew took th^ 
smaU party under his immediate protection, and 
ushered them at once to a small reserved table 
which was made gay by the most neatly folded 
and snowy of napkins, and the most rosy pink of 
hock glasses. Carew called for the carte and 
studied it, and resolved to commence, after consul- 
tation with his own mind, with clear soup, to be fol- 
lowed by salmon, and accompanied with still hock. 



248 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

In the meantime, Felix had leisure to study the 
room. 

Our guests had entered by a wide side-door way, 
in which were fresh evergreens ; but Kilner's 
establishment was plainly attached to a public- 
house or tavern. It may be that the ingenious 
German, finding many come to his house to dine, 
had supplemented the tavern by building a big 
room over a stable yard, and supplying the few 
guests he had. But, having done this thoroughly 
well, his business had increased until a second 
saloon, and a smoking-room all gaily set out, but 
somewhat dose and stufi^, were hardly enough to 
contain the diners, eaters, and even the viveur^ 
who came down expressly to have a good dinner. 

Lighted by a lantern at the top, the sides of the 
square saloon were covered with large pictures by 
third-rate painters, which Kilner had evidently 
picked up cheaply, but which were very much 
better than the ordinary paintings seen in the 
houses of rich men. In the middle of the room 
stood a sturdy carver, stout but pale, as if all 
ruddiness had been steamed out of him, and before 
him, on a dinner-wagon, a small table on wheels, 
almost as large as a dinner plate, was a handsome 
plated dish-cover, under which smoked a fine 



TEE EATINQ'HO USE. 249 

sirloin of beef. When any of the convives desired 
some of this joint, the table was wheeled to his side, 
and the carver, with the artistic ease which only 
long practice can give, cut him his portion as 
defdy as if he imderstood how much he could eat 
to a grain. 

" You will observe/' said George, " how clever 
the fellow is. There is great art in carving ; that 
is why our young men will not undertake it. But 
you should have seen my dad, sir; he was an 
English gentleman, of the time when a gentleman 
sat at the head of his table and served his guests ; 
not when you dine h la Itusse, and a waiter rushes 
up with a joint of a fowl badly prepared and half 
cold, and with all the toothsomeness evaporated. 
Give me the old school. A man should sit at the 
head of his table. I don't know what the present 
age is coming to ; it is abdicating all its duties, 
and will bring us to a pretty pass at last." 

" Bother the present age, you old fogey, you," 
said Scumble, who had been making furtive 
attacks on his bread. ^^Here comes the clear 
soup ; say your grace to yourself, and fall to." 

Before the salmon was despatched, a young 
gentleman of six-and-twenty came into the room, 
whom Garew summoned at once by knocking so 



250 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

sharply on the table that all the convives looked 
up. For at Kilner's silence is respectfully de- 
manded, and, with the exception of a low buzz and 
a laugh from some of the young fellows when the 
wine is not ouly good . that it always is . ^but 
abundant, one might fancy that they were dining 
alone. 

When this young gentleman saw George, he 
rushed to him, and shook him by the hand with 
that warmth of feeling which almost all Carew's 
friends exhibited towards him, and, Garew haying 
pressed him, he took up the fourth and empty 
chair and joined the party, absorbing so much of 
his friend's attention and conversation that Felix 
began to feel a little jealous. 

''Now," said Carew, "I am happy. You're 
just the fellow I wanted, Comer ; I think I have 
introduced you to Scumble before." 

" Oh yes," said the stranger. " Mr. Scumble, 
the artist whose works I so often see noticed in the 
papers ?" 

"Exactly," rejoined Carew, as the two shook 
hands ; '' and a better feUow does not exist in the 
world, except he sits there." 

He pointed out Felix, who blushed and sniggered 
with his usual superabundant modesty. 



TKE EATINQ-EO USE. 25 1 

'* Let me introduce you two ; you ought to like 
each other, and will do so." 

"We have evidently a point of attraction in 
you, George," said the stranger, reading in the 
open eyes of Felix the friendship that he felt, and 
liking the young man before he knew him, " I 
have no doubt that I and your friend will be 
delighted with each other if you say " 

"Ceaseyourfiinning; here comesyour clear soup. 
Mr. Felix Straightways, as you are the oldest 
inhabitant of this table, let me give you the prece- 
dence, and present to you a dear friend of mine. 
Dr. Julius Comer, formerly house surgeon at 
St. Barnabas Hospital, and consultiif^ physician of 
some other place, when he looked such a boy that 
his patients had no confidence in him." 

" They ought to have now, then," said Felix, 
shaking hands with him. 

" Go on with the soup, doctor, and catch us up. 
Waiter, another bottle of this hock, and put the 
sparkling in ice ; bring that up with the haunch. 
Now," turning to the doctor, " I will do all the 
talking," continued Carew ; ^^je commence itre un 
pire gris, as they said in that detestable lingo over 
the water . I have had my tongue oiled. Our 
friend Comer, not only a surgeon, but one who has 



252 OTEER PE0PLE*8 WINDOWSL 

taken bis degree, finding that he could not obtain 
.ufficiont credence in London^ has fled to Stoney- 
Mudboroughy in the connty of GanotBhiie, and 
there practises on the dura corpora of tlie diaw- 
baoons." 

*' Detestable Cockney/' said the doctor, drinking 
to bis friend. *^ The fact is, George, you don't 
know all. I am settled in practice, and, to giye 
myself stability and position, I am. married 

** The sweetest, prettiest, . ^we'U spare the rest; 
but we will drink the bride's health in moselle," 
cried Oarew. 

" At my ei^nse," said the doctor. 

" Not a bit of it," interrupted Carew ; " I, sir, 
am the LuouUus of the day." 
. And so, with friendly jest and joke, the dinner 
passed off, and when the young fellows adjourned to 
a private smoking-room, and sat comfortably down 
to coifee and cigars, Carew found very little diffi- 
culty in persuading his guests . as he had proved 
by demonstration . that there is at least one 
eating-house in London where you can get an 
excellent dinner, notwithstanding that the carte is 
not so extensive as at the " Trois Fr^res," or even at 
Voisin's, in Paris, and the five himdred letters of 



TKE EATINO'EO USE. 253 

complamt from men who want two pounds of 
rump steak and potatoes for sixpence, to the 
contrary. 

" The fact is, London, if you know it well, is the 
cheapest and best place for a dinner of any kind 
in the world. And now, doctor, as you are under 
a promise, tell us how it is that you have fallen 
into the toils of wedlock." 

As nothing in the world makes people so inti- 
mate as a good dinner, Dr. Comer, having 
bound Carew by a heavy promise, strengthened by 
a fine, not to interrupt him, commenced his story, 
which will be found in the following chapter. 



264 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 



CHAPTER XV. 



THE DOCTOE's 8TOKY. 




|H£ four friends haying settled themselves 
very comfortably in their easy chairs, and 
enjoying their cigars, Dr. Comer com- 
menced by laying down his cigar and taking a 
modest sip of coffee ; then, looking chiefly at his 
old friend George Carew, thus began : . 

" I had passed the College, and ' walked,* as we 
then termed it, the hospital, but was not quite old 
enough to practise. However, as soon as I wSas of 
the required age, up I went, with a very juvenile 
appearance, and, doubtless, considerably more con- 
fidence than I should now feel, for my examination. 
Old Cutler, senior surgeon at St. Barnabas, who 
principally took me in hand, gave me some stiff 
questions, but was now and then pleased to look 
over the top of his spectacles and emit a gnmt of 
satisfaction at my answers. When everything 
was over, and my mouth was very dry with a 



TEE D OTOE 8 8T0R Y. 265 

fever of anxious expectation, and my face, of an 
unusual pallor, expressed a clammy dew, the stem 
Cutler demanded how old I was. 

" * Twenty-two,' I said, eagerly. 

** ' Umph !' said he. * And how long have you 
been twenty-two P' . ^this almost incredulously. 

" ' Since eight o'clock yesterday evening,' I 
returned, to convey conviction, as it were, by 
descending to particulars. 

" * That will do,' said he, with a grim smile. 
* You ought to make a very fair practitioner, for 
you have been eager enough to get into practice. 
Go : you are licensed to slay.' 

** My next object was to make a practice. I 
determined not to buy one, but to work myself 
into position and fame. I had a great idea of 
fame. I dreamt of all the best doctors in the 
county, containing the village where I shortly set 
up, failing to cure Lord Demilion, the great man 
of the neighbourhood ; and of my being sent for 
in a hurry, seeing the case at a glance, ridiculing 
the diagnosis of my brethren, who stood paralysed 
at my boldness, resorting to something exceedingly 
desperate, effecting a wonderfiil cure, and living 
for ever on the reputation made by it. Of course 
I dreamt that I became physician ordinary and 



256 OTHER PEOPLE* S WINDOWS. 

extraordinary to the great Demilion family ; that 
Demilion asserted publicly that he never could 
have lived without me, nor would ever let me live 
more than a mile away from his park ; that the 
Lancet had reported the whole of the case, and 
that the senior surgeon at the Hotel Dieu, in Paris, 
had turned yellow with envy when he heard that 
the gold medal, the great prize for surgery, was 
to be sent to me, an imknown rival, and, oh, 
horror ! an Englishman ! 

"Ah! what wild dreams we have! I didn't 
know the precise form that mine assumed, but 
fancy that one of these forms . ^the instancfe of my 
great cure . took the shape of trepanning. ' My 
lord,' I dreamt I said to Demilion, a thin, melan- 
choly, and very rich seigneur, who had read all 
the encyclopaedists so assiduously that he was 
attacked with brain fever . he was supposed to be 
in a rational state between the paroxysms of mad- 
ness . * the only way effectually to cure you is to 
take off the top of the cranium, and remove a 
portion of your lordship's too exuberant and lively 
brain.' My rivals turned blue with horror at such 
a proposal. 'And,' muttered his lordship, with 
extreme feebleness, * what will be the consequence 
if I refuse P' 'My lord,' I (unagined that I) 



THE DOCTORS STORY. 267 

returned boldly, ' I cannot answer for the conse- 
quences ; or rather I can.' Here I took out my 
watch. ' In two hours, thirty-seven minutes, and 
twenty seconds your lordship will breathe your 
last/ His lordship smiled with the resignation of 
a philosopher. * Send for Mr. Capias,' said he ; 
^ he is in waiting, and has my will ready executed. 
I wish to attest it before I submit. Young man. 
Napoleon won the Bridge of Lodi when a mere 
lad ; he was a youth, but he was bold. Into your 

hands, bold like him, I commit myself ' 

" His lordship did not finish the sentence, be- 
cause the next moment he was in a fit of raving 
madness. I saw there was not a moment to be 
lost. I turned out Mr. Capias, forced my terrified 
brethren to strap his lordship down, gave him a 
huge dose of laudanum . ether as an anaesthetic 
was not then known . and in ten minutes his lord- 
ship's scalp was removed, and his head relieved of 
the top of the cranium, and a few ounces of brain. 
In a fortnight afterwards his lordship was walking 
about in his right mind, or rather the best part of 
his mind. All the indigestible notions of D' Alem- 
bert and Diderot seemed happily to have been 
removed with the portion of brain I took away. 
Lord Demilion led a reformed life, and busied 

s 



258 OTHER PEOPLE'S WLSD0W8. 

himself, not in sneering at other people's religiofl, 
but in exhibiting his own. He built a church, 
schools, cottages for the poor, and 

'' I had got just so far in my dream. I need 
not saj that it was a dream, and that I never 
gained the Demilion connection at all, or, in &ct, 
a single patient worth five pounds a-jear in that 
pretty, lonely, and exceedingly healthy Tillage I 
set up in, when an old woman, half->drudge and 
wholly the post- woman of the village, brought me 
word that I was wanted. 

" ' Not at Demilion Park,' said I, with a bitter 
smile, for, awaking from my day-dream, I had 
felt disappointed at the blank reality. 

" * Noa,' returned the withered, brown, healthy, 
absurdly healthy old creature, who had probably 
never taken a pill or had the headache in her life 
. * Noa, Dr. Comer, na such luck for a young 'un. 
It be a Parson Williams as wants you ; he's very 
bad, poor man." Thus saying, the post-woman 
vanished. 

** 'Parson Williams!' said I. 'These people 
call every local preacher a parson, and, egad, every 
quack a doctor ! There's no luck for me ; it is not 
even the clergyman who is ill.' I put on my hat 
in a huff, and went on to Mr. Williams's house. 



TEE DOCTOR'S STORY. 259 

" It was at the end of the village . ^uptown, as 
the inhabitants called it . ^and a quaint, pretty, 
but bare enough little residence it was. The road, 
branchingoff into two divisions, had left a triangular 
bit of common, a sort of no-man's-land, which 
some bold adventurer, with not the slightest right 
on his side, had seized, and stuck thereon a pedlar's 
shop. That speedily changed into a butcher's, 
then became deserted and a nuisance to the village; 
then the Wesleyans opened the shop to preach in 
it, and at last railed in the space and erected a 
plain, bam-like chapel, at the back of which was 
a structure, rather like a large washhouse than a 
small residence, but which contained four rooms, 
and was the local preacher's habitation. 

" To the door of this little house I, Julius Comer, 
Doctor of Medicine and Licentiate of the Apothe- 
caries' Hall, at school known as J. Comer, and 
more frequently as Jack Horner, did apply the 
handle of my worn gingham umbrella rather for- 
cibly, as is the manner of us doctors . a manner 
assumed probably with a view of making our 
patients satisfied with our presence and of re- 
adjusting their nerves. 

" ' Is Mr. Williams to be seen ?' I asked. ' I 

am ' 

s 2 



260 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" ' Dr. Comer/ said a sweet voice, as the sweetest 
of visions seemed to stand before me, *my father 
will be glad to see you.' 

" ' Her father ! goodness gracious !' thought I 
to myself; 'fancy an old local preacher having 
such a daughter !' She stood there, just aside to 
permit me to enter the narrow and small hall, with 
her pretty eyes turned towards mine, a look of 
anxious hope on her face, her white throat poised 
upon her beautiful shoulders, and surrounded with 
a frill of blue silk ribbon, the trimming of her 
dress, which was worn close and high. The deep 
blue of her eyes matched the ribbon very nicely, 
and set off by contrast the rose colour of her 
cheeks, and the warm, red brown of her hair. 
She seemed to be an artist in colour, for every- 
thing she wore always fell into its due contrast 
or harmony. So, too, she seemed always to be 
graceful in her movements ; and, had it not been 
for her extreme unaffectedness and simplicity, she 
wouldhave appeared to have studied all her attitudes, 
they were so graceful. Her chin was round, and 
just sufficiently prominent, her upper lip of the 
true shape, and beautifully and palely red, while 
the lower was fuller and redder. When she 
smiled, which she did readily at my awkward and 



TSi: D CTOE 8 STOR Y. 261 

Intense gaze, she gave a peculiar sweetness to her 
whole face, which smiled all over, dimpled cheeks, 
blue eyes, mouth and all. The sight of her was 
to me something so pleasant that when she spoke 
again I fancied a long interval of time must have 
elapsed since I first saw her, 

" ' He is in the parlour,' she said, leading the 
way. 

"Well, the illness of Mr. Williams was not 
much, but it was obstinate ; it arose, I fancy, from 
the depressed views he took of religion and life, 
and from a great deal of pride, long suppressed, 
and most conscientiously kept down, and woimded, 
perhaps, by his position or his poverty. He was 
a good man, and had manfully struggled with his 
faults, trying to carry out the true view of religion, 
with regard to his failing, in the right way. 
Happily, when I saw my patient, I took a more 
practical and scientific diagnosis of his case than I 
did of that of my Lord DemiUon in my waking 
dream ; I talked cheerfully to him, told him that 
I would get him well enough for prayer-meeting 
on Sunday, and, writing out a prescription, called 
in Miss Williams to give her my directions. 

" ' You will send your servant to N ,' said 

I, ' for this prescription, for the village apothecary 



262 OTHER PEOPLE'S WISDOW^. 

will not be good enough;' I mentxcmed a town 
.omo Hix miles off . ' and tell the servant * 

'' ' I am the Bervant/ she said simplT, and with 
a smihi ; ' I can get some of our neighboon to stay 
in ih(} house, and will walk over/ 

** ' Nuy, if that is all/ said I^ feigning ooenpa- 
tion . for it is incumbent on all doctors to seem 

buMy . * I have to go to N myself; I will see 

it mudo up and send it to you. That disposes of 
thut.' 

" * You will mind the written directions^' I con- 
tinued ; ' and when Mr. Williams awakes in the 
night, it is incimibent that he should take his 
medicine ; but toll the nurse not to wake him/ 

** ' I am the nurse/ she added, with equal sweet- 
ncmM mid simplicity ; ' local preachers in our com- 
munity are not very rich, and my father can hardly 
maintain mo, much less a servant.' 

** * And a very good thing too/ said I, with 
surprise, speaking cheerfully, though in answer to 
a look of pain from the sick man; 'when you 
want a thing done, do it yourself ; I am sure my 
boy breaks as many bottles as he delivers ; I hope 
he won't break the one which I send you.' 

*' * What a wonderful creature this is !' said I, 
inwardly ; ' how beautifully clean all things look ! 



TEE DOCTOR'S STORY. 263 

how bright is that old desk, and there is not a 
spot of dust on the preacher's books ;' I glanced 
at a huge * Matthew Henry,' which, side by side 
with a folio ' Baxter,' a ' Toplady,' and the ' Ductor 
Dubitantium ' of Jeremy Taylor, encumbered the 
table and desk of the Reverend Mr. Williams. 

" ' I wonder what her name is P' thought I to 
myself, after I had bidden her good-bye. * Here, 
what a pretty fellow am I, dreaming of becoming 
head-physician to the court, and in half an hour 
afterwards falling in love with the daughter of a 
dissenting minister, who is at the same time 
servant-of-all-work and head-nurse to her father. 
But then, what a pretty creature she is !' 

" Suffice it to say that my selfish considerations 
about the lowliness of Miss Prudentia Williams . 
her father called her * Prue ' . did not last long. 
I called next day, having manfully walked to 

N , and got my own prescription made up, 

and then went to my patient's house to see how 
far he had amended. I found him rather worse ; 
but I put a bold face on the matter, and told him 
that we doctors always thought that a little re- 
lapse after the first visit was a good sign. Miss 
Prue opened her pretty round eyes upon me with 
implicit belief . a simple credence on her part 



264 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

which made me very much ashamed of myself. I 
entered into conversation with the young lady, 
and found her excellently well read in English 
literature, preferring Shakespeare's ' Tempest/ 
Goldsmith's 'Vicar/ and Dr. Johnson's 'Rasselas/ 
to all other books. I heard incidentally that at 
music she was a proficient ; but there was no sign 
of a piano in the enlarged laundry in which she 
and her father were living. When I purposely 
made a small excursion into French literature, 
Miss Prue was equally at home there, and capped 
a quotation of mine from the 'Malade Imaginaire;' 
nay, I found that she imderstood the simple Latin, 
or Anglicised Latin, of my prescriptions well 
enough, by reading that barbarous jargon which 
we leeches are not ashamed to put as directions 
after our prescriptions. 

" ' Where can she have got all this ?' thought 
I. ' Ah ! I see : the father is a learned man . a 
man much beyond his sphere, poor fellow !' 

'* I was not very wrong there. Mr. Williams 
had, many years ago, with a favourite sister, taken 
to the Wesleyan Connexion from earnest religious 
conviction, and separated himself from his family 
and from brilliant prospects. It was, however, 
not to him that pretty little Prue owed her accom- 



TEE DOCTOR'S STORY. 265 

plishments. While the brother, earnest in the 
ministry, and careless of worldly advancement, 
was moving about from station to station, and 
mission to mission, Miss Williams, his sister, her- 
self very highly educated, had opened a school for 
the daughters of Nonconformists, in which, after 
due time, she had educated her niece, the only 
child of her brother, who, after a short marriage, 
had been left a widower. Good as the preacher 
was, earnest, noble, and thoroughly imbued with 
a Christian spirit, the rough, rude, and often 
selfish manners of his flock hurt him exceedingly. 
Poor people ! although they knew it not, he had 
given up all for them ; and the narrowness and 
meanness with which they . or, say, only some of 
them . ^treated their local preachers affected more 
than one of them . ^nay, wounded them to the 
death. ' It was just the same with Father 
Wesley,' he once said to me, with a faint smile ; 
*that saint, who rode, perhaps, fifty miles to 
preach to the poor people in Cornwall, had often 
to lie on his saddle-bags in a loft, and had hard 
matter to get com for his horse.* 

" ' Too true, poor papa !' said Prue, sadly ; * but 
we are better off, are we not ? Here, Mrs. Bough- 
ton has sent you three pots of black-currant jam V 



266 OTRER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

" * And,' said I, * your house is small^ but very 
neat and elegant.' I glanced round at the furni- 
ture and at some good china vases and well-boimd 
books that decorated the parlour, which was 
dining-room, study, drawing-room, boudoir, and 
breakfast-room to their little house. 

" 'Ah !' said the local preacher, turning his 
white head towards the vases on the mantel-shelf, 
and looking at them fondly, ' I did not think that 
I should have ever loved the perishing things of 
this world so much as I do those bits of china. 
They belonged to my dear sister, who is now in 
heaven.' 

" ' That I am sure she is,' said Prue, blithely, 
with a kind, beaming smile on her face. ' Dear 
aunt ! she was all in the world to me ; but I would 
not call her back from that blessed home for worlds. 
Yes, Doctor, you are quite right ; it is a pretty 
little house. Papa used to quote Herrick's verses 
about it . ^written, too, on his own parsonage : . 

" * Lord, thou hast given me to dwell, 

A Uttle cell ! 
A little cell whose humble roof 

Is water proof T 

And so ours is. It is very compact, is it not. 
Dr. Corner? so compact that dear papa dares 



TSE DOCTORS S20RT. 267 

not to smoke his pipe when he composes his ser- 
monS; because he is afraid of perfuming the chapel. 
He is like Dr. Parr, you know, and many other 
sound divines, and loves his pipe of tobacco/ 

" ' Dear me ! ' said I to myself, rubbing my 
eyes, 'here is a minister's daughter quoting 
Herrick, citing Dr. Parr, and calling tobacco a 
perfume. What comes next P' I had fixed my 
eyes so fondly and admiringly on those of Miss 
Prue . and I am afraid that my eyes held a lan- 
guage of their own that I could not prevent their 
using . that the young lady slowly let hers fall, 
and, with a little sigh, said, * And what are you 
thinking of. Doctor?' We had become quite 
intimate, I and this family ; and I spent more 
time with my first and principal patient than I 
should have done elsewhere, had I been in better 
practice. Miss Prue's question puzzled me. 

" * I was thinking,' said I, with a smile and a 
blush, * that you are quite a character. Miss Prue. 
I wonder what a phrenologist would say of you ?' 
I blundered this out more as an apology than 
anything else. 

" ' Oh, I can tell you,' she said, with a lively 
little curtsy. ' To amuse papa once, and, indeed, 
to carry out his wishes ' 



268 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

** ' You see. Doctor/ said Mr. WiTliaina, * pluren- 
dogy is an interesting study, though medical men 
gire it little credit ; and, wishing to know in what 
direction Prue's education should be forwarded, I 
consulted a rery derer manipulator, but rather an 
illiterate fellow, poor man ! as you will see, about 
Prue's bumps. I dare say she has got the paper ; 
we seldom forget anything which relates to our- 
selres, especially if we be women/ 

" * Thank you, papa dear,' said Prue ; * you are 
getting better, I see. Now, after that, dare I 
show Dr. Comer my character P 

"*0h, pray do,' said I, getting interested; 
' papa only means a bit of fan. I am a believer 
in phrenology myself, and am a devoted student 
of it. I should like to see whether the gentleman 
and I agree in oxir estimate.' 

" * Oh !' said Prue, * you have estimated me, 
have you P Well, you shall see. Doctor ; only, 
remember, this gentleman, whom everybody said 
was really clever at his practice, could not spell 
very well. He travelled about from place to 
place with a hideous collection of plaster casts of 
heads, of which no one ever could tell the philo- 
sopher from the murderer. I remember papa 
thought there was a startling likeness between 



TKE DOCTOieS STORY. 269 

Demosthenes, the orator, and Courvoisier, who 
murdered Lord William Russell. Perhaps he had 
labelled them wrongly, papa dear ; but no, that 
could not be, because the names were cut deeply 
in the plaster. However, here is my character.' 
Prue had been turning over a few papers in her 
desk, and brought out a piece of coarse paper, 
neatly folded and very badly written upon, as 
follows ; the spelling and the numbers, which 
refer to some chart of the operator, I imagine, are, 
as they say in the newspapers, ' his own.' 

" ' 22. Why does he begin at 22, Miss Prue P 
said I ; ' that surely could not have been your age.' 

« ' WeU,' she answered, ' that is a leading ques- 
tion, Doctor. It was not my age. That was 
written just two years ago, when I was exactly 
eighteen years of age. Go on reading.' 

' ' I obeyed with a pleased smile. * Only twenty ! ' 
I thought ; * just the age for my wife.' 

" * The character of Miss Prudentea Williams 
examined by me, Francis Blank, FinoKgest.' (He 
certainly has an original way of spelling.) 
' 22. You are very affectshunate, 
* 24. Very attashed to childrin, 

" * 18. (He is going backward.) Full of con- 
troU of youreselfe. 



it 



270 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

" ' 26. (Forward again.) Devoated to friends* 

" * 14. Not fond of eating and drinking.* 

" ' That is a consideration. Miss Prue/ said I, 
* for your future husband, in these dear times. I 
think the Finoligest an honest fellow/ 

" ' Go on, sir,' returned Prue, archly, ' and 
leave your remarks till the paper is concluded.' 

" * 15. Not too much enigy. 

** ' 10. But not distructive. 

" * You are fond of keeping secrets. 

" * 18. (Why, that's the second 18 !) Rather 
fond of money, for money's worth, 

" ' 18. Considerably fond of making things. 

" * 4. You think next to nothing of yourselfe.' 

" ' Then that's very bad taste on your part,' I 
interpolated, aotto voce. Prue said nothing, but 
gave me a gracious smile, with just the slightest 
tinge of deprecation in it. 

" ' 23. Like people for to prayse you. 

" ' 10. Not generally benov'lent. 

" ' 22. Because you are so carefuU. 

'' ' 9. Fond of musick. 

" * 8. A great deal of language. 

" * 18. You like to go to church sometimes. 
Your ven'ration is about fayre. 

" ' 18. Your firmness is also fayre. 



TEE DOCTOR'S STORY. 271 

" * 22. You are uncommon conscientious. 

" * 20. You are also soon supprized. 

" * 24. Also you are rather wittey.' 

" ' Really/ said I, laughing heartily at the 
queer document, * the man, I suppose, was an 
enthusiast in the science; for, in spite of his 
defective education, he could not have given you 
a character more close to the truth. There are 
higher qualities. Miss WiUiams,' I said, gravely, 
as I rose, * which quite escape the phrenologist. 
These arise from duties weU performed, and from 
the characteristics of our mental organisation being 
weU seconded by principle ' 

" * Or by the grace of God,' said the preacher, 
solemnly. * We map our heads, and offer to lay 
down our little laws for the conduct of life, and 
we forget the great Director, who can give firmness 
to a broken reed and holy strength to those who 
are weak of purpose.' 

" ' Amen,' said Prue, solemnly. She had a 
natural love and veneration for her father, although 
the * Finoligest ' had given her but a moderate 
inclination to 'go to church,' and she was of a 
prayerful, religious nature, as I well knew. The 
fact was, I was in love with this girl. Never had 
I seen so simple, so dear, so generous a character 



272 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

united to so much modesty, capacity, and beauty. 
As for Mr. Francis Blank, * Finoligest/ I became 
at once a convert both to the science and to the 
extraordinary insight of the practitioner. 

" My own practice did not, however, prosper. 
My patient was getting rapidly well . ^an effect 
due, as I humbly conceive, not to my physic so 
much us to the love and interest which his rough 
flock exhibited towards their pastor, and to a visit 
which I persuaded the rector . a man of high 
family, and a ripe and good scholar . to pay him 
as we walked home together from the sick-bed of 
my second patient, a villager. 

*' * A very good man, that Mr. Williams,' said 
the parson, who, far above the little jealousies 
which might exist in the village, always followed 
out his own good impulses. ' I will go and see 
him at once. The Wosleyans are our brothers. 
John Wesley always believed himself in our com- 
munity, and urged his flock to go to their parish 
church two or three times a year.' 

'* ' Mr. Williams is a scholar and a gentleman,' 
said I, ^ and you will be gratified with his con- 
versation.' 

« < Very good. Doctor,' returned the parson . a 
stalwart, jolly, squire-like, looking man, who did 



TEE DOCTOR'S STORY, 273 

an immense deal of good in his own manly, brusque 
way . * I'll come/ 

" And come he did, greatly to Prue's delight, 
and to the comfort of her father, who put on his 
courtliest manners, and delighted the rector. 

" As Mr, Williams was fast passing out of my 
governance, and I should shortly be obliged to 
discontinue my visits, I determined, after a sleep- 
less night, to say what I might in my own favour 
to Miss Williams. Little Prue, as her father 
fondly called her, had become all the world to me. 
Her words, her smiles, her patronage, were of 
more importance than that of my Lord DemiKon, 
or the whole houseful of hereditary legislators. 
I foimd out that single doctors were not so suc- 
cessful as married ones, and that, in fact, I wanted 
a wife most desperately. So it was that I managed 
to get Miss Prue . as the enlarged wash-house 
was by far too small to be the scene of such an 
offer as that of my heart . ^to call for some soothing 
medicine for her father at my house, a very 
humble, but, in comparison with her house, a per- 
fectly palatial, residence. When there, with many 
struggles to keep my courage to the sticking-place 
I determined to ask her to be my wife. 

" After receiving the medicine, my dear little 

T 



274 ' OTHER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

Bweetheart wished to hnny away, althongli I 
pressed her to stay one minutey and even offered 
to walk home with her to her other's. But little 
P^e's delicacy became alarmed: she oonld not 
stay, she said; and as for walking down the 
Tillage with me, that she could not think of doing. 
She was hurrying to the door, when my changed 
and earnest yoice arrested her, and I begged her 
to come for one moment to the parlour. I offered 
her a chair, and stood up before her, looking at 
her changing colour and her pretty, wondering 
eyes. 

" * My dear Miss Williams/ said I, gravely, ' I 
believe that I love you as no man ever before 
loved you. I tell you this plainly, because I am 
sure that it would be useless for me to try to 
conceal it. I have seen your goodness to your 
father, your sweet temper under trial, your watch- 
fulness, your calmness, and patienc e * 

" Prue had covered her eyes with her hands, 
and, greatly to my surprise, I saw, by the tears 
which came slowly through her fingers, was cry- 
ing. I continued : * I am but a poor fellow my- 
self, Miss Williams, and am half-ashamed to offer 
myself to you. I am no fit mate for one so 
beautiful ; but if the devotion of a life can repay 



TEE DOCTORS STORY. 275 

you, I can promise you that from my soul.' I 
had fallen on one knee before the creature I loved 
so much, and tried to take one of her hands. She 
gave me both, and looked at me with such sad 
eyes, so bright and lustrous with recent weeping, 
that I feared greatly, and turned pale with 
anxiety. 'What,^ thought I, 'was the stiflfest 
examination conducted by the grim old Senior 
Surgeon Cutler to this P' 

" The thin, transparent eyelids shut themselves 
tightly down over the pretty eyes, and then, with 
an evident effort. Miss Prue spoke. Her words 
fell as softly, as coldly, and as distinctly as snow- 
flakes at the slow commencement of a heavy fall. 

" * My dear Doctor . ^I will say, my dear friend 
. I am so much obliged to you for your love, your 
devotion . ^I return your love ; I do, indeed, but 
as a sister.' I had put up my hand to take hers 
at the beginning of the slow, sad speech, but she 
prevented me with a gesture. ' As a sister. Dr. 

Comer ; it can be nothing more. for ' Here 

she paused, and then said, firmly, * for ever. Tou 
must not ask me any reasons ; you must not press 
me any further ; as a man of honour, which I 
know you are, you must give up all pursuit of me. 
I feel you have done me a great honour, which, 

T 2 



276 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

indeed, I hardly deserve; but it is best, it is 
bravest, to tell you at once that what you wish 
can never be/ 

" My head was bent down as she said these cold 
words. A white hand was put before my lips to 
kiss, and in a moment, as I remained there stupi- 
fied and frozen into dumbness, little Prue . I beg 
her pardon. Miss Prudentia Williams . ^had passed 
from the room. 

" How long I so remained I can hardly say. 
When I sprang up I was full of an intense shame 
and rage . shame felt for myself and rage for her. 
* Oh !' said I, bitterly, ' I am not good enough for 
her ! She wants some one more rich and accom- 
plished than a viQage doctor. She has tastes 
beyond her sphere; and, as lowliness is yoimg 
ambition's ladder, may dream of his lordship in 
the big park just by. King Corphetua wooed a 
beggar-maid. Why should not Lord Demilion . 
he is a learned, well-read man . marry this pearl 
of daughters of a local preacher? Why not, 
indeed ! What a fool was I to be led away with 
her innocence and beauty ! She love ! 8he can 
never love ! She has got no soul in that beautiful 
body.' 

" Thus I troubled and fretted myself. It is not 



TEE DOCTOR'S STORY. ^11 

a pleasant tiling to be rejected ; it finds out the 
weakest part of one's pride ; for, however good 
we are, we men think that we offer a great prize 
to a woman when we offer her ourselves. How- 
ever it was, I was so tormented with my love and 
with Miss Prue's refusal, that I could not rest. I 
wandered about my small room like an animal in a 
cage. I felt wounded, humiliated at first, and 
then a gleam of hope sprang up in my bosom. 
After all, did this woman reject me because she 
could not love me ? or was there some mysterious 
barrier between us ? She had spoken so solemnly, 
* It can never be.' What was it ? She should at 
least tell me that. Then a sudden impulse came 
upon me, and I determined to seek an interview 
with her father, whom, by the way, I thought I 
might have spoken to at first. He at least should 
explain the mystery to me. 

" Fired by this new resolution, I put my hat on 
and sought the village. I could not rest imder 
my rejection. I determined to know all, and if 
the barriers were, as I had been told, impassable ; 
if she loved another . here a sickly, cold tremor 
passed over me . ^I would strike my little camp, 
and seek refuge in London, and there devote my 
life to my profession. 



278 OTSER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" So I strode on. Recent rain had softened the 
earth, and the air smelt fresh and balmy ; but the 
wind had risen, and was noisily careering over the 
hedges and through the trees. The weather 
suited my frame of mind ; and, closely buttoned-up, 
and eager and resolute, I soon reached the 
cottage. Sheltered by some large trees, the few 
shrubs round the chapel were still enough, and I 
imlatched the gate wherein the small congregation 
were wont to enter, and came to the side of the 
chapel, thus entering the cottage from some secret 
impulse, some sense of repulse and degradation, 
unseen. 

" It was well that I did so. 

" The door was open, and, standing in the little 
hall, pausing ere I knocked at the half-opened 
door, I heard sounds of weeping. Little Prue 
appeared to be kneeling before her father, who was 
sitting in his easy chair, and apparently com- 
forting her. ' You have done well, my child,' he 
said ; ' I can trust the impulses of your heart, so 
tender and so true ' 

" ' Tender and true !' I muttered, grinding my 
teeth in sarcastic agony. 

" ' And yet so wise for its age, poor little heart ! 
poor heart !' 



TEE J) CTOE S 8T0R Y. 279 

"*And yet he loves me, father; he spoke 80 
earnestly, so fondly. We know how good, how 
simple he is. It is better thus for him to bear the 
first shock ; he will soon get over it, and will win 
some happier heart, some one better than I 

am ' Here was a fresh flood of tears, and the 

father again spoke to comfort her : ' No, no one 
better, Prue, I am sure ; you are the best judge 
of your way in life, my child, though I could have 
well liked this amiable young man, who is clever, 
too, and may rise ' 

" * Ah ! but father, father,' said Prue, ' think of 
yourself, growing old and lonely in your poverty, 
worn-out with fatigue and work, and none to help 
you.' 

" ' None, save the Lord, my child,' returned the 
old preacher, reverently. 

" ' Think,' she said, rapidly giving utterance to 
her full heart, ' of the poverty we have had to 
endure, think of the trials and the wanl^ since 
aunt died; could you endure this again, alone P 
would you have this heightened by me away from 
you, and having, perhaps, the same struggle to go 
through with a husband, and, it may be, little 
ones? a husband upon whose advancement I 
should be a burden and a heavy drag, upon whose 



280 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

bright oareer I should be a blot. I could not 
bear it, father, indeed I could not. I have seen 
too much trial with you to endure it with him, or 
to drag him into it ; for I love him, father, indeed 
I do ; I love him in his goodness, his nobleness, 
in his loneliness, and in this bitter trial I love 
him with all my heart.' 

" The tears . tears of joy . ^which had been run- 
ning very quickly and silently down my face, 
gave a sudden gush, when Miss Prue, having 
finished her confession, laid her head upon her 
father's knee, and burst out into a good cry. I 
don't think, as a rule, that crjring is a pretty noise ; 
but I was never so much delighted with any prima 
donna, warbling the divinest aria in the world, as 
I was with that burst of sobbing, ' eon apirito' as 
they write on the music, of dear little Prue's. In 
a moment I was in the parlour, and, hugely to the 
surprise of old Mr. Williams, I was down on my 
knees Jbefore him, with my arm round his daughter's 
neck. She didn't seem so much astonished as he 
was, but sufiered it to lie there while I said . 

"*My dear, dear, dearest Prue, that is all a 
mistake of yours which you just now told me up 
at the surgery. Your father knows all about it, 
so I need not tell him. But when you rejected 



THE D CTOR' S 8T0R Y. 281 

me, simply because you would have spared me 
because of my poverty, you jumped to a conclusion 
not warranted by facts.' 

" Here little Prue dried her eyes, and looked up 
into my face with a puzzled, pleased smile. 

** * Not warranted by facts,' I repeated. ' I am 
not a poor man ; I am rather a rich one. I had 
romantic notions of making a business, and depend- 
ing upon my own exertions ; I detested the trick 
some doctors have of making a show, and I made 
none, not even a red lamp. I made a vile choice 
in coming to a village where all the inhabitants 
are impertinently healthy. But I made a good 
choice in coming to find you, my darling. I have 
just five thousand pounds in the funds ; 'tis not 
much, but a fifth of that will buy a good connec- 
tion in London, or where you will, and the rest 
can remain where it is. And now I am not going 
to give you a chance to refuse me again ; not a 
bit of it.' (Prue put up one little white, hand 
deprecatingly.) *! wiU ask your father, as I 
should have done at first. Will you, dear sir, 
knowing all that has passed between us, give me 
your daughter P' 

" ' My children,' said the old preacher, with 
a smile of happiness . and in a moment Prue 



282 OTJLER PEOPLE'S WINJ)OWS. 

was in my arms, and with her own around my 
neck. 

" In the course of that evening I had recourse 
to Prue's desk : it was one of the worldly goods 
that I claimed of her for a certain purpose; I 
tyrannically claimed it, and she yielded submis- 
sively. * Here it is,' said I, reverently, putting 
aside her letters, and taking the coarsely- written 
paper, ' here is all I want, madam ; you may keep 
the rest. Mr. Francis Blank is the finest F^qo- 
logist in the world ; for, if it had not been for that 
quality he so well delineates, I should not Iiave 
been one quarter so happy as I am now ; indeed 
I could not be happier, and I owe it all, dear 
Prue, to that one fine and rare quality. Here it 
is, marked No. 4 on the chart : ' You think next 
to nothing of yourself,' and therefore vitb . I took 
her father's hand as I spoke, and, placing my arm 
roimd her waist, drew her towards us . therefore 
we, my darling wife, think everything of you." 



CRITICAL OPINIONS. 283 



CHAPTER XVI. 



CRITICAL OPINIONS. 




HEN the story was concluded, Dr. Julius 
Comer, the narrator, who looked rather 
red, and was otherwise not unmoved, 
lighted another cigar, and cleared his throat, 
hoarse with emotion as well as talking, with a 
deep and long application to a glass of cold spring 
water. " There is nothing like it after all, George," 
he said ; ^' I am gradually approaching teetotalism 
myself." 

" We usually do after a good dinner and some 
choice wines. I don't know anything which 
heightens beauty so much as contrast," said 
Cimabue, with a whiff. By St. Vincent de Paul, 
that's a pretty story of yours, though. How much 
reality exceeds fiction I does it not, George ?" 

" Say nothing about it, sir," said Carew ; " I am 
laying by all those little incidents for a work of 
fiction upon which I am engaged, and to-morrow. 



284 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

if you like, I will with pleaBure tell yoa one story^ 
or rather read it to you, and then you can measure 
fiction and reality if you like." 

Tins ho said with a smile, and a burlesque daring 
quite unnatural to him ; for George was one of the 
most modest of authors . a modest enough race, 
too, when of any worth. Then, striking a bell, he 
summoned the waiter and paid the bill, and as he 
linked his arm with the Doctor's, as the whole 
party walked with him towards a newspaper o£Bice, 
ho poured forth such a eulogium on the Doctor's 
story as made the modest narrator blush again and 
again. 

"Little Prue," said George, "is a charming 
charactor. A staimch old widower like myself, 
mourning for my lost love, and comparing women 
one with another, may be allowed to be a judge ; 
and from what you have said of her, there is no 
lady in the land whom I should be more proud to 
meet than Mrs. Julius Comer." 

" I hope that meeting will not be far distant," 
said the happy possessor of that lady; "and I would 
advise you all to get married as quickly as you 



can." 



" A case of the fox, again," said Cimabue ; "why, 
we are all married men; here is FeUx, little 



CRITICAL OPINIONS. 285 

more than twenty-two, and a father, and I can 
show you a procession of young painters, and such 
a wife, sir, that no man in London, in all London 
can equal." 

"Bravo, Scumble!" ejaculated Carew ; "I'll 
back you up. lay any money on what he says ; 
never saw a better woman than Mrs. Scumble. 
The truth is, that when a woman is married to the 
man she loves, she grows better and better every 
year of her life ; that is, supposing the man is true 
and generous and knows how to treat her." 

" There are some men," said Dr. Comer, " who 
never make good surgeons, who always bungle 
with an operation, who kill their patients with a 
surprising facility, and are no more to be thought 
of as belonging to the faculty, of ornamenting the 
noble art of healing, than butchers are. So there 
are some men who never should be trusted with a 
woman's heart, and who make as great a mull of 
that as a sailor would of a fine-mouthed horse if 
he were driving, or a groom in steering a thirty- 
ton yacht with all the canvas set and the wind 
blowing on to a lee shore." 

" Or a painter and glazier . a good grainer, let 
us say . would in copying a fine Titian or a Van 
Huysum," added Gimabue. 



286 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

" Or, let us add, a coal-whipper would in hand- 
ling a delicate Dresden vase, all eggshell flowers 
and gilded scroUs,'' suggested Felix. 

The little party haying now arrived in Fleet 
Street, and Carew being pressed with a mighty 
desire to see his proof, the party . separated, Mr. 
Scumble and Comer going towards Covent Garden, 
there to listen to certain glees and smoke a quiet 
cigar, and Felix returning home to relate to his 
wife some sketch of the pleasant evening he had 
enjoyed. The friends did not, however, separate 
until George Carew had invited them to meet one 
or two others at his rooms the next evening, when 
he promised to read them a story he had just 
finished. " Not that I'm given to reading stories," 
he said ; '' and indeed I think that to all authors, 
except some happy individuals, the contemplation 
of their own works must be rather a trouble than 
otherwise. But IVe promised, you know, and 
that promise I must keep." 

It was in compliance with this, on the next 
evening, the company being duly assembled, that 
George Carew read out the following story, calling 
it "At Last; or, the Window of a Woman's 
Heart." 

" 'Tis a window," said Dr. Comer, rudely 



CRITICAL OPINIONS. 287 

. 

intermptlng the reader^ as he nervonsly shuffled 
with his papers, '' that we should all like to look 
into/' 

''Some of us do; and, if we belieye modem 
journals and modem authors, see nothing so yery 
pleasant there/' said the barrister, who was a 
guest. 

'' Hold your tongue, and let us peep into this 
casement which Carew is about to hold open to 
us,'' returned Cimabue, settling himself comfort- 
ably in one of the many chairs with which Carew's 
study was famished. Silence then being obtained, 
the author began his reading. 



2HH OTHER PEOPLTS WUIMir^ 




" AT Uhw\ ; OK, TiiK wijfDow OF A woatAy'* 

ueakt/' 

ttKIlK arc philosophers, of whom I am 
(itio/ Httid the sick man, with a smile, 
' who do not credit woman's firiendship. 
t don't nicnn to wardM man*. that's certain enough; 
hilt iowardn one another. If they are Mends 
wliiln they iin) girls, the friendship soon dis- 
nppciirs wlicn tlioy grow into women; nay, the 
ujipriritioti of a lover will make friendship fly away 
afi (piirkly hh poHHihlo/ 

.* TIiIm wuh by far too long a sentence for one so 
vory 111, although produced by fits and gasps. 

.* * .l*erli(ips you arc right, my dear boy,' said k 
g(^iitloinini by tho bedside, holding the dying 
inmrM hniul in his. Tho two men were old school- 
follows, uiul at this time of trial the old boy's 
fooHugs camo back. It was again Harry and 
Willy with them, and Harry lay in the darkened 



AT LAST. 289 

room . a strong, powerful man suddenly stricken 
down in the midst of his life and strength. He 
had been forbidden to speak, but speak he would ; 
he had so much to say, and he endeavoured to say 
it, although his life-blood welled up to his lips 
every time he spoke. 

"Willy Frazer, who sat clasping his hand, spoke 
in a very low tone, a3 if to hush his friend, and 
continued holding up his finger as he spoke. 
* Perhaps so ; but what do we want with a philo- 
sophical disquisition now P . all you have to do is to 
get well.' The patient shook his head. * At any 
rate,' said Frazer, * oh, hang it, Harry, don't die . 
don't think of dying yet !' 

" There was so much feeling in these broken 
words that the dying man turned towards him 
with a sad smile and marked the tears in his eyes. 
He would have spoken, but his friend put his 
hand over his mouth. He saw at a glance that 
William Frazer believed in him as he had always 
done . ^believed that by an act of will he could do 
more than any doctor in the land, or in the world. 
The reason of this faith was that Harry and Willy, 
at school and through life, were two difierent 
beings. Harry Armstrong was a dark, strong 
felloow, with a chest big enough for two ; an arm 

u 



290 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 JFINDOTTS. 

which served him well, a ready bold wit ; and, in 
fact, power in him, and plenty of it too. He had 
protected Frazer, who was but a weak little fellow, 
soft and docile, but very clever, and who of 
course, as we all of us like those whom we protect, 
began to like him. The mutual respect and 
liking continued through life, and the mutual 
difiference too. Frazer was poor, and not very 
well able to help himself; Armstrong rich, and 
able to help others. He helped his friend to a 
very decent match and to a cosy place ; and he 
helped himself to one of the handsomest wives in 
the kingdom, who brought him a daughter, and 
then shortly died. Then suddenly, too, he began 
to lose his heartiness; and although for twelve 
long years he was always a foremost man, he was 
never the man he used to be. That great chest of 
his, which ought, as the doctors said, to have been 
sound enough for anything, grew very trouble- 
some ; he caught cold upon cold, neglected him- 
self, and was at last brought down to where we 
found him, with no hopes of life ; his will made, 
his fortune left to his daughter, and his daughter 
and all her future to one whom he could trust . 
his soft, tender old schoolfellow, who was never 
half the man he was, but was now, in life at least, 



AT LAST. 291 

worth twenty thousand times more« Armstrong 
knew and felt all this, and yet could not, dared 
not, say what was nearest to him ; and Frazer 
looked at him to explain the asking eye, very 
earnestly and very fondly. Suddenly that eye 
grew very bright indeed, and Frazer in alarm 
rang a little bell. The physician came in, the 
patient rose suddenly from the high pillows that 
propped him up, put his white handkerchief to his 
mouth and covered it with crimson blood . and 
then lay back never to speak more. 

" Some months after this Mr. William Frazer, 
in his comfortable house in the New-road . ^which 
then was in the country, as the open fields 
stretched up to Hampstead and Highgate . sat 
quietly tasting a glass of old port . and wine of 
1820 was then of the future . and looking out 
upon his half-moon lawn and the circular sweep 
of gravel-ride, up which two girls of about six- 
teen were slowly riding. They contrasted as much 
as the two schoolfellows could have done. One 
was dark, somewhat tall, and very beautiful ; the 
other fair, petite, graceful^ and only pretty. One 
was clothed wholly in mourning, almost without 
a bow or ribbon ; the other was dressed in white, 
with lilac ribbons and bows^ and with a huge 

u 2 



292 OTHER PEOPLE'S WIXDOWS. 

utraw hat with lilac streamefB to h. The differ- 
onco extended eyen to the ponies ; one was findy 
bredi strong, and black; the other a cream- 
oolourcd pet ponjr, that took liberties, and was 
obstinate and fond, wonld only go by fits and starts, 
and was altogether an irr^:iilar pony, decently 
quiet to ride and drive, but of no character at alL 

''These young ladies, whom Mr. Frazer was 
gazing on with quiet melancholy, were both dear 
to him ; one, as being his own daughter, the other 
as the daughter of his dear and dead friend. The 
meditative gentleman quietly took another glass 
of wine. he was soft, pensive, and fond of good 
living . and as he swallowed it, cracked a walnut, 
and said, as he peeled it, ' Poor Harry ! he died 
with a philosophical sentence on his lips about the 
friendship of woman. Now, really, if he could 
only see these two girls, and know their deep 
affection for each other, I believe he would be 
convinced; I really do think he would indeed, 
poor fellow !* 

" Mr. Frazer was very easily convinced himself; 
and his conviction of the purity and depth of the 
affection of the two young ladies was well founded. 
They did love each other deeply, and called each 
other Amy and Hetty, as girls will, with a dozen 



AT LAST. 293 

sweet adjectiyes by turns tacked to the names. 
Amy was Miss Frazer, and Hetty . the short, or, 
at least, Amy's diminutive for Henrietta . was 
Miss Armstrong. 

" The difference, so marked extem,ally, extended 
to the minds of the girls ; and hence, probably, 
their friendship. Amy wanted guidance, Hetty 
could give it, and did not at all object to do so« 
Amy was as soft and yielding as her father; 
Henrietta, strong, conunanding, very wise, and 
very pure . ^ftdl of what Mr. Frazer called * the 
very best common-sense, A 1,' which he, poor 
fellow, acquired with great difficulty, principally 
by experience, which, in his ca^e, was indeed like 
the stem-lights of a ship, and only lighted the 
track over which he had passed. 

" * Well, girls,' said he, with a welcome equally 
tender to each, ' and what have you been talking 
about P' 

" ' Fortune,' said Amy ; * fortune, papa. And 
what a wonderful thing it is, isn't it P' 

" * 'Tis, indeed,' said Mr. Frazer, looking at 
his glass of port with one eye shut, as if he were 
reading a sentence. ' I never could quite under- 
stand it. Armstrong didn't believe in it, poor 
feUow! I did.' 



294 OTHER PE0PLK8 WINDOWS. 

"'Just like Hetty/ said Amy; 'but what I 
gay is . just look here. Here we stand . we are 
about as old as each other ; but look at the differ- 
ence.she has all the beauty.' Hetty smiled and 
shook her head. * All the cleyemess.' 

"'All the good sense, certainly/ said Mr. 
Frazer ; at which Hetty blushed. 

" * And, to crown all, the Hggest fortune. 
Indeed, she is an heiress; and this poor dear, 
dear papa, is not worth half as much. I have 
heard him say so.' 

" * But I'd give all,' said Hetty, earnestly, * to 
have what you have . a father,* There were no 
tears in her eyes. Hetty was not given to crying ; 
but the tone of voice touched Amy so much that 
she put her arms round her friend's neck and 
said that she had been ' a little fool,' and a cruel 
one too, to remind Hetty of her loss; and Mr. 
Frazer cordially assenting in the self-imposed 
verdict, the conversation was changed. 

" For four or five years dark and fair lived on, 
growing, if possible, fonder and fonder of each 
other. Mr. Frazer every day found that his 
verdict was right, and that the two young women 
were fast friends. Still, Amy's character had 
remained the same . do we, indeed, ever change 



AT LAST. 295 

from our originals? . and Hetty, who had im- 
proved her externally, had not altered the soft, 
fond heart, and the quiet, trusting mind which 
so much wanted some one to cling to and protect 
it. Mr. Frazer had long been a widower, and 
Amy wanted a mother . a character which 
Henrietta very quietly and wisely filled. She 
even took poor Willy Frazer in hand . ^he was 
still Willy with his friends, though verging on 
forty-seven . and if she did not make him lay by 
money, she prevented him from spending a great 
deal. In fact, Hetty was the acknowledged head 
of the establishment. 

" She was busied in some household work, some 
tradesmen's accounts, which * always made Amy's 
head ache,' and would, if Hetty had not been 
there, have made Frazer's pocket ache. While the 
father and daughter were together, it was very 
seldom that they talked of her in her absence. 
They both loved her too much to hide anything 
from her ; but at present they did so. 

" ' I suppose, Amy,' said Frazer, who prided 
himself on his knowledge of the world, as most 
soft easy nj§n do, ' I suppose we owe that invita- 
tion to Lady Trefoil's to dear Hetty. What a / 
treasure she is !' 



296 OTILER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" ' La ! papa !' said Amy, with slight indigna- 
tion, 'what! togetyonaninTitationtothatstiqKid 
old dowager's, where yon said the wine was badP 

" * Execrable !* said Frazer. 

" * Well, execrable ; and there was no one worth 
speaking to except Gt)dfirey Fielding. The yonng 
men all took notice of Hetty, and left me to 
myself/ 

" ' Money/ said Mr. Frazer, oracularly, * money 
is not only the root of all evil, but also the general 
attraction of mankind. At one time a yonng lady 
has two chances in life . ^that is, before she is 
bom ' 

" ' Before she is bom, papa !' interrupted Amy, 
in some surprise. 

" * Yes,' continued her father ; ' the young 
being who is about to be bom has two chances if 
a girl, and only one if a boy. If a girl it might 
be bom poor . ^well and good ; but then, if beau- 
tiful, its next chance comes. Men marry for 
beauty; and the daughter of a beggar might, 
from her beauty, be chosen to fill a throne.' 
Having wound up his sentence thus prettily, Mr. 
Frazer rubbed his hands and apologised to his 
daughter . soft, good man as he was . ^for talking 
metaphysics. 



AT LAST. 297 

" ' Chosen to fill a throne !' said Amy, with 
disdain. ^ All those chances took place in the old 
ballad days, when the beggar livedatBednal Green/ 

" * There are a good many beggars there now/ 
said Mr. Frazer ; * but no such chances. Yes ; 
Godfrey Fielding was a nice young fellow.' 

" * The only one in the company that I cared 
about/ said Amy, with decision . an unwonted 
decision, too.' what say you, Hetty P' 

'' Miss Amy thought that Henrietta had heard 
the name as she entered, or she would not have 
asked the question. Hetty had to have it put 
fully to her, and then, with a very slight blush, 
answered ' that she liked Mr. Fielding's manner 
very much.' 

" ' A man of a good family,' said Mr. Frazer, 
who, in the absence of a bluebook, knew every- 
body ; * good family, but poor ; poor as a church 
mouse ; indeed, he will be a church mouse, for he 
is just taking orders.' 

" ' Ah ! I supposed something of the sort, for 
he paid Hetty and me equal attention; and yet I 
would rather marry him with three himdred a 
year than any one else with six.' 

" * Amy, Amy,' said Miss Armstrong, with a 
slight shudder, * how you do run on ! ' 



298 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

** ' Ghreatly/ said Frazer, tapping his half closed 
hands together and mftlnTig his finger-nails clatter 
with a little clash. *Mr. Godfrey Fielding is 
what Lady Trefoil calls forbidden fruit for a poor 
girl like you. You know the blind beggar's 
daughter at Bednal Ghreen, as you correctly pro- 
nounced it, did not marry another beggar.' 

*" La I papa, how mercenary you are !' laughed 
Amy. Hetty blushed prettily and turned the con- 
versation, and Mr. Godfrey Fielding dropped out 
of record for that night at least. 

"But not out of remembrance. Both girls 
thought of him, and both were very glad when, 
two days afterwards, he called on Mr. Frazer. 
He was in orders then ; he had attended ordina- 
tion and had taken his vows. He wore, I am 
bound to say, a white neckerchief with a huge 
bow, and in those days had not the M.B. waist- 
coat with the step-collar, which even the lowest 
Evangelical now assumes. He looked very well, 
very handsome, and was altogether as fresh- 
coloured, honest, imassuming a yoimg parson as 
one could look on. There are parsons and parsons ; 
and an authoress, now, alas I dead, has touched 
with a fine scorn upon some of the failings of our 
curates ; but believe me, there are some good 



AT LAST. 299 

fellows, not far from angels, among them . ^men 
who do their duty as bravely as any soldier who 
goes to meet his death or win his glory and pro- 
motion. The Rev. Mr. Fielding was, above all, 
manly. Shrewd, observant, well read, and full of 
knowledge, he never failed to please his acquaint- 
ance, and could, no doubt^ have risen in the 
Church, had he chosen to think about a rich 
benefice instead of his duty. 

" Being manly, it is no wonder that both these 
young women liked him, and that he grew very 
intimate with Mr. Frazer. Months passed away, 
and Amy had once or twice to scold her friend 
and adviser, and Mr. Frazer had to tap his soft 
and delicate nails more than once, as he heard 
from his daughter of the refusals of good offers 
which Miss Armstrong had perpetrated . offers, 
too, which in more than one instance brought 
dignity and rank with them, emanating, as Amy 
said, from the * Trefoil lot.* 

" At last Miss Amy, who was growing a little 
more impatient than she needed, went a visit in 
the country, leaving her dear friend and adopted 
sister at home. Miss Armstrong, who had her 
opinions about the matter, and who was justly 
indignant because the young fellows would prefer 



300 OTKER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

making love to lier rather than to her good friend 
Amy, made some exception in favour of the 
Reverend Godfrey Fielding, who came just as 
constantly to the house now that Amy was away 
as when she was present, and who^ knowing Miss 
Armstrong's riches as well as benevolence, seldom 
came without some sad story, which touched her 
heart, and at the same time lightened her purse. 

" At length, one day when Amy was expected 
home, and when these visits had become very dear 
to Miss Henrietta Armstrong, the young clergyman 
left Mr. Frazer at dinner descanting on the excel- 
lence of port wine, and joined Miss Armstrong in 
the drawing-room. As in. those days the gentle- 
men were expected to give the ladies at least three 
hours to prepare the coffee. Miss Hetty might be 
excused for her look of gratified surprise, although 
she well knew that the young curate seldom ex- 
ceeded one modest glass, and that Mr. Frazer, from 
whom she cunningly extracted all this knowledge, 
rather despised him as one who did not or coidd 
not take his bottle. 

" ' Well, Sir,' said Hetty, looking up into his 
good face as a sister might, ^ you have made an 
early appearance. I suppose you have some sad 
story to relate.' 



AT LAST. 301 

" * Indeed I have/ retnmed Godfrey, taking a 
chair and carrying it to the side of Hetty's sofa ; 
' but I don't know how to commence/ 

" ' Indeed !' said the lady, with a pretty impu- 
dence, putting her white hand in her pocket to 
feel for her purse ; ' you are generally very fluent 
on other people's woes, Mr. Fielding/ 

" * But, alas !' said the curate, * this woe is my 
own.' 

" Hetty blushed slightly and smiled, as if she 
knew a cure. 

" He continued: * I have come to be your suitor.' 

"The smile faded from Hetty's cheek; the 
pretty lips were parted, the breath came and went; 
she dared not turn her eyes upon him when he 
paused. He rose from his chair and walked a step 
backwards, then forwards. 

" * Pray go on, Sir,' she said at last. 

" ' Oh ! if you can . you who are so rich, so 
good, so pitiful, and kind . if you can aid one who 
does not know how to speak, who dares not ap- 
proach one whom he loves ' 

" * This is pretty well/ thought strong-minded 
Hetty ; ' but, oh ! these men ; we vomen never 
quite understand them.' 

" * who has for many, many a day come 



802 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

here purposely to speak, but yet found his speech 
die away upon his lips ; oh ! if you will let your 
heart speak for him . ^ple'ad for him . ^he will bless 
you all his life.' In his energy the young clergy- 
man had knelt on one knee to her, and now lifted 
up his eyes and looked pleadingly in her face. 

" ' Godfrey/ she said, quietly, but not calmly, 
putting out her hand. 

" ' Yes, call me Godfrey ; you give me hopes.* 
He rose as he said this, and Miss Hetty rose too. 
He placed one arm around her. ' Call me God- 
frey, and plead for me as a sister would for a 
brother. I love, I dearly love your friend Amy . 
Miss Frazer.' 

" He knelt again as he said this, and Miss Hetty 
sank suddenly on the sofa. He was too much 
agitated to notice her sudden pallor and distress, 
and, having once got through his difficulty, he 
proceeded quietly enough. *In the presence of 
the woman I love,' he said, * I am a mere fool. I 
dare not speak nor write to her ; but at last I have 
determine4 to do so. Here is the letter ; it is open. 
Read it, and then aid me if you can.' 

" Miss Armstrong rose hastily. * Yes/ she said. 
' Yes, Mr. Fielding, I will do as you wish. Give 
me the letter, and then go. Her father' . she laid 



AT LAST, 303 

a pretty strong accent on the pronoun . ' will miss 
you.' As Mr. Godfrey was himself very much 
agitated, he rose hastily, and, thanking his pro- 
tectress very humbly, joined Mr. Frazer at the 
port, when he astonished that worthy gentleman 
by finishing a decanter which was half full, and 
which the good man had reserved for himself. 
* By Jove !* said he to himself, in wonder, ' by 
Jove ! Why, when he is a rector, he will drink 
like a fish.' Having astonished his friend in this 
way, Mr. Fielding hastily departed, fearing to 
face the lady in the drawing-room, and feigning 
a call of duty, which indeed he set himself, and 
faithfully kept." 



END OP VOL. I. 
OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER L 

AT LAST . ^THE WINDOW OP A WOMAN's HEART. 

CERTAIN pause haying been made. in 
fact, ten minutes being allowed for re- 
freshments-^Mr. Carew again cleared his 
manly pipes and went on reading as freshly as 
ever, being evidently pleased with the interest taken 
in the story :. 

''In the mean time, whilst Mr. Frazer was 
wondering at the curate's sudden incursion and 
bold attack on the port, Miss Hetty, her face 
pale, her lips parted, and her heart beating . oh ! 
so quickly . ^walked towards her own room. 

" In La Motte Fouqu^'s story of ' TJndLne,' that 
author has drawn a woman . what shall we say ? . a 

VOL. II. B 



"/ 



2 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

child, a sprite, without a soul, which love alone 
gives her. Her childish character, before she 
receives this great gift, is very wonderful and 
very beautiM. How Undine felt then, we know. 
Hetty, as she walked towards her chamber, 
thought of the story, and felt that she was a 
woman too, without a soul ; for all hope, all care, 
all love had for the moment vanished. Had she 
walked out of an open window, into fire, or into 
the raging sea, it would have been the same. 
The one object for which, during the last few 
weeks, she had allowed herself to hope had gone, 
and gone for ever. She was so true, so con- 
scientious, that, while Amy was with her . in spite 
of the hints of that young lady that parsons 
always looked out for rich women, and Mr. 
Frazer's worldly assurance that they were quite 
right to do so, that being, in his opinion, their 
only way of rising in the world . she never 
allowed herself for one moment to think of 
Godfrey otherwise than as a good, kind gentleman 
whom she liked and respected. 

"When, however, in Amy's absence he had 
called so often, and after he had availed himself 
of every opportunity of being with her, she be- 
lieved, allowed herself to believe, all that her 



AT LAST, 8 

heart wished; and, as we know, when she had 
made up her mind it was pretty well made up for 
life. Quod vult valde vult is an old motto and a 
good one. Hetty only wished that which was 
good and right ; but when she wished it she did 
so with all her mind, with all her heart, with all 
her sold. 

"She found herself, somehow, with the door 
locked, standing opposite her dressing-glass. Her 
face was very pale, her eyes hollow, and her 
lips parted as we see them in those sad Greek 
masks of tragedy. She noticed all this. There 
were no tears . ^not a single tear. 

"She pitied herself somewhat, in her own 
strong-minded way. 'Poor thing!' she s«dd, 
* and Amy envied me, envied my riches and my 
beauty ; much they're worth to me !' 

" Then suddenly one faint flush of hope came 
into her sad heart. She opened the letter hur- 
riedly. *He may have been hurried and con- 
fused/ she said. ' / loved him. He must have 
loved me.' 

" Quickly this faint hope of requital, this trust 
in the final Justice of the Heart, faded out. One 
glance at the letter, one glance, which saw it was 
a prayer to Amy's father to be allowed to speak 

B 2 



4 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

to his daughter, and to Amy herself to listen, was 
enough. The letter dropped unfolded to the 
ground, and Hetty knelt, bending low down with 
her hands upon her knees. 

" ' Father, lover, husband ! she has all these, 
and I not one. Poor thing ! poor thing !^ 

"Some few hot tears came then; but Miss 
Hetty was not given to pitying herself, and she 
soon dried them, for she was one of those rare 
young ladies who are as full of true courage as 
they are of tenderness. So it was, perhaps, not 
surprising that Mr. Frazer found his cup of 
coffee ready at the usual time, and Miss Hetty 
as quietly engaged in a novel, as if nothing had 
happened. Nothing had ; it was only a little 
mistake on the part of the yoimg lady, that 
was all. 

" As Mr. Frazer was very full of his port wine, 
and rather given to somnolency, Miss Armstrong 
may be excused that she did not immediately 
give Mr. Fielding's letter to her guardian, or 
attempt to open the subject. When, however, she 
took her candle to go to bed, leaving Mr. Frazer 
to muddle his brains by reading half a dozen 
paragraphs of the Times one after the other, while 
he smoked the mildest of mild cigars; when 



AT LAST, 5 

Hetty rose she quietly put the opened letter into 
his hand, and said. 

" * This is addressed to and concerns you, Sir : 
more nearly it concerns Amy ; but Mr. Fielding 
insisted that I should glance at it. Perhaps it 
will be better for you to speak about it, after due 
reflection, to-morrow. Good night !' 

" * Eh, what P The editor seems here to . 

Oh, she's gone,' said Frazer. * Where the 
plague ! I hate letters, and here is one.' 

"He quietly finished the Thundering leader, 
and then took up the letter and read it. Having 
read it, he yawned, and, making a silent vow to 
sleep on the matter, went to bed to sleep on it 
accordingly, 

" In the morning Amy, who had been driven 
over with a friend, came and joined her father at 
breakfast, and was present at the consultation. 
She was delighted with the proposal, and said, 
laughingly, * There, Hetty, you always said dear 
Godfrey had good taste, and he shows it by pre- 
ferring me to you/ Hetty answered with her 
quiet smile, and, although her wearied eyes gave 
proof of a sleepless night, answered gently. Not 
so Mr. Frazer. He declared the marriage could 
not be. that it would never do for one beggar to 



6 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

marry another, and that Godfrey Fielding was a 
silly fellow, after all, not to fall in love with the 
best and finest girl, too, and the girl who had a 
fortune. 

" In the end, however, Hetty with soft persua- 
sion overruled Mr. Frazer's objections, on the 
understanding that no one was to think of marriage 
until Fielding had obtained a living. Miss Amy 
pouted a little at this ; but dear Godfrey obtained 
leave to come and pay those attentions which all 
find so sweet, and in a twelvemonth Amy and 
Godfrey were married ; and six months after, Mr. 
Frazer died quietly in his bed, of some nameless 
and uncertain disease, which seemed more like a 
carelessness of life and a want of desire to live than 
anything else. 

"When I remember that twelvemonth . that 
long, long, twelvemonth of courtship . ^my heart 
is touched with pity at the silent martyrdom which 
Hetty must have endured. Amy vowed, and 
wondered as she did so, that she was going to be 
an old maid, and joked and laughed at her : nay, 
taught the Rev. Godfrey Fielding, who, it was 
evident, could be, like most clergymen, somewhat 
uxorious, to venture a joke now and then too, and 
also to do his courtship very openly. Hetty was 



AT LAST. 7 

hardly ever held as de trop, although, with much 
delicacy on his part, Fielding would have made 
his sweetheart, if he could, less demonstrative. 
Hetty, however, bore it all ; she saw, too, how the 
^rength of him whom she had loved was rather 
weakeuedby the contact with Amy than strength- 
ened ; she saw that, day by day. Amy did not rise 
to the noble prospects of the man, but brought 
him down to her frivolity. It was a bitter trial, 
but Hetty bore it all . ^nay, she took very quietly 
one or two severe scoldings from Amy, "when, in 
emplojring her pocket* money, she had purposely 
sent away the Bev. Godfrey on some errand of 
charity. 

*' * You will . run him off his legs after those 
nasty poor,' said Amy in a pet ; ' he was to have 
taken me to an Oratorio.' 

*' ' But duty. Amy, duty,' said Hetty, calmly. 

*'*0h, yes,' returned the other yoxmg lady, 
petulantly, * bother duty ; we shall have a whole 
lifetime to think upon our duty.' 

" * And God grant we may do so,' returned 
Hetty, with a sudden break in her voice ; * God 
give us strength-^Amen ! amen !' 

" They were married . Amy and Godfrey. 
Hetty was bridesmaid, and more affected . ^which 



8 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

I am told is no unusual thing . ^than the bride 
herself. Godfrey, to be sure, was but a poor 
curate, and Amy hsid but very little money but 
they were rich in hopes . ^a kind of possession for 
which none of us pays any income tax, but which 
is yet very valuable ; nor was the Rev. Mr. 
Fielding the only curate who has had to draw 
largely upon that bank, a draught upon which, 
thank God, has never been dishonoured. Nor was 
it in this case. Miss Armstrong had been very 
busily employed during the wedding tour of her 
friends with her solicitor, a shrewd old friend of 
poor Mr. Frazer, who, as we have shown, was 
surrounded with shrewd people, who, however, did 
not communicate any of their tact to him. Mrs. 
Amy Fielding had been speculating upon some 
imknown admirer presenting her husband . ^that 
young embodiment of aU the clerical virtues . with 
a living. And sure enough, a solicitor's letter 
awaited them on their arrival at their modest 
home, which contained the news * that the living 
of Hayward's Green, having become vacant by the 
death of the Reverend Samuel Purr, A.M., had 
been bestowed upon ' . no one less than the Rev. 
Godfrey Fielding, B.A., sometime Fellow of 
Merton. Great was the joy of Amy. Those ex- 



AT LAST. 9 

cellent sermons^ she was sure, had done it all; 
whereas Hetty suggested that the gift might 
have some connection with the visitation of the 
poor, 

"'Poor!' said Amy, pouting; 'poor indeed! 
We don't know who our benefactor is, and that's 
one trouble ; but we do know what we get from 
the poor. Godfrey will some day be bringing 
home typhus fever to me and the children.' 

" She blushed as she spoke it. 

'" Oh ! Amy,' said he, reproachfully ; ' I shall 
rather think with Hetty than you. May God 
reward our benefactor and turn my work to good 
account.' 

" Nor did he forget, as Hetty well remembered, 
when they all knelt down to family prayer, to 
bless the giver again and again. 

" Indeed, for sixteen years, during which God- 
frey filled Mr. Purr's place, never did he forget 
that little prayer. Amy yawned over it some- 
times, for she was rather restive at prayers, and 
often turned round to look at the children . ^two 
fine boys and a girl, who, by-the-way, never had 
the typhus fever at aU . ^and never failed to bring 
away in that look some useful hint as to their 
laces or clothes. Poor Amy was, you see, not 



10 OTEJER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

much given to rapt devotion, and was, therefore, 
very well suited to be the * light of the parsonage,' 
. as some good lady has called the clergyman's 
wife . ^to the parish so long ministered to by the 
easy and comfortable Mr. Purr. 

''Not far from that parsonage Miss Hetty Arm- 
strong built herself a pretty little cottage, break* 
ing the hearts of more than one likely yoimg 
fellow who offered his heart and his empty pocket 
to her, and on more than one occasion sending 
away a pretty fortune as well as a pretty fellow. 
As time went on, and it became rumoured that 
' that foolish fort, a heart,' as Suckling says, was 
in Hetty's case impregnable, the sieges put to her 
constancy became less frequent and finally ceased 
altogether. Lady Trefoil introduced no one else ; 
and the Rev. Godfrey Fielding, who once took 
upon himself to declaim to Miss Armstrong on the 
duty and beauty of marriage, received such an 
answer that he never spoke of it to her again. As 
Hetty was prime manager for Mrs. Amy, the chief 
friend of her children, the delight of the poor, 
and very often the defender of Mrs. Fielding 
against the just anger of her husband, we may be 
sure that that happy matron did not urge her to 
marry. Perhaps Hetty's heroism was never 



AT LAST. 11 

shown more than in the instances in which she, 
as the common friend of the two, defended the 
wife with the weak point, against the husband 
with the strong. Like Cato, the cause of the 
conquered pleased her more than the cause of the 
victorious ; she had a twisted crotchet in her head 
that she was doing her duty in aiding the woman 
whose husband she had once dared to love. 

" Mr. Fielding, as we have said, never caught 
anything from the poor; but he caught and 
brought home with him something from the 
graveside of a rich parishioner, who had left him 
a legacy, and whom he rose from the fag end of an 
illness to bury, something which ksted him for 
Hfe, and that was a cold, which carried him off 
very rapidly. Mrs. Amy was in despair. God- 
frey was at once exalted to an angel, and herself 
to that state of martyrdom which passionate 
people claim for themselves in their troubles. 
Hetty, who could not come near to nurse him 
while his wife waited on him, was by him when 
she broke down in her passionate grief, when he 
died, and sat for many an hour by the dead in the 
darkened room, as it lay in the narrow home 
which waits for all of us. The Christmas bells 
were ringing in the air ; a sound of merriment 



12 OTHER PEOPLE'S HTINBOWS. 

seemed all about them^ all around, but not in that 
sad, sad bouse. Tbe mother sat below, rocking 
herself backwards and forwards in her grief, when 
Hetty, taking the face-cloth from the dead, kissed 
the forehead and the lips . ^those» lips which had 
pronounced her fate . ^and murmured, * Godfrey, 
dear Godfrey, you know all now ; you know how 
I have loved you. I wiU still watch over those 
whom you loved ; I will live for them and for 
you.' 

" And indeed Miss Hetty kept her vow. She 
grew more active and more cheerful, and, as Amy 
complained in her widow's weeds, had the * best 
of it, for she could never know the loss of a hus- 
band . and such a husband . no, never.' But 
comfort came to the clergyman's widow, and the 
weeds fell off or grew into flowers through careful 
cultivation ; whereas Miss Armstrong's plain, 
strongly-pronounced black never varied ; * but 
then,' said Amy, * you look so well in it.' 

** Once Hetty, who busied herself in getting the 
boys . ^by-the-way, the young Fieldings did her 
the honour to love her as much, and respect her 
somewhat more, than the mother who spoilt them . 
out in life, and in seeing the girl named after her 
educated and introduced into society . Hetty was 



AT LAST. 13 

once filled with a strange joy, and that was when 
Amy told her that the successor of Godfrey in the 
living once held by Mr. Purr, M.A. . one Mr. 
Dennis O'Flurry, B.A., of Trinity College, Dublin 
. had proposed that she should put an end to her 
widowhood, and become again the * light of the 
parsonage.' Mr. O'Flurry was very eloquent, was 
the nephew of an Irish Lord, and the younger 
brother of an Irish M.P., and had deserted the 
faith of his fathers to try his fortunes in the 
Anglican Church. His views were certainly 
extreme, but very powerful ; and the parish, which 
had been decidedly sleepy under Mr. Purr, and 
quietly active with Fielding, became uneasy and 
restless under Dennis O'Flurry. 

" Amy, not at all averse to the tall, brawny, and 
impressive cleric, promised to consult her friends . 
meaning Hetty and her daughter . and Hetty 
hurried home to consult herself. * His widow !' 
she said, bitterly ; ' his widow ! / alone am his 
widow, now as I ever was. Yes ; let her marry ; 
let her leave me at least his memory and his grave.' 
But in the morning calm reflection came. He was 
her husband ; his wife shoidd never share the for- 
tunes nor receive the embraces of another ; and, 
true to him, Hetty dissuaded Mrs. Amy, sore 



14 OTHER PE0PLJEP8 WINDOWS. 

against her will, to chasser the eloquent Incumbent 
of Hayward's Green. 

" Whether for the loss of this second aid and 
helper . and Amy always wanted two . or from a 
want of excitement, poor Mrs. Fielding after this 
ran down like a clock, and, quietly dying, was laid 
by Godfrey's side. And then, for a few years, 
Hetty still lived on, still beautiful and good, the 
dear mother and friend of his children, whom she 
lived to see well placed and married . ^nay, to hear 
a little Godfrey call her grandmother. A young 
grandmother, indeed, but one who had lived her 
life faithful to one love, never uttered, never 
guessed at, known to no one but herself. It was 
time the thorn she had worn so long in her bosom 
should reach her heart, and it did at last. One 
Christmas time, one merry Christmas time, when 
the air seemed filled with common joy and the 
bells swung jubilant in the frosty air, and the 
children downstairs were shouting in their glee, 
one Miss Hetty Armstrong, an old maid, spending, 
as was her wont, her Christmas Day alone, sud- 
denly rose up with tearful eyes from a half-doze, 
to obey a siunmons which we aU must have, and 
said, quickly, * Godfrey, I am here. At last ! 
at last !' 



AT LAST, 15 

'^ So the summons came ; so ended a life made 
happy by a passion repressed and a duty done, 
and of which it seemed to me fit that a record 
should be made/'* 

* It is due to the public to state that the plot of this 
story is taken from a hint conveyed in a very few lines 
by a French author, and that it was some years ago 
published in the Christmas Number of the " Illustrated 
London News." It has been so much admired by many 
warm, but to me unknown friends, that I am induced 
thus to republish it. . H. F. 



16 OTHER PJSOFZirS WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER n. 

ME. corner's paper. tJNDER THE MISTLLTOE. 

|HE nigKt had worn but little when Carew 
finished his reading, and after his voice 
had ceased there was a gratifying snence; 
for in truth the author^s guests were thinking of 
the story he had told them. 

Carew was the first to clear his throat, and 
with the accustomed mixed feeling . ^very much 
mixed indeed. which pervsides each author, he 
tried to find out how his "work of art*' was 
liked. We have got into the habit of calling 
an author's work a " work of art,'' and an author 
an " artist," but it is just begging the question. 
Of course, if he be not a true artist, and of some 
artistic greatness too^ he will have little effect 
upon any of us. 

" I am glad," said George, when he hsid suffi- 
ciently cleared from his manly pipes the modesty 



UNDER TEE MISTLETOE. 17 

whicli, in his heart of hearts, he persuaded himself 
was the accompaniment of true genius, " I am 
glad you fellows are so silent. It shows that we 
have had some eflfect on you.'' 

George said "we," from an editorial habit, 
meaning, probably, himself and his dramatis 
personw. 

" A very great efiFect indeed, my dear sir,'' said 
a courtly old gentleman, no one less than Dr. 
Comer's father. " I am sure that I was struck 
with the beauty of your creations." 

"'Tis always the way," hastily interrupted 
Carew. "A set compliment brings me to my 
senses at once . nothing sooner. I am sure I beg 
pardon 6)r being so foolish. Of course you like 
the story, cela va sans dire.'* And he lighted a 
cigar and looked disappointedly modest. 

" What a noble thing it is ! " said Scumble, who 
had been leaning back in his chair, slightly 
patting one hand with the other. 

" What is a noble thing P " asked Felix. 

"That honest love of praise," said Scumble. 
" Here is Carew, who knows well enough that he 
has done something laudable. He has put before 
us certain puppets of his creation, made all alive 
by his art, which have thrilled us and filled us 

VOL. II. c 



18 OTHER FEOFLTS WIXDOirS. 

with sweety and tar the most part noUe fedings, 
and hare made our brains and hearts . surely the 
snUimest parts of our body . lire healthily and 
welL Life does not, cannot, consist always in ac- 
tion ; its greater part will eyer be that of thought 
. at least with ciyilized man. So all objections to 
fiction, to poetry, and to art generally, h31 before 
that fact." 

"Good," said Carew; "yon speak like a book. 
I should like to hear you deliyer one or two 
lectures at the Boyal Society, on, for instance, the 
iPhilosophyof Art.'" 

"Philosophy signifies a good deal," said Scumble; 
" and I for one do not know what ground it does, 
and what it does not coyer, and I suspect that 
many people who can blow out the thinnest 
coyering of thought into the largest coloured 
bladder . ^like those gutta percha things they sell 
in thofstreets . ^use the word in lieu of any defined 
idea. To return to what I do understand, I say 
this: . ^that all artists loye praise, honest praise, 
judiciously giyen; nay, that their nature demands 
it. That being conceded, I will first say that 
Carew's story is capitally done." 

Carew blushed, bowed, and replied with the 
well- worn quotation about Sir Hubert Stanley, a 



UNDER THE MISTLETOE. 19 

quotation of which so few people know the context, 
and Scumble continued . 

" And that it is a noble thing to be able to dis- 
pense praise honestly and well. And this all 
critics have it in their power to do, and yet almost 
all miss doing it. What they seek is chiefly to make 
an eflect, and a perceptible effect, upon at least 
one person who reads them, and that is the author. 
They consequently degenerate into mere smart 
writers, and the author, with his legitimate hunger 
for recognition being unsatisfied, grows gradually 
sceptical of his own powers and of the capacity of 
his age for understanding or relishing his efforts.'' 

** Thaf s very true," said Carew. " I remember 
that a great author. some say the greatest author 
whom we have had . said to me, just before he 
died, that he never read a review of his works 
now ; that is, of course, at the time of which he 
was speaking. ' At one time,' he said, ' I had such 
a perfect hunger to know what my critics said of 
me, to be taught in my art by their superior 
knowledge.' 

" That's good," interrupted the Barrister, laugh- 
ing. ' And to be made better by their experience, 
that I eagerly bought a paper with a notice of my 
book, and took all they said very seriously to heart. 

c 2 



20 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS 

But quickly did I find that they knew nothing ; 
that men who had not seen nor talked to me, and 
had yet made up their mind about my character, 
and were jealous of my supposed success, rated 
me for faults which they themselves created, and 
frequently for mistakes that were not in my book. 
I was at the mercy of any yoimg barrister who 
had nothing to do but to fill a column in the 
smartest and most ill-natured way that he could. 
If my friends obliged me by a review it was some- 
what worse ; reticence, arising from personal know- 
ledge and an eager wish to praise, made the praise 
not worth having, and the colour awkwardly laid 
on, bespoke at once the want of nature in the 
charming colour on the features. The only 
review, after all, worth having, is that written 
by a stranger, a man of generous nature, who 
can appreciate at a glance the intention and the 
honesty, the ability, the weakness, or the strength 
of the author.' " 

*' That is very true," said old Mr. Comer ; " but 
there is another effect that the long-prevalent 
kind of criticism has had ; and that is, we now 
all grow sceptical as to praise itself . ^think that 
it is utterly unhealthy, that people who demand 
it are weak and foolish. We deny them the 



UNDER TEE MISTLETOE. 21 

nutritious food, and let them live upon garbage 
. where they can pick that up. Lord Byron 
is only one instance of a poet being materially 
harmed by true praise being withheld in the first 
instance, and afterwards false and injudicious 
flattery being largely heaped upon the noble poet's 
back." 

There was a pause in the talk, and Felix, who, 
being young and inexperienced, had little to do 
but to listen, here found an opportunity for suggest- 
ing that Mr. Comer, a gentleman of mature age 
and experience, should contribute (to " the general 
harmony of the evening," said Bagsley, the bar- 
rister, interpolating a phrase), by telling some 
story ; nay, moreover, that he should do it in con- 
nection with the plan they had commenced, and 
let his listeners peep with him into some window 
of any one's heart, or house. It is more than 
suspected that Dr. Julius Comer hstd something 
to do with this suggestion ; for, to the surprise of 
the simple Scimible, the Barrister, and Carew, old 
Mr. Comer, after the usual faint resistance, pulled 
a manuscript from his pocket, having come fully 
prepared for the event. "I had brought," he 
said modestly, "this story for the purpose of 
giving it to our yoimg and distinguished friend 



22 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Mr. Oarew, to see whether or not he could use it 
in some of the Journals or Magazines with which 
he is connected ; and as he would inevitably have 
to read it before he gave an opinion'' . George 
Carew bowed . "I may as well read it to him, 
and have the benefit of his friends' opinions as 
well." 

And so, in spite of the whispered assurance of 
the Barrister, that " he was a cunning old file, 
and had stolen a march on them," the manuscript 
was put in and accepted. 

" "We are all authors in this writing age, sir," 
said Carew. "I suppose I see more than most 
people do, being in the swim, to speak symboli- 
cally ; but the fact is, I am never surprised at any- 
thing that I discover in that way. 

" As a rule, all clergymen write ; they generally 
take to sober serious essays or theology. They 
have a vile trick now-a-days of putting their ser- 
mons into the shape of moral essays of the heaviest 
kind, so that if we miss them in church . as I, for 
one, confess that I often do . ^we get caught in the 
study. Now that is too bad." 

" Clergymen's wives and daughters belong to 
the order of the inkstand," said Felix ; " I speak 
from experience. There is good Mrs. Rubric 



UNDER TEE MISTLETOE. 23 

Banns, you know ; she lias done a wonderM tale 
about woman being tbe Ligbt of the Parsonage." 

" Write !" said Carew, " I should think they 
did ; if it is not a novel, it is a tract or a moral 
tale, in which there is an angelic curate, or a little 
child, who has all the Epistles of St. Paul and St. 
Peter at his tongue's end. I never yet met with 
such children, although perhaps they may exist. 
Then, too, they publish poetry or rhyme, also re- 
ligious, bless them ! Only, I am afraid that, try- 
ing to do good, they^ like the rest of us, often do 
harm." 

" Governesses, as a rule, write," said Scumble, 
'^ and they beg artists to illustrate their works for 
nothing. Their plea is, poor souls, that they try 
to supplement their modest honorarium, or their 
insufficient salary, by making money by literature. 
They have the best of pleas : they wish to keep 
together the wreck of a home, or to support a 
widowed mother, and to educate an orphan sister. 
Ah, poor things!" continued the author-editor, 
tenderly, "how many such applications have I 
had made to me when I edited the Piccadilly 
Journal/* 

" That was a failure^ I think," said the Barrister, 
maliciously. 



24 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" It was/' said Carew, " a grand failure. Being 
in Piccadilly, the neighbourhood of the Court and 
the West-end, no contributor, except the slave of 
an editor, was allowed to exist, unless he or she had 
a title, at least a courtesy title of some sort. A 
brother to a viscount, or a baronet's lady, as the 
publisher phrased it, was the very lowest creature 
in rank that we admitted to our columns. Then 
it was that I found that the whole of the Peerage 
belonged to what Felix calls the order of the ink- 
stand. We were deluged with Romances of the 
Peerage ; Tales of the Noble House of Jenkyns ; 
Memoires pour servir ; the History of so and so. 
The scandal of the thing was something dreadful. 
In these secret memoirs the heroism of every pub- 
lic man, and the reputation of every woman, was 
attacked without ceremony or scruple. All the 
common people were cads and fools; all the in- 
habitants of the great world seemed to have gradu- 
ated in the demi-monde they so well described." 

" I have heard of some such things before," said 
Mr. Comer, nervously feeling the leaves of his 
manuscript. 

" Heard !" replied Carew, " ay, but I saw and 
experienced them, and bitterly too. The women 
generally dealt in the scandal ; and, in sober truth, 



UNDER TEE MISTLETOE. \2^ 

not one of them seemed to have the slightest re- 
spect for the virtue of her own grandmother, nor 
even of that of her aunt. Some went so far as 
to attack their elder sisters . especially if they were 
in the grave . and the shame of the thing was, 
that they would offer these matters to a publisher 
for the smallest consideration." 

" Surely these great people never took money 
for their exposures?" asked Felix, with a doubtful 
horror upon his face. 

" Did not they ? Oh no, not at all," cried Carew, 
with sarcasm. " Why, they would give us less 
credit than the poorest author living. I was 
obliged to cut away all the scandal, and the other 
parts of their papers were so dreadfully dull that 
the Piccadilly Journal came to grief, and the 
publisher went into the Gazette in a very short 
time. He has since established a flourishing 
radical paper, and he is now, I believe, making 
his fortune ; but I am certain that he would never 
have done so with the Piccadilly JournaV* 

" Umph ! the name is not a bad one," said Dr. 
Julius Comer, dreamily looking at the end of his 
cigar; "and I don't know that stupidity ever 
kills papers/' 

" No, not exactly," said George Carew ; ** but 



26 OTHUR PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

neither does it make them Kve. Our paper never 
got into a full swing of stupidity, or else it 
no doubt would have existed now. We had the 
fashionable style, I can assure you; and there 
were as many French phrases in our columns as 
in a cookery book. I believe that some of our 
best . that is, most fashionable contributors . ^never 
wrote without De Porquet's Tresor Franqais on 
their desk.'* 

" To serve them as a Roget's Tkes(mru>8 ?'* said 
Felix. 

" Exactly. We had a resuscitation of the silver- 
fork school, and a miserable affair it was. Some 
people said it was brilliant ; but all the while we 
knew how dull the fireworks were, and how they 
sputtered and fizzed without any real corrusca- 
tions. Bless you, the public is, after all, the 
very best judge ; that knows whether anybody's 
stuff is worth having ; that knows whether the 
people who write those rapid declamatory leaders 
mean what they say or no. But pardon me, Mr, 
Corner; I am sadly afraid that I am keeping 
the company waiting for your excellent contribu- 
tion." 

Mr. Corner needed very little of Carew*s per- 
suasion, and, clearing his throat with the usual 



UNDER TEE MISTLETOE. 27 

note of preparation, and settling in his chair, the 
Doctor's father began his sketch called 

UNDER THE MISTLETOE. 

'^ I am an old man ; so old am I that, looking 
back, life seems so very long, and yet so short, that 
I do not quite know whether many things did not 
happen in a dream. I am hale, and hearty, and 
merry, for the matter of that ; and when I laugh 
my laugh rings out clearly and loud, they say : so 
much so that it makes the people around me, 
especially my grandchildren and nephews and 
nieces, laugh too. And when I laugh the old 
times come back when others, who are silent now, 
laughed with me, and then I am suddenly still, 
and the laugh dies away ; and when I think of it 
its empty echoes fiU my brain just as if it were 
sleep-laughter in a dream. 

" When I stop laughing so suddenly . ^for the 
merriment and enjoyment, and, for the matter of 
that, the grief and pain of old men are short and 
sudden, like those of children . ^my grandchildren, 
and nephews and nieces, have a great difficulty to 
stop too ; and they choke, and nudge each other, 
aad say, * Ah ! that is a good story. Uncle ; almost 
as good as the story you told yesterday.* 



28 OTHER FEOPLJEPH WINDOWS. 

" Told yesterday ! let me see what it was that I 
told yesterday. How long ago it seems ! it must 
be longer ago than the time when I was only 
twenty years old, a stalwart, brave fellow in yeUow 
breeches, black leggings, a heavy brass-boimd 
leather helmet with a white plume tipped with 
red, and a clanking sword, which I now could not 
lift with my two hands. I was a loyal volunteer 
then, prepared to resist the French ; and I and 
some of my company were encamped in white 
tents on the coast of Kent ; and we had a song, 
too, a good song, about Boney : . 

' We'll still make 'em run, and still make 'em sweat, 
In spite of old Boney and Brussels G-azette.' 

But I don't quite remember what that gentleman 
had to do with the inspiration of the Oazette. I 
don't know that I ever knew, for we young fellows 
were no politicians. 

" Then we had another song in our tents, or in 
our rooms, sitting round the fire, and shouting 
enough to blow the roof off: . 

* We'll rant and we'll roar like true British sailors, 
We'll rant and we'll roar across the salt main ; 
Until we catch sight of the shores of old England, 
And I hope my own true love to see you again.' 

''And in those days our voices did rant and 



UNDER TEJE MISTLETOE, 29 

roar, and the rafters rang again ; but I've got a 
cold now, and my voice isn't vrhat it was ; and I 
must not wake the Kttle children, or I'd sing it to 
you now. 

"Yes; people think me very merry. And so, 
bless Heaven ! I am ; for I try to stand upright, 
four-square to the world, as a man should ; but, 
being an old man, I have blank places in my heart 
now, where no love grows ; barren spots in my 
memory, and chill and numbed parts in my feel- 
ings, whereto I cannot look back, and whereon I 
dare not tread and touch, lest sudden pain should 
come back, like to the shooting of an old, old 
wound. 

" But I've merry recollections and green spots 
too. Just as you see in churchyards where there 
are barren patches under the yew trees, so there 
are elsewhere fertile ones, which tender hands love 
to deck ; and little tombs, which, in the summer 
and the spring, are gay with flowers. Such 
pleasant graves are they, where some lie with 
happy memories about them . good children, sweet 
sisters, or dear wives . ^who lived in peace and 
died happily, and upon whose memory a halo rests 
like fleeting sunshine in a distant field. Such 
graves are for the young, not for the old; and 



30 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

those who are young and happy go and sit the 
summer afternoon near to the grave, and plant 
sweet-smelling flowers in the mould, which blos- 
som and spring up and look gay still, like the calm 
memory of the happy dead. 

" But, deary me ! I am talking now like an old 
man, a very old man, as I think I am ; but then 
IVe got pleasant spots in my dry brain yet, that 
I love to dwell on. 

" Been in love ? Yes, I should think I have ; 
how else could I have grandchildren, those people 
who laugh so well and heartily when I laugh, and 
make me tell how old I am a score of times, and 
say how well I am looking ? Well, well ; some 
of them want me to look ill, I think ; but I'll 
laugh and live to spite 'em. No, no; I don't 
mean that, you know. How can I live but as 
long as I have breath P and breath and life are in 
the hands of One greater than us all ! 

" Been in love ! I think I was talking of that, 
was I not P Yes, been in love ! Well, we just 
did love when I was a young fellow, and I recol- 
lect my wife, my Alice, that left my side but now, 
it seems, and yet it's twenty years ago ; and I 
recollect her as I loved her when she was very 
yoimg, and as I love her now. She was a merry 



UNDER TSE MISTLETOE. 31 

one^ was Alice ; we used to walk, and laugh, and 
talk together like two friends. I think that she 
could &o anything but drink and smoke, or tell an 
untruth, or do a wrong a<5tion. Her face was a 
sweet oval face; her hair a very dark brown, 
nearly black; and her eyes a deep blue, full of 
merriment at one moment, ay, at all moments, 
except when she heard a sad story or was touched 
with pain for any one else, and then they grew 
deeper and deeper as they filled with tears. Not 
for herself, i never cried for herself that I 
know of, for she never had a day's iQness. But 
she was terribly cut up when her poor brother died ; 
and that, you see, was how I knew her. Her 
brother was my right-hand man in my company. 
Many^s the time that he stood shoulder to shoulder 
with me . good at drill, good at a song, good at 
anything. He used to live near the coast ; and, 
indeed, he joined us, and I was one of his tent- 
fellows, and his chum. Well^ he knew people that 
I knew, and we were soon friends ; and he took 
me home to show me Alice. He was always talk- 
ing about her, and she about him ; and when he 
was there, scarce a look did she give me. Her 
brother Joe. his name was Joe, and mine, too. 
could do everything, and was the be-all and end* 



32 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

all of the world to her, I used to think ; and so one 
day I tried to run with Joe, and Joe beat me, and 
Alice laughed; and then I shot against Joe, 
and he beat me too, and she laughed the more ; 
and I wrestled with him and threw him, and 
she didn't laugh then, but ran to see whether he 
was hurt, and said it wasn't fair for Joe to tackle 
a big fellow like me, although he was nigh an 
inch taller. In short, I could not please her any 
how! 

** Well, it was one day when we heard that the 
flat-bottomed boats of old Boney were not coming 
over, and that the Army of Boulogne had melted 
bit by bit away, like a snowdrift, that we made a 
night of it. Ay, it was a night, too 1 and, being 
hot and in the summer, we must needs keep up the 
fun till the sun came up over the seacoast, looking 
red and angry at our folly. Well, Joe and I . ^the 
two Joes as they called uis . ran down to the beach 
and washed our hot faces, and plunged in the fresh, 
salt waves, and were in a few moments as fresh and 
as merry as larks. And, after dressing, Joe must 
needs take a walk with me . who was nothing loth, 
you must know . ^along the edge of the cliflp. The 
seas for centuries have been washing that chalk- 
bound coast, and at intervals there stand up pillars 



UNDER TEjE mistletoe. 33 

of chalky with the sea around them, and with little 
green patches of land, a few yards square, on the 
top of them. The people call such a place No 
Man's Land, and no man can own it, truly. Well, 
Joe came to one of these, a few feet . say twelve . 
from the cliff, and, turning to me, he said, ^ Joe 
Junior,' said he . I think I see his bright face now 
. * I challenge you to leap up on that No Man's 
Land, I do !' 

" ' Joe,' said I, hurriedly, * don't be a fool ! It 
maybe it would give way at top ; and if it did not, 
how could you jump back without a run P You'd 
be stuck a-top there, like a mad sentinel or a pillar 
saint. I'm not going to jump it.' 

" * But J am 1' said he. And before I could 
hinder him, if indeed I had tried, he took a run 
and jumped. 

^* It was so sudden that I could only stand aghast 
when I saw him there. He stood, indeed, but for 
a moment, and then he took a step back, and 
would have jumped back, when I heard a rumbling 
sound, and half the top of the No Man's Land 
parted, and the chalk and earth, and Joe too, feU 
down with a crash upon the rocky coast below. 

" I ran round the little creek to the other side 
of the small bay, and, throwing myself down on the 

VOL. II. ^ D 



34 OTHER PHOPLirS WINDOWS, 

turf, stretched my neck over, looked out, and cried 
out ' Joe ! Are you hurt, Joe P' 

'^ A faint voice came up, and I could see the poor 
fellow strugglingunder a huge piece of chalk, which 
seemed to hold him down in agony. He smiled in 
a ghastly way, with his whitened face, and said, 
* Run, Joe, run ! TJw tide's coming in!' 

" Well, I did run ; and we got ropes from the 
tents, and a few strong fellows held these as I 
swung over the cliff, just reaching poor Joe as the 
cold sea water was lap, lap, lapping up to his mouth, 
taking away his breath and then nmning back, 
crawling over him, and leaving bubbles of salt 
foam, as if in sport. I got him up, but he could 
not stand. Some bones were broken, and he was 
sadly bruised. There was no time to lose ; I se- 
cured the ropes tightly round his body and they 
hauled him up ; then they lowered the ropes for 
me, and together we carried him home as tenderly 
and swiftly as possible. 

" Well, well ! to make a long story short, Poor 
Joe died, with my praises on his lips, and poor 
Alice bowed her head like a broken lily. It was 
a longtime before she got over it, and simuner had 
grown into winter, and winter to summer, to 
autimm, and to winter again. The threatened in- 



mn)ER TEE MISTLETOE. 35 

vasion was all over ; our swords were getting rusty, 
our uniforms dusty, and when the holidays came I 
left the firm in which I had just become a partner, 
and went to spend a fortnight at my old friend's 
in Kent. 

" Alice was there, well and cheerful now, and 
reconciled to her loss, though we often talked of 
poor Joe ; and as the days wore on we grew closer 
together, and she called me by my name, and 
seemed to have transferred her brother's love to 
me. She never told me so, nor let others see it, 
till one merry Christmas night, when she rejected 
all her cousins and her other friends, and would 
only dance with me. 

** We had the mistletoe, too. At last, one mad- 
cap fellow proposed that the ladies should kiss the 
gentlemen all round when and how they could ; 
and Alice and I, who had subsided into solenm 
talky and were speaking of poor Joe, were sur- 
rounded, and it was insisted that Alice should play 
too; and she, in a solemn, quiet way, smiling 
sadly and yet sweetly too, took me beneath the 
Christmas bough and kiased me on my lip8. 

"Ay, it's many years ago, but I feel it now. 
My heart beat so fast that I hardly dared return it ; 
but I put my arm around her and took her gently 

j> 2 



36 OTHUR PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

to the bay window of the old hall^ saying, as I 
pressed her delicate hand in my strong brown 
pahn, * Alice, dear Alice, did you mean that kiss ?' 

" Well, I need not tell you what she answered ; 
'tis fifty years ago . ^fifty years ago ! and I am 
surrounded by Alice's dear grandchildren; and 
there is one, a little thing with light and golden 
hair that will deepen into brown, who plays around 
my knees and tells me her little stories, her sorrows, 
and her joys ; so quick, so sudden, so hurried in 
their coming and their going that they are like my 
own ; and, as we talk, we grow quite friends and 
companions, like my Alice was to me. 

'' Bless you, she understands it all ! She is a 
woman in her pretty ways . ^her poutings, pettings, 
and quarrellings. She manages her household of 
one wax doll and two wooden ones, and tells me . 
for the wax doll is the lady, and the wooden ones 
are the servants in mob-caps and stuff gowns. 
when they are impudent and do no work, and when 
they gossip with a wooden policeman, who belongs 
to her brother, little Joe. 

" So we are fast friends, little Alice and I ; and 
to-night, on Christmas night, I noticed that she 
would not dance nor play with the pink and shiny- 
faced little boys who were so unnaturally tidy and 



UNDER TEE MISTLETOE. 37 

clean in their new knickerbockers with red stock- 
ings; but she came and sat by me and talked 
softly in the firelight, as Alice did, and made me 
think of fifty years ago. And only think how old 
times come back and new times like the old ; only 
just think that when her mother told her she 
should choose a sweetheart, she got a little bit of 
mistletoe, and, cHmbing slily on my knee, holding 
me in talk as if to hide her purpose . ^though I 
guessed it soon, I'll tell you . she put her little 
doU-like arms around my neck, and, holding the 
mistletoe above my head, she kissed me again and 
again, and said I was her sweetheart 1 

" So this child sweetheart brought the old times 
back . ^the old times that are still so distant and 
so near ; and with sweet kisses, 'neath the rustling 
leaves, made me think of my dead Alice in the 
grave. The first kiss and the last ; the last and 
first, and, of all days in the world, on Christmas 
Day." 



38 OTHER PEOPLIPS JTINBOWS. 



CHAPTER III. 



THE solicitor's WINDOW. 




R. CAREW was, it may be supposed, 
sufficiently complimentary to the reader 
of the foregoing sketch ; for, directly a 
certain whispering had taken place, the MS. 
passed from the old gentleman's hands to those 
of the author, and thence into a deep drawer 
filled with manuscripts. 

"The literature of Christmas is curious," said 
Scumble the artist, musingly. 

So is the art,'' ejaculated Mr. Bagsley. 
You may say that," said Felix. "If you 
begin at the pantomimic art, and descend, shall 
we say, to that of the illustrated papers, you 
would reckon up an enormous quantity at least, 
if the quality were not very good." 

" Tut, tut," interrupted George. " I am a man, 
let us say, of middle age, and having read . and I 






THE SOLICITOR'S JFINDOW. 39 

speak of my gluttonous propensity as regards 
mental pabulum, not with anything like pride, but 
with shame . Shaving, then, read as many books 
as would stock a large library, being furnished 
with a capacious memory and able to judge for 
myself, I maintain that the sneer of our young 
friend, which he must have caught from some 
odd number of the Piccadilly Journaly is totally 
undeserved." 

" I didn't sneer at all," cried Felix, blushing a 
deep red, to find himself at the same time re- 
proved by his Mend and made the centre of 
attraction. 

"Well, then, I will pardon you for nothing. 
Some people do sneer at the talent of the day. 
/ don't. As true artists, our authors, painters, 
playwrights, and actors are quite equal to the 
average of any time, and certainly are vastly 
superior to the average of many. I went to see 
a comedy the other day, written by a gentle- 
man to whose well-earned fame no good word 
of mine can add anything ; but yet he has it . 
Mr. Tom Robertson . and I declare to you that 
I never read anything more brilliant by the 
best comedy writers of past days, while in in- 
genuity the play was far beyond Farquhar or 



40 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Wycherley. Poor old Gibber in one or two 
plays, perhaps, equalled it in its structure, but 
then this had not only dialogue, but high passion, 
ay, and high principle in it too." 

" We are after all, then, not such fools as we 
are said to be, we of the present age ?" queried 
the Barrister. 

"By no means, gentlemen," cried old Comer, 
gravely. "I can bear out, as an oldster, that 
which Mr. Carew says. I have lately seen acting, 
which is qiiite as fine as any in the best days 
of gentleman Jones and Farren, while the general 
run of the actors and the whole make-up of your 
comedy is infinitely better." 

"How we apples swim!" cried Scimible, gaily. 
" Now, Mr. Comer, if there be any morning that 
hangs heavily on your hands, just come to me, 
and I will undertake to send you away fiilly 
convinced that, as painters, you have not one 
who can touch Vandyke, Reynolds, Gainsborough, 
Wilson, even Morland in his way, and a score 
of others . ^no one who can come within shouting 
distance of that great man and great artist 
William Hogarth. That your poets " 

A general tumult amongst the company put an 
end to Mr. Scumble's tirade. The truth is, he 



TRE SOLICITORS WINDOW. 41 

was well known for his advocacy of the time 
past; and one or two of the company had heard 
all he had to say on the subject before. 

" Let us suppose, therefore/* said Carew, who 
as host was constituted master of the ceremonies, 
" Mr. Bagsley will oblige us by peeping into some 
window, such as we may not have seen, and 
letting us know what the sharp eye of a barrister 
can find there. 

" I shall begin,'* said the barrister, oratorically, 
first bowing to Carew. 

" You had best not begin in that tone," inter- 
jected his friend ; " for, of all methods of speak- 
ing, I think you gentlemen of the bar have the 
worst." 

"I will bow to the court, mi lud," returned 
Bagsley, humouring Carew. " In my opinion, 
Carew is not far wrong. Barristers do indeed 
get into a sad way; but then mine is far dif- 
ferent." 

"Oh, indeed!" said Scumble, winking at George, 
who laughed heartily. Happily the effect of this 
badinage was that Mr. Bagsley delivered his story 
in a much more natural way than else he would 
have done. In a short time, indeed, his oratorical 
manner . ^which is not preserved in print . sen- 



42 OTEER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

sibly wore off, and his friends listened without 
impatience to his sketch of 

THB solicitor's WINDOW. 

"Castle Street, Holbom, is not a very fine 
lively street, nor has it been such for many years. 
Once upon a time, no doubt . and if it were pos- 
sible to fix the date, the * once * would be found 
many years ago . ^respectable people lived in it ; 
that is, people who possibly kept gigs, and gave 
dinners once a quarter, went out into the country 
by the Margate hoy, and entertained a due regard 
for the aristocracy. There is a legend still exist- 
ing, that, within the memory of the fathers of the 
present generation, the street contained a good old 
firm of solicitors, and that at least once a quarter 
the family coach of a peer of the realm was seen 
waiting on the sunny side of the wide part of the 
street . for Castle Street, except in two parts, has 
only passage for one vehicle . and that the plated 
harness sparkled in the sunshine, which plainly 
lighted up the coronets and coats of arms upon the 
panels of my Lord Viscount's coach. 

" Those days have long since passed by. A 
street is in not very good case when it falls to the lot 
of solicitors ; and years ago the best firms of solici- 



TEE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 43 

tors had commenced an emigration from the street, 
and had settled in Lincoln's Inn Fields, Chancery- 
Lane, and thereabouts, leaving Took's Court, 
Castle Street, and its neighbour, Cursitor Street, 
to law-stationers, law-writers, and the inferior 
followers upon the great Juggernaut of English 
Law. 

*^ Cursitor Street, you may remember, was pitched 
upon by a sponging-house, kept by a person who 
the euphuism of the present * picked ' age would 
say was of the * Hebrew persuasion,' but plainer and 
better English would at once call a Jew. Of the 
true old sort was this Jew, a man who looked upon 
life as a riddle which few people could solve, and 
which most people had better give up. But he 
solved it by renting a very dirty, mean-looking 
house, or rather, when business was good, two 
houses, which were strongly built, and the windows 
of which, backandfront, were secured withiron bars. 
This place, called a * sponging-house,' probably be- 
cause debtors came there now and then to be 
* sponged' from the debts which they had con- 
tracted, and which soiled them, was about the 
most melancholy and God-forsaken looking dwell- 
ing, or more truly den, in all London, and yet, 
surely, the dearest. Were you a gentleman whose 



44 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

creditors could not wait, you were liastily summoned 
there by a long slip of a letter without any envelope, 
the copy of which was generally placed in your 
hands by a vagabond hanger-on of the Sheriff of 
Middlesex instead of a postman, who, after you had 
read the summons, took care not to leave you till you 
were safely within the very hospitable doors afore** 
said. But it was only the doors and the windows 
that were hospitable. They determined to keep 
you, and would rarely let you go; but the 
master of the prison took care to charge you an 
immense rent for the room you inhabited and the 
rough service he did you . ^for the den in Cursi- 
tor Street, and ground floor, first floor, back or 
front, were equally gloomy, dirty, and uncomfort* 
able . was paid for at the rate of an enchanted 
palace, or of the dearest hotel in London or Paris, 
which is saying a good deal. It was an under* 
stood thing between the sages who made, and the 
virtuous people who administered our law, that a 
man being a debtor, and not able to pay his just 
debts, should have unjust debts to an enormous 
extent thrust upon him ; that the sponging-house 
keeper should charge him an enormous rent for 
the dirty rooms in which the poor devil walked 
about, the horsehair chairs that he never sat upon, 



THE SOLICITOR' a WINDOW. 45 

the uncomfortable sofa, all prickly with worn 
horsehair (compounded of grease where there were 
no slits> and slits and dust where there was no 
grease)^ upon which he moaned out his grief when 
tired of pacing his room. 

" Why do I talk about these things P" said the 
narrator, suddenly ; " you know how villainously 
the law is administered ; you know that Fielding, 
and Dickens, and a dozen other men of bench 
genius and an honest soul have protested against 
it, and that yet there is positively no attempt 
made to remedy it. Himianity is the poor man who 
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho; the lawyers 
are the thieves ; but there has been no Good Sama- 
ritan yet foimd to oflfer the charity of release. 

'^ The iniquity amounts to this : that at last, in a 
philosophical and a Christian age, a certain number 
of men are detailed from the body of others, to be 
partially educated in English, and to be wholly 
taught in cunning and chicanery ; to study how 
to break through laws with impunity, not how 
to fulfil them; whose interest is diametrically 
opposed to the interests of humanity ; who bring 
nothing worth having to the common stock ; who 
can earn nothing by trade, but who are paid for 
trading in roguery and hatred, and manufacturing 



46 OTHER PZOPLirS WINDOWS. 

broils and troubles ; wbooe health depends, in £eu^ 
on the ill health of the commmiily." 

'^ Upon my word !" cried Creorge CSarew, who 
seemed lifted out of his chair by wonder. " How 
is it, Bagslevy that tou ahare the, popular pre- 
judices against attorneys P " 

** Ah ! mon mfant^^ said the litde banister, 
'^ if you only knew how we, who are the inter- 
preters of the law, hate these mmecessaiy blood- 
suckers !" 

" Well," said the artist, " they do intercept a 
good deal of the money before it comes to you ; but 
you might pardon them a little, I think. They are, 
to gentlemen of your profession, necessary evils^ 
and do all the ' touting/ which you pretend to be 
ashamed of." 

'' You are both in the same boat. Sir/' said old 
Mr. Comer. 

'^ I quite agree, though, with what Mr. Bagsley 
says," added Dr. Comer. " I have seen a good 
deal of the world when I walked the hospitals, 
and I never knew a man who had passed through 
the hands of solicitors to have either the slightest 
hope or respect for the law." 

" There it is," said Bagsley, warmly ; " and yet 
in theory how beautiful it is ! But the practice ! 



THE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 47 

Is it not monstrous/^ lie continued, waxing warm, 
'' that when a man goes back in life and falls into 
trouble and misfortime, he should be robbed by 
the law's agents so thoroughly, that he would 
imbibe not only a strong hatred of all laws, but a 
thorough determination not to be honest again, 
based on a persuasion that all other men are 
rather worse rogues than he is, having conspired 
together to rob him when he was unfortunate P 
Not to kick a man when he is down is the English 
maxim of the brutal prize-ring ; but to hit, pinch, 
strip, insult, and rob the man who is down 
amongst you, is not only the maxim of the law, 
but the custom of all its wisest and most successful 
practitioners/' 

"To return, however, to Castle Street," said 
Carew, interrupting this burst of forensic indigna- 
tion. Mr. Bagsley bowed, and proceeded. 

''As soon as it fell to law-stationers, law- 
reporters, and law-writers, whatever respectable 
and cleanly habits Castle Street once had, sud- 
denly deserted it. The public-house at the comer 
of the court gained an accession of business, and 
became celebrated for late hours ; and the doors 
of the houses were occupied by fat law-stationers, 
bloated, pale, greasy, and imwholesome, and their 



48 OTEER PEOPLE'S JTIXDOTTS. 

thin clerks, pale, shabby, half-starved, essen- 
tially dissipated, and more unwholesome stilL 
Too would not say that the law was a thriving 
business, nor a healthy one either for body or soul, 
if you watched the masters or the men who lounged 
at the doors of the law-stationers ; and if you 
had looked into their offices, you would have seen 
that these 'professional gentlemen' were con- 
siderably worse off thai; the same number of 
tailors. 

" The best times to observe the poor devils were, 
firstly, when Term was on and the stationers busy ; 
and, secondly, when the law courts were closed, 
and the fellows had nothing to do. A sharp dear 
night in November. and in our contradictory cU- 
mate such can be foimd . might have been taken as 
the first ; and then a sudden burst of the hunts- 
man of curiosities into one of their burrows, say, 
a front parlour in Castle Street, would reveal a 
dozen or so dirty men, frowsy and pale with con- 
finement, sitting in a little room that had barely 
room for two . ^lighted by half-a-dozen flaring jets 
of gas, shaded with dirty paper shades, and lean- 
ing in all sorts of unhealthy attitudes from tall 
stools, over a long mahogany desk, rough with 
hard wear, and spotted with ink. As the half- 



THE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 49 

dozen flaring jets consumed as mucli oxygen as, 
at least, thirty more men would, one can conceiye 
the choking fume that rashes from the room 
wherein the poor lawyers fag, who are slowly 
stewing to death. There are few things to be 
encountered worse than that. No wonder that the 
poor workhouse drudge, who is apprenticed to the 
law-stationer, is constantly sent to the comer 
pubUc-house for 'threes' and 'fours' of gin, 
which is procured in medicine bottles, marked 
with doses for another kind of physic. Happily, 
the apprentice contracts such a cold in these visits 
that he is soon reUeved from them by dying from 
consumption. 

'' Another time, as I have said, is the slack time, 
in which the bloated law-stationer, unhealthy from 
late hours, gin, constant confinement, and the 
dreadful pabulum his mind has in reading the 
yerbiaffe that his clerks copy, is seen standin&r at 

full of keys or hal^ence, which he lazily jingles 
as he stands. 

" His merry men, in the meanwhile, having im- 
bibed a fatal taste for stimulants, while working 
like slaves, are maundering and feeble, hanging 
round the public-house door^ wanting their accus- 

VOL. II. B 



50 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINJDOWS. 

tomed 8crew-upy and not haiing the wherewith to 
pay for it. Now and then one^ more bold than 
the others, dares to suggest to the landlord that he 
shonld trust them, because not one of the half- 
dozen has the price of a 'folio' in his pockets; 
but the landlord is far too wise to indulge his 
natural commiseration at the expense of his pocket, 
and the feeble law-writer retires to the workhouse, 
where he dies of delirium tremens ! '* 

" Dreadful !" said Carew, smiling, as he whispered 
to Bagsley ^ " gross exaggeration ! " 

The Barrister smiled in triumph. 

" I am telling merely plain truth, gentlemen. 
Painting things as they are, Mr. Scumble ; not as 
they ought to be, 

" It was on one of the first of these days that Mr. 
Robert Naylor, of the firm of Sharker, Naylor, 
and Fluke, of Lincoln's Inn, a very eminent firm 
of solicitors, approached one of the law-stationers' 
offices in the street mentioned. The firm originally 
belonged to Mr. Naylor, senior; a decent man, 
with a good conveyancing business ; but as Naylor, 
junior, succeeded him, and combined only part of 
his father's cunning, with more than all of his 
mother's folly, he soon got into a mess, and Sharker 
and Fluke, a new firm, got him out of it. 



THE SOLICITOR'S WIKDOW, 51 

"Shortly after tliis> the firm became Sharker^ 
Naylor, and Fluke; the two very sharp rogues 
having placed a fool between them . an easy-going» 
apparently simple fellow . the better to deceive 
the public. 

"But Mr. Naylor was ambitious. He was a 
doughy-faced man, sUghtly pitted with smaU-pox ; 
so that his face, surrounded with dark-brown, 
imhealthy-looking hair, somewhat resembled a 
slack, imbaked crumpet, burnt at the edges. Let 
us add two brown spots for eyes, and an unmeaning 
slit for the mouth, and we have Mr. Naylor to the 
life. Being ambitious, Naylor quarrelled with 
his partners, who, indeed, relegated him very 
prc^rly to an inferior position in the firm, and 
in due time separated, with the loss of * the pick ' 
of his business, as his faithM clerk was never tired 
of telling him. Fools naturally fall into the status 
of rogues, if, indeed, they are not already rogues, 
just as rogues, as Coleridge has it, are fools in 
circumbendibm. Mr. R. Naylor had no alternative 
but to be a rogue . and he did not object to be one. 

" On the contrary, he comforted himself with the 
fact that as Sharker and Fluke had served him out, 
he would serve out humanity. He had not an 
atom of hatred against the rogues ; on the contrary, 

E 2 



52 OTSER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

lie rather liked them for their sharpness. His 
great ideal was the pompous Mr. Sharker ; for he 
had not the merit and pluck to admire the more 
cunning and delicate workings of the villainy of 
Mr. Fluke, who fleeced his clients as if chance had 
absolutely forced him to do it, and who had the 
address to make the victim come gently to be shorn 
again and again. 

" On the night in question, Mr. Naylor had been 
for some years on * his own hook/ wriggling not 
at all to his satisfaction. He was not equal to the 
* Artful Dodger/ like Sharker, nor could he play 
the bold and happy-go-lucky attorney like Fluke ; 
so he determined to go on the kinchin-lay, like 
Noah Claypole, and make provision for his innocent 
and harmless existence by robbing women and 
children. We shall soon see why he entered Mr. 
Smallwove's shop, or, as he preferred to call it, 
office." 



TEE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 53 




CHAPTER IV. 

THB solicitor's wikdow . {Continued.) 

HEN Mr. Smallwove's door, pushed open 
by Eobert Naylor, genUeman by Act of 
Parliament, and by no act of his own, 
knocked against a little bell, which rang from the 
middle of the room, to the slight confusion of the 
dazed clerks, a fume of gas, heated and foul air, 
and a smell compoimded of gin and ink, rushed 
out into the face of the amiable Naylor, and nearly 
choked him. Unhappily, it did not quite do so. 

*^ * Mr. Smallwove's up stairs,' said a pale man, 
with dishevelled hair, red eyes, and a hoarse voice ; 
a man naturally given to being an amateur actor, 
and with a penchant to play the " Stranger," as 
well as the " Gamester.*' * He's up stairs ; but 
he'll soon be down. He's anxious for business, 
and pops on 'em pretty quick.' 



54 OTRER FE0FLIP8 WmLOWS, 

" This was said in parenthesis, but quite openly. 
The poor slaves of the quill had arrived at that 
state of misery when concealment is felt to be quite 
useless. Their conversations, therefore, were 
savagely artless. 

" * I'll wait outside,* said Mr. Naylor, shutting 
the door. *Pah! no wonder that Smallwove 
prefers the society of his wife to tfiat' 

" The clerk was quite right. Smallwove came 
quickly down stairs, summoned by the bell. He 
was a small man ; fat, but not stout ; imhealthily 
fat, and only remarkable from having two round, 
soft, beady, brown eyes, which looked Mr. Naylor 
plaintively in the face. 

" * "Won't you walk in. Sir P' he said. 

" * No, thank you,' answered Naylor, with a shrug 
of his shoulders. * I only want you to get me 
four copies of this wiU made by to-morrow. It is 
a short one. Your people can do it well in half 
an hour.' 

" * Yes, Sir,' said Mr. Smallwove, in his quiet, 
plaintive voice, uttering a sigh as he spoke ; * I 
see it's a small one.' 

" * Well, you mind and let me have the four 
copies, letter perfect, mind, by nine in the morning. 
Is not your room preciously hot, Mr. Smallwove ?' 



TSE SOLIVITOR'8 WINBOTT. 55 

I^aylor said this with an unpleasant recollection 
of the gush of heated air which he had received. 

" ' Bless you, Sir, they like it/ said Mr* Small- 
wove. 

" * Umph !* grunted the Solicitor, * Well, I dare 
say it's all right.' He said this with some faint 
recollection of an article in the papers, about the 
ventilation of workrooms; but then, to be sure, 
there was nothing about the ventilation of lawyers' 
offices, nor of the wretched dens in Castle Street, 
where the poor law-writers consumed their lives 
so rapidly. 

"Away went Mr. Naylor, not with a manly stride, 
but with a shuffle that was characteristic of the 
man. Talk about telling a man's character by his 
hand- writing ; you may tell it a great deal better 
by watching the way in which he walks ! 

" Mr. Smallwove, who was in a measure case- 
hardened against the fumes of his clerks, and the 
pervading atmosphere of his own workshop, went 
in and gave the will to the blear-eyed melancholy 
clerk with the tendency towards theatrical enter- 
tainments. It was a short one, and the eye of the 
expert Smallwove took it in at a glance. 

" * In the name of God, Amen,' . ^it began, the 
gentleman who drew it up being fond of such 



5i 




ijbam wiSt had soot £ed > lad W tktf 
itruMtsBi ht left ks pnipotr war fioB ikoR to 
wlnom it IxlaBged. to tile penoa widi wlu^ lie 
dioK to fiie^ and ftr whoHn, m die iih»g nf thr 
dxT, heng^faesippiMedtolisiemckHerifiritiul 



« 



Wnk ! we boMt of bariii; Ae light of liire 



mwiUrfjmmir as die Frendi aar, adil vidi us; but 
Ixnr cradlT diat light k abased! The three 
dhildicn of Mr. WiDiam Fieeinaii, die teetator, had 
grovn vpi, little hdlped br their fkdier^ and at his 
deadi ther mi^t haxe fliq^posed, eertainl^ diey 
hoped, that the wroog he did them wtmld have 
been in some measure redr cnaod and atoned tat. 
But the instrument, of whidbi Mr. Xajlor took 
care to hare four ec^ies made, did, wh^i it came 
to be read, dissipate all sodi hf^es. After its 
fldemn ezordinm, it kft all that die testator died 
wordi to his mistress, to hsTe and to h(Jd during 



THE S OLICITOK S WIND OW, 57 

her lifetime, and the use thereof fully to enjoy, 
such residue as she might leave being left at her 
death to the children thereinafter named. 

'^ ^ But/ and as he read this the next morning 
in one of the copies of the will, Mr. Naylor let a 
greasy smile pass over his sallow coimtenance, ^ if 

the said Mrs. ^ who was also the executrix of 

the will, should marry, or live imchastely, then 
the property reverted to the said three children of 
the testator.* 

" * That will do, Mr. Smallwove,' said Mr. Naylor, 
and, paying the law-writer his modest charge, he 
opened the door to him. Mr. Smallwove shuffled 
along the stone passage and passed out into the 
' Fields.' Lincoln's Inn Fields, thus shortened by 
him to the last word, were the ideal of the country 
to Smallwove. He sniffed the air and thought it 
considerably fresher, as indeed it might weU be, and 
as he walked marked the sparrows chirping on the 
stubby lilacs, and the children playing in the grass 
of the square. * It will soon be spring now,' said 
the law-stationer ; ' the trees are beginning to bud, 
and spring water-cresses are getting first-rate. 
I'U buy a pennyworth for Mrs. Smallwove.' 

^' Meantime Mr. Naylor was flattening a fleshy 
protuberance of no character, which he compli- 






^ Zi Tsmsoei. <zf nm saB-<iaix9L and 



vrcaii» :c j::£^* Fmic^ ih < g j;4>i e Mid we 
cc^io^ ci piST^ . ix Mr. XstW vss iamd of die 
drKSi^ Fii. =2i»c. ix & £i cif «c8Garr. sack as msf 
ersc z^Tv lad Utea. nsuse hs «KmBee into a mean 
Lean, bfed Ei^rr^ed a ^rvczjr penou fiun die 
.i!>9A**tf9 id a t^easre. AaaoBsst die tm boxeBy 
vLich boreccrsainxaEMs^cadMumwliitekcten^ 
was one whidi was locked widi a favass padlock, 
and bore xhe initials cnhr of W. F. It was ILr. 
Freeman's tin box^ and. stzange toaay, Mr. Xajto 
produced a key whicli fitted tlie padlock, and 
opening the case . the lawyor had bolted his door 
after looking up and down the ' Fields' from his 
front window . took ont an enydiqpe and inserted 
the original of the will therein, and then locking 
the box, put it back to its place and breathed fineely. 
^ That box,' said he, ' goes down to Clayton Heath 
to-morrow. It will be all right, no doubt' He 
then examined the copies of the will, one of which 
very curiously bore Mr. Freeman's signature, and 
also that of Mr. Naylor as a witness, and then, cal- 



THE SOLICITOR'S WINLOW. 59 

Gulating things careftdly, placed a date to the copy 
and shut it up with the others in his own strong- 
boxy of which one need not say no one else had a 
key. 

" The box did go down to Clayton Heath, and, as 
it happened, Mr. Naylor never needed his copies of 
the wilL Mr. Freeman, a curiously selfish person, 
felt that he was dying, and came up to London to 
get better medical advice, in which, by the way, he 
had not the slight^t confidence, and never troubled 
himself about his will. That concerned other per- 
sons. What concerned him chiefly was that he 
was about to die, and he set himself to do so as 
comfortably as he could. 

" If you knew the sort of man as well as I knew 
him, said the narrator, *^ you would not wonder at 
my thus passing over that exit which was of some 
importance to several parties concerned. Mr. 
Freeman's life had not been a very honourable one, 
nor a very happy one, and it was played out. A 
lawsuit) upon which almost all his property de- 
pended, had got into one of those beautifully in- 
tricate messes into which solicitors know how to 
throw them, and at the same time his health and 
liis conscience . and both at one time could bear 
a good deal . ^had got into a somewhat similar mess. 



60 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

^^ Therefore Mr. William Freeman lay down to 
die, without hope, without much fear, only aoxious 
to be as little ^ bothered ' as possible. 

** He was very iU. Cold upon cold, which had 
settled on his chest, had wrought effects firom 
which a very young man would hardly reooyer ; 
and a young man has hopes, wishes, illusions, 
and a thousand brave and livelong fancies, a 
himdred projects of noble happiness and ambition^ 
to live for ; and all these Mr. William Freeman, at 
the age of fifty- two, just when Shakspeare's poetic 
vision was at its height, had dissipated and lived 
down. 

" Nevertheless, nature struggled very lustily and 
long, and the testator was a long time dying. 

^'His eldest son, for whom I was concerned, 
and who was my dearest Mend," said Mr. Bagsley, 
'^ had lived long apart from his father, but was 
induced to come and see him, and a seeming 
reconciliation took place. But it was like too 
many of such acts on a death-bed . ^a one-sided 
afiGur. The son forgave with his whole heart, and 
wept even in the presence of Mr. Naylor, who was 
on the other side of the bed. The father, who 
hated scenes of any kind, was quite glad to get 
rid of his son; he wanted to lie still in that 



TEE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 61 

langoidy painless state of weakness in wlucH he 
was, floating towards tHe great river, careless of 
the haven to which the tide bore him. The 
son retired, moved, and full of forgiving love. 

" * Did you speak about a will P' I asked. 

" ' A will ! How could I at such a time P Let 
the poor dying man rest in peace. I can win my 
own way.' 

"*But your sister, and your poor helpless 
brother, a cripple, as you know, for life. That 
is a different thing. You know their case.' 

" * There is yet time,' said John Freeman, moodily. 
* All wiU be weU. It cannot be that he can go 
out of the world leaving the great wrong he did 
to my dead mother and her children unatoned.' 

'* ' It can be,' I said. * Such things happen 
every day. You don't know how foolish it is 
to trifle with time upon a death-bed.' 

'* * I will break it to Mr. Naylor,' said Freeman. 
^He has nursed me when a boy, and wiU be 
my firiend.' 

" ' As you like,' said I ; * let anybody do it, 
only let it be done.' 

'*It was done after a fashion. One day Mr, 
Freeman was observed to be nearly dead, and the 
servant summoned his son, who found Mr. Naylor, 



62 OTEER FJEOPLirS WIJVDOJP'S. 

and the lady, who afterwards, as it turned out, was 
most beneficially concerned in the will, carefully 
watching by the sick man. Then it was that 
John Freeman determined to speak. * The will V 
he cried. * Yes, there was a will,* said Naylor, 
* and he had a copy of it . a, blank one, unsigned ; 
the actual will was in Mr. William Freeman*s deed- 
box down at Clayton Heath. However, he could 
look at the copy, although it was an- unusual tod 
indelicate proceeding. But Mr. Freeman was as 
good as dead.* 

" John Freeman did so, and sickened as he read 
the instrument. A smile of triumph passed over 
the face of the lady, and Mr. Naylor absolutely 
looked intelligent . ^a rare feat for him to achieve. 
" * Does he mean this ?' asked the son, bitterly. 
" * Of course he does,' said Naylor. * He was 
only talking about it the day before yesterday.' 
This assertion sounded so much like a lie that 
it determined John Freeman, who insisted upon 
having the will attested. 

" A quick look passed between the lawyer and 
the lady. Of course, Naylor had no objection, 
not the slightest. That, indeed, was just what 
he Was about to urge. *But who is to go 
down to Clayton Heath ?' 



TEE SOUCITOR^S WINDOW. 6a 

" * I will find a person/ ejaculated Freeman,, 
moodily. 

" And as it happened/* said the narrator, " I 
was the person selected. I shan't forget the 
search we had for the will. The box was found 
under some hay^ together with a box of plate, in 
a staUe-lofb. Thie cause of this c<mcealment . 
of which, by the way, a certain groom was weU 
aware . ^was that during the lady's absence no one 
might take any of the valuables, for Clayton 
Heath was a lonely place enough, although the 
people about it were honest ; yet, had a cracks- 
man from London known of the whereabouts of 
Mr. William Freeman's deed-box and family plate, 
we might have been saved an immense deal of 
trouble^ and the family would have escaped a law- 
suit, for you may depend upon it that the will 
would never have been found nor attested ; yet, 
what am I saying ! I forgot the duplicate that the 
astute Mr. Naylor had in Lincoln's Inn Fields." 



64 OTHER FEOFLTS WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER V. 

THE solicitor's WINDOW . (Continued). 

[HE company of listeners here gave 
Mr. Bagsley a little time to refiresh him- 
self, for his story had rather exhausted 
the fluent speaker. Howeyer, he soon recoyered, 
and, after a draught of cool water, thus pro- 
ceeded: . 

" Haying secured the case, I brought it up with 
me. The lady had been too much concerned and 
afflicted to tell me where it was, so that when 
I arriyed in Henley Street, where Mr. William 
Freeman lay dying, I found that John had been for 
a long time on tenter-hooks waiting for me, and 
not knowing what to think, 

"However, my absence had been quite im- 
material. The moribund had not stirred. He 
lay there still breathing gently, with his lips 



THE SOLICITOR'S JTINDOW. 66 

darky his mouth slightly open, and his throat dry 
as a kiLiy save when moistened with wine-and- 
water, or some cool jelly. Mr. Naylor was there ; 
he seemed, during the departing days of this 
poor man, to have no other business than to 
attend to him. Mrs. Naylor, a Mend of the 
future administratrix, was also there, quietly 
chatting with her friend, and John Freeman, 
hated by . and I daresay hating, too, at that 
time, although he was such a good fellow, every- 
body . ^kept his place stoutly by his dying father's 
bed. 

" * By all that's good,' whispered John to me, 
* I thought that you would never come.' 

" ' Well, I daresay it seemed a long time to 

you; but it didn't seem a moment to me,' said 

I, in a whisper. 'Any improvement in the 

patient P' 

" * Not a bit,' returned John. * Doctor says he 

may wake all of a sudden, quite sane, and, for 

a time, strong. Then he will gradually sink, 

poor fellow !' 

" * TJmph,' said I, * then will be the time for us. 

My dear boy, make up your mind to it alL He 

never was a good father.' 

'^ ' This is not the time to say so,' said John, 

F 



66 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

turning away. You see, cliilclren see things 

differently from us. 

"Suddenly Mr. WilliamFreemanrallied. Inever 
could make out how or why he did it. He became 
quite cheerfid^ said he should beat the doctors yet, 
scolded his nurses, grew cross, had an appetite, 
and saw as clearly as any man could . ^he was a 
clever man of the world . the feelings of all those 
around him. But clever people generally shoot 
ahead too far, and Mr. William Freeman made a 
grand mistake in reckoning his son amongst the 
ordinary run of selfish children. Bad as his 
father had been, the son loved him dearly. 

" Every move, however, that the young man 
took, the old one . I say this to excuse him . put 
down to a selfish motive. The woman was quiet 
and passive ; the young man was impulsive, quick, 
full of affection at one time, and of coldness if 
repulsed. He went to the extreme length of 
bringing ,a clergyman to his father's bedside. 
The dying man raved at him and the priest 
alternately, until they departed. 

" The next day he attested his will, after reading 
it carefully over, and the next morning, when no 
one was by him but the nurse, opened his eyes 
suddenly, started, and would have risen, only he 



THE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 67 

was so weak and wasted ; stared as if in great 
surprise, and knitted his brows in a troubled way, 
and then. died. 

*' ' Died/ said his son, * and made no sign/ 

" *Yes,' said I, bitterly ; * but he has made a 
will, and the contents, if they are as you say, will 
simply bequeath a lawsuit to some one . ^to you, 
my poor boy/ 

'* It was as I said. John Freeman and his crip- 
pled brother followed their father to his grave, 
and then, coming back from his funeral, heard his 
will read. John said never a word, but his lips 
trembled. Mr. Naylor read the will, and placed 
it in the administratrix's hands. 

" That lady began to weep. ' Poor fellow !' she 
said, *he always did everything for the best. 
He could not carry on any more ; his Irish law- 
suit has eaten him up ; there is only that little 
farm at Clayton left, and it would have broken 
his heart to have sold it. But I must do so ; 
don't you think so, Mr. Naylor ? ' 

" That gentleman shrugged his shoulders. 
* There's Green and Jackson's bill of costs,' said 
he; *I don't know how the estate will meet 
that.' 

" * Come along, Ben,' said John Freeman ; and 

r2 



68 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

without a word, morally shaking the dust off their 
feet, away the two sons went. 

" ' You see,' said John to me, * we are beaten 
horse and foot. Never mind, Ben,' he con- 
tinued, looking down on the poor fellow, ' I'm 
alive; I'm still superstes. Deoa qtueso tit ifim 
superstes ; and while / live, you are all right. I 
like work, I do, only I wish that the old governor 
had turned up a trump as his last card. And 
that will was made fourteen years ago, when we 
were helpless children. God forgive him.' 

" When Mr. Naylor got home he quietly burnt 
all the duplicates of the will, and sat down to a 
strong cigar and a stronger glass of whisky-and- 
water. Mrs. Naylor was busy admiring her 
presents, for the administratrix had given her a 
fine old Queen Anne coffee-pot, worth I don't know 
how many shillings per ounce, a small salver, and 
one or two other articles of silver, all with the Free- 
man cypher upon them. Mr. Naylor had upon his 
finger an antique silver ring ; and truly the goods 
of the defunct had been already partly shared. 

" To make a long story short, Clayton Heath 
Farm was sold ; but the lady who called herself 
the widow could not so easily get rid of sundry 
acres that Mr. Freeman had rented, and she there- 



THE S OLICITOR' S WIND JF, 69 

fore kept on a likely young countryman, too well 
educated for a labouring man, but too coarse in 
his tastes for anything else, as a bailiff. He was 
fresh-coloured and nice-looking, and as a matter 
of fact always pleaaing in the eyes of his mistress, 
otherwise a low, cunning, coarse brute, and 
certainly pleasing to nobody else. He was put 
into mourning, with some other servants of Mr. 
Freeman, by whom he was looked on with perfect 
jealousy, notably by the groom, an older, cleverer, 
and better fellow than he, who in a short time 
came up to town bringing some books from the 
library which William Freeman had . so the ad- 
ministratrix said . ^made her promise she would 
give his son. 

" Somehow this groom hung about the room 
wherein John Freeman received him, and some- 
how recollections of the old home troubled John, 
and he gave the groom a little more brandy-and- 
water than he should have done, and took him- 
self an extra glass or so of sherry. 

" The wine opened the men's hearts . ^for grooms 
and poor gentlemen stand upon a nearer level 
than such feUows and rich gentlemen. There is, 
too, always a certain imderstood feeling of superi- 
ority with grooms over gentlemen. About horses 



70 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

at least, an animal concerning which all men 
would be learned, the groom knows most. 

" * Sit down, Sam,' said John ; ' the train yon 
go by will let you have another half hour/ 

" * Oh, Mas'r John,' said Sam, gulping the 
brandy- and- water, and pulling his forelock, *I 
looked to have ridden behind you to the hunt with 
a second *oss; an' blow me if the stable ain't 
empty under the Missus.' 

" He jerked his thumb in the direction of Clay- 
ton Heath. 

" ' Ne'er a one in it, 'cept that fat old pony ; 
she won't part with that, and ne'er a one on 'em 
would buy it, may be. Striver's been and sold 'em 
all, damn him. Oh, Mas'r John, I never look'd 
to see the day ; and,' said the good fellow, wiping 
away a tear, ' you a workin' away as hard as any 
of us, no doubt, and you don't look well on it 
neither, 'cos you wam't bom to it. And they has 
got it. That Striver's got the length of her fut, 
too. How was it you managed it so, Mas'r John ? 
You ought to a' bin at the head, you ought, you 
know.' 

" People say that there is truth in wine. There 
is confidence at least ; and the effect of a couple of 
glasses of sherry, added to the memories of the old 



TSE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW, 71 

home, showed themselyes on John Freeman. He 
had a prodigious memory in some things ; and in 
answer to Sam's earnest question : ' How was it 
you managed it so, Mas'r John?' he told the 
groom how it was, by simply repeating the wilL 

'' In answer to this, the groom looked at him 
with all his eyes, as people say, and with ' all ' of 
those organs certainly distinctly visible. ' Well,' 
said he, ' to be sure !' Then clapping his hand 
on the black knee cords, which were terminated 
with black gaiters, in honour of the deceased 
gentleman, he continued: . *The Governor were 
a cunning one, he were. He knew human natur, 
he did. He had a thought, had he, that the 
Missus might turn skittish an' kick over the 
traces. My eye, Mas'r John ! how well your father 
did know womankind. Bear up your head ; we 
am't so fieur off the stable as you think.' 

^* Sani then put on his hat, with a cockade in it, 
a thing which he looked ' contemptibly at,' as he 
said, * 'Cos the old Governor knew better than to 
make the groom of a civilian wear one,' and 
clapped it on his head. Then he winked at John 
Freeman, and shook his hand in all good fellowship, 
andy being a man of few words, bolted. 

** Freeman stood at his door, and thought of the 



72 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

wffl; then, putting his hand wearily to his fore- 
head, he set himself to work. He was an analyti* 
eal chemist, and was rapidlj rising in his pro- 
fession, and his stndj needed a cahn quiet, whksh 
his father's death and will had somewhat disturbed* 
He looked at the books which the groom had 
brought . a handsome set of Hume and Smollett, 
in whole calf bindings, the prize of some college. 
He was glad to have them. They were a memo* 
rial of home, and bore his father's book-plate. 
He hoped that his sons would look at them as 
an heir-loom . a link connecting them with the 
past. 

" ' Well, gentlemen,' continued Mr. Bagsley, a 
must be getting towards the end.' 

'' The groom was as good as his intention, and 
better than his word. In a few weeks he came, on 
a Sunday, when Freeman and his wife were going 
to their quiet humble church, and, touching his 
hat, said that he wanted to say a few words to 
Mas'r John. 

" * Go along to church, Annie,' John said ; * I 
must have a talk with this man.' Mrs. Freeman, a 
trusting and an obedient wife, to whom John was 
a compound of philosopher and angel, did as she 
was bidden, and the groom and John Freeman 



THE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 73 

re-entered the house and sat down, facing each 
other, in the drawing-room. 

" The sun was shining in the Kttle garden, which 
stretched upwards from the house, a suburban 
modest building in a very modest neighbourhood, 
and the church bells were heard ringing sweetly in 
the distance. The two men were in black, and 
each looked earnestly into his fellow's face. The 
diflference between them was this : Sam's face wore 
an air of confident triumph, while on Freeman's 
feeling and intellectual face sat not public, but 
private care, and an expression of sadness which 
rather annoyed the groom. That individual looked 
from Freeman to the table, then he looked at the 
garden, then he pulled off his Berlin gloves, ex- 
hibiting a large coarse hand, and then he looked 
at the floor. John Freeman divined the cause. 

" * What will you take, John,' said he, *brandy- 
and- water, or ale P' 

" * Your brandy's very good, Mas'r,' said Sam ; 
* we don't get such in our parts.' 

" John rung the bell, and ordered tumblers and 
cold water. Then he looked at his watch, and 
then went into the next room, where the side- 
board was, and came out with the liqueur-stand. 

"Sam mixed for himself, took a good pull at some 



76 OTBER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Those were the words I said, after walking leisurely, 
and with our heads down, like defeated men, past 
the window of the solicitor, against which he was 
flattening his plastic nose, as usual. 

" ' By jingo,* said John, * it was lucky that I 
took your advice, and reserved my call till the 
evening. Here, let's have a cab.' 

" In a few minutes we were at home, and told 
Mrs. Freeman of our journey ; in afew more minutes 
we were on our way to a late train; and after 
chartering two miserable ponies to carry us part of 
the way, a dreary nine miles, heavy with snow, 
towards Clayton Heath, we found ourselves at the 
* Pied Bull,' a dreary little public about a mile 
from the old farm-house, in which lay the guilty 
pair. The farm-house had been sublet to Striver, 
and Mrs. Freeman had removedfrom a shooting-box, 
in which Freeman had lived, a few fields away from 
the larger residence, where he thought of retrench- 
ing, and was preparing to quietly go out of the 
world. 

" It was nearly four o'clock, for we had purposely 

stayed some time at , where the groom met 

us, before we got on to the Heath and knocked at 
the ' Pied Bull.' We were answered by a gruflf 
voice from an opened casement, and a nasty look- 



TEE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 77 

ing blunderbuss. There had been some talk of 
robbery thereabouts, and perhaps some real ones, 
and the sight of the protruding barrel gave me a 
pleasant cold tremor aU down my back, since it 
was accompanied by a rough oath and the click of 
the cock. Freeman pulled me back. * Higgins/ 
he cried out to the landlord, * don't be a fool ; I'm 
Mr. Freeman.' 

" * It's Mas'r John, Benjamin,' said the groom, 
who had prudently got behind us both. 

" The blunderbuss was withdrawn, and the door 
soon opened, and, wet-footed as we were, we were 
glad to rest in the kitchen, where the fire was soon 
raked into a blaze, and we sat down, with the 
groom, to a comfortable breakfast of very coarse 
coffee and very good bacon. Our plan was to pro- 
ceed at about six to the house, and to obtain an 
entrance somehow ; so that we ourselves might 
catch the 'poxtiGA flagrante delicto. 

" * It's a delicate business for a yoimg gentleman 
who expects soon to be called,' said I. ' 'Tis 
nothing more nor less than flat burglary; but we 
must do it, John.' 

" John laughed. His spirits were high, and rose 
with the occasion. 'I can understand,' he said, 
how a cracksman must feel. It must be like himt- 



72 OTIIET. PEOPLED WTST/OWS. 

.."ill : tlifn. puttini Lis hacd TearilT to his fbre- 

Lcud, ht- K't LunMrlf to worL He was an aDalTti> 

(uJ chemist, and wus rapidlr rifin^ in his pro- 

j't-ssitm. uud bis studr n^ed a calm quiet, whioh 

;:ir liitLcr*^ death and will had somewhat distnifaed. 

JIc JcKikcd at the books which the groom had 

)>i MU^Lt . a handsome set of Hume and Smdkt^ 

'.'A ^r]j<jli' calf' bindings, the prize of some coll^a 

JJc -arni, pkd to have them. Thej- were a memo- 

nu] 1.4' home, and bore his father's boc^-plate. 

He hoped that his sons would lode at tboa M 

an heir-loum . a link connecting them widi As 

pas^. 

" . Well, gentlemen,' oontiniied Mr. Btgday, 'I 
must be petting towards tie end.' 

" The groom was as good as his il 
bt'TUTihsnhis word. In a fevvieda be a 
a Simdny, irhen Freeman and his wife mrB g 
to ihi-ir quiet hnmble efaanh, . 
Lat. foid that he wanted t 
ilas'r John. 

" - Go along to . 
must liaTe . t 
tnwtingaBdi 



J 



..n 




/ 



:k of 

"IK'S, 

.k i .]' 



..i:i', 



J'JM 



...* . 



4. 



80 OTEER PEOPLE* S WINDOWS. 

possible reflection, and we took that for an omen. 
The grayel was canted lightly against the window, 
and to our deKght a candle was soon seen to bum 
in the room. Then we all crept behind the lauiel 
tree, and waited. 

" The light burned for a little while. The girl 
was cA^dently preparing to come downstairs ; and 
the groom's terror increased. 

"Tmnouse now, Mas'r John,' said he. 'I 
may go now.' 

" ' Yes,' said Freeman, glad to get rid of him. 
' We will do this by ourselves. Mind and wait 
for us at the * Bull.* 

*^ Our stable-minded friend sneaked off in the 
darkness, and we crept up to the front door on 
seeing the light disappear. The girl was evidently 
coming downstairs. Suddenly the bolts were softly 
withdrawn, and the great chain let down. The 
girl opened the door, and John Freeman sprang 
in, caught her round the waist, and put his hand 
over her mouth. * Don't scream,' he cried, * nor 
be frightened. I'm John Freeman.' 

" Well, the girl, who knew John's face and form, 
so like that of her dead master, did not scream, 
but, on the contrary, proved a very efficient aid, 
after she had gone down on her knees, to beg us 



TEE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 81 

to give up our purpose. Finding us set on it, she 
told us that our surmises were correct ; * but/ said 
she, * Mr. Striver gets up early, about seven, and 
comes down with his gun, just to knock over a 
rabbit or so in the dark. If he finds you here, he 
will shoot you, as sure as fate. He has been 
talking about you with the Missus, and he does 
not quite suspect this gsunut, but she does/ 

" He won't find us here,' said I ; * we will find 
him there" 

" ' You can't do it,' she said. ' The bedroom 
door is doubly locked and bolted ; and when the 
men come to the bam to thresh out, he opens the 
window, and chucks out the key to them. How, 
then, are you to get in P' 

" This puzzled us. * Never mind,' said Freeman, 
calmly ; * go and light the kitchen fire ; we will 
wait and see. There is nothing stirring now.' 

" All this conversation was carried on in a low 
tone ; not quite in a whisper, for we were far away 
from where our enemies lay sleeping. Freeman 
took out his purse, and gave the girl some money. 
*In any case,' he said, *you shall be paid for 
letting us into the house.' 

" The servant took the money, and was very quiet 

and obedient. I have every reason to suppose 

VOL. II. o 



82 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

that she had been told of the matter by the groom, 
for whom she had a partkmlar friendship. 

** Then for nearly an hour she left ns alcme. I 
was quite silent, revolving in my mind tiie curious 
chances which, ont of friendship for Freeman, had 
brought me there. We wero not armed, he having 
only a stout walking-stick, and I nothing more 
formidable than a penknife ; but we had courage, 
and doubted nothing. I never saw any one more 
cool than John : he was engaged in making an 
inventory of the contents of the old parlour, which 
had been rofumished exactly as he had known it 
in his father's lifetime. 

" ' Freeman,' said I, * had not one of us better 
look to that girl P' 

"*No!' he returned, quickly; *I can read a 
woman's face. She will do you no harm, and you 
may be at peace, and trust her.' 

" He was quite right. In a few minutes, before 
we could hear anything in that silent house, the 
servant came, and said to John . 

" ' You may look out now ; they are stirring.' 

" The kitchen, in fact, a large and antique room, 
was under the chamber in which our enemies were 
' located,' as the Yankees say. "We both rose, and 
my heart beat a little ; but Freeman was as cool 




TEE SOLICITOR'S WINDOW. 83 

as if he were going to hand a lady down to dinner. 
He took the light from the girl, and shaded it 
with his hands ; and presently we heard a voice 
calling the servant. It was that of Mrs. Freeman, 
who called her to give out the keys of the 
bam. 

" We crept to the stair foot, and heard, with 
quickened ears, the retreating steps of the woman 
after she had given out the keys, and, to our joy, 
we also heard that the chamber door was not 
again locked, 

" * Now*s the time,' said Freeman, doing what 
seemed to me an act of madness, but what, in his 
generous fashion, was intended to shield the girl 
from any blame. *Now's the time,* said he, 
knocking at the open street door, and angrily 
demanding to see the mistress; and then, as if 
pushing the servant away, he rushed up stairs, 
candle in hand, and I after him. He went up 
like lightning, and in a moment we were at the 
chamber door. 

" * You well know me,* cried he, * and I know 
you, Mr. Striver. I'm Mr. John Freeman !* 

" The rest of the story would weary you. We 
won aU before us. We carried down Mr. Striver's 

G 2 



84 OTHER PEOPLE'S WIirDOWS. 

pistols and gun, and unloaded them ; and lie and 
the lady gave up the game. We brought up all 
the plate ; and that erening, or rather aftemoony 
we sought Mr. Naylor. That gentleman was 
penitent, and his wife was horrified. We . ^I and 
John . ^both knew enough about law to see that 
Naylor eould aid us thoroughly, or eould puzzle 
us terribly; and therefore I, at John's request, 
wrong fixMn him by his friends, asked him to act 
tor him. 

'' * You know,' said I, ^ that nothing would suit 
you better, Mr. Naylor, than a Chancery suit ; but 
we don't want it. If the executrix will aid us, we 
will not seek to remove her.' 

** The astute Naylor promised all that we asked, 
and then John set about his honest courses* He 
reversed that part of the will which had left his 
sister and brother destitute, sold the plate and 
commenced paying the little creditors, not one of 
whom had been paid, and trusted to realize the 
large sum of about twelve thousand pounds, owing 
as a judgment debt on property provided for on 
the estates in Ulster of a certain Irish marquis. 
He made Striver marry the woman, thus returning 
in some sort good for evil, and gave her almost 
all the furniture of the old house to set her for- 



TEJS SOLICITORS WINDOW. 86 

ward in a right course, when Mr. Naylor made 
his appearance with a long bill of costs from Stevens 
and Price, against the estate of William Freeman 
for certain Irish law- work. ' This/ said Naylor, 
' must be paid, and the parties would not wait. 
We must,' continued Naylor authoritatively *sell 
the judgment debt, and I have got a purchaser in 
the next debtor to your father's on the Marquis's 
estates, the National Hibernian Bank.' 

" Well, John naturally refused to sell, and ]S*aylor 
seemed to acqidesce^ when all of a sudden Freeman 
was served with notice to appear to answer an action 
of trover, and was forced to pay all the moneys 
received from his father's plate, &c., into the Irish 
Chancery court, where he took action. He had 
to pay also to Naylor, solicitor to the executrix, 
a like amount ; for although the English judges . 
three solemn, not to say, feeble fellows . seemed to 
feel, if they ever do feel, that he had done just 
what an honourable man would do, yet a man has 
no right to right himself, you know. He won all 
in Ireland, when the heir of the Marquis was stirred 
up to resist payment, and Naylor and the execu-> 
trix sold the debt for three thousand . a debt worth 
ten thousand . ^golden sovereigns. This brought us 
into an action to upset the transaction, which the 



86 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Irish Master in Chancery pronounced utterly frau- 
dulent ; but Naylor commenced a cross suit at the 
English Chancery, and there was a conflict of 
courts. Whatever 1;he Irish court said the Eng- 
lish court gainsaid. For eight years my unfor- 
tunate client went on working as a chemist to 
gain money to pay his costs. Often has he paid 
some celebrated man at the bar to lead^ and has 
had to fight the battle with me as a jimior, and I 
imhappily had not the ear of the court. At last 
John Freeman was tired out ; what the Master of 
the Bolls said a higher court unsaid ; and thus 
bandied &om court to court, he had at last nothing 
left but the Lords to appeal to. six hundred 
pounds down, and three old gentlemen, two of 
whom haye previously decided against you, to re- 
consider the verdict of the lower court. * You've 
fought the battle for eight years, John,' I told him ; 
* Naylor has swallowed, as we well know, two thou- 
sand pounds of the money paid in ; you will have 
to sue the executrix, who is now with a drunken 
husband in a workhouse, or next door to it. Leave 
off, John ; you are a brave man, if an unfortunate 
one. You are not rich ; in fact, you have not a 
five-pound note to fold up with its fellow, thanks to 
the law ; but while God gives you health you will 



THE SOLICITOR'S WINDOTT, 87 

never be a poor man. So my advice is^ that yoa 
quietly put up with the loss, and go on working 
in your own noble way. After all, life, which is 
made up of trials and vexations, must be taken as 
it comes to us . ^not as a triumph ; too often as a 
defeat.' 

"John Freeman took my advice, and put up with 
the loss. Strong and good as he was^ a few more 
years would have sent him to the madhouse. He 
is now a celebrated chemist, though still a young 
man, with his hair streaked with grey ; and every 
grey hair he owes to the Solicitor's Window, 
through which Mr. Naylor still peers at coming 
clients; a prosperous man, for I hear that his 
theatrical wife, herself proud and stout, rides in 
her brougham. Gentlemen, I have done. Every 
word that I have uttered is true ; . and I have not 
said half that I could say against the law." 

Mr. Bagsley here ceased, amidst general ap- 
plause. 

"By George," said Carew, swearing by his 
patron saint, " will no one arise to slay this hydra 
of the law ?" 

" My dear yoimg sir," said the old gentleman, 
Mr. Comer, " how can you expect to have it any 
better P What unphilosophical animals are men ! 



88 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

You educate and train solicitors to cheat you, you 
make their livelihood depend upon their cunning ; 
you separate law and equity, you write your laws 
fn an ignorant jargorof arKtrary tei which 
no two men understand alike ; and then you cry 
out and say what wretched fellows such men as 
* Naylor and Co.,' and ' Quirk, Gammon and Snap,' 
and * the rest of the fraternity ' are. Why, you 
might as well blame the foxhound for being a 
capital dog in a pack, after you have been all your 
Ufe training him to hunt." 

"Good," grunted Carew, meditating on the 
story; "and now let us go on with the next 
window." 



TKE WINDOW UPON WHEELS. 89 




CHAPTER VI. 

THE WINDOW UPON WHEELS. 

THINK/* said a little round and some* 
what red man, red in his hair, in his 
eyes, in a foxy complexion . one who 
gave you an idea of redness, but of whose exist- 
ence we had as yet been apparently unconscious . 
" I think that it is my turn now to take you gentle- 
men to a window you have not yet peeped in." 

" That's capital !" said Carew. " I see you are 
now all entering into the spirit of the evening." 

" Yes," said the little red gentleman, pushing 
his fingers through the red hair, abundantly 
streaked with grey ; " when I've a thing to do, 
I do it ; and so here goes for my story." Then, 
having settled himself comfortably in his chair, 
and looking into the end of his long cherry-stick 
pipe, as if he saw therein what he narrated, he 
commenced slowly, thus : . 



90 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

"The first time I saw him, it was under 
disadvantageous circumstances, and he did not 
look so big as he was. 

"I don't know whether any of you, gentle- 
men," . the red gentleman who was telling the 
story was very precise . " ever had the kind of 
hankering that I have after one of those pretty 
little painted houses, with neat blinds, small 
windows, yellow wooden sides spick and span, 
picked out with red styles, that are pulled abqut 
the country on wheels, and are seemingly always 
inhabited by a fat woman, matronly and com- 
fortable, and a gentleman in a fustian jacket and 
overalls. I suppose all boys like those little 
houses. Well, my love for them continued long 
after boyhood, and I was a man, full grown, on 
the road to making a fortune, when I took it into 
my head that I would buy one. 

"I was in the wine trade, wholesale, and pne 
of my customers had been foolish enough to run 
away to America largely in my debt, leaving a 
very excellent stock of wines and spirits and a 
newly-established tavern on my hands. This would 
have broken anybody else's back, but it didn't mine. 

" I looked at the books of my levanting friend, 
and I found that what Shakespeare had said long 



THE WINDOW UPON WHEELS, 91 

ago was quite rights especially where applied to 
publicans . * There w a tide in the affairs of men.' 
I don't exactly know whether he emphasised that 
*is/ or, as you literary gents would do, printed 
it in italics, but this I do know, that he ought 
to have done so. There is a tide, and just at 
the turn of that tide my friend had lost head 
and heart, and had bolted instead of calling on 
me and telling me how matters stood. When I 
came to investigate affairs, / saw that the tide 
was upon the turn, and that Jack Spiggott had 
run away from making his fortune. 

" * What did I do r you will say. Well, I'll 
tell you. I carried on the ' public ' for a time, 
simply because I could get nobody to take it off 
my hands. Whenever I assured a likely man 
that there was a fortune to be made, he shook 
his head with a knowing smile, as much as to say, 
* No, no, Mr. Edgehill ; you're a clever fellow, 
but, if there is a fortune to be made, why don't 
you make it to yoitr own hand.' So I was forced 
to carry on what I knew was a promising concern, 
and I did very successfully, imtil I put it all 
right and flourishing into the hands of the re- 
turned and repentant Jack Spiggott himself. 
Poor Jack," said the wine merchant, looking as 



92 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

sentimental as one of his physique could, into 
the end of his pipe, " I killed him !" 

" ' Ealled him !' cried FeUx, with a start, won- 
dering that Mr. Edgehill should combine charity 
with cruelty. 

"Yes, said the narrator; "the truth is, that 
when Jack came back, and had a fortune put 
into his hands, instead of being thrown into 
jail, he was so penetrated with gratitude, that 
what with hard work, what with excitementi 
what with determination to pay off his debt of 
gratitude, and what with a peculiarly fine growth 
of champagne that I picked up abroad (I bought 
the whole vintage, but could get nobody, except 
me and Jack, to belieye in it, because I did not 
forge a brand) what with these, I say, Jack 
Spiggott drank himself into an early grave, leav- 
ing me. for he had no chick nor child. a Utile 
fortune of ten thousand pounds and his blessing. 
Poor Jack I I made him a happy man, and I'm 
sure he returned the compliment with a benefit. 
It's extraordinary," said the wine merchant, by 
way of a note, " what good fellows men are, if you 
will only treat them as they ought to be treated. 

" Well, you see," continued Mr. Edgehill, " it 
was 'along of,' as the country people have it, 



tjb::e wmnow upon weeels. qs 

'^ it was * all along of ' Jack Spiggott and his large 
public-house^ with a large music-hall attached, 
doing so many butts a week, and altogether a 
thriving concern, that I saw this particular 
window upon wheels. 

"I was nearly worn out; for happily every- 
thing had turned out well, and Jack had come 
home, and was working like an eternally grateful 
steam-engine; the only trouble he seemed to 
have, poor fellow, was that imder which he 
died . ^his gratitude to me. That overweighted 
him. Well, away I went into the country to 
refresh myself, and I was taking a turn down 
at St. Alban's . ^a curious old place, to be sure . 
where I saw the very thing I had been looking 
after for sale. 

" There it was. smaU windows, wooden sides, 
yellow> picked out with red styles, all spick and 
span, green door, brass knocker, and some white- 
painted steps, which invited you to walk up. 

^'I did walk up, especially as I saw in one 
of the little windows, ' To be sold ; also a good 
cart-horse, and harness.' 'Here,' said I to 
myself^ * is a treat. I will leave the wine trade 
for three weeks, buy this, stock it with eggs, 
legs of mutton, and choice provisions in tins, 



94 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

and roam about the country, camping out where 
I like/ 

" By the time I had made this resolution I had 
got to the top of the stairs, and there it was that 
I saw hitn, 

" He was lying the whole length of the van, and 
yet he was bent in the middle. There was a 
curtain, to be sure, to hide him from the public 
gaze, but it was imdrawn, and there he lay. I 
only caught a glimpse of him, however, for his 
friends quickly hid him from my view, with the 
curtain. 

'^ I was so astonished that I forgot what I came 
for ; our friend was so preciously long and big 
that I could not conceive how they got him into 
my snug little home, for I had already begun to 
consider it mine. 

" ' What have you got there P* said I, to a sharp 
young man with rough hair and ferrety eyes, * a 
giant ?' 

" * Yes, it's a giant ; and if you want to see him, 
you must pay a shilling at least, for a private 
interview.' 

"* Don't want to see him,^said I. *What I 
want is to buy this van.' 

"Theyoimg person with the ferrety eyes whistled, 



TEE WINDOW UFON WHEELS. 95 

as much as to say, ' Hookey, Walker !' which 
was a favourite phrase in those days ; and then 
standing before an opening in the curtains, so as 
to deprive me of just about half an inch of the 
giant's trousers, he said: . 'Well, if so be as 
that's the case, you must come and see Mr. 
Smithers at the * Peacock,' in the High Street ; 
for he's gone to Bamet, and won't be back till six.' 
About seven Mr. Ferret supposed Mr. Smithers 
would treat with me. As he closed his speech, 
his companion gave a pull at the " street" door, 
which caused it to fly open and to make a 
aeries of double knocks ; and I, after a glance at 
the outward world through the window upon 
wheels, went my way, promising to call on Mr. 
Smithers at seven, at the hotel called the ' Pea* 
cock.' 

" The glance I had of the inside of the caravan 
made me more determined than ever to possess it : 
it looked so comfortable, if it had not been uncom- 
fortably crowded by the giant, his two friends, and 
myself. I pictured to myself the sweet hedgerows 
of England, the steady old horse pulling along at 
the rate of three miles an hour, tiie country carts 
passing us, the afternoon siesta and the pipe, the 
jolly nights under some gigantic way-side oak, 



96 OTHER PE0FLIP8 WINBOWS. 

with the wind roaring above me and the rest in 
some quiet sunny country town. 

" Punctually at seyen, I went to the * Peacock* 
in search of Mr. Samuel Smithers, and there it 
was that I saw him again. Mr. Smithers, a stoat, 
greasy-looking gentleman, with a sleeye-waistcoat, 
and in corduroys, was sitting in a chair, sipping 
rum-and- water, and smoking, while he tried to 
look indifferent as to the success of his interview. 
Do all he could, however, he could not succeed. 
Mf . Smithers was very much down on his luck, 
and even the giant was depressed. 

^^ He was standing in the middle of the room, 
leaning in an elegant and degagi way, with his 
forearm pressing against the ceiling, by which 
he steadied himself. As I entered the room, the 
first thing that I heard was, 'Well, there's no 
help for it, I suppose ; we must take the long 'un 
back to the little island.' 

*' * To cut a long story somewhat shorter,' con- 
tinued Mr. Edgehill, putting his little finger into 
the bowl of his pipe to feel whether it was alight 
or not, ' I soon got interested in that giant, and I 
found that Mr. Smithers had been deeply in- 
terested in him too, and that was the reason that 
the two pretty little windows, the door^ and the 



THE WnmOW UPON WHEELS. 97 

knocker, and the wooden house on wheels were 
for sale.'* 

** * You see/ said Smithers, ' these two young 
countrymen, they are Manx men, and such rum 
'uns, that I never want to meet their like again ; 
nor Jersey men either; nor any such-like 
islanders.' 

" The party with the ferrety eyes looked rather 
dark at this, butMr.Smithers did not heed the looks. 

'^ ' They are,' said he, as cunning as a couple of 
lawyers' clerks when the goyemor has defaulted, 
and they are carrying on business to pay their- 
selyes above board, and live under the rose. You 
see they are cousins of his'n, and have got a share 
in him, and consequently they go with him ; and 
as giants ain't no pay nowadays, they and him 
are eatin' me out of house an' home. I don't 
want to sell the wan, if so be I could get rid of 
the giant.' 

" ' Well, I'll tell you what it is : A^ hasn*t got a 
tongue in his head . leastways, not cme as is 
any good to him,' said the ferrety gentleman, 
nodding at the giant, who looked calmly down 
from the ceiling upon all of us, ' and I will speak 
for him. He's worth fifty pound a week, is he 
not, governor P Fifty pound a week and his keep P' 

VOL. II. H 



98 OTKER PEOPLirS WIKDOWS. 

''I looked up at my mild Mend, and found 
myself insensibly drawn to him. I was short 
and lie was so very big . so uselessly big. 
If the gentleman with the red eyes had said 
he was worth a hundred pounds a week, I 
should not have had the heart to contradict 
him . at any rate> in the presence of the giant 
himself. 

" ' Yes, he is/ said I, slowly revolving in my 
mind what to do with him. A spell seemed to 
hang over me ; he was so tall, so amiable, and, for a 
wonder, so weU made, and so gracious too, smiling 
down on us. An idea flashed upon ma I would 
make Jack Spiggott's fortune. 

" * Yes, he is,' I again said slowly, rubbing my 
chin meanwhile. 

" ' Thank you, sir,' said the giant, mildly ; * I 
think I will sit down now. I find it hot up here 
when the gas is lighted.* 

" ' Will you give fifty a week for him P* said his 
ferrety cousin ; * any one who knows the ropes well 
would make a hundred.' The young man seemed 
to be entirely given up to the one idea of making 
money ; and, I daresay, although he climg like a 
leech to the unfortunate Smithers, fortime was at 
a low ebb with that limited liability company, the 



TBE WnmOW UPON WEEJSL8. 99 

whole capital^ paid up of which, was a young, 
mild giant. 

'' ' Giants is a bad spec/ said the unfortunate 
Smithers. 

*' * You're a fool to say so/ snapped the ferrety 
fellow; 'a blessed fool anyhow, just when the 
gent was a-goin' to make a bid/ 

"* Yes, for my house, though,* returned Smithers, 
smoothing his dirty hand down his greasy sleeve- 
waistcoat. 'I only wish that the public took 
a little interest in *em, but they won*t. They 
won't walk up now to any one more strange than 
the pig-faced lady, with a real silver trough. I 
saw a handsome woman t'other day as would 
have nearly done for one ; howsomever, if you're 
goin' to travel the country I dare say you could get 
one.' 

" * What !' said I, startled out of my silence ; * a 
pig-faced lady !' 

" * You can get anything for advertisin',' re- 
turned Smithers ; ' any sort o' talent, curious or 
not. Just look at this paper^' said he, holding 
up the Era; 'that's the place to find talent, or 
curiosities ; anything you can find there . lashins 
of it ; but you won't find a better giant in the 
world than what he is, nor one more proper, nor 

H 2 



100 OTSER PJE0PLIP8 WIND0JF8. 

soberer, nor better terapereder^ although / have 
dropped my money on him/ 

'^ The giant, as he heard this eulogy, held out 
his hand to Smithers, and took the whole of his 
hand and forearm in his gigantic paw. ' Never 
mind, old fellow,* said he, * you couldn't help it. 
The fact is, I'm too big for you ; you want more 
money to work me.' 

"'That he does,' said the ferret. 'Now, it 
seems to me that the gent has made up his mind. 
What will he give for the giant per week P £50 
is not dear ; he owns to as much hisself.' 

" ' No,' said I, wondering at the talent that our 
red-eyed young friend had for reading character ; 
* no it is not.' 

" * You think we ought to get it P' 

"*Yes; and I think you will get it, but not 
from me,' said I, reverting in my thoughts to Jack 
Spiggott, . ' now I will tell you what I will give 
you. If you bring that gentleman to London, 
where his true market Ues, and let him come to 

the Music Hall and Terpischorean Enter- 

tainment, for one hour every evening, from eight 
till nine, I'll give him ten pounds a week. He will 
have all the rest of the day and night to himself, 
and it's odd if he can't pick up the £40 somehow.' 



i 



TKE WINDOW UPON WSEELS. 101 



Ci 



Well, to make a long story short, as I said, 
the giant jumped at the offer, and the ferrety 
cousin, after some long preamble, agreed to have 
the terms drawn up in black and white. As for 
Mr* Smithers, he was so pleased that he declared 
that he would now not part with the caravan, 
but stock it with a select assortment of kitchen 
utensils, and start due north after Bamet Fair. 
As that was fixed for the next month, I had time 
before me, and I agreed with Smithers for the loan 
of his house for £2 per week, covenanting to give 
his old horse two feeds of com per day and treat 
him well. 

** Next morning we started for London, and I 
introduced the giant to Jack Spiggott. He was 
already doing a good trade, and all that he wanted 
was something, as he said, to pull the people in a 
little early. He had a chair built for the giant, 
and all that he had to do was to come in at eight 
o'clock to the Hall of Terpsichore and walk about 
as a stranger. Then you should have seen the tall 
men and short men, tall women and short women, 
measure themselves by him. When he was tired 
he would sit down, and then the notion seemed to 
possess everybody that they must sit near him and 
treat hinu 



102 . OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOJTS. 

" * You'll take a glass of wino/ said one, after 
talking with him. 

" * I shall be very happy/ he would say, bow- 
ing ; for he was a very polite young fellow. 

'* ' What shall it be P* then the young fellows 
would ask ; and of course the giant would answer, 
' Champagne, if you please, gents.' When people 
heard one cork fly, another would soon follow, 
I can tell you ; and, to be sure, if the giant had 
not been a most abstemious fellow he would have 
drunk himself to death. As it was, he took my 
advice, dined plainly but well at six o'clock, ate 
' considerable,' as the Americans say, of rice-pud- 
ding without sugar, and stuck to his champagne. 
When I left him, after three days, in Jack Spig- 
gott's possession, he was as happy as a king." 

" ' What had he been P' asked Felix, interrupting 
Mr. Edgehill. 

" ' There you have it,' said the narrator, smiling. 
** Everybody wanted to know what he was, and how 
he grew so long. As fer as I knew or could learn, 
he was the son of ordinary parents, poor farming 
people in the Isle of Man. He grew and grew and 
grew. He ate them out of house and home, and 
his bright cousin . ^the one with the ferret coun- 
tenance, you may be sure . suddenly proposed to 



THE WINBOW UPON WKEJSL8. 108 

atdlise him by taking him to England for a show. 
Somehow or other the only notion they ever had of 
a show was confined to the small house upon 
wheels; hence the poor giant's miserable con- 
dition at the time of my first acquaintance with 
him. 

'^ He was a most amiable young fellow^ and no 
fool. Everybody liked him, and the presents he 
got were innumerable, some of them very valuable. 
Why people should give watches and chains to 
giants, and dwarfs, and such like, I don't know, 
but they did : we have an example in her Majesty 
the Queen. He had a manner of drawing one to 
him, and it was amusing to see little men, when 
they were talking, first get on a chair, and then on 
a table to reach his ear. 

" It soon got abroad . ^for we did not of course 
condescend so far as to advertise him . ^that a young 
gentleman of fortime, a real giant, used to spend his 
evenings at the Terpsichorean Hall, and from that 
day forward the place was crammed. Jack had 
only to sell good wine, and to take the money, and 
his fortune was made. I need not tell you that 
the honest fellow did both, and at the end of the 
month made the giant a present of a five-poimdnote 
over and above his agreed salary. 



104 OTHER PEOPLE^S WINDOJrS. 

*' Poor fellow, I wish he had stayed there tQl 
now! Unfortunately, some Frenchmen came to 
see him, and after many a long palaver with a 
lawyer and the red-eyed cousin, my young Manx 
giant went over to France, where the living did 
not agree with him. They paid him sixty pounds a 
week . part of which he regularly sent to his parents 
.and provided him with some magnificent dresses. 
Sometimes he was the sapeur of a grenadier regi- 
ment, sometimes a gigantic Mameluke. He made, 
or would have made, a fortune for his cousins, 
and the showmen as well, but, as I told you, the 
French cookery did not agree with him, and he 
died at Orleans ; and bless me,'' said Mr. Edge- 
hill, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, '^ if his 
cousin didn't sell his skeleton to some French 
museum." 

" By Jingo I " cried Carew, " I did not like to 
interrupt you before, but I saw that giant at 
Fontainebleau. They told me that he was a Nor^ 
man, and gave me a long pedigree." 

"Those Frenchmen will say anything," said 
Scumble. "But what about the house upon 
wheels ? To have a month or so in one has been 
the dream of my life." 

" It was wonderfully jolly," said the stout little 



THE WINDOW UPON WHEELS. 105 

gentleman, with a dry cough, as he Kt his pipe, 
"in idea. As you travelled along, the carriage 
creaked and groaned, and the infernal little 
knocker worked like a mad postman. Then the 
advance was not quick enough for me, and 
the fireplace not large enough to cook anything 
larger than an egg and a rasher of bacon. 
Then, too, the walls of my house were not so well 
closed against the wind ; the crannies let in rain 
and damp, and in fact the weather was not so 
fine as it might have been. Add to this, my 
friend and chum who was to have accompanied 
me, disappointed me. In short, the journey did 
not quite come up to my expectations ; but I paid 
Mr. Smithers at the end of the month, meeting 
him just before Barnet Fair, and was as glad to 
get out of his house as he was to get into it. But I 
shall never regret having walked up the steps of 
tjiat queer little hutch, nor shall I ever forget my 
first peep at the young giant's legs behind the 
curtain." 



106 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 



CHAPTER Vn. 



THE HOSPITAL WINDOW. 




RS. FELIX was getting remarkably well 
when our friends were assembled for the 
third or fourth time at Carew's, and de- 
clared that if she could only bring " baby '* with her 
she would delight in hearing the sketches, certain 
remembrances of which Felix brought home to 
her. We notice this lest it should seem that our 
little heroine^ such as she is, should fade quite out 
of the reader's remembrance. Dr. Comer's holiday 
was weU nigh over, and at the " next night ** at 
Carew's he was peremptorily ordered to fiirmsh 
some adventure or sketch, which he did as foUows, 
taking the matter from his own experience, which 
must apologise for any sadness that is in it : . 

" It is a day which does not show London to 
advantage. Mr. Glaisher's ' blue mist,' which to 



TEE HOSPITAL WINDOW. 107 

some now alive may be the shadowy mantle of 
death, may be blue enough in Greenwich Park, 
but at the bottom of Lincoln's Inn Fields, let lis 
say, or down eastward thereaway, the mist which 
steams up from the wet streets is anything but 
blue. Blue and yellow, primitive colours, make 
green ; and the fog and mist being of a dim 
yellow, it might have been expected that a dirty 
variation of green would be the result ; but the 
reverse is the case. A dead blueness does pre* 
dominate; for all about the fcetid courts the 
steam which clips us round, even as the cir- 
cumambient air, which hangs in one's whiskers 
and moustache, and gets down one's throat, 
mAlriTig one feel unpleasantly hot, is of a dull 
slate, running off in very close courts to a yellow 
stone colour. 

'* This is very unpleasant for August. All the 
month we have had cold and exceptionable weather. 
As for the dog-days, they were nought, and shel- 
tered themselves under their name, without giving 
any dog an excuse for running mad with heat. 
In the country, the wet weather produced cold, 
and wise people lit their fires in the evening. In 
London, mud and slush in the streets tried to 
rival the mud of November; and in dull days and 



108 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

morning fogs August might be said to have made 
no bad second to that» month. Streaming um- 
brellas, damp and impleasant omnibuses, persecuted 
or mocked the young clerks, who turned up their 
eyes in a disgusted way at the dark and thickly- 
packed clouds overhead, and spun along the pave- 
ments or dashed along the roads. Almost every- 
body felt ill-tempered, * August is not what it 
used to be, sir ; ' or, * Now look here, Jones, we 
shall have the summer over without having any 
summer at all, sir.' 

" Jones, who is unconscious of having anything 
to do with the weather, replies with a truly British 
grunt. He, too, is troubled : in three more days 
the senior clerk at Blogg and Martin's dry goods 
warehouse will be back from his holidays, and he 
(Jones) will have to start for his. He looks to 
have three wet weeks; he has tapped the wea- 
ther-glass angrily but uselessly. He feels, there- 
fore, that the first speaker who addressed hiTn has 
been needlessly personal, and retorts, testily . 

" * I didn't make the weather, did I P Always 
so in England ever since I have known it. Com- 
mon proverb abroad, you know: "Summer in 
England . three fine days and a thunderstorm." " 
Thus far Jones in jerks« 



TEE E08PITAL WINDOW. 109 

" A meek little man, with a bright open eye. r 
a cheerful dark eye, like that of a Robin . ^here 
looks out of the omnibus door and at the disgusted 
cad, who is hanging on with cold fingers . cold 
fingers in August I . to the iron rail. The little 
man takes a cheerful yiew of things. ' Oh, it's all 
right, I dare say,' he chirrups. ' Providence will 
send us bright days for the harvest. It will all turn 
up right at the end ; this is doubtless for some 
good purpose.' 

" * You're right, sir,' said a solemn-looking gen- 
tlemen, nodding approvingly. ' This is just the 
weather we want ; these sudden rains help us 
wonderfully. Capital weather for London, but 
bad for the country ; bad weather for the crops, 
no doubt, but most merciful, providentially mer- 
ciful, for THE Cholera.' 

"Here the City clerks looked round. Jones, 
not a bad sort of fellow, agreed that there was 
something in that, while Brown, who had read the 
Vestiges of the Creation^ and had a foggy idea that 
everything went on topsey-turvey, and that pine- 
apples grew in hot-houses by a kind of natural 
selection, while weak oak-trees shot out into vines 
with spiral tendrils, and bore grapes instead of 
acorns (after a slight struggle of the species), went 



no OTHER PEOPLtPS WINDOWS. 

to his office to give a oaricatore sketch of the 
queer and dictatorial old party whom he met in 
the omnibus. 

"The clerks got down at the City, but tie 'party' 
went on considerably further. He passed splendid 
warehouses, the rent of a first-floor of which would 
be a modest income for a country rector, while the 
very garrets would have maintained a curate. He 
passed a broad, spacious* street, with mediflBval 
houses in it here and there, and with butchers' 
stalls, looking medieBval too, on each side of it; 
and he only rested for a moment to examine a 
paper when he had arrived at the end of his 
journey. That paper bore statistics- formidable 
enough. We had an enemy amongst us, and this 
enemy had slain in one way 354, and in another, 
and with a similar engine, 1,053, or, total, 1,407 
persons in one week. And this enemy, alas I was 
quartered constantly amongst us, although it was 
only now and then that he stepped out, and, foul 
traitor that he was, committed such slaughter as 
he had done that week.* 

"The object of this gentleman might have been 

* For the week ending August 4tli, 1866, Begistrar- 
Gkneral's return. The first number refers to diairhoea; 
the second to cholera. 



' THE HOSPITAL WINDOW. lir 

be&evolent ; let us hope that it was bo. He has 
peeped into more than one hospital window in his 
life, and this is only part, of course^ of what he 
has seen. 

** The hospital window to which our friend made 
his way, looks out upon a spacious street, and there 
are pleasant sights about it. Trees and flowers 
can be seen through its open doors, and on sunny 
days there^ too, are invalids to be seen, crawling 
about the grounds, poor creatures, and basking in 
the sun upon wooden seats, and feeling that after 
all God has given us no blessing so sweet as 
health, and that in a recovery from a desperate 
sickness only can one truly appreciate his good- 
ness and mercy. Beyond the trees and flowers 
there is a wide display of grass lawn, where sheep 
are browsing, green and refreshing to the eyes, 
and many of the windows of the large building are 
gay with sweet-scented flowers, so that half the 
horrors of sickness and of death . and not a night 
passes but the King of Terrors strikes some one 
down within these walls . are taken away. 

"Tip the spacious stairs, accompanied by a 
guide . one learned in the ways of this hospital, 
and known and respected by all in it . goes our 
visitor, past the hall where sick people are flock* 



112 OTEER PEOPLES WINDOWS. 

ing, and past the porter's room, where, in botties 
and gallipots, poof abject wretches, very meek 
and mild, my brother, as you, indeed, would be, 
if so sorely smitten in the battle of life, take and 
carry away mixtures to * do them good,' as they 
say. If we were to follow them to their homes, 
we might find the causes of the cholera, and might 
wonder, indeed, why death delayed so long to 
strike them, and marvel how it was that the 
hearts of their richer brothers did not open to 
them sooner. 

'^ Three sides of a large quadrangle are dotted 
with such windows as that in which we are now 
looking. The wards of the hospital run north 
and south, and east and west, and it is to the upper 
wards that the visitor proceeds. Everything is 
marvellpusly clean, and even bright and cheerful 
The floors are so white that one might with little 
harm put in practice the suggestion which such 
cleanliness always calls forth, and ' eat one's dinner 
off them.' Nor is the sight seen through the win- 
dows in everything a sad one. Doing their duty 
nobly and quietly, without ostentation or sham, the 
doctors move about noiselessly, and the nurses, 
flit calmly from bed to bed. There is no hurry, 
no distress, no fear. At the end of the ward a 



TSE B08PITAL WINDOW. 113 

voluble Irishwoman weeps over her sick husband, 
who, by the way, is far from being very bad, and 
would like to take a gentle but stalwart nurse out- 
side, and pull her cap for her ; but she not un- 
naturally objects to such a proceeding, and a tall, 
imperial-looking doctor, with a good-humoured 
smile on his face, pushes the Celtic lady out, with 
a promise that she shall 'see her husband to-night, 
all well, thank God !' And so Biddy drops a 
curtsey, ceases her voluble grief, and returns to 
the outer world. 

'' There is serious work going on in the ward 
which you see from this window. Let us bend 
for an instant over this bed. A man in the prime 
of life occupies it; he has matted locks, damp 
brow, hollow eyes, and quick-coming but feeble 
breath. Those eyes so sunken are wide open, 
the pulse has fallen, and the natural heat of 
the body is decayed and spent. A nurse stands 
near him, giving him now and then some beef 
tea; but he hardly heeds anything. His bare 
arms are blue at the elbows, and on the backs of 
his hands are stripes and streaks of a deep blue ; his 
chin, clean shaven, but rigid and ghastly, is thrown 
up in the air ; his deep chest, thin and worn, is 
bared as if he felt extreme heat ; and the doctor 

VOL. n. I 



114 OTHER PEOPLTS WIKDOWB. 

examines a thennoiiieter, which he inaertB between 
his arm and the side nearest his heart. The 
mercury, which had been high in the doctor's 
hands, falls, and the doctor looks grave enough. 
He beckons with his finger to some one, and asks 
whether this patient has M^ids ; if so, let them 
be sent for. He has none; no, not one. In his 
poor lodgings he was found a stranger. When we 
pass this bed again a tall, thick, canvas screen 
has been drawn round it, and inside by the bed is 
kneeling a good lady visitor saying an earnest 
prayer into the listening ear of the poor dying 
man. For worn and wasted as he is, the brain is 
clear, and the eye, fixed though it be, is full of in- 
telligence as the poor fellow watches those who 
stand over him. Nor from him, my brother, is 
God's mercy less far off than if bands of princes 
stood around his bed. We must all face death 
alone ; the end of the battle of life is with each of 
us a single combat. Pray Heaven that you and I 
bear it as bravely as did this poor stranger ! 

" A young boy, a sailor boy, too, getting well, 
with a bright eye and a colour on his cheek, is in 
the next bed, and a stout fellow, groaning and 
sighing lustily, but not very ill, next to him. 
Then an old man, silent, rigid, and stem, and 



THE EOS PIT AL WINDOW. 115 

one or two worn wrecks and waifs of humanity, 
who might be of any age, fill up the next few. 
Here are volunteer nurses chafing their cold and 
rigid patients who are seized with the cramp ; 
there a boy is being wrapped in a blanket to be 
carried to a bath ; and so we pass into another 
ward where poor sick women lie. In this ward 
the fresh beds seem filled with sick children, lying 
two in a bed, one poor little poll poking out at 
one end, and another at the other. There they 
lie, head and foot ; not being long enough, to dis- 
turb each other, and both poor little things being 
too ill to say anything, or do anything but sigh. 
In the next bed, however, one with wild, scared 
eyes sits up and looks quietly aroimd; it has 
pulled through, and will soon be sent to kind 
Mrs. Gladstone's Convalescent Home for Children. 
Another two have crawled out of the head-and- 
tail fashion, and are pretty and clean, sitting on a 
pillow with their hair neatly combed, with rose- 
coloured health in their cheeks and pleasure in 
their bright eyes, admiring an old weather- 
beaten doll, which has served, no doubt, many 
such inmates, and now black in its face from some 
incurable disease of which dolls die, broken-nosed, 
and, with its arms and legs stretched out crucially, 

I Z 



116 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

sprawls on its back and looks up to the ceiling in 
speechless indignation. The doll mighty you see, 
have moyed in high life, and has come down to a 
hospital. Happy doll that finds at last that it can 
be of some service, can plead a raison <VHrey and 
which has given more pleasure during its brief 
existence than one or two fine people whom we 
could name if we were ill-natured enough to do so. 

" Come away from the children. Further on 
in the ward is a powerfiil young woman, such a one 
as would carry her basket of flowers from door to 
door, and trouble my sweet lady or my dainty 
gentleman by pleading that they should buy her 
roses and adorn their houses with them. Alas ! 
she will never carry roses more, nor flowers, save 
those that bloom on paradisiac shores. The strong, 
almost masculine arms, are thrust over the cover- 
let, and are marked with the disease ; the eyes are 
sunken, and the cheeks and tongue are as cold as 
ice. Flowers in a little pitcher stand at the bed- 
head, and a nurse chafes, but uselessly, those list- 
less, blue, and once strong hands. 

" Two or three patients whom we next pass are 
doing well. One will be discharged to-night, and 
thanks God for it ; one or two are still weak, but 
very calm and grateful; and some of them, for 



TBE HOSPITAL WINDOW. 117 

I 

they are but poor creatures, are spelling over cards 
upon which prayers are printed. But here again 
stands an awful screen, and a poor young fellow, 
stupid with grief, lies with his head bent down on 
the form of his dying wife, who will never speak 
to him nor cheer him more. Pass quietly by him 
with his great trial : what to him is the comfort 
we can give P how shall we translate our saddened 
thoughts so as to fill his heart, emptied of joy or 
hope P Leave him to time, and prayer, and sweet 
memories of the dead, and hope renascent from 
his buried faith, and God's great love to comfort 
and console him. 

" But the sights in the hospital . and there are 
many to be seen through such windows that I may 
not tell you of . are not all sad like this. Faith, 
and Love, and Hope are to be found there, too, 
and such lessons as can be taught nowhere else ; 
lessons of belief in human goodness, lessons which 
show you more of the inside, which should be the 
best side^ of a true man's heart, and a true woman's 
heart too, than are to be foimd in half the lesson- 
books elsewhere. And that's what Shakespeare 
meant when he sent one of his flaunting, thought- 
less, witty, but not heartless characters to 

* Jest a twelvemonth in an hospitaL' 



118 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

TnJy, he who tries that lesson will only base his 
jests upon wisdom, nor will his merriment be like 
the sudden and causeless laughter of fools. 

" Sights there are, though, to relieve the heart. 
Is that, for instance, a most beautiful wax doll or a 
live baby-girl, who with a pretty condescension 
is permitting the kind nurse to brush her soft 
brown hair P Oh ! it is aKve ! . see, there its glad 
mother comes, tears 'happing,' as they say in 
Scotland, down her pleasant cheeks, when she finds 
her baby well and ready to come with her. Why, 
what blessings and rejoicings will there be when 
father sees her ! And here, too, bustling along, 
is the matron, an important lady in sUks, who 
is ready to take away a dozen or so to the Con- 
valescent Home, and who assumes an almost comi- 
cal superiority, as ladies in authority . this is 
between ourselves . too often will do, to the good 
doctor who happens to have omitted to write the 
orders for their discharge. But he does so at 
once, and the happy brood are taken away to fresh 
air, and such toys, and delicacies, and scenes as 
they have never seen before. 

'* May joy go with them always ! But behind 
those glass windows, in the dead waste and middle 
of the night, the battle of life will go fiercely on 



THE HOSPITAL WINDOW. 119 

over many a heap of red earth of old Adam's 
texture, and when morning dawns, the ghastly 
king of terrors. Death, whose final victory a 
greater King than he has taken away, will rear 
aloft his lethal banner, and be master of the field.'' 



120 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER VIII. 

A WINDOW BY THE SEASIDE. 

EDS reader of these desultory sketches may 
suppose that some time has elapsed since 
our Mends last met in Carew's rooms^ and 
that Felix, his wife and baby, have grown rela- 
tively older, and, as a matter of course, happier. 
The holiday has passed quietly enough, and Felix 
has, in company with his mentor, passed through 
a good many scenes in this gigantic town, which 
some people delight in calling the vast metropolis, 
and others, the little village. 

At the next meeting of the Society of Sketchers, 
no one was particularly surprised to find an addi- 
tion to the number of auditors and possible 
talkers. This was a young gentleman of " some 
five and twenty simimers/' as the novelists say, 
although why they say "some," and why they 



A WINDOW BY TEE SEASIDE. 121 

leave out the winters, is equally a mystery to the 
writer. He wore spectacles, and was evidently 
short-sighted, perhaps in more senses than one. 
He was not very broad-chested, and, after the 
fashion of our modem young men, he wore very 
tight trousers, which made his feet aad his knees 
look big. He had been to college, and had there- 
at assumed or caught a certain method of speak- 
ing which all young Oxonians have, which 
detracted from an otherwise agreeable voice, the 
sound -of which vibrated on the ear of Felix plea- 
santly enough. 

Our young gentleman, who was habited in the 
fashionable " cutaway'' coat, and who wore a cas- 
cade of satin before his manly breasti had very 
little mauvais honte, and indeed gave his opinions 
aplomb, without mincing matters, and without any 
exceptional deference to his elders. Old Mr. 
Comer looked at him with widely-opened eyes 
when flatly contradicted on a certain point, with 
the slightest possible ^* pardon me'' just indicated, 
and Felix felt that our new acquaintance was 
treading upon dangerous ground when he abso- 
lutely bearded George Carew. To him alone did 
he show any deference, but amongst his set, Mr. 
Stanton . such was his name, with Greville put 



122 OTHER PEOPLE' S WIKDOWS. 

before it by his godfathers and godmothers, on 
purpose to prove how much and how thoroughly 
they fulfilled their asserted intention of abandon- 
ing all the pomps and vanities of this wicked 
world . was looked up to, and he took little trou- 
ble to look up to others. 

Our young friend, who was an engineer in some 
vast concern, which employed a few thousands of 
men, and undertook works which ran away with 
millions of pounds sterling, seemed so thoroughly 
to look at all matters as small by the side of the 
immense works with which he was accustomed to 
deal, that it is no wonder that his behaviour 
in the little circle we have introduced him to 
was somewhat nonchalant. Mr. Scumble, who 
admired his liege lord George Carew, and Felix 
were both amused and somewhat scandalized at 
his conduct. 

" I have heard of your evenings," he said to the 
host, "from my friend Bagsley, who has given me 
a sketch of them; and, in my opinion, you have 
hit upon a very sensible way of spending the time. 
Parties now-a-days are so slow." 

"I quite agree with you," grunted George, 
looking at him askance ; " and I'm sure that we 
are all here much obliged for your approval 



A WINDOW BY THJE SEASIDE. 123 

We want somethiiig like that, you know, to back 
US up in our own opinion." 

Felix and Scumble looked at each other as much 
as tosay, "Ha ! he had him there ; " but Mr. Stanton 
merely lifted up his chin, and looked fixedly at 
Carew through his spectacles. 

Spectacles give a man a strange sort of power, 
and Carew instinctively disliked them. He was 
a great observer of faces, and, as he said, those 
*^gig lamps" prevented him from seeing the 
effect of what he said upon the person to. whom 
he was saying it. He likened them to gig lamps 
because, he said to Scumble, "they bother you so at 
a distance. Scumble ; you fancy them nearer to you 
than they really are, and after your eyes have 
grown thoroughly accustomed to the darkness, you 
are dazzled by a flaring monster dashing past you 
and nearly taking your off- wheel off, whereas if 
the beggar did not put up his lamps you would be 
on the look-out, and the two traps would each keep 
to their own side, and pass each other with a 
cheery, ' Yo ho !' " 

The small sarcasm, as we have said, fell harm- 
less upon Mr. Stanton's spectacles. He looked 
up, and continued his mild speech, probing any- 
body he was talking to as cooUy as a scientific 



124 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINBOWB 

doctor probes a patient, and with as little apparent 
feeling. 

'^ Yes, it is a good thing, because parties are so 
awfully doll, and one cannot always sit at a club, 
nor can one for ever play at billiards ; and then 
the fellows of the present day have quite lost the 
art of talking. I suppose it was quite different 
in your time ?" This he said pointedly to Carew. 

" Hang it, young sir !" said Scumble, brushing 
up his hair with his hand, so as to make it staad 
up in a Brutus-like and defiant shock. ''Hang 
it, George Carew is a young man still, and is not 
your grandfather." 

" Oh, indeed !" returned Stanton, cooUy. 

" "Well, yes it was," said Carew, looking down 
the zealous, the too zealous Cimabue ; " yes, it was 
quite different. I recollect, when I walked roimd 
Hanover Square with Mr. Pitt, the Square was 
then implanted, posts and rails {mde Mr. Timbs's 
Curioaitiea of London), and the late Minister's 
statue, did not adorn it ; I recollect that we dis- 
cussed the character of single-speech Hamilton, 
and we then lamented the gradual falling off in 
conversation. * Now, when Johnson, Burke, and 
that brilliant coterie,' said Pitt to me 

Stanton looked with some surprise at Carew, 



A WINDOW BY TEE SEASIDE. 125 

while the company burst out into an uncon- 
trollable fit of laughter, not so much at the 
story as at George's dry way of relating it. It 
seemed, indeed, as if he were speaking from the 
most positive recollection. 

"A very nice roast," said old Mr. Comer, 
.bowing to George, who had told him in the course 
of the evening that his MS. was accepted, and 
it may be supposed that he was all the more 
ready to support his friend. " A very nice roast, 
indeed! Upon my word, I thought we were 
going to have some interesting history of a 
descendant of the great Pitt." 

" By Jove !" said Mr. Stanton, taking off his 
spectacles, " you did not do that badly. But you 
fellows, who marry early and have tall children, 
and all that sort of thing, do seem so old to us 
bachelors." 

" Ah !" said George, .with a sigh, thinking of 
his too short married life, " if *us bachelors' would 
but be wise, and marry as early as we did, you 
would not trouble yourselves with thinking about 
youth and age, and all that sort of thing. 
Why, when a man lives, let him live. Do 
we look &t the clock every minute when we are 
happy P Do we count the moments when we 



126 OTHER PEOPLTS WTXDOWS. 

azeengaged in an exciting chase, in a battle^ or in 
a noUe action ? Do we pull oat our watch every 
half-hour when we are in loTe, and when we are 
dose to the pretty girl we love, pressing her 
rounded arm cloee to those happy ribs, against 
which our heart is beating as if to get out to fuller 
happiness P' 

*' ' How heedlesB foils the foot of thne. 
That only treads on flowers,' 

chirped Cimabue, getting out of his chair in a 
rapture. 

" By Jove !" drawled Stanton, " I say, that's 
plucky though; a very good speech, almost as 
good as a bit of comedy at the Prince of Wales's 
Theatre." 

But as this part of the night was given over to 
conversation, and Stanton began to know the 
company more, much of his manner wore off, and 
George Carew's whispered determination to make 
the young fellow take part, and the first part, in 
their entertainment was easily brought about. 
Strange to say, Stanton was no snob. He defended 
things which men of his class called vulgar, and 
in an earnest conversation with Mr. Corner, who 
at first deemed him an insufferable puppy, he 



A WINDOW BY TKE SEASIDE. 127 

gave his opinion freely in favour of the middle 
dass, which has lately been treated so thoroughly 
de haiU en bos by the Satinwave Review and other 
wonderful prints which set their clocks by that of 
the great leader. 

" No," said he, " I don't dislike them so much, 
nor do I think them such fools for not following 
the examples of their betters, as they call them- 
selves, and racing half over the continent. I 
have been there, and still would go ; but there 
are charms in English watering-places which far 
transcend the foreign affairs we hear so much 
about from people who are only too delighted to 
show other people that they have been there." 

** Bravo !" said Carew, and the talk, which was 
general, became particular or singular, but not 
eccentric ; ^' and then a fellow does get tired of 
town, and does not know enough of his own 
country, beautiful as it always is." 

" By Jove, yes," returned Stanton. " Tired ! I 
should think so. Champagne in decanters, Hero- 
dotus, in the version of Beloe, Groker's notes 
to Boswell's 'Johnson,' minced veal, and kiss- 
ing one's own sister, have been cited as paral- 
lels of dulness and synonyms for flatness . for 
that languid, slow-pulsed feeling we should 



128 OTHER PEOPLE^S WINLOWS. 

all experience were life without its follies, and 
day followed day, devoted solely to business, 
and shorn of its humours and excitements. To 
men in towns, who live a life of turbid tur- 
moil^ this change is as necessary as it is to 
the gentle homekeeper, to vary his monotonous 
life by visits to the plays, to parties, to the 
Zoological Gardens, the game of croquet, and 
the feast on tea and cake, with City magnates, 
on some alderman's lawn. Such delights, for 
which, on Sundays, as a variation, the High 
Church curate hints at penance^ and the Low 
Church incumbent prophecies a severer punish- 
ment, cannot please for ever, and the lisping 
syllables of partners in the mazy dance, or the 
more dogmatic talk of the young gentlemen who 
drop in to see papa of an evening, and who afifect 
to know either the price of securities or something 
of those wonderful mysteries hinted at by the 
diplomatic Owl, and faintly copied by the Court 
Joumaly hardly serve to make them love town in 
August, or admire the dusty geraniimis of the 
park more than their worthier rivals the rich 
yellows of the ripening fields of com. Even the 
college man, delighted with his first season and 
inflated with a belief that his review article is 



A WINDOW BT TEE SEASIDE. 129 

stirring the world, is ready to get away and leave 
the literary club, the scene of his triumphs, and 
ones out, with Virgil,. 

" ' Bura TTiihi et rigui plaoeant in yallibus amnes 
Elxunina amem sylvasque inglorius ' . 

as an echo to the lines which the tired editor 
exclaims, quoting Pope, who wrote them just one 
hundred and fifty years ago : . 

** * Dear, damned, distracting town, farewell ! 
Thy fools no more I'll tease ; 
This month in peace ye critics dwell, 
Ye authors sleep at ease I' 

and in company with Government clerks, War- 
office employes, rising barristers, well-paid soli* 
citors, fashionable physicians, and indeed all the 
ornamental fringe of the upper middle class of 
society, these fly away to all points of the compass, 
either far or near, at home or abroad. 

** It follows, however, that when a man is getting 
en to fogeydom, and has a wife and daughters, . 
charming companions, but items on a traveller's 
Kst of expensive commodities, . that he, like an old 
bird, does not fly far a-field, but settles nearer 
home. And no wonder." 
. Here it was that George Carew obtrusively 

VOL. II, K 



130 OTEER FJEOFZirS WINBOWa. 

winked at old Mr. Comer, and afterwards laughed 
with that gentleman, at the comic notion which 
seemed to pervade all young readers of the Satin- 
wove Review, that they knew as much of old 
fogey^s feelings as old fogey did himself. But 
Mr. Stanton, with his eye-glasses dreamily fixed 
on the fire, still went on with his discourse, utterly 
impervious to the chaff of George, or the smiles of 
his companion. 

" His daughter may be beautiful,^ but she still 
costs something considerable as a first-class pas- 
senger ; and although his wife is as affectionate as 
she is comely and faithful, the trouble which her 
boxes and packages occasion is added to the ex- 
pense, and increased tenfold if he goes abroad. 
So, like a sensible man, he stays at home, and sees 
more life and gains more health than if he ran 
to and fro upon the earth and went to Jeru- 
salem, or the New Salt Lake City, as quickly 
as some rapid travellers on record have done. 
Cromer, Hunstanton, Whitby, Scarborough, Far- 
mouth, Margate, Ramsgate, Brighton, Hastings, 
and St. Leonards, are the places upon one 
of which, ten to one, the old bird will settle. 
The most distant are always the most dull, and 
are therefore reckoned ^the most fashionable. 



A JFUWOW BY TEE SEASIDE. 131 

There are the Welsh watering-places, the south- 
west coast ; there is Boulogne, or Dieppe, or even 
Heme Bay : . 

it I "ysrixyj -^here can you have been to not to know 
Somewhere where no one ever seems to go ? 
Is it Heme Bay ? No I 'tisn't hem nor his^n.^ 

" But these we will leave out of the record. 
Wherever it be, whatever sand be turned into 
Pactolean gold when trodden by our silver- footed 
nymphs, it matters not. The towns are much the 
same. A high street, leading up from a bay, at 
the side or middle of which is a pier ; side streets 
narrow, inefficient, awkward, and contorted; 
houses small, dark, and fishy ; improvements silly^ 
bad, recent ; inhabitants brown, lazy, and rapa- 
cious ; poor people lounging, good-natured, clothed 
in blue flannel or serge, and with a general, open, 
sea-going character about them. Brave d smi insu, 
whenever there is a life to be saved or cordage 
to be stolen is the male amphibious creature ;, 
jolly and merry, but with an idea that a washer- 
woman at the seaside ought to be paid somewhat 
more than an Anglican bishop or an American 
president . tearful, greedy poor soul, as poverty^ 
losses, and the ever-pressing landlord has made 

K 2 



132 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

her . ^nervous, anxious, over-charging, and, when 
flint meets flint, insolent is the lodging-honse 
keeper ; devil-may-care is the butcher ; and ex- 
ceedingly nonchalant is the hotel-keeper, as well 
as every shopkeeper in the town of Shrimpton- 
super-Mare, which I will take as a type of any of 
these towns. How can it be otherwise P A little 
quiet town, holding, let us say, six thousand in- 
habitants, who live by catching herrings, potting 
shrimps, stealing cordage, and other small games, 
has suddenly poured into it, at the beginning or end 
of the simimer season . for fashion is very curious, 
and no one knows when the exodus will begin . an 
additional thirty thousand inhabitants. It is true 
that speculative builders have run up slight houses 
on purpose to hold some of these ; it is true that the 
butcher and baker have made their arrangements, 
and that the farmers around are aware that their 
markets will be diverted. But Shrimpton cannot 
be otherwise than excited . ^there are so many 
buyers ; lodgiugs and legs of mutton advance ia 
price each day ; the whole town gives itself up to 
bagging the shoal of customers. Shrimpton is 
like an old woman, two of whose hives swarm at 
once ; out sh^ is with her key, her warming-pan, 
her pattens, and her shrill voice, trying to get all 



A WINDOW BY TEE SHASIBR 133 

the bees in. In vain : Shrimpton runs over ; part 
of the bees settle at Herringtown, a little farther 
off; some sleep in bathing-machines, and others 
go back to London and proceed elsewhere. Her- 
ringtown and Shrimpton hate each other mortally. 
They have done so ever since the Conquest. 
Herringtown believes that it is the more aris- 
tocraticy Shrimpton knows that it is the more 
healthy, and each eagerly looks during the season 
to the London papers for remarks prejudicial to 
the other. When Shrimpton bags a sensation 
leader-writer, and urges him to perpetrate a 
libel called, ' Lidecent Bathing at Herringtown,' 
it is in ecstacies of delight; when another who 
has had to pay more for his brown brandy, 
his glass of mahogany-coloured fluid hot, than ' a 
literary man, sir,' likes to pay at Shrimpton, 
assaults that health-resort with a similar charge, 
Herringtown grins all over. It is the same every- 
where, Wavetown and Foamtown, Folkestone and 
Dover, Hastings and St. Leonards, hate each other 
like rival prima-donnas, and each revels in libels 
on her competitor. In the respective local papers 
sensation paragraphs are kept standing, and 
'Measles at Margate,' and ' Rattlesnakes at 
Ramsgate>' are the sort of head-lines that best 



134 OTHER FJEOFZirS WINDOWS^ 

please the editors. Following out the tradition, 
the chiiff-headed chawbacons of the coimtrv round 
have their antagonistic stories ; the Doverers are 
credited by the Folkestoners with being such fools 
that they ' threw a robin over the cliff to break 
its neck/ while the Folkestoners sent up to Go- 
vernment to know what colour they should white- 
wash the church. 

'' But here we are at the seaside, and at Shrimp-^ 
ton ; with a land-breeze sweeping over hill and 
down, with great white chalk-cliffs, and a vast 
expanse of a changeful but peaceful sea, that 
spreads its broad breast to the stars> and tosses 
about like a playful giantess ; not, indeed, curling 
its monstrous head, but letting down its back-hair 
in rippling wavelets, as if happy to wash the 
pretty feet and dimpled toes of the nvmphs and 
chUdren who gaze upon it. lu aU xner^Engknd 
there is no finer air than blows upon that Kentish 
coast. In all England there are few prettier 
sights on a bright morning. and the mornings 
are there ever clear, with flying clouds darkening 
the middle distance of the sea, and the sunshine 
resting on the golden waves beyond . ^to watch 
the bright English girls crowding down to the 
beach to bathe, eager to plunge in the fresh ocean. 



A WINDOW BY TEE SEASIDE 135 

neat and pretty in demi-toilets, merry and aKve 
with excitement, and making the keen fresh air 
vocal with sweet words, and ringing with their 
laughter/' 

Mr. Greville Stanton stopped for a moment to 
rest. He had evidently talked himself out of 
his 8tiffiie88, and clear away from the armour 
of society which he wore, into his natural self. 
So much so had he done this, that he carried his 
hearers entirely with him; and George Carew, 
slapping him on the shoulder, cried out that what 
he said was good. 

" I can fancy," said brave George, leaning back 
in his chair, and half closing his eyes, " I can pic- 
ture the scene. It is before me now : who cannot 
recall it in his own experience P Let us often do 
ao, when we are the denizens of smoky towns, but 
let us do it as cleanly, honest, manly-hearted 
gentlemen, who have sisters of our own ; let us 
picture our English girls as did John Leech, in 
those sketches which were the delight of all art- 
lovers at home and abroad, and in which there is 
npt a wrong thought, nor an impure suggestion. 
But don't let him follow the example of the writers 
of * sensation leaders,' and go with a big opera 
glass, like a Paul Pry or a Jerry Sneak." 



136 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

** If he do so/' said Scumble^ ''he will see but 
little. I know what scenery is, and what effect 
Katore has npon eyen bmtal instincts and low 
natures. The distance^ the open air, the yast- 
ness of the ocean, the magnitude of the wide-spread 
scene in which mankind are but so many specks, 
relatively not so big as a fly in the dome of St 
Paul's, all these must purify eyen the prurient ; 
and the bathing-machines that receiye our young 
ladies do, when drawn dose in line, more or less 
effectually conceal them from view, although they 
are shrouded in a bathing-gown, and soon coTered 
with the friendly waves of the ocean." 

"By Jove!" interrupted Stanton, taking up 
the thread of discourse so determinedly snatched 
from him " I think you artist fellows are right in 
the long-run. StiQ there is a for and against in 
everything, and there is something to be said in 
favour of the sensational leader-writer's view of 
the matter. There are those who, urged by the 
reports of those many correspondents of a pc^uhur 
journal of last year and the year preceding . ^I 
believe it is a regular thing with them, like the 
big gooseberries . there are those, I say, who will 
believe in the possibility of becoming Acteeons 
without enduring the punishment he met with, 



A WINDOW BY THE SEASIDE. 137 

.and hope to yiew Diana in her oeean bath^ sur- 
rounded with nymphs, rosy and beautiful as any 
in the court of the Divine Huntress. These stand 
in the garb of men, in their form and clothes, 
some, indeed, with the insignia of the navy, with 
tarpaiding hats and anchor buttons, and peer and 
pry through the narrow interstices left by the 
bathing-machines, and impudently confront the 
ladies who pass them, with a grin upon their 
simious faces." 

"Nor is that the worst," said Carew; "you 
have pictured the men ; now let me, an old fogey, 
deal with the women. There are other beings, of 
a female form, who go and sit . under the plea of 
waiting for their husbeuids . ^in a too close proxi-^ 
mil J to where the Actseons are themselves bath- 
ing. But let us pardon, or, at least, pass by these 
mole-eyed offenders. Vulgar as some are, we 
have yet, I believe, not arrived at the turn of the 
scale : we have not a superabundance of snobs, and 
delicacy yet lives in English bosoms." 

"Bravo!" said old Corner; "I think we are 
degenerating, but I think with you, sir; I am 
happy to think with you." 

" And so," concluded George, " our rose-red 
English girls, blushing with' exercise, and with 



138 OTHER PEO FLIPS WINDOWS. 

the sweet flower of modesty on their cheeks, 
may bathe in peace, and afterwards breakfast 
with an appetite that would seriously offend 
Lord Byron, who, I am told, loved not to see 
women eat. Then there is the morning lounge 
upon the sands, the walk on the cliff, the luncheon, 
the little tea, the ride before dinner on the well- 
worn hack, which tit-nps and tit-ups as easfly as 
a rocking-horse. Where do you get such or like 
enjoyment abroad I should like to know P After 
dinner there is the moonlit stroll upon the jetty, 
ihe dulcet sounds of the last new waltz borne over 
the waves from the band which is playing on the 
pier ; or if silence intervenes, and is to be enjoyed, 
where is its happy non-existence so fully felt as when 
it is only broken by the murmur of the waves P while 
to some happy nymphs at the seaside there is the 
sweeter joy in the presence of the happier lover/'< 
** Dear, dear,'* murmured George, enjoying the 
picture thus conjured up by Stanton, " I did not 
believe the young feUow had it in him. They do 
not marry nor give in marriage, the men of our 
day. Yes,'' he continued aloud, " there too is the 
happier lover, and to both the silent joy of being 
each by each ; the budding hopes made dearer even 
by fears, and the silent sweet hour which never 



2 WINDOW BY TEE SEASIDE. 139 

dies from memory, but grows dearer stiU with age, 
the hour wherein they together watch the silver 
moon surmount the clouds, and through the pure 
ether the great stars globe themselves in heaven, 
above the bosom of the silent sea. 

** Adieu, oh nymph at the seaside, sleep well 
and dream softly in your little cosy nest, although 
we have peeped through a window ! Morning 
will soon come and put a happy ending to the 
dream^ and when it does, 

" ' Hil feHce di te non vede il Sole.' 

The morning sun wiU not shine on one more blest 
than thee.'* 



140 OTHER PEOPLES WUTDOWS, 



CHAPTER IX. 



THE CLUB WINDOW. 




CONSIDER," said Cimabne Scumble, 
" that we have triumphantly got to the 
seaside and back again, under the con- 
duct of our new ally, and almost without his 
knowing it : I propose that we hereon drink his 
health." 

This was carried, of course, and Mr. Ghreville 
Stanton, kicking his legs under a vain attempt to 
shake his tight trousers down, stood up to speak 
Even then he was at odds with those very skinny 
continuations, a];Ld it was observable that under 
the table he was rubbing one leg against the other, 
like a fly cleaning its fore-legs in that wondrous 
and exhilarating fashion of its own. 

" I am sure," said Stanton, " I am heartily glad 
that I have made my company pleasant; I've 



TEE CLUB WINDOW. 141 

heard a good deal of Uterary and artistic men- 
generally not much to their credit, it must be con- 
fessed . ^but I find them very jolly fellows, I assure 
you/' Then he sat down, and, taking a fine 
meerschaum from his pocket, xmdid the case, and 
proceeded to fill it with George's best birdseye. 

Seeing he could do no better, Carew followed 
his example, first calling on Felix to take up the 
conversation, and to lead the company in search 
of farther adventure. *' 'Tis your turn, I am sure, 
Sraightways,*' said Carew, " and I am anxious to 
learn more about that parson in Lancashire, of 
whom you talked. I pity those poor solitary 
fellows, who are in the church, and yet not of it. 
Does he ever come to townP A cleric of that 
complexion is always anxious about a wider 
sphere ; as if it mattered a pin what a man's 
sphere is, so that he fills it properly.'* 

'* You are quite right there," said Dr. Julius 
Comer. " My dear father-in-law, who is deeply 
read in ^Nonconformist theology, used to quote 
something from Newton which he devoutly wished 
was written on every young man's heart : * If 
two angels were sent down from heaven, one to 
sit upon a throne, and the other to sweep the 
streets, it would not matter to the angels which 



142 OTEER PEOPLE'S WIJVDOJFS. 

was the soyereign and wluch the scavenger ; but 
hoto each performed his duty would matter.' " 

"A strange doctrine for the present time," said 
Stanton ; " I wonder whether that would do as a 
text for a sermon." 

" Capitally," said Scumble, " to be admired and 
forgotten." 

** Oourtenay himself, that was the Parson of 
Shelton Longa, you will recollect," seid Felix, 
with his usual modest blush, a colour at which 
Mr. Stanton stared somewhat, "would have 
preached a capital sermon on it. But he fervently 
desired, of course, to move larger audiences than 
those who entered that small whitewashed church. 
He has since, I find, entered fairly into controversial 
and general literature in London, and I am quite 
astonished at the variety of his subjects and the 
vivacity of his style. He writes upon anything, 
from an aquarium to an armour-plated ship of 
war. I find him equally learned on vestments 
and prize fights, epigrams and hymns by holy 
George Herbert." 

"A miserable thing/' said Carew, "for an 
author to take to. The best way for a man to 
make a name is to fix himself to one subject, and 
to get celebrated for a &pecialite. These general 



THE CLUB WINDOW. 143 

writers are often excellent and admirable scho- 
lars, who manage to gather just what we want 
to know about a subject, and to present it in 
the most captivating way ; but the public reads 
and presently forgets, whereas a fellow with a 
tenth part of their knowledge, who shall set him- 
self to weaye stories, shall make a name which 
will be known all over the world, and a fortune 
and position which the poor general scribe can 
never hope to achieve." 

"And yet one should paint in all styles, and 
educate himself in his art. I should like to have 
seen that book, if it ever existed, of Thackeray's, a 
thick foHo, I am told, of his general articles, bound 
up, and lettered Chaines cPEsclavage ! '' 

" It was not at his sale, and I presume he des- 
troyed it," said Carew. "But how about the 
parson, Felix ? " 

" I took him," answered Felix, " to a club that 
I happen to belong to. It was one of an uncle's 
. a rich uncle's . ^vanities to get me into a fashion- 
able club, and when Courtenay returned my visit, 
I thought I could not do better than take him 
there. I need not tell you that I do not frequent 
it much myself. It is altogether too grand and 
too swell a place for me, and I feel when I 



144 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

enter its huge portals, and look at tlie eminently 
respectable hall-porter who sits there, a perfect 
tjrpe of . of what shall I say ? . ^the British consti- 
tution . of something never to be surpassed, and 
hardly to be equalled . ^I feel that I am playing a 
part. When a footman . I should say waiter 
.comes to help me on with my coat, I humbly 
thank him and retire. 

" My club is in a celebrated street, with one of 
the prettiest and freshest roads out of town at the 
top, and the dullest and dreariest of old palaces at 
the bottom. One cannot pass along it without 
pleasant memories. Here just as you look down 
the street, you may shut your eyes, and fancy that 
you see the great Doctor Swift walking in his silk 
gown to debate with ministers, and to talk of Pope 
and Gay ; to say some strong, honest, very spiteful, 
or very tender thing. What a man that was . 
a man of power . sometimes misused, it may be ; 
but why is he to be always misjudged ? He had, 
perhaps, as we see him rustling along in his 
canonicals . for clergymen of the English Church 
then walked abroad in the manly, decent, and 
graceful Geneva gown . some petition for Gay, or 
a word to say for the poor young Oxford scholar, 
who wrote so well and who died unknown ; or he 



THE CLTfB WINHOW. 145 

carried In his pocket some of those touching, ten- 
der, quaint little letters to Stella . ah how deeply 
tender and sorrowftd in their touches some of 
them are ! . or he had something to urge about the 
subscription to Pope's Homer. Here, too, may 
Addison often have lounged, turning off through 
the park top to Holland House ; and just at the 
top of the street . ^you can see it is St. David's 
day, and the Prince of Wales receives the Ancient 
Britons . that immortal beau was arrested as he 
was about to step out of his chair. As he stepped 
. ^is stepping, I should write . will he not live for 
ever in Hogarth's prints ? I wonder whether 
that fine wig of his, upon which the lamp-trimmer 
is dropping oil, was spoilt or not. I am always 
soUcitous about the wig; and about the poor 
beau, a soft and not bad fellow, horribly scared at 
the bailiff who arrests him, which proves that he 
was young and unused to the folly . ^as senseless a 
habit as can possess any one . of running in debt. 
On the right-hand side, looking towards the 
Palace, stands a house, which, if the misery grown 
therein coidd break down walls and rend beams, 
would long ago have fallen to pieces. It is now a 
West-end dining-rooms ; but therein old Crockford 
held his reign, and there nightly, in the days of 

VOL. II. L 



146 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

the Begency, and long afterwards, the green 
board, the cards and the dice, made fEuster inroads 
into good old fortunes than any possible madness 
could. There it was that Captain Kook brought 
simple Mr. Pigeon, with the fell purpose of pluck- 
ing him ; and there poor Mr. Pigeon was plucked, 
robbed of his estate, of his mother's money, his 
sister's dowry . as much robbed as if he had been 
garotted. But of course in those gay old times 
. I protest a thousand fold that they were not the 
good old times . Captain Rook was deemed a man 
of honour. Did Mr. Pigeon doubt ? If he did, 
coffee for four, and Manton's hair-trigger pistols 
for two, and poor Mr. Pigeon was a shot pigeon, 
and Captain Rook, who never missed his birdnor his 
man, had occasion to retire to Boidogne, and live 
abroad for some time. There was a window in 
old Chalk farm-house, which has long ago dis- 
appeared, out of which I should like to have 
looked with my readers and have seen the strange 
tragedy of foUy. 

" Opposite Crockford's House, which was called 
by a name which the facetious Tom Brown has told 
us is not mentionable to ears polite, is a window 
celebrated for exposing for many years the H. B. 
sketches, which were the genteel followers of the 



THE CLUB WINDOW. 147 

wild GHlray's caricatures, and the mild successors 
of the pepper-and- vinegar cartoons of the elder 
and the younger Gruikshank. The younger, did I 
say P Of a truth, aa a man, the son is now older 
than the father, and has for years left bitter 
sarcasm and turned his pencil to preach moral 
lessons ; and his etchings point to the noble use of 
pricking the consciences of those who love the 
coarse and sordid vices of the world, or indulge 
in the foUy of crime. All honour be to the good 
and brave old man, although he drinks nothing 
stronger than water, and lets his fervid brain run 
up, like a thermometer in the sun, to fever-heat 
when demolishing an anti-TeetotaUer. In that 
window, through the very panes which now give 
light to photographs from Meissouier, one may 
&ncy that Samuel Rogers is peering . an old man, 
with few pleasures of memory about him . an 
old man, feeble, forgetful, even amongst his 
riches, his wonderful prints, his editions de hixey 
his rare pictures, and all the more when in the 
street, sadly resembling the one he painted . 

' An old man wandering as in quest of something, 
Something he could not find, he knew not what !' 

And so, if we live to be so old, my brothers, 

l2 



148 OTHER PEOPLirS wmBows. 

we shall be telling our tales over again with 
no laughter to greet them, dim in our eyes, 
clouded in our minds, to whom the morning 
sun will have no brightness, nor the winds of 
heaven freshness and balm ; better to leave the 
feast of life before the grace is said and the cloth 
withdrawn, if the Master wills it so. 

"And by the side of Sam Rogers there is, 
fresh and vivacious. Sir Robert Peel, with his 
fawn-coloured waistcoat, brim hat and frockcoat ; 
and in the street there dashes past a very smart 
park phaeton, and the one who drives it . an old 
man, if one counted years . is gay and jaunty, 
and has a little twig or flower in his mouth, 
and the cares of the Foreign Office on his mind. 
Such is Lord Palmerston, once so elegant, gay, 
and debonair, that men called him Cupid. As 
he rides along he salutes with respectful admira- 
tion, which all men seem to feel, an old warrior 
wto, with a tight-fitting frockcoat, a military 
frock, with bent shoulders and head thrust for- 
ward, rides on his honoured way up the wide 
street and past the club window. 

" The whole neighbourhood is full of associa- 
tions: Fox and Pitt, Alvanley and Beau Brimi- 
mell, noted wits and dissipated kings, pretty little 



TRE CLUB WINDOW. 149 

Fanny Macartney, dear Kttle Miss Bumey, Sir 
Joshua Reynolds, going to pay court to some great 
lord, and burly Samuel Johnson puffing round the 
comer of King Street into St. James's Square, and 
wondering why people preferred those then fresh 
suburbs to his beloved Fleet Street. 

"Such memories stir our two friends, who stand 
upon the steps of the Constitution Club, the two 
bow windows of which look out upon the street. 
Our restless friend the clergyman, armed with a 
volume of Divinity, has come up to town with his 
guest, leaving Stretton Longa in charge of a neigh- 
bouring clergjnnan, and determined to force his 
way to fame. 

" ' Yes,' he says, as he enters the hall, in which 
a stout military-looking porter in the club uniform 
is seated behind a glass screen, from which he 
adspects the visitors ; * Swift must have often 
passed up and down the street, and the sharp 
face of poor Torick, Lawrence Sterne, must have 
peered into the space which these windows cover.' 

" * Poor man !' answered his friend ; ' a sad, rest- 
less career was his ; he died in Bond Street, hard 
by. This is our dining-room,' he continued, 
showing a long and very handsome room, rather 
darkened with continual gas-light and occupation ; 



150 OTHER PSOPLirS WINDOWS. 

' but strangers dine elsewhere. We do not make 
much proyision for them/ Several gentlemen^ 
seated at small tables^ were breakfasting, though it 
was noon, and handsome footmen, better and more 
featly than the ordinary style of ' Jeamses/ moved 
noiselessly about. ' Ah/ said the clergyman, ' fine 
room ; very nice indeed !' He spoke as if he were 
awed at the British stolidity and cold silence that 
reigned. Passing over the hall, from which a very 
wide and splendid staircase led to the upper part 
of the club, the two friends came into the morning* 
room, a gloomy and vast apartment, lighted by 
those two immense bay windows, into which the 
non-aristocratic portion of London people gaze? 
with envy ; although those who know anything 
about club life are quite content to be outsiders, 

'^ The cleric had come up to be delighted, but it 
must be confessed that he was somewhat chilled ; a 
few old miiitaires, in very stijff stocks, shiny boots, 
waxed moustaches, and new hats, or hats most 
carefully brushed, were talking in the window, 
looking out occasionally and waggling their heads 
or hands ; they were the club gossips. * Ah 1* 
said one, in a voice which proclaimed a love for 
curries and hot dishes . a peculiarly rich and worn 
voice, which, once heard^ one never forgets. 



TKE CLUB WINDOW. 161 

' there's Colonel Fail, Sir Charles; Lucky fellow . 
always drops into something without doing any- 
thing ; now, in my days ' Here he was in- 
terrupt 3d by Sir Colandar Yawn, who nodded to a 
friend, who was hurrying along in a vigorous way. 
*If O'Neil is in such a hurry,' said the young 
o£G[cer, stretching himself, ' why the plague doesn't 
he take a ca . a . ab ?' He stretched himself and 
his last word as he spoke, and Sir Charles Cold- 
stream, looking with a gloomy empty eye upon the 
outside pavement, said . 'Going up to Hertford 
Street, no doubt ; thinks he's a happy fellow ; 
going to marry, eh ! Is very spooney on one of 
the Mitchener girls ; thinks she's a sweet creature : 
he will find there's nothing in it.' * What I com- 
plain of,' cried a veteran with a creaking voice, ' is 
that a man is not allowed to sell out of the army 
and keep his commission too ; he would bag a lot 
of money.' Here all the company turned round 
with an admiring gaze upon the colonel, who 

begged to explain that 

" But why listen to the conversation of the old 
captains of the club? A more gloomy and ill- 
used set of warriors never existed ; but they were 
equalled, not excelled, that they coidd not be, by a 
set of politicians in the next window. These were 



152 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINBOWS. 

gentlemen of various ages, gentlemen certainly in 
look and in manner, who had been in the diplo- 
matic service, or who expected a little place under 
so and so, when somebody else came in. Unhap- 
pily, when he did come in, somebody else forgot 
to bestow the place, ' where it ought to have been 
bestowed, you know,' and our politicians, who 
knew all the moves on the board, and could have 
prevented Fenianism or have made Ireland con- 
tented and Lancashire fully employed, were left 
out in the cold to grumble. 

" The politicians were decidedly shabbier than 
the military men, and wanted a certain neatness 
which the old warriors had. They were more 
restless, and wandered about now and then to the 
papers which were opened on stands, or lay on the 
table. They seemed to regard all writers with 
much contempt, and were afraid that they knew 
the motives and secret springs of every thing ; for 
every why there was a wherefore with these lively 
fellows. * 'Spose the Chancellor has been at Milroy, 
you know, or he never would have written that 
article in the Economist^ you know ;' or, * To my 
certain knowledge, Lady Bokanky sent an invita- 
tion to little Ledgers of the Morning Post; he 
married very well, but is an awful cad himself; 



TEH CLUB WINDOW. 153 

and then out came that Airious leader In favour 
of the Emancipation of the Serfs^ and for changing 
the English standard of miles into that of the 
Russian versts.' In one thing both parties agreed. 
The coimtry, sir, was being ruined ; slowly the 
progress of democracy was ruining this great 
nation.; the Constitution was being undermined ; 
the army was going to the devil . thus plainly they 
spoke. the Civfl Service was given over to cads ; 
the Universities were hotbeds of sedition ; and the 
days of England were numbered. 

" Our friends caught up the gist of this plea- 
sant talk as they moved about the room, so full of 
easy chairs and soft lounges, and so full of dis- 
content too. Here was Mr. Grabber, an inde- 
pendent member, who belonged to no set, with 
the Saturday Review before him, the Spectatar 
and Examiner under his arm, the Quarterly and 
Edinburgh tucked into his chair ; and Blackwood, 
the London News, Frazer, and a miscellaneous 
assortment of papers tightly screwed down by his 
superincumbent fist. There, Lord Dawdle, half 
asleep over the Ghmrdian, and in the comer, 
Mr. Flutter, who constantly disturbed all the rest 
of the members by rattling over the papers, and 
dwelling for no one moment on a paragraph. 



154 OTffER PEOPLJBTS WINDOWS. 

'* * Come upstairs into the drawing-room/ said 
our Mend to the clergyman. * You see we are 
not very friendly. No one knows anybody else 
at our club, just except those two sets. You may 
be as lonely as in the deserts of Sahara ; but this 
is nothing to the Universal Club at WhitehalL 
There clergymen do congregate, and no membw 
speaks to the other on pain of expulsion/ 

" ' Oh !' said the visitor ; ' I thought you wots 
rather jolly.' * Some clubs are, but not the itite ; 
we must pay for our superior advancement. A^ 
the Universal, for instance, billiards are imknown, 
and the smoking-room is in a kind of den, looking 
out on the Thames, like a back kitchen ; but their 
drawing-room, lined with tapestry, is superb. But 
I don't like the club ; no one ever speaks there in 
a tone louder than a whisper.* 

** * Ahl* returned his guest, 'and this roomf 
' Is the smoking-room ; you can smell it. Th&t is 
the cause of the double doors which, at either end d 
the passage, keep the room from contaminating 
the other part of the house. You see how com- 
fortable these spring seats are; here^ too, are 
sofas that you can lie on and kick up your 
heels ; whereas, in our drawing-room, you must 
be as stiff and as proper as if you were at Lady 



THE CLUB WINDOW. 155 

Jusanem's. Let us now go downstairs to the 
library. 

** And so onwards into a fine room they went^ 
the very doors of which^ when shut, presented the 
backs of books. Quiet reigned perpetually there ; 
but the room seemed little frequented^ and the 
books dusty and imfingered, except one or two 
Tolumes of reference^ and a Blue Book or so^ at 
which our politicians now and then laboured. 
Afterwards our yisitors passed into card-room 
number one^ card-room number two, and so on, 
cheerful, quiet places, with the tables set and 
Candles ready for the rubber ; then they descended 
to one of the yisitors' rooms, and had some luncheon, 
promising to come back and yisit the kitchen in 
an hour or so. 'I must send a note to our cook/ 
said the member ; ' for he is a gentleman who liyes 
in the suburbs and drives into town every day ; 
and, as he enjoys a much larger income than I 
do, he is too great a man to be visited without 
notice.' 

" * TJmph I Capital sherry this,* said the 
clergyman. Whereupon the member went into 
a long disquisition on club wines, and proved iu- 
contestably that the steward was the best judge of 
wine and the best buyer in the world. As every 



156 OTHER PJS0PLIP8 WINDOWS. 

club-steward has, or should have, the same reputa- 
tion, we will not disturb that of this one. 

"'And have you no friends here?' asked the 
clergyman, looking at the strangers' bare little 
room, and contrasting it with the comfort and 
magnificence of the rest of the house, 

" ' Oh, none. You see fellows don't know other 
fellows in clubs, except some few. Some men 
everybody is proud to know; other men go on 
alone. Club Ufe is very, very lonely.' He said 
this with a sigh. 

" * Almost as lonely as my parsonage ?' 

" * More so ; for you have a wife.' 

" ' And yet, the people who marched past on 
the Reform Demonstration looked up with envy 
on your palaces, and may be with hatred on the 
members who looked out at them.' 

" ' My dear sir,' said the guest, ' that was the 
effect of ignorance on their part. I know for a 
fact that those old warriors were envying the 
healthy workmen, so full of pluck and energy. 
Our clubs maintain some hundreds of people in 
service and in the kitchen ; they have the best of 
it. We pay thirty guineas entrance, and a dozen 
pounds a year . some more, some less . ^for the 
privilege of entering a big house once a week and 



TEE CLUB WINDOW. 157 

readmg the papers. That is all. Tis true you 
can play at billiards by paying the marker, or dine 
a little more cheaply than at an hotel, and be 
attended by your club footmen. Beyond that, if 
you are a busy man, who has a home and a wife, 
you get nothing. For an old broken-down single 
fellow, soldier, or else one . ^let us say from a 
distant colony . ^who has no friends, a club aflfords 
a daily shelter, and gives him something to grumble 
at^ He sleeps in Bury Street or King Street, in 
an attic, perhaps, and crawls in and out to his 
club. He scolds the pages and waiters, eats his 
chop, grimibles with a particular friend, if he 
have one, and abuses the army, navy, or civil 
service.' 

" 'And this is club-life !' said Mr. Courtenay. 

" * The ordinary side of it at least.' 

" * Where are the jolly, merry, witty literary 
dubs gone to ?' asked the parson. 

"'Ah!* returned his friend, 'we must peep 
into another window to see them.' 

" 'There are two or three that I know of, to 
whom some friends of mine belong, which I believe 
are jolly places enough ; whereat the smaller stars 
of the literary world sit, but do not set, for they 
sparkle as brilliantly as ever. There you find wit. 



158 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

companionsliip, fuiii and friendship ; although^ to 
be sure^ when these warriors of the pen have 
donned their uniform of foolscap, they charge each 
other with undoubted vigour, and cut, slash, and 
slay the very people whom they have belauded and 
drank with the night before/ 

" * And quite right too,* said George Carew, 
gruffly ; * the Muse admits no rivals to her charms. 
We must serve her without reference to others. 
Plato is my friend, but Truth is my sister. Al- 
though, by the way, I confess that I don't like ta 
recognise the bold Roman hand of a friend in the 
trouncing that I get. But now I think it is 
Cimabue's turn to tell us a story. He picks up 
many of his properties at a pawnbroker's ; let us 
peep into one of their windows." 

Thus adjured, Mr. Scumble related that which 
will be found in the next chapter. 



TSE PAWNBROKERS WINDOW. 169 




CHAPTER X. 

THE pawnbroker's WINDOW. 

one might have seen/' said the artist, 
laying down his pipe and taking a pre- 
paratory sip of some weak gin-and-water, 
"in that wonderfiil literary organ, the Paton* 
brokers* Oazette, an advertisement . ^in large type, 
very wide and waddling, and pressed half through 
the paper, as if the machine had determined to 
make it go far enough . an advertisement to the 
eflFect that a * yoimg man' was required to * dress' 
me. 

"Some windows into which the reader may 
have looked, or will have yet to peep, are quite 
undressed : bare and grim, even unto tears, is the 
Workhouse window ; ofttimes not less so is the 
Cottage window; and lonely and dull, with its 
naked bars, is the Prison window. These are but 



160 OTHER PEOPLE'S WIKDOWS. 

dull eyes of houses, out of which the light of life 
has long gone, &ded, evoMt . * Y Vanished was the 
sight, he wist not where' . gone with the joys of 
last summer, and even the cold, frosty glories of 
our Christmas-tide. But other windows are 
dressed gaily, it may be, with flowers outside, and 
rare and rich hangings within ; nay, ofttimes, in 
the West-end, with cimningly-disposed yellow 
panes of glass, so that one always has a yellow, 
mellow light . b, sunset glory in the room . ^just as 
the tomb of Sir Nicholas Bourgeois, at Dulwich, 
has above it this simulated sunshine, which sheds 
down a soft and theatrical glory upon the dead 
knight's tomb ; and there he and his lady lie, 
under an artificial and artistic colouring, with a 
perpetual and unreal sunshine upon their coffins, 
and the eternally young pictures and images of 
men and scenes, long passed away, around them 
in that quiet picture gallery. 

"No such 'dressing' has the Pawnbroker's 
window. The person who does this . an active 
young fellow, in a black, shiny apron, new tweed 
trousers, dreadful in their cut, and evidently the 
production of slop work, and short Wellington 
boots . is an artist in his own way. I don't know 
whether he be so in any one else's way ; I am in- 



THE PAWNBROKER 8 WINDOW. 161 

olined to think not. But he has an eye to setting 
me out . ^to making me, the window, a perfect 
trap, to catch the wandering gaze of those who 
pass me by . ^to ask them, as plaintively, entic* 
ingly, and as plainly as a dimib thing can speak, 
to walk into my parlour, and to therein deposit, on 
a mahogany counter kept for the purpose, sundry 
coins, in exchange for various articles which are 
supposed to comprise the necessities or fineries of 
Hfe. 

'^ This young man, who understands the art of 
dressing a Pawnbroker's window, is a young fel- 
low of infinite knowledge. He has not graduated 
at Cambridge, nor has he even matriculated at 
King's College, or at Durham, or St. Bee's. He 
is not a dab at himianities, and would be hard 
put to it to go through his ' mods ;' but he knows 
a thing or two. He can tell you, who may be an 
artist, the price of a second-hand model, or of a 
well-coloured meerschaimi pipe^ and Mr. Jones, of 
Fig-tree Court, Temple, the exact value of his 
stufP gown and his wig. Mr. Banns, the curate, 
had a silver coffee-pot presented to him, with a 
purse of (five) sovereigns, and an altar-book ; the 
young man will value them all ; he will weigh 
the pot, examine the hall-mark, calcidate the 

VOL. II. M 



162 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

amount of silver, charge for the make^ and put it 
*all at per ounce/ Even the purse, emptied of 
the sovereims, he will assay ; or the book . ^weD, 
of that, ' Z. anon,' as they say in the legitunate 

drama. Just as he is depositing, on my right side, 
a pair of one^s grandmother^s long drop, coral ear- 
rings . which he tickets, and with complete truth, 
such is the whirligig of time . * Very select, the 
newest fashion' . a carpenter enters his shop with 
a basket of tools on his back. 

" From the gouge to the plane, the biggest saw 
to the smallest gimlet, our young man will tell 
you the value of these implements of labour ; he 
will even look at them with the eye of one who 
could use them if he liked, only he does not like ; 
and tell whether they are made by Buck, or merely 
Sheffield imitations. So he can pronoimce on a 
piano by Broadwood . save that he seldom sees 
one ; or, at a glance too, on one of those outside in- 
struments, which are made on purpose for widow 
ladies to dispose of by advertisement. As for your 
watches, chains, and brooches, of course the young 
man knows all about them. Whether that suc- 
cessor of your grandfather's turnip which ticks 
in your pocket be by Arnold or Dent, Foster, 
Frodsham, Eoskell, BadoUet, Bertie, Dubois, 



TEE PAWNBROKER a WINDOW. 168 

French, or Benson, the young man can inform 
you ; from a kitchen clock to a ship's chronometer, 
he will not be far wrong as to approximate yalue, 
and the worth of the maker's name in the market. 
His description of these things is graphic and 
amusing. He tickets one as ^A superior lady's 
gold lever watch ;' and he adds, in red characters, 
' Going fusee ;' while at the bottom of the card, 
in stumpy letters, firm as a rock is the word . 
WARRA19TED. Why SO, how, for what, is a mystery 
not explained by the man who dresses me up. 
But it is a comfort to know that I am warranted ; 
and also to hear that the ' Blue gentleman's 
Spanish cloak,' which hangs in the doorway, is by 
Poole ; and that the ' Silver-fitted gentleman's 
dressing-case' is by Mechi. 

" If we pass to other valuables, a profusion of 
which my yoimg man decks me out with, he is 
equally at home. He puts down in my very centre 
a red velvet porcupine, stuck over with innumer- 
able scarf-pins. There you have the plain onyx, 
the flashing diamond^ the emerald, opal, topaz, 
ruby, sapphire, turquoise, or carbuncle. Car- 
buncles glowing Uke the eye of a wild animal^ 
flashing red blots of light in the morning sun, are 
the favourites^ not only of the pawnbroker, but of 

M 2 



164 OTEER PUOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

the public. They are yery cheap, and make a 
grand show for the money. But our yoimg man, 
turning his keen eye on one side^ and then run- 
ning out into the street to see how matters look, 
goes on scattering his. yaluables and his trinkets 
in the most advantageous way over my broad 
space. Here you have waiters, tea and coffee ser- 
vices, cups, mugs, tankards, tea-caddies, mustard- 
pots, and cruet-frames ; spoons, forks, and ladles, 
pimch-ladles for jolly old boys, and pap-boats for 
the jolly young ones. Indicative of what we may 
all come to, is a vellum-boimd marriage-service, 
resting cosily in a pap-boat, and the cunning 
yoimg fellow has ticketed the book, ' Chaste and 
delicate present.' Not far from this vision of 
holiness and purity is a Heathen Deity, no less 
than Cupid himself, who is wheeling a little 
barrow which the * young man * has filled full of 
wedding-rings. 

" Ah me ! if you were to stay looking at that 
window, looking it through and through for an 
hour, you could not picture to yourselves the 
various scenes those wedding-rings will go through 
.how some are made to circle hands which shower 
blessings, some others which are clenched in the 
fierce agony which calls down a curse. There are 



TEE PAWNBROKER S WINDOW. 165 

two objects which always make me meditative and 
sad wheneyer I pass them^ or I should say when- 
ever I pass one of them, or the other passes me, 
and they are a train of schoolgirls and a trayful 
of wedding-rings. Ah I young ladies, young 
ladies, one had need bring you up with chastened 
hearts and disciplined minds. What a wide sweep 
of fate may yours be I Bom in a kitchen of a 
cottage, or in the tent of a soldier, you may aspire 
to a throne by the magic aid of this golden circle, 
or by its terrible agency you . reared in happiness 
and innocence, lapped in luxury, and dandled in 
the arms of fortune ; you, upon whom a pious 
fiither's eyes have shed the light of blessing, and 
for whom a mother's lips haye daily and nightly 
put up fondest prayers . ^may be plunged and 
dragged in the yery kennel itself/' 

It may not be out of place to chronicle the 
behaviour of Carew, who, while listening atten- 
tively, gave his friend an applausive " hear, hear ! '' 
which, so diflferently we interpret matters, Mr. 
Greville Stanton thought derisive. 

'^ I declare,'' continued the artist, not noticing 
the interruption, '' that my young man is just pull- 
ing out a dandy lot of vinaigrettes, scent-bottles, 
opera-glasses, and pearl and filagree card-cases. 



166 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

Here is a mounted meerschaum pipe ; there are afew 
sets of brilliant studs, and a dozen pairs of sleeye^ 
links ; a gold Masonic order^ and behind it a white 
kid apron trimmed with blue. Plenty of life in 
the window, plenty of life. There is a notice here 
that our friend has a few dozen of fine brown 
East India sherry to dispose of, some harps^ 
violins, concertinas, bronzes, surgical instruments, 
and a costly electrical apparatus. He can let you 
see, if you choose, a gallery of fine paintings by 
his favourite masters ; for our universal student 
has his favourites . Cuyp, Wouvermans, Bysdael, 
Yemet, Moreland, Eeynolds, Gainsborough, and 
Armfield. Mr. Armfield's celebrated, eager-eyed 
sporting 'terrier^. which, coupled with his own 
brother of a different colour, is nearly strangling 
himself roimd a post in search of a rat . ^tail visible 
in the distance, rat escaping through a hole . ^is 
well known to the public. Then we have now 
and then, in West-end windows, a Watteau, a 
Schalchan, a Peter Neefs, and especially the great 
moonlight scenes of Petter. Nor alone with such 
appendages and decorations of life is my window 
dressed. Behind the Cupid, to the right, hangs 
a bundle of second-hand mourning-rings of aU 
periods and patterns. Death jostles life. Some 



TEE PAWNBROKEie 8 WINDOW. 167 

fast young man has deposited a gold pin of a 
death's head and cross bones. Not fast enough, 
poor soul, to escape the pawnbrokers, as, indeed, 
sinoe the middle of the fifteenth century, when 
the good Bishop of Winchester, to relieve the 
poor, first established the system of taking pledges, 
few &st young men have been able to do. But 
there are other signs of death : there is the picture 
of the bride, sold, surely, when both she and the 
loTe she held was gone and dead; and there, in a 
golden lock|^ is a baby's face, soft, radiant, and 
laughing, and at the back of this locket is a little 
ring of soft golden hair^ hair with life and sun- 
shine on it stilL Inside this is engraved, ^ Darling 
Oharlie/ There is so fresh a look about this 
imwenir^ that the love which it commemorates 
shouM be fresh too. How came it here ? 

** Are we so soon forgotten, then, when we die ? 
Does even a mother's heart grow cold and obli- 
vious P Hopefully, we must answer, No. In my 
window there is seen more of tragedy than 
comedy. It must have been death, death of want, 
or death of life, that made the mother part from 
this dear pledge. 

** I don't think it worth while to lead my lis- 
teners up stairs to the top warehouse of the Pawn- 



168 OTEJER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

broker, the garrets of his house being crammed 
with pledges, deposited with extreme order and 
regularity, and in the smallest space. Commend 
me to one of these gentlemen for his art and 
ability in packing and wrapping up. No one can 
come near him for that art. See how he snatches 
away that sleazy shawl, so full of wrinkles and 
folds that it would require an almost magical art 
to get it smooth. Our friend does it at once. 
dashes in a pair of stays, and another pair of old 
dancing-pumps, and rolls up the b^dle in the 
most compact form possible; and, taking a pin 
from a hundred or so stuck on the lapeL of his 
coat, he fastens the bundle, and throws it into a 
square and vast basket, whence it is carried up 
stairs. 

** The receptacle I spoke of communicates with a 
simple piece of machinery, by which a miserable 
prisoner in the frowsy upper regions, smelling of 
confined clothes, sends down to the shop the 
redeemed pledges. Hence the jGaLso saying that 
one's goods are * up the spout,' when, in fact, they 
only come down it* The yoim.g gentlemen con- 
demned by fate to this horrid, but money-making 
trade, sit for several months or years, in the 
beginning of their probation, in the upper regions, 



THE FAWITBROKER S WINDOW. 16d 

waiting for their companions below to send up the 
ticket which is to be matched with its fellow ere 
the pledge is redeemed. the miserable young 
wretches who are obliged to sit with their feet 
upon chairs, on accomit of the huge fleas which 
inhabit that place/' 

^'Kot bigger than the 'Museum flea/'' said 
George Carew. ** Beg pardon, I'm sure, for the 
interruption. The generous organiser of the 
grand rule, the 'Selection of Species,' has so 
arranged that the warmth of the warm air-pipes 
the congenial atmosphere created by many readers, 
and the proximity of so many learned folios, shall 
produce a huge flea, an Anak amongst the genua 
Pulex, which may sometimes be seen by students, 
gentiy resting on the pink blotting-pads, so 
generously provided by Goyemment. But go on." 

" No, thank you," said Cimabue ; " I have done 
what I can do. I am not generally an habituS of 
the pawn-shop, though I confess to haying picked 
up some admirable property there." 

" Property P" asked Mr. Stanton. « What a 
peculiar way to use the word. What do you mean 
by property P" 

, ''I use it," said Scumble, ''as actors use it, 
meaning 'props'. old shawls, ribbons, dresses. 



170 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINLOTTS. 

coetumes, anything that will Jook picturesque on 
the stage^ or in a picture. I haye finished my 
sketch, but am willing to proyide a substitute. 
Here is my Mend the traveller^ ready to relate 
something of his adventures.'* 

" * My friend the traveller/ was a delicate^looking 
man, of about forty-five years of age^ and about 
five feet seven inches in height. He was compact 
and well made, save that his hands and feet were^ 
to say the least of it, of full size. He wore some 
admirable studs of oriental onyx, had an antique 
ring on his finger, of great value. Hisbootswere 
9iade of Russian leather ; his coat was evidently 
cut in Paris ; that is to say, it was neither so well 
cut nor so well finished as if made at Poole's^ or 
at any of our first-rate English tailors. His eyes, 
of the softest brown, to match with his whiskers; 
and beard^ wore a peculiarly sad and worn ex* 
pression. Some said he had been crossed in lovoi 
and thus with one stone accoimted for the sad look 
and the life of determined bachelorhood that he led* 
The truth is, Mr. Staypelton was a traveller pur 
mng. He was always for roving; he never stayed 
long in one place, but always, it must in justice 
\^ said, foimd his way back to England, after 
rovings of different durations. 



TBS FAWNBR0KEX8 WINDOW. 171 

" My artistic friend," said he, with a polite bow, 
and a somewhat foreign accent, '^ has explained to 
me how your little conversaziones or stances are car- 
ried on ; but truly I don't know how to aid you. 
Of course I know many stories. My trouble is, in 
£EUst, an emharras de richesses; but I can't teU them 
well. I am of a taciturn nature, and notably a 
good listener. I am a fldneur. I want other people 
to amuse me. I^evertheless, I must obey the rule 
of this society ; and I shall do it, gentlemen, in 
the way which is most easy to myself. Baison de 
pkts^ I heard a capital story, and met with a 
strange adventure, just as I came home. A gen- 
tleman told it me in a second-class carriage ; for 
abroad, only fools, princes, and Englishmen trayel 
first-class. Let me, then, throw it into form, and 
give it with the air of a true raconteur ^ so far as I 
know how to imitate it ; and I will call the story, 
since I there heard it, The Second-Class Window. 
. Having each of us disposed himself to listen, 
the traveller began as follows. 



172 . OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER XI. 

THE SECOND-CLASS WINDOW. 

|HE trains which had proceeded a few 
thousands of yards from Mayence, on 
our way to Strasbourg, all of a sudden 
stopped short. The passengers craned their 
necks out of the carriages to see what was the 
matter, but, as a thick darkness lay all along the 
line, they did so to no purpose. 

** * Peste I* said a fat Frenchman, ' how goes it 
with us now P are we to be suspected and stopped V 

"A German student, who had probably dis- 
tinguished himself in a way which was not very 
creditable to his small country, looked round in 
alarm, and fancied that he saw one of the armed 
police of Mayence ready to pounce upon him. 
One or two ladies were very much alarmed, and 
were for getting out ; but three Englishmen, with 



TEE SHCOND'CZASS WINDOW. 178 

the cool poUteness of their race^ assured them that 
there was a great deal more danger on the line 
than in the carriages, and made them understand 
that foreign trains did not run so fast as English 
ones, and that, therefore, there was little danger/' 
** ' But shall we not get hurt P' cried one of the 
ladies . a travelling nun, in a black gown, huge 
cross, and a white cap. 

''Here I interposed, and begged to explain. 
' I will not,' said I, ' guarantee that we shall 
not get hurt ; but the fact is, that on an English 
railway, when a passenger-train is run into by an 
express, it is smashed to bits, and all that the 
company has to do is to pick up the pieces of 
the unfortunate passengers and pay damages to 
the survivors. Now, in this case,' I continued, 
'I do not think that we shall be broken to 
bits. We shall be violently bumped . ^to death, 
perhaps; certainly broken, but not disjointed. 
Our friends, par exempUy to a French priest^ 
who had his eyes cast down on his Missal, ' would 
easily recognise us I' 

" I shocked the nun. 

^* * -4A, frisson P said she, between her teeth, 
'what an unpleasant pleasantry this rude Eng- 
lishman has.' 



174 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

9 

" ' Alle righte P said the Gterman-French guard, 
passing rapidly from carriage to carriage by the 
foot rail ; he had been absent only a few moments, 
and now came to reassure his charge. 

'^ ' Stay !' cried the ladies ; ' what is this terrible 
suspense P' 

"'Alle righte!' said the guard, with a most 
polite grin ; ' the rails are not quite safe a few 
miles lower down, and they have telegraphed us 
to stay whilst they are being repaired;' and 
away went the guard, in the good Ciontinental 
fashion, to assure others that they were in no 
danger. 

" Everybody breathed more freely. The priest 
read more continuously from his ' Offices ;' the 
nims looked more happy ; the German student 
was no longer restless, and even we phlegmatic 
Englishmen settled ourselves more comfortably 
in our seats. Presently there were fumes of 
tobacco perceptible in the railway carriage, and 
the tall, thin man opposite me, who spoke French, 
German, and English with equal precision and 
ease, lifted his hat, and obtained permission to 
smoke his cigar. 

"Very soon it glowed in the darkness with 
a melancholy, phosphorescent look, lighting up 



TEE SECOND-CLASS WINDOW. 175 

a little circle round the melancholy mouth and 
grizzled moustache, as he drew in the smoke. 

'^'A bad time at Baden/ I remarked, ten 
tatively. 

" ' Is it V was the dry response. ' I never play 
myself, and I don't care to hear about gamblers.' 

" * Perhaps you are right,' I answered ; ' only 
very few who travel to Baden think so . our two 
Mends, for instance ;' and I threw back my thumb 
as I said this, pointing over my left shoulder to 
two young Parisian gentlemen, who were in the 
next compartment . for the carriage was a second- 
class one . enjoying a snug game at cards. 

'' The tall, grizzled stranger took his glowing 
cigar out of lis mouth and prepared to speak. 

" * I dare say,' he said, * that we shall be here 
for half-an-hour at least ; and as I tell my story to 
at least two persons . if they choose to listen . ^in 
every calendar month, I may as well tell it to 
you.' 

" * I shall be delighted,' I replied, eagerly ; * I 
thought your remarks very interesting while at 
the table-d'hdte at Mayence. I shall be delighted 
to improve the acquaintance. Moreover, you can 
speak here very safely ; there are not many who 
understand our rough island tongue.' 



176 . OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

''The priest looked np with a knowing snnle, 
but said nothing, and, dropping his eyes on his 
book, he continued his reading, apparently keep- 
ing his eyes and ears both busy. 

" * Our tongue !' said the melancholy stranger, 
with an inflection on the possessive pronoun : ' I 
am not an Englishman ; I am a native of good 
old Kiew ; a Eussian bom and bred ; a Russian in 
love, in hope, and in heart/ 

'' He spoke this so slowly, that he did not re- 
move the glowing cigar £rom his lips, but moved 
them gently up and down. 

"Tve often heard Russians speak English,' 
said I, ' but never one so well as you. I should 
have thought your Kiew was our good old Surrey 
KeWy without your explanation ; but don't let me 
mterrupt you.' 

'' The Russian settled himself in the seat of his 
carriage, drew his soft gloves from his pale hands, 
on the right little finger of which sparkled a dia- 
mond of great value, which threw out strange, 
steely, bluish, rays, and began to speak as fol- 
lows : . 

" ' I was brought up at the University in my 
native town . I need not say to the military life; 
we always embrace that, nom autres, and we like it : 



TRE SJECOJND'CZASS WINDOW. 177 

it suits us, and Holy Russia as well. It is so long 
ago since I was at college, that I almost forget the 
strict rules, and bad food, and the constant drill 
which we military students had. There were 
many others to be brought up for a priest's life 
. ^theological students . ^but we took little heed 
of those poor fellows, who had neither money nor 
spirit enough to enter the only profession in Russia, 
that of arms.' 

*^ The reverend gentleman next to him gave a 
sUght cough. 

" * Amongst those fellows, however, with whom 
few of us cared to associate, was one who gained a 
complete mastery over me by his gentleness and 

his cleverness. His name was Alexis , his 

9g^9 ^ y^i* younger than mine; his form com- 
manding ; his face beautiful ; his birth low. The 
son of a peasant serf, he could not enter the army 
as an officer: he would not do so in the ranks ; so 
he determined, he said, to enter that large army . 
a few brigades, aud of the worst sort of which are 
quartered in Russia . ^underthe name of the Greek 
Church. 

" * Alexis was too clever for a Pope, or Papa, as 
we call all our priests. He leamt everything ; he 
used to join a few of us, whom he kept alive by his 

VOL. n. K 



178 OTEER PEOPLE'S WUSDOWB. 

wit, in our rooms, go throagh the drill, laugli at 
our awkwardness, pore oyer our books of infantry, 
artillery, or fortification practice, and so loved 
them, in fact, that I believe some of the old books 
that were missed would have been found in his 
box if we had searched it. At any rate he made 
himself master of the knowledge that was in 
them/ 

" ' What could he do that for ?' asked the priest, 
interested in the fate of his Greek brother, and be- 
traying his knowledge of the English, tongue. 

** ' Another listener !' said the Russian ; * all 
the better ; three would be better still. Reverend 
sir,' he continued, raising his hat with respect, 
^ listen, and you shall hear. 

" * Amongst other matters that he was master 
of, this Alexis' . the narrator continued, softly 
puffing the smoke from his lips at short intervals, 
so that his cigar kept up a soft glow . * was that 
of cards. Peste 1 they seemed as if they knew him ; 
it was a pleasure to see him shuffle, deal, and cut ; 
he could do almost anything with the pack^ ex- 
cept that which was dishonourable. No man 
brought cleaner hands to the table, and when he 
played for money, which he seldom did, he went 
away more often a loser than a winner. When 



THE SECOND-CLASS WINDOW. 179 

he played for love, lie used to astonish us. Crib- 
bage, Piequet, Lansquenet, OmbrOy or Whist, it 
Mras aU one to him. He played a scientific game, 
too, and was most fond of Whist, because, he said, 
it taught you more than any other game. 

" * It taught you hopCy^ he said ; * when you 
had a bad hand you had merely to hope and play 
well ; the next deal would be better. 

" *It taught you charity, because you felt for 
those who, with a weak hand, struggled against a 
strong one, and you saw that weakness or strength 
was dealt equally around. 

" *It taught joufaithy because, bad as the luck 
might be, it constantly veered and turned, and 
although you might lose one game, you could win 
another.' 

« ' He was a good man, that young priest,' said 
the reverend father, who was listening attentively, 
^ for he put a bad thing to a good use.' 

" * Ah V continued the Russian, * he taught me 
Whist, and I became enamoured of the game. He 
taught me Chess, too, and we often played toge- 
ther, and he would then talk to me of the art of 
war, and show me how the two bodies of red and 
white ivory were like armies. But we more jfre- 
quently played our old game at cards, and got so 

n2 



180 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

perfect in it, tliat no other two could beat us. I 
loved the game as he did. 

" * Well, time rolled on, and I left, and waa 
drafted into the army; I was sent to the Caucasus, 
and fought SchamvL Sometimes we were beaten 
by those wild mountaineers, sometimes we beat 
theoL Beaten or beating, we still held on. A. 
Russian bear sticks to his prey like an English 
bull-dog.* 

" What could I do but bow with a grave smile 
to the compliment P 

"'Well, after a time . after years, indeed . I 
gained my rank as others had gained theirs. I 
got my regiment, and I came out of my accursed 
expatriation to the Caucasus; I travelled to St 
Petersburg and joined the Imperial guard there, 
and lived jollily enough. I was not rich^ but I 
found that I could, fairly, now and then pick up 
some money at the card-table ftom officers richer 
than myself, and could always do this honestly . 
thanks to the lessons of Alexis. No one for a 
moment, even in thought, impugned Colonel 
Alexandre Petrovitch, and yet few came off more 
regularly winners than he.* 

" ' You will understand that he speaks of him- 
self/ said the scholarly priest, turning to me as if 



THE SJECONB-CLASS WIKDOW. 181 

he were helping one of duller wit . a habit, per- 
hapSy he had contracted from catechising and 
teaching others. 

" * Well/ continued the colonel, * I went upon 
some special mission southward, and I came to 
Kiew> and I thought that I should like to hear 
about my old friend Alexis, although I was then 
of higher rank than he, and nobles don't mix with 
priests in Holy Russia.' 

''The reverend fieither, who was reading his 
' offices,' shrugged his shoidders when he heard the 
words. The colonel continued : . 

" * However, I could not find him. He had left 
on a mission ; he had passed out of everybody's 
recollection. There was his name on the college 
books, years ago, and that was alL '' Poor devil !" 
sighed I, "what a fate to be condemned to! Teach* 
ing £Eibles to poor ignorant fellows /' ' for you must 
know/ said the traveller to the priest, ' that in 
the army we have little futh in what our Greek 
Church teaches.' " 

*' The priest crossed himself at these sceptical 
sentences, while I watched him with a smile. 

« ' Well,' continued the colonel, * I left Kiew 
with a sigh for my poor Alexis ; for, after all, the 
heart of the young feels for the companions of its 



182 OTHER PEOPLES WINDOWS. 

youth : His the only bit of Paradise left us ; and I 
went back to St. Petersburg, just in time to be 
ordered forward into Poland. A revolution had 
broken out in Poland, and at the battle of Gochow, 
near Praga ('tis now thirty years ago), we Russians 
were beaten, and left seven hundred dead upon the 
field. Curiously, too, the priests were mixed up 
with the people, and a Greek priest, a pervert to 
the faith of Poland, was said to be the leader. 
Others, too, aided them with their prayers, and 
fought at the head of their columns, promising 
them liberty and a kingdom. We Russians, as 
you know, were determined not to hear of it. 

" * Well, we fought one day after another, and 
were beaten badly enough. They attacked us at 
Wawer, carried all our positions, after two days' 
fighting, took 2000 of us prisoners, and made us 
retreat, leaving 12,000 dead on the field. The 
rebels ! But Holy Russia never looses her hold. 

" * I was slightly bruised, for my horse had been 
shot, and feU, and I was taken prisoner. We 
were marched a little way into the interior, and 
we saw the celebrated General Skrynecki, and 
heard the rejoicing of the insurgents. I had 
noticed that the Polish colonel who carried us off 
had something of a look about him that I remem- 



i 



TSE SECOND-CLASS WINDOW. 183 

bered ; bat I had not the remotest idea of knowing 
him. Yet that evening, as I sat a prisoner in a 
miserable inn, listening to the tramp of the senti- * 
nels, and not very merry, I can tell you, the door 
opened, and I heard the voice of the colonel. He 
was in a priest's dress now. By his side hung a 
great silver crucifix, flat, and polished with use, 
but around his wiust was also a sword-belt, and a 
cavalry sword clanked at his heels. When I 
carried my eyes to his face,I saw at once the mild 
glance and handsome face of Alexis ! 

" * Alexis !' cried I, with astonishment. * My 
father !' said I, kneeling the next moment, as if 
for a blessing. 

" * No,' cried he, * no, Colonel Petrovitch, I 
prefer the military life, as you know ; call me 
colonel whilst I am here; general of division,-! 
hope, soon.' 

" I still kndt, and ground my teeth with rage. 
' So,' thought I, * this is why he learnt our art at 
£iew ; this is why he was so fond of our books ; 
this is the directing head which overthrows the 
armies of Holy Kussia . ^he shall die !' 

" ' Alexandre !' cried Alexis, * are we not friends P 
We are old companions. I love my country . you 
yours. Rise ; you are no longer a prisoner, you 



184 OTHER FJEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

are my guest. To-morrow you shall mount a fresh 
horse and rejoin your countrymen. You fought 
well : would it were in a better cause^ and we were 
side by side.' 

" I rose at his orders. What could I do P He 
was a rebel, I was his prisoner to whom he had 
given liberty. I accepted the situation. * I thank 
you/ said I, * but I would rather go at once, if 
you give me my liberty.* " 

" * No/ said the soldier priest, laying his hand 
on my shoulder, * no ; and when you go, Alex- 
andre, you must no longer fight against Poland ; 
you must, at least, save me the mortification of 
believing that my friend's hand is a foe to my 
country.' 

" * Nevertheless,' continued the Russian, * I did 
not promise, but I promised to myself one thing, 
which was to rid Russia of her enemy. Here was 
this priest's brain, which plotted all. Here was 
he, the chief and leader. My love for him was 
changed to hatred. We supped gaily, and I re- 
member he was Ml of hope for his country ; for 
his compatriots had won a glorious victory. 
After supper we played at whist, and when he 
gave me a pass, the next morning, Alexis, 
not having paper, took a card . ^the ace of 



THE SECOND-CLASS WINDOW. 185 

diamonds . and wrote my safeguard on it. We 
parted. 

"I went straight to our general, who was con- 
sulting with a few officers, with his troops, beaten 
and dispirited, around him. 'General,^ said I, 
' are promises to the rebels sacred P I think not.' 

" * Parbleu P said the old fellow, who had in his 
day served both with and against the French, ' if 
you think not, colonel, think so ; we are in a bad 
strait here, I can tell you.' 

'^'Exactly, and I can help you,' said I, joy- 
fully. 

" To make a long story short, whilst our general 
held the insurgents in check, and amused them, I 
was detached with a colimm of picked troops, 
and, skirting round our enemies, at a wide dis- 
tance, I came upon a body in their rear . a body 
of raw, ill-disciplined recruits, who were being 
licked into shape by the energy and tact of Alexis 
and his drill-masters. They yielded after an 
obstinate fight ; and after a few hours' search we 
tracked, and found their head. I shall never for- 
get his face when he saw me. 

** * You !' he cried, * is it you, Alexandre, whom 
I have spared P* 

''After his capture, the Poles gained no more 



186 OTHER PE0PLIP8 WINDOWS. 

victories. The rebellion was stamped out. We 
threw two hundred thousand armed men into the 
country, and * order ' reigned at Warsaw. As for 
Alexis, our general saw that he was more valuable 
dead than alive, and I was ordered to ^ him shot. 

" I was rather than otherwise glad of my job, 
for my old liking for Alexis had grown into a 
bitter hatred. Had not Holy Russia fairly con- 
quered Poland P Would she not always hold her 
down P Will she not do so now P*' 

" The question was put straight to me, and I 
could only shake my head and answer, ^ I do not 
know ; I hope not.' 

" The good priest looked up with a sigh for his 
co-religionists whom Holy Russia was driving into 
the winter's snows, was flogging into m^ess, 
or torturing into shame and disgrace. But the 
Russian, a strange weird guest, with his beard, 
his phosphorescent cigar, and his Cossack face, 
looked so determined and bold that the priest said 
nothing. We were both spell-bound by the myste- 
rious story, and wished to hear it to its end. As 
for the narrator, as he came towards the conclusion 
he seemed to gain in intensity, and jerked out his 
sentences in a short, incisive manner, which made 
them very telling. 



TMS SECOKD'CLASS WIJWOJT. 187 

" The night before he died I went to Alexis/' 
continued the colonel, "for he had sent for 
me, and wished to speak to ma Of course I 
went." 

" ' Alexandre/ he said earnestly to me, * we were 
boys together ; does not some of the old love re- 
main?' 

"*It cannot be,' said I, firmly. *We serve 
other masters. I am a soldier of Russia. '^ God 
and the Czar " is my cry ! You fight against both, 
although a priest.' 

" * No,' said he, sadly ; * not I, Alexandre : I 
fight for liberty and for Poland.' 

" * Bah ! Liberty is a delusion. Who is free P 
Is a soldier free, an artisan, a tradesman, a coun- 
cillor, a priest P Am I free, or are you P ' I said 
this hastily. 

" Alexis took advantage of my slip. * Free !' 
said he, with a smile, ' no : that is what I want to 
be. Will you free me, Alexandre P When you 
were bound, I imdid your chains ; can you not 
undo mine P' 

" * No,' I said ; * I cannot, and I will not. I 
am true to my cause and my sovereign. Your life 
is forfeited ; you must die.' 

" * If I die,' said he, * I warn you, Alexandre, 



188 OTHER PJEOFZirS WINDOWS. 

that you shall repent all your life ; there shall be 
no peace for you. You will have returned evil 
for good, and the Gospel tells you to give good for 
evil. Tou "will have murdered Liberty in Poland ; 
'tis for her I woidd live, alone for Ber, for my 
coimtry.' 

" 'I know it/ said I, as I closed the door, *and 
for that I slay you.* 

** The next morning the Greek priest Alexis was 
led out to die. 

'^ He stood up there in his priest's garments, his 
arms bound behind him ; the only favour granted 
him was that he was to die without being blind- 
folded. It was a dark, spring morning when he 
was led out, and knowing how bold he was, and 
how his eye alone would intimidate my men, I 
sought for some mark on his dress that might 
direct their aim. I found, by chance, in my pocket, 
the safeguard given . ^the ace of diamonds . and I 
pinned it on his breast, over his heart. 

" ' Alexandre,' he said, moum&lly, 'I die for 
my country.' 

" f As I would for Holy Russia, whose sons you 
have slaughtered,' said I. 

" * But I will come again ! I wHl revisit this 
earth for you . ^farewell . ^but not for long.' 



TEE SECOND-CLASS WINDOW. 189 

^* ^ Bah/ said I. I had detailed the men myself: 
five good shots ; but^ to make siire, I myself drew 
my pistol and aimed at the card ; then I gave the 
word . One, two, fire !* 

'^I heard those five shots strike and rebound 
from the wall behind Alexis, but one shot served . 
it was mine ; it struck him to his heart. 

" Since that time,*' continued the Bussian, " I 
have never played at whist with comfort. It 
always happens that three only of the company 
wiU play ; that I am urged, as it were, to play ; 
that we agree that I shall take the double hand, 
and then, there, opposite to me, in the empty 
chair, sits Alexis . ^the card upon his priestly 
robe, the same smile . so sad, so sweet . ^upon 
his £eu^, the blood welling through the centre of 
the card. 

" We always win I Huge heaps of money fall 
to my share, whilst I tremble, and feel what fear 
a soldier can. Sometimes he holds up, with 
ghastly fingers, the card to me, and others see it 
not. I see him make signs about the play of my 
opponents. I see him interested, full of sad eager- 
ness, playing for me and directing my play ; and 
when I throw up my hand in passion and horror, 
to the astonishment of my friends, he glides away. 



190 OTMER PJEOJPZirS WINDOWS. 

waving his thin hands, and calling in my ears mi 
the last the name of Poland ! 

" In my dreams I see Mm as weU ; in fact, he is 
seldom away from me. I played with him last 
night . three living men and one dead one ! Is it 
not horrible? No one sees him but myself, and 
the students and young soldiers I meet are fond 
of sitting down with the mad player. I am forced 
to go through this, or I would not. Would every 
pack of cards were burned before I touched them ! 
Day and night this Alexis haunts me. I saw him, 
coming along to the station. I was driving in the 
droschky, and I put my hejid out of my window 
to urge on the driver, for I like speed. * Faster,* 
cried I, ' faster !' I again sat down, and there 
by my side in the carriage was the dead Alexis ! 
dead to all, but alive to me.*' 

The colonel paused for awhile, and wiped his 
clammy brow. His listeners shuddered. 

" I never play now, if I can help it," added the 
Russian, after a pause, "yet I am sometimes 
forced to do so, and sometimes, as I said before, 
am made to tell over and over again this tale of 
' Dummy at Whist.' " 

He was silent ; no one spoke, I heard the priest 
muttering a " Paternoster/' Just then the voice 



THE SECOND-CLASS WmLOW. 191 

of the guard was again heard, '^ Alle righte, Mes- 
aieurs. Tiens done ! the way is clear." 

The engine gave a snort and a wheeze. The 
bell, which they use abroad instead of a whistle, 
was rung, and the train went forward to Stras- 
bourg. When we arrived there, I found I had 
been asleep, and so was not surprised, but greatly 
disappointed that I had missed my Bussian friend. 
The next day I went on to Paris, dining in the 
evening at the TroiH Frires. Here I met friends, to 
one of whom I happened to say, " By the way I 
came from Mayence to Strasbourg with General 
Alexandre Petrovitch ; he told me such a queer 
story.'* 

" Did he ?" said my friend, with a shrewd smile, 
tapping the empty champagne bottle meaningly. 
" It must have been a queer one, for General 
Alexandre Petrovitch was at the very time you 
mention, and when you state you were travelling 
with him, lying dead in a church in Warsaw, 
shot through the heart with a Polish bullet, by 
some Polish insurgent who knew how to take 
aim.*' 

"Ay,** said another; "but the most curious 
part of the matter is yet to be told. On the breast 
of the colonel's uniform, over his orders and his 



192 OTKER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

stars (for he had seen service), was pinned an Ace 
of Diamonds ! Such is the fact, or the Russian 
account is confoundedly false/' 

It was not false, however. The patriot priest 
had found an avenger ; Petrovitch was slain^ but 
by whom must ever remain a mystery. 



TEE EAVNTED WINDOW. 193 



CHAPTER XII. 



THB HAUNTED WINDOW. 




JFTER this story the host was moved with 
a vehement desire to speak. " Now," 
said he, hardly offering the assembled 
company time to congratulate the last speaker ; 
" now you've begun upon ghosts, I will tell you 
a story that always makes my hair creep. It is a 
ghost, and no ghost. As for the fools who 
believe in ghosts, I shall leave them to Mrs. 
Crowe, who is half mad on that subject ; but, 
as to those who believe in ' spirits,' I shall say 
nothing.'' 

"What!" cried Scumble, "have we got the 
great author in a fix ? Does he also stumble and 
fall over the many difficulties in the English 
tongue? Pray what is the difference between 
a ' ghost ' and a ' spirit ' ?" 

VOL. n, o 



194 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" Difference enough, and to spare/' said George, 
** only people always will run their heads against 
Btupid things. You can see a ghost, can't you ? . 
at least, so people say you can. Nay, you are 
called upon to swear that you see resuscitated 
grave-clothes, and such like follies. Perfect mad- 
ness to say any such thing ; for, if that be true, 
the grave-clothes must project into infinite space, 
certain eidola of themselves . that is, material 
objects would at once become spiritual, and for 
no purpose in the world, and that you know 
is foUy." 

" Very good ; I quite agree with you now as 
to spirits.'' 

" Well, as you can see ghosts, so spirits are not 
to be seen, but affect the mind, and not the eye. 
As to the existence of spirits, I, as a Churchman, 
have made my mind up. I have no doubt of it ; 
but whether they be disembodied human spirits I 
very much doubt. However, I have a story of 
one who was invisible to man, but plainly visible 
to an animal. What think you of that ? Listen 
and you shall hear the story ; but, as I tell it not 
on* my own credit, I must introduce you to the 
narrator in the regular way . Captain John 
Ramble. 



THE KAUNTEB WINDOW. 195 

Then, without further preface, George Carew 
commenced his story :. 

"If any one knew Captain John Ramble, he 
knew a remarkable man. He was one as full of 
energy as an egg is full of meat. By-the-way, 
that is a very absurd proverb, because, as Lord 
Dundreary would observe . and the suggestion is, 
perhaps, not greatly above his Lordship's capa- 
city . an egg can't be fidl of meat, and if it be full 
of fowl it is not worth eating. I wish some one 
would revise our proverbs ; and if any one this 
pleasant Christmas time should make a collection 
of those that are manifestly silly, and stick them 
up in the reading-room of the 'British Museum for 
the learned men of the nation to gaze upon, and 
hereafter to be called in for ever, as they do old 
coins that are past use, he will be conferring a 
benefit on a very busy and exceedingly ungrateful 
set of contemporaries. 

" But about Captain John Bamble. He was a 
remarkable man, and had been in many curious 
places. He had travelled over America, China, 
India, Persia, Africa, and the South Seas. To 
say where the captain had been would be like 
a lesson in geography, and would not set off my 
tale one whit. I would much rather say where he 

o 2 



196 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

had not been, although that would not be pleasant, 
because if he only saw the statement he would 
write to the papers to contradict it ; he always 
has an ink-pot at his fingers' ends, and would in 
all probability quarrel with me most bitterly. 

" Captain Ramble's stories are various, and this 
is one ; but before you hear any of his stories you 
must know him. He is, then, about five feet eight 
inches and one half inch in his stockings. He is 
just tall enough for a gentleman, and not too tall 
to be without energy ; for what says the proverb, 
again . 

" * Fair and foolish, 
Dark and proud ; 
Long and lazy. 
Little and loud/ 

"There, now, I'm quoting proverbs again! 
What have I to do with them, I wonder, that 
they run in my head so to-night ? I don't believe 
in that proverb either. I know many people who 
are fair and not foolish, and many people who are 
dark and not proud, and I may say, while I am 
about it, that the captain was one of them. 

" He was very dark, but as gentle and humble 
as a well-taught nigger, except when his blood was 
up ; then he was as proud as an hidalgo of the 



TKE HAUNTED WINDOW. 197 

bluest blood in Spain. He was skilful in all exer- 
cises wliich men practise^ except cricket. He 
could ride, shoot, hunt, fish, row, and play bil- 
liards. I donH think he excelled in croquet, for 
he said that was a woman's game. Not that 
Captain Bamble despised women ; not a bit of it, he 
loved the very ground they walked on, but he had 
been much in the East, and was as despotic with 
them as the great Mogul. 

"With his dark-brown face he had also dark 
thin hair, a pair of piercing eyes, a small half- 
sown moustache, a nose slightly turned up . not 
turnip, which is a very different kind of nose, and 
a very unpleasant one to behold, being a spreading 
nose, as if it had been put on hot, and had s\mken 
in its place« Well, Ramble's nose was only a little 
elevated, good generally in form to the bottom of 
it, and then it bent upwards in a proud way, as if 
it rather than otherwise despised the world, as 
I have every reason to believe our good friend 
Jack Bamble did. Add to this a capacious head 
of a bullet shape^ a fair forehead, high but not 
broad, a sabre-cut in one comer of it, and a pair of 
ears which came a little too far out for a handsome 
man, and you have the captain to the life. 

" This man was ^ all a man/ as the jockeys say 



198 OTHER PEOPLE'S JFINBOWS. 

of a horse. He was brave, generous, daring, quar- 
relsome, but forgiving ; hot-tempered, impetuous, 
unreflecting, a great eater, muscular, broad-chested, 
one to bear fatigue and not to flinch ; tender to 
women and children, but a despiser of cowards; 
learned, and knowing many creeds, and, alas! 
almost a believer in none. Such was and is . ^for 
he is abroad in the world, and, as he wrote lately 
from the very centre of the largest steppe in 
Tartary, sure to turn up, 'All alive, oh !' 

" Now, once upon a time the captain had a dog, 
a ferocious feUow, a buU terrier, with a great deal 
of the bull in him, and in my opinion much too 
little of the terrier. This dog he named Jemmy, 
or Jem ; but to please the brute, I suppose, for the 
dog had its notion of dignity, he called him James 
on Sundays. In my opinion he ought to have 
been called Boxer, or Pincher, or CaBsar, because 
James was too m^d a name for him ; and moreover 
the Scriptural signification of James is beguiling^ 
and the dog was not so ; not one bit of a beguiler 
was he, but a staunch kind of a fellow, who had 
made up his mind thoroughly upon many points, 
two of which were . 1st, that his master was the 
bravest, cleverest, and grandest person in the man- 
world ; and 2nd that he, James, was the boldest, 



TBJE MA UNTED WINL W. 199 

best, firmest on his legs, two of which were bandy, 
and trustworthiest person in the dog- world. 

" If any one had doubted this, he would have no 
longer done so had he seen this bull terrier sitting 
between his master's feet as he smoked a long 
ohibouque, on a low chair, and between the puffs 
indulged in conversation with his dog. 

" * Jem ' he said, ' you are a beauty ;' a compli- 
ment which the dog no doubt understood. * I 
would not lose you for half-a hundred pound note; 
youVe the right deep chest, thin legs, small stem, 
and tapering tail, that you should have, my dog. 
And now, my friend, Christmas is coming on, and 
where shall we spend it P' 

" The captain said * we,' because he took his dog 
with him. The company of James was a ^ine qtid 
non, an unpleasant alternative to quarrelsome lap- 
dogs and unruly spaniels, but that was all. Jem 
was a dog of good habits ; for there is about the 
same difference with dogs as there is with men. 
There is the gentlemanly dog and the ungentle- 
manly dog ; the first looks well, even when he is 
footsore with paddling up and down town, and is 
splashed with mud on a wet day ; the latter, even on 
the finest afternoon, is shabby, shambling, awkward, 
and ungainly; or if he be shapely he has a villainous 



200 OTEER PEOPLE'S WmDOJFS. 

forehead, a half-closed eye, and a white feeble nose. 
Then there is the dog with a business, who is placid 
and quiet, who goes straight away down streets, 
makes his calls and comes back again; the dog 
with no business, who yawns in the sun, snaps at a 
fly or two, and blinks at you with a lazy intel- 
ligence. There is the masterless, spiritless dog, 
which haunts door-steps, sleeps in out-of-way 
comers, catches the mange in fault of anything 
better, and slinks out of your way in a dejected 
manner, as if he knew you had half a brick in an 
old pocket handkerchief, ready to tie round his neck 
and drown him off-hand. There is the dog flirt 
and the coquette, the dandy dog, which trots about 
with the air of a man with a flower in his button- 
hole; the slatternly little cur and the prim and 
neatly cropped dog. And yet Jem was none of 
these ; he was the well-bred English gentleman- 
dog, full of courage and staunch to his back-bone. 
So he of course went with the captain and was 
well received. He slept at his bed-room door in 
country houses ; kept at his proper distance when 
the guests were together ; and during the time the 
captain dined he might be found lounging about 
the stables, or now and then looking out for a bit 
in the kitchen. Other dogs he did not much 



TKE EAUNTEL WINDOW. 201 

associate with ; he had seen the world with his 
master, or perhaps^ being a purist in dog-Latin, he 
found their conversation low. During the morn- 
ings he would of course be with his master ranging 
about theestate, and in the evenings he would wait 
in the hall till the captain came out to smoke his 
cigar in the shrubbery. 

" ' And where shall we go to this Christmas, 
Jem P Three invitations ; none of which I care 
about ! Hang'd if I should not like to go abroad.' 

'^ As he said this, Sinks the valet, groom, and 
factotum, knocked at the door. ' Please, sir,' said 
Sinks, ^ here's a letter, a foreigner.' 

" * Give it me,' said the captain ; and he broke 
it open and read as follows : . 

" ' Chateau Sriord, 

" ' 14th December, 185. 
" * Dear Bamble, 

" * What are you going to do with yourself thia 
Christmas ? If you are in England, you disreput- 
able old rambler, come out of it at once, and eat 
your Christmas dinner at our place. Governor 
is very jolly, and wants to see you. I daresay we 
shall have one or two nice people. You may have 
your own room, and do as you like. La Petite 
sends her love to Jemmy, and all sorts of messages, 



202 OTHER PEOPLJSPS WINDOWS. 

and says * Tell him to come, and not to forget my 
Turkish necklace.' Drop a line, and we will meet 
you at Sempiere. " ' Tours very truly, 

"Frank Merton/'' 
" The Mortons were great friends of the captain, 
at least they had been so at one time. Frank was 
one of his old college chums, and three years ago 
Eamble had spent two months very pleasantly 
at his father's mansion, the Ch&teau Briord, in 
Brittany. Old Mr. Merton had married, when he 
was two-and-twenty, one of the prettiest girls of 
one of the best county families in Blankshire, 
whom he loved with that tenderness and devotion 
which only accrues to early marriages. Four years 
after marriage, and one month after the birth of 
her second child, Mrs. Merton drooped and died. 
This sudden and appalling bereavement was more 
than her husband could bear ; he grieved as he had 
loved . ^passionately and sincerely. He acted on 
the impulse of the moment, and, not being able to 
bear the sight of anything that reminded him of 
his wife, or recalled the happy days they spent 
together, he sold his house, furniture, and horses, 
and, retaining only a few old servants, came up to 
London, intending to sail for America, Australia, 
or anywhere, to bury his grief. 



TEEBAUNTEB WINDOW, 208 

" Quite accidentally, one of his friends mentioned 
the Chateau Briord was for sale in Brittany, 
Mr. Morton took the place for a year, and liked it 
so well at the expiration of that time, that finally 
he bought it, and at the time of which we write 
had been established there ten years. He had a 
large staff of English as well as French servants, 
and his horses were the envy of any Cockney 
sportsmen who chanced to venture so far away from 
Paris and the Jockey Club. 

"*Good old Frank,' mused the Captain, *to 
think of his dissolute Kambler at this time of year ;' 
and then, plaiting the letter into a long pipe-light, 
he flicked it into the ear of James, who was slum- 
bering beneath his chair. James lazily opens one 
eye, and wags his tail the least bit in the world. 

« ' Shall us go, Jim P' said the captain. 

" It will be observed that our friend, who usually 
spake as good Queen^s English as you might chance 
to hear anywhere, frequently adopted a sort of 
patois in speaking to his dog, on the same prin- 
ciple, I presume, that ladies do when talking to 
and fondling babies. 

"A mellifluous growl, coupled with a partial 
yawn, ending with a sharp yelp, as if his mouth had 
been suddenly shut with a clasp, was all the brute 



204 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

answered. ' To go or not to go/ said the captain 
aloud^ 'I'll have a pipe over it. Confound it, 
where are the matches P 0, here's a bit of paper ;' 
and, picking up the letter he had just flung at his 
dog, thrust it between the bars and began Kght- 
ing his chibouque with it. Suddenly he noticed 

the words * La Petite sends ' * By jingo !' said 

he, * Old Frank's letter is just in time ; La Petite 
says, ' TeU him to come.' Dear me, does she indeed ? 
and why should I be at La Petite's beck and call, 
I should very much like to know P Upon my word, 
I've a great mind to go, just to give her a good 
talking to. La Petite indeed !' 

" Now, the reader should undoubtedly be made 
acquainted who this ' La Petite' was, on whom the 
captain appears to expend so much good-humoured 
indignation. This young lady was Miss Kate Merton, 
who, during Hamble's visit to the Ch&teau Briord, 
three years ago, was the merriest, sauciest, wittiest, 
most lady-like little romp in the world. She spoke 
French better than she did English, and the prac- 
tical jokes she played upon the captain were in- 
numerable. Whenever and wherever he saw that 
mop of golden hair bursting like tangled sunbeams 
from beneath the shade of her little round hat, and 
those wicked deep-blue eyeS; he knew some mischief 



TEJE EAUNTED WmDOW. 205 

was brewing ; that he would have his chibouque 
hidden or his tobacco stolen, or his French criticised. 
She even ventured to make friends with Jem, who 
would smile grimly in his canine way when she 
dared to pull his ears. 

** The pipe was finished, and the captain rang 
the bell and his man entered. 

" * Binks, pack up my things; I start for France 
to-morrow.' 

^'Binks's countenance fell, as he had been 
reckoning on eating his Christmas dinner with his 
uncle in Staffordshire, but he was not surprised ; 
in fact, he would not have been the least surprised 
if his master had said he was just off to Dahomey^ 
or the Great Salt Lake. 

" ' And Binks,' shouted the captain, as his 
knight of the rueful countenance retreated, * have 
everything ready, and meet me at London Bridge 
to-morrow evening . eight-thirty train . I travel 
alone.' 

" ' Yes, sir,' said Binks, and his countenance 
immediately became radiant, and the way in 
which he rushed about and did everything in 
double-quick time was something exhilarating to 
behold. 



206 OTHER PEOPLIPS TFIKBOWS. 

" Without doubt the chibouqueor La Petite had 
done something to help the captain to his deci- 
sion ; but be that as it may, a couple of days after- 
wards he found himself speeding along in the 
train towards Nantes. He had a first-class car- 
riage aU to himself; books and newspapers were 
lying about on the seat, rugs and overcoats 
scattered hither and thither. I said he had the 
carriage all to himself; but I apologise for having 
so said . a certain great and illustrious individual 
was there : I allude to the dog . ^the Jem of week- 
days, the James of Sundays. He was there in all 
his glory. He had the most comfortable comer 
of the carriage, and the softest and warmest rug 
to repose upon, and was looking very happy and 
contented, except when the guard (who no doubt 
knew the value of Ramble's Napoleons) looked in 
occasionally, saying . 

" * Comment se porte Monsieur, ei Monsieur la has ?' 
" Then a fiendish spasm would pass across Jem's 
face. And once when this same guard happened 
to say to a by-stander, ^Tiens c'est dr61e, ce 
Milord qui voyage avec son boule dogue,' Jem 
leaped up with a sudden snarl, and would have 
jumped out after his enemy had not the glass pre- 
vented him. 



TSJE SAUNTED WINDOW. 207 

" ' Down, Jem, down sir/ said Ramble, ' soon he 
shall see La Petite, and La Petite shall pull his 
ears, she shall ;' and with this he fell to musing 
upon this young lady. He thought, 'Well, I 
cannot go on with La Petite as I used to ; in £act 
it must not be La Petite at all, it must be Miss 
Morton. She is no longer a child ; no, she must 
be eighteen at the ^ery least now. No, we must 
be proper and quiet ; no more romping and chaff- 
ing, no pelting one another with apples in the 
orchard, or madcap scampers on horseback to 
Douamenez .' A growl and a series of un- 
mistakable yelps from Jem at last announced 
the arrival of the train at Nantes. The diligence 
is waiting at the station. The captain and Jem 
and the conducteurs are the only occupants of the 
banquette. The former lights up his pipe and 
wraps his rug around him, and composes himself 
for a half-wakeful snooze when they clatter out 
of Nantes at nine o^clock that evening. 

" Off and away through the dark cold night, no 
sound but the monotonous jing, jing, jing, of the 
horse-bells, and occasional objurgations of their 
driver, and the creaking and crunching of the 
wheels when they passed over a deeper heap of 
snow than usual. The conducteur, who has been 



208 OTHER PJEOPLIPS WINDOWS. 

oppressively loquacious at first, suddenly drops off 
to sleep, and all attempts to awaken him are in 
vain. Jem has been in a sound snooze for a long 
time, and the captain begins to think this really 
is very slow. What would he not give to be at 
home in his warm snug chambers, thinks he, 
instead of going this wild-goose chase to spend 
Christmas, 0-o-oh ! 'twas awfully cold ! That 
was the expression the captain made use of. 

" Once, when they stopped to change horses at 
Pennebon, and Ramble found it so bitter that he 
was obliged to jump down to warm his feet by 
walking about, he pulled out his watch to see 
what time it was, and just as he was going to look 
by the light of the diligence lantern, Jem, who 
had till this time been walking about most con- 
tentedly, gave a long howl and shook himself and 
looked up piteously at his master. ^ Can't think 
what ails the dog,' said he ; * it must be the cold. 
Hell be all right when he gets to the warm 
chinmey comer at the Chateau. Won't you, old 
boy ?' Between fancying he was asleep when he 
was awake, and dreaming he was awake when he 
was asleep. Ramble managed to get through a 
cold and most uncomfortable night, and was glad 
indeed when the diligence clattered along the 



TEE EATINTEB WINDOW. 209 

ill-payed old-fasliioned streets of Sempi^re, and at 
last palled up at the Hotel de TEpee. 

^' Here the captain, to use his own language, 
began to *feel considerably better/ for he was 
well known here. Madame, who was as smiling 
and well'^dressed as ever, was charmed to see him, 
and Monsieur was immediately hunted up from 
some back-room, and appeared in slippers, without 
his coat, and an unshorn chin. He had, possibly, 
been engaged in making the beds, or cir^g the 
floors ; and the latter exhilarating occupation 
one may be certainly disposed to envy. * Woidd 
Monsieur breakfast in the bureau . in point of fact 
in Madame's particular chamber ?' asked Madame, 
with one of her most bewitching smiles. ' Cer- 
tainly, yes, if it would not derange Madame too 
much.* 

" ' Et Monsieur Jacques il veut quelquechose ^ 
manger?' rejoined Madame, at the same time 
keeping at a safe distance from the dog. There- 
upon Jem opened his jaws and gaped ferociously, 
upon which Madame, considering it as a com- 
mencement of hostilities, vanished from the room 
door, and was not seen till the breakfast was 
served. 

" Eamble had scarcely eaten and warmed himself 

VOL. II. p 



210 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

into a good humour when Madame exclaimed, 
' Ah, Yoili Monsieur Merton et la jeune Mees ;' 
and oh me what a clattering and laughing and 
clacking there was all at once then. 

" In came Frank, looking the picture of a young 
Englishman. * What, wanderer ! Bravo, old fel- 
low I Long expected, come at last. Welcome, 
old man. How are youp' and there followed a 
hearty British grip of the hand, that made Ramble's 
fingers tingle for half an hour afterwards. 

'' In came La Petite . same smart little hat as 
of yore . ^her golden tresses gathered into a net 
instead of being allowed to run riot on her 
shoulders . certainly grown, and her figure deve- 
loped into the fullness and roundness of advanced 
girldom . the same blue eyes and the same 
laughter-loving dimples on her cheeks. 

" ' What, Ogre, how are you ?' 

" The captain was so taken aback by the pretty 
girl he saw before him, that he could not for the 
moment speak ; at last he said, with forced for- 
mality, ' Miss Merton, I hope you are welL* 

" ' Ha ! ha ! ! ha ! ! ! . (what a joyous sound there 
was in that laugh.) For goodness sake, Ogre, 
don't be so formal. Please to recollect my will is 
law in these domains ; and Captain Kamble, you 



TEEBAUNTEI) WINDOW. 211 

are Ogre and I am La Petite ;' in saying which 
she made a low courtesy^ dwarfing herself to her 
former stature, and forming such a comical bur- 
lesque of what she used to be, that Ramble roared 
with laughter, and then every one else roared with 
laughter, and then Jem barked in chorus, and Frank 
Merton said the ponies would catch cold, so they 
must go. 

"So off they started in a thoroughly English 
turn-out. Frank Merton drove, and Eamble sat 
beside him ; La Petite occupied the back seat with 
Jem, and amused herself by pulling his ears, and 
telling him all sorts of fabulous tales about his 
master as they went along. 

"* Thediligencewasinearly,wasn'tit,Mr.OgreP' 

*' * No, I think not. Mademoiselle La Petite ; it 
now wants,' said Kamble, pulling out his watch 
. * by Jingo I my watch is stopped. I'm certain 
I wound it up last night. Stopped at two o'clock 
exactly. How very odd I' 

" Here Jemmy gave a growL 

" ' Don't pull his ears, Kate, he looks savage,' 
said Merton, ' and there is something the matter 
with him, no doubt.' ' Bien Mon oher Ogre,' an- 
swered La Petite, and she was silent till the 
joomey ended. 

p2 



212 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

" The Chiiteau de Briord was situated about five 
En^ish miles distemt from Sempiere, and the way 
thereto lay through a closely wooded undulating 
country. Indeed, so narrow were the lanes, and 
80 thick the underwood, that in summer time, 
though the towers of the ch&teau were visible fi'om 
Sempiere, you arrived almost at the gates of Mr. 
Morton's residence before you knew you were 
approaching it. 

" At the present time,, however, our party from 
time to time caught many a glimpse of the old 
walls of the place through the net-work of branches 
which stood out sharp and distinct in the clear 
frosty air. The ch&teau was approached by an 
avenue, after passing along which you crossed 
over the moat and under a dilapidated portcullis 
into the courtyard. Here a flight of steps, imme- 
diately opposite, led up to the haU. To the right 
was an ivy-covered gateway leading to the stables 
and farm buildings. A couple of unmistake- 
ably smart English grooms appeared directly our 
friends drove in, and a true Briton paysan in true 
Briton costume, long hair, aahots and bragon bras 
(or trunk hose), assisted La Petite to dismount. 
Somebody rung a bell, and in two minutes ap- 
peared on the steps an English lady's maid, and a 



THE SAUNTUD JFUffDOJF. 218 

French aoubretie. This curious combination of 
French and English in every part of the esta- 
Uishment amused Ramble not a little. After a 
liearty greeting from Mr. Merton, Ramble was 
shown to his room. The room was rather a small 
one, situated on the south side of the ch&teau^ 
looking on a dilapidated sun-dial and moss-> 
covered gold-fish tank* A large chimney-piece 
occupied almost one side of the room ; this was of 
stone, and carved all over with griffins, boars, and 
dogs, one of which Ramble always declared was a 
picture of Jem, and invariably made the brute 
angry by pointing his portrait out to him. Ex- 
cept the chimney-piece, the room was panelled all 
over with very old dark oak. The bed was un- 
mistakeably English, also the wash-stand, and 
notably the bath and towels. There were two 
uncomfortable high-backed chairs carved all over, 
and there were two most luxurious lounging-chairs, 
and a couple of charred-looking settles, just inside 
the chimney. S(Hnbre-coloured curtains draped 
each side of the chimney-piece, and some of a 
similar tint might be observed on either side of 
the deep bay window, in the recess of which was 
ample room for two tables, one devoted to the 
toilet, and the other covered with books and writ^ 



114 OTKER FJSOPLirS WINDOWS. 

ing materials. The walls were decorated by a 
charming water-colour portrait of Miss Morton, 
when she was in reality La Petite, an engraving 
of Millais, Huguenot, a spirited oil sketch of 
Kate's favourite pony, and a capital caricature 
called ' The Ogre and his Bog,' done by the young 
lady herself. 

" As we have little really to do with caricature 
or with furniture, two of the principal things in 
modem stories and illustrations, we will leave 
these and return to Captain Eamble. That gentle- 
man having borrowed an English servant, un- 
packed, dressed, and dined, and never more com- 
fortably in his life than at Morton's hospitable 
table. Mr. Morton was full of warm hospitality. 
La Petite charming, and she filing old home songs 
so thrillingly that Jack Bamble listened till a tear 
dropped upon his thin silky moustache. 

" * I could, sir,' said Jack, as he told the story, 
^ have cried with delight to find the English home 
planted here amidst foreign scenes and distant 
manners. They suited well, too, with the Breton 
ways.' 

" Well, sir (we will let Captain Eamble finish 
his story), the ladies went to bed, and I drew out 
my familiar pipe and Merton his cigars. He 



i 



it 



THEEATTNTEB WINDOW. 215 

talked about nothing. Women talk; men thinks 
There sat Merton, here sat Jack Bamble in sweet 
silent communion; between us snoozed Jem, 
wearied and full of dreams ; he seemed fonder of 
me than usual^ and now and then gave a yap or a 
whine in his sleep. 

'^ At last I broke this quiet charming interchange 
of feeling. we were as silent as the twins bom 
dumb^ by saying 'Merton, how shall I get my 
watch seen to P it has stopped at two o'clock.' 
Jem^ in his snoozing, gave a groan. 
*I'll give that dog physic to-morrow, and 
cut him off from his meat diet. How about the 
watch ?' 

" * I always carry two, old fellow,' said Merton, 
unhooking a silver hunter, by Barwise, St. Martin's 
Lane, * and I'll lend you this.' 

" * Thanks ! and now ta I ta ! old boy, I'm off, 
with your permission, to Bedfordshire.' 

" * Good* You will find some books, a Quar" 
terly or so, and a novel in your room if you don't 
sleep.' 

" * Don't sleep,' said I, scornfully : ' why, I'm off 
like a top in three minutes after I'm in bed; who 
put that in your head ?' 
. " * Oh, your friend La Petite ; she insisted on 



216 OTEJER PEOPLJE'S WINDOWS. 

the books, and on your occupying that chamber, 
the hussy ; she wants to try you/ 

" ' Oh, then it is haunted ; by jingo, I'm in luck ; 
this is what I've panted for all my life.' 

" * Now's your time,' said Merton, with a smile. 
' Mind I don't say it is haunted. Sure am I that 
you won't see a ghost. Load your pistol, take the 
redoubtable James with you ; fill your pipe, and 
await the result. Goodnight.' 

" ' Good night, Merton,' said I ; * come along, 
Jem.' Jem was aU alive in a minxite, and away I 
went to bed. There was a nice fire blazing on the 
hearth, brandy, cigars, and a moderator lamp. 
The servant pointed these things out and withdrew. 
Jem, the dog, walked as was his wont round the 
room, his nails tapping on the parquette, and then, 
with an expressive look, whined in my fece, as 
much as to say, ' Cap'en, I don't like it.' 

" * Why,' said I, * you luxurious brute, you want 
a sheep-skin mat, do you, in your comer P' Jim 
looked plaintively at me as I sat down, and walked 
to the door, scratching for me to let him out. 

" * Jem,' said I, * that won't do. Come and lie 
here ; here is my railway rug ; you're as clean as 
a Christian, you are, and may take it.' I put the 
rug on the fioor^ but the brute hesitated to take it 



TKE EAUNTED WINDOW. 217 

till I imperatively ordered him. There was this 
good quality about him, that if I had ordered him 
to rush against a bayonet, or through a fire, he 
would have done it. He lay down, therefore, but 
ill at ease, and I sat for one moment in the chair* 
Curiously, all fatigue had fled : I put down my 
two watches^ looked at Barwise ; it was already 
a quarter past one. ' Well,' said I, ' it's morning 
now, and ghosts do not walk then ; I'U take half a 
pipe and the Quarterly J 

** The dog snujfed the friendly weed and was at 
peace, and I read quietly an interminable political 
article, comparing William Pitt to Epaminondas 
or some such stuff, the mind taking in the reading 
and forgetting it as easily, when suddenly the bell 
of the turret stable clock struck two. I looked at 
Barwise, it was two minutes fast. 

** ' Well, now to 'by 'by ;' said I to myself, when 
suddenly I saw Jem stir, spring forward, and 
bristle up his back from snout to tail. Once he 
looked round at me and gave a piteous growl, as 
much as to say, * Come on, master, come on/ 

" I looked where the dog, uttering low growls, 
and trembling, pointed, but saw nothing. The 
air was as clear as glass. There was the wains-* 
cot, there the door. 



218 OTSER PEOPLPa WmDOJTS. 

"*Jem,' said I, 'Jem, my boy, wliat is itP 
I stooped and patted the dog ; from the moment 
my hand touched him the tone of his growl 
was raised; he then sank down on his belly, 
oreeping an inch or so forward, after the manner 
of dogs of his kind, as if about to spring; 
but, although his teeth were shown, he had no 
pluck in him ; he trembled like a leaf and crept 
back to me. 

'' ' What, Jem !' said I, looking at his staring 
eyes, which protruded from his brave buU fore- 
head ; * what ! Jem cowed at last ; at a shadow ; at 
nothing/ The dog whined piteously and * yapped * 
but once, with his eyes still fixed at some object 
about the height of a man. 

''Shall I confess it? That nothing shook me 
more than a thousand spectres. I rushed forward, 
striking my hand through space; the dog, still 
trembling, crept out an inch or so nearer, his eyes 
still fixed. ' Is it so, Jem P' said I ; ' then here 
goes !' and I fired my pistol right above his head 
at the distance of a man's heart ; the dog sprang 
up at the noise, and gained heart for one moment. 
Again I fired, again the same result : I heard my 
bullet enter the wainscot and hit and fall behind 
it, flattened by the stone walL My hair stood 



TEE HAUNTED WINDOW. 319 

oreepingy creeping over my head, my limbs 
trembled as I looked at Jem, the poor brute once 
more appealed to me^ and again crept forward. 

"Creeping inch by inch before me, his eyes 
staring, his limbs trembling, the noble brute 
passed on, and I, equally moved, slowly crept to 
the door. Before me was nothing visible, but 
on my face I felt a cold chill air, as if I stood 
before a block of ice. As we neared the door it 
slowly opened of itself and shut, and the dog, 
looking at me, gave a short howl and crept imder 
a sofa, foaming at the mouth, trembling and shak- 
ing ; I brought him water, and sprinkled him with 
it, but in vain ; in a few moments, with one piteous 
look at me, he fell dead. 

" The report of my pistol brought Merton and 
a servant to me, and my friend laughed tiU I 
showed him the dog. Long as this takes to tell, 
it was only just three minutes past two when the 
dog died ; at two precisely the nothing, the ter- 
rible ^No Qhost' had appeared; no, I cannot say 
that . had made itself felt. 

" For myself, I was never so frightened in my 
life, nor have I ever been since. I am free to 
confess that I had nothing to be frightened at. 
It was just that which did it. . I left Sempi^re the 



220 OTKER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

next day, carrying a corpse with me. It was that 
of poor Jem. You see him stuffed in that case 
there ; and if you could imagine those glass eyes 
protruding about half an inch, those fine legs 
trembling, and that prime plucky tail limp and 
cowed, you can see Jem as he looked when he and 
I saw . No Ghost I 

" * I shall not attempt to explain Captain 
Ramble's story,' said Carew, looking round at 
the company ; ' it admits of no explanation. I 
can only vouch for my belief in the captain's 
utter veracity. He does not believe in much; 
he is half a Turk, and a good deal of a Brahmin, 
except in his addiction to strong liquors. He is 
indeed very little of a Christian, but he does 
believe in one or two things, and this is one 
of them.' " 

" George Carew ceased, and the company, who 
had listened to all he said with intense interest, 
behaved in a similar manner to the admiral in 
the sea ballad which tells of the young lady who 
slew her faithless lover. They and he (the ad- 
miral) werry much applauded what he'd done, and 
during the ensuing supper they all fell to dis- 
cussing ghosts. I don't know that any startling 
theory or novel proposition was advanced about 



TEE HAUNTED WINBOJF. 221 

them. In Carew's opinion ghosts are overdone, 
and not understood; so he said nothing. Only 
after supper . ^a frugal one . ^pipes being lighted 
for those who chose to indulge in the delusive 
and deadly nicotine, our youiig friends unani- 
mously called on Mr. Cimabue Scxunble for a 
story, which they dishonestly declared was due. 
The fact is, none of the rest were prepared, and 
the artist was second favourite. True to his 
determination of only relating that which he had 
heard, and only describing what he knew, the 
artist commenced the Photographer's Window, 
which will be found on the ensuing page. 



S22 OTHER PJSOPZJEPS WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER Xm. 

THE FHOTOORAPHSB's WINDOW. 

WK inside, sir/ said the door-man. 
for he has a professional name, and is 
recognised in the world of labour.* and 
*ave your portrait taken . ^hartist quite ready and 
waitin' . frame and all, on*y one shillin* ; or, hif 
you will go so low, sixpims/ He then added 
confidentially 'that it was ftis* clarse,* which, 
I need not say, was not the case with his English. 
** He was a poor kind of a fellow ; and, if a hat 
and boots are the chief criteria of a gentleman's 
appearance, I don't think this man was .a gentle- 
man. Moreover, he plied his trade on Sundays, 
and this, between the public and myself, I would 
put an end to, photography not being a necessity, 
nor certainly a work of charity . ^rather a work of 
the enemy to some, to judge from the coun* 



TBE PHOTOGRAPHEieS WimOOW. 228 

tenances of my brother Britons hanging in the 
shop window. 

^' To return to the door-man. He had polished 
his boots . I am convinced that he did it himself, 
and he is to be commended for the action, but not 
the manner . ^with black lead. They had that 
ugly, vamped-up, leaden hue peculiar to boots 
which have been purchased about second . not to 
say third . ^hand. The other extremity of our 
Mend's person wa« covered witii a jaunty hat, 
which still kept its shape, but which had a greasy 
lustre from being too oft^n * ironed up ;' a furious 
carbuncle, in real glass, glowed from a black satin 
stock, Piccadilly whiskers trailed on to the coat 
collar and the waistcoat, and an impudent, un- 
abashed countenance, in which, moreover, there 
were marks of hard Ufe and considerable wear 
and tear, was presented to the passers by, the 
door-man, who invited one and all to come in and 
secure a portrait for themselves, their husbands, 
wives, sweethearts, fathers, mothers, brothers, 
cousins, or children. 

" It is not to be supposed that any one filling 
the situation of this Mr. William Jabbers, coidd 
hold it long without a considerable knowledge of 
life. A look sufficed for the discovery of a probable 



224 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

customer, and such a look he gave as his eye fell 
upon me, and he conveyed, by an expressive mo- 
tion of one eyelid and his thumb, his belief that I 
was a very unlikely customer. To his utter amaze- 
ment I replied by walking to his frame and 
examining it. 

" There were some very fair photographs, and I 
asked my friend, who surveyed me with his head 
on one side, who was the * artist,' a term applied 
by way of brevet to the manipulator. Mr. 
Jabbers, who was a man of a few words, where 
many would be wasted, replied by giviiig me a 
card, on which was printed * Jabbers Brothers, 
Photographic Artists.' * Brother's inside/ he said ; 

* I take the houtside, and the most important.' 
I gave an enquiring look at this, and he continued. 

* It's easy enough to knock 'em off, you see, sir, 
when you get em' in ; the artful dodge, sir, is to 
bring 'em to make up their minds.* 

" I nodded approval, and walked in to a miser- 
able little glass house, built over a garden, and to 
my delighted surprise Mr. Jabbers followed. 

* Now, then,' said he, ' here's a gentleman for a 
one-and-sixpenny : look alive.' 

" The other brother, smelling of collodion and 
stale tobacco^there was a half-blackened pipe on 



TBE FEOTOGRAFHEXB WINDOJF. 225 

a small stove . ^tried to look artistic and business- 
like, wliile Mr. William took a professional glance 
at me, and remarked that I had a good strong 
countenance and slioidd come out well. He 
said, 'Trumps should turn out trumps,' a pro- 
fessional way of speaking ; * else,' he added, ' it's a 
healthy cold morning, and there's no white 
cloud.' 

" * I'm not in a hurry,' said I ; * I can wait.' *All 
right,' said he, * we'll 'ave a plate ready in no time.' 
And he disappeared into his dark room, a small 
cupboard about large enough to pack a piano in. 
*Not a good day for business ?' I said, interroga- 
tively. * Thursdays never is,' said Mr. William, 
with authority; *we only catches strays then; 
Mondays is the best for us.' 

" * I suppose I'm a stray, then,' said I. 

"'Exactly,' said the doorman; *we has a 
gentleman now and then just pop in to look about 
him. Should you like to look at some poses, 
sirP' 

"I nodded assent, and while Mr. Jabbers, 
senior, lighted a short pipe, with an apology for 
smoking based on the cold weather, I turned over 
the leaves of a carte de visite albimi. 

" * There you have 'em, sir, in all their glory, 

VOL. II. Q 



226 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

and many's the tale some of them could tell, sir, 
if they could speak.' He took a whiff or two and 
proceeded. ' I might say as you'd see John Bull, 
and Mrs. Bull, and the little Bulls too, for the 
matter of that, in all their native ugliness, in one 
of our books of specimens.' ' Ugh !' said the door- 
man, regarding the volume with disgust, as he 
shuffled over the stiff cardboard leaves, * I'm sure 
I don't know what they have their ugly mugs done 
for.' 

" ' You remember,' said I, * that aU savages like to 
have their sweet faces reflected in a mirror, and it 
is evident that our savages may have the same 
desire.' 

" Yet, as I looked at the bode, I felt that Mr. 
Jabbers was right. Why should such common- 
places be preserved P 1 felt sickened at the enor- 
mous extent of the plain which stretched before 
me. A photograph book of male and female 
Britons of the lower middle class, inartistically 
posed, and inefficiently photog^phed, is not a 
pleasant object, and does not present anything 
peculiarly expressive. Does Mrs. Smith, who 
keeps one on her drawing-room table, think much 
of hers, I wonder P How she must despise her 
friends as she looks over them; from that girl 



THE PEOTOQRAPEUES WINDOW. 227 

with a leer, who is holding up a pocket-handker- 
chief with this motto on it . 

' Tes, this is my album, 
But learn ere you look, 
That all are expected 
To add to my book.' 

" Pah I I can't repeat the ruhhish; the two last 
lines say something about * leaving your portrait 
for others to quiz/ '* 

" Here Mr, Carew burst in with, * You're quite 
right, Scxmible. If there be anything essentially 
vulgar in the world, it is that constant belief that 
when you look over people's property or portraits 
you * quiz ' them. How I should like to punch 
that felloVs head ! ' 

" ' Whose head P asked Felix. 

" ' The horrid wretch who did that photographic 
rhyme. There is something essentially unfortu- 
nate in photographs. Not one photographer, at 
present, in a hundred, has had anything like an 
artistic education. Those who have artistic feeling 
are not good executants ; those who execute well 
. manipulate, the blockheads call it, where there 
is no manipulation in it . ^have no notion how the 
subject should stand, sit, sprawl, or lie. As for 
the middle-class Britons that Scumble is talking of, 

q2 



228 OTHER PHOPLWS WINDOWS. 

they too evidently want much of that sweetness 
and light of which our modem gentle satirist is so 
fond of writing and talking/ 

" ' And then/ continued Scxmible, taking up the 
thread of his story, * consider the female portion 
of the photographed millions . the female Briton 
who, painfully made-up, wears a portrait in the 
centre of her chest, of a policeman or a soldier. 
The form of such a portrait is oval, the size that 
of a penny jam-tart. Or she may be sitting 
angularly and fondly in too close juxtaposition 
to the fiance. He, poor devil, has clothes upon 
his back, stiff and thick in their newness, hair 
arranged in a semicircular curl near his vulgar ear, 
a face puckered into a hard smile, in return for the 
gaze which the she-Briton, with the fond expres- 
sion of an ogress, sheds on him.' 

" I looked upon such a couple with some interest, 
marvelling how people with the fair average of 
brain, say some forty-seven and a half ounces, could 
thus expose themselves, when Mr. Jabbers spoke. 

"'If you turn over the leaf, you will see a 
couple in separate portraits, and a strange one 
they make. That portrait got the man transported 
for life ; he never thought of that when my brother 
posed him, I'll be bound.' 



THE PEOTOGRAPEERS WINDOW. 229 

" M should think not/ I said, * or he would 
never have entered your door.' 

" ' No ; it isn't likely/ answered the door- 
man, with a peculiar grin, as if he had a know- 
ledge of the operation of the law. 

" ' And how was it that the portrait transported 
him P ' I asked. 

" * Well,' said the door-man, moving a little on 
one side, so that he could command a view of the 
street. * A beastly bad momin', sir ; no one comin' 
in, you see. Well, it was somehow in this ways. 
You know we sort of fellows gets pretty well 
known to the police. They're always sure to be 
poking their noses into everything, and very right 
on 'em too ; and the man as is on my beat, he comes 
up to me and talks to me quite confidential about 
business, and as he talks he gives an eye to the 
people who come in. I didn't like him looking, 
'cos I knew that he was a very sharp man. Not 
that there was anything wrong, but I have a 
natural antipathy to a very sharp man ; so I says to 
him, " Oh, it's aU righteous Bobby, I can tell you." 
* Yes,' says he, with a grin, 'I know that you're 
all righteous, William, but how am I to know as 
I mayn't pick up a little job out o' some of your 
customers ? You have a queer lot sometimes.' 



2^ OTEER PHOPZU'S WINDOWS. 

" * Well, and if we have a queer lot/ says I, ' I 
don't care, so as they pay their money in these 
hard times/ 

*' ' Right you are, William,' says he ; * I got a 
couple of bob for assisting a swell last night ; maybe 
you'll have a drink/ 

" * I don't care,' says I, ' if, to use a Yankee 
phrase, I do put myself outside something,' says I, 
' if it's only for the curiosity of seeing the colour of 
a policeman's money.' 

" ' There you are, then,' says he, tossing down a 
bob ; * there you are ; look sl^arp and get something, 
and put mine just inside the door, so as I can get 
it as I go by, and no one the wiser ;' and away he 
walks cool like, as if there was nothing betweeij 
iis. Presently he comes back quietly, takes his beer 
and the change, and turns inside to wipe his 
mouth on the back of his Berlin glove. 

" * We was very friendly afterwards, and soon 
that bobby got promoted.' 

" * He was made sergeant p' said I. 

" * No, he wasn't ; not a bit of it. I missed biTu 
from his usual beat for a longtime, and was rath^ 
anxious, for he was a very good sort, when one day 
I heard his peculiar whistle ; a whistle he used to 
give when he stood beer, or he wanted me to stand 



TEE PEOTOORAPEER 8 WINDOW. 231 

it, for we took it by turns ; and, taming round, I 
saw a jovial young carpenter, with corduroy 
trousers and a foot*ruIe a stickin' out of a little 
private pocket in the side of his leg, that is made 
o' purpose for these things. Hallo ! Bobby,' says 
I. ' Hallo ! William,' says he; * you know me P' 

" * What ! are you gone into trade, then f I 
asked, looking at him from top to toe, his fresh 
complexion, short hair, and the saw-dust in the 
cracks of his shoes. 

" * No,' he says, with a laugh ; * faint a bad get^ 
up, is it ?' * No, William Jabbers ; you see I've 
got promoted, and I'm a plain-clothes man in my 
regiment.' 

" * You see, sir,' explained Mr. Jabbers, * there's 
only a very few detectives ; the number ain't much 
above six or so at Scotland Yard, where the chief 
inspector is, and the rest of the detectives, as they 
call 'em, are merely men attached to each division, 
who put on disguises and go about seeing what 
they can devour. (Mr. Jabbers was here scriptural 
as well as symbolical.) My particular bobby was 
one of these, and, being a sharp fellow, a very good 
thing he made of it. But, put whatever clothes 
on that he coidd, I managed always to know him. 
He walked like a man as had been drilled, and, 



232 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

whether he came as a clergymaiiy a city derk, a 
carter^ or a dissenting minister, I knew my original 
bobby well enough. Many's the day he spent with 
me ; he seemed to like photography, and we was 
always ready to take him in his different dresses. 

" * Well, one day he came to me as a city mis- 
sionary, and very well he looked. He had a 
bundle of tracts in one hand, thick boots, a rusty 
black coat of a clerical cut, an old hat with a band 
round it, and white worsted gloves of the sort they 
call ringwood. He looked a serviceable sort of 
good work-a-day religious man, and no one would 
have thought what a wolf in sheep's clothing he was. 
He gave his whistle, just two bars, as he came into 
the shop, and says he, '^ William Jabbers, do you 
want to make a fi'pun note ?'* ' 

" * Very badly, Bobby,' says I. 

'^ ' You mustn't call me that now,' says he, 
looking round timid like. * I'm the Reverend Mr. 
Dawson,' says he ; ' how do I do ?' 

" * About the best make-up that I've seen you 
in. Do you want it took off?' 

*'*No,' says the reverend gentleman, with a 
ffrin, *not now. But about this fiver. Have 
you seen anything like this ?' And he took out 
of his pocket a description of some unhappy devil 



TKE PHOTO QRAPHJEES WIIWOW. 233 

oi a clerk who had absconded. " About five feet 
seyen, twenty-one yesars of age, fair, with a small 
moustache, and a downcast look, slightly pock- 
marked on the left side of his face, dresses gen- 
teeUy." ' 

"*Well,' says I, *they are not very compli- 
mentary to him, say what they like about his 
dress.' 

" * No,' says the reverend gentleman ; * but 
they're about right, I'm thinking. They ain't 
got no reason to flatter ; yet he seems pretty dear 
to them, I think ; they oflfer two hundred and 
fifty poun' down, and they may med^e it more if 
we catch him before he dii^ses of all as he has 
absconded with. Now IVe an idea, and if it turns 
out right, you must help me with your photos ; 
and if so be you do, why, you shall have five pound 
of the plunder. You took that man about six 
months ago. I have a presentiment that I saw 
him enter this shop.' 

"Well, nothing could drive that idea out of 
the bobby's head. He was one of those fellows 
who took hold of a notion and stuck to it ; and, 
by Jove if he didn't spend all the morning at our 
glass negatives. When you see a man the wrong 
way^ and black where he should be light, he looks 



2a4 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

very diflTerent, so I had to earn my five pound; 
at last I found sometliiiig that might answer to 
our friend's idea, and when we gave him a print 
of it he said, * That's the man !' * That's him as 
yon looked at, sir,' said William Jabbers, lighting 
his pipe. * I did half the bobby's work for him, 
you see ; but I did it with a heavy 'art, for I dis- 
like to blow on any man. I think,' says I, * Bobby, 
you ought to make it ten,' alluding to the pounds, 
' Bobby.' 

"'Well,' says he, taking prints of the two 
negatives, 'it's odds if I don't get 'em now. But 
la ! it is not every rogue's photo as finds him out. 
Good morning, William. If all goes well Til 
make it ten.' 

'' Given a photograph, and a sharp policeman, 
how to find a criminal out of about twelve millions 
as look very much like him. Maybe not so many, 
counting the young and old ; but there's enough 
to puzzle one, I know. That was what the Reve- 
rend Mr. Dawson thought when he went off, 
making me promise not to take the negative down 
to Scotland Yard. It was about a month before 
he turned up, and then he came back looking very 
much like a sailor, and put into my hand a five 
pound note, saying, ' I've done the trick, William 



TEE FHOTOGRAPEEE 8 WINDOW. 236 

Jabbers; but if it hadn't been for the woman's 
carte^ I shouldn't 'adone it at all, and therefore 
right you are. I'll give you another of Mr. Wil- 
liam Marshall's promissory bills in case he turns 
out trumps.' 

" * So you've got him,' says I, pocketing the 
fiver. * Poor devil ! And how did you do it ? 
For by the way, sir' . ^here Mr. Jabbers addressed 
pie-.' /don't like the way those fellows have, nor 
do / like the fact that a man should prey upon his 
fellow man.' 

" * That's all very natural,' said I ; * but why 
will the rogues do so first P' 

'* * Poor fellows, you don't know what you might 
do when you're put to it,' answered my companion. 
In short, my companion had a very common and 
somewhat dangerous feeling, which is shared in 
by hundreds of the lower classes, which arrays 
them against law and authority. I felt that it was 
useless to argue, and so let him' proceed with his 
story. 

'* * The Rev. Mr. Dawson having reported him- 
self to his chief inspector, and made it clear to him, 
and I daresay he greased his palm,' said the door- 
man^ * that he was on a particular lay, that is, 
after a certain absconding clerk, charged with 



we OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

ombczzloment and forgery, by name William 
Maraliall, trotted off down east, and made all 
.ortr) of inquiries. How he settled it in his mind I 
don't know, but ho preciously quickly found ont that 
William was not there, and that he was in liver- 
pool. Ho was not long in getting there, and there 
ho found that his character wasn't no go. They 
are a rough lot down there, sir, a precious deal 
rougher than any you can find here ; and although 
the reverend gentleman didn't offer to preach, and 
^^^'y ffivo away a few tracts, them long-shore fel- 
lows nigh put him into the river. 

" ' So ho reports himself to the police down 
thorCi and soon rigs himself up as a sailor. 
He'd soon a little of seafaring life, and he made-up 
very well. Here's a photo of him, sir. 

" * Well, ho hadn't been there long afore he found 
that there was another of his pals on the same lay 
.one that come direct from Scotland Yard . and 
that every ship was watched ; for somehow they had 
como to the conclusion that Marshall wanted 
to start to New York. Notes had been changed, 
everything had been turned into gold, and it was 
a neck-and-neck race between the policemen who 
should have him, and between him and the law 
whether he should get away or not. 



TEE PHOTOGRAPHER'S WINDOW. 237 

" * The water-side being well watched, my friend 
saw that it would not serve him to waste his time 
upon it, so he determined to try the streets and 
alleys of Liverpool. That town, they tell me, is a 
queer town ; it is at one end of an ocean line, 
and New York is at the other. That alone says 
wonders. Liverpool is altogether about as bad a 
{dace as any one need pick out. The Teetotaller 
med^es it his hunting-ground for terrible examples. 
At one time a fellow went about stating that within 
a certain period 146 drunken mothers had overlaid 
and killed their children in Liverpool alone ! 
Then there are places there where you can do any 
mortal thing, where drunken Yankees draw their 
knives and Spanish sailors cut and slash, niggers 
drink till they are mad, and wild creatures from 
the slums of London are the leading stars at the 
music-halls and sing-songs. It was into such 
places that my friendly bobby goes, and it was 
lucky that he did not put on his white choker and 
his City Missionary dress, I can tell you. He would 
have been smashed to smithereens if he had.' 

" * You give Liverpool a very pretty character, 
my friend,' I said to the door-man. * No doubt it 
deserves some of it, but not all.' 

" * Well, that's what my friend said of it, and he 



a38 OTEER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

knows pretty well, I can tell you. He didn't 
have to wait long before he was on the scent, but 
he had to wait long enough to fancy that he had 
quite lost it. 

" ' This was how it was. One day he was loung- 
ing, about five o'clock in the afternoon, when he 
saw a woman buying some milk. You see these 
people must have their eyes about 'em, for every 
little thing startles them.' 
" * Startles whom P' I asked. 
" * Why, them of course as doesn't act righteous,' 
said the door-man. 

" This poor woman, bu3dng some milk, said that 
it would perhaps be the last that they should have 
for some time, for her husband was going to sea; 
and then she sighed. My friend looked round at 
her, and that startled her. * Oh !' says he, * there's 
something wrong there. GFoing to sea !' says he 
to himself. * Perhaps it's my man.' 

" Thinking that, he let the poor woman scuttle 
away, and, at a distance, watched the door she 
entered. Then he went back to the milk- shop 
and bought an egg . a new laid one ; he was 
very particular about it, because he had just come 
in by the * Saratoga,' he said ; and says he, with 
a wink and half a hiccup, * That's a nice genteel 



TKE PEOTOQRAPEEK B WINDOW. 239 

woman you had here a moment ago buying milk ; 
idxo may she be P She would not be willing to 
gplice a sailor T he asks* 

'< ' What I' says the woman^ not at all surprised, 
&r sailors don't take long fixing their choice in sea- 
ports, * with a wife in New York and one in South 
^^merica, I 'spose, Jack V 

" * Well/ says he, * theyWe far enough apart, and 
won't hurt each other, will they P But . ^no, I'm 
a lone sea-farin' man, without any one to care for 
me^ or to care for.' 

*' ^ Then she has, poor thing !' says the milk- 
woman; 'she has a poor sick husband from 
London as has been ill a'most all the time she 
has been here, and is waitin', I suppose, to get 
over to America to his relations. Why, I declare 
that you've frightened her away without paying.' 

" The plain-clothes man felt pretty certain that 
that was the man he had been wanting so long. 
He felt his heart up in his mouth . ^felt as an old 
huntsman does when, after a long check, he has 
found again. * By jingo I' says he, * that's the 
man.' 

" * Have you seen her husband ?' he asked. 

"'Never,' said the woman. 'He has been ill 
all the time . ^leastways, I have been told so. She 



240 OTRER FEOPLIPS WINDOWS. 

seldom goes out except of an evening. I some- 
times see her a-looking over the London papers.* 

" * Ah/ says he, taking his e^^y * now I mean to 
have this beat up in rum, and jolly good stuff it 
makes. That's not the woman for me, mum. I 
am a plain sea-farin' man, and don't want any one 
else's property. Good morning, mum.' Away 
he went, and had his rum made ready for him, 
and while he was drinkin' it he discussed, as 
he called it, his way of proceedin'. * That woman 
at the milk shop is the only person she comes 
to talk to,' says he to himself, ' and I am about 
sure that she is the woman as was photo'd with 
Mr. WiUiam Marshall ; but I didn't take a fiill 
view of her face. She'll come out again. What 
a pity it was that the milk- woman didn't know 
what ship she was to sail by ; what a pity it was 
I didn't see her face.' 

" He had stepped over to a small * public ' not fer 
from where she lived, and had taken out a small 
magnifying glass, with which he was studying the 
carte de visite, with one eye on the picture and 
one eye on the door, when he saw the woman 
come out again dressed a little smarter, and with 
her bonnet on. She had a warm shepherd's plaid 
shawl, that covered up her neck, and she seemed 



TEE PHOTOGRAPHERS WINDOW. 24.1 

to be a little gayer, for she was singing away in 
a low tone. She came out of the door hurriedly, 
and then went back again. My friend, while she 
was away, hopped out of the 'public' into the milk 
shop. He pretended to be a little light . a little 
overcome with the liquor. and he began to chaff 
the woman and asked for another egg. Presently 
in comes lady from London in her plaid shawl ; 
when she sees my friend she starts back. The 
milk- woman laughed. *La!' she says, 'don't be 
afraid, Mrs. Williams, don't be afraid; this is 
only a poor sailor in want of a wife, as they 
most of 'em are in Liverpool. He's been askin' 
after you as a likely party, but I tell him that you 
don't want a man as has wives in so many parts 
of the world.' 

" The pretended sailor half reeled back on his 
heels, and looked at the innocent milk-woman 
with a jovial laugh. 

" * I last hailed from New York, and from that 
place I hailed from Australia, where there are an 
odd lot o' colony girls, and some of a rum breed, 
between Chineses and Japaneses. What I mean 
to marry is a good sound English woman. I like 
none of your half breeds, I don't.' 

" * Jack's right,' says the milk- woman, and with 

VOL. II. R 



242 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

half a laugh on her face. The party, who called 
herself Mrs. Williams, by the way, looked round. 
My friend was satisfied then that he had been all 
along on the right tack ; there was the woman, 
and not only that, as she began to talk and ask 
rather earnestly about New York, and whether 
there was a decent living to be picked up as a 
merchant, or say as a clerk, she opened the heavy 
shawl she had round her neck and there was a 
common enough brooch, and in it the very photo- 
graph I had taken. My friend had a precious 
hard matter to keep his countenance, but he grew 
so very friendly with the two women, that Mrs. 
Williams actually asked whether he would earn 
half-a-crown by lifting down a heavy box ; for, as 
she said her husband was sick, and they were 
going to sail to-morrow. Meantime, my friend 
had persuaded her to have a little rum and milk, 
which he had fetched, so they were on the best of 
terms with each other, you may be sure. 

"Well, to make a long story short . for I see my 
brother has got his plate ready . ^my friend, who 
could hardly help fixing his eyes on the brooch, 
but who was sharp enough to say nothing about 
it, came the next evening at the time appointed, 
and lifted the box on to the cab, and got inside 



TEE FEOTOGRAFEESB WINDOW, 243 

with Mr. and Mrs. Williams, just to see 'em 
off. 

" * I'm sure it's very kind of you/ says Mrs, 
Williams, 'and thanks for all the information 
you've given me. We can get on very well now, 
for at the docks the sailors will help us.' 

** * I'll just go as far with you myself,' says my 
friend, 'just to see a shipmet. No, thank ye, I 
won't take the half-crown. I like to give a hand 
when I can, and never cares to charge for it.' 

" The fact was, my friend was aboTB being tipped 
by his prisoner. He had squared matters with the 
cabman, and had told him to drive round, not to 
the docks, but to the railway station, and he kept 
a pretty sharp eye on the sick Mr. Williams, who 
was wrapped up in bandages and covered up to his 
nose. 

" ' A simple fellow,' thought the policeman. 
' That's the very way to attrack attention. If I 
hadn't had my eye on him, that detective at the 
dockside would ha' nabbed him for certain.' How- 
ever, both the Williams's were anxious to get rid 
of my friend, but he wasn't ready to go. He would 
stick in the cab, and cabby was ready enough to 
whip up on the box and drive off. Then it was that, 
under the pretence of wrapping up the sick man, 

r2 



244 OTHER FEOPLIPS WINDOWS. 

my friend felt that he had got no pistols, and sud- 
denly popped out his warrant; and just before 
they reached the railway station, he cried out, 
* William Marshall, I arrest you on the charge of 
forgery!' 

" Of course, when the cab stopped, there was 
plenty to help Bobby ; but the prisoner was so 
surprised that he was done. *The game's up,' 
says he ; ' I'll go quietly ; don't make a fuss ; 
don't let anybody know. Let us go first class . 
there's money of my own, and I haven't spent any 
of the firm's yet. You will find it all there.' 

" The woman cried, and was wild enough ; but 
the man, after the first surprise was over, took his 
fate well, and Bobby, to do him justice, put him up 
to all the moves of the law. He was tried and 
convicted, but got a light sentence, because he had 
not made away with any of the estate. My friend 
was of considerable service to him, and got another 
rise on account of his cleverness. He was made a 
real detective, and not a plain-clothes man ; that 
is, he was not attached to any division, but had a 
sort of roving commission to pick up rogues; I 
often see him here, but I don't like him. He 
looks upon every man as if he would one day be 
going and doing something to make himseK his 



THE PH0T0QRAPEER8 WINDOW. 245 

customer, and he has got quite a fond regard for 
rogues of all kinds/ 

" * Plate's quite ready, sir/ said the brother. 

"TU pose you/ ejaculated William Jabbers ; 
and as he did so he continued, ' Lord bless you, 
that is not half what I could teU you that we see 
in our profession ; from being called in to photo- 
graph post-mortems, to making pictures of live 
cats or dead babbies, there's a good deal of variety 
to be seen in a photographer's window.' " 



246 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



A HOUSE OF CHABITT. 




T was now the turn of Dr. Julius Comer 
to amuse his Mends, and he was quite 
ready to do so when called upon. 

" I have lately been called/* said he, in a pre- 
paratory way, " to visit a certain place, of which 
there are many in some degree similar in its object 
and in its formation all over this blessed land. I 
mean a home for orphans ; and it will do us all 
good, I fancy, to peep in at one of the windows 
of such a house as this. Will you, therefore, let 
me be your guide P" So saying, the Doctor com- 
menced as follows : . 

"There are many sad words in the English 
language, some even tearful in their sounds, per- 
haps none more so than two. 'widows' and 
' orphans.' But these symbols are so because they 



TRE REFUGE WIND OW. 247 

convey to us two impersonations, melancholy 
enough to be the chief types of helplessness . the 
woman whose prop and stay are taken from her, 
and the child whose career is saddened at its out- 
set by the death of those whom God had given to 
protect and shield, and whom, for some mysterious 
purpose of his own, he has taken away. 

« These types of affliction are insisted on by one 
whose pathos never fails, and who, in the short 
and simple version of the English Church, exhibits 
the desolation of a nation in the words of the peo- 
ple, crying out, 'We are orphans and fatherless, 
and our mothers are widows.' And yet the grief 
is common enough . ^too common. HerCy where 
we work in London, or in any great town ; thercy 
where they go down to the sea in ships, and ply 
their business on the world of waters ; or under 
the earth itself, where the busy miner burrows 
like a human mole, aud runs his burrow even 
beneath the waves of the ever-surging sea, men 
droop and die, the active brain stops, and the busy 
fingers are cold and still. So, too, as there is * no 
flock, however watched and tended, but one dead 
lamb is there' and hears not the calling of the 
ewe ; no home but has its vacant chair and the 
remembered voice that will never be heard again. 



248 OTEER PEOPLIPS WINDOWS. 

80 there are not many knots or groups of us but 
have our widows and orphans. Tom, who was 
80 brave, and kind, and cheery . the flower of the 
flock . whose pleasant faqe brought sunshine to 
the room, has gone to his long home ; John and 
Hugh, soldiers who married for love, have died on 
foreign service, and left three orphans to subsist 
on small and intermittent pensions ; or Frank, 
ever serious, and kind, and good, has died a curate 
in some fever-stricken town. And in a thousand 
other ways, a thousand other men, treading cir- 
cumspectly this slippery walk of life, fall off into 
the gulf of death, dying at their work . at desk, 
ship, shop, the lathe, or in the field . dying in their 
armour in the strife of life, fighting on to the end, 
it may be against poverty and disease ; moreover, 
as surely being marked off and smitten down as 
any soldier on an actual battle-field. Wordsworth 
says that ' the good die first, and we, whose hearts 
are dry as summer's dust, bum to the socket.' I 
do not know that that is quite true, because . 
praise be to Heaven . I know so many good men 
that, as yet, the world does not want salt and 
savour ; but certainly some of our best men have 
died young. They die before they have had time 
to turn themselves round in life, and leave their 



TEE REFUGE WINDOW. 249 

Kttle ones behind them to those who will befriend 
them for the love of God . the bitterest pang such 
men can have ; a pang only to be eased by Faith, 
almost too strong for many, is the belief in God's 
mercy and in the charity of man. 

" And really it is for us to see that neither fail 
him, for of all methods of doing good . and there 
are many very questionable, often very harmful 
ways, of which indiscriminate * charity,* that is 
penny-dropping, is one of the worst . of all ways 
of doing good, the due caring for orphans is the 
most unmistakable. You can live a life of inten- 
tions without ever getting beyond * intending;* 
you can foster a hypocrite . ^nay, without properly 
looking into the matter, you can create a vice by 
alms-giving ; you may make this man's villainy 
more profitable than a clerk's mdustry, and give 
alms to the beggar and the thief, who will revel 
on your money while they laugh at your credulity ; 
but if you aid to educate and clothe an orphan 
you cannot do wrong. *Pure religion and un- 
defiled before God and the Father is this. To visit 
the fatherless and widows in their affliction.' 
Where duty is so plainly pointed out, where it 
does so much good, where it adds to the holiness 
of a nation, the safety of the state, decreases the 



250 OTEJER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

misery and the crimen forestalls the thief and the 
Arab of the street^ and places a useful working 
man or woman in his stead ; where it stops re- 
cruiting for the devil's regiments of the line, and 
adds an efl&cient soldier to the army of the good ; 
where it is thrice . ^ay, nine times blessed . in 
youth, in age, to the memory of the dead, to the 
comfort of the living ; where it clothes the naked, 
feeds the hungry, lodges the wayfarer, teaches the 
ignorant, and returns thus laden into the bosom 
of the giver . shall I, shall we, be wrong in calling 
all to help us in so good a work P Should they 
refuse, let us ask Fancy and Imagination to a 
holy task . and, cry you mercy, ladies and 
gentlemen, they have been far worse employed 
. ^in carrying you to see what other eyes have 
seen, eyes that have looked through the Cholera 
Window, and seen other of the doings of that 
' Angel of Death/ 

" So let us look straight down into the blank 
space before us. It will shape itself into a very 
wretched room, in which, upon a bed, one poor wo- 
man lies. Her lot in life, which seemed so fair at 
first, as often mornings bright and beautifiil turn 
out to gusty days and stormy nights, has been 
checkered and sad. Still, there was the husband 



TEE REFUGE WINLOW, 251 

and one bright boy^ and manly hope and love to 
cheer her^ till^ of a sudden^ a little illness^ so slight 
at first it seemed but nothings came, and then he 
died. This death was not much in the news^* 
papers ; one more case of the East-end, or West- 
endy or North, or South, no matter. 'Things' 
steadily on the decrease, my lord ; we watch and 
tabulate these matters now, and ' things ' are going 
on so prosperously that we shall soon cease to 
issue bulletins, 

** But little recks the dead soldier whether he be 
shot in the first brave charge or hit by the spent 
shot of the last beaten g^unner, after the recall has 
been blown and the baffled troops have left the 
field. To the widow he was all the world, and 
aU the world has gone from her. Nurtured care- 
fully, a good wife, but now left alone, without 
trade, money, profession, or business tact, what 
can she do ? She and Nature thought, it may be, 
but one thing was left, and so she slowly sickened 
and died, hopeless, of a withered and a broken 
heart . a disease not in the registrar's returns, but 
which yet kills many who are not ticked down 
nor tabulated, and on whom we issue no bulletins. 

" There, in the silent chamber . a sacred place 
while Death is king . she Ues ; a three-year baby, 



252 OTHUR PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

wonder-struck at the closed eye and the stone-cold 
hand, plays with the thin coverlet that shrouds 
her form, and the child, with some dim notion of 
a coming sorrow, holds up his baby hand, and 
with pointed finger says, ' She sleeps/ His eyes 
are brighter for forgotten tears, his arms are 
stretched into the vacant space, and, as his ears 
catch the sound of coming steps, he calls to his 
dead father to waken her to whom in this world 
sleeping and waking are now both alike. lict us 
hope that some good soul will listen to his cry." 



" * There are from eighty to ninety of them 
in this Institution, sir,' said the matron, whom 
one can call comely in the true English sense . 
active, intelligent, and with good looks, looking 
good; Uhe eldest is fourteen and the youngest 
about three.' 

"There the young girls were: some playing, 
swinging, as children will, laughing merrily; 
healthful, but certainly not boisterous nor rude. 
Some, who had struck up that fast and mysterious 
friendship proper to young girls, were knitting 
side by side, softly talking to each other; some 
walked round the small playground, reading ; and 
others, in the house, were studying in the school- 



THE REFUGE WINDOW. 253 

room, or helping in the household work, of which, 
you may be sure, there was enough in so large a 
family. Of these ninety girls, all under ten are 
called 'infants,' are carefully tended together, 
and have their separate dormitory, schoolroom, 
and washing-place. It is impossible not to admire 
the cleanliness and order of the place. Twenty- 
four small heads, two and two, press those little 
white pillows, and sleep calmly the sleep of inno- 
cence and peace ; and forty-eight little feet put on 
those stout, diminutive boots, to trudge together 
to their Sunday services in the church, and raise 
the little voices of twenty- four young hearts in a 
hymn of praise to an Almighty Father. 

" So, too, the matron, not without a consciousness 
of well-doing, shows twenty-four Simday straw 
bonnets and twenty-four neat plaid or tartan 
tippets which the ' infants ' wear. These, like the 
boots, are kept in wardrobes, duly folded and 
numbered, only the boots turn their eight-and- 
forty toes into pigeon-holes such as lawyers . ^to 
worse purpose too . fill up with papers. 

" The room wherein these vigorpus but orphaned 
infants wash is again a perfect pattern of arrange- 
ment and neatness. A dozen or so pewter basins, 
in as good a lavatory as need be, low down, to suit 



254 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

the infant stature, are ranged round the room, on 
the floor of which is a batten, so that it shall be 
always dry. In another room, half a dozen infant 
baths, of a size corresponding to such, small fiy, 
are supplied with hot and cold water, and here 
health is consulted by a thorough wash of, and 
much splashing by, the four-and-twenty infants 
once and sometimes twice a week. 

" Similar to these, but on a larger scale, plain, 
substantial, and without finery, are the lavatory 
and bathroom of the elder girls. In each of the 
dormitories there are monitresses, and after prayers 
are said, and the orphans are in bed, the little 
tongues are bound by a chain of silence, unless, 
indeed, they murmur in their sleep. With the 
infants, in a kind of large pew, covered in with a 
screen of ground glass, but admitting sound freely 
enough, since the screen does not reach the ceiling, 
a nurse or attendant sleeps ; and in a smaller room 
are one or two sick children, whom Dr. Julius, of 
Richmond, attends gratuitously. "Were there 
funds sufficient, the number of orphan girls would 
be increased to 150, and then it would be wise to 
build a small sanitarium at some distance from the 
Home. As it is, however, the health of the chil- 
dren, taken from all classes and all counties of the 



TEE REFUGE WINDOW. 255 

kingdom, and some of them, perchance, but badly- 
fed, is remarkably good. 

" From the upper part of the Home, which the 
visitors have first examined, ther descend to a 
large, very well- ventilated schoolroom, inspecting 
the. linen presses as they go down, and admiring 
cleanliness and order. All the clothes . ^boots and 
bonnets excepted . are made in the Home. In the 
workroom some rough and substantial stuff, warm 
and heavy, is being cut up and made ready for 
winter petticoats. The schoolroom is much the 
same as all such rooms are, only more cleanly and 
neat. Slates seem to be abolished, and the pro- 
vince of many . as of the kings of German States 
. ^to be fulfilled by two of a gigantic size ; there 
they stand, in large oaken frames, like a couple of 
cheval-glasses, reflecting nothing but chalk figures. 
The course of instruction is simple: arithmetic, 
reading, and writing . the old three E's, which, if 
well mastered, are all that our poor little orphans 
want, as they are brought up to help and support 
themselves, and, when they leave the Home, go 
into service, or as apprentices to some trade where 
female labour is remunerative. But there is such 
order and plain, solid, clean comfort in this Home, 
that any one who secures a good servant from it 



256 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINLOWS. 

must be lucky ; while the poor girl herself, made 
to sleep, it may be, in an underground kitchen, 
must often regret the pleasant Orphan Home* 
And here^ only that Mr. Buskin has done it forcibly 
and well before me, I would say something about 
the lodgment of our servants ; but with this hint, 
readers are left to look to it. 

" The kitchen and the laimdry are what they 
should be. When our visitor saw it the cook was 
'cleaning up,* an uncomfortable operation even 
with a drawing-room ; but here everything was 
in order, and the fire, like a living thing, burned 
merrily, as if it had done its duty in preparing a 
good meal for nearly a hundred hungry orphans. 
Although dinner was not long over, they had 
begun, in a little room especially devoted to the 
purpose, to cut up the wholesome wheaten bread 
for tea, for the meal so called . ^which is the last 
the orphans have, and is luckily composed of 
cocoa and something that can nourish, as from five 
at night imtil eight the next morning . a long 
time for the young . those white little teeth have 
no employment. The dietary seems to be very 
good ; if it errs it is not on the side of too much 
indulgence. Meat three times out of the seven 
days, soup once, puddings . rice, milk, and bread, 



TEE REFUGE WIND W. 267 

and apple, on the other days: . ^hence, perhaps, 
not a superabundance of colour in the prphans' 
cheeks, who are otherwise tall, strong, and healthy. 
A large garden beyond the playground, too large 
to be well cultivated by two gardeners, supplies 
the vegetables and fruit. One visitor, having an 
eye to agriculture . ^it can hardly be called horti- 
culture, for there are no flowers . ^thinks that a 
great deal more could be got out of that piece of 
land ; but you must put a great deal more into it. 
Then that visitor, who had an eye to improvement, 
and insisted that orphans must play, God bless 
them ! and that everything was so well done that 
it was a pity to spoil so noble a lifeboat . a boat 
put out to so many wrecks on the dark ocean of 
adversity . this visitor, I say, was going to suggest 
some other inexpensive improvement, when the 
secretary and matron stopped him by a hint: 
there were no funds I 

" * There are many orphans waiting their turn 
outside this harbour of refuge,' said the secretary 
. 'many who cannot come in, because, though 
we have some room, we have not enough money. 
Many good people help us ; but even three .thousand 
nine hundred pounds is a small sum to clothe, 
educate, and feed nearly one hundred orphan 

VOL. II. s 



258 OTEJSR FHOFZITS WIDOWS. 

girls, notwithstanding that this building is our 
own and the land has been given. There is 
another wing ' 

"I never knew an energetic secretary to a good 
Institution who did not want another wing, and, 
to tell the truth, I shared the desire of the gentle- 
man in question. There was, I learnt, a little 
four-year-old girl, the orphan of a certain stalwart 
and staunch keeper of the Eddystone Lighthouse, 
who had trimmed the lamp on many a stormy 
night on the wild Atlantic Ocean : his light has 
gone out now, and one should like to shelter his 
little girl under that * wing.' One might wish 
for another wing, beneath whose shelter boys 
might grow to be good soldiers and sailors, and 
to serve our mother England in the troublous 
times to come. Indeed, if wishes could build 
homes and hospitals, many poor were housed, and 
many a good deed were done. 

" But, alas ! they will not. Wishes alone are of 
little avail ; we must combine to help the helpless. 

" So, in the soft autumnal light, with many a 
dead leaf fluttering to the ground, I walk onward 
to the great city by the river's side. How many 
homeless orphans lie there now ! How many a 
breaking, aching heart would be eased if it knew 



THE REFUGE WINBOW. 259 

that such a home as this awaited its lonely child ! 

and if wishes cannot do much, the little good 

deeds of many may raise a large heap which shaU 

do so^ and in the sight of Him who implants all 

kindly thoughts and gentle deeds, the widow's 

mite was equal to the rich man's liberal treasure. 

" This Home was founded some years ago, to 

provide specially for the children who had been 

left orphans when cholera visited this country 

with terrible severity. Every such eflfort must 

have His blessing whose will it is that * not one of 

these little ones shall perish.' Even a cup of cold 

water given in His name to them is accepted by 

Him as given to Himself. To each one who .does 

something towards this end the thought of the little 

helpless ones safely housed, and fed, and clothed, 

and trained up alike for duty in this life, and 

happiness with their Saviour in the next, will ever 

be a source of truest and purest satisfaction. And 

when we have run our course, and are about to 

sleep, we may not look, indeed, ' to have a tomb 

of orphans' tears wept o'er us,' in the words of 

Shakespeare, but our simpler deed will be rewarded 

with the sweet consciousness that we have in some 

measure * taught the orphan boy to read, and taught 

the orphan girl to sew.' " 

82 



260 OTKER PHOPLIPS WINDOWS. 




CHAPTER XV. 

THE NEWSVENDOR's WINDOW. 

Tm evening was drawing to a close, when 
Mr. Scumble insisted^ having the deadly 
purpose of chaffing and irritating George 
Carew, on drawing a picture of the Newsvendor's 
Window. Carew, being fully prepared for any 
such attack, let him indulge in the pastime, and 
merely now and then turned his point, so that he 
might himself indirectly glance upon Art. 

" There is one window,'* said the artist, " into 
which we ought to have peeped; indeed there are 
many.'' 

" How many indeed !'* returned Carew. " Why, 
what has been said about the * Milliner's Window,' 
what of the * Palace Window,' what of that little 
window covered with a grille^ through which the 
Priest, cowering low and wondering at the awful 



TEE NEWSVENLOR'S WINDOW. 261 

sameness of crime, listens to the gasped- out con- 
fessions of the really penitent, or the drawling 
repetition of her who only goes through the matter 
as a form ?'* 

"By Jove!'* interrupted Stanton, "I suppose 
that's true« Of course all crime is alike. One 
could take a peep now in the ' condemned cell,' 
or into the * prison window;' but I fancy that, 
unless tricked and dressed out by the pen of a prac- 
tised writer, the sketches would have a miserable 
sameness, a dull identity." 

" You can get crime in the Newspapers," said 
the professional author. " Butler's * Hudibras ' is 
a tiring poem. No one has read it through in a 
week or in a month, on account of its intense and 
general evenness of wit. 'So no one has ever read 
the * Newgate Calendar ' through with any plea- 
sure ; not even the most rabid devourer of those 
ghastly and vulgar penny Newspapers that have 
so large a circulation. And why is this ? Because 
of the horrid sameness of crime. These murderers 
have no invention, or the reporters of ' the horrible 
catastrophe,' as they call it, have not the slightest 
variation. What a terrible trade ; what a miser- 
able degradation for any one who has aspired . and 
there is no man who lives by his pen who has not 



262 OTHER PJEOPLW S WINDOWS: 

done so . to Kve by chronicling the brutalities of 
BiU Sykes, and serving up to a vilely voracious 
public the details of disfigurement of poor Nancy's 
face, or the depth to which poor Mary Hackabout's 
throat has been cut.'' 

" There you have it," cried Scumble, triumph- 
antly ; "if you wiU keep with me in this window 
you will find many of the works of literary men 
which ought to be burnt by the common hangman, 
and which is are shame to any Christian country. 
Let us imagine Newspapers written not only by 
those who are entirely ignorant or perverse, de- 
bating questions which only the patient and the 
learned should debate; basing their arguments 
upon falsities or fallacies, misrepresenting every 
shade of opinion, even their own, if they have any, 
and having made the mixture thick and slab with 
long adjectives, and misused participles, filling up 
the rest of the paj)er with the dull records of crime, 
the brutal relations of murder, the foolish, idiotic 
stories of cunning idiots, who thought they were so 
much wiser than the world that they could grow 
rich by violent theft, and, with a himdred thousand 
eyes upon them, escape the consequences of the 
most open and transparent forgery." 

George Carew grumbled an approval. 



THE NEW8VEND0RS WINDOW. 263 

" Simplicity, poverty, and ignorance are, or may 
be, respectable,'' continued Scimible ; " but these 
swaggering ruffians, these shameless bullies of the 
press, who are strong and great only through the 
weakness and cowardice of others, show such dirty 
vulgarity that one's gorge rises at them. These 
are they who yell against the nobility of England, 
whom they miscall the aristocracy, and yet give 
the greatest prominence to the Court Circular; 
who point out, with a finger-nail tipped with dirt, 
an elopement in high life, and yet allow assig- 
nations to be openly advertised in their paper ; 
who are virtuously indignant at a fashionable 
gaming-table in St. James's, and yet give the 
latest odds at a ratting match, or a glove mill in 
St. Giles's ; who are churls at heart, vile in every- 
thing ; whose vulgarity is only surpassed by their 
ignorance ; whose ignorance is only exceeded by 
their vulgarity. These are your literary men !" 

Mr. Carew groaned in spirit, but kept his peace, 
save to say, " Literary hacks, you mean." 

" Well," said Felix, rushing to the rescue, " I 
don't think you are quite fair in that. You would 
not point out those fellows who are drummed out 
of the regiment, those drunken dogs that are found 
every where, for whom the cat exists, and from 



264 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINLOWS. 

whom eyeiybody in the army suffers as soldiers, 
would you P Nor would you class amongst the 
priests of any church those ne'er-do-weels who are 
of no use, and who cannot do good in any way , who 
get drunk upon the most solenm occasions, who 
cannot read the morning prayer, and whose ser- 
mons are spoilt when stolen, and when original, so 
dull that no one can listen to them." 

" What other follies do you not see in the news- 
vendor's shop?" said Carew. ^'Magazines with 
knitting, netting, and crochet in, and yet bolstered 
Tip with stuff they call literature . indigestible 
either by gods or men; lumpy, heavy, without 
taste, savour, or knowledge. Verses written by 
people who don't know how to scan ; descriptions 
of society by those who have never been to a 
decent tea party ; rattling relations of steeplechases 
by those who were never across a saddle; and 
temperance sermons by those whose intemperance 
of life and temper are as remarkable as their 
foUy." 

" Add to this," urged Dr. Comer, " Magazines 
edited (!) . save the mark . ^by people who have no 
more idea of what an editor's duties are than a 
pig ; who pitchfork into their miserable receptacle 
certain articles which are sent them by their 



TEE NUWSVENDOES WINDOW. 265 

friends, without any question as to their goodness. 
And these Magazines are issued by publishers who 
know as little of their trade as would a country 
clown if put to dispense drugs, and sell physic and 
poisons." 

" There you are right/* growled George. " You 
may say what you like against those gentry, al- 
though they, bad as they are, are not all bad. 
How many publishers are there in London, 
Scumble ? Don't know P No more do I. Jobson 
Brothers, who commenced life as putty manufac- 
turers, started all of a sudden into an immense 
popularity as purveyors of novels to a discerning 
public. "Well, let us say there are one hundred 
publishers. Really there are not more than 
ninety-five, or say ninety of them who understand 
their business. Hence the rubbish which floods 
the market." 

" Bless me I" cried Mr. Comer, who had a 
notion that all publishers were as wise and enter- 
prising as * Young John Murray of Fleet Street,* 
of whom Walter Scott wrote ; " bless me ! surely, 
Mr. Carew, you must make some mistake." 

** N<yn mi ricordOy* ejaculated George, with a 
sad smile; possibly I may have said something 
unjust of these gentlemen, but I don't mean it. 



266 OTHER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

I live by selling and projecting books ; so far as I 
know, good books; honest books, I will swear, 
made to the best of my ability, and even, I hope, 
calculated to last and to do good. Cancel, there- 
fore, what I have said against the publishers ; they 
are like picture-dealers, I suppose ; they are the 
reservoirs into which some of the gushing waters 
of genius are confined until the public has tasto 
enough to buy them." 

" Exactly so," said Mr. Comer ; " I love to look 
upon these persons as something more than mere 
tradesmen . as patrons of letters, as the Maecenases 
of our nation of shopkeepers. .They -no doubt 
find out our rising poets by keeping their eyes 
upon the comers of Newspapers, or wherever else 
such flowers grow, and then they write to the 
obscure individual, and, finding him , in a garret, 
purchase from him a volume of priceless verse, 
and publish it in so charming a form that it wins 
its way at once to fame, and the poet blesses for 
ever the judicious kindly men of the counter and 
the shop, who have lifted him into the seventh 
heaven of publicity." 

Carew, who was in a mad humour, was not im- 
willing to humour the old gentleman, and, with a 
solemn bow, seemed to acquiesce in all that he said. 



TKE NEWSVJSKDOR'S WINDOW. 267 

" Of course," said he, " I beKeve that it is a 
known fact that publishers have found out all the 
modem poets . ^let us say Tennyson, Browning, and 
Mr. Swinburne, and that not one of these ever 
published his first venture and lost money by it. 
There is a well-known firm, which, from the fact 
of an ancient member of it having written a few 
sonnets, is called the poets' publishers. Well, this 
benevolent firm has, of course, done little else than 
suggest to rising authors editions of their poems, 
and even subjects for their dramas." The speaker 
stopped short. 

''Bah ! what balderdash this is. Note that the 
publisher who always gets the best of the success- 
ful author at least, although he is sometimes 
pinched by the unsuccessful one, never suggests a 
work . save a cookery book. Pardon me. Two 
publishers did in a way introduce two great au- 
thors to the British public. But, marry, how did 
they do it ? The authors are really great authors, 
worthy of much praise, and they owe their eleva- 
tion to their own genius, but the first step on the 
ladder to the publishers. But, marry, how was 
this done P The two authors are Samuel Bichard- 
son and Charles Dickens, To tiie first . a book- 
seller himself . ^his brethren suggested a series of 



268 OTHER PEOPLE* 8 WINDOWS. 

epistles, a Complete Letter- writer, to teacli servant 
maids and young milliners how to correspond ; and 
hence arose Pamela; to the second, a very admir- 
able publisher, no doubt, travelled from the Straad 
to Holbom one fine morning, to suggest that he 
should write a kind of comic libretto to a set of 
cockney sketches by Seymour; and hence arose 
Pickwick. All honour to the fine old English gen- 
tlemen who drink their wine out of our skulls at 
Stationers' Hall, but don't say that they originate. 
As for poets' publishers, they are the grossest of 
all humbugs. The poor poet publishes, and, even 
if successful, is mulcted heavily by the booksell- 
ing spider into whose web he has been unlucky 
enough to crawl. There, now I have spoken 
enough truth for one evening, and I shall shut up." 

Shut up he did, thinking that he had taken the 
wind out of the excellent Scumble's sails* That 
worthy, however, was not to be disappointed. 

" I think," cried he, starting afresh, and looking 
at Dr. Comer for aid, " that we have taken seve- 
ral furtive glances into various windows under the 
guidance of George here ; but by jingo, or by the 
saint . St. Luke, is it not ? . who is the patron of 
painters, he makes matters worse for himself. We 
have not yet done with the newsvendor's window. 



THE NEW8VEND0R8 WINDOW. 269 

Look at tliose penny numbers in royal 8yo, illus- 
trated! Count them ; they are all stories of high- 
waymen, robbers, thieves, burglars, murderers, 
pirates; they are all issued by members of the /Soci^^y 
for the Prqpagatmi of Vice, and are all winked at by 
a paternal government, although it has an especial 
bill which could pinch those who issued them. 
Every week they bear fruits ; every week, at one 
or two police-offices, the ' intelligent officer ' bears 
witness to finding a juvenile burglar with some 
half dozen of these stories in his possession ; nay, 
every day, as you walk the streets, you may, if you 
are observant, watch the little fellows playing at 
thieves, and pretending to be Blueskin or Jack 
Sheppard . the grand thing in their small noddles 
being to shoot, to pilfer, to steal, and to overcome 
the officers of the law. And now, if the author is 
the originator of such stuff, how much guilt must 
lie at his door !" 

" Well, well," said Oarew, " twice have I bolted 
you out, and yet you will get in at the window. 
Firstly, I disdain all connection with such writers, 
from their great high priests Harrison Ainsworth 
and Lord Lytton downwards; and, secondly, I 
maintain that in the lower strata of the booksell- 
ing trade my rule is reversed. I have no doubt 



wo OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

that the printer, or the peddling publisher who 
owns such efiusions, does suggest . ^his wits having 
been sharpened by a previous success, and by 
having pocketed some of the money of the street- 
urchins whom he has sent to the gaol and thence 
to the gallows . to his wretched hacks the pro- 
priety of copying some greater author's story of 
thieves and bad women ; and hence the ' Claude 
Duvals' and * Spring-heeled Jacks* that we hear of. 
I concede, however," . the author gravely bowed . 
" that there are men of letters . ^no, not of letters, 
but of inventive powers, and great authors though 
not scholars, who have, through a positive love 
for crime and low life, given us pictures which 
these people weakly imitate, and who in their 
prefaces have arrogantly claimed that they were 
writing with a moral purpose. The trenchant satire 
of Thackeray is hardly a sufficient punishment 
and answer to such men." 

" Hip, hip, hip, hurrah V^ cried Scumble ; " we 
have brought him to his knees." 

'* Stay a moment," cried Carew ; " what of the 
artists in the newsvendor's shop P" 

Scumble winced. 

" There you may see them in the long list of 
twenty or thirty of those royal 8vo. highwaymen 



TEE NEWS VEND OR* S WINDOW, 271 

authors you spoke of, Scumble. There you will 
find the illuminated paper that depends upon 
nothing else but its paltry pictures to sell it ; that 
has made literature utterly subservient to art, so 
far as one thing can be subservient to another 
with which it has no connection. There you may 
see this Illuminated Press, serving up week by 

week the old stale repetitions of the wreck of 

and the burning of such and such, with the old 
twaddling stuff about royal progresses and court 
ceremonies. No wonder we have grown sick of 
kings. How much of the obloquy and the hatred 
that they have reaped, is owing to the perpetual 
illustrations of Prince A.'s hat. Prince B.'s coat, 
Prince D.'s feathers, and the stupid servility and 
slavish sycophancy which has made all the honest 
people in the nation sick, even unto death, of these 
gilded shams I Has the Queen much to thank 
those artists for who have so faithfully illustrated 
her progresses, and even the persons of her faithful 
servants and attendants, whose offices and doings 
her Majesty has so touchingly illustrated in her own 
royal book? Why, if the stupid hewers of wood 
and drawers of water had so illustrated the life of 
Aristides the Just, he would have been ostracised 
some years before that event really happened." 



272 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

Scumble tried to turn the torrent. " You should 
remember, George," said he, "that fashion is 
fashion ; that fashionable people are very empty- 
headed, and that when the illuminated paper, 
. ^which I grant is stupidly written, and utteriy 
inane . was first established, the people were in 
love with their young queen, whose progresses 
they watched with interest.'* 

" I wish the triumphal arches had not been all 
80 very like each other," ejaculated Stanton ; 
" there was not much scope for originality in 
these things, but there was a terrible sameness, as 
in the battle of Waterloo ; but every little village 
of Pedlington required its illustration, and the 
matter, begun in a cockney village style has been 
no better. As for being a help to art, it has been 
a help downwards. "Wordsworth was right when 
he denounced in a vigorous soimd the follies of 
picture papers." 

" I confess," said Scumble, " that literature is 
made subservient to art, and to very questionable 
art too." 

" And whenever that irfHihe case," said Stanton, 
"it seems to me that both suflfer. Caesar and 
Pompey berry much alike. 'specially Pompey. 
Pompey being in this case Literature. Look at 



TSE NEWS VEND OK 8 WIND W. 273 

OUT Christmas books, from which the artists draw 
all the profits. Speak faithfully, Scumble. Can 
things be much worse P Are they not to be 
ejected, thrown from usP The newspapers, of 
course, in a fit of Christmas good-humour, give 
each and all a modicum of praise. It is very 
good-natured of them, no doubt, but highly im- 
moral. Regard for a moment, my dear friends, 
your Christmas books of last year. Who now cares 
a whit for the hideously tall and gaimt female 
creatures P they are not women that are in those 
dismal black and white woodcuts. Are there any 
creations of beauty in them P Are they not 
very much like ugly photographs, spoilt in the 
copying P Will our sons, who will have their 
own ideas on art, care anything for them P Our 
fathers, indeed, produced 'Books of Beauty,* 
admirably engraved by Heath, Armstrong, or 
Charles Warren, and we pretend to laugh at the 
fashionable art of Chalon. Well, I give Chalon, 
R.A., up ; I, for one, will not defend him, but I 
am ready to die in the belief that the artists I speak 
of will never make half4bo respectable an appear- 
ance as he, after the hot season of fashion has 
passed over, with all the conceit and self-assertion 
which now so admirably distinguish them. I 

VOL. II. T 



274 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

must say, howerer, that tlie poor devils owe it to 
their injudicious admirers. The common quota- 
tion . whence proceeding, and where bom I don't 
know, not from Mr. Canning's friend. of ' Save 
me from my friends,' would most certainly sound 
well in the mouths of the vast majority of the 
spoilt and petted artists of the day." 

" Poor things, poor things,'' said Scumble, in a 
burlesque humour. " Of course they are much to 
be pitied ; however, they make plenty of money." 

" There you go," retorted Carew, pursuing his 
tirade ; " plenty of money I Yes, I know that a 
mediaeval artist, or a very inefficient barrister, or 
a lucky clergyman, who pleases a patron, will 
make five times the money of a first-rate author; 
especially if that author be not a man of business. 
But all art suffers from money, as every man about 
to run a race would suffer from rich feeding, or 
from too much eating. Gracious Heaven! the 
whole island seems to be given up to making 
money. We need a sore and sharp purgation 
from this, and we shall have it. 

* Come the eleventh plague and reap us down ; 
Come God's sword rather than our own. 
In all the chains we ever wore, 
We sigh*d, we grieved, we wept ; we never blushed 
before.' 



TEE NEWS VEND OES WINDOW. 276 

And now people who watch England as a sacred 
nation, first in the van of all good nations, sigh 
and weep for ns." 

As GcOTge said this, he arose, and looking 
grandly, in his fierce style, which Felix had become 
accustomed to, walked across the room. He meant 
what he said ; he was approaching old fogeydom, 
and was bold enough to affirm and give very 
heavy and hearty reasons for the faith that was in 
him that a gradual '^decline and fall off," to 
appropriate a joke of Mr. Dickens, of the Great 
British Empire, had already begun. 

As Felix knew that matters had gone far enough 
between author and artist, he himself interfered, 
and carried on the war against Scumble. 

" It seems to me," he said, " that we have gone 
a long way out of our way. The artists of the 
newsvendor's window are not exactly those of the 
illustrated Christmas books at a guinea ; they are 
peculiar and dramatic. They draw the noble thief 
in all kinds of heroic positions and actions, beating 
off the king's officers, rescuing the distressed, or 
fighting half-a-dozen .or half-a-score of sturdy 
ruffians, whom you see at once that he will dis- 
comfort. There was formerly an artist, whose 
works I have discovered by looking over some of 

T 2 



276 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

the odd rubbish published twenty years ago, who 
drew Obi, or Three-fingered Jack, and such like 
heroes, always standing in a wide straddle, and 
with their hands extended, showing all their 
fingers, while their eyes were rolling in the finest 
possible fury. I have no doubt that his illustra- 
tions were very popular with the boys of the 
time." 

" No doubt," said Stanton. *' I don^t go in for 
morality much myself, and I fancy none of our pre- 
sent schools of yoimg men do ; but I must say that 
I hate those pictures of brutal murders, savage 
assaults, railway accidents, and other things of the 
sort, wherein killing, battle, and murder, and 
sudden death of every kind are illustrated for the 
British public. Our future masters seem to read 
those matters with delight, and when they get all 
the power will probably repeal the laws which 
punish murder with hanging. In their eyes, I 
suppose, the murderer is the interesting victim of 
evil passions and a bad education, and the poor 
murdered man or woman a troublesome thing 
that got in his way at the wrong time, and so 
was murdered. I should like to see, I confess, 
those benevolent individuals who visit the mur- 
derer in prison, who pity and condole with him. 



THE NEW8VEND0R8 WINDOW. 277 

aiid, 60 far as I can see, logically condone his 
crime. I know my sentiments are absurdly con- 
servative and out of fashion^ but I own that I loo^ 
upon with equal abhorrence . ^not with hatred, for 
I only want to get rid of him. the stupid, fooHsh, 
senseless, blundering, and passionate blockhead 
who has worked himself up through a life of 
imgovemed passions to commit a murder, and 
the soft-hearted ninnyhammers who, forgetting 
aU this, petition the Home Secretary to spare 
his life, and talk about the sacredness of human 
life.'* 

** ' I have no objection,' said Napoleon the 
Third, ' to abolish the punishment of death, pro- 
vided Messieurs les Assassins will begin first/ " 
Thus quoted old Mr. Comer, 

" Did he, indeed P '* said George with a slight 
sneer ; " very ingenious of him to appropriate a 
clever mot of Victor Hugo. But who ever said it was 
quite right. The witticism is so true and so good, 
that it was made to be purloined* It is common 
property, like half the stories attributed to Talley- 
rand. However, I agree with Felix, that an im- 
mense deal of harm must be done by the lower 
press, at which our friend Scumble has glanced in 
the ' Newsvendor's Window/ I will agree with 



278 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

him, the dear old boy ** . ^here George held out 
his glass to Scumble, who touched it with his, 
and the two friends drank together . "I will 
agree with him that much of our literature wants 
sweetness and light, but it is not the lower only. 
These sensational stories have risen from the lower 
classes into the higher, and haye taken root there ; 
but what has not taken root is the sound, Tigorous 
periodical done for the working man, with its 
manly moral essay, its capital writing, its harm'* 
less and innocent tales, its jokes and its home 
amusements: Our Government may think little 
of these people, who do more to keep the queen 
on her throne, and the land quiet, than thirty 
thousand foot and half as many dragoons, and 
yet they cost us nothing. These we see in the 
Newsvendor*s Window in plenty. I must confess 
that my friends the working^classes seem to like 
murders, if I may judge by their newspapers, or 
by the affichea of the 'Daily Thunderers* and 
* Morning Comets,' which every one of us sees. 
But then, if we go to a higher class^ we see just 
the same thing. The latest thing in murder 
is discussed in the Piccadilly Journal and the 
Arcade Gazette with equal gusto. Crime always 
attracts ; did not De Quincy win his reputation 



THE NSWSrSNBORS WINDOW. 279 

by discussing murder as one of the fine arts ? I 
confess that / never could understand that 
ghastly drollery. But in the papers of the 
working-men one sees questions learnedly and 
feelingly discussed, and with great cahnness ; and 
let us say that the papers that they buy are not 
always those that they would choose. When 
proprietors of papers will be bold enough to give 
the word not to write down to your readers' pre- 
judiceSy and to try to elevate them by bold and 
manly thought, expressed in plain language, we 
shall see a great difference. I fancy, too, if we 
were behind scenes, that we should find the low 
influences considerably less powerful with the 
poor than we imagine. The papers we all most 
object to have a small and feeble circulation, or 
would have, were it not for their advertisements. 
There is one paper in London which is filled full 
of nothing but advertisements, and which is 
bought by those who are starving, in want, or 
out of situations, in the hungry hope of getting 
employment. A man who is at that level will 
regard our abstract politics as mere nonsense, and 
think of the selfish struggle for place between the 
parties, in a considerably cleaner cut and sharper 
View of things than you or I should." 



280 OTEER PEOPLITS WINDOWS. 

" Indeed ! indeed ! '* said old Mr. Comer ; "now 
I have never seen that paper/* 

" The poor/' continued George, " are not all bad, 
and, to say truth, are a great deal better than we 
are. They have, to be sure, two of the greatest 
purifiers in life . two of which we are, however, 
heartily ashamed.*' 

" And what are they, sir P" said the last speaker. 

" Poverty, and a low estate," said George ; " and 
I have yet to learn that low living ever was 
divorced from high thinking. Bather, I should 
say, judging from, history, it was its invariable 
concomitant. The superfine people always try to 
make it out otherwise ; but what will they not do P 
I was amused the other day at an account of the 
learned doings of a great Boman bishop, who 
surely must have wanted some of the wisdom of 
his church, and have taken to that of the world. 
By genealogical and rabbinical research . what- 
ever that may mean . said the paragraph, the 
good bishop had succeeded in making out that 
Saint Joseph was not a poor carpenter, but that 
he was a superior sort of decorative upholsterer; 
so that our blessed Lord had not the shame of being 
bom in the house of a poor workman, but was the 
sou of a highly respectable West-end tradesman.'' 



TSB NEW8VEND0RS WINJDOJF. 281 

" How shocking ! " cried one or two of the 
party. 

" Ah ! there you feel it/' said George, " when I 
put it roughly ; but in another way, I am afraid 
respectable Mrs. Grundy often does just the same 
as the bishop. However, to our Newsvendor's 
Window. There you see periodicals which have 
been favourites with the public for twenty years, 
and which have always carried their light and 
cheerfulness into the middle-class home; there 
you see the demy Bible, there Foxe's Martyrs, 
there the serious, and there the comic magazine, 
there books of etiquette and complete letter- 
writers, there Newgate romances, and atop of 
them . I wish they could press them down, they 
are heavy enough . ^the godly and too often stupid 
tract. In short, you see the whole workings of 
the wonderful British press, and upon the whole, 
a wonderful thing it is. What vigour, what 
thought, what folly, what platitudes ! Well, let 
us tell the truth. There is plenty to be ashamed 
of in it, but much to be proud of. We have not 
quite got to perfection, though some would per- 
suade us that we have. We shall go on improving. 
There is plenty of room for it ; but if the press 
has some vivacious vices, it has again, to adopt the 



282 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

alliteratiye, some vigorous virtues ; luad to close the 
subject, as the Easterns shut a well with a stone, 
what should we do without it? Therefore, Plaudite 
Cives. Jump up, little boys^ and clap your hands 
for the best press in the world, bar none, the 
British Press, and with all its faults, say to it, 
Eato perpetua.*' 



TEE PARLOUR WINDOW. 283 



CHAPTER XVI. 



THE PARLOUR WINDOW. 




A YS^ and weeks, and months, some eigh- 
teen months thrice told, have gone by 
since the little society the reader has been 
made acquainted with in this book met for the 
last time. Scumble . ^Mr. Cimabue Scumble . has 
made many advances, and is even now an Asso- 
ciate of the Eoyal Academy. Mr. Comer has had 
his ambition realised by becoming, in his old age, 
a contributor to more than one vigorous new 
Magazine. I say new, because all Magazines are 
much more " vigorous '* when mere infants, and 
create, like other children, a great row and tur- 
moil at the beginning of their existence, which . 
the noise as well as the existence . seems to sub- 
side rapidly, and to die down to nothing, before 
the Magazine is six months old. 

Some men . ^happy are they, and blessed all their 



284 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS, 

days . seem to exist with a perpetually fresh belief 
in life, and to have as much faith in mankind 
when they are leaving the world as others have 
when they are entering it. This dear old gentle- 
man was one of them. He persisted in treating 
George Carew as his literary godfather, and in 
believing that author to be one of the most impor- 
tant personages in England. By the same process 
of illusory belief our old friend believed that he too 
was making quite a name in the world of letters. 

" I have been looking over the names of the 
visitors to Cambridge House," he would say, " or 
the Lord Mayor's grand party to all the celebrities, 
and I did not see your name there, Mr. Carew ; I 
assure you I was quite disappointed. I came up to 
see if you were iU." 

Sly old gentleman ! was there not a MS. peep- 
ing out of the corner of your pocket P 

George tossed back his thick long hair, which 
by this time was a little grizzled, and grinned with 
some bitterness. 

" My dear Mr. Comer," he said, " we do not 
live in France, or we might now and then be 
allowed to show our noses in society* Do you 
really believe that anauthoris honoured in England 
by those whom it is the &shion to call 'Society? ' 



TME PARLOUR WINDOW. 285 

Do you think that he is reckoned much higher than 
a tumbler or an opera singer P The lamented Mr. 
Barey, the horse-tamer, was a thousand times more 
invited out and honoured by the aristocracy than 

the Beverend Mr. , the moral essayist. One 

taught them to tame their horses, and was useful : 
they could comprehend him when taught by 
example ; the other teaches them how to be wise, 
and to control their passions, which is precisely 
what they don't care about doing.'' 

" EeaUy you are very bitter.*' 

^' Kot at all ; I am merely speaking the truth, 
which is, or ought to be, always sweet." 

" But surely, Mr. Carew, if we are to take the 
novels of Bulwer and Disraeli as sketches from 
life, we must believe in rapid triumphs and glo- 
rious successes in literary coteries, where all the 
rank and fashion meet, in the applause and won- 
der of the great. Look, for instance, at Byron." 

"Ay," said George, bitterly, "the applause 
and wonder of one season, and the scorn of the 
next. The English nobility . ^not a bad class if it 
knew how to play its own game . was wonder- 
struck at the fact of Byron. A real genius had 
been born with the frayed purple of an English 
barony about him, and clever people are rare 



286 OTEER PEOPLITa WINDOWS. 

amongst them. As for the others, there used to 
be an assemblage of notorieties at the house of a 
brilliant lady, who, like a brown diamond, shone 
with a tarnished and darkened lustre, and these 
young fellows, with the exaggeration of youth, 
made out that the greatest in the world went 
there. But my experience is different. The 
treatment of literary men by this court and coun- 
try is a shame and a wonder. It is true that 
George III. talked for five minutes with Dr. 
Johnson, and that George lY. patronised Captain 
Morris and Tom Moore, who wrote amatory songs 
for his kingship. Now, so far as I know, no one 
takes notice of us. A good thing for us, look you, 
as people work much more freely and honestly, 
but not for the country.*' 

" Why," gasped our old friend, " do you mean 
to say that no one has done you the honour to in* 
vite you . you, who wrote that splendid article on 
the Targum in the bi-monthly ; that article which 
has done more to rivet the faith of the nation and to 
support the Church than anything for years ; that 
article which sent the Review into six editions, 
and has been translated into three modem lan- 
guages in two months. Did no one notice it P' 

" Yes, Miss Sinks wrote for my autograph, and 



THE PARLOUR WINDOW. 287 

an enterprising photographer took my portrait, 
but he finds it won't sell, my boy ; the straddling 
pictures of Mademoiselle Deminudei and the 
wide-eyed effigies of Miss Leery of the Theatres 
Boyal quite banish mine. No, Mr. Comer, I am 
sorry to tell you and our friend Felix . I Hear his 
knock . ^that if you think of making anything out of 
literature but a very hard liying, you are mistaken.'' 
Here Felix entered, looking somewhat older^ 
but more manly, and as bright-eyed, hopeful, and 
jolly as ever, " It does one good to see the young 
'un," said George, as he shook hands with him. 
He went on with his conversation. " I was telling 
our friend, young Comer here, not to expect 
more from literature than it will realise. It is its 
own great reward this love of letters, and that 
reward alone can we count on as certain. It is 
easy of access, and the suddenness of triumph, 
the applausive breath of a few newspapers, is taken 
as the voice of fame. 



palmaque nobilis 



Terrarum Dominos evelict at Beos.' 

But when a man has been a few years an author, 
he finds that he is no nearer the goal than he 
was when he commenced. The barrister who has 
won a known case gets briefs in plenty ; the 



a88 OTHER PEOPLE* S WINDOWS. 

painter who has exhibited a good picture has 
heaps of commissions^ and an increased price ; the 
clergyman is moved from benefice to benefice ; it 
is only the author who fills just the same space as 
before, and is paid at just so many pounds per sheet. 
The old age of some of these excellent literary 
workmen, who have not been able, by a sensational 
novel or other fluke, to get ahead of the ruds, is 
mournful to contemplate/' 

*' Exactly,'' said Felix ; " therefore we will not 
look at it. Gome, George, your name is worth 
something ; at any rate, your good word is. Here 
is Southwood's letter ; he is delighted to oblige 
you, and to secure me for a contributor. Fancy 
that." 

'' Yes, and thank your stars, too^ that you 
still hold your Government appointment in the 
Tin-tax Office ; or is it the Taper and Sealing-wax ? 
I forget which." 

" And what do you think the paper is about P" 
asked Felix, bringing it out. Why, of course you 
won't guess ; it is one of our old Windows. I 
have given a sketch of home, and the bairns and 
Lotty, and myself, written quite in a sage and 
weary style, as if I were George Carew." 

" Cut along, young one," said the author ; " it 



TEE PARLOUR WINDOW. 289 

does well now and then to assume the mentor ; 
but above all, you are right to let uls know what 
you yourself have seen. * After all/ wrote the 
most scholarly writer of this century, * what you 
have seen for yourself is the best worth telling 
about.' I don't say that the phrase is pecu- 
liarly classical, but it is truei Bead the paper, 
and let us drink success to the new venture/ 
Without fiirther parley, Felix sat down and read 
as follows : . 

" I am tired of books and of reading ; type has no 
charms in my eyes ; many volumes are a weariness 
to the flesh ; read, read, read, . ah, me ! Old Michel 
de Montaigne was right, when, among vows of 
abstinence, he also placed abstinence from know* 
kdge. ' I have sometimes,' says that wise man, 
* taken a pleasure in seeing those who, from devo- 
tion, have made a vow to be ignorant as well as 
chaste, poor, and penitent; for by that vow we 
chastise a disordered appetite, and by restraining 
a greediness which pricks us on to continual book- 
reading, depriving the soul of a voluptuous con- 
ceit, which flatters us under the guise of know- 
ledge ; by doing thus we richly fulfil the vow of 
poverty, since we join to it that of humility of 
mind/ 

VOL. II. XT 



290 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

" Ah ! true indeed, old thinker ! We studious 
book-men rail at the man who heaps up riches, 
and yet ourselves we strive to pile up a quantity 
of vain knowledge ; there is a greediness of learn- 
ing as well as a greediness of gold, ' ut omnium 
rerum sic literarum quoque intemperantid laboramurJ* 
Yes, we revel in intemperance, we do not give 
ourselves time to think ; in learning also, after a 
certain time in life, a total abstinence vow should 
be taken, a Maine Law, a teetotal despotism, might 
be passed and organised. 

** So, good-bye books for to-night. Here is my 
wife looking daggers at me because I will not talk 
to her ; there is Dick wanting to show me a won- 
derful machine made of three pieces of firewood, 
an old pill box, a wheel from the bottom of a 
wooden horse, a cotton reel, and some twine. 
Dick is always making those machines, of a most 
useless and absurd character, but yet he is pleased 
and busy; he proposes to fill the pillbox with 
water for some impossible project, which will end 
in soaking his pinafore, Happy Dick ! there are 
some machinists in the big world, not yet opened 
to you, whose projections are quite as absurd ! 

* Seneca : Epist. 106 in finem. Quoted also by Mon- 
taigne. 



THE PARLOUR WINDOW. 291 

/"I turn away from Dick, however, to little 
Toddlekens, who has been, with a face as grave as 
that of the Lady Mayoress at a ministerial feast, 
receiving company for this half hour. Little 
Toddlekens is just five years old. In another 
week, to use the phrase of my friend the groom, 
she wiU be ' rising six.' She is bright-eyed, with 
a fair face, and such a white and red skin as no 
lady in the land . ^not even Phillis at eighteen . 
can boast. It t9 a pleasure to kiss her. Being a 
married man, I cannot say that it would be so to 
kiss Phillis, although some yoimg bucks would be 
ready to jump out of their skin to do so. / had 
rather kiss Toddlekens. She is so pretty. Like 
Fielding's ^ Amelia,' she has the prettiest nose in 
the world, but, imlike that heroine, she has not yet 
broken it. She has a little mouth and lips, that 
would beat those of Phillis by an inch ; clear open 
eyes, so deep and innocent, that I sometimes look 
abashed before them, and a complexion which 
would send Rowland into hysterics, and make 
Gowland drown himself in his own lotion to 
accomplish. Such is Toddlekens. 

She is receiving company. The latter consists 
of a very wooden Dutch doll, a waxen-faced ditto ; 
Mr. Noah (of the Ark), an elephant who has left 

TJ 2 



292 OTEER PEOPLIPS WINDOWS. 

his trunk beliind him ; a papier-mache donkey, 
who in his youth used to wag what he has lost . 
hiii head . and a miserable kitten, which has not 
spirit to run away. The * company' sit round 
Toddlekens and her tea-tray, and she now pours 
out a curious mixture of weak tea, milk, and dirt. 
Her tea-service is of wood, and the teapot, I must 
confess, hath not a practicable spout ; but what of 
that P The Dutch doll, an ugly brute, with a face 
as flat as that of a clock, without a nose, and with 
no hair on its head, is the favourite. Why it is 
so, I do not know. / hate it myself. It nearly 
threw me down stairs once. It is not half so 
handsome as the waxy doll, nor, on the whole, so 
lively as Noah ; nor so curious as the elephant ; 
and yet she loves it. She bows down to it, and 
worships it, and sets it in the place of honour, 
gives it the best things . ^it has the coffee-pot with 
a wooden spout to drink tea from . and favours it 
in a thousand odd ways, a stupid wooden thing ! 
Why does she do so P But, ah me ! why do I and 
you, reader, bow down to our Dutch dolls P We 
have some very wooden ones in the great world, 
and give them more valuiable things than toy 
coffee-pots to play with. 

There is one thing about this young lady's 



TME PARLOUR WINDOW. 298 

metHod of treating ber company wUch is cer- 
tainly cnrious. She drinks her own tea (try our 
curious mixture, only 48. per lb.), and then ab- 
sorbs that of her guests ; none of them object to 
this proceeding ; the kitten looks sulky certainly, 
and Mr. Noah, who lies in a helpless state of in- 
anity, not intoxication, looks up, I fancy, indig- 
nantly. There, now : she has emptied the coffee- 
pot. Hallo I now the tea-pot is no longer full : 
bless the child, she will hurt herself* 

**She turns from her company at my voice. 
Mr. Noah, &c. (' et settler, et settler,' as Yellow- 
plush writes), are dismissed, and little Toddlekens 
runs to me. She kindly makes me lift her to my 
knee, and then hugs me. She damages my all- 
round collar prodigiously, and ruins my shirt 
front ; but what of that ? they cost but fivepence 
washing, and her kisses axe worth a shilling. She 
proposes . ^now what does she propose ? 

" Firstly, that I should kill her, and secondly, 
cut her up, 

*'Mr. Greenacre did that with Mrs. Brown. 
Nevertheless, brute that I am, I gladly consent. I 
premise, however, that there is a tacit understand- 
ing that she is to represent a sheep, and that I am, 
after doing the cutting up business, to sell her 



294 OTHER FEOPLirS WIXDOTTS. 

shoulders and legs to her mother and to Dick, who 
looks up from his machine with a contemptnons 
expression, at a very high rate indeed. I begin 
butchering. I lay Toddlekens across my knee, 
drive my extended finger into her neck, hold 
her up to bleed, cut her up and dispose of tbe pro- 
ceeds at most exorbitant charges, in tbe market 
not quoted in the Times newspaper. The great 
wonder is that the sheep will come to life again ; 
and after killing it ten times I am tired out. 

" She will be a hare now. Obeying this deci- 
sion of hers, which is conveyed to me in a very 
petulant manner, I proceed to hunt about for 
Toddlekens, who is perfectly visible in the comer 
of the room ; for here, also, tbe axiom of ^ first 



catch your hare' exists in full force. Having 
started my game, I cock my little finger, and dis- 
charge a quantity of No. 18 and patent gunpowder 
from my closed fist ; the hare falls, and, need I 
say, that the cutting up process a la mouton im- 
mediately commences P In fact, the whole hare 
business is a swindle on the part of Toddlekens, 
who thus beguilfes me into the violent exercise she 
so much likes. 

" As it appears perfectly certain that, having 
commenced this kind of business, I am ' in for it' 



TEE PARLOUR WINDOW. 295 

for some considerable period, I do not object to 
carry her to market, and to sell her like Uncle 
Tom. Shouldering my slave, therefore . ^for, by 
the way, in the Kttle world of which I am writing 
I find a great deal of unnecessary labour is gone 
through . ^I travel into a vast and far country, the 
inhabitants whereof are represented by Dick and 
my wife. 

"It may be South Carolina, or Virginia, or 
again, it may be Peru, or that great South 
American Empire which distinguishes itself by 
its adherence to the slave trade. My own ideas, 
from a casual knowledge of the inhabitants, lead 
me to suppose that it is China ; the female portion 
of the community being actively engaged in the 
tea trade, and the male, Mr. Dick, being occupied 
on a curious invention of a water-wheel and pill- 
box apparatus. The Chinese, if we believe the 
earlier penny magazines, always were dabs at 
water-wheels ; hence it must be China. I find a 
difficulty in disposing of my slave. The male 
Chinese looks with great contempt upon her ; but 
the female, on the contrary, kisses and embraces 
her, and then, with strange inconsistency^ offers 
the ridiculously small simi of twopence. I am 
about to drive a better bargain, when the slave 



296 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

asserts her fireedoniy and proposes a game at 
cards. 

" No, not ombre, loo, cribbage, nor vingt-et-mi, 
nor wbist, long nor short; certainly not lans- 
quenet, nor beggar my neighbour, those being 
classic and gentlemanly games. It has nothing 
to do with speculation, unless we call the building 
certain houses of a very insecure foundation by 
that name. We certainly do commence a building 
society. The philosopher Dick, who has soaked 
the bottom out of his pill-box, is at once installed 
as a director. I am a kind of secretary ; for in these 
young people I perceive a feeling of superiority 
to myself. They, I find, have weighed and 
measured me. Dick takes the lead, and Toddle- 
kens pushes me aside. 

"In such house-building as this, I . whose 
ideas have perhaps fiUed the heads of philosophers 
.find that I am awkward and of no avail ; my 
fingers are too heavy.; my ideas of architecture 
also cramp my fancy. Dick and Toddlekens suc- 
ceed much better. A kind of Alhambra, with a 
court of lions and statues of great magnificence 
. the latter represented by Mr. Noah . is soon 
constructed by these youthful architects. The 
nameless lady, who represents Noah's wife, forms 



TEE PARLOUR WINDOW. 297 

the populatioii of this palace ; but it must be con- 
fessed that one's imagination should have the 
vigour of that of Toddlekens to fill it out properly. 
For instance, I am told that there are stairs, 
stables, drawing-rooms, gardens, alcoves, and 
bowers : bedrooms for the princes, attics for their 
servants, and all the appurtenances of an immense 
dwelling-place. It must be said that the Alham- 
bra is built somewhat after my own house in 
Cacklebury-square, and that the pantry is con- 
siderably larger than the drawing-room ; but what 
of that? The imagination of Toddlekens and 
company . ^young, rude, and vigorous . ^fills out the 
thin walls, and peoples those paste-board courts, 
till no doubt that card-board house is, to them, as 
dear, perhaps dearer, than a palace to a queen. 

"There is no doubt but that the profound, 
learned, and chaste poet, Mr. Tom Moore, when 
he wrote the line, 

' AU bright things must fade/ &o., 

had a distinct allusion to card houses. Toddle- 
kens hath become tired. She dissolves the build* 
ing society in a peremptory maimer; she dis- 
charges both secretary and manager very uncere- 
moniously. She is disgusted, probably . ^I know I 



298 OTHER PEOPLJPS WINDOWS, 

am . at the wicked leer of the old king of dia- 
monds ; the stolid stupidity of the king of clubs ; 
the immodest wink of the queen of hearts ; and 
the thoroughly hypocritical coimtenances of all 
the knaves of the pack. And so ' n:ian delights 
her not, no, nor woman either,' and knavish king, 
stupid wicked queen, and intolerable knave are 
swept away without one more thought upon them. 
Let them go ! What would Captain Spot, Mr. 
Seedybuck, Lord Trickster, and other gamesters 
give to be able to whistle all thoughts of knave, 
king, queen, ace, and the trick down the wind like 
Toddlekens ? 

" Tea ! so it is. Was ever such eagerness dis- 
played for a meal, unless, indeed, by the passengers 
of the wreck Medusa, or by City Aldermen for 
turtle! Toddlekens, throned in a high chair, 
waits with much anxiety for her portion of the 
cheering draught, and the philosopher Dick, all 
thoughts of mechanics thrown aside, occupies 
himself with thick bread and butter. Averse as 
the larger persons naturally are to anybody (but 
themselves) talking during the meal, and at the 
risk of choking herself, the heroine of this sketch 
yet manages to edge in a word or two. She in- 
forms Dick, that being out to-day she saw a little 



THE PARLOUR WINDOW. 299 

girl who . ^but bless us, how can we follow the 
interminable rigmarole of Toddlekens' story P it 
has, Heaven forgive her ! the germs of scandal in 
it already. It relates to a certain Fanny Fisher, 
e pluribus unum^ who had her mamma's veil on, 
and was not so nicely dressed as you know who. 
The natural philosopher listens with scorn in his 
eye, and bread and butter in his mouth. He is as 
eager to tell a wondrous tale as Mr. Disraeli him- 
self. He knows something about school, and has 
a cut-and-dried story of certain schoolfellows, 
whose Christian and surnames he serves up in a 
hash. There are Ebenezer Golding, and John, 
and Tom, and Ferguson, Alexander, Jones, and 
Adam, and a certain boy who can't write well, and 
one who is absolutely more than six, and yet can- 
not get through the alphabet. At this flood of 
learning Toddlekens is as much abashed as a 
plain schoolman is before a flourishing imiversity 
gent., with B.A. after his name ; and she holds 
her tongue. Taking advantage of this armistice, 
the larger powers interfere, and tea is performed 
in peace. 

"What does little Toddlekins do after? A 
wiser head than mine hath observed the ways of 
such people, and teUs us of a certain ' four years 



800 OTHER PEOPLirS WINDOWS. 

darling of a pigmy size ' Uke Toddlekens, who 
goes through the old, old games of life : 

* A wedding, or a festival 
A moTiming, or a funeral ; 

And this hath now his heart, 
And unto this he frames his speech : 

Then will he fit his tongue 
To dialogues of business, love, or strife, 

But it will not be long 

Ere this be thrown aside, 

And with new joy and pride 
The little actor cons another part.' 

" Even so they play more eagerly than we work. 
We get tired as we grow older, or perhaps, like 
learned bees, distinguish barren flowers readily, 
and do not buzz so much over the honey that we 
gather ; or perchance the honey is bitter, or we 
get none, but toil and build our empty cells. 

" What ! Why, even Toddlekens is tired now, 
and she runs to her big playfellow, and prefers a 
request that he would tell her a story. One cannot 
deny the small solicitrix, and she climbs upon my 
knee, anxious for the fiction. But first she shall 
name the story. I am myself, I say it modestly, 
a master of children's stories. I think I can beat 
Jack the Oiant Killer, or Sickathrift, or indeed 
many of those time-honoured fictions. At any 



TKE PARLOUR WINDOW. 301 

rate, I have a kindly audience, who prefer my in- 
ventions to those of the illustrious authors of the 
tales mentioned. Perhaps it is, after all, because 
my characters, being drawn from real Ufe, my 
adventures from actual probabilities . which I 
himibly contend is not the case with Jack or 
Hickathrift . ^my audience recognise something in 
my stories which suits their case, and from *a 
fellow feeling ' are so * wondrous kind ;' hence I 
recant my heretical and conceited notions. 

" Toddlekens, aided by the memory of the phi- 
losopher Dick, chooses her story deliberately. She 
will not have Pell Bones, because it consists of 
the history of a little boy, who, having blacked 
his face, is stolen by a negro melodist and cruelly 
used. Pell Bones contains pathos, and makes 
her sad. Nor will she embrace the natural phi- 
losopher's suggestion, and listen to the adventures 
of Rantipoll Jones, a young lady who, with cer- 
tain herrings (her purchase), escaped from a wolf; 
nor of * The Bright Penny-piece ; nay, nor of 
Meddling Margery; but after due care in so 
weighty a suit, she selects the adventures of Tom 
Drum. Now Tom Drimi's is a long story. Hav- 
ing been presented with a military and musical (?) 
instrument bearing his own name, he behaves 



802 OTHER FEOPLITS WINDOTTS, 

selfishly in insisting upon letting no one but him- 
self play it, and goes through a variety of adven- 
tures which bring about his punishment. Thns 
it is I preserve poetic justice, and whilst pointing 
Tom Drum's moral, take care also to adorn his 
tale. Although little Toddlekens and the philo- 
sopher have heard this tale so often, that they can, 
and do, prompt me in every part, and are as 
anxious as a Pimch and Judy audience, that none 
of the usual dramatis personce shall be omitted, 
yet they wish it to be told * all over again.' Oh, 
blessed freshness of young mental digestions ! Oh, 
that I too had a Tom Drum story which I could 
read and re-read. I confess that many master- 
pieces, once eagerly perused, have now a soporific 
efiect upon me. I tried indeed but the other day 
to re-read the virtuous Pamela, but I slept instead ; 
so it is with Bore's novels and Jawaway's divinity. 
There are one or two books ever new : and one, 
reader, which, if we strive to be as little children, 
we shall never lose our taste for. 

" But Toddlekens' mother intimates that it is 
time for bed, and after as tender a leave-taking as 
such an awful separation requires, the young lady 
and gentleman are removed ; Mary Anne is the 
inexorable Fate which bears them ofi*; they are as 



THE PARLOUR WINDOW. 303 

unwilling to lay down toy and story and go to 
bed, as we are to leave property and ambition and 
go to sleep. The mother, to soothe this separation, 
and to see her treasures where they should be, 
departs with them, and in a short time I can hear, 
through the half-opened door, that prayer which 
becomes the child's lips, as well as graces the 
tongue of the philosopher ; and then, * God bless 
papa and mamma, and make us a good girl and 
boy.' Amen to that, indeed, amen. A moment 
more, and Toddlekens is asleep. 

" With one thumb . ^let me confess, an infantine 
weakness . in her mouth, and the other stretched 
with a natural abandonment which after-life yields 
not, on the coverlet, she is asleep in her crib, 
perhaps to dream of Tom Drum, perhaps of 
the hideous-faced Dutch doll. So let her lie; 
After time not uselessly spent let me return again, 
and now imweariedly, to books. I may see with 
a brightened mind some new idea in Plato, or I 
may perceive a latent meaning which I missed 
before, taught by some hint gathered from a little 
child. Who knows? The mind, indeed, is 
fresher from its rest, and I again go on spinning 
the cocoon which must exhaust the grub at last^ 
whilst Toddlekens and the philosopher . fast asleep 



801 OTHER PEOPLE'S WINDOWS. 

^hasten as quickly as their rapid pulse-beats can 
bear them to that time when they shall look down 
upon things as small as they are now, and, per- 
haps, meditate as I do. 

Is it pleasant to take leave of old companions P 
Romantic people say that it is not. Does the 
reader throw aside the book with a sigh, or does 
he rejoice that it is out of his hands P George 
Carew, still lonely in his widowhood, ponders, and 
writes, and talks as before, haK cynically, half 
himiourously, but not without a regret that the 
summer has set in with its usual severity, and 
that the winter is yet afar off, with its cosy 
evenings, when friends old and new, and the 
casual dropper-in come together to talk, and tell 
stories in the firelight. His name is well known 
where English literature is honoured, He is a 
successful author, as times go ; that is, he earns a 
hundred times less, and fills a ten times lower 
position in society than does a successful and alder- 
manic cheesemonger or wood-merchant ; but then, 
as he influences in his quiet, wholesome way the 
thoughts of millions, he is content. He will 
never, probably, earn enough money to retire 
with a parsimonious, not to say a modest compe- 
tence, but will quietly drop at his anonymous 



THE PARLOUR WINDOW. 305 

work when his busy brain is tired out, and bis 
wearied heart is still. 

Felix, ever retdly grateful to his first champion, 
is the father of some children and some books. 
He is most proud of the children, and as he walks 
with Lotty and the young ones on the cool sea-shore 
sand together, listening to the ceaseless roar and 
tumbling of the surf-crowned wave, he passes his 
arm roimd his wife's waist, and in silent thank- 
fulness vows that he would not change his humble 
happiness for the most brilliant crown of fame, 
no not for the delight which he and she envy, 
which other authors would experience, if . ^but of 
course such a thing is an impossibility . it were 
announced that the clever novelist and pleasant 
essayist Mr. F . x S-t-w-y-s were asked to dine 
with her Majesty the Q n. 

Old Mr. Comer supplies stories to the Maga- 
zines, full of a sweetness and simplicity that are 
his most eminent characteristics, while his son, 
Dr. Julius, happy in his home, and standing well 
with the world, may truly be considered a pros- 
perous man. 

The " young man of the period," Mr. Stanton, 
has absolutely confided to Felix his intention of 
marrying . " that is, you know, Straightways, as 

X 



306 OTHER PE OF LIPS WINBOIVS. 

soon as I can find a girl to my mind." The 
sooner the better ; and may all, as they descend 
the slippery mount of time to that valley which 
soon or late we all must reach, like Antoeus, rise 
stronger for the falls and tumbles they meet with, 
and be happier that the sorrow of tens of thou- 
sands casts nothing more than its softening shadow 
over their hearths and homes. 

Mr. Cimabue Scumble is painting for the Royal 
Academy that picture which will win him the 
diploma of R. A. Cheered by the love of his wife 
and the enthusiasm of his friends, he walks on 
through life endued with the perpetual youth of 
artists; he works as thoroughly as ever, better 
than ever, and with greater love for art. 
Bitten with the madness of our modem artists, 
who earn money easily and spend it in a wild 
way, he is now building a vast hall of a studio, 
with an open timber roof; a tower at the end, 
leading to dwelling rooms at the back, gives 
it the appearance of a church, and it is said 
that many semi-rustic couples come there to 
apply for a parson or parson's clerk to talk 
over the preliminaries of marriage. Hoimd an 
antique fire-place at one end, in the midst of 
armour, lay figures, Spanish sombreros, Mexican 



TEH PARLOUR WINDOW, 807 

saddles, crockery of mediaeval shape, and bits of 
colour, bought or accepted from other artists, sit 
Cimabue and his friends ; while, in the distance, 
free from the smoke of pipes, which ascends 
to the roof and stains the rafters, Mrs. Scumble 
and the boys and girls play or work, making 
excursions to the artist's quarter to join in 
an argument or listen to a song; and on Sun- 
day evenings, and on those of the great feasts of 
the Church, these songs are hymns of ancient, 
or, it may be, of modem, date, and the notes 
of an organ weep and wail in sorrow, or are 
jubilant with joy, as the pure hearts of the Painter 
and his companions lift themselves up to har- 
mony with the great Heart of the "World. So 
let the curtain fall upon our friends. 



EXD OF VOL. II.
