LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAETER I. 



ET 



COMING HOME. 

**My lord is dead!" was the answer. 
There had been some delay in opening the 
Park-gates of Harbledown, and one of the 
occupants of the carriage had lowered the 
glass of the window nearest the lodge to 
ask a hasty question. The carriage entered 
the Park, and swept rapidly and smoothly 
along the well-kept road. It contained two 
persons . an elderly man, large and burly 
of frame, and a young girl, whose veiled 
face was averted from her travelling com- 
panion. There was a long and dreary 

VOL. I. B 



L 



2 LADY FLAVIA. 

pause, and full ton minutes passed in 
alence, during which time nothing was to 
be heard but the dull roll of the wheels and 
the trampling of the horses' feet. The 
Park was in its summer beauty, with all its 
stately trees in iiill leaf ; and though the 
July evening was deepening into night, an 
after-glow of crimsoi^sunset rested like a 
glory upon the lofly purple moors in the 
background. 

The young girl was the first to speak : 
" My poor father !" she said, with a 
smothered sob, behind the black veil. The 
simple words, and the accent of grief, might 
surely have claimed eympathy; but the 
only reply which they elicited was a start 
and an abrupt stare, singularly inappro- 
priate, and almost vacant in its expression. 
And yet Mr. lioyston was no fool, iar from 
it. A tall, strong man, with traces of a 
reckless career depicted on a countenance 
at once fierce and shrewd, and yet withal 



COMING HOME. 3 

unquestionably that of a gentleman. He 
was a restless traveller; and as his com- 
panion with a low sigh relapsed into silence, 
he evinced his impatience by puUing his 
long grey moustaches, and drumming on 
the glass of the window with his powerful 
fingers. As the long frontage of the stately 
house became visible, and the carriage was 
nearing the hall-door, Mr. Eoyston looked 
eagerly out, and exclaimed in a harsh tone : 

" At last ! You are at home, Lady 
Flavia ; pray recollect yourself, and what 
you have to do." 

To which a gentle and broken voice lowly 
replied : " I can think of nothing . ^but my 
dear father." 

At this instant the carriage stopped. It 
had evidently been expected, for at the 
same moment the hall-doors were noiselessly 
opened, and numerous servants were seen, 
some of whom came forward to receive the 
travellers ; and when the latter had alighted, 



4 LADY FLAVU. 

a groom of the chambers stepped forward, 
and bowing low, said, in a hushed tone of 
voice: 

" My Lady Flavia Clare, I presmne ? I 
grieve to tell your ladyship that my lord, 
the Earl of Mortlake, is no more. Lord 
and Lady Hythe . that is, I should say, the 
Earl and Countess . are awaiting your lady- 
ship." 

Lady Flavia, followed by Mr. Royston, 
was ^t once ushered into the Vandyck 
drawing-room, where she was to be received 
by the new owners of Harbledown. It was 
a strange welcome for a daughter to meet 
with, in the house that, six short hours ago, 
had been her father's. But that father lay 
dead up-stairs ; and hall and lands, and the 
very title, belonged already to his second- 
cousin, hitherto known to the world as 
John, Lord Hythe, but on whom the Mort- 
lake coronet had now devolved of right. 
The new earl and countess were, as has 



COMING HOME. 5 

been said, in the BmaU drawing-room that 
took its name from some three or four 
pictures of stately personages, beruflFed and 
bejewelled, with the cloth-of-gold vests, and 
rich sword-hilts, and haughty, clever faces, 
that Vandyck drew so weU. These were 
notable ancestors of the Clare family, and 
beneath one of them stood the new master 
of Harbledown, a Clare too, but not the 
least like his forefather's portrait. A plain, 
middle-aged gentleman, with a kindly 
smile. There, too, was the new countess . 
of six hours' standing . a comely matron of 
fifty, who had been handsome in her youth, 
and whose face was still pleasant to look 
upon. There was a third person present, 
too, when Lady Flavia was announced, a 
dapper little man, with light whiskers . Mr. 
Hart, the late earl's law-agent. 

Lady Mortlake was the first to come 
forward to greet the orphaned girl. 

"My dear," she began, "this is a sad 



6 LADY PLAVIA. 

welcome home;" and as she said so, she 
held out her hand ; then, seeing how slight 
and fragile was the figure before her, and 
what a youthful, almost childish face it was 
that was disclosed, when the new-comer 
threw back her veil, the countess drew 
Lady Flavia towards her, and kissed her, 
in sheer pity for her lonely state. A sweet 
little creature, small enough for a fairy 
almost, and graceful as Titania herself, with 
a delicate complexion, like a dainty shell, 
rosepink and white, the soft colour coming 
and going with every varying emotion ; a 
wonderful wealth of raven-black hair, soft 
as silk, and falling naturally into heavy 
curls ; and great dark-blue eyes, gentle as 
those of a fawn . eyes that were dimmed 
by rising tears just then. Lady Flavia 
was eighteen, but she looked younger. It 
was a touching sight to see her standing 
there among strangers in her dead father's 
home, with the marks of tears yet glisten- 



i 



COMING HOME. 7 

ing on the round young cheek, from which 
they had been hastily brushed away. 
The countess, a good soul, warmed at 
once towards the fatherless, motherless 
girl, whom she now saw for the first 
time. 

** I know what you must feel, my dear," 
she whispered ; " but it will be a comfort to 
you to hear that he died without pain, and 

in a happier frame of mind than ^he left 

you his blessing, my poor child, but . . ^I 
will not talk more of it at present. How 
tired you must be with your journey !" 

Meanwhile, the earl had been shaking 
hands with Mr. Eoyston. 

" We are very much obliged to you, sir^ 
for your kindness in undertaking to escort 
Lady Flavia over to England at such short 
notice. It was very inconvenient to you, I 
am afraid ; but poor Mortlake had put it 
off so long, that there was no time to 
despatch a proper person to bring the poor 






8 LADY PUVIA. 

yotmg lady home, and so we were obliged 
to treepass on " 

" No trespass at all, my lord," said Mr. 
Royston, with blnff good-hmnour ; "we 
had all got to be so fond of your niece, that 
it was a pleasure to me to render her any 
little service in my power." 

" Lady Flavia is not my niece, I wish 

she was, for then But as it is, Heaven 

knows what is to become of her," said the 
earl, in a sort of half-soliloquy, speaking in 
a low undertone that Mr. Royston could 
hardly catch ; and then Lord Mortlake came 
forward to shake hands with his young 
cousin, and in a good-natured, common- 
place fashion, asked a question or two 
about her journey, her &t}gue, and so forth. 
Hia heart, too was much softened towards 
this poor, young, desolate thing, who, in 
her simplicily of nature and bringing-up, 
did not seem to be fully aware of the extent 
of her own desolation ; but Englishmen do 



OOHINQ HOME. 9 

not^ as a rule, wear their hearts upon their 
sleeves, and John, Lord Mortlake, was 
English to the backbone. He could not 
for his very life attempt to play consoler to 
anybody. A shade came over Mr. Eoyston*s 
face as he listened to the earl's last words, 
but it soon cleared off again, and the usual 
expression of defiant and blunt shrewd- 
ness succeeded to that momentary gloom. 
Standing there, as he did, and towering 
over the heads of the group around him, 
he looked singularly out of keeping with 
the rest of the dramatis personoe. True it 
was that he looked a gentleman, which Mr. 
Ebenezer Hart, the attorney, certainly did 
not. But there was something about Mr. 
Eoyston that repelled rather than attracted, 
though what that something might be, it 
was hard to say. His attire was neat; his 
person was well cared for; his hale face 
was clean shaven, all but the heavy gray 
moustache that half concealed his firm 



10 LADT FLATIA. 

month ; and tiie faint scent of cheap cigars 
that hung about him was too subdued fo 
cause much xunbrage. It must have been 
the audacious boldness of thoee unabashed 
bull-eyea; the manner in which the veins 
stood out like knotted cordage on the broad 
low forehead; the deep crows-feet that 
seamed the face, which inspired distrust in 
not a few beholders towards Brand Royston, 
sometime of Boyston Hall, Esquire. The 
lawyer, however, succeeded in drawing off 
the earl's attention alike from Lady Flavia 
and Mr. Boyston ; indeed, Mr. Hart was 
very busy and important, and by no means 
willing to permit himself to slip out of the 
notice of his future great cKent. He had 
been man of business to the late peer for 
fourteen years, and hoped to retain his 
lucrative agency under the new reign ; 
indeed, as he was used to say, nobody hot 
himself thoroughly xmderstood the ins and 
outs, the leases, fines, renewals, and mano- 



COMINa HOME. 11 

rial rights of the Harbledown property. So 
he drew Lord Mortlake aside, eagerly 
whispering to him of papers to be docketed, 
desks and cabinets to be sealed up, sums of 
money in local banks, plate locked away in 
iron safes, family jewels which might be 
reset, and so forth. 

Then the countess kindly insisted that 
Lady Flavia must be tired to death, and 
stood in need of refreshment and repose. 
Her rooms, Lady Mortlake said, had been 
got ready for her arrival. Yerj pretty 
rooms they were. The bed-chamber, com- 
pared with which the "bowers*' of 
medieval maidens were but a cross between 
baxn and cell, opened into a dressing-room 
on one side, a small sitting-room on the 
other. The great mirrors were such as no 
Queen of Beauty, in the old spear-breaking 
days ever saw, even in her dreams. Sweet 
bright flowers, Honiton and Flanders lace, 
silk hangings, and tasteful toys firom Paris 



12 LADT FLAVIA. 

and Italy, were to be seen everywhere. 
The windows looked over the gardens, 
grand in the pomp and glory of their mid- 
summer bloom. The suite was known by 
the name of the Pink Booms, from the 
colour of the dehcate paper and curtains. 
Into these rooms, whither the trunks that 
held her modest wardrobe bad abeady been 
conveyed, Lady Flavia was inducted by the 
housekeeper. 

* my lady, but this is a sad day for ua 
all. My poor dear master . ^my lord, that 
is . that was; and as kind a nobleman as 
ever lived ; and you, poor lamb, begging 
your ladyship's pardon, but I remember 
you when you were a little trot; but I 
daresay your ladyship has forgotten old 
Benson." 

As the housekeeper ran on, her listener 
pressed her handkerchief to her eyes, and 
after a short space, said : " Ob, yes, I 
remember Benson well. I am glad to find 



GOMINa HOME. 13 

an old face left But everything seems 

80 strange at home now." 

There was something so touching and 
childish in the manner in which these last 
few words were spoken, that they went 
straight to Mrs. Benson's heart, and there 
were genuine tears in her eyes as she 
busied herself in assisting Lady Flavia to 
remove her travelling attire ; for the earl's 
daughter had brought no maid with her ; 

 

and, as the housekeeper proceeded to ex- 
plain, in the confusion that prevailed, there 
had not been time to provide an attendant 
for her ladyship. 

Dinner had been delayed nearly two 
hours after the usual time, and it was nine 
o'clock before it was announced. By this 
hour Mr. Hart had reluctantly relinquished 
the task of examining and sealing up of 
papers and valuables, to him a labour of 
love, and had bowed himself out. Mr. 
Boyston, who had accepted the earl's 



14 LADY PLAVIA. 

hospitable offer of a room for as long as 
he might wish to remain at Harbledown, 
sat down to dinner with Lord and Lady 
Mortlake ; but Lady Flavia preferred to 
remain in her own rooms. 

Some hours afterwards, as the windows 
of Harbledown were darkened one by one, 
two rooms only remained lighted : one was 
the hushed chamber in which, amid wax- 
lights arranged in formal order, Francis, 
seventh earl of Mortlake, lay sleeping 
death's awful sleep, on his bed of state, 
with the drowsy watchers beside him, and 
the rich pall spread over his lifeless limbs. 
The other was the pretty Pink Eoom, 
where a slight figure in a white wrapper 
sat crouched in a large arm-chair. The 
beautiful face was there still, but a strange 
and undefinable expression had replaced 
the look of child-like innocence that it had 
worn before the world. The cold grey of 
morning was creeping over the eastern sky 



COMING HOME. 15 

before Lady Flavia retired to rest. As she 
laid her head upon the pillow, she mur- 
mured : " Harbledown is entailed, I know ; 
but the Leicestershire and Sussex estates 
were free, and in any case, I am Lady 
Flavia Clare." 

Strange words these for so young a girl. 



16 LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER II. 



LOOKS BACK. 



Francis, seventh Earl of Mortlake, had 
been an unlucky man his whole Ufe long. 
If marriage be a lottery, and birth . as the 
believers in the doctrine of averages tell 
us . a lottery too, then, to all appearance, 
the late master of Harbledown, of Melshot 
Friars, in the county of Leicester, and of 
Cupley Lees, in the county of Sussex, was 
a man to be envied. Rich, healthy, and 
a peer of England, Francis Clare might 
reasonably have been set down among 
those who have drawn the fairest prizes 
from Fortune's wheel. But of what use is 
a prize when, like the apples of Sodom, it 



LOOKS BACK. 17 

turns to dust and ashes in your grasp! 
Even at Eton, his young companions called 
the boy-earl Unlucky Frank. No other 
Etonian came in for such frequent punish- 
ment for peccadilloes of his own or others, 
for such capsizings in skiflfs, such bruised 
fingers at cricket, and for all kinds of mis- 
cellaneous misfortimes. The same repu- 
tation tracked Lord Mortlake to Oxford, 
and thence into the world of London. He 
had tolerable brains, a very warm heart, 
and an almost feminine sensitiveness of 
feeling; about as perilous ballast as a 
young nobleman, who had the ill-luck to 
have become his own master too early, 
could carry forth with him on life's 
voyage. 

Disappointed, deceived, and baffled in all 
ways. poKtical, ethical, and sporting- 
Francis of Mortlake made a great eflFort to 
gain the quiet happiness that had eluded 
him as yet. He was sick of the statesmen 

VOL. I. c 




18 UDT PLATIJ. 

who cajoled him for the sake of his proxy 
and his influence ; weary of the friends who 
made him a stepping-stone to success, and 
laughed at his Utopianism ; tired of keeping 
up, for his trainer's benefit, a stud of fine 
horses that always ought to win the Derby, 
the Oaks, and the Leger, but somehow 
never did. He had one hope left : he 
would many some good girl, well brought 
up in a well-ordered household, and never 
exposed to the hot famace-breath of a 
London season ; and he would teach, guide, 
and gnard this innocent bride, his model 
wife, who would look up to him, and depend 
upon him in all things, and bis domestic 
bliss would be perfect. Other men besides 
Lord Mortlake have reasoned thus, and 
have reduced their theories to practice with 
greater or less success. Unlucky Frank 
nad Lis usnallnck in this, the grejit turning- 
point of life. 

He married a vicar's daughter, a demure 



L. 



LOOKS BACK. 19 

little creature, who had never so mudi as 
danced at a county ball, and whose greatest 
dissipation had been the mild excitement of 
a fancy-bazaar or a feast of the school-chil- 
dren. Very pretty, and very submissive to 
her excellent parents, really most worthy 
people, who had brought up their nine chil- 
dren with praiseworthy care, was little 
Ellen of the vicarage. Her downcast eyes 
were as blue and almost as round as a doll's ; 
her complexion was waxen clear, her temper 
of the mildest, and there was a meek sim- 
plicity in what little she did say, for she 
had been strictly trained in accordance with 
wholesome rules of old-world discipline. 
She was ten years younger than Lord 
Mortlake. It was such a match as Aristotle 
himself would have approved. 

Once fairly Countess of Mortlake, the 
mask dropped from Ellen's pretty face. Or 
perhaps it would be fairer to say that her 
nature expanded, now that the pressure of 



K 



20 LADT FLATIA. 

anilioriij was taken oF. The modest daisy 
was transmuted into a gaudy hot-house 
flower of flaunting hues and arrogant 
beauty. No doubt the germs of arrant 
worldliness were lying latent in that little 
soul, at once so silly and so sly. At any 
rate, Ellen, Lady Mortlake, developed into 
one of the most finished flirts that London, 
or even Paris, had ever beheld. Here was 
a rude shock to the fond husband's hopes. 
He had looked forward to a domestic Para- 
dise, in which his country-bred Eve, shrink- 
ing from the glare of society, as something 
too dazzling for her gentle eyes, should be 
wholly devoted to himself. And, to do him 
justice, he loved her very dearly. He had 
learned to love her, and had thus made him- 
self her slave. He struggled, but to no 
purpose. His Ellen, as she boasted to her 
confidants of both sexes, could twist him 
round her little finger. When tears and 
smiles failed, it was found that the young 



LOOKS BACK. 21 

wife could stamp her little foot upon the 
floor, and say stinging things withal. She 
had a temper, and a petulant one, though 
it had been dormant so long. Why not ? 
We should never judge of people without 
giving due weight to their surroundings. 
At the vicarage, Lord Mortlake's wife had 
been a chrysalis ; but now she unfolded her 
starry wings, rose-coloured and gold-be- 
spangled, and flew forth a butterfly of the 
brightest hues. She dragged the weak 
earl back to the haunts of &shion, and kept 
him there. 

It is needless minutely to follow the 
career of a pair so ill assorted. With a 
different kind of wife, Lord Mortlake might 
probably have been a happy man. With a 
different kind of husband. Lady Mortlake 
might possibly have been a good woman. 
She wanted a firm judicious hand to guide 
her, beset by temptations and giddy as she 
was. She gave her husband much pain. 



22 LADY FLAYIA* 

and at last, but not till years had gone by, 
the crisis came. The poor gKttering butter- 
fly besmirched its gold-powdered wings in 
the mire at last. The moth flew too near 
the &.tal blaze that was to consume it. 
Ellen, Countess of Mortlake, fled from her 
husband's house. A Bussian diplomatist of 
rank was the tempter and the sharer of her 
flight. It was in Paris that this scandal 
occurred ; and when the news reached Pall 
Mall, the verdict of the clubs was, that " it 
was a wonder the lady had not bolted long 
ago ;" that the runaway wife was no loss, 
and that " Mortlake was well rid of her." 
Everybody thought that the earl would get 
a divorce, and marry again, more prudently 
than before. 

Lord Mortlake did no such thing. He 
was stunned by the blow. Vain and flighty 
he had known his wife to be, and had 
groaned in secret over the knowledge ; but 
criminal . that was hard to bear. Proofe 



LOOKS BACK. 23 

were but too plentiful. In her hurry or 
carelessness, the wretched woman had left 
whole heaps of letters behind her, in desk, 
drawer, and portfolio, frivolous heartless 
trash some of them, plain evidence of guilt 
the rest. By means of those letters, the 
betrayed husband was able to realise for the 
first time how worthless was the heart of 
her whom he had taken to his bosom, and 
to learn that, little worth as that heart was, 
it had never been his at all. He was 
spoken of, often, in that precious corre- 
spondence, with levity and contempt. He 
was a dupe from the first to the last, hood- 
winked and tormented by a despicable 
woman, who despised him. ' No honest 
man, going back, after the day's toU, to any 
the meanest hearth where the smiles of an 
honest wife awaited him, but was immeasur- 
ably more to be envied than Francis, Earl 
of Mortlake, as he sat, with his head buried 
in his hands, while that accursed pile of 



k 



24 LADY FLAVIA. 

scented and tinted notes spread their muekj 
pages before him. 

People in London heard vaguely of the 
earl's further proceedings. It was town- 
talk that Lord Mortlake had challenged the 
Kussian, and that the Russian had dechned 
to stand within twelve paces of the pistol of 
one whom he had so cruelly wronged. A 
Frenchman under similar circumstances 
would have come forward at the first sum- 
mons to kill or be killed, and in either case 
would have satisfied his conscience ; but the 
point of honour is said to be differently 
viewed by the Czar's subjects. It was also 
said that Lord Mortlake could not endure 
the sight of his daughter and only child, 
Lady Flavia Clare, whom her mother had 
deserted, and who was hardly eight years 
of age. Why he, who was a kind-hearted 
man, should have found the presence of this 
innocent child painful to him, it was hard 
to say ; but it was conjectured that she 



LOOKS BACK. 25 

reminded him overmuch, hy her imcon- 
scioiis gestures and playful hearing, of the 
woman who had blighted his life. Then 
Pall Mall heard vaguely that Mortlake had 
placed his daughter in some French con- 
vent, in an out-of-the-way place, and had 
himself come home to shut himself up at 
Harbledown, keep his friends at arm's- 
length, and, in a word, to bury himself alive ; 
but every one agreed that such an abnormal 
state of things could not last, and that in a 
few months the earl would " get out of his 
sulks," and appear in the world again. 

Every one was egregiously wrong. Lord 
Mortlake's shadow never again darkened 
the doors of club-house, or House of Lords, 
or Belgravian mansion. He lived perti- 
naciously in solitude, neither paid nor 
received visits, and was considered in his 
county as an English edition of Timon 
of Athens. But as man must do some- 
thing, this soured, unhappy peer became 



26 LiDT PLATIA. 

a model landowner; and there were no 
cottages so free from damp and discom- 
fort, from ague and typhus, as those on the 
estates of Francis of Mortlake ; no farms in 
more splendid order, no landlord more be- 
loved. But he never rallied. The wounds 
he had received were too deep for a man of 
his morbid delicacy of sentiment ever to 
get over them. They may have healed in 
part, for Time is a great healer, but he 
never could be got to parade his scars 
before the world. His wife died. On her 
death-bed, she wrote to him. He received 
the blotted scrawl, unsigned, that prayed 
for forgiveness, along with an announce- 
ment that the writer was gone beyond the 
reach of earthly pardon. He never saw 
his child's face again. He provided for 
her maintenance and education liberally 
enough; but he never visited her, never 
wrote to her, never permitted her to write 
to him. The earl's letters were addressed 



LOOKS BACK. 27 

to the Lady Superior of the convent, not to 
little Lady Flavia Clare. The latter grew up 
from a child to a woman ; but the obstinate 
resolve of Lord Mortlake was never relaxed, 
never till he felt death's icy fingers busy 
with his heart-strings, wheti the frost of 
prejudice and morbid feeling at last gave 
way, and he desired to see his child's 
innocent face beside his dying couch. But 
the change of purpose came too late, and 
the last desire of Francis, Earl of Mortlake, 
was ungratified. It is possible that had 
the earl lived one day longer, one short 
span of twenty-four hours of pur mortal 
time, great results might have followed, 
and much sorrow, and trouble, and grief 
have been eliminated from this checkered 
history. But he died ; and his eyes closed 
without looking upon the face of his long- 
banished daughter. Lady Flavia found no 
living father to welcome her beneath that 
father's roof. 



LADY FLA VIA. 



CHAPTER III. 

STILL OP THE PAST. 



K. 



The convent of Our Lady of Moxmt Carmel 
is by far the largest building in the village 
of Gresnez-les-clochee, a few kilometres dis- 
tant from the town and royal demesne of 
St. Germain. Royal, national, imperial, 
the forest and the chd.teau had changed 
names many a time since Louis the Mag^ 
nificent gave house-room and pension there 
to fugitive James of England. It was 
termed " royal," when a frightened little 
English girl, whom the French folks sur- 
ronnding her alternately called Made- 
moiselle Flavie and Miladi Clare, was 
brought down from Paris to the neighbour- 
ing hamlet of Gresuez-les-cloches, and there, 



STILT. OP THE PAST. 29 

in the parloir of the CarmeKte convent, for- 
mally consigned to the charge of the Dame 
Sup^rieure. 

The convent was, Kke most French con- 
vents, a fair, tall building of white stone, a 
hybrid as to its architecture, between the 
Roman style of Francis I. and the flam- 
boyant Gothic; and as to its adornments, 
well supplied with statues over gate and 
porch, and gilt crosses that glittered in the 
sun on gable and roof, till the eyes ached 
that looked on them. It was very solidly 
built of the best masonry, with very big 
blocks of the most evenly-hewn stone, 
accurately cemented together, and with the 
mightiest beaifis of sound heart of oak 
timber; and from the lead on the roof to 
the sturdy piles and squat arches of the 
foundation, nothing was stinted, or scamped, 
or deficient, as in our contract-built edifices 
nearer home. It was a fine mansion, meant 
to last, and it possessed a tuneful peal of 



L 



30 LADT PLATIA. 

belle, thus keeping up the ancient reputation 
of the village of Gresnez-lesHjlochea, as dis- 
tinguished from the twin-village of Grfesnez- 
Vignoble, higher up the hillside. 

The convent was not old, however. It 
had been founded in the devout reign of 
his Majesty King Charles X., a prince who, 
as Count of Artois, had sown a plentiful 
crop of wild oats, but who cared for little 
else, in his kingly later days, than Mother- 
Church and her interests. The site chosen 
in this case was a good one, occupying the 
ground where a former convent of Car- 
melites, sacked and burned in the revolu- 
tionary times between '89 and '93, had 
stood. Madame herself, though not exactly 
a princess of saintly character, had become 
lay-patroness of the new community, and 
the contributions of the fashionable faithful 
poured in fast as the building progressed. 
But, alas ! when the work-people were 
giving the last decorative touches, and a^ 



STILL OF THE PAST, 31 

day had been named on which the Cardinal 
Archbishop should consecrate the chapel, 
in presence of all the blue blood of the 
Faubourg St. Germain, the July of 1830 
came round, and spoiled the programme. 
Instead of kneeling in the outer court to 
receive the archbishop's blessing, glaziers 
and gilders, and grainers and joiners seized 
muskets and pikes, and went noisily off to 
Paris, there to help in killing his majesty's 
guards; and though, under the Laodicean 
reign of Louis Philippe, the convent was 
really established on a practical footing, 
the zeal of the society was but luke- 
warm; gifts flowed sparingly in, and the 
nuns were glad to eke out their income 
by taking in young-lady pupils as boarders, 
and not only boarders, but Protestant 
boarders, especially in such a case as that 
in which Milord, the Comte de Mortlake, 
pair d'Angleterre, was desirous to place his 
only child, for an indefinite number of 



32 LADT- FLAVIA. 

years, under the tutelage of the Lady- 
Superior, It was made a condition, that 
there should he no attempt at conversion ; 
and as the English pupil was by far the 
most profitable of all her youthful charges, 
the Reverend Mother . the title of Abbess 
has been dropped in French establishments 
of this nature, but the old-fashioned phrases 
of respectfal address are still kept up in 
some of them . gave her word that Lady 
Flavia's Protestantism should be undis- 
turbed. She kept her word loyally. The 
deserted girl was neither persecuted nor 
neglected. Her health was eared for, and 
her education looked after, and she had 
masters and mistresses, and was taught all 
that, according to the standard of a polite 
French system of tuition, a young damsel 
needs to know. 

lint those years spent under the lead- 
sheathed roof of the convent of Our Lady 
of Carmel were wofully dull ones. Amuse- 



STILL OF THE PAST. 3S 

ment does not enter into a scheme of con- 
ventual bringing up ; and if the other girls, 
whb had dear friends at home, and pleasant 
hoUdays spent in the family circle, were 
used to count the hours till their release, it 
must have been worse for the one pupil 
who never was visited, and never had any 
vacation at all, only the great convent 
garden, with its high walls, for what the 
good sisters called '* recreation." When 
Lady Flavia Clare was about sixteen years 
of age, her health began to suffer, and 
Dr. Perinet spoke very seriously to the 
Lady-Superior on his young patient's behalf. 
The jeune Anglaise^ he said, was pining her- 
self to death, like a bird in a cage, and, as 
such birds often do, would die, if not in- 
dulged with more air and light. She was 
the only English girl among the boarders, 
and her companions just then were few, 
and not very agreeable . ^two gaunt demoi- 
selles from the Faubourg, who had sharp 

VOL. I. D 



34 LAUT FLAVIA. 

elbows, and leaden complexions, and vine- 
gar faces, and who had been so bien eleev4 
by the poorest and sternest of parents, that 
they were ready to renounce the world and 
its pleasures, of which, poor things, they 
had seen but little, and were soon to begin 
their novitiate. These, and two or three 
little chattering creatures, with a passion 
for sweetmeats and galetie, were all the 
company that Lady Flavia had, escept the 
nuns, who were mostly placid women, with 
very few ideas. 

The doctor, who was a shrewd and kindly 
physician, had won his young patient's 
confidence enough to be able to assure the 
Superior that the youthful Miladi must 
have some change, some amusement ; that 
she was longing for friends, and that she 
would be all the better for an introduction 
to a family whose acquaintance the doctor 
had lately made, and whose medical attend- 
ant he was. This was a family of her own 



STILL OF THE PAST. 35 

country-people, the. only English household 
nearer than St. Germain ; and they had 
recently settled themselves in a large old 
house, the Chateau des Roches, about one 
mile from the convent. The name of this 
femily was Royston. It consisted of an 
elderly gentleman, M. Royston ; of Madame, 
his wife; and of a niece, Mademoiselle 
Adela Burt, a gu-1 of nearly the same age 
as Lady Flavia. There was also a son, but 
him Dr. Perinet had never seen, and he 
was beUeved to be in India with his regi- 
ment. The family were comme il faut ; 
Mrs. Royston, a very soffc-hearted woman ; 
and the doctor was sure that they would be 
verjT kind to Lady Flavia, and very careful 
of her, if she were occasionally permitted to 
visit them. 

The Superior was a conscientious per- 
sonage. She had every confidence in the 
good old doctor : but it was incumbent on 
her to be very careful with regard to her 



36 LADY FLAVIA. 

boarders. Indeed, the rules of the house 
were excessively strict, and visits, except in 
the case of near relatives, were forbidden. 
But the daughter of M. le Comte de Mort- 
lake, whose cheques came so regularly, and 
were so comfortable in amount, was an 
exceptional person in the eyes of the 
Reverend Mother ; and there was no deny- 
ing that the girPs cheeks were getting pale, 
and her eyes sadly large and bright, though 
she was very young, and small of stature 
for her years. So Madame took what she 
called her " informations ;" and hearing 
that the Roystons were respectable folks 
who paid their bills, she gave her consent. 
Dr. Perinet introduced the English pupil 
to the Roystons, and from that day forth. 
Lady Flavia became a frequent visitor at 
their house. Once, twice, or thrice in the 
week, as the weather might serve, Lady 
Flavia walked across the great meadow, and 
up the sandy cross-road, in whose high 



STILL OF THE PAST. 37 

banks were planted pollard willows, mon* 
sters of ugliness from incessant loppings, 
and so into the broad highway, where the 
^lim poplar-trees were set at intervals, like 
soldiers on parade, and passed the mill and 
the loose stone-walls of the vineyards, and 
so to the great outer gateway of the ch&teati 
where the Roystons lived. Not alone, of 
course. Old Soeur Nanon, the portress, one 
of several religious persons of an inferior 
social grade who attended to the poultry- 
yard, the dairy, and the laundry of the 
convent, and who were servants in all but 
name, being styled "sister," but always 
addressing the lady-Carmelites as " Ma- 
dame,'* accompanied the English pupil, 
and fetched her back at an appointed time. 
If the hour were after sunset, as was some- 
times the case in winter, the gardener went 
too with his lantern and a knotted stick ; 
not that this last was necessary, since not a 
soul in the arrondissement would have 



k 



38 LADY PLAVIA. 

harmed or molested any person belonging 
to the convent of*Omr Lady of Cannel. 

This intimacy with people of her own 
country, who spoke that dear EngHsh 
tongae she had half forgotten in the long, 
years during which she had only used it to 
a langu^a-mistresB in school-hoars, was a 
new life to the, English girl. The very 
wildness and slovenly look of the great 
neglected garden that belonged to the 
iruinous old chateau was refreshing to Lady 
Flavia, after the terrible neatness and inexor- 
able order to which she bad been accustomed' 
at the convent ; for the Superior was punc- 
tilious in matters of discipHne ; and floors 
were waxed, stones scrubbed, and walks 
swept, as regularly as the bells rang for 
AngeluB and Vespers. Nothing was out of 
its pkce, from the milk-pans in the dairy, 
the brass of which shone like gold with 
excess of burnishing, to the trim gravel- 
walks that ran through the formal vege- 



STILL OF THE PAST. 39 

table beds and espaliers of the walled 
garden. It was all very proper, no doubt, 
but excessively wearisome to a buoyant 
young mind, that stiff mechanical tidiness 
and primness at the house of the Carmelites; 
whereas, at the Chateau des Boches, all was 
delightfully shabby, decayed, and sugges- 
tive of romantic notions, which found no 
pabulum in the prosaic convent. 

There was the ch&teau, ^ crazy old place, 
not entirely furnished, and with more than 
one uninhabitable room,, by reason of the 
unsoundness of the steep slated roof; but 
still a picturesque house, with its lofty stone 
turrets, topped by groaning weather-cocks, 
and the high dormer windows twinkling in 
the sunlight. Over its doorway were to be 
seen traces of a stone escutcheon of arms, 
sadly chipped and defeced by the hammers 
and crow-bars of the revolutionary mobs of 
'92. It had a grass-grown courtyard, with 
a choked-up fountain in the middle of ii^ a 



LADT FLATIA. 



K 



lange of emp^ Btables, a stone tower that 
looked strong enough to stand a siege, but 
which was merely the old seigneurial dove- 
cot, on whose roof the hereditary pigeons 
might yet be seen, though in diminished 
numbers, pruning their shining feathers, 
or stretching oat their pretty necks, Mid 
cooing soft music on sunny mominga. 
Better still, the chateau possessed a very 
large garden, long neglected, and in the 
most charming condition of ovei^own 
desolation possible. There were fiBh-ponds, 
but they were so choked with matted weeds, 
and 80 coated with green scum, that the 
mud-loving carp below could scarcely find 
a clear patch of water wherein to lie and 
bask in hot weather, with their broad sides 
and golden armour gleaming through the 
reeds. There were fruit-trees, and there 
were flowers, but so mixed up with tall 
weeds and straggling bushes, as to be all 
but indistinguishable. The trees had low 



STILL OP THE PAST. 41 

branches that barred up many of the mossy 
paths, deep - cushioned with last year's 
leaves; the lawns were mere swampy 
prairies of rank grass, and the whole place 
was a wilderness. Especially was this the 
case with one portion of the garden, where 
the great sun-dial stood, and where a 
mouldering old summer-house existed. 
There were many box and holly trees 
thereabouts, which had once been carefully 
cut into crosses, peacocks, dragons, and what 
not; but no shears had cut these bushy 
shrubs for many a year, and the boughs 
were interlaced, and the clipped trees mere 
monstrous fantasies, grown out of all shape; 
while around them had sprung up tall hem- 
locks and thistles, and coarse grasses, and 
tufted reeds. This was the most remote 
nook of the garden, and here rose out of 
the soil the gaunt grey rocks, sticking up 
out of the earth hke the bones of an ill- 
buried giant, that gave name to the 



42 LADY FLAVIA. 

chateau. The Eoystons called this place, 
the Tangle. 

Altogether, the house was not a very 
valuable property, and belonging as it did 
to a rich proprietor, who lived in Paris, 
and cared very little about this outlying 
scrap of his possessions, it was left to be 
managed by a notary at St. Germain, and 
the Eoystons paid but a low rent for it. 
The latter were not very particular as to 
the fashion in which they were housed, so 
that the rent was a low one. For the 

Eoystons But they are too important 

in this history to be introduced otherwise 
than at the beginning of a chapter. 



43 



CHAPTER IV. 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 



Brand Royston, Esquire, J.P. and D.P.L., 
of Royston Hall, in the county of York, 
had been a notable person in his day. 
That he was of a good old family, allied to 
the most ancient names in Yorkshire, was 
what his bitterest enemies, and he had 
many, never denied. Indeed, from time 
immemorial, the Roystons of Royston Hall 
had eaten of the fat and drunk of the 
strong. rich squires and men of worship 
in their native county. That was all over 
now. Royston Hall, and its eleven thou- 
sand acres of good arahle and pasture land, 
had been brought to the hammer, and 



44 LADY FLAVU. 

knocked down to a Leeds clothier. The 
heir of the old name and the old place . ^he 
whose birth had been hailed by bell-ringing 
in the three parishes, and whose coming of 
age had been celebrated with roasting of 
oxen, broaching of beer-casks, and huzzaing 
of tenantry, was smoking cheap tobacco, 
wearing old coats, and leading a hide-and- 
seek life in France, on the little income 
that his wife's &ther, a commercial man of 
some prudence, had prevailed on him to 
settle on her for her separate use. 

Such was the climax to which dogs, 
horses, chicken-hazard, blind-hookey, and 
racing of maggots across polished dinner- 
tables for heavy bets, had conducted Brand 
Boyston, only son and heir of Thomas 
Boyston and Lady Caroline his wife, both 
as honest and stupid folks as ever lived and 
died respected and worthy of respect. Kot 
that the new and last squire of the Boyston 
line was a fool, There were not a few who 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 45 

were ready to proclaim him the customary 
antithesis of fools. He had hrains and 
daring too, and plenty of the north-conntry 
fether-wit, but his recklessness knew no 
bounds. Brand Boyston, as the knowing 
ones said, with an ominous shake of the 
head, was " at all in the ring/* He was 
known on every race-course in England, 
and at every gaming-table. He rode 
steeplcK^hases, entered his horses for every 
conceivable stake, hedging, backing his 
opinion, betting secretly and openly, and 
having a finger in many and many a 
racing-pie of dubious quality. Had he 
stuck to the turf, people said he might 
" still have done," though his name began 
to be mixed up with ugly stories. But he 
was equally ready to risk his thousands on 
fighting-men and fighting-cocks, on rat- 
killing terriers, on snarling mastiflFs in a 
pit, 01^ his own skill in a pigeon-match. 
Cards and dice, betting-books and extrava- 



\ 



46 LADT FLATU.. 

gant living, such were the demons to 
which he sold himself ; and they aeed him 
as they did many another Faust in top- 
boots and Belcher cravat, buoying him up 
for a while, to sink him the more hopelessly 
at last. 

Mr. Royston fled from England with the 
bailijSs at his heels, and his name was in 
the Kst of outlaws proclaimed by the sheriflf 
of Middlesex. The crash had come, and the 
game was up. He was almost as poor in 
reputation as in purse. "Very queer tales 
were told of his turf-manoeuvres; of young 
fellows who : had been proud to keep com- 
pany with so celebrated a man, and had 
paid dearly for the honour of Rattling 
Brand Royston's acquaintance; of gallant 
race-horses " nobbled " on the night before 
the running, of poisoned beans, of pails of 
water administered just before the bell rang 
for saddling in the paddock on the course, 
and of jockeys bribed to *' pull " the favou- 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 47 

rite back at the crisis of victory. But if 
there were truth in these tales, at any rate 
it must have been diamond cut diamond, 
and Mr. Royston had met with wiKer or 
cooler rogues than himself^ for others grew 
rich, and he poor as Job. Hounds, horses, 
acres, and mansion, all went from the prodi- 
gal, and the haunts of his prosperity knew 
him no more. 

With all Brand Royston's faults, he was 
hospitably incUned, and his wife was very 
glad to welcome Lady Flavia beneath the 
shelter of her rickety roof-tree. Mrs. 
Boyston, as many English residents at 
Brussels, Tours, Dinan, and other resorts of 
British exiles, had been pleased to remark, 
was her husband's guardian angel. But she 
was a very timorous guardian angel, and 
weak on the wing withal, and could not 
save a spendthrift so obstinately bent on 
ruining himself as the ex-squire. It was 
due to her, however, that the ruin was not 



48 LADT FLAVIA. 

more complete. The family had nothing 
to live on, excepting the little sum in con- 
sols that had been settled on the wife at her 
marriage, and which produced a smaller 
annual income than Boyston had once paid 
as a salary to his stud-gproom. Elizabeth 
Bmi; had brought her husband a larger 
dowry than this, the only remaining frac- 
tion of it. Forty thousand pounds of hers 
had gone the way that all guineas went in 
Brand's desperate hands ; hut Mjrs. Royston 
never repined, never would listen to a word 
against the husband who had brought her 
down from affluence to poverty. She was, 
as has been said, of a commercial family, 
and her father, an honest alderman of 
York, had thought it a proud promotion for 
a child of his to marry the heir of Royston. 
He lived to pay his son-in-law's debts once 
or twice, but died before the final break- 
down of the household. Mrs. Royston ac- 
cepted her fallen fortunes very philosophi- 



BACfK TO ENGLAND. 49 

cally. It was due to her that the bills were 
so regularly paid. She managed to spread 
out the meagre income in a surprising 
manner, made one franc do duty for two, 
bargained and haggled over her marketing, 
and took care, somehow, that her Brand 
should always have buttons on his shirts, 
and a savoury dish or two at dinner-time. 

Mrs. Royston was really a very good 
trife, and a well-intentioned woman, al- 
though her weak will could never cope 
with the headstrong resolution of her hus^ 
band. Of him she stood in great awe. 
She cowered before him, spaniel-like, when 
he was angry, which was- not seldom. 
Often she would let her work drop on her 
knee, needle, thread, and all,- when she 
heard the squire's heavy tread without, and 
his loud voice la little louder than usual. She 
was, indeed, a very nervous, easily alarmed 
lady; and the one personal luxury she 
allowed herself was the occasional attend- 

VOL. I. E 



I 



50 LADT FLAVIA- 

ance of a doctor to prescribe for wliat was 
more a mental than a bodily ailment, but 
which she called neuralgia. Dr Perinet, 
who knew pretty well how far she con- 
trived to stretch a slender income, and how 
active she and her niece were in household 
duties, bad a great respect and compassion 
for Mrs. Royston, and pocketed her three- 
franc fees as demurely as if they had been 
golden louis. He was quite pleased to be 
the means of making the family at the old 
ch&tean and the Englieh boarder at the con- 
vent acquainted with each other. The 
former household consisted of four persons 
when first Lady Flavia began to visit at the 
mildewed old chateau. namely, the squire ; 
his patient wife; her niece, Adela Burt, 
whose father had ruined himself in specular 
tions, and left his daughter penniless to her 
aunt's care ; and Qrosse Jeanne, who wore 
sabots, and was cook, housemaid, and ben- 
wife in one. 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 51 

But eighteen months after Lord Mort- 
lake's daughter had become intimate at the 
bh&teau, a new member was added to the 
family circle, and it became necessary to 
supplement Grosse Jeanne's services by 
hiring a country giri to assist in the touse^ 
work. Captain Basil Royston, the only 
son and only child, was coming home from 
India. This young gentleman came accord- 
ingly, and seemed in no hurry to go away 
again. His occupation, indeed, was gone, 
like Othello's, but for reasons less deserving 
of sympathy. A court-martial at Poonah 
had expressed a very decided opinion on 
the propriety of expunging the name of 
Basil Royston from the Army List, and the 
commander-in-chief had been graciously 
pleased to give the sentence his heartiest 
approval. The why and wherefore would 
entail a long and intricate story, in which 
cards and billiards, disputed bets, orders on 
a regimental paymaster, brandy-pawnee. 



i 



32 LADT FLAVU. 

and intimidation of freshly-arrived griffins, 
were curiously mixed up together. Three 
or four names beside that of the captain 
received no great accession of honour from 
the light thus thrown on these queer trans- 
actions, and there were those who called 
Royston " poor fellow," and insisted that 
he had been made a scapegoat of in behalf 
of others whose influence was greater than 
his. But at any rate, the black-sheep was 
driven from the flock; and Captain Basil 
Royston, with no right to his military 
designation, came back to kick his heels at 
the ch&teau; and the place seemed doubly 
dreary when the young man's handsome 
sullen face was seen perpetually about it. 

Had Captain Royston been at his father's 
house when first Lady Flavia's pale cheeks 
and spiritless air warned the experienced 
doctor that some remedy not in the phar- 
macopoeia was necessary, Dr. Perinet would 
liave looked further afield for the means of 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 53 

amnsing her. The old French physician 
would not have reconciled it to himself to 
introduce a girl^ at her susceptible age, and 
with her large expectations, into a family 
that numbered among its members such a 
good-looking idler as that ex-captain of 
Lancers. As it was, when the doctor paid 
one of his rare professional calls to Mrs. 
Royston, and found Lady Flavia and her 
young friend singing a duet to the accom- 
paniment of the jingling old piano, and saw 
Basil Royston*s tawny moustaches and 
handsome gloomy countenance a few yards 
oflF, as their owner leaned indolently against 
the mantel-piece, beating time to the music 
with the lash of his frayed riding-whip, the 
doctor's grey eyebrows rose into an arch of 
surprise ; and the Superior received a quiet 
hint, that perhaps it would be safer if her 
young pupil's visits to the chateau were 
rather fewer and briefer for the future. 
;' The Superior was not slow to take the 



64 LA.DT PLATU. 

hint. She was horror^truck at the very 
idea of an attachment springing np hetween 
a boarder of hers and a yonng man, even if 
the former had but a face for her fortune, 
and the latter were rich ae Rothschild, and 
virtuous enough to deserve the Monthyon 
prize. But between the only daughter of 
the Earl of Mortlake . urie h^ritih'e quoil 
. and a mdchant gca-(^ of a cashiered officer 
without a sou, it was atrocious. Dr. Perinet 
had some trouble to prevent the scandalised 
CarmeHte from insisting on a total breaking 
off of the acquaintance between Miladi Clare 
and the Roystons ; as it was. Lady Fkvia 
was much less frequently to be seen beyond 
the convent walls than before ; and on vari- 
ous pretexts, the Superior contrived to keep 
her from being bo much with the family at 
the chllteau as she had previously been. 
Indeed, the convent was less irksome to 
Lord Mortlake's daughter than heretofore, 
for there was now another English boarder. 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 55 

a sweet-tempered girl named Amy Ford^ 
and those two had become fast friends, 
. The year in which Miss Ford became a 
pupil at the Carmelite convent was the last 
of Lord Mortlake's life. Sickening of a 
mortal disorder, tte natural yeammgs of 
fatherly affection struggled hard with preju- 
dice and habit, and prevailed. Lord Mort- 
lake wrote with a feeble hand to announce 
to the Lady-Superior that he desired to see 
his daughter, should his malady increase^ 
and begged that she would hold herself in 
readiness to start for England at short 
notice, and that m escort might be found 
for her to travel with. The Superior was 
puzzled, and asked her confessor and her 
physician for advice. The confessor shrug- 
ged up his shoulders. Perfidious Albion 
was only a geographical expression to him ; 
but he had no great fancy for crossing the 
sea personally, and for carrying his own 
shovel-hat, and soutane, and little blue collar 



I 



56 LADT FLAVli. 

among irreTerent islandeiB, to c6ayoy a 
heretic young lady. The doctor' coold not 
he spared. He 8D^;ested Mr. Boyston,^^^, 
as a proper protector on the journey for his 
young compatriot ; and the Superior was 
obliged to consent. Old Brand Boyston 
heing appealed to, expressed his willingness 
to take chaise of Lady Flavia onthejonmey 
to Harhledown. His outlawry had never 
heen reversed, but his creditors were dead, 
or had lost sight of him. He had no fears 
of arrest, and was willing to go, on the 
understanding that all expenses were to be 
defrayed, as was reasonable, by Lord Mort- 
lake. 

Another letter came, not from the earl, 
hut from bis medical adviser. It was hastily 
penned, and very short, but it urged on 
Lady Flavia the necessity of hurrying to 
Harhledown, if she would see her father 
alive. This letter reached the convent late 
in the day ; and it was arranged that Lady 



BACK TO ENGLAND. 57 

Flavia should sleep for one night at the 
chateau, past the gates of which the dili- 
gence clattered and rumbled daily on its 
way to the nearest railway-station ; and 
that early on the following morning she 
should, under Mr. Royston's care, set off for 
Paris, and thence to England. Late on a 
Wednesday evening. Lady Flavia Clare 
and the trunks that contained her wardrobe 
were duly conveyed to the Chateau des 
Roches. This was the first stage of a 
journey which ended in the arrival of the 
young girl with her surly protector at 
Harbledown, six hours after the Earl of 
Mortlake had breathed his last. 



58 LADY FLAVIA* 



CHAPTER V. 

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 

The funeral of Francis, Earl of Mortlake, 
had taken place after the usual decorous 
delay of nearly two weeks from the time 
when the weary eyes of the master of so 
much of this world's goods had closed in 
their last slumber. The will had been read. 
It was short and simple. Beyond a few 
legacies and pensions to old servants and 
hangers-on of the family, its provisions were 
very few. It gave to * * my dear and only 
child Flavia, whom I beg sometimes to 
think kindly of me,*' all that Lord Mortlake 
had it in his power to give. Harbledown 
with the Devonshire and Somersetshire 




DIAMOND OUT DIAMOND. 59 

property, followed the title as of right, and 
the new earl was absolute master of these. 
But Melshot Friars and Cupley Lees, with 
messuages and tenements, farms, free-war- 
ren and manor rights, three advowsons, a 
colliery, and many fair acres of fat Leicester- 
shire pasture and sound Sussex arable, were 
given to Lady Flavia Clare. So were 
Bixly-three thousand pounds of funded 
property, the savings of those sad but not 
useless years during which ihe Timon of 
Harbledown had shut his doors against his 
equals. The banished and neglected child 
was a great heiress now. 

Lady Flavia was under age, and it was 
necessary that her large possessions should 
be vested, for the time being, in the hands 
of trustees. These trustees were Sir Wil- 
braham Alleyne, almost the only one of 
Lord Mortlake's early friends with whom he 
had kept up some intercourse, and a well- 
known London banker, Mr. Cottrell. These 




OO LADT FLATIA. 

gentiemen were to pay to Lady Flavia a 
lai^ annual sum by way of an allowance, 
with authority to add to its amount as they 
saw fit ; and the whole property was to be 
at her disposal on her coming of age or 
marrying, on condition of her guardian's 
approval, should she marry while still in 
the period of legal infancy. But the 
strangest part of the will had reference to 
that very guardian. Power was given to 
Lady Flavia to select whatever person she 
might please to fill this important office, on 
condition, however, that her choice should 
be ratified by " my kinsman and successor 
John, Lord Hythe, whom I earnestly entreat 
to be a better firiend to my poor motherless 
girl than I have proved myself a father." 
But within all reasonable limits, Lady 
Flavia's selection of a peimnal guardian 
and place of residence was to be left to her 
own unbiassed decision. 

So said the will ; and though the experi- 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 61 

enced London solicitor who had drawn it, 
and who attended with it at the business 
meeting which followed the funeral, had 
some doubts as to whether the latter provi- 
sion would " stand,'* were the Lord Chan- 
cellor to be moved upon the subject, it was 
soon made quite clear that the new earl 
had not the slightest intention of contesting 
the point, or of in any way deviating from 
the spirit of his predecessor's written prayer. 
The object of so much tardy solicitude, 
looking prettier and slighter than ever in 
her deep mourning garb, sat alone in her 
room, when there was a quick, low tap at 
the door, and her maid entered. She had 
a maid by this time, thanks to Mrs. Benson's 
sense of what was fitting, for her own 
taste and habits had not caused her to feel 
the want of such a functionary as strongly 
as the housekeeper did on her account. 
However, the new maid came in with rather 
a scared look. 



i 



62 LABT FLATIA. 

" Mr. Eoyston sent me, my lady to say 
he is waiting to see your ladyehip. He Bays 
there muet he some mistake, for Lady Mort> 
lake told him you were coming down to 
speak to him an hour ago." 

Lady Flavia looked up from her hook. 
"How ahsurdi I forgot all ahout him. 
Where is Mr. Eoyston ?" 

The ahigail made answer that the gentle* 
man was in the Khrary, that a carriage was 
waiting at the door to take him away to 
the Chartley Eailway Station, and that he 
seemed very impatient. " He says he has 
lost one train already," added the maid in 
conclusion, in a tone of mingled pertness 
and alarm, for there was something in 
Brand's thundering voice and fierce eye, 
when he was incensed, that few servants 
could encounter without flinching; and 
Simmons, London-bred as she was, had 
qTiaked at the prospect of a second meeting 
with one whom she afterwards descrihed in 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 63 

the still-room as an arbitrary person and 
black slave-driver. However, Simmons 
was spared this ordeal, for her young 
mistress went quietly down to the library, 
where Brand Royston was pacing to and 
fro with long strides, evidently in the worst 
possible temper. The Kbrary was a fine, 
large room, with its towering rows of well- 
stored book-shelves ; and many a man in 
the ex-squire's case could have whiled away 
an hour or so agreeably enough among the 
treasures it contained. But Mr. Royston's 
reading was Umited to the occasional si^dj 
of the Racing Calendar and Stud Book, and 
to the sporting newspapers; and he had 
passed the last sixty minutes or so in fre* 
quent comparisons of his watch with the 
clock on the chimney-piece, and in angry 
glances through the great windows at the 
gravelled drive, where one of the earl's 
carriages stood ready to carry him off to 
Chartley, the nearest point on the railway* 



r 



64 LADY FLAVIA. 

A milder man than he -might have been 
provoked at the delay. 

Mr. Royston wheeled round as he heard 
the sonnd of the opening door, and his brow 
was dark, and his voice hareh, as he said : 

" Here have I been left to cool my heels 
this hour and a quarter, by Jove, and you 

care no more than Now yon are come, 

my Lady Flavia, we'd better come to some 
understanding at once, you and I." 

Nothing, not even age and past kindness, 
could warrant the assumption of such a. 
tone as this, and indeed Mr. Royston's 
voice was nearly as gruff, and his demean- 
our as overbearing, as when he terrified the 
maid, a few minutes before. But there was 
no trace of terror or annoyance in Lady 
Flavia's clear blue eyes as she approached 
the angry giant. 

" So very sorry to have kept you waiting, 
of course," she said, in a tone that seemed 
but half-serious; "you must forgive me, 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 65 

dear sir. Mine is. not a common position, 
and I have so much to occupy my thoughts 
just now ;" and she sighed, while the long, 
dark lashes, fell like a veil over her candid 
blue eyes, and rested almost on her soft 
cheek. 

" You don't expect me to believe in your 
grief and sorrow, I suppose ? By the Lord 
Harry, that won't go down with m^," said 
Royston, coarsely. 

The dark eyelashes rose abruptly, and 
for a single instant the blue eyes flashed 
with a cold, angry sparkle, like the glitter 
of a half-unsheathed sword. But there was 
nothing but childUke innocence in those 
pure eyes as they opened wide on the 
rough squire before them, while their owner 
shook her jetty curls back with a half- 
playful gesture, and made answer : 

" G-rief ! You see, Mr. Royston, my dear 
father and I were almost strangers to one 
another. I was taken from him so early . 

VOL. I F 



t 



66 LADY FLAVIA. 

at six jeare old, you know . or eigbt, I 
forget which. otherwise my sorrow would 
have been deeper, naturally." 

And as the last words were spoken, this 
strange speech was wound up by a little 
peal of silvery laughter . very low, but 
very clear; not a mirthful laugh, or one 
that suggested mirthful thoughts to the 
listeners, and yet there was an evident 
enjoyment in its fairy chime. Brand 
Royston's boll-eyes opened in a duU but 
wrathful stare, of no counterfeit astonish- 
ment. He looked sullenly down at the 
lovely little face that looked up at him, and 
by some instinct that he could not account 
for, he recoiled a step, and the blood tiished 
from bis flushed h,ce to his quick-beating 
heart. 

'* I don't see your little game, my lady," 
he muttered between his clenched teeth, 
]}ut so low that it seemed impossible that 
Lady Flavia could catch the sound. She 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 67 

was the first to resume the conversa- 
tion, 

" Must you really leave us to-day, Mr. 
Royston ? Do you know I feel half as if I 
were deserted here, half inclined to beg you 
to take me back to the tiresome old convent, 
and Soeur Nanon, and So3ur Christine, and 
Madame Nenville, with her eternal * de la 
sagesse, mesdemoiselles.' After all, I am 
a stranger here, and " 

Brand Royston broke in here with a 
half-smothered oath and a mighty stroke of 
one of his heavy fists in the palm of the 
other muscular hand. " Let us talk sense, 
will you, madam?" said he, involuntarily 
raising his voice. "You seem to wish to 
throw your old friends overboard altogether, 
but, by George, it won't do." 

The squire had a terrible voice. one of 
those to which the nerves of the ear are 
forced to quiver and vibrate; and few 
persons were stout-hearted enough to listen 



68 LADT FLAVIA. 

to its menacing accents tinmoved. But 
there was not a shadow of fear in the 
girlish face that looked up at him, while 
the fresh young voice said in rather a 
graver tone than before : 

"Mr. Royston, you forget yourself. I 
must heg you not to speak to me again in 
such a manner ; and yet " . and here a pretty 
smile of forgiveness beamed out over the 
fair little fiice . " we are such good friends, 
and I have so many pleasant recollections 
of your hospitality at the dear old chateau 
treasured in my memory, that I wish us to 
continue friends always. Don't be vexed 
with me." 

And she put out her little white hand 
with a timid little gesture of reconciliation 
that would have bewitched any man who 
was not a brute. Brand Royston must 
surely have been a brute, for he made no 
sign of taking the playfully-offered hand ; 
on the contrary, his face grew nearly black 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 69 

with suppressed passion, and he took three 
or four hasty strides up and down the room 
before he coilld calm himself suflficiently to 
resume the conversation. At last he planted 
himself full in front of Lady Flavia, and 
said, in a voice that he struggled to keep 
down to a low pitch : ** I sent for you to 
speak on business. You know that that 
will gives you power to choose your own 
guardian. What do you mean to do ?" 

Lady Flavia looked fixedly at him, but 
gave him no answer. Almost choking with 
rage, the squire forced himself to frame 
the query more politely : *^ Will you. Lady 
Flavia, oblige me by informing me of your 
intention with respect to the selection of 
your guardian ? Has my lord spoken to 
you on the subject yet ?" 

" He has," answered the girl, and her 
colour mounted a very little to her lovely 
face as she spoke, and her eyes became 
more brilliant as their glance, with an inex- 



L 



70 LADT PLAVU, 

pKcable, almost a mocking look, watched 
every movement of the squire. 

" Have you chosen me ?"* blurted out 
Royston savagely. 

" I have chosen Lord Mortlake himself. 
The earl and coxmtesB came to me early to- 
day, and most kindly offered me a home 
with them at Harbledown. They remarked, 
what was very true, that I could not live 
alone . a little lonely creature such as I am 
. in either of my own two houses ; and 
the earl very good-naturedly said, he could 
not help looking on me as the rightful mis- 
tress of this house . my poor papa's, you 
know " 

But here Brand Royston, with flashing 
eyes, strode forward, and rudely grasped 
Lady Flavia's delicate wrist between his iron 
fingers. 

** Have you dared to do this ?" he asked 
in a deep tone, like the distant roar of a 
lion ; " have you dared But you shall 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 71 

unsay the words ; you shall, I say. You 

shall go to Lord Mortlake, and ^" 

His voice had been waxing louder and 
louder, in spite of himself and all his 
eflForts to be prudent, and now its threaten- 
ing sounds seemed a<rf;ually to bruise the 
delicate ear, as the gripe of his crushing 
fingers was bruising the delicate flesh of the 
listener. But there was no shrinking in 
her attitude; and she had the courage to 
smile as she interrupted his furious speech 
with : " I am afraid I must indeed go to 
Lord Mortlake, if you will not be so very 
kind as to release me. There are servants 
in the hall outside. Perhaps I had better 
send word to the earl that I must really 
ask him to be present at this very odd in- 

terview, unless Thank you ! But how 

you have hurt my wrist. There will be a 
great black bruise ; and I shall have to tell 
all sorts of fibs, Mr. Eoyston, to keep your 
eccentric behaviour from the world at 



L 



72 LADT FLA.TIA. 

large ;" and Lady Flavia looked piteously 
down at the hand which Boyston had let 
drop, and on the tender flesh of which the 
livid marka of his rough clutch were already 
perceptible. Then she laughed, with a 
careless toss of her little head, and shook 
back her curls as she added : " You put me 
in mind of the savage baron . ^what was his 
name ? . something beginning with L : oh, 
Lindesay, landesay of the Byres, who was 
so cruel as to squeeze Queen Mary's arm 
with his iron gauntlet, to make her sign 
some silly paper or other. But Mary was 
frightened, and she signed it ; I would not 
have done so, Mr. Boyston . never, never, 
never !" 

The great heatnirops, wrung forth by 
fierce inward emotion, were beginning to 
stand thickly on Royston's brow. He 
daalied them away with the back of his 
heavy hand, and twice he tried to speak, 
but his voice died away without the utter- 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 73 

ance of an articulate sound. When he 
spoke at last, it was in a hoarse accent, like 
that of one half-strangled, that he said : 
"Kemember!" and shook his lifted fore- 
finger with a strange gesture of menace, 
that seemed rather suggested by recollec- 
tions of the past, and bodings of future 
evil, than to imply a common-place threat. 
The squire^s flushed face was pale enough 
now, and his breath came short and pain- 
fully. Whatever his last speech might 
imply, it was obvious that Lady Flavia 
understood it perfectly, for again the cold 
angry glitter^ as of steel suddenly bared, 
shone for an instant in her blue eyes, 

" Remember !" she answered, in a low 
sibilant tone, more like the hiss of a snake 
than anything that could have been ex- 
pected from those rosy young lips . " re- 
member ! As if it was likely that I should 
ever forget !" And then followed a burst 
of that silvery laughter that seemed pecu- 



74 LADT FLA VIA. 

liar to this fairy-like little creature . ^tiny- 
elfin merriment, that somehow made the 
hearers sad without their knowing why. 
This rare little peal of laughter seemed to 
strike Brand Eoyston like a blow. He 
gasped as if for breath ; and there was 
something very like terror in his face as he 
walked with unsteady steps to the window, 
threw it open, and leaned out, letting the 
fresh air blow fi^ly on his heated forehead. 
A long pause succeeded. Mr. Koyston's 
face was averted; but Lady Flavia had 
dropped into a chair, as if fatigued, and her 
slender fingers were trifling with the mala- 
chite and mother-of-pearl paper-knives and 
other toys on the table beside her, while her 
expression was that of a well-bred hostess 
who waits till a tiresome visitor shall re- 
lieve her of his presence. At last the squire 
turned round, and advanced towards her. 
A great change had come over him. He 
looked dogged and ferocious still ; but the 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 75 

audacity of his bearing had been replaced 
by an awkward sort of timidity. His voice 
was studiously subdued, too, as he said : " I 
beg your pardon. I am rather rough and 
hasty; and . and I am not used to be 
thwarted, as you know. Don't let us 
quarrel.'* 

" Now you are my good kind Mr. Eoyston 
again !" said the girl with a bright smile of 
forgiveness. ** My pardon is given as soon 
as asked. Let us part good friends, as we 
were in old days, when you and your kind 
family were so indulgent to the poor little 
lonely school-girl; and come again and 
see us at Christmas, and bring dear Mrs. 
Royston. I'll take care Lady Mortlake shall 
invite you." 

Brand Royston's face would have been a 
study for Fuseli. His colour went and 
came in quick gushes, so that his face was 
red and purple, and almost black, as the 
dark blood rushed surging into it, and then 



76 LADT FLAVIA. 

ghastly white, as fear seemed to conquer 
rage. He had gnawed his lip till it bled. 
His mighty right hand was alternately 
clenched and unclenched, and his staring 
eyes were bloodshot; but with all this 
formidable show of passion, the fiercer 
for its being kept down, there mingled a 
stronger current of fear . the sort of fear 
that a tiger might feel for a little gilded 
snake of deadliest venom, on whose coils 
the lord of the jungle was afraid to set his 
foot. The squire felt himself cowed by the 
presence of a harder nature than his own. 

Very quietly, almost mechanically, as a 
dull pupil repeats a lesson got by rote, did 
he utter the words : ** I am going now, 
Lady Flavia. If you have any last 
words " 

He paused, choking, and she filled up 
the gap, speaking with graceful ease : 
" Only my love to the dear ones at the 
chateau, and my respectful compliments to 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND, 77 

the Superior, should you see Dr, Perinet 
soon. I mean to send the good doctor 
something pretty from London as a sur- 
prise. Do you think a gold snuff-box 
would . But I see you are impatient. 
Have you taken leave of my cousins yet, 
the earl and countess ?" 

"To be sure ! I wished them good-bye 
more than an hour ago," said Brand, 
breaking into something of his old tone ; 
"but that is not to the purpose. Cannot 
you be open and above-board, my lady ?" 

9 

Again that musical little laugh that 
seemed to freeze Mr. Royston's blood, while 
Lady Flavia archly smiled in his face as 
she rejoined: "Now, what does that mean? 
I dare say you will think me very stupid 
for not understanding those nautical meta- 
phors, but it can't be helped. Must you go, 
Mr. Royston ? Ah ! there is one of the 
footmen coming in with some tiresome 
message from the coachman about the train. 



78 LADT PLAVIA. 

or the horses, or my lord's orders, or some- 
thing. . Yes, I thought so" . as the ser- 
vant entered and civilly mentioned the fact, 
that there was hardly time to reach Chartley 
before the passage of the 4.45 express. ** I 
must come and see you oflF, dear sir. My 
love to all at home. Remember me most 
kindly to dearest Mrs. Royston and dearest 
Adela ; and give my best wishes to Captain 

Basil, and I do so hope I shall not 

have made you miss the train." 

And as the carriage drove rapidly oflF, 
bearing away Mr. Royston, cowed, miser- 
able, and inwardly chafing, the last sight 
he saw was that graceful little figure, in 
deep mourning, standing on the stately 
flight of steps, and the last sound hje heard 
was that ringing little silver laugh, that 
seemed to have power to tame his rugged 
nature, as the snake-charmer tames the 
serpent. What was the secret, vaguely 
shadowed forth, of any link between these 





-i 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 79 

two beings, so incongruous, so mutually 
repellent, yet whose conduct, but for the 
ineflFaceable memories of the past, to which 
neither cared to refer, would have bfeen 
inexplicable ? Time alone could solve that 
riddle. At any rate, such was the manner 
in which Brand Eoyston, sometime of 
Royston hall, took his leave of Harbledown 
and its occupants; and thus did Lady 
Flavia Clare become a permanent inmate 
of her kinsman's home. 



80 LADT FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER VI. 



LORD HYTHE. 



The new Earl and Countess of Mortlake 
had four daughters, but only one son, now 
Lord Hythe, but who had for some years 
been known in the House of Commons as 
the Honourable Augustus Clare, M. P. 
for Starvington, a bleak little Wiltshire 
borough that had escaped reform. It 
might have done worse, however, than 
return Mr. Clare, who was a steady work- 
ing-member, if not a brilliant poKtician. 
Lord Hythe was about thirty years old, 
a comely, manly Englishman, sensible, 
honest, and earnest, a capital man on 
committees, a safe vote, not to be led 



LORD HYTHE. 81 

away by pique or crotchet, and exactly 
the sort of speaker who is held worth his 
weight in gold at agricultural meetings 
and mechanics' institutes. He had but 
lately arrived at Harbledown, much to the 
delight of his mother and sisters, whose 
idol he was; and indeed, if praise and 
deference in the family circle could 
have spoiled Lord Hythe's nature, spoiled 
it would have been in no slight degree. 
But all the flattery in the world could 
not have made a coxcomb of the member 
for Starvington, and he shot partridges, 
read bluebooks, and returned the visits 
of the county magnates with equal calm- 
ness. It was not until September that he 
reached Harbledown. 

Of Lord Mortlake*s four daughters, two 
were still in the schoolroom, but two were 
grown up, and very well grown too. 
They had been left in London, under the 
care of a cousin, a certain Mrs. Archibald 

VOL. I. * a 



f 



82 LADY FLAVIA. 

Clare, when their parents were somewhat 
suddenly called down to the west to attend 
their dying kinsman ; and the season being 
over, they had gladly come down early in 
August. Lady Caroline and Lady Julia, 
the two eldest, were a brace of large young 
women, tall, light-haired, and possessed of 
pink healthy faces and equable tempers. 
They had been "out" for two and three 
seasons respectively, and were spinsters 
still ; but they felt no bitterness or morti- 
fication at seeing so many of their contem- 
poraries married before them. That their 
turn would come, they never doubted, and 
they were in no hurry for the orange blos- 
soms and Honiton lace, sure as they were 
that their aristocratic names would sooner 
or later be inscribed in the vestry-books of 
St. George's, Hanover-square. But almost 
all their -sex, from the child, vain of her 
white sash and well-starched frock, to the 
grandmother bending in her elbow-chair, 



LORD HTTHE, 83 

have a turn for match-making, and so it 
was in this case. 

Lady Caroline and Lady Julia often 
disputed which was the first to suggest how 
delightful it would be if darling Flavia 
and Hythe, as they were beginning to call 
their brother, could be brought to like each 
other. But to whichever of the sisters the 
bright original idea was due, it was hailed 
with acclamation, and Lady Mortlake 
smiled upon it with maternal approbation. 
Why not ? It would be an excellent match, 
looking at it merely from a worldly point 
of view. Such a marriage would reunite 
the former possessions of the Clare family ; 
and when Hythe should succeed as ninth 
earl to the pearl-pointed coronet, he would 
be a richer man, and thus more worthy of 
marquisates, Irish viceroyalty, and presi- 
dencies of the council, than any of his 
predecessors. Then Hythe was such a dear 
fellow, so eleven, good, wise, prudent, so 



84 LADY FLAVIA. 

excellent a pilot and protector for a charm- 
ing little giddy thing, such as Flavia, in the 
perilous voyage of life ; and Flavia was 
such a sweet creature, that if ever mar- 
riages are really made in heaven, surely, 
so the sisters thought, this would be one of 
them. It is very probable that had Lady 
Flavia been less splendidly dowered than 
she was, Lady Caroline and Lady Julia 
might have been less eager to hail her as 
their sister-in-law. But they were not so 
much influenced by mercenary motives as 
might be supposed. They had taken a 
great fancy to the lovely little orphaned 
cousin whom they had found, looking so 
pretty and delicate in her deep mourning, 
at Harbledown. They knew enough of 
her story to be prepared jfrom the first 
to sympathise with, and be kind to, 
this, poor lonely little maid, who had been 
the innocent scapegoat for the sins of 
others. But they were surprised at find- 



LORD HYTHE. 85 

ing how very graceful, how sprightly 
and spirited, was the young kinswoman 
whom they had set down, on first hear- 
ing of her, as a raw school-girl fresh 
from backboards and music-lessons. But 
thi8 notion was a thoroughly mistaken one. 
Lady Flavia, hospitably welcomed and 
made much of, had been like a flower 
expanding its delicate petals to the genial 
generous sunshine. Her early silence and 
reserve had thawed as thin ice melts at 
the warm breath of spring. It would not 
have been natural that she, who had but an 
indistinct recollection of her father, should 
have been long overcome by grief at his loss ; 
and her gentle sorrow, which seemed more 
like the overflow of a true and tender heart, 
than the deep-seated regret that in such a 
case was hardly possible, only served to 
lend her an additional charm. Gradually 
the bright smUe on her face became more 
frequent, her youthful spirits rose; and by 



I 



86 LADT FLAVIA. 

the first week in October, the convent-bred 
girl was the pet and spoiled darling of the 
household. 

Lord Hythe smiled incredulously when 
first, on his arrival at Harbledown, his 
sisters combined to fill his ears with the 
praises of their new friend. He knew well 
enough that young-lady friendships are apt 
to grow like the gourd of the prophet, and 
to wither, sometimes, as rapidly, and had 
ntf very high expectations with regard to 
this new relative. He came down to dinner, 
anticipating that the family phoenix would 
prove either a bread-and-butter miss of the 
awkward red-knuckled British type, or a 
chattering, self-conscious damsel of the 
French pattern. But the sight of bo much 
loveliness . for Lady Flavia looked far pret- 
tier than when we first saw her, pale and 
weary, on the threshold of her imfamiliar 
liome . surprised him, and the girl's manner 
jierplexed him excessively. He was not a 



LORD HTTHE. 87 

lady's man, was more at home in a com^ 
mittee-room than in an opera-box, but he 
was no fool, and had some knowledge of 
women's ways. That knowledge was at 
fault now. There was something about 
Lady Flavia Clare that he could not 
fathom. 

*M've seen every variety of prude, flirt, 
and coquette, stupid good women, clever 
good women, and those who were good 
without being clever or stupid, but never 
any one in the least like Aer," said Lord 
Hythe to himself as he strolled beside the 
trout-stream that came splashing and bub- 
bling down jfrom the high purple moors 
whose bold chain overhangs Harbledown 
Park. "I can't make her out. She has 
more sense in her little finger, I'm certain, 
than Carry and Julia put together, and yet 
she lets them treat her like a child or a 
plaything. She has a brilhant fancy, and 
never talks platitudes, yet she is not a bit 



88 LADY FLAVIA. 

of a blue. I never can tell whether she id 
serious or joking, with all that playfulness 
of hers, and that laugh . it's a very musical 
laugh . but I think I had rather my wife 
should be less of an enigma. Eh, Leo, my 
boy?" And Lord Hythe stooped and 
patted the head of his great dog, the usual 
companion of his walkB. A very fine and 
a very faithful dog was Leo, and his master 
insisted on bringing him constantly into 
the family circle, rather to the distress of 
the countess, who was constitutionally timid^ 
and never could quite reconcile herself to 
the animal's presence. Indeed, none of 
Lord Hythe's near relations had ever felt 
quite comfortable when in company with 
the big tawny brute, yellow as a lion, and 
nearly large enough for one, six-and-thiriy 
inches at the shoulder, and possessing the 
black muzzle, the heavy tail, strong paws, 
deep chest, and solemn dignity of the 
pure old Pyrenean breed of wolf-dogs. A 



LORD HYTHE. 89 

patrician of the canine race was Leo, very 
grave and majestic, never seeking a quarrel 
with man or beast, and rarely uttering that 
mighty bark, at the sound of which others 
of his species slunk off trembling to their 
kennels. But for all that, and although 
Leo treated his master's firiends with dis- 
tinguished politeness, there was something 
in the expression of the dog's dark eyes, 
deep-set, and glowing like carbuncles, that 
said. Noli me tangerej as plainly as a human 
tongue could have done, and no one ever 
patted the noble brute otherwise than re- 
spectfully, and in a half-apologetic manner. 
But here, wonder of wonders, came out 
another trait in Lady Flavia's apparently 
incongruous character: she alone of the 
household refused to be afraid of Leo. In 
spite of all well-meant warnings, in spite 
of suppressed feminine screams from the 
young ladies, she would have her way. 
When Leo lay stretched on the hearth-rug. 



90 LADY FLAVIA. 

lazily blinking at the cold grate, and per- 
haps dreaming of winter and its bright 
fires, Lady Flavia would seat herself on a 
low stool beside the dog, twine her arms 
round his neck, and caress the huge brute 
as fearlessly and famiUarly as if he had been 
the meekest of lap-dogs, A pretty sight it 
was, as Lord Hythe often owned to himself, 
that of this slight delicate fairy with her 
slender arms wound round Leo's brawny 
neck, and her silken curls falling in ebon 
masses over the great hound's shaggy yel- 
low coat. But there was one feature in the 
case that could not but strike the young 
man, a keener observer than his mother 
and sisters. If Lady Flavia were not 
afraid of Leo, which was obvious, it was 
almost equally plain that Leo was afraid of 
Lady Flavia. It seemed absurd, but it was 
true. To his master's practised eye, the 
mighty dog never failed to show signs of 
fear, and of a sort of scared subjection. 



LORD HYTHE. 91 

while those white little hands were tenderly- 
stroking his massive head, and those blue 
girlish eyes were bent on his. Then, as the 
dog cowered down submissively, the dead 
earl's daughter would look up with her 
bright glance and her ringing elfin laugh. 

" Leo and I are very good friends, and 
understand each other quite well," she 
would say in that playful tone which always 
puzzled Lord Hythe as to whether some 
deeper meaning did not lurk beneath the 
words than they seemed to convey. ** You 
should give him to me, and then we could 
walk about the moors together, like Una and 
the Lion, you know. Give a paw, Leo. 
Good dog !" 

Leo never condescended to give his broad 
forepaw to any one but his master, Lady 
Flavia excepted ; but there was a spell in 
her voice and look that the creature obeyed 
at once. 

^^ Is she a sorceress, then, and has she 



92 LADT FLAYIA. 

bewitched yon, old fellow?" asked Lord 
Hythe as he walked along, looking down 
at his dog as it gravely paced beside him. 
" Or is she really the Fairy Queen she 
looks? Yes, it would be a very good 
match, as my mother says ; and the girl is 
sweetly pretty, and she nas Cupley Lees 
and Melshot Friars stitched to her apron ; 
but . ^but I had rather think twice about it, 
though I am sure I could give no reason for 
saying so/* 



93 



CHAPTER VII. 

FINDING THE POETRAIT. 

The dusk of an October evening was clos- 
ing around Harbledown, and the last glow 
of the sunlight had faded slowly from the 
windows of the western wing. In that 
wing were the pretty pink rooms, Lady 
Flavians apartments, and there, before a 
quaint old cabinet, stood Lady Flavia her- 
self, with a small box in her hand. The 
cabinet was a specimen of costly old French 
upholstery, sadly overloaded with ornament, 
no doubt, but holding its place in virtue of 
the richness of the materials. Buhl and 
ivory, ebony and ormolu, incrust^d its 
front, and while the legs were inlaid with 



94 LADY FLAVIA. 

tortoise-shell and mother-of-pearl, the doors 
were of gilt filigree-work, with panels of 
enamel, the ground of which was bleu du 
roi or tender rose Dubarri; whilst the 
tiniest of flowers and nymphs, and cupids 
and shepherds, had been painted thereon by 
the daintiest of crayons. Before this cabi- 
net stood the girl-mistress of that pretty 
snite of rooms, somewhat impatiently trying, 
with the aid of a bunch of small keys, to 
open those gorgeous little doors, the gilding 
of which was but little tarnished by time. 
At last the right key was inseited, and 
the long-disused hinges opened creakingly, 
while a faint musky scent, as if clinging to 
perfumed love-letters written by the long 
dead, came from the compartments within. 

There is something melancholy in the 
aspect of these receptacles for old-world 
trifles, these mausoleums, as it were, of 
hopes, and wishes, and follies, belonging to 
those who have perished long ago. But 



FINDING THE PORTRAIT. 95 

Lady Flavia Clare cast no glances of senti- 
mental regret at the relics with which the 
interior of the cabinet was strewed. There 
were yellow old letters there, the dim writ- 
ing of which had once very likely been 
kissed by rosy lips, and read a score of 
times over by bright eyes . eyes and lips 
that were dust and ashes now. There was 
a broken fan ; there was the hilt of a shat- 
tered sword ; there was the miniature of a 
young man, wearing the cross of St. Louis 
over the white uniform of the Bourbons ; 
and there were some loose pearls, and a 
broken bracelet, and a faded breast-knot of 
ribbon, and a dried flower or two, ready to 
crumble at a touch. No doubt, each and 
all of these had a history attached to them, 
but the tongues that could have told it were 
silent for ever. Lady Flavia wasted no 
sympathy on these ; she pushed back in a 
confused heap the letters in their eighteenth- 
century writing, and the breast-knot of 



96 LADY FLAVIA. 

faded blue that had once been pinned to 
the bosom of some fair girl of the days of 
hoops and powder, and the sword-hilt and 
the bracelet; and she set down in the space 
she had cleared the small box she had held 
in her hand, a plain little coffer of walnut- 
wood, shaped like a medicine chest. 

"Dangerous! to keep such matters in 
trunks or wardrobes," she murmured, as she 
laid it down, " This will just be the place 
to lock my treasure safely away from prying 
eyes. I don't think any Fatima among the 
housemaids will think of exploring this queer 
old piece of furniture, even if the lock were 
easier to pick. And as she spoke, she held 
up the twisted little key, with its minute but 
numerous wards, and examined it carefully. 
Then she seemed about to close the doors, 
but some fascination impelled her to gaze on 
the little walnut-wood box, to all appearance 
as plain and unattractive as box could be. 
" Why keep it at all ?" she said hesitatingly. 



FINDING THE PORTRAIT. 97 

"It is a mute witness that might rise 
against me one day. And yet . ^and yet I 
mvst keep it. I am safe. I think I am 
safe. But Life and Death are so very near 
together, and Fate ravels the best of our 
plans, and I would at least be free to choose 
at the last. And there is freedom here " . 
she laid her hand almost caressingly on the 
box . " a refuge in case of need. But I 
shall never want it." She was then about 
in good earnest to close the cabinet, but she 
discovered that the box prevented the doors 
from shutting, and when she pushed it back, 
some hard substance intervened between the 
coffer and the wall of the cabinet. " More 
of this worn-out lumber of Louis XY.'s 
day !" she said, with a petulant stamp of her 
little foot ; and thrusting in her hand, drew 
out an oval morocco-case, evidently of more 
modem construction than the rest of the 
contents of the tiny museum. She pressed 
the spring, and the case flew open, revealing 

VOL. I. H 



I 



98 LADY FLAVLl. 

a miniature delicately painted on ivoiy* 
She carried it to the window, and, by the 
fading light saw that it was the portrait of a 
beautiful child, a little girl of perhaps six or 
seven years of age, with flowing dark curls 
and a sweet face. It was very carefully, if 
not very spiritually executed. The artist 
had earned his fifty guineas by the minute 
prettiness with which he had laboured to re- 
produce the fresh young cheek with its rose- 
leaf bloom, the pure brow shaded by rippling 
ringlets, the bright lips parting in a happy 
smile. Around the painted ivory was a 
broad rim of seed-pearls in a setting of dead 
gold, a frame-work of some value, though 
looking worth more than its actual cost, 
very likely ; and on the border of dead gold 
were scratched the words "Lady Flavia 
Clare." 

For one instant, the colour faded out of 
Lady Flavia's cheek as she traced those 
words ; then it came back in all its delicate 



PINDINa THE PORTRAIT. 99 

beauty, and the young heiress tossed her 
head with a saucy little laugh, as she said : 
"Myself! and very like me, even now, 
after all these years/* And the heiress 
glanced at the nearest mirror, and then 
again at the miniature, with a sort of in- 
fantine pride. The likeness, indeed was 
wonderful, and the youthful candour of ex- 
pression was conimon to both countenances^ 
Suddenly a frown came over the girl's fair 
forehead, and turning away, she hastily 
struck a light, and held a taper close to the 
miniature. One glance was enough. Lady 
Flavia's beauty grew cold and hard, and her 
face assmned the same strange look that it 
wore on that first night when she had found 
herself alone under the roof of Harbledown. 
" It is well I was the one to find it," she said, 
with a low laugh, in which there was little 
mirthfulness ; " I had forgotten those dark 
eyes. They seem to reproach me . that 
matters little. The danger is from others. 



i 



100 LiJ)Y PLAVIA. 

This must not fall into wrong hands." And 
then this singular girl, after one long and 
steady look at the miniature, closed the case 
with a sharp snap, and laid it on the table 
beside her, and lifting her head defiantly, 
looked out upon the shadowy gardens and 
the dark woods beyond, where the rooks 
were cawing querulously among the sway- 
ing pine-trees. For a minute or two she 
stood thus, with compressed lips and 
clenched hands, gazing at the gathering 
mists that began to curl up, blue and thin, 
above the copse and the meadows, while the 
park was already in deep shadow. The 
fogs and darkness were fast closing in, and 
yet the dinner hour was far off . ^much 
might be done before the dressing-beU 
should ring, and Simmons arrive upon the 
scene. And Lady Flavia had already de- 
termined upon her course of action. 

Hastily wrapping a dark shawl around 
her, she extinguished the taper, and left the 



FINDma THE PORTRAIT. 101 

room, carrying the miniature concealed be- 
neath the folds of her lace-bordered hand- 
kerchief. Swift and silent she glided, 
wraith-like, down the broad staircase, flitted 
across the hall, darted into a side-passage, 
and gained a door that was but little used, 
but which led to the garden. In a moment 
more she was outside, among the deserted 
walks- and leafy shrubs, and so far her wish 
had been gratified. She had left the house, 
and unseen. There was a wicket that 
opened on a neglected comer of the park, 
where the tall fern and brambles grew 
thickly, and towards this point of egress 
from the gardens Lady Flavia rapidly 
made her way, keeping heedfuUy in the 
shadow of the masses of lilac and rhododen- 
dron that skirted the lawn. 

It was but a step from the wicket-gate, 
across the angle of the park, to the belt of 
black fir plantation that crowned the low 
hill beyond ; but the wood looked funereal 



102 LADY PLAVIA. 

and gloomy enough, it might have heen 
thought, to repel one so delicately nurtured 
as the heiress of Gupley Lees and Melshot 
Friars from intruding into its darkling 
depths ; especially on a foggy October even- 
ing, when the mists were rising fast, and 
when the low sigh of the wind sounded 
doubly moumfiil among those black, plumy 
trees. But Lady Flavia pressed steadily 
on, looking for the narrow footpath that 
she knew intersected the plantation there- 
abouts. She was one of those persons who 
possess a sort of topographical instinct that 
never deceives them. Once, and once only, 
had she entered the wood that fringed the 
lower part of the park, and that was when 
the earl had insisted on taking his wife and 
daughters a mile or so out of their way, 
that they might see the pheasantries, and 
duly admire the hopeful condition of the 
young birds that were completing their 
physical education there on boiled buck- 



FINDING THE PORTRAIT. 103 

wbeat and chopped eggs. The paths 
through the wood were intricate, and it is 
probable that Lord Mortlake would not 
have known which to select, unaided by 
his pocket-map of the estate; but Lady 
Flavia advanced unhesitatingly, until she 
was deep in the centre of the labyrinth of 
firs, and had arrived at a spot where, amidst 
thick brushwood, stood a gaunt old giant 
of a sycamore, hollowed by decay, and 
seared by lightning, but yearly putting 
forth a few fresh leaves and yellow 
blossoms, in token of vitality. Between 
the forks of the lowest bough, a sear 
bough, in which the sap had not run for 
years, some keeper had nailed a dead hawk, 
and there the dried bird hung, with ex- 
panded wings and fleshless bones, like a 
murderer bleaching on a gibbet. At the 
foot of the tree the . moss grew in thick 
tufts, and there the violets were plentiful 
in the early spring-time, while all around 



104 LADY FLA VIA. 

grew stunted hazels and ash-trees, mixed 
up with unsightly sucker-fringed stumps of 
ehns and oaks felled long ago. Here Lady 
Flavia stopped, glancing to left and right, 
and listening intently for the slightest 
sound. It was with a sigh of reUef that 
she approached the tree, and thrust her 
ungloved hand and slender arm deep down 
into the hollow trunk ; as she did so, her 
fingers grasped something cold and slip- 
pery, that stirred heneath her touch, and 
then followed an angry hiss, as a snake, 
disturbed, probably, in his winter-quarters, 
showed his flat head and lithe body through 
an aperture lower down the bole of the 
decayed sycamore. 

That Lady Flavia should hastily with- 
draw her hand, was not surprising, but she 
uttered no cry, and made no motion to flee 
from the spot, calmly looking down at the 
snake. Then her lip curled as she recog- 
nised, by its diamond-patterned coat, in 



FINDING THE PORTRAIT. 105 

black and white streaks, that the creature 
was harmless. She stood still, watching 
the graceful undulating movements with 
which the reptile glided away through the 
rank grass and dead leaves ; then she 
laughed . one of those strange little laughs 
that any listener, had a listener been there, 
would have found out of tune with the 
voice of his own heart. ^'It might have 
been an adder," she said, in the lowest tone 
of her fresh young voice, but with a strange 
bitterness of expression. ** Would it have 
Qtung me, I wonder, for intruding on its 
nest? No. I bear a charmed life. And 
now to hide away this morsel of painted 
ivory.*' And as she said these words she 
unflinchingly thrust her arm back into the 
hollow tree trunk, and deposited the minia- 
ture at the bottom of the dark recess, cover- 
ing it up with chips of bark and scraps of 
rotten wood, that lay plentifully within. 
Then she turned away, and without one 




106 LADY FLAVIA. 

further glance at the place where she had 
concealed the portrait, she re-entered the 
narrow path through the fir-wood, treading . 
swiftly and silently, and avoiding, by a kind 
of instinct, the knotted and spreading roots 
that protruded firom the ground like a net- 
work to ensnare unwary feet By this 
time the fog and the gathering night had 
made it very dark, and beneath the blsick- 
ness of the boughs the keenest eye might 
have been at fault. But Lady Flavia pur- 
sued her way without doubt or fear, until, 
as she drew near to the edge of the wood, 
the sound of voices speaking in stealthy 
accents fell upon her ear, and she stopped, 
mute and motionless, as if turned into 
stone. 



. i 



107 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 

"Eight pun ten for ninety brace. You 
dare oflTer a man that, dare ye? Ninety 
brace for eight pounds ten shillings ! Curse 
you, what do you mean by that ?" was the 
fierce question, put in what is perhaps the 
the most terrible of all tones, that of a deep, 
strong voice, whose owner struggles hard 
to bridle the fury that rages in his heart. 

" Now, my tear, my tear," thus ran the 
answer, coaxingly uttered in thick, oily 
accents ; " my good friend, Benjamin, don't 
you be in a passion. Conshider ^^ 

" Old Nick take you and your con- 
sideringsl" savagely interrupted the first 



108 LADY PLAVIA. 

speaker, bringing something weighty down 
with a heavy thud upon the soft earth of 
the path, as if to emphasise his words. 
" I'm not such a muff as you suppose, nor 
such a gull neither, Master Levi. I sold 
you nineiy brace of pheasants " 

" Ninety brace of my lord's pheasantsh, 
just so !" said he of the oily voice, inter- 
rupting in his turn. A growl like that of 
a wild beast, and certain indications that 
his companion was preparing to supplement 
words with blows, then caused the" Jew, for 
such he evidently was, to recoil a pace or 
two, and to say, with some alarm in his 
tone : " No violence, my very tear friend, 
or we're all ruined together. The cart's in 
the lane by the park wall, within sound of 
a whistle, and the two ladsh are in the cart. 
You'd best restrain yourself." 

While the two had been standing among 
the thick fir-trees, the forms of both had 
been invisible; but now, as the Jew emerged 



A SlllOKB OF BUSINESS. 109 

into a little patch of cleared ground where 
the young trees were mere seedlings of a 
few months' growth, his plump, little figure, 
fleshy face, and twinkling black eyes, could 
be seen with tolerable distinctness. He 
wore a sailor's peacoat, of rough blue cloth, 
a greasy hat, and a heavy silver watch- 
chain serpentining over his frowsy waist- 
coat and cravat of frayed satin. Altogether, 
he was just such a figure as Houndsditch or 
the Minories could furnish in kaleidoscopic 
profusion, and he formed the strongest 
possible contrast to the tall Anglo-Saxon 
with whom he was disputing. The latter, 
a gaunt giant of a man, clad in velveteen 
and leather, with a face tanned brown by 
sun and storm, a shaggy head, a quick 
restless blue eye that dwelt on the ground 
by preference, a gun and a shot-belt, could 
have been only a backwoodsman or a game- 
keeper. The expression of his face, as he 
moved a step forward from the shadow of 



I 



110 LA1>T FLATIA. 

the trees, boded notbing pleasant ; and as 
he, for the second time, brought the bnt- 
end of his gun heavily down upon the soft 
earth, there was a sparkle in bis eye that 
the Jew was not slow to interpret. 

" Well, well, my tear," be said fewningly ; 
.' if eight poundsb ten won't satisfy you, 
we'll throw in a shoverein more, though, 
BO Moses shall help me, I shall lose money 
by it ; I shall, indeed." 

" Don't try that gammon with me !" 
broke out the keeper, with an angry oath, 
" It's little better nor two shiUings a brace 
. two shillings . and them selling for nine 
or ten up in London ! Was it worth my 
while to risk my place and my character, 
to got fobbed off with such paltry pickings 
I should like to know ? Suppose any one 
wa to tell my lord of them two bucks 
I wiiH f(X)l enough to sell you last June, 

j(l^l l"l'iire the old earl died . Hist! 

di'ltii you hoar abranch crack ?" And the 



A STROKE OP BUSINESS. Ill 

man became silent, peering suspiciously 
about him into the darkness of the planta- 
tions. Levi had heard nothing, but he was 
in haste to be gone out of the reach of his 
savage confederate ; he therefore produced 
a Httle flannel bag, and chinked the money 
that it contained. A brief whispered con- 
versation ensued between the two worthies, 
the Jew*s voice alone being distinctly 
audible at times. The words, " so much 
rishk '* . " police, my tear " . " losses ** . 
and " sad roguesh up in London," rose at 
intervals above the deep, monotonous growl 
of the keeper, and at last the gold and silver 
clinked as the coins, counted out one by one 
into the woodman's hard palm, were trans- 
ferred to safe keeping in a weasel-skin purse, 
and buttoned up in the pocket of the re-, 
cipient. 

Then followed a few hurried sentences, 
which ended in these words : " I dursn't 
kill so many. It's as much as my place is 



k 



112 LADY FLAVIA. 

worth. My lord's so particular about the 
head of hares . Hush ! I heard something. 
You'd better be off !" And then was heard 
the Jew's shuffling tread as he quickly with- 
drew. The keeper remained stationary, with 
his gun cast into the hollow of his arm, 
and his head a Httle bowed, while his prac- 
tised eye roved from tree to bush in eager 
quest of the cause of the slight rustling 
sound that his ear had detected. For more 
than a minute he stood thus, until the faint 
sound of the wheels of his accomphce, the 
Jew-middleman's cart, had died away in the 
miry lane, and then with a grunt of satisfac- 
tion, lifted his head, and shook back his 
shaggy hair. " Maybe 'twas a stoat !" he 
muttered. 

" No, it was not a stoat," said a silvery 
voice at his elbow, and the keeper winced- 
and started as if he had seen a ghost, as the 
slight figure of a girl . a lady by her voice 
and dress^ . glided out of the wood, and stood 



A STROKE OP BUSINESS. 113 

before him. Just then, the moon began to 
whiten the tops of the black-fir trees, and a 
stray gleam revealed the face of what the 
rough forester was at first half inclined to 
take for a supernatural visitant. But no one 
who had once seen Lady Flavia was likely to 
forget her, and it was with infinite dismay 
that the keeper recognised the daughter of 
the late, and kinswoman of the present, earl. 
How much of his conversation with the 
serviceable Mr. Levi had she overheard? 
and how much of what she heard was it in 
young-lady nature to understand? Thus 
ran the man's thoughts ; and for a moment 
a vague idea flashed upon his mind that he 
might deny his own identity, and pass him- 
self off as a poacher, a safer character to 
assume just then than that of a faithless 
custodian of the Harbledown preserves. 
But that was hopeless, Benjamin Haynes, 
alias Big Ben, head-keeper on the estate, 
groaned inwardly, as he remembered how 

VOL. I. I 



^ 



114 LADT PLATU. 

often he had touched his napless hat to the 
young ladiea from the Hall. He was sure 
that Lady Flavia knew him well. But why 
she was there, in that wood, alone in the 
dark, and without hat or bonnet, was more 
than his bewildered faculties could compass. 
He stood still and stared at her quite 
stupidly, like an over-driven ox. 

" Tour interview with your friend . what 
is his name ? . oh, Levi, to be sure. has 
amused me very much, Mr. Haynes," said 
Lady Flavia, with her innocent look of 
perfect candour. *' It was quite like a scene 
in a play, I should think. How Lord 
Mortlake will laugh, I am pure, at that 
funny, funny bargain for the ninety . brace, 
I think you call them, of pheasants." 
And the high-bom beauty laughed in 
her own peculiar elfin fashion, a laugh 
:it whicji the keeper shivered involun- 
tiiiily, and drew back a step, gasping for 
breath. Rogue as he was, Big Ben was 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 115 

was no craven. He had proved his courage 
in more than one midnight skirmish, and 
had been, when a younger man, one of the 
best players at single-stick in that country- 
side, and a staunch bruiser at wake and fair. 
But now he felt his forehead damp with a 
cold moisture, arid his eye quailed before 
the clear, blue eyes of this fairy-like creature, 
who seemed to have risen out of the earth 
for the discomfiture of Benjamin Haynes. 
One despairing effort he made to brazen it 
out. 

" A little matter of business, miss . my 
lady. My lord wanted some young birds 
to turn down in Tinningley Copse, and as 
Levi is in that line of business, I just sent 
for him to '* So the man was blunder- 
ing on, but Lady Flavia cut short the 
embryo lie. 

** I understand the affair perfectly, Mr. 
Haynes, You need not trouble yourself to 
invent any ingenious romances for my bene- 



V 



116 LADY FLAVI-1. 

fit. And I am quite sure that Lord Mort- 
lake will agree with you in thinking two 
shillings a . ' brace ' was the word, was it 
not? . a sadly low price, and hardly one 
that repays you for the trouble of robbing 
your master." 

These words were spoken with a piteoiB 
distinctness, not ang^ly, but rather with 
a provoking clearness of diction, such as 
might have suited the lips of a mocking 
spirit that knew no sympathy with human 
weakncBS. The keeper groaned aloud, 
and his head drooped despondently. " The 
game's up," he murmured ; " All's over with 
Ben Haynes." 

In imagination, already the wretched 
man saw himself dismissed and disgraced, 
turned out of his cottage, and converted 
from a trusted upper-servant into an out- 
cast, with the brand of dishonesty on his 
brow. It was a terrible downcoming. Loss 
of house and garden, of weekly wages, of 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 117 

perquisites lawful and illicit, of money 
honestly made out of the rabbits that were 
called the keeper's property, of milk, firing, 
candles, presents from my lord's visitors, 
black-mail from the master of the fox- 
hounds, loss of social consideration, loss of 
self-esteem. A rogue does not feel half a 
rogue until he is found out. Big Ben, 
prosperous, had been on good terms with 
himself, but now his dulled conscience awoke 
and stung him. 

'" It's all of them infernal skittles, and 
the card-playing up at the beer-shop,'* 
growled the keeper, remorsefully. *' I had 
a good place, and made plenty by it, but I 
lost most of my earnings by ill-luck . more 
fool me ; but my poor missis and the 

children -" And he actually gave a sob 

of mingled rage and pain, and drew the 
back of his rough hand across his eyes, 
filled as they were by unaccustomed tears. 
Lady Flavia looked at him inquisitively, 



118 LADY FLA VIA. 

and a little scomfiilly, like one who studies 
some rare psychological phenomenon, but 
feels no thrill of compassion for the subject 
of that scrutiny. But the melting mood 
did not long endure in the case of Mr. 
Benjamin Haynes. He suddenly lifted his 
head, and stared at his accuser. There was 
something in his look that resembled that 
of an over-driven ox still, but of an ox that 
was about to rush with goring horn and 
trampling hoof upon his tormentors. His 
breath came short and thick, his brows were 
knit, and his teeth were close set. Evi- 
dently the fellow was desperate. Evidently 
the idea, that to sweep away this unwel- 
come witness of his knavery was the only 
chance of safety, had presented itself 
forcibly to his narrow mind. He was at 
bay. It was dangerous to be alone with 
him. 

Lady Flavia Clare was not slow to read 
the. signs of peril in the man's kindling eye, 



I k 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 119 

or to note the manner in which his strong 
fingers clutched the barrels of his gun, as if 
they would crush the tough iron. But she 
remained dauntless and calm, as one who 
trusted in the protection of some talisman, 
against which brute force availed not, and 
it was with perfect steadiness that she said : 

" But it would be so very, very silly . so 
certain to be found out ; and that is why 
you will not do what you are thinking of, 
and thereby noose a halter for your own 
neck, Mr. Haynes." 

The fearlesswords, dispassionately spoken, 
went straight to the man's heart, and with 
a smothered oath he let the gim drop on 
the moss at his feet, and turned his face 
away. Lady Flavia, after a brief pause, 
spoke again. 

" You may take up your gun again, Mr. 
Haynes, and look, if you please, on all that 
has happened as if it had been a dream . a 
great, ugly dream. I have no wish to do 



120 LADY FLAVIA. 

you any harm. I have no present intention 
of saying a word to Lord Mortlake " 

The man looked round, breathing hard. 
" Bless you, my lady ! If you'd have mercy 
on my wife and children, and give a poor 
fellow a chance, I'd serve you to my dying 
day, ay, that I would . I'd go through fire 
and water, if you bid me. I'd never touch 
a card again, so help " 

Thus he went on ; but Lady Flavia 
checked him with an impatient wave of her 
little hand. "Don't promise more than 
you will care to perform," she said, as he 
turned away. " I don't belong to the 
Society for the Suppression of Yice, and I 
have nothing to do with your taste for 
gambling. I may call on you to be as 
good as your word, some day, in doing my 
bidding without asking tiresome questions : 
or I may not. But at any rate, I shall say 
nothing for the present to the earl." 

She turned away, and passed with her 



i 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 121 

usual lightness of tread down the narrow 
path, and was soon clear of the wood, and 
crossing the park towards the gate of the 
gardens. As she reached the wicket, the 
dressing-bell rang. 

" That may be useful one day/' said the 
daughter of Francis, seventh Earl of Mort- 
lake, with one of those laughs to whose 
purport she alone possessed the key ; " and 
now I must make haste up-stairs, and endure 
to hear Simmons express her consternation 
at my risk of catching cold by stopping out 
so late in the evening air. There is an end 
of the portrait, anyhow." 

And she went in ; but with all the mar- 
vellous intuition into other people's motives 
that in her case seemed to stand in lieu of 
worldly experience, Lady Flavia fell into 
the common error of undervaluing a 
defeated opponent. The impulse of grati- 
tude for the unexpected clemency that had 
been shewn him, was short-lived in the 



122 LADY FLAVIA. 

keeper's breast. The impulse of self-preser- 
vation was strong and tenacious. He by no 
means relished the idea of holding his place 
and its emoluments by the uncertain tenure 
of a yoimg lady's caprice, and he had no 
very high opinion of feminine discretion. 
To be sure, he had never in his life before 
that evening seen a woman who could stand 
utterly undaunted before an angry man 
who had cause to wish her dead, and he 
could not but feel some dim consciousness 
that one who could speak so fearlessly and 
so sensibly to a desperado with murder in 
his thoughts, might possibly have an 
abnormal power of keeping a secret. But 
would she keep it ? Did she merely mean 
to play with his fears, like a cat with a half- 
dead mouse, and was the evil day but 
deferred ? One word to the earl would be 
fatal, and that word might be spoken weeks 
or months hence. In this dilemma, a bright 
idea dawned on Big Ben's bemuddled mind. 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 123 

" Why on earth had Lady Flavia," he asked 
himself, " come into the wood at all ?" He 
had been too much occupied in thinking of 
the awkward scrape he was in, to ponder on 
the subject before, and an enigma it was, 
for he was confident that it was not with 
any desire to play the part of an amateur 
detective in matters of game-preserving, 
that a damsel of her rank and nurture was 
found, bare-headed and alone, in a fir-wood, 
during a foggy evening in October, 

" I'll lay my life," exclaimed Big Ben, 
" my lady has got some secrets of her own 
to hide ; and if I could light on one of 'em, 
and so get a hold on her, I'd sleep sounder, 
and feel myself more like my own man 
again. If 'twas to meet some young chap . 
some one as didn't dare to come up to the 
great house to do his. courting openly . 
whew !" and the keeper ended the soliloquy 
by a long and expressive whistle. He was 
no great talker, as we have seen, and still 



124 LADY FLAVIA. 

less had he the power of disciplined thought 
that only belongs to the educated ; but he 
was not wanting in a sort of homely cun- 
ning and shrewdness, and his instincts were 
sharpened by fear of disgrace and beggary. 
To learn something connected with Lady 
Flavia's proceedings, something that she 
would not like to have divulged, and to use 
that knowledge for his own safeguard and 
possible profit, that would indeed be a 
glorious method of turning the tables. 

^' I'll win the odd trick, mayhap, my lady," 
grumbled Big Ben, and he lost not a mo- 
ment in putting his crude project into exe- 
cution. To track the high-bom heiress to 
the trysting-place where she had probably 
given rendezvous to a supposed admirer, 
was the only plan that suggested itself to 
the practical mind of Mr. Haynes, and to 
most persons this would have appeared a 
hopeless undertaking. Not so to Big Ben. 
Woodcraft was his only lore, and his read- 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 125 

ing was confined to the Book of Nature ; 
but to his eyes, as to those of some savage 
hunter of the wilderness, much that was 
written in that wondrous volume, and to 
which spectacled professors would have been 
purblind, was as clear as if it were printed 
in the biggest and blackest of capitals. 
He felt as confident of tracing Lady Flavia. 

Clare, could he once come upon a footmark 
of hers, as any student of hieroglyphic 
literature could be of reading off the inscrip- 
tion on a newly-dug-up obelisk, by aid of 
the OhampoUion stone. Even in the sur- 
prise of being accosted when in flagrant 
delict of game-selling, the keeper's long 

habit of observation had not slumbered. 

" She come out atween two trees, and 
one of *em had a white blaze down its face 
. a cut made by the knife of that gallus 
young Dick, the watcher's son, I'll go bail ; 
anyhow, I saw her step from behind that 
tree," muttered the keeper, and in a couple 



bp. 



126 LADY FLAVIA. 

of strides he reached the spot indicated. 
Sure enoagh, from one of the slender fir- 
trees, a slip of dusky red bark bad been 
sliced away ; the white wood shewed its 
surface, shining like a streak of silver in the 
moonlight, and a few fragrant brown drops 
of turpentine, like tears or gouts of blood, 
bad oozed from the wound. For about the 
distance of a yard beyond this tree, the 
moon's rays penetrated between the sb'm 
fir-boles, and by their aid Mr. Haynea could 
see the print of a pretty little foot quite 
distinctly impressed in the soft loam. There 
it was before bis eyes, as plain to be seen as 
the famous footmark that scared Robinson 
Crusoe on his desert island ; but the ground 
was stony in parts ; and within the illumi- 
nated space on the verge of the plantation no 
other print was visible. The keeper rubbed 
his hands together with a chuckle of satis- 
f;iction. So far, bo good. He had got the 
key of the cipher ; and as he drew from his 



A STROKE OP BUSINESS. 127 

pocket the little dark lantern and the box 
of matches without which he never went 
abroad after sundown, hope sprang strongly 
up in his rugged bosom. "They say 
the old earl left her mortal rich/* said 
Beg Ben, his projects expanding at the first 
gleam of success. "If I could find out 
something or other she does on the sly, she 
might do me a deal o* good, and never miss 
it. Fifty . a hundred . a hundred would 
be a snug stocking-full, wouldn't it ?* And 
again chuckling, the keeper lighted his 
lantern, adjusted the slide, and advanced 
with cautious steps into the wood, examin- 
ing every square inch of ground as at- 
tentively as a conveyancer pores over a 
doubtjful title-deed. There were a good 
many stones about ; the dead fronds made 
a thick carpet, and the knotted roots were 
disseminated around in such profusion, that 
in some places their twisted convolutions 
made a rough wooden platform, over which 



128 LADY FLAVIA. 

a light foot might pass, and leave no more 
trace than a bird leaves in the air. But 
though the progress of Mr. Haynes was 
very slow, it was also very sure. He was 
wonderfully patient as he groped his way 
among the close-growing fir-trees, find- 
ing here and there a clue for his future 
guidance. These were, for the most part, 
such slight indications of the passage of a 
human being as would have conveyed no 
intimation to any but an adept in silvan 
learning. Here, a crushed tuft of moss was 
slowly recovering its elasticity, after being 
flattened under foot ; there, a dry twig has 
snapped under the weight that had rested on 
it for an instant ; and a few inches distant 
was a small indentation in the earth, freshly 
made, but hardly to be recognised as . the 
print of the heel of a dainty slipper. But 
though such signs were faint and few, the 
chain was perfect, and the keeper's keen 
scrutiny was never long at fadt. 



A STROKE OP BUSINESS. 129 

At last the marks led out into the path, 
some thirty yards higher up the wooded 
hill than the spot at which th6 ill-starred 
conversation with Levi had taken place. 
It was not hard for Mr. Haynes to divine 
that Lady Flavia had diverged from the 
path on hearing the sound of voices below, 
and had, during the altercation between the 
Jew and himself, approached them noise- 
lessly under cover of the plantation. But 
to trace her back to whence she came was 
now a more difficult task. Li many places 
the path was quite dry, and took no im- 
pression from the feet that trod it ; in 
others, the moist earth was indented by 
hob-nailed shoes, by boots of lighter make, 
even by the pattens of such of the village 
children as chanced sometimes to pass that 
way on their road home from school to 
the upland cottages on the edge of the moors. 
The path wajs crossed by other paths, and to 
go wrong was easier than to go right. 

T? -^ .' T ; 



130 LAST FLATIA. 

But the search went steadily on. It was 
strange with what skill and pains the keeper 
made his slow way, finding in hroken grass- 
blades, in pinches of freshly-disturbed earth, 
in faint dints made in the smooth, white 
sand deposited by tiny runlets of water that 
had trickled down during the last rains, a 
chart to guide him in his stealthy progress. 
Big Ben was by no meana a student of the 
late Mr. Fenimore Cooper. He had nevei; 
heard of the wondrous skill with which the 
red warriors of America follow up a trail, 
nor of the arts by which the elephant- 
hunters of South Africa read the *' spoor " 
as if it were a book. But he had studied 
under the same schoolmistress . Nature . as 
the Caffre and the Delaware, and he was no 
dunce in his own profession. " I've tracked 
a mort o' vermin," was his uncomplimentary 
soliloquy, as he plodded, with bent head and 
roving eyes, up the hill ; " I know the prints 
ol' a foumart from those of a stoat or a 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 131 

weasel, and a fox's footmark from a dog's, 
and a rabbit'^ from a hare's, don't I ? And 
why shouldn't I be even with you yet, my 
lady?" And in eflfect so steadily did he 
pursue his search, that in little more than an 
hour from the time that Lady Flavia left 
him, he stood beneath the gaunt bare boughs 
of the great old sycamore-tree, like a hound 
that has found the scent suddenly fail him. 
** Hang me, if I can make head or tail of it !" 
muttered the keeper, scratching his right 
ear disconsolately, after a long investigation 
of every portion of the clearing around the 
foot of the blasted tree. " There's plenty of 
marks of her making ; none of any one else. 
Nobody's met her here, that I'll swear to. 
P'rhaps the chap didn't come, and miss got 
tired of waitin' ; or has she been here alone 

for some play-actin' sort o' nonsense, or 

Hilloa ! what's this ?" And he sprang for- 
ward. His restless eye had detected a white 
speck of something that gleamed distinct 



132 LADY FLA VIA. 

from the brown hollow of the decayed syca- 
more, and he pounced on it at once. The 
moon gave so much light in that open space 
that the lantern was hardly needed. Yery 
carefully he detached the scrap of torn lace, 
for such it was, from the splinter of rough 
wood to which it clung, and examined it 
with wondering curiosity. " This is a bit of 
a sleeve, or a hankercher, or some of their 
women's fallals," he said, after a pause. 
** How come it here ? She must have been 
putting her hand in here to take something 
out, or else to hide something, maybe a 
letter for the chap that didn't come . aha ! 
If it's here now, my Lady Flavia, you and 
I are quits." And Big Ben thrust his 
great hand deep down into the hollow of 
the tree. " There's no letter," he growled ; 
** nothing of the sort. Here's something, 
though !" And out he drew the morocco 
case, with a shout of triumph. 

With some fumbling, he undid the clasp, 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 133 

and to his infinite surprise found it was the 
miniature of a lovely child with clustering 
ehon curls and hlooming face. He stared 
at it without being in the slightest degree 
enlightened by what he saw. Nor did the 
pearl-setting inspire him with any par- 
ticular covetousness. He had, indeed, no 
especial idea of the value of the pearls, and, 
besides, they might be beads, for aught he 
knew. Why his late lord's wealthy daugh- 
ter should steal thus mysteriously out at 
dusk to conceal this portrait, was a riddle 
beyond his solving. He could not account 
for it by any of the rude and simple prin- 
ciples by which he was used to test the 
motives of human conduct, and at last set it 
down to that incomprehensible taste for 
" play-acting" that he believed young ladies 
to be possessed by. ** Silly wenches ! good 
hard work would do 'em a deal of good," he 
said, looking contemptuously at the minia- 
ture, as it lay in his homy palm ; ^^ but, some- 



i- 



134 LADY FLAVIA. 

how, she looked a deep one too. What's 
this writin' here?" And Ben turned hie 
lantern on the painted ivory more fully than 
before ; but all his efforts to decipher the 
words " Lady Flavia Clare" were in vain. 
Ben could read a little, that is, he could 
make out the plainest and blackest of print, 
by the joint exertions of eyes, fingers, and 
tongue, a few words at a time, but even 
that was very fatiguing work. As for 
making out the delicate characters scratched 
on the tablet by the artist who painted the 
likeness . that was as hopeless a task as if 
the name had been written in Hebrew let- 
ters. At last he shut up the case and thrust 
it into his pocket. " I'll show the thing to 
Jane," said the keeper, as he extinguished 
his lantern, and returned to pick up his gun 
and go his rounds. " Jane's a scholar, and 
can tell me what's written here. She won't 
blab about it, neither, Jane won't, without 
I give her leave, for she knows I'd twist 



A STROKE OF BUSINESS. 135 

her neck if she did." Now Jane Haynes 
was the keeper's eldest daughter, and she 
had lately been received as one of the under- 
housemaids at Harbledown. 



136 LADT FLAYIA. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE ChItBAU deb E0CHE8. 

The salon d'honneur, or grand reception-room 
in iJie Chateau des Roches, comnmne of 
Grfesnez-Vignoble, near to the town of St. 
Germain, and within eight of the Bhining 
Seine, was the room that most of all re- 
tained some traces of its antique splendour. 
It was of ample extent, though too long in 
proportion to ita width, and too low. But 
although this mode of construction gave it 
rather the air of a gallery than of a draw- 
ing-room, it was a fine apartment still, with 
its five windows, its frescoed ceiling, its 
walls in panel, its fioor in parquet, and its 
cornices and pilasters rich with gilding, 
not yet entirely blackened by time. Yet 



THE CHATEAU DES ROCHES. 137 

it was a melanclioly room, and never could 
it have looked more melancholy than on 
one damp October evening, when Mrs. 
Royston sat straining her eyes over some 
curious piece of needle-work that she called 
white-seam, or cross-stitch, or. by some such 
queer feminine designation, while her hus- 
band strode impatiently to and fro, like a 
caged bear, making the dark oaken plank- 
ing ring beneath his heavy heels. 

The apartment was scantily furnished, 
and scarcely any two objects seemed to 
match one another. One or two tables, an 
armoire of black wood, and a high-backed 
elbow-chair, on the back of which a coronet 
was carved, belonged to the house, and had 
escaped alienation as unsaleable commodities, 
for which no modem broker would give a 
five-franc piece. To the same category 
belonged the pictures on the walls, stiff 
family portraits, in tarnished frames, ex- 
hibiting their wigs and armour, silken coats 



138 LADY FUlVIA. 

and lace ruffles, their rouge, and powdered 
hair, and hoops, and patches, and satin 
sacques, and diamond stomachers, to the 
imsympathising eyes of a generation that 
neither knew nor cared to know their 
names. Part of the furniture was English, 
cheap, flashy upholstery, bought at a Lon- 
don auction, in the second and less reput- 
able period of Mr. Koyston's career, and 
now much the worse for wear, with casters 
lacking, and veneer split away piecemeal. 
The remainder had been picked up, second- 
hand, in St. Germain or Versailles, and 
had been chosen more for economical than 
aesthetic reasons. Especially was this the 
case with the miserable little square of carpet, 
which, as is not seldom the case in France, 
covered but a small portion of the floor ; 

and on this island of red and black woollen 
the chairs and tables were crowded together, 
leaving the rest of the room bare. To be 
sure, the floor was of beautiful old oak. 



THE CHATEAU DES ROCHES. 139 

black and smooth as jet, but it was dim and 
unpolished for want of careful rubbing and * 
waxing, and wofully cold in winter. It was 
almost winter now. A small fire of green 
wood, sticks picked up in the garden for 
the most part, was sputtering and hissing 
on the broad hearth, and Mrs. Royston was 
evidently cold, for she shivered as she sat 
sewing, with her threadbare shawl tightly 
drawn around her shoulders. But she 
seemed afraid of appearing to be cold, or 
indeed, of doing any thing that might 
attract the notice of her irascible lord. 

For more than an hour. Brand Royston 
had not opened his lips except to grind out 
a half-audible oath between his clenched 
teeth, as he strode up and down, making 
the room echo to his massive tread. His 
temper was never of the best, and age and 
poverty, and debts and duns, had made 
it sourer than before. And now, as he 
stamped heavily up and down, gnawing his 



140 LADY FLAVIA. 

heavy moustache, and sometimes stopping 
in his walk to gaze out into the garden, 
where the yellow dead leaves came swirling 
down from the poplars at every puflF of 
wind, Mrs Royston quaked inwardly as she 
watched him. She was a submissive wife, 
and a sufiFering one withal, and no Indian 
squaw ever cowered more abjectly before 
her plumed and painted consort than Eliza- 
beth Royston before the ex-squire. 

" No letter again. That lazy red-collared 
rascal of a postman must have gone past 
this hour or more," said Brand Royston, 
stopping in front of the fire, and giving the 
smoky wood a peevish kick with his foot, 
an attention which the sorry fuel returned 
by sending up a fresh cloud of acrid vapour, 
and giving but less heat than before. " Not 
a word from the boy. He takes it coolly, 
I must say. Confound him !" 

Mrs. Royston looked timidly up. " 
Brand," she said, *' I do so wish Basil had 



THE CHATEAU DES ROCHES. 141 

come back. I didn't know how lonely 
the house would be when he was gone, 
and " 

Mrs. Eoyston came to a dead pause, 
snapped her thread, and had much ado to 
get the needle threaded again in the dim 
evening light, though she was rather glad 
of some occupation that might serve to 
mask the confusion that she experienced; 
for poor Mrs. Royston, like many who live 
with choleric persons, and make it their 
painful study to avoid the giving of oflFence, 
was continually saying or doing something 
which drew down on her meek head the 
Kghtnings of her husband's indignation. 
So it was now. 

*' I'm obliged to you, Mrs. Royston. By 
the Lord Harry! **rm obb'ged to you, 
ma'am. You're to be pitied, forsooth, be- 
cause you are left here with only your hus- 
band to keep you company, and you find it 
dull. Dull ! By Jove, I was not aware 



1 



142 LADY PLAVIA. 

what an honour yon did me, madam, when 
yon condescended to many me, and be 
hanged to you. I thank you for enlighten- 
ing my ignorance, by George, but I do." 

The squire's thundering voice made his 
wife quiver like an aspen leaf; and to see 
the spaniel-like fashion in which she quailed 
before him, any bystander might have sup- 
posed that the poor trembler anticipated a 
blow from the broad hand that Brand smote 
upon the marble mantel-piece, by way of 
pointing his diatribe. But such was not 
the case. Brutal and reckless as Brand 
Royston was, he had never, drunk or sober, 
laid a finger on his wife. With all the 
man's innate savagery, some redeeming 
instinct kept him from maltreating a 
woman otherwise than with his terrible 
tongue, though that he used without mercy. 

" By Jupiter !" resumed Royston, taking 
a fresh* turn in the room, and viciously 
kicking a foostool that stood on the edge 



THE CHItBAU deb ROCHES. 143 

of the island of carpet, " I remember the 
day I saw you first. I'd tooled over to 
York with the drag and a crack team I had 
then . all the bright bays with black points, 
and not half an inch diflFerence between any 
of the four. a team I bought from Sir 

Tatton, and that stood me in four hundred 

 

and eighty guineas for the wheelers alone, 
by George ! and I called on your father in 
Micklegate, about a little matter of a mortr 
gage . Sir Vincent had rooked me sadly at 
chicken-hazard, and I was very hard hit 
indeed, and wanted the ready . and, by 
George, nothing would serve old Burt but 
we must lunch with him ; and his daughter 
Bessy was sent for to take the head of the 
table ; and that was how our acquaintance 
began, old lady. But if I'd known you'd 
have told me to my face you should find it 
a grievance to have no one else in the 
house, why " 

Mrs. Eoyston here ventured on a tearful 



^ 



144 IJLDT FLATIA. 

interruption.' " Brand, dear, you know- 
it isn't that," she said in her thin voice. 
" I should not feel it anywhere but here ; 
but, O dear ! this wretched house . now 
Basil's away . I hardly dare to go to sleep 
here, I feel so chilled and scared. Brand, 
Brand, have pity on me . do, and let us go 
away . to Paris, to Versailles . anywhere 
out of this!" 

She was weeping plentifully now, and 
her busy fingers had ceased to ply the 
needle. Her husband strode up to the 
table, and laid one hand upon it with a 
weight that made it creak as he bent down 
and looked her in the face. 

" How often am I to tell you to hold your 
tongue, and to keep that nonsense to your- 
self?" he demanded sternly. "You're an 
idiot to harp on it as you do. Do you want 
to set the stone rolling that is to crush us 
all ? Keep quiet, or you'll do more mis- 
chief than you think for. It's my belief 



THE CHATEAU DBS ROCHES. 145 

that that blockhead of a girl in sabots and 
an eared cap understands a deal more Eng- 
lish than you give her credit for." 

" What ! Grosse Jeanne ?" bleated Mrs. 
Royston feebly, 

* * Whom else could I mean ?" austerely 
returned the squire. " I saw, no later than 
yesterday evening, when she Was taking 
away the tea-things . and you, like a bom 
gaby, must needs blurt out that the wind 
up-stairs in the passages sounded like the 
voice of some one shrieking for help . I 
saw her eyes twinkle. I'm convinced she 
has some idea in that thick skull of hers. 
We must get rid of her." 

This was not, at the first blush of the 
thing, a very alarming remark ; yet it 
seemed to produce a singular effect on Mrs. 
Royston. The pupils of her pale-grey eyes 
dilated with a strange horror as she glanced 
up at her gigantic husband, who, by this 
time, was standing with his back to the fire- 

VOL. I. L 



146 LADY FLAVIA. 

place, and with one elbow resting on the 
cracked marble of the chimney-piece. 
Twice Mrs. Royston tried to speak, and 
twice her voice proved treacherous ; but at 
last she made shift to stammer out the words : 

" Get rid of her ? Not. not You do 

not mean " 

And then she dropped her head upon her 
knees, covered her face with her thin shak- 
ing hands, and burst into a passion of cry- 
ing, rocking her body to and fro the while, 
and appearing to be on the point of break- 
ing out into a wail of noisy lamentation. 
Brand Royston smothered the fierce excla- 
mation that rose only too readily to his 
lips. He knew his wife's moods well enough 
to be aware that intimidation in the present 
case would merely aggravate matters. He 
laid his powerful grasp, not unkindly, on 
her shoulder, and gave her a gentle shake. 

" Why, Bessy, Bessy, my lass, what a 
goose you are !" said the squire, with a 



THE ChItEAU DES ROCHES. 147 

rough attempt at soothing the half-hysteri- 
cal weeper. " There's nothing to cry for, 
my girl, that I know of. All I meant was, 
that if that French jade suspects anything 
. ^ah, there you go again with the water- 
works . ^we had better pay her her wages, 
and trundle her out of doors on the first 
convenient opportunity. That's all; and 
now you know the long and short of it ; so 
dry your eyes, and behave like a sensible 
woman, if you have brains in that head of 
yours." 

Mrs. Royston rubbed her eyes with her 
damp handkerchief, and brightened up 
surprisingly. Hers was a shallow nature, 
quickly stirred and quickly calmed. It was 
with quite a chirping cheerfulness, like a 
silenced canary beginning to sing again 
after the uncovering of its temporarily 
darkened cage, that she thus made answer 
to the squire's consolatory speech : " I'm so 
glad, but you did frighten me. Brand, and 



K 



148 LADT FLATIA. 

that's the truth. I'm sadly nervoos since 
Basil went away, dear. I wish he'd write, 
if only a line. I suppose he got safe to 
London, though the wind was aw^ on the 
night he was to cross, and I'm sure I lay 

awake " 

Mr, Royston, who had resumed his pro- 
menade in the apartment, answered the 
first part of this discourse without waiting 
for the conclusion ; " Safe to London ! Of 
course he did ! I suspect he found London 
too attractive to leave it in a hurry ; and if 
so, he is engaged in flinging away the 
money I had such work to scrape together, 
to give him a start, in hilliard-rooms or at 
Jermyn Street hells, by jingo ! The lad's 
conceited enough to think no folks cut their 
eye-teeth except himself ; but he'll find out 
his mistake . he will . and serve him right, 
I didn't rake up that cash . at fifty per 
cent, too. for Master Basil to play ducks 
auJ tliakes with it. The elbow's been 



THE CHiTEATJ DE8 ROCHES. 149 

aliaken quite sufficiently in our family for 
one while, I should say ; and if I, matricu- 
lating early, as I did, at Knavesmire and 
on the Beacon course, and paying my foot- 
ing smartly, too . hand and glove with 
noba, by George, who wouldn't have taken 
Basil, smart chap as he thinks himself, for 
a stud-groom, with his airs and graces . 
Lord Bamford, and Jockey Blenheim, and 
Thornton, and Topham, and Sir Vincent, 
and Chesterton, and the Marquis . men that 

knew what life was, I can tell you What 

was I talking about ?" 

And the squire stopped, and rallied his 
wandering thoughts. It was not uncom- 
mon for Mr. Royston, who had an invet&- 
rate habit of bragging, and would pour hia 
boastfiil talk for hours into the ears of his 
patient wife, when a better audience was 
not forthcoming, to ramble somewhat from 
the original text of his edifying monologues. 
But in Mrs, Boyston he had a most excel- 



J 



ISO LADT PLATIA. 

lent listener, attentive to the thrice-told 
tales, and ever ready to laugh at the bad 
jotes that were resuadtated for her amuse- 
meut Nor was her admiration for her 
lord's past social triumphs, his wit, his dar- 
ing, and his cleverness, by any means hypo- 
critical. She had been brought up to 
reverence the Roystons, since her father, 
the York alderman, had been the son of a 
tenant-farmer on the Boyston esiate, and 
had more than once held a gate open for 
yoong Brand and his pony to pass by, when 
that infeint sportsman of nine yeara old 
went clattering eagerly by after his papa's 
foxhounds. In after years, Elizabeth Burt 
had sat hearkening, Hke a buxom north- 
country Deademona, to the young squire's 
narratives of his own adventures in flood 
and field; and indeed York rang with 
stories of the open hand, the strong arm, 
hard head, and reckless heart of rattling 
Brand Royston. "When Bessy Burt was a 



THE CHATEAF DBS ROCHES. 151 

girl, it was thought quite natural that a 
high-spirited young gentleman should 
knock down watchmen, upset gigs, thrash 
bargees, hoax turnpike keepers, and paint 
the ehop-fironts of obnoiious tradesmen 
scarlet or pea-green. These were the 
mildest and most innocent of Brand's 
amusements, and yet the respectable world 
forgave and smiled upon the prodigal, so 
long as he could pay his way. 

He could not pay his way now; but 
Elizabeth his wife believed in him and 
admired him still in a scared fashion that 
suited her character. She was never weary 
of listening to his conversation, which 
turned mainly on his own exploits, or what 
he considered his wrongs; and though 
Brand at times spoke his mind pretty 
frankly on the subject of his own *' infernal 
folly " in marrjdng " a tanner's' daughter) 
without a drop of good blood in her veins, 
or a grain of sense in her head," she was 




K 



152 LADY FLAVIA. 

never provoked into retaliatory remarks 
with reference to her own wasted dowry, 
and the sqiure's self-wrought ruin. In 
truth, she was too timid to be otherwise 
than grateful all her life long for the con- 
descension of so bright and particular a star 
as Brand Royston in deigning to seek a 
bride in the plebeian precincts of Mickle- 
gate. Brand had been her evil genius. 
He had brought her to poverty, to exile, 
and to sorrows and terrors that the after- 
course of this history must elucidate, but 
she never lost a sort of deferential love for 
him; and for his sake she had quarrelled 
utterly with her only surviving brother. 
Mr. Royston said that "WilUam Burt was a 
snob and a miserly hunks, and a rascal to 
boot ; whereas, in truth, William's offence 
was, that having been robbed and cheated 
by his aristocratic brother-in-law, he de- 
clined to give or lend Mr. Royston any 
more money. The sister took her husband's 



THE CHItEAU DBS ROCHES. 153 

part, like a true .wife, and the breach was a, 
final one. 

Thus it was that when Mr. Eoyston 
asked his wife what he was talking about, 
ber answer was prompt and submissive : 
" You were talking of Basil, dear." 

"Ay, BO I was, I was saying that I 
didn't get bim the money he carried away 
in bis pocket for bim to fling it out of the 
window of a London gambling-house," re- 
sumed Mr. Roystou, kicking the unoffend- 
ing footstool. "I gave it him that be 
might hold bis bead up with the best of 

them, and get a rich wife, and I 

wonder if its any devilry of h^s that makes 
tbe boy silent !" And the squire came to a 
bait, and frowned darkly. 

Mrs. Eoyston, who was busy with ber 
sewing again, but had an eye always on ber 
husband, dropped a stitch, and made answer 
soothingly : " Why should you think so, 
Brand, dear ? They were such friends, you 



154 LADr FLAVIA, 

know. She must be fond of Basil, Fm sure. 
Any girl might be glad to marry him." 

There was a dash of maternal pride in 
the accent of the last few words. But 
Brand shook his head. 

"I can't make her out," said the giant, 
with a sort of sullen wonder in his tone : 
"she faced mey and dared me to do my 
worst. Basil s a handsome fellow, but I 
doubt if she cares for him as much as we 
fancy she does ; and if he tries to rein her 
up sharp, she'll soon kick over the traces, I 
can tell him that. She's a puzzle to me. 
I'm not superstitious, Bess, but, by Jove, if 
there was such a thing as being possessed 
by an evil spirit, I should believe that 
girl " 

Here the squire's speech was cut short 
by the entrance of Grosse Jeanne, the ser- 
vant, in her peasant's costume of blue wool- 
len kirtle and black bodice, round white 
cap, earrings, red handkerchief, sabots, and 




_._.- ^-s 



~\ 



THE CHItBAU DE8 ROCHES. 155 

grey worsted stockmga. " Notre Monsieur," 
said Grosse Jeanne, " old Nanon, the por- 
tress, has come up from the convent with 
the compliments of the Dame Sup6rieure, 
and has Monsieur or Madame received news 
of the health of the young pensionnaire . the 
demoiselle Clare?" The stout young pea- 
sant-woman was stohd of manner and"^ 
appearance, hut there was a sort of sly 
curiosity in her dull eyes, for all that, as she 
watched the start and knitted brow with 
which her master received the message. 
But Brand Eoyeton quickly recovered his 
composure. " My compHments to the Dame 
Superieure," he said blandly, and in very 
intelligible Anglo-French; "and say to 
Nanon, that when last I heard from Eng- 
land, Miladi Flavia Clare was in perfect 
health, residing at her cousin's house, Mon- 
sieur le Comte de Mortlake. And ^ive 
Nanon a glass of wine after her walk 
Jeanna" 




156 LADY PLAVIA. 

But when the stout serving-woman had 
had time to get well out of earshot, Mr. 
Royston turned to his wife, and said : ** We 
must discharge that Grosse Jeanne on the 
first reasonable excuse, Mrs. R. Unless, to 
be sure, Basil succeeds at once, when we 
shall leave this rat-hole for ever and a day. 
But Grosse Jeanne must go. She knows 
too much, or thinks she does." 

And for a long time Brand Royston was 
silent, busied with no pleasing thoughte; 




. .I 



AN UNEXPECTED REPI,T. 157 



CHAPTER X. 

AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 

*'Ip you will take ray advice, Augustus, 
you will speak at once. She likes you, I 
am sure ; but she is so very young, and 
naturally fond of admiration ; and when we 
take her to town next season, she is certain 
to be surrounded by men whose flattery and 
attentions may turn her little head, I am 
afraid. I do so wish you would speak at 
once," repeated the Countess of Mortlake ; 
and she was thoroughly in earnest. 

She had called her son into the pretty 
morning-room, with its rose-coloured hang- 
ings, that suited her complexion so well, 
and where she preferred to settle her domes- 



158 LADY FLATIA. 

tic affairs, and to pen letters to her many 
correspondents. A fire was burning in the 
grate, for the morning had been chilly, 
though the bright autumn sun had long 
since melted the hoar-frost with which the 
cold night had electro-plated the grass of 
lawn and park ; and the countess, who loved 
warmth, sat near the fire, gazing at its 
friendly glow, and seeing the face of her 
daughter-in-law elect in every one of those 
ruddy caverns between the coals. For 
Lady Mortlake's mind was made up ; she 
had set her heart on a marriage between 
her son and the late earl's daughter, and 
she would have conceived it her right to be 
justly indignant had any captious moralist 
called her a mercenary mother. The coun- 
tess, a good woman, as the world goes, was 
convinced that she was actuated by the 
sincerest desire for the welfare of both the 
young persons principally concerned in the 
match. She really felt a warm affection for 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 159 

Lady Flavia, and really believed that the 
very wisest course for that Httle lady to 
pursue would be to marry one so eminently 
calculated to he her safeguard and protec- 
tor, her guide, philosopher, and friend, as 
Augustus, Lord Hythe. As for the pro- 
priety of keeping Cupley Lees and Melshot 
Friars, with a considerable sum of ready 
money . just the very thing lacking, by the 
way, to many a lord of uncounted acres . 
from going out of the family, Lady Mortlake 
did not permit her thoughts to dwell upon 
that subject. But it was a comfortable con- 
viction, all the while, to know that, in a 
pecuniary as well as a moral and social 
point of view, the union of the cousins 
would be satisfactory. 

Lord Hythe had caused the countess some 
anxiety . not, let me hasten to say, on the 
score of his wild or dissipated habits, Imt 
on the much more respectable ground of 
his backwardness where matrimony was iu 



^ 



^ 



160 LADr PLAVIA. 

question. He had seemed so wedded to 
hard work, hard thinking, and the severest 
labours of the political tread-mill, that he 
was unlikely to form any softer tie. He 
was so entangled in chains of red tape-^for 
the member for Starvington had recently 
become a junior Lord of the Treasury . 
that it scarcely seemed probable that he 
would submit to wear chains of hymeneal 
roses. His mother and sisters had been at 
the pains to point out to him, in bygone 
seasons, more than one charming young 
creature, worthy to be the future Lady 
Hythe ; but in vain. And there really 
was some fear that ** dear Augustus" might 
subside into a mere celibate parliamentary 
hack, an irreclaimable " Bachelor of the 
Albany," and the coronets of Hythe and 
Mortlake be lost to the Clares for ever. In 
Lady Flavia, the fond mother beheld at 
last the very daughter-in-law that she 
would have selected out of a thousand 



i 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 161 

maiden aspiranta for the honour of her 
son's hand. It was evident that her wit 
and beauty had produced an effect on the 
somewhat stoical nature of Lord Hythe ; 
while her extreme youth and inexperience 
would, of course . so the countess argued. 
render her as plastic as wax. Hythe was 
the best of sons and of brothers, and would 
be the best of husbands; supplying the 
ballast of wisdom to the matrimonial firm, 
and guiding his brilliant partner with 
judicious kindness through the perilous 
voyage of life. It is more than probable 
that Lady Mortlake had never heard of 
Aristotle's axiom, that the husband should 
be thirty-six, the wife eighteen, in a well- 
assorted marriage ; but of her own accord, 
she had arrived 'at the Stagyrite's con- 
clusion. To be sure, her son was not 
above one-and-thirty, but his abilities and 
acquirements were worthy of riper matu- 
rity ; while Lady Flavia, at eighteen, was 



162 LADY FLAVIA. 

to all appearance a bright, light-hearted 
child^ singularly young for her years. 

^* All very well," said Lord Hythe, 
smiling in his good-humoured way ; ** but 
suppose she doesn't care a straw about me ? 
I can't marry her by force, by torch-light 
in the castle chapel, like the girl . what 
was her name? Miss Byron, I think . in 
one of the old Anne RadcliflFe romances; 
can I?" 

But Lady Mortlake was not to be laughed 
out of her pet project, and she fell to work 
again with the old arguments, clenching 
them with such illustrations as her woman's 
wit could supply. Her son listened duti- 
fully enough ; the long habit of pubKc life 
had made him tolerant of all expressions of 
opinion whatsoever, and, besides, there was 
something within his own breast that lent 
its echo to his mother's words. At last, he 
made answer : ^* Well, mother, at least I 
see that it would make you, and my father. 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. J 63 

and Ju and Carry, all happy, if I were to 
marry Flavia; and I assure you I should 
like my wife, if ever I have one, to be a 
person whom my family could love. But, 
after all, the principals in a marriage are 
those who ought to he the siirest of 
knowing their own minds. Now, I hardly 
know mine ; and as for Flavia's . mother, 
I can't comprehend that young girl one 
bit. Either she is deeper than you think, 
or " 

" Augustus, for shame ! Flavia deep ! 
An innocent thing, bred up in a con- 
vent, and .knowing nothing of the world; 
nothing ! "exclaimed the countess. 

" Or," pursued her son, " I am even 
a duller fellow than I thought myself. 
That, very likely, is the case. I change 
my mind about Flavia every day, ay, and 
oftener too. There have been times when 
I could have worshipped her . so young, 
and lovely, and childlike in her pure 



164 LADT FLAVIA. 

iinoonsciousness of evil did she seem ; but 
then^ again, doubts come up, conjured into 
existence by trifles, a mere look or tone. 
That laugh of hers I never quite liked, 
though what business has a grave old 
fellow like me to criticise a young girl's 
laugh , enough if I say that I don't believe 
she cares for me^ and I only hope it may 
not end in my being fool enough to care 
too much for her/' And here^ as if he 
had said more than he intended to say. 
Lord Hythe reddened, and left the room. 
Presently, his mother saw him, thoughtful 
and somewhat dejected of mien, pass along 
the great avenue of the park, with Leo 
following him, and in a few moments he 
was lost to view at a turn in the winding 
road. 

But Lord Hythe's solitary walk on that 
day was not destined to be a long one. 
Scarcely had his stalwart figure passed out 
of sight of the front windows of Harble- 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 165 

down, before a sound of wheels made the 
young man lift his head and recognise Lady 
Flayia's pony-carriage, the two fiery little 
black steeds that drew it, and its beautiful 
owner, looking prettier than ever in her 
small hat with its white feather, the 
braided velvet paletot that fitted like wax 
to her small waist, and the long white 
gauntlet gloves on the tiny hands that held 
the whip and reins so lightly and firmly. 
Lady Flavia drove very well and fearlessly, 
but with perfect ease, short as her experi- 
ence of charioteering could have been. 
Her ponies were mettled little nags, hard 
to keep in order ; but with her they went 
like lamhs, to the wonder of the Harble- 
down stable-yard. She pulled them up, 
noW) as she came abreast of her kins- 
man, who took 00" his. hat. in semi-serious 
salute. 

" I thought Caroline was with you 
said Lord Hythe, wha had aean his 



you j^ 

sister ^^H 



166 LADT PLAVIA. 

and cousih set oat together behind the 
black ponies. 

Lady Flavia said " Yes ;" and proceeded 
to explain how they had visited the village 
Bchoola together, where Lady Caroline was 
busy in examining into the proficiency in 
bibhcal geography to which the pupils had 
attained under a new instmctreBS. 

'* And I took a class, too," said the girl 
with a pretty piteousness of ' tone that 
lieightened her attractions, and shaking 
her raven ringlets the while; "but I got 
into sad, sad disgrace. I made the little 
ones laugh so much. And the certificated 
mistres&T. an awful person, Minerva in blue 
spectacles . looked at me as though she 
would eat me, and protested against my 
telling them French fairy tales . all I could 
tell them, you know, for I'm in a state of 
melancholy ignorance about useful learning ; 
and even Caroline lost patience, and declared 
I was ruining the discipline of the school. 



f 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 167 

So I was turned out in disgrace, and here I 
am." And this time, there was music, indeed, 
in her laugh, as she finished the tale of her 
discomfiture. Lord Hythe laughed too. 

** I am afraid," he said, " that the gravity 
of much more imposing assemblies than a 
village school would not be proof against 
your insidious assaults. Here we are, close 
to the garden ;" for all this time the pony- 
carriage had been slowly advancing, Lord 
Hythe. walking beside it with one hand on 
the splash-board. "Will you leave your 
Bucephali to James's care, and take a turn 
with me on the terrace ? I want to ask 
your advice about the orangery, Jones 
wants it to be in the rectangular British 
style, while my sisters are crazy for a 
Moorish pavilion. I should like to know 
what you approve of. Lady Flavia." 

They were cousins, and very good friends, 
and he was by much her senior ; but he 
very seldom ventured to call her by her 



168 ULDT FLAVIA. 

Christian name without its formal prefix. 
All the family felt, in a greater or less 
degree, the same difficulty. No one could 
be less reserved, less punctilious or exacting, 
than the late earl's daughter ; but yet with 
all her infantine ways and affectionate bear* 
ing, the Clares treated her as if she had been 
a stray princess that had in some way 
dropped into their famUy circle. They felt, 
with all their claims to blue blood, and their 
experience of society, as if the clay of which 
they were composed was not of such a 
dainty quality as that of which their kins- 
woman was moulded. She was very affable 
and gentlp, gave herself no arrogant airs, 
such as purse-pride not seldom inspires i^ 
heiresses, and never said a cross word. But 
the earl and his countess, and the ladies 
Caroline and JuHa, and all the servants 
beneath their roof, and the lawyer, and the 
vicar and his family, and such of the county 
notables as had seen the orphan girl, agreed 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. lo9 

that she was somehow an ideal aristocrat, a 
lady of Nature's own making. 

It was loiAj Flavia's practice to accede 
to all requests the granting of which entailed 
no sacrifice, and she readily accepted the 
aid of her cousin's aim, and stepped out of 
the low pony-carriage. Then they made 
their way towards the gardens, and Lady 
Flavia glanced back with a wicked little 
laugh of amusement at the sight of her four- 
footed pets, lately so quiet, now snorting 
and buck-jumping in a manner that gave 
James the groom an immensity of trouble. 
Jibbing, rearing, and sidling, the restive 
little nags, the carriage, and the tiger, with a 
very white face beneath his gold-laced 
cockaded hat, and both hands taking a very 
desperate clutch of the milk-white reins, 
disappeared in the direction of the stables. 

" They never behave so with me," said 
Lady Flavia demurely, in answer to her 
cavalier's remark that the ponies " were too 



L 



170 LADY FLAVIA. 

hot for safe driving." And then they 
entered the gardens through the very gate 
by which, on a foggy evening, a few days 
earUer, Lady Flavia had passed on her way 
to the fir plantation where she had hidden 
the portrait . that portrait that was now, in 
company with wads, nipple wrenches, Eley's 
cartridges, and wires, at the bottom of one 
of the baggy pockets of Big Ben's velveteen 
coat. But it was in the full belief that the 
miniatiu'e was safely stowed out of sight of 
human eyes, that she who had hidden it 
paced so calmly on the long terrace by the 
side of her relative. Lord Hythe. This 
terrace was at the further side of the gar- 
dens ; and a broad lawn, dotted with clumps 
of rhododendron, lay between it and the 
house, while at either end some tall trees 
quite cut off the raised bank from the sight 
of those who might be gazing from the 
windows of the western wing. At the end 
of the terrace nearest to the fishponds, the 




S^iO^ 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 171 

projected orangery was to be built, and 
hither Lord Hythe conducted his cousin. 

"Moorish, or not Moorish . that is the 
question," said he pleasantly. ** Shall we 
take safe refuge in the no-style of the George 
the Third epoch of sober brick and mortar, 
or shall we *go in' for a slice of the 
Alhambra ?" 

It would have puzzled the member for 
Starvington afterwards to explain how it 
came about ; but he, somewhat to his own 
surprise, found himself giving his cousin an 
animated description of the superb remains 
of Moorish art that still adorn the thriftless 
realm of Spain. Lord Hythe was the least 
boastful of men. He never dilated on his 
travels, nor teased the stay-at-home folks 
with whom he kept company with accounts 
of the wonders of the South and East ; but 
now he was betrayed into something like 
enthusiasm, and only stopped in a glowing 
dissertation on the beauties of the Alcazar, 



\ 



172 LADY FLAVIA. 

its wealth of colour and laviah magnificence, 
when Le saw that his listener's hlue eyes 
were glistening with teara, and that a deep 
flush of ezdtement had suf^ised her &ir 
face. 

" It is nothing " . and the girl turned her 
head away." nothing I Only . only you 
were painting it all so well, that I seemed 
to see it . all those beautiful, beautiful things 
that I shall never see . and I was a Httle 
goose ; that's all." And she gave a little 
sob, and was silent. He took her hand ; he 
could do no less ; but in truth he was him- 
self strangely moved at the sight of her 
distress, and when a cold man is once thawed, 
prudential scruples are as dust in the 
balance. 

*' But why should you not see them ?" he 
said consolingly. " I did not know, on my 
soul, that you cared seriously for sweet 
scenery and glorious architectxu^. What a 
treat it would be to revisit those placee-*- 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 173 

Granada, Seville, Cordova, with you, dear 
Flavia!" 

The little hand in his clasped his fingers 
with a very, very slight pressure, but one 
that sent the blood coursing like fire 
through the veins of Augustus, Lord 
Hythe. 

** You are very kind. Cousin Augustus," 
said the girl, looking up at him. Her 
brow was as innocently smooth as the brow 
of a seraph ; her cheek bloomed like the 
rose; her blue eyes were swimming in 
tears ; and there was something wistful, yet 
coy and timid, in their glance. Lord Hythe 
must have haen more or less than man had 
he held out. 

^ Cousin !" he exclaimed, keeping the 
trembling hand imprisoned in his grasp; 
" let me be more than a cousin to you, Flavia, 
darhng ! beautiful, dear Flavia ! Be my 
wife ; let me have something at last to love 
and cherish ; let me give you a love that is 



174 LADY FLAVIA. 

at least honest and constant, grave and old, 
and staid as I must appear in your young 
eyes, dear ; but listen, dearest . listen, while 
1 tell you what my own heart tells me now 
that I loved you from the first.'* And 
much more did he say to the same purport 
. ^pleading, promising in all sincerity to 
love and cherish her ever ; declaring that 
her wish should be law, running through all 
the gamut that lovers have chanted since 
the days of Adam and Eve, no doubt. 
Starvington would hardly have recognised 
her M.P. 

For a long time. Lady Flavia listened, and 
made no answer, beyond a murmur like the 
low coo of a dove, uttered once and again, 
and this the young man of course inter- 
preted into assent ; but presently she with- 
drew her hand from his, looked him full in 
the face, and modestly but firmly said : 
*' Cousin Hythe, you have done me a great 
honour, and paid me a great compliment. 



L^, 



AN UNEXPECTED REPLY. 175 

I regret that I cannot accept it. I like you, 
and respect your character. I think, my 
lord, that your wife would be in fault if 
she were not a happy woman. But I must 
say No." 

Her eyes were quite dry now. Her tone 
was serious and womanly. The pretty 
pouting child was transformed, and there 
was real feeling in her tone and look, but 
no signs of hesitation. 

" No is the feminine of yes," said Lord 
Hythe smilingly, as he tried to take her 
hand again. But it soon became manifest 
that this was not a maxim of universal appli- 
cation. In vain Lord Hythe pleaded his 
cause; in vain he urged that perhaps she 
was taken by surprise ; that he had been too 
abrupt; that perhaps if she would talk it 
over with the countess, who loved her 
already Hke her own child, &c. 

At last, she begged him to desist ; and 
this time so seriously, that a gentleman 



176 LADT FLATLA. 

coold not disobey. Lord Hytte was a 
gentleman at heart. He walked in silence 
by her edde up to the house, and there she 
gave him her hand with a frank but sad 
smile, and went up-stairs to her own apart- 
ments. He stood in the hall, dejected and 
cut to the heart. His sister, Lady Julia, 
came down hastily from the countess's 
room.- 

" Oh Angostus, have you spoken to her ? 
I am so glad," she said ; but her brother's 
face was not that of a successful admirer. 

" I have spoken to her. Some one has 
been beforehand with me, I'm afraid ; and 
yet that's impossible . brought up in a con- 
vent, too. Say no more, Ju, just now. The 
girl is more of an enigma than ever." And 
there ended the conversation. 



. 



A CORNER OP THE VEIL IS UFTED. 



CHAPTER XI. 

A CORNER OP THE VEIL IB LIFTED. 

Shakspbare, when he drew the portrait of 
Titania, the petulant elfin queen, at the 
height of her quarrel with King Oberon, 
must surely have been haunted by such a 
face and such a figure as those that be- 
longed to the occupant of the pretty pink 
rooms in the west wing of Lord Mortlake's 
mansion. Be that as it may, a student of 
the Midsummer NtgkCs Dream, could he 
have, Asmodeus-like, unroofed Lady Flavia 
Clare's own particular suite of apartments, 
immediately after her rejection of Lord 
Hythe's matrimonial proposals, might hav' 
imagined that he had before his eyes thi 

VOL. I. 



'1 



178 LADY FLAVIA. 

actual presence of the Fairy Queen herself. 
There was the same air of baby royalty 
about the proud pure brow, about the car- 
riage of the graceful little head, about the 
very tread, that are essential to the true 
rendering of the moody majesty of elf-land. 
A starry diadem would well have become 
that haughty little head ; a rainbow-tinted 
wand would have been no unmeet sceptre 
for that small white hand . small, but not 
weak, and which crisped and clenched itself 
fiercely, as if its owner longed to tear some 
invisible object of hatred limb from limb. 

She threw down her hat and driving- 
gloves, shook back the heavy mass of her 
curls, and looked long and steadily at her 
own reflection in the great pier-glass before 
her. The glass had seldom, perhaps never, 
imaged back so much beauty . certainly 
not beauty of so peculiar a character. That 
rippling flood of ebon hair would alone 
have been the pride of a plainer woman, 



A CORNER OP THE VEIL IS LIFTED* 179 

and she wore it according to" her own plea- 
sure, in her careless childish fashion, in 
spite of the feeble remonstrances of the 
countess and her daughters. But though 
the Ladies Caroline and Julia felt them- 
selves in duty bound to protest against 
irregular modes of wearing the hair, they 
were hardly sorry to find that the little 
rebel, to whom their advice was addressed, 
chose to keep to her wilful way. It would 
have been a pity, they owned, to imprison 
all those glorious waves of glossy silken 
ringlets in plain tight braids, like those 
worn by ordinary mortals. The heavily- 
twining curls suited their owner too-a 
youthful, sunny creature, whose life seemed 
to be all summer. But she looked angry 
enough now, as she stood gazing at her 
own face in the glass, and from her blue 
eyes flashed the cold incisive glitter, as of 
steel suddenly drawn, that rarely sparkled 
there, and never without deep meaning i^ 



180 LADY FLAVIA. 

its ominous lustre. Her lips were slightly 
parted, and her little white teeth gleamed 
between them like those of a tiger-cat, 

** I did not dare !" she said, in a low 
bitter tone of rage. " I led him on to 
speak. Yes, my woman's heart craved that 
poor triumph. But I could not accept the 
offer, though I schemed and planned to 

bring it about. I . I . Flavia Clare, was 
obliged to yield up what I had resolved to 
win, but dared not retain, I, who have 
dared so much, am baffled now. I . dared 
. not . accept." She uttered these last 
words very slowly, and with a kind of cruel 
relish of the very pain they evidently cost 
her ; and then her eyes shone like daggers 
flashing forth at a tyrant's breast, and a 
flush of wrathful colour turned her pale 
cheek to scarlet. *^ So much the worse for 
me . so much the worse for others," she 
murmured in a more subdued tone, and 
she turned away. In a moment more, she 



A CORNER OP THE VEIL IS LIFTED, 181 

was singing to herself as she moved about 
the room, taking off the braided paletot of 
black velvet which she had worn out of 
doors, smoothing the troubled gloves that 
had been so roughly plucked off, caressing 
the dainty hat and its crushed feather . all 
of which were somewhat the worse for the 
brief ebullition of temper, of which they 
had been the unoffending victims. The 
smile had come back to her hps ; the dan- 
gerous light was no longer to be seen in 
her blue eyes, lucid as a Grecian sky, and 
all her pretty, half-unconscious graces of 
look and movement had returned. In a 
wonderfully short time, she had made ruf- 
fled feather, and squeezed hat, and crumpled 
gauntlets, nearly as trim and new as before 
she had used them with such abrupt dis- 
favour. She was in the habit of doing 
much more " for herself," as the phrase 
goes, than are most young damsels of her 
position. Simmons considered herself as 



k 



182 LADT PLAVU. 

rather an injored person than otherwiee, io 
having so much easier a place than she had 
anticipated. But her mistresB said, mth 
playful peremptoriness, that she had been 
accustomed to wait on herself while at 
the convent of Our Lady of Carmel, and 
that she had not the slightest intention of 
following any other rule than that of her 
own whims. Accordingly, though Simmons 
secretly grmnhled that her lady was not 
dehvered into her hands like a lay-figTire, 
to be dressed and laced, combed and padded, 
tightened and tormented, according to her 
will and pleasmre, she was forced to con- 
tent herself, like a member of the noblesse 
de robe, in old France, with her grandea 
enir^s, and to leave her mistress alone 
until the half-hour bell should announce 
the approach of dinner-time. 

It is not impcesible that Lady Flavia 
Clare had reasons of her own for declining 
to submit herself to the condition of abso* 



A CORNER OF THE VEIL IS LIFTED. 183 

lute helplessness which, her Abigail . ^who 
waQ a person of vast experience, having 
served the daughters of three peers, who 
were civil to her ; the spoiled only child of 
a great brewer, who treated her with a 
harsh insolence which, as the maid said, 
** flesh and blood couldn't endure, not at no 
salary ;" and the offspring of a bishop, who 
was, I believe, afraid of her . considered a 
necessary adjunct of aristocratic existence. 
For the orphaned daughter of the late master 
of Harbledown had need of some place and 
time for thoughts, and deep thoughts too, 
to judge by the frown that not seldom 
darkened that candid brow, behind which 
one might have fancied no cares weightier 
than such as concerned the hue of a ribbon 
or the trimming of a ball-dress could har- 
bour. She had a habit, too, much less fre- 
quent in real life than it is in books, and 
never very general with her sex, that of 
thinking aloud. As a rule, people who 



184 LADY FLAVIA. 

indulge in the perilous practice of soliloquy, 
are either hermits, unused to any company 
but their own, or they are those who, from 
disposition or necessity, act a part when 
before the world. But it would surely 
have been rash to inclnde Lady Flavia 
Clare in either of these categories, though 
she was somewhat addicted to the trick . . 
for a trick it is . that has supplied our play- 
wrights, from the Swan's days downwards, 
with much of their best opportunity for the 
dissection of the human heart. 

Tap, tap! went some discreet knuckles 
against the door of the pink sitting-room, 
and Lady Flavia, from the pink bedroom, 
bade Simmons come in. But it was not 
Simmons who entered, with deferential 
cough and rustling silken skirt, in the 
pocket whereof jingled the keys of office ; 
it was Benson . Benson the housekeeper . 
and she brought with her a letter, lying on 
a tittle silver-gilt salver. 



A CORNER OF THE VEIL IS LIFTED. 186 

*^I beg your ladyship's pardon" . indeed, 
she said la'ship and parding, for years of 
rule over an earl's domestics had not obli- 
terated the original Cockney in the house- 
keeper." but an answer being required, 
and Simmons having stepped out as far as 
Rev. Mr. Blick's at the vicarage, I brought 
the letter myself." 

There was no apparent need for Mrs. 
Benson's apologetic tone ; but the servants, 
with that fine instinct which servants have, 
all stood in great awe of doing or saying 
anything that might occasion displeasure 
to Lady Flavia. In their eyes, she was a 
very, very grand lady . much grander than 
the present earl's daughters . much grander 
than the countess, whose bread they ate, 
and whose bests they did. Many causes 
may have co-operated to bring this about, 
such as the fact, that the orphan girl was 
bom in the purple, so to speak, and that 
nothing but her sex and the quasi-Salic law 



186 LADY FLAVIA. 

of entail prevented her from possessing 
Harbledown in her own right; while the 
Hythe family had alwayc been poor for a 
baronial household. But it is probable that 
the estimation in which Lady Flavia Clare 
was held depended mainly on personal cha- 
racter, on the same causes which made Leo 
her slave, and the black ponies submissive 
to her guidance. The lookers-on, it is said, 
see most of the game. Certainly, there are 
those whose dispositions are better under- 
stood in the kitchen, where they do not 
pass their time, than in the drawing-room, 
where they do. So in Harbledown, all 
gave way to this young girl, who never 
said one unkind word to her inferiors, who 
was always polite to every one, yet who, by 
some delicate tact, seemed to give her 
courtesy the weight that attaches to the 
civilities of royalty itself. The grooms 
never kept her waiting when she suddenly 
ordered round her ponies. The old coach-* 



1 



A CORNER OF THE VEIL IS LIFTED. 187 

man never grumbled when she took him 
and his great iron-grey horses up the most 
back-breaking hills, through the narrowest 
lanes, or over the most stony moorland 
tracks, in the country round. Jones, the 
head-gaxdener, lost his pomposity and his 
Latin when he ojffered her floral homage in 
the shape of bouquets of his best flowers. 
Mrs. Benson would have let her turn the 
house, to use her own figurative phrase, 
"out of windows," without so much as a 
moan of remonstrance. 

Lady Flavia was gracious to Benson. 
She took the letter, opened it with fingers 
that did not tremble. Ah ! how that little 
hand had quivered in Lord Hythe's grasp, 
and yet if the heart that belonged to the 
hand's owner beat quickly then, it throbbed 
wildly now. But deferential Mrs. Benson 
could not see into Lady Flavians heart. 
She did not know how fast the pulses beat, 
how swiftly ebbed and flowed the rushing 



188 LADY FLAVIA. 

blood, under that mask of ice. The be- 
coming light reflected from the rose-pink 
hangings allowed even the paling hue of 
the tell-tale cheek to pass imnoticed, and 
the housekeeper only saw a young lady, 
who, with an air of easy indifference, was 
glancing over the contents of the letter. 

'* dear, how tiresome !" Benson pricked 
up her ears, for she was not without her 
fair share of curiosity, and the letter was 
certainly in a man's handwriting, a great, 
bold, black hand, and sealed with a big red 
seal, on which were armorial quarterings 
not a few. " dear, how tiresome ! I 
pannot write just now. Say, if you please, 
I will send an answer." 

These words, spoken with consummate 
coolness, sent Benson down-stairs to tell 
the under-butler to tell the messenger, now 
refreshing himself with ale and beef in the 
servants-hall, that he might go back empiy- 
handed, for her ladyship would send an 



A CORNER OF THE VEIL IS LIFTED. 189 

answer. We may be pretty sure that that 
messenger, an oafish lad, sub-hostler at a 
secoiid-rate inn, had been fairly pumped for 
such intelligence as could be extracted from 
him. But neither John nor Jane, nor 
Susan nor Mr. Hedstall, the coachman (who 
had driven three Earls of Mortlake), nor 
even the great Mrs. Cook (for the earl had 
not, as yet, enlisted foreign talent in the 
shape of a white-capped chef)^ could find 
out anything but that the lad came from 
the Nag*s Heady at Chartley Parva, three 
miles from Chartley Town; and that the 
" genelman " who committed the letter, 
with half-a-crown and a curse, to his keep- 
ing, was a tall young chap, " main " well 
dressed, and who smoked cigars, wore 
moustaches, and had the look of a soldier- 
officer. His name had not transpired, 
but he had already spoken to the land- 
lord on the subject of purchasing a likely 
saddle-horse, whence it was conjecture4 



190 LADY FLAVIA. 

that he meant to make some stay in those 
parts. 

Meanwhile, Lady Flavia Clare read the 
letter over once, twice, thrice . ^it was not a 
long one . and then she tore it deliberately 
into fragments so small, that if Hop-o'^my- 
Thumb had used the pieces to mark his way 
back along the winding road to the home of 
his unnatm-al parents, he would have wanted 
keen eyes to distinguish those tiny snow- 
flakes of white paper. She seemed to take 
some sort of pleasure in the destruction of 
this letter, and when she had rent the paper 
into the minutest possible state of subdivi- 
sion, she carried the heap into the next 
room, threw it into the fire, and watched 
the flames devour it. Then she went back, 
walking with a slow, uncertain step, like 
one recovering from a long illness, and 
there was an ashen-grey tint spread over 
her lovely face, like that which darkens the 
faces of the dying. She held up her right 



A CORNER OF THE VEIL IS LIFTED. 191 

hand, that pretty little white hand, with its 
dimples and its slender fingers, tipped by 
such nails as we do not see twice in our 
lives, perhaps . ^transparent, filbert-shaped, 
rose-coloured . a hand so beautiful that it 
would have seemed an outrage against taste 
to put gemmed rings upon its fingers. 
" There is no stain, is there ?" she said, in 
a low dreary voice ; " no stain like that on 
the hand of Lady Macbeth. Ah ! what 
right have I, with my convent breeding, to 
know so much as the name of the wicked 
thane's wicked wife. Bah ! we are wiser 
in the nineteenth century. We don't com- 
mit our crimes in the old coarse way, and 
the blood is not to be seen on our palace 
floors any more. But, knowing what I 
know, and being what I am, you have done 
a wise deed, Basil Royston, to come here 
and try to bend me to your will. A wise 
deed ! But wait, and see the end of it !" 
And here an involuntary shudder crept 



\ 



192 LADY FLAVIA. 

over her from head to foot, and she turned 
away from the looking-glass, and, with a 
smothered cry of actual pain, flung herself 
down on the bed, and writhed there, like a 
crushed worm. " Oh, give me back my 
old self . give me. back the days that are 
gone, when a Uving human heart was in 
my breast, and not this fire and gnawing 
torment :" such were the wild words that 
broke from her lips, wrung forth by no 
counterfeited anguish. " Let me dare to 
pray ! let me look at innocent children with- 
out feeling as if there were a great gulf 
fixed between their lot and mine ; as if I 
were in my place of punishment, but in 
view of Eden and its radiance. Ah me ! I 
am surely one of those accursed ones, with a 
heart of fire in their tortured breasts, that 
roam in the Halls of Eblis . I read of such 
things once in a strange book . Vathek . 
was it not . but I did not know how true 
those seeming fantasies could be. Yes, I 



A CORNER OP THE VEIL 13 LIFTED. 193 

suffer already but not often . I am so hard. 
Yes, I am not often such a fool, whining 
like a sick school-girl;" And here she 
slowly rose, and lifted her haughty little 
head with the old imperial prettiusBs. " I 
serve a master who allows of no drawing 
back on the broad downward road. I have 
phosen, and must be firm to the black ban- 
ner. But I am no dupe, to work for others. 
"What I have done was for myself, not for 
them. And I will be Countess of Mortlake 
yet." 

By this time she was in front of the pier- 
glass again, and with a woman's instinct, 
was adjusting her crushed drees, and smooth- 
ing back the tangled masses of her unrivalled 
hair. " I will be Countess of Mortlake yet, 
a peeress of England, and a queen of fashion. 
I shall make some stir among them . those 
pale inanities . in their Belgravian drawing- 
rooms. Hythe will be proud of his wife. 
He is a good fellow, a good, dear fellow . 

VOL. I. o 




Ik 



194 LADT FLATIA. 

even I see that. Had I been as I once 

was " Then came a long pause, and 

then again she spoke : " Had I been the 
romantic idiot I once was, I should not 
have been content with a red-tape husband, 
nurtured on blue-books. There is no politi- 
cal career, in England, for a woman. These 
are not the beautiful duchess, and " Buff and 
blue Mrs Crewe." But Hythe is a gentle- 
man, the soul of honour ; a hard-working 
honest, clever man. He will be a cabinet 
minister. He will be a marquis, and I shall 
be his wife. And when I die, I shall be 
buried in a crimson velvet coffin, with 
silver-gilt handles, and the bells will toll, 
and the people will take off their hats as 
the stately hearse goes by ; and the marble 
under which I lie shaU tell fiiture ages what 
a paragon I was, what a good woman, what 
a good wife. Yes, but there will be no lie 
in that. I mean to be a good wife. I 
ineaQ to be kind to the poor, to go to 



A CORNER OP THE VEIL 13 OPTED. 195 

chnrch, to do vay duty in the station in 
which I am placed, to live and die the 
best of all the peereesee in the Eed Book. 
Those are my wages . the good-will, the 
homage, the admiration of the silly world. 
Va ! I must play my part out, and be the 
same to the last. After all, che sara sara ! 
Fatalism is a comfortable opiate for such as 
I am. But, Captain Basil Eoyston, what a 
much, much wiser man you would be if you 
would but leave me alone to take my course, 
and face my destiny. Well, che sara sara, 
say I for the second time." And she bathed 
her burning face and eyes in fair water ; 
and after a little while she went down-stairs, 
beautiful and fresh, without a clond upon 
her, forehead, and, to all visible seeming, 
without a care upon her mind. 




LABT FLATIA. 



CHAPTER XII. 

A STOEMT INTERTIEW. 

The Nag's Head in Chartley Parva is a 
large straggling hostelry of the old sort, pne 
of those inns whose B8,nded floors, diamond- 
])aned windows, large garden, ivied front, 
and rose-draped porch, suggest the idea of 
such a place of entertainment as Izaak 
Walton's Piscator would have elected to 
dine in on a dish of buttered eggs, a tankard 
of nut-brown ale, and some trout of his own 
catching. Nothing could be lees like a 
modern hotel on the limited liability prin- 
ciple ; and nothing could be more inviting 
to an angler or an artist than the Nag's 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 197 

Head, standiug as it did at the end of Cbart^ 
ley village street, and only a stone's throw 
from one of the finest trout-streams in the 
county, a stream, too, of whose length two 
miles could be fished by leave and Kcence of 
the landlord. 

But late October is not exactly the best 
season for the practice of the gentle art of 
sticking steel barbs into the mouths of the 
Salmonidse ; and there were no anglers just 
then at the rambling old inn, nor any 
artists to sketch, for the fiftieth time, its 
picturesque tumble-down front, with the 
figures 1693 above the porch; or to stroll 
about its quaint shady garden, where was 
a bowling-alley, on whose smooth turf 
Parson Adams and Squire "Western, and 
Mr. Allworthy too, very probably, had 
long years ago directed their polished 
globes of beech-wood against the jack. 
However, there was a gentleman staying at 
the Nag^s Head, and one who obviously 




198. LADY FLATIA. 

thought hia consequence somewhat im- 
paired by his having to put up with such 
rustic head-quarters. He was, in truth, a 
Bweariug, swaggering gentleman . it was 
thus the host judged him. and ill-humoured 
whenever anything went contrary to his 
desires; but a gentleman stUl. He had 
excellent clothes, a heavy portmanteau, and 
plenty of loose silver, which he tossed 
about like one bom to spend; while he 
was just as ready to bestow a curse or a 
cuff on those who offended him, as to fling 
his contemptuous largesse of half-crowns 
to those who pleased his fancy. He had 
lately given charge to landlord, landlady, 
chambermaid, barmaid, and waiter . which 
last functionary held the posts of tapster 
and boots as weU . that any letter or 
message addressed to Captain Eoyston was 
to be brought to him forthwith. 

Hi3 stood in the window, with the dark- 
greeu ivy e^U round about him, like the 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 199 

frame of a picture ; and it was undeniable 
that he was a handsome, stalwart gentle- 
man of goodly presence. Compared with 
him, Lord Hythe's honest face was very 
homely; whereas the face of Basil Eoy- 
ston was such as generally finds favour 
wherever ladies congregate. He was a fine 
florid specimen of the English stock, with 
waving chestnut hair, clear cut features, 
and a long tawny moustache shading his 
short upper-lip. His teeth were beautiful, 
and his smile pleasing. His brilliant hazel 
eyes were not quite so brilliant as they had 
been, perhaps, for now the whites of them 
were bloodshot and discoloured, and they 
had something of a hang-dog glance in 
them, with aU their fierceness. No man 
can (][uite hold up his head when under a 
cloud; and Basil Royston, captain by 
courtesy, but a cashiered outcast, could not 
maintain the unruflGied demeanour that he 
would have wished to do. He was ex- 




200 LADY FLAVIA. 

pensively dressed. everything he wore 
was of the best materials . ^but his old 
correct taste had deserted him, or rather, 
being no longer the member of a recog- 
nised society, he had indulged his own 
natural fancy for bright colours and showy 
contrasts. Thus, he wore a glaring waist- 
coat, and a gaudy neck-scarf of crimson, 
and had too many rings on his fingers, too 
many charms on his watch-chain, too large 

a pin in his cravat Trifles these, no 
doubt, but they spoke volumes of their 
possessor's state of mind. 

The captain . so they said in the bar and 
in the tap . ^was a restless gentleman. He 
went out, trampling impatiently along the 
garden-walks, and spitefully beheading 
with his stick the great purple dahlias, like 
some dyspeptic Tarquin among his nobles. 
He went down the village street, kicking 
the curs asleep on the thresholds, and 
pushing angrily through the noisy little 






A STORMY INTERVIEW. 201 

gatherings of children disputing a moot- 
point at marbles ; and then he would be 
back again in his ground-floor parlour at 
the Nag's Head, lighting a fresh cigar, 
and ringing the bell sharply for brandy. 
"A large glass, confound you; and look 
sharp ! " 

" The captain drinks a lot ! " said the 
barmaid confidentially to the boots-waiter ; 
and that man-of-all-work grinned as he 
made answer : ** Wants a dfeal of winding 
up of a morning. Miss B. And don't his 
hand shake neither! Blest if I didn't 
think he'd have dropped the tea-cup at 
breakfast. But four goes of neat spirit 
before twelve o'clock is coming it rayther 
strong, ain't it?" 

However, the " hair of the dog that bit 
you " recipe, murderous as it is, produced a 
temporary improvement in the nervous 
system of Captain Royston. His shaking 
hand grew steady ; his bloodshot eye grew 



r^: 



202 LADY FLAVIA. 

brighter ; he was quite, to all appearance, 
a hale and hearty man of nine-and-twenty 
as he stood in the window, puffing at his 
cigar, with his eyes gazing out upon the 
road. 

At last it comes, a low, well-hung pony- 
carriage, drawn by two fiery black ponies, 
well kept in hand ; a young lady in slight 
mourning, with a white feather like a snow- 
flake fluttering in the wind, holding the 
milk, white reins ; and a smart young groom 
perched in the seat behind ready to jump 
down and run to the ponies' heads, as he 
does now. Out comes the hostler to ask 
what the lady may please to want; his 
own thoughts being intent on *' bites" of 
hay, or drops of water for 'the washing 
of the ponies' mouths withal. But the 
captain knows better. He flings away his 
cigar into the grate, glances at his own 
image in the slip of glass over the chimney* 
piece-^it is not women alone who peer at 



A STOEMY INTERVIEW. 203 

themselves in mirrors . and settles his 
cravat. He is not in the least surprised 
when the landlady opens the door, and 
announces that a lady wishes to speak 
with Captain Eoyston, The lady is ad- 
mitted. The landlady retires. The lady, 
not noticing the offer of a chair, still less 
accepting the hand that he extends towards 
her, lifts her veil. He winces, in spite of 
the brandy, before the defiant loveliness 
that confronts him with eyes that have no 
relenting in their blue depths, 

" Upon my soul, you are prettier than 
ever ! " blurted out the captain, hardly 
knowing what he said, as he again pushed 
a chair towards his visitor. She made him 
a low courtesy of ironical politeness, but 
her face was quite grave and cold. 

" I did not come to hear compliments 
from you, sir," she said, her hostility 
breaking out in every tone and gesture, \ 

in the curl of her lip, in the flash of her A ' 




\ ^ 



204 LADT FLA VIA. 

eye, in the very erectness of the attitude 
in which she stood, one hand resting on 
the table : she looked upon him as if her 
sweet blue eyes had been the dreadful ones 
of fell Medusa, and could turn him into 
stone for ever. 

He bit his lip, and the hand with which 
he stroked back his tawny moustache was 
tremulous, even after its owner's repeated 
doses of strong brown British brandy ; but 
he made an eflFort, and said smoothly : 
" Come, come, you are cross with me still, 
I see, though hang me if I deserve it! 
You and I were such good friends once ; 
and I wish the pleasant old times could 
come back, as when I read poetry to you 
under the lime-trees, in auld lang syne, 
and " 

He had begun in an artificial tone 
enough, but as he went on speaking, he 
warmed to the matter of his discourse, and 
there was real feeling in his voice as he 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 205 

spoke the last words, while his look softened, 
and it was easy to guess that at times there 
inust be a dangerous fascination about the 
man. His was a corrupted heart, but there 
was probably a soft spot in it yet ; and for 
one moment Basil Eoyston looked and felt 
as if there were no wicked schemes, no sin- 
ful pleasures, no courts-martial, infamy, 
penury in the world, but only a shady 
French garden, with a rustic seat, whereon 
sat two fair girls, while a tall, soldierly 
young fellow read Tennyson's Maud to 
them in a rich, low voice. 

But Lady Flavia Clare interrupted him. 
" Excuse me," she said, " if I cut short 
your sentimentel reminiscences. The past 
is gone. What might have been does not 
concern us who have to deal with things as 
they are. What do you want with me ? 
You sent for me. Speak your mind, and 
speak it plainly, for I tell you distinctly 
that I will give you no future chance." 



^ 



206 LADY FLATIA. 

" What do you mean ? Yes, what the 
detice are yon driving at ?" exclaimed the 
youDg man, staring at the audacious 
speaker. " Are you vexed at my sending 
for you, as you call it ? 'Pon my Boul, I 
didn't mean it in that light at aU. I only 
thought, and the governor thought, that I 
couldn't come up to the house . what d'ye 
call it . ^Harbledown . without a regular 
formal invitation from old Mortlake " 

" And that," again interrupted his piti- 
less acquaintance, " you are about as likely 
to receive as you are to be asked to dinner 
at Windsor, or to be appointed colonel of 
your old regiment, the Crashers." 

"Confound you, ma'am, can't you be 
civil !" broke out the ex-captain in a fury ; 
but instantly, as though seeming to remem- 
ber his cue, awkwardly began to stammer 
out some words of apology: "You see 
you're so hard on a man, why, too, pray, 
shouldn't my lord ask me, if you make 



A STORMY IXTBRVIEW. 207 

him ? I'll be bound you can turn every 
one of tlie lot round that pretty little finger 
of yours." 

Lady Flavia Clare's eyes really seemed 
to emit sparks of blue light as she looked at 
the man before her. Her beauty was quite 
hardened now; and she gazed at the 
captain, his red cravat, his flaming waist- 
coat, his cheap jewellery, and flashy jaunti- 
ness of mien, with something very like 
loathing. ** I hate myself.she spoke the 
words passionately, but so quick and low 
was the utterance that no ear but her own 
caught their purport . *' I hate myself for 

ever having given a thought to this " 

She left the sentence incomplete, and spoke 
plainly and audibly enough : " But I do 
not intend to ask Lord Mortlake to invite 
you. Are you so dull of wit that you can- 
not perceive my meaning, or must I tell 
you in so many words that I am ready for 
peace or war, at your will, but not for any 



208 LADY FLAVIA. 

renewal of intercourse with you or yours ! 
You had better let me go my way in peace, 
and " 

Here it was Royston's turn to interrupt. 
** By all that's sacred," rapped out the cap^ 
tain, with an oath that cannot be written 
here, " our ways lie together, I begin to 
see your game, my dear; but that cock 
won't fight, as my father says. I'm to be 
the catspaw, am I? I'm to be your lady- 
ship's very humble servant, kicked out like 
a rascal that has stolen the spoons. No, 
no, my lady, that sort of thing won't do 
with so old a hand as I am. I came over 
to England to make you my wife, and my 
wife you shall be ; and I can tell you a 
home-truth . ^if it wasn't for your money, 
I'd look elsewhere ; but a bargain's a bar- 
gain. It was all settled long ago, and you 
know it." 

Lady Flavia Clare looked less angry 
now. A mocking light began to replace 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 209 

the wrathful ghtter in her eyes, and her 
voice was much more amicable as she said : 
" I think you were mistaken in not stopping 
at home, and conducting your wooing by 
proxy. Your father would have made an 
abler plenipotentiary than yotirself, Captain 

 

Eoyston, for to give him his due, he is a 
man, and a bold one. But you How- 
ever, I don't want the ponies to catch cold 
while you and I exchange amenities. May 
I ask how you intend to hold me to my word, 
supposing, for the sake of argument, that I 
ever pledged my word to so utterly absurd 
a bargain as that of which you speak ?" 

Basil Eoyston reddened, and then grew 
very pale ; and he tried to speak, but failed. 
His features worked painfully, as various 
expressions, rage, fear, wounded vanity, 
perplexity, passed across his face. Then he 
suddenly stepped forward, and caught hold 
of Lady Flavia's hand, saying, in a voice 
that was not wholly steady : " Come, dar- 

VOL. I. p 



210 LADT FLAVIA. 

ling, let this end. Let us be friends, as we 
once were. I was in a passion just now, 
and talked rubbish, but '' 

She snatched her hand away, and her 
eyes were ablaze with anger. Her voice 
was cautiously lowered, since inn-walls have 
ears, but it was cruelly distinct as she said : 
" Friends ! What can there be in common 
between a cashiered gambler, a broken 
cheat, a drunken debauchee, and the Lady 
Flavia Clare ? If you dare again to treat 
me with anything but the respect due to a 
lady whose acquaintance with yourself, 
fonaed beneath the roof of your parente, 
has induced her to bear with your rude 
language only too patiently, I shall leave 
the room and the house without delay. 1 
did not come here to endure insult." 

" Remember !" said Basil Royston furi- 
ously, and he shook his uplifted forefinger 
at her as he spoke . ** remember !'* 

" Remember ! Do you think I forget ? 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 211 

No; but you would be wise to let your 
memory be somewhat shorter," said Lady 
Flavia, with a peal of her ringing joyous 
laughter, at the sound of which Basil Roy- 
ston grew pale for the second time, and 
cast a wistful glance towards the table on 
which stood the empty glass that had held 
the last modicum of his insidious bosom- 
friend. But he was not defeated, only 
puzzled. He was not so brave as his 
father, not so shrewd, not so persevering, 
though in certain superficial graces he had 
at one time been very superior to the bluff 
fox-hunting squire. He rallied his spirits 
now, composed his features, and it was in a 
really resolute tone that he said : " I, too, 
if I pleased, might use hard words and ugly 
names, but that is useless now. I find you 
very much changed. I suspect you have 
seen some one among the swells with whom 
you live now, for whose sake you are will- 
ing to break your word to me. Were this 




212 LADT PLAVIA. 

a common case of jilting I should not be 
ass enough to complain. I should take my 
hat and make my bow ; though I can't see 
why even a Clare should think herself 
degraded by marrying a Eoyston of Roy- 
ston. my grandmother was Lady Elizabeth 
Pierrepoint, too, by George; but that's 
neither here nor there. The point to keep 
in view is, that I want Cupley Lees and 
Melshot Friars; the governor wants the 
ready ; and the only way to bring matters 

right being for us two to marry '' 

Lady Flavia Clare's manner changed as 
if by magic, and with a playful gesture she 
laid her little hand on the arm of her sulky 
companion: VTell me one thing," she 
said, "do you know how they execute 
criminals ?. in Fikice, I mean, you know, 
not in England. Don't they build up a 
horrid machine above the scaffold, with a 
great ugly knife that is drawn up by pul- 
leys and cords, and then, when the poor 



A STORMY INTERVIEW, 213 

wretch is thrust through a hole in the 
planks, with a basket of sawdust beneath, 
to receive the head . ^how shocking !. don't 
they let the heavy knife fall swiftly down 
between its grooves, ah ! so swiftly, swift 
as death itself, on the neck of the criminal ? 
Flash ! chop ! and all is over ; so humane, 
they say, so much better than our clumsy 
English hanging. Don't you think so, 
Captain Royston ?" 

And it was terrible to hear the laugh, so 
sUver clear, so sweet, but with something 
in it that froze the listener's blood, which 
concluded these last words of Lady 
Flavia's. But equally terrible was it to 
mark their eflFect on Captain Royston. He 
sat down, shaking as if m an ague-fit, and 
great unwholesome blotches of crimson 
broke out on his pale forehead, and his dry 
white lips twitched quickly, and he looked 
quite haggard and old at nine-and-twenty. 

He did not reply ; but as Lady Flavia, 



214 LADY FLAVIA. 

after a pause, went on to speak again, he 
winced as if she had struck him. He was 
indeed in a sorry state that morning- . ^a 
** cup too low," as he phrased it, after heing 
many cups too high on the previous night, 
for he drank for drink's sake now, not for 
company, as social topers affect to do. 
Basil Eoyston's hard-headed old father had 
not been very fer wrong, after all, in his 
conjectures that his dissolute son would 
linger in London, and plunge into a vortex 
of such dissipation as only a great city 
can furnish forth. But Mr. Royston had 
guessed wrongly in one point . he had 
fancied, and not unreasonahly, that his 
hopeful heir would lose or squander the 
moderate supply of cash, borrowed at 
heavy interest from an accommodating 
usurer, that he had carried with him. 
Such a contingency was probable enough. 
But a heavier calamity than empty pockets 
was impending over the head of Basil 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 216 

Eoyston, and the first steps of the slippery- 
path were strewn with flowers. He had 
indeed gambled and betted, just as his fond 
parent had predicted ; but, instead' of 
losing, he had won . he won what he 
called a " hatful " of money ; and his 
anxiety to bring the business for which he 
had crossed the Channel to a satisfactory 
conclusion, caused him to leave London, 
much to the chagrin of his associates, 
before he had given the losers their 
*^ revenge/' But though he got off with 
unplucked feathers, his constitution, pre- 
viously impaired by a wild life in India, 
had been severely tried by the late hours, 
the fierce excitement, and the almost inces- 
sant intoxication in which the last fortnight 
had been passed. Thus it was that the ex- 
captain's nerves were less than ordinarily 
fit to endure a contest of wit and will, 
though even the results of unlimited alcohol 
and Hay market champagne could not fairly 



216 LADY FLAVIA. 

account for the prostrating effect which 
Lady Flavians words had produced upon 
him. 

She waited to let those words sink deep, 
and then resumed: *'You wonder, I dare 
say, how I came to be aware of such dread- 
ful doings, but even in convents we hear 
an echo of what goes on in the outer world. 
There was a little ivory model of a guillo- 
tine that stood under a glass case in Pierre 
the gardener's cottage at Grr^snez; a toy 
that his uncle had carved, he said, when he 
was one of the French prisoners at Norman 
Bridge in England, and which remained 
unsold at the Peace. Grosse Jeanne, too, 
told me once that she had been with a party 
of her friends to see an execution at Ver- 
sailles ; and the girl described the scene 
quite graphically . ^the hollow square of 
soldiery, the mounted gendarmes, the cart 
in which the culprit was brought, with a 
priest beside him, crucifix in hand; the 




. i 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 217 

executioner . ** Chariot/' they call him, 
instead of " Jack Ketch " . ^in his red cap, 
with bare arms, holding the string; the 
populace pressing on the square of bayonets 
that edged the scaffold; the bright blade 
poised aloft ; every house-top crowded with 
eager feces . c'etait trls amusant . so Grosse 

Jeanne declared, honest girl " 

So far the cruel sweet voice went on un- 
checked ; but at last a hollow groan inter- 
rupted it, and Basil Royston got up, lean- 
ing with both hands on the back of a chair, 
as if for support, and looked with haggard 
eyes at Ms visitor.  I can't beax this," he 
said sullenly ; *' and you . ^you dare to talk 
of these things in that cool way. But you 
shan't frighten me ; hang me if you shall ! 
Why should I care for^your queer notions ? 
The thing's absurd. You can't hurt me 
without hurting yourself, so I'm safe." 
There was a twinkle of reviving cuiming 
in the young man's hazel eyes, and he 



218 LADY FLAVU. 

snapped his fingers in sign of defiance. 
His voice had something of the old insolent 
tone in it as he went on : "I know too 
much of woman's ways, I flatter myseli^ 
to take ' No ' for an answer. And we are 
playing a game at Brag, you and I. You 
will think better of it, Lady Flavia Clare, 
when you've had a little more time to see 
how matters really stand. I shall stay 
here a reasonable time, say three days, and 
then 1 shall expect to be asked over to 
Harbledown. If I get no invitation, I shall 
know that you prefer war to peace, and 
you will only have yourself to thank for 
what follows. By Jove, you'd better think 
twice about it before you make us des- 
perate." , 
Lady Plavia's accent was one of cold 
politeness as she replied : " I have no wish 
to make any of you desperate; I merely 
decline the honour of being Lady Flavia 
Royston, thafs all. But I never intended 



A STORMT INTERVIEW. 219 

to prove ungrateful for the kindness I once 
received from your family. For your 
mother I really feel a sort of aflfection. 
I shall be found willing, when my property 
is at my own disposal, to prove myself the 
best friend that the Roystons ever had. 
But, excuse me. Captain Eoyston, I prefer 
to manage my own aflfairs in my own way, 
and to discuss preliminaries, if need be, 
with your father, rather than with yourself. 
Him I intend to get invited at Christinas ; 
and if you will lay aside your ridiculous 

matrimonial pretensions '' 

** Ah ! but that I never will," said Basil 
doggedly. 

. **Then," was the quiet rejoinder, "I 
have lost my time to no purpose, and can- 
not let my poor pets yonder run further 
risk of catching cold after their scamper. 
James, too, will wonder what evil has be- 
fallen me, for, I assure you, I am not in 
the habit of paying caUs to gay rniUtaires 



I 



220 i:,ADT FIATU. 

like yourself, captain. Good-morning, but 
not, I tmst for your sake, au revoir /" With 
a quick rostle of edlk she vras gone ; and in 
a moment more Basil Boyston saw her take 
her place in the carriage, receive the reins 
from the groom, and drive off at a hrisk 
pace. He watched her until the hig'h 
hedges concealed the last wave of the 
plume in her hat, and listened till the &iiit 
sonnd of the light wheels died away in the 
distance. Then he turned away fix>m the 
window, with a sigh of mingled regret and 
relief " Fifty times prettier than ever " . 
thus ran his outspoken thoughts ; " but she 
is as hard as flint, for all the innocent 
smile and the hlue eyes. What sort of 
stuff can she be made of, to carry it off like 
that; or doesn't she know the danger?** 
Here he paused, and rang the bell. " I 
wonder if she is a flesh-and-blood creature, 
like the rest of us. "I could have fancied 
her a beautiful devii." And here the 



A STORMY INTERVIEW. 221 

waiter entered, and received Captain 

Royston's orders for a bottle of soda-water 

and a dash of brandy . " Just another glass, 
you know." 



222 LADY FULYIA. 



CHAPTER XIIL 

Bia BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 

" How tiresome, mamma ! Flavia won't 
come with us. She insists on staying at 
home, naughty darling that she is!" said 
Lady Caroline Clare, who had grown to 
entertain a romantic friendship for her 
cousin . her cousin who had been a stranger 
a few months back. There was a battue in 
Tinningley Copse, which piece of woodland 
was with justice considered as the cream of 
the Harbledown preserves, and arrange- 
ments had been made for the party of 
gentlemen to lunch at the keeper s house, 
whither sundry hampers of good-cheer, 
liquid and solid, had been previously con- 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 223 

veyed ; and there was a sort of half en- 
gagement to the effect that lady Mortlake 
and her daughters should drive round to 
the lodge in question ; and should be pre- 
sent at the later portion of the sport. It 
was a fresh opportunity of becoming 
known to their country neighbours, before 
the round of Christmas banquets should 
commence. As yet, there had been a few 
rather heavy dinners at which the family 
had been guests; and once or twice, a 
select twelve or fourteen had rallied around 
the Harbledown mahogany; but the pro- 
gress towards intimacy was not more rapid 
than it usually is where miles of road 
divide castle from court, and hall from 
abbey. 

October seemed determined to die smil- 
ing; and if the nights were foggy or 
frosty, day after day had the mellow 
brightness peculiar to that soft season of 
the year. The woods were never more 



224 LADY FLAVIA. 

enjoyable than now, while the red and 
russet leaves yet clung to the boughs, and 
before the November rains had turned the 
paths to quagmires. Some pleasant neigh- 
bours, pleasant at least^ when gauged by a 
oountry standard, were to employ their 
guns to-day in the massacre of Lord Mort- 
lake's pheasants, and were afterwards to 
dine at Harbledown. The afternoon was 
clear and sunny ; the few white clouds had 
not a menace in them; everything pro- 
mised welL But Lady Plavia chose, to the 
disgust of her cousins, and especially of 
Lady JuUa, to shut herself up in her rooms, 
and not only refused to join the party, but 
to decUne giving any reason for her ob- 
stinacy. ^ 

The carriage was at the door, not the 
lofty family chariot over which Mr Hedstall 
presided, but the open barouche, with the 
four bays, and the trim postilions, with a 
little silver tassel sprouting out of the black 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 225 

velvet of their caps. The countess was 
dressed, so were her daughters, and there 
was no time to lose if they meant to be at 
the keeper's before the sportsmen should 
have gone back to their work of semi-wild- 
poultry slaughter. 

" Flavia won't come . ^nonsense !" said 
the countess incredulously ; and then, after 
a moment's thought, she nodded her head 
with an air of ineflFable matronly wisdom. 
" Ah ! to be sure ! she feels a sort of awk- 
wardness about meeting Augustus after 
what I must call her unaccountable whim- 
sicality in rejecting him. You must have 
noticed how she has avoided him ever 
since . a good sign, if Hythe would but 
think m !" 

The countess really believed in the truth 
of her own words. She had set her heart 
on the match ; and it speaks well for her 
sense of hospitality that she had abstained 
from pointedly evincing her displeasure at 

VOL. I. Q 



226 LADY PLAVIA. 

the rejection that her son had experienced. 
But she consoled herself by the reflection, 
that Plavia was very young, and, of course, 
ignorant of her own mind, while pre-en- 
gaged affections were happily, in this case, 
not to be dreaded. Except a priest or two, 
and that snuf^ old French doctor of whom 
the young lady often spoke, the countess 
was convinced that her young relative had 
never in her life been in company with an 
unmarried man, before Lord Hythe burst 
like the day-star upon the narrow horizon 
of her brief experience. 

Thus Lady Mortlake drove cheerily 
away from her hall-door, convinced that 
her youthful guest was already timidly re- 
gretting the coy *'No" which Augustus 
had too easily accepted as an answer to his 
suit; and that plenty of time remained 
between the time present and the re-open- 
ing of parliament wherein to bring the 
course of true love into a channel of satis- 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 227 

factory smoothness. The road was an 
excellent one, thanks to the late earl's care 
for the amelioration of the property, and 
the four bays whirled along the light car- 
riage at a brisk pace. But the keeper's 
cottage was at some distance from the 
great house, and hills had to be scaled, and 
tracts of woodla^nd to be traversed, before 
the goal was reached. The arrival had 
been happily timed; and the barouche 
rolled swiftly across the elastic turf, and 
halted before the door of the thatched 
lodge just as the shooting ponies were being 
brought round, as the spaniels were yelp- 
ing forth their eagerness for a renewal of 
the campaign, and as the sportsmen were 
emerging, gun in had, from the dwelKng of 
the prime-minister of Lord Mortlake's pre- 
serves. 

For some time the countess and her well- 
grown daughters had enough to do in re- 
sponding to the greetings of their friends, 



i 



Tin LADT FLAVU. 

.who, having liad a good morning's sport, 
and the best possible limcbeon to appease 
the appetite prodnced by fresh air and 
exerciee, were in temper and spirits of 
corresponding excellence. Indeed, the 
pleasant hours 6pent under the greenwood 
bough, aided by the charms of good-cheer, 
good-fellowship, and imlimited " cup," had 
thawed the frost that incases an English- 
man's real nature ; and even the young 
squires found themselves conversing with 
the fair occupants of the barouche with an 
ease that astonished themselves. But 
besides the local aristocrats, besides young 
Sir Neville and old Sir John, and the 
brothers Plummington from PImnmington 
Grange, and Mr Fossdyke of Fossdyke, 
with his three eons, and one or two other 
Anglo-Saxon thanes, the like of whom are 
only to he found in such out-of-the-way 
shirow as that whereof Harbledown was an 
ornament, there were other and more fasci- 



BIO BEN BBCEITES A. COHHISSION. 229 

natmg cavaliers present; these were no 
others than Lord Plantagenet Vere and 
Captain Fitzalaric of the Lifeguards, about 
the most dangerous lady-killers in London, 
and now on a visit to Sir Neville Beecham 
at Manley Court. 

As for Sir Neville himself, a pink-faced, 
flaxen-headed young man, who might at 
any time have changed clothes with his 
Own groom, and defied recognition as a 
gentleman, there was nothing dangerous 
about him. He had nine thousand a year, 
an empty bead, an honest heart, and a mis- 
placed affection for short amber-coloured 
pipes and the strongest Cavendish tobacco. 
But the G-oardsmen . for Lord Plantagenet 
was in the Foot Guards, as his inseparable 
companion was in the Household Cavalry . 
were really formidable persons, with such 
black moustaches ; such embroidered shirt- 
fronts and "lovely" waistcoats, and charms, 
and trinkets ; such eyes, and hair, and 



^ 



230 LADT FLATIA. 

neck-ties; auch beautifully white teeth, 
killiog-glanceB, soft smileB, and stocks of 
small-talk, as might well strike terror to 
the heart of any mother in Belgravia. 
These dreadful yoimg men could sing, ride, 
waltz, and flirt so very much better than 
any eldest son worth mentioning; they 
had auch an artful power of being pensive 
or rattlingly meny, according to taste; 
and were so well provided with the most 
deUghtfiil riddles, new croquet rules, new 
forfeits, new scraps of Belgravian slang, 
that no heiress was safe from them. As 
for those numerous fair ones whose feces 
were their fortunes, judicious chaperones 
were as much fluttered at the sight of Yere 
and Fitzalaric in contiguity to the bright 
bevy of whJte-robed innocents under their 
charge, as a hen that sees the shadow of 
the hovering hawk fell upon her chicks. 
They were shocking social sharks, were 
Plantagenet Terc and Alured Fitzalaric, 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 231 

and for a few minutes Lady Mortlake could 
hardly mangle to return their civil speeches 
in kind. 

Why had the earl asked them, she won- 
dered. Ah ! to be sure, they were staying 
with that boorish young baronet, whose 
forefethers had always, kept up a sort of 
hereditary friendship with the Clares ; but 
etill Lady Mortlake wished the dandies 
away. Not that she feared for tihe peace of 

Lady Caroline were case-hardened in the 
fire of London life, and could not easily be 
dazzled now ; besides, they were not rich, 
and it was certain that the too attractive 
Guardsmen could not marry, according to 
Mayfair ethics, until they should find wives 
able to maintain them for the rest of their 
natural lives. But Lady Flavia! the 
countess could have shed tears at the idea 
that " that dear lamb " should be exposed 
to encounter two such elegant wolves as the 



i 



232 LADT FLA.TU. 

graceful gentlemen in the knickerbockers 
and velvet coats, to whom she was now 
forcing herself to say something civil ; for 
she had a horrid idea that Lord Hythe's 
courtship would scarcely be furthered by 
the arrival on the scene of these inop- 
portune exqxiisites; and it was not until 
after mature reflection that she regained 
her serene confidence that her own son's 
sterling merits must eventually be recog- 
nised. Lord Hythe's voice broke in upon 
her reverie: "Where is Flavia?" He 
asked this question with some little con- 
cern, and the lady-MHers themselves 
pricked up their ears like an old hunting 
horse that hears the cry of the far-distant 
pack. They, too, had heard vague rumours 
of something very strange, very beautiful, 
and very wealthy domiciled beneath the 
earl's roof. The earl, too, chimed in with 
the iuquiiy after his favourite, for every 
one liked Lady Flavia. That young lady's 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 233 

absence was accounted for on the ground 
of headache, a plea devised on the spur of 
the moment by the countess, in whose 
opinion any excuse sounded better than an 
acknowledgment that caprice was the cause 
of the non-appearance of her lovely ward. 

'* And, by the by," said Lady Caroline 
suddenly, "I was so near forgetting the 
dear child's commission. Augustus, would 
you call the keeper? . ^Haynes, I mean. 
He has gone forward with the beaters." 

Big Ben, whose towering figure was to 
be seen fifty yards off, presiding over a 
group of boys and farming-men, was sum- 
moned to the side of the barouche, and 
fingered his battered hat in token of 
deference. The keeper did not look 
wholly comfortable at being ihus suddenly 
called up ; perhaps his unquiet conscience 
made a coward of him; at any rate, his 
restless eye glanced stealthily from face to 
face, as if to read the signs of any hostile 



i 



234 LADY FLATIA. 

feeliog that imliicty revelations might 
have conjured up; hnt none snch were 
visible. 

" Isn't there a heronry on what they call 
the Isle, down by the river, on tiie Chartiey 
Road 7" asked Lady Caroline. 

"Yes, my lady," said Big Ben, again 
doing violence to his hat-brim. 

"Then," said Lady Caroline, "perhaps 
yon could manage to get my consin. Lady 

Flavia Clare Dear me!" And the 

comely speaker broke off in some snrprise, 
for at the mention of that name Big Ben 
had given a start of dismay, and had let the 
gon under his arm taH with a crash. Bnt 
the keeper begged pardon, explaining that 
he had &n(ned ibat he heard a dog yelp, jnst 
then, in the woods, and feared somebody 
was disturbing the game ; and the earl 
being by this time very eager to get back 
to tbe covert, and make the most of the 
daylight remaining, the ladies alighted 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 235 

from the barouche, and walked a few 
hundred yards under escort towards the 
scene of action; Lady Caroline briefly 
imparting to Mr. Haynes that her cousin 
had a fancy for some of the long glossy 
heron's plumes, and that she wished to 
speak to the keeper himself on the subject 
of procuring them. And then the whole 
party adjourned to the copse, where pre- 
sently the short armistice came to an end, 
and nothing was heard but the crashing of 
brushwood under the beaters' tread, the 
whirring of pheasants, the crack of guns, 
and the various cries of " Down charge," 
** Seek dead," and so forth, as the spaniels 
rushed through the thickets to secure the 
fallen birds. 

But though Mr. Benjamin Hayes was 
useful and active, his thoughts were not 
wholly of pheasants and breech-loaders. 
He knit his shaggy brows as he went 
sturdily about his work; and when the 



236 LADY PLAVIA. 

battue was over^ and the sportsmen gone^ 
Big Ben, to the surprise of his underlings, 
chose himself to drive the cart that con- 
veyed the dead game up to the great house. 
"A nod,'* muttered the shaggy-headed 
forester, as he jerked the reins and plied 
the whip, " is as good as a wink to a blind 
horse. But Ben Haynes ain't blind. Won- 
der what she's up to now !" For that the 
young lady who occupied the largest place 
in his thoughts just then, was **up" to 
something more than immediately met the 
eye, was a conclusion readily formed by the 
naturally shrewd mind of the earl's un- 
faithful head-keeper. Arrived at the great 
house, Mr . Haynes contrived toget speech 
of Simmons, and begged that waiting damsel 
to tell her lady that he, Haynes the keeper, 
was there by her ladyship's directions, to 
receive his orders about the heron's fe8^ 
thers. Simmons took the message, and 
brought back word that Haynes was to 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 237 

wait. The dressing-bell, indeed, had just 
rung, but Lady Flavia would see the keeper 
for an instant before dinner. 

After a while, Big Ben, very uncomfort- 
able at the proximity of so much splendour, 
was smuggled like contraband goods up the 
back-stairs, along the grand gallery, up the 
corridor to the left, and so into the western 
wing, and into the pink boudoir that formed 
part of Lady Flavia's suite of apartments. 
There was Lady Flavia herself, ready 
dressed for the dinner-party, in what 
appeared to the keeper's bewildered eyes 
as fleecy clouds of gauzy whiteness, very 
soft and gossamer-like, with pearls clasping 
her slender wrists, pearls wreathing her 
graceful neck, pearls twisted in her raven 
hair . not an atom of colour in her dress . 
all white, pure and virginal as a snow- 
wreath. Big Ben stood, hat in hand, 
ducking his rough head, and awaiting her 
commands. 



238 LADT FLAYIA. 

Simmona. whoee innate curiosily was 
sharpened by the fact of her being in the 
service of a mistress whose genuine cha- 
racter was aggravatingly difficult of com- 
prehension, did her best to play the eaves- 
dropper, but in vain. She fluttered about 
near the pink boudoir, going in and out of 
the bedroom, and the bath-room, and the 
dressing-room, and up and down the pas- 
sage, but never daring to apply her ear to 
the keyhole, or to pause near the door, lest 
her lady, of whose quickness of perception 
she had a very high opinion, should detect 
her presence by some abnormal power of 
seeing or hearing. All the waiting-woman 
could distinguish was the faint sound qf a 
girlish voice, very sweet and clear, that ran 
on like the music of far-off harp-strings, and 
an occasional growl like that of a bear . 
such a growl as Orson might have uttered 
in the first stages of his education by Valen- 
tine ; and at last a little silver bell tinkled 



L^ 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A COMMISSION. 239 

out its bidding, and Simmons showed Big 
Ben down-stairs again. 

That evening Lady Flavia was in very- 
high spirits, and her loveHness and her 
sprightly infantine merriment turned the 
heads of the company gathered around 
Lord Mortlake's table. Even the London 
men, who had seen so much beauty, so 
many bright-eyed ingenues were honestly 
fascinated for once, and forgot their own 
hackneyed round of accomplishments, to 
become the very humble courtiers of this 
peerless fairy queen. As for Lord Hythe 
he had never admired her so much before ; 
he drank in deep draughts of love as the 
hours went by ; and even dull Sir Neville 
stood entranced as she sang . simple little 
French pastoral ballads, that she had 
learned, she said, at Gresnez-les-cloches . 
though he neither cared for music, nor 

ew a syllable of any foreign tongue. 
Then the countess, for the first time, saw 



240 LADY PLAVIA. 

that her husband's ward^ once launched in 
London society, would become a leader as 
of right, and seeing this, was more bent 
than ever on hailing as a daughter-in-law 
one so well fitted in every way to be 
Lord Hythe's wife. 

But Big Ben, the keeper, going his 
rounds, and posting the watchers, was 
meantime growling to himself : " I'll do it 
I've promised her, and she'll hold me to my 
word, or my name is not Haynes. I'll do 
it! and yet it's an ugly job . a hanging 
touch, I reckon. But she wam't one to 
say nay to ; and it's sure to be laid on some 
one else, or at worst, 'tis only a mistake ; 
and a hundred pounds is a mort o' money. 
*How do you know he's not a poacher? 
and if he resists, why, you have the law on 
your side ;' them was her very words. And 
she has a head-piece, she has !" concluded 
the keeper, with a sort of stupid enthusiasm, 
and said no more for the time. But his 



BIG BEN RECEIVES A CX)MMISSIOy. 241 

sleep was troubled on that night, and he 
muttered queer things, that his poor, spirit- 
broken wife quaked to hear, about golden 
money, and the red life-blood of murdered 
men. 



VOL. I. . R 



i 



242 LADY FLAVIA. 




CHAPTER XIV. 



SENTENCE OF DEATH. 



Sentence of Death ! . a grim, black, nglj 
name for a grim, black, ugly thing. We 
keep it in the arsenal of justice still, that 
grisly old scarecrow, that barbarous uncouth 
idol, in terrorem of evildoers. But we do 
our best to keep the gory Juggernaut from 
the light of . day, and only now and then 
drag forth the ill-omened car to crush out a 
guilty life beneath its cruel wheels. We 
have almost outgrown the faith of our fathers 
in that old British palladium, the gallows. 
We keep oin* judicial Minotaur yet, but its 
hungry maw is nourished with half-rations ; 
and we are not very proud of the blood-red 




.^ 



SENTENCE OP DEATH. 243 

blot that ,is but partly erased from our 
statute-book. 

Sentence of Death ! It has a harsh, hard 
sound, even when it is solemnly pronounced 
by the ermine-robed judge, whose voice is 
weighted with all the might and majesty of 
authority. In such a case, be sure the trial 
has been full and fair. The evidence has 
been sharply tested ; the smallest loop-hole 
by which the light of truth might shine in 
and show the prisoner innocent, has been 
scrupulously left clear* All the leanings of 
the Court have been towards mercy. The 
Argus eyes of the press have been spying 
about in every conceivable nook and comer 
for whatever might disprove or extenuate 
the crime. There has been almost a weak- 
ness, almost a superstition, in the sensitive 
desire shown that the accused wretch should 
have every chance of safety. Even when 
the evidence was hammered home, point 
after point, like nails knocked into a cofiSn^ 



244 LADY FLATIA. 

the very counsel for the Crown shrank from 
his task, and did his office with studied 
quietude and self-restraint. The jury long 
debated, yearning, some of them, to shut 
their eyes to truth, in favour of a question- 
able mercy ; and when the reluctant verdict 
was given, the judge. himself an old man, 
perhaps, and not long for this world. feels 
his eyes grow dim, and his voice tremble, as 
he bids the culprit, whom he has tried so 
kindly and so patiently, prepare to give up 
a life for a life, and speaks the last and direst 
sentence of the offended law. 

But Sentence of Death lightly, laughingly 
spoken, yet in bitter truth; Sentence of 
Death spoken by the sweet fresh voice of a 
young girl, as she chirrups gaily to her 
bounding ponies, and makes the lash whistle 
around their ears . that is surely more 
terrible than any doom pronounced in any 
court of justice, were it at the judgment-seat 
of Jeffreys himself I There was no appeal. 



SENTENCE OF DEATH. 245 

there. No Home Secretary could feel 
doubts, and stay execution ; no petitioners 
for mercy could beset the Fountain of Grace ; 
no newspaper press could bring the artillery 
of a thousand leading articles to bear upon 
the scaffold, that undue severity had built 
up, not for an innocent sufferer, but for one 
not wholly worthy of the strangling cord. 
Even the condemned did not know how 
close to his elbow were the scythe and hour- 
glass, and had no time given for repentance ; 
yet the fiat went forth that a man must 
die. 

Now back to Harbledown, the seat, as 
Burke and his brother-historians described 
it, of the Right Honourable the Earl of 
Mortlake ; which stately mansion, from; the 
day of the pheasant-shooting at Tinningley 
Copse, had been rapidly changing from the 
condition of dull magnificence that had 
seemed normal to it, to the genial state of a 
great country-house belonging to an owner J 



246 LADY FLAYIA* 

who has ample means and marriageable 
daughters. Before the day of the battue, 
the earl and countess had someTv-liat 
sparingly accepted ,the rare hospitalities of 
their neighbours ; but now they began to 
entertain, and that with a frequency unusual 
in the provinces; while fresh dinners in 
various houses of greater or less pretension 
sprang, like gastronomic phoenixes, from the 
ashes of banquets given at Harbledown. It 
was just what the earl liked. He shared 
the tastes of his contemporaries, and was 
fond of good eating and drinking, of whist, 
and of such conversation as can exist when 
fat oxen are the theme. He really was a 
good farmer, and had a blameless love for 
talking about the details of farming. The 
countess was only in part a lady of fashion, 
according to the common meaning of the 
term. She held that there was a time for 
all things. In the country, she talked of 
schools, penny-clubs, clergymen, teachers. 



SENTENCE OF DEATH. 247 

flannel, childrep, soup, and old women. In 
London, she talked about " people." She 
was very well pleased to extend her ac- 
quaintance. 

It seemed, in fact, that the change from 
comparative solitude to such gaiety as a 
country neighbourhood can supply, was 
pleasing to everybody. To Lord Hythe, 
because he had some idea of divorcing him- 
self from the humble and faithful borough 
of Starvington, as Napoleon did from 
Josephine, and wooing a parliamentary 
Maria Louisa in the shape of the county 
representation. There was only one other 
house in the shire, a house of ducal rank, 
that could vie in grandeur with that of 
Clare ; and it had formerly been an under- 
stood thing that the county should be 
represented in the House of Commons by 
the eldest sons of both noble families. Lord 
Arthur Glendower was already one of the 
members. Why should not Mr. Hoopsley, 



248 LADY FLAVIA. 

the tremendous brewer, who represented his 
own malt-kihis and mash-tubs rather than 
anything or anybody else in the district, and 
who had bought his seat as he would an 
opera-stall, be ousted in favour of so sound 
a politician as Augustus, Lord Hy the ? The 
spread of the Mortlake influence, therefore, 
was welcome to the future candidate ; and 
as for his sisters, they were exactly the sort 
of healthy, placid, young women who see 
no hardship in a ten-mile drive along a 
muddy road, for the blissful purpose of 
sitting for two mortal hours and a half 
between a deaf old squire and a stiff old 
dean, both very noisy over their soup, very 
monosyllabic of speech, and very dry of 
manner. But that Lady Flavia should 
have derived genuine pleasure from such 
heavy entertainments was, at first sight, not 
quite so intelligible. 

But she did. She was always bright and 
gay as a little bird warbling out its joyous 



SENTENCE OF DEATH. 249 

tiny heart in musical trilling on a snmmer 
day. Boredom tried in vain to cast its 
dark shadow upon her ; she was not to be 
bored, not even by the most immature of 
young curates, with colds in their heads, 
and a rabid terror of speaking elsewhere 
than in the pulpit. The curates could talk 
to her. She drew them out by a sort of 
imperceptible traction, and loosened their 
stammering tongues, as they had not been 
loosened since their proprietors left college. 
The proud old dons from the cathedral city 
of Slochester, Brahmin of their cloth, 
unbent in the radiance of her smile, and 
quoted Latin poetry in describing her, 
afterwards, to other Brahmin. The squires 
hoped that she would come and see the 
hounds throw off, and suggested lawn meets 
for her express gratification. The squiresses, 
whose true-blue Protestantism had been a 
little shocked, at first, at the idea of welcom- 
ing a girl bred in a convent, and therefore, 



250 LADY FLAVIA. 

perhaps, a she-Jesait, dangerous to Snglisli 
households, felt their motherly hearts warm 
to the orphan child. Everybody agreed, 
tacitly, to treat her as something between a 
spoiled child and a princess ; a fair, gifted, 
glorious thing, on whom the very winds hard 
no business to blow too roughly, 
y The Guardsmen paid Lady Flavia Clare 
a good deal of attention ; but the countess, 
to her great relief, saw no cause for enter- 
taining a jealousy towards them on her 
son's behalf. The illustrious exiles from 
Mayfair could not, with all their lures, 
and calls, and well-proved stratagems, entrap 
that bright-plumaged young bird, for whose 
enslavement they limed the twig, and spread 
the net. It was to no purpose that Fitz- 
alaric's dark glance, full of pensive sadness, 
followed the heiress as she moved, fawnlike, 
about the lighted room. It was in vain for 
Vere to twirl his moustache till it had the 
true Bobadil twist, and to talk his very best 






SENTENCE OF DEATH. 251 

about the Nile, and the Schreckhom, and 
his slipping down the crevasse, and his 
scuffle with Arab thieves beside the Dead 
Sea. Grrave gr gaj, chattering or mute, 
those gallant youths could get nothing but 
sprightly talk and sunny smiles from Lady 
Flavia, but no sign of preference for either. 
Her little heart was proof against those 
professed lady-killers; and they acknow- 
ledged, with some pique, that the "little 
party, old Mortlake's ward, " was not easily 
to be won, and predicted that she would 
make a sensation in London. 

" You can't chaff her, as you can most 
girls," said Lord Plantagenet to his Damon, 
Fitzalaric ; " and the sentimental dodge 
won't do at all. But nothing so pretty, and 
nothing so clever, will be out next season, 
Fitz, my boy." 

To which Fitz made answer, that the 
"little party" was worthy of his friend's 
praise, adding : " Those Mortlake girls look 



252 lADY FLAYU. 

like cart-horses beside a thoroughbred, when 
she's in the room. But I '11 tell you \^hat 
it is, Planty . I don't fancy that way she 
has of laughing; it makes a fellow feel 
doosed uncomfortable. There's something 
wicked and hard in the sound of it ; haven't 
you remarked it ? " 

But Lord Plantagenet's ear was less 
finely attuned than his comrade's, and he 
had noticed nothing very particular in the 
laugh in question. 

One Saturday night, quite at the end of 
the month, the Harbledown party returned 
from dining at the bishop's palace. The 
carriages had rolled away round to the 
stable-yard, and the newly-returned inmates 
of the house had already taken up their flat 
candlesticks, and were wishing each other 
a good-night, when Lord Mortlake, who 
had picked up the county paper, that day 
published, exclaimed : "Eh, eh! What's this? 
I wonder we didn't hear of this in Slochester. 



SENTENCE OF DEATH. 253 

The editor calls it murder.'* Everybody 
looked eagerly round. Murder is a word 
that none, since all have a life to lose, can 
hear unmoved. The earl hastily skimmed 
the cream of the paragraph, headed in big 
black capitals, which had caught his eye. 
*' There are not many details," he said ; 
" because it seems the news only came just 
as they were going to press with the paper ; 
but " we " have sent a special reporter to 
the scene of action, and we promise further 
and full information in an extra edition. 
All that is known is, that a gentleman has 
been picked up, in a dying state, in a lane 
near Chartley Parva, having been shot by 
somebody, though apparently not for pur- 
poses of plunder, as his watch and purse 
were untouched. Eh ! what's all this ? 
Nag*s Head Inn . ^name of the unfortunate 
sufferer understood to be Eoyston . not 
expected to survive . no trace of the assassin 
'. . police on the track . of course. Ah ! 



254 LADY FLAVIA. 

that will be some work for Mr. FcNssdjke. 
He is an active magistrate, and the murder 
took place on his land." 

'* Boyston ! '* exclaimed the cottntess. 
"Surely no relation to the Mr. Boyston 
you knew in France, Flavia, dear; and who 
so kindly ^" 

"Hardly!" said Lady Flavia, turning 
her beautiful face and limpid eyes towards 
the countess . "hardly. I believe Mr. 
Royston had no near relations. He had a 
son ; but he, I think, is in India, with his 
regiment." 

She said this very calmly and truthfully, 
and the hand that held the candle was as 
steady as a rock. Her cheek was a little 
pale, but it was natural that she should 
betray some token of emotion at the sudden 
intelligence that violence and death had 
been busy so near her. 

" Ah ! well I'm glad of that," said the 
earl heartily. " I'm glad it's not a member 



r 



SENTENCE OP DEATH. 255 

of your fiiend's family. Poor fellow ! I 
wonder who lie was. Some artist, perhaps. 
They often stay at Chartley to sketch, as 
the dean told me the other day." 



256 LADT FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER XY. 



THE heron's feathers. 



" Gee up, then ; gee up, horse !" cried the 
wagoner, without the remotest suspicion 
that he was addressing his team in cor- 
rupted Hindustani, and then, as the talis- 
manic " gee" produced no eflfect, he added 
the words : " Ar-woot ! c mither, woot !" 
cracking his whip the while. The leading 
horse, however, a more sensible animal 
than his driver, planted his broad fore-feet 
firmly on the road, and refused to budge 
an inch ; but stood snorting and jangling 
his bells . the bells that in conjunction with 
flaunting tassels, and brass plates, and red 
fringe, ornamented the gay wagon harness. 



I 



THE heron's feathers. 257 

" What ails old Dobbin ?" asked Roger the 
wagoner, exceedingly puzzled, and not at 
all sure of what his next move ought to be ; 
for wagoners proper, who live with their 
horses, carry their whips more for display 
than for use, and manage their four-footed 
subordinates much more by appealing to 
their better feelings and sense of propriety 
than by hard blows, such as town-bred 
carters too often resort to in default of the 
true language of the Houhynyms. " What 
ails old Dobbin?" therefore said Roger. 
" Look, Bill, if there's a sack in the road." 

Bill, the wagoner's " mate," came tum- 
bling down from among the moxmtainous 
corn-sacks with which the blue wain, now 
on its way from Broomhead Farm to Slo- 
chester market, was piled. Bill was half 
asleep ; but he roused himself up by digging 
his red knuckles into his drowsy eyes, and 
ran forward. 

" A sack wouldn't frighten he," said Bill, 

VOL. I. 8 



y 



258 LADT FLATU. 

with more truth than grammar, for indeed 
Dobbin was a valuable old draugbt-borBe, 
and did not take fright at trifles. The 
cause of his present obetinacy was soon dis- 
covered. 

" HuUoa ! here's a chap lying right across 
the road. One bit more, and we'd ha* run 
ovfflr him," cried Bill ; and Eoger, unhook- 
ing the little lanterm with which early 
wagoners are generally provided, came for- 
ward to reconnoitre the recumbent human 
figure that lay so motionless in the lane. 

" He have had a drop, most like," re- 
marked Bill, with a grin, for, in his simple 
philosophy, the drugged beer of the pubHc- 
house conld alone have famished a valid 
pretext for the choice of so perilous a place 
of repose. But the wagoner's eyes were 
keener, and he dropped on one knee, dose 
to tite prostrate form, earnestly exclaiming : 
" Hold your tongue, you fool. Don't ye 
see the blood upon him ? 'TIs a murdered 



THE heron's feathers, 259 

man !" And so, to the horrified eyes of 
the two farming-men, did the helpless 
figure on the ground appear to be. It was 
very dark, what with fog and the grey, un- 
certain light of the raw morning, and the 
little lantern threw a yellow gleam on the 
prosb-ate form that lay so fearfully still, 
and on a pool of half-dried blood, in which 
stood the iron-shod hoofc of the fore-horse. 

** He's dead, for sure !" said Bill ; but 
Roger had touched the stranger's shoulder, 
and he stirred feebly, and groaned, thereby 
proving that some life still lingered in the 
poor shattered form. But he was very badly 
hurt, that was certain. His right arm, and 
side, and shoulder, were stiff with clotted 
blood, and his coat-sleeve was ragged with 
shot-holes and singed by fire. The faint 
smell of burnt wool was still perceptible, 
proving that the gun that brought the 
victim down had been discharged with its 
muzzle almost touching its mark. They 



260 LADY FLAVIA. 

Hfted his heavy head, and spoke to him 
with surprising gentleness for so rough a 
pair; but got no answer. There was no 
glance of intelhgence in the half-closed 
eyes^ and no sound, save a low moan, came 
from the pale lips. It was a very hand- 
some face, despite its ghastly pallor, and 
the crow's feet that reckless dissipation had 
begun to paint around the eyes . a face set 
off by chestnut curls of hair, and by long 
tawny moustaches. A gentleman's face 
even in its degradation. 

** An accident !" was Bill's verdict ; " his 
gun went off, most likely." 

But his superior, the wagoner, more 
shrewdly held to his own opinion, bidding 
Bill remark that no gun was to be seen, 
and that the unfortunate person, whoever 
he might be, was not accoutred for sporting 
of any sort. The men held a brief debate, 
and finally decided that the best course to 
pursue would be to take on with them this 



THE heron's feathers. 261 

unknown suflferer as far as the Nag^s Heady 
at Chartley, which was on their road, and 
but two miles oflF, and there deposit him. 
Accordingly, though with some trouble 
and delay, the corn-sacks were sufficiently 
shifted to enable Roger and Bill to lay the 
passive form of the wounded man in the 
wagon; and off they set for the high- 
road, every jolt eliciting a groan from the 
sufferer. The two miles seemed terribly 
long ; but at last the blue wagon came to a 
halt before the Nag's Head, and these good 
Samaritans in smock-jfrocks, Roger and 
Bill, knocked and shouted till they aroused 
the sleeping household from their slumbers. 
Great was the perturbation of the landlord 
and landlady at having a dead or dying 
gentleman brought to their door in the 
cold grey light of dawn, and loud were 
their exclamations when they recognised in 
the wounded man their truant guest, Cap- 
tain Royston* 



262 LADT FULYIA. 

The captain had gone out rather ]ate on 
the preyiona evening, and had not re- 
turned; but his absence had caused no 
particular alarm. Basil Boyston was one 
of that numerous class who can put up 
with any company but that of their own 
solitary thoughts. He had found friends 
in and around Ghartley, as any man may 
do anywhere on the one condition of distri- 
buting eleemosynary liquor to an admiring 
tap-room circle; and his evenings had of 
late been spent in the society of sundry 
village Lovelaces and wild apprentices from 
Chartley, who endured his boastful talk and 
arrogant patronage for the sake of his 
superior rank and imlimited capacity for 
standing treat. 

And now the luckless captain had been 
brought back sorely wounded, dying most 
likely, and there was nothing to do but to 
put him to bed, with all despatch to send 
for Dr. Sankey, and to bind up his wounds, 



I 



I 

i 



THE heron's feathers. 263^ 

the hemorrhage jfrom which, however, had 
nearly ceased, or Basil Royston must have 
bled to death before the medical man's 
arrival at his bedside. Mr. Sankey, a hard- 
working general practitioner, who lost 
thirty pounds a year in drugs and port 
wine by his appointment of workhouse 
surgeon, and on whom the popular voice 
had conferred the degree of M.D., soon 
came cantering jfrom Appleby, Church- 
town, and gave his best skill and care to 
the task before him. The patient was still 
all but insensible, and the diagnosis had to 

proceed without any aid from him. It 

* 

appeared that a heavy charge of shot had 
lodged in the sufferer's arm, side, and 
shoulder, by far the larger proportion of the 
leaden pellets remaining in the shoidder^ 
There had been great loss of blood ; but no 
artery seemed to be injured, nor, appa- 
rently, were the lungs wounded, though 
the discharge had been so close that the 



264 LADT FLAVIA. 

flash from the gon had set the ^w^ounded 
man's clothes on fire. The attack could 
hardly have been committed with, a view to 
robbery, for Basil Boyston's i^atch and 
trinkets, his rings, and his purse, contain- 
ing many gold pieces, were still in his 
possession. 

"Will he die, doctor?" asked Mrs. 
Robins the landlady, following the enrgeon 
to the door as he withdrew. But Mr. 
Sankey was true to the etiquette of the 
profession, so he merely shook his Lead, 
and said that the wounds might prove fatal, 
certainly ; but, on the other hand, science 
might avail to preserve the patient ; after 
which Delphic response the oracle rode 
away. 

" If he lives, he'll have had a squeak for 
his life ; that's all / know about it," re- 
marked the surgeon in confidence to him- 
self, as he trotted home to breakfast. ^^ I 
wonder who did it. Most likely some 



LJd 



THE heron's feathers. 265 

jealous young clodhopper of poaching pro- 
clivities. From aU I can hear, the gallant 
captain has a turn for playing the part of 
Lothario; and our west-country folks are 
hardly civilized enough to appreciate the 
character." 

Then Mr. Sankey, between breakfast and 
his next visit to his patient, penned a little 
paragraph for the County Chronicle^ of 
which he was an occasional correspondent, 
and seni it in by the guard of the Honey- 
combe coach. It was a piece of news that 
would be welcome to the editor, he was 
sure, since local news is seldom of a very 
engrossing character ; and it was a capital 
advertisement for himself, Job Sankey, 
M.R.C.S. 

. The Gounby Chronicle snapped at the 
bait as a starving pike at a gudgeon, pro- 
mised an extra edition, and packed off a 
special reporter, in the shape of the editor's 
nephew, to Chartley Parva. But the 



266 LADY FLAVIA. 

special reporter found it more diBciilt to 
fill his note-book than he had anticipated, for 
the affair seemed wrapped in mystery. The 
wounded man was not dead ; nay, he was 
decidedly better, and could answer, in a 
faint whisper . ^the mere ghost of his old 
voice . such few questions as Mr. Fossdyke, 
the magistrate, wished to ask, and as Mr. 
Sankey permitted. But it soon became 
apparent that the wounded man could 
throw no hght upon the matter. He had 
not seen his assailant. He was walking 
home, between twelve and one o'clock, 
down the lane, between the thick woods, 
when he suddenly saw a flash that half- 
blinded him, and felt a blow, and then a 
numbing sensation of pain, that merged 
itself into a deathly chill and faintness; 
and his next recollection was of being in 
bed at the Nag's Heady with the doctor and 
nurse beside him. 

The county constabulary did their best, 



THE heron's feathers, 267 

searching the woods, groping about the 
hedgerows, and badgering with questions 
every man, woman, and child who pre- 
tended to the slightest hearsay knowledge 
of the tragical event. But no trace of the 
assassin could be found ,. and a theory to 
the effect that the unfortunate gentleman 
had been shot by mistake for somebody else 
became prevalent The special reporter 
could only take home the tidings that 
imder the skilful hands of that eminent 
practitioner. Job Sankey, Esq., the patient 
was likely to recover, imless some relapse 
should ensue; that the gentleman's name 
was Captain Royston ; and that he had for 
several days resided at the Nag's Head Inn. 
Only that, and one thing more ; that 
circumstance was, that not long since a 
young lady of great beauty, a resident 
under Lord Mortlake's roof, and a near 
relative of that nobleman, had visited Cap- 
tain Royston at his inn, and that high 



268 LADY PLAVIA. 

words, the precise purport of which were 
unintelligible to her unsophisticated ears, 
had on that occasion been overheard by 
Betty, chambermaid. But this piece of 
information never came before the pro- 
vincial public at all. 

The proprietor of the County Chronicle^ a 
rich corn-factor, who lived in a villa just 
outside Slochester, was, as it so chanced, a 
tenant of Lord Mortlake's, and had strong 
hopes of inducing the earl to ''consent to his 
purchasing his leasehold dwelling, on the 
gardens of which he had spent much 
money. Also the new branch railway, 
the Honeycombe, Chartley, and Slochester 
line, of which nascent undertaking Lord 
Hythe was chairman, gave its advertise- 
ments to the Chronicle. The authorities of 
that journal were unwiUing to print any- 
thing that might give umbrage at Harble- 
down, and they rightly conjectured that 
Lord Mortlake would not be pleased if 



THE heron's feathers. 269 

Lady Flavia's name were dragged into a 
newspaper report of an attempted murder ; 
wherefore no word of that young lady's 
visit to the Nag's Head was suflfered to see 
daylight in the loyal colunms of the County 
Chronicle ; and the County Gazette^ the 
opposition paper, which would joyfully 
have turned the lantern of Diogenes on 
Harbledown and all it^ indwellers, most 
fortunately sent no special agent to the 
scene of. action, and never acquired an 
inkling of any connection between the 
disreputable captain and the house of Clare. 
On the Monday, at the very time when 
the special reporter of the County Chronicle 
was getting into his gig to return to head- 
quarters with the meagre stock of informa- 
tion that he had been able to extract from 
thQ hangers-on of the inn and the puzzled 
police, who felt personally aggrieved at 
having nobody to take into custody, Big 
Ben presented himself at the great house. 



I 

I 

\ 



270 LADY FLA VI A, \ 

He did not come empty-handed, for he 
carried a bnnch of long glossy feathers, i 
dangling from a button-hole of his stained 
velveteen coat. He came, he said, by Lady 
Flavians orders, and Simmons presently 
conducted him to th pink room, where her 
young mistress was writing. Big Ben 
ducked his head, scraped the Aubusson 
carpet with his nailed boot, and presented 
his trophies. " Sorry, my lady," he said 
with the worst possible grace, " that I wam't 
able to get more feathers, as you desired. 
The birds have most died off, for no one 
has cared for the herons in my time, nor yet 
my father's ; and I had to wait and wait till 
I thought I'd never get a shot." 

As Mr. Benjamin Haynes excused himself 
thus, his eyes roved hither and thither, 
glancing at the carpet, the walls, the ceiling, 
or at Simmons, but never at Lady Flavia. 
The waiting-maid was yet in the room, m 
consequence of an order to remain, couched 



THE heron's feathers. 271 

in the words : " Don't go, Simmons," spoken 
with charming ease and simpUciiy. Lady 
Flavia took up the long deh'cate plumes, 
and examined them curiously. "These, 
then, are really heron's feathers," she mur- 
mured gently. " I always had a wish to see 
some of those tall plumes that our ancestors 
prized so much, and that princes and great 
barons were proud to wear. But there were 
no mail-packets coming in then from Africa 
and South America, bringing monthly 
consignments of ostrich and marabou 
plumes. There is a fashion even in fea- 
thers.'* 

She was leaning her graceful head upon 
the hand with which she had been writing, 
and to all appearance her thoughts were far 
away, lost in the mist of bygone centuries, 
and she had forgotten the presence of the 
others. Simmons was too well drilled to 
distob her lady's reverie, and it was left 
for the tall keeper to break the silence by 



272 LADY PLAVIA. 

uneasily changing the position of his feet, 
and stumbling over a low footstool in doing 
so. The Lady Flavia Clare looked up with 
a bright smile. ^*I need not detain you 
here any longer, Mr. Haynes,'' she said ; " I 
have given you a great deal of trouble to 
gratify a whim of mine, and here "-as she 
spoke she opened an ivory portemonnaie, a 
ladylike toy that looked fit for nothing but 
the enclosing of small silver or gold five- 
franc pieces,' and carelessly exacted from 
it a crumpled bit of bank-paper.** here is a 
little present from me to your wife and 
children. Never mind looking at it !" added 
the heiress with imperious playfulness, for 
the slow-witted gamekeeper had begun to 
unfold the precious slip of thin, tough, 
rustling paper. He checked himself,' how- 
ever, as if he had handled hot iron, made his 
bow and growl of acknowledgment, and was 
conducted down-stairs by Simmons ; and 
it was not until Big Ben was deep among 



THE heron's feathers. 273 

the lonely woods that lie ventured to draw 
out and examine the gift that he had 
received. It was a bank-note for a hundred 
potinds. 



VOL. I. 



I 



274 LADY FLAYIA. 



CHAPTER XVL 

THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAO. 

" It will very much depend on whom we 
get to keep the stalls," said Mrs. Dibbs, the 
bishop's wife ; and old Miss Plummington, 
amit to the Plummingtohs of the Grange, 
nodded a cordial assent. 

** To be sure it will,'* chimed in a stronger- 
minded spinster, Miss Billingsley, daughter 
of a former Dean of Slochester, and who, 
as having been born and bred in the 
precincts of the cathedral, where, indeed, 
her whole life had been spent, was regarded 
as a sort of feminine minor canon at the 
least. Miss Billingsley, who was the oldest 
of young ladies, or the youngest of eld 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 275 

ladies, lived in the Close still, with her poor 
deformed sister Maud, who had but one plea- 
sure, the anthem ; and she was deservedly- 
respected, and a little feared. Even Mrs. 
Dibbs, a lady who did not lightly vail her 
crest in social contests, would by no means 
have cared to engage in hostilities with Miss 
Billingsley, who was not quarrelsome, but 
remarkably fearless and outspoken. 

" To be sure it will," said Miss Billings- 
ley. "Nothing in the world depends so 
much upon management, and nothing, if 
ill managed, turns out so flat a failure, 
as a fancy fair. Don't you think so, 
Lady Mortlake?" And Lady Mortlake, 
who made one of the council, smiled 
her acceptance of Miss Billingsley's apo- 
thegm. This conversation, of which a 
fancy fair was the subject, took place in 
the great drawing-room of the bishop's 
palace; and as the season was still very 
mild, most of the party had preferred to 



276 LADY FLAVIA, 

establish themselves at some distance fix)m 
the blazing fire, so that a circle of chairs 
and couches had been formed not far from 
the windows that overlooked the large and 
ancient garden, whose lawns had been 
rolled, whose trees had been trimmed, and 
whose beds had been made gay with 
flowers, for the pleasure of many succes- 
sive tenants for j^ife of the episcopal mitre 
and its snug revenues. That garden was 
beginning to assume but a faded and w^intiy 
appearance, for it was November now ; but 
still it had a pleasant look, and none the 
less pleasant that several merry children, 
young scions of the race of Dibbs, were 
playing noisily among the leafless trees and 
smooth walks, under the patronage of a 
very pretty young lady, whose coquettish 
little hat overshadowed a mass of soft curls, 
fine as silk, and black as night She, Lady 
Flavia Clare, had not cared to stay in the 
grave circle of debating ladies. 





1 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 277 

" You are too wise for me," she had said 

in lier own inimitable childish way. '*I 

shall go and make friends with the little 

people out there." And to judge by the 

bursts of laughter, and by the eager way 

in which the little bishoplings crowded 

around their new acquaintance, Lady 

Flavia's intention was being carried out 

in a satisfactory manner. But the talk 

inside the palace was earnest enough, and 

it was all about the fancy fair. 

Slochester was stirred to its depths. The 
quiet, sleepy x)ld place, that basked, in 
general, like an over-ripe pear, in the 
mellow sunshine of its cosy prosperity, was 
DOW awake, and its chief inhabitants were 
as busy as emmets whose nest had been 
trodden down. Only on one subject could 
Slochester folks have been thus excited, 
and that subject was the cathedral, their 

boast and glory, the pride of all, and 
the source of daily bread to many of 



278 LADY FLAVIA. 

them. It is necessary to pass an ap- 
prenticeship of a few years in a cathedral 
town, before the feeling with which its 
indwellers regard the sacred fane that 
towers in their midst can be fully under- 
stood. They think of it by day, they 
dream of it by night, and are given to 
make disparaging comparisons between 
rival minsters and their own darling 
edifice, every stone of which they love 
with a personal affection. No nave like 
ours; no chancel so full of the glorious 
dust of saints and kings; no windows so 
rich in gules, azure, and gold; no bells 
so deep-toned ; no organ so musical ; no 
choristers so silver-voiced ; no precentor so 
tasteful; no dean so learned and so good. 
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Slo- 
chester was not backward in championing 
its venerable pile. 

But the cathedral was in danger, not, 
indeed, of irreverent reforms introduced 



THE HARBLBDOWN POSTBAG. 279 

by hateful parliamentary statutes, but of 
toppling down bodily on the heads of the 
"worshippers. Time had gnawed at its but- 
tresses and pinnacles with his customary 
inapartiality ; and as the bells were ringing 
one Wednesday for service, there came a 
crash, and a roar, and a rattle of falling 
masonry ; and the horrified vergers ran up 
to find a ghastly gap in the chancel wall 
and roof, whence heaps of heavy stones, 
and lime, and decayed wood had thundered 
down, crushing the sculptured eflSgies of 
Bishop Crump and St. -Mungo, shattering 
the precious panes of the memorial window 
put up by Dean Yellowboys, 1611 a.d., and 
burying the carved tombs and brasses, and 
the noble old altar itself, under four or five 
feet of rubble and dust. Worse still, the 
great architect who came hurrying from 
London to direct the restorations, decided 
that the central tower and the transept 
were in a very precarious state. The 



^ 



280 LADY FLA VIA. 

tower must be onder-pinned, the roof 
atrengthened ; fresh props, fresh bnttresses 
were needed, nnlees the colossal buildings 
were intended to fall to ruin. These 
repairs would be &xs&j ; and the funds at 
the disposal of the dean and chapter -were 
not equal to the estimated expense. 

In this emergency, the bright idea of a 
fancy fair suggested iteelf to some in- 
ventive female mind, and the proposition 
was taken up with enthusiasm. Fancy 
fiure often produce a great deal of money, 
and those shy capitalists who would recoil 
from the naked horror of a subscription 
list, like fish from a bare hook, are not 
always averse to buy guinea nothings and 
five-guinea trifles, when there is a good 
band of music, a decorated tent, and, above 
all, when the shopwoman of the hour is 
an attractive girl of the highest lineage 
procurable. This last, in the present case,- 
was the difficulty. Contributors of elegant 




THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG, 281 

inutilities were as plenty as blackberries; 
good stall-keepers were rare. 

And there was another reason why Mrs. 
Dibbs was peculiarly anxious to net great 
profits from the charitable, one of those 
reasons which perpetually occur to compli- 
cate the machinery of human action. Mrs. 
Dibbs, who had naturally taken one-half of 
the stalls under the shelter of her matronly 
wing, was jealous of the dean, and of 
Sophronia his wife, and wanted to eclipse 
their good works. 

Was there ever a dean, I wonder, who 
got on quite well with his bishop ? Not at 
Slochester, at any rate. In that ecclesias- 
tical city, the dean and the bishop were 
looked upon as the white and black kings 
at chess, as fire and water, as the First 
Lord of her Majesty's Treasury and the 
leader of her Majesty's Opposition. The 
dean, within the precincts, was by far the 
more popular. All the canons, the preben- 



i 



282 LADY FLAVIA. 

daries, the precentor, everyone who ate the 
cathedral's bread and drank the cathedrars 
port, stuck to the dean in fair weather and 
foul. But the secular clergy, the in- 
cumbents of the town churches, the country 
vicars, the rural deans, adhered to the 
bishop with equal zeal. There was much 
debatable ground in the shape of pov^er 
between those two churchmen. There was 
chronic though mild war between palace 
and deanery. 

Mrs. Dibbs had not been very long at the 
palace, but she was as zealous in the feud as 
if she had been bom within hearing of the 
great bell of Slochester. She was not a 
humble woman ; indeed, though a good 
soul in the main, she was of a pugnacious 
and self-asserting turn; but we ought to 
deal gently with the wives of bishops, 
remembering that the world deals harshly 
with them. It must be very hard, cer- 
tainly, to live in a palace, and have for 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 283 

one's husband a spiritual peer of this realm, 

and mix with the great of the earth, yet be 

Mrs. Dibbs still . ^plain Mrs, Dibbs, as the 

washerwoman is plain Mrs. Brown. If 

society, refusing to say '' My lady " where 

the husband is called " My lord," would 

only be considerate enough to address its 

notes, its bills, circulars, and so forth, to the 

Right Reverend Mrs. Dibbs, that would be 

something. But no ; the wife of a bishop's 

bosom is unrecognised by the Heralds' 

College. None the less, however, did Mrs. 

Dibbs defend her right of professional 

superiority. In this matter of the repairs, 

his lordship had given five hundred pounds 

. ^no small slice out of his nominal five 

thousand, and he had winced as he signed 

the cheque . ^but the dean out of his savings 

had given as much, and had got twice as 

much credit for his liberality. It was the 

more necessary to outshine the enemy on 

the occasion of the fancy fair, and for this 



284 LADY FLAVIA. 

purpose Mrs. Dibbs had reckoned on her 
kind new friend, Lady Mortlake. 

If the Ladies Caroline and Julia would 
be so good as to condescend to stand behind 
the counter for two or three hours, surely 
all would go well. They were fine comely 
young women . thus ran the thoughts of 
the lady of the palace . ^but their main 
merit was in their rank. Over their stalls, 
metaphorically speaking, would float the 
banner of all the Clares, the field gules 
and the falcon armed and pluraaged oi\ 
that had figured gallantly on shield and 
knightly pennon in the old wars of the 
Edwards and Henries. There was only 
one house in the county fit to vie with 
Harbledown. The spending public of Slo- 
chester and its vicinity would make liberal 
purchases when the sellers were an earl's 
daughters. 

But to the infinite chagrin of Mrs. Dibbs, 
the Ladies Caroline and Julia said No, and 



THE HABBLEDOWN POSTBAG, 285 

no amount of pressing could make them say 
Yes. It was not in their line, they said. 
The style of thing suited some people, but 
tlxey had tried it ; and not even to restore 
the Yellowboys' window, not even to mend 
St, Mungo, or the Crump eflSgy, or even to 
repair the central tower, would they do it 
again. In truth the Ladies Caroline and 
Julia were not fit for work of that sort. 
They were kind creatures; not lazy, not 
haughty. They were heartily willing to 
help the good cause. Julia was hard at 
work on a large screen, Caroline was paint- 
ing a pair of fans. Both sisters had spent 
a large part of their allowance in pur- 
chasing fancy articles for the fair. But 
they would not keep stalls. Tiresome men, 
they declared, expected stall-keepers to have 
wit and repartee at command, to keep up a 
constant fire of crackling jokes, and to 
smile incessantly at every coxcomb who 
might affect to cheapen a penwiper. It 



286 LADY FUlVJA. 

was as cruel a tax on the mind as the act- 
ing of charades. It was a bore. The 
Ladies Caroline and Julia said No, and the 
countess did not attempt to make them say 
anythiBg else. 

" What on earth are we to do ?" asked 
rueful Mrs. Dibbs, 

" You will take a stall yourself," said the 
Countess of Mortlake. 

Yes, Mrs. Dibbs would take a stall her- 
self; but though she was sure of absorb- 
ing the enforced half-crowns of a great 
many curates, and the sovereigns of many 
rectors, it would never do to trust to one 
successful stall alone. And Miss Billingsley 
shook her head laughingly at the sug- 
gestion that she should preside over a 
counter ; declaring with great good-humour 
that her ugly face would frighten people 
away, though she could do some service 
as a whipper-in. But saleswomen must be 
had. 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 287 

" There's Mrs. Bangham," was the first 
suggestion. 

" Odious creature ! I wonder she has 
the impudence to show her face in such a 
place for such a purpose ; but I understand 
she belongs to the deanery half of the 
fair already," austerely remarked Mrs. 
Dibbs. 

" There's Mrs. Faddleton, a very pretty 
woman," said Miss Plummington. 

And though Mrs. Dibbs made a wry face 
at the name of Mrs. Captain Faddleton, 
wife of a raffish ex-officer of the Hussars, 
and whose ponies, and French finery, and 
French manners somewhat scandalised Slo- 
chester, it was agreed that fair-haired little 
Mrs. Faddleton should have the offer of a 
stall. 

" The countess," suggested Miss Compton. 

" I have asked her," was the reply of Mrs. 
Dibbs ; '* but Lady Compton won't let her 
keep a stall." 



288 LADY PLATIA. 

Two ladies who had not yet spoken now 
brought forward their candidates : " There's 
Miss Cooper." 

" She is laid up with inflnenza, and 
besides, she's such a fright, poor dear," 
returned the bishop's wife. 

" There's Blanche Pender," was the next 
suggestion. 

" Yes, but she's so silly. She would mis- 
call everything, and very likely give sove- 
reigns in change by mistake for shillings. 
But there's the cake-stall, to be sure : yes, 
I think even Blanche might attend to that," 
said Mrs. Dibbs thoughtfully. And it was 
settled that Miss Blanche Pender's intellect 
was capable of grasping the distinction 
between raspberry-jam puffs and cherry- 
brandy. Then came a quick fire of question 
and answer. 

" Miss Watkins . Emma, I mean, not the 
eldest?" 

" A country banker's daughter, my dear, 



i 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 289 

and niece to Pluckley the veterinary sur- 
geon ! That would never, never do !" and 
Mrs. Dibbs, whose grandpapa had filled 
the useful oflSce of head-cook to Merton 
College, Oxford, shuddered at the notion of 
calling in so plebeian an auxiliary as Emma 
Watkins. 

" One of the Rawlinsons ? They are all 
pretty." 

** Yes, but they are going immediately to 
Nice. The second girl is consumptive." 
" Miss Violet Vavasour ?" 
" She is booked for a stall already. The 
deanery people snapped her up at once. 
And it is such a pity ; for she is sure to 
draw customers by the hundred ; and I'm 
sure dear Violet would rather have been on 
my side of the room, only she had promised 
them," said Mrs. Dibbs with unconscious 
egotism. 

" I can show you where to find some- 
thing prettier even than Violet Vavasour. 
VOL. I. u 



290 LADY FLAVLA.. 

Look there. out of that window T' said 
Miss Billingsley, pointing to the merry 
group that now drew near the house, and 
to the beautiful girl, who fell into fifty 
graceful attitudes as she directed their 
sports. 

"Lady Flavia Clare! Dear me, how 
stupid I was not to have remembered her 
before," said Mrs. Dibbs naively. ** -But do 
you think, dear Lady Mortlake, that . that 
she would like " 

The countess took a minute or two to 
consider the matter. " I do not know what 
she would say," was her answer ; " she is 
very young, you see," 

" But if you don't object ?" pleaded Mrs. 
Dibbs ; and the Ladies Caroline and Julia 
at once protested that the idea was a 
charming one. Lady Mortlake had no in- 
tention of opposing her veto to the generai 
wish, for already there was a chorus of 
rejoicing over the discovery of so high-bom 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 291 

and attractive a recruit. But she really did 
not know how her young cousin might take 
the proposal. To sell penwipers, and fly- 
traps, and photographs for vidgar coin to 
motley strangers, might suggest degrading 
associations to Lady Flavia's mind, for 
aught the countess knew. It seemed to 
her like asking a princess to bare her white 
arms for the purpose of manipulating 
dough into a pudding-crust, or even into 
those famous unpeppered cream-tarts of 
Arabian story; a proposition that might 
De accepted with delight or rejected with 
auger, according to the fancy of the 
moment. However, she tapped at the 
window with the handle of her parasol, 
and smilingly beckoned to Lady Flavia to 
come in. 

Lady Flavia came in, surrounded by two 
or three of the younger children, who clung 
to her skirts, and would not leave her. 
Her sweet face was a little flushed, or at 



292 LADY FLAVIA. 

any rate, its delicate bloom was heightened, 
and her eyes sparkled ; and with her flow- 
ing curls and animated look, she ^was lovely 
indeed. To the delight of Mrs. Dibbs, she 
readily agreed to take a stall at the ap- 
proaching fair. 

.* Thank you for thinking of me !" she 
cried, in her simple way ; and she laughed 
with childlike enjoyment at the prospect, 
as she said, of selling real things across a 
real counter for real gold and silver, and 
was wonderfully winning and sprightly, 
bringing more smiles to the faces of those 
fearfully-wise matrons and spinsters tbac 
often beamed there. 

So, after lunch, when the countess's car- 
riage had driven off, and Miss Billingsley 
was tying her bonnet-strings, she said, by 
way of leave-taking : '' There, dear Mrs. 
Dibbs . I don't think, even with Violet 
Vavasour to help them, that the deanery 
people will cut you out now." 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 293 

And Mrs. Dibbs replied with genuine 
^warmth, that Lady Flavia was " a sweet, 
darling little thing . more Uke an angel 
than anything else, if it wasn't wrong to 
say so." 

Meanwhile the angel who formed the 
subject of Mrs. Dibbs' eulogies was rolling 
rapidly homewards. The post, thanks to 
some casualty that would furnish an 
" alarming accident " to the daily papers 
that delight to treat of shuntings, and sid- 
ings, and point-switchings, was late. Lord 
Mortlake was. at home, and was just un- 
locking the post-bag as the countess and 
the three girls arrived. The opening of 
the post-bag, and the distribution of the 
family correspondence, is an engrossing 
and deHghtful occupation to many and 
many a Paterfamilias; so it was to the 
earl. He did his sorting gently, like an 
elderly Ariel ; but he looked twice at every 
letter before he let it out of his custody. 




294 LADY FLAVIA. 

" Eh, eh 1" said the earl ; " Miss Stock- 
ings . who's Miss Stockings? One of the 
maids, eh ? Lady Mortlake . one, two, 
three ; and one for Julia ; five newspapers ; 
a letter for Benson ; one for Robert Brovm 
. who's he ? Oh, the new stable-helper, is 
he ? And, Flavia, there is one for you. 
You don't give me much trouble in letter- 
sorting in general, missy ." And the good- 
natured old gentleman held out the letter, 
and placed it in Lady Flavia's gloved 
hand. What he said was perfectly true. 
The late earl's daughter, as was but natural 
on account of her secluded youth, had very 
few to write to her. She took her letter 
into the little hand that wore Number Six 
of Houbigant's gloves ; hands such as no- 
body else possessed, gloves such as nobody 
else inquired for, in all the county. She 
went straight up-stairs with it, nor did she 
open it until, half mechanically it would 
seem, she had closed and locked the door 



THE HAKBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 295 

of her room. She eyed the letter with a 
kind of wondering curiosity, and laughingly 
said, as she hroke the seal : " Who can have 
\ritten to me . to me, to whom no one 
writes?" But from the moment that her 
eyes fell on the first lines of the letter, a 
change came over her fair face ; the smile 
died away on her lips, a strange, terror- 
stricken look was in her eyes, and her 
cheek grew paler as she read on. She 
looked then as she had done on that first 
night heneath the roof of Harbledown, 
months before, when she had watched while 
others were sleeping. The shadow of a 
Fear was upon her ; and yet there seemed 
no cause for such agitation in the letter 
before her. It was surely a very kind and 
affectionate little letter, and it ran thus : . 

" My own dearest Flavia, . Do you 
remember, love, when you and I used to 
talk in our little room at the convent. 



296 LADY FLAVIA. 

looking down npon the great \rood-pile 
and that noisy hasae-courj where old Mar- 
gaerite did her best to keep order among 
the hens . do you remember, I say, how we 
two nsed to look forward to our meeting* in 

ihe great world outside the gates ? We 
used to think, I remember, that life outside 
would be all one long holiday, "with no 
lessons, no piano-practice, no " il faut dtre 
sage. Mademoiselle,*' from that weary Sister 
Agnes, or from the good, stiflF, old Dame 
Superieure. Well, dear, that happy time 
has come now. It came to you earlier, 
though I ought not to call thctt happy, as 
you only left us, darling, to go to the 
death-bed of your poor papa ; and I assure 
you I lay awake, night after night, thinking 
of you, and how strange and sad everything 
must be to you in England, and how melan- 
choly that great, grand house must be, when 
you found none but strangers to welcome 
you. Many a night I have waked up, and 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTS AG% 297 

spoken to you between sleeping and waking, 

and felt so sad and deserted to find your 

little bed empty, dear, and nobody in the 

room but poor, lonely me. I hope you 

'won't think me selfish, dearest, but I was 

so sad, and so forlorn, when you were gone, 

and I was left the only English girl, the 

only Protestant in all the dreary place. I 

never liked it, you know, but then I did 

not come to Gresnez when I was quite little, 

as you did. But there, dear child, it's quite 

over now ; and I am so pleased to be on 

English ground again, and to have done 

with school for ever. My papa, Colonel 

Ford, has come back from India for ever ! 

Flavia ! How I wish you could see him ; 

' he is the kindest, best, most generous of all 

the fathers in the world, and quite spoils . 

me. He says he has to be father and 

mother too to me, and, indeed, his care and 

goodness are beyond all praise. And I am 

so happy now. But, dearest, one thing is 



298 LADY FLAVIA. 

wanting to mj happiness, and that is the 
sight of your sweet face, and the assurance 
that you love your little Amy still. You 
know we two are to be friends always. 
Have you forgotten what plans we made 
for the future, and what feimous chcUeaux 
en Espagne we built, I hate writing, and 
yet I can hardly stop my pen ; but I hear 
papa calling me, for we are to go to some 
sight or other. Where can we meet, dear ? 
We are in London now, and in lodgings, in 
Minden Street, St. James's, Number Seven- 
teen ; but soon we are to take a house in 
the country ; though I think I like London 
best. No more time. Mind you write 
soon, if only one line. You are a lazy puss, 
not to have written before. I must go ; so 
with dear kind love and kisses to my own, 

own darling, ever her affectionate friend. 

Amy Ford. 

Lady Flavia Clare read this letter over 



\ 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG, 299 

twice, and then yet a third time, and then 
the hand that held the paper dropped to 
her side ; and as she sat in the great arm- 
chair, gazing dreamily at the fire, her whole 
attitude expressed weary, hopeless discour- 
agement. Minutes went hy, and formed 
themselves into hours; the hands of the 
clock travelled along the dial-plate; the 
dark November afternoon became a dusky 
November evening, and still the mistress of 
tte pretty pink rooms sat silently brooding 
over the fire, with the letter in her hand. 
After a long, long time she rose, tore the 
letter to fragments, tossed the scraps of 
paper into the fire, and with a sort of fierce 
intentness, watched them shrivel, and scorch, 
and blacken, and so vanish into nothingness. 
Then she gave a long sigh, and turned 
sadly away. 

"It must come to an end at last," she 
said ; ** but when, and how ?" And she sat 
down in her old place, and remained 



300 LADY FLAVIA. 

motionless, with her eyes on the fire, until 
her maid tapped at the door, and the 
dressing-bell rang. Lady Flavia rose and 
unlocked the door, and in the act of doing 
so, the beauty and candour of her bright 
young face seemed to return like those of 
the witch-maiden in Christabel. Simmons, 
observant as she was, saw not a trace of 
emotion in her lady's fac as she busied 
herself in her duties. And when the earl's 
W9.rd appeared at dinner, her loveliness had 
lost none of its charms ; her spirits were 
high ; she was the same fairy creature that, 
since they first knew her, had been the life 
and soul of the Harbledown household. 



END OF VOL. I. 



LONDON : PBimSD BT. W CLOWBS AND SONS, SIAMFOBD SIBKBr AXD CBAHINQ CBOOS, 



/ 




d 



294 LADY FLA VI A. 

" Eh, eh !'. said the earl ; " Miss Stock- 
ings . ^who's Miss Stockings? One of the 
maids, eh? Lady Mortlake . one, two, 
three ; and one for Julia ; five newspapers ; 
a letter for Benson ; one for Robert Brown 
. who's he ? Oh, the new stable-helper, is 
he? And, Flavia, there is one for you. 
You don't give me much trouble in letter- 
sorting in general, missy/' And the good- 
natured old gentleman held out the letter, 
and placed it in Lady Flavia's gloved 
hand. What he said was perfectly true. 
The late earl's daughter, as was but natural 
on account of her secluded youth, had very 
few to write to her. She took her letter 
into the little hand that wore Number Six 
of Houbigant's gloves ; hands such as no- 
body else possessed, gloves such as nobody 
else inquired for, in all the county. She 
went straight up-stairs with it, nor did she 
open it until, half mechanically it would 
seem, she had closed and locked the door 



THE HAKBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 295 

of her room. She eyed the letter with a 
kind of wondering curiosity, and laughingly 
said, as she broke the seal : " Who can have 
written to me . to me, to whom no one 
writes?" But from the moment that her 
eyes fell on the first lines of the letter, a 
change came over her fair face ; the smile 
died away on her lips, a strange, terror- 
stricken look was in her eyes, and her 
cheek grew paler as she read on. She 
looked then as she had done on that first 
night beneath the roof of Harbledown, 
months before, when she had watched while 
others were sleeping. The shadow of a 
Fear was upon her ; and yet there seemed 
no cause for such agitation in the letter 
before her. It was surely a very kind and 
affectionate little letter, and it ran thus : . 

** My own dearest Flavia, . Do you 
remember, love, when you and I used to 
talk in our little room at the convent. 



294 LADY FLAVIA. 

" Eh, eh r* said the earl ; " Miss Stock- 
ings . ^who's Miss Stockings? One of the 
maids, eh? Lady Mortlake . one, two, 
three ; and one for Julia ; five newspapers ; 
a letter for Benson ; one for Robert Brown 
. who's he ? Oh, the new stable-helper, is 
he? And, Flavia, there is one for you. 
You don't give me much trouble in letter- 
sorting in general, missy." And the good- 
natured old gentleman held out the letter, 
and placed it in Lady Flavians gloved 
hand. What he said was perfectly true. 
The late earl's daughter, as was but natural 
on account of her secluded youth, had very 
few to write to her. She took her letter 
into the little hand that wore Number Six 
of Houbigant's gloves ; hands such as no- 
body else possessed, gloves such as nobody 
else inquired for, in all the county. She 
went straight up-stairs with it, nor did she 
open it until, half mechanically it would 
seem, she had closed and locked the door 



THE HAKBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 295 

of her room. She eyed the letter with a 
kind of wondering curiosity, and laughingly 
said, as she broke the seal : " Who can have 
written to me . to me, to whom no one 
writes?" But from the moment that her 
eyes fell on the first lines of the letter, a 
change came over her fair face ; the smile 
died away on her lips, a strange, terror- 
stricken look was in her eyes, and her 
cheek grew paler as she read on. She 
looked then as she had done on that first 
night beneath the roof of Harbledown, 
months before, when she had watched while 
others were sleeping. The shadow of a 
Fear was upon her ; and yet there seemed 
no cause for such agitation in the letter 
before her. It was surely a very kind and 
aflfectionate little letter, and it ran thus : . 

** My own dearest Flavia, . Do you 

ft 

remember, love, when you and I used to 
talk in our little room at the convent, 



296 LADY FLAVIA. 

looking down upon the great wood-pile 
and that noisy basse-couTj where old Mar- 
guerite did her best to keep order among* 
the hens . do you remember, I say, how we 
two used to look forward to our meeting in 
the great world outside the gates? We 
used to think, I remember, that life outside 
would be all one long holiday, with no 
lessons, no piano-practice, no " il faut fetre 
sage. Mademoiselle," from that weary Sister 
Agnes, or from the good, stiff, old Dame 
Superieure. Well, dear, that happy time 
has come now. It came to you earlier, 
though I ought not to call that happy, as 
you only left us, darling, to go to the 
death-bed of your poor papa ; and I assure 
you I lay awake, night after night, thinking 
of you, and how strange and sad everything 
must be to you in England, and how melan- 
choly that great, grand house must be, when 
you found none but strangers to welcome 
you. Many a night I have waked up, and 



THE HARBLEDOWN POSTBAG* 297 

spoken to you between sleeping and waking, 
and felt so sad and deserted to find your 
little bed empty, dear, and nobody in the 
room but poor, lonely me. I hope you 
won't think me selfish, dearest, but I was 
30 sad, and so forlorn, when you were gone, 
and I was left the only English girl, the 
only Protestant in all the dreary place. I 
never liked it, you know, but then I did 
not come to Gresnez when I was quite little, 
as you did. But there, dear child, it's quite 
over now ; and I am so pleased to be on 
English ground again, and to have done 
with school for ever. My papa, Colonel 
Ford, has come back from India for 'ever I 
Flavia 1 how I wish you could see him ; 
he is the kindest, best, most generous of all 
the fathers in the world, and quite spoils - 
me. He says he has to be father and 
mother too to me, and, indeed, his care and 
goodness are beyond all praise. And I am 
so happy now. But, dearest, one thing is 



294 LADY FLA VI A. 

" Eh, eh I" said the earl ; " Miss Stock- 
ings . ^who*s Miss Stockings? One of the 
maids, eh? Lady Mortlake . one, two, 
three ; and one for Julia ; five newspapers ; 
a letter for Benson ; one for Robert Brown 
. who's he ? Oh, the new stable-kelper, is 
he? And, Flavia, there is one for you. 
You don't give me much trouble in letter- 
sorting in general, missy." And the goodr 
natured old gentleman held out the letter, 
and placed it in Lady Flavians gloved 
hand. What he said was perfectly true. 
The late earl's daughter, as was but natural 
on account of her secluded youth, had very 
few to write to her. She took her letter 
into the little hand that wore Number Six 
of Houbigant's gloves ; hands such as no- 
body else possessed, gloves such as nobody 
else inquired for, in all the county. She 
went straight up-stairs with it, nor did she 
open it until, half mechanically it would 
seem, she had closed and locked the door 



THE HAKBLEDOWN POSTBAG. 295 

of her room. She eyed the letter with a 
kind of wondering curiosity, and laughingly 
said, as she broke the seal : " Who can have 
written to me . to me, to whom no one 
writes ?'' But from the moment that her 
eyes fell on the first lines of the letter, a 
change came over her fair face ; the smile 
died away on her lips, a strange, terror- 
stricken look was in her eyes, and her 
cheek grew paler as she read on. She 
looked then as she had done on that first 
night beneath the roof of Harbledown, 
months before, when she had watched while 
others werie sleeping. The shadow of a 
Fear was upon her ; and yet there seemed 
no cause for such agitation in the letter 
before her. It was surely a very kind and 
aflfectionate little letter, and it ran thus : . 

** My own dearest Flavia, . Do you 
remember, love, when you and I used to 
talk in our little room at the convent. 



296 LADY PLAVIA. 

looking down npon the great wood-pile 
and that noisy basse-couTj where old Mar- 
guerite did her best to keep order among 
the hens . do you remember, I say, how '^e 
two used to look forward to our meeting in 

the great world outside the gates? We 
used to think, I remember, that life outside 
would be all one long holiday, with no 
lessons, no piano-practice, no " il faut 6tre 
sage. Mademoiselle," from that weary Sister 
Agnes, or from the good, stiff, old Dame 
Superieure. Well, dear, that happy time 
has come now. It came to you earlier, 
though I ought not to call that happy, as 
you only left us, darling, to go to the 
death-bed of your poor papa ; and I assure 
you I lay awake, night after night, thinking 
of you, and how strange and sad everything 
must be to you in England, and how melan- 
choly that great, grand house must be, when 
you found none but strangers to welcome 
you. Many a night I have waked up, and 



THE HARBLEDOWN P08TBA.G. 297 

spoken to you between sleeping and waking, 
and felt so sad and deserted to find your 
little bed empty, dear, and nobody in the 
room but poor, lonely me. I hope you 
won't think me selfish, dearest, but I was 
so sad, and so forlorn, when you were gone, 
and I was left the only English girl, the 
only Protestant in all the dreary place. I 
never liked it, you know, but then I did 
not come to Greenez when I was quite httle, 
as you did. But there, dear child, it's quite 
over now ; and I am so pleased to be on 
English groxmd again, and to have done 
with school for ever. My papa. Colonel 
Ford, has come back from India for ever I 
Flavia ! how I wish you could see him ; 
* he is the kindest, best, most generous of all 
the fathers in the world, and quite spoils . 
me. He says he has to be father and 
mother too to me, and, indeed, his care and 
goodness are beyond all praise. And I am 
so happy now. But, dearest, one thing is 
CHAPTER I. 



IN MINDEN STREET. 



The rooms which the Fords occupied at 
Number seventeen Minden Street, St. James's, 
were larger and handsomer rooms than are 
often to be found in a London lodging-house ; 
and the furniture, if slightly dingy, was 
good and costly furniture, that had been 
supplied by Dowbiggin or Seddon, when 
William the Fourth was king. The street 
itself is not one of the most cheerful of 
London thoroughfares ; indeed, nothing but 
a Hansom cab, that seems to have lost its 

VOL. II. B 




2 LADY FLAVIA. 

way, or a hired brougham from the neigh- 
bouring Kvery-stables, ever traverses its 
hundred yards or so of genteel desolation. 
But if not the rose any more, as when the 
bloom of freshness was on the memory of 
that dubious victory which had given name 
to the place, Minden Street is near the rose. 
It is close to the parks, the palace, and the 
theatres ; and might really be said to be, as 
so many other spots in this metropolis are 
only advertised to be, within five minutes' 
walk of everywhere. 

In the Minden Street drawing-room were 
two persons, a tall elderly man, and a girl 
of nineteen. The colonel . ^you would have 
known him for a soldier, at half the length 
of Regent Street . had rather a stern look 
when his sunburnt features were in repose ; 
such a look as the long habit of command 
and long intercourse with a supple but wily 
race impart to the firm mouth and keen 



IN MINDEN STREET. 3 

eyes of a brave and clever man. But when 
the colonel smiles, and especially when he 
speaks to his daughter, Amy Ford^ the 
whole character of the face is changed and 
softened ; and the grim old warrior's inner 
nature seems well-nigh as gentle as a woman's. 
He is a very distinguished officer, is Lieu- 
tenant-colonel Richard Ford ; and his name 
is known and respected in every cantonment 
in India, in the durbars of native princes, 
and under the tents of wild tribes, who 
cherish the name of Ford Sahib as of the 
kindly conqueror and wise lawgiver to 
whom they owe a deep debt of gratitude. 
He has been a ** political " ad well as a 
fighting officer, has Colonel Ford, has main- 
tained England's honour and England's 
cause at the courts of cruel despots, who had 
never heard plain truth till they heard it 
from his lips, and has spoken as boldly as if 
an army were at his back ; even when he 




4 LADY FLAVIA. 

Btood alone in the centre of a crowd of 
enemies thirsting for his blood, and waiting 
but a sign from their prince to strike him 
down. In those intricate negotiations where 
poison and the dagger are deemed fair diplo- 
matic adjuncts, where threats are breathed, 
and brilx^s proffered, and the very atmosphere 
of the divan is fraught with lies and for- 
geries, and i)lot and counterplot, Eichard 
Ford liad borne himself wisely and well, 
with courage undismayed and loyalty un- 
tainted. An envoy, a soldier, he was a 
good type of the best class of the old 
Company's servantH, and had filled high 
civil appointmentH in time of need, with 
great credit to himself, and greater advantage 
to the country. 

The colonel had come back from India 
comparatively a rich man, though poor, in- 
deed, when his savings were compared with 
the treasures amassed by those who shook 



IN MINDEN STREET. 5 

the pagoda-tree in the shamefully glorious 
days of Clive and Warren Hastings. But 
every anna of the money was honestly 
earned. There was no scent of blood, no 
stain of tears, upon the rupees that Colonel 
Ford converted into British securities. He 
had high pay and pension for the evening 
of his days, and might so far have been said 
to be recompensed for his work. The colonel 
was not a grumbler, and did not grudge the 
wear and tear of sleepless nights and long 
marches, and the thought and toil that had 
left his temples bare and his brow furrowed. 
But India had robbed him of more than it 
could ever give him in return ; and the re- 
collection of his dear young wife and the 
two bright boys that the fell climate had 
struck off in a few short hours from the roll 
of t];ie living, came back like a sad dream of 
the past to sadden the stout heart of honest 
Richard Ford. 




6 LADY FLAVIA. 

Amy was his only surviving child. It had 
been a sharp trial to the bereaved father to 
send that little prattler away to Europe and 
siafety ; but the colonel was the least selfish 
of men. He made the sacrifice, and toiled 
on for years in the burning land where men 
barter health for gold, that he might have a 
fortune garnered up for Amy. He longed 
to see the child ; but he steadfastly resisted 
the temptation to send for her back to India ; 
and as for furloughs and a long leave spent 
at home, Ford Sahib was too much valued 
in the troubled and anxious times that then 
brooded over India, easily to be spared. He 
had his reward now, as he sat in that London 
lodging and saw the fresh bloom of health 
and happiness on his daughter's cheek ; but 
with the pleasure came sadness. Amy was 
very like her mother, the cglonel thought. 

Amy Ford was indeed a pretty, kindly, 
honest English girl, with a rosy cheek, 



s 



IN MINDEN STREET. 7 

hazel eyes, and nut-brown hair. She was 
no wonderful beauty to fitscinate all who 
came near her ; but hers was a face that it 
was very pleasant to look upon, radiant 
with innocence and good-humour. She was 
very happy. The five or six weeks she 
had spent in London had been delightful 
to her, and Minden Street was Eden* 
Hers was one of those fortunate natures 
that derive pleasure from surroundings 
which others accept grudgingly, and that 
find harmless sources of joy as instinc- 
tively as the bee sucks up honey from 
the calyx of a flower. Her father, whom 
she remembered through the hazy atmo- 
sphere of childish memories, and who had 
been her constant correspondent since she 
was old enough to read and reply to his 
letters, was with her again, jio more to go 
back to that odious India. She had done 
with her convent school and its drudgery. 




S LADY FLAVIA. 

She was indulged, petted, and made much 
of. She had seen many sights and shows 
in tliat ecstatic six weeks, and had relished 
them as only the young can relish such 
delights. And her cousin Charley . well, 
Charley was the dearest fellow in the world, 
and was almost as much at home in Minden 
Street as in his Temple chambers. 

It had always been the colonel's wish 
that, if the young people could only like 
each other as well as he desired that they 
should, Amy should marry Charles Ford, 
the only son of the colonel's only brother, 
who had been an Indian judge, and had 
died at some dreary place in the Mofiissil. 
The said Charles, to the best of the colonel's 
knowledge and belief, had turned out a fine 
young fellow, and he and Amy had taken 
to each other wonderfully from the first. 
The cousins had met before, at an old 
aunt's house in Hampshire, where Amy 



IN MI^TDBN STREET. y 

had Kved during those first years before 
she was sent to complete her education . 
first to a school in Brussels, and then to the 
French convent of Our Lady of Carmel. 
But Charles was then an Eton boy, and 
Amy a little lass in a short frock, and 
neither had an idea that the other would 
ever come to be dearer to him or her than 
all the world beside. Yes, all the world, 
though Amy would still have fondly vowed 
and protested that she loved her father the 
best. But the attachment between the 
cousins was ripening day by day. It was 
smiled on by the ccflonel. Charles's widowed 
mother desired no better lot for her son. 
The match, in fact, was a very suitable one ; 
there would be some money on both sides, 
and Charles Ford was just called to the 
bar, and, of course, would be Lord Chan- 
cellor. 

" What is the matter with my pet ? Come, 




10 LADY FLAVIA. 

Amy, my girl, let us hear what it is that is 
troubling that little head of yours. Are 
you tired of London ? Or have you and 
Charles quarrelled? Or is it the mauve 
bonnet that the milliner talked you into 
taking, against your better judgment, that 
is weighing on your mind ? I never did 
think well of that bonnet, myself," said the 
colonel, who had for some time been watch- 
ing his daughter's thoughtful looks. 

Amy turned frankly towards her father, 
and her answer was prompt : ** No, papa. 
I wasn't thinking of bonnets at all. I was 
thinking how very, very strange it was 
that Flavia did not write, and I was 
wondering whether my letter ever reached 
her." 

The colonel made rather a wry face. 
He had his own opinion as to the probable 
cause of the interruption of friendly inter- 
course between his daughter and her titled 



IN MINDBN STREET. 11 

friend. He made answer gravely: "You 
must remember. Amy, my love, that Lady 
Flavia . what's her name? Vere . Vane . 
Clare? yes, Clare . a boarder in the con- 
vent at Gr^snez-les-cloches, was a very 
diflferent person indeed from Lady Flavia 
Clare after her entry into society. She is 
among her grand relations now ; she has 
no doubt inherited a great deal of pro- 
perty; and her beauty, and her rank, 
and her money, are three magnets that 
will draw friends and admirers aroimd 
her as surely as the loadstone draws iron. 
/ don't blame her, I am sure, for the short- 
ness of her memory; nor will you, when 
you have seen a little more of the world, 

wonder that she should forget " 

"But Flavia was not at all the sort of 
girl to fotget her old friend, her sister 
almost, because she is rich, and living in 
splendour," burst in Amy, impetuously. 



r 



12 LADY FLA VTA. 

with her cheeks flushing scarlet. "For 
shame, papa, dear, to misjudge my poor 
darling so! Flavia is the very last, last 
person in the world to be proud or forget- 
ful, or ungrateful, the last and most unlikely 
to be changed for the worse by prosperity, 
of all the girls I ever knew." (The colonel 
struggled in a praiseworthy manner here 
to preserve his gravity of countenance, as 
Amy appealed to her large experience.) 

" The very night before she left the con- 
vent, to go over to England, at her dying 

father's summons, she But you'll think 

mo so silly, papa, if I teU you." 

And Amy coloured afresh. But the 
colonel gently replied, that he should be 
glad to have his child's confidence, and 
would promise not to be a very severe 
critic ; on which Amy went on thus : ' ' We 
had been talking in our own little room, 
papa, till very late, on that last night, as 



^ 



IN MINDEN STREET. 13 

girls will, when anything particular excites 
them ; and when I fell asleep at last, and 
had been asleep some time, I suppose, I 
was awakened by . don't laugh at us, papa 
. by the sound of sobbing close by, and I 
looked up, and there stood Flavia in the 
white clear moonlight, at my bedside, with 
her beautiful dark hair all loose over her 
shoulders^ and her feet bare, and her poor 
sweet face all .stained with tears, weeping 
as she stood there and watched me sleep. 
And I put my arms round her, and cried 
too . you'll think us very silly, papa . and 
she was cold and trembling, and quite pale, 
like a ghost, in the ghastly white moon- 
light : and after a long time, poor love, I 
managed to comfort and calm her, and 
then I asked what it was, and she tried to 
smile as she said : * Amy, dear, I'm almost 
ashamed to tell you ; but . ^but I could not 
sleep. I feel so cold and sad. I seem to 




14 LADY FLA VIA. 

dread to-morrow. It must be nonsense, of 
course ; but I feel as if some evil was going 
to happen . I do, indeed, darling. And 
when I fell asleep just now, I dreamed . 
oh ! it was a horrid dream.' And she 
shuddered, and left off talking ; and I never 
could get her to tell me what the dream 
had been, and indeed I did not like to dis- 
tress her by teasing her about it. But I 
know she thought her fears were a pre- 
sentiment of evil." 

This was a long speech ; but the colonel 
listened to it with indulgent patience, and 
he had the grace not to smile. He knew 
that nothing so checks the confidence of 
the young as the ridicule of their eldfers. 
But there was a little dry humour in his 
tone as he said : " And what came of the 
presentiment? I mean, what occurred to 
justify the young lady in her apprehen- 
sions ? 



IN MINDEN STREET. 15 

" Why, nothing that I know of," said 
Amy, hesitatingly; "and indeed, papa, I 
never saw it in the same light that Flavia 
did. Ton see she was very young of her 
age, and rather fanciful ; and it must have 
been so strange and forlorn to her to go 
away from the convent that she had grown 
to regard as her home, since, poor love, she 
hardly remembered any other. She came 
to the convent quite as a little child, you 
know, and " 

" Yes, I know. You told me all about it 
by letter, and vivd wee too, pet," said the 
colonel, with a slight yawn. He was not 
very strongly interested in this schoolfellow 
of his daughter's, nor did he believe in the 
solidity of female friendships. Moreover, 
like most Anglo-Indians who have spent 
their lives in a country where, in default of 
hereditary rank, the chief places are occu- 
pied by an ofl&cial aristocracy as professional 



r 



16 LADY FLAVIA. 

as the mandarins of China, and where lien- 
tenant-govemors do duty for earls, and sub- 
collectors occupy the position of, say, the 
British baronet, he found himself strangely 
at sea with regard to social precedence atv^<^ 
home. He had a prejudice to the effect 
that the titled classes in England held them- 
selves aloof from those who were untitled, 
pretty much as he had seen the covenanted 
servants of the Company eschew the fellow- 
ship of the Eurasians and European " ad- 
venturers " who belonged to the ranks of 
the uncovenanted. And it may be that his 
long experience of the sharply-drawn dis- 
tinctions of caste among the natives, corro- 
borated his simple theory of English society. 
Now, the Fords were of gentle blood, but of 
short pedigree and homely alliances; and 
the colonel had little doubt that Lord Mort- 
lake's daughter had taken that fact to heart, 
and had, as her knowledge of the world in- 



m MINDEN STREET. 17 

creased, determined to " drop " her girl- 
friend of other days ; and hence the silence 
that had caused more pain and surprise to 
Amy than she cared to acknowledge. 

" Well, well," said Colonel Ford at last, 
** you may see your fiiend sooner than you 
think, and I hope you may not find her the 
worse for the few months that have passed 
since you parted with her. Slochester is 
her post-town, isn't it ? Well, I have writ- 
ton ta accept your uncle William's invita- 
tion, and we shall go down next week. I 
take it for granted that Lady Clara . no, 
Flavia . comes into Slochester sometimes 
for shopping, or flower-shows, or concerts . 
though, to be sure, it is getting too late for 
flower-shows ; but I dare say there will be 
something going on. Shall you be sorry to 
leave Minden Street ?" 

" N-no," said Amy, wistfully, though at 
the first announcement her hazel eyes had 

VOL. II. c 



r 



18 LADY PLAVIA. 

sparkled, as young eyes generally do, at the 
idea of any stir or change. 

The colonel smiled, almost imperceptibly. 
" Where's Alleyne's letter ?" he said, feel- 
ing in his coat-pockets for the missing docu- 
ment. ** There's an invitation for Charley, 

too, unless I'm much mistaken; and 

How the time flies ! to be sure. It is time 
for you to put on the mauve bonnet, miss, 
if you mean to be at Victoria Station in 
time for that Crystal Palace concert . ^not 
much in my line, to be sure, as they persist 
in singing ItaKan instead of Hindustani ; but 
Charles says it ought not to be missed on 
any account; and there's his rap at the 
door, so make haste, and put on your finery, 
pet." 

So those three, for the rap at the door of 
the Minden Street lodging-house was really 
that of Charles Ford of the Middle Temple, 
went down to the Crystal Palace, and spent 



\ 



IN MINDEN STREET. 19 

a pleasant afternoon, in spite of the colonel's 
not unnatural preference of the Oriental 
tongues, which he knew, to the modern 
European languages, which he did not 
know. 

And it was settled that Charles Ford also 
was to be a guest at the Slochester par- 
sonage ; though, owing to some tiresome 
case or other that was to come up for hear- 
ing before the Yice* chancellor, and the con- 
duct of which, in that uninteresting stage 
of the proceedings, fell to yoimg Ford as 
junior counsel, while his seniors were enjoy- 
ing the last sweets of their vacation, he 
could not leave London so early as his uncle 
and cousin. 

The Rev. William Alleyne, the " Uncle 
William" in question, was a brother of 
Amy's mother. He was incumbent of one 
of the parishes into which Slochester was 
divided, and belonged to that class of town 



i 



20 LADY FLAVIA. 

vicars whose social position was eclipsed hy 
that of the cathedral dignitaries^ even as 
their little churches were dwarfed hy the 
colossal proportions of the central fane it- 
self. The dean and canons, and prebenda- 
ries regarded these hnmble brethren in 
much the same light as the Benedictines 
and Dominicans, their predecessors, had 
eyed the unlearned secular clergy, who did 
parish duty, and held their breviaries up- 
side down when affecting to read the dog- 
Latin they knew by rote. The Brahmins 
who officiated in the mighty temple of St. 
Willibald Martyr, with its tombs of Saxon 
saints and Norman queens, its reliquaries 
that faithful lips had pressed when the 
Plantagenets were kings, its stone steps 
worn hollow by the knees of old English 
pilgrims, thought little of the Rev. William 
Alleyne and his church of St. Eanswith. 
There were many such churches in Sloches- 




IN MINBEN STREET. 21: 

ter, little dull-looking edifices of red brick 
or grey flintnstone, where scanty congrega- 
tions gathered behind the tall partitions of 
the worm-eaten pews, and where the feeble 
organs piped out a weak music, that seemed 
the thinner by contrast with the sweet fall 
thunder that poured from the great gilded 
tubes of the minster organ. Mr. AUeyne 
and his fellow-vicars dwelt outside the 
.Close, and the Close was not on visiting 
terms with them. 

But St. Eanswith's was a pleasant parish, 
close to the crumbling city walls; and it 
had a genuine parsonage, with a fine old 
garden, wherein grew the biggest mulberry- 
trees and the tallest cedars in Slochester ; 
and whose sunny south wall ripened 
peaches even mellower and more melting 
than the deanery peaches ; and to this 
snug professional abode, Mr. AUeyne and 
Dorothy his wife, had invited their brother- 



f 



22 LADT FLAYIA. 

in-law, Colonel Ford, and Amy their niece, 
and Charles Ford their connection ; and the 
invitation was accepted. One of Mr. 
Alleyne's written inducements to the colonel 
to pay an early visit to Slochester, was the 
prospect that the fancy feir might amnse 
Miss Amy,* " who had most likely never 
seen that kind of thing." And thus the 
straggling threads were taken up, one hy 
one, in the hand of Fate ; and surely, 
though slowly, were those seemingly dis- 
imited threads spun and woven into the 
weh of human destinies . amongst others, 
that of one who might have seemed secure 
from the shafts of fortune . ^Lady Flavia 
Clare. 



23 



CHAPTER IL 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 



"Stani> back! stand back! Get oflf the 
pavement, you boys, or FU drop into some 
of you. Little owdacious varmints ! . This 
way, ma*am, please. . Coachman, you get 
on, and make way for the other carriages 
to come up. . ^Look sharp, you with the 
bay horses! . Yes, my lord; been here 
some time, my lord, all the ladies have. . 
And no sky-larking. Bill Jenkins, or I'll 
walk you oflf. . Quite right, miss. . Hulloa ! 
there ; where are you pushing to ? You 
can't pass without a ticket !" 

Sergeant Owen of the city police had 



r 



24 LADY FLAVIA. 

qnite enough to do, and got very hoarse 
and thirsty after an hour or so of this 
mingled dialogue and monologue. The 
people, attracted by the brilliant festival, 
pressed and squeezed one another on the 
muddy pavement in front of the town-hall, 
gaping, staring, and elbowing; being 
thrust back, and trodden upon, and put in 
peril by stamping horses and rmnbhng 
carriages, and punched in the ribs by 
official truncheons, and splashed by passing 
wheels. Yet they behaved with the good- 
natured, patient, inquisitive endurance in 
which a nineteenth-century crowd is pre- 
eminent, and made way for the privileged 
with perfect cheerfulness. 

The fancy fair was being held at the 
Slochester town-hall, in the great room up- 
stairs ; and the preparations were on a scale 
of dazzling splendour that almost took away 
Slochester's corporate breath. The great 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 25 

staircase was covered with crimson cloth ; 
the banisters were roped with silk; the 
large room where the magistrates, and 
conjurors, and Christy Minstrels were wont 
to play their several parts at proper seasons, 
was gay with flowers, evergreens, streamers, 
and stars of bayonets and muskets, the 
latter ornaments contributed by the regi- 
ment of infantry at Slochester. This regi- 
ment, a crack corps, with a good fatherly 

colonel, had done its best to help out the 
show^ Its trophies of weapons and captured 
spoils, Sikh helmets, Afghan chain-shirts, 
Mahratta tulwars, Maori spears, Chinese 
gongs and dragon standards, and a gilt 
Burmese umbrella, were adorning the walls. 
So were the colours of the corps, the brave 
old weathernstained flags, " full of honour 
as though they could feel," with just three 
or four shot-holes through th^ silk. The 
Waterloo and Peninsular colours of the 



20 LADT FLAVIA. 

nrgiinent, nigged with French bulletrhdes, 
wcro hiin^ iu Chelsea Hospital ; and now 
thoHe {M3niiou8 in their turn were getting 
uhuoHt too aucient for use. But they swung, 
on Htavea wreathed with rose and laurel, 
over the Slochester fancy fiedr, while the 
n*giuieiital hand banged and blew its best, 
and in itn intervals of rest was relieved by 
the band of the Dragoon Guards. 

There were plenty of coquettish stalls^ 
more or less tastefully set out with goods 
for sale, and more or less fortunate in the 
wit or beauty of the presiding lady-shop- 
keeper. There was a post-office, or rather 
the Poste Restante branch of a post-office, 
where any rash inquirer, by payment of a 
shilling, could become possessed of a letter 
containing verse of a sarcastic and depreda- 
tory character. Sometimes the rhyming 
epigrams were dull enough ; but sometimes, 
when Chance caused the cap to fit, they 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 27 

had a cruel pungency ; and the puhlic read* 
ing of them convulsed the audience with 
wicked merriment. Over this post-oflSce, a 
lady . ^it was bold, black-browed Mrs. Bang- 
ham . held sway. So with respect to the 
pastry-cook's stall. Blanche Pender, a 
pretty, brainless creature, with a slim figure 
and glossy brown hair, like a spaniel's ears, 
was confectioner-in-chief, and smiled a 
welcome to the hungry ; while two sharp- 
witted younger sisters kept a due watch on 
the fiscal interests of the concern. 

In the dean's half of this bazaar, the main 
attraction was the showy stall where was to 
be seen Violet Vavasour, tall, dark, and 
superb, selling fancy wares at fancy prices, 
and rather commanding custom than solicit- 
ing patronage. Miss Vavasour was a 
reigning toast in the counly, or would have 
been, had health-drinking been yet in 
feshion. a grand girl, weU bom, well bred, 



28 LADY PLAVIA. 

and rich in beauly, in good qualities, and 
in everything but money. She was the 
daughter of a gentleman with a bemort* 
gaged estate, and she had four red-fisted 
brothers to inherit the dubious patrimony. 
She had never been to London, except at 
Exhibition-time, and had had but a sorry 
education imparted by cheap governesses. 
Yet she ruled over half the shire in right 
of her beauty, and it was well-known that 
she might marry half-a-dozen men with ten 
thousand a year apiece, if she would but 
consent to say Yes where she had civilly 
said No. She was of sterling gold, not 
very witiy, perhaps, but lively and good- 
humoured in her royal way, and it is no 
wonder if the county crowded around her 
stall. 

But at the other end of the room were 
arrayed the opposition attractions of the 
bishop's party ; and to the friends of Mrs. 



\ 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 29 

Dibbs, who watched every coin that was 
paid across the counters, it was ahnost as 
important that their own saleswomen should 
draw the larger receipts, as that the Yellow- 
boys window should once more "fling a 
bloody stain" upon the pavement of the 
cathedral. If the dean had the post-office, 
the bishop had the pastry-cook's. If the 
deanery people had made alliance with 
Mrs. Bangham and her black eyes, the 
palace had almost as potent an auxiliary in 
Mrs. Faddleton, who was shaking her fair 
curls over a collection of photographs, near 
the music-stand. The dean was happy in 
the support of the beautiful Miss Vavasour ; 
but metal as attractive was to be found on 
the other side . ^more attractive, even, for 
the tide of popularity obviously flowed to- 
wards the new star that Mrs. Dibbs had 
been lucky enough to allure within her 
own orbit. 



f 



30 LADT FLATIA. 

The attendance was large, larger by fior 
than on any of the few previous occasiODB 
of the same kind within the memory of 
Slochester 8 oldest inhabitant The general 
public, that huge floundering leviathan for 
whom so many baits are daily provided, 
and into whose slippery sides so many 
barbed harpoons are daily driven with 
more or less of force and skill, had sub- 
mitted, like the meekest of mythological 
dolphins, to be harnessed to the car wherein 
Mrs. Dibbs represented Amphitrite. The 
county had mustered in great strength, 
bringing in with it volunteer purchasers 
from the bordering shires. The com- 
mercial towns had sent a sturdy contingent 
of wull-to-do customers to the rescue of St. 
Willibald Martyr. The men of Woofsley, 
the men of FuUington, the ship-owners and 
merchaiitH of Spiceport, the paper-makers 
of Bleacbanipstoad, the carpet-weavers of 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 31 

Shnttlingham, were not what the Close of 
Slochester considered as ^ sound " on church 
matters. They had had many a fling,' by 
the mouths of their M.P/s and the pens of 
the editors of their local journals, at the 
lotus-eaters of the Chapter, at the dean's 
obstinacy, at the sleepy sinecurism of the 
steady port-drinking canons ; but in the 
hour of misfortune they came gallantly 
forward to help their old antagonists ; got 
up a noble subscription, unasked, and sent 
troops of moneyed men and women, ready 
to empty their purses for the salvage of 
Slochester Cathedral, the pride and orna- 
ment of the diocese. 

" This way, my dear. What a crowd, to 
be sure ! Don't let go my arm, for if you 
do, I shall never get near you again. What 
shameftd crushing I Eound here to the lefl^ 
and rU take you to her," said the Rev. 
William Alleyne, as he did his best politely 



vl 



irt:iei urrmr. vm. iat cu^ sSeee* Amy 
F;rL r:i:a. Lir AZTL A pb cr tmo behind, 
"iiji L-i-riUri. vns^ i:u:nrnir vEi. Its. Aflevne. 

T' A V Tift vits- THiS iOU^ :& C^vrfSnnitUl 



TTiriiT L~jr ZJiz^iT ^i. Trenr ^xst limbs, 
fi J .^=^7 :oij. 4 ^rizz^ baidL ;u^ a ruddy 
j.rAZr^i^'^iz. fii.:^ 7cZ2iiir C'f ccoiirr air and 
: . !!. -g-fa'c-^. Eis irii^t ijccicacidi was neat, 

er-T'^ r^y lEirt^z. a2>i his Uack 



. . ' . i .>. - A A*. . 



^. -.i^IT-a 4^ > X'i 



^^ r. 'ir-w^ coaifcftahle loose- 



L^>. Hr read ihe J:}ak Bull newi^paper, 
wore rrK'ZLT hz'Cus aiid a wcollv hat. saw no 
Kami ill ibe iLeatre, pK>videl Shakspeare 
R^ipplied the play, and woxild as soon have 
thought of calling moming-serrice by the 
name of matins, or of oideiing a cassock- 
ve^t, afi he would have done of shaving his 
h<;a/l in emulation of Brother Ignatius. He 
wa a good parish priest of the pattern of 




THE CLOUDS GATHER. 33 

1820, and did his duty ungrudgingly in a 
queer old-fashioned style that was illogical, 
no doubt, but which won the love of the 
poor at his gate. The bishop, too, had a 
considerable respect for William AUeyne. 

He was very hot, now, was the vicar of 
St. Eanswith's, and in mortal fear lest his 
left foot, tender still from the last attack of 
his hereditary gout, should be trodden on 
by some careless heel. But he felt a certain 
pride and satisfaction, too, in giving pretty 
Amy his arm, and in hearing various lauda- 
tory whispers, which the sight of the good- 
looking young stranger in the mauve bonnet 
elicited from Slochester amateurs of female 
charms. And Amy really looked imusually 
well, for her cheeks were glowing, and her 
eyes were sparkling ; she was evidently 
excited on some subject or other. Such 
was the case. Charles Ford was still up in 
London ; but Lady Flavia Clare was known 

VOL. II. D 



34 LADT FLAYIA. 

to be a stall-keeper at the hncj fiur^ and 
Amy was anticipating the pleasure with 
which she and her quondam schoolfellow 
would greet one another. There is some- 
thing passionate in those feminine friend- 
uliips that girls form, and Amy was true 
still to her old affection. She had persuaded 
herself that her letter had never reached 
lior friend, or that the reply, through some 
[)OHtal defalcation, had miscarried. The ap- 
parent unkindness of the last few months, 
slio had forced herself . no hard task for 
one HO gentle and good . to ignore or ex- 
plain away. She was sure that her dear 
friend loved her still; but yet her heart 
throbbed in a quick apprehensive way at 
tlie thought of their meeting thus abruptly, 
and in public. 

** That's Miss Vavasour, at the great stall 
where so many people are gathered. No, 
not where you are looking . the tall girl in 




THE CLOUDS GATHER. 35 

blue . a fine young woman, quite the belle 
of the county. She puts me in mind of a 
dahlia . ^rich, and dark, and stately. But I 
think your friend Lady Flavia is by far 
the prettier of the two. We shall see her 
directly. Quite a pleasant surprise," said 
the vicar, and he did not feel Amy's arm 
tremble as it rested in his, so fully was he 
occupied in making his way without detri- 
ment to his own gouty foot or the skirts of 
his fair neighbours. The military band 
was playing a wild waltz. The pressure 
of the people was denser at the point which 
the uncle and niece had reached than it was 
anywhere else, and they progressed slowly, 
followed by Mrs. Alley ne and the colonel. 
Suddenly they came upon the bishop, sleek, 
black, and glossy as to his garments, as if 
his lordship's broadcloth had been cunningly 
woven from silk, not wool, supple, smiling, 
and slightly nervous as to his deportment, 



36 LADT FLAYIA. 

yet obviously anxious to unite dignity with 
conciliation. The episcopal office is not an 
easy one, now-a-days, to fill with credit or 
comfort, especiaUy if the holder be a thin- 
skinned personage with very Kttle of the 
Anax Andron for that sensitive epidermis 
to cover. The Bishop of Slochester was an 
excellent man, and his sins of commission, 
to use the technical phrase, were wonder- 
fully few; but his was not the head on 
which a mitre sat becomingly. One glance 
at the fat, flabby, white face, at the weak 
mouth and vacillating eye, at the pompous, 
yet pleading helplessness of the good pre- 
late's manner, was enough. Bishop Dibbs 
was an extreme example of the round man 
stuck into the three-cornered hole. 

" How d'ye do ? how d'ye do, AUeyne ?" 
" How do you do, my lord ? Getting on 
famously here, I should think ! The fair 
will bring in more than was expected." 



^ 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 37 

" Yes, yes," answered the bishop, furtively 
wiping his forehead, and looking as if he 
were not quite sure whether to find it hot 
might not be construed by some censor or 
other into a shirking of his episcopal duties. 
** Mrs. Dibbs is much pleased ; Mrs. Dibbs 
is delighted. Your wife quite well, I hope ? 
Good'hje to you !" 

And as the prelate shuffled off crablike, 
a view was obtained of the circle around 
the stall where the buyers and chatterers 
were thickest, and whence came the sounds 
of incessant laughter and conversation. The 
focus of all this was immediately around a 
young lady whose stature was rather below 
the average, who was dressed in white, and 
whose dark curling hair was worn with a 
sovereign contempt for fashion. But it was 
evident that fashion did not resent this 
rebellion, for the crowd of customers and 
spectators was even greater than that which 



t 



38 LADT FLAYIA. 

rallied round Miss Violet Vavasour. Ladjr 
Mortlake and her daughters were there, 
and Sir Neville Beecham, who had become 
insolvent by reason of his frequent pur- 
chases, and now stood gaping admiringly 
at the beautiful stall-keeper. There, too, 
were many of the county grandees, of the 
Spiceport folks, of the officers in garrison, 
and of other miscellaneous people. There, 
too, were London exquisites temporarily 
airing their elegance in the country, and 
whom the county papers, on Saturday, 
would announce, with a flourish of trum- 
pets^ as ^'a brilliant and distinguished 
company, among whom we noticed Lord 
Plantagenet Vere ; Captain the Honour- 
able Alured Fitzalaric, of the Guards; 
the Right Honourable Stephen Skinner, 
of the Direct Taxation Office ; BuUamy 
Pledge, Esq., M.P. ; Count Ruffanoff and 
Baron TufiTanoff, of the Russian Embassy ; 




THE CLOUDS GATHER. 39 

Crespigny Cremer, Esq., of the Foreign 

Office," &c. 

Mrs. Dibbs was in her glory. The re- 
ceipts were great ; and she should be able to 
pour more into the common purse than the 
dean could hope to do. Lady Flavia Clare 
was a great success. She was beating Miss 
Violet Vavasour out of the field. She was 
new, and that is something with a fickle 
public ; but her merits did not depend on 
mere novelty. Her beauty, her readiness of 
repartee, the charming half-infantine grace 
with which she did her work as an amateur- 
fihopwoman, more like a lovely overgrown 
child playing at some game, than a genuine 
trader, won all eyes, and not a few hearts. 
She chained the London dandies, Vere and 
Fitzalaric, to the neighbourhood of her 
counter. She bewitched the 'last sixpence 
out of the pocket of Sir Neville, and indeed 
that unlettered baronet was seriously re- 



40 LADY PLAVIA. 

volving in his mind as to whether he could 
not revert to the principles of primitive 
barter, and "swop" his drop-chain and 
gold sleeve-buttons for papier-mache en- 
velope-cases and malachite pen-trays, so as 
again to have an excuse for drawing the 
flattering attention of the lovely sylph upon 
his flaxen-headed self. 

Yes, Lady Flavia Clare was 'a great 
success. She was happy, sparkling, in lie 
most mischievously high spirits. She was 
in her element now, conquering rivals, 
turning the heads of all men, making 
simple swains draw involuntary compari- 
sons between their engaged ones and that 
peerless Titania who reigned over the stall 
on which their wondering eyes were bent. 
Dear Georgy was a good girl, of course, 
and Robert loved her ; but how large and 
clumsy her hands looked when compared 
with that tiny white hand that was now 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 41 

proffering to Eobert a guinea bouquet of 
lilies of the valley ; such a hand ! too per- 
fectly beautiful to need the glitter of rings 
to adorn it. Georgy was pretty . to doubt 
it would be treason ; but she looked quite 
dowdy and coarse when compared with that 
pure white brow, those pink-flushed cheeks, 
those bright blue eyes, glittering with lam- 
bent light, that mass of ebony curls, to 
which Georgy's braids of hair, charitably 
called auburn, seemed so poor and conunon. 
But those were not the only triumphs. 
Sober fathers of families, broken in for so 
inany years to run quietly in double har- 
ness, that they might have been warranted 
in any mart in Christendom, suddenly liirew 
off a few lustres of their age, and became 
spendthrift slaves to the Circe from Harble- 
down. They crowded about her, and 
bought the privilege of a few smiles and a 
few words at any price she chose to set 



42 LADY PLAVIA. 

on the stock-in-trade of pretty toys heaped 
up around her. She took their money, and 
laughed at them, at their compliments, at 
the melancholy expression that the old boys 
contrived to throw into their poor old eyes ; 
but she laughed so good-humouredly that 
they took no offence. 

It was afterwards, when sad and terrible 
events had caused that bright holiday of the 
fair to stand out like a shining landmark 
against a dark background of black clouds . 
it was afterwards remembered that through- 
out that afternoon Lady Flavia had not 
said one word that even hostility itself 
could could call ill-natured. And this 
could not be said of all the fair saleswomen. 
Mrs. Bangham was giving her tongue free 
play, and she spared no one whose appear- 
ance or antecedents pointed them out as 
butts for her boisterous ridicule. Mrs. 
Faddleton was having her verbal revenge 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 43 

for the criticisms of the ** slow coaches '' of 
the place, and was flippant with many, and 
spiteful with some. But Lady Flavia's wit 
wounded nobody. Her arrows, though 
sharply shot, were not such as rankled in 
the wound. The laughter around her stall 
was as harmless as summer lightning. 

** Those people are just going to move, 
so now, my dear, you see her at last,'' said 
Mr. Alleyne. 

"Her! where? Why, uncle Alleyne, 

you don't mean " said Amy, bewildered, 

and glancing up at her uncle in blank sur- 
prise. 

The vicar was just then returning the 
condescending bow of Mrs. Dibbs, who 
stood beside Lady Mortlake, near the stall. 

" That's Mrs. Dibbs, the bishop's wife," 
he whispered; "and that's the countess, 
your friend's cousin, and the others are 
her '' 



44 LADT FLAYIA. 

"But Flavia! where is Flavia?" asked 
Amy, with quite a quaver in her voice; 
and she trembled very much. A surge of 
the crowd swept them forward at the same 
moment, and bore them close up to the 
stall. The vicar looked down, surprised. 
" What's the matter. Amy ? Too hot for 
you, eh ? I feel quite stifled myself." 

" No, no," gasped Amy, while her eyes 
dilated, and her lips grew white, and all the 
bright colour faded out of her face. ** Who 
. ^who is that at the stall ? I did not catch 
the name, perhaps." 

The vicar turned to his brother-in-law 
and his wife, then close behind. ** Eichard, 
I'm afraid your daughter's ill. Heat too 
much for " 

**No, no," again earnestly whispered 
Amy. "Only one word, uncle! Who is 
that young lady, in front, with the dark 
curls r 



\ 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 45 

**Who?" answered the vicar, arching 
his grey eyebrows. "Why, Lady Flavia 
Clare, of course. There's no mistak- 
ing . Heyday! Ford, Dolly, dear, 

let's get her out of this." 

It was too late. Amy, whose ghastly 
pale face had suddenly alarmed the good 
clergyman, fell back, fainting, and lay 
helpless and insensible upon the floor. In- 
stantly there was a rush and a cry : ** Some- 
thing wrong ! somebody taken ill ! Oh, 
it's a lady that has fainted, is it ?" 

Then everybody seemed to converge to- 
wards the spot, moved by compassion, by 
curiosity. Or by that odd nervous thrill that 
pervades crowds, but which is neither one 
nor the other. But Richard Ford had 
caught up his daughter in his strong arms, 
and was pushing his way to the door. 
Everybody called to everybody to stand 
back and give the sufferer air, and as the 



t 



46 LADY FLA VIA. 

AUejnes and their guests passed, many 
voices were raised. "Poor thing! poor 
thing!"." It's the heat"." Give her air'' 
. "Open one of the windows" . "Cold 
water ". " Brandy ". " Burnt feathers ". 
"Try these smelling salts" . "Here's a 
vinaigrette, Mr. Alleyne;** &c. But the 
colonel never halted till he had got out into 
the freer air of the landing-place ; and there 
they stopped, and Amy revived a little. 

" You are better now, pet ? It was the 
heat," said the colonel, supporting the 
child's head. 

" take me home, take me away ; please 
take me home 1" said Amy, piteously ; and 
home they conveyed her forthwith, in one 
of the many carriages that were kindly 
offered by their owners for the accommoda- 
tion of ** the poor young lady." 

" It was the heat," said experienced Mrs. 
Alleyne. 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 47 

It SO happened that Lady Flavia Clare 
had not seen Amy fall ; her attention had 
been claimed elsewhere at that moment, and 
when the commotion caused her to turn her 
head, the crowd had closed in so as com- 
pletely to hide Amy from her view. She 
merely gathered from common rumour that 
a lady had fainted. 

" It's a niece of old AUeyne's," said one 
of the bystanders, to whom the clergyman 
was known ; " quite a stranger here. I 
saw her at the cathedral on Sunday. She's 
rather pretty, poor thing." 

Lady Flavia turned towards the last 
speaker. ** Was it a young lady I noticed 
just now in front of the stall, in a mauve 
bonnet, with light brown hair, and rather a 
pretty face ? She was very much flushed, 
and had a scared look ; was that the person 
who fainted ?" asked Lady Flavia, with an 
eagerness that surprised herself. The truth 



48 LADY FLA VIA. 

was, tliat she had noticed Amy's eyes fixed 
upon herself in a sort of inquiring wonder, 
as of one who tries to trace a resemblance, 
or to recognise some greatly-altered fece 
that was once familiar. 

The gentleman appealed to, a spruce 
young curate in an M.B. waistcoat, who 
was chaplain-expectant to his uncle the 
bishop, so soon as the heavy clergyman now 
occupying that post should have made up 
his mind to accept the benefice of Fenny 
Kolwich, with its great tithes, ague, and 
isolation, replied at once : ** That is the 
young lady, sketched to the life. 'Pon my 
word. Lady Flavia, you have a power of 
dashing oflF a portrait that . that . ^why . of 

course " But before the young divine 

could piece the broken thread of his discourse 
into a compliment to Lady Flavians faculties 
of perception and description. Captain Fitz- 
alaric chimed in : "I noticed the girl when 



THE CLOUDS GATHER. 49 

she came in, and to tell you the truth I 
envied her a bit, she showed such a delight- 
ful aptitude for being pleased . such as / 
haven't felt for ages and ages, not since I 
went to the pit of the Haymarket, and ate 
hardbake, on my way home from Eton. 
She's the daughter of that tall old gentleman, 
a fine old fellow to look at . ^seen a deal of 
service and that . Colonel Forbes or Ford, 
or some such name . yes. Ford. Shouldn't 
wonder if he's the Colonel Ford whose re- 
tirement was mentioned, with a puff about 
distinguished services, the other day, in the 
Army and Navy. He looked like a Quitti. 
She's a Miss Ford ; but I'm afraid her plea- 
sure's spoilt for to-day . a pity, too !" said 
the good-natured guardsman, in conclu- 
sion. 

Ford! And with a father fresh from 
India ! The mention of that name was a 
wet-blanket, under which Lady Flavia 

VOL. II. E 




50 LADY FLAVIA. 

(Glare's joyous spirits dropped. A shade 
came over her bright face, like an envious 
cloud intervening between the eartli and 
the sunshine. She talked and laughed 
still ; but the music had gone out of her 
laugh, and the charm from her words. She 
longed to be at home, alone, to think. The 
unlucky utterance of that name had roused 
a hundred thoughts, a hundred fears, and 
she was sick at heart, and weary of the 
show. It was poor fun, after all, keeping a 
stall. The band played execrably, in a 
wooden, soulless style. The flowers gave 
out a heavy perfume that clogged the hot 
air. The crowd was simply a bore. Where 
was the satisfaction of cajoling the coin of 
niggardly purchasers out of their porte- 
nionnaies ? Where the pleasure of fasci- 
nating boobies, commercial and agricul- 
tural ? Lady Flavia began to feel as if the 
whole fancy fair were one great tiresome 




THE CLOUDS GATHER. 61 

dream, from which she longed to wake. 
She cared nothing for the fact, that as her 
smiles grew rarer, and her merry prattle 
less continuous, many of her lieges proved 
recreant, and went off to swell the throng 
around Miss Yavasour. She only wished 
the whole affair well over. That fainting 
girl, that Miss Ford, had spoiled her 
triumph. 

It was over at last. The ultimate six- 
pence had been drained from moneyed 
humanity ; and the band had played out its 
last tune, and had gathered up its music- 
stands and instruments, brazen and wooden, 
and marched home to barracks. The car- 
riages drove off . one of them. Lord Mort- 
lake*s, carried off the admired of all. Lady 
Flavia Clare. None of the young men, 
militarv and clerical, who stood on the 
steps and took off their hats as the 
aristocratic beauty was whirled away, 



52 LADY FULVIA. 

knew what a heavy heart, and what a 
busy, plotting brain she carried back with 
her to her dead father's noble house of 
Ilarbledown. 




53 



CHAPTER III. 



CONFIDENCES. 



" I WILL tell you^ papa, now they are gone," 
whispered Amy, nestKng down her heavy 
aching head upon her father s shoulder, and 
looking fondly up at his sun-browned face, 
and the soft smile that belied all the stern- 
ness of the iron mouth and the grey mous- 
taches. I could not speak before Aunt 
Alleyne; she thinks" . and here Amy 
smiled in spite of . her sorrowful looks. 
"she thinks she knows young girls like 
me, and everything they can possibly feel 
and wish, exactly, just as that lecturer we 
saw at the Polytechnic poured a pink liquid 




54 LADY FLATIA. 

into a yellow liquid, and they both became 
white, or took fire, or whatever it was, just 
as he had told us. But Aunt Alleyne does 
not know about this.** And here Amy 
paused, and began to tremble again ; and 
Colonel Ford spoke to her in a soothing 
tone, such as he might have used to calm 
her to sleep in some infantine ailment long 
years ago : " Yes, yes, pet. But you must 
not worry yourself with talking just now, 
dear. You shall go to sleep, and I will 
mount guard, and see nobody disturbs you. 
It was only the heat.*' 

" It was not the heat, papa !** cried Amy, 
passionately. ** I let my aunt have her own 
way, and Uncle William too. They are 
good kind folks; but they cannot under- 
stand anything beyond the regular hum- 
drum of everyday life. And this is some- 
thing new . something strange and dread- 
ful. Papa, I really feel as if I had been 



COXFIDENCES. 55 

near something wicked and hurtful ; some- 
thing that wished ill to me, and would 
harm me if it could. I shook all over when 
her eyes met mine, and yet indeed . indeed 
I am not a coward, generally. The French 
girls said it was English hetise^ when I did 
not scream at harmless poor toads and 
spiders, as they did* 

Colonel Ford laughed, and then looked 
grave, and he patted his daughter's hand 
with infinite gentleness. " Well, Amy," 
he said, '*you shall tell it all to papa* I 
believe that will be the best, after all. 
Whose eyes do you speak of?" 

Amy's answer was made in a low but a 
firm voice : " The eyes of her who was 
pointed out to me as my dear friend and 
school-companion, as the Lady Flavia Clare, 
who was as a sister to me at the convent of 

Our Lady of Carmeh Papa . the lady 
whom Uncle William pointed out to me is 



56 LADY FLAVIA. 

not Lady Flavia Clare . she is sot my dear 
Flavia. But why, why does she bear her 
name and hold her place in the world ?'* 

The colonel made a wry face. He was 
sorry to hear his daughter speak thus, not 
that he in the shghtest degree believed that 
there was any real foundation for what she 
said. He was not a credulous man, or, if his 
nature inclined him to believe others to be as 
truthful as himself, long habit had steeled him 
against too easy faith. He had sat on silken 
cushions, face to face with maharajahs and 
their ministers and generals, and had 
listened to falsehoods the most unblushing 
that Aryan brain could spin, and Aryan 
tongue could tell, yet never moved a 
muscle of his countenance. He had seen 
rich native contractors, caught red-handed 
in peculations, grovel abjectly at his feet 
and embrace his knees, as they tearfuUy 
swore by Siva and Brahma, and the great 




CONFIDENCES. 57 

oath on Gunga water, that they were 
innocent of having wronged the Company 
Bahadur of a single rupee, and that all the 
witnesses were suborned perjurers. But 
still it vexed him that this delusion should 
take possession of his child. He was 
confident in her truthfulness, but it an- 
noyed him that she should be capable of 
such romantic folly. He tried to laugh it 
oflF, as he said : " My little girl must not 
take her notions from novels, nor imagine 
Enghsh society in the nineteenth century 
to be full of crimes and horrors, like Mrs. 
Radcliffe's romances . which, by the by, 
were about the only novels I ever read, 
except Scott's, and I remember thinking 
them mighty fine compositions before I 
went out to India. But if you will take 
my word for it, life is a prosaic affair for 
most of us, with its duties, and affections, 
and hopes, and joys, and griefs, no doubt ; 



58 LADY FLAVIA. 

but these are quite enougli to bear, Amy 
dear, without any wonderful adventures 
and soul-harrowing revelations. You have 
too quick an imagination, pet, and are too 
ready to take every windmill for a giant, 
like Don Quix " 

" don't, pray, don't," cried Amy, ahnost 
petulantly. " Papa, you are much wiser 
and older than I am, and I would rather 
trust to your judgment than to mine, a 
thousand times over. But not in this case. 
There is no sentimental fancy here . indeed, 
indeed there is not. The lady who kept 
the stall to-day was not the same who stood 
sobbing by my bedside, a few months ago, 
in our little room in the French convent. 
I had a perfect view of her. I could not be 
mistaken. She was a stranger." 

There is a contagion in earnestness ; and 
it is very hard to disbelieve what we are 
told by a person who has entire and fervid 




C0XF1DEXCE8. 59 

faith in the assertion itself. The colonel 
began to waver in his opinion. " You are 
sure," he said, " that the person your uncle 
William showed you was the bond, fide Lady 
Flavia Clare who kept the stall ? I did not 
see her myself, at all, though I heard some 
silly young men prating about her beauty, 
as if she had been a wonder of the world. 
But over the people's heads I could see that 
there were several ladies about the stall. 
Perhaps you made a mistake, and this was 
. some sister or cousin." 

Amy shook her bead in decisive dissent. 
" I am sure there was no mistake," she said. 
"The other ladies, uncle AUeyne told me, 
were Mrs. Dibbs, the bishop's wife, and 
Lady Mortlake and her daughters, two fine 
tall young ladies, not in the least like that 

. that . 0, papa, what puzzles me is, 

that there vms a likeness, a very slight like- 
ness, but still a perceptible one, between 



60 LADY FLAVIA. 

Flavia and the girl I saw to-day. They 
certainly are alike ; and Flavia too, like 
her, had beautiful long dark hair, but she 
did not wear it in loose curls, as that other 
did ; and 1 think Flavia was taller ^" 

" Depend upon it, Amy," interrupted the 
colonel, ** either you are mistaken . different 
styles of dress, and different habits of life, 
make a surprising change in a young lady 
at the plastic age of eighteen . either you 
are mistaken, or there is another explana- 
tion of the mystery. There are two Lady 
Flavia Clares ; the name very probably be- 
longs to more than one noble family, and 
your school-friend is the daughter of some 
other earl than an Earl of Mortlake.'* 

But Amy refused to receive this theory, 
however plausible it might sound. She was 
positive that the lady pointed out to her was 
not her friend ; and she was equally sure 
that her friend had been a daughter of that 



\ 



CONFIDENCES. 61 

Earl of Mortlake whose death had been 
announced to her by Dr. Perinet, who had 
heard with regret from Mr. Royston, on his 
return to the ch&teau, that the late lord had 
not lived long enough to see his long- 
banished daughter before his eyes closed on 
the world. There was a Dod's Peerage in 
the room . even homely Mrs. AUeyne could 
not dispense with that inevitable volume . 
and its pink and gold binding caught Amy's 
eye. The pages were hastily rustled over, 
and search was made for the noble surname 
of Clare. 

" I told you so," said the colonel, triumph- 
antly, when the oracle announced that Right 
Honourable the Earl of Sheemess, in the 
peerage of Great Britain, to say nothing of 
Right Honourable the Earl of Kilmanning 
and Viscount Coolyboy, in the peerage of 
Ireland, were Clares. But alas ! among the 
numerous offspring of both these illustrious 



62 LADY FLAVIA. 

persons, no daughter bore the name of 
Flavia. There was but one Lady Flavia 
Clare, and she was the only child of Francis, 
seventh Earl of Mortlake. 

" I can't make it out," said the .colonel, 
knitting his brows thoughtfully. 

A my went on to relate, for the first time, 
how very keenly she had felt the sting of 
her schoolfellow's apparent caprice and 
neglect ,. how unkind conduct and fickleness 
on the part of Flavia astonished and pained 
her, the more because they seemed so utterly 
foreign to her friend's character ; how Flavia 
had been tlie most simple, humble-minded, 
thoroughly good of all possible good girls, 
not a bit proud of the rank and prospective 
wealth that had made more than one juve- 
nile companion ready to fawn upon her' and 
flatter her, since money and station will 
produce their effect even in a convent ; how 
nothing could be more dissimilar than the 




CONFIDENCES. 63 

manner of the Lady Flavia of the house of 
Our Lady of Carmel, timid, reserved, and 
rather grave, and the manner of that spark- 
ling Lady Flavia of whom Amy had caught 
a glimpse in the Slochester town-hall. 

The colonel listened, indulgently at first, 
then intently, and presently a crowd of 
thoughts came thickly pressing into his 
mind, each thought with a tongue, as it 
were, that cried out clamorously to him that 
what his daughter said was worthy of more 
attention than men of the world are usually 
willing to pay to the sayings of an inexpe- 
rienced girl on the threshold of womanhood. 
There was nothing shallow or pert in Amy 
Ford; her youth gave her the power of 
being easily pleased, and her knowledge of 
life was necessarily slight ; but in listening 
to her as she spoke with all the earnest 
warmth that was in her heart, the colonel 
recognised in her some of the clear-sighted 



64 LADY FLAVIA. 

common-sense and energy of purpose by 
which he had himself made his way out 
of the ruck of his Anglo-Indian contem- 
poraries. 

Although the old soldier had seen fit to 
check his child's supposed taste for detecting 
romantic mysteries in the midst of the com- 
mon-place events of life, he was not such a 
disbeliever in such matters as he chose to 
appear to be. He had heard very strange 
stories on very good authority, and had 
spoken with the actors in dramas of real Hfe 
compared with which Macbeth and Othello 
would show but as milk-and-water present- 
ments of human wickedness and passion. 
He had diplomatised with a turbaned 
Richard III. whose guilty slumbers ought 
to have been haunted by the ghosts of more 
nephews than two, of more wives than one, 
and of certainly more than a solitary bro- 
ther. He had been envoy to a queen- 




CONFIDENCES. 65 

mother regent who had received him seated 
on a throne, under which it was matter of 
notoriety that a shrieking slave-girl had 
been buried alive. Horrible tales of the 
dark doings in the dark places of the zenana 
were as familiar to his ear as the Newgate 
Calendar to a Newgate ordinary, and these 
he knew to be for the most part only too 
literally true. 

But these things had been done by dark- 
skinned humanity, that huddled itself up in 
shawls and Dacca muslin, and wore bangles 
on ite arms, and diamonds in ite cap of state, 
and not seldom a jewelled nose-ring. All 
that cruelty and treachery, and vile greed 
of gold, and pleasure, and revenge . so 
Colonel Ford fancied . sprouted like foul 
fungi under the Asiatic sun alone, and had 
been left to the eastward of the Cape of 
Good Hope, as the Company's old officers 
used to leave their miUtary rank, coming 

VOL. II. F 



66 LADY FLATIA 

home dvilians in the eye of British law. 
The colonel could not easily bring himself 
to believe that the same passions conld exist 
in a bosom cased in broadcloth^ cut by Poole 
or Moses, as in a breast swathed with 
Benares silk or Delhi kincobs. He had 
chosen to fancy, in spite of police reports, 
that the mechanism of modem European 
society was so nicely counterpoised, and so 
carefully oiled, as to work without jarring 
or strainiilg, and that accidents were all but 
impossible. But now he doubted. 

While Bichard Ford sat bending his 
shaggy grey eyebrows, and paying what 
was but a forced and partial attention to 
his daughter's words, so active was his own 
practised mind in scanning the case accord- 
ing to the meagre evidence he possessed, 
Mr. AUeyne the vicar came in, sorely dis- 
composed in countenance and bearing. 

"Here's a pretty business, Ford," he 



CONFIDENCES. 67 

said ; " really, people seem to think a par-r 
son a sort of Jack-of-all-trades, for they 
come to me to help them out of every 
hobble that they get into. Here's Mrs. 
Turner, the sick-nurse, sitting in my study, 
looking as if she were sick herself, and, 
indeed, I had to give her some brandy for 
what she calls her spasms ; but, the truth 
is, the woman's frightened out of what wits 
she has; and the doctor being out on his 
roiinds, she comes to me as coolly as if I 
kept a register-office for the constant supply 
of Mrs. Gramps. It's a shame and a plague, 
just as I wanted to see after my sermon and 
the celery-beds." 

All this time the Worthy clergyman was 
jerking to and fro about the room, adjusting 
his neckcloth, hunting for his gloves, and 
brushing his hat with his coat-sleeve, evi- 
dently preparing to sally forth into the 
outer world. 



68 LADY FLAVIA. 

** What's the matter, though ? You have 
not told us that yet," said the colonel with a 
smile. 

Mr. Alleyne wheeled round : ** Bless me, 
I forgot. Well, then, after lunch, and just 
before we started for that luckless fancy 
fair . and, by the bye. Miss Amy, I hope 
you feel better now? that's right! . the 
landlady of the Royal George hotel, which 
is just within the bounds of my parish . 
more's the pity . came in a state of excite- 
ment to say that a strange gentleman, who 
seemed to know no one in Slochester, has 
been taken very ill at her house, and was 
lying in Number Thirty-nine, in a burning 
fever, and light-headed. Would I please to 
come over ? I asked if she had sent for a 
doctor, and it seems she had called at Smith- 
son's door . Smithson attends us, or did, 
when the children were at home . but he 
was out ; and so, in great distress of mind, 




CONFIDENCES. 69 

she had come round to me. Well, it came 
out that Mrs. Eoiight's distress was rather 
selfish, for she was terribly afraid the sick 
man should die in the inn, and give her the 
annoyance of a funeral, and perhaps an 
inquest.'* 

"An inquest!" exclaimed the colonel. 
"Why, surely you stay-at-home English 
folks don't insist on the formality of 
an inquest, whenever a patient dies of 
fever ?*' 

" Mr. AUeyne stared. " Fever, no,'* said 
he ; " but when a fellow receives a charge 
of Number Six shot in his ribs and shoul- 
ders, and lingers a few weeks, they call in 
the coroner, just as if he had been left dead 
on the spot. Didn't I say that this was the 
gentleman who was wounded by some un- 
known person, in a lane near Chartley 
Parva, and who was supposed to have 
got well, and would have been well but 



I 



70 LADY FLAVIA. 

for his own confounded folly . Captain 
Royston ?" 

" Captain Royston !" exclaimed Amy from 
the sofa. ** I wonder if he belongs to those 
Roystons I was speaking of, papa ; the 
family that Flavia was so intimate with, and 
who lived in the Chateau des Roches, at 
Grresnez, near the convent. I know that 
Mr. Royston, the gentleman who brought 
Flavia to England when her father was so 
ill, had a son who was called Captain Roys- 
ton, and that he was at home during part of 
the time when Flavia visited there. She 
never liked him, though I remember teasing 
her about him, and asking whether he was 
handsome." 

"Royston!" said the colonel in his turn. 
"The name comes back to me, somehow. 
Something about a court-martial at Poonah 
or Kirkee, and a sentence of dismissal for 
gambling and dishonourable practices. It 




CONFIDENCES. 71 

may be quite another person, though, of 
course, and I don't remember the facts of 
the case." 

" I can't get in a word edgeways, if you 
take me up in that fashion," said the vicar 
of St. Eanswith's, with an air of serio-comic 
distress ; " but the long and short of it is 
this : Mrs. Knight wanted to know whether 
the law would countenance her in turning 
her sick guest out of doors, and I rated her 
pretty sharply for her inhumanity. Then 
she got into a more Christian frame of mind, 
and went to fetch a nurse, one of our three 
Slochester nurses, Mrs. Turner, a respect . 
able woman, in spite of my joke about her 
being of the Gramp sisterhood . she sat up 
six nights with our eldest boy Willy, when 

he had the scarlet fever, and But I 

never could keep to the thread of my dis- 
course out of the pulpit. The fact Js, that 
the patient is raving, and the nonsense he 



72 LADY PLAVIA. 

talks is so frightful, or she says it is, that 
she is afraid to stay in the room. Her 
nerves are none of the strongest, and she 
really is alarmed, and has come to resign 
her post. Mrs. Ovens, one of the other two 
nurses, is a woman who would nurse all 
Bedlam, I believe, without attending to a 
word ; but she won't be at liberiy till late 
to-night, it seems. So I must go." And 
the vicar began putting on his gloves. 

" You must go . to play sick-nurse ?" 
asked the colonel. 

Mr. AUeyne said yes, he must go, or Mrs. 
' AUeyne must t-ake the place of the craven 
nurse until the more eflScient Mrs. Ovens 
should be ready to enter on her new 
duties. This Captain Royston, however 
much of a stranger and a scamp he might 
be, was temporarily a parishioner ; and if 
he had been cashiered by sentence of all the 
courts-martial from Cape Comorin to the 




CONFIDENCES. 73 

Ejhyber Pass, lie was entitled to be taken 
care of in tlie hour of sickness. The 
AUeynes, husband and wife, did a great 
deal of parochial work of this kind when 
ague or typhus was busy in Slochester, and 
though this was an unexpected call, the 
vicar was by no means disposed to treat it 
with neglect. 

"Stay !" said the colonel, suddenly getting 
up from his seat at the head of the old- 
fashioned scroll sofa ; " I'll walk down 
with you. It won't be the first gunshot 
wound I shall have seen, nor the first 
delirious patient. I do not profess to be 
a doctor, but I may be of use in this sort 
of thing." 

So the brothers-in-law, clerical and mili- 
tary, left the house together, and Mrs. 
AUeyne came to keep Amy company, and 
favoured her with a good deal of her 
verbal wisdom, cut and dried, with a par- 



74 LADY FLAVIA. 

ticular appUcation to almost every yariely of 
human trouble, and notably to the case of 
" young things of your age, my dear," who 
faint at fancy fairs. 




to 



CHAPTER IV. 

* 

THE GENTLEMAN IN NUMBER THIRTT-NINE. 

** Which it's dreadful, sir, even to think of 
such goings on ; and I've brought up six 
out of eight ; and if it wasn't that the eldest, 
sir, who's a sawyer, begging your pardon, in 
the Royal Dockyard at Portsmouth, hadn't 
broke his arm, which the doctors said it was 
a commutated fracture, and he obligated to 
come home to his native air for nursing, and 
has been heavy on a narrow income ; but 
leastways so I have got my bread for seven- 
and-twenty year, and no complaints, but 
always the first families and the highest 
testimonials ; if you would please to call at 



76 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

Number Six, Bench Street ; and if out, my 
youngest girl will be happy to show the 
certificates framed and glazed from the 
County Infirmary, and never no such un- 
pleasantness " 

Thus far, Mrs. Turner, sick-nurse, as she 

accompanied Colonel Ford and the Rev. 

. 

William AUeyne along the cobble-stoned 
by-streets that led to Pyx Street, where the 
Royal George, a good second-rate hotel, was 
situated. Nor would that worthy lady have 
desisted from her lucid explanation, had not 
lack of breath put a padlock on her fluent 
tongue. As it was, however, she stopped, 
laid her hand on that portion of her shawl 
that might be supposed to cover her heart, 
and panted distressingly, like a drover's dog 
on a hot day. The vicar looked alarmed, 
lest a fresh attack of " spasms," the conven- 
tional malady of Mrs. Turner's sisterhood, 
might supervene, and render spirituous re- 




NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 77 

freshments, not to be obtained without igno- 
minious adjournments to low public-bouses, 
indispensable. 

But Mrs. Turner had only stopped for 
breath, and in the present instance her mind 
was not intent on her favourite nostrums of 
peppermint-drops, gin and cloves, or even 
the sovereign west-country remedy of rum 
and butter. She was indeed as sober by 
choice as most of her hard-worked class; 
and if she had accepted the vicar's cognac, 
it was because she sincerely believed it 
would do her good. She was a respectable 
nurse of the soft sort, one of those bundles 
of shapeless clothes, with a middle-aged 
female inside the crust of the animated 
dumpling, who doze pleasantly in great 
chairs, and wake up periodically to admi- 
nister medicine ; not a rawboned task-mis- 
tress who bullies her victims for their own 
good. She broke out again : " Which I 



78 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

wouldn't, not for no money, listen to such 
gashly things ; and me sitting in the room, 
and shaking like a jelly that hasn't turned 
properly out of the mould ; and though not 
the first time I've attended the light-headed, 
no, not by many, I never, no never, heard a 
gentleman run on so ; and so violent too, 
and under-waiters got to be called in ; but 
Mrs. Ovens, which I'll not deny that she 
has the sperrit of ten such as me, which 
Miss Jemima Ovens she strictly is, never 
having been married, as I was one-and- 
thirty year ago, at St, Eanswith's Church ; 
but afore your reverence's time, sir, though 
Mrs. Ovens is fifty-six or seven, if she's a 
day, and was a ward-woman in the County 
Lunatic But here's the hotel, gentle- 
men. 

Perhaps it was because Mrs. Turner had 
to sit so silent by night, that she indemnified 
her tongue in this manner ; or she may 



NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 79 

merely have been anxious to clear her pro- 
fessional reputation from the charge of 
lightly deserting a sick room; but at any 
rate, she went vigorously on, with no stops 
to -punctuate her oration other than invo- 
luntary gasps for breath, till the party 
arrived at the Royal George, and were 
ushered into tha parlour, where the land- 
lady sat in state among her account-books, 
and a multiplicity of gilt bottles containing 
cordials of a kind obnoxious to the Maine 
Liquor Law. Mrs. Knight had taken to 
heart the vicar's lecture of the morning, 
and was no longer desirous to eject her 
troublesome guest. But she seemed to con- 
sider Captain Royston's presence under her 
roof as a grievous calamity, which she was 
bound to bear resignedly, but not cheerfully. 
No particular change, she said, had taken 
place since the departure of the frightened 
nurse. The poor gentleman was talking 



80 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

very much, sometimes low, sometimes loud 
enough to disturb everybody ; but he had 
not been violent since that time when the 
under-waiter and the chambermaid had 
come to assist Mrs. Turner in restraining 
him from his insane attempt to dash himself 
against the walls. He was ** moaning like" 
now, and rather less restless. Dr. Smithson 
had seen him once, and would look in again 
in the evening. He shook his head . the 
doctor did . when he heard what a deal of 
brandy and soda-water Number Thirty-nine 
had taken since he came, and before he fell 
ill. 

Up-stairs, preceded by the chambermaid 
and followed by the nurse, went the two 
gentlemen ; and before long they heard the 
groans and broken talk of the invahd 
through the painted door of his room. 
They went softly in. The sick man was 
propped up with pillows, his disordered 



NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 81 

hair streaming in tawny profusion over the 
white sheet, and his face terribly haggard, 
shrunken, and sallow, with the veins stand- 
ing out Hke whipcord on his temples. His 
eyes were glaring at vacancy. It was evi- 
dent that he neither knew nor cared that 
strangers were gazing at him. 

"He won't die !" said the colonel, after a 
long look at the sufferer. 

" Thank Heaven for that ! But are you 
sure of what you say ?" half- whispered the 
vicar. 

Colonel Ford gave rather a melancholy 
smile. *' Of course, I am not sure ; I only 
give my opinion. The issue of Hfe or death 
is in higher hands than mine ; but I have 
seen very many of these cases among hard 
drinkers in India. Delirium tremens is 
hideous in itself, but the first attack is 
seldom fatal. It is not until repeated 
paroxysms have worn out the nervous 

VOL. n. G 



82 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

system, that the sufferer sinks into his 
grave ; and I think there is hope here." 

" Dr. Smithson didn't say it wa^that 
thing with the hard name you called it, 
sir," said Mrs. Turner ; " he seemed to take 
it to he fever from the wound." 

" And so it is,'* said the colonel quietly ; 
" but delirium tremens has come on to com- 
plicate the disorder. Now, just let me have 
my own way. I have seen hundreds of 
these cases, in private soldiers of our Euro- 
peans in India, in oflScers, and others, and 
have been obliged to play nurse and surgeon 
too, in scores of lonely spots where there 
was no medical assistance procurable. This 
poor fellow, I feel sure, is in just such a 
scrape. He has been in India, too, for 
some of that gibberish he was talking just 
now was tolerable Hindustani . he was 
ordering a syce to bring his horse round . 
and I can give a shrewd guess at his history. 



NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 83 

Leave me in charge of him till Mr. Smith- 
son the doctor looks in ; I should like to 
have a word with him about the treatment 
of the complaint, and I will stick to my 
post till Mrs. Ovens relieves me." 

" I'll stop too, if you like ; it won't be so 
dull for you," said Mr. AUeyne, but he could 
not help wincing a little as he made the 
offer. The truth was, that he did not much 
fancy such a patient. All this time, the 
sick man was maundering on with speeches 
that now and then were unintelligible, but 
which sometimes were frightful to hearken 
to, replete with blasphemous words that 
made the vicar's blood run cold. All this 
time, too, the sufferer kept thrusting forth 
his lean hands, as if to push back some 
invisible foe, and once or twice he shrieked 
aloud to have " the snakes, the black, slimy, 
venomous snakes kept away from the bed." 
He saw snakes, he protested, coiling among 



84 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

the curtains, twining about the foot-board, 
creeping over the counterpane, hissing and 
writhing, and he screamed out in an agony 
that they were upon him, and would sting 
him, since no one came to save him, and 
then moaned and sobbed like a child in 
pain. 

This was so different from all the harm- 
less wanderings of such few fever-stricken 
patients as had come under the vicar's 
notice, that he stood aghast and useless in 
the sick room. But Colonel Ford knew 
well enough that all this snake-talk, all this 
terror of threatening monsters and veno- 
mous reptiles, was an almost invariable 
symptom of the disorder. He had heard 
such outcries as this, often and often before, 
shrieked forth by foaming lips of those 
whom he had known and liked, those who 
had been brave and valued officers until the 
demon Drink enslaved them and brought 



\ 



NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 85 

them down to this earthly hell of the 
drunkard. He knew, too, that although 
the sick man was too far gone in delirium 
to see or hear those who were present, yet 
by some subtle instinct their presence 
excited him to his hurt. The room must 
be cleared. Colonel Ford uncorked the 
draught which the surgeon had sent round, 
smelt it and tasted it, and smiled, but he 
was too good-natured and prudent to dis- 
parage Mr. Smithson's prescription before 
the women. 

" This," he thought, as he recorked the 
phial, ** will do neither good nor harm. I 
will have a little chat with the doctor when 
he pays his next visit, and he shall fancy 
the Indian remedy which I shall modestly 
hint at is a suggestion of his own. In the 
meantime, I may safely promise to admim's- 
ter this innocuous stuff according to the 
label, and I shall be on the spot to stop the 



86 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

poor wretch from committing any fata 
imprudence, which is not an unlikely con- 
tingency, with such a set of boobies about 
him." 

But though the colonel thought all this, 
he said much less, merely undertaking to 
give the patient his physic, and to watch 
how the paroxysms aflFected him, until the 
surgeon's second visit and the arrival of the 
nurse* 

" Gt)od-bye, Ford, then," said Mr. AUeyne. 

" ril take care to send Mrs. Ovens the very 
instant she is at liberty. And as for Miss 
Amy, she's pretty well now, and in good 
hands. We'll take care of her. Shall we 
wait dinner ? No ? Well, you'll find some- 
thing kept hot for you when you do come, 
and a bottle of the East India sherry you 
praised yesterday. Good-bye." 

Then Colonel Richard Ford sat as still as a 
mouse beside the bed-head, in that great 




NUMBER THIRTT-NINB. 87 

dimity-covered arm-cliair, that seemed to 
have been constructed expressly for the ac- 
commodation of such rotund matrons as Mrs. 
Turner. The sick man raved on . raved of 
scenes and persons the most incongruous, 
jumbled together in a grim chaotic medley 
. of an old mansion in Yorkshire, where he 
was a boy again, spending his holidays in 
the midst of a flattering court of grooms 
and gamekeepers, tearing after the hounds, 
playing madcap pranks in the village, 
" taking off his wine like a man " in com- 
pany with the hard-drinking set who sur- 
rounded his fathers horse-shoe# table, and 
getting precociously tipsy amid the noisy 
approval of his seniors. Hip, hip, hurrah ! 
He was not in Yorkshire now . he was iu 
London, with full pockets, on what he called 
a spree, and jolly companions were around 
him. Hip, hip, hurrah ! again. There was 
a grand feast, and they were wetting his 



88 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

commission, as the phrase went, wetting it 
in a red sea of strong heady port, with 
punch to finish what champagne and Mo- 
selle had hegun. Then India, with more 
revelry, play, quarrels, wild orgies, fierce 
grumbling and discontent, curses on the 
climate, duty, discipline, on the scanty re- 
mittances from home, on the luck of the 
ruined gamester, on the heavy interest 
charged by Indian banks, and the hard 
terms of Parsee usurers. 

" Flames and fury !" he broke out, inter- 
larding his discourse with many interjec- 
tions best unwritten ; " confound you ! how 
dare you talk of cheating ? Who says the 
cards were marked ? Who says that fellow 
Hartopp was making signals the whole time 
the game went on ? Loaded dice, forsooth ! 
I'll cut the throat of the first man who talks 
of loaded dice. Gentlemen, play on the 
square. I'm a gentleman . a Royston of 




NUMBER THIRTY-NINB. 89 

Royston. There's not a man in the regi- 
ment has better blood in his veins, nor half 
so good as mine; and you . you pitiful 
sneak . ^your father was a tailor, wasn't he ? 
it's too much honour for you to be allowed 
to lose your money in a gentleman's com- 
pany. Hold your tongue, you snivelling 
fool ! Write home to your mother, and tell 
her any lie you like : she'll send you the 
blunt, I'll warrant you, when she hears 
you're in a scrape. Say you stood security 
for a brother-officer; but no names, hang 
you. Come, a little more punch and another 
cheroot, and I'll give you your revenge at 
anything you like . ^blind hookey, ecart^, 

Van John, and we won't play high, you 
baby . just a chick of rupees f 

Presently, he was in fierce dispute with 
some imaginary opponent on the subject of 
a horse-race, and then he started up in bed 
and tried to clutch the colonel by the throat. 



90 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

vowing to have blood for the insult put 
upon him; and by the time he was half- 
forced, half-coaxed into lying down again, 
his mood had changed, and he was scream- 
ing out in mortal terror, now of the snakes, 
and now of a certain black hound, a big 
shaggy dog that he conceived to be crouch- 
ing in the room and lurking behind the 
curtains, ready to spring upon him. 

" Keep him off!" he cried . " the ugly 
grinning brute* Drive him away ; don't let 
him touch me ! I see him ; there . there he is, 
crawling towards the bed . a brute as large 
as a wolf ! Save me . save me ! He will be 
upon me directly. ' Not there . not there ! 
doctor, don't leave me alone with him, 
the brute." 

And with a shrill cry, the trembling 
wretch cowered down and hid his face with 
the bed-clothes, all the time holding tight 
to the hand which Colonel Ford had given 




NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 91 

him . ^tight, ay, with the frantic force with 
which a drowning seaman gripes the plank 
that is his only support above the fathom- 
less depths of the hungry roaring sea* 
Then, after a long interval, a fresh change 
occurred; Basil Royston complained no 
more of the loathsome presence of the rep- 
tiles, nor of that of the black hound, fearful 
images in that dismal procession of phan- 
tasms that dehrium tremens conjures up. 
But he was very weak and broken-spirited, 
wailing and sobbing as if he had been a 
child, clinging to the colonel, and begging 
that he might not be left alone, then glanc- 
ing timorously round the room, lest some- 
thing baleful might be prowling there 
still; and then his ravings took another 
turn, and he struck his forehead with his 
weak hand, and wept as he called himself a 
great sinner, a wretch black with crime, 
and weary with wrong-doing. Next, he 



92 THE GENTLEMAN IN 

' pronounced a name that made the colonel 
start and bend forward to hear more . 
" Lady Flavia Clare ;" and then he rambled 
on, muttering indistinct allusions to things 
and places of which the colonel knew no- 
thing. But though much of what he said 
was inaudible, and much obscure, a new 
and lurid light began to break in upon the 
intelligence of him whom Chance . if there 
be such a thing as Chance in this wondrous 
world, where every heart that throbs is knit 
by some viewless bonds to other hearts, and 
where all actions bfend into a web of com- 
mon destiny . ^had sent to sit beside the bed 
of this sinful sufferer. Half-uttered words, 
hints rather than revelations, reached the 
listener's ears, and made him hearken the 
more thirstily for confirmation of his fears ; 
and then the black mirror of Basil Royston s 
unhealthy mind reflected other impressions, 
and he spoke no more of France, no more of 



NUMBER THIRIT-NINE. 9 3 

the gaunt grey Chateau des Roches, no 
more of the white-walled convent, or of the 
green vineyards and long dusty stretch of 
high-road, with its grenadier poplars planted 
stiffly on either side. He was back in India, 
not quarrelsome as before, but in the high 
tide of evil prosperity, with plenty of cash 
and credit, revelling in native society of not 
the very highest stamp. Captain Royston*s 
fondness for bad company had met with 
countenance in the bazaars of Indian cities. 
He began to troll the refrain of a ditty that 
Richard Ford knew well . the famous 
** taza be taza^ vedano /" that Hafiz first 
sung, and that from the poetry of the Per- 
sian Anacreon has gradually filtered down 
to its condition as a sort of *' tol-de-rol" 
chorus to Hindu drinking-songs. But not 
a word more that the colonel cared to hear. 
Not a syllable about the lonely French 
chateau, or the neighbouring convent, or 



94 THB GENTLEMAN IN 

the vague and ugly secret of which a 
glimpse had heen suddenly afforded, much 
as if a dark curtain had been pulled aside 
in part, and then allowed to drop again. 

** Lady Flavia Clare !" thought the colo- 
nel as he sat watching through the dusk of 
the long evening, now and then striking 
his repeater to learn the hour, that the pa- 
tient might swallow his medicine with due 
punctuality . " Lady Flavia Clare ! Three 
times that name has passed the lips of this 
wretch, and queer words they were that 
followed the mention of it. Foul-play! 
yes, I do really begin to believe that there 
has been foul play. But how to see clearly 
through the labyrinth : the clue is want- 
mg. 

Hours passed slowly by, the deep swift 
river of Time gliding steadily on, and tum- 
bling over the falls into the yawning gulf 
of Eternity ; and still Richard Ford kept at 




NUMBER THIRTY-NINE. 95 

his post Then the doctor came, and started 
to see who was the watcher beside his 
patient's couch. Colonel Ford conversed 
apart with him, and Mr. Smithson returned 
to his surgery to bid his assistant make up 
a prescription of a very different character 
from the mild palliatives with which the 
Slochester surgeon had begun the campaign 
against a disease new to his experience. 
And Mrs. Ovens arriving, took her place in 
the great arm-chair, and promised to be 
vigilant. Colonel Ford walked slowly back 
to the parsonage, and as he walked, there 
were stranger and more startling thoughts 
passing through his mind than had visited 
him for many a day. It seemed to him as 
if he had suddenly received the power to 
penetrate a veil of fair seeming, and to catch 
a glimpse of something hideous and unna- 
tural looming darkly beyond. 



96 BY SUBMARINE 



CHAPTER V, 

BY SUBMARINE AND INTERNATIONAL TELE- 
GRAPH. 

** Flavia, dearest^ I do so wish you could 
like Hythe," said Lady Caroline Clare, 
turning her head towards her companion, 
and apparently taking advantage of the 
fact that James the tiger had got down to 
open a gate through which it was necessary 
that the pony-carriage should pass. The 
gate was a clumsy one, for the top rail 
was composed of what seemed the whole 
trunk of a small tree, the unbarked end 
of which protruded so as to give the 
requisite leverage, while the lowest bar 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 97 

was buried in the moist gravel of the ill- 
kept road. James the tiger had to put 
out his strength, and to soil his white 
Woodstock gloves before he could drag 
back the creaking barrier, and leave the 
way clear for his young mistress to drive 
through. And as Lady Flavia slackened 
the reins of her impatient little steeds, and 
the light carriage jolted on over rut and 
stone, she looked round at her kinswoman,' 
and smilingly rejoined : " But I do like 
Cousin Hythe very much. I think him 
a dear good fellow ; and I wish I had had 

a brother as honourable and sensible as 

< 

yours." 

It was a frank, but hardly a satisfactory 
answer, and Lady Caroline shook her head. 
'* Ah, Flavia, love !" she said, ** I am afraid 
you never will like Augustus as he would 
wish. And yet, though other young men, 
who have not really a tenth of his good 

VOL. IT. H 



98 BY SUBMARINE 

qualities, may seem more brilliant, as Cap- 
tain Fitzalaric does " 

" He is worth fifty of Captain Fitzalaric," 
said Lady Flavia, playftJly ; " and I don't 

mind telling you, Carry, that if . But 

here comes James. And who, in the name 
of all that's extraordinary, have we here ?" 

The horseman who was approaching 
them, at a brisk canter, making the tstones 
clatter and fly beneath his horse's ironshod 
feet, was certainly an odd-looking figure. 
He wore a macintosh, expanded balloon- 
wise by the strong breeze that seldom fails 
to blow on that high moorland ridge which 
lay north and west of Harbledown ; he had 
a white hat, and leggings of some water- 
proof material ; and, but for his awkward 
seat in the saddle, might have passed 
muster for a veterinary surgeon, bound 
for some farm where **foot and mouth" 
was doing mischief among the Oxen. But 




AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 99 

his cures were wrought on men, not beasts ; 
and he was no other than Job Sankey, 
Esq., M.R.O.S., in his usual costume for 
moorland visiting. He checked his white- 
legged horse as he recognised the occupants 
of the pretty shell-shaped pony-carriage, and 
politely took off his hat. 

** Oh, Mr. Sankey," said Lady Caroline, 
quite eagerly, "I do so want to hear the 
last news of your patient, poor little Susan, 
at Fletcher the wood-cutter's cottage, you 
know. I have not had time to go round 
myself, and she was so terribly weak when 
her mother came up to Harbledown." 

Lady Caroline was of a kindly nature, 
and she, rather than the countess, had 
begun to be regarded as the Lady Boun- 
tiful of the neighbourhood. It is true that 
she viewed the poor in the light of children, 
to be lectured and taught, and supplied with 
flannel, soup, calico, and coals, rather than 



100 BY SUBMARINE 

as brethren and sisters who needed a helping- 
hand to Kft them out of the slough of pau- 
perism ; but she did good. It is better to 
give as Lady Caroline, than not to give at 
all ; and the very sight of her comely good- 
humoured face was Kke a sunbeam in the 
house of affliction. Mr. Sankey, who had 
lately become medical attendant at Harble- 
down, and who knew the earl's eldest 
daughter weU from having met her in 
cottage-homes, was able to give her good 
news of Susan Fletcher. He said, with 
perfect truth, that, but for the hot-house 
fruit, the jelKes, and wine, which had been 
supplied from Lord Mortlake's house, at his 
daughter's desire, he should have lost his 
patient. The sick child, large-eyed and 
hoUow-cheeked, tossing in fever on her 
little bed, had really seemed to be brought 
back to life by those grapes from the great 
house, the first nourishment her parched 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 101 

lips had taken for weary days. And now 
she was mending fast, and would "pull 
through," as the surgeon phrased it. 

" But I wish I could say as much of all 
my sick-list/' said Mr. Sankey, turning 
half-round in his saddle, and tapping his 
stirrup-iron with his hunting-whip. " Your 
ladyship, perhaps, remembers hearing of a 
gentleman who was shot, by mistake, it was 
thought, and lay under my care at the Nag's 
Head^ Chartley Parva, some weeks since ?" 

"Yes, to be sure," said Lady Caroline, 
looking up, and all alive to hear more, 
for no healthy mind is dead to curiosity. 
Lady Flavia remained looking down, 
trifling with the reins, and adjusting her 
white gauntlets. 

" Well," said the surgeon, " I've just 
heard that he has undone all the good that 
physic and regimen had done him. He 
chose to dismiss his doctor and leave the 



102 BY SUBMARINE 

inn before he was quite justified in doing 
so; still, he might have done well, with 
common prudence. But what does the 
wiseacre do but go to Slochester, and drink 
himself into a smart attack of delirium 
tremens, and there he is lying ill at the 
Royal George. Smithson attends him, and 
it was by meeting Smithson in consultation 
over at Downingham that I came to hear 
how ill this Captain Royston was." 

" Poor man," said Lady Caroline, with 
genuine pity in her tone, ^*Has he no 
friends to take care of him ?" 

Lady Flavia left oflF twitching at her 
gauntlets, and listened for the doctor*s 
reply. 

" Why, that's the queerest feature of the 
case, Lady Caroline, The young man was 
apt to be m dreadfully low spirits -always 
the way with those hard drinkers when 
their supply of alcohol is cut off . ^but he 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 103 

obstinately refused to allow me to write 
to his family. He chose, he said, to keep 
the thing quiet. And I believe no one 
about him exactly knows the address of his 
relations, while he is not in a fit condition 
to hold a pen, Smithson says his ravings 
were shocking; frightened the first nurse 
he had out of the room . accused himself 
of every crime under the sun . common 
symptom of deltre. Beg your pardon, 
ladies for keeping you so long in this 
bleak spot ! Wish you a good morning I" 

But Mr. Sankey was a great gossip, 
though a skilfiil practitioner, and he would 
have ended less abruptly had he not noticed 
that Lady Flavia's manner of handling the 
whip and gathering up the reins evinced an 
impatience to bring the conversation to a 
close. As it was, he bowed, and rode on, 
and the pony-carriage swept swiftly in an 
opposite direction over the crest of the 



104 BT SUBMARINE 

moor. Half a mile ofiF, a white guide-post 
stood at the junction of three roads, with 
its fingers pointing respectively towards 
Ohartley, Harbledown, and Downingham 
and Slochester. To the surprise of her 
companion, the mistress of the ponies 
wheeled her pretty equipage smartly round 
into the Chartley road, laid the lash over 
the mettled little brutes, and dashed rapidly 
down the rough moorland track. That part 
of the country belonged to Sir Neville 
Beecham, a great practical admirer of the 
good old plan of letting well (and ill) 
alone, and the roads were a disgrace to 
the century. But Lady Flavia dashed on 
fearlessly over rough and smooth at ten 
or twelve statute miles to the hour. 

" Flavia, dear, what are you about ? You 
are going wrong, love ! The other road 
leads to Downingham, and thut is where we 
are to go," bleated Lady Caroline, looking 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 105 

with dismay at the deep ruts, the loose 
stones, and the water-courses that intersected 
the track. Lady Flavia laughed. Her laugh 
had never sounded so strangely before in 
her cousin's rather dull ear. Caroline was 
very fond of her young relative, none the 
less so, perhaps, because almost unconsciously 
her regard was spiced with fear, but this 
new freak vexed her. 

" How the carriage jolts and rocks ! You 
will upset us, you mad girl ; and how are 
we to get to Mrs. Plummington's, besides 
paying the call at the Archdeacon's, if you 
will persist in scampering over the country 
in this extraordinary way?" said Lady 
Caroline ; and James the tiger, peering to 
right and left from his perch behind, and 
holding fast to the seat as the light carriage 
swayed and bounded in its headlong course 
over turf and gravel, looked very much as 
if he would have liked to back Lady 



106 BT SUBMARINE 

CaroKne's remonstrance with a word or 
two of warning. But James the tiger 
prudently kept silence. Lady Flavia Clare 
looked round and laughed at her cousin's 
frightened face. Her own face was un- 
usually flushed, and her blue eyes were 
glittering. 

" You dear single-minded Carry," she said, 
"I'll promise not to bring you to grief. 
You shall go home as safe and sound as if 
steady old Hedstall had been driving you in 
the fainily-coach. As for Mrs. Plummington 
and the Archdeacon, qv!ils attendant I I am 
going to Chartley." 

And she gave a shrill cry of encourage- 
ment to the ponies, now gallantly dashing 
on up a gentle slope, where the wheels cut 
furrpws in the black peaty soil. Once up 
the slope, they were at the loftiest point in 
the high moors, where a cairn of huge grey 
stones stood piled, while beside it was the 




AND INTERNATIONAL TElLEGRAPH. 107 

blackened stump of a thick post that had 
been a gibbet once, and on which the flesh- 
less bones of a west-country highwayman 
had long swung rattling in chains, within 
the memory of some who were yet dodder- 
ing and crooning in the chimney-corners of 
old farmhouses, or beside the scanty work- 
house fire. On both sides spread the great 
rolling moorland, billowing like a sea into 
mounds and hollows, and carpeted with 
heather that had lost its purple summer 
gloss, and was now a dusky flame, crim- 
son red, flaring far and wide. In front, 
far below, were trees and cultured land, and 
a green valley with a lazy stream winding 
through it and glimmering among the 
poplars ; and farther still was the pale thin 
wreath of rising smoke that floated over the 
chimneys of Chartley. 

But the two fair occupants of the pony- 
carriage scarcely gave a glance or a thought 



108 BY SUBMARINE 

to the prospect, with all its wealth of form 
and colour. Lady Caroline was half alarmed, 
half annoyed, and would have been wholly 
angry with any other person than the one 
beside her. But Lady Flavia was privileged 
- . one of those few favoured mortals who 
follow their own wild will, yet offend 
nobody ; and her cousin, though she deplored 
the apparently causeless freak of which she 
was the victim, contented herself with an 
occasional protest against the escapade. 
Lady Flavia, on the other hand, was evi- 
dently very much excited, and a score of 
signs betrayed the tumult of her spirits : 
she laughed and sang ; but the laugh was 
short and almost fierce, and the songs were 
mere snatches of Italian or French ditties. 
She chirruped and talked to her ponies, 
stroked then: glossy necks with the whip, 
and made the lash whistle and hiss about 
their ears, and laughed afresh as the carriage 




AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 109 

spun rapidly down the steep slope of the 
turnpike-road into which they had now 
struck, whirling round comers, and sending 
the mud in great splashes on all sides. As 
they approached Chartley, vehicles of all 
kinds were encountered, and many a carter 
looked back, gaping, at the flying equipage 
that swept past him like a tornado. The 
wilful girl who held the reins seemed to take 
a strange pleasure in brushing close by the 
ponderous wheels of waggons ; in darting, 
like a dragon-fly on the wing, into the 
narrow space between two farmers' gigs ; 
and when the Honeycombe coach passed 
with its top-heavy load of outsiders, the 
pony-carriage all but touched its hind-wheel 
as it was dexterously steered between the 
coach and a heavy timber-dray. 

"Pray . pray take care!" gasped Lady 
Caroline ; but her terror merely seemed to 
amuse her companion, whose blue eyes had 



/ 



110 BY SUBMARINE 

a mocking light in them as she turned them 
towards the pale face beside her. 

*^ Suppose a * fiightfiil accident ' were to 
occur, for the benefit of the country news- 
papers?" said Lady Flavia in that half- 
serious manner that always puzzled her 
kinswoman, " would it really matter so very 
much ? Would anybody miss me ? Ah, I 
forgot you. Carry dear, with your old women 
and your schools. You do some good in 
the world ; and for your sake, nobody's neck 
shall be broken. And indeed our cruise is 
.nearly over, for there is the station." 

That was indeed the case : Chartley rail- 
way station, . with its semaphore, and lamps 
red and green, and white telegraph-posts, 
and a dozen trucks in process of being laden 
with rough stone from the quarries, ap- 
peared within a quarter of a mile ; and the 
black ponies, in a lather of foam and heat, 
with bits and curb-chains clotted with froth, 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. Ill 

stained sides, and quivering nostrils, were 
not sorry to be pulled up in front of the 
station. James sprang down, and Lady 
Flavia alighted. 

" Lend me some money, Carry ; I haven't 
got any," she said, laughing ; and indeed 
the V heiress who owned Cupley Lees and 
Melshot Friars had not an available sixpence. 
Young ladies in the country are seldom 
called upon for any direct outlay of actual 
cash, and James paid the tolls ; but Lady 
Caroline, whose almsgiving was extensive, 
was better provided. Lady Caroline pro- 
duced her purse. 

" What do you want now, Flavia ?" she 
said. " Surely you are not going any- 
where by train. I couldn't . no, really I 
could not agree to that." 

Her imperious little friend laughed 
saucily as she took the purse. 

" You dear old Carry," she said, '* if I 



/ 



112 BY SUBMARINE 

wanted to run oflF to Gretna, and chose to 
take you with me as gooseberry-picker, you 
would come along with me, under protest, 
of course. But I won't tease you any more. 
Five minutes' grace, and then we will jog 
home together as demurely and slowly as 
any Miss Goodchild could desire. Just 
wait for me ; I will not be long." 

So saying, she passed through the book- 
ing-office into the telegraph office, and 
disturbed the boy-clerks, who were be- 
guihng their leisure with a game at 
marbles. 

"You send messages to France?" she 
said quickly. The eldest lad, under a 
strong impression that to ** knuckle down" 
was a gross breach of official propriety, 
swept the marbles into his pocket, and 
turned to the window in which the appli- 
cant's pretty head and flushed, eager face 
now appeared. He replied in the affirma- 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. US 

tive, pushing a heap of " forms " towards 
Lady Flavia. She wrote rapidly. 

" Send this off at once, if you please ; I 
wish to be certain that no time has been 
lost f and she waited mitil the sharp click, 
click of the instrument had spelled out the 
last word of her message. Then she 
gathered up her change, dropped it into her 
cousin's portemonnaie, and left the room. 

** You never took your receipt, miss," the 
young clerk called after her; but she did 
not hear him. Little oversights like this 
sometimes produce important results. In 
this case the clerk picked up the little 
scrap of half-printed, half-written paper, 
and thrust it into a sort of japanned toast- 
rack, full of memoranda and messages that 
could not be delivered for want of a proper 
address. " If she wants it," said the boy, 
" she can have it by asking for it. " She's 
not bad-looking, that Miss Jones." 

VOL. II. I 



/ 



114 BY SUBMARINE 

The sender of the telegram had given 
her name as Miss Emma Jones, and her 
address at the Earl of Mortlake's, Harble- 
down. This little written fib was im- 
promptu. Lady Flavia Clare could not 
reasonably be supposed to be familiar with 
every detail of telegraphic communication, 
^nd, in fact, she had been unaware of the 
necessity of giving a name and address, or 
her own claim to a receipt. Her quick 
brain had in part solved the dfficulty before 
the youthful clerk had had the trouble of 
calling her attention a second time to the 
needful formality. Jones . Emma Jones . 
she wi'ote the name down as easily as if it 
had been her daily practice to sign herself 
thus ; but she gave no false address. Was 
not James the tiger, in the Mortlake livery, 
ayid with coronets on his buttons and a 
cockade in his hat, visible to porters and 
ticket-taker ? And might not some by- 



AND INTERNATIONAL TELEGRAPH. 116 

stander recognise the pony^arriage ? But 
Miss Jones might reside under Lord Mort- 
lake's roof, and yet be anybody. visitor, 
governess, hired companion to the countess ; 
and Lady Flavia knew by intuition, it 
would seem, that a half-truth often stops 
the mouths of the inquisitive. ' 

The cousins drove back to Harbledown 
very slowly, in mercy to the ponies, and 
also to the nerves of Lady Caroline Clare ; 
and on the way home the younger of the 
two girls was wonderfuU}^ gentle, winning, 
and affable, quite unUke the capricious, 
almost brusque little creature that she had 
shown herself a short time before. Lady 
Caroline was calmed and soothed, and in- 
stead of expatiating on her own terrors and 
her cousin's wilfulness, she gave her kith 
and kin to understand that Flavia, " like a 
naughty darling," had insisted on taking* a 
long drive, instead of paying " duty visits ;" 



i 



116 BY TELEGRAPH. 

and when Lady Flavia returned her the 
borrowed money. some eighteen shillings 
or so . she never inquired in what the coin 
taken from her purse at the Chartley 
Station had been spent. It was a whim of 
Flavians, she supposed, some fancy to order 
down a new bonnet or dress from a London 
milliner. But the telegram was not to a 
milliner . it was sent to Monsieur Brand 
Eoyston, Ch&teau des Roches, Gr^snez- 
Vignoble, prfes St. Germain, in the empire 
of France; and it was urgent as to its 
contents. 




117 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 

Colonel Bighard Fokd was an early riser. 
Old Indians, such as he was, have long ago 
learned to consider the dawn as the most 
precious portion of the day, when baths are 
cool, and rides pleasant, and when it is pos- 
sible to snatch a spell of healthful exercise 
before the fierce sun gathers power. He 
was up, and walking in the parsonage-^ 
garden of Mr. Alleyne's house at Slochester 
before Mrs. AUeyne's kitchen-maid had 
stolen shivering down the back-stairs, and 
with her unwashed hands had put back the 
shutters of the groimd-floor windows, en 



4 



118 LADY FLAVIA* 

attendant the high presence of cook and 
hooflemaid. 

Colonel Ford, according to his practice, 
was early abroad. He wore his coat tightly 
buttoned, since the grey November fog 
clung, chilling and clammy, to tree and 
man, and the clouds above looked like grey 
blotting-paper, through which the mUd 
jfoitish sun could not penetrate. The 
colonel chafed his cold hands, and thought 
of very different scenes where the best years 
his life had been spent Yellow plains in 
winter, green plains in summer, when the 
rice was waving unripened in the breeze; 
topes of feathery pahns, and the rough 
tiiomy jungle beyond, with its tall bamboos 
and stunted arecas, and thatched huts, and 
temples as white as chimam could make 
them, and over all the blue unclouded sky, 
with an orange-tinted fiery ball mounting 
higher and higher like a balloon, until it 



> 



THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 119 

burst into a shower of flaming raySi The 
box-borders, the queer old flowers, dahlias, 
hollyhocks, sunflowers, marigolds, China 
roses, southernwood, were full of novelty to 
the long-expatriated Englishman ; and yet 
not of novelty. of something sweeter than 
novelty ; for the sight and scent of those 
homely old plants and shrubs roused for- 
gotten recollections, that bridged across the 
great gulf of Time, and Colonel Ford felt 
as if he were a boy again in his mother's 
garden, in the far-oflf days before he went 
to school, college, India, 

But, in very truth, the colonel's thoughts 
were neither among the plumy palms and 
arid plains amid which his manhood had 
gone by, nor had they long lingered in the 
scenes of his boyhood ; they were drawn 
back involuntarily to the Roycd George 
Hotels and to the hours passed beside the 
sick-bed of the raving wretch in Thirty- 



f 



120 LADY FLA VIA. 

nine. Do what he would, the colonel could 
not shake off the remembrance of Basil 
Royston, and of the train of thoughts that 
his wild words had evoked. He resisted this 
mental preoccupation; he fought against 
it ; but his efforts were in vain. The sick 
man's words seemed to bum into his brain. 
" Pshaw ! I am getting old and whimsical,** 
he said, as he strode to and fro along the 
soft earthen walks, so different from the 
bright gravel of new-fashioned gardens, 
and saw the heavy rime fall from the 
peach-trees on the south wall. " Why, if 
I think I trace some signs of a hidden, 
stealthy crime, am I to trumpet forth my 
discovery to all men ? Why am I to open 
on the scent like a babbling young hound, 
full of importance at what I have been 
clever enough to sniff out. I dare say the 
whole mystery is a mare's nest ; and if not, 
why, let Society send her own bloodhounds, 




THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 121 

salaried and trained, down the track. It is 
no business of mine." And the colonel 
whistled quite a lively air as he dismissed 
the unwelcome subject. 

Conscience, however, is not to be fobbed 
off in this manner . her still small voice 
kept ringing in the ears of the old soldier. 
** Richard Ford, Richard Ford!'' said the 
persistent voice, " will you be false, now, to 
all the teachings of your life ? Will you 
skulk, like a lazy coward, and allow others 
to bear the burden and heat of the day ? 
Is it not the duty of every honest man to 
give help to th^ law, that exists for the 
good of all, and but for which we should be 
savages, greedy and blood-besmeared ? Is 
not he who winks at the impunity of a 
criminal, the virtual accomplice of the 
crime ? And who are you who choose to pass 
by on the other side, and leave the wicked 
in their triumphant injustice . you who 




122 LADY FLAYIA. 

declare that you are not your brother's 
keeper? Richard Ford, Richard Ford, I 
am ashamed of you !" 

But the colonel kept up a dogged fight ; 
he really did not want to mix himself up 
in a business from which, once embarked 
in, he could not with honour withdraw 
until justice had been done ; he felt quite 
angry with himself for having come down 
to Slochester; for having volunteered to 
sit by the couch of Basil Royston ; and for 
having overheard the unconscious revela- 
tions that were shaping themselves into 
such ugly suspicions in his unwilling brain. 
He resisted, and strove obstinately. He 
did not intend to be a knight-errant, for- 
sooth, and get pelted and bespattered for 
his redressing of wrongs. 

** Good-morning, papa!" It was Amy 
who spoke. She had opened her window, 
and was leaning on the sill, looking down 




THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 123 

at him. Her face was pale, and her eyes 
had a careworn, thoughtful look. ^* Papa," 
said Amy, " I am so glad it is day. I have 
slept very badly, and my dreams and 
thoughts were of poor Flavia. The more 
1 think of it, the more wretched I feel. 
Papa, I am certain that some evil has . 
ril put on my hat, and come down, and 
we'll walk about the garden before ^" 

" Hey, Ford, you out there among the 
slugs and snails ! November's rather late 
for garden-walks, but perhaps you've been 
looking at the celery. The dean's is not to 
be named with it, though the deanery 
gardener gets double what my Robert gets," 
called out the Rev. William AUejne from 
his threshold. "But come in, if you've 
had enough of it. The urn's in the break- 
fast-room, and I have rung the bell for 
morning prayers." 

All through the day, the colonel's be- 




124 LADY PLATIA. 

haviour was exceedingly odd and nnsatis- 
fsujtory . he avoided his daughter ; he was 
carefiil not to notice her pleading looks and 
anxious countenance ; he would not speak 
one word with her in private, and feigned 
to misunderstand her whispers. He rattled 
and laughed in a way foreign to his nature, 
listened patiently to Mrs. AUeyne's dis- 
course, which was as a triple strand woven 
from the quoted wisdom of Mrs. Bandall's 
Domestic Cookery^ Dr. Graham's ditto 
Medicine^ and the Whole Duty of Man^ and 
adhered to the side of his brother-in-law 
for hours. He even allowed Mr. Alleyne 
to read^ him the choicest portions of a 
sermon that his admirers had urged that 
he should embalm in type, though its 
author was too prudent to expend money 
in cumbering the shelves of ecclesiastical 
booksellers with one homily the more. 
And he consented to devote a portion of 



THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 125 

the short November afternoon to inspect- 
ing such curiosities as the little church of 
St. Eanswith's contained, inclusive of a 
parish register whose first entrieis bore the 
date of 1560, proving that the then in- 
cumbent and wardens were obedient to 
King Henry's Grace, and my very good 
lord, Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex; 
two brasses showing a knight and his 
dame, the latter in pointed hat, and wimple 
and pinners, in the style of Margaret of 
Anjou; and a noseless little image of 
blackened stone, which was fondly believed 
to represent St. Eanswith herself. 

Mr. AUeyne, whose affection for his 
church resembled that of a mariner for his 
ship, saw nothing remarkable in the sudden 
plasticity with which his brother-in-law 
permitted himself to be drawn within sound 
of the feeble roaring of St. Eanswith's puny 
lions. But Amy in the course of the last 



126 LADY PLAVIA. 

few weeks had learned to know her fietther 
sufficiently well to be sure that he was 
merely trying to distract his thoughts from 
some graver preoccupation, and also, which 
seemed unkind, was evidently holding 
aloof from anything like conversation with 
herself. She said nothing, however, but 
let him go on his way through the narrow 
and tortuous by-streets towards where the 
low square tower of St. Eanswith*s reared 
its trimcated top above the ambitious 
chimney-stacks of the neighbouring dwel- 
lings. It may be doubted whether the 
colonel paid as much genuine attention to 
the queer old vellum-bound register, with 
its brass clasps and early black-letter entries, 
and red crosses to mark the signatures of 
bride and bridegroom, as that quaint 
volume really merited. At any rate, when 
he left the church, in company with Mr. 
AUeyne, he said somewhat abruptly : 



THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 127 

" Suppose we go round by the hotel, and 
see how that poor fellow is getting on. It 
seems hardly right to leave him to him- 
self." The vicar was as humane as most 
men ; but he did not wish to go back to 
the Royal George^ and hear any more of 
the wild talk of that terrible invalid in 
number Thirty-nine. Besides, he had 
secured what is always a treasure in 
country life, a patient and intelligent listener, 
and he clung to his prize as a limpet to a 
rock. He wanted to tell the Colonel *^ all 
about" his suit in Doctors' Commons con- 
cerning a disputed tithe-charge, before 
Bishop Dibbs ascended the throne in Slo- 
chester Cathedral. He had resolved to 
give his brother-in-law the exciting plea- 
sure of perusing some of the letters he had 
received from his proctor, with the great 
Dr. Wootton's written opinion on the nice 
points of law involved in the case of the 




128 LADY PLAVIA. 

Rev. William Alleyne, Clerk, v. {tie Dean 
and Chapter of Slochester. He meant also 
to explain how the case was removed by 
writ to the High Court of Chancery ; and 
how Lord Bagsworth had from the judg- 
ment-seat recommended that the parties 
should "split the diflFerence" rather than 
be bled to death by bills of costs; after 
which a compromise was agreed to, rather 
to Mr. AUeyne's chagrin^ on account of his 
confidence in Dr. Wootton's opinion, and 
the justice of his cause. 

" There's Smithson !" exclaimed the vicar 
gleefully, as the doctor and his umbrella 
suddenly came round the comer : " he will 
tell us how his patient is." 

Mr. Smithson's report was satisfactory, so 
far as it went. The patient was improving 
steadily. Colonel Ford's prescription (not 
that the surgeon gave the colonel more than 
a very small share of the credit of that 



THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 129 

recipe, which he sincerely believed to be 
almost entirely his own) had acted like a 
charm. The nurse reported that the sick 
man had slept soundly. He had not talked 
much more " nonsense," Mrs. Ovens said; 
he had been quiet and docile. But he 
was weak, and in wretehedly low spirits, 
whimpering out prayers for strong drink, 
"just a thimbleful/' and shedding immanly 
tears when the strong drink was denied 
him. He was asleep just then, and the 
doctor meant to call later, and had little 
doubt but that he should find Captain 
Royston better. To-morrow, if the improve- 
ment continued,'a little chicken-broth might 
be beneficial ; and so forth. 

" And now, Richard," said Mr. AUeyne, 
tightening his grasp of his relative's armj^ 
after the surgeon had left them . '*now 
we'll go home and make ourselves com- 
fortable over my study fire . ^you shall 

VOL. II. K 




130 LADY FLAVIA. 

smoke if you Kke . Mrs. Alleyne won't 
mind your indulging in a cigar in my den, 
and I'll just tell you the whole story of that 
tithe-charge business from first to last. I 
can show you the very first letter from the 
solicitor to the chapter, and so on, down to 
the taxed bill of costs of my own agents ; 
and I think you'll agree with me that Lord 
Bagsworth was misinformed in the matter, 
and that, if we had nailed our colours to 
the mast, we should have come off winners 
after all." 

What thoughts were travelling through 
the brain of Colonel Ford, as he sat deco- 
rously listening, with his feet on the fender, 
and his eyes on the red depths of the coal- 
fire, to his brother-in-law's oral and docu- 
mentary statement of facts connected with 
the great tithe-cause ? They were many 

and various, but through them all was an 
under-current of self-reproach. The voice 



THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 131 

that had spoken to Richard Ford, as he 
walked the garden-paths that morning, was 
busy at his heart ; and it was in answer 
to that voice, whose small but imperious 
accents drowned the somewhat monotonous 
discourse of the vicar, that the colonel 
exclaimed, unawares : " Absurd ! rank non- 
gense ! What right has society to put this 
hangman's oflSce upon me, whether I will 
or no ? . Dear me ! I beg your pardon, 
William !" 

We never know what events, to all 
seeming, imconnected with our purposes or 
interest, are shaping themselves into being 
in places afar off. While Colonel Fgrd was 
doing his best to show a decent interest in 
St. Eanswith's register, brasses, and battered 
effigy. Lady Flavia Clare was dashing down 
the hills towards Chartley at the full speed 
of her black ponies. As the colonel entered 
the vicar's study, and meekly submitted to 




132 LADY PLAVIA. 

have his ears assailed by the contents of a 
mass of papers " of no value except to their 
owner," as the advertisements say, Lady 
Flavia Clare was listening to the clicking 
of the telegraph instrument, and watching 
the vibration of the needle across the dial- 
plate, as the words of her message were 
flashed away along the fateful wire that 
links distant minds together in a subtle 
union, and laughs at space. But all this 
was of necessity unknown to Colonel Ford. 
Nevertheless, when the colonel said good- 
night on that evening, and retired to his 
room, and when there came a tap at his 
door, and in answer to his bidding to come 
in. Amy came in, in a white wrapper, with 
loosened hair (for the colonel had lingered 
late), and with tears in her eyes asked her 
father why he avoided her, and how she had 
displeased him, he stooped over and kissed 
her, as he said : " Because I was selfish, 




THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 133 

Amy, and inclined to shirk a duty, and 
therefore, like all cowards and self-seekers, 
avoided whatever would remind me of what 
I had neglected. My little girl, you have 
only forestalled me. I made up my mind 
an hour ago to do the thing that is right, 
and to leave the issue to a wider Wisdom 
than that of men. I should have spoken 
of this in the morning, but perhaps it is 
better as it is. I give you my word to do 
all I can to clear up this mystery about 
your poor young friend, though it seemff 
more like some grim tale of diablerie than 
anything to be expected in these prosaic 
days of ours." 

There was a little more conversation, in 
the course of which Amy learned from her 
father, that by a chance that appeared 
providential, he had discovered that the 
gentleman lying ill at the hotel. Captain 
Royston, was more or less deeply implicated 



134 LADY FLAVIA* 

in the transactions, whatever they might 
have been, that had preceded the arrival of 
Lady Flavia at Harbledown. The colonel 
touched as lightly as possible on the hideous 
nature of the sufferer's self-accusations, 
truly adding, that whatever dark comers 
there might exist in even the purest human 
heart, delirium unveiled the lurking de- 
formity with pitiless and sometimes exag- 
gerated distinctness. It was by no means 
a proof of guilt committed that a raving 
wretch should charge himself with such and 
such offences, and very likely Captain 
Eoyston was not practically so wicked as 
his own lips had declared him in those 
moments of torture. But it seemed certain 
that he could throw light upon the question 
of Lady Flavia Clare's identity with Amy's 
former friend, and this the colonel con- 
sidered so necessary, that he was resolved, 
as soon as the patient was suflBciently 



THE COLONEL MAKES HIS MIND UP. 135 

reasonable, to have his deposition formally- 
taken down in presence of a magistrate. 

'* To-morrow, papa ?" said Amy, wistfully* 
" Oh, do consider what may happen in the 
meantime. My poor, dear Flavia . I feel 
as if she were in suffering and sorrow, and 
with no friend on earth to help her . except 
you and me." 

" To-morrow !" said the colonel, smiUng ; 
and Amy kissed him gratefully, and went 
away comforted. Her dreams were happier 
dreams on that night. How little could 
either of them, father or daughter, know 
that through all those dark hours of the 
night a traveller was speeding on his hasty- 
way as fast as steam could carry him across 
the French plains, across the surging waves 
of the Channel, past the rolling outlines of 
the Kentish chalk-downs, and on into sleep- 
ing London. -A fast morning train left the 
Great Western terminus at so early an hour 



/ 



136 LADY PLAVIA. 

that the piles of damp newspapers could 
hardly be conveyed in time to the station 
by their breathless bearers; and the pas- 
sengers walked, stamping up and down the 
platform to warm their half-frozen feet, as 
the porters shovelled luggage into the vans. 
There was a passenger in one of the first- 
class carriages of that teain who had had 
no sleep, but whose iron frame was proof 
against fatigue, a large, loud-speaking man, 
with heavy grey moustaches and fierce bull- 
eyes. He took his ticket for Slochester. 
The train rushed off, screaming and tearing 
down into the west, and before breakfast 
was over at Mr. Alleyne's parsonage, the 
rapid steam-horse with its living load had 
devoured many a league of the ground that 
lay between London and the cathedral of 
St. Willibald Martyr. 



137 



CHAPTER VII. 

A NEW MOVE IN THE GAME. 

" What sort of magistrates have you in 
Slochester, Alleyne?" asked the colonel, 
gently clinking his spoon against the edge 
of his coffee-cup, and speaking in a tone of 
careless indiflFerence. The vicar's mouth 
was pre-engaged with an egg that had been 
boiled secundum artem^ by a three-minute 
sand-glass, and his wife, with feminine 
readiness, was the first to reply. " Magis- 
trates ! my dear Colonel Ford, what on 
earth can you possibly want with a magis- 
trate?" And her little beady eyes, black 
and bright, twinkled interrogatively. 



i 



138 LADY FLAVIA. 

But Colonel Ford had expected this, and 
lie parenthetically praised Mrs. AUeyne's 
marmalade as he said that he had merely 
some curiosity respecting a law-point, that 
was all ; it was a long story, but he had no 
doubt that any shrewd justice of the peace 
could solve his doubts. 

By this time Mr. Alleyne had finished 
the deglutition of the yolk, and was at 
Uberty to speak. *' Why, Ford, there you 
puzzle me ! County magistrates have no 
jurisdiction here, you know. Our city 
Solons . let me see : there's Bates the 
mayor ; he's in the hardware business ; a 
good man, but very ^ ignorant. Waite, 
Peake, Bradley, Hughett, are aldermen, I 
know ; but Hughett is in his second child- 
hood, and the other three take their law 
from the clerk's dictation. Hoopsley, the 
brewer, is on the bench, but he's always 
away since they returned him to parliament. 



A NEW MOVE IN THE GAME. 139 

Then there's Admiral Mainbrace, he's a 
magistrate, and about the most active of 
them all," smnmed up the vicar. 

" What sort of a man is Admiral Main- 
brace ?" asked the colonel. 

Mr. AUeyne replied that he did not know 
the old flag-officer personally, but had heard 
him spoken of as a worthy man, though of 
as overbearing and irritable a disposition 
as a gouty and disappointed old gentleman, 
used to despotic authority, and vegetating 
on five hundred a year, was likely to be. 
The very names of the other aldermen the 
vicar did not know, and he did not suppose 
that any of them were very deeply versed 
in the common or statute law of England. 
" Much better consult an attorney," said the 
vicar. " Stay, there's Dr. Hambrook in 
the Lower Close, he's a magistrate, though 
he never acts. Monstrously well-informed 
man. . A slice of bacon? . He was one of 



140 LADY PLAVIA, 

George IV .*s physicians, and a courtier, 
and refused a baronetcy. He is a native of 
this place, and has lived here for years 
with a poor blind daughter, who will be 
uncommonly rich when he dies, I beUeve, 
Dr. Hambrook used to attend the Sessions, 
and his word was law with our city Justice 
Shallows; but he leads a very retired, 
studious life. . Some iliore muflBn ?" 

Then the colonel turned the conversation 
by referring to some of his Indian experi- 
ences. Any little anecdote which Richard 
Ford might choose to tell, acquired an 
additional charm from the fact of his 
habitual reticence on such topics. He was 
not like those returned self-exiles, civil or 
military, whose talk returns to Bengal as 
Mr. Dick's writing to the execution of King 
Charles I., and who serve up India, hot, 
cold, or tepid, at every conversational ban- 
quet. The colonel had too much good taste 




A KRW MOVE IN THE GAME. 141 

to run the risk of becoming that most 
dreaded of all the bores of boredom . an 
Indian bore. But on the present occasion 
he fell vigorously to work, and succeeded 
in interesting Mrs. Alleyne and her hus- 
band too on the subject of kedgeree, and 
the comparative merits of a Bengal, a Bom- 
bay, and a Pondicherry curry. The vicar 
had parish business to attend to; Mrs. 
Alleyne, as usual, meant to devote the 
morning to household cares and corre- 
spondence : and the guests were to be 
left to their own devices until lunch-time 
should arrive. Amy and ^ her father, 
therefore, were able to sally out together 
without exciting any remark or inquiry, 
and were soon clear of the parsonage 
grounds. 

" Where are we going, papa ?" asked 
Miss Ford, as soon as the green garden- 
gate had closed behind them. 




142 . LADY PLAVIA. 

" To tho Lower Close . to this Dr. Ham- 
brook's/' replied the colonel. " I have 
l)Oon thinking, pet, that if we had the pick 
of all Kngland, we could not have lighted 
upon a magistrate better suited to the pur- 
poHO, A fashionable physician, a court 
phyHieian, ought to be the very man to 
koo]> a soorot; and remember, Amy, that 
tlu buNiuess should be kept secret as far as 
pOHHlblo, Tho honour of a noble family is 
at Htako in tho matter, and common justice 
ruquiroH that wo should be careful not to 
Npruad ovil reports that may turn out, after 
all, to be based on mere moonshine. Pro- 
mise, dear, not to mention your suspicions 
without first consulting me," 

"O papa, not to Charley?" said Amy, 
lialf shyly, half reproachfully; but her 
father bluntly replied that her cousin would 
make tho worst conceivable confidant, and 
that it would bo almost as safe to reveal the 



A NEW MOVE IN THE GAME, 143 

matter in question to good garrulous Aunt 
AUeyne as to Mr. Charles Ford. 

" A fine lad, but distressingly outspoken ; 
so much so, that I am afraid he will never 
make any figure at the bar," said Colonel 
Ford, hypocritically, for in his own heart 
he respected candour and courage above all 
other human qualities. "You must have 
noticed how unprofessionally straightfor- 
ward are his views. When I asked him, 
the other day, what he should do if he dis- 
covered his client to be a rogue, he could 
find no better answer than that he should 
throw up his brief, and say : * My lord, I 
am in the wrong.' A pretty fellow to wear 
a wig, certainly. Why, old Mr. Silverton . 
they called him Counsellor Silvertongue at 
the Calcutta bar . ^would have found twenty 
valid reasons for not believing in a client's 
rascality until the verdict was delivered. 
Charles would be for knocking at the front 



4 
i 



144 LADY FLAVIA. 

door of Harbledown, and stating his suspi- 
cions in plain terms. But here is the 
Lower Close, and here is a house with 
creepers all over the front, and plate-glass 
windows; just such a house as a retired 
Mayfair Medico might fancy/' 

The colonel was right; the house was 
really that of Dr, Hambrook. But a small 
matter sometimes upsets the best arranged 
plans, and Dr. Hambrook was from home. 
He was in London, but would return on 
that same afternoon. Miss Hambrook ex- 
pected him at three o'clock. Disappointed, 
the colonel turned away from the door. 
There was nothing for it but to await the 
magistrate's return, and in the afternoon it 
would be extremely difficult to get rid of 
hospitable Uncle WilKam and his old- 
fashioned anxiety to provide occupation for 
his visitors. Mrs. AUeyne, too, was not 
unlikely to suggest some mode of time-kill- 




A NEW MOVE IN THE aAME. 145 

ing which could not easily be declined ; 
and Amy's heart sank at the prospect of 
losing an opportuniiy of discovering the 
fate of that friend whose identity with the 
fairy princess of Harbledown she stubbornly 
refused to admit. 

"Never mind, love," said the good- 
natured colonel, as they walked back to the 
parsonage ; " to-morrow will serve our 'turn 
as well as to-day, and so we can " 

"No, indeed; indeed I had so much 
rather go again to-day," said Amy with an 
earnestness that surprised herself. " I feel 
as if the hope of finding out the truth were 
getting fainter and fainter. You may 
smile, papa ; but I am sure that imless we 
make haste, something will happen . some 
misfortune or other." 

The colonel laughed as he said : " Very 
well," and agreed, if possible, to call again 
in the Lower Close on that very day ; but 

VOL. II. L 




146 LADY PLAVIA. 

only on condition that the visit should be 
managed without the necessity for taking 
the AUeynes into their confidence. The 
more Colonel Ford thought the matter over, 
the more convinced he was that to be the 
source of a series of rumours such as might 
injuriously aflFect an innocent lady, and in 
any case would set idle tongues babbling, 
would be cruel and wrong . ^wrong towards 
Lord Mortlake and his family, cruel towards 
a young girl who was, perhaps, the blame- 
less victim of a strange chapter of acci- 
dents. 

It so happened that the vicar did not 
return to lunch; he was detained at the 
bedside of a dying parishioner, and had 
sent word that it might be late when he 
should reach home. Mrs. Alley ne had 
chosen to devote the afternoon to a grand 
field-day, so to epeiak, in her store-room, 
and was jingling keys, and examining lists. 




A NEW MOVE m THE GAME, 147 

previous to passing a long array of pre- 
serves, pickles, home-made wines, and 
home-grown honey, imder review. No 
impediment, therefore, was presented to 
the employment of the few remaining hours 
of daylight in any manner which Colonel 
Ford and his daughter might prefer. At 
half-past three o'clock, therefore, they re- 
visited the Lower Close, and this time Dr. 
Hambrook was at home. The doctor was 
a physician of the old school, bland, well^ 
dressed, and a little pompous, but very well 
informed and aflfable. He listened with 
much courteous attention to Colonol Ford's 
succinct story, asked Amy a few questions 
in his most urbane manner, and was by far 
too polite to express any incredulity. 

* ** I shall be very happy, I am sure, to act 
as a magistrate in taking down this unfortu- 
nate Captain Royston's deposition, should 
we find him still in the same penitential 




148 LADY FLAVIA. 

mood, and am quite at your service this 
moment ; and I need not add that the secret 
will not cease to be a secret in coming under 
my notice. But allow me to remark, my 
dear sir, that if the illegal acts, whatever 
they may have been, and assuming that 
they should really be proved, have taken 
place in France, the EngHsh law can take 
no cognizance of them, except at the re- 
quest of the French authorities. You don't 
take snuflF, Colonel Ford ?" 

And the doctor took a large pinch of his 
late royal patient's favourite mixture from a 
gold box, on the lid of which was enamelled 
the portrait of that august monarch, with 
his wig, star, and high-collared blue coat. 

Dr. Hambrook was as good as his word, 
and the three went at once to the Royal 
George. It was only when beneath the 
shadow of the great gilded sign, represent- 
ing George III. in his coronation robes. 



A NEW MOVE IN THE GAME. 149 

engaged in what seemed the juggler's trick 
of balancing a golden ball on the tip of his 
sceptre, and looking miserably nervous with 
fear lest the slippery globe should tumble 
into the street, that Colonel Ford remem- 
bered that the inn was hardly a fit place for 
Amy to wait in whilst the interview with 
the sick stranger proceeded. Amy, how^ 
ever, knew her way back to her uncle's 
house, and stoutly protested that she could 
return thither without escort. 

*' I daresay,'* said her father, " that Dr. 
Hambrook will stay with you for one in- 
stant, while I go in to make sure that this 
invalid of ours is not too unwell to receive 
visitors. One moment." 

And in he went. Mrs. Knight, the land- 
lady, was in her own peculiar parlour, not, 
as usual, serenely reigning over account- 
books and uncut pastry, but indignantly 
haranguing a sympathising audience, com- 



160 LADY PLAVIA. 

posed of the barmaid, two chambermaids, 
and the one waiter of the establishment. 
The colonel only caught the words, '* black- 
slave-driving " and " harbitrary." But when 
he asked for the gentleman in Thirty-nine, 
Mrs. Kjiight gave signs of incipient hys- 
terics, and asked why she should be trampled 
upon, and if it was thus she was to be re- 
warded for warming serpents in her bosom, 
and much more to the same purport. The 
colonel looked about for an explanation, but 
heard nothing but murmurs from the women, 
who all seemed flustered and incoherent in 
no common degree. 

** Gent's gone, sir," said the waiter, who 
had the coolest head of the party. 

" Gone ! You don't mean that the poor 
wretch is dead?" cried the colonel, greatly 
shocked. 

" Gone by express up-train, sir," rejoined 
the waiter, rolling a dirty napkin very 




A NEW MOVE IN THE GAME. 151 

tightly round his left thumb, *- which it 
have upset missis dreadful, sir^ But the 
gent, the other gent, would take no denial 
at all. ' Get up/ says he, * and come, if it's 
in your coffin.' And his son was forced to 
go along with him." 

And by degrees the colonel made out the 
following facts : That an elderly man, who 
declared himself to be the sick man's father, 
had arrived about an hour previously at the 
hotel, had insisted on his son's accompany- 
ing him forthwith back to France, and had 
refused to hear reason from the mouths of 
nurse and landlady ; that this Mr. Eoyston, 
who had sworn at everybody, threatened to 
fling the remonstrating boots out of a first- 
floor window, called the Father of the 
commercial room, " respected on the road, 
sir, for thirty years," a ** gaping gaby," for 
mUdly protesting against the noise he made, 
and driven the establishment about like 




152 LADY FLAVIA. 

scared sheep, had carried off his son, 
wrapped in shawls and cloaks, to the rail- 
way station : that Jack, the postilion who 
drove the fly, had reported the departure of 
fether and son, the latter looking ", fitter to 
be in hospital," as Jack observed, than in 
a first-class compartment of the np-train 
that was 'now bearing them Londonwards: 
and that Mrs. Knight's circulation had been 
abnormally affected by the agitating scene, 
insomuch that that lady darkly described 
the vital current of her blood to have been 
** turned " and " curdled " in a fashion that 
would have perplexed the illustrious Harvey 
himself. 

Leaving the aflSicted landlady to get over 
her griefs as best she might. Colonel Ford 
walked out into the street. 

" There will be no deposition taken to- 
day. Dr. Hambrook," said he ; " Amy, we 
have been checkmated this time. But, 



A NEW MOVE IN THJK GAME. 163 

never fear, my pet ; we'll win the next 
game, whatever it costs ns. Mr. Eoyston 
has been here, and has dragged his son off 
to France. We must go to France too." 

'' Who's off to France, and who must go 
to France too, uncle ?" asked a hearty, fresh, 
young voice ; and Charles Ford, followed 
by a man carrying his portmanteau, sud- 
denly turned the corner. '^ What, in the 
name of fortune, are you two about ? Here 

 

have I come down, a day earlier than I was 
expected, on purpose to surprise you, and I 
find you groping about here like a pair of 
conspirators, and you don't look in the least 
glad to see a fellow. Why, Amy ?" 

For the surprise and the disappointment 
had been too much for Amy's composure, and 
tears had sprung to her eyes, and were stain- 
ing her pleasant pretty face. Dr. Hambrook 
saw that his company was not necessary for 
the happiness of the group, and he took his 



f 



154 LADY PLAVIA. 

leave of the colonel and Miss Ford with 
his usual nrhanity ; and the Fords walked 
on together to the parsonage, the colonel 
talking as fast as possible on indifferent 
topics, and laughing off, as well as he could, 
the fact that the words which his nephew 
had overheard had any serious meaning. 
But Charles Ford's spirits fell, and his 
answers grew monosyllabic, and he glanced 
at Amy's sorrowful face, and began to feel 
jealous rage stir within him for the first 
time. Downright and plain-dealing in his 
own course through life, anything like de- ' 
ception in those that he esteemed made him 
savage. He had a sincere regard for his 
uncle, and he loved Amy ; but he had not 
told his love in so many words, and there- 
fore he had no right to upbraid her. Was 
it possible . could it be . that she, this simple 
young girl, cooped up so long at school and 
college, and who had never been ** brought 




A NEW MOVE IN THE GAME. 156 

out " in society, had been laughing in her 
sleeve at him and his soft looks and soft 
speeches? Could it be that she loved 
another? that her father sanctioned the 
attachment ? and that because this man, this 
puppy, this coxcomb, that Charles Ford 
hated without knowing him from Adam, 
had gone to France, she and the colonel 
must go too in pursuit of him ? 

Altogether, when the party reached the 
hospitable house of Mr. AUeyne, the colonel 
looked grave and imeasy. Amy cast down 
and wretched, and the young barrister as 
black as a thunder-cloud. And good Mrs. 
AUeyne sincerely wondered, long before the 
uncomfortable evening had worn itself away, 
what disagreeable circumstances could have 
occurred to change persons individually 
pleasant into such heavy, dreary company as 
that which assembled around the parsonage 
fireside on that November evening. 




156 LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 

Winter had come at last, or rather there 
was one of those premature bursts of cold 
weather which precede the true winter as 
the alse dawn of the east heralds the real 
daybreak. The month was November, but 
the ctill that had suddenly come on was 
greater than we moderns expect on the 
hither side of Christmas. All night long, 
a fierce storm had raged. The wind had 
moaned and shrieked among the chimneys 
and gables of Harbledown, had howled over 
the bleak moors, and done much damage in 
the way of uprooting young trees, and 




MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 157 

rending boughs from the groaning oaks. 
The gale had abated now, but as the family 
gathered about the breakfast-table, the 
white feathery snow-flakes came whirling 
down, and all the grass of the park, and 
the fern and brambles of the hillside, and 
the crimson heather of the moor beyond, 
were white with new-fallen snow. 

*' That high wind of last night has done 
a good deal of mischief,'* remarked the earl, 
as he broke the seal of the topmost letter of 
a pile that stood beside his plate. ** John- 
son, the bailiflF, has been here already with 
a long face, talking of the havoc among the 
Scotch firs. But these west-country folks 
are amazingly superstitious. Johnson's 
trouble seemed chiefly to arise from the fact 
that, because But it's not worth re- 
peating such nonsense." And Lord Mort- 
lake sipped his tea, and read his letter. If 
he had Ijeen a professional improvisatore, 



i 



158 LADY FLAVIA. 

he could hardly have piqued the curiosity 
of his audience more artfully, though in 
his case there was no such design. The 
countess and Lady Julia were simultaneous 
in asking what was the superstition that 
had been the cause^ of the bailiffs troubled 
spirits. 

" Eh, eh ? what's the good of talking of 
such childish stuff?" said Lord Mortlake, 
when he was aware of what was required 
of him. " It seems that the people here- 
abouts have a beUef that if a great tree is 
blown down it portends a speedy death in 
the owner's family . ^that's all. A sharp 
charity-boy now-a-days would be ashamed 
to quote such rubbish, and so I told John- 
son ; a great broad-shouldered fellow like 
him to fetch and carry croaking stories of 
that sort." 

" I have heard something of that kind 
before, among our own poor, in Wiltshire," 



> 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE, 159 

said Lady Caroline, whose soft nature was 
easily impressed, 

** I never did," said Lord Hytlie, good- 
humouredly, from his side of the table ; 
<* and if the notion were a correct one, I 
think a landowner's position would be any- 
thing but an enviable one. I suppose, 
though, some fine tree is down . not one of 
the old oaks in the avenue, I hope and trust ? 
A gap there would be a sad pity." 

His father still with one eye on his letter, 
replied in a half-peevish tone : " Oaks ! not 
at all. It's a useless hollow old sycamore 
that has fallen . a sort of historical tree, 
though, for there's some tradition, according 
to Johnson, of a Clare bringing home the 
slip from which it was planted from the 
Crusades . I don't suppose there's any truth 
in the story . that big old dead sycamore 
that stood alone in the home plantation, 
near the pheasantry, and Bless me, 



160 LADY FLAVIA. 

what's that ?'' It was nothing. Lady Flavia, 
who had been listening very intently, had 
dropped her tea-spoon, that was all; but 
the clatter of the falling silver had startled 
Lord Mortlake. Very few more words were 
devoted to the elegy of the noble old tree. 
The countess had never seen it. Lady Julia 
had observed it, and so had her brother ; but 
they had been quite ignorant that the big 
sycamore had a history. And the most 
practical remark was that of the earl, who 
briefly observed, that he could not bear to 
see a litter of dead wood lying about among 
the growing saplings ; and that if the snow 
left off, the men should have orders on the 
following day to saw the fallen tree into 
blocks, and cart the timber away. Lady 
Flavia said never a word. The colour had 
risen to her delicate cheek in one great 
blush when Lord Mortlake had given his 
explanation ; but the tell-tale flush was of 




MB. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 161 

short duration, and thirty seconds later it 
would have been diflScult for the keenest 
eye to detect any sign of emotion in that 
fair young face, or any shadow of trouble in 
those sunny blue eyes. 

The snow fell fast ; not heavily ; not in 
those broad massive flakes that build up a 
drift in an hour or two, wherever a bank or 
a dyke affords a resting-place for the falling 
whiteness, but in quick small spangles, that 
chased each other as in sport, and made it 
all but impossible to distinguish objects with 
certainty through the dazzling veil whose 
pattern was ever varying. All the morn- 
ing, the snow fell, and though the sun made 
opal gaps through the grey clouds towards 
noon, the light feathery shower never 
ceased. It was falling, falling, like frozen 
spray from some cold ocean, when a little 
female figure glided ghost-like through 
the same disused doorway that had once 

VOL. II. M 



162 LADY FLAVIA. 

before proved a means of egress to the Lady 
Flavia Clare. The Lady Flavia Clare it 
was who passed through that doorway 
again, crossed an angle of the lawn, now 
white as the sugared crust of a Twelfth- 
cake, and made her way into the shrubbery, 
and thence towards the wicket that led into 
the park. There were no gardeners about 
then; rolling, and sweeping, and raking, 
were impossible operations in such weather ; 
all the industry of the pleasaunce was con- 
centrated in the long ranges of low glass- 
roofed buildings, where tropical and semi- 
tropical fruits and flowers were being heed- 
fully protected, by moist heat and wrappings, 
from the nipping cold without. There was 
no chance, therefore, of meeting any one in 
the gardens. 

Yet Lady Flavia went on her errand, 
whatever it might be, almost as cautiously 
as some wary Indian scout whose dangerous 




MR, HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 163 

task it is to thread the forests,^ any tree of 
which, for aught he knows, may harbour an 
enemy in wait for his life. Although, in 
that blinding snow-storm, with the hood of 
her grey cloak closely drawn over her head, 
she had little to fear from observation, since 
it was her wish to hide, she neglected no 
precaution. She had chosen her time well. 
Lunch was over. The servants were at 
dinner ; the earl was writing letters ; Lord 
Hy the was deep in the Saturday Review ; 
and the ladies of Harbledown were clustered 
roimd the fire, talking over some mighty 
subject of social propriety, a visit that could 
not well be omitted, or the like. It was the 
very moment to be secure from prying eyes. 
And Lady Flavia was soon out of sight of 
the windows ; soon among the evergreens, 
with half an acre of laurel and hollow be- 
tween her and the house. Even then she 
advanced with circumspection, often stop- 



164 LADY FLAVIA. 

ping to listen, like some hunted animal, and 
then resuming her course, but still availing 
herself of the shelter that the bushes gave, 
and darting forward with bent head, when- 
ever there was a gap among the dense shrubs. 
Even when she reached the park, she made 
a long and painful circuit, entering the 
plantation by a white gate, at a considerable 
distance from the opening by which she had 
entered it before, imder cloud of night. 

Once in the darkling fir-wood, where the 
dusky boughs were getting heavy with soft 
snow, and where it was difficult to trace the 
paths that were turned to mere white 
ribbons, meandering among the black- 
crested trees. Lady Flavia breathed . more 
freely. She was safe now, surely. No one 
was likely to pass. Field-labour would not 
go on, on such a day. The village children 
were at school. The keepers were not on 
duty. She could carry out her purpose, 




MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 165 

unmolested and unseen. It was scarcely 
the kind of afternoon on which a delicately- 
nurtured girl, so beautiful, so rich, and so 
high in station, might have been expected 
to be abroad. The sun was getting the 
best of it for the moment, in his struggle 
with the frost. The white covering of the 
earth was getting very soft, and it clmig to 
the foot that trampled it, wet and clammy. 
The sludgy snow fell with a heavy splash, 
ever and anon, from the fir trees. The 
flakes that fell now on Lady Flavians cloak 
melted as they fell. It was a wretched 
sloppy thaw ; and the damp cold of the day 
struck a chill to the very marrow of those 
who were exposed to it. 

But this strange girl seemed to be insen- 
sible to cold or discomfort. She looked up 
once or twice, impatiently, at the strip of 
sky that was visible between the gloomy 
fir trees ; but not because the falling snow 



166 LAST TLjLTIA. 

annojed her ; on the oontrarj , her fear was 
lest the friendly ronghnesB of the weather 
shoold cease to secnre her fit>m obseryation. 
She went along the winding path with her 
light tread, and her mantle covered with 
halfnuelted flakes, like some beantifbl wood- 
spirit of Gterman romance. More than once 
she fomid the track obstructed by a clnster 
of yonng pines, that had been snapped or 
uprooted by the gale of the previons night, 
and that lay heaped in wild confusion across 
the path, with white splinters protruding 
spear-Iike from their broken branches. But 
she made her way, swiftly and dexterously, 
over all obstacles, and soon she stood in the 
mossy clearing, now ankle-deep in snow, 
where the great old sycamore had stood, 
like a dying giant, sternly awaiting the 
death-blow. There it lay, the grand old 
tree, the forest monarch, planted by some 
mythical crusading Clare, whose bones were 



MR. HART SELLS HI^ SILENCE. 167 

dust long ago, and whose cross-legged 
eflSgy had been smashed to fragments mider 
the hammer of some iconoclast of the Com- 
monwealth days. There it lay, a huge 
prostrate wreck, a mere heap of rotten 
touchwood and corroded timber, scarcely fit 
to be fuel for a cottager's fire, with the 
snow draping it Hke a pure white shroud. 
The tree had snapped just above the large 
hollow in its decayed trunk, and the stump, 
shaggy . with moss that the snow had 
whitened, and which hung down like 
a hoary beard, fit for Merlin's self, 
yet showed the gaping cavernous space 
within. 

With an eager cry. Lady Flavia sprang 
forward into the drift, and plunged her hand 
and arm deep down into the hollow of the 
old tree's trunk . deep down, without any 
heed of snakes or other creatures that might 
resent such an invasion of their home. 



168 LADY FLAVIA. 

Again and again did she renew her search, 
angrily plucking out the dead leaves, the 
chips of bark, the snow, and the crumbling 
brown dust sprung from decay. Again and 
again, each time more fiercely, more ear- 
nestly than before. But it was all in vain 
.all in vain. She withdrew her hand at 
last, with a dull moan of actual suffering. 
The hollow was empty. The portrait . ^the 
miniature that she had concealed there but 
a few short weeks since. was gone. 

The shock of this discovery seemed to 
turn her to stone. She stood quite quiet 
and silent^ leaning on the jagged remnant 
of the fallen tree, as if for support. The 
hood of her grey cloak had fallen back, and 
the snow-flakes descended fast on her un- 
covered head, and clung to her raven curls ; 
but she never heeded them. Her face was 
as white and as motionless as stone, and in 
her blue eyes, bent in meaningless fixity on 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 169 

the ruin of splintered wood and half-thawed 
snow at her feet, was the dreamy horror 
that might lm*k in the sad eyes of a prophet 
of woe and evil, brooding over sorrows yet 
to come. Her little hands were torn and 
bruised by the rough wood, and there was 
blood trickling from a scratch on her white 
wrist ; but she did not care for that. As 
little did she care for the wet drift in which 
her feet were sinking, or for the mingled ' 
sleet and snow, turning almost to rain as 
the streaks in the clouds widened, that beat 
upon her unprotected head and her pale 
beautiful face. For a long time she stood 
thus, and then she gave a single heaving 
sob . ^half sob, half sigh . and trembled, but 
not with cold. " Gone ! An ill augury 
that," she murmured, in a voice as low as 
the ripple of a summer brooklet. " Misfor- 
tunes do not come alone. Gone ! The pic- 
ture is gone . stolen. It is the first, sign of 



170 LADY FLAVIA. 

the shadow that waits on wicked deeds. It 
istiiebegiimingoftheend." 

As she said this, a slight sound reached 
her. She looked quickly up. From the 
opposite side of the fallen tree, Mr. Ebenezer 
Hart, attomey-at-law, and land-agent to the 
Ewl of Mortlake, was steadfastly contem- 
plating her. Their eyes met. 

There was another path, almost parallel 
to the one which Lady Flavia had followed, 
which crossed the clearing where the syca- 
more had stood. In this path was the law- 
yer. There was nothing peculiarly won- 
derful in the fact that Mr. Hart should be 
found where he was, though probably he 
did not cross the plantations half a dozen 
times in the course of a year. But he did 
occasionally traverse them when business 
took him to the outlying forms and ham- 
lets ; and he had on that very day been 
sent for in a hurry to draw a sick farmer's 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 171 

will . Mr. Gnppy's will it was, a venerable 
agriculturist, yeoman, bachelor, and vale- 
tudinarian, who was faiUng in real earnest 
at last, and who had just made a new will 
in favour of a nephew kicked out of the 
cob-walled farm-house long ago, but who 
was rehabilitated in consequence of the old 
man's favourite niece, Patty, having failed 
to season his gruel to his liking. All our 
fates are linked together. If George Guppy 
of Quarry Farm had been less capricious as 
to the inheritor of his savings and acres, 
Mr. Hart would hardly have encountered 
Lady Flavia Clare in such a place on such a 
day. 

Mr. Hart looked very damp, and cold, 
and miserable. He carried an umbrella; 
but he had forgotten his goloshes, and his 
feet were wet, and his fingers stiff, and his 
nose was pinched and blue. He was a light- 
haired dapper little man, and those Hght- 



172 LADY FLAVIA. 

haired dapper little men seem to feel cold 
the most. He was shivering in his sodden 
boots. But he forgot the cold for the 
moment as he saw his dead patron's daugh- 
ter in that spot, in such weather, and 
marked her strange conduct. Her words 
he could not overhear; but as she stood 
with her head uncovered, reckless of the 
snow, marble white, with a gesture of de- 
spairing wretchedness such as no tragedian 
living could feign, the attorney was struck 
dumb like one of those who, according to 
old Grecian belief, met a nymph in the 
woods, and were palsied at the sight of her 
fatal loveliness. But if Mr. Hart did not 
speak, at least, like the parrot in the fable, 
he thought the more. What was the mean- 
ing of all this ? It was queer, very queer. 
But the lawyer, a shrewd little man as far 
as his narrow orbit stretched, and habitually 
suspicious, had always been privately of 



L. 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 173 

opinion tliat there was something odd, 
something uncanny, to use a word that has 
no direct equivalent in southern speech, 
, about the late earl's daughter. 

But Mr. Hart couJd hardly help doubting 
the testimony of his own eyes, so instanta- 
neous was the transition from the despair- 
ing, sorrow-stricken attitude to one of lady- 
like ease. As if at the bidding of an en^ 
chanter, the fair face before him had lost its 
expression of grief and pain, the blue eyes 
were full of innocence and candour, and the 
soft bloom stole back to the cheek that had 
looked so wan and white with wrath and 
sorrow but a moment before. There was 
no start of self-betrayal, no flinching. The 
clear blue eyes did not droop even in the 
surprise of encountering those of the attor- 
ney. Lady Flavia was always affable. She 
gave Mr. Hart exactly such a bow of civil 
recognition as he would have received from 



I 



174 LADY PLAVIA. 

her had he met her in company with her 
kinsfolk, in the main avenue of the park . 
no more, and no less. It was not a bow 
deprecatory, it was not a bow defiant ; it was 
a mere ladylike inclination of a proud and 
pretiy little head, and off" came Mr. Hart's 
hat, mechanically. 

" Bless my stars. Lady Flavia ! You will 
get shockingly wet ! dear me ! such a 
day as this !" stammered the lawyer. 

" It is a very wet day. I really think I 
had better go home, since the weather is so 
bad,'* said Lady Flavia in her ingenuous 
manner ; and she smiled as she shook the 
snow from her curls, and turned away. 
" Good morning, Mr. Hart." 

But to this parting Mr. Hart would by 
no means consent. Gallantry and politeness 
combined to forbid the deserting of a lady 
in a wood, in the snow ; and he insisted on 
escorting Lady Flavia with his umbrella, at 



MR. HART SELLS mS SILENCE. 175 

least as far as the garden-gate of Harble- 
down. Lady Flavia had not the least 
objection to this, or if she had, she was none 
the less gracious in her acceptance of the 
proffered civility. She walked very com- 
posedly beside Mr. Hart, who held his 
umbrella . it was a small one, only meant 
to accommodate one person . exclusively 
over Lady Flavia, and got terribly wet in 
consequence ; for the snow was more and 
more becoming mixed with sleet and rain. 
But the high-born heiress at his side walked 
on with perfect unconcern, and never seemed 
to care, as she struck across the park in 
such a manner as to avoid being seen from 
the windows of the great house, that her 
feet sank at every step in the soft snow and 
half-congealed water. 

" Mr. Hart," she said, " I wanted parti- 
cularly to see you, and I was thinking of 
sending a note to ask you to call. I really 




176 LADT FLAVIA. 

want your advice . about that property my 
poor father left me, in Leicestershire and 
Sussex-was it not? I am so shamefuUy 
ignorant of business matters ; but you know 
all about it . do you not ?" 

Mr. Hart, who was coughing as he 
stumbled through the drift.s, made answer 

readily enough : " Yes, Lady Flavia, I think 
I may say that I know the main facts. I 
have never been in Leicestershire, nor, 
indeed, strictly speaking, had I the manage- 
ment, under the late lamented earl, of either 
property, though in my lord's confidence 
here. But I once went to Cupley Lees to 
consult about improvements with Mr. 
Sutton the steward. A fine property of 
your ladyship's, but rather imder-rented ; 
would bear ten shillings an acre added to 
the rent, I'm certain. Beg your pardon, 
but are you aware that the hood of your 
ladyship's cloak " 




MR. HART SELLS ffiS SILENCE. 177 

" Thank you,"^ said Lady Flavia, with one 
of her ringing laughs, as the attorney rather 
awkwardly assisted her to replace the hood 
over her black curls. " I hardly knew it 
had fallen off. But that Leicestershire 
estate . I believe there are coal-mines, and 
ground-rents of factories, and all sorts of 
dreadful compUcated things, and poor people 
that have no resident squire to do them any 
good, and a new church that ought to be 
built, and a great deal more. I wish, Mr. 
Hart, you would be kind enough to read 
over the papers and explain them to me. 
I shall want an agent, you know, to manage 
both properties . Lord Mortlake lets me do 
as I like, even now, and so do the trustees 
.and, if you would not mind the trouble, I 
should very much prefer your managing 
the estates for me, Mr. Hart." 

So she ran on. The attorney almost for- 
got his wet feet, almost forgot the unplea- 

VOL. II. N 



178 LADY FULTIA. 

sant sensation cansed by the melted snow 
that had lodged between his cravat and 
coat-collar, and was now trickling down his 
neck, in the prospect before him. He was to 
be agent for Cupley Lees and Melshot Friars, 
and in behalf of a yonng lady who was 
likely to leave all business details to her 
prime minister. The oflFer was tantamount 
to a promise of a good many hmidreds a 
year, besides jobs contingent on such an 
appointment. Moreover, Mr. Hart was 
fascinated, dazzled, bewitched. Very seldom 
in the little man's sterile life had he spoken 
with any one whom even partiality could 
compare with his dead client's daughter, 
nev^r with her equal in grace and in that 
nameless charm that encompassed her like 
a magic atmosphere. This extraordinary 
girl had the rarest of all powers . she could 
be frank and friendly without any fear lest 
her openness of manner should be construed 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 179 

into familiarity. With all her winning 
sweetness, Mr. Hart always felt the exist- 
ence of the social gulf that separated the 
village lawyer from the earl's daughter. 
She was kind and almost playful in the tone 
that she adopted ; but she contrived to im- 
press the attorney more with a sense of the 
awful distance between them than the 
starchest and stiffest-backed of dowagers 
could have done. It was Mary Queen of 
Scots condescending to confide in the 
smallest scrivener in her dominions. 

And now they were at the side-gate that 
opened into the garden, and Lady Flavia, 
armed with her smiles, turned upon Ebenezer 
Hart, gentleman, and said : " By the by, 
Mr. Hart, it would be as well not to mention 
my being in the park on this snowy day, as 
it might make the countess imeasy. I never 
catch cold" . here she laughed with a 
wicked enjoyment of her escort's sorry 




180 LADT FLAYIA. 

plight . "but dear Lady Mortlake would 
be alarmed lest I should oome to harm by 
mj imprudence. I'm sure I need not add 
more." And she bowed to the lawyer, 
opened the gate, and was gone before Mr. 
Ebenezer Hart could assure her that he was 
discretion itself, and that her ladyship's 
escapade should be kept profoundly secret. 
And then l3ie agent-expectant for Cupley 
Lees and Melshot Friars trudged home to 
drink hot drinks and sit before the fire. 
His lips, for the time, were sealed. 

Half an hour later. Lady Flavia Clare, 
rustling in a blue silk dress, and with 
golden ornaments twinkling and sparkling 
in the firelight, came rustling down to join 
the family group in the south drawing-room. 
She was in childishly high spirits, and laughed 
her gayest laugh when her friend Caroline 
gentiy reproached her with her imaccount- 
able preference for solitude. 




MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 181 

** To own the truth," she said, " I have 
been reading Tennyson ever since lunch . 
the Idylls, you know, and I could not tear 
myself away from the book till I knew what 
had become of poor old Merlin. Poetry 
like Tennyson's is new to me ; we used to 
read Racine's tiresome hexameters at the 
convent. How wretchedly cold and dark 
the day looks, to be sure !" 

She took her seat on a low footstool on 
the rug, and put her arms caressingly round 
Leo's tawny neck. The great dog was in 
a strange humour on that day. He had 
been restless for hours. He had given a 
long melancholy whining cry, a howl at 
once fierce and mournful, about half an hour 
before, just at the time when a grey-cloaked 
slender figure had glided in, unobserved, 
at the convenient side-door that opened on 
the gardens. And now, as Lady Flavia 
threw herself beside him, and patted him. 




182 LADT PLAVIA. 

the noble brute gave a deep growl like the 
roll of smothered thunder, and his lip 
curled up and showed the glistening white 
teeth. 

" Oh, pray take care, love !" cried Lady 
Mortlake in alarm ; and Lord Hythe spoke 
angrily to the dog. But Lady Flavia 
merely laughed, as she put her little hands 
on either side of the animal's huge head, 
and forced him to look up in her face. The 
lionlike brute growled again. Then his red 
glowing eyes quailed before the utter fear- 
lessness of the blue eyes that looked at 
them, and as the dog shrunk down, cowed, 
and licked the small hand of his conqueror 
in token of subjection, the girl patted him 
with contemptuous kindness. 

" Poor Leo !" she said ; and then Lady 
Julia asked in dismay how her cousin had 
been so unlucky as to hurt her hand and 
get that scratch on her rounded white arm ; 




MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 183 

and these trifling mishaps were smilingly 
accounted for by a stumble, and a fall nar- 
rowly escaped, and there was an end of the 
matter. Lord Hythe said never a word. 
But it so happened that he, and he alone, 
could estimate the enthralling influence 
which the Laureate's verses must have 
exercised over his kinswoman. He alone, 
from the window of the library, had seen 
the grey-mantled female form steal, wraith- 
like, from the sheltering laurels, and glide 
through the fast-falling snow towards the 
side-door of the house. He had seen it, nor 
had he ever for an instant doubted its 
identity. But Lord Hythe, as he stood 
with a grave face, listening to Lady Flavia s 
careless prattKng, said never a word. He 
kept her secret unasked. 




174 LADY PLAVIA. 

her had he met her in company with her 
kinsfolk, in the main avenue of the park . 
no more, and no less. It was not a bow 
deprecatory, it was not a bow defiant ; it was 
a mere ladylike inclination of a proud and 
pretty little head, and off" came Mr. Hart's 
hat, mechanically. 

** Bless my stars, Lady Flavia ! You will 
get shockingly wet ! dear me ! such a 
day as this !" stammered the lawyer. 

" It is a very wet day. I really think I 
had better go home, since the weather is so 
bad,*' said Lady Flavia in her ingenuous 
manner ; and she smiled as she shook the 
snow from her curls, and turned away. 
" Good morning, Mr. Hart." 

But to this parting Mr. Hart would by 
no means consent. Gallantry and politeness 
combined to forbid the deserting of a lady 
in a wood, in the snow ; and he insisted on 
escorting Lady Flavia with his umbrella, at 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 175 

least as far as the garden-gate of Harble- 
down. Lady Flavia had not the least 
objection to this, or if she had, she was none 
the less gracious in her acceptance of the 
proffered civility. She walked very com- 
posedly beside Mr. Hart, who held his 
umbrella . it was a small one, only meant 
to accommodate one person. exclusively 
over Lady Flavia, and got terribly wet in 
consequence ; for the snow was more and 
more becoming mixed with sleet and rain. 
But the high-born heiress at his side walked 
on with perfect unconcern, and never seemed 
to care, as she struck across the park in 
such a manner as to avoid being seen from 
the windows of the great house, that her 
feet sank at every step in the soft snow and 
half-congealed water. 

** Mr. Hart," she said, " I wanted parti- 
cularly to see you, and I was thinking of 
sending a note to ask you to call. I really 




176 LADT FLAVU. 

want your advice . about that property my 

poor father left me, in Leicestershire and 

Sussex . was it not ? I am so shameftilly 

ignorant of business matters ; but you know 

all about it . do you not ?" 

Mr. Hart, who was coughing as he 

stumbled through the driftiS, made answer 

readily enough : " Yes, Lady Flavia, I think 
I may say that I know the main facts. I 

have never been in Leicestershire, nor, 
indeed, strictly speaking, had I the manage- 
ment, under the late lamented earl, of either 
property, though in my lord's confidence 
here. But I once went to Cupley Lees to 
consult about improvements with Mr. 
Sutton the steward. A fine property of 
your ladyship's, but rather imder-rented ; 
would bear ten shillings an acre added to 
the rent, I'm certain. Beg your pardon, 
but are you aware that the hood of your 
ladyship's cloak " 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 177 

" Thank you,"^ said Lady Flavia, with one 
of her ringing laughs, as the attorney rather 
awkwardly assisted her to replace the hood 
over her black curls. " I hardly knew it 
had fallen off. But that Leicestershire 
estate . I believe there are coal-mines, and 
ground-rents of factories, and all sorts of 
dreadful complicated things, and poor people 
that have no resident squire to do them any 
good, and a new church that ought to be 
built, and a great deal more. I wish, Mr. 
Hart, you would be kind enough to read 
over the papers and explain them to me. 
I shall want an agent, you know, to manage 
both properties . Lord Mortlake lets me do 
as I like, even now, and so do the trustees 
. and, if you would not mind the trouble, I 
should very much prefer your managing 
the estates for me, Mr. Hart." 

So she ran on. The attorney almost for- 
got his wet feet^ almost forgot the unplea- 

VOL. II. N 




 



178 LADY FLAVIA. 

sant sensation caused by the melted snow- 
that had lodged between his cravat and 
coat-collar, and was now trickling down his 
neck, in the prospect before him. He was to 
be agent for Cupley Lees and Melshot Friars, 
and in behalf of a young lady who was 
likely to leave all business details to her 
prime minister. The offer was tantamount 
to a promise of a good many hundreds a 
year, besides jobs contingent on such an 
appointment. Moreover, Mr. Hart was 
fascinated, dazzled, bewitched. Very seldom 
in the little man's sterile life had he spoken 
with any one whom even partiaUty could 
compare with his dead client's daughter, 
nev.er with her equal in grace and in that 
nameless charm that encompassed her like 
a magic atmosphere. This extraordinary 
girl had the rarest of all powers . she could 
be frank and friendly without any fear lest 
her openness of manner should be construed 




MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 179 

into familiarity. With all lier winning 
sweetness, Mr. Hart always felt the exist- 
ence of the social gulf that separated the 
village lawyer from the earl's daughter. 
She was kind and almost playful in the tone 
that she adopted ; but she contrived to im- 
press the attorney more with a sense of the 
awful distance between them than the 
starchest and stiflFest-backed of dowagers 
could have done. It was Mary Queen of 
Scots condescending to confide in the 
smallest scrivener in her dominions. 

And now they were at the side-gate that 
opened into the garden, and Lady Flavia, 
armed with her smiles, turned upon Ebenezer 
Hart, gentleman, and said: "By the by, 
Mr. Hart, it would be as well not to mention 
my being in the park on this snowy day, as 
it might make the countess uneasy. I never 
catch cold" . here she laughed with a 
wicked enjoyment of her escort's sorry 




180 LADY FLAVIA. 

plight . "but dear Lady Mortlake would 
be alarmed lest I should come to harm by 
my imprudence. Fm sure I need not add 
more." And she bowed to the lawyer, 
opened the gate, and was gone before Mr. 
Ebenezer Hart could assure her that he was 
discretion itself, and that her ladyship's 
escapade should be kept profoimdly secret 
And then iSie agent-expectant for Cupley 
Lees and Melshot Friars trudged home to 
drink hot drinks and sit before the fire. 
His lips, for the time, were sealed. 

Half an hour later. Lady Flavia Clare, 
rustling in a blue silk dress, and with 
golden ornaments twinkling and sparkling 
in the firelight, came rustling down to join 
the family group in the south drawing-room. 
She was in childishly high spirits, and laughed 
her gayest laugh when her friend Caroline 
gently reproached her with her unaccount- 
able preference for soHtude. 



MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 181 

** To own the truth," she said, " I have 
been reading Tennyson ever since lunch. 
the Idylls^ you know, and I could not tear 
myself away from the book till I knew what 
had become of poor old MerUn. Poetry 
like Tennyson's is new to me ; we used to 
read Racine's tiresome hexameters at the 
convent. How wretchedly cold and dark 
the day looks, to be sure !" 

She took her seat on a low footstool on 
the rug, and put her arms caressingly round 
Leo's tawny neck. The great dog was in 
a strange humour on that day. He had 
been restless for hours. He had given a 
long melancholy whining cry, a howl at 
once fierce and mournful, about half an hour 
before, just at the time when a grey-cloaked 
slender figure had glided in, unobserved, 
at the convenient side-door that opened on 
the gardens. And now, as Lady Flavia 
threw herself beside him, and patted him. 




182 LADY FLAVIA. 

the noble brute gave a deep growl like the 
roll of smothered thunder, and his lip 
curled up and showed the glistening white 
teeth. 

" Oh, pray take care, love !" cried Lady 
Mortlake in alarm ; and Lord Hythe spoke 
angrily to the dog. But Lady Flavia 
merely laughed, as she put her little hands 
on either side of the animal's huge head, 
and forced him to look up in her face. The 
lionlike brute growled again. Then his red 
glowing eyes quailed before the utter fear- 
lessness of the blue eyes that looked at 
them, and as the dog shrunk down, cowed, 
and licked the small hand of his conqueror 
in token of subjection, the girl patted him 
with contemptuous kindness. 

" Poor Leo !" she said ; and then Lady 
Julia asked in dismay how her cousin had 
been so unlucky as to hurt her hand and 
get that scratch on her rounded white arm ; 




MR. HART SELLS HIS SILENCE. 183 

and these trifling mishaps were smilingly 
accounted for by a stumble, and a fall nar- 
rowly escaped, and there was an end of the 
matter. Lord Hyihe said never a word. 
But it so happened that he, and he alone, 
could estimate the enthralling influence 
which the Laureate's verses must have 
exercised over his kinswoman. He alone, 
from the window of the library, had seen 
the grey-mantled female form steal, wraith- 
like, from the sheltering laurels, and glide 
through the fast-falling snow towards the 
side-door of the house. He had seen it, nor 
had he ever for an instant doubted its 
identity. But Lord Hythe, as he stood 
with a grave face, listening to Lady Flavians 
careless prattKng, said never a word. He 
kept her secret unasked. 




184 LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER IX. 



DARK THOUGHTS. 



Lord Hythe stood apart from the others, 
turning over the leaves of one of those 
albums of photographs which are among 
our modem Lares. But his thoughts were 
not with the sun-pictures on which his eyes 
were idly bent ; he was thinking of Lady 
Flavia, and not as lovers think. 

It had been a mistake, that notion on the 
part of his soft-hearted sister, that dear 
Augustus was pining and moping on ac- 
count of dear Flavia's rejection of his hand. 
Such a simple solution of the young M.P.*s 




DARK THOUGHTS. 185 

reserve and moodiness was very far from 
the truth. On the terrace, on that day, 
vs^hen the utterance of the monosyllable 
" yes," in the place of " no," would, barring 
the chapter of accidents, have placed the 
pearl-pointed coronet of Mortlake on Lady 
Flavia's head. Lord Hythe had lost his. He 
had been intoxicated, led away, spell-bound, 
by the excitement of the moment, and by 
the witchery of the beautiful little fairy 
whom his mother and sisters desired him to 
marry. When he said, afterwards, that he 
was afraid he should come to be more 
deeply in love than he cared to be, he 
spoke a truth of broader application than 
the conventional despair of a rejected ad- 
mirer. He was sincerely afraid lest, in 
spite of his reason, in spite of his prudence, 
and, above all, in spite of a warning voice 
within him that cried, " Beware !" he 
should become the slave and the dupe of 



186 LADY FLAVIA. 

this wondrous little syren with the blue 
eyes and night-black hair. 

He had always felt some hidden instinct 
warning him against Lady Flavia ; always^ 
even from the first. And yet he was a 
good-humoured honest Englishman, not 
disposed to severe judgments on light 
grounds. He had been favourably in- 
clined, before he saw her, towards this poor 
lonely orphan, who had borne the burden 
of another's sins, and whose cheerless girl- 
hood had been passed among strangers. 
When he saw her, he saw as others did, 
that this neglected daughter of a noble line 
possessed gifts that would have enabled her 
to do credit to any rank, however lofty. 
Had her face been her fortune, had the Earl 
Francis left her nothing, she might still 
have been a wife of whom princes might 

well have been proud, if That terrible 

If ! If the heart within were worthy of the 



DARK THOUGHTS. 187 

beautiful form that enshrined it ; if the cou- 
rage, and the sweetness, and the grace, and 
the power, were not merely the weapons by 
which a hard and unscrupulous spirit strove 
for mastery in the battle of hfe. 

Lord Hythe would marry no woman that 
he could not respect and trust, wholly and 
entirely, with a full and sincere confidence, 
and a love anchored on esteem. There are 
men who can bow in no feigned homage 
before an idol that they despise or distrust. 
He was not one of them. Perhaps he was 
himself too cold, too critical ; but he was 
thoroughly honest. He could have loved 
his beautiful cousin with a fervour new to 
his nature. With such a friend, such a con- 
soler, such a wife as she might have been, to 
share his joys and sorrows, to nerve him 
for toil, and whisper '* Hope !" in the day 
of discouragement and baffled ambition, he 
might have done something for England 




188 LADY FLAVIA. 

and for fame. But lie could not trust her. 
He could not read her nature, but his in- 
stinctive repugnance warned him back. He 
was like one who should possess the know- 
ledge, that deep down beneath the green 
vineyards and the pleasant meadows, the 
fiery gulfs were yawning hell-like, and the 
red torrents of molten lava were gathering 
for the day of doom. 

When once suspicion is awake, the watch- 
ful sentinel is always ready to catch at the 
veriest trifles that may confirm a foregone 
conclusion. So it was in this case. A 
slight inflection of voice, a heedless word, a 
look surprised at some moment when the 
mask, if mask it were, was laid aside for a 
moment . such airy nothings as these formed 
the evidence, such as it was. Lord Hythe 
had too much good sense and feehng to 
condemn his cousin on such grounds; but 
he doubted, doubted and watched. He was 




DARK THOUGHTS. 189 

not in love with her; he had never been 
in love with her. But St. Anthony's self 
would have been unable always to resist 
the fascinations of that elfin beauty ; and 
the member for Starvington prudently kept 
as far as possible beyond the vortex of the 
whirlpool. He allowed his mother and 
sisters to believe that he regretted Ids rejec- 
tion, and that he would willingly renew his 
suit. He said to himself that this tacit 
admission of his being still a petitioner for 
the hand of his fair cousin, was merely 
a harmless means of obtaining that deside- 
ratum of the male sex, " a quiet life." But 
the human heart is wonderfully elastic, 
very complicated, very full of mysteries. 
Perhaps this was not all. Perhaps he hoped, 
hoped that Lady Flavia was really the 
angel of goodness and truth that his family 
. doubtless a little biassed by the not unna- 
tural desire to keep a handsome fortune in 



190 LADY FLAVIA. 

the Clare family . believed her to be. Pos- 
sibly, he trusted that the enigma would be 
happily solved, and that Lady Flavia would 
come forth from the trial candid and blame- 
less, an innocent, snow-white dove. 

But on that very day he had seen . what ? 
A stealthy figure ghding through the snow- 
storm, past the screening shrubs, over the 
lawn, and creeping Uke a thief into the 
mansion of her fathers . a cloud of ebon 
curls falling from beneath the hood of a 
muffling grey cloak, and beneath the hood 
a face haggard and pale with emotion, but 
defiant still. The moment when Lord 
Hythe, himself unseen, had marked the ap- 
proaching figure, had been one when Lady 
Flavia had thought herself beyond reach of 
scrutiny. As the knights of old, weary and 
gasping with battle-toil, put up their barred 
visors to breathe more freely, so she had 
then laid *fetside the wreathed smiles that 




DARK THOUGHTS. 191 

had been so eflfective in disarming the pos- 
sible suspicions of Mr. Hart. She looked 
ill, tired, white, and desperate, as she shook 
her cloak to clear it of the clinging snow. 

And there she was, rustling and flashing 
in her blue silk, and Honiton lace, and 
golden ornaments, with her hair about her 
shoulders as no one else but this styange 
girl could wear it, for what in others was 
slovenly, in her was but natural and grace- 
ful. There she was, with a bright colour in 
her dainty cheek, a bright radiance in her 
pure blue eyes, merry, happy, prattling out 
a plausible excuse for her short absence, 
laughing, singing, moving about the room 
with her customary carelesss grace, but ever 
returning to her favourite seat on the silken 
footstool beside Leo. There she was, among 
her unsuspecting relatives, an incarnate 
Lie. 

What strong motive could have driven 




192 LADY FLAVIA, 

this high-bom, carefully-reared girl to go 
abroad, secretly, on such a day, braving the 
rough weather, perhaps rejoicing in it, as 
affording the means of escaping notice ? 
What, indeed? But of one thing Lord 
Hythe was sure . the errand had been 
neither a pleasant nor a successful one. 
The pale face that he had seen had been 
that of one who bears up doggedly against 
defeat, but is well-nigh hopeless of victory. 
This was no mere youthful caprice. There 
was a deep, stern purpose written in the 
face that Lord Hythe had seen from the 
window; and there was the face before 
him, lovely, bright, full of mirth and 
thoughtless innocence, the face of one to 
whom life was one long holiday of harm- 
less enjoyment. Lady Flavia was pleasant 
to look upon ; but Lord Hythe shuddered, 
he hardly knew why, as he watched her 
over the top of the album, and his eye 



DARK THOUGHTS. 193 

avoided hers as if she had been a basilisk 
indeed, and her gaze could strike him dead. 
And thus in family conclave the short 
November day came to a close at last. 



VOL. IT, 



194 LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER X. 

PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAIGN". 

In that very drawing-room of the Minden 
Street lodging-house, in the parish of St 
James, and county of Middlesex, where the 
curtain first rose upon the Fords, father and 
daughter, the curtain rises again. Amy 
Ford, and her cousin, Charles Ford, of the 
Temple, are sitting side by side on the old- 
fashioned scroll-sofa, as happy and fond a 
young couple of engaged lovers as any in 
London. They have had a hearty quarrel 
down there in Slochester, and have made it 
up, and are better friends than before. In 




PREPARINa FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 195 

their case, as in myriads of other cases, the 
truth of the old Roman playwright's maxim 
has been made manifest, and the quarrel of 
the lovers has proved itself the renewal of 
love. Charles had been jealous of that 
mysterious stranger who had gone so sud- 
denly to France ; had been angry at the 
secret that was kept from him by both 
uncle and cousin ; had conceived himself in^ 
jured by Amy's lack of confidence, and had 
behaved petulantly, irritably, and alto- 
gether unreasonably, as jealous men will 
do. Amy had resented this injustice ; there 
had been a grand dispute ; Charles, always 
impetuous, was preparing to take himself 
and his portmanteau back to London, and 
there seemed every prospect that the two 
young folks would be rendered utterly 
miserable, when the colonel intervened. 
Charles was taken into counsel. The mys- 
tery was cleared up. Avowals and confes- 



196 LADY FLA VIA. 

sions of a mutual attachment followed the 
proclamation of peace, and it was satisfac- 
torily settled that Charles Ford should 
many his cousin Amy, with the full con- 
sent of all parties. But not yet. There 
was a duty to be first discharged, a task to 
be first carried out. 

Amy was firm in her resolution to leave 
nothing untried for the discovery of her un- 
happy friend, that Flavia Clare whom she 
had known and loved at the convent of Our 
Lady of Carmel. The colonel, partly to 
gratify his daughter's wish, and partly be- 
cause his honest nature revolted against 
the spectacle of triumphant iniquity, had 
pledged his word that he would not desist 
from the search until some satisfactory in- 
telligence should be obtained with regard 
to the actual facts of the case ; and now 
Charles Ford, who had at first been incredu- 
lous, even more so than the colonel, was 




PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAiaN. 197 

almost as eager as Amy herself in the good 
cause. 

It was to this end that the Fords cutting 
short their visit, much to the chagrin of the 
worthy vicar and his wife, had returned to 
London, and since their return they had not 
been idle. The colonel had consulted his 
solicitors without much immediate benefit. 
The Southampton Row of steady-going old 
lawyers, had listened to him certainly, but 
then they would have listened just as 
patiently to a chapter from the Arabian 
Nights^ or a fragment of Ossian, had so 
esteemed a client as Colonel Ford chosen to 
favour them with a recitation; and they 
urbanely gave him to understand that the 
affair in its present stage, was not one 
which a respectable firm of family solicitors 
could well take up. They were willing to 
meet Colonel Ford's views, of course, and to 
assist him in every way compatible with a 



198 LADY FLA VI A. 

due regard for their own repute in the eyes 
of the profession. Had the case been one 
in which the Court of Queen's Bench eould 
have been moved, or the Chancellor 
prayed, for a writ or an injunction, that 
would have made a diflference. But Old 
Bailey business was an incubus on the 
spirits of the quiet scribes, and the Central 
Criminal Court was anathema maranatha. 

" Besides, my very dear sir," said old Mr. 
Pounce, the senior partner, and moneyed 
man of the firm, " I tell you fairly that to 
act in this aflFair would be to pick your 
pocket of the costs of the transaction. The 
story . excuse me . sounds like a leaf out of 
that French fellow's book . Monte Christo 
was the name of it, that my girls would 
insist on my skimming over. Miss Ford, 
most amiable young lady, I'm sure, has no 
doubt allowed her kind feelings and excited 
imagination to run away with her . indeed. 




PREPAKIXG FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 199 

that must be so. Dear me, such things 
don't happen, can't happen, in these matter- 
of-fact days that we live in. No magistrate 
would act, no judge would listen to such 
unsupported statements, I do assure you, 
my very dear sir." 

Charles Ford, on the other hand, had 
consulted a cynical old Q.C., and bencher of 
Gray's Inn, on whose discretion he knew 
that he could rely. This old gentleman 
had been a champion at assizes for many 
years in the grim old hanging-days, and 
had the names of the harsh old hanging- 
judges always on his lips. He smiled 
sourly when he heard the bald imperfect 
story, which was all that his young friend 
had to tell, and took a noisy pinch of snuff 
as he thought it over. His judgment was 
different from that of the Southampton Row 
men. 

"Now, Ford," he said . "mind me, as 




200 LADY FLAVIA. 

the jargon goes, this is without prejudice. 
The farrago of nonsense you have been 
telling me, my lad, has not, legally, a leg 
to stand upon. No evidence. But I sus- 
pect there's something in it. Fm not one 
of those who think a thing's false unless it's 
proved by testimony as clear as the noon- 
day. I've got oflF too many gallow's-birds, 
I'm afraid, to trust to fair seeming. Still, 
you can'^t go into court on such proofe as 
those. Go to Scotland Yard ; spend your 
money freely, and the detectives wiU ferret 
out the truth, if there be such a thing at 
the bottom of the bag." 

Colonel Ford had acted on this advice. 
He had visited Scotland Yard ; he had been 
absent for hours, and now his heavy step 
was heard without on the landing-place, 
and his hand was on the lock of the draw- 
ing-room door, and in he came. 

"What have you to tell us, papa?" 



PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 201 

asked Amy. Colonel Ford's news was 
soon imparted. He had seen the commis- 
sioner, had asked for and obtained the 
services of a detective officer, and that per- 
son was soon to present himself in Minden 
Street. 

'^ The commissioner regretted," added the 
colonel, " that the member of the force whd 
was most usually employed in aflFairs of this 
sort on the continent, was engaged else- 
where. However, he said that Sergeant 
Skinner had been repeatedly employed 
abroad, and . . But here* he comes to 
speak for himself." 

And at that moment a single knock, 
modest but not timorous, resounded on the 
street-door, and in a minute or two the 
policeman was introduced. 

" Take a chair. Sergeant Skinner ; we 
have a long conversation before us," said 
Colonel Ford. The detective took a chair. 




202 LADY FLAVIA. 

and sat slowly smoothing down the nap of 
his hard hat. He was in plain clothes, of 
course. His appearance rather disappointed 
both Charles and Amy, who had formed a 
high estimate of the extraordinary intelli- 
gence of detectives. They had expected 
a progidy of astuteness, Mephistopheles 
attached to the British police, Asmodeus in 
constable's clothes, and with a crown-headed 
staflF in his pocket. What they saw was a 
stout dark man, middle-aged, of middle 
height, middling in all respects. Sergeant 
Skinner had a fat, good-humoured face, 
sleek hair that was flecked with grey, 
rather jovial black eyes, a firm mouth, and 
a square lower jaw. He shaved himself 
very closely. He wore a well-brushed suit 
of black, and might have passed for a 
decent tradesman of moderate means, or a 
steady artisan, or the captain of a river 
steam-boat, or even a city missionary. He 



PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 203 

was very quiet, respectful, and unobtrusive 
in manner. 

The colonel was not disappointed. He 
knew that the cleverest men are not always 
those who make a parade of their clever- 
ness. There was something soldierly, ser- 
viceable, and self-collected about the police- 
man that pleased the old warrior well. 
Colonel Ford, as succinctly as possible, told 
what it was necessary for their new ally to 
know. Sergeant Skinner listened with 
much attention, and then asked Amy a few 
questions in a quiet way that seemed part 
and parcel of himself. When he heard the 
name of Royston as that of the gentleman 
who had accompanied Lady Flavia's hurried 
homeward journey from France, he smiled. 

"Mr. Brand Royston, was it, miss . a 
large, big man, getting on in years, with a 
particularly loud voice?" asked the ser- 
geant. 



204 LADY FLAVIA. 

Amy made answer that she had never 
seen Mr. Royston, but she believed, from 
her schoolfellow's account, that the descrip- 
tion was a tolerably accurate one. 

" You know him ?" asked the colonel. 

Sergeant Skinner continued to smooth 
down the rebellious nap of his hat as he 
repKed :  In a sort of way, sir, I do. I Ve 
seen him, often, when I was a youngster, 
and new in the force; and I've heard a , 
deal about him . a deal." 

**Not much to his credit, I suspect?'* 
said Colonel Ford. 

The detective's thick forefinger moved a 
little faster round the hard hat. ** Well, 
hardly," he answered. " But, bless yon, 
there are those that think all's fair game 
on the turf, where Greek meets Greek, as 
they say. I've heard ugly stories of Mr. 
Royston, but not worse than of others that 
walk Pall Mall yet. He was a deep chap, 



PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 205 

but too rash to keep what he made. A 
violent gentleman, not a bit like swells are 
now. I saw some skittle-sharpers once . 
that didn't know their bird . ^try to hustle 
him on the course one Derby Day. They 
found out their mistake, they did. It was 
just as safe to take a mad bull by the horns 
as to meddle with Battling Brand Boyston. 
He gave 'em a lesson that day." And the 
detective chuckled with quiet enjoyment of 
the recollection. At the sound of Battling 
Brand's sobriquet, now heard for the first 
time, Charles Ford looked up. He was a 
reader of the Sporting Magazine and other 
works dear to the country-bred youth of 
Britain ; and the name of Brand Boyston 
had come down to him as that of one of the 
giants of that far-off time when Mr. Osbal- 
diston rode the forty-four mile heats with- 
out pausing, except to change a tired 
horse for a fresh one ; and when Assheton 




206 LADY FLAVIA. 

Smith computed his falls at a hundred a 
season. 

" Brand Royston ?" he said ; " old Rattling 
Brand Royston of Royston Hall, is he our 
antagonist ? To me he seems like Ajax in 
top-boots, or Agamemnon in a racing jacket* 
I never thought of measuring myself with 
an old paladin of that sort, who seemed to 
have lived as long ago as Brummel did. 
Royston of Royston. 

And the young man thought of the pages 
upon pages of engrossing literature which 
he had imbibed, and of which Brand Roy- 
ston had furnished the subject-matter. The 
Duke of York had won a heavy bet on 
Brand's horse Daredevil, ridden by its 
owner, in the Coventry steeple-chase, and 
had slept two nights at Royston Hall. The 
king . it was George the Magnificent . had 
told Mr. Royston, after uncounted bottles of 
claret had been imbibed, at the Brighton 



PREP^VRma FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 207 

Pavilion, that his Sacred Majesty rather 
liked him, as a thorough-going ruffian, 
whose talk did not always smell of the 
stables, as that of other sporting men did. 
Nimrod had spoken warmly of Brand ; so 
had Mr. Radcliffe. His prowess, his libe- 
rality and openness of hand, his success in 
wild pranks and fistic encounters,^ were 
plentifully embalmed in print. Few men 
had t^ken such leaps; scarcely any had 
gone through such broils and battles ; 
Brand never stood upon his rank ; he faced 
wrestlers, pugilists, [single-stick players at 
their own weapons, and came off the victor. 
Charles Ford had a pretty distinct remem- 
brance of his encounter with the Brum- 
magem Bully, a heavy-weight bruiser, the 
terror of the Black Country, whom his 
admirers had set upon Brand at some 
country race-meeting, to be " polished off " 
in eighteen rounds. Also of Manifold, that 



i 



208 LADY FLAVIA. 

ultra-vicious horse of Lord Bamford's, the 
kicking buck-jumper that had smashed the 
coUar-bones of so many grooms, and of 
which the rough-riders stood in awe. His 
lordship had said : ^^ Bide him as far as that 
white gate, Boyston, and he's yours, and I 
wish you joy of him. If you can't ride 
him, I must have him shot." 

But Brand Boyston had tamed the plung- 
ing furious brute, and had won the Welter 
Stakes with him at the next meeting on the 
Curragh. 

Something of this Charles related. It 
was all new to the colonel, whose only 
notions of sport had reference to the 
slaughter of great game, the Burra Shikar 
of the Indian jungle, racing for the spear 
of honour in a Bombay boar-himt, or a 
match between two wiry Arabs on an 
Indian Maidaun. 

But Sergeant Skinner nodded his head 



PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 209 

in token of assent. " Quite right, sir," he 
said'; " and 1 believe the gentleman did 
everything you mention, and^ more too. 
He was the talk of the town, I know, that 
time when he broke out of the round-house, 
after the row at Crockford's. But often 
when I was a lad on duty, and I've seen 
him among the tip-tops, bawling out the 
odds, and shaking the elbow at the Epsom 
booths, IVe thought to myself he would end 
at Bow Street. He was the man to stick at 
nothing. I wouldn't have been a life in 
his way, I know, if he saw a hatful of 
money beyond, and nothing but me betwixt 
him and it." 

The cool reticent man had warmed some- 
what in saying this, his black eyes twinkled, 
and his determined face looked more intel- 
ligent than before. But Amy grew pale, 
for his words had evoked a new fear. She 
had thought of her friend as in captivity, 

VOL. II. p 




210 LADY FLAVIA. 

but the policeman's words had aroused an 
apprehension that had never before dark' 
ened her mind. Hastily, almost imploringly 
she spoke : " You surely do not think the 
lady I have told you of . my dear, dear 
friend . a girl of only eighteen years old . 

you do not think he would . ^would " 

And Amy broke off, sobbing. 

The detective left off rubbing his hat. 
"No, miss, I don't. My opinion is that 
Mr. Royston is a hard man, but I don't 
beHeve he would do what you mean. I do 
not think he would harm a woman. My 
own idea is that your friend would be safe 
with him, so far as her life went ; but as 
for locking her up in an asylum, if he had 
a chance, and could make money by it, he'd 
do it. as sure as I am sitting here." 

Soon after this, the conference came to 
an end. Sergeant Skinner, from first to 
last, had expressed no surprise; and this 




PREPARING FOR THE CAMPAIGN. 211 

was a notable feature in the case. He had 
known, he said, " starts " of as singular a 
nature, but they did not always work out 
as well as could be desired. He declined to 
give any opinion as to the chance of sue-? 
cess. The evidence, he pointed out, was 
scanty. Possession represented nine points 
of the law. It was a comfort in some 
respects that the search, in the first in- 
stance, was to be conducted in France. 
The French had ways of their own, and 
would rake up evidence where our own 
more scrupulous system broke down. But 
Sergeant Skinner especially begged to ad- 
vise that Colonel Ford should provide him- 
self with formal papers, and if possible with 
introductions to some one in the Ministry 
of the Interior or Foreign Affairs, as other- 
wise it would be difficult to induce the local 
authorities to take up a case on such slight 
grounds. 




212 LADY FLAVIA. 

Then Sergeant Skinner, promising' to 
call next day, took his leave ; and Amj, 
who had not yet recovered her bight about 
her poor friend's safety, slipped quietly up 
to her own room. Colonel Ford stood 
before the fire, rubbing his hands together 
with a cheerfulness that surprised his 
nephew. **I rather like this, Charley,*' 
said the old soldier ; " I begin to warm to 
my work, for its own sake, I'm afi^id. You 
see I was one of the commissioners for put- 
ting down Thuggee, during which time I 
heard stories that I think would astonish 
even our cool friend from Scotland Yard ; 
and I begin to feel as if the work were yet 
unfinished, and I had Thugs . English 
Thugs, but not the less dangerous, to deal 
with still." 



213 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 

*' Messieurs, Mademoiselle, miUe excuses I 
It is not my fault if I keep you waiting so 
long. But, voyez vouSj till Monsieur le Pro- 
cureur Imperial sliall ring his bell, I dare 
not introduce you." And as the concierge of 
Palais de Justice said these words, he took 
off his night-cap with a grin and a grace 
impossible to any but a Frenchman. 

Colonel Ford, his daughter, his nephew, 
and the London detective, had been politely 
invited into the den, called a lodge by 
courtesy, which was the oflficial abode of 
the concierge of the Palace of Justice at 



r 



214 LADY FLAVIA. 

Versailles. There they sat on cane chairs, 
confronted by a series of highly-coloured 
prints representing Napoleon I. at Auster- 
litz, at the Milan coronation, at the cere- 
mony of the Champ de Mai, and lastly, at 
St. Helena. Madame Lebrun, wife of the 
concierge, was frying something savoury 
for an early dinner ; and the fat old con- 
cierge himself, bald and polite, in an apron 
and blue cotton night-cap, with a Turk's- 
head brush under his arm, was awaiting the 
tinkle of the bell that should authorize him 
to induct the English visitors into the pre- 
sence of the pubhc prosecutor. 

It was very cold . a gloomy day in De- 
cember. The sky was dull and lead- 
coloured, and the snow that lay white in 
the half-deserted streets of the old 'royal 
town of Versailles, had a glare that con- 
trasted with the murky darkness of the 
clouds overhead. Amy shivered as she 



THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 215 

looked out through the half-open door into 
the great hall of the Palais, that hall whose 
pavement had echoed to the tread of so 
many hundreds of disappointed suitors. 
The pavement was left in repose now, since 
the assizes were not going on. Only now 
and then did some lagging foot tread those 
cold stones, as some one passed towards 
the tribunal of the Correctional Police or 
the cabinet of the Judge de Paix. Some- 
times, too, ' the clink of a sabre and the 
tramp of heavy boots would annoimce the 
entrance or departure of a gendarme who 
had brought in the report from his brigade, 
or an agent of police, or one of the smart 
ser gents de ville^ with the cocked- hat and 
slim waist, and slender straight-bladed 
sword, would go in a leisurely manner 
down the steps in front of the stately 
portico. Then doors would be heard to 
slam suddenly at the end of long ghostly 



r 



216 LADY FLA VI A. 

corridors, or at the top of grim flights of 
stone stairs, that led up to more and more 
bureauxj more and more law-courts, all of 
which seemed, for the moment, to be asleep 
and unused, like an engine out of gear. 

It was the second visit which the Fords 
had paid to the Palace of Justice. At the 
first. Colonel Ford had presented his creden- 
tials, obtained from the Ministry of the 
Interior by the help of the French Embassy 
in London, to which latter appBcation had 
been made by certain friends of the colonel's 
in town. These credentials paerely vouched 
for the fact, that Mr. Ford (Richard), 
Colonel in the service of Her Britannic 
Majesty, was an honourable person, visiting 
France for the purpose of obtaining im- 
portant information, in the furtherance of 
which object the authorities were prayed 
to assist by all legal means. The Pro- 
curer Imperial at Versailles had received 



THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 217 

the bearer of this recommendation with 
much politeness, had listened to the coloneFs 
statements, as interpreted by Amy, and had 
appointed that morning for the second in- 
terview. 

And now the bell tinkled shrilly, and the 
visitors were shown into the cabinet of the 
public prosecutor. 

M. Achille Duvillers - Hardouin, the 
dreaded functionary in question, was a type 
of his class. He was the son and grandson 
of lawyers, being indeed of an old family of 
the noblesse de robe^ and though a fervent 
imperialist for the time being, wore his 
loyalty loosely, like the Yicar of Bray. He 
had been appointed substitut by the July 
' government, procureur by that of the Prince 
President, had been promoted to a better 
department under the Imperial system, and 
hoped that the next step, under what 
regime he cared little, would carry him to 



218 LADY FLAVIA. 

Paris itself. But he was none the less a 
most efficient sleuth-hound of Justice. He 
could track a political offender through all 
the mazes of the organic law; brought 
the Code to bear on rash journalists whose 
strictures galled the prefect ; and demanded 
the head of a culprit with a terrible elo- 
quence that Fouquier Tinville might have 
envied. 

M. Duvillers-Hardouin was tall and rigid- 
looking, an elderly young man, rather than 
a middle-aged one, with a high bald fore- 
head, a pale face, weak hair of reddish tint, 
gold-mounted spectacles, a spotless white 
cravat, very high and tight, but not shining 
with starch like those of our English divines 
. of a dead pearly white rather . and a 
black frockcoat, with one button-hole bloom- 
ing with the red ribbon of the Legion. 
He was a legal dandy in his way, and wore 
rings and a diamond brooch, besides the 




THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 219 

heavy god chain and bunch of seals that 
dangled from his pocket in old-fashioned 
style. He received the new-comers with 
much urbanity, and as he motioned them 
to chairs that a grave huissier set ready for 
them, he said a civil word or two about his 
regret that Mademoiselle should have been 
put to the trouble of waiting. There were 
velvet chairs in the pubhc prosecutor's 
study, not cane ones, as in the den of the 
concierge. The fire burned cheerfully, a 
wood-fire, resting on brass andirons. There 
vsras nothing oflScial about the room ex- 
cept its chief occupant, and the row of 
huge folio volumes, with boarded sides and 
green morocco backs, that stood beside the 
great arm-chair of the Procureur Imperial 
himself. 

Of the English party. Colonel Ford was, 
as far as European tongues went, the least 
of a linguist ; he knew but some half-dozen 



/ 



220 LADY PLAVIA. 

French words ; and though Charles under- 
stood the language tolerably well, he spoke 
it badly, on which account the labour of 
interpreting chiefly devolved on Amy. As 
for Sergeant Skinner, he knew something 
of the Gallic speech, and could eke it out 
with signs and haphazard guesses in a 
manner that answered wonderfully at times, 
but on an occasion like this he sat silent and 
observant. The preliminary compliments 
being over, M. Duvillers-Hardouin put on 
his most business-like air. 

** Mademoiselle," he said, tapping one of 
the monstrous green-backed ledgers that lay 
open beside him, with a great red R con- 
spicuous in the comer of the page, " I will 
ask you again to oblige me by translating 
to Monsieur le Colonel, your father, this 
report, which I have obtained since last I 
had the gratification to receive your visit 
here. This is the report : Royston, phre 



THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 221 

(Brand), rentier Anglais^ has for about two 
years rented the half-ruinous Chateau des 
Roches, in the commune of the Gresnez- 
Vignoble. Of the character of the said 
Royston, pere, all the public functionaries 
who have any knowledge of the facts are 
agreed. Monsieur Royston is a man of 
most violent temper, and extraordinary 
physical strength, in spite of his age, 
already ripe {son &ge mur). He is often 
brutal and vehement in address and man- 
ners, passionate if contradicted, but occa- 
sionally capable of generous actions- He 
is not unpopular with the country-people 
about Gresnez. Speaks French well. Has 
within the last few months contracted a 
loan from a marchand de grains, at St. Ger- 
main, who is known to lend money on 
usurious terms. Is restricted and broken 
as to his means {crible). Is a man remark- 
able for daring and audacity, which, with 



i 



222 LADY PULVIA. 

his formidable strength, have won him 
much respect among the peasants, always 
impressed by material advantages. Has 
gained the good-will of certain proprietors 
by breaking in horses considered incurably 
vicious, &c., in return for which they have 
permitted him to sport over then: lands. Is 
fond of sporting, and an unerring marks- 
man. Does not encourage visitors " 

" I beg your pardon," said Colonel Ford 
at this point, " but really I can hardly 
see how this information bears upon Mr. 
Royston's complicity in the crime, if crime 
there be." 

The Procureur Imperial smiled with lofty 
superiority. He was desolated, if these 
petty details proved wearisome ; but in his 
opinion they were valuable, as throwing a 
light upon the habits of the suspected per- 
son. He went on : " Royston, pere, has 
committed no action, since he came into 



THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 223 

the canton, which the authorities can fairly 
consider as criminal. He has once or twice 
given way to his temper, and struck blows : 
but no complaint has been lodged at the 
niairie. He once, under provocation, at 
Pecq, hurled a man named Jean Vasseur, 
nicknamed the Malin, into the Seine ; but 
this rough correction was acknowledged to 
be merited, as the nomnie Vasseur, a man 
of bad character, and considerable renown 
as a wrestler and boxer {savateur\ had 
insulted Monsieur Royston of malice prC' 
pense. Further, Monsieur Royston has 
been suspected of poaching (braconnage) in 
the imperial forest ; but no proch-verbal was 
ever drawn up to this efifect, nor is this 
offence uncommon on the part of even 
respectable farmers living near the woods. 
Of Royston, ^fe, it is only known that he 
haunted certain taverns in St. Germain, 
well known to the police, and kept com- 



224 LADY FLAVIA. 

pany with some of the most dissipated 
yoxmg men in the town. Of the ladies 
of the family nothing particular is re- 
corded." 

The Procnreur Imperial ceased reading, 
and wiped his spectacles with a cambric 
handkerchief, while Charles Ford and his 
uncle exchanged looks of blank disappoint- 
ment. 

The public prosecutor smiled again. 
" You see, [Messieurs," said he, " how 
meagre is the information that I have as 
yet been able tp extract from the mairey the 
gardes champStres^ gardes chasse^ and other 
rural officials. Certainly, on such grounds 
as these, I should scarcely feel justified in 
recommending a domiciliary visitation of 
the Chateau des Roches, still less the pro- 
visional arrest of the person principally 
suspected. And yet . " here the speaker's 
half-shut eyes, behind the gold-rimmed 



THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 225 

glasses, began to flash and dilate like those 
of a cat that sees a mouse within reach of 
her paw ; " and yet I frankly tell you that 
I do not despair of seeing this Monsieur 
Eoyston and his confederates sitting on the 
sellette of the accused in the assize court. 
There are other witnesses to' be sounded, 
and . " here he looked at his watch; ** I 
have telegraphed to the prefect of police at 
Paris for a person whom I expect will 
shortly be here. He is the best Umier of 
Justice we have in France, and " 

Here the huissier came in and whispered 
something in the ear of the public pro- 
secutor, then went out, and quickly returned, 
ushering in a gentleman, who carried a 
small black carpet-bag in his hand, and who 
came in, bowing low, and walking trippingly, 
like an habitu6 of the Boulevards. 

And indeed the new arrival, to all ap- 
pearance, was merely one of those hundred 

VOL. II. Q 




226 LADY FLAVIA. 

thousand copies of the Emperor that daily 
saunter and lounge about the ca^ and 
fashionable thoroughfares of Paris . a plump, 
well-dressed man, with auburn chin-tuft and 
moustaches, tightly buttoned frock-coat, 
braided pantaloons, narrow-brimmed hat, 
and varnished boots. He, too, wore spec- 
tacles, but he wore them jauntily, as if for 
show rather than use, 

'^I have been sounding your praises, 
Durbec," said the Procureur Imperial, with 
an affable nod, 

" Ah !" said the man from the Rue Jeru- 
salem, " Monsieur le Procureur is too good. 
We have done business together before, have 
we not, monsieur ? and I hope when you 
are president of the tribunal Ih has, in Paris, 
that I may still have the felicity to purvey 
you thieves and assassins. They will never 
be wanting, that harvest there, foi de 
Durbec.'* 




THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 227 

As he said tliis, the French detective 
was taking a rapid survey of the company. 
When he saw the emissary of Scotland 
Yard, he held out his hand, *' Ah ! c'est 
ce bon Skinner ! Give me your hand, dear 
colleague. Au plmdr de vous revoir /" And 
he shook hands with Sergeant Skinner, good- 
humouredly remarking that it seemed a 
hundred years since they had met in London. 

The English detective blushed as he took 
the Frenchman's hand. ^* I ought to have 
known you directly ," he said, in self-reproach 
for his own slowness of perception ; ** the 
name of Durbec did come back to me, some- 
how : but you make up wonderfully well. 
Took me in, for a moment." 

The Gaul laughed. The praise thus in- 
directly rendered was music to his ears. 
Begging that the company would excuse 
him one moment, he vanished from the 
room, and almost immediately reappeared. 




228 LADY FLAVIA. 

It was diflScult to believe that he was the 
same man. 

Gone was the auburn wig, gone the chin- 
tuft and moustache, gone the spectacles, 
and the very complexion had been washed 
away by the rapid application of a wet 
towel borrowed from the concierge. The 
Durbec who now entered the room was a 
spare, sallow- visaged man of two or three 
and forty, with black eyes that seemed to 
flame, so bright and hard was their hawk's 
glance, with short cropped hair of the 
deepest jet, as stiff and harsh as wire, with 
thin Kps, pointed teeth as white and strong 
as those of a wolf, and a keen bold face. 
Sergeant Skinner nodded a cordial recogni- 
tion, and whispered to the colonel that he 
thought if any man in Europe could find tlie 
needle in the haystack, that man was Mon- 
sieur Durbec, chief of the trusted agents of 
the police prefect. 




THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 229 

The Colonel eyed this French thieftaker 
with an interest which surprised himself. 
Richard Ford had been compelled, as other 
government officials had been, to keep spies 
in his pay, and had found such an office 
well suited to the supple natives of India, 
He had seen his emissaries suddenly cast oflF 
the decrepitude and squalor of extreme old 
age, fling aside their rags and false white 
beards, straighten their bent spines, and 
start up active and vigorous ^scoundrels as 
ever planned a dacoity* But never had he 
seen a scotit whose features expressed such 
ability and resolve as those of Antoine 
Durbec, 

The Procureur Imperial, a functionary of 
no slight importance, was playfully polite, 
almost affectionate, towards the master- 
spirit that he had conjured forth from the 
Rue Jerusalem. He asked kiijdly . ^not 
after Durbec's health . ^that would have been 



230 LADY FLAVIA. 

absurd in the case of a man whose iron con- 
stitution repelled the very idea of sickness, 
but after the policeman's birds and pet 
monkey. It was known that this hard, 
stem man had a weakness for favourites of 
this sort. His canaries knew and loved 
him, and would perch on his shoulder, and 
look up in his face in the most pertly con* 
fident way ; and his monkey knew more 
tricks, and evinced more attachment to his 
proprietor, than any monkey in Paris. 
There was some softness, after all, in M. 
Durbec, and his furred and feathered pets 
had found it out. By his employers, he was 
rightly valued as the very pearl of spies ; 
and it was a lucky day for the prefecture 
when the starving Provencal lad had been 
taken into police pay, and had brought his 
lucid reason and falcon eye to the aid of 
that establishment. 

Durbec was invaluable. He was worthy 




THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 231 

of a higher place in the world than that 
which even the shrewdest agent of the 
police minister can occupy. Seven distinct 
languages, besides French, are spoken in 
some of the ninety-one French departments, 
and Antoine Durbec was fluent in them all. 
The Basque shepherd, propped on his stilts, 
and knitting stockings in the deep sands of 
the Landes, down by Bayonne there, 
answered him as readily as did the Flemish 
maid-servant brightening the brass door- 
handle of her master's house in Dunkirk or 
St. Omer. German millers' men, going 
home in Alsace with a cart full of empty 
flour-sacks, fell into conversation with him 
as naturally as the queer long-haired 
Bretons, in trunk hose and goat-skin jerkin, 
to whom he oflfered a mug of cider in some 
cabaret of far-oflf Finisterre. Corsicans and 
Savoyards were ready to hail Mm as ^pays 
from Calvi or Chambery . The Walloon shep* 



232 LADY PLAVIA. 

herds of the French Ardennes were as 
friendly with him as his brother Proven5als 
from the land of the troubadonrs. Besides 
his knowledge of the patois of a dozen dis- 
tricts, he could talk English pretty well. 
And this power of picking up strange 
tongues stood him in especial stead in 
France, where a linguist is as rare as a 
black swan. 

Durbec's qualifications for his dangerous 
trade were not confined to the power of 
talking to many men in many languages ; 
he . he alone, of all the unconvicted . was 
supposed to know the thieves' signals and 
the mysterious freemasonry of the Toulon 
prison-yard. He was the only living man 
who had boldly ventured into a seance of 
the Italian Secret Society, and had sat com- 
posedly taking notes in the midst of fifty 
daggers, that at a word would have been 
sheathed in his body. He had captured 




THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 233 

some of the most ferocious mflSans in France, 
men who for months had gone free from 
arrest in consequence of their known boast- 
ing that the corheau who touched them on 
the shoulder should " eat knife," and with 
whom the agents were averse to meddle : 
and his disguises would have made the for- 
tune of a modern English exhibitor of 
character. 

Such was the man who listened, without 
interrupting the narration by one word, 
until the whole facts of the case were 
before him, and then promptly said : " Mon 
Procureur, is it permitted to give one's 
opinion ?" 

" Certainly, Durbec," was the indulgent 
reply : "no one's opinion can be better 
worth having in these matters." 

"Very well then," said the Proven9al, 
looking around him with his glittering 
eyes, " you will excuse me when I say that 




234 LADY PLAVIA. 

I do not beKeve this gros tnatamore of an 
Englishman, this Monsieur Royston, this 
Blue Beard, that lives in his ogre's den at 
the solitary ch&teau, to be the true author 
of the plot which I vaguely see shadowed 
before me. There is an intelligence more 
fine than his at work in the affair, be sure 
of that . an intelligence de femme /" 

The Procureur Imperial nodded approv- 
ingly- 

" I see,'* said he ; " yoiu: idea is that the 
true clue to this business will be found in 
. England, at that place with the name un- 
pronounceable . Harre . something, the 
castle of the Comte de Mortlake ?** 

** Yes," said Durbec, decisively ; " but the 
pear is not ripe yet. We must begin here 
in France, with your permission, and the 
consent of messieurs the English here pre- 
sent, to whom I beg to offer my respectful 
homage. With s6me assistance from the 



THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 235 

commissaiy of police at St. Germain, and 
the kind help of Sergeant Skinner, my 
former colleague and acquaintance in 
London, je me faia fort in four days' time 
to produce evidence such as may excuse 
madame the Law in putting a little gentle 
pressure on this Monsieur Royston, to ex- 
tract the truth." 

Sergeant Skinner was very willing to 
serve as a volunteer imder the orders of 
so distinguished a professional person as 
Antoine Durbec ; and, much to Amy's 
reUef, the conference came to an end. But 
on the fifth day, which chanced to &11 on a 
Monday, it was agreed that the Fords 
should repair to the town of St. Germain, 
and there have another interview with the 
pubHc prosecutor. 

" It will be better so," said the Procureur 
Imperial, blandly, " because we shall there 
have the witnesses under our hand, as the 




236 LADT FLAYIA. 

phrase goes, and be close to the locus in quo, 
if I may be pardoned for talking Latin in 
hearing of mademoiselle. At two o'clock, 
then, on Monday, Monsieur le Colonel? 
It is agreed, nest oe pas^ Monsieur Charles 

Ford ? Till then Ah I permit me to 

have the pleasure of conducting you to the 
door of the Palais. Au pkdsir de vous 
revoir r 

And so the Fords had nothing else to do 
but to walk back over the pear-shaped 
stones of the Versailles pavement, now pro- 
truding, black and blunt, from the layer of 
hard-trodden snow, to their dull lodgings 
in that dullest of towns. Sergeant Skinner, 
after exchanging a few words with his 
Enghsh employers, had gone off arm in 
arm with his French ally, who had insisted 
on returning what he called the sergeant's 
genial hospitality in London, by standing 
treat to the extent of a ponche in the neigh- 




THE CAMPAIGN OPENS. 237 

bouring Cafe Leblond. The Procureur 
Imperial remained to conduct his corre- 
spondence with the Ministry of Justice, and 
to lay down the pen at times and rub his 
hands in gentle exultation at the prospect 
of another conviction, and for a cause cSlebre 
too, and of the promotion which the affaire 
Royston ought in common fairness to win 
for him. 

" It ought to be Paris this time !" . his 
soliloquy ran thus . " Paris this time ! To 
be sure, the procureur-generalship of a 
department would be better remunerated; 
but who cares for a few miserable hundreds 
of ems more of less ! Paris is life. There 
is a field there for honourable ambition. I 
may be a senator yet, before I am quite old. 
Yes, that must indeed be an ill wind that 
blows no good to any one* Paris, or 
nothing." 



238 LABT FLATIA. 



CHAPTER XII. 



IX THE TOILS. 



The gaunt grey ch&teau, built of cold- 
tinted Btone, to which no friendly moss or 
lichen had imparted a warmer hue, stood 
up against its back-groimd of snow like a 
gaol. A very hard fact it looked in the 
cheerless landscape, where the leafless 
poplars waved their bare arms over the 
neglected garden, and the ruinous out- 
buildings, and the naked rocks that cropped 
abruptly upwards out of the grass-grown 
earth. No grimmer dwelling-house, per- 
haps, existed in all France. Barred with 




l^ THE TOILS. 239 

iron as to its lower windows, dilapidated as 
to its steep roof, now heavy with snow, the 
old house frowned sullenly upon the world. 
Forth from this uninviting mansion came, 
with slow tread and lowering look, the 
master of the house. Brand Eoyston^ some- 
time of Eoyston Hall. He was not dressed 
in deqorous broadcloth, as when he escorted 
Lady Flavia Clare from France to her 
cousin's house . her dead father's home . in 
the west of England. He wore a rusty old 
shooting-coat, and all his garments were 
shabby, and faded, and weather-stained. 
His heavy gold watch-chain, never paid for, 
most likely, but handed over with many 
bows by a smiling London jeweller, glad to 
secure the custom of a great Yorkshire 
squire, was the only thing about the man 
which seemed to appertain to a gentleman. 
Yes, one thing more . some undefinable ex- 
pression in the face of this surly exile, a 



240 



LADT PLAVIA. 



something which stamped Brand Royston, 
in the midst of degradation and debasement, 
as a gentleman still. He had that in hifi 
look, in his bearing and speech, in the very 
carelessness with which he walked, swing- 
ing his stick, and whistling up his nseful 
brown spaniel to heel, that forbade yon to 
take him for other than a gentleman. A 
bad man, very likely, a violent sinful 
wretch, but somehow a gentleman (as the 
word is commonly understood) to the last. 

Mr. Royston had taken one rather remark- 
able precaution before leaving the premises 
of the chateau that he rented ; he had locked 
the front-door, very coolly and systemati- 
cally, and had put the key in his pocket, 
where it jingled against other keys, and 
against something hard and metallic that 
was not keys. He walked sturdily along 
through the rusted iron gates, and so into 
the broad high-road, bordered by trees. 



IN THE TOILS. 241 

whose remaining leaves, of a rich yellow 
now, might be counted, A little way off 
was a steep Httle stone bridge, that crossed 
a streamlet, and then some tan-yards, 
whence came the crisp pungent smell of the 
new tan, and where a row of hides floated 
bleaching in the stream. Beyond the tan- 
nery was a smith's forge, and beyond that 
the straggling village street of Gr^snez- 
Vignoble ; while the broad high-road, 
white with snow, ran gleaming away far 
into the distance, flanked by poplars with 
bare ghastly boughs. 

Mr. Royston walked slowly on, till he got 
to the bridge, and there he . stood listless, 
with one elbow on the stone parapet, look- 
ing down into the stream below. A melan- 
choly prospect, surely. There was nothing 
to be seen but the white treacherous cat*s 
ice, broken and breached by the stone-throw- 
ing of the village boys, beneath and around 

VOL. II. R 



242 LADY PLAVIA. 

which the black current flowed sluggishly. 
Nothing but this, and the willows on the 
further bank, with their thousand slender 
arms, and the long sickly yellow leaves 
trailing in the eddies, and the bushes clogged 
with snow, and the undressed leather steep- 
ing in the chilly water, and the ugly white 
And yellow cottages, with blue doors and 
green window-shutters, of the mean French 
village street. 

But the rusted iron gates and the turreted 
roof of the Chateau des Roches could be seen 
distinctly from that spot, and, oddly enough^ 
it was in that direction that Brand Royston, 
Esquire, and still, perhaps, J. P. and deputy- 
lieutenant, turned his restless gaze the most 
frequently. That an English gentleman 
residing abroad should take the trouble to 
watch the approaches to his house, might at 
first seem strange, and would in any case 
imply guilty concealment, pr a morbid turn 



IN THE TOILS. 243 

of mind ; yet this was exactly the occupa^ 
tion of Brand Eoyston. He was uneasy ; he 
had taken alarm. 

How, or why, had he taken alarm ? That 
is a question which the wide experience of 
M, Durbec, that prince of mouchardsy could 
scarcely have solved. But so it was. How 
does the lark know, as he cowers with his 
mottled breast-feathers pressed into the 
grass of the downs, that broad swift wings 
are flapping overhead, and that far away in 
the sunny air the hawk is circHng round for 
prey? Or, to take a fitter simile: how 
does the tiger scent out the coming danger ? 
how does he know that the beaters are 
closing in, nearer and nearer, in a narrow- 
ing ring, that the nets are pitched, and the 
torches and spears got ready, and that the 
rockets are about to be launched to drive 
him from his cane-grown ravine to where 
the elephant-mounted sportsmen await him 




244 LADT PLAVIA. 

with their deadly tubes? But it is not 
necessary to attribute Mr. Royston's uneasy 
suspicions to instinct ; for peasants, however 
artfully questioned, may prate respecting 
those who have cross-examined them, and 
rural policemen are not always discreet re- 
specting important inquiries of which they 
have obtained an inkling. It is not unlikely 
that the tenant of the ruinous chS-teau had 
heard some flying rumours which had put 
him on his guard. 

More than one carter, clattering by with 
his white-tilted long-bodied vehicle, drawn 
by a sturdy Norman or Perrichon horse, 
touched his cap civilly to the well-known 
M. Royston ; and sometimes a farmer, as he 
passed marketwards, spoke cheerily to the 
Englishman, his acquaintance. But those 
who addressed the squire got but short 
answers and dark looks. '' Bien s&Vy' said 
they, as they passed on ; '^ there has been 



IN THE TOILS, 245 

bad news from England. This good Mon- 
sieur Royston is moussade to-day." 

The good M. Royston lounged upon the 
bridge for a while, and then striding down 
the village street with his spaniel frisking 
about his heels, he tapped at the window of 
the tiny post-office, and bought certain 
postage-stamps, enough for the transmission 
of several letters to England ; then he saunT 
tered back, and stood upon the bridge again. 
The outspoken thoughts of the good Mr. 
Royston were none of the pleasantest. 
" Curse her !" he growled in his deep voice ; 
" I write, and write, and what do I get in 
return ? Riddles ; absurd balderdash about 
her position, and her youth, and her grati- 
tude for old kindness, and so forth, till I ask 
myself if I'm drunk or dreaming. That 
girl ! But I'll not wait here till the twig's 
limed, and the bird snared. There's mischief 
afoot ; I know there is. No place so safe as 




246 LADY FLATIA. 

England, after all ; and the confounded ont^ 

lawry and the writs ** 

Here Mr. Boyston stopped short, and 
scowled at the approaching figure of a man 
who had come so near, and so silentlj, that 
his coming was not noticed until he was 
almost at arm's-length. Down dropped the 
squire's left hand, mechanically, as it would 
seem, into the gaping pocket of his shoot* 
ing-coat, and the low clear clicking of a pis- 
tol-lock, as the hammer was pulled back, 
and let down to the half-cock, followed at 
once. But Mr. Royston took his hand out 
of the pocket that held the weapon, and he 
breathed more freely as he took a survey of 
the stranger. The latter was a broad-chested 
man, of middle height, clad in a ragged 
blouse, a sheep-skin cap, and high leather 
gaiters, smeared with mtid and torn by 
brambles. He had a fowling-piece tucked 
under his arm, a small gourd containing 



IN THE TOILS. 247 

gunpowder at his side, and a game-pouch 
slung at his back* The pouch was empty 
and flat, and in his hand he carried a wil- 
low branch from which dangled a leash of 
wild-ducks, 

" Buy a couple of fine ducks, mon bour- 
geois, they are cheap !" said the man in the 
ragged blouse. 

** I don't want your ducks," replied Mr. 
Royston gruffly, turning his shoulder to the 
tattered poacher, for such the man evidently 
was. 

^^ Excusez^ notre mattrCy' persisted the 
fellow; "I have something more dainty 
than ducks to offer for sale, and at a low 
price too;" and from beneath his blouse, 
first glancing warily around him, he pro- 
duced a fine pheasant, the long tail-feathers 
of which had been roughly hacked off with 
a knife, tiiat the bird might be more easily 
concealed. " There !" cried the poacher 




i 



248 i:;ady flatia. 



exultingly . "there's a beau caq for yox^ 
monsieur, such as the St. Germain poul-' 
terers sell at seven francs, the rascals ! But 
I'm hard up for tobacco, and want my sup- 
per and my gttej and can't hold out for a 
high price. Come ; forty sous for the phea- 
sant*" 

Rattling Brand Royston, despite the 
gloomy thoughts that filled his mind, was 
amused at the man's pertinacity. He looked 
at him more attentively than before. There 
was something reckless and at the same time 
comical about the man's impudent face, as 
he stood showing his white sharp-pointed 
teeth in a grin that was meant to be polite, 
and his one eye, coal-black, and of hawk- 
like brilliancy, was fixed beseechingly on 
the Englishman, The other eye was covered 
by a frowsy patch of black taffetas ; and 
some strips of plaster that peeped out from 
beneath the silk were insufficient wholly to 




IN THE TOILS. 249 

conceal an ugly cicatrice beneath. The 
fellow's entire aspect was that of an outcast 
at war with society, and perhaps a sort of 
sympathy stirred Brand Royston's rugged 
nature, as he said, more gently than before : 
" The world seems to have used you hardly, 
my friend. But there are two sides to the 
account, eh ? I'll warrant that plump cock- 
pheasant was reared in his Imperial Ma- 
jesty's preserves, in the forest yonder, pas 
vrair 

" It won't taste the worse for that !" was 
the reply, defiantly spoken ; " and the curse 
of Pilate on the gredinSy whether lawyers, 
gardeSy or police, who try to keep a poor 
man from earning an honest liveHhood. The 
game, monsieur, belongs to all the world ; 
and may the black death fall on the 
.greedy curmudgeons who send a poor fellow 
to gaol because he takes his share of what 
the woods provide ! See here, monsieur ; 




250 LADT FLAVIA. 

I got this'* . and lie pointed to the black 
patch that covered his left eye, and to the 
scar visible below the taflFetas . ^^ in a scuffle 
with the guards of the forest, and six 
months in prison to boot ; but some day I 
shall see the villain who . owes me an eye 
deep down in the woods, perhaps, where 
there are none but us two under the trees, 
and then '' He shook his fist revenge- 
fully, and with a savage snarl like that of 
a fierce dog, and brought the brass-bound 
stock of his gun down with a bang upon 
the frozen snow at his feet. " Buy my 
pheasant. Monsieur FAnglais !" These last 
words were spoken coaxingly, and in quite 
a different tone. Mr. Royston laughed : he 
had been a strict game-preserver once, but 
times had changed ; and he who had sent 
scores of English poachers to gaol, felt a 
kind of interest in this French one, whose 
lawless effrontery diverted him. He thrust 



IN THE TOILS. 251 

his hand into his pocket, and drew out 
8ome small silver, that jingled as it was 
dropped into the ready palm of the hracon- 

s. 

titer. He cut short the man's thanks by 
good-humouredly bidding him set down the 
pheasant on the coping of the bridge, and 
be oflF to drink his customer's health, and 
confusion to the game-laws, at the nearest 
cabaret. 

For some time longer, the gigantic 
figure of the Yorkshireman might have 
been seen upon the bridge, as he clapped 
his muscular hands together to warm them, 
and idly gazed at the little group around 
the smithy door, where a horse was being 
shod. But presently, at the noontide hour, 
when the labourers began to straggle home- 
wards from their work, Mr. Eoyston picked 
up the pheasant, and strode back to the 
chateau, swinging the bird carelessly to and 
fro in his hand as he walked along. He 



252 LADT PLAVIA. 

unlocked the door^ went in, and the grating 
of the key as it was turned told that the 
occupant of the Chateau des Roches chose 
to exercise a control over the incomings and 
outgoings of his household. It had not 
always been so. Brand Royston's doors 
had once been almost as easy of access as 
those of an inn, in the old days of revelry. 
It was new, this excess of precaution against 
surprise. 

For perhaps an hour or more, the ex- 
squire remained indoors, but when he 
sallied forth again, securing the door as 
before, and wandered about his garden, 
always, however, avoiding, as if by instinct, 
one portion of the neglected demesne. This 
portion was the most remote nook of the 
great garden, the part that bore the nick- 
name of the Tangle^ and where the mould- 
ering summer-house, and the grey sun-dial^ 
stood in the midst of weeds and bushes and 



IN THE TOILS. 253 

unpruned trees, that no one had cared to 
trim or lop for long years past. But soon 
Mr. Royston with his hands thrust deeply 
into his pockets, and his hat pulled down 
over his brows, rambled out to the bridge 
again, and stood there, kicking the loose 
pebbles and lumps of snow down the bank 
into the water, and keeping a vigilant eye 
on the dreary stretch of snowy road, be- 
yond which, on a rising ground, might be 
seen through the leafless trees the red roofs 
of Gresnez-les-cloches, and the white walls 
of the convent of Our Lady of Carmel. 
Apparently, the sight of these objects sug- 
gested no pleasant train of thoughts, for, 
with an angry malediction on some person 
or persons, the squire turned his bull-eyes 
away from the distant buildings. '' Death, 
by Jove, and nothing less !" he muttered, 
as he turned his head towards the village ; 
'' but if that craven cur of a son of mine 



r 



254 LADY FLAYIA. 

holds his oonfonnded tongue The 

sooner we get over to England, ay, and to 

America, perhaps I feel like a fox 

that hears the honnds miles o^ and knows 
what the cry foretells." 

Several persons of different grades in 
French coimtry-Hfe, from the rich farmer 
who jogged by in his demi-piqne saddle, or 
drove past in his hooded cabriolet, down to 
the poorest woman that weeded and delved, 
and helped the sleek donkey and the lean 
cow to draw a plough sometimes, while her 
husband held the shafts, in Gallic fashion, 
went over the bridge ; and many of these 
bowed to Mr. Royston, and some spoke to 
him, for he was well known, and it is 
etiquette among the kindly French to salute 
a stranger, even when encountered far from 
a town. 

To one only of these did the squire, in 
his present humour, deign to utter aliy 




IN THE TOILS. 256 

remark beyond a brief bonjour. The excep- 
tion was in favour of a man who drove 
slowly past, talking volubly to the young 
horse between the shafts of his heavy gig, 
which half-broken animal started aside as 
his inexperienced eyes caught sight of the 
burly gentleman standing at the comer of 
the bridge. " Too soon, Guillaimie, my 
man! you've brought out that colt too 
soon," said Mr. Eoyston in his bluff but in- 
telligible French; "you ought to have 
stuck to the cavesson for a fortnight 
more, and then tried him in double har- 
ness. 

The proprietor of the colt, who was a 
livery stable-keeper at Si Grermain, and 
knew Mr. Eoyston well, pulled up at once. 
He had had, he said, a great deal of trouble 
with the young horse, bite poUronne, that 
shied at everything. Ah ! if M. Eoyston 
would only condescend to buy him and 



256 LADY FLAVIA. 

train him, in his hands the beast would be- 
come worth double his present price ; but 
it was not everybody who was such an 
amateur of horses, or knew so much of their 
ways as monsieur. 

Mr. Royston gave a short deep laugh. 
" / don't want to buy him," he said ; " but 
by the way, Guillaume, I have business 
on which I do wish to speak to you. 

Here " And he spoke earnestly for a 

moment, though almost in a whisper, put- 
ting his mouth close to the man's ear. 

M. Gruillaume Laplace, livery stable- 
keeper, nodded several nods of assent. 
" Good, good," he said ; " it is an under- 
stood thing. You shall have what you 
wish by three o'clock on Monday afternoon, 
without fail, monsieur. Ay, and a good 
pair of horses, that can trot their ten 
leagues " 

''Assez^ assez /" said Mr. Royston, roughly ; 



IN THE TOILS. 257 

and the livery stable-keeper, who knew his 
ways, wished his client a good-day, and 
drove on, just as a priest, in the long black 
cassock, the bands, shovel-hat, and lambs- 
wool gloves of a village cure^ came slowly 
over the bridge. This priest was stout and 
rosy, with spectacles and grey hair that fell in 
thin locks from under his broad-leaved hat. 
His eyes were bent on the open breviaiy 
that he carried in his hand, and he mum- 
bled Latin as he walked. Altogether, 
as he touched his shovel-hat in grave 
recognition of the salute which custom 
almost wrung from Mr. Royston, he ap- 
peared as ordinary a specimen of the rural 
clergy as the tall Englishman had ever 
beheld. 

" I wonder," ejaculated Brand Royston, 
when the last sounds of the curb's footsteps 
had died away in the distance . " I wonder 
if the old boy heard that oaf Laplace with 

VOL. II. s 



258 LADT FLAYIA. 

his * Monday afternoon, sans faute^ Not 
that it matters much, after all/' 

But Brand Royston would have had 
hetter cause for wonder, could he have 
known what thoughts were passing through 
the mind of that meek ecclesiastic who had 
returned his bow a minute before. He 
would have been startled had he heard the 
reverend man, once out of earshot, intermit 
the recitation of his Latin to say, in French 
spoken with a strong southern accent : 
** Thou art a shy bird, brigand of England. 
Aha ! gros croquemitaine I thou preparest 
thy counterplots, thou ! But he will laugh 
well who laughs the last." And as the cure 
spoke thus, he smiled a sinister smile, that 
exhibited a set of brilliant white teeth ; 
pointed teeth that a wolf might have 
envied; teeth such as belonged to the 
tattered poacher who had sold the pheasant 
to Brand Royston ; also such teeth as 




IN THE TOILS, 259 

glistened when M, Dxirbec, of the Eue Je- 
rusalem, smiled upon his friends and ac- 
quaintances. But the cure looked grave 
again as a passing villager pulled off hii^ 
hat in token of respect, and his ^^ BSne- 
dicit^y mon jUs^^ was spoken with unctuous 
emphasis. 

Mr. Royston's eyes followed the priest 
until the black soutane was lost along the 
white desolate high-road. Something, he 
knew not what, about the ecclesiastic had 
aroused recollections within him. He had 
never seen the cure, who belonged, no 
doubt, to some distant village ; but whom 
did the cure so closely resemble ? Not 
closely, perhaps, but there was a likeness to 
some one whom Brand had lately seen. 
The squire never thought of the one-eyed 
poacher who had vowed such deadly ven- . 
geance on the garde to whom he owed his 
mutilation and captivity; that depredator 




260 LADY FJJLYIA. 

on the crown preserves was not in the }east 
like the sleek rosy priest. But the best 
actor cannot always keep one part wholly 
distinct from another. If not the poacher 
of to-day, perhaps the shepherd of yester- 
day, sitting in his goat-skin coat, on the 
upland fallows ; or the postilion, sauntering 
by with his tired horses; or the lame 
beggar, with the white beard ; or the in- 
valided soldier, tramping home, the day 
before yesterday, with limping tread and 
tlireadbare uniform, and his bundle slung 
upon a stick . ^perhaps one or other of these 
resembled the priest a little. 

' For the cowl does not make the monk. 
I^oacher and shepherd, and postilion and 
lame beggar, and footsore soldier and portly 
priest, were all mere husks and outer skins, 
dnd the inner core and kernel was . Mon- 
sieur Durbec. That stanch human blood- 
hound of the police prefecture had a store 



IN THE TOILS. 261 

of disguises, some of which had been sent 
down to him to the Hotel du Paon, at 
Versailles, where he was staying under 
the name of M. Bonchamps, a commercial 
traveller for a Dijon house in the wine- 
trade. 

As for Brand Royston, as evening came 
on, he lit a cigar^ and stole up to the 
smithy, and stood there for a time, watch- 
ing the grimy good-natured workers, as 
they hammered the hot iron, and sent 
showers of fiery sparks floating out into 
the night-air. He joined a group of idlers, 
and chatted affably with them ; and they 
treated him with much deference, and 
laughed applaudingly at the sledge-hammer 
jokes in his blunt French that he made for 
the edification of his audience, and were 
pleased at the notice of the EngKsh gentle- 
man. Then he wished them a good-night, 
and went home. Little did he guess that 




262 



LADY FLAVIA. 



already his description had been sent to 
every seaport and frontier town, that escape 
was all but hopeless, and tiiat he was in the 
toils at lasts 



263 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 

The deposition of Hippolyte Perinet, doctor 
of medicine, residing at Pecq, prks St. 
Germain, and practising as a physician in 
the district : Is acquainted with the Royston 
family. Is medical attendant to Madame 
Royston. Has known the family for two 
years, ever since they Settled at the Chateau 
des Roches; knows nothing to their dis- 
credit. Believes M, Royston, ph^e^ to be 
deeply in debt in England. Has never 
known him to commit any miworthy action 
during the term of his (Dr. Perinet's) 
acquaintance with the family. M. Royston. 




3lU LADT FLATUL 

has a hot tenq^er; he likes to be master 
Au bd. Elas neTer treated him (Dr. 
Perinet) odierwiae than with poIitenesB. 
With respect to the Capitaine ^ojBbosij Jilsy 
Dr. Perinet's opinion is leas &voiirable : 
considers the Tonng man to he a iapageur^ 
a person addicted to lamentable excesses, 
and a maucqis sujet. Has attended Captain 
Hoyston during illness and debility, con- 
sequent upon a severe attack of delirium 
tremens^ which he suffered from in England* 
It was on the Captain's return to France that 
the doctor saw him. He is now convalesceiit 
or cured. 

With respect to Lady Flavia Clare, daugh- 
ter of the Right Honourable the Comte de 
Mortlake, pair cTAngleterre^ brought up 
(elev^e) in the convent of Our Lady of 
Carmel, at Grresnez-les-cloches, Dr. Perinet 
deposes : That he knew the young lady in 
question, having been her medical attendant 




THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 265 

from the time of her arrival, ^ child of 
eight or nine years of age, ^t the convent ; 
that she was a yomig person of the most 
sweet and engaging disposition, though 
somewhat timid (craintive) and reserved in 
manner; that her gentle character was a 
proverb in the convent, among boarders and 
sisters also, where there was a phrase, doius 
comme un agneau, ou la petite Anglaise ; that 
the Lady Flavia, feeling solitary in the 
midst of a commimity wholly French, and 
expressing a desire to speak her native 
language again, the doctor had persuaded 
the Dame Superieure of the House of Our 
Lady of Carmel to allow an introduction to 
the Royston family, then newly settled in 
the Chateau des Roches, distant about 
three kilometres from the convent; that 
an intimacy sprang up between the young 
demoiselle and this family of her com- 
patriots, which was only interrupted after 




266 LADY FLAVIA. 

the return from India of Captain Eoyston, 
and in consequence of a warning which the 
doctor thought it his duty to give to the 
Lady-Superior. 

Further, that he, Dr. Perinet, well re- 
members Miss Amy Ford, and her arrival 
at the convent; that he only knew the 
latter young lady as having seen her with 
Lady Flavia Clare, whose intimate friend 
she was ; that he never saw any signs of 
attachment between Miladi Flavia and 
Captain Eoyston, but that he feared the 
probable result of propinquity in a case 
when two young persons, handsome and 
unoccupied, were thrown into one another's 
society ; and that he was sure that such a 
match would be repugnant to common 
prudence, the captain being without a sou, 
and of dubious repute. 

Also the said Hippolyte Perinet deposes 
that on the receipt of the news of the 




THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 267 

dangerous illness of the Comte de Mortlake, 
and of that nobleman's desire to see his 
daughter before his death, the Lady-Superioi* 
was in distress of mind, owing to the lack of 
a suitable person to accompany Lady Flavia 
Clare to the west of England ; that he, Dr* 
Perinet, had suggested M. Royston, p^re, as 
such a person, and that he had spoken to 
M. Royston himself on the subject. Finally, 
it had been agreed that Lady Flavia should 
travel under the care of M. Royston ; and 
to the certain knowledge of Dr. Perinet, on 
the evening of Wednesday, the 9th of 
July, Lady Flavia Clare went to pass the 
night, by invitation of Madame Royston, at 
the Chfi,teau des Roches. The reason of this 
was, that the travellers might be in time 
for the diligence which passes the gate of 
the Chateau at an early hour in the morn- 
ing, en route for St. Germain and Mantes^ 
At Mantes, the travellers were to proceed 



r 



268 LADY PLAVIA. 

by the railway to Havre, and thence by- 
steamer to Southampton, which the doctor 
has YBTj pardonably described as **aia? 
environs de Londres'' 

Interrogated as to his reason for accu- 
rately remembering the day of Lady 
Flavians departure from the convent, the 
said Hippolyte Perinet deposes that he paid 
a professional visit at the convent on the 
morning of that very day, and found his 
dear little friend and patient, of whom the 
doctor always speaks with much regard, in 
tears, and in very low spirits, being filled 
with apprehensions as to her future fate ; 
that he, the doctor, found her intimate 
friend and adopted sister. Miss Ford, trying 
to console and calm her, and that he too 
tried to quiet terrors which to him seemed 
unreasonable; finally, that he is quite 
certain that the day was Wednesday, the 
9th of July. 




THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 269 

" You see, then," said the Procureur 
Imperial, as he ceased the reading aloud of 
this document, and looked smilingly round 
upon the circle of attentive faces clustered 
about him . "you see, then, how positive 
Dr. Perinet is in asserting that on the 
evening of Wednesday, the 9th of July, 
Lady Flavia Clare went to pass the night, 
at the Chateau des Roches, the more 
conveniently to start betimes on the follow- 
ing day for Mantes, Havre, and England, in 
compliance with the wishes of her dying 
father, the Comte de Mortlake. Is it not 

These words were spoken in the bureau 
of the commissary of police at St. Germain 
where it may be remembered that the 
Procureur Imperial, or public prosecutor, of 
Versailles had appointed to meet Colonel 
Ford, his daughter, his nephew, and the 
English and French detectives, on the 



f 



270 LADY FLAVIA. 

Monday following his conversation with 
them in his own official study in the Versailles 
Palace of Justice. It was Monday now, and 
they were all there but M. Durbec ; but if 
M. Durbec was absent, a number of papers 
piled up before the public prosecutor bore 
testimony to the fact, that he had not 
been idle in eliciting evidence during the 
interval. 

The commissary of police had given up his 
office to accommodate M. le Procureur, and 
had retired into his dwelling ; for commissa- 
ries of police are less important in the legal 
hierarchy of France than public prosecutors, 
and besides, M. Duvillers-Hardouin was a 
man of family and, fortune, wearing a dia- 
mond brooch in his shirt-frill, and counting 
kindred with imperial senators and consuls- 
general ; and the commissaire, who wore a 
brown coat when off duty, and dined at one 
o'clock on cabbage-sooip and sour wine, was 




THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 271 

incKned to be deferential to a man so 
eminently superior as the Procureur 
Imperial. 

Colonel Ford was attentive, but rather 
dispirited. He could not exactly follow the 
thread of reasoning by which the public 
prosecutor was settling matters so much to 
his own satisfaction. Then, too, he had been 
left in the dark during the last few days as 
to the turn which the affair was taking. 
Sergeant Skinner had dropped in once or 
twice to communicate with his employer, 
but even he was either unwilling or unable 
to say more than that M. Durbec was very 
active, and that he, the sergeant, was doing 
his best. Altogether, the colonel found it 
rather dull in their Versailles lodging, and 
looked back regretfully to the days when 
fifty turbaned visitors i n a morning left their 
sUppers at his threshold, and when he had 
successfully pitted his manly English com- 



r 



260 LADY FLAVIA. 

on the crown preserves was not in the least 
like the sleek rosy priest. But the best 
actor cannot always keep one part wholly 
distinct from another. If not the poacher 
of to-day, perhaps the shepherd of yester- 
day, sitting in his goat-skin coat, on the 
upland fallows ; or the postilion, sauntering 
by. with his tired horses; or the lame 
beggar, with the white beard ; or the in- 
valided soldier, tramping home, the day 
before yesterday, with Kmping tread and 
threadbare uniform, and his bundle slung 
upon a stick . perhaps one or other of these 
resembled the priest a little. 

\ For the cowl does not make the monk. 
Poacher and shepherd, and postilion and 
lame beggar, and footsore soldier and portly 
priest, were all mere husks and outer skins, 
dnd the inner core and kernel was . Mon- 
sieur Durbec. That stanch human blood- 
hound of the police prefecture had a store 




IN THE TOILS. 261 

of disguises, some of which had been sent 
down to him to the Hotel du Paon, at 
Versailles, where he was staying under 
the name of M. Bonchamps, a commercial 
traveller for a Dijon house in the wine- 
trade. 

As for Brand Royston, as evening came 
on, he lit a cigar, and stole up to the 
smithy, and stood there for a time, watch- 
ing the grimy good-natured workers, as 
they hammered the hot iron, and sent 
showers of fiery sparks floating out into 
the night-air. He joined a group of idlers, 
and chatted affably with them ; and they 
treated him with much deference, and 
laughed applaudingly at the sledge-hammer 
jokes in his blunt French that he made for 
the edification of his audience, and were 

pleased at the notice of the English gentle- 

 

man. Than he wished them a good-night, 
and went home. Little did he guess that 




274 IJLDY FLATTA, 

has spoken positively to the date of Wednes- 
day the 9th of July last, and, not to weary 
you with dry details, Soeur Nanon, the 
portress of the convent . Louis Siret, the 
driver of the hackney-carriage that con- 
veyed the young lady and her effects fipm 
the convent to the chfi.teau . and his master, 
the [Sieur Armand, of this town, agree in 
fixing the evening of Wednesday, July the 
9th, as the time of Lady Flavia's departure 
from the house of Our Lady of Carmel ; 
and I find, moreover, that two places in the 
coupe of the diligence were duly engaged 
at the booking-office in St. Germain for 
Thursday the 10th of July, and the con- 
ducteur was instructed to stop at the gate of 
the chateau, and pick up the passengers. 
So far, messieurs, all appears correct" The 
procureur looked round, as if to note the 
effect which his words had produced upon 
those present ; then he resumed : 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, 275 

" But . and here I beg you will observe 
is the key to the whole affair . those places 
in the coupS of the diligence, secured for 
Thursday, were never occupied by the 
persons for whom they had been taken. 
When the conducteur stopped the diligence 
at the prescribed spot, he found no pas- 
sengers waiting to be taken up ; and it was 
not until his patience was nearly exhausted, 
that Monsieur Royston, pere, came to the 
gate, and said, with evident agitation^^ that 
the diligence might proceed, that no one 
was going to take a seat in it on that day, 
that the lady was too ill to travel. The 
diligence accordingly proceeded on its way. 
So far, gentlemen, there is nothing incon- 
sistent with probabilities. It would have 
been very natural, indeed, if the sudden 
separation from the kind guardians of her 
infancy, from the convent that was to her 
as a home, and from the amiable society of 



276 LADY FLAVIA. 

her friend, Miss Amy, ci-presente^ coupled 
with fiHal grief for her father's mortal sick- 
ness, should have brought on some slight 
attack of indisposition in a young and deli- 
cate girl. But it appears that on the 
evening of that very day. Monsieur Roys- 
ton went personally to the booking-office of 
the diligence . that there he secured places, 
as before, for the diligence of the following 
day . and that he was even then singularly 
agitated, which in one of his temperament 
took the form of irritability approaching 
to dSmence. The booking-clerk having 
ventured on some commonplace expression 
of regret that the former fare should have 
been wasted. Monsieur Eoyston angrily 
reproved him, using violent expressions^ 
and declaring that before long he should be 
in a very changed position^ and one in 
which people would hardly insult him by 
such impertinent condolences. This was 




THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 265 

from the time of her arrival, a child of 
eight or nine years of age, at the convent ; 
that she was a young person of the most 
sweet and engaging disposition, though 
somewhat timid (craintive) and reserved in 
manner; that her gentle character was a 
proverb in the convent, among boarders and 
sisters also, where there was a phrase, doux 
comme un agneaUy ou la petite Anglaise ; that 
the Lady Flavia, feeUng solitary in the 
midst of a community wholly French, and 
expressing a desire to speak her native 
language again, the doctor had persuaded 
the Dame Superieure of the House of Our 
Lady of Carmel to allow an introduction to 
the Royston family, then newly settled in 
the Chateau des Roches, distant about 
three kilometres from the convent; that 
an intimacy sprang up between the young 
demoiselle and this family of her com- 
patriots, which was only interrupted after 



r 



278 LADY FLAVIA. 

Ford, and also the words uttered in deliriimi 
by the Capitaine Royston. We have also to 
take into consideration the fact that Sergeant 
Skinner, who, in the character of an English 
commercial traveller, has assiduously fre- 
quented the caf^s of St. Germain, and has 
contrived to get into conversation with some 
young men, members of the English resident 
community, has learned that before his jour- 
ney to England, of late Captain Royston 
has been heard to boast, in his cups, that he 
was going to be married to a beautiful 
heiress, riche a millions^ who must marry 
him whether she liked him or not. Also, 
that Monsieur Royston, pere, has of late 
manifested signs of a suspicious tendency, 
going armed, contrary to the law of public 
security, keeping his doors locked, and re- 
fusing permission to his domestics to leave 
the house, even to go to church, or to 
market . all which circumstances point to 



\ 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 279 

one conclusion ; and that conclusion,'* said 
the Procnreur Imperial, rubbing his sleek 
white hands together, ** is, that a crime has 
been committed ; that something must have 
occurred to bring about either the substitu- 
tion of one person for another, or a total 
change of character in the person chiefly 
concerned ; wherefore the law will demand 
from this Monsieur Eoyston frank and full 
explanation of what took place under his 
roof in the inter,val between the evening of 
Wednesday and the morning of Friday, the 
9th and llth of July. And now to 
action." 



280 LADY PLAVIA. 




CHAPTER XIV. 

THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 

As the Procureur Imperial uttered the 
last words: "And now to action," as if 
evoked by a magician's sipell, M. Durbec, 
agent of public security, came quickly into 
the room. He said nothing, but stood at 
the comer of the baize-covered table, silent 
and respectful, waiting for orders. 

" Durbec," said the Procureur Imperial, 
**are the gendarmerie warned to be in 
readiness ?" 

^' Mon procureur^^ was the prompt repJy, 
" I come from arranging with the brigadier 
to give the word saddle and mount !" 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 281 

'' The carriage for Monsieur le Com- 
missaire ?" said M. Duvillers-Hardouin. 

Durbec bowed humbly. The carriage, he 
said, was ready. It was at the stables, with 
the horses harijessed to it, and an agent 
would run down at the last moment to 
summon the coachman. That would be 
better than allowing the char-a-banc to 
station itself before the door of the bureau 
de police. Excess of precaution was never 
hurtful. And M. le Commissaire was put- 
ting on the froc noir and tricoloured scarf 
for an official expedition. All this M. 
Durbec said glibly and meekly, rather too 
meekly, indeed. It was evident that the 
arrangements were not to M. Durbec's 
taste. 

" You hold to your opinion still, my prince 
of all possible spies ?" said the public pro- 
\ secutor, gaily. 

The person addressed bowed and grinned. 




282 LADY FLAVIA. 

"You flatter me. Monsieur le Procureur. 
My opinion ! pouff / it is not of much 
account. But if Monsieur would have con- 
sented, I would have undertaken to hand 
him over this famous Brand Royston, tied 
neck and heels, like a calf emmene by the 
butcher, without the trouble of Monsieur le 
Commissaire, or the probable risk for Mes- 
sieurs the gendarmes. And there is risk. 
Twice, as I have approached Monsieur 
Royston . hel homme, if there is one . ^have 
I heard the click of a pistol that the giant 
keeps in his pocket, and the lock of which 
he arms on the smallest alarm. If the 

arrest were left to me " 

"But I say no! fifty times, a million 
times no !" said the public prosecutor 
decisively. " We must use all the forms, 
all the preliminaries. Monsieur le Commis- 
saire must knock three times, and address 
the usual sommations to the suspect Com- 



\ 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 283 

fnent ! if I would listen to you, Durbec, I 
should furnish a nice handle to the counsel 
for the accused. The prisoner's advocate 
would say in open court that we were 
midnight invaders of the domicile, lawless 
violators of the Code Napoleon. What we 
do, ma foij against Monsieur Royston must 
be done formally." 

Charles Ford had been staring first at 
one and then at the other, and next he 
broke out : " I . I beg your pardon, Mon- 
sieur, but are you really going to have old 
Royston arrested at once ?" 

The procureur smiled at the young man's 
eagerness. He civilly said that his yoimg 
confrere of the English bar had divined 
his intentions: M. Royston was to be ar- 
rested. 

Then Amy whispered in her father's ear, 
and her face was very pale, and her eyes 
dim with tears, as she did so, insomuch 



/ 




284 LADT FULTIA. 

that Colonel Ford turned to Sergeant 
Skinner, and asked him to play interpreter 
for once. 

" Tell him. Monsieur the Procureur 
there," said the colonel . ** tell him, if yon 
please, that it makes my daughter mise- 
rable to think that she should be the cause 
of bringing punishment and suffering down 
even on the heads of the guilty. This idea 
breaks her rest, and causes her many an 
anxious moment; and for her sake I am 
willing to hold my hand. All Amy wishes 
. and it is on her account that I have 
moved in this matter . ^is to discover the 
place where her poor young friend is kept 
a prisoner . and if these Roystons will 
confess that, they may go free, as far as we 
are concerned." 

It would be difficult to describe the ex- 
pression of the procureur's face as this last 
speech of Colonel Ford's was somewhat 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 285 

laboriously translated to him, by the joint 
efforts of Sergeant Skinner and Charles 
Ford ; but its main resemblance was to 
the countenance of Grimalkin when she 
watches a sportive young mouse venture 
forth from its hold. The half-shut eyes of 
M. Duvillers-Hardouin looked more feline 
than ever as they blinked through the 
gold-rimmed glasses, and the mouth con- 
tracted tigerishly, while the wrinkles on 
the high narrow forehead were gathered 
into a frown. But the pubhc prosecutor 
did not speak immediately, and when he 
did, honey appeared to distil from his 
fluent lips. The excellent famille Ford, 
he gently said, must remember that the 
matter had been put into the care of 
Justice, and that Justice had certain 
requirements, perhaps harsh, that must be 
complied with. French law had a claim 
to require of M. Royston that he should 



>,v,f : 



f 



286 LADY FLAVIA, 

clear himself of the grave suspicions to 
which his conduct had given rise. How- 
ever generous and womanly the for- 
bearance of mademoiselle, he, the pro- 
cureur, must remember his duty to society 
and the government ; and Miss Ford must 
not forget that the best chance of seeing 
her friend again was to place the Roystons 
in such a position that subterfuge and pre- 
varication would be in vain. 

The Procureur Imperial continued to 
talk in this edifying strain until a heavy 
trampling of horses and clashing of steel 
scabbards was heard without, and imme- 
diately afterwards a policemen entered, 
announcing that the brigadier of the 
gendarmerie was outside. **Let him en- 
ter," said the procureur, and in came the 
person in question, with clanking spurs 
and heavy tread, his sabre tucked under 
his arm, and his huge cocked-hat in his 




THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 287 

hand. " Bonjour^ Monsieur Leroux !" gaid 
the public prosecutor affably. 

]fi[. Leroux was a fine-looking soldier, 
small in the waist, broad in the chest, 
standing six feet at least in his jack-boots, 
and wearing his silver aiguillettes jauntily. 
He had a bold dark face, full of courage 
and intelligence ; his wiry moustache was 
as well waxed as if he were still a 
sergeant of dragoons; and he wore the 
Crimean medals, and the cross of the 
Legion of Honour as well, shining on the 
breast of his blue uniform coat. Evi- 
dently, the brigadier of the St. Germain 
gendarmerie had smelt powder elsewhere 
than at a review in the Champ de Mars. 

" Monsieur Leroux, you are punctual," 
said the procureur, bringing his spectacles 
to bear on the new-comer. " You will be 
able to reach the ch&teau within an hour 
after sunset, rCest-ce pasT' 






288 LADT FLATIA. 

"Oui, num. procurtm'" said the soldier, 
bringing up his gloved right hand to bie 
forehead in military style. 

At that moment, the coimnissary of 
police, neatly dressed in black, with his 
tricoloured ecaif of office peeping forth 
from between the folds of his frock-coat, 
came bustling in. He was followed by his 
secretary, a lean personage, in threadbare 
clothes, and with no visible linen, but 
carrying a roll of paper, an ink-bottle, and 
a bundle of pens, as well as the brass 
stamp used for affixing the official timbre 
to the documents that emanated from the 
bureau. The duty of this clerk or secre- 
sary would be to draw up ^Q proces-verbcd. 

" Monsieur Leroux," said the commis- 
sary, as he reached down his hat from its 
peg, and adjusted the woollen comforter 
more closely round his thick neck, " who 
are your best men ?" 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SUP. 289 

" Pierre Lulloux and Jacques the 
Norman," answered the brigadier without 
hesitation. " But, excusez^ my commissary, 
if it is at the Chateau des Eoches that we 
are to pay our little visit, it will be better 
to take all the men." 

" Why so ?" asked M. Duvillers-Har- 
douin, with a furtive smile. 

" Because it is with Monsieur Royston 

that we shall have affaire^^ said the 

brigadier ; " and Monsieur Royston is not 

< a man like other men, mon procureur. 

C^est dur, qaJ' 

Indeed the reputation of Rattling Brand 
Royston for the possession of extraordinary 
strength and courage was almost as well 
established in* the foreign coimtry where 
the stern old exile had chosen to pitch his 
tent, as ever it had been in the days of his 
reckless youth at home. His character 
extorted that kind of respect which we 

VOL. II. V 



^m 



290 LADY PLAVIA. 

involuntarily bestow on a wild beast that is 
certain to confront the hunters to the last 
gasp of its breath. In Scotland he would 
have been called a *' dour carle." It was 
difficult to judge of the probable conduct of 
so self-willed and stubborn a personage by- 
ordinary rules. 

" The carriage waits, mon commissaire V 
said an agent stepping in ; this agent was 
in uniform, and had his sword and belt on. 
It was evidently a special occasion. 

" The ouvrier . Chardon . is he in readi- 
ness with his tools?" was the next question. 
The policeman replied in the affirmative. 
The commissary then drew on his gloves. 
" B-r-r-r ! how cold it is !" he said, stamping 
his feet upon the boarded floor, and 
glancing somewhat reluctantly at the 
warm stove with its morsel of glowing 
coal. " It is work to freeze the marrow 
of the bones, to be abroad on cold nights 



\ 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SUP. 291 

like these. You have the best of it, 
Monsieur le Procureur, as you wait to have 
your criminal nicely caught for you . eh, 
eh, eh?" and the commissary laughed at 
his own joke, while the secretary and 
agent, as in duty bound, laughed too. 

But now, after a fresh whisper from Amy, 
Colonel Ford again intervened. He begged 
that no unnecessary harshness might be 
used towards any of the suspected family at 
the chateau. He and his daughter had no 
object whatever but that of obtaining the 
liberation of the real Lady Flavia Clare, 
whom they supposed to be illegally kept in 
confinement either at the chateau itself or 
in some other place of durance. But they 
were very far from wishing harm to any 
one, and would be content, their friend once 
secure, to allow the culprits to go un- 
punished. 

The Procureur Imperial took these re- 



e 



292 LADT FLA VIA. 

marks in good part. He was in a humour 
to be pleased, indeed, with everything. 
Events had turned out admirably, when 
looked at from his point of view. In almost 
any case, there must be a trial and a 
conviction. And he enjoyed his little coup 
d'etat in the matter of the sudden arrest all 
the more because he perceived how likely 
it was that, had he not kept his own counsel, 
his Englisli friends would have tried to 
compromise matters by some direct proposi- 
tion to Mr. Royston ; and in that case the 
bird would probably have taken fright before 
the snare was ready. 

But the procureur was too diplomatic to 
give utterance to his thoughts. He con- 
tented himself with complimenting Miss 
Ford on her compassionate sentiments, at 
the same time deploring that his sentiment 
of duty forbade him, as public prosecutor, 
to indulge in the luxury of tenderness 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 293 

towards those who were suspected of a crime 
against the law, and a flagrant breach of 
hospitaliiy. Justice must be done, Mr. 
Eoyston's violence of temper must not be 
permitted to screen him from the due course 
of law. 

Then Mr. Duvillers-Hardouin rose and 
glanced at his watch. 

" By this time, Monsieur le Commissaire, 
your people are no doubt at their posts ?" 
was his question. 

The commissary looked up at the dial- 
plate of the loud-ticking clock over his head. 
" Yes, monsieur ; by this time the house is 
surrounded. escape is impossible." 

Amy felt a chill run through her veins as 
she heard these words. Those of whom 
these cold-blooded officials spoke as hunters 
speak of the game they drive within range 
of their bullets, were guilty wretches, very 
likely, but human beings still. There was 




294 LADT FLA VIA. 

something saddening in the thought of men 
being chased and hemmed in, like wolves 
cut oflF from flight. " Go with them, papa, 
Charles," she said earnestly ; " go and 
speak a word on the side of mercy . ^if . if 
that misguided man should really resist. 
Go and tell him to yield . that we will not 
harm him. will not bear witness against 
him . only let him give us up dear Flavia. 
Won't you go ?" 

The colonel shook his head sadly. " Dis- 
cipline must be kept up, my pet," he said ; 
"these gentlemen do but what is their 
bounden duty. I cannot interfere." 

" I will go !" cried Charles Ford impetu- 
ously, and Amy's grateful look thanked him 
for his compliance. 

By this time a move had begun to 
take place towards the outer door. Before 
the police bureau were three gendarmes, 
mounted, and towering like gigantic figures 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP. 295 

in the waning light. A fourth gendarme 
stood holding the bridles of his own and 
the brigadier's horse. The blue cloaks were 
rolled up and strapped behind the saddles ; 
and as the horses stood clanking their chain 
bridles and pawing up the snow, the little 
party of stalwart troopers presented an 
appearance both martial and picturesque. 
A few yards oflF was a large char-h-banc^ or 
open carriage, drawn by two horses, and 
with two of the police on the coach-box, one 
of whom held the reins. Beside this vehicle 
stood another agent, and with him was a 
sturdy artisan with an armful of smith's 
tools. The sight of these preparations had 
drawn together a little crowd of inquisitive 
idlers, who began to press rather closely 
about the door of the police-office. 

^' Au large, les curieux ! . Be oflF, you 
chatterboxes, that have nothing to do but to 
stare at your neighbours !" called out the 
brigadier, good-humoured but peremptory. 



296 LADY FLA VIA. 

A French/ crowd is submissive, and with a 
laugh the people fell back. 

" Have you loaded your arms, vous autres?" 
asked the sub-oflScer of his men. 

*' Yes, my brigadier, carbines and pistols, 
both," said one of the troopers. " It is to 
the Chateau des Roches, then, that we go to- 
night r 

Leroux nodded. ** C'est bien Monsieur 
Royston," he said in a sententious tone ; " so, 
attention, and look out for squalls." 
. *' Connu ! my brigadier," said two of the 
soldiers at once, beating their white-gloved 
palms together to keep their chilled hands 
from stiflFening; "a French troupier only 
knows the word duty. Ce sera rude^ all the 
same, monsieur." 

" Ah, ah ! an old dur de cuir /" grumbled 
a third gendarme, dismounting to tighten 
the girths of his saddle : " a famous cuiras- 
sier the old man would have made, I 
warrant you. You give us warm work this 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SLIP, 297 

cold evening, brigadier. Sarpejou ! I could 
fancy it was Africa again ; eh, comrades !" 

It was remarkable that not one of these 
men for an instant imagined that their 
errand, an everyday one in their profession, 
would have a peaceful result. All of them 
had fought imder the standards of France, 
in Algeria, in the Crimea, or at Solferino, 
for the gendarmerie of the empire is recruited 
from picked men chosen out of the cavalry 
corps. But though the very sight of their 
cocked-hats and shoulder-belts exercised a 
talismanic influence on the rural population, 
their weapons were not always borne for 
mere show, and they knew that this arrest 
was likely to be an undertaking of no com- 
mon danger. 

Meanwhile, the commissary, with his 
secretary, an agent, and the smith, took their 
places in the char h banc. M. Durbec, on 
the'invitation of the magistrate, followed, as 
did Sergeant Skinner; and then Charles 



i 



298 LADT PLAVIA. 

Ford stepped forward and asked leave to 
accompany the party. 

" With all my heart, Monsieur I'avocat 
Anglais. You shall tell them in London 
how we manage these Kttle affairs in France, 
said the commissary very graciously, and, 
with some squeezing, room was made for 
Charles. Colonel Ford, his daughter cling- 
ing to his arm, stood on the steps in front of 
the police-office, while in the darkling door- 
way might be seen the figure of the public 
prosecutor, like an elegant spider awaiting 
its prey. The sun had set; there was a 
dull crimson flush of colour yet lingering in 
the west. The stained snow in the streets, 
and the pure white snow that yet clung to 
the roofs of the houses, glimmered in the 
dying daylight. 

'' Bon voyage /" called out Mr. Duvillers- 
Hardouin in his ill-omened voice. The whip 
cracked, and off went the carriage and its 
heavy load. 



THE HOUNDS ARE LET SUP. 291 

like these. You have the best of it, 
Monsieur le Procureur, as you wait to have 
your crimiiial nicely caught for you . eh, 
eh, eh ?" and the commissary laughed at 
his own joke, while the secretary and 
agent, as in duty bound, laughed too. 

But now, after a fresh whisper from Amy, 
Colonel Ford again intervened. He begged 
that no imnecessary harshness might be 
used towards any of the suspected family at 
the chateau. He and his daughter had no 
object whatever but that of obtaining the 
liberation of the real Lady Flavia Clare, 
whom they supposed to be illegally kept in 
confinement either at the chateau itself or 
in some other place of durance. But they 
were very far from wishing harm to any 
one, and would be content, their friend once 
secure, to allow the culprits to go un- 
punished. 

The Procureur Imperial took these re- 



300 LADY PLATIA. 

Cross of Honour on his breast fiiUy proved ; 
bot there are varietieB of braverj, anil a 
Frenchman seldom loses an opportunity for 
display. " Allom" he said ; " keep steady, 
my lambs, to-night, for tbe credit of us aJl, 
as if we were going to deal witii a Kabyle, 
rather than to pay a domiciliary visit. You 
' have all been in Africa . all but Paul there 
. remember, then, that to-night we . are 
going to seek Ihe lion in his den." No 
more words were spoken, but the little troop 
of horsemen pressed on steadily, the hoofe of 
their horses ringing sullenly upon the iron- 
bound road. 



END OF VOL. II. 
LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE LION IN HIS DEN. 

The old Ch&teau des Boches had never 
looked more sombre and sad than on that 
December night when the sleuth-homids of 
Justice were let slip against its inmates. 
The gloomy garden, with its tall trees and 
overgrowth of shrubs, lay in irregular 
patches of black and white beneath the 
pale evening light. The stars shone 
frostily out between the rifts in the clouds, 
but there was no moon. The snow covered 
the earth like a shroud; the northern 
breeze was piercingly cold; the brooks 

VOL. III. B 



I 



8 LADY FLA VI A. 

were all frozen over, and there was ice on 
the Seine. The steep roof of the old 
chateau, the grey tower of the dovecot, the 
ruinous out-buildings, bore a load of unsul- 
lied snow. 

The char^-banCy with its living load, was 
the first to reach the bridge at the end of 
the village street of Grr^snez-Vignoble. It 
was on this bridge, two days earlier, that 
Brand Royston had lingered so long, 
watching for signs of the coming storm. 
The storm had come now. It had rolled 
up, dark and lowering as a heavy bank of 
thunder-firatught clouds, and soon the tem- 
pest was to break forth in its might. By 
this time, at every station of the police 
throughout Northern France the signale- 
ment of Brand Royston was in the hands of 
the agents of government, and escape, 
accidents apart, was impossible. 

The smithy, a few yards oflF, was open, 
and in fall work. The bellows roared, the 




THE LION IN HIS DEN. 9 

hammer tinkled on the glowing iron as it 
was forged into horse-shoes, and the sparks 
went in showers of flaky yellow and 
spangled red, hissing and eddying out into 
the night. There was the usual group of 
idle good fellows hanging about the door, 
and chatting on the sill of the unglazed 
window; and the dusky Yulcans of the 
smithy themselves laid aside sledge and 
bellows to come and gaze out inquisitively 
at the large open carriage and its cluster of 
men. But no one approached. The 
gazers had noted the white belts and 
chapeaux bras, and had no wish to intrude 
on the police. Those corbeaux, as the 
master-smith observed, were birds of bad 
augury, best let , alone. 

And now the dull thud of distant horse- 
hoofs beating upon the frozen snow is 
heard, and as the tall figures and martial * 
accoutrements of the gendarmes come into 
sight, the commissary bids the driver pro- 



10 LADY PLAVIA. 

coed. It is but a step to the rusted iron 
gates of the ch&teau. There, every one 
aliglits ; as they do so, an agent of police 
steps up and lifts his hand to his hat, in 
salutation to his superior. "Anything 
new, Martin?" The policeman's answer 
is satisfactory. Nothing has occurred* 
Every avenue is guarded; the house is 
surrounded on all sides. All is well. Just 
as Martin has given his report, the gen- 
darmes ride up and dismount in leisurely 
fashion, linking the bridles of their horses 
together, so that one man may suffice to 
hold all five of the chargers.^ The man 
selected is an agent of police. He is old, 
and can best be spared when hard knocks 
are looked for, and he is nothing loath to 
take this inglorious part in the campaign. 

The rusted iron gates proved to be un- 
fastened. Their hinges creaked harshly as 
they were thrust back ; and the gendarmes 
and police, headed by the magistrate, made 



THE LION IN HIS DEN. 11 

their entry into the grounds. With them, 
but not of them, were Charles Ford, Ser- 
geant Skinner, and M. Durbec. " Hist ! 
come with me," said the last named of 
these three, as he drew the Englishmen 
aside, speaking at the same time in tole- 
rably good English : " you need not get 
yourselves knocked on the head, that I 
know of; and for me, I wash my hands of 
the aflFair. It is theirs ; they have drawn 
the wine . let them drink it. D'aiUeurSy I 
have made my proofs. They will not call 
me coward." 

Then, eking out his statement with 
shrugs, grins, and gestures more graphic 
than words, M. Durbec proceeded to ex- 
plain that he had offered, if he were given 
carte blanche, to make his way by stratagem 
into the house, and to capture the formid- 
able master of it during his sleep. This 
wise plan had been overruled; formality 
had been the order of the day ; and M. 



12 LADY FLA VIA, 

Durbec had resolved to be a mere spectator 
of the mischief he anticipated. But 
scarcely had he ceased to speak, when, to 
the surprise of every one, in answer to the 
shrill neighing of one of the gendarmes' 
horses, a horse neighed loudly from the 
range of deserted stabling across the neg- 
lected court-yard. A general movement 
took place in that direction, and with no 
small astonishment the police discovered a 
carriage stowed away in the roofless coach- 
house, two horses tethered in the disused 
stable, and t^he coachman, a mere lad, with 
a sheep-skin rug rolled around him, fast 
asleep on a truss of straw. Awaking to 
find himself a prisoner, this poor fellow was 
at first too much surprised to make any 
reply to the questions of his captors ; but 
presently it came out that he was in the 
service of a livery stable-keeper of St. 
Germain, that the English gentleman who 
lived in the chateau had hired the vehicle 



THE LION IN HIS DEN, 13 

and horses of his patron^ bespeaking them 
for Monday, at three o'clock ; that he, Paul 
Peter Lobucheau, had been punctual ; that 
M. Koyston had told him to wait, as the 
carriage would not be wanted till after 
dark, and at the same time had fed him 
weU, and supplied him freely with wine of 
Spain, after which Paul Peter had gone 
snugly to sleep upon the straw : and that 
was all Paul Peter had to tell. 

M. Durbec, prince of spies, laughed imp- 
ishly as he led Charles Ford and the Lon- 
don detective back to the front of the 
house, and placed them under the shelter of 
a clump of lime-trees. " So, so ! " he said 
softly; "this good Monsieur Royston 
would have stolen away, it seems, and left 
an empty nest. His journey would only 
have extended to Mantes, or at most to 
Havre. But now, listen: mark what 
Monsieur le Commissaire is about to do." 

By this time the gravel and the crisp 



14 LADY FLAVIA. 

snow were crackling under the tread of 
many feet ; and the commissary, with the 
smith from St. Germain at his left hand, 
and his secretary on the right, stood in 
front of the principal door of the chateau 
. the door above which the mutilated 
escutcheon frowned upon the intruders. 
Every window was dark; all the lower 
shutters, all those on the first floor as well, 
were closed. Above, the dormer windows 
in the steep roof looked blankly out, ink- 
black and mournful, on the night . ^no 
light ; no sound ; no sign of life. The 
commissary rang the door-bell, and, lifting 
the rusty knocker, sent a peal of hollow 
sounds echoing through the apparently de- 
serted house. The knocking elicited no 
response. The commissary glanced over 
his shoulder at the five gendarmes and the 
agents who stood ready. Then clearing 
his voice, which was husky and thick with 
the combined effects of the night-air and 




THE LION IN HIS DEN. 15 

the excitement of the moment, the com- 
missary again struck three times upon the 
oaken door, loudly pronouncing the magic 
words of the legal open sesame : " Ouvrez^ 
au nom de la hi I " The summons was dis- 
regarded. The commissary of police turned 
to his men. This is the first sommation^^ 
he said in a loud voice. Again the words 
and the knocking were repeated. ** Open, 
open, in the name of the law ! " but all was 
dark and silent as the grave. 

M. Durbec, under the shadow of the 
lime-trees, whispered to Charles Ford : " A 
nice mess they will make of it ; you will 
see. There was but one way," he added, 
with the incomparable fatuity that sits 
more naturally on a Frenchman than on 
any other mortal man, " and that way was 
to leave all to me." 

" I don't like this," said Charles Ford, 
hurriedly ; " all these displays of guns and 
pistols and cold steel against one man. It 



16 LADY FLAVIA. 

seems a cowardly butchery. When he 
shows himself, I will call to him to , sur- 
render, and I'll promise him that he and 

his shall not be hurt, if only " 

^*Hark!" hissed out the French detec- 
tive. " Monsieur le Commissaire speaks 

for the last time. * Open in the name of 
the law !' The curtain will rise soon, and 
you shall tell me, mes amisy how you fancy 
the play." 

There was a long pause. The workman 
from St. Germain was getting ready his 
tools. The night was very bleak ; the air 
was cold and frosty ; but the commissary of 
police took oflF his hat and wiped his fore- 
head, which was beaded over with heat- 
drops. Not a man spoke. There was no 
sound but the faint rattle of arms, or the/^ 
clink of a spur as one of the gendarmes 
moved uneasily. The silence was broken 
by the voice of the commissary, and very 
harsh and strident was the sound of that 



\ 



THE LION IN HIS DEN. 17 

voice as it said : " The third soinmation 
has been addressed without obedience being 
rendered. In virtue of the powers con- 
ferred on me by the Criminal Code, I, com- ^ 
missaire de police, command the door to be 
broken open ! To your duty, and burst in, 
the door?" 

Instantly the workman thrust the sharp 
point of a long crowbar between the door 
and the jamb nearest to the lock, and drove 
it home with two strokes of a mallet. 

** Help me, comrades," cried the smith ; 
" two of you bear a hand, and we will prise 
open the door in a twinkling." Two of 
those addressed, an agent and a gendarme, 
laid their hands upon the lever. As they 
did so one of the outside shutters of the 
upper windows was flung open, and two 
shots were discharged in rapid succession. 
The jarring of the windows, and the hollow 
echoes of the successive reports as they 
rang through the rooms and passages of 

VOL. III. c 



18 LADY PLAVIA. 

the house, were such loud and startling in- 
terruptions of the previous dead silence, 
that the nerves of the bravest were affected 
for the instant. The blue smoke of the 
firing rolled lazily away, and it was seen 
that no one was hurt. The excited gen- 
darmes set up a cheer of derision and de- 
fiance. M. Durbec shook his head. 

" He fired too high," said the man from 
the Rue Jerusalem. ** It was done on pur- 
pose. He desired to scare them away, if 
they would take the hint. He will not 
miss them again, be sure." And indeed, as 
those outside worked vigorously with the 
crowbar to break the fastenings of the door, 
two more flashes lit up the blackness of the 
night, and the gendarme who was aiding 
the smith gave a groan and dropped the 
mallet. 

" I am wounded, mon brigadier ! " said 
the poor fellow, sinking down upon the 
snow, which was instantly crimsoned with 



THE LION m mS DEN. 19 

blood. The brigadier sprang forward, 
sword in hand. 

^' Feul feu I sur les brigands 1'' he 
ordered, pointing to the window above. 
Instantly the brass-bound carbines were 
brought to the shoulder, and a rattling 
volley was poured into the fatal casement. 
Shattered glass and broken wood-work fell 
in a clattering shower upon the frozen 
snow; but a deep mocking laugh repKed to 
the discharge, and from another window 
four more shots were fired. The air was 
filled with smoke. The sharp discharge of 
firearms seemed continuous ; and the shouts 
of the men without blended with the crash 
of the breaking door, and with the thunder- 
ing blows of the mallet upon the- panels. 

 

" There are two of them. The Gapifcaine 
Royston has his share in the dance also," 
said M. Durbec philosophically. 

The police behaved well ; there was no 
flinching. Even the commissary, whose 



20 LADY PLAVIA. 

vocation was not that of a warrior, stood 
his ground, and urged those about him to 
fresh exertions, while such of his followers 
as had firearms kept up a rapid fusillade 
upon the windows of the upper story. The 
shrill screams of women, coming appa- 
rently from the highest range of rooms in 
the gaunt, high ch&teau, were now plainly 
to be heard amidst the noise of the assault. 
The door was fiercely attacked now with 
crowbar and mallet, chisel, hammer, and 
hatchet. The old oak flew in splinters, 
and lock and hinges creaked and bent ; but 
within there was a barricade hastily built 
up with heavy furniture and logs of fire- 
wood, and the task of forcing an entry was 
no light one. Several more of the police, 
at the sound of the firing, had come hastily 
up, and those nearest to the door worked 
with a will. They were in a savage 
humour now. Between rage and fear, 
their . blood was at fever-heat. Three or 



THE LION m HIS DEK, 21 

four of them had received slight wounds, 
besides the serious injury received by the 
first man who had been hit. The bullets 
spattered like hail upon the gravel; but 
the smoke grew thicker every moment. 

The door was now breached in several 
places ; the hinges had been torn away ; 
the lock and bolts scrooped and grated 
harshly as they were bent back, and 
the whole framework seemed parting to 
pieces. 

" Push, push hard, ferme et fort /" cried 
the brigadier Leroux, encouraging his men. 
His own hat had been perforated by a ball. 
He was bareheaded, and the blood was 
trickling down his face where a stray shot 
had grazed his left temple ; but he was 
hardly conscious of the trifling hurt. 
*. Together, my Iambs !" As the, words 
were uttered, a thin stream of flame 
spouted forth from one of the gaps in the 
door, and a taU gendarme put his hand to 



22 LADY FULTIA. 

his side, and staggered back among his com- 
rades, then fell prone upon the bloody snow. 

^' Art much hnrt, Norman, man enfcmtV^ 
asked the brigadier, stooping over him. 

^ It was hhoutpartaat. I think I have my 
paquet made np for the other world, men 
brigadier. It is a (xmge in foil," gasped 
the poor soldier, trying to smile. Half 
maddened at the sight, the rest of the party 
rushed at the door, and by a combined 
eflFort, tore it down, and forced their way in- 
wards, firing as Aey went, and scrambling 
pell-mell over the ruins of the barricade. 
After them, drawn as iron by a magnet, 
rushed in Charles Ford, followed by 
Durbec and Sergeant Skinner, and the 
paved hall of the chateau was crowded in 
a moment. The commissary, less active 
than h^ subordinates, had been left behind 
the others, and it was Leroux who took 
the lead, sabre in hand. The two remain- 
ing gendarmes and nine or ten of the 



THE LIOK IN mS DEN, 23 

ordinary police were at his heels. The 
whole afiair resembled the storming of a 
fort rather than a common arrest. M. 
Durbec canght hold of Charles Ford, and 
held him back, pointing upwards with a 
warning gesture of mute horror doubly 
impressive from such a man 

On the landing-place above them, at the 
head of the broad staircase of fair white 
stone, bordered by a massive bronze 
balustrade, to which some scraps of gold- 
leaf clung yet, relics of its old splendour, 
stood Brand Royston, towering through 
the sickly haze of the smoke which the 
firing had raised. He looked more like a 
giant than a man of the common human 
standard, as he stood there, with his fierce 
buU-eyes glaring bloodshot, his fece Uvid 
and swarthy with pa^ion, and his hands 
blackened with powder. His double-bar- 
relled gun lay at his feet, and he was 
grasping a small wooden keg, hooped with 



24 LADY PLAVIA. 

copper, to which he was deliberately 
attaching a slow match, the lighted end of 
which glowed red through the smoke. 
With a threatening gesture, he poised this 
burden aloft, holding it above his head, 
at the full stretch of his huge arms. 

" See this!" he said, in* a deep low tone 
that hardly rose above a whisper, terrible 
in its distinctness. ** Come a step nearer, 
one step, and I'll not die without sending 
some of you to the devil before me !" 

That the barrel contained gunpowder, 
there could be no doubt. That the mad- 
man, or the goaded desperado, for he might 
have been either, so frightful were the 
angry passions that distorted his coun- 
tenance, would keep his word, there was 
no doubt. All shrank back. " A terre 1 h 
terre T cried a frightened voice ; and most 
of those present fell upon their faces, and 
lay grovelling on the pavement. 

** That won't save you !" was the savage 



THE LION IN HIS DEN. 25 

taunt of their enemy, and there was an 
insane glitter in his eyes. Perhaps he was 
really mad at that moment, or it may have 
been merely the desperate desire to avenge 
himself in the last struggle that prompted 
his horrible design. The screams of the 
women overhead, " Au secours 1 help us !" 
grew shriller than before. A few of the 
boldest men in the hall remained erect . 
the brigadier foremost. Sergeant Skinner 
had thrown himself into a small unfur- 
nished room, the door of which was ajar, 
and had dragged Charles after him. It 
was safer there than the hall would be 
when the deadly grenade should explode, 
M. Durbec knelt on one knee, thrust his 
hand into the breast of his coat, and fixed 
his eyes on the gigantic form above him. 
All this passed very quickly. 

The brigadier was the first to recover 
from the stupor of surprise. Calling on his 
men to follow him, he pointed to the 



26 LADY FLAVIA. 

staircase, and set his foot on the lowest 
step, making the sign of the cross as he 
did so. 

" One step more !" hissed forth Brand 
Royston, swinging back the dreadful load 
in his strong hands. The brave soldier con- 
tinned to advance. Already the powder- 
keg was poised for the fatal cast, and in 
another moment it would have been hurled 
into the hall, when M. Durbec's hand, with 
a pistol in it, was drawn forth from the 
breast of his coat, a sharp report followed, 
and Brand Royston, shot through the fore- 
head, fell with a crash upon the floor, the 
heavy keg rolling upon the landing-place. 
Quick as thought, Leroux rushed up the 
stairs to extinguish the match before the 
powder should ignite. Too late. 

A vivid, blinding flash of fierce white 
light, a shock at which the very earth 
seemed to tremble, and at whose touch the 
stout stone walls of the chateau shook like 



THE LION IN HIS DEN. 27 

the flimsy pasteboard of a child's house of 
cards, while beams snapped in twain, 
ceilings fell in a cloud of lime and horsehair, 
and the rattle of tumbling joists, laths, 
rafters, sktes, and masonry, mingled with 
the awfiil roar of the explosion. Every 
window in the house, glass, wood, lead, 
iron and all, was blown out, and fell 
tinkling on the snow. The doors burst 
open as if some Titan's hand had thrust 
them from their fastenings. The roof bore 
the blow better than could have been 
predicated of it by mortal architect. But 
the upper staircase of wood fell in ruins, 
the grand staircase of stone was shattered 
and disjointed, brigadier Leroux rolling 
down in breakneck fashion, along with an 
avalanche of stones and mortar, and the 
shrieks of the women at the top of the 
house died away in a drear silence. 

On the first floor, where the powder had 
exploded, the mischief was at the worst. 




28 LADY FLAVIA. 

Below, except for the feet that every one 
had been thrown down, that some bruises 
had been inflicted by the felling wood and 
plaster, and that the brigadier had been 
hurled back, with aching bones, among his 
comrades, no harm was effected. And 
now that the walls had ceased to vibrate, 
all fear of being buried alive died out in 
the hearts of the bystanders. But as the 
thick smoke cleared away, it was seen that 
the walls above were blown away, leaving 
a gap as if Big Will from Shoeburyness 
had been placed in battery against the 
Chateau des Eoches. The panels were 
sullenly smouldering, and a curtain that 
yet hung to an iron rod was in a light 
flame, and sparks and burning wood were 
everywhere. The shrieking of female 
voices on the attic story, hushed for a few 
minutes, now broke out again with re- 
doubled force. 

" You saved all our lives !" said Charles 



THE LION IN HIS DEN. 29 

Ford, as he took the hand of M. Durbec, 
and wrung it hard ; an^ several of those in 
the hall came swarming about the door of 
the little ante-room, loud in their praise of 
the detective's presence of mind and uner- 
ring aim. But M. Durbec received these 
praises rather coldly, and he made haste to 
replace the yet smoking pistol in his breast- 
pocket. 

" I always said, mm commismire, that the 
plan was none of mine. I do assure you 
that it went against me to caramhqler that 
pauvre diabU there . but who can escape 
his fate !" 

Outside the house, piled in ruin over the 
frozen snow, lay scorched beams and lumps 
of broken masonry, and riven panels of 
costly carved wood, and fragments of 
furniture. There they lay, ghastly and 
confused, beneath the pale stars; and 
amongst the ruins lay a blackened corpse, 
burned and torn out of all semblance to 



30 LADY PLAVIA. 

humanity. It was a fit ending to such a 
life as Brand Eoyston's. 

And now, as the smoke and the scent of 
burning wood filled the house, the screams 
of the poor creatures above became more 
piteous in their terror. Their piercing 
cries rang wildly through the passages, and 
made the roof resound. "Help, help!" 
they cried; "aw secours^ for the love of 
Heaven. Fire! the chateau is on fire. 
Help us, good Christians, or we shall be 
burned here too. Help, help ! h Vincendk /" 
It was sad to hear them. 



31 



CHAPTER II. 

UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 

The Chateau des Roches was really on fire ; 
of that, the flakes of half-consumed wood, 
dropping like a fiery snow-shower from the 
first-floor landing-place . the sparks that 
were scattered at each gust of the cold 
wind that had now free entry into the 
dismantled house . and the pungent smoke 
afforded proofs suflScient. But no one 
doubted but that the fire could easily be 
checked, if only access could be obtained to 
the upper stories of the building. The 
grand stairs were broken up, and the slabs 
of hewn stone, piled upon one another like 



32 LADY FLAVIA, 

the boulders in a rugged moraine among 
the glaciers of Switzerland, threatened to 
give way beneath the rash foot that should 
touch them. Above, matters were even 
worse. The narrow wooden staircase that 
led up to that part of the house which was 
occupied by the servants, had been shat- 
tered by the explosion,, and the wreck of 
the half-rotten timber looked like the 
remains of some vessel that has been 
broken up among the sharp-toothed rocks 
of a lee-shore. 

To gain the upper floor, whence the 
screams proceeded, was impossible, except 
by the aid of a ladder ; and as there were 
none at hand, there was reason to fear that 
the flames might gather head, fanned by 
the strong wind, and that the unhappy 
women above might be burned or sufibcated 
before their rescue could be effected. In 
this strait, the apparition of a number of 



UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 33 

r 

the country-people was indeed welcome; 
and when once the peasants understood the 
urgency of the appeal for aid, they showed 
no slackness in rendering it. The repeated 
discharge of the firearms, coupled with the 
arrival of the gendarmerie, had caused 
much excitement in the village, and when 
the roar of the explosion was heard, a 
crowd began to hurry towards the chateau. 
Then the cry that stirs every heart, and to 
which the most selfish can scarcely be deaf 
. ^the cry of " Fire !" . spread from lip to 
lip, and the bells of the village church rang 
the, tocsin, carrying the alarm far over the 
fix)st-bound country. 

Ladders were brought in hot haste ; a 
chain of men was formed, stretching from 
the brook-side to the door of the chateau, 
and buckets of water, hastily scooped up from 
holes broken in the ice, were passed along 
from hand to hand. The brigadier and the 

VOL. III. D 



34 LADY FLAVIA, 

police, forgetting their braises and wounds, 
set an example of hard work to the good- 
natured blouse-clad husbandmen ; and the 
commissary, with his cool presence of mind, 
proved nseihl in directing thoee about him. 
Charles Ford worked as hard as any of 
them ; he and Sergeant Skinner were the 
first volunteers who mounted the ladders 
through the stifling clouds of smoke. 
Plenty of brave men were ready to follow 
them ; and the pails of water were drawn 
up, and emptied upon the smouldering 
wood- work, and though the serpent of fire 
reared his red head, and writhed and 
fought, as if unwilling to be baulked of his 
prey, the house was saved. The fire was 
got under ; the charred boards hissing and 
sputtering like Medusa's snakes, and the 
steam and vapour rising in clouds. Not 
too soon ; the flames were festening on the 
wreck of the upper staircase, and, had they 




UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 35 

once mounted to the roof, nothing could have 
prevented the loss of life now happily averted. 
Clambering up, by the help of a ladder 
hauled by ropes, to the scanty platform 
which alone represented the once stately 
landing-place, several adventurers reached 
the attic story, and the screams of the 
women guided them to the right door. 
That door proved to be locked on the 
outside, and the key was in the lock. A 
tough door it was, made of seasoned elm, 
and clamped with iron, or Grosse Jeanne, 
whose stout arms and large-knuckled hands 
were bruised and bleeding with their 
owner's frantic efforts to break her prison, 
would have torn it open. The two women 
who had screamed were G-rosse Jeanne, the 
cook^ housemaid, and factotum of the 
Royston* family, and her aide-de-camp and 
satellite. La Petite. Both females were in 
a pitiable condition of terror and excite* 



36 LADY FLA VIA. 

ment; their voices were hoarse with 
screaming, and their faces were wet with 
tears. They continued to shriek as they 
were assisted to descend the ladders, and 
became hysterical on reaching the hall. 

The commissary was the most active of 
men. So long as it was needful to fight 
the fire, the worthy magistrate had been 
zealous in the work ; but no sooner had the 
joyous vociferations of the men above 
borne witness that the danger was past, 
than the secretary spread out his supply of 
stationery on a table in the salle-a-mangerj 
while M. le Commissaire prepared for the 
inevitable ceremony of drawing up the 
prochs-verbal. In England, hysterical Grrosse 
Jeanne and the weeping handmaid who did 
her bidding would, in right of their agita- 
tion, have been exempt from questioning. 
Not so on the present occasion. The com- 
missary merely said, in a querulous tone: 



UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 37 

" Assez . assez de bruit comme qa ! Your 
names, Christian names, age, domicile, and 
occupations, if you please. Allans I no 

more crying! the interrogations must be 
replied to in categorical order.'* 

And the excited females became in a 
moment as meek as lambs, and answered 
the commissary's questions one by one, 
while the clerk's pen went rapidly scratching 
over the paper. For the present, however, 
and before M. le Procureur Imperial and 
M. the Judge of Instruction should take 
them in hand, Jeanne Marguerite Pom- 
ponnier, dite Grosse Jeanne, age thirty-two, 
native of the commune of Pecq, servant ; 
and Marie Pichard, dite La Petite, age 
nineteen, native of the commune of G-rfesnez- 
les-cloches, had not much to relate. Their 
master, of whom they spoke with dread, 
.even now that they knew him to be lying 
dead in the garden without. had locked 



38 LADY PLAVIiu 

them up in that room at the hour of stmset. 
He had forbidden them to make any noise, 
and they had obeyed, until the soimds of 
combat grew too terrific for feminine nerves, 
and then they had screamed. They had 
screamed more afterwards, when the fear of 
being griUed, " like a chestnut on a shovel," 
according to the cook's professional simile, 
had been added to their former fears of 
powder and ball. 

But before the serving-women had 
finished their statements, fi:esh captives were 
forthcoming. In a room on the first-floor, 
the door of which was approached with no 
slight difficulty, two persons were found . 
Mrs. Royston and her son. The humble 
household drudge, wife, and now widow, of 
RattKng Brand Royston, was found crouch- 
ing in a great elbow-chair, with an old India 
shawl, that had perhaps made part of her 
costly trousseau in the far-off days when 



UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 39 

the daughter of the York alderman married 
the young squire, wrapped round her head. 
She seemed trying to shut out all the horrid 
sounds and sights of that terrible night. As 
for Basil Eoyston, he looked fitter, with his 
pale cheeks and emaciated figure, to be in a 
hospital bed than to take part in an affray. 
His late illness had shaken him morally and 
physically. He stood in the middle of the 
room, trembling and crestfallen, and when 
the poHce entered, the cashiered captain 
held out his hands to receive the irons with 
perfect docility. 

" I surrender myself," he said ; " but, 
messieurs, I had nothing to do with it. It 
was all my father's doing. He is so head- 
strong that he would have his way." It 
must be remembered that at this time the 
young man did not know that his father 
was dead. The gendarme to whom he gave 
himself up whistled contemptuously as he 



40 LADY FLAVIA. 

clasped the handcuflFs on the prisoner's 
wrists. 

"I don't think this pevU mouilUe had 
much to do with the skirmish/' he said. 
However, a search soon brought to light a 
double-barrelled fowling-piece that had been 
hidden in a comer, under a curtain. This 
weapon had silver mountings, the Royston 
crest on its stock, and beneath it the initials 
B. R., which would apply equally to father 
and son. But that the piece had been 
recently fired, there was no doubt. A white 
handkerchief thrust into the muzzle was 
blackened with burnt powder; one barrel 
was still charged, and that with ball, and 
a number of bullets and a powder-flask were 
discovered in Basil's pockets. Evidently, 
he had taken some share in the late resist- 
ance. 

*' Where," he asked confusedly, as he was 
led away . ** where is my father ?" 




UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 41 

The brigadier, a good-hearted soldier, 
hesitated to reply. But one of the agents 
was less considerate. " Your scelerat of a 
father,*' he exclaimed coarsely . "txx/ he 
has got change for his money, I can tell 
you that. Shot like a dog, the^05 Anglais ^ 

Mrs. Eoyston gave a cry of real anguish, 
and tried ta push her way through the 
group of police who were conducting her, 
not imgently, from the room. "Let me 
go," she cried ; " let me go to him ! My 
husband dead ? Brand, Brand, speak to 
me; tell me it is not true!" All the 
squire's faults, all the long years of hard 
usage and tyranny, were forgotten in a 
moment, and no model of human virtues 
could have been mourned more sincerely 
than Brand Royston by her who only remem- 
bered that he was the husband of her youth. 
The commissary, when the widow was 
brought into his presence, respected her 



42 LADY FLATIA. 

grief, and forbore to torment her with 
questions. 

*' She will have enough to bear later, 
pauvre dame** he mumbled to himself be- 
tween two pinches of snnff. Even a com- 
missary of poUce, in that country where the 
logic of law demands that all possible guilty 
persons should prove their innocence, could 
not see much harm in Elizabeth Boyston. 

That was but a melancholy procession 
which took its way homeward to the good 
town of St. Germain, Two of the strong 
horses that belonged to the gendarmerie 
went riderless back, led by the bridle, and 
with empty saddles. One gendarme, whose 
shattered knee-joint wrung a groan of pain 
from the wounded man at every jolt of the 
cart in which he lay, was slowly removed 
to the town. As for the poor fellow who 
had been shot down in the act of forcing 
open the door, he had proved but too true 




UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 43 

a prophet in taking a gloomy view of his 
own case : he had died from inward 
bleeding, long before the fire was extin- 
guished. Stiff and stark, the soldier who 
had ridden forth from the streets of St. 
Germain a few hours before, lay wrapped in 
his blue cavalry-cloak upon a table in the 
dilapidated saloon of the Chateau des 
Roches. Beside him, covered with a ragged 
sheet, borrowed from a neighbouring cot- 
tage, lay the mutilated body of RattHng 
Brand Royston. Death, like poverty, makes 
men acquainted with strange bedfellows. 
Had any magician possessed the power, in 
the heyday of youth, to show Brand Eoyston 
that goal to his career, his own disfigured 
carcass lying beside the body of a French 
gendarme, perhaps the evil man might 
have been awed into repentance. It was a 
strange ending for a man who had touched 
his glass of sherry with that of a royal 



44 LADY FLAVIA. 

duke, and who had walked Bond Street 
with nobles for his companions, and every 
shopkeeper cringing for his custom. But the 
poor gendarme had the best of it. He died 
in doing his duty, and with a smile upon 

his lips. Brand But why speak of it ? 

They took the prisoners home. They 
were all prisoners . the widow and son of 
the dead EngUshman; the servant who 
was only too ready, when once she should 
have rallied her wool-gathering wits, to tell 
all she knew, and perhaps more ; and the 
simple wench who had looked on Grosse 
Jeanne as her mentor, and who had few 
original ideas to be ventilated in her coming 
examination by M. le Procureur Imperial. 
All who had been found in that ill-fated 
house, including the young driver of the 
hired carriage, were to be detained until 
they should have fully satisfied the autho- 
rities on all points. 



UNDER LOCK AND KEY. 45 

 There is one person missing," such were 
the commissary's words, as he drove slowly- 
home wards imder the waning stars . " a 
member of the family, a demoiselle, niece, 
or cousin to feu Eoyston. I have her name 
writen here . Adele . ay, Adela Burt. But 
she was not in the house, that is certain. 
Where is she, then? Where is Adela 

Burt r 



46 LADY PIJLVIA. 



CHAPTER III. 



A LEGAL ALNASGHAB. 



" This is all very fine, my pet, but it is not 
what we came out from England for. The 
real object, the discovery of your school- 
friend, Amy, seems as far off as ever," said 
Colonel Ford, in a very discontented tone, 
as he pushed back the burning logs that 
threatened to roll off the raised hearthstone, 
and invade the polished floor of smooth 
dark marquetrie, glassy and glossy, but 
deathly cold in that biting French winter 
weather. And indeed, the Colonel had 
some reason for his remark. He, who had 
ruled provinces, and had given the law to 




A LEGAL ALNASCHAR, 47 

myriads of martial barbarians, found him- 
self and his daughter mere puppets in the 
hands of one immeasurably his inferior in 
all respects but dexterity. The Procureur 
Imperial, who viewed law as conquerors 
view war, as a game of chess where human 
lives are the pawns, considered the Fords, 
the Roystons, and the others involved in 
tiuB very promising case, as so many step- 
ping-stones in his own progress to fame and 
fortune. He had not the shghtest thought 
of allowing mercy to temper justice, a 
notion which he would have stigmatised as 
Utopian, and only worthy of those "ideo- 
logues" for whom Napoleon I. had so 
sincere a contempt. 

The Procureur Imperial meant that there 
should be no drawing back upon the road, 
no halt, no change of purpose, no slacken- 
ing for pity, or fear, or disgust. Of what 
use was it that so much trouble should have 



48 LADY PLAVIA. 

been taken, unless the trumpet of renown 
should blazon forth the name of M. Dn- 
villers-Hardouin as a man worthy of all the 
favours of Themis ! He was an officer of 
the Legion of Honour already ; he wanted 
the cross of a Commander, He was Pro- 
cureur Imperial in a department that was 
close to Paris ; he panted to be Procureur 
General, Judge, President, Senator, in Paris 
itself. He had been near the rose long 
enough ; he longed to be the rose. 

No wonder that when the Fords, dis- 
appointed in their hopes of finding some 
clue to the whereabouts of the true Lady 
Flavia Clare, of that school-companion of 
Amy's who, as they fully believed, had 
been ousted from her place in the world, 
as by witchcraft, in favour of another . no 
wonder that when they spoke of withdraw- 
ing from the affair, the way of their retreat 
was barred. Not that M, Duvillers-Har- 



\ 



A LEGAL ALNASOHAR. 49 

doTiin was capable of giving offence. He 
contented himself with artfully appealing 
to the Coloners ideas of discipline, duty, and 
so forth ; and with throwing out dark hints 
that Miss Ford might perhaps be re- 
nouncing the only chance of preserving 
the life or the reason of her unhappy 
fiiend, now no doubt a captive in un- 
scrupluous hands, and whose main hope 
must be in the devotion of her adopted 
sister. 

Meanwhile, the Judge of Instruction, 
polite but peremptory, hinted that the laws 
of France admitted of no indulgence of 
private caprice. Heavy bail was exacted, 
he said, from those witnesses who were 
supposed reluctant to appear in court in 
criminal cases. In this instance, the well- 
known honour and distinction of M. le 
Colonel Ford would render such a proposi- 
tion insulting ; a simple parole would suffice. 

VOL. III. B 



50 LADY FLAYIA. 

It was the judge's duly to ask it ; would the 
colonel give it ? The colonel gave it, and 
was bound. 

In the meantime the great miU of ex- 
aminations, inquiries, interrogatories, of 
questioning, writing, brow-beating, cajoling, 
and other time-honoured methods of wire- 
drawing the evidence, had not been suffered 
to stand idle, Basil Royston, who was in 
prison, and au secret^ of course, was in 
process of being manipulated into a con- 
fession that should ruin others without 
saving himself; for the French authorities 
are not very fond of letting any of their 
trapped birds go when once they are caught. 
They do not bid so high for decoy-ducks as 
we do, and never purchase king's evidence 
when they can get it at the cheaper rate of 
a little judicious bullying. Mrs. Royston, 
also in prison, was also under the moral 
thumbscrew, being daily badgered by the 



A LEGAL ALNASCHAR. 51 

Judge of Instruction ; and Grosse Jeanne 
and La Petite had already been pumped 
dry of all available information, and were 
dismissed to their homes. But even these 
human oranges, squeezed as they had been 
till the last drop of testimony had been 
drained from them, were not held wholly 
free from the taint of suspicion. Their 
livrets . the little books which are to ser- 
vants in France at once a passport and a 
character . were detained at the police- 
oflSce; their parents had to give bail for 
their reappearance at the assizes; lastly, 
they were put under surveillance of the 
local constabulary, and were enjoined to 
present themselves twice a week at the 
mairie of their commune. 

The Chateau des Roches had been 
searched from cellar to grenievj and every 
scrap of written paper had been removed to 
the bureau of the police. The interpreters 



52 LADY FLAYIA. 

had ample employment in decipliering and 
explaining the contents of Brand Boyston's 
old betting-hooks, and in translating the 
mass of hopelessly irrelevant letters from 
creditors, relations long dead or alienated, 
and other correspondents, that the agents 
had raked out from drawers and desks; 
but there was not a line that served their 
turn. The squire had been burning papers 
on the very afternoon of the day preceding 
his arrest and death. The heap of black- 
ened tinder lay yet on the hearth in his 
bedroom, tantalising those who came to 
pry into the mystery that he seemed to 
have carried with him to his grave. Brand 
was in his grave now, in a lonely nook of 
the cemetery of Grresnez-Vignoble, where 
the few sleepers were such as had died in 
mortal sin, according to M. le Cure, and 
where not even a wooden cross marked the 
low mounds of brown earth. 




A LEGAIi ALNASGHAR. 53 

But the Procureur Imperial sorrowed over 
the loss of so important a culprit, and found 
his day-dreams, in which he had seen this 
grand central figure, with his accomplices 
grouped about him, put to the bar in the 
assize court of Versailles, rudely dashed to 
the ground; for although Basil Eoyston 
was a prisoner, and to procure his condem- 
nation to a certain term of tramiax fords^ if 
not to the guillotine itself, might not be 
difficult, so poor a triumph was scarcely a 
subject of rejoicing. It was not the con- 
viction and punishment of a wretched 
creature of this kind that would satisfy the 
public prosecutor ; such a legal epicure as 
M. Duvillers-Hardouin hankered after 
daintier materials wherewith to famish 
forth a pie fit for the Law's palate. The 
Procureur Imperial desired to grind down 
more delicate bones, in that grim official 
mill where men and women were crushed 



54 LADY FLAVIA* 

between the stones, whence fell the flour 
whereof to make his bread, than the bones 
of the cashiered captain. 

Even a lawyer, and a French lawyer, 
may build castles in the air, and M. Duvil- 
lers-Hardouin constructed several aerial 
edifices of this description ; but it was re- 
markable that they were all reared on the 
same substratum. Some cruel old Eastern 
despot, when he raised his monstrous palace, 
no cloud-castle, but a building of fair hewn 
stone, with courts and fountains, domes and 
minarets, chose to bury alive a beautiful 
young girl beneath the mountain of masonry ; 
it would bring him luck, the tyrant thought. 
So in the airy structure of M. le Procureur, 
the foundation-stone always reposed on a 
victim ; and that victim was a fair woman, 
as the old Eastern king's had been ; a lovely 
girl . he did not know how lovely ; but then 
he had only Grosse Jeanne's description to 



\ 



A LEQAL ALNASCHAR. 55 

guide him. He had heard her spoken of 
with a kind of dull grudging admiration, bs 
a bdle brunette j ma foi 1 joli minoiSj with long 
black hair, that Grosse Jeanne cjould only 
liken to the hair of a pictured saint, whose 
portrait, by some student of Murillo's, formed 
the altar-piece in the church of her native 
village. 

Clever, beautiful, and with the prestige 
of rank and wealth and refinement enwrap- 
ping her like a royal mantle, what would 
be the fame of the skilled legal sportsman 
whose arrows should bring down a bird of 
such glowing plumage as that? He saw 
her, with her dark beauty and her graceful 
mien, the mark for every eye in the crowded 
court, and he gloated over the thrill of half- 
incredulous horror that ran through the 
shuddering spectators as he threw the piti- 
less light of truth upon the story of her past 
deeds. He saw her yet again . as her dark 



56 LADY FLAVIA. 

silken ringlets fell, one by one, beneath the 
scissors of the public executioner . that 
other prop and pillar of the state, who, in 
Bourbon times, was slyled Monsieur of 
Paris . plied in that ill-boding ceremony 
that goes by the name of Toilette of the 
Condemned. He saw her yet again . on 
the scaffold, whose hateful planks are 
painted of a dusky red, that the stains of 
human blood may be less distinguishable, 
with the fatal knife of the guillotine, heavy 
and sharp, glittering above her slender 
neck, and the multitude hushed and speech- 
less as the headsman takes the cord in his 
hand, and the priest holds up the crucifix 
for the last time. But then M. Duvillers- 
Hardouin preferred to look away, for the 
public prosecutor was averse to seeing what 
might haunt him in his dreams. 

Much had to be done, however, before 
Justice could be propitiated with such a tit- 



A LEGAL ALNASGHAR. 57 

bit as the Procureur Imperial desired to oflFer 
Tip on her sacrificial altar ; and the progress 
of affairs was inconveniently slow, as we 
shall learn from Charles Ford's lips when 
he reaches the appartement in which his 
betrothed and his uncle are waiting for his 
return. The young man bounds lightly 
up-stairs, taking the carpetless steps by 
twos and threes, and lifting the queer old- 
world latch of the door, enters the little 
salon that had seen fine company in it once, 
all powder, patches, rouge, hoops, perfume, 
good manners, and bad . principles ; for 
though the lodging seemed small and in- 
convenient to the Fords, as it would to 
most of us modern Sybarites, it had har- 
boured marchionesses and coiuily abb^s, more 
chevalier than priest, wits and beauties, 
seigneurs and financiers, of the old rotten 
splendid days when all things animate and 
inanimate in broad France were the king's 



58 LADY FLAVIA. 

absolute property, '^ses choses^ as loyal 
lawyers declared. 

" This sort of thing will never do," said 
Charles Ford, in answer to the demand for 
news . ** never do. I've been for hours 
hanging about the Palais, and I beUeve that 
no lost steps in the Salle des Pas Perdus 
were ever more thrown away than nodne. 
It's plain, though the Procureur always 
speaks as enigmatically as if he had taken 
lessons at Delphi, that nothing can be made 
of that Captain Royston. They have him on 
the rack . metaphorically speaking . for 
about four hours a day; but whether fear 
has sharpened the fellow's wits, or whether 
his ravings were all a delusion, hang me if 
I can form an idea. And Mrs. Royston is 
as close as an oyster. They don't like to 
tease her so much, because the doctor appre- 
hends softening of the brain, poor creature ; 
but to one thing she is firm. she won't 



N 



A LEGAL ALNASCHAR. 59 

Bay a word that can cause injury to her 
son/' 

** I don't blame her for that," said the 
Colonel, tossing a fresh log on the fire. 

" Nor I, of course," said his nephew ; 
"but as for any certain tidings of Amy's 
friend, we seem as fer off from getting them 
as ever. As a great favour, old Duvillers- 
Hardouin has let me peep at Grosse Jeanne 
the servant's deposition ; and I can't help 
thinking that there is a person who could 
solve all our doubts, and set the matter at 
rest . Adela Burt." 

** Adela Burt ?" said Amy, as if the name 
recalled no very distinct recollections . then 
raddenly she exclaimed : ** Dear me, yes. 
How stupid of me ! Mrs. Eoyston's niece, of 
course ; and I assure you that I was foolish 
enough to be jealous, once upon a time, of 
Flavia's fancy for that very Adela Burt . 
schoolgirls are always unreasonable in such 



60 LADY PLAVIA* 

matters, you must know . and dear Flavia 
took what I said seriously to heart, and 
never mentioned Miss Burt's name again/' 

** Did you ever see her ?" asked Charles^ 
sitting down by Amy's side. 

" Adela Burt ? never !" was the answer. 
" But what makes you mix her up with the 
case at all ? I thought she was gone, and 
that Grosse Jeanne said that madame's 
niece had left France long ago." 

" Well, that's the wonder of the thing," 
observed Charles musingly, as he eyed the 
fire. ** Grosse Jeanne says that on the day 
when Lady Flavia was staying at the 
chateau, the Thursday, you know, July the 
10th . she did not see Lady Flavia at all* 
Your friend remained shut up in her own 
room, if the woman speaks truth, from bed- 
time on the Wednesday night until the 
morning of Friday, when she came down, 
closely veiled, and started by the diligence 



A LEGAL ALNASGHAB. 61 

for Mantes. She was said to be ill, and 
Mrs. Eoyston and this Adela Burt, the niece, 
waited on her, and did not allow a servant 
to enter the room at all ; and Grosse Jeanne 
never exchanged a word with Lady Flavia, 
though she had expected a present from 
that young lady on leaving." 

" But Adela Burt T said Amy. 

" Well," said Charles, " it seems, from 
Grosse Jeanne's account, that during the 
early part of the Thursday there were high 
words going on between her master . that's 
Brand, poor wretch . and the captain and 
Miss Adela. There was a regular row; 
but though the maid-servant admits that 
her knowledge of English is greater than 
her employers supposed it to be, as is often 
the case abroad here, she says that her 
fear of the squire prevented her from 
approaching near enough to listen, as she 
wished to do. But at last the quarrel 



62 LADY FLAVIA. 

seemed to come to an end ; and this Miss 
Burt seemed to get her own way in the 
dispute . so Grosse Jeanne said. But on 
Friday morning, when La Petite went into 
Miss Burt's room to make the bed, she 
found that the bed had not been slept in ; 
and the family hunted in vain, and so did 
the servants, up-stairs and down-stairs, and 
in my lady's chamber, but never a trace of 
Miss Adela did they find. Probably she 
had borne malice on account of the quarrel 
of the previous day ; or she may have 
feared injury from that old Royston, who 
was a violent man, as we all know. At 
any rate, the girl had run away ; and she 
has never returned. 

The Colonel knit his brows, and became 
more thoughtful than before. " Charley, 
lad," said he, " I may be a suspicious old 
fellow, and perhaps I am, but two ideas 
came into my head as you were speaking. 




A LEGAL ALNA8CHAR. 63 

In the first place, it seems to me as if this 
niece, this Adda Burt, was the person that 
we ought to find. Her quarrel was very 
likely all a pretence . a mere blind to mis- 
lead the servants ; and as for her departure 
in that secret fashion, how do we know 
that Miss Burt had not appointed to meet 
her uncle somewhere, in England or in 
France, and is not at this very moment the 
guardian or gaoler of your poor schoolfellow, 
kept in durance somewhere or other. in a 
madhouse or any other den of iniquity ? . 
In the second place," pursued Colonel 
Ford, stroking his grey moustaches, " the 
question arises, why should the Roystons 
play this dangerous game ? For profit, of 
course. But how, unless they were bribed, 
and handsomely bribed, could they expect 
to turn a shilling by the transaction ? I 
am very much afraid that this new Earl of 
Mortlake, who succeeded to the title on the 



64 LADY PLAVIA. 

death of my Lady Flavians father, is some- 
how implicated in the matter. I am indeed. 
Is it Hkely that he should have taken an 
impostor into his family . and I take your 
word, Amy, that the girl is an impostor . 
unless he could reap a rich harvest from 
this shameful business? Now, remember, 
this is a mere guess . ^but it has an ugly 
look. That property that was left to the 
old earl's daughter, I am afraid, has been 
the temptation to foul play in this wicked 
aflFair. The true heiress is shut up in some 
place of confinement, and the earl and his 
instrument divide the spoil." Thus, in the 
innocence of his heart, and the plenitude of 
his Indian experience, spoke Richard Ford. 
But the two young persons to whom he 
spoke put faith in his words. 

" The wicked wretch !" said Amy, wdth 
flashing eyes. 

" Let's send Skinner oflF to England ; he 




A LEGAL ALNA8CHAR. 65 

can fun down to Harbledown and pick up 
something," cried Charles, eagerly ; " and 
the procureur will lend us Durbec. I'd go 
myself, only I could do no good, unless 
I could walk straight into the earl's house 
and tax him with his share in this robbery. 
But Skinner can go . Skinner and Durbec." 
' And it was agreed that they should go. 
There was one curious feature in this aflFair ; 
the honest English family talked always of 
the missing girl as immured in one of those 
gloomy dens where force and fraud may in 
aU countries immure the defenceless. Such 
wrongful imprisonment the law severely 
punishes^ but not with death ; yet it was a 
guillotine and a sentence of death that were 
ever in the mind of M. Douvillers-Hardouin. 
Plainly, the ideas of the public prosecutor 
differed from those of the faraille Ford. 

In the meantime, matters were kept very 
quiet. There were facilities for this in the 

VOL. III. F 



66 LADY PLAVIA. 

practical working of the institutions of the 
country. In England, such a grisly drama 
as that which had taken place at the 
Chateau des Roches would have stirred 
society to its depths. A penny-a-lining 
army of occasional reporters would have 
marched upon Grfesnez-Vignoble. Our own 
correspondent, our own artist, our special 
commissioner, would have taken the deso- 
late old chateau by storm. The illustrated 
papers would have been too small to contain 
the views of the battered country house, the 
portraits of the police, and the biography of 
the actors in the tragedy. 

But they manage these things better . 
or at least dififerently . in France. The pre- 
feet of the department ordered his secretary 
to address a civil note to the editors of such 
meagre journals as existed within his juris- 
diction, and the conductors of those periodi- 
cals took the hints which the note conveyed. 



A LEGAL ALNASCHAR. 67 

Messieurs les Bedacteurs were begged to 
consider how prejudicial to the best interests 
of order, and how subversive of the respect 
due to authority, it would be to encourage 
the circulation of garbled reports and in- 
complete narratives. How much wiser and 
better to wait for the full and accurate 
information. the correct card, in fact. 
which would in proper time be furnished by 
those who alone had access to the truth. 
Whenever a strange mysterious crime 
startles us in England, there are not want- 
ing censors who invite the Press to gag 
itself for the general good, and would have 
the watch-dog cease barking until the wolf 
should be stoned by the shepherds. But 
these self-appointed high-priests of silence 
cannot, like a French prefect, close the 
printing offices, impound the type, and 
bring the proprietors to grief. It is not 
very wonderful if the provincial news- 



68 LADY FLAVIA. 

papers allowed themselves to be deprived 
of the pabulum which Brand Eoyston's 
arrest would otherwise have afforded 
them. 

And as for the Paris papers, no circular 
was sent to them, no document that might 
have got into the hands of some wrong- 
headed marquis or meddlesome deputy of 
the Montague, and so come to be read out 
in the Chamber or the Senate, in spite of 
the clamours of the loyal, and the dignified 
disapproval of the President. But a little, 
quiet-mannered old gentleman, whose grey 
head and sleek black suit gave him some 
resemblance to an elderly jackdaw, went 
pound in his brougham from one publishing 
office to another, and paid a visit to the 
editors. Not officially, certainly not. There 
was no avertissement in the case, no solemn 
threat of fine, imprisonment, suspension of 
a journal. But the little old gentleman 



A LEGAL ALNASOHAR. 69 

advised the r^dacteurs, as a private friend, 
not to blazon abroad any details of the 
affaire Royston ; and no political principle 
being at stake, the advice was religiqusly 
followed. Nevertheless, certain feeble para- 
graphs did ooze out into circulation, vaguely 
intimating that there had been a great fire, 
which had been heroically extinguished by 
the aid of the gendarmerie, but not without 
lamentable loss of life among the gallant 
guardians of order. Not a word, as yet, 
of arrest and resistance . ^not a mention of 
Brand Royston. The newspapers alone 
were apparently unconscious of what was 
the talk of all the country round. 



( 



74^ XASm: TiJLTIft. 



CHAPTER IT. 



-CHABmr. Cliart4ey! Any puBcogeiB 
fofr Chartkyr* su^ oat the goud, in a 
brisk Toioe, as he scampered, key in hand, 
down the pjatfcnm, reteasii^ sudi of the 
oocnpantB of the seTeial compartments as 
choee to signify by word or gesture a 
desire to quit the train at the Chartley 
station* 

**We are for Chartley, s^il vaus platt. 
Open the door, I beg. Merdy monsieur.** 
This to a porter who had tagged open the 
door of a second-class carriage out of the 
window of which the foreign traveller had 




THE COMMERCIAL ROOM. 71 

thrust his head. And there alighted upon 
the draughty platform, along which the 
night-winds were whistling, the figure of 
an active man, unmistakahly no native of 
these isles. A swarthy, sprightly, broad- 
chested fellow he was, with flashing dark 
eyes like the eyes of a falcon, pointed teeth 
that looked all the whiter for the crisp 
blackness of his bushy whiskers, and strong 
coarse hair, as dark as night, as stiff as 
wire, and as short as the cropped hair of 
a convict. This man was dressed in a suit 
of dark navy blue cloth, rather the worse 
for wear, but neat, and well brushed; he 
had gold rings in his ears, silver rings on 
his fingers, a watch-chain of Maltese fili- 
gree-work, and a flaming red bandana tied 
loosely, by way of a cravat, aroimd his 
simbumed neck. Any one who knew the 
world well would have set him down as 
the skipper of some small French coaster. 



72 LADY FLAVlA. 

or more probably still, as mate of a vessel 
in the Levant trade. There was a salt- 
water smack about him, outlandish as his 
finery might be, that would have passed 
unquestioned by the toughest boatswain in 
the British service. 

Yet the foreign seaman who is now bustling 
and gesticulating as he reclaims his luggage 
from out of the heap of trunks, bags, and 
boxes that is being accumulated Oh the 
sloppy platform, bears no trifling resem- 
blance to some one we have seen before. 
Those pointed teeth are much like those 
of the maimed poacher who bargained for 
a stolen pheasant with an English cus- 
tomer, one Mr. Royston, on the bridge 
at Gresnez-Vignoble, a few weeks back. 
Those bold bright eyes, that cause a sort 
of painful shrinking in other eyes that 
encounter their piercing glance suddenly, 
as when we meet the gaze of a bird ()f 




THE COICMERGIAL ROOM. 73 

prey, were very similar to the eyes which 
M. Durbec, prince of spies, was accustomed 
to conceal behind all manner of tinted 
spectacles and Brazilian pebble-glasses, as 
Jupiter in the myths was wont to mask his 
effulgence. Indeed, they were M. Durbec's 
eyes. The French master-mariner was no 
other than Antoine Durbec, on a special 
service* M. Durbec had a good deal of 
l^ffstge. three trunks and a carpet-bag. 
His companion, for he was not alone, had 
much less to look after. That companion 
was unquestionably English. He was 
neatly dressed, had an Inverness cape and 
a railway rug thrown over his left arm, 
and was stout and florid . ^a genuine John 
Bull. A large clasped memorandum-book, 
or perhaps a book of samples, such as com- 
mercial travellers often carry, was peeping 
out of the outside breast-pocket of his rough 
greatcoat. His whole aspect, from his iron- 



74 LADY PLAVIA. 

grey hair and iron-grey whiskers to his 
iron-heeled boots, was commercial, and 
north-country, or at least such as would 
have suited a veteran of the coal, iron^ 
and cloth and cotton districts, one who 
had journeyed many a mile in gig and 
coach before railways existed; and yet he 
was merely Sergeant Skinner, of the metro- 
politan police force, detective oflficer. 

**Now, mon ami^ it is for you to play 
the pilot, is it not? You have cruised in 
these seas before, A.m f and you know the 
snuggest harbours, mille sahordsV said 
M, Durbec, rolling a very little in his 
walk, and lighting a cigar the very instant 
he was across the threshold of the booking- 
pflBce. " Ah I peste /" he continued, wrap- 
ping the hooded caban that he wore instead 
of an overcoat more closely about his 
broad shoulders ; "do you know that it 
is damp and clammy, this climate of your 




THB COMMERCIAL ROOM. 75 

old England? I shiver in it, foi de 
matelot H 

The porters and miscellaneous outsiders 
who were engaged in heaving up Monsieur's 
luggage to the roof of the omnibus which 
Monsieur and his friend had notified their 
intention of patronising, and which be- 
longed to the Bell^ Family and Commercial 
Hotelj grinned and jerked their thumbs in 
sign of intelligence at one another. Fo- 
reigners, excepting organ-men and stray 
Hebrew pedlers, were rare at Chartley* 
And this foreigner was evidently a sea- 
faring man. He had a good deal of bag- 
gage; he had paid a heavy excess-charge 
for it. The chief-porter showed the ticket 
to an admiring circle of fly-drivers and 
touters for inns, and the verdict of that 
irregular jury was that Monsieur was a 
smuggler. 

** You'd have made a fortune on the 



I 



76 LADY PLAVIA. 

stage, captain,^' said Sergeant Skiimer, as 
the two went thumping and bumping along 
down the rough road in the jangling ill- 
hung omnibus. ^ To look at you, any chap 
might swear you were a regular salt." 

Durbec's smile was more melancholy than 
was usual when his vanity was fed with 
praise. - My friend," he said, - 1 am not 
acting now . at least the part comes natu- 
rally to me. I was bom on the shores of 

the Mediterranean, and I ahnost wish . 

But, bah ! I will not fatigue you with any 
sentiments." And he was silent, and almost 
sad. He was thinking of the little port of 
St Tropez, a thousand miles oflF, in simny 
Provence, where he had played with other 
barefooted urchins on the white beach. His 
father had been a fisherman there ; and his 
own earliest recollections were of tossing about 
in the great clumsy boat, with one large lateen 
sail, on the purple tumbling waves, and of 




THE OOMMESCIAL BOOM. 77 

screaming with fear when one of the men, 
who had caught a big eel of the conger sort, 
with rough playfuhiess tossed the struggling 
monster down at the feet of the pairons 
child. That was before he was drawn for 
the conscription ; before he ran away, and 
shipped on board the merchantman outward- 
bound for Egypt, and was beaten and 
starved, and caught the fever of the 
country; and finally, being discharged, ill 
and ragged, at MarseiUe, begged his way 
to Paris, and was picked up, half dead, on 
the stones outside the poKce prefecture. 

"The Bell^ gentlemen," said a waiter, 
opening the omnibus-door. The travellers 
alighted, and the luggage was unloaded 
from the roof. 

" Coffee or Commercial, sir ?" asked the 
waiter dubiously, flipping his napkin to and 
fro as he spoke. The English new-comer 
looked Commercial to the backbone ; but 



( 



78 LADY PLAVIA. 

the Frenchman was a riddle less easily read. 
However, Sergeant Skinner, whose name, 
as it appeared on his portmanteau and hag, 
was Wright, and his address Liverpool, 
promptly replied in favour of the Commer- 
cial Room ; but still the waiter hesitated ; 
and as the luggage was being carried past, 
on its way up-stairs, he Kngered with his 
hand on the lock of the rooih sacred to 
those who journey in the interests of trader 
and said confidentially : " Beg your pardon, 
sir, but is this gentleman Conmiercial too ? 
Because, sir, as you are aware, when other 
parties as are not themselves Commercial 
wish to use the Commercial Room, the 
Commercials always expect the compliment 
of their consent being asked first . as a 
matter of form." 

Sergeant Skinner, or rather Mr. Wright 
of Liverpool, chuckled with great enjoy- 
ment. "Captain," he said to his French 




THE CX)MMERCIAL ROOM. 79 

friend, who was volubly entreating the 
Boots of the hotel to be careful of his effects, 
** he wants to know whether you are Com- 
mercial or not. Pooh, pooh, young man, 
you may let us pass. Mounseer, there, is 
in a larger way of business than I am 
myself; but it's in his own line . his own 
line." 

And now they were both in the snug 
Commercial Room, where the blazing fire 
and flaring gas were not unwelcome on 
such a night, and where the waiter took 
their orders for some substantial refreshment 
to be prepared as soon as possible. There 
were three or four persons present whose 
right to the occupancy of their own pecu- 
liar saloon was indisputable. Most of 
these were shrewd hard-headed men from 
Lancashire, Birmingham, or Yorkshire ; but 
one was a Cockney of the raciest genus, one 
of those cheek-suited, sandy-whiskered little 



80 LADY FLAVIA. 

Londoners that John Leech sketched with 
no unkind pencil, and who advertise their 
quality hy dropping the letter h broadcast 
in their speech. 

**The 'eat, sir" . such were the words 
which the metropolitan Commercial was 
uttering, his back to the fire, and his eyes 
fixed on the best listener present . " the 
'eat was something horful : Hindia could 
not have been 'otter. The crush defies 
comparison; the Hold Bailey and New- 
gate Street, when a hexecution takes place, 
hexcepted. The 'ole hexcitement of the 
day was due to that rivalry between Miss 
Violet Vavasour" (at mention of which 
name the speaker smacked his lips, by way 
of a compliment to beauty) "and Lady 
Flavia Clare." 

Here some interruption was naturally 
caused by the entrance of Mr. Wright and 
his French companion, and the orator stirred 




THE COMMERCIAL ROOM. 81 

the fire with a wrathful growl, but was pro- 
pitiated by the respectful and silent attention 
with which both the invaders turned towards 
him, as if the sound of the noble name of 
Clare had been talismanic. 

The enemy of the letter A, who, except in 
respect to his systematic perversion of that 
member of the alphabet, was really a glib 
and fluent speaker, resumed his discourse : 
"This Slochester Fancy Fair, as I said 
before, was a tremendous success, a bumper 
house; but the hatmosphere was killing. 
Lots of ladies swooned dead away ; I helped 
to carry out half-a-dozen at least" (for poor 
Amy's fainting fit had been multiplied 
like FalstaflTs men in buckram) ; " and 
there that Lady Flavia stood, smiling and 
chaffing the young swells about her, and no 
more caring for the 'eat than if she had been 
a salamander. I take it she was used to 'ot 
rooms habroad, for you know, or, if you 

VOL. III. o 



82 LADY FLA VI A. 

don't, /do, that she was a concert-singer^ 
and on the stage, too, I believe, in Prance." 

** Do you know that for a fact ?" sneered 
one of the Birmingham men, or a Sheffield 
blade it may have been, across the room. 

" Know it ? Of course I do. Lady Flavia 
Clare's father, the late earl, turned 'er hout 
of doors when he divorced 'er mother. She 
had to get 'er bread as best she could. She's 
monstrous rich now ; governor made a new 
will. I know a good deal of 'er 'istory. 
You see I Ve a huncle in these parts, and I 
was down in November for a blaze at the 
birds. But I'm keeping the fire from you 
gents." And the kindly little man of 
Cockayne, who had been flattered by the 
deference with which the two new-comers 
drank in his words, made way for them to 
warm themselves, if so disposed. 

" Thank you," said Mr. Wright ; " we're 
quite comfortable. Coldish weather, though ; 



THE COMMERCIAL ROOM. 83 

nasty sort of thaw. I don't know this part 
of the country ; much business doing ?" 

Now this was a question that admitted of 
but one form of answer. If you ask a gold- 
digger, as he works waist-deep in pipeclay, 
forty feet below the surface, in his explora- 
tions of a sunken reef in Gipps Land, 
how he gets on in the auriferous line, what 
will be his reply ? Do you expect him to 
descant on rich wash-dirt and large nuggets, 
or to be expansive about the " pocket" of 
glittering spangles and yellow water-worn 
nodules that gladdened his eyes yesterday ? 
Will a merchant tell you that money is 
going a-begging, so to speak, in that Tom 
Tiddler's Ground, the City? Or will a 
genuine beggar frankly inform you that 
Belgravian cooks are charitable, and that 
Brompton ladies are becoming liberal of 
their small-change? Until this millenium 
of truth- telling, what need for a new com- 



84 LADY FLAVIA. 

mercial traveller to ask for information 
from his rivals already in possession of the 
circuit ? 

" Very slack," said one of the company. 
"Times bad; nothing doing," growled a 
second, " Hon^id hole ; benighted neigh- 
bourhood. A man throws away his time 
and his money to no purpose hereabouts,** 
authoritatively pronounced a third. 

The eyes of Mr. Wright twinkled merrily . 
" G-entlemen," he said, " I don't come among 
you to diminish your profits. I shan't take 
the wind out of your sails; we shan't 
clash at all, I'll warrant you." 

^ You don't travel in hardware ?" said one 
questioner. '' Nor buttons?" asked another ; 
" Nor Manchester piece-goods ?" " Nor 
woollens ?" cried two other anxious voices. 

No, Mr. Wright travelled in none of these 
lines. His was a fancy business, quite . a 
foreign commodity . a patent affair that had 



THE COMMERCIAL ROOM. 85 

better, ahein ! be kept secret for the present. 
But he pledged his honour not to sell, or try to 
sell, so much as a penknife, or a yard of ging- 
ham, or a gross of buttons, or an ell of cloth^ 
in Chartley, or Slochester, or Honeycombe ; 
and he gave the company free leave, in his 
jocular way, to tar and feather him, or to 
subject him to retaliatory discipline under 
the parish pump, if ever they caught him 
tmdermining their established connection; 
this sally being exceeding well received, 
Mr. Wright took the opportunity of intro- 
ducing to the worshipful society his foreign 
friend, Capitaine Goulot, of the French 
mercantile marine, who was desirous of 
setting up a dep&t in some thriving town in 
the west of England, for the sale of certain 
Algerian commodities which the captain's 
knowledge of North African markets en- 
abled him to import at a profit. And 
Captain Goulot soon spoke for himself, in 



86 LADY FLAVIA, 

tolerable English, garnished with a number 
of strange maritime oaths, and eked out by 
a perfect pantomime of shrugs, grins, bows, 
.and snappings of the fingers. He, the cap- 
tain, was transported to find himself so well 
received, here, in this vieille Angleterrej that 
he was now visiting for the first time. He 
admired the British character, so robust, so 
solid ; he liked the country ; he loved the 
ladies; all he could not praise was the 
climate, which was brumous and melan- 
cholic. But what mattered that? With 
our admirable ale, our gr-r-rog, our punch, 
we could defy the weather. Punch . it was 
an idea that : might he, he, Maxime 
Goulot, captain, late in command of the 
brig Cerfvolant^ of Cette, trading to Teutan, 
Oran, Algiers, Tunis, and Malta . might he 
have the felicity to pfier a bowl of punch to 
the honourable company ? Would they per- 
mit him ? They would ? . aA, bonheur ! 




THE COMMERCIAL ROOM. 87 

" Waiter ! a large bowl of punch au rhwii, 
and let it be blazing wiz fire !" 

The punch was brought; and at the 
same time the head-waiter came in to say 
that a gent had just come in, that the 
coffee-room fire was out, and perhaps the 
gentlemen would have no objection to 
letting the stranger come into the Com- 
mercial Boom. The gentlemen were pro- 
pitious, and the stranger was shown in. a 
little man, with light whiskers, and a face 
very much flushed with the combined 
effects of strong heady port and rapid 
motion through the cold night-air . the face 
of Mr. Ebenezer Hart, gentleman, attorney- 
at-law, and agent to Right Hon. the Earl of 
Mortlake. 



I 



88 LADY FLAVIA. 



CHAPTER V. 

HR. HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 

Nothing, at first sight, could have ap- 
peared more natural than Mr. Hart's 
appearance at the Bell^ Family and 
Commercial Hotels on the evening of that 
cold and wet day in the latter part of 
January which witnessed the arrival of two 
commercial travellers, hitherto unknown 
to the neighbourhood . Mr Wright and 
Capitaine Goulot. The lawyer had an 
uncle in the person of a rich farmer, 
who held nine hundred acres of Mr. Foss- 
dyke's best land, at a^conveniently low rent, 
and whose lease had yet fifteen years to 




MR. HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 89 

run. With this agriculturist, who was 
relatively a wealthier man than half the 
squires in the county, and whose orchards 
alone were worth an annual thousand in 
the worst years, Mr. Hart was accustomed 
to dine some three or four times a -year. 
Old Mr. Puckle was a bachelor and a hard 
drinker, very fond of telling long-winded 
stories of his own services in the yeomanry 
during the first years of this century ; and 
Mr. Hart could never get away from the 
hospitable board till a somewhat late hour. 
His uncle had so far complied with modem 
innovations as to dine at four instead of the 
old two o'clock meal of his early days ; but 
he liked to take what he called his " wet " 
afterwards ; and it took a great while, and 
no small quantity of liquor, to saturate the 
thirsty clay of the tough old Nestor. 

The Honeycombe coach, which in its 
devious course between Chartley, Laceton, 



90 LADY FLA VI A, 

St Mary's, Fallbrook, and the sea-coast 
could have deposited Mr. Hart within an 
easy distance of his own dwelling, had 
started hours ago ; wherefore the solicitor 
was in a manner constrained to sleep at the 
Bell Hotelj as he had frequently done 
before. The CoflFee-room being empty, 
the gas being turned down, and the fire 
extinct, it was plain that the lawyer's best 
chance of warmth, light, and conversation 
was to be found in requesting the entree of 
the Commercial Room. All this was very 
natural ; but it was not on every day of 
the year that Mr. Hart would have the 
pleasure of mixing in social intercourse 
with two bagmen, who travelled really, 
though not nominally, on behoof of Sir 
Richard and Monsieur the Police Prefect. 

Another coincidence. Mr. Robinson, the 
London Commercial, whose leading pecu- 
liarity it was to maltreat the letter A, 



MR, HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 91 

scowled sulkily when Mr, Hart's red face 
emerged from the shelter of the shawl and 
coat-coUar, and said: **How d'ye do?" 
very ungraciously ; for Mr. Hart's Uncle 
Puekle was also the Uncle Puckle of Mr. 
Robinson. They were cousins and hated 
one another in a manner that is hardly 
possible except among blood - relations. 
Each of the two knew that he had an 
eye to the old yeoman's savings, and each 
suspected the other of a wicked desire to 
supplant him in Mr. Puckle's good graces ; 
and on this account Cousin William and 
Cousin Ebenezer eyed one another with 
anything but affectionate regard. But 
though their greeting was a surly one, it 
was a greeting, and Mr. Robinson could 
not well help asking after the health of the 
veteran at Hordle Farm ; and as the Com- 
mercials discovered that Mr. Hart was 
related to one of their order, they were 



92 LADY FLAVIA- 

graciously pleased to vote him an honorary 
member, for the time being, of their 
fraternity, and spoke to him with much 
affability; and thus it fell out that Mr. 
Hart made one of the party who sat down to 
partake of Captain Q-oul6t's bowls of punch. 
There was no lack of merriment, but at 
first the Commercials rather preferred to 
listen than to talk. The jolly French 
merchant-captain was to them a wonder 
and a novelty. As he chirruped and gas- 
conaded, ladle in hand, pouring out the 
punch in generous profusion, boasting of 
his triumphs in love and war, swaggering, 
singing scraps of forecastle songs, murder- 
ing the Queen's English, and joining most 
good-humouredly in the laugh which his 
own blunders occasioned, he was, as the 
Birmingham man of buttons observed, "as 
good as a play; but presently . no one 
could exactly say how . the two nephews 




MR. HART TELLS AIJL HE KNOWS, 93 

of Mr. Puckle were pitted against one 
another as conversational fighting-cocks, 
each doing his very best to outcrow his 
kindred enemy ; and the subject on which 
the cousins vied with each other was simply 
which should exhibit the profoundest infor- 
mation with respect to Lady Flavia Clare. 
Mr. Wright (of Liverpool) and his French 
friend were extremely interested in the 
competition. 

" I say she was a concert-singer, or some- 
thing of the sort," said Mr. Eobinson ; " she 
'aidn't a sixpence, nor the ghost of one, till 
the hearl changed his mind, just before he 
went hoflF the *ooks." 

** Pooh, pooh ! . rubbish I" ejaculated Lord 
Mortlake's agent, with an air of serene 
superiority. "Flatter myseli^ in my re- 
sponsible position with regard to the 
family, I know rather better than to give 
in to such a cock-and-bull story as that." 



94 LADY PLAVIA. 

** Cock-and-bull story you call it* I 'ad 
it from the governor straight. Tell 'im the 
story's a cock-and-bull story, if you dare, 
Mr. 'Art," was the answer ; and thereupon 
followed a wordy war, which at one time 
threatened to degenerate into a pugilistic 
encounter, but was happily confined, by the 
intervention of friends, to a trial of moral 
force alone. However, Mr. Hart, who had 
been the least willing of the two to submit 
the chronic feud between the cousins to the 
wager of battle, was continually recurring 
to the subject of dispute. He not only gave 
an emphatic denial to Mr. Robinson's asser- 
tion that Lady Flavia was on the point of 
being married to **Lord 'Ithe," but he 
hinted that he, and he alone, could furnish 
a key to the mysterious romance which 
seemed to surround the daughter and 
heiress of Earl Francis. But Mr. Hart 
would do no more than hint ; he shook his 



MR. HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 95 

head with tipsy gravity, and decUned to be 
explicit. 

The punch sank gradually to a lower and 

lower level in the bowl, and more punch 

was called for. It was very late, and the 

waiter looked in at intervals of fifteen 

minutes or so, yawning, as if he hoped, by 

force of sympathy, to biologise every one 

into feeling sleepy and going to bed. By 

half-past eleven the commercial gentlemen 

began to grow drowsy, or they prudently 

thought they had imbibed enough of the 

punch, and had better sleep oif its fumes, to 

be ready for the duties of to-morrow. One 

by one they took their flat candlesticks and 

departed. The last of the party left at the 

table were Lord Mortlake's agent, his 

inimical cousin, and the new-comers who 

travelled for Scotland Yard and the Rue 

Jerusalem. 

The French sea-captain was in wonderful 



9C LADY FLAVIA. 

spirits : he would insist upon pulling little 
coral charms, and sequins, and gold Moorish 
mitzakels, and queer scraps of embroidery, 
out of his deep coat-pockets, and passing 
them round for inspection. He would sing 
songs, that for aught the hearers knew, 
might be Moorish too, but which sounded 
jovial and reckless. He had eaten his sup- 
per . ^the cold beef (" saignant, as you love 
it, you English"), the chicken, and ham, 
with hearty appetite. He had not swallowed 
above a third of the amount of punch that 
had been taken oflF by even the most tempe- 
rate of the others, but he had seemed to 
drink incessantly. When a man flourishes 
his glass, and trolls out Bacchanalian ditties, 
and glows rubicund, Uke a reformed Silenus, 
over his potations, it is difficult for even a 
keen-eyed observer to be aware that he sips 
instead of drinking, 

Mr. Wright of Liverpool, yawned and 




MR. HABT TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 97 

stretclied his arms in a manner that moved 
the envy of the waiter. " I'm dog-tired, 
Gonlot," he said, **and I've got to be early 
up ; I'll say good-night, old fellow !" And 
up he rose, and so did Mr. Eobinson, whose 
memory had been refreshed as to the fact 
that he, too, must be early astir. But 
Captain Goulot, who had taken a great 
fency to Mr. Hart, would not hear of part- 
ing from his new friend until they should 
have finished the punch. There was still a 
steaming pool of the fragrant liquid at the 
bottom of the bowl. The night was young 
yet. Why go to bed h si bonne heure? But 
Mr. Wright and Mr. Eobinson would not 
stay, and they took their brass candlesticks, 
and left the room. 

Mr. Hart never knew in after-days how 
it was that he came to be so very confiden- 
tial with the French captain. He was not 
naturally given to put faith in strangers, 

VOL. III. H 



98 LADY FLAVIA. 

and it was probably due to the strong fruity 
vintage that his hospitable uncle denomi- 
nated " black strap," capped by the smok- 
ing brew of inn-punch, that the lawyer's 
tongue wagged with such unusual freedom. 
But the inebriate have not seldom a tipsy 
caution that prevents them from blabbing 
what they feel that it would be safer to 
keep back ; and but for Mr. Hart's rivalry 
with his detested cousin, he would most 
likely have resisted the temptation to prove 
how extensive was his information respect- 
ing the Mortlake family. As it was, he soon 
found himself talking to Captain Goulot as 
if the latter had been his sworn brother. 

*' That fellow Eobinson . thnob, you 
know ; ithn't he ? Motht offenthive idiot, / 
call him," stammered the lawyer. Mr. Hart 
did not lisp in general, tat the strc^g drink 
that had muddled his brain was confusing 
his labials and sibilants dreadfully. A 



MB. HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 99 

minute more, and Captain Goiil6t was 
listening to details of the London nephew's 
mercenary wiles for the conciliation of 
Uncle Puckle, strangely mixed up with 
assurances that Mr. Eobinson knew no- 
thing of Lady Flavia Clare; while Mr, 
Hart knew a great deal, and could tell it if 
he pleased. 

And Mr. Hart did please, premising that 
the Frenchman was a "regular goo' fellow," 
to relate what he knew. As for Lady 
Flavia's bringing up, he said, truly enough, 
there was no mystery in that. My lord 
had provided carefully for her education at 
a French convent, and she had come straight 
home in obedience to his summons. Still, 
there was something odd about her conduct, 
artful as that conduct was, and little as any 
one suspected her. She was not a bit like 
other young ladies. She had no ordinary 
feminine tastes and habits . did not teach 



100 lADT FULTIA. 

at the sc1k)o]3 did not iUnminate prayer- 
books^ or work slippers for curates, or em- 
lx>ider screens for a reredos, or photograph 
her Mends. Xor was she exactly a flirt. 
Nobody knew what to make of her. The 
poor, certainly, did not understand her. 
They were used to be visited by young 
ladies, who listened patiently to their com- 
plaints, lectured them seTcrely on moral 
and sanitary subjects, and were moderately 
Uberal in the distribution of blankets, soup, 
and shillings. But Lady Flavia Glare 
would not hearken at all to details of rheu- 
matism, marital drunkenness, and the mis- 
conduct of children. She did not scold. 
Her bounty did more harm than good. 
She flung her gold about broadcast, as a 
bucaneer might have done. 

" Would Captain Groulot believe it ? She 
had given . hundred poundsh . drunken 
rashcal . Benjamin Haynes . gamekeeper . 




MR. HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 101 

and he bragged that he could get . ^mush 
more . ^for the ashking for 't." 

By this time, Mr. Hart's hand was very 
unsteady, and he spilled the punch as he 
attempted to refill his glass. The foreigner 
politely ladled him out a fresh supply. 
** Comment 1 a hundred pounds ! cent livres 
sterling t for a cadeau to a gamekeeper ! 
But it is Oriental munificence that ! They 
are wonderftd people . they throw gold 
about as if it were pebbles . your English 
aristocrats," cried the captain, arching his 
eyebrows, and holding up both his out- 
spread hands, on the fingers of which 
the silver rings glistened. But Mr. Hart 
winked and blinked in a manner that was 
meant to be exceedingly knowing. He 
hiccoughed out an assurance that the pre- 
sent which Haynes had received was no 
gift, but a bribe for secrecy; and tiiat he 
had learned that the keeper's companions 



102 LADY FULVIA. 

at the beer-fihop were in the habit of indue- 
ing him to stand treat by flattering him on 
the score of his occult influence over the 
heiress. Also Mr. Hart related how Lady 
Flavia Glare was drawing considerable 
sums of money from her trustees, to the 
annoyance of Lord Mortlake. Also how 
he, Mr. Hart, had encountered Lady Flavia 
in the home plantation, at the foot of the 
old sycamore-tree, on a day of snow-storm, 
and how he had espied her, for once, with 
her mask off. 

By this time, Mr. Hart's dazzled eyes 
saw before them two Captain Goulots, two 
punch-bowls, and a plurality of glasses ; 
and presently it was necessary that his 
French friend and the waiter should unite 
their efforts to lead the attorney to his 
room, where they left him. As Captain 
Groulot passed down the long passage that 
led to his own chamber, humming a tune 




MR. HART TELLS ALL HE KNOWS. 103 

as he went, one of the little numbered doors 
was cautiously opened, and Mr. Wright of 
Liverpool put his head out. ** Grood-night ! " 
said he, " anything new ?" 

" I think so, my dear colleague. I have 
learned something; va! We shall cage 
the pretty bird, yet, mon cherl Good- 
night, and pleasant dreams !" 



104 LADY FLA VIA. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 

'' I MiOHT escape. I might flee before the 
storm bursts, and be safe and free. I might 
teke warning by him. He was rash and 
headstrong, and he is dead. Dead ! Is my 
own life likely to be a long one ?" 

It was an inveterate habit with her, that 
trick of talking aloud. It is a habit that 
perhaps belongs to only two classes of sane 
persons . students who live in the silent 
company of their books, and schemers who 
dare not trust the secrets of their hearts to 
any ear but their own. It was not often 
that Lady Flavia Clare indulged herself in 




THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 105 

this dangeroiiB luxury, but when she did so, 
she felt less utterly done than at other 
times. She stood now before the mirror 
on her toilet-table. She was ready dressed 
for the usual afternoon drive. Her maid 
had left her, and she had drawn a news- 
paper forth from its hiding-place in the 
splendid old Louis XY. cabinet, the same 
cabinet in which she kept the little oaken 
box that looked like a medicine-chest, and 
in which the miniature had been found. 
This newspaper was the county news- 
paper. It had arrived that morning, and 
had received the lukewarm welcome which 
provincial journals generally receive. Its 
cream of local news had been skimmed off 
at a glance ; and the rest of the paper, 
chiefly composed of extracts from metro- 
politan periodicals, had been ignored "as of 
no account Lord Hythe had glanced at 
it; so had the earl; so had the countess. 



106 LADY PLAVIA. 

Lady Flavia had held it in her hand for one 
short moment, and in that moment her eye 
had lighted upon a paragraph, not of local 
intelligence, that had suflScient interest to 
stop the beating of her heart, and to glare 
before her startied eyes as if the printer's 
ink had been phosphorus. No one, not 
even Lord Hythe, had seen the momentary 
signs of emotion which the heiress evinced. 
She walked to the window, carrying the 
paper carelessly, and read the paragraph 
again ; and the journal, never asked for or 
sought for again, vanished from amidst the 
heap of papers down-stairs, and here it was 
in Lady Plavia's keeping, as she for the 
third and fourth time perused the printed 
words that had affected her so powerfully. 
The paragraph was an extract from a 
London paper ; and it gave a tolerably ac- 
curate account of the affray at the Ch&teau 
des Eoches and ite sanguinary results. 




THE FOREIGN PBDLER. 107 

Even the shrewdest official cannot always 
succeed in blindfolding the Argus eyes, and 
stopping the Hydra mouths of the press. 
The French papers had kept faith with the 
authorities. They had been mute, as they 
are apt to be when cholera or small-pox 
stalks abroad, when workmen are out of 
employ and bread, or when any one has 
been oppressed on non-political grounds. 
There was a tacit compact between them 
and their censors that they should make 
public nothing tliat niight prove disagree- 
able to the Panglosses of imperialism. 

But a young English artist, studying art 
in Paris, and living with the merry Bo- 
hemians of artistic Lutetia^ earned an 
addition to his allowance by acting as occa- 
sional correspondent to a penny paper in 
London. He had lately paid a visit to an 
iaunt of his, a member of the economical 
English community at St. Germain, and 



108 LADY PLAVIA. 

there he had necessarily heard a great deal 
of the recent tragedy. The EngKsh exiles 
of that once royal town talked of little else, 
and had written many a letter about it to 
their friends in England, but none of their 
friends had any connection with literature, 
and the affaire Royston was still in the 
obscurity of manuscript. The young artist 
drew up a long account of the skirmish at 
the chateau, hazarding several ingenious 
hypotheses of the original offence for which 
Mr. Eoyston was arrested, and giving all 
the names with perfect accuracy. The 
unrelenting Bhadamanthus of the penny 
paper had cut down this contribution to a 
paragraph of a dozen lines, but in its 
clipped condition it went the round of the 
British provincial press. It was tolerably 
faithful to facts, and though it described 
the squire as an illicit manufacturer of 
gunpowder, and gave his name as Eol- 




THE FOBEIGN PEDLER. 109 

liston, instead of Boyston, there was no 
mistaking the well-known localities of St. 
Germain and G-rtenez-Vignoble. And this 
was the intelligence that Lady Flavia Clare 
had read four times over, until she could 
have repeated every syllable of its con- 
tents. 

"I might escape!" she said again, and 
her lovely little face was thoughtful and 
grave as that of a girl who ponders over 
her first oflFer, as she spoke : " I might 
escape. I have money ; 1 have youth and 
health, and my wits. There is money in 
the Slochester Bank, a thousand pounds 
and more. I have nearly two hundred 
here. I could flee. I should not stand a 
b^gar on the quay of New York, or on 
the quay of Melbourne. And then, if I 
escaped pursuit, a new life ! A new life . 
it is the culprit's day-dream. But am I a 
culprit . I . Lady Flavia Clare? Let by- 



i 



110 LADY FLAVIA. 

gones be bygones, and let me start afresli 
in America, or in Australia, with a new 
name, new hopes. Ah ! can self be thrown 
oflF so easily? . ^What should I be in the 
rongh life of the New World . ^I, the very 
creatore and creation of the Old? My 
poor money would soon be gone. The 
Irish drudges would outbid me in the 
market for toil. I could not work, and 
what remains ? Governess, actress, wife. 
I the wife of a down, of some lucky digger 
fresh from Ballarat, of a hard nasal-voiced 
Yankee !" 

She walked to and fro, like a panther 
caged, fierce, lithe, stealthy. The soft foot- 
fall, the peculiar step, that neither minced 
nor tripped, royally firm, and yet so elastic, 
were the attributes of an elf-queen rather 
than a woman. Anger never took so pretty 
a shape before. Fear never assumed so fair 
a guise. But in her case there was no true 



THE FOREIGN PEDLEB. Ill 

fear. Her strong mind, her strong nerves, 

battled with her sensitive instinct of self- 

* 

preservation, and she felt more wrath than 
alarm as she scanned the dark past and the 
darker future. 

** Flavia, love ! Flavia . may I come 
in?" and the speaker knocked for the 
second time, and her voice was the voice of 
Lady Caroline Clare. In an instant Lady 
Flavians face changed. The old look of 
pain, of dark thought, and wounded pride, 
had passed away. The happy, dearly-loved 
girl, heiress of five manors, and cynosure of 
all eyes, passed out of the door, and kissed 
her cousin with the utmost affection, blam- 
ing herself for the delay. " And I have 
given you the trouble of coming to fetch 
me. Never mind, dear. I am going to 
mend my ways ; you will not wait for me 
many times more, Caroline." 

There was a strangeness in her tone that 



112 UUir FLATIA. 

jarred on Gardme's ear ; and Caroline was 
realty fond of her kuuBwoman. She was 
veiy soft-hearted, and there were tears in 
her eyes as she replkd: '^What have I 
done, dear? Tm sore Tm very sorry 

if "" 

The impetoons little heanty to whom she 
spoke stood ahnost npon tiptoe to kiss her. 
" Carohne !" she said, " if I were poor, and 
despised, and spoken ill of hy all . ^if I had 

as you see it now . ^would yon care for me 
then ? Would yon let me kiss you, then, 
dearr 

** Yes, I would," said Lady Caroline, with 
perfect sincerity, and she looked at her 
beautiful little cousin through her great 
oxlike eyes, and wondered what she meant 
by talking thus. Lady Caroline Clare was 
quite honest. At first, no doubt, she and 
her sister had been influenced by the wealth 




THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 11 



o 



of the late earl's daughter in their desire to 
see her married to Lord Hythe ; but now 
Lady Caroline had learned to care for this 
sweet little wilful darling for her own sake. 
If she still wished to promote the match 
between her brother and the heiress, it was 
not because of the expediency of keeping 
the property together. If Flavia had been 
poor, Caroline would still have been her 
friend and slave. The strong, brilliant 
nature had taken its ascendancy as such 
natures are apt to do. 

Yet, as the pony carriage, drawn by the 
miniature pair of mettled black steeds, rolled 
away down the park. Lady Flavia and her 
cousin, side by side, smiling, conversing, were 
as far apart as the poles. The simple, kindly, 
decorous daughter of the present earl could 
hardly have realised the dark thoughts of 
her kinswoman. She found herself talking 
of Hythe, and had no conception that her 

VOL. III. I 



114 LADY FLAVIA. 

companion had touched the key-note to 
which her words were in a measure com- 
pelled to answer. Hythe was thoughtful, 
distrait, out of spirits, his sister said. He 
insisted on going np to London at the 
opening of Parliament. He was evidently- 
eager to get away from Harbledown. It 
was all naughty Flavians fault. 

Naughty Flavia, on her part, had her 
own train of fast-flying thoughts. " Hythe 
will not marry me" . she thought . ^*'will 
not ask me again to be his wife. He it is 
who is really the judge to condemn me. 
In every look, and tone, and gesture, I can 
read his coldness and suspicion. Yet he 

would have loved me, if But he is 

right ; he does right in shunning me. I 
have tried to win him back, stooping to 
lures that I scorned, and that he scorned . 
the old weapons of smile and sigh, and 
spoken word, and the droop of an eyelid . 



THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 115 

the snares that were known before Delilah's 
day. All in vain. He keeps aloof. He 
was my only real chancy of safety. As his 
wife, I should have been safe, at least from 
what newspaper reporters call- the last sen- 
tence of the law. They must all have stood 
by me then. The future peeress could not 
be left to her fate as I shall be." 

And even as her mind was busied thus, 
she was smilingly listening to her com- 
panion's prattle, and laying the light whip- 
lash caressingly over the arching necks of 
her ponies. The ponies, all alive to the 
influence of the bright sun and bracing air, 
would have dashed off at speed if they had 
not been reined in by a hand at once gentle 
and firm. 

The weather, indeed, was such as would 
warrant the praises which Charles I. be- 
stowed upon our English climate. It was 
January, but the pale blue sky glittered like 



I 



116 ' LADY FLAVIA. 

a sapphire, flecked all over as it was by the 
golden sunbeams. The bright, kindly winter 
sun, freed from clouds, did its best to light 
up the green, brown, and russet-red tints 
of lawn and tree. The rabbits were out, 
sunning themselves in front of their bur- 
rows; their long ears were visible above 
the crisp brown fern. The deer stalked in 
Indian file across the uplands, or browsed be- 
neath the beech-trees, where the grass was 
tender yet. The birds sang shrilly ; a tribe 
of purple-breasted starlings were cheeping 
from the gnarled bough of one of the giant 
oaks. There was no snow left, except in 
certain shaded nooks, whence the gleam of 
a white drift, " waiting for more," as gossips 
said, threatened a fresh outburst of winter. 
Otherwise, all nature seemed to be joyous 
in the sweet promise of the friendly sun- 
shine, joyous and trustful in the coming 
spring and the rich, jocund summer. 



THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 117 

Even Lady Flavia Clare, whose mind 
was busy with darker meditations than had 
ever troubled even the dreams of the comely 
yoimg woman at her side, was soothed by 
the soft murmur of joy and hope that field, 
and wood, and wild, moor and forest, com- 
bined to whisper to every ear that cared to 
listen. Already, as old weatherwise men 
were wont to say, " the neck of the winter 
was broken." A few coy primroses had 
been gathered among the deep lanes that 
seam the face of the west country. Soon 
the snow-drops would show their pure 
beauty above the dark earth; soon there 
would be tufted violets in niches among the 
roots of the forest trees; soon, again, the 
fresh, rich love-song of the lark would be 
trilled forth between heaven and earth, 
gush after gush of the world-old song 
falling on the ear, long after the bird was 
lost in the dazzling blue. 



118 LADY FLAVIA. 

'* It cannot be," thought the girl, as with 
queenly carelessness she shook back the 
splendour of her raven hair, and as her 
loveliness seemed to acquire a new charm 
finom the ^Hurkle of the winter sunlight . 
^ it cannot be that I shall have no share of 
the new year ! It cannot be that the snow- 
drops are to peep forth, and the blue violets 
to bloom, and bird, and leaf, and flower, to 
form a court for the Spring, and I be cold 
and dead. It cannot be. I am not old yet. 
There must be more life for me." 

For it is very hard for the young to con- 
template death. The young are the inheri- 
tors of the earth. It is very, very hard for 
them to leave the beautiful bright sky and 
the glowing promise of the future. Lady 
Flavia Clare, with her warm, young Kfe 
stirring in her veins, was almost incredulous 
as to death. How could she die as yet? 
She was so young. 



THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 11'^. 

How could she know that far away, in a 
room of a Palace of Justice, near the wind- 
ing Seine, a spider was spinning his web, 
mesh upon mesh, thread upon thread, and 
that this frightful Arachne, embodied in the 
white neckclothed form of M. Duvillers- 
Hardouin, Procureur Imperial at Versailles, 
sat watching the gauzy wings and bright 
colours of a pretty little fly named Lady 
Flavia Clare ! How should she know that 
in Paris, in the gloomy quarter of the 
Marais, a sad-eyed, heavy-browed man, 
whose name was Sanson^ and whose fore- 
fathers had eaten bread bought by blood- 
shedding, under warrant of law, for cen- 
turies past, was at that moment inspecting 
a Thing that was kept in a locked-up shed, 
beneath his ofiScial residence. It was old, 
and crazy, and broken, this thing, made of 
dull red planks, that were stained, splint- 
ered, rotten, and of blue bright steel, that 



120 LADY PLAVIA. 

bore a fine polish, but was notched and 
worn. 

Not a workman in Paris could be bribed 
by money or liquor to mend this thing. No 
carpenter would knock a nail into the foul 
old wood, or clamp new props to the failing 
timbers. Ragged, hungry men, out of 
work, out of food, home, character, had 
been coaxed with promises and df ams to 
come and undertake a well-paid job for an 
unknown employer; but when they had 
found what that well-paid job implied, the 
ragged, foodless, friendless workman had 
flung back hammer and chisel into the 
straw wallet at his back, and had turned 
loathingly on his heel, with a curse on 
Chariot and his accursed machine. Chariot 
is the French version of our English Jack 
Ketch. M. Sanson is Calcraft. The thing, 
the hideous toy, with black stains of old 
blood on its vile old timbers, is the guillo- 



THE FOREIGN PEDLER, 121 

tine. It was made in the furious saturnalia 
of the Reign of Terror, Some of that gore 
upon it was perhaps drawn from the veins 
of Robespierre's victims. It has drunk 
much blood, innocent and guilty . that of 
Lesurques, of Madame Roland, of Papivoine, 
who was mad, of the Girondins, of the four 
sergeants of La Rochelle. The executioner 
taps it with his hammer. He handles its 
frail wood-work cautiously. It hangs to- 
gether, but that is all. The headsman and 
his men cobble it up as best they may. If 
it were destroyed, the construction of its 
successor might cost even the Elected of 
the millions some trouble. It will perhaps 
last as long as capital punishment may en- 
dure. The executioner has had a hint from 
St. Germain . a great trial and condem- 
nation may be looked for : he is getting the 
guillotine ready for Lady Flavia Clare. 
The park of Harbledown is large, and 



122 LADY FLA VIA. 

by the time the gate-lodge was in sight, 
Lady Flavia's spirits had risen, and her 
mind was free from the black cloud of care. 
Care was not natural to her. She shook it 
oflF like an unwelcome load ; she talked with 
animation, all the more volubly, perhaps, 
for fear the unbidden thoughts should come 
back. Lady Caroline laughed and admired. 
She could not always understand what her 
young cousin said, but how clever it was ! 
She gloried beforehand in the success of 
Lady Flavia's first appearance in the coming 
season in town. There was surely no such 
face, no such faultless grace, nor any such 
quick brilliancy of mind, in London. And 
Flavia had her fortune, and her pride, which 
was no vulgar pride in money or station. 
Her kinswoman anticipated the triumphs of 
the next May, when the convent-bred girl 
should throw all the reigning beauties of 
Belgravia into the cold shadow of neglect. 




THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 123 

Now, there is a blue ribbon of the ball- 
room as well as a blue ribbon of the 
turf. The fiamily that can boast of num- 
bering among its members the belle of a 
London season, is not less elated by good- 
fortune than is the lucky owner of a Derby 
winner. The hope of re-imiting the Mort- 
lake estates by a marriage was waxing dim ; 
but the Clares felt assured that Lady Flavia 
oould not &il to make some grand alliance, 
that would shed reflected light upon the 
noble House from which she sprang. There 
was a wide abyss between the thoughts of 
Lady Caroline and those of her cousin. 

" How very odd ! Look, Flavia, at those 
people!" exclaimed Lady Caroline, as the 
carriage suddenly came in sight of two 
persons standing beside a gig that had been 
daawn aside from the road, and stood on 
the turf, beneath an oak-tree, the horse 
bending his neck forward jerkingly to 



124 LADY FIAVIA. 

snatch a mouthful of the delicate venison 
grass of the park. There were bundles 
and packages on the seat and on the foot- 
board of the gig, on which vehicle were 
painted in thin white letters the name and 
address of the Chartley innkeeper. The 
two persons who were conversing so earn- 
estly that they had not heard the approach- 
ing carriage till it was abreast of them, 
were a man and a woman. The latter, 
evidently a maid-servant by her dress, was 
holding the comer of a gaudy yellow- 
patterned shawl between her finger and 
thumb, as she gazed upon it with covetous 
eyes. But when she looked up and saw the 
carriage and its occupants, she shrank back 
with a shrill exclamation of alarm, and 
scuttled off like a frightened rabbit to the 
shelter of a clump of gnarled hawthorn- 
trees that skirted a pool hard by. 

The man' stood his ground. He was a 




THE FOREIGN PEDLER. 125 

swarthy fellow, as dark as a gipsy, with 
earrings, and a flaring red handkerchief 
tied in sailor fashion ahout his neck. His 
clothes were as foreign in their style as his 
keen brown face, and as he took off his hat 
with a flourish, in compliment to the two 
ladies, his sharp teeth, white and pointed as 
a wolfs, glistened between his bearded lips. 
The carriage passed on. 

" A strange-looking man that foreigner," 
observed Lady Caroline ; " I suspect he is 
some sort of pedler, tempting the maids to 
spend their little savings in finery and trash, 
I wonder which of the servants that was . 
if I knew, I should mention to Benson that 
we found her with that person in the park, 
and evidently aware that she was doing 
wrong to meet him there, or she would not 
have run away when she saw us. Don't 
you think it was Jane ?" 

** I don't know. Who is Jane ?" answered 



126 LADY FLAVIA. 

Lady Flavia, hardly aware what she said, 
for the sight of the swarthy foreigner had 
aroused a thousand shadowy dreams of evil 
in her haunted mind. And no more was 
said on the subject. Lady Flavia might 
have been more interested in the maid- 
servant's identity, had she known that the 
Jane in question was the daughter of Ben- 
jamin Haynes, the earl's head^keeper, and 
her own chosen instrument. 



12 



CHAPTER VII. 



AT THE BEER-SHOP. 



" Father 'd kill me, if he knew !" She was 
a good-looking girl who spoke . a girl with 
glossy black hair tinder her straw-bonnet, 
and wearing bright ribbons and artificial 
flowers that displeased Mrs. Benson sorely. 
A smart, qnick^yed girl, fond of dress, fond 
of ornament, but fearful of displeasure that 
took the form of * carpetings,* month's 
warnings, and dismissals, was Jane Haynes. 
Fear^, also, of displeasure that assumed a 
ruder shape ; afraid of strength, indeed, 
however it might be made manifest. 
Father 'd kill me, if he knew !" And yet 



128 LADY FLAVIA. 

Jane Haynes, fourth housemaid at Harble- 
down, hovered around the Frenchman's gig 
like a wasp buzzing about a honey-jar. 
She covld not tear herself away from the 
tempting finery that had been shown to her 
as a bait. She had come back from among 
the hawthorns, when once the pony-carriage 
was clear of the park gates, an,d there she 
stood, irresolute, with her red Hps, and her 
black hair, and her quick hazel eyes shining 
like the eyes of an intelligent dog, as she 
hovered around the foreigner and his gig, 
and his stock in trade. 

^* Tron de VairT muttered Captain 
Goul6t, otherwise Louis Durbec of the 
French police . '' Tron de Vair /" and the 
Proven9al oath rolled naturally off his 
southern tongue, as he watched the last 
flutter of the feathered hats in the distance ; 
" I did not think how beautiful was the 
game I was hunting. It is a fay, that. It 



AT THE BEEB-BHOP. 129 

is not a creature of flesh and blood, like 
others . bah ! I could fancy a man selling 
his life and his hopes for one smile of such 
a woman as that. What are they made of, 
then, these Englishmen, that she has no 
husband, no lover, no one to be on her side 
in the. cruel time that is coming ? Bagasse I 
Is it my fault? I saw her start like a 
frightened deer upon the hill ; she knew, 
when our eyes met, that my coming boded 
her no good. But how marble calm her 
sweet yoimg face became ; how cold was the 
pride of her dauntiess blue eyes! That 
young girl has the heart of a Hon. She is 
not conquered yet." And for a moment a 
sort of apprehension crept over the man^s 
bold heart, as he thought that even in the 
moment of success the prey might escape 
his grasp. He was used to deal with vulgar 
criminals, and had learned to despise the dull 
fetuity of guilt. He had never before seen 

VOL. ni. K 



130 LADY FLAVIA. 

 

such a face as Lady Flavia's belonging to 
one over whom suspicion brooded so darkly ; 
and for an instant a vague idea that she 
might be innocent, that the chain of evidence 
against her was tarnished by error, dawned 
upon his mind. But no ! the proofs were 
too clear. 

" Mounseer whatever's your name ! if you 
don't attend to me I shall be off home. I've 
lost my place already, as Hke as not," 
ejaculated Miss Jane Haynes, looking exces- 
sively inclined to cry. 

Captain Goul6t turned, and took oflF his 
hat. " Pardon^ Mademoiselle ! Our little 
conversation was interrupted only for the 
moment. If you would like again to inspect 
the shawl, or the brooch, or the embroidered 
jacket from Oran, worked in gold and floss- 
silk by the women of the tribe of Beni FKta, 
I would " 

*' I can't afibrd to pay for 'em, and you 




AT THE BEER-BHOP. 131 

don't give no credit, you higglers and 
hawkers, and what not, as 'spectable shops 
do,'' said the under-housemaid very tartly ; 
** so I don't see what's the good of my look- 
ing any more at your trumpery, that I 
dare say I could get for half the money in 
Slochester." 

The captain did but answer by means of 
a shrug, but that shrug spoke volumes . 
shoulders, mouth, and eyebrows all co- 
operated in that expressive gesture ; and 
then the Frenchman began to pack up his 
bales, but so awkwardly, that he opened 
more folds of the external cloth than he. 
closed, and gleams of yellow, blue, pink, and 
white, of silk, wool, brass, silver, and gold 
shone provokingly out, and dazzled the eyes 
of Jane Haynes. The fourth housemaid at 
Harbledown could hold out no more ; she 
Kfted her apron to her eyes, and began to 
whimper : " It's a shame, that it is, to 



132 LADY FLAVIA. 

tempt a poor girl like me by the promise of 
a bargain, and then to clap on such a price 
as that. But I should like to wear that 
yellow shawl next Sunday. Bob says . but 
he's so foolish . ^yellow suits me best of all." 
Here the girl stopped, bridKng, and looking 
out for a compliment. It had occurred to 
her more than once that a little flirtation 
with the chapman would probably influence 
the market rates, and she had tried the 
artillery of her hazel eyes and pouting red 
lips upon this queer French dealer in 
feminine finery. But Captain Goulot was 
proof against this kind of assault and 
battery ; he was a man of the world, and 
not scrupulous ; and he saw that in this case 
his cue was to be as cold as ice, and as hard 
as adamant. He contented himself with 
saying that the shawl would suit Mademoi- 
selle a ravir. Shawl, and silk, and trinkets 
would all be at the disposal of Jane Haynes, 




AT THE BEER-SHOP. 133 

if she would but make over to him that 
miniature of which she had spoken, and if 
the pearls of the setting were real pearls. 

"** Well/' said Jane, changing colour, " I 
don't like to let the things go : and I can't 
pay. My wages won't be due till next 
month, and I owe that odious Susan thirty 
shillings. If I could get the picture safely 
. ^I told you before about the picture . how 
father gave it me, and how he asked for it 
back again ; and how he threatened, if ever 
I spoke of it, he'd wring my neck round 
like a pullet's. I'm father's favourite child ; 
but I don't care to anger him. He's awful 
uneasy about anything that has to do with 
my Lady Flavia. He says, father does, 
she's sure to bring him to the gallows. 
But I don't know what I'm saying. Any- 
way, I durstn't bring you the picture." 

" Voyom done /" said the Frenchman, as 
he managed to put the famous yellow shawl 



134 LADY FLAVIA. 

in a more tempting light ; " let us see, 
Mademoiselle, how we stand. Here is a 
little picture, which your Miss . ^nay, Miladi 
yonder . threw away, or, at any rate, flung 
into the hollow tree, whence Monsieur your 
father very sensibly extracted it. The 
miniature, which is set, you tell me, with 
pearls, is more your property than that of 
Monsieur Haynes, as he gave it you. 
Monsieur Haynes, it appears, has some 
scruples as to selling it. Bah! absurd 
scruples. You are a young lady of sense ; 
you see how much better are a gold brooch, 
from Paris, fabrique Bobichon, Boulevard 
Montmartre, a silk of Lyon, the new fashion- 
able colour, glossy, supple, and the wide 
width, a shawl from the Indies fit for a 
sultana, quoi I and a bunch of lovely Neapo- 
litan charms, such as Lady Julia wears.." 
" I'll have il^ril have them all. You 
shall have the picture ; and father may 




AT THE BEER-SHOP. 135 

wring my neck if he chooses," said the girl, 
with a sudden tightening of her red lips, 
and a sudden flash of her hazel eyes. Her 
mind was made up. To pay for the trea- 
sures which Captain Gk)ul6t spread before 
her dazzled eyes, she would run the needful 
risk ; she would risk the physical penalties 
. ^for the moral ones she cared nothing . of 
filial disobedience. She knew in which 
cupboard her grim parent kept the minia- 
ture that Lady Flavia Clare had hidden in 
the hollow of the old sycamore-tree. She 
would watch her opportunity, would possess 
herself of the prize, which, as having been 
a gift to her, though afterwards taken back, 
she could in some measure consider as her 
own; and she appointed to meet the 
Frenchman at a certain hour, at the guide- 
post on the moorland road that skirted the 
northern side of the park palings, to ex- 
change the miniature and its pearls for the 



136 LADY PLAVIA. 

tempting gauds that were worth the risk of 
rough usage. 

" One condition more to the bargain, ma 
belle J a kiss !'' said Captain Goul6t. But he 
exacted the salute in question with much 
cookiess, and rather as a matter of form 
than otherwise, and looked relieved when 
Jane Haynes vanished among the haw- 
thorns and Spanish chestnuts of the higher 
slopes of the park. 

" Va ! daughter of the horse-leech 1" 
cried the G^ul, as he gathered up the reins, 
and led the horse towards the road ; ^'pourvu 
that thy greediness conquers thy cowardice, 
ma mie ! And now for the rendezvous with 
that excellent Sergeant Skinner. A worthy 
man that, and would have made some stir 
in Paris if he had only been bom on the 
sunny side of the Channel," 

Twenty minutes later, the gig that bore 
Captain Goulot and his goods rolled up to 




AT THE BEER-SHOP. 137 

the door of the beer-shop in Lambhurst 
village. A sorry house of entertainment 
was this. There was no sign, there were 
not even the usual red curtains to mark out 
the windows of parlour and tap-room. A 
few raw-looking clay-pipes in those windows, 
and a meagre inscription to the effect that 
Isaac Bond was licensed to sell beer to be 
drunk on the premises, alone indicated the 
public character of the hostel. And yet 
Isaac Bond was not the poorest man in the 
parish. Much beer, not quite so pure as 
when it left the brewery, was imbibed in 
his low-ceiled rooms; and although his 
licence was for the blood of John Barleycorn, 
and for nothing more, no law can forbid a 
publican to regale his friends with glasses 
of spirituous refreshment as a free gift. 
Although the riding oflBcer of excise 
threatened crown prosecutions, it was a fact 
that there were always black bottles of 



138 LADY FLAVIA. 

spirits hidden in handy lockers and presses, 
of the contents of which Isaac was not chary ; 
while Isaac's affectionate customers, in re- 
turn, were always presenting him with 
pieces of silver-plate in the shape of shillings 
and sixpences. 

" House, hola ! house ! somebody catch 
the reins of my horse ! somebody to him 
give 'ay and a drop of water ! Bonjour^ my 
dear sir; I desire some of your capital 
portarCy after my journey, if you please !" 
said Captain Goulot with much affability ; 
and half-a-dozen boys, who were playing 
pitch-and-toss in the mud, stopped their 
sport to set up an ironical cheer for the 
foreigner. But Isaac Bond, a fat pudding- 
faced man, smoking a churchwarden pipe 
in the doorway, eyed the polite Frenchman 
with no very great favour. 

" Mounseer," he said, " we Ve no 'com- 
modation here for the likes o' you. I'se got 




AT THE BEER-SHOP. 139 

no stable to put your beast in, nor yet hay 
for him ; and the only room I got is occu- 
pied. You'd better push on to Treddleton, 
three miles of a good road, to the Green 
Griffin,^ reglar pubUc." 

" I should be the Green Griffin, my ver' 
good friend," said Captain Goulot, delibe- 
rately getting down and leading his nag up 
to the horse-trough, beside which a bunch 
or two of mahogany-hued old hay told that 
some equine guests were nourished by Isaac 
Bond . ** I should be the fabulous beast you 
name . aha I it is of English jokes that, 
ma foi . if I were to take you at your word. 
What ! I am thirsty, my nag is tired, and 
you would send us away? But that is 
hardly reasonable. Monsieur Bond," and the 
French detective's eyes, that had looked 
upon so many rogues, and looked them 
through and through, like panes of dirty 
glass, contemplated Isaac Bond in a manner 



140 LADY FLAVIA. 

that made him extremely tmcomfortable. 
Gruffly growling out that he would " borrow 
the loan" of some hay, he retreated, and 
returned with an armful of that commodity, 
and then angrily chid the boys, who were 
b^inning to perform a derisive war-dance 
around the Frenchman and his gig. French- 
men were not seen every day in such 
secluded villages as that of Lambhurst. 

" Shall I fetch you the porter out here, 
mounseer?" asked Bond, furtively eyeing 
the swarthy foreigner, and liking him none 
the better for the inspection. The landlord 
of the beer-shop resembled Tennyson's 
Princess in this wise, that he stood in great 
terror of an Anaconda that might one day 
come to devour him ; and this Anaconda of 
his had three heads, since Bond's triple ap- 
prehension was lest the excise should crush 
him with fine and imprisonment, lest the 
justices should shut up his house, and lest 



V 



AT THE BEER-SHOP. 141 

Lord Mortlake should have him ejected ; 
and no one knew so well as Bond did how 
well he merited that this threefold doom 
should come upon him. He mistrusted 
strangers, especially strangers who had clean 
faces and decent coats, and yet were not 
gentlemen ; and perhaps a lurking suspicion 
that the foreigner might be mixed up with 
the Board of Inland Eevenue prompted 
Isaac's evident reluctance to admit Captain 
Goul6t within his doors. 

" Mais non ! I will come in, my good 
friend, and drink your nice portare more at 
my ease than I could out here. Allonsr 
replied the skipper, as he patted his horse's 
neck and stepped upon the broad flat stone 
in front of the door. 

The landlord interposed his burly person 
between the guest and the threshold. *^ No 
offence, sir," said he, " but I'd a deal soouer 
be without your custom, unless you'll let 



142 LADY FLAVIA. 

me serve you with the beer out here. This 
is a poor place, not fit for the likes o' you ; 
and, to tell 'ee the truth, there be a gent in 
here, one of my best customers, and he's 
a little queer in his head when he's had a 
drop more than his allowance, and it's best 
to let him be till he comes round ; so I'd 
take it as a favour if you'd stop outside." 

Now, there was a good deal of truth in 
what the landlord said. One of his chief 
patrons, no less a person than Benjamin 
Haynes, the earl's head-keeper, was under 
that mean roof at that very moment, and he 
had had at least one drop more than his 
allowance, whatever that unknown quantity 
might represent ; and when Big Ben, of late, 
exceeded the bounds of sobriety thus, he 
was apt to say things that were best unsaid, 
in the opinion of prudent Isaac ; wherefore 
the keeper of the beer-shop had given a 
broad hint to the knot of disreputable 



-^ 



AT THE BEER-SHOP. 143 

roysterers who hung about Haynes for the 
Bake of drinking unpaid-for beer, and win- 
ning hfs money at cribbage and blind-' 
hookey, that their Maecenas would be better 
pleased with them if they allowed him to 
maunder on alone until he sunk into a 
drunken sleep, than if he afterwards learned 
that they had kept him company during his 
untoward monologue. And the parasites 
and trenchermen . for even a gamekeeper 
may have his parasites and trenchermen, 
and drugged beer will buy flattery and lip- 
service as surely as *' comet " port and iced 
hock. had slowly departed. 

But Bond did not say that a traveller 
sitting in a comer of the tap-room, with a 
bundle of wearing-apparel disposed as a 
cushion between his head and the wooden 
rail of the bench, had professed himself too 
footsore and tired to turn out before he had 
had his rest ; and as this man seemed very 



144 LADY FLATIA. 

drowsy, and was, to all appearance, a sturdy 
navvy, speaking with a north of Ireland 
accent, very red-haired, very much splashed 
with the mire of the roads, and trudging 
his way down to Honeycombe to work at 
the harbour improvements, Isaac had been 
forced to tolerate his presence in the beer- 
shop. 

Captain Gk>ul6t's exuberant bonhomie was 
gone ; his falcon eyes fixed their piercing 
gaze on the pale grey eyes of the landlord, 
and the Frenchman's voice had a harsh me- 
tallic sound in it as he replied : " My worthy 
Isaac . ^my good Bond . for such I see to 
be your respectable name . ^you will not, I 
hope, persist in your inhospitable resolution. 
Mille sabordsy man, let me pass you ! I go 
from this to the house of the Honourable 
Monsieur Fossdyke, and it will be a droll 
story for me to relate how you exclude the 
public from a house which the first-comer 



AT THE BEER-BHOP. 145 

has a legal right to enter. Entendez-vous, 
my friend ? a legal right, as the magistrates 
may remind you on licensing-day, as you 
call it." 

It was part of M. Durbec's system to 
make himself acquainted with practical 
points of law in such foreign countries as 
he had occasion to visit professionally. The 

4 

result of his studies was signal in this case. 
Isaac Bond struck his colours at once, 
begged pardon, and surrendered at dis- 
cretion, stepping aside to let the obstinate 
guest pass. Then he went to draw the 
porter. 

The Frenchman walked into the tap- 
room, lifting his hat in mechanical com- 
pliance with the polite continental practice, 
as he crossed the threshold . a poor room, 
with sanded floor, a kitchen-table, and 
several benches and chairs. On one of 
the benches in the comer lolled a man with 

VOL. III. L 



146 . LADY PLAVIA. 

a red bush of hair protruding from under 
the shapeless white billycock-hat that he 
wore, and dressed in a suite of white slop- 
clothes, not very seasonable for winter wear, 
and very muddy, as were his heavy ankle- 
boots. His head rested on a blue cotton 
bundle, and he appeared to be asleep. The 
Frenchman grinned approvingly as he 
scanned this figure with an apparently 
careless glance. '^ BonT he muttered, in 
his native tongue. "I should not have 
known him thus, had he begged a sixpence 
of me on the road." 

On a chair beside the table, his elbows on 
the table itself, which was littered with 
broken pipes, a torn newspaper, and some 
empty pewter pots and earthenware mugs> 
sat a tall man, whose face was hidden 
between his outspread hands. a gaunt, big^ 
Wmea fellow, with shaggy hair hanging 
about the collar of his velveteen coat like 



V 



AT. THE BEER-SHOP. 147 

a grizzled mane, with leathern gaiters, 
nailed shoes, and a good many patches of 
soft fur and clotted blood sticking to the 
skirts of his stained and faded shooting- 
coat. Benjamin Hajnes it was, and he was 
sobbing in a weak way, wonderful to wit- 
ness in a man of his stalwart frame. But 
Captain Goul6t had probably seen more 
than one toper in a state of maudlin in- 
toxication, "crying drunk," in the ver- 
nacular phrase, and he manifested no 
curiosity or surprise. The landlord brought 
him the porter he had ordered, and he 
sipped it, and sat down at some distance 
from the gamekeeper. But when the 
landlord had retired . for Isaac Bond chose 
not to hear anything that he might after- 
wards be obliged to tell in a court of justice, 
a change came over the scene. The navi- 
gator in the corner roused himself, and 
came softly up to the table, and as he 



148 LADY FLAVIA. 

exchanged glances of intelligence with 
Durbec or Goulot, he pulled out a pencil 
and tablets from the breast-pocket of his 
clay-smeared jacket. " He's been talking a 
deal ; I've taken most of it down," whispered 
this eccentric excavator, in a voice that was 
surprisingly like that of Sergeant Skinner 
of Scotland Yard, also like that of Mr. 
Wright of Liverpool, who for some days 
had used the Commercial Room of the Bell 
at Chartley. "Hist! he's at it again." 
.And the two policemen, French and 
^plnglish, bent forward to listen, as Big 
Ben the keeper broke out with a whine like 
that of a beaten hoimd, and then said in 
husky tones : " Fetch th6 constables, if you 
choose. Clap the darbies on me, and let 
me swing on the gallows, and end it. I 
deserve it ; curse you all ! . I'll make a 
clean breast, for the sake of my miserable 
soul. I'm a sinner, I tell you . the biggest 




AT THE BEER-SHOP. 149 

villain unhung . and she bribed me to it. I 
shot him ; I shot the young chap ; and 
'twasn't my fault he ever got over it. The 
night was dark, and I rapped both barrels, 
right and left, into his ribs, and saw him 
drop like a stone. I made sure he was dead. 
** How*s anyone to know ?" says the yoimg 
lady. She paid me well . a himdred poimds. 
And when that's gone . ^when that's gone . 
why, I know where to go for more, my 
mates. Don't ask me for names ; names 
are tellings. I could go up to the house 
this minute, and she daren't refuse me a ten- 
pun' note. Where's the bottle ? I've not 
had half enough yet, my bucks !" And 
here, his mood changing, he struck up some 
scrap of a song, but broke down, and began 
to cry, declaring that he was a sinner and a 
murderous scoundrel^ and that all he wanted 
was to tell all before he was hung up as he 
deserved. 



150 LADY FLAVIA. 

The two detectives listened with greedy 
ears, and as quick as the words fell from the 
Hps of Hie dninken penitent, Sergeant Skin- 
ner's rapid pencU transferred them to the 
paper. At last, the flow of words ended 
abruptly; the man's head dropped upon 
the table, and very soon his heavy breath- 
ing told that he was asleep. 

" No more now," said Sergeant Skinner, 
concealing the tablets once more in his 
breast-pocket ; ** but you heard him as well 
as myself, and weVe enough grounds to go 
upon. We could ask for a warrant this 

r 

-^ery day ; but we'd better wait . better 
wait. It's a hanging matter this ; but the 
chap will be more use in the witness-box 
than in the dock- . eh, captain ?" 

Captain Goulot thought so too, and the 
pair of confederates soon parted on their 
several ways. 




151 



CHAPTER VIII. 



CONFESSION. 



But it is sublime . ^it is poetic. It is a 
stroke of genius, do you know, my dear 
colleague, that tour that you have played 
there. You are an honour to the metier:,*'' 
cried M. Antoine Durbec, with warm appro- 
bation. The Frenchman was still in his 
assumed character of Captain Gk>ul6t, late 
of the mercantile marine, and now in Eng- 
land, with a view to commerce. The scene 
was the Commercial Boom at the Bell^ at 
Chartley ; and the foreigner and his friend, 
Mr. Wright, of Liverpool, otherwise Ser- 
geant Skinner, had the room to themselves. 



152 LADY PLAVIA. 

It was three o'dock in the afternoon of a 
fine day towards the end of January. All 
the other commercial travellers were out on 
their lawfol business, and the loud ticking 
clock and the blazing fire ticked and blazed 
for the sole accommodation of the con- 
federates. The London detective had just 
thrown on the table a crumpled scrap of 
printed paper ; and this it was that had 
awakened the right-hand man of the Paris 
prefecture to the avowal of a sincere admi- 
ration of the sergeant's skill and luck. 
" Va ! good friend," said the Frenchman, 
seriously ; " you Britons are too fearful of 
ridicule. Parole of honour, I, Durbec, 
never thought of trying the telegraph-oflSce 
. ^never, never, au grand jamais /" 

Sergeant Skinner looked modestly pleased 
with his achievement, as an Englishman 
will do. Nothing can make plain John 
Bull vapour and strut ovet his victory in 



CONFESSION. 153 

the fashion of conquering Jaques Bon- 
homme. . Each nation has its own deep- 
rooted customs. 

" You see," said the English member of 
the copartnership, clearing his throat as he 
began his speech . " You see, we neither of 
us thought of the telegraph. We guessed 
pretty well who had sent over for Royston, 
senior, when his son lay ill at the hotel in 
Slochester, but we had no idea of anything 
else than the post. We thought . Lady F. 
had written per post, and we were wrong, 
it seems. Now, Durbec, when I went to 
the Chartley station to-day, to send word, 
as agreed, along the wires to Colonel Ford, 
our employer, how we were getting on 
with our work, I hadn't any more idea, 
no more than an innocent babby, that any- 
thing could be learned in that quarter. 
But the little youngster who works the 
telegraph, he told me something worth 



154 LADY FLAVU. 

knowing. ** I think I've a sort of way 
with boys that I don't understand, nor they 
either, but which makes us the best of 
friends. I fancy, sometimes, I must be like 
that clergyman who advertises in the 
Times, that he has the knack of gaining 
the confidence of young persons. Anyway, 
I do get it mostly. So it was with this 
young chap. He was very soon quite at 
home with me, and I happened to say, as 
he was spelling out the message, that I sup- 
posed he had never sent a despatch to 
France before. Yes, he said, he had . one. 
And when I began to ask questions, it 
came out that a pretty young lady had been 
the sender; and she came in a pony-car- 
riage, with a groom in livery ; and the 
message she sent was to Mr. Royston, at the 
Chateau des Roches. And here, in a sort 
of japanned toast-rack, I found, among a 
lot of mouldy old papers, the receipt that 




OON^FESSION. 155 

was given to her, but which she never took 
away ; also the form on which she wrote 
the message. 

Antoine Durbec threw his falcon eyes at 
a glance upon the two documents which 
Sergeant Skinner submitted to him. The 
message was in French. It was guardedly 
worded, but it told Brand Eoyston of his 
son's condition, and it urged him to remove 
the young man without the loss of a mo- 
ment. It was signed Emma Jones, and the 
address was that of Miss Emma Jones, at 
Harbledown, 

" Her own handwriting !" exclaimed 
Durbec, hastily comparing the written 
words with a scrap of manuscript which he 
had bought from Simmons at the price of a 
thiriy-franc Palais-Eoyal brooch. " It is 
another link. The jury will condemn her. 
We triumph Tnon cher 1 And yet it is pity- 
too. and she so young and beautiful !" 



/ 



156 LADY FLAVIA. 

There was quite a ring of sentimental re- 
gret in the Frenchman's voice as he spoke. 
There may be vegetarian butchers who sing 
the coronach of a lamb. Sergeant Skinner 
spoke doggedly out. 

^' Beauty or no beauty, young or old, our 
duty comes first," said he ; " our ^business 
is to catch the criminal, and a hard one it 
is. Judge, jury, press, and public, do the 
rest; and it's wonderful if they don't get 
her off among 'em." 

^ But no !" cried the French commercial, 
thrusting his hand into the breast of his 
coat, " one more proof! See, I have not 
been idle . I also. Here is what she hid in 
the hollow tree; here is what the keeper 
found; here is the pretty toy I bought 
from the keeper's daughter jB.ne j- Jille de 
chambre at Harbledown, two hours ago, for 
the famous yellow shawl, the mauve silk, 
the brooch gilt by the method Roulz." 




CONFESSION. 157 

And the Paris detective suddenly exhi- 
bited the pretty portrait of the blooming 
child with dark ringlets, and with the pearl 
setting, and the name of Lady Flavia Clare 
scratched upon the ivory. The morocco 
case still bore the green stains of moss, and 
the warps and cracks caused by exposure to 
rough weather : battered and stained, it 
told its own tale. 

" Well done, Monsieur Durbec!" cried 
Mr. Wright, of Liverpool. " I haven't the 
gift of the gab, like you French chaps, but 
in getting that miniature into your posses- 
sion, you have hit the right nail on the 
head. We've that ; we've the form and the 
receipt from the telegraph-oflBce ; we've 
Haynes, and Mr. Hart too, under our 
thumbs, for the matter of that ; and we've 
all the Colonel's evidence, and that which 
Mounseer the Procureur has raked up. 
They are shy about granting extradition 




158 LADY FLAVIA. 

warrants, but in tliis case I think we may- 
reckon on getting one." 

" And, my friend," said the Frenchman, 
glancing up at the clock, ** you will agree 
with me, time is of value. Vite ! Pack, 
pay, and be off. A train starts in fifty 
minutes ; let us be of the number of the 
voyageurs.'* 

The London, Chatham, and Dover Com- 
pany's steamer Lapwing, made the Calais 
passage on the following day in an hour 
and three-quarters. Before the daylight 
had faded out of the winter's sky, M, Dur- 
bec and his English coadjutor clattered into 
the streets of V'ersailles, and bade their 
coachman drive to Colonel Ford's lodgings. 
Two gentlemen were on the threshold when 
^e fiacre stopped. 

" We bring you news. Monsieur le Colo- 
nel !" said Durbec, through the window of 
the hackney carriage. 



CONFESSION. 159 

" And we have news for you/' said 
Charles Ford, who looked unusually grave. 

** Yes/' said the colonel, in answer to 
Sergeant Skinner's look of inquiry, ^ the 
secret is told at last. We come now from 
the bureau of the Procureur Imperial. The 
prisoner, Basil Royston, has confessed all." 




160 LADY FLAVIA, 



CHAPTER IX. 

WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 

The Colonel was too sanguine. Basil 
Royston, prisoner au secret^ and once a 
captain in her Majesty's service, had not 
confessed all. To do so would have been 
contrary to his nature ; and he had borne 
much before he would admit anything. 
At first, the man's instinct of self-preserva- 
tion had steeled him in his resolution of 
keeping silence. Again and again had the 
magistrate appointed to examine him re- 
coiled baffled, wearied out by the elastic 
pertinacity of the culprit's resistance. In 
the French system, as is well known, every 



WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 161 

servant of the state, from the turnkey to M. 
the President in his velvet cap, does all he 
can to bring about a conviction. The 
obstinate elements are twofold . ^the prisoner 
and the jury ; and as the authorities have 
the prisoner under lock and key, and can 
bully, starve, and annoy him or her for any 
time, or to any extent, their best chance is 
with the prisoner. A viUain in a French 
gaol is not perhaps much to be pitied ; 
but when an innocent person gets im- 
pounded there by mistake . a white sheep 
among the black sheep . it is not the fault 
of the officials if the intrusive fleece is not 
painted as sable as Sin itself. 

Captain Basil Royston was not innocent, 
but he gave a great deal of trouble to those 
who desired to prove him guilty. He would 
not open his own mouth to betray himself, 
so he was either silent, or he told lies. Of 
the two alternatives, the authorities of 

VOL. III. M 




162 LADY FLAVIA. 

France injfinitely prefer that a prisoner 
shall tell lies, for then they cross-examine, 
question, and confute him ; and if they 
can do no more, can at least reproduce 
his fictions with damaging eJBFect before the 
jury. 

But they prefer to entrap a culprit into 
labyrinths of confession, explanation, and 
hypothesis ; and the pen of the greffier 
never goes so glibly over the thin blue 
legal paper, as when the criminal is floun- 
dering through a quagmire of statement 
and retractation. Basil Royston proved 
less malleable than had been expected. 
Whether he was very cunning or very 
shallow, they could not decide, but what he 
said was hardly worth writing down. His 
rhodomontades were wearisome, but they 
led to no good end ; and sometimes he was 
refractory, and would say nothing. They 
had put him on bread and water. Again, 




WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 163 

they had tried other tactics, and had set wine 
and brandy before him at meal-times. He 
was wary, and for the first time in his life 
would not drink. 

Meanwhile, his mother, Brand's widow, 
kept fast to her purpose. Not a single 
syllable that could injure her son could be 
drawn from her Kps. They could not make 
anything of poor Mrs. Royston. For once, 
her feeble mind, braced by the deep instinct 
of maternal love, was equal to the occasion. 
She answered all questionings with an 
assertion that she knew nothing of any 
conspiracy, and that Basil Royston had done 
no harm. Threats were wasted on her, 
persuasions failed. She was strong in her 
wish to save her son, and was regardless of 
the consequences which her obstinacy might 
bring upon herself. 

Often, as the Judge of Instruction, re- 
turning foiled from a long interview with 




164 LADY FLAVIA. 

one or other of the prisoners, reported 
progress to the public prosecutor. often did 
those two props and pillars of French law 
sigh over the meddlesome philanthropy that 
had abolished the use of material means for 
unlocking the lips of a reluctant witness. 
Two turns of the rack would have brought 
that mauvais gars of an English captain to 
his senses. Or, if the rack were voted 
barbarous and medieval, why should not a 
little unobtrusive thumb-screw . a poitcette . 
extract the truth by a trifling dislocation of 
the lesser joints, a thing hardly worth 
mentioning in an anatomical point of view ; 
or, if the humanitarians of the day would 
not hear reason, there were military punish- 
ments . the strapado, the wooden-horse, the 
collar of durance, all abolished during the re- 
volutionary mania of '89. 

But although torture may not be applied 
to a prisoner's body in France, his mind is 



WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 165 

given up to whatever anguish the ingenuity 
of his guardians may care to inflict. And 
on a sudden, Basil Eoyston had given way ; 
his stubbornness had relaxed. He had made 
a sort of bargain with the Judge of Instruc- 
tion, and he had told something, enough to 
ruin others as well as himself. 

"Search in the Tangle . ^we called the 
most neglected part of the garden of the 
Chateau des Roches by that name . and 
between the summer-house and the old sun- 
dial, you will find the proof you have been 
looking for." 

** We are going to over Gresnez . Mr. 
Charles and I . in the Procureur's carriage, 
to be present at the search," said Colonel 
Ford to the detectives ; " perhaps you had 
better be there also." 

There was no exultation in the old 
soldier's tone, no elation, or even any ex- 
citement in his manner. He looked weary 



166 LADY FLA VIA. 

and depressed. The news that he had 
received that day, the news of Captain 
Royston's confession, was bad news. True,- 
he would soon be able to quit France, and 
there would be an end of the irksome busi- 
ness in which he had become involved. 
But he was averse to anything that could 
give pain to Amy's gentle nature, and he 
felt assured that her hopes with regard to 
her unfortunate friend were doomed to dis- 
appointment. The policemen understood 
in a moment the fall purport of the recent 
avowal ; their eyes met, and M. Durbec, no 
longer Captain Goulot of the merchant 
service, nodded his head, in token that he 
wished Sergeant Skinner, late Mr. Wright 
of Liverpool, to speak. 

" Colonel," said the London detective, in 
his grave, respectful manner, " you always 
were of opinion, were you not, that this 
would be the end of it, early or late, and 



WHAT THEY POUND IN THE TANGLE. 167 

that we should never see the poor young 
lady alive ?" 

The Colonel winced a little. " I never 
said so," he answered, almost confusedly. 

** Why, no," rejoined Sergeant Skinner in 
a meditative tone; "certainly not. But 
then, sir, that was out of nothing else than 
consideration for Miss Ford's feelings. The 
young lady had set her heart on getting her 
dear friend back safe and sound, out of the 
sorrow and captivity in which she fancied 
her to be kept against her will, that it would 
have been cruel to persuade her to the con- 
trary before it was quite certain ;" and the 
sergeant rubbed his broad palm very slowly 
over his chin, as if he were shaving himself 
without a razor, as he thoughtfully added : 
" Quite certain ; quite . quite certain !" 

" Well, I admit," returned Colonel Ford 
in a low and hasty voice, " that I always 
had darker suspicions than those that I 



s 



16S LADT FLATIA. 

openly avowed. I kept them to myself* 
But I have reason to befeve the ProcTireiir 
entertained similar notions, and that you, 
too, have always been of the same way of 
thinking/* 

" Certainly,^ said Sergeant Skinner. 

" Monsieur is right V* chimed in M. Dur- 
bec, with a grimace of assent 

"Well, I thought as Amy did!" said 
Charles Ford, stoutly. That Brand Roy- 
ston . ^poor devil . ^was a violent old savage, 
but I never thought so ill of him as to be- 
lieve he would commit so cowardly and 
treacherous a crime as you are hinting at. 
I don't believe it now. The old fellow had 
too much manliness in him to shed the 
innocent blood of an unoflFending young girl 
like " 

" Hush !" said the Colonel nervously, as 
Amy opened one of the windows of the little 
sitting-room above, and leaned out to ask 



WHAT THEY POUND IN THE TANGLE. 169 

why her father and cousin chose to stay out 
there in the cold, and whether she was to 
be excluded altogether from the council that 
they were holding on the door-steps. 

The Colonel and his nephew went in ; but 
the detectives had to make their report at 
the Palais de Justice, and could not spare 
time to enter. 

" Cependant^ it is of much importance," 
whispered M. Durbec hastily, in English, in 
Colonel Ford's ear, " that Miss Ford should 
pronounce upon the authenticity of the 
hand-writing of Miladi yonder, and also 
should see the portrait. Will you be so 
good as not to tell her any evil news, until 
I have submitted these proofs for her inspec- 
tion, whatever we may find to-night." 

Colonel Ford and Charles had to smile, 
and talk of indijBFerent matters, and dissimu- 
late as best they might the shadow that 
darkened their minds, as they thought over 



170 LADY FLAVIA. 

the probable discovery of what they most 
dreaded to find in the spot indicated by 
Basil Royston. They could both say with 
perfect truth that they were ignorant of the 
precise results of the expedition from which 
the detectives had just returned ; and they 
could add, with equal truth, that they had 
an appointment that evening at the Palais 
de Justice, when, no doubt, they would 
learn the exact state of affairs. They tried 
to appear confident, easy, cheerful ; but men 
are poor dissemblers ; it is only a woman 
who can wear a perfectly natural mask of 
smiles, while her heart is aching and her 
brain on fire with painful thought ; and 
when the colonel and his nephew went to 
keep their appointment, Amy threw herself 
on the sofa and sobbed aloud. She had 
kept back her tears for hours ; they flowed 
fireely now. 

** They are hiding the truth . the worst 



WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 171 

.from me, out of sheer kindness, I know," 
said the weeping girl ; " but I read it in 
their faces, I shall never see her again . 
never, never, never again I' 

Carriage after carriage rolled away from 
Versailles, along the darkling road that led 
to St. Germain and Gresnez-Yignoble. The 
lamps flashed yellow as they made their 
way past the interminable rows of poplars, 
tall trees some of them, others poor weak- 
lings, no thicker than the puny arhres de 
liberie that they plant in Paris when the 
blood is still wet in the streets, and when 
the short-lived popular triumph is at its 
height. As night fell darker and deeper, 
the rays of the carriage-lamps seemed all 
the brighter for the gathering gloom. On 
they went, through hamlets of blue or 
yellow cottages, all with gaudy shutters of 
green, all drawn up in formal lines, like sol- 
diers at drill, but with a certain air of com- 



i 



172 LADY FLAVIA, 

fort, and thrift, and plenty about them, lor 
all that . on, skirting the town of St. Ger- 
main without entering it, on to Gr^snez- 
Vignoble, and its mill, and its church, and 
its bleaching-works, and the smithy, and the 
bridge, and the grim iron gates of the dila- 
pidated Chateau des Roches. 

There the carriages stopped. The Pro- 
cureur Imperial alighted, and so did Colonel 
Ford, his nephew, M. Durbec, Sergeant 
Skinner, and some four or five workmen 
and agents of poHce, who had been brought 
from Versailles to assist in the search ; also 
a tall thin man in black, a doctor from the 
hospital at Versailles, on whose discretion 
the authorities could depend. The chateau 
had been in the keeping of the police ever 
since the fatal affray, and now, by appoint- 
ment, the commissary from St. Germain, 
with a party of his subordinates, was ready 
to receive M. le Procureur. Leroux, the 



WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 173 

brigadier of gendarmerie, was there too with 
two of his men. 

'* Entrons ! let us get this business over 
as soon as may be. The proces-verbal will 
take up some time," said M. Duvillers-Har- 
douin. 

The gates were opened, and the whole 
assemblage poured into the demesne of the 
ruinous old country-house, the pile above 
them towering black and shapeless on that 
moonless night. 

'* Light the torches," commanded the 
commissary in a suppressed voice. 

All spoke below their breath. Each one 
present, even of the rough workmen with 
pick and spade, trod softly as the group ad- 
vanced deeper into the shadow of the trees. 
One of the agents of poHce from St. Ger- 
main acted as guide. He had some acquaint- 
ance with the old gardener, whose duty it 
had been to cultivate the portion of garden- 



174 LADY FLAVIA. 

ground on which some vegetables were still 
grown, and he knew whereabouts the de- 
cayed summer-house stood. 

The torches were now kindled, and they 
threw a flaring Kght, now of a smoky 
yellow, now of blotted crimson, and again 
of dusky orange, or blood red upon the 
thickets, the black earth, the ivy-grown 
trees, the lawn, on which the long grass 
grew like the unshorn hair of a madman 
crouching in his lair. The night-wind 
sighed and murmured among the bushes, 
and the dripping of the heavy drops of wet 
that clung to the boughs, for there had been 
rain that day, was distinctly heard, so pain- 
ful was the silence. Stumbling over roots 
and fragments of rock, pushing aside briers 
and fallen branches that barred the path, at 
last the searchers reached the spot where 
the old sun-dial stood, with moss clinging to 
its white stone-work. There, too, was the 




WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 175 

crazy old summer-house, with its broken 
roof, paintless waUs, and door hanging by 
one rusted hinge . ^the emblem of desolation. 
There the rank grass grew the tallest, there 
the weeds and overgrown shrubs were 
thickest, and the neglected vegetation lay 
like a jungle, unkempt, unpruned. 

" This is the place they called the Tangle. 
C'est ici^ sa7is douteV said the Procureur, 
surveying the scene through his gold- 
rimmed glasses. 

''Dig here!" ordered the commissary, 
pointing to a spot between the sun-dial and 
the summer-house ; and instantly the work- 
men began to plunge their spades into the 
soft soil. They toiled in silence, delving 
carefully, and throwing up heap after heap 
of the black mould. The others stood beside 
them, peering down into the trench, which 
every moment grew deeper. A strange 
wild scene it was, that uncared-for nook in 



176 LADY FLAVIA. 

the deserted garden, with the ill-omened 
work that went on there, and the pale 
anxious faces of the bystanders, looking all 
the paler for the glare of the torch-Kght. 
The shifty, restless gleam played upon the 
steel scabbards and martial accoutrements 
of the gendarmes, on the dark clothes and 
white eager countenances of the spectators, 
on the tri-coloured scarf of the commissary, 
and on the sturdy men in blouses, who were 
standing now up to their waists in what 
seemed a freshly-opened grave. They 
worked, and worked, but nothing was 
found. There were no signs, even, that 
the earth had been recently disturbed. The 
Procureur's brows began to contract in a 
frown that boded no good to the prisoner, 
whose confession had apparently been dis- 
proved by fact. 

"He has deceived us," muttered the 
public prosecutor ; " tant pis pour lui /" 



WHAT THET FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 177 

The men were leaning on their spades to 
take breath ; they were getting discouraged. 
The subsoil had been reached, and no dis- 
covery had rewarded their toil. 

" If I may advise," said the voice of Durbec 
in the commissary's ear, " I would say, try 
elsewhere. A little to the left, near the sun- 
dial, the turf looks withered, mon commissaire r 

The commissary turned to the men. " Mes 
braveSj' he said, *' Monsieur Durbec here 
will tell you where to dig. . Un Jin limier, 
Monsieur Durbec, is it not so, monsieur ?" 
This to the Procureur Imperial, who nodded 
approvingly. 

*' Dig, my lads . ^here where the grass is 
short and brown . here where the rushes 
are broken, from the great stone up to the 
tuft of daisies, and be careful what you do 
with your spades, camarades /" cried Durbec, 
taking the command. The workmen obeyed 
willingly. 

VOL. III. N 



178 LADr FLAVIA. 

" One sees well that the turf has been cut 
before, hein ?" said one of the labourers, as 
he lifted up a spadeful of the black mould. 

"Yes, yes, one sees it," returned the 
others; and they shovelled up the heavy 
black mould with renewed vigour. 

For a minute or two they dug on, then 
came a pause. 

. " Tiens /" exclaimed one of the men ; *' I 
touched something." 

In a moment more that something was 
laid bare. A dead, white human hand and 
wrist, white, wan, bloodless, more like the 
model of a hand exquisitely moulded in pure 
wax, than a real hand, suddenly showed 
itself among the fibrous roots and the black 
clods of tenacious earth. 

*'Ah-h-h !" exclaimed the workman, 
dropping his spade, and wiping the clammy 
moisture from his brow ; " she lies here, 
then, for certain. Diantre! it makes me 



WHAT THET FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 179 

feel ill, comrades ;" and the man sat down 
at the edge of the trench, and looked paler 
than all the rest of that pale group. He 
was a stout fellow of forty, and had smelt 
powder at Solferino and Kabylia; for the 
three workmen were all picked as good and 
steady men, and all had " served," as is the 
case with most of the best French artisans 
and labourers. But the sight of the dead 
white hand, so small, and so Httle changed 
by decay, was too much for the nerves of 
the ex-Zouave at first. One of the agents 
gave him some brandy from a flask, and he 
got up and took up his spade reluctantly. 
" If it had been a man . ay, or a woman of 
the canaille of brown Bedouins ; but a white 
arm like that Laugh if you will, mes- 
sieurs, but it put me in mind of my own 
dear young sister, little Rosalie, lying these 
twenty-two years in the cimetiere of 
Alengon;" and he delved on. Nobody 



180 LADY PLAVIA. 

was incKned to laugh ; every face was 
serious and anxious, for death comes home 
to all hearts. A moment more, and the 
spade struck with a dull thud upon a soft 
substance that was not earth. The mould 
was scraped away, and a dark heap, a some- 
thing shapeless, wrapped in woollen rags 
and a frayed old boat-cloak, the dull red 
lining of which had turned to purple, was 
exposed. At the commissary's orders, the 
men stooped and opened the wrappings. 
The result had been anticipated long before, 
but a shudder ran through the crowd, and 
loud exclamations of horror, anger, indigna- 
tion, broke the silence of the still night. 

" Poor lamb ! poor murdered lamb ! The 
curse of Heaven and the curse of the poor 
on the villain that has done this deed ! 
Look at her young white face . look at her 
limbs; how she lies as if she were only 
asleep. Pauvre petite demoiselle^ the butchers 



WHAT THET FOUND IX THE TANGLE. 181 



who killed her must have had hard hearts ; 

va r 

All the men standing round that unhal- 
lowed grave were not good, or honest, or 
compassionate in everyday life ; hut they 
were all moved now. There were none 
whose faces were not softened, there were 
few whose eyes were not dim, as they looked 
down at what lay disclosed in the trench 
beneath their feet. 

The corpse of a young girl, in the first 
years of early womanhood, white, and wan, 
and waxen, with its dead young face up- 
turned, and one arm outstretched beyond 
the coverings that had been hastily wrapped 
around the passive form. The night-black 
hair looked the darker for its contrast 
with the awful pallor of the face. There 
was no shroud, only a sheet hurriedly and 
carelessly sewn together. The attitude was 
that of repose rather than of death; the 



r 



182 LADT FLA VI A. 

features were calm, and the peaty soil had 
probahly conduced to arrest the course of 
decay. There she lay, she whom they had 
eome to seek. The search was over ; the 
Tangle had given up its dead. 

M. Durbec drew the portrait from his coat- 
pocket, and examined it for a moment, 
then glanced again at the blanched awful 
face below. *' There is no doubt now," he 
said in a loud clear voice; "a foul crime 
has been committed. The body that lies 
here is that of the true Lady Flavia Clare, 
of Lord Mortlake's daughter, and of her 
who was a guest, par malheur^ under this 
accursed roof ; and this grave was dug by 
murderous hands, red from the recent deed, 
liift her, men, but gently and steadily, poor 
thing ! " 

No need to tell the men to be gentle. If 
she had been their own sister or child, dead 
or dying, they could not have raised her 




WHAT THEY FOUND IN THE TANGLE. 183 

helpless form from the earth more tenderly 
or borne her more reverently and slowly on 
through the dank garden to the ruinous 
house, where they laid her on the same 
couch that had once received the mutilated* 
remains of Brand Royston, The doctor 
from the hospital made a rapid examination 
of the corpse, " I find no trace of violence,** 
he said. " But for the suspicious signs of 
the secret interment, which, of course, 
denote guilt, I should see nothing to mark 
the case as one of assassination. These were 
no vulgar murderers. Monsieur le Commis- 
saire. I assure you. Monsieur le Procureur, 
that I can do no more till daylight. It will 
be an affair of tests, and reagents, and 
delicate experiments, and I should much 
prefer to call in the assistance of messieurs 
my colleagues." 

So it was settled. A guard was left all 
night at the chateau to watch over the 




]84 LADY FLAVIA. 

dead; and carriages rolled swiftly back 
towards Versailles, the lamps flaring with 
yellow light over the empty fields and 
lonely roads, and the tramp of the horses 
disturbing the sleeping viUage streets. 
** We have Miladi now," said M, Durbec to 
Sergeant Skinner ; " bien s&r^ we have her, 
were she twice as beautiful, and wicked, and 
crafty as she is." 




185 



CHAPTER X. 

M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUIN PEELS SURE OF 

HIS PROMOTION. 

There was no more secrecy now. Amy 
Ford knew the truth, which, indeed, her 
father had been in a manner constrained to 
tell her when the searchers returned to 
Versailles long after midnight, and the 
Colonel started as he saw Amy's pale anxious 
face at the head of the stairs. He told her 
of the discovery, softening down the details 
as best he could ; and Miss Ford gave him 
no reason to repent his impulse of candour. 
She wept, indeed, but it was with a chastened 
sorrow ; and when the Colonel told her how 



186 M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUm 

calm and peaceful was the aspect of the fair 
dead face, on which the torches had thrown 
their fierce light, Amy smiled through her 
tears. 

" I know how good and innocent Flavia 
was, papa," she said, softly. " Now I know 
all that can be known, I feel less unhappy 
about her than when I fancied her among 
cruel people somewhere. My dear is beyond 
the reach of grief, and fear, and pain now. 
Her pure soul is with the angels. May I 
see her once again, papa ? I should like to 
see her, if you will let me." 

Colonel Ford shook his head. " It would 
be better, pet, that you should be spared a 
sight which would only distress you. The 

surgeon said that no time must be lost in 

But why should we dwell on details that 
can only give pain. " Take my assurance, 
darUng, that she seems to have died with- 
out suflFering. There has been foul-play, of 



FEELS SURE OF HIS PROMOTION^. 187 

course ; this is no natural death. But her 
end must have been peaceful, and without 
any sharp pang that could leave its traces 
on her poor young face. Good-night, now, 
Amy. We shall soon be at home in Eng- 
land, I hope, and all this will seem like a 
feverish dream that we are glad to forget." 

An hour before noon, the Procureur Im- 
perial paid a visit to Colonel Ford's lodgings. 
He brought with him the two detectives, as 
well as a huissier, who carried his chief's 
portfolio, well stuflFed with papers, bound in 
green morocco, and lettered Dossier de 
Vaffaire Royston. The library of every 
public prosecutor is in great part composed 
of these lugubrious volumes of mingled 
manuscript and printed matter, each of 
which has its own mournfully monotonous 
history of crimeandpunishmentattachedtoit. 

Always urbane, M. Duvillers-Hardouin 
was now imbued with a tenfold politeness. 




188 M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUIN 

He rubbed his sleek soft hands together, his 
eyes beamed benignly through his gold- 
mounted spectacles, and his mouth had the 
satisfied look that we notice in a cat that 
purs out her paean of victory over her cap- 
tured prey. Amy turned her eyes from 
the lawyer's parchment face, the sallow 
pallor of which was mottled now by a flush 
of unwholesome crimson, conjured up by 
the excitement of success. Charles Ford 
Contemplated him for a moment as he scat- 
tered his civil speeches broadcast among the 
company, and then walked to the window 
to conceal the disgust which he knew must 
be but too plainly legible on his honest 
English countenance. This leering, soft- 
spoken, legal ogre was too much for him, 
and made him sick of his profession, that 
could rear up such a carpet tiger as M. 
Duvillers-Hardouin. But the Colonel looked 
on the exulting lawyer with greater philo- 



FEELS SURE OF HIS PROMOTIOX. 189 

sophy. He saw the stealthy feline savagery, 
the unscrupulous adaptation of means to the 
end in view, beneath the varnish and gloss 
of that smooth outside, to the full as plainly 
as his nephew could do. But he accepted 
the public prosecutor as a hard fact, that 
the existence of other hard facts, in the 
shape of thieves and assassins, rendered in 
some shape a necessity. 

" Will mademoiselle oblige me by in- 
specting this sample of handwriting, obtained 
by the ingenuity of our admirable con- 
federate, Monsieur Skinner ?" said the Pro- 
cureur, as he selected from the contents of 
the portfolio the form which the London 
detective had procured at the telegraph- 
office in Chartley. " The signature is that 
of Emma Jones ; but there is no doubt as to 
the position occupied by the person who 
sent the message to France. Is that a 
handwriting that mademoiselle knows ?" 



190 M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUIi* 

" Certainly not," said Amy. I never, to 
my knowledge, saw it before." 

" Bon I You have probably in your pos- 
session some lines of the writing of your 
friend, Miladi Flavia Clare?" pursued the 
Procureur. 

Amy rose silently, left the room, and re- 
turned with a book, on the fly-leaf of which 
were written the words : " Amy Ford, with 
many happy returns of the day, from her 
loving sister, Flavia Clare." It was diffi- 
cult to look upon those few simple words 
and be wholly unmoved. The ink was still 
black and unfaded, but the hand of the 
writer was stiff and chill, and would hold 
the pen never more. But the public prose- 
cutor's dim gaze waxed the brighter as he 
scanned the written lines slowly and criti- 
cally. " All goes for the best, mademoiselle," 
he said : ** there is no similarity. The ex- 
perts from Paris, if the advocate for the 



FEELS SURE OF HIS PROMOTTON. 191 

prisoner should summon them, could never 
pretend that the same person traced the 
characters of both. . The portrait, Monsieur 
Durbec, sHl votes plait. 

The detective drew out the miniature, 
opened the case, and laid it on the table. 

Amy bent over it. ** I do not know 
this face,'' she said. " It is the likeness of 
some child. yes, now I know it . it is 
poor Flavia. I cannot bear this any 
more." And she turned her streaming 
eyes and sorrow-stricken face from the hard 
lawyer, and hastily left the room, Charles 
Ford springing to the door to exchange a 
whispered word with her on the threshold. 

" It's a confounded shame. I'm sick of 
the whole affair ; and I don't envy you your 
position and its duties, monsieur, I assure 
you," said the colonel's nephew with Eng- 
lish plainness of diction, but in intelligible 
Anglo-French, and with a significant look 



192 M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUIN 

of anything but admiration for the Pro- 
cureur Imperial. 

The public prosecutor smiled with polite 
scorn. " Monsieur is young," he said. " By 
the time his talents elevate him to the 
dignity of judge, Monsieur will have learned 
that we cannot always indulge the tender 
sensibilities of our nature. Monsieur le 
Colonel, I am sure, will agree with me that 
duty must precede sentiment. And now, 
since we are for the moment deprived of 
the society of Miss Ford, may I beg of her 
father, in the interests of justice, to ask 
Mademoiselle one question. The eyes of 
the portrait . I wish to ask if she sees any- 
thing pecuhar in them ? Has the artist 
made any mistake. -I mean, in colour ?" 

When this request was translated to 
Colonel Ford, he somewhat reluctantly 
undertook the oflBce of going to seek Amy 
in her room, to make the apparently trivial 



FEELS SURE OF HIS PROMOTION, 193 

inquiry suggested by the public prose- 
cutor. He soon returned with the minia- 
ture in his hand, which he replaced on the 
table. 

" The portrait, allowing for the diflference 
of years, seems to be a very faithful one," 
said the Colonel. " My daughter sees no- 
thing remarkable in it. The eyes are dark 
. ^black, in fact . they match well with the 
dark hair and the complexion." 

" Ah ! I thought soj' said the Procureur, 
rubbing his hands together, and smiling 
blandly. " Bertrand, call them up cTen 

Bertrand was the name of the huissier. 
That useful dark-clothed familiar disap- 
peared, and soon returned, followed by a 
gendarme, in whose safe-keeping was a stout 
young peasant-woman, with large-eared cap, 
gold cross and earrings, and a scarlet hand- 
kerchief pinned across her bosom. " You 

VOL. III. 




194 M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUIN 

are the former servant of feu Monsieur 
Royston ?" asked the Procureur. 

" At your service, monsieur," answered 
Grosse Jeanne, surveying the company with 
rustic curiosiiy under her eyelashes. 

" You remember, Mademoiselle, the niece 
of Madame Royston, Adela Burt by name ?'' 
was the next question. 

" Mafoi^ monsieur, I have said so a dozen 
times ; and a hard thing it is that an honest 
girl like myself should be kept from getting 
her livelihood with her ten fingers to listen 
to such sornettes^ saving the respect due to 
Monsieur, and the Emperor, and the Maire. " 

** Of what colour were Miss Adela Burt's 
eyes?" asked the Procureur in a tone of 
authority. 

" Dame /" said Grosse Jeanne, twisting 
her apron backwards and forwards, " I never 
thought of it before. Blue ; yes, they were 
blue. Un beau bleu du del ! Pretty eyes, 



FEELS SURE OF HIS PROMOTION. 195 

too, tliough it was droll they were not 
black, when she had such heaps of fine hair, 
noir dujais,^' 

*' Monsieur Durbec, and you, cher Mon- 
sieur Skinner, you both of you at different 
times saw the woman who, at the house of 
the Comte de Mortlake, takes the name and 
fills the place of Miladi Flavia . of what 
colour were her eyes ?" 

" Blue !" said the sergeant. 

" I have but to repeat what Monsieur 
Skinner has said : the person of whom we 
speak has blue eyes . heaux yeux also, and 
the more remarkable for the profusion of 
her dark hair, messieurs," said M. Durbec. 

'^ Then," said the public prosecutor, " I 
think the last thin veil of disguise, mes- 
sieurs, is torn away. Already I have re- 
ceived intelligence that this morning the 
body of that ill-fated lady has been recog- 
nised : Soeur Nanon, and three Sisters of the 




196 M. DUVILLERS-HARDOUIN 

Convent of Our Lady of Cannel, as well as Dr* 
Perinet, depose positively to its identity ; and 
now we wait only that the sword of justice may 
fall the more surely on the guilty. In spite 
of all the craft and cunning of the wretches 
implicated in this infernal plot, we now know 
all. She who has alone profited hy the 
crime committed . she who has robbed the 
dead of her very name and place in the 
world's favour, is the missing niece of 
Madame Royston. This monster of de- 
pravity . this tigress in a woman's form . is 
detected at last. Long suspected, her sin 
has found her at last. The false Lady 
Flavia, the impostor who has taken her 
victim's place under the roof of Harbledown, 
is Adela Burt. Adela Burt it is whom 
French law demands from the English 
government, to pay the penalty of that 
night's work at the Chateau des Roches." 
M. Duvillers-Hardouin spoke strongly^ 




FEELS SURE OF HIS PROMOTION. 197 

fiercely ; he had dropped his aflFected bon- 
homiej and his utterance and gestures were 
those of a hard, merciless accuser, who 
sternly asks blood for blood. Very little 
more was said; and those who had been 
gathered in Colonel Ford's apartments, dis- 
persed gradually, the Procureur taking his 
leave with a cold politeness of those whom 
he well knew to have scant sympathy with 
his prospects. 

" That young creature that was at the 
Fancy Fair at Slochester !" exclaimed the 
Colonel, half incredulous as yet : ** she is an 
impostor, I grant, and deserves to be 
punished ; but surely she ought not to die ; 
yet the Procureur meant what he said. 
They will let off that cur of a young Roy- 
ston, and send her to the scaffold ; and yet, 
if she was mixed up in the crime at all, she 
inust have been a mere tool of that savage 
old uncle of hers, that " 




198 LADY FLAVIA. 

" The extradition warrant will be granted 
to-morrow, or the next day; there is no 
doubt about it, Colonel," said Sergeant 
Skinner, putting his head in at the door : 
" we start for Paris at once, and then for 
London. The arrest must be made now or 
never." 



199 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE LAST WARNINGS. 

And now she knew tliat site was lost. It 
was long before the tidings of the coming 
danger reached her in a definite shape ; but 
when they came they did not find het im- 
prepared. There are natures whose organi- 
sation is so 'sensitive that they appear to be 
gifted with some subtle instinct that whispers 
of perils afar off, and that draw warnings 
from events which coarser perceptions allow 
to pass imheeded; and such a nature was 
that of her whom we will still call by the 
name of the Lady Flavia Clare. Her 
senses were exquisitely delicate, and her 




200 LADY PLAVIA. 

fancy morbidly vivid. Had she been more 
diHpoHod to superstition, it is not tm- 
lik(^ly tliat she might have been a dreamer 
of (IreamH, a mystical enthusiast, a rapt 
prophctoHH, or a seer of visions. But her 
mind was of anotlier order ; and the pitiless 
(!lcani(HH with which she saw the faults and 
frail ticH of others kept her imagination in 
olujck. 

But Lady Flavia Clare could not have told 
anotlior whence she first drew the dismal 
(^rmvictJon of the ruin that was at hand, 
A H tlio first pale streaks of the sad morning 
liglit steal in at the grated window of the 
(H)ndomnod cell, so did the ghastly truth 
creep in upon her shuddering soul, that her 
enemies were many and * strong, and that 
she was weak and alone . ^most miserably 
alone ; more forsaken than the wretch that 
gasps out his last breath on the jagged rock 
where the surge has hurled him, for she 




THE LAST WARNINGS. 201 

dared not call on God to hear and help her. 
She was alone, without hope in earth or 
heaven. 

Various, though slight, were the signs of 
the coming storm. Lady Flavia seldom 
drove out now without catching sights 
somewhere, of one or more of the rural 
police. The constabulary hung about 
Harbledown, in an unobstrusive way, no 
doubt, but still it was now quite a common 
event to see a policeman sauntering down 
the green lanes, or skirting the dun moor- 
land above. The earl had remarked this 
circumstance, and he had asked questions on 
the subject. But the man whom he asked 
had replied, with respectful mystery in his 
tone and manner, that he was there in 
obedience to orders, and that there were 
suspicious characters known to be in that 
part of the country : more the policeman 
did not say ; but Lord Mortlake was satis- 




202 LADT PLAVIA. 

fio<l. It never entered into the peer's head 
that any watch was being kept npon ibe 
incomings and outgoings of his own fiunilj, 
and ho was, of course, unaware that 
Sor^oant Skinner had held a conference 
with the superintendent of police during 
liis stay at (^hartley. 

Then llaynos the keeper had high words 
with liis daugliter Jane, whom in his wrath 
ho accused, not imjustly, of purloining the 
miniature which the under-housemaid had 
sold to the French trafficker in feminine 
finery. There was a violent quarrel 
between father and child, mutual recrimina- 
tions, threats on the part of one, pert 
rejoinders from the other ; and half-a-dozen 
of the servants at Harbledown heard Jane 
Haynes utter the rash retort that ^*the 
picture^ pearls and all, belonged quite as 
much to her as to him. It was Lady 
Flavia's property, and if she was a thief he 



THE LAST WARNINGS, 203 

was a bigger thief." This altercation came 
to the ears of Mrs. Benson, and that func- 
tionary considered herself in duty bound to 
report the supposed theft to the countess ; 
but as Lady Flavia's name had been men- 
tioned, she spoke to Lady Flavia first. The 
matter was settled, but hardly in a fashion 
which seemed satisfactory to the prosaic old 
housekeeper. Both the kindred litigants 
were sent for to Lady Flavia's presence, 
and the end of the discussion was, that 
Jane Haynes packed her boxes and left 
Harbledown at an hour's notice, minus place 
and character, but with anything but an 
empty purse. A reconciliation had been 
patched up between the girl and her father. 
Both were silenced. Lady Flavia sweetly 
assured Mrs. Benson that the recovery of 
the miniature was a matter of no conse- 
quence to her; that she had, indeed, in 
a manner condoned the appropriation of 



204 LADT PLAVIA. 

it, and that she was sure that there was 
no wilful dishonesty on the part of any- 
one, and no need to trouble Lady Mort- 
lake. 

So Jane the fourth housemaid went her 
way, with ill-got cash enough to set her up 
in business, or in matrimony, as her tajxcies 
might incUne ; and Big Ben, to the surprise 
of all, gave formal notice of quitting his 
post as head-keeper, and spoke of emigrat- 
ing. He, too, had plenty of money perpetu- 
ally burning holes in his thriftless pockets, 
and had presented more than one cheque 
at the Slochester Bank, where Lady Flavians 
fast-waning thousand pounds lay. From 
Haynes, and from his daughter, the heiress 
had learned with tolerable accuracy the 
history of the finding of the miniature, and 
of its subsequent sale to the foreign pedler. 
Who was the pedler ? His account of him- 
self was plausible enough. He did not care 



THE. lABT WARNINGS. 205 

to deny the imputation of being a smuggler ; 
for hawkers of this sort are aware that con- 
traband goods have a sort of prestige that 
tempts even purchasers who should know 
better. But he told his name to all who 
cared to hear it. he was Captain Goulot, a 
French ex-merchant captain, and now a 
commercial traveller, staying at the Bell 
at Chartley. Commercial travellers do not 
haunt the back-doors of country mansions, 
or chaflFer with servant-maids for shawls 
and trinkets; but then the man was a 
foreigner 5 and foreigners might have a dif- 
ferent code of trading etiquette. . He said 
he wanted the miniature because he was 
sure he could find a good mart et for it in 
Paris. Good portraits on ivory were 
getting rarer every day since photography 
came in, and there were amateurs in these 
matters, as in others. Trust him (6oul6t) 
to make the best of his wares. 



206 LADY FLAVIA. 

She had money yet . ^perhaps five or six 
hundred pounds. It would have seemed 
much to many and many a man or woman 
in her predicament. It would once have 
seemed a mine of wealth to her. But she 
viewed the world now from a different 
stand-point. As the panther that has once 
lapped blood cannot easily be brought 
under control again, so it was with her. 
She had learned to breathe a new air. 
Luxury, homage, refinement had become to 
her as a vital atmosphere, and to escape to 
poverty and neglect was merely to seek out 
a boundless prison for herself. She had 
jewels of some value, notably one fine set of 
diamonds that Francis, Earl of Mortlake, 
had purchased for a peace-offering, after 
some petty quarrel with his vain young 
wife, and which he had meant to give to 
her on the very evening that had witnessed 
her shameful flight. But these were not 




THE LAST WARNINGS. 207 

enough. Better stay and brave it out, 
than lead a life of obscure hardship far 
away ; and she doubted if, even with ample 
means at her command, she could escape 
detection, pursuit, capture. Her intellect 
was clear, her will strong, and her readiness 
of resource could be relied upon; but 
perhaps it was too late. And to flee, and 
be overtaken, that were folly indeed. She 
would never be self-condemned, at any 
rate. Nevertheless, had she been able 
to possess herself of a considerable sum 
of money, it is probable that she might 
have made the attempt to seek a refuge 
in the New World. But this could not 
be. 

Lord Mortlake, a very indulgent guar- 
dian, and one who felt a sincere liking for 
his beautiful young ward, had begun to 
remonstrate with her on her extravagance. 
He had set his face against Mr. Hart's being 




208 LADT FLAVIA. 

appointed agent to the Sussex and Leicester- 
shire properties, saying with much reason, 
that the lawyer had enough to do in 
managing the Harbledown estate, that Mr. 
Hart had none of the local knowledge 
requisite for the land-agent for Cupley Lees 
and Melshott Friars, and that his kins- 
woman must not allow her good-nature to 
be imposed upon. Also, the earl had posi- 
tively declined to urge on Lady Flavia's 
trustees the propriety of paying a sum of 
five thousand pounds into the Slochester 
Bank ; and indeed the trustees themselves 
had raised all sorts of diflBculties when this 
request was made to them by Lady Flavia 
herself. 

Sir Wilbraham, a distant relation of Mr. 
AUeyne of Slochester, wrote to the vicar of 
St. Eanswith's, to ask him if he could 
privately inform him as to the terms on 
which the late earl's daughter was at 



THE LAST WARNINGS. 209 

present with her relatives at Harbledown, 
It really seemed to the baronet as if there 
must be some quarrel or estrangement, 
which led Lady Flavia to form the inten- 
tion of seeking a home of her own, for on 
no other supposition could he or Mr. Cot- 
trell understand the young lady's constant 
demands for money. If such should un- 
happily be the case. Sir Wilbraham added, 
steps might be taken to increase Lady 
Flavia's annual allowance to an income 
suJBScient for her separate maintenance in 
one of her own houses, and in that case, it 
would be necessary to provide a suitable 
middle-aged chaperon, of good birth, and so 
on, all of which would be very troublesome 
and tiresome. 

On the other hand, the earl felt convinced 
that he was doing right in preventing his 
ward from dilapidating her large property 
out of idle caprice. She would soon marry, 

VOL. III. p 



210 LADY PLAVIA. 

HO he tliought, and her husband should not 
liavo cauHe to blame tlie careless goazdiaii 
who Iiad neglected the interests of his giddy 
young bride. So trustees and guardian, in 
all kindness of heart, concurred to close tlie 
last loophole for escape. Meanwhile Lord 
Hythe avoided Lady Flavia as much as he 
could without attracting attention, but 
observed her conduct narrowly ; and though 
her hopes that she might still bring him to 
her feet were almost dead within her, she 
still felt a kind of regret when he annoimoed 
his intention of going up to London to take 
his place in parliament. The earl was to go 
up at the same time, the countess and the 
others remaining in the country for another 
month or more. 

" One short campaign" . she repeated 
these words over and over again in the 
solitude of her chamber . " one season in 
London, and I should be safe ; I know 




THE LAST WARNIK^GS. 211 

enough of the world to be sure of that. 
Earl Ferrers, now a days, would not have 
been hanged at Tyburn with a silken rope ; 
he would have been certified as mad by the 
highest medical authorities, and so died 
tranquilly in his bed at last. And I, as the 
wife of a man of rank and influence, should 
not be left to my fate. It woidd be the 
business of all sorts of great personages to 
screen me, and hide me, and smuggle me 
out of reach of the disgrace that might soil 
the ermine of the peerage. At the worst, I 
could die to the world, and be mourned 
decorously, and chronicled in the obituary of 
the Court Circular, and emerge from my 
ashes like a phoenix, with an allowance of a 
couple of thousands, and so travel the 
continent as a Polish countess or a German 
baroness . a feminine Free Lance of modern 
watering-place society. But no ; it is too 
late. I shall die without even a glimpse of 



212 LADT FLAYIA. 

the Promised Land of earthly splendour and 
power." 

She had the more reason to ^ew the 
future thus despondinglj after her maid 
Simmons had one day taken the liberty of 
showing her a dirty little parallelogram of 
gilt-edged pasteboard, very limp but highly 
glazed, and which was in fact a French 
visiting-card. "The furiner that's been 
about the place, my lady, selling rubbish of 
lace and fal-lals to the under-servants," said 
Simmons, nobly oblivious of more than one 
specimen of Palais Royal jewellery and 
Temple embroidery which the discriminating 
Goulot had sold her for about half the cost- 
price; "that Frenchman that bought the 
ivory miniature set with pearls, about which 
your ladyship " 

" That will do ; I have heard enough 
about that wretched miniature. What do 
you want, Simmons?" interrupted Lady 



THE LAST WARNINGS. 213 

Flavia, with a little petulant stamp of her 
foot. 

Simmons humbly begged pardon ; she 
only meant to say that the card had been 
found between the folds of a smart shot-silk 
mantle which one of the maids, who hap- 
pened to be " keeping company" with James 
the footman, had bought, cheap, from the 
accommodating foreigner. Most Ukely the 
card had dropped into this place of conceal- 
ment accidentally. The foreigner was now 
gone, for good, since one of the grooms 
going on an errand to Chartley had made 
inquiry for him at the Bell, where the 
waiter had reported him as having returned 
to his own country. And Simmons, as the 
inscription on the card was in French, and 
as Lady Flavia had been so much abroad, 
had made bold to ask her ladyship for a free 
translation of the enigmatical document. 
The card was lettered thus, in small 




214 LADT FLAVIA. 

characters, very black and thin, after the 
favourite style of Parisian lithography : 

LOUIS DURBEC, 

SOUS-CHEF DES AGENTS DE SURETE, 

S'ADRESSER BUREAU SPECIAL DE SURVEILLANCE 

RUE JERUSALEM, 

OU 29 RUE PEPINIERE, 

A BELLEVILLE. 

" I thought you said this was a pedler's 
card," said Lady Flavia, with perfect com- 
posure ; " it is nothing of the kind. It ia 
only the address of some person named 
Durbec, employed in a government office in 
Paris. I think an agent de sdrete has some- 
thing to do with the police, but I really 
don't know. You had better attend to those 
knots of velvet ribbon ; the one to the left 
is quite crooked." 

Nevertheless, when Simmons was gone, 
her mistress smiled bitterly, and the old 
hard look of desperate defiance darkened 
her beauty like the shadow of an evil 




THE LAST WARNINGS. 215 

angel's dusky wing. ** The play is very 
nearly played out !" she said ; and then she 
went down-stairs, and was gay, mirthful, 
happy to all appearance, as if life were a 
holiday of perpetual enjoyment. 

It was remembered afterward^ that, during 
these last days, Lady Flavia appeared at her 
best, brighter, more winning, more endear- 
ing than ever before. She took pleasure in 
the veriest trifles. No one guessed the true 
reason of the interest that she seemed to 
feel in watching the shy little snow-drops 
display their budding purity above the 
earth so lately-frost bound, or the meaning 
of her strange smile when a few early prim- 
roses, gathered in some sheltered valley 
where the aspect was southern, were 
brought by a village child to Lady Caroline. 
" They are pale, poor flowers, but they are 
the last of their humble sisterhood that I 
shall ever see !" such were her thoughts as 



216 LADY FLA VIA. 

she smiled. "These meek, pale blossoms 
will soon make room for gaudier rivals, and 
the roses and the violets will bloom a gain 
in their maiden glory, but my eyes will not 
look upon them ; I have seen my last 
sunmier-tide/' And the strength and fire 
of her young life seemed to shudder within 
her as she held the flowers in her hand ; 
but her soul was strong, and she betrayed 
no emotion. She bent over the flowers and 
kissed them, and laid them gently down. 
The peril that was so near her braced her 
nerves, where a weaker than she would have 
been utterly unstrung. The fairy queen 
queened it well to the last. " They shall 
remember me," she thought : *' I cannot be 
robbed, at any rate, of the memory that I 
shall leave among them.'* 

Her singing had always been admirable 
for its pathos and power, but now it was 
siren-sweet. The Clares wondered what it 



THE LAST WARNINGS. 217 

was that chained them around the piano, 
that was so poor and conventional an 
instrument when others used it, but whose 
ivory keys, under her soft touch, had a 
magic potency. What a voice it was, 
thrilling unsuspected fibres in the listeners* 
hearts, witching, enthralling, but ever sad 
in its silvery music ! Those songs might 
have been sung by an erring spirit, not all 
evil, longing, vainly longing to atone for 
the past, while turning away from the 
radiant gate and flaming sword at the 
entrance of Eden. Lord Hythe, in spite of 
himself, could not tear himself away while 
that wonderful voice was to be heard. He 
felt that his honest manly nature mistrusted 
this woman, but there was that in her 
mournful passionate tones that almost con- 
quered his reason and his resolve. 

All this time, she who stood before the 
world as the envied heiress, the high-bom 



218 LADY FLAVIA. 

maiden, the noble daughter of the dead Earl 
of Mortlake, as she laid her head upon her 
pUlow, wondered that she was still free, tm- 
accused, unharmed. She counted the hours 
as they went by. There have been vulgar 
criminals who have caroused without a sign 
of fear until they were in the clutch of the 
oflScers of justice, and who then sank below 
the common standard of men ; but it was 
not so with her. Afar off she saw the 
gathering blackness of the storm ; afar off*i 
she heard the halting step of the Fate that 
dogs the guilty, and she knew the tread of 
Nemesis, and waited, despairing but uncon- 
quered, for the coming doom. 




219 



CHAPTER XII. 



NEMESIS. 



There was to be a grand ball at Sir 
Neville's. The bachelor baronet had been 
egged on to the enterprise by his patroniz- 
ing friends, Vere and Fitzalaric ; and the 
skilful diplomacy of Lord Plantagenet had 
brought the Dowager, Sir Neville's mother, 
from Torquay, to receive, the guests. In 
this she was to be aided by Miss Billingsley 
from the Close of Slochester, a lady who 
had tact, boldness, eyesight, and memory, 
in all which essential features of a party- 
giver the Dowager was lacking. Of course, 
the Mortlake family would be at this ball ; 



220 LADY PLAVIA. 

indeed, the Guardsmen had designed it in 
honour of Lady Flavia. They had seen 
her at croquet-parties, archery-meetings, 
dinners, breakfasts, and a fancy fair. They 
knew how very well she could dance, and 
how wonderful was her power of amusing 
even the duUest-witted partner. But they 
wished to see her in a ball, a real ball, 
before making their report of her in the 
smoking-rooms of the dubs. 

Both Guardsmen had given up the use* 
less pursuit of twenty-eight or thirty 
thousand a year, to be taken in conjunction 
with such a dazzling little beauty as the 
daughter of Earl Francis. They fell back 
with a sigh, to their normal ambition of 
heiresses without any acquaintance with 
the letter H ; heiresses that squinted, hump- 
backed heiresses, or, at any rate, heiresses 
that Cupid would pout at as he launched 
his shaft, and that Hymen yrould be half- 



NEMESIS. 221 

ashamed of escorting to the mercenary- 
altar. 

** The little party," said Lord Plantagenet 
Vere to Captain Fitzalaric, " is a cut above 
you and me. You'll see she'll marry deuced 
high. She'll carry London by storm. Some 
duke, or some Irish marquis, with forty 
thousand a year out of the potato-gardens, 
or some awfully heavy swell of a railway- 
carrier or contractor, who counts his tin by 
millions, will put the ring on her fingers at 
St. George's, Hanover Square. And if she 
runs to win, and takes us up, she may be 
uncommonly useful to us younger sons, 
Fitz, my boy !" And these two young men 
agreed that Lady Flavia's future patronage 
(and they agreed that she was just the sort 
of girl to stick to her friends like a brick) 
would be very serviceable to Mayfair 
Ishmaelites like themselves. 

The carriages. two were needed, of 



222 LADY FLAVIA* 

conrse, to convey so large a party. drove 
slowly round from the stables to the front 
door of Harbledown. All the &mily gronp 
had assembled around the fire in the bine 
drawing-room . ^the small blue drawing- 
room, not the one with about half an acre 
of Axminster carpet, and four windows 
looking over the lawn. A sort of murmur 
ran through the httle crowd . even Lord 
Hythe joined in it involuntarily . a murmur 
of irrepressible admiration as Lady Flavia 
ent,ered. They knew that she would be in 
white, but they had never perhaps seen, 
never perhaps conceived, such exquisite, 
tiny loveliness. She wore a ball-dress for 
tlio first time. The pure rustling robes of 
Htiowy white, the lace, the spotless tulle, the 
^I(MUii of half-seen silk, the soft feathery 
f.riinniinpH, sot off her beauty as a frame sets 
oir II. pirinrc. For the first time, they saw 
ili(^ ivory whiteness of her polished shoul- 



NEMESIS. 223 

ders ; for the first time they saw her queenly 
little head crowned with a wreath of white 
flowers. Her jewels, pearls, and diamonds 
flashed back the hght. It is an axiom of 
good taste that a rich heiress should be 
simply attired, and should eschew orna- 
ments ; but the sparkle of the brilKants, and 
the soft, moony shimmer of the pearls, 
seemed as much to belong to this wondrous 
little beauty as the perfume to a rose. The 
absence of all colour from her dress, seemed 
to make the ebon hair loom more blackly, 
and the blooming cheek more dainty in its 
soft pink blush. 

" My darling !" said Lady Caroline, sidling 
up to her friend, with honest admiration in 
her look and half- whispered tone . **my 
darling ! we shall all " 

A sudden upraising of angry voices with- 
out, a momentary stamping and scuffling, 
and then a fresh outburst of clamorous dis- 



224 LADY PLAVIA. 

pute, made Lady Caroline stop short in her 
speech, and look round. The noise and 
confusion seemed to increase. No one 
knew what to think. In that well-ordered 
household such a breach of discipline was 
unaccountable. The countess was the first 
to express her alarm. Something must have 
happened . some dreadful accident. Lord 
Hythe walked across the room, and threw 
open the door. The hall was full of people. 
There was a policeman standing in the 
outer doorway. The lamplight glistened 
on the glazed rim of his hat. There 
were other strangers there, holding no 
friendly altercation with some of the 
men-servants, while two or three of the 
maids were hovering round, and talking 
volubly. 

" What is all this ? What has happened ?" 
asked Lord Hythe in a loud voice. 

** Now just you attend to me, and stand 




NEMESIS. 225 

back, young man," said one of the strabgers, 
a stout, good-humoured personage in black, 
pushing one of the powdered giants out of 
his way: "it's your fault, not ours, that, 
there has been any disturbance at all. But 
we must see Lord Mortlake at once on im- 
portant business, and those that hinder us 
will find they do it at their own peril, I can 
tell you." 

" Who are you ? What do you want ?" 
asked Lord Hythe, motioning at the same 
time to the footmen to allow the intruders 
to approach. These, not reckoning the 
constables without, whose shiny hats were 
visible in the light that streamed through 
the door, both leaves of which were open, 
were three . the stout, jovial-looking spokes- 
man ; a tall, stern-faced man in the braided 
uniform worn by superintendents of police, 
and wearing the Crimean medals; and a 
dark wiry man with broad shoulders, pointed 

VOL. III. Q 



226 LADY FLAYIA. 

white teeth, and the eyes of a hawk . a 
foreigner evidently. 

" We want, my lord, to see the earl at 
once," said the first of these three. ** Beg 
pardon for any annoyance or inconvenience, 
but we must do our duty. This is Mon- 
sieur Durbec of the French police, and I am 
Sergeant Skinner of the detective depart- 
ment of the force, from London. We have 
our warrant, my lord, signed by the Secre- 
tary of State, and " 

" Hush ! come this way . come into 
Lord Mortlake's study," said Lord Hythe, 
in a changed tone . '* you shall speak to my 
father there." 

A strange scene did the spacious entrance- 
hall of Harbledown present. A handsome 
hall it was, with marble floor and colmnns, 
and a fine frescoed roof, copied probably from 
the decorations of some Italian palace, to 
which a former Earl of Mortlake had taken 




NEMESIS, 227 

a fancy when on the grand tour ; but now, 
with the servants crowding into it, whisper- 
ing and talking as they stood together in 
knots, with the superintendent of police 
leaning against one of the polished Carrara 
pillars, and with the ominous figures of his 
satellites visible in the porch without, the 
ample vestibule looked like a ship's deck in 
possession of mutineers or pirates. 

The servants had been quieted now, and 
looked scared and inquisitive rather than 
angry. At first, the tall footmen whose 
calves had been more developed than their 
brains, with others of the younger men, had 
been for forcibly ejecting the intruders who 
had presumed to make their way into an 
earl's mansion; but the groom of the 
chambers, the butler, and one or two of the 
more aged and prudent domestics, had re- 
strained this outburst of indignation from 
taking any practical shape, and the per- 



228 LADY FULYIA. 

suasive firmness of the police, coupled with 
the timely arrival of Lord Hythe, had 
hushed the storm. But the retainers of the 
House of Mortlake, forbidden to defend 
their master's castle in the old law-defying 
style, could not tear themselves away from 
the scene of such unprecedented events. 
There they stayed, whispering to one 
another that there were constables guard*' 
ing the back entrance of the house as well 
as the front, and that most likely the 
carriages waiting outside to convey the 
family to Sir Neville's ball, would prove 
to have been harnessed to no purpose that 
night. 

Lord Mortlake had been sent for. He 
had entered the study where his son and the 
two detectives awaited him, and had closed 
the door. Those without tried to overhear 
something of the conference, but the thick 
wood baflSied them, and nothing could be 



NEMESIS. 229 

made out except that the voices of those 
within, loud and wrathful at first, had sunk 
to a subdued under-tone of rapid conversa- 
tion. Presently . it seemed a long time to 
all . the earl came out, followed by Lord 
Hythe and the policemen. "They must 
know it," he said with a groan ; " let them 
learn it at once ;" and they all entered the 
blue drawing-room, where the countess, 
with a pale, terrified face, sat on the sofa 
near the fire, with her daughters beside her. 
Lady Mortlake was not a courageous 
woman, and she had a real cause for 
dreading strong emotions, since her heart 
was not wholly sound, and her physicians 
had warned her once and again that excite- 
ment might prove serious to her one day. 
The earl knew this, and spared her any 
vexation that he could take on his own 
shoulders ; but now he overlooked it . the 
blow was too sudden. "Where is Lady 



230 LADY PLAVIA. 

Flavia ?" he asked in a harsh tone . " where 
is she ? This dreadful affair concerns her." 
The countess and her daughters looked 
round surprised. For the first time they 
thought of Lady Flavia since the confusion 
began. Lady Flavia was gone. 

" She cannot escape, parhleu f* said M. 
Durbec, with a shrug and a grin. The earl 
dropped into a chair, and let his grey head 
rest upon his hand as he bent forward. He 
looked quite old in a moment. He had 
come into the room with anger in his looks 
and voice, but the anger had been short-lived 
in the absence of the offender. His tone 
was one of mere dejection as he said : " You 
must teU them, Augustus. I cannot do it. 
I never thought to see such shame and 
misery as this wretched girl-this impostor, 
that we were all so fond of. It's very hard 
to bear the disgrace." There were a few 
moments of weeping and outeries, and 




NEMESIS. 231 

quick, passionate, broken words. The 
countess lay back half-fainting on the sofa, 
while her daughters, in a bewildered manner, 
reiterated their questionings. 

" Who is an impostor ? Not Flavia . 
impossible !" cried Lady Julia. 

Lord Hythe shook his head. " Too true, 
Julia," he said : " she is not what she feigns 

to be. She is not of our blood or name. 

. 

That is bad enough . the robbery of another's 
station and fortune. But there is worse be- 
hind . such shame and grief as And 

to think !" broke out the young man, losing 
the composure he had hitherto maintained 
. :" to think that I asked her to be my wife, 
that she was a a sister to my sisters !- 
blind dupes that we were !" 

By this time the incredulity of the girls 
was broken down ; they began to weep and 
lament in a manner that it was painful to 
witness; and the countess, much agitated. 



232 LADY PLAVIA. 

pressed her hand to her heart as she turned 
her eyes reproachfully towards her son and 
her husband. ^^ Shame ! . disgrace !" she 
said, bitterly ; " and you, who are men, and 
should know the world better than a woman 
can, you suflFered that wretch to be the com- 
panion of my children, and the shame ^" 

She broke down, sobbing. 

" No, not so !" cried Lord Hythe, eagerly ; 
"on my soul, it is not as you think . ^not 
such shame as is that which commonly 
tarnishes the name of a guilty woman. 
Wicked as she is, as I hope for Heaven's 
mercy for my own sins, I believe her to be 
as pure as any one that breathes on earth. 
Her reputation is not tarnished. There 
will be no after-slur, on that account, to 
embitter the future lives of my sisters. But 
. there are other evil deeds for which she 
has to answer before Heaven and before 
men." 



NEMESIS. 233 

*^ Who . ^what is she ?" asked Lady Julia, 
ahnost in a whisper. 

Lord Hythe replied in a voice that was 
less firm than before : " Her true name is 
Adela Burt ; and these oflScers of justice 
hold warrants for her arrest and removal to 
France, there to take her trial for " 

" For what ?" asked the countess, eagerly, 
and yet with a shrinking fear of the answer. 

*^For murder!" said Sergeant Skinner, 
laying some papers on the table ; " and I'm 
sorry to say there's no doubt whatever about 
the business." 

" Murder ! the terrible word sent an icy 
chill through every heart there. A long 
silence followed. The earl was the first to 
break it. ^' Read the warrants, Julia," he 
said: "you have the coolest head of us all. 
Tell your mother what their contents are ; 
and then for the end of this sad affair." 



234 LADY PLAVIA. 



CHAPTER XIIL 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 



The warrants were formal. Signed by 
the Minist;er of Justice in France, signed 
by the English Secretary of State, their 
authority was not to be denied or opposed. 
They ordered the arrest of Adela Burt, 
British subject, falsely called the Lady Flavia 
Clare, and her removal to France, there to 
stand her trial for complicity in a murder 
alleged to have been committed in France. 
The name of the murdered person was the 
Lady Flavia Clare. The other accused 
were Brand Royston (dead), Basil Royston, 
and Elizabeth, widow of Brand Royston, 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 235 

and aunt to Adela Burt ; and the warrants 
were backed by abridged copies of deposi- 
tions in both languages, bearing upon the 
crime. The reading and the explaining of 
these documents occupied some time. But 
the detectives were in no hurry. They 
were civil and respectful, now that their 
professional vanity, ruffled by the unthink- 
ing resistance which the earl's serving-men 
had opposed to their entry, had been ap- 
peased. They stood very quietly beside 
the table, and never spoke but in answer to 
a question. Of the escape of her whom 
they sought they had no fear ; the house 
was too well watched for that ; a poKceman 
was at every outlet, and they could well 
afford to be gentle and deferential in their 
caption. The earl had rallied from the 
first shock, and his practical common sense, 
not very far-reaching, but sound, so far as 
its rays could penetrate through the haze of 



236 LADY FLAVIA. 

prejudice and routine, did not fail him in 
the present strait. He could not resist the 
weight of the proofs in support of the ac- 
cusation, but he spoke in favour of the cul- 
prit. *'You will not be harsh mth her; 
indeed, as a magistrate, although my au- 
thority is of course overborne by that of the 
Secretary of State, I should not permit any 
imdue severity to be used towards her. 
But she has sat at my table, and been as a 
daughter of my own for months, and if she 
were the guiltiest wretch in the world, 
I would not see her roughly or rudely 
treated." 

Lord Mortlake's voice was firm enough 
now ; and Sergeant Skinner, who had been 
brought up to respect a lord in our simple 
British fashion, took upon himself to 
answer: *^I can answer for myself, my 
lord, and for Monsieur Durbec here, that 
we shall do our disagreeable duty with as 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 237 

little harshness as we can consistently with 
duty (here the sergeant's hand dropped 
into the side-pocket of his greatcoat, where 
lay a pair of bright steel handcuffs). We 
know what is due to an inmate of your 
lordship's house, and begging your lord- 
ship's pardon, we would not be rough or 
hasty with any woman, lady or no lady." 

At this point the countess interposed. 
" I don't believe the story," she said : " the 
personation of the late earl's daughter is, I 
fear, too'^true. But the murder ! that girl 
. who laid her pretty head on my knees 
yesterday, and looked up into my face with 
her sweet trustful blue eyes, like an inno- 
cent child . she to be a murderess . impos- 
sible ! " 

And then Lady Mortlake began to weep 
afresh, and Lady Julia bent over her and 
spoke soothingly to her. Lord Hythe and 
Lady Caroline spoke with one voice when 



238 LADY FLAVIA. 

they declared their fiill belief that Mrs. 
Rojston's niece had been a mere passiYe 
tool in the hands of her ruflSanly uncle. 
It was absurd to think her anything but an 
unwilling instrument of more designing 
persons than herself. 

Now that the worst had been told . ^now 
that it was known that the sin of which she 
. the late idol of the household . stood ac- 
cused was not the sin that turns a woman's 
own sex into her bitterest foes and detrac- 
tors, it was wonderful to see how the affec- 
tion and esteem of months struggled against 
the too clear convictions of the reason. 
Even Lord Hythe forgot his own doubts, 
his own suspicions, as he protested against 
the seeming cruelty of making this helpless 
young creature the scapegoat for the 
offences of the real criminals. 

" Pardon^ milord, I fear we must execute 
our orders," said M. Durbec at last. 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 239 

Lord Mortlake rose, and said with a 
dignity that was rare with the plain, gaiter- 
wearing earl : " I will go with you. This 
young lady, be she what she may, has been 
my guest. It is my duty to hear what she 
may be able to say in extenuation of her 
conduct, and to report it in the proper 
quarter. She shall have justice; and if 
there be grounds for mercy, my voice shall 
be raised in her behalf. That she is deeply 
to blame, I am certain ; but I do not believe 
she is as bad, gentlemen, as these papers 
would make her out to be.'* 

" I cannot go up," said Lord Hythe, with 
a groan ; " I asked her to be my wife ; 
I could not bear to see her as a criminal." 

He turned away and hid his face. But 
Lady Caroline sprang up with a flushed 
cheek, and eyes that were bright through 
their tears : *^ I will go up, papa . don't for- 
bid me . I can never see her again after this 



240 ULDT FLAVIA, 



he . ^but I loved her . ^loved her so very 
dearly, for herself . and I will not desert 
her or refuse to listen to her now/* 

Those two were the only members of the 
noble family of Clare who went np-stairs, 
accompanied by the two detectives. 

" Is Lady Flavia in her room ?" asked the 
earl of one of the servants still hanging 
about with anxious faces. They had just 
made a new discovery ; some one had 
recognised the foreign pedler in the person 
of M. Durbec. One of the housemaids 
came timidly forward to say that Lady 
Flavia had passed by her, " Hke a ghost," on 
the back-stairs, nearly half an hour ago ; 
and Simmons and Mrs. Benson, the house- 
keeper, pressed on to precede the party on 
their way ; her ladyship, they knew, was 
in her own apartments. It was extraordi- 
nary how easily all the servants of Harble- 
down had caught at the idea that there was 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 241 

something wrong about Lady Flavia, who 
was not as others were. 

The earl paused. " Go down, all of you ,' 
he said ; " I want no tattling gossips here. 
This is a serious business, with which you 
have nothing to do. If any one plays the 
eavesdropper, she shall be turned out of my 
house at once. Let no one enter the west 
wing without orders." 

The disappointed women fell back with 
frightened courtesies and protestations. It 
was the first time they had heard their lord 
speak as a master who chose to be obeyed. 
Lord Mortlake, like most other kindly 
common-place gentlemen, was a little afraid 
of womankind, and always very civil and 
awkward on the few occasions on which he 
exchanged a word with the female servants. 
The apparition of a cap and apron in such 
a house as that of Harbledown, elsewhere 
than on the back-stairs, was as rare as that 

VOL. III. R 



242 LADY FLATIA. 

of a black swan ; but now the establishment 
was thoroughly disorganised, and it took no 
less than the earl's blunt language, and its 
implied threat, to keep the west wing clear 
of curious spies. 

" The doors will be locked most likely ; 
we must persuade her to admit us, poor 
unhappy girl," said the earl, laying his 
grasp upon the handle of one of the doors. 
But contrary to his expectation, it did not 
prove to be locked ; it yielded at once. 
The intruders found all the inuer doors of 
the pretty suite of piAk rooms open, and the 
rooms in a blaze of light. The wax-lights, 
which it was the whim of their wilful 
occupant to keep ready on every chimney- 
piece and table, had all been ignited, and 
the bedroom, boudoir, dressing-room, bath- 
room, were all filled with the clear white 
hght. 

" Come in, if you will ; I am here," said 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 243 

the well-known girlish voice from the bed- 
room. 

They went in, Durbec going first. The 
large chamber was not one of our ordinary 
English rooms, choked up by a monstrous 
bed, and containing little else than that 
mountain of upholstery. It was furnished 
in the tasteful French fashion, with sofa, 
and couch, and arm-chairs of damask and 
velvet, mirrors, pier-glasses, vases of flowers 
here, pretty knick-knacks there, and it had 
a deep Brussels carpet, whose tints did not 
jar with the warm rose pink of the silken 
curtains. The little bed, in its alcove, 
standing modestly aloof, with its virginal 
white curtains edged with lace, was merely 
an unobtrusive feature in the appointments, 
not a self-asserting Temple of Sleep, like 
the British four-poster. It was a room at 
which a Parisian could have looked approv- 
ingly. 



244 LADY PLAVIA. 

The fire burned bright, adding its flicker- 
ing yellow lustre to the glare of the many 
wax-lights. Near the fire^ standing beside 
a large arm-chair of crimson velvet, on the 
back of which her small right hand rested, 
as if for support, stood the object of their 
search . motionless she stood, confronting 
them. They had expected to find a guilty, 
panic-stricken woman cowering in a comer, 
and receiving them with shrieks and frantic 
prayers and false assertions of her innocence. 
What they saw was this : 

She on whose head the storm, long 
dreaded, had burst, she whom the halting 
step, slow, but sure, of Nemesis had over- 
taken at last, stood and faced them with 
dauntless mien, and eyes that never quailed. 
In the shock of that dreadful discovery, with 
all its bitter sting of exposure and of punish- 
ment to come, she bore herself right royally. 
Her dazzling beauty had never before worn 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 245 

the strange charm that it possessed in the 
excitement of that terrible hour. No terri- 
fied woman, trembling at the coming of her 
accusers, was there : but a queen, rather, 
who, in the midst of ruin and insult, faces 
her rebellious subjects with indomitable 
pride, and meets their menaces with quiet 
scorn. 

Durbec advanced towards her with a 
quick step and his hand extended. " De "par 
la hi r he said, as he drew near . " in the 
name of the law, and in the Emperor's name, 
I arrest you, Adela Burt, falsely called the 
Lady Flavia Clare, for your share in the 
assassination here deposed to. You are my 
prisoner, mademoiselle." 

And he displayed the warrant with one 
hand, while with the other he seemed about 
to lay hold of her arm, according to the 
formal procedure in case of arrest. She did 
not shrink, she did not start back; but 



246 LADT FLAVIA. 

there was a sort of fihudder and shrinkiiig, 
not of fear, but of strong repugnance in her 
voice as she made answer : " No ; do not 
touch me ; it is useless. I deny nothing. 
Je me rend&, monsieur ! I am Adela Burt, 
and I am your prisoner. Your duty is dis- 
charged. Monsieur Durbec." 

The Frenchman bowed and fell back, 
respectful of the beauty and courage before 
him. Power of any sort will make itself 
felt, and the very fact of his prisoner s being 
acquainted with his name, by some means 
which he could not guess, had weight with 
him. The others, too, stood silent for a 
moment, gazing on her who had been one of 
their own fireside kindred circle for weeks 
and months. 

She . let us call her Lady Flavia Clare to 
the last . she met their gaze with an 
audacious daring that was merely the un- 
masking of a strong soul in its despair. 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 247 

Her elfin majesty, her almost childish love- 
liness, were enhanced by the anguish that 
gnawed her heart in silence. Her raven hair 
fell in masses of gleaming curls, and once she 
tossed it back with the old gesture of in- 
fantine impatience ; her great blue eyes . . 
those eyes whose colour, so rare in conjunc- 
tion with black hair, was one of her chief 
charms, and had aided in the detection of her 
imposture. were unnaturally bright and 
large, so it seemed, and her sweet young 
face was slightly suffused with a flush of 
hectic colour. Her gloves, and fan, and 
her handkerchief . a little heap of Honiton 
lace . ^lay on the chair beside which she 
stood. She had thrown her cloak . the 
cloak she was to have worn on her way to 
the ball . over her shoulders, and the 
scarlet cashmere, with its broad border of 
gold, set off the splendour of her beauty like 
some theatrical costume might have done. 



248 LADY FLAVIA, 

The cloak was a Kttle open in front, and it 
might have been noticed that her breath 
came quickly, more quickly by far than was 
usual, but that was the only visible sign of 
emotion. The gems on her neck, on 
her bare arms, sparkled and flashed 
as she stirred, and ihe coronet of flowers 
made the blackness of the hair around the 
pure white oval of her forehead appear more 
intense than ever before. 

'*0 Flavia, Flavia!" broke out Lady 
Caroline with a sort of half-reproachful wail, 
and then stopped abruptly in her speech, as 
she remembered all ; for they who looked 
upon her, their late companion and spoiled 
darling, saw her now, gleaming in her 
awful lovliness, through a fancied mist and 
haze of blood-red light that encompassed 
her like a lurid atmosphere of guilt and sin. 
And she . the fairy princess, the creature 
that seemed too bright for earth, and only 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 249' 

to be lent for a little while from some 
sunnier sphere that she might sport for a 
brief hour of butterfly-life among flowers 
and fair scenes . she was accused, and did 
not even deny her crime . and that crime 
was murder, 

" I have not come here to reproach you," 
said the earl, sadly ; *' my wish is, that if you 
have anything to urge that can extenuate . 
that can palliate what you are charged with, 
you should tell it to me, that I may use the 
knowledge on your behalf. I pass over the 
wrong and injury done to me and mine. 
But . you understand that you are accused 
of murder. of being an accomplice, if not a 
principal, in the . and a helpless girl the 
victim . I can't believe it. 

And Lord Mortlake looked from the 
oflScers to the culprit, and back again, with 
an expression of painful perplexity. 

Then Lady Flavia spoke. " My lord," 



250 LADY FLAVIA. 

she said, ** you are a good man. You and 
yours have been kind to me. That is 
over now. You wiU remember me with 
loathing, as a hateful thing that you would 
wish to put out of your memory, as I shall 
presently be thrust out of the world, as a 
wretch unfit to cumber it. But bear with 
me now; and you. Lady Caroline, listen. 
Before I go to my French prison and my 
French scaffold, I wish to say some words, 
with the permission of these gentlemen, 
who are my masters now." And here she 
glanced half in scorn, half in entrearty, 
towards the detectives. 

" We will wait as long as you please, my 

la 1 mean, miss," answered Sergeant 

Skinner ; "only please remember you are 
not bound to criminate yourself." 

Durbec put his hand on his heart and 
bowed without speaking ; and then both 
men's faces evinced the curiosity that they 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 251 

could not help feeling. The earl seated 
himself in a chair, leaning his head on his 
hand; but Lady Caroline, nervous and 
distressed, continued to stand, with her 
eyes wandering from the carpet to the 
face of her former friend. 

Lady Flavia, paused for a moment, and 
then commenced in a clear low voice, that 
was wonderfully distinct and firm, even in 
that extremity; "I thank you for your 
indulgence; I shall not abuse it. The 
confession I am going to make will have 
one merit . it will be true, I, who have 

been a Lie Incarnate, whose name was 
usurped, whose fortune was a theft, whose 
very being was steeped in falsehood, shall 
tell no lie to-night. You may believe me, 
as you would believe .the words of the 
dying. and T am very near to death . I 
mean to tell you the whole truth." Here 
she laughed, the old ringing laugh, the 



252 LADY FLATIA. 

joyleas, elfin kngh that had seldom fefled 
to cause fear or perplexity even in the 
dollest listener. Those who heard it now 
understood it better than thej had been 
nsed to do, and they shuddered as they 
hearkened to it She went on : '^ Listen. 
Yon know my real name, my real station, and 
that I am a niece of Mrs. Rovston ; but 
vou know little more. These are the facts. 
I was left an orphan, and penniless, and I 
was received out of charity by my aunt, 
whom I had never seen before. The name 
I bore was a verv humble name ; the blood 
in my veins was derived from very humble 
sources; the Burts were plain yeomen at 
best, and I do not think that their pedigree 
aspires so high as to daim even a great- 
grandfather. Yet such as I am, I have 
played my part tolerably well. It cost me 
no effort to act the patrician. Did I prove 
a disgrace to the name and the Norman 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 253 

blood of Clare, my lord ? Did you, Lady 
Caroline, or any of your aristocratic friends, 
ever detect the daw beneath the fine 
borrowed plumes ? Hardly so, I ^think !" 
Here again she laughed, but instantly 
resumed : " I don't think I bore much 
resemblance to my worshipful ancestry, the 
Burts. My uncle Brand was no flatterer, 
but when I first came to share my aunt's 
home, he asked, in his rough way, where 
his wife's family had stolen me, since I 
seemed a thoroughbred hawk from out of a 
nest of owls. Indeed, poor Aimt Elizabeth 
was afraid of me at first, because, as she 
said, I was a lady. The Roystons were 
abroad then. Debt and outlawry kept 
them out of England, and in their wander- 
ing shifting life, I accompanied them. My 
poor father had thought himself quite a 
rich man once. He gave me a good 
education, so far as a prize governess and 



254 LADY PLAVIA. 

expensive masters can impart one ; and I 
read much more, perhaps, than was good 
for me, Thcjre was no one to restrain my 
choice of literary food, and I could repeat 
whole chapters of the French novels that 
amused my idle hours. For the rest, I had 
memory and quickness, and my own strong 
will, I learned what I chose to learn ; I did 
what I chose to do, and even Brand Rov- 
ston had a kind of respect for me. 

" He had no respect for his wife's family ; 
indeed he had been disappoiuted in his 
hopes of getting money from them, and he 
was not over-delicate in speaking his mind. 
He was himself of a grand old stock . com- 
moners, no doubt, my lord, but the Roystons 
of Roy ston have as many quarterings of 
nobility as would satisfy a Vienna herald 
. B, grand old stock, that had produced 
none but beef-faced, dull-brained ^squires 
until Brand was born. He was a ruffian, 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 255 

but he had some good qualities ; he was 
brave, and he was open-handed. I dare 
say he would have made a very respectable 
bucaneer. He was always moodily re- 
volving in his muddled mind how he might 
retrieve his losses, and be wealthy Rattling 
Royston as of old. And I, too, had my 
dreams . dreams that are held wrong in 
a woman, but that in a man are thought 
the main-spring of a noble ambition. I 
wished to rise, to take my place in the 
bright prosperous world, where gold, and 
sounding titles, and flashing jewels, and 
power over the thousands and the millions 
who make up the bulk of the world, give 
life a charm that mine lacked. 

" I wanted, also, to be free from the 
petty cares, and duns, and difficulties which 
caused Aunt Elizabeth to spend her days in 
pinching, and saving, and temporising . 
from the existence of privations, hard 



256 LADY FLAVIA. 

bargains, and keeping up appearances, that 
is the lot of shabby-gentility abroad. A 
man has fifty fields open to hina] if he care 
to rise, but a woman . her paths are few# 
If she cannot write, or paint, or sing, or 
act better than other women, she has no 
resource but in marriage ; and marriage . 
mercenary marriage . ^you need not tell me 
what you think of it. You cannot despise 
it more than I, who would have married 
Lord Hythe, had I but dared, without a 
spark of love for him. 

" But presently . we were at Brussels 
then . Basil Royston, just then made junior 
captain in his regiment, came on leave to 
spend his furlough at what was called his 
home. We cousins met for the first time, 
and I . 1 loved him. . Does my egotism 
tire you? May I go on?" And she 
tossed back her curls, the jewels on her 
bare white arm flashing in the light as she 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 257 

drew her litde hand over the radiant brow 
that bore up against shame and sorrow 
with a courage that could not be beaten 
down. The witchery of her manner and 
look had sujQfered no change; on the 
contrary, her eyes seemed to dilate and 
glitter, and her fair face had never seemed 
1^0 delicately fair as while she spoke. It was 
Titania pleading, but not for mercy, before 
a mortal tribunal, and as the fire rose and 
fell, and the light played on the scarlet 
cloak, on the white floating ball-dress, the 
gems, the lace, the ebon curls, the match- 
less face, even M. Durbec felt as if the 
whole scene were the delusion of a dream. 

" I loved him," she said . " the selfish 
poltroon. But I did not know his base- 
ness; I did not know how shallow a soul 
was hidden under that showy surface. He 
was a handsome, well-bred young oflScer, 
and I was a schoolgirl. He, on his part 

VOL. III. s 



258 LADY FLAYIA. 

had a contempt for his mother's race. I 
was but a Burt, and he, as a Bojston, 
amused himself with my adoration. Idiot 
that I was! He went away to India, 
carrying with him a poor Utile ring I gave 
him . he very likely tossed it to some 
dancing-girl who amused him in one of the 
nautches he liked so well . and my heart, 
and love, and prayers, for I could pray then. 
If he would have married me, and taken 
me out with him, I would have made him a 
good wife . ^have nursed him in sickness, 
soothed him in sorrow, and been true to 
him to the last. Do you doubt me ?" 

She struck her right hand fiercely upon 
the back of the chair, the left being still 
hidden under her cloak, and her voice was 
almost harsh. But the old music came 
back to it as she went on. 

"Very seldom, very seldom did he 
answer my letters ; and yet, when he came 




THE WHOLE TRUTH. 259 

back, disgraced, a cashiered swindler, from 
India, I would have married him even 
then. He was worse than before. He 
did not dare to drink at home as he did 
elsewhere, for he stood in awe of his 
formidable father, who was the terror of 
the household. But he was bad and weak. 
He set the seal to his offences, in my eyes, 
by paying court to the late Lord Mortlake's 
daughter, who came from the convent to 
visit at the Oh&teau des Roches. A poor, 
pale, spiritiess girl, my lord-I assure 
you. Lady Caroline, you would never have 
caressed and valued the true heiress as you 
have caressed and valued the counterfeit; 
a timid, frightened, harmless creature; as 
fearful of being withdrawn from her quiet 
convent, and launched into a bustling 
world of strife and pomp, as if she had 
been Caspar Hauser. We were all kind to 
her, but it was with a sort of pitying kindness. 



260 LADY PLAVIA. 

**She shrank from Basil's dark beauty 
and bold dissolute bearing. A &tlcon and 
a pigeon would have mated as easily as 
those two. She disliked and avoided him, 
and soon the Superior of her convent cur- 
tailed the visits she had been used to pay 
us, and there was an end to the intimacy. 
Then came the earFs illness; then his 
daughter was bidden to be ready to hasten 
to his death-bed, and Mr. Boyston was 
asked to be her escort : he agreed ; he was 
not ill-natured; he had no design then. 
One day, he chanced to say that it was a 
pity Adela was not in Lady Flavians shoes 
. she would play the earFs daughter 
twenty times better; and on that chance 
remark my plan was founded. 

"For the plan was mine. I was the 
first to think of the scheme of personating 
the daughter of Earl Francis. We were of 
an age . both eighteen. Both were dark. 



s 



THE WHOLE TRUTH. 261 

and we were even a little alike. The earl 
had not seen his child for many years ; he 
could not recognise her, surely. He would 
leave her, now that his heart was softened, 
all he had to leave. Brand Eoyston and 
his son came greedily into the conspiracy. 
It was agreed that Lord Mortlake's daugh- 
ter should be induced, on some easy pretext, 
to sleep one night at the Chateau des 
Roches, before starting for England, and 
that she should be consigned to safe-keep- 
ing in some madhouse . my uncle knew an 
unscrupulous keeper of such an asylum, d 
German Jew, once a money-lender in Lon- 
don, now a naturalised Frenchman, whose 
dwelling was in a lonely part of Poitou . 
while I assumed her place. Then Basil 
was to marry me . he would do that for 
gold . and we three were to share the spoil 
between us. Lady Flavia was to be drug- 
ged with a strong narcotic, and carried 



262 LADY FLAYIA. 

awaj before she recovered from the stupor 
it produced." 

Here the sweet clear voice failed, and 
the girl's breath came in quick panting 
gasps, and she pressed her hand to her 
bosom for one moment with a wild, sudden 
gesture of pain. Sergeant Skinner, who 
had been for some time looking very uneasy , 
cast a suspicious glance around the room , 
but he only saw the many pretty toys 
arranged on tables and consoles, the jewel- 
cases open, and their glittering contents 
spread about, and among them one little 
box of plain brown oak, the lid of which 
was closed. 




263 



CHAPTER XIV. 



ESCAPED. 



"She came to sleep one night at the 
Chateau des Boches, that she might start 
early on the following morning for Eng- 
land, nnder Mr. Royston's escort. The 
places were taken in the diligence, but it 
was never meant that she should travel by 
it; I was to take her place. The doctor, 
the madhouse keeper, was to come and 
fetch her away, when we had drugged her. 
Mr. Royston had drugs in plenty ; he had a 
Httle medicine-chest fiill of phials and 
powders, that he had used of old to poison 
or stupefy horses, and i hocus jockeys, 




264 LADY FLAVIA. 

when he had turned from a turf-pigeon into 
a turf-robber. It was to me that lie in- 
trusted the task of administering the drug. 
" I gave it her, that poor weak girl, in 
some tea that I broaght to her room and 
forced her to swallow, after she had gone 
early to rest, pleading headache, and no 
doubt truly, for she was ill and nervous; 
and she kissed me, and thanked me for 
being so kind . I! We had been some 
time acquainted with one another, but there 
was nothing in common between us, and 
she had a friend in the convent who suited 
her far better than I did. I wished her a 
good night, and I left her. In two hours 
I came again ; something drew me, as with 
a magnet, to that chamber where she lay. 
How very still she lay . how awfully 
motionless and quiet was her repose ! The 
potion had done its work well. I watched 
beside her; I began to long for her to 



ESCAPED. 265 

wake. The quiet of her attitude frightened 
me, somehow ; I grew alarmed. I touched 
her: she was cold, very cold. I put my 
hand on her heart; but its beating was 
finished. I listened for her breathing, but 
there was no sound : the feather I laid on 
her lips remained unmoved. Ah ! how I 
shrieked and cried, and flung myself upon 
her, begging her, praying her to wake, 
clasping, chafing her cold hands, crying 
aloud : " Flavia, Flavia !" But she was 
dead . dead, dead, dead, and I had mur- 
dered her !" 

"Then you did not intend it . did not 
intend to kill her ? It was by accident, by 
mistake, not on purpose ?" interrupted Lady 
Caroline with a feverish eagerness new to 
her. 

" It was. I am too near death to speak 
falsely now. And I take Heaven to wit- 
ness that as I stood beside the bed on which 



266 LADY FLAVIA. 

she lajy as if in sleep, I would have given 
my own life ten times over, ay, a hundred 
times, to bring her back from the grave. 
I called them all np into the room, I im- 
plored them to help me to revive her ; but 
it was too late. She must have died hours 
before." 

^ It was not a murder, then ? Oh, I am 
so glad, so glad you did not mean to harm 
her. You hear, papa, she did not intend it," 
cried Lady Caroline. 

" Thank God for that !'' muttered the 
earl. 

There was a long pause ; then she who 
had borne the name of Lady Flavia spoke 
again : " You would judge me leniently ; 
not so do I view my own sin. What I the 
lamb dies in the wolfs gripe, and it is not 
murder. True . I did not mean to rob her 
of her innocent life. I did not even design 
that her imprisonment should be for ever ; 




ESCAPED. 267 

but I meant to take her rank, her name, 
her fortune, and it was my hand that gave 
her the draught that contained death instead 
of lethargy. It was murder, let who will 
deny my words ! 

" The eflfect of that crime upon my nature 
was to harden it till my heart seemed of 
adamant. The first paroxysm of remorse 
and horror over, I took the lead among 
that panic-stricken group. Even Brand 
Royston was much moved ; I saw tears in 
those fierce angry eyes of his. Basil was 
not so much sorry as alarmed for his own 
neck. My aunt, their unwilling accomplice, 
whom nothing but terror of her brutal hus- 
band I must hurry on . I " 

She stopped, gasping, and again, with a 
sudden shivering motion, pressed her hand 
to her bosom. The bright colour had faded 
out of her face, and her cheek was blanched 
to the whiteness of marble, but she stood 



268 LADY FLAVU. 

firm as a rock, and when Lord Mortlake 
asked if she were ill, she waved her hand 
impatiently, and went on Bpeaking. 

.* We buried her on the following night. 
All day we had watched the room where 
she lay, and at midnight a grave was dug 
in a lonely part of the neglected garden, 
and we hid our victim away from men's 
sight, but not from God! She is happy 
now, and I am lost, body and soul ! The 
Fiend to whom I sold myself has cheated 
me out of my wages, as I cheated those 
who shared in my guilt, but did not profit 
by the dark deed." 

Here she ceased to speak. It was ob- 
servable that her voice had lost its music^ 
and its tones had grown harsh and shrill, 
as if the emotions of that fearful hour had 
exhausted her. But though her pallor 
grew more ghastly each moment, it was 
still Titania . still the fairy queen that 




ESCAPED. 269 

lifted her radiant brow and clear blue eves, 
defiant in her petulant loveliness even to 
the last. Crowned with flowers, in her 
flaunting gauzy robes, she was still more 
winning, more graceful than other women, 
as if her powerful will that had brought 
her to this pass had force to sustain her 
through all calamity. 

Sergeant Skinner here interposed again 
with a hint that no one was bound to 
criminate himself. 

M. Durbec spoke more to the purpose 
when he said, " If mademoiselle can prove 
the truth of her statements, there is no fear 
for her life. No French jury will find a 
verdict in such a case without adding that 
there are circonstances atthmantesy 

Lady Flavia's laugh . that terrible, mock- 
ing counterfeit of merriment . was heard 
for the last time. " How gallant they are 
in France ! They would let me live, then. 



270 LADY PLAVIA. 

as a life-long prisoner in a penitentiary I 
And I am so young yet : I should be nine- 
teen in another month, if I lived. But now 
I can say, as Agag said to his conqueror, 
* Surely the bitterness of death is past I' " 

There was a silence. All present looked 
anxiously at the lovely face : the eyes were 
bright still, but the very lips were white, 
and a sickly ashen grey had begun to 
spread itself over the lately blooming 
cheek. 

"You are ill! I see you are faint, 
dear," said Lady Caroline, unconscious that 
the familiar phrase of affection had been 
uttered, but advancing towards the friend 
she had loved so well. 

Her friend waved her back : there was 
no resisting the gesture of hailf-playful 
imperiousness. With an evident effort, 
Lady Flavia spoke again, in a low, weary 
voice : ^' Have you not wondered at my frank- 




ESCAPED. 271 

ness? I have * criminated ' myself sadly, 
as this good English detective would say : 
perhaps I have my reasons ; perhaps I can 
speak without fear. Did you never read of 
that condemned wretch, the apothecary in 
Sir Walter's novel, he who showed a little 
silver pen, and said that by the help of that 
pen he could defy all the power of the 
Black Douglas ? So I . I, Flavia Clare. 
I, Adela Burt . can escape all the gaolers, 
and guards, and mouchards^ and executioners 
of the French emperor and the French law. 

I have a talisman, a charm, a ." She 

said no more, but clung to the chair with a 
quick, convulsive clutch, and her dauntless 
eyes grew dim. 

" I thought as much, mille diahles r ex- 
claimed the French policeman, and he and 
Sergeant Skinner sprang forward ; but 
before they reached her, she whom we have 
called Lady Flavia fell with a crash, and 



272 LADY FLA VIA. 

lay writhing on the floor. ** Tran de Fair I " 
exclaimed Durbec, in mingled wrath and 
sorrow ; '^ she has cheated us ; she has 
escaped the guillotine and the prison, la 
malfieureuse. She has poisoned herself, and 
she is dying-dying-or dead ! 



273 



CHAPTER XV. 



DEATH. 



Yes . poisoned . dying. There was no 
doubt now, and there was little hope* As 
she lay grovelling, like a crushed worm, 
upon the floor, all present forgot her guilt 
at the sight of her, and hurried forward to 
help her. The earl assisted in raising her 
from the floor. They laid her on the bed 
where she had tossed sleepless through 
many a weary night. She lay still enough 
now, but that she writhed, and that she had 
bitten her lips till the blood sprang. But 
she uttered no word of complaint, no cry, 
no moan. Yet that she was in great pain 

A OL. I IT. T 




274 LADY FLAVIA. 

was only too certain ; there was the cold 
damp of agony on her forehead, her eyes 
were half closed, and there was foam upon 
her wan white lips. They laid her on her 
bed. In her left hand, the hand she had 
kept constantly hidden beneath her scarlet 
cloak, they found a tiny glass phial; the 
glass had actually given way, crushed under 
the frantic pressure of that little soft hand. 
The phial was labelled " Aconite." It con- 
tained traces of a strong preparation of the 
deadly drug, and the analysis afterwards 
showed that its contents had been mixed 
with strychnine. That it came from the 
little oak-chest that Lady Flavia had been 
used to keep in the oimolu cabinet, and 
which bore Brand Royston's cipher in tar- 
nished brass, was manifest. The little 
medicine-chest, half full of various poisons, 
stood among the jewels on the dressing- 
table. 



DEATH. 275 

Not a word, not a groan ; silent and 
stoical as an Indian warrior at the torture- 
stake, she bore it all. Lady Caroline, 
hardly conscious of the effort, flung aside 
prejudice and pride, and all her woman's 
nature rose into action. 

" I will not leave her !" she exclaimed, 
passionately ; ** do not make me leave her ! 
Oh look, look at her as she lies helpless and 
so changed, and think what she was a few 
short hours ago !" 

And Lady Caroline, than whom there was 
no better woman, so far as routine and 
education allowed, and who never harboured 
even a sinful thought, sat down on the bed, 
and took the sufferer's passive head upon 
her lap, and tried to soothe her as if she had 
been a sick child. 

** Send off for help ! Let some of the men 
ride as fast as possible for Mr. Sankey . for 
Mr. Bramber . for any doctor, and send the 




276 LADY PLAVIA. 

women here . not all of them . only Benson 
and her own maid. do not let them come 
in to stare at my poor, poor darling'. Gro, 
pray, go !" 

Lord Mortlake, whose] slow mind had 
been quite stupefied at first, went quite 
meekly to do his daughter's bidding. 
Quietly, too, the detectives left the room. 
Sergeant Skinner went to tell the superin- 
tendent that he might call off his men. 
There was no need to watch the doors now ; 
there would be no prisoner to escort to 
Chartley. The sergeant and his French 
ally must remain in the house, of course, 
but their presence was little more than an 
empty form now. Their warrants were 
superseded by a summons in the grisly hand- 
writing of the King of Terrors. 

" Didn't I say," grumbled out Durbec as 
he went down-stairs . " didn't I say she had 
the heart of a lion ? Pauvre petite I there's 




DEATH. 277 

many a brave soldier that could not have 
borne that torment, burning, gnawing, and 
yet smiled and smiled to the last, jt?ar6few r 

Soon the alarm spread through the house 
that Lady Flavia was dangerously ill- . 
perhaps dying . and horses were saddled, 
and grooms galloped off in hot haste in 
search of Mr. Sankey, of Mr. Bramber, of 
any doctor within reach. Lord Hythe, 
glad to be of use, glad to be employed in 
nything that entailed stir and bustle, and 
would distract his thoughts from the reflec- 
tion that his reticence and selfish caution 
had perhaps precipitated the death of her 
to whom he had once offered his hand, rode 
off, outstripping the others, to bring help. 
Mrs. Benson and Simmons came hurrying 
up, loud in exclamations of distress and 
horror, but Lady Caroline sternly bade 
them be silent. It was evident that there 
was no hope; the poison had fastened its 



278 LADY FLATL4. 

fangs too deeply upon the systein, and those 
around that couch of pain oould do nothing, 
ignorant as they were, and only longned and 
listened for the surgeon's coming. 

Throughout the house there reigned a 
gloomy silence ; no one spoke above his or 
her breath, as if there was a fear of dis- 
turbing the sufferer. The hideous word 
** poison " had not been spoken openly, but 
it was stealthily passed from one to another. 
Mingled with the wonder, the excitement, 
the curious sense of what may be called 
satissu^tion, with which the news of some 
great misfortune is sure to be received by 
those whose hearts are not stricken by the 
blow, was real sorrow. There was genuine 
regret alike in the blue drawing-room, 
where Lady Mortlake and her daughter 
Lady Julia sat weeping, and in the servants' 
hall, where a crowd of pale faces confronted 
one another, and where no topic was spoken 



DEATH. 279 

of but one . will she live or die ? The 
spoiled darling, the noble heiress, the wilful, 
lovely girl, that, like some tiny bird with 
jewelled plumage and wings flecked with 
gold, that flutters in at the open window of 
some settler's dwelling far off in the tropics, 
and falls dying on the floor, bruised by a 
careless grasp, had been the pride of 
Harbledown . ^was snatched away. Nor 
was illness the only unwelcome guest in 
that mansion . ^the grief and shame of 
detected guilt . imperfectly understood by 
some . merely guessed at in random fashion 
by others . had been beforehand with this 
calamity. 

Meanwhile, Lady Caroline watched over 
the prostrate form that lay on the bed, with 
the scarlet cloak yet streaming, unfastened 
over the crushed ball-dress, and the white 
flowers yet gleaming from amid the loosened 
masses of the ebon hair. There was some- 




280 LADY FLAVIA. 

thing in that Spartan silence, that strange 
despairing courage, that would not permit a 
moan or a shriek to escape the haggard lips, 
which distressed those who stood by, help- 
less. If she had uttered so much as a word 
of complaint, that would have been a relief 
to those about her. But no, she bore it all, 
mute and patient. It was terrible to see 
how the young life fought against the 
poison ; terrible to mark; the struggle before 
that rich youthful vitaUty could be con- 
quered by the insidious venom that made 
its way unchecked through the blue veins. 
A wild fancy possessed Lady Caroline then, 
and to her own dying day she will pro- 
bably retain the impression; that fancy 
was, that if her wretched friend had wished 
to live, her will would in itself have had 
power to retard the effects of the fatal drug, 
and that she might have been saved. But 
Lady Flavia did not wish to live. 



DEATH. 281 

It was piteous to note how she turned 
away her poor little white face, as if un- 
willing that the by-standers should see the 
ghastly change that had come over it. She 
buried her face in Lady Caroline's lap, and 
lay quite still, except that a quick convulsive 
shudder made her bosom heave from time to 
time. But it was a touching sight . ^the 
feminine vanity that endured to the last, 
the wish to hide her blasted beauty from 
the eyes of those who stood around to see 
her die. How slow the doctors were in 
coming ! How could , they linger so ? 
Would no one come? Surely there was 
hope while Ufe remained. 

"Flavia, darling, try to live. We will 
save you. You judge your faults too 
harshly. You are so young. Try to live. 
Speak to us, dear, if only one word." 

She made no answer. But the white slen- 
der arm, with the diamonds yet sparkling 



282 LADY FLA VI A. 

on it, as if in mockery, moved a little, and 
the cold little hand was laid in Lady 
Caroline's hand, and the weak fingers 
closed in a feeble 'pressure, and then lay 
passive. The hand was very cold now ; the 
fair face was cold as snow, and the convnl- 
sions were more rare. 

Twice she spoke, after a long delay, bnt 
her voice was thin and weak, and Iiady 
Caroline had to stoop forward to catch the 
words : " Cast me out, as the cursed thing 
I am. Bury me where the nettles and 
grass grow the thickest, in the paupers' 
comer of the churchyard." 

The second time that her whispering 
voice was heard was the last : " It is very 
dark," she murmured, " and so cold ! I am 
very cold. Have you left me ? I wish I 
could pray." 

" No, darling," said Lady Caroline ; " I 
am with you ; my arm is round your necki 




DEATH. 283 

But pray, Flavia, pray, and I . . Do you 
hear me, dear ?" 

No answer. She never spoke again ; she 
never stirred. The dreadful silence was 
only broken by the sobbing of the two 
frightened women, Benson and the maid. 
Lady Caroline bent over the passive form, 
and her heart prayed that the sinful spirit 
might find pardon at the mercy-seat of G-od. 
Long before the surgeon came there was no 
other trace of hfe than the feeble breathing 
that still continued . no warmth, no pulse 
in the cold arm around which the diamonds 
were clasped. 

She was still breathing when Mr. Sankey 
arrived. Lord Hythe had reached his 
house the first, and he had lost no time ; 
but his coming was useless. He knew what 
had occurred. He entered the room with a 
face in which the women could read no 
hope. 



274 



LADY FLA VI A. 



was only too certain ; there was the cold 
damp of agony on her forehead, her eyes 
were half closed, and there was foam upon 
her wan white lips. They laid her on her 
bed. In her left hand, the hand she had 
kept constantly hidden beneath her scarlet 
cloak, they found a tiny glass phial; the 
glass had actually given way, crushed under 
the frantic pressure of that Uttle soft hand. 
The phial was labelled " Aconite." It con- 
tained traces of a strong preparation of the 
deadly drug, and the analysis afterwards 
showed that its contents had been mixed 
with strychnine. That it came from the 
little oak-chest that Lady Flavia had been 
used to keep in the ormolu cabinet, and 
which bore Brand Royston's cipher in tar- 
nished brass, was manifest. The little 
medicine-chest, half full of various poisons, 
stood among the jewels on the dressing- 
table. 



DEATH. 275 

Not a word, not a groan ; silent and 
stoical as an Indian warrior at the torture- 
stake, she bore it all. Lady Caroline, 
hardly conscious of the eflEbrt, flung aside 
prejudice and pride, and all her woman's 
nature rose into action. 

" I will not leave her !" she exclaimed, 
passionately ; *' do not make me leave her ! 
Oh look, look at her as she lies helpless and 
so changed, and think what she was a few 
short hours ago !" 

And Lady Caroline, than whom there was 
no better woman, so far as routine and 
education allowed, and who never harboured 
even a sinful thought, sat down on the bed, 
and took the sufferer's passive head upon 
her lap, and tried to soothe her as if she had 
been a sick child. 

** Send off for help ! Let some of the men 
ride as fast as possible for Mr. Sankey . for 
Mr. Bramber . for any doctor, and send the 



276 LADY PLAVIA. 

women here . not all of them. only Benson 
and her own maid. do not let them come 
in to stare at my poor, poor darling. Gk), 
pray, go !" 

Lord Mortlake, whose] slow mind had 
been quite stupefied at first, went quite 
meekly to do his daughter's bidding. 
Quietly, too, the detectives left the room. 
Sergeant Skinner went to tell the superin- 
tendent that he might call off his men. 
There was no need to watch the doors now ; 
there would be no prisoner to escort to 
Chartley. The sergeant and his French 
ally must remain in the house, of course, 
but their presence was Uttle more than an 
empty form now. Their warrants were 
superseded by a summons in the grisly hand, 
writing of the King of Terrors. 

" Didn't I say," grumbled out Durbec as 
he went down-stairs . " didn't I say she had 
the heart of a lion ? Pauvre petite ! there's 



DEATH. 277 

many a brave soldier that could not have 
borne that torment, burning, gnawing, and 
yet smiled and smiled to the last, jt?arW^ /" 

Soon the alarm spread through the house 
that Lady Flavia was dangerously ill- . 
perhaps dying . and horses were saddled, 
and grooms galloped oflT in hot haste in 
search of Mr. Sankey, of Mr. Bramber, of 
any doctor within reach. Lord Hythe, 
glad to be of use, glad to be employed in 
nything that entailed stir and bustle, and 
would distract his thoughts from the reflec- 
tion that his reticence and selfish caution 
had perhaps precipitated the death of her 
to whom he had once offered his hand, rode 
off, outstripping the others, to bring help. 
Mrs. Benson and Simmons came hurrying 
up, loud in exclamations of distress and 
horror, but Lady Caroline sternly bade 
them be silent. It was evident that there 
was no hope ; the poison had fastened its 



288 LADY PLAVIA. 

and not to destroy the quiet of the earl's 
family, and the matrimonial prospects of 
the earl's daughters. 

There was no inquest at all. Most for- 
tunately, the coroner was a brother of 
Ebenezer Hart, gentleman, Lord Mortlake's 
land-agent. Mr. Hart, whose name had 
heen implicated slightly in the disclosures 
made by the detectives, was clearly given 
to understand that his snug salary depended 
for the future on his success in putting the 
matter in a proper light to his brother. Job 
Sankey, M.E.C.S., certified to the cause of 
death, and so did Mr. Bramber, and so did 
old Dr. Tench from Slochester. Their 
report was, that the sudden death of the 
Lady Flavia Clare was occasioned by angina 
pectoris^ to which there was a constitutional, 
and indeed hereditary disposition ; her 
mother, the vicar's daughter, had died of it ; 
and as angina pectoris it was no doubt entered 



DEATH. 279 

of but one . will she live or die ? The 
spoiled darling, the noble heiress, the wilful, 
lovely girl, that, like some tiny bird with 
jewelled plumage and wings flecked with 
gold, that flutters in at the open window of 
some settler's dwelling far off in the tropics, 
and falls dying on the floor, bruised by a 
careless grasp, had been the pride of 
Harbledown . ^was snatched away. Nor 
was illness the only unwelcome guest in 
that mansion . the grief and shame of 
detected guilt . imperfectly understood by 
some . merely guessed at in random fashion 
by others . had been beforehand with this 
calamity. 

Meanwhile, Lady Caroline watched over 
the prostrate form that lay on the bed, with 
the scarlet cloak yet streaming, unfastened 
over the crushed ball-dress, and the white 
flowers yet gleaming from amid the loosened 
masses of the ebon hair. There was some- 



280 LADY FLAVIA. 

thing in that Spartan silence, that strange 
despairing courage, that would not permit a 
moan or a shriek to escape the haggard lips, 
which distressed those who stood by, help- 
less. If she had uttered so much as a word 
of complaint, that would have been a relief 
to those about her. But no, she bore it all, 
mute and patient. It was terrible to see 
how the young life fought against the 
poison ; terrible to mark the struggle before 
that rich youthful vitality could be con- 
quered by the insidious venom that made 
its way unchecked through the blue veins, 
A wild fancy possessed Lady Caroline then, 
and to her own dying day she will pro- 
bably retain the impression; that fancy 
was, that if her wretched friend had wished 
to live, her will would in itself have had 
power to retard the effects of the fatal drug', 
and that she might have been saved. But 
Lady Flavia did not wish to live. 



DEATH. 281 

It was piteous to note how she turned 
away her poor little white face, as if un- 
willing that the by-standers should see the 
ghastly change that had come over it. She 
buried her face in Lady Caroline's lap, and 
lay quite still, except that a quick convulsive 
shudder made her bosom heave from time to 
time. But it was a touching sight . ^the 
feminine vanity that endured to the last, 
the wish to hide her blasted beauty from 
the eyes of those who stood around to see 
her die. How slow the doctors were in 
coming ! How could , they linger so ? 
Would no one come? Surely there was 
hope while life remained. 

"Flavia, darling, try to live. We will 
save you. You judge your faults too 
harshly. You are so young. Try to live. 
Speak to us, dear, if only one word." 

She made no answer. But the white slen- 
der arm, with the diamonds yet sparkling 



4 



272 LADY FLAVIA. 

lay writhing on the floor. ** Tron de Fair I " 
exclaimed Durbec, in mingled wrath and 
sorrow ; " she has cheated us ; she has 
escaped the guillotine and the prison, la 
malfieureuse. She has poisoned herself, and 
she is dying. dying . or dead !" 



273 



CHAPTER Xy. 

DEATH. 

Yes . poisoned . dying. There was no 
doubt now, and there was little hope* As 
she lay grovelling, like a crushed worm, 
upon the floor, all present forgot her guilt 
at the sight of her, and hurried forward to 
help her. The earl assisted in raising her 
from the floor. They laid her on the bed 
where she had tossed sleepless through 
many a weary night. She lay still enough 
now, but that she writhed, and that she had 
bitten her lips till the blood sprang. But 
she uttered no word of complaint, no cry, 
no moan. Yet that she was in great pain 

VOL. I IT. T 



274 LADY FLA VIA. 

was only too certain ; there was the cold 
damp of agony on her forehead, her eyes 
were half closed, and there was foam upon 
her wan white lips. They laid her on her 
bed. In her left hand, the hand she had 
kept constantly hidden beneath her scarlet 
cloak, they found a tiny glass phial; the 
glass had actually given way, crushed under 
the frantic pressure of that little soft hand. 
The phial was labelled " Aconite." It con- 
tained traces of a strong preparation of the 
deadly drug, and the analysis afterwards 
showed that its contents had been mixed 
with strychnine. That it came from the 
little oak-chest that Lady Flavia had been 
used to keep in the oimolu cabinet, and 
which bore Brand Royston's cipher in tar- 
nished brass, was manifest. The little 
medicine-chest, half full of various poisons, 
stood among the jewels on the dressing- 
table. 




DEATH. 275 

Not a word, not a groan ; silent and 
stoical as an Indian warrior at the torture- 
stake, she bore it all. Lady Caroline, 
hardly conscious of the effort, flung aside 
prejudice and pride, and all her woman's 
nature rose into action. 

" I will not leave her !" she exclaimed, 
passionately ; ** do not make me leave her ! 
Oh look, look at her as she lies helpless and 
so changed, and think what she was a few 
short hours ago !'* 

And Lady Caroline, than whom there was 
no better woman, so far as routine and 
education allowed, and who never harboured 
even a sinful thought, sat down on the bed, 
and took the sufferer's passive head upon 
her lap, and tried to soothe her as if she had 
been a sick child. 

'' Send off for help ! Let some of the men 
ride as fast as possible for Mr. Sankey . for 
Mr. Bramber . for any doctor, and send the 



( 



276 LADY PLAVIA. 

women here . not all of them . only Benson 
and her own maid . do not let them come 
in to stare at my poor, poor darling. Go, 
pray, go !" 

Lord Mortlake, whose] slow mind had 
heen quite stupefied at first, went quite 
meekly to do his daughter's bidding. 
Quietly, too, the detectives left the room. 
Sergeant Skinner went to tell the superin- 
tendent that he might call off his men. 
There was no need to watch the doors now ; 
there would be no prisoner to escort to 
Chartley. The sergeant and his French 
ally must remain in the house, of course, 
but their presence was little more than an 
empty form now. Their warrants were 
superseded by a summons in the grisly hand- 
writing of the King of Terrors. 

" Didn't I say," grumbled out Durbec as 
he went down-stairs . " didn't I say she had 
the heart of a lion ? Pauvre petite ! there's 



DEATH. 277 

many a brave soldier that could not have 
borne that torment, burning, gnawing, and 
yet smiled and smiled to the Is^sty parbleu r 

Soon the alarm spread through the house 
that Lady Flavia was dangerously ill. - 
perhaps dying . and horses were saddled, 
and grooms galloped off in hot haste in 
search of Mr. Sankey, of Mr. Bramber, of 
any doctor within reach. Lord Hythe, 
glad to be of use, glad to be employed in 
nything that entailed stir and bustle, and 
would distract his thoughts from the reflec- 
tion that his reticence and selfish caution 
had perhaps precipitated the death of her 
to whom he had once offered his hand, rode 
off, outstripping the others, to bring help. 
Mrs. Benson and Simmons came hurrying 
up, loud in exclamations of distress and 
horror, but Lady Caroline sternly bade 
them b silent. It was evident that there 
was no hope ; the poison had fastened its 



t 



25>S 



kiOed br BeumI BoTsuD. It bad bea& 
agreed iqMm dat die cxTvaLrfs Kie w^astobe 
spap&L The Piucureor did not eren de- 
maod Ids bead; and ihe apntfrme of the 
enmri was fifieen years of trammut fiwws. 
The ex-captain, die ex-dandr, lady-kiDer, 
and pigeoner of newh'-joined ^isigiis^ is 
woridng out his time, in chains and a suit of 
serge, among die galley-slaves at Lambeasa. 

Mrs. Boy ston, widi die consmt of the 
public proeecator, was acquitted. Her healUi 
and her feeble mind were quite broken. 
Hlie was brought into court a paky-stricken 
old woman ; and she dweUs now in a York- 
Khire farmhouse, with some distant rela- 
tions, who claimed the custody of her for 
the sake of her little income, and sits ii^th 
nodding head and bleared eyes beside the 
ctiimney-comer. 

As a matter of course, Amy and Charles 
1' ord are married, and there is every reason 




DEATH. 



279 



of but one . will she live or die ? The 
spoiled darliag, the noble heiress, the wilful, 
lovely girl, that, like some tiny bird with 
jewelled plumage and wings flecked with 
gold, that flutters in at the open window of 
some settler's dwelling far off" in the tropics, 
and falls dying on the floor, bruised by a 
careless grasp, had been the pride of 
Harbledown . ^was snatched away. Nor 
was illness the only imwelcome guest in 
that mansion . ^the grief and shame of 
detected guilt . imperfectly understood by 
some . merely guessed at in random fashion 
by others . had been beforehand with this 
calamity. 

Meanwhile, Lady Caroline watched over 
the prostrate form that lay on the bed, with 
the scarlet cloak yet streaming, unfastened 
over the crushed ball-dress, and the white 
flowers yet gleaming from amid the loosened 
masses of the ebon hair. There was some- 



300 LADY FLAVIA. 

Lord Hythe, member for the county now, 
and a Lord of the Treasury and privy- 
councillor, is regarded as a rising statesman, 
who may, in a score of years or so, be 
qualified for some post really worth having. 
The Right Hon. the member for Blank- 
shire is still unmarried. At the earnest 
wish of his parents and sisters, he has more 
than once thought seriously of taking to 
himself a wife, that the coronet of Mortlake 
may not be consigned to the limbo of 
extinct peerages. As yet, he has found no 
one sufficiently to his taste, and the House 
and its blue-books absorb most of his time ; 
but there is still hope that some of the 
maidens of Belgravia may be the future 
countess. 

And she . ^the beautiful, guilty thing . is 
she forgotten in that household of which 
she was for a few short months the wonder 
and the idol ? Not so. More tears were 



\ 



DEATH. 281 

It was piteous to note how she turned 
away her poor little white face, as if un- 
willing that the by-standers should see the 
ghastly change that had come over it. She 
buried her face in Lady Caroline's lap, and 
lay quite still, except that a quick convulsive 
shudder made her bosom heave from time to 
time. But it was a touching sight . ^the 
feminine vanity that endured to the last, 
the wish to hide her blasted beauty from 
the eyes of those who stood around to see 
her die. How slow the doctors were in 
coming ! How could , they linger so ? 
Would no one come? Surely there was 
hope while life remained. 

"Flavia, darling, try to live. We will 
save you. You judge your faults too 
harshly. You are so young. Try to live. 
Speak to us, dear, if only one word." 

She made no answer. But the white slen- 
der arm, with the diamonds yet sparkling 
