ODD NEIGHBOURS. 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

" Senor Inglese, a young lady renders 
a visit to your grace/' said fat Juan the 
waiter, throwing the door wide for the visitor's 
admission. I was sitting in the window of 
my little room on the third floor of the Fonda 
de 1' Alameda, looking down upon the dark- 
ling promenade where the lighted cigar-tips 
were beginning to twinkle among the foun- 
tains and marble statues, and where the beaux 
and belles of Malaga, with fan and rustling 
mantilla, and jingling spurs, were passing 
and repassing in endless groups, full of mirth 
and gossip. As for myself, I was heartily 
tired. We had had a long day's work in get- 
ting the cargo on board, and I was fairly 
worn out with the toil of encouraging the lazy 

VOL. I. b 



Z POR LIFE OR DEATH. 

stevedores and disputing with the harpies of 
the Spanish custom-house. Bat the good 
ship Tudor, of Bristol, to which I belonged, in 
the capacity of first mate, had to be freighted as 
speedily as possible for the homeward voyage, 
and as Captain Meiklejohn was getting frail and 
old, most of the responsibility devolved upon 
myself. Nor did I grudge it, the rather that 
Price and Thompson, our owners, had as good 
as promised that when the Tudor next sailed 
away out of the sight of the tower of St. Mary 
Redcliffe,HenryWest should command her, vice 
Meiklejohn, retired on a pension. And then . 
But as my thoughts were busy with the 
day-dreams which fancy had conjured up with 
reference to what I should be able to do with 
the increased salary and higher position of 
captain, day-dreams in which the sweet little 
face and soft brown eyes of Alice Croft were 
inextricably mixed up with visions of a snug 
English home at Clifton, with happy children 
at play in its garden, and a loving welcome 
back for the husband and father when he 
should return from sea, Juan the waiter flung 
the door open exactly as I have described. 
And Alice Croft herself, with her poor little 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 3 

pretty face very white and tear-stained came 
hastily in, while in the passage without I 
caught a glimpse of the wrinkled ugliness 
of old Seraphina, the old crone who was the 
Crofts' only servant. 

" Alice darling ! You here ? What is the 
matter?" said I, springing from my chair; 
and in a moment the poor little lonely English 
girl was weeping on my shoulder. It was 
not for some moments that I could succeed 
in calming her agitation sufficiently to draw 
from her a coherent account of the misfortune 
that had occurred, though I easily guessed 
that no trifling cause would have induced 
a girl so modest and strictly brought up as 
my dear Alice to enter the crowded and bust- 
ling Spanish hotel for the purpose of visiting a 
bachelor inmate of the Fonda. But at first 
Alice could say no more, through her sobs, 
than the words, " My father, my dear father !" 
and these led me vaguely to conclude that 
some accident had happened to old Mr. 
Croft, though of what nature I could not 
guess. 

Old Mr. Croft was one of the few English, 
excepting the invalids whom the warm winter 

b 2 



4 POR LIFE OR DEATH. 

climate had at that time begun to attract, 
resident in Malaga. He was a widower, and 
Alice was his only child, and about nineteen 
years of age. Her father had married late in 
life, and on this account, perhaps, and for the 
sake of the wife, to whom he had been ten- 
derly attached, and who had died when Alice 
was still very young, he was unusually wrap- 
ped up in his daughter, of whom he was 
excessively proud and fond. He was, indeed, 
of rather a proud and reserved nature, and 
disposed at times to speak and think with 
bitterness of a world by which he considered 
himself to have been unjustly used. His 
past history I never thoroughly knew, for he 
was not over communicative, but he had been 
very well educated, and I often fancied from 
his manners and appearance that he had once 
occupied a much higher social position than 
that which he filled when I knew him. As it 
was, he was poor, and lived by the exercise of 
his talents as an artist. I believe he had 
considerable merits as a painter, but from 
constitutional shyness, or some feeling of, 
perhaps, morbid sensitiveness, he did not carry 
his powers to the best market. He was an 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 5 

excellent draughtsman, and had a fertile fancy 
and a correct taste, and he got his living 
partly as a drawing-master, partly by exe- 
cuting designs for Perez Brothers, the richest 
manufacturers in Malaga. 

The Tudor paid periodical visits to the 
port of Malaga, and during one of these I 
had accidentally formed the acquaintance of 
Mr Croft, for whom I willingly undertook to 
execute some trifling commission in England. 
I suppose we were mutually pleased with each 
other, for I percieved at once that he was 
a very superior man, and that in spite of 
the cynical tone that he sometimes affected, 
he was really of a generous and kindly dis- 
position, a little warped by the world's rough 
usage. On his part, he showed his regard 
for me by inviting me to his house, a compli- 
ment which he paid to but few of our wan- 
dering countrymen. I saw Alice, and soon 
learned to love her, and after a while I was 
overjoyed to find that her innocent heart was 
given to me. But old Mr. Croft, who had 
been accustomed to think of his daughter 
as a child, set his face against our marriage, 
and behaved, as I thought, very cruelly in the 



6 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

matter. It would have been a hard thing for 
him, I am sure, to part with Alice to any one, 
a not uncommon case of half-unconscious pa- 
rental selfishness. But, to do him justice, 
I am sure he thought that he was merely 
showing a prudent forethought for his child's 
interests in forbidding her to marry. He not 
unreasonably objected that my profession was 
hazardous, and my income small, and that 
though youth was apt to be sanguine, expe- 
rience must be cautious. There was no hurry. 
Alice was very young, and 1 was young too, 
for that matter. Probably we should both of 
us see cause to change our minds, but if not, 
some years hence, &c, &c. 

Though I chafed against the sentence, and 
Alice grieved at her father's decision, she 
was a good, obedient girl, and submitted to 
her parent's will. She would never marry 
any one else, she said, but she would not 
marry me in spite of her father's prohibition, 
never, never, though her heart should break 
for the loss of me. And with this qualified 
engagement and troth-plight I was forced to 
be content, though I looked eagerly forward 
to promotion, hoping that as captain of the 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 7 

Tudor I might appear to the old artist as a 
more eligible son-in-law. And now here was 
Alice suddenly appearing in my room at the 
hotel, and sobbing piteously as she tried to 
tell me what had happened. 

At last I learned the truth ; Mr. Croft had 
the habit of taking a morning walk outside 
the landward gate of the city, and in the 
direction of the mountains. He was an early 
riser, and had an artist's fondness for the face 
of nature when the earth seems to awaken, 
fresh and young, at the first kiss of the sun- 
shine. He was used, then, to stroll out be- 
yond the walls as soon as the gates were 
opened for the ingress of the peasants coming 
to the market, and many of his best sketches 
were made in these rambles. In one of 
these strolls, that very morning, Mr. Croft 
had by ill-luck stumbled into an ambush of 
the banditti, from whom the wild sierras 
neighbouring on Malaga are seldom free. 
These robbers, under a noted chief named 
Moreno, had of late been very audacious and 
troublesome, and it was conjectured that a 
party of the gang, lying in wait for the chance 
of kidnapping some wealthy townsman or 



8 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

landed proprietor, had pounced on Mr. Croft 
for lack of loftier game. 

It is probable that the bandits may at first 
have been deceived as to the value of their 
captive. An Englishman is always consi- 
dered a wealthy man in virtue of his nationality, 
and, besides, the sight of broadcloth produces 
on Spaniards nearly the same talismanic effect 
that the Neapolitan lazzaroni experience when 
confronted by a " vestito di panno," whose 
rank is inferred from the material of his coat. 
But at any rate they had made a hasty 
retreat to their fastness in the hills, bearing 
their captive with them. And when Alice, 
ifter waiting for her father's return, first in 
surprise, then in uneasiness, and lastly in 
alarm, went out to seek him, and came home 
baffled and tired, deep in the afternoon . old 
Seraphina gave her a letter, hastily pencilled 
on a scrap of folded paper, which an un- 
known peasant woman had left at the house. 

The letter was from Mr. Croft. It ran 
thus : 

" My dearest, dear Alice, . To give you pain is 
worse than pain to me, but the truth must 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 9 

be told. I am a prisoner in the hands of 
Moreno, at a place high up in the sierra. I 
write this at a halting-place, and I am told 
we shall instantly resume our journey, whither 
I do not know. I am in the hands of 
desperate men, who sell blood, or shed it, for 
money. They demand a ransom from me- 
As I have succeeded in convincing them that 
I am poor, they have fixed my price at five 
thousand reals. But unless this money is 
paid by noon on Wednesday, the chief assures 
me that . but why torture you, my child, by 
repeating a barbarian's threats ? . at any rate, 
you will no longer have a father. I must die, 
Alice, dear, for well I know that to raise even 
that small sum is impossible. And we have 
no friends in Malaga. Perez Brothers might 
perhaps be induced to . but no. My em- 
ployers would refuse. It is possible, however, 
that the British consul might take up the 
case. At any rate, Alice, love, I am sure he 
will assist you in getting home to England, 
and it is my earnest wish that you should 
leave Spain as soon as you can, and seek out 
those relatives of your mother whose names you 
have heard me mention, and who will not 



10 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

deny you shelter and protection in your great 
need. The robbers whose prisoner I am bid 
me say that on Wednesday, at noon, some of 
the gang will await the payment of my ran- 
som at the oratory near the village of Santa 
Maria del Gloria, at the foot of the mountains 
that border the road to Antequera and Madrid. 
There the money can be paid in the presence 
of the village padre, who is known to the band, 
and Moreno has sworn on the crucifix to give 
me up unharmed, and not to molest the 
messenger. But I have little hope, though I 
know you will try to obtain the money, dearest 
child. Farewell, dear Alice, God bless you, 
and Harry West too. I feel I was harsh 
with respect to . but you have my consent 
now. Bless . " 

Here the paper had been torn, probably by 
the rough hands of the messenger to whom it 
was entrusted, and some lines of writing were 
lost. However, the signature, " Philip Croft," 
still remained legible, and beside it was a 
rude representation of a cross, traced appa- 
rently with the point of a charred stick, while 
below it was written the word " Moreno," 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 11 

in Mr. Croft's handwriting. No doubt the 
robber captain had chosen to add his counter- 
sign to the document, the language of which 
he was unable to interpret. 

" How shall we save him !" were the words 
that broke from the lips of both. I had to 
learn, however, that Alice had not sought 
me in the first instance. 'As soon as she 
received the pencilled lines, and had rallied 
from the effects of the first stunning shock, 
she had been nerved to exertion by the 
thought of her dear father's danger, and she 
had gone from place to place, accompanied 
by old Seraphina. But in vain. The most 
obvious course to pursue, since there were 
but a very few dollars in Alice's slender purse, 
was to sell the modest furniture of the little 
household, but a short interview with a 
broker proved the uselessness of this step. 
Those humble Lares and Penates would not 
bring a fourth of the necessary sum, and the 
landlord, too, had claims for the rent of the 
current half year. The artist's forebodings 
with respect to the liberality of Perez Brothers 
were fully realised. Alice begged and prayed, 
but the firm refused, blandly, but pitilessly, 



12 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

to make any advance, much less one of five 
thousand reals. Mr. Croft, they said, was 
a very good draughtsman, but business was 
business, and there was no obligation on 
either side. They very politely bowed the 
weeping girl out of their counting-house. At 
the British Consulate, Alice met with no 
better success. By ill luck the consul was 
absent. He would return in three or four 
days, but for the moment there was no help 
to be looked for in that quarter. Alice had 
a few cherished ornaments that had belonged 
to her mother. These she had sold, but, 
alas ! they had produced but eight or nine 
hundred reals. And though old Seraphina, 
who took all the saints to witness that her 
master was a good man, and her young 
mistress was an angel, heretics or not, came 
with tears running down her wrinkled face, 
and offered her contribution in the shape of 
the gold cross she wore on holidays, and some 
twenty pillar-dollars saved out of her wages, 
nearly four thousand xeals remained to be 
provided for within a brief delay. 

What was to be done? I had not ten 
pounds in my possession, and neither I nor 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 13 

the Crofts had any credit with the bankers 
or merchants of Malaga. Captain Meiklejohn, 
as I knew, had but cash enough in his cabin 
locker to pay his harbour dues and the ship's 
provisions, and even if the cautious old 
Aberdonian would have lent me the sum 
required, as I believe he would, it was out 
of his power, since his wife, as I knew, drew 
his salary while he was away at sea. Only 
one hope I had, and that was that the 
merchants to whom our cargo was consigned 
might lend me the money on my note of 
hand, backed by the captain's recommenda- 
tion. Alice, the good old Spanish woman, 
and I, lost no time, late as it was, in hurry- 
ing to the residence of the gentlemen of whom 
I have spoken. They were a well-known 
firm, Edwards and Son, and had had many 
dealings with my employers at Bristol. 

" Mr. Edwards is absent, sefior ; he went 
yesterday by the steamer to Barcelona," said 
the servant who opened the door. 

"Mr. James Edwards?" asked I, as my 
heart sank. 

The man arched his eyebrows. He won- 
dered, he said, that I was not aware that 



t 



14 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

Mr. James had been away from Malaga this 
week past. He was amusing himself, shooting 
and coursing, at a friend's country-house 
somewhere near Xeres de la Frontera. He 
was expected back for the grand bull-fight 
to-morrow. Mr. James had too much good 
taste to miss such a spectacle as that, Pedro 
was sure. 

I turned away, feeling the bitterness of 
hope deferred. Still, there was hope. Mr. 
James Edwards was a very good-natured 
young man, not so often to be found in the 
counting-house as his steady and punctual 
father, but he had always been civil to me in 
our business transactions. If he should really 
be back in time for the bull-fight, which I now 
remembered was to take place on the follow- 
ing day, he might be persuaded to lend the 
needful sum. At any rate, no more could 
be done on that night. It was getting late. 
The lamps fixed beneath the effigies of saints 
and the few street lights, were already shin- 
ing yellow through the darkness, and from 
tertulia gardens and the windows of wine- 
shops came the tinkling sound of guitars and 
castanets, with that of voices singing or 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 15 

brawling, and the clink of glasses and stamp- 
ing of feet. It was time for Alice to go home 
and take some rest . rest that would be 
needed to recruit her strength for the toil of 
to-morrow. I walked beside her through the 
dark streets, but we did not converse much. 
Each of us was discouraged and full of sad 
forebodings, and when I had said " Good 
night" with forced cheerfulness, and gone 
upon my way, the recollection of Alice Croft's 
pale face and wistful look haunted me. I 
did not at once return to my hotel, but paced 
the Alameda for hours, racking my brains 
to no purpose. And at length, when the 
last lounger had dropped away from the 
deserted promenade, and there was nothing 
to be heard but the rustling of the night 
wind through the leaves and the melancholy 
splashing of the fountains, I, too, went home, 
and, thanks to the habit of a sailor's life, slept 
soundly enough. 

On the next morning I was early abroad. 
While the women were gathering with their 
pitchers around the fountains at the corner of 
the streets, and the drowsy waiters, half asleep 
as yet, were letting down the gaudy awnings 



16 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

in front of the cafes, I sallied forth from the 
Hotel de l'Alameda, unable to remain inactive, 
but with no clearly defined purpose. It was 
in vain that I tried hard to be hopeful and 
sanguine, and that I repeated to myself, for the 
twentieth time, that all would come right, on 
the return of Mr. James Edwards. But the 
young merchant might not return ; he might 
refuse my request; any of the many petty 
accidents that daily occur might prevent him 
from granting me the favour I sought. And 
that a life was at stake I could not doubt. 
This was Tuesday. To-morrow the ransom 
must be forthcoming, or Alice would be left 
an orphan. It was in vain that I endeavoured 
to persuade myself that the robber captaiii 
was merely practising on the fears of his 
prisoner, the better to extort money. I knew 
but too well that Moreno was a man of his 
word in such matters. Ugly stories, half 
forgotten, which I had heard in the city or 
on the quays, recurred vividly to my memory 
now, and in many of these Moreno's name 
figured. Nothing was to be hoped from the 
bandit's clemency. 

To seek the assistance of the authorities 



FOR LTFE OR DEATH. 17 

might have seemed a natural step. But 
this was not to be thought of. If I com- 
plained to the corregidor, it was probable 
that that dreaded functionary would see in 
the rendezvous at the village oratory an op- 
portunity of attempting the capture of the 
obnoxious Moreno, and would think more of 
entrapping the outlaws than of saving the 
life of an obscure English heretic. And any 
affray between the police and the robbers 
would only ensure the butchery of the help- 
less captive, while it was notoriously impossi- 
ble to hunt down offenders in such a difficult 
district as that of the mountains above 
Malaga. 

Meanwhile the preparations for the great 
bull-fight went gaily on, and as I passed the 
amphitheatre I heard the hammers of the 
workmen engaged in putting up the striped 
canopies that were to shelter the mgre aristo- 
cratic spectators from the rays of the hot sun. 
The savage spectacle of the day was to be an 
unusually grand one for Malaga, by no means 
the Spanish city where this favourite Spanish 
sport is exhibited on the largest scale. But 
on this occasion thte Captain-General of An- 

vol. i. c 



18 POE LIFE OR DEATH. 

dalusia, with some foreign guests of high 
rank, were to honour the show with their 
company, and the town had gone to consider- 
able expense in providing for their entertain- 
ment. 

As early as I decently could, I called at the 
merchant's house, but Mr. James Edwards 
had, of course, not yet arrived. I had not 
expected him to be there so early, but my 
impatience would not let me rest, and I paced 
the town like a perturbed spirit, eyeing with 
indifference the motley groups of people in 
holiday attire who were already astir and 
chatting merrily over the anticipated amuse- 
ments of the festival. Duty made no call on 
my time, for, for that day, the work of freight- 
ing the ship was suspended. Our porters 
and dock labourers would not have been 
tempted to miss the bull-fight, even by qua- 
druple wages. 

At ten o'clock I went to the Crofts' house, 
and saw Alice. Poor girl, the dark circles 
around her pretty brown eyes, dimmed by 
weeping, showed that her sorrows had made 
the night a wakeful one for her. She was 
feverish and agitated, at one time seeming to 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 19 

partake the hopes that I expressed in the 
kindness of Mr. Edwards, at another, wretched 
and cast down, dreading the worst. In case 
of failure, her poor little plan was formed. 
She would go up, with such a small sum as 
she could get together, perhaps one thousand 
reals, to the chapel at the foot of the hills, 
and would try with prayers and tears to soften 
the ruffians who held her father prisoner. 
She would beg them to let him live, to restore 
him to her, and would promise by degrees to 
pay the remainder of the ransom, if she went 
into service to earn the money. And she 
really in her innocent ignorance appeared to 
believe in her own power to melt so hard a 
heart as that of Moreno, who was said to have 
the blood of sixteen victims on his own hand, 
and who was at war with the law. 

I did not openly oppose this scheme, con- ' 
scious that it would be well that Alice should 
have something on which her mind could 
dwell, as a relief from torturing thoughts. 
But I determined that she should not incur 
so fruitless a risk by going thus . a lamb 
among wolves . if I had to detain her by 
force. My own heart was very heavy when 

c 2 



ft 



20 FOE LIFE OR DEATH. 

I left the dear girl, making her promise to 
stay quietly at borne and await my return, 
and sallied out once more into the streets of 
the town, now alive with merry crowds hurry- 
ing to secure good places at the show. I 
began to perceive how slight was the founda- 
tion on which my hopes rested, and to fear, 
too, that the death of her father would darken 
my darling's happy young life, and that she 
would lose the sunny freshness of her youth- 
ful mind in the pain of that sharp and bitter 
trial. And the unthinking mirth of the care- 
less pleasure-seekers chafed and galled me, as 
the sight of merriment is apt to do in the 
hour of suffering. 

Noon at last. I went again to the house 
of Mr. Edwards. Good news, as I thought, 
awaited me. The young merchant, with two 
of his friends, had arrived, and, after partak- 
ing of breakfast, had repaired to the amphi- 
theatre, " like all the world," as the old hag 
of a portress, left in charge of the house 
while all the other servants were gone to the 
show, rather grudgingly remarked. To the 
bull ring I therefore hastened at once, and 
having purchased a ticket which was to admit 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 21 

me to any part of the amphitheatre, elbowed 
my way through the swarming crowd, and 
entered. I had no eyes for the mass of gay- 
coloured apparel or the rows of eager excited 
faces, tier above tier, and still less for what 
was going on in the ring, where a young bull 
was being goaded to fury by sharp tridents 
and fluttering flags, a mere prologue to the 
more thrilling scenes that were to follow. 
But the crowd baffled me. Such multitudes 
from the neighbouring towns and villages, 
attracted by the spectacle, had poured into 
Malaga, that it was only for the ladies, and a 
favoured few of the magistracy and nobles, 
that seats could be retained. The rest stood 
so thickly massed together that I soon found 
that to trace out Mr. Edwards was hopeless. 
Giving up the effort in despair, I turned to 
depart, but through some mistake, instead of 
gaining the open air, I struck into a long 
passage leading I knew not whither, though 
I heard the bellowing of tKe bulls from the 
dens where they were shut up. Suddenly, 
from a sort of crypt, the half-open door of 
which was on my right, came the sound of 
voices, and I caught these words in Spanish : 



22 FOR LIFB OR DEATH. 

" If you offer a large reward ? Say four thou- 
sand reals! Consider, gentlemen, four thou- 
sand reals for an hour's work !" 

My feet seemed rooted to the ground, and 
I felt my face flushed while I listened, as if life 
depended upon my overhearing what followed. 

" We shall not find a man, bid what we 
may," said another voice, despondently ; " no 
one not tired of his life would run the risk, 
and, Caramba! what will the people say? 
There will be a riot, and our houses may pay 
for it. Only think what will be the fury of 
the thousands up yonder when they hear that 
Manuel Zagal cannot perform at all, and that 
we have no matador to take his place. ,, 

"If the idiot had but had the sense to 
break his leg after the bull-fight instead of 
before \" said a third speaker, in a whining 
and querulous tone. " But, sefiores, what is 
to be done? I would sooner pay four, ay, 
or six thousand reals out of my own pocket, 
than be the one to tell the people that they 
are to be disappointed of the cream of the 
sport. They may sack our houses in revenge, 
and mischief will surely be done. What can 
we do ? Not a matador worth a straw with- 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 23 

in leagues, and Choco only fit to face the 
young bulls, and those with the wood on their 
horns. We shall have to use the demilune, 
and before the captain-general, what a dis- 
grace !" 

I began now to understand more clearly 
the purport of this discourse. I knew that a 
celebrated matador named Manuel Zagal had 
been engaged to come over from Seville, the 
head-quarters of bull- fighting, to exhibit his 
skill in despatching the infuriated animals that 
had been previously provoked to fury by their 
mounted tormentors the picadors. This man, 
who was famous for skill and courage, stood 
so high in his profession, that it had not been 
thought needful to hire any other artist in the 
same line, and as matadors, like opera singers, 
travel from place to place as their engage- 
ments serve, there was no member of the 
guild then in Malaga. There was, indeed, 
an active toreador whose nickname of Choco 
was well known ; but this man, though a fa- 
vourite with the mob, was more a buffoon than 
a swordsman, and had neither the dexterity 
nor the daring which a true matador should 
possess. When a matador is wounded, or 



24 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

some untoward accident prevents the appear- 
ance of one, there is no resource but to end 
the lives of the bulls by cutting off their legs, 
or ham-stringing them by means of a sharp 
scythe on the end of a pole, called a demilune. 
But this barbarous expedient seldom fails to 
irritate the populace, who are displeased, not 
at the cruelty of the act, but at the absence 
of that risk of human life that is essential to 
the excitements of the bull-ring. 

In this case, I could easily divine what had 
happened. The talented performer from 
Seville, Sefior Manuel Zagal, had met with 
a serious accident, and the authorities were 
afraid to announce to the people what had 
happened, aware that a violent outbreak of 
popular wrath would ensue. As for the 
speakers, by moving forward a step I could 
see them. Two were in civil uniform, the 
alcalde of the city, and a heavy beetle-browed 
man, the corregidor of the police. The third 
was a supple, deferential personage in black, 
well dressed in the French style. He was 
the manager of the shows. 

" His excellency has arrived. I hear the 
trumpets !" said the head of the police, gruffly ; 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 25 

" we must go and meet him, or we shall be 
thought lacking in respect. Pity there is no 
time to find a substitute, but who, even for 
four thousand reals, would face our two best 
bulls . the black Portuguese and the brindled 
Murcian, fiercer than " 

" Make the reward five thousand reals, and 
I am your man, noble sefiores," said I, with 
sudden resolution, emerging from my hiding- 
place. Had I risen, like a theatrical spectre, 
through a trap-door, my appearance could not 
have created a greater consternation. The 
corregidor was the first to recover his equani- 
mity. He knit his heavy brows into a dark 
frown, and angrily demanded who I might 
be. 

" Henry West, British subject, mate of the 
ship Tudor, now in port," was my answer ; 
.' ready to be your matador to-day, if you will 
raise the pay to five thousand reals." 

An animated discussion then took place. 
The idea of a sailor, an Englishman, under- 
taking the difficult and perilous task of bull- 
killing . for the matador, as is well known, 
is the only person exposed to real danger . 
seemed absurd. But then, it was shrewdly 



26 FOB LIFE OR DEATH. 

observed by Don Ramon, the alcalde, if I chose 
to get gored to death, it was no concern of 
theirs, and the catastrophe would at least put 
the people in good humour. But the worthy 
magistrate was reluctant to give so much as 
five thousand reals. If J would accept three 
thousand, or even four ? 

But I was firm. Five thousand or nothing 
were my terms, and as the mob began to get 
very noisy and impatient, the bargain was 
struck. An agreement was hastily written 
and signed by the alcalde, and a cheque for 
the money was drawn and entrusted to the 
master of the shows, to be handed to me when 
I should have earned it. As I traced my 
signature on the paper, I felt that I was 
bartering my own life and blood to save Alice's 
father. That five thousand reals would be 
his ransom. But I had little time to medi- 
tate, for I was hurried off. to another room, 
and there bidden to assume, as quickly as 
possible, the gay costume of a matador, and in 
the meantime the magistrates hastened to 
their places, and the master of the shows 
went on the somewhat awkward errand of 
explaining to the multitude that Manuel Zagal 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 27 

had broken his leg, and that a tyro would take 
his duties on himself. 

From the dark little chamber in which I 
was occupied, clumsily enough, in exchanging 
my own clothes for the gaudy Andalusian suit 
which was a necessary adjunct of the charac- 
ter I had assumed, I could now and then 
catch the sound of the manager's voice, as in 
oily accents he addressed the enlightened 
audience of his patrons. At first his speech 
elicited much noisy disapprobation, but pre- 
sently laughter and cheers drowned the ora- 
tion, and when he came back he wiped his 
forehead with an air of self-congratulation. 
The audience had been restored to good 
humour. They had been testy and irritable, 
the manager told me, as he lent me his 
practised aid in dressing, until he reminded 
them that, at the worst, they had never seen 
an Englishman killed, and might look out for 
a novel excitement. w I told them, St. Martin 
forgive me, that you were the first toreador in 
all London, and had come to Spain to chal- 
lenge our. best bull-fighters to a contest of 
skill, ,> continued the man, and then bade me 
look at myself in the glass. I did so, but 



28 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

hardly recognised myself, so much was my 
appearance altered by the embroidered jacket, 
the slashed calzoncillos, and many-coloured 
silken sash, the scarf heavy with silken fringe, 
and all the lace, bell-buttons, and frippery of 
my costume. The master of the shows eyed 
me critically, from the broad-leaved sombrero 
with its red plume and golden cord, down to 
the pumps and silk stockings which are as 
essential to the matador as to a master of the 
ceremonies, and clapped me on the shonlder 
with a good-natured word or two of approval. 
Then he presented me with the scarlet cloak 
and the long straight-bladed sword, and 
rapidly explained to me what strokes were 
considered " foul," and what were in accor- 
dance with the etiquette of this gory pastime. 
He was by no means ill-natured, anji did his 
best to encourage me, offering me wine and 
refreshments, and insisting that I should 
swallow at least one goblet of strong Calca- 
vella. 

" Cheer up comrade/' said he, " keep cool, 
avoid the first rush, and you may get off with 
unbroken bones and a whole skin. Throw 
the cloak well over his horns, and drive in the 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 29 

sword thus, turning the wrist in this manner, 
and avoiding the breastbone. Never be in a 
hurry, or you are lost. I have seen old hands 
lose their heads at the first roar and dash of a 
hurt bull, but I like you, lad, schismatic as 
you are, and I don't want to see you go out 
feet foremost. Let me feel your pulse." And 
he took my wrist between his fingers, pro- 
bably to ascertain if I were too much flurried 
by the approach of danger to attend to his 
instructions. However, he released my hand, 
muttering with something of genuine admira- 
tion in his tone, " Those island mastiffs 1 a 
tough breed !" 

He then conducted me to a nook whence I 
could see through a small window which com- 
manded a good view of the arena and of the 
spectators above, while the close trellis-work 
of rusty iron prevented the occupant of the 
lair from being visible. And then, bidding 
me be of good courage, he left me to attend 
to his duties. I was alone, though I could 
hear the hoarse bellowing of the bulls confined 
in dens near me ; and now for the first time* 
I had leisure to realise the rashness of my 
undertaking. I had followed the bidding of 



82 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

theatre. And now a fine bull, with wide- 
spreading horns, was in possession of the ring. 
This animal, however, disappointed the ama- 
teurs of the arena by showing more desire to 
escape than ferocity. He ran round and round, 
seeking an outlet, and bellowing piteously, as 
the active toreadors on foot, with banners and 
scarfs, ran nimbly around him, taunting and 
teasing him, until his hide was like a pin- 
cushion stuck full of tiny barbed darts 
adorned with coloured paper. Of this, too, 
the people grew weary, and a general shout 
arose: 

" Toros ! toros ! the Murcian bull at once ! 
No, the Portuguese ! Let the English matador 
show us what stuff he is made of. Toros P' 

The manager looked up appealingly to the 
captain-general, and, receiving an august nod 
of permission, bustled out. Very soon there 
was a flourish of trumpets, and then a deep 
roar, and then, amid clapping of hands and 
huzzaing of countless voices, the brindled 
Murcian bull came at a heavy canter into the 
ring, stopped short, lifted his head, and gave 
a second roar of impatient anger. A noble 
beast he was, and the populace enthusias- 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 33 

tically shouted forth their comments on his 
tossing mane, his deep chest, his dauntless 
look, the strength of his limbs, and the sharp- 
ness of his horns. Then to the sound of 
martial music, in poured the mounted picadors, 
two and two, fluttering with bright ribands, 
and dressed in the old Castilian garb. They 
lowered their lances before the captain-general, 
and rode three times round the arena to 
exhibit their bright scarfs and rich jackets, 
while the cymbals clashed and the drums 
rolled out their loudest notes. The bull 
pawed the ground, distended his nostrils, and, 
with a short bellowing cry, stooped his head 
and began the attack. The words " Bravo, 
toro V 9 rent the very sky. 

It was a butcherly business at best, though 
I admit that the rich dresses, the long lances, 
and waving of scarf, and riband, and plume, 
gave a false glitter and gallantry to what was 
really a very dastardly and disgusting scene. 
The picadors, padded as they were, and 
furnished with immense boots through which 
the bull's horns could not pierce, while scores 
of watchful attendants stood ready to distract 
the animal's attention in case of need, or to 

VOL. I. D 



34 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

carry off a prostrate combatant, were safe 
enough.. But the bull, itself bleeding from 
the repeated lance-thrusts, did great execu- 
tion among the horses, plunging his sharp 
horns into their quivering flanks again and 
again, and inflicting ghastly wounds, while 
still the wretched steeds went reeling round 
the ring, until loss of blood made them drop 
down dying on the ensanguined sand. And 
still the music played its most stirring strains, 
and still the people shouted, while the ladies 
waved fans and handkerchiefs in token of 
applause, and all the gory savagery of the 
Spanish national sport went on with sickening 
repetition. At last, nine horses being dead 
or frightfully injured, two picadors having 
been bruised by falling against the oaken 
barriers, aijd the bull being much spent, the 
remaining horsemen left the ring. Ropes and 
hooks were fixed to the carcases of the slain 
horses, and they were dragged away, and 
fresh sand and sawdust were thrown down. 
It was time for the matador to appear. 

"Now, Englishman, they are waiting for 
you. Remember the thrust, and be cool," 
whispered the manager. He led me into 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 35 

the ring, and I made my bow to the captain- 
general, and another to the audience, while 
the manager, with much grandiloquence, pre- 
sented me to the public as " Don Enriquez, 
of London, the distinguished volunteer, who 
had so kindly undertaken to fill the office of 
the eminent Manuel Zagal." Scarcely had 
the finished this speech before the bull began 
to advance, and my introducer hastily retired. 
I stood alone in the ring, my heart beating 
thickly, and a red film seeming to obscure 
my dazzled eyes, while the clamour of the 
crowd, and the consciousness that I was the 
mark on which thousands were gazing in 
pitiless expectation, almost unnerved me. I 
had faced danger before, but not in such 
a shape, and I am not ashamed to own that 
for a moment my knees felt strangely weak, 
and ray pulses fluttered like a bird over which 
the hawk hovers. Then came back the 
thought of Alice, and I was myself once 
more. Disregarding the spectators, I bent 
my whole attention on the bull, which was 
slowly approaching me, with its head bent 
down, and bloody foam dropping from its 
lips. I steadied myself on my feet, carrying 

d 2 



36 FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

the cloak gathered up on my left arm, and 
with my right I kept the sword pointed to 
the earth, ready to spring aside when my 
antagonist should charge. But the bull was 
more hurt than I had expected. His move- 
ments were slow and painful, and the blood 
trickled fast from his brindled flanks. His 
rolling eyes fixed upon me, then he gave a 
roar, and dashed at me, while, following the 
manager's instructions, I avoided him by 
springing aside. I thought the animal would 
have wheeled to renew the attack, but the 
last rush had manifestly exhausted his re- 
maining strength. He fell on his knees, and 
did not rise till the men on foot beset him 
with squibs and darts, when pain and fury 
revived his forces, and he again made a 
floundering charge. This time I stepped 
aside, and, without throwing the cloak over 
the bull's horns, plunged the sword into his 
neck. He fell, and the audience set up a 
shout of "Well done, Inglese \" 

" That was an easy victory/' whispered my 
friend, the manager, as he led me off, after 
making my bow to the people ; " but don't 
let it make you rash. The poor brute was 



FOB LIFE OB DEATH. 37 

bleeding to death ; anybody could see that ! 
It will be different with the black Portu- 
guese." 

And so it proved, for the audience loudly 
demanded that the lances of the picadors 
should be tipped with wood, all save a point 
two inches long, so that the next bull should 
show better sport. And, not to dwell on 
details, after five or six horses had been dis- 
abled, the picadors retired, and amid a 
flourish of trumpets I was placed face to face 
with the black Portuguese bull. 

"Bravo, torol look what a wicked eye 
he has 1 I bet an ounce of gold on the bull !" 
shouted one amateur, springing to his feet, and 
there was a burst of laughter at the offer of 
this wager, but a breathless silence succeeded 
as I advanced, step by step, towards where 
the bull stood, pawing up the loose sand 
with his fore feet, and roaring low, as he 
watched me. He was a superb beast, very 
large, but a model of symmetry, and his 
sable coat, spotted now with froth and gore, was 
as glossy as satin. He was very little hurt ; 
his bloodshot eyes rolled fiercely ; he was 
evidently gathering breath to renew the battle. 



t 



3S FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 

On my part, I was well aware that my life hung 
by a thread, but that if I could conquer this 
one bull, the last survivor, my work would 
be done, and the money . the price of a 
man's safety . would be earned. A hasty 
word of prayer rose from my heart tamy lips, 
and I advanced, cautiously but firmly. The 
bull appeared to be in no hurry. He waited, 
with heaving flanks, close to one of the 
barriers, while I drew near. 

11 Have a care, Englishman, have a care 1 
he means mischief !" cried some well-meaning 
spectator in the front row. Scarcely were 
the words uttered, before with a deep and 
Hiidden roar the black bull came thundering 
down upon me in headlong charge. It was 
all that I could do to spring aside, and the bull, 
unable to check himself, dashed his head 
against the wooden barriers with a violence 
that made many women in the lower tier 
scream with affright. But with great quick- 
ness the huge beast recovered himself, and 
came rushing towards me, with his head low. 
Again I sprang aside, but so narrow was my 
escape that one of the sharp horns caught 
the sleeve of my gaudy jacket, and ripped 



FOR LIFE OR DEATH. 39 

it open from wrist to elbow, while the applause 
of the audience followed the stroke. Before 
I could use my sword, the bull nimbly 
wheeled, and I was forced to trust for my 
life to my superior speed of foot, running 
round the ring, hotly chased by the bull, 
whose feet sank in the loose sand. I then 
turned, and made an ineffectual effort to 
throw the red cloak over the eyes of my terrible 
antagonist, but the crafty beast eluded me, 
and this time, as I sprang out of its way, I 
felt * a sharp pang in my left arm and side, 
and staggered back, almost dropping the 
sword. The people set up a cry : 

"Toro! Viva El Negro! the black bull 
for ever! Well done, bull; I see the En- 
glishman's blood." 

A crimson mist floated before my eyes, I 
grew dizzy, and the roar of the audience 
confused me. Was all indeed lost? Half 
mechanically, while the blood ebbed from my 
wounded arm, I looked around me. The 
bull was close, by. I saw his glaring eyes 
and tossing horns ; he lowered his head, and 
made a fresh charge. Hardly knowing what 
I did, I thrust forward the long strong-bladed 



I 



ttS Ll fl OR DEATH. 

On my 1 ):! ^tador, and planted ray feet 

l,y a tlm -*^ n t h ere wa8 a cras li and a 

one bull.- *. aD d I was beaten to the 

be cloii' * ^ a g a i Dj feebly, and then I 

man's - . on m y sword, reeling like a 

word c! *** gg the manager supported me 

and 1 : J* bow to the audience, while the 

bull ap *tQ 9 well done the Englishman! 

with 1 * j Well done!" rose from thou- 

barricr .groats. Close beside me lay the 

"U ; "jfthe black Portuguese bull. My 

he ini'-a. ^ j reached its heart. The next thing 

spcctaU * ^ wa8 t^ j i a y } half swooning, on 

the w^g in one of the inner crypts of the 

suddci) ^ggtre, while a doctor was binding up 

down i^ 

a ^ tha -^pgiderable haemorrhage, but no artery 
unabl^ after all!" said the French sur- 
again  let us see the other wound. Bah ! a 
that _ graze. You have escaped bel et bien, 
screa ^mg friend, after all !" 
ness jo tt proved. I suffered no inconvenience 
cam fond loss of blood from the injury I had 
Agi^ived, and the money I had earned being 
esc ;V varded by a safe hand to the place of 
theudezvous on the following day, Mr. Croft 




FOR LIFE OB DEATH. 41 

was set at liberty. Moreno proved a man of 
his word, being equally willing to release a 
captive whose ransom was paid, as to poniard 
an insolvent prisoner. I will not attempt to 
describe Alice's joy at being reunited to the 
father whom she had mourned as dead, nor 
the mingled terror and gratitude with which 
the darling girl learned the desperate means 
I had taken to save him. I am captain of 
the Tudor now, and she is my wife, and in 
our English home, in which we have lived 
happily together for so long, she has often 
recalled, with tears and smiles, that episode 
in our lives which was so nearly proving 
tragical at Malaga. 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 



A stealthy step in the corridor, the faint 
rustle of a woman's garments, and then there 
was a low tap at the door, and a voice said 
softly in the French language, 

" Doctor, monsieur, are you awake ? Come 
and speak to me, but hist ! be careful, for the 
love of Heaven !" 

The summons rather startled me, as I sat 
in my lonely room, late on the third night 
after my arrival at the castle, writing a long 
letter to Alice in England. It was for her 
sake . Alice Wilson's . that I was in Poland, 
and at Miklitz, the mansion of Count Em- 
manuel Oginski, whose household surgeon I 
was. The count was one of the chief nobles 
of the kingdom ; his forefathers had been 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 43 

Palatines in the days of Polish independence ; 
his domains were great, and his revenues, in 
spite of neglect, considerable. The possessor 
of all these advantages was, however, anything 
but happy. He had wretched health, his 
naturally good parts were rusted by sloth, 
and his kindly disposition was fast growing 
irritable and morbidly sad. I had been given 
to understand, by the friend who had pro- 
cured me the well-paid situation I now filled, 
that Count Oginski had fallen under the dis- 
pleasure of the Russian Government. This 
was not from any act of his own, for my em- 
ployer had been scrupulous in his avoidance 
of politics. His son, however, Emile Oginski, 
had been convicted of some share in a con- 
spiracy to throw off the Muscovite yoke, and 
had been punished by being forced into the 
ranks of the army, and sent to serve as a 
private in the Caucasus, with the regiment of 
Astrakhan. 

Two years had elapsed since this harsh 
sentence had been carried into effect, and the 
young heir to a proud name and fair estate, a 
mere boy in years, easily tempted into the 
rash plot whose detection had brought the 



44 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

Czar's vengeance on his head, had never since 
been suffered to communicate with his parents. 
Count Oginski had in vain invoked all the 
influence of his powerful relatives; and the 
mother of the poor boy, a high-spirited wo- 
man, who had never been willing to appear 
at the imperial court, had conquered her 
Polish prejudices so far as to travel to St. 
Petersburg, and kneel at the Emperor's feet 
to solicit the pardon of her son. But Nicholas 
considered mercy as mere weakness, and the 
suppliant was coldly dismissed. At the same 
time an order was transmitted from the Chan- 
cellerie of St. Petersburg that the count, who 
had long resided in Italy during most part of 
the year, should not quit the Russian do- 
minions without a special authorisation from 
the Czar. And it was thought indulgent by 
the bureaucrats of the capital to give " the 
father of a traitor " the choice between St. 
Petersburg and his own Polish estates in 
the government of Kalisch. Thus it came 
about that the count, suffering from gout, 
rheumatism, and a lack of educated com- 
panions, wrote to a friend in London to 
express his desire for an English medical 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 45 

attendant, while the high salary tempted me, 
a poor young surgeon who had only just taken 
his doctor's degree, and who had been for 
years engaged to a clergyman's daughter who 
was good and pretty, but poor as himself. 

And now, when my long letter descriptive 
of the strange place and strange people . a 
letter that might have wearied others, but 
which I knew Alice would read over and over 
again with fond interest in every detail . 
when this letter was half finished, there came 
the midnight summons I have spoken of. 
Opening the door, I found myself confronted 
by the countess. She was very pale, and she 
trembled, and I fancied there were marks of 
tears hastily dried upon her face, but her eyes 
were unusually bright, and had the restless 
craving look often seen in those of some 
hunted creature. As she stood in the silent 
corridor, hung with moth-eaten tapestry, her 
dark hair . streaked with early grey that was 
due to sorrow more than years . falling in 
disorder over her white wrapper, and a small 
silver lamp flickering in her unsteady hand, 
she looked more like a spirit than a living 
woman. 



I 



46 THE POLISH DE8ERTER. 

" Madame/' I said, " I am at your orders, 
but I hope there is no cause for alarm. The 
count " 

She interrupted me by a hasty gesture: 
" The count is sleeping. He is not ill ; it is 
not on his account that . ah ! M. le Docteur ! 
can I trust you ? Will you help me, and be 
careful and silent ?" 

I stammered out some common-place assur- 
ance of my willingness to do all in my power 
to render service to the family, but I dare say 
I was awkward in my speech, being not only 
unpractised in French conversation, but sorely 
puzzled by the visit. Hitherto, I had only 
known the mistress of the house as a some- 
what proud and stately lady, with a grave 
gentleness of bearing, equally remote from 
cordiality or haughtiness. And now this 
marble figure, so cold and impassive, agitated, 
fearful, and with glittering eyes and loosened 
hair, a prey to some inexplicable terror and 
excitement ! Was the countess mad ! No 
doubt she read the doubts that were passing 
through my mind, for she conquered her own 
emotion and addressed me in a calm voice, 
and in a low and wary tone. She wanted my 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 47 

aid, she said, for a sick person who had just 
arrived at Miklitz, and whose arrival, for 
weighty reasons, must be kept a secret from 
the household. The sufferer was . would I 
promise, as an English gentleman and a man 
of honour, not to reveal a word she told me, 
till I had permission from herself? . the 
sufferer was a poor lad, the son of a former 
steward, and who had left the Russian regi- 
ment to which he belonged, without leave. 

" He is a deserter, then, madame ?" 

The countess slowly bent her head, and for 
a moment or two tried to speak, but her voice 
failed her. Then, to my surprise and dismay, 
she sprang forward, dropped on her knees, 
and caught my hand in both of hers, pas- 
sionately crying aloud : 

" Forgive me, monsieur, if I tried to deceive 
you. I will trust you ; I know I may do so 
safely. He is my son, my only son, my dear, 
dear boy, come back from the Caucasus, 
wounded, famished, to die at the threshold of 
his father's house, which he must not enter 1" 

Here the mother's voice broke into stifling 
sobs, and it was with great difficulty, and 
only by representing the risk of alarming the 



fc. 



48 THE P0LI8H DE8ERTER. 

household, that I succeeded in raising her 
from the ground and soothing her to a more 
reasonable frame of mind. At last she was 
able to tell me the rest. 

" I could not sleep," she said eagerly, " and 
I looked out of the window into the great gar- 
den, where the fountains were playing, and all 
was bright moonlight up to the verge of the 
belt of dark oaks. It was then I saw him, 
Emile, but so wan and haggard, so ill and 
emaciated, in a tattered caftan and cap, like 
those of a Russian peasant, that none but a 
mother's eyes could have recognised him. His 
eyes were dim, and his left arm was bandaged 
with a bloody cloth ; but it was Emile, my 
dear boy, that I have seen in my dreams every 
night since the cruel day of his sentence. He 
was so ghastly, standing out in the wan moon- 
light, that I feared he was dead, far off, and 
that his shadow was come to warn me that 
we should meet no more. But he looked up 
and saw me. And I lighted my lamp, and 
went down, and undid the door, and went 
out. And it was my Emile, alive, but dying, 
doctor." 

With all my heart, I offered every assis- 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 49 

tance in my power. The most cruel part of 
the matter was, that we dared not bring the 
sufferer . for the poor lad was smarting under 
the effects of a gun-shot wound, aggravated 
by privation and neglect . into the house, nor 
even reveal his presence to any one, his father 
not excepted. The count . as his wife re- 
luctantly owned . could never in his life keep 
a secret, and his nervous temperament would 
infallibly lead to a betrayal of the fugitive's 
position, should he learn the truth suddenly. 
Most of the servants were faithful and trusty, 
but there were some on whose discretion no 
reliance could be placed : while one in especial, 
the major-domo, a Courlander by birth, and 
who had been recommended by the governor 
of Kalisch, was suspected of being a spy. To 
harbour a deserter, particularly one whose ser- 
vice in the ranks was the chastisement of 
rebellion, was to commit an offence which 
Nicholas never pardoned. If it were known 
that Emile Oginski were sheltered beneath 
the roof under which he was born, the ruin 
of the family was certain to result, while the 
youth himself would be sentenced to the knout. 
There was an outhouse, a sort of grange, 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE POLISH DE8ERTHL 

over which were two rude chambers, intended 
to accommodate husbandmen at the season 
of harvest, but which had for some time been 
unoccupied. This building, old and ruinous, 
would prove a safer shelter than the castle, 
and there would be no prying eyes there. 
Food and clothing could be conveyed there, 
and, under rny care, Emile might perhaps re- 
cover his health and take some opportunity of 
crossing the Prussian frontier, which was at 
no great distance. Though even on Prussian 
soil, as a deserter, young Oginski was liable 
to extradition on the demand of the Russian 
government. There was no safety for the 
hunted wretch, short of the civilised kingdoms 
of Western Europe. All this was sufficiently 
clear and coherent, and I could not but 
admire the prudence and forethought with 
which maternal affection had inspired the 
speaker. Tn as few words as possible, I 
pledged myself to secresy, and snatching up 
my little medicine chest and a pocket flask 
of brandy, I signified to the countess that I 
was ready to follow her. Under her guid- 
ance, and treading with extreme caution, I 
contrived to reach the door that opened on 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 51 

the garden without arousing any one, though 
it was necessary to pass several doors, stand- 
ing half open, according to the careless custom 
of Polish domestics, and from which issued 
the sound of the heavy breathing of sleepers. 
We were soon out upon the smoothly-inown 
lawn, speckled by the dead leaves that had 
fallen during that autumn evening, and the 
sickly gleam of the moon fell on the fountains, 
on the statues, on the withering flowers, and 
the softly swaying boughs of the dark trees. 
But no human form could be seen, and the 
idea occurred to me that the whole must be 
a delusion, a mocking vision seen by the eye 
of overstrained imagination. 

"I bade him wait. I said I would soon 
return. Emile, Emile!" whispered the poor 
mother, gradually raising her voice. But 
there was no reply. The countess trembled 
so much that, but for my support, she would 
have sunk to the ground. Suddenly she 
bent forward, uttered a low cry, "There! 
he is there !" and darted across the lawn 
to where, at the foot of a spreading chesnut- 
tree, lay something hardly to be seen by my 
duller eyes. I found that the unfortunate 

e 2 



52 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

young man was really lying there, motionless, 
in the deep shadow. He was dressed in the 
tattered and travel-stained garb of a Russian 
peasant, his shoes were worn away by rough 
travel, and his feet were cruelly scarred and 
bleeding. There was a gory rag wrapped 
round his left arm, and his matted hair hung 
wildly about a haggard young face that must 
have been handsome once. His lips were 
white ; his eyes closed. 

" He is dead," said the countess, breaking 
out into a low wail, as she kneeled on the wet 
turf and gazed with despairing eyes upon 
the prostrate form beside her. 

" No, madame, he has only fainted. There 
is a pulse, though a very feeble one, and the 
heart beats ; if I can get him to swallow a few 
drops of this brandy, he will revive/' I lifted 
the passive head, and forced a small quantity 
of the cordial between the pale lips. By 
chafing the cold hands, and by repeating 
small doses of the spirit, we managed with 
some trouble to restore the sufferer's senses ; 
but his strength was quite gone. He had 
been so spent by loss of blood and almost 
unheard-of hardships, hunted like a wolf 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 53 

through the forests, that all the strength of 
his youthful constitution had been exhausted. 
Like some wounded animal, he had made a 
desperate exertion to reach his native scenes 
and die at home, but the effort had been too 
severe, and the last of his forces bad been 
expended in the struggle. He was conscious 
of his mother's presence and caresses, but he 
could not speak or stand, and it was necessary 
to carry him to the old grange, as if he had 
been a sick child. 

More than an hour was now spent in pro- 
viding, as well as circumstances allowed, for 
the poor fugitive. There was nothing in the 
deserted building but some trusses of straw, 
and two or three wooden bedsteads like those 
commonly found in a military guard-room. 
Food, water, warm clothes, bedding, must all 
be brought, though at the imminent risk of 
detection. The countess went untiringly on 
this errand, again and again, gliding through 
the house, and returning with linen, wine, 
blankets, and so forth, while I remained with 
the patient, doing whatever ray experience 
could suggest to keep alight the flickering 
lamp of life. We did not leave him until 



54 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

sparingly fed (for he was suffering from actual 
famine, and a free supply of nourishment 
would have proved fatal) and warmly wrapped 
up, he had sunk into the deep and dreamless 
sleep of exhaustion. 

From that night forth, an atmosphere of 
mystery, concealment, and apprehension, 
seemed to extend itself over all things. 
There was a patient to be cared for, a secret 
to be kept, a human being to be secluded 
from the observation of even friendly eyes. 
It was necessary to disguise the fact of Emite's 
proximity from his own father : a deception 
by no means to my taste, and galling to the 
frank and noble nature of the countess, in 
whom her invalid husband reposed the fullest 
confidence. But the more I reflected, the 
more perilous did it seem to afford Count 
Emmanuel any information on the subject of 
his son's refuge. He was unsuspicious by 
instinct and by habit, spoke freely of his 
affairs before his domestics, and felt the most 
perfect assurance of the devotion and attach- 
ment, not only of his Polish servants, but of 
Glittstein, the major-domo, who was, as I 
have said, a Courlander. 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 55 

Of this man the countess entertained sus- 
picions which I was inclined to treat as the 
results of national prejudice. Personally, I 
was rather disposed to like the Russo-German, 
who was a fine portly fellow, with a shining 
bald head fringed with yellow hair, bright 
blue eyes, and a pleasant smile. He was an 
excellent servant, and his punctual neatness 
contrasted favourably with the thoughtlessness 
of the Poles. I might have shared the lady's 
antipathy, had Glittstein been a velvet-footed, 
sly-faced sycophant, gliding cat-like through 
the house, but there was something bluff and 
down-right in the major-domo's speech and 
bearing that pleased me. 

On the very morning that succeeded the 
night of the young man's arrival, a startling 
incident occurred. It was a cold moist morn- 
ing, and the lazy white fog clung like a 
ragged veil of half transparent gauze to mea- 
dow and forest, while the mist hovered in 
thicker masses over the many pools and 
morasses of the low-lying landscape. The 
count was unwell and restless, and ate his 
breakfast in a desultory fashion : now listlessly 
trifling with a morsel of toast, now rising 



56 THB P0LI8H DE8ERTER. 

languidly to gaze out of the window on the 
melancholy prospect, and now, as he drew 
his elbow-chair nearer to the great stove, 
desiring a servant to bring him an exact re- 
port of the last reading of a new barometer 
from Paris or London. The master of Miklitz 
was very curious in all weather-predicting 
instruments, and the hall was full of aneroids 
and wheel-glasses, whose French-polished 
mahogany and burnished brass seemed out of 
place among the grim wolf-heads and spread- 
ing antlers, the spears, nets, and antique 
weapons. 

" A miserable morning, Dr. Burton !" said 
Count Emmanuel, pushing away his cup; 
" the forerunner of a winter such as you can- 
not realise till you have felt it ; a winter that 
nips and pinches you, chills you and wets you, 
all at once. Even St. Petersburg is pleasan- 
ter, as being dryer. Bah ! What cruelty of 
the government to compel a crippled martyr 
like myself, M. le Docteur, to leave dear beau- 
tiful Italy, with a sun that really shines . Eh ? 
Adeline, what is amiss ?" 

The countess had started from her 
chair, and stood listening eagerly to some 



THE PpLlSH DESERTER. 57 

faint sound which no ear, unsharpened by 
strong emotion, could have detected. My 
senses are tolerably quick, but I could hear 
nothing. A minute passed, and I thought I 
heard something like a dull far-off beat of 
horses' feet. 

" Soldiers ! They have come to seek him ! 
He is lost !" murmured the poor mother, but 
in so low a tone that the rash words were 
heard by none but myself . unless, indeed, 
Glittstein, who was handing some cordial to 
his master, had caught them. 

In a few moments all doubts were set at 
rest by the arrival of a commissary of police, 
accompanied by several agents and a party of 
dragoons, to search the castle for the appre- 
hension of Emile Oginski, political offender, 
and deserter from the regiment of Astrakhan. 
Very particular orders to secure the person of 
this young man had arrived by telegraph from 
St. Petersburg, and no retreat appeared so 
likely to shelter him as his father's house. 

Two hours, two long and painful hours, 
were consumed in a minute search of the 
extensive mansion, which was rummaged from 
the garret and turret-chambers to the cellars. 



58 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

The servants were rigorously cross-examined, 
and the official in command entered into an 
artfully managed conversation with the count, 
whose easy disposition was well known, in- 
somuch that the authorities felt assured of 
being able to worm out the truth from him. 
But the count knew nothing, and the astonish- 
ment with which he heard of his unfortunate 
son's flight was too genuine to be mistaken 
by so practised an observer as the commissary. 
The servants also, being wholly ignorant of their 
young lord's return, could not possibly betray 
him, either by awkward zeal or venal perfidy, 
and the police were at last fain to believe that 
no person of the household had the slightest 
idea that the fugitive had even committed the 
otfence of desertion. Fortunately the countess 
was asked no questions, nor was it thought 
worth while to examine myself, a foreigner 
newly arrived. The out-buildings underwent 
no scrutiny, for the agents were convinced, 
long before the mansion was explored, that no 
one had seen the runaway, and that without 
having been seen he could not be here. 

" He never got out of the forest of Pylclo- 
vicz, where he was last seen by a charcoal- 



THB POLISH DESERTER. 59 

burner/' said the commissary in a testy man- 
ner, as he took his leave. " I told our lord 
the governor that mortal limbs could not have 
borne such a journey as that from the wood 
hither. And now, perhaps, some booby of a 
village headman will get the reward after all." 

The police and troops went off in a crest- 
fallen style, like foxes baffled in an inroad on 
a poultry-yard, and the servants, male and 
female, watched them as they rode down the 
avenue, and followed their retiring forms 
with suppressed curses and jeering laughter. 

The conduct of Glittstein during this domi- 
ciliary visit had been very satisfactory. He 
was present when the commissary announced 
his errand, and when Emile's escape was pro- 
claimed ; and the look of surprise with which 
he received the news was evidently genuine. 
When the police were searching the house, 
his broad face wore an expression of concern 
and disgust; he did not scowl or mutter 
maledictions, as the Poles did, but held him- 
self aloof; and I thought I could read in his 
intelligent countenance not only sympathy for 
the distress of the family, but an honest man's 
natural repugnance to tyranny. 



60 THE POLI8H DE8ERTER. ' 

" What would they say to this in England, 
1 1 err Burton P" he asked, in a cautious tone, 
us I passed him. 

" What indeed, Glittstein I" 

The troubles of the Oginski family were by 
no means at an end. Two days after the 
withdrawal of the baffled gendarmes, there 
arrived an imperative mandate, sent by tele- 
graph to the governor of the province, and 
transmitted as rapidly as man and horse could 
bear it to the castle. Count Emmanuel was 
required immediately to present himself before 
the authorities at St. Petersburg, there to 
remain until he had satisfied the Czar of his 
innocence of any complicity in his son's 
desertion. 

A pbinful dilemma now arose. Disobe- 
dience was not to be dreamed of, and the 
count at once prepared to depart, but would 
have preferred to be accompanied on his 
dismal northern journey by his wife and his 
medical attendant. Under ordinary circum- 
stances, the countess would have gone with 
her invalid husband without hesitation, but 
now . when her son lay, worn out and 
wounded, perhaps dying, on a mean bed in 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 61 

a neglected outhouse, it was impossible. 
It was equally out of the question that I, 
whose professional care was necessary to the 
sufferer's recovery, should absent myself from 
Miklitz. 

The count went alone. How it was 
managed in detail I do not bear in mind, but 
the countess feigned severe indisposition, and 
this afforded a plea for retaining the English 
doctor at Miklitz. The count was, as I have 
said before, the most trustful of men. He 
would not hear of my leaving the countess, 
and was considerate enough to leave Glittstein, 
his right hand man, whom he accounted a 
treasure of sense and fidelity, to help us, 
taking with him only his Polish valet. 

The object of so much hostility, tenderness, 
and pity, lay passive and prostrate, in a con- 
dition between life and death. We could 
only visit him by stealth, and it was with 
much difficulty that we could convey to his 
comfortless lair the supplies of which he stood 
in need. He was very, very ill. The gun- 
shot wound in his arm gave me a good deal 
of anxiety, for the bone was badly shattered 
and exfoliated, and the wonder was that 



62 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

gangrene had not already ensued. But my 
chief fear was that the terrible exertions of 
that long journey through forest and over 
bleak steppes, with its attendant hunger and 
hardships, would prove too much for even 
a sound and youthful constitution. 

It was long before the patient could find 
strength for anything like a continuous narra- 
tive of his escape and the causes of his deser- 
tion. It was a tale not merely of privation 
and toil, and barbarous warfare on a rugged 
frontier, but of studied insults, unjust punish- 
ments, and a deliberate purpose to break the 
spirit and crush the heart of every one of 
these unfortunate exiles. He had fought and 
marched, had endured the hardest details 
of a hard life, with an unflinching and un- 
complaining courage that was due to his 
Polish pride, but he had been at last com- 
pelled to become " dushtek," or servant, to 
a Russian major. 

" He was a cruel coward, the most hated 
of all our tyrants/' said the young man, 
feebly ; " he taunted me, he spoke to me as 
if I were his dog ; he mocked my country and 
my creed ; he made my tasks, and the bread 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 63 

I ate, as bitter and as odious as a petty des- 
pot could. * One day he struck me across the 
face with his cane. Next moment he lay at 
my feet, calling for help, and I fled." 

How he had formed the bold resolve to 
regain his home in West Poland, penniless 
and on foot ; how he had journeyed, hiding 
in the woods by day, and travelling by night ; 
how the peasants had sometimes given him 
food and shelter, and at other times had 
turned* out to hunt him down in hopes of 
reward ; all this he told in simple and modest 
words. Also, how he had changed clothes 
with a Malorossian serf, who had given him 
an old caftan and cap in exchange for his 
uniform coat ; and how, soon afterwards, the 
tidings of his escape having preceded him, 
he had been pursued by a troop of Cossacks, 
and had received his wound from one of their 
musket-balls, while in the act of scrambling 
up the steep bank of a river which he had 
swum, and which had baffled the horsemen. 
Finally, how, famished, cramped in every 
joint and sinew, he had dragged himself with 
bleeding and crippled feet to the door of his 
father's house, at which he had not dared to 



64 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

knock, and was watching the windows when 
his mother saw him. 

A gallant lad he was, slender and graceful 
of figure, rather active than strong, and with 
a handsome face enough, when once it be- 
gan to lose the gaunt famine-stricken look 
which it wore at first. When the crisis of 
his illness was past, and his recovery became 
only a question of time, we contrived to remove 
him to a lodge in the forest, a mile or more 
from the castle, which was tenanted by a 
woodsman, whose wife had been his nurse. 
These good people were wholly trustworthy, 
and would have borne torture or death, I 
believe, sooner than betray their young lord. 
They cared for him with the utmost affection : 
and Michael, the woodsman, actually relin- 
quished his Sunday visit to the brandy-shop 
which a Jew kept in the village, lest he should 
in his cups let slip any unwary allusion. 

The winter had now set in with much 
severity, but Count Emmanuel did not return 
from St. Petersburg. His letters were few, 
and cautiously worded, as if the writer knew 
that they would have to pass the ordeal of 
the Secret Scrutiny Bureau in the Russian 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 65 

post-office ; but he spoke of occasional inter- 
views with the ministers and the emperor, 
and of his hope that he might soon be able 
to quit the metropolis. Of his son he said 
little, and that little was cold and artificially 
expressed ; not that the count was without 
paternal affection, but because of the strict 
supervision under which he, as the father 
of a " delinquent," was placed. 

Emile could walk now, though not very 
vigorously, nor was it deemed wise for him 
to stir abroad. A proclamation had been 
largely circulated in the province, offering a 
reward of eight thousand roubles . four times 
the amount first proposed . for the capture 
of the deserter Oginski. So high a price 
would never have been set on him, of course, 
but that he was a man of rank, and heir to 
a fine estate, which could not legally be confis- 
cated, unless he had been tried and convicted 
of desertion and mutiny. Emile, knouted 
and imprisoned in Siberia, would lose his 
civil rights, and the state might inherit at 
Count Emmanuel's decease ; but Emile at 
liberty and across the borders, could not be 
so summarily disposed of. In such a case 

VOL. I. F 



66 THE. P0LI8H DESERTER. 

the Czar could only condemn him as " contu- 
macious," and the property would hereafter 
be sequestrated, instead of permanently con- 
fiscated. 

The proclamation was affixed to trees, 
posted up in markets, and made widely 
known, but all in vain. Many of the greedier 
peasants and of the Jewish inhabitants were 
rumoured to have expressed a longing hope 
that such a prize might fall in their way; 
but the labourers on the Oginski estate tore 
down every one of the detested placards with- 
in their reach, and the fierce Slachsiz, or 
peasant nobles of the province, made no 
secret of their intention to put to death any 
traitor who might betray young Oginski into 
Muscovite hands. Some such threat, ill- 
written and ill-spelt, but penned in stern 
earnest, was to be seen scrawled at the foot 
of every copy of the manifesto that yet adhered 
to a wall or tree. 

Yet I could not but agree with the countess, 
that the earliest opportunity of getting the 
young man safe over the frontier ought to 
be embraced. How to effect this escape was 
not so clear. Prussia was not far off, but 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 67 

the frontier guards were on the alert, and 
so were prowling detachments of Cossacks. 
Money, horses, and a disguise, had to be 
provided; and we dared not remove any 
horse from the castle lest the grooms should 
suspect the reason. 

Three months after Ernile's arrival, on a 
crisp frosty morning when the ice sparkled 
like flawed crystals on every pool and run- 
let of water, and the snow upon the dark 
pine-boughs gleamed doubly white and pure 
in the sunlight, I set off to walk to the lodge. 
No one in Poland ever dreams of walking for 
mere pleasure. To account for my being 
often afoot, I always carried a gun, and oc- 
casionally shot a few squirrels or hares. There 
was a good deal of snow on the ground, and 
my footsteps made so little noise, that two 
men, in close conversation beside an enormous 
pile of rudely hewn logs, did not observe my 
approach. 

" Six out of the eight thousand roubles 
are mine ! Remember that ! If I trap the 
bird, I do not choose to be cheated of 
my fair share of the roast, Isaac. The 
place is too good a one to lose gratis; 

p 2 



M 



68 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

besides, I shall have made Kalisch too hot 
to hold me." 

It was Glittstein's voice. I bent forward, 
and, cautiously peering round the corner of 
the wood pile, beheld the worthy major-domo 
in company with a red-bearded man in a 
Jewish dress, but whose flat Tartar counte- 
nance matched ill with his Hebrew robe. 
The latter drew out a folded paper, cast a 
quick glance to left and right, and handed 
the paper to Glittstein, saying, in a coaxing 
tone, in German : 

" There, there, excellent brother Glittstein 
. be pacified, I pray you. Here is a promise 
under the governor's own hand and seal. 
Six thousand roubles, and promotion in the 
Warsaw police office. You are to be a com- 
missary, and in the secret department, on 
the day when Emile Oginski is brought be- 
fore the court-martial. Come, good friend, we 
mean fairly by you. Do you, on your part, be 
ready to point out the hiding-place of the young 
count. In an hour, our men will be here." 

I think the wretch said more, but I had 
heard enough. I withdrew as silently as I 
had approached, and hurried back to the 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 69 

house. In five minutes, the countess knew 
all. Glittstein's treachery was clear, and it 
was also evident that by some means, perhaps 
by dogging his mistress, or myself, or both, 
in our frequent visits to the hut where the 
young man lay concealed, the false major- 
domo had discovered the lurking-place. 
There was little leisure for thought. In one 
short hour the soldiery would arrive, and the 
wood would be surrounded by armed men. 
The countess bore the cruel tidings bravely, 
nerving herself, for her son's sake, to be calm 
and resolute. 

" We might resist/' she said, with a bright 
but steady eye, glancing over the snow-en- 
cumbered plains. " There are nine true 
Poles among the servants, and Michael, and 
the four mowers, and Karel the smith, and 
the tall sawyer and his son, with Demetrius 
at the farm, and all the quarrymen. Twenty- 
five good muskets, and a breast-work of trees 
such as the axe would pile up in half an hour, 
and Polish hearts behind it . ah, no ! my 
good, kind husband. Flight is the only hope ! 
Yet Emile is weak and ill yet . and to fly 
alone " 



70 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

" Not alone. I will go with him/' I ex- 
claimed ; " he is not strong enough to endure 
alone, but with my help I think he may make 
shift. By striking through the woods, in 
four hours' time we may touch Prussian 
ground. The horses . " 

Here the countess interrupted in turn, 
hastily informing me that the men-servants 
were all gone to a wedding in the village, 
and that I could remove two strong horses 
from the stable without being observed. Even 
as she spoke, she unlocked a cabinet, and 
drew out a heavy purse of gold, which she 
had provided to aid Emile's escape, and 
which she put into my hands, with a thou- 
sand thanks and blessings, and fond messages 
to her son, mingled with entreaties that I 
would not lose an instant. 1 rushed down 
stairs, catching up a whip as I passed the 
hall, ran to the stable, and hastily saddled 
two horses; the black which I usually rode, 
and a fiery chesnut of great fleetness and 
power. My fingers trembled so much that 
I could hardly adjust the bridles. As I 
buckled the last strap, the open door was 
filled by a dark figure . Glittstein! I had 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 71 

just turned the chesnut in his stall, and the 
eyes of the major-domo met mine, and each of 
us read in the other's glance that his secret 
was known. 

An evil look came over Glittstein's face, 
and he strode forward and snatched the bridle 
rudely from my hand, saying : 

"Nein, nein, HerrEnglander; your pretty 
little pleasure-trip is spoiled." 

I have never clearly remembered how I did 
it ; but in a moment the spy lay grovelling on 
the floor, with my foot on his breast. Glitt- 
stein was a cowardly creature, and begged 
for mercy in abject language. He offered 
no resistance when I bound his hands tightly 
with an old girth, tied him to one of the 
wooden pillars, and bade him stir or speak 
at his peril. I then led out the horses, closed 
the door, and mounted. As I did so, my 
horse laid back his ears, snorted, and pawed 
the earth, and the fiery chesnut neighed long 
and shrill. To my dismay, the neigh was 
answered by other horses afar off, and then 
came a long wailing note of the Cossack 
trumpet. The Czar's bloodhounds were be- 
fore the hour named for the rendezvous. I 



72 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

darted into the wood, the led horse rearing 
and plunging, and giving me some trouble. 
Looking back, I saw a flash of steel between 
the trees of the avenue, and I heard Glittstein, 
who had probably caught the sound of the 
trumpet-call bawling in the stable, and roar- 
ing in German and Russian for help. 

Emile, when I arrived at the lodge, was 
not much surprised by the sudden summons 
to fly. He came to the door, accompanied 
by Michael and his wife, both uttering excla- 
mations of alarm, while the children set up 
a wail of terror. 

"I have been expecting this for many a 
day and night, doctor," said he, smiling. " 1 
hope to escape, if only for my poor mother's 
sake, but in no case shall they take me alive. 
Give me the pistols, Michael ; I loaded them 
yesterday. Farewell, Nurse Katrina! fare- 
well, Michael ! and you, good doctor . you go 
with me, you say? My mother ought not 
to have asked so dangerous a service from 
you, Burton. Those Cossacks are wolves 
when they scent blood and plunder." 

I assured him that my mind was made up. 
I had promised, and even had I not promised, 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 73 

I would not have abandoned him in his weak 
state. He wrung my hand, and mounted 
without further parley. Away we went along 
the ride, the frozen snow cranching beneath 
our feet, and the dry branches cracking. 
Quick as we were, we had scarcely emerged 
from the forest into a region of morass and 
scrubby brushwood, beyond which gleamed, 
iron grey, the frozen lake of Vartha, when a 
long-drawn whoop rang through the frosty 
air, and was followed by two or three twang- 
ing notes of the trumpet, quick imperious 
calls for stragglers to close up. Then, looking 
back, we saw the whole troop of wild riders, 
some sixty strong, come dashing over the 
heath towards us, their lance-heads and gun- 
barrels glittering in the rays of the wintry 
sun. We doubled our speed. 

" Steady, Burton, steady!" exclaimed young 
Oginski. " A stumble may cost us our lives. 
Beware of that green bit of ground where the 
snow has thawed away; it is a bog that would 
swallow a squadron, horse and man ; keep to 
the right. We must push for the causeway 
that spans the morass, or we shall get to a 
creek of the Vartha that cannot be crossed. 



74 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

The ice would bear us, but the banks are 
rotten and unsafe. A tight rein, and a keen 
eye for deep drifts, and we shall sleep in 
Prussia yet." 

Einile had ridden with his greyhounds or 
his gun over most of the country around, and 
his knowledge of its localities did us infinite 
service. At times he seemed at fault, but his 
memory would soon revive, and he would 
recollect every knoll and dyke of that difficult 
district. But fast as we went, we could not 
shake off the pursuers. It was impossible to 
help noticing, with a sort of unwilling admira- 
tion, how warily and well those wild horsemen 
made their way through the broken ground, 
scenting danger with an instinct that never 
erred. Their long habit of ranging savage 
plains made them fully a match for Emile's 
experience. 

At Emile himself I looked with some 
anxiety. I knew that he was weak, much 
weaker than he would allow, that his left arm 
was stiff and painful, and that he had lately 
shown symptoms like those of incipient con- 
sumption. He was pale, with a hectic spot 
on each cheek, and his breath came short and 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 75 

with effort; but his eye was bright and 
fearless, and he sat the fiery chesnut like one 
bred to the saddle. 

On we went, over rough and smooth, now 
floundering through a snow-bank, now dash- 
ing through such a collection of peat-bogs, 
moss-grown stones, and the tough, gnarled 
roots of furze and broom, as I should have 
been sorry to have traversed in cold blood; 
and every instant a stumble, which no care 
could avoid, all but brought the horses to 
their knees. We reached the causeway ; a 
straight road, embanked with rough stones, 
and built of pine-logs and birchen fagots, 
with earth and pebbles rammed into the 
interstices . a work that dated from the reign 
of John Casimir. It was old and out of 
repair, rotten in many parts, and full of dan- 
gerous holes partly concealed by the snow, 
but it was a welcome exchange for the broken 
surface of the moor, and we sped on. 

"You see that hill, doctor, due west, and 
beyond the pine-wood, with a white cottage 
on it, and some trees, and a flagstaff? That 
is Prussian ground 1" 

I did see the low swell of sandy earth, 



76 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

rather a mound than a hill, and yet visible for 
many miles over the monotonous flat land- 
scape. But, between us and it was a dark 
stretch of forest, beyond which gleamed some- 
thing bright . water ! There was a river to 
ford, then, and a wood to struggle through, 
but the distance was not great. Emile spoke 
again, after a glance to the rear. 

"How those Cossack fellows are closing 
up ! How their ponies go ! Steady ! they 
have got the range." 

A shot came whizzing past us as Oginski 
spoke, and I started as I heard the peculiar 
hiss of the ball, blending with the loud and 
threatening hurrah of the pursuers. I looked 
round. They had gained on us, and were 
fearfully near. Two more muskets were fired, 
and then we plunged into the pine-wood, and 
galloped up a narrow path that seemed to 
lead towards the river. There was not room 
for us to advance abreast, so we hurried on in 
single file, stooping our heads to avoid the 
branches that stretched across as if to bar our 
way, and half blinded by the snow that we 
shook down upon ourselves from bough and 
sapling. Behind us were the Cossacks, yell- 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 77 

ing like hounds closing on the prey, and firing 
random shots, in hopes, no doubt, of crippling 
our horses. We pulled up, panting and torn 
by bramble and branch, on the bank of the 
river. It was not frozen. It rolled on, deep 
and dark, but behind us were the howls of 
the Russian troopers, and we could not hesi- 
tate to plunge in. 

" Head him for the spit of land yonder, 

doctor ; the bank is too steep to Ah ! the 

game is up 1" 

A bullet from the bank mortally wounded 
his gallant horse. The poor creature reared 
and floundered, made an effort to swim on, and 
then rolled over and sank, snorting, beneath 
the cold water, which was crimsoned with his 
blood. The soldiers set up a shout of exulta- 
tion. By great good fortune I had contrived 
to catch Emile by the collar as he sank, and 
to drag him free of the dying horse. It was 
an awful moment, for the current was strong, 
my horse was spent and frightened, and made 
feeble way against it, and I, encumbered as I 
was, could hardly keep my seat. The Cossacks 
set up another shout, and, while some plunged 
into the stream, others renewed their fire. 



78 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

" Save yourself, Burton ; never mind me," 
gasped the young Pole, still up to his neck in 
water ; " save yourself, for they will give no 
quarter 1" 

But I retained my grasp, and in an instant 
more, to my great joy, the exhausted horse 
touched the ground, and I urged him by voice 
and heel up the slope, half-dragging, half- 
supporting, my young patient, whose strength 
was gone. The Prussian custom-house guard 
came hurrying out of their huts, and their 
German phlegm was surprised into something 
like excitement, for they gave us a faint cheer 
as we reached the striped flagstaff, and were 
safe from our enemies. 

" Your passports, mein Herren ? Then you 
are prisoners in the name of his Majesty of 
Prussia," said the sergeant who commanded 
the post, swelling with official pomposity. 
For a minute or two I began to fear that our 
dearly bought liberty was about to be rudely 
cut short. Emile, however, knew better than 
I did with whom he had to deal, and, by a 
judicious investment of part of the gold with 
which the countess had supplied me, suc- 
ceeded in enlisting in our behalf the sympa- 



THE POLISH DESERTER. 79 

thies of the Prussian guard, who, after all, 
had little love for their Russian neighbours. 
Accordingly, when, an hour later, the Cossacks 
crossed the river, and an officer of Russian 
police came up to demand, in the Czar's 
name, the extradition of the deserter, Emile 
Oginski, the sergeant demurred and diplo- 
matised, asked for impossible proofs, talked 
of writing for instructions to head-qtiarters, 
and finally refused to give up the fugitives 
until his " high-and-well-born Herr Captain 
Inspector" should decide the point. 

Two hours later, we were suffered to hire 
a peasant's cart, and to depart for Posen 
under the nominal custody of a douanier, who 
left us in the nearest village, wishing us a 
good journey in return for a brace of golden 
Fredericks which were slipped into his hand. 
With some little difficulty, which tact and 
bribery smoothed away, we managed to tra- 
verse Prussia, and at Hamburg we embarked 
for England. I have not much more to tell, 
except that my young companion's state of 
health became such as to induce his physician 
to order him to the south of Europe, and that 
at Lisbon he was joined by the Count and 



80 THE POLISH DESERTER. 

Countess Oginski, as soon as the Emperor 
would give permission to the former to reside 
out of Russia. This was at length obtained, 
partly, I believe, in consequence of an un- 
varnished account of the circumstances of 
Emile's desertion coming to the Czar's ears. 
Any rate, after a year's time, it was intimated 
that Count Emmanuel might please himself 
as to his residence. 

The parents of Emile were only too deeply 
grateful to the English doctor for the service 
he had rendered to their son. As I declined 
a considerable annuity which the count 
pressed on my acceptance, the countess pro- 
posed that I should reside at Miklitz, as 
manager of the estate and all its wealth of 
salt mines, with full powers and a liberal 
salary. This offer I gladly closed with, and 
I am happy to say that the value of the pro- 
perty has steadily augmented under my care ; 
while Alice, whom this sudden accession of 
competence enabled me to claim as my wife, 
has long been reconciled to her home in 
Poland. 



A LITTLE DINNER 

WITH 

THE CAPTAIN. 



" I wish I could paint like that !" said a 
voice high pitched and with a nasal drawl in 
it, as I sat sketching among the highlands of 
the Hudson. 

"You take an interest in art?" said I, 
dabbing away at my landscape, for I saw that 
the man meant civilly. 

" Art and nater 1" answered the tall Yankee; 
"art and nater! You're making a pretty 
view of it, and so you had oughter, for 'tis an 
all-fired location this ; yes, 'tis. I guess you're 
an artist?" 

"Yes." 

"A Britisher born?" 

"Yes." 

" I know'd it. Them blues and whites air 

vol. i. Q 



82 A LITTLE DINNER 

neat, and like the real thing; the clouds is 
ftot bad ; but the water's the thing that shows 
gumption." 

" You should be a judge of your own 
element/' I answered, laughing, for I had 
already settled my friend's calling, on a second 
glance at his cornelian waistcoat buttons and 
his coral breast-pin. " You have sailed over 
a good deal of blue water in your time." 

" Scalp me, stranger," said he, " but you're 
right. We must be better acquainted, we 
must. I haven't a card, stranger, but my 
name's Daniel Coffin, of Providence, Mass., 
first mate of the Bird of Freedom, clipper ship, 
lying down at New York." And he held out 
his strong sunburnt hand for me to shake. 

Some more conversation followed. I found 
my new friend, like most of his countrymen, 
very inquisitive, though the questions he asked 
were propounded with an apparent simplicity 
that made them by no means offensive. It 
was not enough for him to know my name 
and profession. He was curious about my 
antecedents, my travels, my habits, my pros- 
pects, and the friends I had in America. 
" Tell you what, sir," said he at last, " you 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 83 

kiender took me in, first I spied you out. 
Something of the soger officer about that 
individual, says I to myself; something square 
about the carrying of the shoulders and head, 
that a man who's knocked about the world as 
I have, can't mistake. Mebbe, thinks I, 'tis 
an engineer officer from West Point, making 
tactical sketches. Have you done a little in 
that line, sir, afore you took to the brush ?" 

I owned that I had worn the Queen's 
colours, and had sold out, after some years in 
Sydney and Auckland, to escape the weariness 
of colonial quarters, and the tardiness of pro- 
motion. 

The first mate of the Bird of Freedom 
asked no more questions. He began extolling 
beyond measure the good qualities of his 
skipper, Captain Malachi Hodgson. The 
" cap'en" was a scholar, the " cap'en" was a 
gentleman fit to pick mutton-chops at Wind- 
sor, the " cap'en" could speak all languages, 
and had been over the Italian picture-galleries 
and museums, and was an antiquary, and a 
collector, and what not. Nothing came amiss 
to this extraordinary captain; he had auto- 
graphs of all the great or notorious of the 

g 2 



84 A LITTLE DINNER 

earth, gems, coins, medals, statuettes. Then, 
the personal accomplishments of the com- 
mander were equal to his possessions: he 
could sing and play, and sketch, and model in 
wax and clay, and take photographs, and 
lecture on chemistry. Now, would I come 
and see the Bird of Freedom when I came 
back to New York ? 

I faithfully promised that when I returned 
to the city I would call on Daniel Coffin. 
And we parted, excellently well pleased with 
each other. 

Three weeks passed before, quitting the old 
Dutch farm-house where I had boarded, I 
went back to the Empire City. There, as I 
was one day skimming the Herald, in a'cafe, 
my eye fell on the following advertisement: . 
"California direct. The splendid clipper 
ship, Bird of Freedom. To sail on the 17th. 
For freight or passage, apply, &e." The 
advertisement recalled my enthusiastic friend, 
Mr. Coffin, and the Admirable Crichton of 
a skipper whose praises he had so loyally 
sounded, and I resolved to be as good as my 
word, and to pay him a call. I found that 
the ship had dropped down, and was lying off 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 85 

Long Island. Hiring a pleasure pinnace, I 
made the short voyage to her anchoring- 
ground, and found reason to admit that the 
mate's eulogy had not been much overstrained. 
The Bird of Freedom was a magnificent 
vessel, nearly new, and of immense tonnage. 
She was one of those long, sharp-bowed, 
lofty-masted craft of which Americans are so 
proud, and appeared, as indeed she was, 
admirably designed for speed. I could not 
help fancying, however, that her build was 
better adapted for summer seas and the trade 
winds, for quick runs, in fact, under favour- 
able circumstances, than for buffeting to and 
fro in rough variable weather. "A raal 
darlint, your honour," cried ray tough old 
Irish boatman, who had not in twenty years 
dropped a note of his brogue ; " she lies on 
the say like a duck, and is as nate as if she'd 
a glass shade over her." By this time we 
were alongside, and a rough head, crowned 
by a Spanish straw hat, was popped over the 
bulwarks, while a harsh voice swore at us, 
and asked what we wanted, that we scraped 
our boat's snout against their keelson? I 
answered from the stern-sheets, taking off my 



86 A LITTLE DINNER 

hat, "We were merely admiring your fine 
vessel, t>ut may I ask whether you have on 
board a gentleman who invited me to pay you 
a visit, I mean Mr. Daniel Coffin ?" 

The second mate, who was our questioner, 
acknowledged my salute by sulkily lifting his 
own Panama, and replied, " Yes, I kalkilate 
he air. Did you wish to come on board. 
You'll find a clean side rope at the starboard 
gang. The larboard one's tarry, and would 
spile them gloves o' yourn." 

The boat was directly at the foot of the 
starboard side-ladder, and I jumped on board, 
just in time to meet honest Daniel Coffin, who 
came bustling aft to welcome me. 

And, sure enough, Daniel Coffin did appear 
glad to see me. His mahogany face was as 
radiant as such a face could be, and the grip 
he gave my hand was like the pressure of a 
vice. He did the honours of the ship, at 
least of all above decks, making me duly 
admire the tapering of the masts, the square- 
ness of the yards, the trim neatness which 
regulated everything. There was no visible 
morsel of metal, whether ringbolt, pin, rail, or 
brass gun, that was not scoured as brightly 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 87 

as the kettles in a Dutch kitchen. There was 
an unusual quantity of rackwork and windlass 
tackle about, as well as pulleys, patent blocks, 
and other mechanism for economising labour. 
As for the crew, I saw .three or four fine- 
looking seamen on the forecastle, busy with 
serving mallets, spunyarn, rattlins, and inch 
and a half rope, preparing something or other 
for the ship's top hamper, and a couple of 
wobegone persons were wringing swabs near 
them, which latter alone took some notice of 
us. One of these men touched his hat, not 
to the mate, but to me, and seemed disposed 
to speak, but Mr. Coffin swore at him, and 
bade him " keep his distance," and he shuffled 
off in a broken-spirited fashion. 

"Those are not sailors?" said I, with a 
jerk of my thumb to point out the object of 
my query. 

"No; they air not. They're what they 
call ' waisters' in the navy ; but here we jest 
call 'em landlubbers ;" answered Mr. Coffin. 
" Never mind 'em. I wish I could show you 
the cabins, but cap'en's busy writing. They're 
splendacious, and that air a fact. Ah ! here 
is cap'en himself." 



t 



88 A LITTLE DINNER 

And, sure enough, up the cabin stair came 
the commander, and the mate bustling to 
introduce me, we exchanged bows and com- 
pliments. The skipper was a little man, not 
puny, but a giant cut down, with broad 
shoulders and "double joints/' He had a 
massive jaw, full of great white teeth, bright 
chesnut hair, blue eyes, and a very red and 
white complexion. Altogether he was as 
little like an American as any man I ever saw 
in any country. But he was very well bred 
and polished, quite a gentleman in manner, 
and I soon found that I was talking to one 
who was at least my equal in education, and 
a man of talent to boot. He showed me the 
cabins, gave me a peep at two or three cabinets 
of medallions, cameos, rare shells, and so 
forth, as well as at some valuable pictures and 
curious arms, and only regretted that he was 
too much occupied on that day to submit to 
my inspection all his treasures. Would I 
come and dine with him before he sailed? 
Meanwhile I must have some lunch, and he 
tinkled a little silver handbell, which brought 
in the coloured steward and a tray. During 
lunch, we chatted on indifferent subjects ; the 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 89 

captain pleasing me greatly by the frank 
shrewdness of his talk. Presently feats of 
strength were mentioned. There were some 
very heavy round-shot in the steerage, the 
captain said he could hardly lift them, and he 
wondered whether I could make a better job 
of it than he. So, after lunch, we went into 
the steerage, and there, by a great effort, I 
contrived to heave up one of the shot to the 
level of my head, to the great amusement and 
satisfaction of my entertainer. 

" Well, sir," said he, " you have done what 
only six of us here aboard can manage. Myself 
. that is . Dan Coffin, who is strong, for all 
that he looks so loosely put together, and four 
of our primest forecastle salts. I wish you 
were one of us. But the next best thing will 
be to get the advantage of your company 
while we can; so excuse a sailor's rough 
invitation, and come and dine with me aboard 
on Thursday, the 16th. We are advertised 
to sail on Friday, and the passengers come on 
board early on that day ; but on Thursday we 
can have a cozy evening, and you shall look 
over my hoards of old rubbish. May I expect 
you?" 



r 



90 A LITTLE DINNER 

I said "Yes, I would be sure to come," 
and thanked him for his hospitality. We 
shook hands. I stepped into my boat, and 
went off, and the last things I saw on the 
deck of the clipper were the heads of Captain 
Hodgson and his mate Coffin, as they waved 
their hands in a parting salute. 

No obstacle having intervened, on Thursday 
afternoon I found myself a guest at the cap- 
tain's hospitable board, in his pretty cabin, 
with its trophies of weapons and its choice 
little Flemish pictures hanging on the walls. 
There was rather an ostentatious display of 
plate and glass, and fruit and flowers, con- 
sidering that covers were laid for only four, 
Captain Malachi Hodgson, his first officer, 
Mr. Dan Coffin, Dr. Ellerman, the ship's 
surgeon, and myself. The dinner proved 
a capital one, the champagne . the royal 
Madeira . were worthy of the dinner, and the 
conversation pleasant, for both the captain and 
the doctor were well-informed rattles. Cap- 
tain Hodgson was very gay and amusing. As 
for the surgeon, he was a dry, caustic talker, 
with a good deal of ironical humour, and a 
talent for quotation. In person he was a 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 91 

large bony man, with inscrutable eyes like 
those of an elephant. We did not spare the 
wine, but were all perfectly sober when we 
rose from table, and proceeded to sip our 
coffee and smoke our cigars, when I soon 
afterwards proposed to take my leave. The 
skipper would not hear of it. Indeed, as he 
reminded me, I had no shore boat in atten- 
dance, having been pulled from the quay in 
the ship's yawl, which, with Nathan the 
second mate in it, had been fortunately lying 
off the jetty just as I came down to the water. 
I must . trust to my entertainer's good offices 
for the means of departure, and the captain 
promised me his gig at eleven oclock. " Not 
a minute before," said he, gaily, " for till then 
you are my prisoner." Then I remember 
that the captain played a tune on the piano, 
very nicely indeed, and the doctor sang a 
sentimental Spanish air to the guitar, with an 
absurd gravity that set us all laughing. Then 
we played cards for low stakes, and I won a 
few dollars. Next, a bowl of punch was pro- 
posed, and the doctor was enjoined to brew 
it. " A famous punch-maker the doctor is," 
said the captain. The black steward brought 



92 A LITTLE DINNER 

in the materials, and the surgeon began his 
task in an elaborate manner. Then the cap- 
tain jumped up, and proposed to show me 
his coins and other treasures while the punch- 
making went on. As I lifted my eyes from 
a tray of very curious Etruscan relics, I hap- 
pened to glance at the mirror opposite, and 
there, to my wonder, methought I saw the 
doctor shaking a white powder into his brew 
from a paper he held in his hand. The 
captain's eyes followed mine, and saw the 
reflexion in the glass as well. He saw, too, 
my slight start. "Powdered sugar, hey, 
doctor ?" said he. " Yes, to be sure," an- 
swered the man of healing. "I always use 
lump, myself," remarked the captain; "but 
that may be an old fashioned prejudice. The 
result is undeniable, anyhow. Have you seen 
these seals, sir ? I bought them in Athens." 
Powdered sugar ! to be sure it was powdered 
sugar, and I was an ass to be suspecting 
Borgian sleights of hand in the nineteenth 
century. But now we were asked to taste of 
the punch. It was hot, fragrant, and very 
tempting. The doctor flourished the ladle. 
We all sat down, and held out our glasses, 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 93 

which were filled. " Now, gentlemen, a 
toast," cried the doctor; " The fatherland of 
our accomplished visitor, Old England, and 
good luck to her !" We all lifted our glasses, 
I as a good patriot drained mine ; and almost 
as I did so, noticed that the others held full 
glasses to their lips, but only made a feint 
of sipping. I caught the captain's eyes fixed 
on me with a peculiar glance of triumph and 
mockery. The doctor's face, too, had a sneer 
on it, and the mate was chuckling audibly. 
Meanwhile I reeled in my chair, the glass 
quivered in my hand, there was a humming 
in my brain as if of a million bees, and the 
room was revolving like a top. I was giddy, 
sick, blind, and a laugh rang in my ears as I 
became insensible. 

A dreadful roaring made me dream that I 
was in a den of lions; next, that I was in 
the midst of an earthquake; and lastly, to 
awake to a dull sense that steam was being 
blown off somewhere, but where or how, even 
when awake, I could not conjecture. I had 
afterwards no doubt that the steam-tug was 
then alongside. There were all sorts of dull, 
confused noises, but none that I understood. 



i 



94 A LITTLE DINNER 

There were foul smells, too. Something 
crawled over my face. Another something, 
also with legs and antennae, was rustlijig at 
my ear ; that was a cockroach, and I swept it 
aside with disgust, but the drug still over- 
came me, and I fell asleep again. From this 
second slumber I was rudely awakened by a 
shower of merciless kicks in the ribs, against 
which not even morphia could make a sleeper 
proof. My eyes opened with a jerk, and in 
the dim light I could faintly discern the ill- 
looking face of Nathan, second mate of the 
clipper, who was swearing as hard as he 
kicked. 

" Get up, ye skunk, and show your carcase 
on deck." 

" On deck !" said I, in a bewildered way. 
" Why should I ? Where am I ? Leave off, 
I say ; you hurt me." 

" I'll jest break your bones, ef ye don't 
obey orders," answered Nathan, tartly. 
"Cap'en says hands are to be mustered to 
sign articles afore sailing, and I've been 
told to rouse up the skulkers; so up with 
you." 

Indignation was but a tenth part of what 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 95 

I felt. I made a lurching effort to rise, and 
tried to catch Nathan by the throat, but was 
too weak, and only got a grasp of the monkey- 
jacket, from which he had now changed his 
shore-going coat. Nathan laughed grimly as 
he caught me by the arm. 

" Well larn ye," he said, " to respect an 
officer, afore you've seen your last of Slue 
water. But I must git ye to quarters. 
Halloa ! Jonadab and Titus, ketch hold of the 
British skulker here, and help him to tumble 
up." 

Two brawny natives of Cape Cod came 
jumping down a ladder, and, before I could 
remonstrate, I was hustled up some steps, 
through a hatchway, and finally found my- 
self at the foot of the mainmast, in broad day, 
and surrounded by a crowd of men in all 
varieties of shabby dress. The Bird of Free- 
dom was in open water, standing out to sea. 
There was "a sea on," and the vessel was 
rolling and pitching quite enough to account 
for the absence of any passengers from deck, 
and enough, too, to make it difficult for those 
recruits who had not their sea legs to keep 
their feet. 



i 



96 A LITTLE DINNER 

Presently I saw advancing from the after- 
deck the treacherous skipper, Captain Malachi 
Hodgson, accompanied by his three mates, 
his supercargo, the surgeon, the carpenter, 
the cooper, and a gruff man who officiated as 
boatswain, the large crew requiring such an 
official. Captain Hodgson was in his sea- 
gopg clothes, a shabby old suit that had 
already borne the souse of much salt water. 
He had a broad belt round his waist, in which 
was stuck a six-shot Colt's revolver, whilst a 
brass-hilted hanger swung at his left side. 
Each of the mates, too, as well as the boat- 
swain, cooper, carpenter, &c, had a revolver 
and cutlass ostentatiously displayed. The 
captain's eye ranged along our ranks, calcu- 
lating and keen. I had thought that he 
would wince when our glances met, and I 
dare say I looked stern enough in my just 
indignation, but I mistook him. His eye met 
mine quite coldly and unconcernedly, and all 
he deigned to say was : 

" The forecastle hands will be picked from 
the strongest, of course, Mr. Coffin. Put that 
man along with them." 

And as his forefinger pointed me out, 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 97 

Jonadab and Titus whisked me a little on one 
side, where several quiet large-limbed mariners 
were standing and chewing their quids. 
" That man !" It was thus he designated 
one who but yesterday had been his flattered 
guest. I choked with wrath, and when I did 
find my tongue, my voice was so peremptory 
and loud, that Jonadab and Titus let go my 
arms in sheer surprise. 

" Before Heaven, sir, you shall repent this 
outrage, if there be law in America. You 
shall " 

" Hold your tongue, sir !" bawled the cap- 
tain. "Do you think, under my own flag, 
on my own deck, I'll submit to the imperti- 
nence of a whelp like you. I'll teach you 
your duty, unless you prefer Old Nick for 
a schoolmaster." 

And then followed a volley of oaths. 

" If we fall in with a cruiser, British or 

American, I give you my word " I began, 

but I was cut short. 

"Gag the hound, Mr. Coffin," said the 
skipper; "stop that tongue of his, or cut 
it out at once." 

Gagged I was, accordingly, in spite of 

VOL. I. H 



< 



98 A LITTLE DINNER 

my feeble resistance, but even had not my 
brain been humming with the effects of the 
drug, I could not have shaken off the united 
strength of my three or four brawny tormentors 
with the biblical names. Thus roughly reduced 
to silence, I was lashed to a shroud and left 
to be a passive spectator of the scene. The 
captain then ran his eye over the shrinking 
mass of landsmen, and I could see that his 
violence had produced. its effect, and that they 
were cowed into servility. "Bring forward 
those articles, and the writing-desk," was the 
next order. " Now, men," said the skipper . 
but his oaths I leave unrepeated . " you have 
shipped, as you are aware, for California direct, 
on board this screamer of the seas, Bird of Free- 
dom. Hush ! no interruptions allowed ; I don't 
ask you how you all came on board, and I don't 
care. I make no distinction. Here you are, 
and here you stop. I don't ask you to ship 
for the return voyage, because I know for 
certain that I couldn't keep a scamp out of 
the lot, once we drop anchor at San Francisco. 
But for the voyage out, I've got you, and 
I'll keep you. Mutiny shall be punished. 
Skulkers and shammers shall get their deserts. 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 99 

Provisions you'll find good, the biscuit won't 
hurt your teeth, nor the salt meat neither ; 
there's lemon juice, there's a doctor, there's 
no stint of cocoa and tea, and Uncle Sam's 
full allowance of grog," (here there was a 
feeble cheer, set up by some sycophants in 
ragged garments). " As for wages, we won't 
quarrel. Twelve dollars for A.B.'s, eight for 
landsmen, four for boys. Supercargo and 
steward will find you in Jerseys, frocks, and 
shirts, if your kits are not in order. Now, 
each man will step forward, answer to his 
name, and sign the register." 

Daniel Coffin unfolded the paper, as his 
superior's oration closed, and called the first 
man's name, " Kit Marsh !" " Here !" re- 
plied a brisk little English sailor, whose red 
eyes and sallow face told tales of the debauch 
at a tavern ashore, which had thrown him help- 
less as a sack into the hands of the crimps and 
the captain. But Kit cared little. It was 
only that he had spent his money like a fool, 
and must now go to sea months earlier than 
he intended. The kidnapping appeared to 
him in no very dreadful light, and he was 
always at home in a forecastle. So Kit Marsh 



100 A LITTLE DINNER 

signed articles with his shaky hand, remark- 
ing that he was but ten days back from 
China, and had not a cent left. The others 
followed suit, and name after name was 
appended to the register. Some of the men 
tried to remonstrate ; one went down on his 
knees to beg to be put ashore; he was an 
emigrant house-painter, a Swiss, and had a 
wife and child in New York, who must starve 
in his absence. But the oak planks he knelt 
on, were not harder than the heart of Captain 
Hodgson, and the suppliant was bidden to 
"leave off snivelling, and go for'ard." Of 
course I do not for a moment mean that every 
one there, was an unwilling recruit. Far 
from it. There were several New Englanders, 
hard of head and hand, who had a small 
venture in the ship, and were treated con- 
siderately by the skipper and mates. There 
were also certain seamen, English, Scottish, 
or Dutch, who had been coaxed into shipping 
when intoxicated, and who had merely been 
wheedled out of their liberty. But hardly one 
of the landsmen was there of his own free 
will. They had been beguiled on all sorts 
of pretexts ; had been drugged, cajoled, and 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 101 

intimidated ; in fact, had been enlisted very 
much as French recruits were in the days of 
Louis the Fifteenth, and before France had 
a conscription. For seamen were terribly 
scarce in New York, and were chiefly manned 
by crimped foreigners ; the natives being un- 
willing to ship, except in whalers or coasters, 
where they could have a share in the venture. 

The poor house-painter had been victimised 
in a cruel way. He had been tempted on 
board to do some job in the way of his trade, 
but scarcely had he fallen to work, before he 
was unceremoniously forced into the hold, 
and there detained under hatches till the ship 
sailed. He told me this story with many 
tears ; tears of no selfish sorrow, for his 
heart, poor fellow, was with the helpless crea- 
tures he had left in a garret at New York, 
and he was in a most distressing agony of 
mind when he recalled the privations and 
sufferings which in all likelihood awaited them. 

When all but myself had signed, a pen 
was placed between my fingers, Nathan held 
my wrist, Mr. Coffin guided my hand, and 
between them they managed to affix a splutter- 
ing signature to the important document. Then 



102 A LITTLE DINNER 

we were ail sent forward ; libations of 
grog were served out, petty officers ap- 
pointed, and the mates catne up to teach us 
our duty. " You air in my watch," said Mr. 
Dan Coffin, as he very deftly removed the 
gag, and undid the cord that confined my 
wrists; "you air in my watch, and kinder 
under my care. Keep your mouth shut, now ef 
you don't want to bite oakum again. I am 
speaking out of pure kindness, and for your 
good ; for I don't mind saying I have taken 
a sort of fancy to you, mister, and we're old 
acquaintances. Don't bear malice, stranger, 
for I mean no harm, and I wish you no worse 
than jest to go quietly through the voyage, 
aud keep a whole skin and sound bones. 
For that, mister, you must keep a civil 
tongue, and be less bumptious to cap'en. 
He's terrible, cap'en is, once he takes a spite, 
and already you've roused his grit. I see by 
your eye you're riled, but jest you consider 
this; 'tis better to go ashore at San Fran- 
cisco, alive, than mebbe to be food for the 
fishes, atween this and the Gulf. I'm hard, 
myself, but not like cap'en. I'm hickory, 
but he's flint." 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 103 

Tor all my righteous rage, for all my na- 
tural repugnance to submit to so unjustifiable 
an outrage, I felt that Dan Coffin gave good 
advice. I also felt sure that he spoke truth ; 
he had taken a " sort of fancy' to me, al- 
though he had been the original decoy-duck 
concerned in my capture. I had heard queer 
stories and read strange paragraphs, respect- 
ing the doings on board American vessels, 
even while in British waters. What then was 
to bridle the imperious will of Captain Hodg- 
son, on the long voyage that was just begun : 
a voyage round the great western continent, 
from lax New York to lawless San Francisco ? 
Entrapped as I had been, it was still necessary 
that I should obey and toil, until a chance of 
escape should present itself. I consented to 
work as a foremast man. The actual labour 
was the least part of what I had to undergo, 
for I was vigorous enough to get through my 
"duty" with comparative ease. 

The voyages I had previously made, had 
seasoned me against sea-sickness, and I could 
tread the deck with tolerable firmness ; whereas 
many of the kidnapped men were in agonies of 
nausea, and slipped and tumbled as they went 



1C4 A LITTLE DINNER 

about their work. But the cockroaches and 
vermin in the forecastle, the foul air, the noise, 
the broken slumbers, the grease, dirt, and 
squalor, and the many disgusts of such a life ! 
Nor was it agreeable to be the only educated 
man. among companions who often jeered at 
me for not drinking rum and chewing tobacco 
like the rest . for being so " mealy-mouthed" 
when oaths were in question .and the like. 
But here, too, my robust constitution stood 
me in good stead, for nobody ventured on 
practical jokes or personal rudeness, whereas 
a more slightly made man would probably 
have had to endure a good deal of annoyance. 
Of my enforced messmates the majority were 
rather well-disposed fellows, although ignorant 
and fond of drink, and as impressionable as 
schoolboys. Half a dozen of them were sad 
ruffians, quarrelsome evil-eyed scamps, who 
were the bullies of the forecastle, and whose 
ordinary talk was full of blasphemy and threats. 
Among these, I have heard proposals for a 
mutiny broached twenty times, but nothing 
ever came of them. When once the ship's 
officers came hectoring in among the crew, to 
distribute their daily dole of cuffs and curses, 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 105 

the ruffians were always utterly cowed, and 
would bear any amount of beating. 

But while it was needful to keep a tight 
hand on this portion of the ship's company, 
nothing could excuse the capricious severity 
of those in authority. Captain, mates, and 
boatswain, were never without revolvers, and 
seldom without a cutlass or hanger, which 
latter they would fetch and buckle on at the 
slightest murmur or remonstrance from the 
sailors. The boatswain always carried a thick 
rattan, and was unsparing in its use; the 
mates had knotted ropes-ends, or " colts/' in 
their pockets, and mercilessly applied them to 
every laggard. But what the crew most 
feared, was the free use of the " brass knuc- 
kles," or " knuckle dusters," which our task- 
masters wore six times out of seven. These 
are brass finger-guards, not unlike what the 
Roman gladiators called the cestus ; they con- 
stitute a regular portion of the equipment of 
an officer of the American mercantile marine, 
and they convert the fist into a metal mace 
for cutting and gashing the face which it 
strikes. The punishment was unsparing and 
continual. The crew was an incongruous one, 



106 A LITTLE DINNER 

with its incapables, its skulkers, and its sick 
men . real and feigned. Picked up as it had 
been, it was certainly a very indifferent ship's 
company, and would have tried the patience 
of even a good-humoured commander. But 
in our case pity and patience were put out of 
court at once. Sick or well, lazy or willing, 
stupid or shrewd, every man must work, and 
every man must obey any order, smartly and 
well, or bear the penalty. And the weather 
was exactly that least suited to a display of 
the clipper's qualities. Baffling winds, rough 
seas, and adverse currents, made the Bird of 
Freedom beat about in a most unsatisfactory 
style, and soured the temper of skipper and 
subalterns. If there came a fine sunny day, 
with favouring wind and moderate sea, the 
passengers would appear on the poop, basking 
like butterflies ; but soon the cloudy sky and 
increasing sea sent them all out of sight again. 
It was curious on these occasions for me to 
look from my post forward at the gay groups 
in silk and broadcloth, and the fluttering 
muslins, with spy-glasses and parasols, and 
books, to hear the silvery peals of ladies' 
laughter, and the voices of educated men, from 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 107 

whose society I was shut out. And it was 
curious to see the captain a prime favourite 
among them, amusing, courteous, and kind, 
and then to see how the same captain came 
among us, swearing, black-browed and cruel 
as Nero. 

Four men died, before we were off Cape 
Hatteras, every one of whom might have lived 
but for the brutal usage and neglect on board. 
The surgeon only attended to the passengers. 
He declared the sick seamen were shamming ; 
they were driven to quarters, and buffeted 
while they could stand. They died like dogs, 
and had dogs' burial. A worn out hammock, 
a round shot sewn up in it, a grating tilted 
over the gangway, and a sullen plunge in the 
sea, without prayer or blessing . and they were 
gone. By this time, many others had received 
severe injuries, few or none were without cuts 
and bruises, for the mates thought nothing of 
felling a seaman with their brass knuckle- 
dusters, every blow of which broke the skin. 
As little did they think of a knock-down blow 
with a marlinspike or belaying-pin, and the 
canes and knotted colts were always in full 
play. I cannot say that the more deadly 



108 A LITTLE DINNEE 

weapons were much used. I have certainly 
seen the captain give a flesh wound with his 
hanger to a sluggish sailor, and two of the 
men were pistolled by the first mate for dis- 
obedience, but the wounds were slight, and the 
shots had been designedly aimed at the calf of 
the leg. But I could have no doubt that on 
very slender provocation the shooting and 
hacking would have been resorted to freely. 
Yet many of the men were content and cheer- 
ful. The provisions were excellent, and libe- 
rally furnished; check, shirts and sea frocks 
were supplied freely against wages ; and the 
grog was good. It was only when fresh from 
punishnjent that the more thoughtless were 
out of spirits. 

But there were those to whom the disci- 
pline was unbearable, and the captain as 
much an object of dread as if he had been 
really a demon. The mates were harsh 
enough, but the captain was a worse tyrant 
still. He bore heavily on the weak, and most 
of all on the poor young Swiss, the kidnapped 
house-painter. He was a well-disposed fel- 
low, rather puny and timid, and never quite 
free from the qualms of sea-sickness. He had 



WITH THE CAPTAIN. 109 

been an excellent workman ashore, but never 
would have made a sailor. I protected him 
from the forecastle bullies, and spoke in his 
favour to Dan Coffin, but Nathan and the 
captain were very severe with him. Poor 
wretch I what he went through, will hardly 
bear detailing . the oppression, the injustice, 
the sickening brutality. I shall never forget 
how he crept to my side one night as we 
kept watch on deck, and whispered to me 
that he had seen his wife and child in a 
dream, nights before, dead of want, and 
that in another dream he had seen them free 
from pain and trouble, happy in Heaven, 
beckoning and smiling to him to join them. 
" I shall be with them soon/' he said wildly ; 
" I can no longer bear the life on board this 
ship, this hell upon the waters." I looked 
down at his white face in the moonlight, 
scarred with ill-usage as it was, and saw a 
new resolve there. I tried to comfort him, 
to put hope into him, and enable him to 
struggle on. He pressed my hand and 
thanked me, and glided off like a ghost. 
That night he drowned himself, springing 
over the side during the bustle of relieving 



110 A LITTLE DINNER 

the watch. "The thief! He has cheated 
me, has he?" was all the captain said 
about it. 

We were in the tropics then, and the winds 
were light, and the clipper went like a wraith 
over the waters. She was a wonderful 
sailor. The men were now less maltreated 
than in rough weather. Nevertheless, seven 
had died before we had crossed the line. 

We were not much south of the line when 
an accident occurred. The great iron tank, 
a patent one, proved defective, and the water 
ran out, floating the cargo, and mixing itself 
with the bilge- water of the hold. Only the 
casks remained. We sailors were restricted 
to a quart a day, then to a pint, and that in 
the tropics. But the torture of thirst con- 
quered even fear ; we spoke out loudly, in 
spite of steel and pistols, and we got our 
way. The captain was obliged to put into 
the harbour of Rio Janeiro to obtain a fresh 
supply. He was very unwilling. He would 
let no one go ashore, except the American 
seamen whom he trusted, lest he should lose 
his white slaves. Those Americans I speak 
of, were not ill treated; they were on a 




WITH THE CAPTAIN. Ill 

different footing from that of the crimped 
men. 

With great trouble I succeeded in writing 
a letter, and bribing, with the few dollars I 
had about me, a black canoe-man who sold 
fruit and yams, to carry it secretly ashore. 
This letter T addressed to the British Consul, 
my schoolfellow in former days, and on 
whom I felt I could depend. Nor was I 
disappointed. Before the water was all 
shipped, the Bird of Freedom was boarded 
by the gentleman in question, who had wisely 
procured the attendance of a lieutenant and 
boat's crew from the United States frigate in 
harbour. The consul civilly but firmly 
claimed me as a British subject, under illegal 
restraint, and the American officer backed 
the claim. 

I never shall forget the face of our "old 
man/' as the sailors called Captain Hodgson, 
as he stood biting his lips and looking from 
the consul to me. The whole thing had 
been managed so suddenly that he was for 
once, outwitted. "Take your Britisher !" 
he said at last ; and as I passed over the side 
to the consul's boat he eyed me with the 



112 A DIXXER WITH THE CAPTAIK. 

malignity of a fiend. Bat orer me, at 
least, his power no longer extended, though 
my heart ached for the poor fellows I had 
left, as I next day saw the Bird of Freedom 
unfold her white wings and glide away oat 
of the port, and out of my life, over the blue 
sea. 



A DAY AT GRAND GULF. 



The long vacation served for an excuse; 
but, indeed, I might have given myself a 
holiday, even during the busiest portion of 
the legal year, without detriment to my pro- 
fessional prospects. I was not precisely a 
briefless barrister, having made exactly nine- 
teen guineas and a half (the half-guinea 
being due to a " motion of course") during 
the past twelvemonth. But I did not depend 
on the patronage of attorneys for my bread ; 
my great-aunt's legacy gave me a modest 
independence, and I felt an anxious wish to 
visit America 'and see my brother once more. 
There were but two of us left out of a rather 
large family. I had been bred to the bar, at 
home, but William had chosen to push his 

VOL. I. I 



114 A DAY AT 

fortunes in the New World. He had hitherto 
chased the fickle goddess so hotly, that the 
letters of his relatives rarely reached him, and 
that his were seldom dated twice over from 
. the same town, or even from the same state. 
He had adopted the restless habits of the 
most migratory Yankee, whisking from Flo- 
rida to Maine, speculating, mining, prospect- 
ing, land-jobbing, entering professions to 
abandon them half tried, and leading that 
Jack-of-all-trades life so dear to our Transat- 
lantic cousins. Yet Willy made money: he 
never complained, never asked assistance from 
his few surviving kinsfolk, and his elastic 
spirit swam like a cork in all waters of 
difficulty. When last I heard of him he was 
junior partner in a new bank at New Orleans; 
he had done^ well enough, and gave me a 
pressing invitation to visit him in the healthy 
season. He was housed in Rochambeau- 
street, and could introduce me, he said, to all 
the celebrities of a city compared with which 
even Paris is tame and common-place. Au- 
tumn came, and I went. I had written twice 
since 1 had made up my mind to the voyage, 
but had received no reply. This, however, 



GRAND GULP. 115 

disturbed me little. I made no doubt that I 
should find my brother in the bank parlour, 
safely anchored before his ledgers and cash- 
books. "Banking," said I to myself, "is a steady 
and permanent pursuit, and 1 am glad that 
Willy has taken to so sober a mode of realising 
a fortune. This is very different from his Cali- 
fornian land-jobbing, or his Texan mule trade, 
or his Oregon life assurance company. He 
will do well now, and I shall find him at his 
post." I set off. I travelled by rail and 
steam, without the slightest adventure, to a 
certain well-known port on the Mississippi, 
where I embarked. The river-boat I selected 
was a fine one, the Benjamin Franklin ; she 
had been launched but a month before, and 
her superb cabins retained their maiden 
splendour of decoration. What pretty cabins 
they were, lavishly adorned with mirrors, 
alabaster statues, costly woods, gilding, and 
rich carpets and curtains, a world too fine 
for the rough majority of the company. 
There were some well-bred, quiet people on 
board, certainly, but they formed a small 
minority, and seemed to shrink from notice. 
The bulk of the passengers were excessively 

I 2 



116 A DAY AT 

wild and noisy, with beards and hair tangled 
and luxuriant, and dressed in garments of 
incongruous fashion, half dandy, half back- 
woodsman. 

"Surely, steward/' T ventured to say, 
" these cannot be all Southern planters. Are 
they filibusters, or " 

"No, no, massa," grinned the black, very 
affably ; " dem not Southern gentlemen, sure, 
nor yet Yankee notionsellers, nouther. Massa 
must have heard ob de great diggins at Pike's 
Peak, hey?" 

"Pike's Peak!" repeated I, rallying my 
wandering recollections. 

"Iss, sir, up 'mong de ole Rocky Moun- 
tains. Dere dem passengers are all going off 
as fast as can hurry. Pike's Peak shocking 
savage place, massa, not fit for Chris'en . oh 
dear no!" 

I had heard of Pike's Peak, the reports 
of its immense wealth, varied by hideous tales 
of starvation, suffering, death, and canniba- 
lism, among the emigrants thither. 

"But those gentlemen," said I, glancing 
towards a group of well-dressed, well-behaved 
men, " can hardly be going to Pike's Peak ?" 



GI&AND GULF. 117 

"Which, massa?" said the affable negro. 
"Ah! I see; dem wid de lily-white hands 
and de smart cravat round him throat, and 
de shirt-cuff so clean and stiff, and all de 
bootiful rings and watch-guards. Certainly 
not, sir; dem never go grubbing wid pick 
and cradle. Dey too clebber, sure." 

"Those, then, are planters?" said I, with 
some interest. 

"Cornelius, ye darned snowball, get me 
a julep!" bawled a fierce adventurer from 
among the diggers. 

" Coming, sir 1" answered the steward, 
swishing his napkin, and then answered my 
query with, " He ! he ! he ! Massa make 
comical mistake. Dem are sportsmen" 

" But how . why ?" I began, when the im- 
patient digger assured the black that he would 
" draw a bead on his ugly carcase" with his 
revolver, unless the desired refreshment were 
instantly produced. Nor did Cornelius seem 
to regard this threat as a mere flower of 
speech, for he hurried off, muttering between 
his teeth, but outwardly obedient. 

I was left alone. Not for long, however. 
One of the gentlemen who had attracted my 



118 A DAY AT 

observation, very civilly came forward and 
invited me, as a stranger and an Englishman, 
to take a seat at their table. 

"We may be able," said the American, 
"to afford you some reliable information 
respecting the productions and noteworthy 
points of the country we are skirting, and . I 
need scarcely say that to assist a traveller in 
forming a correct estimate of the South will 
be a pleasant task to us all" 

Very civil this. I willingly complied, and 
met with a genial welcome. Two of the party 
were fine-looking men, of an appearance 
eminently prepossessing, and seemed to com- 
bine keen intelligence with the bland suavity 
of citizens of the world. The others were much 
younger, and had rather a haggard aspect, 
but their dress was faultless . at least, from 
an American point of view . and their display 
of jewellery, and spotless linen was equal to 
that of their elder companions. " Well \" 
thought I, " if all American sportsmen are as 
elegant in dress and deportment, it is plain 
that, in the New World at least, out-door 
amusements have a tendency to refine instead 
of brutalise." And I thought with a con- 



GRAND GULF. 119 

teinptuous pity of British fox-hunters, and 
still more of British turfites, as I surveyed 
these dandy Nimrods of the West. Still, I 
am bound to say that not one word of sport 
did I hear. On the contrary, my new friends 
conversed on politics, commerce, the cotton 
crop, the snags and sawyers of the river, the 
last revival, the last explosion, and the dif- 
ference between New York and London. 

"You seem to know New Orleans well, 
gentlemen/' said I, after listening to two or 
three anecdotes, the scene of which was 
invariably laid in the metropolis of the 
Western Delta. 

"No place like it!" cried one of the 
younger men, with a sort of enthusiasm ; " it's 
right down, thorough going, and slick through, 
the cream of all creation. Life goes faster 
there than in other places." 

" So I have heard," said I, with a smile, 
but rather diffidently; "life, I understand, 
goes a good deal more abruptly than is 
pleasant. In duels I mean," added I, seeing 
that I was not understood. 

" Sir," said another of the party, " you have 
been misinformed. Not that I insinuate that 



120 A DAT AT 

our free citizens will tamely brook affront. 
No, sir! But there is great exaggeration 
prevalent on the score of duels and fatal 
affrays, pretended to be of continual occur- 
rence down South. We have chivalry, sir, we 
have fire, but we air not the monsters we air 
depicted/' 

I told him I had always understood that 
the state of Mississippi in especial was re- 
nowned for its lawless condition, and for the 
slight value set on human life by its inhabi- 
tants. The four gentlemen shook their heads 
with one accord. 

"These air slanders/ 1 said one of the 
seniors of the party, whose name I understood 
to be Alphonso P. C. Jones . "these air 
slanders, I give you my sacred word of honour. 
We live, it is true, in a land where the blush- 
ing bloom of Eden has not yet wholly faded 
away ; in a land where the luxuriant beauty 
of airth sometimes attracts the spoiler and 
the rowdy, and occasional difficulties will 
happen. But peace is our idol, and the olive- 
branch " 

Here some confusion was caused to the 
orator by the trifling circumstance of his 



GRAND GULF. 121 

bowie-knife tumbling from its concealment 
somewhere in the roll-collar of his waistcoat, 
and coming with a bang on the mahogany 
table. He turned very red, and was shuffling 
the unwelcome implement away, when I 
stretched out my hand, saying, " Would you 
allow me to look at it ? I have often wished 
to inspect fc bowie-knife." 

Mr. Alphonso P. C. Jones solemnly handed 
over the weapon in its shagreen sheath, and I 
looked with great interest at the sharp and 
heavy blade, the strong cross-bar to increase 
the purchase in close conflict, and the silver 
mountings of haft and scabbard. Meanwhile, 
Mr. Jones muttered something about the 
necessity of self-preservation, and the number 
of Irish and Germans about. 

" You must often have found this sort of 
thing useful in your mode of life," said I, 
poising the heavy dagger as I gave it back. 

"What way of life? What might you 
mean ?" 

Such were the questions rather fiercely pro- 
pounded, and every brow was overcast. But 
I had spoken in perfect innocence ; and when 
I went on to talk about buffalo-chases and 



122 A DAY AT 

bear-hunts, and the rough forest sports of 
America, the frowns relaxed, and my new 
acquaintances gave me a good deal of surpris- 
ing information on the subject of woodcraft. 
Suddenly my eye lit upon a remarkable 
object. This was no other than the face of 
Cornelius, the black steward, now expressing, 
with its rolling eyes and open mouth, as 
much astonishment as the face of a negro 
can convey. He was gaping and glaring, 
first at me, and then at my companions, quite 
oblivious of the tray and napkin he carried. 
I jumped up : 

" What on earth is the matter, steward ?" 
said 1. 

The black drew me aside : i. Me tell massa 
no lie ! When Britisher ask if me sabe who 
gentlemen wid lily-white hands and plenty 
gold rings . me say, sportsmen. Den Cor- 
nelius come back, and find massa sit down 
along wid dem, as tick as tieves." 

" And why not ?" asked I, in bewilderment. 
"What possible objection could I have to 
their company? Or, indeed, what better 
company could I expect to meet with than 
those gentlemen, who, by your own account . " 



GRAND GULF. 123 

" Curm hyar, you black-faced chatterbox !" 
thundered a voice from the pantry, the voice 
of the captain himself. " How's dinner to 
be true to time, if you stand preachin* there ? 
Free nigger or not, I'll cowhide you." 

Off flew Cornelius, and I returned to my 
seat, puzzled, but pleased with my new 
friends. A few more spirit-stirring tales of 
the prairie and the forest, and then a game of 
cards was proposed, and a couple of 'packs 
seemed to appear, as if by magic, on the 
table. But Alphonso P. C. Jones would not 
play, nor would he agree to any game, 
excepting for merely nominal stakes, quarter- 
dollar points, or the like. I have never felt 
any taste for gambling, but I play a steady 
rubber at home, and I had no objection to 
make a fourth in a quiet way, the stakes being 
so small, and the other gentlemen being so 
disappointed at Jones's firm refusal. But 
scarcely had the second deal taken place 
before Captain Pell himself appeared, and 
marched with a stern countenance straight up 
to our table, on which he placed his clenched 
hand. 

"Very sorry, gentlemen," said he, "but, 



124 A DAY AT 

as commander of this vessel, I am obligationed 
to say, shut up 1" 

Mr. Jones remonstrated in a mild but dig- 
nified manner. " Surely, captain, we are as 
harmlessly employed as the chess-players 
yonder, or as those enthusiasts who make 
such a tarnation clatter with the dominoes. 
I was not aware that your rules " 

" Then, sir, you had oughter ! ? Tis printed 
up yonder in black and white, plain to read 
as a chyild's horn-book. Cyards air pro- 
hibited aboard any of our owner's bits o' 
hollow timber. So, I say, gentlemen, shut 
up, or go ashore I" 

There was no more card-playing, but I 
could not help sympathising with my new 
acquaintances in their suppressed indignation 
at this arbitrary interference with our recrea- 
tions. 

We were running fast down stream, and 
the brown levees, or artificial embankments, of 
the Mississippi shore were visible on the left 
bank, while above them nodded the green 
crests of tall trees, not yet laid low by the 
woodman's axe. 

" If you will do us the favour," said Al- 



GRAND GULF. 125 

phonso P. C. Jones, after a little whispering 
conversation with his three friends, " to be- 
come our guest for a few days, it will please 
us much, and honour us excessively. We 
disembark at Grand Gulf, where the boat 
will stop some three hours hence, and where 
my residence is located. We can offer you 
but bachelor accommodation, sir, combined 
with duck-shooting, but if you air not too 

proud " 

What could I do but accept so frank and 
well-meant an invitation? It was settled 
that I should for a short time become the 
guest of my fellow-travellers. And now the 
metallic summons to dinner was heard, and 
then succeeded the usual crushing, elbowing, 
and pushing for places. I was swept away 
by the crowd, and found myself seated at the 
table at a considerable distance from my new 
friends. On my left was a rosy clerical 
gentleman, an episcopal bishop, I believe; 
and on my right sat a rather prepossessing 
lady of literary tastes, Mrs. Governor Gunn. 
Mrs. Governor Gunn had a husband some- 
where about the ship; a small grey-haired 
gentleman with excessively sore eyes, and who 



126 A DAT AT 

had been governor of some outlying state . 
Wisconsin, Florida, or Missouri . but had 
retired on account of bad health. The consort 
of this puny dignitary was certainly the prin- 
cipal personage on board, the queen of fashion 
and arbitress of taste, and she had been 
pleased to converse with me in a gracious and 
regal manner during the early part of the 
voyage. Now, however, the springs of Mrs. 
Governor Gunn's affability were frozen. She 
answered my remarks with icy monosyllables, 
frowned at me, rustled her ribbons at me, 
and gave me the cold shoulder. I was at a 
loss to know how I had given offence, but 
when I attributed this hostile behaviour to 
feminine caprice, and turned to the bishop, 
the bishop was just as bad. He became 
redder of visage and huskier of speech, lost 
bis bland smile, and was no longer interested 
in my comments on the voluntary principle, 
or desirous of information respecting the Bri- 
tish hierarchy. It was very odd. What 
had I done? I was obliged to confine 
my attention to the wild-turkey and venison 
steaks, and presently the plentiful meal came 
to an end. 



GRAND GULF. 127 

We all rose. Mrs. Governor Gunn, at the 
head of a bevy of flounced silks, swept off in 
dignified procession to the ladies' cabin, and 
nothing remained but to smoke and chat, to 
lounge and "liquor." The bishop edged 
away from me as soon as he could, and I was 
left among a knot of planters, overseers, and 
the like. But these yellow-faced gentlemen 
did not seem to eye me in a very amicable 
manner. There was a scowl on every face 
and a sneer on every lip. I felt angry and 
uncomfortable, but I could scarcely demand 
an explanation. I glanced around for my 
new friends. I did not see them, so I went 
on deck. The hurricane-deck of a Mississippi 
boat usually presents a lively scene of anima- 
tion and stir. So it did on this occasion, 
but it curiously happened that whenever I 
joined a gossiping group, that group broke 
up and dispersed. I might have beeu one 
of the plague-stricken in a time of pestilence, 
so shunned was I, for no apparent reason. 
I felt puzzled and irate. I was avoided 
as if T had suddenly become a leper. What 
was the reason ? Never mind ! My con- 
nexion with the Benjamin Franklin was about 



128 A DAT AT 

to terminate. The boat was approaching 
Grand Gulf; I saw the shingled roofs' and 
the church belfries peeping over the tawny 
levee, and it was time for me to settle with the 
steward and to see about my baggage. I 
found black Cornelius as grim and sullen as a 
bear. He received payment and gratuity 
with a dry "Tank you, sir!" and did not 
permit his white teeth to shine upon me any 
more. I thought, too, there was a reproachful 
and somewhat resentful expression in his roll- 
ing eyes. But I had neither time nor 
patience to ask for an explanation. I was 
obliged to bustle up on deck, followed by 
a coloured man with my bag and port- 
manteau. There I found . Alphonso P. C. 
Jones and his companions, with their effects, 
ready to land at the wharf towards which we 
were rapidly gliding. 

"Welcome, my dear sir, to Grand Gulf," 
said my hospitable inviter ; " it is but a small 
city, but " 

Crack ! The clear, sharp detonation of a 
rifle cut Mr Jones short in his civilities, and 
then succeeded the bang, bang, of several fire- 
arms, and a clamour of voices, and then a 



GRAND GULF. 129 

deathly stillness. Mr. Jones looked at his 
friends; there was a haggard intelligence, a 
lurking apprehension, visible in every eye for 
a moment ; then the usual calmness of mien 
came back. I heard a bystander remark, 
" Something amiss in Grand Gulf, I guess ;" 
and his friend said something about "row- 
dies." 

We went on shore. A couple of lean and 
shabby German emigrants, with yellow hair 
and sunburnt skins, were ready to load them- 
selves with the baggage of the party ; but, 
with the exception of these men, a couple of 
half-clad black children, and a yawning book- 
keeper, the wharf was deserted. Nor was 
there any stir or sign of life among the 
timber-built stores and taverns, the tall gaunt 
hotels over which waved the stars and stripes, 
the wooden houses that stood back from the 
road in their plots of garden ground. It 
looked a mournful place, did Grand Gulf; 
and I half regretted the Benjamin Franklin, 
as she sidled off from the landing-stage and 
snorted her course down stream. 

Crack again 1 Bang again ! and a hoarse 
roar, inarticulate and menacing as the utter- 

VOL. I. K 



]30 A DAT AT 

ance of a wild beast's wrath, broke upon our 
ears, and then for a minute or two the rattle 
of fire-arms was continuous. 

" What's going forward ?" asked Mr. Jones, 
hastily. 

The nearest of the German porters grinned 
humbly as he replied : " It is a pad pusiness, 
mein herr, put it is only a street affair. It is 
not apout bolitics." 

We were now in sight of a crowd of people, 
eddying wildly to and fro, who were gathered 
in front of a pretty house, whose smart veran- 
dah and bright paint had an air of pretension 
unusual in that wretched town. 

" By Jehoshaphat !" exclaimed one of the 
young men, excitedly, pointing out the scene, 
" it's our boys the row is about." 

" Keep cool, keep cool," answered Alphonso 
P. C. Jones, who was pale but collected. 
"Step out; push through them, but no 
running." 

On they went, still accompanied by me, 
though I was completely, at a loss to account 
for the popular fury or the turmoil. We 
reached the crowd, and began to elbow 
through them. 



GRAND GULP. 131 

" Who on airth may you be ?" asked one 
fierce-looking woodsman whom we jostled. 

" More of the gang, I reckon/' bawled a 
former, in homespun. 

I was hanging back, but one of the party 
grasped my arm and urged me on, whispering 
in a husky tone, " Get in-doors, stranger, if 
you don't want to cheat the insurance com- 
pany." 

We were now in the garden, the gay 
flowers of which the mob were trampling 
down in a reckless way. I could see that the 
windows were open, but barricaded with logs 
and furniture, and that two or three gun- 
barrels were peeping through the chinks. We 
got close up to the door, and Mr. Jones 
knocked, uttering a peculiar sharp cry at the 
same moment. I looked round for our Ger- 
mans with the luggage: they were not to be 
seen. After the lapse of a minute . the longest 
minute I ever spent . the door was cautiously 
opened, but not to its full extent. " Quick !" 
muttered a voice at my ear. In we went. 
There was a shout and a rush: the people 
surged up to the door, like an angry sea ; 
but the muzzles of two revolvers were thrust 

k 2 



132 A DAT AT 

into the faces of the foremost, and they fell 
back, and we were inside and the door was 
closed. 

i was now, to all appearance, in a besieged 
place, and one of the beleaguered garrison. 
And yet I knew nothing of the quarrel, and had 
no share in it. Of all the strange specta- 
cles this strange continent had hitherto afforded 
me, this was the most inexplicable. In the 
midst of the bustle and feverish hurry, as bolts 
were shot, chains linked, and bars slipped 
across the door again, I asked repeatedly what 
was the matter, but in vain: "Thank your 
stars, stranger, for a whole skin/' was all the 
reply I could elicit. And then everybody 
went up-stairs. In a front room, prettily 
decorated in French taste, we found five men 
fashionably dressed, bejewelled, and white- 
handed, like my inviters. But there was a 
terrible confusion reigning there. The costly 
furniture had been piled up as a barricade 
before the windows, mixed with firewood, 
mattresses, and portmanteaus. The five occu- 
pants of the room were flushed and heated, 
with disordered hair, and faces already smeared 
with black stains of powder. An arsenal of 



GRAND GULF. 133 

weapons lay about; guns, swords, pistols, 
ball-pouches, flasks, kegs, bottles, saddles, 
whips, and boots, all in confusion. One of 
the party was binding up his arm in an awk- 
ward way, as heavy gouts of blood ran trickling 
down his shirt-sleeve. The two gentlemen 
who had admitted us came in along with us, 
making a total of eleven, not reckoning 
myself. 

" Phillips, what accursed folly has brought 
on all this P" asked Mr. Jones, angrily. 

." Keep your temper, Jones/' answered the 
man who had been hurt ; " no need to quarrel 
among ourselves, I guess. The Grand Gulf 
vagabonds will have all our scalps before 
sundown/' 

Jones shrugged his shoulders. 

"How did it happen ?" 

Another of the group answered, " Oh, the 
old story; Phillips is so tarnation random. 
.He polished off young Edmonds, and they 
got to blows a few over the card-table, and 
Phillips gave him a Kentucky pill, and has 
brought the wasps about our ears." 

"Young Edmonds 1 Do you mean the 
judge's son?" asked Jones, with a long face. 



134 A DAT AT 

" Yes," was the reply ; " they've taken him 
into the doctor's, with breath in him yet, and 
if he recovers " 

" It's all U. P. with us, misters !" cried ano- 
ther man, gazing from the window. 

We . I say we, for I was getting a terrible 
interest in the affair . rushed forward, and 
saw what haunts my memory still. Carried 
on a door by several strong men was the dead 
body of a young man, quite a youth, partially 
wrapped in a gaudy Indian blanket. An old 
man, grey-haired and venerable of aspect, was 
weeping over the passive form, while a crowd 
of angry men, with clenched fists and bran- 
dished weapons, surrounded it. Meanwhile, 
one tall fellow, carrying on a pole, as if it 
were some ghastly banner, the bloody shirt of 
the murdered man, was haranguing a dense 
mass of human beings, above whose dark 
heads we saw the ominous glancing of axe- 
heads and rifle-barrels. 

"See what you've brought on us, Mr. 
Phillips !" said Jones, bitterly ; and he ground 
his teeth as he spoke. 

" The pot and the kettle, I calcu- 
late!" answered Phillips, sulkily; "better 



GRAND GULF. 135 

keep your breath to try and cheat the hang- 
man 1" 

There was a yell from the mob beneath: 
" Kill 'em ! Burn the house over their heads 1 
Forward, bhoysl" And twenty shots were 
fired, splintering the Venetian blinds and 
crashing into ceiling and wainscot. 

" Stand to it V* cried one of the boldest of 
the besieged. " Blaze away, gentlemen, and 
we shall beat 'em yet." The speaker fired a 
rifle at the broad mark of the crowd ; a cry of 
pain succeeded, and then a savage roar. 

In a moment there was firing enough on 
both sides. The reports were deafening, 
doors and windows rattled again, the room 
was full of smoke, and the sulphurous steam 
of the gunp9wder half choked me as I got my 
back against the wall in a recess between the 
windows, and awaited in comparative security 
the issue of the affray. I knew nothing of 
the quarrel. Trojan and Tyrian were alike 
to me, only I wished with all my heart that 
Mr. Jones had been less hospitable, or I less 
complying. The besieged fought hard, firing 
incessantly with revolver and gun, while I 
heard Mr. Jones encouraging them. But 



136 A DAT AT 

four were already down, wounded, on the 
floor; one of them mortally hurt, to judge by 
the blood that bubbled from his lips as he 
gasped for breath. I knelt beside the poor 
wretch, to offer such unskilful help as I could 
afford, when there was a crash, a whoop, and 
a rush, and the barricade was scaled or forced, 
and the citizens came pouring in, furious as a 
storming party. Borne down, trampled, sick, 
and giddy, I was dragged from the scuffle, 
and found myself in the street, pinioned, and 
a prisoner. Beside me were the majority of 
my new acquaintances, tattered, bruised, and 
their faces hardly to be seen through their 
masks of blood and gunpowder. They were 
all bound and captive. 

" Drag 'em forward, Up to the big oak. 
The court sits theer!" bawled fifty voices; 
and we were roughly hauled or pushed to a 
grassy space, where a huge solitary tree 
spread its branches, while under its shade 
stood a score of farmers and boatmen, well 
armed. 

" Now for it !" shouted the crowd ; " we've 
got 'em, red-handed. " 

Some one twitched my sleeve, and pointed 



GRAND GULF. 137 

to the oak, into whose boughs several men 
had climbed, and were busy in reeving . as I 
saw with horror . a rope and running noose 
to every branch strong enough to serve as an 
impromptu gallows. 

" Silence for Judge Lynch !" bawled an 
amateur crier. 

A gaunt farmer represented the redoubtable 
judge, and addressed the assembly. 

"Fellow citizens, I'm no forky-tongued 
lawyer, nor yet no stump speaker, but it's 
easy to clap the saddle on the right hoss. 
We've had our hosses stole, our niggers 
'ticed away, our liquor hocussed, and 
our dollars spirted out of our pouches. 
That's bad enough, but when it kern's to 
blood " 

Here a roar drowned the orator's voice. 
Next, the crier shouted that the jury had 
been impanelled, and the prisoners must be 
put to the bar. I was thrust forward with 
the rest. 

" Guilty, or not ?" was the stern demand. 

Some of them trembled very much. Jones 
and Phillips were calm, but it was the calm of 
desperation. 



138 A DAY AT m 

"Guilty, or not guilty?" 

" Bring the farce to an end," cried Jones. 
" You've got us ; more ass I to run back into 
the trap. Do your worst !" 

" Are those ropes ready aloft there ?" Judge 
Lynch called out. 

" All ready, Judge," was the rejoinder, 

" Then, gentlemen of the jury, your ver- 
dict." 

"Guilty! All guilty!" 

The wild judge exclaimed, " I kin pass but 
one sentence. Death. A halter apiece, and 
> a good riddance to the city and State !" 

A yell of approval broke forth ; we were 
hustled beneath the tree, and a halter soon 
encircled every neck. Then I found my 
voice, and loudly appealed: protesting my 
entire innocence, and that I was a harmless 
traveller, an Englishman, and so forth. A 
peal of incredulous laughter decided my 
appeal. 

" Britishers ain't licensed to rob and mur- 
der, ye'U lam to your cost," said an old 
farmer, who held me. 

" Smother the hypocrite !" exclaimed a 
boatman. 



GRAND GULF. 139 

" Did ye hear the cantin', cowardly skunk," 
cried another fellow. 

11 Can't ye take pattern by your captain, 
Jones there, and die like a man ?" 

My eyes following the man's pointed finger, 
I beheld the blackened face and staring eye- 
balls of my late acquaintance, as his struggling 
body dangled some yards above. 

"Now for Phillips," was the cry; and I 
closed my eyes, not to see the wretch's 
execution. 

" Morgan third ; the Britisher fourth/' an- 
nounced Judge Lynch. " Up with Phillips I 
Haul and hold." 

" Tchick 1" cried somebody, with an unfeel- 
ing laugh. 

" Whisht ! howld your sneaking tongue, not 
to mock the dyin'," sternly replied some 
honest Patlander hard by. 

" Now, Morgan 1" was the next summons. 

"Hyar'sthe deputy sheriff!" cried a voice, 
as a horse was heard galloping. 

"What o' that?" replied another: "the 
sovereign people aint to be choused out o' 
their revenge. Besides, Willy Hudson's a 
good fellow." 



140 A DAT AT 

Willy Hudson! All the blood rushed 
from my head to my heart, and back again, 
and I tingled from head to foot. My name was 
Hudson . my brother's name was William 1 
One glance was enough, as a sun-browned 
horseman dashed into the crowd. It was 
Willy . the brother I had come to visit . just 
in time I I forgot exactly what was done and 
said. I only know that in about two minutes I 
was unbound, safe, free, arm in arm with my 
brother, and that the rough fellows who had 
been about to hang me were nearly wringing 
my hand off as they shook it, begging pardon 
for an awkward mistake. It was not only 
to me that Willy rendered service ; I twitched 
his sleeve, and begged him to do what he 
could for the. miserable men, whatever their 
faults, still under sentence. He pushed me 
into a tavern parlour, shut the door, went 
out, and left me. I heard shouts, laughter, 
groans, the applause, the mutterings of a 
mob. After a long time, Willy returned, 
wiping his face with a handkerchief, very 
much flushed and dishevelled. 

" Wagh !" he exclaimed, " what a tough 
job ! But it's done now, though my tongue 



GRAND GULtf. 141 

aches with the talking. I did it for you, 
George, my boy, and, luckily, I'm in favour 
here. Tar and feathers, instead of hanging, 
and nine-and-thirty with a cowhide, well laid 
on, will spoil their beauty for one while. 
But how came you to be with them?" 

"First, Willy, tell me what brought you 
here? I thought the bank at New Or- 
leans " 

" Pooh !" interrupted my Americanised bro- 
ther; "an old story that! It broke down, 
paying assets and no more. I'm here, agent 
for a goods insurance company. I'm doing 
well, and I'm deputy sheriff. Didn't you 
get my letter at New York ? But how about 
your being with those rascals, of whom two 
have been hanged, and four shot I hear, 
eh?" 

" Why, they told me they were sportsmen, 
Willy, and " 

" You greenhorn !" said my brother, good 
humouredly ; " were you thinking of fox- 
hunting or partridge popping ? c Sportsman* 
in America means sharper, gambler, thief, 
swindler, gallows-bird !" 

I did not stay long at Grand Gulf. 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 



Several people came in at the gate, not 
only when the last speaker had withdrawn, 
but at various times throughout the day, from 
whom nothing could be extracted by the 
utmost ingenuity of Mr. Traveller, save what 
their calling was (when they had any), 
whence they came, and whither they were 
going. But, as those who had nothing to 
tell, clearly could tell nothing in justification 
of Mr. Mopes the Hermit, Mr. Traveller was 
almost as well satisfied with them as with any 
of the rest. Some of the many visitors came 
of a set purpose, attracted by curiosity ; some, 
by chance, looking in to explore so desolate a 
place ; many had often been there before,, and 
came for drink and halfpence. These regular 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 148 

clients were all of the professed vagrant order; 
"and, as I observed to you/' Mr. Traveller 
invariably remarked with coolness when they 
were gone, " are part of the Nuisance/' 

When any one approached, either purposely 
or accidentally, to whom the figure in the 
blanket was new, Mr. Traveller, acting as a 
self-constituted showman, did the honours of 
the place : referring to the Hermit as " our 
friend in there," and asking the visitor, 
without further explanation . lest his own im- 
partiality should be called in question . if he 
could favour our friend in there with any 
little experience of the living and moving 
world ? It was in answer to this inquiry, that 
a sunburnt gentleman of middle age, with 
fine bright eyes, and a remarkable air of 
determination and self-possession (he had 
come over from the assize town, he said, to 
see the sight in the soot and cinders), spake 
thus: 

Office-hours were over, and we were all 
taking down our straw hats from the pegs on 
which they dangled; ledgers were clasped, 
papers put away, desks locked, and the work 



144 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

of the day was at an end, when the white- 
haired cashier came sidling towards me. 
"Mr. Walford, sir, would you stay a mo- 
ment? Would you step this way? The 
firm wish to speak to you." 

Good old Job Wiginton always described 
his employers, collectively, as "the firm." 
They were sacred beings in his eyes, were 
Spalding and Hausermann, and he had served 
them for a quarter of a century, with exem- 
plary fidelity and respect, Job Wiginton, like 
myself, and like the senior partner in that 
great mercantile house, was an Englishman 
born and bred. He had kept the books of 
Spalding and Hausermann for twenty years 
at Philadelphia, and had cheerfully followed 
them to California, when they decided on 
settling in San Francisco City, five years 
before. The younger clerks, French or Ame- 
rican for the most part, were rather disposed 
to make a butt of the simple honest old 
cashier; but he and I had been very good 
friends during the four years of my em- 
ployment, and I always entertained a sincere 
respect for the old man's sterling good quali- 
ties. Now, however, for a reason I will pre- 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 145 

sently explain, I was considerably taken aback 
by the communication which Mr. Wiginton 
made in his own formal way. 

" The firm wish to see me P" I stammered, 
with a tell-tale colour rising in my face. Old 
Job nodded assent, coughed, and carefully 
wiped his gold-rimmed spectacles. I had 
noticed, in spite of my own confusion, that 
the cashier was dejected and nervous; his 
voice was husky, his hand trembled as he 
rubbed the dim glasses, and there was an 
unwonted moisture in his round blue eyes. 
As I followed Job into the inner parlour, 
where the merchants usually sat during busi- 
ness hours, I marvelled much what this wholly 
unexpected summons might portend. I had 
formerly been on terms of great and cordial 
intimacy with ray employers ; but for the last 
three months, my intercourse, with the senior 
partner in especial, had been strictly confined 
to business matters and dry routine. It was 
not that I had done anything to forfeit the 
good opinion of the firm. My employers had 
still the same confidence in me, the same re- 
gard for me, as heretofore ; but there was an 
end, if not of friendship, at least of cordiality. 

VOL. I. L 



146 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

This partial estrangement dated from the day 
when, with Emma Spalding, smiling through 
tears and blushes at my side, I had ventured 
to tell the rich merchant that I loved his only 
daughter, and that my love was returned. It 
is an old, old story. We were two young 
persons of the same country and creed, alike 
in tastes and education, and in other respects, 
wealth excepted, not so ill matched ; and we 
were together on a foreign shore, among 
strange people. We had been suffered to 
associate familiarly together, to read poetry, 
sing duets, and so forth ; for Emma had no 
mother to watch against the approach of po- 
verty-stricken suitors, and Mr. Spalding was 
a proud man, and not given to suspicion. 
Hence we glided . as millions of couples have 
done before, and will again . down the smooth 
rose-strewn path that leads from friendship to 
love. I am sure of one thing : it was not my 
employer's wealth, or the idea of Emma's pro- 
bable expectations from her father . who had 
but two children, a son and a daughter, 
between whom to divide the accumulations of 
a life spent in honourable toil . which allured 
me. But the time came when soft words and 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 147 

fond looks had to give place to an avowal of 
attachment. I spoke out to Emma, without 
premeditation ; and, once across the Rubicon, 
other considerations, undreamed of as yet, 
came to beset me, mockingly. What would 
Mr. Spalding think of me ? Surely, he could 
form but one judgment of the poor clerk, 
with no property beyond his pitiful savings, 
who had dared to entangle the affections of 
his master's daughter? My course was clear. 
I must tell him the truth, at whatever cost 
to myself. 

I did so. The disclosure was hurried on 
by some slight unforeseen circumstance, as 
my proposal had been, but I was at least 
candid in my avowals. To do Mr. Spalding 
justice, he rejected my suit in as gentle and 
courteous a fashion as the harsh operation 
would admit of. But, cut to the heart, I with- 
drew from his presence, very very wretched, 
and had for many days afterwards, serious 
thoughts of excluding myself from observa- 
tion, becoming a solitary man, and leading 
a gloomy and moody life. Better thoughts, 
however, lying deeper within me, admonished 
me of the utter worthlessness of a purposeless 

l 2 



148 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

existence, and of the utter contemptibility 
of the soul that can sink into it. And thus 
it fell out that I ceased to visit my employer 
as a private friend, and yet remained in his 
employ. 

Was I mean-spirited for staying on thus ? 
I cannot pretend to decide so nice a point, 
but I know that it was a great stimulant to 
me to have obtained a moral victory over 
myself, and some relief to the disappointment 
of my dearest hopes that I was still allowed 
to breathe the same air as Emma Spalding, 
to catch a glimpse of her sweet saddened 
face, were it but on the way to church, 
though for three weary months we never 
interchanged a word. 

So \ was not a little surprised when Job 
Wiginton summoned me to the presence of 
" the firm." My heart beat quickly as the 
old cashier turned the handle of the door. 
What could Mr. Spalding want of me ? I had 
kept the promise he had wrung from me ; I 
had abstained from any intrusion, any un- 
licensed correspondence. Surely, surely, he 
could not send for me merely to say that a 
rejected suitor was ineligible even as a servant, 



PICKING tfP A POCKET-BOOK. 149 

and that our connexion must cease? In the 
larger of the two adjacent rooms, a room 
hung in Spanish fashion with stamped and 
gilded leather, and heavily, furnished with 
dark mahogany from Honduras, I found the 
firm. Mr. Spalding, a tall thin grey-headed 
gentleman, was pacing up and down the 
apartment in great agitation. Mr. Hauser- 
mann, a German, as his name implies, sat 
before a table covered with papers, ejaculating 
guttural exclamations of wonder from time 
to time, with a look of hopeless perplexity in 
his fat pink face. The cashier entered along 
with me, and closed the door. 

" Ah, mein Himmel I" muttered the junior 
partner : a hale, portly man, but of a flabby 
nature, morally and physically, compared with 
the energetic chief of the house . " ach ; we 
were petter to have never peen born, than live 
to see this I" 

Job Wigington gave a groan of sincere 
sympathy. I quickly perceived that some- 
thing had gone wrong, and as quickly did I 
see that this mysterious something had no 
direct reference to my audacity in winning 
the heart of Emma Spalding. What was 



r 



150 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

amiss ? There is one grisly ghost that always 
haunts the imagination of the more intelligent 
subordinates of a commercial firm . Bank- 
ruptcy. But the house had been such a 
prudent house, so steady and well ballasted, 
had glided so demurely along in safe old- 
world grooves, that it was rather ridiculed in 
consequenee by the mushroom firms that 
daily arose or collapsed around us. But I 
had little time to think, for Mr. Spalding 
stopped in his walk, came abruptly up to 
me, and took me by both hands. " George 
Walford," said the old merchant, with more 
emotion in his voice and features than he had 
ever shown before, " I have not been kind to 
you lately. You were a good friend to me 

. before . before " and here he reddened 

somewhat, and ceased speaking. 

I glanced towards Mr. Hausermann, but 
he looked so fat and helpless as he sat in his 
arm-chair, murmuring phrases in his native 
tongue, that I saw no explanation was to be 
looked for in that quarter. So I told Mr. 
Spalding, in as firm a tone as possible, that 
our mutual esteem had, I hoped, survived 
our intimacy, and that I still felt myself a 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 151 

faithful friend to him and his, and would 
gladly prove myself one. 

"I thought so . I thought so," said the 
merchant, looking pleased for a moment; 
" you are a good lad, George, and that's why 
I come to- you for help in my sore need, hard 
and harsh as you may have thought me the 
other day . when . never mind !" 

"I was first to say it," exclaimed Mr. 
Hausermann. " ' Let us call Shorge Walford/ 
say I. 'He has got ver goot prains; ver 
goot young man.' " 

A quarter of a century spent among Anglo- 
Saxons had never taught Mr. Hausermann 
the English language in its purity. Indeed, 
his life, out of office hours, was spent entirely 
with Teutons like himself, who swarm all over 
America, and with whom he could enjoy 
German conversation, Rhine wine, and the 
black coffee of the fatherland. I should never 
get to the end of the interview if I described 
it verbatim, chronicling the broken sentences 
and vague talk of the junior partner, and the 
comments of Job Wiginton. The confidential 
cashier sympathised with the distress of his 
employers as a faithful dog might have done, 



152 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

and was about as likely to suggest a practical 
remedy. Mr. Wiginton was worthy of all 
trust ; he was as close as wax and as honest 
as the day, but he was a mere machine for the 
casting up of sums, the balancing of books, 
and locking of safes. Mr. Hausermann was 
not much cleverer than the cashier; he was 
an admirable arithmetician, could detect an 
error of a halfpenny in a problem involving 
billions, and his penmanship was magnificent. 
But, with these attainments, he owed his pre- 
sent position in commerce, not to his abilities, 
but to the florins he had inherited, and to the 
talent and keenness of his English partner. 
It was from the chief of the house himself 
that I heard the following tale : . Mr. Spald- 
ing, as I have said, had but two children, 
Emma, and her brother Adolphus; his wife 
had died on the voyage from Philadelphia, 
and his affection centred in his boy and girl. 
Unluckily, Adolphus did not turn out well, 
was wild and extravagant, and squandered 
his liberal allowance among horse-jockeys and 
gamblers. Mr. Spalding, strict with all the 
world besides, was rather lax and indulgent 
where his son was concerned. The young 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 153 

man was very good-looking and of pleasing 
address ; he had been the darling of his dead 
mother ; and the father was very patient and 
forbearing with him, for her sake. The youth 
went from bad to worse, got deeper into debt 
and evil company, seldom came home, and 
seriously impaired his health by a long course 
of excesses. All this I knew, for Adolphus 
was a clerk in the house, nominally at least, 
though he hardly ever occupied his stool in 
the office. But what I did not know was, 
that Adolphus Spalding, in his eagerness to 
settle a number of so-called debts of honour, 
had been led to rob his father. He had 
forged the signatures of Spalding and Hauser- 
mann to a cheque for thirty thousand dollars, 
payable at sight, and purporting to be drawn 
by the merchants on their bankers in New 
York. More than this: he had abstracted 
from his father's desk a Russian-leather pocket- 
book, containing bills and securities to a great 
amount, and this he had placed in the hands 
of the same vile associate who had undertaken 
to present the cheque at the counter of the 
New York bank. 

" The scoundrel is gone northward already. 



154 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

He started last Tuesday, by the way of 
Panama, along with the mail/' said Mr. 
Spalding. " You know the man, I dare say, 
for he was very notorious in the town . Joram 
Heckler/' 

"Dr. Joram Heckler!" I exclaimed, as I 
recalled to mind the dark clever face of the 
young man alluded to: a plausible, well- 
mannered person, who had been sub-editor of 
a San Francisco newspaper. 

"Yes, Doctor, or Colonel, Heckler," re- 
sponded Mr. Spalding, with a bitter smile, 
" for it appears that he has assumed a military 
title on the journey back to the north. He 
possessed great influence over the mind of 
my misguided son; he was the tempter in 
this accursed robbery ; and I doubt not that 
he intends to appropriate the entire spoil to 
himself." 

I now asked Mr. Spalding, as delicately as 
I could, how he had obtained his informa- 
tion. 

It appeared that Adolphus, whose feeble 
frame, exhausted by hard living, was ill fitted 
to sustain the fierce excitement of the felo- 
nious act he had committed, had sickened of 



* 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 155 

a fever, immediately after the departure of bis 
accomplice. 

" The wretched boy lies on his bed upstairs, 
quivering betwixt life and death/' said the 
father, with a faltering voice, "and in his 
delirium he has betrayed his guilt. His sis- 
ter, who has watched at his bedside like an 
angel as she is, dear girl, she was frightened 
at his ravings of self-accusation. She called 
me, and with my own ears I heard the son I 
was so proud of . my petted boy . tell how 
he had cheated and plundered me." 

The old merchant staggered to a chair, and 
I saw the tears trickle between the fingers 
with which he tried to hide the workings of 
his wrinkled face. 

After a time he grew more calm. Then he 
developed his plan, in which broke out his 
habitual decision and force of character. 
Before all things, the honour of the house 
must be saved. The value of the money at 
stake (though a large sum) was trifling, com- 
pared to the disgrace, the loss of credit, the 
blot upon the name of Spalding. Yes, at any 
cost, the young man's shameful act must be 
hidden in darkness. The cheque must not 



156 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

be presented, the bills must not be negotiated. 
But how to prevent the tempter from realising 
the benefits of his ill-gotten booty ? He was 
off . he was speeding towards New York by 
the quick Panama route ; in a few weeks he 
would be there. No pursuit seemed possible. 
The delay till the start of the next mail would 
be fatal. I remembered the Pony Express, 
the swift overland mail whereby we Califor- 
nian residents can most rapidly communicate 
with the civilised world, and I suggested this 
resource. 

Mr. Spalding shook his head. "No, that 
would never do ; I might send a despatch, no 
doubt, to stop the payment of the cheque. I 
might perhaps procure Heckler's arrest on 
his arrival in New York, but thence would 
spring inquiry, doubt, suspicion, and the 
whole black affair would creep into the jour- 
nals before a week was out. No. I have 
but one hope, one chance: I must send a 
trustworthy person . I am too old to go 
myself . a trustworthy person to hasten to 
New York by the perilous route across the 
Rocky Mountains, and he must arrive before 
Heckler, and must get the papers from him 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 157 

by violence or stratagem. George Walford, 
you are the man I have selected." 

" I, sir." 

I was stupified. Before my fancy rose, like 
a panorama, the long route, then but lately 
explored, that traversed the enormous con- 
tinent from sea to sea : a route teeming with 
dangers. All I had ever heard or read of 
prairie travel, of famine, fire, the assaults of 
wild beasts, and of human foes more pitiless 
still, crowded on my memory at once. I 
thought of the vast distance, of the almost 
herculean fatigues to be undergone, of the icy 
barrier which the Rocky Mountains stretched 
across the track, as if to bar the progress of 
presumptuous man ; and though I am no 
fainter of heart than my neighbours, I dare 
say my countenance expressed dismay. and 
repugnance. Indeed, I am sure it did, for 
Mr. Hausermann groaned, and said, " Donner 1 
what shall we to now !" 

"Walford," said Mr. Spalding, "I don't 

wish to dissemble with you. I am asking 

>you to incur the certainty of very great 

fatigue, hardship and danger. I am asking 

you to risk life itself to save the honour of the 



158 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

bouse and that of my own family. I do not 
make such a request without proposing a 
proportionate reward. There, hear me out! 
I don't offer you money for such a service. 
Come back successful, and you shall be a 
partner in the house of Spalding and Hauser- 
mann ; and if you and Emma are still of the 
same mind three months hence " 

I trembled with joy as I interrupted my 
employer. "Ill go, sir, gladly and most 
willingly." 

" That's a prave poy. I knew he would !" 
ejaculated the German; and the cashier 
rubbed his hands joyfully. 

"When can you be ready to start?" asked 
Mr. Spalding. 

" Directly. In half an hour, if you please." 

"j\.n hour will do," said Mr. Spalding, 
with a smile at my eagerness. " Bodesson 
shall be at the door by that time, with his 
carriage and his best horses. You must save 
your strength as much as you can for the 
prairie. You have a six-shooter I know. 
Get ready what requisites for the journey will 
go into small compass. You shall have an 
ample supply of money . spend it freely, 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 159 

lavishly, and don't spare horseflesh or gold 
upon the way. I would give half my fortune 
to place you speedily on the pavement of New 
York. You are an ambassador with full 
powers, George, and your own wit and 
courage must carry you through. Now, you 
had better prepare for the road." 

I lingered. 

" Anything more to say ?" asked the mer- 
chant, good humouredly. 

" If I could speak for a moment . just an 
instant . to Miss Spalding?" 

" She is at her brother's bedside," replied 
the old man, hurriedly. " But . yes, you are 
right. You shall see her before you start." 

I seemed to make but one step to the 
house where I lodged. I spent ten minutes 
in hastily arranging my belongings . and it 
is wonderful how much a man can condense 
into ten minutes when he is under the in- 
fluence of strong excitement . charged my 
revolver, packed a few things in a small bag, 
and ran back like a greyhound. Mr. Spalding 
gave me some fuller instructions, and handed 
to me a heavy parcel of gold and silver, as 
well as a bundle of bank-notes. I was to 



160 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

keep the bank-paper until I reached the 
civilised world ; in the desert, my only hope 
would be to bribe in specie the half-tamed 
wanderers of the west. Mr. Spalding was 
still talking when Bodesson, one of the prin- 
cipal liverymen of San Francisco, drove his 
spanking pair of Spanish horses up to the 
door. Then the merchant went up-stairs, and 
returned with his daughter. Dear Emma! 
she was pale, and thinner than of old, but her 
eyes were bright and loving, and her words, 
full of hope and constancy, gave me fresh 
courage, and a resolve to do or die. Our 
parting was very brief. A few hurried whis- 
pers . a hasty renewal of the old vows and 
troth-plight . and for a moment I caught her 
in my arms and kissed her cheek, and in 
the next I was gone. I sat by Bodesson's 
side ; the whip cracked ; off flew the foaming 
horses along the street; and I looked back 
and waved a farewell in answer to Mr. Spal- 
ding's waving hand and Emma's handkerchief. 
Then we turned the corner, and darted along 
the road. 

Bodesson was well paid, and he kept the 
mettled horses at their work over many a 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 161 

mile of ground. I seemed to start cheerfully, 
and under good auspices. My heart was full 
of hope. The gay French Creole by my side 
was a merry companion ; he sang Canadian 
songs, whistled, chirruped to the bounding 
bays, and chattered incessantly. 

" Monsieur was going to the prairies ! Ah, 
tres bien! The prairies were ver int&es- 
santes, ver moch so. But monsieur must 
take care when he got there . must not stir 
from the protection of ze dragoons, or les 
sauvages, ze ferocious Indians, would carry off 
monsieur's cheveux . what you call scalp !" 

So the Frenchman prattled on. He be- 
lieved I was going to Salt Lake City on busi- 
ness, and never doubted that I should voyage 
with a caravan under escort of the States' 
dragoons. What would he have said had he 
known that I was to traverse that land of 
danger and hunger alone ? 

My journey to the eastern border of Cali- 
fornia was not remarkable enough to justify 
me in dwelling here on its details. Spending 
money freely, I was able to proceed almost 
entirely in wheeled carriages more or less 
rude, and I contrived to push along over 

VOL. I.. M 



162 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

sorry roads at a respectable pace. I slept 
in the vehicles during the dark hours, snatch- 
ing a broken slumber as best I could, in 
the midst of jolting and swaying. Sometimes 
even a bribe could not induce my Mexican or 
American drivers to risk the perils of a stony 
road at night, and then 1 recruited my 
strength by rest, but was always ready to 
start at cock-crow. I knew well what was 
before me, and that all the fatigue I endured 
was child's play to what was in store. I had 
been on the prairies before . those, at least, 
which lie east of the Rocky Mountains. Mr. 
Spalding was well aware that I was a good 
horseman, expert in the use of fire-arms, 
and of a robust constitution. These are not 
the common attributes of a clerk, but I had 
not been bred to the desk. My father had 
been esteemed rich, till at his death, in em- 
barrassed circumstances, I had been left to 
battle with poverty as I might ; I had kept 
hunters at Oxford, and had been passionately 
fond of field sports. I had kept up the habit 
of taking brisk exercise, and now I was about 
to find the benefit of trained muscles and 
robust health. I did not disguise from my- 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 163 

self that I was embarking on an enterprise 
full of risks. I might starve in the desert, 
whitened as it was by the bones of many an 
emigrant. I might perish miserably in one 
of those fires that rush like flaming serpents 
through the boundless sea of grass. And if 
my scalp did not blacken in the smoke of 
some Indian wigwam, fever or sheer fatigue 
might make an end of my life and hopes 
at once. Or, I might reach New York too 
late. It was gall and wormwood to me to 
think that Joram Heckler was pressing on 
towards the north with all the speed of a fast 
steamer. The very thought made me bound 
and stamp my foot on the floor of the rude 
mail-cart, as if I could quicken my progress 
by such a gesture. How I prayed that con- 
trary winds might delay the packet on its 
passage from Aspinwall to the Empire City ! 

I reached Carson City, on the border of 
the desert, and there I made a brief halt 
that I might prepare for the coming effort. 
I was perfectly well aware that the most dan- 
gerous and difficult part of the road was that 
lying between California and the Mormon 
settlements. Once beyond the Utah territory, 

m 2 



164 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

I might well hope to escape the arrows and 
tomahawk of the savage. I found Carson 
full of returning emigrants, diggers going 
back with their pelf to the Atlantic states, 
Mormon converts, and traders who had emptied 
their waggons in Californian markets. These 
good folks were all waiting for the regular 
escort of national dragoons, under whose 
guard they were to travel. It was impossible 
for me to move so slowly, and I accordingly 
bought a bag of sun-dried beef, another of 
parched corn, some blankets, and such mat- 
ters, and a powerful horse handsomely ac- 
coutred with a bridle and saddle of Mexican 
make. I bought the latter from an American 
dealer, who was mightily tickled at the idea of 
my making my way alone over the prairies. 
"I give you credit for your grit, sartainly, 
mister/' said he: "it is good, and no mis- 
take ; but I guess you'd better sleep upon the 
idea a few times more. Them Indian scalpers 
will lift your ha'r, sure as hogs yield bacon. 
Won't you believe me? Come along, then, 
and ax another man's opinion!" And he 
dragged me towards a sort of tavern, the 
porch of which was crowded by men and 



PICKING TJP A POCKET-BOOK. 165 

women, French, Spanish, German, Yankee, 
and mulatto, all of whom were gathered round 
a lathy dark-haired young fellow in a trim 
half-military dress, that would have passed 
for that of a policeman but for the red flannel 
shirt and Mexican sombrero he wore. This 
man bad keen mobile features, and was hard- 
ened by constant work and weather into little 
more than muscle and bone ; he wore spurred 
boots and thick " savers," and was cracking 
a whip as he gaily chatted with the crowd, 
who laughed at his wit in a way that proved 
him a prime favourite. He was, in fact, one 
of the salaried riders of the " Pony Express," 
ready to start with the bag of dispatches, 
the instant the courier from San Francisco 
should arrive with it. 

"Yes, colonel; yes, gals," I heard him 
say ; " I'm downright sorry to leave, but duty 
is duty, ain't it? If the Indians don't rub 
me out " 

"Rub you out, Shem? Catch a racoon 
asleep !" cried one of the rider's admiring 
friends. 

" Waal !" said Shem, with a modest voice, 
but boastful twinkle in his restless eye, " the 



166 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

varmints have tried a time or two, but they've 
found Shem Grindrod rather a tough nut 
to crack, they have. When a chap's Ken- 
tucky bred, real right down hard hickory, 

'taint so easy to lift his ha'r as Service to 

ye, stranger !" 

For his eye had lighted on me. 

"Shem," cried the horse-dealer, "here's 
a gentleman wants to cross the parara, all 
alone, on hossback, Broadway fashion. What 
do you say to that ?" 

There was a general laugh. Shem took off 
his hat with mock respect. 

"Whoop!" he cried. "If that ain't clear 
grit in the down-easter dandy ! You'll see 
snakes, mister, I reckon. There's no accom- 
modation for gen-teel persons, and you'll jest 
get your hoss stole, or chawed up by the 
wolves, and you'll lose yourself and die for 
want of a dinner, if you don't fall in with the 
Injuns . and if you do, Jehoshaphat !" 

All this would have been provoking to some 
men, but I knew the American character too 
well to be out of temper. Shem evidently 
took me for a presumptuous townsman, plung- 
ing wantonly into the lion's mouth, and was 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 167 

good-naturedly discouraging my rashness. 
With some trouble, I drew him apart, and 
commenced a private conversation. I told 
him that I was bound for the eastern states, 
that my business was imperative, but that 
if he could help me I would pay him most 
liberally for the aid rendered. For I had 
formed a crude idea that if I could procure 
the privilege of using the relays of spare 
horses kept at the different stations on the 
route, for the use of the mail-bag riders, I 
might accomplish the most awkward part of 
the journey with great rapidity. Shem, how- 
ever, though not ill-natured, dashed my hopes 
to the ground. Such a concession would be 
" agin all rule." The servants of the Express 
Company "darn't do it." It was not to be 
thought of. I must wait for the caravan. 

I did not wait for the caravan, but set 
forth that very day. The people gave me a 
half ironical cheer as I rode out of the strag- 
gling street of Carson, but I saw the Yankee 
dealer shake his head and screw up the 
corners of his mouth, as if he considered me 
little better than a suicide. 

There was no use in letting the grass grow 



168 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

under my feet, so I pushed briskly ahead. I 
was riding a powerful horse, one of those 
bred in Kentucky or Tennessee, and which 
will sell for a high price on the western 
border of prairieland. To find the way in 
broad daylight was easy. There was a broad 
track made by the passage of countless wag- 
gons and beasts of burden. I had a compass, 
but I really did not need it. I covered many 
a weary league of ground in the course of 
that day's ride. Here and there, among the 
forked streamlets which were feeders of the 
Carson, I came to farms where I easily 
procured corn for my horse and food for 
myself. I had come to two resolutions : one, to 
economise my little store of jerked beef as 
much as possible; the other, to refuse all 
hospitable proffers of whisky, being convinced 
that on water only could such trying work as 
that before me be accomplished. I kept on, 
with brief pauses, through the day, and held 
to the track as long as the moonlight served 
me, urging on my flagging steed to the very 
limits of his strength. Then, in the dark, I 
dismounted, took off saddle and bridle, hob- 
bled my horse, and tethered him so that he 



PICKING UP A. POCKET-BOOK. 169 

had ample space to graze. Then, I lay down, 
wrapped in my blankets, pillowed my head 
upon my saddle, and fell asleep with my wea- 
pons by my side. 

I awoke with a start, in the pitch dark 
night, and could not well remember where I 
was. My horse was uneasy, and his abrupt 
motions had disturbed me. I heard a rustling 
in the long grass, a scratching, a pawing of 
light feet amongst the herbage, and a whining 
sound as of hungry dogs whimpering for food. 
Dogs ? There were no dogs there. Wolves ! 
And my horse, on whose security my life 
might depend, was trembling and bathed in 
perspiration. I had kindled no fire, appre- 
hensive lest the light should attract some 
band of prowling savages ; and now the 
coyotes were gathering around us like flies 
about honey. For myself, I felt no fear : the 
wolf of America is very different from the 
" grey beast" of German forests or Pyrenean 
snows. But my poor nag was in danger, and 
his very tremors were adding perilously to 
the exhaustion of the long and hurried ride. 
I rose, and began groping about for brushwood. 
Luckily I was still in a well-watered region, 



l 



170 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

where shrubs and undergrowth abounded, 
and where the gigantic cotton-wood trees 
reared their majestic forms beside the stream- 
lets. I soon came upon a clump of brush, 
and cutting with my sharp and heavy knife 
as much as I could carry in both arms, I 
returned with it, and cleared a little space of 
the grass, which was long enough to be dan- 
gerous in the event of its catching fire. I 
then took out my tin box of lucifers, struck a 
light, and kindled a fire: though not very 
easily, for the heavy dew stood in great glis- 
tening beads on grass and shrub, and the 
moistened wood emitted many a cloud of 
pungent and dark smoke, before I could coax 
the sullen embers to burst forth in the required 
blaze. All this time, I had to give an occa- 
sional halloo, rattling a tin cup against the 
barrel of my revolver, for the purpose of intimi- 
dating the wolves ; while it was necessary to 
pat and soothe by voice and hand the poor 
horse itself, which was tugging at the tether- 
ing-rope in a way that threatened to break 
it every instant. At last, to my great joy, 
the fire leaped up, red and cheery, its bright 
beams illumined a little radiant patch of 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 171 

prairie, and, hovering in the shadows on the 
edge of this illuminated spot, I saw the slink- 
ing coyotes, the smallest and most timid, but 
also the most cunning, variety of the wolf 
of America. Presently I flung a firebrand 
among the pack, and they vanished into the 
darkness, but for half an hour I could hear 
their howls of disappointment, growing fainter 
and fainter, as the distance increased. My 
horse was quieter after the disappearance of 
the wolves, and in about an hour I ventured 
to return to my blankets and my repose, after 
piling a fresh heap of brush on the steadily 
glowing fire. Not very long afterwards, a 
feeling of intense cold awoke me by slow 
degrees. I opened my eyes. The fire was 
low ; its embers glowed crimson, fading gra- 
dually into blackness. Overhead was the dim 
sky, the vast host of stars having the peculiar 
pale and sickly hue which heralds the dawn. 
It was very cold. There was a rushing sound 
in the air, and the grass of the prairie was 
tossed to and fro in wild confusion ; a strong 
wind was blowing . the norther. This was 
the first blast of the chilly north wind that 
annually sets in at the close of the unhealthy 




172 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

season in the south. It had a piercing and 
glacial effect, coining, as it did, from the 
Polar ice-fields, and across the Rocky Moun- 
tain range ; but I gladly hailed it, for I remem- 
bered that it would be dead against the mail 
steamer that was breasting the waters of the 
Mexican Gulf with Joram Heckler and his 
plunder on board. I might beat him yet ! 

But the wind increased in force; it was 
blowing like a hurricane, and I shivered in 
spite of my warm poncho and blankets. My 
horse had lain down, and was trembling with 
cold. I was obliged to spare him a blanket ; he 
was a " States" horse, swifter, but not so hardy 
and useful for prairie travel as the mustangs 
of the plains. The wind did not diminish as 
the sun rose, red and angry, and a new cause 
of alarm began to haunt me. I had heard 
of travellers utterly weatherbound for days 
among the prairies, on account of the fury of 
the resistless wind. And time was so valu- 
able to me ! I felt sick at heart as the chilly 
hours of early morning crept on, and almost 
despaired of success. I was benumbed and 
stiff ; the dew had been turned to icicles by 
the sudden cold ; and now every waving 




PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK, 173 

blade of grass seemed crested with a diamond 
glittering and flashing in the level sunshine. 
By nine o'clock the wind began to abate ; it 
slackened very gradually, and at half-past ten 
I considered that I might resume my journey. 
My breakfast was not a luxurious one; a 
mouthful of beef and parched maize, swal- 
lowed in the intervals of saddling my horse 
and rolling up my blankets. Then, I drew 
up the iron peg to which the halter was 
attached, rolled up the halter, lasso fashion, 
at my saddle bow, and mounted. I was less 
awkward in the every-day routine of prairie 
life than might be supposed. Years ago, 
before I entered Spalding and Hausermann's 
employ, I had spent some weeks in a frontier 
fort, as the guest of the officers of a United 
States Ranger regiment. I had accompanied 
my hosts on several hunts and scouting expe- 
ditions against hostile Indians, and had found 
some amusement in picketing my steed, light- 
ing camp fires, and so forth : little dream- 
ing that my whole earthly happiness would 
ever depend on my proficiency in such arts. 
As the sun rose in the pale blue sky, nature 
assumed a more cheerful appearance; the 



174 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

icicles and hoar-frost melted, and the air be- 
came merely bracing and agreeable, as the 
bitter cold passed away. On we went, follow- 
ing the plain trail of the waggon trains, up 
and down the gently rolling slopes of the 
undulating prairie. I noticed with some dis- 
may that my horse was no longer the mettled 
creature that had pranced so gaily out of 
Carson the- day before. At first he certainly 
answered my voice and the pressure of my 
knee, by stepping out gallantly ; but after a 
while he began to flag, bore heavily on the bit, 
and required a frequent touch of the spur. 
It was clear I had taxed his powers too 
severely on the previous day. He was going 
weakly under me, in a spiritless way that 
spoke volumes. What was I to do ? I had 
plenty of money, but money cannot prove a 
talisman in the wilderness. There was not a 
farm between the place where I stood and the 
Great Salt Lake itself. My only chance in 
procuring a remount, lay in meeting some one 
who would sell me a steed, and this was far 
from a certainty. I was chewing the cud of 
bitter reflections when I heard the light tramp 
of a galloping horse behind me. Quickly I 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 175 

turned my head, and saw a booted rider 
dashing gaily along over the swells of the 
prairie ; his trim coat, half opened, showed a 
red flannel shirt ; and his Mexican sombrero 
was bound with a cord of tarnished gold. He 
had a revolving carbine pistol at his saddle- 
bow, and at his side hung from his shoulder- 
belt his leathern, despatch-bag. It was my 
acquaintance of yesterday . Shem Grindrod. 

" Morning stranger !" he called out, cheerily ; 
" I did'nt skear you, yesterday, it seems, by 
my yarns about Injuns. Twas Gospel truth, 
for all that. Camped out, I reckon ? Your 
hoss does look a little the wuss for wear, 
mister, though. You've pushed him a goodish 
stretch, you have." 

We rode on for some distance side by side. 
My poor horse was inspired to do his best by 
the presence of the other horse, and together 
we sped over the country : my steed trotting, 
Shem's mustang galloping, for Spanish-Ameri- 
can horses have but one pace when urged 
beyond a walk. Shem was much more kind 
and even polite in his manner than on the 
previous day. He told me, bluntly, that he 
respected a fellow that proved himself a man, 



176 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

but that what he hated worse than copper- 
head snakes was a Broadway dandy giving 
himself adventurous airs. My horsemanship 
had won Shem's esteem, and he sympathised 
heartily with me when he saw that I was really 
bent on crossing the desert at any risk. 

" Your boss is a good bit of stuff, mister," 
said he, " but I'm afraid he\ pretty nigh used 
up for one while. Now you listen to me. 
The best thing you can do, is to buy a mus- 
tang fust chance you get. There'll be hunters 
passing south, and p'raps they'll trade. When 
you get right out among the plains, you stick 
to the trail well, and if a grass fire blinds it, 
you take your compass and bear up for east 
by north. Keep that pistol of yourn ready, 
and if you do see Injuns, keep cool. Don't 
waste a shot. Every round bit of lead is 
worth a life on the parara. Good-bye, wish 
you luck." 

Shem headed his horse for one of the Ex- 
press stations, a little lonely block-house, with 
a stockaded yard, which was garrisoned by a 
few of his comrades, and where a relay of fresh 
hbrses was kept. I looked wistfully at the 
block-house and the well-stocked corral, and 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 177 

then turned away with my tired steed to re- 
sume my weary travel. I knew that early in 
the afternoon I should reach another station of 
the same kind, and there I meant to apply for 
refreshment and shelter, in case my horse 
should knock up altogether. Before I had 
gone a mile, I saw my friend Shem, on a fresh 
steed, scouring the plain. He waved his 
hand, and gave me a cheer of recognition, and 
I looked after him enviously as he flew like an 
arrow up the slope, and vanished in the dis- 
tance. By good luck, however, I almost in- 
stantly encountered a party of white men, the 
first travellers I had seen. These turned out 
to be three trappers returning from Oregon, 
with a fair stock of peltry loaded on two 
mules. They were all well mounted on 
" Indian ponies," and one of them led by a 
lariat a powerful and shapely mustang, whose 
bright eye and wide nostrils matched well with 
his wiry limbs. He had been captured on 
the plains, not two months before, one of a 
wild herd ; but he was sufficiently broken in 
to be useful in prairie fashion. I struck a bar- 
gain with the trapper, by which my exhausted 
but more valuable quadruped was bartered for 

VOL. I. N 



178 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

the half-wild mustang; the trapper also re- 
ceiving four gold eagles. The arrangement 
was mutually satisfactory, and as the tall 
Kentuckian helped me to shift my saddle and 
bridle to the spotted nag I had just acquired, 
I saw his eyes twinkle with self-congratulation. 

" One word of advice, colonel," said the 
trapper, as I placed the gold in his hard 
brown hand ; " keep your eyes skinned as 
you go along, and don't let the cussed Red- 
skins double upon you. There's Indian sign 
about, there is. I saw the print of a moccas- 
sin, down yonder by the spring, where the 
Indians never come for any good, mister. 
You mind . Utahs ain't to be trusted, and 
Shoshonies are worse. As for Rapshoes, 
Heaven help you, colonel, if they ketch you 
alone ! There's Indians about. I smell 'em." 

"I wish you'd got a good rifle on your 
shoulder, mister," said another, as I mounted ; 
" six shooters is very handy tools, but nothing 
sickens the Indians like a good five-foot bit of 
holler iron, that air true." 

I took leave of these good fellows, who 
wished me a safe journey in the heartiest way, 
though evidently disbelieving in the likelihood 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 179 

that a " greenhorn " could carry his property 
and scalp safe across the desert. The mus- 
tang was fresh, and darted along at that un- 
tiring though not very speedy gallop which 
animals of that hardy race can maintain for a 
very considerable time. We made capital 
progress: the country grew drier, and the 
grass shorter, and the swampy bottoms and 
trickling brooks were fewer. I met with no 
adventure, except that my new purchase put 
his foot into an outlying burrow, as we skirted 
a " village " of prairie dogs, and gave us both 
a roll on the turf ; but we were unhurt, and I 
had luckily kept my grasp of the bridle, or I 
should have lost my horse. Once I thought 
I saw something hovering on the edge of the 
horizon, but whether savages, buffaloes, or 
wild horses, I could not determine. After 
riding several miles I came to a place where 
the trail dipped suddenly into a low tract of 
alluvial earth, intersected by a stream of some 
magnitude, and shaded by a belt of lofty 
cotton-wood trees. I traced here the fresh 
footprints of a horse which must just have 
passed, for the bruised grass had but partially 
risen around the edges. "Crack, bang !" 

n 2 



180 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

went the sharp report of fire-arms ringing 
from the thicket below, and with the reports 
mingled the horrid war-whoop of the savage. 
Grasping my pistol, I dashed in among the 
trees, and beheld poor Shem Grindrod, bleed- 
ing, reeling in his saddle, and beset by a party 
of six or seven Indians, mounted, and in their 
hideous panoply of war. Shem had been 
pierced by three arrows : he was fainting with 
loss of blood: but he fronted the savages 
boldly, and one Indian lay at his feet, rolling 
in the agonies of death. My arrival changed 
the current of the fight ; two rounds from my 
revolver, the second of which laid low a mus- 
cular barbarian, smeared with yellow ochre, 
who was pressing on Shem with an uplifted 
tomahawk, sufficed for their discomfiture. 
Probably they took me for the advanced guard 
of *a party of whites. At any rate, they fled 
at speed across the plain. 

I was just in time to break Shem's fall, as 
the poor fellow dropped from his saddle, feebly 
murmuring, " Thank ye, mister. You've saved 
my scalp, any way, if 'twas just too late to save 

" His voice was hushed here, and he 

fainted in my arms. 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 181 

There was a metal flask of whisky dangling 
at the mail-bag rider's saddle-bow, along with 
his blanket and havresack ; I hastily un- 
screwed the stopper, and contrived to force a 
few drops into the mouth of the wounded 
man. Then, I tore my cravat into strips, 
and with it and my handkerchief tried to 
bind up the hurts Shem had received, after 
vainly attempting to withdraw the barbed 
arrows. Two of the injuries were mere flesh 
wounds, more painful than dangerous; but 
the third was of a more serious character: 
the shaft was imbedded in Shem's side, though 
the hemorrhage was trifling in appearance 
when compared with the abundant flow of 
blood from the other injuries. In about a 
couple of minutes Shem revived sufficiently 
to look up. I was touched by the gratitude 
his eyes expressed. Probably, poor lad, he 
had received but a scanty share of kindness 
in his scrambling life. 

" Do you suffer much pain from the arrow 
wounds ?" I asked. "Take a drop more of 
the whisky ; it will give you strength, and 
if I can once help you to proceed as far as 
the block-house " 



182 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

" 'Tain't no manner of use, stranger, my 
duty to ye, all the same/' replied the rider, 
after swallowing a small quantity of spirits. 
" I've got my finish at last. A chap that's 
fit in the border fights ever since he could 
squint along a gun, don't need no doctor to 
tell him when he's got goss, he don't. 

I could not disguise from myself that 
Shem was right. His face showed a ghastly 
change; it was ashen white, pinched, and 
thin; while the lips twitched, and the eyes 
had acquired that peculiar eager glance, and 
restless craving brightness, which we never 
notice except in those over whom death 
hovers. But I tried to cheer the poor fellow ; 
succeeded in stanching the blood that flowed 
from his arm, transpierced by two of the 
iron-tipped reeds ; and begged him to keep 
up his hope and courage. 

" 'Tain't worth wasting words upon, 
mister," gasped Shem ; " I knowed I'd my 
call; onst I felt the cold and the rankling 
pain that follered the smart of that cussed 
arrow in my ribs. I'm jest bleeding to death, 
inwardly, I am, and all the surgeon chaps in 
the States, couldn't help me, no, nor yet the 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 183 

cleverest bonesetter in the pararas. But you 
cheated the curs out of my scalp, stranger. 
They had a hanker to get this child's ha'r, 
they had, to dance round in their darned 
village, them Shoshonies. My ! How the 
squaws will jeer and mock 'em when they go 
back empty-fisted, and leavin' two of the 
pack behind 'em, too!'' And Shem, with 
death in his face and at his heart, actually 
laughed. He had to catch painfully at his 
breath before he spoke again. " Stranger, 
it's an ill wind blows nobody any good. 
You hark to me. What I could't give you, 
nouther for dollars nor axin', you'll get now. 
Go on to the station ; take this here mail- 
bag along; give it 'em, and tell 'em the 
rights of what's chanced. They'll turn out 
fast enough, I'll warrant, and they'll put me 
under the turf afore the wolves pick my bones. 
And another rider must go on with the bag. 
And tell 'em 'twere my dyin' wish, they'd 
give you a fresh boss at each block, and so 
let you go with the rider, and push ahead. 
The Co. won't be riled at the breach of rules 
. seein' you saved the bag, let alone my 
scalp, and " 



184, PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

He broke down here. I was quite melted 
at the unselfish thoughtfulness of this poor 
dying creature, this untaught, half-wild fron- 
tier-man, who could care for my speedy jour- 
ney while his own vital breath was trembling 
on his livid lips. I gave him a third sup 
of whisky, begging him to let me know if I 
could communicate his last wishes to any 
distant friend or relation ? 

" There's a gal that lives to Hampton Town," 
said Shem, almost in a whisper, " the darter 
of a dealer that trades in mules, she be ; and 
Ruth and I. . Oh, 'tis a pity the wedding 
day were put off, cause the Co. gives pensions 
to wives, but none to sweethearts, and Ruth's 
father met with misfortins in trade, and she'd 
ha' been glad of a few dollars a year, poor 
thing 1" 

I asked his sweetheart's name, for, as I 
assured him, I felt certain that the house of 
Spalding and Hausermann would befriend her 
for his sake, if through the service I had 
rendered Shem I were really enabled to do 
my errand with a success otherwise unattain- 
able. 

"Ruth Moss," said Shem, in his weak 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 185 

voice; "that's her surname and given name. 
She's a good girl, pretty and good, is Ruth, 
and only too tender a flower for a rough 
borderman like me; goes to chapel reg'lar, 
and writes like a print book." 

He then begged that I would send to Ruth 
a certain knot of ribbon which he had received 
from her as a keepsake, or merely snatched in 
a lover's whim, I do not know which ; at any 
rate, I found it carefully wrapped in deerskin, 
in the bosom of his dress, but ah! with a 
deep dark stain of blood marring the gay 
blue of the silk. The arrow had passed 
nearly through that humble love-token. Shem 
further prayed me, that as I passed by the 
Round Pond Station, between Fort Bridge 
and Red Creek, I would tell his old father, 
Amos Grindrod, that he, Shem, had " died 
like a man," 

"The old man'll be cut up, I'm afraid," 
murmured Shem, whose eyes were getting 
dim; "but he'll be glad to know my ha'r 
warn't lifted. Tell him I were wiped out by 
the band of Mad Buffalo, the Shoshonie, 
'Twar Mad Buffalo hisself that sent the arrow 
through me, just as I kivered him with the 



186 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

carbine. The shunk! Many a noggin of 
drink I've given him when he come tradin* 
to the fort. But there war a grudge atween 
him and me, and he's ped it ; but let him 
mind how he ever comes within range of 
old Amos Grindrod's rifle I" 

Shem was anxious to know whether the 
Indian I had shot *vas quite dead, and what 
painted device his half-naked body bore. His 
own glazing eyes could not distinguish ; but 
when I described the yellow ochre barred 
with white, he said it must be the " Little 
Owl," one of Mad Buffalo's best warriors. 
The other Indian was of slighter make, and 
daubed with black and vermilion. Both were 
stone dead. Shem asked me, half timidly, if 
I would be so good as repeat " a bit of Scrip- 
ture." He had not been much of a chapel- 
goer, but Ruth had "got religion," and his 
mother, too, had been " a Christian woman," 
as he quaintly observed. I knelt beside him 
and held up his head as I uttered aloud 
the words of a brief and simple prayer, such 
as little children are taught to lisp with 
their innocent lips; and once or twice I 
heard the husky tones of the dying man 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 187 

repeat the words. But there was a strong 
shiver through his frame, and poor Shem 
Grindrod was dead before the prayer was 
prayed out. 

About an hour later, I rode up to the 
station, mounted on my own horse, and lead- 
ing Shem's by the bridle. 

" Halloa ! pull up, pull up, or I'll plug ye, 
sure as my name's Bradshaw!" shouted a 
stern voice through a loophole of the lonely 
blockhouse. And I saw the long clouded 
barrel of a frontier rifle pointing in my 
direction. I halted, of course. 

" That's one of our hosses," cried a second 
voice ; " the critter's stole it, I reckon. What 
is he?" 

" I am a friend," I called out ; " a traveller 
from California. Let me come in, and I will 
explain all." 

The garrison held a short but animated 
debate. One man avowed his belief in the 
truth of my story, another broadly hinted 
that 1 might turn out a "renegade" or 
" white Indian," that I merely wanted to open 
the doors of the fortress to my ferocious allies, 
ambushed somewhere hard by, and that it 



188 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

would be as well to shoot me, as a provisional 
act of prudence. But the majority carries 
the day in America ; and, luckily for me, the 
majority decreed my admission. Loud was 
the surprise, and sincere the sorrow, with 
which the little garrison received the news 
of their comrade's murder. Three of the 
men caught up such rude tools as they pos- 
sessed, and, slinging their rifles, prepared to 
take the " back trail" to the spot where the 
unfortunate young man's body lay, and where 
his remains would be hastily laid in earth, 
after the custom of the frontiers. Another 
hurried, with all the instinct of discipline, to 
saddle a horse for the purpose of carrying 
forward the mail-bag which poor Shem had 
resigned only with his life. This rider was 
the most affected of the group, by the melan- 
choly tidings I had brought. He would have 
preferred to be one of those who were to 
lay his old associate beneath the prairie turf, 
but this could not be. He was " next for 
duty," he said, simply, with tears standing in 
his hardy eyes. So, he hurried to equip him- 
self and steed for the perilous road. I now 
ventured, rather timidly and awkwardly, to 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 189 

prefer my request for the accommodation of 
fresh relays of horses along the rest of the 
route, speaking as modestly as I could of my 
own preservation of the despatches. The 
men looked puzzled as they scrutinised me 
and weighed my demand. One of them, he 
who had taken me for a renegade white in 
the Indian interest, gave me a piercing glance, 
and gruffly said, " How do we know he ain't 
been bamfoozling us with a pack of lies? 
He may have murdered Shem, ye see, jest 
to get a remount, and " 

" You jest shut up !" thundered, in tones 
of deep indignation, the rider who was to 
carry on the mails, "You ougbter to be 
ashamed of that tongue o' yourn, Jethro 
Summers. Here's a gentleman, and what's 
more, an honest chap, has fit by poor Shem's 
side, has saved his scalp from them Shos- 
honies, and brought on the bag for us, and 
you're to insult him with your mean talk. 
See! his hoss is fresh, and he's brought in 
Shem's hoss ; and you to go telling him he'd 
murder a white Christian to get a lift. It's 
a burnin' shame, Jeth Summers !" 

" 'Tis, 'tis !" exclaimed the other two men. 



190 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

<c Did ye ever know a darned renegade look 
a chap in the face, bold and honest, like the 
colonel, there ? He's a good chap, is mister ; - 
and if ever he wants a friend in a rough-and- 
tumble fight, we're his men, sure as minks 
can swim/' 

The trio shook hands with me with genuine 
warmth. Now, when the iron was hot, was 
the time to strike. I therefore made an 
energetic appeal to them to supply me with 
horses, assuring them that my whole prospects 
and happiness, as well as those of others, 
depended on my speed. They listened with 
interest ; but when I concluded with the 
words, " Shem Grindrod wished it ; he bade 
me ask it of you, as he lay dying," the game 
was won. To be sure, the one ill-conditioned 
member of the community grumbled out 
something about " soft sawder, breach of 
rules, cunning Yankees, and dismissal." But 
the tall rider cut him short, by affirming 
with an oath, that " if the Co. chose to ride 
nasty on such a point, after the stranger's 
services, why the Co. was a mean scamp, and 
he wouldn't serve 'em for one." I did not 
at first exactly comprehend this frequently- 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 191 

recurring phrase of the " Co.," and was dis- 
posed to regard it as the name of some 
overlooker, or superintendent, but afterwards 
discovered that this monosyllabic impersona- 
tion meant the Express Company. 

"Look sharp, mister. You shall have a 
mount, but there's time lost a'ready, and we 
shall have to ride whip and spur. Come and 
pick a nag out of the corral. There's a 
brindled mustang your saddle will fit like his 
skin. The roan's best, but his back's rubbed 
raw. Ask Jonas to give you some beef and 
biscuit: we shan't pass many hot-els, that air 
positive. Charge that revolver o' yourn, 
colonel ; 1 see two bullets a-missing. Have 
a horn of whisky . old Monongahela ? No ! 
Do be spry with the saddle, you Jeth . a man 
should help in a case like this. Easy, mister, 
with the bridle . the mustang bites . so! 
We'll take care of your nag, and you'll find 
him as sleek as a slug, if you come back our 
way. Good-bye, boys !" 

So saying, the impatient rider finished his 
preparations, sprang to his saddle, waved his 
repeating carbine over his head, and set off at 
furious speed. I followed as rapidly as I 



192 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

could, shouting a farewell to those left behind, 
who were on the point of starting for the 
place where poor Shem was lying beside the 
corpses of his copper-hued foes, stiff and 
stark. 

The brindled mustang was fat and lazy, 
compared with the nimble cream-coloured 
pony on which my guide was mounted. It 
took all my exertions to overtake 'Demus 
Blake, whose name was probably Aristoderaus, 
though thus curtailed by usage. We rode at 
a tremendous pace. 

"Larrup your beast, colonel," cried the 
rider, " we're woful behind. Don't be stingy 
with the spur-iron, for that brindle does allays 
shirk when he can. Mind . 'ware the sappy 
ground, where you see them clubby mosses ! 
Jordan ! they'd take a hoss up to the girths, 
and there you'd stop, like a tree'd coon. Push 
on, sir. Rattle him across them riv'lets : not 
that a parara hoss can jump like the critters 
from the U-nited States." 

It struck me that 'Demus Blake was bawl- 
ing and flogging in this excited way, for no 
other purpose than to quiet his own nerves, 
and drown care. I was confirmed in this 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 1 93 

view by the fact that, after six or seven miles 
had been swallowed up by the rapid career of 
our foam-flecked steeds, the rider reined his 
horse into a steady hand-gallop. 

"There, .mister/' said he, "we'll go quiet 
now. I feels kiender easier under my left 
ribs. Tell'ee, colonel, little as you think it, to 
look at such as me, I was as near making the 
biggest baby of myself. there, I was ! Poor 
boy Shem ! I knowed him, sir, oncommon 
well, and oncommon long. We played about 
together, when we were as high as a ramrod, 
in Pequottie village, nigh to Utica, in old 
Kentuck. And when old Amos and my 
daddy, Jonathan Blake, calculated to move 
west, they chose the same location. Sad 
news for old Amos . a white-haired old chap 
now, but pretty tough, too. He's -at Brown's 
Hole . no, at Round Pond . trading for peltry. 
I wouldn't care to have the tellin' on him." 

The rider was silent for a good while after 
this. He did not speak again till I paid a 
merited tribute to Shem's courage. I had 
found him, I said, fronting seven Indians like 
a stag at bay. The frontiers-man's eye glit- 
tered proudly : 

vol. 1. . o 



194 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

" A brave boy, sir. I was with bim, first 
fight . that is, Shem's first, cause I'm two 
year an older man. 'Twarnt hereaway. South 
of Fremont's Pass it war, and bloody Black- 
foot Indians war the inimy, three to one, on'y 
they'd no fire-arms. Twarnt child's play 
that day, mister!" The backwoodsman ex- 
panded his broad chest, while his nostrils 
dilated, and his lips tightened, as he recalled 
the arduous struggle long past. 

He was a much stronger man than Shem, 
of a spirit less gay and lightsome, but not 
without a certain amount of rude practical 
poetry in his disposition. He knew Shem's 
sweetheart ; a very nice-looking girl, of rather 
a quiet, subdued, and pious nature. "Not 
too common on the border, nouther, where 
even gals mostly has a spice of the wild-cat, 
but, mebbe, that pleased Shem." 

Of the distress in store for old Amos 
Grindrod: a hunter, once renowned for his 
prowess and skill, whether in warfare or the 
chase; Blake spoke feelingly and with deep 
conviction. 

" 'Twill shorten the old man's days, sir, but 
it's lucky the old woman's not alive to hear 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 195 

it : she was that tender of Shem, if his finger 
ached she'd flutter like a robbed hen. Good 
old soul she was, Mrs. Grindrod, and nursed 
my old mother when she took the fever in 
that murderin' swamp." 

Honest 'Demus had too much innate good- 
breeding to be inquisitive as to the purport of 
my unusual journey. In this respect, as in 
some others, he far surpassed in tact and 
politeness many an accomplished citizen in 
varnished boots and satin vest. But he 
offered me some well-meant advice. 

"Take it coolly," said he, "and don't 
flurry yourself, colonel. You've got more 
colour in your cheeks than need be, and your 
hand was as hot, when I shook it, as a bit of 
deer-meat toastin* over the fire. I don't 
know as you ain't right, shirking the whisky, 
though 'tis food and comfort to such as me. 
But a smart touch of fever would tie you by 
the leg, stranger, so don't fret overly, and 
sleep all you can. As for Injuns, they'll 
hardly trouble two white men, when there's 
nouthin' to be got but a kipple of nags that 
can be bought for a cast of the lasso or larist. 
The emigrant trains is different, for the Red 

o2 



196 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

devils scent plunder in the waggons, and only 
the dragoons skear 'em. Twar spite med the 
Mad Buffalo fall on Shem Grindrod. Shem 
give him a coat o' tar and turkey feathers 
one night, at Bridger's Fort, when the Injun 
got so drunk with whisky some rascal sold 
him, he lay like a hog on the ground. They 
never forgive, them Injuns. Shoshonies have 
no pity, compared to the savages east of the 
Rocky Mountains. Keep a look out for out- 
lying war parties, mister, when you get to the 
mountain parks. Crows will take hoss and 
clothes ; Blackfeet allays hanker arter ha'r !" 

I took my guide's well-meant advice, and 
endeavoured to get through the journey as 
phlegmatically as might be. I snatched 
every opportunity of repose, if only for a few 
minutes, while the reeking saddles were being 
shifted to the backs of fresh horses ; and it 
is wonderful how much refreshment I at 
times derived from a nap so brief as not much 
to exceed the traditional " forty winks." More 
than once, my companion said to me, 
"Colonel, you're about dropping with sleep. 
Shut your eyes, if you like, and give me your 
reins. I'll guide both hosses, and you can't 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 197 

hardly roll out of that cradle o* yourn." 
And, indeed, the deep Mexican saddle of 
demipique cut, which I had luckily provided 
on starting, was admirably adapted, with 
its lofty pommel and cantel, to the use of a 
dozing equestrian. Curious spells of slumber 
those were, when my head would nod like 
that of a porcelain mandarin, and my eyelids 
droop as if weighted with lead, and when, 
after a few minutes, I would start up, broad 
awake, as my mustang stumbled over broken 
ground. Once . it was while 'Demus Blake 
was still with me . I had a long and most 
delicious period of slumber, uninterrupted by 
jerks or concussions; and when I awoke, 
quite a new man, and revived to an extent at 
which I now wonder, I found myself sup- 
ported by the strong patient arm of my 
conductor, who had been galloping by my 
side for miles, managing both bridles with 
his disengaged hand. "I thought it would 
fresh you up, colonel 1" said the brave fellow. 
Not all my mentors throughout that phan- 
tom ride across prairieland were as frank as 
Blake, nor as merry as Shem. But the mail- 
bag riders turned out good fellows in all main 



] 98 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

points, and I can safely say that I found but 
two or three surly or ill-natured persons 
among all those who garrisoned the block- 
houses : while fortunately it fell to my lot on 
no occasion to be accompanied by one of 
these. In the prairie, as in the world at 
large, I found good-feeling the rule, cynicism 
or malice the exception, though I am bound 
to say that the ill-conditioned individuals 
made twice as much noise and stir as their 
more amiable mates. The first start had 
been difficult, but at each succeeding station 
I received my remount without much delay 
or parley. The " privilege of the post" was 
conceded to me, while I was always welcome 
to a share of the rations in each little com- 
munity. On the whole, I found the men 
cheerful in their strange isolation. They 
were liberally paid and not ill-fed, and they 
looked forward to a pension in the event of 
becoming crippled by some Indian hatchet- 
stroke or arrow-shot. Planted in the wilder- 
ness, with the prospect of being presently 
encompassed by deep drifts of snow, over 
whose frozen surface the wolves would come 
to howl and scratch at their doors, like dogs 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 199 

seeking admittance, they were in fair spirits 
and undismayed. Their habitual talk was of 
the wild adventures that formed the every-day 
life of that frontier of Christendom ; of Indian 
stratagems and cruelty, of panthers and 
" grizzlies/' pronghorns and buffaloes. Se- 
veral of them had consorted familiarly with 
the painted tribes of the desert, and spoke 
sundry Indian dialects as fluently as their 
mother tongue. I found these hardy men 
kind hosts enough; they would hush their 
talk, not to disturb me as I lay down on a 
heap of skins and blankets, to sleep, while the 
guide saddled the horses ; and they soon 
ceased to ridicule my apparently capricious 
refusal of whisky. "Mebbe the colonel's 
right l" (Colonel is the Western title of 
courtesy), they would say in their blunt 
politeness. Once I found the inmates of a 
station, built on swampy ground, quite help* 
less and prostrate with fever. The fever had 
abated when the healthy norther began to 
blow, but the poor fellows were cramped with 
pains, and very feeble, and only one of the 
party could crawl about to cook and feed the 
fire. I had need to fix my mind on the 



200 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

reward of success, on the distant goal glitter- 
ing far ahead, for it was no light task that I 
had undertaken. The thought of Emma 
nerved me, and I felt an Englishman's 
dogged resolve to win, to fight on, and to 
break sooner than bend. But the fatigues of 
that journey surpassed all my conceptions. By 
day and night, under a glaring sun or through 
the frost and cutting northerly winds, on we 
pressed, fording streams, threading the way 
through marshes, stumbling among the bur- 
rows of prairie dogs, or dashing across 
boundless plains. I almost learned to hate 
the long terraces of turf, the illimitable 
sweeps of dark green surface, the blue hori- 
zons, the swells of gently sloping earth, 
smooth enough for the passage of wheeled 
carriages. On we went, till the long grass, 
mixed with flowers and wild tufts of the flax- 
cotton, gave place to a shorter and crisper 
herbage, the true "buffalo grass" that the 
bisons love ; or till water became scarce, and 
the sage plant replaced the blossomed shrubs 
of the west, and the springs were brackish, 
and here and there our horses' hoofs went 
cranching over a white stretch of desert, 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 201 

strewn with crystals of salt that glittered in 
the sun. We saw little of Indians, and of 
game still less. The latter, my guides told 
me, had been chiefly scared away, by the 
constant passage of emigrants. As for the 
savages, we sometimes saw the plumed heads, 
the tapering lances, and the fluttering robes, 
of a troop of wild horsemen, against the 
crimson sky of evening ; but they offered us no 
molestation, and the riders said they were 
Utahs on the look-out for "buffler droves" 
returning from the south. Of the fatigue of 
that interminable ride, the aching joints, the 
stiffened sinews, the pains that racked my 
overstrained muscles, I can give no just idea. 
Still less can I convey any sense of the con- 
tinual strain upon the intellect and perceptive 
faculties, or how my brain grew as weary as 
my limbs. 

I shall never forget the evening of my 
arrival in Salt Lake City, the capital of Utah 
territory, and New Jerusalem of the Mormons. 
I had been encouraged by the guides, to look 
upon this town in the deserts as a turning- 
point in the journey, beyond which I should 
be in less peril from Indians, and after which 



202 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

a comparatively short ride would cany me to 
more civilised regions. But, to my surprise, 
I found the inmates of the station at Salt Lake 
City quite as lonely as, and more suspicious 
and moody than, in the far-off posts among 
the prairies. They were Gentiles in the 
midst of a fanatic population, wholly swayed 
by the hierarchy of that strange creed, whose 
standard had been set up in the lawless 
wastes of the west. Nor was it long before I 
heard the cause of their dark looks and low 
spirits. 

"Where's Josh Hudson?" asked the rider 
who had come with me, when the first greet- 
ings had been exchanged. 

" Who knows ?" answered the man ad- 
dressed ; " I don't. Seth said he went to the 
town, while I were in the corral with the 
hosses. If so, all I can say is, he never come 
back." 

" When was that, Seth ?" asked the newly- 
arrived rider. 

"Two days agone," answered Seth, as he 
scraped the surface of a half-exhausted quid 
of tobacco with his long sharp bowie-knife, 
"jest afore sundown." 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 203 

" He's not desarted. Josh was too honour- 
able to make tracks, that way," said the rider, 
confidently. 

"Desarted! Not he. But that's what'll 
have to be put in the report . leastways, 
missing" said Seth. 

The rider looked Seth in the face, and drew 
his forefinger, with a meaning look, slowly 
across his own throat. Seth nodded. 

"Least said, safest," said Seth, looking 
dubiously at me, 

" Colonel's safe. You may speak afore 
him, same as myself, boys !" cried the mail- 
bag rider, who had come with me ; " do ye 
mean them bloodthirsty Mormons P" 

" Whist, Jem ! Whew ! You'll get all our 
throats cut," cried the oldest man, starting 
up in great alarm; "there may be one 
of the brutes within earshot." He looked 
through the window, and opened the door, to 
satisfy himself that no eavesdroppers were 
near. 

"I forgot," apologised Jem; "but about 
Josh Hudson ?" 

"I'm afeard," answered Seth, in a voice 
dropped almost to a whisper, " that he's gone 



204 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

for good. Josh was troubled about his sister, 
Nell Hudson, that jined the Mormons last 
winter, up in Illinoy, and was coaxed off, and 
is here, somewhere/' 

"Ah," said the listener, " I've heerd as 
much." 

"It's my belief," continued Seth, "that 
Josh got on this station a purpose to seek the 
gal out, and get her to go home to the old 
folks and the Church she were bred in. 
Mormons won't stand that." 

" Ah !" said the guide Jem again. 

" So, in short, Seth and me some think, we 
do," said the oldest of the group, " that Josh 
has been at his scoutin' onst too often, and 
met ' shanpip/ " 

" Shanpip !" I repeated, " what is that?" 

The man eyed me curiously. " Never 
heerd of c Shanpip brethren/ then, harn't ye, 
mister? So much the best for you. P'raps 
you've heerd tell of Danites ?" 

I had heard, vaguely and obscurely, of that 
spiritual police of Mormondom, of those fierce 
zealots who obey their Prophet blindly. 

" Then you have reason to fear that your 
comrade is " 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 205 

" Is lyin' under the salt mud of one o' them 
briny pools nigh to hand," interrupted the 
man, " and not alone, nouther. Theer's been 
a many missin* that never went back to settle- 
ments nor on to Californey. And theer 
they'll lie hid, I reckon, till the Day of Judg- 
ment, when Great Salt Lake shall give up its 
dead, like the rest of the airth and waters." 

I asked if an appeal could not be made to 
the Mormon elders themselves P 

"'Twouldn't answer, colonel.^ Suppose I 
goes to-morrow to Brigham's own house, or 
Kimball's, or any of their big men . elders, 
or angels, or high priests, or what not . and 
asks after Josh Hudson. Brigham's very 
mealy-mouthed, afraid the man's run away; 
what could be expected from a benighted 
Gentile, and that ; gives his own account of it 
in preachment next Sabbath. P'raps one of 
'em gives me a glass of wine or a julep, and 
niebbe it disagrees with me, and I die of it. 
You may stare, but didn't the States treasurer 
die that way, arter takin* refreshment at 
Angel Badger's house? And a pretty angel 
he be. P'raps I don't drink under a Mormon 
roof, and then, mebbe, I walk home late, and 



206 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

lose my way, or some other accident happens 
me . true as death, mister, on'y last week, as 
I passed Big Lick, I saw a dead woman's 
face looking up at me, all white and still, at 
bottom of the salt pool/' 

Thus far the elder man had spoken, but 
now Seth, who had evinced great uneasiness, 
jumped up with an oath, and cautiously 
opened the door. No one was listening. 

" TelTee what," said Seth, " we'd best keep 
this discoorse close, till we're outside the terri- 
tory. They're that sharp, Mormons, blessed 
if I don't think they're all ear. And if they 
get's a notion what we're sayin', the colonel 
won't never see New York, and I shan't 
never happen home to Montgomery agin, 
Indian Walker and his pesky Utahs mostly 
got a knack of tomahawking them as Mor- 
mons don't much like. And mebbe we'd 
meet other Indians, with blankets and red 
paint on their faces, jest like the real Utahs, 
and pretty sharp knives in their belts." 

" Seth's right," said my former guide ; " we 
don't want to set up any chaps to paint Injun 
on our account, as Angel Brown and Young 
Harris and the Danites did, when Martha 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 207 

Styles and Rachel Willis chose to go home 
to Illinoy . so, colonel, you get a snooze, and 
Seth, you needn't hurry about saddlin* . 
we've rode awful quick." 

I was not sorry when day-dawn found me, 
after a hard gallop by moonlight, approaching 
the confines of the Mormon territory. The 
rest of the journey was unmarked by adven- 
ture. Hardships there were, but no great 
perils. We traversed a route on which the 
bleached bones of many horses and mules 
lay white and ghastly, and on which many a 
low turfen mound marked the last resting- 
place of an emigrant, or his wife or child, 
never to reach the Promised Land of Hope. 

But provisions were more plentiful now, 
and water more regularly stored and easy of 
access, than when the expeljed Mormons 
made their famous march across the desert, 
marking the untrodden route with graves. 
We narrowly escaped being smothered in the 
snow, in passing the outlet in the Rocky 
Mountains, and this was our last semblance 
of peril. 

Previous to this, it had been my sad duty 
to tell old Amos Grindrod, whom I found at 



208 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

the Round Pond Station, of his son's death, 
and to commit to his care the bit of ensan- 
guined ribbon that was to be returned to poor 
Shem's sweetheart. The old man tried to 
bear the tidings with the stoicism of those 
Indians among whom he had passed so much 
of his life, and expressed great pleasure at 
hearing that Shem had " died like a Kentucky 
man, clear grit/* and that I had come up in 
time to save his scalp. But in a few 
minutes, nature conquered. The old man's 
bronzed features worked and twitched, and 
tears trickled from his aged eyes, as he sobbed 
out, " Shem ! dear boy, Shem ! 'twas I that 
oughter be dead, not he." 

At last the weary ride was over : we had 
passed outlying farms guarded by a strong 
stockade, then the farms grew thicker and the 
stockades were dispensed with, and at last the 
roofs of a village, called by courtesy a town, 
came in view. Gladly did I dismount, gladly 
did I shake the hard hand of the last rider of 
the Express Company ! Leaving that honest 
fellow puzzling over the cabalistic flourishes 
of a ten-dollar note I presented to him, I 
hired a pair-horse waggon of light build, and 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 209 

set off at once. The waggon bore me on 
until I exchanged it for a coach, the coach 
did ine the same good office until I heard the 
snort of the steam-horse, and took my ticket 
by railway. How delicious, how snug and 
luxurious was such a mode of travel, after so 
much hard saddlework ! Corduroy roads 
seemed smooth, and American railroads not 
in the least addicted to cause the trains to 
jerk or rock. The gliding motion was charm- 
ing, and I made amends for lost time, by 
sleeping in a manner which provoked more 
than one fellow-traveller, eager to know my 
business and station in life. 

I had already telegraphed to New York 
briefly thus : 

" Has the Californian mail, via Panama, 
arrived ?" 

Briefer still was the answer : 

"No." 

That was right, so far. My toil was not 
yet purposeless. I might hope to be in New 
York before Dr., or Colonel, Joram Heckler. 
The victory, to be sure, was not yet won. 
The valuable papers remained in the scoun- 
drel's keeping. But my presence in New 

yol. i. p 



210 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

York would be unsuspected by him, and any 
overt act on my part would have the effect 
of a surprise. I was too exhausted, to devote 
myself to spinning air-drawn schemes for out- 
witting the intriguer. I should have need of 
all my faculties when the tug of war began, 
and I must sleep now. Sleep I did, over 
miles and miles, over leagues and leagues, 
of the iron way. resting obstinately, and 
being as passive as possible. 

" Massa get out ? Dis New York, sare.'' 

Some one was shaking me by the arm : 
some one else held a lantern to my face. A 
black man and a white. The conductor, and 
a negro porter. 

" I'm going to the Metropolitan Hotel. " I 
want a hack: no luggage. Has the Cali- 
fornian mail arrived ?" 

"Yes, it has," said a newsvendor, who 
stood by, with a heap of journals under his 
arm; "got all the news here. Herald, 
Tribune, Times. Which will you have ?" 

I bought one of the papers, and glanced at 
the list of arrivals, via Panama. So much 
gold dust, so much bullion, distinguished 
European traveller, postmaster-general, Sig- 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 211 

nora Cantatini, Colonels Thorn, Heckler, &c. 
The driver of the hack-carriage was an Irish- 
man, as usual, and luckily, not a new arrival. 
He readily conducted me (at that late hour 
all other stores and shops were closed) to the 
emporium of a Jew dealer in ready-made 
clothes, who was willing to turn a cent even 
at irregular time. I purchased a new suit, 
linen, a portmanteau, and so forth, and 
shaved off my stubbly beard with razors 
supplied by the Jew, and before the Jew's 
private looking-glass. My driver drove quite 
a trim, ordinary-looking gentleman to the 
Metropolitan Hotel, instead of the shaggy 
flannel-shirted Californian who had first en- 
gaged him. 

Before I engaged a room, I civilly asked 
the bookkeeper to let me look at the addresses 
of guests ; I was expecting my brother, I 
said, from Albany. I took good care to say 
nothing of Heckler or California, and the 
bookkeeper had no suspicion that my voyages 
had commenced at any more remote spot 
than Philadelphia or Baltimore. Yes . 
Heckler's name was down. 

I had guessed he would put up at the 

p2 



212 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

Metropolitan, for I had heard him mention 
the house approvingly in conversation. I 
hung about the bar and the staircases until I 
happened to hear that he had gone to bed. 
Then, 1 withdrew to think over ray own plan 
of operations. I own I was puzzled. I 
tossed and tumbled uneasily on my pillow. 
While hurrying onward it had appeared as if 
I had but to arrive in time, and the difficulty 
was at an end ; but now, what was I to do ? 
The battle had yet to be fought. What should 
I do? In the morning, no doubt, Heckler 
would repair to the bank to present the forged 
cheque, if not to get the bills discounted. I 
must stop him. But how ? Should 1 go to 
the police, and return with the police myrmi- 
dons? Not to be thought of! Scandal, 
exposure must follow such a step; nay, in 
the eyes of the law, Heckler might see man 
innocent man, and I a false accuser. I next 
thought of confronting him boldly, and 
forcing from him, with a pistol at his head, 
if need be, the property of the firm. But 
this was too Quixotic a proceeding to be 
adopted in a first-rate hotel in New York. I 
was at my wits* end. 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 213 

Heavens ! What a smell of burning, and 
how stifling and thick the air! Smoke! 
The house is on fire. Up I sprang, and flung 
on my clothes in hot haste. " It's an ill wind 
that blows no one any good." I thought of 
Joram Heckler as I rang my bell to alarm the 
people. 

" Fire ! fire !" The awful cry broke upon 
the ears of the sleepers, like the trump of 
doom. Dark clouds of volleying smoke 
poured along the corridors, flecked here and 
there by thin ribbons of flame that licked the 
walls and floors like the tongues of fiery 
serpents. Shrieks were heard; doors were 
burst open ; men, women, children, rushed 
out, half-dressed and screaming. There was 
panic terror and wild confusion. The fire 
gained ground, the smoke was blindingly 
thick, and all fled before it . all but myself. 
I steadily groped my way towards Joram 
Heckler's room. I knew the number, and 
where to find it. I knew that I risked my 
life, but the stake was worth winning at such 
a risk. I was very nearly suffocated as I 
pushed on, holding by the wall, into the 
thickest of the smoke. Some man, half- 



214 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

dressed, and winged by fear, came rushing 
by with extended arms, and nearly overturned 
me. He uttered a savage oath; the red 
glare of the fire fell on his face ; it was Joram 
Heckler. 

He did not recognise me, but dashed on, 
only mindful of his danger. Had he the 
papers with him ? I thought not. I hoped 
not. That was his room then, the door of 
which was ajar, and into which the smoke 
was rolling. Not the smoke alone ; I saw a 
thin red tongue of fire creeping in over the 
floor, beside the wainscot. I dashed in. My 
eyes smarted with the smoke, and I gasped 
for breath, but smoke and fire could not turn 
me now. Heckler's clothes and dressing-case 
were as he had laid them ; the latter was 
open : no papers ! His valise, too, lay open : 
no papers ! I struck my forehead des- 
pairingly. He had them about him then ! I 
was risking life idly. Emma was lost to 
me ! The smoke choked me : the intolerably 
hot fire had gained the bed: valance and 
curtains were flaring high in a tall yellow 
pillar of flame. The subtle tongues of flame 
almost touched my feet. I must fly, if I 



PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 215 

would not perish. Outside, I heard the 
noise of the engines and the cheers of the 
mob, and then the dash of water, as prodigi- 
ous efforts were made to extinguish the fire. 

I was staggering away, when I saw, peeping 
from under the bolster of the bed, a Russia- 
leather pocket-book. The rascal had forgotten 
it in his blind terror. The blazing curtains 
fell in fragments upon me, and my hands 
were a good deal scorched, but I rescued the 
precious prize. I tore it open. Yes, cheque 
and bills, all were there ! Thrusting it into 
my breast-pocket, I left the room, and 
struggled as I best could down the passage. 
Dash after dash of water, flung from hand- 
buckets, had partially subdued the flames, 
and the firemen were gaining the victory. 
Half smothered, singed, blackened, but with 
a proudly beating heart, I forced my way 
down the heated and crowded staircase . 
reached the outer air, and fainted. 

I have little more to tell. I am a partner 
in the firm : Emma is my wife ; her brother 
recovered from his illness, and is now, in 
another land, an altered and penitent man. 
The house of Spalding, Hausermann, and Co. 



216 PICKING UP A POCKET-BOOK. 

(I am Co.) have granted a pension to the poor 
girl who was to have been the bride of the 
luckless Shem Grindrod. Of Heckler we 
heard no more. 



A TUTOR'S STORY. 



I am by profession a tutor. Carefully 
educated, and of a studious disposition from 
the first, I had been designed by my father 
for the bar, but his commercial misfortunes, 
followed by ruin and death, had compelled 
me to leave the university without even the 
barren advantage of a degree. Fit to teach, 
and fit, as discerning friends unanimously 
declared, for nothing else under the sun, I 
was induced to apply such abilities as I pos- 
sessed to the task of tuition. Having passed 
some years in this calling : now assistant 
master in a school 2 now " coach " to a party 
of young Oxonians or Cantabs reading through 
a vacation spent in Wales or Cumberland: 
I at length found myself in want of an 
engagement. None of my old pupils or sur- 



218 a tutor's story. 

viving relatives could assist me in this strait, 
and I at last determined to apply to one of the 
more reputable of those agents who profess to 
facilitate both the obtaining of situations and 
the choice of competent persons to fill them. 
I paid my fees, was duly entered by name in 
some enormous ledgers, and for several weeks 
was a punctual caller at the office, which was 
near Oxford-street, but without success, I 
seldom visited Mr. Hudson's . this was the 
agent's name . without seeing other appli- 
cants, sad-eyed and dejected, sent empty 
away. And I began to regard the whole 
system as a snare and  delusion. 

"I will call yet this once," said I one 
muggy autumn day, as I turned into Oxford- 
street with my umbrella, " yet this once, and 
if the usual answer is returned, I will trouble 
Mr. Hudson no more, but will accept the 
post of usher in that school at Northampton/' 

The office was empty of all but the clerk, 
posted behind his monstrous books, in a sort 
of mahogany cage. Of him I made, though 
with little hope of a favourable answer, the 
customary inquiry ; " anything for Mr. Edwin 
Kirby?" 



a tutor's story. 219 

" Kirby," said the clerk, rustling the leaves 
of a ledger, and referring to the K's, with an 
irritating pretence of never having seen me 
before: "Kirby . Edwin, I think you said? 
Was it Edwin, or Edward?" 

I nearly lost my temper at this. I had 
besieged the office for weeks, and here was 
this man, not merely forgetting me, which 
was pardonable, but talking as if he had 
a legion of Kirbys . not a very common 
name . entered on his books. Very oppor- 
tunely his employer, who lay ensconced in 
some hidden recess, like a human spider, 
intervened. 

" Don't worry the gent, Bruce. I told you 
I'd see him when he called, and I've got 
something for him." 

Mr. Hudson came wriggling out from his 
den, rubbing his hands and congratulating 
me with a warmth which seemed to savour of 
surprise. Perhaps it was not every day that 
the wealthier portion of the public consulted 
the office as to the filling up of such posts as 
they had to bestow. 

" This is bonny fide, mind," said the agent, 
holding up a dirty forefinger. " I've as good 



220 a tutor's story. 

as fixed the gentleman for you, and you can 
have an interview any day before three, at 
Ducrocq's Hotel." 

" Ducrocq's ?" repeated I, rather puzzled ; 
for I knew the hotel to be a fashionable one, 
chiefly patronised by foreign visitors to Lon- 
don, whose rank or fortune made them shrink 
from Leicester Square. 

" Yes ; the party is a foreign party. Rich, 
I believe. He's a raarkis, and he wants a 
tutor for his only son. Salary's the only 
thing, Mr. Kirby, I can't tell you about ; but 
I'll go to the hotel and introduce you to- 
morrow, if you like." 

Mr. Hudson's information was accurate. 
The French gentleman in want of an in- 
structor for his only son was really the Mar- 
quis de Vauxmesnil, a rich landed proprietor 
in one of the central departments. The salary 
he offered was one which, had salary been 
my chief object, I should have owned to be 
liberal. The manner in which his tutor was 

to be treated at his ch&teau was kind and 

* 

handsome. I might have my own suite of 
rooms, M. de Vauxmesnil said, and dine alone 
or with the family exactly as I pleased. If I 



a tutor's story. 221 

cared about riding, a horse should be at my 
disposal. My time out of school-hours, was 
my own. So far, so good, and indeed I had 
never dreamed of such privileges ; but there 
were some things which puzzled me. The 
marquis was perfectly polite, and yet I was 
rather repelled than attracted by his courtesy. 
He was a tall and handsome man, in spite of 
his dyed hair ; but there was a curl in his lip 
when he spoke, more like a sneer than a smile, 
and his voice had an imperious accent, as of 
one who had pampered his pride until it was 
a passion. There were traces of other pas- 
sions, in the crow's feet and wrinkles about 
his keen dark eyes and firm mouth, and his 
complexion was so pale as to be colourless. 
Why had he come to England in search of a 
tutor? Why apply to an agency? Why, 
indeed, did he want a tutor at all, if his son 
were, as he told me, hardly eight years old : 
an age at which boys are generally left under 
female superintendence ? 

I am unskilful, I know, in hiding my 
thoughts. The marquis read them with ease. 

" My dear sir," he said, taking snuff from 
a little gold box, which he handled with all 



222 a tutor's story. 

the foppish grace of the old regime, "I see 
you are dying to know why I have come for a 
tutor to your foggy capital . excuse me . and 
whether I am what I profess to be, or an 
adventurer masquerading in the title of mar- 
quis. Reassure yourself. I am neither a 
Monte Chris to nor a chevalier of industry. 
As to my wanting to place my child so 
early, under a tutor, that is my affair ; it is 
my idea that education cannot begin too soon. 
As for my preference for an Englishman, it is 
briefly this . I cannot easily find a French- 
man of learning who is not imbued with 
horrible revolutionary principles, unless I take 
an ecclesiastic, to which course I also object. 
Therefore, I choose an Englishman, and pre- 
fer that he should teach my child your bar- 
barous pronunciation of Latin . pardon me . 
than that Henri should learn to lisp the cant 
of the Jacobins." 

All this, of course, was said in French, 
which I fortunately happened to be pretty 
conversant with; but it was an unknown 
tongue to Mr. Hudson, the agent. The mar- 
quis, however, found English words enough 
to inform my introducer that the result of the 



a tutor's story. 223 

interview was satisfactory, and he begged me 
to favour him by leaving my testimonials with 
him for a day or two, until his final answer 
should be given. For my part, I was referred 
to a member of the French embassy for any 
information I might desire respecting the 
position of M. de Vauxmesnil. 

I did apply in the quarter indicated, and all 
the statements of the marquis were fully con- 
firmed : with the addition that M. de Vaux- 
mesnil had been a peer of France under the 
Orleans reign, and enjoyed the post of senator 
under the existing government. 

"Ma foil a superior man," added the 
young attache, with one of those shrugs that 
say so much ; " a man eminent in every sense 
of the word, but not of our century. There 
is no love lost between the government and 
M. de Vauxmesnil." 

The political squabbles of France were no 
concern of mine, and I gladly closed with the 
liberal proposals of the marquis. During the 
journey to his country seat, which was on the 
banks of the Rhone, a short distance below 
Lyons, I had ample opportunity for esti- 
mating the character of my employer. He 



224 a tutor's stort. 

was a man who bad had the irreparable mis- 
fortune to be born some hundred years too 
late, for his -sympathies and tastes were 
wholly absorbed in a bygone state of things, 
and his life had been spent in useless strug- 
gles to put back the hands of the clock of 
time. He was not precisely a bad man, but 
he contrived to do more harm and to provoke 
more antipathies than many who were worse 
than himself. He treated me well and civilly, 
but I could see that in his ideas there was a 
great gulf between us, never to be bridged, 
and that a Brahmin could as easily believe a 
Sudra his equal, as the Marquis da Vaip- 
mesnil could regard Edwin Kirby in that 
light. Once or twice I had my doubts whe- 
ther I were doing wisely in burying myself in 
a lonely chateau in a foreign country; in 
turning my back, so to speak, on the nine- 
teenth century, and becoming the stipendiary 
of an obstinate grand seigneur. But my 
prospects in England had beeu dark enough, 
and I had little choice. 

"Welcome, M. Kirby," said the marquis, 
at last ; " welcome to Rochaigue I" 

The train had just come jarringly to a halt 



a tutor's story. 225 

at a small station. On the right hand, 
foamed the Rhone; on the left, shot up a 
sharp and jagged rock, rising to a point like 
the spire of a Gothic cathedral; and on a 
platform of this rock stood the castle . a very 
imposing structure, especially at a first glance. 
The village, with its grey stone houses and 
avenue of walnut-trees, nestled below; and 
the well-wooded and broken country on one 
bank, and the green meadows on the other, 
made up a pleasant prospect. 

We quitted the train, and reclaimed our 
luggage. A carriage was waiting : not, as I 
had half expected, a coach and six, with 
triple file of powdered lacqueys : but one of 
those roomy shapeless vehicles, fitted with a 
light roof, and drawn by two long-tailed La 
Perche nags, commonly used by rich residents 
in the south. The coachman, in laced coat 
and flat cap, clambered on to a little pyramid 
of our portmanteaus and hat-boxes ; the mar- 
quis's valet, who had been with him to Eng- 
land, climbed up beside him, and sat more 
comfortably on the box; the whip cracked, 
and we set off at a round trot. As we passed 
through the village many hats and caps flew 

VOL. i. q 



226 a tutor's story. 

off in honour of the rich proprietor, but I saw 
few or no smiles of genuine welcome. M. 
de Vauxmesnil returned all these salutes 
affably. 

"I am bon prince/' he said, with one of 
his faint smiles. " So long as no idea-mon- 
gers come between us, my tenants and I get 
on reasonably well. What do you think of 
Rochaigue ?" 

" Splendid 1" was my involuntary exclama- 
tion. Indeed, from the point to which we 
had attained in our winding ascent, the old 
castle looked grand and majestic. On a 
nearer approach I could see that much of this 
splendour faded into nothing. Great part of 
the building was in ruins . a mere shell ; the 
towers were broken, the walls breached, and 
the white modern house that clung to the 
shattered pile appeared smaller than it really 
was by contrast with its neighbour. 

The marquis smiled bitterly as he observed 
my look of unconscious disappointment. 

"Yes," said he, "Rochaigue has seen its 
best days, like its master. Yonder, where 
you see the burnt beams, stood the gallery 
where the king . pshaw ! what do you care 



a tutor's story, 227 

for such old-world memories, monsieur? I 
dare say you would rather see a good dinner, 
now, than all the ruins on earth. So should 
I have thought, at your age. We are 
arrived." 

My life at the chateau was somewhat mono- 
tonous, but decidedly not an unhappy one. 
The marquise, with the little boy, my pupil, 
and a sister of M. de Vauxmesnil, a quiet 
prim person, made up the family circle. 
Madame de Vauxmesnil was much younger 
than her husband . a pale gentle woman, with 
fair hair and kind grey eyes that had some- 
thing mournful and timid in them. Very 
likely the match between those two had been 
made up, as French marriages often are, by 
busy relatives, and without much regard for 
the wishes and inclinations of poor Made- 
moiselle Louise. She was very obedient and 
subdued, not over cheerful, seldom well. The 
child, on the other hand, was really a noble 
little fellow, with chesnut hair curling in 
heavy natural rings, a clear healthy red and 
white complexion, and the frankest blue eyes 
in the world. A fine little fellow, with good 
abilities, so far as I could judge, and giving 

Q2 



228 A TUTORS STORY. 

promise of a high spirit and a sweet temper 
. rare but enviable combination. It is not 
surprising that the little Henri . his father's 
christian names were Gaston Pierre Louis 
Armand Henri, after the fashion of the Fau- 
bourg St. Germain . was the idol of his 
parents, and that he stood as fair a chance of 
being spoiled as ever boy did. 

There are some natures, however, which 
even flattery and indulgence seem unable to 
corrupt, and such was that of my little pupil 
the tiny viscount, as he had been called while 
still in the cradle : the eldest son of the Mar- 
quis de Vauxmesnil possessing that rank. His 
father wished his education to be conducted 
on as nearly as possible the system that had 
been in vogue before the Revolution. He did 
not, to be sure, insist upon my teaching the 
young heir the history of his native land 
through the medium of that veracious chro- 
nicle of the Abb Labeille, much esteemed in 
clerical schools, and which represents Auster- 
litz and Marengo as victories gained by a 
certain Marquis de Bonaparte, " general of the 
armies of the king/' The scholastic works 
whose use were enjoined upon me were not 



a tutor's story. 229 

such transparent traps for blindfolding the 
intellect. But they had been carefully se- 
lected, and were from the pens of men who 
viewed the progress of our dge with fear and 
dislike, and who availed themselves of modern 
discoveries to hamper and embarrass the march* 
of public opinion. The object of M. de Vaux- 
mesnil was no secret. 

" A gentleman," he used to say, " should 
not be ignorant of what is known to all the 
canaille of the cities. For my own part, I 
value your wonderful nineteenth century and 
its boasts, your steam, gas, and electricity, at 
less than a pinch of snuff. But Henri must 
not grow up unacquainted with all these mate- 
rial phenomena which it is the trick of the 
time to praise and to study. I was a page to 
Louis the Eighteenth, and we had something 
else to talk of then, than your science and 
your improvements. Gentlemen were gentle- 
men, in those days, my good M. Kirby." 

Fortunately for me, the marquis had a high 
appreciation of the classics. The study of 
Horace and Cicero was to his taste, and had 
been sanctioned by the approval of the Grand 
Monarque, and he therefore encouraged his 



30 A TUTOR'S 8TORT. 

youthful sou to devote much time to the dead 
languages. I say fortunately for me, because 
in helping little Henri through the Latin 
grammar, my way was clear before me, and I 
had none of the perplexities which beset me 
Vhen natural science and history were under 
discussion. Then, indeed, my pupil often 
puzzled me by asking questions which it was 
hardly possible to answer in accordance at 
once with truth and with his parent's wishes. 
Children, when even moderately intelligent, 
have a restless curiosity and a talent for cross- 
examination, worthy of a procureur imperial ; 
and Henri frequently perplexed me by pointed 
inquiries which it was scarcely within my 
power to answer or evade. The boy's nature 
was singularly frank and noble ; there was a 
true chivalry in it, of which his father's dis- 
position, with all its superficial gloss and 
glitter, possessed little or nothing. I felt 
assured that Henri de Vauxmesnil had only 
to know what was right, to act on that know- 
ledge, without reference to sacrifice of self or 
prejudices. And I often thought with appre- 
hension of the day when the young heir, 
arrived at man's estate, would find himself 



a tutor's story. 231 

radically at variance with his father on some 
social or political question. 

For, it was impossible that Henri should be 
always content to look at the broad noonday 
world through a pair of mediae vally- tinted 
spectacles. Anything might open his eyes, 
any accident might reveal to him the actual 
condition of Europe, and enlist his sympathies 
on the side most opposed to the stubborn pre- 
judices of his parent. As for myself, my 
position sometimes caused me considerable 
uneasiness. My own opinions were those 
which I shared with the majority of my 
countrymen, of whatever class, and were natu- 
rally heterodox in the eyes of my employer. 
It would have been a gross breach of duty had 
I imparted to my , young charge, facts and 
theories which his father abhorred ; but, on the 
other hand, ray conscience did not permit me 
to paint things in false colours . to blacken 
white, or whiten black, I tried to be neutral, 
to act a purely negative part, and for some 
time I succeeded tolerably well, but the 
effort was far from agreeable. Meanwhile, 
my little pupil became fond of his English 
tutor, and I had no cause to complain of 



232 A TUTOR'S 8TOHT. 

want of kindness from any member of the 
household. 

The Marquise de Vauxmesnil had not, I 
fancy, been consulted as to my engagement. 
She was always gentle and polite, but I ima- 
gined that she objected to me as a foreigner 
and a Protestant: while her husband more 
than once hinted that her desire had been that 
little Henri's education should be conducted 
by a priest. 

"But that," said the marquis, in his 
sprightly way, "was out of the question. 
Certainly the Church is to be supported, but 
it would bore me frightfully to have a 
calotin under my roof, though my wife, poor 
dear creature, believes that every soutane 
covers an angel. No ! I do not wish the boy 
to grow up awkward and silly, with a spice of 
cunning mixed with much ignorance. I am 
of the counsel of M. de Voltaire, himself a 
pupil of the Jesuits." 

That was true. The marquis was an odd 
mixture of the eighteenth-century philosopher, 
and the political partisan of the Church. His 
speeches in the senate were bitter and violent, 
full of ultramontane feeling and spleen, but he 



a tutor's story. 233 

made no pretence of being devout or even 
reverent when out of the tribune. He was an 
active opponent of the existing government; 
was often in Paris, where he used his whole 
influence for the Legitimist party ; was con- 
stantly in correspondence with the exiled 
Bourbons, and always busy in weaving some 
cobweb conspiracy to annoy, if he could 
not overturn, the actual authorities of his 
country. 

Life at the chateau was dull enough. A 
very few great people, who lived a long way 
off, would sometimes drive solemnly along the 
poplar-fringed roads, to dine at Rochaigue, to 
play old-fashioned games at cards, and discuss 
new events by the light of old politics. But 
there were not many persons left in the depart- 
ment who were considered worthy the honour 
of admission to the formal saloons of the 
Vauxmesnil family. Titled names, indeed, 
abounded in the province, but some fatal flaw 
attached itself to most of them. Such and 
such a count was ineligible, as a Bdnapartist 
son, or grandson of one of Napoleon's rough 
soldiers of fortune; this baron was an Or- 
leanist; that baron was a flatterer of the 



234 a tutor's story. 

imperial master of the Tuileries; while the 
rest were hobereaux or French squireens, or 
were descended from pitiful farmers of the 
revenue, dishonest stewards, or wily notaries 
of the old regime. So, except the old Prince 
de Pontanec, the Duke and Duchess of Rohan- 
Bournon, and four or five other families whose 
nobility was as ancient as that of the 
Vauxmesnils, hardly any visitors crossed the 
threshold. 

I was fond of sitting with ray volume or my 
sketch-book, on the summit of the ruined 
keep, which commanded a splendid view. 
The elevation was considerable ; the air, even 
in sultry weather, was generally, at that 
height, refreshed by a breeze; and it was 
pleasant to look down over the broad country, 
the distant mountains, and the wide river 
specked with barge and steam-boat. I was 
there, one day, with my drawing apparatus 
before me, and little Henri by my side, and 
the marquis was walking slowly to and fro on 
the terrace beneath . a favourite promenade of 
his. conning some speech which he intended 
to "fulminate" in the senate. The day was 
a peculiarly fine and bright one, with a brisk 



a tutor's story. 235 

breeze stirring, and through the clear air the 
mountains looked nearer than usual, and 
showed new tints and fantastic forms of pre- 
cipice and glen. I worked vigorously at ray 
sketch, and the child looked on with his great 
solemn eyes. He was in an inquisitive mood 
that day. 

" Mr. Kirby," said the little fellow, "whom 
do those meadows belong to? There where 
the cows are grazing, below the vineyards ?" 

I told him. to his papa, but was rather sur- 
prised when he rejoined : 

" But the country yonder, across the river, 
towards those hills you are drawing, does not 
belong to papa, does it ?" 

I answered in the negative. 

" And yet it did." 

"How do you know that, Henri ?" I asked. 
I was surprised at the boy's knowledge. My 
own had been gained from the accidental study 
of an old map of the estate, in which the con- 
fiscated possessions of the family had been 
carefully scored off with red ink. I was 
aware that the lands remaining to the marquis 
were but a fourth of the great property owned 
by his forefathers, but I had been careful not 



236 a tutor's story. 

to arouse feelings of discontent in the child's 
innocent mind by any hints on the subject. 

" Old Pierre, the gardener, told me," said 
the boy, looking forth into the distance. 
" Those were the revolutionists that took the 
lands away ; the same who burnt the gallery 
and the chapel here, and made the castle so 
ruinous. Why did they do so, monsieur? 
Were they not very wicked men ?" 

It was an awkward question. How was I 
to explain to this child that feudal tyranny 
and court vice had brought about a dire retri- 
bution ? How was I to tell him that there 
were faults . black and bitter faults . on both 
sides, and that the guiltless had suffered for 
the guilty ? 

But before I could frame a discreet answer, 
an eldritch laugh, harsh $s the cry of the 
screech-owl, broke upon our ears, and made 
us both start. I looked hastily round, and so 
did Henri, for the sound seemed to proceed 
from among the ruins. To my surprise I 
caught sight of what seemed to be a human 
form ; but so small and fantastically arrayed 
as to resemble a huge ape rather than a 
woman. Yet a woman it was, dwarfish, 



a tutor's story. 237 

bowed, and draped in a short red cape, 
blotched by stains of rough weather, and 
over which her long grey hair hung in tangled 
masses. A woman with a face hideous and 
wrinkled enough to have looked upon the 
wickedness and woe of a hundred years, 
but with bright malignant eyes in whose 
sparkle there was none of the bleared dimness 
peculiar to extreme age. 

" I know her. I have seen her before . 
the Cape Rouge !" cried the child. Mean- 
while, the old hag mopped and mowed, and 
shook her skinny finger at us, and mumbled 
out a cackling laugh. 

" She is crazed, of course, poor creature," 
said I. Though I spoke in English, and to 
myself, the old woman guessed my meaning, 
for her moans instantly changed into a shrill 
laugh. 

" Ah ! ah ! Mon beau monsieur, you think 
so too, do you P" were the words that reached 
me. "Wait and see; wait and see. And 
you, pretty child, does the curse weigh on 
you, my ?" Here the lunatic, or what- 
ever, she was, ceased abruptly, and vanished 
so noiselessly and quickly among the ruins, 



238 a tutor's stort. 

that it almost seemed as if she bad melted 
into air. 

Next moment the stately step of the 
marquis was heard ascending the stone steps. 
I have no doubt the old crone's ears had 
caught the sound some seconds before I did, 
and that the approach of the lord of the 
castle had cut short her warning or her 
malediction. 

"The owls are noisy to-day/' said the 
marquis, taking snuff from his precious little 
bijou of a box. 

The owls ! Doubtless M. de Vauxmesnil 
had heard that strange cry without dis- 
tinguishing that it came from human lips, 
nor did either the little boy or myself breathe 
a word regarding the weird figure in the 
stained red mantle. 

I took an early opportunity of asking 
Pierre, the old gardener, the meaning of the 
apparition. The old man seemed rather 
disturbed by my question, for he leant 
heavily on his spade, and devoutly crossed 
himself, as he said, " Holy St. Catherine! 
Has she been here again. That bodes bad 
luck/' 



a tutor's story. 239 

"But who is she?" I asked, a little im- 
patiently. 

" Not know the Cape Rouge ! Ah, pardon ! 
I forgot monsieur's quality of foreigner. Well, 
sir, they call her Red Cape because of the 
mantle she wears, but her true name is the 
Mfere Chardon . Marie Chardon . and she 
lives in a little hut among the stones by the 
river, all alone. As for her age, who can tell 
it ? I have heard my father say that when he 
was young the Cape Rouge always looked as 
old, and as wrinkled, and as grey as to-day. 
But, one thing is sure, her presence bodes no 
good." 

With some difficulty I elicited from the 
gardener that this old crone was believed to 
have been an eye-witness of the Revolution, 
and a sharer in its wild frenzy. She was re- 
ported to have joined in the dance of the 
Carmagnole around the scaffold at Lyons, 
when the dismal guillotine was plied in 
the suburb of the Croix Rousse, until the knife 
was notched and blunted, and the headsmen's 
arms were weary with hauling at cord and 
pulley, and the yelling mob had grown 
hoarse. She was mixed up, traditionally, 



240 a tutor's story. 

with the attack and conflagration of the 
Chateau de Rochaigue, and there were vague 
rumours of some great wrong that had been 
done to her or hers by a former seigneur 
of the castle, and which had been thus 
avenged. 

" Certain it is, sir, that though the Cape 
Rouge hates all the noblesse, she hates our 
master and his family worst of all, and never 
speaks of the Vauxmesnils but with a curse. 
She has seldom appeared here, and never but 
as the precursor of sorrow, the saints be with 
us !" 

I tried to laugh the old man out of his 
superstitious apprehensions, but in vain. He 
shook his head, and overwhelmed me with 
melancholy facts gathered from the store- 
house of his memory. The Cape Rouge had 
appeared just one week before the younger 
sister of the marquis had sickened of a fever 
which carried her off on the very day fixed for 
the wedding. On the morning of the day 
when M. de Vauxmesnil's uncle, from whom 
he had inherited the title and property, was 
shot in a duel at Paris, the fatal red cape had 
fluttered among the ruins. And, again, when 



a tutor's story. 241 

the great process was lost, by which the mar- 
quis failed to re-establish his fallen fortunes, 
and when the political earthquake happened 
which deprived the Vauxmesnils of place and 
power, the same evil-omened visitor had 
haunted the chateau. 

That Pierre Ducosse, gardener, and ex- 
corporal in the Garde Royale of Charles the 
Tenth, should believe in the supernatural 
powers and malignity of the Mere Chardon, 
was not wonderful; but I was surprised to 
find that the priest of the village in some 
degree shared his opinions. This priest, M. 
Tonot, came often to the chateau, and was 
always welcomed, though less in his spiritual 
capacity than as a healer of bodily ailments. 
,It is not unusual for a cur6, especially in 
remote and poor places, to possess a smatter- 
ing of medicine; and as the parish did not 
boast a doctor, M. Tonot's simple lore was in 
frequent request. There was a surgeon in a 
neighbouring commune, to be sure, and good 
medical attendance was of course procurable 
from Lyons; but the marquis had an odd 
antipathy to doctors . the u trumpeters of 
revolution," he styled them . and so the cure 

VOL. I. R 



242 a tutor's story. 

had to prescribe alike for the feeble health of 
the marquise and for the infantine ailments of 
the young heir. I liked M. Tonot very well. 
He was a tall stout portly man, with a whole- 
some florid face, and honest common-place 
mind, and a deep quiet sense of duty. The 
poor were fond of M. Tonot, so were the 
children and dogs of the village, and Madame 
de Vauxmesnil always had a smile of welcome 
for him. But the marquis, who was kind to 
the priest in his way, mixed a good deal of 
contempt with his regard. Indeed, such an 
ecclesiastic as M. Tonot was hardly adapted 
to please M. de Vauxmesnil. He was neither 
ambitious nor witty, neither a cynical jesting 
sprightly abb, with poetry and the classics 
at his finger ends, nor a dark-browed ultra- 
montane, cork-screwing his way to notoriety 
and a bishopric. 

" Eh ! You have seen her then, the unfor- 
tunate! Poor soul, she has suffered in her 
time, I fear, and no wonder that her temper 
is soured," said M. Tonot, when I questioned 
him on the subject of the Cape Rouge. " It 
is wonderful, monsieur, how accurately some 
of her predictions have turned out, sinister as 



a tutor's story. 243 

they always are . for she bears no love to the 
family at the chateau." 

The priest could tell me little more. Even 
Mary Chardon'p age was unknown, the church 
registers having been burned at the Revolu- 
tion. How she lived was doubtful, but it was 
known that she derived some support from 
the fears or from the pity of the peasants, 
though she never begged. She was no sham 
sorceress, such as are common in the French 
provinces, telling fortunes for a silver fee, and 
vending charms against mildew and blight, 
murrain and oidium. She had no living 
relatives, and none knew the cause of her 
vindictive spite towards the Vauxmesnils, 
though the old crone had been heard to 
mutter, "Blood for blood, tears for tears, 
sorrow for shame 1" 

" Old stories, monsieur ; tales before the 
Flood," said M. Tonot, with a shrug ; " but 
it is surprising how keen the old woman's 
scent is for any misfortune about to overtake 
the Vauxmesnils. You smile, monsieur. You 
are an esprit fort, I see : all you English are." 

Time went on, and nothing occurred to 
justify these remarks. The weird figure was 

r 2 



244 a tutor's story. 

never seen again among the ruins during my 
residence at the chateau, and I began to 
forget it. M. de Vauxmesnil, though com- 
paratively a poor nobleman, was owner of a 
good deal of property, which might have been 
worth much more had it been sensibly 
managed. On this head, however, his pre- 
judices interposed. The m&airie system was 
that which had suited his ancestors, and to 
this system he obstinately adhered, at a con- 
siderable loss of rental. The agriculture of 
his estates was singularly backward, progress 
made no way there, and new-fangled machines 
and modern breeds of cattle were discouraged. 
When the prefect of the department publicly 
congratulated the notables on the improve- 
ments that yearly took place, he could not 
deny himself the pleasure of a civil sneer at 
the ponderous ploughs, the ill-drained fields, 
and the gaunt coarse-woolled sheep on the 
Vauxmesnil property. But this censure on 
the part of a Bonapartist functionary was 
enough to confirm the marquis in his anti- 
quated habits, and he politely derided all that 
I could hint on the subject. 

In one matter the fancies of the marquis 



a tutor's story. 245 

and his farmers went hand in hand ; and this 
was the wholesale slaughter of small birds. 
The French tiller of the soil has a deep pre- 
judice on this score ; small birds, says Jacques 
Bonhomme, eat wheat, and peck grapes and 
cherries : so death to them ! And birds grew 
scarcer and scarcer throughout the province. 
But matters were brought to a climax, indeed, 
when a remonstrance was sent down from the 
ministry in Paris, with orders that the priuted 
document should be affixed to the door of 
every mairie and chapel, and that the destruc- 
tion of birds should be stayed. I read the 
paper, which was terse and good, and pointed 
out very forcibly what an important link in 
the chain of nature would be missing were 
the feathered tribes swept away from earth. 
The farmer was warned that in murdering 
birds he was fostering noxious insects; he 
was reminded that a few ears of corn, and a 
little fruit, were but a small makeweight to 
ricks burrowed by the weevil, and fields black 
with the fly; and that the tiny destroyers 
would harm his crops a thousand-fold more 
than ever the poor tomtits and chaffinches 
had done. 



246 a tutor's sTORr. 

There were those who had the sense to 
listen to this well-timed appeal. There were 
more who gaped incredulously at the statistics, 
and let the nest-robbing and sparrow battues 
go on. But to the marquis such a piece of 
advice was gall and wormwood. He change 
his practices at the bidding of an usurping 
government ! He receive good counsel at the 
hands of an imperialist minister of agricul- 
ture ! He assembled his tenants, harangued 
them in a speech that came very close to 
sedition, and set himself to thwart the wise 
and kind designs of the authorities, with all 
the short-sighted malevolence of an ill-tem- 
pered child. 

Such a massacre of birds as then took placr 
the country had never known. The songs . 
the grove and meadow were silenced. R- 
wards were offered for the heads of lark at 
robin, thrush and wren, anything with b( 
and feathers. Gangs of birds'-nesters prov* 
through the woods, guns popped inglorio* 
all day long among vines and hedger* 
poisoned grain was thickly strewn about, i 
hundreds and thousands of dead birds 
stiff and stark on the inhospitable soil. 



a tutor's story. 247 

The usual consequences of such suicidal 
folly succeeded. There was a Nemesis of 
insect life, in the second year of my stay, 
which made the most obstinate farmer stare 
aghast at the countless legions burrowing, 
creeping, or winging their way to blight his 
hopes of profit. Grubs, caterpillars, flies, 
weevils, everything that crawls or flies, that 
bores the root or gnaws the bursting corn-ear, 
or cankers the blossom, or hollows out the 
fruit, everything that tunnels the bark or 
harms the wood of trees, everything that 
haunts the barn or the store, seemed gathered 
in hosts undreamed of. There were no birds 
to thin off the plunderers. Those faithful 
allies had been stupidly butchered. Their 
sharp-sighted little eyes and active bills would 
have done, for scanty wage, a hundred tihies 
more to stem the plague than all the hired 
.labourers could do, with all their work of 
crushing and quick-liming, sulphuring and 
smoking. What with loss to grain, trees, and 
fruit, what with the cost of keeping down 
the pest by human agency, every cultivator 
suffered heavily, and the marquis found his 
income and his popularity waning together. 



248 a tutor's story. 

For, people began to regret the birds, and to 
blame the noble adviser who had urged their 
extermination. But the marquis was a dogged 
personage ; he would not own himself in the 
wrong ; he hired more and more men to dress 
the trees of his orchards, and he tried to 
make clumsy human fingers and toes do the 
work of the tomtit and the swallow. 

On one sad afternoon in early autumn, 
while they were gathering the wreck of the 
fruit crop, little Henri begged for a walk in 
the woods. It was a dark hot lowering day ; 
the air was heavy and dull ; and the great 
masses of copper-coloured cloud that hung 
lazily in the deep blue sky, had a lurid tinge 
that threatened storm. All nature seemed 
oppressed beneath the menace of the gather- 
ing tempest, and the hum of the insects 
sounded sullen among the shrubs of the 
garden. I declined to accompany my young 
charge so far as the woods, but suggested as 
a compromise that we should repair to a 
certain hill-side orchard, where I knew the 
fruit was to be gathered that day. Thither 
we bent our steps, and, seating ourselves on a 
mossy bank close to the edge of the forest, 



a tutor's story. 249 

which in that place bordered the cultured 
land, we watched the workers. It was a 
busy scene. Crowds of peasants: the men 
in blouse and striped nightcap ; the women 
with broad hats of coarse yellow straw, 
crimson kirtles, and sabots of black wood : 
were swarming round the trees, filling baskets 
with red-cheeked apples and violet or yellow 
plums. But the fair promise of many a tree 
proved hollow and fallacious, the caterpillar 
and grub had been beforehand with the 
gleaners, and the men were more busy in 
killing insects than in piling fruit. 

I took a book out of my pocket and began 
to read, giving Henri permission to join one 
of the groups of apple-pickers, in which old 
Pierre and his daughter, the blanchisseuse of 
the ch&teau, were employed. Presently I 
sauntered down to join the party, and found 
Henri, rosy with exercise, clambering into 
the upper branches of a gnarled old tree, the 
trunk of which he had scaled by help of a 
ladder. 

" Hola, cher enfant !" I exclaimed, in some 
trepidation ; " have a care, or you will tumble 
and hurt yourself." 



250 a tutor's story. 

" No fear, Mr. Kirby," cried the laughing 
child. " See those apples up above ! I will 
pick them." And he pointed to a cluster of 
fine fruit on a lofty bough, while the ser- 
vants clapped their hands, and applauded 
the courage of young " Monsieur le 
Vicomte. ,, 

Plump ! A great ugly caterpillar, dis- 
lodged by the boy's shaking the tree, fell 
upon my foot, and then another, and then 
another, a perfect shower of caterpillars. I 
picked one of them up. It seemed to be of 
a new species, and as I had commenced, in a 
humble way, the study of entomology, I placed 
it in a tin box to carry home. The peasants 
were less critical. 

"Ah, the wicked beasts!" they cried; 
11 it is they that spoil the apple-crop. Peste ! 
.here must be a regular nest of them aloft. 
Shake them down, please, M. Henri, and 
we'll stop their pillaging." 

The little viscount shook the bough lustily, 
and the insects fell in swarms, many of them 
dropping on his upturned face and bare 
neck ; he brushed them off with a cry of dis- 
like, but more fell next moment. The 



a tutor's story. 251 

peasants, with their wooden shoes, soon 
crushed the fallen brood. A growl of thun- 
der was heard afar off. I called to the child 
to come down, but it was not until he had 
gathered two of the apples that he would 
obey. When he descended he was flushed 
and trembling. 

"Tiens, M. Kirby," said he, "can cater- 
pillars sting ? I feel as if I had fallen among 
the nettles, as I did last year. My neck 
smarts, and so do my hands, and oh, how my 
face burns !" 

To my surprise I found the child's face and 
neck covered with dull red blotches, while his 
little hands were hot and dry, and he trem- 
bled like a leaf. 

"My poor Henri, we must go home at 
once," said I, getting alarmed, while the 
quick natures of those around us broke ou^ 
into loud exclamations. 

The sky darkened fast, and a bright flash 
of lightning gleamed across the horizon, 
followed by the deep roll of advancing thun- 
der. The poor little boy was in much pain ; 
he put his weak little hand to his head and 
moaned as he lay in ray arms. He was get- 



252 a tutor's story. 

ting delirious, or at least stupified with the 
rapid progress of fever. 

" Quick !" I exclaimed. " Pierre, help me 
to carry M. Henri home. The doctor must 
be fetched at once." 

A laugh, as harsh as the croak of a raven, 
followed my words, and something red came 
rustling and glancing through the bushes of 
th.e nearest thicket. 

" The Cape Rouge ! The Mere Chardon !" 
cried the peasants, huddling together. Sure 
enough, the goblin face and dwarfish figure of 
the malignant hag, in her frouzy red cape, 
and leaning on her crutch, hobbled out from 
the screen of embrowned leaves. Her grey 
hair fluttered loose, and her eyes sparkled 
with hate and cunning. She lifted her 
crutch as if it had been the wand of a 
<wicked fairy, and cried, in an ear-piercing 
voice : 

" Ah ! evil race of the Vauxmesnils ! Brood 
of vipers with gilded skin ! The curse works, 
does it? You who oppress and scorn the 
poor: you who robbed me of home and hope : 
you on whose heads lie my son's blood and 
my daughter's shame : you who even murder 




a tutor's story. 253 

the little birds of the forest, blight and wither, 
old and young, till none of ye be left." 

Through the storm and through the rain 
and the hoarse roar of the tempest, Pierre and 
I hastily carried the helpless child home. As 
I looked half timidly back amid the gathering 
blackness and the fitful glare of the forked 
flashes^ I could still see the figure in the red 
cape, with streaming grey hair and upraised 
staff", screaming out unheard curses in the very 
rush of the tempest. I have seldom seen so 
painful a sight as the chateau presented, when 
the child was laid on his little bed. The sor- 
row of the mother was passionate and unre- 
strained, but I think it was still more dis- 
tressing to mark the anguish of the stern 
proud father, callous to all the world besides. 
M. Tonot was sent for and came in haste, but 
could do nothing. * 

" If you will take my advice, M. le Mar- 
quis, you will send to Lyons for advice at 
once, and by telegraph. No ordinary physi- 
cian will be able to deal with such a case. 
Send for Dr. Servans himself." 

The marquis groaned, for the name of 
Servans was associated in the department 



254 a tutor's story. 

with the most advanced principles in politics, 
and there had been something like a personal 
antipathy between the Legitimist noble and 
the Republican doctor. But he meekly 
obeyed, and I myself hurried to send off the 
message. A train left Lyons within the hour, 
and. in a few minutes after its arrival at 
Rochaigiie station, the famous physician stood 
knitting his grey eyebrows by the bedside of 
the dying boy. He had never spoken since 
we brought him in. His eyes were half closed, 
and he did not know any one present : not 
the nurse crying at the foot of the bed , not 
the mother sobbing beside his pillow: not 
the hard and haughty father, never haughty 
or hard to him, who stood by, with unwonted 
tears in his eyes. 

It was piteous to see the imploring eager- 
ness with which the marquis scanned the face 
of his old enemy the doctor, trying to read 
hope there. Dr. Servans saw the pain and 
quivering anxiety written on the ordinarily 
impassive face, and his own shaggy brows 
twitched, and his rough voice was unusually 
gentle, as he asked the necessary questions. 

"Had the child been stung by a snake? 



a tutor's story. 255 

Well, then, had he eaten any berry, or herb, 
in the wood ? WJio was with him when it 
happened P" 

" Mr. Kirby, the English tutor." 

I gave a brief account of what had occurred. 
Dr. Servans saw light amid the darkness. 

"The caterpillar . you say you preserved 
one, monsieur . let me see it !" 

I drew out the tin box, and the doctor pro- 
nounced the insect to be a specimen of the 
rare and poisonous Bombyx processionea, 
whose touch, or even smell, is well known by 
naturalists to produce violent pain, inflamma- 
tion, fever, and death.' 

Why prolong a sad tale ? Tile great physi- 
cian could do nothing. 

Three blouse-clad men then came up, carry- 
ing on a hurdle something that lay still and 
shapeless, something in a tattered Red Cape. 
There was an awe-stricken look on the men's 
worn faces. 

" Struck by lightning, you say ?" cried the 
doctor. "Ah ! I can do nothing here 1 , my 
friends." 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 



"Change carriages, here, gentlemen, on 
account of the Russian frontier. Every one 
descends. Pardon, gnadiger Herr, but you 
must remove your effects, for the visite de 
douane." Thus, the civil Prussian guard of 
the train. 

Out we got accordingly. There were a 
good many passengers, mostly Germans or 
German Jews, somehow connected with the 
trade in corn, feathers, tallow, Riga hemp, 
and Memel timber ; for the station was 
Eydtkuhnen, on the Eastern Railroad. The 
flat-capped porters laid violent hands upon 
the luggage, and we all went through the 
Prussian bureau and across to that over which 
was painted the black eagle of Russia, and 
through the dim glass of whose windows 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 257 

appeared the green uniforms and glistening 
pewter medals of the Russian frontier guard. 
For myself, I felt slightly nervous, as an 
Englishman often does when he first enters 
the Czar's dominions, and when all the stories 
he has ever heard of prison, knout, and 
Siberia, come crowding on his mind. But 
I put a good face upon it, and walked into the 
custom-house along with the rest, carrying my 
railway rugs over one arm, and in the other 
hand the small but weighty portmanteau 
which I had received especial instructions 
never to trust out of my sight. 

This was my first northern journey, and it 
was undertaken chiefly, though not entirely, 
on account of business. I was not, strictly 
speaking, a business man, being, in fact, a 
sleeping partner in the old established house 
of Hutchmere, Lowndes, and Co., bankers, of 
Lothbury, London, E.C. Old Mr. Hutch- 
mere and a deceased uncle of mine had been 
first-cousins, and the latter had bequeathed to 
me the small interest he possessed in the firm. 
The share of the profits thus accruing to me 
was enough to defray my expenses during 
the years 1 had spent in qualifying myself for 

vol. i. s 



258 ONLY ONE BOOM. 

practice at the bar, and in waiting till the 
attorneys should find me out. They had not 
found me out yet, and I had plenty of spare 
time. This circumstance probably induced 
my senior partners to fix their eyes upon me, 
when a trustworthy messenger was required 
to convey a large sum of money to a corre- 
spondent in Russia. 

As Mr. Lowndes, who managed most of 
the affairs of the house since Mr. Hutchmere 
had grown so very old and frail, confidentially 
informed me, we had long been on terms of 
business intimacy with one of the oldest and 
most respected of the English firms in St 
Petersburg ; that of Druce, Gray, and Druce, 
in the tallow trade, whose signature was 
known and honoured on every exchange in 
Europe. But Druce, Gray, and Druce, who 
were truly reported to have amassed great 
wealth in forty years' experience of the gainful 
Russian traffic, had imprudently invested in 
other securities than tallow. They had lent 
great sums to the half-ruined Russian nobility, 
sums duly secured on mortgage of their 
estates; but the estates were now of little 
more than nominal value, since the proprietors 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 259 

had neither serfs nor tenants, neither rent 
nor obrok. . In consequence of this partial 
collapse of the social system, the St. Peters- 
bnrg firm that I have spoken of, found itself 
sorely straitened, and bankruptcy began to 
threaten the long-prosperous establishment. 
In this emergency, our house was applied to 
for aid, and we agreed to come to the rescue, 
on condition that valuable securities, for the 
realisation of which we could afford to wait, 
should be lodged in our hands. These 
securities were transmitted to London, and 
but one thing remained . to forward the 
money urgently needed. 

This, however, was not easy. Under ordi- 
nary circumstances, a draft on a St. Petersburg 
bank, or a parcel of bills of exchange, would 
have answered the purpose; but not then. 
The credit of a commercial house is as delicate 
a thing as the white coat of the ermine, and 
as easily tarnished ; and Druce, Gray, and 
Druce had stipulated that every conceivable 
precaution should be taken to keep the affair 
a profound secret. They had weightier 
reasons for this mercantile prudery than mere 
pride; they knew too well that while their 

s 2 



260 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

capital was chiefly locked up in mortgages 
upon, the unproductive lands of insolvent 
barons and princes, their sound credit and 
good name could alone keep them afloat, and 
that the lightest whisper might occasion a 
panic among their creditors, and overwhelm 
them. Time, on the other hand, was money ; 
it was more than money, it was salvation. 

" Now, clerks/' observed Mr. Lowndes, as 
we talked the matter over, after dinner, at his 
house at Wimbledon, " clerks are given to 
tattle ; that is, the younger clerks are. The 
cashier is discretion itself, but of course he 
can't be spared, and Mr. Rogers, who is as 
close as wax, cannot be spared either. My 
going is of course out of the question ; too 
many irons in the fire to leave the City for a 
day; so, unless you, my dear Bainbridge, 
will oblige us " 

I was startled, and at first refused to go ; 
but Mr. Lowndes had made a hit in remind- 
ing me of my character of habitual wayfarer 
on the Continent. 

"I have never been to Russia," I said, 
irresolutely. 

" So much the more reason for going now/' 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 261 

returned Lowndes, refilling my glass ; and the 
bargain was speedily clenched. It was agreed 
that I should visit Moscow and Novgorod, as 
well as St. Petersburg, and, in fact, "do" 
Northern Russia in the course of a six weeks' 
visit, without the cost of a shilling to myself. 

Thus it fell out that I found myself on the 
Russo-Prussian frontier on a grey and moist 
afternoon in autumn, bound for St. Petersburg. 

I found the custom-house officials at Eydt- 
kuhnen much less troublesome than I had 
expected. Some of the Jewish passengers, to 
be sure, appeared to undergo an endless 
round of formalities, but in ray case there was 
little to complain of. My passport was per- 
fectly en regie, duly emblazoned with the 
British arms, and stamped with red and black 
eagles in every absurd attitude . to say 
nothing of the Belgian lion thereon imprinted 
at Ostend . I was pleased to escape the worry 
which their own parsimony inflicted on some 
of my more needy or stingy fellow-travellers ; 
for I bribed freely. 

In the first-class carriage of the Rus- 
sian train I had no companion to Kowno ; but 
there, a gentleman got in. He was a well- 



262 ONLY ONE BOOM. 

dressed well-looking man of thirty-five : dark, 
wiry, and active, with lively hazel eyes and 
superb teeth. With him he brought a heap 
of fur coats and pelisses, as well as a port- 
manteau closely resembling that which I kept 
under my feet, and which contained, in gold 
and notes, the large sum to be advanced by 
our house to the firm of Druce, Gray, and 
Druce. The new arrival took off his hat on 
getting into the carriage, according to the 
polite fashion abroad, and, as he settled him- 
self in his seat, eyed me with a quick side- 
long glance that seemed to take my measure 
in a moment. 

We were soon engaged in conversation, 
our talk beginning in French, and gliding 
imperceptibly into English. My new ac- 
quaintance spoke both languages with per- 
fect fluency, and with no perceptibly foreign 
accent. He was very chatty and agreeable, 
full of anecdote and information, and told 
me as much about the country and people 
of the district we were traversing, as if 
his life had been spent in the neighbour- 
hood. I set him down inwardly for a Rus- 
sian nobleman, till by some chance remark 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 263 

he changed the current of my ideas, and he 
afterwards frankly owned that he was a Dutch 
engineer, and named Van Marum. 

I presently gathered from M. Van Marum's 
discourse that he was in the employ, for the 
time being, of the imperial government, and 
was preparing estimates for an extensive 
system of drainage and embankment to be 
carried into effect on the crown estates. I was 
equally communicative : not that I thought it 
prudent to dilate, in conversation with a 
stranger, upon the considerable sum of which 
I was the bearer ; but I mentioned that busi- 
ness of unusual importance had prompted my 
journey, and mentioned the name of the firm 
to which I was accredited. 

" You don't say so, my dear sir," exclaimed 
the Dutchman ; " Druce and Co., of Nevskoi 
Prospekt, and the Admiralty Quay ! In that 
case, permit me to congratulate you in ad- 
vance, upon the brilliant reception that awaits 
you. The hospitality of that great house is 
splendid . sumptuous. Here is Wilna. What 
on earth is the matter ?" 

M. Van Marum might well ask! The 
train had just stopped with a jarring jolt, the 



264 ONLT ONE ROOM. 

brakes were giving out a grating noise, the 
steam-pipe had begun to utter its angry roar 
of impatience, and thump ! thump ! went the 
buffers of the carriages together, as we came 
to an abrupt halt. On our right appeared 
the town of Wilna, with its grey roofs, and 
the domes of the numerous churches sheathed 
in polished metal, bronzed and gilt, or blazing 
with green and vermilion, under the watery 
rays of the setting sun. But we had stopped 
just outside the station, whence came hollow 
and prolonged noises ; the guards ran up and 
down as fast as their lengthy serge coats 
permitted, and the little bell of the telegraph 
gave out its shrill tinkle incessantly. 

" Some accident ?" I said, jumping up to 
look out of the window. I took a long look, 
but could not exactly make out the cause of 
our detention. Something was in the way, 
something that blocked up the rails, but why 
it was not shunted off to make room for our 
progress, I could not conjecture. 

" It looks like a line of bullock-cars," said 
I, resuming my seat. 

My companion thrust his head out of the 
window, saying, " Not so, my dear Monsieur 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 265 

Bainbridge. Those are the carriages that 
soldiers travel in. The government must be 
forwarding troops in haste along the railroad. 
Something must have happened in the 
south/' 

And so it proved. A strong force of troops 
was being sent to the south and west, to 
repress some threatened outbreak among the 
Polish peasants or Russian serfs, and the 
authorities had pressed all the staff and rolling 
stock of the line into their service. The rails 
from Wilna to St. Petersburg were dotted 
with waggon-trains loaded with men, horses, 
stores, and artillery. For forty-eight hours 
there was no hope that the regular passenger 
traffic could go on, and it was compulsory 
that we should stop at Wilna, where the 
guard assured us we should find accommoda- 
tion worthy of even such distinguished per- 
sonages as ourselves. There was no help for 
it. 

"Come along, Mr. Bainbridge/' said my 
new friend ; " I know Wilna well. There is 
but one inn above the rank of tavern, and if 
we do not make haste it will be filled up by 
these Hebrew brokers, whom you now hear 



266 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

jabbering out lamentations in our rear. 
Quick! This way. Those are your trunks? 
I'll see to them for you. Cloak-room, non- 
sense ! Pardon me ; you should never trust 
effects out of your own custody in Russia. 
Here is the drosky of the hotel, which the 
proprietor fondly calls his ' omnibus/ Jump 
in!" 

I congratulated myself, as we jolted along, 
on the good fortune which had procured me 
so potent an ally as my Dutch friend, for I 
began to feel my own helplessness pretty 
strongly. As I looked up at the dim lanterns 
that lighted the fronts of the shops . shops 
adorned with huge gaudy pictures of saints, 
and the inscriptions over whose doors were in 
the Cyrillic character . unintelligible to me . 
I began to experience the sensation of being 
beyond the pale of civilisation. The groups 
lounging about the brandy-shops were talking 
in the Russian language, which has a soft 
sweet sound, but, at the same time, one rather 
melancholy and monotonous. But the cur- 
rent of my ideas soon changed when we 
rattled into the court-yard of a slovenly hotel, 
that appeared principally to consist of stables. 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 267 

Van Marum thundered out a demand for the 
" gospodin," and so peremptory was his voice, 
and so perfect his fluency in the difficult 
Muscovite language, that we soon had the 
landlord, a greasy Russian Jew, cap in hand, 
before us. A long discussion ensued. 

" It is vexatious," said Van Marum. " The 
inn is very full ; some stupid fair has attracted 
brokers and buyers from a distance ; and there 
remains 'only one room/ Come and see 
it." 

Accordingly, preceded by the gospodin, 
upstairs we went, and the landlord, producing 
a key, unlocked and opened the door of a 
large bedroom, decently furnished. The bed 
was supplied with sheets, which, although 
coarse, were almost white, and the curtains, 
floor, and heavy eider quilt, though villanously 
dirty when judged by a Prussian standard, 
were clean for Russia. 

"You will be able to sleep Here?" asked 
the Dutchman, good-naturedly. 

"But you, monsieur?" returned I; "I 
ought not to monopolise all the accommoda- 
tion the house affords, . and, in fact, your 
claim is far better than mine." 



268 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

Van Marum laughingly answered that he 
should do very well. He was, he said, used 
to take the rough and smooth of life as he 
found them, and he could sleep in the salle, 
wrapped in his cloak, as he had done before. 

This, however, I opposed, for I felt shocked 
at the barefaced selfishness of taking up my 
quarters in the only habitable chamber, 
merely because the politeness of my fellow- 
traveller offered it to me. I flatly refused to 
take possession unless my new acquaintance 
could be lodged as well as myself. 

A compromise was at last suggested. 
There was but one bed, but there was a sofa 
in Number Eight. On this sofa a sort of 
impromptu bed was hastily rigged up for my 
companion's use, the luggage was brought 
up-stairs, and we went gaily down to supper. 

I still found my Dutch friend, whom I was 
inclined to like better and better the more I 
saw of him, an invaluable Mentor. He unra- 
velled the mysteries of a Russian bill of fare, 
conjured good wine from the cellar and eatable 
dishes from the kitchen, and altogether the 
repast passed pleasantly off. 

I had not neglected to take proper precau- 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 269 

tions for the safety of the large amount of 
money of which I was custodian. When we 
went down to supper I brought the heavy 
little valise with me, and used it for a foot- 
stool. When I retired to rest, I did not fail 
to place the treasure under my head, beneath 
the feather-bed and bolster, so that it could 
not be removed without my knowledge during 
the night. In acting thus, I did not positively 
anticipate that such vigilance would be need- 
ful. Van Maruin's frank manner would have 
disarmed suspicion, had I been of a distrust- 
ful nature ; but I thought it my duty to keep 
strict watch and ward. 

We slept well : I in the bed of state, with 
its dingy plumeau of crimson silk, its coarse 
sheets, and successive layers of feather- 
stuffing: Van Marum on the sofa, among 
pelisses and rugs. My own repose must 
have been unusually profound, thanks, per- 
haps, to the drowsy properties of a sort of 
sleeping draught which my Dutch friend had 
skilfully compounded with hot wine and 
spices, and which we had imbibed after 
supper . Van Marum having pressed, with 
his usual generosity, the lion's share on me. 



270 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

When I awoke it was broad day, the outer 
door was unlocked, and I was alone. Not a 
trace of my late acquaintance remained. His 
portmanteau was gone, his cloaks were gone, 
and nothing but a couple of pillows and the 
mark of his recumbent form on the dusty 
sofa were visible to prove that he had ever 
shared my apartment. 

Quite alarmed, I sprang out of bed, and, 
lifting the bolster, saw the dark morocco 
leather and brass mountings of my portman- 
teau precisely as I had left them. Not trust- 
ing to appearances, I drew out the precious 
valise, and found, to my great joy, that the 
casket was intact. The excellent Bramah 
lock had not been forced, the hinges were in 
their proper place, all was well. I then 
bethought me of my other effects. My un- 
locked trunk was closed ; I opened it, and saw 
the shirts and coats in regular layers, just as 
I had packed them. My clothes, neatly folded, 
were on the chair where I had placed them ; 
my watch ticked on the table; and in the 
pocket of the coat, which I had hung from a 
nail, I found my purse undisturbed, my 
pocket-book, my passport in its yellow leather 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 271 

case, and other little matters. Not the value 
of a pin's bead had been abstracted, and I, 
who had been disposed to regard myself as a 
dupe, and my fellow-voyager as a rogue, now 
took shame to myself for my unjust and gra- 
tuitous suspicions. Still, where was Van 
Marum ? 

There was no bell, but I hastily dressed, 
opened the door, and bawled in French and 
German for the waiter. The fourth summons 
brought a tow-headed girl with an empty 
pail in her hand, and though she could speak 
nothing but Russian, she presently compre- 
hended me so far as to send the waiter . a 
Jew, like the landlord, and able to converse 
in broken German. 

"I have a note for you, mein Herr, and 
what would you like for breakfast P" said the 
man, unwrapping the dirty napkin which he 
carried as a badge of office, and handing me 
a letter. It was from Van Marum, written in 
French, and very short. My late companion 
informed me that a telegram from head- 
quarters had called him off to Warsaw on 
professional duty, that he regretted the 
abrupt termination of our acquaintance, wished 



272 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

me bon voyage, and had paid the landlord for 
his share of room and supper. The letter 
was signed " Cornelius Van Marum," and by 
its blots and hasty writing showed proofs of 
hurry. 

The landlord, who entered the coffee-room 
while I was seated at my breakfast, told me 
in his execrable German that the " foreign 
lord" had gone off in a hired telega two hours 
before, on the Warsaw road, as fast as four 
good nags could wheel him along, and that 
he had charged him to say "a thousand 
gracious things" to the English excellency on 
the part of M. Van Marum. 

I passed but a dull day at Wilna. To be 
sure, the churches were curious, with their 
amazing pictures and the gaudy robes of the 
high-capped and long-haired priests, but T 
soon found that delicate olfactory organs did 
not agree with close neighbourhood to such a 
swarm of unsavoury fellow-creatures as were 
gathered in these edifices. The town was full . 
of a wild, unshorn crowd of buyers and sellers, 
some in caftans, some in sheepskins, but all 
unkempt, noisy, and more than half tipsy. 

My chief occupation was the paying of 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 273 

constant visits to the railway station, in hopes 
that there might be an end to the interruption 
of the ordinary traffic. But in vain. Troops, 
troops, troops, kept flowing on in an appa- 
rently inexhaustible stream towards the west 
and south. 

Unwilling to spend my whole time in com- 
pany with the treasure I carried, I hit upon 
the expedient of placing the valise in a cup- 
board, which I locked, as well as the door of 
my room, and slipping the keys into an inner 
pocket, felt secure as to the safety of the 
advance so anxiously expected by Druce and 
partners. I dined early, but by no means 
well, since I had now no friend to interpret 
for me, and half the Russian plats on whose 
long-tailed names in the bill of fare I laid my 
finger at random proved unfit for civilised 
consumption. Having finished my bottle of 
hock, which ought to Uave been superlatively 
good at the price of seven roubles, I strolled 
for the fourth time to the station, where I 
had the satisfaction to learn from the good- 
tempered old Dane who presided over the 
telegraph instruments, that there was a lull in 
the bustle of martial preparation, and that by 

VOL. I. T 



274 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

half-past four p.m. of the following day I 
might reckon upon the means of pursuing my 
journey. 

I went back to the hotel in good spirits. 
Scarcely had I crossed the threshold before 
the Hebrew waiter, with his many-stained 
napkin rolled round one of his dingy thumbs, 
bolted out of some secret lair where he had 
been washing glasses and settling plates upon 
a rack. 

" Ach, himmel ! ach, Fader Abraham ! here 
he is again I" cried he. 

" He has come back ?" bawled the landlord, 
with uplifted hands and eyes, emerging from 
his bar parlour. 

" Mein Herr, the police are above stairs," 
whispered the waiter in awe-struck tones. 

Before I could ask an explanation, two 
brawny green-coated gendarmes came clat- 
tering down the dirty wooden staircase, and, 
before I could recover from my surprise, 1 
found myself collared, hustled, pushed up- 
stairs, and thrust into my own apartment, 
which I found full of policemen and other 
functionaries, in and out of uniform. At a 
table sat a lean man in black, pen in hand, 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 275 

writing away as if for his life, and with several 
sheets of official foolscap before him, as well 
as a portly purple-faced individual in uniform, 
and with several medals and crosses glittering 
on his breast. My trunks had been burst open, 
my clothes lay strewed about, and the cup- 
board door, as well as the precious portman- 
teau, had been unscrupulously forced. Some 
of those present were fumbling among my 
shirts, or exploring the pockets of dress- 
waistcoats ; one fellow of intelligent aspect 
had made free with my writing-case, and was 
coolly poring over my letters with the aid of a 
dictionary ; another was counting out the gold 
and notes in my valise, with all the dexterous 
composure of the teller of a bank. 

Amazement and indignation stopped my 
mouth. My blood was boiling, but I could 
not find words to express myself, but merely 
gasped forth my anger and surprise, as I 
stood under the eyes of this intrusive 
assemblage, fast pinioned between the two 
gendarmes. 

" Is that the . suspect ' himself?" asked the 
portly personage in uniform, speaking in 
French, which language is compulsorily fami- 

t 2 



276 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

liar to all members of the Russian tchinn, or 
official caste. One of the men in black spoke 
in Russian to one of the gendarmes, and then 
bowing deeply, said : 

"Batuscha, I have the honour to report 
that the * compromised ' was captured below, 
in an audacious effort to return, probably 
with the desperate hope of carrying off the 
treasure." 

For a moment I fancied myself dreaming. 
Then anger prevailed, and I shook off the 
grasp of the gendarmes, loudly demanding of 
what I was accused, and by what right they 
had committed so unwarrantable a trespass on 
my person and property ? But I took nothing 
by my motion. Three pair of strong hands 
grappled me with a force beyond resistance, 
and the interpreter hastily assured me that I 
should be put in irons forthwith, if I failed 
again in the respect due to the governor. 

" I don't care a straw for all the governors 
in Russia," answered I, recklessly, " and you 
will live to repent this outrage. England does 
not allow her subjects to be oppressed without 
exacting reparation, as you will learn." I saw 
a sneer on the faces of all those who under- 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 277 

stood French. The governor, though a fierce 
and consequential looking person, laughed 
outright. 

"That trick will not serve your purpose, 
monsieur !" said he, scornfully : then, turning 
to the man who had been counting the money, 
he asked him what was the amount ? 

"One hundred and seventy-one thousand 
and fifteen roubles, nine copecks, at the cur- 
rent rate of exchange of six roubles thirty- 
one copecks per pound sterling," was the 
reply. 

" Write that down in the procfes-verbal !" 
said the governor ; and the pen of the clerk 
flew over the paper. 

It now occurred to me that I must be the 
victim of some mistake, some unlucky coinci- 
dence. Accordingly, I stated, as calmly and 
coherently as I could, my name, position in 
life, the errand that took me to Russia, and 
my being accredited to the widely-known firm 
of Druce, Gray, and Druce. 

They heard me to the end, with a civil 
sneer of incredulity on their faces, and then 
requested proofs of the truth of my state- 
ments. 



278 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

" Proof !" said I, " what proofs can I offer 
if you persist in disbelieving a plain series of 
common-place facts. You have my letters 
before you, and I see that one of your spies is 
mastering the contents. Pray do you not find 
ample confirmation there, of my assurance 
that I am a member of the Inner Temple, and 
have no more concern with your country than 
with China or Ashantee ?" 

The interpreter spoke in Russian to the 
governor, who shook his head, and bluntly 
told me that the letters were "ingeniously 
composed, and gave a good colour to my 
assumed character, but that I was found out. 
I might drop the mask. The time for feign- 
ing was over, but I might merit the imperial 
clemency by free and full confession." 

I almost choked at this. However, I 
remembered my passport, which I had about 
my person, and I at once offered it to the 
governor for inspection. This valuable docu- 
ment was neatly bound in a yellow leather 
case, with clasps, and the case was duly 
stamped in gold letters with my name and 
address, Thomas Chatterton Bainbridge, Hare- 
court, Temple, and with the Chatterton crest, 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 279 

a goldfinch proper. As for the pass itself, I 
felt sure that it would carry conviction to the 
most prejudiced mind. But what was my 
horror when the governor, after slowly perus- 
ing the name on the binding, opened the case, 
unfolded the rustling official paper emblazoned 
with the arms, of England, and read out a re- 
quest to all friendly powers to give aid and 
protection to "Mr. (or Count) Demetrius 
Zlisynczka !" a naturalised British subject, 
about to proceed to Frankfort-sur-Metn," 
&c. 

A loud exclamation burst from all the by- 
standers, and was echoed by the listening ser- 
vants along the passages of the hotel. In 
every eye I could read wonder and satis- 
faction, mingled with admiration of my im- 
pudence. 

" Zlisynczka !" I heard them mutter, and 
the gripe of the gendarmes tightened as they 
became aware of the importance of their 
prisoner. My passionate declarations were 
laughed at. I was bluffly declared to be a 
Pole, and no born Briton; my errand to 
Russia would warrant my lifelong banishment 
to Siberia, even if past misdeeds did not pro- 



280 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

cure my condemnation. And I was ordered off 
to jail to await my trial, with the assurance 
that only by giving up my accomplices could 
I obtain mercy. 

"But the money, the money ?" I cried, 
struggling as I was dragged away. 

" The money with which the Revolutionary 
Committee have supplied you to sow sedition 
in the Czar's dominions, is confiscated to the 
Czar's use," said the governor, testily ; and T 
was hurried away. 

They thrust me into the common jail, 
giving me, however, a cell to myself. This 
cell was about the size of the sleeping cabins 
on board a steam-packet ; it was dimly 
lighted ; and its iron-studded door and 
stoutly-barred window looked as if they 
might have baffled Jack Sheppard. I was 
searched, and my money, pocket-book, and 
watch, my rings, my pencil, and penknife, 
were solemnly taken away. I asked for writ- 
ing materials, but my captors shook their 
heads. 

When they were gone, I sat down upon the 
mean pallet bed, the legs of which were 
screwed to the floor, buried my head in my 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 281 

hands, and fairly sobbed. Pride and the 
sense of innocence had hitherto sustained me, 
but now my strength gave way, and I felt 
a dreadful sense of depression and isolation 
in that strange half-barbarous land, and wept 
as bitterly as a lonely child lost in the dark- 
ness. Was it not all a dream ? 

Time seemed in no hurry. Three times a 
day my jailer, an invalided soldier, drilled to 
the bloodless regularity of an automaton, 
visited me. He brought me bad coffee and 
dark bread, indifferent cabbage soup and sour 
quass, and then good tea and dark bread, at 
early morning, noon and sunset. He swept 
my cell, refilled my pitcher, arranged my 
wretched bed, and marched off in aggravating 
silence. Indeed, he spoke no tongue but 
Russian ; that he could not help ; but he 
never deigned to reply by sign or smile to all 
my beseeching looks and expressive panto- 
mime, and I could hardly help giving way, 
sometimes, to an insane impulse to fly at his 
throat. There came, also, at irregular inter- 
vals, a superior official in uniform, who 
narrowly examined the cell, and tested every 
bar and bolt with a small hammer, and 



2S2 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

rapped on the walls and floor to detect any 
excavation on which I might have been busy. 
But I had none of the talents of Baron 
Trenck or Latude, and made no effort at 
breaking bounds, so he might have spared 
his pains. He, too, refused to converse. 
When my gestures grew exceedingly ani- 
mated, he made shift to tell me in 
French that "if contumacious, I should be 
chained." 

In vain I demanded a trial, a public hear- 
ing. The governor with two inferior judges 
in black, a greffier and an interpreter, did 
twice visit my cell ; but, as I could only tell 
the truth, while they were seeking political 
revelations, they merely set me down for the 
most obstinate and brazen of culprits, and I 
was warned that my recusancy would bring 
down on my head the full weight of the em- 
peror's displeasure. 

I kept a reckoning of the days. More 
than a week had elapsed since my arrest . it 
might have been a year by the tedium of it . 
but it was now the twenty-fifth, and if Druce, 
Gray, and Druce were unable to meet their 
engagements on the twenty-eighth, speedy 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 283 

bankruptcy must follow, and the fair credit 
and great business of the merchant princes 
would collapse like a soap-bubble. I went 
nearly mad as I paced the monotonous round 
of my cell, watching the dawning day, and 
thinking of the mischief about to ensue. But 
the authorities were deaf to my remonstrances 
and I could not even elicit from them when 
or where, if ever, I was to be tried for my 
imaginary offences. I was hopelessly a pri- 
soner. I might die in jail, I might go mad, or, 
who knows, I might actually be sent to Siberia, 
and perhaps grow grey in the Ural mines, I . 
Thomas Chatter ton Bainbridge . in expiation 
of the sins of a man whose very name I could 
not pronounce. 

I had been listening to the rattle of every 
key, to the sound of every step. Mercy ! Was 
I awake? Was it the voice of the official 
interpreter whom I heard, amidst a great 
bustle, apologising to somebody in bad French 
for the facheuse circonstance of the English 
gentleman's ten days' detention ? Magistrate, 
greffier, turnkey, guard, soon entered my cell ; 
and who was that tall, frank-looking young 



284 ONLY ONE ROOM. 

Englishman, who came forward to shake my 
hand as if he would have wrung it off? 

"Mr. Bainbridge, allow me to introduce 
myself . George Druce, nephew of Druce and 
partners. My dear sir, how sorry we all are 
that you should have suffered so much on 
your kind errand to serve us ! How lucky 
we learned your whereabout I I was sent 
off at once, after the governor, my uncle, 
had made it all right with the Russian 
authorities. Shamefully you were treated to 
be sure, but that fellow has the cunning of 
Old Nick himself." 
" "What fellow?" I asked. 
"That Pole, that Zlisynczka, the Mazzini 
of the North. He wrote a letter to our house 
which confessed, in a jocular manner, the trick 
he had played you. He stole your passport 
in the night, at the inn, substituting his own; 
and, as Mr. Bainbridge, he easily managed to 
elude suspicion, and plunge deep into the 
interior, on one of his dangerous missions. 
The disguise has now served his turn, for the 
man has as many characters as Proteus, but 
he never meant your imprisonment to be 
perpetual." 



ONLY ONE ROOM. 2S5 

" How ?" cried I, as a light broke in upon 
me. " Do you mean that my companion at 
the hotel, Van Marum, the Dutch engineer, 
was Zlis what do you call him ?" 

" The same," answered Druce, smiling. 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 



" Leaving us, Captain Yates, and so 
soon? How very much we shall miss you. 
And I, who had counted oft you as one of 
my knights during the winter ! You must 
own that you are a sad truant !" said the old 
princess, with a kind smile. Though why she 
should wonder that a Queen's messenger like 
myself should get the route from St. Petersburg 
it would have been hard to guess. The won- 
der was, rather, that I should have been kept 
dangling so long about the embassy, under 
orders to report myself every morning, but 
my own master as to the disposal of my su- 
perfluous time. It was summer, and the 
Russian capital was as empty as a capital 
ever is, but I had met with a good deal of 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 287 

hospitable attention. And now, under orders 
to start for Vienna with important despatches 
I was paying a hasty round of farewell visits. 

Although I had been often in St. Peters- 
burg before, I had only of late been intro- 
duced to the Princess Anna Sobieski, widow 
of a Polish noble, who had represented a 
junior branch of that great historic race which 
has given kings and martyrs to Poland. The 
old lady . whose large landed possessions, be- 
queathed by her husband, had procured her 
the dubious compliment of an imperial com- 
mand to reside in the metropolis . had treated 
me with much kindness, and my first call, 
when the order to depart arrived, was to the 
Sobieski palace. 

I forget what I said, but the conversation 
rolled on in the usual common-place strain of 
French compliment, until the princess in- 
quired if I should make any stay at Warsaw ? 
If so, perhaps I would do a kind turn to 
an old woman who had few opportunities cf 
communicating with her native country. It 
was nothing . a mere toy . a bagatelle not 
worth the attention of a State messenger like 
ce cher capitaine, who carried papers the 



288 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

contents of which might convulse Europe . 
but, but would I take charge of a roll of 
manuscript music, produced by a gifted 
German composer in the capital, and which 
her dear niece, enthusiastic about music as 
all Poles were, was dying to receive ? Still it 
was a precious charge, being a loan, since the 
composer declined to publish it, and on that 
account it could not be entrusted to the care 
of the Russian railway officials. The princess 
added, that her brother, Count Szomyzy, 
lived but eleven virsts from Warsaw, that his 
castle was just then full of guests and gaieties, 
and that I should be a welcome visitor there 
on the mention of her name. 

It was to the count's only daughter, Rosa- 
lie, that this invaluable roll # of manuscript 
music was to be conveyed, and her aunt 
jestingly advised me to take good care of my 
heart, since her young relative was acknow- 
ledged to be the reigning beauty in the govern- 
ment of Warsaw. I laughed at such a warn- 
ing. The habit of a roving life had shown 
me the ease with which impressions are effaced 
by absence ; but I was glad to be of use in 
a way that involved no dereliction of duty. 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 2S9 

More than once, I had felt myself bound to 
refuse Polish friends some favour which would 
have been discordant to the allegiance I owed 
to I)owning- street, and I was rejoiced that 
the kind old lady had asked of me nothing 
that bore, however remotely, on politics. 

The roll of music, in a locked morocco- 
case, with the little silver key dangling from 
it by a string, was delivered at my hotel by 
one of the princess's chasseurs, and I placed 
it in my portmanteau, with a mental resolve 
to diverge from Warsaw to the country-seat 
of Count Szomyzy, if only for an hour or 
two. 

I had packed my effects, and was ready to 
start, when a man suddenly burst into the 
room, and fell on his knees before me. 

It being always necessary to speak decidedly 
to a Russian, I ordered him to leave the room. 
He was not a beggar . he was too well 
dressed; not wearing the caftan and boots, 
but a decent suit of European clothing. Tears 
were streaming down his face, and he seemed 
sober, though he moaned piteously as he 
embraced my knees after the abject fashion of 
his countrymen. 

vol. i. u 



290 THE ROLL OF MUSIC 

" Noble excellency ! magnanimous English- 
man ! have some pity on a wretch whose 
whole life hangs on yonr honourable decision. 
I swear to your grandeur that you can make 
a whole family happy or miserable by a word, 
one little word, illustrious one !" 

With some trouble, I drew from the man, 
whose language, in spite of his agitation, was 
too pure for a mujik, the substance of his peti- 
tion. His seemed to be really a hard case. 
He was a courier, having travelled Europe for 
years with different masters, and he had a 
wife and children living at Naples, where he 
was in hopes of an engagement in the service 
of a former employer, one of the wealthy 
Demidoff family. However, he had been 
recalled to Russia to give evidence in a law- 
suit, and, on preparing to leave St. Peters- 
burg, the police, in some fit of caprice, had 
refused him his passport, on the ground that 
a Russian, unless noble, could not by law 
quit the empire alone. If he had a master, 
well and good. If not, he might stay where 
he was. 

" But I don't want a servant : should not 
know what to do with one," said I, hardly 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 291 

knowing how to get rid of the singular sup- 
pliant. But a flood of words overwhelmed 
me. My protection was alone asked for. 
Ignatius . that was the man's name . was 
only to be nominally my retainer, and was 
not to cost me a copeck. He had money for 
his expenses, and only wanted the aegis of 
my name. In return for this, I should have 
his undying gratitude, and his devoted ser- 
vices upon the journey to Vienna. He pulled 
out his passport for my inspection . or rather 
the " provisional permit" that represented it 
.and I satisfied myself that Ignatius Kras- 
koff, native of Moscow, was really in the 
strait he represented himself, for across the 
document was written, " Papers refused, con- 
formably to ukase/* with the signature of a 
high functionary. 

I could not deny the poor man the trifling 
favour he asked, so I wrote a line to the police 
prefect, requesting permission to take him as 
my servant, and committed the note to 
Ignatius, who received it with transports of 
joy, kissing my hand, and, I believe, my boots, 
with the exaggerated humility which the 
Russians owe to their Oriental traditions. 

u 2 



292 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

Two hours later, on reaching the railway 
terminus, sure enough, there was Ignatius, in 
his smart garb of green cloth trimmed with 
Astracan fur, the livery of the Deraidoffs, 
bustling to and fro with the utmost activity. 
He had already secured a compartment for 
my especial behoof, had placed the lately pub- 
lished editions of the Invalide Russe and the 
Northern Bee ready for my perusal, and on 
my arrival pounced on my cloaks, canes, and 
luggage with a zeal and energy which I had 
never seen equalled by the best paid of his 
professional brotherhood. 

It need not be imagined that the only pre- 
liminaries to starting, as with us in Western 
Europe, were the taking of tickets and regis- 
tering of baggage. On the contrary, the 
great question under discussion was, not what 
could be done for the traveller's comfort or 
safety, but whether the candidate for a place 
in the train were a fit and proper person to 
be suffered to go at all. Those were the old 
harsh days of the Emperor Nicholas, when 
Russia was an enormous camp, under mar- 
tinet discipline, and railways were looked on 
with no great liking by the official Tchinn. 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 293 

In the times of which I speak, two hours, at 
the lowest computation, had to be spent at 
the station whence a voyager meant to depart, 
and two hours more full of vexatious cere- 
monies, tedious delays, and the petty insolence 
of Jacks-in-office, can scarcelv be conceived. 
The station was full of scowling policemen, 
in uniforms of every shade . blue, green, grey, 
more or less medalled and military of aspect, 
but all troublesome, venal, and suspicious. 
Passports were handed from bureau to bureau, 
stamped, countersigned, inspected, cavilled at ; 
luggage was examined, pockets tapped, tra- 
vellers cross-questioned on every conceivable 
point, and an incessant clinking of silver and 
pocketing of bribes went on as an under- 
current to this chorus of query and answer. 

As a cabinet messenger, I was exempt from 
the annoyances that fell to the lot of my fellow- 
travellers, especially of such as were too poor 
or too stiugy to fee the official vampires, and 
my papers were civilly returned to me, after 
a long delay, while ray luggage was not dis- 
turbed by any prying on the part of the 
imperial agents. At length the ordeal was 
past ; the last rouble that could be extorted 



294 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

from Polish Jew or Russian trader was 
secured ; the engine puffed out hoarse notes 
of impatience, and the people took their places, 
the mob of beards and caftans crowding the 
waggons of the third class, and a few well- 
dressed persons entering the first and second- 
class carriages. 

" A pleasant trip to you, Yates, and I wish 
I were going too. Even Vienna and its 
Volksgarten is better fun than St. Petersburg 
in the dog days. But is that your courier ?" 
observed young Dillon from the embassy, a 
junior attach^ with whom I was on. very 
friendly terms, and who had strolled down to 
see me off. At that instant, Ignatius, who 
had just brought me some flowers and a 
basket of Ingrian cherries, had scoured off on 
some new self-imposed task, and was dimly 
visible in the distance. The bell had rung, 
and the guards were marshalling the bewil- 
dered peasants, new as they were to steam 
and iron roads, into their respective cars. I 
hastily told my friend how it was that I had 
become the nominal master of so splendidly- 
accoutred a retainer. Indeed, such an explana- 
tion seemed necessary, for Ignatius, with his 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 295 

bullion-tasselled cap, morocco money-bag, and 
green livery trimmed with costly dark fur, 
looked more fitted to serve a royal highness 
than a mere subaltern of the F.O. 

" Ignatius Kraskoff . Kraskoff . are you 
quite sure that is the name ?" asked Dillon, 
thoughtfully. I was quite sure. 

" Strange, how that name runs in my head ! 
Yet I have not the least idea where I heard 
it, and I'm certain I never set my eyes on 
the fellow's swarthy face before. A stunning 
servant he seems ; but, somehow, I must have 
heard of him before." 

I laughed, and remarked that all Russian 
names were pretty much alike, ending as they 
did in the invariable " off," " vitch," or " sky." 
Young Dillon was a fine generous lad ; but he 
was not thought over bright, and his bad 
memory was a theme for joking at the em- 
bassy. I paid, therefore, very little attention 
to his imperfect reminiscences, while he, on 
the other hand, as some men will do, grew 
absorbed and silent, and was evidently rack- 
ing his brain to identify the name that 
haunted him. 

Ignatius bowed and smiled me into my 



296 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

carriage, the guard closed the door, the bell 
rang again, I shook hands with Dillon out of 
the window, and settled myself for the start. 
Off the train glided, amid many ejaculations 
on the part of the mujiks, who blessed them- 
selves and invoked their saints as the snorting 
iron horse wheeled them away. The pace 
increased, and we were almost clear of the 
station. Heaven and earth 1 what is the 
matter ? 

It was the young attach^, without his hat, 
running breathless along the platform, and for 
a moment coming abreast of my carriage. 

" I say, Yates/' he called out, with a gasp, 
" I remember now. Kraskoff is " 

A scream from the engine drowned the 
words, and in a moment more we darted 
tli rough an archway full of steam and smoke, 
and I neither saw nor heard any more of my 
young countryman. This incident made little 
impression on me, beyond giving me a laugh 
at Dillon's sudden revival of memory, and his 
effort to impart to me some real or fancied 
facts . wholly immaterial, no doubt . with 
respect to my superb servitor. 

I had fully expected that the exuberant 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 297 

gratitude of the courier would die out as soon 
as we were well away from St. Petersburg, 
and, in fact, I was rather in hopes that he 
would cease the volunteer good offices, that 
teased as much as they amused. But I had 
reckoned wrongly. Ignatius continued to 
attend me with the same zeal and pertinacity 
with which Man Friday fulfilled the behests 
of Robinson Crusoe. He was not to be 
shaken off, and during that summer journey 
of brief halts and almost continuous way- 
faring, he showed such thoughtfulness, such 
good temper, was so eager to please, that to 
repulse him with anything like harshness or 
petulance was impossible. He was, in truth, 
an admirable servant. 

Warsaw at last. But we were not per- 
mitted to enter the station until the train had 
been brought to a halt, and a severe examina- 
tion of passports and faces had taken place. 
The imperial gendarmes who acquitted them- 
selves of this duty were unusually curt of 
speech and peremptory of bearing, and seemed 
ill at ease. Drums were heard beating, and 
bugles sounding, in the town, and it was plain 
that the whole garrison must be astir. 



29S THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

" What has occurred ?" 

" A conspiracy detected . Numerous arrests. 
A state of siege proclaimed." 

Yet, as I drove from the station to the Pala- 
tine Hotel, I saw no particular signs of popu- 
lar commotion. There were whisperings, and 
cautious interchange of words among the 
groups at the corners of streets, and I 
noticed the square Polish cap and jaunty 
Polish jacket, the wearing of which was ac- 
counted as half treasonable by the Czar 
Nicholas, more prominent than usual. But 
of noise there was none, except the heavy 
tramp of horse and foot, as the Russian troops 
swept through the streets, squadrons and 
battalions following the battalions and squa- 
drons that had gone before, as though to 
prove to the conquered race the hopelessness 
of resistance. 

Although fairly inured to fatigue, I was now 
somewhat weary, and was not sorry to reach 
the inn, where I counted on a night's sound 
sleep. I had, in truth, somewhat condensed 
the first portion of my journey, that I might 
have time to execute the princess's com- 
mission, and I was thus sleeping at Warsaw 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 299 

at a time when his excellency the ambassador, 
if he thought on the matter at all, imagined 
me to be at Wilna. Ignatius, on the other 
hand, was very fresh, and as brisk and atten- 
tive as ever. He whisked up and down the 
dirty but splendid marble staircase of the 
great hotel, busy at once with preparations 
for my supper, and with purveying for me 
such scraps of news as fell in his way. From 
him I learned that a wide-spread plot had 
been detected, that the police were scouring 
the city, and that the citadel was full of 
captives, some of whom belonged to the 
noblest families of Poland. 

" What will be done with them ?" I asked. 

The man shrugged his shoulders. " Gener- 
ous Englishman, who knows ? They will be 
tried by court-martial, and perhaps some may 
suffer death. Those who are lucky will get 
off with five years in a fortress, in irons, or 
with service against Schpmyl in the Caucasus. 
Most of them will be knouted or sent to 
Siberia. Poor wretches ! they are goaded to 
revolt, and then crushed." 

" Hush, friend," said I hastily, for I thought 
I heard a step and the clink of spurs in the 



300 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

corridor, and I knew what linguists the 
Russian officers were. " Hush ! Politics are 
best left undiscussed, at any rate on this side 
of Cracow." 

The caution I had just administered was 
entirely prompted by the fear that Ignatius 
would get himself into trouble, were eaves- 
droppers to overhear his rash remarks. In- 
deed, it was not the first time in our hurried 
journey that Ignatius had uttered something 
which, however slight, showed advanced ideas 
for a Russian of the days before the Crimean 
war. 

I fell asleep as soon as my head touched 
the pillow, but my dreams were troubled and 
painfully vivid. The old Princess Sobieski, 
transformed into a malignant fairy, hovered 
incessantly around my couch, waving her 
ivory-handled crutch-stick' (she was lame, and 
carried such a ptop) by way of a wand, and 
mopping and mowing at me in the wickedest 
exultation. Ignatius, in a black cloak, with 
a stiletto in his right hand, glided around me 
like a snake, and was always on the point of 
stabbing . whom or what I know not. And 
Dillon, the young attach^, was frequently 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 301 

present, always gasping, breathless, eager to 
communicate some all-important secret, but 
entirely unable to do more than make the 
most absurd grimaces. I think this last 
phase of the dream must have awakened me, 
for I awoke, laughing, the amusement pre- 
dominating over the more disagreeable im- 
pressions to which my visions were calculated 
to give rise. I laughed again, as I rubbed 
my eyes. Poor Dillon ! what a queer figure 
he cut, hatless, and gurgling for breath, at the 
end of the platform ! I wonder what mighty 
intelligence the poor lad sought to commu- 
nicate. Some mare's nest, no doubt. 

The soft morning light was pouring in, and 
the early bugles were sounding at the Russian 
barracks far away. I rose, ordered breakfast, 
and writing a short note to Count Szorayzy, 
sent it by a mounted messenger. Ponies and 
boys, equally unkempt, wild and active, are 
always plenty in Poland, and the promise of 
an extra rouble for speed sent off the emissary 
like a cannon-shot. In a briefer time than I 
had expected, the boy returned, bearing a 
courteous answer from the noble Polish land- 
holder, begging that 1 would take up my 



302 THE ROLL OP MUSIC. 

quarters at the castle, where a friend of his 
sister would always be more than welcome, 
and naming five o'clock as the dinner-hour, 
if not inconvenient to myself. I determined 
to accept this frank invitation, the rather as I 
was anxious to see something of Polish cus- 
toms and character. Suddenly it occurred to 
me that the note was open when delivered, 
and I sharply questioned the boy who had 
brought it. 

" Gracious sir, the Russian guard !" 
It really appeared, on further inquiry, that 
the guard stationed at the gate of the city had 
stopped the messenger both on his exit and 
return, and that my note, like that of the 
count, had been unscrupulously opened and 
read by *he subaltern in command. This was 
not a usual precaution, even during a state of 
siege ; but I was informed that private intelli- 
gence which had reached the authorities had 
induced extreme vigilance. It was rumoured 
that some manifesto, or other document, of 
the utmost importance, and to which were 
appended the signatures of many men of high 
rank and influence, hostile to Muscovite rule, 
was passing from hand to hand. And eyery 



THE ROLL OP MUSIC. 303 

" plotnik " in Poland was anxious to earn 
promotion and reward by intercepting papers 
of so compromising a character. 

" A carriage of some sort, Ignatius, to take 
me to the ch&teau. Then, if you will have 
the bill ready, and the luggage taken down, 
we can start by the express for the south, 
after I get back again. The rest of the day 
will be at your own disposal, of course. I 
dare say you have friends here who will be 
glad to see you." 

The eleven versts of sandy road were soon 
performed by the fleet, loose-jointed Lithua- 
nian horses, which were driven in a sort of 
wicker-work cart, covered with a pink and 
white tilt, by a wild lad in a sheepskin pelisse. 
I chatted with the driver, and we understood 
each other pretty well, considering that I only 
knew some scraps of Polish and Russian. 
He was, he told me, a noble, the son of a 
man who had had his property confiscated by 
the Moskov tyrants for joining Kosciusko. 
His father was a glazier, his two uncles 
worked in a forge, and he had four or five 
brothers and sisters. They lived very poorly, 
on cabbage soup and rye bread ; they could 



304 THE BOLL OF MUSIC. 

not read or write ; the one thing they knew 
and cared for was that they were Poles . Poles 
and nobles. 

" Are there many like you ?" 

" Gracious sir, who knows! Thousands, 
very likely. Perhaps more. I could mention 
a good number. We are ill off now, but we 
shall get our own again when we have 
chased away the Russians. Yes, yes, the 
good times will come back. Hoop ! horses ! 
hoop! away!" 

Presently we saw the castle, with its 
straggling line of brick and timber buildings, 
large but irregular, and one grey tower rising 
over the rest of the pile, dinted and crumbling, 
but of immense solidity. 

Dashing through some slovenly plantations, 
where the wild-plum and wild-pear, the 
favourite trees of the Polish nation, over- 
numbered the elms and birch-trees, we 
reached the gate, and were received by a 
large retinue of servants and barking dogs. 
There was not one of the former who had a 
clean face or a whole coat, but I never saw 
men more courteous to a stranger than those 
long-haired, shabbily-clad Poles, and they ap- 



THE ROLL OP MUSIC. 305 

peared to receive their master's guest as if 
he were a benefactor of their own. 

I was shown into a large saloon, the deco- 
rations of which must once have been splendid 
enough. But the mirrors were dimmed and 
cracked, the marbles chipped, the gilding 
dull, and cobwebs clung to the cornices, 
which had been handsomely carved in the old 
French style. The furniture was ludicrously 
scanty, according to the ordinary European 
standard, but everything told of decay, and 
it was evident that the castle had been a 
magnificent residence some eighty or ninety 
years ago. 

There was no lack of guests. The great 
room was filled with company, and I remarked 
tljat almost every one present had handsome 
features, and a bearing at once gentle and 
spirited, that contrasted forcibly with the 
usual inmates of a St. Petersburg drawing- 
room, its flat-faced men and sallow dames. 
Most of those I saw wore the picturesque 
Polish dress, richly embroidered, and the 
amaranth velvet of the pelisses matched well 
with the dark hair and pale keen features 
of the wearers. 

vol. i. x 



306 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

The count, who was much the junior of his 
sister, Princess Anna, received me with much 
cordiality, and presented me to his three sons 
and his daughter, Rosalie Szomyzy. I had 
just time to see that the latter was a most 
beautiful dark-eyed girl, well meriting her 
aunt's eulogies, when I was put under the 
care of my host's valet, and hurried off to 
dress for dinner, which was nearly ready. 

"Where on earth are you taking me? 
This is some one else's room 1" I ventured to 
remonstrate, as I was ushered into a long low 
room, uncarpeted, but provided with five or 
six beds, and where sabres and pelisses, 
cloaks, saddle-bags, and riding gear, lay 
strewed in heaps. 

"Pardon, excellent sir," said the grinning 
valet, as he bowed in deprecation of my 
remark . " a thousand excuses ! This is the 
apartment of the bachelor lords." 

And, to my surprise, I found that the 
arrangements of a Polish household are in 
some respects copied from those of* the neigh- 
bouring Turks, and that the "selamlik," or 
men's apartment, is a time-honoured Sarma- 
tian institution. However, I had little time 



THE ROLL OP MUSIC. 807 

to meditate, but, making a hasty toilet, reached 
the saloon just before the horn sounded for 
dinner. 

During the long and plentiful, if ill-served 
meal, there was conversation enough, but it 
was mostly in Polish, or in the colloquial Latin 
which the natives of Poland and Hungary . 
or the higher classes of them . speak with as 
much rapid fluency as their own tongues. 
To judge by the tones of the speakers! the 
talk was rather sad than gay, and by the 
constant recurrence of the words " Warsaw" 
and "Moskov," I gleaned that the state of 
siege was frequently mentioned. I saw visible 
signs of emotion, quivering nostrils, eyes 
bright with anger or scorn, and heard more 
than one gentle voice tremble, though not 
with fear, in uttering the hateful name of 
the Russian oppressor. 

Whenever I spoke, either in French or 
German, I received a courteous reply, and the 
old count and one of his sons frequently and 
politely addressed me; but I felt somehow 
that there was a freemasonry among the com- 
pany from which I was excluded. They were 
kind and affable, but I was not one of them- 

x2 



308 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

selves, and they were too deeply interested in 
one subject to have ears and tongues for 
casual conversation. 

" A political gathering !" said I to myself, 
and felt somewhat uncomfortable. My favour 
at head-quarters depended, I well knew, on 
my keeping up a strict neutrality, and I con- 
gratulated myself that my stay under Count 
Szomyzy's roof would be but brief. And yet, 
with all my prudence, I could not but sym- 
pathise with the gallant high-spirited men and 
graceful women around me, and I sighed as I 
remembered the melancholy failure that had 
for many years attended every effort of a race 
so gifted and so unfortunate. 

After the heady Hungarian wine had been 
succeeded by coffee, we all rose from table, 
and returned to the saloon into which I had 
first entered, and where a band of motley 
musicians had already begun to tune their 
instruments. Often as I had beard of the 
passionate Polish taste for music and dancing, 
I had never till then realised the eager delight 
with which those present took their places, 
whirling round in the quick movements of 
the dance, as if bewitched by the tune. 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 309 

Polkas and mazurkas, the national dances, 
and the wild, swift Magyar waltz, kept us all 
well employed. The woes of Poland were 
forgotten for a time, I believe, in the physical 
toil and excitement of the scene, and the 
flashing eyes and flushed cheeks of those 
around me told me how dear the amusement 
was to their generous and energetic natures. 

The ball had gone on above an hour, and I, 
as a stranger, had twice had the honour of 
giving my hand to Rosalie Szomyzy. It was 
during a pause in the exciting Magyar waltz, 
as we stood together under a huge battered 
picture in a frame of dimmed gold, and whose 
subject was Watteau's version of Arcadia, 
with hooped and highly-rouged shepherdesses, 
that the count passed, and whispered some- 
thing to his daughter. I saw the beautiful 
girl's flushed cheek grow suddenly pale, and 
then redden again, as she asked me, with 
some embarrassment, "Whether her aunt 
Sobieski had not . had not requested me to 
deliver some trifle . a present . on her part to 
Rosalie Szomyzy P" 

The question was a very natural one ; the 
only puzzle to me was the evident and appa- 



310 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

rently causeless emotion of the fair speaker. 
Nieces might be very fond of their aunts, but 
why they should be thus agitated at receiv- 
ing a token of their affection, was incompre- 
hensible. 

" Certainly," said I, with a smile ; " not that 
I am the bearer of any remarkable treasure. 
A roll of music, on which the princess seemed 
to set great store " 

I broke off abruptly, for at that moment a 
faint, far-distant sound, hardly audible to the 
most attentive ear, reached me. The clank of 
cavalry advancing at a rapid pace 1 It was 
impossible for an old soldier to mistake the 
peculiar jingle of sword and stirrup, and the 
deep beat of many hoofs striking the ground 
in unison. But at the same instant the music 
poured forth its maddening strains with fresh 
spirit, and the sounds I had heard were 
drowned by the melody. 

"This . this roll of music, captain; I am 
so longing to see it. My dear, good aunt ! 
Have you it here P" 

Mademoiselle Rosalie's sweet voice trembled 
as she pronounced these common-place words; 
she tried to smile, but her lips quivered, her 



THE BOLL OF MUSIC. 311 

eyes were full of tears ; I saw her father, under 
the shadow of a pillar, watching her keenly 
and anxiously from a distance. 

"Mademoiselle . you are ill . the heat of 
the weather, and . . " 

" No, no, I am quite well. It was only a 
silly fancy. I was impatient to see my aunt's 
gift, that was all/' said my pretty partner, 
hurriedly. Now, it so happened that the gift 
in question was in the room ; I never liked to 
let the despatches out of my sight, and I had 
hidden in a corner of the dancing-room the 
official bag which contained them, side by side 
with the morocco-case that held the princess's 
precious music. We were within a few yards 
of the nook where these objects lay, and I at 
once stepped forward to pick up the morocco- 
case, . and placed it in the hands of its fair 
owner, saying lightly as I did so, "I am 
sure Princess Anna would be gratified could 
she see " 

When a man, glided like a serpent along 
the wall, darted forward, and rudely snatched 
the packet 1 A scream broke from my part- 
ner's lips, and I grasped the intruder by the 
arm, but recoiled, less from the pistol which 



812 THE BOLL OP MUSIC. 

was presented at my head, than in sheer 
surprise. 

"Ignatius!" 

"Ay, captain," said the courier, whose 
shrewd face wore a look of irrepressible 
triumph. "Ay, captain, Ignatius, your wor- 
ship's poor servant. But the tables are 
turned now." 

At the same moment there was a great 
clash of weapons, and a wild outcry of voices, 
and a servant of the count's, bleeding from a 
sabre cut, rushed groaning in, and fell at his 
master's feet. The music came to an abrupt 
stop, and the dancers crowded together like a 
bevy of frightened wild-fowl. Then followed 
the tramp of booted feet, and the saloon was 
suddenly filled by Russian soldiers, their 
swords flashing in the light of the lustres 
and lamps. The officer in command gave 
some brief orders, and in a moment every 
one of the male guests was secured. So 
quickly was the work done, that resistance 
was impossible, even had there been a fair 
chance of repelling force by force. As it was, 
the dragoons had an easy task, and while 
some of them held their cocked pistols to our 



THE ROLL OP MUSIC. 313 

foreheads, their comrades were binding our 
wrists tightly together with thongs or cords. 
Only one person, so far as I know, was hurt 
during the onslaught, and this was the ser- 
vant I have spoken of, and who had been 
sabred in a futile attempt at giving the 
alarm. 

"I am a British officer, sir, and you will 
have to answer for this outrage/' said I to the 
Russian major, as he passed me,' stolid and 
smiling, as if the sobs and cries of the terrified 
women, and the indignant remonstrances of 
the captives, had been soothing to his ear. 

The major made no reply, but taking the 
roll of music, in its morocco-case, which Igna- 
tius obsequiously proffered, burst the box open 
with the point of his cavalry sword, and deli- 
berately opened and spread out . not a roll of 
music, but a closely-written document, to 
which were appended a great number of 
signatures. The Russian's yellow moustaches 
actually appeared to bristle, like those of a cat 
springing on its prey, as his cold blue eyes fell 
on this paper. 

"At last, Polish dogs, I have you in my 
clutches !" he shouted, as he slapped the 



814 THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 

manuscript with his heavy hand ; " the coun- 
cil of war will make short work with your 
rebellious lives, for here is the proof of your 
conspiracy/' 

"Which this noble English seigneur has 
brought from St. Petersburg, like an ass 
that knows not what he carries on the pack- 
saddle/' said Ignatius, my precious courier, 
who now stood revealed in his true colours as 
a hypocrite of the first water. 

An appalling scene followed. As the priso- 
ners were dragged away, their wives, sisters, 
daughters, clung to them with tears and 
shrieks, believing they were to be led off to 
immediate butchery, and the poor ladies were 
driven back, often with unfeeling violence, by 
the Russian soldiers. 

But no pillage of the castle took place, the 
troops being of a regularly disciplined corps, 
and the officer too great a martinet to disobey 
orders. 

Tied two and two, we were placed in 
country carts and driven off under escort to 
the citadel of Warsaw ; and it was only by 
using the name of the Queen of England, and 
repeatedly urging my position of a State 



THE ROLL OF MUSIC. 315 

messenger, that I could persuade the Musco- 
vites to let the Foreign-office despatches 
accompany me. In the citadel of Warsaw I 
spent four-and-twenty miserable hours, my 
mind torn by regrets for the kindly and 
gentle people who had so lately broken bread 
with me, and whose fate was now so disas- 
trous, and distracted by gloomy forebodings 
as to my own future. True, I was safe from 
bullet or scourge, from Siberia or death. 
But a long detention, coupled with the non- 
delivery of the dispatches, would be ruin to 
my prospects in life. 

After a time I was admitted to a private 
interview with the viceroy, and to my great 
joy and surprise was informed that I was free 
to depart. 

" My courier had explained," the prince 
said, with a polite smile of dismissal, "the 
little ruse of which I had been the victim. 
There was no reason longer to impede my 
journey." 

It cost me twenty-six pounds sterling, out 
of my own pocket, to hire an extra train ; but 
I did not grumble, as it enabled me to reach 
Vienna in time to escape a reprimand. The 



316 THE ROLL OP MUSIC. 

exact fate of the other captives I never knew, 
but I believe that they were not severely 
punished, since, by a lucky accident, they 
had not had time to affix their signatures to 
those already attached to the manifesto which 
Princess Anna had hoodwinked me into car- 
rying to her brother's house, and which was 
a document pledging its subscribers to a 
general revolt. 

Years afterwards, at Lisbon, where Dillon 
was first attache, the latter told me that the 
words he had vainly attempted to bawl in 
my ears as the train swept me past the plat- 
form, merely comprised this friendly warn- 
ing: 

" Ignatius Kraskoff is a notorious spy of 
the police !" 

In which capacity, and in consequence of 
my intimacy at the Sobieski palace, that 
pink and paragon of good travelling servants 
had been instructed to attach himself to me. 



END op VOL. I. 
ODD NEIGHBOURS. 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

" Thirty-eight, I think you said, with 
extras, and the steward's fee two guineas 
more ?" I asked. My tone of voice was des- 
pondent enough, for I saw something like a 
lazy scorn come over the clerk's face as he 
replied, 

" That's correct. Two guineas at least." 

"Those, then, are the lowest terms for 
cabin passengers." 

" The lowest, by the James Watt,*' returned 
the shipping clerk, with every sign of being 
bored at my pertinacity, and rustling the 
leaves of his ledger to and fro. 

"You may, of course, get berthed much 
more cheaply among the Dutch or Spanish 

VOL. II. B 



2 A CHKAP PASSAGE HOME. 

vessels in harbour, but in that case we can do 
nothing to further your views/' 

I sighed, and turned away. Poverty, no 
doubt, often causes a man to take a jaundiced 
view of the conduct and motives of those 
around him ; but I could not help fancying 
that the persons lounging about the office 
where this brief dialogue had taken place, and 
who had looked up from their newspapers, or 
suspended their chat to listen to my request, 
were regarding me with contemptuous wonder. 
A foreigner, fairly well dressed, in that city 
of palaces, and unable or unwilling to pay 
some forty-four pounds for a luxurious pas- 
sage to England ! 

I hurried away, but when out of sight of 
the office windows, I sat down upon a stone 
post on the broad quay, and gave myself up 
to reflections of a character rather bitter than 
sweet. Three years spent in Russia, and 
nothing to show for them. Three years of 
change and toil, of waiting and enforced 
inaction, of hardships and hard work, but 
where was the fruit of so much thought and 
labour. There was none ; I was leaving the 
czar's dominions a still poorer man than I had 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. t> 

entered them, and this not from any improvi- 
dence or indolence on my own part, but in 
consequence of a series of petty misfortunes. 
It was not that I had not occasionally had 
well-paid employment in my own line as an 
analytical chemist ; but that I had vainly 
tried to save . the great expense of living and 
travelling in Russia keeping my purse lean in 
spite of myself. Lately I had been retained 
for several months, at a liberal salary, to assay 
the ores and other products of Prince Vassili- 
koff*8 mines in the Ural chain, and my 
thoughts and fingers had been ceaselessly busy 
with malachite and platinum, gold grains and 
native copper. But soon after my engage- 
ment came to an end, the breaking of a bank 
had mulcted one-half of my little savings, 
and the expenses of a tedious country fever, 
of which I sickened at Taganrog, had reduced 
my funds to a very low ebb indeed. 

So there I was, on the quay of Odessa, 
wistfully computing the amount of a few 
dollars and roubles that remained, and pon- 
dering on the best means of getting home to 
England, where I had hopes of promptly ob- 
taining employment. My anxiety was not 

B 2 



4 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

entirely selfish. I had a mother and sisters 
at home, not, indeed, dependent upon me for 
support, but in narrow circumstances, and I 
had often promised myself the pleasure of 
giving them many comforts which had been 
their's in earlier days, and before my father's 
misfortunes and death. This now could not 
be. My slender means required to be most 
carefully husbanded, were I to get home at 
all. And I was still weak and emaciated 
after the fever, and unfit to bear much priva- 
tion, or I might have found an economical 
passage on board one of those unclean foreign 
vessels, whose sfovenly decks and untidy 
rigging contrasted so strongly with the trim- 
ness of the James Watt, at anchor beyond. 

There was a Spanish schooner, deep laden, 
that was moored close to the quay. Her 
decks were encumbered and foul, her cabins, 
as I guessed, mere flea-haunted dens, and the 
shaggy olive-skinned crew, in their red sashes 
and red Catalan caps, were quarrelling over 
their greasy cards, or eating with wooden 
spoons some dark mess of semi-liquid food, 
the garlic and oil of which I could smell from 
where I sat. No doubt the Spaniard would 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 5 

take me as a passenger at a low rate, but I 
was ill and weak yet, and could not bring 
myself to face a month in such companion- 
ship. 

There were plenty of vessels, lofty-masted 
American clippers, huge-hulled barques from 
Bremen or Hamburg, Dutch, Turkish, and 
Maltese craft, but only a per-centage bound 
for England, and none so attractive as the 
James Watt. I sighed as I glanced at her 
red chimneys, clean decks, shining cabin 
windows, the awning over her poop, and the 
spruce figure-head as gay as paint and Dutch 
metal could make it, and thought how pleasant 
would have been the run home in her, over 
the summer sea. There is a longing for 
home that seizes on a lonely Englishman, 
and especially a sick Englishman, in a far 
distant country, to which words cannot do 
justice. It must he felt. 

" Pardon me, sir, if I intrude ! You seek 
a passage to Liverpool? do you not?" said 
a soft musical voice at my elbow, a voice soft 
enough and musical enough to have belonged 
to a young girl. I turned my head, and saw 
that the person who had accosted me was a 



b A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

well dressed, slightly built young man, with 
a smooth dark face and brilliant restless eyes. 
Very handsome, and very elegant, as he stood 
beside me, gracefully bowing, with uplifted 
hat and winning smile, but the first impres- 
sion on my mind was one of distrust. I felt 
ashamed of the impression. 

" You seek a passage ? Indeed I know that 
you do. I was in the office, yonder, when 
you called just now.*' 

And he pointed with his supple forefinger, 
clothed in spotless yellow kid, towards the 
imposing edifice I had so lately left. He had 
been there, then, I thought, probably con- 
cealed from me by that group of newspaper- 
reading loungers of which I have spoken, and 
I was silly enough to feel a twinge of pain 
at the reflection that he had heard my ques- 
tions and the clerk's replies, and knew how poor 
I was. The young man possibly guessed 
what was passing through my mind, for his 
flexible voice assumed a tone of grave courtesy 
as he resumed : 

" Forgive my intrusion. I am not prompted 
by idle curiosity, I do assure you. It is a 
matter of mutual convenience that I wish to 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 7 

speak about. You are going to England, and 
I am in a position to offer you the chance of 
making the trip as comfortable as if you em- 
barked in the James Watt, and as economical 
as if you put up with the miseries of one of 
those exceedingly dirty but picturesque craft 
before us." 

The distrustful impression was waxing very 
faint by this time, but I still felt some doubts 
as to the exact social status of my new ac- 
quaintance. He was not a sailor, that was 
plain, and while his look and tone were those 
of an educated man, he was too young for 
a merchant. 

" Then you have . you are *' I began, 

in some perplexity. 

** Not a tout . not that, 1 assure you, since 
I see that you are too polite to finish the sen- 
tence," said ray companion, with a ringing 
laugh that spoke of exuberant spirits and 
a genial nature ; " I am merely the supercargo 
of the Seven Angels there, about to sail for 
Liverpool, and I should gladly take you 
with us on the voyage . that is all, my dear 



sir." 



The impression was quite gone now, and 



b A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

as I looked at the noble ship, a stately three- 
master, anchored some cables' length from 
the quay, I felt a thrill of pleasure, slightly 
alloyed by doubts as to whether I and my 
new friend could really come to terras. To 
my great relief, however, I found this an 
easy affair. The Seven Angels was to sail on 
Tuesday, the day before that appointed for 
the departure of the James Watt, and I could 
be well accommodated on board of her for a 
very few pounds. 

" This is how we stand," said the young 
supercargo, "and this you have a right to 
know. The ship, an old one but a good 
one, is going to England with a cargo of 
wheat from this port, added to which we are 
to take in oil at Trebizond. The freight 
being an unusually valuable one, I have been 
put on board as supercargo, my father, you 
must know, being part owner of vessel and 
goods, the remaining shares in which belong 
to other merchants of this place. Now, the 
ship not being regularly on the Liverpool line, 
seldom carries passengers, ample and well- 
titted as her cabins are, and we never adver- 
tise. It so happens that an English merchant 



A CHEAP PASSAGE EO'ME. 9 

of this place has begged us as a favour to take 
charge of his daughter going home to finish 
her education at a Brighton school, and there 
is some awkwardness about it, for though 
Captain Veltrivitch is a good fatherly old man, 
his time is much taken up, and, in a word, 
Miss Brackley cannot sit all day in the cabin 
in no other company than mine. So, you 
see, if you will take a berth, you will relieve us 
from some embarrassment, and I will promise 
not to charge you a copeck more than cost 
price, so that if you go slowly, your trip will 
be cheap and not disagreeable. Come aboard 
and judge for yourself.** 

And a boat being quickly hailed, we were 
soon aboard the Seven Angels, a large and 
handsome ship, faultlessly trim and neat, 
though with the high poop and elaborate stem- 
galleries of the antique naval style of architec- 
ture. The captain was ashore, but we 
were speedily ushered into the cabins, which 
were certainly handsome and snug, and more 
than warranted the commendations of the 
supercargo. The few seamen I saw about 
were smart fellows, Hydriotes and other 
Levantines ; there was not a rope out of its 



10 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

place; the decks were almost white enough 
to belong to a ship of war ; but I was par- 
ticularly struck by the appearance of the holy 
pictures, with lamps burning before them, 
and of the massive group of wooden images, 
gay with paint, and gold leaf, doing duty 
for a figure-head. Never had I been on 
board a Russian ship before, but I could 
easily believe, what my guide assured me, 
that this was a favourable specimen of their 
mercantile marine. 

" What name shall I have the pleasure of 
putting down ?" said my young friend, pro- 
ducing from a locker a clasped book, and dip- 
ping his pen in the ink. 

" Millington . Alfred Millington," said I ; 
'' may I, in return, ask your name and nation ? 
Your English is perfect, but I hardly fancy 
we are countrymen." 

" In a certain sense we are," said the young 
man, with one of his bright smiles ; " I am 
an Ionian . a Greek from Corfu . and my 
name is Spiridion Colotroni, at your service." 

During the three or four days which pre- 
ceded the ship*8 sailing, Spiridion and I became 
quite intimate, and the young Greek did me 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 11 

several petty kindnesses, doubly grateful to a 
stranger in so lively a town as Odessa. 
Thanks to his introduction I was made free 
of several circles and clubs, which are fre- 
quented not only by the merchants of the 
place, but by the smartest of the staff officers 
and government functionaries, and where I 
was kindly made welcome. Also, although 
unable to present me to his own family, then 
absent at a sea-side villa some leagues off, 
Spiridion introduced me to his father's part- 
ners, and to that Mr. Brackley whose only 
child, as a great favour, was to be transported 
to England on board the Seven Angels. 

We dined at Mr. Brackley's the day before 
sailing, and I shall never forget the group that 
I then saw gathered in the merchant's draw- 
ing-room, connected as it is with the memory 
of the terrible events which followed. The 
master of the house was a plain, downright 
man enough, a little rough and blunt of 
speech and bearing, perhaps, and it struck 
.me that his quiet wife, a subdued little per- 
sonage with hair prematurely grey, and a 
nervous manner, stood in great awe of his 
displeasure. But there was no mistaking the 



12 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

unselfishness and depth of the father's love for 
his only child ; his voice was softened when he 
spoke to her or of her, his eyes followed her 
about the room with a sort of sad pride, and 
1 could see that all his hopes and feelings 
were wrapped up in plans for her welfare. 

As for Marian Brackley, she was simply an 
honest English girl, rather pretty, and very 
good-humoured and full of blithe youthful 
spirits. They were sending her to her all 
but forgotten native land, the place which they 
still fondly called "home," for a better and 
more solid education than Odessa could sup- 
ply, and she was sorry to leave her parents, 
but full of wonder and curiosity about the 
Western European world, and especially the 
great cities of London and Paris, which she 
was to see before returning. The only other 
person present was the commander of the 
Seven Angels, and he was the member of the 
company most worthy of remark. 

Captain Veltrivitch was a grand looking 
old seaman ; there was something noble and 
majestic in his tall and upright form, his 
stately head and weather-beaten face, with its 
shaggy white eye-brows and the fringe of 



A CHfeAP PASSAGE HOME. 13 

white hair that hung about his high forehead. 
H.e wore two Russian decorations, and was 
somewhat stifP and slow in his gait, in conse- 
quence, as Spiridion told me, of a wound in 
the knee received at Navarino. He had, 
indeed, served long and creditably in the 
imperial navy, but when I asked my Greek 
informant why he had left it, Spiridion laid 
his finger on his lips, and muttered something 
about pohtical reasons. I remarked that, con- 
trary to the usual custom of veterans, the 
aged officer was not inclined to dilate upon 
his military career, and when Mr. Brackley 
touched on the subject, he answered with dry 
brevity, and showed signs of relief when some 
other topic was started. 

But the captain of the Seven Angels was 
far from being a silent member of the party ; 
he talked well and pleasantly of the interior 
of Russia, of seafaring experiences during the 
four years he had filled his present post, and 
not only of foreign ports but also of foreign 
capitals, their architecture, picture-galleries, 
and so forth. His language and anecdotes 
were those of a well-informed person, and I 
took much pleasure in his conversation, but 



14 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

after a time an odd fancy seized upon me. I 
fancied that Captain Veltrivitch was afraid of 
Spiridion, that he watched his eye as a dog 
watches the countenance of his master, and 
that, according to the expression of Spiridion's 
bright face, so the captain's vivacity rose or 
fell, and his flow of words slackened or 
increased. Nay, such is the power of ima- 
gination, that I thought that once or twice I 
intercepted a stolen look of command, a quick 
imperious flash, in the eyes of the young 
supercargo, and that each time this occurred, 
the old captain, whose spirits had begun to 
flag, and whose features were sinking into 
mriody repose, started, made an effort over his 
own sad thoughts, and took up the ball of 
conversation with the utmost good humour. 
And yet I must have been mistaken, for how 
absurd was the notion that such a careless 
butterfly nature as that of gay Spiridion 
could exercise authority over that of the stout 
old seaman, in whose praise Mr. Brackley was 
loud when the captain bade us good night, 
and departed the first of the company. 

*' A noble old fellow !" said the merchant, 
wannly, rubbing his broad hands together ; 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 15 

" he is about the only Russian commander to 
whose care I should have liked to entrust my 
girl. He has children of his own. By the 
way, Colotroni, has anything been heard lately 
of that son of his in Siberia ?" 

Spiridion gave a little start, but immediately 
recovered his composure. 

"Not to my knowledge," he answered; 
**the skipper never cares to talk on that 
subject. Perhaps the young man is dead. 
At any rate, he is dead to the world.*' 

"No chance of his pardon, I suppose?" 
said Mr. Brackley, in a meditative way, for 
the pain of parting with his daughter had 
made him unusually sympathetic with the 
griefs of others. 

Spiridion was afraid there was no such 
chance. Still, greater offenders had been re- 
leased before the expiration of their sentence, 
and no one knew when some whim of cle- 
mency might possess the imperial mind, or 
the minds of the Czar's ministers. And, for 
the sake of the poor gallant old father, he, 
Spiridion, wrould be glad to hear that the 
younger Veltrivitch had a chance of pardon ; 



16 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

to which Mr. Brackley heartily, and Mrs. 
Brackley timidly, assented. 

"At ten to-morrow, then, T shall bring 
Marian on board. You sail at noon, sharp ?" 
said the merchant, as he bade us good night. 

" Sharp ! The captain is as punctual as 
Time himself," answered Spiridion, as he 
waved his hand in adieu. We walked home- 
wards arm in arm, since my lodging was near 
the waterside, where also stood the Colotroni's 
house, and, as I went on through the moonlit 
streets, I could not help reverting to the 
theme of Captain Veltrivitch and his son. " A 
political offence, of course ?" I hinted. 

Spiridion made answer in his usual airy 
way : 

"Political . to be sure it was. In Russia,/ 3 
you know, we move in an atmosphere of in- 
trigues, domestic or politic ; the very air is 
thick with plots. I see you are dying to 
know the history of the Veltrivitch family, 
and though I am not fully conversant with its 
details, I can at least give you a sketch. The 
captain was well off; a noble, of course, or he 
could not have been an officer in the Russian 
navy. He doated on his son, young Deme- 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 17 

trius, who was a lieutenant in his own ship. 
Well, the lad picked up dangerous ideas, 
dangerous friends, got mixed up in 9 con- 
spiracy, and the whole affair was found out, 
as always happens. The youngster would 
not have been very severely dealt with, but 
unfortunately he had laid hands on a certain 
chest of silver roubles belonging to the govern- 
ment, and which, in his amiable zeal, he had 
devoted to the use of his visionary republic ; 
this was a great fault, and he has been in 
Siberia these five years." 

"And the father?" 

" Old Veltrivitch was tried by court-martial, 
on suspicion of being his son's accomplice. I 
really doii't know whether he was acquitted, 
or whether the emperor put a stop to the 
proceedings. But 1 am certain that he re- 
signed his commission voluntarily, and, soon 
after, he came here, and became a merchant 
skipper. He was all but ruined; I believe 
his son had been very extravagant, and so 
forth, before the crash came, but what does a 
poor Sybarite like myself know of plots and 
schemes? Eh, my dear serai-countryman, 
youth should be a time for enjoyment. You 

VOL. II. c 



18 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

won't come to the circle and have a few last 
games of dominoes, and some punch P Then 
good night, and a riverderla !" 

And I heard him humming an opera tune 
as he went up the marble steps. For the first 
time this gaiety of his grated somewhat on 
my feelings ; his tone in speaking of old 
Veltrivitch and his misfortunes had been care- 
less, almost exultant, and I began to doubt 
whether the exquisite urbanity of my Greek 
friend might not hide a very callous heart. 
And yet I blamed myself, as I strode on, for 
entertaining harsh thoughts of Spiridion, or 
expecting too much sensibility from that light 
and shallow nature. The young Greek had 
been kind to me, kind to the merchant, our 
late host, kind even to poor neglected Mrs. 
Brackley, kind to Marian, our future fellow- 
passenger, to whom his bearing was brotherly 
and frank, and it was too much to expect that 
he should always take a serious view of the 
misfortunes of others. And having reasoned 
thus, I laid my head upon the pillow, and 
dreamed of England and the dear ones at 
home. 

We weighed anchor next day, with every 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 19 

prospect of fiue weather. Only a few rounded 
masses of white cloud, like so many wool- 
packs, rolled languidly across the deep blue of 
the sky, the little waves glistened as if mo- 
delled in glass, and there was just breeze 
enough to fill the topsails of the good ship, as 
she swam majestically out of the roadstead. 
Before long, Odessa, its busy quays, its many 
masts, white houses, and church roofs of 
various bright colours, faded away from our 
sight, and the tall ships themselves were hull 
down in the haze of distance. 

Mr. Brackley had brought his daughter, 
and his daughter's trunks and bandboxes, on 
board in very good time. He tried to feign 
supreme content and cheerfulness, spoke of 
Marian's voyage as a mere holiday trip, and 
her absence as of trifling duration, and did his 
best to be jovial and light of spirit. But there 
was a good deal of pain behind this mask of 
gaiety ; it was the merchant's first separation 
from the darling child with whose life and 
happiness his very heart-strings were knit up, 
and it was plain that to say farewell cost him 
a sharp pang. There were tears in Marian 
Brackley's eyes too, but she bravely kept them 

2 




20 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

back. She knew, probably, that had she given 
way to grief her father would have been quite 
unmanned. I turned away my own eyes not 
to see the last embrace between parent and 
child, and made myself purposely deaf to the 
last few broken words of parting, and then the 
shore boat, the rowers of which had long been 
getting uneasy and impatient, was cast oflF, 
and we saw Mr. Brackley standing up in the 
stem-sheets, waving his hat and hand as long 
as hat and hand continued to be visible. Then 
old Captain Veltrivitch led the sobbing girl 
down to her state-room. 

" Better rest a little while, my dear,*' said 
he, in his slowly uttered but perfectly pure 
English ; " I am your father's deputy, and I 
must not let you break your heart on the first 
day of the voyage.'* 

The arrangements of the Seven Angels were 
comfortable enough. There was a large and 
handsome cabin . what in a regular packet 
would have been dubbed the saloon . and into 
this all our state-rooms, as well as the cap- 
tain's cabin and steward's pantry, opened. 
The deep stem windows offered the most 
delightful cool and snug lounging places. 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 21 

where the ear was soothed- by the eternal 
wash and ripple of the water as it seethed and 
swelled under the ship's counter and against 
the rudder, and through the windows them- 
selves was to be seen a stretch of dimpling 
blue waves, framed as in a picture. There 
was a stem gallery too, where we could idle in 
fine weather, and the lofty poop, with its 
awning to keep off the strong rays of the 
Eastern sun, was a point of observation from 
which we could look out while enjoying the 
breeze. 

We had nothing to find fault with, for not 
only was a good table kept, but, thanks to the 
liberality of the owners, there was a cow on 
board, and we had fresh milk, the rarest of 
luxuries in a Mediterranean voyage. But, 
indeed, we were bidden to consider ourselves 
rather as guests than as paying passengers, 
and it was undeniable that the proprietors of 
the Seven Angels had no eye to screwing a 
profit out of our fare. 

The ship was a fine one, but a slow sailer ; 
even a seaman^s partiality could not help ack- 
nowledging that, and though I was not very 
experienced in maritime matters, I could not 



22 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

but imagine that the Seven Angels was more 
fit for the calm than the rough of ocean life. 
The fine weather \vhich witnessed our de- 
parture from Odessa proved fickle, and a bout 
of stormy weather succeeded, during which 
the huge old vessel groaned and creaked in a 
most lugubrious manner, shipped so many 
seas that the hatches had to be battened down 
and the ports made fast, and sprung a leak, 
which kept the grumbling crew busy at 
the pumps. But Captain Veltrivitch handled 
her skilfully, and when the gale fell, the leak 
was adroitly stopped, and the clang of chain 
and lever ceased. Still, the wind continued 
provokingly variable, and we were repeatedly 
forced out of our course, and driven far to the 
westward over the muddv waters of the Black 
Sea . waters more shallow and dirty, but more 
perilous to navigators, than any in the Levant. 
At last we bore up for Trebizoiid, where the 
oil destined to complete our cargo was taken 
in, and where the Armenian caulkers soon 
patched up the vessel's injured side, and then 
we sailed again. 

" Slow work, Millington, but not, I hope, 
dull or comfortless," said Spiridion, gaily; 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 23 

" we have paid our forfeit to Neptune, and 
shall probably bowl from the Dardanelles to 
the Mersey as smoothly as a Cowes yacht in 
the Solent. The barometer tells a very satis- 
factory tale." 

These words were spoken on the evening 
which witnessed our departure from Trebi- 
zond, as we stood under the awning that 
shaded the poop, gazing now upon the white 
and yellow town, lessening to Lilliputian pro- 
portions as we made sail to seawards, now 
towards the west, where a blended web of 
colours, with crimson predominating, stained 
all the sunset waters. Spiridion was in high 
spirits on that evening ; he insisted on bring- 
ing Miss Brackley's guitar on deck, and sang 
us several songs in different languages, play- 
ing a masterly accompaniment, for he was a 
capital musician. Captain Veltrivitch, on the 
other hand, was restless and ill at ease, made 
curt and peevish answers to any remark 
addressed to him, and was, for the first time, 
very bad company. The wind served us well 
that night, but on the following day, which 
was sultry and oppressive, light puffs of air 
succeeded to the steady breeze, and after 



r 



24 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

wasting much time and trouble in incessant 
tacks and changes of course, we finally lay-to 
for the night, some five miles from the coast 
of Asia Minor. 

How well I remember that evening, with 
the purple mountains of Anatolia looming in 
the distance, and the sun going down, blood 
red, on the European side. There was no 
cause for apprehension, and it had been out of 
a prudent resolve to avoid the chance of a 
collision during the darkness with some of 
the numerous craft that swarm about the 
entrance to the Bosphorus, that our com- 
mander had resolved on lying by for the 
night. To-morrow we should see the Castles 
before noon, and, a few hours later, Con- 
stantinople itself. 

The crew were lounging about the deck, 
forwards, some preparing their supper, which 
chiefly consisted of outlandish Russian salads, 
made with the fresh vegetables brought from 
Trebizond, some asleep, and others gathered 
about the forecastle, where a fiddle was sound- 
ing merrily. The fiddler was Jack Judkins, a 
little sun-browned English sailor, the life of 
the ship before the mast, as Spiridion was of 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 25 

the state-cabin. He was the only Briton on 
board, except a gaunt grave seaman from 
Aberdeen, ^Eneas M'Donald by name, and 
whose austere demeanour made a fine contrast 
to the other's flippancy of bearing and speech. 
Oddly enough, the tall Scotchman had an in- 
separable messmate still more unlike himself 
than Judkins, a brisk negro lad, whose white 
teeth and rolling eyeballs were now expressing 
the utmost approval of the jig which the 
amateur fiddler played. This negro, whose 
name was Roderick Sprowle, but who was 
never known by any other title than " Rod," 
or "Black Rod," was, I believe, a runaway 
from some Carolina plantation, and had a 
curious afiection and admiration for M'Donald, 
whom he had followed from ship to ship, 
never caring where he engaged his services, 
so that he could be near his white friend. It 
was curious to see this ill-assorted Damon 
and Pythias together, and Judkins always 
spoke of them as Robinson Crusoe and Man 
Friday. 

The rest of the creWwere not very interest- 
ing personages. About half of them were 
dull bearish mujiks from Malorossia, while the 



ms 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 



rent were keen-visaged Hydriote and Mainote 
Greeks, tolerable sailors, but somewhat averse 
to sustained exertion. It was creditable to 
Captain Veltrivitch that with such hetero- 
geneous materials he had got the ship into so 
good a condition as to discipline. 

I had always had a taste for the sea, and it 
had become a habit with me to go forward 
and chat with my fellow countrymen and their 
black ally . a fortunate habit, as it turned out, 
since the men had thus got to know me 
better and trust me more, than could other- 
wise have been the case. 

Once or twice, on this particular evening, 
as I stood with the other cabin inmates beside 
the taffrail, I fancied that ^neas McDonald 
was watching my movements, and that he 
seemed anxious to attract my attention with- 
out provoking remark from the black-capped 
Russians or greaved and kilted Greeks around 
him. I had no cause to be mysterious in 
my proceedings, but man is an imitative 
creature, and the Scotchman's evident caution 
infected me with some of his own distrust for 
the foreign portion of the crew. I therefore 
left the group aft with as careless an air as 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 27 

I could assume, and sauntered languidly for- 
ward to where the gaunt form of the Scottish 
mariner, in blue Jersey and Kilmarnock cap, 
towered above the bulwarks. McDonald had 
passed one arm through the last round of the 
Jacob's ladder, and was meditatively chewing 
a quid and staring at the water below, when 
I came up. 

"Good evening, Mac," said I; "a fine 
night we shall have, unless there's a shift in 
the wind." 

" 'Deed, sir, but ye're richt," answered the 
wary Aberdonian, lifting his eyes and taking 
one of those sweeping surveys of sky and 
sea so customary with an old sailor; then 
dropping his voice, he added : 

** Mr. Millington, I jalouse there's a squall 
brewin' here aboard. I've noted mair whis- 
pering and signals than suld be amang honest 
men/' 

" The plague you have !" said I. " Do you 
mean that you suspect a mutiny ?" 

" Hoot ! whisht 1 have a care, gudesake I" 
interrupted iEneas, hurriedly ; " some o' they 
loons understand English. That's just it, sir. 
There's some colloguing and plots afoot ; and 



28 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

the puir creature Rod being just a simple 
black sumph, and Judkins a feather-brained 
gowk, I've naebody to tak' counsel wi' but 
yoursel, landsman though you be, at the 
back o't." 

McDonald's conclusion was scarcely com- 
plimentary but this was no time to indulge 
any silly sentiments of wounded self-conse- 
quence. I knew the Scot to be a cool, long- 
headed fellow, steel to the backbone in danger, 
and with the experience derived from a quar- 
ter of a century's seafaring all over the globe. 
I had heard, too, of ugly things being done on 
board Levantine vessels, and as I looked 
around at the muscular forms and brutish 
features of the Russian mariners, and at the 
piratical aspect of the Greeks, with their 
gaudy jackets, embossed greaves, and kilts of 
dirty white, I could not deny that we were 
utterly at their mercy, should there really 
be a conspiracy to seize the ship. 

After some serious talk, it was agreed 
that I should take the earliest opportunity 
of informing Captain Veltrivitch, privately, 
that a suspicious intelligence existed among 
several of the crew, and that the officers and 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 29 

passengers had better be on their guard. I 
should have mentioned that the first mate 
was a Russian, the second being a Greek, 
and that it was McDonald's opinion that the 
superior of these, at any rate, was ignorant of 
any plot. 

I went aft, and to my surprise I found 
Miss Brackley alone upon the poop, reading. 
She told me that Spiridion had gone away as 
soon as I went forward, pleading headache, 
and announcing his intention to lie down for 
a while, but that the captain had very lately 
quitted the deck. I at once descended the 
companion-ladder, determined to tap at the 
door of the skipper's cabin and tell my tale 
without delay ; but as my foot was on the 
last step of the narrow and winding stair, I 
heard a word that checked my progress, 
hushed my very breathing, and appeared to 
curdle the blood in my veins. 

The word was " Murder." 

*' Murder ! that I should do it ! /a mur- 
derer!" said some one in a thick broken 
voice, the voice of Captain Veltrivitch. The 
answer to this passionate exclamation was in 
the clear mocking tones of Spiridion : 



30 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

" Bah, mon capitaine ! what's in a name ? 
When anything gets in my way, I crush it, 
man or scorpion. Be a man, Alexis Veltri- 
vitch, and remember what is at stake. The 
liberty of your son. It is the gold of the 
underwriters who have insured the Seven 
Angels, ship and cargo, that must furnish the 
bribe that sets him free." 

There was a pause. Cautiously I bent my 
body forward, without moving my feet, and 
Gould thus see into the great saloon. The 
door of the captain's cabin was ajar. Those 
within were not visible, but the sound of their 
voices reached me with surprising distinct- 
ness. They spoke in the French tongue, for 
Spiridion was not well versed in the Russian 
language, and of course every word was 
clearly comprehensible. It was with a sound 
that was between a sob and a groan that the 
old captain broke the terrible silence. 

" Cannot she be saved ? It will break her 
father's heart, and I have broken bread at his 
table, and he trusted his child to me . ^the 
lamb to the butcher. I don't care so much 
about the others . the men : let them be 
sacrificed, but the girl . I tell you, Spiridion, 



A CHAP PASSAGE HOME. 31 

I have daughters of my own, and I cannot 
bear to do this black deed/' 

"Think of your son," hissed Spiridion, in 
a tone that was worthy of a tempting fiend . 
" your son, sick, dying in the mines, and this 
bribe to the minister's favourite sets him free 
. gives him back to life and you. This 
affair over, all our fortunes are made, your 
rank in the navy will be restored, and I will 
burn before your face the letters that prove . 
you know what . the letters relating to the 
stolen money, and which, if shown to the 
Czar '* 

" Hush ! hush !" cried the old man. " I 
obey, Spiridion, I obey. I am yours, body 
and soul, alas ! Where is the pen. I will 
write the entry in the ship's log-book . the 
rest is your work ; but ah ! cannot the inno- 
cent girl be spared ?" 

" No inconvenient witnesses, I thank you," 
sneered Spiridion. "Here is the pen . 
write." 

At this moment it occurred to me, stupified 
as I was with horror and surprise, that in an 
instant the plotters would sally forth and 
detect me, while, if I ascended the compan- 



32 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

ion, it was hardly possible but that I should 
make some noise, which might provoke fatal 
suspicion. Therefore, half instinctively, I 
stole on tiptoe into the saloon, crouched 
behind the crimson curtains that hung in 
heavy folds before the door of Miss Brackley's 
state-room, and, with all my speed, was but 
just in time. The conspirators passed by me 
and went on deck, the captain with an uncer- 
tain step, and features in whose painful 
working might be read the signs of mental 
suffering, the Greek, jaunty and smooth of 
mien, but with a dangerous sparkle in his 
serpent eye, and a paler cheek than usual. 
Scarcely was the coast clear before I ran to 
the captain's cabin, the door of which still 
stood ajar, and there, sure enough, lay the 
ship's log-book open, and with a fresh entry 
written on the page before me. The ink was 
still wet. What I read ran as follows : 

" Coast of Anatolia (here followed a latitude 
and a date). On this night, during the middle 
watch, the ship Seven Angels, from Odessa 
to Liverpool, with corn and oil, was wholly 
destroyed by fire, vessel and cargo Papers 
. manifest, logs, and invoices saved. Money 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 33 

lost. Officers and most of crew escaped to 
shore in the large boat. Unfortunately there 
perished, by the fire, and by upsetting of a 
Waller boat, the two passengers, Mr. Milling- 
ton, and Miss Marian Brackley, also John 
Judkins and iEneas McDonald, able seamen, 
and Roderick Sprowle, ordinary seaman, ship- 
ped at Odessa. Fire the result of accident. 
Cause doubtful." 

Here ended this precious entry, the death- 
warrant and epitaph, at once, of five human 
beings, myself included. No wonder that as 
1 perused the words I felt my forehead grow 
moist with a sickly dew, and that the letters 
seemed to dance before my eyes. In vain did 
I try to tear myself away. Some terrible 
fascination riveted my feet to the floor, my 
eyes to the page on which still glistened the 
wet ink of that last dread sentence. How 
long I stood, thunderstruck and half incredu- 
lous, I cannot say, but the rustle of feminine 
attire caught my ear, and I turned my head 
with a quick start to find Marian Brackley . 
one of the doomed . standing in the middle 
of the saloon, and looking at me. I had left 
the door wide open, and was, of course, plainly 

VOL. II. D 



34 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

visible, in the act, apparently, of prying into 
some papers of the captain's. 

My impulse to tell Miss Brackley all carried 
the day, and most fortunate it was that I h^ 
not time for reflection. Common-place pru- 
dence would have led me to keep the danger- 
ous secret to myself, but this was no ordinary 
occasion, and, to my great comfort, the young 
girl showed a fortitude quite unexpected. 
She did not faint or weep, though her cheeks 
faded to ashen paleness as she read the 
dreadful wprds, and listened to my hasty 
comments on them. It was evident, I told 
her, that the wicked scheme for making profit 
by the destruction of the Seven Angels was 
deeply laid, and that our deaths, along with 
such members of the crew as were not im- 
plicated in the plot, were deemed necessary 
to give colour to the plausible tale of the 
incendiaries. And now, what was to be 
done ? We were warned, but what hope had 
we. To tax the villains with their perfidy 
would be to seal our own fate. 

After the first moments of horror, and the 
doubt with which the innocent usually receive 
the earliest hints of crime in others, Marian 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 35 

Brackley showed the ready wit of her sex. 
Still, her pleasant young voice was harsh, and 
her lips white and trembling, as she said : 

"It is very, very dreadful. Poor papa, 
that loves me so dearly, and raararaa, too, at 
home, what will they do when they hear . and 
you, Mr. Millington, who have a mother longing 
to see you, far off in England, and the poor 
sailors, all to be burned to death for the sake 
of money, . oh, God help us and forgive 
them ! Mr. Millington, let us fly, let us 
escape !" 

" Escape ! but how ?'* I answered, 

Marian's answer was prompt. 

** The sailors, that tall young Scotchman 
above all, thev are brave fellows, and used to 
danger. Go to them, Mr. Millington, and 
tell them what shocking schemes are going 
forward, and perhaps we can all get away. 
But whatever you do, show these wretches no 
change in your manner, lest they suspect us." 

"You are right. Miss Brackley," said I; 
" and yet . how to make the men believe me. 
How to induce them to put faith in so wild a 
story." 

Marian Brackley had a device ready in an 

D 2 



36 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

instant. Catching up a penknife, with a firm 
hand and before I could remonstrate, she had 
cut out the page of the log-book that contained 
the fatal entry, and given it to me. Then she 
closed the book and clasped it, bidding nie 
show the writing to McDonald, as the best 
evidence of my story's truth. 

" It is rash ; if the villains return, to find 
the page gone, we are lost," said I. 

" They will not come together. Whichever 
comes in will believe the log-book to have 
been closed and clasped by his confederate, 
and neither will care to open it. Go, Mr. 
Millington, pray go quickly." 

And she almost pushed me out of the cabin. 
As I ascended the companion-ladder, I saw 
Spiridion hovering about the hatchway. Guilt 
is ever suspicious, and he gave me a sharp 
glance as our eyes met. I kept my counten- 
ance well, I suppose, for he instantly took 
my arm, and strolled along the deck in my 
company, laughing and chattering in his usual 
light style, but with rather a forced mirth. 
It was some time before I could shake him off 
without appearing anxious to do so, and I 
began to fear that he meant to keep his eye 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 37 

on me till supper-time, in which case I should 
have been cut off from communication with 
the British portion of the crew. But the 
captain, who was sitting, moody and stern of 
aspect, beside the tall binnacle lamp, called 
out impatiently, ** Spiridion, come here a 
moment," and I was set free. 

With some little trouble I contrived to 
attract the notice of the intelligent Aberdeen 
man, and we held a short but weighty con- 
ference beside the bulwarks. McDonald 
showed less surprise than I haid expected, but 
twice read over the written words which I 
cautiously thrust into his hand, and then 
gruffly remarked that " the day's darg" would 
be a hard one, but that '*with a blessing, 
we'd win through it." 

I asked if he thought we could not take 
one of the small boats and slip off unper- 
ceived, but McDonald shook his sagacious 
head, and bade me remark that the launch 
alone was afloat, and towing astern with the 
oars in her. The small boats were all on 
board, and could not be got out without 
attracting notice; besides, a very cursory 
inspection of the yawl, that swung near where 



38 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

we stood, showed that the plugs in the bottom 
of the boat had been removed. 

**rve nae doubt, sir, the stony-hearted 
villains took oot the plugs on purpose. They 
kenned we'd make a struggle for life when 
they abandoned the ship," said ^neas ; *' but 
leave it to me, and I'll tell Jock Judkins nae 
mair than is necessary, and Red Sprowle just 
naething at a', and all you and the young 
leddy have to do is to be on deck, and ready, 
when the middle watch is set. Go and stand 
by the man at the wheel and talk poetry or 
what ye like, and be gazin' at the stars and 
the clouds, and leave the rest o't to us." 

I will not dilate on that last meal, the sup- 
per, where we sat down to break bread with 
assassins. It was a cruel trial. There, oppo- 
site to me, sat cowardly murder, in the person 
of Spiridion, smiHng on those who were be- 
trayed to die. There, too, sat Captain Vel- 
trivitch, ill at ease, with bloodshot eyes and 
quivering features, drinking deeply, and ex- 
cusing his discomposure on the ground of 
indisposition. I tried to eat, but every mor- 
sel choked me. I tried to talk and laugh, 
but felt frightened at the sound of my own 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 39 

voice. How I envied Marian her courageous 
composure. 

At rather an earlier hour than usual we all 
retired to rest, ostensibly at least, Spiridion 
yawning and stretching his limbs with every 
sign of lassitude, the captain dogged and dark 
as ever. A little before the time for changing 
the watch, I cautiously opened the door of 
my sleeping cabin, stole out, carrying my 
slippers in my hand, lest my step should be 
heard, and, tapping at the door of my fair 
neighbour s state-room, was quickly joined 
by Miss Brackley, who was wrapped in a dark 
cloak, that almost hid her light-coloured 
mushn dress. We glided up the cabin stairs 
without exchanging a word. 

Sail had been made on the vessel when the 
breeze freshened at sunset, but the wind was 
light, and our progress slow. Not a man was 
to be seen aft of the mainmast, except the 
helmsman. He was a Greek, and he eyed us 
with keen and angry scrutiny when first we 
appeared. As we paid no attention to him, 
but leant on the taffrail, conversing as usual 
in a low tone, and, to all seeming, absorbed 
in contemplation of the glorious starry heaven 



i 



40 A CHFAP PASSAOK HOME. 

and sparkling sea, the fellow soon ceased to 
pay any heed to us, and I heard him chuckle 
to himself, and hum a scrap of some Romaic 
song. When the bell struck, and the watch 
was changed, a black-capped Russian came to 
take the helm. The Greek whispered some- 
thing in his ear, and walked forward, and I 
saw the new comer's strong white teeth glisten 
as he grinned at his comrade's remark. But 
he never spoke, and stood with his shoulder 
towards us, and for a long time I heard 
nothing but the sullen flap of the sails over- 
head. 

A noise at last. Two men, wrapped in 
boat cloaks, had come up the cabin stair. 
One of them had stumbled over a coil of rope 
in his way, and in the petulant oath he uttered 
I recognised the voice of Spiridion. The 
other, and more bulky of the two, was the 
captain, and T saw them both proceed to the 
main hatch, withdraw the fastenings, and 
descend into the hold. 

Marian Brackley caught my arm in her 
quivering fingers, and exclaimed, "O, Mr. 
Millington, they have fired the ship/' 

And indeed a spiral column of smoke, 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 41 

accompanied by a crackling sound and a 
strong smell of burning wood and singed 
woollen, came up the cabin hatch. At that 
instant three dark forms, bending low, came 
stealing along with noiseless tread under the 
shadow of the bulwarks. Nearer and nearer 
they drew, until the helmsman started and 
bent forward to peer into the darkness. 
Then the foremost of the stealthy figures leapt 
on with the bound of a tiger, and, with one 
blow of a handspike, dashed the Russian 
senseless on the deck. 

" Weel done, Jock Judkins !" whispered 
McDonald, hoarsely, as he darted on with 
bare feet, followed by the negro ; " haul in the 
tow-rope, so ; now fair and softly aboard, and 
the leddy first, when Rod's over the side to 
help her. Mind your footing, my bonny 
lassie . a slip might cost a' our lives." 

We got on board the boat, unshipped the 
oars, and cut the "painter;" but I suppose 
we made some little noise, for a smothered 
cry arose on board the vessel, and in the 
bright starlight we saw Spiridion and three or 
four more rush to the poop with frantic 
gestures of rage. 



42 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

" Curses on you ! Come back, or I'll fire !" 
yelled the young Greek, levelling a musket 
over the rail. 

"Fire away, you cowardly lubber; who 
cares a mouldy biscuit for your gun," bawled 
Judkins, in derision; but McDonald, more 
thoughtful, by a quick jerk of both arms, 
pulled Marian down under shelter of the 
thwarts, and the ball hissed by, knocking off 
Rod's straw hat. 

" Hi ! Massa 'Donald, him near touch dat," 
cried the negro, but his words were drowned 
by the discharge of several muskets from the 
ship, none of which, however, were well 
aimed. We pulled vigorously; for luckily I 
could row almost as well as the sailors, and, 
heavy as the boat was, our efforts soon car- 
ried us out of range. Through the dim dis- 
tance we could see the black mountains of 
the coast. Once there, we should be safe. 
The only real danger was in pursuit. Marian 
who had taken her place in the stem-sheets, 
and who had cast a wild, half despairmg look 
behind, suddenly cried, 

"Look there . there . horrible, most 
horrible !" 



A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 43 

The huge ship was now a seething pyramid 
of fire ; flames spouted from her port-holes, as 
from the jaws of some fiery dragon ; flames 
ran along her bulwarks; leaped among her 
rigging ; rioted on her deck. The masts were 
kindling into pillars of flame, the sails, the 
cordage, were blazing broad and bright. By 
the glaring light we could plainly see many 
dark forms, some climbing with desperate 
agility to yard and truck, in hopes of prolong- 
ing life ; some toiling to launch the boats, 
made purposely useless by themselves ; some 
whose frantic gestures of despair gave them 
the air of demons as they rushed to and fro 
across that lurid back-ground of fire. 

" They're caught in their ain trap. Heaven 
hae mercy on their sinful souls !'* said McDo- 
nald, grimly, but with an unwonted twitch- 
ing in his stern features. 

" Could we not save them ? O, save them ! 
it is too dreadful !" cried Marian, sobbing. 

But to render aid was impossible. Even 
if we could safely have trusted the forbear- 
ance of such wretches, we were now too far 
off*, and a strong current was sweeping us 
shorewards. The fearful spectacle was brief. 



44 A CHEAP PASSAGE HOME. 

For a little while the burning ship gleamed 
like a volcano in eruption, then came a dull 
booming roar, and blazing planks and spars, 
sails and cordage, went rushing up into the 
air, as the powder in the hold caught fire. 
A thick cloud of smoke was the last we saw 
of the catastrophe. 

With some danger and trouble we effected 
a landing, on a very stony and unfrequented 
part of the coast, and were received hospitably 
enough by the Turkish villagers, whose aga 
sent us on, by slow stages, to the British 
Consulate at Trebizond. Our perils were 
then at an end. Marian Brackley was re- 
stored to her home, luckily before the news 
of the ship's loss reached Odessa ; the seamen 
were forwarded to Constantinople, where they 
easily found employment ; and I was so for- 
tunate as to be offered a passage home in a 
frigate bound for Portsmouth, and the com- 
mander of which had heard of our adventures. 
These made some noise at the time, and the 
production of the leaf from the log-book 
saved the underwriters from a heavy loss, and 
caused no trifling stir at Odessa. 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 



" Great news, glorious news ! Victory ! 
The Danes are falling back ! Flensburg has 
been taken. Flensburg has hoisted the Ger- 
man colours. Hoch liebe Deatschland !'* ' 
bawled a hundred voices at once, and the 
bells in the church tower rang out their 
merriest peal, while the little village was 
decked with ribands and boughs and flowers, 
as gaily as for a fair. There were crowds in 
the straggling street; and, from the open 
windows of most of the houses, hung out 
the gaudy German flag, the tricolor of the 
Fatherland. Young and old wore cockades 
and rosettes of the national colours, and had 
joyous faces and busy tongues. For the vil- 
lage of Steerup, on the direct road from the 
strong fortress of Flensburg to the little har- 



46 CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

hour of Kappel, is a village in which the 
Germans outnumber the Danes in a proportion 
of at least three to one. 

"May Nip and Nock throttle the noi^y 
swine !" growled the old man who walked by 
my side, and who, like myself, found his 
progress so much impeded by the gesticu- 
lating groups in front of every beer-house and 
tavern, that his usual swinging stride was 
reduced to a slow step. "Let us turn up 
this lane to the left, Mr. Harry, and get 
clear of the traitorous crew. This is no place 
for a Dane. If I had but a couple of guns 
charged with grape " 

" Halloa, Captain Bluenose ! you seem out 
of sorts ! Learn to change with the times, 
old sailor; cast your Danish skin, as the 
snakes do in summer, and come forth in 
sprucer guise as a true patriot and a Schles- 
wiger. Here is a pot of the best beer Rostock 
ever brewed, in which to drink the freedom 
of Schleswig-Holstein," broke in a half-tipsy 
German, advancing towards my guide, and 
holding out a tankard invitingly, while his 
companions set up a jeering laugh ; for they 
knew the old " skipper's" Danish sentiments 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 47 

too well to doubt the reception which such a 
proflFer would meet with from him. Indeed, 
a scuflBe seemed more than probable, when a 
sudden shout of " Here they are ! here they 
come !" and a rush on the part of the throng 
to some safe place . such as the gateways of 
yards, or the mouths of lanes and alleys . 
cut short the threatened quarrel, and my 
curiosity kept me in the village street, while 
the old man, muttering curses on the muti- 
neers, remained at my side. We heard the 
roll of drums and the heavy tramp of march- 
*ing men, and strained our eyes towards the 
Flensburg road, whence a cloud of dust began 
slowly to whirl along before the light summer 
breeze. What we were about to see was no 
doubtful spectacle. The Danish troops, beaten 
back at all points by the weight of superior 
numbers, were retreating towards the islands, 
and a column of infantry was to pass through 
Steerup ; the artillery, cavalry, and baggage, 
with the bulk of the army, being sent along 
the broader causeway that traverses HoUebul. 
The Prussians and the insurrectionary army 
of Schleswig-Holsteiners had already occupied 
the principal towns of the duchy, and the 



43 CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

Isle of Alsen was spoken of as the probable 
refuge of the overmatched Danes. 

On they came, marching regularly enough, 
and preserving a martial aspect ; but, for all 
that, the sight was a melancholy one. There 
was a gloomy expression on the faces of the 
beaten soldiers, but it varied much. Some 
looked sullenly downwards, as if unwilling 
to catch the eye of any spectator of their 
disaster, others stared defiantly at the un- 
sympathising faces of the bystanders, and a 
few preserved a bright bold look, as of men 
who had done their best, and who had only 
succumbed to odds that no courage could 
cope with. Many were wounded, having a 
bloody handkerchief tied around their brows, 
or wearing an arm in a sling, and some were 
footsore, or lamed by slight gun-shot hurts, 
and had to limp painfully to keep up with the 
rest. The drums beat, and the colours flut- 
tered ; but there was a funereal sadness about 
the pageant ; and, by the dark looks of the 
Danes, I could see that they knew they were 
passing through a crowd of ill-wishers. 

Still, if no cheer, no friendly word, greeted 
the retiring troops, it is equally certain that 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 49 

no actual insult was oflfered to them. Not a 
villager spoke above breath. Indeed, the 
men kept back, though the women pressed 
forward as if to show the breast-knots and 
fluttering streamers of the German colours, 
and the Schleswig-Holstein rosettes, that they 
wore. The bells in the church tower had 
ceased their clangour; but, of course, the 
flags still flaunted from roof, and spire, and 
casement, and wherever the Danes cast their 
eyes they were met by signs of mute hostility. 
The discipline of the troops, and the temper 
of their chiefs, were such as surprised me. 
Without a threat, or a menacing gesture, 
they pushed steadily on ; though once I saw a 
tall officer, whose arm was in a sUng and 
bandaged, look up at the gaudy banner, red, 
black, and gold, that flapped on the church 
tower, and clutch his drawn sword the tighter 
with his uninjured hand, as he bent his 
head and strode on. And, when the Danish 
rear-guard was passing the last houses of 
Steerup, the bells struck up the joy-peal 
again, while the people raised an insulting 
shout of: 
*' Run, Danes, or Prussians will catch you ! 

VOL. II. E 



50 CAPTAIX BLCEXOSE. 

Schleswig-Holstein glaube !" Aod, at that 
taunt, a dozen soldiers faced-about, and 
ordered arms, as if to fire; bat an officer 
hurried back; the muskets were shouldered 
again, and the faint sound of the Danish 
drum soon died away in the distance. 

" Let us go home/' said Captain Blaenose. 
with an extra hoarseness in his deep strong 
voice ; and home we went. The home whither 
I, an English lad of seventeen, and my surlv 
guide, were wending our wav under the load 
of rods, and leaping-poles, and creels well 
filled with pike and perch, was Fladswast, a 
village Ijing north of Steerup, and nearer to 
the fens and the coast. If Steerup was chiefly 
German (though there were Danish families 
too, sitting with sad hearts, in back rooms, 
and trying to shut out the clamour of the 
enemies of their country), Fladswast was as 
Scandinavian as Harold Harfager. Quite 
nine houses out of ten were inhabited by 
people of the pure Danish stock; many of 
them natives of the isles, or North Jutland. 
But the most thorough Dane, in heart and 
soul, that dwelt in Fladswast, was certainly 
my guide^ philosopher, and friend, in all 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 51 

matters of boating, fishing, and fowling. 
Captain Bluenose. 

This old man's real name was Peter Voss. 
He was a Laaland man. He had served, I 
think, as a ** powder monkey,'* but at any 
rate as a boy, on board one of the Danish 
frigates in the Copenhagen sea-fight of 1807. 
Au unlucky shot from some English ship had 
fired the Dane's magazine, doing dreadful 
mischief, and blowing poor little Peter, as he 
phrased it, "like a feather" up'the hatchway. 
The child was not maimed nor bhnded ; but 
a quantity of the loose gunpowder was blown 
into his face, and disfigured him for life, pro- 
ducing the effect of a ghastly and indelible 
tattooing. Hence, Peter Voss received the 
nickname of Bluenose, which stuck to him to 
the last. He had been man-of-war's-man, 
smuggler, boatswain of an Indiaman, a 
Singapore pilot, mate of an opium clipper, 
and what not. At last he had come back, 
well to do, from the far East ; had married the 
heiress of a small Schleswig farmer, and suc- 
ceeded in right of his wife to the farm. But 
he had never quite divorced himself from the 
blue water on which his best years had been 

 2 



52 . CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

spent. He was still master and owner of a 
tidy sloop, lying at Kappel, and made many a 
profitable cruise, selling grain and bullocks 
among the islands, and bringing back eider- 
down, salt fish, wool, and Norway spars. 
Hence he was always called Schipper Blauness, 
a name which I Anglicised into Captain Blue- 
nose, much to its owner's satisfaction. 

For the tough old seaman bore no grudge 
to the Britons for his own share of the defeat 
which " Nelson and the North " inflicted on 
Prince Frederick's fleet. If we English had 
not seized the ships, he was wont to say, the 
French would, and he was rather proud, than 
otherwise, of the manly resistance which had 
been offered to so mighty a neighbour. And 
he had served on board an English man-of- 
war, where he had learned to speak our tongue 
very intelligibly, and had a curious sort of 
liking for whatever bore the English name. 
Hence, no doubt, his fancy for me, a pupil, as 
I was then, of Mr. Blenck, the pastor of Flads- 
wast, a great classical scholar and accom- 
plished linguist, as are many persons in North 
Europe, whose humble life is passed within 
the whitewashed walls of a Lutheran manse. 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. ^ 53 

Mr. Blenck's stipend was small, since though 
his glebe was large, he did not farm it as skil- 
fully as some of the Danish clergy, than whom, 
in their old-fashioned way, there are no better 
fanners, and he added to it by taking pupils. 
Three months before, there had been three 
English youths under the pastor's roof. But 
the others had been recalled, as soon as the 
revolutionary disturbances broke out through- 
out Western Europe, their parents fearing 
they might come to harm among the wars 
and riots that prevailed. I, then, was the only 
pupil left, and as I had a good deal of leisure, 
was glad to make an ally of Captain Blue- 
nose, the best fow^ler and fisher in that village 
of fowlers and fishers, and to enjoy the sports 
of the country under his guidance. The 
skipper was well ofi*; he could indulge him- 
self with a holiday twice a week, without much 
detriment to his afiairs, and it was wonderful 
what havoc among birds and fish his lines 
and nets, his guns and decoys, contrived to 
make. 

At Voss's farm I was always a welcome 
guest. His wife was dead, but he was not 
alone in the world, for besides Han Voss, his 



54 ^ CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

SOD, he had a daughter, Lilien. Han was 
about my own age, a handsome, dreamy-eyed 
boy, with a sweet temper, and a slow intellect, 
a direct contrast to his fierce old father ; who 
was fiery by nature, though he had a peculiar 
power of concealing his emotions beneath an 
exterior as rigid as that of a mask. Lilien 
was a lovely little creature of nine or ten, 
with hair like rippled gold, the brightest face, 
the bluest eyes, and the light step of a fairy. 
Indeed, one might have taken the girl for a 
fairy, her -cleverness and grace being some- 
thing surprising at her years; while there 
was a dehcacy about her appearance that 
almost tallied with the description of the 
Jutland elves. Both of old Peter's children 
loved him dearly, and a kind father he was to 
them, much as Han's lack of the old Norse 
shrewdness sometimes tried his temper ; but 
Lilien was his idol. He would spend hours 
in carving dolls for her with his clasp knife 
and a bit of alder wood, and in dressing these 
dolls with scraps of bright-coloured rag, after 
the fashion of the strange nations he had seen 
in far-off climes. He was never weary of 
telling her endless stories of China, and the 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 55 

Malay Archipelago, and the Spanish Main, 
to which Lilien, on her part, would listen with 
breathless attention. I won the little lady's 
favour by relating to her some of the wonders 
of English civilisation, and by describing to 
her the railways, the steamers, the crowded 
shipping in the Thames, the roar, and rush, 
and surge of human life to be witnessed in 
London. To all these things Lille Lilien . or 
Little Lily, as I generally called her . would 
listen with her grave blue eyes fixed almost 
wistfully upon my face, ever and anon looking 
inquiringly round at her father as if to ask . 
" Can this be true ?" And when the old 
man nodded assent, the child would nestle 
close to me, and look steadily up in my face 
as she drank in every word. I could talk to 
her in English, but poor Han never picked 
up more than a few sentences of our language, 
then, as now, very common in Denmark. 

A great change had come over my simple 
friends since the insurrection in the duchies, 
and the entry of the German troops. Most 
of the Fladswast people, being Danes, were 
true to King Frederick ; but their loyalty did 
not prompt them to any act likely to occasion 



t 



56 CAPTAIN BLUENOSB. 

the burning of their homesteads oi; the pillage 
of their barns. They drank the king's health, 
and wished all manner of ill to the invaders, 
but it was known that Captain Bluenose had 
vainly used his influence to raise a band of 
partisan soldiery to harass the German out- 
posts. The other farmers hung back from any 
rash demonstration of patriotism, pointing out, 
not without much show of reason, how hope- 
less would be a guerilla struggle in such a 
country. 

Thus it came about, as the German triumph 
over the Danes grew daily more assured, the 
old mariner became more and more silent and 
morose, and spent hours in gloomy and bitter 
thoughtfulness. Han, who admired his father, 
and accepted every opinion of his without 
question or comment, once timidly offered to 
enlist as a volunteer in the Danish army, and 
got a grim smile of approval for his pains. 
But old Peter would not agree to the pro- 
posal. 

"Thou art so calf-headed, lad, that thou 
wouldst get thy simple brains knocked out in 
the first skirmish," said Peter, with rough 
kindliness; ' Sveyn Dumfka, that the Swedes 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 57 

made a ballad about, was not slower- witted 
than my Han, though I know my son's 
heart is in the right place. I'll not part 
with thee." 

But Han, too, fell to thinking to an un- 
accustomed extent, and I have seen his eye 
kindle, and his cheek flush, many a time when 
I was sitting in the great kitchen, or the 
Sunday parlour at the farm, chatting with 
the skipper, or coaxing Lily to sing some old 
Danish song of Trolls, and Mermaidens, and 
gallant sea-rovers, in the quaint language that 
came near to the Icelandic itself. Even Lilien 
was more solemn than before, and often asked 
me if I did not " think the Trolls would come 
to the help of Denmark." But when I 
laughed at the notion of such fairy auxilia- 
ries, Lille Lilien's look changed to one of 
offended dignity, and she rebuked me for 
ridiculing the Trolls. However, neither cham- 
pion nor fairy appeared able or willing to do 
much for royal rule in Schleswig, since 
German soldiers and volunteers overran the 
country unmolested, and the entire German 
population made common cause with the 
invader. Still the Danish force in the island 



i)"^ CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

of Alsen, secured by the sea (Denmark's best 
frieiul), m\{\ bticked by several armed vessels, 
held out flrudy, and the marshy country be- 
tweou Flousib\irg and the Baltic was still 
|)atiH>lltHl by Danish horse. A camp had been 
foruuHl at a place called Flaxbye, on a swampy 
tongue of land nearly opposite to the island, 
and in this camp were quartered the Danish 
cavalry and one or two battalions of foot, 
guarding a quantity of stores and material of 
war, which it had not been found convenient 
to remove by sea. This camp, small as it was, 
was still an eyesore to the Germans, and it 
would probably have been instantly assailed, 
had it not been very difficult of access. The 
main road to Flaxbye was indeed circuitous, 
and in more than one place was commanded 
by earthworks still in Danish keeping, while 
pontoons would be needed for the passage of 
streams and creeks, the bridges over w^hich 
had been blown up. So Flaxbye was left un- 
disturbed for a little time. 

M. Blenck, my worthy tutor, who would, I 
believe, have taught Greek without tripping 
over a tense or a particle, while Nero was 
burning Rome about his ears, expressed his 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 59 

mild concern that I should have grown so 
inattentive and unpunctual in my studies. 
But for the life of me I could not help it. 
Boy as I was, the deep thrill that pervaded 
the popular heart reached mine and made it 
quiver with sympathy for the shame, the 
sorrow, the desperate hopes, of those about 
me. Every day brought some fresh rumour : 
now that a Swedish army was landing ; now 
that England was coming to the rescue ; now 
that all Danes were to be driven from house 
and home, and banished. But nothing of 
much moment occurred, until the roll of the 
Prussian drums was heard in Fladswast one 
fine afternoon, and I dropped my Herodotus 
and Lexicon, and, snatching up my hat, ran 
out of the manse, deaf to my tutor's up- 
braidings. 

In the little market-place, under the cool 
lime-trees, almost all the population of the 
village had collected, while the troops had 
been halted on the paved space in the middle 
of the square. I instantly guessed that some 
mischief was meant. Had it been designed 
merely to disarm the people and dismiss the 
Amtmann, as had been done elsewhere, a 



r 



60. CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

tithe of the force present would have sufficed. 
But as it was, my eye ranged hastily over a 
battalion of Prussian infantry, a company of 
Jagers, and some hundreds of riflemen be- 
longing to the half-disciplined Free Corps, 
escorted by some cavalry and four guns. Of 
the cavalry about forty, or half a troop, were 
lancers, and I counted seventy- nine hussars. 
The advance of this imposing force augured 
ill for the security of the few Danes left on 
the mainland, and this thought struck others, 
for I heard the word, 

'* Flaxbye ! Flaxbye !" muttered all around 
me. 

Brigadier Hahn, who commanded the 
column, came forward at the head of the 
little knot of officers that formed his staff, 
and ordered silence, reining in his horse and 
holding up his sword to indicate that a speech 
was to be expected. There was a dead hush ; 
all were so eager to know the worst. The 
brigadier, a stiff martinet, but accounted a 
valuable and active officer, glanced frowningly 
to left and right. He saw anxious faces, but 
no smile of welcome, not a rosette of the 
Schleswig colours, not a scrap of tricolored 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 61 

ribbon. The Danes had too much manli- 
ness to curry favour with the foe by wear- 
ing these hated emblems, and the few Ger- 
mans in the Fladswast were too prudent 
or too kind to outrage the feelings of their 
neighbours. 

Brigadier Hahn rated us all collectively in 
the purest court German, which every man 
and woman there, of whichever race, under- 
stood suflBciently well, save myself. I could 
only pick up broken scraps of the discourse, 
but I gathered that the Fladswasters were 
abused as a pack of disloyal churls, unfit for 
liberty, that they were threatened with all 
sorts of penalties for giving countenance to 
the cause of Denmark, and that the Prussian 
ended by demanding guides to show the 
nearest way to Flaxhye. There was a mur- 
mur, for suspicion had been exchanged for 
certainty. Flaxbye was to be attacked, and 
by surprise, if the enemy could manage it. It 
was well known that a road existed between our 
village and the Danish camp, but so miry 
and wet, so intricate, that few Fladswast 
fenners, when out after wild-fowl, could have 
pointed out the true course. And this fact 



62 CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 

the Prussian commander evidently knew 
well. 

" I must have two guides. Do you hear? 
Thousand Teiflem ! must I have you pricked 
by bayonets to sharpen your wits !'* called out 
the brigadier, harshly. The Free Corps be- 
gan to get noisy as they heard the general's 
voice in anger; hard words were bandied 
from side to side, and I dare say the village 
might have been sacked, or even burned, 
on light provocation. But the officers were 
firm, and in a few moments all was quiet 
again. When the brigadier next spoke it was 
in a different key. 

" Come, my lads, there's no use in making 
wry faces. You are all subjects of Schleswig- 
Ilolstein, and had better forget the king of 
Copenhagen as soon as may be. We don't want 
to harm peaceable people ; but that wasps'-nest 
at Flaxbye shall be smoked out, if I have to 
burn fifty hamlets in the doing it. Give me 
guides, and I promise you protection. Come, 
I offer a hundred rixdoUars. Will no sensible 
fellow step forward ?" 

No reply. 

"Two hundred. Three," repeated the 



CAPTAIN BLUENOSE. 63 

Prussian, more impatiently. A man came 
shouldering forward through the crowd, drag- 
ging a youth by the arm. 

" I'm your man, general. For three hun- 
dred rixdollars in hard money, I'll guide you 
to Flaxbye, by day or night ; for I know 
every inch of the way, and my boy here 
knows it as well as I do.'* 

To my astonishment . and astonishment is 
a mild word for the stupefaction with which I 
listened to these words . the man was my 
own dear Captain Bluenose, the staunchest 
Dane in the place. The lad, of course, was 
Han. I think the neighbours were as sur- 
prised as I was. They were silent for a 
minute, and then there broke out a storm of 
hissing and curses. 

Old Peter stood up undaunted. His grim 
face betrayed no touch of shame, but Han 
hung his head, and I could see that he was 
sobbing as he stood beside his father under 
that hailstorm of disgrace. Some of the 
Prussian troopers were now ordered to ride 
into the crowd and enforce order, which they 
did by beating the people over the heads and 
shoulders with the flats of their swords, but 



r 



84 OUT TN OREGON. 

never gave unlimited credence to the tempting 
statements of our Yankee Mentor. But I fell 
into the error of imagining that vrhere so 
much of superfluity was proffered, the per- 
formance must at any rate comprise all that 
was essential. As for the Irish emigrants, 
they were quite fascinated by the speculator's 
graces of deportment. I did not, personally, 
share in this admiration for the doctor. He 
was a thin cadaverous person, with hard 
features, a yellow face, and a backbone of 
eel-Hke suppleness. But it must be owned 
that his conversation was very persuasive, 
amusing, and full of anecdote. 

Dr. Smith paid me the compliment of 
ultra-frankness, candidly avowing that with a 
man of the world like myself it was useless to 
keep up the impression which served well 
enough for the rest. 

" * You see, mister,* said he, ' well enough 
that it can't pay an individual like myself to 
carry these Paddies and Dutchmen to your 
British placers just for the few dollars agreed 
upon. Well, sir, and what then? Why, I. 
F. Smith has two strings to his bow. He 
means to get a big claim, and he's been long 



OUT IN OREGON. 85 

enough prospecting in California to know 
stuff that pays, when he sees it; and then 
he'll import machinery, and get up a regular 
grand quartz-crushin-, steam-power, washin', 
company. And these emigrants, who'll soon 
spend their last dime in provisions, will be 
glad enough to work for the new company, 
and as they know me, and as 1 know them, 
we'll soon come to terms, and there's labour 
ready to hand.' 

" ' Ignotus is a queer given name, ain't 
it ?' he said on another occasion ; ' the min- 
ister to Salem poorhouse, he invented it for 
me, I guess. I was picked up in the streets 
of Salem, wrapped in an old shawl, the ugliest 
baby in the Union, I've heard tell. Not 
knowing what to call me, they wrote me 
Smith, and as it was just then that the chap 
tried to shoot the old King of the French, 
Fieschi was tacked to me, as- well as Ignotus. 
Well, I growed. I've tried most callings. 
I'm a real doctor of Augusta College, and 
here's my diploma to prove it. I'm young 
enough yet, and I mean to be President afore 
I die.* 

** The start at last took place, and a motley 



SC OUT IN OREGON. 

Ilirong it was that poured out of the streets 
of Lecompton and struck into the renowned 
'Oregon trail/ It had not been necessary 
for the doctor to provide means of convey- 
ance for all the passengers. The farmers, as 
I have said, drove their own waggons, which 
formed carriages by day and tents by night 
for the accommodation of their own families. 
Bwt the Europeans, and many of the New 
Kiiglanders, were of course destitute of such 
vehicles, and for them Dr. Smith had pro- 
vided transport. Several waggons had been 
purchased or built, and these were crammed 
with women and children, with clothes, food, 
cooking utensils, bedding and necessaries 
of various kinds. These waggons were vari- 
ously horsed. Some were dragged by broad- 
fnoted strong-h'mbed steeds from the North ; 
others were drawn by mules; one or two 
were set in motion by the exertions of a 
f>tv\\\g of Indian ponies, piebald or brindled 
for the most part, and looking almost rat- 
like in their diminutiveness when compared 
with the big-boned importations from Ken- 
tucky. It was an understood thing that the 
able-bodied men were to walk, and to assist 



OUT IN OREGON. S7 

in the management of the teams ; but those 
who could afford to pay for such a luxury as 
a pony were duly provided, the doctor having 
made an advantageous barter for souie half- 
tamed animals brought in by an Indian half- 
breed, and I was one of this band of the 
privileged. 

Let me try to explain how the staff of the 
expedition was composed. Pirst of all, there 
was Dr. I. F. Smith, physician in ordinary, 
contractor, and manager of the community. 
Then there were two satellites of the doctor's 
whom he called his ' mates' by word of mouth, 
but who in the prospectus had been euphe- 
mised into * assistant deputies' . Hiram Hall 
and Ben Tubber. There was a cook, a 
French Creole, a gay laughing fellow, who 
played the fiddle, and who was the life and 
soul of the caravan when a halt was called ; 
there were the cook's boy, a mulatto lad and 
runaway slave, and seven or eight teamsters. 
Besides these we had for guides and hunters 
the Indian half-breed who had sold the ponies, 
two savage kinsmen of his who accompanied 
him, and a promise of two or three more, 
who were to meet us at Yellowstone Rock, 



S^ OUT IN ORECiOX. 

out on tlio prairies of the Platte. So far, so 
^ood. 

'. Tluinj wen; plenty of weapons belonj^ing 
to the pnrty ; hut we were far from trusting 
lo our own viih;ur in ease of assault. Another 
(taravan was to set out nearly at the same 
time, from another point on the frontier, 
hound for Oregon, and escorted by dragoons. 
VVj were to join this caravan, and travel 
undiU' the protection of its soldiers, so far 
ah our roads lay together; and when they 
div(irg(ul, the doctor assured us that the 
nioHt dan({(;rouH part of the journey would 
he ov(;r; further, that the United States 
ollicer in cornnuind would not refuse to de- 
tach a party to guard us to the British bor- 
dern. 

** We Het oir confidently, gay with hopes of 
tin; bright fortunes in store for us in the 
far North- West. As we passed out of Le- 
conipton, some of the idlers gave us a cheer 
in answer to the hurrahs of the Irish, the 
* hoch h(K;hs' of the (Jermans, and the shrill 
elunuMir of the women. But I noticed that 
one or two bearded old trappers, rough men 
of the wilderness, clad in greasy skins, and as 



OUT JN OREGON. 89 

grim and rude as bears masquerading in 
human shape, eyed us with a sort of scornful 
pity, and shook their grizzled heads as they 
watched the train of waggons rattle merrily 
by. 

" The first part of the long journey gave us 
little to complain of. Our progress, to be 
sure, was tediously slow, but for this we were 
prepared ; food was plentiful, and there was 
no danger, and but little fatigue. We were 
soon across the frontier, and out of the terri- 
tory of the United States, but we found the 
plains of the Platte well watered, abounding 
in grass for our cattle, and brushwood to 
make our tires when we camped, and free 
from hostile savages. For the latter, indeed, 
we had little reason to care much, for we had 
met and joined the other caravan at Marys- 
ville, beyond Fort Leavenworth, and we were 
under the protection of a strong detachment 
of dragoons, hardened to the rugged warfare 
of the borders. Our principal trouble was in 
fording the numerous feeders of the Platte 
river, on which occasion the waggons were 
apt to stick in the slimy blue mud, until a 
number of men, waist deep in slush and 



90 OUT IN OREGON. 

water, literally put their shoulders to the 
wheels, and heaved the huge machine up the 
yielding bank. One or two of the children 
sickened of ague, and one was bitten by a 
snake ; but Dr. Smith showed genuine skill 
in attending the sufferers, and set them right 
by prompt and vigorous measures, thereby 
winning more good will and admiration from 
every woman in the party. 

" The doctor's satellites were by no means 
as popular as the doctor. Hiram Hall and 
Ben Tubber were a pair of the most truculent 
ruffians in all America, and it seemed a 
marvel to me what bond of union could exist 
between them and the soft-spoken pliant 
Ignotus, who gave me the idea of anything 
but a fighting man. Hall was a black-browed 
shaggy Missourian, athletic in person, and 
forbidding in countenance ; his character was 
more than dubious, and he was reputed to 
have been one of the fiercest of those ' border 
ruffians' who had afflicted Kansas during the 
pro-slavery riots. Tubber was a powerfully- 
built Georgian, who prided himself on his 
prowess in * rough and tumble,' and who 
boasted to me one evening, after a fourth 



OUT IN OREGON. 91 

tumbler, that he had 'gouged nigh twenty 
eyes/ and would back himself to * do the 
trick neatly, all thumb and forefinger/ with 
any one in the United States. This engaging 
pair, who wore revolvers and bowie knives in 
their belts, and who were never seen without 
their rifles, were nicknamed the doctor's bull- 
dogs. 

" The teamsters were of very various cha- 
racters. Two of them were lathy, dark-com- 
plexioned Missourians, with reckless mien, and 
whisky written on their blotched faces; but 
still they were bold, muscular men, who knew 
their trade. Two were mere lads, recent 
draughts from some Alleghany farm, and 
quite raw to prairie life; the others were 
flaxen-headed Germans, well-meaning enough, 
but very inexpert where horses were in ques- 
tion. The cook and his boy were general 
favourites, but the guides hardly pleased me. 
In the first place, even after they were joined 
by three other Indians at the Yellowstone 
Rock, they brought in no fresh meat. 

** They made no pretence of hunting, but 
lounged about at every hut, sleeping in the 
shade of the cotton wood-trees, smoking and 



\)'2 OUT IN OREGON. 

drinking, prowling about the wagnrons, and 
begging for tobacco and spirits, but never 
Mullying far beyond the camp. When remon- 
8t rated with by those who began to grow 
tinrd of pickled pork for breakfast, dinner, 
and Huppcr, the half-breed repUed: 

"'What for hunt here? No game here, 
HO near Rcttlcinent. All frightened away. 
Hunt wlu^n far off. You very foolish mans . 
you enngrccs. (jib Rising Hun some tobacco, 
and JKJ g(Jt you plenty of deer meat presently.' 

*. My Hccond reason for not liking the half- 
breed and his red relations was a mere ques- 
tion of physiognomy. I did not like Rising 
Sun, in particnilar, for the same reason assigned 
in the poiJtn for an aversion to Dr. Fell. He 
had the long slanting Mongolian eyes . the 
true feline eyes of his race . and as for his 
high cheek-bones, large mouth, and lank hair, 
these W(5re such as all the aborigines pos- 
sessed. [Jut with him they had an especial 
treacherous crafty look, or so I fancied, and I 
hinted as much to the doctor, who merely 
huighed, and said the man had been well 
recommended. 

''Nothing worthy of notice occurred till we 



OUT IN OREGON. 93 

crossed the Rocky Mountain, which we did by 
way of Fremont's Pass. Up to that time we 
had certainly seen bands of roving Indians, 
dim against the evening sky, a sort of distant 
vision of spears and blanket-clad horsemen ; 
but they had been mere Pawnees or Foxes, 
tribes which were in a kind of vassalage to 
the white man. At the foot of the pass, how- 
ever, an imposing cavalcade of Crows arrived, 
and seemed to design an attack. For some 
hours they kept prancing and caracoling 
around us, uttering loud shouts, and shaking 
their lances and robes at us, with many a bar- 
barous gesture of defiance or threat, but they 
took care to keep out of rifle range, and our 
camp was too well watched at night to allow 
them an opportunity of stampeding our quad- 
rupeds. The officer in command of the dra- 
goons valued these Crows very lightly, but 
when we got over the pass, and into the coun- 
try usually traversed by war parties of the 
Blackfeet tribe, he grew more serious, and his 
vigilance was unremitting. 

** Our supply of meat now began to run 
short, for some of the barrels which had been 
stored up, and which were duly labelled with 



94 OUT IN OREGON. 

the words, * Prime Pickled Pork/ proved to 
be half empty, and to contain little more than 
garbage, unfit for human consumption. Some 
of the flour and biscuits, too, turned out to 
be mouldy, and full of weevils ; and while the 
doctor laid the blame on the storekeeper who 
had supplied the provisions, many were dis- 
posed to lay the blame on the doctor. 

" Violent reproaches were also lavished on 
the laziness of the guides, and the military 
officer was appealed to to exert his authority 
in compelling the half-breed and his dusky 
kindred to hunt for us, in terms of the agree- 
ment. The officer spoke tartly, the doctor 
suavely, and the red-skinned attendants of the 
caravan were induced to sally forth ; but they 
rarely brought in anything beyond a half- 
grown deer or a wild turkey, and excused 
themselves on the ground of the bufialo herds 
having been driven off by Indians. 

" We found the grass much less plentiful 
and succulent, to the west of the mountains. 
It was a stony region which we were traver- 
sing, and the animals lost flesh and strength 
from the difficulty of picking up sufficient nu- 
triment among the boulders and pebbles. 



OUT IN OREGON. 95 

Over vast tracts, too, extended a carpet of 
charred turf and white ashes, where the grass 
and flowery weeds had been wantonly set on 
fire by careless emigrants or roving savages. 
But when we got into the well-watered re- 
gion on the banks of Lewis River, we found 
verdant pastures enough, and our jaded 
quadrupeds recovered their strength and 
sleekness. 

'* At Fort Bois^, on Lake River, our leader, 
Dr. Smith, suddenly announced that our road 
no longer lay in the same direction as that of 
the Oregon party. This was a great disap- 
pointment to myself and some others, who 
had begun to imagine that we should journey 
on with the other caravan, under military pro- 
tection, almost as far as the British posses- 
sions. But Dr. Smith had decided that we 
should here quit the main Oregon trail, and 
strike off into the mountainous region to the 
westward : steering our course by Mount 
Jefferson and Mount Hood, and crossing the 
Columbia a little below the point w^here it is 
joined by John Dyer's river. This was cer- 
tainly the most direct route, the usual Oregon 
road being very circuitous ; but it led through 



96 OUT IN OREGON. 

an unknown tract of country, and its adop- 
tion deprived us of our escort. 

** Fierce remonstrances and a long debate 
ensued, but the doctor was obstinate. He be- 
lieved, or affected to believe, the assurances 
of the Indian guides, that the western region 
was safe, easy of access, and abounding in 
grass, water and game. Indeed, some of us 
shrewdly suspected that this rumoured plenty 
of buffalo-meat, salmon, and venison was the 
main attraction in the eyes of our chief; for it 
would save his stores, which were nearly ex- 
hausted, and afford cheap sustenance for the 
hungry folks under his charge. Be that as it 
might, Dr. I. F. Smith was peremptory. In 
vain the officers, both the lieutenant com- 
manding the dragoons and the captain who 
was governor of the fort, advised him to 
' keep on along with the Oregon emigrants, by 
way of Grande Ronde, and the Walla Walla/ 
He was deaf to all persuasion, and peevishly 
informed us that we might leave him if we 
chose, but that it was for him to select the 
route. It was a melancholy morning for us 
when, after two days' rest at Fort Bois^, we 
saw the Oregon caravan start, waggon after 



OUT IN OREGON. 97 

waggon, with the dragoons riding in front 
and rear, their arms and accoutrements glan- 
cing in the sun. Under their guardianship 
we had travelled safely for hundreds of weary 
miles, and a gloom that seemed prophetic of 
coming evil settled upon us as the last horse- 
man vanished among the swells of the prairie. 

** The commandant of Fort Bois^ could not 
spare us a guard. His garrison consisted 
almost wholly of invalids or convalescent sol- 
diers of infantry, dragoons and rifle-rangers. 
These palid veterans, most of whom were 
suffering under wearing intermittent fevers, 
caught by long exposure on the swampy plains, 
were well able to man the stockades ahd 
crumbling earthen curtain of the little fort, 
but active service seemed beyond them. . I 
say seemed, because these poor sick soldiers 
were capable of much more exertion, under 
the influence of generous feeling, than would 
have appeared possible. 

" We set forth on our lonely westward 
march. The doctor affected to rely implicitly 
on the knowledge and skill of the guides, but 
there were alarmists who noticed that a strange 
sort of understanding appeared to exist be- 

VOL. II. H 



98 OUT IN OREGON. 

tween Dr. Smith, the half-breed, and the two 
.deputies/ These men had grown undis- 
guisedly surly and insolent since the departure 
of the escort, while there was a sinister ex- 
pression in the half-breed's cunning eyes as he 
pointed his finger northward, and spoke of the 
* plenty grass, plenty meat' up there. Our 
journey was now very diflScult. The grazing 
was bad, the springs were brackish, and we 
had to travel plains where the white salt crys- 
tals lay strewn like sand in an Arabian desert, 
dazzling our eyes as the sun glared upon us. 
Then there were innumerable slimy creeks to 
be crossed, where much exertion was needed to 
push or drag the waggons out of the deep mud. 
Worse than all, our provisions began to fail. 
The public stores were nearly spent, and in- 
roads had been made on those supplies which 
a few of the more thoughtful farmers had 
taken with them in the waggons. Sickness 
appeared among us, and five children and a 
woman died of fever, while many suffered 
more or less in health from the efiects of con- 
stant wettings and privations. 

" Then the doctor showed the cloven foot. 
On the third day after leaving Fort Boise he 



OUT IN OREGON. 99 

demanded payment of the second moiety of 
our passage money. I ought to have told you 
that, before starting, we paid down one half of 
the doctor's demand: the rest being to be 
paid, according to stipulation, on our arrival in 
British Columbia. Thus his sudden call for a 
second instalment was not only a very suspi- 
cious proceeding, but a direct breach of agree- 
ment. There was a warm dispute, for the 
doctor was by this time unpopular. His 
varnish of gentleness and politeness had long 
been rubbed off, and his hard grasping nature 
stood revealed. Besides, we were all half fed, 
weary and sickly, and it was but that very 
morning that one of the poor German women 
had been buried under the prairie turf, in a 
shallow grave scooped by the hands of her 
husband and son. The doctor's claim, then, 
came with a very ill grace, and so we flatly 
told him. 

*' But we found out, to our cost, the use of 
the doctor's human bull-dogs. Hall and 
Tubber came forward into the conclave, 
bristhng like boars at bay, and armed to the 
teeth. 

" * Jest look here, cl;iaps,' said Hall, cocking 

H 2 



100 OUT IN OREGON. 

his rifle, * rm not a man for many speeches, I 
ain't. You jest pay up the shiners, or Vm 
scrunched if we won't kick every tarnation 
emigrant, Britisher, or Dutch, or Irish, out of 
our waggons, and set 'em afoot on the parara, 
to pad the hoof to the diggins. As for you, 
western citizens, your traps is your own, but 
the grub's oum, the Injuns air our Injuns, 
and if you don't Uke us, jest fish for yourselves. 
If my gentleman ain't satisfied, hyar's a con- 
vincing argument. He won't need two, I 
guess.' 

"The ruflSan tapped the brown barrel of 
his rifle and ran his wicked eye over our party, 
while the women set up a scream and clung to 
their husbands' arms, as if to restrain them. 
There were several present who had guns and 
knives, and who were no cowards ; and at one 
time I really thought a bloody scuffle would 
have ensued. But Hall and Tubber were 
backed by the two Missourian teamsters ; the 
doctor himself, though his face was very 
sallow and his eye unsteady, had turned out 
with rifle and revolver! and the guns and 
tomahawks of the six guides* were plainly 
ready to be employed against us. The Irish 



OUT IN OREGON. 101 

and Germans were unarmed, or nearly so, 
while the western farmers could not resist the 
entreaties of their wives, who dreaded a san- 
guinary struggle, in which even victory must 
be fatal. 

'* The dollars were reluctantly told out, and 
the doctor received the entire remuneration 
for his services, while yet Columbia was far 
remote. I do not know, I never shall know 
now, what was the original project of this 
unscrupulous man. 

'* After another tedious day's march 
we had encamped on a plain of short crisp 
herbage, nearer to the rolling range of the 
Blue Mountains than we had previously 
attained. The guides had brought in a 
quantity of bull meat ; they had fallen in, I 
believe, with a disabled buffalo that had been 
lamed by an Indian arrow, and which had been 
an easy prey. For once, we had supped well, 
and we settled ourselves to sleep, some under 
the waggon-tilts, the rest around the fires, the 
horses being picketed, and the care of keeping 
watch being left, as usual, to the sharp-eared 
Indian guides. The dews were heavy, lying 
in big beaded drops on buffalo-robe and 



102 OUT IN OREGON. 

blanket, and I gladly accepted an invitation 
to sleep under the waggon-roof of one of the 
Indiana farmers, big Simon Davis, a very good 
specimen of his sturdy class. Davis was a 
widower, having lost his wife but a short 
time, and his whole affections centred in his 
only child, a fine dark-eyed boy of six years 
old, over whom he watched with a care and 
patience wonderful in so rugged and blutF a 
man. The farmer had been for a fight when 
Dr. Smith extorted the second moiety of our 
payment from us, and he was by far the most 
resolute and respected member of the caravan. 
Well, we were all asleep, when I was awakened 
by the neighing and snorting of a beautiful 
coal-black horse, a mustang, which the farmer 
had bought from a trapper at Fort Bois^, and 
which had been captured out of a wild herd 
far South. This animal kindly used, had 
become very afiectionate and docile, and Davis 
had picketed it close to the waggon. He 
generally rode it for a short time every day, 
merely to pace it, meaning it for the riding of 
his young son, little Lafayette Davis, when he 
should be a couple of years older ; for it was 
unfit to bear the father's weight. 



OUT IN OREGON. 103 

*' The mustang neighed and snorted, and I 
awoke with a sense of danger, and thrusting 
my head out, saw by the light of the expiring 
fire a dark form hovering around Snowball's 
heels, apparently trying to reach the picket- 
ropes : a task rendered difficult by the furious 
way in which the gallant horse lashed out at 
the intruder. 

"* HuUoa !* I cried 'who are you there? 
What do you want ?' 

" No answer was returned, until I called 
out that I would fire unless my challenge 
were replied to. Then the guttural voice of the 
half-breed Indian called out, cautiously, 

" ' Hist 1 no harm. Rising Sun walk 
sentry. Him tink horse get loose from heel 
roups, dat all. Good night !' 

" And off the semi-savage went with his 
noiseless mocassined tread. Davis awoke, 
and sleepily asked what was amiss, then 
growled, and sank back into slumber. 

" In the morning there was a great outcry. 
Treachery had been at work. We had been 
basely abandoned by our precious Mentor, his 
confederates from Missouri and Georgia, and 
the Indians. More than this, the beasts of 



104 OUT IN OREGON. 

draught were gone, every hoof of them had 
vanished. Horse and mule had been stolen 
av^ray, not merely those animals v^rhich be- 
longed to the contractor, but the teams which 
the richer among us had brought from distant 
farms. Only Simon Davis' beautiful black 
horse remained in camp, preserved, no doubt, 
by my opportune wakefulness on the previous 
night ; but some distance off we saw a spotted 
mustang quietly cropping the short grass, 
and this, by the broken lariat about his neck, 
had probably escaped from the 'caballada* 
which I. F. Smith and his accomplices carried 
off with them. Further scrutiny showed 
that the store waggon had been stripped of 
clothes, medicines, arms, and ammunition, and, 
in fact, of all that could be easily packed up 
and carried away. The trail of the deserters, 
trending due south, was plainly to be seen, 
but pursuit was hopeless, even had there 
been any use in overtaking so hardened a set 
of villains as our false allies. 

" The screams, passionate outcries, and sor- 
rowful forebodings that now resounded among 
us, made a perfect Babel of confusion. The 
women were loud in their wrath and fear, the 



OUT IN OEEGON. 105 

men angry and perplexed, the children queru- 
lous and hungry. We had very little food . a 
few pounds of sorry flour and worse biscuit, 
and a small quantity of meat. What was to 
be done? Could we return on foot to Fort 
Boise ? The strong men might do so, but the 
feeble, the young, and the sick, must perish 
on the way. 

** Big Simon Davis took no part in the idle 
clamour of the rest. He sidled quietly up to 
me. 

" ' Britisher,' said he, ' I don't think you're 
no chicken-hearted chap, an' so I'll tell you 
truth. I'm kinder skeared.' 

" I stared at this confession, for my 
burly companion was a person of tried cou- 
rage. 

"* Kinder skeared,* repeated Davis, drop- 
ping his voice, ' and that not so much because 
the rascal Smith has skedaddled with the 
teams, as for what I see, jest now, when I 
took a turn round the outside of camp. Mister, 
I seed the print of a mocassined foot stamped 
into a bit of soft mould, clear as if 'twas the 
American eagle in the sealwax on a lawyer's 
letter/ 



106 OUT IN OREGON. 

'. ' What of that /' said I, surprised. ' Our 
scoundrel guides wore mocassins^ and * 

" . Stranger, I ain't a blind mole/ inter- 
rupted Davis ; ' our guides war Osage Injuns, 
wam't they? and strapping redskins as all 
their nation ? Their mocassins war soled with 
buffler parfleche, and all stitched up with por- 
kypine quills and beads, smart as a squaw 
could work 'em. This foot war small; the 
leather mout have been deer, or mout have 
been pronghom, but 'war plain and hairy, raw 
hide, I guess. I tracked it up, and I found 
the hoofmarks of an unshod horse, down by 
some bushes. Shoshonies hev' been scoutin' 
nigh us, mister.' 

".Shoshonies?' 

"'Ay, that's what they call themselves; 
the cruel Snake Injuns. That war a Snake's 
mocassin, I tell 'ee. Some cussed war party's 
hard by, and their loping spies hev seen the 
doctor vampoose, and know our helpless con- 
dition. May I never,' he suddenly exclaimed, 
* but here the red beggars come 1' 

" Far oflp on the prairie appeared something 
like a herd of wild horses galloping towards 
us, for no riders were visible : a circumstance 



OUT IN OREGON. 107 

which drew a grim smile from the tall 
farmer, 

.* 'Tis a stale trick, that/ said he, bitterly ; 
* every darned brave of the lot is hangin* at 
his nag's flank, clingin' by the mane like a 
bat to a bough, and with jest one foot over 
the mustang's withers. We'll see enough of 
their painted faces afore we finish/ 

"Then, uplifting his voice, he thundered 
out the alarm call : 

" ' To arms, men, to arms ! Don't ye see 
the Injuns ? Quick, Western-men, with your 
rifles, and recklect every grain of powder's 
preciouser nor gold dust, short of ammynition 
as we are. So . no use screechin', you gals 
and women (for a shrill cry had broken from 
the females of the party), we must fight for 
our scalps.' 

"After the first moment of panic, nine- 
tenths of the men, and even several of the 
women, showed no lack of sense and courage. 
All the available weapons were brought out 
and got ready, the waggons were dragged and 
pushed until they formed a circular fortifica- 
tion, proof at any rate against the first rush 
of the mounted foe. The children were placed 



108 OUT IN OREGON. 

under shelter, and an active lad among the 
teamsters went out and caught the grazing 
horse, just as it threw up its head with a 
frightened air and was about to gallop off. 

" You must not expect from me a detailed 
and minute account of what followed. I only 
remember what seems a hideous nightmare of 
frightful painted faces, brandished weapons, 
shields, lances, and tomahawks, the trampling 
and rearing of horses, the hurtle of arrows, 
and the hiss of rifle-balls. I remember the 
dreadful cry of the Indians, repeated again 
and again as they renewed their charge, and a 
sense of something like disappointment on 
my part that this horrid war-whoop was not 
more horrid, since it had been to me a subject 
of curiosity from childhood. And I recollect 
the oaths and cheers of our men, the shrieks 
and prayers of our women, the dust, smoke, 
flashes, and volleys, and that we fought hard, 
and drove off the yelling painted pack, again 
and again. 

*'We beat them, for the time at least. 
Seven grim bodies, smeared with paint and 
charcoal dust, lay stark upon the prairie, and 
flve wounded horses were rolling over in the 



OUT IN OREGON. 109 

death-struggle, before the red robbers fell 
back. On our side we had many slight 
wounds, but only one death. A poor child, a 
little fair-haired German girl, had been pierced 
through the neck by a barbed arrow that 
went through the tilt of the waggon where 
she lay trembling beside her mother. The 
wound would have been mortal, even had 
surgical aid been at hand; the poor thing 
bled to death, while her parents almost raved 
in their entreaties to all present to save her. 

"The Indians had not done with us yet. 
They hovered about like vultures, greedy for 
prey. Warned by their loss, they did not 
again try, to storm our camp, but harrassed 
us with endless stratagems and alarms, while 
awaiting the sure progress of starvation to 
reduce us. We had to fight for the water of 
the creek, and it cost us two lives before we 
remained masters of the deep stream, fringed 
by bushes, near which we had halted. We 
kept a vigilant watch by night, and our 
feverish slumbers were sure to be broken by 
the war-whoop. Several were badly hurt by 
the arrows that hailed on us every day ; but 
the worst infliction was that of hunger. Our 



i 



110 OUT IN OREGON. 

scanty food waned. The children cried for 
nourishment ; but even they had to be severely 
stinted, and men and women grew pale, gaunt, 
and hollow-eyed, till our camp was as a camp 
of spectres. And still the hideous merciless, 
savages thirsted for our blood and our plun- 
der, and beset us like wolves. They were in 
no want. They hunted, and brought in 
plenty of game, and would tauntingly show 
us venison steaks and wild turkeys, impaled 
on the points of their lances, and then, with 
ferocious gestures, would draw the scalping- 
knife around their own up-lifted hair. They 
were squat and low of stature, almost dwarfish 
in comparison with the tall tribes to the 
eastward ; but these accursed Snakes showed 
no lack of strength or hardihood. And we 
knew too well how fearful it would be to fall 
alive into their hands. 

"It was settled, as the sole last chance, 
that two messengers should mount the two 
remaining horses, and try to reach Fort Bois6 
and obtain a rescue. It was a desperate 
service, for the mounted Indians beset the 
path, while the captain of the fort and his 
ailing garrison seemed little likely to render 



OUT IN OREGON. Ill 

prompt help. But it was a chance, and a 
chance not to be sUghted. The food was all 
but gone. The powder was nearly spent. 
There was no other hope. The messengers 
were chosen. It was needful that they should 
be good horsemen. It was also needful that 
they should be light weights. The only good 
riders, in fact, besides big Simon Davis, were 
myself, and Triptolemus Nutkins, a little 
withered Yankee jockey who had ridden many 
a match in the North, and who had taken a 
fancy to make his fortune in Columbia. It 
was agreed that Trip Nutkins, as the lightest, 
should mount the spotted mustang, and I the 
black. 

" Then it was that Davis gently twitched 
me by the sleeve, and addressed me with a 
timid hesitation quite uncommon to him. 

" ' Britisher, we're gone coons. Even if 
you get through safe, help won't hardly find 
us livin*. Twenty charges left, and no more, 
as I'm a sinner. I don't care over-much for 
myself. The Injuns will find my old bones 
tough pickin'. But the women . well 1 'twill 
be soon over. Look here, sir, I'm that 
anxious about my little Lafi^ . the child . I 



112 OUT IN OEEGON. 

can't but ax a favour. Will ye take him with 
you? I kuow he'll hamper you some, but 
he's brave for a little chap of six ; he'll hold 
fast and never cry. His weight's triflin' ; but 
if you hev to fight, I don't disguise as Lap 
will hamper you. Still, do save him, and the 
very last word old Simon Davis says shall be, 
God bless and reward you, stranger !' 

*' There were tears in the father's bold eyes, 
and his voice shook in a manner very foreign 
to its usual manly tone. But the brave fellow 
was quite unselfish in his fears, which were 
wholly for the child. He had forgotten him- 
self. 1 wrung his muscular hand. 

" * Trust the boy to me,' said I ; ' that is, 
if you really think it best/ 

"'Harkye,' he continued, 'nothing for 
nothing. Snowball's your own from this 
minit. You've always consaited hevin' that 
hoss, and, win or lose, you shall keep him 
in remembrance of Simon Davis.' 

" It was no easy matter to coax little LaflF 
Davis into a quiet consent to the flight. The 
little fellow was my very good friend ; but he 
had got an inkling of what was afoot, and 
he clung sobbing to his giant father's neck. 



OUT IN OREGON. 113 

declaring that he would not go unless ' daddy 
went too/ It was a painful parting. The 
tears ran down the farmer's sun-browned 
cheeks, but he dashed them away with the 
back of his rough hand, and lifted the boy on 
to the saddle-bow, bidding him hold tight, 
and be good, and do as Mr. King told him. 

" Nutkins was already in the saddle, sur- 
rounded by anxious, wild-eyed women, hold- 
ing up their children and beseeching him to 
take some little Ellen or Gertrude along with 
him to the fort and safety. But the jockey 
was deaf to their cries, not from hardness of 
heart, but sheer conviction that such a burden 
must lead to capture and destruction. He 
was past middle age, and quite weak, though 
a superb horseman, and altogether unfit to 
carry a restless screaming child through so 
terrible a ride as lay before us. As for 
myself, I took off my cravat and tied httle 
Lafayette fast to my belt, looked to my knife 
and pistol (the rifle I had abandoned), and 
asked Nutkins if he were ready. 

" ' Ready, mister 1' 

" Out we went, with a rush, from between 
the sheltering waggons, which had as yet 

YOL. II. I 



114 OUT IN OEEGON. 

screened our proceedings from the wild be- 
siegers. The Indians were gathered around 
their fires, about half a mile off, their horses 
tethered and grazing, every horse with the 
hide saddle on his back, and a lance stuck in 
the turf beside him. We got out unseen, 
and headed for Fort Bois^. 

" * Steady, mister,' said Nutkins, who was 
pale but collected ; * spare the bosses all we 
can. The niggers don't see us. We've got 
a goodish start, so let's canter quiet.' 

" On we went at an easy hand-gallop, and 
perhaps we might have got off unpereeived, 
had not some of those left behind given way 
to their feelings in a most luckless cheer of 
encouragement. 

" * Cuss the noise ; they'll be after us, now,' 
said the jockey, peering over his shoulder; 
and the words were hardly uttered before a 
yell, loud and fierce enough for the throats of 
a drove of wolves, was heard, and we saw the 
Indians leaping on horseback, and dashing 
madly in pursuit of us. Fifty wild riders were 
in our rear. The fort was far ahead. It was 
a terrible race for Ufe and death that ensued. 
Nutkins proved a valuable companion. His 



OUT IN OREGON. 115 

experience suggested what I should never 
have thought of. 

" Keep a tight rein/ he cried ; ' hold your 
beast together, Britisher. Beat 'em by jockey- 
ship. Do, Mr. King, keep a turn of speed in 
your boss, and we'll beat them rowdies yet, 
for see how they flog and jag the reins, and 
a'most leap ofi^ in their hurry. The blood- 
thirsty mufis ! They blow their beasts afore 
they go a brace of miles/ 

"Instinctively 1 felt that the man was 
right. Still, it was an awful sensation to feel 
that the Indians were gaining on us, to look 
back and see their excited gestures, as they 
shook their spears and rattled their shields, 
while every now and then they beat their 
open hands upon their mouths as they uttered 
the hideous war-whoop. At last they got 
within a hundred yards, and an arrow whistled 
past us. 

" Slip ahead, mister ! No hurry, but hustle 
on quicker !" cried Nutkins, and we heard the 
yells of the disappointed savages as we forged 
ahead. We got clean out of sight of our 
pursuers, and saw nothing of them for a long 
time. Nutkins was triumphant, but I enter- 

I 2 



I 



116 oCt in oeegon. 

tained strong doubts as to the chase being really 
over. And, indeed, more than an hour later, 
as we forded a creek, we heard the whoop of 
our barbarous foes, and twenty arrows were 
discharged at us, while the hoof-strokes re- 
sounded thick and fast on the turf of the 
prairie. We were in no light danger for the 
next half hour. The savages pressed us hard. 
Nutkins was slightly hurt by two shafts, a 
third arrow struck into the fleshy part of my 
right arm, causing a slight throb of pain, but 
doing no severe injury, while another grazed 
Lafayette's cheek, just drawing blood. The 
gallant little fellow behaved very well. He 
never sobbed or screamed, but held fast to 
my belt with his small hands, and scarcely 
winced when the arrow touched him. We 
had hard work, swimming two rivers before 
we were free from our savage foes, but at last 
we saw them rein up, and heard their farewell 
yell of vexation. 

" We had yet a rough and long ride to the 
fort ; we had missed the direct route, and had 
to shape our course by bearings ; but at last, 
after twenty hours in the saddle, we came 
in sight of the moss-covered stockade and 



OUT IN OREGON. 117 

shingled roofs of Fort Boise. By this time 
even Snowball was in a sad state, covered with 
mud and foam, and with drooping head and 
quivering flanks. As for the other horse, he 
was so utterly done up, that he fell about 
a mile from the outpost, and Nutkins had to 
walk the rest of the way. Both the jockey 
and I were very weary and worn, but I was 
glad to find that fatigue had proved a kind 
nurse, and that for some hours the child, 
quite exhausted, had been asleep. 

" Our arrival created a great sensation, and 
when the lonely garrison of that little place 
heard that Christian men and women in sore 
distress were calling on them for help, they 
responded nobly to the summons. Captain 
Watkins, a grizzled, disappointed old officer, 
but of sterling stufi^, as events proved, was at 
first much perplexed. 

" * What on earth are we to do, doctor ?" 
said he to the regimental surgeon ; * out of 
ninety men of all arms, there are but twenty 
fit for duty. There are horses enough, if we 
take the waggon-teams on their way back to 
fort Leavenworth, but the men ! Yet, 1*11 
go, if it's with a corporal's guard !' 



118 OUT IN OREGON. 

" The surgeon considered awhile, then tap- 
ped his forehead briskly. 

.* * Our men are moped here/ said he, * and 
nerves are queer things. This is a call might 
move the dead. I'll go to the infirmary and 
tell the lads there are women and children in 
danger a few miles off, beset by Indians, and 
you shall see what follows.' 

*' And, wonderful to tell, out of seventy 
invalids, fifty-five volunteered for instant ser- 
vice. Pale, gaunt, and tottering, but with 
bright eyes and faces elate with courage, the 
bold fellows came up one by one to report 
themselves as 'fit for duty' to the captain. 
I felt my own eye moisten as I looked upon 
the simple chivalry of these poor soldiers, for 
the most part foreigners, in American pay, 
who staggered from their very sick-beds to 
save those they had perhaps never exchanged a 
word with. 

" Many who volunteered were too weak for 
such a ride, but at last a force of about fifty 
well-armed men set off on horseback. They 
were led by Captain Watkins, and guided by 
myself, the jockey being left behind, as too 
exhausted for more toil. Little Laff Davis 



OUT IN OKEGON. 119 

was left at the fort, in charge of a good- 
humoured Scotchwoman, the wife of the pay- 
sergeant. 

" Much time was necessarily lost ; our 
march was not so rapid as we could have 
wished, for the waggon-horses were heavy 
animals, and the infantry soldiers not very 
expert riders. Our progress was therefore 
slow." 

"But you got there in time, eh?" ex- 
claimed Tom Rawlinson, excitedly ; " you set 
things to rights, and gave the Indians a lesson 
surely?" 

" No, Tom, we were too late. Too late by 
many hours. No living soul was left to tell 
the tale, but the ashes of the waggons were 
nearly cold, and we guessed that, the ammu- 
nition being spent, the camp had been forcibly 
entered immediately on the return of the 
party that had chased us. Doubtless the 
Indians struck quickly, lest a rescuing force 
should arrive to wrest the prey from them. 
The horrid work was complete. Everything 
portable had been carried oflF. The waggons 
had been set on fire, and the people . happiest 
those that died fighting, like poor Simon 



120 OUT IN OREGON. 

Davis, whose body, dreadfully disfigured, we 
found in the centre of a trampled patch of 
ground, marked by gory footsteps afnd torn 
turf. Yes, all had perished, some in fight, 
and some by torture, I fear, for the bodies 
that lay around, stripped and gashed by the 
knife, had been partially consumed by fire. 
Women, children, strong and weak, old and 
young, the butchers had spared none, and the 
mutilated corpses alone were left on the black- 
ened turf. Tom I it sickens me to think of it, 
and I saw the bronzed soldiers' cheeks blanch, 
as they gazed on the hideous sight, and heard 
many a muttered vow of vengeance . vows 
generally well kept in those stern frontier 
wars. But the Indians were beyond reach of 
pursuit for the time. They had carried off 
their own dead. 

"And now, Tom, I see the Whittington 
milestone, and we shall soon part company, 
so I must be brief. Little Laff Davis was 
adopted by Captain Watkins, who took a 
great fancy to him, is giving him a good 
education at Chicago, and promises to send 
him to the military school at West Point, 
there to qualify for a commission. Snowball, 



OUT IN OREGON. 121 

his father's gift, bore me faithfully for years ; 
I kept him through my struggles in Columbia, 
where I did well, and saved enough to enter 
into the mercantile firm in which I am now a 
partner. And when 1 returned to Europe I 
could not bring myself to abandon the faith- 
ful creature, but brought him home, at no 
small cost, so you may easily guess, my friend, 
that Snowball is not for sale/' 

" But the knave of a doctor . Ignotus 
Smith . was he ever hanged?" asked Tom, 
eagerly. 

** Never. But Nemesis overtook him in 
another form. 1 was in San Francisco, on 
my way home, when the event happened. 
Dr. 1. F. Smith fought a duel in a tavern, 
' over a handkerchief,' with a man whom he 
had cheated at cards. As usual, one pistol 
was loaded, and one empty, and the doctor 
put faith in a confederate, who acted as 
second to the antagonist, and was to give 
Ignotus the loaded weapon. But by some 
bungling or treachery the biter was bit. Dr. 
1. F. Smith received the wrong pistol, was 
shot through the heart, and died like a dog, 
without warning or repentance." 



OVER THE ICE. 



In the winter of 1813 there was hard 
fighting along the borders of Canada; the 
desultory campaign went on with variable 
fortune, but the Americans pressed us severely, 
and we, the few regulars, were worn out with 
fatigue and annoyance. This was the state of 
aflFairs when a heavy fall of snow put an end 
to hostilities, as the curtain of a theatre 
might drop upon a battle scene. A space of 
enforced quiet succeeded. The roads were 
impassable, the drifts lay deep over the coun- 
try, and we had for a time to contend with 
the intense cold, instead of a human foe. 
However, fuel abounded, provisions were plen- 
tiful, and the troops enjoyed their rest after 
the harassing marches and counter-marches 
of the past season. 



OVEE THE ICE. 123 

My detachment was stationed at Port Hope, 
a little fresh-water harbour on the north bank 
of Lake Ontario. It consisted of a single com- 
pany of my own regiment, a few artillerymen, 
and a handful of sappers under charge of an 
engineer officer. Captain Haworth, of our 
own corps, was in command, and I was his 
only effective subaltern; the ensign having 
been wounded and removed* to the hospital at 
Quebec, just before the snow set in. I was 
then a lieutenant, and, although a young man, 
had been a lieutenant for s6me time, having 
been lucky enough to win ray first promotion 
in Spain, within a few months after joining 
Lord Wellington's army. But I was eager, 
almost unreasonably eager, for further and 
speedy advancement : not from motives of 
merely selfish ambition, but because I had 
left a mother at home in England who was 
old and in narrow circumstances, as well as 
sisters who had stinted themselves of many 
comforts to furnish the outfit for my career. 

Port Hope was at that time a sorry little 
place, with mean sheds and shanties, a few 
boarded houses roofed with glittering tin, and 
many log-huts little better than the wigwams 



124 OVER THE ICE. 

of the savages. The few barges and coasting 
craft belonging to it were fast ice-bound in the 
little haven, surrounded by bavins and fenders 
made of pliant brushwood, to protect the 
timbers from the grinding and pressure of the 
jagged ice, when the thaw should come. 
There was a stockaded enclosure which was 
called the fort : a place originally constructed 
by the French masters of Canada ; but it had 
never been fit for defence against any but a 
hostile party of Indians or scouts, and was 
decayed and ruinous. We had toiled hard to 
strengthen it, under the direction of the engi- 
neer officer, and what with logs, and puddled 
clay for mortar, and gabions, and sand-bags, 
and earthen ramparts built up before the iron 
ground refused to admit the spade, we had 
really succeeded in rearing a solid and impos- 
ing series of defences. As the massive flakes 
of snow darkened the air, we were just finish- 
ing the embrasures, and we contrived to get 
the guns into position, swathing them with 
haybands and tarpaulin to preserve them from 
the weather. 

Then our labours ceased. There was bar- 
rack-room drill, and nothing else, except a 



125 

roper vigilance 
ii'S. But these 
luirdly needful, 
lisniissed to their 
(Jreat then was 
- turning one even- 
sentries, Captain 
cloak, met me with 
able on his bronzed 

us business. Say no- 

ut go quietly up to my 

HI in a moment. 

was half full ; not merely 

.\cs and children, but of 

blks, and miscellaneous 

lid black. Wondering what 

ould possibly have to com- 

Liired to his quarters. In 

^^-room . for, as commander, 

uxury of two rooms . a great 

burning, and before this fire, 

ludy-coloured blanket, was an 

The man's face was hidden 

it his careless attitude and heavy 

:ioted fatigue, and his fringed 



i 



126 OVER THE ICE. 

leggings were wet and steaming, as if the 
frozen snow upon them had lately thawed. 
A plate, on which were some clean-picked 
bones and crumbs of bread, lay near beside 
an empty tumbler, the latter of which ex- 
haled an aromatic fragrance of whisky-and- 
water; a pair of snow-shoes had been tossed 
into a corner of the room. 

I had barely time to take in all these objects 
at a glance, when Haworth entered, humming 
a tune, as if in lightness of heart. He was 
followed by his servant, with a fresh store of 
fire-wood. 

" That wiU do, Martin : I shall want nothing 
more till nine. Mr. Mills sups with me, so 
you may grill the turkey's legs as well as the 
other things I ordered. I'll brew the punch 
myself." 

Martin made his military salute and de- 
parted. Instantly the captain's gaiety of 
manner fell like a mask. 

" Ned Mills," said he, with unusual energy 
and seriousness, " I believe you're a true 
friend to me, and. Heaven help me, I want a 
friend this night, if ever a man wanted one 
since the world was a world." 



OVER THE ICE. 127 

I was a little startled by this preamble, but 
I lost DO time in assuring him that my regard 
for him was genuine and of long date, and 
that I was ready to aid him in any way 
"What was the matter?" 

Haworth opened the door before replying, 
and glanced down the passage, to make sure 
no eavesdroppers were at hand ; then gently 
closing the door, he said, in a low voice, 

" Ned, this Indian runner has brought bad 
news. It is a lucky thing that he is a trust- 
worthy fellow, and came straight to me instead 
of blabbing the secret at the canteen. The 
enemy are wide awake across the border; 
they hoped to catch us napping.'* 

" The enemy ?" cried I, half incredulously ; 
" why, the roads are sealed up. The drifts 
are deep enough to smother twenty armies ; 
not a gun, not a waggon, can get along 
through the loose snow, and the war must 
wait till there is a smooth hard surface for the 
march.'' 

'*What do you say to that? Is that 
smooth and hard enough?" said Haworth, 
pointing to the frozen surface of Lake Ontario, 
where a pale blue sheet of polished ice, 



128 OVER THE ICE. 

striped with fleecy streaks of snow, reflected 
the countless stars of a Canadian night. * 

Haworth proceeded to tell me that a force 
of Americans, powerful in comparison with 
our feeble garrison^ had secretly assembled on 
the south shore of the lake, and, led by ex- 
perienced guides, designed to cross the ice, 
which was strong enough to bear the weight 
of a considerable body marching in Indian file, 
according to the custom of western guerilla 
warfare. The Indian who brought the news, 
and who had been sent by one of the spies in 
British pay whom our government then main- 
tained on the frontier, had, by a prdigious 
effort, crossed the frozen lake on snow-shoes, 
without rest or refreshment, and had arrived 
an hour before. At the time of his setting 
out, there were many dangerous places not 
frozen over to a sufficient thickness, and there 
was every likelihood that several hours would 
elapse before the enemy began an advance 
which they fully counted on as a surprise. 

" Why, let them come,'* said I, cheerfully, 
and wondering at Haworth*s face ; .' we've 
got the ramparts well finished, a stout 
paUsade, and bastions that would not dis- 



OVEE THE ICE. 129 

grace Quebec itself. We shall beat them off, 
and the repulse will be worth a step in the 
Army List to both of us." 

Haworth shook his head. 

" They won't come here ; small as our fort 
is, they know it to be well anned and in good 
repair, and too hard a nut for them to crack. 
I forgot to tell you that the invading force 
will not consist of American regulars, but of 
twelve or fifteen hundred of the New York 
niiUtia, under a notorious partisan, Colonel 
Carter '' 

" Carter ? You don't mean Jeremy Carter, 
the plundering rascal who was near being 
cashiered for his cruelty at Senetchwan, near 
Sandwich, where he burned the village?" 

" I do mean him," said Haworth. ** He is 
the most unscrupulous leader on the frontiers, 
but he is a daring dog, and is not unpopular 
with the mob of his native state. As I told 
you, he has under his command at least 
twelve hundred militiamen ; not to mention 
a force of six hundred Mohawk Indians in the 
pay of Congress. And their destination is 
Hamilton." 

This explained Haworth's unwonted emo- 

VOL. II. K 




130 OVER THE ICE. 

tion. In the fort of Hamilton, at the western 
extremity of the lake, was residing, as well I 
knew, one very dear to him. Jane, Major 
Lee's only daughter, was affianced, with the 
full approval of her surviving parent, to 
Arthur Haworth, who was her cousin, and it 
was understood that their marriage was only 
deferred until my captain should be gazetted 
major. It was only natural that he should be 
alarmed by the prospect of a sudden attack 
upon the fort under Major Lee's command, 
the place being weak and the garrison slender. 
"You see," said Haworth, "the general 
has been deceived by false reports, and has 
drawn away every available bayonet towards 
the Lower Province. Since the detachment of 
the Sixtieth were ordered oflP to Kingston, Lee 
has scarcely had men enough to mount guard 
and do fatigue work. And, depend on it, the 
Americans know well what a rich prize they 
will get, seeing that money, cannon, powder, 
and stores of all kinds are waiting there for 
transport to Toronto. The old major, you 
know, is as brave as a lion, but his resistance 
will probably lead to a massacre when the 
fort falls, and Carter is likely to have neither 



OVER THE ICE. 131 

the will nor the power to restrain his savage 
allies, led as they are by Wild Cat, the very 
worst of the Mohawk nation. What can I 
do ? Even if I dared abandon my post, to 
march the men to Hamilton is impossible, 
and Jane may perish while I am idling here.'* 
Haworth was as gallant and good a fellow 
as any in our army, but he was utterly un- 
manned by the horrid vision his boding 
fancy had called up. I could not but own to 
myself, as I strove to comfort him, that he 
had reasons for his worst misgivings. But 
what could we do? Even supposing that 
my commanding officer could venture, at the 
risk of ignominious dismissal from the ser- 
vice, to abandon his post, our hundred and 
nine effectives could never cope with the su- 
perior numbers of the enemy ; and the road 
was hopelessly impassable to any but the 
most adroit woodsman trained to snow-shoes. 
The lake presented a tempting expanse of 
flint-hard ice, but we knew that along the 
coast to the westward there were many spots 
where the flowing water from brook and 
creek had spoiled the uniformity of the sur- 
face: substituting rough "hummocks," ce- 

K 2 



132 OVEa THE ICE. 

mented together by treacherous " glaire," for 
the firm and polished sheet that stretched 
away in front. A good many of our men 
were raw recruits from England, unused to 
ice, and certain to flounder and exhaust 
themselves in drifts of any depth, while only 
half a dozen of the old soldiers were even to- 
lerable performers in snow-shoes. A rescue, 
therefore, seemed impossible. 

" What on earth can I do ?'" said poor Ha- 
worth ; " the major has not, to the best of my 
belief, sixty men under arms. The stockades 
are rotten, the earthworks are waiting till 
our sappers are at leisure to patch them up, 
and yet I know the stout old soldier won't 
surrender. His resistance will be just enough 
to rouse the devil in the hearts of those with- 
out ; and when the Indians get at the spirit 
casks, who can tell what barbarous frenzy 
may take possession of their wild minds. 
No use in tears and prayers when a drunken 
MohaWk sniffs blood and liquor !" 

I made no reply for some minutes, for I 
was pondering over a plan that had occurred 
to me. Haworth waited awhile, and then 
peevishly asked why I did not answer? 



OVEE THE ICE. 183 

" Look here, old fellow," said I, at last, " if 
we can't help them, the next best is to warn 
them. A good runner in snow-shoes might 
get to Hamilton in time, and perhaps they 
may have some communication open with the 
interior. If Major Lee thinks fit to hold out, 
he can at least send his daughter to a place of 
safety, and '* 

"Do you imagine I haven't thought of 
that? But it's hopeless. There is not a 
scout at Port Hope now, there is not an In- 
dian worth his salt ; none but a parcel of 
worthless drunken redskins, who have been so 
corrupted by fire-water and lazy dependance 
on the whites that they couldn't get through 
such a march to save their lives. Heaven, 
if they were all like Kesnakupak there . - . " 

" Kesnakupak," exclaimed I, casting a look 
at the sleeping Indian in his scarlet blanket 
before the fire ; " do you mean that our fleet- 
footed messenger of evil is Elk-that-runs him- 
self?" 

I had never before seen that renowned per- 
sonage, equally famous for his speed of foot 
and his extraordinary skill in the chase. In 
ti me of peace, this man, who was one of the 



124 OVER THE ICE. 

of the savages. The few barges and coasting 
craft belonging to it were fast ice-bound in the 
little haven, surrounded by bavins and fenders 
made of pliant brushwood, to protect the 
timbers from the grinding and pressure of the 
jagged ice, when the thaw should come. 
There was a stockaded enclosure which was 
called the fort : a place originally constructed 
by the French masters of Canada ; but it had 
never been fit for defence against any but a 
hostile party of Indians or scouts, and was 
decayed and ruinous. We had toiled hard to 
strengthen it, under the direction of the engi- 
neer officer, and what with logs, and puddled 
clay for mortar, and gabions, and sand-bags, 
and earthen ramparts built up before the iron 
ground refused to admit the spade, we had 
really succeeded in rearing a soUd and impos- 
ing series of defences. As the massive flakes 
of snow darkened the air, we were just finish- 
ing the embrasures, and we contrived to get 
the guns into position, swathing them with 
haybands and tarpaulin to preserve them from 
the weather. 

Then our labours ceased. There was bar- 
rack-room drill, and nothing else, except a 



OVER THE ICE. 125 

daily inspection of arms, and proper vigilance 
in posting and visiting sentries. But these 
precautions were regarded as hardly needful. 
The militia-men had been dismissed to their 
homes, and war slumbered. Great then was 
my surprise when, on my returning one even- 
ing from inspecting the sentries. Captain 
Haworth, wrapped in his cloak, met me with 
an unwonted look of trouble on his bronzed 
face. . 

" Ned, here's a precious business. Say no- 
thing before the men, but go quietly up to my 
quarters. I'll join you in a moment. 

The barrack-yard was half full ; not merely 
of soldiers, their wives and children, but of 
settlers, country folks, and miscellaneous 
hangers on, white and black. Wondering what 
my commander could possibly have to com- 
municate, I repaired to his quarters. In 
Haworth's sitting-room . for, as commander, 
he enjoyed the luxury of two rooms . a great 
fire of logs was burning, and before this fire, 
wrapped in a gaudy-coloured blanket, was an 
Indian asleep. The man's face was hidden 
by his arm, but his careless attitude and heavy 
breathing denoted fatigue, and his fringed 



124 OVER THE ICE. 

of the savages. The few barges and coasting 
craft belonging to it were fast ice-bound in the 
little haven, surrounded by bavins and fenders 
made of pliant brushwood, to protect the 
timbers from the grinding and pressure of the 
jagged ice, when the thaw should come. 
There was a stockaded enclosure which was 
called the fort : a place originally constructed 
by the French masters of Canada ; but it had 
never been fit for defence against any but a 
hostile party of Indians or scouts, and was 
decayed and ruinous. We had toiled hard to 
strengthen it, under the direction of the engi- 
neer officer, and what with logs, and puddled 
clay for mortar, and gabions, and sand-bags, 
and earthen ramparts built up before the iron 
ground refused to admit the spade, we had 
really succeeded in rearing a solid and impos- 
ing series of defences. As the massive flakes 
of snow darkened the air, we were just finish- 
ing the embrasures, and we contrived to get 
the guns into position, swathing them with 
haybands and tarpaulin to preserve them from 
the weather. 

Then our labours ceased. There was bar- 
rack-room drill, and nothing else, except a 




OVER THE ICE. 137 

at the edges, and designed . not to plough 
the waters, but to skim across the ice of the 
great lakes. These craft are propelled by 
sails, and steered by helm, exactly like sea- 
going vessels ; it is hardly necessary to add 
that with a favouring breeze they can attain a 
speed never equalled by a ship that has to 
cleave through water, and not much inferior 
to that of an express train. But they have 
the drawback of danger. So many accidents 
have occurred from the breaking in of the ice, 
from sudden squalls, collisions, and so forth, 
that these winter yachts have never attained 
the popularity of the safe and convenient 
sleigh. 

It was a rough walk to Big Lick. More 
than once, in spite of all my caution, I plumped 
nearly waist deep into a bank of snow, and the 
loose drift was always up to my knees. But 
I pushed on, and presently found myself in 
the stove-heated "keeping-room" of the 
Kendals, briefly telling my tale, and entreating 
assistance. A fine family group they made ; 
the hale grey-haired father ; Mrs. Kendal, a 
comely matron who had preserved her bright 
English complexion through many a Canadian 



138 OVER THE ICE. 

summer ; her daughters, of various ages, from 
infancy to nigh womanhood; and the frank 
bold Willy, with his blue eyes sparkling, and 
his sun-browned cheeks glowing with excite- 
ment, as he listened. 

Hardly had I finished when he sprang up. 

" Thank you/ Mr. Mills, for thinking of me 
in such a muss. I'll just jump up stairs for my 
rifle and ball-pouch, and Til get Stormswallow 
out of dock, and we'll make shift to lug her 
down creek. Once on the lake, she'll show 
heels, I guess, and if we do meet those robbers 
and their red bloodhounds, why " 

Here he caught sight of his mother's wistful 
gaze fixed upon him ; he stopped short. 

Mrs. Kendal's first remark was not an 
unnatural one: "Suppose Willy should be 
killed !" 

It was her husband who answered, and 
though there were tears in the old farmer's 
hardy eyes, his voice was firm as he said : . 

" Wife, we must not hold back our boy from 
a work of mercy. If I knew how to steer as 
he does, I'd go in his place, and take all risk, 
sooner than lie snug and warm in my bed, 
and leave women and young girls to the mur- 



OVER THE ICE. 139 

dering tomahawk of the savage. But let our 
dear boy go, in God's name, and trust to the 
Heaven above us all to send him safe back 
to us/' 

So it was settled ; but the parting was a 
painful one. The sisters clung, weeping, to 
Willy as he went to and fro, and though Mrs. 
Kendal kept her feelings down for a while, 
and made a mighty show of business equani- 
mity in giving out blankets and hides, pro- 
visions, cordials, and other necessaries, for the 
storing of the yacht during our wild trip, she 
broke down at last, and caught her son to her 
heart with a burst of passionate sobbing very 
painful to hear. 

"Let the mistress have her cry out. It 
will do her good," whispered the old farmer. 
^ " You and I, lieutenant, will go down and get 
out the boat." 

We went down, followed by two of the 
hired men, a negro and white, bending under 
the weight of our provisions and wrappings. 
With the help of these two men, we dragged 
the cutter from her miniature dock, got up 
her topmast, removed the tarpaulins, unlocked 
the cabin doors, bent the sails, and drew the 



140 OVER THE ICE. 

light vessel to the frozen creek. Then Willy 
Kendal, his face stained with tears, but flushed 
and eager with courage and hope, came up to 
us, with his gun on his shoulder, and his 
ammunition slung to his wampum-fringed belt. 

*. Aboard, if you please, Mr. Mills ! We'll 
pull down the creek. Good-bye, father. Til 
soon be back. Cheer up mother and the 
girls, There*s no danger.** 

Down the creek we slowly went, and by 
the soft light I could see the old farmer with 
his bat oflP, and his face turned up towards 
the bright starry Heavens, praying for the 
safety of his first-born. 

Then we turned the corner, dark with 
maple-trees, and saw him no more. Willy 
gave me the needful instructions as to trim- 
ming the sails, while he grasped the helm. 
We were on the broad glassy lake, now 
ploughing through a seam of snow, now 
flitting lightly across a dark sheet of ice^ 
polished and resonant as metal. The Storm- 
swallow was a well-built boat, large, com- 
modious, and swift. Willy Kendal, young as 
he was, had a very high reputation for skill in 
this peculiar and perilous navigation. He 




OVER THE ICE. 141 

knew Ontario well, and had ranged its most 
distant waters scores of times. The light 
wind was tolerably favourable, and we were 
soon abreast of Port Hope, and showed a 
light three times, as I had concerted with my 
captain. 

Presently a footstep was heard on the hard 
ice, and two muffled figures approached us. 
One was Haworth, the other was the Indian. 
In a moment they joined us. 

*' Thank you, Kendal, thank you, my brave 
lad," said Haworth ; ** and you, too, Mills. 
I'm no great hand at speeches ; but if ever 
you want a friend, I owe you a debt a life- 
time would be too short to pay. See, Mills 1 
The Indian wants to go, tired as he is. 
He*8 a rare guide, and you may meet the 
enemy, and if so, his forest cunning may 
prove useful." 

Elk-that-runs had by this time squatted 
himself on the deck, and was deftly proceed- 
ing to kindle his long pipe, the stem of which 
was of wild cherry, while the bowl was of 
soap'Stone from the western prairies. I 
pressed Haworth's hand once more, and we 
parted: he to plod his way back to shore: 



142 OVER THE ICE. 

the crew of the Stormswallow to skim towards 
the west. We had to shape our course in a 
much more southerly direction than that in 
which Hamilton lay, to avoid weak places in 
the ice that would not have borne the weight 
of our vessel. Willy Kendal showed great 
adroitness in taking advantage of every puflF 
of the light and fickle breeze, and I toiled to 
the best of my power to trim sail as he bade 
me ; but our progress was not as fast as I 
could have desired. The cold, too, was bit- 
ter. In spite of our blanket-suits and robes, 
our fur-gloves and flap-eared caps of racoon- 
skin, we could hardly keep ourselves from 
stagnation of the blood, and our breath con- 
gealed in shaggy icicles on our vn*appings of 
fur and woollen. For a time the boat glided 
on, ghost-like, over the smooth lake, under the 
pointed silvery stars; but presently a low 
sighing sound reached our ears, and a film 
like a black crape veil began to draw across 
the spangled dark-blue sky. 

" A snow-squall comin' up !" said young 
Kendal. 

Lashing the tiller, to keep the boat's head 
right, he sprang to help me in reducing sail. 



OVER THE ICE. 143 

Just as we had got the cutter under a modi- 
cum of canvas, the sigh of the wind swelled 
into a roar, and Willy caught the helm while 
a whirling datsh of snow-flakes reached us, 
whitening our decks, and the wind made us 
heel over perilously. 

"We must let her run before it,'' said 
Willy ; and in a moment we were rushing 
over the frozen lake at such a speed as I had 
never dreamed of, and which realised the 
hackneyed comparison of arrow-swift. On 
we went, lashed by the hissing gale and 
driving snow : the ice, and the land, and the 
sky equally hidden from our sight by the 
dazzUng thickness of the shower of whirUng 
flakes. There was something weird and un- 
earthly in such headlong bUnd speed through 
such weather. 

.* The Labrador folks are plucking their 
geese some," observed Willy Kendal ; " we're 
most smothered with the feathers." 

I could not help smiling, though there was, 
in truth, good cause for being serious. The 
winter had set in too recently for the ice to 
have attained that comfortable "two yard" 
thickness in which Canadians delight. There 



144 OYER THE ICE. 

were places where it groaned and quivered, 
bending like a floor of springy planks ; there 
were other places where small gaps or cracks 
intervened, causing the Stormswallow to rock 
and reel as she flew over the dangerous spot 
like a hunter over a ditch. To lie to was now 
impossible, and while the furious squall lasted 
we were hurried along, without seeing a 
yard ahead of us. Presently the gale sub- 
sided, or more probably passed on towards 
the Upper Lakes, and we saw the snow- 
clouds break and scatter, and the bright stars 
glimmer overhead. The wind became mode- 
rate, and the cutter was once more under 
control. 

" Where are we ?" was my first inquiry. 

My young companion looked around with a 
puzzled air. 

" Crimp me like a shadfish if I can tell 
you, Mr. Mills! Better ask old beads and 
blankets there. Indians have the eyes of 
cats." 

Elk-that-runs, who had not said one word 
since we started, but had gravely kept his 
pipe alight through the elemental strife, com- 
posedly made answer to my inquiry : 



OVER THE ICK. 145 

" Pale chief no can see ? Dat (pointing 
over his shoulder) Bald Point, dere, lower 
down, is Voyageurs* Spit, where trees, and 
light you take for star, Hamilton." 

*' That beats all," cried Willy.  I thought 
I knew old Ontario a few, but the redskin 
whips me clean. See, lieutenant, there is the 
Spit, with something waving that may be 
trees, or may be feathers, for anything I can 
tell from here ; but the Indian's right. Yon 
is Hamilton, though how we've run the dis- 
tance in the time I can't guess. That puff of 
wind was some pumpkins 1" 

Hamilton it really was, to our great joy, 
and in about half an hour we were within a 
short distance of the shore, and heard the 
hail of a sentry, ** Who goes there ?" 

Of course I had not the countersign, but 
replying " A friend," I jumped out upon the 
ice, and approached the sentry ; opening my 
wraps to show my uniform. Thus I managed 
to be passed on to the guard-house, and 
thence to the commandant's quarters. By 
this time the stars were getting pale, and 
there was an intense chill in the air, and a 
grey tinge in the eastern sky that heralded 

VOL. II. L 



146 OVER THE ICE. 

the dawn. Major Lee was aroused from 
sleep, and came down half-dressed to meet 
me. The fine old soldier exhibited unusual 
emotion and discomposure when he learned 
my tidings. 

" The defences are in wretched condition, 
by no fault of mine," said he. " It is in 
vain that T have urged them for months, at 
head- quarters to spare us guns and engineers. 
But I don't mean to yield, Mr. Mills, on the 
first summons, I can assure you.*' 

*' I should be sorry to recommend such a 
step," said I ; " and yet, major, this is one of 
those cases in which courage can hardly avail 
much. The Americans know your weakness, 
be assured, and their own strength. They 
are no clement conquerors, and their Mohawk 
allies are under no sort of discipline. If the 
fort should be stormed " 

** There it is, sir,*' said the old officer, 
pacing up and down the room in considerable 
agitation. " I am sorry for the poor fellows 
who wear the king's cloth, but they and I are 
soldiers, and must take our chance. But my 
daughter and my sister . and yet I have no 
means of sending them away. The roads 



OVER THE ICE. 147 

are deep with mountains of drifted snow ; no 
sleigh could run, no horse could struggle 
through. They would perish long before 
they were in sight of Toronto/' 

A bright idea flashed upon me. 

" Major, you forget the Stormswallow. She 
will carry several persons, and Willy Kendal 
and the Indian guide can make shift to navi- 
gate her back to Port Hope. Put your 
daughter on board her, put Mrs. Harrison on 
board, put every soldier's wife and child on 
board, and let them trust to Providence and 
the care of my comrades. I can then stop 
here. You won't be sorry to have an extra 
man, and we'll endeavour, by hook or by 
crook, to give a warm reception to the 
enemy." 

An animated though brief debate followed. 
Major Lee readily consented to my first pro- 
posal, but he would not hear of my remaining. 

" You must go," said he* '* Remember, 1 
commit my daughter and her aunt to your 
care, and you are responsible to me for their 
security. A pretty thing, that I should suffer 
you to stop here and get knocked on the 
head, when you don't even belong to the 

l2 



148 OVER THE ICE. 

regiment, and when your leave is only for 
eight-and-forty hours ! As commandant of 
Fort Hamilton I order you, sir, to return to 
Port Hope . and no more words about it, my 
dear boy. My heart will be lighter when 
the women are gone, and perhaps I may think 
of some plan for checkmating the assailants.'' 

The major was obliged to use both autho- 
rity and persuasion to induce his daughter to 
leave him in peril. 'She clung to his side, 
wound her arms round his neck, and adjured 
him to let her stay, or to go with her . a 
thing, of course, impossible to be done with- 
out a breach of duty, which the veteran would 
not have been guilty of to save his life a 
score of times. Luckily, Mrs. Harrison, the 
aunt, was animated by her ' own fears into 
acting with the energy of selfishness, and she 
assisted in almost forcing the weeping girl on 
board the ice boat. With them went a negro 
woman servant, Susannah by name, and five 
soldiers' wives, their frightened children hold- 
ing to their skirts. Two of these women 
were very reluctant to leave their husbands, 
but motherly apprehensions for the safety of 
their children when the Mohawks should win 



OVER THE ICE. 149 

the fort, prevailed at last. The soldiers be- 
haved very well and very gallantly, as soldiers 
usually do when they respect their com- 
mander. They were left to face cruel odds 
and a merciless foe, and they knew it ; but 
no voice was raised for flight, though there 
was just a chance of escape on foot over the 
ice. They eagerly aided the females to em- 
bark, and stood around, prepared for the 
worst. Willy Kendal got the yacht's head 
round to the south-east, and amid wild out- 
bursts of grief from those we were taking 
away, and many a cheer and hearty blessing 
from the brave fellows left behind, we glided 
off across the glassy ice, and heard the last 
English hurrah die away behind us. 

It was now dawn, but the sun was hidden 
by thick grey clouds, and a dull mist, through 
which the familiar headlands of the coast 
loomed gigantic, until we lost them too, and 
trusted to the compass for our guide. The 
ladies were put in possession of the cabin, the 
stove was lighted, and such few preparations 
as we could make for their comfort were made. 
The soldiers' wives and their children crouched 
on the deck forward, and we were sorely put 



156 OVEE THE ICE. 

clouded barrel of his rifle over the taffrail. I 
struck it up. 

** No need to throw away a shot/' said T, 
"besides, they are an overmatch. Ten to 
one. We had best make terms." 

"Terms, lieutenant?" said young Kendal 
bitterly ; ** the Yankees may promise, but 
the Mohawks ain't easy to choke off. Fight or 
yield, they won't spare us . and, may I never, 
but the wind's down !" 

Too true. A sullen flapping of our sails 
announced that it was too true, and the 
Stormswallow only glided along under the 
influence of the momentum she had acquired. 
The Indians set up a long exulting whoop, 
like hounds when the chase is well-nigh over, 
came on. 

" Let us die like men, any way !" cried 
Willy Kendal, catching up his gun : a motion 
which T half mechanically imitated. But at 
this instant Elk-that-runs let his own piece 
drop to the deck, and uttered a strange 
chuckle as he pointed with his tawny finger 
to the ice, and bent his head to listen. 

A groaning sound, like the complaint of a 
tortured giant, came to our ears. Then the 



OVER THE ICE. 151 

It might have been half an hour after this 
when Susannah, the negress, as she came up 
from the tiny cabin, suddenly started and 
cried out, 

" massa, we 'rived ! Poor 'Sannah see 
bay'net of sodger shine, dar/' 

She pointed south, where something shone 
through the fog. 

** Wagh !" grunted Elk-that-runs, rising to 
his feet with the noiseless agility of a panther. 
" Kesnakupak blind squaw . deaf stupid 
Indian . let listen a bit." 

He put his head on one side, and listened 
like a stag for the hunters. Then he drew 
himself up, folded his arms . naked but for 
the heavy silver bracelets on his medalled 
breast . and said : 

" Men talk . Mohawk . out yonder." 

" Impossible !" cried Kendal and I, with 
one accord. 

" Elk-that-runs speak truth," answered the 
Indian, stoically. ** Some talk English talk, 
dem Yankee soldier . some talk Mohawk . 
dem warriors of de Six Nations. Dat all." 

** Hist !" cried Willy, very cautiously. 

A shrill quavering sound reached our ears 



152 OVKE THE ICE. 

through the mist, and we recognised an Ame- 
rican air, though the words could not be dis- 
tinguished. At the same moment the curtain 
of fog lifted sufficiently to enable us to discern 
a sight appalling enough under the circum- 
stances. A small sandy islet, specked with 
trees, visible above the ice, and on it and 
around it the temporary encampment of a 
large body of armed men. No tents, but 
many a rude ** lodge" of skins and branches, 
while a number of hand-sleighs, probably 
containing provisions and ammunition, were 
scattered about. Most of those in sight were 
white men, of whom the majority wore the 
uniform of the New York militia, though 
many were in the fringed hunting-shirts or 
the suits of blanketing commonly worn in 
winter by the dwellers in Oswego county. 
There were a number of grim forms 
whose paint and fantastic head-gear of 
plumes and fox-tails, whose buft'alo-robes 
and gaudy-coloured blankets, sufficiently de- 
noted their stock. I saw no cannon, but 
bayonets glanced far and near, and the bright 
barrels of muskets and the clouded tubes of 
rifles bristled on all sides. 



OVER THE ICE. 153 

*' We've poked our heads into a wild bees' 
nest, lieutenant," whispered the brave young 
Kendal. " Our best hope is, that the fog 
may fall again." 

But a sudden ^yell from some sharp-eyed 
Indian announced that we were seen. Hun- 
dreds of voices took up the cry, and a huge 
clamour and confusion began. Rallying 
squares were formed by the Americans, while 
the savages huddled together in dusky groups. 

" Hurrah ! I see how 'tis," cried Willy 
Kendal ; *' the scamps think we're Britishers 
coming over to attack 'em. They're that 
struck of a heap, we might gain a couple of 
mile before a shot's fired, if " 

Flash ! A rifle had been fired at us already, 
and the ball was so well aimed that it cut 
one of the feathers from the head-dress of 
Elk-that-runs, and sent it fluttering to the 
deck. The chief never . moved a muscle, but 
sucked on at his pipe, and waited a full mi- 
nute before he uttered his eternal " Wagh !" 

But after this tribute to the etiquette of 
his stoical race, the intelligent savage proved 
anything but a drone in the hive. While 
Willy clutched the helm, and I did my best 



^ 



154 OVER THE ICE. 

to trim sails and haul ropes so as to make 
the most of the sluggish' breeze, the Indian 
rose to his feet, cast a piercing glance at the 
enemy, and then stood beside young Kendal, 
perfectly regardless of repeated discharges 
of fire-arms. 

" Ice no good, dere !'* cried Elk-that-runs. 
" More to east, young chief. Tell you, cur- 
rent dar, and you no sheer off we break 
through and all lose scalp, sure/'* 

Indeed, Kendal had but just time, by a 
sharp jerk of the helm, to avoid a sheet of 
weak " cat-ice*' that glittered diamond bright 
in the rays of the dim wintry sun, and one 
plunge into which would have been fatal. 

Elk-that-runs showed wonderful knowledge 
of the lake in that part, and thanks to him, 
we avoided more than one shoal and more 
than one unsafe place, while the brave lad 
and his swift boat both did their best. 

But the wind was faint and unsteady, the 
Stormswallow was heavily laden, and her 
progress was sorely unlike the lightning rush 
of the preceding voyage. We were chased 
hotly. I cannot tell whether the enemy 
guessed whence we came, but they spared no 



OVER THE ICE. 155 

eflFort to overtake us, and while nearly two 
hundred joined the pursuit, about thirty 
of the fleetest gained on us terribly fast. Of 
those, about one-third were New Yorkers, the 
most being Mohawks ; but all bore rifles, and 
frequently halted to fire. We were obliged to 
place the women and children under cover 
by crowding them into the cabin, and as to 
ourselves, we crouched down as we Ustened, 
under cover of the bulwarks. 

" If the wind would but freshen !" said I. 

Willy Kendal shook his head. Our pur- 
suers were gaining on us. They came on in 
straggling disorder, white men and red men, 
pell-mell. Most of the Indians wore snow- 
shoes, which helped them well across the 
patches of loose deep snow; but the New 
Yorkers, in their '* cramponned" shoes, made 
better way across the polished ice. 

" Hilloa ! Britisher, give in ! You'd best V 
bawled a threatening voice in our rear, half 
drowned by the whoops of the Mohawks. 

" Surrender there I" cried another panting 
American. " We'll make short finish of the 
hull lot of you, once ye pull trigger !" 

For Elk-that-runs had thrust the short 



1G2 Sophie's ribbon. 

on suspicion of a share in some conspiracy. 
He was found not guilty ; but, being unable to 
clear himself wholly in the eyes of government, 
bad been compelled to serve as a private for 
three years in the Caucasus; had quitted 
Russia at the end of this term ; and, after a 
long exile, had lately been permitted to return, 
at the intereession of his powerful relatives. 
He was still under considerable suspicion, and 
it was more than rumoured that his presence 
in the capital was due to his desire to render 
aid in some widely-spread plot for the enfran- 
chisement of Poland and its imperfectly Rus- 
sianised dependencies. 

" If they catch him tripping, woe be to the 
lad," said old Campbell, oracularly ; " he'll 
be lucky if he gets off with Eastern Siberia 
and airmine trapping for the rest of his days ; 
more likely the mines or the knout, if the 
czar's ministers happen to be specially ill 
humoured, or specially frightened, when the 
bubble bursts." 

The old chancellor had seen so many abortive 
plots, painfully planned, warily kept, collapse 
in the miserable ruin of the plotters, that he 
had got to regard the Russian government as 



Sophie's ribbon. 163 

conspiracy proof. This was peculiarly true as 
regarded the Polish aristocracy, many of whose 
chief families were understood to reside at St. 
Petersburg rather as hostages than as courtiers, 
though never venturing to absent themselves 
from the imperial presence-chamber on cere- 
monious occasions. Among these were the 
Leczinzkas ; the old prince and princess ; their 
grandson, heir to the extensive estates in 
Lithuania and the government of Warsaw; 
and their grand-daughter, Sophie Leczinzka. 
The prince himself was a gentle genial old 
man, with a taste for numismatics. I do not 
believe that his patriotism ever went beyond a 
mild sentiment in favour of a free and pros- 
perous Poland. The princess, who had been 
a famous beauty in her day, was kind and 
hospitable, but not by any means capable of 
dabbling in political intrigues; while the 
grandson was as yet so young, and so heed- 
fully kept under the eye of a tutor recom- 
mended by the czar himself, that he could 
scarcely have imbibed any "revolutionary" 
ideas. Still, whoever was lord of the Lecz- 
inzka lands, and of the influence attached 
to the great name of that illustrious race, 

M 2 



164 Sophie's ribbon. 

was esteemed worth watching by the autho- 
rities. 

The family had not always been so passive. 
The prince's eldest son, a high-spirited young 
man, had shared in the last disastrous revolt 
of the Poles, and died, in captivity, of wounds 
received in the defeat of Ostrolenka. His 
young widow had soon followed him to the 
grave, leaving Alexis and Sophie, the one an 
infant, the other a girl eight years of age, to 
the care of their grand-parents. And the 
second son, who had long wandered, an exile, 
from country to country, had died far from 
his home and friends. All this happened 
long ago, and the Leczinzkas, if still watched, 
were smiled upon at court. Their entertain- 
ments were among the most splendid at St. 
Petersburg, and the foreign residents, in 
especial, met with the most kindly reception 
there. 

Sophie Leczinzka was a beautiful dark- 
haired girl, in the early bloom of a loveliness 
that gave promise of becoming queenly and 
majestic at a later period ; but just then she 
was a bright-eyed young creature, simple and 
frank of manner, and more like an English 



Sophie's ribbon. 165 

maiden than the languid Russian damsels 
around her. Indeed, Sophie, by far the 
cleverest of the household, was also the most 
national. It was her pride to be a Pole ; she 
loved to sing PoUsh songs, and to listen to 
Polish stories ; and I remember her pretty 
sorrow, half sad, half petulant, when her grand- 
mother absolutely forbade her appearing at 
the empress's masquerade in the high cap, 
velvet jacket, and gold-braided vest of the old 
Sarmatian pattern. 

It is not surprising that I, who was most 
heartily made welcome at the Leczinzka 
palace, on the strength of some intimacy in 
long- past times between the old prince and 
a relation of mv own, should have become 
attached, and deeply so, to the beautiful 
Polish girl, but the wonder should rather be 
that my suit received the sanction of Sophie's 
guardians and kindred. For an attach^, even 
though tolerably well off, to aspire to such a 
match would have seemed idle in most cases, 
since even in their hour of captivity there is 
no prouder nobility than that of Poland, and 
a Leczinzka might, as I well knew, reasonably 
expect to ally herself with some man of rank 



3 60 Sophie's ribbon. 

much more brilliant than mine. It must, 
however, be remembered that Sophie was no 
heiress, since the estates were strictly entailed, 
and I was at that time understood to be the 
next inheritor of a considerable property in 
England. Whatever the cau^e, so the matter 
stood. I was regarded in the household as 
actually betrothed to Sophie. There had 
been no formal troth-plight ; still less had 
any time been fixed for our marriage, which, 
indeed, the princess desired to defer for a 
year or two on account of her grandchild's 
youth, and her own reluctance to be parted 
from her, but the afiair was no secret. 

And Sophie? With all my wish to relate 
calmly and fairly what occurred, I cannot, 
even at this distance of time, be certain as to 
what were her feelings. Perhaps she herself 
did not realise their nature. She certainly 
did not dislike me. She had merely looked 
down, with a timid blush and smile, when the 
old princess bade her look upon me as her 
future husband. Her lips had never ratified 
the tacit consent thus given, nor is this 
expected in a continental country, and espe- 
cially in a rank so elevated. 



Sophie's ribbon. 167 

Gliska, being in some way related to the 
princess, and having been Brought up in the 
Leczinzka mansion in Poland, was often to be 
met in the family circle, where he was always 
welcome. He had been a ward of the old 
nobleman's, having been early left an orphan, 
and both the prince and princess had a regard 
for him, which was probably in great measure 
the result of habit. Nothing could be more 
unlike than the bent of the ex-guardian's 
mind and that of his former charge. The 
kind white-headed master of the house had a 
soft easy nature, that shrank from disagreeable 
or painful topics, and a narrow, though culti- 
vated intellect. He had travelled much, had 
many foreign friends, and loved to recal by- 
gone intimacies among the wits and statesmen 
of the West. His correspondence, his French 
novels, and his curious cabinet of rare coins 
and medals, filled up his leisure fully. The 
chevalier, on the other hand, was calm and 
thoughtful, rather silent, but evidently not 
from lack of thoughts. When he did speak, 
it was always in well-chosen words, and with 
ascertain suppressed fire and eloquence that 
told of great powers undeveloped. 




168 Sophie's ribbon. 

I could not exactly make out on what foot- 
ing Gliska stood with reference to Sophie 
Leczinzka. They were cousins. Sophie, as 
a child, had been used to look up to the tall 
playfellow so much older and wiser than her- 
self . nothing would have been more reasona- 
ble than that they should have been on the 
same terms as brother and sister. Yet GUska 
seemed to me rather to avoid his pretty cousin 
than otherwise, and Sophie rarely mentioned 
his name. There were times when I could 
not help feeling a thrill of jealous suspicion, 
as a vague idea dawned in my mind that this 
apparent indiflference, on Gliska's part at any 
rate, was mere feigning. But such impres- 
sions were always fugitive, and were not long 
able to disturb my peace. 

I was one night at a ball at the Gortschakoff 
palace, and happened to stand close to the open 
door of a card-room, where the whist-players, 
ignorant of my proximity, were chatting of the 
Leczinzkas and their prospects. One of them 
asked, carelessly, whether there had not once 
been some talk of a match between the che- 
valier and his beautiful cousin ? Involunta- 
rily, I listened for the reply, which was as 



sophif/s eibbon. 169 

\ indifferently spoken as the question had 

been : 

** Why, yes, there was such a plan. The 
old princess, who has a match-making turn, 
like most of your ex-beauties . your deal, 
general ! . was eager about it, long before 
mademoiselle was out of the nursery. But 
then came the coup, and the lad's lands were 
confiscated, and himself packed off to carry a 
musket against Schamyl in the Caucasus . so 
there was an end of the matter. cut the cards, 
marshal, if you please." 

** But the chevalier is pardoned/' observed 
a cracked female voice across the table. 

" True, madame ; but poor . poor as Job ; 
and not only penniless, but compromised. 
No, no, the English fellow is a better parti, 
though I should not wonder if Sophie pre- 
ferred the ' suspect.' Women are problems, 
madame." 

In the midst of the laugh that succeeded, I 
moved away with tingling ears. A glance at 
Sophie's face, as she sat in the centre of a 
blooming group of girls of her own age, prat- 
tling of dances and their partners, made me 
ashamed of my suspicion. If ever candour 



170 Sophie's ribbon. 

sat enthroned on a fair forehead, surely, surely 
it was manifest on hers. I approached, and 
she greeted me with a bright smile, as I asked 
if she had been charitable enough to keep an 
early dance for me. 

** You are too late, M. Charles ; my poor 
little book is terribly full of names ! I have 
promised to dance with Rogamoff and Oginski, 
and your great friend Baron GaUtzin of the 
Guard, and O, so many more \" 

*' And with your cousin, ChevaUer Gliska ?" 
I asked the question in apparent playfulness, 
but I suppose there was something harsh and 
hostile in my tone, in spite of myself, which 
grated on the quick ear of a woman, for 
Sophie glanced rapidly at me with the look of 
a frightened fawn. 

"No!" she said, and her lip trembled 
slightly as she spoke. 

Vexed with myself for my own unjust 
peevishness, I tried to make amends, and so 
far succeeded that Sophie recovered her cheer- 
ful composure, and accorded me a waltz. It 
was in one of the pauses in that giddy whirl, 
in the midst of light and glitter, the sparkle 
and gleam of gold epaulettes and jewelled 



Sophie's ribbon. 171 

head-gear, and the dying fall of the music, 
that Sophie suddenly turned her eyes on mine, 
and said, with abrupt frankness : 

" M. Charles, avow that you are jealous of 
ray poor consin Demetrius, and that you hate 
him/' 

I forget what I answered in my surprise, 
but I know that Sophie contrived to convey to 
me the impression that she had a sisterly 
affection for the companion of her childhood ; 
that she regretted his misfortunes, and ad- 
mired his patriotism ; that she was only 
anxious to see him safe from future perils, 
and once more in the good graces of the 
Russian government. 

" Poor DemetriuA ! I cannot forget, dear M. 
Charles, how good and patient he was to me 
when I was a spoiled sickly child, full of fan- 
cies and hard to please. Poor Demetrius has 
suffered so much for our afflicted country. 
I, as you know, am a rebel at heart ; I hate 
the Muscovites . I hope that frightful Colonel 
Annenkoff heard that last remark . but I can 
do so safely, because I am too young and weak 
to be dangerous to the czar. It is different 
for a man. You should not be jealous or 



# 



172 Sophie's ribbon. 

cross, M. Charles, because J wish to prevent 
poor Demetrius from ending his days in 
Siberia.". 

I said something about her cousin's secu- 
rity, since his pardon, unless he were rash 
enough to enter into fresh intrigues against the 
emperor. I spoke with more constraint and 
coldness than would otherwise have been the 
case, because I saw Gliska leaning against a 
pillar, at a distance, and regarding us with a 
peculiar look of watchful interest. When his 
eyes met mine, he seemed to shrink back, 
and was soon lost in the glittering crowd of 
guests. 

That night, as our sledges went whirling 
over the hard beaten snovllof the streets, there 
was a great bustle and confusion, and the 
startled horses were sharply checked by the 
rein and thrown on their haunches in front of 
a double rank of soldiers drawn up across the 
principal thoroughfares. A harsh voice bade 
the drivers halt, and a number of policemen, 
accompanied by several officers muffled in 
grey watch-coats, went round from carriage . 
to carriage, throwing the red glare of a lan- 
tern on the faces of the belated guests of the 



\ 



Sophie's ribbon. 173 

prince-minister, and asking with polished but 
imperious courtesy the names of those present, 
which were entered hastily in a book. There 
was much shouting and lashing of whips, 
plunging of frightened horses, and screaming 
of terrified ladies, as the mass of vehicles 
came to an abrupt halt, but some of the old 
residents took the matter very coolly. 

** The first time this year V* said the senior 
attach^, who had taken a seat in my car- 
riage ; '* I began to wonder if the police had 
gone to sleep. Two years ago I remember 
four such stoppages in a single winter. I 
wonder if they'll make many captures to- 
night ?" 

And I, who had been but eight months in 
St. Petersburg, learned with some surprise 
that the favourite time for the secret police to 
select for a razzia against the innumerable 
plotters, Russian or Polish, was that of some 
great festivity or public reception. Half the 
conspiracies of the empire were hatched, my 
informant said, in the saloons of the higher 
aristocracy, under the very noses of the em- 
peror and his ministers ; and the best paid 
and most valuable spies were those who from 



174 Sophie's ribbon. 

their rank and position could enter such as- 
semblies without provoking remark ' or dis- 
trust. No doubt something had transpired at 
the prince- minister's ball which had aroused 
the vigilance of the lynx-eyed prefect of po- 
lice, and hence the impediment to our pro- 
gress homewards. 

The explanation bad got to this point, when 
a plotnik said civilly to our driver that he 
might "go on as fast as he liked," at the 
same time taking off his hat and extending 
his open palm significantly. My companion 
dropped a few copecks into it, and the man 
bowed low as he suffered us to pass by him 
and strike off by a side-street to the Admi- 
ralty quay. 

" They have caught their birds, no doubt !" 
said the more experienced senior attach^, 
treating the whole affair as a thing of course. 

The next day we heard vague rumours of 
detections and arrests, some said of many, 
others of only one or two persons. When I 
called, next morning, at the Leczinzka palace, 
I found the old prince nervous and irritable, 
the princess agitated, and Sophie not to be 
seen. She had a frightful headache, her 



Sophie's ribbon. 175 

grandmother said, and was too unwell to 
leave her chamber. No doubt the heat and 
crush of the Gortschakoflf assembly . those 
ofBcial people gave such shocking balls, 
where you were squeezed and elbowed by all 
the ill-mannered Tchinn in Russia . had been 
too much for the poor dear child. But it 
was not on Sophie's account that her grand- 
parents were so ill at ease. It was on 
Gliska's. Gliska had not returned to his 
lodgings on the previous night. His servant, 
alarmed at the non-arrival of his master, had 
come early to the palace to ask for news con- 
cerning him. One of the Leczinzka chasseurs 
had seen the prisoners of the night before led 
away to the Conciegerie, and was sure, or 
nearly sure, that one of them was the missing 
chevalier. 

I heard this news with mixed feelings. 
4n Englishman's instinct always rises in 
arras against an act of arbitrary oppression ; 
and the arrest of the night before had in it 
something of cat-like and Oriental stealthiness 
that was peculiarly odious. But 1 had an 
uneasy distrust of the chevalier, a smouldering 
jealousy which I tried to trample down, and 



176 Sophie's ribbon. 

I could not help feeling a vague sense of 
relief. 

However, while I was copying a precis in 
the attache's room at the embassy that after- 
noon, old Mr. Campbell came in, chuckling 
and rubbing his hands. 

" Yon fine conspeeracy has just turned out 
a mere flash in the pan . a mare's nest of the 
police," said he; "the chaps are set free, 
Gliska and the rest of them. Their captivity 
was over by lunch-time." 

" Then there was no real plot, after all ?" I 
asked, looking up from my wtiting. 

" I canna tell," said the cautious Scot, 
shaking his head as he took a fresh pinch of 
high-dried ; " the thing broke down for want 
of evidence . a verdict of not proven, as we 
say in the north. They say the emperor had 
Gliska taken into his own cabinet, and ques- 
tioned him there, but couldna cross-examine 
much out of the close fellow. And the story 
goes that his majesty said, in a loud voice, 
before the aide-de-camp. * You may go, che- 
valier, but be careful how you give me the 
right to punish !' Nicholas is ill to thwart. 
He likes contradiction even less than con- 



Sophie's ribbon. 177 

specracy, so Td advise M. Gliska to heed his 
steps in future." 

Gliska had, in effect, been set at liberty, 
and I met him that evening, calm and ele- 
gant as ever, at the Leczinzka mansion. He 
said very little about the exciting events of 
the night, or the formidable interview of the 
morning, but talked pleasantly on general 
topics. Sophie was present, having for- 
tunately recovered from her headache, but she 
was silent and thoughtful, and I fancied that 
I detected a glance of intelligence once or 
twice between her cousin and herself. But 
I soon felt convinced that I was mistaken. 
Gliska paid no sort of attention to Sophie. 
He addressed her rarely, and never with any 
particular show of interest ; indeed, he spoke 
less to her than to her brother, a pale, sleepy- 
eyed stripling, whose Russian tutor was his 
inseparable Mentor and companion. 

The noise the arrest had made in St. 
Petersburg society soon died away, and the 
usual round of gaieties went on, as if Siberia 
and the knout, plots and disaffection, had 
been myths. My own prospects unex- 
pectedly improved. The relative to whose 

VOI^. II. N 



178 Sophie's ribbon. 

estate I was heir of entail, and whom I had 
never seen, since he had lived in morose 
seclusion, died, and I found myself rich 
enough to lead an idle life. An idle life was 
not my choice, however, and at about the 
same time that I succeeded to this inheritance 
I seemed likely to rise in my professional 
career. Certain promotions and retirements 
bad taken place among the diplomatists, in 
consequence of which I was promised the 
post of senior attach^ at one of the Southern 
courts, as soon as the present occupant 
should vacate it : which would probably be 
in early summer. 

Fortified by this intelligence, I was en- 
couraged to renew, or rather to press, my suit 
for Sophie's hand ; the old prince standing 
my friend in the affair, the princess's objec- 
tions to parting with her grand-daughter were 
by degrees overruled. As for Sophie's con- 
sent, that was rather assumed than asked for. 
Her grandfather blessed her, and stroked her 
raven hair as caressingly as if she had been a 
child for whom some holiday treat was in 
preparation; her grandmother cried as she 
pressed her darling in her arms, and dilated 



Sophie's ribbon. 179 

on the happiness of her future life and the 
splendours of her prospective trousseau. It 
was settled that Sophie and I were to be 
married soon after Easter, that in the mean- 
time milliners, lawyers, and jewellers were 
to be busy in providing laces, diamonds, and 
deeds of settlement ; and that all was to go 
merry as a marriage bell. 

In all this arrangement, the bride elect's 
part seemed a curiously passive one. Sophie 
Leczinzka neither ratified nor rejected the 
engagement which her nearest relations had 
thought fit to conclude on her account ; she 
listened submissively to all the prince and 
princess chose to say on the subject, kissed 
their wrinkled hands in the ancient Polish 
fashion in sign of obedience, made me a 
formal curtsey, and left the room with down- 
cast eyes and something like a smothered sob. 
After that, Sophie always seemed to shrink 
from me ; her spirits grew variable, her cheek 
thinner, her manner graver and more thought- 
ful. I ought to have read the lesson thus 
mutely conveyed, but 1 was wilfully blind to 
it, and lent too ready an ear to the assurances 
of the old folks that Sophie's manner was 

N 2 



180 Sophie's ribbon. 

merely the result of girlish timidity and a 
deep sense of duty. The aged princess, in 
especial, was confident that her grandchild 
esteemed me quite as highly as could be 
expected from a " young person bien ^levfe." 

"I must not,'* the old lady said, "judge of 
the sentiments of a Polish girl as if she were 
a * Meess Anglaise/ " 

Gliska's conduct left no room for fault- 
finding. He wished me joy, as the phrase 
goes, politely, but with no afiectation of 
heartiness. Indeed, we had never been inti- 
mate, though I had been at first disposed to 
like him well enough ; but there was some- 
thing dark and inscrutable in his bearing and 
disposition, very unusual among his rash, 
chivalrous countrymen. 

Perhaps the wretched years of degradation 
and suffering, during which he had been a 
soldier in the Caucasus, and from any refer- 
ence to which he always shrank, had changed 
his character. He often reminded me of the 
traditional Italians of the middle ages : such 
Itahans as Macchiavelli knew, and Shakes- 
peare painted. 

He and I now met less frequently than 



Sophie's ribbon. 181 

before. He did not often spend his evenings 
at the Leezinzka palace, excusing himself on 
the score of pressing business, and throwing 
out hints which seemed to indicate that he 
was importuning the Imperial Chancellerie 
for the restoration of his forfeited estates. 
The old prince, always good-natured, in spite 
of his indolence, and frivolous habits, offered 
his interest at court, and Gliska gratefully 
accepted the proffer. He seemed pre-oc- 
cnpied in his mind, and there were new lines 
of care on his forehead, and a harrassed look 
in his bold keen eyes; but he treated 
Sophie with the same indifferent good- 
humour as before. 

One day, when I was driving out of the 
city with one of the French attaches, young 
Dumanoir, to whom the sledge belonged, and 
who was not a little vain of his heavy apron 
of Astracan fur, and of the spirit and beauty 
of his gallant horses with their silver bells, we 
had an unexpected encounter. We had made 
a short cut through the wretched suburbs 
inhabited by the tshernoi narod, or " black 
people," as the ill-fed poor of St. Petersburg 
are called, and we were striking across towards 



182 Sophie's ribbon. 

the broad drive on the bank of the Neva, 
when we spun round a comer, and nearly ran 
over a group of four men in earnest converse. 
They started with evident alarm and vexation 
as they caught sight of us in that unfre- 
quented quarter ; and we, on our part, were 
surprised to see them, for more incongruous 
companions could scarcely have met together. 

The party consisted of a young Russian in 
black clothes, wearing a scrap of coloured 
ribbon at his button-hole and who was some 
government clerk, or other member of the 
privileged bureaucracy of the empire; of a 
sergeant in the Guards, trim and smart in his 
well-fitted uniform ; of a long-bearded grizzled 
peasant, in a torn caftan and sheepskin boots ; 
and of . Gliska. We nodded to him . the 
Frenchman and I . but he was too much 
startled to return the salute, and his pale 
face flushed like hot iron as we dashed by. 

" What an odd quartette !" said I. 

" Very !" said Dumanoir, dryly knitting his 
black eyebrows ; then he thawed into a laugh 
of unfeigned mirth, as he said, " I never saw 
rats so neatly caught ! You are too guileless 
and unsuspicious, my dear colleague, for such 



Sophie's ribbon. 183 

a metier as our rascally one of diplomacy. 
We catch a Polish noble, whose very name is 
as wormwood in the emperor's august mouth, 
conferring with his friends in this delightful 
and civilised quarter ; and those friends are a 
discontented sergeant, a sulky Raskolnik, and 
a hungry understrapper of some government 
bureau : and vou wonder at their confusion on 
being seen by us ! Foi de Duraanoir f My 
chief would never forgive me, if I omitted to 
inform him of what will be welcome news to 
his Majesty Louis Philippe, King of the 
French." 

I could not but own that there was some- 
thing suspicious in the affair, though I with 
some trouble extorted from Dumanoir a 
promise that he would not mention what we 
had seen to any other than his ambassador : 
unwilling as I was that the Leczinzka family 
should be annoyed by any fresh proceedings 
against their relative. But though I was not 
one of those who see a conspiracy in every 
gathering of men, I felt an innate conviction 
that all was not right. Gliska's politics were 
notorious, and his secret communing, in so 
lonely and barbarous a quarter of the town, 



184 Sophie's ribbon. 

with persons so unlike himself in rank and 
bearing, seemed ominous of coming troubles. I 
had heard . as who had not ? . of disaffection 
existing among the Poles, Fins, and Maloros- 
sians, who had been forced into the Muscovite 
army: of disaffection among the educated 
servants of the state, weary of a career in 
which corruption and chicanery overruled 
zeal and merit ; and of deadly hatred on the 
part of the fanatics of the old Greek faith 
. those grim Raskolniks of whom Dumanoir 
had spoken. A junction of such malcontents 
with the restless Polish nobles, was exactly 
what the authorities most dreaded. 

When, later in the day, T drove to the 
Leczinzka palace, I saw Gliska leaving it on 
foot. He seemed to avoid recognition, turn- 
ing up the collar of his furred overcoat so as 
neariy to conceal his face, and hurrying on 
with a quicker step as he caught sight of my 
vehicle. I found Sophie, with sparicling eyes 
and a flushed cheek, alone in the great draw- 
ing-room : the old princess coming in as soon 
as she was informed of my arrival. Never 
had I seen Sophie look more beautiful ; but 
her excitement, which I could not help con- 



Sophie's ribbon. 185 

necting with Gliska's visit, caused me a 
sensation of pain as contrasting with her 
usual cold resignation, when its cause was 
explained. 

Invitations had just been issued for a masked 
ball at the residence of Prince Wittgenstein, 
the Austrian Ambassador ; and this ball, long 
projected, was to be by far the most splendid 
of the season. It was to have taken place long 
before, but had been postponed, and many of 
the intended guests had their fancy dresses 
prepared, while all the .town talked of the 
ruinous costs of the decorations and the skill 
of the artists who were to turn the embassy 
saloons into an ephemeral fairyland. Sophie 
was wild with pleasure at the prospect of the 
fete ; it was her first season, poor child, and 
she had truly a child's deUght in the coming 
treat. Her aged relatives smiled as she 
talked with unusual animation of the fantastic 
splendours that were anticipated. It was said 
that the emperor and empress would be there* 
The grand-dukes and the Grand-Duchess Olga 
would certainly attend. Count Demidoff 
was to go as a Chinese . no, as a Persian Khan, 
with the Sancy diamond to fasten the plume 



186 Sophie's ribbon. 

on his turban. The four beautiful daughters 
of the Swedish minister would represent the 
Seasons ; and so on, interminably. 

It struck me that Sophie's interest in this 
ball was more than natural, but it never 
slackened during the few intervening days, 
and her spirits rose and fell in a capricious 
manner. At one time she was as happy and 
light of heart as a bird on a sunlit bough ; at 
another there would be tear-drops clinging to 
her dark eyelashes, and she had the drooping 
head and dejected look of that same bird 
when prisoned in a cage. Her old grand- 
parents did not wonder at these abrupt 
transitions. 

"Les jeunes fiUes, my dear Acton," said 
the aged prince, lightly tapping his enamelled 
snuflF-box ; " les jeunes filles . who can reason 
with them ? They have whims ; that is all." 

The great night came, and with it came 
the south wind and a thaw. The soft snow 
became of the consistency of treacle, and the 
horses had to labour hard to drag the run- 
ners of the carriages, which had so lately 
glided easily along over a frozen surface, 
through the tenacious drift. But it was 



Sophie's ribbon. 187 

done, somehow, and the superb saloons of 
the Austrian minister began to fill with 
guests, some in dominoes, and the majority 
in fanciful attire of every period and country. 
I shall not describe the fete. It was splendid 
and tasteful in its way, and the crowd thick- 
ened and thickened, and the music swelled 
higher and higher, as half, or more than half, 
of the " society " of St. Petersburg passed 
in. The emperor and empress realised 
Sophie's anticipations, for they paid the 
Prince and Princess of Wittgenstein the 
compHment of their presence. They walked, 
unmasked, through the rooms, the glittering 
company parting into two lines to give them 
free passage ; both czar and czarina smiled 
graciously, and addressed a civil word, here 
and there, to some well-known personages. 
The band played the Russian anthem, and 
every face was uncovered in deference to the 
august visitors, as they moved slowly past. 

But those who were best used to watch 
the face of the strong-willed despot, whose 
personal influence was mightier, at that time, 
than any czar's since Peter the Great, felt ill 
at ease as they watched his gigantic form pass 



188 Sophie's ribbon. 

through the crowded saloons. There was an 
ominous firmness about the imperial mouth, 
it was said, and a dangerous sparkle in the 
imperial eye. The. emperor was known to 
have much self-control, but there were signs 
of suppressed anger under his placidity of 
aspect which courtiers could read. 

The emperor and empress did not stay 
long. When they departed, the masks were 
replaced, the music struck up with fresh 
spirit, and the aristocracy of Russia forgot 
the darkling glance of their master's eye. The 
dance went pleasantly on. 

" M. Charles, will you do me a fa- 
vour?" 

It was Sophie who spoke, and her voice 
quivered in a manner inexplicable to me, con- 
sidering how ordinary were her words. She 
was in the rich Circassian dress of blue and 
silver she had chosen; but she would not 
have known me, in an ordinary domino of 
crimson silk, but for my face being exposed, 
through my not having replaced my mask. 
She was clinging to the arm of a boyish 
figure in Louis the Fourteenth attire : her 
brother, as I guessed. 



Sophie's eibbon. 189 

"M. Charles, will you do me a favour?'* 
It was not very difficult to grant. She 
merely wanted me to affix to the breast of my 
domino, a certain yellow rosette, a shoulder- 
knot of yellow ribbon with two fluttering ends 
. that was all. Hurriedly she thanked me 
for my consent, and insisted on pinning the 
knot to my domino with her own hands, 
though her slender fingers shook so much 
that they could hardly perform the task. It 
was a whini of hers, she said, a trjck to 
" mystify" some one, and 0, it was so kind 
of me to humour her, and would I please to 
wear it till after supper-time, and to be 
masked ! Before I could ask her for a dance 
she was gone, lost in the mazes of the 
crowd. 

'* Hist ! come nearer, the game's up !" said 
a man's voice, thick and husky with emotion, 
at my ear. I started. A tall man in a dark 
domino was at my elbow. 

" It's all over," said the stranger, in his 
guttural French, spoken with a German 
accent ; " some one has betrayed us. The 
troops are under arms, and the soldiers we 
counted on are disarmed and confined to 



190 Sophie's ribbon. 

barracks. Rest assured that the emperor 
knows all. Gliska " 

" Monsieur, you mistake/' exclaimed I, and 
the man shrank away. Scarcely had I time 
to debate in my own mind the purport of 
what I had heard, when two or three masked 
persons came hastily forward, the foremost 
pointing me out to the others. 

" That is he. I know him by the ribbon.'* 

There was a pause, and a shuffling and 
whispering. I bethought me of the mystifi- 
cation Sophie had spoken of. Where these 
the friends at whose expense some harmless 
trick was to be played ? I had little time to 
think, for one of the new comers passed his 
arm familiarly through mine. 

" Come quietly, monsieur, to avoid scan- 
dal" 

By this time my other arm had been grasped 
by another of the group. I made some jocu- 
lar observation, in French, on the peremptory 
nature of the summons, fully persuaded that 
the whole was a masquerade frolic. The 
intruder spoke again, more sternly : 

*' You carry it oflF well, sir. But your 
enterprizes are unfortunate. You must come 



Sophie's ribbon. 191 

with us, in the emperor's name, or I swear 
to shoot you where you stand. Come on T* 

I was pushed, or dragged, through a side- 
door, down a passage, and into the hall of 
the embassy. It was full of soldiery and 
gendarmes. In a moment a cloak was thrown 
over my head, my wrists were chained to- 
gether, and I was hustled out into the snow, 
and thrust into a sledge. There was a shout, 
a trampling and clashing, and I felt the jerk 
of the start. The sledge was going off at a 
rapid pace, in spite of the softness of the 
snow. Half smothered by the cloak over 
my head, I rather lay than sat in the place 
into which I had been pushed, while by th(j 
bounding motion of the kibitka 1 knew 
that the speed of our progress was great. 

Presently the woollen wrapper that muffled 
my head, was removed, and I could see the 
true state of the case. The sledge was tra- 
versing a snow-covered road, markcMl out by 
painted posts at frequent intervals. To right 
and left lay hillocky mounds of snow, cover- 
ing the peat morass through which the causes- 
way passed. Overhead, was a wrack of hurry- 
ing lead-coloured cloud, with the pale winter 



1S2 Sophie's ribbon. 

moon peeping out sufficiently to show the 
horsemen of the escort, a party of dragoons 
of the Guard, who rode to right and left of 
the sledge, their burnished helmets and long 
white cloaks looming ghostly through the diru 
light. Besides myself, there were two persons 
in the kibitka, the driver and a sturdy figure 
in the uniform of a sergeant. The latter held 
a pistol in his gloved right hand ; an excess 
of precaution, for I was bound and help- 
less. 

I closed my eyes for a minute or two, and 
calmed my nerves by a strong effort. Then 
I looked again. Yes, nothing had changed. 
Snowy road, lashing whip, bounding horses, 
painted posts to mark the way, the mantled 
horsemen riding on either flank, the threaten- 
ing attitude of the armed man at my side . 
all were real. And all these objects had but 
one significance . one which my soul shrank 
from. The Guards, the haste, the chains, 
the desolate wastes through which we were 
speeding, reminded me of many a dismal tale 
of exile to the gloomy deserts of Northern 
Asia. Either I was actually on my way to 
Siberia, or I was mad. 



Sophie's ribbon. 193 

My courage revived. It was impossible 
that an Englishman, and an Englishman in 
government employ, should be amenable to 
such a punishment, even had his offences 
against the czar been flagrant, whereas I was 
utterly unconcerned in Russian politics. Even 
the barbarian caprice of absolute power could 
not have taken umbrage at any act of mine, 
and then the idea that my arrest was some 
cruel blunder flashed upon me, I tried the 
sergeant with French and German, but in 
vain. He knew only one language, and in 
answer to my few awkward words of Russian, 
he merely growled out the words. " Polish 
dog!" and pressed the cold muzzle of the 
pistol-barrel between my eyes, as a hint to 
keep quiet. I spoke no more. 

Soon after this, the wind veered round to 
the north, the moon vanished, the night grew 
piercing cold, and then the heavy flakes of 
snow came whirhng down, and the horses 
could hardly struggle through the drift. Then 
all sensations were gradually and surely 
merged in one . the numbing effects of the 
intense cold. 

Hours passed ; post stations were reached, 

VOL. II. o 



194 Sophie's eibbon. 

horses changed, fresh troopers took the place 
of the former escort ; but I only grew colder 
and feebler, and the blood in my veins seemed 
freezing into solid ice, and there were shooting 
pains through every joint, and I remember 
moaning like a child in agony, and then I 
seemed to faint with suffering, the last thing 
I remember being a flash of ruddy torchlight. 

When I recovered, I was in a warm bed, 
and beside it stood two men : one dressed in 
black . a doctor ; the other^ a tall officer in a 
long military cloak, wet with half melted 
snow. In the corner of the room was an 
Ingrian peasant woman, heating some water 
in a samovar. 

" He'll do well, now," said the doctor in 
French : " mortification had not really begun. 
It's only a slight case of frostbite, with 
extreme debility." 

" I'm glad to hear it !" said the officer, in 
whom I recognised a certain Major Orloff, one 
of the imperial aides-de-camp. " The emperor 
is truly distressed that the mistake should 
have occurred. But how this Englishman 
came to wear the yellow knot of ribbon by 
which Gliska was to be recognised by the 



Sophie's ribbon. 195 

other conspirators, had the plot really come to 
a head, and had the czar's person been seized 
on, is a puzzle to us all. I'd lay my life 
there's a woman's hand in it." 

" Very likely," said the doctor with a smile ; 
" perhaps Mademoiselle Sophie Leczinzka con- 
trived the exchange when Gliska found out 
that all was lost, and his arrest imminent. 
The runaway couple have not been caught, I 
believe ?" 

I groaned. 

** Come away, doctor," whispered the good- 
natured aide-de-camp ; " the poor fellow may 
wake and overhear us. And he will know 
quite soon enough that bis fiancee deceived 
him from the first, and that she will be 
Madame Gliska when they get in safety across 
the Prussian frontier, of which the police 
prefect admits there is no doubt . so artfully 
were the chevalier's projects laid, to provide 
the means of escape, in case of the failure 
of the conspiracy. AUons 1 Bad news flies 
fast." 



2 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 



Aftee a whole winter spent in studying 
art at Borne, I had come down, sitting bodkin 
between two Germans in a cheap vetturino 
carriage, to study nature at Naples. I was so 
sick of huge picture-galleries, hired models, 
and the gossip of the studios, that I thought 
it would be a relief to paint landscape for a 
change: so I said to others, and so I said 
to myself; but my own heart contradicted me. 
I knew very well, in my innermost soul, that 
it was in bitterness of spirit that I left Rome, 
unable to bear the sight of other men's 
prosperity. It stung me to see men whom I 
knew to be inferior to myself in taste, in 
knowledge of colour, in originality, in every 
thing but a plodding, stolid industry, pass me 
in the race of life. This is a cold, hard, work- 



TUENINQ OVER A NEW LEAP. 197 

a- day century of ours, an age without sym- 
pathy for the flaws and failings of genias, and 
measuring all capacities by the same pitiful 
little foot-rule of the results attained to. 

And so I went to Naples ; and, when the 
heats of the sultry Italian summer came on, 
led a roving Ufe among the coast towns and 
petty watering- places within reach of the great 
city, now at Portici, now at Sorrento, and 
then dawdling away weeks at Salerno or 
Castelamare. A lazy, good-for-nothing life it 
was ; a life of castle-building, of regrets that I 
tried to banish, and of hopes that I knew 
could never blossom into realities. I was still 
young, not four-and-twenty, but I thought I 
had a right to consider myself a disappointed 
man. Doubly disappointed. First, because 
I had not met with encouragement from con- 
noisseurs and the public. Secondly, because 
Lucy Graham, dear little Lucy, whom I loved 
and had loved for years, and who would have 
shared my poverty unmurmuringly, was not to 
be my wife. Her relations were wise, forsooth. 
" They could not hear," they said, " of the 
dear girl's throwing herself away upon an idle, 
purposeless man, who would drag her down 



t 



198 TUENING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

with him into the mire of merited poverty." 
How false and selfish such reasoning was ! 
They might have known . Lucy's aunt and 
Lucy's brother, to whose will her gentle 
nature deferred . that with such an induce- 
ment, such a talisman, as her love and her 
welfare depending on my toil, I should have 
done fifty times as much as I had ever achieved 
without such a spur to exertion. 

A penniless artist cannot live, even in that 
country, always cheap to those whose wants 
are few, without work. I, therefore, worked ; 
but in an unambitious fashion that did not 
task my patience overmuch. Coloured 
sketches of mountain scenery and bits of blue 
Mediterranean, with bronzed fishermen, 
peasants in goat skins and brown serge, 
square-capped women with pitchers, nets, 
olives, vineyards, rocks, and red caps, I 
drew from time to time, and these sold freely. 
My chief patrons were the foreign visitors to 
Soreuto and Castelamare, who were glad to 
carry home with them some memento of the 
rich scenery of the Neapolitan coast. I worked 
when I was hungry, earned enough to pay for 
beef and maccaroni, and lived altogether in 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 199 

improvident hand to mouth fashion, like an 
educated lazzarone. All this time I was very 
far from haf{)py. There was not a much 
heavier heart in the kingdom of Naples than 
that of Hugh Edwards . British subject and 
artist, as his passport described him . when 
he sauntered out of the little inn at Portici 
one autumn evening. 

The sun was going down ; one could see 
the scarlet light flaring and blazing through 
the green boughs of the rustling chesnut- 
trees, but there was plenty of light as yet, 
and the prospect was a pleasant one, even to 
jaundiced eyes like mine. Portici and its 
painted houses were soon left behind, and I 
struck off by one of the many paths that lead 
into the hills. 

Presently I stopped, and looked around 
me from a small eminence that commanded a 
view of the surrounding country. There was 
one object that especially caught my eye, the 
new railroad, then in process of construction, 
and which was being carried out, like most 
of the iron ways of Europe, by English skill 
and English capital. As I looked, I saw a 
cutting far beneath me, in which a gang of 



200 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 

labourers were still at work. The low rays of 
the sun flashed on their variously clad forms, 
their heads topped by the red Naples cap, or 
bound, turban-like, with a coloured handker- 
chief, and the picks and spades that were 
tearing a way through the volcanic soil. I 
stood afar off, and watched them; but not 
from any sympathy with their toil or its 
ultimate objects. On the contrary, as I 
looked, I felt my lip curl, and my brow 
darken, for the spectacle suggested unpleasant 
thoughts. The contractor who had under- 
taken that section of the new line was no other 
than Lucy's odious elder brother, that very 
George Graham who had had the chief share 
in breaking off the half engagement between 
his orphaned sister and myself. A clever, 
plausible man, who had succeeded, and who, 
like all the successful in this world, treated 
failure as a crime. 

I had never met this prosperous relative of 
Lucy's, nor did I desire to meet him. His 
opinion of myself had been formed from the 
report of mutual acquaintances, from the con- 
versation of Lucy and her aunt, and from a 
brief correspondence that had begun and ended 



TUENING OVER A NEW LEAF. 201 

in anger. To meet George Graham was more 
than I had bargained for, and I quickly made 
\ip my mind to quit Portici. 

A strange whim had urged me to visit this 
little town, and that whim had been disap- 
pointed. While last at Salerno, an American 
traveller had given me an animated description 
of some adventures among the banditti, and 
had told me a number of anecdotes of the 
most celebrated brigand chiefs of the day, 
Saltocco, Capo Rosso, Malinghetti, and 
another freebooter, whose nickname of L'Ag- 
nello, or " the Lamb,'* ironically expressed 
his peculiarly ferocious disposition. My in- 
formant was a doctor, and to this circumstance 
he had owed his immunity from any ill usage 
while in the hands of his dangerous hosts; many 
of whom were at the time suffering from marsh 
fever, and among them their leader, Saltocco. 
The American had been lucky enough, having 
a medicine -chest among his luggage, to cure 
the greater part of these invalids: and in 
return for his medical services, they had set 
him free, uninjured and unransomed, re- 
taining, however, his gold watch and chain, 
which the chief promised to wear as a keep- 



202 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 

sake. The account Dr. Hucks gave of the 
wild bivouacs, high up in the thin clear air 
of the mountain solitudes, of the Salvator 
Rosa groups around the fires, the dances, 
the village merry-makings, in which the 
brigands took a part as welcome guests, had 
piqued my curiosity. My desire was to 
obtain, if I could, a safe-conduct to inspect 
the camp of these marauders. For the idea 
of painting a great picture, and growing 
famous at a single efibrt, haunted my fancy 
yet, as a similar idea does that of many and 
many an idle man. Who knew whether some 
quaintly savage scene amid the hills might not 
suggest matter for a work that should even 
yet retrieve my Uighted fortunes ? 

Most complete, however, had been the 
failure of these romantic notions. I found 
the good people of Portici by no means 
desirous to admit the existence of any bri- 
gands in their vicinity. All stories of outrage 
and plunder were gross exaggerations. A 
petty theft might now and then take place ; 
but, beyond the pillage of a henroost or a 
vineyard, no transgression was authentic. In 
fact, I suspect the Bourbon goveniment at 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 203 

Naples, anxious to avert the troublesome 
advice of foreign powers, had issued orders 
that the banditti, if they could ,not be exter- 
minated, should be ignored. 

" I beg your pardon, but I conclude that 
your name is Edwards, and that you are stay- 
ing at the Albergo dlnghilterra . is it not so ?" 
said a voice in English, at ray elbow. I 
turned and confronted the speaker, who had 
approached me, lost as I was in reverie, without 
my hearing his step. He was a strongly-built 
man of middle height, with a sun-burnt face 
and quick blue eyes, that roved hither and 
thither, and seemed in an instant to take the 
measure of ajjy object or person. His hair 
was getting grey, but probably more from toil 
and exposure to weather than from age, since 
he did not appear my senior by more than eight 
or nine years. His attire, of dark -coloured 
Tweed, was neat and plain, and by the com- 
passes and ivory rule that projected from the 
breast-pocket of his shooting-coat, I easily 
guessed him to be one of the English sur- 
veyors employed in laying out the line. His 
voice was loud, and rather abrupt, like that 



204 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

of one used to command ; but there was 
something pleasant in the ring of it. 

I admitted my identity, wondering what 
the new comer could want with me. He had 
not the air of a mere lounger, seeking to kill 
time, and hailing a fellow-countryman for the 
sake of a chat in his native tongue. Besides, 
be bad taken the trouble, somehow, to ascer- 
tain my name. 

" Then this letter is yours. I thought it 
must be. You dropped it on the' bridge, and 
a goat -herd gave it to me, so, as I had no- 
ticed you pass by the embankment, I followed 
you to restore it, and I am glad to return it 
to the right owner." 

The letter was from Lucy, received that 
morning. I was vexed at my own careless- 
ness, for I might have dropped it in some 
public place, and I knew that all travellers 
are not over-scrupulous as to perusing the 
waifs and strays of correspondence that may 
fall into their hands. I therefore thanked the 
surveyor more heartily than was my custom. 

" No trouble at all, not worth mentioning,'* 
said my compatriot, wiping his forehead as he 
glanced around him ; '' it has given me a 



TURNING OVEE A NEW LEAF. 205 

pleasant walk and a pretty prospect. How 
fine that sunset is !'* 

And he gazed at the deep glow of orange 
and crimson burning in fast-fading splendour 
on the edge of the western sky, with an en- 
joyment that was evidently genuine. Before 
long I found myself deep in conversation with 
the stranger, whose blunt honesty of manner 
pleased me better than the bearing of a more 
courtly person might have done. On my side, 
I did not profess to be other than I was, a 
poor and lonely artist. 

" Not a bad trade either, if a man's true 
vocation be the brush, and he sticks to it,'* 
said the stranger, tapping the crumbling rocks 
with a switch he carried, as if to test their 
solidity. 

" We don't generally regard it as a trade," 
said I, with something of a sneer. 

" Pooh, nonsense ; everything by which an 
honest man makes a living, from soldiering to 
shoemaking, is a trade, and only coxcombs 
are ashamed to own that they are paid for 
their work," broke in the stranger, very un- 
ceremoniously ; " don't let us quarrel on mat- 
ters of professional etiquette. My trade, 



206 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

now, is a rougher one than yours, yet Michael 
Angelo knew something about it." 

I laughed, and remarked that to build a 
cathedral was a nobler task than to plan a 
railroad. 

" I don't know that/* said my new ac- 
quaintance, sturdily. " I never go about my 
task in tunnel or cutting, without remember- 
ing that every one of these iron links between 
town and town, country and country, is a step 
towards bridging over the great gulf that lies 
between mankind and happiness and liberty. 
To my mind, every tinkle of the hammers of 
our platelayers is a pledge and promise of a 
*good time coming,' as the song says. No 
civiliser like the railway. 

I somewhat sneeringly asked if my new 
friend's employer, Mr. George Graham, 
shared these fine sentiments with regard to 
the iron ways with which he was so busy. 

The stranger's eyes twinkled. 

" Oh, Graham,*' he said, with a dry laugh ; 
-" Graham is obliged to have an eye to the 
main chance. He can't afford to indulge his 
fancy much, but must look to the balance- 
sheets and steer clear of the Gazette. I 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 207 

sometimes think he would prefer a safe salary 
to the profits he nets, and the anxious days 
and sleepless nights that go to the winning of 
them/' 

Presently I asked him what he thought of 
his employer, Graham, but he was somewhat 
reserved in his replies. 

" A strict hand. Keeps us all to our col- 
lars. Won't tolerate any shirking of work, 
on his own part or that of others. He pays 
well, but he will have the pennyworth for the 
penny/* was all I could gather, and I own I 
was disappointed. I wanted to have a right 
to despise this hard money-grubber, who 
stood between his gentle sister and myself, 
and it would have been music to my ears to 
hear him called tyrant and miser. Inde- 
pendently of this, I took a great fancy to the 
rugged stranger, and not the less, perhaps, 
because he bluntly disagreed with my own 
theories of social life, which I freely pro- 
pounded to him. 

" Tve heard most of your arguments before, 
Mr. Edwards," he said ; " but I hope you 
won't think me rude when I say that when a 
young fellow is on bad terms with the world, 



208 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

it isn't so much the world's fault as that of 
the other party. I know practice is better 
than precept, and I've no right to preach, but 
one thing I'll say, I've taken a liking to you, 
brief as our acquaintance has been, and in 
spite of your wild talk, and if I can ever 
be of service, I will. Perhaps you may not 
think a poor engineer's help worth having, but 
should you ever be really in want of a friend, 
while I'm in Italy, send me a line. I'll do 
my best for you, and not even ask for thanks.*' 

I smiled, for I was in the humour to treat 
the oflFer as a jest. 

" You forget," said I, " that we are not on 
equal terms. You know my name, while 
yours is unknown to me." 

" ril give you an address by which your 
letter is sure to reach me," said the engineer, 
pencilling some words on a leaf which he tore 
from his pocket-book, and handing the leaf to 
me ; " and now, good-bye, for I must hurry 
back to Portici, and pay wages and docket 
vouchers for a couple of hours at the least." 

He was gone, and it was not until I had 
watched his disappearing figure across the 
olive grove, that I thought of looking at the 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 209 

address he had given me. The words he had 
pencilled were merely these : " S. D., care of 
Burbidge and Styles, English Bank, Via 
Stretta, Naples.*' My new acquaintance had 
not revealed his name after all. For a mo- 
ment I was undecided as to whether I should 
fling away the scrap of paper, or keep it as a 
curiosity. 1 took a middle course, for I 
thrust it carelessly into my pocket, and saun- 
tered away up the hill. It was getting very 
dark, but the moon was half full, and threw 
light enough on the less thickly wooded 
parts of the landscape to save me from stum- 
bling. There was no trace of the sunset 
glories left in the darkling sky to westward. 
It was black night among the cactus shrubs 
and rustling bushes that fringed the rocks on 
my right and left hand. Only a pale yellow 
streak of light fell between the boughs of the 
stone pines, and showed the water-worn peb- 
bles and red sand at my feet. 

" Faccia a terra !" called out a deep voice 
from the thickets overhead ; and then followed 
the sharp click of a gunlock. I stopped, 
and looked quickly in the direction of the 
invisible speaker. Again came the same 

VOL. II. 1* . 



r 



210 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

1 harsh summons, spoken in the vilest Cala- 

brian patois, but quite intelligible. " Face . 
to . the . ground, English fool I Beppo, Nic- 
colo, let him see the carbines/' 

Instantly the branches crashed, and through 

i the evergreen foliage were thrust the gleam- 

1 ing barrels of several guns, while the order to 

lie down and press my face to the earth was 

! gruffly renewed. I had been half incredulous 

at first, half inclined to suspect a trick or a 
delusion of the senses, but now I doubted no 
longer. I was in presence of the brigands, 
and, as I realised the truth, a quick tingling 

i sensation ran like fire through my blood, and 

I scarcely knew whether the thrill were one 
of pain or pleasure. Then came a heavy body 
crushing and tearing through the boughs and 
matted creepers, in headlong descent of the 
bank. I attempted to fly, but, overtaken, 
turned desperately round on the pursuer, 
wrenching the carbine out of his hand, and 
hurling him, with a force that surprised my- 
self, upon a heap of stones and twisted olive 
roots. But two stout fellows were close on 
the heels of the first, and they threw them- 
selves upon me, grappling me with a ten a- 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 211 

cious hug that could not be shaken oflF, while 
a fourth came up in a more leisurely way, 
and, pressing the muzzle of his piece to my 
forehead, ordered me to leave oflF struggling, 
on pain of instant death. 

I submitted, and in an incredibly short 
space of time my arms were tied behind me 
with a cord, my watch, purse, pocket-book, 
sketch-book, and pencil-case, were transferred 
to the care of my captors, and I was in full 
march towards the mountains. 

So long as our course lay through a culti- 
vated district, my lawless guides either kept 
silence altogether, or only spoke in growling 
tones, and as curtly as possible. But when 
the olive terraces and walnut groves had dis- 
appeared, and the walled vineyards and fenced 
fields had given place to bare rocks and thorny 
shrubs, the spirits of the robbers rose in pro- 
portion to their remoteness from civilization. 
When we were quite in the uncultivated 
country, the two younger of the brigands be- 
gan to whistle and sing scraps of operatic airs 
that from La Scala had found their way into 
the hills. 

It was quite in vain that I protested against 

p 2 



212 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 

my captivity, assuring the elder and graver of 
the four that I was a most unprofitable prize, 
if, indeed, I had not, as seemed probable, 
been taken by mistake for another ; that I 
was a poor artist, with hardly a scudo beyond 
the silver coins they had found in my pocket, 
and that no one was able or willing to pay 
ransom for a lonely stranger like myself. 
The only answer I got to these appeals was a 
push from the butt-end of a carbine, coupled 
with a rough command to hasten my steps. 
Presently I had not much breath to spare for 
such useless remonstrance, as I found myself, 
perforce, scrambling up steep and stony gul- 
lies that were probably the mere beds of 
dried-up torrents, dragging myself painfully 
over rocks in whose fissures grew the moun- 
tain thistle and the stunted cactus. 

Breathless, spent, and with bruised and 
bleeding feet, my light boots proving a poor 
protection against the sharp stones over which 
I had for hours been forced to stumble as 
best I might, I sank down on a fragment of 
rock, and declared my inability to go further. 
The bandits threatened me, struck me, but 
in vain. I could do no more. One of them 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 213 

at last drew a gourd from his pocket, un- 
corked it, and held it to my lips. 

" Drink !" he said, impatiently ; .* there is 
but a mile to travel. Drink ! San Gennaro 
blight you . do you fancy the good liquor 
poison ? The coarse and fiery brandy revived 
me ; but it was not without a great deal of 
hustling, supporting, and pushing on the part 
of my conductors that I contrived to stagger 
on, until we entered a narrow glen between 
steep peaks, and suddenly turning a corner 
came upon a small plain, in which a strange 
scene awaited me. A number of ruddy 
watch-fires, perhaps twenty, were burning 
with red and smoky light, and around these 
reclined, sat, or moved in a variety of more or 
less active employments, groups of dark forms, 
most, but not all, of whom wore the pointed 
Calabrian hat so familiar to play-goers. Here 
and there the glare was reflected from the 
barrels of guns which the owners were clean- 
ing or examining by the fire-light, and before 
several of the fires cooking operations were 
going on, and whole kids, hares, or great 
pieces of half-raw meat, were being slowly 
turned as they dangled on a string in front of 



214 TUENING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

the blaze. From one group, larger than the 
rest, came the notes of a guitar, and of a deep 
voice singing some bravura song, such as the 
Italians of the lower class pick up like parrots 
from their occasional visits to a theatre. And 
as the song came to a close, I distinctly heard 
the shrill voices and laughter of women ming- 
ling with the mirth and applause of the 
men. This, however, surprised me little, for 
I had heard that the brigands kept on friendly 
terms with the villagers, whose relations they 
frequently were, and that the wives, sisters, 
and mothers of members of the band were 
constantly visiting their haunts for the purpose 
of conveying intelligence or provisions to the 
outlaws. 

" There he is 1 Ecco, the tall signor beside 
the fire, to the left," said one of my guides. 
" We shall see what the Lamb has to say to 
all this poverty of yours.*' 

" The Lamb ?*' said I, half unconsciously, 
striving to recal the American's account of 
the celebrated freebooter who bore that incon- 
gruous name. 

" Si ! L'Agnello himself," said the brigand. 



.^ 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 215 

thrusting me forward into the firelight, and 
doffing his hat to his leader. 

.'Who's that? The Salemitan. Good. 
And what sort of a foreign sheep have you 
there ?'* called out the chief, shading his eyes 
with his broad hand, and staring hard at me. 
** The Englishman, the Englishman, for a gold 
ounce ! Welcome, milordo I" 

And with a grotesque mockery of cour- 
teous deference, the brigand leader rose to his 
feet and took oflF his hat, bowing low, while 
those around burst into a roar of laughter. 
I looked anxiously at L'Agnello, on whose 
good pleasure my fate probably depended. 
He was evidently a great dandy, his equip- 
ment being more picturesque than that of his 
followers, for he wore a suit of green velvet, 
with silver buttons and embroidery, much 
tarnished, but still handsome, a yellow silk 
sash, two gold watches, whose chains were 
festooned across his waistcoat, and a lady's 
gold chain about his neck. His stiletto and 
pistols were stuck in a crimson belt, and 
under his hat was a kerchief of a, brilliant red 
colour, which waved and flapped like the kefia 
of a Bedouin Arab, setting off the swarthy 



216 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

complexion and grim features of the wearer. 
When the brigand chief had replaced the hat 
which he had doffed in salutation, I ventured 
to renew my protest, declaring that I was no 
"milordo," but an artist, and a very poor 
one : in a word, not worth trapping. The 
Lamb grinned incredulously. 

" Basta ! For what do you take me. English- 
man, that you deafen me with lies. So you 
are poor, then ? You, who arrived at Portici 
with a carriage grand enough for the Holy 
Father to ride in, with trunks and imperials, 
courier and valet, and a fourgon to carry the 
heavy luggage . a veritable train de prince '/' 

This last speech, spoken with an air of the 
profoundest conviction, and in bad French, 
eked out here and there by a word of Italian 
(the Lamb was, as I afterwards heard, not a 
little proud of his abilities as a linguist), 
sorely puzzled me. I could not doubt that 
the brigand believed what he said to be true. 
His jocular aspect was giving place to a 
gloomy frown. 

*' Enough of this play !" he said at length, 
in a more menacing voice. " You see I 
know you. You are the Inglese who gave 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 217 

old Geronimo Valleri, at the inn beside the 
Ponte Nerone, a hundred and twenty golden 
Napoleons for two old pictures the rogue had 
to sell?" 

It now flashed upon me for the first time 
that I had been mistaken for a rich young 
Englishman of rank and fortune, who had 
lately arrived at Portici, and had that very 
day abruptly left the inn where I had been 
staying. He was, as I remembered, said to 
be a liberal, if not a very judicious connois- 
seur of art, and was of about my own height 
and age. I even recollected that he, like 
myself, was addicted to solitary rambles, which 
circumstance had probably been reported to 
the brigands, who have their spies in most 
places, and hence in all likelihood the ambush 
and the capture of the wrong man. 

I could not help shrinking from the awk- 
ward office of undeceiving the chief, whose 
grim visage grew more and more like that of 
a hungry tiger as he watched me. " I could 
guess," I said, " for whom I had been mis- 
taken; but, so far from having arrived at 
Portici with four post-horses, a fourgon, a 
valet, and a courier, I could assure my present 



r 



220 TUENING OVER A NEW LEAF. 

around my wrists and ankles, for it had often 
happened that a tortured prisoner had done 
mischief among the tormentors. Then my 
boots and stockings were torn away piecemeal, 
and I was thrust forward until the bare soles 
of my feet were close to the glowing red 
embers of the great fire. I was chilled with 
the bleak mountain air and with fatigue, and 
for the first few moments the heat was not 
disagreeable, but presently it became incon- 
venient. I bore it silently. The discomfort 
deepened into pain, the pain into agony, and 
I groaned, and tried to crawl away. A robber 
took me by the shoulders, and thrust me back 
again as if I had been a log ; my scorched 
feet came in contact with the hot embers, and 
I could not suppress a scream, which was 
mocked by a roar of laughter froni the unfeel- 
ing savages. 

" The roast meat will be burned," said one 
wag, and the joke elicited fresh mirth. A 
woman or two did certainly say *' poverino," 
as I writhed and moaned, but no one oficred 
to release me, and I began to fear that I 
should be maimed for life. The fierceness of 
the pain drove even that thought from my 



TURTfiNG OVER A NEW LEAP. . 221 

mind, conquered all sense of pride, resent- 
ment, and prudence, and I shrieked wildly and 
incessantly, sometimes beseeching the hard- 
hearted barbarians to have pity; sometimes 
taunting and cursing them, in the frantic hope 
that I might provoke some more irascible 
brute than the rest into ending my sufferings 
by a shot or a stab. Then nature was utterly 
spent, and I fainted. 

When I recovered my senses I was lying 
in a wretched hut, on a heap of straw. On a 
broken wine-cask at some distance sat a grey- 
haired old crone, busy with one of those classic 
spindles which the Italian peasant women have 
used from the days of Etruscan civilisation. 
For a time my senses were so dulled that I 
could remember nothing ; and, though I saw 
that it was morning, and felt the air chilly, I 
did not try to realise how I came into my 
present position. At last a sharp shooting 
pain in my feet recalled my recollection of by- 
gone suffering, and I groaned, and tried to 
rise, but failed. The old woman turned her 
head, and bade me lie still, as if I had been a 
froward child, then came forward to unwind 
some yards of coarse linen in which my in- 



222 TUENING OVEE A NEW LEAP. 

jured feet were wrapped and proceeded to 
dress the scorched skin afresh with some 
wonderfully soothing unguent. 

This old woman had, I suspect, saved my 
life. She alone had had compassion upon 
me as I lay insensible. The motive of this 
was very curious. Neapolitans of her class 
have little or no idea of philanthropy in theory 
or in practice, and it seldom enters into any 
one's head to pity the distress of those who 
are not akin to them in blood, or bound by 
friendship. But old Caterina had, it appears, 
been the mother of two sons, members of the 
gang, who had been hanged at Naples several 
years since, and, to the youngest and best 
beloved of these, I, in his mother's opinion, 
bore a strong resemblance. This lucky like- 
ness had induced the old woman to undertake 
the cure of the lonely stranger. Thus she 
had coaxed some of the men to carry me to 
her hut . a goatherd's deserted hovel . had 
laid me on a heap of straw beneath a tattered 
blanket, and had rubbed my blistered feet 
with an ointment which she declared to be 
infallible, and which would enable me to 
" dance the Tarantella" in a month at latest. 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 228 

But I was not yet safe. The Lamb, though 
convinced that I was not the traveller in 
whose stead I had been captured, was deter- 
mined that I should not get off scot free. 

*' He has fixed your ransom at eighteen 
thousand ducats. The milordo would have 
had to pay fifty thousand," said my protectress; 
" and he will have the money. He gets money 
from all, even from begging friars and vine- 
dressers. Only last week he cut off the ears 
of a rich jeweller, first one, then the other, 
and sent them to his children in Salerno. 
The ransom was paid, but had it not been, 
L*AgneIlo would have chopped off every finger 
of the prisoner's hands joint by joint. That's 
how he serves the rich. As for those who are 
not rich, he first toasts their feet and then 
stabs them with his stiletto . he does not 
waste much trouble on them ; so, child, you 
had better think of some relation who 
would pay down the money to see you alive 
again." 

Later in the day I received a visit from the 
brigand chief, who spoke substantially as 
follows : Everybody knew that all Inglesi were 
wealthy folks, and, if I were not able to 



224 TURNING OYEE A NEW LEAP. 

pay, probably I had kith and kin who would 
buy my safety. Failing that resource, were 
there not consuls and ambassadors of Inghil- 
terra who might, could, would, and should 
forward the necessary cash to save the life of a 
British subject? To facilitate matters, he, 
L*Agnello, would give me two weeks' grace, 
and would lower the terms to fourteen thou- 
sand ducats ; but, sooner than take a mara- 
vedi less, he would cause my head to be cut 
off and forwarded as a present to the 
Syndic of Portici, as he had done, four 
years since, in the case of Tommaso Potti, 
the vintner. 

Thus spoke the Lamb, not angrily, but with 
a kind of good-humoured ferocity, and in the 
course of the afternoon a number of the robbers 
sauntered into the hut, and one and all ad- 
vised me in all seriousness to comply with 
their leader's recommendation. . Some of them 
. of the younger men especially . did not 
appear to be wholly without compassion for 
my wretched state, since my injured feet 
were very painful, and I could not stand as 
yet, and they patted me on the back with 
rough kindness, and bade me fear nothing, 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 225 

as I should be well used among them. But 
one and all agreed that unless I obtained 
the sum demanded, it would go very hard 
with me. 

" The Lamb," said one tall youngster, who 
had been a boatman at Palermo, and was 
very proud of the five or six English words he 
had picked up when plying among the foreign 
shipping . "the Lamb was out of temper 
yesterday, for three of his traps have caught 
no mice. There was the Cardinal, for whom 
nine of us watched for a week on the Sorrento 
road, a prince of the Church, whose ransom 
would have made us all as rich as Jews, to 
say nothing of the absolution he could have 
given us while we had him fast. Well, he 
slipped through our fingers, and so did the 
Notary of Salerno, old Signor Tazzi, who is 
wealthy enough to eat oS* gold and drink 
lacrima every day if he were not a skinflint, 
and so did the milordo of the green carriage. 
The Lamb is not often so hasty as you found 
him, but he is a man of his word, and, per 
Demonio, you had better recall yourself to the 
memory of such of your friends as have the 
plumpest purses and the softest hearts.'* 

VOL. II. Q 



226 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 

Excellent counsel, no doubt, but, like much 
other advice of the same sort, easier given 
than followed. There was no one to whom I 
could turn for help in this sore strait. The 
sum demanded was a large one, above two 
thousand pounds of English money, and I 
could as soon have liquidated the National 
Debt as have raised the tithe of it from any 
resources of my own. Rich friends were no 
more plentiful with me than they generally 
are with a man who is at once poor and self- 
willed, and I had no living relation who either 
could or would pay my ransom. The only 
hope, and that a desperate one, seemed to be 
that of an application to the British Embassy 
at Naples, and I knew too much of routine 
to expect much from this. Time was life to 
me, and most likely, long before a dry oflBcial 
reply should be returned to my letter, I 
should be past all power of diplomatic suc- 
cour. Moreover, it was not improbable that 
my appeal would be treated as a hoax, or an 
impertinence; there was " no precedent " for 
such a solecism as a correspondence between 
a prisoner of L'Agnello and the Envoy of Her 
Britannic Majesty to the Court of the Two 
Sicilies. 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP, 227 

In this emergency I bethought me of the 
stranger, the English engineer with whom I 
had been conversing immediately before my 
capture by the brigands. He had professed 
his desire to render me a service, should real 
need of assistance arise, and I might as well 
take him at his word. Of course, I was not 
so absurd as to dream that a salaried pro- 
fessional man could furnish the considerable 
sum that the bandit leader required as the 
price of my liberty, but I thought that if 
my new acquaintance were to press my case 
on the notice of the officials at the embassy, 
I should have a better chance of a hearing. 
With this idea I penned a short letter, ad- 
dressed according to the direction that had 
been given me by the mysterious S. D., and 
a young brigand undertook to carry this 
missive to the nearest lowland village, whence 
it would be conveyed to Naples through the 
customary channel of the post. 

Day after day went by, and my feet were 
so far healed, thanks to the ointment and 
chewed leaves which old Caterina . daily ap- 
plied to them, that I could hobble about the 
camp, which I was allowed to do pretty 

q 2 



228 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 

freely, for I was by far too lame to escape 
over the rugged and stony country that lay 
between me and safety. I was not ill-treated ; 
a share of the polenta and meat was always 
assigned me, even when, as sometimes oc- 
curred, there was a scarcity of food in the 
bivouac, and I was always offered wine and 
cigars when I drew near one of the fires 
around which the wild groups sat after sun- 
set. I had been appointed portrait-painter 
in ordinary to the band, and ruffian after ruffian 
jostled and squabbled with his compeers for 
the prior right to have his villainous features 
transferred to the blank leaves of my sketch- 
book. A strange set they were, so ignorant, so 
shrewd, so lively in their hours of good 
humour, that they were less like criminals 
than some savage tribe at war with society. 
There were two or three improvisatori among 
them, and several who could sing to their 
own accompaniment on the guitar, and the 
mirth and merrymaking were loud and un- 
restrained around the watch-fires at night. 

The robbers were by no means isolated 
from the sympathies of the rest of the 
community. They were on very good terms 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAlP. 229 

with most of the villagers in the mountain 
glens around them, at whose feasts and fairs 
they showed themselves openly, and from 
whom they received information and provisions. 
Indeed, many of them belonged to the district 
and were akin to the rural magistrates and 
the very police who should have hunted them 
. down, and this, perhaps, explains the fact 
that the carabinieri never seemed able to 
discover the fastnesses where the marauders 
lurked, well known as they were to hundreds 
of so-called honest people. 

The brigands were not idle. Frequent 
expeditions were undertaken with varying 
success, but no prisoner was brought up into 
the hills during my stay, though more than 
one carriage was stopped, and its occupants 
plundered. On one occasion only was there 
any colUsion with the gendarmes, and on 
that the detachment came back sullen and 
discomfited, with the loss of two of their 
number, who had been wounded and taken. 
This misfortune did not tend to make the 
Lamb more amiable. He gruffly intimated 
to his followers that they must prepare to set 
out for another lurking-place, since their 



230 TURNING OVEE A NEW LEAF. 

unlucky comrades, in spite of the tremendous 
oaths by which the banditti are bound to 
keep the secret of their companions' retreat, 
would probably be tempted by promises of 
pardon to reveal all they knew. And it was 
just possible that the authorities would take 
active measures to destroy the wasps, when 
once certain where their nest was to be found. 
Under these circumstances, the Lamb notified 
to me that he must curtail my lease of life 
by two days, and that if in twenty-four hours 
my ransom did not arrive, he should simplify 
matters by cutting my throat. Nor could 
there be much doubt that he would keep his 
word. 

Life is dear to us all, and it was with a 
heavy heart that I prepared to die. But I 
had no hope. I even despised myself for the 
weakness which had made me attach the 
sUghtest faith to the professions of S. D, 
Why, after all, should I expect a casual ac- 
quamtance like the engineer to trouble him- 
self regarding me ? " Nothing for nothing," 
thought I, "is the rule of the world. It 
matters little. Even poor little Lucy will 
soon forget me, and '* 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 231 

"Ho! Englishman, your skin is safe this 
time/* said L'Agnello, breaking in on my 
gloomy meditations, and jingling a heavy bag 
of gold, as he grinned encouragingly at me. 
"Your ransom is paid, and the priest who 
brought it up the mountain will show you the 
path, and let you ride his mule. I bear you 
no malice, and am just as glad as yourself 
to pouch the cash, instead of seeing what 
colour your blood is. So be off, and keep 
clear of my claws for the future !" 

The surprise almost stupified me, but it 
was no delusion. The ransom had really been 
paid, and that in full; and a cura, with 
whom the robbers had a good understanding, 
was there to confirm the Lamb's account. 
All he could say, however, was, that the 
money had been confided to him by an English 
signer, who refused to give any other name 
than " S. D.," and who had ridden down the 
valley, to return, as he believed, to Naples. 

I did not tarry long, but before I went my 
watch and chain were restored to me, and 
these I bestowed, as a parting keepsake, on 
the kindly old crone whose capricious tender- 
ness had saved my life, and the brigands gave 



232 TURNING OVER A NEW LEAP. 

me a cheer by way of farewell as I descended 
the rocky path, mounted on the priest's mule. 
That night I slept at San Paolo, and by noon 
of the next day reached Naples, and hurried 
to the Via Stretta. I was eager to see and 
thank my unknown preserver, ignorant as I 
was of his name or real rank. I found the 
senior partner of the firm of Burbidge and 
Styles in his bank parlour. He pushed up 
his gold-rimmed spectacles to the middle of 
his wrinkled forehead, as he listened to my 
earnest request to be told to whom I was 
indebted for my life. 

** * S. D.,' my dear sir," said the banker. 
" Well, the question is a little out of rule, 
but I have never been asked to keep silence 
on the subject. I do not, therefore, think any 
professional confidence will be violated in 
this case, if I say that the gentleman in ques- 
tion is Mr. Graham.*' 

'* Graham . George Graham ?" asked I, as 
the blood mounted to my face. 

" Yes ; Mr. Graham, the railway contractor. 
He met you, I understood, not long since, and 
. but here he is to answer for himself." 

I turned, and there in the doorway, stood 



TURNING OVER A NEW LEAF. 233 

the English engineer that I had met at 
Portici. And he was the man I had hated . 
Lucy's brother . and to him I owed my life. 
His undeserved kindness, his noble generosity, 
smote me to the heart, and I dropped into a 
chair, covered my face with my hands, and 
burst into tears. 

" Has Burbidge been telling tales ?" said 
the new comer. " Pray don't distress your- 
self, Mr. Edwards, and let bygones be by- 
gones. We have had, I dare say, a fictitious 
idea of each other's character, but in future 
let us be friends." 

And friends we are, friends and brothers, 
for Lucy is now my wife, and the happiness 
of calling her mine, with such of the world's 
good report and worldly prosperity as has 
fallen to my lot, I owe, under Heaven, to the 
man whom I long looked on as a cold egotist . 
George Graham. His succour of me at the 
hour of my greatest need, at a pecuniary 
sacrifice which was no trifling one . for he 
was not then rich . broke through the cynic 
disbelief in human goodness that was gather- 
ing round my heart. Cheered by George's 
counsels and example, I led a new life, ap- 



234 TURNING OYER A NSW LEAF. 

plied myself assiduously to my art, and, in 
four years of toil, was able to repay the 
large sum which Graham had advanced for 
my ransom. By this time I was well known 
as a painter, and in receipt of a fair income, 
and on the day of my marriage with Lucy, 
which took place in the fifth year of my pro- 
bation, George Graham, grown a wealthy man, 
insisted on settlmg ten thousand pounds on 
bis sister and her husband. 



THE 

CARDINAL'S WALKING STICK. 



 Why. West ? old fellow ? West !'* 

** Crooke, my boy !" 

We stood silent for a few seconds, holding 
each other's hands, in the first surprise of the 
unexpected meeting. And as we thus stood, 
the strange foreign street, the tall white Roman 
houses, balconied and terraced, vanished like 
dissolving views, and before our eyes rose 
Magdalen College, Oxford, and the images of 
two beardless undergraduates in cap and 
gown. At least, I can answer for myself. 
Crooke and I had been fast friends and college 
chums long ago, and I forgot, in the pleasure 
of seeing my companion of well-remembered 
days, how difiFerent were the paths which we 



236 THE caedinal's walking stick. 

now trod. Then gradually came back to me 
what had passed, and how our correspondence 
had languished first and finally dropped, until 
we who had been so intimate had wholly lost 
sight of each other. I cast a glance at 
Cfooke's garb, that, of an ecclesiastic of the 
Church of Rome, and could not help sighing. 
" You are still an Anglican, I see? Have 
you been busy all this time with that curacy 
in the north . at Leeds or Halifax, wasn't it ? 
. or have you a fat benefice from some lucky 
turn of the wheel (rf fortune ?" asked my old 
acquaintance, in a tone that I hardly liked. Pro- 
bably he had seen my involuntary start when 
I caught sight of the habit he wore . a trim 
black soutaine and hat of moderate brim, not 
like the portentous Dom Basilio headgear 
usually assumed by priests of Italian birth. 
Hastily I recalled to mind how Crooke had 
given up his fellowship, and a fair prospect of 
preferment, from conscientious motives ; how 
he had incurred slights and aversion on the 
part of his friends ; had been the cause of grief 
and anger in his own family ; and, finally, 
how I had vaguely heard of his working with 
all the enthusiasm of a neophyte somewhere 



THE CAEDINAL's WALKING STICK. 237 

in London, until a newspaper paragraph an- 
nounced that the Rev. Titus Crooke, ex-prize- 
man at Oxford, and Fellow of Magdalen, had 
gone abroad. From that time forth I had 
wholly lost sight of him. 

T suppose my old chum saw that T was 
ruffled by his somewhat flippant remark, for 
he passed his arm through mine, saying very 
gently that he begged my pardon if he had 
annoyed me ; but that I must be lenient with 
a poor fellow whom many of his countrymen 
and countrywomen, kind-hearted enough at 
other times, chose to condemn unheard. He 
did not think me narrow-minded or unchari- 
table enough to treat him thus. The path he 
had chosen, from no selfish motives, was some- 
times a very stony one, and he did not mind 
confessing that it had often happened that the 
coldness or repugnance of old friends had cut 
him to the soul. 

What on earth was I to do? My heart 
softened towards my old companion in his 
adversity, for I could not but see that the poor 
fellow was far from happy, and not in very 
robust health. His face was sallow and thin, 
his eyes were terribly sunken, and his temples 



238 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

were getting bald, while there was a nervous 
twitching about the mouth that told of any- 
thing but content. 

All this time the fierce white light of the 
mid-day sun was pouring down its force upon 
the bleached stones of the pavement, and the 
heat was extreme. I was glad to step aside 
into the shadow of a cool caf^ with a gay red 
and white awning before it, where a drowsy 
waiter was fanning away the flies with a green 
bunch of twigs, and where two or three of the 
foreigners who chanced to be in Rome at that 
unfashionable season, were languidly smoking 
cigars or sipping iced sorbetti and lemonade- 
It was, indeed, not only the hour of a sum- 
mer's day, when, according to the Italian, 
proverb, mad dogs and Englishmen have a 
monopoly of the thoroughfares, but it was 
August, the most unhealthy part of the year 
in the Roman States. Crooke, who, as I 
gathered from his hints, had remained at 
Rome, summer and winter, for three years, 
smilingly asked me how I ventured to the 
Eternal City at that dreaded season of sickly 
heats. 

" My leave is not a long one," said I, laugh- 



THE CABDINAL*8 WALKING STICK. 239 

ing. "School begins again on the 18th of 
next month, and I must be at my post when 
the bell rings for early prayers." 

" School ?" said Crooke, . with a puzzled 
look. 

" Even so/' said I, reddening a little, I am 
afraid, " but I don't mean that I have gone 
back to the status pupillaris. Only I have 
just been appointed third master at St. Win- 
nipeg's, and must enter on my duties at 
the end of the midsummer vacation. Not a 
bad post, and quite as good as ray deserts 
entitled me to expect, though it is not what 
I used to dream of when we were lads 
at college, and I fear I shall never be an 
Arnold. At any rate, I must make haste if I 
am to ' do' Rome and Naples." 

" Ah," said my former friend, " so you are 
going to Naples." 

Lightly as I had mentioned my appoint- 
ment to the office of third classical master on 
the ancient and stately foundation of St. Win- 
nipeg's, the post was anything but a matter of 
indifference to me. It had cost me much 
trouble and anxiety, and the kind help of 
friends, to secure my election, and I thought 



240 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

myself a very lucky curate to obtain it. For- 
tunately I had a good degree ; I had kept up 
my classical lore when more brilliant scholars 
had permitted theirs to mst like a useless 
sword, and if I could but teach as well as 
learn, and win the confidence and respect of 
the boys, I trusted not to prove unworthy of 
the favour of the governors of that fine old 
school. For the rest, there was a tolerable 
house, and an income large enough, as Emma 
and I thought, to marry upon. Emma's 
parents thought so too ; tut it had been made 
a condition of our engagement that I should 
wait until I had had at least a couple of 
terms' experience of the practical duties before 
me. 

T had been appointed just at the commence- 
ment of the vacation, and had decided on 
taking that rare opportunity for a short but 
rapid continental tour. My time was brief, 
and my purse but moderately replenished, so 
I was obliged, though with a sigh, to forego 
ambitious visions of Greece and Egypt, but it 
was a great treat to me, after a peep at Paris 
and the Rhine and Switzerland, to cross the 
Alps and visit that Italy that 1 had so often 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 241 

pictured to myself, but which I only knew 
from books. And now I had seen Milan, 
Venice, Florence, and, more interesting still, 
to one who travelled with Eustace's volumes 
in his portmanteau, the old Etrurian cities, 
and had recently reached Rome. But already 
my time was waning, there was much to 
see, and brief space remained to explore the 
wonders of Rome, Pompeii, Poestum, and 
Herculaneum, and I must not miss the Liver- 
pool packet that left Naples in the first week 
of September, unless I would be a truant on 
the 18th of the month. Should I fail to be 
present at the somewhat ceremonial opening 
of the new term, Dr. Swishington, the august 
head-master, were he so disposed, could "sus- 
pend" me from my duties, and the governors 
had full powers to cancel my appointment, 
without official inquiry, or the prospect of 
legal proceedings. On this account . not that 
I had the slightest reason to apprehend any 
hostile feeling towards myself on the part 
of my future superior, to whom I was per- 
sonally a stranger . 1 ' was naturally a little 
nervous. But I consoled myself by remem- 
bering the admirable punctuality, on the whole, 

VOL. II. R 




242 THE CARDINAl/s WALKING STICK. 

which modern steam-packets display in the 
performance of their service, and by the pros- 
pect of a swift and easy summer voyage in 
that favourite and powerful vessel the Volcano. 
All that was necessary was, that I should not 
permit any circumstances to interfere with my 
embarking on the proper day. So, not to 
lose the golden. hours of this rare holiday on 
classic soil, a chance that might not occur 
again until my limbs should stiflPeu and my 
hair grow grey, I was eager to make the best 
use of my time. And it was vexatious to 
find that the dull professional ciceroni, to 
whom time was of no value, except as repre- 
sented by the piastre earned by a day of 
plodding beside Murray-consulting tourists, 
could not distinguish the chaff from the corn. 
In this strait, Crooke proved a valuable 
ally. He had spoken no more than truth 
when he said that he knew Rome thoroughly. 
And he assured me that he had ample leisure 
(his duties, whatever they were, did not seem 
very onerous), and that it would be a plea- 
sure to him to guide me to the cream of that 
inexhaustible treasure of antiquities which 
Rome contains. 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 243 

" Dismiss your laquais de place, and accept 
rae as a volunteer in the same capacity," said 
Crooke, with great good humour. " Depend 
upon it rU not let grass grow under your 
feet. You shall * do' the seven-hilled city in 
less time than ever did even a Yankee excur- 
sionist, come to Europe to stay his three 
thousand dollars, and yet miss none of the 
true lions." 

The ex-Fellow of Magdalen faithfully kept 
his word, and acted as a skilful and zealous 
guide, while I found it a great comfort to be 
conducted through the wondrous old*city by 
a scholar and an Englishman, instead of the 
snuff- taking old Meator whom he had sup- 
planted, and who referred all buildings to 
Nero, and all pictures to Raffaelle. Very 
kind and attentive my former chum certainly 
proved himself; but there was something in 
his manner that perplexed me, for it sug- 
gested that, for unknown reasons, he was 
acting a part. And yet I was angry with 
myself for the meanness of the suspicion 
and drove it from my thoughts as an 
intruder. Why, after all, should Crooke 
take the trouble to pioneer my steps through 

E 2 



r 



244 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

church and temple, arena and Vatican, as he 
did, save from pure kindness and recollection 
of our old friendship. Why, indeed ! 

Imprimis, there was nothing to be got out 
of me. My former fellow- student was the 
reverse of a parasite, and declined all invita- 
tions to dine with me at my hotel, nor would 
he even permit me to pay more than half the 
hire of carriages or boats on the Tiber. As 
for the idea of Crooke's borrowing my money, 
that was absurd. I bad none to spare, as he 
very well knew, and, moreover, he belonged 
to a wealthy family enough, and had private 
means, which were quite sufficient for a person 
of his careful and unostentatious habits. Nor 
did he appear to be possessed by any peculiar 
proselytising fervour. I stood on my guard 
at first, prepared to do battle, and expecting 
to be battered with the heavy artillery of 
Jerome and Augustin, and sapped by the 
subtler casuistry of Pascal and F^n^lon ; but I 
was agreeably disappointed. Crooke showed 
not the sHghtest desire to make a convert of 
the third classical master of St. Winnipeg's. 
Indeed, beyond a hurried assurance, in answer 
to some timid question of my own, that he 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 245 

had " found peiace" in his present belief, he 
was almost silent on the subject of his own 
faith and calling. 

But he talked freely and amusingly enough 
on mundane topics, and displayed great know- 
ledge of Italian politics and statesmen, having 
endless anecdotes to relate. His view of affairs 
in the peninsula naturally differed from mine, 
but he spoke without bitterness, though in 
terms of gentle blame, of the king and Cavour 
and with admiring regret of Garibaldi. The 
ex- King of Naples he described as a rash and 
generous youth, while admitting that there 
really were great faults, coupled with great 
qualities, inherent in the Bourbon stock. 
But he drew a most masterly and touching 
picture of the bleeding and torn kingdom of 
Naples, the priests persecuted, the bishops 
insulted, the nobles exiled or captive, the 
simple peasantry hunted and harried by cruel 
soldiers, ground to the earth by taxation, 
harrassed by harsh martinets, civil and mili- 
tary, from the pedantic regions of Piedmont. 

Now, I had no especial sympathy with 
brigands and plotters, lay or cleric, but it 
was difl5cult to refuse entire credence to my 



c 



24 G THE caudinal's walking stick. 

friend's statements, highly coloured, no doubt, 
but still supported by legions of facts, real or 
imaginary, and by all manner of circum- 
stantial evidence, drawn not only from news- 
papers, but from private letters, of which 
Crooke translated sundry passages for my 
behoof, and of which he seemed to possess a 
never-faihng supply. At first I was incredu- 
lous, then staggered, and at last I was 
brought to own that very likely there had 
been instances of unnecessary severity or 
caprice, and that it might go hard with an 
ignorant and helpless population, squeezed as 
in a vice between Chiavone on the one hand, 
and La Marmora on the other. 

And then the cloven foot peeped out. 
Crooke very cautiously asked, in a circuitous 
fashion, if I would . if, in a word, I would 
do him the service of smuggling a few letters 
over the frontier of the new reprobate king- 
dom of Italy. He did not ask me to take 
any peculiar trouble in delivering these 
letters, which would be made up into one thick 
packet, and which I could easily conceal 
about my person, while I could simply leave 
them at a certain house in the suburbs of 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 247 

Naples. It was wonderful what good the safe 
arrival of those letters would eflPect. They 
would heal dissensions, comfort those who 
were ready to perish, restore hope to the 
afflicted, stop bloodshed, and, in a word 
benefit everybody without hurting anybody. 
But such was the hard and jealous tyranny 
of the sub-alpine government, that these 
letters, with all their attendant blessings, 
would be intercepted, unless secretly con- 
veyed by an Englishman, who could hardly 

be suspected, would 

** Stay, my dear fellow," I broke mti; and I 
felt the blood rush up to my face, and set my 
very ears tingling, as I thus interrupted my 
old friend, for the idea of seeming churlish 
and ungracious was one that I flinched from, 
resolute as I was not to be beguiled into doing 
what was wrong. " Stay, Crooke, and don't 
tell me more secrets of state, for it is impos- 
sible that we should think ajike upon the 
point in question. You are a far cleverer 
fellow than I . always were . and I remember 
what capital speeches you used to make at 
our old debates at the Union at Oxford. You 
have spoken very well now, and I do you the 



248 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

justice to believe that you believe every word 
you have uttered ; but, you see, I am a plain 
EnglisbmaD, and I can't go with you. I 
cannot believe the Piedmontese to be de- 
tested usurpers, the monks and brigands 
suffering saints. King Bomba an exiled 
martyr, and United Italy a myth. And 
sooner than carry a single letter, however 
well intentioned, that should tend to plunge 
back those poor Neapolitans into the slough 
of degraded servitude they had wallowed in 
so long, I tell you frankly that 1 would 
abandon the pleasure of my journey alto* 
gather." 

I began this speech, an unusually long one 
for me, in a diffident and stammering way, 
but I spoke warmly and earnestly after the 
first words were out. Stranger as I was in 
the land, and few as had been my oppor- 
tunities of intercourse with the natives, I had 
seen and heard enough to convince me that 
the immense majority of the people had ac- 
cepted the new order of things, heart and 
soul, and that rich and poor were alike full of 
hope that a brighter and better era than Italy 
had ever known was dawning throughout the 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 249 

country. Everywhere industry seemed to be 
springing up into healthy vigour, old rubbish, 
moral ^nd material, to be swept away by the 
sudden touch of improvement, and popula- 
tions long inert to be awakening into active 
and intelligent life. Nor could I endure . 
however I might respect Crooke's convictions 
. that he should regard me as a willing 
instrument in thwarting and impeding the 
march of Italian regeneration. 

Still, my heart smote me at the idea that I 
might give pain to my kindly fellow-country- 
man, to whom I was indebted for much 
attention since my arrival in Rome, and I 
broke the awkward silence that ensued by 
some expressions of regret that I should be 
obliged to refuse the desired service . expres- 
sions clumsily worded, I am sure, but none 
the less sincere. 

Crooke took the refusal very well indeed. I 
could see that he was hurt, but he bore the 
disappointment better than I had expected, 
wrung my hand, said that he " fully entered 
into my feelings," begged I would allow the 
subject to drop, and, after gazing out of the 
window for a minute or two, began to con- 



250 THE cardinal's walking stick, 

verse on other topics with more than his usual 
fluency of speech and lightness of spirit. Nor 
did he again allude to the unlucky subject of 
the contraband correspondence. 

However ardent a sight-seer may be, his 
researches are necessarily limited to the period 
of daylight, and even at Rome, the Coliseum 
is the only lion which can well be explored 
by the help of torches or the moon. It was 
summer, and the Opera company had quitted 
the city, while the foreign residents, and most 
of the Romans who possessed country houses, 
were away. But there were a good many 
palaces still tenanted, and Crooke was very 
kind in introducing me to his numerous 
ItaHan acquaintance. My evenings would 
have been dull enough, spent in the empty 
sala of my hotel, but for this thoughtful at- 
tention on the part of my former chum. As 
it was, I was *' presented" in the drawing- 
rooms of several of the Roman nobility, at 
whose houses Crooke was intimate, and was 
hospitably made welcome at the frequent " re- 
ceptions" of sundry ladies of rank. 

A reading and rowing man at College, a 
working curate afterwards, and third master 




THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 251 

elect of St. Winnipeg's, I had no experience 
of London fashionable life, and the little 1 
had heard of it had by no means caused me 
to aspire to an initiation into its social inani- 
ties. I dare say the society of the Roman 
grandees, into which, under Crooke's auspices, 
I was admitted, was sufficiently tiresome and 
stupid, but, at any rate, it was thoroughly new 
to me, and had a sort of picturesque dulness 
and gloom about it. The great shadowy 
rooms, with priceless pictures on the walls, 
peerless marbles, cabinets of gems, and costly 
heirlooms of all kinds, the cumbrous furni- 
ture, carpetless floors, and frescoed walls, all 
seen by the dim light of a few sorry candles, 
pleased my fancy much. There was an illus- 
tration of national life and Old World modes 
of thought in everything around, even in the 
scanty and cheap refreshments, a few cakes, a 
few glasses of syrup or lemonade, a little of 
the common wine of the country, a collation 
for which eighteenpence would have paid 
amply, served on monstrous silver trays by 
domestics in shabby but gorgeous liveries. 
And the calm, portly marchionesses, with 
their fjms, their black silk and old lace, their 



i 



252 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

diamonds, good-hurnoured stolidity, and soft 
voices, were a study in themselves. And so 
were the snuflFy old counts . there seemed to 
be few or no young people at these parties . 
with their decorations, quaint politeness, and 
solemn manner of playing trictrac. 

Perhaps part of the charm of these curious 
reunions was due to sheer vanity on my part, 
for, as Crooke took care to inform me that an 
Englishman was very seldom admitted into 
the dingy but magnificent saloons of which, 
with him for my Mentor, I was free, I could 
not help piquing myself on my rare good for- 
tune. " What a capital subject of conversa- 
tion," thought I, " my sojourn in Rome, and 
the opportunities I have had of seeing how 
Romans really live and amuse themselves, 
would hereafter prove.'' And I found time 
to write long descriptions of life and society 
in Rome to a correspondent who was pretty 
certain to consider my account as a master- 
piece of all that was graphic and diverting. 
It was when the period allotted for my stay 
began to dwindle until the hours might be 
counted, that my old companion proposed to 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 253 

present me at a house the threshold of which 
I had not yet crossed. 

*' It is . don't be shocked . a cardinal's 
palace, that of Cardinal Campobasso, the 
ablest scholar, and most judicious collector of 
antique statuary and mosaics in all Italy. 
His Eminence has fine taste, and his noble 
fortune enables him to gratify it without 
stint. You are not afraid, are you, to be the 
guest of a cardinal ? I'll pledge myself that 
no one shall make even an effort to win you 
to our way of thinking." 

Crooke went on to tell me that the Car- 
dinal, who was one of the riche^st prelates in 
Italy, and was, among other things, arch- 
bishop of the wealthy Neapolitan diocese of 
Foggia, was just then absent from Rome, at- 
tending to his archiepiscopal duties. But the 
honours of his palazzo were admirably well 
done by his sister. His sister and his niece, 
the latter of whom, a young widow, was 
reckoned among the most beautiful women in 
Rome. They had a reception on that even- 
ing, and Crooke had asked and obtained per- 
mission to present me. For the first time I 
demurred. It was Thursday, and a hot and 



m 



254 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

breezeless day, and I had been racing through 
picture-galleries for the last time, had in- 
spected the wonderful cabinets of the Doria 
collection since lunch, and was knocked up 
and weary. As for Crooke, nothing seemed 
to tire him. But then I was booked to start, 
early on the following morning, for the Nea- 
politan frontier, as No. 3 in the coupe of a 
shabby green diligence, and I should have 
preferred a night's unbroken repose. I could 
hardly be tempted, even by my friend's ac- 
count of the treasures of classic art, the By- 
zantine mosaics, the Greek intaglios, in the 
Cardinal's saloons, and was quite deaf to his 
praises of the beauty and grace of the fair 
hostess. However, I did not wish to be 
churlish, and I consented, groaning the while, 
to put on my dress suit, and to accompany 
Crooke to the " reception." Indeed, he made 
such a point of my compliance, that I could 
hardly refuse, little as I guessed the real rea- 
son of his eagerness. 

The " reception" at the Campobasso Palace 
diflfered in some respects from those dreary 
parties at which I had previously been a 
guest while at Rome. The huge mansion was 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK, 255 

brilliantly lighted, the servants wore liveries 
that were grotesque, certainly, but rich and 
new, and there was no lack of music ; a well- 
stored buffet, and a crowd of company, amid 
which youth and good looks were mingled in 
fair proportion. It was a real party, in fact, 
with clean cards on the tables, instead of the 
well-thumbed packs that the old counts and 
abbes must Jiave known by heart, with a 
blaze of wax candles, refreshments that were 
meant to be eaten and imbibed, good singing, 
and fresh toilettes. The saloons were gor- 
geously furnished in the style of Louis Quinze, 
and there were objects of art in even greater 
profusion than Crooke had led me to ex- 
pect. 

My friend introduced me to the Cardinal's 
sister, a stiff old lady in velvet and diamonds, 
whose name I did not catch, and to the Car- 
dinal's niece. Countess Minetta something, 
but the latter somewhat curtailed the intro- 
duction by giving me her hand with a sort of 
queenly condescension, and observing in toler- 
able English that she " was glad to see one 
of whom M. Crooke had told her so much 
good. Her own papa had been half an 



256 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

EDglishman, and she regretted to speak bis 
language so imperfectly." 

1 do not think I could describe the Countess 
Minetta if I were to try. I can only say 
that she was a very beautiful creature, with a 
dark, almost Spanish cast of face, which her 
black dress and sparkling jewels set off to 
perfection, that she seemed very young, and 
had a fawn-like timidity of manner that was 
very charming. But what pleased me most 
was her great kindness to an undistinguished 
stranger like myself, and her filial affection 
for her absent uncle, the Cardinal. Of the 
latter she spoke with the utmost pride and 
fondness, regretting that he should have been 
away from Rome during my sojourn there. 
His Eminence would have been delighted to 
converse with a learned Inglese like myself . 
ah ! I must not be bashful about ray attain- 
ments . M. Crooke had told them aU about 
me . and I should have been sure to like the 
Cardinal. Why not? Her uncle was a 
scholar, a poet, like Petrarch, a father to his 
flock, the tender protector of the poor, kind 
and benevolent to all. Any one less con- 
scientious than himself, so his niece declared. 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 257 

would have stayed away from his diocese, 
which his vicar could administer, but Cardi- 
nal Campobasso was a model archbishop. His 
age and infirmities, alas ! weighed every year 
more heavily upon him, but never was he 
known to be deaf to the call of duty. 

Then Madame Minetta, begging my pardon 
with the prettiest humility for having wearied 
me v^ith her egotistical praises of the good 
old relative who had been as a parent to her, 
offered to show me some of the Cardinal's 
rare stores of curiosities. Very notable and 
exquisite were many of the cameos and scraps 
of many-tinted mosaic to which she called my 
attention, hurriedly describing them in her 
low sweet voice, but I could hardly distinguish 
one from the other. I was fairly dazzled for 
the moment. It was not that I was silly 
enough, or fickle enough, to fall in love ; my 
heart never swerved from its allegiance to 
Emma, at home in England ; but there was 
something in so much loveliness and excel- 
lence as that of the Cardinal's niece that 
interested me very much. I fancied, too, that 
she was not happy; there was a pensive 
melancholy in her dark eyes, and a sad music 

VOL. II. s 



258 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

in her voice, that seemed to hint at hidden 
sorrows. Perhaps she was inconsolable, I 
thought, for the loss of her husband, Count 
something . I only know that the name was 
a long and sonorous one. Or could it be 
that she found no congenial spirit in that gay 
and frivolous society, amid which her lot was 
cast. How noble, in any case, were her 
sentiments, and how exquisite was her devo- 
tion to that good old uncle, Cardinal Campo- 
basso. 

I had plenty of time to think all this, for 
the young countess could not, of course, 
neglect her other guests, among whom were 
princes and great ladies, French officers of the 
garrison. Knights of Malta, and bishops, to 
spend all the evening in showing Macedonian 
medallions and Syracusan bronzes to the third 
master at St. Winnipeg's. But as she glided 
gracefully through the midst of the company, 
she never passed me without a bright smile, 
and a word or two in her pretty broken 
English. And she introduced me to one or 
two persons, among others a handsome young 
Roman lady, who looked like Juno, but spoke 
little, and appeared ignorant of all topics^ 



THE CAEDINAL's WALKING STICK. 259 

save only her parish church, its rich shrines 
and altar-pieces, and her confessor, Father 
Bonifaccio who preached there in Lent, and 
her own, the countesses, brother. The latter 
was a tall young officer in the Pope's Noble 
Guard, very splendid and good humoured, 
but without any of his sister's keenness of 
feeling or grace of manner. Of Crooke I saw 
little. He had many friends, and seemed very 
busy indeed. 

The party gradually broke up. The guests 
took their leave, and I, like the rest, made my 
bow to the Cardinal's sister in bl^ck velvet. 
The niece I did not see, nor at the moment 
was Crooke visible. But before I got clear of 
the ante-chamber, Crooke hurried up and 
caught my arm. 

" Come back. West, for just a moment ! 
Countess Minetta has something to say to 
you." 

So she had. In her sweet soft voice, and 
with her flashing dark eyes a little more 
hidden by the drooping lashes than I had 
seen them before, she asked me to do her a 
favour, if she might presume on the kindness 
of one who must regard her merely as a 

s2 



260 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

troublesome stranger. But Englishmen were 
always ready, she had heard, to fulfil a lady's 
entreaty . was it not so? Ah, so her papa 
had told her in her childhood ! She was so 
reluctant to trouble me, but M. Crooke said I 
was going to Naples next day, and the 
temptation was too strong to be resisted. 
Would I oblige her? She asked nothing 
alarming. But the Cardinal- Archbishop was 
gouty and old, and he had left his favourite 
stick, which usually supported his tottering 
steps, dear man, behind him in Rome. He 
had written twice to his niece from his palace 
at Foggia, lamenting, in serio-comic fashion, 
the want of this well-remembered stafi^, which 
he missed sorely. He had sticks in plenty, 
but none suited him like this old favourite, 
which had belonged to his father. Prince 
Julian Campobasso, and was a sort of heir- 
loom. 

" The aged have their fancies, you know,*' 
said the young widow, smiling with angelic 
benignity, as she finished this explanation : 
" here is the stick. If you would kindly take 
care of it on the journey, and leave it at 
Capua with the Cardinal's factor, Signer 



THE CARDINAl/s WALKING STICK. 261 

Boccotristo, whose house is opposite the chief 
hotel, you would really oblige us all. . The 
dear good uncle ! I know his kind old eyes 
will brighten when he sees this quaint crutch 
of his once more !" 

The stick was a curious one, a tall and 
stout staflF of some dark wood, probably 
ebony, with a silver ferrule, a crutch handle 
of ivory, serrated by the file, and a profusion 
of ivory rings let into the wood. It looked 
ancient, the very ivory being discoloured by 
age to a pale yellow tint, and I could easily 
fancy that its familiar support might be 
endeared by custom to its venerable owner. 
Of course, I wiUingly undertook to execute 
the countess's commission. My road led me 
through Capua, and a walking-stick was no 
formidable addition to my baggage. I pledged 
myself, however, never to lose sight of the 
Cardinal's stick until, at Capua, I should 
resign my trust. The countess thanked me 
in her bewitching way, and I took my leave. * 

Crooke saw me oflp next morning, early as 
was the hour of my departure. I took my 
place in the diligence, along with some in- 
tensely national fellow-passengers, who insisted 



262 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

on keeping the windows closed, and who 
sustained nature on cigarettes and slices of 
melon, as we rolled along. The Cardinal's 
stick was in my hand. " Good-bye, and a 
good journey, West, old boy. Perhaps we 
shall never meet again, but I shan't forget 
you. Mind you take care of the stick/' were 
the last words of my Oxford friend. 

The diligence, with its load, jangled and 
jolted but slowly along the road through the 
Pontine Marshes ; the dust hung around us 
in heavy clouds, and through the hot haze the 
burning sun glared like a red ball. Early as 
had been our start from Rome, it was dusk 
when we left Terracina, and dark night when 
we got to the frontier town of Fondi. The 
boundary line lies, as all travellers know, some 
four miles north of the latter place, and there 
we had duly undergone the usual routine of 
inspecting passports, tapping pockets, and 
" visiting" luggage. All this had passed over 
very smoothly, and as the oflficer of the Do- 
gano Reale returned me my keys, I felt that I 
was fairly out of Papal Rome, and a denizen 
of Living Italy. But at Pondi we found 
lighted torches, a guard under arms, and un- 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 263 

wonted signs of activity at the second custom- 
house. 

" Body of Bacchus !" cried the conductor, 
letting down the glass on my side of the 
coup^, " something must be up. Signers and 
dames, you are invited to descend for the 
gratification of the royal officers. A second 
search takes place." 

Out we got, grumbling, sleepy, and dis- 
gusted at this unexpected call on our obedi- 
ence, and again portmanteaus were unstrap- 
ped, bags forced to disgorge their contents, 
and trunks uncorded and unlocked. The 
second search was very severe, and I was cal- 
led on to explain the purport of even my Eng- 
lish papers and manuscripts, poor Emma's 
letters inclusive, while several cards and 
notes of invitation from the Roman grandees 
were set aside and remitted to the custody of 
the controller. The scrutiny was long and 
minute. Our pockets, even, were emptied, 
and the failure of all these efforts to discover 
anything contraband only seemed to sour the 
temper of the officials, who eyed us with ac- 
tual hostility, the reason of which I could not 
guess. 



264 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

" That stick, English signer ; that stick ?" 

I handed over the Cardinal's staflF, smiling 
the while, to a lynx-eyed person in uniform. 
A fat good-humoured chief clerk in plain 
clothes smiled too, and shrugged his shoul* 
ders. 

"Blessed Gennaro, Signer Vulpini, we 
must not vex the forestieri for nothing. Give 
the English illustrious-one his cane back 
again. Cospetto, man, we don't care, as the 
Tedeschi used to do, even if there be a sword 
or a dirk in that slip of old wood." 

But what was my dismay, when the pry- 
ing personage addressed, unscrewing the 
crutch handle of the cane, drew from a hol- 
low in the staflP itself, not a sword, but a long 
roll of closely-written papers, which had been 
craftily concealed in that receptacle, and of 
which I had been the unconscious bearer. 
There was a hum, and then a Babel of voci- 
ferous exclamations, and all the officers 
rushed, as to a focus, to the spot where the 
papers were rustling in the hands of the wily 
tinder. 

" Instructions to the band of Chiavone !" 
cried one seizing a document. 



THE cardinal's WAliKINQ STICK. 265 

" The College of Cardinals, to all regular 
and secular clergy, greeting !" bawled ano- 
ther. 

"A regular commission of lieutenant-gene- 
ral, under the hand of Francesco de Bourbon, 
King of the Sicilies, to Hernan Mendez, the 
Spanish brigand," cried a third ; " and here 
are letters to all the worst conspirators and 
most pig-headed codini in Naples,, enough to 
hang the messenger ten times over. See, 
comrades, to the Englishman !" 

I had scanty time given me to protest my 
innocence. Collared, hustled, my hands pi- 
nioned behind my back, I was paraded off to 
jail between two soldiers with drawn bayonets, 
regarded by my fellow-travellers as little bet- 
ter than a demon, and hooted by a large 
ragged population that seemed to start from 
porch and stone stair, from hovel and caver- 
nous house, throughout the ruinous old 
town. I scarcely had leisure for reflection, 
before I found myself thrust into a bare and 
damp room, which contained but a truckle- 
bed and a broken stool, but which yet was 
reckoned the state chamber of the prison of 
Fondi. 



266 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

What I underwent in that wretched place 
of confinement, during several of the longest 
and most miserable days that I ever spent, I 
scarcely like to think of. Twas not willfully 
ill-treated. The jailer and his subordinates 
were rough, but not cruel. It was the hard 
fare, the extreme discomfort, the blank mono- 
tony of my captivity that I felt so bitterly. 
The prison had been designed, in the Bour- 
bon times, for the reception of mountain rob- 
bers, but what might have been endurable to 
them, the grim bare room, the bed of coarse 
sacking, covered by a flea-infested rug, the po- 
lenta and rancid bacon, tried my spirit sorely. 
The people persisted in regarding me as a 
great criminal. A judge came to visit me, 
and a greffier with him, and I was interro- 
gated, cross-examined, worried to my wits' 
end. In vain I protested my good-will to 
Italy, and my utter ignorance that the staff 
contained papers dangerous to the state. The 
judge only shrugged his shoulders. And all 
this time the days were dropping one by one 
into eternity, and the time of the packet's 
sailing drew near. The eighteenth of Sep- 
tember would come, and St. Winnipeg's 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 267 

school would assemble, masters and boys, 
but the third classical master . where was 
he ? In an Italian prison, unwashed, hungry, 
despairing, and the governors would no doubt 
proceed to a new election. Emma ! 

" Mr. West, you are free !" said a tall 
young Englishman, coming suddenly into the 
room where I lay, sullen and desponding, on 
the wretched bed. " Unscrupulous as he is, 
your precious college friend, what's his name, 
Crooke, never intended that your captivity, if 
the papers of which you were the unwitting 
bearer should fall into wrong hands, should 
be a very long one. He wrote to my uncle 
the consul, and we have lost no time in set- 
tling matters with the authorities at Naples. 
I have come over here on purpose to etfect 
your release, and if you can start at once, I 
should be happy to have your company back 
to Naples. Here, Giacomo, Beppo, whatever 
you call yourself, unlock those irons, can't 
you? English wrists get chafed by such 
bracelets.*' 

The jailor, as obsequious and apologetic 
now, as rough and suspicious formerly, re- 
moved my chains, and before I well knew 



268 THE cardinal's walking stick. 

where I was, I was whirling away from 
Fondi, by the side of my kindly young coun- 
trymian, who seemed to consider the whole 
matter a capital joke, pushed, perhaps, a little 
too far. 

" Hard on you, I must say," remarked he, 
" but the Italians could only judge by appear- 
ances. They are not to blame, you know; 
but, excuse me, Mr. West, how could you 
let yourself be hoodwinked as you were ? It 
was known papers of a treasonable nature 
were on their way ; but bah 1 I dare say you 
are sick of the subject.'' 

With all our speed, and my deliverer was 
very good-natured in hurrying on when once 
I had told my reason for haste, I did but reach 
the Chiaia at Naples, and jump into a boat, as 
torrents of black smoke gushed from the 
Volcano's chimney. The boatman pulled and 
shouted, and just as the huge paddles began to 
revolve, we were alongside, and I was hauled 
up the side-ladder. 

" Just saved the boat, sir. Cast off there, 
Johnny, and now, go on ahead !" shouted the 
captain. And off we went. 

But when the dreaded eighteenth came 



THE cardinal's WALKING STICK. 269 

round, the third classical master of St. .Win- 
nipeg's, very lean and sunburnt, was at his 
desk in the ancient hall, and Dr. Swisherton 
nodded to him with civil approval. The third 
classical master is at home there now; his 
name is the Rev. William West ; his Italian 
misadventures seem like a dream in the dis- 
tance ; and Emma is his wife. He has never 
heard anything more of his former chum at 
Magdalen College, Mr. Titus Crooke. 



THE AGGEE FIORD. 



" SoHO, mare ! gently, Lapwing, gently, you 
Holstein-bred, hammer-headed brute ! Quiet, 
I say !" 

And the postilion, turning in his saddle, 
confronted us as we sat in the open caleche, 
though so deep was the darkness of the night 
that it was only when a flash of Kghtning 
came that we could distinguish his pale face, 
dripping flaxen hair, and the faded scarlet of 
his gay jacket, now stained by drenching rain 
into a dusky maroon. colour. An awful night 
it was. 

T have been thirty years in Denmark, and 
have seen storms enough since then, but none 
fiercer than that which now raged around us 
as we plodded our way, sore buffeted by wet 
and wind, over a desolate heath in North 



THE AGGER FIORD. 271 

Jutland. The thunder rolled almost unceas- 
ingly ; between the peals we could hear the 
hoarse roar of the distant sea j and the gale 
was so strong that we feared carriage and 
horses would be fairly blown over by the suc- 
cession of angry gusts. To add to the agree- 
able features of the scene, the poor brutes that 
drew us, alarmed by the lightning, were 
plunging and swerving violently at intervals, 
and the driver could hardly control them. 

" English master," said the postilion, very 
ruefully, *' I have lost the way ! It's not my 
fault, for it would need a Troll's eyes, which 
can pierce the earth, they say, to see clear 
on such a night as this. I must have missed 
the turning by the gibbet, and got among the 
lanes to the left, or we should have reached 
the kro. be quiet horses 1 . the kro where 
your worships meant to rest for the night ; 
but now I see neither kro nor village." 

** Then where are we ?" asked Williams, 
rather peevishly ; and no wonder, for our light 
summer suits . admirable wear, as we had 
considered, for a fair weather excursion through 
Jutland in the fair season . ^were thoroughly 
soaked through ; we were miserably off for 



272 THE AGGER FIORD. 

wrappers of any sort, and were as chilled and 
hungry as ever belated travellers were. 

" Where are we ?'' 

" The blessed Olaf of Norway and Niels of 
Denmark alone can tell," replied the young 
Dane, who, for all his Lutheranism, had a 
profound reverence for saints of the pure 
Scandinavian stock ; and then began again to 
soothe and struggle with his horses, which 
were all but unmanageable. 

This was not very pleasant, and Williams . 
less used to rough weather and wet clothes 
than I was, for an artist's profession takes 
him into the open air less frequently, rain 
or shine, than an engineer's . grew testy and 
out of humour. He was a worthy fellow, 
and a good companion, and it was a genuine 
love of his art that had brought him to Den- 
mark : a country then, as now, very little 
visited by English tourists. But his temper, 
amiable in prosperous circumstances, was by 
no means improved by exposure to the ele- 
ments, and he was unsparing in his denuncia- 
tions of everything and everybody connected 
with Jutland, from the time of King Gonn 
downwards. I could not help laughing at 



THE AGGER FIORD. 273 

the excess of his wrath, though I, too, felt that 
we were in a scrape which might prove 
serious. The horses could wirfi difficulty be 
kept in the narrow road, and, should thgy 
bolt across the heath, our choice would pro- 
bably be between jumping out at some per- 
sonal risk, or being smothered in one of the 
numerous bogs, deep and dangerous, with 
which the country abounds. Suddenly a 
flash of lightning, more than commonly broad 
and brilliant, lighted up the whole horizon, 
showing with startling distinctness the black 
and purple surface of the wild moor, strewed 
with stones, speckled with yellow flowers, 
and dotted with round blue tarns and patches 
of intensely green verdure, beneath which lay 
soft mire that would bear Ho heavier foot than 
that of the plover. But there was also visible 
a moss-grown stone cross, broken and weather- 
worn, but conspicuously planted on a knoll 
of rising ground, whereon grew several fir- 
trees, bent and warped into fantastic crooked- 
ness by the might of the north-west gales. 
This was evidently a landmark well known to 
the country people, and the postilion gave a 

VOL. JI. T 

i 
I 



274 THE AGGER FIORD. 

shout of joy as he pointed it out with his 
whip. 

"I know where we are now, English 
knights ! That's the cross of the old Abbot 
Tholl, he that was tied up in a sack, and 
drowned in the Elster fiord by the peasants of 
Vetter, one fifth of whose corn he wanted to 
take away as Church dues. We are far from 
home, and far from the right road though, 
and this rain will have sweUed the Skiem so 
much that we could not get back, not if we 
risked our lives in fording it. The best 
thing I can do, gentlemen, is to take you on 
to Rothesgaard." 

" What does the fellow say ? " asked Wil- 
Hams. He had been but a sh(3trt time in 
Denmark, and had not learned aM much of 
the language, so similar, and yet sc^ provok- 
ingly unlike our native English, as\ I, who 
had been in constant contact with \ native 
labourers, sailors, and professional men. 

" What is this Rothesgaard you speal^ of? 
Is there a kro there, or some farm-hjpuse 
where strangers are received?" I asked. 

But the place was not one fitted foA a 
protracted colloquy, and I suppose the fcad 



THE AGGER FIORD. 275 

was weary of doing battle with his rampant 
steeds, which he had hitherto managed with 
much address and courage. At any rate, he 
shouted something quite uninteUigible, cracked 
his whip, loosened his reins, and went off at 
a slapping pace through the tempest and the 
darkness. Half an hour afterwards he pulled 
up his horses in front of a long and lofty wall, 
which evidently enclosed a large court-yard, 
gardens, and inner buildings, and which was, 
as I could see by a flash of the now distant 
lightning, of a dull red colour, instead of the 
usual white. The postilion sprang to the 
ground, rang a loud clanging bell, and 
thumped lustily on the oaken gate with his 
whip-handle. 

" Any haven in a storm 1" said the driver, 
" but thi6 haven is of the best ! Vl\ warrant 
we find supper not over, and as for corn and 
hay for the nags, where should they be to be 
had if not in the stables of the noble Baron 
Dyring?" At this instant, the gates were 
opened by an old serving-man with a lantern, 
and, after a very brief explanation, we were 
civilly invited to enter. 
I Much as I had heard of the primitive 

T 2 



276 THE AGGER FIORD. 

hospitality still existing in the out-of-the-way 
nooks of the ancient kingdom of Denmark, I 
was rather startled at the notion of intruding 
on the domestic privacy of a country gentle- 
man, such as I could not doubt this Baron 
Dyring, whose name 1 now heard for the first 
time, to be. The name of the place . Rothes- 
gaard . had not prepared me for an invasion 
on our part of a genuine chateau. The word 
.* gaard," meaning hold or place of defence, 
is loosely used in Denmark, applying equally 
to a village farm-house, and feudal castle. And 
as far as 1 could make out in the dim light, 
Rothesgaard, though surrounded with barns, 
stabling, and farm buildings of very great 
extent, was rather an imposing edifice: a 
strong stone mansion in the castellated style, 
moated and turreted, and large, though low. 
Williams, too, drew back somewhat as soon 
as he discovered where we were. He, like 
myself, had expected to be received wiith the 
rough and kindly welcome which the well-tV)-do 
Jutland farmers generally bestow on \the 
foreign traveller, and that we should htVve 
been, on the morrow, rather permitted thi 
required to pay for our accommodation. ThUfs, 



THE AGGER FIORD. 277 

however, was quite a different affair, and we were 
only reconciled to our apparent intrusion, when 
the Baron himself, hearing of our arrival, came 
to the door to meet us with extended hand, 
and gave us a hearty welcome in tolerable 
English. 

In a quarter of an hour we had been provided 
with rooms, in which the stoves were hastily 
lighted, warm as the weather was, in con- 
sideration of our drenched condition ; we had 
been accommodated with dry garments from 
our host's wardrobe, since our scanty baggage 
did not contain much beyond linen and dress- 
ing gear ; and we were sitting in the quaintly 
furnished, finely proportioned drawing-room, 
conversing with our entertainer, and his 
family as if we were old friends : so utterly 
was our British reserve thawed before the 
simple cordiaUty of a Scandinavian welcome. 
And a fine family they were ; every one of 
them, except perhaps Kalf Dyring, the second 
son, being well looking. 

Baron Dyring, who was then about forty- 
five years of age, was a tall man, with a dark 
complexion, and a handsome thoughtful face. 
There was something dreamy and unpractical 



27S THE AGGER EIOKD. 

about his large grey eyes and delicately cnt 
lips, but his forehead was broad and ample, 
and his whole face had a pleasant expression. 
Eskil, the eldest son, was like his father, but 
shorter and slighter; and Madame Dyring, 
who must have been a beautiful woman in her 
youth, still retained the dazzling complexion 
and golden hair that make up the chief pecu- 
liarities of Danish loveliness. Kalf Dyring, 
the second son, was much more what I sup- 
pose the real old Norsemen to have been in 
their day, than either father or brother: a 
laughing, flaxen-haired young giant, with a 
broad face and ruddy cheeks ; not very clever, 
but no fool : a boisterous good-hearted fellow 
when well used, but terrible when in a passion, 
and able to get into a passion on light provo- 
cation. As for Christina, the only daughter, 
I need only say at present, that she was an 
extremely pretty girl of nineteen. 

The Dyrings seemed to treat our invasion 
of their hearth and home as a matter of course, 
or rather as a piece of good fortune which 
had befallen them. At the same time, they 
admitted that the affair might have had a 
tragic ending, since it is not every belated 



THE AGGER FIORD. 279 

traveller who, being lost on a stormy night on 
a wild heath on Jutland, can count upon so 
safe a bourne at the end of his wanderings. 
The kind Danes mentioned many melancholy 
accidents that had taken place . in winter for 
the most part . between Lonne and Rothes- 
gaard, or between the castle and the town of 
Ringkiobing. Now they told of a pedlar who 
had been missing for years, and on whose 
account the gipsies had been suspected, since 
all deemed that the chapman had been made 
away with for the sake of his pack, until, in a 
dry summer, pack and pedlar were found in a 
swamp. Now, they told of a number of wed- 
ding guests, somewhat the worse for brandy 
and Rostock beer, who had perished in the 
snow on the Kobolds' Moor. There were 
many such accidents on record. 

By supper-time, I think we were all, more 
or less, pleased with one another. Our only 
introduction at the gate had been the simple 
announcement that we were wayfarers and 
Englishmen, and no question had been asked 
as to our worldly position. We were left, there- 
fore, to mention our own names. Williams 
told his patronymic and profession, and spoke 



280 THE AGGEE FIOED. 

casually of some Danish gentldmen in Copen- 
hagen to whom he had brought letters : among 
them, a chamberlain of the king, a nobleman 
with whom the baron had been at school, but 
of whom he had long lost sight. 

" You do not go to Copenhagen, then, for 
the winter season?" said my companion. 

'* We never go,*' said the baron, a little 
dryly ; and then, as if ashamed of anything 
that might savour of churlishness, he rejoined, 
*' Gay cities Uke our capital, though I dare 
say you smile in your sleeves, young gentle- 
men, at my calling our poor little Copenhagen 
gay . are not the places for a needy Jutland 
gentleman. Ah ! You look incredulous, but 
if you will do me the favour to stay a few 
days with us, you will learn' all about our 
ways. We have plenty of wheat and barley 
plenty of cows and oxen and swine, plenty 
of all things except dollars, and nothing else 
will pay one's way in city life. No, no, we 
must stop and keep a master's eye over the 
land and its produce. Of courts and towns 
I saw something as a boy, in my grand- 
father's time, but I am a plain man, and my 
children after me will be plain Jutland squires 



THE AGGER FIORD. 281 

too. Try this Marcobrunner, Mr. Williams; 
pity that Denmark ripens no grape ! We 
must trust to the land of our German enemies 
for the very wine that warms our hearts/* 

I was rather puzzled by the baron's good- 
humoured confession of poverty, and was 
inclined to take it as a jest. Certainly of 
what we in England call poverty, there was 
no signs. Most of the furniture was old, no 
doubt ; old enough to have been made in the 
reign of Christian the Seventh ; but it was 
well preserved, and suited the old oak panels 
and carved cornices better than modern finery 
would have done. The supper was excellent 
. almost over-plentiful . the wine was good, 
and there was plenty of old silver and old 
china. To say that the whole mansion was 
exquisitely clean, neat, and in perfect repair, 
is superfluous ; for in Denmark there is a 
more than Dutch passion for cleanliness and 
order, and every rustic inn where we had 
slept in our tour had been perfection in this 
respect. The servants were cheerful, well 
clad in grey cloth coats or trim gowns of 
some bright colour, and conveyed an im- 
pression of anything rather than narrow 



2S2 THE AGOER FIORD. 

circumstances on the part of their mas- 
ter. 

" Well/' said I to myself, as I looked at 
the snow-white sheets redolent of lavender, 
the scarlet silk quilt, and the tapestried cur- 
tains, of my bed, and then at the curious 
looking-glass in its ebony frame, with dra- 
gon's claws on each side of the mirror to hold 
a tall wax-light, while on the walls hung 
several pictures of worthy persons in periwigs 
and plate armour, matched by ladies whose 
hair had been tortured by the barber's art 
into towers of frizzled curls ; " I know many 
a more pretentious personage in England and 
Ireland who would gladly change places with 
my host. Poor, forsooth !" 

I was still more puzzled on the following 
morning, when the sun rose brilliantly in a 
sky of unclouded blue, and sounds of lowing, 
barking and singing, with the tramp of horses 
and the voices of men and women, called me 
to my window. The baron's milch cows were 
being driven out in long file from the yard to 
the meadows, and when they had passed, 
numerous cattle of various sizes and ages, but 
all glossy and well cared for, followed on their 



THE AGGER FIORD. 283 

way to the pasture. I was amazed at the 
signs of agricultural wealth all around, the 
number of sleek cart-horses, the army of 
poultry, the herds of swine. The very 
pigeons, a cloud of which light-winged birds 
hovered over the stone tower that served them 
for a dovecot, or perched on roof and post 
were surprising in their numbers. And the 
many farm-labourers, the sturdy-limbed 
" swains '* in bluish-grey horn-buttoned coats, 
felt hats, and heavy greased boots ; the active 
rosy dairymaids, trimly picturesque in black 
bodice, snooded hair and kirtle of Danish red ; 
helped to convey the idea of comfort and 
prosperous circumstances. 

Baron Dyring would not hear of our leaving 
him that morning, as we, self-invited guests 
that we were, had naturally meant to do. No, 
no, that must never be; strangers from 
England were rare birds of passage in that 
nook of the kingdom ; and we must not quit 
the house of a Jutland gentleman without 
giving ourselves time to learn something of 
Jutland ways. The Dyring family pledged 
themselves to amuse us ; and, to begin with, 
an otter hunt had already been fixed for that 



284 THE AGOEB FIORD. 

very morning. Our host was famous for his 
otter hounds. And two old otters, with some 
three or four cubs nearly full grown, had of 
late been extremely destructive to the sea- 
trout in the fiord, and the brook-trout in the 
streams. Also, Herr Williams, as an artist, 
would perhaps be good enough to look over 
Mademoiselle Christina's portfolio of water- 
colour and chalk sketches, and the baron was' 
anxious to ask me some questipus about 
British farming, and so forth. In fact, they 
would not let us go. The postilion and his 
horses were dismissed, and we were under- 
stood to be fixtures for at least a week under 
the roof of Rothesgaard. 

It fell out, however, that my own sojourn 
at Rothesgaard bade fair to exceed the Umits 
of the week's stay to which we were tacitly 
held to be bound. This was due to an 
accident that occurred in the course of the 
day's sport. Following up the shaggy otter 
hounds, then in full and fierce cry at the 
heels of one of the biggest and most active of 
their amphibious foes, I was emboldened to 
take rather a rash leap across a brook with 
high banks and a rocky bed. The jump was 



THE AGGER FIORD. 285 

no trifling one; but I had been thought a 
good leaper in my school-days, and I was 
piqued by seeing Kalf Dyring, whose strength 
and activity were remarkable, clear the stream 
with a bound, and then turn round and 
laugh heartily at Williams, who stood baffled 
on the brink. The baron and his eldest son, 
with the huntsmen and the other men, de- 
clined the dangerous leap, and pushed on to- 
wards a plank bridge a quarter of a mile off; 
I, with an Englishman's dislike to being 
beaten, resolved to face the brook. I had 
better have imitated the prudence of the rest, 
for though I got across, my feet only touched 
the opposite bank, which crumbled and broke 
under my weight, and down I went, spriiining 
my ankle, bruising my right arm, and plump- 
ing into a deep pool, too much hurt to 
swim. 

Kalf Dyring . he had received his queer 
name in honour of some renowned ancestor 
of Pagan days . dragged me out of the water, 
and with some little trouble lifted me on to 
the bank. At first, I was too dizzy and sick 
to speak or stir, and 1 believe the honest 
young fellow thought I was killed outright, 



286 THE AGGEE FIOBD. 

and through a prank of^his own; for, as I 
afterwards heard, the place where the otter 
had crossed was called by the baron's tenants 
''Childe Kalfs Spring/' as no one in the 
parish but himself dared attempt it. But I 
soon came to myself, and sat up, while the 
hunters, whom a twist in the chase had 
brought back, gathered round me in some 
alarm. When I tried to rise, with KalPs 
help, down I sank again with a groan. 

They carried me horne^ these honest Danes, 
blaming themselves, most unnecessarily as I 
thought, for their want of forethought in 
leading a stranger into such perils. Indeed, 
I fancy that the general impression among 
them was that foreigners were delicate crea- 
tures, unfit for rough Jutland sports and 
hardships, and that they had behaved very 
inhospitably in not taking sufficient care of 
their English guests. We were soon back 
at the chateau, and I doubt if any suficrer 
ever had more tender nursing than I. Where 
it possible, according to the old saw, to be 
killed with kindness, that would have been 
my fate surely. However, the hurt I had 
received was no joke as far as pain and 



THE AGGER FIORD. 287 

inflammation went, and I fainted as thejr 
were carrying me up the oaken stairs, from 
sheer force of torture. The doctor, who was 
brought from five leagues off, gave it as his 
decided opinion that I would not be able to 
walk for a month at least. 

This little incident, along with a great deal 
of pain to myself and trouble to others, 
brought with it consequences which in the 
long run were important. My convalescence, 
when once I could hobble about, propped on 
a crutch-headed cane, was agreeable enough. 
It was the pleasant summer-time. The birch, 
beech, and evergreen oak, were in full leaf 
and shade; the sweet old-fashioned flowers 
in the sunny garden bloomed gloriously ; and 
the hum of the countless bees, that alternated 
between the rose-trees and the moorland hea- 
ther, was peaceful and soothing to the nerves 
of an invalid. Williams had long since re- 
turned to Copenhagen. With the Dyrings 
I was on the footing of old friendship. I 
had gone, on the back of a quiet pony, 
warranted not to indulge in gambols that 
might embarrass a rider who dared not as 
yet put his left foot into a hard steel stirrup. 



288 THE AGGER FIORD. 

i^ith the baron round his farms, and had 
held many a long conversation with him on 
matters of agriculture and politics. Madame, 
the " Hausfiriie," as the domestics called her, 
had given me a number of Danish recipes, 
and I am afraid to say how many balsams, 
essences, and pots of preserve, to be sent to 
my married sisters in England. I had helped 
Eskil with his mathematics, and Ealf with 
his English grammar, and Christina had read 
to me, and with me, and had taught me 
dominoes, and had learned chess from me, 
and had been my most thoughtful and kind 
nurse in those weary hours when pain was 
racking me. She was too fair, and good, 
and charming, that golden-haired Danish 
maiden, not to win an unoccupied heart like 
mine; but I did not as yet own to myself 
that I loved her. Her society was very 
dear to me, and I shut my eyes to the 
future, and the parting that must come with 
it. 

And now a word as to Baron Dyring, whom 
I understood better than on the first even- 
ing of our acquaintance. First, as to his 
position. This was one that I cannot easily 



THE AGOER FIORD. 289 

describe. If I called him a gentleman fanner, 
a phrase to which he would himself have had 
no objection, I should convey a wrong im- 
pression, and yet, in spite of his ancient 
lineage and the length of time for which his 
estate had belonged to the Dyrings, he was 
by no means what a grand seigneur is popu- 
larly supposed to be. A man more simple, 
more free from any haughtiness or pretension, 
I never saw ; and yet he was proud, in a 
quiev ^ay quite his own. With a fair estate 
. the gift, as tradition and some very crabbed 
old charters, in Norse and dog Latin, 
averred, of King Harold Blue Tooth . the 
baron was yet obliged to pay close attention 
to every detail of his property, to keep clear 
of debt ; and, though a good farmer, and rich 
in stock and farm produce, he had been quite 
correct when he described himself as poor in 
money. 

The general thrift, plenty, and industry, 
which reigned in Denmark, seemed to make 
it difficult for wealth to be amassed by agri- 
culture. There was the soil, and there were 
the hands to till it, but markets were few, 
and prices were low. To get a living out of 

VOL. II. u 



290 THE AGGER FIORD. 

the land was easy. To make money, in a 
country where beef ranged from twopence a 
pound, and where 6ne two-year-old colts, like 
those that galloped merrily about the pastures 
of Rothesgaard, could be bought for less than 
five pounds, was the reverse of easy. Ex- 
portation was difficult, and full of risks and 
expenses. The corn laws and the lack of 
steam-ships all but closed the English market 
against Danish grain and Danish bullocks. 
Sweden took a little Danish wheat, and North 
Germany and Holland purchased to some 
extent in the marts of Denmark; but the 
trade was in the hands of middlemen, who 
kept the profits to themselves. And here 
was the key to what had puzzled me in 
Baron Dyring's character. He was proud, 
if not of being a noble, at least of being a 
Danish freeman of the old race, and of a 
family often mentioned in Danish annals, and 
never but with honour. His forefathers had 
been personages of much greater relative 
importance in the realm than he. The 
Dyrings had been the counsellors and com- 
panions of kings, and had filled high posts 
in their country's service. And it vexed 



THE AGGER FIORD. 291 

the baron that he and his two boys should 
be compelled by narrow circumstances to 
remain at home, keeping close watch over 
bam and hay field, while a new aristocracy, of 
German blood for the most part, absorbed the 
patronage of the kingdom. 

It was when my long visit at the castle 
drew, perforce, to a close, my sprain being 
cured, and my leave of absence from the 
engineering works expired, that a singular 
incident occurred, trivial in itself, but which 
led to important results. Againsfc the wall of 
my room, over the mantelpiece, there stood a 
large picture, the portrait of a defunct Dyring 
in trunk hose and cuirass : a poor daub, and 
so dingy and smoked as to be hardly dis- 
tinguishable. For this work of art I cared 
little, but above it were fixed a noble pair of 
antlers . of the elk, long extinct in Denmark 
. and I one day endeavoured, with the aid 
of a chair, to reach down these huge horns 
for closer inspection. In doing this, I hap- 
pened to give a smart jerk to the corner of 
the picture ; the rotten wood and rusty nails 
parted company; and down tumbled the 
portrait in the midst of a cloud of dust and 

u 2 



292 THE AGGSB FIORD. 

lime powder, leaving visible a small recess in 
the wall, in which lay a little cylinder of lead, 
whose dull glimmer caught my eye. 

Curiosity to know what this might import 
caused me to unrol the thin folds of the pliant 
metal, and to draw forth a slip of neatly folded 
parchment or vellum. This was about twelve 
inches by six, was emblazoned with the Dyring 
arms beautifully executed in vermilion, the 
deer's heads looking as fresh as if it were but 
yesterday that the brush had touched them, 
and beneath the arms was written, in a 
crabbed but very distinct hand, a distich in 
Danish, which I translate thus : 

When a Dyring shall drain the Agger fiord's lands, 
Bed gold shall not lack in a Dyring' s hands. 

This was sad doggrel, and unintelligible to 
me, though I knew the Agger fiord, that sin- 
gular arm of the sea which divided the Dyring 
property into two unequal portions, perfectly 
well. It was one of those creeks, or salt lakes, 
common on the coasts of Denmark, and its 
only remarkable feature was the peculiar nar- 
rowness of the channel by which it communi- 
cated with the North Sea. I was unprepared. 



THE AGGER FIORD. 293 

however, for the agitation which the baron 
evinced when I put the parchment into his 
hands, and told him where and how I had 
found it. 

'' Yes," he cried, '' that couplet must have 
been written by my forefather. Admiral Hans 
Dyring, son of the lay Prior of Vokenstrue, 
whose portrait, most unecclesiastical in cos- 
tume, hangs in your chamber. Tt was in his 
time that the Agger fiord was formed, by the 
irruption of the sea through a neglected dyke 
which some say was pierced, out of spite, by 
a malicious boor who had been scourged for 
theft. At any rate, the man was hanged. 
But the change was a sad one for us Dyrings ; 
we lost a fair manor-house, nine farms, and a 
village. They say you can still see the church 
tower, on a still day in summer, and we have 
been a decayed family ever since. There was 
talk of a lost treasure in money, too . idle 
talk, perhaps " 

And here the baron broke off, and became 
moody and silent. Very soon after this, I 
went back to Copenhagen. 

It was autumn ; the moors were brown, the 
fields swept bare of corn, and the gales begin- 



t 



294 THE AGGER FIOED. 

ning. as I sat in my lonely room at the Hotel 
de TEurope, trying hard to fix my attention 
on a column of figures in my account-book. 
Do what I would, my thoughts wandered off 
to Rothesgaard and Christina Dyring. Now 
that T was absent from Christina, I knew for 
the first time how deariy I loved her. And 
that she did not dislike me, was certain enough. 
I remembered what a sad sad look I had 
noticed in her dear blue eyes when I an- 
nounced one morning after post time, that my 
employers were impatient for my return to 
duty. I remembered, too, how cold and 
trembling the little hand had been as it lay in 
mine when the time came to say farewell and 
to leave Rothesgaard. 

But what could I do ? Continental etiquette 
is very rigid in matters matrimonial, and Baron 
Dyring and his kind wife would have had 
a right to be angry with me had I profited 
by their hospitality to steal the affections of 
their daughter. They had made a friend of 
me, the solitary young Englishman, had che- 
rished me in sickness, and had never by word 
or deed betrayed the slightest feeling of any 
social inequality between us. And yet such 



THE AGGER FIORD. 295 

inequality existed. The Dyrings, impover- 
ished as they were, were of a proud old race, 
and it was hardly probable that an English 
engineer, bred in a quiet Essex parsonage, and 
without wealth or connexion to recommend 
him, would be thought a fitting suitor for the 
long-descended Christina Dyring. 

I had got so far in my meditations when 
there was a tap at the door, and the baron 
himself came in. He was in Copenhagen for 
a day or so, and had come in, he said, to have 
a peep at me before leaving. That I was glad 
to see him, and to hear the latest news from 
Rothesgaard, I need not say. All well? 
Certainly, certainly 1 Christina a little pale 
and subdued in manner, her father thought, 
but madame attributed that to the unhealthy 
season, the fall of the leaf. I could not but 
think that the baron himself was looking ill. 
He was haggard, as if with want of sleep, and 
his strong right hand was hot and feverish. 
But he protested that he was quite well, quite 
well. He had been restless of late, he said, 
flitting from town to town, ransacking libraries 
and archives for information relative to the 
drainage of meres and marshes. He said, 



296 THE AGOEE FIORD. 

with a forced laugh, that I should think him 
very foolish, but that that distich, that doggrel 
prophecy I had discovered, and which tallied 
with half-forgotten legends, haunted hira. He 
had heard, when a child, much of the treasure 
lost in the old inundation. 

But what was my amazement when, after 
much beating about the bush, the baron came 
out with a serious proposal to drain the Agger 
fiord, and produced a quantity of rough calcu- 
lations bearing on the subject! He was to 
borrow money on mortgage, since he had no 
pecuniary capital ; the fiord was to be drained 
on the " polder" principle, so successful in 
Holland, and in the management of which I 
had, as he was aware, some experience; to 
cap all, I was to be head engineer, and reside 
at Rothesgaard during the operations, with 
one-fourth of the recovered treasure for my 
meed. 

It was a great temptation, very great. To 
go back to the castle, back to Christina! 
But I drove the fiend, dishonesty, from me, 
though it cost me a pang before I could say, 
"My dear good friend, don't think me a 
churi for saying no. As I'm an honest man. 



THE AGGEE FIORD. 297 

I must say it for two reasons. In the first 
place, those old treasures turn out myths, nine 
times in *ten, while the expenses would be 
awful, and the probable result, ruin. I know 
what you would say; I have just reclaimed 
sixteen hundred acres from the sea. Yes, but 
it was done by a wealthy company of British 
capitalists, and, though we have beaten Nep- 
tune for once, the costs will swallow up all 
profit for ten years or more. And next, for- 
give my bluntness, I love Mademoiselle Dy- 
ring, and I should be base were I to try 
to win her love in return, without your per- 
mission ; yet " And here I broke down. 

The baron got very red ; walked to the win- 
dow, and looked out into the busy street, 
beating with his fingers on the glass of the 
window-pane. After a good while he turned 
round, and said, kindly, that I had behaved 
most honourably, and that he liked me better 
than ever. He went on to add that Christina 
was but a child (girls are always children in a 
parent's eyes), and that there was plenty of 
time before her, ere she troubled her little 
head about love and marriage. As to me, I 
should myself be married long before that 



298 THE AGGER FIORD. 

day. And he gave my band a squeeze that 
I felt for an hour afterwards, and took leave 
of me. 

Long months afterwards, in the pleasant 
spring weather, I got a letter from Madame 
Dyring, ostensibly to beg that I would execute 
certain commissions for her in the Friedrick- 
street. However, the good mistress of Rothes- 
gaard was a poor diplomatist, and she soon 
revealed her real purpose. I had not, it 
seemed, been successful in dissuading the 
baron from his rash project. His mind was 
so bent on draining off the waters of the 
Agger fiord, and regaining the treasure virhose 
recovery would restore the fallen fortunes of 
the family, that he was on the high road to 
ruin. He had for months, even through the 
inclement season, been carrying on extensive 
and costly operations, under the guidance of a 
very clever American, a military man, a cer- 
tain Colonel Popplewell, of the United States 
service. This gentleman, whom the baron 
had met at Kiel, was a man of science, and a 
skilled engineer, and he was superintendent of 
the works, and a guest at the castle. The 
baron thought highly of him, and followed hia 



THE AGGER FIORD. 299 

advice implicitly, but the rest of the house- 
hold had not taken any peculiar fancy to hira. 
Evidently the baroness was alarmed as to the 
consequences of the lavish expenditure going 
on, and she begged, as a favour, that I would 
come down for a week or two and give my 
opinion of the state of aflFairs. " We shall all 
be glad to see our English friend again !" said 
the postscript. 

I could not get leave of absence at once, 
but in about three weeks after the receipt 
of madame's letter, I crossed the threshold of 
Rothesgaard. The baron, looking ten years 
older than he used to look, but still frank and 
hearty, came into the hall to greet me. The 
family, he said, would be glad to have me 
back among them, and he was sure that I, on 
my part, would be charmed with Colonel Pop- 
plewell. He, the baron, had not mentioned 
my name or profession, or even my nationality, 
to the colonel; but he was sure that we 
should take to each other at once, as kindred 
spirits. In a minute more, I was in the 
drawing-room. In the midst of the Dyring 
family stood a tall bony man, showily dressed, 
and with a profusion of coarse black hair fall- 



SOO THE A6GEB FIORD. 

ing over his sallow cheeks, and high though 
narrow forehead. 

" Colonel Popplewell . Mr. King !" said the 
baron, gaily, imitating as nearly as he conld 
the traditional English method of introduc- 
tion. " You will be good friends, my dear 
sirs, I venture to predict. But, ah, himmel i 
what is the matter?" 

For the distinguished Colonel Popplewell, 
who had given a very visible start at the sight 
of me, and another at the mention of my 
name, had reddened, dropped his eyes, lifted 
them again, finally turned away, and shufSed 
out of the room with all despatch. The baron 
called to him, but in vain, and in a minute 
more we heard the hall door violently slammed. 
The American was gone, and it was plain that 
I was the cause of his abrupt exit. 

" My word upon it," said Madame Dyring, 
" our good Mr. King has met the colonel 
before.'* 

I owned that the conjecture was correct, 
but, respecting the baron's evident excite- 
ment and agitation, deferred telling all I 
knew until positively pressed with questions. 
At last I spoke as follows: "I do know 



THE AGGER FIORD. 301 

this precious Colonel Popple well, and, T am 
sorry to say, I know no good of him. He 
was chain-bearer to a surveying party in Ca- 
nada, of which I was second surveyor, and 
was accounted a clever fellow, but was dis- 
charged for embezzlemeut. He has been, to 
my knowledge, a tavern waiter, steward of 
an Ohio steamer, billiard marker, and iti- 
nerant preacher ; and no rogue in the United 
States is more notorious. I saw him tried 
for forgery at Philadelphia, and afterwards he 
was in the penitentiary at Sing Sing. His 
name, when I first met him, was, not Popple- 
well, but Caleb Flish, and *' But at this 

point Baron Dyring, whose bronze face had 
grown ghastly pale, gave a groan, dropped 
into a chair, covered his face with his hands, 
and sobbed. His grief was terrible, for he 
now bitterly reproached himself with having 
encumbered his estate, and ruined his family, 
in following the advice of a specious adven- 
turer. And certainly it turned out that Flish, 
or Popplewell . who never appeared again at 
Rothesgaard, knowing too well that the game 
was up . had led the baron into disastrous 
follies. 



802 THE AGGER FIORD. 

I found that the Agger fiord had been in 
a great measure drained : so far as to leave 
many patches of bare mud, and the ruins of 
a hamlet, visible. But great expenses had 
been incurred in plant and labour; costly 
engines had been erected ; and the wily ad- 
venturer had left his accounts in hopeless 
confusion, and very little cash remained of 
the sums raised on mortgage. I need hardly 
say that no treasure had been discovered. 

Baron Dyring was for giving up the enter- 
prise, selling half his property to clear off 
debts, and cutting down his expenditure to 
the lowest pitch. However, I was able, for- 
tunately, to point out another course. If the 
Rothesgaard estate were swamped with mort- 
gages, the Agger fiord was half drained, and 
it would have been a thousand pities to allow 
the sea to resume possession. By putting 
matters in a right and economical train, I ma- 
naged to drain off* as much water as added a 
dozen fat meadows to the property, with little 
extra cost. The dams were repaired, the 
pumping engines were used more sparingly, 
and the work was slowly but cheaply done. 
At the baron's request, I gave up my situa- 



THE AGGER FIORD. 303 

tion at Copenhagen, and went to reside at 
Rothesgaard. 

In ten years, at little expense, compared 
with the lavishness of the first outlay, we re- 
claimed the whole bed of the Agger fiord 
from tlie sea, turning the salt lagoon into 
marsh, and the marsh into good pasture and 
arable. In fifteen years, thanks to the in- 
crease of national and local prosperity, we 
were able to clear the Rothesgaard estates of 
mortgages. But before three years, I had 
become the husband of Christina Dyring, with 
the full consent . of her family. Our house is 
on the Rothesgaard estate, and I farm a large 
amount of the rescued acres, under Chris- 
tina's brother. Baron Eskil, as I did formerly 
in the Ufetime of my old friend and father-in- 
law, who lived long enough to see the happy 
change, and to own that though the tradi- 
tional treasure was still unfound, the reco- 
vered lands of the Agger fiord had been a 
treasure in themselves. This, 1 suspect, is 
what the rhyming author of the distich meant, 
after all. 

END OP VOL. II. 
ODD NEIGHBOURS. 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

*' From the old country, sir, I guess ? 
Thought so by your countenance. Your first 
visit, sir, to the U-nited States, may I pre- 
sume ?*' 

The gentleman who put these questions in 
a nasal drawling tone that bespoke the New 
Englander, had just' entered the saloon of 
Colonel Pegler's little hotel at Lockhaven, in 
Pennsylvania. He had not come by the 
stage, as I had, but in a spider-wheeled tan- 
dem, drawn by two fine horses, which equi- 
page I had seen through the window as I sat 
at dinner, and which he drove skilfully enough. 
The new comer was a tall loosely hung mail, 

VOL. in. B 



2 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

with the straight black hair, the restless eyes 
and sallow complexion, common throughout 
the States, and was of a somewhat dandified 
appearance, in spite of the dust which clung 
to him. 

" Want your dinner, sar?" asked the negro 
waiter, entering the room at this juncture, and 
almost before I could reply that I had never 
before crossed the Atlantic. The new comer 
made answer in the aflSpmative, glanced over 
the bill of fare, and the wine list, and then 
muttered something about getting rid of the 
grey dust of a Pennsylvania road, and hurried 
out. 

Black Cicero transmitted the orders of the 
stranger to book-keeper and kitchen, and then 
came back to his favourite occupation of 
staring from the window and knocking down 
knats with his napkin. The manner of the 
new arrival had made a favourable impression, 
and Cicero made no secret of his opinions. 

'* Certain, mas'r, dat some great man. Boo- 
tiful bosses, reglar Albany bred, smart car- 
riage and silver-plated harness. Don't see 
such in 'tupid ole Lockhaven ebbery day. 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 3 

Hate Lockhaven. Give warnin' and go, 
when month up. Cicero from de ole South, 
raasr', not used to mean ways of dese parts." 

Cicero was sure that the stranger was 
governor of a state, mayor of a town, or, at 
the least, the " boss" of some great firm in 
the Empire City. Before I could inquire 
what a boss might be, the subject of these 
commendations returned, with washed hands 
and brushed coat, and Cicero scuttled off 
to fetch the turkey, venison steaks, green 
corn cobs, Maine ham, stewed fish, and un- 
known vegetables, which formed the most 
attractive portion of Colonel Pegler's rather 
scanty bill of fare. These he speedily brought, 
along with a bottle of old Madeira, and the 
new guest fell upon the repast with the swift 
and silent hunger of his nation; it was not 
until his appetite was quite appeased that he 
asked me any more questions. 

"Touring, sir?" 

" Not exactly," I answered, in a hesitating 
manner, for I was new to the country and its 
ways, and my heart was heavy within me. 
The two months I had spent in America had 

B 2 



f 



II 




600057807X 



'XIJ.o 



!?.-.?.. ....' '.> 



^ 



2 A KEW Yf 

<!. *r^"rLATION. 

.vith the straight ^ ^^ disappointment. I 
and sallow com --^ ^^.^ ^^ j^^ ^^^^^^^^ ^^ 
the States, and - ^^^^j^^ ^^^^ ^^^j^ j^^^^ 

appearance, in '^^.ess in the Old World, 
to him. _^, g^^j^ .jj tjjg jj^^y 

" Want vf i'^'*'^^ .' , PI.. 

^* offer you a glass of this wine, 
waiter, ente ^^^^ ^^^^gj^ ^^ ^^^e South 
almost bef j^^^^^^ ^j^^^^ ^ Hoboken oyster 
before crc j^^. alligator,'^ said my pertina- 
madeauf ^ gpeaking with good-natured vo- 
the bill ^ j^ ^^^ ^^ pj^]^ yp j^y j^^^ j^j^^i 

mutter ^^^ ^j^^ j^j.^ -^ meditation of a 

S^^y ^ <c Your company will be really a 

' and I hope you won't leave me with 

,o^eiBation accessible but that of a 

^^^ jj bar-keeper." Not to appear churlish, 

^* jk the seat to which the hospitable Yankee 

*' tamed me, and filled my glass at his invi- 

ion- The wine was good, much better than 

a cheap Catawba to which my lean purse 

ad hitherto confined me, and the American 

Jid not ply me with direct questions, as 

before, but, by a succession of delicately-put 

hints, drew from me an amount of informa- 

tion, the retrospect of which afterwards sur- 



i 



^ A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 5 

prised myself. Young as I was, I was not so 
complete a greenhorn as to reveal my precise 
circumstances to a mere inquisitive stranger. 
My new acquaintance contrived to impress 
me with the belief that he was not actuated 
by common curiosity, and the sympathy with 
which he listened had great eCFect on one like 
myself, alone in an unfamiliar country, and 
having as yet met nothing but rebuCFs and 
hope deferred. 

I told him how 1 had been brought up to 
consider myself as heir to my uncle, Mr. 
James Hill, of Cockington, a man of con- 
siderable property ; how an unlucky misun- 
derstanding, for which I could not fairly con- 
sider myself to blame, had arisen between 
thp rich bachelor uncle and the pennyless 
nephew; and how, rather than submit to 
what 1 esteemed injustice, I had taken my 
name off the books at Cambridge, had re- 
nounced all hope of my relative's inheritance, 
and had undertaken to support myself, I 
told him how, not having been brought up to 
any profession, I had been baflBed in every 
attempt to gain employment in the densely- 



6 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

stocked labour mart of the Old World ; how, 
by the advice of an old college chum (who 
had pressed a loan of money upon me along 
with the advice), I had started for America ; 
how I had, as yet, found no opening; here. 
That very day I had come back disappointed 
from the Susquehanna canal-works, where I 
had hoped to be engaged as a sub-surveyor, 
but had been rejected for lack of practical 
knowledge. *' Your mathematics,'* the head- 
surveyor had said, ** are all tarnation fine ; 
but what I want is a chap that's a dab with 
the dumpy and theodolite, and you never, by 
your own showing, did a day's work with the 
instruments. Sorry, but you won't suit." 

My only hope now was, as I told the 
American, to get engaged as mathematical 
teacher in some school or college. 

My sympathetic frien'd shook his head. 

"Poor work, sir, that. Schoolmasters 
don't count for much in our glorious Re- 
public. The* two great powers of America, 
sir, are law and commerce. They lead to 
Congress and the Senate ; to high diploma- 
tic employ, the White House, and what 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 7 

not. Law's out of my line; but for com- 
merce.hum! Would you like to be a 
drummer?" 

"A drummer?" said I, much surprised, 
especially as my acquaintance had anything 
but a military air; " what do you mean ?" 

The American arched his eyebrows, and so 
far forgot his habitual courtesy as to murmur 
something about " British ignorance," and 
then proceeded to inform me that the duties 
of a drummer were to make journeys, solicit 
orders, make purchases, eCFect sales, bargain, 
call in debts, and otherwise promote the 
interests of his employers. 

" In fact, then,'' said I, " what you call a 
drummer, is pretty much what we style a 
commercial traveller." 

"The identical functionary," said the 
Yankee ; " only, as this air a land of liberty and 
light, the social station of a drummer is much 
superior to that which he would occupy in 
your antiquated island. Now, fact is, we 
want a drummer, and if you find the salary 
and work to your liking, and we arrange, you 
may draw your twelve hundred dollars an- 



/ 



8 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

nual pay, with one per cent on net profits, 
and travelling allowances as liberal as Uncle 
Sam gives the Congress men. This, sir, is 
our address/' 

He handed me a large limp card, glazed 
and embossed, on which in pale gold 
letters glimmered the words, *'Petter, 
Latch, and Jarman, Fourth Street, New 
York, G. J." 

" G. J.," said I, rather puzzled ; *' what 

is G. J. r 

" General jobbers,'* said the American, 
solemnly; "and I am Hannibal C. Fetter, 
at your service. Fill your glass, and allow 
me to ring for a fresh bottle. Here, you 
snowball Cicero, be spry with more Madeira, 
and get some chips of ice, do you hear ? We 
speculate in all notions, from whale-teeth to 
Lyons velvet ; and just now, there's an opera- 
tion coming off West, in which you could try 
your wings." 

Long before the wine in the second bottle 
had ebbed away, 1 was duly engaged as 
drummer to the firm of Fetter and Co., con- 
ditionally on my testimonials being approved 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 9 

by my employers. The college friend, to 
whose good nature I owed the means of start- 
ing in the New World, had procured me one 
or two introductory letters to respectable 
residents in New York. These gentlemen 
had not been able at the time, to assist me 
in finding a situation, crowded as the city 
was with needy candidates from Europe ; but 
they had received me civilly enough, and I 
knew they would vouch for my being what I 
professed to be. 

It was settled that I was to repair to 
Cincinnati, and there to await the receipt of 
remittances from the firm. The " operation," 
I was told, consisted in buying up for ready 
cash, a considerable quantity of corn, flour, 
wheat, apples, pigs, pork, and other articles 
of Western export, which Mr. Petter styled 
by the generic term of " pro-duce," and which 
were now supposed to be cheapened by a glut 
in the Eastern markets. The firm, however, 
had reason to know that this phase of affairs 
was merely temporary, and their arrange- 
ments were already made for shipping two 
cargoes of provisions to Europe, where they 



10 A NKW YORK 8PCCLATI0N. 

had an advantageous contract with the heads 
of one of her Majesty's dockyards. 

Very Incky I thought myself, especially 
when Mr. Pett^r, before calling for his bill 
and ordering out his tandem, insisted on 
pulling out his pocket-book, and forcing a 
number of dollar-notes upon me. 

" There, there, dear sir ; you travel on our 
account now, remember. Put up at the 
President House, Dr. Parlam's Hotel, when 
you get to Cincinnati, and 1 will forward 
the remittance there. When you come to 
New York, I shall be glad to present you to 
my partners. Latch has a delightful house, 
and his wife is a most accomplished matron. 
Jarman is, like myself, a bachelor. I am 
sure they will approbation the engagement 
which I have been fortunate enough to form 
with yourself. Six o'clock. I must slide. 
Adieu, Mr. Hill !'' 

OflF went Hannibal C. Petter, leaving me 
half bewildered by the suddenness of my good 
fortune. 

There were plenty of the members of my 
new profession, as well as partners, junior or 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 11 

senior in Northern houses, on board the 
Ohio steam-boats; but there were none to 
whom my employers were known. To be 
sure, as one of the Philadelphia men observed, 
the growth of New York was gigantic, and so 
many new firms sprouted into existence, that 
many of them must necessarily be unknown 
to fame. 

"Petter, Latch, and Jarman,"said the Phi- 
ladelphian, thoughtfully ; '* one of these names 
hangs, somehow, to my memory. Tain't Jar- 
man though, nor Petter. Must be Latch. Let 
me see. There was a fellow of that name 
barber on board the Missouri steam-boat 
Jefi'erson ; same man, do you think, now ?'* 

"I should think not," I answered, more 
than half indignant at the question. " 1 have 
not the honour of being personally acquainted 
with Mr. Latch, but I have Mr. Petter's au- 
thority for affirming that he is a wealthy citizen. 
And his wife " 

" Ah ! this Latch had a wife, too . not that 
there's anything wonderful in that coincidence 
. but I have heard that Madam Latch hadn^t 
her equal for kidnappin' nigger babies : a per- 



12 A NEW YOEK SPECULATION. 

feet talent she had for it, and got hold of 
more bits of live ebony, among the free blacks 
to Ohio State, than any slave-stealer in the 
country. It was a way she had of talking 
over the mothers with fine words, for she was 
well educated, was Hetty Latch. Her hus- 
band made Missouri too hot to hold him, but 
the States Marshal never could put salt on 
him, never. A smart chap, Latch.'* 

The Philadelphia broker whistled a bar 
or two of the Star-spangled Banner as he 
walked away, and for some minutes I was 
exceedingly uncomfortable. However, the 
awkward impression produced on my mind by 
the late conversation, soon wore off. I had 
no reason to think the barber of a Missouri 
packet was connected with my employer, the 
rich and hospitable merchant, in any other 
wise than as bearing the same name. And 
his wife, too, whom the senior partner had 
described as an accomplished matron, what 
connexion could there be between her and an 
obscure female who earned some base gain by 
wheedling credulous negresses out of their 
children for the supply of the Southern 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 13 

markets ? Absurd ! It seemed ungrateful 
on my part even to give such a groundless 
suspicion, a temporary resting-place in my 
mind. What a contrast did my doubts afford 
to the frank confidence of Mr. Petter, whose 
dollars I had actually in my pocket, and at 
whose cost I was now voyaging. I blushed 
at my own meanness of spirit, and rather 
eschewed the company of the Philadelphia 
man for the rest of the trip. 

I was by no means solitary in my new mode 
of life, and I found a new pleasure in American 
society. I was now a member of a recognised 
guild, and free from the harrassing curiosity 
which seldom fails to beset a traveller, native 
or foreign, whose exact rank and business 
furnish an enigma: to the sovereign people. 
Mr. Petter had cautioned me not to be over- 
communicative as to the nature of the 
"operation," which my zeal and the funds 
of the firm were to carry out in the teaming 
West, and I kept my own counsel. It was 
wonderful how many people on board the 
steamer seemed to know one another. Most 
of these were bound for Cincinnati, like myself, 



14 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

though some were going on to more western 
cities ; but I was surprised to see how wide^ 
spread was the acquaintance of nearly all 
those sallow men and pale ladies. To some 
*of the latter I was formally presented by a 
communicative gentleman, who had pre- 
viously introduced himself as the editor of 
the Chillicothe Argus : a journal of which I 
was ashamed to own that I had never 
heard. 

" Allow me, sir, to be the means of making 
you known to Mrs. Pook, a leader of fashion at 
Cincinnati. Gives soirees of a splendour 
which whips anything the down-easters can 
manage, and unites all the beauty, elegance, 
intellect, and natural nobility, to be found in 
the Queen of the West. Major Elijah Pook, 
not at present on board, is an eminent citizen. 
Dry goods. Supplies many village stores. 
Is part proprietor of the Argus, and can 
give you most valuable information about the 
country.*' 

I found myself making my bow to a lady of 
drab complexion and Parisian costume, who 
glared at me through a pair of blue spectacles,. 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 15 

while her three daughters tittered a more 
cordial greeting to the Englishman. 

" Welcome to Columbia, sir ; welcome 
west," said Mrs. Pook, in a deep voice. .' I 
shall be happy, sir, to see you at my recep- 
tions, if you make any stay in Cincinnati/' 

I expressed my acknowledgments, but could 
hardly help laughing, since it was the first 
time that my ears had listened to that strange 
peculiarity of New England pronunciation, 
confined to some districts of the coast, which 
throws an undue emphasis on humble pro- 
nouns and adverbs, careless of sense. But 
Mrs. Pook, although in her own judgment and 
that of others a strong-minded personage, 
was really a kind good woman. When she 
leanied that I was quite new to the country, 
had no friends or relations there, and was 
stranded, on an unknown continent, an innate 
hospitality softened her usually didactic tone, 
and she patronised me in a gentle, motherly 
way. 

I passed three or four very pleasant days in 
Cincinnati, before any communication reached 
me from my distant employers. The hotel to 



16 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

which I had been recommended was a large 
and splendid one, and its dining-hall and 
drawing-room filled daily with a numerous 
company, while I made many acquaintances in 
the city. On the second evening, I was duly 
invited to one of Mrs. Pook's receptions ; was 
introduced to the Major ; and had the honour 
of dancing a quadrille with the youngest 
daughter, Miss Abigail, who asked me for 
more information about the aristocracy and 
court of Great Britain than I could have 
imparted, had my sole reading consisted 
of Burke's Peerage and the Gotha Alma- 
nack. 

On the fourth day of my stay, the major 
asked me to dinner, and volunteered any assis- 
tance in his power towards eflFecting whatever 
business had brought me to the Queen City 
. with one reservation. 

" Onless,*' said the worthy man, " your errand 
is dry goods. There, I can't help you. My 
own line, you perceive. And I have dealt con- 
sistently with Philadelphia jobbers these twelve 
years, and find them far more easy to trade 
with than your New York uppish merchants ; 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 17 

begging parden, Mr. Hill, if you are in that 
grove." 

I hastened to reassure the naajor. I knew 
nothing of dry goods, and it so happened that 
the padlock was taken off my lips. For, that 
very afternoon, a very heavy parcel of bank- 
notes, accompanied by urgent instructions to 
lose no time, had reached me from New York, 
and Mr. Fetter expressly advised that I should 
ask some independent citizen to point out the 
best localities for investing in raw pro-duce. 
Major Fook proved valuable in this capacity. 
Both as a wholesale linendraper and as part 
owner of a country newspaper which had a 
wide circulation among the farmers of Ohio 
and Indiana, he knew a great deal about the 
rural population. 

** Sir,'' said he, " I'll be happy to accompany 
you, per boat, on Monday, down river a bit, 
and introduce you to some of the mammoth 
pig-dealers and most respectable farmers in the 
west of our state. No trouble, I assure you. 
I want to call at Madison, Tenedos, Ameha, 
and elsewhere, about business of my own-. 

VOL. III. c 



18 A NEW YORK SFKCULATION. 

a new assortment from the old country, that 
makes Lowell Mills sing small, I guess." 

Thereupon the major proceeded to give me 
some useful hints about the Western character. 

" Our folks are main good grit," said he ; 
" but they stroke ugly when you rub agin the 
grain. In a bargain with them, you needn't 
double and twist as you must with the down- 
easters, who think themselves robbed if their 
tongues don't ache afore a trade's effected. 
Strike quick and sharp, with no appearance 
of hurry, look 'em bold in the face, and be 
downright. Our folk hate tricks. Soft-Saw- 
dering Yankees get a queer lesson, whiles and 
again, when they come playing off their cun- 
ning dodges on our rough hoosiers and corn- 
crackers, they do." 

The major's introduction smoothed the way 
for me immensely. Fine fellows, certainly, 
were many of the Ohio and Indiana farmers 
to whom he. took me in the course of a couple 
of days spent in short trips up and down the 
river ; but there was something rugged and 
stem in their bearing, and I could easily guess 
that they were quick to take umbrage. Their 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 19 

wives and daughters, too, were strong in 
person and decided of speech, quite unlike the 
languid ladies of the towns. The whole popu- 
lation reminded me much more of the first 
hardy settlers in New England than the people 
of the Atlantic States had done. 

My task was comparatively of a simple 
character. I had to buy, and with ready money. 
My kind adviser gave me a verbal tariff of 
prices, and before the thick pocket-book was 
emptied of its notes, I was master of more 
grunting herds of swine, of more casks of 
pickled pork, of more barrels of flour, apples, 
peaches, and Illinois pears, more sacks of maize, 
wheat and buck-wheat, than seemed enough to 
feed tl^e people of a starving city. My next 
business was to arrange for sending these up- 
stream. On this score I had my instructions, 
duly forwarded by Fetter, Latch, and Jarman. 
I was to hire as many flats as might be neces- 
sary, and a tug-boat to tow them against the 
current to a certain landing-place in Virginia 
where an emissary of our firm would be in wait- 
ing, ready to superintend the transmission of the 
goods overland to Baltimore, where two schooners 

c 2 



20 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

were lying in readiness for their reception. So 
far, so good ; but one thing puzzled me. It 
might have seemed natural that I should ac- 
company or precede my purchases on their way 
to the north-east. Not so. I was expressly 
enjoined to remain in Ciacinnati until further 
orders reached me. It was obscurely hinted 
that my next mission might be one of increased 
importance, further south, and my salary 
might also be augmented, in token of the 
house's appreciation of my energy. 

"There," said the major, as I concluded 
my bargain with the boatmen to whom the 
flats belonged, and as we smoked our cigars 
on the promenade deck of the steamer work- 
ing up-stream . " there ! Your busipess is 
over, and a good spec it will prove, if the 
Britishers pay well, for never were good 
mast and cob-fed grunters bought for fewer 
cents a pound, and the flour's as sweet as 
a nosegay. A rough diamond that old Dan 
Wormald, the pig-merchant.'* 

" He was, indeed,'* said I, as I recalled the 
gaunt grizzled countryman who still wore the 
uncouth attire of the early " pioneers," and 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 21 

whose leathern hunting-shirt and boots of 
well-greased hide matched well with his 
horn-hafted knife and five-foot rifle ; " he was, 
indeed, and one I should be very sorry to 
offend. What's the matter ? Some one over- 
board?" 

So indeed it was, as a shrill outcry of 
female voices announced, and there was a 
rush to the side of the vessel. It was a 
poor little black child, a girl of six, that 
had fallen overboard. We saw her frock of 
light-hued cotton, float for a moment on the 
surface of the turbid river, now flecked with 
white foam and boiling eddies, for the pilot 
had hastily called to reverse the engine. The 
father, a stunted ugly little man, with a 
basket of carpenter's tools at his back, was 
hanging over the rail forward, and screaming 
out passionate and incoherent entreaties that 
some one would " sabe Polly.'' 

" Let every chap shoe his own hoss. River 
runs like a mill-swash," muttered a lean 
sallow-cheeked Yankee at my elbow. This 
seemed to be the general sentiment of the 
company, though two or three of the deck 



22 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

hands bustled to launch the dingy, under 
the captain's orders. Just then I caught 
sight of the poor httle frightened face com- 
ing to the surface again ; there was no re- 
sisting the piteous childish eyes ; and before 
I well knew that my mind was made up, I 
had flung my coat ofi^, plunged into the 
yellow waves, and caught a firm grasp of 
the drowning child. I could swim well, but 
the current was strong, and I was swept 
down many yards, before the boat overtook 
me, yet the whole thing was over in a couple 
of minutes, and I was aboard again, drip- 
ping like a wet water-spaniel, and the steamer 
was under weigh, while the negro carpenter 
was hugging his little daughter in his arms, and 
almost deafening me with his clamorous thanks. 
"There, my good man . there . it's all 
right. You are very welcome to the trifling 
service I rendered you . but pray don't do 
fAflff," said I, as I tried to shake off the 
enthusiastic negro, who clung to my hand, 
and wanted to kiss my feet, and made him- 
self and me ridiculous in the eyes of the white 
passengers. 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 23 

** massa, mas'r Britisher, Job thank you 
so, poor black rascal so 'bliged ! Mas'r not 
know what Polly is now to Ole Job, de only 
joy of him life, ebber since him poor wife 
Dinah die, same year we run from Alabama 
plantation, sar, and Job carry child in 'um 
arms, all way, through swamp and " 

"Come, come, we can't have this here. 
The child's all right, barring a wetting. Get 
away down ladder to your own part of the 
boat !" said Major Pook, pushing the humble 
little man away, kindly but peremptorily. 
As the negro made a parting salute and 
shambled off to the portion of the steamer 
reserved for those of his colour, I saw that 
he was lame, and that even if he had been 
a swimmer (no common accomplishment in 
America), he could not have made the plunge 
overboard with any chance of rescuing the 
sufferer. As for myself, I had merely obeyed 
an instinctive impulse in hurrying to the aid 
of a helpless creature, white or black ; and 
while I wanted no credit for an act of com- 
mon humanity, I was a little annoyed by the 
sneering comments of some of the passengers, 



24 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

who seemed to think me Quixotic for risk- 
ing my own life for that of a ** nigger brat/' 
In half an hour we arrived at Cincinnati, 
where I changed my wet clothes. Having 
averted a cold, or a touch of fever, by 
taking a liberal supply of what the major 
called " brandy medicine,*' before quitting the 
packet, I was in no way the worse for my 
immersion. 

Matters went on smoothly. The provisions, 
dead and alive, were duly shipped and sent 
up-stream, and, while awaiting fresh orders 
from Fetter and partners, I received several 
invitations from the hospitable people of 
Cincinnati, and had no reason to complain 
of my position. Once or twice I happened 
to meet Job, the black carpenter, who was 
a dweller in one of the suburbs of the city, 
and T am afraid I was rather harsh in my 
decisive rejection of the poor little dusky 
fellow's proffered civilities. Job was very 
grateful, but his feelings prompted him to 
such ludicrous exuberance of homage and 
affection that I was compelled to shirk his 
society. A Briton is rarely pleased with any 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 25 

public expression of sentiment ; and besides, 
I fear T was learning from the Americans 
around me to view the coloured race with 
something of their own contempt. 

People in the Western States almost always 
dine early, and there was nothing extra- 
ordinary in Major Pook's asking me to 
dinner al two o'clock on the Saturday 
which followed the shipment of the pro- 
visions. Saturday, in Cincinnati, is always 
a busy day, as the market is sure to 
be thronged, and the country-folks to as- 
semble in greater numbers than on other 
occasions. 

I was not the only guest at the major's 
table. My earliest introducer, the editor of 
the Chillicothe Argus, was also there, as well 
as the Hon. Sampson Petty, one of the 
State representatives, and a family newly 
returned from a residence in Europe, and 
whose conversation turned wholly on the 
titled persons to whom " Our Minister" had 
introduced them. The ample meal was not 
half over, before a distant sound, heard above 
the clatter of wheels and the tramp of hoofs 



26 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

in the street, struck on my ear. Nearer and 
nearer it came, gathering in strength and 
distinctness, swelling from a sullen hum into 
a dull roar, and mingled with the tread of 
many feet, fast approaching. The major heard 
it too, and laid down his knife and fork to 
listen. 

" There must be a demonstration," said he, 
thoughtfully ; *' and yet it's not election time, 
neither." 

At that moment the door opened, and a 
ragged Irish boy, who was retained to black 
shoes and run errands at the hotel where I 
lived, came bursting into the room. 

" Mr. Hill, your honour," panted the breath- 
less lad, " fly for't afore they surround the 
house. They'll show you no mercy, sure as 
my name's Mike Sullivan." 

Everybody started, and a great clamour of 
questions commenced, which Mike answered 
merely by wringing his hands and exclaiming, 
"Wira, wira! 'tis murthered ye'U be, and 
I've most kilt myself scampering to warn ye. 
They've been to the hotel, and they're comin' 
here fast, and tare an' ages, if they cotch ye, 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 27 

there'll be bitter work done, and you always 
spoke civil to Mike, so " 

But before Mike could finish his speech, 
and before I could even guess what had oc- 
curred, a tumultuous body of men, armed 
with guns, axes, crowbars, and other wea- 
pons, poured into the open space in front of 
the house, and advanced with loud shouts and 
excited gestures. At their head was old Da-' 
niel Wormald, flourishing his rifle high above 
his head, with his hard features swollen and 
distorted by fury. 

" Some mischief has happened ! The citi- 
zens have got their backs up, wild-cat 
fashion,'* said my host, as he threw open 
the window and boldly demanded the 
cause of disturbance. There was a confused 
outcry. 

"That's Pook. hurrah for Pook!" cried 
one man, while another bawled out the threa- 
tening words, " Pook be scalped ! He intro- 
duced the tarnation Britisher to us. Mebbe 
he's to git a slice of the profits !" 

"The Britisher! Give him up! Pitch 
him out! Or we'll tatter the house like a 



/ 



28 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

riddled pumpkin-rind!" shouted a score of 
others. I sprang to the window. 

" Gentlemen " I began. But my voice 

was drowned by the dreadful yells that greeted 
my appearance, and I instinctively recoiled, 
while old Wormald snatched an axe from one 
of the lumbermen in the crowd, darted for- 
ward, and struck a shower of blows on the 
polished mahogany of the door. The Ho- 
nourable Sampson Petty was very white and 
nervous, and I heard him whispering to the 
major to " give me up,** but before two mi- 
nutes the door was driven in, and the mob, 
chiefly composed of angry countrymen, came 
pouring in. For some moments my life hung 
on a thread ; I was roughly seized by many 
hands ; my clothes were torn ; I was struck, 
hustled, and bandied to and fro ; nothing but 
the pressure of the throng kept me on my 
feet. But my host showed great courage and 
good sense, and was so firm and fearless in 
his reiterated demands for silence, that a short 
lull took place. 

The major spoke up, the instant there was 
silence, asking " what harm'* I had done. 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 29 

" Robbed us 1" responded Wormald, very 
grimly, and I felt his knotted fingers tighten 
as they twined themselves in my cravat ; 
" robbed us ! But we'll take it out of him in 
another way/' 

" I have never robbed you ; never wronged 
you of a shilling," I gasped, half choked. 

" Tell that to Judge Lynch !'* answered a 
rough bargeman, aiming a blow at my bare 
head with the heavy crowbar he carried. Ma- 
jor Pook caught the man's arm, and warmly 
appealed to the crowd not to act like wild 
beasts, but to bring forward their accusation 
in a rational way. 

" See here, Pook," said old Wormald, pul- 
ling out a roll of crumpled notes, " hyar's 
what your smooth-spoke friend hev paid me 
in, he hev. An' what he's done to me, he's 
done to all. Them fine white-fisted dandies 
of New York town, they must cheat hard- 
working Western men, must they, and pay for 
our substance in bogus notes, not fit to light 
a pipe 1" 

" Bogus notes ! Forged notes 1 Do you 
mean to say those notes are forged ?" cried 



30 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

I ; and I felt the blood rush to my face, and 
my brain reel. 

" Yes, and you know it," cried one ; while 
" Down-east smasher/' " British hound," and 
other flattering epithets, poured upon me in 
a shower, and it was in vain that I pro- 
tested my innocence, since even Fook shrank 
from my side. 

My talc was, indeed, improbable. It 
suited the angry mob better to believe me an 
accomplice of Fetter & Co., whose villainous 
treachery now glared upon me, rather than to 
credit my being a dupe and scapegoat. They 
were all smarting from recent loss, and from 
the disgrace . always keenly felt in the West 
. of having been tricked; and the rugged 
hoosiers and corn-crackers vied with each 
other in fierce suggestions for my punish- 
ment. 

** Lynch him I Tar and feather him ! A 
ride on a rail, thirty-nine with a green cow- 
hide, and a dip in the Ohio !'* roared one. 
"A rope! a rope! There's a lamp-post 
handy !'' yelled a second ; while Wormald 
malignantly declared that he had seen " row- 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 31 

dies burned for less/' and that a halter was 
only too good for me. 

Tn this crisis, Mrs. Pook saved my life. 
She alone seemed to believe in my innocence ; 
and she pleaded with a vigour that carried all 
before it. No other interference could have 
saved me ; but Americans of the roughest sort 
have a deference for " a lady ;" and Mrs. 
Pook was especially popular with the mob, to 
several of whom her ready purse and well- 
stored medicine-chest had been useful in a 
time of poverty or fever. So it fell out that T 
was neither hanged nor cowhided, but merely 
dragged in the centre oi a noisy and menac- 
ing crowd to the court-house ; where, to use 
the expression of the Honourable Sampson 
Petty, I was " given up to justice." 

Muddy, ragged, and exhausted, with torn 
clothes and dishevelled hair, I must have pre- 
sented a wretched spectacle when put to the 
bar, while the clamour of my rude accusers 
filled all minds with the very worst opinion of 
me. With some trouble, order was restored, 
and a detailed account of the transaction was 
rendered. The forged notes were produced 



32 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

in court, and, being examined by experts, were 
unanimously pronounced to be "bogus," or 
counterfeits, though admirably executed. They 
were quite plausible enough in appearance to 
satisfy simple husbandmen, and it was only 
on niarkct-day, when a number of them had 
been offered and refused at the banks of the 
city, that the cheat was detected. 

Every face I looked round upon, was hostile 
and unpitying. Even those who had few 
scru[)les as to the morality of the transaction, 
evidently scorned me as a clumsy tyro, and 
viewed me as the Spartans did a convicted 
pilferer. I heard one man mutter to his 
friend that I was a " raw Britisher," and an- 
other remark that " 'twar a smart idea, but I 
had fixed it awkward." However, though no 
one seemed to give the slightest credit to my 
explanation of aflfairs, the judge decided that, 
on technical grounds I must take my trial 
elsewhere than at Cincinnati. None of the 
goods had been purchased in the city; the 
fraud must be investigated and punished at 
the following assize in the county where the 
notes had been passed ; and I must be con- 
fined in Madison jail for the present. 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 33 

To Madison I was accordingly removed, in 
custody of the deputy-marshal and a party of 
police. My escort had no easy work in pro- 
tecting me from injury during the passage 
from the court to the steam-boat; I was 
pelted, hustled, and threatened; and it was 
only by dint of much firmness and coaxing 
that the officers cleared the way. Even on 
board the boat, I was not free from persecu- 
tion, for several of the farmers were on their 
return to Madison, where they resided, and 
among them Worraald, who never lost sight 
of me until he saw me thrust into the little 
wooden building on th^ swampy bank of the 
river, which served the township for a prison. 
His parting speech was not of a reassuring 
character. 

" Look'ee, my fine bird," said the old man, 
giving a sounding slap with his hard hand on 
the battered stock of his rifle ; " I was loth to 
vex Madam Pook yonder, but don't think to 
get off without paying for what ye done. 
Four-and-forty hogs, eighty bar'ls of apples, 
two hundred sacks of wheat, hev I lost by 
you, jest to be larfed at by your 'complices. 

VOL. III. D 



3i A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

But onless the judges give you a good spell of 
Penitentiary, Til right myself with a rugged 
bit of lead, Gospel sure ! If you slip through 
the lawyers' hands, I'll hev blood for them 
hogs, or my given name is not Dan/* 

A very melancholy time did I pass in that 
Madison prison ; no one came to see me, no 
one wrote to me ; I seemed entirely cut oflF 
from human sympathy. True, I was wholly 
innocent, except of over-credulity, but that 
was only known to myself, and I could not 
right myself. All the profits of the affair had 
gone to my treacherous employers; all the 
suffering was mine. And it was a painful 
reflection that while my reputation was torn 
to rags, my liberty forfeit, and my life in 
peril, Hannibal Fetter and the others were 
chuckling over the folly of their dupe as they 
divided the spoils. I grieved, too, for the 
hard handed Western farmers whom I had 
unwittingly been the means of injuring, 
roughly though they had treated me. 

The officials of the jail supposed me to be a 
rogue of the deepest dye, and gruffly re- 
quested me to keep my " innocent palaver" 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 35 

for the assizes. They refused me writing 
materials, and would not carry messages for 
me, saying that 1 should have plenty of time 
to consult a lawyer when the time of my trial 
drew near. They were not unkind in other 
respects ; I was well fed, as is commonly the 
case in that district of plenty, and was even 
favoured with the loan of a couple of old 
books, battered copies of some New England 
magazine, bound up. I had some hopes that 
I might be able to persuade the judges of my 
being blameless in the fraudulent business 
wherein I had been made a tool, but the jury 
of rugged Western men . I shuddered as I 
thought of their stubborn prejudices and re- 
vengeful spirit. And even if I were acquitted, 
I had no trifling ordeal to pass through. 
Judge Lynch might rectify what he would 
think the blunder o the legal courts ; and 
Wormald and his rifle were no light make- 
weights to a verdict of " Not guilty." 

It was on the third evening of my im- 
prisonment, as I was sitting alone in my cell 
reading the faded print of the old magazines 
by the light of a primitive lamp . the work of 

D 2 



30 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

some travelling tinker, and whose huge smoky 
wick was fed by a quantity of melted tallow . 
that I thought I heard the gnawing of a rat 
in the wall behind me. An active and bold 
rat, too, to tear with busy teeth so steadily 
nnd long. The creature annoyed me, for my 
nerves were irritable, and I tried to frighten 
it away by knocking on tlie unplaned planks 
witli the stool on which I had been sitting. 
The gnawing ceased, and I heard nothing but 
the wash and nmrmur of the great river that 
flowed witliout. But after the turnkev had 
brought nie my supper and locked me in for 
the night, the rat renewed his operations, 
though more cautiously, and for a long time 
the rasping and scratching continued. 

It so happened that 1 had discovered a 
cou[)lc of old letters, yellow with age, between 
two leaves of my book, which had apparently 
been pasted together at the edges, and in 
these letters, ill-spelt and quaintly worded as 
they were, I had found something to interest 
me. They were love-letters, written in New 
England half a century back. Their old- 
fashioned raciness of diction was often amusing, 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 37 

sometimes touching, so I read on, sorely 
puzzled to guess the meaning of some phrases, 
until my studies were interrupted by . 

"Hi, mas'r! hist! dere no time to lose, 
sar." 

I looked round, to discover that a small 
square hole had been cut through the wall of 
rough-hewn timber, and that the ugly honest 
face of poor Job, the little negro carpenter, 
was peering through it. I started up, and 
could not restrain an exclamation of surprise. 
The black's rolling eyeballs expressed alarm, 
and he pressed his finger on his lips. 

" Mas'r sabe little Polly's life, and Job owe 
mas'r a good turn. Britisher in jail ; all him 
fine white friends desert 'urn . Job one poor 
black rascal, but Job come to set mas'r free." 

And the little man began to work away 
with his saw, more vigorously than ever. 

" My poor fellow," said I, my heart smiting 
me as I remembered how unkindly I had 
repulsed the black's uncouth gratitude; "I 
cannot avail myself of your generosity. I 
ought to take my trial, or they will say I am 
guilty, and 



3S A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

**Mas'r talk what hab no sense in him. 
Dey all angry, fierce men, an' will hab re- 
venge, whether Britisher try cheat 'em or no. 
One day, dem cool down . all right; Job 
hear Mas'r Wormald and de rest, at tavern, 
talk ob not wait no more . too long to 'sizes 
. break prison-door and hang up Britisher on 
tree . Judge Lynch !" 

Rasp, rasp, went the saw. 

This news decided me that it would be 
fatal scrupulousness to await the result of a 
trial. 1 therefore accepted the saw which 
Job handed me through the aperture, and 
before long our combined eflForts had made a 
sufficiently large hole to allow of my egress. 
Job hurriedly thrust back his tools into his 
wallet, and pricked up his ears as a distant 
noise reached him. 

" Dis way, mas'r. Job hid de ole dug-out 
'mong rushes. Yah! dem de Reg'lators for 
sartain. Quick, sar." 

Hastily we embarked in the little " dug- 
out," or canoe, grasped the paddles, and shot 
out into the stream. As we did so, the sound 
of angry voices and crashing wood-work be- 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 89 

came very distinct, and a flash of bright 
torch-light from every window proved that 
the excited rabble had burst into the little 
prison. 

" Golly, mas'r, we only jest in time ! Neb- 
ber care. Ole Kentuck not far off." 

A few minutes' paddling bore us in safety 
across the broad river to the Kentucky bank. 
I was still dressed in the torn clothes . in 
which I had been brought to Madison, but 
Job's thoughtfnlness had provided a lumber- 
man's coarse suit of blue blanket cloth, which 
was rolled up in the canoe, and which he in- 
sisted on my wearing as a needful disguise. 
He himself was to return straight to Cincin- 
nati. He was confident that no one would 
know or suspect his share in my escape, the 
penalty of which, to one of his colour, would 
be burning alive, at the hands of the fierce 
populace. 

I was miles away before dawn, walking ra- 
pidly south ; by morning I found myself far 
from the Ohio, and approaching a town. 
Hungry and footsore, I was much in need of 
rest and refreshment, and now remembered 



40 A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 

for the first time that I was penniless, having 
been deprived of my watch and purse on my 
confinement in the jail. Something heavy in 
the pocket of my blanket-coat attracted my 
attention, and on examination I found it to 
be a little heap of dollars, dimes, and cents, 
tightly twisted up in a scrap of some old 
newspaper . Job's parting gift . perhaps the 
poor black's whole savings. Thanks to Job, 
I was thus enabled to reach Lexington, where 
I found employment in a school. More than 
a year afterwards, I was in New York, and 
ventured to call on the merchant to whom. my 
college friend had introduced me. I told him 
what had happened. 

** Fetter, Latch, and Jarman !" said he. 
" Why, my good Sir, their trial has been the 
excitement of New York for the last five 
days ; the Herald and Tribune were full of it, 
but perhaps you don't care much for our 
high-pressure journals. At any rate, they 
are condemned to the ' Tombs' for life, and 
though Fetter tried to prove an alibi, he 
failed entirely. They were sad rogues . made 
a science of forgery, and usually kept clear 



A NEW YORK SPECULATION. 41 

of the dangers into which they pushed their 
victinas. By-the-bye, Mr. Hill, there's a letter 
been lying here for you these three months, 
sealed with black wax.'" 

The letter announced the decease of my 
uncle, and that, in a death-bed revulsion of 
feeling, he had made me his heir. Before 
quitting America I paid every cent due to the 
Western farmers: who sent me a sort of 
round robin, in which they fairly owned that 
I was freed from blame, and that they had 
been in error. I need not add, that my faith- 
ful friend, poor dear Job> was not forgotten 
in my hour of prosperity. 



WRECKED 



ON 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 



" I can't stand this any longer, Ned ; I 
shall turn out, and go on deck. This stifling 
heat is bad enough to bear, without the stings 
of the confounded mosquitoes. I could as 
soon sleep in a kiln with a blister all over 



me/' 



I scrambled out of my berth, and huddled 
on my clothes as well as the dim light would 
allow. The other occupant of the little cabin, 
my dear old friend and kinsman, Ned Granger, 
merely yawned and stretched himself. Petty 
annoyances did not trouble him. He had 



WRECKED ON ISLAND TEN. 43 

been sleeping as contentedly as if the vil- 
lainous little den of a cabin close to the engine, 
which we had been talked into hiring on 
board the Van Buren, were a cool and airy 
bed-chamber. We had both been outwitted 
by the steam-boat clerk, a "smart citizen," 
who had assured us on his honour that the 
only disposable cabin left on board the Missis- 
sippi packet was a snug and pleasant one, free 
from bugs and cockroaches, and not in the 
least too hot. And now I was stewed and 
stung to the verge of fever, while Ned, whom 
nothing seemed to hurt, turned over on his 
pillow with a little sigh, murmuring, " Take 
it coolly, old chap. You'll forget the tem- 
perature and the gnats when we get to 
Cairo and have our breakfast ashore. Take 
it coolly." 

I replied rather testily that I wished I could, 
but that, not being a salamander, I couldn't. 
And with this withering retort I left the 
cabin, and stumbled my way on deck. The 
hurricane-deck of an American river steamer 
is a gay scene by day, but it had a melancholy 
and lonely look as I saw it in the feeble moon- 



44 WRECKED ON 

light, bare and deserted. The pilot in his 
lofty wheelhouse, intent upon the helm and 
the bearings, and a solitary deck hand who 
filled the office of look-out, appeared to be the 
only human beings awake save myself. To 
be sure, from the hatchway of the engine- 
room there gushed at times a transient glare 
of dull crimson firelight, and a pitch-black 
figure crossed the gleam, while a sound as of 
the dull roaring of a caged wild beast, told 
that the furnace had been supphed with fresh 
wood. It was very hot and sultry, even in 
the air ; but the atmosphere was endurable 
when compared with the oven-like oppression 
of the heat below. The mosquitoes were still 
troublesome, but I felt that I could bear their 
sharp stings better than when I lay in the 
close cabin. 

I leaned over the side rail and gazed upon 
the yellow river, whose turbid waters stretched 
for an immense distance on either hand ; the 
moon was new and pale, but I could make out 
the bold bluffs of the Tennessee shore, though 
the low-lying forest of the Missouri bank was 
hid in dark shadow. 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 45 

*' 'Tis lonesome here, mister, ain*t it !" 
drawled out a nasal voice at my elbow. I 
could not help starting. 

" I didn't mean to skear voii, Mr. Barham," 
apologised the voice, which I now recognised 
as that of an American passenger, General 
Jeremiah Flint, who had taken a fancy to 
Ned Granger and myself, and with whom we 
had struck up a travelling friendship. Gene- 
ral Flint was a thorough- bred Yankee, one of 
those tall lathy dark-browed down-easters who 
are found in active employment all over the 
Union. His complete history, of which he 
now and then favoured us with piquant scraps, 
would have been very amusing even in print, 
and partook a good deal of the adventurous 
ups and downs in the career of Hajii Baba. 
Just now the general was at rather a low 
pitch of the social see-saw, being on board the 
boat in no more exalted capacity than that of 
travelling salesman to a "jobber" of dry goods 
at Philadelphia. General Flint was not and 
never had been a military man. He had been 
postmaster-general of some small State, Ver- 
mont or Maine, and had retained the latter 



46 WRECKED ON 

and more portable half of his quondam official 
designation. 

" It's kinder dull up here, but I couldn't 
sleep," said the new comer ; " IVe got it hap- 
pened home upon my mind to-night that mis- 
chiefs on the brew/' 

" On the what ?" said I, laughing. 

'* On the brew, sir,*' answered the general, 
very solemnly. "Young men like you, Mr. 
Barbara, are too apt to ridicule the presenti- 
ments of their elders, but Jeremy Flint's no 
greenhorn, and he don't relish the feel of 
matters." 

I had observed before that the general was 
a little , oracular, and, what may seem odder 
in a Yankee, slightly superstitious; but I 
knew he was a keen practical person who had 
seen ten times as much of the world as I, an 
ex- Oxonian of four-and-twenty, could possibly 
have done. Therefore, when my queer ac- 
quaintance seemed ill at ease, I strongly 
suspected that his prognostications of coming 
evil were based on other grounds than those 
of sentiment. 

" I'll let you know, mister, the long and short 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 47 

of it," said the Yankee, dropping his voice ; 
" this Van Buren we're afloat in, is an old 
craft, old and leaky, and clean wore out from 
her keelson to her b'iler, that's jest truth. 
The owners held a talk about giving her up, 
they did, a month ago, but old Barnabas Kyle, 
senior partner, said, Hold on . she's good for 
a voyage or two, and if she breaks up, the 
fixings are no loss . ^let her rip !'' 

"Do you mean to say that the owners 
have permitted this boat to sail, knowing she 
was unsafe ? If so, and harm happens, it is 
murder !" 

The general nodded. " That's a Europian 
idea, sir. I don't say I approve of what old 
Kyle's done, but it's common enough. Still, 
this child wishes he were in his boots, and his 
boots ashore, he does." 

And the American drummed the devil's 
tat-too on the side rail with his long bony 
fingers. 

I asked whereabouts we were? I knew 
that Flint was familiar with every bend of the 
river. 

" We're past New Madrid," he answered, 



48 WRECKED ON 

scanning the shore line sharply; "and we're 
going mortal slow for all our puflSng and 
straining. Let me see . that's Red Bluff 
on the Tennessee bank, and yon dark line on 
the larboard must be Island Number Ten." 

As if the words had been the sounds of 
some fearful spell, there was, at that instant, 
a roar as loud as the roar of a hundred cannon, 
a crash of breaking timber and riven iron- 
work, and the deck was torn into splintered 
fragments, while fire, shattered beams, and 
scalding vapour, came spouting up as from 
a volcano. I was struggling with the cold 
waters of the Mississippi, which bubbled and 
hissed in my ears, as the strong current 
sucked me down stream. What had hap- 
pened I hardly knew. I was stunned and 
deafened, but I fought for life with mechani- 
cal energy, and, being able to swim, could 
just keep myself above the surface. My wet 
clothes and boots embarrassed me, and the 
stream was too strong to be resisted; but, 
just as I felt myself being swept away like 
a leaf upon the river, I jostled against a float- 
ing mass of wood-work, and clutched it. 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 49 

" Give me your fingers, whoever you air/' 
cried a familiar voice, and a strong hand 
caught my wrist. " Mr. Barham, by all that's 
airthly ! Wall, I'm glad to see you alive, 
Britisher. Get hold of the beam, and scramble 
up where I am." 

General Flint assisted, me to crawl to the 
top of the floating timber, where he sat at 
ease, with his feet dangling in the water. 

"Tain't first time this child has seen a 
b'iler bust. Apple quiltingsl I thought it 
would be a final smash 1 The notions I was 
taking back to Philadelphia were all well 
insured, that's one comfort, and my notes are 
in my waistband." 

" Boiler bust 1 Then the boiler did burst, 
and we are alone 1 The rest of us ? Ned 
Granger ?" 

" There's not much moon, but you may 
make out the hull of the steamer afloat yet," 
said the Yankee ; " what's left of her, a 
drifting like a floating coffin. If there's any 
living human being aboard her . drowning . 
will be welcome, after the misery they're in, 

VOL. III. E 



50 WRECKED ON 

I guess. The water and steam did scald, I 
reckon !" 

A dull pain in my hands attracted my 
notice. I looked down and could see that 
they were swollen and red. I remember 
that I had grasped the side rail at the 
moment of the explosion, and I had no doubt 
that I had been partially injured by the dash 
of heated water, from which Flint seemed 
wholly to have escaped. 

I do not recollect what followed. I heard 
flint's voice very indistinctly . a mere hum- 
ming of meaningless words . and I rocked to 
and fro, from weakness. My brain reeled. 
Then I grew sick and faint, and I remember 
being in deadly fear lest I should tumble 
off the spar. I remember, too, tiying to call 
to my companion for help, but failing to 
speak intelligibly. And then I remember no 
more until I was lying on a heap of brush- 
wood ashore, and Flint was insinuating be- 
tween my lips some drops of whisky from a 
metal flask. 

" Cheer up, Britisher ; you'll do now. It 
kinder came over you/* said the good-natured 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 51 

Yankee, lifting the flask to bis own lips, and 
imbibing several sups of tbe cordial. 

I gave his hand a feeble squeeze. 

" I owe you my life ; but where are we ? 
And Ned . are any saved ?" 

The Yankee shook his head. " We're on 
Island Number Ten, that's where we air. 
Jest after you gave in, we grounded, and I 
got a grip of a snag sticking out of the 
mud, and we're on dry airth again. If you're 
strong enough, mister, we'd best look for a 
shelter, for 'tain't wholesome to lie out, so far 
south." 

I was bruised and weak, and my hands 
were very painful, but I could walk pretty 
well. We made our way across a sort of 
swampy meadow, the general talking rapidly 
and continually, in his kindly wish to divert 
my thoughts from the sad fate of my gallant 
cousin. I gathered from him that the 
island had no permanent inhabitants, but 
was occasionally frequented by ferrymen, flat- 
men, and others, at the particular seasons 
when their trades were in full activity. 
General Flint scarcely fancied that we should 

 2 



52 WRECKED ON 

find mj living possessors of this dreary spot ; 
but he made no doubt we should discover 
some log-house in tolerable repair, where we 
could pass the night. 

'* And in the momin', mister, we'll signal a 
steam-boat and get picked off. No fear of 
our playin* Robinson Crusoe too long here, I 
guess. We'll have a banyan breakfast, but 
our appetite for dinner will be a caution to 
oUigators. Ah ! here's a con-^venient location/* 

In effect, we were on the threshold of a 
lai^ and substantial log-house, behind which 
we could dimly discern the outlines of other 
buildings. The heavy door was ajar, and 
yielded sullenly to our push. We entered. 
The interior was, of course, quite dark, but a 
feeble red glow, proceeded from some dying 
embers on the hearth, proving that human 
beings had been there within a few hours. 
The general showed no surprise. He merely 
observed that a timber flat, bound for New 
Orleans, had probably run aground on the 
island, and wished the men had remained, 
that they might have given us a cast ashore 
in their broadhorn. He stooped, blew the 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 63 

embera to a glow, laid on dry brush and fresh 
wood, and soon the hut was illuminated by a 
cheery glare. It was large, in good repair, 
and contained an old table of unbarked wood, 
and several broken barrels which had probably 
served for seats. There were shelves nailed 
up, but they were empty, nor were any pro- 
visions visible. But in an inner recess, half 
partitioned off from the larger apartment, 
were several heaps of brushwood and flowery 
grasses : beds not to be despised when mat- 
tresses and pillows were out of the question. 
I do not suppose that Jeremiah Flint had 
ever heard of the French proverb. Qui dort 
dine, but he showed some sagacity in re- 
marking that when asleep, our foodless and 
comfortless state would be less vexatious. 
We dried our clothes before the large fire, 
and prepared to obtain such repose as we 
might, in the inner compartment of the cabin. 
General Flint had been, in the course of his 
adventurous life, accustomed to queer sleeping- 
places, and it was with a grunt of satisfaction 
that he adjusted his bony frame to the heaps 
of withering brush. 



54 WRECKED ON 

" Pull some o' them sassafras boughs over 
your face, mister : that's the way to cheat the 
skeeturs/' said he ; " we'll have a good long 
nap, and wake up in time to hoist a handker- 
chief on one of those hemlocks down by the 
water-side. If a steamer don't see it, a flat- 
boat may." 

I lay still a few moments, and then rolled 
restlessly from side to side. My nerves were 
strung to a painful tension, and my brain 
was too active to allow sleep to visit me. 
The accident, with all its horrors, rather ima- 
gined than actually seen, was ever before my 
eyes, but it seemed unreal and unnatural, a 
vivid nightmare rather than a sad reality. 
Poor Ned Granger, too 1 What sad news to 
carry home to the quiet Devonshire rectory, 
where father, mother, and sisters, were hope- 
fully awaiting his return 1 To die so early, 
and by a death so horrible and abrupt . how 
should I ever dare to tell it ? Poor dear Ned, 
who saved my life once, who had done me 
fifty kindnesses, with whom I had never ex- 
changed an angry word. Where should I 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 55 

ever again in life find such a friend as that 
early one, now lost ? 

How long I mused I cannot tell, but I 
was startled by a sound which broke the 
stillness of the night . a very odd sound 
to be heard on Island Number Ten . the 
neigh of a horse, I shook off my reverie, and 
half raised myself to listen. The sound was 
not renewed, but so sure was I that it had 
been no cheat of fancy that I determined to 
rouse my companion and solve the doubt. 
It was not until I had shaken Flint, 
who was a heavy sleeper, that he woke up, 
grumbling. 

.. Jerusalem, mister, what's afloat ? Not a 
b'ar swum across, sure-ly." 

" No," said I, rather ashamed, " only the 
neighing of a horse, close at hand." 

" Unpossible . couldn't be ! There's no 
horse beasts here. What should they be doing 
on the island ? You must have been dream- 
ing, Mr. Barham." 

The general yawned and sank back into the 
pile of brushwood, nor was it long before his 
heavy breathing announced that he was fast 



56 WRECKED ON 

asleep. T was far from convinced, but I was 
puzzled ; imagination, I knew, does often play 
us strange tricks. Besides, was it not pos- 
sible that a horse had neighed on shore, on 
either the left or right bank, and that nay ear, 
perhaps unusually acute after the excitement 
of the night, had caught and exaggerated the 
distant sound. I pondered yet awhile, but I 
was weary ; gradually my nerves relaxed, my 
eyelids became heavy, and I sank into deep 
slumber. Not so deep, however, but that my 
dreams were stirring and various, changing 
like the shifting patterns of a kaleidoscope. 
One dream was particularly distinct. I have 
forgotten it now, but I know that a conversa- 
tion between ideal personages attracted my 
fullest attention, and that by degrees this 
conversation grew more and more real and 
audible. 

.* I don't care a cuss how it kept alight," 
said some one ; *' jist clap on a kipple more 
sticks, and I'll blow up the kindlers." 

Directly afterwards I heard the familiar 
noise . familiar, at least, to one fresh from 
prairie travel . of somebody blowing the 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 57 

embers of a fire into a blaze, while the sharp 
crackle of burning wood succeeded. 

" Where's Stone's marm ?'* asked some one 
else, in a high cracked voice, that contrasted 
with the deep tones of the first speaker; 
" where's the old critter got to, I admire 1 
Tm as starved, for one, as any wolf, and 
there's never a scrap to eat until she briles 
the meat. Ten hours* work makes a man 
peckish, and we must clear out of this before 
day." 

Vaguely the thought dawned in my half- 
unconscious mind that I was no longer asleep, 
and that the words I heard were real words, 
spoken by beings of flesh and blood. I 
opened my eyes. The larger compartment 
of the log-house was suff^used with dull red 
light, which brightened into a clearer glow as 
the wood, heaped on the fire with a lavish 
hand, caught the ascending blaze. Around 
this fire were grouped five or six men, most 
of whom wore the red flannel shirts and 
coarse homespun of the -regular Mississippi 
working garb, though one was in a suit of 
rusty black, of city make. Several more 



58 WRECKED ON 

dark figures hovered about the open doorway, 
going and coming, bringing bags and barrels, 
which were received by two of the men 
within. Boatmen, thought 1, who had pro- 
bably put in for a safe haven when benighted 
on the rapid and dangerous river. I was pre- 
painng to accost them, when a shrill neighing, 
unmistakably that of a horse this time and 
close by, was answered as shrilly and distinctly 
by an equine companion. 

.' Darn them brutes ! pinch their nostrils, 
you loafing dunces ! or, if a steamer goes by, 
the place will be blown upon," said a deep 
and fierce voice from the hut. And a 
man whom I had not observed, sprang 
up from a sitting posture and strode 
across the illuminated space. I rubbed my 
eyes, and cautiously raised myself on my 
elbow. 

The last speaker was of gigantic stature, 
with a fell of shaggy black hair tumbling on 
the collar of his red woollen shirt ; his face 
was a stern and forbidding one, like that of 
some robber soldier in a Flemish picture ; he 
wore a pistol and a bowie-knife, ostentatiously 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 59 

displayed) in the black leather belt around his 
waist. 

" All right, captain 1 *twar that rampaging 
black beast, Jem Hudson's colt, that got loose 
a minit," answered a man from without ; and 
very soon several men and two or three women 
entered the log-house. Most of the new 
comers were ruffianly figures, with the brass- 
bound handles of knives or pistols peeping 
out of their pockets, or protruding from the 
breasts of their homespun coats ; but one or 
two had the air of educated men, though their 
keen faces showed traces of evil passions and 
evil habits. One old man . he must have 
been more than sixty . was well dressed in 
the unpretending garments of a respectable 
Western farmer, and his weather-beaten but 
mild face contrasted with the ferocity and 
recklessness of the countenances around him. 
The man with the high cracked voice, who 
wore a town-made suit of dilapidated broad- 
cloth, accosted this new comer as Mr. Stone, 
and asked if his wife intended to give the 
company any supper or not ? 

" The mississ is comin' in : you'd best ask 



60 WRECKED ON 

her/' said the old farmer, philosophically 
lighting his pipe. Mrs. Stone, a tall bony 
virago, here bustled forward to answer for her- 
self, which she did by telling the hungry 
querist that he was "a greedy, cowardly, 
troublesome, turkey-buzzard of a Yankee, and 
that he had better have been helping to cache 
the horses and unload the boats, than calling 
for food as if he was in some fine city hotel/' 
While thus upbraiding the man in black . 
who indeed seemed to hold a very low position 
in the esteem of his comrades . Mrs. Stone 
bustled furioiisly to and fro, and before long a 
great frying-pan, full of pieces of pork, was 
sputtering on the fire, while several junks of 
beef and venison were broiling on impromptu 
spits made of ramrods stuck in the soft clay of 
the floor. Mrs. Stone was aided in these 
culinary processes by a pretty modest-looking 
girl of eighteen, whose pale sad face looked 
out of keeping with the place and company, 
and whom I discovered to be her eldest daugh- 
ter. A younger girl, about fourteen years of 
age, looked on from the outer circle. I no 
longer felt the slightest inclination to address 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 61 

the members of this group, and hardly knew 
in what light to consider them. I could form 
no guess as to their calling or object, but I 
instinctively cowered down among the branches 
and hid myself from observation. I felt that 
something was amiss, and that discovery might 
lead to awkward results. General Flint was 
asleep, but I feared that every moment he 
might awake and utter some exclamation, 
while it was always possible that his heavy 
breathing might draw the attention of some 
sharp-eared member of the band. Some of 
the party had seated themselves on barrels or 
logs, with every sign of fatigue, but the rest 
stood watching the pork as it bubbled in the 
pan, and the steaks browning before the fierce 
fire. Several voices were speaking at once, and 
I only caught unconnected scraps of the talk, 

" Jem Hudson was terrible riled. He set 
such a vally on that colt. If his gun hadn't 
had too much powder in it, this child would 
have been a gone coon, I guess." 

** I think Hiram Stout's a deal uglier than 
Jem. He owes us a grudge, he does, I reckon 
Tennessee*s gettin' too hot to hold us.'* 



62 WRECKED ON 

" Keep your opinion till it's axed for, green- 
horn," said the big man who had been ad- 
dressed as captain, and who spoke in a tone 
of bullying authority. "This nigger don't 
need a Pennsylvany chicken to tell him when 
a melonsquash is squeezed dry." 

" Here's your victuals ready, and no lady in 
lUinoy State could have fixed 'em better, nor 
yet slicker,'* exclaimed Mrs. Stone, in an argu- 
mentative manner, as if to challenge contra- 
diction. But nobody picked up the gauntlet. 
A circle was formed, some walnut-wood 
platters and pewter pannikins were produced 
from a hiding-place, the company drew their 
bowie-knives, and Mrs. Stone carried round 
the frying-pan, in order that every one might 
help himself; while her two daughters fol- 
lowed, one with the steaks still stuck upon the 
iron-tipped ramrods, the other with some lumps 
of " corn-bread" in a basket. 

It was at this moment that I felt my wrist 
cautiously grasped by a set of long lean fingera, 
and could hardly repress an exclamation, when, 
looking round, I saw that Jeremiah Flint was 
awake, and had risen to a kneeling position, 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 63 

keeping at the same time well behind the 
screen of brushwood, 

" It's well I woke. We're in a fix, mister, 
we air." I looked round. I could see by the 
faint liglit that my companion's resolute face 
was very pale. " Very bad this . wnss than 
scalding water, mebbe; we've got into the 
den of a grizzly, mister ; and if we carry our 
scalps out, we may be thankful a few." 

I began to be seriously alarmed. I was 
yet 'in ignorance as to the true character of 
those on whose bounds we seemed to be 
unwitting trespassers, but I knew that Flint, 
who had spent years in the wild West, had a 
stout heart, and that his apprehensions were 
not likely to be roused without reason. 

" I know more than one of 'em, Mr. Bar- 
ham/' whispered the general ; *' that tall fishrod 
of a man in the tail-coat, comes from Concord, 
Mass. : he was a regular penitentiary bird, he 
was. That German rogue in the cap, is Fritz 
Vogel, who was nigh hanged at Chicago last 
fall. And . may I never 1 . but that big chap 
in the red shirt . the captain . turns out to 
be Black Dave." 



64 WRECKED ON 

"Black Dave?" 

"Ay, Black Dave, or David Jossam, the 
most e-tarnal thief ! Famous for stealing 
horses, coining bogus dollars, robbing stores, 
and breaking out of prison. Last time I saw him 
was at Little Rock, Arkansas, in the Supreme 
Court, under trial, and but for a rogue of a 
lawyer " 

Here my friend's reminiscences were cut 
short by the abrupt question, put by a gentle- 
man whose mouth was very full, and who had 
a huge clasp-knife in one hand, and a pound 
or two of beef in the other : *. Captain Dave, 
when are we to paddle over with them bosses ?" 

" We'll see about it,*' answered the chief- 
" Some one must go over to scout fust. 1 
expect the brutes will be a nation deal safer 
when they git into Missouri, and out of sight 
of the river." 

These words were a revelation. The general 
pressed my elbow. " They're horse-thieves, 
mister." 

This announcement of the quality of our 
unconscious hosts was by no means calculated 
to dissipate my apprehensions. I listened 



ISLAND NUMBER TKN. 65 

nervously enough, to an animated debate which 
now ensued among the members of the gang, 
as to the propriety of hurrying over the stolen 
horses to the Missouri shore, or of lying con- 
cealed for some days, until the first fury of the 
pursuers should be baffled and spent. Opi- 
nions varied. The only person of the male sex 
who took no part in the argument, was the 
old farmer-looking man whom I had heard 
addressed as Mr. Stone. He sat quiet, having 
finished his meal and resumed his pipe, and 
we could see nothing but his respectable- 
looking grey head, and the silvery wreath from 
his soapstone meerschaum, inasmuch as his 
face was towards the outer door. Mrs. Stone, 
his better half, took an active part in council, 
urging a stay on the island, since there had 
been " nothing but scurrying here and stam- 
peding there for weeks, and her darters were 
worrited and worn out with it.'* It was 
curious, but this notable woman's character 
appeared little if at all changed by lawless 
companionship and outlaw life. In the 
midst of robbers she was still the shrewish, 
hard-working house- wife, and I could see no 

VOL. 111. F 



06 WRECKED ON 

remorse written on her parchment cheeks. 
With her daughters it was different. The 
eldest was evidently melancholy and ill at ease. 
She sat a little apart, never replied save with 
a monosyllable to any remark or rough com- 
pliment, and her downcast eyes and colourless 
face told of relets and scruples that her 
mother did not share. The younger girl 
showed the same mental condition^ but in a 
minor degree. Her answers were short but 
pert, and she occasionally exploded into a giggle 
at some jocular sally of the Massachusetts man, 
or the German, who were the wits of the 
assembly. But one glance from her sister's sad 
dark eyes checked her rising spirits, and she 
subsided into gloom again. We listened with 
considerable interest to a discussion which 
materially aflTected our safety ; but over which 
we could exercise no influence whatever. We 
gathered from the discourse that another 
hut existed, not far off, which was assigned to 
the Stone family, but that the rest of the asso- 
ciation had no residence on the island save the 
log-house in which we were concealed, and 
no couches but those heaps of brush aud 



ISLAND NUMBKR TN. 67 

flowering grasses on which we were growing 
fearfully uneasy. The horses, we also learned, 
were hidden hard by, in a cache dug where 
the scrub grew thickest, and which was eflec- 
tually masked from careless eyes by a sort of 
broad trap-door of osier work and sasafrass 
boughs. Here it was customary to conceal 
them . they were all stolen from owners in 
Tennessee until an opportunity occurred for 
transporting them to Bolivar or Greenville, 
in Missouri, where certain accomplices of 
the band resided, whence they were sent to 
St. Louis, to be sold to emigrants bound for 
California. 

Very unwillingly did we thus acquire posses- 
sion of the secrets of those desperate men, 
every fresh admission or unguarded word serv- 
ing to increase our danger, until at last we 
heard with dismay the final award of Black 
Dave, the captain. 

*^ We'll jest stop. This location's good, and 
nobody knows of it [we trembled], and, as 
Marm Stone says the gals are tired some, and 
we'll all be the better for rest. So we'll jest 
keep close for a few days, and then ab- 

f2 



68 WRECKED ON 

squotilate with the hosses, and scurry for 
Bolivar/' 

There was a growl of Jlssent, overtopped by 
the shrill voice of Mrs. Stone, who clamour- 
onsly expressed her approval. I glauced at the 
general's face. It was white but firm ; and 
the compressed lips and brightening eye told 
of a new resolve. 

" It's a bitter pill, sir, 'tis, but we must 
gulp it," he whispered ; *' we must give our- 
selves up, and the sooner the better. It will 
go harder with us if we were found cached, 
than if we come out bold." 

This was logical, but startling. I demur- 
red for an instant, suggesting the possibility 
of our making our way out at the back of 
the cabin by cutting a hole with our knives 
in the comparatively thin roof. But our 
deliberations were unexpectedly cut short. 
Up to this time the party had contented 
themselves with eating and reposing, but 
now a huge can of water and some lemons 
and sugar and some fresh sprigs of mint 
were produced, and a cry was set up for 
whisky. 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 69 

" Where did you stow away the stone jars 
with the Monongahela, Alarm Stone?" 

Mrs. Stone replied that the jars were *' un- 
der the brush of the beds," and bade the Mas- 
sachusetts man fetch them. He rose at once, 
took up a pine torch, lighted it, and ad- 
vanced. " Now/* cried Jeremiah, rising to 
his feet ; and we both stepped out into the 
lighted circle, causing the startled bearer of 
the torch to drop the blazing brand in his 
surprise. 

" Dog-gone it all," yelled one of the gang, 
" the Philistines are on us 1" 

With wild shouts and curses, the ruffians 
scrambled up and clutched their weapons. 

" Huroo, boys, it's only two spy varmints 1" 
thundered Black Dave, who was really a bold 
villain ; " kim back, you down-east coward, 
you 1 And you Dutch cur (for the Massa- 
chussets man and the German were already 
in full retreat), they air but two, and without 
weapons." 

When they were certain of this last reas- 
suring fact, the more timorous of the robbers 
became almost beyond restraint in their blood- 



70 WRECKED ON 

thirsty fnry. Pistols and bowie-knives me- 
naced lis on every side, and it was with some 
trouble that the captain prevented our sum- 
mary extermination. Black Dave, however, 
was firm. By his orders our wrists were 
tightly bound together with handkerchiefs, 
and we were placed in the centre of a circle 
of hostile faces and threatening revolvers, and 
bidden to confess. 

" Speak up, ye skunks, who air ye?" 

In answer to this query, the general gave a 
succinct and graphic account of the steam- 
boat accident, of our escape and immersion, 
of our landing on the island, and of how we 
happened to fall asleep in the log house and 
become the involuntary auditors of the rob- 
bers' council, though this point was rather 
lightly touched upon. A bellow of fierce in- 
credulity answered this statement. 

" Cut out the lyin' snake's tongue !*' bawled 
one. 

" Murder *em both, the oily spoken slippy- 
skinned Yankee eels," cried another, flourish- 
ing his glittering knife within an inch of my 
nose, while two pistd-barrels were pressed to 



ISLAND NUMBKIl TEN. 71 

the forehead of the unflincliing Jere- 
miah. 

" Hold a bit, gentlemen," said Black Dave. 
" Out with the truth, ye skulking crawlers ! 
Who sent you ? Air ye State police, or mere 
informers ? You, specially, with the Connec- 
ticut phiz and satin waistcoat, llev'nt I seen 
your ugly features before? What's your 
name ?" 

" I dare say you have seen me before. I 
am General Jeremiah Flint, of New England, 
and I ain't ashamed of parentage nor raising," 
replied the general. 

There was a murmur. Three or four of 
those present knew the general by repute or 
by sight. The Massachussets man observed 
that " Flint was a hypocrite, that passed for 
doing things on the square." The German 
abused him for a " schelm/' who had ill- 
treated an acquaintance of his at Memphis : 
which accusation afterwards resolved itself in- 
to the fact that Flint had broken the arm of a 
bully who had tried to gouge him. Two 
other men had heard that Flint was " a cute 
chap," and had been soft-hearted enough to 



72 WRECKED ON 

help more than one person they had known, 
and who had been ruined and half-starved in 
the South. 

All this time Black Dave, with an ominous 
frown on his dark brows, had stood toying 
with the lock of his revolver, making the 
hammer play up and down between his strong 
fingers, and tapping the bullets that lay in 
each charged chamber. Presently he fixed 
his keen eyes on the steady eyes of the prin- 
cipal captive. I say principal, because I at- 
tracted little or no attention, being quite un- 
known. 

** Last time we met," said Dave, deliberate- 
ly, " you and me, Jeremiah Flint, you sat on 
the bench along with the sheriff and the 
squires, and I stood in the dock. Now times 
air altered. I am judge, now, and by all 
that's airthly, I'll hev justice. You say you're 
no spy. That mebbe true ; but how if we 
let you go to the next town " 

" You'll never be such a 'tarnal fool, cap- 
tain," said a bystander. 

I took the opportunity of eagerly and so- 
lemnly assuring the outlaw that he had no- 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 73 

thing to fear from our indiscretion. We 
would be silent, until silence could no longer 
be necessary. 

" Shut your mouth, Britisher," said Dave, 
roughly, and instantly resumed. ** Gineral, 
you must die. It goes agin me to kill in cold 
blood, but it's our law, and unless we'd all be 
strung up to trees by the Regulators of Ten- 
nessee, we must silence you for sartui." Dave 
lifted bis pistol, and pointed it at the forehead 
of poor Flint, who gave a slight shudder, and 
then stood firm. 

" rii settle the other sneek,*' said a brawny 
boatman, cocking his revolver, and grasping 
my collar. 

" ril count twenty slow," said Dave. " If 
you've got religion, you can mumble a prayer ; 
and you, too, Britisher, for, when I get 
to twenty, I crook my claw." 

The boatman's pistol was pressed to my 
ear. The muzzle felt icy cold, like the touch 
of death's hand. My arms were bound, and 
all resistance impossible. 

" One,*' began Dave. 

The face of old Stone was contorted for a 



74 WRECKED ON 

moment, as by a twinge of pain, and he let 
his pipe go out, unheeded, but said nothing. 
The girls were sobbing in a corner, and Mrs. 
Stone was apparently urging them, in a 
whisper, to withdraw. 

The robber captain continued to count. 
" Two, three, four, five." 

Such a scream ! Mary Stone broke from 
her mother who sought to detain her, threw 
herself on her knees at Black Dave's feet, 
and began to beg our lives with an incoherent 
energy and a passionate sobbing and outpour- 
ing of words that it was painful to hear. 
This girl, usually so quiet and depressed, was 
now fully roused by the horror of the cruel 
deed abuot to be done. She wept and clung 
to Dave's brawny arm, and supplicated for 
mercy : mixing her entreaties with broken 
Scriptural phrases and incautious censures on 
the lawless life and pursuits of the band. 
But the chief, though startled, was not soft- 
ened. He shook off the weak hands that 
grasped his. 

" Marm Stone, take off your darter, and 
leave me to settle accounts with the spy. 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 75 

Men ain't to be twisted round, like milksops, 
by a useless screechin gal. You've made me 
lose my count, young one, but Til pick it up 
by guess. Twelve !" 

But scarcely had he levelled the weapon 
when Mrs. Stone advanced, and boldly beat 
it down. 

" I've been a puzzlin' my brains,'* said the 
virago, " to recklect the man, and if he's him 
I think, he shan't die. None of your ugly 
frowns at me, rap. ; Bessy Stone's not the 
woman to be frit by black looks. Warn't you 
Jeremiah I'lint, once the actuary chap of the 
Boston Argus Life and Fire Company ?" 

"Yes, I was," said Flint. 

" Of course !" sneered the German malici- 
ously. 

" We'll prove that," returned Mrs. Stone. 
" 'Tis long years agone, but can you remem- 
ber going to a village, nigh Lexington, to see 
a farm-house and barns belonging to a farmer 
that had been burnt out, and the comp'ny 
suspected 'twar done a purpose, and were shy 
to pay the policy thing ?" 

" Stay a moment," said Flint, pondering ; 



76 WRECKED ON 

" the farmer's name was Burke, and the vil- 
lage was Brentsville, Mass." 

" All right 1" screamed the audacious vira- 
go, positively wrenching the revolver from 
between Dave's murderous fingers; "one 
good turn deserves as good, and as sure as 
my name's Bessy Stone, and was Bessy Burke, 
the man that saved my old dad from being 
ruined, root and branch, shan't be shot dog 
fashion . and you, Stone, if you're a man 
you'll say so too." 

The old farmer, who had evidently the 
highest reverence for his wife's judgment, rose 
from his seat, picked up the rifle that had laid 
beside him, and composedly sounded the bar- 
rel with the tough ramrod. 

" The bit of lead's in its place 1" he said, in 
his phlegmatic way, and stood still, but ready 
for action. A violent quarrel ensued ; oaths, 
threats, and hard words were freely bandied 
to and fro ; but four of the least villanous- 
looking of the gang took the side of mercy* 
and Mrs. Stone's dictum obviously carried 
great weight with it. Her bitter tongue 
and the masculine energy of her character. 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 77 

coupled with the respect habitually paid to 
females in America, had made her a potentate 
in the association: while herhushnnd, though 
slow of wit, was known to be a brave man 
and a first-rate judge of a horse. The end of 
the matter was, that our lives were spared, 
but that it was decided that we should be 
kept prisoners until the evacuation of the is- 
land. We were accordingly placed in a sort 
of underground magazine, where forage was 
stored, and within a few inches of the pit in 
which the horses were concealed, and to which 
access was obtained by a drawbridge of stout 
planking. 

Our bonds were slackened, but not re- 
moved, and we were made to give our parole 
not to attempt to escape until the horse- 
thieves should quit the island. Mrs. Stone, 
to whose capricious gratitude we owed our 
lives, was not unkind to us in her rugged 
way ; and she and her daughters supplied us 
with food and blankets, and sometimes 
deigned to descend and converse with us, be- 
sides lending us one or two well-thumbed 
books, which constituted the family library. 



7S WRECKED ON 

In the course of these conversations the ap? 
parent enigma of the connexion between the 
Stones, who seemed decent folks, and the ut- 
ter villains who composed the gang, was 
solved. Old Stone had been a hard-working 
farmer in Illinois, illiterate, but respectable 
and honest in deed and thought. Unluckily, 
he had invested his hard-earned savings and 
the price of his own farm in the purchase of 
a tempting bargain of landed property, with a 
fatal flaw in the title. The knavish vendor 
had fled, and the honest dupe, assailed by a 
lawsuit, had been stripped of all, and had 
found himself a beggar. Unhappily, Mrs. 
Stone was a woman of strong will, and a 
warped and one-sided judgment. She pas- 
sionately declared that as the law had robbed 
them of their earnings, the law was their ene- 
my, and a mere device for oppression. An- 
ger blinded her; she was ashamed to live 
poor where she had been well to do, and in 
the cities of the South the exiled families soon 
picked up associates whose whole life was one 
war with society. 

It was impossible to make Mrs. Stone com- 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 79 

prebend that she wus reuUy a transgressor 
in sharing the perils and profits of wholesale 
plunder. She had got to regard all judges, 
governors, lawyers, and men of reputed hones- 
ty, as rogues, in league, to pillage the simple; 
and she considered the work in which the 
horse-thieves were engaged as reprisals and 
warfare. Her husband, long used to obey 
the shrewd and violent woman who had at- 
tained such dominion over him, only saw 
through his wife's eyes. I believe the couple 
had some vague idea of buying land in Oregon 
or California, and setting up '* on the square," 
when they should be rich enough . a hope 
which has lured on many a half-reluctant 
criminal. The daughters, on the other hand, 
less prejudiced and better taugiit, since they 
had picked up some instruction in a tolerable 
school in Chicago, saw nothing but misery 
and degradation in the companionship to 
which they were condemned. ^J^hcy passed 
their hves in sighing over the old days and 
the innocence of their hfe in Illinois, and 
never willingly exchanged a word with the 
outlaws. 



80 WRECKED ON 

" I'll tell you what, Mr. Barham," said the 
general to me one day, *' I'd like to give a 
lift out of the mire to them Stones. They've 
saved the lives of us both, for gospel truth, 
and my heart aches to think of their bein' 
caught one day, the old man hung, the wo- 
man locked up for life, and the daughters 
driven out to come to want, or worse. I'm 
not rich, no more, I suspect, air you ; but 
land's not dear up in Oregon, nor yet in Cali- 
forney, and between us we might buy 'em a 
farm, and let 'em live honest, and repent 
when grace was borne in upon 'em, A farm 
would be jest heaven to 'em, and three thou- 
sand dollars would buy and stock it in a small 
way." 

I wiUingly agreed, and we quietly settled 
with Mary Stone, who was wild with joy at 
the idea, that a certain sum should be lodged, 
two months hence, in the Bolivar bank, in 
her name. She agreed that it was best to 
communicate this to her mother after the mi- 
gration of the band. This was soon to occur. 
We had been prisoners for a fortnight, when 
one morning we were informed that a general 



ISLAND NUMBER TEN. 81 

flitting was at hand, and our release immi- 
nent. 

With much snorting and trampling, the 
horses were led up from the cache, and em- 
barked on board two flat boats, which were 
to be towed across by two broad horns, while 
a third followed with the rest of the party. 
Dawn was just breaking, no steamer was iii 
sight, no wreath of filmy wood-smoke was on 
the horizon. Once on the Missouri bank, 
safety would be easily secured, since the de- 
predations had been confined to Tennessee. 
We were allowed to come out of our prison, 
and found ourselves, bUnking like owls in the 
daylight, on the margin of the turbid water. 
The first flat boat, full of horses, was towed 
off by a broadhorn pulling six ours. The 
two girls and their father were in the stern- 
sheets, but Mrs. Stone hngered, lest the Ger- 
man, or Black Dave might do us, as she said, 
" a mischief at parting." But the captain 
was in good humour, lie patted us on the 
back, laughing heartily, and advised us to 
"stick to Broadway pavement and Phila- 
dclphy park, oust we got there." 

VOL. 111. o 



82 WRECKED ON 

The last horses were embarked, and the 
rowers of the broadhorn settled themselves on 
the benches and grasped their oars. "All 
aboard, quick, boys !" 

" Stay," said Black Dave, looking round, 
" Where's that Massachusetts bird ?'* 

Nobody knew. One said he was in the 
first boat. Another denied this. No one 
had seen him since the previous evening. 
Black Dave ground his teeth, and muttered a 
deep curse. 

" He's deserted, the cur ! To git the re- 
ward them Reg'lators offered !" 

" He's stole the third broadhorn. It's 
gone!" cried a panting scout, running up. 

There was a moment of suspense, then a 
rush, and the remaining boat was so crowded 
that it was sunk gunwhale deep in the water. 
The captain, rifle in hand, stood up in the 
stern-sheets. 

" Pull all 1 I hear the dip of oars !" 

Plash! went the six oars into the water, 
and off went the heavily-laden boat, towing 
the flat with the horses. The progress was 
necessarily slow. But a few yards had been 




ISLAT^D NUMBER TEN. 83 

gained, before a loud outcry proved that the 
island was invaded. We were still standing 
on the shore, waving our hands to Mrs. 
Stone, whose hard face had relaxed into a 
smile, and who seemed heedless of the 
danger. 

*' Hurrah ! Bang at 'em boys . there the vil- 
lains air!" bawled fifty voices, and a crowd 
of armed men in gaily fringed hunting-shirts 
or homespun suits, well armed, came at a run 
through the bushes. " Down !" cried Flint, 
throwing me to my knees and stooping him- 
self, just in time to escape death, as the rifle- 
balls whizzed over us. I looked up. I saw 
Black Dave drop on bis knees, fire his gun, 
rise again, stagger, and finally roll over into 
the river, mortally wounded by the discharge. 
No one else was hit. Cutting the tow-rope 
and crouching down as much as possible, the 
outlaws managed to escape further harm, and 
abandoning their plunder, reached the Mis- 
souri shore. 

We were at first roughly handled, and 
were even in some danger of being promptly 
hanged or shot by order of Judge Lynch, 



84 WRECKED ON ISLAND TEN. 

when two witnesses to character came for- 
ward. One, on whom we looked with disgust, 
was the treacherous scoundrel who had be- 
trayed the rest of the gang for gold; the 
other, wonder of wonders, was . Ned Granger, 
who caught me in his arms and hugged me 
like a bear ! 

" Dear Ned, I thought you were dead." 
" That's exactly what I thought of you, 
Barham, dear old boy, and of the general 
there. No, T was very little hurt, and was 
able to help the other uninjured passengers 
in caring for those poor creatures who were 
scalded or torn by the explosion. Every 
house is like a hospital. Ah! it was a 
shocking business. But though unhurt, you 
see, I had lost my luggage and my money in 
the crash, and this honest farmer here has 
taken care of me these last weeks. So I 
came to help him to get back his stolen nags, 
little thinking whom I should find on Island 
Number Ten." 

Flint and I kept our word with Mary 
Stone. 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 



It was a provoking thing, in the first place, 
when young Parkes fell ill. We were weak- 
handed, 80 far as the staff was concerned, on 
our section, the Lublin section, of the new 
line. Those were the early days, too, of 
railways in Poland, and the life of an engineer 
was not exactly spent upon rose-leaves. 
Parkes was invalided and went home to 
England, and for a good while the whole 
work devolved on me. I like work, and I 
did my best to work out the South Polish to 
the satisfaction of my employers ; but it was 
really too much for one pair of eyes and one 
pair of hands. The native "navvies" re- 
quired as much coaxing and attention as so 
many children. What with red letter days 



86 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

that were terribly frequent in their tradi- 
tionary almanack ; what with wedding feasts, 
unlucky days, and so on, I could seldom 
reckon on downright labour in exchange 
for actual wages. They were strapping 
fellows, kind, polite, and full of win- 
ning ways and the petty courtesies of life, 
but sure to drop the spade, and light their 
smuggled cigars, unless they were watched. 
And who was to watch them? not John 
Shaw, civil engineer, at any rate. He had 
too much correspondence to conduct, since 
the line was partly paid for by a government 
subsidy, and the imperial bureaux kept up 
a heavy fire of letters, all of which had to be 
replied to categorically, in the best French at 
my disposal. There was other necessary 
labour than this pen and ink work. Even 
surveying was diflBcult, since the labourers 
crossed themselves at the proposal to assist 
me with my apparatus, and briefly gave me 
to understand that they regarded my instru- 
ments as '* magical," and had rather, in con- 
sequence, refrain from meddling with them. 
But for a shrewd Armenian pedlar, who gave 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 87 

me some help, I should have been brought 
to a stand-still, and, as it was, my progress 
was slow. 

It was with much satisfaction, therefore,, 
that I received a letter from the contractors 
in London, announcing that a fresh sub- 
surveyor was on his way to my assistance, 
and assuring me, that Mr. Patrick O'Dwyer 
had been most highly recommended on the 
score of merit and experience. In a day or 
two Mr. O'Dwyer arrived, a well built, well- 
looking young fellow, with dark hair and eyes, 
and a blue scar across his right cheek that 
looked suspiciously like the mark of a sabre- 
cut. When we reached Podlowitz, the 
wretched hamlet where our huts were 
pitched, he ahghted from the drosky, and 
came straight into the little wooden dweUing 
where I was paying wages to the men. He 
held out his hand to me, taking off his 
travelling cap with a frank bright smile. 
There was an *' Obermann " present, a sort 
of sub-contractor, whom in England we 
should call a " ganger,'* and this man started 
forward with a smothered cry the instant his 



88 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

eyes lit on the young Irishman, and seemed 
about to kneel at his feet. 

" Hilloa ! Theodore, what on earth are you 
dreaming of ?" cried I, in surprise ; but the 
new comer looked at the peasant quite 
coldly, without moving a muscle of his 
face, and said something about the odd 
ways of the people. In an instant more, 
the ganger, who had been so eager in his 
apparent recognition was as quiet and 
composed as before, humbly excusing his 
excitement as a Polish fashion of welcoming 
strangers. 

Young O'Dwyer and I got on famously 
together. Whether the lad . he could not 
have been one-and-twenty . was quite as prac- 
tised a hand with the instruments as the con- 
tractors had represented him to be, was not 
so certain, but he had wonderful quickness, 
energy, and an eager desire to please, which 
had something almost feminine in its vivacity. 
No trouble tired him, no difficulty daunted 
him, and I was often obliged to blame his 
rash recklessness of personal danger among 
those tenacious quagmires and deep streams 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 89 

over which we had to carry our works as best 
we might. In managing the labourers, my 
subordinate proved priceless. They would 
sooner go a league for him than a mile for me, 
and the very facility with which he conversed 
with them, speaking Latin at one moment, 
and some Slavonian dialect at another . his 
mother, he told me, had been a Hungarian . 
almost made me envy him. 

Podlowitz was central in its situation, but 
it had few other merits. It was a mere ham. 
let, composed of eight or ten huts like mons- 
trous beehives, the thatch of whose round 
roofs was black with soot and green with 
weeds. There were a few miserable fields, ill- 
fenced, and full of stunted trees and patches 
of tall broom plants, where some hungry crops 
of oats were reared in good seasons. The 
lean cattle that browsed under the care of two 
or three half clad children, the swine whose 
nutriment was picked up in the woods, and 
the potatoes raised in the patches of garden- 
ground, had all alike a look of poverty and 
neglect. Close up to the cultured land came 
the dark forest . pines, and sand, and heath, 



90 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

and then heath, pines, and sand, for verst 
after verst, to north and south. 

Our hut was a double one, of good well- 
seasoned wood, warmed by a couple of iron 
stoves of Berlin manufacture. In addition 
to this, there was a house for the Ober 
Director of the workpeople, a clever Jew, with 
a considerable aptitude for accounts, but 
whose influence over the Poles was trifling, 
and four long sheds where the labourers 
dwelt. There was not a shop, nor a post- 
office, within miles. If one wanted so much 
as a ball of twine or a clasp knife, it was ne- 
cessary to ride all the way to Radom or Lublin 
ito get it. As for a book in any intelligible 
'jmsKoa^, that was not to be procured at any 
-gtm^- riMms- iham Warsaw or Cracow. 

h- WMfc iimiMiiixitsit, in spite of all the 

fr^*^> 4tft^^MM xfi lite Kiencrv and sur- 

Our lomu. ,^ ^ lil lr liuit ^o L^ig 
taavy cm tiwm; md wm ^i^iim Hat snov 
h<V*n to Wl, *li^ np the Toad^ and 
oh^^mfi our progfpw; fr n tim^ we found 
t.Mv IV.01IIV.HI in hxviM <v>untty about us. 



THE SUBSURVEYOR. 91 

We had our guns, and made up heavy bags 
of winter hares and wild-fowl. There were 
wolf-hunts, in which all the peasants took a 
part, and these were the most picturesquely 
barbarous scenes imaginable, what with nets, 
and spears, yelping dogs, and shouting men, 
in every variety of semi-Oriental costume, 
more or less wild and shaggy according to the 
remoteness of the wearer's district from a 
great highway. 

The long evenings were what I had dreaded 
the most, when making up my mind to a 
winter spent among the pine woods of Poland. 
But O'Dwyer was a capital companion, able 
and ready to play at chess, cards, or, I be- 
lieve, anything else, gifted with a store of 
amusing anecdotes, and no mean performer 
on flute and horn. Indeed, he was an en- 
thusiast about music, and would play at my 
request the most difficult and scientific pas- 
sages of the German masters, always straying 
at last into some wild, bold burst of simple 
sad melody . an old Irish tune, as he would 
tell me when questioned on the subject. He 
was always good humoured, but I fancy 



92 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

that he made an eflPort to keep his spirits 
when I was present; for it often happened 
that when I entered the hut unexpectedly, I 
found Patrick sitting with his head resting on 
his hand, eyeing the fire with moody thought- 
fulness; and once I am certain that I saw 
him hastily slip into the breast of his coat the 
miniature of a girl, at which he had been gazing 
when my step was heard on the threshold. 

Much older and more experienced in 
worldly matters than my assistant could well 
be, I felt a strong liking for the lad, and 
would have been glad to win his confidence, 
in hopes of being able to give advice that 
might prove useful, but no such opportunity 
occurred. O'Dwyer was not happy or at 
ease, that was plain ; but there was something 
about him which made it impossible to force 
counsel or help upon him. With all his easy 
gentleness of bearing, the sub-surveyor had a 
quiet dignity that instinctively repelled what- 
ever might have savoured of intrusion. Thus 
it came about, that beyond the fact that his 
mother had been from Hungary, I knew little 
or nothing about my new friend's antecedents. 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 93 

He had, I gathered from various hints, been 
bred up in some foreign university . a fact 
which perhaps accounted not only for his 
slight accent in speaking English, but for the 
scar on his cheek ; some relic, doubtless, of a 
student's duel among the Burschen of Ger- 
many. 

The long winter was nearly over, and our 
body of workmen, reduced as soon as the hard 
frost and deep snow had put an end to our 
operations, was being dafily recruited. I 
noticed, however, that most of the men who 
came, sometimes from a long distance, to join 
our band of pioneers preferred to attach them- 
selves to the gang directed by Theodore, 
the tall Oberman. Since that first night of 
young O'Dwyer's arrival, I had never seen 
anything peculiar in Theodore's manner. A 
sensible, trustworthy person, he was the most 
useful of the native workmen, but he was, as 
a rule, singularly free from the exuberant viva- 
city and fiery emotions of his countrymen. 
He and his men were in constant communica- 
tion with O'Dwyer, of course, and sometimes 
it happened that a Pole who was missing 



94 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

for a couple of days was said to have been 
despatched as a messenger by the latter. But 
as the errand was always plausibly accounted 
for by the truant's return with writing-paper, 
iron chain, a new spade, or the like, I dis- 
turbed myself little on the subject. 

About this time, rather a startling incident 
occurred. One of our labourers, who had 
been sent to Lublin to buy something or other 
of which we were in need, came into camp 
wounded, and with ugly stains of blood on his 
sheepskin pelisse. Luckily the blood flowed 
from nothing worse than a smart flesh wound 
in the arm, and the hurt was soon bandaged, 
while a notable crone from the village, famous 
for her cures of sick cattle and bruised human 
patients, undertook to make "an eight-day job 
of it." But the man's story was alarming. 
It seems that he had met, half way towards 
Lublin, with a party of Russian Light Horse ; 
that they had shouted to him to stop ; and, on 
his appearing to hesitate, had galloped towards 
him, recklessly firing off their pieces, one ball 
from which had taken effect. But the wounded 
man, with a sort of instinctive distrust of 




THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 95 

Muscovite mercy, had plunged into the thorny 
thicket, where even Cossacks could not follow, 
and had made his way, groaning and faint, to 
the sheds of his own people. 

On inquiry, I learned that the Russian 
troops were scouring the country, arresting 
travellers, searching for arms among the vil- 
lages and chateaux, and doing <;onsiderable 
mischief on those estates whose owners were 
under suspicion. Thus much the peasants 
knew from the personal testimony of those of 
their own class ; but there were dark and half- 
defined rumours of detected conspiracies in 
the towns, of wide-spread projects for revolt, 
and of corresponding severities on the part of 
the government. 

All this was very disagreeable news to me. 
Tranquillity is, as I well knew, the vital atmo- 
sphere of commercial success, and our line, the 
South Polish, depended to no small extent for 
its funds upon the guaranteed subsidy of the 
imperial authorities. An outbreak in Poland 
would injure my employers' interests, and 
would probably put an immediate stop to my 
own salary. Yet, as I said to O'Dwyer, I 



96 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

could not find it in my heart to blame the 
people, shotdd they resolve at any risk to fling 
off the dominion of the Muscovites. During 
the fifteen months I had spent in Poland, I 
had seen so many petty acts of dull tyranny 
and cruel persecution directed against those 
who dared to speak or think contrary to the 
usages of Holy Russia, that I half despised 
the Poles for their long submission. 

" You see," remarked I to O'Dwyer, as we 
went down together to examine a bridge, the 
wooden piers of which had been overturned 
by the sudden freshet of thawed snow . " you 
see, these folks have not the sturdy independ- 
ence of John Bull. How they stand the sway 
of the grey-coated bullies for one day puzzles 
me. A clever race, too, with brave hearts and 
quick wits, if they had but common sense . 
yet they let the Czar treat them like cattle in 
a pen, and their spirit seems broken. Ah, if 
they were but English !" 

" Yes, as you say, if they were but English!" 
exclaimed O'Dwyer, so passionately that his 
voice actually quivered with emotion ; *' if they 
were English, there would be no slaves among 



THE SUB-SURVEYOE. 97 

them to look with jealous dislike upon the 
noble ; all, then, would be free-born men alike, 
ready to win or die for their country, and . 
Who fired ?" 

For a gun was suddenly discharged from 
the thicket hard by, and the sharp report sent 
the dead leaves swirling down from a dusky- 
red beech beside me. The first idea which 
suggested itself was, that some prowling Cos- 
sack had fired at us, moved by the desire of 
plunder; but we soon saw a stout-made man 
in a black coat, and wearing tinted spectacles, 
come pushing his way through the brambles, 
and eagerly pick up a dying bird which his 
shot had brought down. 

" Passer rubicellus ! the red-throat sparrow," 
he exclaimed, with exultation ; " a male bird, 
and a noble specimen." 

I nudged O'Dwyer's elbow, and whispered 
that the stranger was, no doubt, a naturalist. 

M. Prevoust, the owner of the gun and 
slayer of the unfortunate red-throated sparrow, 
soon became on very friendly terms with us. 
He was, indeed, an agreeable, well-informed 
person, a Frenchman, and one of the most 

VOL. III. H 



98 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

active enthusiasts for science that I have ever 
met with. He had, I gathered from his dis- 
course, been head clerk of some firm in the 
wine trade at Bordeaux ; but, on coming into 
possession of some small inheritance, had aban- 
doned the desk to devote all his time to his 
cherished pursuits. With his hammer, his 
gun, and his blowpipe, he had wandered over 
Europe, geologising in one district, collecting 
birds and reptiles in a second, and in a third 
performing feats of analytical chemistry. He 
was, indeed, he told me, glad to earn a few 
score of florins by occasional assays at the 
mines, or by testing soils in which the presence 
of certain minerals was suspected, since he had 
only a rente viagere of eighteen hundred francs 
to live on, and travelling, even on foot, was 
expensive. 

I was pleased with the man, his learning, 
his gay good humour, and the simple ardour 
with which he pursued his researches after 
fossils and rare lizards, over hill and dale, at 
an age when most of us prefer the chimney- 
comer. O'Dwyer, I imagined, liked him less 
than I did, and withdrew rather coldly from 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 99 

his frank advances towards friendship, well 
meant, but clumsily made, for the fat Gaul 
was a blundering, awkward creature, and sin- 
gularly devoid of tact. It was curious to see 
his neat little geological cabinet of stained 
wood, with a label to every pebble or lump of 
ore, or to watch the quiet dexterity with which 
he manipulated the birds he was stuffing, and 
then to listen to the quaint bonhomie of his 
conversation. No one laughed more heartily 
at his frequent mistakes or queer speeches 
than the ex-clerk of Grandbouchon et Fils, 
Quai de I'Orfevre. 

" What would you ?'* said the philosopher, 
pleasantly, looking up from his needles and 
stuffing cotton. " I was taught to read, write, 
and cipher. The best years of my life were 
spent in ruling the books of Grandbouchon. 
I made shift, in my evenings, to study Audu- 
bon and Cuvier. For society I had never 
the taste. Parbleu ! I am no Richelieu, no 
Lauzun ; and .it is probably because I am a 
stupid bete of an honest man that your com- 
patriot gives me the <;old shoulder." 

It was true, and I was vexed by it, that 

H 2 



i 



100 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

0*Dwyer grew colder and more reserved 
towards the Frenchman as time wore on, and 
I feared that some pitiful pride of his own 
superior birth or breeding must be the cause. 

About this time a misfortune occurred, 
which threatened for a time to stop our works 
altogether. A debacle somewhere on the 
head-waters of the river swept away our half- 
finished bridges, tore up the rails, and carried 
away not only piles of sleepers, ballast, bricks, 
and other materials, but seriously damaged our 
forge and carpenter's shed, burying the tools 
deep in sludge and ice. We worked hard to 
save as much property as possible, and from 
the eflPects of wetting and excitement O'Dwyer 
caught the fever of the country, and was soon 
prostrate and helpless. 

Either the attack was not very severe, or 
the patient's strength of constitution, aided 
by the herbs administered by the old Polish 
crone, fought successfully against the disease, 
for the poor lad was soon pronounced conva- 
lescent. He had plenty of volunteer nurses, 
for the only difficulty was to keep the hut 
clear of the Poles, and the simple fellows 



THE 8UB-8UEVEYOE, 101 

would trudge for unheard-of distances through 
the woods, to bring back some rustic dainty 
which might tempt, as they said, the '' English 
lord" to eat. If on any sunny bank a few 
stray violets or snowdrops peeped shyly out, 
the village children were sure, to espy them, 
and the village girls to bring them to our 
settlement, tied in bunches with the gayest 
ribbons they could find in their scanty store, 
to please the sick man. I .watched over him 
e^ good deal while the fever was at its worst, 
and Prevoust would willingly have given his 
services too, but O'Dwyer, with an invalid's 
peevishness, could not endure the Frenchman's 
presence. 

One day . I remember it well . the morning 
had been warm and dry, and O'Dwyer, with 
the help of my arm, had taken a short walk, 
to try his strength ; I invited the naturalist to 
share my now solitary meal. Prevoust, I 
should have said, was lodged in the Ober 
Director's hut ; the worthy Jew having a spare 
room, and being glad to earn a few florins by 
entertaining so easily pleased a guest. Pre- 
voust was in excellent spirits. There was a 



102 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

childish good humour about him, which con- 
trasted singularly with his patient pursuit of 
science, and his unwearied industry. He 
talked, as usual, of a thousand things . in- 
deed, he would generally converse with zest on 
all topics save one. but for politics he had a 
rooted aversion. On other points, as he said, 
laughingly, he could trust to his gros bon sens 
not to lead him into quicksands. But politics 
bewildered and confused him, and the ex-clerk 
absolutely declined to speak on that tabooed 
subject. 

"What are kings or kaisers to me, Jean 
Paul Prevoust ?'* he asked in his cheery way. 
" Of tare and tret, or double entry, I know 
something ; but I am stupid as a sheep when 
state affairs are discussed. Parbleu ! it is 
enough for me to stuff my birds and keep my 
minerals in order.'' 

He then proceeded, in his artless fashion, to 
make a number of remarks on the petty events 
that had lately occurred. He had found an 
old book at the bottom of his trunk, and, 
perhaps, as books were scarce, it might amuse 
the sick man. I thanked the good fellow ; it 



THE SUB-SURVEYOE. 103 

was creditable on his part, I thought, to be so 
well disposed towards one who had so plainly 
taken a dislike to himself. Prevoust seemed 
to know by intuition what was passing in 
my mind. 

** Sapristi !'* said he, " people's fancies are 
their own property, hein? If your young 
countryman, who is beau gar9on, if ever 
there was one, does not get on well with a 
dull bourgeois like me, he cannot make me 
ass enough to take offence thereat. Foi de 
Prevoust, I think him a fine lad, and if I 
cannot be his friend, still he is welcome to the 
book I spoke of. It is a novel, I believe, 
though how I got it I can't think." Then, 
striking his forehead, he added, with a vexed 
air, " Blockhead that I am ! I forgot that the 
book is in German, and, no doubt, as useless 
to him as to me." 

" Is that all ?" said I, smiling. '' O'Dwyer 
speaks German fluently. Indeed, he is a re- 
markable linguist. His mother was a Hun- 
garian, and " 

I stopped short, for the ex-clerk's bushy 
eyebrows were suddenly arched, and I fancied 



104 THE SUB-SUKVETOR. 

.it must have been fancy . that his eyes v, 
sparkled tigerishly behind the blue spectacles. 
For a moment, a certain feeling of distrust 
crept over me like a sickly chill, but one more 
glance at the broad honest face of the natu- 
ralist made me ashamed of my suspicion. 

" Another glass of wine ?'* said he, gaily. 
.*Trinquons! so? ah! this meneschar grape 
reminds me of my native Gironde ! Shall I 
ever see it again, I wonder? My faith ! if I 
had but a few thousand livres de rentes--say 
four . I would make my way back there, 
many, and settle. Yes, range myself, as the 
word is, and die where I was bom.'* 

And he leaned back in his chair, and sip- 
ped his wine in sentimental meditation, while 
every shadow of distrust passed away from 
my mind. 

Two days after this I mentioned casually 
that I was, on the morrow, to visit Lublin, 
whither I had to convey a number of docu- 
ments of various natures, certificates, vouchers, 
receipts, letters from officials, and so on, all 
of which had to go to London for inspection. 
I did not care to entrust the posting of these 



TflE SUB-SURVEYOR. 105 

important packets to any other hands than 
my own or O'Dwyer's, and as the latter was 
still off duty, my intention was to do my own 
errand. Then it was that Prevoust, in the 
simplest manner possible^ begged me to ^o 
him a favour. 

It seemed that one of our Polish labourers 
had lately brought a letter addressed to our 
French ally, l)y an old acquaintance of his, 
the curator of the Museum at Prague, who 
was staying for a few days at Lublin, await- 
ing the sale by auction of some deceased 
nobleman's cabinet of medals. Now, this 
very curator was in the habit of purchasing, 
for the Museum, such specimens of Prevoust's 
collecting as were adapted for its glass cases, 
and the Frenchman had expended much pains 
on a little collection of stuffed birds, in their 
winter plumage, expressly for sale to this 
patron. 

*' The rather,'' said he, with his usual laugh 
of absolute good humour, " that I am nearly 
an sec just at present, and these pert little 
tits and wrens are worth a good many gulden 
in convention money. There is one golden 



106 THE SUB-SURVEYOU. 

crest But, bah ! I shall bore you if I get 

on my hobby of rare birds. Will you kindly 
carry the case . it is not very heavy . to Lub- 
lin for me, and bring back the cash P I would 
go myself, but the roads are only passable by 
horsemen, and as for trusting my precious 
neck on the back of one of these kicking 
Polish nags, I might as well jump off a steeple 
at once. eh? eh?" 

I joined in the laugh. It was an absurd 
idea, that of the elderly corpulent Frenchman, 
who had never, probably, backed a horse in 
his life, making his way through drift and 
mire on one of our half-broken, long-maned 
steeds. Polish horses are famed for their fire 
and skittishness, and I should have been sorry 
to see our bulky friend trust himself to their 
tender mercies. 

Thus it occurred that when I rode into 
Lublin, about noon on the following day, I 
carried Prevoust's little green case of daintily 
prepared birds before me on the saddle. Ex- 
cepting this small box I was encumbered by 
no luggage, for the papers were in the pocket 
of my overcoat, and I fully intended to ride 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 107 

back and reach our huts before supper. My 
horse, I knew, was capable of doing the 
distance with ease. I went first to the post- 
office, and having deposited the letters, I put 
up my horse at the sorry inn that was some- 
what magniloquently called the Royal Hotel, 
and ordered some refreshment for myself. 
While it was getting ready, I resolved to call 
on the curator of the Prague Museum, and 
execute the ex-clerk*s commission without 
delay. The box was carefully addressed to 
" Herr Fischer, Turken-strasse, Number 18.*' 
The house was a large one, but it had an 
air of neglect and dingy gloom ; grass grew 
between the stones of its court-yard, the ar- 
morial bearings of some noble Polish family, 
wantonly defaced by some sportive Russian 
soldier, were faintly visible over the low- 
browed arch, and the few wrindows that faced 
the street were dirty and broken. I hesitated, 
I knew not why, as I pushed open the heavy 
gate, which closed after me with a sullen 
clang. In the porter's lodge was an old 
woman, crouched beside a smoky peat 
fire, and pealing some vegetables. She 



108 THE SUB-SURVEYOa. 

merely nodded, and pointed with her skinny 
finger to the house, when I asked for Herr 
Fischer. 

I entered, finding the front door unlatched, 
and making my way up a dusty staircase, 
tapped at the door of a room on the first 
floor. 

" Entrez 1" called out a deep voice, speak- 
ing in guttural French. 

I turned the handle, and found myself in a 
large chamber, meanly furnished, but httered 
with books and papers, and in the presence of 
a high-shouldered, grizzly-headed man in a 
scull-cap and dressing-gown . the curator, 
doubtless. 

" Have I the pleasure to address Herr 
Fischer ?" said I, with a bow. 

The German showed his yellow teeth in 
rather an ugly smile as he replied in the affir- 
mative, and then begged me to be seated, and 
received from me the valuable case of birds, 
and also the letter of the ex-clerk of Grand- 
bouchon et Fils. As the curator read the 
letter, I had leisure to observe him, and I 
cannot say that his large head, grey as a 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 109 

badger's and cropped like a convict's, his 
bull-neck, beetling brows, and saturnine cast 
of features, impressed me very favourably. 
Still, it is not necessary that a scientific man 
should have the graces of Apollo, and I had 
seen too much sterling excellence under a 
rough husk to be hasty in my judgments. 

The curator read the letter very slowly, and 
with something hke a sneer contorting the 
muscles of his coarse mouth, but he seemed 
in no hurry to inspect the stuffed birds. He 
finished the perusal at last, and rubbed his 
fat hands together with a chuckle of not over- 
pleasant mirth. Then he turned his green 
eyes on my face, and stared at me with much 
the same expression . half jocular, half fero- 
cious . with which a cat watches a mouse 
lying crushed beneath its paw. I felt annoyed 
at so singular a reception. 

"If you are at leisure, Herr Fischer," I 
began, " to examine the specimens which . " 

" Hold your tongue !" thundered the man 
of science. "It will be your duty to give 
respectful answers to the interrogations which 
I shall presently put to you, and fortunate 



110 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

will you be if by obedience and respect you 
can get your name off my list V 

So saying, he caught up a hand-bell, and 
rang it furiously. I started up, imagining 
that the curator had suddenly become insane ; 
but in the next moment there was a tramp of 
heavy boots and clanking of steel scabbards, 
and four or five Russian gendarmes, followed 
by a greflSer, or clerk, in professional black, 
hurried into the room. 

" Arrest him 1" said the curator of the 
Prague Museum ; and I found myself a 
prisoner in the grasp of two of the police- 
men. 

" There is some mistake !'* cried I, strug- 
gling. *' I came to see Herr Fischer, of 
Prague, and I have no doubt intruded 
upon . . '* 

" Colonel. Stronow, of the Imperial Russian 
service. Prefect of Police for Poland, very 
much at your service," said the pretended 
German. '*But console yourself; you have 
done your errand faithfully, and Lieutenant 
Gregovitch will not fail to thank you for the 
care you have taken of his invaluable birds.'* 



THE SUB-SUBVETOR. Ill 

" Gregovitch !*' I gasped out, with a sickly 
feeling of dismay. 

" Yes, Lieutenant Alexis Gregovitch, better 
known to you as Prevoust, the wine merchant's 
clerk,'* coolly returned the dreaded chief of 
the police; and then harshly added, "The 
examination will now begin. Greffier, note 
his replies. Prisoner* your wisest course will 
be to tell all you know of the plots and 
projects of Prince Adam Sapieha." 

" I never heard of such a person 1" said I, 
indignantly ; " your spy, if Prevoust be really 
the rascal you represent him, might have in- 
formed you " 

" That your assistant-surveyor, Monsieur . 
Monsieur . ahl M. O'Dwyer, was no other 
than that audacious young rebel and traitor to 
the emperor, and that his secret presence in 
Poland is connected with the conspiracy for a 
general rising against my imperial master's 
authority. This young man has a daring and 
adroitness unusual at his years, and to convict 

him of treason will prove a service which 

GreflSer, are you ready ?" 

I felt stunned, bewildered. In what an 



112 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

atmosphere of deception had I been living for 
months, and how keenly 1 felt my own blind- 
ness in not penetrating the disguise of those 
who had been my constant companions. I 
now remembered the Obermann*s agitation 
on first catching sight of my newly-arrived 
assistant . an agitation explicable enough when 
I recollected that the man had been bom on 
the Sapieha estates, which lay within a few 
miles of Sandomir. 1 remembered O'Dwyer's 
wonderful influence over the workmen, his 
knowledge of their language, his frequent 
confabulations with them, and much more. 
Him I could not blame, for his purpose had 
been a noble one, and its objects pure and 
sacred in my English eyes, but as for the 
treacherous naturalist 

But here a hearty shake from the hard- 
fisted gendarmes put an end to my reverie, 
and I found that the Russian prefect was 
shouting forth angry questions, and foaming 
with rage at their remaining unanswered. 

I never hope to pass such a half-hour again 
as the one that followed. Colonel Stronow 
could make nothing of me, for my very soul 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 113 

within me was stirred into indignant resistance 
against the vile system and its villanous tools, 
and I refused to give the slightest information 
regarding O'Dwyer . or, more accurately, the 
young Prince Adam Sapieha. I said boldly 
that I was an Englishman, guilty of no 
offence, and bade him remember that my 
country had both the will and the power to 
avenge any maltreatment of even one so 
humble as I was. Stronow bullied and ' 
blustered, cajoled and promised, by turns. 
He loaded me with abuse and curses, shook 
his fist in my face, and swore that I should 
be subjected to the " stick," ironed, flung into 
a dungeon, fed on black bread, sent to 
Siberia, even shot. I have no doubt that 
he would willingly have put in force every 
one of these menaces had he but dared, and 
sometimes I half fancied his rage would 
master his reason, and that I should pay 
dearly for my stubbornness. 

The matter ended in my being hustled out 
of the room and locked up in another apart- 
ment, the prefect's last words being a savage 
assurance that my contumacy should not pro- 

VOL. III. I 



114 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

tect my " Polish accomplice," who would be 
brought into Lubliui tied ueck and heels, 
before sundown, and who was known to be 
too feeble after his recent fever for flight or 
resistance. 

" And he,"" snarled out Stronow, with the 
grin of a vicious dog . " he, at least, has no 
British government to back his insolence. 
Martial law has been proclaimed, and a 
garrison court-martial can be summoned at 
any hour. Half a dozen cartridges have 
seldom been bestowed to better purpose. 
Remove the Englishman.'* 

The room into which I was now thrust was 
a comfortless chamber on the second story, 
absolutely bare of furniture, and of wretched 
appearance. The plaster of the ceiling had 
fallen away through damp, the boards of the 
floor were loose and imperfect, and the rat- 
gnawed wainscot was breached and rotten. 
But the door had a strong lock, and after 
satisfying themselves that the drop from the 
window was such as no man could take with- 
out certain injury to neck or limbs, my escort 
left me to my own reflections. 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 115 

Sad enough were these. My own plight, 
to do myself justice, by no means engrossed 
my thoughts. The scrape in which the 
scoundrel Gregovitch had involved me was 
disagreeable, but not dangerous. My release 
was certain, though, during my detention of 
a few days or weeks, according to the temper 
and prudence of the authorities, I should 
probably have to suffer many insults and petty 
annoyances. But I could not but feel the 
utmost concern for the poor lad I had left, 
weak and suflfering, at Podlowitz, and whose 
danger surpassed mine a thousand-fold. I 
remembered fifty little kindnesses that 
O'Dwyer had done me, many and many a 
glimpse which his conversation or conduct 
had afibrded, of a generous and noble dis- 
position. By the new light of this grim 
police revelation I could trace much which 
had puzzled me before, and I knew that the 
brave boy's natural frankness had chafed at 
the concealment his position demanded, and 
that he had been more than once on the point 
of admitting me into his confidence. 

And now, now that he was ill, feeble, be- 

I 2 



I 



1]6 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

trayed, and that a remorseless and stealthy 
spy was at his elbow, what hope was there for 
the banished man who had dared to come 
back and beard the tyrants of his native 
land ? My heart grew sick within me as I 
remembered that Stronow's threat about the 
cartridges and the court-martial was no idle 
boast. Russian tribunals of this sort were 
not too prone to mercy, confident that their 
rough and bloody acts would be called zeal 
and energy by courtiers and bureaucrats. 

A sudden clang of hoofs and neighing of 
horses called me to the window, and in the 
street below I saw a party of Cossacks, 
mounted, gathering into a troop before the 
door, while their trumpeter sounded a call. 
They were chatting and laughing in their 
uncouth way, crouched on the backs of their 
wiry steeds, and shaking their long lances at 
intervals with a significant gesture. A strong 
charger, well caparisoned was led up and 
down by a gendarme, and presently Colonel 
Stronow, in uniform, but with a grey capote 
over his green cloth and glittering decora- 
tions, came out and mounted. He had been, 



THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 117 

no doubt, unwilling to trust the caption of so 
important a prisoner as young Sapieha to 
other hands. The trumpet sounded shrilly, 
and off went the wild riders, taking the 
direct course towards the gate that faced 
Podlowitz. I watched till the last spear-head 
vanished in the distance^ and then turned 
away with a groan. 

A few minutes later I returned to the 
window, and caught sight of a man leading 
a saddled horse to and fro. The horse was 
ray own, and I knew the man well, a certain 
Karel, who had been in our employ, and was 
now stableman at the hotel, a lively fellow, 
and one who had often done errands for 
myself and O'Dwyer. No doubt he had 
heard me say I was going to the Turken- 
strasse, and had brought my horse thither, 
as I did not return to the inn. A new idea, 
a new hope, dawned in my mind, and I cauti- 
ously lifted the window. 

- Karel r 

" My lord '' the poor fellow paused, 

perplexed at seeing my head thrust from a 
window in that apparently deserted house. 



118 THE SUB-SURVETOB. 

" Karel, I am a prisoner. But never mind 
that. Others are worse oflf. The police and 
Cossacks have just started for Podlowitz to 
capture Mr. O'Dwyer . Prince Adam Sapieha 
. ah ! I see you know who he is/' 

For Karel, a slim, fiery-eyed young Pole, 
had turned white with anger and fear at the 
news, and seemed like one at whose feet 
lightning had fallen. 

Meanwhile I tore a leaf out of my pocket- 
book, pencilled a few words, twisted up the 
paper, and tossed it out to Karel, who still 
stood like one in a dream. 

** Quick !" I cried ; " jump on my horse. 
He is a swift one, as you know. Take the 
path through the woods, outstrip the blood- 
hounds if you can . warn O'Dwyer . warn the 
men. Prevoust, the Frenchman, is a Mus- 
covite officer, and has betrayed " 

" I go, English lord I'* cried the Pole, as 
he snatched up my scrap of paper, leaped 
into the saddle, and rode off like one 
possessed. In an instant horse and man had 
vanished. 

I passed many weary hours in expectation, 



THE SUB-SDRVEYOR. 119 

and it was not till long past midnight that 
Colonel Stronovv and his soldiers came back, 
baffled and furious, cursing the evil fortune 
that had saved the prey from the hunter. 

I was set at liberty on the fourth day, 
but was conducted to the frontier by the 
police, and forbidden on any pretext to return 
to Russian soil. My employment was there- 
fore forfeited, but I found work elsewhere, 
and have never regretted my share in the 
prince's escape, a suspicion of which had so 
embittered the authorities against me. 

Karel arrived only just in time, and the 
workmen, headed by the Obermann, and 
carrying with them their young chief, as yet 
too weak to sit a horse, made their retreat 
into morasses too diflScult for even Cossack 
horsemen. As for Prevoust, or Gregovitch, 
a timely flight saved him, and scarcely saved 
him, from the just wrath of the Poles whose 
lives he had betrayed, and who would have 
torn him to pieces in their anger. Prince 
Adam Sapieha, after great hardships and 
perils, lurking in the woods like a hunted 
animal, and with a price on his head, was 



120 THE SUB-SURVEYOR. 

fortunate enough to cross the Austrian fron- 
tier, thanks to the devotion of his followers. 
I afterwards saw him when he was in the 
Turkish service, aqd I an engineer on the 
Smyrna and Aidin line. But he is now, I 
believe, in Poland, and once more risking his 
life for the cause to which his best years and 
best faculties were freely given. 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 



" Land ho !" sung out the sailor from aloft, 
bending down from his giddy perch on the 
yard-arm, and using his hand as a speaking- 
trumpet. The captain sprang into the rigging 
and swept the horizon with his glass. I imi- 
tated his example, as I was weary of my 
floating prison. 

" Land it is !" said Captain Brown, cheer- 
fully ; " not in that direction, though, Mr. 
Compton, sir." You are looking at Fehmem. 
The main-land lies on the starboard tack. 
Mind what you're doing, you, there at the 
helm. Keep her full can't ye? . there's 
Holstein. Looms low, don't it, and yet land's 
always attractive to a passenger 1" 

By-and-by we stood into the pretty fiord at 




122 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

the extremity of which stands Kiel. The set- 
ting sun turned the smooth waters of the bay 
into rippling gold, and I looked forward with 
pleasure to the prospect of landing. The Emma 
was the property of Hallett and Jones, my 
employers, who did a great business both with 
Hamburg and the Baltic ports. She was 
hiden with a valuable cargo of hardware, drugs, 
dye-woods, and sheet lead, to say nothing of 
several hundred tons of the rails, required for one 
of the first of the Danish railways. These goods 
were consigned to a well-known firm, Krantz 
and Co., of Kiel, wealthy and well-known 
merchants with whom our house had had ex- 
tensive transactions. And I, who was in the 
full confidence of my principals, had been sent 
as supercargo. Now-a-days supercargoes are 
seldom needed for even the most valuable 
freights, save in the China trade. But there 
were other reasons for my mission. Messrs. 
Krantz were debited in our books for consider- 
able sums; and, although their commercial fame 
was spotless, and their wealth undisputed, it 
was thought desirable that a balance should be 
struck. There were long and complicated 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 123 

accounts to go through, and it had appeared 
advisable to my chiefs that T should inspect the 
papers and receive the money ; the rather that 
I could take the opportunity of my presence in 
Denmark to inquire into the real nature of 
certain investments at Copenhagen which had 
been represented to us as excellent. I was to 
come back in the brig, which was to take 
in at Copenhagen, a return freight of Baltic 
wheat. It had been settled that without 
waiting for the Emma's unloading, I was to 
hasten to the capital by way of Schleswig and 
Jutland. 

When we dropped anchor in Kiel harbour, 
the last crimson flush of the sunset had died 
out of the horison, with its ever-green oaks, 
rolling sand-bluffs, flat pastures, and thousand 
windmills. On the following morning I set 
off, guided by one of the hangers-on of the 
hotel where I had spent the night, in search of 
the residence of the Messrs. Krantz. The 
guide, a Dutch lad in a green jacket and 
wooden shoes, was loud in his praise of the 
wealth and merits of our correspondents. It 
was old Mynheer Krantz, he declared, who had 



124 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

first turned the stream of Baltic traffic into 
Kiel Bay ; it was he who had encouraged the 
setting up of manufactories in the town ; it 
was he who had, at his own charges, cleared 
away a dangerous sand-bar on which many a 
vessel had struck when the wind was easterly, 
and the currents too strong to be resisted. 
Krantz and Co. had thriven wonderfully. They 
were very rich. The narrator ought to know, 
for had he not a brother Rupert . his own 
name was Clauss, at my service . who was 
messenger in their office? They were liberal 
masters. And then their charity to the poor, 
their hospitality, and their tulips ! Clauss, like a 
true Hollander, grew eloquent, on the score of 
the tuHps of Messrs. Krantz, father and son, for 
the Co. appeared to be mythical. And before 
he had finished, we stood before the merchant's 
door. 

A fine old house, large though low, and 
built of brickwork covered over w^ith a sort of 
glossy cement of a pinkish colour, seamed by 
huge black beams of oak, heavy and stout 
enough to have been the timbers of a line-of- 
battle ship The latticed windows, framed in a 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 125 

thick growth of creepers, had queer old 
diamond panes set in lead, queer mullions of 
carved stone, and little polished reflectors 
placed outside those of the lowest ' storey, to 
convey to the inmates the images of persons 
passing in the street without, exactly such as 
I had seen before in Flemish towns. Behind 
the house was a huge walled garden, flanked 
by conservatories, and one wing of the mansion 
was devoted to the counting-house ; through 
the window of which I could see the grey 
head of ^n elderly cashier bending over a heap 
of papers and glittering coin. The brass-plate, 
on which were inscribed the words ** Krantz 
and C^" was as bright as Mambrino's helmet, 
and from the stork's nest on the roof to 
the moss-grown pavement, everything looked 
venerable, quiet and serene. 

M. Krantz himself was from home, but I 
was cordially received by his son and junior 
partner, Paul Krantz, one of the finest young 
fellows I had ever seen ; tall and fair-faced, 
with bright honest blue eyes and yellow hair. 
He was some years younger than myself, 
being about five or six-and-twenty, but was 



126 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

married. He and his young wife and 
children resided with his father, who was a 
widower, and had no son but Paul. 

"We have been duly advised of your 
purpose in visiting Kiel, Mr. Compton/' said 
the young merchant, as he shook hands with 
me ; and though ray father was unfortunately 
unable to remain at home to receive you, we 
can, if you please, complete the necessary 
arrangements without waiting his return. 
Captain Brown has already looked in upon us 
with the Emma's bills of lading and the in- 
voices, and I am quite prepared to go through 
the accounts and hand over the money to 
your safe keeping." 

We . M. Paul and I . had a rather severe 
morning's work over the voluminous accounts, 
witb all the mass of vouchers, letters, bills, 
couched in every language written throughout 
Northern Europe ; but at last we came to a 
satisfactory conclusion. A considerable sum 
was due to Hallett and Jones, and this sum 
tallied, within a few marks banco, with the 
amount of ray chiefs' estimate. The cashier 
was summoned. 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 127 

" Now, monsieur, we can give you your 
choice," said the young Dane, smiling good- 
humouredly, " how will you take the balance. 
Gold, or bills on London I cannot at this 
moment offer you ; but silver, or Hamburg 
notes, or Russian paper roubles, or notes of 
the Royal Bank of Denmark, or Dutch cou- 
pons : to all and any of these you are heartily 
welcome. Shall we pay in silver rix-doUars ? 
I only. warn you that the weight will prove 
rather cumbrous." 

** Why yes," said I, hesitating, as I remem- 
bered that a sack of no small size and a 
porter would then become necessary to the 
conveyance of the sum of which I was to 
be. the temporary custodian, and hastily com- 
puted the various cares and annoyances in- 
separable from such unwieldy treasures ; " yes, 
I think I will take the balance in Danish bank 
paper." 

And, in Danish bank paper, the money was 
duly paid over to me in exchange for my 
receipt. The notes were securely lodged in 
my big black leather pocket-book, steel- 
chained and patent lodked, and always heed- 



128 TOO LATE POK COPENHAGEN. 

fully kept in an inner breast-pocket of my 
coat. My reason for selecting Danish notes 
in preference to Hamburg notes was, that as 
I was bound for Copenhagen, where I had to 
inquire, as I have previously said, respecting 
the eligible character of certain investments, I 
was sure of being able to exchange the notes 
for good bills on London, or government 
securities, without losing by the transfer; 
which would not have been the case had I 
chosen the German currency. Business over, 
M. Paul Krantz expressed much hospitable 
regret that I would absolutely insist on leav- 
ing Kiel that very day. He had hoped, he 
said, that I should have been able to stay 
as a guest under the family roof for a 
day or two at least, that he might have the 
pleasure of showing me such humble lions as 
Holstein could boast of, and that I should 
have stayed long enough to have made ac- 
quaintance with his father, my correspondent, 
who, his son was good enough to say, had 
heard much praise of me, when he met my 
chiefs in London a year ago. 

However, I could not hnger ; for the jour- 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 129 

ney by land through the southern part of the 
Danish peninsula would, I knew, be slow, and 
I was desirous to have time, not only to make 
the needful inquiries regarding the much- 
lauded investment, but also to explore the 
museums and other stock sights of Copen- 
hagen before the Emma should have com- 
pleted her unloading and be ready for her 
return freight. I had arranged for the hire 
of a light carriage, and had bespoken post- 
horses, and must really go northward that 
afternoon. 

" You will lunch with us, at any rate. I 
will give Margaret a hint to advance the 
dinner hour," said the young representative 
of the great firm of Krantz, who spoke French 
and English with equal fluency. Then, sud- 
denly he frowned and started, exclaiming, 
" Hundsfoot ! What does the fellow want, 
staring in after that fashion ? Arnhold, Ru- 
pert, ask his business, some of you 1" 

I turned hastily. All I could see was the 
fast-vanishing figure of a tall man, wearing 
one of those loose rough coats that sailors call 
" gregoes," and a red Sclavonian cap, such as 

VOL. III. K 



130 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

Baltic mariners affect. Not a glimpse of his 
face could I catch ; but there was something 
suspicious in the hurry with which he was 
shuffling off. Paul assured me that he saw 
the ruffian greedily eyeing the heaps of notes 
and silver which the old cashier, Herr Niklas 
Frost, had spread upon the desk beside me. 
However, Arnold and Rupert, the two mes- 
sengers, came back merely to report that the 
stranger had made off at a brisk pace in the 
direction of the wharfs, and that they thought 
him a Russian seaman, by his gait and attire. 
M. Paul broke into a cheery laugh, saying : . 

** I am afraid Mr. Compton will report us 
Danes as singularly timorous folks, startled at 
shadows, but the face I saw was no pleasant 
one, and the way the rogue gloated over the 
money on that desk was not encouraging to a 
merchant. But come, let me offer you some 
refreshment, and introduce you to Madame 
Krantz.'' 

I was introduced to Madame Krantz, a 
very pretty young woman, with the dazzling 
complexion and pale gold hair for which many 
of the North Jutlanders are celebrated, and 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 131 

also to the two charming little children, Chris- 
tian and EUice (which latter name corresponds 
to our English Alice), and I was shown every- 
thing worth seeing in the house and gardens. 
Such wealth of tulips, assorted like the pat- 
terns of some rich mosaic pavement and 
blooming gloriously ; such a rose garden ; 
such wall-fruit, and stocks, and dahlias, and 
quaint old-world blossoms, I had never before 
beheld. And the pictures . ^choice old battle- 
pieces, pretty bits of pastoral scenery, the 
work of Dutch masters, or of the best artists 
of that Danish school that learned to use the 
brush from Dutch example . were good and 
valuable, and harmonized with the oak panels 
and carved cornices, as perfectly as did the 
massive furniture of heavy wood and crimson 
velvet. 

M. Paul and his pretty wife and I parted 
with civil regrets that our acquaintance 
should terminate thus early. They came out 
to the door to see me start, under the guid- 
ance of the red-jacketed postilion who had 
control over the caleche and the two heavy 
Holstein steeds. Travellers were at that time 

K 2 



132 TOO liATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

greater rarities in Kiel than they have become 
since the war began, and quite a knot of 
people had assembled at the comer of the 
street to see the Englishman drive off. 
Among those idlers, I recognised the tall 
figure in the grego and red cap. 

Ofi^ I went, clattering and rattling up the 
dusty road. The speed was not great, and 
neither coaxing nor scolding could induce my 
gaily-attired driver to accelerate his pace be- 
yond the comfortable jog-trot of Holstein 
joumeyings. His good humour was incap- 
able of being ruffled ; for, however impatiently 
I might address him in my scanty stock of 
German, he did but turn his broad placid face 
towards me with a pleasant smile and a polite 
" Ja, ja, Meinherr ;" but the stout bay steeds 
were never much interfered with. Holstein 
men and Holstein horses are proverbially 
strong, slow, and amiable. 

The sun went down long before we had 
traversed the sixteen English miles of dusty 
road, lying between Kiel and Eckernfiord, 
but there was a bright full moon that made 
travelling safe and easy, as well as cooler and 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 133 

more enjoyable than the journey by day, so I 
pushed on as fast as post-horses could take 
me, and reached the city of Schleswig soon 
after midnight. I allowed myself only a few- 
hours of sleep at the quaint little hotel ; start- 
ing northwards on the following morning, and 
so early that the dew clung in pearly clusters 
to every blade of grass in the great meadows 
to which the thousands of comely cattle were 
being slowly driven ; the larks were just be- 
ginning to rise and warble out their morning 
hymn as the yellow sun shone level across the 
meres and meadows. I found that I really 
did make more rapid progress as I advanced 
towards the north, the horses being fleeter 
and less sluggish ; the postilions less apathetic. 
My hope was to reach the Nyeborg ferry in 
time for the last steamer across to Seeland, 
and to sleep at Ringstad, take the railway on 
the following day, and arrive at Copenhagen 
before noon. To my vexation, however, while 
still there were long miles of road between 
me and the ferry, the clouds began to thicken 
and grow dark to seaward, while the sultry 
air was fanned by short pufis of wind that 



134 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

shook down the yellowing leaves from the 
hedgerows. Sure token of a coming storm. 

At one small station, in Fiinen, midway be- 
tween Flensburg and Odensee . where I had 
found the postmaster asleep and his servants 
absent at some village feast, and had conse- 
quently had to aid myself in harnessing the 
fresh horses . before the traces were quite ad- 
justed, a cloud of dust came rolling like 
smoke along the road, and up dashed a '* for- 
budd/' or avant-courier, very hot and breath- 
less, vdth his horse in a lather of foam, voci- 
ferating for horses. 

" My master's in a wonderful hurry, won- 
derschon !" said the man, swinging himself 
down from his reeking saddle, and stamping 
his heavy boots on the ground to get rid of 
the dust, " but he pays well, and wants to be 
well served." 

And, indeed, the animal he had ridden 
looked, with drooping head and spur-marked 
flanks, none the better for the furious rate at 
which she had sped along. The postmaster 
looked at her rather ruefully. ** If I mount 
a forbudd for the traveller I shan't allow him 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 135 

to go tearing along, wild-bunstman fashion, 
as thou hast, Niel Hansen. Is he some fo- 
reign ambassador, my lad, or going on the 
king's service, that he ruins horseflesh in this 
way, all that he may get some hours earlier to 
Copenhagen ?" 

The postilion replied that he knew nothing 
of him. The stranger was a foreigner, but 
he spoke the best of Danish and German, and 
tossed his dollars about as children toss beach 
pebbles, all the time rating and expostulating 
with those whom he found too slow in driving 
or putting horses to his carriage. He was 
some great baron, no doubt. Perhaps a Rus- 
sian or a Swede. At any rate, he was eager 
to hasten on, and the postmaster had better 
get the cattle ready forthwith. By this time 
my own caleche was ready, and, in the stir 
and exhilaration of rapid motion, I soon forgot 
the impatient traveller who was a few leagues 
behind. The roads were in unusually good 
order, and the latter part of my journey was 
speedily performed ; but as I came in sight of 
the dark blue sea line and the white houses 
and low church tower of Nyeborg, the cop- 



136 TOO LATK FOR COPENHAGEN. 

per-coloured masses of cloud rolled sullenly 
up, and the peculiar gloom that precedes a 
summer storm fell like a veil over land and 
sea. Then came a flash of lightning, and as 
if it had been a signal for elemental war, hail 
and rain came dashing fiercely in our faces, 
making the horses swerve and rear ; the thun- 
der rolled in emulation of the roaring of the 
wind that suddenly sprang up. It was in a 
drenched and draggled condition, half blinded 
by the lightning, and soaked with wet, that 
we reached Nyeborg. 

" The steamer for Korsoe ?" was my first 
inquiry. 

The landlord of the clean little inn removed 
his blue and white china pipe from his mouth, 
and pointed with the stem of it towards the 
ferry. I could see that the water was every- 
where flecked with foam, and that no glimpse 
of the opposite shore could be distinguished 
through the driving rain. There was no 
steamer visible in the little haven, except one 
black and silent craft, lying snugly under the 
shelter of some piles, with deserted deck and 
smokeless chimney. 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 137 

" You won't sleep in the island to-night, 
Herr Englander. The last boat had a tough 
job to struggle across. The wind's getting 
round to the north, too. Not a skipper in 
Denmark, in his senses, would try to make 
the run over to Korsoe this evening, not even 
if his heart were as stout as old Tordenskiold's." 

The landlord's assertions were fully con- 
firmed by the sailors and custom-house officers 
whom I found crowding together under some 
sheds near the wharf, and wistfully peering 
through the rain and gathering darkness at 
the tempestuous sea. It was a mere summer 
squall, they said, but they were afraid that 
mischief would be done among the fishers and 
small coasting craft. However, the storm 
would doubtless have spent its fury before 
morning, and the ferry would then be easily 
traversed, so the delay was not very serious, 
after all. An hour or so earlier I should have 
been in time to be a passenger on board the 
last boat that had ventured out, and, at the 
cost of some risk and a wetting, should have 
slept in Ringstad. As it was, I was too late. 

The accommodation which the kro of Nye- 



138 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

borg offered me was of the character most 
common in Denmark. Everything was ex- 
quisitely clean, homely, and snug. By a slight 
stretch of imagination, I could have fancied 
myself a guest at one of those old English 
hostelries that Izaak Walton selected as the 
rendezvous of his Piscator and Venator, that 
quaint type of rustic trimness with its la- 
vender-scented sheets, sanded floors, honey- 
suckle-draped porch, and rude plenty. The 
supper that was set before me was a good one, 
and so was the Rhenish wine. I had not 
quite finished either, before I heard a rapid 
roll of wheels and a mighty cracking of whips. 
I could distinguish by the sound that a car- 
riage drawn by four horses had dashed up to 
the door of thekro. Then there was a hum 
and clatter of voices and feet, and a tap at 
the door of my room. In came the hand- 
maiden, who combined the duties of waiter 
and chambermaid, and who was as spruce in 
her velvet bodice and scarlet kirtle, her heavy 
gold earrings and silver hair-skewers, as if she 
had no work to do. Her round blue eyes were 
very wide open with astonishment. 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 139 

" Herr Englander," she said, in Ker Jutland 
dialect, so like Yorkshire English in its breadth 
and sound, " a great knight or count has just 
arrived, extra-post, and . " 

" . And if Mr. Corapton will pardon his 
intrusion, he is here to answer for himself,'' 
said another, and a stronger voice, speaking in 
very excellent English. A tall elderly gen- 
tleman appeared on the threshold, bowing 
politely to me, hat in hand, and wearing a long 
blue cloak, on which the rain-drops glistened. 
The newly-arrived traveller, no doubt. But 
what he could want with me ? unless I should 
prove to be the occupier of the only available 
parlour of the kro, and he wished for per- 
mission to sh^re it, I could not guess. Pro- 
bably the stranger saw my perplexity ; for he 
said, stepping forward, " My name is Krantz 
. Jorn Krantz ; and when I tell you that I 
have travelled post-haste from Kiel, on purpose 
to seek a few moments discourse with Mr. 
Compton of the house of Hallett and Jones, 
you will not, I hope, refuse to listen to me." 

I made a polite reply, and begged that Mr. 
Krantz would be seated. He gladly removed 



140 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

his heavy cloak, and stood before me in his 
tightly buttoned black coat, with a neat white 
cravat, a small diamond brooch tuck in the 
breast of his frilled shirt., and the party- 
coloured riband of some foreign decoration in 
one button-hole . altogether, from his grey 
head and calm intelligent face down to his 
well-polished boots, the type of an old- 
fashioned merchant of the highest commercial 
stamp. He was rather proud and stiff of 
bearing, though very urbane, and his voice 
was that of a person used to speak with 
authority. Disregarding my invitation to sit 
down and share the appetising meal that 
smoked upon the table, his first act was, as 
soon as the waiting-maid had left us to our- 
selves, to rise, and lock the door. Then he 
turned to me ; and as his face came for the 
first time under the full light of the lamp, I 
could see that his features were quivering with 
emotion. Twice he tried to speak, and twice 
the words seemed to choke him ; but he turned 
his head away, and covered his eyes with his 
hand, before he said, in a voice that was weak 
and tremulous. 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 141 

" You see in me, Mr. Corapton, the un- 
happy, almost heart-broken father of Paul 
Krantz. Oh, my son ! my son ! Fond and 
proud of him as I have been, what shame is 
this that he has brought upon my white hairs ? 
Bear with me a moment, Sir . only a moment." 

And the old merchant . in whom I could' 
not doubt that 1 beheld the head of the great 
house of Krantz and Co. . sank into a chair, 
covered his face with his wrinkled trembling 
hands, and sobbed aloud. But this emotion 
was soon conquered ; and then, in a broken 
voice and with averted face, the poor old gen- 
tleman told me what here follows : 

The Krantz family had been in commerce 
for several generations, known for a probity 
and honour that were traditional among them. 
The first black sheep of the flock was the old 
merchant's only son, Paul Krantz. I started 
when 1 heard this, half incredulous of such an 
accusation against the fine, frank-looking young 
Dane whom I had so lately seen, and who had 
impressed me very favourably ; but then the 
accuser was his own father ! I was shocked 
to hear that Paul was a hypocrite, a gambler ; 



i 



142 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

SO wedded to high play, both on the Bourse 
and at the lansquenet-table, that he now 
threatened to engulf his father's whole fortune. 

" All I have is his/' said the old merchant, 
sadly ; " and if he has fallen so low as to rob 
his father that he may be in funds for a fresh 
trip to the Hamburg Exchange and the card- 
tables, I can bear it in silence. After all, in 
a few years it would, in the course of nature, 
have passed to him. But my good name is 
in danger now, and that I would keep free 
from stain at any cost. Mr. Compton, the 
notes in which my son paid over to you the 
large amount due to Hallett and Jones . those 
notes . " He stopped, gasping. 

.* What of them ?" exclaimed I, getting 
excited in my turn, and mechanically thrusting 
my hand into the inner pocket, where the 
steel-bound pocket-book lay securely. 

" Those notes are forgeries !*' answered the 
merchant, hoarsely. 

And then the rest of the sad story came 
out. Paul Krantz had wilfully misled his 
father as to the probable date of my arrival 
to settle our account with the Kiel firm. He 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 143 

had had considerable losses of late in some 
wild stock-jobbing speculations on the Paris 
Bourse, and his agents had threatened him 
with exposure if the deficit were not made 
good. Desperate, and confiding in his 
father's indulgence to bear him scathless in 
case of discovery, the unhappy young man 
had contrived that his parent should be absent 
from home at the time of ray arrival, and had 
paid me in fictitious notes, a large quantity of 
which, availing himself of his master-key, 
he had previously lodged in the cash-box. 
These notes were in a manner forced upon 
me, as a conjuror forces a card, for even had 
I chosen to incumber myself with the silver, 
there were not nearly enough dollars in the 
counting-house to liquidate the claim of my 
employers. 

" I returned, and suspecting that some- 
thing was amiss, interrogated my son, and 
examined the books and the cash," said the 
merchant. ** Paul prevaricated at first, but 
presently made a full confession, imploring 
mercy, not only on account of the ties of 
blood between us, but for the sake of his 



I 



144 TOO LATE FOE COPENHAGEN. 

innocent wife . she, sir, knows nothing of his 
errors, and his disgrace and his punishment 
would kill her outright. And therefore, with- 
out losing a moment, I started on your traces, 
using every exertion to overtake you, which, 
however, but for the most lucky incident 
of your being detained here, I should hardly 
have done on this side of Copenhagen. And 
once there, you would, doubtless, have 
presented the notes, when discovery . 

scandal " 

And here he broke off, groaning, but soon 
found voice again *to tell me the object of his 
haste. He entreated, drawing a thick rouleau 
of bank-notes from his bosom, to be permitted 
to redeem, with genuine paper of the Royal 
Danish Bank, those forged securities that I 
had so unsuspiciously accepted from- his 
guilty son. The loss, as he justly remarked, 
ought, in no case, to fall on Hallett and Jones, 
and he would willingly make any sacrifice to 
prevent a stigma from falling on the spotless 
reputation of Krantz and Co- Paul was 
frightened, if not penitent, and his father was 
resolved to send him to America, trusting 



'J 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 145 

that change of scene and habits might wean 
him from evil. If I would kindly pledge 
myself to breathe no word of the trtmsaction 
until T should see my employers, disgrace 
might yet be avoided. 

I consented. My duty to Hallett and Jones 
was clear, and, besides, it would have been 
very damaging to my future prospects to have 
earned the imputation of having neglected the 
interests of employers so kind and hberal as 
my chiefs. The grief of that noble old man 
would have melted a harder heart than mine, 
and 1 readily made him the required promise. 
The notes were duly counted out and the 
exchange eflFected, and it was with a sigh of 
rehef that I secured the true bank-paper 
under lock and key in my stout black leather 
pocket-book. As I did so, M. Krantz held 
out his hand and shook mine heartily, and 
announced his intention of returning home at 
once, without repose, to complete his arrange- 
mertts for the reformation of his misguided 
boy. He at once rang the bell and ordered 
his horses to be got ready. In half an hour 

VOL. III. L 



146 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

we parted company, with thanks and blessings 
on the old merchant's part. 

"Old'Jorn Krantz is your friend for life, 
remember," he said, as he threw his cloak over 
his shoulders and stepped into the carriole; 
"but how very fortunate it was that I 
overtook you as I did V 

I thought so too. Very likely the ultimate 
loss of the money might have been pre- 
vented; but delay, scandal, and annoyance, 
with probable litigation, were evils almost as 
bad ; and I secretly congratulated myself on 
the lucky chance of my detention at the 
Nyeborg ferry. Next morning I crossed 
without difficulty, and before night-fall was at 
Copenhagen. Naturally, my thoughts dwelt 
much on my painful interview with the aged 
merchant, whose conduct appeared to me 
admirable. There, was, however, one thing 
about M. Krantz that puzzled me. It seemed 
to me as if I had seen him before. Not his 
face. That was wholly unknown to me, but 
his figure: that tall, erect, and yet supple 
form, with rather a peculiar carriage of the 
head. It seemed strangely famihar to me, 



TOO LATR FOR COPENHAGEN. 147 

especially when the merchant had flung his 
cloak round him before stepping into his car- 
riage. I perplexed myself on this score for 
some time. 

On the day following I called at a bank 
which the old merchant had recommended, 
and found, as I had expected, the names of 
Krantz and Co. a sufficient introduction. My. 
Danish notes were duly exchanged for good 
bills on London, and for crisp promises to pay 
on the part of the Old Lady of Threadneedle- 
street. I found the bankers remarkably cour- 
teous and communicative, and we parted very 
good friends, and I strolled up and down the 
streets for a while, gazing at the shop win- 
dows, full of curious ornaments and quaint 
objects from Iceland, Sweden, and Russia ; at 
the fisherfolk, gorgeous in blue and red and 
white, and resplendent in gilt frontlets and 
jewelled earrings ; at the rosy lasses from the 
Scandinavian mainland, in their scarlet bodices 
and high caps, staring with round-eyed 
curiosity on the splendours of what seemed 
to them a wonderful city, and chattering 
volubly to each other in Norse or Swedish 



148 TOO LATE FOE COPENHAGEN. 

as they trotted past with their milk-pails. 
But I was not long allowed to play the part 
of a passive spectator. 

I was in a glove-shop, buying a pair of 
number eights of the so-called Swedish kid, 
under the patronage of a smiling gloveress, 
whose knowledge of English did not extend 
. beyond the words, **yes, very well," when 
I heard a sound of running, and a clamour 
of voices, and I looked out into the street. 
My appearance was greeted with a shout of 
" The Englander himself!" 

One of the clerks from the bank I had so 
lately left, breathless, flushed, and without his 
hat, rushed in and caught me by the collar. 
At his heels were several other men, porters 
and messengers of the bank, most likely, 
but they were accompanied by two police- 
men in uniform, who followed the clerk's 
example in grasping me roughly, gruffly 
uttering the words, " In the name of the 
king and the law." 

** Are you all mad ? Let me go, you block- 
heads, or you will repent this," cried I, angry 
though amazed. I shook them off" for a mo- 




TOO LATE FOR COPEXHAGEN. 149 

meut, but only to be clutched by so many 
strong hands that resistance was impossible, 
and I was dragged, with torn coat and disor- 
dered cravat, in ignominious procession down 
the street, the object of hooting from the 
crowd that rapidly assembled. The abus- 
ive epithet most frequently repeated was 
** Schwindler," and this was intelligible 
enough, though vrhy it should be applied 
to my unlucky self was a mystery. The 
mystery was soon cleared up. I was 
dragged into the bank, and confronted with 
the bankers. The good-humoured partners 
looked wrathful enough now. On the counter 
lay a heap of notes, and I was sternly asked 
whether I denied having paid in these notes 
less than an hour before? I took a glance 
at the numbers. The fact was undeniable. 
I admitted it. 

" You hear him ? He confesses. He owns 
to being the man who passed off these forged 
notes," cried the banker, looking round on 
the assembly ; " after that, he may be taken 
before the Correctional Tribunal at once. 

" Forged notes ! You do not surely mean 



130 TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 

. . ** 1 began, but I grew quite faint and 
aick, and I could not continue. They took 
i^y silonce for a proof of guilt, and no 
wandorl 1 was taken before a commissary, 
i^r oino such personage, then before a judge 
irf instruction, and was fully committed for 
trittl. That the notes I had paid in were 
forgeries, tliere was no doubt. All experts, 
including a clerk from the government bank, 
were unanimous on that head. In vain, 
rallying my bewildered faculties, I begged 
for a private interview with the judge, un- 
willing to tell the open court how and why 
I had received the notes, and to suggest the 
only conjecture that appeared possible to me : 
namely, that by some strange mistake the 
fictitious bank-paper had, for the second time, 
been put up in my pocket-book. Refused 
this, I could merely declare that I had 
received the notes from the hand of M. 
Jom Krantz, head of the respected firm of 
Krantz and Co., and being asked where, was 
obliged to own that it was at Nyeborg. ferry, 
whither he had followed me on ** urgent 
private affairs." 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 151 

This lame explanation was treated with very 
natural contempt. I was bullie(J, brow- 
beaten, and ur<j;ed to confess that I was an 
accomplice of a certain notorious gang of 
foreign escrocs, then infesting Denmark, 
whose audacity was well known. Unfortu- 
nately, I could furnish no proofs of my 
respectability, for my papers were all on 
board the Emma, even the vouchers, &c., 
having been left with Paul Krantz, in a 
sealed envelope, to be given to Captain Brown 
at his next visit. The telegraph was not 
yet in existence between Copenhagen and 
Kiel. I had no help for it but to go to 
prison, and to prison I went. Bitter and 
melancholy enough my reflections were during 
the five ensuing days. Danish prisons, like 
all else in Denmark, are clean and neat, and 
I was not harshly treated, but I met with 
no sympathy. The magistrates who examined 
me, the jailers, the chaplain, the very English 
sub whom I teased by repeated letters to the 
British Consulate and Legation into paying me 
a reluctant visit, all believed me a scoundrel 
of the deepest dye, and took my unvarnished 



152 TOO LATK FOR COPENHAGEN. 

tale for a clumsy inventiou. I wrote urgently 
both to the Krantz family and to Captain 
Brown, but had received no reply when the 
day for ray trial arrived. 

" You will be put to the bar along with 
your captain, it seems,'' said the turnkey, as 
he summoned me to come forth, as the judges 
were awaiting me. 

'' My captain ?' 

" I mean," said the turnkey, contemptu- 
ously sneering at my apparent hypocrisy, *' I 
mean your head rascal . Klopstok, the swindler 
. just caught/' 

In a few moments I passed into the 
crowded court, and was thrust into a sort 
of coop, or dock, in which stood a tall man, 
a prisoner Uke myself. I could not repress 
a cry of astonishment. This man, Klopstok, 
was no other than the aged merchant, old 
M. Krantz, who had held so important a 
conference with me at the Nyeborg ferry. 
True, the grey hair that had given him a 
false look of venerable age was gone, and 
in its stead appeared a short grizzled shock 
of coarse black, while the gold-rimmed glasses 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 153 

no longer shaded the cunning dark eyes that 
leered at judge and jury, witness, and fellow- 
prisoner, with the consummate effrontery of 
one who knew that he had nothing for it 
but to put a bold face on the matter. He 
greeted me with a nod and a grin. 

Before 1 recovered from my surprise, to 
my great joy I saw friendly faces and heard 
kind voices, and M. Paul Krantz, accom- 
panied by Captain Brown, and by a benevo- 
lent-looking white-haired old gentleman, whom 
he introduced as his father, the true Jorn 
Krantz, as half Copenhagen could testify, 
came bustling into court to speak to my 
respectability, and to explain the mistake. 

I was liberated, and the good Danes seemed 
to be sorry for the rough treatment 1 had 
experienced, as if it had been really incum- 
bent on them to recognise my honesty when 
appearances were so terribly against me. To 
do Klopstok . alias Bernard, alias Orlemann 
. ^justice, he did not attempt to deny the 
trick he had played me ; certain as he now 
was, that he could not escape punishment 
on the ground of his almost innumerable 



154 TOO LATE KOR COPENHAGEN. 

frauds. This man, a Russian by birth, was 
the chief of that gang of swindlers, of whose 
daring Paul Krantz had spoken to me at . 
Kiel. He it was, who, on the arrival of the 
Emma, had contrived to worm out, by means 
of interrogating one of the mates whom he 
met at a wharf-side tavern, my business in 
Denmark. He, too, in the disguise of a 
Baltic mariner, had dogged me to the Krantz 
mansion, and had seen, through the window, 
in what currency I was paid the large sum 
due to Hallett and Jones, of which he resolved 
to possess himself. My quick departure 
somewhat disconcerted him, but his ready 
wit had devised a plan for turning even that 
to profit, and he had followed me post haste, 
to personate the part of an afflicted father, 
and to delude me into exchanging good notes 
for forged ones : a scheme in which he had 
but too well succeeded. 

By great good fortune, the swindler had 
been captured with my money still on his 
person, and as both i and Paul Krantz . 
who, I need hardly say, had been basely 
maligned, and was neither gambler nor knave. 



TOO LATE FOR COPENHAGEN. 155 

but one ofi the best of good fellows . had a 
list of the numbers, the judges ordered the 
property of Hallett and Jones to be restored 
to me ; and the bankers, who were profuse 
in their apologies, were also saved from loss. 
Before I left Copenhagen, Herr Klopstok was 
sentenced to perpetual imprisonment. I 
think, however, he must have escaped, for, 
during a recent trip to the French dockyards 
and arsenals, I could take my oath 1 saw 
him in a suit of party-coloured serge, in irons, 
on the deck of a French frigate, bound for 
Cayenne. 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 



** Phillips, something must have happened 
to the governor. Tve been watching the 
clock ever since eleven. It is almost half-past. 
He has never been five minutes after time in 
all the twenty-seven years that I have been a 
clerk here/' 

So said the elderly cashier, and 1 could not 
but admit that the occurrence was unprece- 
dented, though my own experience in the firm 
was short in comparison with that of the first 
speaker. Mr. Trent, second partner in the 
old-established banking-house of FoUet, Trent, 
and Co., was punctuality itself. He chiefly 
managed the business, since we saw little of 
our nominal principal, the first partner, whose 
working days were past. And during the 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 157 

five years for which I had been in the employ 
of the firm, I had never known Mr. Trent to 
be absent from his post. Any deviation from 
routine cfn the part of a methodical man of 
business is apt to startle his subordinates, and 
it is not surprising that while Mr. Griffith and 
myself were shaking our heads over the non* 
appearance of our chief, the juniors should be 
venturing on rash conjectures, ranging from 
apoplexy to insolvency. But these guesses 
were abruptly checked by the sudden arrival 
of Mr. Trent himself. He came in with a 
hasty step, and I thought, as he passed by 
with a nod and a civil word of greeting to the 
bank parlour, that he looked ill and harassed. 
Almost immediately he sent for me. 

" Mr. Phillips,'' said the banker, speaking 
in a nervous fidgety manner, quite unlike his 
usual calm decision of speech and bearing, " I 
have something to ask of you . a service . a 
favour, in short, for I am sensible that this is 
not at all in the way of regular business duty 
. in a word, would you go to America to ob- 
lige me?*' 

'* Certainly, sir," I replied, at once. " I 



158 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

have been there before, if you remember, to 
attend the winding up of that Wall-street 
firm, three years since. If it is your desire 
that " 

But here I was interrupted. 

"I want, much more than that, Frank 
Phillips," broke in my employer, speaking 
with unwonted excitement, " more than I have 
a right to ask of you, and more than I would 
ask of any of your companions, except, per- 
haps, Griffith, who is too old, and we have 
been good friends out of business hours, you 
and I, and . and I knew your father, Frank, 
and knew you before you left Charterhouse, 
so I think I may rely on you in this sad busi- 
ness." 

And then Mr. Trent proceeded to explain. 
The service he required at my hands was 
strictly of a private character, and wholly un- 
connected with money matters. The banker, 
as I was vaguely aware, had an orphan niece 
to whom he was greatly attached, and who 
had for some years been married. This lady 
resided abroad, somewhere in Italy, to the 
best of my knowledge, and her husband was 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 159 

an American gentleman from one of the 
Southern states, and the owner of sufficient 
property to enable him to live in Europe with 
his English wife. But I was now to hear, for 
the first time, that on the outbreak of hostili- 
ties Mr. Bolton had found it impossible to 
withstand the call of patriotism, that he had 
hastened across the Atlantic to take service in 
the Confederate army, and that he had quieted 
his young wife's apprehensions by the promise 
of a speedy return. Many Southerners did 
the same, obeying the summons to arms with 
a certainty that the whole dispute would be 
settled in one short campaign. Among the 
disappointed was Captain Bolton. Long 
months went by, and still the war went on, 
nor did any safe and convenient opportunity 
for his wife to rejoin him present itself. 
Blockaded by sea, and guarded by land, the 
passage of the Confederate frontier was full 
of risks, especially for women and children. 
Natural anxiety and hope deferred had af- 
fected Mrs. Bolton's health and spirits. She 
had come back from Italy to England, to be 
nearer, as she said, to her husband when he 



160 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

should summon her to share his fortunes. 
And at last the summons had come, but it 
was no joyful one. ^ 

Captain Bolton had been severely wounded 
in a skirmish with some of General Gilmore's 
troops, then besieging Charleston, and he had 
expressed a strong desire to see his wife and 
babes for what might but too probably be 
the last time. And the favour which Mr. 
Trent had to ask of me was, that I should 
undertake the task of escorting his niece and 
her children on the hazardous voyage to South 
Carolina. The hazards of which I have spo- 
ken of course belonged entirely to the last 
portion of the route, for the outward run 
from England to the British possession of 
New Providence was safe and easy. But be- 
tween the Bahama Islands and the Carolina 
coast lay the blockading squadron, and I 
knew that no trifling dangers and hardships 
must be risked by those whom love of gain 
or any higher motive should urge to elude 
the vigilance of the Federals. Be that as it 
might, I undertook the commission, and the 
next packet carried Mrs. Bolton and her two 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 161 

children, under my care, to Nassau, where the 
real difficulties of the pilgrimage began. 

To procure a passage to Charleston, Wil- 
mington, or some other and less known port 
of the beleaguered Confederacy, was, indeed, 
easy enough. The bay was full of vessels at- 
tracted to that once lonely roadstead by the 
gainful contraband commerce then at its 
height. There, at anchor, side by side, lay 
the bluff-bowed brig that had brought out a 
cargo of war material from England, and the 
swift rakish schooner destined to carry on the 
transhipped freight to a Southern harbour. 
All the fishing-boats, dories, and canoes, 
seemed to have been enlisted in the service of 
plying between the deep-laden vessels and the 
shore, and the quays were all too small to ac- 
commodate the towering piles of clothing and 
medicine, saddles, sabres, cavalry boots, kegs 
of gunpowder, and Birmingham rifles, that 
lay heaped upon wharf and jetty. Streets, 
landing-place, beach and bay, were all alive 
with the bustle and stir of a gainful and peril- 
ous traffic. Under such circumstances as 
these, to obtain a passage to the American 

VOL. III. M 



162 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

mainland might have appeared the simplest 
proceeding conceivable. 

Such, however, was far from being the 
case. I found, by listening to the flying re- 
ports that circulated about the town, and 
which invariably referred to the one absorbing 
topic of interest, that the blockade was more 
serious than we in England had believed it 
to be. Many of the sly low black-hulled 
steamers, many of the tall-masted schooners 
and brigantines, that lay awaiting an oppor- 
tunity to slip off unnoticed, were destined to 
capture. This was a mere matter of profit 
and loss, as an old merchant, whose English 
was made peculiar by the drawling Bermu- 
dian accent, explained to me on the second 
day of our stay at Nassau. 

*' You see, sir, one cargo in three pays, and 
one cargo in four saves us from being out of 
pocket . yes, mister. We count on some 
loss, we do, but if a clipper has the luck to 
get twice in with notions, and twice out with 
cotton, why the Yankees are welcome to her 
afterwards, hull, spars, and running gear/' 

" And the crew ?*' I inquired. 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 163 

But my communicative friend treated this 
part of the business lightly enough. The 
seamen had high pay, and took their share of 
the risk of being shot, drowned, or blown up, 
in consideration of extra wages. The captain 
and mates were allowed stowage for so many 
cubic feet of European goods one way, and so 
many cotton bales the other, and often had a 
per-centage on the amount realised by a fortu- 
nate venture. Success, therefore, meant 
wealth for the owners and officers, and at 
least a pocketful of dollars for the foremast- 
men, and in case of capture there was no 
danger of anything worse than a tedious 
and comfortless detention for some months 
in Fortress Monroe or elsewhere. When, 
however, I spoke of the probable results 
of an unsuccessful attempt to the pas- 
sengers, supposing the latter to be persons 
connected with the South by descent or 
adoption, the talkative Bermudian grew 
serious. 

" That, as he observed, " was no laughing 
matter. Uncle Sam was plaguy vexed with 
rebels or rebels' friends, and to get out of his 

M 2 



164 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

clutches, when once made prisoner, was not 
easy." 

And, indeed, I found that the boarding- 
hotels of the island were crammed with the 
families of Southerners, longing for a secure 
opportunity of rejoining the husbands and 
fathers who, far away in Virginia, Tennessee, 
or Carolina, were fighting or toiling in the 
cause of their new-born republic, but afraid 
to make the perilous plunge. If many ves- 
sels came back triumphant, many were taken 
or destroyed, and most of those that came 
victoriously in with a welcome freight of 
costly cotton could show the shot-holes in 
their sails, and the marks where federal can- 
non-balls had " hulled '* them during the 
fruitless chase. 

Mrs. Bolton, my charge, was a timid, deli- 
cate little woman, quite unfit to lighten my 
burden of responsibility by taking any portion 
of it on herself. She loved her husband 
dearly, and to reach the couch where he lay 
wounded, and perhaps dying, she was willing 
to endure hardships and confront dangers 
that at another time would have seemed 



THROUGH THE BLOOKADB. 165 

insurmountable to her. But as for any aid 
or advice in such a matter as running the 
blockade, I might as well have applied for 
counsel to her two baby girls, little Lucy and 
Fanny, as to their mother, my employer's 
niece. Thrown thus wholly upon my own 
resources, I spent much time in the prelimi- 
nary inquiries, and at last comforted myself 
that I had come to a sensible and practical 
decision. 

The vessel in which I took our passages 
was a swift-sailing English schooner, the 
Saucy Jane, of and from Liverpool. A beauti- 
ful craft she was, with her tapering masts and 
fine lines, lying like a duck on the heaving 
surges of the Nassau roadstead. But her 
chief attraction in my eyes was the high re- 
putation for seamanship and prudence which 
her commander had acquired. With his sail- 
ing vessel. Captain Harrison had made six 
successful trips, four to Charleston and two to 
Wilmington, in the very teeth of the block- 
ading squadron. In each case he had safely 
delivered a valuable cargo to the Confederate 
consignees, and had made the run home with 



166 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

a freight of cotton for the Lancashire mar- 
ket, and though chased, had got off scot-free, 
while fast steamers were daily being sunk, or 
driven ashore. In these bold and dexterous 
evasions of the Federal fleet .the merchant 
captain had amassed a considerable sum of 
money, and this was to be the Saucy Jane's 
last visit to a Southern port, at least with her 
present commander. 

"It's profitable work, very," said the 
daring young sailor, as he told me of his in- 
tention over a glass of wine in his little cabin, 
when our passages had been definitively 
engaged and paid for on board the schooner ; 
" but it's too like gambling to suit my taste, and 
I can't get out of my head that saying about 
the pitcher that goes often to the well. All 
I've made in six double trips . a tidy lump of 
dollars . is aboard the craft now, in the shape 
of quinine, and negro-cloth, and shoes, and 
fire-arms, ready to yield four hundred per 
cent profit if I can swap it for cotton, and 
as much more if I can land the cotton at 
Liverpool. And if all goes well, I can 
cut the concern, and sail to China in a 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 167 

three-master of my own, and Mary Anne and 

But here Captain Harrison came to a stop, 
probably remembering that he had told 
enough of his private affairs and prospects 
to a stranger. I took a fancy to this high- 
spirited young skipper, who was a year or 
two my junior, but a first-rate seaman, bold 
as a lion, and by no means as incautiously 
communicative in his dealings with all the 
world as he had shown himself with me. 

" You see,'* he frankly remarked, <* when a 
chap's knocked about the world, from port to 
port, as I have done since I was bound 'pren- 
tice aboard the Hood barque, in the Rio trade, 
he gets to know something of physiognomy. 
And I saw at once that you were what you 
represented yourself to be, even before you 
showed me the letters of credit drawn and 
signed by your people, that my owners bank 
with, too, as luck would have it. But, mind 
you, the island's choke-full of spies. They're 
about us all day long on one pretence or 
another, like wasps round a comb of honey. 
And there isn't so much as a word buzzed 



168 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

asbore that doesn't find its way, by fair means 
or foul, to that beauty there/' . 

Captain Harrison pointed to a dim speck 
hovering far out at sea, 'beyond the mouth of 
the bay, above which curled a thin wreath of 
dusky vapour. This was the United States 
steam-sloop Pocahontas, whose peculiar duty it 
was to watch Nassau and the ships anchored 
there. This vessel was perpetually a source 
of annoyance, not only to the merchants of the 
place, but also to the authorities. She was 
fond of lying, with steam up, ports open, and 
a spring on her cable, near some ship that was 
notoriously on the eve of departure for the 
Southern ports. And even now, when in 
compliance with the governor's peremptory 
commands, enforced by the presence of her 
Majesty's ship Fury, she had reluctanly retired 
to the prescribed limits of one marine league, 
she remained there as long as her coal would 
serve her, in hopes of cutting oflF some would- 
be blockade runner in the outset of her career. 

On shore there were other dangers. Lean 
wiry men, with keen features and restless eyes, 
were constantly to be met with at the bars of 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 169 

the hotels and taverns, from the handsomest 
hostelries down to the low-browed cabins where 
coarse Mexican corn-brandy was sold, and 
these, though loud and blatant as to their 
Southern sympathies, were nevertheless in con- 
stant communication with the American consul. 
More specious spies, either real Europeans or 
affecting the garb and speech of natives of the 
old continent, lurked in the boarding-houses, 
on the wharves, about the merchants' offices, 
and beguiled the unwary into conversation on 
the engrossing topic of the contraband trade. 
The sailors belonging to the different ships 
about to sail were so often tampered with, that 
many captains found it necessary to refuse all 
shore leave, lest the hour of departure should 
be signalled to the Federal cruiser lying in the 
offing, like a vulture on the wing. That she 
was signalled every night, by some concerted 
system of lights displayed from house-tops on 
shore, was no secret to any one in Nassau. 

I was by no means the only person eager to 
avail myself of the opportunity of crossing in 
the Saucy Jane to the mainland. Several 
parties, even of the more cautious among the 



170 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

Southerners, had arranged to embark when the 
time for sailing should arrive, and the number 
of passengers was only restricted by two cir- 
cumstances, one of which was, that the rate of 
fare demanded was considerable, and the other, 
that Captain Harrison was strict in his scrutiny 
of his would-be guests, and declined to encum- 
ber his cabins with either " loafers'* or sus- 
pected spies. 

I remember well, on the very day on which 
we were to go on board and await the land 
breeze to waft us smoothly out of harbour, 
under cover of the darkness, that a tap, a hesi- 
tating, timid tap, resounded against the panels 
of my door, the door of my room in Willing's 
Hotel. I was sitting alone in the wooden 
balcony under the striped awning that kept off 
the rays of the almost tropical sun, meditating, 
as I discussed my cigar, on the strange nature 
of the affair in which I found myself engaged. 
There was a singular dash of lawlessness about 
the business that contrasted oddly with the 
usual tenor of our quiet Lombard-street life, 
and the very idea of having to steal away, 
secretly and under cloud of night, from Nassau, 




THROUGH THB BLOCKADE. 171 

was anything but agreeable to a man of orderly 
and peaceful habits. However, I recollected 
the helpless children and their almost equally 
dependent mother, for whose safety I was 
responsible, and I consoled myself with the 
hope that in a few days at most my duty would 
be discharged, and the danger past. I had 
got so far in my musings when the tap I have 
mentioned caused me to turn my face towards 
the door, and in answer to my summons to 
" Come in,'* a strange figure presented itself 
in my apartment. 

The intruder was a tall, corpulent old man, 
in the costume of a Roman Catholic priest, 
but of so antiquated and grotesque a fashion 
that I found it extremely hard to suppress a 
smile as its wearer approached me, bowing and 
smiling with oily deference. His twinkling 
black eyes were meekly lowered as they met 
mine, and from the huge shovel-hat that he 
carried in one sun-burnt hand, the knotted 
fingers of which were adorned with silver 
rings, down the black cotton stockings 
and square toed shoes that protected his 
feet, the visitor might have sat for the portrait 



172 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

of a French village cur^ of the time of Louis 
the Fifteenth. And a cur6 he was, as well as 
I could gather from the perplexing jargon of 
mingled French and Spanish, eked out by a 
few oddly pronounced English phrases, in 
which he addressed me. His name he told 
me, was the Padre or Pere (for he used both 
terms indifiFerently) Duchochois, Antoine Du- 
chochois, parish priest of St. Gaspard, a village 
in Louisiana, in that wild region of unhealthy 
morasses that is called the Bayou Teche coun- 
try. This district, as I was aware, neither 
Butler nor Banks had proved able to subdue 
to the Federal sway, and there my new ac- 
quaintance had the spiritual charge of a poor 
and primitive population, who lived chiefly by 
fishing and the culture of rice among the 
swampy fields. Very few of the padre's 
parishioners, white, red, or black, could speak 
anything but French or Spanish, for even the 
seigneur to whom the estate belonged by char- 
ter was a genuine Creole colonist of the old 
stamp, and on this ground M. Duchochois 
begged me to excuse his ignorance of English, 
which it was rarely necessary for him to use. 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 173 

But the poor padre's tale was a pitiful one. 
He had been on a tour which he called a 
*' quete," and which was, in fact, a prolonged 
begging excursion on behalf of his needy 
flock, since the scanty substance of these 
simple people had been wantonly destroyed 
.by a party of Federal foragers, who had 
burned all that they could not carry ofi^, and 
the coasting vessel, in which the priest had 
embarked, had been run down by an English 
brig on its return voyage from Matamoras to 
New Providence. The captain of the mer- 
chantman had done all that could be expected 
of him in setting the Padre ashore at Nassau, 
and in giving him a few dollars by way of 
compensation for his slender stock of wearing 
apparel, which had gone to the bottom of the 
sea. But poor M. Duchochois was in much 
perplexity, anxious to get back to his parish 
and his people, sore afraid of the Yankees, 
whom he seemed to regard as devouring 
dragons, and quite unable to raise the funds 
needful to pay for a passage for himself and 
his Indian servant-boy, Blaise, to South 
Carolina. Once there, the cur^ had no 



174 . THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

doubt that from priest to priest, and from 
convent to convent, he could get passed on 
to his own rustic dwelling-place; but in 
Nassau, where all were absorbed in the 
gainful traffic of the hour, and where few 
could even understand his speech, the un- 
fortunate ecclesiastic was quite at a loss. 

In this strait, hearing that I was an 
Englishman, and reading, as he was polite 
enough to say, some hope in my face, poor 
M. Duchochois had come to throw himself on 
my compassion. Would I kindly use my 
influence with some ship captain to convey 
him and his boy Blaise over to the continent ? 
They would not be troublesome passengers. 
They would ranger themselves, they would 
creep into some hole or corner on board the 
ship, and remain as quiet and unobtrusive as 
mice. They would not ask for anything more 
than permission to occupy a little space on 
board the vessel. A little biscuit and a melon 
or two they could take on board with them . 
bah ! a bagatelle 1 they should cost the 
honourable captain nothing for their subsis- 
tence. And for their passage the padre 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. - 175 

would pay in prayers and an old man's bless- 
ing, for which, at any rate, M. le Capitaine 
Anglais would be none the worse. Would I 
intercede for him ? 

Now the cur^ was a grotesque personage 
in appearance, and he looked inconceivably 
ridiculous, as he squeezed his portly person 
into a corner of the room by way of exem- 
plifying his intention to " effacer " himself 
when on board. And when I thought of so 
fleshy a churchman subsisting on water-melon 
and dry biscuit, I felt a thrill of the same 
incredulity as that which was experienced by 
the Black Knight in Ivanhoe when Friar Tuck 
began to munch the dried peas. But I took 
a liking to the priest for all that, and could 
not help respecting him for the feeling manner 
in which he spoke of his tawny parishioners, 
his " poor shorn sheep," for whose sake he 
, had gone abroad as a clerical mendicant. 
And I readily promised to use my utmost 
endeavours to obtain for him the small boon 
he craved. The priest's eyes filled with tears 
when I spoke kindly to him. He thrust his 
hand into the pocket of his threadbare black 



176 i THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

soutane, drew out a tin snutf-box, and held it 
to me, open, with a little humble bow and a 
French grin of thankfulness. I do not like 
snuff, and it makes me sneeze, but I re- 
membered Sterne, and the Franciscan monk 
at Calais, with his little horn box, and I took 
a pinch as cordially as I could. And just 
then a louder tap came to the door, and in 
bounced Captain Harrison. 

The Saucy Jane's captain had come to 
give me some final instructions on the subject 
of embarking. We were on no account to 
come off before dusk ftom the shore, for 
though the Federal cruiser had met with 
some damage to her machinery, and was in 
harbour and under repairs, a suspicious 
steamer had been espied to seaward, and it 
was rumoured that the San Jacinto was off 
the coast. Seeing that I was not alone, the 
skipper would have retired, but I begged him 
to stay, and introduced the padre, with a 
brief statement of the latter's misfortunes, 
and a hint that it would be a charitable act 
to carry him safely across to the mainland. 

Harrison knit his brows at first, and keenly 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. . 177 

inspected the appearance of this petitioner for 
a free passage, but before long the young 
sailor's frown relaxed, and it was with a good- 
humoured smile that he said he would talk 
the matter over with his steward, and, if a 
berth could be found for the priest, he would 
send me word before sunset. In truth, a 
much more suspicious person than the skipper 
must have been disarmed by a survey of 
worthy M. Duchochois, as he stood, the pic- 
ture of piteous eagerness, with his horn- 
rimmed spectacles pushed up to his forehead, 
and with the marks of snuffy tears very visible 
on his sallow cheeks, his iron grey hair hang- 
ing down over the collar of his shabby 
soutane. Indeed, so childlike and simple was 
the poor old curd's anxiety to have his boon 
granted him, that neither Harrison nor I 
could resist his wistful look, and my exclama- 
tion of, " Upon my word, captain, the poor 
old gentleman must be one of us, if I pay the 
fare myself," was simultaneously uttered with 
Harrison's more genial, ** Cheer up, Monsieur 
le Curd, or whatever you call yourself. You 
shall be very welcome to a passage aboard us, 

VOL. III. N 



178 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

you and your black boy, and we'll answer for 
it you shan't have lost flesh by the time we 

drop anchor in Charleston Hilloa ! what 

on the earth is the man about ?" 

For the padre, vehement in his gratitude, 
had caught hold of Harrison's hand and in- 
sisted on kissing it in sign of thankfulness, 
while his polyglot blessings fell thickly on us 
both. With some difficulty the ecclesiastic 
was induced to calm his transports of joy, 
and he left the hotel to return, as he said, to 
the poor lodging in which he had left his 
servant, and what few necessaries he still 
possessed, with the understanding that he was 
to return at sundown, when he could embark 
vnth the rest of the party. 

*'One word," cried Harrison, as if a 
sudden thought had occurred to him, while 
the padre's hand was still upon the handle 
of the door "monsieur, pas un mot, keep 
it dark, will you, about your appointment 
this evening, do you understand?" But 
the padre looked as blinkingly unapprehen- 
sive of our commander's meaning as an owl 
in the daylight. 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 179 

"PlaiUl, M. le Capitaine?" he asked 
timidly, and off came the shovel-hat again. 
I was obliged to explain in French that the 
skipper had reasons for wishing the cur6 to 
keep his approaching departure a secret from 
any acquaintances the latter might have 
formed in the Uttle town, and this M. 
Duchochois readily and humbly agreed to dp, 
though with no gleam of intelligence in his 
round black eyes. 

" May I go now, messieurs ?" said the priest, 
with another bow, and we exchanged salu- 
tations, and parted. 

" That parson will never set the Thames on 
fire, poor old boy !'' laughed Harrison, as the 
curb's footfall died away in the distance. The 
skipper only stayed to give me some parting 
instructions as to the particular part of the 
wharf where we were to embark, rather a more 
secluded spot than the quay in front of the 
hotel. Thither our baggage was to be con- 
veyed through the network of narrow lanes 
behind the wharves, so as to avoid unfriendly 
observation. And, once past the point where 
the San Jacinto lay watching for prey, the 

N 2 



180 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

captain of the Saucy Jane had few fears of a 
successful termination to the voyage. 

How I watched the sun go down on that 
evening; suffusing the sea with rainbow tints 
that presently merged into rose colour, deep 
crimson, and blood-red of the darkest hue, and 
so abruptly faded out, and left the surface of 
the water as dusky as indigo. There was very 
little moon, and though the stars shone out 
white and briUiant, fog-wreaths came curling 
over the waters as the land-breeze began to 
sigh through the rigging of the ships in the 
bay. As we were cautiously rowed out to 
where the Saucy Jane lay, with her brailed-up 
canvas shaking loosely on boon and yard, 
every flash of the oars elicited a phosphores- 
cent gleam from the gently heaving water. 
The passengers and their baggage filled two 
large boats and a dory, and we were among; 
the occupants of the first boat. By we, I 
mean Mrs. Bolton and her little girls, myself, 
and the padre and his Indian boy. The last 
mentioned, a spare copper-skinned lad, dressed 
in blue cotton, and with a yellow silk hand- 
kerchief tied tightly round his lank black 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 181 

hair, like the fillet worn by horse-riders in a 
circus, sat impassive behind his master, and 
looked more like a bronze statue than a living 
creature. The padre, on the other hand, was 
full of simple elation and good spirits. He 
chuckled and talked in his queer jargon, 
making every one smile, and was evidently 
overjoyed at his good fortune. Mrs. Bolton 
. poor little woman . was in a more cheerful 
frame of mind than I had yet seen her in. 
Hitherto we had been met by baffling delays 
on all hands, but now we were fairly off . 
really " going to Henry at last," as she said ; 
and I heard her murmuring to her little ones 
that they should " soon see papa, now." 

The instant we were all aboard, and had 
answered to our names as the steward read 
them off from his list by the shaded light of 
a ship lantern, anchor was weighed, quickly 
but cautiously. There was no shrilly piercing 
fife to encourage the men . no hearty chant 
of Yo, heave, yo ! as the crew went stamping 
round after the spinning capstan bars. But 
if the work was done silently, it was expe- 
ditiously performed, and as if by magic the 



I 



1S2 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

broad sails dropped from their festoons, and 
the gallant schooner, spreading her white 
wings like an albatross, glided off to sea- 
ward. A sigh of satisfaction burst from 
many hearts as the vessel began to move from 
her anchorage. Mr. Trent's niece was not 
the only one on board whose hopes and 
affections centered in the land towards which 
our prow now pointed. The breeze was 
steady, and the Saucy Jane, slightly heeling 
over in response to its welcome breath, flew 
through the water at a rate that proved how 
well she deserved her reputation as a fast 
sailing craft. Still' the utmost caution was 
preserved. No lights were shown. Captain 
Harrison conned the schooner himself, nor 
did his vigilance appear to relax, until, more 
than an hour after we had left our moorings, 
he laid his hand familiarly on my shoulder, 
saying, "All right, now, Mr. Phillips. Do 
you see that faint blotch of crimson, red and 
yellow, the smoky light three miles off; no, 
more to leeward ? That is the San Jacinto. 
The Yankees won't make much of us this 
time, or my name's not Jack Harrison. 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 183 

And, indeed, a naore fortunate voyage, to 
all appearance, no vessel had ever made. Day 
after day the weather was beautiful, the sea 
snQooth, and the winds, though light, still 
favourable. We saw no Federal cruisers. 
Twice, indeed, we fell in with armed vessels, 
but these our skipper's experienced eye recog- 
nised as British ships of war, even before they 
drew near enough for the red,' white, and 
blue of the Union Jack to be visible by means 
of our best glasses. And on one sultry after- 
noon the cry of " Land, ho !" was raised, and 
the Southern exiles on board set up a cry of 
joy, and clapped their hands exultingly, for 
they knew that the low blue Une, like a cloud 
bank, could be no other than the coast of 
South Carolina. 

Somewhat to the disappointment of his 
lady passengers, however, the captain declined 
to sail into Charleston harbour, as he might 
easily have done, before sunset on that even- 
ing. He knew too well that to make such an 
attempt would simply be to run into the lion's 
mouth. We could see no Federal cruiser at 
that moment, but there could be no doubt 



184 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

that many war vessels of every calibre and 
class, from the ferry-boat hastily armed with 
a branch of nine-inch Parrot guns, to the 
swift steam frigate, lay lurking among the 
numerous islands that skirt the coast so 
thickly. It would have been folly to have 
run the gauntlet through the Yankee squadron 
in broad daylight, whereas by night the 
chance of eluding hostile eyes was an excel- 
lent one. Harrison knew the entrance to 
the harbour well ; his memory for shoals and 
sand-banks, for channels and shallows, was 
remarkable, and one of his crew was a 
Charleston man born, and well qualified to 
act as a pilot in his native waters. 

The schooner was, therefore, moored, stem 
and stern, close under the shelter of a con- 
venient islet, a long low strip of sand, crested 
by palmettoes and overgrown with brushwood, 
and which intervened between us and the 
blockading squadron. The sails were furled, 
the colours hauled down, and the Saucv Jane 
lay concealed, only her bare masts rising 
gaunt and indistinct over the tufted trees of 
the islet. It was confidently believed that the 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 185 

best telescopes on board the Federal men-of- 
war would fail to distinguish any trace of our 
whereabouts, while, towards midnight, we 
could resume our voyage with a fair prospect 
of success. The vessel lay in deep water, so 
close to the shore that a couple of planks were 
thrust oat as a bridge to connect the gangway 
with the sand-bank, and most of us gladly 
availed ourselves of the opportunity for a 
ramble on dry land. Mrs. Bolton, whose 
spirits had improved as we approached the 
country she so longed to reach, was one of the 
group of ladies who visited the islet, where 
the children were delighted to run and play 
on the firm white beach, covered with bright 
shells, and whence terapins and other small 
turtles floundered hastily at the approach of 
a human foot, and splashed into the limpid 
blue water beneath. With this party was the 
padre, M. Duchochois. This worthy eccle- 
siastic had become a general favourite on 
board, thanks to his quaint good-nature, and 
amusing eccentricities. People could not help 
laughing at him, but they liked him, and the 
children, who teased him a good deal at first, 



186 THEOUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

had ended by voting him grand master of 
their revels. 

A curious sight it was, that of a cluster of 
little boys and girls, unconscious of the peril 
that might accrue from the neighbourhood of 
the Federal foes, gathered around the tall old 
cur^, and with eager gestures appealing to 
him to devise some new game for them to 
play at. And it was none the less curious to 
watch the cur^ himself, as intent on the 
amusement of the moment, apparently, as his 
little friends, taking snuff noisily, and volubly 
chatting in his strange dialect of three lan- 
guages woven into one. The ladies on board 
the Saucy Jane, who had at first been some- 
what shocked at the uncouthness of this poor 
priest, now voted him a dear good creature, 
and a subscription had been already proposed 
for the purpose of sending him and his Indian 
servant-lad home to St. Gaspard. This lad, 
Blaise, whom the children had dubbed Man 
Friday, was a taciturn boy, like all his race, 
but evidently attached to the priest with an 
almost canine fidelity. He was seldom far 
from his master, but on this occasion he was 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 187 

not, as usual, ready to hold the large red- 
cotton umbrella over the head of M. Ducho- 
chois, a ceremony which he often gravely per- 
formed on deck. 

Meanwhile, several of the male passengers, 
with Captain Harrison, sat smoking their ci- 
gars in a shady nook of the islet, screened 
from the sun's rays by the long drooping 
leaves of the feathery palmettoes overhead, 
and almost walled in by thickets of the olean- 
der, the nopal, and the prickly pear, gorgeous 
with large red blossoms. Everybody seemed 
happy and hopeful. Suddenly the captain 
sprang to his feet, with a fierce oath that died 
away into a shout of anger : 

" Hilloa ! on board there. Who did that ?" 

One of the mates, lounging half asleep over 
the taflFrail, looked up with surprise at the 
sound of his commander's voice. 

" Look alive, there ! Who loosed that 
sail ?" cried the captain. 

And, as w^e all glanced upwards, we saw, 
to our astonishment, that the maintopsail of 
the schooner was loose, and heavily flapping 
to and fro in the freshening breeze, like the 



188 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

broad wing of some wounded sea-bird. It 
needed but a glimpse of Harrison's look of 
wrathful dismay, as he sprang on board and 
gave his orders . orders that instantly sent 
three or four seamen scrambling hurriedly up 
the rigging to reduce the sail . to assure us 
that mischief was afoot. In a very short 
time the fluttering canvass was close reefed, 
but to discover the offender who had cast the 
sail loose was less easy. In vain the captain 
sternly interrogated such of the crew as had 
been on deck. All declared that they knew 
nothing of the matter. One sailor, who had 
been dozing under the bulwarks aft, did, in- 
deed, say that he had opened his eyes a few 
minutes before, and had, while in a state be- 
tween sleeping and waking, seen some one 
jump out of the standing rigging, and slip 
down the fore-hatchway. And it was his be- 
lief that this person was no other than the 
padre's boy, Indian Blaise. 

But Blaise was found fast asleep in his 
lair below, and he did not seem even to under- 
stand what was said to him when he was 
asked, in French, whether he had been aloft 



X 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 189 

lately. He shook his head in dissent, how- 
ever, and indeed no one had ever seen the 
Indian ascend the rigging, or believed him 
capable of getting high enough to loosen the 
sail, even if there had been any comprehen- 
sible reason for such an act on his part. The 
most natural conjecture was that the sail had 
been carelessly secured, and the captain's only 
hope was that the tellrtale canvass had not at- 
tracted the eyes of any sharp-sighted look-out 
man on board of a Federal ship. And as 
hour passed after hour, and no column of 
smoke rose black against the darkening violet 
sky, giving token of the unwelcome approach 
of an enemy, we breathed more freely again, 
and all looked forward to breakfasting in 
Charleston itself. The sun went down sink- 
ing into a bank of grey clouds, and there 
were signs of a probable change of weather, but 
still the sea was calm. We were all aboard 
again, supper was over, and the lights were 
extinguished, and the passengers in their 
berths, somewhat earlier than usual. The 
deck was left to the watch, and as the 
schooner's bell told off the hours we knew 



190 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

that the time for sailing would soon arrive. 
I was lying, half-dressed, on the tiny bed in 
my little cabin, when I heard a voice say, in 
a husky, smothered tone, . " Not yet ! Japh ! 
I see one of the Britishers leaning over the 
side, forward. Keep in the shadow.'* 

And then followed a gentle splashing 
sound, and a faint tapping against the plank- 
ing, as if some boat or canoe were being 
guided along the schooner's side by the joint 
force of a paddling oar and a human hand 
that grasped the woodwork of the vessel's side 
and drew the boat forward. Of this I should 
have thought little . nothing was more likely 
than that a boat should have been lowered for 
some purpose connected with our getting 
clear of the sand-banks and sunken rocks^that 
were numerous in our immediate proximity 
. but the words were suspicious, and the 
voice was wonderfully like that of the good 
old priest, M. Duchochois. For a moment I 
hesitated as to whether I should seek the cap- 
tain or one of the mates to communicate 
what I had heard, but the more I thought of 
the matter the less certain was I that I had 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 191 

caught the exact meaning of the speaker. I 
had been drowsy and only half awake, and 
the very notion that the cur^ had been the 
owner of the voice was a naanifest absurdity 
that made me consider the whole affair , un- 
worthy a second thought. I listened, but 
could hear nothing, and soon sank into a real 
slumber. 

I was awakened by the quick tramp of 
feet overhead, the word of command, the ratt- 
ling down of coils of rope upon the deck, the 
quick wash of the surging water along the 
schooner's sides. Evidently sail had been 
made on the Saucy Jane, and we were head- 
ing for Charleston harbour. I got up, threw 
on my upper garments, and went on deck, 
where I found two or three of the male pas- 
sengers. They were talking together near 
the stern with excited gestures, but in cau- 
tious tones. As I drew near, I caught the 
words *' the boat," and at once asked if any- 
thing had gone wrong. 

" Yes, Mr. Phillips, the dingey's missing," 
said one of the Southerners, a tall Georgian, 
who bore the title of major; "it was the 



192 THEOUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

only boat towing astern, as you may have no- 
ticed, all the others being on board. Just be- 
fore sailing it was found to have disappeared, 
though in what manner " 

" Captain Harrison suspects," interrupted 
another ; but he was interrupted in his turn 
by the captain, who came quickly up, and 
said in a voice that shook with suppressed 
anger : 

" There's treachery afoot, gentlemen. The 
plugs have been removed from the bottom of 
every boat, and not an oar but has been sawn 
through just above the blade. Some rascally 
traitor must " 

" Sail, ho !" sung out the sailor from the 
mast-head. **A large ship on the weather 
bow." 

" Sail, ho ! a steamer to leeward !" called 
out the look-out man in the bows. 

The captain started, sprang into the rig- 
ging, and took a hasty survey of the probable 
enemy. As he did so, the red flash of a 
cannon-shot lit the darkness of the night, and 
the bellowing report followed sullenly over the 
waters. 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 193 

" Down helm, you 1 put her about ! smartly, 
now, my lads V' shouted the captain ; but 
another flash succeeded, and down came the 
schooner's mainboom, mainsail and all, thun- 
dering upon the deck, knocking down and 
bruising several of the crew, while a third 
shot crashed into the deck, and made the 
white splinters fly. Escape was impossible 
in our crippled condition. We backed the 
topsails, and in ten minutes more a large 
dark steamer had ranged alongside. We 
were immediately boarded by a powerful force 
of armed seamen and marines, and declared 
a lawful prize to the U.S. steam-sloop Susque- 
hannah. 

By the light of the battle lanterns we were 
all paraded on deck as prisoners, when what 
was our amazement at recognising in the 
lieutenant who commanded the boarders no 
less a personage than the cur^ of St. Gaspard, 
the Rev. M. Duchochois. Yes, there could 
be no mistake about it. The shovel-hat and 
shabby soutane and horn spectacles had 
been replaced by navy blue cloth, a gold- 
laced cap, and a belt, in which a revolver 

VOL. III. o 




194 THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 

balanced the cutlass that hung on the left 
side, but the crafty black eyes were those of 
our late prot^g^, though the expression was 
wholly changed. 

" Yes, gentlemen ; ladies, your humble ser- 
vant," said the spy, with a sneer of triumphant 
malice; *'old Papa Duchochois, very much 
at your service in his new capacity of heu- 
tenant in Uncle Sam*s navy, you rebel green- 
horns.'* 

And, indeed, the villain, for the part he 
had played in practising on our compassion 
was to enable him the better to betray us, 
was Lieutenant Aminadab Hitch, of the Sus- 
quehanna, while grinning at his principal's 
side, with the copper-coloured pigment but 
half washed from his cunning face, was the 
ci-devant Indian boy, Blaise, alias Japhet 
Bunch, a Yankee corporal of marines. We 
heard afterwards that the lieutenant, who was 
famous for his power of personating an 
assumed character, had visited Nassau for 
the express purpose of securing the prize 
money of so valuable a capture as the Saucy 
Jane to his own war vessel. It was his 



THROUGH THE BLOCKADE. 195 

accomplice, the pretended Indian lad, who 
had stealthily ascended the rigging and 
loosened the sail to give notice to the look- 
out men of the sloop of the whereabouts of 
the blockade runner. After this, the two 
worthies had stolen the dingey, first disabling 
the other boats from pursuit, and had pulled 
out to sea, where, as they had expected, they 
had seen a preconcerted signal from their own 
ship, and had been picked up by her before 
we approached the channel through which 
the false cur^ was aware of the skipper's 
intention to pass. Had we even eluded the 
Susquehanna, we must have been infallibly 
sunk or taken by the Portland, which was 
awaiting us on the other tack. 

I do not wish to dwell on the scenes of 
misery that ensued on board the schooner 
when husbands were torn from their wives, 
anc[ fathers separated from their children, 
to be consigned to the dreary captivity of 
Forts Warren and Lafayette. Nor was it 
pleasant to see the despair of my charge, 
poor Mrs. Bolton, whose hopes of seeing her 
husband again in life were, to all appearance, 

o 2 



196 THB0U6H THE BLOCKADE. 

dashed to the ground when on the eve of 
being realised ; while, to poor Captain Harri- 
son, the affair was simply ruin. The sight of 
bis pale angry face haunts me still, as he was 
led away to be placed in irons, like the rest 
of the crew and oflScers. However, the 
caprice or mercy of the Federal authorities 
procured the release of Mrs. Bolton, as well 
as of several of the other ladies, after a short 
detention ; and, though I was not myself 
permitted to accompany my charge within 
the Confederate lines, I was glad to hear 
that she and her children had arrived safely 
at Charleston, and still more glad to hear 
that Captain Bolton's recovery was considered 
probable. And thus ended what was my 
first, and will most assuredly be my last, 
experience of blockade running. 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 



The mare swerved, dashing the high lightly 
built gig against 'a stump by the side of the 
narrow road; off flew the spidery wheel; 
down came the fast-trotting chesnut ; and out 
like a brace of rockets were flung the driver 
and myself. There was a moment of scuf- 
fling, floundering, and general entanglement, 
while a thousand sparks of fire danced before 
my eyes, and then I was creeping away from 
the broken wreck, when I heard Ben, the 
driver, cry suddenly : " J'hoshaphat, mister, 
mind her heels, or youVe a gone coon !" And 
I have an indistinct remembrance of receiv- 
ing two or three stunning blows from what 
seemed to be a blacksmith's sledge-hammer. 



198 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

and of hearing a loud shout of human voices 
as I fainted. 

When I again opened my eyes I found 
myself lying on a bank, a few yards from the 
spot where the accident had occurred. The 
smashed gig lay in the roadway, but the 
mare had long since kicked herself free, and 
was gone. Ben, my careless or unlucky 
charioteer, stood dolefully whistling, with the 
whip in his hand. His face was scratched, 
and his garments were muddy, but he seemed 
uninjured, though dismayed. Six or seven 
men in working clothes were lounging about, 
and apparently Conversing on the subject of 
the recent upset, but only one seemed to 
concern himself about my personal condi- 
tion. He was a tall muscular young fellow, 
with a fine handsome face, and a rich bronzed 
complexion. He was better dressed as well 
as better looking than the^ others, though 
he wore homespun cloth, while the rest of 
the party were in patched and discoloured 
suits of black. Kneeling beside me on the 
bank, this young farmer . for it was easy to 
guess his rank in life . was supporting my 



THE OHIO OIL WELL, 199 

head with a gentleness that seemed wonderful 
for one of his thews and sinews. 

*' Labour lost, Joe/* observed one shabby 
smoker from his seat : which, by the way, 
was on the very stump that had occasioned 
the accident. "The Britisher, or Dutch- 
man, or whatever he be, air as dead as Julep 
Caesar/* 

Weak and ill as I was, there was some- 
thing in this conversion of the Dictator's 
name into a Yankee idiom which tickled my 
risible nerves, and I gave a feeble chuckle. 

*' He's alive, I tell you," answered Joe ; 
" though it does sicken a chap, a few, to git 
such a pounding as that. I'd like to see you, 
Zack Brown, after such a dose of cold iron. 
You'd sing a trifle less positive, or I ain't Joe 
Mallory." 

There was a laugh, which Joe cut short by 
asking which of the bystanders had some 
" whisky medicine" about him ? A bottle of 
this potent cordial having been produced, the 
farmer put it to my lips, and with arbitrary 
kindness forced me to swallow as much of the 



200 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

fiery liquor as I could imbibe without actual 
suffocation. 

" I knowM," said Joe, in a dogmatic way, 
" what puts new Ufe into a man in such a case 
as this, though I ain't overfond of the monon- 
gahela in gin'ral. Do ye feel to be stronger, 
sir, now ?'* 

This was addressed to me, and I contrived 
to answer by some feeble acknowledgment of 
his Samaritan kindness. 

'* No bones bruk ?" inquired Joe, adding, as 
I shook my head, " then mebbe you could 
make a shift to walk, leanin' on me ? Sparta 
ain't above a big mile off.'* 

I tried to rise, and with the help of the 
young farmer I did contrive to reach my feet, 
but I could not keep them. One ankle was 
smartly sprained, the foot having been awk- 
wardly twisted under me as I fell ; and I sank 
down with a groan, as helpless as a rag effigy 
of a man. It became incumbent to carry me; 
and the bystanders, now they were quite 
satisfied that I was alive, volunteered with a 
pretty good grace to assist in my removal. A 
light iron gate that gave admission into a 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 201 

field hard by, and which contrasted oddly 
with the rough worm fence of unbarked wood, 
was taken off its hinges to form a litter, 
and I was borne away on this impromptu 
palanquin. 

Ben the driver had by this time set off in 
plodding pursuit of the truant mare ; but, 
before starting, he halloed out a stentorian 
request to know " wheer they were takin' his 
stranger tew, because Major Staines might 
like to action him in county court for the 

gig." 

I could hardly help laughing again, though 
my bones ached cruelly, at the suggestion of 
suing a man for the damage done in half 
killing him, but I felt a thrill of languid 
pleasure when my protector rejoined, 

" Darn the major and his actions ! He 
won't cl'ar many dollars that way, for 'tain't 
fust time that tearin' chesnut brute have 
made a smash of wood and iron, let alone 
humans. That mare's unpopular in the coun- 
try, and no jury would give a red cent if her 
neck was bruk. Anyhow, if the major wants 



202 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

a dose of law, tell him the stranger's under 
Joe Mallory's roof/' 

The other men gave a growl of surprise. 

" Why, Joe," said he who was called Zach 
Brown, " I reckoned we'd jest drop the chap 
at Dan Hunt's, the taverner's. You oughter 
hev more wrinkles by this than to lumber up 
your house with a critter that wants a deal of 
waitin' on, and mebbe hasn't shinplasters 
enough to pay for his board." 

I made some answer to this, or rather I 
began to assure my hearers that I was better 
provided with money than they perhaps 
guessed from my scanty luggage and plain 
dress ; but Joe Mallory pressed his broad 
hand on my mouth to silence me, and angrily 
told Zach that " when he sent in a bill for 
food and shelter to a hurt traveller, he hoped 
niggers would trample on him." 

Zach said no more, and before long I was 
carried into the young farmer's house, and 
laid on a bed. The men were going at once, 
after taking a dram of whiskey, but I insisted 
on remunerating each of them with a dollar, 
which after some hesitation, they consented to 




THE OHIO OIL WELL. 208 

receive for " loss of time." Very odd fellows 
they were . honest, I am sure ; proud, in their 
way, as Hoosiers almost always are ; and 
not wilfully unkind, but blunt of feelings 
themselves and coarsely indifferent to the 
feelings of others. Before they departed, I 
heard one of them ask Joe, in no smothered 
tone, "what whim made him have the 
stranger up there?" to which Joe made an- 
swer, in a more subdued tone, that "Dan's 
tavern was no place for a delicate town-raised 
critter to be ill in, and that it was plain I felt 
the banging more than I said." 

When the men were gone, the master of 
the house called aloud the respective names of 
'* Aunty!" "Phillis!" and "Terence!" but 
no ajiswer was returned. Muttering that he 
would soon return, my new friend strode out 
into the yard, whence issued the familiar 
sounds produced by gobbling turkeys, lowing 
calves, and grumbling pigs. The house was 
a long low structure, mainly composed of 
timber, with chimneys of brick; but it was 
very substantial and roomy. The chamber in 
which I had been placed, was one of a nestv of 



204 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

similar rooms, opening into a passage, at the 
end of which was the great kitchen, decorated 
with dangling hams, smoked venison, corn 
cobs, barrels of pickled pork, huge yellow 
pumpkins, and sundry shelves of pewter and 
New England crockery. At the other end 
was a door, seldom opened, leading into the 
best parlour : where stood the smart furniture, 
the china, fine linen, and so forth, never used 
but at wedding, funeral, or christening. The 
quilt on which 1 lay was of a coarse quality, 
but scrupulously clean ; the brown rough 
sheets of the bed were very clean too; the 
pine planks of the floor, thanks to soap and 
water, were as white as the glaring walls on 
which hung a few cheap coloured prints of 
Bonaparte's battles, and the Queen of Sheba's 
visit to Solomon. The house was that of a 
tolerably well-to-do Western farmer: rather 
neater than the majority, but with no luxury 
or ostentation. While I was musing on the 
strange quarters in which I found myself, my 
host returned, accompanied by a negro girl 
and an old white woman, dressed pretty 
much alike in common cotton prints of Lo- 



lb 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 205 

well make. There was a great difference in 
their behaviour, however, for while the negress, 
whom I shrewdly guessed to be the Phillis so 
often called in vain, merely grinned a saluta- 
tion, the old woman bustled up to my bedside 
in a moment. 

" You're welcome, stranger," said she, " but 
we can talk 'nother time, I guess. A nasty 
tumble! What a bruise that is on your 
temple . Til jest fix that . Phillis, the bottle 
off the shelf in my room, third from the end . 
jump and get it, and be spry, do. That gal 
moves as if she'd lead in her shoes. All 
them darkies do. Sprained your foot, eh, 
mister? Let me turn it about . so, does 
that hurt you ? then, run, Joe, and get the 
black box. Fve got somethin' there woundy 
good for sprains." 

Joe good-humouredly hurried off to fetch 
the rude medicine-chest, saying with a 
pleasant laugh that *'he knowed aunty be 
glad of the job. She was a nurse, if ever any 
woman was." 

Certainly Miss Esther Mallory, Joe's aunt, 
was a born nurse, as well as a bom gossip. 



206 THB OHIO OIL WELL, 




She could do anything and everything that 
was required in a sick-room, except hold her 
tongue. Talk she must, and while with real 
kindness and untiring skill she appUed ban- 
dages and lotions to my bruised head and 
arm and my sprained ankle ; while she brewed 
me tea and barley-water ; while she adjusted 
the pillows under my head, and superintended 
Phillis in the boiling of a chicken for my 
supper; she never ceased to intermit the rapid 
Bow of ber discourse. 

From this notable female, in the course of 
the evening, I heard all the family history. 
How the Mallorys had migrated West from' 
their original abode in New Jersey, where they 
had been, my hostess rather boastfully said 
since William and Mary. How she, Esther 
Mallory, had been induced, sorely against her 
will, to accompany her two brothers, Joe's 
uncle and father, to the then half-known wilds 
of Ohio. How she had been there a long 
time and didn't half like it. and had seen 

Further, the good old maid related how Joe's 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 207 

uncle had died of fever, and how Joe had suc- 
ceeded his father in the property, two years 
before, while she had stayed to keep house for 
him till he got a wife, being fully determined 
to go back as soon as her nephew's marriage 
should take place, and live on her savings, or, 
as she called them, " money-scrapes," in her 
native village. 

Miss Esther was about sixty : angular, raw- 
boned, with a hard-featured face puckered 
into as many wrinkles as a withered apple, 
with keen blue eyes, and brisk active move- 
ments. I had seen many women in New 
England who might have been her twin-sisters, 
and I knew the race well . thrifty clean bust- 
ling busy-bodies, with a supreme contempt for 
the dawdlers and slatterns down South. A 
good cook was Miss Esther, a good manager, 
a skilled sempstress, but a better nurse. If 
she could do any one thing better than another 
it was tending the sick, and I believe she felt 
personally grateful to me for giving her an 
occasion of exhibiting her knowledge and 
adroitness. At any rate she was very affable 
and chatty, and took the opportunity of Joe's 



208 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

absence to sing her nephew's praises' adding : 
" Poor lad ! poor lad ! He's a heavy heart, 
for all he tries to keep up a smilin' face. Drat 
love and sentiment, sez I." 

I started. Sure enough, my kind young 
host had a melancholy look, unaccountable in 
one in robust health, tolerably well off, and 
evidently respected by his neighbours. I had 
noticed it before, but my bruised limbs and 
throbbing temples had put the matter out of 
court, until Miss Esther's remark aroused my 
curiosity and sympathy. Little pressing was 
needed to elicit from the garrulous aunt what, 
after all, was no secret. Joe Mallory had been 
for some time the accepted lover of Susan 
Boone, only daughter of Deacon Gabriel 
Boone, one of the most comfortable farmers in 
the district, and who, as Miss Esther said, was 
" rather uppish " about family, being own 
cousin to the renowned General Daniel Boone, 
the explorer of Kentucky. The marriage had 
unluckily been postponed : a circumstance 
due, I fancy, to Miss Esther's own obstructive- 
ness, since it was her desire that " a good chist 
full of linen web " should be spun at home 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 209 

previous to the establishment of the young 
bride as mistress of the house. In the in- 
terval, a new discovery had subverted the old 
order of things. This was no other than the 
discovery of petroleum, or, as Miss Esther 
called it, " the ile." It had been found, its 
value had been greedily appreciated by a 
population not very apt to let any source of 
profit slip through their fingers, and the 
favoured tract of country, Ohio, New York, 
and Pennsylvania, as well as Canada West, 
had ever since been in a fever of speculation. 
Here were diggings, not indeed auriferous, but 
of a substance capable of transmutation into 
five-dollar notes, brought home to the very 
doors of the people. Of course property main- 
tained its rights ; there was no scramble ; but 
some grew rich by fii>ding wealth bubbling 
up at their very thresholds, and among this 
number was Deacon Boone, Susan's father. 

One of the two " flowing wells" of rock oil 
which had come to light in the parish of 
Sparta was on Deacon Boone's land. Luckier 
than most of his neighbours, almost all of 
whom had oil beneath their fields, but oil 

VOL. III. p 



210 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

only to be raised by expensive pumping, after 
the spade and mattock had done their work, 
the old deacon was proprietor of an absolute 
spring of the odoriferous liquid, which seemed 
inexhaustible. Thousands of gallons, every 
drop of which had its market value, daily 
spouted and splashed into the air, and an im- 
mense per-centage of the produce was lost for 
lack of barrels and labour. Under these cir- 
cumstances it is not wonderful that Deacon 
Boone, always a weak vain man, lost his 
head, and grew, as Miss Esther quaintly said, 
" most too proud to dirty his shoes walkin'/* 
This elation was accompanied by coldness of 
demeanour towards his old friends, whom he 
was loth any longer to regard in the light of 
equals, and by an ominous coldness of bear- 
ing towards his intended son-in-law. Besides 
this, he had dropped hints of the brilliant 
prospects in store for his family; hints that 
struck poor Joe with dismay, since his posi- 
tion was altered now. A little while before, 
Joe, with a tidy farm and a little sum in 
bank, had been a reasonably good match for 
the daughter of a corn and cattle factor ; but 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 211 

he was become relatively poor when compared 
with the fortunate owner of a flowing well 
of wealth. 

" And the young lady herself?" asked I, 
with some interest ; " is she as mercenary as 
her father? As ready to give up a poor 
suitor, in hopes of a better match afterwards, 
I mean ?'* 

Miss Esther answered rather slowly, as she 
plied her knitting needles over the fast grow- 
ing stocking of unbleached wool. 

" Wall I I hairdly know, sir. Young gals 
are that flighty and flim, they don't know the 
differ atween yes and no, sometimes. Susan 
likes our Joe well enough, but her father and 
mother are nouther of 'em over-stocked with 
sense, and they go clack ! clack ! about how 
she's to be a fine lady and that, and visit 
Europe, and keep cumpny with grand folks, 
and wear sat'n and lace, and mebbe the gal's 
little head's getting turned. But I bel've, I 
do believe, her heart air a good and tender 
one, as it had oughter, seein' Joe desarves a 
f^ood wife." 

Joe, I must observe, was out just then, 

p2 



o 



212 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

looking after a * loping deer/ which Terence, 
the old Irish hired man who helped on the 
farm, had caught a glimpse of in the corn : 
and therefore I had time to hear a great deal 
about the Boone family. Among other things 
was a story, the moral of which was that 
Deacon Boone owed Joe a debt of gratitude, 
which rendered his present conduct in giving 
him the cold shoulder peculiarly mean and 
contemptible. Years before, when the State 
of Ohio was more thinly settled, the deacon 
had joined a party of hunters who had 
brought a bear to bay. Old Boone was no 
experienced woodsman, but was vain and 
fond of applause, and perhaps had a notion 
that sylvan prowess ran in his blood as a 
kinsman of the great Nimrod, Daniel Boone ; 
and he rashly approached the desperate animal 
and was caught in its dangerous embrace. 

" IVe heerd tell," said Miss Esther, " that 
the sight wur horrid. There wur the b'ar, 
with red eyes gUtrin' with rage, and a mouth 
full of blood and foam, and the deacon faintin' 
with fright and the hug he got, and never a 
man durst fire, for fear they'd miss the beast 




THE OHIO OIL WELL. 213 

and hit the man. But our Joe . a mere boy 
then . what does he do but run in with his 
hunting knife, and soon med the b'ar drop the 
deacon and tackle to him. That war a tussle, 
mister, for a b'ar takes a deal of killin', and 
when they brought back our Joe here, he war 
tore to bits and all blood. You may see the 
great scar on his forehead yet, whar the b'ar's 
claws scratched him, jest as he drove the 
knife to its heart. T'aint every big man in 
the settlements, let alone a lad, cares to face a 
b'ar with on'y the knife ; and no wonder the 
deacon allays petted Joe arterwards, and used 
to take a pleasure in seein' him and Susan 
together, and sayin' they'd make a handsome 
couple, and so they might, if 'twarn't for this 
weary ile." 

At that moment in came Joe, moody and 
careworn. In answer to the question whether 
he had shot the deer, he rejoined bitterly that 
he had not, and did not care whether he never 
shot another. 

** I know what's amiss," said his aunt, 
glancing up in her keen way. " You've seen 
Susan Boone, and she's vexed you." 



214 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

" Hush, aunty !" said the young farmer, 
looking askance at me ; but Miss Esther as- 
sured him that my presence need be no 
restraint, for she had told me all about it. 

.* You hev ?'* the young man exclaimed, 
with an angry stamp of his massive foot on the 
floor. But almost instantly his frank face 
relaxed into its usual good-humoured look, 
and he said, with a sad sort of laugh : 

" I oughter remember she folks were bom 
to chatter, special them that hail from down 
east-way. And, arter all, Vm no ways 
ashamed o' my share in the bizniss/' 

.' You have no cause to be, I am sure," 
said I, half apologetically, " and I hope I am 
not intrusive when I say that, quite apart 
from the kind service you have rendered me, 
my best wishes would go with you." 

The young woodsman stretched out his 
mighty hand, grasped mine, and gave it a 
friendly squeeze that seemed to make every 
joint and sinew crack. It hurt me, rather, 
but there was no mistaking the kindly inten- 
tion. 

" Thank'ee, mister," said Joe ; " but I 




THE OHIO OIL VVKLL. 215 

reckon I'm an unlucky coon. I some fear I 
air. This ile that's a fortin to thousands, air 
jest perdition to me. Bad enough the deacon 
should be huffy and queer, but Susan ! She 
hadn't oughter . she han't oughter sot more 
store on a pocketful of dollars than an honest 
man's heart.- I met her, jest now at the door 
of the schoolhouse where the children hev 
been larnin' hymn-singing, and she most 
scorned to give me a look . she that I've 
known sin' we were both little trots of six 
year old !" 

" War she alone ?" asked Aunt Esther in a 
quick snappish voice. 

''Wall, no," said Joe, reluctantly; "her 
parents war followin', and she was walkin' 
along of a smart town chap, one I know by 
head mark, Mr. Peter Clovis Tapper, the 
lawyer to Lanesville. Such a dandy fellow, 
with rings and yaller gloves, and scent on his 
white cambrick handkercher ; no wonder she 
couldn't see me." 

The manly young fellow cast a glance, half 
proud, half depreciating, on his plain working 
garb and brown muscular hands. Miss Esther 



i 



216 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

thereupon expressed her fears that Mr. Tapper 
was a new suitor, favoured by Susan's parents, 
who were bent on throwing off the former 
engagement. 

" If I re'elly thought so,'* said Joe, " that 
pretty dressed lawyer and me might hev words, 
we might.'* 

As I saw the dark flush of wrath that crim- 
soned the backwoodsman's sun-browned face, 
making the scar of the bear's claw ominously 
white and clear on his broad honest brow ; 
and as I noticed how the long rifle vibrated in 
the grasp of his strong fingers; I thought 
Peter Clovis Tapper, attorney-at-law, might 
wince a little at the prospect of " words" with 
the man he had supplanted. 

Mallory, however, like most men of genuine 
bravery, was remarkably modest and quiet in 
his general demeanour, and his threatening 
mood passed away very quickly. He said that 
Susan was very young, that girls were apt 
to be fanciful, and that he should go on be- 
lieving her true to him and her phght until 
he received his dismissal from her own lips. 
Then he broke away from the subject, talked 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 217 

of my health, and congratulated me on being 
in Miss Esther's care : declaring what I am 
sure was true, that the old lady had not her 
equal in the country for bone-setting and 
bandaging. Happily, I did not find it neces- 
sary to test her skill in the former branch of 
art ; my bruises were gradually reduced, and, 
but for my sprained ankle, I could soon have 
proceeded on my journey well enough. As 
it was, ray hurt progressed but slowly towards 
recovery : sprains are tedious things, and I 
found a slight imprudence undid the good 
work of days. However, thanks to Miss 
Esther's washes and drops, thanks to wet 
bandages and the healing force of nature, I 
was soon able to walk in a weak slow way, 
with assistance. Sometimes I had the aid 
of Joe's strong arm,- sometimes of old Terence's, 
and now and then black Phillis was commis- 
sioned to help my progress through the village 
or across the yard where the turkeys and fowls, 
her especial charge, gobbled and clucked in 
vast squadrons. There had lately been, Phillis 
said, three more men employed on the farm 
at wages : one Irishman, a nephew of 



218 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

Terence, and two " coloured gentlemen," but 
these had all been tempted away to work at a 
cooperage where the people were busy, day and 
night, in making vats, kegs, and casks, to catch 
the oil which would otherwise be wasted. 
Much labour had been withdrawn from tillage, 
I learned, for the same purpose, and in many 
places the crops were neglected, that the mine- 
ral treasures of the earth might be garnered 
up. Of the crude oil I saw enough, and smelt 
enough, to satiate an amateur for life, during 
the weeks I spent at Sparta. Although there 
were only two flowing wells in the parish, 
there were plenty of pump wells, where ma- 
chinery more or less rude, from the chain of 
hand buckets to the small steam gin or Erics- 
son engine, were in almost constant employ- 
ment. The streams had a. film of oil on their 
surface, the carts dripped oil, the talk of the 
whole neighbourhood was saturated with oil. 

But the two who profited most by this 
sudden outpouring of an oleaginous cornucopia 
were Deacon Boone and another farmer, with 
whom the deacon was on bad terms. This 
was elder Hiram Rutherford, a middle-aged 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 219 

man, whose land at Wyandot Creek adjoined 
the Mallory property. He possessed the other 
flowing well : a still finer one than Mr. Boone's : 
and it was a sore alloy to Mr. Boone's triumph 
to know that the person he hated was getting 
rich at least as rapidly as he himself was. It 
matters little why these two men were foes. 
They had thwarted each other, I believe, about 
some affairs of bargain and sale ; and since 
then, in church assemblies, sheriff's courts, 
market, or merry-making, they never met but 
to bicker and oppose each other. Elder 
Hiram was a gaunt lean old sinner, with white 
hair, a leering bloodshot eye, and a wrinkled 
face, replete with cunning ; whereas old Boone 
had a vacuous face, that expressed little be- 
yond conceit and love of pelf. Mrs. Boone, 
whose acquaintance 1 also made, was a flighty 
silly woman, much over-dressed, and already 
looking forward to the time when her hus- 
band's wealth should buy her a place among 
the Upper Ten Thousand. 

But in Susan, whom I had fancied a cold 
coquette, I found to my surprise a very charm- 
ing girl, extremely pretty, gentle, and sweet- 



220 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

tempered ; rather too much so, indeed, since 
she had been half-persuaded it was her duty 
to give up Joe. But she loved him still, and 
she detested Mr. Tapper, whose visits and 
attentions received every sanction and en- 
couragement from her parents. It appeared 
that the wily young lawyer had found out the 
weakness of the old folks, and was dazzling 
them with pictures of New York grandeurs, 
and of the lofty position which his New York 
connexions would ensure to the Boone family. 
And at last old Boone actually found courage 
to tell Joe Mallory that he must give Susan up, 
unless, in a month's time, he could show that 
he had the means to " keep her as a lady." 

Poor Joe was willing and able to keep her 
as became a farmer's wife and a farmer's 
daughter, and he did not ask for a cent of 
dowry ; but the old man was inexorable, and 
gave Joe plainly to understand that he in- 
tended looking elsewhere for a son-in-law. 
It needed no conjuror to discover where the 
deacon intended to look. Mr. P. C. Tapper 
came over, at least twice a week, from Lanes- 
ville driving his own tandem, and attended 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 221 

by a black groom in a sky-blue coat; that 
being the nearest permissible republican ap- 
proach to livery. My young host was in 
despair, and but that Miss Esther and I se- 
riously took the alarm, and used all our efforts 
to keep him and the legal dandy apart, I 
have no doubt that mischief would have en- 
sued. In this time of trouble, Susan's con- 
duct puzzled us all. She was sincerely at- 
tached to Joe, for her eyes brightened and 
her cheek flushed when they met, and she 
was evidently unfascinated by the Lanesville 
lawyer ; but she seemed a mere puppet in her 
parents' hands. The probable explanation is, 
that she was too young, plastic, and docile, to 
offer any decided opposition to the ambitious 
projects of the old folks. 

Joe did not resign himself to useless and 
idle murmuriirg at his fate. At my sugges- 
tion he availed himself of the services of 
Barney Leech, the old well-sinker, whose in- 
come had been greatly increased by the pe- 
troleum discoveries, and he made a bold push 
to find oil upon his land, which, as I have 
mentioned, was next to that of Elder Hiram. 



222 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

And very tantalising it was to see the thick 
jet of rock oil spirting from the soil at Wy- 
andot Creek, hard by ; to see men ladlisg it 
up with tubs and crocks, coopering it up in 
casks, stowing it in jars, old bottles, empty 
" breakers'* of spirits, anything, and yet al- 
lowing hundreds of gallons to run to waste 
over the creek waters ; while not a drop could 
Joe Mallory find. 

" Sorry for it, for your sake, Mr. Mallory," 
said the old well-digger, when the excavation 
had been made, and deepened, and deepened, 
all in vain. " Sorry for it, but it would be 
robbing your pocket, I guess, to go on. 
A'ready you've spent dollars enough on the 
grope, and it's plain you'll get no ile : not if 
you dig through the world, mister." 

This was sad news for poor Joe, who had 
been informed that morning by Deacon Boone 
that the day of grace was nearly spent, that 
Susan and he had best forget one another, 
and that from Monday next his visits at the 
Boones' house must cease. 

I could give the poor fellow no comfort. 
Indeed, I had been compelled to endorse the 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 223 

verdict of the experienced old well-digger, 
that the search was hopeless ; and my opinion, 
as that of a professional engineer, had great 
weight with Joe. I have not previously men- 
tioned my errand in Ohio, which was con- 
nected with this very oil. My business was, 
to conclude a contract between several well- 
proprietors and the commercial firm in whose 
behalf I was engaged, and who had purchased 
my patent of a new process for refining the 
crude petroleum. When able to walk toler- 
ably, I had not neglected this duty, and had 
concluded a bargain with Elder Rutherford 
for the delivery of a certain quantity of coarse 
oil at specified periods. With Deacon Boone 
I was unable to come to terms, and I should 
have left Sparta but for my interest in Joe, 
and my wish to serve him if I could, were 
it only by keeping him from drubbing 
Mr. Tapper, and incurring the risk of crushing 
damages at law. Joe's position with respect 
to Deacon Boone and his daughter was, of 
course, well known throughout that small 
community, and much sympathy was expres- 
sed for the young woodsman. 



224 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

On the evening of the day when the well- 
digger had ceased operations, I had taken a 
short stroll among the wooded spurs of the 
hills which belt in the rich alluvial meadows, 
with no other companion than a stout hickory 
walking-stick. Rather tired, I was glad to 
sit down under a giant black walnut, whose 
spreading boughs hummed pleasantly over- 
head as the wind waved them, and I lazily 
watched the wild pigeons winging their way 
home towards the forests. 

Presently a dead branch crackled under a 
heavy listless tread, and Joe came striding 
down the path, with his rifle cast into the 
hollow of his left arm, his hat pulled over his 
eyes, and a sullen desperate look that it was 
painful to mark. 

I was on the point of rising to accost him, 
when something rustled briskly through the 
scrubby ravine to my left, and a low voice 
called out, 

" Joe ! hist ! Joe Mallory !" 

"Who calls?" answered the young man, 
stopping short. 

" A friend, I guess V answered the same 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 225 

low hissing voice. And out from among the 
shrubs glided a lean figure, with a broad straw 
hat and a suit of yellowish jean . Elder Hiram 
Rutherford. 

'' Tve no humour to talk much to-night, 
mister ; I'm best by myself, jest now,'' said 
Joe, roughly. The elder laughed a little 
hoarse laugh, with malice and craft in the ring 
of it, but his voice was not unkindly toned as 
he said, 

" Silly boy, don't you go blockin' your own 
light. You jest listen to me, on'y five minutes, 
and then cut up rough and shirk my company, 
if ve like." 

Without awaiting a reply, the shrewd old 
man caught Joe by the arm, and walked by 
his side, talking fast but low, with upraised 
forefinger, but evidently with earnest em- 
phasis quite foreign to his usual sneering 
manner. Even had I been disposed to turn 
eavesdropper, not a word could I have caught. 
I got quietly up from my resting-place, and 
limped home. 

Miss Esther was vexed that evening, for 
Joe was late, and the tea grew black and 

VOL 111. Q 



226 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

bitter, the cakes cold, and the spruce beer 
flat, with long waiting. But when her 
nephew did return, he wore a strangely 
flushed and excited aspect, and there was a 
glow on his cheek, and an elasticity in his 
step. And yet, though evidently in high 
spirits, there was something odd about Joe. 
He avoided meeting my gaze, or his aunt's 
gaze, whenever he could. He shuffled about, 
turning his shoulder on the company. He 
ate and drank and laughed in a boisterous 
way, but as if his thoughts were busy else- 
where. 

That night, Joe's chamber being next to 
mine, I could have sworn I heard his windovv 
stealthily opened an hour after midnight, and 
a dull sound as of a big man squeezing him- 
self through a casement almost too narrow to 
give him egress. Then followed the cautious 
tread of a heavy foot on the garden paths. 
Though why Joe, as master of the house and 
of himself, should choose to slip out hke a 
truant schoolboy was beyond my comprehen- 
sion. Next night the same sound was audible 
at the same hour. Nay more, I looked from 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 227 

my little window, and caught the gleam of 
a dark lantern in the garden, passing rapidly 
on. 

But the morning after, a surprise occurred 
which put these nocturnal sights and sounds 
out of my head. 

A new flowing well of oil had been dis- 
covered, and, wonder of wonders, it was not 
only on Joe's land, but it had burst forth 
from the very excavation he had caused to 
be made ! A cowboy passing with his herd 
along the lane had first seen the jet and 
heard the splash of the spouting petroleum, 
and the news had spread like wildfire over the 
village. 

Before breakfast nine-tenths of the people 
of Sparta, men, women, and children, had 
gathered in a ring to gaze, open-mouthed 
and open-eyed, at the portent. There was 
no mistake about the matter. The tawny 
liquid, like thick dirty water, leaping up in 
a thick pillar of fluid, and arching over as 
it poured its spray into a little pool of oif, 
was genuine petroleum, and the quantity was 
considerable. Fortune had knocked at my 

q2 



228 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

host's 4oor while he slept, or at any rate 
while he was supposed to sleep. 

Bating a little not unnatural envy, the 
impulse of the neighbours was to be sincerely 
glad. Next to having such an outcrop of 
luck within his own bounds, every man 
present would have selected Joe as the best 
recipient for such a boon. In elder times 
and elder countrieSj the windfall might have 
been assigned to the bounty of the fairies ; 
but, as it was, more than one man, and 
many women, loudly declared the appear- 
ance of the oil a "dispensatory" in Joe's 
favour. 

" What will Deacon Boone say to 't?" was 
the general cry. 

Meanwhile I was standing among the rest, 
sorely puzzled. My professional knowledge 
made me suspect that some subterranean flow 
of the petroleum had taken place, and that 
in all probability Elder Rutherford's well 
would be a loser by as much as Joe's gained. 
But, beyond the fence of partition, I could 
see the elder's well, flowing, to all appearance, 
as lustily as ever ; and beside me stood the 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 229 

elder himself, with no sign of apprehension 
on his thin face, or visible in the twinkle of 
his piercing eyes. Indeed, Mr. .Rutherford 
wore an odd look of stealthy satisfaction, and 
he was not the least loud in his congratula- 
tions of Joe. 

''Very strange," thought I. "That old 
man must have a better heart than I gave 
him credit for. But the outbreak of this oil 
is one of those apparent caprices of nature 
which perplex men of science." 

The last sentence had been uttered aloud, 
and the aged well-digger at my elbow answer- 
ed it with : 

'. Solemn true, mister. We dug, and bored, 
and no signs of ile, and here it comes up, 
plenty as peaches in the latter end o' July. 
But here comes Deacon Boone, struck all of a 
heap like, at sight of the ile on the ground of 
the chap he choked off from coortin' his darter. 
May I never, but he's gwine to eat humble 
pie I" 

Eat humble pie the deacon certainly did, 
for, after hovering about the oil like a moth 
round a candle, after listening to the by- 



230 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

standers' vague calculations as to how many 
hundred or thousand gallons a day the well 
would yield, Mr. Boone went up to Joe and 
held out his hand. 

"Give you joy, my boy!" he said in a 
tremulous way, and, taking courage from 
Joe's hearty hand grasp, actually made a 
stammering apology for his late conduct, and 
more than hinted that his desire was that 
Susan and Joe should " come together." 

It was curious to see the vain mean man 
wriggling out of the dilemma, to hear his 
clumsy phrases, and to observe his coarse 
greed and time-serving nature. Such things 
have been done before, in the politest circles, 
but here the mercenary character stood out 
transparent and stripped of artificial adorn- 
ments. Joe seemed to feel the truth, as he 
made answer in a voice that was audible to 
many of those present : 

"Deacon, we'll let bygones be bygones. 
I'm willin' to stick to our old 'greement, 
and I'll be proud of Susan for my wife, but I 
want nouthin' more. Keep your money and 
your settlements and stufi^, or light your pipe 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 231 

with 'em if you like. I take your darter in 
the clothes she stands in, and no property . 
not a cent." 

All the villagers were talking for the next 
three days of Joe's amazing luck, and Joe's no 
less amazing disinterestedness. It was known 
that the deacon, who had but one son and no 
other daughter, would have given Susan a 
large sum on her wedding-day, and would 
have prospectively settled a much larger sum 
upon her. And however productive Joe's well 
might be, a good balance at the bank was 
never a hindrance in business. 

Some oil was collected at the new petroleum 
spring in the course of the next four days, 
but not as much as if the proprietor had not 
been absorbed in preparations for his wedding. 
That wedding was duly solemnised, with the 
full sanction of parents, minister, and magis- 
trate ; and a very pretty dark-eyed bride 
Susan was, and very lovingly she nestled by 
Joe's side. Hers was a soft nature, but she 
had found a strong prop to cling to. I 
was present at the wedding, and found much 
amusement in the spectacle of the feast and 



232 THE OHIO OIL WELL. 

frolic, which wound up with an uproarious 
dance. 

Deacon Boone publicly offered Joe a roll of 
notes, Susan's portion, which Joe as publicly 
declined. 

Two days afterwards I was to leave Sparta. 
My sturdy host would, I knew, have been 
pained by the proffer of pecuniary compensa- 
tion for my maintenance, but he did not 
refuse to accept a good German rifle, neatly 
mounted in silver, which formed part of my 
worldly goods, and which I had sent for from 
Philadelphia. This Joe promised to keep for 
my sake, and in memory of the eventful time 
we had passed together. 

On the day of my departure a new excite- 
ment pervaded the village. Joe's flowing well 
had ceased to flow. The oil spring had 
vanished as abruptly as it had appeared. 
Before long a great crowd gathered, cries of 
wonder and condolence were heard, and 
Deacon Boone and his wife arrived in a state 
bordering on distraction. Joe alone seemed 
cool, though a little sheepish. In answer to 
the deacon's voluble inquiries, he referred him 



THE OHIO OIL WELL. 233 

to Elder Rutherford. The deacon faced his 
enemy. 

"What do you know about it, mister?'* 

" Know?" said Elder Hiram ; ''you've come 
to the right shop for knowledge. The well's 
dry ; and why ? Why, because the lease was 
for a week, and it's out to-day." 

And so it turned out. Elder Hiram's 
malicious wish to play the deacon a trick, had 
suggested an expedient at which Joe, in his 
despair, had caught. A few yards of two- 
inch piping laid down under cover of night 
between the Wyandot Creek well and Joe's 
excavation, had sufficed to extemporise a 
flowing well on the latter's property, while 
it merely relieved the elder's petroleum spring 
of its superfluity. The pipe had now been 
removed. 

Of course Susan's parents were very full of 
wrath and reproaches, but they were at last 
overborne by public opinion. The majority 
favoured Joe, probably considering all strata- 
gems fair in love and war, while Susan took 
her husband's part, and the young farmer's 
remark was unanswerable : 



234 TH OHIO OIL WELL. 

" Deacon, I ain't ashamed. It's fust time 
I ever deceived anybody, but 'twar for 
Susan's sake, and I never took a dollar of 
your money, nor never v^^ill. Remember 
that 1" 

So the young folks moved West, and were 
thriving in Kansas when last I heard of them. 
Miss Esther was still with them. 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 



" I CANNOT say much in favour of the place, 
but such as it is, it is heartily at your service." 
So saying, the secretary shook me cordially by 
the hand, jerked out his watch, and after a 
hasty glance at it, pleaded an engagement, 
and went out. A clerk was left behind to 
fill up my appointment, ready for the signa- 
ture of the governor of North Carolina. 
The latter young gentleman, one of those 
long-haired youths whom New England sends 
to all subordinate posts in the South, had 
a most comical expression on his shrewd face. 
He rolled his eyes over the document, 
pinched up his thin lips into an expressive 
leer, and at last exploded into a titter. I was 
not ofiended. 1 knew the Americans, espe- 



236 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

cially the Northerners, too well to expect at 
their hands the same demur poHteness which 
would have been rendered by a European 
official. And I knew, too, that Yankees 
seldom laugh without a cause, and that their 
opinions are commonly worth listening to. 

" You seem amused," said I. " Pray tell 
me whether at my desire to obtain the situation, 
or at my succeeding in my endeavours?" 

The clerk laid down his pen, turned his 
twinkling eyes full on me, and answered : 

" The reason I larfed mister, was jest this : 
you folks from the old country do the queerest 
things, right out, you do. We native-born 
Americans, we are that plastic and spry, we 
can tackle to most ; and this child has drove 
niggers, kept books aboard a Ohio steamer, 
preached to a congregation in Wisconsin, 
and sold notions to Canada. But what you 
won't catch a New Englander doing, in one 
while, is bein' keeper of the Cape Hatteras 
lighthouse." 

" Why so ?'' I asked, good-humouredly. 
" The situation is, no doubt, a little dull, and 
the salary is not high " 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 237 

" Six hundred and twenty-five dollars, fifty 
cents, and a liberal allowance for wood and 
oil ; not so bad, nouther, for light employ/' 
parenthetically remarked the clerk. 

" But still," I went on, " there are advan- 
tages in the situation. It is not an unhealthy 
spot, it is cheap and quiet, and as for tempta- 
tion to expense " 

" As for them, mister, Robinson Crusoe was 
a Broadway lounger, compared with what 
you'll be. Snakes ! why, a 'possum up a 
tulip-tree is in the world, when you come to 
reckon him with the keeper of that lighthouse. 
Since I've been here, eleven months or there 
away, there's been three fresh keepers ap- 
pointed. One cut his throat. He was a 
German: one died of delirium tremendous; 
and the third, an Irish fellow, was drowned, 
or drowned himself. To hear the secretary 
palavering you as he did, about naturalisation, 
and that . when we should have to get a self- 
acting light, I guess, if we couldn't hire a 
foreigner to kindle it." 

I will own that these remarks of the young 
clerk's gave me more than one melancholy hour, 



238 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

and made me almost doubt whether my own 
acceptance of so ill-starred and lonely a post 
were a wise one. But an old English adage 
declares that a certain class of persons must 
not be choosers, and my purse was lank 
enough to place me in the unlucky category. 
I had come out to America with high hopes, 
and those hopes had been lamentably baffled. 
The fortune I was to have made with brush 
and with the end of a burnt stick. The 
floors were of rough planks, stained in many 
places with palette^and the fame even sweeter 
than fortune, had flitted before me like a 
mocking will-o'-the-wisp. I was actually 
poorer than when I arrived, two years before, 
at New York. Of my own proficiency as an 
artist, it behoves me to speak modestly. My 
studies had been long and sincere, and critics 
of some celebrity had predicted my future 
success. My true course was to have stayed 
at home, to have stuck to my art steadily, 
and, by patient work and thought, to have 
attained, not to a pinnacle of renown, but to 
a reasonable share of public favour. 

I did not do this. I preferred to grow rich 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 239 

and famous at a bound, and I emigrated to 
America in a flush of hope. I could not have 
done a sillier thing. The New World is very 
chary of yielding patronage to any foreign 
talent that has not been heralded by the 
,trumpet-note of foreign praise. The United 
States combine to do honour to the artist, 
actor, or singer, who can boast a great name 
in Europe, but the unknown are sure to be 
looked coldly upon. So it fared with me. 
And this was why, after setting up as a portrait 
painter in Philadelphia, as a historical painter 
in Boston, as a painter of allegory in Cin- 
cinnati, I was finally reduced to solicit the post 
of Hghthouse-keeper in a wretched sandy islet 
off the coast of North Carolina. 

I had one especial reason for asking and ac- 
cepting this unpromising berth : a reason with 
which I did not trouble the clerk, and which I 
had not even imparted to the secretary. If I 
had any peculiar inclination, it was towards 
the painting of sea-views and ships ; but as 
yet I had been dissatisfied with the result of 
my efforts. The colour was so poor . in my 
eyes at least . and the treatment so conven- 



240 THE GBBEN LIGHT. 

tional. I had often longed for a favourable 
opportunity of sitting down before the ocean, 
studying every wrinkle and line in Neptune's 
stormy face, and taking the portrait of the sea 
in every mood from calm to frenzy. Here 
was a capital chance. The keeper of a light- 
house would be alone with Nature ; no bil- 
liards, no gossip, nothing to call off his at- 
tention ; and, perhaps after a summer's study, 
I might contrive to produce something that 
would sell well in London. Longer than half 
a year or so, I never dreamed of retaining the 
employment. Indeed it is not customary in 
the States to stick very long to one avocation, 
or to one oflBce. Americans commonly regard 
one preferment as a stepping-stone to some- 
thing very different, and I, in my turn, hoped 
to save enough and learn enough to enable me 
to withdraw to England again, with a fair 
prospect of success. 

One fortnight afterwards, I hired a boat, 
and was duly wafted across to ray new resi- 
dence. It had been settled that I was to 
receive rations, at regular intervals. Two 
barrels of pickled-pork, with a cask of flour, 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 241 

some bags of biscuit and corn, a keg of whisky 
and some groceries, were on board the boat. 
With me went, also, a sturdy black lad whose 
goggle eyes rolled in wonder at the unaccus- 
tomed sight he beheld, and a hale old negress, 
the grandmother of the boy, a woman with an 
excellent character for cooking and scouring. 
These coloured persons were slaves. White 
servants are hixuries undreamed of in the 
labour-despising South, and I had conformed 
to the prevailing custom in hiring the living 
chattels of a landowner in the neighbourhood 
of Wilmington. I had been recommended to 
this gentleman. Dr. Leonidas Wicks, by a 
friend who knew that the doctor owned several 
negroes whose work on the land, or in the house, 
could be easily dispensed with. An English- 
man never feels his conscience more trouble- 
some than when he meddles with the "domestic 
institution'* of the Slave States, even in the 
indirect method of hiring " animated pro- 
perty" from its possessor. Very likely Dr. 
Wicks read some such feeling in my counte- 
nance, for he said abruptly, before our bargain 
was concluded, '' You've no call, Mr. Britisher, 

VOL. III. R 



242 THE GBEKN LIGHT. 

to be 80 plaguy nice ! I expect Aunt Polly 
and young Juha had sooner go along with you 
to the lighthouse, than be sold to go South. 
It's a nation deal pleasanter work to cook meals 
and shake blankets, than hoe rice and sugar- 
grounds, down in Georgia or South Carolina, 
and it*s there I'd have been obliged to send 
that pair of woolly heads, if you hadn't hap- 
pened in to hire 'em/* My scruples were thus 
removed, and I found Aunt Polly a good cook, 
and Juba a well-disposed lad, though neither 
was industrious nor quick of comprehension. 

There was a light breeze, and, as the boat's 
sails filled pleasantly, we flew along at a great 
rate through the little sparkling waves. The 
whole bay, fenced in from angry gales and At- 
lantic rollers by the natural breakwater of the 
sandy islands, reminded me of the lagoons of 
Venice, and the blazing blue sky overhead was 
thoroughly Italian. It was amusing to hear 
the voluble talk and loud exclamations of my 
sable attendants, who had never before had 
more than a distant peep at the sea, and to 
whom everything was an object of wonder. 

" Hoo ! what sort ob grass dat ?" cried Juba, 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 243 

for instance, when a great heap of tangled 
seaweed . red, brown, and purple, and full of 
shells and small crabs . floated by. 

" Him not grass. Hiin flower, tupidhead !" 
returned Aunt Polly, with all the complacency 
of superior wisdom. 

Presently we got to the little quay, whose 
slimy and weather-beaten piles were deeply 
imbedded in the sand, and above which rose 
the gaunt white tower of the lighthouse. 
Some former occupant of the latter had made 
a desperate attempt at cultivation, and some 
traces of a garden were still visible, though 
the very wall had been more than half buried 
by the pure white sand that had drifted before 
the wind. The whole place was in tolerable 
repair, but had a neglected and dismal appear- 
ance. Nor did the interior of the building 
present a more cheerful aspect. The walls 
were worm-eaten bulwarks of timber, like the 
bulkheads of an old ship; the low ceilings 
were scored all over with names and dates, 
with ill-spelt scraps of songs and frightful 
caricatures that had been sketched in ink, 
paint, and pitch ; and more than one charred 

K 2 



244 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

spot indicated that some of my predecessors 
had been careless in their habits, and that an 
incipient fire had been trampled out jnst in 
time to avert a conflagration. There was no 
furnitare worth mentioning, except some 
broken chairs and tables, an oaken press, and 
a barrack bedstead of iron. 

But there was plenty of wood piled under 
cover ; there was oil in abundance ; there were 
three telescopes with the government mark 
upon them, and, on the wall of the principal 
. apartment, hung a long duck-gun, surmount- 
ing a pair of naval cutlasses, whose brass hilts 
were green as verdigris with the tarnish of 
the moist sea air. I had been warned that I 
must bring everything I wanted with me, and 
the boat was pretty well stored with pro- 
visions, cooking utensils, mattresses, blankets, 
and so forth. In carrying up these matters 
from the little half-decked vessel I had en- 
gaged, I and my black allies were assisted by 
the boatmen. The latter, who consisted of a 
fine old patriarch in striped shirt and a suit of 
homespun, his son, and a strapping young 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 245 

mulatto, waited awhile to drink my health in 
a horn of whisky. 

" You do look a little more shipshape, now, 
Britisher," remarked the old man, as he sur- 
veyed the mattresses and clean Pennsylvania 
blankets which now reposed on the rusty iron 
bed ; *' but you'll find the place a thought 
lonesome or so to a city-bred chap. There's 
neighbours, sure enough ; but, stranger (here 
the fisherman dropped his voice), I advise ye 
to be careful as a b'ar on hot iron, till you've 
larned the length of their foot." 

"How do you mean?" I asked with a 
puzzled look. But the old man was not dis- 
posed to be explicit ; he only muttered that a 
nod was as good as a wink to a blind horse, 
and presently took his departure. The 
negress, who had a real taste for work and 
bustling not very usual in one of her colour, 
was singing as she arranged matters in the 
kitchen, and Juba was slowly carrying in logs 
from the woodpile, with a very unnecessary 
amount of hard breathing and frequent pauses 
for rest. Having taken a glance at the lan- 
tern, and filled the lamps with oil, I walked 



246 THE GREEK LIGHT. 

oat at the half-open door, and sauntered to 
the beach. The prospect was a wide one, but 
monotonous. Sea and sand, sea and sand . 
as far as the eye could range, from north 
to south, from east to west, nothing but sea 
and sand. The dazzling azure of the one was 
only varied by the pure white of the other. 
On the beach itself were a number of bright 
coloured shells, and some heaps of gaily tinted 
weed. There were crabs, too, in quantities, 
and a salt water tortoise (or mud turtle) went 
flopping down into the depths of a little creek, 
as I approached. I looked along the coast- 
line, as it trended sharply away. The sand- 
hills were heaped up, with hollows scooped 
out between them, in a swelling irregular line, 
as the wild wind had piled them during the 
hurricane months. Vegetation was scanty and 
coarse ; a few hardy plants and grasses, of a 
dusky green hue, clung desperately to the 
hummocks of sandy soil, and there were one 
or two specimens of the cotton shrub growing 
wild : the seeds having probably been blown 
by some gale across the landlocked sea that 
severed us from the mainland. The aquatic 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 247 

birds were strangely tame ; they flew scream- 
ing around me in a manner that reminded me 
of Alexander Selkirk and his dreary lordship 
over " the fowl and the brute" more vividly 
than was pleasant. I looked long and hard, 
but could make out no signs of human habi- 
tation within my range of vision. A few 
white sails were visible on the far-away blue 
of the horizon : the very presence of those 
ships seemed a comfort to me, as a link be- 
tween my lonely self and the great stirring 
world of healthy movement and bustle. I 
began to doubt whether I had done wisely in 
accepting the situation. 

" HuUoa, chap 1 Air yew the new light- 
house-keeper ?'* hailed a deep voice among the 
sandhills. 

I wheeled round. Behind me, on the sum- 
mit of a mound, stood a very tall swarthy 
young man, in a checked frock of Osnaburg 
cloth, sea-boots, and a battered straw hat. 
He had a gun in his hand, and a game pouch 
by his side, which was nearly full of recently 
shot birds of the sand-piper class. A red 
handkerchief was knotted loosely around the 



r 



248 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

fellow*8 sunburnt neck, and he was altogether 
dressed in a careless, picturesque fashion that 
gave him the wild aspect of a brigand. 

" Huiloh ! Can't yew answer?" thundered 
the deep voice, 

I replied that I was the lighthouse-keeper ; 
had but just arrived from the mainland, and 
was very much at his service. 

"Then I guess we're neighbours?'* said 
the sportsman, as he advanced and extended 
me the hand of friendship. A brown big 
knuckly hand it was, and the squeeze that I 
received brought tears into my eyes. After 
this salutation, the islander leaned on the 
stock of his piece and scanned me from head 
to foot, and back again, very slowly and deli- 
berately. " I heerd there war to be a new 
keeper," observed the giant, " and my father, 
old Daddy Brown, of Fruit Creek . my name's 
Japhet Brown, stranger, at your call . Daddy 
Brown said, if I tumbled across you, and 
liked the looks of you . why, I were to say 
there's dinner and liquor at your bidding, any 
day you stroll Fruit Creek way." 

After growling out this hospitable message, 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 249 

Japhet Brown stared again, as if to make 
quite sure that he really did like the looks of 
me. For myself, I felt an inward conviction 
that I did not much admire the looks of my 
new acquaintance. I did not, somehow, fancy 
the man. It was not that he was rough and 
uncouth, that his shaggy black hair hung like 
layers of sable fringe under the torn rim of his 
straw hat, or that his clothes were daubed with 
tar and fish scales. I had seen sterling good 
fellows in still ruder guise, and had knocked 
about the world too long, to despise the toil- 
hardened hand-grasp of an honest man. But 
Japhet's face expressed, at the best, but a 
ferocious good humour; the features were 
heavy and lowering, the black eyes were rest- 
less and cunning, and the half-careless smile 
on the mouth had something sinister mingling 
with its effrontery. I did not like the man, 
but I took good care to show no coldness 
or aversion. The keeper of the Ilatteras 
lighthouse, I knew, could not afford to be 
exclusive or dainty in his choice of friends. 
I remembered the warning hint of the old 
boatman, and resolved that I would be on 



250 THE 6BEKN LIGHT. 

good terms with my neighbours, if possible. 
So I took Japhet Brown into my dwelling, 
opened my little store of cordials, and regaled 
him with a glass of gin sling and a prime 
cigar: luxuries which he appreciated the more 
because of their contrast to drams of raw 
spirit and coarse tobacco. The young man 
was less inquisitive than a Yankee would have 
been, but was rather contemptuous and over- 
bearing in manner ; having an evident scorn 
for the natives of a city. 

" You'll be skeared here, all by youraelf, 
chap, won't you?" he asked, with half jeering 
interest in my forlorn condition. " At Red 
Bay, now, there's folks a many, and at Fruit 
Creek there's daddy, and my mother, and 
granny, let alone six of us boys and gals, 
while there's neighbours handy. But here ! 
I wonder a town-bred coon, like you, should 
take the berth. Can yew wrestle ?" 

" I used to wrestle a bit in bygone times," 
I answered with a smile ; " I was fond of ac- 
tive amusements as a boy." 

" Can you shoot ?" demanded Mr. Japhet 
Brown. 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 251 

On my replying that I could, he put his 
long-barrelled fowling-piece into my hands, 
saying, " Try your luck, stranger. You see 
that 'ere bird, jest perched on the lump of red 
weed, floatin' out at sea. Let's see if you can 
hit her." 

To Japhet's amazement, however, instead 
of pulling the trigger at once, I waited till 
the gull rose on her white wings, and then 
fired. The bird heeled over, and fell with a 
splash, stone dead, into the sea. 

*' Whoop ! you air a good 'un, chap ! the 
best Yankee T ever clapped eyes on I Shake 
hands ! TU tell Daddy Brown about that . 
forty- five yards clean, and no lie about it 1" 
And Japhet gave my hand a congratulatory 
squeeze that I felt for an hour after ; so great 
was his delight at my skill. To shoot flying 
is in America a much more rare accomplish- 
ment than in England. The best marksmen 
of the States pique themselves on their accu- 
racy with the rifle, whether at a dead mark 
or a deer or a squirrel, but with the fowling- 
piece they are less expert. I had won Japhet's 
esteem, for the time at least, and it was with 



252 TH GREEN LIGHT. 

unfeigned heartiness that he clapped me on 
the shoulder at parting, and renewed his in- 
vitation. 

'* Come when yew please, chap. There's 
always lots of pork and bacon ; whisky's 
plenty, too, and if yew happen in at dinner 
time on Sabbath, yew'U be welcome. My 
mother she can fix a chicken, and roast a 
chicken, as well as any cook in Raleigh 
city. The gals . them's my sisters . air 
right down merry ones, and a chat with them 
would do yew good, stranger, when you get 
the lonesomes upon you." So saying, Japhet 
turned on his heel, and strode off towards 
Fruit Creek again. 

Nothing worth mention occurred during 
the remainder of the afternoon. When dusk 
came creeping over the low shores, and a 
deepening shadow turned the shining azure of 
the sea first to the glossy purple of a star- 
ling's breast, then to violet, I went up the 
ladder to light my beacon for the first time. 
It was not without a certain amount of ner- 
vous tremor that I trimmed the wicks, ad- 
justed the reflectors, and applied the match. 



THE GKEEN LIGHT. 253 

I read over my printed instructions once 
again, before I executed my task. I held 
my breath, and hesitated before I kindled the 
lamps. For the first time, the great import- 
ance of my duties flashed upon me. I was 
about to ignite a beacon to whose distant ra- 
diance the eyes of the storm-tossed mariner, 
in the direst extremity of his battle with the 
elements, might turn for guidance and direc- 
tion. What mischief might not be caused by 
negligence, however arising, and what a post 
of trust was mine, after all, as a sentinel in 
front of the devouring sea, watchful for hu- 
man lives! 

Flash 1 the bright glow brought forth, far 
to the north. I saw the distant glimmer over- 
swelling mounds of sand and the darkling 
surges. A white light! That must be at 
Albemarle Sound. They were posting sen- 
tries, then . the sentries against wreck and 
calamity. It was my turn to answer the sig- 
nal. So I lighted up my two lamps. A red 
light and a green. They had not twinkled for 
more than five minutes before I saw some- 
thing like a blood-red star over the waves to 



254 THE 6REN LIGHT. 

the southward. A red light. The light on 
Cape Look-out. I remained for some time in 
the glazed apartment which forms the upper 
story of all lighthouses, gazing out into the 
night, and listening to the moan of the wind. 
I did not feel so lonely, somehow, while look- 
ing towards those distant gleams, north and 
south, which told of a common purpose, and 
good-will towards our race. 

*' What time, sar, massa like to hab him 
supper ? Got such a bootiful chicken, sar, 
ready to broil if massa give command. And 
shall old Aunt Polly boil kettle for tea ?" 

It was my black housekeeper, eager to be 
employed, recalled me from aesthetic medi- 
tations, and I left the steady lamps to burn 
alone. 

My every-day life,, as custodian of the Hat- 
teras Light, was an exceedingly monotonous 
one. Yet dull as it was, it could not be called 
intolerable. It is true that there were times 
when I heartily envied Aunt Polly singing 
among her saucepans, and Juba carolling 
some interminable negro ditty as he chopped 
wood or cleaned my boots ; but at other pe- 



THE GREEN LIGHT. . 255 

riods I was more at ease. Sometimes a boat 
touched at my little quay, and I had the 
pleasure of an hour's gossip with the hardy 
sailors it contained : a conversation in which 
fish was oddly mixed up with politics, but 
which was never devoid of interest. 

My own official work was light. I can 
well imagine that to an uneducated man the 
lack of continued occupation would have been 
maddening. After all, to burnish a brace 
of reflectors, and to trim, fill, and kindle two 
lamps, made but scanty inroads on my time. 
The duty required steadiness, sobriety, and 
punctuality ; but not industry. Luckily for 
me, I had my art wherewith to while away 
the long hours of the sultry summer days ; I 
painted and sketched ; I retouched and al- 
tered ; and, by dint of gazing on nature with 
a loving and humble eye, I really made some 
progress as a marine painter. I had fully made 
up my mind not to retain my post above a 
year at the outside ; nor would I have thought 
of staying so long but that I wanted to learn 
to depict the sea, after the long period of 
sunshine and smiles, with a wrathful frown 



256 . THE 6REKN LIGHT. 

upon its expanse. A man cannot always be 
painting, but I had much ado to find any 
other tolerably rational pastime. I polished 
the mountings of the telescopes, and even the 
brass hilts of the old cutlasses, till they shone 
like gold* I cleaned up the old duck gun, and 
got it ready for the arrival of the birds of 
passage, when the northeni snows should 
fall. And, finding that T could not, from the 
quay or beach, contrive to catch any but the 
smallest fish, I seriously set to work to re- 
pair a large old boat belongipg to the light- 
house, and which I found half-sunk in a creek 
not far off. Lucky it was that I betook ray- 
self to this last task, as the reader shall pre- 
sently hear. 

All this time I saw but little of my neigh- 
bours, the islanders. Curiosity brought me 
several visitors during the first months of my 
sojourn ; but, although I made a point of re- 
ceiving their calls as urbanely as possible, no 
particular sympathy could exist between them 
and myself. It was not that they were rude 
of speech and boisterous of manners ; nor was 
it that I found myself the only educated per- 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 257 

son within walking distance. But my am- 
phibious neighbours had in their demeanour, 
for the most part, something that repelled 
esteem and discouraged confidence. They 
seemed sly, with all their uncouthness, and 
they would now and then give utterance to 
sentiments too lawless for my taste. 

I shall never forget the first visit I paid to 
the Brown family. Fruit Creek was a long 
and deep, though narrow inlet, which termi- 
nated in a shelving bank, on the smooth sand 
of which a number of whale-boats and skiflB 
rested, like fish out of water. The creek was 
named in consequence of the wreck of a West 
Indian vessel, laden with pines and shaddocks, 
near the spot where Daddy Brown had esta- 
blished his long black house of well-calked 
timber. There were several huts within sight, 
but Mr. Brown's was by far the best and 
largest of the tenements; its windows were 
completely glazed, and it possessed a tolerable 
garden, fenced from spray and sand by a high 
wall of solid timber slabs. The inside of the 
house was even more comfortable than the 
exterior promised. The Browns were evi- 

VOL. III. s 



25S THE GREEN LIGHT. 

dently well off, and, as they insisted that I 
should not leave them before supper, I had 
an opportunity of seeing how they fared in 
general. 

Daddy Brown himself was a hale old fellow, 

tall, but much bowed with age, though his 

flashing black eyes were as keen as a hawk's, 

and evinced great craft and vigour. I was at 

first rather disposed to like the old man, he 

talked so well and glibly. He alone, of the 

family group, had been a traveller; he had 

been to China and to Europe, as mate of a 

vessel, and had coasted repeatedly along the 

Atlantic seaboard, from Vera Cruz to Halifax. 

There were three sons, of whom Japhet was 

the eldest, and three daughters, all tall and 

well made, with dark complexions and bright 

eyes. Mrs. Brown, on the other hand, was a 

soft little woman, with rather a timid look in 

her round blue eyes, and was, as her husband 

said, from Pennsylvania. She was a notable 

housekeeper, and had the northern taste for 

scrubbing and polishing, since the floor was 

exquisitely clean, and the copper and tin upon 

the kitchen shelves shone brilliantly. The 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 259 

family received me hospitably enough. The 
young men eyed my thews and sinews with 
undisguised scorn, and half-jestingly chal- 
lenged me to " wrastle a fall " with Seth or 
'Symmachus, observing that Japhet was too big 
to make the match a fair one. But they were 
equally anxious to see some proof of my pro- 
ficiency with the gun, concerning which they 
had heard marvels from their elder brother. 
So, a fowling-piece was taken down from the 
hooks over the stove, where it usually hung, 
and half an hour was devoted to shooting at 
a moving mark, such as Seth's cap, or an old 
sea-boot belonging to Japhet, which were suc- 
cessively flung up into the air, and riddled 
with swan shot, amid general applause. 

" Too dark for more ! too dark for more !'* 
cried old Daddy Brown ; " wall done, Britisher, 
all the same ! I could shoot a bit oncest, but 
'twar with the rifle. Come to supper, boys 
and gals. The old woman's just lit up/* 

The lamps which Mrs. Brown had just *' lit 
up,'' were three very large constructions of 
white metal, the work of some Yankee pew- 
terer, which held a great deal of oil, and gave 

s 2 



260 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

a blaze of yellow light. The cloth was laid 
on the walnut-wood table, and on it smoked a 
profusion of hot viands, flanked by all sorts of 
bottles and stone jars. The plates were of 
common delf, but the drinking vessels were 
most various. Thus, Daddy Brown had a 
silver tankard; Japhet, a tin pannikin; the 
girls glasses ; and the rest of the party china 
mugs. I was still more surprised to see that 
some of the forks were of massive silver, 
while others were two-pronged steel imple- 
ments of the cheapest fabric. We had 
scarcely sat down, before a remarkable inci- 
dent happened. I chanced, less through in- 
quisitiveness than absence of mind, to be 
turning round the heavy silver fork assigned 
to me, when 1 descried some half-effaced 
armorial bearings on the handle. Before I 
could decipher them, however, Seth Brown, 
the youngest son, who sat near me, and who 
had watched me, suddenly thrust out his bony 
hand, wrested the fork from me, and tossed it 
across the table: growling out something 
about " a spy.'* I was really too much aston- 
ished to resent this rudeness, but Daddy 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 261 

Brown instantly exclaimed in a harsh tone, 
" For shame, Seth ! you're drunk, boy. Ask 

the stranger's pardon, or '* Daddy Brown 

did not finish the sentence, but his brows cor- 
rugated into an ugly frown, and he shook his 
fist at his youngest son, who gave me back the 
fork with a very bad grace, muttering that he 
meant no harm . " 'twar a joke." This was 
odd, and another trivial circumstance hap- 
pened soon after. One of the girls who sat 
near me, a merry black-haired maiden, like 
her sisters, with a loud laugh and a nut-brown 
cheek, wore a very pretty brooch, mounted in 
gold, and delicately executed in enamel, in 
Louis Quinze style. 1 happened to praise the 
beauty of this costly ornament, to the evident 
gratification of the wearer, until I hazarded 
the remark that " the workmanship was pro- 
bably French. I never saw such a brooch in 
an American jeweller's." 

" That's tellins !" answered the girl in a 
sharp tone. 

"Phoebe!" exclaimed her mother in a 
deprecatory fashion. Her father gave one of 
his oily laughs. " Our island gals," said he, 



I 



202 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

" don't understand your tov^nri ways, Britisher. 
The gewgaw glittery thing was honestly come 
by, you may take your oath of it. And 
that's all that matters the vally of a pinch of 
gunpowder, whether French or not French." 

I parted from the Browns cordially enough, 
but the more 1 thought of them the queerer 
they seemed. Were they really fishermen, I 
wondered, in spite of all the nets and many 
hooked lines ostentatiously displayed around 
their dwelling! Had those sharp whale- 
boats no other use than to carry Japhet and 
Seth to the banks where coalfish, and catfish, 
jewfish, and sunfish, were plenty? There 
were things to be seen in that house of Mr. 
Brown's, w^hich' contrasted forcibly with the 
oaken benches and clumsy furniture. Silk 
curtains to the small paned-windows, one or 
two arm-chairs of frayed velvet, a beautiful 
Indian cabinet in rare wood inlaid with ivory, 
and above all, a small but handsome mirror, 
whose richly carved and gilded frame jarred 
with the coarse coloured prints that were 
hung on the same wall. Very odd, all this. 
To be sure, these expensive objects might be 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 263 

relics of Mr. Brown's seafaring days, treasures 
picked up in the course of his wanderings. 
And yet. I doubted. 

About a week after, something confirmed 
my doubts. An officer arrived suddenly . a 
lieutenant in the United States navy . who 
had been charged with the duty of inspecting 
all the lighthouses on the Atlantic coast. He 
found nothing to blame at Cape Hatteras. 

"Your lamps and lantern are in pattern 
order, Mr. Halford," said the lieutenant, very 
good-humouredly, " and your reflectors do 
you credit. I wish I had always the power 
to say as much ; but the fact is, Uucle Sam 
has some shocking bargains along the cbast. 
No accident here, in your time, hey ?" 

" Accident ?" said I, rather perplexed. 

*^ Ah, yes, it's best to call them by that 
name ;" said the lieutenant dryly : " they are 
rather famous for their frequency hereabouts, 
especially in rough or foggy weather. Ships 
often mistake the lights and run ashore, and 
are lost . and no wonder, if people will fasten 
lanterns to horses, and keep moving along the 
beach, so as to delude poor wretches at sea. I 



204 THE GREEN LIOHT. 

see, Mr. Halford, by your face, that you are 
surprised. Briefly, then, there are gangs of 
as rascally wreckers, not a hundred miles ofl^, 
as ever a country was cursed with. Take 
care they don't play you a trick some night, 
that's aUr 

But nothing whatever occurred, during the 
long hot smnmer, to justify the lieutenant's 
warning. Autumn came, and with it the 
season of violent gales, heavy rains, and fogs 
of blinding thickness. I heard rumours of a 
few wrecks, on remote parts of the chain of 
sandy islets, but no such misfortune occurred 
in my own neighbourhood. Day after day I 
saw ships pass safely by, under shortened can- 
vass, and fighting their way bravely through 
the angry sea. Night after night my beacon 
lights answered the friendly blaze to north 
and south, and along the wave-lashed coast- 
line the signs of danger were shown, not in 
vain. By this time I was getting heartily sick 
of my employment. I had saved a little 
money. I had made many sketches, and had 
much improved in my colouring and taste, by 
dint of study and practice. And as I found 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 265 

my isolation tedious to the last degree, I had 
written to the authorities to inform them of 
my intention to resign, as soon as my suc- 
cessor should be ready to assume my du- 
ties. 

On a blustering and dark autumnal day, 
when the clouds were driving fast across the 
threatening sky, and the waves rolled in with 
a hoarse murmur, I suddenly came, in the 
course of a lonely ramble along the beach, 
upon two men. They were standing in a 
little hollow between two hillocks of loose 
sand, gazing out earnestly to seaward. My 
eyes instinctively followed the direction of 
theirs, and I saw a large ship under double 
reefed topsails, with her courses brailed up, 
staggering along the coast line, with her bows 
turned southwards. The wind was unfavour- 
able to her, and she had much ado to make 
very slow progress indeed, by dint of incessant 
tacks. The two men on the shore, not notic- 
ing me, as my footsteps fell noiselessly on the 
soft sand, conversed in loud, unguarded tones. 
" There she goes on the larboard tack again. 
At that rate she'll beat about till dark, and 



( 



266 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

never make ten cables' length of way f said 
the younger and taller of the two. 

" She can't fetch Ocracock Inlet, with the 
wind where it is, and like to freshen ;'' observed 
the other, in an oily, insinuating voice which I 
recognised as that of Daddy Brown ; " I guess 
her skipper don't know this coast. The fool's 
sure to bump ashore, soon or late." 

*' A good job if she came ashore within our 
bounds !" exclaimed the younger, who was no 
other than Japhet Brown ; " deep laden as 
she is ; there'd be pickings worth a wetrjacket. 
We haven't had a clutch at such a critter, not 
since the " 

" Hush !" prudently observed old Brown, 
who had just turned his head, and caught a 
glimpse of me ; ** hush I there's ears about." 

Japhet reddened and frowned very sulkily as 
I descended the sandhill and wished him and 
his father " good-day." But Mr. Brown was 
very bland. " Glad to tumble on you again, 
Britisher ! Han't see you these two months 
agone. Dirty weather !" 

Our conversation was not a long one, and 
we soon parted. But, to vay great surprise. 




THE GREEN LIGHT. 267 

when I got near home I heard some one 
panting after me, and up came Japhet at a 
run. "Father says," he gasped out, "says 
yew would do him proud if yew'd look in at 
Fruit Creek to-night. The gals have got a 
party . a frolic to shell corn-cobs and string 
*era . and there's lots of neighbours comin', 
both men and women. We have a dance and 
games, and a supper fit for the President. 
Will you come ?*' 

Now if I had consulted my own inclinations, 
I should have declined, but I was anxious to 
give no oflFence, and I knew that my refusal 
would probably be attributed to the pride of 
superior station and acquirements, so I ac- 
cepted. 

" That's right, chap !" said Japhet, drawing 
a long breath : '' I hate a fellow to be nasty 
proud, I do. Ah, yew and we might work 
well together, and yew'd make a better thing 
of it than the State salary, if yew only knew 
which side toot bread was buttered." 

.* What do yea mean ?*' 

Bat Japhet tamed on bis heel with a bouse 
laugh, saying in a load voice. 



t 



268 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

** Never yew mind ; recklect youVe pro- 
mised to come. Folks gather at six. Don't ' 
be later nor the half-past, chap !" 

Off he went. I went home, and, as I turned 
my head in the act of crossing the threshold, 
I saw the same ship still within a mile of the 
shore. The dusk was deepening fast into the 
obscurity of night, but I could see that she 
was making slow progress, while there was 
every indication of a storm. I went up the 
ladder, lighted and arranged my lamps with my 
accustomed care, and then sat down to read 
for awhile. At half-past five, I made such 
slight alterations in my dress as were neces- 
sary, threw my mackintosh cloak over my 
shoulders, and after a glance at the beacon, 
prepared to set out. I had never before left 
the lamps to burn in my absence. 

I had a long and disagreeable walk to Fruit 
Creek; the wind had begun to moan and shriek, 
my cloak flew out and tugged at my shoulders 
as if to hold me back, and my feet stumbled 
among the sand-hills. It was very dark, and 
rain and sleet came driving before the gale. 
After my weary tramp along the desolate 



, THE GREEN LIGHT. 269 

shore, I thought that Daddy Brown's house, 
with a ruddy radiance streaming from its 
windows, and its principal apartment crowded 
with men, matrons, girls, and striplings, pre- 
sented a cheerful scene. There was abun- 
dance of fun, laughter, and hearty mirth at 
this '* frolic.'* An endless country dance was 
achieved by a score of couples, with an obli- 
gato accompaniment of stamping and clap- 
ping of hands ; songs were sung, games, such 
as hunt the slipper and blind-man's-buff, were 
played. At another time I should have 
watched the scene with keen interest ; but on 
this particular evening my spirits were low, 
and my heart was heavy within me. Some- 
thing like a foreboding weighed me down, in 
spite of all my efforts not to play the part of 
kill-joy. Daddy Brown seemed very glad to 
see me, and so did Japhet, but it struck me 
that Mrs. Brown looked at me with rather a 
scared glance. Curiously enough, though the 
three daughters were all dancing as vigorously 
as if life itself depended on their exertions, 
Seth and 'Symmachus, the younger sons, were 
absent. 



i 



270 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

"The boys are all right," said Daddy 
Brown, in answer to my inquiry; "they're 
out late ; been over to the main, after ducks. 
We'll see 'em before supper time, Britisher.'* 

I declined dancing, and for some time con- 
tented myself with the part of a spectator. 
But the fiddling, laughter, and loud talking, 
jarred on my ears ; I became more and more 
oppressed by the gloom that had clouded my 
mind, why, I knew not ; and at last T could 
bear it no longer. Watching my opportunity, 
I slipped out unobserved, and set out on my 
lonely homeward walk. 

About half way from the lighthouse, two 
men, with their heads depressed, as they 
pushed their way against the wind and rain, 
came hurrying rapidly past, and crossed me 
without seeing me. They were of much the 
height and build of Seth Brown and his 
brother; but what errand could possibly have 
taken them to the Cape, when their father 
had accounted so plausibly for their ab- 
sence ? 

A vague formless misgiving came to chill 
my heart with dread. What errand could 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 271 

have led those two young men to my desolate 
dwelling on a night of revelry? I set my 
teeth and strode on faster. Was that light- 
ning, that red flash through the darkness to 
seaward? No. After a pause came the 
sullen boom of a cannon. A signal of dis- 
tress, no doubt, from some ship in peril. 
I pressed on. At last I could see the light- 
house, sending, as usual, its friendly beams of 
radiance far over the roaring sea. As usual ? 
No, for my practised eye soon detected a 
change. The red light burnt alone; the 
green lamp was gone ! 

" Great Heaven V I cried, aloud, " this is 
some dreadful accident, or else villains have 
been tampering with the lights ! Those 
young ruffians . the ship . the invitation . I 
see it !" With a groan I set off to run at 
my utmost speed, hoping to arrive in time to 
light the extinguished lamp before the doomed 
ship, whose signal I had heard, should be 
lured to her fate. I'or, at a glance, I had 
divined the heartless scheme of the wreckers. 
The red light burning alone would be taken 
for that on Cape Look-out, and the captain, 



272 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

utterly deceived, would seek an imaginary 
channel where the fatal sandbanks lay^ 

Before I got home, however, flash upon 
flash, boom after boom, told of the urgent 
danger which the mariners had perceived 
when it was too late. Each report was nearer 
and nearer, and the vessel must be driving 
fast towards the lee shore. I hurried to the 
house. Juba was asleep and snoring in a 
corner of the kitchen, and the negress was 
rocking herself before the fire, crooning out 
some plantation ditty. Evidently the blacks 
knew nothing of what had been done. I ran 
up to the glazed chamber, where the' lamps 
stood. Hastily I relighted that which had 
been extinguished, and then approached the 
glass, and looked out. For a while, I saw 
nothing but the flashes of the minute guns, 
but presently a broad and lurid glare arose, 
and I could see by the light of an enormous 
fire of tar-barrels and wood, which had been 
hastily piled upon the beach, that the vessel 
had already grounded. She had struck, bows 
foremost, her upper spars and rigging had 
gone overboard, covering her deck with a 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 273 

tangled mass of ruin, the waves breaking 
furiously over her. Hard-by, 1 could see a 
number of men, their swart figures clearly 
defined in the blood-red light, bustling up and 
down the sands. They had lighted the fire . 
the wreckers. Without pausing to consider 
the possible consequences to myself, I hurried 
down the ladder, calling on Juba to follow me ; 
and, rushing towards the beach, hoped that I 
might be in time to reach a helping hand to 
some of the poor perishing creatures. When 
1 drew near, I heard a great shout. The 
vessel had parted amidships. The whole sea, 
crimson with firelight, was covered all over 
with floating beams, bales, boxes, fragments of 
wreck, and struggling human forms. The 
latter were but few, and their cries for help 
were disregarded by the greedy wretches on 
shore, who rushed, with loud shouts, waist- 
deep into the sea, to secure plunder. Chests, 
casks, and other prizes, were hurriedly grasped, 
and rolled or dragged above the reach of the 
waves, while the wreckers encouraged each 
other in their unhallowed task. It was a 
hideous scene, but I saw little of it, for my 

VOL. III. T 



274 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

eye suddenly lighted on something like a 
bundle of clothes, lashed to a bench of light 
cane- work, which was floating in an eddy 
hard-by. The white bundle stirred as it was 
swept past, and the long golden hair of a 
child, and the pale pretty face of a child, were 
clearly visible in the crimson-light. In an 
instant I was standing in the foaming water, 
which reached above my waist, and I had a 
firm grasp on the object that had attracted my 
notice. The undertow nearly bore me off my 
feet, and I staggered, but I held the child fast, 
cut the cord that fastened her to the bench, 
and bore her in my arras to the beach. A 
sweet face, innocent and beautiful, the face of 
a seraph ! She was wet and cold, but fear 
had not benumbed her faculties, for she clung 
to my shoulder with one tiny hand, while with 
the other she pointed to the sea, and murmured 
in a weak voice, " Mamma ! Please help ! 
Oh pray, pray save mamma !" 

Poor child ! I looked on her with pity ; no 
doubt was in my mind that her mother had 
perished in the disaster. The little girl . she 
could not have been above seven years old . 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 275 

pointed eagerly to a mass of wreck that turned 
and twirled in the eddy as it drifted past, and 
begged and prayed me passionately ** to help 
dear mamma." 

The child was right : there was a human 
figure lashed to those spars, and the long 
brown hair and the streaming garments 
showed that the apparently lifeless form was a 
woman's. I laid the child lightly on the 
sandbank, telling her not to be afraid, and, 
throwing off my coat, plunged into the sea, 
and with great difficulty dragged the floating 
mass to shore. The little raft, hastily com- 
posed of a couple of studding-sail-booms and 
a hencoop, lashed together, had drifted far out 
before I reached it, and the strong current 
nearly sucked me out to sea as I swam back, 
panting and dripping wet ; but I managed to 
drag the poor lady from the waves. She was 
quite insensible, her eyes were closed, and but 
for the very faintest action of the heart I should 
have thought life extinct. A pale delicately- 
moulded face, with some resemblance to that 
of the beautiful child, though the complexion 
aud colour of the hair were very dissimilar. 

T 2 



276 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

The little girl put her arms round her mother's 
neck, and kissed her a hundred times. 

I now began very seriously to consider how 
I should get the sufferer conveyed to safe 
shelter. To the wreckers I dared not appeal. 
Fortunately, they had been too busy to notice 
what was going on at a distance of fifty paces, 
and if they had seen me at all they probably 
took me for one of the gang. But I dared 
not call to them for help. They wanted no 
living witnesses of their misdeeds, no living 
claimants of the property which they were 
lawlessly appropriating. 

As I swam back with my second prize, my 
face had been towards the wreck, and I had 
distinctly seen two human heads rise above 
the broken water, and two eager gasping 
human faces, and the outstretched hands of 
two half-drowned men. Both were bareheaded 
and drenched with salt water, but by the mo- 
mentary glimpse 1 caught of them 1 should 
have said that the elder was a seaman, the 
other, who wore a dark moustache, a gentle- 
man. They held out their hands, and cried 
for aid, but none came. Only a tall man. 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 277 

whose face I did not see, but whose figure was 
like that of Japhet Brown, repulsed them with 
a boat-hook he carried, and pushed them back 
inte the deep water, amid the jeers and yells 
of the wretches on shore. And so they sank, 
murdered for the sake of gain. I felt that my 
own life hung on a thread. If any wrecker 
espied me, the villains would not hesitate at 
another crime. But how could I go? I 
could carry the child with ease, but her poor 
mother ! 

Thank God ! Juba in person ! I had 
quite forgotten that I had ordered the young 
negro to follow me; I had far outstripped 
him, but I looked up and saw his black face. 
He was dreadfully alarmed at the fierce 
shouts and excited gestures of the wreckers, 
and was on the point of making off when I 
caught him by the collar. Between us, we 
contrived to carry the young woman over the 
dreary sandhills between us and the light- 
house, the child being sufficiently recovered to 
walk. We laid our patient on my bed, and 
when Aunt Polly had exhausted her first 
transports of astonishment, she proved an 



278 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

excellent nurse. Thanks to the care and zeal 
of the kind negress, Mrs. Fairfax gradually 
revived. It was from her own lips that I 
learned her name and position in life. 8he 
was the young wife of a gentleman of good 
fortune in North Carolina, and nephew to the 
Governor of that State. But . poor thing ! . 
I could not disguise from her that she was a 
widow, though I spared her the additional 
pang of knowing that her husband had been 
one of those who had been inhumanely thrust 
back into the sea to perish, although I had 
little doubt that one of the murdered men 
had been Captain Fairfax, whose description 
tallied with that of the poor victim 1 had 
beheld. 

Leaving the widow weeping over her recent 
loss, while she clasped her rescued child as if 
she feared to lose her too, I went to make 
preparations for leaving the island. Most 
fortunately, 1 had employed my leisure in 
repairing the dismantled boat. The latter 
had no mast, but it was now watertight, and a 
pair of the old oars were fit for use. Before 
I slept, I brought the boat from the creek, and 



THE GREEN LIGHT. 279 

moored it to the quay, ready for a start. My 
great fear was that, before we could escape, 
some of the wreckers might discover that I 
had been an eye-witness to their crimes, and 
had saved some of the passengers on board 
the foundered ship, which I now learned was 
the Astarte, of Boston. On this account, 
shortly after daybreak I caused mattresses 
and pillows to be placed in the boat ; and 
Aunt Polly, Juba, and 1. carried down Mrs. 
Fairfax, who was too much exhausted to walk. 
The child followed, and Aunt Polly arranged 
the blankets and cloaks around the invalid, 
while Juba was to take one oar, and 1 the 
other. The black lad was not wholly unused 
to a boat, having rowed on the river near 
Wilmington. In case of pursuit, which, 
however seemed improbable. I had placed the 
loaded gun in the boat, had hidden one of the 
cutlasses under my pea-coat, and concealed the 
other in the sand. We were just ready to 
push off, when I remembered that my sketches 
and drawings, which 1 was loth to leave, were 
still within the lighthouse. I ran back, put 
the portfolio under my arm, and was on the 



280 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

threshold of my late dwelling, when the figure 
of a tall man appeared in the doorway . Japhet 
Brown ! 

His face was swollen and coarse with drink, 
and his fiery eyes drooped as they met 
mine. 

"Whither away, chap? Yew seem in a 
plaguy hurry ;" he growled, and extended his 
hand. 

" I am going out. I have no time for con- 
versation." 

The young villain burst out into baths and 
curses. 

" Conceited British hound, who be yew, to 
refuse to shake an honest man's hand ?" 

" A murderer's hand, you mean !" I cried, 
indignantly, though I repented the words be- 
fore they were well out. 

Japhet turned livid with passion. "You 
know too much, my gentleman. I'll stop your 
jaw pretty smart." 

So saying, he threw himself upon me, but 
I was luckily armed, and I drove him out of 
the lighthouse, pursuing him, cutlass in hand, 
for a short distance. Then I went back to the 




THE GREEN LIGHT. 281 

boat. Juba and I were not first-rate rowers, 
the boat was heavy, and our progress was 
slow. Before we were half-way across the 
sound, I descried a swift whale-boat cleaving 
the waters, on our track. No doubt the 
wretch Japhet had given the alarm to his 
comrades, and had we been overtaken, the 
secret would have been preserved by the 
sacrifice of all our lives, fiut a sloop passing 
within hail picked us up, and carried us to the 
mainland. Before nightfall we were able to 
place Mrs.' Fairfax and her little daughter 
under the safe care of her husband's re- 
lations. 

I have little more to tell. The gratitude 
of the Fairfax family pressed upon me a large 
pecuniary reward. This I declined, but I 
gladly accepted patronage which enabled me 
to leave for Europe two years later, with . for 
an artist . a purse reasonably heavy. A 
States Marshal, backed by an armed force, 
was despatched to Cape Hatteras, with a. 
warrant for the apprehension of the guilty. 
But some delay had occurred, and the Browns 
fled to Texas, in which remote region, years 



282 THE GREEN LIGHT. 

afterwards, I read of the execution, by lynch 
law, of Japhet and his father, for robbery and 
murder. 



TAKEN IN TOW. 



"Will you take the oath of allegiance, 
sirree? Answer me that Mister Britisher/* 
said the Federal commander, very harshly. 

" I must decline doing anything of the sort/' 
was my answer. " I, as an Englisman, and a 
mere temporary sojourner in the States, have 
nothing whatever to do with this unhappy 
struggle, and " 

" And yet we found you doctorin' them rebel 
scum, didn't we?" roughly answered a stout 
man, who sat on the colonel's left hand, who 
was, I believe, Deputy Provost Marshal of 
the force, which, under General Sturgis, was 
scourging the counties that lie between Grand 
Gulf and Bolivar, in the State of Mississippi. 
And the speaker emphasised his meaning by 



i 



284 TAKEN IN TOW. 

pointing with a fat forefinger at several ghastly 

figures, some with bandaged limbs, others with 

pieces of bloodstained rag wrapped round their 

heads, who lay motionless on straw at the other 

end of the bam. These poor wretches, who 

might have been thought dead but for the low 

moan that from time to time was wrung by 

pain from one or the other of their dismal 

company, were my patients . Confederate 

guerillas. They were too severely wounded to 

share the flight of their comrades when the 

Northern troops arrived, and had been of 

necessity abandoned. As for myself, how I 

got into the scrape in which 1 found myself is 

soon told : I was merely one of the many young 

surgeons, who finding no sphere of action in 

the crowded old country, had made my way 

across the Atlantic without greatly bettering 

my prospects by doing so. I had just returned 

from Pike's Peak, whither I had been lured 

by flattering reports of the lucrative practice 

to be obtained there among the miners, and had 

found that all is not silver that glitters on the 

slopes of the Rocky Mountains. While still 

in that savage region, and uncertain as to my 



TAKEN IN TOW. 285 

future course, I had received a letter addressed 
to rae at St. Louis by a friend iu South Ameri- 
ca. This gentleman, an engineer, high in the 
employ of the Argentine Republic, had written 
to suggest that I should establish myself at a 
town some leagues beyond Buenos Ayres, a 
thriving place, where numerous European emi- 
grants had established sheep-farms and fac- 
tories, and where his influence would avail to 
procure me the post of chief surgeon to the 
government hospital. In my position, such an 
ofier was not to be refused, and it was while 
making my way to New Orleans, with a view 
to embarking for Buenos Ayres, that I had 
fallen in with an armed band of Confederates, 
and had been in a manner impressed into 
rendering my professional services to their 
wounded. 

All this I had related, frankly and freely, to 
the members of the Federal court-martiaL 
producing at the same time ray friend's letter, 
and other papers that corroborated my state- 
ment. However, those into whose hands I 
had fallen, persisted in regarding me as a 
prisoner of war, inasmuch as 1 had been found 



286 TAKEN IN TOW. 

in attendance on rebel patients, and my plea 
of neutrality was derided. It was decided that 
I should be sent to General Butler, then com- 
manding the department, and that my future 
destiny should depend upon his good-will and 
pleasure. 

" YouVe escaped merely by the skin of your 
teeth, Britisher, I can tell you," said an old 
captain of artillery, by far the most good 
natured of the party, when he came afterwards 
to the negro hut to which I had been removed, 
to communicate to me the sentence of the court- 
martial. " Provost Noaks was for severity, 
and so was the colonel, but the major and I 
begged you off." 

** Severity ?" asked 1, in some perplexity. 
" May I ask what the word implies in this 
case ?'* 

My informant directed a jet of tobacco-juice 
against the whitewashed wall, and watched 
the result with great apparent interest, before 
he replied with the most matter-of-course air 
possible : " Just hanging Mister ! But you've 
got off cheap. You're to go down river in one 
of the gunboats, the old Mohawk, most like, 



TAKEN IN TOW. 287 

and I'll give a hint to Captain Hopkins to treat 
you \vell." 

" But my patients ? Poor fellows, they are 
not in a fit condition to be left/' said 1, linger- 
ing. However, the artillery officer curtly in- 
formed me that I should have quite enough to 
do in minding on which side my own slapjacks 
were buttered, that hempen cravats were easily 
come by, and that I had better be off before 
the colonel changed his mind once more, a 
thing likely enough to happen, since he was 
generally *' ugly after liquoring :*' an expres- 
sion which I took to mean that the colonel was 
cross in his cups. And further debate was cut 
by the arrival of a file of soldiers with fixed 
bayonets, under whose care 1 was marched off, 
having only just time to snatch my valise and 
medicine chest, and to utter a word or two of 
thanks to my rugged preserver. The latter 
stood in the doorway of the hut, and shouted 
after me as I went : 

*' If it's the Mohawk, give Captain M'Caus- 
land's compliments, and say I'd be obliged to 
the skipper to give you a berth aft. Abe 
Hopkins knows me a few." 



288 TAKEN IN TOW. 

The Mohawk it was, and Captain Abima- 
lech Hopkins received me with tolerable 
graciousness in consequence of my mention 
of his friend's name. He was a tall, raw- 
boned New Englander, one of those Cape Cod 
men, about whom there seems to be a sort of 
salt-water atmosphere, and indeed be was a 
thorough sailor. He was rough and shrewd, 
having been boatswain of a frigate in the 
United States Navy, and having received pro- 
motion to command a river-going gunboat 
when the demand for skilled officers began to 
exceed the supply. The Mohawk was a true 
war-vessel, however, armed with two very 
heavy pivot-guns, and protected as to her 
bows by some thin plates of iron. She had 
an armed crew, and a strong guard of marines, 
and was deep laden with powder, caps, cloth- 
ing, and various stores, medical and military, 
which she had taken in at Columbus, and 
which were to be delivered at New Orleans. 
The voyage down stream was by no means 
secure, in spite of the exertions of the Federals 
to keep the navigation clear. 

Independent of the fortified places in 



TAKEN IN TOW. 289 

Southern hands, the banks swarmed with 
guerillas, and vessels passing down were so 
continually fired at, that it was usual for 
whole flotillas of flat boats and lighters to 
remain in some safe spot, awaiting convoy. 
As it depended on the discretion of the com- 
manders of the Federal gunboats to give or 
refuse the desired protection, and as valuable 
cargoes were constantly exposed to damage or 
detention for lack of escort, considerable 
bribes were often paid to the captains, under 
the various euphuisms of poundage, salvage, 
and premium. And the Mississippi station 
was reckoned, on that account, as only less 
profitable than the duty of blockading Charles- 
ton. 

Captain Hopkins made no particular secret 
of his own transactions in that line, and he 
naively complained to me, as the steamer 
headed down the yellow river, of the ill fortune 
that bad this time attended him. He bad a 
few thousand dollars on freight, he said, but 
not a red cent's worth of dry goods or pro- 
visions for the New Orleans market, while, as 
for cotton, the most gainful article of com- 

VOL. III. u 



290 TAKEN IN TOW. 

merce, he conceived that not a pound more 
could be brought in, all available stores having 
either been carried inland, or burned, to save 
it from capture by " them pesky guerillas," for 
whom the old seaman entertained a rooted 
abhorrence. As regarded myself, I had no 
cause to complain of my treatment, as a cabin 
passage was allotted me, and I was allowed 
the run of the boat on giving my parole not 
to attempt escape. 

" Mind, Captain Hopkins,'* said I, half se- 
riously, " I only promise not to run away at 
the stopping places down the river. I by no 
means mean to pledge myself to remain a 
prisoner, rescue or no rescue, so if the Con- 
federates take the gunboat, I hold myself free 
to go where I please.'* 

To which Captain Hopkins grimly rejoined, 
that if such a thing should occur, I was wel- 
come to " make tracks," but that I need not 
build many hopes on so frail a foundation. 
The vessel, he added, would run past Vicks- 
burg in the night, so as to prevent any chance 
of being sunk by the fire of the hostile 
batteries, and as for guerillas, he should like 



TAKEN IN TOW. 291 

to see them try to meddle with Uncle Sam's 
property under his charge. As he brought 
his broad hand down with a sounding slap 
upon the huge Parrott gun that was mounted 
amidships, and looked proudly at the trim 
neatness of the well-cared-for steamer, I 
could not but own that my chances of re- 
lease in the manner hinted at were infinitesi- 
mally small. 

As the captain had anticipated, we ran past 
Vicksburg under cloud of night, and thus 
escaped any unwelcome attentions from the 
Confederate batteries, and the greater part of 
our onward course lay through a district for 
the most part in Federal occupation. We 
saw, as we skirted the left bank of the river, 
the frequent flash of arms, and crowded 
together on the deck to watch the progress 
of the long straggling columns of blue-coated 
infantry, the clouds of dust raised by the 
passage of the cavalry and guns, and the 
innumerable array of white tilted waggons 
that crawled in the rear. At Natchez, where 
a strong garrison had been posted under 
shelter of some earthworks^ just as we were 

u2 



292 TAKEN IN TOW. 

starting, after taking in fresh fuel, we were 
bailed from a canoe which a couple of negro 
boatmen paddled towards us, and a tall man, 
in a sort of nondescript uniform, with 
shoulder-straps and a narrow gold edging, 
came clambering up our side-ladder, and 
asked for the captain of the Mohawk. In 
spite of his semi-military garb, the new 
comer, who had a broad-brimmed hat, and 
a cigar between his lips, looked like any- 
thing but a soldier, and by the pen behind 
his ear I conjectured him to belong to one of 
the civil departments of the army. 

A word or two from the stranger appeared 
to produce a talisraanic effect upon our com- 
mander, and after a brief conference in the 
latter's cabin, the two worthies came on deck 
again, evidently on very good terms. The 
tall man was introduced to the lieutenants 
and midshipmen, and also to the marine 
officer and myself, as Dr. Amulius Cook, 
storekeeper in the United States army, and 
one who was to be our shipmate for the 
remainder of the voyage. And as the canoe 
slowly made its way back to shore, and the 



TAKEN IN TOW. 293 

Mohawk resumed her course down stream, 
Dr. Amulius, or, as he chose to abbreviate his 
name, Dr. 'Muly Cook, who was extremely 
frank and communicative, did me the favour 
to converse a good deal with myself. 

" Your skipper's a rough specimen ; wood 
with the bark on," said the doctor, with even 
more than the usual drawl and nasal twang 
that marks the genuine New Englauder, "but 
he's clear grit, and real American. I say, 
weren't you surprised to see how 'nation 
polite he was to me, all in a moment ?" he 
continued, as his little black eyes twinkled 
knowingly. 

I smiled as I made answer that Captain 
Hopkins was probably conciliated by the sight 
of the Federal uniform. He certainly was not 
equally bland to all comers, for, at Natchez 
itself, he had somewhat roughly, on the plea 
of " public necessity," repulsed a merchant 
captain who came on board with a written 
requisition for convoy. When I related this 
to my new acquaintance, he laughed in a 
peculiar silent manner, but with obvious en- 
joyment, and told me how matters really stood. 



r 



294 TAKEN IN TOW. 

He, Dr. Amulius Cook, was in charge of a 
string of four barges or flat boats, laden with 
cotton, which were lying at a place called 
Hautpr^, five or six miles lower down than 
Natchez. This cotton had been part of the 
booty seized in a late raid of the Federal troops 
in the country traversed by the Big Black 
River, and to get it safely conveyed to New 
Orleans, where it would fetch an extremely high 
price, was the object of its custodian. 

" You see, mister," said the doctor, as he 
slowly lighted his third cigar, " nothing riles 
them rebel hounds like taking off their cot- 
ton to market, and they bum every cent's 
worth as soon as they hear we're coming to 
fetch it, by reason of which prices rule awful 
high, and we shall realise a most cruel profit, 
or my name ain't 'Muly Cook when we sell it 
on the mart, in New Orleans city." 

" We 1" said I, somewhat bewildered. " I 
beg your pardon, but did you not say the 
cotton was government property ?" 

The storekeeper laughed again. " Bri- 
tisher," said he, " you don't understand Ame- 
rican ways, you don't. We go ahead, we do. 



TAKEN IN TOW. 295 

in Columbia happy land. Now, I'll make all 
clear as a glass of Taos whisky. See here ; 
the cotton belongs to Uncle Sam, of course, 
but sold it must be. For that purpose, it is 
consigned to General Butler's brother, who 
does a smart trade now, on this cupful of 
yellow water we call the Mississippi, and the 
general gives a pass to permit its removal. 
Wall, sir, we've got to get the bales to New 
Orleans, and that's no joke, for there's more 
than one hornet's nest to pass, and we want 
convoy. We wait till we find a sensible 
skipper like Captain Hopkins, and we make 
it worth his while to take us in tow, right 
away down. Then the cotton's sold, and sold 
at a profit that whips creation, and com- 
missary Butler, and storekeeper 'Muly Cook, 
and the skipper of the Mohawk, and Uncle 
Sam, are all the better for the dollars they 
share among 'em, don't you see? But here 
we are at Hautpr^." 

Sure enough, the Mohawk came to a dead 
stop in front of an insignificant little town, 
with its quaint wooden church, its score or 
two of small houses, bright with paint, or 



296 TAKEN IN TOW. 

gleaming white as lime could make them, the 
fac-simile of many of the overgrown Creole 
villages that stud the lower Mississippi. Be- 
side the wharf of this place lay four large- 
sized flat boats, lashed together, and piled 
high with cotton bales in their coarse cover- 
ings of yellowish gunny cloth. These were 
apparently under the protection of a small 
guard of negro soldiers in the blue Federal 
uniform, who lolled about the untidy decks in 
every attitude indicative of careless repose, 
while a few boatmen, white and coloured, also 
lounged beside the cargo. These were the 
barges, with their precious freight, the value 
of which war and devastation had raised to so 
high a pitch, of which our new friend had 
spoken, and the broad hints he had given nie 
as to the expected division of the profits of its 
sale, suflBced to explain the cheerful prompt- 
ness with which the captain of the Mohawk 
consented to encumber himself with so un- 
wieldy a charge. Tow-ropes were soon made 
fast to the steamer's stem and the broad prow 
of the leading flatboat, and the armed vessel, 
tugging the laden barges after her, snorted 



TAKEN IN TOW. 297 

and puffed her way sturdily but slowly down 
the river. 

The rest of that morning's voyage was un- 
eventful. Twice, indeed, we were fired on as 
we went past masked Confederate batteries 
among the tall reeds and cane-brake of the 
western shore, but the guns were mere six- 
pound field-pieces, and the aim bad and un- 
steady, and the Mohawk had merely to send 
a shower of grape-shot hissing and spattering 
among the green bushes of the bank, to drive 
away the invisible enemy. Whether the grape 
harmed the guerillas I cannot say, but the 
light round shot directed against the Mohawk 
passed across her bows without any efiect, 
and in both cases we escaped without so much 
as one casualty. And of those dashing assaults 
which the Southerners sometimes attempt by 
the help of canoes and rafts, when opportunity 
serves, there was little risk in this case. Five- 
and-thirty marines, fifty sailors and officers, were 
on board the gunboat, besides the coloured 
troops, perhaps a dozen in number, who occu- 
pied the barges. And the great guns of the 
Mohawk gave her an incontestable superiority. 



298 TAKEN IN TOW. 

At Berryville, where we took in firewood in 
the course of the afternoon, another passenger 
came on board. This was a lady, splendidly 
dressed, and attended by a black female ser- 
vant, who presented herself in virtue of a pass 
signed by General Sturgis, and in which 
document all naval and military functionaries 
were required to protect and assist the bearer, 
Mrs. Gregg, wife of Senator Gregg, then in 
Washington for the service of his country. 
Captain Hopkins growled a little at the first 
suggestion of a fresh accession to our party in 
the little cabin, but the order from General 
Sturgis was a formal one, and the sturdy ex- 
boatswain was not exempt from the almost 
superstitious reverence for travelling woman- 
kind which his countrymen entertain. 

Mrs. Gregg, however, politically speaking, 
threatened to prove a firebrand in our hitherto 
tranquil society. She was fiercely loyal, and 
her ardour for the 'old flag' proved conta- 
gious, none of the other Americans liking to 
be outdone in verbal professions of attach- 
ment to the Union. I never shall forget what 
a flashing look of scorn she gave me when 1 



TAKEN IN TOW. 299 

was introduced to her as an English surgeon 
who had been captured among rebels, and 
was now a paroled prisoner. 

" Don't excuse yourself, sir, nor wound the 
ears of a loyal lady with remarks on the duty 
of common humanity," said Mrs. Gregg, eye- 
ing me as if I had been a reptile. " I guess 
humanity to copperheads and rebel miscreants 
is often the worst cruelty to the noblest cause 
on earth, the cause of Freedom, sir, if you ever 
heard the word. I speak warmly, as the wife 
of a Union senator who has borne persecution 
and plunder for the sake of our glorious 
principles . Senator Titus Gregg, of Spanish 
Creek." 

Mrs. Gregg was a fine dark-eyed woman, 
of, perhaps, five-and-thirty, and her dress and 
manners were Parisian, but I very much re- 
gretted that she had come on board the boat 
at all, for she could speak but on one subject, 
or rather she contrived to make all topics 
bear upon the civil war, and her ardour seemed 
contagious. Before long, captain, lieutenants, 
and all, save myself, were launched into a 
tide of partisan discussion, and the bitterest 



300 TAKEN IN TOW. 

tongue of the party belonged to Dr. Cook, 
whose abhorrence of the rebels knew no 
bounds. But Mrs. Gregg did not limit her 
sympathy for the Federation to words alone. 
She had some cases of champagne with her 
luggage, and also some French brandy, which 
were being removed from the cellars of her 
country-house to her mansion in New Orleans, 
and a good many silver-necked flasks found 
their way by supper-time to the state-cabin, 
while Mrs. Gregg insisted on imparting a li- 
beral share of the cognac to the crew and ma- 
rines, ''the gallant defenders of our holy 
Union/' To this Captain Hopkins demurred. 
He had a very few good seamen, drafted 
from the regular navy, and whose superior 
eflBciency and discipline served to leaven the 
rest, but the majority of his men were the 
sweepings of the New Orleans quays, mixed 
with lanky untutored lads from Missouri, who 
were more at home in driving a cart than in 
navigation. He was very strict with his mot- 
ley ship's company, and his master-at-arms, a 
grim old whale-fisher, kept a vigilant watch 
lest spirits should be smuggled on board, as 



TAKEN IN TOW. 801 

it was evident that a free supply of whisky 
would destroy all subordination among the 
crew. However, Mrs. Gregg was bent upon 
hospitality towards the "brave fellows" for- 
ward, and the captain, probably computing 
that a dozen of Nantz would not produce a 
very serious effect when divided among eighty 
sailors and marines, grudgingly consented to 
permit that number of bottles to be distri- 
buted to the Mohawk's men. 

How well I remember that supper in the 
gunboat's cabin, the popping of corks, the 
rattle of knives and forks, and the flow of 
champagne and noisy conversation, which all 
tended to one subject, war ! Such bragging 
and boasting, such outspoken enthusiasm for 
the Union, and such vituperation of the rebels, 
it had not yet been my lot to hearken to. 
Mrs. Gregg had struck the key-note, and the 
whole of the party took up the same strain, in 
no measured terms. To hear them, it would 
have appeared that the soUd earth might be 
expected to sink beneath the sea, and the or- 
der of nature to be suspended, should the Se- 
cessionists triumph. But of that there was 



302 TAKEN IN TOW. 

little prospect. Indeed, so loudly were the 
rebels described as starving, cowardly, de- 
jected, and conquered, that there really seemed 
to be little credit in crushing down such 
hordes of hungry wretches. The noisy talk, 
and the clatter of glasses and plates, made my 
head ache : so, glad of an excuse to leave a 
scene that had no interest for me, I slipped 
away, and went on deck. 

The skylight of the cabin had been raised 
to admit air, and through the filmy mosquito- 
nets I could see the group around the table. 
It struck me, by the flushed faces and vacant 
stare of the majority, the young lieutenants', 
and the marine officer, that Senator Gregg's 
wine must be very strong indeed. The cap- 
tain preferred ration rum, as he said, to all 
the grape juice of France, and he, with his 
tumbler of cold grog before him, and the butt- 
end of a revolver, from which he never parted, 
sticking out of the breast of his navy blue 
coat, was sober enough. Dr. Cook, though 
very talkative, and in high spirits, seemed 
more addicted to waving his glass of creaming 
amber, and occasionally proposing toasts to 



TAKEN IN TOW. 303 

the health of "Honest Old Abe/' "Fighting 
Joe Hooker," and so forth, than to any deep 
potations. Mrs. Gregg, though she smiled, 
and prattled incessantly, scarcely so much as 
put the tall glass to her lips. The subalterns, 
however, were less abstemious, and the negro 
steward ^ and his boy went busily to and fro, 
uncorking fresh bottles. 

I went aft, and stood beside the taffrail, 
under shadow of the wheel-house, where the 
careful helmsman was guiding the steamer 
down stream. Three or four men, the watch, 
I suppose, were on deck, lying down among 
the spare sails and cordage, and apparently 
asleep, but I saw no officer. Indeed, I fancy 
that discipline had been somewhat relaxed 
for a time, in consequence of the symposium 
in the cabin, and of Captain Hopkins's unu- 
sual good humour, due to his anticipated pro- 
fits on the cotton. I could hear the crew, 
noisy and merry, in the forecastle, and I 
easily guessed that Mrs. Gregg's present of 
brandy was under discussion. The twanging 
of the fiddle and the sound of a negro song 
came at intervals from below, accompanied by 



804 TAKEN IN TOW. 

clapping of hands and stamping of feet. 
Crouched under the bulwarks was a dark 
form, that of a woman with a gay Madras 
handkerchief tied round her head . Judy, Mrs. 
Gregg's negress, who had probably returned 
from carrying the brandy to the Mohawk's 
men by her mistress's orders. A ray of moon- 
hght fell on her face, and I noticed that her 
white teeth were glistening forth in a smile, 
perhaps of sympathy with the mirth indicated 
by the sounds that reached her. 

I had drunk but two glasses of the wine 
that frothed so freely below, but my temples 
throbbed violently, and the blood that coursed 
through my veins was hot and fevered. I 
was glad, therefore, to feel the cooler air that 
swept along the river, above whose brown wa- 
ters a thin transparent mist, like a veil of 
bluish gauze, rowse in irregular folds. The tall 
monotonous levee, built to keep out the 
stream from the rich plantations; could alone 
be seen to the eastward, but the western bank 
was fringed by the dark trees of the solemn 
forest, whence came at intervals the cry of 
night-birds, and the low whine of a wolf 



TAKEN IN TOW. 305 

prowling for prey. The whooping of the 
great goat-sucker, with its strange note that 
fancy has rendered into the words " Willy . 
come . go," was answered by a hoarse whist- 
ling cry from the cayman among the reeds. 
As we floated on, I could see in the bright 
moonlight the hideous form of more than one 
alligator lying log-like on the surface. In the 
deep thickets the fire-flies and fire-beetles 
shone like a million tiny lamps. What was 
that ? The howling of an owl, twice repeated, 
and so near that I looked round, startled, but 
no bird was visible. However, a human form 
emerged from the shadow of the bulwarks, 
and the voice of Dr. 'Muly Cook said at my 
elbow, 

" Pleasanter here, Mr. Harding, than down 
in that hot cabin." And he, too, looked out, 
as if musing on the tranquil beauty of the 
prospect. Gradually we got into conversation 
on indifferent topics, and I discovered that 
the storekeeper, of whose character I had 
formed no very exalted estimate, was both a 
better bred and a more thoughtful man than 
I had taken him to be. It was notable, too, 

VOL. III. X 



I 



806 TAKEN IN TOW. 

that his nasal accent was no longer promi- 
nent, and in the gentle quiet personage who 
spoke with so much artistic perception of the 
effects of light and shade on the water's edge, 
and on the leafy grandeur of the southern 
forest, I hardly recognised the unscrupulous 
partisan of union at any price. 

Dr. Cook was making some remarks on the 
wealth of parasitic vegetation, the bush vine, 
the Spanish moss, and the other creepers that 
hung in endless profusion from the giant trees 
on our right, when the low cry of the goat- 
sucker, coming to all appearance from the boat 
astern, made him start and break off in the 
midst of a sentence. Then, with a muttered 
apology, he left me and returned to the 
cabin. 

I remained alone. The mists were begin- 
ning to rise more thickly from the broad 
seething river, and the bright moonlight could 
scarcely pierce the rolling wreaths of fog. 
On board, I heard nothing but the sound of 
the steamer's bell, as the sentry struck it to 
mark the prescribed interval, but the fiddle 
was hushed, and no more din of joyous voices 



TAKEN IN TOW. 307 

came from the forecastle. The party in the 
cabin, too, had become silent, and I only 
heard the panting of the engine as the gun- 
boat made her way along the bends of the ' 
endless river. We were now in a very lonely 
part of our course. Short of Baton Rouge 
and Port Hudson there were no places of 
note, and the levies lay stretching drearily for 
leagues and. leagues without a sign of life 
being visible. 

Suddenly I became aware of a low mur- 
muring sound, like the hum of bees stirring 
in their hive, and which seemed to come from 
the laden flat boats astern. The sound 
swelled and deepened, and seemed to ap- 
proach, and I could distinguish the buzz of 
many voices speaking together in an under 
tone, and with this was mingled a faint 
splashing of water. The tow-rope beside me 
grated on the planking of the deck, as it was 
violently jerked, and it was evident that some- 
thing unusual was taking place. My first 
idea was that the barges had been suddenly 
dashed against snags or floating timber, or 
had sprung a leak, and I was in the act of 

X 2 




308 TAKEN IN TOW. 

stepping forward to give an alarm to the 
sailors of the watch, when a dark fonn seemed 
to rise, as it were, out of the mists of ^the 
river, and a man came scrambling with cat- 
like activity over the poop bulwarks beside 
roe, and in a moment more I felt a bony 
hand clutch me by the throat, while a drawn 
bayonet was levelled at my breast. By the 
moonlight I could see, to my amazement, 
that this unexpected assailant was one of 
the coloured soldiers on duty- in the cotton 
boats. 

" Ef you stir an eyelash, ef you speak above 
your breath, I'll drive the cold iron through 
your hump ribs, jest as I would through a 
calf bufHer on the pararas," said a man, in a 
fierce whisper, but in a voice that I knew 
could belong to no negro. I stood still and 
mute, of course, while a number of other 
figures came pouring over the taflPrail, drop- 
ping from the rigging, and clambering over 
the sides of the vessel, but all this was so 
quickly and noiselessly done, that the portion 
of the Mohawk's crew on deck remaineu 
unconscious of what was going on. 



TAKEN IN TOW. 309 

*' Who are you? Speak you Yankee rascal !" 
hissed my captor, relaxing his grasp a little. 
Half choked and startled as I was, I still 
made shift to give a tolerable lucid account 
of my own identity, but before I had said a 
dozen words, a gaunt fellow in a red shirt 
and cavalry overalls came shouldering through 
the group, and put his bearded face close to 
mine. 

" Whoop 1 boys, all he says is true enough. 
He's the British doctor we pressed into the 
service up on the Yazoo, and the Yankees tuk 
him. Loose him, Jem !'' 

The speaker's wish was complied with, but 
he had raised his voice incautiously, and the 
helmsman started and looked down from his 
perch in the wheel-house, shouting out, 
"Hilloa, there, what's afoot now? Watch 
ahoy ! Treachery !" 

Bang went a pistol by way of answer, and 
the steersman fell groaning, while a clamour 
of voices succeeded. The sentry started for- 
ward and levelled his musket at the intruders, 
but the piece missed fire, and the watch were 
in a moment overpowered, beaten to the deck, 




310 TAKEN IN TOW. 

and bound hand and foot by the enemy, who 
far out-numbered them, since fresh assailants 
scrambled up at every moment fix)m the 
cotton-boats to join in the fray. I was 
carried oflF my feet by the rush that ensued, 
and soon found myself in the cabin, spectator 
of a scene which, in my bewilderment, I 
could only partially comprehend. 

Captain Hopkins, foaming with rage, was a 
prisoner in the grasp of two men, one of whom 
wore the " butteniut " uniform of the South- 
western army of the Confederates, while the 
other was in the light blue garb of the colour- 
ed troops in Federal pay, though his woolly 
wig was awry, and the black stain had been 
partially rubbed from his white face in the 
scuffle that had ensued. The old seaman 
had fought hard ; his clothes were torn, and 
he seemed unsubdued in soul, as he stood 
gasping for breath and glaring savagely at 
Dr. 'Muly Cook, who stood on the other side 
of the table, with a revolver in his hand that 
looked very like that which I had seen pro- 
truding from the captain's pocket. The 
marine officer, whose sword lay broken at his 



TAKEN IN TOW. 311 

feet, was powerless in the clutch of two or 
three rough guerilla-looking figures, who were 
binding his hands with his own belt. The 
other officers were either sleeping with their 
heads upon the table, or stupidly surveying 
the scene with the vacant stare of hopeless 
intoxication. Mrs. Gregg, serene amid the 
confusion, wore a triumphant smile. 

" You all-fired, double-dyed traitor ! You 
are at the bottom of this ! You snatched the 
pistol from me, when in a second more I'd 

have Help, help ! to arms, on deck 

there !'* roared Captain Hopkins, as the 
trampling of feet and clash of steel over- 
head suggested to him the idea that the 
Mohawk's crew were rallying to his rescue. 
But he was disappointed, for the faces that 
looked down the cabin skylight, like those 
of the group crowding into the saloon below, 
were those of armed men wearing the hated 
. uniform of the South. As for the storekeeper, 
he answered the captain's speech with great 
coolness. 

" Spare your breath, sir,*' said he, with 
contemptuous politeness ; " your sailors and 



( 



812 TAKEN IN TOW. 

marines will hardly answer to your call. Look 
at your officers. They have done justice, it 
would seem, to Mrs. Gregg's champagne, and 
the brandy that ** 

** The hquor was drugged, as I'm a sinner, 
wine and brandy too !" exclaimed Hopkins, 
as the conviction flashed upon him; ^^but 
who are you, and the cotton, too, what on 
airth " 

" You'll never sell that cotton at fifty cents 
a pound in greenbacks, you won't," said a 
voice down the skylight. " Wagh ! but I'm 
most stifled, lying there under the cover, like 
a turkey in a coop. 'Twarn't a good time 
we had of it, major, I can tell you, pricking 
holes with our bowie-knives to get a breath 
of air. I've most forgot how to stir my 
arms, I have, but the spec warn't bad, after 
all." 

The stratagem was now revealed. Dr. 
Cook, the convenient Federal storekeeper, 
who had appealed so successfully to the 
captain's love of dollars, was no other than 
Major Norris, C. S., one of the most adroit 
and daring cavalry officers of General Kirby 



TAKEN IN TOW. 813 

Smith's army, and Mrs. Gregg was his wife. 
The whole scheme had been contrived for 
the purpose of capturing the Mohawk, which 
was well known to the numerous and zealous 
agents of the South as being on her way 
to New Orleans, laden with valuable war 
material. The sham cotton bales were really 
nothing but enormous wicker work cages 
covered with packing cloth, and in which 
apertures had been made to admit air to 
the Confederate soldiers concealed within. 
A few of the adventurers had been disguised, 
some as boatmen, others as negro troops in 
Federal pay, the better to mislead suspicion, 
while Major Norris, at no sUght risk of 
detection, which in this case would have 
involved a penalty of death, had undertaken 
to personate the part of an unscrupulous 
civilian in government employ, and had acted 
the character so well as to avert suspicion 
until the very moment when he had wrested 
the revolver from the astonished commander 
of the Mohawk. The papers exhibited, I 
need hardly say, were forgeries, while the 
greater part of the sailors and marines were 



314 TAKEN IN TOW. 

found stupified by the eflfects of the narcotic 
with which the wine and brandy had been 
dragged, and which Mrs. Norris, alias Gregg, 
had conveyed to the crew by the hands of 
her faithful coloured maid, Judy, who, as she 
boasted, hated the " bobolitionists '* as much 
as her mistress did. And Judy had rendered 
another service, having slyly seized an oppor- 
tunity of withdrawing the copper cap from the 
sentry's musket, which certainly prevented 
bloodshed. 

The affair was not a very tragic one, for 
the conquerors made a merciful use of their 
victory, and the steersman's wound, which 
was not mortal, was the only one inflicted in 
the hurry of the capture. The Mohawk, 
however, was pillaged and set on fire, after 
having been stripped of every scrap of iron 
or copper, down to her ring-bolts and rivets, 
and I believe the stores she contained were 
of great use to the Confederate army in the 
wild region west of the Mississippi. As for 
my own share in the transaction, the steamer's 
change of owners proved fortunate to me, 
since through the kind offices of Major Norris 



TAKEN IN TOW. 315 

I was permitted to pursue my way, unmo- 
lested, through Western Louisiana and Texas, 
and, finally embarking at Mataraoras, reached 
my destination in safety. Captain Hopkins 
and the rest were of course made prisoners 
of war, but I have no doubt have long 
since been exchanged. Of the further for- 
tunes of the actors in this little drama I know 
nothing. 



THE END.  
