TALLANTS OF BAETON. 



CHAPTER 1 

IN THE SHADOW OF BEBNB HILLS. 

Baeton Hall is a conspicuous feature of the 
landscape in the smiling Yale of Avonworth^ and 
it stands beneath the shadow of Berne Hills. 
Built of white stone, and in the Italian style of 
architecture, it has the appearance of a modem 
fl^ mansion jremoved from Kensington Palace Gar- 
dens, and planted amongst the rare scenery of 
this beautiful western district of the Midlands. 

All that wealth and taste can do to make the 
house generally worthy of the site has been 
lavished upon it, inside and out It is furnished 
with everything that is costly and comfortable, 

VOL. I. B 



2 THE TAT.T.ANTS OF BARTON. 

with ornaments and articles of vertu from all 
parts of the earth. 

A long gravelly drive leads up to the prin- 
cipal entrance, which is cut off from the park 
with iron fencing and chains. On the other 
side of the house there are conservatories of 
flowers and extensive gardens. Behind^ at a 
short distance, there is stabling for many horses, 
shut out from view by shrubs and young 
trees/ 

In front of the house a smooth tract of mossy 
lawn ends in a sunk fence; and beyond lies 
the park, skirted by green fields, which mount up 
the Berne HiUs and lose themselves in the foliage 
of oaks, and elms, and larches. 

Here and there on the lawn are clumps of 
young aspiring cedars, silver birch trees, ash 
plants, and sycamores, hemmed round about with 
rinls of white creepers and luxuriant mosses. In 
"Gems of the Poets," pictorially adorned by 
Laydon, you will find a fanciful illustration of 
Gray's well-known lines : 



"shut out fbom the budb world." 

" Full many a gem of purest ray serene 
The dark, imfathom'd caves of ocean bear." 



In the foreground there is a leafy vignette of 
exotic and other plants and trees sprouting up 
from an island-rock. Turn the water into grass, 
and replace the tall cocoa-nut trees with a 
couple of silver birches, and you have one of the 
Barton Hall lawn groups; for the place is so 
completely " shut out from the rude world " and 
the easterly and northern winds, that the climate 
is more like southern France than western Eng- 
land, and vegetation flourishes there nearly all 
the year round. 

Close by the principal lodge-entrance to the 
park lies a clear deep lake, fed by a stream 
from the Berne HiUs, and the rendezvous of 
innumerable wild and tame water-fowL 

Few places in broad England can compare with 
this modem house and grounds. The sunsets 
are more beautiful here than anywhere else in 
all this western land. The twilights are full of 
yellows, and delicate neutral tints, and shifting 

B 2 



4 THE TALT.ANTS OF BABTON. 

lights. And the mists that float about those Berne 
Hills, like angel shadows ! and the gentle rains 
that foUow them^ filling the air with a thousand 
mixed perfumes, and brightening the greens and 
browns in the landscape, . ^they might make an 
artist frantic with delight. 

In rain or sunshine, in winter or summer. 
Barton Hall, beneath the shadow of Berne Hills, 
is always beautiful In evening sunsets, with the 
red light on its great flashing windows, and a 
tinge of gold on the vane of its Italian tower, you 
might take it for the romantic retreat of a 
southern king rather than the home of a merchant 
princ6 of Old England. 

Christopher Tallant was to all intents and 
purposes a self-made man. He had begun life in 
a humble capacity in the counting-house of some 
great works in the north of England, where so 
many men of position and influence have made 
their way upwards from minor posts. 

They look more at a boy's talents than at his 
friends in those busy hives of industry north- 



NOETHERNEBS. 

wards. No matter how Idghly a young fellow may 
be connected, he has no position without ability 
in these busy districts. 

A rare practical race, these said northerners 
. ^a race to be brought up amongst, studied 
for example's sake. As a class they do not 
possess the refinements of manner and speech of 
the southern races of England, and they do not 
count so much upon etiquette. They are rough 
like their north-east winds, but genial as their 
own firesides* 

Their rivers are black with coal washings, and 
the banks thereof are crowded with great works, 
from which blazing furnaces, and forges, and 
flashes of sudden flame^ cast ruddy reflections 
upon the sullen tide. Their fields are covered 
with pit-heaps, and iron works, and lime-kilns, 
and blasting cupolas. But here and there, in out- 
of-the-way places, you come upon romantic woods^ 
and running streams, and rocky glens. 

A wonderful land the north countrie, the seat 
of great enterprises, and the home of strong- 



6 THE TALLA27TS OF BABTON. 

limbed^ strong-willed^ clear-headed men; one 
would rather some of them had softer manners, 
but for our country's good we can afford to sacri- 
fice that if only in deference to their active brains 
and their inborn love of enterprise. 

It was in the north, we say, where Mr. Chris- 
topher Tallant began life, and where the key-note 
of his career may be said to have been struck ; 
but as a young jnan he had lived in the south- 
west of England, and had mastered the leading 
principles of trade and commerce in several great 
private and public works. He had proved himself 
an adept at legislative finance, at devising and 
canying out great schemes; and at a compara- 
tively early age he had raised himself to a 
position of commercial distinction and opulence. 

He hsid been twice married. His first union 
was an unhappy one. It was altogether a myste- 
lious marriage, which had puzzled and astonished 
his Mends at the time, as well it might ; for with- 
out the smallest warning the yoimg fellow had re- 
turned from a short visit to London with a hand- 



A 8TRANGB HAEBIAGE. 7 

8ome, dashing woman, whom he introduced as his 
wife. At this time he was manager of the Yulcan 
Forge Works on the Avon, twenty miles on the 
other side of a famous western city, and he had 
the entree to very respectable society. 

It was some time before the little local coterie 
forgave his sudden introduction of the unknown 
London wife. In a very short time he had reason 
to repent his rashness and foUy. His wife in- 
dulged in all kinds of extravagance ; she led the 
local fashions, she indulged in fast flirtations 
which set all the gossips in the neighbourhood 
upon her; finally, an unwomanly' passion for 
drink set in, and after a few years of wretched- 
ness she died, leaving behind her one child, a 
son, who will make a prominent figure in this 
history. 

The poor woman's misconduct had but little 
impeded her husband's worldly advances; he 
secured shares in several important patents; he 
became director of one or two companies; and 
started as an iron merchant on his own private 



8 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

account. At one time he held as his own property 
half the iron bars of a whole district This was 
during a strike^ after a period of great depression^ 
and just before a time of sudden and unexpected 
activity. 

Well, by-and-by, in the course of half-a-dozen 
years, the iron merchant married again, and took 
his wife home to that beautiful country residence 
near Sevemtown, and beneath the shadow of 
Berne Hills. He had only purchased the estate 
the year before his marriage. 

His second wife, whom he had loved with a 
fervency characteristic of his earnest character, 
was the daughter of a nobleman, and an exceed- 
ingly handsome and lovable woman. 

She died in giving birth to her first child, 
who, like her half-brother, is one of the leading 
characters in this story. 

The death of his second wife had been a great 
aflBiction to Christopher Tallant It was many 
months before he could bring himsftlf even to look 
at his child. Travel and change of scene, lapse 



NEW HOPES. 9 

of time, increased aordour in business occupations, 
and new hopes, at length softened down his great 
sorrow, and enabled him to take his place in the 
great world calmly, and as became a man of his 
station and influence. His new hopes centred 
round his only son, who was a lad about eight 
years old when the merchant's greatest trouble 
came upon him. 

The boy exhibited considerable native talent 
He was a smart, well-looking, promising fellow, 
full of life and spirits and courage. Before he 
was ten years old his father clung to him like 
a forlorn hope, and centred in him schemes of 
future power and greatness. The name of Tallant 
had of late years become famous in the world of 
trade and money, and the name should be per- 
petuated in this son with honour and distinction. 
This was the happiness which, it seemed to the 
merchant. Fate had decreed he should have at 
last. 

Such, briefly, is the outline of Mr, Tallant s 
history. We introduce him to our readers some 



10 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

two and twenty years after the death of his second 
wife, . a man over fifty years of age. At the time 
when we make his acquaintance he is Chairman 
of the great Meter Iron Works Company, a direc- 
tor of two of the principal railway companies, and 
a shareholder in many extensive city schemes. 

Once a week he was to be found at the London 
ofiSces of the Meter Works at Westminster, and 
he usually returned from London the same day. 
You could not have mistaken him for anything but 
a shrewd, conscientious man of business if you had 
known him. He was above the middle height, and 
usually wore a black shooting-coat, fitting the 
body tightly, and with pockets at the side; 
shepherd's plaid trowsers, and a black velvet 
waistcoat. His hair was grey, and his face 
cleanly shaven. He had a quick, discerning eye, 
and withal a genial expression of countenance ; 
for, though he had not forgotten the past. Time 
had been good to him, as it is good to other 
sufferers who have lost dear ones from their 
homes, and had comforted him with the affection 



AT THE TOP OF THE TBEE. 11 

of his children. He bore an excellent character 
for kindness, integrity, and honour ; but he was 
known at the same time to be a man of imbend- 
ing pride. 

He was proud of his name, of his wealth, of his 
son, of his house, of his grounds, of his farms, of 
his estates ; proud of everything. And to a cer- 
tain extent it was a laudable pride, for his riches 
were the result of his own ability and industry. He 
felt, with a certain acknowledgment of the bounty 
of Providence, that he had made them all himself. 
He might have thanked God a little more for his 
worldly success and been none the less happy, and 
certainly more grateful ; but it was his pride that 
he had worked his way up, from the lowest rung 
of the ladder, and that he stood on the top of it 
with safety. 

Everything he had was better than anythingany- 
body else had ; he would have it so, and yet he was 
a kindly, courteous sort of man, whom you might 
have had pleasure in visiting. His pride of wealth 
would crop up now and then ; but his wines were 



12 THE TATJiANTS OP BABTON. 

superb, his cuisine everything that could be de- 
sired, the views from his windows magnificent, 
his pictures modem and by the best modems, his 
books modem and in glorious bindings, and his 
daughter . ^there was nothing more sweet to look 
upon in all the Avonworth valley, or beneath the 
Berne Hill shades, than the merchant's only 
daughter. 



CHAPTER n. 

INTRODUCES THE BEADEB TO THE MERCHANT'S 
SON AND DAUGHTER. 

Do you know Dicksee's picture of " Miranda ?" 
It was exhibited at the Royal Academy a few 
years ago. There are copies of it in the Strand 
and Regent Street picture-shops. 

It is a fair, sweet, spi/rituel face, full of inquir- 
ing love and innocence. a frank, open face, set 
off with a heavy wealth of bright brown hair . a, 
sunny face, with red, parted lips, and all the pure 
soul of woman in the deep blue eyes. 

When first we saw that picture, we could not, 
"for the life of us," think where we had seen the 
earthly model of it. It haunted us for days ; we 
dreamt about it; we bought the best copy we 
could procure; and at length, with the picture 



14 THE TALLA2STS OP BABTON. 

lying beside us^ caxefully packed, on the seat of a 
Great Western Railway carriage, a London pur- 
chase for our country library, we remembered 
Phoebe Tallant. 

It hangs before us whilst we write, with all the 
story of the life of her whom it so much resembles 
mapped out in our mind. 

Perhaps Phoebe Tallant was not quite so pretty 
as Mr. Dicksee's picture, but she was as near an 
approach to it as one is likely to meet with once 
in a dozen years. 

Occasional visitors at Barton HaU from London 
were in raptures with the bright, fair girl; and 
one or two young fellows had gone home despe- 
rately in love with her ; but none of them dared 
hardly to think of their . love in presence of 
Mr. Tallant: not that the merchant said much 
about Phoebe, not that she seemed to be on such 
affectionate terms with him as might have been 
expected ; but he was proud of her beauty, proud 
of her accomplishments. And, moreover, it was 
shrewdly anticipated that Miss Tallant would not 



A MAKAGIKa DIBEOTOB. 15 

have anytliiiig like the dowry which the daughter 
of so wealthy a father ought to have; for the 
merchant was all engrossed in his heir. 

Bichard Tallant^ who was destined by the old 
man for such a store of riches^ was a dark, 
dashing young fellow, of five or six and twenty, 
when we first make his acquaintance . some half* 
a-dozen years older than his half-sister Phoebe. 

He had been an Eton boy, had graduated at 
Oxford, and travelled through Europe and Asia. 

He had already spent enough money recklessly, 
foolishly, ay, and wickedly, to have produced an 
annuity of at least a thousand a year. He was 
professedly one of the managing directors of the 
Meter Works, and resided in London to take the 
metropolitan and continental business of the 
company. 

When his father complained of his enormous 
expenditure (which was very seldom, by the way), 
Richard Tallant alluded to his position in the 
world, his education, and his habits. 

At Oxford he had been a don, not of learning, 



16 THE TALLAirrS OF BABTOK. 

but of fashion; kept his hunters and his mail 
phaeton, and made many a scion of the old 
aristocracy envy the mushroom son of iron and 
railway debentures. 

"You have given me every indulgence; you 
have bred me up in the hot-bed (rf luxury; I 
am just fresh from a European tour, where I 
travelled like a prince, to finish my college 
education, and now you expect me to pull in,** 
Richard would say, sitting astride one of the 
heavy mahogany chairs in the Westminster 
managerial room, and looking over the back of it 
at his father. 

"I should not care, Dick, if you would only 
do the work of your office, as well as draw the 
salary," Mr. Tallant would remark. 

" Come, now, my dear governor, have you not 
told me you have enough invested to enable me 
to live like a prince all my life ?" * 

" I may have been weak enough to say so ; but 
I calculated upon your doing something towards 
keeping the money coming in." 



,; 



FATHEB AND SON. 17 

" You didn't want me, you said, to be waiting, 
like some heirs, for your death, and then reckon- 
ing upon living in style ; you would rather I had 
my fill of life, and see me enjoy it in your own 
days. Come now, father, you know you have 
said so," said Richard, twirling his mioustache, 
and tapping his patent-leather boot with a riding- 
whip. 

" I fear I had not my usual foresight about me 
when I did say so," said Mr. Tallant 

And he said truly; but having risen by hard 
work himself, and sprung from a comparatively 
humble position, Mr. Tallant was one of those 
men who like to see their children in the other 
extreme, and who, never having been within the 
pale of college and aristocratic life, believe, and 
truly, that, to be a leader therein, a merchant's 
son must let his money fly freely, and like a 
prince indeed. 

He had given his son a free rein. When first 
Bichard went to Oxfoifd, he had been snubbed by 
a young lord, and an epigram had been levelled 

VOL. I. 



18 THE TALLAlATS OF BABTON. 

at him, the point of which turned upon his name 
and origin ; he was called the produce of fiftj 
talents of silver invested in iron. 

When Bichard told his father this, the great 
merchant snapped his fingers, and said he could 
buy up all the Oxford lords in a heap, and, turning 
cleverly round upon their lordships, in reply to 
the epigrammatic hit at his son's origin, he said, 

"Never mind them, Dick; there's as good 
blood in your veins as there is in any of theirs : 
it may not come from a swell who plundered the 
Saxons at the time of the Norman Conquest, oi 
mixed in the vices of licentious courts ; there is 
no dishonour in it, and it has to be proved yet 
whether to spring from merchant princes oi 
England is not the highest of all descent." 

"Bravo," said Mr. Bichard Tallant; "why 
father, you speak like an orator. That hit about 
the merchant princes would drive haJf-a-dozer 
hustings mad." 

Mr. Tallant had warmed up, and was angry 
he paid no attention to his son's comment; he 



CABTE BLANCHE. 19 

only saw before him some ''stuck up" aristocrat 
sneering at his name and origin. 

" Look here, Dick/' he continued, producing a 
blank cheque, "fill that up in the presence of 
these aristocratic snobs, and show them what the 
Tallants can do." 

This was surely putting too much of power and 
revenge into the hands of a young man naturally 
frivolous and overbearing, and it no doubt influ- 
enced, in a great measure, his future <5areer. 

One would have given Mr. Christopher Tallant 
credit for more real worldly wisdom than this; 
he could, perhaps, have borne " the proud man's 
contumely" himself; he might have shrugged his 
shoulders, and sneered at it, with a consoling 
thought about his wealth ; he might have said to 
himself, ''Ah, never, mind, I could buy you up, 
stick and stone*' (for he was weak, you see, on 
this point) ; but he would not have protested and 
been demonstrative : contempt would have been 
his answer, and, in the midst of his commercial 
cares, he would have speedily forgotten the inane 

2 



20 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

taunt To have his son treated with indifference, 
to see him taunted with his origin, by men who 
had nothing but their ancestors to boast about ; 
this was a different thing altogether, and he 
chafed at it, and was angry indeed 

His pride was shocked. The feeling that he 
could buy everything was shaken. He was not 
accustomed to crosses, except such as his wealth 
or his energy could overcome; and his sense of 
injured honour, too, was touched. 

''I would not have you do anything that is 
mean, Dick; there is nothing mean in being 
generous and open-handed; and there are two 
powers, it appears, at Oxford, . ^money and blood ; 
don't be afraid to hold your own; you have no 
reason to be ashamed of your birth, and you can 
make them ashamed of their poverty, the sneaks ! 
Don't spare them one jot, Dick ; punish them, 
and show them what talents of silver invested in 
iron can do. the miserable sneaks !" 

Thus all the mei-chant's practical wisdom and 
his just pride were thrown to the winds ; but he 



"GBanUB BLOOD." 21 

is not the only man of his class who, chafing 
at the arrogance of " gentle blood/' has sought 
revenge on Society at the shrine of Mammon, and 
obtained nothing in retnm but ** a crown of 
golden sorrow." 



CHAPTER m. 

BBIKOS US TO THE HALL FABM, WHERE THE 
BEADEB MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE OF THE 
SOHEBTONS AND A CEBTAIN LANDSCAPE 
PAINTEB. 

It lay on the western border of the park, and 
comprised about eight hundred acres of arable and 
pasture land. 

The buildings were red brick, with white 
dressed comer stones and facings. There were 
model cow-houses, cattlensheds, piggeries, bams, 
comJofts, and poultry pens, that would have 
satisfied even Mr. Mechi's critical eye. An agri- 
cultural writer of considerable repute had, in truth, 
written an essay upon these model buildings, and 
it had been printed in an important agricultiiral 
and scientific review; for there were no better 
arranged buildings in the country. 



A CLBVEB BAILIFF. 23 

Mr. Tallant, you know, would have the best of 
everything, and his bailiff encouraged him in 
having all the best things at his farm. There 
were carts from Crosskill, ploughs from Bansomes, 
thrashing-machines from Clayton and Shuttle- 
worth, reapers from America, clod-crushers, drills, 
rakes, hoes, harrows, and other implements from 
Banbury, Lincoln, Beverley, Worcester, Yorkshire, 
and Bristol 

Mr. Tallant had built these model farm-build- 
ings himself. The Hall Farm had been an es- 
pecial feature of the estate when he purchased it, 
but the buildings did not come up to his notions, 
and the result is before us. 

Mr. Tallant brought all his commercial experi- 
ence to bear upon the cultivation and manage- 
ment of the land. His bailiff, Mr. Luke Somerton, 
had been a Lincolnshire lord's right hand in the 
management of a great farm on the Wolds, and 
he was the very man of all others to enter into 
Mr. Tallant's idea of looking upon a farm in the 
same light as he would a manufactory. 



24 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

The merchant maintained that good land would, 
in a very few years^ amply repay a man for all he 
put into it ; and Mr. Somerton was a thorough- 
going disciple of high cultivation. He had studied 
agricultural chemistry under a professor, and Mr. 
Tallant often said it was quite a treat to chat 
with him about Liebig^s theones, the value of 
agricultural statistics, tenant right, and leases. 
Richard Tallant did not agree with his father, and 
thought Luke Somerton's talk a good deal of it 
"rot:" not that the bailiff cared for Mr. Rich- 
ard's opinion, or feared his father's. 

Luke Somerton was quite a gentleman in his 
way. He was a younger son of a Lincolnshire 
squire, and had been brought up to agriculture as 
a profession. He came to the Barton Hall Farm 
with Mr. Tallant, and he was likely to remain there 
as long as Mr. Tallant lived ; for he was not only 
a scientific farmer, but he fanned profitably, and 
Mr. Tallant said that was what few amateur 
gentlemen farmers could say for their bailiffs in 
that district 



THE S0MEBT019S. 25 

The farm-house was a substantial, handsome 
residence, surrounded with a prettily laid out 
garden, with shrubs and trees all scrupulously 
dwarfed and pnmed. Hard by, and adjacent to 
the fexm-buildings, was the stack yard, and 
beyond were fields, mostly grass, with low fences 
and white gates. 

Mr. Somerton was married, and had three chil- 
dren, . ^two sons and a daughter. His firstborn 
had left home when he was fifteen as an appren- 
tice on board a merchant ship, which sailed from 
London for Bombay. The vessel had been spoken 
once, and had never been heard of afterwards ; so 
Frank had long been mourned as lost, and there 
remained the bailiff, his daughter Amy, a girl 
about the age of Miss Tallant, and a son, Paul, 
three years younger. 

Luke Somerton's married life had not been a 
happy one. His wife had accepted his hand 
mainly out of spite, after she had angled unsuc- 
cessfully for his eldest brother. She was a proud 
disappointed woman ; but a good housewife never^ 



26 THE TALLAlsrrS OP BARTON. 

tbeless, and Luke, by dint of perseverance, had 
successfully combated her overbearing disposition ; 
so that though they could not be said to live 
happily and affectionately^ as man and wife should 
do, they never had noisy open brawls and quarrels, 
as some couples have. If they sneered at each 
other and maintained op|)osite opinions on almost 
any given subject, they very rarely had loud dis- 
putes, and never passed a day without speaking 
to each other. They were opposed on principle ; 
but Mrs. Somerton always managed to conclude her 
bickerings with something like overtures of re- 
conciliation, which Luke accepted for what they 
were worth, and ''tided over with," imtil the next 
fencing bout came on. 

Mrs. Somerton had been a handsome woman . 
a blonde . and might have continued handsome 
had she cidtivated kindness of heart as well as 
her husband cultivated wheat. Hers was a nice 
face spoiled by a nasty temper. She was a fine 
woman, above the middle height, and there were 
little streaks of red upon her cheeks such as you 



AMY. 27 

see on the sunny side of a winter apple. There 
were lines about her mouth which disappointment 
and pride had placed there, during eighteen years 
of sourness and vexation of spirit. She was well 
mated so far as appearances went. 

Her husband looked a thorough son of the soil, 
a tall, well-built, florid, intelligent, business-like 
Lincolnshire farmer, such as you will meet in the 
capacity of judge at country agricultural shows. 

Their son Paul was at a boarding-school, and 
when this story begins, just about commencing 
life as a clerk in Mr. Tallant's London offices. 

His sister Amy was at home, and spent half 
her time at the Hall with Miss Tallant, who 
treated her very much as a sister. 

Amy was not at all like the picture of Miranda 
She was several shades darker than Miss Tallant, 
and neither a brunette nor a blonde ; but she had 
a lai^e black piercing eye, which looked at you 
from beneath gracefully-arched eyebrows. She 
was not so round as Phoebe ; but her figure was 
supple, and well defined. Her mouth and chin 



28 THE TALLANTS OP BAKTON. 

were full of graceful curves, and her liair was 
bound closely to her head, setting off a pair of 
small white ears that gave a high character to the 
face. She was a well-bred, high-spirited girl, and 
accomplished too; for she had not only been 
fairly educated at her father's expense, but she 
had had the benefit of much of the tuition which 
Miss Tallant had received, not only from a clever 
resident governess but from professors who came 
at intervals to Barton Hall. 

Amongst the latter was one Mr. Arthur Phillips, 
who taught Miss Tallant drawing, and as he will 
figure rather prominently in this romance, we will 
introduce him at once, and teU you what he was 
like and all about him. He was a rising young 
artist who resided in the county town, though he 
might have made a successful position in London. 

"I wonder you don't go to town," many persons 
would say to him; and his reply would be in 
effect;, 

" Why should I ? I don't care for London, and 
I like tho country. I can go to town whenever I 



SKETCHING FBOM NATURE. 29 

think proper, and the dealers will buy my pic- 
tures whether I go or not What I get for them, 
and the few pupils I have in the county, give me 
enough for all my requirements, and enable me to 
study quietly and leisurely." 

But there was another reason why Arthur 
Phillips preferred the country, and that was a 
reason, which you may guess, fot constant visits 
to the vale of Berne, beyond his desire to study 
the foliage of the district, and the lights and 
shadows of the Berne hills, and the beautiful 
skies above. 

It *is true that many of his best sketches were 
transcriptions of the varied bits of landscape in 
this district ; and he said he had neVer thoroughly 
understood Cuyp, Both and Buysdael, Salvator 
Bosa, Wilson and Gainsborough, until he knew 
Berne valley in storm and sunshine, in spring and 
summer. He was never tired of painting Berne 
trees and Berne mosses, and the dealers bought 
these little sketchy bits almost as readily as they 
would now buy similar things by Birket Foster. 



30 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

Mr. Phillips was an earnest lover of art ; if he 
had not been a painter he would have been a 
poet. There was poetry in all his works, the true 
poetry of nature ; and he was as well up in the 
principles and beauties of poetry as he was in 
chiaroscuro and perspective. 

Nature had given him a mind worthy of the 
most perfect exterior, but she had denied him 
many of those charms of person which mostly 
delight the eye and captivate the heart of woman. 
He was under the ordinary height, a thin figure, 
with long black hair, and dark eyes set deeply in 
a face notable for sharply cut features. The ex- 
pression was that of a thinker, and his manner 
nervous and retiring. 

Mrs. Somerton had a great objection to Mr. 
Phillips. 

"I don't think his continually lurking about 
here bodes any good to those girls," she said to 
her husband, over tea, as Mr. Phillips passed by, 
with his sketch book under his arm. 

*' Nonsense," said Mr. Somerton, laughing. "You' 



COMING EYEKTS. 31 

don't think either of the girls will fall in love 
-with an undersized whipper-snapper like Mr. 
PhiUips?" 

** There's no knowing what poor silly women 
will fall in love with/* said Mrs. Somerton, with a 
sneer. 

"No, nor men either, for the matter of that, 
dame, if you want to argue the point," Luke 
replied, defiantly. 

Mrs. Somerton, thus challenged, declined to 
pick up the gauntlet which she had so often 
before accepted. She was bent upon talking 
about Mr. Arthur Phillips. 

" I don't think Amy would be fool enough to 
be led away by his poetry and pictures, and fine 
speeches and things; but Miss Tallant's soft 
enough for anything, and I wonder Mr. Tallant 
has that fellow continually about the place." 

" God bless us ! " said Mr. Somerton, his honest 
&tce lighting up with a genial smile of amuse- 
ment ; " why, do you think Miss Tallant, with her 
beautiful face, and her equally beautiful dowry. 



32 THE TALLAirrS OF BABTON. 

is going to throw herself away upon poor little 
PhiUips?" 

" Why not ? He writes poetry, and paints all 
sorts of nonsense, and talks like lackadaisical 
lovers talk in books ; and I'm sure that's the sort 
of thing that Miss TaUant's flashy education has 
taught her to admire. Why didn't her father let 
her go into London society? Why doesn't she ' 
go to town for the season, and be a reigning 
beauty, as she might be? That's the sort of 
education she should have had, and then she 
might have married a duke," Mrs. Somerton said, 
with warmtL 

" Why, you're quite excited about it," said Mr. 
Somerton; "I've not seen your eyes sparkle so 
since I don't know when." 

" I hate to see such namby-pambyism," went on 
Mrs. Somerton. " When a girl's got a pretty face, 
a graceful manner, and plenty of money, she 
ought to take her place and many a gentleman, 
not be buried alive in a stucco palace, with a half- 
gentleman, half-farmer, half-ironfounder father, a 



AMOUR PBOFBE. 33 

sneaking governess^ and an ugly, romantic little 
painter/' 

"Well, well, wife, it is no business of ours, and 
if it was, I don't think there's any founda- 
tion for alarm. Besides, your ambition ought to 
be satisfied if young Hammerton, as you say 
pays more delicate attentions to Amy than he 
does to Miss Tallant. But Master Hammerton 
must mind his eye ; I'd break every bone in his 
body if he oflfered an insult to Amy." 

"Young Hammerton!" said Mrs. Somerton, 
with an affected sneer. "Do you think I'm vain 
and silly enough to think the daughter of a farm- 
bailiff has any chance of catching the next heir 
to an earldom, for her husband ? " 

"A farm-bailiff! Why such emphasis on farm- 
bailiff, Mistress Somerton? There may be as 
good blood in the veins of a farm-bailiff as there 
is in a Hammerton." 

Mrs. Somerton's lip curled with a pitying, 
patronising expression, that put her husband into 
a towering passion ; a most unusual circumstance. 

VOL. I. D 



34 THS TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

" Damn it r' he exclaiined, rising from his seat^ 
'' a Somerton is as independent a man any day ; 
there was never one of the race that didn't always 
pay twenty shillings in the pound, and hut 
wouldn't fell a lord if he spoke a light word of 
any of their women : and, by heaven, I consider 
myself as good a man as any Hammerton, dead or 
living." 

"There, there, Luke; now don't get into a 
passion," said Mrs. Somerton, trying to speak 
soothingly, and like an injured woman, who had 
not given the slightest cause for passion to any^ 
body iQ all her life. 

"What's the meaning of all this, Sarah? 
There's something at the bottom of it." 

" Only a friendly gossip between man and wife ; 
but that's such a novelty in this house, is it 
not?" 

" I have had enough experience to tell me that 
a friendly gossip like this is not meant for 
nothing, Sarah," said Luke, thrusting his hands 
into his pockets, and pacing about the room. 



" TALK OF A CERTAIN PERSON." 35 

Whether there was anything "at the bottom of 
it," or not, did not forther transpire at that mo- 
ment, by reason of the Hon. Lionel Hammerton 
himself dismounting from his horse at the gate 
beyond the garden, and walking up to Mr. 
Somerton's door. 



p 2 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE METER IRON WORKS COMPANY. 

The offices of Mr. Tallant and the Meter 
Works were at Westminster, in a magnificent 
newly erected block of buildings not far from the 
Houses of Parliament. They comprised the whole 
suite of apartments on the ground-floor, with a 
board-room above. 

On the heavy swinging mahogany doors at the 
entrance were two thick brass plates, on one 
of which was engraven "Meter Iron Works 
Company," and on the other " Christopher 
Tallant." 

The establishment was fitted up in the best 
possible style, with mahogany desks; the count- 
ing-house was very much like a bank, the whole 
of the monetary business of the great company, 



AT WESTMINSXEB. 37 

as well as that of Mr. Tallant, being conducted in 
town. Behind the counting-house was Mr. Chris- 
topher Tallant's room, and that of his son 
Bichard. 

Mr. Tallant's room was plainly but well fur- 
nished, and was only occupied once a week ; but 
Mr. Bichard's room was fitted up in the highest 
style of office magnificence, like a gentleman's 
library. There was a thick velvet-pile carpet 
upon the floor, a massive carved mahogany table 
in the centre of the room; several ponderous 
chairs with morocco seats; a quaint arm-chair 
stood before a writing-pad near the table. Where 
there were no book-shelves there were pictures of 
engines, and iron bridges, and curious girder?, and 
wheels, in ponderous frames; and thick cloth 
curtains draped the two windows which looked 
into the street. 

The offices were famous amongst men in the 
iron trade, and once or twice Mr. Tallant began to 
think they were getting a name politically; for 
several deputations had waited upon him there 



38 THE TATJiANTS OF BABTON. 

soliciting him to come forward for various borouglis 
at general elections. 

But Mr. Christopher Tallant always said his 
ambition did not lie that way. Some day per- 
haps his son Dick might like to go into the House, 
and if he did, why go he should of course ; but 
there was plenty of time to think about that ; 
and so the deputations retired, wishing, in most 
cases, that there were not plenty of time to think 
about that, for there was gold indeed at the back 
of Christopher Tallant. 

" By gad, you amuse me," said Mr. Shu9eton 
Qibbs, a college acquaintance of Mr. Richard 
TaUant's, looking at the pictorial treasures of the 
room through an eye-glass. ''To think of your 
going in for engines and machines, with idiotic 
cranks, and all that sort of thing. Ton my soul, 
it's too funny." 

And Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs turned round, showed 
Mr. Richard Tallant his teeth, and said ''haw, 
haw." That was the way Mr. Gibbs laughed: 
that was how he laughed at Oxford, when a 



MOBNING DRAUGHTS. 39 

broken-hearted girl appealed to his sense of 
honour; that was how he laughed when he won 
two thousand pounds at Loo from a college friend, 
who said he was ruined, and threatened to throw 
himself into the Isis; that was how he laughed 
imder all circumstances. 

"One must put a sign of some sort up," said 
Mr. Bichard Tallant, twirling his moustache, and 
stretching his legs under the big library table. 
'* What wiU you take, Shuff ? " 

"Anything you intend taking yourself, old 
l)oy; you are a pretty good judge; Pll trust to 
your sense of what a fellow's morning draught 
should be," said Mr. Gibbs, grinning again, and 
saying " haw, haw " as before. 

Mr. Tallant, junior, struck a gong upon the 
table, and a sober-looking old man in a dark 
livery obeyed the summons. 

" Sherry, Thomas," said Mr. Eichard. 

Thomas taking up a bunch of keys from the 
table, unlocked a cupboard by the fireplace, and 
carefully uncorked a dusty, black looking bottle, 



40 

THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 



and set it before Mr. Tallant's only son, with a 
couple of richly cut glasses. 

Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs took a seat by the window, 
commended the wine as he drank it, and criti- 
cised any woman who chanced to pass on the 
other side of the street. He was not a beauty 
himself that he should be so critical of the looks 
of others. He had weak eyes, and shaky legs, a 
short cough, and a narrow chest. His enemies 
said he wore stays, and slept in gloves, to im- 
prove his figure and whiten his hswids, which 
were naturally red, like his face, that was 
powdered after the manner of women. He was 
a man of fashion nevertheless, and had sprung 
of a noble stock ; but the race flickered its last in 
him, and the estates had been divided by Jews 
in his grandfather's time. 

It was considered a daring thing to be hand 
and glove with Gibbs at Oxford, a dangerous and 
a delightful thing ; for he was known to be the 
fastest man of his college, and he had been the 
ring-leader in everything wicked for years. He 



SHUFFLETON GIBBS. 41 

made himself Mr. TaUant's champion when that 
gentleman was epigrammatically assailed.and ever 
afterwards constituted himself boon companion to 
the iron prince. 

There was a rumour that Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs 
was compelled to leave college when he did on 
account of some offence committed against the 
regulations of the establishment; whether this 
was true or not, he left Oxford suddenly, and 
with no other honour than that of being the 
fastest man who had ever led a gown and town 
row, or hunted down a citizen's daughter. 

"You'll be at the club to-night, of course," 
Mr. Gibbs said, swinging his eye-glass round, 
and admiring the perfect fit of a pair of new 
boots. 

"Yes," said Mr. Richard, "shan't be able to 
come before dinner ; going to dine with a friend 
at seven." 

Mr. Gibbs showed his teeth, and said "haw, 
haw." 

"Will join you by ten," Mr. Richard continued. 



42 THE TALLAirrS OF I^ABTON. 

smiling^ and holding liis empty glass between 
himself and the light to catch its diamond-like 
sparkles in the sun. 

"What's y(mr little game to-night, then," in- 
quired Mr. Tallant, junior. 

''Nothing, nothing; a bit of quiet Loo and a 
cigar. Young Hammerton is to join us by- 
and-by." 

"What, Earl Vomer's brother?" Mr. Richard 
inquired, with more than ordinary interest. 

"The same . ^the paternal seat is near Barton 
Hall, you know." 

" Rather," said Mr. Richard. " Hell be deuced 
rich when the earl hops the twig; he is con- 
siderably older than Lionel and very shaky, they 
say; he often rides over to the Berne district 
The governor says he likes to talk farming to the 
bailiflf at the Hall Farm." 

" Gad bless me ! " exclaimed Mr. Gibbs. " Are 
there any gals about?" 

" There is one, old fellow, and a remarkably fine 
girl, too; but her mother's a she-wolf, and her 



A WARNING. 43 

father. . why, Shuffy, he'd double you up with 
one hand aijd throw you into the road, if you put 
your nose into his place ; he'd smell you out in no 
time;" and Mr. Bichard Tallant laughed aloud 
at his lively picture of Mr. Gibbs's imaginary 
discomfiture. 

Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs bit his lip before he 
grinned and said "haw, haw " this time ; and it 
was a little while before he had time to say, 
"Haw, what an infernally powerful savage he 
must be." 

Mr. Richard Tallant was, and had been for 
some time, of great pecuniary value to Mr. 
Shuffleton Gibbs, who not only sponged upon the 
iron prince, but fleeced him at cards, and assisted 
at all his extravagances. Had it been other- 
wise, he would have resented the tone and 
manner of Mr. Tallant s description of his 
perfect helplessness in the hands of Luke 
Somerton. 

" You may laugh, Shufif, but by Jove it's true ; 
so take timely warning, and if ever you should go 



44 THE TALLA19TS OF BARTON. 

down to Barton Hall mind how you look at Amy 
Somerton." 

Mr. Tallant, senior^ it would seem^ had no 
liking for Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs^ and he had 
privately intimated to his son that he would 
rather that geotleman were not amongst the 
friends whom he introduced to Barton Hall. 

" If ever I go to Barton Hall !" said Mr. Gibbs. 
" I begin to think I shall never have the oppor- 
tunity; my distinguished and most hospitable 
friend, Richard Tallant, Esq., has not yet honoured 
me with an invitation, even to a shooting-party, 
on the estate which calls him heir." 

"Why, to tell you the truth," replied Mr. 
Tallant, junior, with an air of gi-eat candour ; " I 
can't, you see ; Pve often thought I would make 
a clean breast of it, and tell you. The governor 
objects to you somehow or other; doesn't like 
you ; wishes- me not to ask you to Barton." 

"That's candid, begad," said Mr. Gibbs, be- 
coming a little redder in the face than usual. 
"Objects to me 1" 



LE CHAT QUI DORT. 45 

"Stupid prejudice, but so it is; he doesn't 
understand bucks of fashion like you, Shuff ; and 
he's heard about one or two of what you call your 
little affairs* And I am not very sorry either, 
Shuff; for I think the less he sees of you the 
better for me." 

"You're devilish cool this morning, Dick 
Tallant, and." 

"And what?" said Mr. Tallant, hastily ^inter- 
rupting his friend, iiho showed unmistakable 
signs of anger. "Why, you know you're an 
infernal rascal, Shuff, and that I'm not much 
better myself; so let's have no brag about insults 
and all that sort of thing; I'm in.with you for a 
short life and a merry one, so never mind the 
governor. II ne faut pas ^veUler le chat qui 
dort, as they say in France, vide Macdonnel." 

Mr. Shuffleton exhibited his teeth, and haw- 
hawed several times, and Mr. Tallant, junior, 
slapped him on the back. 

" You're a trump, Dick, 'pon my soul you are," 
said Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, in an affected burst of 



64 THE TAUiAlVTS OF BABTOK. 

magnanimity ; " I was inclined to be savage just 
now, but I see the frankness of your disclosure in 
the true light, after your explanation." 

" AU right, old fellow," said Mr. Tallant, " give 
me your hand upon it, and we are Siamese twins 
again ; but let us finish the sherry." 

The two friends fell-to with a will after this, 
and chatted quite genially together about a 
hundred trivial things, until Big Ben tolled four 
o'clo k, when Mr. Bichard Tallant mounted a 
splendid mare, and, followed by a sprightly groom 
on an animal of almost equal value, ambled 
towards the Park; whilst Mr. Shuffleton Oibbs 
betook himself quietly to his lodgings in Ken* 
sington Park Gardens, prior to keeping an 
engagement, he said, at the Comer, before 
dinner. 

. "The infernal impudent humbug,** said Mr. 
Gibbs to himself, as he walked smartly home- 
wards ; " the twopenny - hal^nny mushroom, 
sprung from a northern dunghill . ^never mind, 
m be even with him some day. Fifty talents of 



A THBEAT*. 47 

silver invested in iron ! Of late the fellow has 
assumed an air of superiority^ and a bullying 
manner, which is devilish hard to bear. Wait 
a little, wait a little, trh bon ami /''you'll find 
yourself in the mire one of these days." ' 

It was hard to bear, no doubt, but Richard 
TaUant was a very profitable investment to 
Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, and he could afford to 
bottle up his Brummagem resentment; for such 
a fellow as Shuffleton Gibbs could hardly be said to 
have any honourable feeUngs of resentment. He 
was bankrupt, not only in purse, but in reputation ; 
he might have got over the former in time, but 
he could never whitewash the latter. 

Mr. Christopher Tallant had been proud of his 
son the first time he had seen him, prancing and 
capering in the Lady's Mile, as he pranced and 
capered soon after Mr. Gibbs left him. Mr. 
TaUant had gone down to the Park quietly on 
foot, and, unobserved, had seen his son a leading 
man of fashion, on the best horse amongst the 
most magnificent of all the splendid animals 



48 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

thera He had seen him acknowledged by many 
a dashing rider, and had watched him turn out 
into the carriage-drive, to ride beside a gorgeous 
yellow brougham, with beautiful women in it. 
Somehow the merchant could not help feeling 
annoyed with himself for harbouring such a pride 
as this; but he had not forgotten the Oxford 
epigram, and he liked to see a Tallant riding 
about amongst the big men, the greatest swell of 
the lot. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE DIBBLES AND THEIE NEW LODGER. 

Thomas Dibble, the porter, who held himself 
at the beck and call of the principals and officers 
of the Meter Iron Works Company at West- 
minster, lived in one of those numerous little 
streets which run off from the semi-aristocratic 
regions of St George's Square, South Belgravia, to 
Whitehall; and his wife let lodgings and wore 
goigeouB caps. 

She was quite a study this Mrs. Dibble, quite a 
psychological study. She governed Dibble, and 
yet made him her shield and protection in the 
most amusing and complete fashion. She was 
a fat, rubicund woman, with her dress either 
unfastened behind or before, and her cap bang- 
ing on the back of her head, both in summer 

VOL. I. B 



50 THE TALT.ANTS OF BABTON. 

and winter^ as if she were in a perpetual state of 
perspiration* 

She was by no means an ill-looking woman. 
Dibble in his cups had told his friends that she 
was a regular beauty when first he knew her, as 
fair as waxwork, sir. But her tongue; well it 
was a caution, Mrs. Dibble's tongue, and she had 
a ^ort of intermittent lisp, which instead of being 
an impediment in any way to the rapidity of her 
utterances only seemed to facilitate them, enabling 
her to slip and slide over an argument and abbre- 
viate long words until her hearers might sometimes 
imagine she was pouring out a series of compound 
syllables in some xmknown tongue. But that was 
only when she was iir a passion, thank goodness, 
which did not occur more than once a week. 

Dibble himself was a mild little fellow as a 
rule, and a profound admirer of Mrs. D.'s accom- 
plishments. She had learnt to play the piano 
when she was at school in her youth ; and when 
she sat down to a five-and-a-half octave square of 
Broadwood's on Sunday nights in her black satin 



"fit for a concbbt." 51 

dress, Dibble would sit by the fire and feast his 
eyes upon her with unsophisticated delight. 

It was not a very symmetrical figure neither, 
Mrs. Dibble's, as you viewed it at the piano, and 
the two hooks and eyes which were undone near 
the middle of her back did not make it any the 
more elegant. 

Mrs. Dibble usually thimiped at the Old 
Hundredth and a wonderful variation of "Vital 
Spark," until her cap fell oflf and her hair came 
down, when she would close the *'box of music" 
and utter twenty voluble regrets that she had so 
few opportunities of practising and keeping up 
her fingering. 

But Mr. Dibble did not agree with her on thi$ 
point ; it was the only one he was permitted to 
dispute ; he vowed she played as well as if she 
had no end of practice. 

" You be fit for a concert," he would say, ''that 
you be." 

Not that Thomas Dibble exactly knew what a 
concert was, never having been present at anything 

s 2 



62 THE TALLAHTS OF BABTON. 

of the kind, except on the occasion of a soirSe at 
Gloucester when he went to a Sunday school there. 

Dibble was bred and bom in Gloucestershire, 
and had risen from a kitchen menial to a place 
in the household at Barton Hall two counties 
off, whither he had been recommended by a 
clergyman of the cathedral city. He was not in 
Mr. Tallant's service more than a year before 
he was promoted to the portership at West- 
minster. 

The Barton housekeeper gave him an introduc- 
tion to a relative of hers, Miss Wilhelmina Stikes> 
of Still Street, and after a few visits to that buxom 
spinster, Miss Stikes made love to Thomas, pro- 
posed to him, and married him in less than three 
months. 

They had now been united some twenty years> 
and on the whole Mr, Dibble did not regret his 
bondage. He had always been accustomed to 
servitude ; so the yoke of the fair-fat-and-loqua- 
dous Miss Stikes was not difficult to the patient 
and forbearing Thomas Dibble. 



THE NEW LODQEB. 53 

*' So we axe to 'ave a new lodger, Mithter Dibble, 
in the purthon of thje bailifth's son ; well, so be it, 
though when my pa educated me for a lady, and 
being a builder he could do that because his 
property were naturally his own and if he had 
been thpared he would no doubt 'ave retired on it, 
educated for that thpere it never occurred to me 
that I should *ave to take the hoffsprigs of bailiffchs 
into my house, but there is no knowing what we 
may come to, and if you fulfil the duties of the 
Kfe which has come upon you, though without 
your own conthent I can't see after all that there's 
anything to be ashamed of," said Mrs. Dibble to 
her husband after a tripe supper, on the evening 
when Mr. Richard Tallant had promised to meet 
his friend Gibbs at the club. 

" Yes, he be coming to-morrow ; and I was 
thinking he might have the little back sittin' 
room," said Dibble, deferentially. 

"Thank you, Dib, for your thoughts, but I 
may remark, as I have remarked before, that I 
will do the thinking ; I did it for my pa during 



54 TH2 TAIXJUR8 OF BAKTOS. 

an his caatxattB, and made <mt the thpedufica- 
tions wliich were lor two railway bridges, and 
moie than one or two stxeeth, and ith not un- 
likely that I shall be fblly competent to think for 
yon, Mithter Dibble; bat, at the thame timi^ I 
will own that I had thought of the badt thitting- 
loom mythel^ and there's a chest of diaweis bed 
which Captain MacStrawsel, of the Bines, said 
was a perfect bed of roses ; and it may, therefore, 
be fairly reckoned that a bailifth's son may recline 
upon that which, if his conscience is at rest^ he 
may repose upon as well as in a palace." 

Mr. Dibble said '' Tes," and Mrs. Dibble mixed 
for him, as was her wont, a mild glass of ^n, 
which he proceeded to sip in company with the 
accomplished partner of his bosom, who in- 
variably said, whenever she took spirits pub- 
licly, ''that it was not as she liked spenits or 
any other allycholic liquors, but it were a neces- 
fflty to her, seeing the great strain that was 
constant on her nerves, owing to having both 
mental and physical labour more than common." 



55 

After a short visit to the farm, Paul Somerton 
went to London, and, after due introduction to 
Mrs. Dibble, entered upon his duties at the Iron 
Company's offices. He saw little of Mr. Richard 
Tallant, and less of his father; but he heard a 
great deal about both from old Dibble. 

Once a week Mrs. Dibble permitted Thomas to 
spend an evening out with Paul. She said she 
was not one for letting a yoimg man run about 
London in an evening without a guide, and she 
thought her Thomas's experience of the place 
might be of some benefit to Paul, and she would 
not hear of any opposition to an arrangement by 
which she proposed to set apart "closing time," 
on Friday nights until half-past ten, for Thomas 
DibblQ to show Paul Somerton some of the sights 
of London. 

Mrs. Dibble also at the same time arranged to 
entertain her own particular friends at home on 
these evenings, and so balanced off her generosity 
to poor Dibble, her husband. Thomas Dibble 
soon became a bore to Paul Somerton. 



56 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

So soon as the young man began to know his 
way about town, so soon did he become tired of 
Dibble, and ashamed of him, too; for Paul was 
not altogether a stranger to the manners and 
feelings of a gentleman, and was a good-looking 
fellow withal; whilst poor Dibble was nothing 
more than a respectable porter at any time. 

Besides, Dibble was perpetually praising Mrs. 
Dibble, and would stop to buy hot potatoes 
in the street, and "penn'orths" of pudding; 
so Paul decided to shake him off, but his 
determination was changed by a letter from his 
sister. ' 

"What shpuld Amy want to know all about 
Mr. Richard for?" said Paul, reading a letter in 
bed, one Sunday morning, some weeks after his 
residence in London. 

" And who is Mr. Shuflleton Gibbs ; and what 
the deuce business is it of hers if young Hammer- 
ton is often with them?" he continued, staring 
up from the letter to the ceiling. 

" Please, air, it's nine o'clock. Mrs. Dibble said 



"a constitutional." 57 

I were to tell you," said a voice through the 
keyhole. 

"All right," said Paul;  and . hang Mrs. 
Dibble." 

" Were I to say so, please ? " asked the 
voice. 

"No, confound you," said Paul; "but tell 
Dibble I shall go for a walk ^ith him after 
chapel" 

It was the custom of Thomas Dibble to take what 
he called " a little constitutional " after chapel, and 
before dinner. just half-an-hour's stroll, whilst 
Mrs. Dibble changed her chapel-going satin, and 
dished up the dinner. 

It was a rare thing for Mr. Paul Somerton to . 
volunteer to accompany Mr. Dibble ; but he did 
so on the Sunday in question, and, as they 
walked by the Thames, watching the steamers 
pass and repass with their loads of noisy pleasure- 
seekers, Paul asked Dibble a variety of puzzling 
questions about Mr. Richard Tallant, and his 
friend, Shuffleton Gibbs. ' 



58 THE TALLA2TT8 OF BABTON. 

" Ise no spy, Mr. Somerton, and Ise not an owl, 
or a dormouse," said Mr. Dibble, looking as 
knowing as he could at Paul. 

"Certainly not, Dib," said Paul; "certainly 
not ; you know a thing or two." 

" Well, I dur say, and I knows nothing about 
the things you speaks of." 

"What, don't you know who Mr. Gibbs i% 
and how he lives, and why he is a friend of 
the son's and not of the father's?" asked 
Paul. 

"It hain't my business to know," said Mn 
Dibble. 

Paul Somerton pumped old Dibble all the 
way home, but to little or no purpose ; and 
the porter's dogged silence aroused Paul's own 
curiosity about his sister's inquiries. 

" Does Mr. Bichard attend much at the office ? 
Who and what is Mr. Gibbs? Are they par* 
ticular friends of Mr. Hammerton? Do they 
meet together often ? And where ?" 

These were the chief questions which Miss 



BBOTHERS AND SISTERS. 59 

Amy Somerton required her brother Paul to 
answer. 

Paul was fond of his sister^ and had always 
looked up to her as one of superior knowledge 
to himseE 

" 1*11 tell you all you want to know, as soon as 
I can/' he wrote to Amy on the Monday. " But 
why are you so inquisitive ?" 

There are thousands of brothers and sisters 
without aflfection for each other. We say of So- 
and-so, " I loved him as if he were my brother ;'* 
or, "Mary So-and-so . ^if she had been my own 
sister, I could not have felt more regard for her.*' 
It is flattering to our humanity that these illus- 
trations of regard and affection should be in use. 
Nine families out of ten quarrel amongst them- 
selves, and brothers and sisters are the deadliest 
enemies of brothers and sisters, thwarting each 
other in childhood and at maturity, stepping in 
each other^s way, disgracing each other, and 
making the very name they mutually bear 
hateful to both. Happy, indeed, are brothers 



60 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

and sisters who really and truly love each other ; 
for there is not a holier, not a more beautiful 
passion. 

Paul Somerton would have done anything ia 
the world for Amy. He remembered so many 
hours made happy by her love and foresight. 
They had nearly broken their hearts over parting 
when he went to school ; and Amy had quite a 
box-full of his boyish letters, carefully preserved. 
She thought there was the making of a great 
man in Paul; he was like his father in temper 
and disposition . frank and outspoken, a hater 
of shams. 

At first when Amy had written to him about 
the doings of Mr. Tallant, and concerning Mr. 
Hammerton, Paul had scruples about his duty in 
the matter ; but it was sufficient for Paul that 
Amy assured him that she had a proper and 
sufficient object in learning what she sought; 
and Paul determined that Amy should soon know 
all she desired. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE TWO FKIENDS AND THE TWO VIGNETTES. 

A FINE old Norman cathedral, by the side of a 
famous river . ^the one celebrated in history, the 
other a favourite with poets so long ago as Spenser. 

The great grey cathedral, with its high pitched 
towers, and its crumbling walls, threw big dark 
shadows on the green turf of the college close, 
where half-a-dozen comfortable houses formed two 
sides of a squara In the centre grew a clump 
of venerable elms, the home of a colony of crows 
which were everlastingly calling to each other 
from above. 

The other two sides of the square were filled 
in by the cathedral's grey walls, and an old 
gateway. 

The river flowed on without . ^the famous river 



62 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

with its sedgy banks. It flowed on outside the 
monastic-like square, noiselessly mostly, bearing 
lazy barges on its big brown bosom towards the 
sea. When the floods came down rom the west 
it roared and whirled along in curls and eddies, 
the colour of coffee, like Eingsley's salmon river 
in the "Water Babies." 

In the distance, from the upper windows of the 
cathedral dose, on that side where Arthur lived, 
you could see the linktown hiUs, with their 
graceful curving lines cut out against the sky; 
and if you had stood upon the linktowns you 
might have seen another rapge of hills, which 
shut out Barton Hall from the rude world. 

Arthur Phillips, as I have said, lived in this 
OoU^e Green, and his studio was at the top of 
one of those old houses, which had a glorious 
landscape before it, with the Linktowns for a 
background. 

It was a curious old room, Arthur's studio, with 
mullioned windows in it, and a wonderfully 
carved fireplace, with grinning heads cut in the 



THE abtist's studio. 63 

mantelpiece. Several lay-figures were carelessly 
placed at one end of the room, and there were a 
. couple of easels with half-finished pictures upon 
them. A few sketches in oil and in water-colours 
were hung about the room, and there was a 
guitar upon an old carved couch, and a large 
portfolio beside it. The artist wore a loose 
blouse, . and looked at home in manner and 
appearance amongst his miscellaneous trea- 
sures. 

Young Hammerton was a handsome fellow, one 
of a handsome stock. The Hammertons had 
been Earls of Vomer for a century or more, and 
there was never known an ill-looking man or 
woman amongst them since the period when they 
came into the old island with the Norman 
Conqueror. 

But there must have been much Saxon inter- 
marrying in the family if one might judge from 
the feir skin and brown curly hair of Lionel 
Hammerton. And he was of sturdy make withal 
-*a fine specimen of a handsome young English- 



64 - THB TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

man, with a full hazel eye, and white regular 
teeth. 

Lionel and Arthur had known each other for 
several years, the friendship commencing through 
a series of drawing lessons which Arthur Phillips 
had given Mr. Hammerton at Earl Yemer's 
residence. 

The Earl, lionel's brother, was a man of great 
taste in the arts, and he had been Arthur's first 
patron. 

Arthur had exhibited several pictures unsuc- 
cessfully at the great Midland Counties Exhi- 
bition, when Earl Vemer singled out a landscape 
with figures in the foreground, by Mr. Phillips, as 
the best, the most conscientiously painted picture 
of that year. 

This was Arthur's first start; the Earl pur- 
chased the picture, and the papers spoke of it in 
high terms of praise. The AH Jourrud, in a 
brief sketch of the Exhibition, noticed this painting 
as the work of one of the most promising artists 
of the day ; and next season two works of Arthur's 



CAPEBS ON PAPEIL 65 

were hung at the Eoyal Academy, and Success 
came unto him, and marked him for her own 

Earl Yemer gave him several commissions, and 
placed Lionel Hammerton under him as a pupil, 
and this was how their friendship began. 

He was a contrast to Arthur Phillips, who 
often noticed it, and drew little caricature 
eketches to illustrate it, which Lionel laughed at, 
and threatened to send to Pv/iich as character 
studies. 

Lionel had, indeed, once sent one of Arthur's 
fimny bits to Fundi, which brought a polite note 
from the editor of that famous periodical, soli- 
citing a closer acquaintance with the artist ; but 
Mr. Phillips was a lazy fellow, and his pencil only 
cut funny capers when Earl Vemer's brother 
stirred him up, and suggested comical subjects. 
' " By Jove ! if I were not to come in now and 
then, and laugh at you, you'd die of melancholy," 
said Lionel Hammerton, on one of his recent 
visits to Arthur^s studio. 

" No, I don't think that," said Arthur, lighting 

VOL. I. F 



68 THE TALLAST8 OF BABTOK. 

* Which do you prefer . the landscape or the 
figure studies?" Arthur inquired, still smiling, 
though a little sadly. 

'*! like them both; but there was a head 
which you were going to finish when I was here 
last. I don't see it anjrwhere," said Lionel, whose 
eyes had been wandering into eveiy comer of the 
room, 

'' Here it is/' said Arthur. " I have been making 
a double study of heads ; ** and he brought out of 
a small case, from a cupboard by the window, 
two water-colour sketches, and looked curiously 
into Idonel's fiace as his handsome friend ex- 
amined them. 

The first was something like that picture which 
appeared in the Strand shops some years after- 
wards. 

Mr. Phillips had drawn the face fall, and 
thrown the hair backwards in wavy folds. The 
Ups were parted, and the eyes looked you in 
the face, full of hope and trust, and inno- 
cence. 



DOUBT AND FEAB. 69 

Lionel laid this first study 'down, after a hasty 
glance or two at it, and then fairly " devoured " 
the second one, 

A smothered sigh of relief escaped &om Arthur 
as he noticed this, and a happy smile moved his 
lips as he watched the expression of approval 
which lit up laonel's face whilst gazing at the 
darker beauty. 

"By Jove,** said Lionel, after a long pause, "it 
is exquisite ! What a head ! Talk of blood, why 
this head has all the character of a high-bred 
racehorse." 

Arthur smiled, and puffed out a long thin 
wreath of smoke. 

"What eyes! what a neck! And the hair 
bound tightly to the head, setting off those little 
ears ! And the chin 1 . ^why, all the Unes of beauty 
are exhausted here," Lionel went on ; and Arthur 
almost trembled with delight 

" Give me your hand," he said at length, no 
longer able to control his feelings. "Give me 
your hand, Lionel Hammerton." 



70 THE TALLAinS 09 BABTOK. 

"With all my heart," said Lionel, looking as 
much astonished as he had previonsly been 
delighted. ''But what, in the name of all the 
Arts and Sciences, is the matter with yon 1 Tm 
not praising the pdnter, bnt the subjects Ton 
have not suddenly become ^vain, Arthur 1 " 

''No, no," said the artist^ pushing back his long 
black hair; "it is because you are praising the 
subject that I am delighted, lioneL Tou love 
Amy Somerton." 

"Stop, stop, not so fast, friend Arthur," said 
Lionel, colouring a little, and appearing still more 
surprised at the artist's unusual excitement. 

"If you are in love at all, it is not with . with 
Miss Tallant?" Arthur went on, his big piercing 
eyes fixed intently on his friend. 

"Oh, oh ! " said Lionel, putting his hand upon 
Arthur's shoulder, and laying down Amy So- 
merton's portrait. " Oh, oh ! Have I caught you 
in your own trap, my poor little friend ?" said 
LioneL " It is you who are in love ! Nay, man, 
don't look so woe-begone about it," 



LOVE AND COOTIDBNCB. 71 

^'Aod you?" said Arthur, hanging his head 
like a schoolboy. 

" May be some day, friend Arthur/' said Lionel ; 
''but not with Miss Tallant . riot with Miss 
Tallant" 

''Thank God for that!" said the artist, sitting 
down and fixing his eyes upon the distant hills, 
which the sun was making golden. 

Lionel's manner of meeting Arthur's half con- 
fession of love for Miss Tallant and fear o 
rivalry, did not for the moment please the artist^ 
whose sensitive nature revolted at the apparently 
cool and critical treatment of his friend 

But when young Hammerton said, "Arthur, 
my boy, don't fear me, go in and win," the artist 
forgot his momentary displeasure, and smiled 
half sadly, half comically, at his friend ; and then 
told him how !be had been unable to struggle 
against his admiration for Miss Tallant, and how 
it had ripened into love. 

Lionel promising not to betray Arthur^s con- 
fidence^ laughed at the artist's notion that he 



72 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

was indulging in an utterly hopeless and futile 
passion. 

" I suppose you will be at the Festival of the 
Three Choirs to-morrow," said Mr. Hammei-ton 
by-and-by, when they had changed the subject 
and he had Ughted his last cigar. 

"I shall be in some part of the building/' 
Arthur said. '' I have the e^rie you know by 
certain private doors ; I am rather a favourite 
with the Dean and Chapter. I look down upon 
you from axches high up aloft, I listen to the 
music at various points. I should be too restless 
to sit all the time squeezed up .amongst the 
audience." 

Sevemtown, you must know, was celebrated for 
its Festival Concerts in the cathedral, which had 
been originated as early as 1724, resulting in 
noble collections for charitable purposes, and of 
which the local journalist a hundred years ago 
exclaimed, ''May God grant that all charitable 
undertakings may be carried on^with that be- 
coming zeal and Ardency of Affection which 



ONE PACE m THE THRONG, 73 

Matters of such allow'd Importance must always 
very justly claim 1" Newspaper writers in those 
days, you see, said what they had to say briefly, 
and tersely, and to the point. 

I mention these Sevemtown Festivals not with 
any intention of describing one of them, but simply 
because of the train of thought which the mention 
of the event by Mr, Hammerton excited in the 
mind of Arthur Phillips. 

It was at the Festival, three years previously, 
that Arthur had first seen Phoebe Tallant, a mere 
girl, but of such striking beauty that the image 
was fixed in his mind, as if it belonged to the 
glorious music, . sanctified by the time, and the 
place, and the holy strains. 

And he had gone on the following day, 
and peered out amongst the throng to see the 
same face again, but he saw it not; so he 
went quietly alone into the Lady Chapel to 
think of it, and build up the image in, a 
picture of angels which he had thought, more 
than once, of painting. He never forgot the 



74 THB TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

varied sensations which had been excited within 
him by that solitary ramble through private cor- 
ridors into the Lady Chapel 

Shakspeare, Milton, and Pope have sung the 
delights of " hidden music." Who has not stood 
at night in some quiet churchyard with his 
thoughts reverentially turned to heaven by the 
solenm strains of an evening hymn rippling out 
through the half-open doorway? Who has not 
sat without the precincts of cathedral choirs and 
felt the power of religious strains move him more 
deeply than when in the presence of the choris- 
ters ? Is it that the mind likes to fall back upon 
itself now and then, to wed the music to its own 
hopes and aspirations ? 

The Lady Chapel was quite shut out from the 
choir, nave, and aisles. As Arthur stood there 
the whole of the auditory and performers were 
completely away from view. The altar-screen 
was between him and the ga,j parterre o{ boimets, 
hemmed in by the surrounding margin of baize 
and matting. Around him were decaying menu* 



SACRED MUSIC. 75 

ments, themselves needing memorials (as Crabbe 
puts it in "The Borough"); half-finished slabs 
fresh from the hands of the restorer, and other 
evidences of the struggle of the present to preserve 
the past. 

Subdued morning beams came in through tiers 
of lancet lights ; and mounting up, echoing along 
the fretted roof of the nave, the strains of the 
chorus came streaming in upon him over the 
screen, filling the little chapel with exquisite 
harmonies which seemed to die away in myste- 
rious vaults and corridors. In pianissimo passages 
of solo or chorus the music receded, and died 
away in the west, like faint memories of former 
strains. 

This was a memory worth cherishing; but it 
was fixed in the artist's mind as much by the 
association of the previous day as it was by its 
own intrinsic sublimity. 

Six months afterwards it was that Arthur was 
introduced to Phoebe Tallant, and then that dear 
memory came back to him, softened into a kind 



76 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

of religious tint^ as if it came through a painted 
window of the mind. 

" This girl is my destiny," thought Arthur at 
once ; for the face was always in his mind, and 
somehow' it was mixed up with thoughts that 
were above the world, mixed up with dreamy 
pictures of cathedral aisles, and with memories of 
swelling anthems. 

For a time, after he knew Phoebe, Arthur feared 
he was drifting into morbid sensibility. He had 
led a sober, monkish kind of life for years, and 
with this new image in his mind he had at first 
given himself up to wanderings about the old 
cathedral, and a sort of fascinating unreal saint- 
worship which he carried out for a time on 
canvas; but as time wore on he grew out of 
these morbid habits and once more there was a 
healthy glow in his conversation and in his 
pictures. But he was desperately, madly in 
love, nevertheless. 



CHAPTER VII 

 

IS A SENTIMENTAL CHAPTER, CONTAINING A PEW 
MORAL REFLECTIONS BY THE WAY. 

Yes, Arthur Phillips was desperately in love. 
A silly thing that, now-a-days, is it not ? Love ! 
All very well in poetry and romance; all very 
well for school-girls and beardless boys. 

But may we not excuse an artist for fostering 
such a ridiculous passion ? It is something in his 
line, you know. Painters, Senior Mammon will 
probably say, are ridiculous fellows at best. They 
spend their time in a fool's paradise, studying the 
changes of the sky, making copies of trees and 
leaves, and lashing themselves into furious ex- 
citement about the glories of summer mornings 
and autumn sunsets. 

You saw some of the race at Bettys-y-Coed, in 



78 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

Wales, you know, Senior Mammon, when you were 
"doing" the neighbourhood of Snowdon. Poor 
devils! you remember how they were roaming 
about the rivers and rocks, and painting beneath 
umbrella tents. And you saw how some of them 
were content to live in those little cottages, and 
how they trudged about in the hot sun on foot, 
with their colour-boxes and things strapped to 
their backs. 

Don't you remember saying to Signora Mam- 
mon that it was a pity the strapping fellows you 
meet at the Conway Falls are not better occu- 
pied than in sketching stones and trees. 

You buy the artist's pictures sometimes, to 
keep him from starving, because you are charit- 
ably disposed, . eh. Senior Mammon? And to | 
obtain for yourseK a character for taste, as that I 
sort of thing is necessary in polite circles, . eh, 
dear friend ? 

" But they are poor devils, after all," you say ; 
and " an artist in love with Christopher Tallant's 
daughter must be an idiot indeed." 



"m LOVE." 79 

It is a pity Mr. Tallant is not informed of the 
tutor's infernal presumption, you say. He would 
soon send him to the right-about, he's such ^ 
proud fellow, you know, that Tallant. 

"In love!" you repeat. "In rubbish! He 
should come with me, and air his little bit of 
brains on the Stock Exchange; he shoi4d know 
what it is to make a hundred thousand pounds in 
a week, and lose it in a day ; he should see what 
women are, how they sell themselves body and 
soul for money." 

There, friend Mammon, you need say no more. 
Arthur Phillips does not understand you, and if 
he did, he would continue in love with Miss Tallant 
just the same. 

Strange, it must be to love a woman with all 
your heart and soul, and let her live on, uncon- 
scious of your admiration; to be with her, to 
listen to her sweet soft voice, to assist in the 
development of her taste, to minister to her 
fancy, to cultivate her love of the beautiful ; and 
yet not dare to confess your love ! 



80 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

The river flowed on its way, and the sun went 
down behind the hills ; the tones of the evening 
bell echoed through the college yaxd; and long 
after the heir of the Vomers had left his friend, 
the artist sat smoking his cigar in the twilight, 
thinking of Phoebe Tallant . ^thinking of her as 
he might think of some beautiful vision of the 
poet . thinking of her with a love in his heart 
that was more than love. And yet she seemed a 
necessity in his life, something that made life 
worth living for . something next to his art. 

He wa3 quite alone in the world ; he had 
neither mother nor father. He had been brought 
up in a quiet, humble way, and his father and 
mother both died before their ,son had achieved 
success as an artist. 

It would have been the greatest happiness 
possible for him at that time, could he have 
shown his father the picture which first made his 
name known to the world as a painter. His 
mother had been a querulous invalid most of her 
life, and had few feelings in common with her 



TUTOB AND PUPIL, 81 

son. The father, on the contrary, had been full of 
hope and trust in Arthur ; but he was not to live 
to see these hopes realised. 

So that Arthur's success had been tainted with 
a bitter sense of disappointment ; he had no sym- 
pathiser in his triumph . ^none who knew how 
hard he had worked i. none who knew the 
gigantic difficulties which h^ had overcome. 

The people with whom he mixed knew him 
since success had come to his brush ; and Phoebe 
Tallant had roused the strong feelings which had 
lain dormant within him. 

His love, though excited by a, sudden glimpse 
of the girl's beauty, had been strengthened by 
gradual growth, by little graceful acts, indications 
of sympathy and interest on the part of his pupil. 
He had struggled against it, and had felt once or 
twice that he was guilty of a breach of trust in 
harbouring such a passion for a moment. 

It was true Mr. Tallant had asked him, as a 
favour, to give lessons to his daughter. The 
merchant, as you know, liked to have things 
VOL. I. a 



82 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

which everybody could not have, no matter what 
he paid for them : and it was with something of 
this feeling that he had obtained the services 
of an artist who had suddenly risen above the 
necessity of teaching. 

" I did not wish to come here at first," Arthur 
would argue to himself. " He almost forced toe." 

The idea of marrying Miss Tallant had 
never once occurred to Arthur. In the first 
place, he regarded his passion as a piece of pre- 
sumption. He was unworthy in every respect, 
he thought, of Phoebe's love; and he never 
dreamed for a moment that she suspected the 
real state of his feelings towai'ds her. 

Although his name was so high in art, Mr. 
Tallant only looked upon Arthur as a tutor, and 
he would have regarded an offer of marriage for 
his daughter from such a source as an insult. 
But it was not in this mere worldly sense that 
Arthur felt himself inferior to Phoebe. His love 
and admiration had made a niche for her high up 
in his fancy, far beyond his brightest hopes, and he 



CALM Ain> STOBM. 83 

seemed to look up at her and worship, with a 
fearful^ jealous, burning pleasure. 

Who would have thought that so much passion 
could have a place behind that calm, thoughtful, 
and reserved manner .of the landscape painter ? 



02 



CHAPTER Vm 

IN WHICH PAUL SOMEBTON ENTERS UPON A 
DELICATE, DIFFICULT^ AND DANGEROUS TASK. 

M& Richard Tallant was a member of several 
London duba The one to which his Mend Mr, 
Shuffleton Gibbs invited him was a third-rate 
establishment, rapidly degenerating into a mere 
association of gamblers. 

The members met in an evening and kept up 
in appearance mild whist at shilling points ; but 
large bets were made upon the odd tricks, " each 
and every.*' 

Loo was not permitted because it was too much 
of a gambling game. The Ashford Club assumed 
a virtue they did not possess. Members might 
bet a thousand pounds on the odd trick at whist, 
but they must not play Loo, 



IN THE CITY. 85 

It was here that Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs made 
most of his money, and there was eveiy rea- 
son to fear that Richard Tallant was not above 
helping him. The spirit of gambling had fairly 
taken possession of Eichard's mind, and he sank 
with it into the practice of all sorts of vices. 

In the City Mr. Richard Tallant was known as 
a young, wealthy, devil-may-care fellow, a man to 
know, and a man to fear. He often speculated 
largely, unknown to his father, and had more than 
once "rigged " the share market to great advantage. 
His position gave him excellent opportunities to 
obtain information which Was of financial value, 
and Shuffleton Gibbs was deep enough to put 
his friend lip to all sorts of stock-jobbing tricks 
that often turned him in good round sums of 
money. 

One would have' thought that this, legalised 
gambling would have been sufficient for Mr. 
Tallant and his friend Gibbs ; but Gibbs was an 
old card-sharper ; he loved the fierce excitement 
of the table, and there was more certain success 



86 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

in a doctored card and a loaded dice than in stock- 
jobbing. 

Ton see we don't at all dicfgoise Mr. Oibbs's cha- 
racter ; he was a thorough-paced blackguard, and 
Mr. Itichard TaUant was graduating veiy success- 
fully in the Blackguard school. At present he is 
not aware that Gibbs is indebted to anything but 
skill for his success at cards : he has never seen 
the dii^raoed Oxford toujIb private room. 

Paul Somerton's inquiries had not led him to 
a knowledge of all that we have here set down ; 
but in less than a month he had come to the 
conclusion that Mr. Shuffleton Oibbs was a scoun- 
drel, and that Mr. Richard Tallant was not con- 
ducting himself in a mannw calculated to uphold 
the honour of his feither's nama 

And young Hammerton, the heir to the earldom 
of Yemer : no good oould come of his association 
with Mr. Oibbs and Tallant junior. How per- 
sistent Amy was in her inquiries about Mr. 
HammertonI 

^ I can't see why you be so anxious to know aU 



"littlb confidences." 87 

about their goings on," said Mr. Thomas Dibble, 
in one of their once-a-week perambulations. 

"Well, never mind, old boy," said Paul; "you 
and I are good friends and always will be. Why 
cannot we have our little confidences like other 
people ? " 

" No reason at aU," said Dibble, looking round 
at a baked-potato stove. 

" Have a potato ? " said Paul, stopping his friend 
forcibly as they were turning into Piccadilly. 

Mr. Dibble stared at him to see if he were in 
earnest. 

"All right, old boy; I know you like them; 
have one, don't mind me." 

Dibble instantly complied with Paul's request, 
and was soon engaged in devouring the mealy 
esculent 

In a few minutes he said, as well as he could 
speak with a mouthful of the baked tempta- 
tion, . 

" That be kind of you now. Master Paul, very ; 
you knows I likes taters, . ^weVe all our likes and 



88 THE TALLAirrS OF BAETON. 

dislikes, eh, Mister Somerton ? My weakness is 
Mrs. Dibble and baked pertaters ! " 

" And pudding, old Dib . ^now confess." 

Old Dibble laughed, and said Paul was a regular 
good un ; and from this the porter was easily led 
on to repeat little things T^rhich he occasionally 
saw and heard in Mr. Richard TallanVs room. 

Whilst they were talking, a brougham pulled up 
to the edge of the pavement, and Paul saw that 
it was occupied by the Hon. Lionel Hammerton. 

" Let us wait here a few moments, Dib ; I think 
I know that gentleman," said Paul, detaining his 
friend. 

A smart footman leaped from the box, 
opened the carriage door, and out stepped Mr. 
Hammerton, who immediately disappeared up a 
flight of steps which led into a dingy but rather 
ostentatious building. 

"Dib, old boy, we must see what place this 
is." 

"This?" said Dibble; "why it be the Ashford 
Club. I know Mister Fencer, who takes care of 



THE ASHFORD CLUB. 89 

the rooms; Mrs. Fencer be quite a crony of 
Mrs. Dibble's." 

" The Ashford Qub, eh ? I shoidd like to have 
a peep at the place inside, Dib." 

"Well, that be easy enough, I s'pose. Let us 
call and ask Mr. Fencer how he be." 

They went up the flight of stone steps, and 
found Mr. Fencer, who patronised Mr. Dibble in 
majestic style. 

Fencer was a fussy, pompous person, as was 
also Mrs. Fencer, who was absent this evening ; 
being, in fact, on a visit to Mrs. Dibble. Fencer, 
therefore, was fussier and more pompous than 
usual, and he took Mr. Somerton and Dibble into 
his little room and treated them to hot gin-and- 
water, ad libitv/m. 

By-and-by Paul Somerton insiduously got on 
the blind side of Mr. Fencer, and obtained per- 
mission to go and have a peep into the card-room; 
where Paul, through a half-opened door, saw 
Mr. Richard Tallant, Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, Mr. 
Hammerton, and another gentleman, seriously 



90 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

occupied at cards. There were several other little 
card parties, in the room, but Paul had no eyes 
for any other table than that at which the Hon. 
Lionel Hammerton was seated. Earl Vomer's 
brother was evidently the greatest loser, though 
his partner, Mr. Tallant, was also betting heavily, 
and unsuccessfully it seemed, with the foui-th 
gentleman, who was unknown to PauL 

This was enough for the present. Paul joined 
Fencer and Dibble agsdn, making himself par- 
ticularly agreeable to the former, and promising 
to pay him another visit on the first opportunity 
that occurred. 

Meanwhile Paul cared for nothing more but to 
get back to Pimlico and to bed. There was some- 
thing wrong going on, Paul was sure ; he would 
write to Amy in the morning and reply fully to 
her inquiries. 

Dibble was particularly communicative on the 
way home, on account of Fencer's large dose of 
gin ; he told Paul that he would stick to him till 
death, and tell him anything he knew. He be- 



91 

lieved Mister Gibbs was no better than a swindler, 
and his master's son was surely a reprobate. 

'* You should have heard what Fencer told me 
private/' Dibble went on, nodding his head, and 
clinging hard and fast to Paul Somerton's arm : 
" that Mister Gentleman Gibbs is a sort of Jeremy 
Diddler, sir, depend on it; and master's son is, 
they do say, the fastest man about town." 

"Indeed ! all right, Dib. I'll hold you up, old 
boy," said Paul, as Dibble plunged and fought his 
way through an imaginary crowd of obstructions. 

Dibble gradually becoming helpless, Paul was 
compelled to call a cab ; and they reached Still 
Street just in time to find 'ijlLra. Dibble alone and 
in good humour. 

But a change rapidly came over the salubrious 
calm when Mrs. Dibble noticed Thomas's neck-tie 
twisted round to the back of his neck, and saw him 
gazing at her in a helpless state of idiotic admira- 
tion and amazement. 

Turning upon Paul she poured out such a 
volley of declamation against deceit, and the lead- 



92 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. , 

ing of innocence into temptation and sin, that Paul 
was fain to rush off to bed, and leave poor Dibble 
to. contend with the remainder of the storm. He 
heard the matrimonial tempest raging for fully 
an hour after he had retired, until at length it 
gradually subsided, and peace was proclaimed in 
the sonorous snore of Dibblonian repose. 

It was long past midnight when the last card- 
party at the Aflhford Club broke up. Young 
Hammerton and Richard Tallant left together, 
and Hammerton accepted the offer of a bed at 
Mr. Tallant's house in Connaught Place, where a 
cab soon deposited them. 

The moon shone peacefully over the park as 
they crossed it, and made silvery sparkles on the 
windows of the long, fashionable row of houses. 

The trees stood out in the uncertain lights, 
with early spring leaves upon them. The long 
rows of lamps looked yellow and out of place in 
the pure light of the moon; and the distant 
whistle of a railway engine seemed all the more 
to mark the morning stillness. 



A RAILWAY WHISTLE. 9t3 

That whistle came home to Lionel Hammer- 
ton ; it seemed to upbraid him, and at the same 
time invite him to the coimtry of the Berne Hills. 
He had promised to return to his brother (who 
had been lying ill there for several weeks) two 
days ago ; but the infatuation of play had come 
upon him, and his large losses of this evening 
had prompted him to endeavour to retrieve 
his ill-luck on the morrow. Mr. Gibbs had 
promised him his revenge, and Tallant and he 
were pledged to visit the Ashford on the next 
night. 

Mr. Tallant was light-hearted enough over his 
losses, whilst Hammerton sat gloomily thinking 
of his, and the sick brother, for whom he had 
a real affection. Mr. Bichard Tallant hummed 
bits of an operatic chorus, and the most popular 
bars of the latest waltz. 

The two card acquaintances said scarcely a 
word until they bade each other good night ; and 
before Mr. Tallant was up the next day the Hon. 
Lionel Hammerton was steaming away on the 



94 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Great Western to the halLs of his fathers by the 
Berne Hills. 

A glorious old place that castle where Earl 
Vemer resided, full of odd nooks and comers, 
with quaint gables, and grey, ivy-clad turrets ; a 
castle which had held out for months during the 
great rebellion. The older portion had been sup- 
plemented with some new buildings designed in 
harmony with the ancient architecture of the 
original building. 

Before this history is complete the reader may 
be called upon to visit Montem Castle : until 
then it is not necessary, perhaps, to say more 
than that it was the ancient seat of the Yemer 
family. 



CHAPTER IX 

WHICH n^RODUCES THE READER TO THE SUM- 
MER-HOUSE ON BERNE HILLS, AND ILLUS- 
TRATES THE TRUTH OP AN OLD PROVERB 
ABOUT EAVES-DROPPERS. 

It was pleasantly situated at the top of Berne 
Hills. It had originally been a watch-tower, but 
Mr. Tallant had converted it into what they 
called the summer-house. There were comfort- 
able seats in it, and a few odd books and pictures. 
It commanded sixty miles or more of scenery, 
flat, undulating, and mountainous ; wood, water, 
and pastures ; towns, villages, and hamlets. 

You might search the country through, and 
not find a scene more truly English and more 
perfectly beautiful. In spring, if you jour- 
neyed to that summit from Barton Hall, 



96 THE TALLAISTB OF BABTOK. 

irhen the son was shining and the sky serene, 
you might fiincy yomself in the Happy Valley 
indeed. 

The way is over meadows, down lanes, up 
sloping hiU-sides, throu^^ woods, and by rippling 
water-courses. There are violets in the hedge- 
rows, and daffodils in the meadows, and primroses 
in the woodsL Anemones tremble in seduded 
thickets, and there are fruit-trees in bloom in the 
distant orchards^ that gleam through the fidntly 
green trees. 

Phoebe TaDant and Amy Somerton walked up 
to the summer-house sereral times in the spring 
and summer months ; sometimes they rode part of 
the way on rough ponies, but oftener they walked 
the whole distance, interrupted only by a stray 
deer from the adjacent padL of Montem Castle or 
a fox from the Beme ooveiSw Only, did I say, 
by a deer or a fox? Tmty; for was not Mr. 
Phillq a fox, to sketch so continually amongst 
those Beme Hills ? 

The day after Amy Somerton had receiYed her 



THE SUMMER HOUSE. 97 

brother's full report about Mr. Hammerton, she 
proposed a walk to the summer-house, and 
Miss Tallant gladly accepted the challenge. 

Phoebe was always ready for a long ramble; 
and the Spring sunshine on this day was particu- 
larly inviting. 

Taking their alpine sticks and donning their 
jauntiest hats, our two fair maidens, arm in arm, 
passed over the smooth, green lawn, and soon dis- 
appeared behind the shrubs and trees. 

Luke Somerton, who had been up into the 
woods for a brace of rabbits,, watched them un- 
observed as they entered the lane near Barton 
Hall, and an expression of pride lighted up his 
manly face as he gazed on the supple and graceful 
form of his daughter Amy. 

Richard Tallant spoke truly when he was 
joking Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs about Somerton's 
beautiful daughter. It would have been as much 
as any man's life were worth to have insulted 
Amy Somerton in the knowledge of her father. 

" I tell you, Luke Somerton," said Mrs. S., 

VOL. I, H 



98 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

when Luke entered the house^ "that Mr.ELammer- 
ton is bent upon no good with regard to Amy." 

" Stuff and nonsense ! *' said Luke, laying down 
his rabbits, and putting his gun into a case by the 
fireplace. 

" When you see a fox about the fold-yard, 
what do you think he is seeking?" asked Mrs. 
Somerton, sneeringly. 

" Foxes be hanged ! " said Luke. 

" And fools be hanged ! " said Mrs. Somerton, 
banging the door, and leaving her liege lord to his 
own thoughts. 

" By all means," said Luke, still thinking of 
the handsome women whom he had seen in the 
lane. 

" And that painter fellow," said Mrs. Somerton, 
returning ; " he's in the woods yonder. Old 
Tallant must have lost the small portion of brains 
that God gave him to begin with, if he can't see 
that his daughter is befooling him." 

" Why, Sarah, you are mad on this point. 
These girls seem to worry your life out." 



"trust a mother's eyes." 99 

" Mad ? You may trast a mother's eyes, Luke 
Somerton, to see what's going on. I tell you, that 
ugly little blackamoor painter-fellow is making 
love to Miss Tallant, and that the future Lord 
Vomer is sneaking about after our Amy." 

" The future Lord Vemer after Amy ! . stuff ! 
you're dreaming, wife," said Luke. 

" Some people's dreams are as good as the 
waking thoughts of other people," Mrs. Somerton 
replied. 

" Well, we shall see . we shall see," said Luke, 
carelessly. 

" Yes, when it's too late," Mrs. Somerton 
rejoined, with an emphatic nod of her head. 

And so the subject dropped. Meanwhile Phoebe 
and Amy were enjoying the spring sunshine at 
the top of Berne Hills. The glorious beams shot 
down upon the landscape from behind little scud- 
ding clouds, and made the beech-trees shine like 
silver. 

The river that wound its way from east to west 

shone out here and there in great white patches. 

H 2 



100 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Hundreds of shifting shadows fell upon hill 
and dale ; lulling sounds came up the hiUs from 
the villages round about ; the birds sung as they 
only sing in Avonworth Valley ; and everything 
breathed of peace, content, and happiness. 

" And so you think Mr. Hammerton is getting 
into bad company. Amy?" said Miss Tallant, 
when the two fair girk had sat down to rest in 
the summer-house. 

" He is, indeed," said Amy, seriously. 

''Gambling?" 

" Yes ; to a dreadful extent, Paul says." 

"May I see the letter, dear?" Miss Tallant 
asked, laying her hand affectionately on Amy's 
shoulder. 

" I tell you candidly, Phoebe dear, I do not like 
to let you see what Paul says about your brother." 

" Don't mind that. I have long since believed 
my brother to be much less noble in his conduct 
than could be desired," said Phoebe. 

'' Have you ever heard of his friend, Mr. 
Gibbs?" 



AN EAVESDKOPPER. 101 

"No, dear. Who is he?" 

" Oh, a dreadful man, I believe ; unfit alto- 
gether for the society of your brother." 

" Indeed," said Mr. Bichard Tallant, in a 
whisper, as he stood quietly smoking a cigar near 
the open doorway of the summer-house. "The 
conversation becomes interesting." 

" In what respect 1 " asked Phcebe. 

" Why, dear, Paul has made every possible 
inquiry, and he pronounces him to be no better 
than a swindler; and he says many men have been 
transported and hanged who have done nothing 
worse than Mr. Gibbs has done," said Amy, 
with animation. 

" Those are strong words, Amy," said Miss 
Tallant. 

" They are, by Jove ! " said her brother 
to himself; "but true, I believe, by my 
soul!" 

" Not too strong, I fear. Miss Tallant," Amy 

went on; "and but I would rather not show 

you the letter." 



102 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Now you are getting angry, Miss Somerton," 
said Amy, kissing her companion's cheek. 

" Forgive me, dear Phoebe ; I did not mean to 
use that odious word, ' Miss.' " 

And then the two girls kissed each other, and 
Amy handed Paul's letter to Miss Tallant without 
more ado. 

"Sy Jove!" said Bichard Tallant to himself, 
'* that sister of mine is a perfect fooL The bailiff's 
daughter is fairly master of her; and, egad, I 
don't wonder at it." 

" This is indeed dreadful Your brother has 
certainly been indefatigable. Bichard the asso- 
ciate of gamblers and the loosest men in town, 
and sanctioning a plot to ruin Mr. Hammerton ! 
This truly is sad news," said Miss Tallant, read- 
ing Paul's letter, and commenting upon it as she 
read. 

"Yes, by Jove!" said Mr. Kichard Tallant, 
dropping the remains of his cigar, and crushing it 
under his heeL " So-ho, Master Sneak ! I'll be 
even with you, my fine fellow. A devilish nice 



" ONIiY A WOMAN." 103 

thing to be tracked about by a junior clerk/ set 
on by his sister^ the daughter of my father's bailiff. 
We'll see about this. Shall I play the eaves- 
dropper any longer 1 " 

"And what have you said in reply?" Phoebe 
asked, folding the letter, and returning it to Amy. 

" I have told Paul he must warn Mr. Hammer- 
ton in some way; that he must take means 
to let him know that he is being duped." 

" You are putting too much on the boy's 
shoulders, I think," said Phoebe. 

"Oh 1 I wish I were a man for one month . 
just for a month, Phoebe," said Miss Somerton, 
starting from her seat, her eyes sparkling, and 
her little mouth pursed up. " But, alas ! I am 
only a woman, and a vain, weak, silly creature, I 
fear," she continued, re-seating herself and sighing. 
. "Weak and silly! "said Phoebe, quietly. "Why 
weak and silly 1 " Then dropping her voice and 
putting her arm round Amy's waist, she asked: 
"Do I know why you call yourself weak and 
silly?" 



104 THE TALLANT8 OF, BARTON. 

Amy started, and bltushed, and bent her head, 
spirited and full of mettle as she appeared to 
be a moment previously. 

"Don't blush, Amy dear. Do I know why 
you blush?" and Phoebe kissed her companion's 
forehead. 

"I am a vain, silly, stupid creature, Phoebe; 
and you must despise me." 

Phoebe only pressed her friend's hand in reply. 

"You must easily have read all my heart 
to-day," Amy went on, trembling at her own 
temerity. "Paul's letter, my hasty words this 
morning, my interest in his doings, my '* 

"Of course, of course," said Phoebe, quite in 
a reassuring, comforting way: "you love Mr. 
Hammerton. There, don't start, my dearest, like 
that I know you do, and why should you 
not?" 

Pale and trembling Amy looked for a moment 
at her friend, and the tears started into her 
eyes. 

" You must think me mad," she said. 



amy's confession. 105 

" Indeed I do not, my pet," said Phoebe, quite 
cheerfully, and kissing Amy again, " It is natural 
to love a fine, dashing feUow like Mr. Hammerton ; 
quite natural in a high-spirited girl like you." 

** It is madness, vanity, and everything that is 
weak," said Amy. 

"Nonsense, nonsense, child!" Phoebe replied. 
" You are worthy the love of the finest gentleman 
in England." 

"Ah, Phoebe! you and I know but little of 
the world. Mr. Hammerton is as far above me 
as a prince is above a peasant. I am foolish, 
wickedly foolish, to have permitted my liking 
to have got the better of my judgment." 

"Why, I could almost venture to say Mr. 
Hammerton is in love with you as much as you 
are in love with him," said Phoebe, cheerily. 

Amy shook her head sadly, as she thought of 
the difference between them in rank and station. 

" Bless me ! " said Phoebe, divining her thoughts ; 
"princes have married peasant-girls before now, 
and shall not an earl's son . and only a younger 



106 THE TALLANT8 OF BAKTON. 

son, remember . ^be proud of the love of a true 
and noble heart like yours ? " 

Phoebe grew quite eloquent and enthusiastic. 
"Consult your favourite poet when we return. 
Amy, and read about King Cophetua." 

" I need not ask you never to breathe a word of 
my silly confession to anyone at any time ?" said 
Ajpj, now a little more like her former sell 

"Trust me/* said Phoebe, as she gathered up 
her hat and cloak, which had lain upon the table. 

"My feelings overcame me; but it is a relief 
now, even to have confided my weakness and 
vanity to you," said Amy; and then the two 
impulsive beauties embraced each other again. 

" Humph ! " said Mr. Richard Tallant, "I must 
have a hand in this pretty little business." 



CHAPTEK X. 

MB. BICHARD TALLANT INTERRUPTS A CHARMING 
TETE-A-T TE. 

"Ahem ! pleasant occupation truly," said Mr. 
Bichard Tallant, planting himself in the centre of 
the summer-house doorway, and contemplating 
the ladies, who stared in ^istonishment at the 
apparition. 

"Any objection to take me into your em- 
braces?" he went on, smiling, walking up to 
Miss Tallant, kissing her on the forehead, and 
bowing very politely to her companion. 

"Why, how long have you been standing 
there, Richard?" asked Miss Tallant, in some 
confusion. 

"Not long," said Eichard, fixing his eyes on 
Miss Somerton; "but long enough to be delighted 



108 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

at the charming picture of affection which you 
presented to the view." 

"You have brought your town compliments 
with you, Richard/' said Phoebe. "I fear they 
will be wasted upon us poor provincials." 

"I hope not; as I have come down to spend 
a couple of days with you/' said Richard. 

Miss Somerton said nothing, but she was 
convinced, by Mr. Tallant's manner, that he had 
heard at least a portion of her conversation with 
his sister. 

'*I am sorry I interrupted your i;ete-d4ete'^ 
said Mr. Tallant. "I fear my sudden presence 
has not pleased Miss Somerton. You see, I 
wanted a little rest and quiet, and hearing that 
Mr. Hammerton was at home I thought I would 
first run down, spend a couple of days with 
you and the governor, and then ride over to 
Montem and see a certain noble swell, who has 
a little business with me. When I got to the 
house, I found nobody in ; so I followed you up 
here and smoked my cigar. I have enjoyed the 



FASHIONABLE KEWS. 109 

-walk, I assure you ; 'pon my honour, I have not 
had such a treat for a long time." 

Mr. Tallant and Amy Somerton eyed each 
other more than once during this little speech, 
and Ajny was more and more convinced that 
Eichard Tallant had played the listener, which 
made her for a time constrained in her manner ; 
by-and-by she threw over her anxiety a forced 
liveliness, which did not escape the notice of 
Mr. TallaQt. 

" Shall I have the honour of escorting you to 
Barton Hall ? " he said ; for by this time the 
ladies had left the summer-house. 

"We shall be honoured by so much con- 
descension," said Phoebe, smiling archly. " Shall 
we not. Amy ? " 

" Very much so indeed," said Miss Somerton ; 
*' and perhaps Mr. Tallant will entertain us with 
the latest fashionable news." 

" By all means," said Richard. " Lady Cooling 
has run away with her groom ; Viscount Fusswell 
has married the piquante Miss Morris, . she was 



110 THE TALLAKT8 OF BABTON. 

a govemesSy I think, or somethiDg of the sort, and 
she's a deuced jolly girl Do you care about 
scandal. Miss Somerton, by the nvay, or wiU you 
have another sort of gossip ? " 

''Ask Miss Tallant, sir/' said Amy. *' I have no 
right of choice in this matter." 

" Then I don't like it," said Phoebe. " What is 
that little poem I was reading the other day 
somewhere?" she said stopping, and tapping her 
foot with her dimbing-staK 

 Ah, what is it, Phoebe ? 

' Phoebe, dearest, 
TeU, oh tell me,'" 

said Richaxd, humming one of the English 
tenor's favourite ballads. 

" * A whisper broke the air, " . 

said Phoebe, pausing. " Now I remember : . 

* A whisper broke the air, . 
A soft light tone, and low. 
Yet barb'd with shame and woe ; 
STow, might it only perish there. 
Nor further go ! 



SCANDAL. Ill 

All me ! a quick and eager ear 
Caught up the little meaning sound ! 

Another voice has breathed it clear, 
And so it wandered round 

From ear to lip, from lip to ear, 

XJntil it reach'd a gentle heart, 
And that . it broke,** 

"Bravo, sis ! bravo Phoebe!. delivered with fine 
eflfect," said Mr. Tallant. "May I smokQ one 
cigar, just one?" 

"With pleasure," said Phoebe. " What do you 
say. Amy dear?" 

"I have not the smallest objection; I rather 
like it." 

" It is better than scandal, infinitely, . eh. Miss 
Somerton ?" said Mr. Tallant, lighting a Cabana. 

"Much," said Amy. 

"What do you think now," said Richard, "they 
have been saying about me ? " 

"I seldom go to London," said Amy. 

"Why, a fellow told me that some scandal- 
monger or other was setting it about that I am 
very fast, that I gamble." 



112 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

"Oh! that is dreadful," said Miss Somerton, 
quickly. " That you are a gambler V 

" Yes . ^fact, 'pon my life," said Richard. 

"They could not say anything worse about you 
than that, Mr. Tallant. A gambler, I think, is 
the most despicable creature." 

"Of course," said Richard, looking at Miss 
Somerton with a curious expression of face. 

"Since we have had one quotation, perhaps 
you will pardon another that has direct refer- 
ence to this point . a line from Talfourd. I have 
been reading about gaming lately." 

Miss Somerton looked earnestly at Mr. Tallant, 
for now she was sure he had heard what she had 
said in the summer-house. 

"Indeed! Pray enlighten us," said Mr. Tal- 
lant 

"Gaming, sir, for its own sake, will destroy 
the noblest nature, and ruin the wealthiest 

* "What meaner vice 
Crawls there than that which no affections nrge. 
And no delights refine? ' 



GAMBLING. 113 

It 

' Changes enterprise 
To squalid greediness, makes heaven-bom hope 
A shivering fever, and in vile collapse 
Leaves the exhausted heart without one fibre 
Impell'd by generous passion.* " 

"Really, *pon my honour . why, you two fair 
ladies must have been studying elocution and all 
that sort of thing lately," said Richard, flicking 
off the top of a young ash-plant with his cane. 

" Fm glad you condemn those scandalous asper- 
sions of my character, Miss Somerton ; though, 
you see, all that pretty poetry is not much good, 
for everybody gambles one way or another in turn 
You should see the big guns who do it in the 
City . ^real out-and-outers . ^members of Parlia- 
ment, and swells of the first water . I mean in 
buying and selling shares, and what they call 
rigging the market, and all that sort of thing. 
Why, the governor himself has done a little in 
that way in his time. But let me see, where 
were we 1 Oh, about what people say. Well, I 

VOL. I. I 



114 THE TALLANTfl OF BARTON. 

was told the other day that young Hammerton 
was fond of cards ; but, bless us, there is always 
lots of scandalous things said about young fellows 
of position ; indeed, I heard something of Ham- 
merton the other day which is hardly proper to 
mention before ladies, and yet he's as good a 
fellow as there is going . don't you think so. Miss 
Somerton ? " 

" That I certainly do," said Amy, fully prepared 
for the sly attack ; " but many a good man has 
been led astray by ill-chosen companionship." 

" ' My son, if sinners tempt thee,' &c., . I see, 
yes," said Richard, with a slight sneer. 

" You may laugh, Mr. Tallant," said Amy, 
blushing at her own temerity ; " but many a free, 
generous-minded man has been brought to misery 
by the companionship of a bad man, professing 
friendship which he never felt or understood." 

"That reminds me," said Mr. Tallant; "the 
same fellow who told me that he had heard I 
gambled, told me that hard things were said of 
another man whom I meet sometimes. Of course 



BAD COMPANY. 115 

I cannot be answerable for the character of every 
fellow I meet ; it is all envy, hatred, and malice." 

*' Bad company," said Amy, " is like a nail 
driven into a post, which after the first and 
second blow may be drawn out with little diflS- 
culty ; but being once driven up to the head, the 
pincers cannot take hold to draw it out, but 
which can only be done by the destruction of 
the wood. We had to turn that sentence into 
hexameters the other day by order of Signer De 
Maury, our linguistic master," said Amy; "I 
think it rather a fine simile." 

" Indeed ? yes, perhaps it is," said Mr. Richard 
Tallant, thinking to himself that the girl was 
* infernally impudent." 

By this time they had reached the last coppice, 
prior to coming out into the open before Barton 
Hall ; and at a picturesque bend in the somewhat 
intricate footpath, they came suddenly upon Mr. 
Phillips, the artist, who was sitting quietly con- 
templating a half-sketched-in clump of spring 
foliage, pierced with a broad ray of sunlight. 

I 2 



116 THE TALLANT8 OF BARTON. 

The artist's loDg black hair was thrown back, 
his hat lying on the ground, and his sharply- 
cut features were lit up with a smile of satis- 
faction 

He had worked at this little sketch for many 
dsLjs, and had only just accomplished what he 
considered to be a reasonable approach to the 
production of a peculiar effect of sunlight upon 
firs and larches and silver beech, with a back- 
ground of rock and sky, in early spring. 

For a moment he sat unconscious of the audi- 
ence which stood before him . one a lady, who 
had to make an effort to hide her agitation. 

" Hope you're satisfied, old boy," said Mr. 
Tallant, approaching the artist. 

"Good morning . good morning, ladies," said 
Mr. Phillips in his deep mellow voice, aild 
advancing to meet the party. 

"Ah! deuced good . capital," said Eichard, 
standing in front of the easel 

" Do you think so ?" said the artist " What 
do you think, Miss Tallant ? I have been work- 



GOING TO LUNCHEON. 117 

ing at this poor trifle of study, I am ashamed to 
say how long." . . 

"I am sure you need not be ashamed," said 
Miss Tallant, quietly. 

"You have been highly successful, as you 
always are," said Miss Somerton. 

"Come along, Phillips, come along; we are 
going to have luncheon. The governor is away, 
and I'm master to-day. Come along, and well 
talk about the world and what it saya You 
ought to have been up the hill with us; my lady 
friends have been wonderfully eloquent about 
good boys and naughty boys, and all sorts of 
things. Tommy was a good boy; he said his 
lessons, and never went into bad companjr, and he 
got some nice cake. Billy was a bad boy, and he 
wouldn't say his lessons, and he was whipped, and 
he got no cake. There, don't be angry, Miss 
Somerton," said Richard, rattling on and laughing 
at Amy, evidently glorying in what he had heard ; 
and yet piqued at her covert replies to his pre- 
tended gossip. 



118 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

"Angry! not I, Mr. Tallant. If Tommy is 
good, Tommy wiU be rewarded, at any rate, with 
an approving conscience ; and Billy . ^why, if he is 
bad, he will assuredly be punished And so let us 
go to luncheon." 

'' Hear, hear ! Come along, Phillips ;" and as 
soon as the artist was ready they all went to- 
gether over the lawn, and disappeared within 
the handsome portals of Mr. Tallant's princely 
residence. 



CHAPTER XI. 

ANOTHER UNEXPECTED VISITOR APPEARS AT 
BARTON HALL. 

The drawing-room, library, and dining-room at 
Barton Hall were upon the ground-floor, en suite. 
They had their several and separate entrances 
from the hall and corridor beyond; and at the 
same time had communications with each other 
from within. 

The library was the centre apartment, with 
the dining and drawing-room on either hand ; so 
that, two doors being open, you could walk in a 
direct line from one end of the suite of rooms 
to the other ; and a delightful walk it was, lit 
up by seven or eight magnificent .bay-windows, 
from each of which there were glorious views 
of the Berne Hills. 



120 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTOK. 

The little party which entered the house at 
the dose of our last chapter, having lunched, 
adjourned into the library, where the window 
opening from the ground was thrown up^ in 
order that Mr. Richard Tallant might sit just 
within and smoke one more cigar. 

Miss Somerton strolled into the next room, 
and sat down to the piano, letting her fingers 
wander dreamily over the keys. 

Where he sat Mr. Tallant had, through the 
open doorway, a side-view of her beautiful head; 
and feelings of disappointment^ jealousy, admira- 
tion, and annoyance, sucoessiYely took possession 
of him as he smoked, and looked, and listened. 

Mr. Phillips was absorbed in the examination 
of some new illustrated books which Mr. Chris- 
topher Tallant had sent from town for Phoebe, 
who must have the artist's opinion about them. 

The artist talked about high art ideality, 
and poetic licence. He thought certain Dante 
pLCtures too literal in their interpretation of the 
horrors of the ** Inferno^** and he called some of 



BEAUTY. 121 

the sketches morbid and sensational He was in 
raptures with half-a-dozen pictures in. a work of 
fairy fiction; but he was thinking all the while 
a great deal more of Phoebe's beauty than of 
anything else. 

Mr. Richard Tallant could not help noticing 
the remarkable contrast between the artist and 
his sister as they stood together looking at the 
new books. 

The fair spirituelle face of the woman set in 
that sunny halo of soft brown hair; and the 
sharp and highly intellectual features of the artist 
intensified by the long black hair which fell 
upon the somewhat rounded shoulders. 

It brought to his mind for a moment a famous 
Pre-Raphaelite picture ; but his thoughts wan- 
dered away instantly to Amy Somerton, who 
was softly touching out the melody of " Life let 
us Cherish/' from amongst a wealth of unobtru- 
sive variations which Arabella Goddard has since 
made so pleasantly familiar. 

"And she loves young Hammerton, does she?" 



122 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

he thought, whilst he smoked and nursed his 
left leg, and occasionally stroked his full black 
moustache. "Love's the probable successor to an 
earldom. She aims high. Well, so be it. The 
fellow's good-looking and conceited : he'll humour 
the lady's fancy, of course. He can't marry her ; 
that's out of the question. She evidently thinks 
I'm a blackguard . that's not so pleasant; but 
Master Paul shall pay for that." 

The next moment the Hon. Lionel Hammerton 
was announced, whereupon Miss Somerton rose 
from the piano, and the new comer was shown 
into the library. 

"Who would have thought of seeing you?" 
said Mr. Tallant, throwing his cigar at a black- 
bird (which was hopping about on the lawn), 
and coming forward to greet Mr. Hammerton, 
who was receiving a cordial welcome from Miss 
Tallant. 

" How do you do ? " said the young aristocrat, 
extending his hand. "Phillips, my friend, and 
how are you ? I'm delighted to see you." 



A PICTUKE. 123 

"The delight is mutual," said. Arthur, shaking 
Mr. Hammerton heartily by the hand. 

"I saw one of your last pictures at Earl 
Stanton's place in town three days ago," said 
Mr. Hammerton, " with three wonderful connois- 
seurs going frantic about it. The Earl had given 
a hundred and fifty guineas for it, they said. 
What do you think it was. Miss Tallant ? " 

"A landscape ? " said Phoebe, with an inquiring 
smile. 

" Well, I suppose it might be called a land- 
scape. It was a bit of the lake yonder, in the 
comer of the park, with a clump of trees at 
the back, and some ducks amongst the grass and 
reeds at the side of the pool . ^nothing more . ^a 
mere sketch, which Mr. Phillips can rub in, as 
he calls it, in little more than a week. Your 
trees and hedges, and cows and poultry, and Bits 
of lake and brook, and rock and hill, at Barton 
here, are a fortune to Mr. Phillips." 

The artist smiled and shook his head. 

" Why, you Croesus, you know it is true," said 



124 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Mr. Hammerton. " He will soon be as rich as my 
dear brother is reputed to be. Miss Tallant ; he 
literally coins money does my friend Arthur; 
but what is better . and if he were not here, I 
should be tempted to say more . ^he paints for 
the love of his art, and he is as noble a fellow 
as ever sat before an easel. There ! " 

The young nobleman seemed bent upon exalt- 
ing the moral and pecuniary worth of Mr. 
Phillips. He might have had an object to serve 
in placing his friend's merits and advantages 
before Mr. Tallant and his sister, and he laid 
particular emphasis on " my friend Phillips," 
or " my friend Arthur," and spoke of him with 
the familiarity of pure regard and esteem. 

"By-the-by," said Mr. Hammerton after a 
pause, "let me explain my unexpected visit to 
Mr. Tallant. Don't go away, I beg, Miss 
Tallant." 

"I will return again before you leave, thank 
you," said the lady in her sweetest accents. 
, " I heard you were here, sir," said Mr. Ham- 



A SHORT RECKONING. 125 

merton, resuming an aristocratic dignity of manner, 
which he assumed with those who were not his 
intimates (he had not met Mr. Tallant junior 
frequently), "and thinking you might deem it 
necessary to give me a call, I preferred to 
anticipate you." 

Mr. Tallant bowed, and twirled his moustache 
carelessly. 

" Allow me to present you with a Kttle token 
of our last meeting," Mr. Hammerton continued, 
handing Mr. Tallant a sealed envelope. 

" Thanks ; you are very good," said the Iron 
Prince, dropping the note into the side pocket 
of his loose morning coat. 

"Will you not look at it, and see that it is 
quite right?" 

"No, thank you; I have no fear about that 
Shall I oflfer you a cigar 1 The ladies will allow 
us to smoke on the lawn just outside the window." 

Mr. Tallant handed Mr. Hammerton his 
cigar-case. 

" May I oflfer one to my friend ? " said Mr. 



126 THE TALLAHrrS OF RABTON. 

Hammerion, looking round for Mr. Phillips, who 
had strolled into the drawing-room. 

"By all means. Mr. Phillips, will you do 
me the pleasure of joining us in a cigar?" said 
Mr. Tallant, raising his voice; at which the 
artist returned to the library. 

Just then Phoebe and Amy entered, and Mr. 
Hammerton expressed great pleasure at seeing 
Miss Somerton. 

Mr. Bichard Tallant thought he saw in 
Amy's face, as she returned Mr. Hammerton's 
graceful salutation, an expression of love and 
admiration ; but this might have originated out 
of what he had heard in the summer-house, 
and he felt annoyed in spite of himself, and 
without really knowing why. 

" Shall we have our smoke ? " he said, a little 
impatiently. " The ladies will excuse us, and 
we can walk outside on the grass." 

"Presently, Mr. Tallant," said the young 
nobleman, entering into a conversation with Miss 
Tallant and Amy about a score of trifling things. 



TRUE LOVE. 127 

"Don't let us detain you, pray," said Miss 
Tallant ; and by-and-by Mr. Tallant and Mr. 
Hammerton, with Mr. Phillips between them, 
sauntered leisurely up and down the lawn, 
whilst Phoebe returned to the new books. 

Amy sat down near her, with " In Memoriam " 
in her hand. The Laureate's sublime thoughts 
had long since been in her heart, but she was 
accustomed to dwell upon this greatest of all 
his great w6rks when her feelings were more 
than usually agitated; and this morning sadness 
and gladness were so commingled that she was 
almost beside herself with a sense of doubt and 
fear and sorrow, and of trembling joy and pre- 
sentiments of dread and danger. 

** He pagt ; a soul of nobler tone : 
My spirit loved and loves him yet, 
like some poor girl whose heart is set 
On one whose rank exceeds her own. 

** He mixing with his proper sphere, 
She finds the baseness of her lot, 
Half jealous of she knows not what, 
And envying all that meet him there. 



128 THE TALLAXTS OF BABTOK. 

The little vilLige looks forlorn ; 
She sighs amid her narrow days, 
Moving about the household ways^ 

In that dark house where she was bom. 

"The oolish neighbours come and go, 
And tease her till the day draws by ; 
At night she weeps ' How yain am I ! 
How should he lore a thing so low ! ' " 

Tears fell upon the page. Her inferior rank, 
her humble Qrigin, made her love seem a vain 
and selfish thing indeed. She sometimes despised 
herself for permitting even the thought of it to 
have a place in her heart And yet Cophetoa 
made the b^;gar-maid his queen. But how 
beautiful she was! 

Amy did not understand her own peculiar 
beauty, refined and toned as it was by the 
kindness of her nature, the vigour of her intel- 
lect^ and the graces of her mind ; or she might 
not have despaired of the love of the next heir 
to the Earldom of Yemer. 

O, if he were but poor K he had even 



IN THE HALL GABDENS. 129 

been six or seven removes from an earldom; 
but to set her mind upon one so high! It was 
madness^ and yet poor Amy could not choose 
but love; and Mr. B^unmerton had been so 
marked in his courtesy towards her whenever he 
had seen her at the farm, or met her on his occa- 
sional visits to Barton Hall, that faint whispers 
of hope would sometimes cheer her heart 

Before Mr. Hammerton left he expressed a 
desire to see the garden. , There were some 
famous flowers which he had heard Earl Vemer's 
gardener speak of as rarities that he had seen at 
barton Haa 

Miss Tallant volunteered to show Mr. Hammer- 
ton the garden, and insisted that Amy should 
accompany them. 

.'We will all go," said Mr. Tallant. "Come 
along, Mr. Phillips! you are interested in these 
things ; for my part, I know little about them." 

They saw the flowers and discussed their 
merits, and then, somehow or other, Mr. Ham- 
merton found himself engaged in a deep con- 

VOL. I. X 



130 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

.versation with Miss Tallant and Amy ; and by- 
and-by he was alone with Miss Somerton^ and 
he was all gradousness and gentle words then. 

Once she felt his breath warm upon her cheek, 
and once he pressed her hand. She blushed, 
and the tears came into her eyes, why or where- 
fore she could not telL And then Lionel pressed 
her hand again, and said what a delightful 
creature Miss Tallant was to leave him alone 
with her dear friend. 

He gathered a rose and playfully hung it in her 
hair, and then he asked her if she remembered 
the poetic legend of the origin of the red rose^ 
" Boses were all white originally when first they 
bloomed in Eden. Eve, when first she saw the 
beautiful flower, could not suppress her admira- 
tion, and in her joy at its beauty she stooped down 
and imprinted a kiss on its snowy bosom. The 
rose stole the scarlet tinge firom her velvet lip^ 
and wears it yet. So goes the story; I cannot 
give you the authority, but the tradition is poetic ; 
is it not?" 



I 



131 

Amy looked up and smiled^ and Lionel knew 
that she loved him. The most secret page of her 
story was before him, and he read it with pride 
and satisfaction. 

Lionel went on talking all kinds of loving trifles 
which in anyone else's mouth would have seemed 
ridiculous to Amy; but she could only weep at 
them and feel a strange fluttering at her heart as 
she listened to him and walked with him in the 
shadiest and most remote paths of the Barton 
HaU gardens. 

In the evening Mr. Christopher Tallant returned 
from town, and was greatly surprised to find his 
son at Barton Hall ; and equally astonished the 
next morning to find that he had risen for the 
morning mail, and gone back to London. 



K 2 



CHAPTER XIL 



BENEA.TH THE GOWN. 



Paul Somerton had improved that firiendship 
started at the Ashford Club, and had latterly 
dropped the eyening society of Thomas Dibble. 
He had made the discovery in search of which 
Mr. Dibble had been useful to him, and since 
then he had preferred working at the mine 
alone. 

Somehow or other the lad had acquired a relish 
for the work in which he was engaged. A desire 
to please his sister, whom he loved, had beea 
strengthened by the dislike he had conceived for 
Mr. Gibbs. Had he known half as much of 
strange mysteries as the author of "Zsjiom,'* 
he might have fancied that he was impelled by 
some secret sympathy or antipathy over which 
he had no control But Paul knew very little 



WATCHING AND WAITING. 133 

even about the great novelist's romantic books, 
mucb less of [Victor Cousin, Condillac and 
materialism, Jamblichus and Polinus, Sweden- 
boig and Behemen, the golden ass of Apuleius 
and Hamilton's metaphysics ; and all he had 
ever heard of Puysegur and Mesmer was at a 
provincial lecture on Mesmerism and Biology by 
a quack, who amused his audience immensely 
with a couple of confederate& 

So Paul nevejr attempted to investigate the 
fascination which an exposure of Mr. Gibbs had 
for him, coupled with a vague sort of desire to 
save Mr. Bichard Tallant and Mr. Hammerton 
from the machinations of so consummate a 
scoundreL The sequel, however, may appear as 
if some secret power were at work to bring those 
two opposing forces, Paul Somerton and Shuffleton 
Qibbs, in contact. 

He had watched at the club-door for some 
nights before Mr. Hammerton appeared again. 
He came at last, however, and Paul at once 
accosted him. 



134 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

It had occurred to Paul previously that he 
would endeavour to watch the players until he 
openly detected Shuffleton's double cards, and 
then rush into the room and denounce him. 

But this he thought would compromise the 
poor club-keeper's position, and was a little morc> 
showy and romantic than necessary. So Paul 
accosted the Hon. Mr. Hammerton, and as he did 
so Mr. Shnffleton Gibbs passed into the club, and 
noticed the incident. 

Mr. Hammerton was impatient at first, but 
when Paul told him whom he was, his curiosity 
was aroused, and Paul's earnestness soon rivetted 
his attention. 

"Not a very creditable part to play, my young 
friend, that of spy upon the conduct of your 
master and his friends, by-^d-by," said Mr. 
Hammerton. 

"If I do good thereby to my master?" said 
Paul, a little timidly, as the nature of liis employ- 
ment struck him in the new light suggested by 
Mr. Hammerton. 



" GRATITUBB." 135 

*' I think you have overstepped the bounds of 
both daty and prudence," said Mr. Hammerton. 

"You n;iay change your opinion," said Paul, 
more courageously. "I entered upon the busiiiess 
in your interest as well as Mr. TallantV 

''Oh, indeed 1" said Mr Hammerton; ''that 
was very kind of you, certainly. From whom did 
you receive your instructions ? " 

Paul did not reply ; his pride was hurt, he had 
not expected such a reception as this. 

" Suppose I inform Mr. Tallant how you have 
occupied yourself during these last few weeks?" 
said Mr. Hammerton ; for his pride and dignity 
were hurt alsoi and he was ofiEended at this 
interference with his liberty, in doubt for the 
moment whether Paul was a tool in more skilled 
hamda. 

"I shall watch no more, sir," said PauL "You 
may take your own course ; I have done my 
duty. You know how to test the truth of what I 
have told you. Good-night, sir." 

Paul disappeared without another word, al- 



13ft THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

though Mr. Hammerton called after him. He 
felt miBerably disappointed as he went home, and 
Gould not help feeling that there was something 
of the sneak in his composition, after all. 

Why had he persevered so in this wretched 
business ? Why had he done so much more than 
his sister had asked him to do ? He would move 
no fuiiiher in it now. 

After all his trouble, to be snubbed, and by the 
gentleman most to be benefited ! " Well, people 
should mind their own business," he said to him* 
self. " I'll mind mine in future." 

It would have been better for Paul Somerton 
had he resolved upon this when first he arrived in. 
London. It was hardly wise for his sister to 
excite his curiosity to so high a pitch about the 
conduct of other people. Both of them suffered 
for their indiscretion . suflfered in more ways than 
one. Amy's object was, however, served in a 
measure ; for the dangerous career of young 
Hammerton was cut short on this eventful night 
of Paul's resolve to mind his own business in 



PLUCKING A PIGEON. 137 

future, though it would have been better for 
the honourable gentleman had the conclusion of 
his gaining experiences been less demonstrative 
than it was. 

When Paul left him, he joined the little party 
at the Ashford Club, determined not to entertain 
suspicions which for the moment had been 
strongly aroused. 

This was the night when the pigeon was to be 
completely plucked. Clever manipulators in this 
art do not seize upon their prey at a first, or a 
second, or a third interview. They lure Signer 
Pigeon on by degrees. They let him win in the 
first encounter, and in the second or third vary 
the luck, exciting him at last, perchance, by a 
rather heavy loss, which he is anxious to retrieve. 
Shuffleton Gibbs had worked Mr. Hammerton to 
this point, and had been assisted to some extent 
by Mr. Richard Tallant ; but the latter gentleman 
had been the tool rather than the confederate of 
bis University companion. 

University cpmpanion ! It was this educational 



138 THE TALLAlirrS OF BABTON. 

position which made Oibbs tolerated in the 
society which he affected* He was a University 
man, if he had not taken a degree. Something 
happened to disgrace him a little at Christ Church, 
it is true ; but there I-." it was only a bit of wicked- 
ness.". He made love to a pastrycook's daughter^ 
and ran away with her, or something of the sort, 
and had a row with a fellow-student over cards 
What was all thisi Youthful indiscretion, an 
exuberance of animal spirits. He was a gentle- 
man by education, at all events ; he had worn a 
gown. 

That would have been enough to have made 
him a man of consideration in any provincial city 
in the empire, and it was a great passport even in 
cosmopolitan London ; but in the dear old cathe- 
dral city where Arthur Phillips lived, what weight 
it would have given to Mr. Qibbs 1 ** Of what 
college ?'* says a simpering inquirer. "Christ 
Church,'* is the reply, and the man's position is 
made. You had better be hanged than not have 
worn a gown in some English citiea 



THE DtJPLICATE CABD. 139 

And 80 the gown assisted to cover the cloven 
hoofs of Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, even in London ; 
the gown had been sufiScient for Bichard Tal- 
lant, though it had not been enough for his 
father^ and it had not shielded ail the owner's 
villanies ; it had nevertheless worked favourably 
with Mr. Hammerton, who had put down Shuffle* 
ton's wild college career to his dashing character^ 
his natural wilfulness, and his animal spirits. 

But during that last evening when Signer 
Pigeon was being plucked, the gown somehow 
fell aside, and Mr. Hammerton, made hot and 
suspicious by the loss of more than his present 
fortune, and something on account of his money 
in perspective, suddenly bounced out of his seat, 
picked up a duplicate card, seized Gibbs by the 
collar, and called him " cheat" and " black4eg." 

There was a terrible row, you may be sure. 
Gibbs, in the strong grip of Mr. Hammerton, 
shrunk like a coward, as .he was, deq)ite his 
college reputation as a "fast" man. 

Clubmen and waiters thronged round the pair 



140 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

and Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs* conviction was com- 
plete ; for, besides another duplicate turning up, 
the cards were found to be "doctored" substi- 
tutes for those used at the club. Fortunately for 
Kichard Tallant, he had "cut out" of the four 
who were playing an hour before this contretemps 
occurred. His conduct was not without some 
suspicion in the club ; but his father^s reputation, 
his own presumed wealth, and his generally open 
and apparently honest outspoken sentiments, pro- 
tected him from anything beyond mere suspicion. 

He neither attacked nor defended his friend 
Gibbs, but looked on whilst several members of 
the Ashford conducted Mr. Gibbs to the door and 
thrust him into the street. A confederate assisted 
in the expulsion, and was loudest, after his col- 
league's disappearance, in his condemnation of 
all such scoundrels. 

"A plague on all cowards, I say, and a 

vengeance, too A bad world, I say I I 

would I were a weaver ; I could sing psalms or 
anything. A plague of all cowards, I say still." 



"a plague on all cowabds." 141 

Falstaff was not more demonstrative in praise 
of virtue, and against cowardice, than this 
wretched colleague of Gibbs' in expressions of 
utter disgust for cheats and black-legs. Mr. 
Bichard Tallant was even bold enough to sneer at 
the ranter, and advise him to communicate his 
sentiments to Shuffleton personally. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Gibbs, shaking himself for 
a moment like a dog after a swim, quietly re- 
adjusted his crumpled collar, and deliberately 
pulled on his unimpeachable lavender gloves. 

If you could have seen his face, you would 
have noticed the thin lips closely compressed, 
and the little eyes fixed and glaring. There 
were no great signs of rage there; but an ex- 
pression of disappointment . not of despair by 
any means. He had been in difficulties before, 
and was not wont to lose his coolness; but he 
had never had "cheat" and "black-leg" thrown 
in his teeth imtil now, nor ever before trembled 
in the grip of an adversary. He wondered now 
at his own cowardice, and clenched his little 



142 THE TALLAHTS OF BABTON. 

gloved-hand as lie walk through St James's 
Park, and nursed his wicked thoughts. 

By-and-by he lit a cigar, and walked musingly 
along, . looking up at the moon. A reader for 
the daily press going homewards after his day's 
work, looked at him, and put him down for a 
sentimental swell, planning a plot for a poem> 
or rehearsing some great scene for a new novel 

How clever we all are in reading character! 
Let us hope the i)Oor newspaper fag read his 
proofs better than he read Shuffleton Gibbs. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

PESCBIBES A OREA.T riNANCIAL STOBM AND 
JBXHIBITS THOMAS DIBBLE IK A NEW CHA- 
BACTEB. 

It came steadily but surely, gently at first, 
like great storms come, with a gradual lowering 
of the clouds and a gradual increase in the wind 
It began in a calm . a quiet^ happy, pleasant calm 
-*a calm that may be typified by a man seated 
on the lawn at Barton, and smoking in the shade, 
with sheep bleating at a distance. 
. It came out of a calm, we say . ^a delightful 
time of rising markets, when the bulls of the Stock 
Exchange were in clover, and the bears at fault. 
It began when most kinds of shares were at a 
premium; when all sorts of companies were 
paying big dividends, and 51. shares were selling 
at.Si. and lOt; when everything was "looking 



144 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

up;" when men bought to invest, and even bought 
one day to sell the next at a profit. First, there 
was a whisper from the Continent which agitated 
the financial atmosphere for a moment . ^the first 
breeze of the coming storm. The bears sniflfed 
it, but the bulls feared it not ; and shares for a 
moment wavered, only to recover and make the 
calm seem aU the more assuring. Then a whisper 
came from the New World, and there was an 
Atlantic roughness about it at which the bears 
opened their nostrils and sniffed with a hungry 
relish. The bulls' wavered still in doubt, and then 
in a sudden darkness the big clouds gathered, and 
the wind blew a hurricane . ^blew tempestuously 
from the shores of France, with tributary winds 
from Austria and Prussia, and local winds from St. 
Stephen's. Then the bears growled and frisked 
and bit and bellowed, and the bulls fought hard 
and butted with their horns ; but the bears tore 
and lacerated them : for the financial storm had 
come^ and there was panic everywhere. The 
Genii of Finance no longer in the sun looked 



HOW THE NEWSPAPBRS TOLD THE STORY. 145 

hideous and fearful, and the magicians who had 
hitherto controlled them had lost their power, 
because the world had faith in them no longer. 
The story is not new ; it crops up afresh once in 
9.bout every eight or ten years. 

The newspapers did not describe the storm as 
we have described it They conveyed the intelli 
gence in technical terms which made it hard and 
biting: . "Orientals are now at IJ to IJ dis.; 
Credits, 1 to | ; Unity shares have declined to 
8 to 7^ dis. ; Imperials have gone to 5^ to 4| dis. ; 
Discount Company, | to Jdis.; Overton, Bakei 
and Co.'s Bank, J to | dis. The railway market 
continues dull, with a downward tendency ; there 
is a further reduction of J to ^ per cent, in Great 
Western, South Eastern, Great Eastern, and 
Great Northerns. 

. "Another serious failure is reported from Liver- 
pool, and the directors of the Bank of England 
have to-day raised the minimum rate of discount 
from 6 to 7 per cent." 

This was the fragmentary way in which the 

VOL. I. L 



146 THE TALLAKT8 OP BABTON. 

newspapers indicated the financial storm, and the 
figures started up in the night, like fiends, haunt- 
ing the pillows of many a man, in town and in 
country, who had been induced to ^* speculate" in 
a few finance and other shares "just to make a 
little money " . men who had never touched shares 
before, and did not even know the " beastly'' title 
affixed to professional buyem and sellers on the 
Stock Exchange. To them abull meant an animal 
that waa dangerous in the fields^ and grand at 
agiicultural shows ; and a bear was an ugly brute 
that climbed up a pole at the Zocdogical Qardena, 
William Jones the grocer and Timothy Robinson 
the draper, who had been induced to buy a few 
OvertcMis, or Orientals, at 3 premium, in the hope 
of selling at 5 or 6 premium before the half- 
yearly meeting, were nothing more than buHs, 
nevertheless, in Stock Exchange phraseology, and 
only to become despondent and miserable bears at 
5 or 10 discount. 

" Been bulling the market^ Mithter Dibble 1 
Pray explain yoiurself, and don't offend a 



A BULL. 147 

woman's thenthibilities by such, terms as that/' 
said Mrs. Thomas Dibble^ leaning back in her 
chair, and vainly endeavouring to thread a 
needle. 

" Bulling means selling, my love," said Thomas, 
trembling ; '' selling shares without having them, 
you see, and " 

" Mithter Dibble, it isn't as I wish to be severe 
on you, but I begin to suspect you are drunk, thir 1 
drunk, drunk, drunk," said Mrs. Dibble, lay- 
ing down her needle in despair, and rappii^ the 
table with her thimble. 

" You may call I what you likes," said Dibble, 
witih a tremendous effort to be bold ; ^ but I'm 
sober enough.. I wishes I were drunk." 

" Good heaventh ! why, whath come to the 
man ? How dare you wish you were drunk, thir 
.how dare you, thir I" 

**Dare? I teU you, Maria, Fm a npiserable 

bull, a dead-beat bull, as ever was," said Dibble, 

weeping. 

'' Tou're a beast, if that's what you mean," said 

l2 



148 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

Mrs. Dibble, convinced that her Thomas was in- 
toxicated. 
But DibUe was only suflfering from the panic, 
^ He had been tempted by the financial sunshine . 
^d Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs . and had bought 
the shares of a company that had made a 
call and failed, and of another whose shares had 
fallen from lOl, a share to 51. worse than nothing. 
It had been brought about in this wise: Mr. 
Gibbs was indebted to Mr. Dibble for many little 
acts of courtesy and attention, as a visitor to Mr. 
Bichard Tallant at the Iron Company's offices, 
^homas had always a chair and a polite submis- 
sive word for Mr. Gibbs, and so one day that 
gentleman, arguing correctly that. Mr. Dibble 
must have saved a few himdred pounds, kindly 
showed that confiding porter how to make a few 
hundreds more ; and Mr. Thomas Dibble, in the 
simplicity of his nature, became a bull, without 
the knowledge of his better-half Whispers of the 
panic had come into the big company's offices 
where Thomas portered it, and at last he began to 



dibble's five htjndbed. 149 

tinderstand that his five hundred pounds were 
tossed about in the storm^ and liable to be sunk 
and lost for ever; and on the day in question, 
when Thomas went home and confessed that he 
was a bull in a panic, and other similarly in- 
sane things, Mr. Gibbs bad explained to him his 
position, and advised him to consider his nioney 
lost for the present, but consoling him with stories 
of the immense losses which other people had 
suffered. 

" Mr. Gibbs advised me to do it," said Dibble. 

**Do what, you fool?" shouted Mrs. Dibble, 
who lost all patience with him. 

" Speckerlate with the five hundred pounds 
which we had at the bank," said Thomaa 

" We had . we had, Mithther Dibble : it wath 
my own money, Thomath, and you have never 
dared to touch it ?" said Mrs. D., her face white 
and he* eyes flashing. 

" I touched it to make a thousand of it, Maria ; 
that were my full intention." 

''Oh, youmonthter! Oh, Dibble, Dibble 1 Oh, 



150 THE TAUiANTS OF BAETON. 

Thomaili, Thomath ! I thee it all . joa have lost 
the money ! " 

" Ise afraid on it, that I be,"* said Dibble. "The 
bull sells, and the bear buys. ^ If you bear the 
market now/ Mr. GKbbs says, *you may get 
right ;' but, oh Lord ! oh dear, Maria ! Ise quite 
lost! Whatbeltodo? whatbeltodol" 

Poor Dibble lifted up his arms, and looked 
appealingly towards his furious wife, who sunk 
back in her chair with a scream for water. The 
wretched bull, glad of any diversion from the 
main point, rushed to his wife's assistance. She 
had really fainted, this strong-minded Mrs. 
Dibble, who could think for everybody, and con- 
duct the government of the country if necessary. 

She had often said that had she been a man 
she would have been in Parliament ; and not only 
in Parliament, but a cabinet minister. There was 
nothing too high for the giant intellect of this 
domineering wife of poor Thomas Dibble; and 
yet here she lay^^like a dead thing, with her cap on 
the floor, her arms lying helplessly by her side. 



. HOT TO BS FOBGIVEISL 151 

and Dibble bathing her face^ at the loss of five 
hundred poundsL But it was the insubordination 
of Dibble which affected her more than the loss of 
the money, and when she came to herself again, 
wet and soddened, she declared she would never 
foigive him. 

*' Never, Thomath, tho don't athk it ; ith not ath 
I bear malithe, nor , am mean, but for a woman 
who hath loved like me, and refuthed the greatetht 
offerth from noblemen . ^I say, for one who gave 
her heart up ath I did, it ith not in nature to for- 
give thuch detheption as yourth, Thomath Dibble. 
How true it ith, ath it ith written, that the heart 
of man ith dethperately wicked." 

And Mrs. Dibble went to bed with her woes, 
locked her door, and left the wretched Thomas to 
bemoan his unhappy lot in darkness and in the 
kitchen, where he fell asleep by-and-by, and 
dreamed that he was a bull being devoured by a 
horde of bears; but he awoke, and found that 
he was only in danger of being eaten by crickets 
and beetles, which held great meetings on the 



152 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Dibbleonian hearth-stone every night. They were 
no doubt greatly astonished to find poor Thomas 
lying there all his length ; for their investigation 
of him was veiy minute^ much more so than 
Thomas liked, who jumped upon his feet, and 
roared and kicked until Mrs. Dibble, certain of 
thieves and murder, opened the window, and cried 
" Fire ! " and then, being a strong-minded woman> 
lumped into bed, and covered her head with the 
bed-clothes. 

Happily, Paul Somerton came home just lA 
time to put matters right, and induce Mrs. Dibble 
to admit Thomas to her room, at least for her own 
protection. Poor Dibble said next day he would 
rather have slept with the beetles ; he was sure he 
should have been happier in the kitchen, after all 

Meanwhile the storm in the City was raging, 
and spreading far away to all points of the com*- 
pass. Though the moon shone forth calmly, on 
Comhill and Lombard-street, on Threadneedle* 
street and on the Stock Exchange, through all the 



STOCK EXCHAK6E TEBBOBS. 153 

mght the storm raged in men's hearts ; it tossed 
men and women on their beds, and shook giants 
of finance where they lay sleepless and afeared : 
it tore along the railways, sealed up in letters, 
which carried the tempest to Liverpool, Man- 
chester, SheflSeld, Bristol, Birmingham, and eveA 
to the cathedral city where Mr. Phillips resided. 
They were like so many Pandora's boxes, these 
letters from the City the next morning, letting out 
on being opened evils without end. Despair and 
ruin were in many of them, and all the country 
was agitated with fear. K an invading host had 
been sailing up the Thames, the consternation 
Would not have been so great; for the people 
could have gone forth and done battle with 
the foe. But there is no fighting a financial 
storm, . ^no contending with Stock Exchange 
terrors* 

After the arrival of Pandora's letters, there 
went forth into the country flights of telegrams, . 
electric pigeons which settled in crowds with their 
missives in all the towns of England, and the 



156 THE TATiLANTS OF BARTON. 

leaves of the old oak-tree, keeping the artist's eye 
and hand rapidly at work. And never had Arthur 
Phillips watched the sunny gleams with more 
intense interest. A tramp with his slovenly wife, 
wandering out of the footpath to find a cool 
shelter for rest, stood to look at the artist for a 
moment; and a couple of school-boys, who had 
been fishing for minnows in the adjacent brook, 
sat down quietly in the grass, and lazily watched 
the glowing canvas. 

It would have made a pretty picture this, of 
the artist and his spectators. But Phillips was 
soon alone again ; he was too severe and earnest 
for the school-boys. A squirrel ventured to peep 
at him from a branch in the oak-tree, and a 
couple of mice whisked by him, and squeaked 
beneath the leaves of the broad burdock. A 
stupid moth lit upon the wet stump of his painted 
tree and spoiled its pretty wings. 

How quiet, how peaceful it was, how thoroughly 
the country ! By-and-by Arthur leaned back 
on his camp-stool and thought so ; and his heart 



PAINTING FOR MONET. 157 

was grateful for the running brook, the whispering 
trees, the broad expanse of distant hills and 
meadows, and above all for the sympathy which 
he possessed in his own nature for the beautiful 
and sublime. The sun disappeared behind a 
cloud for a few minutes, leaving the oak-tree 
almost in its own natural colour, and show- 
ing the artist's successful touohea However 
far short of the reality, the canvas held some 
wonderftd sunny effects : the leaves of the grand 
old tree were fairly illuminated, as if gleams 
of sunshine had gone tl^ough them, indicating 
almost the fibres of the lower branches. 

No man knew how far art is below nature ; no 
painter felt more the inferiority of a picture when 
compared with the ever-changing and always beau- 
tiful reality : but Arthur Phillips knew when he 
had achieved something beyond the ordinary work, 
and he was pleased that his labour qn this occasion 
had been successful; for Arthur was now actually 
painting for money. He had long since ceased 
to accept commissions, except for subjects of his 



158 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

own selection, and had painted more for the lore 
of his art than for what his art would bring. The 
drudgery of painting had been got over long 
ago : the years of patient industry and unrewarded 
toil; the pictures returned from the Academy 
unhung ; the adverse criticism when at last they 
were hung : all this had long since been at an 
end, and Arthur Phillips left to select his subjects 
and name his own price for his pictures. 

But on this bright day in August the artist 
sat once more hard at w<^k, painting for money^ 
painting for subsistence. For not only had l^e 
been induced to invest largely, in Overton, Baker, 
& Co., but he had a deposit account at their local 
branch in his native city of Sevemtown, and the 
branch had succumbed to the same monetary 
pressure which had swamped the head concern. 
And Arthur Phillips was nearly penniless. 

There were many others in Sevemtown almost 
in the same condition, and from the same cause. 
So Arthur, instead of making himself wretched 
and miserable, packed up his box of colours, and 



^ 1 



WHILST THE SUN GOES DOWN. 159 

went out to finish that bit of local study upon 
which we find him engaged, prior to locking him* 
self up in his study for months of hard work. 

" I thought I should find you at last, old boy/' 
said Mr. Hammerton, putting his hand familiarly 
on Arthur's shouldera. " By the aid of your man, 
that faithful old grinder of colours and cleaner of 
pallettes, I traced you to the cross-roads ; there 
I was at fault, and almost gave you up. I believe 
my old mare scented you out at last." 

"Then give my best thanks to the old mare, 
for I am glad to see you,'' said Arthur. 

"By Jove, that's pretty ! what a glorious bit of 
colour ! Have you finished 1 " 

"Yes; I think so." 

" Then pack up. here, IH help you . and let us 
have a quiet chat. Your man said he was to meet 
you here in about an hour, to carry the things 
home." 

** Yes," said Arthur ; " but I have finished. I 
was just thinking of smoking a quiet pipe whilst 
the sun goes down." 



160 THE TALLANTS OF BAIJTON. ' 

" Bravo ! well mingle our smoke together, 
firiend Arthur/' said Hammerton ; adding, a little 
more seriously, " and our tears, too, by Jove i It's 
the last time we shall see each other for a long 
time, I guess." 

"Indeed! Why?" said Arthur, turning the 
key in his colour-box. 

" I'm oflf to foreign lands, Arthur . 

' Anywhere, anywhere, out of the world. * " 

" Are you serious, Lionel?" 

" I was never more so. I have had a few angry 
words with my brother ; and though he's a good 
fellow, and is sorry for what he has said, I must 
go away for a time." 

Arthur looked up inquiringly. 

*' The fact is, I have been a great fool ; I have 
lost a lot of money lately. I don't know how 
it was, but through young Tall&nt I was induced 
to visit the Ashford Club. You have not heard, 
then, of the row at that quiet, but now 
notorious, institution ? " 



MORE VICTIMS OF OVERTON AND BAKER'S. 161 

" No ; I never heard of the Ashford be- 
fore." 

" Why, it was in all the papers, man, . ^about a 
fellow cheating, and being put out into the street. 
My name was mentioned. You shall see the 
paper. Well, all that naturally annoyed my 
brother ; but, to clinch matters, I was advised to 
buy a lot of Overton and Baker's shares, to put 
myself right, and I have gone all to the bad. 
Overton and Bakers have failed, and I not only 
lose the value of the shares, but there is a lia- 
bility, and a large one, besides. I suppose you 
heard of the failure ? " 

" Yes. I had a large deposit with them at 
Sevemtown," said Arthur. 

" You had ? By Jove! Fm sorry for that. And 
you are hit then, too ; much, Arthur ? " 

" Yes, considerably. I must work hard, and 
make it up again." 

" I'm awfully sorry. But there, cheer up, old 
boy; there is no good in worrying about it, I 
suppose." 

VOL. I. M 



162 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" No/* said Arthur, quietly. " And where are 
you going, Lionel ? " 

" To join my regiment at Bombay ; I am to be 
gazetted next week. I'm not going in bad dis- 
grace, Arthur . don't think that ; but my brother, 
the Earl, twitted me with my folly and my expen- 
diture, you know, and, no doubt, he was right. I 
have been a fool. A few years in the army will 
do a fellow good. There is no chance of war; 
that's unfortunate." 

They chatted and smoked until Arthur's man 
came and carried the^^artist's picture and mate- 
rials awayi and then they strolled together 
towards a farm where Lionel bad put up his 

horse, and where Arthur had arranged to sleep. 
In the farmer's clean-sanded parlour, Lionel 

told Arthur the story of his losses, not forgetting 

the incident of his interview with Paul Somerton. 

This, it seemed, had annoyed Lionel as much as 

anything in the whole of +he unfoiiiunate affair. 

He was satisfied that Miss Somerton had set her 

brother to watch him. 



LIONEL'S MISTAKE. 163 

" I could never have supposed that a girl could 
have behaved so absurdly. You may rely upon 
it, Arthur, that pretty bailiff's daughter had set 
her mind on manying me, and she was anxious 
that I should not get through my patrimony 
without her assistance, I suppose. Imagine the 
absurdity of the thing ! The girl fancies I am in 
love with her." 

" You have paid her great attention," said 
Arthur. 

" Who doesn't pay a pretty girl great attention, 
whoever she may be ? " said Lionel 

" You were in raptures with her picture . ^not out 
of compliment to the artist, but to the pretty face . 
the aristocratic head," said Arthur, significantly. 

" Ah, you have anticipated me : I shall want 
that picture," said Lionel, with assumed indiffe- 
rence ; " but imagine a bailiff's daughter setting 
her heart upon the next heir to the earldom of 
Verner, and making her brother a spy upon him 
lest he should lose too much money at cards. By 
Jove, Arthur, it was an impudent thing to do." 

11 2 



164 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOX. 

"Did she do it?" 

"Kd she? Of course she did. Why, the 
impudent young blackguard told me who he was, 
as if he had some claim upon ma" 

" And so he had, if he was warning you against 
conspirators." 

/' Look at it in that light, perhaps he had ; but 
what about the other view ? " 

" She is a fine, handsome girl. Miss Somerton, 
and accomplished; she's fit for the wife of a 
prince," said Arthur, in his quiet, emphatic 
manner. 

" Why, what radicalism you are talking ! Many 
a bailiff's daughter to a prince ?" 

" A prince might be proud of such a wife as 
Amy Somerton. You have not seen so much of 
her as I have, and you may rely upon it you have 
wronged her." 

* " She's an impudent, meddling baggage, Arthur 
. a presumptuous, designing woman," said Lionel, 
with an angry flash of the eye. 

" I don't think so, indeed," said Arthur. 



"now came still evening on." 165 

" I am sure ; therefore we will not discuss the 
point further. Miss Tallant would be a better 
theme." 

But Arthur Phillips would not talk about 
Phoebe : and so at last they parted^ Lionel shak- 
ing Arthur by the hand, and telling him that 
whatever might come to pass, he should never 
forget the many happy, hours they had passed 
together, and that he should always treasure his 
friendship. Arthur was not behindhand in reci- 
procating Idoners kind feelings and expressions, 
and he stood at the farmer's gate and watched his 
aristocratic friend until he had ridden out of sight 

" Now came stiU evening on, and twilight grey 
Had in her sober livery aU things clad.*' 

With all his love of nature, with all his courage, 
Arthur Phillips felt sadly lonely now, as he stood 
listening to the last sound of the clatter of 
Lioners horse's hoofs on the white, hard road. 

It seemed as if all things that he loved faded 
out, or were unattainable. He had formed a warm 



166 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

attachment for Lionel Hammerton^ and he wottld 
miss his cheery voice in the cathedral close at 
Sevemtown. Arthur, indeed, had no other fami- 
liar friend. He had followed his art with such 
singleness of purpose, that his life had been com- 
paratively solitary, and he knew little or nothing 
of the world and its doings ; hence his likes and 
dislikes were intensified. ^ 

For the last two or three years his love for 
Phodbe TaUant had grown up into a passion 
which he could not control, and it was only this 
which disturbed the peaceful course of his Ufe. 
He had never thought of disclosing his feel- 
ings to her. It had been a great relief to him 
to tell Lionel Hammerton, and more particu- 
larly when he had for a moment feared that he 
had a rival in his friend. Not that Arthur, per- 
haps, ought to have looked upon any one as a 
rival, when marriage could hardly be said to have 
entered his thoughts. To be near his love, to see 
her often, to speak to her, to dwell on her kind 
words, that was enough for Arthur. HKs ambi- 



POOB ARTHUR ! 167 

tiou SO for had soared no higher. How could ha, 
a poor, ill-shaped little fellow, with his solitary 
life, ask a fair, bright thing like Phoebe Tallant to 
throw in her lot with his . with his, the paid 
tutor ? . 

No, poor Arthur ! he had never arrived at such 
a daring pitch of passion and presumption, even 
when he had a large balance at his bankers, with 
which to meet, in some fashion, the monetary con- 
sideration of the wealthy father. If he had known 
more of the world he might have ventured to 
make this last cast of the die ; but a quiet, retir- 
ing, modest, susceptible nature like Ai-thur's, 
wont to brood over all sorts of imaginary nothings, 
wont to dream and set his thoughts upon the 
quiet river, to be wafted out far away beyond the 
world, it was impossible for him to tell Mr. Tallant 
that he had fallen in love with his daughter. 

Once or twice he had thought there was some- 
thing mean in his position at Barton Hall ; that 
he had taken a mean advantage of his position as 
tutor to fall in love with his pupil. This idea 



168 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

had taken such fast possession of him at one time 
that he had almost determined to leave the 
country ; but his will was not strong enough to 
shut out Phoebe from his sight. He was a pri- 
soner to her charms, and content to remain so. 
How his excitement had blurted out his captivity 
to Lionel Hammerton was something that he 
could hardly understand himself; but he was glad 
that he had no longer to carry the secret about 
alone : it was like a divided responsibility now 
that Lionel knew it. 

"And so I am to begin again," he thought. 
" Well so be it ; maybe this is but a kind act of 
mercy to give me more to think about. I have 
been lazy ; I will paint a grand picture." 



CHAPTER XV. 

BETURNS TO AVONWORTH VALLEY, AND GLANCES 
AT MRS. SOMERTON'S SECRET. 

The trees were covered with a hundred shades 
of brown and red and yellow. A pleasant Sep- 
tember breeze wandered about, carrying with it 
here and there the report of the sportsman's gun. 
Flocks of sheep cropped the sweet herbage, and 
crowds of happy-looking gleaners gathered the 
stray ears of wheat which Mr. Somerton had left 
in the corn-fields. 

There had been an abundant harvest, and the 
com was well and successfully garnered. The 
big yellow stacks peered out amongst the trees 
round about the Hall farmland Luke Somerton 
sat cozily smoking his after-dinner pipe. 

Peace and plenty was the prevailing character- 



170 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

istic of the place, and Luke Somerton was on 
particularly good terms, at the moment, with 
himself and all the world. 

"I wonder how Paul is getting on,*' he said, 
musingly; just as his wife had folded up the table- 
cloth and instructed her servant to "get those 
dinner-things washed up at once." 

"Oh, he'll get on well enough," said Mrs. 
Somerton, "if his sister doesn't spoil him with 
her pack of silly letters. One would think they 
had nothing in the world to do but to write 
letters to each other." 

" Well, there's no harm in their writing to each 
other ; it may keep Paul out of mischief." 

" He is getting very little money for his age ; 
he ought to have enough to keep him without 
assistance from us by this time. It's little we 
save." 

"You think too much about saving money, 
Sarah. There are lots of things in life better 
than money." 

"You may say what you please, Luke, the 



POSITION. 171 

great object of life should be to make moaey and 
get position. If, one cannot gain it oneself^ we 
should try to get it through our children," said 
Mrs. Somerton, taking up her knitting and sitting 
by the window. 

A stranger wandering about the quiet, peaceful, 
happy-looking country of which we speak in the 
opening of this chapter, would assuredly not have 
looked for the expression of such worldly views by 
the mistress of that comfortable-looking house 
amongst the trees. The thought passed over the 
farmer's mind, but so lightly that he did not 
attempt to give expression to it, though his reply 
bordered slightly upon it. 

''And what do you call position, Sarah ? [as 
it anything to do with happiness ' asked 
Luke. 

" Position ! Why, to be above other people. 
To be looked up to instead of being looked down 
upon. To have servants of one's own, and not be 
servants ourselves." 

''That is, your husband should be something 



173 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

more than a farm bailiff^ or a farmer even on his 
own account. The old story ; it's no use, Sarah, 
we can't alter our lot It seems to me that a 
clear conscience, and owing nobody a penny, 
is about the best position in the world, after 
all," whatever your station in life." 

" I know that is your opinion, Lu]j:e, and there's 
something in it, for those who like to jog through 
the world and be nothing to nobody. We have 
money now, and why can't we have a farm of our 
own, at least?" 

^' Oh, we've had enough of farming on our own 
account, Sarah. These are not the days for, 
farmers with small incomes. It doesn't suit me 
to be peddling about in the old style of farming. 
I have gone in for the science of the thing, and I 
must have the best machinery to work with ; and 
you want a big holding for that and lots of 
capital besides. We are much better off as it is. 
Mr. Tallant is rich, and, although he gets now a 
fair return for his money, he's sunk a lot in this 
estate." 



TOWN AND COUNTRY. 173 

"And what for ? That young Tallant will soon 
get through it all" 

"Stop until he inherits." 

"Ah, there will be changes here whenever the 
old man goes. Whatever wiU become of Phoebe ? 
I shall take it upon myself to speak to him about 
that young lady." 

"I should think youll do nothing of the 
sort." 

" Why not ? I say it is a burning shame to 
keep her mewed up here. She would pick up a 
duke, at least, in London ; and, as sure as fate, 
that little painter fellow will get her if she stays 
at Barton much longer." 

" You^seem to be quite insane upon this sub- 
ject, Sarah." 

" Oh yes, of course. Everything that you can't 
see through is absurd; it always was so, Luke. 
When you have got as far as the end of your nose 
there is an end to your prospect, unless you are 
thinking about what crop should follow wheat or 
barley." 



174 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Now, then ; get into a passion. You said 
you would talk quietly if I would stay." 

" I am not in a passion . ^nothing of the kind/' 
said Mrs. S., knitting at double-quick speed. 

" Very well, then, mind you don't get into a 
passion," said Luke, smiling. 

" Phoebe Tallant was made to shine in society, 
and to marry well; and it is horrible to see 
wealth and power going out of a young girl's 
grasp just because nobody puts her anywhere 
near the prize." 

" Happiness never seems to form part of your 
philosophy, Sarah." 

"Wealth and power, Luke . ^isn't that happi- 
ness ? To wear real diamonds, and heaps of 
them ; to drive in the parks ; to be presented at 
court ; to make other women envy you. Happi- 
ness ! Talk of clear consciences and all that stuff, 
to set a room full of women hating you for your 
wealth and beauty is bliss . joy above everything !" 

Luke took his pipe from his mouth and gazed 
\stonishment at his wife, who had ceased 



MBS. SOMEBTON ON WOMAN. 175 

knitting, and was looking out beyond where he 
sat,. but not at the quiet rural picture spread out 
before her. She was simply looking at her own 
thoughts. 

" Women, Luke, are devils. To men they are 
bad enough, but they treat each other like 
fiends : they are mean to an extent beyond all 
imagination ; they hate each other mortally ; and 
a pretty woman is a mark for all their spite and 
slander. But she takes it out; she has her 
revenge ; she stings them like an adder." 

" You are a strange woman, Sarah ; but you 
say a great deal more than you beUeve," said 
Luke. 

"Do I ? . I believe women capable of anything. 
But men deserve to be deceived by them, because 
the first of the race was a sneak and a coward. 
' The woman tempted me, and I did eat' " 

Mrs. Somerton gave a contemptuous toss of her 
head, and went on with her knitting. 

'.What a pity you didn't marry some great gun 
who could have given you your full swing of 



176 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

power and wealth. You were a fine showy woman 
when I married you, Sarah ; and hang me if you 
wouldn't eclipse some of the young ones now. 
What a blessing it would be if you hadn't such a 
bitter tongue." 

Luke seemed to be turning this over in his 
mind, and contemplating it. He spoke half 
admiringly, half in regret. 

"Ah, Luke, I dare say you think I am a fiend 
like the rest of my sex, and I feel like one at 
times ; but if my time had to come over again, I 
should not alter my choice. There are some , 
things that Fve done which I would undo if I 
could, but not that, not that, Luke." 

" Come, Sarah, that does me good," said Luke, 
going up to her, and putting his hand on her 
shoulders. "I have often thought we were an 
ill-assorted couple, and you've said many an 
unkind thing ; but you have been a good wife to 
me after all, always done your duty . ay, and 
more ; and I am sure your heart's in the right 
place." 



HER SECRET. 177 

Mrs. Somerton looked up at her husband with 
a distui'bed expression of face. Her heart was in 
the right place ; but her life was blighted by one 
act of wicked deceit, and she had struggled ever . 
since to justify it to her conscience. 

"There, you may go now, Luke. You don't 
beheve I am so bad as I seem 1 " 

"You're a good soul; try and drop all that 
nonsense about position, and we shall be a regular 
Darby and Joan in om* old age," 

Luke kissed her on the forehead and went out ; 
and the wife continued her knitting. 

There were some things that she would undo 
if she could ! The years of secret hopes and 
fears, and doubts and misery, revealed in this 
expression, were not evenjdreamed of by Luke 
Somerton. She had^ schemed, and plotted, and 
built castles in the future, and carried about with 
her a big, burning secret, and it had lately begun 
to dawn upon her that her designs would be 
fiiistrated. 

There may be far-seeing readers of this book 

VOL. I. N 



178 THS TAUiAHTS OF BABTOH. 

wlio have already plucked out the heart of Mrs. 
Somerton's mystery. We have made no great effort 
to conceal it from this piercing foresight It is no 
new thing that we have invented. Our story will 
not be injured by your knowing Mrs. Somerton's 
secret from the b^inning, neither will it be 
particularly enhanced by delaying the disclosure 
of the great plot of her married life. 

But there are other things crowding upon my 
attention^ and we must leave Mrs. Somerton at 
present without further explanation, to chafe 
against the bars of her own self-made prison- 
house. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

MAY BE SAID TO INAUGURATE A SERIES OF 
IMPORTANT CHANGES IN THE LIVES OF 
SEVERAL NOTABLE PERSONS IN THIS HISTORY. 

The financial storm had been but little felt, 
you see, at Barton Hall, or Mr. and Mrs. Somerton 
would no doubt have said something about it in 
the conversation which is set down in the previous 
chapter. 

Phoebe Tallant and her friend, Miss Somerton, 
had read of it in the daily papers, which arrived 
in a special parcel from Smith & Sons every day 
at the nearest railway station, where a groom was 
in waiting for them. But Phoebe and Amy knew 
little or nothing about panics. It was to them 
very much like what it was to the boy, . " some- 
thing in the City." Miss Tallant*s clever governess, 

N 2 



180 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

however, knew a great deal about a Panic, which 
she seemed to stroke and pat on the back in her 
intellectual superiority. 

They little knew how seriously sucl{ a storm 
might affect the master of Barton Hall. It had 
already demolished more than one or two esta- 
blishments of nearly equal importance ; but Mr. 
Tallant was particularly strong in the back, as they 
say in the Gty, and it was well for him that such 
was the case, as was speedily exemplified soon 
after the first shock of the panic had vibrated 
throughout the coimtry. 

On the very day after the clever governess's 
description of a panic, the half-yearly meeting of 
the Eastern Banking Company (of which Mr. 
Tallant was chairman, and his son a director) 
was held at the London Tavern. 

At about two o'clock quite a little crowd of 
anxious-looking people ascended the stone stair- 
case, and entered that long room with the 
misty looking pictures in it and the great chan- 
delier. 



AT THE LONDON TAVEBN. 181 

Some of the men were talkiiig in loud whispeni 
^about the losses of the company and its evident 
mismanagement There appeared to be a general 
feeling prevailing that it would be an awkward 
day for the directors. But this was no novelty at 
that time for directors of many other concerns. 
Gentlemen who had been working for years up to 
directorships, and some of whom had thought it 
necessary to obtain seats in the House of Com- 
mons, with a leading idea in this direction, now 
began to find that there were two sides to the 
directoral picture. 

The time had been when a. gentleman could 
materially augment his income by having a seat 
at various boards of management ; the time had 
been when he not only got thereby a first-rate 
investment for the nominal sum which gave him 
the qualification for certain directorates, but when 
his social and commercial position were largely 
exalted by these appointments. But directors at 
this period, with a commercial panic in the City 
and throughout the kingdom, began to find their 



182 TEE TALLAlirrB OF BABTON. 

seats full of thorns, and pins, and needles, and 
eveiything but curled hair and feathers. 

Shareholders in ahnost every shaky concern 
were down upon the directors, and in many 
instances very properly so; for gentlemen of 
repute, honourable men hitherto, had been weak 
enough to append their names to prospectuses 
and statements which they knew little or nothing 
about ; and in some cases this was knavishly and 
cruelly done, . ^knavishly and cruelly, because 
honest and industrious people were induced to 
invest hard-earned savings in rotten schemes made 
to look safe by the names of the gentlemen who 
figured as directors! Sir This, and the Hon. the 
Other, Lord That, and Mr. This, M.P. for so and so, 
did not scruple to lend their names to designing 
villains who plundered the pubKc behind these 
swellmarks, and in more than one case Sir This 
and Mr. That did not scruple to go shares in the 
booty. 

So you see the times were rather out of joint 
for directorships, and many eminent City and 



LOCKED UP m IRON SAFES. 183 

country gentlemen would have been rejoiced 
could they all at once have quietly retired from 
their several boards of management without in- 
quiry or explanation. Mr. Eichard Tallant could 
have told you of several safes where shares and 
scrip had been lately locked away by strong- 
backed men with a firm resolution not to look into 
those safes for many months to come. Some of 
these shares had been bought at heavy premiums^ 
and now all that remained were the frightful 
responsibilities which attached to them. But there 
always had been panics, people said, and there 
always would be ; and there always have been 
financial wreckers and sharpers to take advantage 
of monetary storms, and will be until the end. 

The half-yearly report stated that a loss of 
100,dOOZ. had fallen upon the Bombay branch; 
but this was by no means the worst feature in 
the aflfair, according to the views of the share- 
holders. Their shares, lOOZ. paid up, were quoted 
on the Stock Exchange at 51. 10^. 

The chairman explained that there was no bond 



184 THK TAIXANTS OF BARTON. 

jidjd reason for this, the bank being not only 
solvent, but having 150,0002. to the good, and 
better advices were expected from India. 

Mr. Tallant's was a long, clear, and honest 
statement, but it did not allay the storm of abuse 
which had been prepared for the directory. 

One speaker called for the resignation of 
the chairman, and was applauded ; another con- 
demned the directory as a body, called upon them 
all to resign; another fell foul of the auditors; 
another said the managers of the branches were 
evidently a set of incompetent men, put in by 
favouritism. 

By-and-by the first speaker, a City man of 
repute, and famous amongst companies as a finan- 
cial orator, alluded to the fall in their shares, and 
attributed the depreciation to the conduct of one 
of the shareholders. 

"Yes, gentlemen," he said, "one of our own 
firm,. one of our partners in this great concern, . 
has not only been the chief means of running the 
shares down, but he has profited by it ; he has 



*^ NAME ! NAME ! " 185 

sold shares which do not exist, and bought those 
which timid people have thrown upon the market; 
he has borrowed shares for the purpose of depre- 
ciation, and " 

The speaker was interrupted for a moment by 
cries of "Name ! name!" but he was an orator, 
and he had more to say before he had worked up 
his theme to the grand climax of naming the 
victim, whom he was pinning down with his long 
rhetorical lance. 

"Gentlemen, this speculator . ^to call him by a 
mild name . ^is one of a very small but dangerous 
set of men, who have been engaged in rigging the 
market and damaging gi*eat and flourishing con- 
cerns . like wreckers, putting out false lights, and 
then plundering the unhappy mariners." 

Cries of "Shame!" and "Name!" and 
" Swindler !" interrupted the speaker, who waved 
his hand for silence. 

" I had hoped to have seen this gentleman here 
to-day; he ought to have been amongst us ; I gave 
him notice that / should be here." 



186 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

This elicited a cry of "Bravo !" and then the 
chairman rose to deprecate personalities. He 
feared the honorable proprietor was losing his 
discretion by excitement. 

" Not so, Mr. Chairman," replied the honorable 
proprietor. " I am not speaking on the spur of 
the moment : my words are not bom of mere 
excitement, sir. I have thought much and deeply 
about the remarks I am now making ; nay more, 
I have taken advice upon them . ^they have gone 
through the legal crucible. (Cheers, "Bravo !" and 
confusion.) It is exceedingly hurtful to my own 
feelings to bring so painful a subject before this 
meeting, but I am prepared to sacrifice self, upon 
an occasion of this kind, to public duty." 

" " Hear, hear ! " said several shareholders, whilst 
othei's murmured " Quite right." 

" I have ample proof of the charge which I am 
making ; and shall I not for the credit and honour 
and safety of the trading community of this great 
city, in a time of such financial. danger, unmask 
the dastard before the eyes of the world ? " 



FINANCIAL ORATOKY. 187 

"Yes, yes!" and "Name! name!" cried a 
hundred voices ; whilst a pair of stentorian 
lungs shouted, from the gallery at the- extreme 
end of the room, "Why the deuce don't you 
do it ? " 

In the midst of the hubbub a grave, pale-faced 
gentleman rose and said this kind of discussion 
had gone far enough. He wanted to know the 
exact position of the bank. 

"Hear, hear!" shouted several shareholders 
close by; whilst others could not help laughing 
at this bit of clerical impracticability, seeing that 
the report stated the position of the bank, and 
the chairman's address had been furthermore 
elucidatory. 

The chairman rose to order, and was greeted 
with cries of "Sit down!" "Don't interfere!'" 
" Let us have the name ! " 

Meanwhile the financial orator stood, paper in 
hand, calmly contemplating the scene, and half- 
a-dozen other persons rose to speak, including the 
poor parson, who had been induced to invest all 



188 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

his money in this bank, chiefly on account of its 
classical connection with the East. 

" I insist upon knowing the position of the 
bank," said the reverend gentleman, but his 
earnestness only raised a loud laugh. 

" I fail to see the humorous side of my ques- 
tion," said the poor man, thinking of his wife and 
four little ones at the small rectory in Yorkshire. 
'* Is this bank solvent, or is it not ? Is it going 
to break ? What is its position ? " 

Laughter, cheers, and cries of " Bosh ! " and 
"Go on with the meeting!" soon induced the 
poor rector to sit down, and then the financial 
orator said he would resume the case at the 
point where he had been interrupted. 

" Name ! name ! " the shareholders cried, and 
several directors at length grew sufficiently ex- 
cited to join in the chorus; but the financial 
orator begged to be permitted to explain the 
whole case before compljdng with the general 
request ; and whilst he is gradually " piling 
up the agony," and drifting into his telling 



CHANGE OF SCENE. 189 

peroration, we propose to conduct you to an 
adjacent police court, where another extraordinary 
scene is being enacted. 

We can return and pick up the " name " which 
the honorable proprietor has been asked for so 
frequently. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

CHIEFLT CONCERNS THE FORTUNES OF PAUL 
SOMERTON. 

Whilst the honorable proprietor of the Eastern 
Bank was fulminating his financial thunders 
Against somebody at present unnamed, Paul 
Somerton stood at the dock of a London police 
court. 

The prisoner seemed to be overwhelmed with 
the degradation of his position. 

The police inspector, who stood forward when 
the case was called from the charge sheet, said the 
prisoiler had only been apprehended that morn- 
ing. The evidence, however, was very short, and 
he thought it would hardly be necessary for him 
to ask for an adjournment. The prisoner was 
charged with stealing a purse containing three 



BEFORE A MAGISTBATfi. 191 

teD-pound notes, four sovereigns, and scrip pf the 
Barwood Banking Company to the value of fifty 
pounds. 

" Does anybody appear to watch the case for 
the prisoner ?" asked the magistrate. 

Nobody replied, and the magistrate, putting a 
gold-rimmed glass to his eye, addressed the 
prisoner. 

" Judging from your dress and general appear- 
ance, you are respectably connected. Have you 
no friends here ? " 

" No, sir," said Paul. " But I am quite innocent 
of the charge which is ma^e against me." 

" Yes, prisoners mostly say so," said the 
magistrate, cjmically ; " but that must be inquired 
into." 

" It is some horrible conspiracy, sir," said Paul 
with great earnestness, his lip' quivering and his 
face quite pale with apprehension. 

A gentleman who was sitting near the reporters 
rose at this juncture, and asked to be allowed to 
watch the case for the prisoner. Paul willingly 



192 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

embraced the offer on his part, and Mr. Arundel 
Williamson, a briefless banister and a "gentle- 
man of the press," stepped up to the prisoner, and 
entered into a brief conversation with Paul. 

" Would you like the case to be adjourned for a 
short' time ? '* the magistrate asked. 

" Thank you, no, sir," said Mr. Williamson ; and 
the police inspector called Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs^ 
who stated that on the previous day he had 
business at the Meter Ironworks Company, 
Westminster. Whilst he was in Mr. Richard 
Tallant's room, he had occasion to take something 
from his purse, and during conversation he laid 
the purse upon the mantel-shelf. About half an 
hour afterwards, when he was leaving the room, 
he remembered his purse, and found that it was 
gone. At first he thought he must have put it 
into his pocket again, but he searched without 
avail. The only person who had come into the 
room whilst he was there was the prisoner. 

" Will you ask Mr. Gibbs any questions, Mr. 
Williamson?" 



MRS. DIBBLE AND POLICEMAN X 40. 193 

" No, sir, not at present," the barrister replied. 

** Proceed with the case," said the magistrate. 

Policeman X 40 said : " Late last night he had a 
search-warrant placed in his hands to execute at 
the house of Mr. Thomas Dibble, Still Street, 
Pimlico. He went there the next morning, and 
asked an old woman " 

"Old woman, thir! . ^how dare you call me 
an old woman?" somebody exclaimed in the 
body of the police-court. 

" Who is that ? Bring that woman forward," 
said the magistrate. 

" Yeth, my lord and jury, or whatever you call 
yourthelveth," said Mrs. Dibble, elbowing herself, 
amidst much laughter, towards the bench. 

" Silence ! Silence ! " exclaimed two police- 
men ; whilst another took hold of Mrs. Dibble's 
arm to increase her momentum. 

"How dare you, thir! Handth off, or Til 
have the law againtht you for falthe imprithon- 
ment ; and ith more than your plathe ith worth 

VOL. I. o 



194 TH TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

" Take her out . ^take the woman out, if she 
Tvill not be quiet/' said the magistrate. 

" At your peril," exclaimed Mrs. Dibble, 
amidst increasing laughter. 

"Then out with her!" exclaimed the magistrate, 
losing his temper ; and Mrs. Dibble speedily dis- 
appeared, struggling between two policemen, and 
bursting her hooks-and-eyes in the most extra- 
ordinary fashion. 

" I asked the woman of the house," went on 
the imperturbable policeman, " to show me Paul 
Somerton's bedroom. She took me upstairs, and 
pointed a room out to me which she said was his. 
I asked if the^ox beneath the dressing-table was 
Paul Somerton's, and she said it was. I broke it 
open, and found at the bottom, beneath some 
clothes, the purse now produced. I then went to 
the offices of the Meter Ironworks and appre- 
hended the prisoner." 

" Is this your purse, Mr. Gibbs V the magistrate 
inquired. 

" It is," was that gentleman's reply. 



CONSPIRACY. 195 

*^ And the contents now are the same as when 

you lost it?" 

* 
" They are, sir," said Mr. Gibbs. 

''Have you any questions to ask the police- 
man?'* the magistrate inquired, addressing Mr. 
Williamson. 

The barrister, after a short conversation with 
the prisoner, said he had not. 

The police Inspector who had charge of the 
case asked if it would be necessary to call Mrs. 
Dibble to prove the ownership of the box wherein 
the purse was fouiiid. 

Mr. Williamson said he thought, before the 
Court went any further with the case, it was 
well that he should apply for an adjournment 
until the next day. From the instructions of 
his client; who was, as the bench had judged, 
most respectably connected, he had no hesitation 
in saying that the case would turn out to be one 
of conspiracy against the prisoner; but he was 
hardly in a position to deal with it at so short 
a notice. 

2 



196 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

"At present there is ample evidence for com- 
mittal to the sessions . a sufficiently primd 

* 
facie case for trial," said the magistrate. "Would 

it not be better to defer your defence until 
then?" 

Ml*. Williamson differed with the learned 
magistrate, and pressed for adjournment. 

"Without bail, of course," said the magis- 
trate. 

" I think I shall be in a position to offer sub- 
stantial bail in the coui-se of an hour," said PauUs 
new friend. 

" I shall be here for two hours," said the magis- 
trate, " and will consider your application. I do 
not think I should be inclined to accept bail*' 

The prisoner was then removed, and his legal 
and journalistic friend went with him. 

Mr. Williamson was a gentleman well known 
on the London press, not only for a certain 
cleverness in the epistolary style of writing, but 
for his peculiar amiability. Educated for the 
Church, certain scruples of conscience had induced 



ON THE PRESS. 197 

him to give up the Establishment just When he 
iras expected to be ready for ordination. 

Afterwards he read for the Bar, was called in 
d-ue time, and took up his quarters in the Temple. 
No briefs coming into his hands, he directed his 
attention to the Press, secured an appointment as 
.critic on the Sunday Review, and was appointed 
London correspondent of Berrovfa Journal, an 
old provincial paper of considerable repute. He 
joined the Hamilton Club, where Press-men most 
do congregate, and by degrees came to be regarded 
AS one of the craft. 

He was in the police-court during Paul's trouble 
.quite by accident, having called in, out of kind- 
ness to little Simpkins, who was the accredited 
reporter of the Daily Mercury, and who was in a 
delicate state of health. 

" I knew the little fellow was ill, and as he's 
only j ust pushing his way on the Press, I have 
^dropped in occasionally and relieved him. His 
father was an old friend of my father's, and I feel 
A good deal of interest in him." 



198 THE TALLANT8 OF BARTON. 

This was the brief explanation of Mr. William- 
son's presence in courts which he thought it 
necessary to give Paul, and then he sat down 
quietly beside the prisoner, and made notes of all 
that Paul wished him to know. 



CHAPTER XVIIL 

RETURNS TO THE MEETING AT THE LONDON 
TAVERN. 

The honourable proprietor continued to keep 
back his secret for some time, in face of all opposi- 
tion ; several directors drew various devices on the 
blotting pads before them ; the reporters for the 
London papers smiled, took notes, sharpened their 
pencils,, and nibbed their pens; the Yorkshire 
cleric insisted upon knowing the position of the 
bank, and the stalwart layman from the same 
county loudly proclaimed his opinion that it was 
just simply " dommed nonsense to go on like this." 

The financial orator was a gentleman of expe- 
rience ; he had fought shareholders and directors 
before now, and he was not going to give way to 
these Eastern Bank fellows : he said this in a 



200 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

quiet whisper to a friendly M.P. who was standing 
by his side. Then turning towards the directorial 
seats, he said that a certain empty chair at the 
board that day did not at all surprise him. 

" Name ! name ! " cried a few shareholders again ; 
and then suddenly, for the first time, the chair- 
man looked round the room nervously, as if he 
sought an absent face ; and the shareholders 
gradually became quiet. 

"The gentleman who is most conspicuous by 
his absence on this occasion is the absentee to 
whom I refer," said the financial orator. 

Still the shareholders were at fault; some 
shook their heads, others looked as if they knew 
all about it ; and the poor parson, in a moment of 
exhausted patience, again insisted upon knowing 
the position of the bank. 

The chairman fidgetted uneasily in his seat : 
sundry anonymous letters making grave charges 
against his son, several questionable monetary 
transactions in which he had reason to suspect 
he was engaged, and one or two recent little 



THE CLIMAX. 201 

disputes which he had had with his son, occurred 
to him, and he began to fear that the disclosure 
of the absentee's name would be a very painful 
one to himself. 

At length the financial orator, after raising his 
hand for silence, said deliberately, " the gentleman 
to whom I refer is Mr. Richard Tallant;" and 
then there went a whisper all about the room . 
" The chairman's son ! " In the public mind the 
name of Tallant had been so generally associated 
with everything that was honourable and true 
until now, that it seemed as if the bank was 
really broken indeed. London men looked si- 
lently and inquiringly at each other. Country 
shareholders, who had never previously attended 
these half-yearly meetings, looked on in amaze- 
ment, and wondered what would be the next turn 
in the mysterious wheel of fortune. 

All this occurred in much less time than it 
occupies you to read what we have written by way 
of narrative. Not many moments elapsed before 
the chairman rose. He beckoned the speaker who 



202 THE TALLANTS OT BARTON. 

Lad denounced his son, and the gentleman came 
up and began expressing regret at being com- 
pelled to take a course which must be so painful 
to the chairman. 

" Nay, nay, make no apologies, sir ; you have 
simply discharged your duty," said Mr. Tallant. 
"What proofs have you ?" 

The honourable proprietor handed to the chair- 
man a bundle of papers. Having carefully ex- 
amined these through his eye-glass, and apologised 
for detaining the meeting, Mr. Tallant, in a voice 
which fully indicated the mental agony of the 
speaker, said . "Gentlemen, you wiU readily 
understand what a blow this is to me. When I 
rose to order it was not for a moment with any 
idea of screening my son " 

" Query," said a wretched shareholder, who was 
hissed, and hustled, too, in a moment. 

"It has been my pride," said the chairman, 
heedless of the interruption, ** throughout my long 
business career, to make the name of Tallant one 
of strength in this great metropolis, and a name 



" O, CUKSED AMBITION 1 " 203 

which should be synonymous with wealth and 
with honour. My ambition was unbounded, you 
may say, but surely it was. a laudable ambition. 
I say surely it was, more now by way of question 
than by way of assertion ; perhaps the standard 
which I set up was too high. But until to-day 
I seem to have reached the acme of all my pride 
and hope ; for never before, I believe, has a word 
been even whispered against the honour, and 
integrity, and soundness of a Tallant.'' 

Cries of "Hear, hear !" and a weak attempt at 
cheering, greeted the fine old man, as he looked 
round the room with something like an air of 
triumph in his misery. 

" I have held a high place amongst you now 
for many years; but we have fallen upon bad 
times. We are in the midst of a financial crisis 
which is not only breaking banks but friendships ; 
which is not only carrying wreck and ruin to the 
weak and the false, the fool and the knave, but 
which is shaking the reputations of men of pro- 
bity and honour. The suggestion of an honourable 



204 THE TALLAKTS OP BARTON. 

proprietor, made this day, that I should resign, 
was greeted with a suflScient sound of approving 
voices to determine me in my course, before this 
attack upon my son. It had been my full in- 
tention to resign (cries of "No, no!" and "Yes, 
yes ! ") I have no other alternative." 

Here the cries of " No, no ! " and " Yes, yes !" 
broke out afresh, and somebody said, " How do we 
know he isn't as bad as his son ? " 

When something like quiet was once more 
restored, Mr. Tallant said, "I have been your 
chairman now for nearly five years. I have striven 
to do my duty to this great corporation. Through 
misfortunes over which the directors could have 
but little control, the failure of some great houses 
in Bombay " 

"And your own mismanagement," said a 
fierce and irrepressible shareholder, who had five 
thousand pounds locked up in the concern, and 
who thought this a suflScient warrant for being 
angry and insolent. 

But Mr. Tallant did not appear to hear these 



A NOBLE FALL. 206 

galling remarks, howsoever deeply they may have 
impressed him. 

"And through the failure of some great houses 
in Bombay," he repeated, "our Indian branches 
have suffei-ed a loss of one hundred thousand 
pounds." 

Loud groans, and other expressions of anger 
and contempt, greeted this announcement In 
the midst of it the chairman, who had taken a 
cheque-book from his pocket, sat down, and with 
a trembling hand filled it up, and signed it with 
his well-known clear bold signature 

Raising his hand to command silence, he said, 
" One hundred thousand pounds represents your 
losses by these failures . ^the only losses this cor- 
poration have suffered 'during my presidency. 
Here is a cheque for the amount, and I shall . 
never. occupy this chair again." 

Mr. Tallant deliberately handed the cheque to 
the secretary of the company, who sat near him, 
and taking up his hat proceeded to leave the 
room. The shareholders and others made way 



206 THE TALLAOT'S OF BABTON. 

for the fine old English gentleman as he passed, 
and in a few moments his firm steady footstep 
covld be heard on the staircase. 

Some minutes elapsed before it occurred to 
several friends that they ought to follow him. By 
the time they reached the street Mr. Tallant was 
nowhere to be seen. He had called a Kansom, 
and ordered the driver to go to the Paddington 
Hallway Station : and he sat there in the waiting- 
room for nearly an hour. Trains came and went 
whilst he sat there; people came in and out, 
happy mothers and children, merry West-coim- 
trymen, and London tourists, and sorrowful- 
looking people also. 

The sunlight was struggling through the great 
glass roof of the station, and making the place 
look quite joyful and festive. White wreaths of 
steam from noisy engines crept up to the glass, 
and dispersed in a sparkling kind of mist. There 
was a general air of pleasantness about the place 
that was cheering; but the great London mer- 
chant sat in the waiting-room with his arms 



SHUNTED. 207 

folded, and his head upon his breast, waiting for 
the train. 

You have stood at a railway station and seen 
them shunting a train of carriages upon some 
weed-grown siding. It seemed as if Fate had 
shunted the owner of Barton Hall . as if his day 
were over, as if, after going bravely through the 
world for a long time, he had broken down, and 
had come to be shunted upon a siding. Not 
shunted, like you and we hope to be shunted some 
day, smoothly and quietly to rest from our 
labours ; but roughly, ruthlessly, thrust and 
bumped into a line of off-rails, covered with the 
dust of the world, and ticketed " Not to be used." 

It was a bitterly hard lot for Christopher 
Tallant, in his prime and in his glory, but he 
knuckled down to it manfully, and bent his head 
to the storm. 

The train came at last, and carried the mer- 
chant away to the station nearest Barton Hall. 
The porters were in a state of great excitement 
because there was no carriage as usual to meet 



208 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

Mr. TaUant ; he took no notice of their inquiries 
and suggestions beyond the courtesy of a passing 
nod, but walked quietly to the principal hotel 
Thence he sent a messenger requesting a local 
lawyer to attend him at Barton Hall, whither he 
departed as quickly as a hired conveyance would 
permit. 

They had heard of the panic at this little out- 
of-the-way town, and concluded at once that 
Mr. Tallant had received some gi*eat financial 
injury in the crisis. The town was alive with 
rumours all the night, and by bed-time Mr. 
Tallant was reported to have lost a million of 
money in railways. But on the following day the 
true story was told by the London papers, or by 
one of them at least; for the majority had ex- 
cluded the point of the denunciatory speech 
which ended with the name of Richard Tallant. 

The law of libel, as it affects newspaper pro- 
prietors, is peculiar with regard to the publication 
of public sayings and doings. The reporter may 
set down the most scurrilous and libellous speech 



THE LAW OF LIBEL. 209 

which counsel or solicitor may make in a court of 
justice, and the newspaper editor may publish it 
in his columns without a shadow of legal re- 
sponsibility resting upon him ; but anything said 
at a public meeting which in any way affects the 
character or reputation of a private individual or 
a public man, is published at the editor's peril : 
so that several of the London journals refrained 
from chronicling all that took place at the 
Eastern Bank meeting. One editor, bolder than 
the rest, published the meeting at length; and 
his paper it was which enlightened the people in 
the Avpnworth Valley with regard to the unusual 
manner and conduct of the famous proprietor of 
Barton Hall. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

OF CERTAIN REPORTS IN THE NEWSPAPERS. 

O, THOSE hard and bitter histories, the news* 
papers! Hard as the metal in which they are 
printed. Stem matter-of-fact histories of the 
great world. They go sti*aight to the subject; 
they do not prepare the reader by any quiet pre- 
liminary caution that the man who has been 
found murdered is his father; there is nothing^ 
roundabout in that long list of deaths. You have 
no time to think before the awful truth is in 
your mind. That railway accident, . ^is your dear 
friend unhurt ? . ^whilst you are wondering, there 
stands his name in the list of dead. That little 
indiscretion of your son's; . ^here it is, blazoned 
forth to the world in the police reports : he was 
only anxious to save his friend, and his zeal over- 



NEWSPAPER RECORDS. 211 

came his discretion ; he is fined for obstructing a 
poKceman in the execution of his duty, and here 
stands the record, to be turned against him any 
day. 

O, hard and bitter histories ! They told the 
story on that second day. They told the two 
stories. They came to Barton Hall, wrapped up 
carefully and smug as of yore. They were 
carried to the kitchen fire and dried. John 
scanned them, and saw nothing of importance. 
Mary noticed a frightful murder stuck down in 
one corner, almost out of sight. Peter the groom 
took note of the latest betting ; but none of them 
saw what the people at the town found out later 
in the day ; and none of them saw what Phcebe 
Tallant and Amy Somerton saw. 

Mr. Tallant had been engaged until late with , 
his country lawyer, and had kept his room on 
that second day. Phoebe was sure there was 
something seriously the matter with her father; 
for he had pressed her hand, and kissed her, and 
made the tears come into her eyes. 

p 2 



212 TUB TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

This was something very unusual for Mr. 
Tallant. Proud as he undoubtedly was of 
Fhcebe's beauty, hers was a sort of negative 
existence in his mind. Richard, her brother, had 
engrossed nearly all his thoughts. Phoebe was 
like a simple flower adorning the name of 
Tallant; . ^but Richard, he would build up the 
house and perpetuate the name, and be the 
grand, educated successor of his father. 

Once or twice, however, within the few pre- 
vious months, grave doubts as to the propriety 
of his son's conduct had crossed the merchant's 
mind ; but these had been to a gi-eat extent 
dispelled by a few words of conversation with his 
son. Of course, the young fellow had been 
educated at Oxford, and had thoughts, and 
feelings, and aspirations altogether different to 
his father's. The old man understood this to a 
certain extent, but " honour, Dick ; remember, 
that does not come with college education, my 
boy," Mr. Tallant would say ; " don't let Latin, 
and Greek, and mjrthology, and grand acquaint- 



THE STARTLING NEWS. 213 

ances shake plain old Saxon notions of honour 
and honesty, and paying your way, and owing no 
man, and all those old-fashioned things which 
have made the name of Tallant foremost in the 
city of London." 

But Richard Tallant was in the whirlpool of 
fast life, of speculation, of financial scheming, of 
gambling ; and at length he reached the vortex, 
with all the good lessons and examples of his 
father upon his head. 

So these newspapers, as we have said, were 
dried, and whilst a couple were sent up-stairs to 
Mr. Tallant, two were taken into the drawing- 
room to Miss Tallant and her friend. Miss 
Somerton. 

Never did papers contain so much to startle 
and interest two girls before. The Eastern Bank 
meeting, and the exposure of Richard Tallant; 
the charge of robbery against Paul Somerton ; 
and a paragraph recording the departure of the 
troop-ship Atlas for India, with Captain the 
Hon. Lionel Hammerton on board. 



214 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

They mastered it all at last, and clung to 
each other in terror and amazement. It seemed 
almost as if the world had suddenly come to an 
end. Phoebe looked round, as if to assure herself 
that she was at home. There was no mistak- 
ing this. The familiar chairs and cabinets, and 
pictures and statuettes, all seemed to look re- 
assuringly at her. 

Amy took things in a more demonstrative 
fashion. She pressed her hand to her head, and 
then broke forth into a low wail of pain. 

" And I did not know that he even intended to 
leave the country," said Amy, by-and-by, all her 
thoughts <;oncentrated upon Lionel Hammerton. 

Phoebe, with her brother's disgrace, her father's 
misery, and Paul Somerton's troubles, each 
agitating her mind in turns, had scarcely thought 
for a moment of the sudden and unexplained 
departure of Lionel Hammerton. Arthur Phillips . 
might have told her of it, but the artist had not 
been near Barton Hall for more than a month. 
He had written a note of apology, and explaining 



215 

that his absence was necessary for the completion 
of some important work upon which he was 
engaged. 

" Not even to say good-bye," Amy exclaimed, 
rocking herself to and fro. 

It quite shocked Phoebe to see how Amy dwelt 
upon this departure of Hammerton ; to see how 
it overshadowed all the other bitter news. Amy 
had not even uttered one expression of pity for 
the brother whom she loved so welL 

This secret love of Lionel Hammerton had 
burned itself into her very nature. However 
much she might have doubted her powers to 
bring him to her side, and however much she 
may have despaired of the return of her love, on 
the ground of their great disparity of position, 
she had long since been convinced that Lionel 
ared a little for her. She had brooded over his 
acts of kindness and courtesy ; she had bound up 
his image in all her ways of life, and Phoebe 
knew how much she loved him. 

His leaving without explanation, and without a 



216 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

word at parting, was not only a blow to the girls' 
soft and tender dreams of love returned, but it 
struck at her pride, and brought her down to the 
abject thing at which she had seemed to rate 
herself in her thoughts of the greatness and glory 
of Lionel Hammerton. 

There might have been something like the 
aping of humility in this girl's love ; in her own 
estimation she had been as nothing compared 
with him, to whom she had given up her secret, 
soul ; but, trodden upon and slighted, she rose up,, 
conscious of her own beauty, and with a sense of 
her own deserts, burning with wounded pride. 

" He treats me with contempt and indifference,, 
Phoebe," she said, casting the newspaper upon the 
floor, and trampling upon it. "Let him; he 
shall have scorn for scorn, qontempt for contempt. 
Does he think that a woman's heart is to he 
trampled upon because of lowly birth ? Does he 
think true love and English chivalry have ex~ 
elusive inheritance amongst the titled and the 
wealthy? Does he think I am a poor silly 



TEARS. 217 

country girl, with a weak, pliable nature, that 
will bend and adapt itself to whatever may turn 
up in a jog-trot country life ? He shall see ; he 
shall see." 

With this Amy Somerton swept out of the 
room like an enraged queen, who coimted her 
subjects by millions. 

" Poor Amy, she has read too much poetry of 
late, and thought it all true," said Phoebe, the big 
tears rolling down her fair cheek. "Whatever 
will become of us all ! I am sure my head swims 
with the thought of all the dreadful things that 
have taken place. My poor dear father!" then 
she exclaimed, and the next minute she had 
burst into his room, and flung herself upon his 
neck. 

"Dear, dear father," she said, "do bear up; 
perhaps it is not true ; perhaps he has repented, 
and all may come light again," said Phoebe, 
smoothing the merchant's grey hair; but she 
felt how hopeless was Richard's case notwith- 
standing. 



218 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Mr. Tallant submitted to his daughter's ca- 
resses, and his mind was suddenly carried back to 
the days of his second wife. In the midst of 
great trouble and distress of mind the thoughts 
will often ramble to times and things altogether 
apart from the immediate cause of your mental 
anxiety. Mr. Tallant thought of the wife whom 
he had loved so dearly, and then wondered that 
no likeness remained of her in his child. 

"You are not quite ruined, perhaps, father," 
said the girl, by-and-by ; " we can go and live in 
some quiet little place, where we shall be 
unknown." 

" Ruined, my love," said the merchant, with a 
faint smile, "what made you think of that?" 

"That great sum of money which you paid, 
father . so nobly, so like your true self," said the 
girl, with a look of admiration shining through 
her tears. 

" I could do that several times over, and be far 
from ruined then," said the merchant, with just a 
touch of pride in his manner ; " it is our name 



THE "golden sorrow." 219 

that is ruined, our name that is blemished; his 
name . ^he who was to be the pride of the 
land." 

"But the paper says the name of Tallant has 
risen higher than ever with your magnanimous 
and noble revenge," said Phoebe, timidly, for she 
had never in all her life before spoken to her 
father of money and things appertaining to trade 
and commerce. 

" The papers !" repeated the merchant, bitterly. 
*' What can they say or do ? Who cares for the 
papers in times like these, when the greatest 
houses in the country are tottering to their very 
foundation. The name of Tallant would have 
risen like a rock of gold in this panic, and 
been impressed for all time in the history of 
finance, but" for this wretched, this nuserable 
deception." 

" But your own name, father ; your own 
honour," said the girl 

" What do I care for myself," said the mer- 
chant, interrupting her ; " it was for him that I 



220 THE TAT.T.ANTS OF BABTON. 

worked, and saved, and hoarded. Did I grudge 
bim ? No ; he was his own master ; he had the 
run of my own bank. But there, there, Phoebe, 
say no more upon the subject. We will try to 
talk of other things." 

" The Somertons, too, will be in great distress/* 
said Phoebe, " about their son." 

" Why ?" asked the merchant. 

" Did you not read it in the paper ?" 

*' I have read nothing in the paper," was the 
reply. 

"In prison, and charged with robbery," said 
Phoebe, softly ; " but a counsel appeared for him 
and said it was a conspiracy." 

" That is easily said," the merchant answered. 
" Robbery ! whom has he robbed ?" 

Phoebe shuddered at the emphasis in the latter 
sentence, which convinced her that her father'a 
opinion of Richard was sealed and settled. 

"His prosecutor is a person named Gibbs . 
Shuffleton Gibbs," said Phoebe. 

" The greatest scoundrel in London," said the 



" A MINISTERING ANGEL THOU ! " 221 

>merchant. " Better to have such a man against 
you than for you ; he is the intimate and bosom 
friend of your brother. Give me the pap^r, love, 
and leave me to read it." 

Phoebe opened out the paper which lay upon 
the table, kissed her father's forehead, and went 
to comfort the Somertons. 

She looked the very impersonation of comfort 
and consolation, this gentle, confiding, Miranda- 
like being, as she quietly glided across the park 
towards the farm. An old shepherd dog came 
bounding up to her, and leaping for joy, in its half- 
blind, shambling fashion; a little group of deer 
trotted off before her, but turned round to look, and 
said as plainly as could be, " We should not have 
moved, had it not been for that villainous dog;" 
ducks, and hens, and chickens, all came round 
about her as she entered the farm enclosure; a 
great furry cat came and purred beside her ; and 
Mr. Someiion's blackbird, which hung by the 
window in a wicker cage, began to sing so merrily 
that you could hardly hear the whiiT and rattle 



222 THE TALLANTS QF BARTON. 

of the threshing-machine^ which was hard at 
work in the adjacent stack-yard. 

Whilst Amy Somerton was pacing to and fro 
in her chamber at the Hall, Phoebe Tallant ful- 
filled her office at the Hall Farm, and endea- 
voured in a hundred gentle, gracious ways to 
console the bailiff and his wife. So far as Luke 
was concerned, she was not unsuccessful, but 
Mrs. Somerton gave way to her feelings with- 
out the slightest regard to Amy's consolatory 
observations. 

The farmer's wife seemed to arraign all hu- 
manity as if it were in a conspiracy against her, 
and she was almost rude to Miss Tallant, so 
much so that Luke interposed in an authoritative 
manner, and Phoebe looked hurt and concerned. 

This only changed the manner of Mrs. ,Somer- 
ton's complainings. She was satisfied that Paul 
was guilty. He must have stolen the purse; it 
didn't often happen, she went on, that people got 
charged with offences of that kind unless they 
deserved it. All her children went wrong ; none 



MRS. SOMERTON'S TROUBLES. 223 

of them cared for her ; none of them made any 
return to her for all her care. 

Nobody knew her trials, nobody could under- 
stand her troubles; all she hoped was, that the 
time would come soon, when they would be 
ended for ever. 

Luke Somerton rated his wife in a quiet, 
manly fashion for her injustice towards Paul, and 
her unkind return for the generous attention 
of Miss Tallant; and by-and-by Mrs. Somerton 
began to cry, and that was a suflBcient apology to 
the rich merchant's daughter, who sat beside the 
bailiff's wife and said all sorts of comforting 
things, whilst Mr. Somerton set about packing up 
a carpet-bag for the purpose of going to London ; 
and eventually Miss Somerton presented herself, 
and requested that she might be permitted to 
accompany her father. 



CHAPTER XX. 

SHOWS HOW THE PURSE FOUND ITS WAY INTO 
PAUL SOMERTON'S BOX. 

In this world the victory is not always with 
the good and the true. It has shaken many a 
man's faith before now to see the wicked and the 
selfish thrive, whilst the noble, and the generous, 
and the pure, were beggars. 

Suppose there were no hereafter? What 
would compensate us for the unequal justice 
which, judged by the world's standard, is meted 
out? What would hinder the unfortunate and 
poveity-stricken from making their quietus with 
a bare bodkin ? What would reconcile the man 
bound to work on, and toil on, and sweat and 
drudge in misery, from eating his very life out 
with envy of the rich ? What would prevent the 



THE BEST POLICY. 225 

wealthy man who, willing to help his poorer 
brethren to the fullest extent, finds individual 
help like his of comparatively little use . ^what 
would there be left for him but to put down the 
unequal distribution of riches to gross injustice ? 
How could we reconcile it with a good and 
beneficent Creator, that some are bom and bred 
in poverty and wretchedness, and are doomed to 
wear the chain of want all their lives; whilst 
others inherit all the luxuries of purple and 
fine linen, and chairs of state and command? 
What else but a future of rewards and punish- 
ments would enable us to live and endure all 
this, rich and poor, good and bad, selfish and 
generous 1 

Honesty is the best policy in the end, so far as 
personal happiness is concerned. It is a selfish 
way of preaching honesty nevertheless ; but how 
often, in a worldly sense, does the axiom seem to 
be reversed. On the Stock Exchange there were 
certain men who were dishonest. They lied 
wilfully and designedly about the credit of banks 

VOL. I. Q 



226 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

and companies ; they propagated scandalous re- 
ports about certain establishments; they sent 
out thousands of lying letters throughout the 
country, cautioning people against concerns which 
they knew to be safe. Then they went into the 
market and sold shares which they did not 
possess, and secured low quotations in the news- 
papers. This frightened people who had invested 
their money honourably, and they began to selL 
Confidence was shaken, and the ''bears" made 
money. Their lies and dishonesty ruined hun- 
dreds of honest people ; but men like young 
Tallant and Mr. Gibbs profited by the trans- 
actions. They bought and sold at pleasure, and 
in the midst of the general .panic selected what 
concern they liked for ruin. 

It is true that by degrees the gentlemen known 
as "bears " created a stoim which they could not 
control, and that some fell by their own thunder 
. some were caught in their own snares ; whilst 
others thrived and waxed rich, and retired on 
handsome fortunes, many of them made by pur- 



MAKING MONEY. 227 

chasing at a low figure shares which they had 
assisted to depreciate. 

Young Tallant was amongst those who made 
large sums of money. He was fortunate in all he 
undertook ; and on that very morning when he 
was denounced at the great City meeting, his 
" bearing " speculations represented a profit to the 
tune of many thousands. It was in this wise : he 
was a director of the Mercantile Finance Bank. 
On the previous day the shares had been run 
down by false reports to ten shillings a share- 
scrip upon which twenty pounds had been paid. 
Yoimg Tallant bought two thousand shares at the 
close of the market. The next day the Tvmes 
contradicted the rumours^ the directors made a 
statement, confidence was restored in a few hours, 
and the director who knew that such would be 
the case, sold his two thousand at an average of 
more than seven poimds a share. 

Since the row at the Ashford Club he had 
acted more upon his own account, and had 
avoided Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, who, left to his 



228 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

own machinations, had been a little too clever in 
his stock-jobbing operations ; he had sold largely 
shares which had rallied, and were likely to 
stand all future assaults. But he still had 
schemes on hand which seemed likely to bear 
substantial monetary fruits. He was rich enough, 
as the readers of this history will no doubt have 
guessed, to encompass his revenge against Paul 
Somerton. 

The plot had been well and skilfully managed. 
Thomas Dibble had led a life of dreadful misery 
since his loss of the five hundred pounds, and 
Mr. Gibbs had aggravated his torture with a 
thumb-screwish perfection of cruelty. The shares 
which Thomas Dibble had bought carried a 
future responsibility of fifteen hundred pounds. 
So that his loss, instead of being five hun- 
dred, might really have been increased to two 
thousand. 

Mr. Gibbs, by degrees, explained this to the 
wretched Dibble, who had lain awake during long 
weary nights, beside the partner of his bosom. 



AN UNFORTUNATE ENCOUNTER. 229 

suffering all sorts of agonies, and without daring 
to explain his misery to Mrs. D., who said enough 
every day and night about the five hundred 
pounds to have broken down more sensitive 
minds than Dibble's. 

"I do really think I shall go mad," he said to 
Mr. Gibbs, on the day when that gentleman* had 
tortured him up to the last pitch necessary for 
making Dibble his tool. 

" Then I must save you," said Mr. Gibbs, at 
length. 

" Oh, Mr. Gibbs, dont 'e trifle with my feelings," 
said Thomas. 

" Not I, my friend ; I intended to have assisted 
you when I advised you to buy those shares, and 
I am sorry they have not turned out so well as 
we had a right to expect," said Mr. Gibbs, tapping 
his tight little boots with a cane, and looking up 
at the lamp imder which Dibble had accosted him 
in the street. 

"No, no . ^the best intentions sir; but dear, 
dear, bad be the best this time." 



230 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

"Come to my chambers in an hour, Dibble, , 
and I will see if I can put the thing right" 

" Yes, sir," said Dibble, touching his cap ; the 
two parted, and in an hour Dibble was sitting 
on the edge of a chair in Mr. Gibbs* private 
room. 

"Business is business," said Mr. Gibbs ; " I will 
take the shares from you, and here is a cheque 
for five hundred pounds." 

*' God bless 'e, God bless 'e ! " began Dibble, in an 
ecstasy of delight. 

"Stop a little ; there is a small condition," said 
Mr. Gibbs, placing his hand upon a puree which 
he laid upon the table. 

Dibble looked at Mr. Gibbs for explanation, but 
quite prepared in his own mind to buy peace at 
home at any sacrifice. 

"You must put this purse secretly into Paul 
Somerton's box, in his bedroom." 

Dibble looked puzzled, and Gibbs fixed him 
with his fishy eye. 

"It is a very simple thing. Take it without 



THE PLOT. 231 

examination, and find an opportunity to-night to 
put it carefully in the lowest comer, underneath 
his clothes or papers, or whatever else he has in 
his box." 

"Yes, it be simple," said Dibble, patting his 
forehead, and looking at his boots; "it be very 
simple, that's true." 

" Do it, and to-morrow morning give me your 
shares and I give you five hundred pounds ; hei^e 
is one hundred on account to-night, in proof of 
my sincerity." 

" Oh, that be all right, sir . I can trust to what 
you says; but what be the meaning of this 
business about the purse ? " 

"I like your question . ^nothing like being open 
and straightforward with each other. That's my 
motto," said Gibbs. 

" And it be a good un, too," said Thomas. 

" Paul Somerton has done me a serious injury, 
and I am determined to punish him; he is a 
conceited, proud young fellow, and I mean to 
take him down." 



232 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

"He be proud, that's true," said Dibble, re- 
membering how Paul had dropped his companion- 
ship of late. 

"I hate and detest him, he is a thief and a 
scoundrel ; and I could have him transported if I 
liked." 

"Could you now?" Said Dibble, staring ^in 
amazement at Mr. Gibbs, who, despite his efforts 
to appear calm, had clenched his fist, and looked 
particularly ugly. 

"I shall punish him by means of this purse. 
If you do what I require you will have your five 
hundred pounds, and have no liability beyond it; 
and you will be able to live comfortably and 
happily again with Mrs. Dibble. And if you 
don't, you will have fifteen hundred pounds to 
pay beyond the five hundred ; you will be sold up 
and turned out of house and home, and be done 
up root and branch." 

Dibble groaned aloud at this picture, and 
jumping from his seat, said, " Give me the purse, 
give it me ; I'll do it." 



"swear! swear!" 233 

"And you swear on your oath . go down on 
your knees . there, that will do ; now you swear 
that whatever may take place you will never 
confess that you know anything about the purse, 
or ever saw it in your life before." 

" I swear it all," said Dibble. 

" So help you, heaven ! " said Gibbs, holding his 
hand aloft, and Dibble repeated the imprecation. 

" If you should break your oath you will not 
only go to the devil," said Gibbs, solemnly, " but 
you will before that be taken by the police as a 
thief, and transported. Now, here are ten ten- 
pound notes, and here is the purse; in the 
momin]^ early I shall know if you have done 
youi* work properly. Good night." 

" Good night," said Dibble, slinking away in a 
perspiration of fear and happiness, of doubt and 
hope ; afraid of his own shadow, yet less afraid of 
Mrs. Dibble than he had been a few hours before. 

And this is how the purse came to be in 
Paul Somerton's box ; and this is how it was that 
Mrs. Dibble's joy at seeing her five hundred 



234 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

pounds on the table before her was neutralised 
by Paul Somerton's apprehension, and the in- 
sulting manner of the policeman towards both 
herself and her establishment. 

That night of Paul's apprehension and remand 
was a terrible one for poor Dibble ; for during the 
evening there arrived Paul's father and sister 
Amy, and he was witness of their distress and 
trouble. He sat there and listened to Amy's 
stories of his goodness, and he saw the silent 
sorrow of his fine manly father. He heard Mrs. 
Dibble speak of Paul as the best and kindest 
young man ; and he felt that she was speaking 
nothing but the tnith when she said she would 
rather have lost a thousand pounds than such a 
thing should have happened. 

And by-and-by Mr. Williamson, the barrister 
who had spoken up for Paul, came to the house 
in a cab, bringing Paul with him; which was 
fiuch a blow to Dibble that he had not the heart 
to join in the general expressions of delight at 
the poor young fellow's appearance. He sat 



PAUL AND AMY. 235 

there looking on, so pale and woe-begone, that 
Mrs. Dibble was struck with his appearance, and 
pitied him for taking the thing so much to heart. 
There was quite a scene between Amy and 
Paul, neither of them expecting to see each other. 
Amy rushed into his arms and sobbed on his 
shoulder, until Paul could hardly help crying* 
himself; and Mrs. Dibble bxlrst every hook-and- 
eye she had left. And Dibble could stand it no 
longer ; so he slunk away into the back kitchen, 
with serious thoughts of putting his head into 
the water-butt, and keeping it there until he 
was dead. After five minutes' consideration he 
changed his mind, and returned to the little 
parlour calmer and more contented, and suffi- 
ciently at ease to shake hands with the released 
prisoner, for whom Mr. Williamson had succeeded 
in giving bail. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

WHEBEIN THOMAS DIBBLE "BUNS AWAY," AND 
MEETS WITH A VEBY REMABKABLE COMPANION. 

Mbs. Dibble insisted upon Miss Somerton and 
her father remaining in her house until the next 
day, when Paul was to reappear at Bow Street ; 
and this increase in the Dibbleonian establishment 
made it necessary that Mr. Thomas Dibble should 
sleep on the sofa in the parlour. 

" ril make you up a comfortable bed, Thomath," 
said Mrs. D., when all the other members of the 
household had retired to rest, "particularly on 
account of your sympathy with that young man ; 
for if ever there was innocence anywhere it is in 
his face : though however that purse could get into 
his box is a matter as I have yet to learn. It's very 
well for Mr. Williamson, that barrister gentleman . 



A 



REPENTANCE. 237 

who reminds me of a young man as made me an 
oflFer before I left boaixiing-school, which my parenth 
were particular in sending me to on account of 
the position I was expected to take in the world . 

* and he may say it with perfect truth, that some 
one has got into the house and put that purse 
into his box ; but how to get the police to believe 
it is another thing : but we shall see in the morn- 
ing/' 

" The/11 believe it, Maria," said Thomas, very 
solemnly, with his eyes fixed upon his wife's 
buxom figure, which would obtrude its plumpness 

* and its whiteness through her tight dresses, either 
in front or behind, and more particularly in an 
evening when Mrs. Dibble unbuttoned her dress 
for the purpose of being able to breathe more 
freely. 

"They will ? . ^it's all very well to say they will, 
but if Mr. Williamson can do no more than show 
the animas, as he calls it, of the persecutor Mr. 
Gibbs, it strikes me . judging from the villainous 
manner of those policeman, who will not allow 



238 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

anyone else to speak except themselves . ^that 
Mr. Williamson will only waste his breath." 

And Mrs. Dibble went' on laying sheets and 
blankets between a sofa and three chairs, and 
tucking them down at the foot and making the 
two pillows go as far as possible in height by the 
aid of the sofa cushions and an old carpet bag ; 
whilst Dibble looked on very sadly, but calmly, 
and wondered what Mrs. Dibble would think in 
the morning when she entered the room and 
found that the extempore bed had never been 
used. 

" WilJ you give me a kiss before you go to ' 
bed, Maria ? " said Dibble, in an appealing tone. 

" Of course I will, Thomath ; for the way as you 
snatched that five hundred pounds out of the fire, as 
I may say, deserves ever so many kisses, Thomath, 
and as done everything to make our lives happy 
again, though, as I have said before, it was not the 
money so much as deceiving me, Thomath ; I did 
think I never could have forgiven that ; but there; 
it's all over, Thomath, and seeing other people in 



" GOOD-BYE I " 239 

trouble makes one's heart softer than usual : and 
so bless you, Thomath, bless you." 

Whereupon Mrs. Dibble put her arms round 
poor Dibble's neck and bade him good-night. . 

"And good-bye!" said Dibble, when she was 
going up-stairs ; "And good-bye, Maria!" he re- 
peated when he heard the door shut upon her. 
For Thomas Dibble when he went out into the 
back kitchen and contemplated the water-butt, 
determined to run away. Not only to run away, 
but to leave behind him a confession of the part 
he had taken in the conspiracy against Paul 
Somerton. 

He sat down before the handful of smouldering 
cinders in the little parlour grate, and thought 
out his plan. He had suffered much from Mrs. 
Dibble about the five hundred pounds ; he 
had purchased peace by its return, and she had 
forgiven himu But how had he ^bought peace? 
If he remained where he was, he would be sure 
to confess, and then what would Maria say ? what 
would Paul say ? what would his sister say ? what 



240 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

did his own conscience say now ? He could not 
endure the latter, even in secret, and how could 
he bear the fonner ? 

No, he would run away. His master was at 
. home, in grief and sorrow for the disgrace of his 
son. That son had dishonoured the name of 
Tallant, and Paul Somerton was on the verge of 
becoming an outcast. It would be better that he, 
Thomas Dibble, should go forth and become a 
wanderer and a beggar than that the innocent 
should suffer, and bring disgrace upon a respect- 
able family. 

Then poor old Dibble thought about his oath, 
and fear came upon him in a remembrance of 
the dreadful consequences which Mr. Gibbs had 
described. Then he thought of Maria, but a 
bitter memory of the wretched life he had led 
with her, during the monetary interregnum, steeled 
him slightly against her, and he consoled himself 
with the feeling that at least she had the money 
back again. 
A hundred other things occurred to Thomas as 



dibble's letter. 241 

reasons why be should run away, and why he 
should not. It was dishonourable to take an 
oath and take a man's money without sticking 
to the bargain ; but no gentleman ought to have 
inveigled a poor man into such a plot. No matter 
which way Thomas looked at the case, he saw 
himself a disgraced man ; but he thought there 
was far less disgrace in running away than in 
staying behind, and a thousand times more dis- 
grace in letting the affair go on than in prevent- 
ing the conspiracy from taking effect 

So Thomas decided that he would go, that he 
would be a wanderer, a beggar, a tramp, . any- 
thing but a persecutor of the innocent. He 
would eat Mra Dibble's bread-and-butter no 
longer. 

It occupied him nearly two hours to write out 
in his big, round, straggling hand a brief account 
of his share in the plot to ruin Paul, and having 
done this, and signed it, and laid it in the middle 
of the parlour table, directed to Paul Somerton, 
he wrote on another sheet of paper, "Faxwell, 

VOL. I. B 



242 THE TALLAin'S OF BABTOK. 

Maria, and if for ever, may. you forgiv your herring 
sinner, T. Dibble." 

Then the model porter of the Meter Works 
thought it would be only fau: to let Mr, Gibbs 
know that he had confessed all He, therefore, 
wrote a very short but very lai-ge letter to " Mr. 
Shuffleton Gibbs, Esq.," determining to leave 
London by the West End, and put the letter 
under the door of Mr. Gibbs' lodgings as he 
passed by. 

It was on a fine, bright, starlight autumn 
morning that Thomas Dibble went forth on his 
pilgrimage. 

Turning out of his way a Httle he pushed the 
letter under Mr. Gibbs* door, and then directed 
his steps towards Paddington. He preferred to 
take the longest way through the streets, because 
he thought he would like to tread them once 
more, and say good-bye, as it were, to familiar 
scenes. On past Westminster he trudged, with a 
little bundle over his shoulder, on past the Houses 
of Parliament, where he encountered an early 



NEAB THE DAWK. 243 

coffee man, and invested in an early cup of bis 
refreshing beverage. He would fain bave bad a 
pennywortb of pudding, but the pudding men 
were all abed, and so were tbe vendors of cbes- 
nuts. Tbe police were awake, and Tbomas 
cbuckled quietly to bimself, as be passed certain 
active members of tbe force, upon tbe way in 
wbicb tbey would be sold at Bow Street next 
day. 

He trudged on past Charing Cross and through 
the Haymarket, along Begent Street and past 
Regent's Circus, meeting a few roysterers, early 
workmen going to half-built houses, and printers 
going home from daily newspaper offices ; be saw 
a few shambling tramps banging about doorways, 
and seeking intervals of repose on doorsteps, 
whence they were ousted occasionally by police- 
men ; be met stray cabs with early fares, scaven- 
gers, and slouching women reeling from infamous 
dens in by-streets; and be wondered when it 
would be daylight. 

By-and-by thie great city and its smiling suburbs 

B 2 



244 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

were left behind, and Thomas was on the white 
highway, with hedges right and left, and market- 
gardens behind them ; and then morning dawned, 
and he -journeyed on beside carts and waggons, 
and met tramps with dusty boots and jackets ; 
for the autumn had been a particularly dry 
season, and the roads were covered with dust 

At length the afternoon began to wane, and 
Dibble turned into the fields, over a stile, and sat 
down beside some half-cut com and imtied his 
bundle. A piece of bread and cheese dropped 
but, and Thomas, being hungry, fell to with a will. 
Whilst he was eating, a miserable, lean, lank-look- 
ing dog came crouching and smelling towards 
him. Alone in the wide world, Thomas naturally 
felt some little sympathy with the vacant dog, 
and he threw it a piece of bread and then a piece 
of cheesa The animal, making certain apologetic 
snaps at the crumbs, ate them, and then stood 
upon his hind-legs and seemed to beg for more. 
Dibble could not help smiling at the quaint, 
gaunt, spectral-looking dog, with all its ribs 



dibble's TRAVELLINa COMPANION. 245 

showing througli its tight ragged skin ; and he 
fed it again. Then the animal walked round 
Dibble, on his hind legs, and performed a sort of 
double shuffle. Dibble was highly amused with 
this performance, and he laughed very heartily 
and patted the dog on the head. The animal 
wagged his tail, turned a somersault, and stood 
upon his head in such a comical fashion that poor 
Dibble fairly rolled on his back with laughing, 
the dog leaping over him and barking in the 
most extraordinary and un-doglike fashion. 

Thus Thomas Dibble made friends with this 
singular animal, and resolved to have it as his 
ti-avelling companion if his dogship would consent. 
The dog was nothing loth, and the companionship 
led to important results in the history of Thomas 
Dibble's adventures. 



CHAPTER XXn. 

IN WHICH THOMAS DIBBLE CONTINUES TO "RUN 
AWAX" 

Tms strange, mongrel-looking dog, which 
Dibble encountered amongst the cpm, was not 
only a source of amusement to the runaway porter, 
but gare rise to a variety of speculations far be- 
yond the usual scope of Dibble's imagination. 

As the evening came on, and the mist began to 
rise upon the brooks and rivers, and the leaves 
whirled about amongst the dust, however, poor 
Dibble's somewhat dull imagination took its hue 
from surrounding objects, and he suddenly became 
very thoughtfiiL He looked at the dog as it 
walked by his side, vnih its nose nearly upon the 
ground and its stumpy tail sticking up behind, 
and a sense of fear came over him. 



A DOa? OR A DEVIL? 247 

All at once it occurred to Dibble that the devil 
cotdd assume any shape he pleased. Supposing 
this dog were the devil, come to claim the price 
of the broken oath which Dibble had sworn to 
Gibbs ! Just then the dog began to walk on his 
hind legs and barked, as if to confirm Dibble's 
supposition. 

The runaway porter quickened his pace imme- 
diately, and his heart sunk within him. He was 
glad to see a cart coming along the road ; this 
re-assured him, and he began to run as fast as he 
could ; but the dog soon dropped on all fours 
again, and overtook his companion. 

Dibble would have cried out to the carter for 
help, but just at that moment he came to a bend 
in the road, and saw a roadside inn and a little 
village not many yards ahead. The dog, it would 
seem, saw the iuq, too, and the sight was not so 
pleasant to him as to Dibble, for the dog stood 
still, and then turned tail and crept into the 
hedge, and howled. Thomas was surprised at 
this, and plucked up courage enough to whisUe 



248 THE TALLANTS OF BAIXTON. 

and beckon his companion, believing that if the 
dog were not the devil, it was staying behind be- 
cause of Dibble's unkindness in iiinning away, and 
feeling that if it were the devil he might get 
some assistance in the village to kill him, and 
thus get rid of the devil for ever ; which Thomsls, 
in his own way, thought would be a grand 
achievement. 

It was some little time before the dog acknow- 
ledged Dibble's sympathetic whistles and encou- 
raging words to " come along ; ** but at length the 
vagrant animal came forth, and walked sadly and 
solemnly at the porter's heels. 

They went into the roadside inn together, 
along the passage, past the bar window, and into 
the tap-room, where two or three rough-looking 
fellows were drinking beer. Dibble sat down, 
and the dog slunk away into a comer under a 
long seat with a high back, called a "settle." 
One of the men, a little fellow with a fur cap on 
his head, and a brown velvet jacket on his back, 
evidently noticed the dog, for he smiled and 



VAGABONDS. 249 

winked at another fellow, who sat opposite to 
him. 

" There'll be some fun jest now," said the little 
man, looking at Dibble, who called for a pint 
of ale. 

Several other people came in at this moment, 
three women amongst the rest. Most of them 
had bundles, and the men all wore caps and 
shabby coats ; the women wore shawls and showy 
ribbons, and spok6 in a hoarse, foggy style, an4 
reminded Dibble of the women he remembered 
presiding over nut-stalls and shooting galleries 
at the Gloucestershire fairs when he was a boy. 

Whilst he was drinking his beer the window at 
the back was darkened with several show-houses, 
caravans, and ricketty canvas-covered carts, which 
were coming into the yard for the night, and then 
Dibble knew that he was amongst show people. 
He ventured to ask an old man, who sat next to 
him, and who was engaged in spinning a penny in 
a peculiar way, and twitching it up his sleeve, if 
there was a fair coming off. 



250 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Sevemtown races/' said the man, continuing 
his occupation, and evincing a desire not to be 
interrupted. 

" Oh ! " said Dibble, looking round, and taking 
stock of his new acquaintances. Several of them, 
he saw, had bundles like himself, and all of them 
produced something to eat. Bread and sausages, 
bread and herrings, bread and cheese, bread and 
onions, bread and black-pudding, bread and tripe ; 
and bread and many other things were exhumed 
from those mysterious bundles, and from deep 
greasy pockets. The edibles were demolished 
along with beer, and gin-and-water, and porter, 
and cider, and other liquors, which a thick-fisted 
waiter brought in, amidst much talking and some 
swearing. 

All this time the little man in the velvet coat 
kept careful watch over Dibble and the dog; 
and by-and-by, when the man who had been 
spinning the penny went out with a person in an 
overcoat and tights (who had been standing on 
his head in the villages through whi<;h he passed, 



MISTRESS HOMUS. . 251 

and doing other funny tricks upon a square 
piece of carpet), the little man went and 
sat beside Dibble, at whom he nodded plea- 
santly, and for wljiose especial behoof he tapped 
a nose somewhat flattened by hard usage and 
dirty weather. 

" I forgives yer, old gal, I forgives yer," he said, 
directing one eye towards the dog's hiding-place, 
and winking at Dibble with the other. 

Whereupon the dog came forth, rubbed his 
bony sides against Dibble's legs, and licked the 
porter's dusty boots. 

" Oh, this is the gent whose bin keind to yer, 
.^h, Mistress Momus ? " said the man, nodding 
pleasantly to Dibble. 

The dog gave a short bark, and rubbed herself 
once more against Dibble. 

"Well, weU, I forgives yer, Momus," said the 
man again, but this time in a softer voice, and 
with a coaxing kindliness which the dog seemed 
to understand. 

" Come, then, old gal ; stand up and make him 



252 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

a bow," he went on, motioning to the dog with his 
hand. 

Dibble's companion stood up as it had done in 
the corn-field, bowed gravely to Dibble, and 
raised a forepaw to its head, like charity school- 
boys on an inspection day. 

" You've not fed the dawg too much, guvner," 
said the man, patting the dog's head, and ad- 
dressing Dibble. 

"I only saw un this afternoon," said Dibble, 
"for the first time, and I never see a dog so 
hungry and so quiet over it, nor one half so 
funny ; I began to be afeared he wor something 
evil, he acted so much like a Christian, surely," 
said Dibble. 

" Why, he's been away for this week or more 
. ^broken-hearted a' most; and we've bin obliged 
to fall back on the basket trick." 

Thomas looked inquiringly at the little man, 
and wondered why showmen were so addicted to 
brown velveteen and pearl buttons. 

" She can do pretty nigh everythin', can Momus ; 



" TOO CLEVER BY HALF." 253 

she was the wife of a clown's dawg called Momus, 
so we called her Mistress Momus. Everythin' she 
can do pretty nigh, but like a brute I expected 
her to do somethin' more nor everythin' ; nothin' 
would do but she must talk, and she couldn't 
do that of course . no dawg could . ^and so we 
quarrelled. Didn't we, old gal ? " 

The dog licked her master's hands, and looked 
up into his face. 

"I wanted her to say 'Thank 'e, sir.' Poor 
. lass, she tried hard, but she couldn't." 

Mistress Momus here opened her mouth, and 
jerked out something very much like "thank," 
and wagged her wretched stumpy tail. 

" Never mind it, old gal ; don't try agin," said 
.the master, patting the dog's head. " She couldn't 
say * Thank 'e, sir,' and I got savage aud kicked 
her, and druv her out, and threw a hammer at 
her. Poor Momus! She's sulked before for a 
day, but allers turned up for the evening per- 
formances ; but this time she's been out, as I was 
a sayin', about a week . ^reglar done up, poor old 



254 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

gal, and as thin as a skeleton. Why, you'd do to 
go with the human skeleton from Brummagem 
eh, old lass ? . eh i They could get up a bit of 
special business for yer, eh, old wench ? " 

The dog barked, as if the notion was highly 
entertaining, and laid her head on the showman's 
knee. 

"That's a new idea, isn't it, Momus," he went 
on; "but never mind, old gal, you shan't go on. 
as a skeletoiL Tip us a tumble, jus to show 
you've got the free use of yer limbs, and then 
you shall have yer supper." 

Momus turned a somersault, walked on her 
fore legs, danced on her hind legs, and then made 
another bow to Mr. Dibble; and that runaway 
<x)nspirator was so diverted, that he forgot Mrs. 
Dibble and all his old friends, and called for 
another pint of beer. 

The showman ordered in a dish of tripe, of 
which savoury meat the landlord had procured a 
laige supply on the day previously for his ex- 
pected customers; and Dibble, the dog, and an 



A SAVOUBY SUPPEB. 255 

interesting young lady in faded silk and curls, 
were to be the showman's guests ; the young lady 
being his daughter Christabel, as he informed 
Dibble, and one of the most rising gals of the 
day. 

Supper was laid on a little round table near 
the fire-place, and an old pewter plate was placed 
on the floor for Momus. 

" Give her all the scraps you've got, Dick," the 
showman said to the waiter, "and I'll come down 
'ansum for it." 

Dick brought in a variety of pickings, and 
heaped them upon the dish; Momus speedily 
devoured them, and then lay down beside the 
plate, at her master's request, ''becos there was 
tripe to foUer." 

The tripe came in at length, hot and steaming, 
and floating about in a milky flood redolent of 
onions. A candle was placed in the middle of 
the table, and the showman held it over the 
brown dish for a moment to feast his eyes upon 
the contents^ and then he dashed in a wooden 



256 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

spoon and served out a plateful to Dibble and 
his daughter, a few inches to Momus, and a large 
quantity for himself. They all set-to with a 
will, Christabel making short work with her 
allowance, and helping herself to more, with 
sudden rapidity. Her father cautioned her not 
to be greedy. She only deigned to reply in one 
word, the meaning of which,* under the circum- 
stances, seemed to be particularly significant ; for 
her father began to heap more tripe upon his own 
plate, and Dibble began to ply his knife and 
fork with increased rapidity. " Walker " was the 
word which the fair Christabel had used with 
such magic effect ; but there was no necessity for 
the alarm which it evidently created in her fond 
parent's breast, seeing that she could not eat the 
whole of that second lot, and the showman 
and Dibble were not compelled to stint their 
appetites. 

After supper, the showman lighted a short 
pipe, and ordered rum-and-water for three; 
Christabel brought some mysterious article of 



AN OFFER. 257 

finery from her basket, and began to sew; and 
the three looked particularly happy and con- 
tented. 

The showman drank Dibble's health, and then 
asked him what his little game might be. 

Dibble drank the showman's health and the 
young lady's, and said he did not know what the 
showman meant. 

"Gammon," said the showman. "Did yer 'ear 
that, Momus?" 

Momus did not, for she was fast asleep at her 
master's feet. 

"Ever been in the profession?" the showman 
inquired. 

Dibble looked puzzled, and said " No." 

"I mean the show business," said the man, 
blowing a cloud of smoke into the candlelight 

"No, I've been in diflferent employ," said 
Dibble, feeling hot and comfortable with so much 
eating and drinking. 

" Looking for work ? " 

"Yes," said Dibble. 

VOL. I. S 



258 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

" Would you like the show business?" 

"Shouldn't mind anything to turn an honest 
penny," said Dibble. 

"Well, as you've bin good to the dawg," said 
the showman, " 111 give you a few weeks' regler 
employment certain, though the season is getting 
to an end. I've been and invested in a horgan, 
I was afraid the dawg 'ud never come back, and 
I've added a horgan to the dnmi for the sake of 
hextra attraction on the outside. Would yer 
mind takin' the outside dooty and grindin' the 
horgan? I can give you a matter o' twelve 
shillin a week and most o' your grub." 

Dibble said he was much obliged to tha 
gentleman, and he would be glad to try his 
hand at the business; he could only give it up 
if he did not suit. So he was engaged on the 
spot, and became part of the establishment of 
" The Northern Magician," otherwise Digby Mar- 
quis, otherwise Bill Smith, the showman's real 
name. 

The company consisted of himself and Chris- 



ON THE HIGHWAY. 250 

tabel, who figured as "The Mysterious Lady/' 
and the dog, T)yho was known as " Madam Momus 
the four-legged Wonder." They travelled with a 
big cart-load of canvas, long poles, tressles, boards, 
and boxes, drawn by two ancient horses remark- 
able for " high points," long necks, and drooping 
heads. 

They rose early the next morning and went on 
their way over dusty high-roads, through green 
shaded lanes covered with leaves, over country 
bridges, and beneath railway viaducts. They 
went on, now merrily down hill with cheeiy 
words from Digby the showman, and now sadly 
up hill with Dibble and Digby pushing behind, 
and Christabel and Momus urging the horses in 
front. Occasionally they rested beside green 
patches of grass, and unlimbered the horses that 
the poor brutes might crop the herbaga On 
these occasions the showman smoked his pipe, 
and gave Dibble bits of philosophical advice 
anent his "outside dooties" in connection with 
the organ and the drum. 

8 2 



260 THE TAIiLANTS OF BARTON. 

Sometimes they travelled in company with 
cheap-jacks and peep-shows; hut these were 
generally too swift of motion for Dighy's esta- 
blishment. Once a grand photographic saloon on 
radiant wheels, and with a smart young lady 
doing crochet work at the front door, went saucily 
by, without even a smile of contempt for the 
magician's poles and bundles and boxes. But 
Digby had a merry word for everybody, and 
Momus stood upon her hind-legs and made de- 
risive bows now and then when the vehicles were 
particularly fast and showy. 

At night, when tbe moon had risen, they 
arrived at the Severntown race-course, and Dibble 
sat down to rest, and wonder what Mrs. Dibble, 
Mr. Gibbs, and sundry other persons, thought 
about his running away. 



CHAPTER XXIIL 

IS OF A MISCELLANEOUS AND DISCUESIVE CHA- 
RACTER, BUT ESSENTIAL TO THE NARRATIVE. 

" The early bird for the worm," saith the pro- 
verb, which the healthy-wealthy-and-wise preachers 
quote with such stirring effect in the society of 
young people. 

Supposing you are a bird, with an inordinate 
appetite for worms, it is good to rise early, no 
doubt; but if you are a worm it is better that 
you should not rise at the time when the early 
birds are congregated for breakfast. 

Eight or nine o'clock is quite soon enough to 
begin the day if you have to begin it in misery ; 
and if you have happiness before you all day long, 
you cannot get up too early to enjoy it. 



262 THE TALLA19TS OF BAKTOK. 

Now Mrs. Dibble had a hard day before her, and 
not a particularly happy one, and she rose early 
at the call of duty ; but she might just as well 
have had another hour's peaceful rest, for she was 
doomed to begin a day of more than ordinary trial. 

Shuffleton Gibbs also rose earlier than usual 
on this evenijful day, and it was well, for his own 
comfort, that he did do so, as a certain bird of 
very "taking" habits only found out his place of 
.residence at a later hour of the morning, and 
would have demoKshed him had he not sneaked 
away from his customary locaKty an hour or so 
earlier. 

So you see, whether we are birds or worms, 
we cannot count our chances of success or safety 
by our early rising. A certain worm may rise 
too early for the particular bird which is waiting 
for him, or he may lie abed just long enough to 
be snapped up by a late and luxurious cor- 
morant ; so, though the early bird may pick up 
the early worm, yet the lazy bird may also en- 
counter the worm that is late. 



MRS. DIBBLE FAINTS. 263 

The meaning of this is that proverbs are not 
necessaiily the most truthful and useful things in 
the world, though Mrs. Dibble discovered some 
truth in the axiom> that "it can't rain but it 
pours." 

A series of short, sharp screams were the 
earliest indications of something wrong in the 
Dibbleonian household on this morning of the 
"gude man's" departure. 

Mrs. Dibble got up, as we have intimated, 
rather earlier than usual, for the purpose of pre- 
paring breakfast with her own hands, scorning to 
trust certain little delicacies of bacon and kidnejrs 
to her diminutive servant. 

The sight of her extempore bed undisturbed 
and with no Thomas in it gave her a dreadful 
turn, as she explained afterwards, and that 
writing on the table with his confession in it 
might have knocked her down with a feather. 
So she screamed aloud, and as soon as she heard 
footsteps on the stairs she composed her morning 
gown into becoming folds, and posed herself for a 



264 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

comfortable faint upon the previously unpressed 
bed. 

Mr. Somerton was the first to put in an appear- 
ance, then came Paul^ and in a few minutes his 
sister Amy, all more or less frightened by Mrs, 
Dibble's screams. Mr. Somerton took the paper 
from her hands, read aloud the big open letters, 
and expressed his satisfaction in immistakable 
language. 

Amy threw her arms round Paul's neck, and 
at the same moment her father threw a jug of 
cold water into Mrs. Dibble's face, which roused 
that lady up in a fit of passion and indig- 
nation. 

"Mithter Thomerton, thir, I wonder you are 
not ashamed of yourself, to treat a lady in that 
outdacious way, throwing a bucket of water over 
her as if she were a doorstep or some other in- 
animate thing, or one of your own cattle ; but it's 
the way of the world, . oh, yes, nothing but in- 
gratitude and all that's bad !" 

Mrs. Dibble shook her dress, and wiped her face 



WHAT WILL SHE DO? 265 

with a towel, and shook her head, and stormed 
and stamped her feet, and gave other iudications 
of perfect convalescence, and finally sank down 
again exhausted; but she sprang to her feet in 
an attitude of defence when Mr. Somerton seized 
the water-jug for the second time. 

By-and-by the position of affairs was gravely 
discussed, and Mrs. Dibble talked of a hundred 
schemes of restoring Thomas to his home. She 
would send the police after him ; she would 
advertise for him in the Ti/mes ; she would follow 
him on foot through the wide wide world. Then 
in a moment of indignation she insisted upon his 
never returning to the roof which he had dis- 
honoured, and the harmonies of which would 
never go up to heaven any more on Simday 
evenings as tokens of peace and honour. The 
old termagant grew quite eloquent in her distress 
and passion, and all the time expressed her con- 
viction that Paul was innocent as the lamb led 
to, the slaughter. 

The only thing which at all mollified her was 



266 ' THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Amy's suggestion that perhaps poor Dibble had 
been tempted to do wrong because he loved his 
wife so dearly ; though Mrs. Dibble insisted that 
it was not love she valued so highly as honour 
and virtue and prudence, however much she had 
certainly been attached to Thomas in the early 
days of their courtship. 

Things were assuming, it wiU be seen, rather a 
ridiculous aspect when Mr. Williamson arrived, 
with his grave, amiable face, to put affairs upon a 
proper footing. He mastered Dibble's confession 
immediately, and rubbed his hands over it and 
smiled. 

" Yes, yes," he said, " we must change places to- 
day, Paul ; we must put you in the witness-box, 
and Gibbs in the dock : that will be a good joke, 
eh ? It's really a capital case . as nice a bit of 
conspiracy as could well be imagined. I thought 
yours was an honest face, young man," he conti- 
nued, addressing Paul, " as soon as you appeared." 

Paul blushed, and said, "Thank you, Mr. 
Williamson." 



AMY TRIES TO EXPLAIN. 267 

The journalist and barrister then made a quiet 
effort to learn from Paul his reasons for taking 
such an interest in the doings of Mr. Gibbs at the 
Ashford Club. 

Paul hesitated and looked at his sister, who 
immediately came to his assistance. 

" I induced Paul to make inquiries," she said. 

Her father and the rest looking for some further 
observation, she said, 

"Paul heard some strange things, concerning 
Mr. Tallant's son, and . ^and Mr. Hammerton, 
who resided near us. I was anxious, if possible, 
to learn the truth of the rumours, which were to 
their discredit. In truth, it seemed as though 
the good name and reputation of Mr. Hammerton 
were likely to be lost to him, as if he were 
being gradually led into the society of dis- 
reputable people and deceived, and " 

Amy was very much at fault in her attempted 
explanation ; she felt that she hardly knew why 
she had interfered, now that she endeavoured to 
justify it. Curiosity, excited by Paul's letters, had 



268 THE TALULNTS OF BABTOK. 

been her first impulse^ and then her romantic love 
for Hammerton had shown her the danger into 
which he was drifting. Her hero a gambler, the 
man whom she held up in her imagination as the 
best and the truest and purest and noblest, an 
associate of gamblers and speculators and drunk- 
ards ; the idea had tortured her to an extent quite 
sufficient to add eloquent point to her inquiries 
concerning Hammerton and Tallant, which had 
at first puzzled Paul, an^ then enlisted him in 
her service as Mr. Hammerton's good angel. 

Could she explain this, with the eyes of her 
father and Mr. Williamson upon her ? She suc- 
ceeded in leaving on the mind of the latter 
gentlemen the impression that she had had a 
mind to pry into the private doings of these 
gentlemen from idle girlish curiosity, and that 
Paul had been very foolish in giving way to her ; 
but Mr. Somerton saw a little further than this 
into the secret of his daughter. 

'<Well, we must not stay chatting here," said 
Mr. Williamson at length ; " I will go and apply 



TOO LATE I 269 

for a warrant against this Mr. Gibbs for con- 
spiracy ; and with regard to your husband, Mrs. 
Dibble, you had better take no steps at present 
to discover him." 

Mrs. Dibble, who had been mechanically light^ 
ing the fire and boiling the kettle all this time, 
turned round and requested Mr. Williamson to 
attend to his own business, and promised the 
whole company that she would attend to hers. 

Upon this Mr. Williamson declined the lady's 
invitation to breakfast, and went away in company 
with Paul, whom Mr. Somerton and his daughter 
promised to meet at Bow Street at twelve o'clock, 
when PauVs bail expired. 

A warrant for conspiracy was granted against 
Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs ; but nearly an hour before 
a detective from Scotland Yard tapped at Mr. 
Gibbs' door to execute the warrant, his land- 
lady had slipped inside her lodger's bed-room the 
rough-looking note of Dibble's. It happened that 
Mr. Gibbs rose a little earlier that morning, or 
he would not have received the warning in time 



270 THE TALLA1TT8 OF BABTON. 

to have taken measures for his own safety. As 
it was, he no sooner received the letter than he 
commenced to prepare for flight. 

In the midst of a volley of "curses not loud 
but deep," he deposited a few articles of linen 
and other things in a valise, into which he 
emptied the contents of a small cash-box. Then 
from a drawer beneath the bedstead he brought 
forth a grey wig, a long strait coat, and a pair 
of green spectacles. 

" Somehow I thought I should come to this at 
last," he said, tossing the things upon the bed and 
locking the bed-room door. " The luck's against 
me. 

And then he swore bitterly, and savagely 
ground his teeth, and coughed, and vowed the 
direst vengeance against everybody. 

Taking up a pair of scissors, he cut off his 
whiskers and moustaches, and wrapped them up 
in paper. 

"I must bum them somehow," he said to 
himself. "What an ass I must be to get my- 



ESCAPED. 271 

self into this mess to satisfy my revenge on 
a boy, . a twopenny-halfpenny clerk whom I 
ought to have thrashed within an inch of 
his life." 

He went on muttering to himself as he shaved 
his face clean and bare. He certainly was not 
improved by the operation. The bad lines about 
his mouth came out in painful distinctness, now 
that the hair was gone. 

Fastening a white band about his neck, Mr. 
Gibbs next adjusted the grey wig upon the 
partially bald head, put on the green spectacles, 
donned the long strait coat, opened his bed- 
room door, listened attentively for a moment, 
and then quietly disappeared down-stairs and 
out at the front. 

He had an hour's start of the police, and he 
maintained his advantage cleverly. 

No prosecutor appeared at Bow Street against 
Paul, and the purse was impounded, . "rather a 
sell for Mr. Gibbs that," as Williamson said in 
his quiet amiable way afterwards. The magis- 



272 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

trate said Paul left that court an injured young 
mau, without a blemish on his character. 

In the evening Amy and her father returned 
home, and they would fain have had Paul's^ 
company ; but Mr. Williamson begged that they 
would let Paul spend the evening with him, 
as he thought he could introduce the lad 
to a better situation than the one at West- 
minster. 

Amy looked the gratitude which she felt for Mr. 
Williamson's great kindness, and Mr. Somerton 
delicately pressed a ten-pound note upon him just 
'*to buy something, you know, in remembrance 
of the affair . ^not in the way of payment for a 
moment, but to buy a ring or something as a 
token of a father's gratitude for protecting his 
son when no friends were near." 

Mr. Williamson could not resist the fine fellow, 
as he said at the Club afterwards, "there was 
something so noble in the way in which it was 
done. A true son of the soil that Somerton . sl 



MR. WILLIAMSON AT HIS CLUB. 



^73 



fine noble fellow with his heart in his eyes, and 
then his splendid daughter standing by and 
looking so appealingly, by Jove, I took the note, 
and the young fellow and I went together into 
Regent Street and spent it." 

This Club of which we speak was the Cavendish, 
. a Club frequented by artists, actors, writers for 
magazines, and newspaper critics, . and in the 
evening, Mr. Williamson, one of its most lovable 
members, introduced his proUg4 Paul 

It represented quite a new world to the bailiffs 
son, . and a world which was highly attractive. 
A new drama had been produced on this evening, 
and soon after eleven o'clock quite a small crowd 
of fellows came in to eat chops, drink grog, and 
discuss the new play. Some of them shook 
hands with Williamson, called him " dear boy," 
and asked what new bit of philanthropy he had 
in hand. He introduced Paul to one gentleman 
as his amicua curice, his camarade, his Jidus 
Achates, and said he wished to recommend Paul 
to him for a clerkship in his office. 



274 THE TALLAin?8 OF BABTON. 

"I know you have a vacancy, because I in- 
quired yesterday. Bead the papers to-morrow 
about a case at Bow Street . ^the one in which 
I was engaged, . ^they were talking about it 
here, you know, last night, . don't ask any 
questions, but wait untU I call upon you to- 
morrow." 

**A11 light," old fellow," said the gentleman; 
and when he had joined a companion at the 
furthest end of the room, Mr. Williamson said, 
" That gentleman is the proprietor of The Pyro- 
technic, a musical, theatrical, and Kterary paper 
of which, entre rums, I am the editor." 

Paul during the whole night acted upon 
the nursery proverb . ^list^ned and said nothing. 
He heard all sorts of wonderful things about 
dramatic art and literary criticism, and Mr. 
Williamson pointed out to him the most notable 
personages present. One of the quietest and 
"meekest-minded" fellows there was the lead- 
ing low comedian of a famous theatre ; and the 
noisiest and funniest dog of the lot was the 



RELIGIOUS TBAOHBRS. 276 

gentleman who played high tragic characters at 
the same house. The most '' disputatious person " 
was a musician who talked of German operas and 
the unities of the classic drama. A gentleman 
who was renowned as a wit spoke of the gorgeous 
poetic beauty of the Psalms ; and a preacher who 
contributed leading articles to a popular religious 
paper got a little applause and some quiet ex- 
pressions of irony by designating himself " a pro- 
fessor of Hebrew mythology." 

Paul did not quite understand this latter 
bit of smart profanity at the time ; but he 
learnt eventually to estimate it at its true value, 
and understand how much of the practical 
imbelief of the day arises from the want 
of downright earnestness on the part of many 
professed religious teachers. Mr. Williamson 
often talked about questions of this character 
with Paul in after days at his quiet chambers 
in the Temple, and Paul found at the bottom of 
Williamson's philanthropy a fine vein of religious 
feeling. And yet Mr. Williamson was a disap- 

T 2 



276 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

pointed man. The world had not gone well 
with him^ he used to say. He commenced life 
with grand theories and sentiments, and with 
convictions too strong, and a heart too suscep- 
tible of honour and truth and honesty, to let him 
register vows which he did not feel that he could 
perform to the letter. 'Otherwise he might have 
been a shining light perchance in the Church : at 
all events he would have been true to her, not 
like that miserable fellow who talked about 
Hebrew mythology, and chuckled over his own 
infamy. 'Mr. Williamson had avoided this re- 
ligious writer ever afterwards ; not, as he said, 
for being an unbeliever, not because he was an 
atheist, but because he belonged to the holiest 
and best of all professions and made a boast of 
his perjury and unfaithfulness. Mr. Williamson 
gave the greatest latitude to free-thinking, and 
never interfered in religious controversies, and 
he instilled into Paul's mind opinions of libe- 
rality and toleration. 

It was strange that Williamson should have 



A GENEROUS IMPULSE. 277 

taken such a fancy to Paul Somerton; but he 
was an eccentric, amiable, kindly fellow, and his 
ways and mode of life, his likes and dislikes, his 
selection of companions, and his general motives 
of action were not influenced by common im- 
pulses : he had habits of thought and ways of his 
own, and he took it into his head that he would* 
help this young fellow whom Fortune had thrown 
in his way. 



280 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

when father was done up, and had to turn to con- 
juring, he stuck to us for long enough, and it was 
he who used to tell me all about it." 

" I never see a clown but once," said Dibble, 
" and that was when me and " 

" Yes," said Christabel, " you and " 

" Well, I was going to say," Dibble stammered. 

" You and " repeated ChristabeL " Now, 

you are keeping something from me : if it's a 
secret, tell it me, and 111 tell you another . 
such a first-rater." 

" You wiU ?'' exclaimed Dibble. 

" Yes," said Christabel, nodding her head, and 
laughing quite gleefully. 

" And you'll never tell, on your blessed oath ? " 
said Dibble. " But what's the good of oaths ? I'd 
rather trust to your honour." 

" Then you may," said Christabel ; " for I'm 
longing to tell you a secret, . one that I've kept 
for, 0, ever so long ! Now, who was it when you 
and." 

" Well, then, I wor going to say, when me and 



" what's a panic ? " 281 

Mrs. Dibble . which be my wife," said Thomas, 
" once went to a pantomime, and see the clown 
eat three yards of sausages, and jump through a 
clock." 

" So youVe a wife ? " said Christabel, disregard- 
ing altogether the wonderful feat of the clown in 
the pantomime. 

" Yes ; and IVe bin and run away from her," 
said Dibble ; " so there's my secret, and I trusts 
to your honour." 

" What did you run away for ? '* asked 
Christabel. 

" Well, 'cos I'd bin and got into trouble in the 
panip," said Dibble. 

" What's a panic ? " asked Christabel " I never 
heard of a panic." 

" Why, you see, it's a sort of row in the City 
about what shares be worth, and which buys 'em, 
and who sells 'em, and whether you've got 'em, or 
the other one ; but the great thing of all is to 
know what a bull is, and which is the bear, and 
whether you ought to be one or the 'tother, and 



282 THE TALLANT8 OF BARTON. 

whether it's premiuin or par, or what the dis- 
count be." 

This was one of the longest explanatory 
speeches that Dibble had ever made, except when 
he was trying to convince Mrs. Dibble that he 
was a bull, and could not help it. He looked at 
Christabel, and fancied that he had given a par- 
ticularly lucid description of a panic ; but the 
mysterious lady stared in astonishment at Dibble, 
and said . 

" So that's a panic, is it ? " 

" Yes it be, summat near it," said Dibble. " I 
ought to know, considerin' as I lost five hundred 
pounds in it." . 

Dibble raised his head, and looked quite impor- 
tant when he thought of his financial experience. 

" Well I never heard of a panic before," said 
Christabel. " I begun to think you must be going 
off your head . ' off your nut,' as father calls it . 
when you talked of bears and bulls, or else that a 
panic was a menagerie, and you really had been in 
the profession before." 



WORSE THAN WILD BEASTS. 283 

" No, a panic bain't a menagerie/' said Dibble ; 
" it's worse nor anjrthing of that sort ; it's some- 
thing as you can't see, but it's got a way of 
getting at your money, and swallering of it up in 
the most outdacious style, and the more it gets, 
the more you has to give it." 

"Why, it must be a menagerie," said ChristabeL 
" What be a menagerie, . wild beasts ? " 
" Of course, you know that," said Christabel, a 
little impatiently. 

"Well, it's worse than the awfullest wild beasts 
as ever you heard on; but you can't see it. I 
thought you could myself, and I went into the 
City and inquired. ' Where be the panic ? * I says 
to a porter as I knowed. ' In there,' says he, 
' in the Stock Exchange.' I looked into a place, 
through a hole, and there I sees above a hundred 
men, a talking, and shouting, and writing in little 
books, and going on like Bedlam ; but I never see 
the panic. So I asks a man as was standing close 
by, and he begun to laugh and told me to inquire 
of a fat party again the door, and he said I was to 



284 THE TALLAHTS OF BABTON. 

ask the Old Woman of Threadneedle-street. I went 
there, and I see an old 'oman, a selling oranges, 
which I asked at once. She said she thought that 
was it, pointing to a great big house ; but I never 
see it, and I 'eard arter, as it was not to be seen, 
that it was like the devil going about in the 
character of a roaring lion on the quiet, never 
letting anybody see 'un/' 

Dibble was becoming quite garrulous upon the 
panic, and Christabel sat looking at him with a 
startled sort of curiosity ; she had never heard of 
such a wonderful animal before; but then, she 
said, there were no doubt many things of which 
she was ignorant. 

" If Carkey had lived," she went on, " I should 
have known all about eveiything, because he said 
he would teach me, and some day he said I might 
become a fine lady. Just fancy, wouldn't that 
be fizzing, to be a fine lady ! If I was to tell your 
secret, you'd be in an awful way, eh ? It would 
be a reglar do, wouldn't it ? " 

"Hawful," said Dibble. 



MYSTERY. ' 285 

" That's right, 'cause I want to tell you mine. 
Now, look here." 

Christabel looked cautiously round, to see if 
the miscellaneous company were occupied. Con- 
vinced that nobody was watching them, she took 
from her bosom a small miniature. 

" Now, you see that ? " she said, in a whisper. 

"Yes," said Dibble, fully expecting to see it 
changed into a pigeon or something more wonder- 
ful still, in the way of conjuring. 

" That is the picture of a lady. Carkey gave it 
to me, and he told me never to part with it for 
love or money. It is a picture of a real lady, 
such a beauty, and he says, . ^you swear you will 
never split ? " 

"Never,** said Dibble, solemnly. 

" Well, that this lady was my mother, and that 
my father was a gentleman ; that Digby Martin is 
not my father at all, and that some day I would 
perhaps find out my real father. I promised on 
his death-bed always to call Digby father, and 
never to let anything make me not do so, and 



286 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

that I was to try and learn things out of books, 
and read newspapers, and all that. Now, I've 
always wanted somebody to talk to since poor 
Carkey died, and to ask their opinion about it ; 
and now you and I shall be friends for ever,. eh, 
Thomas?" 

" Oh, yes, sure," said Dibble. " I wouldn't 
tell your secret for all the world. What a 
wonderful girl you be, surely ! " 

"Ain't I?" said Christabel, quite proudly. 
"I often thinks of it when I'm going through 
the performance, and especially lately. I read 
in bed, and sometimes of a morning; and I 
know it's true what Carkey said, because there's 
a tale just like it in the paper which I buy every 
Saturday morning, as sure as the day comes 
round ; and O, it makes my blood boil ! O, it's 
such a fizzing story, and there's pictures of her 
in it ! She was stolen by gipsies, and they 
made her sell buy-a-brooms and matches; and 
she was a lord's daughter all the time! And 
who knows, Thomas, but that I am the same? 



christabel's ambition, 287 

Haven't I got a picture in my bosom, and all 
that? O, wouldn't I go it if I ever came 
to be rich ! And I mean to be, Dibble ; I'm 
not a-going to be always performing here, don't 
think it!" 

Dibble said Miss Christabel ought to be in 
London, at the British Museum, or some- 
where. 

^ When she knew a little more of things in 
general, Christabel said she meant to try her 
fortune. There were lots of marriages in the 
tale she was reading, and always a lot in the 
newspapers. Why shouldn't she be married ? 

" Why, you be too young for that," said Dibble. 
"I know a young gentleman as would make 
such a sweetheart for you," said Dibble ; " such 
a sweetheart*! " 

"Yes," said Christabel, smiling her sweetest, 
and putting her hair to rights. 

" But there, he be miles and miles away from 
here," said Dibble ; " and you're never likely to 
see him, Ise afeared." 



288 THE TALLANT8 OP BABTON. 

" What is he like ? " said Christabel, preparing 
for a flirtation in fancy. 

" 0, a handsome, nice young gentleman ; 
and his name's Paul" 

" What a jolly, stunning name ! " said 
Christabel. 

"He wouldn't like you to speak like that," 
said Dibble. 

" How do you mean 1 '* asked Christabel. 

" Why stunning and all that . it hain't perlitej 
he talks so fine himself, he do." 

"I know what you mean," said the young 
lady. "I can talk fine, too. I know stunning 
isn't fine ; but I know what is, so there ! " 

"You hain't angry now?" said Dibble. 

" Not at all . oh, no," said Christabel 
"What's his other name?" 

"Somerton," said Dibble. "Master Paul 
Somerton." 

" Oh ! and do you think he would fall in love 
with me ? " ' 

"I should think he would," said Dibble, as- 



THE OLD STOBT. 289 

tonished that there should be any opening for 
doubt upon the subject. 

" Oh, how nice ! I often think some grand 
young gentleman will come into the Temple 
and fall in love with me; but I never see a 
real handsome one come in, dressed pretty, you 
know, and with a little moustache, like the 
pictures in the tale that I was telling you of. 
I always looks round the audience to see if 
there is aireyone as is in love with me; airey- 
one as I could love, you know. But they are all 
such a gawky lot.* Most of them are in love 
with me . ^I know that, of course; but they 
are hardly worth being niade miserable. O, I 
gives them such looks sometimes!'' 

Christabel seemed to hug herself upon her 
assumed capacity to make some of the male 
portion of her audiences unhappily in love with 
her, and Dibble felt morally certain that it 
would be impossible for ' any young gentleman 
not to fall in love with her; but as for 
marriage it was nonsense, Dibble told her, to 

VOL. I. T7 



290 THE TALLAIflTS OF BABTON. 

think of that, . such a very young lady as she 
was; he should think for his part that she 
ought to be able to conjure some handsome 
young gentleman into that basket when she 
disappeared at the touch of her father's wand . 
disappeared nobody knew where. But the young 
lady only laughed at this, and thought it a 
good joke. 

What if she could conjure into it that hand- 
some Paul Somerton, she said, who talked so fine! 

Dibble said that would be splendid, and then 
Christabel as a further prdof of her favour, 
gave Thomas her royal permission to call her 
" Chrissy." Carkey, the clown, had always called 
her " Chrissy," and in future Dibble should take 
the clown's* place, and be her confidant. 

"But mind," she said, clenching her little 
hand, " if you dare to betray me. if you do not 
keep my secret, . I will not only tell yours, but 
oh, I don't know what I will not do besides. 
shoot you, perhaps, with a pistol, like the lord's 
daughter in the tale." 



THE YOBESHIBE QIANT. 291 

Christabel said this so fiercely that Dibble 
almost wished she had not confided her secret 
to him. Just as he was about to make a 
remark to this eflfect, there staggered into the 
room, reeling through the smoke, the showman 
and his " dawg." The company hammered their 
glasses on the tables and shouted "bravo," as 
Digby strutted in with the Yorkshire giant and 
Momus, the giant smiling benignly upon his 
tipsy friend, and Momus marching in front with 
her head very erect, and her nose turned towards 
her proprietor. 

Thom^iS Dibble had hardly raised his eyes to 
look at his new master and the giant, when 
Digby seized a cup and threw it at Momus, and, 
missing his mark, made stupid efforts to kick 
the animal, whereupon Christabel rushed to the 
dog's rescue and called the showman a brute, 
at which there was another burst of applause. 
The giant hereupon lifted Digby up by his 
collar out of harm's way, as if in terrible affright 
at Christabel; at this Digby kicked and swore, 



292 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

and the giant^ dropping him, said the young lady 
was right, Digby Martin was indeed a brute; and 
it was generally agreed that this was the most 
courageous thing that a giant had ever been known 
to do and say. This led to a dispute between a 
very tall gentleman in the peepnshow line, and 
the proprietor of a boxing booth, which e^ded 
in an extempore fight on the spot; in the midst 
of which Christabel retired in disgust, quietly 
intimating to Dibble that she would not put up 
with "this sort of thing" much longer. Dibble 
slunk away too, and wished there had never 
been such a thing as a panic in the City. 



END OP VOL. I. 
TALLANTS OF BARTON. 



. CHAPTER I. 

ENTER THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OF 
VERNER. 

So swiftly did one incident of change crowd 
upon another at this period of the lives which we 
fear we are but faintly sketching, that it seemed 
as if Fortune had arranged all the concomitant 
circumstances that were culminating in these 
/ few eventful days of autumn. 

Fortune, " the great commandress of the world," 
had already played strange pranks with those two 
charming girls at Barton. Until lately their 
destinies had flowed on smoothly and in peace. 
They had grown up side by side, . one the 

VOL. IT. B 



2 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

mistress, the other the companion and friend,. 
and until now there had been no jealousy on 
either hand . until now Amy Somerton had been 
content with her lot. She had brooded over her 
owly birth, in those hours when she had loved 
and dreamed about her love for Mr. Hammerton, 
but she had only seemed to look up the higher to 
her love. She had seen him as miners see the 
sky, far above her, and with hardly a beam of 
hope animating the thought that some day he 
might take her hand and raise her up, as the king 
selected the beggar maid in the poem. 

In those sunny days of doubt and hope and 
maiden admiration, she had been happy in her 
own quiet, dreamy fashion, contented with 
Lioners kind words and delicate attentions. He 
had never, perhaps, told her in so many words 
that he loved her, but there was that in his voice 
and manner, when he addressed her, which led her 
to believe that he took delight in her own undis- 
guised admiration. He had signified his pleasure 
in her society in a thousand different ways, and 



REBELLION. O 

for the time being this was enough to satisfy the 
heart-craving of Amy ; but content to be humble, 
her pride nevertheless rose up against attack, 
with all the fierceness of injury. On that 
morning when she learnt that Lionel had left the 
country without one word at parting, she knew as 
if by instinct that her love was cast off. He must 
have known some time before he left that he 
was going, and yet he had not even deigned to 
say so. She knew how weak she had been ; she 
knew how little she h?td striven to hide her love. 
Lionel Hammerton knew that she had loved him 
with all her heart and souL She had not cared 
to disguise her feelings. She would have given 
up all the world for him, even like Groethe's 
Marguerite. There was no sacrifice she would not 
have made, if sacrifice had been needed, at the 
feet of Lionel Hammerton ; yet he had treated 
herself and her love with contempt and in 
difference. 

You have seen how her spirit rebelled against 
the slight which she imagined was the assertion 

b2 



4 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

of rank and fortune over lowly birth. Her whole 
nature seemed to have undergone a change . a 
change in which pride took such full possession of 
her heart, that there was no more room left for 
love. She who had sat and simpered over Tenny- 
son like a love-sick, romantic girl, dreaming of 
Cophetua, and Camelot, and A. H. BL, now 
thought of nothing but schemes of revenge and 
ambition. K she were only in Phoebe Tallant's 
place, what would she not do to assert the rights of 
lowly birth and beauty ! She envied her friend 
at the moment with a hot and a bitter envy, and 
hated her own more lowly origin. 

It was the morning after her return from 
London. She sat at her bed-room window at the 
farm, commanding a long reach of the carriage- 
drive to Barton Hall. The park trees were stand- 
ing in golden circles of leaves ; the great elms 
were shaking down their last autumnal tributes to 
mother earth ; the old roots were wrapped in soft 
carpet-like coverings of red and brown and gold ; 
the long carriage-drive was firinged with the same 



"A CARRIAGE AND FOUR." 5 

remnants of the djring year, and anon a gust of 
wind would sweep along the road and carry the 
leaves high up into the air, like flocks of birds 
sporting in the sunshine. 

But Amy saw only desolation in the scene ; she 
saw all her best and holiest aspirations tossed 
about the world like the fallen leaves. Whilst she 
sat there musing and fretting by the window, 
there entered the di-ive a carriage drawn by four 
horses ; as it gradually approached, she saw that 
there were footmen behind, and that the equipage 
was splendid. 

" As there are no fairies and magicians in these 
days," she said to herself, " that is not Cinderella's 
coach, and I am not Cinderella. Why, it must be 
Earl Vemer*s caniage: his brother is going to 
call at Barton Hall. I will go there too." 

And as she said so, the carriage swept along, 
with the leaves flying about the horses* heads and 
sporting round the carriage wheels. 

Amy was right. This was Earl Vomer's 
carriage, and his lordship was on his way to pay 



6 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Mr. Tallant a personal visit. Once, and only once, 
previously had he honoured Barton Hall with his 
presence. He was of a quiet, retiring nature ; a 
luxurious and learned nobleman, who cared more 
for rare books and works of art and old pottery 
than for anything else. 

He was scarcely fifty years of age, . a lithe, 
supple man, with brown, curly hair, and evidently 
a quiet, luxurious fellow, who liked to have his 
own way and take things easily. He had never 
been married, and never would marry, he said, 
because it would bore him. It would be impos- 
sible, he had often said, for any woman to be 
happy with him ; she would be jealous of his pic- 
tures and pottery in less than a month. And 
then the going into society, and fulfilling those 
duties of property which people talked about, and 
laying yourself out for being everybody's friend 
but your own : . no, he could not marry ; he 
would leave that, he said, to his brother Lionel. 

It was through this brother Lionel that the 
Earl Vemer called at Barton Hall this second 



CALLS. 7 

time. Mr. Hammerton had, it appeared, nat only 
invested largely himself in some of the bubble 
concerns of the day, but he had induced his lord- 
ship to divert considerable sums of money into 
the same channel; and now that his lordship's 
steward had large demands upon him for calls. 
Earl Vemer said to himself, " I will go over and 
see Tallant . pay him a visit of condolence, and 
kill two birds with one stone." 

So his lordship sent in his card, and followed it 
into Mr. Tallant's library, where he found the 
merchant engaged at his desk. 

" Ah, Mr. Tallant, how do you do ?" said his 
lordship, advancing with opening hand. 

"I hope your lordship is well?" said Mr. 
Tallant. " May I offer you a chair ? " 

Earl Vemer seated himself, and rubbed his 
hands familiaiiy before the fire. 

" Mine is rather a selfish visit, Tallant," he 
said. **I fear you must have thought me an 
unneighbourly fellow ; but, you see, I am fond 
of quiet, and I rarely pay visits. Perhaps I take 



8 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

too little interest in the county. However, you 
will believe me when I say that I was grieved to 
hear of your domestic trouble . deeply grieved ; 
for I knew you had set your heart upon making 
that young fellow a sort of intellectual Croesus, 
and " 

Here his lordship hesitated, seeing that the 
subject was painful to Mr. Tallant. 

" We will not talk about it, Mr. Tallant, but 
pray accept my sympathy ; and if there is any- 
thing I can do for the young fellow . I have 
some little influence, I am told, with the Govern- 
ment " 

" Thank your lordship. Let us act upon your 
former suggestion, and not talk about it. Richard 
Tallant is no longer my son." 

There was something so calm and determined 
in the merchant's manner, that Lord Vomer did 
not attempt to say any more on the subject. 

" 'A fellow feeling makes one wondrous kind,* 
you know," he said by-and-by. " My brother 
Lionel Hammerton, like everybody else, has been 



THE POPULAR FOLLY. 9 

drawn into considerable speculations, and, what is 
more, he has led me into the popular folly. 
Finance is a splendid game for those who under- 
stand it, no doubt ; but it is worse than the turf 
to a novice. My steward informs me that I have 
five hundred shai-es in the Oriental Bank, one 
hundred in the Mardike Mines, and five hundred 
in the Bank of Finance. There are calls due upon 
the whole of them, and two are to be wound up 
in Chancery. What shall I do in the matter 1 " 

" Pay the calls, and be prepared to pay up the 
whole of the Finance and Mining shares, and 
expect no return," said Mr. Tallant. "The 
Orientals may come right, and will come right if 
the shareholders and directors do not succumb to 
the bears on the Stock Exchange." 

" Hammerton holds similar shares : the same 
advice will apply with regard to those ? " 

" Yes, your lordship ; you have nothing to do 
but pay." 

" Thank you. I knew I should get clear and 
straightforward advice from you, Mr. Tallant. I 



10 THE TAT.T.ANTS OF BARTON. 

have abeady occupied your time too long, and I 
see you are busy. I will shake hands with Miss 
Tallant, and take my leave." 

Mr. Tallant made no reply, but rose, and con- 
ducting his lordship to the drawing-room, bade 
him good-moming. 

In the drawing-room Earl Vemer found Miss 
Tallant and Miss Somerton. The former he had 
seen once before, the latter he now saw for the 
first time. Phoebe was attired in her ordinaiy 
morning style, and looked fresh and blooming as 
a rose, but with just a trace of languor in her 
manner which did not usually characterise it. 
Amy had astonished her friend immensely, only 
ten minutes previously, by suddenly entering the 
room in a favourite delicate white merino, and 
with unusual signs of care manifested in her 
toilette. Her appearance was worthy that of a 
duchess. She looked like a queen in her own 
right. Her head never looked nobler ; the grace- 
ful curves about her mouth and chin seenied to 
be full of sunshine and happiness; her eyes 



FIRST IMPRESSIONS. 11 

spaorkled with unwonted brilliancy, and when 
Lord Vemer entered he found it difficult to 
remove his eyes from the lady's face. 

" Pray, present me to your friend," he said, 
after he had shaken hands with Miss Tallant, and 
without waiting to give Phoebe the voluntary 
opportunity of doing so. 

Miss Tallant presented Amy accordingly, and 
his lordship was not displeased to see how sensibly 
his rank affected her. His rank ? Might not his 
appearance have something to do with that faint 
blush and unmistakable embarrassment ? The 
thought flashed through his lordship's mind in an 
instant, and it flattered him. He grew quite 
affable, and insisted, in his grand way, upon sitting 
down and having a little chat. 

" I am sorry," he said to Miss Tallant, " to see 
your father so sensibly affected by late events ; i 
really grieves me to the heart . such a fine 
business gentleman as he was, so full of energy 
and resource. I must call again and see him. I 
fear he is moping. You must cheer him up. 



12 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

Miss Somerton, you must bring your high spirits 
to bear upon the poor gentleman; he is quite 
downcast." 

" I fear we had best not interfere with him 
just now, your lordship ; there are troubles which 
are better nursed and thought over. I hope Mr. 
Tallant will soon be well again," said Amy, sweetly. 

" Trouble ought to be quickly dispersed with 
such companionship as Mr. Tallant has in his 
daughter and yourself," said Lord Vomer, bent 
on paying Amy a compliment in return for her 
gracious looks. 

" I fear me we scarcely understand all Mr. 
Tallant's troubles just now, and perhaps he does 
not understand our sympathy and desire to con- 
sole him. Your lordship is pleased to be compli- 
mentary ; but there is little of woman's society at 
Montem Castle, I have always heard, or you 
would understand how easy it may be to tire of 
it." 

*. Ah, there you hit me. Miss Somerton; now 
really that is cruel Because I am deserted by 



CHANGED, INDEED ! 13 

the ladies, because I am a mopish, cross-grained, 
old bachelor, you think I am a fitting target for 
your sarcasm. Well, well, be it so. At least I 
have not to bear any woman's taunts and jests at 
my own hearth. Hal ha! . ^there, there . I think 
that is one to me. Don't you think so. Miss 
Tallant?" and his lordship laughed merrily at his 
own jocularity. 

Phoebe smiled a little sadly, and with a puzzled 
look at Amy, who gave her no opportunity to 
reply, but raising her hand slightly to give point 
to her words, she said : . 

" No, and your lordship has no woman's sweet 
smiles at your fireside either, no chatty sympa- 
thising companion in pretty dresses to walk by 
your side, and talk to you about all manner 
of things in which you are interested ; no cheery, 
pleasant womanly face at the head of your table 
making everything brighter about you. There . 
is not that one to me, as your lordship puts 

itr 

Amy smiled so coquettishly, and looked so 



]4 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

much all that she had described^ that his lord- 
ship soon found himself in an exuberance of 
spirits. 

" Ah, I am no match for you ; it is easy to 
see that you have Uved in the world, Miss 
Somerton. Your Belgravian guns are too many 
for our poor little pop-guns in the country, eh. 
Miss Tallant ? " said his lordship. 

"Miss Somerton has lived in the country all 
her life," said PhcBbe. 

" You surprise me," said the Earl. 

"And should never desire, I think, to live 
anywhere else," said Amy. "On the whole I 
think a country life by far the happiest, and 
the most independent." 

"Indeed, I think so too," said his lordship. 
"There is a certain amount of solitude in a 
comparatively retired country life, which allows 
the greatest scope for freedom of thought, and 
for manners and opinions." 

"In what is called society, you sacrifice your 
liberty, you lose your own individuality," said 



STBIEI^G HOME. 15 

Amy, taking up the theme in a manner that 
she knew would be highly pleasing to Lord 
Vomer, for she had an ample knowledge of 
his whims and peculiarities, and she was bent 
upon playing her new part in the most effective 
manner possible. 

" Hear, hear ! . admirably well illustrated ! " said 
Earl Vomer. " In the country one is not bored 
with all the trumpery little gossip of town. The 
news gets fairly sifted before it reaches us, as 
Gibbon, I think, somewhere says. We are the 
lookers-on, and we can rest or give up when 
we cease to be interested. In society, as you 
say, we are mixed up in the throng, we are 
part of all that is going on, we must be in- 
terested in all the frivolous nonsense. 0, no, 
nothing like the country, and especially whea 
you can occupy the mind." 

From this topic, in which Phoebe took great 
interest, the Earl glided into more lively sub- 
jects, and talked of pictures and new books ; 
and he was surprised at the smartness and learn- 



16 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

ing evinced in some of Miss Somerton's replies. 
She seemed to know a little of everything, and 
to express herself with such charming deference 
to his lordship s greater wisdom, that Earl 
Vomer was quite delighted. He was not bored 
a bit ; he had never before been in the society 
of women, who knew anything about books, 
without being bored ; he hated women who were 
at all clever as a rule; but there was an 
unaffected modesty, a charming maiveM about 
this lady's manner, which left its fascinating 
spirit upon Lord Verner long after he had left 
Barton HalL Who could she be, this splendid 
specimen of common sense and beauty ? 

When he had fairly left the house, Miss 
Somerton made a curtsey to herself in a mirror, 
and said, " Tr^ bouTie, Mademoiselle, your 
acting is really most natural" 

Then turning round upon Phoebe, who was 
gazing at her friend with an expression of the 
most profound astonishment, she said : . 

"Pray fprgive me, Miss Tallant; you won't 



AT BEST. 33 

to his side. Through every cleft and crevice the 
morning sunbeams streamed; a thousand motes 
sprang up and danced in the columns of light, 
as if they mocked the grave; and a reflection 
from the merchant's watch-seals trembled like an 
active eye upon the wall. 

Still the merchant slept on in his long, long 
sleep, until at length the sun rose higher and 
higher, ^ paling with his growing radiance the 
gaudy colours of his throne, and sending^ forth 
streams of purer and brighter light. By-and- 
by a door was opened in the quiet room, 
followed by an expression of hon-or and amaze- 
ment, and then hurried footsteps came and ^ent, 
additional doors were opened and shut, and in a 
few minutes the household was astir, heavily 
laden with the morning's sad discovery. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER III, 

"ARCADES AMBO/' BUT FLOUMSHINa 
NEVEBTHELESS. 

All this time Richard Tallant had remained in 
London ; not only remained in London, but had 
regularly and assiduously attended to his duties 
at the offices of the Meter Iron Works Company. 

There had been numerous board meetings, and 
a half-hearted kind of effort had been made to 
induce the chairman's son to retire. Mr. Chris- 
topher Tallant had given notice of his resignation; 
but the board could not agree upon the question 
of his successor. Mr. Richard Tallant attended 
every meeting, and had increased his holding of 
the company's stock to a large and important 
extent. 



ATJDACITT* 35 

In his father's absence he had made himself .of 
value to the company ; the nm upon their shares 
had been of brief duration; they had not only 
speedily recovered, but had gone up to a heavy 
premium. Eichard Tallant held his own in thq 
company with a tenacity that surprised everybody 
connected with it. Unabashed by the disclosures 
at the Oriental Bank, undaunted by newspaper 
attacks, since that notorious meeting when his 
father left the chair of the Banking Company, he 
had been almost ubiquitous. He had commenced 
actions against two newspapers for libel, and had 
threatened others. Some of his former friends 
cut him dead in th^ Stock Exchange and in the 
Park ; but he defied them all, and was to be seen 
as usual at the Comer, on 'Change, and at West- 
minster. 

He had wiitten a long letter full of excuses, 
and promises, and regrets, and justification to his 
father ; but the proud old merchant did not even 
acknowledge it. His disgrace was not so much 
as a nine days' wonder in the City, and his con- 

na 



36 THE TALLAlirrS OP BABTON. 

tinued success was considered, by many, to be a 
sufficient justification of his conduct 

Amidst so many failures, with such numerous 
instances of sharping, and in the presence of a 
panic so severe, Bichard Tallant's naone soon 
ceased to be canvassed : he paid every call that 
was made upon him, and he maintained his repu- 
tation for wealth. It was known that he had 
made enormous sums of money in recent specula- 
tions, and that he was financially independent 
So many men were shaking in their commercial 
, shoes, that few thought themselves able to afford 
to go out of their way to interfere with a rich man. 
"What have I done?" Mi-. Bichard Tallant 
asked at one of the Meter Board Meetings, whein 
he was attacked by an old friend of his father, 
" What have I done more than others have done, 
and are doing daily ? " 

" You have circulated false reports to damage 
the credit of good concerns, in order that you 
might make money by clever manipulations of 
shares," said his opponent 



AT BAY. 37 

"That is a mere assertion/* was Mr. Bichard 
Tallant's reply. "Prove it, . ^prove it, sir; and 
take this as a caution if you cannot prove it; 
there is an offence called slander, which is action* 
able at law ; rely upon it, I will not allow these 
things to be said with impunity. If I have made 
a few hundred thousand poimds by speculation on 
the Stock "Exchange, by carefully watching favour- 
able opportunities for buying and selling, it is not 
my &ult that others have lost, and I defy you or 
any other man to prove that I have done any- 
thing without the pale of legitimate specula- 
tion." 

" Did you not lend your shares in the Oriental 
Bank, of which you were a director, to persons 
who were bearing the market? Did you not 
throw shares upon the market, and did not timid 
shareholders sell, in consequence, at a heavy de- 
preciation, and did you not afterwards buy all 
you could get V* 

" Suppose I say yes I Had I not a right to 
deal as I pleased with my own shares ? K I did 



38 THE TALLANTS OF. BABTON. 

depreciate the property of tLe concern . which I 
deny . was I not depreciating my own ? " 

" Why were you absent from that meet- 
ing?'* 

" I had unexpected business elsewhere." 

*' Why have you not answered the atta<;k which 
was made upon you ? " 

" I will answer it in a court of justice, sir/* 
said Mr. Kichard Tallant, striking his jfist upon: 
the table. " Do you think I shaU permit the 
thing to pass over? You shall see how I will 
put my detractors down. Do you think I will 
permit the name of Tallant to be sullied by petti- 
fogging brokers in the City ? . ^by twopenny half- 
penny newspapers? Do you think a man with 
a balance of two hundred thousand pounds at his 
bankers in these times is to be put down by 
reports and rumours, and So-and-so says, and 
bosh of that character ? If you do, you do not 
know Kichard Tallant. And with regard to 
the Meter Iron Works, how many are there who 
have a larger stake in the prosperity of thQ 



THE VIBTTJB OF SUCCESS* 39 

concern than I have myself? Who charges me 
with neglect of duty ? " 

Mr. Christopher Tallant . poor man . might 
almost have been proud of the way in which his 
clever^ unscrupulous son asserted himsel One 
or two of the old men at the board applauded 
and backed him up. There were many things 
in which he had been useftJ during his father's 
absence, and it was chiefly through his influence 
with a certain railway company that a recent 
extensive order for girders had come in from 
India. Above all, the young fellow had been 
successful, and there was a manliness in his standi 
up fight against all opponents that seemed to 
carry everything before him. 

The truth is, on that day when his course of 
knavery was exposed, he had sent a trusty 
messenger to the meeting to report what took 
place, and when he learnt the result, he quietly 
shut himself up in his rooms at the West End, 
and debated with himself upon his line of conduct. 
"ShaU I make a bolt of it?" or "ShaU I fight it 



40 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

out?" These were the. two momentous questions 
which he put and argued out in a dozen different 
ways. 

He knew that his &ther would never forgive 
him, and, despite all his ill conduct, this gave 
him, a pang or two of regret and sorrow. It 
was not until midnight was long past, that he 
settled his plans : the ashes of many cigars lay 
upon the table, and numerous sheets of paper, 
cov^ered with figures, were torn up and scattered 
about the hearth, before the final resolve was made. 

" I'll fight it out ; ril go through with it," he 
said at last " The world bows down before suc- 
cess, no matter how it is obtained : money opens 
all doors, whoever knocks. I'll go in for money- 
reputation be hanged. Who has got a reputation 
worth a button in these times ? We are in the 
midst of a panic that will sweep away hundreds 
of reputations. What is the reputation of an 
honest bankrupt worth ? Where is the flyblown 
reputation that money, and success, and bounce, 
arid swagger will not cover ? " 



riGHTING IT OUT. 41 

So Mr. Eichard Tallant began to '' fight it out" 
next day. He served two persons with notices 
of action for slander, and commenced actions 
for libel against two newspapers; he obtained 
insertion of a paragraph to this effect in a 
monetary journal; he attended to his duties 
at the Meter Works with an assiduity that 
astonished everybody; he wrote that letter to 
his father, and he fought that battle at the 
Meter Board which we have briefly indicated ; he 
plunged deeper and deeper into speculations, 
and he was successful in almost every monetary 
operation in which he was engaged. 

Meanwhile things were not quite so pleasant with 
Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs. His overthrow had been 
completed by poor Dibble's confession. " Whom 
the gods devote to destruction, they first deprive 
of understanding." Mr. Gibbs ought to have 
had sufl&cient experience of life to have known 
that his passion for revenge was mastering his 
cunning; he ought to have known enough of 
character to have seen that Dibble would break 



42 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

down in the part which he had assigned to him ; 
but Fortune had permitted Gibbs to have his 
day, as she lets every other dog have his; and 
she selected her time and instruments accord- 
ingly for bringing his day to an end. 

With justice upon his heels, he had been com- 
pelled figuratively to blot himself out ; he could 
not only not sign his name to anything, but he 
could not put in a personal appearance anywhere 
as Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs; he had ventured to 
do a little business in his semi-clerical capacity, 
but failure was the result. The transfer of the 
shares which he had induced Dibble to take 
had never been completed, and when Gibbs 
benevolently took them back again they were 
improving; but two days affcer Dibble ran away, 
they went down to a heavy discount. Other 
things in which he wa3 interested went wrong, 
the purse that the police held he could not hope 
to obtain, and Jie soon foimd himself reduced to 
his last fifty pounds. 

He invested this sum characteristically. 



ARTIFICIAL BAITS. 43 

Assuming his semi-clerical disguise, he took 
lodgings in a quiet respectable street oflf the 
Strand, purchased a Newspaper Press Directory, 
and wrote out the following attractive adver- 
tisements:. 

" Loans. . Sums of money, varying from 21. to 
2000?., may be had for short or long periods, on 
personal security, on application to the under- 
signed. Secrecy observed in all transactions. 
Interest at the rate of 6 per cent. Apply (en- 
closing stamp for reply) to James Marfleeting, 
Esq., Accountant, 3, Great Charlton-street, Strand, 
London." 

" To Widows and Ladies in Needy Circum- 
stances. . The advertiser has patented a new 
invention, which opens up employment for ladies 
in their own homes, whereby they can make from 
11, to 21. a week with ease. Send 5s. in stamps 
for materials and instructions to the inventor and 
proprietor, Henry Cavendish, Esq., No. 6, Birkit- 
street. City, London." 



44 THE TALLANTS OF BABTQN. 

Having penned these enticing announcemetits, 
Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs called upon an engraver and 
ordered a couple of very business-like headings 
to be printed upon unimpeachable letter paper. 

These he obtained in the course of the next 
day, and meanwhile he studied the Press Direc- 
tory. This valuable work contained an elaborate 
index to the newspapers of the United Elingdom, 
giving their titles in full, the names and addresses 
of the publishers, with a brief description of the 
towns in which they were published, and the dates 
of their first publication. It also contained the 
publishers' own descriptions of their newspapers, 
. from which it would seem that each paper was 
the best medium for giving publicity to announce- 
ments of all descriptions; that several journals 
in the same town claimed to have the largest 
circulation; that they were all leading papers, 
first-class family papers, influential papers ; some 
were the oldest Liberal papers, some the oldest 
Conservative papers, many the only Penny papers 
in the district. 



ABS EST OELABE ABTEM. 45 

Mr. ShuflBleton Gibbs made a careful list of 
these numerous journals, selecting largely from 
among the newest penny papers, carefully jotting 
down all the dailies, and judiciously balancing the 
old weeklies, in the manufacturing districts, 
against those claiming to be more especially 
county papers. 

A printer in Shoreditch struck oflf for him a 
number of copies of his advertisements, and when 
all was prepared he commenced to write his 
orders for their publication. With these orders 
he enclosed packets of postage stamps, varying 
in value from sixpence to five and six shillings. 
Nearly one hundred and fifty went away without 
any stamps at all, the writer requesting a bill for 
the amoimt to be sent oflf when the advertise- 
ment had appeared, with a quotation for thirteen, 
twenty-six, and fifty-two insertions. These were 
chiefly posted to the penny district papers and to 
those most recently established. 

These missives duly passed through the post- 
office, and were opened by newspaper publishers, 



46 THE TAT.TiANTS OF BABTON. 

clerks, proprietors, and e(litors,^the next day, in all 
parts of England. Some of them were opened in 
bright, well-furnished counting-houses; many in 
dingy little back rooms, j others were carried up 
to private houses, where proprietors and editors 
read their letters before business hours in the 
morning. 

If you could have witnessed the varied 
treatment which these letters of Mr. Qibbs, oMaa 
Marfleeting, alias Cavendish, received, you would 
have been highly entertained. Some gentlemen 
who opened the letters smiled contemptuously, 
said, " Indeed," and returned stamps and order ; 
others who were not favoured with stamps tossed 
the letters into waste-paper baskets ; some said, 
^'Bah !" and tore the things up. In many cases, 
however, the stamps were passed to credit, and 
the advertisement ordered for insertion in the 
ordinary course of business; and amongst the 
new and cheap district papers, half printed in 
London and otherwise, the order unaccompanied 
by stamps was duly obeyed, and a price gravely 



BESULTS. 47 

quoted for thirteen, twenty-six, and fifty-two in- 
sertions, with discount carefully mentioned for 
pre-payment. 

In a few days, therefore, Mr. Gibbs' advertising 
baits were duly displayed in numerous journals, 
Several leading papers had at various times cau- 
tioned their readers against this class of an-> 
notmcement; still advertisements of the kind 
occasionally obtained insertion in the ordinary 
course of business. Thus the two I have mentioned 
had places in many newspapers, and in less 
than a week Mr. Gibbs found quite a heap of 
letters waiting for him at the little cofifee-house. 
No. 6, Burkit-street, City, addressed to Henry 
Cavendish, Esq. To the first batch of these he 
replied, stating that applications were so nume- 
rous the materials could not be manufactured 
fast enough, but that they should be sent ofif in a 
few days. He had so many communications at 
Great Charlton-street, that he was compelled to 
have a printed form of reply, and in this he en- 
closed another form, which thq applicant was re- 



48 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

quested to fill up and forward by return, with five 
shillings for inquiry fees and five shillings for 
preliminary fees, which would be returned in case 
the loan were not granted. " An agent will call 
upon you personally in the course of three or four 
days with the cash, Mr. Marfleeting having several 
agents travelling through the provinces, as he 
finds this mode of doing business safer, more 
expeditious and private, than negotiations by 
letter." 

Hundreds of clients responded to Mr. Mar- 
fleeting's reply, and scores of ladies continued to 
address private notes to Henry Cavendish, Esq. 

What pinching and starving, and need, and 
keeping up appearances, all these letters repre- 
sented ! What stories they indicated ! What 
fears of bankruptcy, what hopes deferred, what 
cheerless hearths, what battles for life, what 
misery ! Small tradesmen with bills of exchange 
coming due ; shopkeepers pressed for rent ; clerks 
who had overrun the constable ; mechanics with 
extravagant wives ; men of small means who had 



AFTERWARDS. 17 

cast me oflf for trying to outshine you this morn- 
ing? You will not show me the door because 
I am only a bailiff's daughter, and not rich ? " 

Amy's sarcasm astonished Phoebe more than 
her previously extraordinary manner had done, 
and she could only think that poor Amy was 
not quite right in her mind. 

"You surely cannot be in your right senses. 
Amy? " said Miss Tallant. 

"Oh yes I am, dear. I was a poor foolish 
creature once; but I am going to appear in a 
new character in future. I will tell you all about 
it, like a dutiful companion and bailiff's daughter, 
if you will not denounce me." 

" I fail to understand you, Amy," said Phoebe, 
a little piqued at this undeserved reference to 
their relative positions. 

Any further explanation on Amy's part was 
prevented at that time by an unexpected message 
from the farm. Mrs. Somerton was seriously ill, 
and Luke had sent for his daughter, who went 
hurriedly to the bedroom which was set apart 

TOL. IL c 



18 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

for her at the Hall, changed her dress, and 
obeyed her father's summons. 

Mrs. Somerton had been ailing for several 
days. The shock which she had sustained by the 
news of her son's imprisonment had been but 
little relieved by the intelligence of his release. 
She had persisted in thinking that his life was 
ruined. The taint of dishonesty, though it had 
only attached to him in imagination, was upon 
him. He could not hope, she thought, to make 
a name after that. Everything, she said, went 
wrong with them, and she was well punished. 
This had been the substance of her talk half 
the night when she should have been asleep, 
and in the morning, whilst Amy was acting her 
new part before Lord Verner, she had fallen 
from her chair, and her husband had carried 
her to bed. 

When Amy appeared at her bedside, the 
mother turned her head away sobbing and 
weeping. 

" I'm very ill. Amy," she said, by-and-by. 



VERY ILL. 1ft 

** very ilL The longest day will come to an end 
at last. I hope the doctor will be here soon." 

"Dear mother, you must not give way so," 
Amy said, kissing her forehead. "What shall 
I get for you?" 

" Nothing, nothing. There'^ no salve' for sores 
of the mind, my girl," replied the sick woman. 
** Let me have a doctor soon," and then she closed 
her eyes. 

It happened that Luke's messenger to Avon- 
worth met the doctor at the cross roads, returning 
from Berne; and he came therefore soon after 
Amy entered the room. Her mother looked at 
him eagerly as the doctor felt her pulse. 

"Is there any danger, doctor?" she asked 
earnestly; "shall I die? pray do not deceive me. 
I am not a young woman, and don't expect to 
live longer than my time ; but do tell me if it 
has come ? " 

"There is no danger, I assure you," said the 
doctor. " You have been excited lately, by some 
trouble perhaps . that aflfair of your son's, which 

2 



20 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

has come all right, I am glad to hear. Your 
greatest want is quiet and repose. You must 
not alarm or excite yourself: you will soon be 
better." 

Amy and her father followed the doctor down- 
stairs to obtain a verification of this statement ; 
and as they left her, Mrs. Somerton repeated 
slowly to herself, " quiet and repose." 



CHAPTER II. 

CONTAINS IMPORTANT REVELATIONS, AND 
TERMINATES FATALLY. 

The next day Mrs. Somerton grew worse, and 
in the afternoon she insisted that she was dying. 
The doctor, on the contrary, insisted that she was 
not doing anything of the sort. 

In the afternoon she expressed a strong desire 
to see Mr. Christopher Tallant. 

" I must see him, Luke. There is something 
which he should know before I die . something of 
the greatest importance to others besides himself. 
Do, pray, send for him. It does not matter what 
yon senseless doctor says ; I can feel I am dying, 
and I durst not die without seeing Mr. Tallant." 

So Luke communicated this strange intelligence 



22 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

to Mr. Tallant, and that gentleman proceeded at 
once to the farm. 

" Oh, how ill you look, sir ; how much you are 
changed," said the sick woman, when Mr. Tallant 
appeared. 

Mr. Tallant paid no heed to the remark, but 
sat down upon the nearest chair, and asked what 
she had to say to him. 

"I am dying, sir, I am dying," said Mrs. Somerton. 

" I hope not," said Mr. Tallant ; "you look ill 
and excited, but not like dying." 

" They all say that," she replied ; " but some- 
times the patient knows more than the doctors. 
Luke and Amy, will you leave me with Mr. 
Tallant ; I have something to say to him. You 
will know of it hereaftei-, but don't stand by and 
hear me confess my own wickedness. I am going 
to confess in time for a great wrong to be reme- 
died . ^that is something in the way of atone- 
ment." 

Mr. Somerton and his daughter exchanged 
looks of blank astonishment, and left the room. 



ifBS. somerton's secret. 23 

" Yes, yes, that is some comfort. There's little 
good exposing a wrong when it cannot be reme- 
died," the sick woman went on, as if communing 
with herself. " The very thought does me good ; 
I shall feel easier when the load is oflF my 
mind." 

"What is this secret, Sarah?" Mr. Tallant 
asked, and his thoughts wandered back to the 
time when she acted as his housekeeper; the 
sound of her Christian name coming from his own 
mouth seemed like the revival of an old memory. 

"Are they gone ? " she asked. 

" Yes," said the merchant ; " do not delay ; I 
have business letters of impoi1;ance to write for 
post." 

" You would not think I was a very ambitious 
woman, Mr. Tallant ; it is true, nevertheless. I 
was vain and full of being great when I was a 
girl, and all my life long I seem to have been 
going backwards instead of onwards. Nothing 
has come about as I expected." 

"We have all our disappointments," said Mr 



24 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

Tallant, dryly; "I hope you are not going to 
recount all yours." 

"How hard you are, sir; how little you seem 
moved by my wretched position. Have you no 
fears concerning this confession I am about to 
make?" 

" None," said the merchant ; " my troubles are 
about over. You can't hit me any harder than I 
have been hit already, whatever you may have to 
tell." 

" You remember your second wife," went on 
the woman, half raising herself in bed; "you 
remember her dark eyes, and her graceful, lady- 
like fonn. You remember how she wore her dark 
hair, and how musical her voice was ? " 

The merchant did remember. The loss of this 
woman had been the saddest episode in his life. 

" Have you never seen any one like her ?" the 
sick woman asked, looking steadfastly at him. 

" Never," he replied ; " but why all this mystery ? 
. go straight to the point, my dear woman, at 
once, or I must leave you." 



THE TWO INFANTS. 25 

"I have not much more to say. I thought 
your own fatherly instinct would have assisted 
me. Do you remember that you left me in 
charge of your child after Mrs. Tallant's death ? 
You were so stricken with grief that you never 
saw the child but once ; and when the poor lady 
was buried you travelled on the Continent for 
more than six months. I had an infant two 
months old when your child was bom. You left 
your house and child in my care. I was to do 
everything that was right and proper under the 
circumstances. Do you remember ? " 

The woman grew very much excited, and would 
not be content with Mr. Tallant's solemn nod in 
the affirmative. 

" Do you remember ?" she repeated. 

 I do," he said. 

" Do you remember, when you returned home, 
that you came of your own accord and asked to 
see the child, and how you called it Phoebe, after 
its mother . do you remember ?" 

" Yes, most assuredly," said the merchant. 



26 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

"That child was my own child. I changed 
them before you had been gone a month." 

Here she paused to see what effect the revela- 
tion had upon her hearer. But she could glean 
nothing from Mr. Tallant's solemn, passive face. 

"Amy Somerton is your daughter, and the 
young lady called Phoebe Tallant is mine." 

She went on . "And now I can die in peace. 
It was all ambition. I thought to be somebody 
through the means of my child ; it was not all for 
her own sake that I did it. I thought of it night 
and day before 1 did it . night and day, and day 
and night, and I changed my mind many a time, 
until at last Luke, my husband, became accus- 
tomed to the new face, and then I could not go 
back from my purpose. And yet all my plans 
fail, everjiihing goes wrong, and this secret has 
burnt into my life like a red-hot coal, until I am 
dying of it-dying of it." 

Then she sank back exhausted, and the mer- 
chant sat by with his eyes fixed upon her face, 
but without making the slightest effort to give 



THE DEAD WIFE'S PICTURE, 27 

her any assistanca He was a good deal stunned 
by the woman's revelation ; but if all other things 
had been well, he could have borne it without 
scarcely a pang either of indignation or regret, for 
both girls had been well cared for. They had 
lived like sistei*s, now for a long time past, 
and Amy had picked up an education almost 
equal to Phoebe's. 

"What proof have you of this base and un- 
grateful fraud?" he asked, when the woman 
opened her eyes again. 

" Look at the picture of your wife . ^the one 
which hangs in the library . and then tell 
me how it is that you have not found out the 
deception long ago. Amy grows more like the 
lady who is gone every day, and Phoebe has not a 
feature in her face to remind you of her." 

Mr. Tallant saw the justice of the remark in an 
instant, and it seemed like a rebuke when he 
remembered how dearly the wife was beloved. 
With the picture and the familiar face of the 
assumed Amy Somerton in his mind for a 



28 THB TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

. moment, his whole nature cried out in proof of 
the woman's story ; and now he bethought him- 
self of the strange interest he had always taken 
in the girl, and how indifferent he had been in 
comparison to Phoebe, lovable as she undoubtedly 
was, beautiful as everybody must confess her 
to be. 

It seemed for a moment as if a new link of 
interest between himself and the world had been 
forged by this confession. 

" You will wait until I am dead, sir . ^pray do . 
before you repeat my story : do, do wait ; I 
should not like to lose Luke's respect in my last 
moments." 

" I will not divulge what you have confessed, 
at present at least^" said the merchant ; " but 
justice must be done." 

" Yes, yes, that is right ; but I am not long for 
this world . there is no hurry now." 

The merchant promised to keep her secret for 
the present, but she could get no other promise 
from him. 



THE LAST WILL. 29 

She asked his forgiveness, and he forgave her. 

When he left her she seemed to be considerably 
better. Exhausted by the excitement of her con- 
fession, she lay motionless when Amy and her 
father returned. She had been slightly feverish 
all day; towards night brain fever set in, and 
then the doctor confessed there was danger. 

Meanwhile Mr. Tallant had sent for his London 
lawyer, who remained closeted with him all the 
next day. In the afternoon a clerk came down 
with parchment and other materials for engross- 
ing, and Mr. Christopher Tallant made a new 
and final will, little thinking how soon it would 
come to be read aloud for the benefit of the 
parties interested therein. 

He had taken every means for verifying the 
rumours which had reached him concerning his 
son; for many days past he had had a private 
detective upon his track, who had laid before him 
unmistakable proofs of his son's commercial dis- 
honesty. The detective had even hunted out the 



30 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

card scandal at the Ashford Club, in which Mr- 
Bichard Tallant had not altogether escaped sus- 
picion. He laid before the father shares recently- 
transferred by Richard Tallant in the Meter Iron 
Works Company, whose stock had begun to 
fall in the market. The managing director had 
sold shares at par which had been at ten pre- 
mium, and there was evidently a scheme on 
foot to run them down to a discount, and then 
Mr. Richard Tallant would buy up all he could 
get, for there was not a better concern in all 
England than the Meter Works. 

It was a sore home-thrust this dealing with the 
Meter shares; but not the worst blow of all. 
Certain bill transactions, in which something 
very nearly akin to forgery had been committed, 
were disclosed, and Richard Tallant appeared to 
be a designing sharper of the first class, . 
one of the leading Stock Exchange conspirators, 
through whose arts so many concerns had been 
brought to ruin, and from which disasters the 
conspirators had reaped great golden harvests. 



"night and morning.*' 31 

The merchant was a just man, and he would 
have every possible proof of his son's dishonour 
before he wiped him out for ever. He had ample 
proof, and he wiped him out accordingly. 

On the second . night after Mrs. Somerton's 
confession the lawyer and his clerk returned to 
London, and the merchant, having sent to in- 
quire after the bailiff's wife, who continued 
dangerously ill, took a light supper, retired to 
his bedroom, and dismissed his man for the 
night. 

He took with him the vignette of which Mrs. 
Somerton had spoken ; he pulled an arm-chair 
towards the fire, and sat gazing at the picture 
long after everybody was a-bed. 

He sat there when the last embers in the grate 
had faded out, and he sat there when the sun rose 
the next morning. sat there with the picture 
at his feet . sat there with the red sunlight 
streaming through the blind, and through aper- 
tures in the door of the adjoining room ; he sat 
there with his head upon his breast, his hands 



32 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

hanging down, and with his eyes wide open ; but 
he had been dead for several hours when daylight 
looked in upon his corpse. 

The sunshine was streaming in upon him, we 
say, and it was so ; for on that morning the 
sun had risen with unusual splendour. 

The east was all ablaze with crimson and golden 
hues, and from its gorgeous throne the sun shone 
forth as if with a burning glowing sense of its own 
grandeur. Troops of radiant beams, bearing com- 
missions from the mighty king of day, gleamed 
above "the high-raised clouds," dispersed "the 
morning fogs,*' flung wreaths of sunny beauty 
upon the mantling hills, and glimmered in golden 
glittering sheen upon the windows of Barton 
HalL 

Not upon the windows only did the sunbeams 
fall, we say, but they penetrated the darkened 
rooms *and fell upon the dead man; and here 
they played softly upon his whitened hair, and 
stole about the room as if they sought for some- 
body whom he loved that they might bring them 



hope's delusions. 49 

speculated, and had to meet unexpected calls 
upon shares which were to have made their 
fortune, and would prove their ruin . drowning 
men in the financial sea . ^these were they who 
caught at the monetary straws of Marfleeting. 
Widows with small allowances hardly enough to 
keep body and soul together, widows who lived 
on lodgers, widows keeping up appearances, 
spinsters with precarious incomes, daily govern- 
esses, eldest daughters in large families, mothers 
with invalid and drunken husbands . ^these were 
foremost in the crowd who sent their money to 
Heniy Cavendish, Esq., and saw in the future 
competency and comfort by means of his glorious 
invention ; and some of these poor people went 
down upon their knees at night and prayed that 
God would prosper their labours and so extend 
the use of this new invention, that it should be a 
blessing to them and to others who might be in 
necessity and tribulation. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER IV. 

IN WHICH RICHARD TALLANT VISITS BARTON 
HALL AGAIN, AND ARTHUR PHILLIPS COM- 
PLETES A GREAT WORK. 

The news- of Mr. Christopher Tallant's death 
brought down his son by the earliest train. He 
hired a fly at the Avonworth Hotel, and reached 
Barton jn the afternoon of a cold November 
day. 

He felt that his conduct had hurried on the 
sad event which brought him once again in 
the vale of Avonworth. The telegram which 
Phoebe had considered it her duty to send to him, 
had for a moment struck him down like a blow. 
But of late he had so thoroughly schooled himself 
to his fate, had so trampled upon conscience and 
feeling, that he soon recovered his former coolness. 



THE DESIRE OF POSSESSION. 51 

The tl^ought occurred, to him whether any 
change had been made in the will which he, 
knew had been signed in his favour. Was this 
fine estate his own ? Were those fields and 
woods his ? Had that property in Yorkshire, 
those splendid farms on the wolds, reverted to 
the only son of Christopher Tallant ? How 
much had the old man left ? 

It occurred to him that his father might have 
changed his will, indeed he had every reason to 
believe that such had been his intention. But he 
would not let this more than probable contin? 
gency have a settled pla^e in his thoughts; for 
the desire of possession came upon him as the 
country conveyance dragged slpwly along through 
the fine well-timbered park which had been fields 
within his own memory . ^fields overgiown with 
hedges and elm trees, and gorse and brushwood. 

The blinds were down in all parts of. the house, 
and Chester, the late Mr. Tallant's man, opened 
the hall door slowly, and took Mr. Kichard's 
coQfi p,nd hat without a smile or a word. 

E 2 



5Z THB TALLAKTS OF BABTOH. 

"Where is my sister?" said Bichard, with an 
air of authority and command 

" I will inquire, sir/* said the old man. 

" Tell her to come to me in the library ; and 
look here, bring me some dry sherry." 

" Yes, sir," said Chester. 

Bichard Tallant had qualms of conscience as 
he entered the familiar hall ; a sense of fear came 
over him; he remembered all of a sudden the 
thousand acts of parental kindness and liberality 
that had been lavished upon him. Qonsdence 
would not let him forget all this^ and honour 
reminded him how low he had fallen ; so he 
spoke loud and gave commands, and assumed 
a tone of authority. 

Phoebe soon came, pale and careworn, and with 
the tears in her eyes, she submitted to be kissed, 
and she kissed Bichard. in return, but she said 
not a word. 

"Have you nothing to say?" Bichard asked, 
after a few moments ; " no explanation to give ? " 

"Don't ask me for explanations . Chester will 



HE DARE NOT LOOK TTPON THE DEAD. 53 

tell you about it/' she replied, softly and 
tend^ly. 

** Oh, very well, as you . please, as you, please," 
he said, assisting himself to the sherry. 

"Will you come up stairs and see him?" 
Fhcebe asked, putting her hand upon his arm, 
and wondering for a moment at his changed 
appearance. 

He could not meet the glance of those bi^ 
inquiring eyes. 

''See whom?" he asked loudly and filling 
another glass. 

" See our father," said Phoebe in a whisper. 

The son paused, with the sherry partly raised 
to his lips, and replaced the full glass upon the 
table. 

"Ccwne," said Phoebe; ^'coine, I will go with 
you." 

"No," he said at length with a great eflfort, 
and withdrawing his arm from her gentle touch, 
"No; by-and-by." . 

He. dare not look upon that cold white face ; 



64 THE TALLAirrS OF BARTON. 

for whilst Phoebe was talking, conscience gripped 
him savagely and made him a coward. He could 
look at nothing but the floor, and there the 
very boards seemed to twit him with his infamy 
and ingratitude. 

His only relief was to rush to the bell and 
ring for Chester, and when he came, Phoebe 
glided out of the room to her chamber. 

It had been a particularly sad and anxious 
time for Phoebe, and she appeared to stand alone 
in her sorrow. Arthur Phillips, from whom &he 
had been wont occasionally to ask advice upon 
minor things, and in whose talk about art she 
had been so often engrossed, had not been near 
the house for months ; the change which had 
recently come over Amy, Richard Tallant*s 
estrangement from hei^ father, that father's sortow 
and death, all seemed to come upon her, blow 
after blow, and to leave her without one sympa- ' 
thising soul to whom she could look for a ray 
of hope and comfort 

What had become of Arthur Phillips? She 



ABSENCE. 55 

had wondered d. hundred times. His absence 
had been like something gone out of her life . 
like some domestic affliction. Her palette and 
canvas had lost all interest for her now. They 
had reminded her too much of her deep and 
secret sympathy in all that concerned him. She 
did not confess to herself that she loved him, 
and, truth to tell, she hardly knew that she 
did love him; but his absence was a hardship. 
His quiet homage was something that satisfied her ; 
his warm enthusiasm about the beautiful and the 
true ; his stories of painters who had won their 
Way to fame and fortune by dint of their inborn 
genius and industry ; his judgment about books ; 
his criticisms on poetry; his compliments when 
she had been more than ordinarily successful 
in some touch of colour : all this had been part 
of her existence, and with Arthur's absence 
had come all the manifold troubles which had 
afflicted her yoimg life, clouded her hopes, and 
covered het with a sorrow too deep for words. 
And what Jiad Arthur Phillips been doing 



56 THE TALULNTS OF BAETON. 

all this time 1 Painting that grand picture 
which he said he would paint when last we 
heard him speak some months ago. 

The tx)mmercial panic had sorely afflicted a 
special local manufacture in which a large num- 
ber of men and women had been employed at 
Sevemtown. As Arthur was returning home, on 
the day following that evening when we saw 
him at work in the fields, he met a number of 
operatives thrown out of work, who with no 
chance of the factory being re-opened, had set 
out "on tramp." Arthur questioned them, and 
found that on the next momin]g nearly a hundred 
families were going to leave by train for Liver- 
pool on their way to Australia. Subscriptions 
had been entered into to promote a scheme of 
emigration started by liie operatives themselves, 
and this first exodus would take place the next 
morning. 

Few of us but will remember, at some period 
of life, standing in a railway station, and 
watching the departure of a train containing 



PARTma. 57 

some one the taking leave of whom excited 
all those human sensibilities which find vent in 

" The silent pressure of the hand 
"Which friends too well can understand." 

We have seen to the luggage, found out the best 
seat for our friend, advised him to keep clear of 
the draft, begged of him to write at* an early 
day, and done a variety of other trivial things 
by way of keeping the little time occupied, and 
smothering as much as possible the sorrows of 
parting. And then, when the squeezing of the 
hand was over, and the engine had shrieked the 
signal of departure, and the train had moved 
off, and grown less and less until it was out of 
sight, we have stood gazing at the long lines of 
rails over which it had disappeared, with thoughts 
and regrets too deep for words. Let us not deny 
such touches of nature. The most querulous, 
petulant, hard-hearted of mortals have experi- 
enced these emotions, and with something of 
the fear, that the future might sever those ties 
of friendship, the danger of the breaking of 



68 THE TAT.T.ANTS OF BARTON. 

which Bulwer Lytton describes so forcibly when 
he says : '* The true sadness is not in the pain 
of parting . ^it is in the when and the how 
you are to meet again with the face about to 
vanish from your view; from the passionate 
farewell to the woman who has your heart in 
her keeping, to the cordial good-bye exchanged 
with pleasant companions at a watering-place, a 
country-house, or the close of a festive day s 
blithe and careless excursion . a chord, stronger 
or weaker, is snapped asunder in every part- 
ing, and Time's busy fingers are not practised 
in re-splicing broken ties. Meet again you 
may : will it be in the same way? with the 
same sympathies? with the same sentiments? 
Will the souls, hurrying on in diverse paths, 
unite once more, as if the interval had been 
a dream? Rarely, rarely." 

Here was Arthur's inspiration; he read the 
simple thoughts and the attendant quotation 
in a newspaper. The parting with Lionel 
Hammerton had prepared him for it, and all 



SEEKING NEW HOMES. 59 

of a sudden he said to himself, "This shall 
be my great picture, and I will call it 'Seeking 
New Homes/" 

He was at the railway station with the dawn 
of the next day, busily engaged sketching 
various points. 

By-and-by, as the emigrants began to arrive, 
he made hurried sketches of faces and costumes, 
and in the course of an hour or two he 
stood there, fully realising all the inspiration 
which had come upon him in the highway : 
his broad elastic sympathies had been excited 
to the full, and he stood watching the train 
that had gone, almost with tears in his eyes . 
stood amidst numerous little affecting groups 
of men and women, and shared their sorrows. 

The train which had gone was gaily deco- 
rated with ribbons, and had quite a holiday 
appearance; the passengers had been singing 
some well-known ballad ; and the friends left 
behind had cheered theto. People must do 
something to keep down that choking sensa- 



60 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

tion which the strongest have felt at parting, 
and songs and cheering were capital resources 
for "driving dull care away," on the occasion 
of a hundred poor families seeking the means 
of existence in a distant land. 

Great battles have no more moving incidents 
than those social catastrophes which fall now 
and then upon manufacturing districts, bringing 
all the ills of poverty and starvation, and forced 
idleness upon poor, uneducated, improvident 
peopla At these times instances enough of 
self-sacrifice and love crop up amongst them 
to make up for all the stories of selfishness 
and brutality that come out in their prosperity. 

Arthur Phillips did not fail to take in the 
whole of that scene at the railway station: 
he did not forget those men and women with 
the blanched cheeks and tearful eyes. To them 
the parting could not be otherwise than pain- 
fully significant It was a separation more 
fruitful of grief and apprehension than the 
eommon parting of friendsL It was a forced 



THB GBEAT WORE 61 

exile, which those left behind might soon be 
compelled to follow . ^a flying from one ill to 
another, between which those left behind stood 
wayeiing, with little ones around them looking 
up for comfort and finding none. 

The artist bent himself to his work from 
that Tery day. At night he completed his 
various sketches and studied his subject, and 
in the day he painted from early mom to 
evening . ^painted for very life . ^painted for love, 
and money, and fame, and sympathy. It was 
striking out in a new line, but he had no fear 
of the result. In less than a month the picture 
began to assume form and character; never 
had artist worked with more rapidity and with 
more earnestness of purpose. The work had 
never flagged . ^it had gone on day by day 
without interruption or change of plan. The 
subject was so thoroughly mapped out in the 
artist's mind, that time alone stood between him 
and its completion. The figures were few but 
full of character, and the last touch was given 



62 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

to tbe wbole on that morning when Mr. Tajlant 
died. 

The story was wonderfully told: the picture 
was a poem on canvas . ^full of human nature^ 
brimming over with sympathy. As a work of 
art . for conception, drawing, perspective colour, 
it was truly a grand picture; and Arthur felt 
his success as he sat before it that morning, 
when the sun was shining upon the dead man 
at Barton Hall. 

On the next day, before the picture could 
hardly be said to be dry, Arthur had it packed, 
and he posted with it to London, where he had 
arranged for it to be hung at a winter exhibition. 
Josephs the dealer, who had previously purchased 
everything Mr. Phillips chose to let him have, 
had heard some whisper about it, and had visited 
Arthmvthe week before ; but the artist could not 
be prevailed upon to show the picture to anybody 
but his old housekeeper who had nursed him 
when he was a boy, and she had sat before it and 
cried and sobbed over it almost heart-broken : 



SUCCESS. 63 

then Arthur felt that he had painted a great 
picture, and he knew it when he unveiled it 
again in that long room in Sufifolk-street, Pall 
Mall, before a small critical company. 

In a few hours "Seeking new Homes" was 
talked of in artistic and literary society all over 
London, and when everybody was asking every- 
body else if they had seen the new pictuie, 
Arthur Phillips drove down to Paddington and 
took a ticket for Avonworth. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE TWO TEMPLES. 

The success of Christabel, "the mysterious 
lady," in some new business at the Sevemtown 
races, together with the high appreciation which 
the working classes exhibited of the tricks of 
" Momus " . and his master, induced the show- 
man to make a considerable stay at Severn- 
town. 

Mr. Henry Bilks, "the only living skeleton 
extant," had also made overtures to Mr. Martin 
to join him in a permanent winter exhibition, 
and, so strangely does one thing influence another, 
that the advertisement of Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs 
played its part in the scheme. 

The Temple of Magic had already been removed 
to the Blue Post's Yard, where "the riders" and 



THE LIVING SKELETON. 65 

other companies of public entertainers usually 
took their stand ; the public had already been 
addressed* in grandiloquent terms, in very grey . 
inky on very thin paper; and Mr. Dibble had 
solemnly done duty "on the outside" for many 
nights, when Mr. Bilks drove to the side door, 
(''private entrance, ladies and gentlemen, at the 
side, price three pence!'*), and without further 
ado went behind the magic curtain, -and offered 
to join the wizard for the winter season, if the 
wizard would take a shop in some public street, 
advertise the exhibition, and conduct it upon 
something like high-class principles. 

The " living skeleton " had left with the show- 
man copies of various testimonials, and a copy 
of the Slvmkey Guardicm, It was in this latter 
journal that Martin had spelled out the Loan 
Office advertisement, whereupon he dictated to 
Dibble the terms of a letter which should be sent 
to James Marfleeting, Esq. 

It was a strangely quaint and ungrammatical 
letter this, penned by Thomas Dibble. It set forth, 
VOL. II. r 



66 THE TALLANTS OF BARTOK. 

in big straggling letters, that the writer was the 
proprietor of an exhibition of considerable fame m. 
the provinces ; that he was anxious to add theretO' 
additional attractions^ and make it a permanent 
thing for the winter at the important city of 
Sevemtown, where it had recently attained to a. 
pitch of great celebrity. 

The writer required a loan erf one hundred 
pounds for six months^ re-payable by instal-^ 
ments, and he was prepared to give his bond 
for the amount, together with security upon his^ 
properties. 

" Indeed," said Mr. ShuflBieton Gibbs, who was. 
just preparing to remove his quarters &om the: 
street off the Strand. " Indeed ! Thomas Dibble,, 
by ^ that is wonderful ! I never forget hand-^ 
writing, and I shall never forget Master Dibble'a 
above everybody else's. Surely he has not turned 
showman t No ; he is the exhibitor's fag, his man- 
of-all-work, and he has written this letter from 
dictation. I will reply by-and-by. Meanwhile, 
I must see what there is to be made out of this 



" GETTING HOT." 67 

with Mra Dibble. I fancy the old girl would 
give something to know where her faithless 
Tommy is." 

Thus soliloquised Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, whilst 
he packed up sundry letters and papers, and pre- 
pared to change his residence. 

Some of his correspondents were beginning to 
be tiresome ; they had commenced to require ex- 
planations of the continued delay ; and the women 
who had written to the Coffee House in the City, 
were appealing in heart-breaking terms for the 
promised materials, or the return of their money. 

" It is getting hot," the ex-swell went on. " I 
can't stand these pathetic epistles ; they hurt my 
feelings. Poor creatures ! They would surely be 
satisfied if they knew that they were contributing 
to maintain the faded splendours . ah ! of a buck 
out of luck. That's rhyme . ^*gad, bless my soul ! 
who would have thought that I should burst 
out into rhyme ? I am very sorry, ladies, that I 
cannot afford to forward the materials in question, 
nor the trifling sums which you have . ^haw . 

F 2 



68 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

entrusted to my care. And, messieurs, les pauvres 
gentilhommes, and you, ye wretched traders, who 
get into debt beyond your means of payment, I 
will make further inquiries into your cases. 
Meanwhile I am much obliged to you for the 
fees which you have forwarded so promptly." 

The next day a detective oflScer inquired at 
No. 3, Great Charlton Street, Strand, for James 
Marfleeting, Esq.; but that gentleman had left 
the house without giving the landlady warning, 
or paying for the last week's rent. 

Shortly afterwards, in the garb of a " Mossoo " 
of the Leech cut, and with a heavy black 
moustache, Mr. Gibbs called at Mrs. Dibble's. 
He found that lady in a very melancholy state 
of mind, and considerably thinner than when we 
last saw her. 

With a strong French accent he asked Mrs. 
Dibble if her husband had run away, and if his 
name was Thomas. 

 Yeth, thir," was Mrs. Dibble's reply. " It ith 
with feelings of thorrow and shame . ^though why 



A BUSINESS WOMAN. OV 

I should have such feelings, ith not my fault or 
deserth . it ith, however, with these feelings that 
I thay yeth to you, and having had a boarding- 
school education atb a girl, and been brought up 
in the highest spear of society, it ith a degrada- 
tion which I feel to the core." 

" Ah, madame, dat is bad, dat is very bad ; for 
it is goot to have education, . and why shall your 
husband leave you ? " 

Mr. Gibbs shrugged his shoulders and raised his 
hands as he spoke, and Mi*s. Dibble sighed and 
shook her little stumpy curls sympathetically. 

" It ith a long story, which I am not inclined 
to go into imnecessarily," said Mrs. Dibble, " and 
there are griefs which are not improved by being 
talked about. Ath a busineth woman, and one 
who wath the daughter of a builder that erected 
hundreds of houses and public inthitutions, the 
specifications of which I have written out many 
a time, . ath a busineth woman, I would athk 
what your busineth ith with me? and then we 
can go on." 



70 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Mrs. Dibble sat down, smoothed her apron, and 
looked Monsieur full in the fitce. 

" If I shall pring you to vere your husband 
shall be, is he of. ah ! vat sail I say ? . ^is he of 
dat value to you for vich you sail pay mine fees, 
vich is out of mine pocket ?" 

Mrs. Dibble did not reply, but proceeded to 
fasten her dress behind, which required a con- 
siderable effort. 

" You vill be surprised at vat I ask, but dat vill 
disappear ven I tell you I am attached to a 
Private Inquiry Office, vich is on de French plan, 
and dat I am in de detective line d la FraTi^ise, 
and I can restore to your arm de husband of your 
heart." 

" You can ?" exclaimed Mrs. Dibble. "Prove 
that to me, and I will pay your fees." 

*' Is dat his writing ? " he asked, showing her 
part of the showman's letter. 

" It ith ! " Mra Dibble exclaimed. " I should 
know it in ten thousand." 

" VeU . ^fifteen pounds is my fees for bis 



BUYING dibble's ADDRESS. 71 

direction^ vere you sail find him," said 
Gibbs. 

Mrs. Dibble demurred to this for some time, 
and argued the point in a dozen ways ; but Mr. 
Oibbs was not to be moved. Finally Mrs. Dibble 
gave him three five-pound notes^ and in return 
received his address at " The Temple of Magic, 
Blue Posts Inn yard, Sevemtown." 

It was rather a courageous thing on the part of 
Mr. Gibbs to visit Mrs. Dibble ; but he no doubt 
felt perfectly secure in his disguise. 

He visited her at a time when he calculated 
that her lodgers would be away at their several 
places of business ; for Paul Somerton might have 
been more penetrating than Mrs. Dibbla 

Paul still lodged with Mrs. Dibble, and was 
rapidly making his way to a respectable position 
through the kind introductions of his patron, Mr. 
Williamson. 

His unsQphisticated manners, his honesty, his 
thoroughly English characteristics, his manliness, 
and his intelligent face had quite won Mr. 



72 THE TAILANTS OP BAETON. 

WilliamEon's heaxt, and he frequently invited 
Paul to sup with him at his chambers in the 
Temple. 

A quiet cozy little room, up several narrow flights 
of stairs . a snug little room, though slightly fusty 
. ^with two sides occupied by law books bound in 
calf. There were sundry maps and old engravings 
himg here and there ; a bust of a Chancery judge, 
a ditto of Shakspeare ; a coal-box, a couple of 
easy chairs, a table littered with papers, and a 
mantel-piece covered with visiting and invitation 
cards. 

When the sombre curtains were drawn, and 
that mysterious old woman, who turned up from 
some dark comer outside the door, was per- 
mitted to retire for the night, and Mr. Williamson 
produced the sugar and lemons and whisky . 
when the kettle was singing on the fire. then 
indeed was that little room snug, /and cosy, and 
everything else that is comfortable. 

''It is pleasant to talk to a simple-hearted 
young fellow like you," said Mr. Williamson 



PAUL. 73 

upon one of those evenings prior to the sudden 
death of Mr. TaUant. 

Paul smiled and sipped the whisky. 

" And so you think, notwithstanding all your 
troubles, that it is a good thing to have been 
bom?" 

" I do," said Paul, modestly. 

"You think an all-wise Providence conferred 
a great boon upon you when He called you 
into existence, and all that sort of thing ? " 

" Of course," said Paul 

" You would not, could you now select, be 
blotted out for ever, and have all your chances 
or hopes of a future annihilated ? " 

"Oh, no!" said Paul 

" Happy youth," said Mr. Williamson, smoking 
and blowing the smoke up amongst his books 
bound in calf. 

"Well, not particularly happy that I know 
of," said Paul; "but still, with all respect to 
you, I thank God I am happier than some 
people." 



74 THE TALLANT8 OF BABTON. 

" And you don't think the Bible is Hefarew 
mythology? In tact, you are a virtuous, good 
boy. You think it's a good thing, too, to have 
been bom an "RngliahTnATi^ and that we are 
better and braver than other people, and all 
that stuff?" 

" All this I steadfastly believe," said Ptal, 
remembering a passage in the Prayer-book. 

" Very well ; I shall not try to influence you 
orthodox views, and I will endeavour to pro- 
mote your temporal prosperity. You like the 
Pyrotechnic office, and you think you will get 
on?" 

" Yes, thank you, I do," said Paul 

"I suppose, like most fellows connected with 
newspapers in any way, you would rather be 
on the literary staff? You would like to be givin 
forth your own opinions, and see them printed 
in long coluinns of leaded type?" said the 
barrister, who was evidently highly amused 
with Paul, whom he seemed to r^[ard as an 
agreeable study. 



LITEBATURE AND LAW. 75 

** I sometimes think I should be glad if I 
could write," said PauL 

" There's nothing in it, my boy . ^nothing at 
all. At first there is a kind of satisfaction 
about the thing; but it all arises from conceit: 
it is all vanity and vexation of spirit, as the 
Preacher says. It is all very well if you can 
obtain one or two comfortable engagements, 
irith permission to write pretty well what you 
please ; and when you can combine literature, 
as I do, with another distinguished profession." 

Mr. Williamson smiled at this bit of quiet 
waggery of his own, seeing that he had nevet 
yet had more than a single cKent. 

" If one has not many cKents, however," he 
went on, as if answering his own protest against 
that small boast about combining two professions, 
''the law is a distinguished profession after all: 
makes one a gentleman by Act of Parliament, 
you know, PauL" 

And then the barrister smiled again ; he was 
evidently entertaining himself as well as PauL 



76 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

" There is an offshoot of the legal profession, 
a sort of Jackall-byeway, along which a large 
quantity of grist comes to the legal mill . I 
mean the police. The higher branches of that 
craft present many features of interest . the 
detective feature in particular," the barrist^ 
went on. "I have been studying it a little 
lately, in the interest of your friend Gibbs; 
the police seem to have given the fellow up 
altogether." 

As they were talking, two literary friends dropped 
in, and the conversation was changed to a gossip 
about books, and plays, and pictures . *' Seeking 
New Homes " was a leading topic. One of the 
strangers said the town was mad about it and 
after all it was just simply a sensational thing . 
a dramatic bit that would engrave well and be 
popular in cojmtry districts. His companion did 
not agree with this criticism, but spoke of the 
picture as a work of really high art . a poem 
on canvas, wonderfully well pidnted. 

And so the time wore on, and by degrees 



MATEBIALS FOB A ROMANCE. 77 

the banister's room was filled with smoke, and 
Paul at length bade his Mend and patron good- 
night, shook hands with the visitors, and 
departed. 

" You are a tjueer fellow, Williamson," said one 
of the new comers as Paul left the room and 
commenced blundering his way downstairs. 

"Oh, this is Williamson's proUgi, is it ? " said 
the other. 

"Yes, that is the young fellow," said the 
banister ; " he is quite a study of English 
innocence and honesty, and I am going to be 
useful to him. His sister is a splendid creature ; 
but, somehow or other, he tells me now that 
it is discovered she is not his sister, but the 
daughter of a very wealthy gentleman. There is 
sometliing exceedingly interesting in the whole 
family : his only brother went to sea iat fifteen, 
and has never since been heard of." 

" Williamson's going to write a sensation 
romance," said one friend to the other, in a loud 
ironical aside ; " and here are his materials." 



78 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

" I am certainly studying the young fellow/' 
said Williamson, quietly. "A bit of genuine 
honesty of thought and feeling and expression, 
though it be not coupled with the highest 
order of education, is very refreshing to con- 
template in these times, and especially when 
one is connected with professional critics." 

Williamson smiled quietly at the gentleman 
who had spoken adversely of " Seeking New 
Homes," and the critic laughed good-humouredly 
in i-etum, tapped his hand upon the table, and 
said : . 

''Ah, well! wait until your sensation novel 
appears, Williamson, and TU take it out of you, 
my friend " 

And then they all laughed; for who that 
knew Williamson's lazy habit would ever expect 
him to write a stoiy of ei^t or nine hundred 
pages ? And if he did, who anKigst bis personal 
friends, that were criticsj, would have said an 
unkind word of him or bis woik I 

He was a big-hearted, generous pet amoiigst 



THE PHILANTHBOPIST. 79 

all the men, this same journalistic barrister, and 
known amongst them all as " The Philanthropist.'* 
It was a happy thing for Paul that the barrister 
was on a mission of benevolence at the Police 
Court on that memorable morning when he 
stood at the dock, and equally unlucky for 
Mr.Shuffleton Gibbs. 



CHAPTER VI. 

MBa DIBBLE AND PAUL SOMEBTON JOURNKT 
TO SEVERNTOWN. 

It did not need much persuasion to induce 
Paul to accompany Mrs. Dibble on her projected 
journey to Sevemtown. He easily obtained per- 
mission to leave the Pyrotechnic for a couple of 
days, and on a miserable December morning they 
arrived at the Eunous city of Sevemtown . unous 
in the present day for many things : for its noble 
cathedral, as we have already intimated ; for its 
grand old river, its clean broad streets and its 
narrow dirty ones, through whidi a king was 
chased by Cromwellian troops. 

A city to be proud of this same Sevemtowii . 
to be proud of for its historical associations, its 
eminent men and women, ancient and modem ; a 



S3VEBNT0WK. 81 

dty surrounded by a beautiful country, studded 
with the seats of noblemen, whose four-in-hands 
are still oftentimes seen rattling over the white 
road-ways ; a city that was wont, in ancient days, 
to have unusually fierce election contests, and 
which is now settling down into moderate 
opinions, and throwing its latent political fire into 
commercial enterprise. It manufactures all kinds 
of things which have a strange sound when men- 
tioned together, such as steam-engines and porce- 
lain, pickles and horse-hair, carriages and sauce, 
fire-grates and shirt-studs, gin and boots, and 
other machines, condiments, ornaments, spirits, 
and wearing apparel. It has quarrels about 
sewers, the price of gas, and the state of the 
streets, like all other provincial towns, and a long 
dirty road to the railway station. 

There was a row of six cabs and an antique 
sort of bus at the railway station, and several 
ragged yoimgsters who oflfered to carry the tra- 
vellers' carpet-bags. 
. .Close by the station Paul detected a comfort- 

TOL. IL o 



82 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

able-looking inn^ into which inn he and Mia. 
Dibble directed their steps . ^not that Mrs. Dibble 
approved of inns, for she did not, as she told Paul 
over and over again, although in the course of 
business her father had been called upon to build 
several establishments of the kind, and the speci- 
fications had gone through her hands; but no' 
doubt they were necessaiy sometimes, and she 
thought they were justified in taking up their 
abode at one, and having something hot and some 
tea at this inn in particular, and on the shortest 
possible notice ; so Paul ordered the refreshment 
whilst Mrs. Dibble, struggling under a load of 
shawls and comforters and rugs, was shown to 
her room. 

If Mrs. Dibble had had the smallest compunc- 
tion about entering the railway tavern, she had 
no hesitation about the chops and the tea and 
the muffins and watercress, which she was libend 
enough to commend, giving very practical illustra- 
tions of her approval of the fare, and all the time 
talking of her poor appetite, and telling Paul how 



IN THE HAZY LIGHT OF DECEMBEB LAMPS. 83 

seriously Mr. Dibble's conduct had injured her 
health. She became so confidential upon this 
. pointy and at length felt herself so much ^t home 
that she permitted the hooks-and-eyes nearest 
her chin to disengage themselves, and insisted 
upon Paul joining her in just sixpenny-worth of 
spirits-and-water before they ventured out in the 
cold to discover the yard by the Blue Posts Inn. 

The spirits-and-water made them both very 
warm and comfortable, and Paul at length offered 
his arm to his companion, and away they started 
towards the point indicated. 

It was a damp, diizzling night, and there were 
treacherous holes here and there in the path 
which Mrs. Dibble assured Paul were in the 
highest degree uncomfortable. She was sure her 
stockings would be that splashed that they would 
not be fit to be seen. 

Sevemtown did not look at all inviting in the 
hazy light of the December gas ; but Paul knew 
the place, and redeemed its character to some 
extent by telling Mrs. Dibble that they were in 

a2 



84 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

the back slums, which she said she could readilj 
understand. 

Through dirty streets, with one or two bridges 
over black, murky water ; past lazy carts and 
rumbling cabs splashing through the mud; by 
narrow footways, which were sometimes no foot- 
ways at all ; it was certainly no pleasant route to 
the Blue Posts. At length, however, they came 
to a fine, open, well-lit street, and after walking a 
short distance in this brighter locality, they turned 
sharply round into a narrow passage, and then 
emerged into an open, muddy square. 

Here was situated Digby Martin's Temple of 
Magic, and Mrs. Dibble and Paul stopped to study 
the scene before them. 

About two hundred persons of all ages were 
crowded in front of a show of the old-Eishioned 
traditional stamp. A small platform, which was 
ascended by broad wooden steps, was surmounted 
with a very florid painting of a character that 
evidently proved highly attractive to the audience. 
A lady in a low dress^ with a wonderful necklace 



OUTSIDE THE SHOW. 85 

round her neck, and very dazzling bracelets upon 
her arms, was represented in the attitude of pointr 
ing at a box, from which two pigeons were flying, 
in the direction of an auditory consisting of a king 
and numerous officers in the army. Several rabbits 
were quietly peeping out of a saucepan placed 
upon a fire, a shower of cards and fruit and 
watches was falling from an inverted hat, and in 
the background were sundry mystic signs beneath 
a blazing sun. 

The companion picture was, if possible, of a 
higher order of merit, though of a simpler cha- 
racter. It represented the young lady in the low 
dress crouching beneath a capacious basket, and 
it also represented the same basket being raised 
by a man with black moustachios, who signifi- 
cantly pointed to the vacant space beneath ; 
underneath was written in big letters, " The 
Famous Basket Trick." 

Hung at various points in trames of various 
character, was represented a tremendous dog 
going through an exciting and varied performance 



86 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

Here he stood upon his head, there he fired off a 
pistol ; in another^nlax^e he was engaged in a sort 
of pugilistic encounter with a professional bruiser, 
and around the frames which contained these> 
pictorial attractions was printed, " The celebrated 
dog *Momus' in a round of favourite and world- 
renowned characters." 

The proprietor of the caravan had had a great 
argument with the artist who executed these 
latter works upon the propriety of calling Momus 
a " dogess," which the showman thought would be 
sure to "draw;" but the artist had gravely 
assured him that such a title would not come 
within the rules of strict art, however grammatical 
it might be, and this settled the question at once. 
Upon the platform a young lady, in pink 
muslin and spangles and fleshings, with a crown 
upon her head, and many rows of curious beads 
around her neck, was marching solemnly to and 
firo to an old ballad melody which a fellow in a 
bowkr Iiai was twisting out of an ofgan, and to 
wkkliiie was keeping time on a veiy haid drum. 



THE MAN AT THE ORGAN. 87 

Strutting backwards and forwards also, some- 
times before the young lady in muslin and some- 
times behind her, was a gaunt, greyish-looking dog, 
dressed up in military costume, and occasionally 
stepping to go through little bits of military exercise. 
Three flaming and spluttering naphtha lamps 
cast a flickering uncertain light upon the singular 
scene, making the surrounding darkness all the 
darker. 

By-and-by the man at the organ laid down his 
dnun-stick, and, taking up a long whip, came to 
the top of the ladder, and after cracking the whip 
in a grave, solemn sort of fashion, he struck the 
spangled lady in the picture, and said in a loud 
voice, . 

" Now, ladies and gentlemen, be in time, be in 
time ! there be no time to lose ! we be just argoin' 
to commence I The mysterious Lady of the 
North and the hemmement Wizard . the greatest 
wonder in Europe ! The wonderful basket trick, 
or the mysterious secret, is pronounced by all who 
'ave seen it to be the greatest feat " 



88 THE TALLANTS OF BAETOK. 

There is no knowing how much more the 
speaker would have said concerning the manreLs 
of this famous exhibition had he not been inter- 
rupted by three terrible screams, one following 
the other in rapid and startling succession, and 
uttered by a stout woman in the crowd, who was 
looking up at Dibble and fighting the air above 
her head with two very short arms in a most 
alarming manner. 

"Oh, here's a lark . ^the old woman's drunk," 
said a boy, throwing his hat up into the drizzly, 
mizzly air. i 

" Pat her on the back," said an excited woman 
with a baby in her arms. 

" Let me alone . let me alone !" at length Mrs. 
Dibble exclaimed, beating her way through the 
crowd, and mounting the Temple steps amidst 
roars of laughter and shouts of applause. 

The gentleman with the whip became suddenly 
very much agitated, and when he saw the woman 
approaching the platform, he fairly turned round 
and bolted into the Temple. 



INSIPE THE SHOW. 89 

Seeing this, a crowd rushed up after the old 
lady ; but " Christabel," the showman's daughter^ 
seized the whip which Dibble had dropped, called 
** Father" lustily^ and began to defend the pass. 

Digby Martin appeared in his shirt-sleeves, and 
in an instant struck a splendid fighting attitude 
in face of the intruders, which caused a number of 
them to change their minds, and produced from 
others sundry coppers which entitled them to 
admission. 

When they were inside, Paul amongst the 
number, they saw a gorgeous array of tinselled 
cups and vases arranged on a black velvet dais, 
with a shimmering wheel revolving in the back- 
ground, Mr. Dibble leaning over the stout woman 
and calling frantically for somebody to bring him 
some water, whilst the renowned Momus was 
jumping round the pair and barking in a most 
unmilitary fashion. 

Before there was time for Dibble's calls for 
water to receive any attention, Mrs. Dibble looked 
up and requested Thomas, "dear Thomas," to 



90 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

conduct her to a private room, at which there 
were renewed shouts of laughter. 

Paul Somerton was fain to keep in the back- 
ground, for he was getting rather ashamed of 
the unexpected turn which affairs were taking. 
Dibble said a few hurried words to the showman, 
and then, taking Mrs. Dibble by the arm, disap- 
peared at the side-door. 

The audience made a rush to follow, but Digby 
Martin, the magician, placed himself before the 
doorway and informed them that he could assure 
them there was no more fun to be had out of the 
lady and gentleman who had just retired, and 
that he would show them something ten times 
funnier than what they had just seen ; whereupon 
Paul quietly took his leave, and made the best 
of his way to the Railway Tavern, where he 
found Mrs. Dibble had just arrived with her 
husband. 

Mrs. Dibble was in tears, and Dibble was talk- 
ing to her rather loudly and in an authoritative 
tone ; but half an hour afterwards they were all 



BEPRESHMENT. 91 

sitting quietly down to refreshment, and Mrs. 
Dibble's journey having ended in finding her 
husband, Paul now proposed to leave them in 
order to catch the mail for Avonworth. 

Mrs. Dibble thanked him for his kindness, and 
said she had no further need, she thought, to 
trespass upon him ; so he bade them adieu, and 
went off laughing to the_ railway station. 



.> 



CHAPTER VII. 

IN WHICH MR. 8HUFFLET0N GIBBS PRESENTS 
HIMSELF IN ANOTHER CHARACTER. 

Amongst the audience who had witnessed the 
amusing encounter between Mr. Dibble and his 
wife, was Mr. Shuffleton Gibbs, who looked on 
with a grave air of quiet enjoyment. 

You would hardly have known him from our 
former description. He was attired in respect- 
able professional style, with just an assumption 
of swellishness. His face was cleanly shaven, 
and he wore a low-crowned hat, and a black wig. 
From a light, fair man, he had made himself up 
dark. To a stranger he wore the marks of foreign 
travel ; his cheeks were " bronzed with the Eastern 
sun." 

The disguise was complete, and it certainly 



FRIENDS NO LONGEB. , 93 

made the fellow infinitely better looking than 
he was in his customary habit, and far more, 
attractive to the " feminine " mind than in either 
of his former disguises. 

He had come down to Sevemtown partly out 
of curiosity, -psMj on speculation, with a per- 
sonal desire to ferret out poor Dibble's " little 
game/* and also to i-un through Avonworth valley, 
and take a peep at the neighbourhood of Barton 
HalL His recent advertising scheme had sup- 
plied him with a little ready cash, and he had 
augmented this at ^cart^ in a recently-established 
gambling-house, where he was tinknown. 

In funds, and anxious to make up a sufficient 
sum to enable him to set up as a gentleman on 
the Continent, he had waited upon Mr. Richard 
Tallant under an assumed name, and that 
gentleman had denied all knowledge of him to 
his fece. He would have no more dealings with 
his police-hunted friend, and they had parted 
in anger, Richard Tallant threatening to hand 
his former companion over to the police as an 



94 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

impostor, and Mr. Gibbs making a vow as he 
left the high steps of the fine West-End house, 
to be revenged on " this mushroom upstart." 

Defiance and assumption seemed to be the 
leading features of Bichard JDallant's policy. He 
defied eveiybody, he assumed an air of injured 
dignity upon the slightest reference to his past 
oareer, talked of envy, hatred, and malice, almost 
wept at his father's name, and gave splendid 
illustrations of his wealth in noble public sub- 
scriptions. Scarcely a list of pubHc donors to 
any charity that appeared in the ISmes without 
Sichard Tallant held a place there. He had 
even astonished the citizens of Sevemtown lately 
by suddenly appearing as a subscriber to various 
local institutions. His father had rarely done as 
much as this, though Sevemtown was the capital of 
the county in which he resided; and people soon 
hogaui to say that young Tallant was not such a 
bad fellow after alL 

The actions which he had threatened pro- 
gressed very slowly. Writs had been issued in 



. CONSCIENCE AND CREDIT. 95 

several cases; but nothing further seemed to 
have been done. This, however, speedily closed 
the mouths of other people who might be in- 
clined to @ay malicious things about the disgraced 
director of the Eastern Bank. It is astoni^iing how 
people shrink before the threat of an action for 
libel and slander, and it oftentimes happens that 
those persons who are most ready to talk of vindi- 
cating their characters, and who threaten actions 
for that purpose, are often all that their traducers 
have said of them. A public man with a tolerably 
settled conscience, and assured of his own pro- 
bity, does not trouble himself much about the 
cavillers who attack him, unless they attempt 
to undermine his credit : then if he cannot afford 
to have his credit undermined, he will blaze out 
at his libeller, and endeavour to put himself 
right with the world. If he has money enough 
to Btand the undermining principle, he treats it 
with contempt. 

It was so with Richard TaUant: he was not 
an honest man, and not so rich as he professed 



96 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

to be; and this made it all the more necessary 
that he should set up for an injured man and 
a wealthy one. He convinced many people that 
he was the latter^ and they speedily gave him 
credit for being the former 

And thus it was that he had refused to sully 
even his memory with a knowledge of Shuffleton 
Gibbs, who at once in his own way held his 
head above the plebeian upstart, and thought of 
his own "gentle blood." 

"I will show the trumpery humbug, whether 
a Gibbs . ^the last of his race . shall be scorned 
for naught by a mushroom iron-dealer. Shu9eton 
Gibbs snubbed and threatened with the police! . 
Gibbs, the greatest swell of all Oxford under- 
graduates, the pride of the river and the forum, 
the man who drove the best cattle, and gave the 
most sumptuous dinners! It is certainly going 
hard with me now, but it shall go harder with 
Richard Tallant," and Gibbs smiled sardonically, as 
he quietly wended his way homewards, and revolved 
in his mind the notion of visiting Sevemtown. 



GIBBS AND THE SHOW GIBL. 97 

Not only was the ex-swell amongst the audi- 
ence at the beginning of that evening's enter* 
tainment, in which Mr. and Mrs. Dibble figured 
BO prominently, but he remained afterwards, and 
took a lively interest in " the mysterious lady " 
whom he applauded loudly. 

She was a lively pleasant looking girl, this 
showman's daughter, active of limb and nimble 
of tongue. There was something in her appear- 
ance far beyond the ordinary show girl. Then 
she was young and full of life and buoyancy. 
She evid^tly enjoyed the part she played. The 
wonder and amazement of the younger portion 
of her audience, and the undisguised admiration 
with which some of the elder ones contemplated 
her round little figure, her painted cheeks, and 
her well-formed arms, gave her a real pleasure. 
She was slightly coarse in her maimers, as the 
reader has already seen : added to this she 
was vain, so the applause of the miscellaneous 
low-bred audiences before whom she performed 
was agreeable to her; and on the evening in 

VOL. n. H 



98 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

question she was particolarlj delighted at the 
marked wkj in which the nearest approach to 
a gentleman she had even seen in the Temple, 
expressed his approval of her tricks and of her 
personal appearanca 

When Christabel brought out those two 
packs of cards, and shuffled them, and handed 
them round, and tossed them about, Oibbs's 
weak eyes began to sparkle with unwonted 
fira 

It was quite delightful to see how clever 
Christabel was with those bits of pitsteboard. 
The audience might cut them as they ^eased, 
and think of what card they liked, she could 
always present iJiem with the oounteifeit of 
their thoughts. Shuffle them as they mighty 
in two or three cuts she would bring all the 
miits together : blindfold her, and sbe could pick 
out any card that was mentioned. She did 
twenty clever things with the cards; not the 
ordinary showman's tricks . not simply the 
innocent jokes which mark the sport in draw- 



chbistabel's tsices. 99 

iDg-TOoms at Christmas time; but genuine 
clever unaccountable tricks which ^elicited 
from Mr. Jefferson Crawley^ otherwise Muffle- 
ton Gibbs, frequent exclamations of ^*\[b;vo, 
bravo." 

It was not the mere tricks that enraptured Mr. 
Crawley either ; but the dexterous way in which 
Chiistabel manipulated the cards and moved any 
nimiber of them to that part of the pack where 
it was necessary to her success they should be. 
Deeding with ordinary players^ and with experi- 
enced plaj^rs too^ she could evidently turn up 
almost any card she pleased. 

This was the leading thought that cropped 
up in the mind of Mr. Crawley, He eaavied 
the girl h^ j^dexterity, her lithe quick fingers, 
and then he thought what a fortune she n%ht 
be to any one who could give her an .education 
worthy of her powers. 

Wheal the performance was at an end, he 
waited until the magician emerged from behind 
the curtain, whereupon he complimented him 

H 2 



100 THK TALLAHTS OF BABTOK. 

upon his powersy and desired to be introduoed 
to his wonderful daughter. 

The showman with the aliases^ looked in* 
quiringly into the ace of the gentl^nan with 
the same possessions. Gibbs thou^t he under- 
stood the expression, 

''I have an interest in a certain exhilntion 
of some importance^ sir," said Gihbs^ drawing 
himself up to his full hei^t and tordng as much 
assumpticm of virtuous circumspection into his 
bleary eyes as possible, ^ and I have also a very 
slight acquaintance with a gentleman to whom 
you directed one Dibble to write requesting a 
loan," 

**Your humble servant," said the showman. 
** Christabel, when you have dressed . ^this is our 
last perfcHmance to-night, sir, . ^when you have 
dressed, h^e's a gent wishes to see you." 

Momus hereupon came out to see the "^gent," 
making her best bow to Gibbs, who took no 
notice of the ''dawg," but went on talking to the 
magidao. 



THB PBOPOSKD LOAN. 101 

"Is it 6nly fifty pounds you require for th6 
proposed extension of this exhibition, haw?** said 
Gibbfi. 

. ^No more and no less," said the showman^ 
giving Momus a friendly kick in the ribs for 
persisting in forcing her attentions upon a " gent" 
who seemed studiously to disr^;ard them. 

"Well, I think the matter may be arranged, 
^y Mend is a close-fisted fellow. I have . ^haw 
. only a very slight acquaintance with him ; 
Vit being in the neighbourhood, I undertook to 
call on his account ; and, between ourselves, I 
have stayed here. haw . a little on my own. 
Is there any likelihood of your clever daughter 
accepting an engagement in a large concern . 
a f)ennanent affair in town? You see . haw . 
I am straightforward with you." 

"Well, it aint a question that, as can be 
answered in a moment. What would be the 
figure . and could you do anything for me ? " said 
the showman. 

At this juncture a boy entered at the side- 



102 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

door with a note in his hand, which note he 
presented io Mr. Martin. 

" Here, Chris. come, come, what a timer yow 
are I" said the showman,^ disappearing behind the 
curtain, that the wonderfdl lady mi^t spell 
out the cosiieatB c the letter. She had been 
taught to read aad write in her eariy days, and 
she had not nmdi difficidty in making oat that 
her father's presence was requested knmediately, 
by Mr. Thomas Dibble, at the Railway Tavera 

"Weil, then, I must go,'' said the sbowmao. 
'' Yon^U be careful with this 'ere swell outside^ 
mind, and make no promises . d'ye bear?'* 

"Yes, father," said the girl, who was not jusi 
at that time on the best of terms with her 
parent^ and colleague in the mystic ariy seeing 
that he had knocked her down on the previous 
nighty and kicked the supper-things or^, be- 
cause she had omtradicted him and expressed 
a determination not to join in the sdieme for 
introducing the Skeleton into their ezhibiti(i. 

When she came ibrth Mr. Martin introdueed 



NOT " MAKINa FUN." 103 

her to the ''gent/' and with a precautionary 
motion of his finger, he left the pau^ in answer 
to Dibble. 

" I am delighted of this . ^haw . opportunity/' 
said Gibbe, showing his teeth a3 of old, and 
tiying to look fascinating, ''of congratulating 
you on your ability." 

" Thank you," said the showman's daughter, 
bluntly ; *' if you aint making fun." 

She looked quite bright and sparkling; she 
had made a much more careful evening toilette 

''Making fun!" said Qibbs, taking her hand. 
" I should be more inclined to make love," he 
said ; " for you certainly are the prettiest girl I 
have seen this many a day." 

This was quite up to Christabers taste . ^the 
most delicious bit of flattery she had ever heard* 

" I declare positively you have quite made a 
fool of me . haw . ^to-night," he went on, showing 
his teeth again. "You are not offended at my 
saying so ? " 



104 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Not I," said C^bristabel. "What is there to 
be oflfended at?" 

There was a charcoal stove in the show, and 
Gibbs drew the young lady of the mystic cups 
to a seat beside it, and thereupon told her that 
he had fallen madly in love with her; that he 
was a gentleman, though a poor one; that if 
she felt she could love him in return, he would 
marry her. But she must keep what he had 
said to her a secret from her father. 

Then he dexterously drew from her an account 
of her life ; the story of Dibble's joining the 
exhibition ; and, above all, an account of the 
quarrel with her father; and finally, after a 
lengthened conversation, he escorted her to the 
little lodging close by, Momus being left to mind 
the shoWj after Christabel had duly locked 
up the side door, extinguished the light, and let 
down the platform. 

Gibbs was scrupulously attentive and gallant 
to the girl, and when he left her she promised 
to give him an answer next day upon the 



THE SKELETON. 105 

momentous question of elopement and mar- 
riage. 

It was a rapid courtship this, but cleverly 
done; and Gibbs, you see, had had a large 
experience in this way. Christabel was so much 
impressed that she went up the dirty creaking 
stairs^ and paraded before about twelve inches 
of looking-glass, by the light of a tallow candle. 

Her father, when he returned home that night, 
was imusually bumptious in his manner towards 
Christabel, his daughter, and more than usually 
tipsy. Dibble had obtained a partial promise 
from Mrs. Dibble that the showman should not 
want for fifty pounds, and before that, as we 
have seen, a " gent " had given him similar hopes. 
Everything was going well with him, and he 
was independent of everybody ; his daughter, too, 
felt particularly independent that night, and the 
result was a wordy warfare about the Skeleton. 

Christabel hated the sight of the Skeleton, and 
what was more, she would leave the exhibition 
if he entered it. 



106 THE TALLA17TS OF BABTON. 

The showman swore that the Skelebon should 
come into the exhibition, and what was more, 
by . . , she should marry the Skeleton if she did 
not mind what she was saying. 

This was the greatest bit of tyranny in words 
which the showman felt he could threaten, and 
he seemed to gloat over the idea. Tes, she 
should* marry the death's head and bones, he 
said, and he chuckled and laughed and thumped 
the table, and became quite jocular at the bare 
notion of such a union. 

Christabel, however, flamed up in return, and 
by degrees the showman became terribly angry, 
and threatened to turn her out of doors. 

The end was that Chiistabel went up-stairs, 
locked herself in her bed-room, and began to look 
out her things for packing ofif the next day. 
Meanwhile the showman lay down by the fire, 
went to sleep, and dreamt he was proprietor of a 
pair of giants, two skeletons, five boa constrictors, 
and a wax-work museum: that he wore a tiger- 
skin coat, and walked about smoking a cigar. 



THE. showman's AMBITION. 107 

whilst a brass band beneath a gorgeous display of 
pictures performed the Conquering Hero, with 
real gas shining on their music books, and that 
all he had to do was to wear the tiger-skin coat, 
smoke thick cigars, and swear at everybody who 
did not please him. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

WHAT ABTHUE PHILLIPS SAW THBOUQH THE 
MIST. 

A WHITE, wet, grovelling mist; with a long, 
black procession creeping through it; and the 
solemn tolling of a village bell ; nodding plumes 
and draped horses ; a small group of well-dressed 
farmers, the tenants of the late Mr. Tallant. 

There was something weird and miserable 
. about the whole thing, as Arthur Phillips viewed 
it at a distance ; something that chilled him and 
bowed him down. 

He followed the mourners into the church ; the 
solemn village church, with its high-backed pews, 
brass monuments, and marble effigies ; the solemn 
little church, with the ivy nodding round the 
porch, and the damp making big blotches on the 
pavement. 



A FUNERAL, 109 

The mourners shuffled into their seats, and the 
villagers came peering in with vacant looks. 

" In the midst of life we are in death/' The 
words were repeated back again from the walls, 
and the kneeling effigies in stone seemed to take 
up the text and say it over again with the echoes. 

The great black coffin stood in the chancel, and 
Arthur could not help picturing the dead face of 
the merchant. 

How changed everjrthing was. How sad, how 
hopeless ! And yet Arthur's own deep love, for 
a moment, lit up his thoughts with a hope that 
had scarcely had a place in his heart before ; but 
he banished the thought in a moment as selfish. 

Bichard Tallant was there amongst the 
mourners, loudest in his Amens, and apparently 
most moved, as he should be, at the pathetic 
solemnity of the church service. 

Arthur quietly walked over the fields to the 
Somertons, whilst the coffin was being laid in th^ 
grave, 

A faint streak or two of sunlight struggled 



110 THE TALLAirrs OF BABTON. 

through the mist here and there, but with little or 
no influence on the soddened, damp atmosphere, 
which penetrated everything. 

Arthur found Mrs. Somerton alone in a high- 
backed chair by the .fire. He knew that he was 
no favourite with the bailiff's wife ; but he bade 
her *' Good-morning" with a quiet courteqr pecu- 
liarly his own, and she was evidently not dis- 
pleased at the visit. . 

" You have been ill, I fear," said Arthur, notic- 
ing the unusual wrappers about the arm-chair, 
and Mrs. Somerton's rather pale face. 

" Yes, sir, very ill," she said, in a subdued 
voice. 

" I am sorry to hear it ; but hope I may 
congratulate you upon having got over the worst 
of it" 

" I don't know that there is much to congratu- 
late about," she said, looking at him with a sad 
expression in her big eyes ; " but I have got over 
the worst of it, they say, thank you." 

"I was very much shocked to hear of Mr. 



ARTHUB Ain) MBS. SOMSBTON. Ill 

Tallant's death. I only heard of it yesterday/' 
said Arthur. 

" What has become of you lately ? . you have 
not been in this neighbourhood for a long time," 
said Mrs. Somerton, evidently only attending to 
her own thoughts. 

" I have been engaged on on important work, 
which has occupied me almost night and day 
for several months past," Arthur said. 

"Will you not sit down, sir?" Mrs. Somerton 
asked. " I am sorry I can't get about to oflfer 
you a seat." 

Arthur sat down beside the neat bright fire- 
place, and looked into the burning coals with a 
variety of curious feelings : he longed to ask all 
kinds of questions, but feared to do so. 

"Many strange things may occur in a few 
months," said Mrs. Somerton; "the purpose of a 
life-time is easily upset." 

Arthur said nothing, but looked curiously up at 
the speaker. 

"We all think we are very clever, and we 



112 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

go on planning and planning; but things 
are not to be as we like: there is a Power 
above us." 

" True," said Arthur, " we must all bend to the 
decrees of Providence." 

'' Ah ! if we only knew that, at the beginning, 
Mr, Phillips," said Mrs. Somerton earnestly, " if 
we could be content to learn that from other 
people's experience : ^ better learn from your 
neighbour's scathe than from your own ;' but we 
learn from our own, Mr. Phillips, we learn from 
our own." 

Arthur had upon a former occasion been struck 
with the snatches of moral and proverbial philo- 
sophy which characterised Mrs, Somerton's con- 
versations ; but he had thought her a clever cynical 
pountrywoman before, and had disliked her : now 
he rapidly felt himself beginning to take a deep 
interest in her. 

" Folks that do wrong have generally plenty of 
excuses; but I have none worth the name of 
excuse, though they say a bad excuse is better 



BEMORSE. 113 

than none. You are surprised at my talk : you 
will not be so before the night is over/* 

"Surely nothing has happened that does not 
appear to me. Poor Mr. Tallant is dead, and you 
have been ill; is there anything else?" Arthur 
asked as calmly as he could. 

"I won't torture you, . I know your secret, sir. 
Miss Phoebe is well, though, poor soul, she is 
sadly cut up; but misery is no respecter of 
persons. Ambition and pride are the ruin of 
most people. You would hardly think I had 
been an ambitious, scheming woman, with plans 
far above the station I hold?" she went on 
excitedly. 

" I have often thought that you would worthily 
fill a much higher position," said Arthur. 

"Ah, well, it is a long story, and I will not 
weary you with it ; everybody thinks their own 
stories interesting to everybody else ; but, there, 
mine need not be told. I have been an ambitious, 
scheming woman ever since 1 was a woman, and 
I have always been foiled. Half my life has been 

VOL. II, I 




114 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

spent in studying how I should play the ace with- 
out knowing whether I held it or not, and in the 
other half I have been learning the truth of the 
proverb that wine poured out is not wine swal- 
lowed. Lincolnshire women have a way of talking 
in proverbs, Mr. Phillips : one can say a good deal 
like that without seeming to." 

Arthur was altogether at a loss to understand 
Mrs. Somerton; but he boded iU from all this 
apparent mystery, and yet a voice seemed to 
whisper hope all through it. 

" You are in love with Miss Phoebe/ said Mrs. 

* 
Somerton at length, and with singular abrupt- 
ness; "I know it. I have not watched ani 
watched with a mother's eye for nothing, and I 
think the young lady loves you in return . ^if 
there is such a thing as love . and I begin to think 
there may be, or somettiing better than love, 
something better than leva*' 

The woman repeated these latter words 
with unaffected tenderness as she remembered 
how kindly, how generously, how tenderly, her 



ONLY A PAINTER AFHEB ALL. 115 

husbaad, Luke Somerton, had nucsed lier in her 
iUness ; how when he knew afl, he had not up- 
braided her ; how he had pitied her and bade her 
be of good heart, for that a wrong atoned for was 
a wrong nndcme ; how in the early watches of the 
night she had seen him by her bedside wakeful 
and gentle, but yet manly, as she remembered 
him when he was young in the grand old lincobi- 
shire wolds. 

*' Something better than love," she tjontinued . 
^ friendship, benevolence, cTiarity, synjpathy. I 
know not what you call it ; but perhaps it may 
b^ love, after all,*' she went on ; ^* and I don't 
think there is any wrong ambition about you, 
Mr. Phniips, if you will forgive me fox saying so. 
A man who can sit in the sun painting pictures 
and all that sort of thing, and be content with it, 
can't very well be much wrong, except >that he is 
only a painter after alL Don't be angry, sir ; we 
never thought much of painters in Lincolnshire ; 
we used to look at them the same as we did poets 
and such like ; but I have heard that some of 

I 2 



116 THE TALLANTS OF BARTOK. 

them make money, and can keep up a good 
house. However, I will say no more about that ; 
but somehow, sir, I think you will find things 
going favoui'ably, so far as Phoebe is concerned. 
We shall see ; if such should be the case, Mr. 
Phillips, no matter what you hear of me, you will 
not forget that I was the first to give you hope . 
that will be something to think of, perhaps some 
little consolation to me." 

Arthur was too much agitated to ask any ques- 
tions. He thanked Mrs. Somerton as well as he 
could for what she had said, and he began to look 
out into the future with hope. 

We never know how imexpectedly Hope may 
pay us a gorgeous visit; how often she comes 
when we least expect her. With death barring 
his way, and funeral plumes crossing his path, 
Arthur Phillips could hardly have expected Hope 
to come by his side and whisper so confidently of 
happiness almost beyond his most sanguine 
thoughts. Once or twice in the darkness, once or 
twice between the acts of the day's solemn drama. 



HAPPY DREAMS. 117 

k faint whisper had lighted up his soul as we 
have seen; but here he stood at last almost in 
the full blaze of hope, and the light had come 
from the darkest of all places, in his own esti- 
mation. 

And so Arthur sat and pondered, and Mrs. 
Somerton quietly regarding him, dosed oflf into a 
quiet slumber, induced by the fatigue of thought 
and conversation which Arthur's visit had occa- 
sioned. 

Far away amongst the Lincolnshire meadows, 
where the long, lazy river flowed by the cornfields 
and lingered amongst the reeds and rushes; far 
away in the green and. golden fields, and over the 
brown and loamy furrows, hemmed in by short 
hedges, and dotted here and there with ricks of 
hay and straw and stray clumps of trees; far 
away amongst Lincolnshire homesteads, and miQs 
with their swinging sails, and square-towered 
churches, and broad lanes, and long teams of 
horses dragging well-stocked waggons; far away 
in the past the mind of the bailiff's wife was 



118 THE TALLANT8 OF BABTON. 

wandering, and the dream was a happy one, for it 
dealt with childhood only* 

Arthur stole out whilst she dept The mists 
had crept about the valley and were havering 
over the hill-tops. 

He started off to visit some of the familiar 
scenes where he bad sat in the l&ag summer 
days, wondering and hewing ajid painting in hazy 
romantic dreams which were not all happiness. 

His thoughts were strangely mixed and intri- 
cate now: a host of anxious feelings had been 
awakened whidi he could not control, and which 
he could hardly understand. 

"Gone . are you gone?" said Mrs. Somerton, 
awaking &om^ her brief sleep. 

*^ No, I am here/' said her husband, removing a 
crape hatband from his hat and laying it upon 
the table. 

"Ah, it's you, Luke; I have had Mr. Phillips, 
the painter, here." 



AFFEB THS FUIfERALr 119 

** Yes," said Luke.** yes ; and what has he to 
say for himself? '' asked llie bailift 

'' Not much ; I think I have done all the talk- 
ing, Lnke. And so you hare buried the poor 
gentleman V* she went on, mournfully. 

" Yes, poor fellow j not many better men ever 
were buried than he," said Luke. 

"And now . ^now they are going to read the 
will, I suppose 1 " 

" They were all going into the dining-room as I 
came past. The lawyer asked me to come in ; 
but I thought you'd be lonely, Sarah, and so I 
came home." 

Mrs. Somerton could not he^ thinking that 
Luke had better have stayed and heard the 
will read ; but [she was too considerate now, to 
say so. 

"You are very kind, Luke; but how shall we 
know all about it ?" 

" Oh, I forgot that ; ITl go back," said Luke. 

"Do; I should like to hear it all from your 
own lips, Luke." 



120 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

And the bailiff returned just in time to hear 
the various clauses read. 

When he was gone, Arthur Phillips came back 
again to the bailiflF's house, determined to learn 
why he had so suddenly filled himself with hopes 
that excited him beyond description. He would 
not be content with vague hints and proverbial 
sayings, and he would not conceal his own feelings 
with regard to Miss Tallant. Mrs. Somerton 
could evidently help him in some way or another ; 
she knew more than she chose to tell ; she knew 
what he ought to know, and he would endeavour 
to learn what she did know. 

Mrs. Somerton did not need much persuasion 
to reveal her secret. She knew that in a few 
hours Arthur would know it, and it was a satis- 
factory sort of penance t6 tell him herself, and 
to confess all her plotting and meannesses; to 
disclose to him her feelings with regard to her- 
self ; to show how jealous she was of her daughter ; 
and to point some of her moral aphorisms with 



A SURPRISE. 121 

illustrations from this last phase of the failure of 
her schemes. 

It was indeed a new light this to Arthur. He 
had dreamed of all sorts of contingencies which 
might bring Phoebe nearer to him, and his only- 
hope was in the production of some great work 
that should open up a golden vista which the 
merchant might comprehend; for Arthur had 
always regarded Mi\ Tallant as the wealthy com- 
moner who gauged men and things by money, and 
this had disheartened him even more than the 
thoughts of his own shortcomings and the beauty 
of her whom he had been rash enough to go 
on loving without daring even to hint at his 
passion. 

And now fate had decreed that this difficulty 
should disappear. Did he blame Phoebe's mother ? 
No. He sat before her stupified with amazement. 

His first thought, now that the great barrier 
of all was cleared away, was of his own unworthi- 
ness; but he had courage enough to tell Mrs. 
Somerton that she had excited hopes which had 



122 THE TAT.TiANTS OP BARTON. 

never before dared to mount so high. He had 
heard her story with the greatest surprise, and, 
but that his own heart hoped and desired its 
truth, it was abnost too extraordinary for belief. 

Supposing he dared to hope that Phoebe loved 
him, had he her mother's consent to ask her the 
question I 

Mrs. Somerton replied in the affirmative. 
There were many ways in which amends might 
be made towards wiping out great wrongs, and it 
seemed as if God had spared her life that she 
might have time to repair nearly all the injury 
she had done. 



CHAPTER IX. . 

IN WHICH AN IMPORTANT WILL IS READ. 

The lajst will and testament of Mr. Richard 
Tallant set forth in proper legal phraseology, at 
grfeat length, that the person known as Phoebe 
Tallant, and who was understood to be his daugh- 
ter, was the daughter of Sarah Somerton, wife 
of Luke Somerton, farm bailiff; and that the 
person known as Amy Somerton, and who had 
passed hitherto as the daughter of the said Luke 
Somerton, was his, the testator's, daughter. 

This had been satisfactorily proved to him 
by the said Sarah Somerton, who had changed 
the said persons when they were infants ; and 
the likeness of the late beloved testator's wife 
bore testimony to the truth thereof!, 



124 THE TALLAin:S OP BARTON. 

But though the testator was fully satisfied 
of this, and though he acknowledged the person 
known as the said Amy Somerton to be his 
lawful child, his will had been drawn in such a 
way that its validity and legal weight should not 
simply rest upon this; but certain checks and 
explanations and provisions were made, the result 
being that the person hitherto known as Amy 
Somerton should be his heiress, and henceforth 
take the name of Tallant. 

To this lady he left the whole of his real 
and personal estates, furniture, plate, linen, and 
moneys of all descriptions, banked or funded. 

This was set forth in a deed of great length, 
dealing as it did with an estate which could 
so well aflford long clauses on many sheets 
of parchment. 

Property of the value of five hundred a year 
was left to Phoebe Somerton ; a legacy of 2000Z. 
to her father, and numerous small legacies to 
servants and others. 

The name qf Bichard Tallant was not men- 



THE WILL. 125 

tioned in any way, and that gentleman resolved 
to dispute the validity of the will. 

He told the lawyer that he would file a bill 
in Chancery the very next day. The lawyer 
smiled and said he had no objection. 

This was the report which Luke Somerton 
gave to his wife, 

*'And so justice is done," said Mrs. Somerton. 
" Thank God !" 

The lawyer had discreetly prepared the two 
girls for what was to come, so that the extraordi- 
nary revelation and the great change might not 
come upon them so suddenly as to be dangerous. 

The whole truth, when it was disclosed to them, 
changed all those feelings of estrangement which 
had lately been engendered by Amy's desperate 
conduct. 

In a moment Phoebe, with all the nobleness 
of her nature, felt Amy's wrongs; and Amy's 
heart overflowed with gratitude to Phoebe, and 
with love and sympathy. 



126 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

" Sister, dear, dear sister ! ** Amy exclaimed, 
folding Phoebe in her arms, and sobbing aloud. 

Phoebe hid her face in Amy's neck, with a 
hundred strange emotions agitating hen 

And then they sat together hand in hand, each 
occupied with her own thoughts ; each too much 
under the influence of the change which had come 
to pass, to have aaiy very clear thoughte about it 

Phoebe had all along mourned for Mr. Tallant 
with all the sorrow of a daughter ; she had often 
felt, as my readers know, that all her love was not 
reciprocated, but she knew how much her mother 
had been loved, and how deeply her loss had 
a^Eected him, and she loved him aa a daughter 
and would continue to do so. 

She could not for the moment bring herself to 
look upon Mrs. Somerton as her mother : she had 
always admired Luke, and had spent many an 
hour talking to him amongst the poultry and the 
sheep, and in the corn-fields. It waa no degrada- 
tion to be the daughter of such a. man as Luke 
Somerton, and none, perhaps, for that matter, to 



A GREAT CHANGE, 127 

be the daughter of his wife ; but it was a great 
change . too great for Phoebe to comprehend it 
thus far. Her first thought had been for Amy, 
and Amy's first thought had been for Phoebe. 

But in a few short hours Phoebe's highly- 
wrought sensibilities began to reflect back upon 
her the true meaning of the change in ber por- 
tion. She was only a \dsitor here. She had en- 
joyed many privileges in this house, and many 
advantages ; she was thankful for them, but they 
had not been hers by right, and now they were 
hers no longer in any sensa 

She would go home. Sometiiing Kke a shudder 
came over her as she said this to herself in her 
own room, and she rebuked herself for it, and 
knelt down and prayed, thanking God for all his 
mercies, and earnestly soliciting His guidance and 
protection. 

What a sweet, fair face it was, turned upwards 
in supplication; the deep blue^ beseeching eyes, 
the half-opened lips, the pale cheeks, the round, 
arched neck, the long wavy hair thrown back : 



/ 



128 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

what more beautiful picture than such a woman 
kneeling in prayer ? 

How diflferent was Amy's occupation. Pacing 
to and fro in her room, and looking at herself now 
and then in the long mirrors which adorned the 
wardrobes, she was torn by contending feelings, 
too varied for peace, too strong for aught else, at 
that moment, but walking. 

She was overcome by her advancement. 
Lately we have seen how high her ambition had 
soared ; we have seen how she had changed, how 
she had marked out a new line of action, how she 
had set her heart on something almost beyond the 
romantic dreams of mere ambition. 

Her love for Lionel Hammerton . ^her deep, mad 
love had been trampled on, and she had risen a new 
being, with all the pride of her dead mother beat- 
ing in every vein, with a sense of insult and wrong 
far beyond what she had a right to feel, far beyond 
the measure of Hammerton's oflfence. 

The appearance of Earl Vemer at Barton Hall 
that day had given a new tone to her life. He 



FATE. 129 

had appeared at the very moment when decision 
seemed wavering ; he had come upon her like an 
interpretation of her own thoughts, as if Fate 
said, "Here is your opportunity;" and then it 
was that she determined to play for high stakes, 
even at the risk of ridicule and failure. 

And now that she stood on the hill top, and had 
only, she knew, to raise her finger and beckon, she 
was bewildered. Lord Vemer had called at Barton 
Hall twice since that memorable meeting, and had 
on the second occasion evinced mai'ked admiration 
of Amy, such as could not be mistaken, notwith- 
standing that he knew her position, for he had 
signified as much. 

If even her lowly birth and her poverty had not 
scared Earl Vemer away, she knew well enough 
that her wealth would only enhance her beauty 
and attractions. 

What delicious revenge to marry LioneFs 
brother, and to make the chance of a coronet 
for him all the more remote ! 

And yet, how she had loved this man.! How 

VOL. II. K 




130 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

fervently, how fondly ? Did he know how much ? 
She asked herself the question, and then blushed 
at the remembrance of a hundred little acts in 
which she had disclosed it to him. 

Had he encouraged her love ? She asked her- 
self that question, too; and then she recalled 
softly whispered compliments, and delicately 
hinted regrets that society should not welcome 
beauty into its ranks without requiring that it 
should be backed with ancestry. And above all, 
she remembered a time when he told her a simple 
narrative, how the brother of a noble earl had 
loved a beautiful maiden, a farmer's daughter, and 
how when he had made a name beyond that which 
mere rank could give, he came back and married 
her ; and how, upon that occasion, he had kissed 
her and pressed her hand, and left her bathed in 
tears of joy and feai*. 

And yet, without a word he had left her ; with- - 
out even telling her that he loved her ; not even 
giving her the consolation of hope. She had been 
too coAfiding, weak, silly, and he had treated her 



love's last hope. 131 

accordingly: lie should see libw Amy Talla/nt 
would requite him. 

She was walking to and fro, with her earnest 
eyes looking out into the new, strange future, 
when a servant brought her the card of Mr. 
Arthur Phillips. 

" Tell him I will see him. Show him into the 
library." 

Arthur began to apologise for calling at such a 
time, but Amy silenced him at once by telling 
him she had desired to see him ; and, full of 
her own purposes and feelings, she said: . 

" Have you heard from Lionel Hammerton ? " 

" I have," said Arthur. 

" Pray excuse me if I appear inquisitive or 
rude. I have ample reasons for going a little 
beyond what may seem courteous under the 
circumstances. Does he mention me in his 
letter?" 

" He does not," said Arthur, quietly. 

" Have you heard from him more than once ? " 

" Only once," said Arthur. 

k2 



^ 



132 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Does he mention Baxton Hall ? Pray, be plain 
with me : on your honour, as a gentleman ? " 

" Yes, he does," said Arthur. 

" How ? does he send any message ?" 

" He desires to be remembered to Miss Tallant.'* 

" Meaning Phoebe, of course ? " 

'* Yes," said Arthur. 

" And he does not refer to me in any way?" 

" No," said Arthur. 

" Did you see him before he left England ? " 

" I did." 

" Did he take leave of you ? did he bid you 
good-bye ? " 

'' He did," said Arthur. 

" Pray pardon me, Mr. Phillips ; I assure you 
these questions are of great moment . they con- 
cern the happiness of more than one person." 

Miss Tallant was greatly excited. 

"Did he mention me to you upon that occa- 
sion?" 

" Eeally, Miss Somerton . Miss Tallant . I beg 
your pardon," . said Arthur; ''but you must not 



TOO TRUE. 133 

expect me to go into our private conversa- 
tions." 

" I do, sir ; I commaxid. L entreat" she added, 
in supplicating accents, " did lie charge you with 
any message to me ? " 

" He did not," said Arthur. 

"Did he speak of me, sir . did he speak of 
me . ^in what way did he speak of me ? " 

" Eeally," said Arthur, in an expostulating 
manner. 

" Suppose you were my brother, sir, and 
suppose I loved that man, your friend ; did he 
speak of me in such a way as you would wish 
for the man to speak whom your sister loved ? 
You see I am plain with you . be you honest 
with me ; Yes or no." 

" I must decline to answer," said Arthur. 

" And yow profess to be in love ; nay, you need 
not start. Do you think I do not know your 
secret ? Do you think I do not know how many 
sleepless nights you have spent; how you have 
been tossed between hope and fear; how* you 



"N 



134 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

have cursed your lot^ and, consoled yourself with 
poetic dreams, and the voice of her you love ? 
I tell you my happiness and all my hopes are at 
stake. I know ^ well enough . ^my own instincts 
teU me that he did but trifle with my love, 
and your silence only . confirms it Now that 
wealth falls in to fill up the scale and weigh 
down the balance, I should despise myself if 
I accepted compromise; for I very nearly hate 
him as it is ; but I seek for full satisfaction. I 
will ask you but one more question. Did he 
speak of me before he left England as yov, 
would speak to a fidend who had your confidence 
concerning Phoebe ? " 

" No, he did not** said Arthur, earnestly. 

"Thank you," said Amy, "thank you, Mr. Phillips, 
sincerely ; and now may I beg that you never re- 
peat what has passed in this conversation ? " 

"You may rely upon me," said Arthur. 

Amy put out her hand, and said good-bye, 
and left the artist wondering at her extraordinaiy 
conduct 



CHAPTEE X. 

ARTHUR PHILLIPS HAS A HAPPY GLIMPSE OF 
THE FUTURE. 

Arthur stood irresolutely wondering what he 
should do next He had intended to ask Amy 
quietly to inform her friend of his presence here ; 
but she had given him little or no opportunity 
to do that^ as you have seen. 

He looked round the library where the merchant 
had been accustomed to sit at his desk. There 
was no change in the room. The light elegant 
book-shelves were there. The grandly boimd 
books were there as usual Pens and ink and 
blotting pads all in their places ; and the leather 
chair stood near the desk by the window; but 
the merchant lay quietly in his grave. 

Presently Arthur rang the bell, and sum- 
moned up courage enough to send his card up to 




136 FOBTUNE AND FINANCE. 

Phoebe Somerton, who presented herself almost 
immediately. 

She was a good deal changed ; but her black 
clothes seemed only to add a sprt of refining 
touch to her beauty. 

"I am so pleased to see you, Mr. Phillips," 
she said frankly, putting out her hand, " if one 
really ought to be pleased at anything, consi- 
dering that we have buried my father . I mean 
Mr. Tallant. to-day." 

Phoebe spoke with some restraint and hesi- 
tation, and Arthur was visibly nervous and 
excited. 

"I am sure you will pardon me," said Arthur, 
" if with the view of suppressing any embarrass- 
ment I tell you that I have been made acquainted 
with all that has taken place. I came down 
here from London yesterday, ignorant even of 
Mr. Tallant's death ; but I could not return 
without venturing to say to you, peraonally, how 
deeply, how respectfully, I sympathise with you 

your troubles." 



ONCE MORE. 137 

There was a tone of deferential homage and 
sincere interest in Arthur's manner which did 
not fail to make an impression upon Phoebe. 

" I am sure I thank you sincerely, Mr. PhiUips, 
and appreciate, as I hope I ought, your great 
kindness : I have frequently wondered why you 
had deserted Barton," said Phoebe. 

" I shall hope to have an opportunity to 
explain to you one of these days," said Arthur. 

" Nothing I hope ever occurred here to induce 
your absence?" said Phoebe. 

" O no ; on the contrary," said Arthur, looking 
at the speaker with undisguised emotion, "en- 
gagements of a pressing character have kept 
me confined to my studio." 

Then the conversation dropped into matters 
of fact concerning the late Mr. Tallant's troubles, 
his illness and death ; and eventually Phoebe 
Somerton and Arthur shook hands, and Arthur 
asked permission to call and see his fair pupil 
on an early day, which permission was readily 
granted. 



% 



138 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

And so Arthur went back to Sevemtown, to 
his quiet house beneath the shadow of the old 
cathedral^ full of new hopes, a new man, and 
with the future opening up to him bright and 
sunny. 

He found several congratulatory letters at 
home about his. work, "Seeking New Homes/' 
and two oflfers of purchase, the highest being 
fifteen hxmdred pounds. 

This was cheerful; for though Arthur was, by 
no means mercenary, he felt that this was a 
practical tribute to the excellence of his work ; 
and, moreover, he had, as we have already learnt, 
been a heavy loser through the recent bank 
failm-es. 

He sat in the firelight with his happy dreams, 
listening to the roar of the river without, 
and letting it bear away his thoughts on its 
bosom. The cathedral chimes fell dreamily upon 
his ear, and he thought of a merry Village peal 
which might some day be rung in token of the 
consummation of his wildest hopes. 



LOOEma BACK. 139 

Thoughts of the cold damp church, with the 
coffin in it, would crop up now and then, but 
they had no abiding - place in his mind that 
night; happier thoughts crowded in and dis- 
persed them. 

His long lonely life, with quiet grassy spots 
in it here and there, and nooks of peace, 
dedicated to art, was before him. He travelled 
over it again in the firelight. He saw himself 
a studious boy without playmates, without com- 
panions; he saw himself verging into manhood 
with a strangely awakened love of art and nature, 
and with only a poor broken-down painter 
taking any interest in the mysterious signs 
which his genius would make in spite of him- 
self. He saw his humble home and his toiling 
parent ; a mother without one gleam of sympathy 
in common with his aspirations, and who only bore 
querulously with his odd ways, and a father whose 
besetting sin was the bottle, which was his ruin. 

He thought of his early struggles, of his early 
privations, of the burning passionate love of his 



^ 



140 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

axt. It was a rugged, broken road at the starting, 
and his first success had brought with it a bitter 
pang ; it would have gladdened his heart to have 
given his father and mother this evidence of 
the practical correctness of his judgment, to 
have shown them how honourable art is, and 
how it elevates the humble worker into the 
highest rank, and places him on a level with 
princes. 

A lonely, lowly road, but by-and-by covered 
with mosses and soft grass, and sober flowers 
and shady ferns ; and then umbrageous trees 
threw their arms over it, and gleams of sunshine 
came through the branches. Presently another 
figure appeared in this more cheerful path, but it 
only seemed to mock the student with its beauty, 
and to lure him on into hopes that would only 
strew his way again with broken rocks, and 
thorns, and rough places. 

All at once, however, the sun shone out full 
upon him, and the figure held out its hand, 
and smiled with truthful human eyes. And 



FORGIVENESS. 141 

something said within him that he would have 
a companion at last to share his journey, and 
that the happy, happy goal was near. 

That same night Phoebe sat before the parlour- 
fire at the Hall Farm, with Mrs. Somerton on one 
side and Luke on the other. 

Her right hand lay quietly in her father's, and 
she was talking cheerfully to them both. 

They had evidently had a long and aflfecting 
interview. The storm was past ; the rush of the 
tempest was over ; and it had left Mrs. Somerton 
gazing through tears at her daughter. 

No words of rebuke, no complaint, had been 
uttered by Phoebe ; she had said nothing but 
what was kind and dutiful, nothing that could 
wound, except that her kindness stung her 
mother more than hard words would have done. 

The remorseful woman had burst out into sobs 
and heart-breaking lamentations at the first 
tender acts of filial forgiveness, and Luke had 
hardly known how to master his own feelings 
when, in reply to some remark of his conveying 



"^ 



142 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

the thought that she would be ashamed of such a 
father^ she had flung herself into his arms and 
called him Father. 

There was something hysterical at first in the 
whole proceeding ; but by-and-by the calm came, 
and then they all three sat and talked. Phcebe 
was hardly herself, though she had made up her 
mind so fully how she ought to act and how she 
would act. 

A sense of duty had impelled her to come 
home to her father and mother, and there was a 
vague, strange sense of happiness and safety in 
sitting between thenou The Hall without her 
sometime father seemed full of desolation and 
shadows. Unaccustomed sounds had sti-uck upon 
her ear, she thought she heard the merchant's 
voice and his footstep on the stairs. 

A sense of fear and loneliness had been upon 
her ; and she had come home to her father and 
her mother, and now there was a sweet lulling 
feeling of peace at her heart which she had not 
felt for a long time past. 



PITY. 143 

Had the visit of Arthur Phillips done anything 
to enhance that sensation of quiet and repose ? He 
had been in her thoughts more than once, as she 
sat there with her hand in her father's; 

It was no use Luke or his wife expostulating 
with Phoebe ; home she had come, and *at home 
she would stay. And when at length the wonder- 
ing domestic at the Hall Farm came to show her 
to the' room which had been always set apart for 
Amy's use, Phoebe knelt and received her mother's 
blessing, bade Luke good night, and called him 
"Father" again. 

Luke and his wife had rarely sat up so late 
as upon this eventful night, and so much good 
will sometimes come out of evil, and sins con- 
fessed are so nearly atoned for . ^that Luke and 
his wife loved each other now for the first time. 
There was a deep wondering pity in Luke's heart 
for his wife now that he saw the secret of her life, 
and looked at the drooping head and the eyes 
filled with tears. Mrs. Somerton had not ex- 
pected such a generous forgiveness, and so much 



144 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

sympathy and gentleness^ at Luke's hands. Id 
the last few weeks she had suflfered a world of 
remorse for her past shrewish conduct, and now 
her gratitude knew no bounds ; gratitude and 
sympathy and pity, and memories of the past, 
mingled together in these two hearts, and on the 
steady downward path of life they came to love 
each other with a quiet calm love that is nearest 
akin to a long-proved generous friendship. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

DURING THE WINTER. 

The winter slipped swiftly away, without 
making many important changes in the positions 
of the people in our story. 

Important events were in course of consumma- 
tion, but no special incident cropped up to mark 
the gradual development of the various circum- 
stances calling for anything more than simple 
narration. 

Earl Vomer had taken several opportunities to 
renew his acquaintance with Amy, and we must 
do his lordship the justice to say that her sudden 
and imexpected advancement in fortune had little 
or no influence upon his course of wooing, for he 
was hit at that firat interview, hit irredeemably. 

VOL. II. L 



% 



146 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

There was something in Amy besides her good 
looks which had fairly fascinated the earl. The 
idea of a thoroughly companionable and intel- 
lectual woman had never presented itself to him 
before. Hitherto women had represented to him 
trouble, bother, putting yourself out of the way, 
and everything that was not being easy and lazy 
and lolling about, and grubbing amongst old 
books, and fadding with ancient cUna, and being 
constantly delighted with pictures. Woman en- 
grossed all this in herself She wanted to be old 
china and books and pictures and antiquities and 
everything all in one; and this notion did not 
suit Earl Vomer ; but in Amy he felt that there 
would not be this autocracy. She was evidently 
as much interested in these things as he was 
himself, and, considering how much his con- 
descension in manying her would elevate her 
in the social scale, he would have an influence 
over her that he could not hope to have over 
a woman in his own walk of life. 
The more he saw of Amy Tallant the more 



ACCBPTBD. 147 

enraptured he became, and well he might, for 
Amy spared no pains to make herself charming 
and agreeable in his eyes; indeed, Amy had 
vowed to herself that she would marry him. She 
would show Lionel Hammerton what a mistake 
he had made when he sported with, the deep 
feelings of a girl like her. 

And so in due course his lordship proposed for 
Amy's hand, and was accepted. 

Meanwhile, Phoebe Somerton had insisted upon 
staying at the Hall Farm. Her obstinacy upon 
this point had appeared at first to give Amy a 
good deal of pain ; but Phoebe explained that she 
had marked out a line of conduct for herself as 
the line of duty under the circumstances, and, 
whatever she might do in the future, at present 
she would certainly live with her father and 
mother. Amy soon saw that there was no pique 
in this, that it meant no ill feeling towards her- 
self, and the two girls understood each other well. 

l2 



148 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Amy wajs too much engrossed in her own scheme 
to let anything else trouble her. 

She had written to Paul Somerton a warm, 
aflfectionate letter, in which she had charged her- 
self with his advancement in life ; she had asked 
him to select his career, and insisted upon bearing 
all the cost of his studies and promotion. Paul 
had consulted his friend Mr. Williamson, and had 
discussed the question with him in a hundred 
different ways. He had for some time almost 
resolved upon declim'ng this proffered aid, but he 
knew that this would be hm-tfiil in the extreme 
to Amy's feelings, and Mr. Williamson argued the 
case so well, from a sisterly point of view, in 
favour of its acceptance that Paul becomingly 
thanked his sometime sister, and left the point 
open for further consideration. 

Finally, Amy requested him to come to the Hall, 
and there she introduced him to Earl Vomer, and 
told his lordship the brief story of the lad's life ; and 
the end was, with the consent of Mrs. Somerton 
and Luke, that a commission in the army was 



" GOING TO BE MABRIKD." 149 

purchased for Faul^ and he commenced his mili- 
tary career as an ensign in the gallant Ninety- 
fifth, with fair prospects of rapid promotion. 

Mr. Williamson received a magnificent me- 
mento of his kindness to Paul in the shape of a 
watch exquisitely set with jewels, and a courteous 
intimation that if Miss Tallant could at any time 
render Mr. Williamson any service she would 
esteem it a delightful privilege to show her high 
appreciation of his conduct. 

The barrister treasured her sweet-scented little 
note quite as much as he did the Valuable jewelled 
watch, and he sighed and rubbed his hands over 
the smouldering fire at his rooms when he heard 
of her forthcoming marriage. 

" She is such a splendid woman," he would say. 
"I had almost persuaded myself that I was in 
love with her that first and only time when I saw 
her in town; and now that she is going to be 
married, by Jove, I begin to think I really am in 
love with her." 

But the truth is, Mr. Williamson had been hit 



150 THE TALLAirrS OF BABTON. 

in early Ufa There was a mysterious, vague sort 
. of story, which a few of his old friends sometimes 
told each other, concerning a romantic love affair, 
.~-a wedding, a separation and death, under very 
sad circumstances. Whatever the story was, 
nobody ever alluded to it in presence of William- 
son; but they knew who knew him that there 
was no likelihood of his fedling in love again, or 
any nonsense of that sort, as others would put it. 
And the barrister had only sigh^ at the mention 
of Amy's marriage because a thought of his own 
love-dream and its terrible termination occurred 
to him at the moment. 

Phoebe Somerton and Arthur Phillips were 
constantly together at the Hall Farm, and before 
the winter ended Arthur had summoned sufficient 
courage to discharge his heart's load of love by a 
full and ample confession; and Phoebe had looked 
into his great dark eyes, and responded to his 
vows with all the frankness and innocent truth of 
Miranda herself. 



LINCOLNSHIBE. 151 

Thus Arthur was in the sunny path of ihis 
existence at last^ and he seemed. to become a 
new being imder the influence of his happiness. 

Luke Somerton and his wife were calm spec- 
tators of all these changes^ and meanwhile they 
had their own little schemes for the future. There 
was a certain farm in the Lincolnshire fens which 
Mrs. Somerton had known as a girl, and which, 
from inquiries that Luke had made, was likely 
to be "To Let." There were no more fertile 
pastures than those which surrounded it in all the 
fen country, not a pleasanter house and garden^ 
no better shooting than was to be had close by, 
and with the advantage of being near an impor- 
tant town, and not far from a railway station. 

Luke and his wife had calculated the prospects 
of settling down in their own native county, and 
the bailiff was full of plans and schfemes, which 
were an everlasting source of pleasant, hopeful talk 

All this time Richard Tallant was up to his 
neck in the great game of financial speculation, 



152 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

and rumour had over and over again predicted 
his downfall. The Eastern Bank, notwith- 
standing his father's noble contribution towards 
its shaken capital, had failed. The Indian 
branches had suffered serious losses, and the 
retirement of Mr. Tallant from the directory had 
led to other resignations, and Stock Exchange 
rumours had eventually shaken the confidence 
of depositors and others, and the Bank went 
to the wall The Meter Iron Works continued 
to flourish, but with diminished dividends and 
gradually falling stock. 

Mr. Tallant had been mixed up with some 
of the greatest fidliu-es of the day, and people 
said that by-and-by, when he really came to 
understand his own position, he would find him- 
self insolvent]; but people said this about dozens 
of others whose possessions had not even been 
shaken in the panic, and who could show a 
bond fide income of many thousands a year 
from real property. 

What did Richard Tallant care for all this^ 



AT THE LODGING-HOUSE AGAIN. 153 

Nothing, so far as the world could judge; but 
it made him irritable and ill-tempered in his 
own house. His valet could have told you a 
good deal about this, and so could the servants ; 
but to the outside world, whatever else he might , 
be, he was a straight-forward, independent, good- 
tempered fellow. There were those who said this 
was all "put on," and that he was a designing 
sneak; but his high -stepping horses and his 
splendid dinners soon silenced these doubtful 
ones, whom the great man entertained for that 
purpose only, cursing them in his heart whilst 
he smiled upon them and called them friends. 

Mr. and Mrs. Dibble had returned together to 
London, to their little lodging-house at Pimlico, but 
by no means to live a happy life ; for Dibble had 
been persuaded to lend the showman fifty pounds 
the morning after that introduction at Severn- 
town, and the money had been lost irretrievably ; 
for within a fortnight afterwards Digby Martin 
had presented himself at their house a ruined, 
ragged, dissipated fellow. 



154 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

His daughter had eloped with some vagabond, 
and left him; business had waned from that 
moment until it dwindled away almost to nothing. 
The skeleton had declined to enter into the pro- 
posed contract, and his 'traps'" had been sold to 
pay the rent of the ground at the "Blue Posts." 
He had walked all the way to London, riendless 
and a beggar, his only means of subsistence being 
in the money earned by Momus. The dawg, he 
said, had behaved like a Christian to him, and he 
was sure his friend Dibble would do no less, 
considering how Dibble had been treated in the 
palmy days of the Temple. 

This was all very well, and Mrs. Dibble would 
perhaps not have complained had the showman 
taken his departure after the first visit, and not 
presented himself for renewed charity; but he 
came again and again, and Mrs. Dibble and her 
husband had serious disagreements about it. The 
lodgers were scandalised at the visits of this low 
person and his dawg, and one of them had given 
up his rooms at a day's notice because he had 



AN UNWELCOME GUEST. 155 

seen this friend of Dibble's going through a per- 
formance with his dog^ and begging coppers, in 
a back street. 

Dibble had appealed to the showman to leave 
the neighbourhood, and had bribed him toa But 
Digby Martin, alias Digger, alias Smith, knew 
a trick worth two of that. He only spent the 
bribe in drink, and came back to Still Street 
and abused Mrs. Dibble for being proud and 
stuck up. 

To think that she should come to this, with her 
boarding-school education and her semi-architec- 
tural contracting father ; it was a blow which Mrs. 
Dibble could not possibly have dreamed of, and 
she upbraided herself for her weakness in fol- 
lowing Dibble and releasing him from his de- 
graded position. 

"He never asked you, marm,*' said the show- 
man, with a drunken leer. ''It wash not our 
wish you should come and sheek ush out. you 
old catamaran I ** 

'* Catamaran ! " exclaimed Mrs. Dibble, dashing 



156 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

the tears from her eyes. " Catamaran !. Dibble^ 
if you don't punch that breuth head I will . so 
there!" 

"Then I must do it, I suppose," said Dibble. 
" Now, look'e 'ere, friend," said Dibble ; " I baint 
goin* to stand any more o' this ; so clear out." 

" D/e hear that, Momush ? " said the showman ; 
" we're to clear out," and thereupon the drunken 
magician prepared for the coming engagement. 

There was the shank-end of a leg of mutton 
on the table. Dibble, nodding to his wife to 
make her comprehend his plan, took up the 
bone and held it to the "dawg's" nose. Momus 
immediately stood upon her hind-legs and fol- 
lowed Dibble to the back kitchen, where she was 
speedily locked in with her supper. 

The showman, hardly comprehending this 
scheme for removing the protector, by whose side 
he was so valiant, darted towards the door before 
Dibble had time to turn round , but not before 
Mrs. Dibble had time to insert her arm between 
the drunkard and Dibble, the result of which was 



MOMUS. 157 

that the magician rolled over, and Dibble was 
saved the pain and trouble of knocking his old 
friend down himself. 

It was an easy matter to put the show- 
man into the street after this, and when a 
policeman came up Momus was let out, to walk 
on her hind legs, by the side of the man in 
blue. 

A facetious reporter at the police-court the 
next day made a funny paragraph out of the 
showman's appearance, the magistrate having 
requested the " dawg " to be brought into couit. 
Momus made a bow to the bench, and stood 
upon her hind legs; which put the magistrate 
in such a good humour, that he let oflf the 
howman with a caution. 

The incident was anjrthing but a funny one. 
to the Dibbles, for they lost theii- lodgers, and 
Mrs. Dibble lost her respectability and her control 
of the street ; so she gave vent to her feelings by 
upbraiding Thomas, and the end was that they 
were exceedingly miserable, and Mrs. Dibble 



158 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

talked of a '^ judicious separation/' which was a 
thing that her " wortht dreamth had never 
brought to her mind ; and oh ! if her poor father 
could only rithe and thee her ! " Poor Dibble, he 
could . think of nothing but getting into the 
Thames, or thrusting his head into the water-bijtt. 
He thought better of this by-and-by, however ; 
but not until he had looked at the Thames by 
gas-light and dipped his head a little way into the 
water-butt If the, water had not been so cold, 
we believe Dibble would have put his head deeper 
into it ; but, oh, it was so very cold ! 

Meanwhile Mr. Jeflferson Orawley, alias 
Shuffleton Gibbs, and the showman's daughter, 
were spending their honeymoon, and the ex-swell 
was educating the young lady, and introducing 
her into a new world. 



CHAPTER XII. 

DISCOUBSES CHIEFLY OF UNREQUTTED LOVE. 

" I WANT you to come and spend a week with 
me, Phoebe," said the Miss Tallant to the young 
lady who had abdicated. 

They had met near Barton Hall, each on a 
morning's ramble in the park, the spring sunshine 
was so tempting. 

" You must really grant this as a favour 
to me. I want your advice about a himdred 
things." 

" Mother is not well," said Phoebe, hesitatingly ; 
" and father is so busy just now in negotiations 
for a new farm in Lincolnshire." 

At first blush it ahnost seemed as if there were 
a little affectation in this careful mention of her 
new position, and the display of duty, on Phoebe's 



160 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

part ; but it was not so. Phoebe had argued out 
her duty^ had reasoned with herself upon the 
course which she ought to pursue ; she had prayed 
earnestly, and religiously striven to see aright, and 
the end was that she determined to act her part 
as became a dutiful child. It was not for her to 
judge her mother's conduct, nor to repine at her 
change of fortime. If she had lost wealth and 
station, she had found a mother and father, and 
she had obtained thereby perfect freedom in the 
expression of her love for Arthur Phillips. 

On the whole, then, Phoebe's real happiness 
had rather been enhanced by the discovery that 
she was not the wealthy Christopher Tallant's 
daughter. A certain feeling of regret would 
make itself manifest to her now and then when 
she remembered the luxuries of the Hall, the 
charming books, the pictures, the familiar boudoir, 
with its dainty furniture; but this feeling was 
soon followed by a remembrance of the vague 
sense of loneliness which often afflicted her there, 
and the consciousness of being neglected by her 



THE LOVE OF EQUALS. 161 

fkther. Though there had been scarcely a wish 
that she could not gratify, so far as money was 
concerned, her life had not been altogether a 
happy one ; it was cahn and peaceful, but there 
had seemed to be no motive in it. 

Now all this was changed. Duty had stepped 
in between herself and the world. " Honour thy 
father and thy mother" was a commandment 
which had a new meaning for her. A certain 
amount of self-sacrifice seemed to be involved, and 
she made it cheerfully. And all the time she 
loved the landscape painter. 

Phoebe's was not the love which Amy had felt 
for Lionel Hammerton ; it was not that mad, pas- 
sionate, doubting, hopeless, longing love, which 
often animates the heart that is fixed upon one of 
high rank and station ; it was not the love of the 
lowly maiden for the prince, whom she feels that 
she lowers by her very passion ; it was not the 
almost fanatical looking upwards of idol-worship ; 
but the love which feels itself worthy of the thing 
it loves . ^the love of equals, the passion which has 

VOL II. M 



162 THE TATiLANTS OF BABTOK. 

no worldly fears of rank intervening, the love that 
dreams not for a moment of condescension on 
either hand, the love that levels by its intense 
nobleness and generosity the king with his subject, 
the noble-bom with the peasant, the rich with the 
poor. 

Amy had loved humbly and meekly, but still 
with a burning passion; she had looked up to 
Lionel Hammerton as one afar off, and she could 
have suffered for him in any fashion, and been his 
slave ; he might have commanded her in almost 
all things. And when he raised her up and 
whispered in her ear the love he bore her, she 
had gone home and cried tears of joy and grati- 
tude ; but being raised, as it were, to his side, she 
could not bear indifference, and all her latent 
pride had come to her aid when the most generous 
constructions she coidd put upon Lionel's conduct 
only led her to feel that she had been designedly 
slighted. Her woman's instinct had begun to 
interpret his attentions into mere flirtation some- 
time before he had so suddenly left the country. 



LioioiL. 163 

After that day when he had whispered his admira- 
tion so earnestly, and sealed his words with a kiss, 
he had never called at the Hall or the farm. She 
had learnt that he had been at home several 
times prior to his departure, and that he had been 
at Avonworth, too ; but he had made no sign to 
her. This was not love, she knew. The lover, 
whose mistress has hung upon his tender words, 
and told him by a thousand endearing glances 
how fervently his love is returned, loses no oppor- 
tunity of enjoying the sweets of courtship. Lionel 
Hammerton had been near Barton, and Amy had 
sighed for his presence. had longed to look upon 
him . ^had counted the hours and days since she 
saw him last ; yet he came not. And then he left 
the country, deeming her unworthy of a parting 
word. Had he sent her some letter which had 
miscarried ? No. Had he left any message for 
her with his friend, Arthur Phillips ? No. On 
the contrary, he had spoken of her, not as Arthur 
would like to have had his sister spoken of, before 
he left on that long journey, which was, no doubt, 

M 2 



164 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

intended to make a gulf between them that 
should separate them for ever. 

Lionel had flirted with her^ and left her with 
indifference^ perhaps with contempt^ and the native 
pride of her mother asserted itself^ and revenge 
had filled up the place which love had occupied. 

" Ah, I know you will come, my darling," said 
Amy. " I want to talk with you about my 
marriage." 

" I will come. Amy, with pleasure," Phoebe 
replied. 

She must have been more than woman if she 
could have resisted that latter appeal 

"Will you come now?" said Amy, taking 
Phoebe's arm, 

" Yes," said Phoebe. " We will first call at the 
farm, and let mother know," said Phoebe. '' I know 
she will be pleased for me to go with you, and I 
can go and see them every day." 

*' Oh, yes, child ; but how very dutiful you are, 
to be sure : more so than I was, I fear," said Amy, 
just a little impatiently. 



SPBma suNSHiNB, 165 

The spring sunshine streamed upon them as 
they walked, like a benediction from heaven. The 
trees were tipped with brown and green; some, 
shone like frosted silver, and others looked like 
mere outlines against the sky, as if nature had 
just sketched them, and left them in outline. The 
lake shone with a clear bright radiance, and re- 
flected itself full of the adjacent hill, and you 
could look down into it and see a picture of sur- 
passing beauty, now and then veiled for a moment 
by passing clouds that made great flitting shadows 
over the green turf, too, and seemed to chase each 
other, like the birds that were building their 
nests. 

Phoebe felt all the delightful sensations of the 
time ; she stepped aside when her foot threat- 
ened the daisy just peeping forth amongst the 
tender grass ; she felt the warm breath of the 
genius of the time upon her cheek, the bleating 
of the lambs awakened gentle sjnnpathetic emo- 
tions within her, and she shared in the general hope 
of creation at the return of the gracious season. 



166 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

Poor Amy had fixed up an entirely worldly 
standard for her hopes and fears ; a standard that 
was but little influenced by any feelings such as 
those which animated her companion. The life- 
giving spirit of the season only animated Amy 
with fresh vigour in the prosecution of her plans, 
and with a more lively animation in carrying 
out the magnificent scheme of revenge and self* 
justification. 

"What will become me most as a bride?" Amy 
asked, when they were alone at Barton HalL 

It was a tremendous question, but it was 
answered at last, by the aid of a multifarious 
collection of patterns of materials, and the written 
opinion of a French inodide who was coming 
down from town to wait upon Earl Vomer's 
intended wife. 

Then questions about bridesmaids were dis- 
cussed, and the pedigrees of several of the earl's 
lady relatives, who were to take part in the 
ceremony, were hunted up in the Peerage. 

" Of course you will be one of them, my dear," 



PREPARING FOR THE WEDDING. 167 

said Amy, " and the prettiest of all, I dare be 
bound/' 

Phoebe hesitated, and looked inquiringly at 
her friend. 

"I shall think you do not love me at all, if 
you decline ; his lordship shall ask you himself if 
you will not say yes to my request." 

"But you are soaring so far above me," said 
Phoebe, in her quiet gentle way. "I shall feel 
out of place amongst such great people." 

" Nonsense ! beauty shall rank with the 
highest of them that day," said Amy, proudly. 
'* Nay, do not blush ; you know I would not flatter 
you." 

" You are so changed," said. Phoebe, thought- 
fully. " I seem to remember you as one belong- 
ing to the past. Amy; and it has often made 
me feel very sad." 

" Think differently about it," said Amy, 
assuming a light, gay tone. "I know I am 
changed, but changed for the better. I have 
dropped out of my bundle " of feelipgs a parcel 



168 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

called sensibility, or sensitiveness, or something 
of that kind, Phoebe, and I am glad of it. I 
find myself in a world where it is inconvenient 
to have fine feelings, and I have resolved to take 
the world as I find it." 

" Suppose," said Phoebe . " but you will forgive 
me for being candid with you ? " 

" Yes, yes," said Amy, lightly ; " say whatever 
you please, dear ; you have the right to do so." 

*' Supposing, then, that Mr. Hammerton should 
return," 

Amy was discomposed for a moment at the 
suggestion; but she recovered her self-possession 
very speedily. 

" Well, suppose he should ? " said Amy, whilst 
she thought of her reply. " How would that 
afiectmel" 

" Yes," said Phoebe, with an earnest look in her 
deep blue eyea 

"You are thinking of what I told you in the 
summer-house, in that past time of which you 
have spoken." 



SCORN FOR SCORN. 169 

" Yes," said Phoebe. 

" I knew you were. Well, Phoebe, that be- 
longs to the past; Lionel Hammei-ton belongs 
to the past . ^to my past ; he has no place in my 
future." 

Amy said this solemnly, and with a fierce kind 
of firmness in her manner, which told Phoebe 
how much revengeful feeling there was in the 
change that had come over the new mistress of 
Barton Hall. 

" But, Amy " 

Amy interrupted her. 

" There is no *but ' in the case, love ; he shall 
have indiflference for indifference, scorn for scorn, 
and I will trample upon all his worldly hopes as 
the Countess of Vemer, as he trampled upon 
mine as the Honourable Lionel Hammerton." 

Amy rose from her seat when she said this, 
and planted her pretty feet upon the ground 
with calm determination. 

"You loved beneath your station, as some would 
hold, my dear," said Amy. *' I loved above mine: 



170 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

it is the way of the world: the highest may 
stoop to the lowest, or trifle with the love that 
is offered. Fate or Providence, as you would 
say, has wrought a wonderful change in our lots, 
has reversed our positions, and just at the proper 
moment. By placing you a little lower, as far 
as worldly considerations are concerned. Fate has 
brought you nearer to him you love, and brought 
hopes of future happiness. My exaltation has 
given me the power for self-assertion, for blotting 
out a silly passion, granting me, almost at the 
moment when I prayed for it, the dearest wish 
of my heart. That carriage with the coronet in 
the panel, whirling along through the autumn 
leaves, was the omen . ^the sign which Fate flimg 
before me. I accepted it, and I shall not turn 
back ; no, I shall not turn back." 

Phoebe blushed at the mention of her own love, 
and pitied Amy, knowing how she too had loved 
in those past days ; but she could give Amy no 
soothing tidings of Lionel; she could not deny 
that his conduct had been immanly, and some- 



SUPPOSING HE SHOULD RETURN ? 171 

what dishonourable. Yet Arthur Phillips had not 
told her of those last words of Lionel's, nor had 
he shown her a letter since received from him, 
in which Mr. Hammerton said "that stupid bit 
of flirtation in Avonworth Valley " he hoped was 
forgotten by the bailiff's pretty daughter, -^ who 
had played her part so well and very nearly with 
success." Phoebe could not hdp feeling that 
some misunderstanding, some mistake or other, 
had come between the loves of these two, 
and she would fain have pointed this out to 
Amy. 

"Who knows but some dreadful misunder- 
standing may have " 

"Don't speak of it, Phoebe, love, . ^I have thought 
of that and everything, and have resolved. Beside, 
my love, it is not fitting we should discuss the 
question. I am betrothed ; in a few short weeks 
I shall be a wife." 

"It is because you have those few weeks 
in which you might still change your deter- 
mination that I venture to ask you, supposing 



172 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

Lionel Hammerton were to return and renew 
his former attentions, and offer you marriage," 
said Phoebe. 

" I should not believe in his sincerity, . ^I would 
rather be beyond his reach. I could fain hope 
that he might feel a passion for me, that he might 
all of a sudden love me ; that he might feel some 
of the pangs I have felt. No, Phoebe, if he were 
at my feet this moment I might smile and let 
him sue ; but I should not love him, . I should 
hat prefer him to his elder brother with the 
title; . oh, no! all that romantic sentiment is 
over! . I should prefer to be a countess in pos- 
session rather than in reversion. And now we 
have said enough about this. I wanted to talk 
to you and ask you all sorts of questions, and you 
have literally timied the tables upon me by putting 
me through a most romantic catechism. I have 
answered you to the best of my ability and with 
perfect sincerity ; so now, pray, be content, and 
let us talk of laces, and ribbons, and orange blos- 
soms^ and glace, and pouU de eoie; of brides- 



"WHEN SHE WAS ALONE. 173 

maids, and Hanover Square, and matrimonial 
responsibilities." 

And Amy rattled away and laughed at Phcebe's 
sober face, and kissed her fair forehead, as joyously 
as if she were about to marry her first love ; but 
when she was alone in her bed-room, she flung 
herself down and sobbed aloud. 

Why had heaven given her all those warm 
passions, that deep capacity to love, and set the 
idol before her, and let all her love go for naught? 
This was the burden of the burning thoughts 
which Phoebe's conversation had aroused. 

** Alas ! the love of woman ! it is known 
To be a lovely and a dangerous thing." 

It is questionable whether Byron really knew 
in his soul much about the true and pure love of 
woman, though he has described its dangerous and 
passionate phases so well. It is a lovely and a 
dangerous thing, undescribable and imfathomable. 
"All that has been written in song, or told in 
story, of love and its eflfects, falls far short of its 



174 THE TATJ.ANTS OF BABTON. 

reality. Its evils and its blessings^ its impotence 
and its power, its sin and its holiness, its weak- 
ness and its strength, will continue the theme 
of nature and of art, until the great pulse of the 
universe is stilled." 

0, how she had loved this man ! And he knew 
it ! Here was the bitter sting that wounded 
the poor, stricken woman; that stirred all her 
woman's pride, and made her almost hate herself 
that she had confessed so much . ^made her 
hate him, or fancy she hated him, the more for 
having wiled her secret from her. 

Love, jealousy, pride, and woman's modesty, 
all seemed to pronounce in her mind against the 
man whom she had loved so wildly; and Pride 
inflicted the fiercest pangs of all in the woman's 
wounded sense of unrequited Love. 



CHAPTER Xm. 

THE FIKST OBSTRUCTION IN A CEBTAIN SCHEME 
OF AMBITION AND REVENGE. 

During Phoebe's visit to her old home, Lord 
Verner called twice. His lordship was particu- 
larly gracious, and evidently deeply enamoured of 
Amy. 

When he came Amy was careful to put on her 
best smiles. It seemed to Phoebe as if she de- 
lighted in watching the eflfect of her little sallies 
of pleasantry and wit upon the love-sick earL She 
humoured and petted him in her conversation, and 
at the same time triumphed over him. She 
seemed to give way to all his whims, and yet 
had her own way. 

His lordship had at first been all anxiety that 
the marriage should be particularly quiet, and 



176 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Amy had appeared to enter into his plans in this 
respect ; but now he was for all sorts of extra- 
vagant demonstration^ and Amy led him on so 
far, that it would be impossible to give up any 
important points in the general display. 

And she looked so fresh, and bright, and happy 
in his love, and Lord Vemer appeared to be 
so proud of her, that Phoebe almost began to 
believe that happiness would come of the union. 

No one could say that Amy would not fill -her 
high station so far as appearance, and carriage, 
and manners were concerned. She looked every 
inch a countess already. And she knew it; for 
she took all manner of pains to set off her grace- 
fill, well defined figure. Dainty robes of well 
studied colour to throw up her clear, but dark 
complexion ; scarlet bands in her black hair, with 
a simple diamond star that did not sparkle more 
brightly than her own bright eyes. Pretty ruffles 
on her wrists, and about her neck, and dainty 
shoes upon her feet, that now and then peeped 
forth from beneath her embroidered petticoat; 



^^STRANGEB THAIST FICTION." 177 

she had a powerful fascination for Earl Vemer. 
She seemed to be unconscious of her charms, 
and this made her doubly attractive. 

What would his lordship have said if he could 
have overheard that conversation between his 
betrothed and her friend with the sweet Miranda 
face ? He would not have been more surprised, 
we suspect, than Mr. Lionel Hammerton, who was 
in India all this time, blissfully ignorant of all that 
was going on at Barton, . ^blissfully ignorant of the 
recent changes. If any one had told him that his 
thorough-going old bachelor brother was engaged 
to be married, he would have treated it as a good 
joke. And supposing the gossip had supplemented 
that statement with a true history of the case, he 
would hava given him considerable credit for 
imagination, and pooh-poohed the whole thing. 

Amy Somerton discovered to be Christopher 
Tallant's daughter, and Miss Tallant no other 
than the bailiff's daughter [ . changed in infancy 
by the bailiff's wife ! Old Tallant dead, and made 
Amy his heiress, cut off his son, not even with a 

VOL. II. H 



178 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

shilling. And Earl Vemer going to marry the 
young lady that Lionel had flirted with, and whose 
likeness was hung outside those mosquito curtains I 
Of coui-se he would not have believed a word of 
it. He would more readily have accepted the in- 
cidents in the novel he had been reading than 
these. Besides, who could be expected to believe 
that those two girls had been changed in their 
cradles ? It was such an old story, that ; all very 
well in a poem or a romance, but it could never 
occur in the Vale of Avonwoilh. 

Perhaps, chera amis, you, too, may think in 
this wise. The idea is not a new one, we must 
confess ; but if it is a fact, you will accept it as 
worthy of record, not for its own sake, but on 
account of the consequences arising out of 
Mrs. Somerton's mistaken ambition. Eemember, 
friends, there is no new thing under the sun. We 
have this upon the authority of the wisest of all 
m^n, and the preacher is verified in ten thousand 
ways. As far back as the thirteenth century one 
Friar Bacon, probably writing upon facts and 



NOTHINa NEW UNDER THE SUN. 179 

traditions handed down from times long ante- 
cedent to his own day, anticipated in his works 
the railway, the steamship, the hydraulic engine, 
and the balloon. The Chinese were printers be- 
fore the ancient Romans discovered Britain, and 
the Romans made gunpowder when there were 
naked savages living in the neighbourhood of 
Barton HalL The Chinese had discovered gas 
long before we knew anything about it. Chloro- 
form, photography, the telegraph, and a hundred 
other " new " inventions, were old things used and 
forgotten before we heard of them. Have not all 
the finest thoughts that can enter the brain of 
scholar or poet been thought before? and does 
not some classical writer anathematise the great 
men who had said all the good things before him ? 
All that long race of thinkers and wiiters, and 
poets and orators, and tale-tellers and humourists, 
and playwrights, . ^what room have they left for a 
mere story-teller to interest and say something 
new? 

" There is nothing new under the sun." But 

N 2 



180 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

there ought to be something new in a noyeI 
nevertheless, most readers seem to think. Critical 
readers claim something new at the novelist's 
hands, and rate him an he dare to walk in beaten 
tracks. Next to something new comes something 
true. This shall protect our neck from the sharp 
edge of the sword that hangs by that Damo- 
dean thread which is so easily severed. We are 
telling a tale with Truth for its basis, and how 
can the mere historian help it if there is nothing 
new in one of the main incidents of his narrative ? 
Himian hopes and fears, and sorrows and troubles, 
and joys and pleasures, are a constant repetition 
of the same occurrences, and love of money forms 
the axis upon which this world of trouble revolvea 
When you teU your favourite little stories after 
dinner . incidents in your own life . ^you don't 
think there is nothing new under the sun then . 
eh ? " New or not, they are true," you say. Very 
well, sir, and so is this history ; and if there is one 
part of it more truthftJ than another, it is that 
quiet but important bit of exchange performed in 



ON THE SEA. 181 

those early days of those charming young women, 
who used to live like sisters at Barton Hall. Ask 
old Dibble if this is not a true story ; ask Arthur 
Phillips and his wife ; ask the Eight Hon. the 
Countess of Vomer ; go down to Avonworth, and 
visit Barton HalL 

lionel Hammerton would not have believed it, 
nevertheless, and he will return from India utterly 
ignorant of all the changes that have taken place 
up to this period of our story ; for those two 
letters written by a certain painter, and the one 
sealed mth a coronet, are destined to pass their 
owner on the high seas, both travelling in diffe- 
rent directions. 

If Lord Vomer would have been very much 
surprised could he have heard that conversation 
between the two ladies at Barton Hall, what would 
he have thought of the following dialogue, which 
w^ spoken a few days afterwards. 

" I must confess I^ am a little surprised,'' said 
Miss Tallant, ''that you should not have given 
me notice of your visit" 



182 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" It did not occur to me that such a measure 
was needful from a brother to his sister/' said Mr. 
Richard Tallant, coolly throwing himself into an 
easy chair. 

" Brother and sister, truly," said Miss Tallant, 
with dignity, " but hitherto somewhat divided in 
feeling and opinion, and latterly by a law-suit" 

"Yes, these things will occur; but you possess 
rather more than your share, my sister, of our 
father's goods. Would it have been otherwise 
than fair to have given the son and heir half the 
property?" 

" Would it not have been brotherly to give the 
sister an opportunity at least to consider what 
course she should take before loading her with 
threats, and commencing an action against her in 
Chancery 1" said Miss Tallant. " The wishes of 
the dead are entitled to respect, and especially 
with regard to property left behind for others; 
but the recipient of a fortune such as that which 
I have inherited could have afforded to be 
generous, and would have endeavoured, no doubt, 



BROTHER AKD SISTER. 183 

to give effect to the impulses of her own heart, 
even in the interest of one who did not deserve 
compassion." 

"Indeed!" said Eichard; "you are qidte elo- 
quent, I declare. You fill your high station 
magnificently. May I ring for luncheon 1 " 

" Perhaps it would be a little more courteous in 
the first place to explain your business, and in 
ihe next to leave the ordering of luncheon to the 
mistress of the house.*' 

"As you please," said Mr. TaUant. **as you 
please. I want you to instruct TwyzeU and Kits, 
your lawyers, to pay four thousand pounds to my 
credit to-morrow." 

" Indeed !" said Miss Tallant. 

" Yes, I will be frank with you. Certain im- 
portant securities which I hold have suddenly 
fallen in value, and a banking friend of mine who 
holds them is anxious that the simi which they 
did represent should be made up in cash ; I am 
veiy desirous of obliging my friend, and I knew 
you would oblige me." 



184 THE TALLANT8 OF BABTON, 

"Indeed," repeated Miss Tallant, " I fear I 
must refer you to the gentlemen whom you have 
mentioned ; your legal process has quite removed 
the affair beyond the pale of my consideration, 
whatever my feelings with regard to it might be." 

" Indeed !" said Mr. Eichard Tallant, altogether 
uninfluenced by the quiet, sarcastic smile which 
played round Miss Tallant's mouth, and ignoring 
altogether the evident annoyance which his 
eflfrontery excited, and which Amy struggled 
imsuccessfiilly to hide. 

"Is this your reply? Will you not lend the 
money to your brother V* 

"It may not be mine to lend; you have 
threatened to upset your father's will, and your 
lawyer professes to be certain that you can 
succeed in doing so. I must refer you to Mr. 
Twyzell ; and now I will order luncheon for you/* 
said Amy, advancing towards the bell. 

" Stay one moment," said Bichard, stroking his 
beard, in which already there were many grey 
hairs ; " it is useless to refer me to Twyzell ; you 



A MISERABLE THREAT. 185 

must write a note requesting him to let me 
have the money to-morrow. He may lend it me 
without prejudice, as the lawyers say, so that it 
will in nowise influence any legal proceedings 
that are pending. You must do this, or I shall 
be compelled to say something very unpleasant. 
I cannot possibly do without the money, and it is 
most convenient that you should be the lender." 

"What does this mean?" said Amy. "You 
know that I have no other course but to refer 
you to the lawyers, and it is idle to say more 
about it." 

" Very well ; it is hard to force a gentleman 
and your brother, in difficulties, to appear un- * 
gentlemanly and unbrotherly; but if he has no 
other resource, he must use means which he 
would otherwise reject with contempt. You are 
to be married to the Eight Hon. the Earl Vomer, 
of Montem Castle ; it is a great match." 

" Well," said Miss Tallant, impatiently. 

" Do you remember a confession you once 
made. rit is a long time ago now . ^to the yoimg 



186 THE TAT.T.ANTS OF BABTON. 

lady who was Miss Tallant then and your 
patroness." 

The questioner looked up to his sister to note 
the effect of his interrogation 5 but there was no 
change in Amy's face, though she began to sus- 
pect why her visitor had exercised so much 
assumption of power and authority in this imex- 
pected interview. 

"You were sitting together in the summer- 
house yonder on a spring morning not unlike the 
present, and you entered into some very inte- 
resting details with regard to myself, and also 
concerning your love, or fancy, or liking, or what- 
ever it is called, for Earl Vemer's brother." 

Amy did i;ot lose her self-control even at this 
point of the conversation; but she remembered 
the time to which he alluded, and remembered it 
vividly, for she had always believed that Eichard 
Tallant had overheard all she and Phoebe said on 
that particular occasion. 

" When you pressed your ear against the key- 
hole ? " she said, with a scornful look. 



amy's difficulty. 187 

" No, that was not necessary," said Mr. Tallant ; 
" the door was open a little way, and two voices 
forced themselves upon my attention . that is the 
courteous way of putting it." 

"Well, you have something more to say? 
Better say all you desire." 

"It occurred to me that you might spare 
me the pain of proceeding further, and that 
you would write to Twyzell and Kits at 
once." 

" Since the subject is becoming interesting at 
last, I have no desire to put an end to it now," 
said Amy, who had some little time previously 
sat down, with the table between herself and her 
visitor. 

" Earl Vomer would hardly like to hear that 
you were passionately in love with his brother, 
and that his brother had jilted the woman he is 
about to marry; besides, he is a generous fellow . 
he might give the lady up to her first love, and 
particularly as he is invalided sometimes and fond 
of a quiet life. I have business with his lordship 



188 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

and thonght of riding over this afternoon, if you 
could lend me a horse." 

It was a desperate struggle for Amy to sit 
still and endure this ; the colour came and went 
in her cheeks, and her heart beat at a fever 
rate, and then seemed to stop altogether; but 
still she sat in her chair, and gave but slight 
indication of the sharpness of the poisoned shafts 
which made such a sensible impression upon her. 
The humiliation of bargaining for the mainten- 
ance of a secret from her husband . a secret that 
might possibly break off an alliance which she 
had done so much to encompass. But he would 
not believe it 1 And if he did, she could tell 
him that all that silly passion was at an end. 
These thoughts passed through her mind much 
more rapidly than the printer's type has con- 
veyed them to the reader ; but she made no sign. 

"Shall I ride ovpr to Montem, or return to 
town ? If I go to town you will hear no more 
from me, at all events until the marriage is over, 
unless you would like me to give you away." 



KNAVERY WINS AGAIN. 189 

This was another sting ; it reminded Amy of 
her helpless and forlorn position^ and as she 
glanced at the fine manly form of her brother, 
a pang of honest regret that they were so fear- 
fully sundered, shot through her heart, and almost 
brought the tears into her eyes. 

*' I think we understand each other," said Mr. 
Tallant, as though this suspense made him un- 
comfortable. 

" Yes," said Miss Tallant. " I am sorry to feel 
that I understand you, Eichard Tallant." 

It required no considerable effort for Amy to 
maintain her calmness, though she had lately set 
up in her own way for a very clever actress; 
but she did not break down. She rang the bell, 
ordered luncheon for Mr. Bichard Tallant, and 
desiring that gentleman to givQ her half an hour 
to consider his request, withdrew and sought her 
own room. 

"Ha!" exclaimed Mr. Bichard Tallant when 
she had gone, "a devilish good fight she made 
of it : there's no mistake about her parentage ; 



190 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

if anything had been wanting to prove our 
relationship, this interview would clinch it" 

Mr. Tallant thereupon walked up to the 
mantel-piece, contemplated himself, stroked his 
beard, and apostrophised his counterfeit 

" You must be an infernal blackguard, Richard 
Tallant, Esq., to work such an infernal scheme 
as this against a woman ! Upon my soul I 
believe you are a bad fellow, a deuced bad fellow. 
How is it, my friend, you are such a rascal ? 
You had a fine opportimity once. I believe that 
thief Gibbs ruined you, eh? Perhaps; perhaps 
not But you have been put to some tightish 
shifts, have you not, my friend, none tighter 
than this ? When a fellow can see his way out 
of certain ruin by a bit of meanness, or whatever 
you like to call it, the temptation is very great . 
is it not ? Ha, well, it's a wicked world, a wicked 
world. You ought to have been the proprietor 
of this place, my friend : well, never mind ; you 
must manage to do with a part of it, eh ? Yes, 
with a part of it : half a loaf, you know." 



OVER LUNCHEON. 191 

" Half a loaf did you say ? " asked the quick- 
eared servant who had just entered with a tray. 
"Yes, sir . ^white or brown,?" 

" Both," said Mr. Tallant. 

" Yes, sir ; what wine will you take, sir ? " 

"Sherry," said Mr. Tallant. 

"Yes, sir." 

And the son of the dead merchant commenced 
his luncheon. Before he had finished, the 
same servant brought him a note from Miss 
Tallant, which enclosed a letter to Twyzell and 
Kits. 

"That's all right," he said to himself; "give 
my love to Miss Tallant, say I am greatly obliged 
to her, and that she need not give herself any 
further trouble in the matter." 

" Yes, sir." 

Poor Amy! She had not counted upon this 
new feature of difficulty in her scheme of ambi- 
tion and revenge. But she was resolved that 
nothing should frustrate the accomplishment 
of the whole scheme which she had planned 



\ 



192 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

out. She was betrothed to Lord Vemer, and she 
wotdd marry him at any sacrifice, ay, even to 
standing at the altar with Mr. Bichard Tallant in 
the paternal and brotherly position he had men- 
tioned. It was rather singular that Bichard 
Tallant as he returned to town that day should 
have thought so much about this same con- 
tingency. 

"Why should I not be one of the wedding 
guests 1" he said, as he smoked and waited for 
the next train at Orford Junction. " Why should 
I not give her away ? " 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

OF HAPPY DAYS IN SPRING. 

And these were the happy days of the courtship . 
of Phoebe and Arthur. They came with the spring 
blossoms, opening up a bright new future to both. 

Yes, happy days, perfectly happy. Philosophy 
says there is no perfect happiness. Mr. William- 
son would smile with quiet amazement at your 
simphcity if you held that anybody had been per- 
fectly happy, even for an hour. But then, you 
know, he had been hit in his early days, and the 
remembrance of his own transient approach to a 
sense of happiness may have embittered his later 
existence. 

Arthur Phillips, a year ago, would have entered 
into an abstract argument with you upon the sub- 
ject. He would have told you, with Guizot, that 

VOL. II. o 



194 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

the study of art perhaps contained the highest 
elements of happiness; that, in the abstract, it 
was altogether unconnected with the struggles 
and contests of ordinary life. Although he would 
have told you that Guizot's charming views about 
the study of art did not always apply to the practice 
of it, he would have defended his opinion of the 
unselfishness of a pure taste for the beautiftd in art, 
and demonstrated to you that it brought into play 
and had the power of exciting the deepest emotions, 
gratifying both the nobler and softer parts of our 
nature, . ^the imagination and the judgment, love of 
emotion and power of reflection, the enthusiasm 
and the critical faculty, the senses and the reason ; 
. ^but the painter would have sighed as he quoted 
this enthusiastic commendation of .art, and thought 
how far short all this was from perfect happiness. 

To ramble about that old cathedral, to think of 
that dear, sweet face, was happiness ; yet it left 
so much to long for and regret, that sometimes 
the pain was greater than the happiness. 

But as he sits beside that fair girl in the 



WAS THIS PERFECT HAPPINESS? 195 

faxmer's parlour, what does he think of happiness 
now ? The philosopher says perfect happiness 
was never intended by the Deity to be the lot of 
ms^, but that He has given us the power of an 
exceeding near approach to it. And we do not 
hesitate to say, that He does give to some mor- 
tals a foretaste of that perfect happiness which 
is to be the undying prize of the future day. 

A wise lady, and a duchess, too, has said that 
our happiness in this world depends on the affec- 
tion we are enabled to inspire. Let Phoebe and 
Ai'thur be judged by this standard, and they are 
to be envied indeed. To sit hand in hand, to 
walk and talk with freedom of their love, of the 
little incidents of past days, to recall their mo- 
ments of doubt, and look back to times of utter 
hopelessness, to trace their little acts of sjnnpathy 
from the first days of their love, to recall that 
grand festival beneath the cathedral roof, to think 
of the days when each loved the other in secret 
and in fear and dread and in solitude ! Was not 
this perfect happiness ? 

2 



196 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Friend Greybeard, does not the old love break 
out afresh as you contemplate two lovers like 
these ? Don't you remember the old dream ? If 
there is a picture in thy brain such as that of 
which sings the poet whose scrap of rhyme, with 
an American name at the bottom, has just 
attracted my attention in the comer of the county 
newspaper, do not shut it out. 

'* Upon the budded apple-trees 
The rohins sing by twos and threes, 
And ever at the faintest breeze 

Down drops a blossom ; 
And ever would that lover be 
The wind that robs the burgeoned tree, 
And lifts the soft tress daintily 

On Beauty's bosom. 

" Ah, greybeard, what a happy thing 
It was, when life was in its spring, 
To peep through love's betrothal ring 

At fields Elysian ; 
To move and breathe in magic air, 
To think that all that seems is fair . 
Ah, ripe young mouth and golden hair, 
Thou pretty vision ! " 



OLD TIMES. 197 

Let the old dream nestle in thine heart ; there is 
nothing else therein so beautiful Don't you 
remember what noble, unselfish things you would 
have done in those days ? What were capital and 
interest, and shares at par or premium or dis- 
count to thee, except so far as money might con- 
cern her happiness ? You have not seen that curl 
of hair, wrapped in faded paper, and put away 
in the dark comer of that old desk, for years. 
Take it out, old friend ; there is nothing immaniy 
in thy tears, for it is manly to have loved, and it is 
better even " to have loved and lost than never tp 
have loved at all." It is something to have the 
memory of those happy times. You were happy, 
whatever you may say to the contrary, you know 
you were . ten times happier when she smiled and 
returned the pressure of your hand than you are 
now at the prosperous state of markets and the 
thrift of your fiim. You may deny it ; but the 
old times come back in the firelight, old friend, 
do they not, when the heart confesses its own 
bitterness ? Don't deny it, and don't look ashamed 




198 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

at your own shadow in the glass, when you unfold 
that poor little curL 

The happiness of Arthur and Phoebe was some- 
thing to look upon and be happy at If Asmodeus 
had taken you to that model farm-house, that you 
might have been a calm spectator of the love 
that had folded his wings and settled down there 
beside that hearth, you would have been happier 
for the sight. For it was a catching happiness, 
ihat of Phoebe and Arthur ; an epidemic of joy 
and bliss and peace. You could not possibly have 
come within a yard of its influence without feeling 
a certain delight. If you happened to be a young 
fellow, a slight touch of envy might, perhaps, have 
struggled into your heart and embittered the 
sight ; for Phoebe might have struck you as the 
realisation of all your dreams of beauty, so soft, 
and gentle, and pulpy, and rosy, and innocent, and 
loving. 

We only meet with those beauties in books, you 
say, and in pictures. But this is a common calumny 
upon English women. Such beauties as Phoebe 



CRITICISM. 199 

Somerton are rare, no doubt ; but there are tender, 
kitten-like, innocent, candid, pretty girls like her 
in many an English county. Ay, and girls as 
good and true and generous. If our Mend Mr 
Williamson were critising this book for the 
Pyrotechnic, he would probably say at this point 
that so far as the heroines are concerned, the male 
novelist usually describes his characters as the 
perfection of beauty and goodness, impossibly 
lovely, impossibly true and generous ; whilst the 
lady novelist combines beauty with devilry, and 
makes her charming women fiends beyond the 
imagination of men ; and as Mr. W. has a smart 
epigrammatic way of writing, he would possibly 
say that whilst most men draw women as they 
ought to be, most women depict them as they 
ought not to be, and the public are waiting to 
see them painted as they are. ^ 

We need not take the trouble to convince the 
Pyrotechnic that Phoebe Somerton is drawn to 
the life, if the Pyrotechnic thinks otherwise ; but 
let us tell you, friendly reader, who has accom- 



200 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

panied us, paper-knife in hand, that Phoebe 
Somerton was all we have described her in beauty 
and in gentleness and truth. And no wonder that 
she had been attracted by Arthur Phillips, with, 
his big, black, melancholy eyes, and his fine intel- 
lectual face. One good nature speedily detects its. 
counterpart in another, and it was a testimonial 
of high and noble character to be loved by a 
woman like Phoebe. Love perpetrates strange, 
mad freaks, but it would have been next to im- 
possible for a pure nature like Phoebe's to have 
allied itself with another that was unworthy. 

Luke Somerton and his wife grew quite genial 
in the presence of the radiating love-beams that 
seemed to shine about the lovers ; and the bailiff 
thought about his young days in the great Lin- 
colnshire fens and wolds. He and his elder 
brother had quarrelled when they were boys, 
about Sarah Howard, his present wife. Luke 
had loved her passionately, and had been per- 
sistent in his attentions towards her ; but Sarah 
played her cards to win the elder brother, who 



lUKE SOMERTON's EARLY LIFE. 201 

would come in for the great bulk of the property. 
She was worldly, as you have seen, and had fixed 
upon doing great things if she married the elder 
Somerton. But it was only Luke who really 
loved her ; his brother flirted with her, and even- 
tually married a rich widow, whereupon Sarah 
Howard was fain to be content with Luke, who 
had quarrelled with his brother, not because his 
brother loved Sarah, but because he did not. For 
Luke, like a great, fond Lincolnshire lad as he 
was, on learning that Miss Howard liked his elder 
brother better than himself, had actually given 
her up, and called upon his brother to marry her. 
And now Luke looked back to these days, and 
remembered the time when Sarah had professed 
to return his love, and when they walked to the 
church through the meadows, and over the bridge 
that spanned the sparkling beck ; and he heard 
the half-a-dozen bells ringing afterwards, . ^heard 
them now after all those years: and he was 
happier in these memories because he knew that 
these two lovers really loved each other, both 




202 THB TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

of them as truly as he had loved Sarah 
Howard. 

Mrs. Somerton would now and then become 
quite cheerful, and tell Arthur in fun how she 
had disliked him once, bemuse she could see he 
was after Amy; and this would start conver- 
sations and confessions that gave the greatest 
pleasure to all concerned. 

Arthur would bring Phoebe bundles of news- 
papers and magazines in which his pictures were 
criticised. And Phoebe would blush with delight 
over the praises there bestowed upon her lover, 
and look dreadfully astonished when any critic 
threw in some adverse suggestion ot observation. 
The Pyrotechnic said Arthur Phillips was at the 
head of his profession ; no previous artist had 
combined landscape and figure painting with the 
success which had crowned his efforts: he was 
Salvator Bosa and Wilkie in one. Happily the 
higher class journals and the art magazines were 
more judicious in their commendations than this, 
but they all agreed that Mr. Phillips had a genius 



A PROPHETIC TITLE. 203 

for painting, and knew how to put that genius 
into his pictures; so the artist was not only on 
the high-road to lasting fame, but to monetary 
competence. He therefore talked to Phoebe of 
their future with confidence, and Mrs. Somerton 
was not a little pleased to learn that after all her 
daughter would be the wife of a thriving man. 

There was something prophetic, Arthur thought, 
in his title of that picture which had given the 
finishing touch to his professional reputation; 
and Phoebe pressed his arm as he said so whilst 
they were walking up to the summer-house on 
those dear Berne Hills. Something quite prophe- 
tic ! That gleam of inspiration which had fallen 
upon him in connection with those poor emigrants 
could only have been a stroke of Destiny : the 
tide was at the flood, and Fate pointed in the 

right direction. " Seeking New Homes ! " It 

. 
was the key-note to all the recent events in their 

history. They were all on the eve of seeking 

new homes : Mr. Somerton, Mrs. Somerton, Paul 

Somerton, Miss Tallant, and Phoebe, and himself. 



204 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

New homes ! What a pleasant, happy ring there 
was in the words ! Arthur drew all sorts of 
imaginary word-pictures of their home in the 
future ; and it was a paradise indeed, with such 
a studio, where Phoebe should have an easel, 
too, . such a home, the home of Love and Art ! 

If Arthur grew enthusiastically poetic in the 
contemplation of this future, who could feel sur- 
prised ? Walking abroad with Phoebe Somerton 
hanging on his arm, betrothed to him, almost 
mated like the birds that were building their 
nests all round about them. Was it not a poetic 
time? Is there any period of the year more 
eloquent to lovers, more fairy-like, more hopeful 
than Spring ? 

And Spring in that Berne Hill country ! Alike 
in every other season you saw all the special beau- 
ties of the time in the neighbourhood of Barton 
Hall. Standing near the summerhouse (where 
Bichard Tallant played the eaves-dropper to that 
Tiaive conversation, of which he reminded his 
sister so recently), Arthur and Phoebe may well 



nature's own patnting. 205 

feel that their lines have been cast in pleasant 
places ; that Heaven is dealing tenderly with 
them ; that the future will be a blessed time like 
this. The sky above them is full of blue and 
white, . ^great silver mountains piled upon each 
other in an azure sea. A lark is mounting up- 
wards, with a cheery song that is answered by 
a thousand wood-notes in the grove beneath. Far 
away on every side stretch the green fields dotted 
with homesteads and villages, past which winds 
the river sparkling in the sun. Old church towers 
and steeples peep over the tree-tops in quiet 
glades, and white wreaths of smoke in the distance 
mark the course of railway trains hurrying on 
their way to London. A misty cloud, half-pene- 
trated by the sun, hangs over the linktown Hills, 
and envelopes the shai-p outlines that come out 
here and there in undulating curves, picturesque 
indications of their graceful lines of beauty. How 
eloquently Arthur dwelt upon the glories of this 
great picture of Nature's own painting ! 

The trees were clothed with delicate verdant 



206 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

tints, through which the graceful shapes of 
the budding branches were seen, and the white 
birch did indeed stand out like the fair lady of 
the woods, nodding her pretty head and shaking 
her tresses to the music of the birds. Phoebe 
hushed Arthur's voice at the piping of a nightin- 
gale in a copse hard by, and the artist recalled old 
Izaak Walton's exclamation, " Lord, what music 
hast Thou provided for the saints in heaven, when 
Thou aflfordest bad men such music on earth ! " 
Whether it was the associations of the place 
. with former times or the words "bad men" that 
set Phoebe thinking of the time when the wicked- 
ness of Eichard Tallant was first strongly put 
before her, listeth not ; but she began to talk of 
Amy and of Lionel Hammerton. 

" Do you think Mr. Hammerton was really 
fond of Amy ? " she asked. 
" I do, indeed," said Arthur. 
" Were they engaged to be married ? " 
"Oh no, I think not; there was nothing so 
serious between them as that." 



lovers' conversations. 207 

"So serious !" repeated Phoebe, archly. 

"So sweet," said Arthur, promptly and ten- 
derly . " serious is the conventional phrase." 

" Why did he neglect her ? Did he speak of 
her unkindly when he left England ? "' 

" He said something about Paul . her brother 
in those days, you know, when you were 
Miss Tallant . something about prying into his 
affairs." 

"Indeed!" 

"Paul had followed him to the club, and 
warned him against some persons who were con- 
spiring to win his money at cards." 

" Oh yes, I remember something of it ; but I 
was not aware that the surveillance had gone so 
far. Mr. Hammerton was being deceived, I 
think. Amy said. There was a plot against 
him, she thought ; but, poor girl, she was so 
deeply in love with him." 

"He felt annoyed that she had interfered in 
his private doings," said Arthur ; " he thought it 
was officious, I suppose." 



208 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Was that aU r asked Phoebe. " Then he did 
not love her." 

Arthur had too much regard for his old friend 
even now to hint that Lionel thought Amy waa 
influenced by mere worldly motives. 

"And you think he really loves Amy now 1" 
said Phoebe, half-aloud, half to herself. 

" Not as I love you," said Arthur ; " but our 
love, dearest, is a love apart from any other love ; 
it seems to me that nobody in the whole world is 
blessed like I am with a love so generous, so 
noble. What have I done that I should deserve 
so much happiness ?" 

" Dear Arthur !" was all Phoebe could say, and 
then for a time they forgot all the world but 
themselves and the trees and flowers and grasses 
and the distant hills and the spring sky above 
them, with the hopeful lark in the sunshine, and 
the nightingale singing in the shade. 

What a delightful path it was, that old familiar 
way by which they returned to the farm ! Wood- 
sorrel, buttercups, sweet woodroof, primroses, and 



THE PATH THROUGH THE WOOD. 209 

violets bespangled and scented the way; green 
grasses and ferns shot out like emerald spikes and 
crooks from amongst dead leaves that autumn 
winds had left in out-of-the-way comers. The 
lake in the shadow of the hills shone here and 
there through the trees like glints of silver, and 
the sunbeams sparkled white and shimmery on 
the windows of Barton HalL At length the 
lovers stopped beside a rustic stile near the foot 
of the hills . one of those oldffashioned, moss- 
grown, lichen-coloured stiles, which give such 
additional charms to straggling hedge-rows, with 
great clumps of flowering hawthorn here and 
there at the top, and patches of red and brown 
and amber in the old roots at the bottom. 
Beneath a bending branch of budding May- 
flowers Ai-thur pointed out the spot where he had 
sat for hours to paint and think of her in the 
summer-time, and she saw that the place com-^ 
manded a full view of the room where she mostly 
sat. 

Oh, what a happy time it was! The spring- 

VOL. IT. p 



210 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

wind went about the woods in gentle murmurs, 
as if it were saying so in every nook and corner. 
" How are you, old friend ? " it seemed to say 
every now and then, as it rustled the young 
leaves of an oak or an elm . "glad to see you 
looking so well . pleasant day;" and the trees 
seemed to nod and look happy, and congratulate 
each other that the south wind had come again, 
and the ash trees shook their jangling locks with 
delight. Everything seemed to say the winter is 
over, and we are glad of it and sure of it. The 
frogs croaked by the margin of the lake, and the 
crows replied as they winged their way over them 
up into the elms that glassed themselves in the 
deep. Bees hummed musically in the air, and 
darted into the midst of great yellow butter-cups 
as if in very wantonness of joy. What a happy- 
time it was ! Everything seemed to say so. birds 
and trees and hills and fields. There was a 
general jubilation of Nature, such as the Psalmist 
might have had in his mind when he sang, 
"Let the floods clap their hands, and let 



FLOWERS AND THORNS. 211 

the hills be joyful together before the 
Lord'' 

Happy days ! Why do we dwell upon them ? 
It is not easy to close any page which has spring 
sunshine in it. We have all of us so many dear, 
treasured associations with it, bringing us back to 
the spring-time of life when the world looked 
so hopeful and charming . ^when there were 
flowers of love and friendship in our paths, and 
we knew nothing of the thorns that lurked 
beneath them. 



p 2 



CHAPTER XV. 

FINANCE AND "FINESSE." 

The spring did not bring happy days with it 
in the city of London. The south wind had no 
influence on that financial stonn which had not 
yet subsided. It brought no comfort to unhappy 
speculators and tottering houses of trade. The 
city sparrows shambled from under the eaves, and 
rolled themselves in the dust of the great city> 
and street boys whistled merrily along the hard 
pavements ; but great merchants held down their 
heads, directors of companies hurried to and fro 
with great secrets in their hearts that troubled 
them sorely ; countrymen stared vacantly up at 
oflSces and banks that were closed and marked 
" To Let." The genius of finance, and not spring, 
had full possession of the City, and he was 



THE BANK BAROMETER. 213 

tormenting it with panic fiends and imp3 of all 
kinds. 

People had said six months previously that the 
worst was over ; but the genius of finance looked 
on with a sardonic grin, and after breathing awhile 
quietly he set to work again, shaking the city 
with all his might, and letting flights of rumours 
out of his black bag that frightened people almost 
out of their wits. Then the telegraph wires 
carried the rumours far away into the country 
once more, and newspaper editors began to write 
furiously about the currency ; deputations waited 
on the Chaoicellor of the Exchequer to talk about 
the Bank Charter Act ; and the court of the 
Bank of England sat in secret, and raised the 
rate of discount. The more that big demon of 
finance shook the City, the higher went up the 
Bank bai'ometer, and the higher it rose the lower 
fell the hopes of traders, and discounters, and 
shaky companies. 

The period of panic through which the mone- 
tary world is passing whilst we are writing this 



214 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

history, has nearly all the characteristics of the 
one which occurred in the days of Thoma,s 
Dibble and Richard Tallant, and the other persons 
who make up this poor drama of life. Every 
ten years these storms occur, they say; and yet 
the wise people who say so, never seem prepared 
for the rainy day. 

Mr. Eichard Tallant had hitherto succeeded in 
profiting by the storm. He was one of those 
financial wreckers who. plundered the broken 
ships, and made money out of claims for salvage 
after the crews were murdered. But he had 
believed, like some others, that the worst was 
past during that breathing time, and in an evil 
hour for him he had, on good information, bought 
largely of shares in the Bungalay Bank, and had 
taken a seat at the board of directors. The 
thing collapsed immediately on the revival of 
the financial storm, and Mr. Tallant's losses were 
so considerable, that the four thousand pounds 
which he had screwed out of Tyzell and Kits 
were absolutely necessary to meet and float fresh 



215 

bills of exchange which had been useful bladders 
to him in the monetary sea for some time past. 
Several "good things" had come to the ground 
without warning, including a discount house in 
which Mr. Tallant was interested. 

The times were peculiarly ticklish for many a 
stronger man than Richard Tallant; but that 
gentleman found himself in a position which 
needed all his administrative abiHty. He not only 
held a large number of shares in the Bungalay 
Bank, but he had used the establishment largely 
in connection with the Discount Company for 
bill purposes. He had worked his position at 
the Meter Iron Works to considerable advantage, 
drawing upon foreign iron houses, and other 
companies (some of them quite imaginary), and 
holding their acceptances to a large amount. The 
collapse of the Bungalay Bank and the Discount 
Company made things particularly unpleasant. 
It would not do for him to sell to any extent 
the shares he held in the Meter Works ; for his 
holding there gave him a strong position at the 



216 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

board. He had before now made money out of 
winding up a bank; but there had been no oppor- 
tunity for this in the Bungalay, and Mr. Tallant 
had a shrewd suspicion that he had been " done " 
in this business, seeing that the promoter of the 
bank was the gentleman who had brought it to 
the ground by a petition to wind it up. 

Keeping up appearances was a thing of great 
importance to Mr. Tallant . ^next indeed to meet- 
ing his engagements. He therefore took aji 
opportunity to let it be known in the proper 
quarter that his sister was going to be married 
to Earl Vemer, which fact speedily came forth 
in the Morning Post, and was copied by a host 
of other journals. "The Eight Hon. the Earl 
Vemer will shortly lead to the hymeneal altar. 
Miss Tallant, daughter and heiress of the late 
Christopher Tallant, Esq., of Barton Hall, and 
sister to Richard TaUant, Esq., of the City of 
London, Managing Director of the famous Meter 
Iron Works Company." 

Lord Verner did not much like this announce- 



THE PARAGRAPH IN THE " POST." 217 

ment. The thing might have been blazoned 
forth in all the papers so far as the mere fact 
was concerned ; but he objected to the intro- 
duction of Richard Tallant into the announce- 
ment. He was her brother, no doubt, but he 
was a scoundrel he believed in addition, and his 
father had disowned him. 

His lordship showed Amy the Post, and she 
only laughed at it, and said how very absurd to 
mention her brother. 

" Though by the way, my lord, he is wonder- 
fully improved, I believe. He is making quite a 
reputation in that dreadful London." 

"Is he, my love?" said Lord Vomer, looking 
down at Miss TaUant, as she put the last touches 
to a water-colour drawing. 

"Yes, I have seen his name in the papers 
several times lately mentioned almost as respect- 
fully as his late father's." 

What a splendid creature she is, Lord Vomer 
thought, as he stood by her side, forgetting 
altogether about her brother. "Is not that 



218 THE TAT.TiANTS OF BABTON. 

sky slightly too blue ? " he said, leaning over 
her. 

" Perhaps it is my love . my lord, I mean," 
said Amy, at which his lordship was in raptures ; 
so much so, that he put his arm round the 
painter s waist, and kissed her. 

" There ! " said Amy, laughing. " I will call 
you love no more . ^what a mistake I made to be 
sure; now, pray go away, you will spoil my 
work. Sit down, and let us talk." 

Lord Vemer complied at once, and sat down 
close beside her. 

*'I ought not to be wasting time upon this," 
said Amy ; " but I really could not resist finishing 
it this morning. Let me see, what were we 
talking about. Oh, my brother. Well, as I 
observed, he is really making quite a posi- 
tion as a financier . q^iite. What a pity it is, 
he did not begin to reform before Mr. Tallant 
died." 

" That is a matter of opinion, my dear . ^ha, ha, 
ha!" said Lord Vemer, laughing and chuckling 



BADINAGE. 219 

quite merrily ; " he would have had all the money 
then, perhaps . ha, ha ! " 

Amy turned round and looked his lordship full in 
the face, and saw at once that this was said in jest. 

" Don't you see, my love, you would have had 
no great fortune to give your husband . eh ? don't 
you see ! How it might have influenced events . 
eh? Ha, ha!" 

Lord Vomer went red in the face at the bare 
idea of anything influencing his choice of Amy 
for a wife. 

"And then you would not have proposed for 
me ? " said Amy, smiling. 

"No, no . capital idea, is it not? . splendid 
idea . ^ha, ha ! " 

"Then you only care about my money?" said 
Amy, with aflfected seriousness. 

" That is all, dear, that is all. I am poor my- 
self, very poor ; I wanted money . ^ha, ha 1. capital 
joke!" 

" I think it is more than a joke, my lord," said 
Amy, quite seriously. 



220 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

" No, now, you do not," said his lordship, rising 
and taking her hand quite gravely ; " I am sure 
you do not." 

Now it was Amy's turn to laugh, and she did so 

right mei-rily, shaking her finger archly at her 

lord and saying, " There, that is one to me, as you 

say. Of course I was joking ; but now, really, let 

' us talk seriously." 

" Well, then, my dearest girl," said his lordship, 
"if you had been no more than that bailiflTs 
daughter, if you had been that beggar maid you 
talk of in the poem, I would have asked you to 
marry me all the same, and felt blessed with your 
consent. You know I would," said his lordship, 
with passionate earnestness. 

" My dear lord," said Amy, with more warmth 
than she had ever spoken before. 

"What care I for money," said his lordship, 
" except for the luxuries it can purchase ? . and 
nothing it could purchase would make me so 
happy as I am with you." 

Amy held down her head and blushed, not for 



amy's management. 221 

the love she bore him, but because in that 
earnest moment she saw a likeness to his brother, 
and she was grateful for his aflfectioh, and re- 
membered how she had sought to inspire the 
same feeling in another. 

" We were talking of my brother," she said pre- 
sently, laying down her brushes. " "What a pity 
it is that we are not friendly ; it seems so lonely 
to think that I have no male relative who should 
stand by my side at our marriage." 

Poor Amy ! There was something in that half- 
threat of Richard Tallant's about giving her away 
which had set her thinking and preparing for such 
a contingency as a demand from her brother to be 
a wedding guest ; and she knew that if he vowed 
to be there at the ceremony, there was no Ancient 
Mariner to take him by the button, and keep him 
away. She almost hated herself for saying a word 
in favour of one whose conduct ought to have 
placed him outside all decent society. 

" Don't think of that, my dear girl,** said his 
lordship. "Lord Tufton will 'give you away,' as 



224 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

spirits, the Earl laughed and chuckled^ and said 
he had no time to be ill ; he did not intend to be 
ill any more; he had wasted enough valuable 
time upon that hobby. 

Then the vicar would go home to chat with 
Mrs. Vicar about, the changes which were taking 
place, and wonder what Mr. Hammerton thought 
about the affair. Of course he knew nothing of 
it at present ; there had scarcely been time for 
letters to reach him since the match had really 
been settled and made known. 

Everybody in the neighbourhood of Montem 
Castle and at Brazencrook had looked upon the 
Hon. Lionel Hammerton as certain of the earl- 
dom. Not only was his brother considerably his 
senior. old enough to be his father . ^but he had 
generally been an invalid, and looked much older 
than he really was. But his lordship was far 
stronger than they imagined. He had loved retire- 
ment and study, and frequently secured it by a 
pretence of not being well He had a horror of 
" boredom " ; he could not endure toadyism ; he 



THE EARL. 225 

loved his books and his pictures, his old china, his 
statuary; and he preferred this to the best society 
in the district, though he and the vicar and 
occasional visitors diijed luxuriously together, and 
sat genially over their wine until late in the night. 
It was generally agreed that his lordship was 
odd, and nobody doubted that some day he would 
be found dead in his bed, and that Lionel Ham- 
merton would succeed and make up for the former 
Earl's retirement by a liberal reign and a generous 
performance of the duties of his high station. But 
his lordship had opened their eyes of late, and 
turned the gossip into entirely new and unex- 
pected channels. 

Earl Vomer's intended wife had not misinter- 
preted Richard Tallant's vague threat. The idea 
had only occurred to him suddenly as an availkble 
bit of sarcasm to hurl at his sister ; but he ha& 
thought of it in the railway, lighted his cigar with 
it at the junction, and it had cropped up in his 
thoughts several times since. To be publicly 

VOL. II. Q 



226 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

reconciled to his sister, and be seen hand and 
glove with Lord Vomer ; to be recorded as giving 
away his sister to an Earl, would be of great 
advantage to him, just at that time when it was 
important he should keep up appearances. So he 
resolved to write to his sister upon the subject, 
and Amy was not at all surprised when she 
received the letter. 

Nevertheless, Amy's first impulse was to explain 
the whole thing to Lord Vemer, and entreat his 
advice and forgiveness ; but her secoiid thoughts 
were calmer and more worldly, and she wrote 
a brief acknowledgment of Mr. Tallant's letter, 
drove to Avonworth, and posted it herself, that 
the servants might not know there was any 
correspondence between her brother and herself. 
She promised to give the subject her best con- 
sideration, and on the next opportunity that 
offered she again introduced the question to Eail 
Vemer. That she might do so more easily, and 
with a better chance of success," Mr. Richard 
Tallant had forwarded a copy of the Sevemtoxvn 



THE PUFF POLITICAL. 827 

Times, ia which the following paragraph was 
marked: 

"The Representation of Severntown.. We 
are authorised to state tl^at at the next election 
for Sevemtown, Mr. Richard Tallant, who is well 
known in the county, will oflfer himself as a 
candidate in the Liberal interest Mr. Tallant 
is a gentleman of great financial and administra- 
tive ability ; he is best known as the managing 
director of that great and flourishing corporation^ 
the Meter Ironworks Company. Added to his 
high position in the comipercial world, our readers 
have had many proofs of his benevolence. He is 
a subscriber to all our local institutions, and we 
happen to know that his private charities are 
equally liberal. With regard to his politics we 
believe him to be a Liberal in the best sense of 
the term ; but upon that point the electors will 
form their own judgment at the proper time. 
It is pretty well understood that we shall have 
a general election during the next six months." 

'*I had thought of my brother Lionel for 

Q2 



228 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Sevemtown," said Lord Vemer, when Amy showed 
his lordship the paragraph ; " but I have given 
that up, of course, . he was too extravagant." 

Miss Tallant made no remark about Lionel ; 
but endeavoured to impress his lordship with the 
growing importance of her brother, and what a 
position he might have held had he made his 
peace with his father before he died; then by 
degrees she presented herself in the light of an 
ungrateful sister, and talked about the duty of 
forgiveness. 

Need we say that in the end she gained her 
point, which was not exactly permission to invite 
her brother to be present at the ceremony, but 
that Earl Vemer should himself suggest that 
perhaps it would be best that Mr. Eichard Tallant 
should be asked to act the paternal part on 
the interesting occasion. He had called upon 
her, Amy explained, and this newspaper was 
directed to her by himself. He had made overtures 
of peace ; was it not her place as the inheritor 
of so much propei-ty, which ought to have 



ARMED AT ALL POINTS. 229 

been his, to respond, and thus give him an addi- 
tional inducement to blot out the past, and make 
reparation to society and to his father's memory ? 
Of course it was. Lord Vomer was too liberal 
a man not to see this at once, and not to love 
his intended wife all the more for her generous 
and noble advocacy of her brother. 



CHAPTER XVL 

IN WHICH A CERTAIN LIEUTENANT GETS INTO 
DEBT, AND TRYING TO GET OUT AGAIN 
FALLS WICKEDLY IN LOVE. 

The regiment to which Ensign afterwards 
Lieutenant Somerton was attached had its sta- 
tion in London, and this gave him an oppor- 
tunity of keeping up his friendship with Mr. 
Williamson. 

The Lieutenant had become quite a dashing 
young officer, and his adventures began early, as 
we shall learn from an elaborate confession which 
he made to Mr. WiUiamson before he had worn his 
epaulettes six months. 

They were sitting at the window of a famous 
hotel at Brighton, whither they had gone together 
for a day's lounge. It was a pleasant summer 



A STORY AFTER DINNER. 231 

day, and after dinner, when Paul, smoking a 
cigar somewhat rapidly and drinking a little 
more wine than was customary for him to drink, 
said : 

"I have been trying to tell you about some- 
thing that has happened to me lately." 

" Yes," said Mr. Williamson, in his lazy fashion 
putting up his legs upon a vacant chair, and 
nodding a smiling signal of approval. 

Paul hesitated, and said it was rather a long 
story, and he fidgetted with a tassel that hung 
from the sword he had laid upon the window 
seat. 

"All right, mon gallant how/me, proceed!*' 
said the literary barrister. 

Paul gave a long pull and a strong pull at 
his cigar, and said he would proceed. " I must 
tell you, . I can't rest unless I do, . so here goes" 

"Open confession is good for the soul," said 
Mr. Williamson ; " the auricular business is not to 
my fancy. But there, go on. Lieutenant, I am 
getting interested." 



232 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

" About a month ago Captain Macshawser gave 
me a tip about a certain steeple-chase, and hia 
information turned out wrong, and " 

"You laid a wager and lost, yes," said Mr. 
Williamson, looking out to the sea, and smoking 
with perfect content. 

"And then, in order to get back what I lost, 
I ventured to take the odds about Fleetwing, and 
was unsuccessful again," said Paul, with boyish 
frankness. 

" Very good ; I am glad of it," said Mr. William- 
son. "I hope you have been so well punished 
that you will, like the burnt child, dread the fire 
in the future."^ 

Paul did not like the quiet tone of authority 
and rebuke in which his friend appeared to 
speak ; but he felt that the barrister was in the 
right, and had his interest at heart. 

" You don't sympathise with me much ? " said 
Paul, moving uneasily in his seat, and smoking 
by fits and starts. 

"O yes, I do. Lieutenant . O yes, I do ; I 



^' GOING IT.'* 233 

fancy that Macshawser s a humbug ; but I inter- 
rupt your narrative." 

" Well ; these losses, and some extra expendi- 
ture which I felt called upon to make in a little 
dinner to some fellows belonging to the Guards, 
run away with my allowance twice over before I 
knew where I was." 

" You have been going it, as the saying is, . 
been fast in the double sense. We say a man is 
fast who is fond of gaiety, keeps late hours, bets 
on horse races, and takes "tips." In Yorkshire, 
a man who is " hard up " is said to be fast, . ^fast 
for money. Are you fast for money now ? If so^ 
how much do you want ? " said Mr. Williamson 
still, looking before him far away at the ships 
in the distance. 

"You had better let me tell you the whole 
story through," Paul replied. " I was ashamed to 
let anybody know that I wanted money; I could 
not summon courage even to tell you, and should 
not have had courage to do so even now but for 
another circumstance which has arisen out of it** 



234 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

" You axe too modest," said Mr. Williamson. 

"I thought of a hundred ways of raising 
money, and I knew that some of our fellows 
borrow money of Jews ; I did not know what to 
do. Whilst I was sitting over the Times and a 
cigar in my own quarters, my eye caught an 
advertisement about " money to lend." 

Mr. Wilkinson grew particularly interested at 
this point, for a detective friend of his had tolch 
him some time ago that he had been on the trail 
of Shuffleton Gibbs, who had slipped him, in the 
character, he believed, of an advertising money- 
lender. 

"I replied to the advertisement, and had a 
letter by return of post requesting me to call at 
No. 15, Chaucer-street, Lincoln*s-inn-fields. J 
called, and was requested to fill up a long form, 
in which I answered a great many questions ; but 
I concealed my connection with the army. My 
life was to be insured, and a bill of exchange, 
backed by one good name besides my own, for 
two hundred and fifty pounds would secure to me 



THE MONEY LENDERS. 235 

two huildred for three months. I paid the two 
guineas and a fee the next day for medical exami- 
nation. Two days afterwards they informed me 
that the medical oflScer of the company had made 
an unfavourable report with regard to the state 
of my health, and that the loan could not there- 
fore be granted." 

'. Of course," said Mr. Williamson, lighting an- 
other cigar. 

" I asked for the return of the fees which I had 
paid, and was informed that no fees were ever 
returned. I felt that I had been swindled, but 
still could not rest until I had undergone an 
examination by our own surgeon, and been re- 
ported sound in wind and limb." 

" Well," said Mr. Wilkinson, " you have been 
making experience ; your story grows in interest ; 
make a clean breast of it, perhaps I can help 
you." 

"I did not know what to do next; somehow 
these advertisements attracted my attention 
again. I found one which really did seem honest. 



236 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

It stated that gentlemea in the army and others 
requiring temporary loans might obtain them 
with strict privacy on application to Mr. Jefferson 
Crawley, at Titchwell-street West. I wrote to 
Mr. Crawley, determined not to be done a second 
time. I was desired to call, and with some diffi- 
culty I found the place . ^rather a queer place, 
too ; through a mews, and in a back, out-of-the- 
way comer I found a shabby-looking office, and 
entered. A small boy sat at a small desk and 
said his master was out, and whilst he was saying 
so a girl came , into the office by a flight of stairs 
at the back." 

" Oh, there's a woman in the case, is there ? " 
said Mr. Wilkinson, in a somewhat cynical tone. 

Paul threw the stump end of a cigar out of 
window, and coughed to conceal some little con- 
fusion which this part of the narrative occasioned 
him. 

" I know you will say I have been a fool," he 
said, with unusual energy ; " but I can't help 
it." 



IN THE PARLOUR. 237 

" The first part of the confession has a good 
sound . confession and then repentance; but 
' can't help it' is a horse of another colour. Out 
with the whole story, my friend ; you will find me 
mum as a priest, and 111 give you absolution, 
too." 

"A beautiful-looking girl she was ; I was quite 
struck by her appearance . so unexpected, you 
know." 

" Yes ; go on," said Mr. Williamson. 
" She said she must apologize for Mr. Crawley ; 
he had been quite imexpectedly called away and 
would not return until evening; but she was 
acquainted with my business, and would I kindly 
step inside for a moment. I followed her into a 
small room, a miserable sort of attempt at a 
parlour, wretchedly furnished. - 1 took a seiarti and 
almost forgot my business . ^I was so taken up 
with the woman. She was to ask if I knew 
Oaptain Macshawser, aiud if that officer would 
join me in a bilL I felt ashamed to talk about 
the subject, to a woman, and especially such a 



238 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

pretty one, and I said as much, but in a different 
way." 

" You let her see that you were admiring her, 
of course," said Mr. Williamson, adding, sotto voce, 
" innocent youth !" 

" How it was I don't know, but we got into a 
long conversation, and it came out quite by acci- 
dent that she knew Sevemtown, and she spoke 
about the place so familiarly that I felt sure I 
had seen her before. I thought so at first, and 
was convinced of it when she mentioned the old 
cathedral city. I don t know how long I stayed, 
but T said no more about money, and I never felt 
so much pleasure in talking to a girl in all my 
life. I went away, promising to call again, and I 
secretly hoped that Mr. Crawley would still be 
from home at my next visit." 

"And who was the lady, pray?*' asked the 
barrister. 

" I did not inquire at that time," said Paul ; 
"I longed so to see her again, that I called 
in the afternoon, and she was out ; I was 



SISTER, DAUGHTER, OR WIFE? 239 

very much disappointed The boy said she 
would be in soon, and I sat down and waited. 
I felt miserable, I hardly knew why. I asked 
the scrubby-looking clerk if the young lady 
were Mr. Crawley's daughter? He said 'No.' 
Was she his sister ? I asked. * No,' he said 
again. Somehow, I felt as if I dare not ask if 
she were his wife. Whilst I was thinking and 
wondering who she could be . such a sweet 
charming girl in such a place (Paul went on 
excitedly) . in she came. I jumped up and shook 
hands with her, and felt as if I had known her 
for years." 

Here Paul rose from his seat and walked about 
the room. Mr. Williamson had never seen him so 
agitated before. He had no idea that there was 
so much fire and enthusiasm in the young fellow. 
The barrister leffc the ships at sea, and watched 
his young friend with a kindly ^interest which 
he had not exhibited hitherto during the con- 
versation. 

" She asked me to come in," said Paul, still 



240 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

pacing the room. " We talked again of anything 
and everything but the business upon which I 
was supposed to have called. I could see that 
she was troubled about something . ^how I had 
courage enough to press her upon the subject 
I don't know, but I did, and she began to 
cry. 

" Curse their tears !" said the barrister, between 
his teeth, as he removed his legs from the vacant 
chair, and, planting them firmly on the floor, 
gazed steadfastly at Paul. 

" I took her hand ; I don't know what I said, 
but I think it was that I loved her, and begged 
to know how I could be of service to her. She 
looked up at me . with such despair that I could 
almost have cried myself . and begged me not to 
talk of love ; she was married !" 

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Mr. Williamson. 
The remark was wrung from him, not so much by 
Paul's story as by a touch of memoiy. 

" I knew she was . I felt almost from the first 
that she was married ; it seemed as if some devil 



IN TROUBLED WATERS. 24! 

whispered it in my ear to mock me ; but it only 
made me love her ten times more." 

"Unhappy boy!" said the barrister, quite 
sadly . ** unhappy boy ! " 

"Her husband treated her cruelly, she said; he 
was a swindler, a thief, everything that was bad, 
and he had married her merely that she might 
assist him in his conspiracies. She would rather . 
die than continue such a life, and I could not help 
but feel that the love she had inspired in me was 
returned ; she seemed almost delirious for a time, 
asked me not to leave her, and clasped her hand 
to her head. At this the office-boy came in, and 
taking some water from a jug, said, ' Put that on 
the top of her head.' I obeyed him mechanically, 
and then the girl was herself again. * Peter,' she 
said to the boy, ' you will not mention what has 
occurred to Mr. Crawley.' ' Of course I shan't,' said 
the boy, and then she begged me to go. I made 
her promise to let me help her in some way, and 
she cautioned me not to have anything to do with 
her husband. She said I might call the next 

VOL. II. B 



242 THE TAT.T.ANTS OF BABTON. 

night at six. I kissed her and left the house^ not 
knowing where I was or what I was doing." 

" By Jove," said Mr. Williamson, "it is an ex- 
citing story, and you tell it well, Paul; but I 
fear it is a sad affair : you are getting into 
troubled waters. Best awhile, light another cigar, 
let us have some more sherry, and then you can 
go on ; I think I know the end of it . poor 
feUow!" 

The barrister put his hand quite affectionately 
on the Lieutenant's shoulder, and then rang the 
beU, saying all the time, "Poor fellow! . ^poor 
fellow !" 



CHAPTER XVII. 

CONTINUES THE LIEUTENANT'S ADVENTURE 

xThej lighted fresh cigars as the sun went 
down in the West, and Arundel Williamson felt 
the spirit of old days come over him. 

A sad train of thoughts and memories had 
been awakened in the barrister's mind; and 
he placed his chair near his young friend, and 
bade him continue his story. 

"Don't be afraid, Paul; tell me everything 
and, believe me, I sympathise with you deeply." 

Paul was re-assured by the kindly tone of 
the barrister's voice. 

"I passed a wretched night that night when 
I had left her, thinking of her troubles, and 
trying to remember where I had seen her; 
and my mind wandered away to Avonworth 

%2 



244 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Valley, and it seemed as if I had known her 
when I was a child. When I went to bed I 
dreamt that she was my sister, and that we 
lived at the farm; and then I was rescuing 
her from some blackguard who had beaten her. 
I could not sleep, and I hardly know how the 
night and day passed. Macshawser came to 
me, and said he had had a mutual friend with 
him making a private inquiry. He alluded to 
Mr. Jefferson Crawley, he said; and wished I 
had mentioned the subject to him (the Captain) 
first. Of course he would have helped me at 
once; he could have put me in the way of 
getting the money apart from Crawley, though 
Crawley was a decent sort of fellow. He said 
he would back my bill for me; of course my 
allowance was safe. I told him I would con- 
sider the matter fuiiher, and I resolved at 
once to write to my benefe-ctress and ask for 
a remittance on account: I felt that was the 
most honest way, after what she and Lord 
Vomer had said to me." 



" CAN WRONG BE RIGHT ? " 245 

" Bravo ! " said Mr. Williamson ; " that was 
right" 

" As six o'clock struck by a church clock 
somewhere in the thick of the houses^ I was 
at Crawle/s again. The office-boy was not 
there, Mrs. Crawley was alone. I trembled like 
a schoolboy in her presence. She seemed pleased 
to see me. Had I heard anything of her 
husband ? she asked. I said ' No ; ' but I told 
her of the incident about Macshawser. She said 
she need hardly ask if she might rely upon 
my honour and secrecy. I assured her, and 
begged that she would show me how I could 
help her. It was not wrong to go thus far ? " 

Paul waited for his friend's reply. 

" Considering how far you had gone, no," said 
Mr. Williamson. 

"She said Macshawser was an agent of the 
Jews ; that although he was an officer in the 
army, he was the secret spy and agent of 
money-lenders ; that his business was to get 
into the confidence of people, and particularly 



246 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

military men, and when they were in trouble 
for money he made inquiries as to their posi- 
tion, then told them where to go, and afterwards 
got a bonus from the usurer to whom he had 
made his recommendation." 

" She told you the truth ; my friend of 
Scotland Yard could tell you some rare stories in 
illustration," said the barrister. 

"Her husband," she said, "was an agent of 
a lower stamp than this gentleman . of a much 
lower stamp; and what was worse, he did not 
confine himself to this; but he cheated at 
cards, and expected her now and then to assist 
in plucking young men whom they met by 
accident at a friend's in the West End, where 
Macshawser was an occasional visitor. Her 
husband had gone there now to dinner, and she 
was ordered to attend at eight o'clock. And 
then the tears rolled down her cheek, and I 
felt that I could have laid my life down for 
her." 

" Yes, yes . ^we are all alike," said Mr. William- 



"too full of foolish pity." 247 

son ; " those cursed tears, they make fools of us 
aU." 

"Then she asked me if I did not truly pity her, 
and from that we got to a mutual confession of 
love. She knew it was wicked, and she had tried 
to fight against it, she said ; but she loved me with 
all her heart, because I had had pity on her, and 
had loved her as a woman should be loved before 
I had known she was manied. We set to think- 
ing what we should do under the circumstances, 
but all that I could think of was that she must 
get away from this fiend, her husband.'* 

" How came she to marry him 1 Did she not 
tell you that ?" asked the barrister. 

" Not at that time, but she has told me all her 
history since. I went to see her the next evening 
at the same hour, and found her pale and ill, and 
unlike herself. She had had a violent quarrel 
with her husband, who had subjected her to gross 
insult on the previous night ; she had refused to 
go out this evening, and I stayed with her until 
late, and tried to cheer her. We talked of Severn- 



248 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

town, and of her childhood She never re- 
membered her mother; she had always under- 
stood that her mother died when she was but a 
child. She dare not tell me, she said, how her 
younger life had been spent, lest I should despise 
her ; but she would tell me by-and-by. The more 
she said to prevent me from loving her, the more 
my sympathies were excited, and I laid down a 
plan whereby she should leave her husband the 
next day, if she would." 

" Bash . ^rash boy ! " exclaimed Mr. William- 
son. 

" I know it. I felt afterwai'ds, in sober mo- 
ments, that I had behaved most foolishly, but I 
could not help it. The next morning twice the 
money I wanted reached me from Barton Hall, 
and this determined my course of action." 

" Why did you not tell me of it at the time ? " 

" I dare not ; I seemed to be impelled by an 
infatuation that overcame me completely. I went 
and hired a modest lodging for her out at Pimlico, 
not far from where the Dibbles lived ; and that 



AND THIS WAS PAUL'S TROUBLE. 249 

evening at six I went again, told her what I had 
done, and implored her to come with me. She 
was paler and weaker than when I saw her the 
evening previously, and wandered a little in her 
talk. I told her she should not want . she should 
be kindly treated . ^and talked of happiness in a 
distant land. I hardly know what I said. She 
came with me, and she has never rallied since; 
she is very ill, and somehow I do not think she 
will Kve, and I love her so much, that if she 
should die, I think it would drive me mad." 

And then the young fellow threw his arms upon 
the table, buried his face in his hands, and sobbed 
like a child. 

" Poor fellow ! " said the barrister, " poor 
feUow!" 

" Now, call me a fool, or what you like," said 
Paul, in broken accents. " This is my trouble, 
and this my reason for going to tovm by the next 
train. I came with you to tell you my story ; it 
has been breaking my heart, and I know you are 
my best friend." 



250 THB TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Yes, yes," said the barrister, taking Paul's 
hand; ''we are nearer and dearer friends than 
ever now, heaven help us! I will tell you of 
my trouble some day, Paul. But about this poor 
woman : has she had medical advice ? " 

" She has," said Paul, " and every attention." 

"Ha! that's well I think it is time we re- 
turned to town, then," said the barrister. " Come, 
cheer up. Lieutenant ; cheer up, man ! " 

" I feel better now," said Paul, taking up his 
sash, and slinging his sword round his waist. 
" A nice fellow to be a soldier, I am ! " he went 
on, as he wiped his face with his handker- 
chief. 

" You are a good feUow," said the barrister ; 
" unfort^jnate, but a good fellow. What a blessing 
it is we know each other I I thank that rascal 
Gibbs that he put a certain young fellow to much 
trouble years ago. I might never have known 
you but for that. It was necessary we should 
know each other : the hand of Fate is in this 
business." 



SHE HAD ASKED, FOR HIM TWENTY TIM;ES. 251 

It was late when the two friends reached 
London. They drove from the station to 
Pimlico, and halted at a house in a quiet bye- 
street. They both entered, and dismissed the 
cab. 

Mrs. Dibble let them in, and Mr. Williamson 
recognised her with pleasure. 

" You did not tell me she was with Mrs. 
Dibble," said the barrister. 

" Did I not ? " said Paul, hardly heeding the 
question. 

" How is she to-night ? " said Paul 

"Better. a little better," said Mrs. Dibble. 
" She hath athked for you twenty timeth." 

" I will not keep you five minutes," said Paul, 
as he ascended the stairs on tip-toe. 

" Poor creature ! poor dear love ! " said Mrs. 
Dibble ; " she'th had a thad life for one so young 
though we all have our troublth. I'm thure if my 
pa could rithe and thee me, it would break hith 
heart, that it would, to think that after having a 
boarding-thchool education, and being brought up 



252 TnE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

with accomplishmenth at my fingerth ends, that 
I thould have to let my huthband go out to ther- 
vice in hith old age, and live on the bounty of him 
and Mithter Thomerton." 

The bare contemplation of her lot set Mrs. 
Dibble weeping copious tears. 

" In service ? Why I thought Thomas had 
come back to live with you, and that you were 
going on quite comfortably again?" said the 
banister. 

" Tho he did, tho he did," said Mrs. Dibble, 
wiping her eyes ; " but it wath only to bring fresh 
troubleth. We were perthecuted by a showman . 
a dreadful, drunken perthon . and then we had to 
move, and what ith worth, thith panic, or what- 
ever it ith, in the Thity, hath been our ruin ; the 
bank in which our all wath depothited broke, and 
left uth without tho much ath five poundth in the 
world. If Mithter Thomerton had not helped uth 
. God bleth him for it ! . ^we thould have been in 
the workhouth, and one of the gentlemen at the 
bank who had known thomething of Dibble, he 



MRS. dibble's pa. 253 

offered him a plaoe as his butler, and I came to 
live in thith little houthe, having thold motht of 
my other furniture : and loath I wath to part with 
that piano which poor pa bought me when I came 
home from boarding thchool ; and Dibble he hath 
a good place, and he comth home thometimeth, 
though what I thall do when the family goth for 
two month to Brazencrook, I don't know; but 
the Lord have merthy on uth ! My poor pa ! my 
poor pa ! " 

The contemplation of what her poor pa would 
think of her forlorn condition was too much for 
Mrs. Dibble, and she lapsed into silent tears, whilst 
Mr. Williamson bade her be of good cheer and 
asked her to accept a guinea for "auld lang 
syne." 

Meanwhile the Lieutenant came downstairs, 
looking more hopeful than he had done pre- 
viously. He certainly thought the poor girl 
was better. 

" Poor dear ! " said Mrs. Dibble again ; " tho 
young too, tho young ! " 



256 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

. ^pegs away, sir, and produces a certain amount 
of copy before she dines ; and she can write two 
books at once, sir, like winking. That's the 
woman for my money. 

O for the pen of one of these ready writers, 
that we might throw of in a few rapid pages the 
conclusion of all that romantic story which Paul 
Somerton told the barrister a few evenings after 
that day at Brighton. If we sat before that ream 
of foolscap, and filled every sheet, we could not do 
full justice to the extraordinary narrative, nor to 
the imagination of Mrs. Jefferson Crawley, the 
young lady whom you met in the early part of 
our history as the showman's daughter. You 
remember how she gobbled up the tripe on that 
first evening, when Mr. Dibble joined the com- 
pany of the Temple of Magic to do the outside 
business. You would hardly give her credit for 
imaginative power. She handled the cards well, 
and was gi'eat in the basket-trick, but you, would 
not expect her to possess what phrenologists call 
Ideality, in a large degree. 



chbissy's education. 257 

Perhaps the education which she had received 
in a few months as the wife of our old acquaint- 
ance Mr. Gibbs, alias Jeflferson Crawley, had been 
beneficial to her in this respect. Mr. Crawley 
nevertheless had been .disappointed in the young 
woman. He did not find that her abilities as a 
shuffler at cards were of any great benefit to 
him ; but she was useful in some respect-s. There 
was an air of respectability that was beneficial 
sometimes in speaking of " my wife," and intro- 
ducing Mrs. Crawley, though the class of persons 
to whom introductions usually took place cast 
knowing glances at each other, and commenced 
desperate flirtations with the young lady imme- 
diately. This was useful too, and Mr. Gibbs 
sometimes traded upon it in a way that was by 
no means pleasant to the showman's daughter. 
She was not a refined young woman as you have 
seen, not over-particular as you know ; but she 
was vain of her good looks, and had just sufficient 
of woman's amour propre, speedily to contract 
a contempt for a husband who was base enough 

VOL. II, 8 




268 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

and mean enough to be utterly indifferent to his 
wife's honour. 

These two soon understood each other, abnost 
indeed from the moment when Mr. Jefferson 
Crawley, having run away with the young woman> 
wished to set aside the ceremony of marriage 
which Giristabel, the mysterious lady, had 
punctiliously insisted upon. What a wedding it 
was ! What a honeymoon ! Yet not stranger 
than ten thousand other weddings and honey- 
moons. Truth stranger than fiction! If that 
strange little fellow on two sticks who appeared 
so mysteriously to Don Cleofas, would come and 
take you for an evening's ramble, you would see 
in half an hour how far fiction falls short of the 
realities of life; how far the darkest pictures 
which those ready writers have limned in pen 
and ink are less appalling than the realities 
of sin, and wickedness, and woe, which exist in 
the dark places of our moden]^ Babylon! Ask 
that detective officer who used to visit the late 
Mr. Christopher Tallant at Barton Hall ; he ^ould 



BAST DIVORCEMENT. 259 

tell you some rare tales of the class of people to 
whom Mr. and Mrs. Crawley belong. But even 
that gentleman would be surprised if Asmodeus 
sat him down upon St. Paul's, and unroofed a 
few hundred yards of that mass of brick, behind 
which the great game of life is being played 
out in ten thousand different ways. 

Before Mr. Gibbs had been married three 
months, he gave his wife permission to find a 
better home if she could. He v6wed he had no 
desire to limit anybody's freedom. As far as the 
work of the household went, he said, looking 
round the miserable den, he thought he should 
lose nothing by the departure of the lady of the 
house. He could easily get somebody else to 
come and clean his boots, and cut bread and* 
butter for him. If the young lady thought it 
would advance her prospects to leave his humble 
roof, she might go ; he should put no advertise^ 
ment in the papers for her, he should employ 
no private detective to hunt her up: he was 
exceedingly obliged to her for becoming his wife, 

tf 2 



260 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

highly honoured in fact, if not more so, but he 
should not break his heart if she returned to 
the sawdust and naphtha lamps of the Temple 
of Magic. 

And so the young lady disappeared accord- 
ingly; but that wonderful account which she 
gave of her early life, and which Lieutenant 
Somerton repeated to the barrister, left out 
altogether those incidents to which her husband 
had alluded. She certainly did justice to the 
gambler's tuition. Old Martin could never have 
taught her to be such a clever dissembler ; and 
that melancholy clown who had on his death- 
bed presented her father with Momus, had cer- 
-ttainly not wit enough to instruct her in such 
^delicate cunning. 

The daughter of respectable parents at Sevem- 
-diown, her father died early, and left her with 
.a widowed mother. She had received but little 
^education in consequence, and was obliged to 
go out to service. Her mother soon afterwards 
died, and then she was left alone in the wide. 



chrissy's fibs. 261 

wide world. She had lived for some time with 
her aunt, who was then a wealthy lady, re- 
siding at Carter Street West, but had since lost 
all her money in the panic, and had gone to 
Paris. Her aunt was too poor to take her along 
with her, or she would have done so; but she 
recommended her to a lady in whose service she 
had endeavoured to study, and carry out the 
good advice which her dear aunt had given her. 
The lady had a son who came to see her at 
intervals, a very handsome young gentleman, and 
who seemed very good. He was very kind to 
her, and she often saw him watching her. One 
day when his mamma (who was a widow) had 
gone out, he made love to her, and soon after 
he asked l^er to be engaged to him : she wished 
to ask the permission of her mistress, but he 
would not hear of it; she would never consent 
he saidj and one day he persuaded her to elope 
with him, and in the end, after a long struggle 
between duty and inclination, she gave way. 
And here it appeared the young lady had 



262 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

broken down in tears, and Paul had soothed her, 
and vowed eternal love, like a weak, infatuated, silly 
fellow that he was. We almost question whether, 
had she told him the whole truth of her life, 
he would not have done just the same. 

She soon discovered that her husband was a 
bad man, a gambler, and everything that was 
wicked, and she went to his mother to b^ her 
forgiveness, and asked to be taken back as her 
servant. The old lady had ordered her to be 
turned out of the house, and her husband laughed 
and jeered at her when she related the incident 
to him. She had never really loved him, but 
had hoped to have a home, and to find peace, 
and she tried to love him, and was a faithful 
true wdfe to him; but oh, he led such a life! he 
was a cheat, a forger, everything that was bad, 
and not the old lady's son after all, but the son 
of her first husband, jwho was a dissipated man, 
and had died of deUri/wm tremens. 

How Paul pitied her ! 0, if she had not been 
married ! he had exclaimed in his ecstacy, as he 



PAUL'S PRESENTS. 263 

looked inta her deep eyes^ and nursed her hand 
in his. 

She sighed at this, and wept again, and said 
there was something yet which she had not told 
him. Some day he should know alL Meanwhile 
she was so good, so kind, so affectionate. Mrs. 
Dibble even went so far as to say that if she 
had not been brought up at a boarding school, 
she ought to have been, for her manners were 
quite boarding-school, and her disposition was 
heavenly. 

Paul sent her books of poems, and novels, and 
all sorts of works, to read, that she might be 
amused and improve her mind ; and it was 
astonishing how rapidly the young lady mastered 
their contents, and how ably she used the senti- 
ments of some* of those poems that were fiill of 
love and tenderness. It was surely native inborn 
tact this. The cynic would say that all women 
have it; that nature has given them cunning 
instead of physical strength. What a woman 
this would have been with a good education! 



264 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

What a woman with the French language on 
her tongue ! The judgment of Shuffleton Gibbs 
when he sat in the show and thought he could 
make a fortune by her cleverness at cards, was 
that of a shrewd observer, though he had been 
disappointed. 

What happy days these were to the Lieu- 
tenant, what happy hours, these stolen intervals, 
as Chrisgy got better. Chrissy she had always 
been called she said, and that was nearer the 
truth than any other word she had spoken; for 
that old clown who taught her to read and write, 
had called her Chris in those wild days of her 
childhood. With good treatment and comfort, 
she had soon recovered her strength, and the 
roses came back to her cheeks, the roundness to 
her arms, and the brightness to her eyes. There 
was a little vulgarity in her appearance, and in. 
her manners. The red in her cheeks was not 
of a delicate rosy hue, and her voice could not 
be called musical. Her nose was anjrthing but 
classical, . not that we care for classical noses ; no,. 



love's blindness. 265 

nor for classical foreheads either for that matter. 
To Paul Somerton Chrissy was beautiful, and 
that which you would call vulgar he looked upon 
as frankness and innocence, which charmed him 
all the more on that account. 

Mr. Williamson soon had a surfeit of all this. 
The Lieutenant became quite a bore to him, and 
as obstinate as a mule. He would take no 
advice, and listen to no arguments that in any 
way interfered with his wild idea of living with 
this woman in some distant land. That special 
feature of interest in the woman's history which 
had, as you will remember, brought up the name 
of Shuffleton Gibbs, soon disappeared ; for Chiissy 
had described to Paul a young and dashing 
fellow as her husband, and they had both taken 
the description as true of course. The Lieutenant 
might have asked Macshawser what sort of a 
fellow Crawley was ; but neither he nor the 
clever barrister thought of this, or if they had, 
perhaps the Lieutenant would have put his veto 
upon such a course, seeing that it might in 



266 THB TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

some way have led to the detection of Paul as 
Chrissy's protector. 

Now, Mr. Arundel Williamson had been hit 
in some escapade of his youth in which a married 
woman was concerned ; and it was this you know 
which excited his sympathy so much for Paul, 
or he would long since have shunned that young 
gentleman's society, though the fellows at the 
club to which the barrister belonged liked the 
Lieutenant for his pleasant, outspoken, honest 
manners, his &ee and easy and unsophisticated 
ways, and the perfect absence of military 
snobbism which was characteristic of him. But 
a good deal of this was assumed as a sort of 
standing argument against the barnstorms advice 
to Paul to give up his schemes with regard to 
the lady whom he loved so much, and remember 
that his duty to his family, to himself, aye, and 
to the army, was to avoid a disgraceful Uaiaon, 

Paul had once or twice become quite eloquent 
on this point, reminded the barrister of his philo- 
sophy, quoted some of those very broad maxims 



LEGAL OBSTRUCTIONS. 267 

which Mr. Williamson had repeated in that little 
room in the Temple^ talked of equaUty, and raved 
against all aristocratic assumption on the score of 
birth and position. When the barrister replied, 
and endeavoured to show that the Lieutenant 
was making use of arguments which did not 
apply to the present case, Paul would hurl at 
him all kinds of absurd aphorisms about love 
equalising all ranks, and then rave aboiit his own 
birth . a bailiflTs son, sir ! 

The only point upon which the barrister got 
the better of his friend, was when he quietly 
rehearsed the penalties attendant upon the crime 
of abduction, and more particularly the severity 
of the punishment which the law awarded to 
bigamy. Paul certainly retaliated with the 
Divorce Court, but he found himself weak in 
the combat, very weak when the barrister talked 
of bigamy. The time came however when that 
difficulty was at an end. 

Three months of this feverish and wicked dream 
of love had passed, and Paul had worshipped 



268 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

the idol which the fickle, cynical god, whom 
the classics supposed to reign supreme in affairs 
of the heart, had set up. How the rosy youth 
must have laughed (not in his sleeve, for he never 
had any sleeves according to the painters) at the 
simplicity of this young fellow who wore Her 
Majesty's uniform ! Perhaps Asmodeo was the 
true god after all; the lame monster with his 
goat legs, his long visage, his sharp chin, and 
his demoniacal eyes and mouth, is certainly a 
more fitting spirit to preside over some of Love's 
entanglements than he of the gilded wings and 
the quiver full of arrows. But he boasted of 
assuming whatever shape he willed, and confessed 
that it was necessary to look well sometimes; Vice 
never pleased half so well unless it had a fair 
appearance. 

Lieutenant Somerton did not dream of gods 
at all in the matter, and he would, not have 
indulged his fancy upon such a cynical fellow as 
Asmodeo for a moment; he was in love, over 
head and ears, madly in love with this woman. 



" TOO CLEVER BY HALF." 269 

who thrust that wooden spoon into the bowl at 
the roadside inn, and ate her share of the repast 
like . well, like a vagabond, as she was, you 
know, in the eyes of the law . ^like a rogue and 
vagabond ; for the law combines the two in its 
harsh description of the poor stroller. The Lieute- 
nant would surely have been disenchanted if 
Signer Asmodeo had taken the bandage from his 
eyes and shown him that incident in the past ; 
or that little scene in the show when Mr. Shuffle- 
ton Gibbs, his dire enemy, had made love to her, 
and succeeded in his suit. 

What a clever girl she was ! The god " so glo- 
riously celebrated by Agrippa and the Clavicula 
Salomonis/' and his friend Don Cleofas would 
have been delighted with her. His Spanish 
majesty would surely have painted her image on 
his cloak, and illustrated her curious and brilliant 
career! 

One fine summer evening, when a gentle rain 
had washed the dust out of the two trees which 
lived out a shambling sort of existence at the back 



270 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

of the hoTise where Mrs. Dibble consented, to act 
the part of guardian to that poor persecuted 
orphan^ whom she loved as if she were her own- 
on a bright summer evening when the sun was 
shining out after the rain, and a refireshing breeze 
came up the Thames and moved the leaves of 
the trees in question, Chrissy leaned upon Paul 
Somerton's shoulder, and told him that she must 
leave him on the next day. She was now quite 
well, she said, and her gratitude to him for his 
great kindness compelled her to take this course. 
His honourable and respectful conduct towards 
her, and her love for him, too, all urged departure. 
She had deceived him, deceived him wickedly, 
and had never imtil now felt courage enough to 
tell him how much she had wronged him, 

Paul grew terribly alarmed at her earnest 
words, and begged h&c not to tell him, not to talk 
of leaving him. Where could she go ? He could 
not live without hen 0, that cursed marriage ! 
O cruel Fate that had not brought her to him 
in the days of her early life ! It seemed to him. 



" O THAT CUBSBD MARRIAGE ! '* 271 

he said, that he had known her always. Her face 
was fanuliar to him when first he saw her. Paul 
had often said this, and poor Chrissy felt satisfied 
in her own mind that he must have seen that 
mysterious lady of the Temple of Magic ; but, of 
course, she never assisted his memory one jot, and 
if memory had given him a quiet nudge in con- 
nection with his visit to Sevemtown with Mrs. 
Dibble, he would have repudiated the suggestion 
with scorn. 

When he exclaimed, O that cursed marriage! 
Chrissy held down her head and sighed and wept 
and murmured out some pathetic words of Thomas 
Moore's about forgiveness. She had rehearsed 
this point before Mrs. Dibble's glass, and had 
committed the words to memory for the purpose 
a week previously. She knew that Paul could 
not marry her because she was Crawley's hus- 
band; she knew that a divorce was a serious 
business, and that it might lead to the exposure 
of her real history. So she had resolved, the first 
week she was in Paul's care, that when she was 



272 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

once firmly secure of his love, she would make 
a pathetic confession of being single, and then 
fall at his feet and implore his forgiveness. 

How cleverly she did this it is unnecessary to 
say. It was a splendid success; the confession 
jumped so well with the Lieutenant's wishes that 
he blotted out the past at once, forgave her, and 
in his blind mad fashion felt perfectly happy. He 
went to his quarters that night determined to 
exchange into a regiment that was abroad or 
going abroad, and maiTy this poor girl, who had 
been so wronged, and who had knelt at his feet 
until his heart ached for her, and whose future 
happiness he vowed should be his continual 
care. 

Mrs. Dibble had told dear Chrissy that she 
expected her husband coming to spend a day with 
them in the course of a fortnight; and as the 
chatty, old woman had told dear Chrissy how she 
had found poor Thomas with a set of nasty, dirty 
show people, dear Chrissy thought it best to 
bring her grand scheme of a new start in life to 



A PRETTY IDEA, 273 

an early conclusion. 0, how she would love to 
go to India or anywhere beyond the seas, where 
she could begin her life anew, and prove to her 
dear, dear Paul, the depth of woman's gratitude 
and love ! 



VOL. II, 



CHAPTER XIX. 

''THE COMING EVENT." 

The preparations for the marriage of Lord 
Vomer to Miss Tallant gradually drew towards 
completion, and the fashionable world was all 
agog at the event. The newspapers had published 
all kinds of piquant paragraphs about the beauty 
ofl the bride, her great wealth, the nobility of her 
bii*th, and the immense riches of the bridegroom. 
Introduced by the popular gossip-preface on dit, 
the Court Journal and Court Circular had fairly 
vied with each other in racy scraps about Montem 
Castle and Barton HalL A journal devoted to 
the fine arts had made the discovery that many 
of the landscapes by the now famous artist, Arthur 
Phillips, were copies of the glorious scenery in 



PROVINCIAL JOURNALISM. 275 

that beautiful valley of Avonworth where Barton 
Hall was situated. 

Local newspapers dug up from local histories 
and elsewhere anecdotes of the Vemers, and ex- 
pressed their belief that his lordship the present 
Earl would now take his place at the head of the 
county, and mix in society, as his noble father had 
done before him. It was, indeed, confidently 
stated that this would be the effect of his lord- 
ship's marriage, and the county was congratulated 
upon the event in a hearty, manful style. One 
journalist, evidently with the fear of London and 
Pv/nch and EatanswiU before him, came out in a 
very explanatory sketch, in which he ventured to 
point out how legitimate it was that oounty 
people should make a fiiss on the occasion of this 
marriage, and how proper it was that the news- 
papers should set forth the event as one of great 
importance. It was all very -well for London 
people to think lightly of such things; but 
Londoners were altogether differently placed. 
They made fuss enough on the occasion of royal 

t2 



276 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

marriages, and filled their newspapers with 
orange-blossom articles. In a city like Severn- 
town the nobility were mixed up with the social, 
political, and religious welfare of the placa The 
citizens rejoiced in having such neighbours, and it 
was right that they should acknowledge the 
dignity and worth of their native aristocracy. In 
the present instance the union of an Eail of 
Vomer with the daughter of a woman of the 
house of Petherington, and daughter of the late 
Christopher Tallant, a merchant prince, was an 
event of importance not only to the county of 
Sevemshire but to England. The provincial 
editor, though he might feel that he was saying 
nothing sUly, nor anything smacking of toadyism, 
thought it judicious once more in this place to 
contrast the difference between provincial editors 
and London editora The latter might think it 
fine to laugh at enthusiastic provincials, but 
Londpners could not possibly enter into the feel- 
ings which must necessarily animate a provincial 
community on an occasion like the present. 



THE COUNTRY EDITOR. 277 

Londoners who did not talk politics, and could 
not understand the intense excitement of an 
election, did not know what it was to live in a 
restricted community associated with noble and 
wealthy families who possessed means and facili- 
ties for being of the greatest social benefit to 
those amongst whom they lived. 

Our friend got a little involved at this point of 
his elaborate justification of himself. There was 
so much of special pleading in his article that the 
intelligent reader might not unfairly think that 
he knew he was toadying a little, and was fighting 
an attack by anticipation. In one portion of his 
article he was very bitter; he said that the 
London newspaper-men, who pfofessed to look 
down from the greatest heights upon provincials, 
were provincials themselves. Then he claimed 
all the best men in town as countrymen, and 
vowed that all the most noteworthy magazine 
articles were written by provincials. How the 
editor drifted into this irrelevant discussion was 
curious to note ; how he got back again to the 



278 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

subject in hand was a marvel of literary art. He 
finished by showing how the marriages of the 
great influenced the destinies of b/ nation, and he 
went back to the remotest times for illustrations 
of this important point. 

Even at the risk of involving the narrative, we 
pause to tell the reader that the provincial 
thunderer in question has since succeeded in 
obtaining an appointment in town, and that he 
has begun already to look down from his high 
tower upon his humbler brethren of the Severn- 
shire press ; indeed, he is said to be the writer of 
that amusing satirical tract on "Mrs. Grund/s 
Borough," which lampoons so smartly the society, 
public and private, of the old city. Well, " cir- 
cumstances alter cases," as the Seveniixywn 
Mercury wisely remarked in reviewing that 
offensive publication, which took the old city and 
the post-office by storm one morning not very long 
ago. The London provincial gentleman, if he be 
living now (and we hope he is living happily and 
prosperously), will we trust forgive our allusion to 



THE VBRNBRS A10> THE TALLANTS. 279 

this incident"; he may say that it is more irrele- 
vant to this history than that passage in his article 
to the subject discussed Perhaps he is right ; we 
how to his opinion with all deference. We can 
assure him that we should not have mentioned 
him at all, only that our story seemed to demand 
it. Honestly endeavouring to place these records 
of modem history fairly before the reader, we 
could not, without something like a breach of 
faith, have excluded the journalistic features of 
the union of the houses of Vemer and Tallant, 
and particularly when we consider the con- 
sequences of that interesting and delightful 
marriage. 

It would appear that when the Hon. Elizabeth 
Petherington married Christopher Tallant, Esq., 
her family had discarded her. Being of high and 
noble birth, the other ladies of her family had not 
approved of the marriage, and when the male 
head of the Petheringtons died, the female tails 
cut themselves off from the wife of the merchant 
prince ; so that neither Phoebe nor Amy had ever 



280 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOX. 

heard from the Petheringtons, and Miss Tatlant, 
in fact, knew nothing of them until she received 
a friendly and affectionate letter from Lady 
Petherington, reminding her of the relationship, 
and desiring that she might be by her neice's side 
at the wedding. This renewal of family friend- 
ship resulted in the broken threads o other links 
being gathered together, and as those hymeneal 
paragraphs continued to appear in the fashionable 
newspapers, there opened up to the bride elect 
quite a party of relatives and friends, who came 
and visited her shortly before the time fixed for 
the wedding ; so that all of a sudden Barton 
Hall became quite gay with visitors, and Phoebe 
was invited to come amongst her dear friend's 
newly-found relations. Phoebe feared at first that 
she might be embarrassed in such high society ; 
but she was not in the least, and Miss Tallant 
complimejited her upon her beauty and her 
chaiming manners. As for Amy, she received 
her guests with the most graceful dignity, though 
her aunt. Lady Petherington, was piqued and 



amy's new relations. 281 

annoyed at the high tone of her niece. Her lady- 
ship confessed to her sister that the young woman 
actually patronised her . she was sure of it ; 
she had never met with such audacity. The poor 
thing was certainly rather good-looking and 
dreadfully rich, she believed . shockingly rich . 
so she supposed they must put up with her airs. 
The Vemers were an old family, and wealthy, too, 
she said, and no doubt his lordship was marrying 
for money. What he could see in the young 
woman beyond that, of course, she was at a loss to 
know. The sister did not quite agree with her 
ladyship; she vowed she thought the young 
person very tolerable indeed, very tolerable ; of 
course it did not concern her whether she were so 
or otherwise. An introduction to Earl Vomer's 
set . for of course he would go thoroughly into 
society now . ^was all she cared for, coupled with 
one month in the year at Montem Castle. 

During their stay his lordship sent over carriages 
to convey them to Montem, where he gave them 
a magnificent entertainment, and showed them 



284 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

she laughed again, and Lord Vemer laughed, and 
said the Countess was full of fun. 

Whether it was fun or not, he said the Countess 
of Vemer should select her own guests, and at 
this moment their ladyships and Phoebe joined 
them on the terrace. 

A few minutes afterwards, when Phoebe and 
the future Countess went upstairs to put on 
their shawls. Miss Tallant sat down wearily in the 
first chair that presented itself, wearied and jaded 
with the part she had been playing. What a fine 
actress she would have made ; her rdle would 
have included all the glorious women of the 
drama, from *' Lady TeJizle " to " Constance " in 
King John. 



END OF VOL. II. 
TALLANTS OF BAKTON- 



CHAPTER I. 



WEDDING BELLS. 



As the sail whicli we first discern, like a speck 
against the sky, conies into port at last, so the 
wedding-day of Miss Amy Tallant arrived in 
due course of time ; and in order that we'may pre- 
sent the event to our readers in the most familiar 
manner, we have compiled from the newspapers 
the following account of it, discarding on the one 
hand the rhapsodies of a Sevemtown reporter who 
introduced the whole of the marriage service into 
his version of the ceremony, and omitting on the 
Y other hand certain Swivellerish flights of fancy 
in which the redoubtable Mr. Jenkins himself 

VOL. III. B 



2 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

indulged after he had dined with Richard. Tallant, 
Esq., at his "palatial residence'^ in Kensington 
Palace Gardens. 

The marriage took place at St. George's, Haao- 
ver Square. The bride was accompanied to church 
by her brother, Mr. Richard Tallant, her aunt, 
Lady Amelia Petherington, Miss Somerton, and 
Lady Georgina Evelyn. The Earl of Vomer, ac- 
companied by his " best man " Lord Tufton, went 
to the church from the Gordon Hotel, Pall Mall 
East; and the bride from her brother's princely 
residence, Kensington Palace Gardens. The brides- 
maids were Lady Georgina Evelyn, Lady Maria 
Fotherington, Miss Fredrika Lionel, Miss Alicia 
Lionel, Lady de Witz, and Miss Somerton. The 
bridegroom was first at the church, speedily fol- 
lowed by the bridesmaids, who came from their 
respective residences. The bride arrived at eleven 
o'clock, and was conducted to the altar by her 
brother, a voluntary on the organ being played 
meanwhile. 
Long before this, a distinguished party of friends 



WEDDING GUESTS. 8 

and spectators had taken their places in the churchy 
and amongst them we noticed Lady Duval, the 
Countess of Wharton, Major Darfield and Mrs. 
Darfield, the Hon. J. Delafield and Mrs. Delafield, 
the Hon. Mrs. Dawkins, Miss Elizabeth Dawkins, 
Miss Amelia Dawkins, and Miss Felicia Henrietta 
Dawkins, the Misses Constantine, and the Mar- 
quis of Questfield, Sir John and Lady Bewdley, 
Lady Elizabeth Himley, the Hon. Captain Eves- 
ham, Mrs. Evesham, and Miss Evesham, Lady 
Worcester, the Marquis of Forth, Mr. De Lawt- 
worth and the Countess Dawnforth, His Excellency 
the French Ambassador, His Excellency the Prince 
CaHgnousky, accompanied by the Baron Dionsky 
and General Dronkoni, Mr. Dest, Lieut. Somerton, 
Captain MacSchauser, &c., &c. 

The bridesmaids awaited the arrival of the bride 
in the central aisle, and their appearance was as 
charming as the loveliest bride could desire. Their 
dresses were of white grenadine trimmed with 
cerise satin and sashes of the same colour. The 
wreaths were of lilies of the valley and violets. 

B 2 



4 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

The beauty of the bride was the theme of 
general admiration. She was said to be much 
like the Petherington family, of which her noble 
mother was reckoned the greatest beauty. Her 
bridal dress was of the costliest and most becom- 
ing character, . a robe of white satin with a veil 
of exquisite point-lace, which fell in gorgeous folds 
upon her heavy sweeping train. She wore a neck- 
lace of pearls and diamonds, and bracelets to match. 

The ceremony was performed by the Eev. Francis 
Clifton, vicar of Brazencrook, assisted by the Hon. 
and Rev. James Fitzpatrick. The responses were 
given in clear and distinct tones, and the ceremony 
was altogether most imposing and impressive. 

Amidst the magnificent strains of the " Wedding 
March ^* the bridegroom led the newly-created 
Countess to the vestry. The register having been 
signed and attested, the bridal party left the 
church for the Gordon Hotel, where a sumptuous 
dijeuner was prepared for the bridal party and 
friends. The bill of fare was quite a curiosity in 
the way of luxurious indications of the feast, and 



"the happiest DAT OP MY LIFE." 5 

the tables were adorned with the most exquisite 
ornaments and rare flowers. The bride-cake was 
designed by an artist of high repute, and was sur- 
mounted by a design of the noble Earl's magnificent 
castle of Montem. 

Before the company retired from the dining- 
room, Lord Tufton rose, and in a few appropriate 
sentences proposed ''Health and happiness to the 
Bride and Bridegroom." The toast was received 
with rapturous applause. In reply, Lord Vemer 
said that a year ago he had not even dreamed 
of such a day as this ; but the time would never 
be effaced from his memory as one of the greatest 
happiness he could possibly experience : it not only 
was a day never to be forgotten by him, and al- 
ways to be remembered with gratitude and delight 
as that upon which his dear wife had given herself 
up to his keeping ; but it was to be remembered 
also with unfeigned pleasure on account of the 
many friends it had brought around him, and from 
whose society his former bachelor habits had, to a 
great extent, excluded him. It was indeed the 



8 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" You may leave me now," said the bride to her 
maid. 

" Yes, your ladyship," said the womaa. 

The title sounded strange and harsh somehow to 
the newly-made countess. It seemed to cut her 
off from the people whom she had known from 
childhood; and yet her heart beat with pride 
when she felt that she had reached the highest 
point of her ambition . that all her wild dream 
had come true. 

" How charming you look, my pet ! " she said 
to PhoBbe. 

"Reflected beauty," said Phoebe, putting her 
arm round the bride. " Only reflected beauty, for 
I never saw you look so pretty, so lovely as you 
look this morning." 

The Countess smiled a little sadly, but this might 
only be a woman's tribute to the importance of the 
occasion. 

" How kind his lordship is ! how very kind,*' said 
the bride, as she discovered som^ new gift on the 
dressing table. 



THE FUTURE. 9 

" It made me cry to hear him speak so earnestly 
and nobly to-day when your health was proposed," 
said Phcebe. 

" You are very tender-hearted/' said the Coun- 
tess, " I did not see any one else look like cr3ang ; 
hut the words touched me too. He is a truly 
generous, warm-hearted man, I am sure." 

Phoebe looked at her .friend, as much as to ask 
her if she had ever doubted it. The Countess read 
the thought in an instant. 

" You think me a strange woman. I have never 
thought much about his feelings or his heart until 
lately, Phoebe, and never so much as I have done 
this morning. It has been all ambition and re- 
venge until to-day, Phoebe ; what is it to be in the 
future?" 

She sat down as this thought presented itself to 
her, and looked at herself in the great mirrors that 
repeated her supple figure over and over again. 
She sat and looked at herself, and Phoebe, knowing 
her secret, crept near her and laid her head upon 
her shoulders. 



10 THE TALLANTS OP BABTON. 

" Duty in flxe fdture/' said Phoebe softly ; " your 
noble husband's love and generosity will make you 
love hinr in the end I am sure, as he deserves to 
be loved; the path of duty lies before you and 
cannot be mistaken." 

"He has long since won my respect, Phoebe, and 
my gratitude ; he loves me with a good man's 
truthfulness and sincerity, and I will love him; 
you know how I have struggled, you know what I 
have suffered: let us both blot all that part out 
now and for ever, Phoebe, and as you love me pray 
that I may be sustained in the wifdy path of duty 
and obedience." 

The Countess spoke like her former self in those 
past days before that cloud of sorrow fell upon Barton 
Hall ; in those past days when she was the bailiff's 
daughter and the sisterly companion of her whom 
she had since supplanted in fortune and position. 

The tears came into Phoebe's eyes again, and the 
two women embraced each other tenderly. 

"Bless you, my own dear friend," said the 
Countess, " believe me, I will make reparation for 



ON HER KNEES. 11 

all my unkindness to you. There dear, do not 
reply . ^kiss me again and leave me . ^it is better I 
should be alone a little while/' 

Alone, the Countess fell upon her knees, and 
prayed with passionate fervency . ^prayed as she had 
not prayed since that change came over her on that 
never-to-be-forgotten day when she learnt of his 
departure . prayed as she had not prayed since that 
scheme of ambition leaped into her mind at the 
appearance of that carriage with the coronet on the 
panel. 

She rose with a calm expression upon her face, 
refreshed by the outpouring of her supplications, 
and determined to do her duty in the high station 
to which she had risen, and towards her husband. 

XJnlocking a small dressing-case which stood near 
his lordship's latest present, she took out an inner 
drawer which was curiously concealed. Her hand 
trembled slightly as she withdrew the contents . a 
letter. It was his letter (if it might be called a 
letter) . ^the only memento of him which she pos- 
sessed except in memory. There were only three 



12 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

lines upon it, and these were written on the day 
following that day when they had walked together 
in Barton Hall gardens. 

"Dearest . ^I shall be at Barton Hall at four 
o'clock to-morrow. Do not let me go away with- 
out seeing you. L. H." This was all the note 
contained. For long days and weeks and months 
afterwards she had treasured up that poor little 
scrap of paper . ^wom it in her bosom, wept over it, 
kissed it, and cherished the memory of that hour of 
happiness which followed it. 

For a moment she held it in her hand hesitat- 
ingly. She felt that it was the only link between 
the present and the past. Lighting a vesta, she 
held the paper in the flame until it was consumed, 
and then she stamped her little satin-slippered foot 
upon the embers. The flame burnt her fingers be- 
fore it went out, as if there were venom in the per- 
jured words that the fire was consuming. But this 
was nothing to the fire which had seared her heart 
long since, burning into it those serpent words 
that had looked so fair only to sting the deeper. 



THE BRIDAL JOURNEY. 13 

But it was over at last, and now she was Countess 
of Vemer. 

"My lady " rung for her maid, and prepared to 
dress for the bridal journey. Whilst her robes 
were being removed she glanced round the room 
which had been furnished with so much magnifi- 
cence for her reception, and then she thought, with 
a grateful smile, of the homage which her husband 
had paid her in all things. 

The maid being asked some simple question, 
told her how the health of the bridesmaids had 
been proposed, and how her ladyship's handsome 
brother had made a beautiful speech in reply. This 
she thought would please her ladyship very much 
indeed ; but it only excited uncomfortable thoughts 
in her ladyship's mind . a vague kind of danger 
seemed to threaten her through Kichard Tallant. 

Her ladyship asked no more questions, but went 
through the elaborate process of her toilette in 
silence, and by-and-by left the room robed in 
purple moire, and lace, and looking every inch a 
countess, to the everlasting envy of Lady Pether- 



14 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

ington and her youngest sister, and to the delight 
of her husband and the rest. 

All this time the bells at Sevemtown, Avonworth, 
and Brazencrook rung out over town and field and 
river. The summer air was full of their glorious 
old music. The ringers in their shirt sleeves pulled 
with a will, until the churches fairly shook again. 
Mighty jugs of ale passed from hand to hand, from 
lip to lip, in the intervals of this labour of love, and 
majors and triple bob-majors and all kinds of curi- 
ous changes were performed on the swinging bells. 
Avonworth caught the faint echoes from Sevemtown, 
and Brazencrook, picking up the trembling tones 
from Avonworth, took them up into its own ring- 
ing measure, and carried the grand old-fashioned 
harmonies away down the river to distant ;idllages, 
where women stood at cottage doors and listened, 
and men jested on their scythes to wonder why 
Brazencrook bells were ringing. 

Glorious bells, merry bells, wedding bells! 
Arthur Phillips sat in his studio with the windows 
wide open listening to the joyous music, and think- 



BELLS. 15 

ing of the peal that would soon ring out the heWs 
of another marriage. He looked away beyond 
the linktown hiUs in the direction of London, 
thought of his darling Phoebe in her bridesmaid^s 
dress, and pictured her, in a wreath of orange blos- 
soms at a country church, by a time-sanctified altar 
in Avonworth Valley. 

Happy bells, tuneful bells, olden bells, wedding 
bells ! Luke Somerton heard them as he sat with 
his wife at the Hall Farm, and puzzled his brain 
Vith all sorts of vague happy fancies that seemed to 
soar upwards in the smoke of his early after- 
dinner pipe. His wife spoke cheerily of the music, 
but it was a great struggle for her. Something 
would whisper in her ear that the Countess might 
perhaps have been her daughter, but the next 
moment she remembered that Phoebe was there as 
her ladyship's Menu, and that Lieutenant Somerton 
was amongst the distinguished visitors. That 
strange dream of ambition, you see, hadnot all passed 
away from the proud Lincolnshire woman'gj heart. 

Jojfvl bells, brazen bells, jubilant beUs, wedding 



16 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

bells ! Travel your happy strains adown that glim- 
meiing rirer ; no whisper of your tender music can 
reach that home-bound ship that rides on the 
Indian sea. 



CHAPTEU IL 

"yet oft o'er ckedxilous youth such sirens 
triumph, and lead their captive sense in 
chains as strong as adamant.'* 

The day after the marriage of Miss Tallant, 
Lieutenant Somerton sat in Mrs. Dibble's front 
parlour, discussing, with her interesting lodger, the 
details of his scheme for the future. 

Embellished with several pictures and vases, a 
lady's easy chair, and other little things which the 
Lieutenant had purchased from time to time, the 
room looked quite neat and attractive. 

They would be content, Paul was telling her, 
with something a little better than this in their 
distant home, where they would begin the world 
aU afresh, and remember nothing but their own 
true love for each other. "What an infatuated 
fool he must be, most renowned Asmodeo," Don 

VOL. III. 



18 THE TALLANTS OP BARTOK. 

Cleofas would say. " Why, the young woman is 
vulgar too. Do you not notice how ignorant she 
isP And what shambling efforts she is making 
to hide it?" "You forget that my business/* 
says Asmodeo, ''is to make ridiculous matches^ 
marry maids to their masters, greybeards to raw 
girls ; and see here, you forget the cloak ! " 
Eefreshing his memory upon these points, Don 
Cleofas would be satisfied of course ; and so must 
we; for Paul Somcrton sees only charms in 
"Chrissy's" defects. We need hardly say that 
she had improved considerably in her manners 
since that co^versation with] Dibble at Severn- 
town; she had long since ceased to call things 
"stunning" and "fizzing." 

That gentleman, who was enamoured of her 
dexterity at cards, had done much to prune her 
exuberance of expression in this respect, and it 
was wonderful how quickly she farther improved 
during her stay with Mrs. Dibble, not under the 
tuition of that elegant lady, but with the inspira- 
tion of Paul's books and her own cunning instinct. 



chrissy's conjuring. 19 

She had often thought of that night when first 
she heard the name of Paul Somerton. " I know 
a young gentleman as would make such a sweet- 
heart for ypu . such a sweetheart ! " old Dibble 
had said. And her own remark . ^what if she 
should conjure into the basket that handsome Paul 
Somerton, who talked so fine ! How strange that 
she had conjured him to her side! She wished 
she had seen him before she saw Crawley. Why 
did he not come into the Temple of Magic 
first? It was not her fault that he didn't. She 
would have had him for her husband sooner than 
she would have had that mean sneak, Crawley, 
who cared nothing at all about her, and who never 
admired her. at all after they were married. And 
what a funny ihing that she should be living with 
Dibble's wife! There were lots of murders and 
robberies, and other awfiil things in that tale in the 
Weekly Sensation, but her own story was certainly 
as strange as that of the young lady who was 
stolen by gipsies. She had not been confined in a 
castle^ and left for dead in a cellar to be eaten 

2 



20 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

by rats, been rescued by her father, and after- 
wards stabbed the yillain who had run away with 
her at first : none of these things had come to pass 
yet in her history; but there was no knowing 
how soon they might. 

She was prepared at any moment, she felt, to 
enter the next phase of her career, whatever it 
might be, and had gone so far in her imitatire 
insane fashion, as to sleep with a dagger beneath 
her pillow; but she secretly hoped that nothing 
would occur to prevent her flying with Paul. In 
her own fashion, she loved this mad-headed 
soldier, and she dreaded the discovery of her 
wickedness and deception. If she had been 
brought up in a respectable home^ with moral 
influences about her and a mother at her elbow, 
she might perchance still have done justice to her 
home education, as she did now; but it is not 
necessary that we should enter into speculations 
upon this point. Her story is before us, and it 
is the duty of the writer to tell it fairly, and leave 
the reader to form his own opinion about what 



THE KNOCK AT THE DOOR. 21 

education and good moral home influences might 
have done for this woman of the booth and the 
fair, the race-course and the gaming-room, who, 
with the brightness of youth still about her, 
managed, with syren-like skill, to look so innocent 
and attractive in the eyes of Paul Somerton. 

The day' after that grand wedding at St. 
George's, Hanover Square, Mrs. Dibble told Chrissy 
that her husband would be coming to pay her a 
visit in a week or two, and Chrissy knew that it 
was necessary she should leave Mrs. Dibble before 
that period : so she had talked of change of air, 
and Paul, given over to the reckless passion of his 
first love ! . (Heaven save the mark !) . ^had re- 
solved upon a quiet private wedding at Brighton 
that day week. The Lieutenant was just ex- 
plaining his views when there came a loud 
knocking at the front door, and after consider- 
able bustle and confusion in the little narrow 
passage, Mrs. Dibble burst into the room with her 
husband. 

" Lor, Mithter Thomerton, Leftennant, thir. 



22 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Thomath thaith he mutht shake hands with you, 
and he hath come before hith time, becauth it 
wath more convenient, and I'm sure you will 
excuthe him, when you think of old times 
and '' 

" Of course, of course,'* said Paul, wishing old 
Dibble at Hanover ; " and how are you, Thomas ? 
how do you do P '* 

Dibble made no reply, but allowed his hand 
to be shaken in the most condescending 
fashion, whilst he fixed his eyes upon the young 
lady. 

"Why, deary me!" he exclaimed, all of a 
sudden, " Miss Christabel, how do you do P Well, 
who would ha' thought as I should find you at 
Mrs. Dibble's P" 

The lady addressed looked at Mr. Dibble with 
the greatest possible astonishment, and then turned 
to Lieutenant Somerton, as if she sought some 
explanation of this extraordinary conduct. 

"Daughter of the Northern magician, you 
know," said Dibble, addressing the Lieutenant; 



DIBBLE IN ANOTHER DIFFICULTY. 2 

"the cleverest young lady as ever I see. Lor* 
bless you, I " 

"What the devil do you mean!" exclaimed 
the Lieutenant. 

" Surely the man is not sober," said the young 
lady in her finest style, and with just a faint 
smile at Dibble's bewildered look. 

" It hain't the voice quite," said Dibble ; " but 
it be Chrissy, you know ; she was the mysterious 
lady and- " 

" And what P " exclaimed the* Lieutenant. 

Before Dibble had time to answer, he caught 
"Chrissy's" eye and its sudden expression of 
warning, such as that which he remembered 
coupled with her threats about the pistol; so he 
only stammered out something about being mis- 
taken, and beting pardon 

" You're alwayth making thome mithtake or 
other," said Mrs. Dibble; "there, come along in 
the next room. I'm thorry I allowed him to 
come in, Mithter Thomertcn, but hith headth 
bewildered, no doubt, with having been away from 



24 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

home the much and having previouthly had my 
eye on him: and what he would do without ith 
a mythtery to me." , 

The Lieutenant said, "All right, Mrs. Dibble, 
don't apologise," and poor Dibble slunk away into 
the kitchen and sat down, Mrs. D. following. 

" There, Thomath, never mind," said Mrs. 
Dibble in her blandest tones; "come and tell 
me all about it." 

But Dibble remembered how clever that mys- 
terious lady of the show was ; how fierce she was, 
and he trembled at the bare idea of her exercising 
any of her black arts upon him, in case he should 
betray her secret. It was quite clear that she did 
not wish him to know her ; but he had made no 
mistake at all, he was sure of that; and Mrs. 
Dibble was sharp enough to see that there was 
some mystery here which she would assuredly 
have cleared up before Dibble went to sleep that 
night. 

An unfortunate night altogether was this for 
the " mysterious lady." Mr. Williamson had sent 



MR. BALES. 25 

a messenger to the house for Lieutenant Somerton 
soon after Dibble's strange arrival, and Paul had 
taken a cab, as requested, to the Temple, where 
he found the barrister in company with an 'un- 
known gentleman. 

"This is Mr. Bales, the detective officer, of 
whom you have heard me speak," said the bar- 
rister. 

Paul bowed. 

"My friend, Lieutenant Somerton," said the 
barrister,, introducing Paul. 

The detective nodded in dehberate professional 
fashion. 

"Mr. Bales has executed that old warrant 
to-day, and Shuffleton Qibbs, alias Mr. Jefferson 
Crawley, of Carr Court, Eegent Street West, is 
now in custody. (Paul looked a Kttle bewildered, 
and sat down.) Mr. Bales is a great Mend of 
mine, and I tell him that it might not be advisable 
after all this time to reopen thq case. Mr. Bales 
fears that we shall be compelled to proceed with 
it. But there is, it appears, some other case 



26 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

{gainst hiniy though not quite so dear as that of 
the pocket-hook.. Mr. Bales will call here again 
in an hour before anjrthing further is done : mean- 
while you and I will talk afiairs over. Good-bye 
for the present, Bales.*' 

The detective officer nodded in reply and left 
the room, and then Mr. Williamson, alluding to 
that first gleam of suspicion in connection with 
Paul's attempt to borrow money, went on to tell 
his firiend that this woman whom Paul had made 
up his mind to marry was the wife of Shuffleton 
Qibbs. He belieyed he should be able to produce 
the marriage certificate. Gibbs knew where she 
was, and had told this to the detective. He 
had found her out within a week of her dis- 
appearance, through Macschawser, and he talked 
boldly of an action for abduction and other tre- 
mendous things. 

Paul would not believe a word of it His 
Mend had surely entered into a plot against him. 
Then he remembered the strange conduct of 
Dibble, and hesitated. 



FRIENDSHIP. 27 

" I haYe ohly one duty to perform in this 
matter/' said the barrister^ " and that is to show 
you the charaoter of the precipice upon which you 
stand, and then leave you to your fate. Have 
you obtained the sanction for your change of 
regiment ? " 

"Yes," said Paul; "and the vessel sails next 
month.'' 

" For the Cape of Good Hope P " 

"Yes." 

"Now, my dear boy, I know you beUere in 
my fiiendship ; will you permit me to investigate 
this affiair for you, and undertake to give the 
facts proper consideration before you take farther 
action?" 

" I will," said Paul, " provided that in aU you 
do you respect her fedings, and remember that I 
love this woman better than all the world." 

Mr. Williamson shrugged his shoulders. 

"I love her better than all the world, and I 
only consent to this active interference because 
I know she will come out <rf the inquiry clear. 



28 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

The idea of her being Qibbs's wife is absurd," 
Paul went on. 

" But supposing it is true P " said the barrister. 

" I will suppose nothing. Why do you try to 
bring unhappiness between usP In less than a 
month we should have been on the sea to begin 
a new life in a new country. turning our backs 
upon the past." 

' "And upon your friends," said the barrister. 
"You would be leaving father and mother and 
sister and friends in the society of an abandoned 
woman." 

" Mr. Williamson," exclaimed Paul, " I will not 
stand this!" 

" In the society of an abandoned woman," re- 
peated the barrister, " not like those poor people 
in the picture * Seeking new Homes,' with the asso- 
ciation of pure aflfection and honest noble aims of 
independence. Your whole life would have been 
blighted, your family disgraced, and yourself a 
miserable man." 

" I will not get into a passion with you," said 



THE LEEUTENAUT'S LEGAL ADVISER. 29 

Paul, ^^but I cannot stand this, so good night;" 
and before the barrister had time to intercept him, 
Paul rushed out of the room and hurried away into 
ihe street. 

Meanwhile Mr. Bales returned. The barrister 
informed him that he thought it would be impos- 
sible to proceed with the case of conspiracy. The 
officer said he had another charge against the 
prisoner upon which he could secure a conviction, 
and so the two parted ; the detective to complete 
his entry in the police charge-sheet and arrange 
for the appearance on the next day of certain wit- 
nessess, and Mr. Williamson to the residence of 
Mrs. Dibble, where he at once introduced himself 
to her interesting lodger as Lieut. Somerton's 
dend. 

He did not hesitate at aU about the part he 
should play. Assuming the position of Lieut. 
Somerton's legal adviser, he told the lady that 
Paul knew everjrthing, and when she assumed an 
injured and indignant air, ho showed her a copy 
of that very marriage certificate which she had 



30 THE TALLAITTS OP BABTON. 

burnt. I^ay more; he said that he knew where 
her fiither the showman was to be found, and that 
her husband, who was in custody, had explained 
everyihing to the policeman who had apprehended 
him. 

And yet whilst the barrister was utterly crushing 
the girl, and even threatening her with a poHce 
cell, he felt a strange interest in her. The 
remembrance of a well-known face which had 
fascinated him when a boy came so vividly into his 
mind as he stood before the showman's daughter, 
that he grew strangely embarrassed in his man- 
ner. Shortly, his assumed austerity gave way, 
and he foxmd himself speaking very gently and 
tenderly. 

The girl was quick enough to observe this, and 
she proceeded at once to make capital out of it, 
appealing to his kindness and sympathy, assuring 
him that she loved his firiend with all her heart, 
acknowledging to the fuU how she had deceived 
him, and then humbly soliciting the barrister's 
advice. 



carket's prophecy comes true. 31 

Old memories came back to the barrister as the 
woman continued to talk, and her tears did not 
fail to soften the hues of that picture of old which 
would rise up between himself and the humiliated 
woman before him. Leading her on from one topic 
to another he induced her to narrate her history, 
aad by slow degrees she repeated to him the heads 
of the story which she had told Dibble on the 
Sevemtown race-course. Feeling sure that this 
would excite the barrister's sympathy, she hoped 
that it might in some way make him her friend. 

Watching the effect of all she was saying, the 
girl perceived that her listener was peculiarly 
touched; and when at the proper moment she 
produced that little miniature which she had shown 
to Dibble, Mr. Arundel Williamson, exclaiming 
" Good heayens, can it be possible ! " threw himself 
back in his chair and nearly fainted. 

Fixing her eyes upon him as he grasped the 
locket, the woman, with the cunning of the race- 
course and the lodging-house, the precocity of 
poverty, and her fixed faith in Carkey's prophecy 



32 THE TALULNTS OF BABTON. 

about her parentage, felt at once that the hour of 
discoyery had come. 

''You are my fiEither !'' ahe said, with an air of 
pride and triomph. ^* That lady was your wife." 

''Gh)d help ns!'' said the barrister solemnly. 
^'He visits the sins of the fathers upon the children 
indeed!" 

"You won*t driye me away now," said the girl 
quickly; "you won't try to make him hate me, 
and put me in prison now. If you don't like me 
to be your daughter, let me go away with him ; 
tell him all that about Gibbs is a lie, . he will 
beheye you . he will belieye anything. don't se- 
parate us . ^I wiU neYer tell anybody you are my 
ither." 

The hamster made no reply ; he rocked himself 
to and firo in his chair, and looked Tacantly at the 
girl, as if he were in a dreaoL 

"I am your &ther/' said the banister presently; 
"flieie is no doubt about that The sin and the 
pumshment are so equal, and the parentage is so 
toKxb^ Terified in your own career and conduct : 



<^ never!" 33 

there is no cheating heaven, no tricking the law of 
punishment in this world. God knows I have 
suffered too, without this additional pain and de- 
gradation." 

" You're ashamed of me, then P" said the woman. 
"Lieutenant Somerton is not; let me go away 
with him." 

'* Never ! " exclaimed the barrister: " never ! " 

" Well, it thertainly ith the motht exthraordinary 
thing I ever heard of," whispered Mrs. Dibble to 
herself and Thomas in the passage after she had 
been listening at the keyhole for nearly half an 
hour: "motht wonderful. Now come here, thir, 
and juth tell me all you know about that woman. 
It's bad enough to have one's money lotht and 
brought to poverty, without secrets of this sort 
being kept away froin the lawful wife of your 
boolham, Mithter Dibble. ^ You thall tell me every 
word before you go to bed." 

Dibble struggled a little against this decree, but 
without avail. Whilst he was telling his wife all 

VOL. III. D 



34 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

{hat he knew about CShiistabel, Mr. TVilliaiiiscm 
was endeavouring to bring that lemarkable young 
woman to a sense ^of her position. To what 
extent be soooeeded we may hope to learn beie- 
after. 



CHAPTER ni. 



OOMXNG HOME. 



Yes, ihej were coming home; the Earl and 
Countess of Vemer were coming home. The 
"Sevemtown Mercury*' said so, and mentioned 
the exact day on which they would return. Nay, 
more, the accomplished journalist announced that 
daring that very week his lordship had accepted 
the colonelship of the Sevemshire Yeomanry, and 
that the local troop would receive the distinguished 
couple at the Sevemtown Station, and escort them 
to the Junction, from whence they would continue 
their journey to Avonworth. A member of the 
oldest county family, and the most distinguished of 
the local aristocracy, the '* Mercury *' suggested 
that the civic authorities should show his lordship 
some mark of their respect as he passed through 

9 2 



36 THE TAUaAKTS OF BABTON. 

fhe ancient city on his way to the historic home of 
his fathers. 

The Right Honourable the Earl Yemer was 
descended firom that fftmons Yemer who figured so 
magnificently in the early days of the reign of 
Henry lY. In the tonmaments of that time, 
Henry^ Earl Yemer, was the bravest and most 
formidable of all the gallants of the period. He 
fought like a lion at the battle of Shrewsbmy, and 
serred the king in yarious parts of the ooontiy 
wifli unequalled bravery and success. The Yonera 
had always been qdendid men. There was another 
of flie race who distinguished himsdf as highly in 
ttie senate as the Yemer of Hairy lY.'s time had 
in ttie field. It was to this senator that En^and 
owed so mudi in those critical times when tibe 
doctrines of flie Frcndi BeToIution were makii^ 
progress in our own country. The ari*s ^eech in 
parliament upon this grand question was one of flie 
most powerful otaticaBs in hbtcttT. He filled sereial 
hi^ oflkes of state, and his fine ai?Tmk irat;vi> 
abililT could be traced throoghoiit tibe important 



PEDIGREES. :37 

epoch in which he lived. The present earl, though 
he had hitherto taken no lead in public affairs, was 
an accomplished scholar, and had contributed 
several important pamphlets to the literature of 
art and antiquity ; and he would, no doubt, now 
take that position in the county to which his family 
distinction, his accomplishments, and his great 
wealth entitled him. 

The Countess of Verner had also sprung of a 
tock not by any means of small celebrity. Her 
parentage might be said to have represiented the 
aristocracy of birth and commercial enterprise. 
Her father, the late Christopher Tallant, Esq., had 
ranked high amongst the merchant princes of 
Great Britain, and had come of an old York- 
shire family. Her mother, a lady of the noble 
house of Petherington, was a descendant of the 
Petheringtons of Fife. The Lord Petherington of 
that Hk it was who distinguished himself in Egypt 
in 1800, and who fell fighting the battles of his 
4X>untry in Spain. Celebrated for their beauty, the 
daughters of Qie house of Petherington would be 



88 THE TALLAinS OF BABTOK. 

fianiliar to those admirers of '' female loveliness ** 
who had studied ''Garten's Beauties of the 
Court" 

The ''Mercury" grew quite doquent in its 
historical revelations, and Sevemtown resolved, 
in accordance with the editorial hint, that the Earl 
and Countess should be "received" at the station^ 
and escorted to the junction in right royal fashion. 
So, when the day came, there was quite a crowd 
of people at the station. A troop of the Yeomanry 
Cavalry were there, and their horses pranced and 
curvetted, and stood upon two legs, in the most 
approved military faflfaion ; a number of ladies who 
had seats upon the platform, presented the Countess 
with a handsome braodet and a charming bouquet 
of flowers; the mayor came forward, and made a 
pretty little speech to the newly-married pair ; and 
tilie Earl repUed in a hearty address. Then his 
lordship conducted his wife to a caniage, and drove 
off to the junction, amidst great dieeting, in 
company wkh the gallant Yeomanry on their 
prauBng steeds* 



BRAZENCROOK HANGS OUT ITS BiLNNERS. 39 

But it was at BrazencroQk where the greatest 
demonstration was made. Sevemtown was some- 
what proud and dignified; but Brazencrook was 
full of rejoicing. Nearly the whole of the longest 
street in Brazencrook belonged to Earl Yemer, and 
the people had always been warmly attached to the 
noble proprietors of the Castle of Montem. Brazen- 
crook was the nearest station to the castle, and 
Brazencrook determined to make the return home 
something not to be forgotten. The Town-clerk 
had been instructed to prepare an address for the 
occasion. The cordwainers of the place had made 
the Countess a pair of dainty slippers ; the glass- 
cutters had manufactured and made wonderful 
toilet-bottles for her ; the ladies of the town had 
subscribed for a gold casket ; and the civic autho- 
rities had ordered the town to be decorated, and 
the bells to be rung in honour of their distinguished 
friends and neighbours. 

The old Guildhall was carpeted, and a da'is 
erected in the ancient assembly-room. The earl 
had consented to bring his wife here to receiYO the 



40 THE TALLANTS OF BAfiTON. 

cmc coBgratulations and the big towns presentB. 
Brazencrook had always been celebrated for doing 
things wdl ; it was one of the leading mottoes of 
the local newspaper, that " if it was worth while to 
do anything it was worth while to do it weLL** Thns 
the welcoming home of the earl and conntess grew 
and grew out of the first proposals into a demon- 
stration worthy of royalty. If our fiiend Asmodens 
had taken you there on the moniing of the oelebra* 
tion of this retom-home, you might haTe fancied 
that you had heea transported back to the " good 
old times" of proyincial display. The visit of a 
queen, the dose of a three weeks' election, the 
tennination of a great war, the ioangnration of 
some old-woild rerels, or something <m an ancient 
scale of grandeur, wotdd have seemed to be mani- 
fested in those flattering flags and banners ; those 
half-miEtaiymeninthe streets; that ox roasting in 
the maiket-place ; those great casks of ale ready 
ta^ed imder the ancient piazzas of the maiket- 
konse. Bands playing, beUs ringing, shops dosed, 
izKumphal aidies receiTing the last-finishing touches. 



" DOING IT WELL." 41 

old gabled houses with devices painted up between 
the windows, Odd-Fellows in sashes and aprons, 
gentlemen with white rosettes on their breasts, 
women with babies in their arms, boys climbing 
lamp-posts, and again Yeomanry Cavalry with 
brass helmets and unmanageable horses, Brazen- 
crook had never presented such a scene of jubila- 
tion and bustle. The fine old town seemed to rub 
its jolly big hands, and .say, " How do you do, 
everybody . glad to see you. Have a drink . ^we 
are going to enjoy ourself to-day. It is a little 
foolish to make such a tremendous fuss, we know ; 
but never mind ; . better to do a thing well, if 
you do it at all, you know." 

Somebody had drawn an allegorical figure of 
the town, and it had been sculptured by a famous 
artist It was a brawny athletic man, with a 
hammer in Us hand, leaning upon a rock from 
which water was supposed to be bursting forth . 
the fiource of the river upon which the town was 
built. If the figure could have spoken it would 
have said something Hke what we have just written. 



42 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

. and it might have laid down its hamm^ and 
smiled pleasantly at the Brazencrookians as they 
bustled about on that memorable morning. 

There was a glow of pride, and delight upon the 
rosy cheeks of the Countess as she sat by her lord 
in that pretty open brougham which oonveyed 
them to the Guildhall. It was like the reception 
of a prince and princess. Lord Yemer bowed like 
a king to his bending subjects, and the Coimtess 
smiled and bowed with a gracious condescension 
that was quite charming to see. The people 
cheered and shouted and threw up their hats, 
and " Welcome Home," " Long Life and Happi- 
ness," and good wishes of all kinds greeted them 
from nearly every banner and triumphal arch. 

Meanwhile a dense crowd congregated at the 
Guildhall, and a fashionable throng was con- 
gregated within. There had been many local 
feuds about places. The town-councillors had to 
be accommodated first, and their wives next, and 
we regret to say that quarrels which time will 
never heal arose out of the preference shown to 



"hip, hip, hurrah!" 43 

BQme ladies over others in the selection of the 
Gommitiee to rq>re8ent l^e ladies who had sub- 
scribed for the casket It was quite grand to see 
ilie aldermen in their blue cloaks and chains, the 
bonncillors in their gowns, the mayor in his cocked 
hat, the sword-bearers with their fur hehnets on 
and their beavers up. Then there were the 
mayor's officers in their new liveries, and his 
Worship's own footman with a bouquet iii his 
waistcoat as big and as round as his own rubi- 
cund face. The military pensioners with their 
shining accoutrements were drawn up in line 
ready to present arms. Even Earl Vemer was 
struck with surprise and amazement as his coach- 
man pulled up opposite the halL What a scene 
it was, to be sure ! " Eyes front . ^fix bayonets . 
present a-r-r-r-rms ! " could be heard half way 
down the street, as a fierce old officer, on a 
plnnging horse and half pay, thundered out these 
oemmands to the pensioners; and then, oh, how 
his stentorian voice was drowned with drums and 
fi&s and " hip-hip-hip-huxxahs I '' 



44 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

The Countess began to feel terribly nervous as 
his lordship handed her out and introduced her 
to the mayor, who offered his arm and marched 
magnificently into the Guildhall along the crowded 
corridor and into the great assembly room, where 
a thousand well-dressed persons rose to receive 
the noble visitors. Onward through the smiling 
throng, with his head in the air and the Countess 
by his side, went the Mayor of Brazencrook, up 
to the da'is of crimson cloth, where the Countess 
sat down in a gilded chair of state, and the Earl 
stood beside her, his lordship looking almost as 
proud as his Worship the Mayor himself. 

Suddenly the Countess recognised Phoebe, 
Arthur Phillips and the baUiff sitting close by. 
She rose instantly, advanced towards them, and 
the next moment had kissed her Mend with a 
heartiness that made the tears come into Phoebe's 
eyes, and quite electrified everybody. Who was 
the lady whom she had kissed P Everybody asked 
everybody else, and nobody knew. Who was that 
strange looking little man with long black hairP 












r X 



Viw 



^lOUl* 






i 



IS 

ad 
jad 

no 
-t the 
OibWo 




46 THE TALLANTS OF BAKTON. 

The Countess might fairly have disputed tiie 
prize for beauty with all Sevemshire, nevertheless ; 
her chiefest competitor, to our mind, would have 
been the artist* s fianc^e^ but the two styles of beauty 
were entirely different, as our readers know. 

It was not long ere the Town Clerk had read the 
civic address, and the various presents were made. 
The Earl replied in a manner that promised all 
the old borough hoped for with regard to the 
fiiture; whilst the Countess said a few words of 
thankfulness, which were so gracious, so sweet, so 
becoming, so perfectly modest, that even the ladies 
who had been excluded from the committee afore- 
said could not resist joining in the general expres- 
sions of approval. 

How sincerely the Countess vowed in her own 
heart to be an obedient and faithful wife to this 
man who had raised her to such a height of distinc- 
tion! He had never seen her look so affec- 
tionately upon him as when they were once more 
moving on their way to his magnificent house at 
Montem. The welcome which they had received 



HOME AT LAST. 47 

at Brazencrook was of such a right royal kind, that 
it kindled not only sensations of pride in the 
woman's heart, but feelings of the deepest grati- 
tude. The sublime and the ridiculous are often 
to be seen in very dose proximity. The Countess 
could not fail to notice' some of the laughable inci- 
dents of the Brazencrook display, but she felt to 
the full the earnestness of the scene, the manliness 
of the civic address, the outspoken, independent 
allegiance of the great body of her husband's 
tenants, represented by a fine old man, who talked 
of the ancient days of Brazencrook, and how the 
retainers of the House of Vomer had fought, 
under previous earls, the battles of their king and 
country. But it was the arrival at Montem Castle 
itself which most impressed the Countess. That 
long drive through the luxurious park, that long 
line of citizen soldiers, that body of local tenants 
at the castle gates, those loud cheers, that other 
address of welcome, the jbending servants in the 
grand old hall, and the gracious words of the Earl 
introducing her as the mistress of Montem CasUc. 



48 THE TALLANTS OF BARTOK. 

She wept tears of joy and gratitude. There was 
no acting in this. When she saw Earl Yemer first 
she had commenced to act a part which she hoped 
might lead up to some such scene as this ; but she 
had never imagined that the actress would weep 
real tears^ and feel a deep and fervent gratitude to 
the nobleman who had taken her hand and placed 
her by his side. 



CHAPTER IV. 

TRAVELLERS BY LAND AND SEA. 

In the morning after Mr. Williamson's discovery 
of his daughter, Lieutenant Somerton sought the 
woman whom he had loved so wildly . ^he sought 
her with a troubled heart, and a half resolve to see 
her no more, if she had deceived him so grossly as 
the barrister had intimated. He had thought long 
and seriously over all the circumstances which his 
friend had laid before him, and he resolved to 
search out the truth. 

When he reached the house, however, he was 
spared the scene of anger, mutual explanation, and 
final triumph of love and frenzy which he had 
imagined. The bird had fiown; there was no 
Ghrissy in the little house with the trees at the 
back. The rooms were deserted, and Mrs. Dibble 

VOL. III. E 



50 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

sat weeping over the ddbris of a liasty. pack- 
ing-up. 

"Sheath gone, thir: gone for ever," said Mrs. 
Dibble. 

" Yes," said Thomas, wbo stood by, looking more 
firigbtened than sympathetic. 

"Gone. what do yon mean?" asked the 
Lieutenant. 

" She wath a wicked creature, thir, and she hath 
fled," said Mrs. Dibble; "if my poor dear papa 
conld only rise from his grave and see the path to 
which hith daughter Maria hath come." 

" Hang your papa ! " exclaimed Paul ; " tell me 
what aU this means." 

"How dare you, thir," said Mrs. Dibble, start- 
ing up ; " how dare you hang my papa ! Ah, I 
forgot, of courthe poverty mutht be insulted, and I 
am a wretched dependent, though I have had a 
boarding-school education, and been brought up 

" Confound it, Mrs. Dibble : will you talk com- 
mon sense for a moment. I don't wish to insult 



GONE. 51 

you, nor to be unkind in any way. Will you 
tell me how it is that this lady has left your 
house?" 

** Here is a note/' said Mr. Dibble, timidly taking 
a small bilkt rom the mantel-piece. 

Mrs. Dibble scowled at her husband, and began 
to weep afresh over her fallen fortunes. 

Paul hastfly opened the note, which Dibble gave 
to him, and read as foUows : . 

"My dear Paul, . ^I have saved you from a 
great sin and from terrible misery. This wretched 
girl is my daughter. I have taken her away ; do 
not seek to follow us. You shall know all in the 
course of a day or two. ^ He visits the sins of the 
fathers upon the children imto the third and fourth 
generation of them that hate him, and shows mercy 
imto thousands in them that love Him and keep 
His commandments.' 

" Believe me to be ever yours in truth 
and affection, 

"A. Williamson.*' 

X 2 



52 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Paul read the note twice and in the greatest 
astonishment. His mind was in a chaos of wonder 
and amazement. He sat down upon a chair, and 
read the strange words over and over again, until 
Dibhle interrupted him. 

" It was all true, sir,** said Dibble, " what I 
said yesterday j^ she was the show-girl, Chrissy, 
who conjured, you know, sir, at Sevemtown." 

Paul made no reply. 

Mrs. Dibble only nodded her head to signify that 
she had had a boarding-school education, and had 
been brought to this wretched pKght, nevertheless. 

**She be main clever, surely," said Dibble, " and 
improved wonderful." 

*' "When did she leave here ? " asked Paul, look- 
ing to Mrs. Dibble for a reply. 

*' Before daylight, by the mail," she said ; " and 
what with packing and Mr. Williamson^s fidgeting 
and going on, and his wild ways, I hope I shall 
never see such a night again." 

" They left together," said Paul, staring vacantly 
at tiie barrister's note. 



KBs. dibble's daggers. 3 

"Teih, and Dibble fetched the cab." 

" Did she seem willing to go ; did she leave any 
. message for me ? '* 

"Nothing/' said Mrs. Dibble. "She waih 
willing enough to go; but anybody would have 
been willing to do whatever he thaid, he theemed 
to order about so.'' 

" Order ! in what way ? " asked the Lieutenant. 

" Why, ath if he were her father, which he thaid 
he waih, though that wath never to be repeated to 
anybody but you, and he went home and brpught 
some money, and wath motht liberal for all we 
had done, though I thertainly would have returned 
it if Mithter Dibble had not lotht money in the 
panic, and that bank had not broke, which left uth 
almost in poverty." 

The Lieutenant took little or no notice of Mrs. 
Dibble's long speeches, but they were fiill of da^ers 
to Thomas Dibble, who would have laid down his 
life if he could have obtained money enough to put 
an end to his wife's taunts about their losses, . 

Paul was altogether at a loss to know how to act. 



54 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

His first impulse was to make an effort to follow 
the ftigitives ; Ids first impression was that his friend 
had hehaved treacherously ; hut when Dibhle told 
him all he knew about " Chrissy," and her belief 
that her father was a gentleman^ and when he 
thought again of all that Williamson had said, 
and of the dark shadows upon his early life, 
he resolved that he would try to be patient, and 
weit for the next chapter in this extraordinary story 
of his first love. 

Meanwhile the fugitives were speeding on their 
way to Dover, their destination being Paris. 
Whilst they were leaving England, a traveller 
was journeying to London in whom the reader has 
a still greater interest. Lionel Eammerton was 
coming home. He had only been a few months at 
his post ere he left it. Nobody knew why he did 
80, or upon what plea he had obtained permission* 
He had not been well, his comrades knew ; but a 
general depression of spirits rather than any physi- 
cal complaint seemed to be the secret of his reti- 
cence and retirement. On board the vessel in 



THE VSDUS OFFICER. 55 

wluch. he went out his conduct was set down to the 
motion 'of the vessel, and a few harmless jests were 
made at his expense. He was advised to drink 
plenty of brandy and water, which would soon 
bring his sea legs all right ; but Lionel Hammer- 
ion did not recover, except when he drank 
more brandy than was good for him. Now and 
then this occurred, and at such times he was pro- 
nounced to be a splendid fellow, a dashing, daring, 
high-souled fellow. 

Lionel himself hardly knew why he wished to 
return home. He felt impelled by an unseen 
influence. Like the herd of some ghost story who 
at Christmas had seen by his bedside the face 
of a loved one at home, and a beckoning finger 
which haunted him day and night imtil he set foot 
on board a home-bound ship, Lionel Hammerton 
could think of nothing but returning home. There 
was something wrong, he could not rest, he must 
go home and see the old country once more ere he 
settled down in Lidia. For days and weeks he 
struggled against this instinctive longing to re-crosa 



56 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

the ocean. That vignette wliicli Arthur Phillips 
had painted hung hj his bed, inside those mosqnito 
curtains ! Had this aught to do with his desire to 
return home P Did he repent of his neglect towards 
Amy? Did he love her after all? Did the 
memory of those happy days at Barton torture him 
with remorse ? Or had that idea of Amy's mer- 
cenary motives evaporated in presence of that 
honest and noble face, about which he had talked 
so rapturously in the artist's studio ? K so, why 
did he not write to her and say so, or send some 
message to her by Arthur Phillips ? This would 
have been easy enough, and sufficient too for Amy, 
who would have caught at the merest straw that 
offered a prospect of regaining his love. 

They passed each other on the sea, the two 
Indian ships . one homeward-bound with Ham- 
merton on board, the other on its way to Calcutta 
with letters for him, and ftdl particulars of his 
brother's marriage. What a world of trouble 
might have been spared to him and others, had 
he yielded at once to those home-promptings, or 



1 



TOO late! 67 

waited until those letters arid papers had reached 
their destination I 

As the vessel bounded along through the waters, 
Lionel shaped his course. He was fain to confess 
that he wanted to see Amy, to see her once more, 
and judge for himself by her own words and con- 
duct whether she truly loved him, or whether it 
. was a mere mercenary passion. It was a long time 
before he confessed even to himself that it was she 
who drew him back to England . ^he could, not rest 
without her. If she were really true, true as the 
artist had painted her, true as he once believed her, 
he would confess all to his brother, and ask Amy 
to return with him to India as his wife. What a 
fool he had been, he thoi^ht, to doubt her, and to 
come away without seeing her. What a miserable 
lonely life it was out there in India without a soul 
you cared for. How happy to have a wife there ! 
No feUow ought to go out to India without one. 
And what did it matter about a woman's origin in 
India, so that she was a lady in manners, and the 
wifeofanoficerofrankinhisownrightP Why had 



58 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

he not thouglit of all this before P It was only bj 
degrees that he had permitted his thoughts to ran 
wild like this. The sea seemed to help him out 
of his troubles ; it was so boundless^ so foil of life 
and beauty. His thoughts appeared to mount the 
white-crested waves and travel away upon them to 
some quiet sandy beach where Amy was walking. 
Now that he had confessed to himself why he was 
returning to England, he gave his imagination tiie 
freest rein, and pictured the future as something 
almost pretematurally happy. He never doubted 
for a moment that when he came back to Barton 
Hall and threw his handkerchief at the feet of Amy 
she would pick it up and be his slave. That pride 
which had had so large a share in his leaving 
England and neglecting the woman whose love he 
had taken the trouble to win, did not desert him on 
his return. 

When he set foot in London he hesitated whether 
he should go straight to Montem, run down to 
Arthur Phillips' at Sevemtown, or take the train to 
Avonworth. It had occurred to him more than 



WAS IT TRUE LOVE? 59 

once to visit Amy secretly; but his better sense 
prompted him to write a note to his brother telling 
him that he should visit him the next day, hoping 
to return again to India by an early mail. 

"He will be surprised," Lionel thought "to receive 
this ; but he is a dear old boy after all, and I will 
soon put him all right. I wish I had had nothing 
to do with that infernal Stock-Exchaage business. 
I should then have had no qualms at all about 
meeting him again so suddenly." 

The hon. of&cer of her Majesty spent the 
evening of his return to England at Dniry Lane, 
and his magnanimous intentions with r^ard to 
Amy were stimulated by the action of a drama, the 
chief lesson of which was the levelling power of love, ^ 
and the exaltation of beauty and virtue above raok 
and fortune. Lionel went home to his hotel in quite 
a sentimental mood, longing to confess his unchang- 
ing love and receive Amy's gratefbl acknowledg- 
ments of the sacrifice which he was willing to make 
for her, raising the baiKfTs daughter to his own 
rank'aiid making her his wife and compamoiL* 



CHAPTER V. 

LORD AND LADY TERNER. 

A DBLiQHTFiTL September morning inaugurated 
the seoond day of the return home to Montem 
Castle. The sun shone upon the grand old towers 
which stood out in clear outline against the sky ; 
and upon the old ruin with its moss-grown walls and 
whispering ivy^ a grey old token of the past, with 
a long line of green turf stretching forth to tiiie 
more modem castle which had been built in presence 
of the ancient ruin. The modem establishment had 
been built as closely as possible after the old model, 
and iumished too in antique style, but with all 
modem comforts. 

As &r as the eye could see> streti^ed tibe noUe 
prk witii grand old txee$ shdt^mag groi^ of de^. 
Fhm the t^xace in firaat <f ^ easde half a miW 



A PARADISE OR A DESERT? 61 

of turf, interspersed with beds of flowers and shrubs 
and winding walks and natural glints of rock ter- 
minated in a broad expanse of lake, ornamented 
with sundry islands that looked in the distance like 
floating gardens. Far away against the sky the 
Berne Hills melted as it were into the linktowns, 
whose topmost point was hung with a misty 
mantle which the sunbeams fringed with gold. 

The Earl and Countess of Yemer sat at break- 
fast two mornings after their return home in pre- 
sence of this glorious scene. The windows were 
wide open, letting in the perfume of autumn flowers, 
the song of birds, the sound of plashing water 
flowing from an adjacent fountain. What a para- 
dise it was ! Would Amy make it a desert ? We 
shall see. 

When her husband said they might expect bis 
brother during the day, Amy's cheeks lost their 
colour for a moment, and her hand trembled ; but 
the change was not noticed, and a strong effort of 
will at once restored the wife's self-control. The 
announcement was so unexpected ; all her specula- 



62 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

tions Had not prepared lier for so sudden an appear- 
ances She liad expected to meet this man some 
day, and had thought about her manner of receiving 
him; but she had never dreamed that the trial 
would come so soon. 

"Shut the window, Morris," said his lordflhip, 
"the air is rather chilly, her ladyship will take 
cold.'' 

" Thank you," said the Countess, gently. 

" You have met my brother, I think," said the 
Earl. 

" Yes, at Barton," said Amy, promptly, but with 
a cold chill at her heart. 

"Eather a strange fellow. Why he should 
return home so soon, I cannot understand. You 
may leave the room, Morris." 

Morris and his second in command bowed and 
retired. 

"There was a time when I could not bear 
Morris to be away from my elbow for a moment," 
said his lordship, "and now I would rather the 
fellow were a mile off when you are here, my 



DABBYS AND JOANS. 63 

darling; there is no cliatting freely to one's wife 
with that booby swallowing every word." 

His lordship looked across the table at the 
Oountess in her white morning-robe^ and smiled. 
"I positively envy those Darby-and-Joan people 
of the middle dass^ who are not bothered with a 
regiment of servants." 

The Comxtess looked up and said there were 
Darbys and Joans^ she hoped^ in halls and castles. 

"I know of one- couple," said his lordship, 
cheerily. " Qeorge and Amy are their names, and 
they will be candidates for the Dunmow FKtch. 
Lionel Hammerton can hardly have heard of our 
marriage." 

" Not heard of it P " said the Countess. This was 
a new feature of the case which had not presented 
itseK to her mind. 

"Unless the outward mail made a very quick 
passage indeed, he has not heard of it ; I question 
whether he can be acquainted with any of the 
changes that have taken place in our fortunes 
daring the past year." 



64 THE TALLAinS OF BARTON. 

" What a surprise it will be for him/' said the 
Countess. 

'< Indeed, it will/' said his lordship. 

*^ Was not his departure a yery sudden affair P '' 
asked the Countess. 

" Not particularly so, my love/' said the Earl. 
" We had not contemplated his entering the army . 
that was his freak. He indulged in the luxury of 
speculation rather extensively, and I think I was a 
little emphatic in condemning his large and useless 
expenditure. I feared he was making ties of 
friendship which were not beneficial to him. Per- 
haps I said so. In an excitable moment he said it 
would be better for him to join the army, and go 
abroad for a few years. I dislike discussing these 
personal questions ; it rather bored me at the time, 
I remember; and I said I thought it would be 
best. And so he made his own arrangements." 

" Then he knew that he was about to leave the 
country some time before he went away," said the 
Countess. 

"Yes, he was Gazetted soon after our serious 



65 

conyersation, as lie called it, and sailed a month or 
two afterwards I think. I knew he would soon be 
tired of it, but I had no idea that his return would 
be so sudden. He wiU hardly know the place. I 
never saw so great and complete an improvement 
as there appears in the grounds, and the general 
re-arrangement of the house. The whole place 
is changed, and with a mistress at the head of 
affairs, I seem to be quite in a new world, quite. 
And what a delightful world it is. Amy ! " 

His lordship was charmed with his wife, and 
with everything around him. The servants did not 
see a greater change in Montem Castle than they 
saw in the noble master thereof. From a quiet, 
retiring, luxurious student, who buried himself 
in his books, and lost himself in continual admira- 
tion of his pottery or pictures, he had become a 
Hvely, chatty, merry gentleman. Formerly, with 
a continual fear that he was going to be bored, 
he had guarded himself as carefully as though he 
were a confirmed invaKd. No noises, no open 
windows, as few visitors as possible; he had 

VOL. III. F 



66 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

appeared to mope away existence, and Brazen- 
crook looked forward to a speedy successor in Lionel 
Hammerton ; but old Morris and tlie butler both 
said cracked jugs often lasted the longest, and 
that ailing men mostly made old bones. Even 
they, however, were surprised beyond expression 
at his lordship. It was marvel enough that he 
should marry, but that he should have a really 
grand wedding, and make public speeches, and 
come home " livelier than a cricket, sir," as Morris 
said, was something which they could never cease 
to wonder at. 

He loved his wife with all that fervency which 
often marks the love of an old bachelor^ who is 
&6cinated out of his former course of life by a 
beautiftd woman bent on winning him. There was 
nothing that he would not have done to add to her 
comfort and happiness. All his bachelor ways, his 
fogeyism, his books, his pictures, his china, none 
of them could weigh in attractiveness against the 
deUght of giving her the smallest pleasure. Her 
ladyship knew this, and resolved to interfere as 



DOMESTIC REGULATIONS. 67 

little as possible with his habits and general course 
of life ; she would join him in his studio and in his 
pleasures she vowed, and be his companion indeed. 

She would also govern his household, and per- 
form her wifely duties to the letter. Were she 
twenty times a countess she would take her place 
as the responsible head of the domestic government. 
She would give her commands for the day, and do 
all things in order, as a wife should. 

" You shall do whatever you please, my dear/' 
said his lordship, upon the mention of this item in 
her wifely programme. " You are mistress here, 
but do not rob me too much of your society ; and 
one thing I must insist upon." 

The Coimtess, who had risen and was standing 
with her hand in his, smiled archly at the idea of 
his insisting upon anything. 

''Yes, I must insist; you are to remember that 
my name is George here, just as it was when we 
were in Kent, and that I am to have a kiss always 
when we part, you as you say on your morning 
duiiesy I to wait your pleasure in the library." 

7 2 



68 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

The Countess promised edihM compliance with 
this command^ and went on her way to the house- 
keeper's room to signify her pleasure with regard 
to the arrangements of the day. Amy (for we are 
privileged to call her Amy stilly and shall insist 
upon an occasional exercise of that privilege) 
entered upon her domestic reign so mildly^ and 
with such unaffected modesty, that the old house* 
keeper gladly obeyed her behests, though this 
extraordinary interference, on the part of a lady 
and a countess, wiili household affairs was the 
subject of some slight mutinous discussion that day 
in the housekeeper's room and in the butler's 
pantry too. 

Having discharged these morning duties to her 
own satisfaction by an inauguration of her system, 
the Countess ascended the grand old staircase and 
sought her boudoir, where she sat down to discuss 
with herself and consider the situation which 
Lionel Hammerton's letter had created. She had 
refrained from asking mkny questions which her 
heart had prompted her to ask at breakfast, fearing 



A HABD TRIAL. 69 

that she was not altogether fulfilling her part of 
the solemn contract she had entered into, by learn- 
ing from her husband the motiyes which had 
actuated her lover without confessing how much 
she knew of his brother. All she had sought to 
learn was in the way of justification of her own 
conduct, and she had been strengthened in this by 
his lordship's replies. How should she meet Mr. 
Hammerton ? How much did he know of recent 
events to prepare him for the change at Montem 
Castle P How far might surprise betray him or 
her? 

Whilst she was thinking of these things the 
^und of wheels attracted her attention, and the 
next moment she saw one of the Earl's dose car- 
riages, with luggage on the roof, approaching the 
main entrance. The conveyance had been to 
Brazencrook Station to meet Mr. Hammerton. 
She had no doubt he had arrived. She watched 
the brougham roll along the great drive, through 
the autumn-tinted trees . watched it, as she had 
on another memorable autumn-day watched Earl 



70 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

Vemer's carriage whirl along, through the dying 
leaves, to Barton HalL It was a coincidence which 
struck her forcibly these two autumn days, and 
seemed to bode eyil to her. Did she love this man 
who had won her heart in those past days, and 
whose neglect had urged her into a scheme of 
reyenge P She asked herself the question fearlessly, 
and her heart said ISo ; but still there was fear in 
the answer . a momentary fear that it were better 
Lionel Hammerton were in India &an here. Con- 
trasting his conduct with that of the Earl, remem- 
bering how niggardly he had been, in those early 
days, of tender words, and how he had rather 
seemed to revel in her own silent admiration than 
delight in her love ; and how devoted the Earl was ; 
how noble, how generous ; how he had raised her 
up not thinking he had done so, but thanking her 
for his own happiness. -thanking her that she had 
consented to be the mistress of these grand old 
halls, and the successor of a long line of countesses 
who lived in the history of titles and beauty. 
Contrasting the two thus, Lionel Hammerton took 



HOW MUCH DID HS KNOW? 71 

but an abject place, and Amy's heart oyerflowed 
with gratitade to the man whom she had sworn 
to lore, hononr, and obey. 

Bingmg for her maid, the Gonntess took a fieuicy 
to have her hair dressed afiresh, and then she put . 
on a plainer dress, and in a little time there came 
a message firom his lordship that Hr. Hammerton 
had arrived, and would lunch with them. 

The Countess expected this, and was preparing 
for it. When she had dismissed her maid, she 
surveyed herself fixedly in a mirror, as if she were 
practising some peculiar expression. She was 
nervous, and wished the day at an end. Why 
had he come here ? If he knew of his brother's 
marriage, it would have been fax nobler to have 
remained away rom the place? Did he know 
of it? 

Let us answer that question to the reader. 
Lionel Hammerton heard of his brother's marriage 
for the first time firom the servants at the Brazen- 
crook Station. He heard it, and with no pleasuie ; 
for although he loved his brother with a generous 



72 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

affection^ lie had come to expect that some day, in 
the ordinary course of nature, he would be called 
upon to succeed him. Not only did the disparity 
of years lead to this supposition (they were the 
offspring of two different mothers, the former Earl 
having married twice), but the general opinion was 
that the younger brother was so much stronger 
than the eldest, that he must live out the other. 
This marriage, therefore, seemed to set up an 
obstacle to his hopes. But the news did not affect 
him half so much as might have been expected. 
The strongest feeling about it, we are bound to say, 
was one of surprise, which was not a little increased 
when he learnt that Christopher Tallant's daughter 
was his brother's wife. 

All the way to the Castle he pondered over this 
extraordinary fact, and wondered how it was with 
his poor friend, Arthur Phillips. There was one 
thing which gave him comfort: if his brother 
could descend to marrying a commoner^'s daughter, 
surely he, a mere officer in the army, might marry 
Amy, the daughter of the commoner's bailiff. 



THE CHANGE. 73 

This thought in some measure revived his spirits, 
which had been dashed on the first blush of the 
matrimonial news. He could hardly believe but 
what there was some mistake^ but when he saw 
the trim flower beds, the new gravel walks, the 
trim sunblinds, the cheerful brightness of the win- 
dows, he felt that the bachelor days of Montem 
were certainly at an end. " How odd," he thought, 
"to take sweet counsel with my brother's wife 
about Amy Somerton; I will confide all to her 
ladyship before I say anything to George.fancy 
Miss Tallant, Countess of Vomer, my sister-in- 
law. No wonder I was prompted to come back to 
England!" 



76 THE TALLANTS OF BAETON. 

fellow^ and asked him when he would be married. 
Morris thought the jest rather grim, and said it was 
certainly time for him to think about it^ now that 
his lordship had taken a wife. 

''Her ladyship is pretty, Morris, is she notP" 
said Lionel, taking off his coat and throwing the 
window up. 

" Very pretty, and as amiable as can be, too," 
said Morris. 

" That's a good thing; what time do we lunch, 
Morris P" 

" Two o'clock, sir," said the servant. 

'' Ah, it is one now," said lionel, looking at his 
watch. " I shall have time to dress and have ten 
minutes' walk to collect my faculties for an intro- 
duction to her ladyship, your mistress." 

"Yes, sir," said Morris, depositing waistcoats 
and trousers, and hanging up coats and caps and 
swords in the ample wardrobe ; " shall I ring for 
hot water, sir?" 

"No, thank you, Morris; the news has made 
me hot. J^ever mind undoing that leather case." 



"we shall see!'* 77 

"All right, sir," said Morris. "You are look- 
ing a good deal bronzed with the sun, but glad to 
see you so well. Anything else I can do, sir ?" 

" No, thank you, Morris,'' said Lionel, taking no 
notice of the servitor's remark about his brown 
face, but wondering how Arthur PhilEps had taken 
his disappointment. " Somehow I never thought 
the poor fellow had the slightest chance of marry- 
ing Phoebe. Poor Arthur! Such a sentimental 
feUow, too, he was; it would almost break his 
heart I should think; I will hunt him up to- 
morrow. Fancy George, Earl Vomer, my whim- 
sical, apathetic, luxurious, moping brother, falling 
in love with that pretty face at Barton, and 
marrying it ! Wonders will never cease ! I sup- 
pose he must have seen her on one of his calls on 
Tallant about those humbugging shares. Some 
people beUeve in the exercise of a sort of electrical 
sympathy influencing friends at the longest dis- 
tances. Did that worry me in India P A stroke of 
fate, I suspect, in the whole thing. Well, we shall 



80 THE TALLAKTS OP BARTON. 

moned up all her courage and fortitude. He looked 
at her for a moment^ and then with a sudden gleam 
of joy upon his face he rushed towards her. Amy- 
stepped back a few paces and coldly extended her 
hand. 

"Why, what is this, AmyP" said the Indian 
officer. " Surely some joke, some jest to increase 
my present happiness at sight of you." 

" I do not understand you," said the Countess, 
in real astonishment ; for she had dismissed from 
her mind the possibility of Lioners ignorance of 
Mr. TaUant*s death and the discovery of Mrs. 
Somerton's fraud. 

" You are here to surprise me, to punish me for 
my neglect by a gracious condescension ; you have 
forgiven me, but I am to suffer for leaving you so 
strangely. I see it all, dear, dear Amy." 

" Sir, is this the language which you address to 
your brother's wife," said Amy, with a glow of 
indignation and alarm in her face. 

"What do you mean? What is thisP Pray 
be candid with me and forgive me. Surely the 



THE BXPLANATION. 81 

jest has gone &x enough ; your looks alann me/' 
said Lionel^ in a passion of appeal. 

^' There is no jest in this business/' said Amy. 
'' I fear you do not know all. Before Mr. Tallant 
died it was discoyered that 1, whom you knew as 
Amy Somerton, was his daughter, and that the lady 
you knew as Miss Tallant was, in truth, the bailiff's 
daughter. I was Christopher Tallant's heiress, and 
I am now your brother's wife, the Coxmtess of 
Vomer." 

Lionel sunk into a chair and covered his face 
with his hands as Amy, in a dear, firm voice, spoke 
these words. And this was what he had come 
from India to learn. Was he in some hideous 
dream P He looked up only to be the more con- 
vinced that he was a victim to cruel fate. 

"And now, Mr. Hammerton, if you ever loved 
Amy Somerton, respect her as your brother's 
wife; and if you value his happiness or mine, 
guard as a sacred secret the memory of that love 
which you once professed for her. Now is the 
time to prove the sincerity of a passion which 



82 THX TALLAm^S OF BABTON. 

yoa onoe professed^ and which was the joy of that 
poor girl, until neglect and indifference stepped 
between her and hope, and gave her hand to 
another. For my sake, for your own, for your 
brother's, leave this house as soon as possible; 
whilst you do remain, blot out that memory of the 
past . crush it out as I have crushed it . and never 
let Earl Yemer's peace be disturbed even by a 
suspicion of anything more than a mere acquaint- 
anceship between yourself and his wife. As you 
fulfil these my wishes, so shall I gauge your love.'^ 
She left him as she said this, and when he 
raised his head he looked for her in vain. The 
twin brothers in the "Comedy" were not in a 
greater maze of bewildennent than was Lionel 
Hammerton. Though the light broke in upon his 
mind during that cold resolute explanation, it 
seemed like an ugly dream. He was like a man 
paralysed by a sudden blow of misfortune, against 
which he struggled ineffectually. To fall from the 
simniest height of anticipated bliss into a Stygian 
gulf of misery like this, was enough to unnerve a 



BTBUOK DOWN. 83 

stronger man than Lionel Hammerton. Pride, 
self-loTe, hope, fortune, happiness . ^all were struck 
down w^en most ihey should haye flourished. It 
had flashed upon him, at first sight of Amy, that 
her Mend, the Countess, had confessed all with 
regard to his (lioners) loye, and that his generous 
brother had concocted a delightful plot to surprise 
him. But for Amy's fixed, cold look, he would 
have been at her feet imploring her forgiyeness, 
and blessing her for coming there, that he might 
not lose a moment in asking her to be his wife. 
And now she had slipped from him for eyer, and 
Fate mocked him with her as his sister-in-law ! 
Was it true P Was there hope yetP He would 
go out and walk; there was yirtue in fresh air. 
He took up his hat, and went forth into the old 
ruin; he clambered up the rotten stone steps, and 
stood upon the moss-grown battlements, where 
men-at-arms had defended the garrison hundreds 
of years before ; he looked round upon the glorious 
scene, mellowed with a thousand tints of autumn ; 
he watched the blue wreaths of smoke, mount- 

a 2 



84 THE TALLAUTS OF BARTON. 

ing up in tall ethereal colmns from the old 
hall chmmeys; he saw those purple hills in the 
distance, beyond which he first met Amy Somer- 
ton. Then he remembered the enumeration of 
her wishes so recently expressed . ^wishes that were 
a command to him . a command by the observance 
of which she would gauge his love. 

" She shall have no reason to complain/' he 
thought, as he came back again to the hall. 
" There may be some cruel plot of punishment for 
my neglect at the bottom of all this ; it is a slight 
hope, a weak- plank in the ocean of my disappoint- 
ment, but I will cling to it for this day at least." 

"Why did you run awayP" said his lord- 
jship, when Lionel returned. "Did the Countess 
irighten you? We are waiting for luncheon. 
<!omington dines with us ; he has just taken her 
4adyship in . come along, come along ! '* 

And the brothers, arm-in-arm, entered the 
luncheon-room, where Lord Comington was just 
landing Lady Vomer to her seat. 

The Countess nerer looked better than she did 



DOUBTS AND FEAKS. 85 

this morning, and slie led the conversation in her 
best manner; her racy, humorous repartee re- 
minded the Earl of his first introduction to her at 
Barton Hall. Lord Comington thought her one of 
the most brilliant women he had ever met. Lionel 
Hanmierton watched her, and replied to her sallies 
now and then with undisguised astonishment. 
Lord Vomer was delighted with his wife, proud of 
her wit, proud of her beauty, proud of himself that 
she was his wife. 

None of them saw that weary, haggard look 
which Amy saw an hour afterwards in the glass, 
when she had retired to her room. She was a fine 
actress, and she knew it ; but the effort now was a 
severe strain upon her nervous system. She had 
hoped until yesterday that she would not be called 
upon to act again for a long time to come. Grati- 
tude and respect had been ripening into love for 
her husband ; but she would never be herself so 
long as Lionel Hammerton remained. She was 
beset with fear and alarm ; fear lest her husband 
should discover the love that had once existed 



86 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

between herself and his brother ; fear arising from 
her own conscience, bnrthened with the knowledge 
of the reyenge she had sought and obtained ; alarm 
lest she should fsdl in the estimation of her hus- 
band. This was the greatest fear of all ; the idea 
of losing one jot of that love and admiration 
which he had lavished upon her, was torture. Her 
own fidelity and truth were safe ; she never for a 
moment doubted her strength to maintain her own 
self-respect as Earl Verner^s wife ; but there was 
a wretched spell upon her, with Hammerton in the 
house, which made his presence a torment far 
greater than she could have dreamed of. All 
those first passionate feeHngs of triumph and 
revenge which had supported her during that time 
of Lord Vomer's courtship, had vanished long 
since, and now she only prayed for peace. 

When the soft mellow gong, which announced 
dinner, resounded through the halls and corridors 
of Montem Castle, Lord Yemer, who had been 
sitting with his wife in her own room, brought an 
excuse for her absence. She was not at all well 



WRITING TO PH<KBE. 87 

this eveningy he said, and so Lord Comington and 
Lionel HammertcHx and the Earl dined together, 
and Lord Comington re-echoed Earl Vomer's hope 
that her ladyship might come down to tea. Mean- 
while Lady Vomer wrote to her dear Mend 
Phoebe, begging of her to come and stay a few 
days with her at Montem, and telling her that 
Arthnr Phillips shonld have an invitation to 
dinner as long as her stay lasted. 



CHAPTER VII. 

CONTAINS A LETTER FROM A DEAR FRIEND, AND 
TAKES THE READER ONCE MORE TO SEVERN- 
TOWN. 

" My dear Amy," wrote Phoebe in reply to her 
fiiend's invitatioii, "your letter was indeed wel- 
come, though the news it contained startled me 
not a little, and made me regret ever so much 
more my inability to respond to your kind and 
mterly invitation. My poor mother is so unwell 
that I cannot possibly leave her at present. She 
is suffering from an attack of the same kind as 
that which prostrated her at Barton Hall. I hope 
she will be quite recovered in a day or two, and 
then I hope to come to you. 

"Dearest Amy, I am sure you will not give 
way in the slightest with regard to that respect 
and love which is your noble husband's. The 



phcebe's letteb. 89 

trial lias come earlier than yon expected, but so 
much the better ; it will be the sooner at an end ; 
trials in anticipation are more giievons often than 
when they come npon ns suddenly. The memory 
of yonr noble and religions yow in that London 
hotel when yon and I were alone wiU support yon, 
and God will help yon to keep in the path of duty ! 
I know what your only fear is; but you may rely 
upon his respectmg your position and considering 
the happiness of his brother too much evea to 
ntter an incautious word that shall compel you to 
confess aU. Should the worst come to the worst, 
my dear sister . and this is the worst . there will 
be no shame in an honest avowal of the past. 
Don't fear, my dear, dear Amy, he must have 
too acute a sense of his own neglect to make him 
otherwise than your true Mend, and you will 
find him returning to India sooner than you 
expect. 

^'When mother has recovered I am to make 
arrangements for my marriage to my own dear 
Arthur. Of course you have seen how famous he 



90 THE TALLAMTS OF BABTON. 

has become ; he is taking the highest position in 
art that is attainable. Ere long he will stand at 
the highest point of success* He comes to us 
from Sevemtown every week. 

''You win be surprised to receive this letter 
from Lincolnshire. That Oldhall fionn of which 
my father used to talk so mudi is his, and we 
have removed thither now a month past. during 
the month of your honeymoon. We have left 
old Dorothy at Barton, and father is going to 
write to you about the tenancy. We are not far 
from the birthplace of Tennyson, your favoimte 
poet. I don't think I like the country quite so 
well as Avonworth Valley; but it is a pleasure 
to see my father 'at home/ as it were, in his 
native county. 

** I shall write again in a day or two. Mean- 
while accept my most affectionate regards, and 
believe me to be 

" Ever yours devotedly, 



" Oldhall, Lmcolmhire: 



AFTER THE EXPLANATION* 91 

Amy was disappointed with this letter, but she 
had grown cahner since she had written to PhoBbe ; 
she had become more accustomed to the situation, 
and Lionel Hammerton's conduct had allayed her 
fears. He observed a studious courtesy towards 
her, and had not in the slightest alluded to the 
past by word or deed. It is true she gave him 
no opportuniiy, although he had certainly once 
made an effort to be alone with her in the 
grounds. 

A succession of callers and visitors was of great 
assistance to the Earl's wife, and she encouraged 
his lordship to invite his country neighbours to 
dinner. On several days she had to receive pre- 
sents from local manuEicturers at Brazencrook . 
specimens of their wares specially manufactured 
for her. This gave her occupation, and her 
gracious manners speedily won for her a reputa- 
tion of which she might well be proud. She was 
pronounced in Brazencrook to be the most beauti- 
ful and the least proud of any lady in the land, 
and the country people were enchanted with her 



92 THE TALLANT8 OF BARTON. 

amiability and Her sparkling conversational powers. 
The old yicar and his wife, who had never agreed 
about anything in their lives before^ agreed that 
she was a charming woman, and all the district 
was singing her praises in less than a week. 

Mrs. Somerton's health did not improve, and so 
Phoebe did not come to Amy's side, and Lionel 
Hammerton still remained at Barton Hall. A 
hundred times he had resolved to go, but he had 
resolved, as many times, to stay. By degrees Amy 
became more accustomed to his presence, though 
she had taken an opportunity, after a fortnight 
had elapsed, to hint that she was unhappy in his 
continued stay at Montem. 

After this he went away to London for a month, 
preparatory to making final arrangements for his 
return to India; so he said. During this month 
Am/s life flowed on again smoothly amidst these 
new scenes ; she received visits and returned visits ; 
she had given a grand ball to the county families 
surrounding Montem Castle, and his lordship had 
given an al fresco fete to his tenantry. Never 



RESOLUTIONS, MADE TO BE BROKEN. 93 

had there been such gaiety at Montem Castle; 
never had the old place rejoiced in so gracious 
a mistress. 

Meanwhile Lionel Hammerton led a life of 
excitement in London. Proud and weak, as the 
reader has seen, Earl Vomer's brother could not 
overcome his terrible disappointment. He was 
mad with vexation, and he hated himself for 
losing the prize which had fallen so strangely to 
his brother's lot. That this woman had loved him 
with all her heart he now believed, and that she 
had married his brother out of pique or revenge 
he believed also. Why had he doubted her? 
That miserable thought about mercenary motives ; 
he despised himself for harbouring it, and yet it 
was a plausible doubt, he confessed to himself. 
What should he do P Oo to Lidia again and for 
good, without returning to Montem. He would. 
There could be no good purpose served in seeing 
her again. It would be manly to depart now. 
He would do so. Thus he would resolve at night 
only to break his resolution in the morning, and 



94 THB TALLAirrS OF BABTON. 

the end was a cab to Paddington and a iieket 
for Brazencrook. When Lionel had arrired at 
Seyemtown, however, he changed his mind again, 
got ont, and drove to the College Green, where he 
found Arthur Phillips at work in his familiar studio. 

''At last/' said Arthur, reciprocating Lionel's 
hearty greeting, ''at last; I feared you had for- 
gotten your friend.*' 

'' No chance of that," said Lionel ; '' your name 
is in everybody's mouth, and I have seen your 
great picture ' now on view.' " 

<<Li England all this time, and not even a 
letter from you ! " said Arthur. 

'' I meant to have looked you up the first day 
after my arrival, . ^I did indeed, but at the time I 
thought you miserable." 

'' Miserable ! " said the artist with some astonish- 
ment. 

''Yes; but it was I all the time who had 
reason for sympathy." 

" Let me ring the bell," said Arthur. " There ! 
Now go on." 



IN THE STUDIO AGAIN. 95 

A man-servant answering the bell, the artist 
said, ''Take Captain Hammerton's portmanteau 
into the blue room." 

" Yes, sir/' said the man. 

" Of course you will make a short stay here/' 
said Arthur, once more addressing his Mend. 

"I will not leave you to-day at any rate,*' 
said Lionel. " May I smoke P " 

"Of course you may," said Arthur, opening 
the old cupboard by the fireplace and producing 
cigars and lights. 

'' How &miliar the old room looks," said Lionel. 
** You have made no change here." 

"No/' said Arthur ; " none was required." 

" Tau are changed, Arthur . changed for the 
better. You seem to have lost some of your 
quiet dreamy nature. There is more animation 
in your step and in your voice. How well you 
look!" 

" Yes, thank God, I am well/' said Ar&ur. 

"Success in all things . success in your pro- 
fession . success in love/' said Lionel; "you 



96 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

should look well and liappy. By heavens^ Arthur, 
I envy you ! '* 

Ar&ur shrugged his shoulders deprecatingly, 
and said no man could judge another s happiness 
sufi&ciently to justify envy. 

'* A sop to Cerberus that/* said Lionel. " You 
wish to discount your own happiness that my 
misery may appear the less. It won't do, Arthur. 
But never mind, I have not come here to croak. 
I have heard of your success, of your happy pro- 
spects, even in London, and I congratulate you. 
You have deserved success; you deserve happi- 
ness. If I had listened to you before I left Eng- 
land, I too might have been a happy man. As 
it is, I am the sport of cruel Fortune, a broken- 
spirited, weak fool, only fit for the sodeiy of idiots." 

"Tush, tush! talk rationally, my friend; we 
have all our troubles and disappointments," said 
Arthur. " You will soon get over this. Change 
of scene, the performance of duty, will stand you 
in good stead, and help you to loo^. upon the 
past indifferently." 



BEMABEABLE OHANGES. 97 

"I fear me not, Arthur; I am dead beat. I 
came over to England for nothing in the world 
else but to marry that girl ; to throw myself at 
her feet, and ask her to have mercy on me. In 
the meantime, as if the devil himself had plotted 
against me, everything is changed . even the 
woman herself. Fortune has been playing a 
game of *swop,* and the woman whom I could 
have married meets me as my brother's wife." 

" The changes have been very remarkable . 
very," said Arthur, altogether at a loss how to 
say anything in the way of consolation. 

'^ Bemarkable ! Good Lord! why, the world 
is turned topsy-turvy. Tou have come right, 
Arthur, that's one comfort, and it is my own 
fsEiult that I stand where I do. Does she love 
my brother? How came it all about? "Was it 
revenge? Tell me all you know, Arthur: it is 
some relief to talk about one's misfortunes." 

Arthur complied so eu* as he could with this 
request, telling Lionel the story of the eventfdl 
period between his departure and return. They 
VOL. III. a 



98 THB TALLAITTS OF BABTOK. 

sat talking together until evening approacliedy acnd 
then went in to dinner, Lionel finding comfort in 
liis Mend's kindly considerate words and advice. 

At night they walked forth together by the 
river. Lionel grew calm in presence of the great 
swollen torrent, and listened to Arthnr^s story of 
his own life and its troubles, and of his plans for 
the future. They talked of Phoebe too, and of 
Arthur's years of patient hope. Lionel laughed 
aloud with joy at the story of Bidiard Tallant's 
discomfiture. 

" I always hated that fellow,'' said Lionel, in 
his loud emphatic way ; " he was a thief." 

''He had not too high a sense of honour, I 
fear,'' said Arthur. 

''He was a thief when I knew him,'' said 
Lionel still more emphatically, "and the con* 
federate of that ruffian Gibbs. What a fine old 
fellow, that father of his, to disinherit the vaga- 
bond!" 

"It was a great blow to him, though he 
prospers still," said Arthur. 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 99 

" And I might hare had some of the bear's 
money/' said Lionel, ^* had I married his sister. By 
hearens 1 I would have pitdied it into the river ! '* 

"He does not want money, they say," Arthur 
went on. " His losses have been great lately, but 
he talks of going into parliament. In fact he has 
selected my native town for the honour of his 
candidature.'^ 

" Happy coincidence I Sevemtown was to have 
suppKed me wiih a seat in the house, if I had not 
been fool enough to run my head into that Ashford 
Club den, and consented to soil my fingers with their 
filthy Stock-exchange ventures. TJpon my soul it 
is time I disappeared from the land altogether.'' 

liond strode on as if he were keeping pace with 
his thoughts, and intended to stride out of the land 
at once, and then he broke out into a loud ironical 
laugh as he said, . 

"Fancy anybody contesting a seat with a scoun* 
drel like that fellow Tallant ; and yet Amy is his 
sister, and my sister-in-law. We must all have 
been eating of the ixisane root, Arthur." 

H 2 



100 THB TALLASTS OF BABTON. 

''Fact is stranger Uiaa fiction," said he artist 

''Fiction! Fiction lialts miles behind tlie or- 
dinary tetdM of daQy life. What is this fisOow 
then?" 

"A great financier, I suppose they would call 
him : his chief position is that of managing di- 
rector of the Meter Iron Works Company, which 
his father founded,. one of the ridiest ooiporations 
in the land, I believe." 

They little thought that Mr. Bichard Tallant 
was really in serious difficulties at this veiy time. 
Whilst others of his class had been content to 
make large fortunes and retire, Mr. Bichard Tallant 
had gone on playing for hi^er stakes. Mai who 
had no money to b^;in with, had succeeded 
in humbugging the public out of thousands ; and 
others who commenced cautiously and equally un- 
scrupulously with thousands, had retired upon 
magnificent fortunes. Bichard Tallant might have 
been amongst the latter had he been less covetous ; 
and now he stood in imminent peril of losing 
nearly all: nothing but timely aid could save him. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

FOBTENDS A DEED OF VEKGEANCE. 

The difficulty of getting up the eyidence to sup- 
port a charge of conspiracy^ in the absence of Mr. 
Williamson, and Lieutenant Somerton's unwilling- 
ness to prosecute, saved Qibbs from one of the perils 
which threatened him ; and the other case which 
Mr. Bales had against him also fell through. But 
the ex-swell was reminded by the Court that he 
had had a narrow escape, and that his escape was 
rather owing to a technicality in the law than to 
any doubt of his guilt. 

Gibbs had been falling lower and lower, as our 
readers will have seen, since the night of his ex- 
pulsion from the Ashford Club. Now and then 
Fortune's lamp had blazed up for a moment, but 
only to flicker down agaiti, and tempt him into 



102 THE TALLANT8 OF BABTON. 

lower depths of d^radation. From bad to worse, 
from fEishionable gamUing to swindling^ from cheat- 
ing at cards to forgery, Gibbs had nm the gauntlet 
of .Yice and immorality. From a Stock-exchange 
bear to a money-lender's cad ; from an adyertising 
sharper to a b^ging-letter writer ; from hannting 
dubs to freqn^iting botels; from botels to tavems' 
from tayerns to gin-shops ; from gin-shops to the 
lowest m^t-boQses, ShnflBetoi Grlbbs had beocmie 
a mean, shabby, ont-of-elbows^ unshayen outcast of 
society, who had twice he&i within a gaol, and 
seoned likely to die in the gutter. 

There is no exaggeration in this rapid downward 
career . it is a common occmience. We are not 
romancing, we are not sennonising, we do not be- 
Ueye in the Maine Law, wehaye no syn^athy with 
trampet-and-drom teetotal demagogues; but we 
are none the less sure in our bdief that the first 
step aside from the straigbt path, unkas at once 
letraced, winieadtomissiy if nottorain, aadiliat 
flie man oar woman who descends to** neat gin** k 
bqrond human iedempti<m. There k h^ in tiser^ 



OIK. 103 

in wine, even in brandy ; but tbe gin drinker swal- 
lows a devilish elizir that destroys him body and 
soul. There is something heroic in brandy, some- 
thing noble, the smack of the grape is there, the 
origin of the liquor has a glory in it ; in gin there 
is debasement; the jumper berry has no classic 
history ; who does not shudder, too, at the compound 
which the habitual gin tippler consumes . ^the 
fumetacious spirit, imbued with turpentine P TJgh ! 
Whilst brandy fires the soul of the hero, the gin of 
the Xiondon stew stimulates the morbid passions of 
the thief and the murderer I 

Shuffleton Gibbs had come down to gin and fog, 
to gin and darkness, to gin and the reeking night 
air ; he was the habitu4 of the lowest night-houses, 
a shivering miserable wretch, and all the more dan- 
gerous to the man whom he hated with the low 
grovelling murderous hate of raw gin. and poverty. 

We have told the reader how Gibbs had applied 
for assistance to his early-iend, Sichard Tallanty 
and how he had been discarded and disowned. He 
made another effort still, a last effort, the effort of 



104 THE TALLAHITS OF BARTON. 

a miserable hungiy b^gar, in whose heart eyerj 
spark of pride and honour has been drowned in 
jimiper jmce and torpentine. 

''I have done with yon, sir/' said the managing 
director of the Meter Works^" yon are an impostor; 
I noTer saw yon before." 

''Not at Oxford," said the shivering b^gar, 
''not when somebody wrote an epigram on the 
nameofTallant?" 

"Never! This will be my answer always." 

"Not at Westminster, at the Ashfind, at 

"Never, sir!" exdaimed Bichard, stopping 
Gibbs in his ennmeration of tibe places on the high- 
way of infiuny where they had siqiped tog^er. 
" I onoe knew a soonndrd who led astiay a wealthy 
merdiant's son and broke tibe fidher^s heart; yon 
are something Uke that aristocratic sneak, hot yon 
are not he. The man I mean was a swell, wore 
h^t kid gloves, and splendid shirts. They did 
say he wore stays, and thought himsdf a woman 
kilkr; fiM are not that man, hot some blear- 



GBEEE AXD GREEK. 105 

eyed, shambling vagabond wbo would impose 
upon a gentleman in order that he may give you 
a night's lodging in the station house." 

" You infernal damned scoundrel," said Gibbs, 
rushing towards the cool satirical Mend of former 
days ; " you miserable mushroom huxter ! " 

Bichard Tallant was by far the strongest man of 
the two, and he felled Gibbs to the ground with 
ease. 

"Now, shall I ring the beU and have you 
pitched into the street, or will you get up and go 
home to dinner, or go to your club and have 
devilled chops and champagne . eh ? " 

Gibbs gathered himself together and stood be- 
fore his victor, clenching his hands and teeth, and 
trembling with passion. 

"I will go," he said, hissing out the words 
as if they scorched him. "The cat will mew; 
the dog will have his day." 

Mr. Tallant rang the bell. A servant came on 
the instant. 

" Show this feUow to the door ; if ever he pre- 



106 THE TALLANT8 OF BABTOK. 

somes to make his appearance here again ihrost him 
into the street and give him in charge of the police." 

" Yes, sir," said the man, ** this way." 

GKhhs followed his guide muttering, and nerrotislj 
clutching his fingers. 

''Now then, old ragamuffin," said the servant 
when they were in the hall, " hoff yer go." 

Hunger, as Zimmennann says, is the mother of 
impatience and anger, and never had mother a more 
worthy son than Shnffleton Gibhs. It was hunger 
which had driven him to make that third application 
to his Mend; hunger and thirst; hunger for mon^ 
as much as hunger for food. He had neither money 
nor credit, even in the stews, where he had exhausted 
both, when he made this last appeal to Bichard 
TaUant. But he got money somi^ow that nij^t^ 
and he swore an awful oath that he would wreak a 
tetriUe revenge on the head of this vile seoundreL 
The red-eyed, low-hrowed corouohiiig gin diinkera 
who sat with him at the midnight oigie. even fliey 
notioed the satanic malignity of Gibfas^s eoimte- 
f as it wQiked and wnthed under a paasiaii 



"LUCK." 107 

too deep for words ; they knew that, whatever it 
might importj that awM oath would not be broken. 
They fairly clanked their glasses and knocked their 
skinny knuckles upon the table to see Gibbs so 
much excited, and the women, with witch-Hke 
grimaces, pledged his '^ health " and wished him 
'.luck." 

There is generally a weak point somewhere in 
he schemes of men who set right and virtue at 
naught, and who endeavour to build up wealth 
and fEune upon fake pretences. Beligious seep* 
tics will direct your attention to instances oi 
undeserved poverty and sufferings borne through 
a whole lifetime ; will show you persons dragging 
out wretched lives of penury and want, and prove 
to you that they are good, honest, honourable 
people. As companion pictures, they will show 
you men of wealth and station living luxuriously, 
and rejoicing in the highest state of worldly hap- 
piness. And then they ask you what sort of a 
sermon or essay you can write upon the text, 
''God is love.'' But the sceptic*critic has little 



108 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

or nothing to say about real liappniess and bow 
fbat is dirided amongst the bnman &mily. If 
he bad, peibaps be mi^t pnzzle a good many 
by pointing to tbe colliery districlSy tbe &ciorie8y or 
tbe nail conntry, and sbowing you tbe bard, bitter 
life to wbicb tbonsands of cbildien are bom daDy. 
Wbat a blessed thing to some of these people is 
the futurey founded on tnie Christian Edtb ! But 
oar critic of tbe irays of ProTidence does not tell 
you of the Tniseries of keeping iqp appearances 
wbicb are behind some of those madcs of wealth ; 
and be does not tell you bow scores of the prospe- 
rons ones to whom be points come to grief at last, 
as they deserve. He fixes them before yon in 
tbar foil career of success, bnt be does not sbow 
yoa tbeir disappointed bopes, tbeir nnfolfilled 
ambition, tbeir social cats and woonds, the 
grieTances of tbdr women, tbe sodal fBofaires of 
dicar sons and daughters ; and, wbat is more, be 
does not sbow 3^oa tiie aid of tbe men wb<nn be 
boUs op asprospooos, bappy, Inxmioas, levdUn^ 
wealtby Tilbin& 



RETRIBUTION. 109 

Depend upon it, men sucli as Richard Tallant, 
who have trampled upon honour and honesty, and 
aboye all, upon parental kindness (howeyer mis-< 
taken that kindness may have been), are punished 
in this world below, whatever may be their lot in 
that which is to come. 

The weakest point in Eichard Tallant's poUcy 
was the want of a course of conciliation towards 
ShuflELeton Gibbs. Fate would, no doubt, have 
met him with a just retribution in some other way 
had he escaped the result of this mistake ; but it is 
no part of our business to consider what might 
have been, we who are considering the facts of 
Siichard Tallant's career ; and as it has not been 
our purpose to be mysterious in this simple narra- 
tion, we do not hesitate to teU you that Bichard 
Tallant sealed his destiny when he resealed that 
letter of his former companion, . ^the last aban- 
doned representative of a fallen line of gentlemen. 

He little knew how often he was accompanied 
after this by a shadow more than his own. Once 
or twice, thinking he was being watched, he 



110 THE TALLA19TS OF BABTOK. 

had turned ronnd suddenly in the London streets 
to see a figure disappear as suddenly in some dark 
entry, or round an adjacent comer. He thought 
this was fancy at first ; but finally beginning to 
fear, he armed himself. He had never thought 
of Shuffleton Qibbs at these times. A super- 
stitious dread took possession of him at the outset, 
thoughts of his dead father haunted him, and 
occasionally sent him home hot, and feverish, and 
nervous. Latterly he rarely went out on foot; 
but still a mysterious figure occasionally fiitted by 
as he alighted from his carriage. Sometimes it 
seemed as if an arm were upraised. That same 
figure would stand now and then in &ont of the 
great house where Mr. Tallant resided, and con- 
template the lighted windows, and then disappear 
by crooked unfrequented ways, up dark alleys, 
along neglected streets, away ciiy-wards, until it 
entered a dirty gin-shop or some wretched lodg- 
ing-house, where it would ^issume the appearance 
of Shuffleton Gibbs, but sufficiently changed in 
feature to render disguise unnecessary. 



"blood, blood, ugo!" Ill 

Weird, restless, sunken eyes, sharp features, 
a nervous twitching of the mouth, and a continual 
watchfidness, like that of a man charged with some 
desperate mission of blood; it was a miserable 
wreck tossed about on the dark sea of criminal 
London without sail or rudder, bound for no port, 
without a name, without papers ; and yet with a 
compass pointing its trembling finger unerringly in 
one direction, where the signal lights burnt red 
and murky on a dark and dreadful shore. 



CHAPTER IX. 

GLANCES AT WILLIAMSON's STORY, AND TERMINATES 
PAUL SOMERTOn's ADVENTURE. 

It come at last, that story of Williamson's life ; 
it came in a heavy letter franked with foreign 
postage-stamps; and Paul Somerton read it with 
hot curiosity. 

There was nothing particularly new or startling 
in the narration. It was the old old story of sin 
and sorrow, with perhaps darker hues of melan- 
choly in it, here and there, than usual. ' 

During his Ilniversity career, at a very early 
age, Williamson had been attracted by the wild 
beauty of a woman who was the daughter of an 
adventurer . a man without principle . seeking in 
a son-in-law an annuity for himself, as well as a 
husband for his child. Williamson related by 



THE OLD OLD STOBT. 113 

what mean and mercenary arts this man of the 
world had lured him on, and how the daughter 
had shared with her father in the shameful plot. 
A long, long story of love, and douht, and fear, 

and unholy passion ; . of mad, blind loye, and 
desperate resolves ; of a clandestine marriage, and 
exposure; of a widowed mother's death; of a 
son's sorrow embittered by his wife's ingratitude, 
and a father-in-law's impecunious and drunken 
habits. A long, long story of woe and violence ; 
of a brave man's struggle against the miseries of a 
worse than unloving wife, and a wretched home, 
in the midst of comparative wealtL 

Soon there appeared on the scene an infant with 
bright eyes, and a young doating father seeking 
comfort in its innocent loving ways, in its happy 
smile, and its first words. But this gleam of 
sunshine quickly disappeared, and then there came 
clouds again, darker and darker ; and, finally, 
there stood forth in the immoral darkness a hus- 
band's shame, a wife's infidelity, a father's miserable 
death from drink. 

VOL. ni. z 



114 THE TALLAKTS OF BAETON. 

Paul shuddered as lie traced out the dreary story 
with the writer's special notes and comments, in- 
tended to apply to Panics own position and act as 
awful wammgs. 

Then at length the husband was alone. The 
wife had fled with a cher ami of former days. 
Her child disappeared, too. She kaew that the 
infant would have been a source of consolation 
to the forlorn and broken man; hence her 
fiendish vow that he should see it no more. The 
wrongs which she had heaped upon him induced 
all this fierce hatred and malice; and, finally, 
Williamson was alone in the world with his 
sorrows. 

Tears passed away, and he heard a strange story 
of the death of his wife in connection with a tra- 
velling theatre or circus. The name of a celebrated 
comedian, who had by misconduct been reduced to 
the booth and the fair, was mixed up with the 
event in some way; but WiUiamson could never 
clear the story up satisfactorily, and all his efforts 
to obtain tidings of his child proved ineffectual. 



A BLIGHTBD OAJEtSKB. 115 

How he had lired sinoe those terrible days of his . 
early life his friends knew ; that there was a dark 
shadow upon his history they knew also ; but of the 
misery and despair^ the blighted career^ the hopes 
destroyed, the opportunities misapplied, the broken- 
down ambition, the aching heart, Ihey knew 
nothing. 

And this woman . ^this wife of Shuffleton Qibbs 
-*^this scheming, unscrupulous woman, was his 
child ! That Paul Somerton should never see her 
again would be her father's chief care ; his next, 
a life-long effort to redeem her from herself to 
straighten the crooked mind, to win back to the 
darkened conscience some ^t light at least of 
purity and truth . ^to combat with the inborn devil, 
that some essence of the angel might stiU revive 
within that human souL 

And then the writer grew eloquent upon won- 
derful cases of conversion from the lowest depths of 
sin to paths, of virtue ; the &ith of the true Chris- 
tian broke out in burning words, and here and 
there expressions of parental hope in the future. 

I 2 



116 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

But SO far as Paul was conoemed^ he was reminded 
in firm, but kindly words, that there stood between 
him and this woman marriage vows plighted to 
another, and the claims of a long suffering father 
pledged to a great and holy work of religious duty. 
Some day, ere the deep shadows of the future 
closed upon them all for ever, and there was an 
end of passion and repentance, they might meet 
again, but for the present their paths in the great 
world lay in different directions. 

Wearied and unhappy. Lieutenant Somerton lay 
down on his bed Ihat night when he received this 
letter. The next morning he woke with a sense 
of pain and weakness. For days after this he was 
delirious. His constant attendant during this time 
was his gentle sister Phoebe, who came to town 
with her &ther on a special summons from the 
young officer's medical attendant. 

Though in point of time we anticipate slightly 
some of the .events of the next few chapters, we 
think it well to finish Paul's " first love " adven- 
ture in this place. We take the liberty, there- 



AT OLDHALL FABM. 117 

fore, to say that when lie had suffidently recoyered 
his father took him down into lincohishire^ and in 
OQnrse of time, amidst the bracing air of wolds and 
fensy health and strength came back to him. What 
a quiet, dreary time it was these few months, in 
the heart of the great agricultural district ! Slug- 
gish rivers, with sedgy banks ; long hard roads ; 
low trim hedges; sleek, short-homed cattle; big 
hay-ricks and straw stacks . how fSuniHar they 
became ! Then there was an occasional ride to the 
hounds, visits to the local markets, unsophisticated 
evening parties, and all the other rural pleasures of 
the place. 

Paul felt happy in the society of his new sister, 
as he called her . ^the happiness of an aspiring 
mind in the presence of its superior ; and Arthur 
Phillips, with his grmi thoughts and his quiet 
manner, was a welcome guest at the old Lincoln- 
shire house. Mrs. Somerton was not a happy woman, 
though she evidently made a constant effort to 
appear so ; but Luke was full of Ufe and spirits. 
He was the leading man of the district, and rapidly 



118 THE TALLAKT8 OF BARTON. 

beeonoong the most popular. It wa6 like reading a 
book, his lineolnsliire fi:iends said, to hear him 
talk about tarmmg^ and the newspapers reported 
his speeches in fiill when he presided at the Dis 
trict Agrienltaral Soeieiy. 

After a time the Lieutenant rejoined his regi-* 
ment, and left England for the Gape of Good Hope^ 
a wiser and a better, though not a happier, man^ 
for his adyenture with the barrkter's mjnsterious 
daughter. He kept his secret all the time in the 
lineolnshire fens and marshes, and carried it with 
him to Kaffir-land, May we hope to hear of him 
before our story doses, that he found consolationi 
in the loye of some other woman more worthy his 
devotion. The lacerations of young hearts oftei^ 
heal with astonishing rapidity. 



CHAPTER X. 



Jot and grief, how they alternate! What a 
busy^ sorrowing, cheerfiil^ merry, sad, wicked, vir- 
tuous world it is ! Births, marriages, and deaths ! 
. a text for all preachers . ^a safe guide for novelist 
end story teller. Births, marriages, and deaths! 
The same story every day told by every newspaper. 
What then can a true history of life be but a story 
of births, marriages, and deaths ? 

Unroof yon street, friend Asmodeo, and let the 
reader judge for himself. Here a child is bom ; 
there a bridegroom has just brought home his 
newly-married wife ; yonder lies a dead man with 
sorrow weeping by his side. Carry us away to 
that village in the soft, sunny country. The same 
story stilL Births, marriages, and deaths. joy 



120 THE TALLAinrS OF BABTON. 

and grief alternating ! What bells are those that 
ring so merrily P What bell is that which groans^ 
and sobs, and wails P 

Thank goodness, the merry bells are for our ears 
in this chapter. The sonnd comes firom a great 
square tower, that stands up like a beacon in the 
Lincolnshire cornfields. The dash and dang of 
the bells comes rushing out through the belfry 
apertures into the dear air amongst the rooks and 
the swallows. The dead who He beneath those 
gaunt, crumbling, half-buried graye-stones, hear 
them not, though they rung out joyously at their 
marriages. The hard, grimy faces in the church 
pordi, and the cherubims that ornament the water- 
spouts, hear the bells now quite as weU as the men 
and women who passed them by on their way to 
the altar years and years ago. You would think 
the birds heard the melody and rejoiced in it; 
they chirruped, and sung, and flitted to and firo 
with a gaiety which they rarely exhibit in autumn 
days; for they knew the year was coming to an end, 
and that the north wind cometh after hanrest. 



A QUIET WEDDING. 121 

Thai ancient sluggish river, which had been red in 
olden times with the blood of the last Saxon war- 
riors, let the bell-music rest upon its bright bosom 
in which the clouds mimicked each other, and 
hid themselves amongst spikes of waving rushes 
and green water flags. 

They were ringing, these Lincolnshire bells, in 
celebration of the marriage of Arthur Phillips and 
Phoebe Somerton, who had walked arm in arm 
to church to be married, unattended save by Luke 
Somerton and Paul, and their own true love. It 
was Arthur's wish that it should be so ; and no- 
body but those most intimately concerned knew of 
the marriage until the bells, big with tiie secret, 
burst their iron bonds, and gave birth to that 
joyous melody. 

And whilst they were ringing out their blithe 
and hopefcd song, the Earl and Countess of Yemer 
were discussing the happy event at Montem'Castle, 
walking by the side of that sunny lake in the park. 

" The news comes so suddenly," said her lady- 
ship, ''that it is almost tantalising.'^ 



122 THE TALLA19TS OF BABTON. 

" What a sly little foz it is/' said his lordship. 

'^I haye pressed her upon the subject several 
timeSy but unsuocessfally. Never mind, I irill be 
even with her. It has been in my mind very often 
to tell you of my idea of a wedding present for 
these dear friends of ours.** 

'^Yes, yes/* said his lordship; ^^what is it, 
dearest?" 

^'Oh, something so dread&lly expensive/* said 
the Countess ; '' something almost unheard of as a 
wedding present** 

"Ton excite my curiosity/* said his lordship, 
gaily. 

''It is something belonging to you . a gift in 
your own possession.** 

" Our pictures P ** said his lordship, eagerly. 

" No, my love.** 

" Our pottery, our books, our jewels P ** said his 
lordship, tossmg a stone into the lake for the 
amusement of a water spaniel. 

"No ; I fear you cannot guess/* said Amy. 

'' Then I will give it up at once : whatever it 



A. NOBLE GIFT. 123 

be, Amy, it is yours to bestow upon bride or bride- 
groom,^' said bis lordship. 

" Thank you, my dear George ; how good you 
are,'' said the Countess. 

" Not half good enough to have such a dear, 
dear wife as you. Amy," said the loying old lord. 
" And now what is it P " 

*'The Barton Hall Estate," said Amy, trium- 
phantly. "The house where Phoebe was bom, 
where she Kved, and which was really her home, 
the fields in which she walked, the rocks and trees 
which her husband loved to paint, the place where 
PhoBbe and your Amy Kved and loved together." 

"Good, good! '' said the Earl. 

" You consent P " asked Amy, joyfully. 

"Certainly," said his lordship, "with all the 
pleasure in Ufe ; you never doubted it. Besides, 
the estate is your own, Amy." 

"My dear love," said the Countess, a warm 
affectionate smile lighting up her beautifdl face ; 
but her countenance fell immediately, as Lionel 
Hanmierton emerged from a thicket dose by. 



124 THE TALLANTS OP BAKTON. 

*' Oh ! Lionel, going for a ramble P " said the Earl. 

*^ Yes/' said Lionel, raising his hat to the 
Conntess, ''the weather is so tempting, and my 
time down here so short/* 

" Indeed ; when do you leave ns then P " asked 
the Earl. 

'' Next month,'' said Hammerton. 

" Thank God I " said the Conntess in her heart. 

" Yonr friend the artist is married to-day," said 
the Earl ; '' a quiet wedding all to themselves, and 
a secret." 

" I understood it was to be so," said Hammer- 
ton. " I hope they will be happy." 

" As happy as two other friends of yours," said 
his lordship, merrily. 

" Happier, if that were possible," said Lionel. 

" But it is not possible," said his lordship. " Is 
it Amy?" 

** I think not," said Amy, casting a side-glance 
of defiance at Lionel. '* When two people marry, 
happiness comes to them in a hundred different 
ways." 



BENEATH THE STTBFACE. 125 

"What do you think her ladyship's wedding 
present is to be P '^ his lordship asked. 

" Diamonds and pearls^ and bracelets of gold, 
and rubies/' said Lionel. " Her ladyship has good 
choice of jeweby and things that are costly." 

Amy could understand the covert sarcasm of 
lionel's reply, but his lordship laughed and said : 

"I knew you could not guess. I tried much 
more likely presents than those, without avail.. 
Guess again.'' 

" Books of poems bound in gold, &11 of legends 
of love and constancy." 

" No. you'll never guess. What do you think 
of the Barton Hall Estate for a wedding present F " 

Lionel hesitated and looked at Amy, who had 
taken her husband's arm and was walking quietly 
by his side. 

"I am not joHng. What do you think of a 
woman who presents to her Mend Barton HaU, 
and the lands surrounding it, chiefly on account of 
the dear associations connected with it, and all that 
sort of thing?" 



CHAPTER XI. 

EXFLANATIOKS THAT CAME TOO LATE. 

"I HAVE many times endeavoured to converse 
with yon alone ; you have studiously prevented this 
until now," said liond Hammerton, addressing the 
Countess, as she sat at the piano the morning after 
their meeting by the lake. 

Lord Yemer was in the library, indulging in his 
morning's devotion at the shrine of his favourite 
author. 

" I feared you until yesterday ; I fear you no 
longer, because your sympathies have at last been 
awakened in my favour,'' said Amy. 

"I thought you mercenary . let me confess 
it . ^I thought you worldly and selfish; that you 
had married not only for revenge, but for 
riches." 



BEPBOACHES. 129 

'' You are pleaded to be candid/' said Amy, a 
little indignaatly. 

" Not to wound you, any more tlian myself; for 
I loved you with all my soul . . " 

" I must not listen to you if you talk of love," 
said Amy, interrupting him. 

" You must, you shall," said Lionel, firmly. " It 
will be the last time." 

" Have I deserved your reproaches?" said Amy, 
looking straight into his eyes. " You, who deserted 
and neglected the woman whom you professed to < 
love, . deserted her because of her lowly birth, . 
did you think there was no pride as well as humi- 
lity in loveP How did you mention my nam 
to your artist Mend when you left England with* 
out even saying fiaxeweU to me P" 
"What did I say to PhilKpsP" 
*' Yes, I asked him. It was the last straw to 
which I dung." 

Lionel remembered his parting conversation with 
Arthur. 

" What did he say P" 

VOL. m. K 



130 THE TALLAirrS OF BABTOK. 

" He would not teU me how you had spoken 
of me. This was when I was rich, Lionel, an 
heiress, possessed of fortune . ^aye, and of modest 
rank too. I pressed him. He confessed you 
had spoken of me. ' Did he speak of me as 
you would wish to have heard your sister 
spoken of by the man whom she loved P* I asked 
him." 

" And what was his reply P" 

"He said *No;' and from that moment I re- 
nounced you and your fiedse love. I had only been 
in a whirl of jealousy and pride before.'' 

" He said truly . Arthur Phillips said truly ; but 
0, 1 loved you then, Amy, loved you stiU in my 
heart ; and when I returned to England, ignoraat 
of aU the changes which had taken place, I came 
to throw myself at your feet." 

Amy trembled as he spoke, trembled at the 
thoughts of the happiness there would have been in 
this ; but respect for herself, gratitude to her lord, 
womanly, wifely pride stepped in and restored her 
former self-conmiand. 



AND HE CALLED THIS LOVE ! 131 

" And what did you say then to Arthur Phil- 
lips P'' asked the Countess. 
, " I th()ught you cared more for my position^ for 
my presumed wealth and prospects, than for myself 
alone/' said Lionel. " Why did you interfere in 
my private aflfairs P why make those inquiries con- 
cerning my relationship with Eichard Tallant, or 
my doings at the Ashford Cluh P" 

"It brooks little now how much I loved you, 
Lionel ; and an explanation of my motives can do 
no good, seeing that neither of us can restore the 
past ; but Heaven knows I grieved that your sta- 
tion was so much higher than that of the girl who 
loved you so well. And stiU I could not bear to 
see you &11, to hear of your noble nature lowering 
itself to the level of the base and the mean, to 
have it suUied by contact with gamblers, and '* 

"There was no thought of self in thisP no 
jealous watching over my expenditure P no worldly 
speculations of the future P" said Lionel, hurriedly 
interrupting her. 

" For shame ! " exclaimed the Goimtess, rising ; 

K 2 



132 THS TALLANTS 07 BABTON. 

" for shame t If this is how yon interpreted my 
weak condnct . ^if this is how yon estimated the 
homage of 'my poor girlish heart . thank God, 
Lionel Hammerton, yon and I are parted for ever ! 
Had my love been blessed with yonr acceptance, 
this dLscovery wonld have been like a corse npon it 
. ^it wonld have broken my heart." 

Lionel bowed his head before this storm of 
womanly indignation. 

" Never talk of love again, Lionel, nnless yon 
can believe that woman's love has nothing of self 
in it ; that it is above the world almost as mnch 
as the angels are ; that it is self-sacrjcing, meek, 
lowly . content to be trodden npon by the living 
idol which it sets np for worship. Thi& is true 
woman's love: in my love for yon there was, 
indeed, the worldly leaven of pride; the inborn 
spirit of my race, I suppose. But for this I should 
have sunk under your neglect and withered and 
died. With pride came the desire for revenge; 
and the love that was scorned and neglected, I 
plucked it out of my heart, trampled upon it as 



FOBGIVENESS. 133 

you had done^ and in its place, Lionel, I planted 
Ambition. As fate would have it, jqvi brother 
came in my way, and I am his wife. I have 
sworn to honour, love and obey him, and I mil to 
the end. His kindness, his devotion, have already 
made me deeply grateful to him; and love, the 
love of devoted friendship . ^not that passionate love 
of past days, but constant considerate love . ^wiU 
come with time. And now you know all my 
secref 

'* You can never forgive me," said Lionel ; " I 
can never forgive myself 

"Just now I thought I could not, but I can 
forgive you, Lionel : I do with all my heart Do 
you forgive me P I ought to have waited . ^I know 
all that meek and lowly love should have done. 
but my soul was on fire with my wrongs, my hopes 
were all cast to the winds ; my mother, or rather 
Mrs. Somerton, taunted me with my folly, and I 
scarcely knew what I did.'' 

''God bless you, Amy 1 . if there be aught to 
forgive, I forgive you freely. I was anxious that 



134 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

we should both understand each other ; that there 
should be a mutual ezplanationy a reconciliation. 
Amy . a restoration of some little of that old love 
in which we may pray for each other as brother 
and as sister/' 

Amy gave Lionel her hand, as the tears coursed 
down her cheeks : he took the fair white fingers 
and pressed them to his lips; and just at that 
moment a &ce peered in at the window. It was 
Richard Tallant ; he had come down to Brazencrook, 
left his luggage at the hotel, and walked oyer to 
Montem Castle, smoking a cigar, and reyolying his 
position and prospects in his mind. He had come 
oyer to see the Countess on business ; he wanted a 
large adyance of money, or some security which 
would enable him to raise fimds. He was in what 
commercial men call a ''deft stick,'' and he would 
speedily be what they call, in equally significant 
language, " up a tree." Not content with a mode- 
rate fortune, he had continued his course of specu- 
lation, and the tide had turned against him. The 
bills which he had unwarrantably kept afloat in 



A FINANCIAL FIX. 135 

connection with the Meter- works had been mostly 
" done " by a discount house which had suddenly 
failed^ and there were large payments to meet with- 
out delay. A bank, of which he was a director, 
grew suspicious of his transactions, and he was 
called upon by his colleagues to put his accounts 
straight. Another bank, where he had deposited 
his meter shares, suffered from so great a pressure 
that the manager was compelled to threaten that 
in two days ttiose shares would be sent into the 
market for sale. Therefore, without some imme- 
diate and extraneous aid, he was a ruined man. 

In this fix he determined to seek the assistance 
of his sister. He had compelled her to help him 
before, and, what was more, to invite his co-opera- 
tion in that famous marriage ceremony. He had 
paid a formal visit to Montem since then, and had 
not received any ftirther encouragement for keep- 
ing up the family connection. But he felt that 
he had a hold upon the Countess ; if she would 
pay for her secret once, she would pay twice . and 
she should. 



136 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

''The iU-mannerly fellow/' said Lionel, as he 
caught a glimpse of the face in the window. 

" It is my brother Eiohard," said Amy ; " what 
can he possibly have come here for, without an- 
nouncementy and evidently on foot, from Brazen- 
crookP" 

Lionel left her, and the next moment Sichard 
Tallant sent in his card. 

Her ladyship's reply was, that she was indisposed, 
and would not be able to see Mr. Tallant at present. 
He would find Lord Vomer in the library. 

"Thank you," was Richard's reply. "I will 
take a little walk, and return shortly. I will not 
disturb his lordship." 

Meanwhile the Countess sought her room, and 
Lionel called old Morris to pack his trunks that he 
might leave for London by the morning mail. He 
felt that it was now really time he should leave 
Montem Castle for good. 

The Countess did not put in an appearance until 
dinner-time, and she was surprised to find her bro- 
ther dressed and waiting to conduct her to her seat 



A DULL DINNEB PARTY. 137 

"lionel has ridden Hector into Brazencrook," 
said his lordship ; '^ he fancies that he must make 
certain inquiries himself concerning the trains ; he 
finds that it will be necessary for hirn to be in Lon- 
don to-morrow. It has suddenly occurred to him 
that he must reaUy get back to India. Queer fel- 
low, Mr. Tallant, my brother." 

"So it would appear/' Mr. Tallant replied. 

'*And you are a queer fellow too! Imagine, 
my love, he had left his luggage at the Vomer 
Aims in Brazencrook, and declined my invitation 
to dinner. Of course I ordered his luggage to be 
sent for immediately.'' 

His lordship had done this, not because he had 
any particular regard for Mr. Tallant, but simply 
in the hope of pleasing his wife ; for, truth to tell, 
the Earl didiked this fellow, who had been a source 
of so much sorrow to that poor old man, his 
Etther. 

The dinner was a dull affair, despite Lord 
Yemer's efforts to make it cheerful. The Countess 
complained of headache. Mr. Sichard Tallant 



138 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

would talk of nothing but money and finance, of 
foreign bonds and national liabilities, and great 
houses which were at that moment experiencing 
the pressure of the panic more than they had felt 
it when the storm was at its height. 

Lord Yemer thought politics almost as dull a 
theme as finance ; but he was more at home when 
Mr. Tallant spoke of the probability of a Government 
crisis, and Lady Yemer found that she, too, could 
say something about Whigs and Tories, liberals 
and Bradicals ; and so by the time the last course 
was removed a conversation had been started and 
maintained in which Mr. Tallant did not monopo- 
lise all the talking. 

Lady Yemer rose to leave the room much earlier 
than usual at dessert, and tea was announced before 
the two gentlemen had well tasted the Earl's choice 
old port. 

"Her ladyship is early to-night," said Lord 
Yemer. " I suppose she is amdous that we shall 
come into her dominions as soon as possible." 

" Perhaps her ladyship fears you may become a 



AKISTOCRATIC FINANCIERS. 139 

financier, if I am honoured with your society too 
long over wine," said Mr. Tallant. 

"No fear of that," repKed Lord Vemer* 
"Haminerton induced me to invest in some new 
companies, and I don't think it at all likely that I 
shall make such another mistake." 

"There are peers of the realm, and cabinet 
ministers too, bishops also, who have thought it 
quite legitimate to do a little in finance lately," 
said Mr. TaJlant ; " your lordship might do worse 
than be at the head of some gigantic company." 

" You think so P" said Lord Vomer. 

"I do indeed; rank and fortune, the highest 
aristocracy in the land, have not thought it infra 
dig. to take part in promoting the commercial pro- 
sperity of their country." 

" GKgantic companies seem to be gigantic hum- 
bugs just now, Mr. Tallant, and I assure you that 
is not in my line ; and so we wiU in to tea . 
Lady Vomer does not like to be kept waiting." 

From the grand old oak dining-room, with its 
black polished wamscoting, its great black elabo- 



140 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

rate sideboard and antique cliairSy into an adjacent 
drawing-room, was qnite a little walk over Turkey 
carpets and soft flu% mats. The tall flunkeys in 
attendauce were a splendid match both in manner 
and matter ; and, however much Mr. Sichard Tallant 
might ape this sort of thing at Kensington Palace 
Gardens, he could not help feeling that he was in 
presence of the real thing here. There was no 
veneering at Montem Castle, no attempt at display, 
none of that demonstrative show with which Ple- 
beian Upstartism impresses you. Whatever there 
was at Montem Castle struck you with ite reality, 
even to the form and ceremony. It was not put 
on. for special occasions. The inmates were used 
to it. The best of everything was for my lord 
and lady, and the guests came in for their share 
of the best. There were certainly in the castle 
graud plate services for state occasions, when 
numbers were the chief consideration of cook and 
butler; but the grandeur of Montem Castle one 
day was the same as the next, and Mr. Tallant felt 
that this was the great difference between his place 



BEALITIES. 141 

at Kensington Palace Gardens and the magnificent 
realities of Montem. 

The drawing-room in which the Countess 
awaited her husband and brother was the smallest 
of the two drawing-rooms . an exquisitely fur- 
nished room in which pale green and pale gold 
predominated in colour. The walls were enriched 
with delicate water-colour sketches, and there were 
dainty yases and statuettes here and there. Pale 
green curtains hung in massive folds beside each 
window, and the cornices above were floral designs 
in white and gold. Mirrors between each window 
reflected the pictures aud the vases and the cabinets 
over aud over again, and the great chimney-glass 
carried facsimiles of the chandeliers far away as 
though you were looking down a long vista, until 
the hundreds of wax candles flickered like stars in 
the distance. 

The blinds were not drawn, and one of the win- 
dows looking out upon the terrace was open ; for it 
was twilight and unusually hot^ and the harvest 
moon was just rising. 



142 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

The Countess, in a low evening dress, and wear- 
ing the diamond necklace which his lordship gave 
her on her marriage, was sitting near a tray of 
silver service, and one of those said matched servi- 
tors handed to the Earl and Mr. Tallant tea and 
coffee, whichever they desired. 

In a short time Mr. Tallant said he should be 
compelled to return to town in the morning, aadhe 
would like to have a little conversation with her 
ladyship on some family matters that would not 
interest Lord Vemer. As it was such a charming 
evening, might he suggest a walk on the terrace. 

" By all means, if Amy would like it ; I think 
it would do you good, my love. Lionel will be 
here presently, and he and I can chat whilst Mr. 
Tallant is engaged with you." 

" I hope her ladyship will pardon the liberty I 
have taken,'' said Mr. Tallant, " and your lordship 
too." 

" Certainly," said Amy, " kindly ring the bell, 
my love." 

One of the matched ones came presently and 



ON THE TERBACE. 143 

brought her ladyship an Indian shawl, followed by 
her ladyship's maid, who brought a light Tuscan 
hat ; and then the Countess and her brother went 
out upon the terrace, whilst the moon was begin- 
ning to show itself through the evening clouds 
and in the lake beneath. 

Whilst they were on the terrace the yicar of 
Brazencrook, who had been visiting in the neigh- 
bourhood, made his appearance, and he and the 
Earl becoming interested in an abstruse topic upon 
which the parson desired reference, they adjourned 
to the library, leaving the Countess and her brother 
alone. 



CHAPTER Xn. 



^WHAT THE MOON SAW." 



" The amount is too large," said the Coxmtess ; 
''too large, I am sure, even if I asked his lordship 
to assist me." 

" I must have it, and you must get it," said 
Richard Tallant. 

"Indeed!" said the Countess; "you are very 
peremptory." 

" As peremptory as Fate," said the other. 

They had walked along the terrace, past the 
modem mansion and beneath the ruin of the old 
castle. Amy thinking it best that they should be 
out of danger of being overheard by servants who 
might be near any of the upper windows above the 
terrace. 

Lionel Hammerton, who had ridden in from an 



"suppose I SAT, NO?" 145 

opposite direction, saw the two figures, and, 
leaving his horse in the stable, walked round the 
back of the house to the ruin. The speakers had 
not noticed him ; and as he approached behind an 
angle of the ruin he was startled by Amy speaking 
in an angry voice, and her brother answering with 
threats. He crept within the shadowy wall, 
beneath a dump of ivy, and listened. Perhaps 
Amy might require his help. 

** By whatever means you may deem best you 
must help me out of this difficulty," said the 
brother. 

** It would certainly be more becoming to speak 
respectfully, and leave musts and threats out of 
the question until I have time for consideration." 

''There is no need for consideration. Yes or 
No : it is easily said." 

** Suppose I say. No?" 

'' Then I go straight to that fool, your huS"> 
band '' 

" Sir ! " said Amy, " this is an outrage ! '* 

" Call it what you please . ^I go straight to Lord 

VOL. III. h 



146 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

Vemer, and tell him of your love for his 
brotiier." 

" But what will that avail you now? It is an 
old story, and I am married.*' 

"Lord Vemer does not know that you were 
madly in love with his brother; that he east you o'' 

" No, no . ^how despicable ! " said Amy. 

" He cast you off, I say ; that will be my story 
to Lord Yemer. I shall tell him as a matter of 
duty. And something more too. Why is Mr. 
Hammerton here ? " 

" Because he is Earl Vomer's brother, of course, 
and this is his home when he is in England," said 
the Countess. 

"Because he is Lord Vomer's brother, poor 
fool ! Because he is your lover, my sister ! . ^your 
lover!" 

An exclamation of pain escaped from Amy's lips 
at the baseness of the insinuation conveyed in these 
words, and Lionel had almost rushed oiit to 
strangle her maligner on the spot ; but discretion 
pitMiapted him to remain where he stood. 



A TRUE WOMAN. 147 

'' Oh, yes, it is very fine to assume an injured 
tone, but I saw him kiss you this morning . I saw 
him through the window. You cannot deny it. 
What will Lord Vomer think of that ? 'Eh.ma 
bonne acsur ?*' 

" And this will be your story to Lord Vemer," 
said Amy, trembling with indignation, "if I do 
not find the money you ask for ?'* 

" It will most assuredly," said Eichard. 

"Then tell your story, sir . tell your story at 
once; I will rather throw myself upon Lord 
Vomer's love, the consciousness of my own inno- 
cence, and the honour of Lionel Hammerton, than 
buy your silence any longer, you miserable un- 
scmpulous man," said Amy ; and then it seemed 
as if she hurried away, or as if they had passed 
within the old court-yard of the ruined castle. 

Just then the moon shone forth brightly for a 
moment, and Lionel heard voices again in the 
direction of the court-yard ; but the intervening 
walls were too thick for him to hear distinctly 
anything that was said. 

l2 



148 TDE TALLABTB OF BABTOS. 

Ab he came fiirili to leoomiaibe a psbol 
fixed, and ilieii a temble cry btd^e i^on ilie stiH 
eremng air . a iiaiA fliai echoQl throog^ flie 
hroken dd oarridon, ataiflmg ilie bats and ilie 
Olds. Hurrymg to Ilie spot, Lkxnel ibiind Bidbaxd 
Tallant stietehed li^on tlie tai And now tbe 
moon fihone fortli in att its autumnal ^orj, aoiding 
a pale g^eam thioiigh the eourt-yard and athwaEt 
ilie figaie of ilie djiDg man. 

HaatQy raising, ilie body np, Liond fimnd fliat 
ilie man had been diot through the light temple. 
The ball must faaye penetrated the brain, xr he 
was qnite dead, and ilie blood was streaming 
down his pale diee^L 

One of the castle s^rants bad heard the report 
of ilie pistol and the cry that followed it, and be 
bad bnrried to the rain too, and found Lionel 
apportu]g the dead body. Mr. Hammerton bade 
bim alann ibe bonsebold, and in a short time 
Sichard Tallant was lying dead in the room to 
whidi bis lu^age bad been carried. 

What a terrible nigbt it was . that' nigbt of the 



POLICE mQTTIBIES. 149 

murder ! The police came from Brazencrook, and 
made all sorts of inquiries. They found a pistol 
lying near the spot where the body was found. A 
case of suicide was the first suggestion; but it 
seelned that a breast-pocket in the gentleman's 
coat was turned inside out^ and torn as if some- 
thing had been violently removed from it^ and 
there was a bruise on the back of the right hand 
as if the deceased had attempted for a moment to 
defend himself after he had fallen^ and been struck 
with a stick or with the butt-end of the pistol. 

'* Where is her ladyship P " Lionel asked of the 
maid. 

"In her room, and very unwell indeed," was the 
reply. 

Who could have committed this terrible deed P 
The thought flashed through Lionel's mind, and 
with it just the whisper of a terrible suspicion. 
What an awfiil weight of anxiety and misery it was I 

The superintendent of the Brazencrook police 
intimated that he would like to put a few questions 
to Mr. Hammerton and the groom in his lord- 



150 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

ship's presence, and also to Lord Yemer himselfl 
His lordship, therefore, invited the officer to go 
into the library with himself and the Brazencrook 
yicar, and here the policeman finished his inquiry 
for that day in the following manner : 

First he obtained from Lord Vomer the particu- 
lars of Mr. Tallanf s arrival, and having brougbt 
the story up to the point where Mr. Tallant went 
out upon the terrace with his sister, the policeman^ 
desired to see Lady Yemer, that she might con- 
tinue the narrative ; whereupon Lord Yen^^ re- 
buked him as an insolent fellow, and reminded him 
that he was in the presence of the Lord Lieutenant 
of the county. 

"Who has only a duty to perform, like myself,'* 
Said the officer. 

" You cannot see Lady Yemer," said his lord- 
ship ; " and your desire to do so is an impertinence. 
If you choose to conduct your inquiries respectfully 
you may continue them ; if not, were you twenty 
times a policeman I would have you bundled out 
of this room, sir. There ! '^ 



WHAT THE OBOOM SAID. 151 

"I bow to your superior authority, your lord- 
sliip," said the officer, cahnly. " May I ask you 
one more question before I proceed to put one or 
two to your servants P " 

" You may," said Earl Vomer. 

" Did this gentleman come here on business ? " 

'^I think he had some little business with his 
sister, the Countess." 

" Thank you, my lord," said the officer. 

" What is your name ? " asked the officer, turn- 
ing to the groom. 

" Jones . ^Peter Jones," said the man. 

" Tell me all you know about this affair," daid 
the officer, " and how you found the deceased.'* 

" I had suppeied up Hector after Captain Ham- 
merton had returned from Brazencrook, and I was 
just leaving the stable when I heard a gun or pistol 
fired off, and somebody shout. I went in the 
direction of the sounds, and there saw Mr. Tallant 
dead, and Captain Hammerton holding his head 
up.'' 

" Very good," said the officer. 



152 THE TALLA19TS OF BABTON. 

" Will you kindly explain what you know about 
it, Captain?" 

'^I heard the report of fire-arms/' said the 
Captain, *' and hurrying to the spot, foxmd the poor 
gentleman dying. He was not quite dead when I 
raised him up." 

" How far were you away from the spot, sir?" 

''A hundred yards, perhaps." 

" Tou were near the nun, then ? '' 

" Yes ; by the keep." 

" Had you been there long P " 

" Only a short time." 

" Were you with the deceased P " 

"No." 

"May I ask what brought you near the 
ruinP" 

" Seeing some one walking there, I had gone in 
that direction when I gave my horse to Jones." 

"Did you see one or two persons P " 

"I thought I saw two." 

" Did you hear voices P " 

"IbeKeveldid/' 



Lionel's hobbiblb suspicion. 153 

"Did any one leave the min whilst you were 
ihereP " 

" I cannot say/' 

"Did Lady Vomer P Her ladyship had been 
walking on the terrace with her brother." 

"I don't know," said the Captain, his heart 
beating wildly with a burning suspicion that 
haunted him like a ghost. 

" Tou were going towards the figures when you 
heard the pistol,'* said the officer. " Did you go 
straight in the direction of the persons you thought 
you saw ? " 

"Not quite." 

" You put the keep and that comer of the ruin 
to the right between them and you P " 

"Yes.'' 

" Thank you. Captain Hammerton. There will 
be an inquest to-morrow on the body. I suppose 
we may rely .upon your attendance." 

" Certainly,'' said lioneL 

" Shall we remove the body for the inquest, your 
lordship?'' 



154 THB TALLABTS OF BASOOBL 

^ It IS not neceaBHiy," said the EaiL 
^GK>od mg^ty my lord . good mg^t, geiitle]iin,* 
said the oflScer, leaTing the room. 

When lie was dear of the castle gates the 
poHoe superintendent despaiched the poHrpinm 
irho was with him to Biazencrook for three more 
oflioeray who were to meet him near fiie mms as 
qnidJy as poanUe. When they came he posted 
them at Tarions distant points commanding flie 
casdoy and bade fliem take any person into custody 
who might attempt to leaye it during the night, ihe 
.icar of Brazencrook alone excepted. 

In the castle that night 4wo persons gave fliem- 
selves npy during the still hours, to thdr wakeM 
thoughts. When the Countess heard the whole 
stoiy, a terrible 8(duti<m of the mystery suggested 
itself to her mind. liond Hammerhm had oTcr- 
heard her brother's threats, and had shot him in 
his fear and passion ; for he knew how mudi the 
Earl's happiness was bound up in the love of his 
wife. It was a terrible thought^ but came again 



"the avenging shadow." 155 

and again into Am/s troubled mind ; and all the 
time^ think whatever he might, it seemed as if the 
devil whispered in Lionerq ear, ** She kiUed him." 
He knew that it was a miserable morbid thought 
arising out of excitement, and overhearing the dead 
man's threats, and his violent taking off occurring at 
so important a moment for Amy's peace. And so 
these two fought with the ghosts of fancy, whilst 
the policeman half suspected Lionel, who had blood 
upon his coat, which, however easily accounted for, 
was still blood for all that. 

What a blessing it would ha\^ been for them all 
if they could have seen that dark, halting shadow, 
which had flitted about amongst the ivy, and in 
out-of-the-way nooks and comers of the old ruin 
all the day long; that same figure which had 
haunted Eichard Tallant in the Great City ; that 
same figure which, on the night before, had slept 
beneath a tree in Kensington Palace Gardens, near 
Mr. Tallant's house ; that same figure which had 
glided behind his carriage in the early morning. 



156 THE TALLAIJTS OF BABTOK. 

and perched upon {he springs behind ; {hat same 
figure which had trayelled by {he same train, and 
disappearing amongst the passengers at Brazen- 
crooky had hannted Bichard Tallant hr away in 
the distance, through the harvest fields, and along 
the white highway ; that same figure which had 
leaped upon him with a hissing taunt, and pressed 
the cold weapon to his head that the work of 
destruction might be certain. Oh, if the police 
could but haye met that creeping, stealthy figure, 
as it hugged that pocket-book, and crept away 
towards the woods for shelter, until the rain, which 
had been threatening to Ml, should come down, 
and obscure the moonlight. In less than an 
hour great clouds rolled before the moon, and 
the rain fell in big splashing drops upon the trees, 
carrying now and then to the ground the first 
brown leaves of autumn. 



CHAPTER Xin. 

m WHICH THE SEVERNSHIBE OOBONEB HOLDS AN 
INQUEST. 

At noon the next day an inquest was held on 
the body at ''The Magpies/' the inn nearest 
Montem Castle . a roadside hostelry that stood 
back firom the road, as if it had stepped aside 
for shelter beneath those great walnut-trees and 
ekns which stretched their mnbrageous arms oyer 
the lidien- covered roo An open space in front 
was occapied by a pump and a wide trough, to 
which wi^goners brought their horses, whilst they 
sat on the adjacent seat and tossed off brown 
sparkling ale from small glasses, which they re- 
filled with a sort of pride from blue foaming jugs. 
There was the sign swinging between two bars 
like a wooden banner, displaying three mag- 



158 THE TALLANTS OF BAETON. 

pies in solenm oondave near a wood. The lichens 
on the roof had gradually dispersed themselves 
over the coping-stones of the old house^ and the 
brown and yellow excrescences vied with the 
changing hues of the sheltering trees. 

Upon the day mentioned there were unusual 
signs of life at " The Magpies.*' A crowd of idlers 
and gossips, men from the comers of Brazencrook 
streets, and boys and girls and hulking farm- 
labourers, lounged about the house, watching eyery 
moyement of the police, and the coroner and 
the jury, with a dull but observant curiosity. 
When the jurymen went to view the body of 
the deceased man, and the spot where he was found, 
the little crowd followed at a respectful distance, 
and then came back again, after a walk of nearly 
three miles, to stare in at the window where the 
inquest was held, or drink beer in the tap-room. 

The coroner opened the inquiry in a long and 
judicious address upon the circumstances of the 
case, and stated that the superintendent of the 
Brazencrook police had been anxious that Lady 



BEPOBTERS. 159 

Yemer should be called upon to give evidence. 
He regretted, howeyer, that her ladyship, who was 
unwell when the dreadful occurrence took place, 
had been so shocked by the event that she was 
now seriously ill, and her medical attendants were 
anxious that she should haye repose of mind and 
body. His lordship had, however, kindly signified 
his intention of being present ; he beUeved that he 
was now in the house, and if so, they would hear 
his evidence "first. 

Lord Vomer entered the room opportunely at 
this moment, with his lawyer firom Brazencrook, 
and followed by reporters firom the adjacent towns, 
where the news of a '' Dreadfiil Murder in the Old 
Euin of Montem Castle '^ had already supplied 
materials for sundry second editions of sundry 
newspapers. There is no more startling illus- 
tration of the rapid rate at which we live in these 
times than that afforded by the chronicles of our 
daily history. The other day, we were grub- 
bing over the files of an old newspaper which 
was published weekly, coming out on Saturdays at 



160 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

noon with a foolscap sheet of postal news and 
rumours^ a few adyertisements^ and sundry 
mamages and deaths ; it was the leading journal 
of a great city . a city divided by a river, upon 
which vessels came and went on their way to 
' America and the East Indies, and other distant 
countries. In this Saturday's paper we came across 
a paragraph of local news, to the effect that ^' We 
hear that a dreadfiil murder was committed 
in Bedminster, on Wednesday evening;" then 
followed two or three lines indicating the manner 
of the murdered man's death ; and this was all the 
information considered necessary for the reader. 
Bednunster was really a portion of the city in 
which the journal was published, and in the present 
day that same paper would, between the time of 
the murder and the Saturday publication, liave 
reported the fullest details of the crime, with a 
description of the scene of the murder, the antece- 
dents of the dead man, a full report of the inquest 
and finding of the jury, and, supposing the criminal 
captured, a full report of the examination before 



EVIDENCE. 161 

the magistrates^ and committal^ occupying in the 
narration of this one case as much type and 
paper (to say nothing of writers and printers) 
as would have published the dd journal for several 
weeks. 

Thus the local newspapers of Sevemtown, and 
Brazencrook, and Avonworth, gave the whole dis- 
trict the speediest and fiillest information relating to 
the tragedy^ with an eloquent and graphic sketch of 
the scene by that smart gentleman who " did " the 
Vemer marriage with the prayer-book service in it. 

They told how Lord Vemer "^as the first witness 
examined^ and how his solicitor^ Montagu Masters^ 
Esq. (of the firm of Masters & Filmer of Brazen- 
crook)^ watched the proceedings in the interests of 
the family. They repeated that story of the de- 
ceased's arrival and his going out to walk, which is 
already fully known to our readers. Then they gave 
the evidence of Jones the groom, and finally the some- 
what remarkable statement of Lionel Hammerton, 
which was the most interesting portion of the in- 
quiry, seeing that the coroner cautioned the Captain 



162 THE TALLAMT8 OF BABTOK. 

in nniiBaally solemn terms that what he said would 
be taken down in writings and as he was nnfbrta- 
nately with the deceased when Jones came up, that 
ciicimistanoe might possibly prore inoonyement and 
troublesome to him, to say the least 

Mr. Montagn Masters had quite a battle royal 
oyer this point with the coroner ; but her Majesty's 
representative finally put the lawyer down by in- 
timating that he was only permitted to be pie- 
sent in this court by courtesy* and that he (the 
coroner) would conduct this inquiry in his own way. 

This most effectually prejudiced the miods of the 
jury against Lionel Hammerton, ^o cotainly gave 
his evidfflioe in a hesitating and dubious manner, 
whidi seemed fully to justify the suspcion of the 
police that he had murdered the deceased. 

In the midst of Liond's examination the groom 
was recalled. 

'' How long after the Captain gave you his horse 
was it that you heard the noise which induced you 
to go to the ruin?" 

" About a quarter of an hour/' was the reply. 



HOW THE DEED WAS DONE. 163 

. ^' Did the Captain go straight in that direction 
when he left the stable yard ? " 

" He went the shortest road/' 

"Was he in the habit of taking a walk in that 
direction after riding P " 

"I can't say." 

Then the surgeon was recalled. 

"The bndse upon the right hand is recent, you 
say?" 

"Yes." 

"Supposing the deceased had shot himself, it 
would have been almost impossible that he could 
have fired the pistol with his left hand P " . 

" Quite impossible, I should say, and considering 
the position of the wound there would have been 
some little difficulty with the right ; but of course 
he could have used both hands ; the wound is quite 
compatible with the supposition of suicide." 

The superintendent of police was also re- 
called, and he said that at the place where the 
deceased gentleman fell there were marks as if a 
struggle had taken place, and on searching the 

X 2 



184 THE TAIXAHTB OF BAKTOB. 

body no papers liad been fimnd. Mcfnis, bis lord- 
ship's man, bad seen ibe deceased wiib a podci^ 
book, and from the way in wbidi the breast podcet 
of bis coat bad been dragged open and torn, it 
would seem as if something (perhaps the podcet- 
book, as that conld not be foimd) had been forcibly 
remoyed. He wonld also yentoie to point out to 
the coroner that althongb the groom bnnied to 
the spot immediately upon bearing the noise, the 
Captain was there before him with the deceased's 
bead npon bis knee. If be bad committed suicide 
the Captain must haye been dose to the spot at the 
time, and yet he heard yoices. 

Mr. Masters protested against this police state- 
ment. 

The coroner said it was not eyidence, and he was 
not taking it down. 

Lionel Hammerton said he had no objection to 
the policeman's theorising. He certainly was the 
first on the spot; and there was blood npon the 
coat which he had just been infonned the policeman 
had sent for to the hall. 



POINTS IN THE INQXnRY. 165 

It was well Earl Vemer had long since left the 
court and knew nothing of this, or there would 
haye been a fierce struggle between the leading 
authorities. 

The points which stood out most prominently 
in the inquiry were the facts that the deceased 
had come to Montem on some business with 
his sister the Countess ; that in the twilight they 
walked out to conyerse ; that Lionel Hammerton, 
on returning from Brazencrook, instead of going 
into the house, goes towards the ruin by the nearest 
route ; that no more is heard or seen of Lady 
Vemer; that by-and-by a pistol is fired off, and 
Hammerton is found supporting the body of the 
deceased; that there is evidence of a struggle, 
though a brief one; that Hammerton can give 
no reason for going towards the ruin except that 
he saw two figures; that nobody can throw any 
light upon the nature of the business between the 
deceased and his sister; that the visit was alto- 
gether a peculiar one, the deceased leaving his lug- 
gage at the Yemer Arms at first, and then sending 



166 THE TALLABTB OF BABXOB. 

tar itf IIS ilioiigb lie were not eeriam of a land 
leeeption at the Casde; iJiat neiflier p^er nor 
notes are firand upon him; iJiat Ins foAsirboA 
is miaBing, thongb his watch and pucse, contain- 
ing gold^ remain. If the deceased was mnr dered 
the crime had heen one, not prompted suddenly hy 
ToVbery so mnch as hj rerioigey or a lobbeiy of 
papers or letters of some land which might he more 
yaloable than money. 

The inquest was adjonmed, and in the erening 
Lord Yemer and his brother had a long, serious 
talk in the library; but it consisted chiefly of specu- 
lations about Tallanfs death, and the Earl firmly 
belieyed that he had committed suicide. 

"What figures did you see, Lionel? . Her lady- 
ship must haye returned into the house, poor soul, 
for her maid tells me she had a terrible headache, 
and came in yery soon after she brought her shawl 
and hat.'' 

"No doubt," said Lionel, "it could not haye 
been her ladyship." 

Poor fellow, what was he to say! "What a 



PREVARICATION. 167 

tangled thread we weave, when first we practise to 
deceive ! " One lie led to another ; with that awful 
suspicion huming in his heart, . and it would not 
go, despite all his eflforts . ^Lionel's chief aim was 
to shield the Countess. 

*' You heard voices, you say P " 

"Yes." 

" Were you listening to them, or what ? " 

" I did listen a moment or two.'' 

*' Why did you listen P what did you suspect P " 

" I do not know ; there are times when we do 
things the most trivial without being able to explain 
why or wherefore.'' 

"So there are. Your belief that you heard 
voices, and the statement tiiat you saw two figures, 
clearly point to the theory of murder as against 
suicide-" 

" Yes," said Lionel. 

" How could the murderer have escaped P You 
were on the spot in an instant almost, it seems." 

" I was there very quickly." 

" And you saw no one P " 



168 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" No, only Tallant on the ground." 

" From what Masters says, there is no douht that 
that fool of a policeman has taken it into his thick 
head that you killed Eichard Tallant/' said his 
lordship, in a tone of contemptuous coohiess. 

** I thought so last evening, and see it clearly to- 
day," said Lionel. 

'' Let him have a care, Lionel, how he tampers 
with the name and fame of the house of Yemer. 
By heavens I will punish him! The thing is 
absurd on the face of it." 

'' I suppose the idea is that a man found by the 
side of one who is murdered should be able to give 
a succinct account of his death." 

" Once a policeman starts a theory of his own 
respecting any particular crime, he thinks of nothing 
else ; he follows no clue which does not support 
that theory ; he rejects all evidence that may tell 
against it ; his leading idea is that somebody must 
be apprehended and convicted for it; and this 
Brazencrook fellow is a shallow-pated, ambitious 
booby, whose fingers are itching to have a distin- 



A NEW WITNESS. 169 

guislied prisoner ; he is anxious to create a sensa- 
tion/' said the Earl. 

And so they continued to talk the affair over, 
whilst the gossips in the neighbourhood and 
throughout the country theorised upon it, and 
deared up the mystery in their own way. Mean- 
while, Lady Yemer, to all appearance, continued 
very ill, and no word concerning recent events was 
to be whispered in her hearing ; but when there 
was no one present but her maid she brightened up 
and insisted upon hearing of all that had occurred. 
Lady Yemer was not so ill as she seemed. 

At night when the shallow-pated and ambitious 
policeman, as Earl Yemer called him, was smoking 
his pipe oyer his own fire, and relating the incidents 
of the day to his admiring wife, an assistant in the 
shop of the leading gunsmith of the place knocked 
at the door and wished to see the superintendent 
privately and on particular business. 

*^ I come as an act of duty," said the young man, 
" although I know I shall lose my place by it, for 
the master dared and forbade me to come to you.'' 



170 THE TALLA19TB OF BABTON. 

" Yes/' said the officer, shutiang the door <^ his 
private office, and taking his seat at his desk he- 
neath a long row of handcoffii and cutlasses. 

''Captain Haxnmerton honght two pistols at our 
shop to-day." 

'' Yes," said the officer, writing down the words, 
the name of the assistant, the name of the master, 
&c. 

** A reyolver, and an ordinary pistoL" 

"Yes, go on ; I will not interrupt you, tell your 
own story." 

"He houghtthe ordinary one hecause it attracted 
his &ncy . the stock was peculiar. The reyolver, 
he said, he wanted to take to India with him, and 
he was going to London in the morning." 

" Going to London in the morning ; yes," said 
the officer, writing industriously. 

" He hought hullets and powder." 

"Yes," said the officer. 

"That is all; hearing what I did ahout the in- 
quest, I thou^ it right in the interest <tf justice 
that you should know this." 



" THINKING OF PISTOLS !'* 171 

'^ Quite right; did he take the pistols with 
himP'' 

"No ; we werp to send them by Lord Vemer's 
groom when he passed with the letters.'' 

" Oh ! '' said the officer, '' that alters the case." 

"When did the groom call ?" 

" Not until this morning." 

" What the deuce is the good of that P" said the 
officer angrily; for he was greatly disappointed. 
He had hoped that the next moment when he 
should produce the pistol found in the ruins, the 
gunsmith's assistant would identify it. 

"That will do . ^thank you all the same, though 
there is nothing much in it ; however it may be 
useful ; if so you shall hear from me again." 

When the officious apprentice had gone, the 
Brazencrook chief leaned back in his chair and 



" It shows he was thinking of pistols, at any rate 
. ^that is something ; he had deadly weapons in his 
mind. Not much in that perhaps, being a soldier, 
but put this and that together. And then about 



172 THS TAIXJklSTS OF BABTON. 

going to London to-day. Ha! I mnst get at that 
point. Fm morally certain lie killed the man, and 
Lady Yemer knows something aboat it. There 
was a qnanel, something about her peihaps ; she 

is pretty and yonng, and " 

Another knock at the door, and enter a gentle- 
man whom we have seen before, thongh a stranger 
to the chief of the Brazencrook police . ^Ifr. Bales 
rom Scotland Yard. 

The Brazencrook officer was delighted to receiye 
so distingnished a visitor. 

Mr. Bales said he knew something of the mnr- 
dered man and his connections^ and on making 
certain representations at head-qnarteiSy he had 
come down " on spec," in fact, " on his own hook." 
A large reward wonld, no doubt, be offered for the 
discoTory of the murderer, for it was a case of 
murder, . ^nobody in their senses could doubt that 
. and Lord Vomer would, of course, second the 
Oovemment efforts to dear up the mystery. 

The local officer said, mysteriously, he was not 
so sure of that ; he believed he was on the right 



"counting the chickbns." 173 

track ; if suet should prove to be the case, of course, 
he would have the reward, or at any rate the 
greatest share of it. 

" Certainly," said Mr. Bales, " certainly ; I have 
not come down here to rob you, my friend." 

" Well, I think not ; you are too great a man ; 
but that is mosfly the little game of the London 
detectives who come interfering in a thing like this, 
' on spec,' as you say." 

" It is not mine, I assure you.'* 

" Then we will make a bargain." 

"Yes, if you like." 

" Supposing my clue is right, and I get hold of 
the right man, you lay no claim to the reward/' 

" I consent." 

" And supposing you are the successful hand, you 
divide the reward with me." 

" I consent to that also . ^but it is just possible 
neither of us may touch the money ; there is gene- 
rally a third party who brings these things to light 
in country districts: somebody comes and gives 
information of something that has escaped the 



174 THE TALLAMTS OF BABTON. 

police, eh ? " said the London detectiye, with just 
a slighily sarcastic smile. 

** There mil be nothing of that sort in this case/' 
said the superintendent, who made up his mind 
there and then that, snpposiDg a reward were 
offered, and that he received the announcement of 
the same in the morning, he would, at all risks, 
apprehend Lionel Hanmierton. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE CHIEF OF THE BHAZENCBOOK POLICE MAKES A 
BOLD STROKE FOR THE GOVERNMENT REWARD. 

The Brazencrook officer^ after sleeping upon the 
resolution he had made> receiyed notification of the 
Goyemment reward; and, determined not to be 
bilked by Mr. Bales, he went off quietly the next 
morning to Montem Castle, and asked for Captain 
Hammerton. 

When Lionel appeared, he said, . " Will you be 
good enough to come a little way with me ; there 
is a man who has a question to ask you P'' 

Lionel looked puzzled for a moment at the re- 
quest, and then replied, . " Certainly, if you desire 
it.'* 

"Yes I do," said the officer; and without 
another word they went forth together. 



176 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

When they were outside the Castle gates, the 
superintendent said, "The truth is, I did not wish 
to make any fdss ; but I went to Mr. Smith, the 
county magistrate, early this morning, and upon 
the facts that I considered it my duty to lay before 
him, he granted me a warrant for your apprehen- 
sion ; and I now claim you as my prisoner on the 
charge of wilfully and maliciously Trilling Bichard 
Tallant." 

Saying this the officer laid his hand upon Lionel's 
arm, who started as if he had been stung. The 
officer thereupon gave a shrill whistle, and two 
policemen rushed out firom a hiding place in the 
hedge. 

" If you will go quietly with me," said tiie officer, 
" I will dismiss these men ?" 

^^ You may rely upon it I shall make no attempt 
to escape, not that your men would intimidate me 
were I inclined to have a fight for it," said Lionel, 
stretching himself up to his full height and survey- 
ing the force. " You represent the law so hx that 
you are its officer : you may dismiss your fellows." 



LIONEL IN CUSTODY. 177 

The chief did so at once^ and when he and 
Lionel reached "The Magpies/* there was a cab 
waiting to convey them to Brazencrook. 

When Earl Vemer learnt what had taken place, 
he rode to Brazencrook, and demanded that Lionel 
should be released, famed and threatened, and at 
last discovered that although he was an Earl and 
Lord-Lieutenant of the County, the Brazencrook 
police superintendent was master of the situation. 
Lionel was taken before the Brazencrook bench, 
and remanded until the conclusion of the inquest, 
and was then conveyed to '* The Magpies " at the 
request of the coroner, that he might hear the 
remainder of the evidence. 

The jurymen were considerably surprised at what 
the Brazencrook officer had done, and so was the 
coroner, who said, in commencing the business of 
the day, that the superintendent had, he hoped, 
acted on evidence which had come to his know- 
ledge since the business of the previous day; other- 
wise he had no hesitation in saying that he had 
committed a serious error. He was a plain, out- 

TOL. III. y 



178 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

spoken fellow, this Sevemsliire coroner, who, 
though he might not always conduct his investi- 
gation with legal discretion, fearlessly searched out 
the truth, and endeavoured to do justice. 

It was soon noised abroad that the Earl's bro- 
ther was in custody ; and this act was conclusive 
in the minds of large numbers of persons, especially 
of the lower order, that he was guilty. There was 
a great crowd about the inn on this second day, 
and a numerous body of policemen, chiefly of the 
county force, to keep the mob in order. "The 
Magpies " never had so good a time of it. The 
landlord had been compelled to send into Brazen- 
crook for fresh supplies of beer and spirits, and 
several additional, waiters had to be employed in 
serving the thirsty customers. 

The only additional witnesses were the gun- 
smith's assistant and a railway clerk ; the former 
to make that absurd statement about the prisoner 
purchasing pistols and ammunition, which were not 
ent home until after the murder; the latter to 
prove that it was Lioners intention to leave Mon- 



ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE. 179 

tern Castle that day. But there was another fact 
which the officer thought a great deal of. In the 
prisoner's pocket-book there were some memoranda 
relative to an account between the deceased and 
himself> with regard to some share speculations 
prior to the panic, and in the margin was written 
in pencil, . " This teas a downright smndle of TaU 
lanesr 

In addition there was a scrap cut from a news- 
paper, alluding to a fracas which had taken 
place at the Ashford Club, and in which the Hon. 
Lionel Hammerton's name was mentioned, and also 
Mr. TallanVs. 

Our readers will remember that Lionel had al- 
luded to this gossiping paragraph when he left 
England. They also know that Hammerton had 
been led into speculations by Tallant, which had 
ended in grievous losses that seriously involved 
Lionel, and had cost the Earl no small stun. The 
policeman naturally argued from these papers and 
memoranda, that there had been a quarrel between 
his prisoner and the deceased ; and he laid them 

V 2 



180 THE TALLA^TS OF BABTOK. 

before the coroner's jury with an air of 
triumph. 

But the coroner strongly advised the jury to 
adjourn for a week, and they did so, leaving the 
onus of committing the prisoner for trial on the 
magistrates. Meanwhile Mr. Bales, the detective, 
did not agree with the opinion of the Brazencrook 
police. The case bothered him considerably, he 
acknowledged ; but he could not bring himself to 
think that the prisoner had killed Eichard Tallant. 
If the crime had been committed in London, he 
would certainly have looked up Mr. Shuffleton 
Gibbs ; for, in the course of the inquiries he had 
made in those past days for Mr. Christopher Tal- 
lant, and since then, he had come across suspicious 
transactions in which Mr. Gibbs had been mixed 
up when the ex-swell was in the hey-day of his 
questionable glory. Hunting out this same gentle- 
man for Mr. Williamson, and finally bringing him 
to Bow Street to be unsuccessful in his charge 
against him, the detective knew that Gibbs had 
appealed to Mr. Tallant in vain for assistance. 



MR. AND MRS. PHILLIPS ARRIVE AT MONTEM. 181 

But Gibbs was a broken-down, drunken wretch: 
what could he do down here ? However, it might 
be worth while to run up to town, and see if the 
fellow had been away. 

In the evening Mr. Arthur Phillips and his wife 
arrived at Montem Castle. The Earl welcomed 
them heartily, and poor Amy, who had come down- 
stairs wrapped up with shawls, fell upon her dear 
friend's shoulder, and sobbed until Phoebe's heart 
ached with sympathetic sorrow. What a weary, 
weary time it was ! 

Lord Vomer started early the next morning to 
town, that he might personally consult his London 
solicitors, and take some potent action against the 
police, or the magistrates, or anybody and every- 
body by whom his brother was detained in custody. 
The poor Earl was almost beside himself with 
indignation and passion. 

And all this time that shrinking, hiding, halting, 
slouching figure, which the reader has seen before, 
had found shelter in Brazencrook. Moving in the 
darkness, with the rain splashing on the highway 



182 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

and hissmg in tlie hedgerows, the figure stalked 
back again towards Brazencrook, instead of 
getting away from that town, as the cnnning mind 
had planned. But haying no knowledge of the 
district, and being nervous and excited, and lacking 
gin, the wretched criminal had succeeded the next 
day in reaching the town he would have avoided ; 
and when Mr. Bales was thinking of going to town 
as a sort of forlorn hope, or an excursion by the 
way, to see Qibbs, this same Gibbs was imbibing 
his favourite liquor at a sixth-rate tavern at 
Brazencrook, and reading a fiill account of the 
murder in the " Brazencrook Daily Banner." 

^'Hang that bruise on the hand," thought the 
haK-tipsy reader . "dear case of suicide but for 
that . clear case of felO'de-se . ^they might have 
buried the beast in the cross-roads. A rum go if 
they hang that swell Eammerton . a very rum go. 
I must bum this pocket-book, and the cheques too 
for the matter of that . ^it's no good trying to cash 
them ; I can get rid of the notes easily enough. 
What an infernal scoundrel he was, to be sure. 



CRIMINAL CONCEIT. 183 

threatening his sister the Countess ! By Jove, I 
was dose to him then; sh.e ought to thank a 
fellow for stopping his mouth. How he clutched 
me . a good thing the pistol was pretty heavy, but 
confound that bruise and the torn pocket ! That 
policeman is a clever fellow; nobody else would 
have thought of the pocket-book : wish I'd had 
time to get his purse . ^these notes are a nuisance. 
I'm safe enough, that's one thing . good idea 
following the thief by train, deuced good I " 
' Thus the gin-drinker's thoughts flitted throu^ 
his mind, as he sat before the tavern fire drinking 
raw spirits and drying his clothes, a poor thin, 
wretched-looking object, with one foot in the grave, 
as the slipshod servant had said to her boozy 
master, when he asked who it was that had such 
** a big swallow.*' 



CHAPTER XV. 

OOKTAINS A CnUOUS ILLUSTRATION OF DETECTIVK 
PHILOSOFHT, AJTD IS AK DiPOBTAST LOTK IS 
THIS UISTOKT. 

"Well, I shall be off to town,'' said Mr. Bales 
to ilie soperintendent of the Brazencrook police, 
on the third moTimig after his arriTaL ''This ease 
is a floorer to me." 

The constable smiled, and thought be bad cer- 
tainly done the detectiTe. 

"I have been connected with Scotland Yard for 
some years now, and had a tolerable experience in. 
America too, and I don't think I hare felt so 
belpless as I do in this bnan^s ; so I caQed in to 
[ w^b you well through the case." 
i BW minnteS)*' said the superin- 
i mngnlar dUappeanmce of bank 




A NEW CASE. 185 

notes has been reported to me just now ; you may 
like to hear the story; being here on spec, you 
know, and not a very successful spec, perhaps you 
might like to try your hand at another case." 

The speaker smiled a little sarcastically, but as 
much as to say, having beaten your head off in 
this Montem business, I can afford to be generous. 

"All right," said Bales; "better luck next 
time." 

" Will you hear about this note job ? " 

" Certainly," said Bales. 

Whereupon three gentlemen entered the room. 
The first, a fat, fussy little man, said he was 
the proprietor of the Bra2sencrook Music Hall; 
that half an hour ago he went to the Old 
Bank to pay in three hundred pounds. It 
consisted of a miscellaneous roll of notes. He 
pushed the money upon the counter towards the 
receiver in the usual way; and at that moment 
"this gentleman," pointing to the Bev. Thomas 
Barnes, curate of All Souls, asked him a question 
about some subscription to a fund for a poor unily 



186 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

formerly in his employ, and when he turned round 

fhe money was gone. 
The second speaker was the receiying clerk at 

the bank, who said when Mr. Flooks came in he 

noticed that the gentleman pushed a parcel upon 

the counter; but when he laid down his pen to 

take it there was no money to be seen. 

" What were you doing when Mr. Flooks entered 

the bank P " asked the chief of police. 
" I was casting up some figures." 
" Did you attend to Mr. Flooks at once P *' 
" I did not ; I finished my casting first." 
" Did you see the notes on the counter P " 
''I saw something which appeared to be a 

bundle of notes." 

" When did you know the money was gone, Mr. 

Flooks P" 

''As soon as I turned round. I expected the 

receiver had taken it up, but he said, * Where's the 

money P'" 
'' And there were only you and Mr. Barnes here 

in the bank at the timeP " 



THE BANK BOBBEBY. 187 

 That's all," said Hooks, 

" And did nobody come in and go out P " 

Upon this point there was a little difference of 
opinion. The curate believed a person passed out 
whilst he was speaking to Mr. Flooks. The cashier 
also thought a man came in and went out again. 

When it was discovered that the notes were 
gone, careful investigation was made by the 
manager of the bank on the spot, and a search 
was instituted, which had been considered rather 
offensive by the receiver ; but the money was gone, 
and here the story ended. 

" Have you the numbers and description of the 
notes, Mr. Flooks?" 

"No; I very seldom take any precautions of 
that kind about notes, because I always make a 
point of paying all cash into the bank myself." 

Here, it seemed to Bales, was another case as 
free from a due to the criminal as tiiat of the 
murder at Montem. He felt as if his skill were 
specially challenged, and he resolved at once to delay 
his return to London. 



188 THB TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

" You will really not be offended at my meddling 
in this case P " he said to the Brazencrook chief. 

"Not at all . ^not at all. I question whether 
Mr. Flooks really put any money on the counter. 
These professionals^ as they call themselves, are up 
to so many dodges for advertising and all that sort 
of thing. K he did put any money on the counter, 
I suppose t^e fact of a parson condescending to 
speak to him flurried him, and he forgot where he 
was, because they have been preaching against his 
entertainment.*' 

The superintendent was quite friendly in his 
conduct towards Mr. Bales, and said he should be 
glad if he hit the mark in this business better than 
he had done in that other little affair. 

Mr. Bales, after paying Mr. Flooks a private 
business visit, and seeing several letters referring 
to 280 (which was really a payment to Flooks 
for the goodwill, scenery, &c., of a small music-hall 
establishment at Sevemtown), went to his lodgings, 
reported himself for two days fiirther leave of 
absence, lit a dgar, and quietly thought over the 



SCOTLAND YARD PHILOSOPHY. 189 

story he had just heard. There was clearly nothing 
in the Brazencrook officer's idea about Flooks 
haying lost no money : there was the transaction 
before him accounting for the receipt of ^6280 
out of the 300. Could the cashier himself 
be the fliief? No. The curate? . ^the receiver? 
No. Had the job been done by a professional 
thief? He thought not. He could not exactly 
say why. He thought that this was a case of 
sudden temptation and robbery. This was his 
theory : the receiver had been busy at his desk ; 
Flooks, the Casino proprietor, flurried, as the police- 
man had said, by talking to a parson . ^had been en- 
grossed in the clerical conversation; a third party 
had come in on business, and had walked out again 
unobserved with the notes in his pocket. Fnder 
such circumstances, the fliief would naturally be- 
come worried and nervous, when he got into the 
street, as to his next step. What would he be likely 
to do P Brazencrook was a large town . a town of 
some eighty thousand inhabitants . a busy, bustling 
place. What would the feUow do. slink away ? If 




190 THB TALLAKT8 OF BABTOK. 

be W.se a pr o fe aBtonal iliie^ no doubt be would. 
But a new band . tbeie was a cab-stand dose by, 
and be would call a cab . of oonise be would. 
Bales repeated to bimaelf. He made inquiries 
at once. There were only two flys on fbe 
stand* and ihe driven bad not taken a bie that 

"DriTe me to tbe next stand*" said Bales, step- 
ping into ibe fiist cab. 

He was unsuooesBfuL at tbe second stand and at 
ev7 oflier. No driyer remembered baring taken 
up any poson near tiie Old Bank at about eleven 
o'clock. He detenmned to see every cab-driver in 
Braaenerook befiore be gave i^ this first part of bis 
flieoiy of tiie robbery. Tbe Abbey chimes were 
slowly hammering out the tnoTning hymn for the 
seoond or third time fliat day, when tiie detective 
alighted from the last cab to prosecute bis inquiries 
on fcot^ resolvii^ to stop evoy fly be met in the 



duBies had hardly finisbed, when an old 
up an empty cab near the Abb^ 



THE BBWARD OF PERSEVERANCE. 191 

entrance, and got off his box to tie a dirty hay-bag 
npon his horse's nose. 

Sales put his question to him . ^had he taken up 
anyone near the bank that morning P 

Near the bank! Yes, he had. 

'.Who?" 

"A gentleman's servant.'* 

" Bid lie come out of the bank?" 

.'He did.*' 

"Here is half-a-crown. take me to the spot 
where you took him up." 

<<Certamly, with pleasure, rir," said the man, 
and in a few minutes he polled up wifliin a few 
yaids <rf the Old Bank. 

"And now drive me to flie place where you put 

mm down. 

In tm minnteB he pulled up again. Bales 

aKghted. 

 Wen,whcfe didhe go?** 

 He went into ihat house yonder. die last J^ 

flie cRmnt." 

Then Bales made the dnTcr describe the i 



192 THE TALLANTS OF BABTOK. 

carefully^ and after taking a note of the number of 
the fly, he knocked at the door of the last house 
in the crescent, feeling convinced that he was on 
the track of the roU of notes. 

A maid servant came to the door. 

"Is James in P '* asked Bales, familiarly. 

" We have no James here," said the girl, smiling. 
" Our James is a Thomas.^' 

 Well, is he in the house P " 

" No, he ain't,*' said the girL 

" He was in this morning,'' said Bales. 

"Yes, but he ain't now; he's gone into the 
country." 

" When did he go P I want to see him very 
particularly." 

"About an hour ago. His aunt's took very 
bad." 

"Where does she live ? " 

" That I can't tell you." 

"When is he coming back P " 

" Ah, that's what master's just asked me ; but 
that's what I don't know." 



THE CABRIER's CART. 193 

''All right/' said the detectiye to himself, as he 
left the house. " This is my man." 

He made inquiries at the railway station, but 
nobody remembered having seen ''Thomas'' there. 
Only one train had gone out within the hour, and 
that to London. Bales tel^;raphed to Faddington, 
but at the same time felt pretty well satisfied that 
Thomas had not gone away by train. 

He made inquiries about other conyeyanees 
leaving Brazencrook. There was a coach to 
Sevemtown, but only on Monday and Friday, -and 
this was Tuesday. 

"There's a carrier's cart to Avonworfl^" said 
the ostier at the Yemer Arms. 

" ATonwarili ! That is on the high road to 
Sevemtown and London ?^' 

"Yes, it be." 

"When does it go?" 

"About iar o'dod^ on Tuesdays, and six on 
Sotoidays.'' 

The earner's cart had been, gone two homs^ and. 
iiiere was a tnin to ATonwoith half an boor ] 
vol. lU. 



IM THB TALLA27TS OP BABTON. 

'' Perhaps my Mend started to walk, and the car- 
rier will pick him up. The road to Avonworth is 
his most likely way. He may hare started with 
the carrier and gone the whole journey. * It is 
what he might do, innocent or guHty/' thought 
Bales. 

In a short time Bales had donned his country- 
man's attire . ^the smock and all-rounder, without 
which he never travelled ; and by half-past six 
he was at Avonworth. The carrier's cart had not 
arrived. He loitered about, and presently had the 
satisfaction to see it come creeping along the dusty 
highway, and finally enter the "Lion " yard, and, 
what is more, out stepped " Thomas.'* 

The man did not enter the inn, but walked away 
out of the town and along the road towards Severn- 
town. By-and-by he left the highway and turned 
into the turnpike road. He wore an overcoat and 
an ordinary hat, but nobody could have mistaken 
the light brown livery trousers. 

Bales followed him at a distance for a couple of 
miles, and then "Thomas" entered a roadside 



DETECTIVE FICTION. 195 

inn. Shortly, the detective was stttmg in the same 
room, where he had ordered brandy-and-waterhot. 
And lo and behold, !MJr. Bales recognised the Face 
of our poor friend, Thomas Dibble. 

The detective directed the girl to bring him a 
pint of hot ale and gin, known by the euphonious 
title of dog*s-nose, of which smoking liquor he 
politely offered a glass to " Thomas.'* 

Poor Dibble treated this little act of courtesy 
coldly, but tasted the liquor notwithstanding, 
and then Bales began to talk. He was a farmer, 
going to be married ; he was on his way to Brazen- 
crook to see his Sarah, who lived in service there. 
How &LT was it to Brazencrook? Dibble did not 
know. It was a nice place. Bales had heard P Yes, 
he heUeved it was. And then Bales ordered some 
more gin and ale, for the night was closing in wet 
and cold. 

At length the ice was thoroughly melted, and the 
two men talked and smoked and drank in good-fel- 
lowship. '^ Thomas'' was highly amused at the 
detective's simplicity. 

02 



196 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

As the evening wore on Dibble gradually became 
thick and confused in his speech, and then Bales 
saying it was time for him to go, rang the bell and 
asked the girl to see if the landlord could change 
him a fifty-pound note. This was the sum he had 
saved for the purpose of marrying Sarah at 
Brazencrook ! 

"You shan't schange a fifty-pun' note,** said 
Dibble ; " noshing of the short." 

"No, master could 'not change a fifty-pound 
note," the girl said ; " pretty well, he thought, if 
he could change a five-pound note." 

" All right,** said " Thomas," thrusting his right 
hand into a breast-pocket of his coat, and producing 
a roll of notes, " I've got a five pun' note." 

Poor Dibble ! When the detective showed him 
a pair of handcuffs, and charged him with robbery, 
he burst into tears. 

It was as the detective had guessed, a case of 
sudden temptation. The robbery had been com- 
mitted just as he had suggested ; but there was no 
thirst for money for its own sake in poor Dibble's 



HOW DIBBLE BECAME A THIEF. 197 

wickedness. For weeks and months he had brooded 
over his wife's misfortunes ; her taunts had sunk 
deep into his heart ; he was miserable beyond de- 
scription to think how she had been reduced ; and 
all in a moment this bundle of notes had seemed to 
offer him and his wife release from their troubles. 
He had been sent to the bank to change a cheque. 
The notes were close to his hand; he touched 
them ; nobody was looking ; he seized them^ and 
walked out of the bank as he came. Hurrying 
back to his master's, he gave the cheque to an 
under-servant, as though he had not had time to go 
to the bank, and then after that one bit of clever- 
ness, he made a shambling excuse about an aunt 
in the country, and left Brazencrook. 

Poor Dibble ! He did nothing but moan about 
his poor dear wife, . ^his poor injured wife. 

This smart bit of police detection was destined to 
lead to more important and startling results than 
the capture of Thomas Dibble, otherwise we should 
not have narrated it so circumstantially. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

"BAL. TO E. T., 300." 

When Dibble was fairly locked up in the Bra- 
2eiicrook station, and Bales had indulged in a 
quiet joke with the Brazencrook chief, he had the 
curiosity to examine the roll of notes after Mr. 
Mooks had identified them. 

Two of these notes were new Bank of Englands, 
and were for 10 each. At the back of one 
there were some figures in pencil, . a calculation 
evidentiy of interest, and the result was carried 
down at the comer. "Bal. to R. T., 300." Then 
the figures had been run through with the pencil, 
as though the writer had made a simple calculation 
of moneys on the spur of the moment, and the sum 
showed a balance of 300 to " R. T." Who was 
" R. T P" Singular that these should be the initiab 



THE TRKASURY. 199 

of the man who was muidered at Montem ! Mere 
ooincidence thought the detective, . nothing in it ; 
neyertheless, he would see Mr. Hooks again. 

"Do you remember whether these notes were 
paid by the Sevemtown man in the 300 P" said 
the detective. 

"I do not.'* 

** Yet you identified the bundle easily ?" 

" yes, I could swear to the lot. But wait a 
moment ; we will go into the Treasury .*' 

And into the Treasury (as theatrical managers 
call the room occupied by the cashier of the es- 
tablishment) they went. 

" You paid me a balance of petty receipts and 
other things yesterday with the balance of the re- 
ceipts of the night before." 

"Yes/' said the treasurer, "twenty pounds." 

' " Did you pay me in these notes P " 

"I think so ; I am not quite sure." 

"Where did you get themP" asked the detec- 
tive. 

" From the bank. I changed your cheque for 



200 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

30, for the purpose of paying a poor-rate wteii 
you were away at Sevemtown," said the treasurer. 

The detective extended his inquiries to the hank. 
A cheque had heen cashed as descrihed ; hut it had 
heen paid in gold. The two notes in question had 
not passed through this hank. 

Bales went hack to the music-hall treasury. 

"Did you cash that cheque yourself?" he asked 
the cashier. 

" No, sir ; I sent the porter to cash it" 

" Will you let me see the porter P" said Bales. 

Mr. Flooks sent out for the porter, who was no 
less a personage than our old acquaintance the 
showman, Dighy Martin, alias Bill Smith, "The 
Magician of the North." 

" You cashed a cheque on Friday for the trea- 
surer P" said Bales, addressing the porter. 

" Yes," said the man, hesitatingly. "Yes, I did." 

" Send that dog out," said Mr. Flooks ; where- 
upon a taU grey animal which had followed the 
porter in a very undog-like attitude, quietly dis- 
appeared hehind the scenes. 



THE CLUS. 201 

"You got the money in gold ? " said Bales, fixing 
the porter with his cold grey eye. 

The man hesitated, held down his head, changed 
colour, and then looked at Mr. Flooks. 

** Don't look at me," said Mr. Flooks, " attend 
to this gentleman.'' 

" What is your name ?" Mr. Bales asked. 

*' William Smith's my own name ; Digby Martin 
was my professional name before I came down to 
being a porter," said the man. 

"Come, you answered that question quickly 
enough ; now why can't you tell me with the same 
rapidity whether you got gold for that cheque at 
the bank or notes P" 

" I forget," said the porter, sulkily. 

"No, you don't. Now come, Mr. Smith, you 
changed the gold for notes yourself; you can't de- 
ceive me. Now where did you get the notes ?" 

The porter made no reply, but turning upon his 
heel to leave the room, he said he did not know 
what the gentleman meant. 

 Then I'U teU you, my friend," said Bales. " I 



202 THE TALLANT8 OF BARTON. 

arrest you, Williani Smith, on the charge of being 
concerned in the nmrder of one Bichard TaJlant/' 

We need hardly say that the music-hall gentle- 
men were not a little surprised at this striking 
dino&ment ; their, astonishment was much greater 
than the porter s. 

" Oh ! " said the porter, when the detectiye pro- 
duced those same " bracelets " which had frightened 
poor Dibble. " TouVe got the wrong 'un, guvner^ 
but suppose I put you on the right track P" 

" You had better be carefol," said Bales : *' any- 
thing that you may say now can be used in evi- 
dence against you." 

"All right, guvner, the truth's the truth, and you 
shall have it. I've always done my duty by you, 
Mr. Flooks," said the porter. 

" Yes, yon have been a sober steady fellow for 
this year past," said Mr. Hooks* 

'^There's a bill out offering a reward to discover 
the man as did the deed, ain't &6reP " 

'.'Yes," said Bales. 

" I knows that, 'cos I've read it r me [and Mo- 



THB 8H0WtfAN*S CONFEBSIOK. 203 

mus read it last niglit, and there's a free pardon 
for him as ^nfesses who may know about it^ and 
yet was not actually concerned in it." 

"Yes," said Bales. 

" Then here goes ! The day after the murder 
as me and Momus were having a bit o' dinner in 
at the Music-Hall TaTom at the back of the house 
here, a traveller comes in^-a half-starved looking 
sort of a chap . ^and he sets down albre the fire. 
Momus, that's my dog, sir, one of the wonderfollest 
animals out, sir. Momus smells at him, as if she 
had met him afore, and walks round him on her 
hind legs. That causes me to take notice of him 
like. The gal comes in, and he orders some grub, 
and asks if there's a fire in the other room : she 
says yes, and in he goes. * Do you know him, 
Momus; does yer know the gent, old galP' She 
wags her bit o' stump, as mudi as to say * I does/ 
and so does yer guvner, says I, all of a suddent ; 
'cos it just then flashed on me that it were my 
son-in-law. Yes, gents, I ain't talking no bosh . 
my son-in-law, Mr. Jefferson Crawley." 



204 THE TALLAIITS OF BABTOK. 

Hr. Bales pursed up his lips^ and gave a low 
wliisUe at ihis^ and could not resist making other 
indications of his surprise and satisfaction, 

" Oh, you knows him, do yer ? " said the porter. 
" Well, arter a bit, I goes into the room, and I sees 
him a reading the newspaper all about the murder, 
and when I goes in he drops it as though it had 
bitten him. * Don't yer like the news, guyner,' says 
I P * don't you like it, son-in-law P' He looked awfiil 
at this. He bolted with my gal 'Chrissy,* you 
know." 

The detective whistled again. 

" Oh, you know'd her, did yer ? " said the porter. 

"I know she was not your daughter," said 
Bales. 

" S'help me Davy, but you seem to know every- 
thing." 

" Never mind, go on," said Bales. 

" Well, he looked hawful, as I said afore, and I 
thought as he was a going to faint. He didn't, 
however. He rung the bell and ordered a pint of 
gin, and drunk it ofF, and then he seemed better. 



BEIATIONS. 205 

* Ho^ come you here ? ' says he. * How come you 
here?* says I. ' You seems to have been travelling ; 
and what's that blood on yer shirt P' says !. 
' Blood P* says he. 'Yes/ says I. *0, I had a 
bit of a row/ . '0/ says I. With that I says, 
' Where's my gal P' and then he begins to say as 
how she'd treated him shameful, and a lot of it, 
and gets to abusing me. Then he says, * We're 
relations, you blow;' and I says, * Yes, of a sort.' . 
' I was a gentleman,' ,says he, ' till I know'd your 
daughter.' . * Perhaps,' says I. ' Fact ! ' says he ; 
and then he tells me how she brought him to 
poverty, and all that, which I quite believe ; and 
then, after his grub he says, says he, 'We're 
relations . brothers in distress, deceived by a 
wretched gal;' and it was a fact too; 'so let's 
drink,' says he ; and he had another pint of gin, 
but I was not to be tempted. However, I has a 
little, and then I leaves him sitting afore the fire, 
drunk I should think, and he paid for what he 
had : so I leaves him, as he had took a bed for the 
night. ' You'll stand my friend P' says he, as I was 



206 THE TXLJJiSTS OF BABTON. 

going ; * relations, yoK know! ' and all that. When 
business was over, about twelve o'clock, I goes 
again, and I finds bim muddling over the fire, still 
drinking gin, and I hears a9 he'd changed a five- 
pound-note; so says I, 'Giivner-^ son-in-law, 
money's flush with you ; ' and he says, * Father-in- 
law, it is ; and if you'll be my friend, it shall be 
with you : swear,' says he, and his hands trembled 
awfol to behold : so I swears. * I'm hawful bad,' 
says he, ' being out in the rain ; be my friend . 
take care of me ;' ^nd I sayis, 'All right, guvner ;' 
he puts his hand into his coat, pulls out a pocket- 
book, and gives me them two notes; then he 
seemed as if he was off his head, and I and the 
gal sees bim to bed. Hiat 6re pocket-book, and 
the blood and altogether bothered me a good deal ; 
and when I changed that cheque, thinks I, I'll get 
rid on 'em; 'cos you see, I didn't know what 
might happen, and somehow I thought as my son- 
in4aw might have had a hand in the job, and you 
see, as we were sort of relations, and all that, I 
didn't like to say nothing, and especidUy as he wor 



uonel's release. 207 

ao bad . so. hawfiil ill . and that's the whole trufli 
o' the matter/' 

. *' And what became of him P " asked the detec- 
tive ; " don't answer unless you choose." 

" 0, bless yerlife, he's there now in bed/ and it's 
my humble opinion as he'll never stir out of it 
again." 

He did "stir out of it again," nevertheless, and 
the decayed showman and his son-in-law were in 
Brazencrook lock-up within an hour, to the relief 
and release of Lionel Hanmierton ; for the Brazen- 
crook chief deemed it necessary to get two magis- 
trates at once to authorise the Captain's release 
from custody. 

What a change came over the spirit of the 
Brazencrook policeman's dream, as he smoked his 
pipe and talked to his wife on this night over the 
kitdien fire ! It needed all the wifely consolation 
which his admiring spouse could bring to bear 
upon his deep dejection, to save him from utter 



"I'm a rained man! I'm a ruined man!" 



208 THE TALLA17TS OF BABTON. 

was all the defeated officer could say. His two 
new prisoners were not more chapfiEkllen than the 
Brazenerook chief, through whose fingers had 
sEpped government reward, credit, reputation . 
everything which he hoped to gain . by his rash 
act of the morning. 



CHAPTER XVn. 



IN THE FIRELIGHT. 



Earl Yerner retamed firom London by the 
evening mail, after having put the law into active 
operation on lionel's behalf. When he came 
bustling into the coziest of cozy drawing-rooms^ 
having rushed in before anybody had time to go 
out and meet him in the hall, he was most agree- 
ably surprised by a singularly happy-looking family 
party. 

Lionel Hammerton, in the easiest of easy chairs 
(the hero of the evening, the e^ecial delight of all 
beholders just then), was sitting near Mrs. Arthur 
Phillips, on one side of the fire. On the other 
sat the Coimtess, looking abnost herself again, and 
dose by her side was the artist. Before the fire, 
sitting in a rather constrained manner, was a 

VOL. III. p 



210 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

stranger . o, mild-looking^ inoffensive gentleman, 
with brown curly whiskers and expressive grey 
eyes. This latter person was Mr. Bales, whom 
Lionel had brought with him from Brazencrook, 
in order that he might relate the singular story of 
his capture to the Earl. His lordship being away, 
the Countess had insisted upon Mr. Bales coming 
into the drawing-room and telling her all about it. 

And so they had sat in the firelight, this happy 
gratefiil group of friends, listening to the detective's 
story. It was one of those first chilly autumn 
nights with falling rain, when the farmer begins to 
have fears for the wheat which should have been 
carried the week before ; one of those nights when 
the shortening of the days begins to be more par- 
ticularly apparent, and when you feel that winter 
is really not far off, and the sooner it comes the 
better. So the curtains were drawn over the 
windows, and the great dogs in the fireplace were 
weighted with a glowing pile of wood. The fire- 
light fairly contested supremacy of effect with the 
numerous wax candles, sending flickers of light into 



m THE FIBEUGHT. 211 

the furthest comers, and reflecting its radiance 
in the mirrors on the opposite aide of the 
room. Mrs. Arthur PhilKps, with her wealth of 
wavy hair, her deep blue eyes, and those half- 
parted lips, . a round, rosy dimpled beauty,. 
(Dicksee's Miranda arrived at the full beauty of 
womanhood), . ^looked like some painter's dream of 
perfect loveliness in this softened light of evening. 
There was just a shade of melancholy now and 
then upon her fair hopeful features ; but her newly* 
awakened joy at Hanmierton's escape, chased the 
shadow away almost before there was time to note 
it. The Countess looked considerably older than 
Phoebe ; there was an air of matronly and aristo- 
cratic dignity in Amy's manner which was entirely 
foreign to that of Phoebe. The anxiety which Amy 
had undergone had left its traces upon her ; and for 
the last few days she had sufibred a world of agony 
and remorse, which she could never explain to 
anybody. She had endured the cruellest tortures 
on Hammerton's account. She could not have 
borne up against her fears and sorrows much 

p2 



212 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

longer; but for Hammerton's timely release the 
Earl would have known everything, and from her 
own lips. 

Never had she prayed so fervently for guidance and 
succour and mercy as she had done during these few 
days of her severest mental agony ; and it seemed 
to her as if her petitions had been specially an- 
swered in this most unlooked-for and marvellous 
release of Lionel Hammerton, . ^not only from cus- 
tody, but from suspicion. And lie, how grateful he 
was on her accoimt; and he had felt a bitter 
pang of self-condemnation when he thought how 
deeply he had wronged her in his foul and absurd 
suspicion. It seemed to him as if Fortune had 
willed it that he should be unjust to this woman ; 
as if Fate had put a finger upon his love to blight 
his dearest hopes. This woman, whom he had 
loved and lost through neglect and suspicion ; this 
woman, the memory of whose love he had vowed 
to treasure up as a sweet dream of the past,7-again 
had Fate stepped in and cast down the idol. 

And so they sat there in the evening whilst 



TEMPTATION. 213 

Mr. Bales related to them tlie story which we have 
already told in the previous chapters, and they all 
pitied poor Dibble. When " Thomas" was in his cell, 
he insisted upon telling Mr. Bales how he came to 
commit so great a crime. The reproaches of his 
wife had rung in his ears night and day. It had 
seemed as if the devil had told him to touch that 
roll of notes ; and when he felt his hand upon the 
money, he could not help taking it. Crying like a 
child, and sitting on the edge of the little prison 
bedstead. Dibble said he had never known beforp 
what that beautiful prayer meant, in which we 
asked our Father to lead us not into temptation. 

Whereupon the Countess told Earl Vomer what 
she knew of Mrs. Dibble, and hoped that something 
might be done for both of them. 

Mr. Bales said Mrs. Dibble's money had been all 
lost in one way or another during the panic, and 
this had led to ail their misfortunes. 

"Have you written to her, Mr. Bales?" the 
Countess asked. 

"I have not, your ladyship. The prisoner was 



214 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

mofli aimoiis ihat I should not do so: it ironld kill 
her, he said." 

<*WhBt can we do, my loid, for these poor 
peopleP" asked the Countess, earnestly. '< Is there 
no means of obtaining the man's idease ?'' 

" I fear not," said the EarL "Who is the pro- 
secator, Mr. Bales ?" 

"The bank, I think, your lordship. It is a ques* 
ti<m whether the money belonged to the bank or to 
Mr. Hooks. The bank repudiated all responabiUty 
at the outset." 

"Oh, but surely they could be induced to with- 
draw firom the afiEedr, or make it up in some way, 
seeing that the money is restored?" said the 
Countess. 

"There is a serious offence, my love, called com- 
pounding a felony, which might be an obstruction 
to your wishes," said his lordship. " My riend. 
Lord Tufton, is chairman of Quarter Sessions, I 
must talk to him upon the subject to-morrow ; he 
can adyise us best" 

" Meanwhile, however, we can do something for 



GOING TO TOWN. 216 

this woman Dibble. She was very kind to Lieute- 
nant Somerton/' said the Conntess; "we must 
take care of her.** 

" I go to town in the morning/' said Bales. " I 
shall be happy to be your messenger to her." 

"By what tram, Mr. Bales, do you leave?*' 
her ladyship asked. 

" At ten o'clock, your ladyship.** 

" That means half-past nine from MontemP'* 

" It does, my lady,** said Bales. 

" I will see you before you go, if you please, at 
nine in the morning,** said the Countess. 

" So early !** exclaimed the Earl. 

The Countess smiled and nodded assent. 

" One cannot rise too early to help a poor creature 
in trouble, Mr. Phillips,'* said the Coimtess, aside ; 
adding, "and now, Phoebe, I think we may retire.'* 

Phcebe took her ladyship's proflFered arm ; Lionel 
Hammerton opened the door, and the two women 
went up*stairs to sit and tslUc of the past and the 
present, and the time to come; to have one of those 
long confiding gossips which are so charming to 



216 THE TALLAKTS OF BARTON. 

newly-married friends. But there was a gloomy 
shadow now and then which seemed to lay an icy 
finger upon their warm and tender words . ^the 
shadow of the dead man, Amy's half-brother . 
who lay in that darkened room above. 

The gentlemen, when they were alone, adjourned, 
upon Earl Vomer's invitation, to the billiard-room, 
not for the purpose of playing at the fascinating 
game of billiards, but to smoke and talk and drink 
spirits and hot water before they went to bed. 

Lord Yemer had heard in town that if Tallant 
had lived two more days, he would only have lived 
to be a disgraced and ruined man. His shares in 
the Meter Works had been sent into the market 
and sold, a heap of bills had been dishonoured, and 
he was involved to the last degree. 

^'I have a shrewd guess that he came down 
here to see if he could get money from his sister; 
knowing her generous disposition ; I do not doubt 
that he came here as a forlorn hope. My solicitor 
said the opinion in town was that he had committed 
suicide/* 



THE detective's STORIES. 217 

"I am anadous to see his servants," said Mr. 
Bales. " I think his butler will be able to give some 
strong testimony against this man Gibbs." 

Then, upon a remark from Lionel, they discussed 
the career of this miserable wretch. Lionel did 
not hesitate to relate the ftiU particulars of that 
scene at the Ashford Club, which our readers wUl 
remember. 

The detective thereupon added some other cu- 
rious details of the downward career of Gibbs, 
carefrdly guarding himself in respect to Bichard 
Tallant's connection with some of the transactions 
which he narrated. If his lordship had not been 
" a sort of relation" of the dead man, he would 
have made his stories more piquant with the intro- 
duction of some of the financier's schemes. 

There was quite a cloud of smoke amongst the 
beautiful carved leather work of the biUiard-room 
ceiling, before the Earl and his friends thought it 
necessary to adjourn. Their closing conversation 
turned upon the great success of Arthur Phillips 
as an artist ; and Earl Vemer complimented him 



218 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON, 

more particularly upon his taste in selecting a wife. 
Arthur deftly changed the subject, and Lionel 
readily caught at the opportunity to urge his bro- 
ther to take no steps against tiiat silly policeman 
at Brazencrook ; but Earl Vemer would make no 
promise at all about it. 

" We will talk of that to-morrow," he said. 

They sat for an hour over the fire, Lionel, Ar- 
thur, and Mr. Bales, after his lordship had gone 
to bed; Mr. Bales telling the two gentlemen all 
he knew about Paul Somerton. Lionel said he 
wished the young fellow had gone to India; he 
would like to make his acquaintance and apologise 
to him for a little act of discourtesy which lay 
heavily on his mind. It appeared firom what the 
detective said, that Williamson had the credit at 
his club of having eloped with another man's wife, 
and his oldest friends were his severest critics. It 
was quite a joke at the club, Williamson's philan- 
thropy, now : some of the fellows put the aSSEor 
down to constitutional weakness. He had done 
something of the sort, they said, when he was a 



WHAT THEY SAID OF WILLIAMSON. 219 

very yoimg fellow. That lie was a fool was the 
worst thing they said of him nevertheless, and 
some of them pitied him, wondered at his silly 
in&taation, and was glad to hear that the husband 
had made no objection to his wife's fresh choice. 
But they missed the barrister's quiet benevolent 
face ; some of them would miss the sovereigns that 
he lent so readily ; and the motion of the clerical 
gentleman who called himself a professor of He- 
brew mythology, that his name be expunged from 
the list of members of the club, was negatived 
unanimously. 

Lionel could have sat all night listening to Bales 
telling these stories of Paul and Williamson, Tal- 
lant and Dibble, and so could Arthur Phillips, 
had that pretty wife of his not been waiting for 
him. 

"Ah, I see you want to be off," said Lionel at 
length : " good-night, old boy. Bales and I have 
no magnetic attraction to induce us to lay down 
our cigars. Ah, well, never mind. Bales, we can't 
all expect to be Arthur Phillipses. Good-night, 



220 THE TALLANTS OP BAKTON. 

dear old boy. Bales and I will smoke just one 
more cigar." 

But old Morris^ who would persist in sitting up 
tmtil the Captain was ready to retire, looked at 
his watch and found that it was' four o'clock 
by the time he had put the gas out and gone 
to bed, . shuddering with superstitious fear as 
he passed the room where the body of Bichard 
Tallant was lying. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE BEGINNING OF THE END. 

How utterly friendless this dead man appeared 
to be. Nobody came to Montem Castle to weep 
over the bier; no man or woman came to look 
their last upon the white calm face. Two solicitors 
had been down to make inquiries concerning the 
state of his affairs. One of them represented the 
Meter Ironworks; the other was the solicitor to 
a banking company. Neither of them cared to go 
up that great oak staircase of Montem Castle into 
the room were the dead one lay. Their business 
was of a professional character. Lord Vomer 
tried to avoid seeing them. Lionel Hammerton 
represented his brother, and endeavoured to 
answer the questions which the legal gentlemen 
asked ; but they fought very hard for an interview 



222 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

with Lord Vemer. They "were anxious to learn if 
there was any chance of his lordship contributing 
funds towards putting his brother-in-law's affairs 
in a solvent condition. They regretted that the 
extraordinary state of Mr. Tallant's affairs would 
not allow of their delaying their visit to Montem 
Castle until the funeral was over. Lord Vemer 
winced at this reference to the murdered man as 
his brother-in-law, and promised to consider the 
application when the gentlemen were enabled to 
furnish a complete balance-sheet of the deceased's 
financial position. 

The house in Kensington Palace Gardens was 
closed. One or two slouching .fellows with big 
watch-chains, black hair and prominent noses, had 
called there soon after the news of the murder, to 
know if the master was really dead. The first 
gentleman of this class begged to look at the 
pictures in the dining-room. He had never looked 
closely into them; perhaps they would be sold 
now, and he might be a buyer. Several Stock 
Exchange men had called, partly out of curiosity. 



CALLERS AT KENSINGTON PALACE GARDENS. 223 

and partly in the hope that there* might be some one 
at the house to tell them that those little claims of 
theirs for "carrying over*^ would be honourably 
settled ; but not a soul called out of respect to the 
man, or from any deep feeling of sorrow at . his 
violent taking off. Certain tuft-hunters made 
inquiries, chiefly on account of the fellow being 
murdered in such aristocratic quarters, a^d a few 
"diners out" called to gossip with Tallaait^s man 
about his affairs . how he would cut up . if it was 
true he had died not worth a penny, &c. &o. But 
there was speedily an . end to all this. The 
servants had not received their wages for the past 
few months, and when they began to feel that 
there was no chance of legacies, and little hope 
even of their wages being paid, they began to^ 
disappear^ and with them disappeared sundry 
articles of plate and wearing apparel, ornaments, 
jewels, china, and other miscellaneous things. If 
certain officers of the law had not been speedily 
placed in possession of the establishment, even the 
pictures, in which the Jews had exhibited such a 



224 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTOK. 

lirely interest, would soon have followed plate and 
jewellery. 

After thundering at the great door (where 
Bichard Tallant had stepped out into his carriage 
only a few mornings before) for a long time, it 
was opened by a lively-looking little man, with a 
woollen comforter round his neck, and a bowler 
hat upon his head. Mr. Bales understood his 
man immediately, and followed him into the 
kitchen, where he found another person of the 
bailiff profession, smoking a short black pipe and 
shuffling a pack of cards. They soon explained to 
Mr. Bales that they had nothing else to amuse 
them but cards. They had looked at everjrthing 
in the house . at the pictures on the walls, the 
pictures in the books, and all the curious things 
up-stairs and down-stairs. They had searched 
every nook and comer to see if any money had 
been left about ; but the servants had been before 
ihem in their investigations, and so they were 
unsuccessful. 

The grbat house had a gloomy, melancholy 



AT WESTMINSTER AGAIN. 225 

appearance; blinds down, furniture in disorder, 
rooms dusty and unswept. After a brief conver- 
sation with the bailiff's -men, the detective hurried 
away to Westminster. The great brass plate was 
there as of old ; the well-fiimished offices ; all 
that air of wealth and power which had been so 
attractive to the electioneering deputations in the 
late Christopher TaUant's days. But with the 
managing director's death, and the forced sale of 
his shares, the stock had fallen considerably in the 
market; and Mr. Bales found the directors dis- 
cussing certain fraudulent bill transactions, which, 
through the managing director, involved the 
scheme in enormous liabilities. It was urged by 
the solicitor that the transactions were founded in 
fraud, and that the credit of the company was in 
no way compromised by them; but the board of 
directors were divided upon this, and the state of 
the concern, as the detective saw it, was all sixes 
and sevens. A rumour got abroad that it was to 
be wound up, and forthwith commenced all those 
intrigues which go on amongst a certain section of 

VOL. III. Q 



226 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

the city lawyers, who have recently made such 
heaps of money by winding-up shaky com- 
panies. 

The most satisfactory part of the detective's 
business in town, was the fulfilment of Lady 
Vemer's commission concerning Mrs. Dibble. He 
was instructed to give that lady a fifty-pound note 
and bring her back to Montem Castle. 

He found Mrs. Dibble in the little house to 
which she had removed under the auspices of 
Lieutenant Somerton; but she was evidently in 
very low water. She had heard nothing of her 
husband's crime. 

" I have been exthpecting to have a letter from 
him for several days," she said, " and it was my 
hope that I should have got the charge of a set of 
chambers, with Thomas for porter ; but they say 
the panic has done away with all that ; and me 
and Mrs. Robinson, we have been into the city 
together for days, and to see the beautiful places 
as is to let, it do make one's heart ache, though 
there must have been swindling to build such 



dibble's scheming, 227 

grand houses and then to fail ; and I often think 
it is a mercy my dear pa is not alive, for he 
would to a certainty have lost his money in 
building some of those palaces/* 

"-How long has your husband lived in Brazen- 
crook P" Mr. Bales asked. 

" "Well, six months now, come December, 
though the family hath moved about a good deal, 
firtht from London, in Fall Mall, where one of 
the directors of the Meter Works first got him 
the situation, and then they went to Bath, and 
after to Brazencrook : it wath not my wish that 
Thomas should return to the menial employment 
of his bachelor days, but losing my money was a 
sore afi^ction, and Dibble, he thaith, 'Maria, I 
shall soon save money, and when the family is 
once settled in a place, which they expect soon to 
be, you can come and live in that town, wherever 
it is, and have your own little house, and I will 
sleep at home, which, Mr. Bales, was all Jthe 
recompense he could make for the mithfortunes 
which have come upon us, and the change in that 

Q 2 



228 THE. TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

position of society in which my poor dear pa 
brought me up, being, as I dare thay I have told 
you, a builder, and haying large contracts, he 
could do." 

" Then you have not heard of Mr. Dibble's re- 
cent efforts to restore a few hundred pounds of 
the lost money P*' said the detective calmly, dis- 
regarding the injunctions of his prisoner. 

"A few hundred pounds!" exclaimed Mrs. 
Dibble, bursting a hook and eye and making 
no effort to remedy the accident. "Hath he 
rethcued that thum from the fire? Well, so he 
ought; for what with one thing and another he 
thertainly hath been my ruin, for we should never 
have been in the panic at aU but for him, though 
how that bank came to fail ith a mythtery to me ' 
which will never be cleared up." 

" He has not exactly rescued the money as you 
say ; but if you will pay attention to me for a few 
minutes, I will explain the case." 

''Thertainly, I will pay attention with great 
pleathure, and more particularly as you theem to 



THE DETECTIVE AND MRS. DIBBLE. 229 

have thome good news, you do nurse it so care- 
fully, for if it was bad you would have out with 
it at wonth." 

" No, it is not good news : it is bad news and 
good news together." ^ 

"Well, so that the good ith uppennotht, I can 
put up with a little bad," said Mrs. Dibble, pro- 
ceeding to readjust one of the little jaunty curls 
that ornamented each side of her fair fat face. 

She had not lost all those red and white and 
chubby charms which had attracted poor old Dib- 
ble in those early days of his London situation ; 
but she was not so rosy nor so fat, nor so well 
dressed as she was when we saw her strumming 
out the "Old Hundredth" at that little square 
piano in Still Street ; neither was she so demon- 
strative, nor yet quite so overbearing in her man-^ 
ner. But she still presumed upon her boarding- 
school education, and the high position of her pa 
as a builder, and the matrimonial offers she had 
had before she condescended to marry Thomas 
Dibble. 



230 , THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

" Your husband, Mrs. Dibble, edged on by your 
taunts about your losses, and bis own affection 
for you, bas appropriated three hundred pounds." 

"Appropriated," said Mrs. Dibble; "a fine 
word, thir, and one as I remember well to have 
written over and over again at boarding school, 
but I am not quite clear about the exact meaning 
of it." 

" Prepare to hear the very worst news possible, 
Mrs. Dibble, and then I will tell you what it means." 

"Don't, thir; O don't, thir !" said Mrs. Dibble. 
" I know now, I know ; Thomas is a thief, I know. 
Teih,yeth; I thee it aU!" 

"Don't agitate yourself," said the detective; 
"pray be calm. I have good news to come as 
well, . ^very good news." 

But Mrs. Dibble would agitate herself; Mrs. 
Dibble would not be calm; Mrs. Dibble would 
insist upon moaning and crying and rocking herself 
to and fro, and bursting her hooks and eyes, and 
undoing her cap-strings and letting her curls come 
down. Mrs, Dibble was, indeed, most perverse. 



MRS. dibble's grief. 231 

"The money has been restored to its owner, 
and Dibble will, no doubt, get off with a month or 
two," said the detective. 

"Get off with a month or two, thir; what do 
yon mean ? A month or two of what ?" 

" Imprisonment, of conrse," said Bales. 

" dear! O dear!" exclaimed Mrs. Dibble, the 
tears really coming into her eyes now, and her 
cap-strings too, blinding her with pink ribbon and 
"round saline globules," as that smart reporter 
friend of ours would say, . "What will become of 
me ! I shall descend with grey hairs to the grave ! 
and to think that I wath once at a boarding-school, 
the envy of them all, and the daughter of a gentle- 
man, thir ; yeth, a gentleman, though I thay it 
Odear! dear! Thomath, Thomath, what have 
you done V* 

" I have told you what Thomas has done," said 
Bales, in his calm, imperturbable way ; " and now 
I will tell you the good news I have for you, if 
you will only be quiet. The Bight Honourable 
the Countess of Yemer sends you this, . it is a 



232 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

fifty-pound note ; and she requests you to pack 
up your things and come down to Montem Castle 
with me." 

Mrs. Dibble glanced at the note and listened to 
the detective's words, but continued to moan and 
cry. She did not know what else to do ; for she 
was not quite sure that Bales was not deceiving 
her. 

** The lady, it appears, was once in your house : 
she is Lieutenant Somerton's sister: if I told 
you that much, she said, you would under- 
stand." 

"Lieutenant Thomerton! yeth, yeth," said 
Mrs. Dibble, seizing the note ; " I understand." 
" It seems so," said Bales. 
" She married a lord, yeth. Me and Chrissy 
(poor lost dear !) . ^me and Chrissy went to see the 
wedding at Hanover Square, and grand it was to 
be sure, tliougli I have heard my pa say that 
when he was married to my ma, . ^it is a good 
many yearth ago now, . that they walked on 
flowers and carpets for a quarter of a mile." 



i 



GOING TO MONTEM. 233 

Then suddenly remembering that she had serious 
cause for grief, Mrs. Dibble put her apron to her 
eyes and began to cry afresh. 

"Oh, you know all about it then; when will 
you be ready?" 

"Thath hard to say. I shall have a great deal 
to do to get ready, and I thent a few things to the 
wash, which it hath not been my custom to do of 
late, and I am sure '' 

" Can you be ready in an hour ? " asked Bales, 
interrupting her. 

" An hour ! Abthurd : you mutht be mad to 
think of thutch a thing, thir. I wath thinking 
of a week at leatht before I could be ready to 
appear in noble society at a castle, though when 
I wath a girl '' 

" Never mind when you were a girl, Mrs. Dib- 
ble, just think of your husband ; he is in prison, 
and perhaps you can help him ; Montem Castle is 
dose to Brazencrook." 

. " O dear ! what a hard-hearted man you mutht 
be to be thure, to remind me of that again just ath 



234 THE T.\LLANTS OF BABTON. 

I wath a trying to think that all your newth wath 
not bad newth." 

And then Mrs. Dibble began to cry once more 
for decency's sake. 

" Will you be ready in the mor^iing ? . ^however 
you must ; so there's an end. Lady Vomer wished 
that you would come to-day. You don't suppose 
you are going to sit in the drawing-room, and all 
that sort of thing, with an earl and countess, eh ? 
You will be the housekeeper's visitor. Come, no 
more nonsense; say you will be ready in the 
morning." 

" If it ith for the thake of my poor forlorn 
mithguided husband," said Mrs. Dibble, sighing, 
" I mutht, of course. I will, I wiU, thir." 

" Then I shall call in a cab for you to-morrow 
morning at ten o'clock," said Bales, taking up his 
hat and leaving the poor little house without fiir- 
ther ceremony. He was by no means in a good 
humour the next morning when he found Mrs. 
Dibble prepared with luggage enough to have 
made a voyage round the globe. Boxes, bundles. 



PADDINGTON PLATFORM. 235 

parcels, carpet bags, umbrellas, shawls and mufflers, 
the old lady filled the cab inside and out, and she 
created quite a sensation at Paddington whilst 
Bales was taking tickets. She had lost an um- 
brella, and left a parcel in the cab ; she had fallen 
over a luggage-truck, and quarrelled with a porter: 
so that when Bales came upon the platform, he 
found his companion the centre of interest and at- 
traction, and the target for a series of lively jokes 
and witticisms from the " paper boys," who pressed 
the TimeSy Standard, and Telegraph upon her at- 
tention, much to her annoyance. She was telling 
an old gentleman who had come to her assistance, 
that she had had a boarding-school education, and 
that her father, who was a builder, had erected 
several stations and a railway bridge ; and she did 
think that if there was civility to be got she ought 
to have it, let alone the fact of her losing money in 
the panic. 

Mr. Bales, however, speedily induced Mrs. Dib- 
ble to take a seat in a first-class carriage, and the 
old gentleman smiled benevolently upon her. He 



236 THE TALLANTS OP BARTON. 

could easily see that it was not a dangerous case, 
he said to Mr. Bales. To what asylum was he 
convejdng her P 

"You had better ask her," said Bales. "You 
will be amused at her reply." 

" Indeed !" said the gentleman. 

" Yes," said Bales, " she rather likes to be asked 
the question." 

" Then I will certainly put it," said the traveller, 
and he walked with Bales to the carriage. 

The detective took his seat, and began to read 
the Times with great attention. 

"Athylum, thirl" exclaimed Mrs. Dibble after a 
few moments, in reply to a bland question. "What 
do you mean, thir ? How dare you, thir ! " 

"Really, madain, I did not intend to oflfend, 
but " 

" But--don't but me, thir ! " 

"No, certainly not," said the traveller, "cer- 
tainly not ; it was not my intention." 

"Athylum indeed ! If you are inquisitive, thir, 
let me tell you that my destination is Montem 



AN INCIDENT BY THE WAY. 237 

Castle. Did you think I was mad, or a matron, 
thir." 

" Oh, neither, neither ; but a philanthropic lady 
who '' 

" Rubbish ! you think you are making game of 
me, but you can't do it, thir ; and I am surprithed, 
-.a man of your years." 

" My years ! what do you mean P" 

"Yes, your years. Will her ladyship send a 
carriage for us, did you say?" Mrs. Dibble inquired 
of Bales, with the full intention of crushing 
her persecutor at once by the grandeur of her 
connections. 

" Certainly," said Bales, with a bow of deference 
and a quiet wink at the stranger, who, at first in- 
clined to be angry at Mrs. Dibble's remark about 
his age, now laughed heartily. 

''Very good! Ha, ha, ha!" he exclaimed. 
" Very good. Her ladyship's carriage !" 

The old gentleman's hilarity attracted quite a 
little crowd round the window, and Mrs. Dibble 
was excited into such a terrible rage, that she 



238 THE TAIXANTS OF BABTON. 

flung her reticule at him and knocked his hat off, 
to the immense delight of the bystanders. 

Bales roared with laughter, as Mrs. Dibble 
screamed and vociferated at the humorous gen- 
tleman upon whom she had turned the laugh so 
vigorously. 

**Here, none of this, . ^none of this," said the 
guard, pitching the reticule back into the carriage 
and giving the signal for departure. 

Screech went the whistle of the engine, and the 
train moved off amidst roars of laughter at the 
gentleman whose wig had fallen off with his hat. 
The passengers were looking out all along the train, 
and Mrs. Dibble suddenly seeing the humour of 
the whole thing, and the old man's difficulty with his 
false hair, began to laugh too; and Mr. Bales 
telling the story afterwards, said he certainly never 
laughed so much in his hfe. 

Meanwhile the remains of Bichard Tallant were 
being buried ; buried in the same tomb where the 
father lay in that old church near Barton. Earl 



THE FAMILY VAULT. 239 

Vemer had desired that the obsequies might be 
performed with all decency and respect, seeing that 
whatever the dead man might have been, he was 
his wife's brother. So Lionel Hammerton and 
Arthur Phillips had attended with the Earl, and 
the body was buried with due solemnity. 

What a termination to the ambition of Christo- 
pher Tallant ! What an end to all that pride of 
wealth ! . all those years of hard work, of toil and 
anxiety in the father's yoimger days; all those 
lessons of thrift, of energy, of industry, learnt in the 
north coimtrie ; all that heaping up of riches : here 
was the final scene. Father and son lay together, 
the one a broken-hearted man, the other a bankrupt 
in purse and reputation, with a murderer's bullet 
in his brain ! . ^the son of that London wife whom 
Christopher Tallant had taken down to Avon- 
side in those days of his early manhood. Here 
they lay together . ^the proud dead father and his 
disinherited son: here they lay with their dead 
hopes, tenants of a dishonoured grave ! They who 
should have been living in honour and high repute. 



240 THE TAUJlSTS of BABT05. 

asslstmg to goyem fhe destinies of a nation. A 
fine, generous, hospitable, manly fellow that proud 
merchant had been, hating anything and every- 
thing that was dishonourable in a monetary sense, 
yet gauging everything by a simple golden stand- 
ard; he had carried his just anger at his son's 
misconduct into the grave, but there lay the son 
by his side, quiet enough now. It had been a 
subject of considerable discussion at Montem Castle 
before the funeral, whether Itichard TaUant should 
be buried in the family vault, and Lord Yemer 
had overruled all objections with his aiguments in 
&vour of this intennent. He was the last male 
representative of the race, and it was not for 
them to carry further that awful retribution which 
had be&Hen him; and so, as we have said, the 
merdiant's son was buried in the fionily vault 

Arthur Phillips remembered the other funeral ; 
that gloomy cort^ge^ which had arrested his steps 
on that misty autumn day, when, assured of the 
success of his picture, he had come down to Barton 
Hall to !e PhoDbe. It was Autumn again at this 



"ashes to ashes, dust to dust." 241 

second funeral, but the sun was shining brightly 
now, sending glints of coloured light from the oriel 
windows down the chancel of the old church, and 
glimmering upon the ceiling with a trembling 
reflection from the adjacent lake. The old church 
was full of people, not mourners, but lookers on : 
men and women come to see the murdered man's 
funeral, just as many of them would go to see the 
man hanged who had killed him, if they had an 
opportunity. 

The old trees that had loomed forth dim and 
shadowy in the adjacent park, now stood forth in 
all their autumnal grandeur, and some of them 
cast long shadows in at the open doorway, upon 
the monumental pavements. The October wind 
moaned now and then round the old tower, and 
rustled the ivy, making it tap upon the windows 
in the midst of the parson's solenm funereal words. 
And now and then a few brown leaves came 
rushing into the chancel, as if they sought sanC/- 
tuary against the persecutions of the wind. When 
the sexton crumbled the dust upon the coffin-lid, 

VOL. III. B 



242 THS TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

these stray leaves shambled in also, . sad emblems 
of death and decay, but not without an eloquent 
suggestion to the thoughtful mind, of our reason- 
able faith in the resurrection of the dead; for 
autumn and winter are but the harbingers of 
spring. Arthur Phillips uttered a prayer that 
they whose sins brought their own punishment in 
this world, might thereby find forgiveness in the 
next for these same misdeeds. 

Mrs. Phillips and the Countess sat together at 
Montem watehing the leaves whirl hither and 
thither ; those leaves, . so wild, so weird, so beau- 
tiful, so sad, so eloquent to Amy . ^they flew along 
the terrace like flocks of birds, away over the 
green turf, until they lighted on the distant lake, 
and sailed about wherever the wind willed. And 
Amy told her dear friend how tlie leaves had 
whirled round those carriage-wheels on that 
autumn day, when she first saw her husband. 
They always recalled that day, these autumn 
leaves . always brought it back to Amy's mind. 
These were her dead hopes, the leaves of her 



THE TWO AUTUMNS. 243 

young Jove that had been nipped by the frost of 
neglect. She had watered them with her tears, 
and then bade them go whither they listed. 

Poor Amy ! What a relief it was to open all 
her heart to Phoebe now, to repeat to her all those 
acts of deceit which she had practised. Mrs. 
Phillips shuddered at her friend's description of 
her interviews with Richard Tallant, and Amy 
painted her own miserable acts of dissembling in 
more sombre colours than they deserved. Yet aU 
this had increased her gratitude to the Earl, who 
had believed in her despite everything, who had 
loved her from the beginning with the same 
earnest affection, who had never once doubted her, 
and whom she vowed again and again she would 
love at last. 

Yet the dead leaves whirled about in the wind, 
and faint sounds of the minute-bell came wan- 
dering over the lake, like the knell of departed 
hopes and joys. Even Phoebe's soft sweet voice 
and tender words did not altogether neutralise the 
melancholy effect of these dead leaves and that 

n 2 



244 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

distant bell. But Amy felt that there was peace 
in this solemn autumn-time, nevertheless ; and 
that all danger of losing Earl Vemer's love was at 
an end. Remembering the peril through which she 
had passed, there was happiness in this ; looking 
back for a moment to the black clouds which had 
hovered over Montem within the last few days, 
she could bear to look upon the dead leaves now 
without a pang, and with the soft, tender, soothing 
words of her dear, dear friend Phoebe nestling in 
her heart, there was peace and hope even in the 
murmurs of that funeral bell. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

IN WHICH SEVERAL PEKSONS QUIT THE STAGE 
FOR EVER. 

No great amount of persuasion was required to 
induce Lord Vemer to give up his intention of pro- 
secuting the superintendent of poKce at Brazen- 
crook. The Watch Committee of the old borough 
had intimated to the officer that it would be neces- 
sary he should resign his situation, and he had 
done so. They were very obsequious to Lord 
Vemer, and this was the most practical way of 
showing the town's allegiance to his lordship. 
But the chief contended, as fairly he might, that 
there were groimds of suspicion against Captain 
Hammerton, and that although he might have 
been hasty, he had not exceeded his duty in appre- 
hending that gentleman. The subject was taken 



246 THE TALLAKTS OF BABTON. 

up warmly by the local Press, and a smart London 
paper had a powerfnlly sarcastic and biting article 
calling the Brazencrook Watch Committee a set of 
snobs, and upholding the officer of police. On all 
hands, however, testimony was borne to the com- 
plete exculpation of Lionel Hammerton. 

Seeing that the guilt of Shuffleton Gibbs was 
established mosi clearly in the first examination 
before the Brazencrook magistrates, it was certainly 
due to Lionel that he should be regarded as an in- 
jured man in that unfortunate apprehension by the 
Brazencrook chief. All his trouble andsorrow had 
arisen out of his own pride and want of confidence 
in the woman whom he professed to love. If he 
had been content to accept the warning of Paul 
Somerton that night in London, near the steps of 
the Ashford Club, what a world of misery he might 
have been spared; a manly faith in that high- 
spirited girl at Barton would have saved him. 
No one saw all this now more clearly than Lionel 
Hammerton, and what was more, he knew that 
he had been rightly punished. The only real bit 



LIONEL'S FUTUBE. 247 

of consolatioii in the whole business was the 
prison episode. This was his only real grievance, 
the only bit of martyrdom in his career. If he 
could have felt that he had been injured by Amy ; 
if the grievance had been on his side, he might 
have been more content. It is better to be 
wronged than to wrong ; it is more comfortable to 
receive an injury than to commit an injustice. 
All Lionel Hammerton's troubles had been of his 
own creation, and family pride was at the bottom 
of them all. His incarceration was the only 
injury done to him which he had .not courted, 
which his pride and injustice had not brought 
upon himself; but it was a source of gratification 
to him that Amy felt he had undergone this 
indignity on her account. 

It was hard work to part from Amy ; to leave 
the two girls whom he had known in those 
happy days at Barton Hall ; to erase the past, and 
look forward into a future in which there were no 
familiar faces ; but this was his penance, and he 
was willing now to abide by it. If that most 



248 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

unkind suspicion of mercenary motives (which 
Honel had not strength of mind enough to keep 
back in the personal explanations) set forth in a 
previous chapter, had not rankled in the mind of 
the Countess, the parting would have been no 
small trial on her part. She would not have 
given any outward sign of her feelings had her 
heart been breaking; but Lionel's unmanly sus- 
picion had almost entirely removed the last frag- 
ment of her romantic love for him. Setting this 
aside, her honour as a wife, her gratitude towards 
Lord Vemer, and a strong sense of duty (kept in 
constant excitement by Mrs. Arthur Phillips), would 
have saved her from any further exhibition of 
strong feeling. It is not in human nature to 
maintain a full control over the passions, and par- 
ticularly over that love between man and woman 
which God has planted in the human heart for 
His own wise and beneficent purposes. When 
that great instinct of nature, which, secretly and 
unseen, draws two souls together, is set at nought, 
certain sorrow is the result. Happiness may come 



THE LAST KISS. 249 

in time to eacli of those who have broken this first 
instinctive contract of nature ; but it is a very 
limited happiness compared with that perfect bliss 
which true lovers feel. 

The Countess of Vomer was as happy as a 
woman can be who had loved and lost, and mar- 
ried for revenge and ambition. Eegard and 
respect ripened by degrees into what may be called 
sincere matrimonial ifriendship, and this was stUl 
further enhanced by the discovery of her old lover's 
unworthy suspicion about the sincerity of her 
love. She vowed to Mrs. Phillips, that had she 
been free to accept Lionel Hammerton, and he had 
sued at her feet with ten times the honeyed sweet- 
ness of his eloquence in the Barton gardens, the 
knowledge of his imworthy doubt of her true 
faith would have made her refuse him, had he been 
twenty times Lionel Hammerton and her first love. 

So when they parted, Lionel Hammerton's bro- 
therly kiss sent no thrill to Amy's heart, though she 
knew it was his intention never to return. Lord 
Vemer shook his brother warmly by the hand. 



250 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

begging him to come home as soon* as he liked 
and as often. Mrs. Arthur PhilKps kissed him for 
" Auld Lang Syne ; '* and her husband, the artist, ex- 
changed a sympathetic glance with the friend of his 
early days, which deeply affected the voluntary exile. 
Mrs. Dibble, who was living in the housekeeper's 
room until Thomas should be released, begged to 
be allowed to shake hands with the Captain, and 
she told the servants afterwards that it did not 
need a boarding-school education to see that the 
Earl's brother was bom nobility, and that you 
need not be a builder's daughter and copy specifi- 
cations to know that Mr. Bales was a policeman 
in disguise, as he stood by all the time without 
the least emotion, for all the world as if a trial 
had just come to an end and the prisoner was 
going to be hanged, and he had the job of taking 
him back to gaol prior to the sentence being 
carried out. 

Mr. Bales travelled as far as London with the 
Captain, and almost the first person he met, after 
seeing Lionel off, was Mr. Williamson, the barrister. 



KOT LOST. 251 

walking into the Temple. The two reoognised each 
other immediately. 

"Ah, Mr. Williamson, sir I how do you do? 
I thought you were lost," said the detectiye. 

"No, not lost. Bales,'* said the barrister, ex- 
tending his hand. " Come with me." 

It was evening, and the detectiye followed his 
friend np the dark staircase. 

When they reached the barrister's room, Wil- 
liamson produced a latch key, and opened the 
door ; the old woman who attended to this part of 
the chambers came blundering after them, fall of 
exclamations of joy at seeing the barrister again. 

" light a fire," said the barrister. 

"Lor, sir, the room is as damp as can be; it 
ain't fit to sit in after all these months; they 
wanted to break the door open, but I paid the 
rent regular out of the money you sent me, and I 
knowed, of course, as you would come back some 
day," said the woman. 

"I neyer expected to do so, or only for a day, to 
settle my affairs here and giye up the chambers 



252 THE TALLAl^TS OF BARTON. 

properly," said the barrister, addressing Bales, in 
reply to the woman. 

"Lor, sir ! '' said the old woman, bustling about 
and lighting the fire and putting the table to rights. 

"We can keep the damp out," said the bar- 
rister, " if there is any whisky left." 

" yes, sir, plenty ! " said the woman. 

"Very weU," said the barrister, producing his 
cigar case, and in a very short time Mr. Bales sat 
listening to those portions of Mr. Williamson's 
story with which he was not already acquainted. 

The barrister's manner was far more quiet and 
subdued than it was when we first made his 
acquaintance. All that cynicism and apparent 
infidelity had dropped bodily as it were out of his 
conversation. He was evidently quietly resigned 
to his lot, calmly resolved to Kve out the end of 
his days uncomplainingly. He had succeeded to 
a certain extent in his somewhat romantic and 
almost hopeless resolves to reform his miserable 
daughter. He did not teU Bales how and by 
what degrees he had worked upon her darkened 



THE END OF CHBISSY's CAREER. 253 

mind ; lie said nothing of the days of patient and 
unflagging effort to instruct her, to excite her 
higher sensibilities, to animate her with a true 
love for the beautiful and sublime, and through 
the medium of nature and art to bring her to a 
knowledge of the divine blessings of the Christian 
faith and hope. It was a plain unvarnished story 
which the barrister told his fidend the detective. 
Whatever may have been the result of the father's 
endeavour to change the perverted nature of his 
singularly-discovered child, her career was at an 
end . she died of a fever in a French convent, 
where the barrister had placed her, by her own 
desire ; and Mr. Williamson had left France only 
the day before the detective met him after the 
burial of his daughter, upon whose tomb he had 
inscribed those words of the second commandment, 
which he had written down in that memorable 
epistle to Paul Somerton. 

The detective told Williamson all about the 
stirring occnrrences which had taken place during 
his absence, and the barrister resolved that he 



254 THE TALLANTS OF BAETON. 

would convert what stock and property he had 
into money, and join Lieutenant Somerton in the 
Cape, at any rate for a time. 

"I shall travel about the world and occupy 
myself with the manners and customs of other 
lands," said the barrister, ^' and write sketches of 
travel for some of my publishing friends in town. 
If I could put my own trials into a book, and 
make capital out of my own troubles, I might 
perpetrate a novel. Bales." 

" It would be very taking," said Bales ; " I 
have been asked, sir, by a gentleman that writes 
for the Pyrotechnic^ to let him do my auto- 
biography, with all the cases I have been mixed 
up in ; but I don't think I shall." 

They chatted together for some hours in the 
familiar room, and we leave them enveloped in 
clouds of smoke through which the candles bum 
as dimly as the barrister's future hopes ; we leave 
them to carry our readers to the Brazencrook 
county gaol, where there are three prisoners in 
whom we have an interest. 



"cheating the gallows." 255 

Shuffleton Gibbs had been examined before the 
magistrates, and committed for trial on the clearest 
evidence, as we have intimated ; so that the pre- 
diction of the showman, that he would not leave 
his bed again, was not fully verified : only a very 
few weeks elapsed, however, before the criminal 
gradually sank, and at last died as much from want 
of gin as through disease. He died a miserable 
death, uninfluenced altogether by the ministrations 
of the chaplain who, by a strange coincidence, had 
been a member of that very college where Gibbs 
and Eichard Tallant had first become acquainted ; 
but before he died, when he felt quite satisfied that 
he was in no danger of being hung, he admitted 
.the truth of the showman's evidence, and not only 
confessed his own guilt, but boasted of it, gloated 
over it, and described the murder in fearfully 
graphic terms, until the prison officials sickened at 
the details, and shrunk back from the awfiil 
skeleton-like figure that grinned and raved in 
those last death agonies. 

Confronted with the chief witness against him. 



256 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

Gibbs put out his skinny band, which the show- 
man took timidly in his, and with that professional 
feeling which never deserted the owner of the 
famous dog Momus, Digby Martin, alias Smith, 
thought to himself what a rival Gibbs would have 
been just then to that living skeleton, who had 
treated him so shamefully at Sevemtown ! 

It is neither necessary nor desirable that we 
should dwell upon this wretched scene in the 
prison, where the last of the race to which Gibbs 
belonged ended his miserable career. Let it suf- 
fice that he died and was buried ; and that the 
showman .was released, and afterwards brought 
quite a small fortune to the proprietor of the 
tavern near the Brazencrook Music Hall, by relat- 
ing the true particulars of the murder in the 
ruined castle of Montem, exhibiting the clothes of 
the murderer, and the pistol with which the deed 
was done. Momus took her share in these per- 
formances, and afterwards went roimd with the hat, 
. being faithful to her rough master to the last, and 
never wearying in her obedience to his behests. 



THE dibbles' new HOME. 257 

Thomas Dibble was found guilty ; but in con- 
sideration of tbe excellent character which he 
received from several witnesses, and the whole of 
the circumstances under which the robbery was 
committed, he was only sentenced t.o three months' 
impiisonment. During the whole of this time, 
Mrs. Dibble remained at Montem Castle with the 
housekeeper, except when she went, once a month, 
to see Thomas, for a few minutes, at the gaol, 
upon which occasions she made a show of forgive- 
ness and sympathy; but she could never resist 
teUing the turnkey, in Dibble^s presence, of her 
boarding-school education, the proposals of mar- 
riage which she had received when she lived at 
home with her pa, and other biographical remi- 
niscences with which the reader is already too 
JEuniliar. 

When Thomas was released he was conducted 
from the gaol by an agent of Lord Vomer to a 
comfortable cottage near Avonworth, a few miles 
from Barton Hall, in which cottage Mrs. Dibble 
was already living. She would have met her 

VOL. in. 8 



260 THE TALLAliTTS OF BABTON. 

this assertion of his position by Dibble. But the 
builder's daughter, with her peculiar intermittent 
lisp, did not fail, whenever an opportunity arose, 
to proclaim her birth, parentage, and education 
to the inhabitants of the district. In course of 
time, by dint of household economy, Mrs. Dibble 
bought an old square piano at Avonworth, and 
she would sit as she did in the old times of 
Still Street on Sunday evenings, and thump Out 
the " Old Hundredth " until her hooks and eyes 
came undone, and Dibble had a fine prospect of 
back and back hair which reminded him of those 
prosperous days when he was porter at the fa- 
mous offices of the Meter Iron Works Company. 
This, however, excited feelings of regret in poor 
Dibble's mind that he was dependent upon the 
bounty of Lady Vemer now, instead of earning 
his own living; so he made application to the 
agent for "something to do;" and, j'pleased with 
Dibble's desire to make some practical return for the 
kindness he received, Lady Vemer recommended 
him to Mr. Arthur Phillips, who gave him 



OVER GIN TODDY. 261 

another cottage near Bartoiii and liad liim 
instructed in the mystery of grinding colours. 
Dibble soon made himself useful, and found 
enough to do at Barton Hall (where he had once 
been in the employ of Christopher Tallant, Esq.) 
all day long. This made his evenings happier ; the 
music of the old piano no longer twitted him with 
his dependency. Mrs. Dibble, as had been her 
wont in the happy times, mixed every night for 
him a glass of gin toddy, and whilst they sat 
togeiher by the fire on the conclusion of the " Old 
Hundredth,'* she acknowledged that after all 
Thomas Dibble was worthy to be the husband of 
a woman who had had a boarding-school educa- 
tion, with music and extras. 



264 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

meadowSy real halls and castles^ real streets, and 
above all; real people. 

If we succeed in impressing you with this fact, 
we shall gladly dispense with the blue fire and the 
orchestral accompaniments. Our fire shall be the 
glorious Sim ; our music the roar of the great city, 
and the murmur of the wind in the Seyemshire 
valley. 

Nearly a year has elapsed since the Brazencrook 
bells proclaimed the Countess of Vomer a mother ; 
two years have gone by since Lionel Ham* 
merton sailed for India; and oi^ce more it is summer 
time o'er all the land, . hot, glowing, glorious 
summer, . and we propose to let down the drop- 
scene amidst the refulgent splendours of the 
time. 

Shining with the same genial warmth upon all 
men and things, Gh-eat Sol is your only constitu- 
tional monarch. Yon magnificent sun, . ^nothing- 
influences his benign influence. The courtier wins 
no smile from him that the beggar may not have. 
None enjoy a monopoly of his favour. He rules 



SUKBEAMS. 265 

over all with an equal sway. Eloquence, money, 
daims of long descent, deeds of arms, gorgeous 
array, elicit no extra honours at his court. See 
how benignantly he looks down upon yon little 
cottage. See how his beams light up those lichen- 
covered bricks, and tremble upon those little square 
panes of glass. See how yon beggar lies in the 
royal presence, basking in the genial warmth. That 
fine mansion close by has no grander lights upon 
it ; that proud lord in his carriage gets no more 
sunshine than the beggar. 

glorious freedom of nature ! Why do we not 
learn the lessons thou teachest P Why does that 
proud woman take up her dress lest her ragged 
sister should contaminate her, when yon glorious sun 
takes both in his radiant arms in acknowledged 
equality ? Look at those streams of sunny light 
that fall upon the gorgeous equipages in Hyde 
Park; they do not disdain those ragged children 
on the footpath. 

It is the height of the London season, and all the 
great town is filled with the pomp and glitter of high 



266 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

life. Everything looks briglit, even poverty has a 
smile. The beggar is in clover, and the wretched 
are at least warm. There are no snowstorms, no 
cold cutting winds to torture the body and make 
cheerless hearths still more dismal. London wears 
her fairest smiles ; the sun with one broad depth of 
light clasps the great world in a fond embrace. 
The great town is a whirl of Hfe. Royalty, 
nobility, commonalty, roll along the glowing 
thoroughfares in glitter of gold and silver. The 
Thames is aKve with pleasure-boats, and the 
steamers go skimming along past the Houses of 
Parliament, where the business of the nation is 
going on despite those everlasting reform debates, 
and that continual stream of talk which flows 
from lip to pencil, from short-hand notes to 
type, and stares us in the face every morning in 
long columns of print that are never read from 
beginning to end, except by those professional 
readers who corrected them in the garish glare of 
the gas when we were all abed. It is the gay 
time of the year entirely, for the rich more par- 



THE LONDON SEASON. 267 

ticularly, for beauty, for the young commencing 
their first' season ; it is the gay time of the year 
for those dashing gentlemen on prancing horses, 
for those blooming ladies in the open carriages ; 
" those loungers in the parks ; for artists whose 
pictures are marked " sold " in the Exhibitions ; 
for opera and theatrical people in the full tide of 
success; for West-End tradesmen and hotel- 
keepers ; for strolling musicians ; for everybody 
in fact; the hot, gay, bustling, brilliant London 
season. 

There was a time, at this period of the year, 
when Eichard Tallant rode about amongst the 
best of those gallants at Tattenham Comer ; and 
when Mr. Gibbs wore the lightest of light gloves 
and the tightest of fancy boots that you would 
see in all the park. Christopher Tallant too, in his 
cut-away coat and checked trousers, . he had stood 
by those railings, in the sunshine, to see his fine 
son pass by. The Right Hon. Lionel Hammerton 
had many a time and oft been in the midst of that 
glittering stream of humanity. 



268 THE lALLAJSTQ OF BABTON. 

Surely all this pomp and pageantry comeih not 
so soon again after that financial earthquake 
which swallowed up so many heaps of gold and 
houses and horses and carriages ! Does any- 
thing ever make any change in that magnificent 
show of national wealth in the London season? 
Do all those railways over the house-tops and 
under the houses, spanning streets, and bur- 
rowing beneath the cellars . do they make any 
difference to those everlasting rows of cabs and 
'busses and carts and carriages, and the blocks 
in Fleet Street and Ludgate Hill? Does any- 
thing ever alter the social aspect of London, 
the busy, bustling, gorgeous, golden, seething as- 
pect of the streets ? 

Despite the commercial storm, in face of all those 
wonderful contrivances of bridge and rail to ease 
the traffic, London was as full of life and gaiety 
and pomp and glitter and show, this third London 
season of the Coimtess of Vomer, as ever it had 
been before. We shall leave her ladyship in the 
midst of the whirl of pomp and pleasure, one of the 



FAME AND FASHION. 269 

queens of beauty. She has been kissed by our 
gracious Queen ; she has excited the envy of many 
a titled dame. She has had many an admiring 
eye upon her amongst crowds of smiling courtiers. 
She has reached the highest point of her ambi- 
tion, and in the foremost rank of the first society 
in Europe ; her husband has made a great speech 
in the House of Lords; she is still declared to be 
the most beautifcd woman of this gorgeous London 
season. Their West-End house is filled with all 
the leading people of the time; the Vomers are 
the rage, . ^the Countess is the one bright par- 
ticular star in the aristocratic atmosphere of the 
period. And here we leave her looking her best ; 
heightened are all those charms which once at- 
tracted Lionel Hammerton, and will liyein his me- 
mory, like the sound of falling water to the traveller 
who has sunk down maimed and athirst, unable to 
taste the cooling stream which goes rippling and 
smiling on, and chattering over the rocks as if it 
mocked him. "We leave Lord Vemer, supremely 
happy in his married life, blissfiilly ignorant of the 



270 THE TALLANTB OF BARTON. 

narrow escape which that happiness has had of 
shipwreck ; blissfully ignorant, like the mariner, of 
the shoals and quicksands which have endangered 
his yessel in the fog and darkness. We leave our 
Countess in the full light of fashion's splendours, 
and still bent on the performance of her duty in the 
high station to whidi she has been exalted. If we 
were writing a mere book of fiction, and not a true 
story of life. Lord Vomer woidd probably have died 
conveniently towards the end of the story, that 
Lionel Hammerton might, in defiance of law and 
order and everything else, have married his widow, 
the twain ending their days by some lake of Como, 
where the perfumed light steals through the mist 
of alabaster lamps, and the law is not too stringent 
anent matrimonial license; but, as this is a matter- 
of-fact history, Lord Vemer does not die for the 
purpose of rewarding his brother's stupidity with a 
wife and a title. Nay, more, that title has slijpped 
away from Lionel Hammerton for ever. 

We leave the Countess of Vemer amidst the 
splendid pleasures of the London season, and, 



AT OLDHALli FABM AGAIN. 871 

with the hope that . an occasional expression of 
weariness which shadpws those hrilliant eyes may 
indicate a surfeit of pleasure, rather than any lack of 
real happiness, we turn to that great flat country 
of Lincolnshire with its green fields of wheats its 
long dreamy-looking river, and its rich pastures. 
"We stop at Oldhall Farm, and there, with the 
windows wide open, we find Luke Somerton teUing 
some neighbours, who have come in to tea, all about 
that model farm in Sevanshire. He never wearies 
of talking about those wonderful cow-sheds and 
stables and granaries, and the new yard that is 
hemmed in with buildings such as those whicli he 
is erecting at Oldhall. Mrs. Somerton, with a 
watchful look in her eyes, sits by plying her needle, 
and now and then a telling proverb falls from her 
Hps. She has not quite got over that sarcastic 
disappointed manner which characterised her con- 
versation years ago, but she is quieter now and 
more subdued ; any one can see that she has had 
her troubles, but she is not an unhappy woman 
nevertheless. Some. people would call her a very 



272 THE TALLAirrS OF BARTON. 

happy woman; but these knew nothing of that 
confession made to the master of Barton Hall in 
those past days of her life in the Yale of Avon- 
worth ; otherwise they would have seen cause to 
rejoice over certain occasional letters from Paid 
Somerton^ and sundry sweet little notes rom 
Mrs. Arthur PhiUips, which cheered the latter dajrs 
of Ihe ambitious Lincohishire woman. 

The letters of Paul Somerton reveal many 
circumstances of interest to the readers of these 
pages. We gather from them^ and the batch of 
Gape newspapers which accompanies each epistle, 
that the Lieutenant soon .ceased to nourish his 
unholy attachment for the siren who, for a time, 
had held him in adamantine chains. There 
are fevers of passion which in the young heart 
soon bum out and leave nothing behind but 
a vague and harmless memory, without one pang 
of sorrow or regret. Happily for Paul Somerton, 
his wild and wretched passion for that poor aban- 
doned dupe of Shuffleton Gtibbs partook of this 
fiery yet transient character. When his better 



AT THE CAPE OP GOOD HOPE. 273 

nature had time to assert itself^ and the temptress 
was no longer in his sights her image gradually 
faded out, to be replaced by one worthy in every 
way to be treasured in the heart of an honest and 
honourable man. 

Going out to the Cape, Lieutenant Somerton 
made the acquaintance of the daughter of a brother 
officer, a charming girl of his own age ; acquaint- 
anceship rapidly grew into love, and a month after 
the vessel's arrival in Table Bay, they were inar- 
ried. Paul wrote home very romantic letters 
about his wife, her beauty, her accomplishments, 
the bravery of her father, with sundry domestic 
details of regimental life at the Cape, which were 
highly gratifying to his father and mother. The 
latter said to herself that, after all, the Somer- 
tons were people of importance in the world. 
Thoughts of the boy who had gone away in early 
life and never return^, thoughts of the poor un- 
buried body tossed about beneath the deep waters, 
intervened, to throw a shadow upon these happy 
feelings concerning her soldier-son ; and that con- 

VOL, HI. T 



274 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

fessioQ started up to max the happy associatioiis 
which now clung about the Avonworth region of 
Barton ; but, on the whole, Sarah Somerton was 
in a certain sense a happy woman, and Luke would 
laah himself into ecstasies over the letters of Pheebe 
and Paul. 

Lieutenant Soxaerton had not been married 

many months wh^ his old Mend Mr. Williamson 

called upon hkn, and was pleased to find him 

married. The Barrister did not stay long at flie 

Cape, but long enough to teU Paul the conclusion 

of the story which he had partly related in 

that big letter which struck Paul down with 

such severity in those dark days of his boyish 

passion. Williamson derived great satisfaction 

and comfort from Paul*s marriage, and Paul 

parted from his old friend with tears of gratitude. 

Williamson had determined to go into the interior 

of Africa with a band of adventurous explorers, 

and the last that Paul had heard of him was from 

some natives, who had gone out part of the way 

and returned with satisfactory news of the progress 



A LETTER FROM PAUL. 275 

of the expedition. After the first year of Paul's 
marriage some English troops arrived in the colony 
from India, one <5ompany being in the command of 
the Hon. Captain Hammerton, who had at once 
sought out Paul, and they speedily became bosom 
friends. 

" We often talk," said Paul in his last letter, 
** of Avonworth Valley, Barton Hall, and the farm. 
My dear little wife says she gets quite jealous of 
Barton Hall, and Phoebe and Amy (we never call 
her Countess, I and Hammerton) and I do hope that 
some day I shall bring her over to England to see 
you all. She is most delighted with my description 
of Oldhall and the Lincolnshire country, for she 
was bom dose by, in the north of Nottingham- 
shire, bless her dear little face ! 

^'Captain Hammerton and myself once had a 
disagreement, which you know something about. In 
the most noble way he apologised to me, and expressed 
his regret for any annoyance he may have caused 
me, and said it had been a load on his mind for a 
long time. He is a very agreeable companion, but 

T 2 



276 THE TALLANTS OF BABTON. 

rather gloomy and despondent at times. I often 
tliink that he and our Amy that used to be were 
rather smitten with each other, and that he grieves 
about haying lost her. My wife sa3rs it is easy to 
see that he has been crossed in love. If being 
careless and generous; sometimes in very high, 
spirits and at others equally low ; continually with 
a cigar in his mouth, and sitting dreamily looking 
at the smoke,; talking regretfully about England, 
and saying he shall never see it any more ; some- 
times visiting us continually, and then keeping 
away altogether, as it were : if these are tokens of 
his being crossed in love, as my wife calls it, then 
she is right no doubt The other day he had a 
brush with some Kaffir raiders, and fought like a 
lion. He went after them with only some twenty 
men : they encountered a hundred, killed a dozen, 
and brought in twenty prisoners. They say the 
Captain fought like a very devil, and he talks of 
the business as if he liked it. He says he should 
not mind if war broke out to-morrow; he would 
like to have a year of exciting work. My wife 



"SUMMKB o'er all THE LAND." 277 

says this is a further sign that he has been crossed 
in love. 

"For my own part, I hope things will go on 
peaceably. I think they will. There is a more 
settled feeling here than there was. I am not a 
coward, I hope ; but war for its own sake is not to 
my liking, and the chances are that, if all goes on 
comfortably for another year, I shall be with you 
for a month or two, with my dear Katy, in your 
flat but fertile county. 

" I am glad to hear such good news from Mr. 
Phillips, and it is just as it should be that Phoebe 
and her husband should be living at Barton Hall : 
I should like to see that well-known district once 
again, and sincerely hope to do so before another 
year is at an end.'' 

It is summer, we said, o'er all the land, and these 
are summer scenes, these closing scenes of ours. 
The winter of fickle Fortune has been with us in 
many of these pages. Our story has had more to 
do with storm than sunshine ; this closing scene is 



278 THE TALTiANTS OF BABTON. 

the greenest and simniest spot in our journey. We 
stand where we did at the opening of our story, 
within the shadow of Berne Hills. You know 
that modem mansion in the smiling vale of 
Avonworth, with its long gravelly drive, its half a 
mile of velvety lawn, its splendid park ; its groups 
of cedars, birch trees, ash and sycamore ; its orna- 
mental lake, and those glorious bits of distant hill 
and dale in the ever-changing lights of this western 
land. Here, where we first saw that sweet, fair, 
spirituel face, with the parted lips and the flowing 
hair ; here, where we took you, dear reader, by the 
button-hole, to direct your attention to all that was 
picturesque and lovely in the hills and the valleys ; 
here, where we introduced you to the leading people 
in our story ; here, where we paused to mourn over 
that fine old merchant, dead of his golden sorrow ; 
here, where we saw those love-passages between 
Lionel and Amy, and where we have sat beside the 
artist whilst he has limned those wood-side bits of 
beauty, heightened by his dreams of love ; hpe, in 
this glorious summer-time> with all the familiar 



THE NEW STUDia 2^9 

assodations of the place upon us: here we call 
upon the prompter to whisfle down that sombre- 
coloured scene and bring this poor drama to an 
end. 

In the room above the -portico, looking down the 
drive and commanding the fdU range of those 
Berne HiUs, we find Arthur Phillips in his new 
studio. Far different to that work-a-day room in the 
cathedral dose, wealth has stepped in here to make 
art luxurious. This studio is a painting-room, 
drawing-room, library, all in one, as if the whole 
house had been ransacked for contributions to the 
master's pet room. Cabinets, couches, statues, vases> 
rich curtains, a piano, curious clocks, mirrors, 
books in elaborate bindings, great portfolios, and 
a host of things that might in imagination have 
graced the room of some grand old Venetian 
painter of the classic days. From one comer, 
these many treasures are excluded by means of 
curtains of a neutral tint, which shut in a space 
where the artist works with whatever light he 
pleases, with the Berne Hills before him, or with 



280 THE TALLANTS OF BARTON. 

nothing but the light of day upon his canvas . bo 
perfect and unique are his arrangements. 

Here we leave our artist at work finishing a 
picture which he is painting, with a loving fidelity, 
worthy of the subject. . A beautiful woman like 
that vignette which we saw in the College Gbreen 
(when Arthur Phillips discovered that he had not 
a rival in Lionel Hammerton) is sitting beside a 
cradle where a baby lies fast asleep, with one of 
its little rouud arms outside the lace coverlet. By 
the mother's knee is a curly-headed boy, making 
his first acquaintance with picture-books. This 
study from life represents the artist's wife and 
children. 

Whilst he is putting in the finishing touches to 
the accessories Mrs. Phillips is playing a rippling, 
dreamy sonata on the piano close by. 

In at the open window comes the warm breath 
of the sunmier wind laden with rare perfumes, 
the music of birds, the faint tinkle of sheep- 
bells, and full of suggestive whisperings about 
the summer fields of rustling com, and the 



"PBBFBCT HAPPINESS.*' 281 

newly gathered hay, the wild flowers in the green 
and sunny lanes^ the clear rippling brooks that 
glide by luxurions hedge-rows, and all the multi- 
farious rural beauties that are known to summer 
winds. 

Free from all the ordinary cares of the world, 
with faculties cultivated and imagination influ- 
enced and softened by the loving study of art, 
blessed in the love of the one woman who had 
been the dream of his life, as husband and father, 
Arthur Phillips had realised far more than all his 
dearest hopes. 

And Phoebe, . ^that frank, confiding girl who 
had loved him all along, and told him so when 
he had been courageous enough to ask the question, 
. ^her life was as near an approach to the perfect 
happiness of which we spoke in some preceding 
pages as it is possible for mortal existence to be. 

Arthur had realised to the frdl that touchingly 
simple. saying of Anderson's, that ''people had a 
great deal of trouble to go through, and then they 
became Eunous.*' 



282 THE TALLANTa OF. BABTOK. 

The only . shadairo whiok fell upon the green- 
sward of {heir path in life's highway were'4ihose 
which fell from the memory of others' sorrows ; 
but, like the shadows of summer clouds upon the 
green and flowery landscape, these only made the 
way more beautiful, and heightened still further 
the glory of that halo of gratitude which shone 
about their peaceful lives. 



THE END. 
