IN THE LAP OF FORTUNE. 



INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 







THE STORY OF A STORY. 

H E N I wias a boy I saw the dis- 
covery of a murder. The tra- 
gedy was relieved from barren 
horror by some lights and sha- 
dows of romance. My father attended 
the inquest and published a plan of the 
deed, a map of murderous footsteps. One 
of the chief criminals occasionally visited 
my father's office. A thrill of terror shook 
our little household when we looked back 
and remembered that he had made a busi- 

. VOL. I. I 



Stranger than Fiction. 



ness call upon my father a few days after 
the murder. 

The scene of the crime was on my way 
to school. In the dark evenings of autumn 
I passed it hurriedly and with a shudder, 
whistling for companionship ; but the cry 
of the stricken man followed me, and the 
drooping figure of his sweetheart haunted 
me in my dreams. When first I began to 
write, which was at a very early age, this 
story of Middleton-in-the- Water arose be- 
fore me with that strange mystic-looking 
ground-plan drawn by my father. The 
ancient mariner was not more the slave of 
his story than I was slave to this record of 
blood that tinged the imagination of my 
youth. 

At eighteen I began to relieve my 
soul of its ghostly burthen. Two or three 
years afterwards the gleam of my watch- 
man's lantern radiated the pages of a 
provincial magazine. That was in 1863 ; 
shortly afterwards a limited number of this 
work was published in London. It was 
my first novel. I regarded it with a pride 



The Story of a Story, 



that has long since evaporated. Never- 
theless to do justice to the materials thus 
clumsily thrown together, became one of 
my cherished desires. In the present work 
I have acted on my more matured instincts, 
with what result it is not for me to say. I 
could not let the book go forth without 
this explanation. The story is in some 
respects recast; fresh incidents are intro- 
duced here and there ; it is almost wholly 
re-written, and on the score of literary 
execution may fairly be regarded as a 
new work. If it is not **my favourite 
child,*' it is in spirit and action my first 
born ; and if I may accept as fair token of 
successful labour, the kindly and distin 
guished notice which it has received during 
its wayward career in the pages of the 
Gentleman's Magazine, I feel that I may 
rely upon the sympathies of the general 
reader in this re-introduction of my first- 
born, newly dressed, and with a fresh set 
of thoughts and manners. 

It was dedicated to a dear friend, this 
story of my boyhood, a dear friend who de- 



Stranger than Fiction. 



spite the perils of the Hterary highway 
encouraged me to go on. When that dedi- 
cation was written Mark Lemon seemed to 
be in the hey-day of a second youth ; 
Thackeray and Dickens were both alive ; 
they were not yet engaged upon their last 
contributions to our instruction and plea- 
sure ; the world was going merrily round ; 
Mark Lemon had not even thought of his 
** Falstaff " tour. All this was only yester- 
day. . Yet it seems ages ago since the bells 
tolled at my poor friend's funeral, reviving 
loving memories of those who had gone 
before. 

Carefully revising my earlier impressions 
of the character and work of Mark Lemon, 
I find no reason for altering a single word 
of my original dedicatory tribute, except, 
alas ! the necessity of adapting it to the pre- 
sent time by a sad and solemn formality. 



1^ 



%a the ,p:f mxrcg uf 

MARK LEMON, 

EDITOR OF " PUNCH f 
AND A WRITER, WHO, FOR MORE THAN THIRTY YEARS, 

ADORNED 
DRAMATIC, BALLAD, AND MISCELLANEOUS LITERATURE, 

WITH A PEN THAT TOUCHED 
ALL THE NOBLEST SENTIMENTS OF THE HUMAN HEART ; 

THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED, 

IN REMEMBRANCE OF HOURS MAD? HAPPY 

BY HIS GENIAL SOCIETY, 

AND IN GRATEFUL RECOGNITION OF LITERARY ADVICE 

FREELY AND GENEROUSLY GIVEN TO 

THE AUTHOR. 




CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCES THE HERO AND OTHER PERSONS, 
MATTERS, AND THINGS, OF IMPORTANCE IN 
THIS STRANGE, EVENTFUL HISTORY. 

BRIGHT bit of North-Midland 
landscape. A shallow, shingly 
reach of river flowing through 
mowing grass, and skirting the 
high-road of Middleton-in-the- Water. 

There are cattle standing at a distant 
bend of the river. The foreground has a 
group of children playing within the sha- 
dow of an ancient bridge. An artist might 
paint the picture, and call it " Peace," 
though the bridge was the scene of a 
bloody battle in olden days, and in modern 
times had been the subject of many a noisy 




Introduces the Hero. 



dispute at Quarter Sessions. The autho- 
rities differed concerning the owner- 
ship of the bridge. City and county both 
refused to acknowledge the responsibility 
of repairing it. The local journals always 
contained racy reports of magisterial elo- 
quence whenever the Middleton bridge 
was mentioned to the Court for repairs. I 
do not propose to enter into the details of 
this exciting local question. The bridge 
belongs to history, and it occupies as pro- 
minent a place in the foreground of this 
story as it does in the landscape upon 
which the curtain rises. 

The children by the river never dream 
that the everlasting scene-shifter is at their 
elbows. They have fished and bathed in 
the quiet waters. They have despatched 
fleets of imaginary ships beneath the 
shadowy portals of the ancient bridge to 
more shadowy countries beyond the Mid- 
dleton meadows. By-and-by they will 
play at a higher game, with the rough river 
of life for their ocean, and human hopes 
for their ships at sea. 



8 Stranger than Fiction. 

The shadow of the county bridge falls 
gently upon the calm and sunny river . 
falls as if it were the welcome shadow of a 
familiar friend. And so it is ; for they are 
old companions, bridge and river. The 
children would have stood aghast could 
they have heard even a whisper of the 
sights which these old friends had seen to- 
gether. Strange stories of battle, murder, 
and sudden death, had been acted out in 
presence of the county bridge and the Mid- 
dleton river. But who could think of any- 
thing that was not full of summer-days in 
presence of the tender evening lights and 
the soft fading shadows ? It was like a 
dream of childhood, this picture of the 
world outside of towns. 

But we are old hands now, you and I, 
my friend. We know when the curtain 
rises on a sunny scene of rural happiness 
that the orchestra is provided with charac- 
teristic strains for other incidents in the 
drama. Behind that artistic glimmer in 
the first act we know the storm is brewing. 
We know that the soft and gentle music 



1^ 



Introduces the Hero. 



will send up in due course mysterious 
chromatic passages with violinistic sugges- 
tions of treasons, stratagems and spoils. 
And so it is with this real picture in this 
real drama. Already a cloud of mystery 
begins to settle down upon the mill by the 
Middleton river. Even the children are 
at last disturbed in their innocent amuse- 
ments. The great scene-shifter is at work. 
He obeys no noisy whistle. You cannot 
tell when he will begin to move. He 
needs no prompter. His scenes never 
hitch ; he makes no mistakes ; he works 
by immutable regulations. Let us accept 
his changes humbly, and be thankful. 

While we are moralising, another shadow 
falls upon the water. It threatens the 
destiny of one of the real figures in the 
foreground of the real picture. It is the 
shadow of a woman. At first it is a long, 
strange-looking shadow, contesting the very 
existence of the reflection of the bridge it- 
self. By degrees it becomes less and less, 
until it disappears behind its owner, who 
stands in the grim majesty of a stranger 



lo Stranger than Fiction, 

before the children who helped to make up 
this picture of peace and quiet. 

" Where does Mr. Alfred Martyn live ?'' 
asks the new comer. 

" Here, Jacob Martyn," shouts the first 
boy addressed, " here Jacob, come and 
show this woman where your father lives." 

Thereupon came forth Jacob, who up to 
that time had been intently engaged in 
directing the course of an East India ship 
across a stormy sea, said ship being the 
trunk of an ancient oak which had lost all 
its branches,, save one shrivelled stump. 
This solitary reminiscence of the great 
tree's arms served for a mast, which Jacob 
Martyn had ordered his crew to cut down 
in the hope of saving the storm-pressed 
vessel. 

" Are you Jacob Martyn ?" asked the 
woman. 

"Yes," said Jacob, holding his head 
down, and making a mental inventory of 
the lower portion of the questioner's travel- 
stained garments. 

'' Have you ever heard of your aunt 




Introduces the Hero, 1 1 

Keziah ?'* she asked, taking the boy by the 
hand, "your aunt Keziah, who lives in 
London ?" 

"Yes," again said Jacob, venturing to 
lift his eyes as high as the woman's waist, 
and examining the exterior of a quaint- 
looking bag, fastened there by a faded link 
of bonnet ribbon. 

" Well, I am your aunt Keziah," ex- 
claimed the strange wpman, with an air of 
triumph not unmingled with defiance, as if 
she gloried in her individuality, and was 
prepared to defend herself against any 
number of spurious aunt Keziahs who 
might question her rights and privileges. 

This time little Jacob made no reply, 
but his black eyes travelled beyond the 
ribbon-tied bag, and up to his aunt's face, 
with an eager, wondering look ; for Jacob 
had heard of his aunt Keziah, and strange 
were the stories which made her name 
familiar in the boy's memory. 

Without another word aunt Keziah took 
possession of her nephew, took him by 
the arm, and marched away with him. 



1 2 Stranger than Fiction. 



From that moment Jacob's troubles and 
adventures commenced. Play was over 
with him for ever. He had sailed his last 
ship to India, caught his last minnow, 
staked his last marble, and fought his last 
battle with savages among the thistles of 
the adjacent common. Aunt Keziah had 
arrived. She and Fate were introducing 
Jacob Martyn to his Destiny. 

Let us take note of aunt and nephew as 
they move along the shabby street that 
leads to Mr. Martyn*s house. The woman 
is of middle age, with a large quantity of 
grey hair escaping, in jaunty curls, from a 
showy bonnet trimmed with ribbons of all 
colours. Upon her shoulders she wears a 
curiously figured shawl ; and her black 
dress is variegated with dust, giving evi- 
dence of a long joumey on foot. From 
her waist hangs a velvet bag, drawn toge- 
ther by many rings and suspended by a 
faded ribbon. In one hand she carries a 
dusty umbrella, and by the other she leads 
her somewhat unwilling and wondering 
companion, Jacob Martyn, a boy of thir- 




hitroduces the Hero. 1 3 

teen. Jacob is nothing more than an ordi- 
nary-looking boy, except that he has large 
black eyes which seem to have a world of 
their own to wander in. 

Mr. Marty n was a printer and publisher. 
His establishment, to which these two 
were walking, stood in an old-fashioned 
street some distance from the spot indi- 
cated in the first few lines of this chapter. 
It was a dingy-looking place in front ; but 
at the back there was one of those fruitful, 
miscellaneous, carefully tended gardens, 
which seem more particularly to belong to 
the Midland counties, where one o'clock 
dinners, eight o'clock suppers, and garden 
arbours still linger. 

Jacob and his aunt entered Mr. Martyn's 
shop just as a very savoury smell was issu- 
ing from the snug parlour behind ; a smell 
that suggested something stewing in a 
saucepan with a judicious mixture of herbs ; 
stewing on a clean hob, in presence of a 
polished fender and a white cloth on a 
round table laid for two ; a smell which 
seemed to titillate the nostrils of aunt 



14 Stranger than Fiction. 

Keziah's long nose, and soften the corners 
of that hard mouth which was the unmis- 
takable portal of mischief-making words. 

" What ! you here ?" exclaimed Mr. 
Martyn, with more of annoyance in his 
manner than surprise, and more of surprise 
than pleasure, **you here! bless my life, 
what particular quarter of the sky has 
dropped you down at Middleton ?" 

"No part of the sky at all, brother 
Alfred,'* replied aunt Keziah, still revelling 
in that delicious culinary perfume that came 
out in double force in company with Mr. 
Martyn as he flung open the parlour door. 

" Come in, come in ; at all events you 
must be hungry ; you look as dusty as if 
you had been running in the Middleton 
female steeple-chases for a gingham gown,'* 
said Mr. Martyn, referring to the civilized 
sports of the period. 

After supper, aunt Keziah told a long 
tale of matrimonial infelicities ; in the midst 
of which Jacob was permitted to escape 
into the garden. Aunt Keziah, according 
to her own showing, had been the amiable, 




Introduces the Hero, \ 5 

self-denying, generous wife of a brutal hus- 
band, a schoolmaster, who had varied the 
occupation of flogging boys by occasionally 
beating the woman whom he had sworn to 
love and cherish. Aunt Keziah had sub- 
mitted to this for the sake of peace ; her 
sharp thin lips had never ventured even to 
remonstrate ; her beaky, bird-of-prey nose 
had not even indicated the slightest feeling 
of disdain ; the kind-hearted, submissive 
wife had bowed her head to the cane . at 
least so the kind-hearted, submissive wife 
told her brother ; and it was only when the 
cruel husband had substituted the poker 
for the stick that the tender, patient wife 
had remonstrated ; only when he laid 
down the poker and took up the carving 
knife, with sundry threatening references 
to coup la gorge, that she had resolved upon 
running away. 

Mr. Martyn and his sister had never 
loved each other with the sweetness which 
is supposed to pervade the love of brothers 
and sisters. He had had some experience 
of her sharp firm voice in days gone by, 



1 6 Stranger than Fiction. 

and had pitied Mr. Gompson when certain 
church bells were ringing years ago to cele- 
brate the second marriage of aunt Keziah. 
Nevertheless, her account of Mr. Gomp- 
son's ill-treatment was sufficient inducement 
for the generous brother to offer his sister 
a home ; and aunt Keziah having come to 
Middleton-in-the- Water for a home, took 
off her shawl, laid down her 'bag, untied 
her bonnet strings, and accepted his offer 
forthwith. 

Meanwhile, Jacob Martyn was taking a 
last free and unfettered walk in .that old- 
fashioned country garden which in his eyes 
was the pride and glory of his father's 
house. In one favourite corner was ar- 
ranged his own garden, two feet by four, 
where each year, so long as he could re- 
member, blossomed a sweet-scented white 
violet, which had been set there by his 
brother the day before he died ; and close 
by this little plot of the boy's freehold was 
a favourite seat of his mother's, who used 
to sit there and sew, and talk to Jacob, in 
those happy days before she, too, passed 



Introduces the Hero. 1 7 

away, and had a tombstone erected to her 
memory in the great cold churchyard of 
the cruel dingy town of Middleton. 

One side of the garden was bordered by 
a high wall, which shut out a row of 
houses, and served for the cultivation of 
wall trees that bore a variety of forbidden 
plums and peaches. On another side 
Jacob's paradise was hemmed in by an 
orchard, which, in its turn, was hemmed in 
by green fields fringed with that very river 
on which the sun is shining in our first 
chapter. On another side, the sunbeams, 
when they wandered to that quarter of the 
world, were shut out by a factory . a great 
block of bricks, pierced with hundreds of 
windows, whence came the sound of whirl- 
ing wheels and bobbins, mingled with the 
voices of girls singing at their work, and 
making the hot stifling factory appear to 
Jacob more like a fairy temple than a 
miserable unhealthy slavehoiise, as it was. 

Swallows built their round nests under 
the factory window-sills, and went twitter- 
ing through the orchard hard by. Black- 

VOL. I. 2 



1 8 Stranger than Fiction. 

birds sung in the fields. Red-breasts and 
linnets trilled vocal chants in the apple 
trees. The laughter of children came over 
the wall from the row of houses ; and the 
distant hum of the river wandered through 
the orchard with the scent of fields and 
flowers. 

It was a paradise indeed, that little gar- 
den, where Jacob used to dream of angels 
and fairies, and wonder what he should do 
when he was a man, and whether his 
mother and brother would watch over him 
until he died and went to heaven. 

Children have an intuitive sense of cha- 
racter. When Jacob went to bed that 
night the strongest impression in his mind 
was, that he disliked his aunt Keziah. 
The boyish nature had taken alarm. A 
shadow had fallen upon the dial of the 
boy's mind, indicating the noon of childish 
freedom. A presentiment of evil had 
sprung up and filled the boy's thoughts. 
Something told him that aunt Keziah could 
and would make herself very disagreeable ; 
not that she had said or done anything to 




Introduces the Hero. 1 9 

excite his especial aversion. She had 
taken his hand kindly, but had rather 
seemed to drag him along, than to walk 
with him in amiable companionship. Per- 
haps it was the recent death of his 
mother that made him feel a keen aver- 
sion to the picture of a strange woman 
sitting in his mothers chair. Whatever 
had brought about this miserable condition 
of Jacob's mind, the poor fellow, instead 
of calmly laying his head upon the pillows 
to sleep, could only toss about and bury 
his face in the bed-clothes, and feel that 
he was nothing but a wretched, lonely, 
motherless boy. 

" Don't cry, don't cry, Jacob," by-and- 
by said an honest sympathetic voice, " you 
will only spoil your dear face and be ill. 
Go to sleep, my lad, go to sleep ; Tom is 
going out with Caesar in the morning, and 
rU call you up early to go with him." 

The comforter was Susan Harley, who 
had been some years in Mr. Martyn's ser- 
vice, and whose affections seemed to be 
divided between Jacob and certain very 



20 Stranger tha7t Fiction. 

shiny dish-covers and saucepans, which 
were the cabinet pictures of her kitchen . 
her Vandykes, Turners, Hunts, Landseers, 
and Faeds. 

Under the influence of Susan's tender 
words of comfort, Jacob soon forgot the 
vague sense of misfortune which had agi- 
tated his little mind at the advent of his 
aunt Keziah. Forget ! Forget, did I say ? 
I, the faithful chronicler of this history ? I 
can hardly say he forgot. During the 
night he was in endless trouble and diffi- 
culty. He fell off* houses, was pushed off" 
rocks, was glared at by idiots. The only 
face which he distinctly saw in his dream- 
ing was that of his newly-arrived i;elative. 
In the morning the only words which he 
could remember to have heard during his 
nocturnal perils were uttered by a mocking 
voice, which said triumphantly, and in 
threatening tones : . 

** Well, / am your aunt Keziah." 
He did not know it, and she did not 
know it ; but in another part of the great 
world there was a girl about his own age, 




Introduces the Hero. 2 1 

. 

who was just beginning to have troubles 
and anxieties of her own ; a pretty soft- 
hearted little thing, who seemed only made 
for happiness. Fortune is wayward and 
fickle. She scatters troubles where least 
they are expected, and when most they 
seem unlikely to come. By remote and 
crooked paths she brings people together 
who never heard of each other before, 
and in ways the most extraordinary she 
depends the weal or woe of these peo- 
ple upon their liking or disliking each 
other. Through the mist which has 
gathered about these early days of Jacob 
Martyn's career, the historian sees sha- 
dowed forth another face, besides that of 
aunt Keziah, and another voice which shall 
influence his destiny for good or evil, far 
more than that of the stranger who has 
just broken in upon the calm present and 
undrawn the bolt of a stormy future. 




CHAPTER II. 

AUNT KEZIAH ASSERTS HER AUTHORITY. 

HOMAS TITSY, or Tom Tit, as 
he was not unfrequently called, 
in short, for his more imposing 
name, or in playful allusion to his 
height, was Mr. Alfred Martyn's factotum. 
He polished the household boots, cleaned 
the household knives, and was the house- 
hold's Mercury; in addition to which he 
was partially retained for the more onerous 
and more mysterious duties of printer's 
devil. He neither looked his character of 
Mercury nor devil. He was tall, angular, 
heavy, slow, and healthy. There never 
was in the world a printer s devil so clean 
and well dressed, and merry, as Tom Titsy. 




Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 23 

His face was a perpetual May-day, it had 
a smile all over it ; there was a genial sim- 
mer of content in every awkward dimple. 
It may, indeed, be said that he rejoiced in 
a broad open countenance. I say rejoiced, 
advisedly. There was nothing but rejoic- 
ing from chin to forelock. He rejoiced in 
blue eyes, in a stumpy nose, in red cheeks, 
and in red hair. Tom could do almost 
anything and everything but that which 
was the ambition of his life. He wished 
to be a printer ; but he coul3 not set up 
types. He had learned the boxes by heart. 
He knew where every letter lay, but he 
might as well have tried to analyse a watch 
with a bodkin, or wear a pair of kid gloves, 
as pick up those bits of metal and arrange 
them for the press. By dint of an amount 
of finger exercise worse than that de- 
manded of young pianistes by Czerny, and 
an effort of intellect equal to the solution 
of the hardest problem in Euclid, Tom 
had succeeded once or twice in setting up 
a paragraph ; but successes of this kind 
had been achieved at such a cost of mental 



24 Stranger than Fiction. 

and bodily vigour, to say nothing of the 
patience they demanded at the hands of 
the reader, that Tom soon gave up the 
Caxtonian art, and consoled himself with 
the performance of the general and useful 
duties supposed to be combined in the 
classic description of " head man and bottle- 
washer/' 

Tom was the proud and fortunate owner 
of a dog, something between a mastiff and 
a Newfoundland, which was the source of 
much anxiety to that limited circle of so- 
ciety in which Tom moved. The animal 
had come into his possession as a legacy 
from a Frenchman (originally a prisoner on 
his parole at Middleton), who had lodged 
with Tom's mother, and had died in her 
house. The dog was called Csesar, and 
there was a certain imperial look ^about 
him which did canine justice to the title. 
He had a noble head, an intelligent eye, 
a firm heavy paw, an extravagant quantity 
of tail, and an amount of bark that was 
appalling. Coupled with this, there was a 
joyous activity in the brute which kept 




Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 25 



people continually watchful and wary. He 
was not vicious, but his frivolity and fun 
were so much disguised by his imperial 
Roman dignity, that his general conduct 
may be described as alarming, and more 
particularly among persons who were not 
acquainted with his peculiarities. 

It was the society of this buoyant and 
honest couple to which Susan had referred 
in her consoling address to Jacob, and for 
the pleasures of which the boy rose up in 
the morning at sight of the earliest sun- 
beam that fell upon the diamond-shaped 
panes of his little bed-room window. In 
the midst of dressing, Jacob was eagerly 
talking with Susan about the frolics of his 
morning's run with Tom and C^sar. Stimu- 
lated by the deep-mouthed bay of Caesar 
under the window, and excited by Tom's 
equally deep-mouthed bay of " Lie down, 
dog ; lie down, Csesar," Jacob had rapidly 
finished his toilette, and was just setting 
forth, when, who but aunt Keziah should 
march into the room, which no other 
woman but Susan had invaded since Mrs. 



26 Stranger than Fiction. 

Martyn came there for the last time and 
blessed her poor little son. 

"What are you going to do with that 
boy ?" asked aunt Keziah, smoothing her 
apron, and evidently determined that her 
new and voluntary duties, as the head of 
the household, should begin without the 
smallest possible delay. She had said to 
Mr. Martyn on the previous night, that his 
son required great care and attention ; and 
Mr. Martyn had acquiesced in that pro- 
found sentiment. 

" Why, he is going out with Tom for a 
run, marm, before breakfast,'* said Susan, 
buttoning the last button of Jacob's coat. 

" A run before breakfast I" said Mrs. 
Gompson, with marked emphasis, and 
smiling with high disdain upon Susan. 
"A run before breakfast ! I should think 
it probable, young woman, that you are 
likely to have a run after breakfast your- 
self some fine morning if this is to continue ; 
pulling the boy from his bed, and sending 
him out for a run before breakfast^ endan- 
gering his health and his morals. Undress 




Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 27 

the boy, undress him immediately, madam," 
said aunt Keziah. 

It is a remarkable, but no less positive 
and certain fact, that among women of 
Susan Harley's class, nothing gives greater 
offence than to be called " madam " or 
"woman." In the present instance the 
" epithet " was accompanied with such a 
disdainful toss of the head, that Susan 
Harley, as she afterwards told an intimate 
friend, felt as if she must eitl^er expire on 
the spot, or scratch that woman's eyes out. 

" Madam ! " exclaimed Susan, " don't 
madam me, marm ; I'm not used to it, 
never was used to it, and, what is more, 
never wjU be ; Master Jacob has always 
gone out in a morning before, and " 

" Don't answer me, you impertinent 
creature !" screamed aunt Keziah, at the 
same time making a dash at Jacob ; '' put 
that boy to bed again." 

Jacob eluded his aunt's grasp, and darted 
behind Susan, who was sobbing and choking 
herself with rage and vexation. Would she 
had never had more serious troubles than 



28 Stranger than Fiction. 

this incident in the domestic discipline of 
Jacob's home ! 

The window of the room in which this 
altercation took place looked out upon what 
was called the back-kitchen, a low-roofed 
part of the house, which Tom (hearing the 
unaccustomed noise and bandying of angry 
words) had ascended in some alarm, ren- 
dered greater by l^is ignorance of the arrival 
of Mrs. Gompson. Caesar had followed 
Tom, of course, and in his anxiety to render 
whatever assistance might be necessary, 
Tom had neglected to exercise any control 
over the movements of the dog, which, just 
as aunt Keziah dashed towards her nephew, 
made a similar movement towards aunt 
Keziah, and, coming at a bound through 
the open window, laid that unhappy matron 
prostrate upon what had a moment pre- 
viously been the scene of her triumph over 
Susan Harley. 

Horrified and alarmed, Tom came head 
foremost after his dog, bringing with him a 
dressing-table and looking-glass, and all the 
time bawling . *' Seize-her, seize-her! come 



Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 29 

off, come off!" which, though to ordinary- 
ears might sound like a strange jumble of 
commands, was thoroughly understood by 
the dog for which Tom's orders were in- 
tended. 

Mr. Martyn arrived upon the scene in 
time to complete the grand tableau, and 
after hearing a narrative of the whole story, 
and having an assurance from Mrs. Gomp- 
son herself that she was not hurt, he 
made a painful effort not to laugh ; but he 
did not succeed in this praiseworthy desire 
to spare the feelings of his visitor. The 
astonished company in Jacob's bedroom, 
assembled so suddenly and so strangely, 
could hear Mr. Martyn's loud and hearty 
laugh all the way to that gentleman's bed- 
room. 

Taking his cue from his master, Tom 
also began to laugh. Susan's face gradu- 
ally reflected back the joyous glow of Tom's 
open countenance. Jacob looked up wick- 
edly at his aunt Then Susan tittered, and 
next Susan and Tom commenced a laugh- 
ing chorus, in the midst of which Caesar 



30 Stranger than Fiction. 

entered upon a series of lively performances 
on his own account. Mrs. Gompson, pick- 
ing up a bundle of false curls, marched 
from the scene, head erect, back straight, 
nose in air, and a bitter resolve in her 
heart. 

Upon the departure of aunt Keziah, Tom 
intimated that he could hold out no longer, 
that he should split his sides. Susan was 
sure she should kill herself, and little Jacob 
joined in the general hilarity. The room 
fairly shook with Tom's laughter, and at 
the risk of breaking his neck, that honest 
ungainly retainer of the Martyns felt it in- 
cumbent upon him to roll out upon the tiles 
as a precautionary measure against the in- 
convenience and pain of splitting his sides 
in downright earnest. 

All this time Caesar barked, jumped in 
and out of the window, ran to Tom, who 
was lying in the yard beating the ground 
, with his feet, darted off the tiles and ran to 
Susan, administered sundry wet salutes 
upon Jacob, and finally rolled down the 
roof to Tom, in the company of a collection 




Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 31 

of hard clattering tiles and soft sympathetic 
lichens and house-leek. 

Henceforth, however, Mrs. Gompson 
was determined to rule that household 
despotically. Her chief attention was de- 
voted to her nephew. For his especial 
behoof she devised all manner of schemes 
of domestic economy, which included limi- 
tations of sugar, and additional supplies of 
fat meat. By a series of insidious hints, 
she had gradually succeeded in obtaining 
Mr. Martyn's full endorsement of her sys- 
tem. She had not told him in direct terms 
that the late Mrs. Martyn had killed Jacob's 
brother and herself too, by bad manage- 
ment; but she had made her brother be- 
lieve that he had over-estimated his wife's 
ability ; and Mr. Martyn was too much en- 
gaged with his business to think very much 
about anything else. 

Sent to bed early, carefully prevented 
from associating with vulgar companions, 
made to be regular in his attendance at the 
day school, and compelled to pore over his 
tasks at night, Jacob's moral and physical 



3 2 Stranger than Fiction. 

health were so well cared for that the boy 
gradually became shy, morbid, stupid. Mrs. 
Gompson complained so constantly of his 
bad conduct, and his father had grown so 
indifferent to him owing to his sister's 
numerous and irritating charges, that poor 
Jacob began to think he was in everybody's 
way, a plague to those about him, a worth- 
less piece of humanity. H is life became a 
torment to him, he grew timid and cowardly ; 
and yet there would occasionally rise up the 
. conviction that he was not judged aright, 
that he had capabilities and feelings which, 
had he dared to exhibit them, must have 
commanded approbation. 

By-and-by there came a gloomy day in 
Jacob's career, which cast a dark shadow 
upon his boyish life. Ever since school had 
closed, he had for a slight offence been sbut 
in his room, with a limited supply of bread 
and water, and a command to go to bed. 
The birds were singing in the garden, 
which was shut out from his view by a 
building in the yard, which said building 
must be passed ere the garden wicket was 




Atmt Keziah asserts her Authority, 33 

reached. Jacob could hear the music of 
the factory and the voices of boys and girls 
at play. His heart told him he had done 
no wrong. There arose within him a burn- 
ing sense of injustice. Only twelve months 
had elapsed since his mother died, and 
twelve months prior to that he had a com- 
panion in his brother. Now he was cut off 
from all he loved. Susan dared not come 
near him. He had even been denied the 
society of Tom and his dog. His father 
said he was wicked and ungrateful. One 
moment the suffering boy longed to cling 
to his father's neck and pour out his over- 
flowing soul ; at another moment dark 
thoughts agitated the little mind, weighted 
at these times with sorrow and longing for 
his dead mother. At length his miseries 
appeared to grow and grow until they 
filled the room and threatened to stifle him. 
The sorrows of childhood, though they ap- 
pear unimportant to the grown-up man, 
are bitter as the troubles which tear the 
heart in maturity. 

Jacob had heard of people drowning 

VOL. I. X 



34 Stranger than Fiction. 

themselves with their woes. The distant 
murmur of the river mingled its wooing 
music with the soft evening breeze. To 
Jacob it seemed to whisper an invitation. 

Under the influence of some fearful spell, 
Jacob climbed through the window, de- 
scended into the yard, walked quickly, but 
firmly, on through the garden. Kissing 
his mother's seat, kissing the leaves of his 
brothers violet, he went on through the 
orchard towards the mill-pool. 

The sudden exercise and the refreshing 
breeze chased away some of the fever 
of the boy's brain. He became calmer 
and more subdued when he reached the 
bank of the river. It was the calmness 
which is often full of anger and passion. 
The miller sat smoking his evening pipe 
near the spot to which Jacob's disordered 
mind had directed him. Still the boy's 
fearful resolve was unshaken. To his 
other fears was now added the peril of re- 
turning home. Let not the reader imagine 
that this is an overdrawn picture. The 
newspaper records of late years have con- 




Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 35 

tained many cases of suicide among com- 
parative children. It is no exaggeration to 
say that the sensibilities of many a child of 
thirteen are as keen and active as they are 
at thirty. Jacob Martyn was an example 
in point. It is true he had had an excep- 
tional experience of sorrow and domestic 
tyranny. He sat down by the mill-pool, 
with his brain throbbing against his temples, 
and his heart leaden and still, waiting until 
the miller should knock the ashes out of his 
pipe and go home. 

It is doing the memory of Jacob's mother 
no disparagement in fancying that her spirit 
was abroad on this summer evening years 
ago. If those we love can after death re- 
visit the scenes of their life below, on mis- 
sions of love and mercy, it is in keeping 
with the woman's devoted affection to ima- 
gine that Jacob's mother was with her un- 
happy son while he gazed into the deep 
mysterious river, growing more solemn in 
its marvellous beauty as the sun gradually 
declined, and the sky became more and 
more overshadowed with gathering clouds. 

3.2 



^ 



36 Stranger than Fiction. 



In a little while Jacob's head became cooler. 
A deep fervent prayer escaped his lips, and 
lightened his 'overburdened heart. 

Little we wot of the hot burning thoughts, 
of the strong emotions and feelings which 
may agitate the mind of a mere youth ! 
Jacob was eloquent in his distress, and if 
ever prayer was acceptable to Him, whose 
special providence is extended to the 
smallest creeping thing, that simple prayer 
of childhood was not unheeded. 

Suddenly the boy thought he would re- 

m 

turn home. As this ray of repentance 
entered his soul, his good angel led him 
away. He staggered through the fields as 
one bewildered. H e looked like a somnam- 
bulist. There was no speculation in his 
eyes. His feet wandered. The orchard 
and the garden flitted by him as if they 
were a panorama moved by hidden ma- 
chinery. He was an automaton. He 
found his way without looking for it ; 
found his way over stile and brake, through 
gate and doorway, with his eyes looking 
into vacancy. 




Aunt Keziah asserts her Authority. 37 

Jacob Martyn had not been missed. His 
bread and water were undisturbed. He 
slipped off his clothes, shivering from head 
to foot, and then burning like a fire, he 
crept into bed, his great eyes distended 
and flaming with the excitement of fever. 

Hour after hour the iron tongue of the 
old church proclaimed the tardy flight of 
time; the solitary watchman paced the 
solitary street, and repeated the same 
solemn story, with an equally solemn de- 
scription of the character of the night ; but 
it was only when the sun returned from his 
long journey to light the Middleton factory 
girls to their looms, that poor Jacob closed 
his eyes, and became indifferent to the 
myriad sounds which heralded the day in 
the midland borough of this history. 




A 




CHAPTER III. 

CHIEFLY TREATS OF THE DOMESTIC LIFE OF 

THE TITSYS. 

HE mother of Mr. Martyn's radiant 

factotum lived with her son in an 

alley near the old church, gaining 

an honest, if not a luxurious 

livelihood, by letting lodgings and taking 

in plain sewing. 

It was a remarkable cottage that which 
the Titsys had made their home. It had 
evidently dropped from the clouds, or had 
been pitchforked from some other town' 
into this particular corner of Middleton, and 
had only been saved from total destruction 
by a friendly stable, upon which it had ever 
since leaned for protection and support 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 39 



The collision had made the stable stagger 
just a trifle, but it had shaken the cottage 
into a round bulbous lump of stone, and 
thatch, and steps, and window-sills, and 
lichens. You entered the cottage by a 
descent of round stone steps, which led to 
the " house-place," which in its turn led to 
the kitchen, and also to sundry mysterious 
bedrooms, up in the thatched roof, where a 
family of pigeons also boarded and lodged, 
and mingled their monotonous cooing with 
the equally monotonous chattering of a 
tribe of sparrows. The pigeons were 
Tom's particular pets. They comprised 
numerous varieties of the pigeon order . 
pouters, fantails, short-faced tumblers, and 
almost every other kind down to the com- 
monplace Barbary runt. Tom was a trainer 
of birds, a dealer in birds, and a lover of 
birds. He seldom left home without a 
pocketful of pigeons, which he would re- 
lease at intervals on his way to work, some 
on tumbling expeditions, and others on 
mercurial flights, bearing hieroglyphical 
billets to unknown countries. 



40 ^Stranger than Fictio7i. 

The house-place, or living-room, of Mrs. 
Titsy's cottage was comfortably, though not 
elegantly, furnished. There was a delf-. 
shelf shining with blue willow-pattern plates 
and green and coppery-gilt cups and saucers ; 
a deal dresser as white as snow ; a rickety 
linen press ; a round oak table, with half- 
moon-shaped wings ; an overgrown arm 
chair, so full of feathers that they had burst 
through two corners of the chintz covering ; 
a bright old oak corner cupboard ; a high 
mantel shelf, adorned Avith a pair of very 
bright figures illustrative of the loves of a 
green and white shepherd and a blue and 
white shepherdess ; two chalk apples, and 
an equally honest artificial pear ; with sun- 
dry other small items, surmounted oil the 
wall by a vivid representation of Napoleon 
crossing the Alps. On a pair of wide 
brackets over the dresser was displayed an 
exceedingly fine tea-tray, upon which a 
very yellow lion was crouching at the feet 
of a radiant lady, who flourished in her red 
right hand an unusually large toasting-fork, 
all the while looking toasting-forks, and 




Domestic Life of the Titsys, 41 

daggers too, at a white cloud which seemed 
to threaten instant destruction to a ship sail- 
ing on a blue and golden sea. The walls were 
also decorated with the portrait of a mur- 
derer who was hanged at the county town ; 
a landscape excessively green and purple ; 
and the effigies of Tom and his mother, cut 
out in black paper and framed in black 
frames. 

The Eve of this cottage-paradise was 
Mrs. Titsy, a blooming widow, who, with 
the assistance of a small annuity, eked out 
a tolerably comfortable livelihood by taking 
in plain sewing, and boarding and lodging 
one Horatio Johnson, a gentleman of some- 
what eccentric habits . one of those out-of- 
the-way characters now fast disappearing 
from among us, but common enough thirty 
years ago in every country town. He was 
an herbalist, and had devoted many years 
to a blind sort of study of the application 
of herbs as remedial agents in cases of 
disease. He was versed in the flora of the 
district, and knew where every plant and 
herb that grew in the county were to be 



42 Stranger than Fiction. 

found, and at what time of the year, though 
he only knew them by their English or 
local names. If a botanist had asked him 
for milium effusum he would have been 
utterly ignorant of the nature of the herb 
demanded ; but he would have recognised 
it by the appellation of millet-grass. This 
simple illustration of the kind of knowledge 
which he possessed will be as good as the 
dozen others which I might append. Mr. 
Johnson was a country herbalist, or herb 
doctor, experienced in the practical effects 
of certain herbs in certain cases, and hold- 
ing a high reputation among the lower 
classes of the people. 

There had been a time when he had 
dealt with cases as they arose, but the 
growing reputation of wonderful pills and 
potions, warranted to cure all diseases, 
compelled him in the way of business to 
introduce the celebrated ** Oriental Herbal 
Pill," which, with certain accompanying 
draughts and mixtures varying with the 
nature of the maladies to be cured, was 
warranted to perform wonders in the heal- 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 45 

ing way. Thousands of testimonials from 
old iand young vouched for the value of 
the Oriental remedy, and such had become 
the demand for it that at the time when 
we make his acquaintance, Dr. Horatio^ 
Johnson had extended his operations from 
Middleton and found his reward in travel- 
ling from village to village, market town ta 
market town, vending his medicines. His 
means had thus been so largely increased 
that he could afford to drive his own gig, 
and have a splendid awning over his stall 
in the Middleton market ; while on Sundays 
he comfortably smoked his pipe under his 
own vine and fig-tree, or without metaphor, 
in the cosey chimney-corner of Mrs. Titsy,. 
widow. 

The Doctor was moistening his clay one 
Sunday evening some thirty years ago as 
the parish bells were ringing for church. 
Mrs. Titsy had just gone forth in a shot- 
silk dress, a blue bonnet and gloves, and a 
very green and gold prayer-book (a present 
** from her dootiful son"). Now that she 
had passed through the sombre ordeal of 



44 Stranger than Fiction. 

weeds for what she considered a reasonable 
period, Mrs. Titsy affected very gay colours. 
She had abolished, as a stupid prejudice, 
that distinctive mark of the dangerous 
classes, the widow's cap. If she had had 
any cause to remember the late Mr. Titsy 
with gratitude, she might have been less 
liberal in her interpretation of social laws 
and customs. Old Titsy had always treated 
her vilely when he was drunk ; and, as he 
was rarely sober, her life was anything but 
a pleasant one. As for Tom, he had grown 
so accustomed to his father's allowance of 
more kicks than halfpence, that for some 
little time after the allowance was stopped, 
Tom seemed quite unhappy. In good 
truth, he was miserable at the loss of the 
wicked father, and so in truth was Mrs. 
Titsy, although they would not deny the 
general verdict of the district that his death 
was " a happy release." 

Mrs. Titsy may, therefore, be fairly for- 
given for her glow of colour on this parti- 
cular Sunday. Having for several years 
wrapped herself in the clouds and weeds of 



\ 



Domestic Life of the Titsys. 45 

widowhood, the relict of the late James 
Titsy thought herself fully entitled to don 
the rainbow. 

The rainbow had just dawned upon the 
gaping street, and Tom ^nd the philosophic 
lodger were left alone. Tom was stu- 
diously contemplating the ceiling, and 
the Doctor testing the capacity of his 
lungs by blowing forth a long-drawn-out 
volume of smoke, and watching it dis- 
perse. 

" I tell you what it is, Tom," said the 
Doctor, after making an unusually long 
wreath of smoke, which evidently gave him 
great satisfaction, " your respected master, 
or governor, or whatever other title you 
may . recognise him by . if that influential 
individual would only listen to the words 
of prudence ; for all her paths are pleasant- 
ness, and the ways of life are uncertain . . 
if your master made prudence his guide, 
he would, as my circulars admirably express 
it, * save doctors' fees and try the Oriental 
remedy.' " 

** Now, don't joke about it, don't, Mester 



d 



46 Stranger than Fiction. 

Johnson, 'cos he's really very bad, poor 
little chap," said Tom. 

" If a man deceive thee once, it is his 
fault ; if he deceive thee a second time, it 
is thine own," was Mr. Johnson's reply. 
** Read the testimonials from all classes of 
suffering humanity, and be on your g^ard 
against spurious imitations . moniti meliora 
sequamur, as it is writ down in Virgil. It 
is all the Latin I know, except some of the 
.dog-latin of the fancy herbalist ; it cost me 
several nights to commit it to memory, 
Tom ; translated, it means * being admo- 
nished, let us follow better things.' I find 
it an admirable conclusion to my profes- 
sional perorations ; while it puzzles the 
crowd, it gives undoubted evidence of my 
learning. A scrap of Latin is to the orator 
what the gilded cup and the double-bot- 
tomed box is to the juggler ; it is the gold 
of the wise man, the equally effective tinsel 
of the clever man, and who shall say whe- 
ther it is better to be clever or wise ? But 
no matter; let us revert to the glorious 
motto . moniti meliora seqtiamurr 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 47 

 

The Doctor was rushing into one of the 
orations which he usually addressed to his 
assembled clients in *the market-place, and 
was waiving his hand in majestic accom- 
paniment to every sentence, when it sud- 
denly occurred to him that, after all, this 
might not be the best mode of impressing 
Tom. In order to gain time for weighing 
the thought and adjudicating upon it, he 
took a long pull at his pipe, and shortly 
expelled so tremendous a cloud of smoke 
towards Tom, that Mr. Martyn's factotum 
was for the moment quite eclipsed ; indeed, 
the robust yet gentle Mercury looked like 
a member of one of those peep-show bands 
of warriors who are perpetually thrusting 
forth military arms or plumed heads from 
the midst of clouds of smoke which never 
disperse, and behind which the battle is 
supposed to be raging with intense fury. 
The difference between Tom and the peep- 
show was certainly an important one. Tom 
did come out of his clouds, or rather the 
Doctors clouds, to speak correctly; and 
when he was once more visible, he said . 



4 



48 Stranger thafi Fiction. 



" If I thought thou really meant what 
thou said, Dr. Johnson, I would ask mother 
to get thy stuff a trial." 

" Stuff f' said the Doctor, with a dispa- 
raging nod. 

" Beg pardon, Doctor ; I meant no 
offence. The Oriental is what I was 
driving at. Now don t deceive me, tell me 
the right down out and out truth. Give 
me your word on it, and TU believe.'' 

'' Nothing that is true can ever die," 
began the Doctor. ** Now, in a certain 
sense, the philosopher who said that is 
right, and in a certain sense he is wrong,'' 
continued Horatio, looking hard at a smoke 
ring which was coming to grief against the 
green and white shepherd. " I am true, 
Tom, and yet I shall die ; thou art true, 
Tom, and thou wilt die. Still, the maxim 
is good, and demands our highest respect. 
Now, truth, as embodied in the Orien- 
tal, will never die ; and the Oriental, 
with an accompanying prescription, is a 
cure for those whose time has not arrived. 
Master Jacob, being young, the chances 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 49 

are ten to one that his time has not yet 
come, and that if the doctors would let him 
alone, and give nature a chance, nature 
would do her duty by the youth and per- 
form a cure. Nature ! Blessed nature ! 
There is no doctor like nature, no nurse 
like nature. Nature has antidotes. The 
Oriental is the secret antidote for wind in 
the stomach, spasms, giddiness, disturbed 
sleep, palpitation of the heart, colic, jaun- 
dice, gout, dropsy, sore throat, palsy, and, 
as the Immortal Bard himself puts it, all 
the other ills that flesh is heir to. He said 
something else," continued the herb doctor, 
rising from his chair, and solemnly sawing 
the air with his pipe ; " he said something 
else. What else, what else, my friends 
and fellow-countrymen, did that mighty 
poet say ? You don t know. Then be 
enlightened ; listen to the glorious words* 
* Throw physic to the dogs.' That is what 
the greatest of all poets, the greatest of all 
philosophers, the greatest of all great men, 
said . * Throw physic to the dogs \ at the 
same time intimating in equally emphatic 

VOL. I. 4 



50 Stranger than Fiction. 

language that he would have none of it. 
Away with it, he said ; away with the 
draughts and powders, the nauseous potions 
and mixtures, and poisonous pills with 
which the faculty purge and torture and 
kill you ; away to the dogs with such 
physic ; Shakespeare would have none of 
it, and we will have none of it, my 
friends. The Oriental remedy, extracted 
from the choicest herbs, was not dis- 
covered in Shakespeare's time, or Wil- 
liam . I call him William because I love 
him ; I am always familiar with those I 
love and admire . I say, if the Oriental had 
been discovered in his time, if it had been 
known to mankind when the greatest of 
mankind said, * Throw physic to the dogs,' 
the greatest of mankind would most cer- 
tainly have added to that never-to-be-for- 
gotten exclamation a few other remarkable 
words . probably to this effect : ' Throw 
physic to the dogs ; and, having done so, try 
Dr. Horatio Johnson's celebrated Oriental 
Pill, only sixpence a box, or six boxes for 
half-a-crown. Moniti meliora sequamur f " 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 5 1 

There is no knowing whether the Doc- 
tor had really finished his address or not 
when he was interrupted by a visitor. 
The speaker had unconsciously glided into 
a professional oration, and had so warmed 
with his subject, that, in the fruitfulness of 
his imagination, he had turned the little 
room into a market-place, and the chairs, 
and tables, and pots, and pans, and pic- 
tures, and Tom, into a great crowd, with 
ears only for the eloquence, and throats 
only for the pills of Horatio Johnson. 
Tom had long since subsided into a dreamy 
reverie upon the beauty of the lady on the 
tea-tray, and the ferocity of the lion at her 
feet, mingled with a certain admiration of 
the Doctor's eloquence, which was the 
pride and wonder of a large majority of 
the people of Middleton-in-the- Water. 

The oration was brought to an end 
through a knock at the door, which said 
knock was followed by the immediate ap- 
pearance of two visitors. The first was a 
young man, dressed in a suit of black that 
had been brushed and cleaned until it was 

4.2 



52 Stranger than Fiction. 

threadbare at those particular places where 
the wearer's bones were most angular and 
obtrusive. It was difficult to say whether 
the owner of the suit was young or old, 
but the conclusion which you would arrive 
at after some consideration would be in 
favour of the more youthful side of the 
question. He was a thin, sallow man, 
with lank black hair combed carefully be- 
hind his ears. His eyes were small and 
piercing ; they glittered in a pair of bony 
caverns, and looked at you when you 
thought they were looking in another 
direction. 

This interesting gentleman was Mr. 
Julius Jennings, confidential clerk in the 
house of Mr. Alfred Martyn. His com- 
panion was an entirely different specimen 
of humanity; so different, that your first 
feeling on meeting the two would have 
been one of surprise at the association of 
such dissimilar beings. Silas Collinson 
was a young farmer, an honest, manly -look- 
ing son of the soil, with brown curly hair, 
and brown curly whiskers, and a brown 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 53 

velvet shooting-coat to match. He was a 
pleasant, happy-looking fellow, with pros- 
perity written on his forehead, and the 
faint shadow of speculation hovering about 
his legs, which were just a trifle horsey ; not 
horsey in the agricultural sense alone, but 
horsey from the turfite's point of view. If a 
glance at his narrow black trousers did not 
make you feel sure that they had been at 
Epsom and Doncaster, the gold horseshoe 
pin in the blue and spotted neckerchief would 
have convinced you. This gave to the 
rural and agricultural character of the man 
just a sufficient dash of the town and the 
ring to make him seem sprightlier and 
more knowing than the ordinary farmer ; 
and herein you would have found the only 
bit of reason for his association with Julius 
Jennings ; for what is called sporting 
brings a man into strange companionship. 
Mr. CoUinson was the proprietor of a small 
freehold farm, pleasantly situated on the 
outskirts of Middleton. 

" Good evening, gentlemen," said Ho- 
ratio Johnson, extending a hand to each. 



54 Stranger than Fiction, 



Tom gave them a somewhat gloomy 
greeting. His face smiled in spite of him- 
self, but there was no cheerfulness in 
his voice ; his heart was in the sick-room 
of Jacob Martyn, at least so much of his 
heart as was not 'in the unwilling possession 
of Susan Harley. 

" I thought you always went to chapel 
on Sundays, Mr. Jennings," said the 
Doctor. 

'' Yes," said Jennings, " I think I have 
not missed for a twelvemonth before." 

'* Dear me, very remarkable ; surely the 
day should be held in remembrance that 
marks so extraordinary a breach of custom," 
said the Doctor. 

"Mr. CoUinson is going to leave us 
soon, you see, and he wanted a stroll. I 
could not refuse him, notwithstanding my 
respect for the Decalogue." 

*' Not a pleasant night for a stroll, either," 
said the Doctor, poking the fire ; " quite a 
November wind getting up." 

" Don't you like the wind ?" asked Col- 
linson, answering the question in the same 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 5 5 

breath. " Nothing like a good breeze ; 
blows the cobwebs out of your mind, and 
out of the air too, ventilates the earth, 
wakens up your faulty fastenings, and re- 
minds you of bits of mendings to be done 
at gates and doors ; nothing like a bit of 
wind. Doctor!*' 

" For those who are strong and hearty 
and active as you are, Mr. CoUinson, true 
for you, sir, true for you. Hope you will 
have a fair wind and a pleasant journey 
when you cross the Atlantic.*' 

" Ah, Fm with you there. Doctor." 

" When do you sail ?" 

** Next week, my friend, next week. 
Time flies fast ; if it went a bit slower, I 
think I should change my mind." 

** Indeed ?" said Johnson inquiringly. 

**Yes, a sneaking sort of kindness for 
home seems to come over me, and IVe 
had uncommonly unhappy thoughts at 
night about the journey, almost as bad 
as if I were being turned out of the old 
country, instead of just going on a busi- 
ness trip that may, or may not, lead to 



Stranger than Fiction, 



my going there for good some day; but 
only if I can make a lot more money 
there than is to be had here; that's all, 
Doctor." 

"Ah, well," observed Johnson, ''there's 
nothing like making money when you're 
young, though money may be bought too 
dearly. After gjl, America is a long way 
to go for money, and the sea's as trea- 
cherous as . as . as the sea, for there's 
nothing more treacherous." 

" Not a woman ?" interposed Jennings, 
glancing at Tom, who sat looking into the 
fire as if he were paying no attention to the 
conversation. 

" No, not a woman, Mr. Jennings, and 
not a man neither, and not a rigid re- 
specter of the Decalogue neither," said 
the Doctor. 

*' If you intend to be personal, Doctor 
Horatio Johnson," with strong italics on 
the word Doctor ; " I forgive you for the 
sake of the day." 

" Thank you, Julius, thank you, and 
thank the day very much." 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 57 

" Come, none of this," said Mr. Collin- 
son, laughing, " have a pinch of snuff : 
here, clear your daylights a little/' 

" Oh, don't* be alarmed, sir, we don't 
quarrel ; Mr. Julius and I understand each 
other ; we always have a playful spar when 
we meet." 

" Certainly," said Julius, taking a pinch 
from CoUinson's box, and squeezing it very 
tightly between his fingers. 

" Only a complimentary box, eh ?" said 
the Doctor, examining the pretty little 
silver box that CoUinson handed to him ; 
" I thought you were not a snuffer ; horrid 
habit, bad in every way ; but a snuff-box is 
a useful thing ; helps to smooth differences, 
eh, Mr. Jennings ? You will be sorry to 
part with Mr. CoUinson." 

" Very," said Jennings. 

*' When is your last night in England 
then ?" asked the Doctor, turning to the 
young farmer. 

" This very night," said CoUinson ; " I 
go to Liverpool in the morning. Mrs. 
Titsy is gone to church, I suppose ?" 



58 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Yes ; but it is not Mrs. Titsy whom you 
would wish more particularly to inquire 
about, eh, my friend ? There, we know all 
about it ; don't be angry or think I am in- 
quisitive. Susan Harley generally spends 
her Sundays here, but she has not been 
with us to-day. Young Martyn is very ill, 
and like a kind good soul, no doubt she is 
nursing the boy ; but she is sure to come 
before the night is out. Sit down, sir, and 
have a taste of the fragrant weed . just one 
pipe." 

" We cannot stay, thank you," said Jen- 
nings. 

" Can't we, indeed ?" asked the Doctor. 

" No, thank you," said CoUinson, " we 
have a little appointment presently, but I 
don't expect to be late, and I do want to 
see Miss Harley, Doctor . Miss Harley, 
mind you." 

" Certainly," said the Doctor, '* by all 
means ; nobody respects her more than I 
do." 

" That's all right," said the farmer ; " I 
will call here again before the night is 



Domestic Life of the Titsys. 59 

over. She said she would be in about this 
time ; so you see she expects me." 

Although Tom Titsy s thoughts were 
occupied with Jacob's illness, he possessed 
sufficient of the receptive faculty to lose 
little or nothing of the conversation be- 
tween Horatio and Mr. CoUinson, the close 
of which considerably reduced the natural 
gaiety of Tom's countenance. He had no 
claim whatever upon Susan's special regard, 
but he had in his blundering way exhibited 
a kindness for her which was not mistaken 
by the Titsy household. 

" Then it is not to be good-bye until we 
see you again ?" 

" No ; I shall look in before the watch- 
man begins to try the doors, and thinks it 
time for you to go to bed." 

" I will say good night," said Jennings, 
shuffling towards the Doctor, and offering 
a flabby hand. 

" The same to you, and many of them," 
said the Doctor, taking the hand for a 
moment. " Let me see what is the day of 
the month, November 1 5 ; it deserves our 



6o Stranger than Fiction. 

remembrance, the Sunday on which you 
gave up the evening meeting to oblige a 
secular friend. If the world comes to an 
end before morning, or some other start- 
ling manifestation is made, we shall know 
the reason." 

There came over the sallow face of 
Julius Jennings a strange expression as the 
Doctor marked the calendar that hung 
near the shepherdess on the mantelpiece ; 
an expression indicating both annoyance 
and fear. 

" Don't you like my marking the date, 
Mr. Jennings ? You think I am sarcastic, 
eh?" 

" Not so sarcastic, nor so humorous, 
Johnson, as when you are thrusting the 
universal remedy down the public throat," 
said Jennings, rubbing his mittened hands. 

" Good : one to Jennings," said the Doc- 
tor. " I wonder which of us two is the 
biggest quack . you with your moral and 
religious pills, or me with my bits of herbs 
rolled into little lumps ?" 

" Having your altercations again," said 
Collinson, smiling. 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 6 1 

" No, having Jennings," said the Doctor, 
laughing and resuming his seat by the fire- 
" Good-bye for the present, gentlemen, 
good-bye." 

" I hate that sneak," remarked the Doc- 
tor, refilling his pipe and pressing the 
tobacco into the bowl with more than usual 
energy ; " he is a canting, sneaking, mali- 
cious, plotting scoundrel, or I am a Dutch- 
man, which I certainly am not : it bodes no 
good to Mr. Silas Collinson when Julius 
Jennings gives up his chapel for him. It 
is a strange thing to me how Magar the 
Miller and Jennings the Saint can be so 
intimate, and stranger that an honest fellow 
like Collinson should be mixed up with two 
such men. Well, there is no accounting 
for taste, is there, Tom ?" 

" No," responded Tom, still looking into 
the fire. 

" For your part you don't think much of 
Collinson ?" 

" I don't," said Tom, shifting his position 
and facing the philosophic Johnson. 

" Never mind, lad, the best man will 



62 Stranger than Fiction. 

win at last; I know where the shoe 
pinches ; you must grin and bear it like a 
man." 

"Well, Doctor, the shoe that pinches 
most is Master Jacob's being ill," said 
Tom. 

At this the Doctor became silent again, 
and more regardful of his pipe. He made 
a succession of smoke rings, which floated 
up among the chimney ornaments and 
obscured for a time the pencil mark under 
*' November 1 5 " in the calendar. Ominous 
date ! how ominous the reader will dis- 
cover sooner than Mrs. Titsy s talkative 
lodger, who had noted it and dragged it 
from oblivion in the Titsy household. 
November 15th ! It stood out like a warn- 
ing . it was a warning ; it was a guide 
marked out by an all-wise, all-seeing Provi- 
dence for a clue in the darkness that was 
coming on. It is not difficult to believe 
that the pencil mark made by Horatio 
Johnson had been ordained. 

While the Doctor went on making 
smoke rings the cooing of a stray pigeon 



.^ 



Domestic Life of the Titsys. 63 

reminded Tom that the whole of his fea- 
thered family should have been in bed long 
ago. He went to the door and released a 
fantail which he had pocketed in an absent 
frame of mind two hours previously, and 
subsided again into a calm contemplation 
of the fire ; not that his imagination led 
to his seeing streets and castles, and 
trees and rocks in the cinders ; he saw 
nothing but the hot coals which were 
making his face ten shades redder than 
usual. 

It was only when the door opened and 
Caesar came plunging headlong down the 
steps that Tom shook off his unwonted 
lethargy, and this was not so much out of 
regard for the dog as for Susan Harley, 
who followed Caesar (with more ceremony 
than was considered necessary by that ex- 
cited quadruped) into the cottage. 

*' Well, Susan, my lass," said Tom, " how 
are you } weVe been expecting you ; and 
how is the little governor ?" 

** Better, Tom, a little better, thank you,'' 
said Susan. 



64 Stranger than Fiction. 

" That is good news for Tom," said the 
Doctor. " Pray sit down, Mrs. Titsy will 
be here almost immediately." 

Mrs. Titsy arrived before the Doctor 
had done speaking. The two women 
kissed each other and cast mutual glances 
at their Sunday clothes, and then went up- 
stairs to take their bonnets off and have a 
litde private gossip ; after which they came 
down and Susan assisted Mrs. Titsy to pre- 
pare the supper. As soon as this frugal meal 
was ready the Doctor took his seat at one 
end of the table and Mrs. Titsy at the other, 
and Susan sat on one side and Tom on the 
other, and they were a very happy family 
indeed. 

After supper the Doctor returned to his 
pipe; and tumblers and hot water were 
brought forth. The Doctor had a steam- 
ing glass of grog, and Mrs. Titsy had a 
glass, and Tom had a glass, as was the 
custom on Sunday evenings ; but Susan 
could not be prevailed upon to drink. She 
would only just have a sip, and at Tom's 
suggestion she consented to sip out of his 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 65 

glass, which made Tom very happy indeed 
. as happy as a great gentleman might 
feel at any act of condescension from a 
great lady for whom he might have the 
highest possible admiration. Tom was 
continually passing his glass to Susan, who 
only wetted her lips ; while he only sipped 
again, that Susan might wet her lips the 
oftener. 

Mr. Horatio Johnson having given Col- 
linson s message to Susan, soon after her 
arrival, they were in momentary expecta- 
tion of the young farmer s re-appearance, 
but he did not come. Susan began to 
think he was annoyed that she had not 
kept her appointment. It made her 
miserable every now and then when this 
thought crossed her mind, like an ugly 
flash of doubt doing violence to her new 
budding love for the man who had given 
a man's best evidence of his affection 
for her. At length a step was heard, 
and a hand moved the latch ; but it was 
the watchman whose visit Silas had pro- 
mised to anticipate. " All right T' in- 

voL. I. 5 



66 Stranger than Fiction. 

quired the watchman. " All right," re- 
sponded Tom, whereupon the footstejp 
passed the cottage and died away in the 
distance. 

"It is getting very late," said Susan. 
" I must really go ; I am going to sit up 
with Jacob and I promised not to stay away 
long." 

Susan had several times announced that 
indeed she really must go, and at last 
she got up and put her things on ; where- 
upon Tom said it was so late that he 
must see Susan home. Susan struggled 
hard against Tom's proposition. She 
could go very well alone, she was not 
afraid ; besides she could take Caesar with 
her for that matter. But nothing would 
satisfy Tom, who persevered with an 
energy which would have stood him in 
good stead at the printing office if he 
could have commanded it in the cause 
of type-setting. Well then, he should go 
to the bottom of the street with her and 
not a step farther. Tom accepted the 
compromise, and his mother and the Doc- 




Domestic Life of the Titsys. 67 

tor looked pleased at the young man s 
triumph. 

In less than half an hour Tom returned 
out of breath, with despair in his face, and 
despair in his voice. His mother was 
wanted down at the Governor's imme- 
diately . " little Jacob was dying !" 




vit 5.2 




CHAPTER IV. 




"NOVEMBER 1 5/' 

IDDLETON-IN-THE-WATER 

was the most benighted town in 
the Midland Counties. Even by 
Middletonians themselves it was 
acknowledged to be quite a hundred years 
in the rear of every modern social and 
national improvement No matter how 
liberally Time scattered his seeds of pro- 
gress, while winging his way over the an- 
cient borough, they rarely took root ; and 
if they did the result was some miserable 
deformed weakly product that could never 
be recognised for any plant associated with 
progress or advancement. Whether the 
utter failure of the sowing might be ac- 




''November 15." 69 

counted for by reason of the adamantine 
quality of the paving stones of the period 
is a question which only requires proposing 
to the local debating club to be duly ac- 
cepted and discussed. 

The old town was a gigantic puzzle 
which nobody but the letter-carrier could 
solve. It was one mass of crooked streets 
and alleys which led to everywhere and 
nowhere, and seemed to have been planned 
for the especial purpose of confusing stran- 
gers, supplying covering galleries for thieves, 
and courting-corners for lovers. The houses 
were built of bricks which had once been 
red. Nearly every house had bow windows 
and door-steps. The latter were continu- 
ally undergoing the process of scouring at 
the hands of women who had once been 
red like the bricks and the tiles. 

A cloud usually hung over the borough, 
a cloud of sooty smoke from taiU chimneys, 
which all day long sent forth volumes of the 
dunnest vapour. Except when the wind 
chased it over the hills, the smoke never 
left the town. Every day it gradually 



70 Stranger than Fiction. 

mounted up above the roofs, and then, 
quietly descending, it dispersed itself 
through every street and billeted itself for 
the night in the narrowest thoroughfares. 

In many quarters of Middleton the 
houses looked as though they had crept 
together for mutual warmth during some 
terribly fierce winter in the old old days, 
and had been fixed there by icy bonds 
which had never since been melted. In 
other districts huge habitations reared them- 
selves up in the smoke and looked down 
with uncompromising contempt out of their 
top windows upon half-thatched cottages 
below. There was a general air of squalid 
grandeur and pride, mingled with squalid 
poverty and fear, throughout the place. It 
was a town of vulgar bullying creditors and 
poor vulgar grovelling debtors, going on 
from day to day living close together, bully- 
ing and being bullied, grinding and being 
ground, cursing and being cursed. 

Yet this miserable Middleton was fixed 
in a glorious setting of hills and dales, and 
woods and rivers ; a setting the rarest and 




''November 15." 71 

most beautiful that can be imagined ; it 
was like a spurious stone in the setting of 
a rare gem. There had been days in the 
olden times when the divine light may 
have shone out full and brilliant in the now 
dimmed and flawed stone ; indeed it must 
have been so, the origin of anything so 
fairly set could not have been ignoble. On 
summer days you would have thought the 
sunbeams were charged with the mission 
of restoring the ancient glory of the town, 
and that the mission was too difficult for 
accomplishment. The sunbeams would 
wander through the gabled streets, linger- 
ing here, darting off there, tarrying in this 
spot and shunning the other, until, weary 
of the pestering smoke-grimed, factory-rid- 
den, money-grubbing place, they returned 
to the realms of light, leaving for a moment 
a parting ray of golden splendour on the 
vane of the old church steeple. 

There had been no sunbeams visible in 
Middleton on this Sunday of our story. It 
was a dull leaden November day, not wet, 
not foggy for a wonder, but simply a gloomy 



72 Stranger than Fiction. 

autumn day, which was succeeded by an 
equally gloomy night. It was therefore a 
cheery thing to see the broad glint of fire- 
light that came out of the little parlour of 
" The Angel/' as Julius Jennings and Silas 
Collinson entered that hostelrie. It was a 
back parlour, a dark heavy parlour, despite 
a large quantity of bow-window looking 
upon the town. The curtains had just been 
drawn, and visitors were evidently expected. 

"Is this our room ?'' asked Jennings, of 
the waiting- woman. 

" It is," she said ; " what will you please 
to take ?" 

Jennings looked at Collinson, plainly inti- 
mating that if he consented to enter a pub- 
lic-house on a Sunday, it did not at all 
follow that he should drink. 

" I will have some brandy hot," said Col- 
linson ; " Mr. Jennings will give his own 
order.'* 

" Nothing for me, thank you," said Jen- 
nings. 

" You must drink, man," said Silas, " if 
it is only for the good of the house." 




'^November 15." 73 



" Well then, for the good of the house/' 
Jennings replied, " for I really don t care 
about anything ; for the good of the house 
I will take a little rum shrub/' 

** And I will take some Scotch whisky," 
said a rough voice at the door. 

The rough voice introduced its rough 
and ready owner, Mr. Ephraim Magar, a 
thick-set, square-headed, low-browed man, 
who assumed the character of a jovial, 
plain-spoken citizen of the world. But 
there was a cunning expression in his small 
grey eyes, and a heavy ' sensual cut about 
his lower jaw and his bulging neck, which 
did not quite correspond with the part he 
wished to play. He looked the genial 
character of his intentions perhaps less 
successfully than usual when dressed in his 
Sunday clothes. 

Ephraim Magar was the miller whom 
Jacob Martyn had observed smoking his 
pipe by the mill-pool in Jacob's great trouble. 
Viewed from a distance, whitened with 
flour dust, and supported by an old mill 
and a pleasant bit of meadow for a back- 



74 Stranger than Fiction. 

ground, Mr. Magar might have been ac- 
cepted as something akin to the jolly miller 
to whom in the song Henry the Eighth 
doffed his hat during a romantic comparison 
of the positions of king and subject ; but in 
his Sunday face and coat, Mr. Magar cer- 
tainly did not look like the jolly miller of 
the Dee. 

Perhaps there never was a more mys- 
terious mill than that of which Mr. Ephraim 
Magar was proprietor. If ruin, and thatch, 
and lichens, and weeds, and shady corners, 
could make it more picturesque than that 
famous mill in Wales which every artist 
paints, Magar's mill decidedly carried off 
the palm. It had not a rocky romantic 
river to set it off, that is true ; but it had a 
calm lake margined with weeds ; and it had 
an old wooden wheel with plenty of colour 
in it, colour of rust and age and slimy 
moss. 

Any time for twenty years the mill was 
going to be pulled down, to be replaced by 
a more useful building, but latterly Mr. 
Magar had told the landlord that it answered 




'''November 15." 75 

his purpose very well. What his purpose 
was the gossips were continually trying to 
discover. It was clearly not the simple 
business of a miller ; his purpose was con- 
siderably deeper than that. He made more 
money in buying at the turn of the market 
at Wakefield and selling again than he made 
by the turn of the mill-stones. The old 
wheel was continually going it is true, 
and there was flour to be had at the mill. 
Suspicions of distilling had been aroused 
by some imaginative neighbour who thought 
the miller's late hours, coupled with lights 
at midnight and early morning, meant 
distilling. The Inland Revenue officers 
searched the mill and had to defend an 
action at law for their pains, to say nothing 
of being threatened with the mill-pool. 
Magar stood no nonsense from any one; 
what he could not do in the way of defence 
and attack by a foul tongue and a strong 
arm he did by means of Mr. Gripps, a 
local attorney, who had punished several 
and sundry persons who had brought them- 
selves within the miller's power. 



76 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

It was known to Julius Jennings, and 
also to Mr. Silas CoUinson, that Magar 
had lost a large sum of money at a certain 
gaming-table in a neighbouring town. Jen- 
nings had lent Magar money, and CoUinson 
had lent money to both. Moreover, 
Magar had bought corn, as well as sheep, 
from CoUinson at the turn of the market 
and at other times, and there was a balance 
in Magar's books of four hundred pounds 
still owing to CoUinson. The miller had 
promised to pay this sum over to the young 
farmer a month ago, and on failing to do 
so at that time, had mentioned seven days 
afterwards, and failing seven days after- 
wards had fixed Saturday, and then 
had solemnly named Sunday evening, this 
very Sunday evening of our story. He 
had arranged to meet Jennings and CoUin- 
son for a final settlement and a farewell 
glass at " The Angel i' and here they were, 
all friends together, on this memorable and 
never-to-be-forgotten Fifteenth of Novem- 
ber. 

" And when do you sail, CoUinson ?" 




^' November I ^y 77 

asked Magar when the grog was brewed 
and the shutters closed. 

^* I am due in Liverpool to-morrow/' 
said CoUinson, " and I sail on Wednes- 
day." 

*'What about Miss' Susan Harley?'' 
asked Jennings, sipping his shrub and look- 
ing at Magar. 

** Susan ! well, poor girl, she does not 
know what to say ; she does not like the 
notion of my going, of course." 

" Wavering, perhaps," said Jennings 
slowly and with a deprecatory glance at 
Silas, "wavering between Thomas Titsy 
and yourself. What a rival ! And Mis- 
ter Collinson might marry the richest 
trader's daughter in Middleton." 

" That will do, Jennings, I did not come 
here to talk about my matrimonial pro- 
spects ; and if I did, what is the richest girl 
in the town to me . riches don't mean hap- 
piness, I suppose ?" 

'" Don't they ?" said Magar stirring his 
whisky and stretching his ungainly legs; 
" then what is happiness ?" 



78 Stranger than Fiction. 

" I can't exactly say, but I would sooner 
make the money myself than have it with 
a wife," said Silas. 

" You are sweet on Susan, I know . a 
decent sort of a wench, but you may have 
a woman of that class to keep your house 
without all the fuss and bother of a wed- 
ding, Silas." 

"Ah, I've heard of your ideas on this 
subject before ; and there is a certain woman 
whom some folk know, that is aware of 
them practically," said Silas. 

** That's one to you," said Magar. " One 
to Silas. Eh, Mr. Jennings ?" 

" Yes," said Jennings. 

" That's glasses round," said Magar, 
ringing the bell. 

Jennings no longer attempted to resist 
the generous liquor. Magar had a double 
quantity of whisky in each glass, and 
seemed inclined to grow quarrelsome over it. 

" So you mean to marry that servant of 
Martyn's T he said in a patronising manner 
to CoUinson, who was annoyed at this con- 
tinual reference to Susan. 



^'November 15/' 79 

" Look here, my friends," he replied, " as 
I said before, I did not come here to dis- 
cuss marriage, but money ; and not money 
in connection with marriage, but money 
owing to me in the way of trade. I came 
here at your invitation to do business, 
although it is the Sabbath, and Mr. Julius 
Jennings is a regular chapel-goer.'' 

" The Lord plucked ears of wheat on 
the Sabbath, friend Silas," said Jennings in 
a soft tone of injured innocence. 

" Oh, burn your texts !" exclaimed Col- 
linson, " Fd as lief hear the devil quote the 
Scriptures as Julius Jennings ; so you have 
got out that bit of my mind. I told you a 
year ago that I had no faith in your reli- 
gion, Julius.'' 

** That was when you were angry, as 
you are now," said Jennings with an air of 
calm superiority, " and when you are angry 
it is the evil one who speaks, and not you 
yourself, Mr. CoUinson . not you, sir, not 
you." 

" Then where is the religion of calling a 
business meeting, a sort of twopenny-half- 



8o Stranger than Fiction. 



penny insolvent debtors' court, on a 
Sunday night T exclaimed Silas, clenching 
his hand and looking angrily at Magar, 
who rose with a flash of fury in his face. 

" Insolvent debtors !'' roared Magar, 
glaring at Silas, " where are they ? What 
dost mean ? Who do you mean ?'' 

Jennings slid his thin writhing body be- 
tween his two friends, keeping them apart 
by word and gesture. 

*^ Gentlenlen ! . gentlemen ! . my friends! 
. Mr. Magar, sir ! . Sunday night ! Pray 
remember. And Silas Collinsons last 
night in England !" 

" Ah !'' exclaimed Magar, " there you hit 
me, Jennings. his last night in England. 
But what the devil does Silas mean by in- 
solvent debtors ?" 

" Now look here, Magar, and you Jen- 
nings/' said Collinson, his anger subsi- 
ding immediately upon Magar's reference 
to his last night in England, " I don't want 
to quarrel ; I did not mean to be offensive ; 
I was hasty ; I apologise ; there \ Come, 
let us be friends. There's my hand." 




I 

''November 15/' 8r 

Magar took the proffered hand, while 
Jennings grasped the other, and then they 
pledged each other's health, and Magar 
proposed that they should **get to business.'^ 

" I should not have asked thee to come 
here to-night, Silas," began Mr. Magar, 
" only I received a bit of money yesterday 
which I ought to have had before, and I 
wanted to keep my promise as close on the 
time I named as I could, and as you were 
going off to-morrow, I thought it best to do 
it to-night. Besides, I am going to Bir- 
mingham in the morning, and I don't want 
to be tempted to risk it there." 

" Why don't you keep a banking ac- 
count ?" asked CoUinson ; ** I have often 
wondered that you do not." 

" Oh, I should never get on with a bank- 
ing account," said Magar ; " I should do 
nothing but sign cheques ; I should never 
think I was short of money. Besides, banks 
break, and my mill is as safe as any bank 
I did keep a banking account once, for 
about a month, but I didn't like it. Now 
to business. Look here. I shall pay thee 

VOL. I. 6 



82 Stranger than Fiction. 

two hundred pounds down, and give a bill 
at six months for the balance. There's the 
money in bank notes, and well walk down 
to the mill presently, and Jennings will 
draw up a receipt and a bill. Will that do T 

" Yes," said CoUinson, " I am perfectly 
satisfied ; two hundred in cash will suit me 
very well, and I can leave the bill at the 
bank." 

" I owe you a trifle, Silas," said Jennings. 

" Never mind, Jennings,'' CoUinson re- 
plied promptly ; " say no more about that ; 
we will talk about it when I come back." 

" There, man, put the money in your 
pocket," said Magar, pushing the notes 
over to CoUinson, " and let us have another 
glass a-piece before we walk down to the 
mill." 

" Thank you, Magar," responded CoUin- 
son. *' All right ; let us start at once, it is 
getting late." 

The last round of grog was soon finished, 
and CoUinson, who had despaired of getting 
any money at all, was very talkative and 
friendly. The brandy, too, had begun to 




''November 15/' 83 

tell upon him. He walked a little un- 
steadily. 

It was a dark night. There were a few 
stars twinkling in the blackness, and some 
dozen houses sent forth gleams of light from 
bedroom windows. The Middleton Corpor- 
ation, who had only introduced gas into the 
town a few years previous to this history, 
took Old Moore for their guide in the 
matter of illumination. When the almanac 
promised moonshine, which it did very 
frequently, the Corporation saved their gas. 
Middleton was therefore in total darkness 
once or twice a week, as it was upon this 
occasion. To make the night more objec- 
tionable, November began to assert its title, 
not only to be dull and dark, but to be 
drizzly and windy and cold. Before Magar 
and his friends had arrived at the mill the 
rain began to fall, accompanied by a hollow 
soughing, melancholy gusty wind, with a 
howl in it at street corners, and a moan 
here and there in dark alleys and mys- 
terious passages. 

The mill, as the reader will readily under- 

6.2 



84 Stranger than Fiction. 

Stand, was a weird, solemn place at night, and 
especially in November, when the rain had 
swollen the pool, and the wind wandered 
about among the naked trees and made a 
low moaning music that deepened into a 
sigh as the river carried it gurgling and 
sobbing under the mill-wheel. 

While they stood upon the threshold of 
the mill a light from a half-concealed win- 
dow near the wheel glimmered upon the 
wet slimy ladders. 

Magar cursed the light, and said he 
thought he had put it out before he left. 
In the same breath he asked CoUinson why 
the devil he did not walk straight, and if 
he wanted to tumble into the pool. Silas 
laughed, and said he would rather tumble 
into bed. It was the peculiarity of CoUin- 
son to be particularly merry in his cups ; 
while an extra glass brought out the brutal 
nature of Magar and the canting hypocrisy 
of Jennings. 

By-and-by the door closed upon the 
three friends. The light disappeared and 
came forth again in another part of the mill. 



X 



^^ November \^r 85 

The wind swept along the adjacent river 
and wandered round the mill, and threw the 
drizzling rain upon the dusty windows. 
The water trickling through the locks of 
th6 pool, slipped away to the river beneath 
the silent wheel, and the time slipped away 
also; the hours, half hours, and quarters 
being steadily marked by the local chimes, 
the sounds of which wandered through the 
November air down to the old bridge as if 
to keep the watchman company at the last 
and loneliest portion of his rounds. 

Magar's Mill was the boundary of the 
watchman's beat ; but the officer was gene- 
rally content to cry the hour on the bridge, 
unless anything called his especial attention 
to the mill. On this Sunday night of the 
fifteenth of November he heard a door 
-closed and saw a light ; thereupon he passed 
along the bridge, and casting a long column 
of light before him, went to the mill and 
tapped at the door with the same interro- 
gatory remark as that which had interrupted 
the Titsys only half an hour before. " All 
right ?'^ said the watchman. 



86 Stranger than Fiction. 

" All right/' was the immediate response 
from within. 

"Humph !" said the watchman as he left 
the spot ; " in a great hurry to say all right; 
might have asked a fellow to have a drink 
on a night like this ; a fine sight of money 
that man must be making one way and 
another. He's always at it, Sundays and 
work-a-days. What's he up to now ? Well, 
it's no business of mine. I'll just go home 
for a quarter of an hour and warm mysen. 
* Twelve o'clock and a stormy night !' " 

The watchman's cry fell dead and still 
and unheeded upon the darkness ; the wind 
did not even carry it away as it swept over 
the bridge ; it fell heavily, as if it had sunk 
into the river. The town clock soon after- 
wards began to strike out the hour, but it 
seemed to make a fitful ending after the 
first three strokes of the bell, and Novem- 
ber took possession of the town and 
did as it liked with it, covering it up 
with sleet and drizzle, and making low,, 
wailing, and terrifying noises up and down 
the streets. 



''November 15." 87 



A Middletonian who had been visiting 
his friends in a village, beyond the bridge, 
on the London road, was passing the mill 
shortly after twelve o'clock, and was at- 
tracted by the shifting of a light from one 
part of the mill to another. Having heard 
the story of the supposed illicit still, he 
paused a moment near the old building, and 
thought he heard a groan, as if from some 
person in pain. The noise frightened him for 
a moment, but he put it down to the cry of an 
owl or the sighing of the wind. The same 
sound was presently repeated, and there was 
something so solemn and ghost-like about 
the place, it was such a wretched November 
night, and his wife would be so angry at 
his staying out late, that the Middletonian 
hurried away from the mill and over the 
bridge into the town, and was very glad 
when he saw the light of his own fireside. 
Moreover, the poor fellow had bethought 
himself of one of the many legends of the 
bridge, where a murder had been perpe- 
trated in the days of Jack Sheppard, and 
he terrified his wife by repeating that story, 



88 Stranger than Fiction. 

and wondering if the ghost of the mur- 
dered man had haunted the bridge on this 
miserable November night. 

The watchman had hardly reached his 
home, and the Middletonian had only just 
brewed himself a nightcap when the door 
at the back of the mill was cautiously un- 
locked and opened. In another minute 
Julius Jennings peered out into the dark- 
ness and listened. He heard nothing but 
the water gurgling down the weir to the 
river. Five minutes afterwards a dreadful 
cry broke out upon the night, a cry of de- 
spair and death, a cry that trembled in the 
air. The very wind stopped as if to listen, 
and the river carried the awful sound down 
to the bridge and lost it among the dark 
arches. Time seemed to stand still for a 
moment, as if the night had received a 
sudden shock ; and then the wind gathered 
strength, and rushed at the mill as if it were 
about to drag forth the heart of its mystery. 
It shook the doors, and broke in upon a 
half-open window. It came back again and 
plunged beneath the water-wheel, and then 



'^November 15/' 89 

rushed over the mill-pool and shook every 
reed upon the banks ; but nothing came of 
all this demonstration except the creaking 
of doors, the rattling of windows, the hissing 
of water, and the rustling of reeds and 
sedges. No other cry came from the mill ; 
all was still and quiet, and silent, and solemn 
as if death had really been in that despair- 
ing shriek, and was now in gloomy posses- 
sion of a victim. 

At two o'clock in the morning the old 
borough watchman ^appeared again. He 
cast the same long column of light before 
him : it was like a luminous elastic wand ; 
it struck the front of the mill, and then 
mounted the roof, increasing its proportions 
as it moved upwards until it changed from 
an elastic wand into a spectre. 

" Past two o'clock and a cloudy morn- 
ing," sang the watchman. As he turned 
away, the bull's-eye spectre came back over 
the mill-roof, down the front, and stretched 
away again towards the bridge. " Past 
two o'clock and a cloudy morning," again 
sang the watchman, as if he desired in this 



90 Stranger than Fiction. 

dreadful solitude the companionship of his 
own voice. 

Daylight dawned at last, ragged and 
patchy, cold and wet and chilly. The first 
glimmer of morning saw Julius Jennings 
creeping into bed, while daylight fell upon 
Mr. Ephraim Magar standing with his arms 
folded at the mill-door. 

" Good morning, sir ; not a very inviting 
morning, sir," said Tom Titsy. 

" No ; it ain't,'' said Magar. " You are 
out early." 

" Same to you, sir," said Tom. 

" Them as thrives must be up betimes, 
Tom," said Magar, with calm self-posses- 
sion. 

** And stop up at nights, too," said Tom, 
noticing the miller s haggard and wild ap- 
pearance. 

" Take that dog away," said Magar. 

" Oh ! he won't hurt, sir ; he don't mean 
nothing," said Tom, pretending to lash 
Caesar with a light stick, which he carried 
for the purpose of intimidation rather than 
correction. 




^^ November 15." 91 

Caesar had snarled at Magar, and the 
miller had resented the dog's sullen recog- 
nition. 

" It would be the worse for him if he did 
mean anything," said Magar. " Fd smash 
him." 

" Well, I don't know whether you would^ 
for that matter," said Tom. ** But there's 
no need to be angry. Come along, Caesar> 
come along ! Mr. Magar's been up late, 
and got out of bed the wrong side." 

The dog barked and leaped up at Tom> 
and the pair went bounding on together. 

" Has he ?" said Magar. " I'll be even 
with you, Thomas Titsy, some day." 

" Past six o'clock, and a cloudy morning,'^ 
said the watchman in the distance. 




CHAPTER V. 



COMING TO LIFE AGAIN. 




HAT autumn day and night of the 
preceding chapter had been the 
introduction to many weeks of 
cold and biting winter weather. 
Keen northerly winds had dried up the 
earth, until it rang with the tread of ordi- 
nary boots, and re-echoed the clatter of 
horses. Middleton groaned under the long 
frost which pinched the poor, and filled the 
streets with unemployed bricklayers, gar- 
deners, and canal boatmen, who howled 
forth lugubrious complaints in monotonous 
protests against winter and wealth. The 
river which had carried down to the bridge 
that terrible cry in the November night 



Coming to Life Again^ 93 

was frozen hard and fast, and the mill-pool 
was covered with skaters. People went 
about shrugging their shoulders, rubbing 
their hands, and puffing out their cheeks. 
Those who had jolly fires and well-filled 
tables said it was good old-fashioned wea- 
ther, delightful weather, seasonable weather. 
Mr. Ephraim Magar said this ; but he said 
more . he declared that the poor ought to 
be specially cared for at such times. He 
set the excellent example of opening a 
public soup-kitchen, over which he presided, 
and for which he was duly praised, and 
puffed, and lauded in the local newspaper. 
Like the longest lane and the greatest 
trouble, the bitterest winter comes to an 
end. This winter which was so hard upon 
Middleton had its last day. One morning 
the dull cold earth was awakened into life 
again. The river flowed on once more. 
' The birds got up early and told each other 
that spring was coming. The boatmen 
unmoored their barges. The gardeners 
looked up their spades. The bricklayers 
hammered their melted mortar into plastic 



94 Stranger than Fiction. 

heaps, and resumed their storeys which 
had been left "to be continued" for many 
weary weeks. The whole world was com- 
ing to life again, and with it our little friend, 
Jacob Martyn. He was lying where we 
left him after his mad ramble by the mill- 
pool; he was lying where he had been 
lying all through the autumn and the win- 
ter ; but at last he was coming out of his 
long illness. 

It was early morning. The white cur- 
tains of Jacob's little room were warm with 
the tints of the rising sun. A tea-cup and 
saucer standing near the bed, in the full 
radiance of the morning light, looked to 
Jacob like some wonderful trophies of 
Chinaland. There was a small collection 
of medicine bottles on the dressing-table, 
and a few smouldering cinders in the fire- 
grate. The mantel-shelf was decorated 
with an apple, half an orange; a wine-glass, 
a packet of sweetmeats, a jelly-mould, and 
a variety of other sick-room trifles, and the 
atmosphere of the room was heavy with 
the perfumes thereof. 



^ 



Coming to Life Again. 95 

Jacob was bewildered as he gazed upon 
all these things. He tried to remember 
what had happened, what time it was, when 
it was, how it was, who he was, where he 
was. He cudgelled his brains with a variety 
of strange conceits, until he sank exhausted 
on the pillow where he had lain for so many 
months . ^we cannot say weary months^ so 
far as Jacob was concerned, for to him they 
had passed away almost without a sign ; 
but so far as others were concerned, they 
were long, dreary, anxious, melancholy 
months. 

Jacob raised himself gradually upon his 
pillow to take a more careful survey of the 
room. It was then that he found out how 
weak he was, discovered the meagreness 
of his wasted little hands, and arrived at 
the conclusion that he was very ill. How 
came he so ? Had he been rescued from 
drowning ? Had the miller brought him 
home on a shutter, as he had brought home 
the boy in the next street after an evening's 
fishing in the mill-pool "i These and a 
hundred other questions Jacob mentally 



96 Stranger than Fiction. 

asked himself, and all were dismissed with 
equally unsatisfactory answers. He was 
in this oblivious state when the door was 
steadily and cautiously opened. 1 1 occurred 
to Jacob that he would lie down and watch. 
One, two, three, four, five light, soft, up and 
down steps, and then a hand pulled the bed 
curtains aside. One, two, three, four, five 
more soft steps, and the window blind was 
pulled down to shut out the sunshine. 
Then a voice whispered, *' Bless him . he's 
asleep." Jacob could not help smiling at 
his own mild joke of being wide awake all 
the time. The face which had looked in 
upon him, the hand which had drawn down 
the blind, the voice which had whispered, 
** Bless him . he's asleep," went to another 
part of the room. Then Jacob peeped 
forth, and saw Mrs. Titsy put her cap to 
rights at the glass. He saw Mrs. Titsy 
encourage the aspiring cinders in the fire- 
grate with a gentle touch of the poker. 
He saw Mrs. Titsy return again to the 
bed, and thereupon he determined to sur- 
prise that buxom matron by suddenly pro- 




Coming to Life Again. 97 

nouncing her name in a very loud key. 
Jacob was startled at the result ; startled, 
not at the noise he made, but at the noise 
he did not make ; startled at the very small 
voice which said, " Mrs. Titsy . Boh !" To 
Jacob it was like anybody else's voice but 
his own. He began to wonder if he was 
in the condition of those poor people, men- 
tioned in the Scriptures, who were afflicted 
with some evil spirit that was talking for 
him. 

Mrs. Titsy, however, did not give him 
time to follow up this train of thought. 
She was close to him in an instant, and 
when he said, or when somebody else said, 
or something said, " Mrs. Titsy . Boh 1" 
Mrs. Titsy commenced to laugh and cry 
and kiss Jacob in a manner that in nowise 
tended to clear up the mystery in which he 
found himself so important an actor. 

** Wait a bit, my dear," said Mrs. Titsy, . 
" wait a bit," as if she had a reasonable 
fear of his getting up and dressing him- 
self ; " don't distress yourself; FU be back 
in a moment." 

VOL. I. 7 



98 Stranger than Fiction. 

Then she laughed, and nodded her head, 
and drew the curtains, and opened the 
door, and disappeared. In another mo- 
ment she returned, still laughing and nod- 
ding her head at Jacob ; and, following her 
upon tiptoe, came Jacob's father. 

" Jacob, my dear boy," said his father, 
stooping down and kissing his forehead ; 
" Jacob, my poor boy, you are better then 
at last, at last." 

Jacob thought he saw a tear roll down 
his father's cheek, and he felt his own eyes 
growing dim with joy. 

" Am I, father ?'' he said presently. 
** Yes, I think I am . I am sure I am better." 

He would have said anything just then 
that could give pleasure to his father, who 
had spoken to him in the familiar voice of 
old, in the tone of the old days before aunt 
Keziah came to Middleton. 

" And you know me now, and Mrs. 
Titsy," said Jacob's father; "Mrs. Titsy, 
who has been so kind to you ?" 

"Yes, father," said Jacob putting his 
wasted hand into his father's. 




Coming to Life Again. 99 

"Poor dear fellow!" said Mr. Martyn, 
**poor dear boy! you have had a hard 
time of it, well and ill for that matter ; but 
happier days are coming; don't cry, my 
boy ; don't cry, Jacob ; cheer up." 

The sympathetic, caressing mannei: of 
Jacob's father quite overcame the invalid. 
A chord had been touched in the boy's 
heart that had lain still and hushed for so 
long that the ^ unaccustomed music now 
thrilled the wasted frame. 

"There, we've had enough of this, 
please," said Mrs. Titsy. " Now, Jacob, 
no more crying; there, that will do, we 
must have a wash and be cheerful, and eat 
some breakfast." 

In a very short time Mrs. Titsy had 
bustled Jacob's father out of the room, and 
Jacob was propped up with pillows and 
made comfortable. 

During the morning the doctor came. 
He was not one of those medical authori- 
ties in whose care we would trust your life, 
most polite and courteous of readers ; but 
he was looked upon as one of the best men 

7.2 



lOO Stranger than Fiction. 

in Middleton. If you had asked his own 
opinion of his own abilities he would have 
given you most clearly to understand that 
but for him Middleton would have been 
little better than a city of the dead any 
time this twenty years. He was a stiff, 
pompous, starchy, very much linen-collared, 
kid-gloved, ringed gentleman, with a gold- 
headed cane, and a gold- headed pin in 
a black satin cravat. 

'' Put out your tongue, my friend," he 
said to Jacob, feeling his pulse at the same 
time. 

'' Ah, we are improving," he said in a 
deep hollow voice. " Improving, decidedly 
improving." 

" It is a long lane that has no turning," 
said Mrs. Titsy, smoothing her apron and 
nodding mysteriously at Jacob. 

" A wise proverb, Mrs. Titsy," said the 
doctor, with a grand patronising air, " we 
are just arriving at the turning, Mrs. Titsy." 

** It seems so," said Mrs. Titsy, drawing 
herself up and standing upon her dignity ; 
" quite out of danger, sir ?" 




Coming to Life Again, loi 

" Quite out of danger/' said the doctor, 
taking up his hat and cane and contem- 
plating Mrs. Titsy with an air of triumph ; 
" as I said before, we are just at the turn- 

ing." 

"Thank God!" said Mrs. Titsy, not 
noticing this last remark of the doctor, 
who proceeded to give instructions with 
regard to the patient's diet, without in his 
turn noticing Mrs. Titsy s fervent ejacula- 
tion. 

" Arrowroot, with a little milk, plain 
pudding ; no objection to chicken or beef- 
tea in moderation, no vegetables, the mix- 
ture as before, and leave off the powders ; 
good morning, Mrs. Titsy, good morning." 

" Certainly, by all means, thank you for 
nothing," said Mrs. Titsy, when the last 
sound of the doctor's footsteps had died 
away ; '' mixture as before, by all means, 
certainly." 

Jacob thought very seriously about Mrs. 
Titsy's state of mind. It was plain to him 
that her intellect was going. She was 
evidently losing her head. 



J 



J02 Stranger than Fiction. 

" No, I am not/' said Mrs. Titsy, an- 
swering his wondering look ; ** I am quite 
right in my mind, Jacob ; you will know 
all about it some day, don't distress your- 
self." 

During the day Jacob showed still more 
gratifying symptoms. The old days were 
coming back. Susan came to see him. 
Julius Jennings came to see him. Tom 
Titsy came to see him. They were only 
permitted to say a few words, but it was so 
pleasant to hear kind tender soft expres- 
sions from these people, and it was so very 
pleasant to feel of importance to them. 
Mrs. Gompson paid him a visit, and after 
the first momentary chill which her pre- 
sence created, Jacob found a kindly feeling 
in his heart for his aunt, who did her best 
to speak softly and agreeably; but she 
could not resist a parting shot at Mrs. 
Titsy as she left the^room. 

" Fewer visitors, Mrs. Titsy, and a more 
moderate diet, in my opinion are advisable ; 
I only state my own opinion ; it is of little 
moment I know what my opinion may be. 




Coming to Life Again. 103 

. . . ....... . . --.-.,...-- ^..- , . .. .l-^..^.^..l .^ 

but Still I State it, I record it ; fewer 
visitors and a more moderate diet." 

Many days passed away before Jacob 
came to know how ill he had been. Dur- 
ing these many days he improved rapidly. 
In course of time Tom Titsy was per- 
mitted to have long interviews with his 
young master. On these occasions, at 
appropriate intervals during their talk, Tom 
would go to the window and release pigeons 
from his big coat pockets ; and Jacob 
noticed that every pigeon was a carrier, 
gently laden, with variously coloured ribbon 
tied round its neck, or fluttering from its 
feet. 

** Them's volumes, M ester Jacob," he 
would say, watching the pigeons as they 
sailed round and round in the air before 
starting off to the thatched roof of the 
Titsy household. 

** I thought they were pigeons, Tom," 
said Jacob smiling. 

" Now you're laughing at me," said 
Tom. " Never mind, I like it. There 
was a time when you couldn't laugh nor 



1 04 Stranger than Fiction. 

*^^^ ...- -l ..ll III. . M ^B.^ 11.^ . I .... I . - 

cry either, for that matter. Them bits o' 
ribbon speaks no end of eloquence to 
M ester Johnson, if he's at home, and I 
think he is." 

" Indeed ! In what way T asked Jacob. 

" Why they're to him . what they call 
bulletins when grand folks are ill. They 
tell him just how you're goin' on." 

" Does that interest Mr. Johnson so 
much then ?" inquired Jacob. 

" Ah, a good deal more nor you think." 

" Indeed !" 

" Yes, indeed, M ester Jacob, he's never 
tired of hearing about you, and he's the 
best and the cleverest man in all the world, 
I don't care where the t'other comes from." 

" That's right, Tom, always speak well 
of your friends ; I am sure I am very much 
obliged to the Doctor. And now you 
shall tell me all the news, Tom." 

** Yes," said Mrs. Titsy, "do tell Mester 
Jacob all the news while I have just one 
cup of tea, and listen ; you won't mind 
that, will you, Jacob dear ?" 

"No, I shall like it very much," said 




Coming to Life Again. 105 

Jacob, composing himself carefully on his 
pillows to listen. 

" Well, first about Susan,'* said Mrs. 
Titsy ; *' you know she is engaged to Mr. 
Silas Collinson, engaged to be married," 
said Mrs. Titsy. 

Tom winced a little at this opening, but 
recovered his self-possession immediately. 

** And he*s gone off to America," said 
Tom. 

f* Yes," said Jacob. '' What for ?" 

" Oh, to make his fortune bigger ; he 
wor n't satisfied, you know, and he's got a 
speculation out there as is to bring him in 
no end of money," said Tom. 

" Much would have more," said Mrs. 
Titsy, mashing an ounce of a favourite 
mixture in a favourite fashion in a little 
black tea-pot with a saucer over it ; " much 
would have more and lost all." 

" The night afore he left," said Tom. 

" I thought that was a secret," said Mrs. 
Titsy, letting out a fragrant steam for a 
moment and then pressing the saucer 
tightly over the teapot. 



io6 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Not to Mester Jacob," said Tom. 

"Well then, you must know/' said Mrs. 
Titsy, carrying the gossip away from her 
son, who to be sure was very slow and 
bungling in his narrative, " that the night 
before he left he was to have come to our 
house, having been once with Mr. Jennings 
in the evening ; he was to have come at 
night again and didn't, and Mister Jennings 
told us privately that the fact was he had 
got tipsy, very tipsy, his feelings and one 
thing and another having overcome him^ 
and he had to go early, to Liverpool the 
next morning. For my part I never knew 
Mr. Collinson except as the soberest of 
men ; horsey but only a little, no more 
than a young farmer generally is." 

Mrs. Titsy had poured out her first cup 
of tea by this time, and under its stimula- 
ting influences was all the more inclined 
to talk. 

" Mr. Horatio Johnson, our Doctor, 
Mister Jacob, who takes such an interest 
in you, he has got some curious idea into 
his head about Mr. Collinson going away> 



\ 



Coming to Life Again. 107 

.. " ^^^^. . -^^^^i.-. - ^ - .. .  >. mm^m^^ MM ii . m Bill Bi I .^.^.^-^^^.^BM^^^ 

but that's owing perhaps to his not liking 
Mr. Jennings. A curious man the Doctor, 
he has been and made the acquaintance of 
the gentleman as has taken Mr. CoUinson's 
house ready furnished. As for Susan 
thinking of going to America to be married, 
if I was her I certainly should not do it, at 
all events at present." 

Mrs. Titsy was anxious to familiarise 
Tom with the fact that Susan was in- 
violably and unalterably pledged to Mr. 
Collinson, and she mentioned their probable 
marriage as often as she could. Tom bore 
it very well, but generally in silence. 

** It was on her account* that he went to 
America ; she was engaged to him afore 
he went, and agreed that if he could do 
better there than he could in England she 
would go out to him. She has had one 
letter to say he had arrived safe, and found 
things looking well." 

This, and a great deal more information, 
Jacob received during what Mrs. Titsy 
called her tea-drinking, and the conversa- 
tion only came to an end when that buxom 



1 08 Stranger than Fiction. 

woman disco vered that Jacob was fast asleep. 
Then she quietly left the room, cautioning 
Tom, if he would insist upon sitting there, 
to make no noise, and let the boy sleep on. 
So Tom sat by the bed watching his play- 
mate as he slept, and recalling in his blun- 
dering way the happy hours they had spent 
together ; and thinking in his blundering 
fashion of Susan and of his love for her, 
and wondering if there were the slightest 
possibility of her not loving Mr. CoUinson, 
and if she did not marry him, if he, Tom 
Titsy, would have any chance of being ac- 
cepted. The twilight came on as Tom sat 
there nursing his thoughts. It was dark 
before he stroked Jacob's hand as it lay on 
the counterpane, and slipped away down 
stairs and out into the gaslit streets. 

Tom Titsy had never confessed his love 
to Susan, but it was pretty well understood 
by Susan and everybody else what his feel- 
ings were towards her. When it was 
thoroughly settled that Silas Collinson was 
to be **the happy man" Tom treated Susan 
with more respect and deference than 




Qoming to Life Again. 109 

. .. I.. I- . I. . M. ... II IMMI . I M^M^^^^^M^M I . JIM- 

formerly, but he did not relax one jot of 
his kind attentions towards her. He would 
carry a bucket for her, or help her in any 
household duty with all his former alacrity, 
and his assistance was valuable to Susan, 
who found her duties none the lighter since 
Mrs. Gompson became mistress in the 
Martyn establishment. Susan responded 
to Tom's delicate attentions with a kind 
fellow-servant's consideration, and the two 
people who were bent on such different 
roads in life, against the dearest wish of 
one of them, were the best of friends. 
There was a delicacy and thoughtfulness 
in Tom Titsy s treatment of Susan which 
in the higher walks of life would have been 
considered courtier-like and graceful in the 
extreme. 

At length the pompous gentleman of the 
rings, and gloves, and collars, and gold- 
headed cane, said Jacob Martyn was suffi- 
ciently recovered to be taken out for an 
airing on every fine day. Accordingly, the 
next morning, after being duly wrapped 
in many shawls and blankets, Jacob was 




no Stranger than Fiction. 

carried into the garden by his father, carried 
as if he had been a child instead of a boy 
of fifteen and a much taller fellow than he 
was when the reader met him in the first 
chapter of this history of Jacob's life and 
adventures. He had grown immensely 
during his illness. 

This glimpse of his father s garden from 
his father's arms on that bright spring 
morning was always a strangely happy re- 
membrance to Jacob. The fresh earthy 
and flowery perfume that pervaded the 
elastic breezy air was an everlasting scent. 
It came back to him in after years, as if his 
mind inhaled the perfume with the memory 
of it. As Mr. Marty n walked gently up 
and down between the apple-trees, Jacob 
was too happy for words. He only spoke 
a few syllables, and these in a dreamy kind 
of assent to some kind remark of his father s ; 
but nothing escaped his observant eye. He 
seemed to see things with his mind, too, 
and to feel them in his mind. It appeared 
to him as if he belonged to the garden, as if 
he were akin to the buds and leaves, as if 



\ 



Coming to Life Again. 1 1 1 

he were growing up afresh with them, 
.coming to Hfe with them, breathing with 
them the spring atmosphere, rejoicing with 
them that the winter had gone, and looking 
forward with them to the summer that was 
coming. Early peas were showing their 
leaves in emerald rows above the dark- 

s 

brown earth. Mustard and cress made 
velvet patches here and there in sunny 
corners. White and pinky buds, covered 
with silky coats, laid their soft cheeks 
against the southern wall of the garden. 
There were crocuses and snow-drops here 
and there behind the box-borders. The 
favourite violet in the favourite corner was 
in full bloom. The tall poplars in the ad- 
jacent copse were covered with half-de- 
veloped leaves. They looked like giant 
" nodding-grasses" which tremble in early 
hay. The apple-trees were dotted with 
buds. There was a brown healthy glow 
in the trees, a bursting into life, a fulness, a 
sappy budding bursting joyfulness that 
gladdened Jacobus heart, and seemed to 
promise happiness in the future. For a 




112 Stranger than Fiction, 

moment a cold shudder passed over him, 
but it was only for a moment ; the reason 
of it was a gurgling humming sound that 
came over the meadows from the mill-pool. 
Happily the factory, with its whirling 
wheels and bobbins, took up the sound, and 
hustled it out of hearing. Then the voices 
of girls at their looms broke in upon the 
hum of machinery ; the voices that Jacob 
had heard so often singing the familiar 
hymn of his early youth. 

Well might Jacob's garden seem a para- 
dise to him for all time ; that patch of 
ground, with its bird-songs of freedom, and 
its songs of labour coming out of the great 
red hundred-eyed factory, coming forth in 
gushes of wild harmony; that bit of Mid- 
dleton sacred to the memory of mother 
and brother, sacred to the memory of pure 
thoughts and holy aspirations, of noble re- 
solves and wondering fancies ; sacred to 
the memory of Jacobus first love. Through- 
out these memories, as they cropped up in 
after years, there lingered ever that fresh 
flowery perfume, and the one favourite 




Coming to Life Again. 113 

chant of the factory, the old-fashioned 
hymn which a band of Sunday-school girls 
had introduced there, a hymn that must 
permeate this history, cropping up here and 
there, and wandering through the story 
like the familiar strain in some sad drama, 
awakening sympathetic echoes in the hearts 
of those who watch the action of the piece 
and follow the actors to the last touching 
scene of all. 

" There is a happy land, 
Far, far away." 

It was a plaintive song coming from a 
mass of factory windows on a bright spring 
morning, but there was something of the 
joyousness of the time in it, something of 
the hopefulness and freshness of spring, 
and it dwelt in Jacob's mind an equal 
sharer with the sunshine, the perfumed 
breeze, the early buds, and the tender 
words of his father. 

How often we brush shoulders with des- 
tiny, and know it not ! There was one 
voice in that factory chorus destined to 

VOL. I. 8 




114 



Stranger than Fiction. 



influence Jacob's whole life. Sing on, poor 
toilers at the loom, spinning the silken 
weft ! Sing on, sweet-voiced maiden ! 
Heaven grant thee a happy sojourn on 
earth, as well as in that fairer country- 
shadowed forth in the Sunday hymn. 




^ 



CHAPTER VI. 




WOMAN S MISSION IS MARRIAGE. 

N the part of Susan Harley there 
was more of expediency than love 
in her engagement with CoUin- 
son. Her regard for Silas was, 
however, more than respect or esteem. She 
was grateful to him, and she felt that it was 
time she was settled in life. Silas loved 
her. With his heart, there was a comfort- 
able home, a good income, and, perhaps, a 
large fortune. 

These latter considerations had influenced 
Susan. She was not a selfish, worldly 
woman, but her forbears had been well off, 
and she understood the practical value of 
a comfortable home. It was time she 

8.2 



^ 



1 1 6 Stranger than Fictio7i. 

should be settled in life. This woman's 
feeling had come upon her more than once 
before she ever saw Silas CoUinson ; it had 
come upon her with thoughts of Tom Titsy^ 
and gratitude for his kindness to her as a 
fellow-servant. She did not love Silas 
CoUinson, and she did not love Tom ; but 
she admired and respected Silas, and felt 
proud of his regard for her . proud of it, 
and grateful for it. Once upon a time she 
had wondered if ever Tom would be able 
to keep a wife. She knew he was fond of 
her, though he had never said so, and she 
liked his mother much, but she knew that 
poor Tom w^s a dull, stupid fellow, with 
all his kindness and honesty, and this feel- 
ing had been sufficient for her to dismiss 
him from her mind when Silas CoUinson, 
his superior a hundredfold in every respect, 
confessed his love and admiration for her. 

Woman's mission is marriage. Susan 
had engaged to enter the wedded state be- 
cause she had been asked to do so by a 
respectable, well-looking man, who loved 
her and could afford to keep her. Collin- 




Woman s Mission is Marriage. 117 

son might have looked higher too ; she 
knew that, and he knew it ; but he thought 
he had discovered in Susan all that he 
could wish for in a wife. He had no 
parents living, no one to control or influence 
his movements, no one to work for or to 
live for; he wanted a happy face by his 
fireside, and a companion in some of his 
out-door pleasures, and he proposed that 
Susan should be his wife. 

Now Silas had a shrewd commercial 
capacity. He had long since made up his 
mind to see America, not simply as a buyer 
of agricultural produce, but as a practical 
farmer. He had heard of some of the re- 
markable inventions which had been per- 
fected in the States for cultivating the soil ; 
he had seen examples of their work at the 
Royal Agricultural Society's Exhibitions ; 
and latterly he had opened up communica- 
tions with New York which seemed to pro- 
mise an important enterprise, more particu- 
larly in the purchase and sale of corn. He 
had therefore resolved to go to America 
and spend at least twelve months in the 



1 1 8 Stranger than Fiction. 

New World, and he hoped to make his 
journey a great source of profit. It was 
this resolution that stimulated the other 
concerning Susan. Before he left England 
it was most desirable, he thought, that 
Susan and himself should thoroughly under- 
stand each other, and they did. 

** I shall come back in twelve months, and 
then we will be married. We have only 
known each other three months, and if we 
make it a year s courtship we shall not be 
called hasty, and my American journey 
will have some effect, perhaps, on the way 
we shall live, and how we shall live, and 
where, for that matter, seeing that I may 
make a great thing out of the business or I 
may not'* 

It was very painful to Susan that she had 
not said good-bye to her lover. She had 
seen him and talked with him nearly every 
day for a fortnight before he left, but on 
that last night she had not kept her appoint- 
ment, and he had gone without a last part- 
ing word. She had mourned over this in 
secret for many days. It was Jacob Mar- 




Womatis Mission is Marriage. 119 

tyn's illness which brought her this trouble ; 
it was Jacob Martyn's illness which relieved 
it. The extra work of the house kept her 
constantly employed ; labour occupied her 
thoughts, and helped her to conquer stray 
doubts and fears concerning Silas Collin- 
son's sincerity. 

She was surprised, some three months 
after her lover's departure, to be summoned 
into the little room which Julius Jennings 
occupied as an office in the front part of 
Mr. Martyn's premises. 

'* Mester Jennings would like to have a 
word with you,'' said Tom Titsy. 

" Where is he ?" asked Susan. 

" In the office," said Tom ; " he would 
like you to go to the office to him." 

** Oh, indeed !" said Susan ; '' and what 
may it be about, Tom ?" 

" Don't know," said Tom, "but it was 
particular, he said." 

" Tell him I will come, Tom, please." 

Poor Tom ! he did her bidding with 
happy alacrity. Susan laid aside her work, 
wiped her hands upon her white apron, ad- 



1 20 Stranger than Fiction, 

justed the linen collar round her well- 
shaped neck, and went to the clerk's room. 

"Good morning, Miss Harley, how do 
you do ?'* said Jennings, rubbing his hands, 
and leering at Susan. 

" Good morning," said Susan, standing 
by the door. 

" Hope you are well, Susan," said Jen- 
nings. 

" Very well, thank you, Mr. Jennings," 
Susan replied ; "what is it you want to see 
me for ?" 

" I have a letter for you," said Jennings, 
" a letter from Mr. Collinson." 

Susan blushed, and put out her hand. 
She did not attempt to disguise the plea- 
sure which the information gave her. 

" Thank you ; give it me, Mr. Jennings," 
she said. 

Jennings placed a letter in her hand, and 
watched her cunningly as she looked at it. 

" Fine fellow, Mr. Collinson. He arrived 
a little later than he expected, but safe and 
sound, and in good spirits. Yes, that letter 
of yours was enclosed in one to Mr. Magar, 



"^ 



. . 



Woman s Mission is Marriage. 121 

who sent it down to me immediately. A 
considerate man, Mr. Magar, very con- 
siderate." 

Jennings was talking as if to cover his 
thoughts, or prevent Susan from asking 
questions. He need not have troubled 
himself Susan only said, " Thank you, 
Mr. Jennings, good morning," and hurried 
away with her let;ter. 

" Does not seem at all surprised at Col- 
linson sending the letter through Magar. 
That is good. I thought she would not. 
It is very good . very good indeed," said 
Jennings, apostrophising the door when it 
had closed upon Susan. 

" I wonder how people feel when they 
are sorry," he went on ; " is it like tooth- 
ache, or chilblains, or what ? Is it like 
being afraid, or having no money in your 
pocket ? I sometimes think I feel sorry, 
but I suppose it's a mistake. Must be a 
mistake ; let us scratch it out." 

Jennings took up a sharp penknife and 
began to obliterate a figure in one of Mr. 
Martyn's books as if that were the mistake 



122 Stranger than Fiction. 

alluded to. While he was thus engaged,. 
Susan Harley was sitting upon a box in 
her bedroom spelling out Silas CoUinson's 
letter. It was a difficult task for Susan. 
She had barely received sufficient educa- 
tion to enable her to master printing such 
as she found in Jacob's books of fairy tales 
in the days of Mrs. Martyn. Writing was 
a mystery to her, but not altogether beyond 
translation. Susan could write a little, and 
in due time she made out her lover s letter. 
It announced his arrival, and expressed his 
regret at not seeing her again before he 
left ; at the same time intimating that this 
was not his fault. He liked what little he 
had seen of the country, and would write 
to her again and tell her more about it. 
Whether he should come back or not he 
was uncertain, but this should be explained 
very soon. As he was writing to his friend 
Mr. Magar he sent her letter with his, and 
he thought this was best with regard to 
others, seeing that Magar would be his 
agent till he came home, and would 
transact his business. He advised Susan 




Woman's Mission is Marriage. 123 

..- ...... . ..-. - I. ... .. .^i^M^.l ^. I I . . ... IIMI 11 ..!. .^^.^l^^.^M^,^ . 

to see Mr. Magar when she wanted any 
advice, and sent her his love and best 
wishes for her happiness. She could write 
to him at the Post-office, New York, or 
send her letters through Mr. Magar. 

Susan hardly knew whether the letter 
gave her pleasure or not. There was 
something vague about it, something cold 
and formal. She did not like the letter so 
well as she thought she should. She de- 
rived great satisfaction from the fact of her 
lover s safe arrival, and she told him this in 
her reply . told him in her plain way ; and 
she wished Silas would send her letters 
straight through the post. Of course every- 
body who was his friend would be hers, but 
she would rather Mr. Magar was anybody's 
friend but his. She told Silas not to work 
and run risks on her account, and she 
finished the letter with some commonplace 
gossip about Middleton and good news of 
Jacob Martyn s progress towards restored 
health. 

Julius Jennings gave Susan every infor- 
mation with regard to the postage to Ame 



1 24 Stranger than Fiction, 

rica, and offered to post the letter for her ; 
but Susan preferred to drop it into the 
letter-box herself, and did so. 

A few weeks afterwards there came 
another letter, written in a more loving 
spirit, and suggesting that Susan should 
come out to America if she still cared for 
the writer. Silas informed her that he had 
quite made up his mind not to return. He 
found that the business he had entered 
upon demanded constant attention, and in 
a monetary sense that he had, as he might 
say, hit upon a good mine. He had in- 
structed his friend Magar to dispose of his 
property in England and supply her with 
whatever money she might require to come 
over. Some folk might think it strange 
for her to go over, but she knew him as an 
honest man and pledged to her, and she 
should not be a day on shore without being 
his wife. 

Susan was unhappy concerning these 
letters. She did not at all know what to 
make of them. They were not the letters 
she had expected to receive. But Mrs. 




Woman's Mission is Marriage. 125 

Titsy, whom she consulted about thein^ 
said they were straightforward, manly let- 
ters, and all that a young woman could 
desire. 

They were discussing the subject when 
the miller called at the Titsys. He had 
thriven immensely of late, and Mrs. Titsy 
considered it an honour to receive him in 
her cottage. 

** Ah, I am glad to see you two folks 
together," he said, " very glad, because I 
have a few words to say which I should 
like you both to hear. My friend CoUinson 
wants his intended wife to go out to Ame- 
rica to be married." 

" Yes, indeed, so she was just telling 
me," said Mrs. Titsy ; " and will you sit 
down, sir ? though this is but a poor house 
to yours." 

" Poor, but honest ; that's the time of 
day, Mrs. Titsy. I am one of the people, 
and go in for what is straight. Hollo ! 
Confound, beggar that dog, he's biting my 
leg." 

" Down, Caesar, down ; how dare you !" ^ 



126 Stranger than Fiction. 

screamed Mrs. Titsy, striking the offending 
animal with a broom just as Magar kicked 
him with his heavy boot 

'' A beast, that dog," said Magar. " I 
always hated him ; he's a foreign brute, I 
know, a mongrel dam brute. Mrs. Titsy, 
I shall be the death of that dog if you 
.don't keep him tied up." 

Mrs. Titsy apologised, was very sorry, 
and begged Mr. Magar to look over the 
dog's ill behaviour, which with a very bad 
grace he consented to do by-and-by. 

" Now there's no man in this town who 
has more respect for Miss Harley than me ; 
I've often had thoughts of making up to 
her myself, and trying to cut Silas out" 

" Indeed," said Susan, scornfully ; " and 
is that what you have come here to say ?' 

"No, Miss, it isn't; no, Susan, no; I'm 
a plain, straightforward man. I've come 
to ask what it is your pleasure to do, as I 
am a sort of trustee for Mr. CoUinson, and 
he has placed money in my hands for you. 
And here's a letter which I only got this 
morning, and he tells me that inside it he 




Woman! s Mission is Marriage. 127 

lias told you what his wishes are. I am 
to give you one hundred pounds." 

" Generous man ; I always liked him," 
said Mrs. Titsy. 

Susan only listened. 

" Now, as a plain, straightforward man, 
I should say take the money by all means, 
but don't go out, not at present at all 
events. If a man has not enough liking 
for a woman to come over that drop of 
water and marry her in her own country, 
why I say he don't deserve her at 
all. You have my opinion, and I have 
told Silas the same. But it's not for me 
to decide in such a business. Whatever 
Susan wishes I am ready to carry out, but 
I should say don't go, and I say it in pre- 
sence of a sensible woman as can advise 
another sensible woman; and that's all 
I've got to say. Ladies, I wish you good 
morning." 

Taking up his hat, Mr. Ephraim Magar 
made an awkward bow to the two women 
and bowed himself to the door, and then 
out into the street They caught sight of 



128 Stranger than Fiction, 



his flat sinister face as he passed the win- 
dow. 

" A rough but good man," said Mrs. 
Titsy, " I am sure." 

" A rough and bad man," said Susan, " if 
ever I saw one. As for his advice, you 
may depend on it I shall be sure to do 
quite the contrary to whatever that may 
be." 

And it came to pass that Susan acted 
upon this avowal. She resolved upon going 
out to Silas. It was no use for anyone to 
argue with her, she said; her mind was 
made up, and she would go. 






CHAPTER VIL 

ILLUSTRATES THE OLD PROVERB ABOUT A 

FRIEND IN NEED. 

RS. GOMPSON had expressed 
herself very warmly on the im- 
propriety of Susan's conduct in 
leaving England prior to her 
marriage, intimating that there was no 
knowing whether she might not be basely 
deceived when she arrived in New York. 

r 

Men were a perfidious lot, as far as Mrs. 
Gompson's experience went, and she ad- 
vised Susan to go out a wife or not to go 
at all. But Susan had placed her trust 
in CoUinson. She gave him full credit 
for being as honest and true as herself. 

VOL. u 9 



1 30 Stranger than Fiction. 

It would have looked better, no doubt,, 
in the eyes of the world, had Silas re- 
turned, married Susan, and taken her 
to his new home in America; but if 
Silas and Susan, two good, honest, faith- 
ful, and well-known respectable people, 
chose to arrange that the marriage should 
be solemnised on the other side of the 
Atlantic, there was nothing in Susan's con- 
duct upon which she need fear criticism ;. 
so Susan was determined to go. Mrs. 
Gompson shook her false curls, and said 
of course Susan might please herself;, 
and several gossips in the neighbour- 
hood, including a few confirmed spin- 
sters, pitied the poor girl most assidu- 
ously. 

Some weeks after the sale of CoUinson's 
property, Susan received a note from Mr. 
Magar, requesting her to meet him in the 
afternoon of the following day at his house, 
to receive the money which Silas had 
directed him to pay to her out of the pro- 
ceeds of the sale of Mr. CoUinson s effects. 
Susan went accordingly. 




A Friend in Need. 131 

Magar's was an imposing-looking house, 
worthy of a newly-made Town Councillor, 
who had been returned for the central 
ward at the head of the poll, and one who 
had it in contemplation to retire from busi- 
ness arid put himself in nomination for the 
Mayoralty; for Magarhad prospered greatly 
of late, and was becoming much more cir- 
cumspect in his manners, and making, it 
was observable to everybody, visible efforts 
to correct his mode of speech, and " talk 
fine," as the Middletonians characterised 
all language free from their own extraordi- 
nary dialect. Although Susan knew that 
before long, as Collinson's wife, she would 
be mistress of as fine a house as Magar's, 
she knocked with considerable diffidence 
lat the well-polished door, and felt nervous 
when it was opened in the presence of an 
oaken hall table, with an immense stag's 
head and antlers upon it ; a hat-stand with 
pegs made of polished horns ; a rail 
covered with rugs and coats, and hung with 
whips; the head of a huge ox over the 
staircase ; and an open door exhibiting the 

9.2 



132 Stranger than Fiction. 

imposing length of a drawing-room, blazing 
with a red and green carpet. 

Susan was shown upstairs into a small 
room which Magar called his snuggery. 
When she found herself in the miller's 
presence, she could not disguise her sur- 
prise at the change in his appearance. He 
had been judiciously dressed by a tailor of 
much higher culture than the artist who 
had hitherto worked for him. He sat 
at a desk writing, and looked quite magis- 
terial 

" Good morning, Miss Harley," he said 
in his best manner. " I hope I see you 
well." 

Susan said she was very well. 

*' Sit down, pray ; let me get you a chair ; 
you don't seem well." 

Susan again said she was very well, but 
it was with a fixed and peculiar look at 
Magar. 

" You seem surprised, my girl," said 
the miller, coming down a little from the 
great height which he had previously occu- 
pied. 



A Friend in Need. 133 

" Yes, I am," said Susan. 

'*You think Tm changed," Magar re- 
sponded. ** Maybe I am a little. We all 
change with circumstances, but you will 
find me the same man, Susan . plain, 
straightforward, and to the point as 
ever." 

Magar leaned back in his chair, and 
made a palpable effort to look his best 
He smiled at Susan, and hoped she would 
make herself at home. 

" I don't understand you at all," said 
Susan ; " I came here on business, and 
so far as that is concerned, I shall cer- 
tainly try to make myself at home," said 
Susan. 

" That's right, that's right, Susan," Magar 
replied, going to an adjacent cupboard and 
putting a decanter of wine upon the 
table. ** You will take just one glass of 
wine, eh ?" 

" No, thank you," said Susan ; '* I never 
drink wine." 

** Then it is time you made a beginning. 
Come, let me give you one glass/* 



134 Stranger than Fiction. 

Even Susan could not help noticing the 
peculiarity of Magar's efforts to shake off 
the Middleton dialect with the Middleton 
tailor's clothes. The moment he forgot to 
play his part as a leading burgess matricu- 
lating for the position of chief magistrate, 
he fell back into his old manner of speech. 
His thees and thous and wenches and 
lasses came back the moment his earnest- 
ness and passion returned. 

" You won't drink a glass ? Very- 
well ; then let us come to business. You 
have made up your mind to go to 
America ?" 

" Yes," said Susan. 

" Then I wish thou would take me," 
Magar replied, again trying the effect of the 
fascinating leer with which he had greeted 
her when she first entered the room. 

" I think you have some particular mes- 
sage for me from Silas," said Susan, dis- 
regarding his remark and the look which 
had accompanied it. 

" Ah, he's a happy man ; he don't de- 
serve thee, lass . not he." 




A Friend in Need. 135 

Magar came close to Susan as he said 
this, and put so much tender expression 
into his face that under other circumstances 
Susan would have laughed at him, and 
flapped it. But now she was afraid of him. 
She had been afraid from the first moment 
when she entered the room, as if some 
vague sense of danger had taken posses- 
sion of her. 

" Now look here, Susan ; I want to talk 
to you seriously. Come here, my girl," 
said Magar, coaxingly ; " I am a straight- 
forward man, and- '^ 

" You are a fool, and something worse V 
said Susan, pushing him aside just as he 
had put his arm familiarly upon her 
shoulder. 

"Holloa! hoity-toity! it's no good 
making for the door ; it is shut, and it 
is locked. Now come, let us be friends 
r and talk like friends." 

Magar locked the door and stood with 
his back against it. 

" What do you mean ?" said Susan, with 
a fierce light in her eye. 



136 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Nothing but what's straight and honest ; 
I mean to be friends with Susan Har- 
ley/' 

" Well, and so you shall be friends," said 
Susan, trying another mode of treatment; 
** we are friends ; but please to unlock that 
door r' 

" Will you shake hands with me ?" 

" Yes, if you will unlock the door and 
open it." 

Magar opened the door and offered his 
hand. Susan kept her word. 

** That's right ; now look here, let us 
talk sensibly ; you will be going to America. 
Don't go if you be wise, unless you go with 
me. There, don't scowl at me, I am in 
earnest ; that man cares nothing for thee, 
and I do !" 

" I will hear no more of this," said Susan, 
rushing towards the door. 

Magar barred the way. 

" It's no good making a row. There's 
nobody in the house. I sent the girl out 
into the next street when you came in. 
If you scream and make a fuss, there 



.% 



A Friend in Need. 137 



will only be a jolly talk in the town, and 
they'll nfiake a mountain out of nothing . 
trust Mother Gompson for that ; I mean 
you to hear what I have to say." 

" I will not hear you," said Susan, putting 
her hands to her ears. 

" Yes you .will, my love," said Magar, 
seizing her right wrist, and bringing back 
the old hideous look into his face, with the 
old hideous intention of being fascinating. 
" Listen ! Silas CoUinson is a beggar, a 
fool, a nobody. I could make him a bank- 
rupt to-morrow ; he's in my power ; he's 
neither been true to me nor to thee ; I 
could crush him, and when you see him 
thou'lt ask me to do it." 

This change of Magar's tactics had its 
desired effect, but from an entirely different 
motive than that which the miller thought 
to excite. Susan listened. H There was 
something so terrible in Magar's manner, 
something so fiendish, that she felt it her 
duty to listen, felt it the duty of Silas Col- 
linson's future wife to hear his traducer 
that she might thwart^his malice, that she 



A 



138 Stranger than Fiction, 

might warn Silas and put him on his 
guard. 

" There, be calm, and I will listen,*' said 
Susan. 

" Of course you will," said Magar ; " but 
that it shall not be said I did not give thee 
thy rights before I warned thee, here is 
one hundred pounds ; give me a 'receipt 
for it." 

Magar drew from a drawer in his desk ten 
crisp Bank of England notes, and laid them 
before Susan. 

" Tell me, sir, if you please," said Susan, 
once more trying to smother her fears and 
speak in a friendly way, ** tell me what you 
mean by speaking against Silas as you have 
done." 

" Give me a receipt for this money," 
Magar replied. 

Susan wrote as well as she could in large 
cramped letters, with a tremble in them, 
"Received of Mr. Magar ;^ioo. . Susan 
Harley." 

" This is what I mean, Susan : I am a 
plain man, and straightforward's my motto. 




A Friend in Need. 139 

Fve had my eye on you this longtime, and 
if I had been in CoUinson s place I'd have 
come from the other end of the world to 
marry thee. Don't start like that ; I'm a 
better man than Silas, and if you'll change 
your mind about him I'll marry thee to- 
morrow. Come, now, what do you say to 
that ? . and if you want to go abroad, why 
I will go ; I don't mind ; I've got money 
enough, and it don't matter where I live. 
Now, what do you say . a bird in the hand, 
you know ? Here I am, a straightforward 
man, with plenty of money. Over the sea 
yonder is a beggar, a poor devil who 
wouldn't, if he could, come over and fetch 
thee. Now, then, here you are, which will 
you have ? Say me, and seal it with a kiss, 
and the job's done." 

It was a bitter struggle for Susan to re- 
main and listen to Magar's vile proposi- 
tions, but she seemed to have little choice 
in the matter. If she attempted to leave 
the room Magar prevented her, and she 
dreaded the scandal that might follow an 
alarm and a rescue. Moreover, her woman's 



140 Stranger than Fiction, 

wit told her that calmness and judgment 
might place Magar's cards in her own 
hands, and enable CoUinson to see his. 
dreadful game, whatever it might be^ 
Therefore, with a brave heart she listened. 

During this interview between Susan 
and Silas Collinson's agent, Dr. Horatio 
Johnson, on a mission of mercy, obtaining 
signatures to a memorial in favour of a 
wretched prisoner, who had been unfairly^ 
convicted of a robbery . knocked at Mn 
Magar's door. A pert domestic replied, 
and informed the Doctor that Mr. Magar 
was not to be disturbed. He was engaged 
with Susan Harley. 

The Doctor said he would wait, as he 
wanted to see Miss Harley as well as the 
master. The pert domestic said he might 
please himself, and he pleased himself by 
sitting on the edge of a chair close to the 
dining-room door. He was not an inqui- 
sitive man, but he hated Magar, and had 
the warmest regard for Susan. Hearing 
voices in a louder key than that which 
generally betokens friendly conversation,. 




A Friend in Need. 141 

lie stepped into the hall and listened. 
Simply influenced by kindly feeling for 
Susan, he listened very attentively. He 
thought Susan was appealing to Magar. 
There was fear in her voice. He crept 
up two stairs. Susan was angry. " I defy 
you," she said. Horatio crept up three 
stairs. Then Magar spoke quietly, and 
Susan responded calmly, but still in fear. 
Horatio, in three long strides, stood out- 
side the door of Mr. Magar s '* snuggery." 

" You'll think of it, then, to-night," said 
Magar. 

" I will," said Susan, " pray let me go 



now." 



There were sounds of a short sharp 
scuffle. 

Horatio turned up the coat-cuff of his 
right arm. 

** Just one kiss to seal it,"' gasped Magar, 
evidently struggling with his victim. 

Horatio buttoned his coat. 

" Help, help !" cried Susan. 

The next moment Magar measured his 
length upon the floor, and Susan was in 



A 



142 Stranger than Fiction. 

the arms of Horatio Johnson . a friend 
indeed. 

Horatio had not heard all that was said, 
but, in his opinion, the scream of a woman, 
and that woman Susan Harley, neutralised 
all the rights and privileges set up in the 
proverb which declares that an English- 
man's house is his castle. No man had a 
right to be a Blue Beard, if he had a castle, 
thought Horatio, which said thought passed 
through his capacious mind in a moment^ 
and acting upon this view of citizenship he 
played the part of woman's champion with 
that wonderful energy which had carried 
locks, bolts, and bars before it, culminating 
in the overthrow of Blue Beard upon Blue 
Beard's own hearth-rug. 

The fallen one seeming in no hurry to 
rise again, and his pert domestic being en- 
gaged at the end of the street in conversa- 
tion with the baker's boy, the Doctor walked 
off with Susan, who, on the way home, gave 
him an outline of what had occurred, care- 
fully omitting, however, to mention any- 
thing about CoUinson being in Magars 




A Friend in Need 143 

. . * . - I 

power, fearing that such an exposure would 
strengthen the persuasion already used to 
prevent her leaving England. Johnson 
had overheard the mention of CoUinson's 
name, but could not understand how or 
why it was used. Susan was not long in 
discovering this, to her great satisfaction ; 
for now she was more than ever bent upon 
going to Silas. The thought of CoUinson 
poor, Collinson a beggar, GoUinson in the 
power of Magar, excited sensations which 
she had not previously felt. Her highest 
nature was touched. She experienced 
something of that sympathetic yearning 
which carries woman into the midst of 
disease and death, a ministering angel. 
With this feeling was coupled a deep grati- 
tude that almost warmed into love. Silas 
Collinson in prosperity had sought her 
who was in a much humbler sphere of life 
than himself. He had loved her for herself 
alone . she knew he loved her; and now that 
some unforeseen misfortune had brought 
him down in the world she longed to prove 
herself worthy of his love and confidence* 



J 



144 Stranger than Fiction. 

It was autumn again, and the wind was 
driving before it the smoke of the factory 
chimneys, driving it down the narrow streets 
and through the narrow courts, and dis- 
persing it in the Middleton meadows. It 
shook Mrs. Titsy's window-shutters as it 
passed, and set Horatio Johnson thinking 
of the last time Silas CoUinson had called 
there in search of Susan. Silas ColHnson's 
intended wife was spending the evening 
with her friend Mrs. Titsy, and talking 
over the arrangements for her journey to 
New York. Tom Titsy was toasting his 
feet by the fire and listening to the domestic 
eloquence of his mother and the advice 
which Horatio Johnson was giving to 
Susan. The Doctor was particularly ear- 
nest in what he said, and was only tempted 
once to introduce the favourite Latin motto, 
and then he stuck half-way. Susan was 
thoughtful and sad, as well she might be 
with the wind sighing so mournfully at the 
window, and the great sea rolling between 
her and the man whom she was beginning 
to love in real earnest 




A Friend in Need. 145 

Caesar went to the door while they were 
talking, and came back again, lying at the 
feet of Susan and looking steadfastly at his 
master as if influenced by some instinctive 
sympathy for both of them. 

Tom thought the dog was fidgety and 
strange, and he went to the front door him- 
self just in time to see a crouching figure 
steal away from the window. 

" Caesar ! here, lad ; hie up, man . ^pin 
him!" said Tom, following up the brief 
command that had brought the dog into 
the street. 

In a moment Caesar was barking and 
jumping round the figure, which had re- 
treated from the window, and which 
was now returning, cursing the dog 
fiercely. 

" Call your dog away, Tom Titsy ; call 
the brute away, or FU brain him !" ex- 
claimed the man, hoarse with passion. 

Tom had followed his dog a few yards 
along the street. 

" Oh, it's you, M ester Magar, is it } I 
thought as somebody was listening at the 

VOL. I. 10 



146 Stranger than Fiction. 

shutters/' said Tom. " Here, come in, 
Caesar ; come in, lad ; down, dost hear ? 
Down, dog." 

" Listening be hanged," said Magar. 
'' What should I listen for ?" 

" ril be hanged if I know," said Tom, 
** dost thou, Caesar, eh, dog ? good dog ; 
come then, come along ; he'll brain thee, he 
says." 

The dog le;iaped up at Tom, and they 
both returned to the cottage, leaving Magar 
cursing and slinking away in a contrary 
direction. 

" Magar, eh ?" said the Doctor ; " that's 
odd, nay, it's more than odd ; ha ! what's 
in the wind, I wonder ? We'll make a 
note of this, Tom : just a little mem. as 
they say." 

Going to the calendar which had re- 
placed the one of the previous year, the 
Doctor took out his pencil to mark the 
date. He started for a moment at the 
coincidence which presented itself with 
peculiar force to his mind. Once again it 
was the Fifteenth of November ! 




A Friend in Need. 



147 



" Tom," said the Doctor, ' solemnly, 
** when you see Susan home to-night don't 
go half-way ; see her into Mr. Martyn's 
house." 





CHAPTER VIII. 



A FACTORY VISIOlJ OF BEAUTY. 




NCE fairly released from the sick- 
room, Jacob rapidly recovered 
his strength. He grew out of 
his clothes and out of the Gomp- 
son power. Mrs. Gompson declared he 
was too much for her. 

One day, when her nephew had been 
particularly obstinate in opposing some 
new piece of tyranny, Mrs. Gompson sug- 
gested to Mr. Martyn the desirability of 
sending Jacob to a boarding-school. Day 
schools, she argued, were a mistake ; boys 
made companions all over the town, and 
were spoiled in temper and disposition by 
mixing with their inferiors ; while, in living 




A Factory Vision of Beauty. 149 

with a master, there was a guarantee that 
their morals were looked after, and that 
they were only permitted to associate with 
their equals. Whether these reasons car- 
ried any weight with Mr. Martyn, or not, 
we arQ not prepared to say. We hope he 
took a broader view of Jacob's educational 
requirements, though he agreed with his 
sister that Jacob ought to be placed under 
a good master at some distance from Mid- 
<lleton. 

Singularly enough, when Mr. Martyn 
opened his letters, on an eventful morning 
some few weeks after this conversation 
about Jacob's education, he found that his 
earliest communication for the next Mid- 
dleton Star was an advertisement in which 
the master of the public school at Cartown 
intimated to parents and guardians that he 
had a vacancy for two or three young gen- 
tlemen, as in-door pupils, on moderate 
terms . the house being pleasantly situated, 
and references kindly permitted to the 
vicar of the parish. This bait caught its 
first fish before it had been fairly dropped 



1 50 Stranger than Fiction, 

into the advertising sea of a newspaper. 
After communicating with the vicar of 
the parish of Cartown, Mr. Martyn de- 
termined that his son should be one of 
the two or three young gentlemen for 
whom Mr. Gregory Spawling had va- 
cancies. 

Accordingly, in due time, the mail-cart 
was ordered to call for Jacob, and the 
night before the morning fixed for starting, 
the ostler from the inn left word that the 
Cartown mail would leave Middleton as 
early as seven o'clock. 

Jacob did not dislike the idea of leaving 
home, especially as everybody was so kind 
to him on the occasion ; his father giving 
him more pocket-money than he had ever 
before possessed; Susan packing no end 
of curious things among his clothes ; Tom 
sending him, wrapped up in brown paper, 
a bran new pocket-knife; Mrs. Gompson 
presenting him with a comb and brush ; 
Dr. Johnson sending him a cricket bat ; 
and Mrs. Titsy adding to his treasures a 
book of fairy tales, which she had been 



A Factory Vision of Beauty. 151 

advised by the Doctor to purchase, instead 
of a very severe work on " The Death- 
beds of Good and Bad Boys," which she 
had originally selected as ** a keepsake for 
Sunday reading." 

AH this was very gratifying to Jacob, and 
excited him into a flutter of good spirits 
that gave him little sleep at night, and 
made him wake very early the next morn- 
ing. Indeed he was up almost as soon as 
the birds ; but he felt a little sad when he 
went into the garden to bid everything 
there good-bye. The sun had only just 
risen. The factory had not begun to make 
its accustomed noise, though the engine 
could be heard hissing in a subdued tone, 
while a thin column of smoke went lazily 
up from the tall chimney. Jacob wished 
he could hear the sweet voice which had 
soothed and charmed him on many a 
sunny day when he was out among the 
apple-trees. Then he thought how much 
he should like to see her to whom the 
voice belonged. \\^ wondered why he 
had never thought of this until now when 



A 



152 Stranger than Ftction. 

he was about to leave the place, perhaps 
for ever. 

While a tide of ideas was flowing in this 
direction, Jacob happened to look up to- 
wards the windows whence the sweet 
sounds had so often come, and there, lo 
and behold ! he saw a face looking out of 
one of the factory windows, just filling up 
the opening which had been made out of a 
couple of panes . and, oh, what a sweet face 
it was ! round and rosy, fair and blue- 
eyed, and surrounded by golden hair finer 
than the wealth of yellow silk from China 
arid Japan that went into the factory in bun- 
dles of gossamer-like threads, and came out 
in great breadths of yarn that were sent all 
over the world to adorn ladies of all degrees. 
At first Jacob thought the face must belong 
to an angel, or to a fairy who was going to 
give him three wishes. He had almost de- 
cided to ask as his first wish that his mother 
should be brought to life again, and for the 
second that the fairy should come and live 
with them, when the face disappeared ; but 
the dear familiar voice carolled forth one of 



.^ 



A Factory Vision of Beauty. 153 



the old songs so sweetly that a thrush, which 
had been singing in the apple-trees, stopped 
to listen as eagerly as Jacob . at least Jacob 
thought so ; but allowance must be made 
for a romantic youth just setting out into 
the world. 

'* There is a happy land 
Far, far away," 

was the burden of the song, and had the 
singer only known what a happy land she 
might have made of Middleton, and every 
other place, to Jacob Martyn, that morning, 
by putting her face through the little win- 
dow once more, and saying " Good-bye, 
Jacob," she would certainly have done so ; 
because her face was a sure index to the 
kindness of her heart. 

Before the song was over, Susan came to 
hurry Jacob on his journey. 

" You don't want to go, eh ?" 

** I don't know," said Jacob. 

" We are bound to do a great many 
things in this world which we don't like ; 
but the same Power that taught yon 



Jdl 



154 Stranger than Fiction, 

swallow to come thousands of miles to 
build its nest under that window is guiding 
us." 

" How serious we are ! You are be- 
coming almost as bad as Mr. Jennings with 
his sermons." 

" I hope not, my love," said Susan. " Do 
you know, Jacob," she continued, " there is 
something about Mr. Jennings that I very 
much dislike ? He is not what he pretends 
to be. Never say I said so, Jacob ; but 
remember it . remember it, Jacob." 

" Susan, you look ill, and you are crying !" 
exclaimed Jacob. " What is the matter ? 
Don't fret about me; I shall soon come 
back." 

" But I shall be gone then, love ; and 
years, many years, may^go over before we 
meet again." 

" All the better, Susan. I shall be a man 
when you come back, and then you know I 
can visit you at your house, and you can 
come to see me at mine. Don't be down- 
hearted, Susan. Let us say good-bye here, 
and promise never to forget each other.*' 




A Factory Vision of Beauty, 155 

Jacob took both her hands, and she 
kissed him, just as aunt Keziah appeared 
upon the scene. 

" Come, come, Susan, let the boy have 
his breakfast ; you treat him as if he were 
a baby. Jacob, I say, be quick !" 

Mrs. Gompson seized Jacob's hand, 
which Jacob resented by immediately re- 
leasing himself, and looking at his aunt 
defiantly. 

" Well, well, sir ; we will have no noise 
now : it is time there was a parting here,'" 
said Mrs. Gompsofi, walking on alone ; 
" the ingratitude of some people begins in 
the cradle." 

" There are differences of opinion, Mrs. 
Gompson, as to what folk ought to be 
grateful for," said Susan. 

" And the impudence of some people is 
not lessened by their fine airs," continued 
Mrs. Gompson ; and thus this trio entered 
Mr. Martyn's house ; soon after which 
Jacob Martyn had said good-bye to the 
whole household. 

The conveyance in which Jacob made 



156 Stranger than Fiction. 

his first journey into the outer world of 
Middleton was one that has now disap- 
peared from English highways. It was a 
comfortable well-to-do sort of cart, capable 
of carrying four passengers, in addition to 
the driver. It was dignified by the title of 
" The Royal Mail," which designation it 
claimed by reason of its being the postal 
conveyance between Middleton and Car- 
town. 

The driver of the mail was a bluff hearty 
countryman, who had been a rural postman 
before the railway was introduced into Mid- 
dleton. Driver and cart have now been 
superseded; the former by a sharp, '^horsey ' 
looking fellow, aQd the cart by a red, sugar- 
loaf shaped, high-wheeled chariot, con- 
structed to carry the driver and the letter- 
bags. 

When Jacob Martyn was a boy the rail- 
way was in its infancy, as they say steam is 
still, and there were several coaches pass- 
ing daily through Middleton, collecting 
crowds at the chief inn, to see the foaming 
steeds changed, and to hear the guards 




A Factory Vision of Beauty. 157 

crack their jokes, and to see the drivers 
crack their whips. To race with the 
coaches was the daily delight of Will Tun- 
ster. On the morning when Jacob left 
Middleton the mail-cart soon distanced the 
coach ; for Will had an unusually light load 
of letters and parcels, and Jacob Martyn 
was his only passenger. 

On their route they delivered letter-bags 
at Crossley, a mining village which every 
year sent up to London thousands of tons 
of coals. Never having been far beyond 
the precincts of Middleton, Jacob took 
careful note of all he saw, and especially at 
Crossley, which was one of the most 
notable sights in the wonderful panorama 
that seemed to be flying past him. There 
were long rows of newly-built cottages, 
with water-tubs in front and pig-stys be- 
hind ; red burly Dissenting chapels ; beer- 
houses and inns ; little shop-windows filled 
with tempting displays of sugar and flies, 
tape, nutmegs, clogs, currants, mouse-traps, 
gingerbread, mops, buckets, Spanish juice, 
shot-bags . ^the latter adorned with an illus- 



158 Stranger than Fiction. 



tration in which the chief figure was a man 
firing a gun, at the discharge of which in- 
numerable birds were falling to a brace of 
barking dogs. At intervals, high chimneys 
towered above the little mining town, cast- 
ing long shadows on the house-tops, and 
darkening the sky with rolling clouds of 
smoke. On one side of the village the 
blackened fields looked like gigantic cordage 
manufactories. The coal-pits were sur- 
mounted by long three-legged erections, 
supporting a net-work of ropes which ran 
along iron rollers with an incessant rattle. 
Mountains of coal were piled along the 
road side. Troops of grimy miners, 
who had been working through the night, 
wended their way to their respective homes 
in the houses with the pig-stys and water- 
tubs, in front of which noisy children 
quarrelled over marbles, to the annoyance 
of boisterous mothers, who fought the 
battles of their respective offspring in lan- 
guage more noticeable for its energy than 
for its refinement. 

" I must waken them up yonder/' said 




A Factory Vision of Beauty. 159 

Will, as they left Crossley and approached 
a turning in the road ; whereupon he com- 
menced an ambitious performance on an 
old keyed bugle, vigorously blowing out 
the melody of "Rory O'More,'' with 
snatches of which he announced his ap- 
proach at the various villages or inns for 
which he had parcels. Gradually "Rory 
O'More,'' was transformed into " Tom 
Moody,'' over which the performer grew 
red in the face. 

Then Crossley disappeared, and the 
change in the scenery, as Will Tunster's 
horse turned up a by-lane, was as striking, 
when compared with Crossley, as the diffe- 
rence between Bagdad and the enchanted 
regions which surrounded that famous city 
of romance. In place of coal-pits and pit- 
men's hovels, there were now tall hedge- 
rows and trees, and rich pastures. On one 
side of the road there was a rude stone 
foot-path, fringed by a stream of clear 
water, which irrigated a numberless variety 
of cresses ; and on the other a long verdant 
streak of grass stretched into the distance, 



1 60 Stranger than Fiction. 

where a small house lay half concealed by a 
wood. 

" Oh, how pretty !" said Jacob involun- 
tarily, as this bit of rural fairy land opened 
up before him. 

" Ah, it's a noice tune enough ; IVe 
blown it for years," said Will Tunster, 
taking Jacob's remark as a compliment to 
the echo passages in " Tom Moody." 
" We've gotten to stop here to take up Miss 
Dorothy Cantrill, your schoolmester's house- 
keeper, and somebody else's housekeeper 
that is to be when the toime comes," con- 
tinued Will as he pulled up opposite the 
house amongst the trees. 

The door was opened as the mail stopped. 
An elderly woman handed out a bonnet- 
box, and a man brought forth a portman- 
teau covered with a very rich drawing-room 
paper. Next came a shawl, an umbrella, 
another little box, and a bunch of flowers ; 
and then the passenger herself, a comely- 
looking woman of about thirty, with whom 
Will Tunster shook hands, and whom Will 
Tunster carefully assisted into the cart. 




A Factory Vision of Beauty. i6i 

" Here's the young gentleman who is to 
have the honour of living wi' you, Dorothy/' 
said Will Tunster, directing her attention to 
Jacob. 

"How do you do, sir?" said Dorothy, 
settling herself into a seat, her face beaming 
with good nature. " I hope Mr. Tunster 
has been kind to you." 

** Thank you," said Jacob ; " yes, he has 
been very kind." 

" IVe played him * Tom Moody' with 
variations, and told him all about the pits 
and foire damp, and. colliery accidents, 
haven't I, Mester Jacob ?" said Will, touch- 
ing up his mare as he spoke. 

" Yes, sir," said Jacob. 

Dorothy waved her handkerchief to her 
father and mother. Will flourished his whip 
and played very loudly the echo passages 
in " Tom Moody," Jacob waved his cap 
to the old people, the mail-cart turned 
another bend in the road, and then the 
schoolmaster's ' housekeeper began asking 
Will a variety of questions concerning the 
news of M iddleton and Crossley. Will told 

VOL. I. II 



1 62 Stranger than Fiction. 

her how he had been to the parson's at the 
latter town, to hear a lecture on fire damp, 
a recent explosion at one of the pits there 
having destroyed a hundred men and boys. 

" Dear me," said Dorothy, " you talk 
like a book." 

" You'd rather I should talk like a letter : 
Miss Dorothy Cantrill, care of Mr. Gregory 
Spawling, Cartown, Midlandshire, England, 
and if not there, at Mr. CantrilPs, near 
Crossley, post paid," said Will, holding his 
whip and ribbons in one hand, and gazing 
intently into the other, as if he were actu- 
ally reading the superscription of a letter. 
On pronouncing the last word, he cast a sly 
glance at Dorothy, who, instead of making 
any reply, put the corner of her apron to 
each eye in succession, and complained of 
the dusty road. This little subterfuge, how- 
ever, was without avail, for Jacob saw that 
she was crying. 

Will coughed violently and thrashed his 
horse, but finding that this did not repair 
the mischief, he turned sharply round upon 
Dorothy, and begged her pardon " a thou- 




A Factory Vision of Beauty. 163 

sand times over '' . assuring her that he did 
not mean to hurt her feelings. 

Why Miss Cantrill should have cried at 
all Jacob could not understand, but he was 
quite convinced that Mr. Tunster had been 
guilty of some gross act of unkindness, 
and until^ the mail-driver had begged 
Dorothy s pardon a thousand times, Will, 
despite his musical powers, had very much 
deteriorated in Jacob's good opinion. 

The storm at an end, Mr. Tunster 
commenced to blow his horn with un- 
wonted vigour (but whether the tune was 
" Rory O'More," " Tom Moody,'' or both, 
or neither, not Will nor any other acconv 
plished musician could have decided), and 
the little* party entered Cartown. 

** Yonder is the church/' said Dorothy, 
pointing to a brown, time-worn tower 
among a clump of trees ; " and that's the 
* Blue Posts,' " pointing to an inn, with 
two posts painted blue, a water-trough, a 
bucket, and two men refreshing themselves 
and their horses ; " and this is the market- 
place," she continued, as they entered an 

II . 2 



1 64 Stranger than Fiction. 

irregular square of irregular houses and 
shops, with a few people loitering about 
on an irregular pavement, and several per- 
sons looking from their windows and 
several tradesmen gazing from their doors, 
at a carriage and pair, which had halted 
before the chemist's shop. 

" And here's the post-office," said Will,, 
as he pulled up opposite a private house 
with a window half blackened, and a slit in 
one of the panes for letters, a green curtain 
above, and an " Important Notice " with a 
coat of arms fitted into one of the square 
panes at the side. A black square beneath 
this was opened, and Will, thrusting in a 
leather bag covered about the neck with 
worn-out wax seals, said it was " nice 
weather ;" and on the mail started again, the 
driver occasionally dropping a parcel into 
the hands of people who were standing at 
their shop doors, in anticipation of packages 
inscribed with their names and addresses. 

Miss Cantrill, who was quite at home 
with Jacob already, and was almost as kind 
to him as Susan herself, said: Dear me^ 




A Factory Vision of Beauty. 165 

. 

the streets seemed quite natural again since 
she had seen them, which was a fortnight 
<:ome Monday . such a holiday as she 
had not had for some time. She told 
Jacob a great deal about the town, and said 
she was sure he would like Mr. Spawling. 
Will Tunster expressed a similar opinion, 
and guessed that Jacob would like Mr. 
Spawling's housekeeper too. Jacob frankly 
admitted that he liked her already, an 
admission which pleased Dorothy amaz- 
ingly, and an admission which Susan Har- 
ley might not have liked so well, much as 
she desired Jacob's happiness ; for there is 
a tinge of jealousy in every phase of 
woman's love. 

" That's the school," at length said 
Dorothy, pointing to a plain stone building 
standing between a grocer's shop on the 
one hand, and a large square playground 
on the other. It was a very plain-looking 
establishment, even to the sign which de- 
scribed the place, in simple Roman capitals, 
as "The Cartown Public School." Will 
Tunster said the school was only some 



1 66 Stranger than Fiction. 

five years old, but he understood it was 
doing a deal of good ; upon which he entered 
into some very crude speculations about 
the position he might have held in society 
if there had been such ** shops '' for learn- 
ing when he was a boy, until once more he 
gave the reins a check and the conveyance 
stopped at Mr. Spawling's . a small house 
standing alone in a bye-lane some few 
hundred yards from the school, with a 
blood-red rose climbing over a lattice 
porch, and . the front door being open . a 
refreshing peep, right across a long strip 
of oil-cloth and well-cleaned stones, into a 
back garden full of miscellaneous vege- 
tables and flowers. 

Mr. Spawling came to the door to meet 
his visitors. He was a man beyond the 
meridian of life ; though Time had dealt 
kindly with him, only leaving a few grey 
marks of his passing upon Mr. Spawling's 
head and among Mr. Spawling's whiskers. 
It is true there was a slight falling in at 
the mouth, but this only heightened the 
benignant expression which animated his 




A Factory Vision of Beauty . 167 

regular features. There was an elasticity 
in his gait, a quiet grace of manner, a bright 
healthy twinkle of the eye, and a sound of 
music in Mr. Spawling's voice that relieved 
Jacob's mind of a great weight of doubt 
and fear, which had occasionally influenced 
his thoughts and speculations concerning 
his new home. 

" Well, my boy, how are you ?" said Mr. 
Spawling, when Jacob had alighted ; " and 
how have you enjoyed yourself, Dorothy ? 
and how does the world go with you, Mr. 
Tunster ?" listening and smiling at the 
answer which each question elicited. 

While these little courtesies were being 
observed, Will handed out the luggage. 
Dorothy soon bustled off her bonnet and 
shawl, and at Mr. Spawling's direction 
drew a glass of beer for Will : and in a 
most astonishingly short space of time 
Jacob found himself in a pleasant little 
parlour, taking tea, with Dorothy on one 
side and Mr. Spawling on the other. 

That evening rapidly changed into night, 
though the twilight lingered lovingly about 



1 68 Stranger than Fiction. 

the open window, while the wind wandered 
gently in, laden with the scent of mig- 
nonette and sweetbrier. The lamp was, 
however, trimmed at last, and . with the 
sounds of Mr. Spawling's voice (reading 
a chapter of the Old Testament before 
Jacob's retiring) lingering in his ear, and 
th^ rattle of the cart, and the good-bye of 
Susan, and the remembrance of bright spots 
in the panorama of the day's journey, all 
mingling together in a strange jumble . 
Jacob soon found himself between the 
cleanest and coolest of white sheets, sur- 
rounded by the whitest of white dimity, in 
the smallest and prettiest of pretty little 
rooms, trying to go to sleep, and feeling 
himself able to do nothing but think and 
dream, until at length memory gradually 
faded away, and even the angel face look- 
ing out of the factory window was for- 
gotten. 




CHAPTER IX. 




JACOB GETS UP EARLY AND MAKES THE 
ACQUAINTANCE OF SPENZONIAN WHIFFLER. 

ARLY the next morning Jacob was 

awakened by a noise of thumping, 

and plunging, and knocking, and 

^ scrubbing, and scouring. When 

he had dressed, and was descending the 

stairs, he was saluted with a rough push 

from a side door, and an exclamation of: 

** Now, you sir, can't you keep to the right 

when you see that the other side's wet ?*' 

On turning round he met the gaze of 

Dorothy Cantrill, wrapped up to the neck 

in a coarse apron, and with her arms black 

and bare. She glared at him furiously for a 

moment, and then went on rubbing the 



1 70 Stranger than Fiction. 

brass round a bedroom key-hole with an 
energy quite unnecessary upon such a trifle 
of metal. A boy, coming upstairs, in 
corduroy clothes (ornamented with brass 
buttons, and made something after the 
fashion of Harlequin's suit), almost ex- 
ploded, in apparently desperate efforts to 
keep down a strong exercise of his risible 
faculties; and looking at Jacob several 
times, over his shoulder, blew out his 
cheeks, held his sides, and stooped, as if 
with great effort, to intimate that he was 
very much tickled and delighted at Do- 
rothy's conduct 

" Now then, you Spen, have you brought 
that brush ?" cried Dorothy, dashing out 
' upon Whiffler, when he had reached the 
landing, and seizing the brush in question \ 
" now fetch me a pail :" whereupon Whiffler^ 
leaping down six stairs at a time and turn- 
ing a somersault at the bottom, disappeared 
at the back of the house. 

Below stairs Jacob found his new abode 
in extraordinary disorder. It was just as 
though the whole of the furniture, having 




Spenzonian Whiffler. 171 

had a midnight revel with Hans Christian 
Andersen, had been transfixed in un- 
lawful positions by some angry magician. 
Chairs were locked in fond embraces, or 
standing carelessly upside down. Tables 
were making love to arm-chairs. Orna- 
ments of every description had been romp- 
ing on the sofa. A little jaunty card-table 
was perched upon a sideboard, petrified no 
doubt in the very act of shouting ** hurrah !" 
and crowing over the rest of its less nimble 
companions. There was a great patch of 
black on the hearth, and the poker and 
tongs had turned white with rage (or 
whiting) at the conduct of a tea kettle 
which had tipped forward, and which was 
quietly emptying itself upon them ; a few 
red cinders, fallen into the water beneath, 
hissing an additional insult to the fire- 
irons. 

Jacob had hardly time to note all this, 
ere Dorothy, with a female lieutenant, 
entered the room. Her first inquiry was, 
had Jacob any eyes. Jacob said he had, 
and so he thought had somebody else, for 



172 Stranger than Fiction. 

Whiffler was peeping round the door at 
him with an unmistakable pair, which 
twinkled and flashed like stars. 

" Well, and couldn't you see that kettle, 
young sir ?" said Dorothy, seizing the 
offending vessel and thrusting it deep down 
among the cinders. " If s well lads should 
come to school to learn something; it's 
precious little sense or manners they are 
born with ; getting up at -five o'clock on a 
cleaning morning, without why or where- 
fore, or by your leave or warning. Here, 
Whiffler, take this young gentleman out 
into the fields till Tve done, and don't 
stand grinning there, or Til polish your 
buttons till the brass shames your brazen 
face." 

" Now, Master Jacob, this serves you 
right," whispered a still small voice in 
Jacob's conscience. " It was only yester- 
day that you kissed Susan Harley, and 
promised never to forget her, and it was 
only last evening that you did some- 
thing worse than forgetting her ; you only 
remembered her to think how lucky you 




Spenzonian WMffler. 173 

were in having so soon partially replaced 
her by another kind-hearted woman, who 
would, you felt sure, be a second Susan to 
you. Now be warned, Jacob ; make new 
friends if you like, and as many as you can, 
but prize the old and tried ones, and never 
let the new ones thrust them from their 
places in the deepest recesses of your 
heart." 

" Here, don't stand staring there," said 
Whiffler, handing Jacob his cap, " ain't you 
a-goin' in for a run ? Fll bet a stony fox- 
eye and a lumbo to thirty commonies that 
I beat you at a hop, skip, and jump ;" and 
away went Whiffler from the back-door, up 
the garden path, and over the railings at 
the end, into the open meadows. But 
Jacob was too much surprised and bewil- 
dered at the events, of the preceding ten 
minutes to run after him ; so Whiffler came 
back again. 

" Don't get a-minding her, bless you ; 
she'll be as good as pie after the first round 
of toast, and better than duck and green 
peas when the school bell rings : now, ain't 



1 74 Stranger than Fiction. 

you in for a lark ? . up, up, up, up, up, up," 
went on this volatile youth, and every time 
he said " up" he leapt over his own head, 
concluding by striking a circus attitude and 
kissing the tips of his fingers first to Jacob, 
and then to a couple of poplar trees and six 
gooseberry bushes ; after which dramatic 
demonstration he assumed a quieter man- 
ner and conducted himself with a sort of 
rational consideration. 

" And are you one of the boarders ?" in- 
quired Jacob. 

" Am I ? ain't I ? that's all," answered 
Whiffler. 

" But are you really T said Jacob, doubt- 
ingly. 

" You're another," was all the somersault- 
thrower said, but he looked up into Jacob's 
face with such a thoroughly good-natured 
smile that Jacob could not feel offended. 

" A boarder. Mister . I beg your pardon, 
who have I the honour of addressing . 
what name, sir ?" said the nimble youth, 
throwing his head aside, sticking his arms 
akimbo, and looking excessively funny. 




Spenzonian Whiffler. 175 

"Jacob Martyn," said Jacob laughing. 
" Well, Mister Martyn, now FU tell you 
the sort of boarding this cheild would like. 
I should like, this ere werry moment, to be 
a-boarding of a pirate ship with two broad- 
swords . 2i phantom bark at the back, and 
five-and-twenty bally gals in buck musling, 
luminated with blue fire . that's your time 
of day,'' said Whiffler, with suitable panto- 
mime ; concluding his brief sketch of the 
height to which his ambitious hopes soared 
by conducting an imaginary sword en- 
counter with an imaginary foe, and ex- 
claiming, when the said foe was supposed 
to have fallen, weltering in his blood, 
^* Death to the traitors . Old England for 
ever !" which patriotic and loyal sentiment 
he followed up by whistling " God save the 
Queen " in the highest key ever attempted 
by whistler, or Whiffler, before or since. 
Then, as if he had done and said nothing 
at all unusual, he again became something 
like a natural specimen of human nature, 
and commented thus upon the outline 
of fame and glory which he had drawn : 



1 76 Stranger than Fiction. 

" But there ain't no such luck at present^ 
Mister. I mu3t be content to learn my 
verbs and adjectives . English grammar is 
the art of speaking and writing the English 
language with propriety. But never mind^ 
wait a wee, as Scotchy Farlane, the 
Athenian Hercules, used to say, when 
Scotch Jessie, the Zephyr of the Arena, 
was a-f etching of him home from the 
* Arena's Retreat . licensed to be drunk .on 
the premises ' . ^wait a wee !" 

" You're a very queer fellow," said Jacob ; 
" I can't make you out. But since you 
have asked me my name, tell me yours." 

" Spenzonian Whiffler . they used to call 
me Spen Whiff for short, and Spen for 
shorter," replied the boy. 

" Why, your name is as funny as your- 
self," said Jacob. 

" Well, it belonged to a funny fellow, you 
see. I was christened after my great-grand- 
father, who turned five-and-forty somer- 
saults at a stretch and died at Drewry 
Lane, through a-swallowing of a red-hot 
poker when a-playing Pantaloon, which he 



%. 



Spenzonian Whiffler. 177 

was obliged to take up with in his old age/' 
replied Whiffler. 

" Why, he must have been mad to have 
done such a thing." 

" What, as play Pantaloon ?"^ inquired 
the descendant of the unfortunate panto- 
mimist 

** No, no . mad to put a red-hot poker 
into his mouth,'* said Jacob. 

" Nonsense ; it wasn't real, of course. 
Don't you know ? . poker wooden property, 
painted red at the end, sometimes used in 
conjuring trick, made like a telescope." 

" How long have you been here, then ?" 
inquired Jacob. 

" Well, I'm a-going in sixteen now," said 
Whiffler, knitting his brows and losing 
himself for a moment apparently in deep 
thought . " and I made my first pot-hook 
when I was about fourteen." 

" Where did you make it ?" asked Jacob* 

" In the last desk but one." 

" What, here, at Cartown ?" 

" Rather," said Whiffler ; " I never made 
any nowhere else." 

VOL. I. 12 



178 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Where does your father live ?" asked 
Jacob. 

" I don't think I have one . at least Pe- 
troski said I hadn't, nor a mother neither." 

" And who's Petroski ?" 

" Ah, Pet ; he was the Indiarubber 
Wonder, and a wonder and a wonner he 
was too; he could do everything . the 
dagger trick, the globes, the stilts, the 
tight-rope, the bottle feat ; but he left the 
circus and came here as clown in the * Fairy 
Diamonds, or the Demons of Domingoe,' 
a comic Christmas pantomime performed at 
Cartown for a whole week, two Christmases 
ago ; he's dead . poor Pet, poor old fellow !" 
said Spen Whiffler, with emotion ; but he 
was too full of mother wit and good humour 
for sadness to leave more than a momentary 
impression upon his features . sorrow glided 
over his face like a cloud flitting across a 
sunny landscape, leaving no trace behind it. 

" How did he die ? What was the 
matter with him ?" inquired Jacob, begin- 
ning to feel very much interested in his 
new and strange companion. 




Spenzonian Whiffler. 179 

" He died chiefly through want of breath, 
after playing for a week and getting no 
salary, the treasury being done up. Being 
unable to get either beef or brandy, poor 
Pet soon lost his breath. It didn't matter 
so much about me, he used to say, I should 
live to be the pride of the profession ; and 
here I am a-learning of nouns, as if it made 
any difference to me whether a chair is a 
noun or a pronoun, or anythin' else, for the 
matter of that. But FU try. Til try; for 
poor old Pet cried with delight when Mr. 
Spawling said he would take me and teach 
me . Pet didn't like the idea of me a-coming 
to grief as he had done. So at last he said 
I wasn't to be the pride of the profession as 
a sprite or nothing of that sort, but as an 
ornament to society. Poor old Pet! . a 
pretty ornament I shall be." 

'* Then you have no friends," said Jacob, 
with much sympathy in the tone of his 
voice. 

" No ; that's it, you see, only Mr. Spaw- 
ling ; and I can't find it in my heart to run 
away when he is so kind to me. And 

12 . 2 



1 80 Stranger than Fiction. 

there's something else . do you believe in 
ghosts, Mister Jacob ?" 

" Call me Jacob . not Mister, and I'll 
call you Spen," said Jacob. 

"Well, then, Jacob, do you believe in 
ghosts ?" 

" No ! I never saw one," Jacob re- 
plied. 

** Well, I have," went on Whiffler. " I'll 
tell you ; but it is a secret, you know. I 
started to run away one night . I couldn't 
help it . I dropped a little bundle of 
clothes out of the window, and then 
dropped myself after them. The moon 
was a-shining bright, and when I got to 
the churchyard, yonder, I saw Petroski's 
ghost." 

" No !" said Jacob, looking round as if 
he expected to see the indiarubber man 
bounding along behind him. 

" I did, right over his grave, a-signifying 
with its hands that I was to go back, and 
not be an ungrateful rascal. I thought it 
was a sort of moonbeam at first ; but no . 
it was poor old Pet ; and I went back, and 




Spenzontan Whiffler. i8i 

.got into the house again without disturbing 
anybody." 

For more than two hours the two boys 
walked and talked, [Spen brimming over 
with fun and frolic, and taking an especial 
.delight in telling the wondering boy from 
Middleton all the incidents of his life. 

"You must know the governor, Mr. 
Spawling, is a bit of an actor himself . he 
calls it helocution," said Spen ; " he was a 
reglar patron of the drama when we came 
down here afore poor Pet died.'' 

" Tell me all about it," said Jacob. 

" Well, you see, we wos a-playing'in the 
country . a thief of a manager made up a 
sort of scratch company . half dramatic, 
half circus . a reglar mixture. When we 
come here he bolted ; the ghost hadn't 
walked, as they say, for a long time. Mr. 
Spawling was our principal patron ; he 
used to bring the boys and give bespeaks, 
and he assisted the treasury in other ways. 
The parson took on about Mr. S. a-doing 
of this, but, however, there was no time for 
a row. Poor old Pet was took awfully ill. 



1 82 Stranger than Fiction, 

Mr. S., the governor, he soon heard this,,, 
and he come to see him ; Pet used to sing 
a song about a friend coming at last, but 
ah! 'twas too late, and so when Mr. S., 
the governor, you know, comes, the poor 
old boy he whispers . 

A friend came at last, 

Who had heard of Pet's fate ; 

He approached his straw pallet. 
But ah ! 'twas too late. 

And it was, poor dear old boy, and Mr^ 
S., the governor, he fairly broke down, and 
he regular cried, and leaned his head on 
his hand a-sobbing ; but Pet he was as 
cheerful as could be, and he says, * Oh L 
sir, if you would but put Spen in the way 
of getting his living away from the sawdust^ 
and out of the glare of the foot-lights !' 
And Mr. S., he says, * I will, Petroski, I 
will ;' and then old Pet he sings in his dry 
way, as if he were a-whispering, he sings 
that a friend come at last, and he wasn't too 
late, and then by m-by he puts out his hand 
to thank Mr. S., and then he goes off to 
sleep, and he was dead ; leaving me a worse 




Spenzonian Whiffler. 183 

orphan than ever, and a blubbering orphan 
as was nigh a-broken hearted." 

** What a sad story !'' said Jacob through 
his tears ; " how good Mr. Spawling must 
ber 

" Should think he was," said Spen. 
" Now, no blubbering . it ain't no good . 
here you go up . up . up . ^up . up . ." 

Spen would have astonished the little 
arab tumblers of the London streets; he 
bounded along the roads as if he were in a 
well sawdusted circus. At the very edge 
of Cartown Dale he pulled up to tell Jacob 
that this valley reminded him of nothing so 
much as a scene in a London pantomime, 
in which he had played a sprite for so many 
nights running that he could not tell how 
many. 

But never in any theatre, except in 
Nature's playhouse, had there been such a 
scene as that valley of Cartown which 
opened up at the feet of Jacob and Whiffler ; 
a valley studded with alabaster rocks jutting 
out from clumps of green foliage, with a 
rippling river running down the centre, and 



184 Stranger than Fiction. 

a white road that went winding away by 
the side of the brook till both were lost in 
a wood. 

" This is what I like," said Jacob ; ** is it 
not grand ? Don't you feel as if you could 
leap with joy and fly over to the other side, 
or roll down into the brook below ?'* 

" Ah, that would be a trick ! You would 
make a fortune in a twelvemonth if you 
could do that. Mr. Spawling should ride 
in his carriage, and Fd build a monument 
to Pet as high as the church, and Fd pay 
for no end of people to go into no 
end of circuses and theatres," was Spen's 
reply. 

Jacob thereupon felt a vague sort of con- 
scious superiority to Spen, who did not ap- 
preciate his enthusiastic admiration of the 
gorgeous scene before them. While Jacob 
was up in the sky of wonder, Whiffler was 
in the ring among the sawdust. At least 
some such thought passed through Jacob's 
xnind ; and yet the two boys mutually felt, 
as only boys could feel, on so short an ac- 
quaintance, a deep sympathy with each 




Spenzonian Whiffler. 185 

I 

other. Before they reached home again 
they were fast friends. 

And when they did reach home again, 
as they now called Spawling^s School ? Well, 
everything was in astonishing order. The 
wrathful magician had released the chairs 
and tables, and brought down the bumptious 
little card-table from the sideboard ; and in 
fact everything was the pink of neatness. 
Cups and saucers shone on a large quantity 
of white tablecloth : Mr. Spawling was 
sitting in his arm-chair reading a book ; and 
Dorothy was cutting a pile of white bread 
and butter, and watching at the same time 
an hour-glass, from the top to the bottom 
of which the sand was running in a little 
golden stream. 

Whiffler (after changing his Harlequin 
jacket for a loose blouse) took his seat 
meekly at the bottom of the table. Dorothy 
requested Jacob to sit on the other side, at 
the corner near Mr. Spawling, who looked 
up and said he hoped Spenny had shown 
Master Martyn the beauties of the country, 
and that he had not been guilty of any 



1 86 Stranger than Fiction, 

absurd tricks. Jacob said his companion 
had been very kind. 

Accompanied by some other common- 
place remarks, breakfast . was finished ; 
shortly after which Whiffler quietly dis- 
appeared, and almost immediately the 
school-bell began to ring, so furiously 
at first that it was quite startling; but 
gradually it became slower and slower, 
and softer and softer, until at last it died 
out in a quiet murmur ; whereupon Mr. 
Spawling put down his book, and the 
master and the new pupil went to school. 






CHAPTER X. 



MR. GREGORY SPAWLING AS AN EDUCATOR. 




N the days of the first public school 
at Cartown education was gene- 
rally regarded as a privilege only 
intended for those who could 
afford the time and money necessary to be 
expended upon it. The Education Act 
had been dreamed of by a few maniacs, 
who contended that every child was the 
rightful heir to knowledge ; but these dan- 
gerous persons had little or no influence, 
though they were getting the thin end of 
the wedge into the constitution by means of 
British and National Schools, which pro- 
vided cheap learning in some of the large 
manufacturing towns. The Cartown school, 



1 88 Stranger than Fiction, 

started by Mr. Spawling, with the aid of a 
local committee, was a wonderful advance 
for the northern division of the Midland 
mining county, though many of the people 
of Cartown regarded Mr. Spawling as a 
mild kind of lunatic, who could do little 
harm or good, and who was at the same 
time a kind-hearted man and loved the 
poor. 

As many other persons, matters, and 
things are crowding into my canvas, and 
presenting themselves for recognition, I 
must leave the reader to imagine the cha- 
racter and capacity of the public school at 
Cartown, premising by the way that Jacob 
was Mr, Spawling's only boarder, and that 
the advertisement which the schoolmaster 
sent to Middleton was the first announce- 
ment Mr. Spawling had made of his inten- 
tion to receive boarders. 

The pupils were a happy family. Mr. 
Spawling tried to teach them to think as 
well as to read and write and work out 
elaborate arithmetical problems. He made 
himself the personal friend of every indi- 




Mr. Gregory Spawling. 189 

vidual boy ; he was an excellent judge of 
character ; he gauged the capacities of his 
scholars separately ; and in his way was a 
model schoolmaster. 

Spen Whiffler was the low comedy boy, 
the merriman, the Touchstone of the schooL 
He could draw as many funny things on his 
slate as he could cut queer capers in the 
play-ground. Once he had had a fight with 
the tall boy who came from a long distance 
every day to school, in company with a bag 
of books and a particularly plain luncheon ; 
during the encounter the tall boy had not 
once been able to hit Spen, while Spen, on 
the other hand, contrived to knock his man 
down ; and when his man was down, Spen 
turned a somersault over his prostrate form^ 
and then posing himself dramatically with 
one foot upon the tall boy's body, crowed 
loudly like a cock, upon which the tall boy 
from the country could not restrain his 
laughter, and a lasting friendship was 
thereupon cemented. Jacob had this story^ 
from the tall boy s cousin. 

One day at school was very much like 



. 

1 90 Stranger than Fiction. 



another. All the year round the reading, 
and writing, and ciphering^ and spelling, 
and dictation went on with little variety, 
save now and then when the master de- 
livered a short lecture from his desk, 
or the "mapping day" came round, as 
it did every first and last Friday in every 
month. 

One of the most agreeable things for the 
pupils on mapping day was a general per- 
mission to go into the yard to mix Indian 
ink at the pump. There was a mysterious 
charm attending these brief moments of 
leisure outside the school just before the 
bell rang for departure. The hum of the 
school coming through the windows in- 
creased the sense of quiet without, and 
seemed to enhance the freedom of the time. 
Mapping was a branch of education in 
which only a few of the elder boys were in- 
structed, and it was carried on in a special 
little room behind the master's desk. 

This room communicated with the yard, 
in which there was a pump with a leaden 
spout. The water was always turned on. 




Mr. Gregory Spawling. 191 

It made a continual pleasant pattering 
music as it fell into a trough. When Jacob 
and Spen were here together, the Indian 
ink, used for making the mountains and 
rivers in ** The Land of Palestine " and 
**The British Islands," and the Prussian 
blue for colouring the sea to the extent of 
half an inch all round these said countries, 
required more mixing than usual, the 
operation being varied by Spen's tricks and 
witty sayings. But if Spen began these ten 
minutes as merriman or Touchstone, he 
frequently became more like Jacques than 
the wearer of the cap and bells, before the 
ink was considered sufficiently black for the 
little wavy rivers, and the blue became suf- 
ficiently blue for the half-inch sea. More 
than once he sat on the edge of the trough, 
and wondered where everybody would be 
in ten years, and especially whether, after 
that lapse of time, he would be mixing 
ink to map the Nile on a sheet of cartridge 
paper, or whether he would be mixing 
colour to blacken his own eyebrows and to 
redden his own cheeks. 



192 . Stranger than Fiction. 

After school hours, Mr. Gregory Spawl- 
ing and Jacob frequently made long excur- 
sions into the country. The schoolmaster 
would stimulate the boy's natural love of 
the beautiful by explanations of form and 
colour, and remarks upon the picturesque in 
nature and in art. H is own particular views 
were often supported with apt quotations 
from Shakespeare and the old dramatists. 
The incomparable bard always found a 
clever, ingenious, and loving interpreter in 
Mr. Spawling, who evidently knew him by 
heart. 

The schoolmaster, very early during the 
friendship which was established between 
himself and Jacob, gave his pupil a glimpse 
into his history, a cue to the reflective cha- 
racter of his mind, and his comparatively 
humble position in Cartown. 

" How is it now," said the schoolmaster, 
"that smoke, which is usually offensive 
(you will have noted it at Middleton), 
should be accounted a picturesque and 
beautiful addition to a landscape as we see 
it now ?" 




Mr. Gregory Spawling. 193 

"It has a beautiful appearance here, sir," 
said Jacob. 

** With what a grace it mounts upwards, 
and spreads Hke an ethereal mist over the 
foliage !" 

" And the colour, sir, is almost like the 
sky yonder . smoke is very different at 
Middleton/' 

" It not only pleases the eye, Jacob ; it 
induces a sensation of quiet, satisfied plea- 
sure, which the landscape would not alone 
invoke. Do you perceive that, Jacob ?*' 

" I think I do, sir ; I hardly know why 
I like to see the smoke among the trees.'* 

" Is it not because you connect it in your 
mind with the cottage below ?" 

*' I do not know, sir.'' 

*' Nor I, Jacob ; but I think we are on the 
right track in that thought at least ; and I 
want you to remember this little incident, as 
an example for the future to inquire into the 
reasons why any particular thing gives you 
pleasure. Look below the surface ; it will 
accustom you to analyse your feelings, and 
give you as much pleasure as profit. Now 

VOL. I. 13 



194 Stranger than Fiction. 

my opinion about this wreath of smoke on 
the tree tops is that there is more of the 
practical than the poetical about it . ^more 
of the physical than the spiritual. There is 
an inherent love of home among us English; 
and I think that, in addition to the pic- 
turesque bit of colour which it waves above 
the trees, we associate the smoke with the 
comfortable hearth at the foot of the chimney 
whence it rises ; we link with it, if I may so 
speak, that traditional idea of the purest 
love, the most complete happiness, being 
found in a cottage, where there is no am- 
bition beyond the possession of the common 
necessaries of life and an honest name. 
Beware of ambition, Jacob; beware of 
building your hopes on one object, be that 
object what it may ; and remember that the 
blessings of contentment . the greatest 
blessings in this world . are more frequently 
found in a humble cottage such as that 
among the trees below us than in the man- 
sions of the great and wealthy. This is 
not mere book philosophy, Jacob. I have 
seen the world ; I know every trick of it. 




Mr. Gregory Sp aw ling. 195 

Most of us have our troubles, Jacob, sooner 
tDr later. I have had mine ; some day we 
may talk of them for your own benefit." 

From these evening walks Spen was for 
some time excluded. Whether it was out 
of deference to Jacob, who was to be looked 
upon with more consideration than Spen, 
or whether Dorothy wanted Spen to run 
errands, I cannot say ; but when Jacob 
asked that Spen might accompany them 
the schoolmaster seemed pleased at the re- 
quest and complied with it immediately. 
And so these three had long happy walks 
together in the evenings, and upon these 
occasions Spen conducted himself with 
great propriety, never doing anything in 
the tumbling way, beyond thinking of the 
ring, the sawdust, and the theatre. 

One evening, instead of a ramble, Mr. 
Spawling invited the two boys into his own 
room, a mark of the very greatest considera- 
tion. The schoolmaster's sanctum adjoined 
Mr. Spawling's bedroom, and was regarded 
by Dorothy as all but sacred. The school- 
master dusted his own books, and arranged 

13.2 



1 96 Stranger than Fiction. 

his own papers; so that Dorothy should* 
have no excuse for touching anything be^ 
yond the ordinary furniture when she en- 
gaged in her periodical house-cleaning. 
The room looked orderly and comfortable, 
nevertheless. The furniture consisted, in 
chief, of a table, on which lay several books 
and manuscripts; a well-filled set of book- 
shelves ; a small stand sacred to a bust of 
Shakespeare; a fat arm-chair; two other 
chairs from the bedroom . one for Jacob- 
and one for Spen ; and an old-fashioned 
sofa. Several water-colour drawings and 
engravings adorned the walls. There were 
portraits of three several gentlemen in the 
three several characters of Hamlet, Corio- 
lanus, and Romeo. Near these hung the 
pictures of two ladies, one as Desdemona 
and the other as Rosalind. Jacob did not 
know who these persons were, and indeed 
did not know whether the last mentioned 
was intended for a boy or a young lady^ 
and he did not ask. Mr. Gregory Spaw- 
ling knew, and Spenzonian Whiffler knew . 
had not Spen seen many ladies dressed as. 




Mr. Gregory Spawling. 1^7 

ioys, both in the circus and in the theatre ? 
But even Spen Whiffler, who was so learned 
in these matters, did not know that the 
water-colour drawing was a portrait of Mr. 
'Gregory Spawling, and that when he played 
Romeo he was to have been married to the 
young lady who played Juliet, and that she 
died two days before the one fixed for the 
wedding. Indeed, nobody in Cartown, or 
Middleton, or all through the Midland 
.Counties, north and south, knew this. Even 
the school committee knew nothing of it, 
because Mr. Gregory Spawling had been 
recommended to them by a lord, a real 
live lord, who had said nothing about Mr. 
Spawling having been an actor, but had 
spoken of him in the highest terms in which 
one man could speak of another, especially 
when the one speaking is a lord and the 
other an ordinary mortal. But it is hardly 
right to call Mr. Spawling (there was a dif- 
ferent name under the portrait of the actor 
as Romeo) an ordinary mortal. He had 
been a leader in his profession. Admired, 
flattered, followed, he had filled a large 



1 98 Stranger than Fiction. 

space in the world's esteem. He had been 
the observed of all observers. It was no 
ordinary mortal that could step down from 
this pedestal and under a new name settle 
down in the capacity of a country school- 
master at Cartown. 

Jacob and Spen had a delightful evening 
with their master, who read to them from 
his choicest books. The gems of some 
prose works having been discussed, the 
schoolmaster took up the Bible, and read 
from the Psalms, but with a touching pathos, 
and a perfect grace of elocution which made: 
the Song of Solomon a very different thing 
to what Jacob had been accustomed to con- 
sider it ; while " Proverbs" in the mouth 
of Mr. Spawling was poetry indeed. Spen 
afterwards asked if Mr. Spawling would be 
kind enough to read from Shakespeare,, 
whereupon the schoolmaster brought forth 
a thick volume, the pages of which were 
marked with many notes. He read from 
" As You Like It," calling Jacob's attention 
to the perfect beauty of its descriptions of 
scenery, and instancing how the poet had 



Mr. Gregory Spawling. 199 

often said more in one line than they had 
said in all their conversations. To Spen 
he pointed out the real humour of Touch- 
stone, showing him that fun did not consist 
in standing upside-down or in making queer 
grimaces. And then he read the famous 
soliloquy of Jacques, and the song of Amiens 
in the same act, whereupon Spen remem- 
bered Petroski, and Jacob thought of Susan, 
a traveller on the broad ocean. 

" Though thou the waters warp, 
Thy sting is not so sharp, 
As friend remembered not." 

" There is another friend whom I have 
not remembered," said Jacob when he was 
taking off his boots in the kitchen. 

"Oh, indeed, and who may that be?" 
inquired Dorothy, accompanying her inter- 
rogation with the music of two knitting 
needles. 

" Who may who be?" asked Jacob. 

" The other friend you have forgotten." 

" Did I say I had forgotten one ?" 

" Of course you did." 

" I did not intend to say so," said Jacob. 



200 Stranger than Fictiofi. 

' ** Only a-rehearsing of your own thoughts, 
Jacob, eh?" said Spen. 

" That was all," Jacob replied. 

" Well, good night; the best of friends 
must sever . I cannot always be with you 
. ^ajoo! ajoo!" said Spen, his left hand 
theatrically covering his eyes, and his right 
grasping a long candlestick with a short six 
in it. " Good night . exit Whifflen" 

" You're a strange boy, Master Jacob," 
said Dorothy as Spen disappeared, " to be 
talking about somebody and not to know 
you was." 

" But I did know," said Jacob, '* and yet 
I do not know the friend . is not that odd ? 
I have seen her many times, and yet I do 
not know her." 

" Her, Aer . oh, that's it, is it. Master 
Jacob ?" Dorothy elevated the first finger 
of her right hand and laughed. 

" Yes, her, Aer, Dorothy . oh, if you only 
knew her 1 . 

" Though thou the waters warp. 
Thy sting is not so sharp, 
As friend remembered not ;" 




Mr. Gregory Spawling. 201 

and away Jacob marched to the stair- 
case. 

" Why, I declare you will soon be as bad 
as Whiffler. Well, I told master he d con- 
taminate any boarders as come here, with 
his nonsense. But talking of friends, Jacob, 
and hers, I am going, or hope to go, to see 
some on Saturday and stay till Monday. 
And if I might make so bold as to ask you 
home with me for two days'* 

" What, among the trees yonder, Doro- 
thy ?'' 

" Yes, where Will Tunster took me up." 

" I should like it amazingly," said Jacob. 

** I have took the liberty to ask master 
already, and you see I can go better with 
taking you than if you stayed behind, be- 
cause of the work. You won't mind leav- 
ing Spen for two days, eh ? I promise you 
a nice companion." 

" I do not care for a companion," said 
Jacob. 

" Oh ! of course not,*' said Dorothy. 
" You aren't old enough to be in love, or 
I should think you was." 



202 



Stranger than Fiction. 



" Love !" said Jacob, laughing ; " good- 
night, Dorothy ;" and the image of a beau- 
tiful face, looking out of a factory window, 
floated a second time into Jacob's memory 
with the song of Amiens. 





CHAPTER XL 




IN WHICH JACOB MAKES A BLISSFUL 

DISCOVERY. 

HEN Saturday morning arrived 
Spen volunteered to walk a little 
way with Jacob and Mr. Spaw- 
ling's housekeeper, just to see 
them on their way, as he said. Dorothy's 
home was only a few miles on the road. 
Jacob remembered it well. Nothing in that 
first memorable journey from Middleton 
could ever be blotted from his memory. 

It was a grey autumn morning. The 
first dead leaves had fallen. They were 
lying on the road, with big drops of dew 
upon them, like tears. There was a settled 
calm in the air, a death-like stillness. The 



204 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

year was beginning to die. You could not 
help getting this thought into your mind 
on such a morning. 

" Why, what a solemn lot we are," said 
Spen ; " we might be a-going to a funeral ; 
we should just be the sort to come on with 
the coffin in ' Richard the Third.' " 

" We do seem dull," said Dorothy, " as 
if something was going to happen." 

" Something is," said Jacob. 

" What ?" asked Dorothy, stopping in 
the middle of the road. 

" The year is going to die," said Jacob. 

" Lor' bless us ! how you do startle one !" 
said Dorothy. 

" It's the sort of morning that gives you 
the shivers, like the slow dithering music 
before the villain enters, or when he's 
groping about the stage with a dark lantern 
and a dagger," said Spen. 

The merriman of the Cartown school 
illustrated his remarks. He bent his head, 
and felt his way about the road in imagi- 
nary darkness. 

Jacob was amused at Spen's acting, but 




A Blissful Discovery. 205 

he pulled him up soon afterwards by telling 
him that it was on an autumn day when his 
mother died. 

" Oh, just like to-day, was it ?" said Spen. 
" Tell us about it ; I never had a mother 
except old Petroski the clown, and he was 
father and mother and a whole family to 
me. 

" No ; let us talk of something else," said 
Jacob. " I thought all the world was dead 
when my mother died; the sun set early 
in the day, and there were no stars, and 
the next morning the leaves were lying in 
the road." 

** Bravo !" said Spen, solemnly ; " you 
would do for leading business . Hamlet, or 
the fellow who has run away from his wife^ 
which her name was Haller," said Spen. 

" Well, you are a rum pair," said Doro- 
thy, contemplating the two boys with won- 
dering astonishment. 

" Let us talk of something lively," said 
Jacob. " Give us a somersault or set us a 
back, Spen." 

" I could'lt do it, as the gedleman in the 



2o6 Stranger than Fiction. 

stocks said, when they told him to blow 
his doze/' replied Spen, suddenly suffering 
from a very severe cold in the head. 

"Then give us a recitation/' said 
Jacob. 

Spen, pulling a lock of hair over his fore- 
head, fnd assuming a serio-comic attitude, 
said his dabe was Dorbal on the Grambian 
hills, and that if 'twere done it were well it 
were done quickly ; for there stood Eliza 
on the wood-crown'd height, and all the 
world was a stage, the men and women 
merely a weak device of the enemy ; and 
after he had said many other similarly ex- 
traordinary things, making Dorothy laugh 
until she was red in the face, he thought it 
was time he should return ; whereupon he 
shook hands with Jacob and Dorothy. 
Taking but his handkerchief and wiping 
very dry tears from each eye, he begged 
them to remember that if cruel fortune 
should part them, it might be for years and 
it might be for never, his heart would still 
be breaking for the love of Betsy Jane, and 
his will would be found in Miss Dorothy's 




A Blissful Discovery. 207 

cheenie teapot, among that respectable 
housekeeper's curl-papers. 

Then solemnly extending his arms 
towards his enthusiastic audience of two, 
Spen exclaimed, " Bless ye, my children ; 
bless ye !*' and disappeared through an 
adjacent hedge. 

Dorothy and Jacob continued their walk 
past cornfields and through meadows, by 
-woods and by rivers. On the highway 
they met parties of reapers, chiefly Irish- 
men, carrying reaping-hooks tied up in 
straw-bands ;' country people going on vil- 
lage errands ; tramps who had footed it 
over nearly every turnpike road in Eng- 
land ; and other members of the great army 
of strollers which is for ever journeying 
hither and thither on* the highways and 
byways of Britain. 

In an obscure cross-road they passed a 
gipsy encampment, and Jacob thought of 
his smoke lesson as a white wreath as- 
cended from one of the canvas tents and 
went sailing away over a sea of green and 
amber leaves. Jacob was destined to know 



A 



2o8 Stranger than Fictioff. 

something more than the mere picturesque 
side of gipsy life ; but he recked not of his 
destiny as he passed on admiring the land- 
scape. Near the gipsy tents the road was 
crossed by a shallow brook which came out 
of the wood and reflected the shaggy dogs 
and dark-eyed children who stood on the 
bank and watched Dorothy and Jacob cross 
the bridge. 

A pleasant walk of half an hour brought 
the visitors in sight of Dorothy's cot- 
tage. 

" I shouldn't be surprised if your me- 
mory was taxed just now," said Dorothy, 
referring to Jacob's mysterious reference to 
the song of Amiens, after his evening in 
Mr. Spawling's room. 

** How ?" asked Jacob. 

" Didn't you say her hair was like the 
yellow silk at the factory ?" 

" Well ?" 

" And her face was round and laughing 
like a fairy's, though I never see a fairy 
myself." 

" Well r 




A Blissful Discovery. 209 

" And when you first saw her she was 
like a hangel ?" 

" Well ? Yes, yes/' continued Jacob. 

" And she looked out of the factory win- 
dow ?" 

" Ah, but we are a long way from Mid- 
dleton-in-the-Water," said Jacob. 

"And mayn't somebody, else be a long 
way from Middleton ?" said Dorothy, with 
tantalising emphasis. 

" I fear not," said Jacob. " What do 
you mean, Dorothy ?" 

" And you said she sang . oh, I don't 
know how beautifully you said she could 
sing." 

" Well," said Jacob, " what are you going 
to say ?" 

" What am I going to say ? Listen. Is 
that as good as the factory angel's singing ?'^ 
As Dorothy opened the little gate at the 
entrance of the garden behind the house, 
the sweet sounds of a girlish voice came 
through the open doorway. 

" It is ! it is !" exclaimed Jacob, seizing 
Dorothy by the arm. 

VOL. I. 14 



2 1 o Stranger than Fiction, 

" Lor', how you pinch ; for goodness' 
sake, leave go." 

Jacob, however, detained Mr. Spawling's 
housekeeper, as the music might have done 
had she not been anxious to see her cousin. 
But their voices had already been heard. 
The singing ceased and the factory angel 
came to the door. That moment Jacob felt 
as if all his dearest hopes were realised. 
All the longing sensations of that last 
morning in his father s garden came back 
to him. This boy of seventeen had for 
years been unwittingly drifting into love 
with somebody's voice, and here was that 
somebody before him, and far more beauti- 
ful than his own ideal creation. 

"This is Master Martyn, Lucy," said 
Dorothy. The fairy putting out her hand 
Jacob floated into the house. He cer- 
tainly did not walk in. It was all a 
dream. He should wake immediately 
and find himself at Cartown in bed, or 
lying by the river and picturing the big 
towns on its banks, miles away from Mid- 
dleton and Cartown. 




A Blissful Discovery, 211 

" And how's father ?" said Dorothy, 
sitting down oj^posite an old woman who 
was seated when they entered. 

" Well, John baint ower well . he's 
abed, and has been these two days," 
said Dorothy's mother, an old woman of 
seventy. 

Dorothy must go up-stairs to see him, 
and Mrs. Cantrill, after telling Jacob to 
make himself at home, and saying how 
proud she was to see him, followed her 
daughter, leaving Jacob and Lucy together, 

" Do you like Cartown, Master Martyn ?" 
said Lucy, in a soft voice, after a rather 
awkward pause. 

" I do, miss," said Jacob, his voice trem- 
bling. 

" Better than Middleton?" inquired Lucy, 
as she busied herself about some household 
duties. 

"In some respects," said Jacob, in a 
nervous whisper. 

" You seem tired," said Lucy ; " shall I 
get you a little ale ?" 

" Thank you," said Jacob, and Jacob'3 

14 . 2 



212 Stranger iJian Fiction. 

goddess, his dream, his ideal of all that 
was lovely, disappeared behind a pantry 
door, and presently came back with a foam- 
ing jug of brown ale. Jacob held his glass 
while the cottage beauty filled it 

" I am sure you are very tired," said 
Lucy, noticing Jacob's unsteady hand. 

" Not very, thank you," said Jacob, his 
face all aglow. 

" The beer will do you good," said the 
fairy, frothing the boy's glass, and showing 
off to perfection a white round arm that 
might have been modelled for a study of 
classic beauty. 

Poor Jacob ! his heart beat wildly. 
Lucy, on the contrary, was quite self- 
possessed. She did not know that Jacob 
was the little fellow whom she had occa- 
sionally noticed in the garden near the 
Middleton factory. She knew nothing of the 
selection he had made among the factory 
voices, ticketing it in his memory with a 
motto from her favourite hymn . 

" There is a happy land. 
Far, far away." 




A Blissful Discovery. 213 

" Will you excuse me?'' said Lucy. " I 
am going into the garden to gather a few 
apples." 

" Certainly," said Jacob. 

He tried to say, " May I come with you ?" 
but found himself altogether unequal to 
such a courageous flight of familiarity. 

Jacob saw Lucy go out. His eyes never 
strayed away from her. He made up his 
mind more than once to rush out and assist 
her, but he still sat in the cottage sipping 
the foaming ale. 

Just budding into womanhood, Lucy was 
indeed a model of healthy beauty. She 
might have sat for Hebe, or any other 
lovely creature. Fair round arms, with 
dimples at the elbows, and a slight dimple 
everjrwhere where there is generally a pro- 
jection on the hand, it might have been the 
arm of our first mother that Jacob watched 
plucking the apples and dropping them into 
a small woollen apron. The pretty foot 
and ankle, in grey hose and rather thick 
shoes, peeping from beneath a white petti- 
coat, were not to be disguised by homely 



214 Stranger than Fiction. 

worsted or leather. And the wealth of 
wavy hair that would come undone and fall 
in golden ripples over shoulders which^ 
despite the dark print dress that covered 
them, you might be su^e were white as 
lilies are ; and the white and red, vying for 
the mastery in that sweet fair face, and the 
bright grey eyes, sparkling with health ! . 
what would not grand city ladies have 
given to carry such rosy colour and such 
natural brightness into their ball-rooms ? 
Why, Lucy Cantrill would have driven a 
whole city full of young fellows mad, let 
alone Jacob Martyn, who had heard her 
sing for years, and was in love with her 
before he saw her face. 

** Ah, bless her, there she be !" said Mrs. 
Cantrill, her aunt, as she entered the 
room again with Dorothy, and observed 
Lucy in the garden. **She grows more 
beautiful every hour of the day. Lord ha' 
mercy on her !" 

" You make too much of her, mother ; 
you'll spoil her if you don't mind," said 
Dorothy ; but Jacob thought otherwise,. 




A Blissful Discovery. 215 

and when the apples were dished up at 
dinner in the shape of dumplings, as round 
and hard as the clouds in some of the old 
masters, Jacob summoned courage enough 
to pay Lucy a compliment. 

" I did not make the dumplings," said 
Lucy ; " I cannot cook." 

** You gathered the apples/' said Jacob, 
at which, for the first time, Lucy blushed, 
while Dorothy and the old woman laughed 
heartily. 

In the afternoon Jacob, and Lucy, and 
Dorothy walked in the wood, and Do- 
rothy told Lucy about Jacob listening to 
her singing in the factory, and how she had 
learnt from him the particulars of his seeing 
Lucy on the morning when hfi left home. 
She even told Lucy how Jacob had de- 
scribed her; and although Lucy laughed 
and pretended to make fun of it, and 
although Jacob treated Dorothy's gossip 
lightly, and pretended that he wished her 
not to say any more, Jacob felt that Dorothy 
was placing him under an eternal obligation 
for telling Lucy how he had fallen in love 




2 1 6 Stranger than Fiction. 

with her ; and Lucy was not displeased 
either. What pretty girl could have been 
displeased at such an ingenuous narration ? 

" How do you get on with Dorothy ; 
don't you find her very cross sometimes ?" 
said Lucy, changing the subject and putting 
her arm through her cousin's. 

"We get on very well indeed," said 
Jacob. 

" On cleaning days ?" asked Lucy, laugh- 
ing. 

" Now, none of your impudence, Pussy," 
said Dorothy ; " everybody has their weak- 
ness, haven't they, Jacob ?" 

Jacob laughed, and said he supposed he 
had his, and the little rivulet that ran by 
his side seemed to say it also had its weak- 
ness, which was to go on for ever chattering 
over stones and gliding over mosses. Then 
the path became too narrow for three to 
walk together; so Dorothy fell behind 
Jacob and Lucy, and thought " what a nice 
pair they would make !" 

There was something noble in Jacob's 
appearance, boy as he was. Since his ill- 




A Blissful Discovery. 217 

ness he had grown rapidly. He was slightly 
taller than Lucy, though of slender build. 
There was a marked contrast between his 
dark, thoughtful features, and the fair, 
hopeful, and merry face of Lucy. She 
wore a straw hat, and a shawl hung care- 
lessly over one shoulder. The conversa- 
tion between her and Jacob was very 
limited, so much so that Dorothy said they 
seemed afraid of each other, and wished 
Spen had come all the way with them, 
whereupon Jacob turned his head and tried 
to be facetious upon Dorothy's weakness 
for cleaning and talking. By-and-by he 
felt more at home, and at length he told 
Lucy how he had lain in the sun listening 

to the factory music, and how he had often 

 

wished he had been compelled to work in 
the factory ; for it seemed to him that 
there was such a glory in the rattling 
wheels, such a freedom about the place, 
such a pleasure in watching the silk grow 
into yards and yards of fleecy cloth. 

"Ah, you are mistaken, Mr. Martyn,*' 
said Lucy ; " you might like the factory on 



2 18 Stranger than Fiction. 

cold winter afternoons, when the snow is on 
the ground ; but in the early morning, in 
the dark, before the stars are out !" 

Lucy shrugged her pretty shoulders, and 
looked at Jacob. 

" And then," she continued, " in the 
summer, when the birds are singing, the 
heat and noise, the stifling dreadful heat ! . 
not that I was compelled to stay in it 
always, but I saw those who were." 

" And yet you sang as if you were very 
happy," said Jacob. 

" Larks sing in cages, but I don't think 
they are happy." 

" You often made me happy," said Jacob ; 
" but if I had thought you were not happy, 
I should have been very miserable." 

" I was not unhappy," said Lucy ; " I did 
almost what I pleased ; the proprietor of 
the factory was very kind ; he is a sort of 
relation of ours." 

" And have you left Middleton for good ?" 
Jacob asked. 

" I think so," said Lucy. 

" You were glad to come away ?" 




A Blissful Discovery. 219 

'* Yes, I think so ; but sometimes I feel 
as if I were sorry." 

" How strange that you should have left 
so soon after I left, and that I should come 
here !" 

" Very," said Lucy. 

Then Jacob looked back into the wood, 
and Dorothy was nowhere to be seen. The 
good-natured creature, muttering to herself 
that " two is company and three none,'' had 
quietly slipped home. Jacob made a great 
effort to use his opportunity bravely. 

" It seems as if it had happened pur- 
posely," said Jacob. 

" Do you think so ?" said Lucy. "Why?" 

" Because I feel as if I had known you 
ever since I was a little boy." 

" You are not so bashful as you were an 
hour or two ago," said Lucy, smiling. 

" You thought me very silly, I know," 
said Jacob ; "and do so now, I dare say." 

" I do not, I assure you," said Lucy, 
gathering her shawl round her, as they 
stepped forth into the open meadows. 

" Should you be dreadfully offended' if I 



220 Stranger than Fiction. 

were to call you Lucy ?'' said Jacob, taking 
her hand. 

Lucy withdrew her hand. 

" I knew you would ; I am very sorry I 
asked you ; pray forgive me if I have 
offended you," said Jacob. 

" I am not offended," Lucy replied ; 
^* here is Cousin Dorothy coming to meet 
us." 

It was twilight when they returned to the 
cottage among the trees. They chatted 
together until it was nearly dark. Mrs. 
Cantrill sat in her arm-chair near the fire. 
Dorothy occupied a seat near the open 
door, and Jacob sat near Lucy against the 
window. The firelight flickered on the 
white-washed walls. There was a whole- 
some smell of tar from the recently black- 
ened fire-grate, which made the place seem 
very homely. A few bright pans hung 
over a white dresser, and an old-fashioned 
clock, in an oaken case, ticked solemnly and 
peacefully in a comer behind Mrs. Cantrill. 
Outside the house the trees looked dim and 
shadowy. The cry of the landrail came in 




A Blissful Discovery. 221 

at the open doorway, almost keeping time 
with the clock. The ivy tapped at the 
diamond-shaped window-panes. A cat 
purred on the hearth. You could hear the 
drowsy hum of the beetle, and a robin sat 
singing on the garden wall. 

Lucy knew that Jacob loved her. When 
she went into her little room that night, she 
looked into her glass with a smile of satis- 
faction, and gathered her hair up and tried 
the effect of wearing it in a band. Then 
she let it fall in a cluster down her back, 
brushed it off her face entirely, finally fast- 
ening it up with a comb ; and, however she 
dressed those golden tresses, she looked 
like one of whom the poet could not choose 
but feel that she had reason to fear her own 
exceeding beauty. 

" Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness." 




CHAPTER XII. 

IN WHICH SUNDRY STRAY THREADS OF THE 

 

STORY ARE GATHERED UP, AND SOME COM- 
ING EVENTS CAST THEIR SHADOWS BEFORE. 





HEN Jacob returned to Caxtown, 
he found a letter and a news- 
paper for him, which, by the way, 
was not an extraordinary circum- 
stance, seeing that he had received many 
communications from his father containing 
words of parental kindness and solicitude, 
besides a Middleton StaVy every week. 
This morning both letter and newspaper 
were more noteworthy than usual. The 
letter informed Jacob that his father would 
call for him that day, on his way to 
Clumberside, which was the seat of Mr. 



Coming Events, 223 

Bonsall, M.P., who had been returned to 
the Commons House of Parliament for the 
borough of Middleton, through the instru- 
mentality of Mr. Martyn, of the Star. In 
the newspaper there were several items of 
local news, interesting both to Jacob and 
to the readers of this history. Perhaps a 
brief description of the journal itself may 
not be out of place here. 

It was a large folio paper, the front 
page chiefly occupied with advertisements. 
Several auctioneers monopolised the first 
two columns, with announcements of forth- 
coming sales of all manner of extraordinary 
things, from kitchen chairs to magnificently 
carved mahogany sideboards, from cottages 
to family mansions, and from collections of 
poultry to herds of fat stock. There was 
a slight error, called by printers " a literal," 
in the description of the poultry, " twenty- 
five turkeys " being - printed " twenty-five 
turnkeys ;" but this was a mistake that 
might occur in the best-regulated print- 
ing offices. In the third column several 
grocers, a couple of tailors, and seven or 



224 Stranger than Fiction. 

eight drapers struggled with each other for 
supremacy, and according to their announce- 
ments, teas, sugars, dress-coats, silks, rib- 
bons, bonnets, shawls, and cloaks, at Mid- 
dleton-in-the- Water, had reached the mini- 
mum of cheapness, combined with the very- 
maximum of quality. In the fourth column 
a brace of enterprising druggists announced 
themselves as the sole agents for certain 
wonderful medicines; and, beneath these, 
Dr. Horatio Johnson, beginning with the 
quotation, " Throw physic to the dogs," and 
ending with ^^ Moniti meliora seqTiamur'^ in- 
formed the afflicted of all ages that he visited 
certain towns on certain days, and that the 
Oriental remedy had proved its efficacy 
by the most convincing and extraordinary- 
tests. In the fifth column several persons 
who wanted situations elbowed sundry 
others who had situations vacant ; while 
half a dozen announcements headed " To 
be Sold '' made desperate efforts to eclipse 
in attractiveness an equal number of others 
under the title of " To be Let ;" and the 
page finished with a collection of miscel- 




Coming Events. 225 

laneous intelligence. In the second page 
commenced the leading articles, in the 
preparation of which it was evident, even 
to Jacob, that Mr. Martyn had procured 
some litei;ary assistance. The first article 
was a severe criticism of the Middleton 
Guardian, from which it appeared that the 
organ of the Red party had for several 
years devoted its special attention tq a 
consideration of the errors of the British 
currency system, the heinous crime com- 
mitted by those persons who clipped and 
mutilated the coin of the realm, and the 
condition of the savage tribes of Africa 
and America. The next article . a descrip- 
tion of the mineral wealth of the country 
surrounding Middleton . ^concluded by wel- 
coming the advent of a new company 
started to get lead at a short distance 
from the town ; and the last was one, the 
brevity of which , induces me to ex- 
tract it as an example of the indepen- 
dent character of the journal and the sus- 
ceptibility of the Middleton Corpor- 
ation : . 

VOL. I. 11; 



J 



226 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Fearful Calamity : The * Star ' in 
Danger. . We can hardly find words to 
describe the calamity which has befallen us. 
The remarks we made last week respect- 
ing the careless and disgraceful manage- 
ment . or rather mismanagement . of the 
corporation property, and the culpable 
neglect of our corporate body in re- 
spect thereof, has brought down upon us 
the thundering anathemas of the Council. 
But this is not the worst. Our very exis- 
tence is threatened. The fiat that is to 
annihilate us has gone forth. The writing 
is on the wall. Twelve Town Councillors 
have stopped our paper ! Twelve repre- 
sentatives of the burgesses of the free 
town of Middleton have given us notice 
that we are no longer to count them as 
subscribers to this journal ! Twelve four- 
pennies per week are banished from our 
exchequer ! ! ! If we can survive this ex- 
pression of the opinion of Councildom for 
another week, our circulation may possibly 
be less next Saturday by five than it is at 
the present issue ! ! ! Oppressed by this 
dreadful weight, this shadow of the Cyclops, 
this co-operated condemnation, we fear the 



\ 



Coming Events. 227 

6'/^r will cease to shine and that we must 
hide our diminished head for ever. An 
aggregate of four shillings per week from 
twelve Town Councillors ! It is a deadly 
blow, truly. . . . But (joking apart) we 
may inform our readers, in confidence, that 
the Star will be printed as usual next 
week, notwithstanding, and that the profits 
of the extra sale, which will be created by 
the conspiracy we now chronicle, will be 
given to a fund which the editor suggests 
should be raised to pay the expenses of a 
public examination of the corporation ac- 
counts by a public accountant." 

Following the leaders came the local 
news, beginning with short paragraphs, and 
ending with very long ones. Among those 
of medium size the following attracted 
Jacob's attention : . 

" The New Mayor. . It is now generally 
understood that Ephraim Magar, Esq., 
will be chosen Chief Magistrate of Mid- 
dleton at the next election. Though we 
are opposed to Mr. Magar on political 

15.2 



228 Stranger than Fiction. 

grounds, we cannot withhold an expression 
of our approval of this election. So far as 
Mr. Magar's connection with the Council is 
concerned he is comparatively only a young 
member ; but he has exhibited a desire to 
promote the welfare of the town, and he 
is among those of our enlightened towns- 
men who desire to reform altogether the 
present management of the corporate pro- 
perty. It is not on this account, however, 
that Mr. Magar is to be elected Mayor. 
But more in consideration of the spirited 
and liberal way in which he has fulfilled 
his duties as a Councillor, heading muni- 
ficently every subscription raised for bene- 
volent purposes, and showing, in a variety 
of ways, that having the means to be bene- 
volent he has also the will. Mr. Magar is 
one of those men who is the founder of his 
own fortune, and as such it is highly credit- 
able to his colleagues in office that they 
should select him for the high and honour- 
able position of Chief Magistrate. We 
hear that Mr. Magar is a large shareholder 
in the new lead mining undertaking, that 
he is also a sleeping partner in several 
local works, and that he intends retiring 



Coming Events, 229 

from the business with which he has so 
many years been connected, and enjoying, 
for the remainder of his life, that repose 
which he has so well earned." 

Another paragraph ran as follows : . 

"Gratifying Testimonial. . We are 
glad to announce that Thomas Titsy, who 
our readers will remember was imprisoned 
on a charge of having intimidated certain 
voters during the last election for Middleton, 
has been presented with a purse of fifty 
sovereigns by several gentlemen who were 
instrumental in obtaining his release, as an 
expression of their sympathy, and in token 
of their confidence in his honesty and in- 
tegrity. Mr. Thomas Titsy, who has served 
his apprenticeship in this office, desires us 
to express his sense of the kindness and 
sympathy exhibited towards him ; and we 
may add our own testimonial to the sub- 
stantial one he has received, with regard to 
his faithfulness and good conduct. The 
subscription was commenced shortly after 
Thomas Titsy's release: its presentation 
has been delayed, that it might in no way 




230 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

smack of anything like political partisanship. 
The testimonial has been presented on 
purely philanthropic grounds." 

In the next page there was an account 
of an interesting discussion, at a meeting of 
the Commissioners of Lighting and Paving, 
respecting the width of one of the public 
streets, the respective merits of closed and 
open drains, as opposed to no drains at all, 
and the price of gas, which one speaker 
contended was higher than the cost of oil. 

" * He for one would not say anything 
against the illuminating powers of gas ; but 
he would say this, that when the good old 
oil lamps were in use, there was much less 
money to pay for them, and much less fuss 
about the quality of the light and the num- 
ber of burning hours. He was one of the 
old school, and akhough he liked progress, 
he did not like humbug . (Hear, hear) . 
and what was more, he would not have 
humbug ; and he proposed that they should 
have no more to do with this new-fangled 
light, but order forth the old oil-lamps . 
(laughter) . and defy the ghastly innovation 



Coming Events. 231 

altogether.' (Hear, and laughter.) The 
motion was not agreed to." 

Following this, came the foreign news of 
the week, and the " General Intelligence." 
The last page began with a short poem 
extracted from the work of a well-known 
poet, and then came numerous paragraphs 
under the title of " Varieties ;" following 
which was a description of " A Tour Out- 
side Middleton," and a condensed account 
of a lecture on minerals ; the whole ending 
with the publishers imprint, until they 
arrived at which, it is said, many readers 
never halted in the perusal of their favourite 
paper. 

During the pleasant part of the day, the 
interval after dinner and before the com- 
mencement of school, Spen Whiffler, who 
had welcomed Jacob back again, early in 
the morning, with great manifestations of 
delight, invited his friend to join him in a 
short walk, that he might have an oppor- 
tunity of telling him an important secret. 

*' If it is a very great secret, Spen, you 



232 Stranger t/ian Fiction. 

had better not tell me," said Jacob, "be- 
cause I really cannot promise that I can 
keep it." 

" Oh, bother, but you mtist keep it 
You ain't a woman. It's only women that 
can't keep secrets." 

" Indeed ?" 

" Yes ; a secret to a woman is such an 
awful sort of thing, that she is obliged to 
get the assistance of every other woman 
she knows to help her to keep if, and such a 
pack of feminines at last get hold of it that 
at last the secret is as common as sawdust." 

" You don't seem to have a very high 
opinion of women, Spen," said Jacob. 

" Oh, haven't I though, neither ? When 
lovely woman stoops to folly, uncertain, 
coy, and hard to please ; kindness in woman, 
not their beauteous looks, shall win my 
love . Shakespeare, etc.," said Spen, raising 
aloft his right arm, and exclaiming, " Not 
a high opinion ? Why, I loves 'em all." 

" What a queer fellow you are, Spen." 

** I think you have made the observation 
afore. But let us to business. Prompter, 



Coming Events. 233 

ring up. Now for the secret. Shall I 
begin r 

" Yes, go on . I will keep your secret." 
"You swear?" said Spen. "Say, / 
swear." 

" I swear," said Jacob, laughing ;" where- 
upon Spen, in a sepulchral voice, repeated, 
" S-w-e-a-rl' and stalked solemnly in front 
of Jacob, in imitation of the ghost in 
" Hamlet." 

".Come, Spen, no more nonsense; begin," 
said Jacob, who was becoming a little 
anxious, wondering if Spen had seen some 
pretty face through a window. Momen- 
tarily the thought crossed his mind that 
Spen had seen Lucy, and then the blood 
rushed into his face, and he repeated im- 
patiently, " Now, Spen, begin." 

" Well, then, I am to be the pride of the 
profession. I am to be a player. The 
drama is to be my game, and I am a- 
studying of Shakespeare with Mr. Spaw- 
ling," exclaimed Spen, his eyes flashing 
with exultation. " TU tell you all about 
it. The night you went away, Mr. Spaw- 



ji 



234 Stranger than Fiction. 

ling asked me into his room, and read to 
me out of the big book ; and when he saw- 
that I liked it as well as Scotchy Farlane 
used to like his gin-and-water, he says, says 
he, * Now, Spen Whiffler, Tm going to have 
a little talk to you.' *Yes, sir,' says I. 
*Well,' says he, 'you are fond of acting.' 
'Very, sir,' says I. *"And you feel as 
though you cared about no other profes- 
sion ?' ' I am sorry to say I do, sir,' says 
I. ' Well,' says he, ' I have thought about 
all this for a long time, and I have come to 
the conclusion to instruct you in the art/ 
' You, sir ?' says I. ' Me,' says he. * We 
will read together,' says he, * and if, within 
a reasonable time, you continue in the same 
mind, and I think you capable of sustain- 
ing a part with credit, I will get you an 
engagement.' * Oh, sir,' says I, ' how shall 
I thank you, how shall I return your kind- 
ness ?' * By paying particular attention to 
all I tell you,' says he, ' and above all, 
Spen, by keeping this conversation and my 
intentions regarding you, a profound secret, 
by never mentioning them to a soul.' " 




Coming Events. 235 

" And the first grateful thing you do is 
to tell a soul immediately/' said Jacob. 

" I could not help it/' said Spen ; " I was 
so delighted that I was obliged to tell you . 
I should have burst if I hadn't ; but Jacob, 
you will never repeat it ?" 

" I will not ; you may depend on me^ 
Spen/' 

'* Well, after he d talked to me like that, 
he gave me my first lesson, Hamlet's ad- 
vice to the players, and he explained it all 
to me just as if he were an actor himself ; 
and I can say every line of it /' in illustra- 
tion of which Spen recited the passage for 
Jacob's edification ; after which they re- 
turned, and Jacob found his father waiting 
for him. 

This was the fourth or fifth time that 
Mr. Martyn had called since his son had 
been at Cartown, now about two years. 
On the last occasion Mr. Martyn expressed 
himself thoroughly satisfied with Jacob's 
progress, and arranged that his son should 
remain with Mr. Spawling for two years 
longer, still continuing at school during the 




236 Stranger than Fiction. 

holidays, as he was anxious that Jacob 
should lose no time in completing his 
studies. On the first visit Mr. Marty n 
was on his way to Clumberside ; and Jacob 
having improved so much in his letter- 
writing, and having grown into a fine hand- 
some lad, his father had decided that Mr. 
Bonsall should see him, secretly hoping 
that if such a misfortune should occur as 
that of Jacob being left an orphan, before 
the Middleton Star was a magnificent 
propert}'', the member for the borough 
would do something for him. . It would 
be easy enough, thought Mr. Martyn, for 
Mr. Bonsall to get Jacob an appointment 
in some of the Government offices, though 
he never for a moment feared that Jacob 
would require such assistance. 

Jacob straightway introduced Spenzonian 
Whiffler to his father; but Mr. Martyn 
was too much engrossed in his son to take 
any particular notice of Spen, who con- 
ducted himself with perfect propriety, dis- 
appearing shortly after the introduction, 
and excusing himself by saying that it was 



Coming Events. 237 

time for school. Shortly afterwards Mr. 
Spawling also left on a similar plea, and 
Jacob and his father sat together, while 
Dorothy prepared luncheon for Mr. Mar- 
tyn, and Tom Titsy took the horse to the 
** Blue Posts'' for a refresher of meal and 
water. 

At length, Tom returned with a hand- 
some carriage drawn by two horses, and 
by this time Jacob and his father were 
ready to start. Jacob went up to Tom 
and shook him heartily by the hand, 
though at first Tom did not intend that 
there should be such a display of familiarity 
between them. Jacob looked so much 
more like a gentleman than when he left 
Middleton, and the dignity of the Martyns 
had also increased so greatly, that Tom 
was a little bashful (notwithstanding that 
he was now a journeyman) in approaching 
Jacob, his master's only son. Moreover, 
Tom had not been so light-hearted and 
outspoken a fellow since his imprisonment 
and the departure of Susan, as he was 
previously. Both these events had exer- 



238 Stranger than Fiction. 

cised a great influence upon him. At one 
time his mother had cause to fear that he 
was endeavouring to drown his troubles 
in drink, and but for the advice and com- 
panionship of Dr. Johnson, Tom would 
undoubtedly have fallen. It was the Doctor 
who had projected the testimonial to his 
landlady's son, and this had done much to 
re-establish Tom's own estimatipn of him- 
self and to restore an honest pride in his 
own good name. With regard to Susan, 
he kept all he felt to himself Had the 
Doctor known how much Tom really loved 
that woman he would have almost de- 
spaired of succeeding in any attempt to 
restore his peace of mind. 

" Jacob has grown a fine boy, has he not, 
Tom?" said Mr. Martyn, taking the reins. 

''He has, sir ; Tm glad to see him 
looking so well." 

*^ We must soon have him back again at 
Middleton ; eh, Tom ?" 

" I should be glad if he were, sir. He's 
a fine young gentleman now. Caesar '11 
hardly know him." 



Coming Events. , 239 

"^ . . . I - .. . I . . . . ...!... .11 . . 

" Oh, yes, he will," said Jacob, " we were 
always such good friends. He will not 
object to shake hands with me." 

Tom said he hoped Csesar would not be 
such an ill-mannered dog as that. 

Then Mr. Martyn engaged his son's 
attention by describing to him the changes 
he had made at home : how he had built 
a printing-office in the garden ; how he 
had enlarged the shop and turned it into 
a counting-house ; and how he had other- 
wise expended a large sum of money. He 
pointed out to Jacob the great advantages 
of a good education, and beggisd him to 
pay strict attention to his studies, and pre- 
pare himself for the day when Martyn & 
Son should be the principal publishing 
firm in Middleton. ay, and in the whole 
county. 

Thus their time to a great extent was 
occupied until they arrived at Clumberside. 
The lodge gates flew open at Mr. Martyn's 
approach, and with an extra flourish of an 
exceedingly handsome whip, Mr. Martyn 
increased the speed of the horses along a 



240 Stranger t/ian Fiction. 

broad and weU-kept carriage drive, and at 
length pulled up in front of a noble country- 
residence. Mr. Martyn was received by 
Mr. Bonsall himself, who came out at the 
same time as his servant, and conducted 
Jacob and his father into the library, 
while Tom Titsy drove round to the 
stables. 

" I am very glad to see you, Mr. Mar- 
tyji/' said Mr. Bonsall, " and you . Master 
Jacob, I presume." 

"Thank you, sir," said Jacob, whose 
moderate amount of self-possession was a 
litde shaken by the unaccustomed grandeur 
of the room in which he was desired to be 
seated. 

By-and-by luncheon was announced, after 
which Jacob was allowed to go into the 
garden while the newspaper proprietor and 
the member of Parliament discussed local 
and imperial politics. Mr. Martyn's paper 
had been expressly started in the interest 
of the Yellow party, which had promised 
Mr. Martyn their substantial support. Mr. 
Bonsall's election was the first political fruit 




Coming Events. 24 1 

of the StaVy which had absorbed the whole 
of Mr. Martyn s small fortune. 

Jacob had not explored many acres of 
Mr. Bonsall's estate when he encountered 
Tom. 

"Hurrah! Fm glad I have met you; 
now Tom, come under this tree and tell 
me the news." 

** There's not much to tell," said Tom, 
who, yielding to Jacob's influence, sat down 
on a seat under an old elm. 

" Well, how is aunt Keziah ?'' 

'* Oh, crotchety, crotchety." 

" And Mrs. Titsy ?" 

*' Middling," said Tom ; '' not quite so 
fresh as she used to be." 

" And Mr. Johnson ?" 

" He's lively enough : he smokes his pipe, 
and makes speeches, the same as ever." 

*' And the pigeons .'^" 

*' I don't do much in that way now ; I've 
a few fantails and tipplers." 

" Have you one in your pocket now, 
Tom ?" Jacob asked, smiling, and laying 
his hand on Tom's broad shoulders.^ 

VOL. I. 16 



242 Stranger than Fiction. 



" No/' said Tom, quite seriously, " I had 
one a bit since, though ; I let him go from 
the stables yonder ; but I doubt if he'll get 
home ; I've no luck with the birds now." 

" Never mind, Tom, if the luck only 
comes in other more useful things. 

"Ah, I've no luck at all," said Tom, 
shaking his head. 

"No luck ! . ^what was that I read about 
the fifty sovereigns ?" 

" Well, that was luck of a sort. I had 
to go to prison though, and I'd rather have 
given a hundred sovereigns, Jacob, not to 
have done that." 

"How was it, Tom ? It is strange I 
did not notice it in the paper." 

" Yes, it was strange. Well, you see, 
.your father, when first he started the Star^ 
as you know, did it for the sake of his 
Yellow principles . liberty, and freedom, 
and all that." 

" And to promote the return of his friend, 
Mr. Bonsall," Jacob rejoined. " At least 
that is what I understood." 

"Well, our side lost the election, fouir 




Coining Events^ 243 

years ago, as you know," continued Tom, 
pushing his hands deeply into his trousers 
pockets, ** and Mr. Martyn had been work- 
ing hard to get over that, and make it right 
for the next time ; and, by gum 1 when that 
time came we'd a great fight. Talk about 
work, by gum! we were at it night and 
day. Of course I wanted the Yellows to 
win, and there was a row somehow or 
other, and the Doctor knocked a Red drum- 
mer into his own drum for calling him 
* Blue pills,' and you see somehow it was 
nearly four o'clock, and a cab full of Red 
voters came up at the time, and they were 
saucy, and my blood got up, and I suppose 
I said something as frightened them about 
the consequences of voting for the Reds. 
However, they screwed it into intimidating 
'em, and the Doctor was fined for assault ; 
but my offence was a misdemeanour, I 
think they called it. But this was at the 
bottom of it That thief Magar got me 
took up, because he wanted to make Susan 
Harley his mistress, and he was afraid I 
should be in the way.*' 

16 . 2 




244 Stranger tJian Fiction. ^ 

** Poor Susan !" exclaimed Jacob. "What 
an ungrateful b^gar I am not to have 
asked after her before ! How is she ? 
Have you heard from her ? I often think 
about her." 

" And so do I," said Tom, sighing. 
" Well, she's been away all this long time, 
and weVe never heard from her not a 
word. Mother has expected letters over 
and over again ; but all we have got is her 
love, and that's only second-hand . it comes 
through Jennings. He said as Mr. CoK 
linson was a-coming over, but that's a year 
ago, and nothing has been heard of him 
since. It makes me very uneasy in my 
mind." 

Tom felt in his pocket for a pigeon as 
some relief to his feelings, but thejbird had 
gone. 

"And I doubt if it will get home," he 
said. 

"Oh, yes, it will, Tom; you are dis- 
pirited ; the bird will soon be in the dove- 
cote, and Susan is all right too, depend on 
it," said Jacob. 



Coming Events. 245 

" May be, may be," said Tom reflec- 
tively ; " you see we don't even know 
whether she's married or not; Fm sure 
ColHnson would treat her well ; I wish I 
could go over and see, and by gum ! if he 
didn't '' 

*' Where did she sail from ?'* asked 
Jacob, interrupting Tom in the midst of an 
angry shake of the head. 

" Liverpool," Tom replied ; " I meant to 
have seen her safe off, but I was in quad, 
locked up by that infernal Magar. I wish 
that election had been a long way off Mid- 
dleton. Magar was awful hard again me, 
swore my very life away, and lied. Mister 
Jacob . lied like a blackguard, though he is 
going to be a magistrate." 

" It was very hard," said Jacob, " but it 
will all come right" 

" Hope it will," said Tom. 

" How do you get on with type-setting, 
Tom ?" 

" Pretty middling," said Tom, " but I 
don't do much in that way now. I'm a sort 
of head devil, you see, and I'm often out 



246 Stranger than Fiction. 

, , , -^ 

with the master as I am to-day, driving- 
him to see some swell or other ; but it's all 
one to me ; Tm a reg'lar miserable beggar, 
sir/' 

At sunset Mr. Bonsall's visitors left 
Clumberside. 

They would have started earlier, only 
Mr. Martyn had determined upon staying 
at Crossley all night, so that his horse 
should not be overworked. Mr. Bonsall, 
M.P., offered Mr. Martyn every accommo- 
dation for the night, but Jacob's father 
urged important business at Crossley early 
in the morning as a reason for not partak- 
ing further of Mr. Bonsall's hospitality. 

Mr. Martyn made no remarks of import- 
ance on the way homewards. He smoked 
his cigar in evident enjoyment The night 
being chilly, he drew a rug over Jacob's 
knees, and told Tom to wrap himself up. 
The horse's hoofs resounded along the 
hard road. Trees, and cottages, and stojie 
walls, and fields, and brooks, and road-side 
inns seemed to race by them in the sunset. 
Now and .then stray leaves deadened the 




Coming Events. 1247 

sound of the carriage wheels, and the 
autumn wind moaned in the trees. The 
hips and haws were red on the hedges, and 
the plover uttered its " weak complaining 
note " to the sky. The wind rippled the 
bending com in waves like summer seas. 

The spirit of autumn, which had touched 
Dorothy and Jacob and Spen, influenced 
the thoughts of Jacob and his father and 
Tom. It softened and idealised Jacob's 
dreamy ideas of love. It led Mr. Martyn 
from money calculations into vague and 
shadowy thoughts, upon the vanity of 
human hopes and wishes, until he could not 
help feeling that, since autumn was but 

typical of the close of man's own existence, 
perhaps contentment and a pipe in the gar- 
den at Middleton would have brought him 
more real happiness than was to be got out 
of journalism and county influence. The 
waving com, the setting sun, the yellow 
hedgerows, the evening bells, and all the 
tender influences of the time also found 
their way into Tom's dull mind. As he 
cracked his whip he thought how happily 



248 Stranger than Fiction. 

he might have ended his days with Susan, 
when the autumn of his life came, if fortune 
had been kind to him. 

At Cartown Tom lighted the carriage 
lamps. Jacob watched them until they 
glimmered faintly on the hill and, finally 
disappeared behind^ the wood which shel- 
tered the cottage home of Lucy Cantrill. 





CHAPTER XIII. 



A BOY S WOOING. 




T IS a good thing to give vent to 
your feelings in ink. The relief 
thus afforded to a heart over- 
charged either with love or rage 
is immense. But it is a mistake to post 
the result of your lucubrations. Write 
love letters, write angry letters . and burn 
them. This is worldly wisdom. It was 
not, however, for common reasons that 
Jacob tore up a dozen letters which he had 
written to Lucy Cantrill. He could not 
sufficiently express his feelings, his pen 
refused to interpret his thoughts, even the 
Muses failed to assist him; he copied 
Tom Moore's amorous lines, " I love but 



250 Stranger than Fiction. 

thee," and burnt them because he was too 
proud to send second-hand verses to the 
girl who had enslaved him. At last he 
made up his mind, like a man, to tell Lucy- 
he loved her, and when he saw her, he 
only blushed, like a woman. It was about 
a week after he had first spoken to Lucy 
that he stole away from Cartown to spend 
his half holiday in a pilgrimage to the 
shrine of the factory angel. 

" This is a surprise,*' said Liicy, as she 
opened the cottage door in response to 
Jacob's knock. 

The factory angel looked more charming 
than ever. She wore a lilac print dress 
and a black ribbon round her full fair neck. 
She was a blonde of the healthy kind. 
You could see the blood in her cheeks. 
She was not white, like some blondes, but 
red and white, the red a blushing rosy red 
that became vermilion when it reached her 
lips, which were pouting cherry lips. She 
stood firmly upon her feet, and carried her 
head proudly after the manner of a race- 
horse. 



rv 



A Boys Wooing. 251 

. I- I . -- I - . ~ 

Jacob thought there was a little sarcasm 
in her reception of him. 

" We are glad to see you," said the old 
woman promptly, as if she thought so too. 

" Thank you,*' said Jacob. 

" Pray sit down," said the old woman ; 
" how is Dorothy ?" 

" She is very well," said Jacob. 

" That's right ; it would be a sad job 
if somebody didn't keep well," the old 
woman replied. 

" How is Mr. Cantrill ?" asked Jacob. 

"About the same . no worse, and no 
better," said the old woman, " and he's 
getting cross, particular as this is the sea- 
son when he ought to be out ; gamekeep- 
ing as a business is at its best when things 
have to be shot." 

" Yes," said Jacob. 

" Lucy, my child, draw Mr. Martyn some 
beer after his walk," said the old woman. 

"No, thank you," said Jacob, feeling 
that it was a degradation for Lucy to wait 
upon him. 

" Oh, yes," said Lucy, " certainly." 



:252 Stramger tkam. Fiction. 

Lucy tripped into the pantry, and poured 
out the beer for Jacob with the grace of a 
goddess. 

Then they talked about Cartown, about 
Middleton, about the weather, about Mr. 
Cantrill's illness, about the arduous duties 
of a gamekeeper, and about a hundred 
other subjects. Lucy said very litde, but 
she looked her best, and in order that she 
might do this successfully, she left the room 
twice to examine herself in her litde glass 
and see that her hair kept its becoming 
folds. A fashionable lady would have 
done the same, with the addition of a little 
fresh rouge upon her cheeks, a general 
powdering, and a slight revision of her eye- 
brows. 

Jacob was very shy and nervous. Lucy, 
I fear, did not compassionate him just then. 
She was enjoying her triumph over him ; 
though he was only a schoolboy, he was 
not an unworthy conquest He was a 
manly looking fellow, and a blonde gener- 
.ally likes a dark lover. Jacob was dark 
.enough^ goodness knows; he might have 




A Boy's Wooing. 253. 

had gipsy blood in his veins for that 
matter. 

" The wood is very pretty to-day," said 
Jacob, summoning to his aid all the courage 
he could command. 

" Is it ?" said Lucy. " I have not been 
out to-day." 

" Are you going out ?" said Jacob, men- 
tally patting himself on the back for his 
boldness. 

" I don't know," Lucy replied. " Per- 
haps I may by-and-by." 

The sunshine was streaming into the 
cottage. 

" It almost seems a pity to stay indoors 
on such a day as this," Jacob said. 

"Perhaps you would like to go for 
another walk ?" said Lucy, looking archly 
round at Jacob as she wound a worsted 
ball for the old woman, who was knit- 
ting. 

, " I should very much," said Jacob, " if 
Mrs. Cantrill could spare you." 

" We were talking of you," said Lucy, a 
little surprised, ** not of me." 



254 Stranger than Fiction. 

** I can spare her," said Mrs. Cantrill. 
" Go, Lucy ; it will do you good/' 

" Very well," said Lucy, and she went 
again to her glass, before which she ar- 
ranged a pretty light shawl round her 
shoulders. 

Half an hour afterwards Jacob and Lucy 
were in the wood, walking beneath elms, 
chestnuts, and beech trees, from which the 
leaves were falling ; still there were many 
trees yet unshaken, the oaks making a 
magnificent show with their yellow leaves. 
As yet there was none of autumn's hu- 
midity in the air. The atmosphere was 
dry and clear. Lucy and Jacob walked 
long, and talked little. Jacob gathered 
blackberries for Lucy, and presented them 
to her in burdock leaves. Once she was 
frightened by a snake, which started at her 
very feet, and flashed over the path like a 
gleam of light. Jacob said he thought 
Lucy was used to the woods and fields^ 
Lucy replied that she was not, and never 
should be. This little incident induced 
the boy to offer her his arm. She took it 




A Boys Wooing. 255 



There was a great deal of happiness in 
that . at any rate so far as Jacob was con- 
cerned. The leaves falling had no sad 
influence on his feelings upon this menior- 
able occasion. While Lucy was with him, 
his thoughts were of her and her alone. 
Lucy certainly did not dislike his com- 
panionship, but whether it gave her the 
pleasure that Jacob wished to inspire it is 
impossible to say. Women are mysteries 
from their childhood. 

Jacob entertained Lucy with an account 
of his visit to Clumberside. Then he re- 
lated to her the respective histories of Tom 
and Susan, telling her how poor Tom was 
desperately in love with Susan, and how 
she had married somebody else, in which 
episode Lucy seemed very much interested. 

**And now I am going to ask you a 
favour,'' said Jacob, as they passed into an 
unusually shady recess of the wood. 

" Indeed ; what is it ?" Lucy inquired. 

" Will you grant it ?" 

" Perhaps." 

" Will you try to do so ?" 



256 Stranger than Fiction. 



"Yes," said Lucy, beginning to think 
that Jacob was not so school-boyish as she 
had thought him. 

"Well then, I want you to call me 
Jacob." 

" Is that all T inquired Lucy, and Jacob 
felt a trifle less happy than he had done a 
few minutes before. He had asked what 
seemed to be the question of his life. 

" I think it is a great deal," said Jacob. 

" If you particularly wish it," said Lucy, 
" I will . Jacob.." and her voice softened 
as she spoke his name, to which Jacob re- 
sponded by an almost imperceptible pres- 
sure of the arm he loved so dearly. 

" And now another favour ?" said Jacob, 
surprising himself not more than he sur- 
prised Lucy. 

" You may ask too many favours ; I 
thought you were very bashful," said Lucy. 

" I am," said Jacob. 

" I don't think so," said Lucy. 

Jacobs bashfulness was giving way 
before the warmth of his feelings. More- 
over, he had been rewarded for his pre- 




A Boy^s Wooing. 257 

vious act of courage. Lucy had said 
** yes" to his first question. He was de- 
termined to go on, though his cheeks 
were burning and his hands were on 
fire. 

" I want to ask you to let me call you 
Lucy," said the intrepid youth. 

Lucy did not speak. 

" You are angry with me," said Jacob 
his voice trembling. 

"No," said Lucy, **it is time we re- 
turned." 

" May I not call you Lucy ?" said Jacob 
again, in sheer desperation. 

He pressed her hand; she returned 
Cupid's familiar signal. Jacob's heart beat 
with joy. He could not speak. 

At this moment a girl from the gipsy en- 
campment crossed their path and curtseyed 
to Lucy. The vagrant was the beauty of 
her tribe. She was well dressed, though 
her feet were bare. After she had passed 
they saw her watching them at the 
bend of the road, where they crossed the 
brook to go out of the wood. There was 

VOL. I. 17 



258 Stranger than Fiction, 

something in the girl's manner which Jacob 
did not like. 

" Do ,the gipsies stay here all the year 
round ?" he asked.^ 

" I think so," said Lucy. 

" Are you afraid of them ?" 

" No, I think not ; I often meet that 
girl ; I don't think I like her ; she is con- 
sidered very beautiful." 

" She is following us," said Jacob, turning 
round on the bridge. 

" She is always very civil when I meet 
her ; never forgets to curtsey, as you saw 
her," said Lucy. 

** Does she beg ?" Jacob asked. 

" Beg I" said Lucy ; ** she is as haughty 
as a queen ; I think her mother is the 
Queen of the North." 

" Then you are not frightened at gipsies," 
said Jacob, musing, as they continued their 
walk home. 

" No ; there is no reason why I should 
be frightened. They are not interfered 
with on this estate ; my lord, I have always 
heard, is most kind to them." 




A Boy's Wooing. 259 

** Your house is very lonely," said Jacob, 
and he thought of the cottage in the dark 
nights of winter. 

" Yes ; but the watchers are about all 
night," said Lucy. 

" The watchers ?" said Jacob. 

** Yes ; uncle's men, you know . the 
keepers . there are several of them." 

" To protect the game ?" aid Jacob. 

" Yes." 

" I wish I were one of them," said Jacob. 

" Why ?" 

" That I might be near to guard you," 
said the boy, drawing himself up to his full 
height. 

When they reached the cottage, tea was 
on the table. It was sunset, and Jacob had 
several miles to walk. But he thought 
nothing of the journey, and would not have 
hurried to leave had not Lucy spoken 
of the distance. Mrs. Cantrill said Master 
Martyn must just have one cup of tea, 
which would refresh him for his walk to 
Cartown. Jacob had one cup, and was 
still in no hurry to go ; he had another, and 

17 . 2 



26o Stranger than Fiction. 

still remained gossiping with old Mrs. 
Cantrill and gazing at Lucy. At length 
Lucy said it was growing late, and as she 
said so she looked at Jacob, saying, as 
plainly as possible with her eyes, " Don't 
you think you had better leave us ? you 
have a long way to go." So Jacob rose^ 
from his seat, shook hands with Mrs. Can- 
trill, and said " Good night" 

" Please to gie my love to Dorothy," said 
the old woman. 

Lucy opened the door, and when Jacob 
shook hands with her, he said " Good 
night " in a lower voice than that in which 
he had previously spoken, and finding that 
Lucy's hand was- not withdrawn from his 
when he detained it for a few moments 
more than was necessary, he said, "dear 
Lucy," and hurried away down the garden 
and over the meadow into the wood. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



OF LUCYS HISTORY. 




T was dark when Jacob reached 
Cartown ; so very dark that in 
passing the churchyard he began 
to whistle . as if whistling would 
have laid Petroski's ghost should it have 
had a mind to appear. It was late enough 
for Mr. Spawling to look for an explanation 
from Jacob, who gave it with tolerable fair- 
ness, under the circumstances. He had 
walked as far as CantrilFs cottage . it was 
a long way . ^but he had hoped to be home 
sooner. 

" We were becoming alarmed on your 
account, Jacob," said Mr. Spawling. 
" There has been a grand sunset I for- 
give you." 



262 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

Dorothy, who passed through the room 
as Mr. Spawling was speaking, looked 
sundry meaning things at Jacob, as he re- 
plied to Mr. Spawling in some general 
terms relative to autumnal tints. 

" Spenny has been wishing for you. We 
have been reading together, and he is now 
busily engaged with Shakespeare in my 
room, where I shall be glad to see you, 
Jacob, for a quarter of an hour after you 
have supped ; it will soon be bedtime ;" 
saying which, Mr. Spawling left the 
room. 

** Autumnal tints !" said Dorothy, when 
the schoolmaster had gone. " Beautiful 
sunset ! Oh, Jacob, Jacob ! Did you for- 
get to ask how my poor father was ?" 

" No, I did not, Dorothy. He continues 
about the same." 

** Ah, poor soul I that's what I heard by 
the post this morning. Well, and how's 
Lucy ? Did she like the autumn tints and 
the fine scenery ?" 

" Don't sneer, Dorothy." 

" Fm not sneering, Jacob. I only asked 




0/ Lucys History. 263 

a civil question/' said Dorothy, laughing. 
" Was she very much delighted with the 
trees and the leaves falling ? Did you say 
some poetry to her ?*' 

" Dorothy, I shall be savage with you." 

" Oh, you'll be savage, will you ? Was 
Lucy savage, then } Woiildn't she sing to 
you r 

" Dorothy, Dorothy," said Jacob, " don't" 

" Well, I won't then. But, Jacob, mind 
what you are about ; you mustn't go wan- 
dering off to mother's without telling me, 
and you are over young to be love-making, 
and so is Lucy." 

" I was obliged to go, Dorothy. You 
will not tell, will you ?" 

" Tell who ?" 

" Mr. Spawling, or Spen, or anybody." 

" Are you ashamed of Lucy then ?" asked 
Dorothy sharply. 

" Ashamed, Dorothy ? No. But I don't 
want to be laughed at as you were laughing 
at me just now." 

'* Then I won't do it again. But how 
could anybody help laughing at you talking 



264 Stranger than Fiction. 

ot autumn tints, as if Lucy was autumn 
tints ?" 

" Lucy is everything to me," said Jacob. 
" I wish you would tell her so, Dorothy." 

" No, no, Jacob ; do your own courting ; 
ril be no go-between. But what will your 
father say ?" 

" I don't care what anybody says. I 
would give a thousand pounds if I were 
two or three years older." 

** You'll get over that, Jacob. You'll 
mend of that, lad, every day." 

" Dorothy, I feel that you are my friend/* 
said Jacob, rising from his seat and taking 
her hand; "will you assist me? will you 
find out if Lucy loves me? will you say 
something for me ?" 

" Well, you are nearly of an age, and I 
really think you would suit each other, and 
if you can't screw your courage up, lad, I'll 
tell her; but you'll do it. And do you 
think she doesn't know ? lor bless you !" 

** Thank you, Dorothy, thank you; and 
now let me tell you what I mean to do, 
Dorothy. I shall study harder than ever^ 




Of Lucy s History. 265 

and I will go into the world, and work^ 
until I show her that I am not a boy. Oh, 
Dorothy, if you only knew what I feel, if 
you could but tell what I think about Lucy, 
I am sure you would help me. If I cared 
nothing about her I could talk to her by 
the hour, almost as fast as Spen, if I wanted. 
But she is different to everybody else ; I 
can't talk to her. I love her so much that 
I am too happy to speak. I don't know 
what I am saying when she is there, and I 
want to say so much. I think of a thou- 
sand things to say to her, and never say 
one of them." 

" That's it ; oh yes, I know it ; you're in 
love, lad ; youVe in love, sure enough," said 
Dorothy excitedly. " I can feel for you, I 
can feel for you! I declare I feel quite 
overcome." 

Jacob was delighted at this manifestation 
of Dorothy's interest in his feelings. 

" He didn't say it so well ; but that is 
just how Jim used to feel when I knew 
him first." 

" Why, Dorothy, then you have " 



266 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Don't ask me about it ; don't say any- 
thing about it. He's dead and gone now, 
I know he is ; six years at sea, and I've 
had no letter for nigh upon two." 

" Oh, then, that is what the mail meant/' 
said Jficob. 

Dorothy could not restrain a few tears, 
and Jacob tried his art of soothing in a 
variety of gentle admonitions and snatches 
of advice, and a variety of hopeful ifs. 
" Don't fret, Dorothy. He will come back ; 
I have heard of people being away a great 
deal longer." 

** No, no, Jacob ; he would have written : 
and I've seen shrouds in the candle, and 
coffins have popped out of the fire. Oh, 
no, no." 

Dorothy rocked herself to and fro for a 
few moments, and then gradually recovered. 

" You've never asked about Lucy's father 
and mother," she said at length, wiping her 
6yes. 

" I understood they were dead," said 

* - 

Jacob. 

"Her mother died an hour after she was 




Of Ltccys History, 267 

born, and her father was ordered to India 
with his regiment a week afterwards." 

"Tell me all about it, Dorothy," said 
Jacob. 

" Her mother was my mother's youngest 
sister, and an ensign in the army fell in 
love with her. He was very young at the 
time : it was in this way. The regiment 
was in Middleton for a fortnight, and my 
grandfather was a farmer; mother's youngest 
sister was very pretty, and was staying on 
a visit at Middleton. The young officer 
followed her several times, and at last went 
into the house where she was stopping, and 
said right out he loved her, and asked for 
her father. After that he went and saw 
her father, and got his consent to go and 
see her, and they were regularly engaged. 
When the regiment went to other quarters 
the officer wrote to Lucy's mother every 
week, and a year afterwards married her ; 
but his father disowned him for it." 
. " How hard-hearted !" said Jacob. 

" Yes, hard-hearted it was. Well, she 
lived happily enough with him for about a 



I 



^:- 



268 Stranger than Fiction. 

year, and then came home for a litde while, 
when Lucy was bom, and her poor dear 
mother died, as I have told you. The 
father was nearly broken-hearted, and more 
so that he was ordered to India. I've 
heard mother tell the story many a time, 
and cried at it till my eyes have been 
swelled up. When he went, he left as 
much money as he could for the support 
of the child." 

" Poor Lucy, dear Lucy !" said Jacob, 
deeply interested in Dorothy's unexpected 
and romantic narrative. 

" But time wore on, and as he never 
came back, the money was spent ; and 
grandfather getting old and infirm, things 
went wrong with him, and at last he fol- 
lowed grandmother to the grave. Soon 
there was nobody left but mother, who was 
married to father before the youngest sister 
was wed, of course ; so Lucy went to live 
with them. When she was about ten the 
housekeeper of Mr. Bradforth, who owns 
the factory, took a fancy to her, and got 
Mr. Bradforth to let her come and live in 




Of Lucys History. 269 

the house with her, and be in the factory. 
The gentleman being kind, and hearing a 
bit about Lucy's history, consented, and 
the housekeeper taught her to read and 
write so well that Lucy got a prize for 
Scripture reading at the Sunday school. 
About this time, father, who was groom 
for Squire Northcotes, got the situation as 
head keeper at Dunswood, and then when 
he took to be ill sometimes, and mother 
was not so nimble as she had been, they 
thought Lucy might come and keep house 
for them ; and I thought so too, because 
Mr. Bradforth's housekeeper, the latter 
part of Lucy's time at the factory, used to 
let her work more than I thought was 
good for her ; and what was more, she 
was getting to an age when she would be 
better away from such society as there is 
in a factory, though she is as good as she 
is beautiful. That's her history, as far as 
I know. IVe told you all mother has told 
me, and I ought to know it,v all the times 
I've heard it. So you see Lucy's got good 
blood in her veins, Master Jacob. Her 



270 Stranger than Fiction, 

father was an officer in the army, and her 
mother was the daughter of parents who 
were honest enough, if they were not so 
rich as they might have been." 

" You amaze me !" said Jacob ; " why 
it is quite a romance, the history of Lucy's 
life ! but a very sorrowful one. Poor 
Lucy! What was her father's name, 
then ?" 

" Oh, I forgot to tell you that," Dorothy 
replied, " His name was Thornton !" 

" Then Lucy's proper name is Thorn- 
ton." 

" Yes, it is ; but we've always called 
her Cantrill." 

" Well, you are a gossiping couple," said 
Spen, entering the room. " Mr. Spawling 
has been waiting for you this half hour, 
Jacob, and now he's gone to bed." 

** I am sorry he waited, Spen, but Dorothy 
and I have been having a long chat, and 
the time has gone very quickly," 

"Time travels in divers places with 
divers persons," said Spen. " I'll tell you 
who Time ambles withal, who Time trots 



Of Lucy's History, 271 

withal, who Time gallops withal, and who 
he stands withal. But no, 'tis getting 
late. We must to bed . to bed . friend 
Jacob." 

"Always lively, Spen, always funny," 
said Jacob." 

" Tm brimful of Shakespeare to-night, 
Jacob ; but it's not all fun. It's grand, 
Jacob. If learning Shakespeare was learn- 
ing grammar, I should soon be a scholar." 
" I don't think you could learn better 
grammar, Spen," said Jacob. 

" I declare the boy's head's turned with 
Shakespeare . one hears about nothing else 
now . I shall go to bed ;" whereupon, 
Dorothy put a bundle of sticks into the 
kitchen oven, removed the chairs a little 
distance from the fire, screwed down the 
window cotter, lighted candles for Jacob, 
Spen, and herself ; and then the three bade 
each other " Good night." 




CHAPTER XV. 



A man's troubles. 



DULL February morning. Mr. 
Martyn had just breakfasted at 
a shining square table in the 
general room of the new Hum- 
mums Hotel, Co vent Garden. He lighted 
a cigcir, and stood at the door of the 
house to smoke. There was a cold som- 
bre cloud hanging over the garden ; the 
atmosphere harmonised with Mr. Mar- 
tyn's thoughts. The rime frost still clung 
to some waggon-loads of winter-greens. 
Mr. Martyn presently strolled into the 
market. He looked vacantly at the fruits 
and flowers. He was thinking of the last 
effort he was about to make to save himself 




A Maris Troubles. 275 

from bankruptcy. A tray of violets car- 
ried his mind back for a moment to early 
days, but he could not afford to indulge in 
a reverie on flowers. Over breakfast he 
had read a letter from Jacob, in which our 
hero had expressed a desire to go into the 
world and commence the battle of life* 
Jacob said he had worked hard for many 
months ; that he had studied night and 
day, and that Mr. Spawling was more than 
satisfied with his progress; that he had 
made up in these latter days for any early 
neglect of his education. Jacob said no- 
thing about Lucy, though he had thought 
of her all the time he was writing. What 
pretty secrets, what pleasant mysteries 
Love permits to his votaries. 

Mr. Martyn walked and smoked and 
calculated his chances of success and failure,, 
until he stood before the London chambers 
of Mr. Bonsall, M.P., in Piccadilly. It 
was eleven o'clock, and the servant said 
the hon. member had not yet breakfasted. 

" There was a very late sitting of the 
House last night," said the man. 

VOL. I. 18 



2 74 Stranger than Fiction. 

" I have particular business with Mr. 
Bonsall, and will wait/' said Mr, Martyn. 

"I will take up your card/' said the man. 

The provincial journalist followed the 
man into a handsome little room, where 
a bachelor s breakfast was waiting for the 
rising member for Middleton, 

Presently Mr. Bonsall entered. He 
was a tall, square-built man, with hard 
features, though the mouth bespoke that 
peculiar power of talk which belongs to a 
certain class of men who come to the front 
at public meetings of all kinds. You could 
see at once that there was no sentiment in 
Mr. Bonsairs constitution. He was a 
business man, sir ; looked at life from a 
practical point of view : he reduced feel- 
ings to figures, and balanced them up as 
he did his steward's book. He looked at 
his watch as he entered the room, and 
made up his mind to get rid of Mr. Mar- 
tyn within half an hour. 

"Ah, Mr. Martyn," he said, " I am glad to 
see you. Charles" (calling to his servant), 
'' Mr. Martyn will have breakfast." 




A Marts Troubles. 275 

" No, thank you/' said Mr. Martyn, " I 
have breakfasted." 

" Mr. Martyn has breakfasted/' said the 
member to Charles, who at once left the 
room with the additional plates which he 
was about to place on the table. 

" \ hope you are well," said Mn Martyn. 
*' You are compelled to keep later hours 
in town than are observed at Clumber- 
side." 

" Yes," said Mr. Bonsall. " These late 
sittings are not conducive to health ; I am 
not so well as I was ; you will take a cup 
of coffee at all events." 

"Thank you, yes, I will/' said Mr. 
Martyn. 

"Charles, Mr. Martyn will take some 
coffee," said the member. 

" How is Middleton getting on T asked 
the member, chipping his morning ^^g. 
" I am told trade is bad there, and I sup- 
pose that was to be expected ; the depres- 
sion is perfectly natural; money is too 
cheap. trade requires the stimulus of a 
rising discount ; the money market is the 

18.2 



2 76 Stranger than Fiction. 

surest barometer of the commercial atmo- 
sphere." 

" I suppose it is," said Mr. Martyn, 
" though I do not find money cheap in the 
common acceptation of the term at all 
events ; the iron trade is in a miserable 
state, and we have two thousand colliers 
out on strike." 

"That is bad, though I hold that the 
collier has a perfect right to strike ; his 
labour represents capital, and it is for him 
to assess the value of that capital." 

"There, Mr. Bonsall, you know we 
differ ; but we will discuss the point at 
some other time ; I dare say you have 
important business to attend to this morn- 
ing, and I have come to town especially 
to talk over with you a matter that concerns 
you indirectly and myself in a very import- 
ant degree." 

"Yes," said Mr. Bonsall. "Take a 
little more coffee" (refilling Mr. Martyn's 
cup). " I should like to argue that question 
of the relation of capital to labour and vice 
versa ; but we will reserve it, as you say, 



s 



A Man^s Troubles. 277 

for a more convenient opportunity. What 
is our business together this morning? . 
nothing like seeing a man on business and 
doing business promptly." 

" The newspaper," said Mr. Martyn, his 
voice faltering a little, **the Middleton Star J' 

" Yes, I congratulate you upon it, Mr. 
Martyn. It is admirably conducted and 
well written, though I doubt whether you 
are not just a trifle too liberal in your 
treatment of our opponents. For my own 
part, I think uncompromising enmity the 
policy in politics. If an opponent were 
known privately to be an angel, I should 
insist on calling him a devil, sir," said Mr. 
Bonsall. " Give the other side credit for 
nothing, sir, but tyranny, selfishness, and 
knavery." 

** I know your views upon that subject," 
said Mr. Martyn. **You remember when 
first you suggested that I should start this 
newspaper ?" 

" No, not exactly," said the hon. member, 
though he remembered the circumstance 
perfectly well. ** Did I suggest it ?" 



278 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Most certainly/' said Mr. Martyn. ** I 
remember our talking about it, before the 
first election when you were defeated/' 

" Some years ago. It must be a very 
long time ago.'' 

" The party wanted a paper, you wanted 
a paper, I was enthusiastic for a paper, we 
all wanted an organ," said Mr. Martyn. 

** Yes, I remember something of it" 

" Mr. Bonsall," said the journalist, rising,. 
" why this pretended want of memory 'i Is 
it because you have heard that the paper 
is in difficulties T 

" No, my dear sir ; I simply do not quite 
remember the circumstance; pray don't 
excite yourself." 

" Then of course you quite forget the 
promises which you and your agent made 
to me when I consented to enter upon this 
enterprise ?" 

" Promises !" said Mr. Bonsall, looking 
up with an expression of great surprise. 
" Pray explain. I do not quite understand 
you." 

" The Middleton Star was projected and 




A Maris Troubles. 279 

started in the interest of the party," said 
Mr. Martyn. " I believed then, and I do 
now, that the party represented those prin- 
ciples which mean the national good and 
the national welfare ; I felt that apart from 
its political views, a well conducted and 
independent journal would be successful ; 
you and your agents promised me substan- 
tial aid if I required it 'We are not 
particular to a couple of thousand pounds 
if you want it,' you said; my reply was 
that I should put all my own money into 
it before I asked for the party's assistance. 
I looked for a fair reward for my capital 
and energy. I have been disappointed. 
The chief success has been in electing you, 
and thus maintaining the supremacy of the 
party at Middleton after a struggle of many 
years. Not only have I spent all my own 
money, I have borrowed of others, and the 
present stagnation of trade compels me 
to remind you of your promise : that is 
the explanation of my visit this mom- 
mg. 

"And to be business-like and to the 



28o Stranger than Fiction. 

point, you have come to ask me for a large 
sum of money ?" said Mr. Bonsall. 

" Two thousand pounds," said Mr. 
Martyn. " I have already sunk in the 
paper four thousand of my own. I am 
now threatened in respect of a sum bor- 
rowed ; threatened with almost immediate 
execution. I am more than solvent; I 
have more than twenty shillings in the 
pound if the property were available. A 
thousand pounds would put my affairs in a 
comparatively healthy position ; two thou- 
sand would make the paper." 

" Who is pressing you T 

" A member of our own party." 

" That is strange." 

** He is a gas shareholder to a large 
amount, and is interested in other 
schemes which I have not always sup- 
ported." 

" Ah, you should always stick to your 
party." 

" I have done so, as a party." 

" But you should also adhere to indi- 
vidual members of it When a man goes 



A Mans Troubles. 28 r 

in for politics he reduces the thing to a 
simple matter of figures ; he ^" 

*' I know your theory," said Mr. Martyn, 
interrupting the member ; " you used to say 
that I returned you to Parliament; you 
said so on the hustings." 

" That was unwise on my part ; for once 
in my life my feelings overcame my judg- 
ment ; it was not respectful to my consti- 
tuents. But who is the person who is 
pressing you for this money ?" 

" Magar," said Mr. Martyn. " I must 
have been hard up indeed to have borrowed 
from him.*' 

" A very rising man," said the member ; 
" energetic, plain-spoken, a thorough party 
man. And how is Mr. Magar ? He was a 
miller, I think ?" 

'* He is a scoundrel," said the journalist ; 
^* a deep, designing, vulgar ruffian." 

" Really, Mr. Martyn !" said the member, 
laying down his knife and fork and leaning 
back in his chair. 

" Plain-speaking," said the journalist ; 
^* I thought you admired plain-speaking." 



282 Stranger than Fiction. 

- . . * 

Mr. Bonsall rang the bell. 

" Charies, if Lord Fazbale calls, detain 
him ; I am very anxious to see him." 

" Yes, sir,'* said Charles, leaving the 
room as softly as he had entered it 

" I am wasting your time and my own, I 
fear," said Mr. Martyn ; " is my mission 
successful ?" 

" In respect of the money ?" said the 
member, with tantalising coolness. 

" Yes." 

" Well, you see, Mr. Martyn," said the 
member, rising and planting his feet firmly 
upon the hearth-rug, and giving his back 
the full benefit of the fire ; " the question is 
a very delicate one. Prior to my election I 
should have had no difficulty ; then I was 
not pledged to the national work as it were ; 
then I was not in the House, bound to its 
dictum of honour and independence ; now> 
in my present position as a member of 
Parliament, as a legislator having taken 
certain oaths and entered upon certain 
duties, it would ill become me to advance 
money in the interest of party journalism. 




A Man's Troubles. 2831 

As a matter of inclination I should like to* 
write you a cheque for two thousand pounds ; 
as a question of duty I cannot." 

" That is your answer. I don't under- 
stand the pretended philosophy of it, but it 
means No." 

" I fear so." 

" In spite of your own words, * We shall 
not be particular to a couple of thousand if - 
ever you require the money.' " 

** I don't remember the words," said the 
honest, plain-spoken, liberal-minded, and 
eloquent member for Middleton. 

" You remember being returned ?" 

" Yes," said Mr. Bonsall, " and I shall 
always acknowledge myself much indebted 
to you, Mr. Martyn, for that honour, and I 
regret that you and I in this present busi- 
ness cannot quite agree with each other's 



views." 



" There is an old English proverb," said 
the journalist, " * I taught you to swim and 
you drown me.' " 

" I don't believe in proverbs," said Mr. 
Bonsall. ** If you reduce them to facts and 






^84 Stranger than Fiction. 

figures you find the balance of experience 
against them ; they are the aphorisms of 
disappointment*' 

Good morning," said Mr. Marty n. 

Good morning, Mr. Martyn," said the 
member. ** I hope we shall meet on a 
subject in which we mutually agree the 
next time I have the pleasure of seeing 
you.*' 

Mr. Martyn had played his last card. 
When Don Quixote rescued' the galley- 
slaves they rewarded him with stones and 
stole his squire's ass. The provincial 
journalist found London a desert He 
never had felt so lonely as he felt while 
walking along Waterloo Place, for he 
selected to go in that direction when he 
left Piccadilly. He passed the fine club- 
house where he had once dined with Mr. 
Bonsall and half a dozen other members of 
the House of Commons. Arrived at Tra- 
falgar Square, he walked round the foun- 
tains there . round and round, until he 
thought a policeman looked curiously at 
him ; then he went into the National 




A Man's Troubles. 285 



Gallery and sat down opposite a Turner, 
his mind, however, being far away from 
the sunny mists of the famous landscape. 
" Poor Jacob," he said to himself. '* Poor 
Jacob." 

Presently Mr. Martyn returned to his 
hotel. 

" Let me have my bill," he said, sitting 
down at an empty table near the fire. 

" Right, sir," was the quick response. 

" Very cold morning," said a gruff voice 
at the opposite side of the room. 

Mr. Martyn recognised a gentleman 
whom he had seen in the smoke-room on 
the previous night 

" It is," said Mr. Martyn. 

" Excuse me, you look as if we were 
both in the same box," said the stranger. 

" I don't understand," said the journa- 
list 

" You look disappointed." 

" I am," said Mr. Martyn. 

" Committee business T' said the stran- 
ger. 

'' No," said Mr. Martyn. 



-286 Stranger than Fiction. 

.' I have seen you before," said the stran- 
ger. 

" I think I can say the same with regard 
to yourself," said Mr. Martyn. 

" Yes," said the stranger. " IVe been 
up now every session for six years; for 
five years I have opposed a railway coming 
through my estate, and for five years I 
have beaten the marauders in one way or 
another ; this time they have beaten me." 

" Indeed," said Mr. Martyn, wondering 
for a moment how much good money had 
.been wasted in the litigation. 

'* Yes ; this session I came up to oppose 
the line going in a fresh direction, instead 
of through my land ; they actually, sir, had 
the audacity to make fresh plans and leave 
me out of their calculations altogether! 
and, by the Lord Harry ! they have licked 
me, sir ! and it has cost me, one way and 
another, not less than twenty thousand 
pounds." 

The obstinate old man tossed off the last 
glass of a bottle of sherry, and smacking 
his lips, said, " But TU be even with the 



A Mans Troubles. 287 

beggars yet, if it costs me another 
twenty." 

And yet Mr. Marty n's dear and honest 
hopes were to be blighted, his good name 
sullied, his son's, future made miserable 
perhaps, for the want of a couple of thou- 
sand pounds ! 



THE END OF VOL. I. 
IN THE LAP OF FORTUNE. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE LAST OF JACOBS HAPPY DAYS AT CAR- 
TOWN; UPON WHICH NOTABLE OCCASION 
HE RECEIVES BAD NEWS AND GOOD ADVICE, 
AND EXPERIENCES THE SWEET SORROW OF 
PARTING. 

HEN he wrote the letter men- 
tioned in my previous chapter^ 
Jacob Martyn little thought he 
would be suddenly summoned 
home a few months afterwards ; and never 
for a moment, in all his dreams and specu- 
lations concerning the future, did he calcu- 
late upon such events as those which were 
VOL. n. I 




4 



Stranger than Fiction. 



then progressing towards consummation. So 
far as he wa3 concerned, that short space 
of time had been full of happiness. He 
had frequently seen Lucy ; they had 
walked hand in hand, full of hope, through 
the dead leaves of autumn ; and Jacob had 
written to Lucy, and Lucy had written to 
Jacob, when winter set icy barriers and 
very early sunsets between the young lover 
and his half-holiday walks to the house 
among the trees. Mr. Spawling had once 
or twice been on the point of writing to 
Mr. Martyn upon the subject of the tender 
relationship between Jacob and Lucy ; but 
he had each time dismissed it as unworthy 
of serious attention. ** Boys will be boys," 
he thought to himself, " and girls will be 
girls . with this addition in the present case, 
however," ran on Mr. Spawling's thoughts, 
" that there are few girls so fair as Dorothy's 



cousin." 



" I am sorry," began Mr. Spawling, at 
breakfast on a March morning, which Jacob 
Martyn had cause long to remember, " I 
am exceedingly sorry to learn, Jacob, that 



y^. )j's Last Days at Car town. 



you must leave us to-day on a journey of a 
sorrowful character. You have had a letter 
this morning ?" 

" I have, sir/' said Jacob, sadly. 
Spen gazed steadfastly into his coffee cup, 
and Dorothy, looking at Jacob with tears 
in her eyes, said she " hoped things would 
turn out better than was thought" 

" I trust they will. And you must be 
hopeful too, Jacob, my boy ; but never for- 
get that we all have our cares and troubles, 
and that there are times when adversity is 
a blessing, coming to us as the forerunner 
of real and lasting peace," said Mr. Spawl- 
ing. 

Spen still looked at his coffee, and tears 
trickled slowly down Dorothy's ruddy 
cheeks. 

*' You have my heartiest sympathy, Jacob. 
I shall feel your trouble as if it were my 
own. We have been acquainted with each 
other a long time now ; and for my own 
part, Jacob, the more I have known of you 
the higher you have risen in my estimation. 
Do not think I flatter ; I am not given to 

I . 2 



Stranger than Fiction. 



mere Up compliments ; you will have 
the good sense to regard what I say in 
the proper light Praise and commenda- 
tion, fairly earned, represent a just debt, 
and I pay it willingly and with satisfac- 
tion/' 

"You are very kind, sir," said Jacob, 
his face beaming with gratitude. 

" Whatever may be our respective des- 
tinies, Jacob, I am sure we shall always 
remember each other with esteem and 
respect." 

" Yes, sir," said Jacob. 

" We cannot say what the future may 
have in store for us. When autumn tinges 
the leaf its sure decay has begun. The 
fruit falls with its own ripeness. But true 
affection lives on to the last ; and memory 
has consoling pleasures, sad though they 
sometimes be, for those who have lived 
to wear grey hairs. Old men look for 
their pleasures in memory. It is youth 
which looks hopefully into the future. 
May yours be a bright one, Jacob! Do 
not expect it to be without clouds, and 



Ik 



JacoUs Last Days at Cartown. 5 

storms, and tempests. AfHiction will surely 
come to you, sooner or laten Already 
you have tasted of the bitter cup. When 
next it is presented to your lips, take it 
meekly, submissively, and religiously. We 
are the creatures of an all-powerful and 
beneficent Being who ordains everything 
to a good and wise end. He puts us 
through the fire of adversity that we may 
be made the purer for the burning, and 
our afflictions are the offspring of His 
mercy. If ever you find it difficult to 
realise this, my dear boy, go down upon 
your knees and seek instruction and con- 
solation at the hands of Him who will 
never desert you so long as you seek 
Him ; and whose love is as infinite as 
His wisdom, and whose mercy endureth 
for ever." 

Mr. Spawling spoke these words so 
solemnly, with an elocution so touching, 
and in a voice so rich and musical, that 
his hearers were no less astonished than 
they were affected. And when Mr. Spaw- 
ling, after a short pause, said, ** Let us 



Stranger than Fiction, 



pray/* they fell upon their knees and joined 
the schoolmaster in his supplications with 
true religious fervour. A 

Family prayers h^d not Tormed part of 
tlie domestic arrangements of Mr. Spaw- 
ling's household, though a blessing was 
asked upon every meal, and Mr. Spawling 
frequently closed the day by reading a 
chapter from the Bible ; so that there was 
something unusual in the present proceed- 
ing, which would have been impressive 
from its novelty had it not been touching 
from its earnestness. 

The truth is, the letter which Mr. Spaw- 
ling had received prepared the schoolmaster 
for the event of Mr. Martyn's death, which 
it was feared would take place within a 
few days. This sad news could hardly 
be said to have been unexpected, though 
the information appeared to come with 
terrible suddenness. On his last jour- 
ney to London Mr. Martyn had taken a 
severe cold, which had settled upon his 
lungs ; in addition to which he had for some 
time past been suffering from disease of 



Jacob's Last Days at Cartown. 7 

the heart. Poor Mr. Marty n was dying 
of disappointment and trouble. If his 
journey to Ld(idon had been successful, 
he would not have taken cold. Mental 
anxiety predisposes men to all the ailments 
under the sun. 

"And now, good-bye for the present, 
Jacob," said Mr. Spawling, putting out his 
hand. " Remember my words, and God 
bless you." 

" Good-bye, sir," said Jacob. " You 
have been very kind to me, and I shall 
never forget it" 

Mr. Spawling here left the room, just 
as Spen began to give note of the com- 
mencement of another scholastic day. The 
bell tolled slowly this morning, from first 
to last Spen afterwards told Dorothy 
that he felt as if he were operating at a 
funeral. 

" How solemn master was ! It's enough 
to upset anybody . I wonder he did so," 
said Dorothy, when she was alone with 
Jacob. " But he has changed of late. He 
gets dreaming up in that room, and reading 



Stranger than Fiction. 



until he is quite strange sometimes. The 
letter you got did not say Mr. Martyn was 
dangerously ill, Jacob, did it ?" 

" No, Dorothy. Aunt Keziah says that 
father has been unwell for some weeks, 
that he is worse during the last few days, 
and wishes me to come and see him. I 
am not so much alarmed at it, Dorothy, as 
I otherwise might be, because I have asked 
him to let me leave school, and aunt 
Keziah says, in a postscript, that it is pos- 
sible I may not return to Cartown again." 

" You don't say so, Jacob !" 

"I do ; you know why I wish to leave 
here, Dorothy ?" 

" Well, yes ; and I like you for it, sir. 
But still I am sorry." 

" You must take care of Lucy for me, 
Dorothy." 

" Ah ! heaven bless her. You will go 
and say good-bye to her ?" 

" Of course I shall, Dorothy." 

" You can go on there now; Will Tunster 
can take up your box here, and call for you 
on his way. 



>> 



Jacob's Last Days at Cartown. 9 

" Thank you, Dorothy ; how kind and 
considerate you are." 

Spen entered the house at this juncture, 
with a small vessel in one hand and a piece 
of Indian ink in another. It was mapping- 
day, and the merriman had been filling in 
the waving snakish wriggling twining twist- 
ing lines, indicating rivers around the 
western hemisphere. 

" I just ran off to bid you good-bye, 
Jacob," said Spen. " Cheer up ; don't be 
frightened at Mr. Spawling being so tragic 
this morning ; he was carried away by his 
feelings and his eloquence." 

" I am not frightened, Spen," said Jacob, 
shaking his friend by the hand. 

" That's right ; good-bye, Jacob," said 
Spen, returning the grasp. "We shall 
soon meet again ; but tip me a letter." 

Then their eyes met ; they looked sadly 
at each other, and " Good-bye" was re- 
peated in a low whisper. 

" If I should not come back, Spen," said 
Jacob, following the mapper as he slowly 
left the house, " you will " 



lo Stranger than Fiction. 

" Write to you every day," said Spen, 
finishing the sentence. 

" Yes, but that is not what I was going to 

say. You will '^ and Jacob paused a 

second time. 

'* Never forget you, and take the first 
opportunity of seeing you again,'* said 
Spen. 

" Yes, yes, my dear fellow,'* said Jacob, 
'' and you'll have an eye upon Lucy some- 
times ; and watch over her for me in my 
absence." 

" Lucy ! ah, bless her, won't I, though ? 
But Jacob, suppose / was to fall in love 
with her." 

Jacob smiled at the remark, and Mr. 
Spawling's two boarders shook hands once 
more, and parted. 

" Now I think I will go, Dorothy," said 
Jacob, re-entering the house. 

" Dear me, how one thinks of all sorts of 
things when folks is going away like this,'^ 
said Dorothy. ** There is one thing I want 
to ask, so that nothing shall be on my mind. 
You'll never think about that morning I 



yacoBs Last Days at Cartown. 1 1 

was so rough with you, Jacob . the very 
first morning you came ? Lor', how time 
does fly, to be sure !" 

" I shall remember nothing but your "" 
kindness, because, indeed, I have no other 
memories of you, Dorothy," said Jacob. 

In less than half an hour Jacob was 
walking to the house among the trees. A 
March wind rollicked by him on his way. 
The tinkling of sheep-bells came over 
hedges that were swelling with the earliest 
reanimating influences of spring. Field- 
labourers were calling to each other ; and 
there was a fresh earthy smell from the 
newly-turned furrows, that were beginning 
to make long lines on the brown soil, as if 
Nature had turned schoolmaster and were 
ruling giant copy-books. Rooks jvere 
cawing in the trees and holding great meet- 
ings about family rights of building on 
certain branches. Sundry other birds, 
which had mated in the previous month, 
were gathering wool and sticks and hay for 
making nests in out-of-the-way places. 
The world which had been dead was 



1 2 Sinxfi^cr than Fiction. 

coming to life again. Jacob was almost 
shocked at his own want of sensibility. 
He felt happy in spite of his father's illness 
and notwithstanding his solemn parting 
with Mr. Spawling. Sorrow seemed to 
him at that time an impossible sensation. 
The song of birds, the chattering of rooks, 
the labourer whistling in the fields, the 
bright sunshine, the bursting buds, and the 
hot pulsation of first love in his heart . 
Jacob's feelings were in strong sympathy 
with nature. 

" How you frighten me ! " Lucy ex- 
claimed, as Jacob entered the cottage un- 
perceived. 

"Is the surprise agreeable ?" said Jacob, 
stealing his arm round Lucy and kissing 
her before she could reply. 

" Jacob !" said Lucy, starting from his 
side, *' you are positively rude.'' 

Lucy's eyes flashed. She picked up her 
back-comb and looked almost angry. 

" I am very sorry," said Jacob. " You 
are angry." 

"No, indeed I am not," said Lucy ; " but 




yacoUs Last Days at Cartown. 1 3 

you surprised me at first, and then to take 
that sudden advantage of my confusion !'' 

Jacob could not tell whether Lucy was 
angry or not. 

" And you have caught me in the middle 
of house-cleaning," she said. 

That was the grievance. Lucy did not 
object to Jacob kissing her ; but she could 
not endure his seeing her with dirty hands. 
Her face was not clean either, and she had 
on a grimy apron. Fancy Hebe cleaning 
the hearth with a dirty face and her hair 
falling down ! Jacob thought Lucy all the 
prettier for this domestic taint. Her cheeks 
were red, and her print dress showed to 
perfection the round contour of her figure. 
There are ladies in Mayfair who would 
look very drabs in such attire, and with 
dirty faces, (if such a contingency were 
possible) ; but Lucy would have looked 
ladylike and Hebe-like under any circum- 
stances. 

" Ah, you will forgive me when you 
know why I have come,'' said Jacob. 

** I do forgive you ; I should not have 



14 Stranger than Fiction. 

objected even to your rudeness if I had 
been dressed," Lucy replied, her eyes bent 
upon the ground. 

" I am going to leave Cartown,'' said 
Jacob. 

" When ?" 

" Very soon.*' 

" Next week ?'' 

" Earlier than that." 

** Oh, Jacob, you should have told me 
before," said Lucy, with a look of real ten- 
derness. 

" You are sorry," said Jacob. 

" It is very sudden, is it not ?" said Lucy, 
not quite willing to say that she was sorry. 

"You will think it sudden and a little 
sad when you know all about it," said 
Jacob, lowering his voice and pressing the 
hand that somehow or other had found its 
way into his own. 

"Tell me at once," said Lucy, "or I 
shall think something very dreadful has 
occurred." 

" To-day, dear, to-day," said Jacob. 

Lucy did not now attempt to disguise 




Jacob's Last Days at Cartown, 1 5 



her sorrow. Her nature was less enthu- 
siastic than Jacob's. She was not easily 
moved from the even tenour of her way. 
To her, life was a calm river, with none of 
the dashing over precipices and leaping 
over stones which were characteristic of 
Jacob's temperament. Lucy s was a quiet, 
loving nature that soon bent to circum- 
stances. She liked a bit of finery, as her 
aunt would truly say . what pretty girl does 
not ? And she liked admiration. When 
some of the gentlemen who came to shoot 
over my lord's estate called at the cottage, 
Lucy always looked her best and was as 
haughty as a queen. She made fun of 
Jacob when first he came to the cottage, 
mimicked his voice and manner when he 
left; but by degrees he gained a higher 
place in her thoughts ; his companionship 
had broken down the monotony of her 
existence. When she found that he was 
going to leave Cartown her voice faltered, 
her heart beat convulsively, and when she 
went upstairs to wash her face and change 
her dress there were tears in her eyes. 



1 6 Stranger than Fiction. 

She forgot her mortification at being dis- 
covered cleaning the house, and she came 
down again with a bright blue ribbon in 
her hair, and a clean, pretty dress, and 
coquettish little apron ; and while Jacob 
sat admiring her ^ she took a little brush 
and gave the finishing touches to the 
polished and shining hearth, which had 
been cleaned and brightened by her own 
fair hands. 

Jacob told her he was going to begin the 
battle of the world for her sake, to win a 
name for both, when nothing but death 
could part them. He was not likely to 
return to Cartown again to live. Middle- 
ton was no distance truly, but still there 
was the going away under circumstances 
so different to those which had hitherto 
marked their partings. Heretofore they 
had only said " Good night." Now they 
would say " Good-bye." When they met 
again would anything have occurred to 
change their love ? 

" How silent you are, Lucy," said Jacob, 
leaning over her chair. 




yacoGs Last Days at Car town. 1 7 

Lucy was very quiet all the day long ; 
her movements were more gentle than 
usual. When she did speak it was almost 
in a whisper. Jacob was content to sit 
with her hand in his, listening to the birds 
singing, and with his brain full of bright 
pictures of the future. When they walked 
out together she leaned more heavily on 
his arm than ever she had done before, and 
the sense of their first real parting seemed 
to deepen into a sacred feeling, a confiding 
trustfulness, that was best interpreted by 
silence. Lucy had not known how much 
she loved Jacob until now ; while the con- 
sciousness that his love was reciprocated 
heightened Jacob's hopes of days to come> 
and if possible made Lucy seem to him 
more beautiful than ever. 

Mrs. Cantrill and her husband had gone 
out to see a neighbour at Crossley whom 
they had not visited for many years. The 
old man had only left his bed about a week 
previously, and the change, it was thought^ 
would be beneficial to him. The squire's 
steward had offered, the day before, to let 

VOL. II. 2 



1 8 Stranger than Fiction. 

a conveyance (which was going through 
Crossley and would return in the evening) 
call for them, and the poor old couple had 
made holiday . the first for a good round 
number of years. 

So the lovers were alone. The time 
passed very rapidly. Their talk was 
chiefly the language of the eye and the 
pressure of the hand. And still the clock 
ticked and beat, out the time with mar- 
vellous speed. The little sprites that 
swung upon the pendulum sent it to and 
fro with a swift perversity ; a malicious 
hand turned the fingers round and round, 
in provoking harmony with the swaying 
pendulum. The fire in the shining grate 
burned quickly, and soon became white 
and dusty, as though night were coming 
before the afternoon was over; while a 
cricket began to sing long before its cus- 
tomary time. 

At length Lucy placed cups and saucers 
upon the table and made the tea. How de- 
lightful it was to see Lucy cutting bread and 
butter and sitting at the head of the table. 




yacob^s Last Days at Car town. 19 

" Some day we may sit in our own house 
and have tea together," said Jacob. 

" We must not think of it ; first love is 
never successful, Dorothy says," Lucy re- 
plied, with a touch of her former arch- 
ness. 

" Dorothy does not think so in her heart, 
though she may say so," answered Jacob. 
" I hope to earn a house very soon ; 
would you not like to live in London, 
Lucy ? Mr. Spawling says London is the 
place for enterprising spirits." 

" I don't know," said Lucy ; " it is very 
dull here." 

" Yes, very ; is it not ? I wish you lived 
in a town, Lucy." 

" Why ?" 

" I don't know ; I always think some- 
body will be running away with you down 
here." 

Lucy laughed at this, and said Jacob was 
a silly boy. 

" If I were a lord, or a great mkn's son, 
and came here to shoot, and had plenty of 
money, I should try and run away with 

2 . 2 



20 Stranger than Fiction. 

you/' said Jacob, handing Lucy her own 
bread and butter. 

" Yes, but other people are not so silly 
as you are, Jacob ; you think so much of 
me, you see." 

" I do, indeed ; you are all the world to 
me, Lucy ; you shall see ; some day I will 
do wonderful things; it is a pity this is 
not the age of knight-errantry." 

" You would go to the wars then and be 
killed, and a great deal of good that would 
do," said Lucy. 

And they went on talking lovers* talk 
until time seemed to be in a conspiracy 
against them. The wind began to rise; 
the evening shadows fell upon the window ; 
the clock ticked faster than ever. Jacob, 
after a great deal of persuasion, induced 
Lucy to sing the factory hymn, in which 
she broke down and burst into tears, and 
then, for the first time, Jacob wished the 
last five minutes were over. The sweet 
sorrows of parting were giving way to the 
bitterness of saying farewell. 

"My dear, dear Lucy," said Jacob at 




yacoUs Last Days at Cariown. 2 1 

last, both his arms round the weeping girl, 
'* good-bye ; God bless you !" 

Will Tunster's horn sounded shrill and 
clear through the leafless . trees of March. 
Before the echo passages of " Tom Moody" 
had reached the last quivering variation, 
which was WilFs especial pride and glory, 
Jacob was at the cottage door. He went 
away with the picture of it in his memory, 
to carry it about with him, to fill into his 
dreams . ^the home of his love, the scene of 
his happiest hours. Jacob had often talked 
of the battle of life ; he had pictured him- 
self a victor in the conflict, coming home 
in triumph to stand beside Lucy at the 
altar. From this time . ^this last day at 
Cantrill's . his soldiership, his courage, his 
prowess, his endurance, his faith in love 
and duty were to undergo great trials of 
warfare. Will Tunster's horn was sound- 
ing the first alarm of the battle. 



CHAPTER II. 



.* WHITHER GOEST THOU, MISFORTUNE? TO 



WHERE THERE IS MORE. 



 




IDDLETON-IN-THE-WATER, 
I believe, retains many old cus- 
toms even in the present day. 
Neither badger-baiting nor cock- 
fighting is quite extinct in the North Mid- 
land borough. Wife beating is looked upon 
as the exercise of a manly right. The pro- 
verb of a spaniel, a woman, and a walnut 
tree being the better for beating had its 
origin at Middleton. In the early days of 
Jacob Martyn there were trapper girls in 
the pits and women-slaves on the banks. 
Middleton fought hard to retain these glo- 




Misfortune. ^ 



nous privileges when Parliament interfered 
with the local rights of property. Little 
sweeps were forced up the Middleton flues 
long after the Act of Parliament against 
this particular kind of cruelty was passed. 
In the old days they used to duck shrews, 
bum witches, drive stakes through suicides, 
and assemble together in joyous crowds to 
see criminals whipped or hanged. 

The Middletonians clung to everything 
old, whether it was bad or good. The 
most harmless of their ancient customs was 
that of the curfew bell. It was tolling as 
Jacob and the mail driver neared the town, 
tolling just as it always had done from the 
first, and the sound brought back to Jacob's 
remembrance many strange recollections, 
including that most memorable incident of 
all, the arrival of his aunt Keziah. Will 
Tunster answered the bell with a solemn 
bugle performance of " Tom Moody," after 
which he resumed a somewhat lugubrious 
attempt at conversation, which had not by 
any means been successful on the road. 
Now that they were entering the town, 



24 Stranger than Fiction. 

however, Will thought it was necessary to 
come to the point at which he had long 
been aiming. 

" Hope you won't be down-hearted," he 
said in his strong northern dialect 

" I do not know that I have any parti- 
cular cause to be so," said Jacob, who had 
received a very different letter to that 
which aunt Keziah had written to Mr. 
Spawling. 

" Tm afeard thou has, Mester Jacob, but 
thou won't be so much at first as after. 
When a chap falls down and is badly hurt, 
he doesn't feel it so much at the time as 
after, thou sees." 

Will flicked his horse with the whip by 
way of emphasis, and Jacob made no 
reply. 

" I had a talk with Dorothy, thou sees," 
went on the driver, ** before I took up thy 
box at Spawling' s, and I've heard summat 
o' what's been going on in these parts 
lately. Bad luck always runs his cattle in 
pairs." 

Will flicked his horse again, and dragged 



Misfortune. 25 



at the reins as if his willing steed were one 
of the demon's ill-begotten cattle. 

" I don't understand you. I am not pre- 
pared for the ill news which you seem to 
suggest/' said Jacob, drawing nearer to the 
driver, and trying to look up into his face, 
which was impossible, seeing that the night 
was dark, and that the town lamps were 
therefore not lighted. 

They were just entering the town of 
Middleton. Jacob could hear the water 
rushing over the mill-weir by the bridge. 
** Well, it's a pity thou hast not been more 
prepared, Jacob," said the driver, with a 
familiar expression of sympathy. " Keep 
up thy spirits. It's no good meeting a 
winter storm with one's jacket off, as if it 
was summer." 

" You alarm me. Will," said Jacob. 

" Nay, don't be alarmed : set thy teeth, 
clench thy fists, and summon thy courage." 

" What is it, Will 'i tell me before we 
stop; why this is our house . ^we are at 
home." 

** Hush, lad ; don't say no more just now ; 



26 Stranger than Fiction. 

wait a bit ; keep up thy courage and trust 
in God," said Will, pulling his horse into a 
walk. 

The curfew bell had ceased, making the 
suddenly noiseless motion of the mail- 
cart more impressive than the unexpected 
silence virould otherwise have been. They 
were travelling over a muffled roadway. 
Bark cuttings, from the tannery, had been 
laid upon the street So strong are local 
associations, that Jacob was at once re- 
minded of the quarter sessions and the 
death of an eminent townsman. Tan had 
been chiefly used, in his memory, when 
the magistrates, "in quarter sessions as- 
sembled,'' met to try prisoners at the old 
Town Hall; and on these occasions it is ques- 
tionable whether the boys, who rolled them- 
selves in the soft broken bark, and pelted 
each other with the same, did not make 
more noise than the coaches and coal carts 
would have done upon the ordinary flags 
and boulders with which the streets were 
paved. But when the bark was strewed 
before a house in which death was busy, to 




Misfortune. 2 7 



keep the sick chamber quieter than fear 
and love could keep it, the sign was re- 
spected, even in Middleton, and the knocker 
might have been left unmuffled. 

" Surely my father is not seriously ill ?" 
at length said Jacob to himself. He was , 
afraid to ask the question aloud* 

Tom Titsy was standing in the street 
waiting to carry Jacob's box into the house. 
When the cart stopped he came forward 
and assisted Jacob to alight, never uttering 
a word, but returning the pressure of 
Jacob's hand in a very different manner to 
his greeting at Cartown when he accom- 
panied Jacob and Mr. Martyn to Clumber- 
side. 

Will Tunster very quietly moved on his 
way, when Jacob and his luggage were in 
Tom Titsy's custody. Tom threw the box 
over his shoulder, and preceded Jacob into 
the house. 

"This way, sir," said a prim domestic, 
and Jacob was ushered into a comfortable 
dining-room, which in the old time had been 
an ordinary parlour. At Jacob's request. 



28 Stranger than Fiction. 

Tom took a seat, and Jacob began to ques- 
tion him. 

" How is my father, Tom ?" 

" Bad, Jacob ; very bad," said Tom. 

" But . but, Tom, there is no danger ?" 
said Jacob, in a faltering voice. 

Tom held down his head. 

" Don't be afraid, Tom ; tell me truly. 
Tom, be honest with me." 

But Tom maintained a miserable silence, 
broken only by a sigh that said more than 
Jacob's worst fears had predicted since the 
mail-cart rolled softly on the bark carpet 
without 

" Illness is not -the worst," at last said 
Tom, rising and striding across the apart- 
ment, with his lips compressed and his 
hands clenched. 

" For God's sake, don't drive me mad !" 
exclaimed Jacob, grasping Tom by the 
arm. " If you care anything about my 
friendship, tell me everything. Am I a fool, 
or a baby, or an idiot, that you hum and ha, 
and nod and sigh and trifle with me thus ?" 
Jacob's eyes flashed with indignation, "Will 




Misfortune. 29 



Tunster treated me just as you are treat- 
ing me. It is monstrous ; it is cruel." 

Tom turned upon Jacob a surprised look, 
and stopping his indignant protest against 
further silence by a motion of his hand, 
said, "Well then, M ester Jacob, you shall 
know all. Pull yourself together, for you 
will need all your strength if you were as 
old as Methuselah. Follow me ; steady, 
steady." 

Tom led the way to the kitchen. The 
door being ajar, he requested Jacob to walk 
on tiptoe and peep in towards the fire-place* 
Jacob did so, and saw a dwarfish-looking 
man sitting in the chair which Jacob's 
mother had been accustomed to use, and in 
which aunt Keziah sat on the first night 
when she made her appearance at Middle- 
ton. 

The stranger was by no means prepos- 
sessing in appearance. He looked like a 
combination of several people. The head 
was that of a tall, muscular man, and it was 
reclining on the body of a stiff, thickset 
dwarf, with the legs of a miner, who had 



30 Stranger than Fiction. 

- . ^-^ 

bent them out of their natural shape during 
years of labour in narrow and stifling head- 
ings. This combination was evidently 
asleep with its legs on the fender. 

Jacob gazed in astonishment for a few 
minutes, and then looked eagerly at Tom 
for an explanation. 

" Don't you know him ?'' Tom inquired. 

" No," said Jacob, following Tom into 
the dining-room. 

" What ! not know Bamaby the '' 

" Yes, yes," said Jacob ; but still he did 
not seem to understand what was the 
matter. 

** Bamaby the bum-bailiff," said Tom in 
a whisper. ** He's in possession of the 
place." 

Jacob staggered towards a chair, as Mrs. 
Gompson entered the room. 

" Your father would like to 3ee you, 
Jacob. Dear me, how youVe altered." 

Aunt Keziah could not resist this ex- 
pression of surprise on finding the weakly 
boy of a few years ago a fine haftdsome 
fellow on the verge of manhood. She had 




Misfortune. 3 1 



a basin in one hand, and a napkin in the 
other, which she had picked up as an 
excuse for not shaking hands with her 
nephew. She felt for a moment half in- 
clined to lay them down, on looking at him 
again. But the old antipathy arose when 
Jacob treated her with quiet, self-possessed 
indifference. 

" Jacob," repeated Mrs. Gompson, " your 
father wishes to see you." 

Jacob stared into vacancy, and remained 
silent. 

" Well : it is hardly a time to try to 
make disturbances," said Mrs. Gompson, 
tossing her head, and walking away. " I 
was in hopes we might have been on better 
terms than before." 

" Stay, stay ; so we will be," said Jacob, 
rising. " I am not well ; I have heard 
much worse news than I expected ; indeed, 
I did not expect misfortune of any kind." 

" Oh ! of course," said aunt Keziah, 
glancing angrily at poor Tom; "there's 
always babblers to tell bad news." 

Tom was hurt at this cruel taunt, but he 



32 



Stranger than Fiction. 



was compensated by a kind, sympathising, 

grateful glance from Jacob, who said . 
" Tom did not wish to tell me/' 
" Of course not ; making it appear all the 

worse by a little mystery," said aunt 

Keziah. 
"Well, well; say no more about it," 

Jacob sorrowfully replied. "I will go to 

my father's room;" and he followed Mr. 

Martyn's erratic sister to the staircase. 





CHAPTER III. 



IN THE HANDS OF THE PHILISTINES. 




A COB had a long and sad inter- 
view with his father, who was 
dangerously ill. Aunt Keziah 
. came in and out of the sick- 
room while Jacob was there. His father 
said she had been very good and very 
considerate. 

" I took cold in London," said Jacob's 
father. " But I shall soon be well ; I am 
getting on nicely now.'* 

Jacob's heart sank at sight of the thin 
hands, the pale cheeks, and the lustreless 
eyes. 

** I am not so ill as you were," said the 
sick man ; " not so ill as you were ; no, not 

VOL. IL 3 



34 Stranger than Fiction. 

so ill as you were, when I carried you into 
the garden. I could not do it now, Jacob ; 
you have grown a fine manly fellow since 
then/' 

" Aunt said you were not to talk much, 
father dear/' 

" I am only talking very quietly," said 
Mr. Martyn ; " only very quietly. Come 
closer, my boy. I have been thinking 
a great deal about your letters, Jacob. 
You are a good fellow, and I will see what 
can be done in the way of starting you in 
life. But I shall sell this newspaper. It 
is killing work, Jacob. Don't be afraid of 
my talking. I am only whispering ; come 
closer." 

Jacob took his fathers hand. It was 
very thin. He laid his head on the pillow 
by his father, who continued in a low whis- 
per to unburthen his poor breaking heart. 

" Have nothing to do with newspapers, 
Jacob. It is the tread wheel in another 
shape. You are always , toiling upwards, 
but you don't progress ; your work is never 
finished. And as for the influence of the 



In the Hands of the Philistines. 3 5 

press, it is not worth having ; it is only a 
perpetual worry ; you make enemies under 
any circumstances ; if you are independent 
and honest you lose your money ; if you 
belong to a political party your own friends 
do not support you. When I am about 
again, Jacob, we will live at our ease, and 
cultivate the garden. You will not grow 
tired of such a life as that." 

" Tired, father } No !" said Jacob. 

" Then you must think about it, my boy ; 
we will talk it over to-morrow ; we will 

talk ," and the sick man dropped into 

a troubled sleep. 

Mrs. Gompson explained to Jacob in a 
hard; matter-of-fact manner, that there 
were some papers under her brothers 
pillows which she thought he wished to 
speak about 

"He had them in his hand one day," 
she said ; " but he put them out of the. way 
hurriedly, as if he did not wish me to see 
them ; they are under his pillow." 

" I will not disturb them," said Jacob. 

Mr. Martyn continued to sleep during 

3.2 



36 Stranger than Fiction, 

the greater part of the day, which was re- 
garded by Mrs. Titsy as a very hopeful 
and good sign of improvement. 

In the evening Jacob went into the little 
counting-house, and saw Mr, Julius Jen- 
nings. 

Wiping his pen upon his coat-sleeve, 
and descending from a high stool, Jennings 
looked round as if to satisfy himself that 
Jacob was alone. Without any further 
greeting than a nod, he motioned Jacob to 
a chair. 

Jennings was greatly changed. His 
hair was grey. He had a watchful, sus- 
picious look. His shoulders were getting 
up into his neck. His chin had elongated. 
His elbows were more pointed than usual, 
and his hair had grown lower down upon 
his wrinkled forehead. His voice, which 
had once a little of the roundness of the 
canting preacher in it, was now harsh and 
grating. He was like a man in continual 
fear of some threatened danger. . 

" You have heard all ?" said Julius, rub- 
bing his hands nervously. 



In the Hands of the Philistines. 3 7 

^ . .. - . .. ..I.. .!.... .. I. .... 

" I have." 

" You know who the fellow in the kitchen 
is ?" 

" Yes." 

"Good," said Julius promptly, as if 
anxious to clear the ground and come to 
the point which he had in his mind. 

" You are prepared to look into things 
in a business-like way ?" 

" I am." 

" Good . ^you have grown into a man, 
sir, since we last met." 

Jacob nodded. He had never liked 
Jennings, and his pride resented the power 
which Jennings seemed to wield. 

" You know we are entirely done up ?" 

" Pray tell me all there is to tell, sir," 
said Jacob. 

Jennings took up a sheet of note-paper 
from his desk, and looking at some rough 
figures, frowned at the paper, thrust his 
bony hands deep into his pockets, and in 
a sententious manner gave Jacob a de- 
scription of the financial position of the 
house. 



38 Stranger than Fiction, 

" Debts ;^3,500, assets ;^3,500 ; assets 
not available, consisting of money spent in 
buildings, alterations, machinery, and or- 
ganisation. Your father had ;i^3,ooo in 
cash when he began this new business. 
Meeting of creditors on Mr. Martyn's 
return from London. Offered to assign 
everything on condition that the Star 
should be carried on for another six 
months, with option of re-purchase to 
vendor. I advised going into bankruptcy ; 
father would not ; concern w ent on. ;^ i , 500 
of debts secured by bill of sale ; there's the 
rub. Mrs. Gompson has told you, no 
doubt, of the papers under your father's 
pillow . copy of bill of sale, that's all . it 
is killing him, wearing his life out. Worst 
of it is, Magar has the bill of sale. Magar 
has been puffed in the paper for his benevo- 
lence, but lately has been trying to swindle 
the public, and he has been pitched into . 
honest but bad policy ; he and some other 
corporation swells have sworn to slop the 
paper. Your father had an editor from 
Brighton, or somewhere . a sort of half and 



In the Hands of the Philistines, 39 

half Londoner, clever no doubt, but indis- 
creet ; has taken a mortal hatred to Magar, 
and vowed he would expose the schemes 
of Magar and a little clique of speculators 
who are in power here. Magar has seized . 
the man in possession is Magar s man/ and 
before the week is over we shall all go to 
the wall." 

It was a brief story, but no item was left 
out. Jennings expressed no regret ; nor 
did he exult. He omitted to use a single 
scriptural quotation. He treated the mat- 
ter in a business light. When he had 
concluded he looked at Jacob curiously, 
withdrew his hands from his pockets, took 
a pinch of snuff, and resumed his seat at 
the desk. 

" Are you not a friend of Mr. Magar ?" 
asked Jacob calmly. 

" Not particularly," said Jennings; "why?'* 
" Have you no influence with him T 
** A little," said Jennings, looking straight 
at Jacob. 

" Not sufficient to put an end to this 
seizure T 



40 Stranger than Fiction. 

" I fear not/' said Jennings. 

" You would if you could ?" 

" I would : your father has always been 
good to me. Magar is a stubborn man. 
He has risen swiftly to wealth and position. 
When men shoot up like that they are apt 
to forget old friends. It is an infernal ' 
world, sir ; a sneaking, blood-sucking, fool 
of a world ; a blind, time-serving world ; 
but no matter . every dog has his day." 

Jennings rocked himself to and fro as he 
spoke, and seemed to be talking to himself. 

" And you think there is no chance of 
settling this affair?" said Jacob, with an 
effort at business nonchalance^ but with a 
sickly sensation at his heart. 

** I fear not. Bonsall has behaved like 
a thief. He promised ;^2,ooo whenever it 
was required. That was before he became 
M.P. Now he is a swell ; they say he is 
to be a Cabinet Minister ; he has kicked 
the ladder down ; he got up through your 
father s energy and hard work ; he does 
not answer our letters now ; he is a fool as 
well as a knave." 




In the Hands of the Philistines. 4 1 



" Heaven's will be done," said Jacob. 

" Amen," said Jennings. " You had 
better go and look round the place, if you 
have not done so. Have you seen the 
new office ?" 

- No." 

" I wish I never had." 

'* Where is it ?" 

" At the top of the garden. The men 
work late to-night; you may not have 
another opportunity. Meanwhile if it is 
possible to influence Magar I will do it." 

" Thank you," said Jacob, and as he left 
the counting-house Mr. Ephraim Magar 
was ushered into it. 

" I began to think you were not coming," 
said Jennings, carefully closing the door. 

" What ! not keep my promise ?" 

" Promises are easily made and broken, 
nowadays," said Jennings, dryly. 

" Oh, that's the game, is it ? You are 
in one of your growling moods, eh ..^" 

" No," said Jennings. *' I don't feel 
over well satisfied with myself, that is all." 

" Oh, it's all right, then, so far as I am 



42 Stranger than Fiction. 

concerned ?" said Magar, standing with 
his back to the fire. *' YouVe only out 
of temper with yourself/' 

'* You know what I want," said Jen- 
nings, fidgeting with his snuff-box. 

" Me and my friends to clear out of this ?" 

" Yes ; it is not very much to ask, con- 
sidering all things,** said Jennings. 

" What do you mean by all things ?" 
asked Magar, his anger perceptibly rising. 

" I leave that to your imagination," said 
Jennings, with irritating deliberation. 

" Always some damned threat in your 
mouth, Jennings . something underhand ; 
you don't speak out and give it breath." 

** You ought to be grateful to me on that 
account," said Jennings. 

Magar clenched his big hard fist, and 
ground his teeth with rage. Jennings 
glanced to see where the ruler was lying. 
The ruler was a formidable weapon. Jen- 
nings never used a ruler, especially one 
with a string through it, like an officers 
staff; but he kept such an instrument 
constantly on his desk. 



In the Hands of the Philistines, 43. 

** Say you will do what I wish in this 
matter, and we are friends for ever ; I will 
ask no more favours/' said Jennings, in 
a conciliatory tone. 

" I tell you I can't do it," exclaimed 
Magar, striding across the room. " If it 
were my own affair I would give way at 
once. They are determined to wipe the 
paper out, and I think the town will be the 
better for it. When a fellow's lost his 
money he shouldn't set others at defiance. 
They've never forgiven that attack about 
the accounts, and there's lots of other 
scores to settle ; and what is more, there 
is no chance, I hear, of Martyn's getting 
better, and we don't mean his party to buy 
the paper,' and we don't want it ourselves, 
because we have one . so that's the straight- 
forward truth ; and as I always like to be 

fair and above board " 

'' Very well," said Jennings, leaving his 
stool and confronting his friend. " Now, 
hear what I have to say. You are aware 
that I never had much money, and that 
what I had I put into this business when it 



44 Stranger titan Fiction. 

was much needed, on the understanding 
that at Mr. Martyn's death I stood joint 
heir with his son. Now I know that the 
concern will pay, and you know that there 
is more than twenty shillings in the pound 
now, if the property were fairly realised, to 
say nothing of Martyn's original capital, 
which we will regard as altogether gone. 
Now, if you sell hastily, as you contem- 
plate, you will make that twenty shillings 
no more than five, and destroy the copy- 
right, which, in my opinion, would make 
the twenty shillings forty. It is against 
my interest that you should do this." 

** I said you should find ;C i >ooo put to your 
credit at the Cartown Bank," said Magar. 

" It is also against my wish," continued 
Jennings, without noticing Magar's remark. 
** Martyn has suffered undeservedly, and 
Bonsall has behaved like a sneak and a 
thief." 

" This is something new," said Magar. 
'' Getting sympathetic in your old age, eh ? 
Why, Jennings, you are a very queer 
fellow." 




In the Hands of the Philistines, 45 

Magar thought it best to try and meet 
his friend's attack with banter, though he 
was boiling over with rage. 

" I owe a little gratitude to Martyn/' 
said Jennings. 

" Gratitude," said Magar, with a sneer ; 
" humbug !" 

" It is not humbug," said Jennings, 
fiercely, and at the same moment soften- 
ing his voice and repeating "it is not 
humbug, Magar," in a more deferential 
tone. " I am in earnest/' 

" And so am I," said Magar, buttoning 
his shining black coat over his chest and 
looking defiance at his friend. " And so 
am I ! Let us drop this palaver and talk 
business. IVe given way to your whims 
too often ; I make a stand here, so there, 
damn me !" 

" Very well," said Jennings, putting his 
tall stool between himself and Magar, " to 
business, then. I forbid this forcible re- 
moval to-morrow." 

Jennings spoke with a threatening de- 
liberation, and his thin face was pallid. 



46 Stranger than Fiction, 



Magar received the reply as if it were a 
blow* He shook himself together, and his 
eyes flashed angrily. 

" I command you to dismiss the bailiff 
to-night ; I have pleaded, and begged, and 
humbled myself ; I now command ; I say 
you shall do it, Ephraim Magar ; you shall 
do it.** 

Jennings stamped his foot, and hissed 
his commands, and crouched as he hissed. 

Magar deliberately walked to the door, 
opened it, looked out, and then, locking the 
door on the inside, put the key into his 
pocket. Jennings' looked on with a sud- 
den expression of fear. 

" We want no eavesdroppers,'* said 
Magar, "that's all . no witnesses. Now, 
what do you mean ? Once for all, what 
do you mean ?'' 

Jennings shuddered as Magar approached 
him, and looked at the ruler. 

" I mean what I say," said Jennings. 

" It can't be done. What then T' said 
Magar. 

" It must" 




In the Hands of the Philistines, 47 

" It won't," shouted Magar, striking the 
desk with his clenched hand. 

" Then beware V hissed Jennings^ his 
little eyes flashing fire, his nostrils dis- 
tended, his long fingers stretched out ; 
" beware, Ephraim the honest and out- 
spoken." 

" You damned villain !" shrieked Magar, 
unable to control his passion. 

In a moment he had seized Jennings by 
the throat, and pinned him up, choking, 
against the desk. The ruler dropped 
upon the ground. 

" rU teach you to threaten, you miserable 
devil," said Magar, shaking him like a dog ; 
** rU put you in Cartown Gaol before the 
night is over." 

He flung Jennings from him with a curse, 
and walked about the room like a caged 
hyena. Jennings crouched and trembled 
on the floor. He had been attacked too 
fiercely for retaliation. Then for a moment 
there was a dead silence. 

" Get up, you fool," at length said Magar; 
** what an ass you must be to aggravate 



48 Stranger than Fiction. 

me; you know what a passionate devil I 



am. " 



Jennings made no reply. He adjusted 
his' collar. 

" It's all over. Don't be afraid. ^ Tm 
sorry I did it. But you shouldn't have 
egged me on. Give me a pen." 

Jennings handed his friend a pen, and 
solaced himself with a pinch of snuff. 

Magar took a cheque-book from his 
pocket and wrote oijt a cheque for five 
hundred pounds. 

*. There, when you have cashed that I 
will give you another ; it is payable a week 
from this." 

Magar laid the cheque upon the desk. 

" Will that do r he asked. 

Jennings nodded. 

" Come, we must be friends, you and me, 
Jennings ; it is damned nonsense to think 
we are not to be, I ask your pardon and 
offer you my hand. Come, no more sulks." 

Jennings put his hand in Magar's, and 
said, " All right . good night, Magar." 

** Are we friends ?" asked Magar. 




In the Hands of the Philistines. 49 

'' We are/' said Jennings. 

** Then good night," said Magar, taking 
the key from his pocket, unlocking the 
door, and disappearing. 

" Friends !" said Jennings, when he was 
once more alone, "friends! yes, as tigers 
in a cage are friends when the weaker of 
the two is afraid to show his teeth. But 
there shall be a settling for this," he con- 
tinued, shaking his fist at the door. ** Phy- 
sical strength is nowhere against cunning, 
you horrid brute, you shall see.'* 

Jennings paced the room, crouqhing in 
his anger, shaking his fist, and muttering 
curses. He went on apostrophising Magar 
a3 he walked to and fro. 

" You everlasting scoundrel ! I wish 
you could have lived the life I have en- 
dured. What a punishment ! . what a 
punishment ! Look at my grey hair, my 
sunken eyes, my bones ready to come 
through my skin. I suffer the tortures of 
the damned before my time. You ! . you ! 
You gross, thick, rhinpceros-hided beast ! 
Only physical pain touches you, and that 

VOL. II, 4 



50 Stranger than Fiction. 

must be something more than ordinary- 
pain. But the day will come, Magan It 
will come, depend on it ! There must be 
a reckoning." 

Jennings sat down before the fire and 
took several pinches of snuff. 

" Why do I stay here ? I am a fool. 
My place is beyond the seas, with a new 
name. Patience, patieilce t Always on 
the watch . I shall be prepared." 

He got up and went to his desk, stared 
vacantly about the office, folded up Magar s 
cheque, put it into his pocket, closed his 
ledgers and placed them in his desk ; 
locked his desk, lighted a dandle, changed 
his coat for one that hung on a set of pegs, 
extinguished the gas, and went out at the 
door which had just closed upon the burly 
form of Ephraim Magar, twice Mayor of 
Middleton-in-the-Water, and a permanent 
magistrate of that notorious borough. 





CHAPTER IV. 

In which JACOB MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE 
OF MR. WINDGATE WILLIAMS. 

HE gatden was destroyed. Jacob 
did not require daylight to reveal 
this. It was dark everywhere 
except near the old favourite 
flowef beds, and there stood his father^s 
printing office glaring at him through a 
dozen lighted windows. The violets were 
gone, his mother's seat also ; he was glad 
he had not come here in the daytime. He 
heard the distant roar of the river as it 
rolled over the weir, and he thought of the 
days when he went imaginary voyages to 
the Indies. What chatiges had occurred 

4.2 




5 2 Stranger than Fiction, 

since then, and were occurring ! They 
would not bear thinking of. He went up 
to the printing office. The door was open. 
He ascended a flight of steps, and found 
himself in a spacious room, the atmosphere 
of which reminded him of one of Mr. 
BonsaU's pine houses. A number of men 
in their shirt-sleeves were actively engaged 
in setting up type, from copy of various 
descriptions. Tom Titsy was not in the 
room. A boy asked Jacob if he wanted 
the editor. Jacob, replying in the nega- 
tive, entered an adjoining apartment, which 
was strewn with scraps of paper and muti- 
lated newspapers. There was a table in 
the centre of the room, upon which the 
litter on the floor was repeated, with the 
variation of a few stray books, several quill 
pens, a bottle, and a jar. A shaded gas- 
light burnt dimly over the table, and left in 
shadow two busts which occupied brackets, 
one on each side of the fire-place. 

While ' Jacob was contemplating this 
journalistic chaos, some one rushed in and 



Mr, Windgate WiUiams. 53 

turned on the gas. Before Jacob had 
time to look round a voice said, 

" Good evening, sir . good evening ; 
what can I do for you ?" 

The speaker assumed a somewhat the- 
atrical attitude, throwing his head back, 
dashing aside the collar of a loose coat, and 
disclosing a light waistcoat, a low collar, 
and a loose neckerchief. It was altogether 
a curious and striking figure ; it had a head 
covered with a profusion of dark hair, 
two piercing eyes, and a wide mouth, indi- 
cative of considerable humour. 

Jacob bowed to the stranger and said, 
" Good evening.'' 

" Who have I the pleasure of address- 
ing ?'' asked the stranger, coming down 
from the imaginary pedestal upon which 
he had posed himself ; coming down and 
taking from his pocket an eye-glass, which 
having rubbed carefully with an old silk 
handkerchief, he planted in his left eye. 

" I am Jacob Martyn," said Jacob ; " I 
merely came in to see the place." 

" Oh ! indeed . delighted to see you . 



54 Stranger than Fiction, 

I am Mr. Maftyn's editor . take a seat, sir, 
I pray . rather in confusion to-night . day 
before publication . you feel the heat . 
I am sorry you found poor Mr. Martyn so 
ill . good man, sir . kind-natured, indepen- 
dent, noble-spirited man, sir," rattled on 
Mr. Windgate Williams. " There's my 
card, sir . a little soiled like its owner ; 
ah 1 ha ! never mind ; we all. get soiled in 
this world." 

Jacob took the card, read the name, and 
sat down, up to the knees in old news- 
papers ; but Mr. Williams gave him no 
opportunity of replying to his remarks, 
which he uttered in a rapid, jerky, dis- 
jointed fashion, looking fixedly at Jacob all 
the time. 

" I hope Mr. Martyn will be enabled to 
manage his affairs . fine property, the Star 
. double itself in a few years . great pity 
if such a calamity should occur as a stop- 
page ; but we must bend to the decrees of 
Fate. I have thought of getting up a 
company to carry it on, with Mr. Martyn 
as chairman ; most perfect establishment. 




Mr, Windgate Williams. 55 

you see . capital offices . beautiful situation 
. factory rather a nuisance sometimes ; 
but we must take the agreeable with the 
disagreeable . nothing is perfection in this 
world ; excuse my blinds [adjusting a green 
shade over his eyes] disfigures and makes 
one look strange, I know, but the eyes get 
weak with so much work by gas-light . will 
you take a drink of stout ? . obliged to 
have something on these busy nights/' 

Mr. Windgate Williams poured out a 
glassful of stout, and handed it to Jacob. 

At this moment a boy came into the 
room and asked for proofs, whereupon 
Mr. Williams began to make his desk in a 
greater state of confusion than ever, and 
Jacob thought it a good opportunity to 
escape, which he did, saying that he would 
not detain Mr. Williams any longer. 

" You are very kind/' said that gentle- 
man ; " business must be attended to, cer- 
tainly . very considerate . I shall have the 
pleasure of seeing you again," and the 
editor followed Jacob up with a running 
fire of words, until both were out on the 



56 Stranger than Fiction. 

steps, and Jacob gradually got beyond the 
sound of the editorial voice. 

The doctor had just left Mr. Martyn 
when Jacob re-entered the house. Jacob 
went upstairs, and stood by his father s 
bedside, and held his hand. Mr. Martyn 
did not speak, but he looked affectionately 
upon his son. 

Long after his father had dozed off to 
sleep again, Jacob sat there, holding the 
clammy hand, and trying to collect his facul- 
ties for meeting the troubles which seemed 
to be hemming him in on all sides. Mrs. 
Titsy looked on, with her heart too full to 
speak, and her eyes too misty to see more 
than the form of Jacob. 

'' Will you not go to bed ?" at length 
asked Mrs. Titsy, in a whisper, when the 
candle had burnt itself almost into the 
socket, and a long black tottering wick, like 
a small bulrush, stood above it. 

" No, thank you," said Jacob ; ** no^ 
thank you ; I would rather sit here." 

When you and I are ill, my friend, may 
we have by our pillow two souls as careful 




Mr. Windgate Williams, 57 

of our every want, and as solicitous for our 
recovery, as these two before us. And may 
we be as patient as poor Mr. Martyn ! He 
knew that the nature of his disease required 
submission and calmness ; and for Jacob's 
sake he wished to be spared. Happily 
he knew nothing of Debt's policeman who 
sat in the kitchen below. But he was 
fully aware of the fact that years of hard- 
earned savings, the fruits of incessant toil, 
had been scattered to the winds. All he 
now looked forward to was a small com- 
petency, though he had no really definite 
reason for hoping to obtain even that. It 
was a hard lot : sometimes he could not 
help thinking so, and then he remembered 
the injunction of the doctors not to let 
anything trouble him, and he dismissed 
the disagreeable thoughts. Hope raised 
up the sinking soul and gave it glimpses 
of a shadowy future, with gleams of sun- 
shine in it ; but there was a serpent under- 
neath the sick man's pillow, and a fell 
disease at his heart. 





CHAPTER V. 



" STAR " 




DESCRIBES THE SIEGE OF THE 

PRINTING OFFICE ; AND NARRATES ALL THE 
HUMOROUS AND MELANCHOLY INCIDENTS 
THEREOF. 

T seemed as though the morning 
would never come. Daylight 
lingered behind the clouds of 
night, as if the two had leagued 
together to keep Middleton in perpetual 
darkness. Jacob had dozed occasionally, 
and Mrs. Titsy had once or twice fallen 
asleep ; but both quickly awoke again and 
mentally chid themselves for want of 
thought and attention. Mr. Martyn had 
slept but little during the night. He had 
lain awake and heard the church clock 



n 



The '-'Star'' Printing Office^ 59 

strike hour after hour, without the know- 
ledge of his watchers. Jacob went to the 
window and gently drew the blind aside 
when the clock seemed to announce that 
the long dark night was really over ; but <^ 
few stars were still shining upon black piles 
of clouds, and the sign, of the *' Durham, 
Ox" was swaying to and fro in the wind.. 
Jacob wondered if the wind was shaking 
the trees round Lucy's dwelling; and it 
gave him a pang of sorrow to think how 
grieved Lucy would be to hear of the mis- 
fortunes which had befallen him. And the 
wind grew more boisterous still. It had 
come for miles and miles over sea and 
land, and was gathering its forces in the 
Midland counties. It had rolled into foam 
the deep waters, and had awakened echoing 
voices in many a sea-swept cavern. Driv- 
ing the clouds of night before, it had left 
shivered masts and sinking ships behind. 
Wise mariners, who had caught the first 
sounds of its hoarse voice, had sought 
shelter in creeks and bays. It was too 
proud and haughty to seek them out, 



6o Stranger than Fiction-. 

though they tossed and trembled as the 
giant passed by in full cry, with clouds of 
sea-gulls screaming overhead; Morning 
began to show grey streaks in the east as 
the wind came ashore. The clouds were 
rent in red and grey shreds and black 
patches. On land nothing was too trivial 
for the notice of this mighty wind. It 
carried tiles off houses. It blew down 
straw stacks. It banged doors open, and 
frightened children into fits. It shook 
new buildings to pieces, and tore trees up 
by the roots. Now and then there was a 
rough rollicking humour in its doings. It 
lifted watchmen off their feet, and set them 
down again. It shouted down chimneys. 
It bellowed round corners, and it roused 
sleepers from their beds with the smashing 
of glass and the parting of window frames. 
When it reached Middleton' it rested awhile, 
and took a survey of the place, feeling its 
way about the narrow streets and round 
the curious gables, and over the red -tiled 
pointed house tops ; and then it scattered 
the remnants of night s dark mantle, blew 



The ^^Star'' Printing Office. 6i 

out the two or three remaining stars, and 
roared and shouted and raved, and tore up 
and down the streets and over the houses 
with maddened glee, 

Mr. Martyn grew restless, and complained 
that the wind effected his head. What . 
cared the wind for that ? If ten thousand 
heads had ached it would not have bated 
a jot of its rough humour. It shook Mr. 
Martyn's house, banged at the bedroom 
windows, whooped up the passage by the 
side of the counting-house, rushed through 
the garden, blew the smoke from the fac- 
tory chimney away into the fields, bounded 
off over the meadows, made the miller 
tremble for his house, threw the water 
over the weir in white clouds of spray, re- 
turned, came up the streets of Middleton 
again, ran away with the caps of men on 
their way to work, blew the factory girls 
petticoats over their heads, knocked down 
boys who were opening their masters shops, 
and made all such signs as those of the 
" Durham Ox,'* which hung upon hinges, 



62 Stranger than Fiction. 

creak ind groan and yell and scream as 
though th^y were in pain. 

Thus was a stormy day stormily ushered 
in. It was in the power of the most relent- 
less and malicious of Mr. Martyn's Creditors 
on this day to remove his goods and chat- 
tels and types and machinery to a con- 
venient place of sale, or to sell them on the 
spot, if prior and proper notice had b^en 
given. But no sale had been announced. 
The few offended public men who wished 
to put out the Middleton Star had no de- 
sire that their designs should be made 
public too soon. Their proceedings had 
been organised and man-aged by Zebedee 
Gripps, a lawyer of Middleton, whose 
membership of the Zion Chapel, and whose 
preaching twice a week, and whose reli- 
gious whinings every day, had not shielded 
him from the censure of the Star^ when he 
had been false to his public trusty though 
his chapel zeal had assisted him to guide 
the greater portion of the Charity Trustees' 
funds into his own pocket. Gripps was de- 
termined to make a clean sweep of the Star 



The ^^Star' Prmting Office. 63 

offices on this stormy day, the more so that 
Mr. Martyn was in bed, and could not 
interfere. As ten o'clock was striking, he 
ascended the printing office stairs, with a 
compositor from an adjacent town and an 
auctioneer. Notwithstanding a rushing 
torrent of indignant remonstrance and in- 
quiry from Mr. Windgate Williams, the 
auctioneer began to make a note of what 
he saw, aided by the technical explanations 
of the strange compositor. Mr. Martyn's 
men permitted this to go on until a couple 
of stout labourers made their appearance, 
and were instructed by Gripps to begin the 
removal of sundry articles, known as chases 
and Column rules. 

" Oh ! this will not do ! the law will not 
permit it . the thing's illegal . you are 
bent upon destruction, not upon realising 
the amount of your just claim, whatever 
that may be . put down those chases," ex- 
claimed Mr. Williams, who had shuffled 
and jumped upon the scene, with a bundle 
of proofs just taken up for correction. 

Upon this, Tom Titsy and several other 



A 



64 Stranger than Fiction. 

persons put down their work, and sauntered 
up to the spot where the editor was dis- 
puting with the man of law. 

" This is our authority," said Mr. Gripps, 
exhibiting an ofificial-looking roll of paper. 

" I care neither for you nor your author 
rity,'* said Mr. Williams, closing the office 
door and locking it. " You shall not stop 
the publication of this paper to-day . you 
will destroy the copyright . destroy a valu- 
able property . it shall not be." 

" Quite right I'' " Hear, hear !" '' Just 
so," cried the printers ; while Tom Titsy 
laid his hand upon the shoulder of one of 
the stout labourers. 

" Remove those articlois," said Mr, 
Gripps. 

.' Printers !" exclaimed Windgate Wil- 
liams; **and you more especially, Mr, 
Overseer," addressing a middle-aged gen- 
tleman, who looked exceedingly bewil- 
dered : " it is your duty and mine to 
publish Mr. Martyn's newspaper to-day . 
no law will sanction the destruction of the 
copyright of this journal, as these men 




The ''Star'' Printing Office. 65 

maliciously contemplate . laws were not 
made to minister to the bad passions of 
human nature, nor to aid a canting hypo- 
crite in satisfying his devil's prayers. If 
you allow this wickedness to proceed, you 
are the veriest lot of chicken-hearts that 
ever stood at cases and followed the 
glorious profession of Caxton, who wore a 
sword and was a brave man." 

'* Put down them traps," said Tom Titsy 
to one of the stout porters, while the editor 
was running his fingers wildly through his 
hair, at the fclose of his address ; " put 
down them traps." 

The porter hesitated, which was unfor- 
tunate for him. 

" Then go down thyself," said Tom, seiz- 
ing the chases with one hand, and felling 
the deputy-bailiff with the other. 

"No blows ! no blows !" exclaimed Mr. 
Williams ; " let us keep within the law ;'* 
but like many a revolutionary orator, Mr. 
Windgate Williams having raised the 
3torm, found the tempest beyond his con- 
trol. 

VOL. II. 5 



VV 



66 Stranger than Fiction, 

When stout porter No. i was down, No. 
2 showed fight, and there was a general 
attack in consequence. 

The strange compositor was carried to a 
trough and held there, while a jet of water 
was turned playfully upon his face. 

The auctioneer closed his book and 
struggled in the arms of a couple of men, 
who quickly deposited him outside the 
door, and told him to thailk his stars that 
he had not gone through the window. 

Porter Noi 2 soon succumbed, and was 
glad with No. i to scramble after the auc- 
tioneer. The strange compositor was 
carried wet and limp to the staircase, and 
was allowed to slide to the bottom thereof, 
on his back* Mr. Gripps gesticulated, and 
roared, and threatened Mr. Williams with 
transportation for life ; and the printers 
seemed too much delighted with the wordy 
encounter between the two chiefs to inter- 
fere, beyond applauding the sallies of Mr. 
Williams, and hissing the threats of Gripps 
the lawyer. 

"Sir," at length shouted the editor, 



\ 



The ^'Star '* Printing Office. 67 

. . _- - - - - . . 

throwing back his loose coat, taking a sort 
of a hop skip and jump towards Mr. 
Gripps, and screaming with excitement, 
** leave this room, sir ! leave this room, 
or I will not answer for the conse- 
quences." 

" I'll have you put in the darkest cell in 
Middleton lock-up, breaker of the Queen's 
peace I murderer of the Queen's English !" 
shouted Gripps in reply, and flourishing 
his roll of official paper, as if it were a mar- 
shal's baton. 

This was too much . " murderer of the 
Queen's English !" . Mn Williams could 
put up with a great deal, but there are 
bounds to the patience of the most patient 
and unassuming of men. 

" You canting rascal !" shouted the editor, 
rushing upon Mr. Gripps, and shaking him 
by the collar, until the marshal's baton flew 
over his head, while the legal watch, leap- 
ing from the legal pocket, dashed itself 
against a heavy eye-glass, until both were 
broken. 

" You blaspheming imp of darkness ! 



68 Stranger than Fiction. 

you parchment-visaged cackler . you rob- 
ber of the orphan and plunderer of the 
poor . you beast, you beast !" went on the 
maddened editor, shaking the lawyer, until 
both were panting for breath, 

"Hear, hear!" "Bravo, bravo T "En- 
core !" " Give it him !" shouted the printers. 

At length, by some unlucky mischance, 
Gripps fastened his fingers in the editorial 
hair, and the editorial teeth chattered with 
the violent motion of the bewildered 
cranium. 

Their sympathies being of course more 
on the side of the editor than with the 
lawyer, the printers now thought it was 
time to part the combatants, for just then 
Mr. Williams was decidedly getting the 
worst of the encounter. They seized Mr. 
Gripps, and as- he was not inclined to 
loosen his grip of the editorial locks, Tom 
Titsy gave him a slight intimation that he 
must. The hint was given forcibly under 
the fifth rib, upon which the lawyer released 
his possession of the head, but not without 
removing therefrom a large quantity of the 



The ''Star'' Printing Office. 69 

hirsute growth which had thatched that 
intellectual locality. 

" Now, be off, sir," said several voices. 
" Hook it while you can ;" " Take the steps 
in preference to the window." 

Mr. Gripps was wise enough to accept 
the warning. 

" And take your authority with you, you 
pounce-box, do," shouted Mr. Williams, as 
he tossed the marshaFs baton after him. 

Then a council -of war was held on both 
sides. The first command of Mr. Wind- 
gate Williams was : " Secure the outer 
doors ! Fasten the windows ! Let one 
man cease work and keep guard that he 
may give warning of danger. They may 
come in force now . if we can hold out 
until sundown, we can contrive to get to 
press, and then the copyright will be secure 
for another week, by which time fresh 
arrangements may be made." 

In the offices of Mr. Gripps were as- 
sembled Mr. Magar and a wronged cabinet- 
maker, who had wished, as a town coun- 
cillor, to purchase a piece of corporate land 



70 Stranger than Fiction. 

for a mere song ; a pious currier, who was 
in the habit of attending the ministrations 
of the pious lawyer ; and several other 
members of the clique which objected to 
the little ray of light that radiated from the 
Star printing office. Gripps described the 
murderous attack to which he had been 
subjected, and demanded that the whole 
affair should now be left entirely in his 
hands. The meeting cordially assented to 
this, and broke up, to talk about the strange 
occurrences of the morning, and to satisfy 
their small consciences by saying to them- 
selves, " Well, we have left the affair in the 
hands of our lawyer, and of course we 
cannot be blamed for what may take 
place. " 

An hour afterwards Gripps, followed 
by a little army of the scum of Middleton 
. dog stealers, reputed thieves, deputy- 
bailiffs, and cads of all kinds and classes . 
entered the counting-house of Mr. Martyn 
and demanded free admission into the print- 
ing office. . 

Mr. Jennings referred Gripps to Mr. 




The '^Star'' Printing Office. 71 

Windgate Williams, and followed it up by 
hoping that Mr. Gripps had not suffered 
much from the striking remarks of the 
editor. 

Seeing that he could obtain no assistance 
here, the lawyer proceeded with his ragged 
army to renew the siege of the typographical 
fortress. 

" It is a dangerous game youVe playing 
. ^have a care ; stop this seizure/' Jennings 
wrote on a scrap of paper, and sent it in an 
enveldpe to Magar. 

Meanwhile Jacob left his father for a 
short time and proceeded to seek out Mr. 
Horatio Johnson. 

The people stared at Mr. Martyn's son 
as he passed along the streets. Some 
knew him and thought he had grown won- 
derfully proud since he had left the old 
town. These said, ** Ah ! pride would have 
a fall." Others pitied him, said he was a 
fine fellow, and that it was a sad thing a 
young man's prospects should be blighted 
as his were likely to be. Jacob passed 
along unconscious of these observations, 



I 



72 Stranger than Fiction, 

but nevertheless cognisant of the fact that 
he was being stared at and criticised. 

Half a dozen pigeons were blowing about 
like bundles of feathers over the thatched 
cottage of the Titsys as Jacob entered it. 
When he opened the front door another at 
the 'back was slammed with a shock that 
seemed to make the little house shake to 
its foundation. The Doctor was taking a 
morning pipe, and blowing the smoke 
against the chimney ornaments as usual. 
He rose when Jacob entered, and looked 
towards him as if awaiting an explanation 
of the intrusion. Then all of a sudden he 
knew Jacob, and his face lighted up with a 
smile of intense satisfaction, 

" The times are out of joint, as the say- 
ing is,'' said Mr. Johnson, after sundry 
cordial greetings, and inquiries and good 
wishes and admiring expressions regardirc^ 
Jacob's improvement, " the times are out of 
joint, Master Jacob. We shall need all 
our philosophy . to say nothing of our 
tobacco . to bear the changes that seem to 
be coming upon us ; but change is a moral 



^ 



The '^Star^' Printing O^ce. 73 

law . a, law of nature, a law of society . and 
we must learn to take things as they come, 
and with resignation." 

Mr. Johnson seated himself as he gave 
forth these little scraps of philosophy, and 
tried to look exceedingly contented ; but 
Jacob could see that he was feigning. 

" I have encountered too many troubles 
in this vale of tears to quarrel with the 
happiness still left ; and you. Master Jacob, 
must apply yourself to philosophy. It will 
triumph over all difficulties and disappoint- 
ments. And don't forget, if ever you should 
come to want a friend, that Horatio John- 
son will deem it an honour and a pleasure 
to be commanded by you." 

" I am already under an eternal obliga- 
tion to you, Mr. Johnson, if Mrs. Titsy 
.topped the professional draughts and 
,ecretly replaced them with your own, as 
ihe now avows, when I lay dying years 
igo," said Jacob, greatly moved at the 
Doctor's earnest and delicate proffer of as- 
;istance. 
" No, no, Jacob ; don't thank me. 



74 Stranger than Fiction. 

Nature performed the cure, and your 
time was not come. There is a divinity 
doth shape our ends, Jacob, and I was but 
Fate's minister. If I had not been here 
ready to his hand, the destiny you have 
to fulfil would have found another agent. 
Things must be done regularly and pro- 
perly, and in a natural manner ; but fate, 
sir, fate will have its own way." 

" Do you not think fate is a hard master 
sometimes i^" inquired Jacob. 

" Truly, truly," said the Doctor ; " but it's 
not in mortals to say when fate is hard, and 
when it is kind and merciful ; we must not 
look at events as they present themselves 
at the moment, but keep our eye forward 
into the future. You know what the old 
song says . 

" * For there's many a dark and clou4y morning 
Brings forth a pleasant day.' " 

While they were conversing Gripps and 
his ragamuffin army passed the house. 
The Doctor went forth to inquire the reason 




The ''Star " Printing Office. 75 

of the commotion. When he opened the 
door they had turned the corner of the 
street, and the wind was howling after 
them. A small boy was running in the 
wake of the mob and the gust of wind ; to 
this juvenile piece of human nature the 
Doctor addressed himself 

" Hallo, boy ! what's the matter ?" 
** The Middleton Star,'' shouted the 
youth, running on, and then in a gasp, 
which a new gust of wind cut short, he 
ejaculated, " Row at Martyn's." 

Jacob, following the Doctor, heard this, 
and without another word dashed out into 
the street, and speedily outstripped the 
urchin, while the Doctor hastily followed, 
bethinking himself to carry with him a 
walking-stick which had hung beneath the 
clock-case for many a long year. Another 
important actor in the drama went in the 
wake of the Doctor* This was our old 
friend Caesar, who, less nimble than of 
yore, had Iain beneath the stairs, without 
condescending even to pay his compli- 
ments to Jacob, but had sniffed mischief in 



76 Stranger than Fiction. 

'he Doctor's hasty departure and was soon 
barking at his heels. 

They reached Mr. Martyn's establish- 
ment just as Gripps had left the counting- 
house. Jennings informed them of the 
situation of affairs, and Jacob and the 
Doctor and Julius Jennings went after the 
besieging army. 

And now, for the first time, Jacob saw 
the change which had been wrought in his 
garden. The favourite seat had gone ; 
he flower-beds had been replaced with 
;rass ; a wide, hard, stony path led up to 
he printing office . the whole scene so 
otally different to what it had been that 
he change only strengthened Jacob's 
nemory of its former beauties. 

Mr. Windgate Williams wr haranguing 
:he besiegers from the window of the edi- 
torial room. He was appealing to the 
minions of Gripps as working men and 
lovers of freedom, in whose special in- 
terests the Star had been established ; he 
enjoined them to be patient and respect 
the law. He was throwing back his loose 



The ''Star'' Printing Office. 77 

coat, and running his fingers through his 
hair, and pouring out a volume of words 
that seemed to roll over each other and 
fall in showers upon the heads of those 
below. 

Blackguards as they were, the hired mob 
who had been bellowing for admission into 
the printing office evidently did not like 
the work in which they were engaged, and 
they did npt attempt to interrupt the elo- 
quence of Mr. Windgate Williams. 

" This is waste of time," said Gripps at 
length, flourishing his paper baton, ** waste 
of time. I summon you to open these 
doors in the name of the law and of its 
powers which I now hold in my hand." 

** If you will give me your word in 
writing that nothing shall be removed for 
one week you shall be admitted immedi- 
ately," said Mr. Williams. 

" I will do nothing of the sort, and you 
may think yourself fortunate if I do noj 
give you into the hands of the police," 
replied Gripps, in a harsh, crackling voice. 

" The object of this attack " 




78 Stranger than Fiction^ 

" ril hear no more, sir." 

" The object, I say, of this *' 

" Open the door, sir," demanded Gripps* 

" Hear what he has to say^" said Dr. 
Johnson, coming forward. 

" Ay, ay," said several voices. " Let's 
hear what he's gotten to say*" 

" The object of this attack is not fairly 
to satisfy a legal claim, but to ruin Mn 
Martyn and destroy his paper." 

" Mr. Martyn, who at this moment lies 
dangerously ill !" said Dr. Johnson, while 
Jacob held his head down in sorrow and 
humiliation. 

" What have we to do with that ?" said 
a brutal fellow, with a black eye, who was 
known by his companions as The Bruiser. 
" What have we to do wi' illness or owt 
else } law's law, and when a man wants his 
money, let it be paid ; and if it can't, why 
let's have the traps . that's law !" 

" You wretch," exclaimed the editor. 

" That is law," croaked Gripps, " and 
here is our authority. There are five 
shillings fof each of you when the work 




The "Star" Printing Office. 70 

is done. Now thehj burst open those 
doors !" 

" Wait I wait ! wait a moment," ex- 
claimed the Doctor, facing half a dozen 
of the most bfutal of the mob who were 
pressing forward to execute this command ; 
" if it's a matter of money, TU give you ten 
shillings each to do nothing of the sort, 
and a trifle into the bargain if you'll throw 
this grasping lawyer into the mill-dam 
yonder. ^^ 

"Hurrah !*' shouted the mob ; "hurrah V 
Several sticks and hats flew up into the 
air, and so fickle were the retainers of 
Gripps that had it not been for the arrival 
of two constables and the police superin- 
tendent there is no knowing what might 
have become of the besieging chief. 

" Here's th' constables,*' said The Bruisef, 
" ax them ! ax them !'* 

Mr. Gripps stepped up to the superinten- 
dent and ejtplained the case, finally asking 
if the document he held in his hand did not 
give him the power to force an entrance 
into the building and remove its contents. 



8o Stranger than Fiction. 

The superintendent said he believed it 
did, whereupon Mr. Gripps demanded 
the assistance of the police ; but the super- 
intendent explained that they had no 
power unless a breach of the peace should 
be committed ; and being satisfied that 
such would be th^ case, and having more 
regard for his own neck and the safety of his 
men than anything else, the chief of police 
marched from the scene of the encounter, 
after giving the mob a general caution not 
to commit a breach of the peace, and re- 
questing Mr. Gripps \q do what he had 
to do lawfully. 

" But you must stay, sir, you must stay," 
said Gripps. 

" That is my business," said the super- 
intendent ; ^* I give my countenance to 
neither side, and my presence is best 
dispensed with. So men . attention ! right 
about face ! march !" and the police dis- 
appeared. 

" Hurrah !" shouted the mob again. 

" Now, my men," said Gripps, ** bailiffs 



The *^Star'^ Printing Office. 8i 

to the front, and especially those who wish 
to keep their situations." 

" Ay, ay, that's it/' said The Bruiser, 
placing himself at the head of a few re- 
solute-looking fellow3 who prepared to 
advance. 

" One last word, one last word," shouted 
the editor from liis high place, and by this 
time sundry other faces appeared at other 
windows. 

" Hear him, hear him," said some of the 
mob. 

'' All I have to say is this," began Mr. 
Williams, deliberately flinging back his 
coat, as if he were a barrister pleading at 
the bar, and then raising his right arm 
as if he were a warrior about to command 
a charge ; " I give you fair warning, I 
caution you in the name of God and the 
law, not to enter here ; for, by heavens ! 
I swear that the first head which comes 
through yon doorway might as well be on 
the block ! Dante's Inferno has no more 
fanciful terrors than the reality shall be for 
the first man who crosses the portals of the 

VOL. II. 6 



J 



82 Stranger than Fiction, 

offices of the Middleton Star P' with which 
threat Mr. Williams banged down the win- 
dow, and the heads which had been seen 

in the composing-room simultaneously dis- 
appeared. 

For a^ few minutes there was a dead 
silencer 

Mr. Johnson looked at Jacob, who had 
gradually entered into the excitement of 
the moment and could not resist a cry of 
admiration and approval at the gallant bear- 
ing of the gentleman whom he had con- 
sidered radier a bore on the previous night. 

"He defies you, he defies you,*' said 
Gripps at length ; ** and here^s a young 
puppy applauding him," turning to Jacob. 

" Bridle that tongue," said Dr. Johnson 
to Gripps, ** or Til tear it from your throat, 
you pettifogging rascal.'' 

Jacob felt his blood boiling* 

'' Hear that! hear that ! a pretty set of 
cowards you are," said Gripps, turning his 
small eyes upon the motley crew : " bullied 
on both sides . a sovereign for the' first 
man who puts his foot through yon door." 




The ''Star'' Printing Office. 83 

The Bruiser leaped forward at the offer, 
followed by several others. Jacob's heart 
beat as though it would burst, when ring- 
ing knocks on the door rose above the 
clamour of discordant voices. 

Then there was a crash and a cry, and 
the besieging host fell back, yelling, down 
the stone steps before a charge from 
above, 

Windgate Williams had been as good 
as his word. The Bruiser was bleeding 
from a wound in the head. 

The door was again slammed to, and 
sounds were heard as if the printers were 
nailing it up. 

Caesar, hearing Tom's voice, grew terribly 
excited, barked, and rushed up the steps, 
and forced itself through the aperture 
which had been made by the first assault, 
that had proved so disastrous to Gripps^s 
principal villain. 

There was another pause, and if Mr. 
Windgate Williams had been discreet as 
well as brave he would not have inter- 
rupted it ; but he had received an ugly 



^ 



84 Stranger than Fiction, 

blow on the nose, ahd the sight of his 
own bldbd overthrew all his self-control 

" You infernal rascals ! you scum of a 
black and ungrateful town ! you cowardly 
miscreants !" he shouted, leaning half way 
out of the window, " TU pound you like 
corn between mill-stones, if you don't 
disperse/' 

" Hear that, you cowards !" shouted 
Gripps ; " hell pound you like flour ; you 
the scum of Middleton ; infernal rascals he 
calls you !*' 

This was irresistible, Gripps knew how 
to influence a mob. A second charge was 
made, and there was a desperate fight . 
this time within the composing-room, which, 
by sheer force of numbers, the besiegers 
entered. 

Mr. Johnson and Jacob followed, and 
succeeded in getting inside the room, where 
they found the printers, headed by Wil- 
liams, contesting every step of ground, and 
using all manner of weapons. 

Blood was flowing freely, cases of type 
were overturned, and in a few moments 




The ^^Star " Printing Office. 85 

several persons were placed hors de co7n- 
bat. 

At length the printers gave way. The 
fighting gradually became less furious, and 
then mutually ceased ; whereupon Gripps, 
who had kept in the background, came to 
the front, and no sooner did he show him- 
self than Mr. Williams leaped upon him. 
There were shouts of " Fair play," and 
" Let them fight it out," and the battle of 
the two hosts suddenly became an en- 
counter between the two chiefs. 

Williams and Gripps tugged at each 
other and rolled on the floor, and got up 
and fell down again, until Gripps refused 
to rise, and cried for mercy, whereupon the 
victorious editor, exclaiming, " Printers, 
give in ! you are an honour to your coun- 
try !" mingled among the throng, and dis- 
appeared. 

Nobody seemed desirous of fighting any 
longer, and when peace was restored the 
police once more appeared. 

Several persons were seriously hurt. 
One man's leg was severely lacerated by 





86 Stranger than Fiction, 

the bite of a dog. The Bruiser had sought 
the infirmary, after the first attack. The 
compositor from an adjacent town, who had 
been under the pump an hour or two pre- 
viously, was carried, insensible, to Dr. 
Smythe's. Three deputy - bailiffs were 
' much bruised, and black eyes and bleeding 
noses were general. Tom Titsy was among 
the latter, and even Dr. Johnson had a con- 
tused eye. 

The superintendent of police took a note 
of all this ; but he said, as there seemed a 
legal quibble . a question whether Gripps 
was not a trespasser . he could not comply 
with the lawyers request to apprehend 
several of Mr. Marty n's men ; neither 
could he take any of the other side into 
custody. Those who chose to do so might 
apply for summonses or warrants to the 
magistrates. He would advise all those 
who wished for ulterior proceedings to see 
Squire Northcotes. 

When he found *his adversary gone, 
Gripps began to give orders for the re- 
moval of the type, directing his first atten- 



The ''Star '' Printing Office. 87 

tion to two pages of the paper which were 
ready for press. 

" These first, these first, you rascal," he 
exclaimed to one of his leading men ; " give 
a hand here, giVe a hand, and on to your 
heads with them." 

" No ! no ! for goodness sake," said 
Jacob, who had some knowledge of print- 
ing, " you will destroy them." 

** Stand aside, young prater; Tm master 
here." 

" Fair words, Gripps," said Jacob, clench- 
ing his teeth and his fist at the same time, 
" or rU finish the work which Mr. Williams 
began." 

" Braggart ! puppy ! son of a bankrupt," 
exclaimed Gripps in reply, anxious to have 
a clear case of assault in the presence of the 
police. 

Jacob had suffered too much already to 
put up with this open insult. His eyes 
blazed with fury and indignation ; his right 
arm struck out, followed by his left, with 
pugilistic vigour ; and never was man more 
completely " floored" than Zebedee Gripps, 




88 Stranger than Fiction. 

who lay as quietly after it as if it were 
pleasant to be knocked down. A constable 
raised him up, and by signs and gasps 
Gripps endeavoured to impress everybody 
with the information that he was very badly 
hurt, as no doubt he was, taking into con- 
sideration all he had undergone during the 
morning. His first words were a request 
that the policeman would take Jacob into 
custody. 

The officer said he was sorry to decline, 
but he must nevertheless . it was a case for 
a summons ; at the same time, he advised 
Mr. Gripps not to call names. 

'* Come, then, on to your heads with that 
stuff,*' said Gripps to the two men who had 
each raised a page of the Middleton Star 
which was to have been printed that after- 
noon. Jacob found that it was useless to 
remonstrate, and the two men putting their 
heads beneath the locked-up type, imme- 
diately had it all breaking and falling over 
their shoulders, leaving the iron frames 
round their necks. From that moment the 
Middleton Star was defunct. 



V 





CHAPTER VI. 

HOMELESS, HOPELESS, PENNILESS. 

. 

HE passing-bell swung to and fro 
in the church steeple. It was 
evening. The wind had gone 
down the river, and had travelled 
miles and miles away out to sea. Middle- 
ton was calm and still. People paused at 
their suppers to ask who was dead. The 
bell knocked at Jacob Martyn's heart. He 
had only one consolation. His father had 
died utterly oblivious of the humiliating 
scene which had been enacted on the pre- 
vious day. 

Jacob could not rest in the house. The 
silence appalled him. He could hardly 
breathe. He went into the garden. The 



^ 



90 Stranger than Fiction. 

factory was a blaze of light. Half a dozen 
voices were droning forth the old hymn . 

" There is a happy land, 
Far, far away." 

It was like a dirge . it wailed. The voices 
seemed tired. The girls had been at work 
all day. They had begun with the early 
morning. They sang the words " Far, far 
away" like a complaint, a protest, a cry, a 
regret, as if there were no hope in it, but 
only a mockery, a delusion, and a snare. 
The wheels and straps and shafts and 
spindles seemed to catch up the words and 
whirl them round and round, hurling them 
finally among the great plunging machines 
to be crushed and ground out of all shape. 
The whirling and spinning seemed to get 
into Jacob's head ; his thoughts went round 
and round with the flying and flashing 
wheels. A reminiscence of a certain calm 
evening with a miller smoking his pipe got 
mixed up in the general confusion, and he 
hurried back again into the house of the 
dead, finding no consolation, no relief, out 
in the world among the living. 




Homeless, Hopeless, Penniless. 91 



"This is for you," said Mrs, Titsy, 
handing him a letter and wiping away her 
tears. 

" Did it come by the post ?'' Jacob 
asked. 

"No, and the boy said that it was very 
important.'* 

It was a brief note. It simply stated 
that Squire Northcotes had important busi- 
ness with Jacob Marty n, whom he would 
expect at his residence at eleven o'clock 
the next day. 

Squire Northcotes was one of the nota- 
bilities of Middleton. He was a short 
gentleman, with a red face, bushy grey hair 
and whiskers. He usually wore a brown 
dress-coat with brass buttons, a canary- 
coloured waistcoat, and grey trousers. 
Out-of-doors, he generally carried a riding 
whip. When he went without this emblem 
of the stable he carried his hands in his 
pockets, in a swaggering manner. He was 
always cleanly shaven, and his boots were 
bright and creaky. He wore a ponderous 
hunting watch, indicated by a large gold 




92 Stranger than Fictiofi. 

seal, which drew particular attention to the 
owner*s rotundity of person. Meeting him 
in the High Street of Middleton-in-the- 
Water, a stranger might easily have 
imagined that the Squire had inherited 
the entire town front a long line of distin- 
guished ancestors. In his magisterial 
capacity he was a terror to evil-doers ; in 
his private capacity he had been one of 
Mr. Martyn's fiercest opponents. 

** You're a fine young fellow to assault 
a gentleman, are you not ? a very fine 
fellow," said the Squire, addressing Jacob 
on the day appointed for the interview. 
" What have you to say for yourself ?*' 

The little magistrate put his double 
glasses over his nose, and leaned back in 
his chair to obtain a full view of the de- 
linquent. 

" Am I on my trial, then ?" inquired 
Jacob, a slight blush tinging his otherwise 
pale cheeks. 

" On your trial, sir 1 I should think you 
are on your trial." 

" I hope you will not trifle with me," 



Homeless, Hopeless, Penniless. 93 



said Jacob, thinking he detected something 
in Squire Northcote's manner less earnest 
than a magistrate would be when fulfilling 
any portion of a justice's duties. 

" Trifle with you ! trifle ! not at all/' 
said the magistrate, rising and ringing a 
bell. 

**When did Mr. Gripps say he woulcj 
call again ^bout those warrants ?" he in- 
quired, on his summons being answered. 

" At half-past eleven/' said an apoplectic 
flunkey. 

"Very well ; when he comes, let him wait." 

** And why am I called here, sir ? Pray 
do not keep me in suspense, whatever the 
business may be," Sc^id Jacob, as the man 
disappeared. 

'* Suspense . it will be suspension for you" 
\the Squire chuckled at his own joke) *' if 
you go on attacking gentlemen in the per- 
formance of their duty. Suspense indeed," 
and then the Squire put his hands into his 
pockets, and rattled his gold and silver 
until it seemed to repeat as plainly as pos- 
sible, " Suspense indeed !" 



94 Stranger than Fiction, 

" Gentlemen r repeated Jacob, con- 
temptuously. '' But I do not wish to 
have any discussion. If you cannot in- 
form me, at once, what your business is 
with me I must go home." 

Jacob spoke with a sad, hopeless expres- 
sion, that touched the Squire despite his 
brusque nature. 

**Well then, be seated, Mr. Valiant,'^ 
said the magistrate. " I have an applica- 
tion from Mr. Zebedee Gripps for warrants 
against yourself and others for assaults.'' 

" Yes, sir,'' said Jacob, waiting for fur- 
ther information. 

"Well, does not that make you feel 
frightened } doesn't it alarm you . eh T' 
said the Squire, evidently surprised at 
Jacob's coolness- 

*' No," said Jacob, in desperation ; " is it 
to frighten me that you have been good 
enough to send for me here T^ 

" Why, what a fierce young fellow you 
are ! Really I begin to think I shall do 
wrong to . Dear me ! dear me ! why, you 
might be a poacher, or a burglar, instead 




Homeless, Hopeless, Penniless, 95 

of what you appear to be, with your curt 
answers and defiant bearing," said Squire 
Northcotes, annoyed that he had not suc- 
ceeded in awing Jacob into a terrible fright. 

" I always had reason to entertain a poor 
opinion of you, sir," said Jacob, rising and 
taking up his hat, " but now you sink lower 
than ever in my estimation/' 

"Sir!" exclaimed the Squire. "You 
impudent rascal ! I simply meant to frigh- 
ten you ; but, by Jove ! I don't know but 
what Gripps is right after all !" 

" A brave thing," continued Jacob, with- 
out noticing the Squire's remarks, "is it 
not, to take part with scoundrels in^ the 
wreck and destruction of an honest man's 
home, and then to triumph over his son, 
and try to frighten him while his father lies 
dead ?" 

" Stop ! Stop ! Dear, dear me ! dear 
me I poor fellow ! there, there, sit down." 
The Squire seized Jacob by the arm, and 
thrust him into the chair which he had just 
vacated. 

" You wrong me ; you do indeed. Dear 



96 Stranger than Fiction, 

me ! what a sad thing ! Dead, do you 
say ? How is it I did not know ? As if 
it were not enough to have the bailiffs in 
the place, let alone . Dear me I Why^ 
what an infernal hard-hearted devil ! . 
ahem ! . I must be, to torture the lad in 
this manner. Dear, dear ! why, it's cruelty 
to animals. Damme ! I deserve a month 
on the treadwheel." With which emphatic 
comment upon his own conduct, the Squire 
walked about the room, and rattled his 
gold and silver, which repeated his last 
pungent remark as plainly as gold and 
silver could possibly do. 

Jacob looked up in astonishment, and 
when there was a slight pause in the 
Squire's movements, he essayed to speak. 

" Don't speak, sir ; not a word, not a 
word. Tm a homicide, sir, a homicide . a 
murderer of the innocents ; Tm a wretch," 
went on the Squire, twitching at his coat 
collar, and throwing his little head about in 
the wildest state of excitement. 

Indeed, there is no knowing to what 
extent his contempt for himself might not 




Homeless^ Hopeless ^ Penniless. 97 

have gone had not the corpulent individual 
before mentioned knocked at the door, 
thrust his head inside, and ejaculated 
** Gripps." 

The Squire caught at the word with the 
eagerness with which it is said drowning 
men desire to seize upon straws. " Gripps, 
Gripps !" The magistrate darted out of the 
room ; and immediately afterwards, Jacob 
heard a great deal of talking in the hall. 
The conversation was very noisy, and all on 
one side. There were few words, however, 
that he could detect, save " dearme " and 
" damme ;" and the Squire made such fre- 
quent use of both, that it would have puz- 
zled a much cleverer fellow than Jacob to 
decide when the Squire's exclamation was 
" dearme " and when it was something else, 
the words were so singularly blended, and 
were used so frequently. 

By-and-by the Squire returned, some- 
what consoled by his interview with 
Gripps, to whom he had transferred all the 
epithets and reproaches which he had 
hitherto applied to himself. 

VOL. II. 7 



^ 



98 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Dear me, I flattered myself I knew 
something ; I thought I was rather a man 
of the world/' 

The discovery that he had somehow or 
other made a mistake in this was a blow 
to the Squire's vanity, which fretted him 
almost as much as it did to think that he 
had been acting cruelly towards one who 
had so much right to find sympathy and 
kindness. 

" Well, sir,'' he said at length, *' you need 
fear no trouble from Gripps : I'll see that 
you are safe at any rate." 

*' Thank you, sir," said Jacob, 

" Don't thank me ; no words about that ; 
but tell me what you are going to do! 
what are your prospects in life .'^" 

" I do not know," said Jacob. 

" No, no-= . of course not ; cannot think 
about it until the funeral is over : that's the 
feeling of a good son ; well, well . I know, 
I know. But look here, now" (the gold 
and silver rattled, and then several gold 
pieces came forth). " Look here, now, you 
may have use for this ; there, take it ; it 




HomelesSy Hopeless^ Penniless. 99 

isn't a gift ; TU lend it to you ; IVe no use 
for it ; I shall only throw it away . come, 
come." 

But Jacob declined, 

*' I do not need it at present, sir ; I am 
greatly obliged to you." 

The Squire was hurt at Jacob's refusal, 
but nothing would induce him to take the 
money. 

" Very well, I regard it as false pride ; 
but never mind," said the Squire ; ** per- 
haps you are right ; this, however, you 
must do . let me know when you do require 
it, that's all." 

Jacob thanked the Squire, and was 
shown to the door by the magistrate him- 
self, 

'^ Humph ! he's a proud young fellow . 
like his father," said the Squire, ringing 
the bell for his sherry and biscuits. " As 
it happened, it turned out well for a time, 
but I've been sorry ever since for that row 
I had with poor Martyn : dear me, it's a 
pity he wasn't a Red." 

" Dear me, it's a pity he wasn't a Red," 



^ 



lOO Stranger than Fiction. 

said the agitated gold and silver. There 
was no mistake about it. Whenever the 
Squire wished to be very emphatic he 
shook up sundry coins of the realm, includ- 
ing two old guineas which were always 
domiciled in those ample pockets, until 
they repeated, as plainly as possible, the 
words upon which he laid the gold and sil- 
ver emphasis. 

A week after this interview between 
Jacob and the magistrate, a vault in the 
Middleton Churchyard was opened that 
the body of Alfred Martyn might rest in 
company with the remains of his wife and 
Jacobus little brother. The establishment 
of the late Mr. Martyn was closed ; great 
placards were posted upon the shutters 
announcing a sale by auction. The win- 
dows in the upper rooms were dirty, the 
blinds had disappeared altogether, and 
*' To Let" was daubed on the panes, in 
white letters. The garden was strewn with 
scraps of paper, fragments of straw, broken 
packing-cases, and pieces of rope. All 
that remained to remind those who knew 




Homeless, Hopeless y Penniless. loi 

Jacob's paradise in its sunny days, was the 
factory music, the noise of the distant river, 
and voices from over the wall. But of 
these only the river was unchanged. Joy, 
nor sorrow, nor death altered the gurgling, 
rippling, rumbling river, as it fell from the 
mill-pool, tumbling over the stones, leaping, 
and splashing, and rushing through guUeys, 
and then going on quietly to the sea. 

Jacob Martyn was alone in the world, 
friendless, homeless, and an orphan. He 
had received only one letter from Lucy. 
It was a short, sweet, * simple letter. In 
reply, Jacob told her he was lost. He 
loved her with all his heart, but he would 
not bind her to her vows. He released 
her ; for he was a beggar, a broken-hearted, 
helpless, penniless beggar. Fortune was 
against him. The world was a delusion, 
life a curse, hope a snare. He should 
always love her nevertheless, but he would 
not darken her life with the shadow of his. 
If ever he should be successful ; if ever 
fortune did smile upon him ; and she were 
free to be his and still cared for him, he 




I02 Stranger than Fiction. 

would be at her feet. Until then he would 
wait, and fight, and strive, even without 
hope, to conquer the demon misfortune who 
was in full possession of him. He wrote 
letters equally desponding to Spen; and 
then slipped away from Middleton-in-the 
Water; slipped away over that bridge in 
the shadow of which we found him at play 
in our opening chapter ; slipped away en- 
tirely, and for a long time was not heard of 
again. 





CHAPTER VII. 




HOW A FAMOUS BANQUET WAS BROUGHT TO 
A SUDDEN AND STARTLING END. 

HEN we are gone the world soon 
forgets US. The ranks close up 
and we are not missed. If we 
could not console ourselves with 
the thoughts of the world beyond, the idea 
of death would be enough to drive us mad. 
Middleton-in-the-Water showed no change 
on account of the removal of Mr. Martyn. 
A new name was cut on the old tomb-stone 
that stood up among the hard, formal-look- 
ing monuments in the churchyard. That 
was all. Middleton even existed without 
Mr. Martyn's newspaper. It went on buy- 
ing and selling and cursing and swearing 



I04 Stranger than Fiction. 

and robbing just the same. The smoke 
dragged itself up and down the streets and 
the river rolled under the bridge as of yore. 
When Mr. Windgate Williams shook the 
accursed dust of the town from off his feet, 
and travelled fourth class by train to another 
city, no startling phenomenon marked the 
incident. Jacob Martyn was not missed. 
The old Squire, jingling his money, had 
thought of him once, and the Titsy house- 
held kept his memory green ; but Middle- 
ton put its shutters up at night and turned 
down its gas without a thought of the wan- 
derer. 

Soon after the eclipse of the Star, the 
opposition journal, now in undisturbed pos- 
session of the field, was ^' glad to learn," in 
a very jubilant paragraph, " that arrange- 
ments were at last completed for the pro- 
posed banquet to his Worship the Mayor, 
Ephraim Magar, Esq., who has for three 
successive years fulfilled the onerous and 
important duties of the chief magistracy. 
On Tuesday next the burgesses will testify 
their appreciation of his great services to 




A Famous Banquet. 105 

the town by entertaining the retiring 
Mayor at a public dinner, to be provided 
by our worthy townsman, the landlord of 
the ' Durham Ox,' and we doubt not that 
the demonstration will be equal to the 
occasion. Without for one moment de- 
siring to introduce politics into this matter, 
we cannot close our remarks without con- 
gratulating the Reds that the retiring Mayor 
is on the right side, and we hope this fact 
will be duly remembered/' 

I do a section of the inhabitants some 
injustice. The '* Yellows" had not quite 
forgotten Mr. Martyn. When they read 
the desire of the Guardian that politics 
should not be introduced into the Magar 
demonstration, the Yellows gave a unani- 
mous sigh for the Star that had ceased to 
shine. They little thought how completely 
they would be revenged before the banquet 
was ended. Fate is always at our elbows. 

As the eventful Tuesday approached, 
the bustle and excitement of the chief 
hotel grew loud and noisy. The landlord 
had engaged a numerous staff of super- 



io6 Stranger than Fiction. 

numerary waiters. The corps had been 
inspected by their chief and lectured upon 
their duties. A greengrocer, a scavenger, 
an ostler, a baker, and a score of other 
artists had begged and borrowed black 
coats and white neckties for the occasion. 
They were strictly enjoined not to hand 
dishes over the heads of guests nor to 
leave the posts severally assigned to them, 
except to assist in the removal of the 
various courses. They were not to pocket 
the tarts nor to carry away the wine until 
the dinner was over. One man to eight 
guests was the proportion of waiting power 
decided upon by the chief, who was to be 
assisted by the footman attached to the 
establishment of Squire Northcotes ; while 
the Middleton bellman, done up in red and 
blue, with brass buttons, was to play the 
part of toastmaster and stand behind the 
Mayor's chair until the conclusion of the 
banquet. 

Before sunrise on the morning of the 
feast the gardens of Squire Northcotes 
and other gentlemen in the neighbourhood 




A Famous Banquet. 107 

were, with the full permission of their 
several owners, ransacked for the pur- 
poses of decoration. The dining-room 
was wreathed with holly, fir, and laurel. 
Shrubs and branches of trees were crowded 
into every corner of the room, relieved by 
paper rosettes and ribbons. Some local 
expert, whose name was ever remembered 
by the decorators as the author of a great 
achievement, planned and arranged and 
formed '* Welcome All " with laurel leaves, 
everlasting flowers, and holly berries. 
The magic words were stretched across 
the room behind the chairman's seat 
" The Town and Trade of Middleton,*' in 
white letters pasted upon red glazed calico, 
gleamed forth, at the opposite end, from 
beneath a ponderous wreath of Middleton 
foliage. 

When the tables were laid to the satis- 
faction of the head waiter a few fortunate 
persons were permitted to inspect the 
room. The female servants of the estab- 
lishment, the wives of six of the super- 
numerary waiters, the bellman's daughter, 



loS Stranger tJmn Fiction. 



the barber from round the corner, and Mr. 
Magar s chief domestic went into raptures 
over the display of plate and glass and flags 
and mottoes. 

The room certainly looked festive and 
inviting. Two long tables occupied the 
centre of the apartment, crossed at one end 
by another slightly raised above the rest, 
and on this table were displayed the best 
plate and glass. The borrowed knives and 
forks were placed upon the lower tables. 
On the upper table there was no mixture of 
dinner services. The plates and centre 
dishes were all of one pattern, and so were 
the tumblers and wine-glasses. This was 
considered to be a great triumph of arrange- 
ment. The waiting staff at the head table 
had been doubled, while the wine for the 
chief guests who were to sit there was 
specially selected. The next great exhibi- 
tion for the sightseers was certain artistic 
models of flowers with which some of the 
dishes were to be adorned. 

" This way/' said the chief waiter, who 
was stout, bald, and hot. The admiring 




A Famous Banqtiet. 109 

group followed him down stairs, all marvel- 
ling at his fine black suit, except the barber, 
who was lost in calculating the proportions 
of a wig which had been exhibited on a 
wooden block in his window since the first 
day when he put out his pole with the gilt 
termination. He felt sure that a little 
manipulation would adapt the wig to the 
bald head before him, and resolved to wait 
upon his friend on the following day with a 
view to business. Meanwhile the chief 
waiter led the way into a pantry,'^ x:lose 
by the kitchen, and there produced two 
dishes full of biMs, roses, stars, diamonds^ 
and leaves, cut out of turnips and carrots, 
and covered with watef to keep them 
fresh. 

** Beautiful !" said a chorus of voices. 

" Like wax," said Mr. Northcotes' house- 
keeper. 

" Like natur," said the charwoman. 

They all agreed that the chief waiter was 
a wonderful man. 

" But to think of them bein' stuck on 
boiled mutt'n an' caper sarse . I cudn't eat 



no Stranger than Fiction. 

for lookin' at 'em/' said the wife of one of 
the supers. 

And then each woman (except the ser- 
vants in the house, who had only time 
'*just to have one peep") went and told 
every other woman she knew all she had 
seen ; and the barber, after another mental 
calculation, went straight to his old wig- 
block and wondered if it really would fit 
the waiter's head. 

When the guests arrived they were 
ushered into the smoke-room, the bar and 
commercial roon^, until the announcement 
of dinner. 

For ten minutes two ** commercials " 
looked inkstands and daggers and fire- 
irons at the head of every fresh comer, 
and then disappeared, denouncing this 
intrusion upon their sacred apartment. 
The bar, I must not forget to say, was 
occupied by those who considered them- 
selves the leading burgesses ; and here 
the most proficient waiters relieved every 
gentleman of his hat and overcoat, 
which were exchanged for small round 




A Famous Banquet. in 

tickets, numbered with very bloated 
figures. 

At length there was a sound of carriage 
wheels, followed soon afterwards by a loud 
shout The uproar was first raised by a 
crowd of shivering men and boys, who 
stood outside the hotel sniffing the odours 
of the kitchen. Three waiters took up the 
cry, which was immediately repeated by 
the smoke-room and echoed by the com- 
mercial, reaching its climax with the bar. 
The reason for this jubilation was the 
arrival of his Worship the Mayor (Ephraim 
Magar, Esq.), leaning on the arm of Squire 
Northcotes, who accepted the ovation with 
becoming grace, the Squire looking through 
everybody as if occupied with some impor- 
tant sight a long way off. The Mayor 
bowed his humble acknowledgments for 
this kindness, which, he said, as plainly as 
looks could speak, " is really more than I 
deserve. I am a plain outspoken man, and 
I have only done my duty." But his ad- 
miring fellow-townsmen would not permit 
this self-depreciation. The more his Wor- 



112 Stranger than Fiction. 

ship shook his head and bowed the louder 
they shouted ; and if during a brief lull in 
the tumult of applause dinner had not been 
announced, there is no knowing whether 
speech-making might not have begun be- 
fore the banquet. 

Squire Northcotes and the Mayor led 
the way to the dining-room, followed by no 
fewer than one hundred of the gentry and 
tradesmen of the town, in order, according 
to their position or conceit. The trades- 
men permitted professional people and 
gentlefolks to pass first; then came the 
manufacturers and wholesale traders, who 
elbowed each other fiercely, while the 
struggle for precedence among the retail 
people was tremendous. 

On all sides the air was filled with the 
odour of boiling and baking and roasting, 
and the scorching of japanned plate 
warmers. Anybody could have sworn to 
the latter ; and there was no mistaking 
the odoriferous breezes that C3,me down 
the yard from the stables, and held a con- 
test with the steam from the kitchen. The 




A Famous Banquet. 113 

result was by no means appetising. The 
scent was altogether a peculiar blend, as 
peculiar as that mixture which was known 
at the ** Durham Ox " as sherry. 

These gastronomic and horsey vapours 
were to some extent dispelled by the 
musical breezes of the Middleton brass 
band, which was stationed in the yard to 
give a classical sensation to the dinner. 
They were to play a selection of pieces ap- 
propriate to the occasion. They began 
with the " National Anthem," in which the 
loyalty of the drummer was made strikingly 
manifest ; while the powers of a cornet 
player, and one who blew out his cheeks 
and fastened his lips deep into the mouth- 
piece of an ophicleide, were exemplified in 
a rivalry for the lead, which was peculiarly 
effective. Occasionally the cornet would 
give signs of weakness that were not to be 
resisted by the ophicleide, which upon 
these occasions made a dash at the air, and 
carried it off into a high discordant warble 
that excited the drummer into such " pitches 
in,'' and worried the cornet so successfully, 

VOL. II. . 8 




. 114 Stranger than Fiction. 

that nothing could exceed the energy of 
these three instruments. ** The Roast 
Beef of Old England " awoke the echoes 
of the stables, and set several of the crowd 
of lookers on dancing, while great dishes of 
meat were carried out, steaming hot. Just 
as the last dish was being conveyed in 
great state past the musicians, the trombone 
executed a movement which, though not 
set down for him, proved highly entertain- 
ing to the crowd. Everybody knows that 
the trombone requires much more space 
than other instruments, the perpetual draw- 
ing in and pushing out of a portion of the 
machine requiring a considerable area. The 
Middleton trombone was a very celebrated 
one, and the player had been originally 
selected because of his long arms. The 
performer prided himself upon a certain 
lower note which was produced at arm's 
length, and he was just on the point of 
adding to the effect of the general harmony 
by the production of this fundamental 
groan, when Master Super staggered a 
little out of his course, and caught the end 




A Famous Banquet 115 

of the brass instrument in a very sensitive 
part of his body . namely, the funny bone 
of his right arm . and down went a huge 
joint of beef, in a glorious splash of gravy, 
that spoiled the bearer's borrowed trousers, 
and for the time being brought the music 
to an end, while the hungry populace 
roared with malicious laughter. 

But the ilite of the neighbourhood and 
the gentry and tradesmen of Middleton, as 
the local reporter styled the assemblage in 
the dining-room, never missed this trifle of 
beef, though they drank and ate everything 
before them, one gentleman taking caper 
sauce with apple tart, and another having 
commenced dinner with the custards and 
jellies. So much meat and so many clean 
plates had never before been seen all at one 
time by the Middletonians, 

One often hears about the heat of battle ; 
the heat of a public dinner in a country 
town is something equally palpable. Of 
course every window was kept carefully 
closed. Indeed it was impossible to open 
tfhem, They were covered with flags and 

8.2 



J 



1 1 6 Stranger than Fiction. 

flowers, with mottoes in calico and senti- 
ments in leaves. Clouds of candles made 
the air luminous, and a dozen gas jets burnt 
it. The heat condensed itself and covered 
the decorations with trickling streams of 
water. It glowed and danced on the 
ceiling; it fired the blood of the guests, 
settling on their faces, making their eyes 
sparkle. The dooi* was opened, but with- 
out relief. The heat was a great suc- 
cess. 

Ephraim Magai* was ubiquitous. He 
took wine with everybody. Squire North- 
cotes was never more condescending. He 
rattled his money, and even went so far as 
to patronise a retail flour dealer, who was 
in such a hurry to respond to the Squire's 
challenge) and was so nervous and excited, 
that he filled his glass with a piquant sauce 
from a bottle that stood in dangerous prox- 
imity to the sherry ; and determined that 
he would do full honour to the Squire, he 
tossed off the pungent draught and at once 
made such extraordinary faces at his oppo- 
site neighbours, accompanied with so many 



N 



A Famous Banquet 117 

dangerous symptoms of choking, that he 
was carried out into the open air to re- 
cover. 

*' Gentlemen," said the Squire, rising 
behind a mutilated haunch of venison, 
" Mr. Magar desires me to say that he 
wishes to invite you to take champagne 
with him . (hurrah and cheers) . and to 
enable you to do so, he has given orders 
for an ample supply . (hurrah) . to be 
brought into the room instanter ' . (tremen- 
dous applause). 

When the cheese had been removed, 
and the last scrunching of celery was 
heard, a tall gentleman in a white neck- 
cloth rose for the purpose, it was generally 
believed, of "saying grace." He opened 
his mouth twice and nodded his head sig- 
nificantly at three wax candles ; but being 
young, nervous, and thin, he could do no 
more. Happily, the assemblage was con- 
siderate. Taking the will for the deed, 
everybody was perfectly satisfied with the. 
pious and proper exercises of the bashful 
curate. The Mayor of Middleton said 



1 1 8 Stra7iger than Fiction. 

"Amen" in a loud voice, and cracked the 
first walnut of the day. 

"And now, gentlemen, we come to the 
toast of the evening," said the Squire, after 
having duly proposed those toasts which, 
in every assemblage of Englishmen, as 
every proposer, before and since Squire 
Northcotes, has said, are always drunk 
with loyal enthusiasm . " The toast of the 
evening." (Tremendous cheers). 

This leading toast was, of course, the 
health of Mr. Ephraim Magar, Mayor of 
the ancient borough of Middleton-in-the- 
Water. The Squire said all that could 
be said about Mr. Magar and his office, 
and the toast was drunk with musical 
honours : 

" Which nobody can deny. 
Which nobody can deny. 
For he's a hearty good Mayor, 
For he's a hearty good Mayor, 
For he's a hearty good Mayor, 
And so say all of us." 

The town-crier had a particular formula 
as toastmaster when musical honours were 




A Famous Banquet 1 1 9 

introduced. The first-'* hip, hip, hurrah" 
at an end, the crier, raising his hand for 
silence, desired to ask the assemblage an 
important question. Everybody knew what 
the question would be. They smiled and 
nodded at each other and waited, 

** Gentlemen," said the crier, in slow, 
solemn tones ; " why do we drink his 
health ? . why do we drink the health of 
his Worship the Mayor ?" 

" Because he*s a jolly good fellow, 
Because he's a jolly good fellow, 
Because he's a jolly good fellow . 
With a hip, hip, hurrah !" 

thundered out the Middletonians. 

It was one of the chief incidents of a 
merry evening to. hear the toastmaster pro- 
pound this question. 

When Mr. Magar rose to reply, the 
shouts and cheers were repeated, and by 
a preconcerted signal the band stationed 
in the yard struck up, " See the conquering 
hero comes," so that the Mayor was com- 
pelled to resume his seat, and submit to 
" more musical honours." 



1 20 Stranger than Fiction. 

Only a few bars of the stirring music 
had, however, been performed, when it was 
interrupted by a disturbance on the stairs. 
The conquering hero was coming, with a 
vengeance ! A woman's voice was heard, 
in remonstrance with persons who were 
evidently trying to prevent her entrance 
into the room. 

" I must ! I will ! it is life and death !" 

Then the waiters could be heard thrust- 
ing the woman back, 

" Are you men ?" she shrieked. " Mur- 
der has been done ! Let me pass, I say !" 

The next moment she had broken through 
those who resisted her and was in the room. 
Her appearance seemed to act like a spell 
on the company. Pale, haggard, defiant, 
her eyes glaring, she walked to the head 
of the table. No one attempted to inter- 
fere with her. She carried authority in 
her gait. The Mayor was observed to 
clutch the tablecloth and gasp for breath. 
In a moment, however, he had recovered 
himself. 

" Ephraim Magar," said the woman, in 



A Famous Banquet. 121 

the midst of a dead silence, ** I denounce 
you as the murderer of Silas CoUinson," 

" Remove this woman !" said the Mayor, 
addressing the town-crier and the Squire's 
footman, who stood aghast at her effrontery. 

" Hands off!'* exclaimed the woman. 

" Remove her . she is mad 1" shouted 
the Mayor, who had risen to his feet at 
her first attack. 

'' Gentlemen, a moment ; hear me a mo-' 
ment," she said with touching earnestness ; 
" most of you knew Silas Collinson . he 
has been foully murdered, and by that man ! 
I am Susan Harley, who went to America 
to marry a man that lay murdered at 
Magar s Mill." 

At this moment several persons left their 
seats and crowded about the Mayor. One 
of them crept away into the street; that 
man was Julius Jennings. 

" Susan Harley is dead," shouted the 
Mayor. ** This woman is a lunatic. Gen- 
tlemen, will you permit your chief magis- 
trate to be insulted, and at a moment like 
the present ?" 



122 Stranger than Fiction, 

" Turn her out," shouted several voices ; 
" take her back to the asylum." The 
town - crier laid his hand on Susan's 
shoulder. 

" Silence !" cried Squire Northcotes, who 
up to this moment had been an astonished 
spectator of the scene ; " I command 
silence !" 

" Away with her !" roared Magar, his 
face livid with rage ; " away with the crazy 
hussy 1" 

He rushed towards her, with the evident 
intention of himself ejecting her from the 
room. 

" Hands off!" said a stout young fellow, 
who had forced his way with some others 
into the room, on hearing the commotion 
from the street. " Til take care of thee, 
lass, again all comers." 

It was Tom Titsy, at the sound of whose 
voice Susan uttered a cry of joy and flung 
herself into his arms. Tom held her 
bravely, and patted her head with his 
great rough hand. 

" Mister Magar doesn't treat the charge 



A Famous Banquet. 123 

as if it were such a lie, your Honour/' 
said Tom, addressing the Squire. 

" Hold your tongue !'' said the Squire, 
through whose mind the same thought was 
passing. 

*' Gentlemen, gentlemen !" exclaimed the 
Squire ; " pardon me a moment. Mr. 
Magar, pray be quiet an instant." 

" Order ! order !" cried twenty voices. 

" This woman has placed a paper in my 
hands ; allow me a moment to read it ; the 
print is small.*' 

The Squire examined the paper through 
his glass during continued cries of " Order, 
order !" 

" I will not submit to this infernal hum- 
bug any longer," said Magar. 

" Pray be calm,'' said the Squire, " the 
affair will soon be at an end. Here is the 
Superintendent." 

As the chief of the borough police en- 
tered the room, Susan Harley, overcome 
by fatigue and excitement, fainted. Tom 
carried her into the yard. 

" Mr. Superintendent," said the Squire, 



1 24 Stranger than Fiction. 

in a loud magisterial voice, which hushed 
the bystanders, " Ephraim Magar is your 
prisoner, on the charge of murder." 

The officer looked from one to the other 
in amazement 

" Monstrous !" exclaimed Magar, his 
voice trembling, " I am chief magistrate 
of Middleton . arrest me at your peril." 

As the officer advanced towards Magar, 
there were indications of disapprobation 
among the company. 

" No, no !" said several voices. 

" Gentlemen, fellow townsmen !" said the 
Squire, with an authoritative wave of his 
right hand, " let us obey the law as honest 
Englishmen ; never let it be said there is 
a law for the rich and another for the 
poor. If Mr. Magar is innocent he has 
his remedy, and we shall be all delighted 
to see him come out of this, clear, and in 
a manner worthy of his office." 

** Hear, hear," said the Middletonians, 
" that is true." 

The Mayor had lost his self-possession 
by this time. He was trembling in every 



A Famous Banquet, 125 

limb. His lips were white. He leaned 
against the table for support. 

" Officer, do your duty/' said the Squire. 
** I will hold you harmless." 

"You are my prisoner/* said the chief, 
laying his hand on Magar's shoulder. 

" You shall pay for this/' was all Magar 
could say, his teeth chattering with fear. 

Half an hour afterwards Ephraim Magar, 
Esquire, thrice Mayor of Middleton, was 
a prisoner in the strongest cell of the local 
lock-up* 




CHAPTER VIII. 

IN WHICH SUSAN TELLS HER TERRIBLE 

STORY. 




u '-^ "^"^'OOR dear soul ; why, I should 

not ha known you," said Mrs. 
Titsy to Susan Harley, who 
sat in Dr. Johnson's easy-chair, 
supported by several pillows. 

" I dare say not," said Susan feebly. 
" Dear, dear, what must ha' been the 
sufferings thou's gone through |" 

" Poor lass ! poor lass !'' said Tom Titsy, 
while Caesar insinuated his nose between 
Susan's hand and knee. 

" To think of the poor dear fellow being 
murdered ! It gives me the shivers ! 
Well, I never did like that Magar." 




Susan tells her Terrible Story, 127 

" Mother !" exclaimed Tom, " don't say 
that, it*s just what everybody will say : and 
besides IVe heard you stand up for him." 

'' Be quiet, Tom," replied Mrs. Titsy ; 
** let Susan tell us all about it/' 

Susan sat gazing into the fire, while 
Tom's big rough dog blinked his eyes at 
her. 

" Do you feel strong enough, Susan, lass, 
\o talk to us ? If not, thou knows we can 
wait. 

" Yes, yes," said Susan, looking into 
Tom's face with a kindly expression and 
motioning him to a chair. 

*' I saw Magar when I was in Liver- 
pool." 

" Dear, dear," said Mrs. Titsy, smoothing 
her apron and preparing to become an at- 
tentive listener. 

" I did not think so until lately ; but I 
know now that it must have been him. He 
was disguised, and talking to a bad-looking 
man who came on board as a passenger." 

" Don't fluster yourself, lass," said 
Tom. 



128 Stranger than Fiction. 

" That man was engaged to push me 
overboard." 

" Good Lord !" exclaimed Mrs. Titsy. 

" I know now that he was, though I did 
not know it then." 

Tom set his teeth, and wished he had , 
the scoundrel by the throat 

"He spoke to me more than once in a 
friendly way, pointed out to me the Welsh 
coast, and told me when we were passing 
Cape Clean He was a blear-eyed, ill-look- 
ing man, but he tried to make himself 
agreeable . for the purpose, no doubt, of 
putting me into the sea." 

" Damn him I" said Tom, half rising 
from his seat. 

" There now, do be quiet," said Tom's 
mother, " and don't let us hear such lan- 
guage as that when we should be saying 
our prayers and thanking Heaven for this 
deliverance." 

" We had a pleasant passage until we 
caught sight of land, which they said was 
the shore of Long Island ; but here the 
ship tossed a good deal, and the man I tell 




Susan tells her Terrible Story. 1 29 

you of was continually close to me. He 
wanted me to look over the side to see 
some dolphins/' 

Tom could not keep his seat 

" When we were just entering New York 
Pay he got more friendly than even It 
was evening. The sea was smoother, but 
the ship seemed to roll a good deal The 
pilot had come on board, and some of the 
sailors had just before been lowered in a 
boat . I don't know whg^t for. It was get- 
ting dusk, and I went to the side of the 
vessel to see more distinctly a sight which 
the man I tell you of said I should never 
forget. I stood upon a coil of ropes. Sud- 
denly the vessel gave a great lurch, and I 
felt as if I were lifted off my feet and 
pushed over," 

" Lord have mercy on us !" exclaimed 
Mrs. Titsy, "And did you go into the 
water ?" 

*' No ; thank God ! The boat which had 
been lowered was going to be used again 
shortly, and was only partly drawn up the 
vessel's side." 

VOL. II. 9 



1 30 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Capital !" said Tom, rubbing his hands, 
*' and you fell into it ?" 

" I did," said Susan, " and was not much 
hurt. When I got on deck again there 
was a noise between the man I tell you of 
and a sailor. The man was taking his 
oath he did not do it. The sailor asked 
me if the fellow hadn t pushed me. I said 
I thought not, and I did think not The 
man said he had tried to save me. The 
sailor said he could almost swear the brute 
pushed me over ; but as I took his part^ 
the row ended in the sailor swearing a good 
deal, and advising me to keep clear of the 
fellow, which I did. The next day, an 
hour before we landed, he was taken into 
custody for a gold robbery in Liverpool. 
The police had followed him in a steamer 
which must have passed us during the 
night, and the detective came on board in 
the bay.'' 

" And didn't you think, then, that he 
had pushed you, Susan, lass ?" inquired 
Tom. 

" No ! why should he wish to harm me ? 




Susan tells her Terrible Story. 131 

I have thought so since. I know now that 
he was engaged to do so. I am sure of it.*' 

" Have you ever seen him since ?" Mrs* 
Titsy askedi 

'^Neven" 

" Should you know him again ?*' 

" Amongst a thousand," Susan replied. 

" Well, go on, lass . about the landing ?" 
said Tom. 

" I looked for Silas," went on Susan in 
an undertone^ " You may be sure I did 
not know what to do when I could not find 
him. I made inquiries. I mentioned the 
address which Magar had given me 
There was no address in his letters, be- 
cause he had moved about so much, he 
said, and I was to direct to the post-office* 
Nobody knew the address. I was half mad. 
People were running and pushing about. 
It was all I could do to keep my luggage. 
At last I told a good-natured looking 
woman my troubles, and by her advice I 
was taken to an hotel, and the next day I 
put an advertisement in a newspaper. I 
wandered about half the night, near where 

9.2 



132 Stranger than Fiction^ 

*-he ferry-boat from the vessel landed the 
passengers ; but no Silas, no Silas." 

Susan's voice faltered, and she hid her 
face in her hands. Tom stole up to her 
chair and laid his hand gently upon her 
shoulder. 

" There, there, my lass, don't give way ; 
there, there,'' said Tom. 

" Have a little drop of something warm," 
said Mrs. Titsy, rummaging among some 
bottles in the oak corner cupboard and 
mixing a decoction of which Susan was 
induced to sip. 

** Nowhere could I find him. I could 
not sleep night nor day. I could not be- 
lieve he had deserted me." 

*' No, lass, he wouldn't have done that, 
wouldn't Silas; I'll say that for him," said 
Tom. 

** The advertisement did no good. The 
police did no good. The post-office did 
no good. Days went on, weeks, months. 
I could do nothing. At last my money 
was gone ; and, the Lord forgive me ! I 
began to think I had been duped ; for why, 




Susan tells her Terrible Story. 133 



or for what, I could not imagine. But Mrs. 
Gompson said I should be. I thought of 
that. I remembered, too, what Magar had 
told me about Silas being a beggar, and in 
his power.'' 

" When did he tell thee that, lass ?'' in- 
quired Tom. 

" I never heard that before," said Mrs. 
Titsy. 

" No, you would not. I told nobody ; 
but I wished to go all the more for that. 
At last I thought Silas was ruined, as 
Magar said, and that he was ashamed to 
meet me, or that he had done something 
wrong; I thought a thousand things. I 
often sat down to write to you all ; but my 
pride would not let me. I could not bear 
it to be said I had been deceived. People 
shook their heads and warned me when I 
went away ; I could not bear the triumph 
they would have in knowing that they had 
prophesied right ; I should have had no 
pity.'' 

" Susan, Susan, no pity," said Mrs. Titsy, 
reproachfully. 



134 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Yes, yes, from you ; and yours I could 
not bear. Oh, Tom ! have you forgiven 
me ?'' 

This appeal to Tom fairly brought tears 
into his eyes. He took Susan's wasted 
hand in his and kissed it; after which 
he was obliged to go to the door and pre- 
tend to release a pigeon from his capacious 
pocket. When he returned Susan con- 
tinued her story. 

" My feelings would not let me write. I 
prayed for you all, and at last resigned 
myself to my fate. I went out to service ; 
I lost two places because I was not cheer- 
ful. Whenever I had a holiday I wan- 
dered about looking for Silas. Christmas 
days were the hardest to me. I thought 
my heart would break many a time. By- 
and-by I grew more resigned, and after 
being two years in two places, I got with 
an English family who kept a store, and 
there I lived more peacefully and con- 
tentedly." 

" And did you never get any letters 
from us ?" asked Mrs. Titsy. 




Susan tells her Terrible Story. 135 

" Never." 

** What a plot it is ! what a plot it is !" 
said Tom. 

" One day, wheil I had 'begun to be a little 
more like myself, I thought I would paper 
out a trunk that I had at poor Mr. Mar- 
tyn's. I got a London newspaper which 
master sometimes received, and then the 
awful light burst upon me.'* 

" There, gently, lass, gently," said Tom, 
noticing Susan's growing excitement. 

" I noticed the word * Middleton,' and I 
read it till my brain was on fire. I was 
nearly mad. I raved. Oh ! don't be 
afraid, Mrs. Titsy . mother . for you have 
been a mother to me, ungrateful that I am. 
Don't be alarmed, Tom. It is all over 
now. There, you see, I am quite calm 
again. Read that." 

Mrs. Titsy took from Susan a carefully 
preserved though soiled extract from a 
newspaper, and read as follows : . 

" Extraordinary Discovery : Suspi- 
cious Affair. . Our readers will remember 



1 36 Stranger than Fiction. 

that some time since it was decided by the 
county authorities to widen and rebuild 
Middleton Bridge. The increased traffic 
along the London road, consequent upon 
the gradual opening up of the great coal 
fields of Tipwell, had rendered the bridge 
unsafe, and on the recommendation of the 
Bridge Committee, and in consideration of 
the voluntary assistance of some of the 
wealthy inhabitants of Middleton, it was 
resolved to purchase a large piece of land 
on either side for the purpose of widening 
the bridge and making a handsome struc- 
ture worthy of the borough and county 
too. Mr. Alderman Magar for some time 
strenuously opposed the scheme ; but when 
he found how strongly the burgesses were 
in favour of it, and how handsomely some of 
them had offered to subscribe towards it, he 
liberally came forward and made the autho- 
rities a present of his famous old corn mill, 
which at the outset they had proposed to 
purchase at ;^3,ooo, being determined to 
obtain an Act of Parliament, if necessary, 
to compel owners of property on either side 
to consent to the proposed improvement. 
We have previously expressed our high 




Susan tells her Terrible Story. 137 

sense of Mr. Magar's liberality, which is 
duly appreciated by the town. Let us not 
further wander from the subject in hand. 
On^ Monday last, when the masons were 
removing the last stones of the old mill, a 
labourer struck his axe upon what appeared 
to be a vault Some few Roman coins had 
been found in the course of the work, 
and the labourer, thinking he had come 
upon something still more valuable, said 
nothing of his imaginary good luck except 
to an old friend, and they agreed to open 
the vault after the other labourers left work. 
Their hon'or and disappointment may be 
imagined when we state that a ghastly 
skeleton of a man was the result of their 
secret search. The body had evidently 
been interred in quick-lime. There was a 
terrible fracture on the skull, and medical 
examination goes to prove that the remains 
are those of a full-grown man, who had evi- 
dently been foully murdered. There were 
no clothes nor linen found ; but a ring or 
galvanic hoop was afterwards discovered 
with the letter ' H ' upon it. The medical 
authorities cannot agree as to how long 
these bones have been lying there. Dr. 
Smythe is of opinion that they have been 



138 Stranger than Fiction. 

^1 ..^.1 .! . .. .....Il MMMI^ . .. . . ..- . ... I 

interred upwards of fifty years ; while Mr. 
Jones, surgeon, thinks they have not been 
buried more than ten years. The affair 
has created a great deal of sensation. Some 
of the oldest inhabitants in the borough re- 
member the mysterious disappearance of a 
townsman about thirty years ago; but at 
present no further light has been thrown 
upon the affair. The mill has been in the 
possession of Mn Alderman Magar for 
about fifteen years, prior to which the late 
Mr. Smithson had it for more than half a 
century. Mr. Magar has himself offered a 
reward of ;^ 50 to any person who can iden- 
tify the body or give conclusive evidence as 
to the murderer. On Tuesday evening an 
inquest was held on the remains, when evi- 
dence bearing out the above facts was 
adduced. The jury returned a verdict of 
* Wilful murder against some person or per- 
sons unknown.' The police are using 
strenuous efforts to fathom this horrible 
mystery. It is to be hoped that persons 
who have relatives missing will communi- 
cate with the police. We trust that through 
the publicity which will be given to the 
case by the press the murdered man will 
be avenged. We have some hopes that 



Susan tells her Terrible Story. '139 

the ring may prove to be of more import- 
ance than the jury seemed inclined to 
accord to it Every effort should be used, 
at any rate, to find the party who sold the 
ring. * Murder will out,' and justice will 
claim the guilty sooner or later." . Middleton 
Star. 

Susan sobbed while Mrs. Titsy read, 
though every word had long been im- 
pressed upon her memory. 

" Can you wonder at my feelings on 
reading that paragraph ? It was my own 
ring they found. Silas took it from my 
finger the week before he was to have gone 
to America." 

" Well, by gum ! Dear me ! What a 
world it is!" exclaimed Tom, striding up 
and down the kitchen, and then stopping 
suddenly before Susan. " I set that bit of 
news up myself. It was the first paragraph 
as I ever did put into type all through. 
By gum ! And to think as I was tracking 
the murderer all the time. Why it's 
enough to make one daft to think on it !" 

" And to think of that Magar," said Mrs. 
Titsy. 



jSttti^'^ rZuffx FirdiTK. 



* TnL iSSL IT ji* JHrr?.. mother/' said 
nn: TOii: ie ifc':-T:::^% symptom of a re- 



Xi'jwsr. T.nii . feour can you say so T 



. Will, no isEiatter, mother, we are all 
r-nxr 3&otrt him now; and that psalm- 
^impnjg: t&ieC Jennings, must have had a 

--Tbat is true," said Mrs. Titsy, "for 
vi>a t jxxi mind, Tom, how he used to read 
Ibtters which he pretended he had received 
fctwn Sflas T 

''^Aye, and from Susan too, for that 
Bnatter. By gum, it s been a deep-laid 
sclteme/' 

At this moment Dr. Johnson entered the 
house, and the strange story of the day 
had to be recounted to him ; his principal 
comment upon the narrative had reference 
to the old calendar on the mantel-piece, 
upon which '* November 15'* was still pro- 
miuent iha^ugh.the pencil marks made on 
that fatal and ne\'er-tO'be-forgotten Sunday 
v>f t\>lUiV5iv>i\ s disappearance- 




CHAPTER IX, 



FOOTPRINTS IN THE SNOW. 




HE scene shifts to the highways 
and byways of Cartown. It is 
a cold, dreary afternoon. The 
snow is white and hard on the 
earth. The wind picks up loose feathery 
particles of it and drives theni hither 
and thither in wavy drifts of white. It is 
winter over all the land. The cold is bit- 
ing and bitter. It attacks you at all points 
and enters your very soul like iron. There 
is no avoiding it 

On the road leading to Cartown there is 
a solitary wayfarer who marches on defiant 
of wind and weather. He is meanly clad, 
but his fur cap and tightly fitting coat give 



142 Stranger than Fiction, 

him a comfortable appearance nevertheless. 
A small bundle is strapped upon his shoul- 
ders, and he carries a heavy stick. The 
wind receives him, at every bend in the 
road, with an icy gust, which he parries 
with his arm drawn over his face. Despite 
the icy shower of snow crystals that meets 
him he is victorious; for he trudges on 
with a lithe swing in his gait. 

The ti*aveller is Jacob Martyn. You 
might have expected to find him downcast 
and despondent. Not so. There are 
marks of care upon his young face, but 
pride and energy shine out of the full 
searching eye, while the compressed lip 
and well-cut chin give additional evidence 
of mental and physical vigour. 

Arrived at the entrance to Cartown, 
Jacob pulls his cap over his brow and 
pauses upon the bridge. The river, which 
had sparkled in the sun when he first saw 
it, is now silent as the tomb. It is frozen 
into lumps, as if its life had been stopped 
in the height of a wild gambol of pleasure. 
Jacob's fine imagination at once sees in the 




Footprints in tk^ Snow. 143 

picture a likeness to his own frozen hopes 
and prospects ; but in spite of himself he 
cannot shut out from his mind the thought 
that some morning the sun will shine upon 
the river and release the imprisoned waters; 

Instead of going straight on into Car- 
town, Jacob takes a bypath which leads 
him to a public-house at the back of the 
principal street . the very house in which 
Mr. Spawling undertook to protect and 
assist Spenzonian Whiffler in the days of 
Petroski the clown. 

Lifting the latch, Jacob enters, the wind 
rushipg after him with a bitter hissing; 
Unslinging his bundle, Jacob seats himself 
before a great crackling wood and coal fire; 

" It*s fine and cawd," says the landlord^ 
a stolid, soldierly looking fellow of fifty. 

Jacob makes no reply. He puts his feet 
upon the fender with the air of one who 
has taken possession of the hearth and has 
a right to it; 

" I said it was a cawd day !^' shouts the 
landlord, with undisguised annoyance at 
his guest's indifference. 



144 Stranger than friction, 

" Indeed !" says Jacob, without turning 
his head ; " the news is somewhat stale. 
What can I have to eat T 

" Supposii^g I say * nowt/ Mr. Surly ?" 
is the reply. 

" I can pay for what I have," responds 
Jacob, turning round and looking at the 
host for the first time. 

'' Did I say thou couldn't ?" 

*' Well, well, let us have no fuss." 

" Who wants to ?" 

'' Not I." 

" Then be civil, and thou'U get civility in 
return," says the landlord, taking up a huge 
poker, and raising up the wood on the fire 
until the sparks leap up the chimney in a 
swarm, like a cloud of golden bees, 

" Fm hungry," says Jacob, ** and have 
forgotten how to pay compliments ; I dare 
say Fm a brute, but I didn't mean to be 
uncivil. There ! Now what can I have ?" 

The iron has evidently entered the soul 
of Jacob. The bitter experiences of life 
have come upon him in his youth. 

'' Well,'' replies the landlord, " if thou rt 




Footprints in the Snovt), 145 

civil, thou can have some Irish stew and 
the best glass of beer in Cartown, and be 
served by a chap as fought at Waterloo," 

" A soldier !" says Jacob quicklyj " and a 
Waterloo veteran !" 

'* Right you are/' says the man. 

" Sir," says Jacob, " pray forgive my 
rudeness ; I ask you ten thousand pardons/' 

*^ All right ; say no more. It's my busi^ 
ness to serve you," said the host ; and he 
disappeared, leaving Jacob in the full enjoy- 
ment of the roaring fire. 

Presently, having done full justice to the 
cuisine of the establishment, Jacob ordered 
a jug of hot ale, and with an air of polite- 
ness which astonished the landlord, begged 
that he would join him in disposing of the 
same. 

" A man's manners always improve after 
dinner," said the host 

" And his strength also," said Jacob, 
smiling. " When a fellow is cold and 
hungry, his manners are apt to get 
frozen;" 

" Yes, you niust have been very hungry, 

VOL. II. lO 



146 Stranger than Fiction. 

master, and cold/' said the host. " Here's 
your health !'* 

" And better manners to me, eh ?*' 
said Jacob, his face beaming with good 
humour. 

" Certainly," said the old soldier. " But 
Fm not so sure that youVe right about a 
chap as is hungry not being strong. I re- 
member fighting a man of the 20th on an 
empty stomach ; and, by jingo ! I should 
have killed him if he hadna shut up after 
th' second round." 

" Yes, one feels vicious and brutal when 
one is very hungry," said Jacob. " By the 
way, can you tell me anything about the 
public school here ?" 

" Should think I can," said the soldier, 
tossing off another glass of his own hot and 
pungent liquor, which scented the room 
with ginger and nutmeg. 

" Do you know Mr. Spawling ?" 

" Ay, God bless him, I do," said the 
landlord, his face relaxing into a genial 
smile. " Like some other good folk, he's 
gone." 




Footprints in the Snow. 147 

** Gone !" exclaimed Jacob ; " you don't 
piean that he is dead ?" 

" No, not as I knows on." 

*' Thank God for that," said Jacob, fer- 
vently, 

" Amen," responded the landlord. 

*^ You mean that he has left this part of 
the country." 

** Ah, that's what I mean," said the land- 
lord, looking at Jacob with a puzzled, in- 
quiring air. ** Why, where have I seen you 
before, master ?" 

" Here, perhaps, in Cartown," said Jacob; 
" but tell me, my friend, tell me about the 
schoolmaster." 

^' Gone away nigh si^c months back." 

" Where ?" 

''To London, they say, but nobody 
seems to know for certain." 

'' And Spen, the. the '' 

" The actor lad T said the landlord. 

" Yes ; the boy who " 

'* The schoolmaster took to in this very 
house, about ten years ago," continued the 
landlord ; '' he's a man now." 

10 . 2 



148 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Yes, the same/' said Jacob ; ^* Spen- 
zonian Whiffler he called himself." 

** Ah, he was a rum 'un, and no mistake. 
Well, he's gone, too ; all the lot's gone, in 
fact." 

" What ! the housekeeper, too ?" said 
Jacoby starting to his feet- 

" Yes, and th' housekeeper too," said the 
landlord. 

Jacob put on his cap, buttoned his coat, 
put half-a-crown upon the table, strode 
about the room, and sighed deeply, the 
landlord with a glass stopped short on its 
way to his lips staring at him. 

" Look here," said Jacob ; ** I shall sleep 
here to-night. Til pay for what IVe had : 
if there's any change give it to me when I 
come back. I'm not rich, but I can pay. 
Take care of my bundle." 

And without another word Jacob rushed 
out of the house. 

" Well, I don't know about that," solilo- 
quised the landlord ; " perhaps the beds 
will be all engaged. We're not called on^ 
to take in lunatics, and if thou'rt not very 




Footprints in the Snow. 149 

like one my name isn't Bill ; he's regular 
crazy, or else in some trouble. Why, he's 
left his glass full r 

This latter fact quite confirmed the land- 
lord's views, and pondering over the cir- 
cumstance he laid down his own empty 
glass, put forth his hand in a vague, puzzled 
way, carried Jacob's to his lips, and set it 
down again quite empty. 

Jacob hurried back over the bridge and 
into the white fields, and on over snowy 
hedge and frozen ditch, leaving a long 
track behind him, where no other feet had 
pressed the virgin snow. 

It had been his intention to see Dorothy 
privately at Cartown, and if possible to 
learn from her whether Lucy's love had 
changed. He feared for his fate because 
he had received no letter, from Lucy's own 
dear self nor from Dorothy or Spen, in 
reply to communications which he had sent 
to each. Though he had been wandering 
about the country for more than a year, 
obtaining occasional employment in various 
capacities, he had made arrangements for 



1 50 Stranger than Fiction. 

the receipt of letters. He knew the Car- 
town postmaster, and had written to him 
saying that he had instructed some corre- 
spondents to address him at the Cartown 
post-office, and requesting that these letters 
might be forwarded to him from time to 
time, according to circumstances. The 
postmaster had written a kind note . in re- 
turn, gladly undertaking to see that his 
correspondent's wishes were carried out. 
Meanwhile Jacob had written a long letter 
to Lucy, detailing his misfortunes, but 
telling her that her love would support him 
under his afflictions, and that so long as he 
had that bright talisman to cheer him, he 
would struggle on with the hope that the 
day was not far distant when a brave re- 
liance on industry and perseverance and an 
implicit trust in God would bring their re- 
ward. Then he told her how to address 
her letters to him in the future. He wrote 
thus the very day upon which he left Mid- 
dleton. A week afterwards he received a 
letter from Spen, in which Whiffler told 
him that shortly he would be going to 




Footprints in the Snow. 151 

London, and that if Jacob ever journeyed 
to Cartown and did not find him there, he 
must write to him "To be left at the 
General Post Office, London." Jacob, 
thinking that Spen was romancing as usual, 
was in no way prepared for the breaking up 
of the Spawling establishment. He had 
written to the Cartown post-office and 
found that no other letters had been ad- 
dressed to him ; he had written to Spen 
and received no reply ; he had also de- 
spatched a letter to Dorothy as well as to 
Lucy. At length he began to believe in 
the saying about people being friends so 
long as the sun shines, and deserting each 
other in the darkness of poverty. But he 
was determined to satisfy himself concern- 
ing Lucy, and thus it was that he came to 
Cartown. His pride would not let him 
show himself to any one but Dorothy. 
With her he could have carried matters 
with a high hand. But the intelligence 
which the landlord at the public-house had 
given him disarranged his plans, and excited 
fears and forebodings that impelled him 



152 Stranger than Fiction. 

onwards through the snow to the house of 
the Cantrills. 

Jacob did not pause until he reached the 
wood. The loneliness of the place, made 
more apparent by the moaning of the wind 
among the trees, appalled him. There 
were the marks of other footsteps in the 
path that led to the well-known cottage. 
Could they be hers ? Robinson Crusoe 
did not look with more curiosity and 
interest at the print in the sand than did 
Jacob at the traces of some person who 
had passed on before him. He contrasted 
the marks with the impressions made by 
himself. The feet that had gone before 
were much smaller than his own. How 
his heart beat ! He hurried on faster, 
thinking he might perhaps overtake Lucy ! 
On he went, until he saw a figure enter the 
garden in front of Cantrill's cottage. It 
was a woman, and about Lucy's height, 
wrapped up in a dark red cloak . it must 
be Lucy 1 No . there was an indescribable 
grace in Lucy's movements that was want- 
ing here. He concealed himself behind 




Footprints in the Snow. . 153 

the gate-post at the entrance to the garden. 
The cloaked figure turned half round, and 
Jacob saw that it was the gipsy girl whom 
he had met in the wood when walking with 
Lucy. Then he saw that the cottage was 
deserted ; the shutters were closed ; no 
smoke went up from the chimney. Even 
Jacob's desperate energy and schooled will 
gave way before this realization of the fore^- 
bodings that had fallen upon him when he 
hurried away from the inn at Cartown : he 
reeled, with an exclamation of pain, threw 
himself upon the garden step, and sobbe(J 
as though his great heart would burst. 

Setting down a little basket half filled 
with herbs which even the snow had not 
concealed from her, the gipsy ran to Jacob's 
assistance. With the quick perception of 
her sex aad tribe she recognised him im- 
mediately, and knew, as well as if he had 
told her, that Lucy was the immediate 
cause of his grief 

It was long ere the gipsy girl could 
induce Jacob to rise, and when he did com- 
ply with her urgent appeal he stood up 



154 Stranger than Fiction^ 

- 

crushed in heart and spirit, shattered more 
beneath a fear of misfortune than by its 
actual realisation. We all suffer more 
from imaginary than from real calamities. 
It seemed to him as if Fate had left him 
alone with Woe. 

** When did they leave ? . when did she 
go T he inquired at length, with well-acted 

calmness. 

" A long time since,'* said the gipsy girl. 

" How ?" 

** In a grand carriage that waited for her 
in the road near our tents,*' said the gipsy, 
watching intently the effect of her words. 

** By force T asked Jacob, excitedly, re- 
animated by a gleam of hope that Lucy 
was prevented against her will from com- 
municating with him. 

*' Force !*' exclaimed the gipsy. *' When 
a country girl leans on the arm of a grand 
gentleman, and is conducted to a carriage 
in company with her mother, and rides 
away smiling, that doesn't look like force.*' 

Jacob compressed his lips, and groaned 
inwardly. 




Footprints in the SnOw. 155 

" My dream is over, then," he said" bit- 
terly. " Oh, my God 1 have I deserved 
all this ?'' 

The words hissed between his teeth as 
if his soul were in rebellion against the 
Deity. 

" Sir . sir ! you take it too much to 
heart," said the gipsy girl, alarmed at 
Jacob's wild looks. 

" Heart !" exclaimed Jacob. " I had a 
heart once. It has been a target for all 
the fiends in hell ! , Go away, my girl ; 
leave me." 

Mother, father, home, fortune, all gone, 
Jacob's was indeed a sad fate ; but even 
his dark life had been illuminated by the 
love of this girl, whose voice had filled his 
childhood with an everlasting charm. The 
only real happiness he had ever known had 
been in her society ; all his hopes centred 
in her ; she was the only encouragement 
he had to work and hope and strive ; he 
clung to her love with the desperation of 
one who was utterly destitute of friend, 
home, or fortune ; he had doubted her, and 



156 Stranger than Fiction. 

that was torture ; but to have his doubts 
endorsed, and so cruelly endorsed as they 
had been, was an almost unbearable misery. 
He leaned against the well-known gate, 
gazing at the house, his thoughts wander- 
ing after the grand carriage to London; 
wandering to the great city which he had 
never seen . the city of wealth and fame 
and wickedness, the city of broken hopes 
and of realised ambition, the great 
crowded, friendless city whither he had 
hoped some day to have carried Lucy in 
triumph, a conqueror in the lists of fame. 

** You saw her go ?" he said, fiercely 
turning upon the gipsy girl. 

" I did," was the stern reply. 

** Was the gentleman young ?' 

The gipsy nodded, and smiled a half 
pitying smile, which said more than words. 
Jacob hated her for it. 

" You lie r Jacob exclaimed. " You are 
a wicked libeller, you " 

The girl put her hand over Jacob's 
mouth. 

" You must not say that to me. Is it 




Footprints in the SnoW. 157 

- . - - . . 

not enough that she has gone without tell- 
ing ^ you she was going ? Come to our 
tents and rest." 

" Forgive me for my harsh words," said 
Jacob, "and go away . leave me, leave 



me. 



 





CHAPTER X, 




A STRANGE ADVENTURE. 

&IRIAM did not obey the im- ' 
perious command which closed 
the last chapter. On the con- 
trary, she induced Jacob to ac- 
company her to the gipsy encampment. 
She led him away like a child. After his 
outburst of disappointment and ' grief he 
became calm and silent For the time 
being he was indifferent about his move- 
ments. It was a dull sort of relief to walk. 
The wind had subsided. Evening had 
come on, clear and bright. There were 
already stars in the sky when he passed 
down the path froni the cottaige with 
Miriam, 




A Strange Adventure, 159 

The gipsies had fixed their winter quar- 
ters at a short distance froni the spot where 
Jacob had seen their tents in the old days. 
Miriam conducted hin> through the wood 
to a deep and shaded valley, that very dale 
which he had visited on his first day at 
Cartown. It looked marvellously strange 
now lying before him under the winter 
sky, with mock-yellow stars down in the 
ravine. 

Arrived at their destination, Jacob found 
himself in quite a formidable settlement of 
tents and houses on wheels. Of the latter 
there were several with lights shining 
through well-curtained windows. Standing 
apart from the rest was a roomy-looking 
hut covered with thatch and furze. Yoi; 
could smell the wood fagots that were 
burning on the hearth. A gleam of light 
came through the wooden doorway as 
Miriam thrust open the doon 

" A friend of the Cantrills, who cl^ms 
our hospitality," she said, with a combined 
air of appeal and command. 

Jacob bowed his head before a motley 



1 60 Stranger than Fiction. 

group of men and women who were sitting 
and lying before the fire. 

" Who is he ?" asked a bearded fellow, 
rising and approaching Miriam. 

*' A wayfarer and a son of sorrow and 
imisfortune/' said Jacob, touched by the 
picturesque interior. 

*' You are welcome," said the gipsy, look- 
into Jacob's face ; " I have seen you in 
these parts before.'' 

At a signal from Miriam, Jacob took a 
seat in the warmest part of the hut, and a 
man who had been gazing intently at him 
since his first entrance gathered up a cloak, 
and went out. 

" The Baron doesn't like strangers," said 
a voice near Jacob ; to which another an- 
swered, "He'll not be so nice when he 
skowers the cramprings in Dinsley." 

"Ahl ah! the devil claw thee, but 
thou'U be there before him." 

" Muffle your patter ; he's only here with 
his swag to dodge grabbing ; his tale won't 
fadge ; it's bam ; he'll be at home with the 
jigger dubbers yet" 




A Strange Adventure. 1 6 1 



This conversation was carried on, in a 
low confidential style, by two men, who 
were lying on a bundle of matted straw. 
Though he understood but little of the 
gipsy cant in which they were partly speak- 
ing, Jacob could glean from it that the man 
who had left the hut was comparatively a 
stranger among them^ and that there was one 
of the tribe who had a poor opinion of him* 

A rude fireplace had been constructed at 
one end of the hut The wood fire and a 
quaintly-contrived lamp that swung from 
the ceiling lit up the hut with a lurid glow, 
reddening the dark faces of the company, 
making the white teeth of the man who was 
laughing at the garrulous " patter " of the 
'* Baron's " critic still whiter ; casting into 
shadow the " furzy " corners of the apart- 
ment; bringing into relief various rough 
seats and couches, covered with coats and 
mats and thick drapery, and giving the 
whole scene the appearance of a set of 
deftly arranged accessories to heighten the 
beauty of Miriam, and make up an artistic 
picture of a gipsy queen. 

VOL. II. 1 1 



M 



1 62 Stranger than Fiction. 

A red cloak, which had previously 
covered the girl's black hair, was now 
flung carelessly over her shoulders. Her 
thick cloth dress was short enough to dis- 
close a pair of beautifully rounded ankles, 
protected by woollen hose. She wore 
buckles in her thick shoes, but her bright 
eyes outshone the sparkles which the fire 
extracted from the well- polished metal. 

** Now, cheer up ; this will do you good," 
said Miriam, handing Jacob a hot potation 
that smelt strong and spicy. 

Jacob, who felt weak and weary, nodded 
his thanks, and Miriam returned his gaze 
with a look of complete satisfaction. 

Soon afterwards Lucy's lover was fast 
asleep, and dreaming, not of the black- 
eyed beauty who leaned over his couch 
and covered him with a rug, but of a fair, 
light-haired creature, by whom he was led 
a weird chase over hill and dale, through 
valleys and over rivers ; until at a loud 
mocking laugh, he fell headlong over a 
precipice . and awoke. 

With the imaginary fall Jacob's dream 



A Strange Adventure. 163 

ended ; but he started up at its seeming 
reality and uttered a cry of pain, whereupon 
a heavy hand grasped him by the shoulder, 
and the man who had left the hut when 
he and Miriam entered it said, " Hush . be 
quiet, for your life." 

Jacob looked round. He found himself 
lying alone in a corner. He could hear 
voices hard by, but the hut was evidently 
closed for the night. He must have slept 
some hours. 

** You are safe and in the hands of a 
friend, but we are both in danger," said 
the man. 

*' I have heard your voice before," said 
Jacob. 

" Follow me," said the man. 

Jacob hesitated. 

" Fool !" hissed the man. " Take this, 
and fear no harm." 

Jacob grasped the pistol which the stran- 
ger thrust into his hand, 

"Will you trust me now ? Another 
minute and we are lost . come !" 

Half believing that he was still in a 

II . 2 



1 64 Stranger than Fiction, 

dream, Jacob arose and followed his guide. 
They passed two or three tents. The 
lights were out in the houses on wheels. 
It was a bright starlight night. The white, 
shining snow seemed to give forth a light 
of its own. When they were at a safe dis- 
tance from the gipsy village Jacob's mid- 
night disturber halted suddenly. 

** You heard them speak of the Baron ?'' 
he said. 

" Yes." 

" It amused you, no doubt." 

" I do not understand you," said Jacob* 

" Jacob Martyn," said the man, " you 
know me." 

" Good heavens, yes !" said Jacob, '* now 
that you speak in your natural voice. It 
is Jennings." 

'* Enough," said Jennings. 

" What means this masquerade ?" 

" Jacob Martyn, I once tried hard to 
serve you. As Heaven is my judge, I 
strove to avert that smash at Middle- 
ton." 

" I believe you." 




A Strange Adventure. 165 

" Have I, then, any claim on your con- 
sideration ?'' 

*' Certainly. But why all this mystery ? 
Why drag me out of a warm comer into 
the cold " (Jacob shivered) '* to ask me so 
silly a question ?'' 

'' Do you mean to say you are not here 
as a spy ?" 

Jennings turned sharply upon him as he 
asked the question, thrusting his face close 
to Jacob's and gripping him tightly by the 
arm. 

" A spy !" exclaimed Jacob. 

"A spy!" hissed Jennings; *'to track 
me and take me." 

*' Track you ! take you ! what do you 
mean ? You must be mad ; that can be 
the only explanation of this strange con- 
duct. Hands off, Jennings !*' 

" Swear it." said Jennings. 

'' Don't be a fool,'' said Jacob, thrusting 
the man from him and assuming an attitude 
of defence. 

" Pooh !" said Jennings, " there is noth- 
ing in that pistol, but in this there is a bit 



JSA 



1 66 Stranger than Fiction. 

of lead that would settle you before you 
could say ' Jack Robinson/ " 

" I don't want to say * Jack Robinson.' 
Let me go. You are playing a very poor 
trick upon an old friend." 

"I begin to believe you," said Jen- 
nings. " Here, take this scarf, tie it round 
your neck . you are cold. How long 
is it since you were in Middleton } 
Answer my questions, and we will re- 



turn." 



There was something so 'firm and ear- 
nest in the manner of Jennings that Jacob 
felt bound to comply. 

*' I have not been in Middleton since my 
father's death." 

'' Where have you been V 

" Everywhere : but let us go back to the 
fire." 

'* In good time. What have you been 
doing ?" 

'' Working." 

" At what ?" 

'* Writing, teaching, printing." 

" Newspapers ?" This latter interro- 




A Strange Adventure. 167 

gation was made sharply, and with the 
speaker's hand once more on Jacob's 
arm. 

" No ; with the exception of a poem in 
the corner of a Darnforth paper." 

" How long is that since i^" 

"Months. It is called 'A Dream of 
Love ;' would you like to hear it ?" 

Jacob laughed a grim, sarcastic laugh. 

" Will you swear you know nothing of 
what has transpired at Middleton for six 
months ?" 

" Yes, madman ; anything you like, if 
you will let me get back to the fire." 

" Nothing of that discovery at Magar's 
mill?" said Jennings, his hand trembling 
on his pistol, his face once more close 
to Jacob's . so close that Jacob felt his 
hot breath, and saw the wild gaze of his 
sunken eyes. 

" No." 

" On your honour ?" 

" On my honour." 

" I believe you. Let us return ; we can 
talk as we ".'^ ." 



1 68 Stranger than Fiction, 

"Now for my explanation. I am an 
outlaw. . I have made money by criminal 
practices ; I have cheated Magar ; the 
police want me . now do you understand 
my disguise ?" 

" Yes, and you may rely on it, with that 
other voice of yours." 

" Will you make me a solemn vow for 
* auld lang syne ;' for the sake of what I 
tried to do for your father ?" 

" Name it." 

" As you hope for prosperity in this 
world and happiness in the next, you will 
not, by word or deed, aid or assist in my 
capture. Swear me that on your honour 
and on this Testament (producing a 
book)." 

" It is a great oath." 

" Do you reject it T 

" No ; why should I ? Why should 
misfortune run down misfortune ? There 
are worse crimes than cheating Magar." 

" Will you swear ?" 

Jacob repeated the oath and kissed the 
Testament. 




A Strange Adventure. 169 

"Signed, sealed, and delivered,'' said 
Jennings, pocketing the book. " I keep 
the Testament with me because my mother 
gave it to me when I was a boy. I won- 
der it does not scorch my pocket out and 
set me ablaze with the fires of hell ; but no 
matter, we do not make our own destiny, 
it is all chalked out for us . we can't help 
it." 

"And is this mountebank nonsense all 
that is to repay me for my nocturnal pro- 
menade ? You said we were in dan- 
ger." 

" I thought / was in danger," said Jen- 
nings in the other voice. " I am the 
Baron once more." 

" Is your lordship married ?" said Jacob. 

" My lordship is not," said the Baron ; 
"if I had any sentiment in my soul I 
should have shot you for the interest which 
that girl Miriam takes in you." 

" Who is she ?" 

" Our queen-elect ; and a fine creature 
to boot. I suppose you intend to join us, 
and go in for the throne, eh ?" 



1 70 StrdHger than Fiction. 

" Even that might suit my present 
mood," said Jacob. 

By this time they had reached the hut ; 
Miriam was standing at the door. 





CHAPTER XL 

RETURNS TO THE HISTORY OF LUCY ; 
GLANCES BACK TO THE DAYS OF HER 
father; and DESCRIBES THE CONTENTS 
OF AN IMPORTANT PACKET WHICH CREATED 
A PROFOUND SENSATION IN PARK LANE. 

A KING up the history of Lucy 

where Dorothy Cantrill left off, it 

now becomes necessary that the 

reader should know what became 

of her father, and her father s father. The 

story may be briefly told. 

When the British Guards dashed into 
the Bois de Bossu, and drove out the 
French, a lieutenant fell mortally wounded ; 
and the soldiers of Napoleon, on their 
way to Waterloo, some two or three days 




172 Stranger than Fiction. 

afterwards trampled over the shallow but 
glorious grave of Lieutenant Thornton, 
next to whose cold heart lay a portrait of 
Lucy's mother. 

A week prior to this event the poor 
lieutenant, who had a presentiment that he 
would not live to see the end of the en- 
gagements which were expected, gave his 
servant a packet, with directions that in 
case his gloomy predictions were fulfilled 
he would find out Portland House, Park 
Lane, London, and deliver it into his 
uncle's hands^ 

When the servant reached his native city 
in the West of England, he made love to a 
buxom landlady, won her heart and her 
business, and forgot to deliver the packet 
of his dead master. Six months afterwards 
he remembered that it was in his old trunk 
under the bed ; and then he determined to 
start off to execute his neglected commis- 
sion : but he got drunk while his good in- 
tentions were still warm, and six months 
more passed away. And so the time 
rolled on, month after month, year after 




. The History of Lucy. l^% 

year, until the unfaithful servant could get 
drunk no more. Eventually he " drained 
the flowing bowl " to the dregs, and died 
of a surfeit thereof, leaving behind him a 
still marriageable widow, and a reputation 
for being a " jolly fellow." He was suc- 
ceeded by a more sober and conscientious 
person, who made the widow a wife for the 
third time, rubbed out the former land- 
lord's name from over the door, pulled out 
the trunk from under the bed, and dis- 
covered the packet which his predecessor 
had neglected. The ** blushing bride *' 
had heard something of the " big letter," 
and handed it to the " happy bridegroom," 
who had once been a solicitor's clerk, which 
had made him somewhat methodical in mat- 
ters of letter writing. The official-looking 
envelope brought back to him, even in the 
fulness of his marriage bliss, remembrances 
of sitting on a high stool to copy letters, 
and leaving it to see that they were pro- 
perly posted : so, after carefully scrutinising 
the letter, he ordered Tim, the pot-boy, to 
have it posted, but not until he had added 



1 74 Stranger than Fiction, 

after the name of Mr, Thornton, in case 
(death might have carried off that gentler 
man, **his heirs, exors., or assns." 

And thus at last was Lieutenant Thorn- 
ton's letter delivered. 

The gentleman who received the packet 
was the brother of the dead lieutenant's 
father. The latter gentleman had died, 
when the news of Waterloo was tossing 
. on the sea off Dover, in ignorance of the 
death of his son, whose name had not, 
strange to say, appeared in the lists of 
either killed, wounded, or missing, so far 
as either father or uncle had seen. More 
than six months prior to his death the angry 
old man had, by a codicil to the will in 
which his son had been cut off without 
even the traditional shilling, almost rein- 
stated him in his former position, dividing 
between his brother and his son the mag- 
nificent property of which he died possessed, 
the brother being left sole trustee. 

Jyst about the time that the mysterious 
packet arrived by post, Cavendish Thorn- 
ton, Esquire, had been holding a conversa- 




The History of Lucy, 1 75 

tion with his lawyer relative to the pro- 
perty of his nephew. He had long since 
ascertained from the Horse Guards that 
the lieutenant was killed at Quatre Bras ; 
and though sonie years had elapsed since 
his brother died, he was not happy in re- 
taining property which had not been be- 
queathed to hin>. He had understood that 
his nephew was a father, and had instituted 
some private inquiries respecting his sup- 
posed child, but without any satisfactory 
result; and the trustee was still in duty 
bound, as his lawyer advised him, to retain 
property to which nobody had a greater 
right. Though he had much of that family 
pride which had so strongly influenced 
his brother when the young soldier mar- 
ried Lucy's mother, yet he combined the 
highest feelings of honour and honesty 
therewith ; and his lawyer found it a diffi- 
cult task to make him feel that he was not 
outraging any of these virtues by keeping 
possession of the fine property to which he 
had no doubt a high claim. "We have 
made proper inquiries after the child," said 



1 76 Stranger than Miction. 

the lawyer, " and find it an imaginary one \ 
we have advertised for the next of kin to 
your nephew, and find, though we have 
had a few speculative answers, that you are 
the next of kin/' 

The mysterious packet put an end to 
these periodical discussions. It contained 
the last will and testament of James Caven- 
dish Thornton, lieutenant in his Majesty's 
army, wherein he bequeathed everything 
of which he died possessed, or of which he 
might become possessed under the will 
of his father, James William Cavendish 
Thornton, gentleman, of Portland House, 
Park Lane, London, or in any other way 
whatsoever, and of any property whatso- 
ever, real or personal, whether in lands or 
money, houses, plate, furniture, linen, or 
jewellery, deeds, scrip, and all other valu- 
ables whatsoever and wheresoever, to his 
daughter, Lucy Cavendish Thornton, who 
was left in the custody of certain persons 
named Cantrill, at and in the neighbour- 
hood of Middleton, the relatives of testator's 
beloved wife, deceased, Lucy Thornton. 



The History of Luc^. I'^J 

The will was written on a sheet of letter 
paper in the lieutenant's own writing, and 
was duly signed and witnessed. It was 
accompanied by a letter addressed . 

*' To my Father, if he be still living." 

Mr. Thornton, who had dismissed the 
lawyer, and called in his confidential valet 
to make some enquiries respecting " these 
Cantrills," made up his mind to read the 
letter, and asked his advice as to the pro- 
priety of opening it. 

"It is hardly for me to say what is the 
correct thing to do, sir," said Allen, gravely. 

Allen had been in the family for many 
years, had, in short, grown fat and wheezy 
and arrogant in the service. He was now 
something between a secretary and a butler 
to his master, who, since the death of his 
brother, had talked a great deal to Allen 
about old times, and had twice sent for 
Allen after dinner, when there were no 
visitors, to drink a glass of wine with him. 

" You see, Allen, there is something very 
extraordinary in this case. It is a letter 
from the dead to the dead." 

VOL. II. 12 



178 Stranger than Fiction. 

Allen wiped two drops of perspiration 
from his manly forehead, and with a shud- 
der that seemed like the action of a small 
earthquake beneath his waistcoat, said 
(wonderful Allen !) ** Yes it is." 

" Then, do you think I should open it ?" 
said Mr. Thornton, eyeing it curiously 
through his gold-rimmed glasses. 

" Trustee to the defunct's will, sir. Should 
say you ought to, sir/' 

*' So I think, Allen," said Mr. Thornton ; 
" but again, Allen, I tell you, as I told you 
yesterday, I dislike that word * defunct.' 
There ! there ! let us have no discussion 
about it, but don't repeat it." 

Allen had duly trespassed, in course of 
time, upon his master's kindness, and had 
grown pompous with good living and in- 
dulgence ; so he replied . 

" It's a dictionary word, sir ; I have it 
from the one you gave me years ago, when 
you said I suffered from the western dialect, 
and I studied pronunciation and language 
in consequence." 

" Very well, very well ; then take a pen 




The History of Lucy. 1 79 

and erase it from the dictionary, Allen. I 
object to it," said Mr. Thornton, with his 
thumb beneath the seal of the dead lieu- 
tenant's letter. ** I feel I ought to read 
this. It may relate to business plans which 
I may carry out on behalf of my poor 
brother James, who relented about the 
young fellow at last, and wished to serve 
him." 

" Certainly ; that was my meaning, sir," 
said Allen. 

Mr. Thornton read as follows : . 

" Brussels, y^;/^ 5, 1815. 
" My Dear Sir,. 

" We are now covering Brussels, 
and ere long expect to meet the enemy. 
Taking time by the forelock, in case I may 
fall, I have forwarded to my uncle papers 
which he will show you ; and which I look 
to you, sir, to make of value. 

*' I conjure you, by the memory of my 
mother whom you loved, by my own suffer- 
ings, and by the days of my boyhood when 
I sat upon your knee, to find out my dear 

12 . 2 



1 80 Stranger than Fiction. . 

child Lucy, and let her be to you what I 
was in the days that are gone. 

" Of her mother I will only remind you 
that she died when Lucy was born, and 
that she died beloved and revered by 
" Your most unhappy son, 

" James Cavendish Thornton/' 

The grand old gentleman did not read 
the whole of this to Allen ; but communi- 
cated to that independent and worthy ser- 
vitor the nature of the contents thereof, 
coughing once or twice as he did so, and 
wiping his eye-glasses with evident emo- 
tion. 

Allen, who was by no means an ill-dis- 
posed- person or a hard-hearted man, saying 
it was very affecting, seated himself and 
waited for some further communication from 
his master, who laid down the letter from his 
dead nephew to his dead brother, heaved 
a sigh, and proceeded to inspect the follow- 
ing letter enclosed for himself, which had 
escaped his notice until Allen had directed 
his attention to it : . 




The History of Lucy, 1 8 1 

" Brussels, y^ 15, 1815. 

" My Dear Uncle, . 

^* At last the news has arrived. We 
have just learnt that the rumour of the ad- 
vance of the French upon the line of the 
Sambre is a fact. The army is moving on 
Quatre Bras, and we who are in Brussels, 
including Lord Wellington, start for the 
rendezvous almost instantly. 

" I have a strange presentiment that my 
hour is coming. L have had many narrow 
escapes. Bloodier work than I have yet 
seen is, I believe, coming on, and graves 
are already yawning for their tenants. 
That we shall be victorious I have no 
doubt ; that every man in this army would 
die rather than yield I could swear. The 
Thorntons were never braggarts, uncle, nor 
cowards ; and your nephew fears death no 
more than he fears the French. But sol- 
diers have their presentiments and touches 
of superstitious feeling as well as sailors; 
and the thought has occurred to me fre- 
quently of late that in some battle, at no 
distant date, I shall be with those whom 



1 82 Stranger than Fiction. 

Fate has marked down for sacrifice in the 
victories that are coming. 

" I have a child. Until lately I knew 
not how much I loved it ; for a time I could 
almost have persuaded myself that no affec- 
tion could centre in a child, the birth of 
which was destined to rob me of the dearest 
treasure on earth. I should not write to 
you thus were I not satisfied, uncle, that 
you will read it only when I am dead. 
Few of us know each other when we are 
living. Of late frequent contemplation of 
the likeness of her I loved so dearly, and 
whose spirit is near me whilst I write, has 
brought me to my proper senses, and re- 
stored my love for her child, my poor little 
deserted Lucy . your relative, uncle, re- 
member that . and I enclose to you my 
last wishes respecting her, and a letter for 
my father, whom may God forgive as I do. 

"Seek out my child. They said she 
was like her ; if so, the whole pedigree of 
the Thorntons may be searched in vain fo 
one to surpass her in beauty, in goodness, 
in affection. Plead for her with my father. 



The History of Lticy. 183 

Give him this opportunity to atone for the 
past, and for your success I shall offer up 
my last prayer. 

" I left my child with the relatives of my 
wife at Middleton. They may soon be 
found out ; leave no corner of the empire 
unsearched as you hope for mercy, and as 
you loved one who never harmed you, and 
who has upheld the honour of his family on 
the field of battle, and laid down his life for 
his king and country. 

" Your unhappy 

" Nephew." 

" There, Allen !" exclaimed Mr. Thorn- 
ton, rising from his seat and pacing the 
room excitedly. " Presentiments ! poor 
boy ; poor fellow ! Egad, sir ! I have had 
presentiments about this matter. Egad I 
I shall believe in dreams, and broomsticks, 
and witches soon I" 

" There is one as does a good trade, sir, 
near the church at Westminster," said Allen, 
rising also, and looking round him with 
superstitious awe. 



1 84 Stranger than Fiction. 

" I have dreamed more than once that 
there would be a claimant for that pro- 
perty," said Mr. Thornton, breaking out 
between his remarks into exclamations of 
" Poor fellow !" " Brave as a lion, sir, to 
the last," " A Thornton, sir . after all, a 
Thornton." 

" Aye, sir, they was great fighters," said 
Allen, wiping his face. 

" WerCy sir, were . * was ' is a gross 
vulgarism as you too frequently use it ; the 
rule is " 

** Where, sir ? Why, in many a battle, 
even so far back as the days of Cressy," 
said Allen, pretending not to understand 
the correction of his grammar. 

" Well ! well ! we will not waste time 
now," said Mr. Thornton, putting his 
glasses into a red morocco case. " Order 
my carriage, Allen. We will find this 
child. Pack up some shirts and all neces- 
saries, Allen ; we may be away several 
days." 

" Yes, sir," said Allen, who always prided 
himself upon his prompt execution of Mr. 




The History of Lucy. 1 8 5 

Thornton^s commands; and was highly 
esteemed by his master for the care which 
he exercised in anticipating his wants, and 
for generally understanding him. 

" Tm getting an old man now. I don't 
know that I ever injured any one ; ancj 
when I think of the past, I don't know that 
I ever did anybody any particular good. I 
have been as liberal as most men in what are 
called charities. Well, well, nephew. Your 
last wishes shall be carried out. Some^ 
body shall be made happy. Yes ; his 
father forgave him ; and whatever his child 
may be, she shall have her own. Poor 
dear fellow ! Egad 1 I could almost make 
a fool of myself. Yes, yes : she shall be 
found, James Cavendish Thornton . if she 
lives she shall be found ; if she be dead, 
she shall have honour done to her memory. 
But, after all, that is empty work. Post- 
humous honours . well, well, I must not 
change my creed now ; but Fll supplement 
it with a noble action. God grant an old 
man's prayer, that she /nay still be living !" 

The fine old boy, overcome by his feel- 



1 86 Stranger than Futiofi. 

ings, buried his face in his hands, and 
repeated the supplication with an energy 
that had not characterised any other action 
of his life since he left college. 





CHAPTER XII. 




SHOWS now THE CHANGE IN LUCY S FORTUNES 
AFFECTED THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE. 

T is not necessary that I should 
describe how Mr. Thornton dis- 
covered and brought home his 
niece and her foster-mother. The 
adventures of himself and Mr. Allen, their 
disputes and afguments, their disappoint- 
ment and final success, present no special 
features worthy of detail. Jacobus inter- 
view with Miriam, the pretty queen-elect 
of the gipsies, has already posted us up in 
the manner of the Cantrills' removal, only 
that Mademoiselle Miriam fed Jacob's 
jealousy and disappointment with false- 
hoods. She distinctly planted in his mind, 



1 88 Stranger than Fiction. 

h^owever much he rejected it, the picture of 
his love going off in si carriage with a young 
and handsome gentleman. His thoughts 
easily followed hers, because he had told 
J^ucy that if he were a young rich acquaint- 
ance of my lord's coming there to shoot, he 
should certainly carry off the keeper's 
daughter. Moreover, during Jacob's idle 
time at the gipsy village, Miriam, with 
subtle power, had led him to think of Lucy 
married and settled ; for Jacob would talk 
of her despite Miriam's, undisguised aver- 
sion to the subject of their conversation. 

*' It is not to be wondered at," he said 
one day in reply to the gipsy girl's remarks ; 
." why should a girl fit to adorn any station 
in life throw herself away upon a beggar ?" 

" You are not a beggar . even we gipsies 
are not beggars, despised though we be," 
said Miriam proudly. 

They were sitting by the fire in the hut 
^Miriam slept in an adjacent house on 
wheels. During the day, when not abroad, 
she spent most of her time in the hut, 
stringing shells and putting in some artistic 



Chdnge in Lucy's Fortunes. 189 

touches to fancy baskets and other articles 
which the tribe manufactured. 

"A mere peep into the great wide world 
will sometimes carry a girl's heart away, 
your sex is so very fickle, Miriam." 

"Not ours . not the gipsy ; faithlessness 
is death." 

The girl's black eyes flashed with a hot 
passionate glance. For a moment it em- 
barrassed Jacob. Her undisguised regard 
for him showed him the danger of his 
ground; 

** How is it, Miriam," he said, changing 
the subject, " that you are so much supe- 
rior to the people about you . to your 
mother, for example ?" 

" I can read and write. The mysteries 
and customs of our people are not mere 
oral traditions to me. I have books, and 
moreover I have read the poets ; our 
people often buy me books for which they 
have bartered their goods, and I some- 
times read to them a blood-stirring poem . 
a story of love and vengeance." 

" Love is a delusion," said Jacob ; " never 



1 90 Stranger than Fiction. 

believe in love . it is only to be found in 
poetry; and vengeance is not worth the 
trouble which it involves." 

" You only say so because your love is 
despised . you gave your heart to'that poor, 
fickle thing at the cottage, and you are mad 
at being deceived." 

" Speak respectfully of the lady," said 
Jacob. 

** Lady ! she is no lady," said Miriam, 
scornfully. " Am I a lady ?" 

" Certainly ; you will be a queen some 
day," said Jacob. " I should be ungrateful 
to quarrel with so charming and distin- 
guished a hostess ; but do not speak of that 
young lady as a fickle thing." 

" You are a fool, a poor weak fool," said 
Miriam, standing before him with anger 
flashing in her eyes. 

" Thank you," said Jacob. 

Miriam left the hut to vent the re- 
mainder of her passion upon some mem- 
bers of the tribe. These outbursts were 
frequent. She was not accustomed to have 
her wishes thwarte4. If Jacob had not 




Change in Lucy^s Fortunes. 191 

been attracted to the spot and kept 
there by the magic of old associations, he 
would have gone on his way long ago. 
He lingered about the scenes of his early 
happiness, feeling that his joys were all in 
the past. He would not harbour in his 
mind an unkind thought of Lucy. She 
was inexperienced ; she hacj not known the 
world when she met him. Sometimes he 
tried to think that she might be still true 
to him, but the fact that he had received 
neither letter nor message from her did not 
allow hini to retain this sweet conceit with- 
out many grave misgivings. 

Let me disabuse the minds of my readers 
of any such cpnflicting doubts and fears as 
those which Miriam fanned in the mind of 
Jacob. Lucy Cavendish Thornton was 
not to blame ; whom do you think was the 
chief sinner ? The gentleman who closed 
the last chapter with a vow that he would 
do a noble deed, and a prayer that he 
might be permitted to make the living 
happy, in atonement for the faults both of 
the living and the dead. And yet Mr. 



192 Stranger than Fiction. 

Thornton had never been known to be 
guilty of an unkind action in his life. He 
had done more generous things than he 
admitted to himself, as I introduced him to 
you, pacing about, in his library, under a 
conflict of sorrow and remorse. 

When he strung himself up to that pitch 
of magnanimity which I have previously 
described, he thought of finding Lucy a 
poor country girl, ill-bred arid devoid of 
manners, in some outlandish place. Indeed, 
after discovering her whereabouts, and on 
their way to Gartown, he had frequently 
said to Allen that it would be a severe trial 
to set up a gawkish country woman in an 
establishment near his own, and introduce 
her to Society ; but he was determined to 
carry out the first instincts of humanity 
which had moved him on reading her 
father's letters. " She's been in a factory, 
too,'* Allen had observed, rather depre- 
catingly. "So it appears," Mr. Thornton 
had replied with a sigh ; but still he was 
resolute. ** Queer characters, sir, factory 
girls,*' Allen had rejoined; " Not a word, 



Change in Ltuy's Fortunes. 193 

sir, reflecting upon her honour, for your 
life ; one drop of Thornton blood in her 
veins is sufficient protection for her, if she 

be a drudge in a ^" Mr. Thornton had 

not finished the sentence, but had thrown 
up the window for air. 

So soon as the high-bom gentleman saw 
Lucy, some of his better feelings regarding 
her evaporated, pride stepping in furious 
and rampant. Fear to acknowledge her as 
his niece ! she was fit for a princess. In 
her the glories of the Thorntons would be 
resuscitated. She should marry as she 
deserved to marry ! All the world should 
sue at her feet ! 

But Allen, who had inquired into 
every particular of Lucy's history, told 
Mr, Thornton that she had a lover 
already. 

" A lover, sir ! How dare any one pre- 
sume so far, without consulting her guar- 
dian, her great-uncle ?" said Mr. Thornton, 
angrily. 

"Somebody has dared, at all events," 
said Allen, defiantly. 
VOL. II. 13 



194 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Who is he, Allen ? who is he T 

" Well, they say he's nothing now," said 
Allen, calmly wiping his face with an enor- 
mous silk handkerchief. 

" Allen, how dare you torture and bore 
me in this fashion ? Out with it, sir." 

" I were not aware I were torturing 
you/' 

"Were, were . waSy sir, was . for Hea- 
ven's sake, Allen, don't be so stupid." 

" You said quite the contrary, sir, if I 
may remind you, the other day, when it 
was . werCy sir, were, sir." 

" Damn the fellow. There, Allen ! I've 
not sworn for years/' 

^* It's rather late to begin, sir, and with 
an old servant," said Allen, while the evi- 
dence of an earthquake, beneath his waist- 
coat, was awful to contemplate. His shirt 
frill rose with undisguised emotion, and two 
buttons, which could no longer bear the 
beating of his tender heart, parted com- 
pany with his waistcoat. 

Mr. Thornton marched about his room 
(for they had returned to Park Lane, with 




Change in Lucy's Fortunes. 195 

Lucy, when this scene occurred), and tried 
to be calm. 

" Well, now, then let us see what mild- 
ness will do, Allen. There now, I ask you 
quietly who has dared to seek to win the 
affections of my niece, without my con- 
sent ?" 

" Jacob Something, they call him," said 
Allen, picking up the fallen buttons. 

" Who is he ?" 

*^ Well, I cannot tell ; they do say his 
father died insolvent." 

" Monstrous ! monstrous !" exclaimed 
Mr. Thornton. "Was his father in 
trade ?" 

" The loveris have written to each other, 
and there's one. of the epistles," said Allen, 
throwing down the very letter which Jacob 
had written to Lucy, telling her of his de* 
parture, and instructing her where to ad- 
dress him. 

" And where did you get this ?" 

*'Well, you see, as I thought nothing 
should be left undone, I went to the nearest 
post-office to where the young lady lived, 

13.2 



196 Stranger than Fiction. 

and instructed them to send all letters 
under cover to you, sir, who was her law- 
ful guardian, and I awed them with some 
envelopes ready directed, and a sovereign 
to pay expenses, which they refused, but 
which I left . and this is the result, sir," 
after which Mr. Allen regarded his master 
with an air of triumph, and blew his nose 
fiercely. 

" Good r' said Mr. Thornton. " But to 
open a letter which belongs to your mis- 
tress, Allen '' 

" I have not opened it," said Allen. 

" I should hope not . to intercept it, 
Allen, is bad enough." 

" Then 111 take it to her," said Allen, 
seizing the letter. 

" No ; after all it is my letter. I am her 
guardian, her trustee, her father and mother, 
her great uncle, the brother of her grand- 
father, her only living relative, her guide, 
counsellor, and friend. Yes, you are right, 
Allen." 

" Thank you, sir ; I should say I were 
right, looking at all the circumstances." 



Change in Lucy's Fortunes. 197 

" Was right/' said Mr. Thornton ; " and 
damn your circumstances." 

" Yes, sir, if you please ; but I will not 
submit to this any longer," said Allen, 
mopping his face with his handkerchief, 
blowing his nose, and coughing violently. 

'' That will do, Allen," said Mn Thorn- 
ton. 

" No, it will not do, sir; I shall leave your 
service . I insist on it. Ever since my 
young lady has been found you have treated 
me like a dog ; sir, I gives you warning 
once for all." 

" Give, Allen, give." 

" Yes, sir, if you please, sir." 

*' Now, no more nonsense, my good fel- 
low ; I am very sorry I have hurt you feel- 
ings ; I apologise ; there ! Never before 
was a Thornton known to do such a thing; 
no, not in all their history." 

" You shall not do it, sir," said Allen. 

" I will." 

" No, sir, never. I forgive you, sir." 

*' Very well, that is right, Allen ; we are 
on the old terms again ?" 




198 sir anger than Fiction. 

^ We are, sir, and many of them." 

" Allen, do you take your wine before 
luncheon ?'' said Mr. Thornton. 

" Just a drop of sherry and bitters," said 
Allen. 

" Very well/' said Mr. Thornton, with a 
look of doubt in his grey eyes that twinkled 
behind his heavy eye-glass. 

" Yes, sir, it is very well." 

" Then once more to the subject in hand. 
On second thoughts your foresight in this 
matter of the letters has my best thanks ; 
I cannot reward you after the manner of 
your present to the local post-office; I 
would not insult you, Allen. I thank you, 
Allen, thank you heartily." 

Allen thereupon wiped his brow in com- 
fort, and looked superlatively superior to 
his master. 

" But now and for ever we must put an 
end to this plebeian love-making ; it will 
soon be over; there must be no letter 
writing, or if there is there must be no 
posting of letters; you understand, Allen?" 
Allen understood all his master's thoughts, 



Change in Lucy's Fortunes. 1 99 

wishes, and desires . understood them often 
before they were expressed, which is the 
height of efficiency in a servant. 

" She will soon recover herself," said Mr. 
Thornton. " Girls in country places always 
have lovers ; no wonder Lucy had one ; 
but she will rise with her fortunes ; she has 
the true Thornton blood ; she will marry 
worthily ; her beauty and her family and 
her wealth entitle her to make a good 
match." 

" It is so," said Allen. 

"It shall be so," said Mr. Cavendish 
Thornton. 

Thus was a formidable conspiracy against 
Jacob Martyn inaugurated and put into 
action. 





CHAPTER XIII. 

THE BELLE OF A LONDON SEASON. 

HE was a mystery. Not after the 
manner of the present day, though 
the time is only a few years back. 
A lady with any mystery in her 
career nowadays is at once associated with 
the demi-monde. The changes which have 
taken place in London society are very 
great within the past few years. Ladies of 
questionable repute, nay, women of the 
town, distinguish themselves in all our 
places of public resort They are every- 
where. They ride the best horses, rival 
the Court in carriages and ponies, they 
** walk in the Zoo," display their dress im- 
provers at South Kensington, leer at you 



The Belle of a London Season. 201 

at the theatres, flash their diamonds on the 
grand tier of the opera ; now and then they 
are even presented at Court ; they are always 
conspicuous at the boat-race, and they 
monopolise some of the best houses in the 
prettiest suburbs of the town. Society is 
more and more tolerant of these creatures. 
Young innocent girls copy their style of 
dress and manner in the hope of captivating 
the men who do not marry because of the 
increased freedom which society has ex- 
tended towards them. I am not an old 
man. I do not therefore know how long 
this present looseness in London society 
has been coming on ; I only know that 
when a certain belle of the season only a 
few comparatively short years ago dazzled 
Mayfair, the shop windows of the metropolis 
had not burst out into exhibitions of in- 
famous photographs ; and it seems to me 
that this great triumph of Anonyma in 
London society dates from the time when 
photographers commenced to take their 
types of female beauty from the class of 
women who now fill so large a space in 



202 Stranger than Fiction. 

the public eye . here, there, and every- 
where. 

It almost makes my pen falter to mention 
my mysterious belle of a London season on 
the same paper which holds this short dis- 
course upon Circe. Her name was Lucy 
Cavendish Thornton. You. can imagine 
that fair, round, supple, young, healthy, 
bright-eyed cottage beauty of Cartown, full 
of native grace, who looked like a princess 
even when she was cleaning up the kitchen ; 
you can fancy how this fresh rural beauty 
would shine and glow in Mayfair! The 
niece of Mr. Cavendish Thornton, of Park 
Lane, a gentleman of high family and un- 
blemished honour, Lucy took her place in 
the foremost rank of society. She was 
presented at Court, she had an establish- 
ment of her own in Piccadilly. Her pre- 
sent wealth was enormous, and as old 
Thornton's heiress, her expectations were 
equally great. Although comparatively 
uneducated, she was a lady by nature, and 
readily fell into the ways of her advance- 
ment. Moreover, before Mr. Thornton 



^ 



The Belle of a London Season. 205 

introduced her to Mayfair he surrounded 
her privately with tutors, male and female ; 
he gave her the benefit of the advice of a 
professed chaperon^ who had brought out 
some of the most fashionable ladies of the 
time, and more than that, she had the run 
of the best milliners and dressmakers^ 
jewellers, and lace dealers ; he took her 
over to Paris on a flying visit, coming home 
through Germany; he told her over and 
over again the Thornton history, and asked 
her to do justice to her name, and play the 
part of princess. Old Thornton was as 
pleased with her as if she had been the 
special gift of a fairy. She was in all his 
thoughts. He anticipated her every want. 
He loaded her with the rarest gifts. She 
was in an atmosphere of pomp and luxury. 
If Thornton himself had been a magician 
in disguise when he appeared at the cottage 
of the Cantrills, he could hardly have made 
a greater change in the life of Lucy than 
that which his visit had inaugurated. Silks 
and satins, lace and diamonds, instead of 
cotton and woollen, simple ribbon and glass 



204 Stranger than Fiction. 

beads. She was mistress^ of every desire, 
and she did justice to her position. 

It was her first season. She was the 
rage. Lady Mary Miffits, her chaperon^ 
had never received so much attention in 
all her career. Uncle Thornton was as 
proud as a Thornton and as jealous as a 
Turk. He was by Lucy's side in the Row, 
he was with her at the opera. Fortune- 
hunting gadflies had not too many oppor- 
tunities of pouring their pretty nonsense 
into Lucy's ear, though mademoiselle was 
quite inclined to flirt. She had made her 
uncle uncomfortable once or twice, but 
Lucy replied to his words of alarm with 
such merry badinage that he declared she 
was a true Thornton, and fit to be a 
princess. 

Young Max Walton was the only fellow 
who seemed to have the smallest chance of 
making a favourable impression upon the 
belle. He had met her at his brother's 
town house at Queen's Gate. Lord Folden 
was his brother. The family were wealthy, 
and the Hon. Max Walton was the next heir. 




The Belle of a London Season. 205 

" I like Max Walton," said Lucy to her 
confidante, Dorothy Cantrill, "because he 
does not treat me as if I were a fool." 

Dorothy was sitting with Miss Thornton 
in the belle's boudoir while the belle was 
sipping a cup of coffee prior to dressing for 
a dinner party at Lord Folden's. 

" He is very handsome," said Dorothy^ 
"but '' 

" But what ?" said Lucy. 

" Not so handsome as somebody else." 

" You mean Jacob," said Lucy ; " I don't 
agree with you. I never thought Mr. 
Martyn handsome." 

" Mr. Martyn," said Dorothy, with much 
emphasis on the Mister. 

" You do not think ' Mister' sufficiently 
familiar ?" said Lucy. 

" Not if you care anything for him, miss,'* 
said Dorothy. 

" Miss ! There you are again. I sup- 
pose that means you no longer care any- 
thing about me," said Lucy. 

" Well, I really feel as if it was not right 
to call you * Lucy,' " said Dorothy ; " it does 



206 Stranger than Fief tan, 

seem so wonderfiil for me to be sitting here 
on silks and satins, and looking into gold 
looking glasses, and that, and calling the 
mistress of it all ' Lucy/ Don't you think 
me and mother had better go back into 
tiie country ?*' 

"If you are not happy, Dorothy, by all 
means ; but surely with your own apart- 
ments, dear, and everj^ing you can wish 
for '' 

" Yes, yes, Lucy, that is right enough ; 
but somehow I feel like a fish out of water, 
or a newt taken out of a ditch and put into 
a crystal fountain." 

" And is this to be the result of my good 
fortune ? . ^the loss of everybody I love T 
exclaimed Lucy, fanning her cheeks that 
were still rosy, despite a score of late nights 
in hot, stifling rooms. 

No, don't say that, dear." 
I do say it," said Lucy, petulantly. 
** This Jacob Martyn of whom you speak, 
you give^me credit for casting him off; it 
is not so ; he has deserted me ; he is too 
proud to come to me now that I am rich." 







The Belle of a London Season. 207 

" No, dear," said Dorothy, mildly ; " he 
must know that your uncle would not hear 
of such a match." 

" If he had heard so a hundred times, 
and a hundred uncles stood between him 
and the girl he really loved, that should 
make her doubly precious. He ought to 
6ght his way and meet me on my own 
ground if he cares for me." 

" Do not be angry ; I dare say Mr. Max 
Walton will make up for the loss of poor 
Jacob." 

" Dorothy, you shall not talk tc^ me in 
that way," said Lucy, beginning to cry with 
vexation.. . " You will make me hate Jacob 
Martyn." 

Lucy hid her face in her hands, and 
tossed her pretty little foot up and down, 
and rocked herself to and fro ; while Doro- 
thy patted her head and called her " dar- 
ling" and " love ;" and presently the sweet 
face which had looked out of the factory 
window in Jacob's boyhood turned smiling to 
Dorothy and kissed the kind countrywoman, 
and begged her to forgive her ingratitude. 



2o8 Stranger than Fiction. 

" I am becoming spoiled, Dorothy, I 
know I am ; I feel my heart changing ; 
I am beginning to like this gay, frivolous 
life ; I shall only be fit for some wealthy 
aristocrat soon." 

Dorothy drew her arm round Lucy's 
waist, and for a few brief minutes the two 
were once more in the old house among 
the trees, with the kitchen clock ticking in 
their ears, and the homely smell of the 
tarred mantelpiece insinuating itself into 
the perfumed atmosphere of the belle's 
fairylike boudoir. 

" Ah, poor Jacob !" Dorothy whispered. 

Lucy hid her face in the woman's neck. 

" If he had only written," said Lucy. 

** Does he really know where we are .'^" 

** Does he 1" said Lucy, with a little of 
her former asperity. " Did I not write ? 
Twice, I believe ?" 

" Did he get the letters, dear ?" 

" Did he not ? Have]I not his reply to 
the first one ? That he would write soon . 
soonT 

** Think of his troubles.*' 




The Belle of a London Season. 209 

" I do, God knows how much ! If I 
only knew that he was not toiling for bread 
I should be satisfied. If I could help him 
without his knowledge. I sometimes think 
I will consult my uncle about him." 

" Don't do that, dear," said Dorothy ; 
" Mr. Thornton is so very proud. No, no, 
not at present, dear ; let me advise you in 
this." 

A knock at the door. Mrs. Thornton's 
maid had come to say that she feared my 
lady would be late. Lady Mary was 
already dressed. Lucy kissed Dorothy 
and gave herself over to her maid, a bright, 
clever little lady, who deferentially chatted 
to Lucy about a hundred incidents of 
fashionable gossip, Lucy soon regained 
her spirits under this change of companion- 
ship, and when she took his arm an hour 
afterward^, and stepped into his brougham 
en rout^ for Queen's Gate, Uncle Thornton 
said he had never seen her look better. 
A little later Max Walton declared 
upon his soul that Venus was a fool to old 
Thornton's niece. He vowed the world 

VOL. II. 14 



2 lo " Stranger than Fiction. 

had never seen such a round, scrumptious, 
sweet-lipped, dainty beauty as Miss Thorn- 
ton^ Lord Folden, his brother, did not 
altogether agree with Max; but his lord- 
ship was married^ 

" Have I yotir lordship's consent to 
marry her ?" said Max when the party was 
at an end, and the last carriage had been 
called. 

" By all means," said his lordship. "Have 
another cigar ?" 

" Will your lordship do the correct 
thing ?" 

" Give you the Fenchale Estate ?" 

" That same," said Max, smiling, and 
lighting another cigar. 

" I will," said Lord Folden. 

" Then, by Jupiter ! she is mine," said 
the Hon. Max Walton. 

While this conversation was going on 
Miss Thornton was being presented to a 
Cabinet Minister's wife, whose assemblies 
were famous for their pretty women and 
famous men. Men and women were talk- 
ing about the new arrival, in every corner 




The Belle of a London Season. 211 



of the several rooms which were thrown 
into each other for conversation and re- 
freshment, the music-room, one of the most 
exquisitely decorated salons in London, 
being devoted to dancing, which had not 
yet commenced^ 

It was curious to hear the various stories of 
Lucy's career. She was not Thornton's niece 
at all, some said, but his daughter by an illus- 
trious lady from whom he had been divorced 
in the East, One who knew all about the 
story said she Was picked up on the road 
to Waterloo, her mother (the wife of an 
officer) having been killed by a cannon 
shot. Hef father was Mr. Thornton's 
brother, and a major in the army promoted 
on the field of battle for his gallantry. He 
had married his wife contrary to his father's 
consent The child had been discovered 
in a convent in the south of France. Her 
grandfather relented before he died, and 
left all his immense fortune to his son, not 
knowing that he had fallen gloriously fight- 
ing for his king. This young lady was his 
heiress, and in addition to enormous pos- 

14 . 2 



212 Stranger than Fiction. 

sessions in land and a slice of Piccadilly, 
she would come in for all old Thornton's 
money. It was no wonder, they all agreed, 
that she was the belle of the season . such 
a combination of money and beauty I 1 1 was 
certainly not true. Lady Mary Mififits told 
a little group of dowagers, that Miss Thorn- 
ton had worked in a factory ; not true that 
she had been a barmaid ; and it was a gross 
calumny to say that she had had no educa- 
tion. She could assure their ladyships that 
Miss Thornton was in every respect worthy 
of the distinction of their ladyships' pat- 
ronage and consideration. 

It was morning again when Lucy re- 
turned home . a bright summer morning. 
A light mist hung among the trees in the 
Park. Early workmen were clattering over 
the pavement of Piccadilly. Lucy noticed 
a poor little outcast watching with hunger- 
ing eyes the scanty business of a coffee- 
stall planted against the Park railings. 
Lady Mary Miffits shrugged her shoulders 
when Miss Thornton, with sympathetic 
glance, pointed to this wayside picture of 




The Belle of a London Season. 213 

London life. He was a crossing-sweeper, 
that poor waif of the streets. He had 
been busy with his broom late into the 
night, and at four o'clock in the morning 
was not rich enough to buy a cup of coffee. 
The thought struck a sad key in ^Lucy's 
memory. When she was alone in her own 
room, she flung herself upon a couch and 
wept. She could not think why it was 
that she felt so miserable. It never seemed 
to her that her melancholy came from sheer 
overwork. She was tired, worn out, and 
too much excited for sleep. She opened a 
cabinet and drew from it a miniature which 
had been painted by her uncle's order. It 
was the portrait of her father when he was 
a young man, and before he had entered 
the army. The only token which she pos- 
sessed to remind her of her mother, whom 
she had never seen, was a light brown curl 
of hair, which Mrs. Cantrill had given to 
her in the old time. 

How completely these relics indicated 
her position. Although she had never 
known what it was to dwell in the sunshine 



I 



214 Stranger than Fiction. 

of a mother's love, she seemed now for the 
first time to require a mother's guidance 
and sympathy. She needed advice and 
assistance . ^the affectionate regard of a 
higher nature than Dorothy's, and of a 
nobler ambition than that which inspired 
the spinsterial breast of Lady Miffits. Do- 
rothy only talked of to-day; Lady Miffits 
of the beneficent laws of society ; and her 
uncle of ancestral glories and being worthy 
of them. In the midst of all her wealth 
and honour, despite her woman's triumph 
in the Row, at Lord Folden's, in Bel- 
gravia's halls and assemblies, at Court, and 
everywhere else, Miss Thornton was not 
happy. One great drawback to the full 
enjoyment of her position was her want 
of education, though this was a blemish 
only felt by herself, for she was one of 
those clever girls who learn rapidly, and 
who seem to fall into a position of dis- 
tinction with as much repose and dignity 
as if they had been born to it. 

Lucy's window overlooked Piccadilly. 
It was a bright summer morning. The 




The Belle of a London Season. 215 

fresh green of early June gave the Park a 
sylvan look that almost rivalled the Car- 
town pastures. The coffee-stall propped 
against the Park railings was an odd con- 
trast to the wealthy surroundings. That 
poor little crossing-sweeper was still de- 
vouring the humble refreshment with 
hungry eyes. Cautiously opening her 
window, Lucy flung out a handful of 
silver, which went crashing down upon 
the stall. There was a sudden panic. 
Customers, coffee vendor, and crossing- 
sweeper darted upon the money, and Lucy 
was presently rewarded by the sight of the 
outcast making a very hearty breakfast, 
after which she went to bed and slept until 
long after Piccadilly had awakened to the 
life of another day. 





CHAPTER XIV. 

WILL TUNSTER VISITS THE GREAT 
METROPOLIS. 

O this IS Piccadilly, is it?" said 
Will Tunster, standing at the 
edge of the Circus pavement, 
with a carpet-bag in one hand 
and an umbrella in the other, and attired 
in a new velvet coat of the gamekeeper 
cut, and wearing almost for the first time 
in his life a tall hat. 

" Room for one outside," said an omnibus 
conductor in reply. 

"No, thank thee, lad; I've had roidin' 
enough for this day." 

" Right you are," said the conductor ; 




The Great Metropolis. 217 



"come to town in a Pickford's wan, I 
dessay." 

Will did not understand the cad's plea- 
santry. He smiled, and at the same time 
turned clumsily upon a street boy who in- 
sisted upon carrying his luggage. 

" I tell thee no," said Will, " I don't want 
thee ; but thou can tell me where Portland 
House is . where Miss Cavendish Thornton 
lives, if thou likes." 

" Yessir," said the boy, " show you the 
way ?" 

" No thanksta ; here's a copper for thee ; 
now tell me and hook it." 

The boy gave Will the proper direction, 
and presently the mail driver of Crossley 
stood opposite Portland House, the archi- 
tecture and general character of which he 
took in with all his eyes. 

" Dang my buttons !" Will exclaimed, 
" but this is a foin spot ! Th' young queen 
hersen might make a mistak and fancy 
she'd gotten whoam here." 

Will put his bag down, thrust his hands 
into his pockets, and lost himself in a reverie 



2 18 Stranger than Fiction, 

of wonder. It was a good thing that his 
bugle was in his bag, and that the key of 
the bag was in the deepest comer of his 
watch-pocket, or Piccadilly would have 
been considerably astonished during these 
abstract moments of Will's with a very 
florid performance. 

" Hey, sowdger," said Will, " can thou 
tell me" 

But Lord Flunkington's coachman, whom 
Will mistook for a sergeant of Foot, did 
not deign a reply. 

**Oh, them's thy manners, be they? 
Thou'll be had up before a court-marshal 
if thou doesna mind, for being too polite 
and getting mistook for a officer one of 
these days." 

A butcher-boy with a tray on his shoul- 
der next attracted Will Tunster's atten- 
tion. 

" Hey, lad ! what's thou gotten .>" ex- 
claimed Will ; " a leg of mutton in a coffin ! 
Well, I'm danged, you're rum folks in 
Lundun." 

" Walker !" said the boy. 




The Great MetropoHs, 219 



" He thinks I'm axin his name. Dang 
it, Fm a regular furriner here !" 

A policeman coming up, Will asked him 
if there were any back doors to these grand 
houses. 

" What do you want ?" asked the officer 
in reply. 

'' T back door, I tell thee." 

" Are you a servant ?" 

" No ; art thou ?" 

''There's the harea bell . ^ring it/' said 
the officer, pointing downwards with his 
thumb, and moving on with a contemptuous 
toss of his head. 

" Well, I suppose I mun go down these 
steps ; it's a rum thing tp go into th' cellar 
before you get to th' house place." 

Will knocked at the door, and when it 
was opened walked in, much to the as- 
tonishment of a couple of female servants, 
and evidently to the great delight of a 
familiar friend . old Mrs. Cantrill. 

" I'm glad to see thee, lad," said the old 
woman, tottering towards Will with the 
aid of a stick ; " though whether others 



220 Stranger than Fiction. 

will be so in this grand place I cannot 
say/' 

" Niver fear/' said Will. 

"Ah! times is changed since my poor 
man died," said Mrs. CantrilL 

" For th' better, mother, for th' better." 

"Aye, aye, if fine gownds and grand 
livin' can do owt to male folks happy. Let 
me look at thee, lad ! Ah, thou brings 
back old times to one." 

The two female servants, glancing mutual 
signs of pity and contempt upon Mrs. Can- 
trill and Will, left the kitchen. 

" Hey ! where's them cherubums off to ? 
they look as if they didna like one's 
society." 

" Oh ! they're not bad sort of lasses ; 
but thou sees they've no sympathy with 
an old woman brought to die away from 
th' old house ; I've heard them say I'm an 
ungrateful old creature." 

" Weel, weel ; none of us can see wi' the 
same eyes. My eye ! but this is a grand 
kitchen ; it licks t' County Hotel, and is 
equal to th' Duke's Palace, or nigh on 




The Great Metropolis. 221 

. - . . .. 

it, at Chatsworth. But where's Doro- 
thy ?" 

" Do you wish to see Miss Cantrill ?" 
said one of the two domestics, returning at 
this moment 

*' Aye, lass, I doo ; bless her heart !" 

" Then come this way, sir, please." 

Will followed his leader up two flights 
of stone steps, then across a wide hall, then 
down a passage, and at the end was ushered 
into a pretty little room, where Dorothy 
Cantrill, the housekeeper and friend of the 
lady of the house, was occupied with some 
fancy needlework. 

" Bless thee ! And how ist thou ?" said 
Will, squeezing Dorothy's hand and giving 
her a kiss before Dorothy hardly knew 
where she was. 

" Dear, dear, how rough you are. Will," 
she said, disengaging herself; " and I de- 
clare you have been drinking brandy." 

*' Only i' th' coach and i' this new fangled 
whaf-do-ye-cole-it. Puffin Billy; it was a 
bit cawd, thou knows, in the raw of the 
morning, and I just took a bottle to sup on 
th' road." 



222 Stranger than Fiction. 



" And I doubt not youVe supped it all." 

" I dur say," said Will, laughing. " Well, 
was you surprised to have a letter to say I 
was coming ?" 

*' Yes, indeed I was," said Dorothy. 

** And are ye sorry Tve come ?" 

" I cannot say that I am ; but I wish 
you would not shout so. Will." 

" Aye . bless thee, Dorothy, I mun shake 
hands agean, thou looks so bonny !" and 
Will shook hands so long and so vigorously 
that Dorothy began to think he would 
never leave off. 

" Now, Will, take a seat, and see if you 
ca*n sit 3till a few minutes.'' 

" Ole right ! Well, now tell me, how's 
Lucy ?" 

" Lucy !" exclaimed Dorothy. " Dear 
me, Will . you must not call her by that 
name. Don't you know she's my mistress ? 
She is very well, thank God, and as beau- 
tiful as ever." 

''Aye, she oleways wos a beauty; but 
what about th' old sweetheart, M ester 
Jacob ?" 




The Great Melropoiis. 223 

" We hear nothing of him/* said Dorothy^ 
sadly. 

" Ah ! it were a hawkard smash oleto- 
gether, Fve heered. Nobody knaws owt 
about Jaciob at Middleton, Cartownj or 
Crossley, though I could almost a swore I 
seed him a tramping one day; but it 
couldna a bin him." 

" I don t know that," said Dorothy ; *' I 
fear he is in very low water somewhere." 

" Him i' low watter ! nowt at sort Why 
that lad had enough brains for a Prime 
Minister. Him i' low watter, Dorothy ! 
He's ole reight somewherev*' 

" Do you think so Y' said Dorothy, 
shaking her head. 

" I do. Thy mother doesn't seem to 
care about this high life.^" said Will, in- 
terrogatively. 

" No," said Dorothy ; " she is always 
complaining. I thought it so kind of Miss 
Thornton, as soon as she heard the good 
news, to insist on our all coming together 
to enjoy her good fortune. And ever since 
she has been my mistress she has been 



2 24 Stranger than Fiction. 

kindness itself, and mother has never 
wanted for anything, and yet not a day or 
night passes but she frets ; she will only 
sit up here now and then ; and you know, 
Will, I cannot be always in the servants' 
hall, or I should soon lose my control over 
them. It is a sad, sad trouble to me," and 
Dorothy looked as if she were going to cry. 

" Well, now, rU tell thee what Fve beeii 
thinking, Dorothy. Tve gotten a proposi- 
tion to mak." 

"Not now, not now," said Dorothy, 
rising. " You must have something to eat 
first. And then I am going to assist the 
maid to dress my mistress for a grand ball," 

" Oh, that's the gam, is it . grand doings, 
eh?" 

** Yes, indeed, Will ; my mistress, they 
say, is the belle of the season." 

" Oh !" said Will ; " and what art thou ? 
Dang it, I mun shake hands agean, lass." 

Whereupon Will not only shook hands 
again, but he made a comical pretence of 
kissing Dorothy, which she resented on the 
spot. 




The Great Metropolis. ii<^ 

" Now, Will, you must behave yourself 
properly; you shall go into the butler's 
pantry and have something to eat," 

" Ole reight, lass ; ole reight," said Will, 
who shortly afterwards found himself very 
comfortable, and in the society of a gentle- 
man who knew Cartown and Crossley, 
which was sufficient to command the re- 
spect and regard of the mail driver. 






CHAPTER XV. 

DOROTHY AND MISS THORNTON COUPARE 

NOTES. 

j^ FEW days after Will Tunster's 
visit to Portland House Dorothy 
found herself alone with her 
mistress. 

" Well, Dorothy/' said Lucy, ** and what 
conclusion have you arrived at with regard 
to your faithful lover, Mr. William Tun- 
ster r 

*' If I say I wish to le^ve you ?" an- 
swered Dorothy, with rather surprising 
promptness. 

" I shall be sorry,'' said Lucy/ 
" You don't seem astonished.'* 
'' I am beginning not to be surprised at 
anything," said Lucy. 




Dorothy and Miss Thornton. ^ij 

" My mother . you know tow she grieves 
after the old place," said Dorothy* ** But 
I give you pain !" 

" No, no/' said Lucy, with a sigh ; " go 
on. 

"Will has taken the old house . they 
have let it to hiiii as an especial favour, 
though it will not be wanted any more for 
a keeper, because they are going to cut a 
railway a quarter of a mile above it,'* said 
Dorothy, n:iaking an effort to say what she 
had to say " quick, and get it over," as she 
afterwards told Will.  

Lucy saw her embarrassment, and with 
womanly instinct and sympathy interpreted 
what Dorothy further desired to say. 
" And you think you will say * Yes ' to 
Will's proposition^ and leave this fine city^ 
and settle down as a quiet country wife ? 
You are right, Dorothy; Will deserves 
to have that answer ; he has waited long 
and patiently, and you will be happy." 

" God bless you !" said Dorothy, while 
Lucy flung her arms round the woman's 
neck and kissed hen 

15.2 



228 Stranger than Fiction. 

Dorothy's was a sad and romantic story 
in its way. In early life she had loved 
deeply and passionately. She was a fine 
handsome girl at eighteen, and her lover 
was a manly young fellow. She had 
mourned his loss for years and vowed that 
her heart was broken. This had been her 
reply to Will Tunster any time for fifteen 
years. At last she told Will he was wel- 
come to half her heart. She could give 
nobody more than what was left, she said, 
and she would not give anybody else that 
except Will ; and he said dang his buttons 
he would only be too glad to have it, for 
half a loaf was better than none. 

" It will perhaps be happier for mother," 
said Dorothy, " for since she has had no- 
thing to complain about, she has only 
grumbled the more." 

*' But that has not influenced you," said 
Lucy. 

** No, I've come to like Will ; he is very 
kind ; and we shall all live together in the 
old house." 

" Ah, my dear friend, you are right." 




Dorothy and Miss Thornton. 229 

A gentle tap at the door. 

" Come in," said Lucy. 

"The Hon. Max Walton and Mr. 
Thornton are in the hall," said the servant. 
"Mr. Thornton wishes to know ff you will 
join them in the park." 

'* I will presently," said Lucy ; "in half 
an hour." 

" Yes, my lady." 

" Tell John I will be ready in half an 
hour." 

" I shall leave London," said Lucy. 

" You !" 

" Yes, for a couple of years at least." 

"My dear Lucy," said Dorothy, with 
tears in her eyes, " you are not happy." 

" Oh yes, I am," said Lucy, smiling sadly, 
" but I ought not to have come out this 
season ; I want more education ; I must 
study quietly ; I know nothing." 

" You know as much as other ladies." 

"No, I do not ; my music requires prac- 
tice ; I cannot speak French ; my water 
colours are daubs ; I am very ignorant." 

" You can ride better than any lady in 



230 Stranger than Fiction. 

the Row, and dance . Oh, how you did 
dance the other night ! I was watching you 
from the gallery." 

" Yes," said Lucy, " and uncle is anxious 
that I should marry." 
Dorothy sighed. 

" I know what you are thinking," said 
Lucy. 

" I suppose it is not to be." 
" What is not to be ?" 
" I was thinking of Jacob Martyn," said 
Dorothy. 

*' He is not worth thinking about," said 
Lucy, her face suddenly flushing. 
" Don't say that, dear." 
" Well, we will not discuss the subject," 
Lucy replied. 

" Of course you are going to marry Mr. 
Max Walton." 

" Not of course ; there are a dozen men 
quite as eligible as my lord's brother," said 
Lucy ; " but I must have a nice quiet house 
in the country, where I can study and make 
myself worthy to be a wife." 

Dorothy, in thinking of Jacob, had for- 




Dorothy and Miss Thornton. 231 

gotten for the moment how even she had 
given up her old lover at last. She did 
not know that neglect is harder to bear 
than absence. Dorothy had waited from 
year to year, expecting her lover to return 
to her across the treacherous sea, and at 
last was fain to give him up as dead, and 
transfer her affections to another. Lucy 
had waited for tidings of Jacob, and she 
too was tired of waiting. 

If you had seen her galloping with her 
uncle and Mr. Max Walton an hour after 
her conversation with Dorothy you would 
have thought her happy and contented. 
She was the admiration of riders and 
pedestrians. The latter leaned upon the 
railings, watching her lithe figure as it dis- 
appeared among the trees; the former 
admired and envied her according to their 
sex. Sometimes she tried to chat with her 
uncle about a pleasant country house and 
two years of retirement from London ; but 
the moment they pulled their horses into a 
walk under the trees they were surrounded 
by friends. The Hon. Max Walton was 



232 Stranger than Fiction. 

perpetually by Lucy's side, and it was 
generally believed that he was the most 
fortunate man of the season. Now and 
then, however, Lucy gave gossips a little 
reason to doubt this, by marked flirtations 
with other admirers. Indeed Lucy played 
the part of the belle of the season to per- 
fection, and especially as the season ad- 
vanced, practice in flirtation giving addi- 
tional grace and piquancy to her natural 
charms. 

" They say you are becoming a finished 
flirt, Lucy," said Mr. Thornton, as they 
were riding home ; *' quite cruel and fickle, 
upon my honour." 

" Who says so ?" 

" Max thinks so, I am sure," said Mr. 
Thornton. 

Lucy burst into a merry little laugh. 

" Lord Folden has made a bet against 
Max Walton's success." 

" Success ?" said Lucy, inquiringly. 

'* As the favourite for your hand." 

" Oh, they bet on matrimonial events, do 
they ?" 




Dorothy and Miss Thornton. 233 

'' Lord Folden bets on anything/' 

** How droll !" said Lucy ; " I will sup- 
port his judgment." 

" What is the joke ?" asked Max Walton, 
riding up. 

" A bet of your brother's," said Lucy, 
looking across her horse's neck at the 
speaker, who found himself at a loss what 
to say in reply. 

" Do you make bets ?" asked Lucy, en- 
joying his confusion. 

" Sometimes . I backed the Derby 
winner this year," said Mr. Walton. 

" Oh, indeed ; then you are lucky in your 
wagers." 

" Generally, yes." 

They had arrived at Mortimer House. 
Lucy alighted ; Mr. Thornton and the 
Hon. Max Walton raised their hats. Lucy 
smiled, waved her whip, and disappeared, 
to meet her escort, however, again at 
dinner. 



CHAPTER XVI. 



DESCRIBES A FAMOUS FAIR, ITS PLEASURES, 
PECULIARITIES, AND PASTIMES; BUT IS 
MORE PARTICULARLY NOTEWORTHY ON 
ACCOUNT OF THE UNEXPECTED MEETING 
OF TWO TRAVELLERS, 

ELL, dang my buttons !" said 

Will Tunster, who was mounted 

upon a Sturdy cob, doing seven 

miles an hour on the Dinsley 

road, about twenty miles from Cartown. 

" Gee up, Sauce Box, gee up !" 

Sauce Box shook her head, and declined 
to gee up. 

" Vary weel, owd testy, then ston still, 
and rU get off." 





An Unexpected Meeting. 235 

Sauce Box scrambled into a trot im- 
mediately. 

" Thou'rt like th' paddy's pig as had to 
be shoved t' rong way before it ud go th' 
reight un." 

Sauce Box shook her head and walked 
again. 

" Weel, niver moind ; we're up to him 
noo ; and if it isna Jacob Martyn, whoy, 
my name's not Will Tunster, that's ole." 

Will said this in such a loud voice that 
the object of the remark turned round, and 
there was a mutual recognition. Jacob, 
however, looked far less pleased at the 
meeting than Will, who slipped off Sauce 
Box and shook Jacob by the hand, and 
hoped he was well, and hearty, and stun- 
ning. 

** I am very well, and glad to see you, 
Will," said Jacob, after a pause. 

" Weel now, I shouldna a thout it ; thou 
doesna look ow^r pleased, master. But 
niver moind, I know thou's had thv troubles 
and dang nie, whether thou'rt glad or not 
I'm glad. Roide, sir, roide . I've had a 



n 



236 Stranger than Fictuntk 

long spell, and thou'rt more fit for a horse 
than I am." 

Jacob smiled bitterly, and said, "You 
forget the adage. Will, about putting a 
beggar on horseback." 

" A beggar ! Well, if thou rt a beggar, 
I can only say thou deserves to be one, 
lad," said Will, slapping his thigh with a 
short ash stick. 

Jacob looked angry. 

" I donna care ! When Dorothy said to 
me, only t'other day, as she feared thou 
might not be doin' well, I laughed at her, 
and towd her it was rubbish. Mester 
Martyn i' low watter! I said, why he'd 
brains enough for a Prime Minister !" 

" Dorothy !" said Jacob ; " where did 
you see Dorothy ?" 

" Where I . why, in Lundon, to be sure, 
where th' owd women go abaht i' glass 
cases, and th' butcher lads carry legs of 
mutton in coffins," said Will. " But come 
now, get on Sauce Box, and Til tell thee 
ole abaht it." 

" No, thank you," said Jacob, anxious 




An Unexpected Meeting, 237 

to hear what Will might have to disr 
close. 

" Then dang my buttons if TU tell thee ; 
and it's worth symmat what I can tell ; sp 
now then . here, gie me thy leg." 

Jacob mounted ; Will took his bundle, 
and walked like a dutiful squire by the 
cavalier's stirrup. 

And then Will, in a cjuaint roundabout 
way, told Jacob as much as he knew con- 
cerning Lucy's removal to London, until 
Jacob's thoughts ran on at such a rate that 
Sauce Box suddenly seemed desirous to 
overtake them, and aw^y she went as fast 
as her little stumpy legs would carry her. 
But she was winded sooner than Will, who 
laughed heartily at her antics. When she 
stopped Jacob dismounted, 

" I can stand this no longer !" said Jacob. 

" Oh, gammon !" said Will, " you made 
her start off, you know." 

" But that is not what I mean. Will. Did 
you say that Mr. Thornton was her grand- 
father's brother ?" 

'' Of course." 



I 



238 Stranger than Ficttofi. 

"And that Miss Thornton still thinks of 
me?" 

" Aye, lad ! And ud give a trifle to 
know where thou art." 

" Will, your hand ! God bless you^ 
Will ;" and Jacob returned, with ihterest, 
the squeeze he had received a few minutes 
before. 

The people who passed looked and 
laughed at this strange pair making these 
. demonstrations of regard for each other. 
Some of them nodded, and winked, and 
thought the two had begun the day's drink- 
ing bout early ; for the majority of the 
travellers on the road that morning were 
on their way to Dinsley Statute Fair. 
Jacob had noticed many strange people by 
the way ; he had started early from a little 
roadside inil, and was one of a motley crew' 
that reminded him of an old nursery ditty 
which Susan Harley had sung to him when 
he was a child i . 

" Hark ! hark ! the dogs do bark, 
The beggars are coming to town, 
Some in rags, some in tags, 
Some in silken gown." 



An Unexpected Meeting. 239 

When Will came up, Jacob was thinking 
of the old song, and of some of the trials 
he had undergone since the last time poor 
Susan had called him up in the early 
morning to ramble in the fields with Tom 
Titsy and his dog. 

When they reached Dinsley, Jacob and 
Will went to a little inn, where. Sauce Box 
being stabled, Will repeated his story over 
again, and detailed his conversation with 
Dorothy. 

" And Tm justified, thus far, in believing 
that Miss Thornton is concerned about my 
welfare ?*' 

" Aye, lad. but TU go further nor that." 

** You think she has made some efforts 
to find me out ?" 

" I know she has/' 

*' And gone so far as to write to me ?'* 
said Jacob, his eyes flashing with hope. 

" Yes, Dorothy said so, and she wouldna 
tell a lie for ole Lundon." 

"And her address is Portland House, 
Piccadilly T 

" It is, lad" 



?40 Stranger than Fiction. 



" I will leave you for a while now, Will, 
\{ you please." 

" I am goin' on a bit further this after- 
noon," said Will ; *' I'll meet you here at 
eight o'clock to-night, sir." 

" Very good, that is an engagement," 
said Jacob, as he strode forth, only, how- 
ever, to return almost immediately to order 
a bed for the night, requesting to see the 
room at once, that he might wash. 

It was long since Jacob had been so 
careful about his toilet as he was upon this 
occasion ; and although he had but a few 
shillings in his pocket, and his clothes 
were rough and shabby, his face was 
animated, and he looked happy and gentle- 
manly. 

He went into the nearest bookseller's 
shop, purchased a sheet of note-paper, 
wrote the following lines upon it, and ad- 
dressed the letter to Dorothy : . 

" Tell Miss Thornton that Jacob Martyn 
still lives in the hope of some day being 
worthy of her ; tell her that he goes about 




An Unexpected Meeting. 241 

the world with the music of the old hymn 
in his heart-^ 

^' * There is a happy land, 
Far, far away.' 

Tell her he has heard of the change in her 
fortunes, but not rightly until now ; that 
under the circumstances he still releases 
her from a girlish engagement ; but that 
he has not given up loving, nor hoping ; 
and that he prays always for the happiness 
of the companion of his boyhood, and thanks 
heaven for news of her welfare and happi- 
ness, for the continuance of whiqh be ever 
prays." 

Having dropped this missive into the 
post-office, Jacob took a turn down a by- 
lane and wandered, with his thoughts, into 
some green meadows. After a while he 
came back to the inn, where he partook of 
a simple meal, and then sallied forth, to 
search for Dr. Horatio Johnson, who was in 
the habit of attending great fairs in all the 
Midland counties. 

VOL. II. 16 



ii 



^42 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Dinsley Stattis," as the people called 
it, was a holiday long looked forward to by 
the rural population as well as by the in- 
habitants of iDinsley with pleasurable and 
profitable anticipations; and it shall have 
more than a passing notice at my hands. 
The hiring saturnalia was still kept up, 
with little change in the way of business 
and pleasure from the days of our fathers. 
The adjacent villages sent to the fair ser- 
vants, male and femalej dressed in their 
finest clothes ; and masters and mistresses 
on all kinds of beasts of burthen^ and in all 
manner of carts, gigs, and waggons. The 
servants whose periods of hiring termi- 
nated that day mostly desired new mas- 
ters, and the masters new servants, and 
so they all congregated at certain places 
in the market-place and stared at each 
other. When a farmer liked the look of 
a man he opened negotiations for his ser- 
vices, and the same process was adopted 
by the farmer's wife with regard to her 
assistants . only that in the latter case a 




An Unexpected Meding^ 243 

great deal more examination on both 
sides was deemed necessary. If the terms 
suited, and both parties were agreeable, 
a bargain was stfuck, and considered 
thoroughly binding by the servant accept- 
ing what was called '* the fastening pe;nny," 
which was presented on the principle of 
the recruiting shilling. The " fastening 
penny," however, was represented by any 
amount the hirer might think proper 
to give ; a " waggon-wheel," as the five- 
shilling piece was called in some parts of 
the country, being generally considered a 
tolerably liberal premium^ As soon as 
the money was accepted the engagement 
between the contracting parties was as 
binding for a year as if half a dozen law- 
yers had been employed to set forth the 
contract ott as many skins of parchment. 
And all this matter-of-fact business went 
on amidst the noise and bustle of the fair ; 
yet it was seldom that mistakes of terms or 
breaches of contract arose out of the statute 
engagerfients, clumsy as the system cer- 

16 . 2 



A 



244 Stranger than Fiction. 



tainly appears in these days of educational 
progress. 

The old institution is at an end. It 
was a relic of barbarism, no doubt There 
are a few links still left between feudalism 
and serfdom. The School Boards will 
break the remaining bonds. But let us 
turn back to the old fair. I remember it 
as it were with the eyes of childhood ; I 
see it as Jacob Martyn saw it years ago. 
It is at night, when the shows are most 
attractive, when the excitement of ginger- 
bread dealing, the fun of putting pennies 
into lotteries and getting nothing for them 
are at their height. It is when the naphtha 
begins to blaze and splutter, filling the at- 
mosphere with a sort of illuminated mist, 
that the fair is " in full go." The " pale 
moonlight," which still heightens the beauty 
of Melrose Abbey, though Sir Walter never 
saw the sweet effect, would be fatal to the 
fair. The darker the better for the glory 
of naphtha lamps and tinselled queens and 
magicians. It is quite invigorating to 



 



Aii Unexpected Meeting. 245 

watch the fierceness of the competition be- 
tween the rival showmen. 

First, there is the dwarf, perpetually 
ringing his bell out of the first story front, 
and his proprietor yelling the proportions 
of ** the wonderfuUest fe-nomenah as ever 
appeared afore the British public, at the 
low charge of one penny." 

Then there is the red-faced gentleman 
belonging to the waxwork, who seems to 
be shouting himself into fits of apoplexy, 
in an over-weening desire to make known 
to those who are wavering betwixt " Daniel 
in the lions' den, as natural as life," and 
" the wonderfuUest dwarf halive," " that 
this hexhibition of mechanical figures chal- 
lenges the world for variety and perfection, 
avin ad the honour of happearin afore 
nearly all the crowned eads of Europe." 

Above all, there is Bumwell's Royal Col- 
lection of Animated Nature, towering up 
into the darkness, with florid delineations 
of lions, tigers, birds, and reptiles, occupied 
in the amusements of their native woods, 
or being mildly inspected, in a semi-circle 



246 Stranger than Fiction. 

of cages, by the reigning monarch and 
several persons in military uniform. Bum- 
well's have a band of music, which the pro- 
prietor of "The Temple of Magic" is en- 
deavouring to drown with a drum and 
barrel organ, assisted by the band belong- 
ing to the giant and the boa constrictor . 
two trombones, a comet, and drum . which 
appears to be fully determined to drown 
everybody else or perish in the attempt ; 
while the crowd below, tantalised by the 
half-drawing of a curtain exhibiting a sort 
of monster Catherine wheel, spinning be- 
fore a piece of looking-glass, dash up the 
steps, and disappear behind two very green 
doors, ornamented with a very bright 
knocker. 

In the midst of these exhibitions, sur- 
rounded by a host of other equally noisy 
establishments, including peep-show de- 
lineations of Waterloo and the latest mur- 
der, is situated the booth of the " Notting- 
ham Pet," a gentleman of somewhat short 
stature and battered aspect, who, elevating 
himself on a temporary platform, proclaims, 




An Unexpected Meeting. 247 

in a husky voice, " YouVe the real thing 
here, gents . no infernal drums an trumpets 
to dror yer in, and ease yer of yer money 
. it's the nut . the nut^ gents, wot you has 
here in all its perfectshun . the nut, gents, 
the nut" This choice oration is accom- 
panied with a beating of the head every 
time that piece of human anatomy is al- 
luded to as " the nut," and by the time the 
" Pet " has exhausted his speech, and made 
himself much hoarser than when he com- 
menced it, another of the same calibre of 
" nuts," and rejoicing in a similar " gin and 
fog" organ, invites **them as loves the 
noble skience of self-defence " to lose no 
time in witnessing ** a set-to atween the re- 
nowned Nottenham Pet, which is backed 
for a undred pund a side to fight the 
' Tipton ' and * Jimmy, the Black,' which 
has had the honour of oldin the champion 
belt of the light weights, and which is also 
backed to fight a battle in the ensooing 
munth." 

Leaving " the real thing," with its gloves 
and its flat noses, we come to something of 



248 Stranger than Fiction. 

a more imaginary character . "The Theatre 
Royal." The performers, in a remarkable 
variety of costumes, are pacing the plat- 
form, and just as we arrive at the steps it 
is announced that the company will have 
"one dance at the exterior of the house 
prior to the commencement of Shake- 
speare's im-mortal tradegee of * King 
Richard the Third ' . by the whole 
strength of the company, after which a 
Grand Tragical, Magical, Comical, Laugh- 
able Pantomime, . only twopence to the 
gallery ;" all this being accompanied with 
the most positive assurance that there will 
only be three or four more performances 
this evening, and that the house is elegantly 
illuminated, and heated with a patent stove. 
Thereupon the whole strength of the com- 
pany . a hump-backed individual in a black 
velvet coat and feathers ; two or three royal 
looking swells of a past age, in various 
stages of seediness ; two children (shortly 
to be murdered in the tower), shivering in 
scanty garments and buckled shoes ; and 
divers ladies, in long robes of all colours, 




An Unexpected Meeting. 249 

together with short robes, for the panto- 
mime, of the most gauzy and gaudy cha- 
racter, begin to dance ; and after a few 
fantastical turns, the men severally fold 
their arms, the women raise their dresses, 
and at the pantomimic beckoning of a 

m 

clown, who tumbles head over heels across 
the stage, and then runs back again, they 
all disappear to commence their interpreta- 
tion of Shakespeare's ** Life and Death of 
King Richard the Third." 

Moving a little way from the noise of 
the shows, we find ourselves in a maze 
of stalls, shooting galleries, roundabouts, 
swinging boats, bazaars, and " good stuff *' 
booths, and wherever we go, gingerbread 
and nuts seem to be the staple luxuries ; 
indeed, the fair is redolent of gingerbread, 
and in whatever other occupation they may 
be engaged, girls and boys, and men and 
women, are all cracking nuts, which are 
offered and sold to them as " real Barsalo- 
nies." Here a group throngs round a 
ballad singer, who sells his ditties by the 
yard. Close by, a bustling individual, with 



250 Stranger than Fudom, 

a sort of dumb dock, paintpd in str^ies of 
red^ and Uue, and black, and gieen, widi a 
perpetually moving loag^ hand, cries. " Xow, 
gents, try your luck again . (aint heart 
never won fair lady. nodiii^ ventar, no- 
ting win . one down, who makes two ? . 
111 bet even on the red;"* and smock-frocked 
fellows gape at his volubilit>% while his 
volubility wins their pence by handsfiiL 

In close proximity, all who are suffering 
from pains in the head or hack, nervous 
debility, spasms, wind, gout, or any other 
complaint, are requested to try the infallible 
pill, the recipe of which was procured from 
an officer in '* the Royal Artilleree,'* who 
had been in the habit of curing whole r^- 
ments with the recipe, and who had only 
been induced to part with the same on 
account of the humble individual who now 
possessed it having saved that officer^s life 
when set upon by four blacks in the great 
Sikh war . two night and morning would 
be found efficacious in all disorders, and 
the charge for one box was about one-third 
of the price which would have to be paid 



^ 



An Unexpected Meeting. 251 

for a single pill in any respectable druggist's 
in town . and why ? because the seller was 
not compelled to pay rent and taxes, and 
because he gave the public the benefit of 
his not keeping a large shop with numerous 
assistants. 

These arguments are found to be irre- 
sistible, especially with the women ; as are 
also, with numerous men, the jokes of 
" Cheap Jack," who is continually trjang ta 
break a joiner's saw, and expressing an 
emphatic opinion that nobody ever saw 
such a saw as that saw, which said saw was 
as elastic as india-rubber, and as sharp as 
a razor, and if the axe he now held in his 
hand . and which he would neither ask 
five, four, three, two, nor one shilling for, 
but would sell at the low and ruinous figure 
of tenpence . ^was placed at the root of a 
tree that night, the timber would be found 
felled and ready for carting the next morn- 
ing. Above all this you hear a mingled 
hubbub of cries, made up of " Three a 
penny, three a penny,** " Taste 'em and try 
'em 'afore you buy 'em," " Try your weight, 



252 Strdngir than Fiction. 

gents, try your weight," "Strong leather 
laces," " Only a penny in the lucky bag," 
"The real Turkey rhoobarb, only four 
pensh de ounsh, two pensh de half ounsh, 
and as low as a penny de quarter of ail 
ounsh," " Now, my little dears, who rides, 
who rides ?" " Real Grantham gingerbread, 
only sixpence a pound," " Here yoii are, 
the real brandy snap, the real brandy 
snap ;" 

" We are poor folk from Manchester, 
An we've gotten no work to do ;" 

and a hundred other inducements to buy 
or give, interspersed now and then with a 
deep bass entreaty to ** Pity the poor 
blind !" 

It is a source of pleasure and amusement 
to watch the children, among all the noise 
and glitter, and to see them struggling 
home under loads of toys, blowing their 
trumpets and beating their drums, and talk- 
ing about their " fairings," and bedaubing 
their cheeks with gingerbread ; and to see 
the rough country lovers taking their sweet- 



p*^ 



An Unexpected Meeting. 233 

hearts to the shows, and buying them nuts ; 
and to see the tradesmen busy in their 
shops round the market-place ; and to hear, 
as you may sometimes, the parish bells 
ringing joyous peals, that fill up the small- 
est lull in the noise of the fair, and make 
the holiday clamour complete. 

Jacob wandered among these familiar 
scenes, now lingering here, now linger- 
ing there, searching for Dr. Johnson, and 
listening for his voice among the Babel of 
cries of the fair. But nowhere could be 
found Mrs. Tits/s famous lodger. Jacob 
was, however, interested in one discovery. 
He recognised the two waggons which had 
formed part of the gipsy settlement. One 
of them attracted his particular attention. 
It was the " Cheap Jack's " establishment, 
at the back of which, handing out the 
goods, was the " Baron " of the encamp- 
ment Julius, he thought, was playing a 
dangerous game 'if he had really committed 
any serious crime; but his disguise was 
certainly a most complete one . ^so complete 
that Jacob doubted, after all, whether this 



254 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

was the Baron or not, and he would never 
for a moment have dreamed of that strange 
figure being Jennings had he not met 
with the Baron as I have previously de. 
scribed. 

He was wondering what crime his late 
father's factotum could possibly have com- 
mitted, when a hand was laid upon his 
shoulder, and he found himself face to face 
with Dr. Horatio Johnson^ A hearty greet- 
ing on both sides followed the recognition. 

"I have been looking for you every- 
where, listening for you in every comer of 
the fair,** said JacoK 

" My assistant is here to-day,'* said Mr. 
Johnson. " A vulgar antagonist has sprung 
up who talks about having saved an officer 
in the Sikh war ; he has planted himself 
opposite my place in several towns, and 
wherever he has done so I encounter him 
with my assistant. Did you not notice my 
stall ?" 

" No ! Looking for you I naturally took 
little notice of any establishment where I 
did not see you, though I did observe the 




An Unexpected Meeting. :J55 

Sikh- war-man, because he wore regimen- 
tals, and shouted louder than anybody 
else." 

" That^s the fellow. ^well) nev^r mind 
him . come along/* 

" I have ail engagement at eight," said 
Jacob, " clnd it must be nearly that time 
now/* 

" So have I,** said the Doctor^ ** but mine 
is one in whidh you may participate ; I am 
going to sup with a gentleman Whom you 
know very well" 

" 1 have met a fellow to-day whom I knew 
years ago," said Jacob, " aild I have pro- 
mised to meet him at eight/' 

" Not at the Grove T said the Doctor. 

" No," said Jacob. 

** Welly I'll let you off for half an hour, 
on one condition," said the Doctor, ** that 
you bring your friend, and come to No. 
6, The Grove (it is close at hand), to 
supper." 

** You have my word,'* said Jacob. 

" Your hand upon it," said the Doctor, 
" and I am delighted, sir . delighted to 



256 



Stranger than Fiction. 



have met you again. I rely on your coming 
to the Grove." 

And the Doctor disappeared among the 
crowd. 





CHAPTER XVII. 

" WELCOME TO THE GROVE ! " 




R. WINDGATE WILLIAMS, 
the accredited editor of the Dins- 
ley Courant, lodged in a pleasant 
part of the county town called the 
Grove, whither Dr. Horatio Johnson hur- 
ried, after leaving Jacob in the fair. Open- 
ing a little ornamental gate he passed 
through a small square garden, and 
knocked at a respectable-looking door. 

" Yethir, he ith in," said a young woman 
with black hair, blinking eyes, and promi- 
nent teeth. 

" Walk in, sir," thereupon said a bland, 
patronising, oily voice from a side door, 
VOL. II. 17 



258 Stranger than Fiction. 

accompanied by powerful indications of 
fried onions. 

The voice belonged to the landlady, who 
was the mother of the interesting girl with 
the lisp, the blinking black eyes and the 
prominent teeth. 

" Joanna, show the gentleman upstairs." 

Joanna, who dashed about the house, 
Windgate Williams had said, like a lost 
thunderbolt took two stairs at a time, and 
beckoning the Doctor to follow, was in 
another moment hammering at the door of 
Mr. Williams. 

" Aha, my boy . half an hour before 
your time ; ' but no matter, ah,' as the 
heavy drama men say ; glad to see you . 
sit down, sit down." 

" I have taken a liberty with your hospi- 
tality," said Mr. Johnson. 

*' Not at all, Doctor . don't see it . 
hang it . I invited you to meet my friend 
Crooks " 

" But I have invited two other friends to 
accompany me . at least, a friend and his 
friend,'' said the Doctor, interrupting Mr. 
Williams. 



" Welcome to the Grove P' 259 

" The deuce you have," said Williams, 
knitting his brows, and ringing a bell. 

Before the Doctor had time to reply, the 
thunderbolt rolled into the room, and stared 
at Mr. Williams. 

*' Send your mother here." 

The thunderbolt rolled down stairs. 

" Queer girl that," said Williams ; " I call 
her Jumbo . her name's Joanna . Jumbo 
the lost thunderbolt, sir . I contemplate 
writing a humorous song about her." 

" Mrs. Smick . my friend Dr. Johnson." 

The Doctor bowed to a fat, smiling, 
good-natured looking woman of fifty. 

" What have we for supper to-night, 
Mrs. Smick ?" 

'* Oh, plenty, sir . never fear." 

" Plenty for five T 

" I thought it was three which I were a 
saying to Joanna when ^' 

** We have been into the highways and 
by-ways, mam . result is two more," said 
Mr. Williams, interrupting his landlady. 

^^Ho!" said Mrs. Smick, thoughtfully; 
** couple of ducks and a steak . ha ! . we'll 

17 . 2 



26o Stranger than Fiction. 

put on a little more steak, sir, which, when 
the pertaties is considered " 

" Very well . very well . ^all right," said 
Mr. Williams, and the lady bowed herself 
out of the room. 

" You seem doleful. Doctor . come now, 
none of that . it will not be tolerated to- 
night . away with melancholy ! . youVe 
thinking about that sanguinary affair which 
is to be tried at the assizes . he's all right, 
sir . the lad's all right . Fve told you so 
before . come now . for to-night we'll merry 
be, et cetera." 

With these disjointed remarks, dropping 
from him during journeys round the room, 
made for the ostensible purpose of putting 
papers and books and other litter out of 
the way, Mr. Williams endeavoured to raise 
the Doctor's spirits, finally extracting from 
him a promise that he would, for that night 
at least, confine himself to the pleasures of 
social life, and that he would in no way 
mar the hilarity of the company by thrust- 
ing a murder under its nose. 

Then Jumbo rushed into the room and 




" Welcome to the Grove /" 261 



laid the cloth, seeming to look everywhere 
at once and to be there at the same time ; 
she was followed by a short, stout, closely- 
cropped gentleman, who wore spectacles, 
and " snuffed." 

*' My friend Mr. Ebenezer Crooks, well 
known for his dramatic readings and his 
eloquent lectures . Dr. Horatio Johnson of 
Middleton-on the- Water . ^glad to have the 
pleasure of introducing you," said Mr. Wil- 
liams. 

"And here comes our other friends . 
why . no . yes . yes . it is . Mr. Jacob 
Maijyn . delighted to see you, sir . Dr. 
Johnson, this is a pleasure I did not ex- 
pect . Mr. Crooks, allow me to introduce 
you to my friend Mr. Martyn." 

Will Tunster stood smiling near the 
door, swinging his hat in one hand while 
he rubbed his nose with the other. 

" This is my friend Mr. William Tunster, 
farmer." 

" Noa, not yet," said Will, bowing; "not 
farmer yet . hopes to be in two or three 
weeks." 



262 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Welcome to the Grove !'' said Mr. Wil- 
liams, theatrically. 

" Sur, to you," replied Will, smiling. 

The supper was speedily brought up,, 
filling the table with good things and the 
room with the perfume and odour thereof. 

The party ate and talked, and drank 
each other's healths. The fair, the 
shows, the new company at the Dinsley 
Theatre, the recent lectures of Mr. Crooks, 
the smart article in the Courant on the 
condition of the High Street, furnished 
varied and interesting topics of conver- 
sation. 

" Talk of the state of the High Street,'^ 
said Mr. Crooks, in a deep bass voice, 
which gradually rose to ^ baritone, and 
then to a tenor, " I can tell you . ah, ah . 
a good joke . the reason Williams objects 
to '' 

" Now, come . don't expose me . that is 
too bad," interrupted Mr. Williams, with 
perfect good humour. 

" That was the foundation o( the article 
. you know it was now," said Mr. Crooks, 




" Welcome to the Grove T 263 



in his tenor notes, and adding in a deep 
bass, " It's too good to be lost. I must 
tell the story. Williams avec de V eau-de-vie 
in Vestomac^ was coming home, leaning on 
my arm. * Confound those Lighting and 
Paving Commissioners,' said mon ami, reel- 
ing along . 'what a dreadful state the streets 
are in, to be sure . FU pitch into 'em next 
week/ and he did ad nauseam /' and then 
Mr. Crooks paused to say, in a falsetto 
shriek, " The streets were all right, gentle- 
men ; it was the editor who was all 
wrong." 

Everybody laughed except Will Tunsten 
After quietly laying down his knife and 
fork, he turned round to the gentleman in 
the spectacles, and said, " I hope Tm not 
goin' to be rude, sir . Mr. Snooks ; but if 
you have anything to say as you object to 
my hearing, Til leave th' room." 

Mr. Crooks's reply was an inquiring 
glance at the company. 

" There's no need to stare ; ole IVe 
gotten to say is, that I haven't had a forrin 
edication, and if there's to be ony parly- 



264 Stranger than Fiction. 

vooin, if it's the same to you, sir, I shall 
be glad if you'll tell us the English on it 
after/' 

The truth is, Mr. Crooks being a local 
lecturer was continually on the watch to 
impress the local ignoramuses among whom 
he managed to scrape together a living. 
Unlike Mr. Johnson, he did not confine 
himself to a single Latin quotation ; but he 
larded his pompous talk with scraps of all 
the tongues he had come across. Wind- 
gate Williams swears he heard the impostor 
in his closing peroration to a scientific lec- 
ture tell his gaping pit-village audience that 
tempus fugit in vino Veritas^ usque ad nau- 
seam must be the end of all who did not 
look progress fairly in the face, but he 
would beg them to join him in hoping that 
the mauvais stijety ad korrenduniy tout en- 
semble, would be the lot of that glorious 
country which placing its semper idem on 
the wave of time had sailed to the highest 
pinnacles of a never dying future. 

But this is by the way. 

Mr. Crooks was angry at honest Will 




'* Welcome to the Grove /" 265 

Tunster's protest, and would have at once 
given that presumptuous mail driver a 
moral rebuke, had not Williams verbally 
stepped between the two with " All right, 
sir . all right . FU interpret for you, Mr. 
Tunster, if necessary . but I claim your 
attention for a moment . I must have my 
revenge . you forgot to tell our friends, 
Mr. Crooks, what you did on that same 
evening when I had taken too much brandy, 
as you say." 

" Did 1 I went home to Mrs. Crooks," said 
the lecturer, 

'' Oh, no," said Mr. Williams, laughing ; 
** he was here all night, I assure you . came 
home with me . we toasted each other in 
this very room till midnight . then my 
friend left . half an hour afterwards thought 
I heard a noise in the backyard . sober as 
a judge I was . went out with a light . 
' No more, thank you . no more, thank 
you,' said a voice, in a sort of bubble-and- 
squeak style . I looked everywhere . still 
the voice ' No more (bubble), thank you,' 
as if a man were speaking in the act of 



266 Stranger than Fiction. 

drinking . at last I thought of the duck- 
pond, two yards by three, about a foot deep 
. turned the light in that direction . Crooks 
lying on his back, with the water bubbling 
into his mouth whenever he moved . ^at 
every bubble he said, ' No more, thank 
you ' . ah, ah . thinking, no doubt, some- 
body was insisting upon his drinking eau- 
de-vie . I beg your pardon, Mr. Tunster 
. ^brandy, sir, brandy." 

Will Tunster leaned back in his chair 
and roared with laughter. 

" Dang my buttons, but that's a good un 
. well done, lecturer." 

"Go away, sir . don't be so familiar," 
said Crooks, wiping his spectacles, and 
glaring without them at Will. 

" Familiar ! That's good ! Fve always 
paid to hear thee lecture ! But dang it> 
Mr. Williams has made me laugh for nowt 
more than thou ever did for twopence." 

" Don't be angry, Crooks . I knew a fel- 
low once who got awfully drunk, and then 
throwing himself upon the floor bemoaning 
his incapacity to imbibe further, hiccupped, 



^ 



" Welcome to the Grove /" 267 

*I can't drink any more, throw the rest 
over me/ Now, gentlemen, I am not 
going to indulge you to that extent ; but 
I can offer you some very fine old whisky,, 
and I hope you will not spare it" 

" Bravo !" said Will, and " Hear, hear " 
the Doctor. 

The steaming punch which Mrs. Smick 
brewed after supper, and brought up in an 
old-fashioned china bowl, put everybody into 
excellent humour, except the Doctor, wha 
was vainly struggling against gloomy fore- 
bodings. But even Horatio smiled genially 
when Mr. Windgate Williams handed him 
a long pipe and bade him smoke his cares 
away. Jacob was in high spirits ; the news 
of the morning had almost turned his head ;. 
he fired off jokes at everybody, to the evi- 
dent delight and admiration of Mr. Williams. 
Will Tunster laughed and danged his but- 
tons at Jacob's wit, and Mr. Crooks, who 
had been accustomed to talk a great deal, 
sat uncomfortably in his seat, and jerked 
out some random remarks whenever an 
opportunity occurred. These opportunities. 



2 68 Stranger tJmn Fiction. 

were few indeed, for Williams was also 
fond of talking, and he rattled away at such 
a high-pressure rate that Will Tunster 
laughed more at the manner of his speech 
than at the matter thereof 

At length, a question arising as to the 
best method of brewing punch, Mr. Crooks 
made it a peg on which to hang the heads 
of a lecture on chemistry which he had re- 
cently delivered ; and as his lectures were 
always dribbling from him, he threw off, 
with scientific garrulity, the compilation of 
several volumes of facts and theories about 
matter, its physical properties, the attraction 
which determines chemical combination* 
single elective affinity, changes produced 
by chemical action, chemical nomenclature, 
theories of combustion, &c. 

Meanwhile Mr. Williams and the Doctor 
entered into a confidential chat ; the end of 
which appeared to be very satisfactory to 
the Doctor, who smiled benignantly upon 
Jacob. The latter, while pretending to be 
listening to Mr. Crooks, was occupied with 
his own thoughts. 




" Welcome to the Grove r 269 

" It's a danged good lecture. I've heard 
some on it before at Crossley Institute. 
Give us thy hand, lecturer ; thou art not 
such a bad sort when thou doesn't speak in 
foreign languages." 

The lecturer smiled and took Will's hand, 
whereupon Mr. Williams in a short speech 
proposed Will's health. '' And the future 
Mrs. Tunster" added the Doctor from the 
midst of a cloud of smoke. 

Will said he was very much obliged to 
all, and begged to drink their good healths 
in return ; as for t' future Mrs. Tunster, he 
was sure that if she know'd he was in such 
edicated company and that her health had 
been drunk, she would like him to say 
" Thank you, same to you " on her behalf^ 
and he therefore begged to do it ; and he 
might inform them that Mrs. Tunster 
wasn't such a myth as the Doctor seemed 
to think, as he laughed so much abaht it ; 
however, he would not sit down without 
giving them th' health of Mr. Doctor John- 
son and his good leddy. 

The Doctor replied . ^all my readers will 



^ 



2 70 Stranger than Fiction. 

readily believe that he did so genially and 
in appropriate terms . and then toasts and 
sentiments and songs became the order of 
the evening. 

Mr. Crooks made sundry efforts to intro- 
duce a discussion upon astrqnomy, and 
failing to secure any attention for his 
second-hand views of the Atomic theory, 
or the phenomena of Affinity, he laid down 
his pipe and recited the well-known scene 
from " Speed the Plough," where the 
Farmer tries to make himself agreeable to 
Sir Philip Blandford, at the conclusion of 
which Will Tunster applauded most lustily ; 
and Mr. Crooks, steaming with the exertion 
and delighted with his own performance, 
said to Will, ** Vous chantez f 

" Sha'n't I ?. by jingo, but I will ;" and 
the countryman rattled his glass and 
cheered again, and proclaimed it as his 
opinion that Mr. Crooks was a real good 
un, 

" Mr. Crooks would like to hear you 
sing," said Mr. Williams. 

"Well than, dang me, as I havn't th' 




" Welcome to the Grove T 271 

oud bugle here, he shall ; it's mony a long 
day sin' IVe sung, but there's an oud song 
of the same tune as * Mary on the banks of 
3weet Dundee,' and a bit like it, as I heered 
ith' fair, which, as Mester Crooks has gin 
us a bit in th' farmin loine, and as I'm goin 
to be sommat i' that way, maybe you'll 
loike." 

Will therefore stretched out his legs, un- 
buttoned his plush waistcoat, and bellowed, 
in a minor key, the following ditty : . 

Young William was a ploughboy 

In famous Lincolnshire : 
Young William was a ploughboy 

For more than fower long year ; 
Till by the pressgang he was ta'en . 

As I will tell to you . 
Before that he'd arrived at 

The age of twenty-two. 

Young Mary was a milkmaid ! 

In that same famous shire : 
Young Mary was a milkmaid 

For more than fower long year. 
She loved the gay young ploughboy. 

Whistling behind his team ; 
When to their joys an end was put, 

As quickly it shall seem. 



272 Stranger than Fiction. 

Ben Swasher was a captain, 

All dressed out in blue : 
Ben Swasher was a captain 

Of a famous pressgang crew. 
Says he . "We*Il have young William, 

The ploughboy brave and true ;" 
And on they marched to capture him, 

Which quickly they did rue. 

The ploughboy they did lure away, 

By a message from his love : 
The ploughboy they did lure away. 

Into a lonely grove ; 
And there out dashed upon him. 

The pressgang brutally, 
And Will did wage a deadly fight. 

All for his liberty. 

t 

Before young William was secured. 

Two men had gasped their last : 
Before young William was secured, 

Two men had breathed their last. 
But William he was put on board 

A ship that very night. 
And sail'd away unto the wars 

Before the morning light. 

Now the Captain came to Mary, 
For to make love to her ; 

He came unto young Mary. 
With precious gold a store ; 

But when she knew her ploughboy 
A pressed man was he. 




" Welcome to the Grove T 273 



She seized his betrayer, 
And stabbed him mortally. 

Young William he returned, ! 

In about ten year, or more : 
Young William he returned. 

All from a foreign shore. 
They pointed to the churchyard, 

And there he found his bride j 
And over her a stone, which said . 

" Of a broken heart she died." 

Young William heav'd a deep sigh, 

This painful sight to see ; 
Young William heav'd a deep sigh, 

A deep sigh heaved he; . 
" Oh Mary ! dearest Mary ! 

With you I'll quickly lie," 
And then upon the cold, cold ground. 

He laid him down to die. 

It was now past midnight. The Thun- 
derbolt had twice rolled in to see if Mr. 
Windgate Williams would require anything 
more, as her mawther was going to bed# 
Mr. Crooks fell asleep over Will Tunster's 
song, and Jacob at its conclusion thought 
it was time to bring their pleasant evening 
to an end. Mr. Williams insisted upon 
their all having one nip at parting, and 

VOL. II. 18 



A 



2 74 Stranger tJian Fiction. 



\ 



further, taking the hands of Jacob and the 
Doctor, commenced to sing, very piano, 
the opening of " Auld Lang Syne," which 
the party struggled through much to Will 
Tunster's satisfaction, who vowed they were 
all good uns, and his only r^^et was that 
he had not brought th' oud bugle. 

When Jacob reached the inn where he 
had ordered a bed for the night, he found a 
note waiting for him. It was evidently 
written in a disguised hand ; nobody knew 
who had left it ; but it was to be given " to 
the good-looking young man who had 
ordered a bed there, and who was in the 
house with a countryman in the morning.'' 
Jacob opened the note, and read as follows : 
. '* I saw you in the fair to-day ; keep my 
.secret as you have sworn. Tom Titsy is 
innocent, and if the worst comes to the 
worst, /will save him." 



CHAPTER XVIII. 




Jacob's aspirations and williams's adven- 
tures. 

N the day follpwing the supper party 
at the Grove, Jacob learnt what 
the readers of this history already 
know of the events which had oc- 
curred at M iddleton since the day when he 
turned his back upon it, as he thought, for 
ever. His wanderings upon the earth had 
been strange and purposeless, or he would 
have been informed of what had transpired. 
Some of Jacob's notes of these early days 
remind me a little of the wanderings of De 
Quincey before his arrival in London. He 
had been altogether out of beaten paths, 
and in the summer months had more than 

18.2 



2 76 Stranger than Fiction. 

once slept in the open fields, sheltered by 
some luxuriant hedge-row or fragrant stack 
of newly-mown hay. 

Mr. Johnson informed Jacob that Tom 
Titsy had been apprehended as an accom- 
plice of Magar's. The police, he said, had 
taken this extraordinary step on account of 
some words which Magar had let fall in 
his cell, and because an old watchman re- 
membered seeing Tom and Magar together 
on the morning of the murder. This 
watchman had seen Tom out late at night, 
and had also a strange story to tell of the 
same voice which said " All right" to him 
in Magar's mill when the murder was, no 
doubt, being committed, saying " All right'* 
when he tried Mrs. Titsy's door, two nights 
afterwards. That might have been Jen- 
nings's voice, the Doctor said; but the 
police were determined to have some one 
else in the dock if they could not catch 
the other villain, and so they had pounced 
upon poor Tom, who seemed born to be 
unfortunate. The Doctor was satisfied that 
Tom would be acquitted, but he was very 




Jacob's Aspirations. 277 

much troubled on account of the misery 
which the event had brought upon Mrs. 
Titsy and poor Susan Harley. 

" However/' continued the Doctor, " I 
have a scheme in my head concerning 
them, which shall be explained in due 
course. The first thing I want is to make 
a proposition to you. By-the-by, has Mr. 
Tunster left Dinsley ?" 

*' He went away early," said Jacob ; " he 
is furnishing, and otherwise preparing for 
matrimony. He made many mysterious 
purchases here yesterday. His father has 
left him a little fortune, and he is going to 
make good use of it." 

" Well, it seems to me," continued the 
Doctor, "that the time has come for a change 
in all our fortunes, sir. Fate will work in 
its own way, and if we do not take up our 
proper positions until we are fairly thrust 
into them by sheer good luck, we may wait 
until the crack of doom." 

*'A true philosopher," said Mr. Wind- 
gate Williams, at whose lodgings the reader 
will already have concluded this conversa- 



2 78 Stranger than Fiction. 



tion took place . "looks on the bright side 
of things . has faith in truth . he will win^ 
sir, he will win." 

" Now, Mister Jacob, I know you are 
proud, but you are not too proud to take 
the first step on the ladder up which you 
may mount to fortune ; Mr. Williams offers 
to put your foot upon it. Moniti meliora 
sequamur ! I beg your pardon, gentlemen 
. habit ! Forgive the lapsus, and let us 
get on." 

Jacob looked anxiously from one to the 
other. He had been racking his brain, half 
through the night, wondering how he might 
fairly start in life, and secure the prize 
which hope whispered might still be 

his. 

" This is it," said Mr. Williams ; " I 
admired you, sir, at Middleton. I had the 
greatest esteem for your father . fine man, 
sir; noble-hearted creature. Mr. Johnson 
has told me of your great merits ; has 
spoken of the intention of your father to 
make a journalist of you ; and in the most 
handsome manner has placed a sum of 



^\ 



Jacob's Aspirations. 279 

money in my hands (he said you would be 
too proud to take it) for the purchase of 
books or for other purposes ; and, in fine, sir, 
the reportership and sub-editorship of the 
Courant is vacant, and the appointment is 
yours if you will take it." 

If he would take it ! Jacob's heart 
swelled with gratitude ; he felt that the 
ice was thawing rapidly now, and that the 
sunshine was brightening the future. He 
would only accept the Doctor's pecuniary 
assistance as a loan, to which his kind- 
hearted friend consented. It was arranged 
that Jacob should lodge with Mr. Williams, 
who delicately hinted that Mr. Snippers in 
the High Street was the best tailor in 
Dinsley. Jacob called upon that eminent 
clothier in the afternoon, and in the evening 
took up his quarters at Mrs. Smick's in the 
Grove. 

The Doctor visited him there, and an- 
nounced his intention of astonishing his 
friends. He thereupon surprised Jacob 
with a declaration. 

"Jacob, Mr. Martyn, I am a capitalist; 



28o Stranger t/tan Fiction. 

I could drive my own carriage, sir, if I 
chose/' 

*' Indeed," replied Jacob. " I am de- 
lighted to hear it; you always did drive 
your gig, which constitutes a gentleman 
nowadays, and entitles a man to be writ 
down esquire/' 

" I could drive my brougham, sir, and 
keep my coachman ; I am a capitalist 

Moniti I beg your pardon, Mr. Mar- 

tyn." 

** Since we are talking of money, Mr. 
Johnson," said Jacob, " let it be distinctly 
understood upon what terms I accept your 
pecuniary aid." 

" Yes, yes, as a loan, to be returned with 
interest . all right . pray do not mention 
it" 

"Mr. Johnson, you are too good ; I ac- 
cept your aid, and thank you heartily.*' 

Jacob was going to add " And I will 
repay you promptly ;" but he kept that to 
himself. Every man who borrows money 
has that promise ready upon his tongue. 
A week previously he would not have ac- 



yacoUs Aspirations. 281 

cepted the Doctor's money ; his pride was 
then above all assistance; nor would he 
have consented to settle down to work; 
Mr. Spawling's exordium on a certain 
memorable morning had long since been 
forgotten ; but just now Jacob's better me- 
mories came back to him. He still loved 
Lucy. He had not wiped out her image 
from his heart as he had vowed he would 
on that bitter winter day at Cartown. It 
is easy to say we will do this and that ; but 
neither love nor hate is easily wiped out. 
As for obliterating the image of Lucy from 
his memory, Jacob might as well have tried 
to forget his own history. This he did 
not desire, for he was very egotistical in 
his troubles. If he had suffered martyr- 
dom, he did not forget, poor fellow, to 
credit himself with the pain. He had set 
himself the part of the misanthrope. In a 
common-place book which he carried in his 
pocket he had satirised some of Mr. Spawl- 
ings philosophy. He had done his dis- 
appointment into epigrams and snatches of 
verse. The verses to which he had sneer- 



282 Stranger than Fiction. 

ingly alluded in his strange interview with 
Jennings contained a piece of cynicism 
bitter enough for old Nickleby, or Old 
Nick himself, for that matter. 

Jacob was master of many of Rochefou- 
cauld's maxims; he knew nearly all the 
proverbs that have been launched against 
women and love. Hazlitt's maxims, which 
he had found in a country library, were 
quite a glorious discovery for him ; he 
revelled in them. He was especially struck 
with the author's knowledge of women. 
Years afterwards, when he read the " Liber 
Amoris," he understood why the lodger 
under the spells of " L. S." seemed en- 
titled to say a few hard words of the sex. 
And yet there were times when the would- 
be cynic stretched forth his arms in imagi- 
nation to Lucy ; he often walked in memory 
through the fields at Cartown ; he heard 
the factory hymn in his dreams ; he prayed 
Heaven to give Lucy back to him, and, 
with her, peace and hope, and a noble 
ambition. If Jacob could only have seen 
his angel in the Row, smiling at the 




JacoUs Aspirations. 283 

gay nothings of a lively young guards- 
man ! 

Had not all the world been against him ? 
Poverty and pride are very unreasonable. 
Jacob ought to have remembered the con- 
duct of Squire Northcotes. There was a 
shoulder to lean upon. That eccentric 
gentleman would have lent any amount of 
practical aid to Jacob in his need. If the 
absurd young fellow had only looked up 
the squire, he might have been his heir . 
who knows ? No ; Jacob only thought of 
Fate's unkindest blows; his mind dwelt 
upon the death of his father, the cruel scat- 
tering of their household gods, his humili- 
ation, the letters which he never received 
from his friends, whom he suspected of 
deserting him in his troubles, whereas he 
himself was the only deserter ; above all, 
that deserted cottage at Cartown. Miriam's 
story of Lucy's departure had haunted him 
day and night. But the ice and snow began 
to melt before Will Tunster's words on the 
road to Dinsley fair ; and then he remem- 
bered Spen's injunction to address him 



284 Stranger than Fiction. 

at the General Post Office, London. He 
hardly cared to own to himself how wrong 
he had been in suspecting Lucy, how un- 
worthy he was of her love, how ready he 
had been to think ill of her, how easily he 
had forgotten her last tender words ; he 
was heartily ashamed of himself, and he 
resolved, without making any vows about 
the matter, to retrieve his position. At 
that moment there was no height that 
seemed to him inaccessible. 

Many a night, when Windgate Williams 
was asleep, and the Thunderbolt was warm 
in bed ; when Mrs. Smick was dreaming of 
her dear departed (" which he were a cap- 
tain in the merchint service "), and the other 
lodgers in the Grove were oblivious of both 
time and money, there was a light in Jacob's 
bedroom, where the editor's lieutenant had 
set up a private desk at which to burn the 
midnight oil. In the watches of the night 
Jacob believed he was preparing for a coming 
day. Poor Jacob ! we have all built our 
castles in the air. How few of them have 
represented hopes destined to be realised ! 




Jacob's Aspirations. 285 

Jacob's castles, we may be sure, were gor- 
geous palaces ; for it was his nature to run 
into extremes. But he did not wait for the 
palaces to grow, he worked like a nigger 
at the foundations. 

**Well, my boy," said Mr. Williams, a 
few weeks after Jacob's appointment on the 
Courant and his residence at the Grove, 
" You're getting on . ^made a good start, 
sir . ^you'll do, Jacob, you'll do, my boy . my 
friend Beswick, who now shakes London 
to its centre two or three times a week in 
the Leviathan^ began as you have, at the 
bottom of the ladder . there are prizes to 
be won, sir ; you'll win one ; but sitting up 
half the night will not do . be careful . 
nurse your powers, don't overtax them. 
Burning the midnight oil is all very well,, 
but it exhausts the human lamp, sir." 

" You do not know why I am so anxious 
to improve my position ; some day I will 
tell you," replied Jacob, stirring the fire 
and looking down a long street of burning 
houses, which the poker left behind it. 

" Oh, it's a case of love, I dare say : 



286 Stranger than Fiction. 

young fellows like you, hot and sanguine, 
always get violently in love and set about 
making their fortunes at twenty, that they 
may be married at twenty-one . ^saw you 
looking at that pretty girl over the way . 
eh ? is that the flame T 

Mr. Williams was gracefully reclining on 
a sofa, with one leg on the back, and con- 
templating Jacob through the smoke of a 
cheap and a strong cigar. 

" No,'' said Jacob, " but I have occasion- 
ally noticed rather a pretty girl at the 
window." 

" Yes, I dare say . too short, but rather 
nice though . soft blue eyes. Was nearly 
in love once myself, Jacob . ^was editing 
the London Smasher at the time . agoing to 
the office one afternoon, just passing 
through Temple Bar, became conscious 
that a magnificent creature, in a gorgeous 
turn-out, was gazing at me . ^two flunkeys 
behind . I returned her smile . ^raised my 
hat . she beckoned, check string was pulled, 
and Love and Beauty were wheeled away 
to Mayfair . magnificent mansion . she had 



yacob^s Aspirations. 287 

noticed me at the opera . ^love at first sight 
. she had adored me long ! . would I be 
hers ? Yes, by Jove, I would ; she rung the 
bell . for the priest I expected. Show this 
gentleman to the door, and kick him down 
the steps if necessary. Ah ! ah ! turned 
out to be an eccentric lady of great wealth, 
who had once been jilted . revenged her- 
self by befooling all the handsomest men 
in town, ahem !" 

" A very good story,", said Jacob, " espe- 
cially for the Marines, as you sometimes 
say." 

*^ Is it, sir ? Thank you for nothing ; 
but let me advise your not going in for 
scepticism. Extraordinary place, London 
. as you'll know some day. Marvellous 
incidents occurring there every day . used 
me up in seven years . just that time since 
my cousin Webster, who wrote that work 
which created such a stir two years ago, 
said, 'Windgate, my boy, youVe dishing 
yourself up . ^go into the country and re- 
cruit' . did so, and, by Jupiter, have been 
in the country ever since. Should hardly 



7^^ Strvmger tkoTi Fzctwn^ 

Vnow Lootfcti no^ I suppose^ or be known 
^ my daK Ho^ tfme fffesT aad Mr. 
VniBsms pcct Iris ocfier kg^ upoa the sc^> 



'^ Do yoa kncnr any of the Loodcm pub- 
lisbers weQ ?^ Jacob u^oired. 

"DoIkiMnrthem? Rather! Wasbored 
oat of my fife to write a novel for Sharmans 
. worrkd to death to edit Ginghem's 
Magazine . dWn't care for that sort of thing 
. contributed occasionally to the mag., and 
wrote my three leaders a week . quite 
enough for a lazy beggar like me All the 
publishers in the Row, and out of it, know 
Windgate WiDiams . did you never see my 
' Topsy Turvey ; or Out of Sight,' pub- 
lished by . let me see . was it by Ginghem 
or Sharmans ? . Ginghem, of course . 
haven't a copy now . shall come across one 
some day." 

" I should like to see it," said Jacob, 
wondering at his friend's garrulity. 

" Oh, yes, I can see . you don't believe 
half I say ; just like you young fellows. I 
forgive you . a man who doesn't know 



r\ 



yacoUs Aspirations. 289 

London knows nothing. London is the 
epitome of the world, the encyclopaedia of 
life, the centre of fashion, the hot-bed of 
genius, the arena where wit tilts with wit, 
the scene of all the greatest tragedies and 
comedies and farces in real life. By Jove, 
sir, I don't wonder you don't believe all I 
say. You have read a good deal, Jacob . 
. know something of classic stories, fairy 
tales, and all that sort of thing . none of 
them comes up to London. Bagdad, and 
Athens, and the Flying Island, Rome, 
Pompeii, Constantinople, Aladdin's Palace, 
Pandemonium, and Paris, all rolled into 
one, would not make a London." 

** I did not say I doubted your word, 
Mr. Williams." 

*' No, but you looked it I forgive you ; 
no offence, my boy . truth being stranger 
than fiction, no wonder that one is mistaken 
for the other. Some day I shall be telling 
another young fellow, perhaps, about my 
engagement at Middleton, and how it 
ended. He'll not believe it. By Janus 
and his gates, sir, it's a wonder I'm not a 

VOL. II. 19 



290 Stranger than Fiction. 

prisoner now for manslaughter ! You re- 
member the grand charge up the steps. I 
never hit a fellow with such malice prepense 
as I hit that minion of the fiend Gripps . 
it reminded me of an affair in which I was 
concerned some years ago. It was a grand 
night at Vauxhall ; I was dancing with a 
very fine girl . swell of the first water 
annoyed me continually . put his eye-glass 
perpetually upon both of us . seemed to have 
known the lady before. This went on for 
some time, when he was joined by another 
fellow. I ordered lobster salad for myself 
and friend . they passed the little harbour 
and sneered . lost my patience at last . 
dashed out upon them . thrashed them 
both, within an inch of their lives . nearly 
killed three waiters who interfered, and 
broke my arm against a policeman's head 
. was laid up six weeks . fined a pile of 
money, and was afterwards presented with 
a purse and a pair of embroidered boxing 
gloves, at an oyster supper, by a select 
party who admired my courage and hated 
the swells Td beaten, for the brutal snobs 




yacob^s Aspirations. 291 

turned out to have been a perpetual nui- 
sance at Vauxhall." 

"You have had many strange adven- 
tures," said Jacob. 

" Many . you are right ! The country 
is very tame after London. You live in 
the presence of the world down here, like 
fish in a glass globe . ^gold fish from China 
. mentioned first by Pepys . one of his 
curious notes . ^great book, Pepys\ But 
one has quiet in the country, that is a great 
thing ; and after a fellow's done everything 
and seen everything there is balm for the 
shattered mind in a country town. Of 
course a fellow is thrown away here ; but 
what of that ? . a sucked orange is good 
for nothing else. When I was your age I 
lived as much in a day as we live here in 
ten years. But no matter ; such is life . 
which it is uncertain and has its troubles, 
as Mrs. Smick says." 

Mr. Williams tossed up his slippered 
toes, and laid his head upon the sofa 
cushion with an air of comfortable resig- 
nation, and smoked away with a calm 

19 . 2 



292 Stranger tkaji Fiction. 

philosophic expression of face which defied 
all Jacob's critical interrogations. 

Windgate Williams is not a very singular 
character on the press ; he was not, at all 
events, when Jacob Martyn was young. 
Windgate told fibs by the score . ^but they 
were amusing fictions. There was no 
malice in them ; they hurt no one ; they did 
not sting ; and the author of them was not 
offended if any one seemed to challeng^e 
his ** facts." He loved to talk, and to talk 
about himself. He was content if you lis- 
tened ; delighted if you took his points ; in 
ecstasies if you laughed at his jokes ; and 
with all this, at bottom, he was a kind- 
hearted, sympathetic fellow. For a time he 
had an excellent listener, while he had 
always a staunch friend, in Jacob Martyn. 




CHAPTER XIX. 



"weighed in the balance." 




ACOB MARTYN'S first import- 
ant business on the Dinsley paper 
was in connection with the trial 
of Ephraim Magar and Thomas 
Titsy for the wilful murder of Silas 
Collinson. And Thomas Titsy ! Here 
was a discovery. It was sufficiently 
strange that Jacob should join the press 
as if for the very purpose of being asso- 
ciated with this trial, in which he was 
so deeply interested ; but Tom Titsy 
at the bar was an incident far more 
astonishing than all that had gone before 
in Jacob's experience. But fact is indeed 
more strange and startling than fiction. 



2 94 Stranger than Fiction. 

As this story progressed month by month 
in the chrysalis form of serial publica- 
tion, prior to assuming the butterfly with 
three wings at the libraries, one of its 
numerous critics treated it very much after 
the fashion of the celebrated doubter 
who could not take in all the adventures 
of Gulliver. My unsophisticated friend 
is a countryman, on which account I am 
the more inclined to shake him by the 
hand ; for there is a fresh well-spring of 
criticism in some of our dear old country 
newspapers. Was not the Middleton Star 
accustomed to deal with books with 
an independence of feeling and an im- 
partiality of opinion that often startled 
authors and publishers to their very 
souls ? My critic said this story was in- 
deed stranger than fiction . stranger than 
fact truly ; for whoever heard of a news- 
paper office being stormed by bailiffs, or 
a mayor committing murder ? He evi- 
dently regarded these two incidents as a 
slight upon the press and an insult to the 
civic magistracy throughout the provinces. 



" Weighed in the Balance!' 295 

Let me assure my friend that ingratitude 
is not one of my special sins, and as I have 
edited a country newspaper myself and had 
a narrow escape of being a mayor, I should 
not be likely to fix the stigma of impecu- 
niosity and murder upon the two leading 
representative offices in the country. 

When once a man begins to talk about 
himself, be he never so modest, it is hard 
to stop him, difficult for that man to pull 
up. I have been sorely tempted, in de- 
fence of my facts that are stranger than 
fiction, to give a list of newspapers which 
have fallen into the hands of the bailiffs or 
been undone by party intrigues, and the 
names of mayors who have committed 
murders . aye, and been hanged too, Mas- 
ter Brooke. But I fear this would bring 
me down to the level of the mere realistic 
school of authors . the domestic reporters 
of fiction. I therefore content myself with 
reminding my friend that the Burgomaster 
in " The Polish Jew " murdered a man for 
his money and burnt him in a lime-kiln ; 
while Tobias Aconite, the Mayor of Hole- 



296 Stranger than Fiction. 

cum-Corner, made the acquaintance of a 
Spanish devil for unjustly ordering Gaffer 
Nimmington to be whipped. Here, how- 
ever, my mind misgives me. My friend 
may change his front, and charge me with 
getting my inspiration from *' The Bells." 
I was congratulated when t this story ap- 
peared in its originally crucj^ shape . con- 
gratulated in a column of leader type . 
upon the fact that ** Felix Holt " had not 
then seen daylight, though I only recog- 
nised in that story and this the similarity 
of a quack medicine exercising an import- 
ant influence upon the conduct of the hero. 
For my own sake and the reader s, I wish 
there was a closer resemblance. My critic, 
however, pointed to an assize trial and an 
election. In those days I was his *' fel- 
low townsman" (provincial life is essen- 
tially clannish), and my fame was dear to 
his heart. He therefore set forth the fact 
that Doctor Horatio Johnson and his sur- 
roundings were created by his fellow towns- 
man, and published in the year 1863, while 
" Felix Holt" and his patent medicine did 



" Weighed in the Balance!^ 297 

.^ m. Ml _ - - - - , , . 

not come before the world until 1866. 
Even my friendly critic did not go so far 
as to class the two novelists together in 
the scale of merit ; for I know he had read 
'* Adam Bede," which would be sufficient 
for any sensible person to put "George 
Eliot " in the very highest niche of fame. 
May I remind my other critic that the con- 
duct of the young squire in that never-to- 
be-forgotten story of " Adam Bede," which 
opens with a scent of pine-wood and elder- 
bushes, is not necessarily a condemnation 
of all the young squires of the midlands ? 

As to my inspiration for this romance of 
murder and retribution, it came to me (as 
I have already explained in a prefatory 
chapter) one morning on my way to a mid- 
land counties school. They carried Silas 
CoUinson's remains across my path. I saw 
the poor bones huddled together in a stable. 
The discovery was a horrible incident, the 
murder a thousand times more barbarous 
and revolting than I have made it here. 
Mere physical horrors are beyond the 
region of art into which I have transferred 



298 Stranger than Fiction. 



the tragedy of Middleton. The murderers 
thrived after the annihilation of their friend. 
It was long before Nemesis seized the chief 
criminal The discovery was made as 
accidentally as I have set it forth ; the 
evidence was just as circumstantial . there 
was a poor forlorn woman like Susan, with 
a love token, in it; a frightened burgess 
out late at night, with the memory of a 
strange cry ringing in his ears ; and other 
details of persons and things that belong to 
the original murder, though I have never 
read a line of the famous trial since I was 
sixteen years old. I still remember a dark 
gloomy day when the sun went out, and 
the air was filled with lightning and thunder 
and sheets of driving hail, in the midst of 
which they were hanging one of the men 
who murdered Silas CoUinson. 

Such is the origin of this story, which 
so strangely verifies the maxim of the old 
printer, Franklin. The Middleton Star is, 
I grant, a more shadowy creation. But I 
have known all these people ; some of them 
I know now ; and my greatest difficulty in 



" Weighed in the Balanced 299 

revising this history is a fear of altering 
even the crudities that belonged to the first 
idea. The very title of this chapter was 
suggested by me years ago (it was after- 
wards used by a novelist) to Mr. Gregory 
Spawling for a play which he had composed 
in admirable blank verse. Submitting it 
to the most successful playwright of the 
age, he was informed that the title was in- 
admissible. The Lord Chamberlain would 
not pass a scriptural title. They " strain 
at a gnat, and swallow a camel.'' It would 
have delighted my critic and defender of 
civic dignity to have read Jacob Martyn's 
magazine article on this subject. I will 
warrant you it dealt roundly with the short- 
comings and short petticoats, or no petti- 
coats for that matter, of the modern stage, 
which, though it was then matriculating for 
the advent of '' Traviata" and '' Formosa,'* 
could not commit the sin of a scriptural 
allusion in connection with a fine, well- 
written, and strictly moral play. 

Forgive me, most considerate and friendly 
reader, for having led you this dance out of 



300 Stranger tlian Fiction. 

the direct road upon which we started. It 
is a digression not to be defended. I will 
not, even with Armado's apt reply to Moth 
on my pen, attempt to qualify it by some 
mighty precedent I apologise humbly, 
and ere I am tempted to sin ^igain go, at 
once, straight back into the beaten track. 
The bells invite us. They are ringing 
lustily, as if the judges of assize were going 
to be married, or had daughters on their 
way to the hymeneal altar, or sons just 
coming of age. It is the assizes at Dinsley. 
The town is topsy-turvy. The theatre is 
open for a whole week with a famous com- 
pany " for six nights only !" Dobble's 
Waxwork competes with the theatre. 
'* There is no waiting, remember ; you see 
the exhibition the moment you enter; 
there is no waiting, and the charge is two 
pence ! Two pence will admit you !" 
Punch is murdering his wife in the High 
Street, to a numerous and highly delighted 
audience. Gingerbeer corks are flying into 
the air close by ; a peep-show near the 
Castle is doing a very excellent business. 



\ 



'' Weighed in the Balanced 301 

The policemen are in new clothes. The 
town-crier and a greengrocer are dressed 
up as heralds, and they blow their flourishes 
of trumpets with a marked independence of 
time and tune. The everlasting tan-nubbles 
are laid down near the assize courts to 
deaden the noise of traffic which does not 
exist ; and the Dinsley people are wonder- 
ing whether there will be a double or single 
execution ! 

With a sad heart, Jacob entered the little 
box set apart for reporters in the Criminal 
Court of Dinsley Castle. The monitors of 
the press sharpened their pencils and 
nibbed their pens ; they opened their note- 
books; they looked round the court, and 
put their sandwiches in safe places. The 
retainers of various solicitors brought in 
numerous blue bags, which the said solici- 
tors critically examined ; then the retained 
of the solicitors came into court and smiled 
at their retainers, and looked at their briefs 
as pleasantly as if murder was an unknown 
crime, and Dinsley Castle one of the temples 
of the Happy Valley. Javelin men, with 



302 Stranger than Fiction. 

white wands, took up positions here and 
there about the body of the court ; police- 
men gathered quite a harvest of sixpences 
from people who were crowding into the 
galleries ; the brazen trumpets bellowed 
without; the crier of the court rose and 
said something in a loud voice ; the trum- 
pets ceased their discordant blare ; the 
judges entered ; everybody stood upon his 
own legs and upon everybody else's toes ; 
and with the usual formalities of reading 
the proclamation against vice and immo- 
rality, and swearing in the jury, the court 
was opened. 

While these various ceremonies were 
being performed two persons near Jacob 
were calmly discussing the case which had 
crowded the court with spectators. 

" There seems to me to be very little evi- 
dence against the younger fellow of the two.'' 

" Felon, you mean," said the other per- 
son, who chuckled at his own joke. 

** I don't know about felon yet ; no man's 
guilty till he's tried and condemned," said 
the other. 



" Weighed in the BalanceJ^ 303 

. . 

" Well, go on/' said the wag ; " give us 
the point." 

" The evidence, I believe," continued 
the first speaker, "will be that Collinson 
was at Titsy's house on the evening of the 
murder; and that Titsy was seen with 
Magar the next morning after Magar had 
removed the body." 

" Well r 

" And the police have some theory about 
the forged letters, which the Titsys always 
professed to regard as genuine ; they make 
a point of young Titsy having an interest 
in Collinson's death, the poor fellow having 
cut Tom out as Susan's lover ; and, above 
all, some property bearing Silas Collinson's 
initials has been found upon Tom, or at 
any rate in the house." 

" That will hang him whether he's guilty 
or not," said the other speaker. 

" Which property, I am told," went on the 
other, not noticing his friend's interruption, 
** Susan Harley will swear belonged to her, 
being, in fact, a present from the murdered 
man. What was it . a snuff-box or a watch T* 



304 Stranger than Fiction. 

"A watch, I think! Well, we shall 
see. rU take odds it's a double execution/' 

Jacob had been out of the world of news, 
local and general, so long, that he had not 
learnt,' until after the supper at the lodgings 
of Mr. Williams, that his friends at Middle- 
ton were in trouble and tribulation. He 
had casually heard of a murder having 
been committed in the hated old borough, 
and although he noticed that the name of 
the Mayor was connected with the offence, 
it only seemed to him at the time that his 
worship had committed the offenders to 
gaol, not committed the crime himself. The 
subject had been talked about at a roadside 
inn where he had lodged for a night during 
his wanderings. The name of Middleton 
was particularly odious to him, and he had 
not cared to listen to any conversation about 
it, or to make any inquiries concerning the 
scene of his greatest misfortunes. It 
seemed as if fate had compelled him to ac- 
cept the link that bound him to Susan and 
the Titsys ; and as if he were to be punished 
anew through the horrors of this bar- 




" Weighed in the Balancer 305 

barous murder and the miseries of old 
friends. 

Shortly after the court was opened, two 
prisoners were tried for minor offences, 
and sentenced ; and during their removal 
the grand jury sent in the result of their 
investigations in the case of murder, 
which was read as follows by the clerk of 
arraigns : . 

" True bill against Ephraim Magar for 
the murder of Silas Collinson at Middleton, 
in the county of Dinsley, on the 15th of 
November, 18 . ." 

** No true bill against Tom Titsy." 

A sudden shuffling of feet, a slight 
attempt at applause, and a sort of general 
gasp of relief followed the solemn announce- 
ment. The two men who had discussed 
Tom's chances in Jacob's hearing, looked at 
each other significantly. As for Jacob, his 
most severe efforts at self-control were 
necessary to keep him quiet in his seat. 
The other pressmen noticed his excitement, 
which they put down to his want of ex- 
perience in connection with a branch of the 

VOL. II. 20 



~^^a. 



" Weighed in the Balanced 307 



now fairly laughed ; for there were actually 
tears in his eyes. 

Jacob could stay there no longer. He 
said he was ill, and a few words whispered 
to one of his colleagues, in which he inti- 
mated that Tom had been an old servant 
of his father, were sufficient to obtain for 
him the full performance of his business 
while he left the court for an hour. 

To slip out of the box, and elbow his 
way through a group of attorneys' clerks 
and others who blocked up the passage 
allotted to " Solicitors and the Press/' was 
the work of a few moments. As Jacob 
went forth at one door, he saw Susan and 
Mrs. Titsy leaving the court by another. 
They did not notice him. He felt afraid 
to intrude upon them at that moment 
While he watched them an officer from 
the gaol, despatched by the kind-hearted 
governor, requested them to accompany 
him. Jacob followed. Turning from the 
noise and tumult, in front of the Assize 
Hall, the officer led the way across a green 
lawn (where a few daisies, sown by the 

20 . 2 



3o8 Stranger than Fiction, 

" March winds/' had sprung up without 
waiting for the " April showers "), to the 
governor's house, which was at the entrance 
of the gaol. The officer knocked at the 
door, and they were shown into a little 
room, neatly furnished, and unadorned with 
the chains, manacles, pistols, clubs, daggers, 
and knives that garnished the walls of the 
governors office. Jacob still followed. 
The officer was going to push him back. 
Jacob, however, slipped half-a-crown into 
his hand, and said, ** Tm a friend." He 
still kept behind the two women, and care- 
fully avoided their observation. They were 
received by a benevolent-looking lady, who 
told them to sit down. The officer went 
his way. The door was closed ; and then 
Jacob stood in the presence of his old 
friends. For a moment neither of them 
knew him. But when he went up to 
Susan and kissed her, and then gave Mrs. 
Titsy a great smack on the cheek, and 
shook both her hands, his old friend smiled 
sadly, and began to cry afresh ; while Susan's 
face beamed with surprise and pleasure. 



" Weighed in the Balanced 309 

JSfone of them spoke. Jacob was shocked 
at the change which time and trouble had 
worked in the once comely features of his 
nurse. 

A servant brought in a tray, and the 
benevol^t lady made Mrs. -Titsy and 
.Susan drink. The glass trembled in the 
elder woman's hand. Joy was afflicting 
Jier now almost as much as sorrow had 
done before. Presently there was a heavy 
advancing footstep on the stairs. Then 
the door was suddenly opened ; and Tom 
Titsy was in his mothers arms. Susan 
looked on with a calm smile of gladness. 
Jacob, in a whisper, declined the wine 
offered to him by the kind-hearted wife 
of the governor, who thereupon nodded 
pleasantly to him and disappeared. 

Half an hour afterwards Jacob left his 
poor friends sitting hand in hand, too 
much impressed with the escape of the 
inhocent to talk of it, too happy to put 
their gratitude into words. 

" Have you met them ? Have you met 
them ?'' said Dr. Johnson, who was running 




3IO Stranger than Fiction. 

over the Castle green towards Jacob. ** I 
was told they had gone this way ; I have 
been looking for them everywhere." 

'' In the governor's house," said Jacob. 

" Good ! What a fool I tnust have been 
to lose them ;" and away went thf Doctor, 
as nimbly as a ^boy, v\ the direction pointed 
out to him. 

" Dear old fellow !'* said Jacob, looking^ 
after him. " The heart of a woman and 
the courage of a lion, if he is but a quack 
doctor. Would there were no greater 
quacks in the world than this Middleton 
herbalist !" 



THE END OF VOL. II. 
IN THE LAP OF FORTUNE. 



CHAPTER I. 



FOUND WANTING. 




HEN Jacob re-entered the court, 
Ephraim Magar was at the bar, 
and Mr. Wentworth Quarrington, 
Q.C.,' had commenced his address 
for the prosecution. Jacob took his turn 
in reporting the famous oration ; but fre- 
quently lost himself in amazement at the 
terrible story of guilt which the learned 
counsel linked together in a chain of cir- 
cumstantial evidence that seemed to cling 
about the prisoner, and all but strangle him 
where he stood. Magar glanced round 

VOL. III. I 



Stranger than Fiction. 



the court with a searching, sunken eye. 
Presently his attention became concen- 
trated upon the counsel's speech, and an 
occasional clutching of the bar, a sudden 
flush, a startled look showed how nearly 
some of the advocate's story touched the 
prisoner. But Magar was not aware that 
his movements could be read ; he was try- 
ing to appear calm and indifferent. 

It was almost pitiable to see the great 
man of Middleton, the leader of public 
opinion, the benevolent Mayor, the straight- 
forward, out-spoken, manly founder of his 
own fortunes, standing in the felon's dock to 
be tried for one of the most horrible crimes 
recorded in the annals of the county . a 
crime which had set all the Midlands in a 
tremor of horror . a crime which the author 
of this history again assures his readers he 
has not exaggerated. 

Perhaps the learned Q.C. travelled 
beyond the limits of what may have been 
fairly considered to be his duty when he 
endeavoured to show that the wretched 
prisoner at the bar had been benevolent 



" Found Wanting." 



only to hide his sin ; that he had busied 
himself in public matters to raise himself 
above suspicion ; that he had striven to 
lull the reproaches of conscience by acts of 
charity ; that he had made sacrifices to the 
murdered manes of poor Silas Collinson, in 
the vain hope that he would thus appease 
the anger of Him who in His own good 
time discovereth the murdered and the 
murderer. 

Never, however, did there appear 
to be a clearer case of guilt than the 
evidence of the witnesses bore out 
Susan Harley told the terrible story with 
which our readers are acquainted. She 
identified the ring as the property of Silas 
Collinson, and she also identified as his a 
pin and a snuff-box found in Magar's iron 
chest. She proved the receipt of the  i oo, 
which the prisoner paid her as part of the 
proceeds of the sale of Collinson's effects ; 
she told the story of his overtures to her on 
that occasion, and gave evidence as to the 
letters which Magar professed to have 
received from Collinson. In cross-exami- 

I 2 



Stranger than Fiction. 



nation Mr. Arthur Macintyre, Q.C. (who 
with Sir Howard Pisquelly, Bart, Q.C, 
had been specially retained for the defence) 
tried to shake Susan's evidence, but only 
succeeded in his object so far as to get 
upon the judge's notes that she could not 
say whether Collinson might not have 
given to his friend Magar the snuff-box 
and pin ; and that one Julius Jennings had 
also professed to have heard from Collin- 
son. 

Then there were witnesses who proved 
that Collinson and Jennings and Magar 
were drinking together on the Sunday 
night upon which Collinson was supposed 
to have started for America ; there was the 
constable who had flashed his lantern upon 
the mill on that same night, that dreadful 
" November 15" of our story ; there was 
the timid husband who had been out late, 
and was frightened when crossing the Mid- 
dleton bridge at the cry which came out of 
the " darkness visible " of the mill, where 
a light moved from one room to the other ; 
there was another witness to swear that 



"Found Wanting? 



she marked the letter "C" on some 
linen proved to have been Collinson's, 
which had been found at the mill ; 
there was Collinson's old housekeeper to 
swear to his handkerchief and its initials 
of " S. G," found in Magar's house ; there 
was the policemen who had taken the 
prisoner to gaol; and the superintendent 
who had searched in vain for any receipts 
of moneys or letters from Collinson to 
Magar since Collinson's disappearance, but 
who produced a receipt signed by Collin- 
son, and dated November 15, for ^200, 
and a bill for the same amount, and the 
copy of a bill of exchange for ^200, at six 
months, drawn by Collinson and accepted 
by Magar, but which had not passed 
through a bank. A banker's clerk proved 
that Magar opened a banking account on 
the Monday following ^ with ^200; an 
auctioneer proved paying Magar ^4,500, 
in three sums, the result of the sale of Col- 
linson's property; the aforesaid banker's 
clerk proved the payment into the bank of 
these moneys, showing that no payments 



Stranger than Fiction. 



had been made to Silas Collinson, and that 
^500 had been paid to Julius Jennings. 
A surgeon, who had known Collinson inti- 
mately, was of opinion that the murdered 
man had been killed by blows on the head 
with a blunt instrument, and there were 
other witnesses called to speak to minor 
details, such as Magar's trafficking with 
Collinson's property, and Collinson's com- 
plaints that he could not get his money 
from Magar, and that he was going to have 
a final meeting to arrange matters on the 
Sunday night in question, when Magar had 
promised " to settle up." The cross-ex- 
amination upon all these and other facts 
aimed at several things . one was to make 
the jury believe that Collinson still lived, 
and that the bones in question were not in 
any way identified (but no witnesses were 
called for the defence) ; another was to in- 
sinuate into their minds that if the remains 
in question were Collinson's, not Magar, 
but the man so often spoken of as Julius 
Jennings, whom the police had been unable 
to capture, was the murderer another was 



"Found Wanting." 



to make capital out of poor Tom Titsy's 
acquittal by' the grand jury, which Sir 
Howard Pisquelly, in his eloquent defence 
of the prisoner, characterised as a piece of 
justice to an innocent fellow-creature, which 
he hoped the intelligent jury before him 
would emulate ; and the closing effort of 
the defence was an appeal to the jury in 
favour of a man who had in every relation 
of life shown himself to be actuated by 
feelings altogether at variance with those 
which had been imputed to him ; a man 
whose benevolent acts the learned counsel 
for the prosecution had chosen most un- 
warrantably to array against him on a 
theory which, if it had any weight, would 
go to show that our great philanthropists 
only gave money to the poor and endowed 
churches and hospitals because they were 
murderers striving to shield their sins ; a 
man who had ever been characterised by 
an outspoken honesty altogether incompati- 
ble with guilt, who had given of his self- 
earned riches to the poor and needy, which 
was at variance with murdering for gold ; 



8 Stranger than Fiction. 

a man of social standing, an honourable 
burgess, a wise magistrate, and a man who 
by the verdict of the jury would either be 
sent home to his sorrowing friends and to 
the poor by whom he was revered and 
beloved, or who would be sent forth to die 
the ignominious and awful death of a mur- 
derer on the gallows. 

This and much more did the learned and 
eloquent counsel urge in behalf of the pri- 
soner, as any of my readers will find by 
consulting the files of the Dinsley and 
Middleton journals, which issued special 
supplements containing full reports of the 
trial. 

Magar heaved a deep sigh at the con- 
clusion of his counsel's address, and looked 
eagerly at the jurymen, who began to talk 
to each other in noisy whispers. 

Then there was a sudden and death-like 
stillness, made more awful by the darken- 
ing shades of evening which fell upon the 
oriel windows. The densely crowded 
court seemed to hold its breath, and to 
wait 



"Found Wanting" 



" Gentlemen of the jury, what say ye ? 
Is the prisoner at the bar * Guilty/ or * Not 
Guilty' ?" 

The words fell one after the other upon 
the court with ominous distinctness. Even 
the bar looked earnestly to wards, the jury- 
box. When the foreman in a clear but 
trembling voice said " Guilty," the people 
in court gave a great gasp for the breath 
which they had previously stifled in their 
anxiety ; and before the echo of the dread 
word was still there was a clank of irons in 
the dock, where the prisoner had fallen, a 
senseless heap of crushed humanity. 

Water was at hand, but it only served to 
awaken the wretched man to a sense of his 
position ; his cries for " mercy," his protes- 
tations of innocence rang through the 
building ; but Justice was inexorable. " Si- 
lence !" " Silence !" was demanded from one 
part of the court, to be repeated by another ; 
and then the prisoner was asked if he had 
anything to say why the sentence of the 
law should not be passed upon him. 

Exhausted by his cries, and awed by a 



io j Stranger than Fiction. 

sudden realisation of his danger, the pri- 
soner, clutching the bar, and trembling 
from head to foot, stared vacantly at the 
judge, who, putting on a black cap, as the 
twilight was deepening into night, sentenced 
the prisoner to the last awful penalty of 
offended justice. 

Then the Court broke up ; the trumpets 
were sounded ; the Bar went to dinner ; 
the reporters went home to finish their 
work ; the crowd gradually dispersed, pour- 
ing itself into inns and private houses, and 
up and down narrow streets and noisy 
thoroughfares. A few of the more distin- 
guished citizens and visitors went home to 
dress for the theatre ; while all over the 
town dashed slipshod men crying catch- 
penny chronicles of " the trial and con- 
demnation of Ephraim Magar for the 
murder of Silas Collinson, together with a 
copy of verses written on the melancholy 
occasion . only one penny each." 




CHAPTER II. 

IN WHICH A NEW ERA DAWNS UPON THE 
HOUSE OF TITSY. 

HEY were all sitting round the fire 
in the old thatched cottage . Tom 
Titsy, Susan Harley, Mr. Horatio 
Johnson, and Mrs. Titsy. The 
Doctor was blowing a cloud of smoke up 
among the chimney ornaments. The best 
family tea-tray occupied its usual conspicu- 
ous position. The oak corner cupboard 
shone with unwonted radiance. Caesar lay 
asleep on the hearth ; Mrs. Titsy was knit- 
ting ; Tom was looking into the fire ; and 
Susan Harley was looking at Tom. 

" Well, we are a nice little family party 
after all," said the Doctor, making an ele- 



1 2 Stranger than Fiction. 

gant smoke ring, and watching it mount 
upwards until it came to grief against the 
artificial apple. " All things are arranged 
for a special purpose ; I trace the finger of 
Fate and a kind Providence throughout all 
our trials : troubles are stepping-stones to 
happiness . blessed are the sweets of philo- 
sophy." 

" What we should ha' done without you, 
Doctor, I will not pretend to say . the Lord 
only kno^s," said Mrs. Titsy, slowly plying 
her needles. 

Susan, whose appearance had much im- 
proved since we saw her at the assizes, 
looked up into the Doctor's face ad- 
miringly. 

"You see how Fate pursued that 
wretched creature who was sentenced to 
death a week ago ; and * may the Lord 
have mercy on his soul !' say I, with the 
judge. Fate, Susan, marked you down 
for one of its instruments, and Retribution 
required that you should be slow in the 
work of detection, tfrat the rascal might 
prosper for a whfle^and get up to a height 



Tlie House of Titsy. 13 

from which his fall would be all the more 
terrible ; in due time Fate suggested to 
you the idea of papering that little box, and 
Fate provided the paper." 

" Rather, Doctor, was I not punished all 
that time for my wickedness in not writing 
to you, and my dear friend here who has 
given to me the love of a mother ; those 
long weary nights and months and years 
when I thought I should go mad, and 
did do so sometimes I think ; was not 
all this a deserved punishment for my 
pride, which would not let me own that I 
had been deceived ; and for my injus- 
tice to an honest man who would not 
have deceived me ? I ought to have 
known that he would not have sent for 
me to America . he would have fetched 
me. 

Susan spoke with unwonted animation. 
Tom turned his eyes from the fire to 
look at her ; while Mrs. Titsy let her knit- 
ting fall into her lap to note the Doctors 
reply. 

" There is much in what thou sayest, 



14 Stranger than Fiction. 

girl," said the Doctor, evidently bent upon 
a speech of more than ordinary importance, 
indicated as much by the extension of his 
right hand, in which he held his pipe, as 
by his grandiloquent rendering of "thou 
sayest" 

" Pride is a bad adviser, and an ungrate- 
ful heart is a miserable companion. But 
my friend Susan Harley hath neither the 
one nor the other as we understand those 
weaknesses of weak humanity. The pride 
which attacked her was that which springs 
from a laudable self-esteem . a virtuous, 
honest, and high-minded girl, she could 
not endure that one idle gossip should 
whisper a word to sully her fair fame, and 
she could not live to be taunted by the 
Mrs. Gompsons of this world with having 
done an imprudent action . she wanted 
courage, that noble attribute of our nature 
which prompts us never to give in against 
the longest odds, but induces us to bear 
and hope and strive, and, what is more, 
makes us win at last Win, I say, as we 
shall do, for Truth and Honesty must have 



The House of Titsy. 15 

their day when Villainy is dethroned. 
Moreover, touching the self-made charge 
of ingratitude, the fact that our Susan suf- 
fered, that she grieved after us, that she 
dreamed about us, and longed to come and 
sit here under this humble but honest roof, 
proves that she had a grateful heart ; and 
even if she had not . I only use if for the 
sake of argument . if, I say again, this dear 
girl, destined to suffer so much, that the 
guilty might be brought to punishment . if 
she had not been grateful the open con- 
fession of a fault straightway amendeth it 
And with regard to Mr. Thomas Titsy, 
Fate, hard as it may seem, required that 
he should be placed in danger, that he 
should be seized by the law and locked 
up in a cell, in order that such an amount 
of sympathy and compassion might be 
excited in the loving breast of Susan 
Harley " (Susan held down her head and 
Tom fidgeted with his hands), " to induce 
her to turn to the man who has loved her 
from the first, and who loves her now, 
and say to him, * Tom, thou shalt be more 



1 6 Stranger than Fiction. 

to me than my brother . take me for thy 
wife/ " 

Here something seemed suddenly to rise 
in the Doctor's throat, and after stammer- 
ing a little and coughing, he found he could 
say no more ; he, therefore, quietly whis- 
pered Moniti meliora sequamur, and sat 
down, by which time Mrs. Titsy was weep- 
ing all over her knitting. 

Susan, whose kindness towards Tom had 
been very great during the last few days, 
and whose heart had yearned to comfort 
and console him, though she felt that the 
Doctor had almost interpreted her own 
wishes, could only follow the example of 
Mrs. Titsy and fall to a-crying ; but when 
Tom came towards her and held out his 
hand, she laid hers in it Caesar woke 
up at the moment, and seemed to ratify the 
engagement by licking both hands and 
then inserting his nose between them. 

When Mrs. Titsy looked up through her 
tears, the Doctor made a signal to her, and 
while one went out to see that the pigeon- 
cote door was shut, the other went upstairs 



The House of Titsy. 17 

to sit against the window, where the moon 
was shining in upon a patchwork quilt, and 
making a chest of old oak drawers as bright 
as the looking-glass that hung upon the 
whitewashed wall. 

" Shall it be so, Susan ?" said Tom, after 
a long pause. 

Susan returned the pressure of his hand. 

" I think I could hold up my head again, 
lass, in some spot where nobody 'ud know 
me, if I had thee to live for." 

This was a longer speech than Tom had 
ever made to Susan in the way of love- 
making ; and there was something so for- 
lorn and sad and appealing in his manner, 
that Susan felt glad he had said so much. 

" Tom, dear Tom," she said in a falter- 
ing voice, " you have suffered a great deal 
through me ; nay, don't deny it ; if, after 
all, you think that I am worthy " 

" Susan ! Susan ! God bless thee, lass ; 
say no more . all the old time comes back, 
and the old feeling/ 1 and Tom, pressing 
her hand, drew Susan towards him, and 
she laid her head upon his shoulder. 

vol. in. 2 



1 8 Stranger than Fiction. 

Of course the pigeon-cote door was shut : 
so the Doctor went upstairs, not to his own 
room, but to Mrs. Titsy's door. 

" Deary me, that must be a knock," said 
Mrs. Titsy, who had been sitting at the 
window . " Yes ; and there it is again." 

" Mrs. Titsy ! Mrs. Titsy !" a voice whis- 
pered through the key-hole. 

"It is indeed the Doctor," and Mrs. 
Titsy went to the door. 

" Don't be alarmed," said the Doctor ; 
"but put your bonnet and shawl on; I 
want to have a little talk with you, and we 
must leave them for a while." 

Mrs. Titsy frequently indulged in pre- 
sentiments. " Sometimes," she said to 
herself, " it is a death tick, sometimes it is 
somebody treading on one's grave, some- 
times it is a stranger on the bar, or a letter 
in the candle ; but for three days it's been 
no death warning . that's certain." 

The Doctor was waiting for her at the 
bottom of the stairs. 

" Tell them we shall be back again in 
half an hour," he said. 



The House of Titsy. 19 

Mrs. Titsy put her head into the kitchen 
and did as she was desired ; and then she 
took the arm gallantly offered to her by 
her famous lodger, and suffered herself to 
be conducted out into the moonlight. 

" You will think my conduct strange, 
perhaps, my dear madam," said the Doctor, 
when they had walked a short dis- 
tance. 

" Hem !" said Mrs. Titsy, not knowing 
what to say : she did not think his conduct 
at all peculiar ; she was a woman with 
presentiments. 

" But I will no longer delay what I have 
to say to you." 

Mrs. Titsy leaned a little more heavily 
on the Doctors arm. 

" We are not young, you and I, Mrs. 
Titsy ; I am getting on towards fifty ; and 
though you married young, your son's 
manly form tells of the matronly period of 
life, my dear madam, at which you have 
also arrived, although Father Time has 
dealt kindly with you, and left you with 
personal attractions which I have long ad- 



20 Stranger than Fiction. 

mired, while your good disposition and 
kind heart are as fresh as ever/' 

" Really ! Mr. Johnson/' said Mrs. Titsy. 

" Old fools are the worst of fools they 
say; I am not going to play the goose, 
and try to make love ; but Mrs. Titsy, if 
you will become Mrs. Horatio Johnson, 
that individual will be happy for the rer 
mainder of his days, and will endeavour to 
make you a good husband, and Tom and 
Susan a good father. Moniti meliora se- 
quarnur /" 

She knew it ! When the Doctor whis- 
pered at the door she was sure that this 
was coming. She was a woman, however, 
and of course must be astonished and con- 
fused at the Doctor's proposition, though I 
must do Mrs. Titsy the justice to say that 
she made as little fuss as could possibly be 
expected from the most ingenuous of 
widows at so trying a moment. After 
many faltering attempts to reply to the 
Doctor in suitable terms, she leaned nearly 
\\\ i v weight upon his willing arm, and 
he was his. When the two were re- 




The House of Titsy. 21 

turning, and had left behind them the street 
in which I first introduced Jacob Martyn 
to my readers, the Doctor was unfolding to 
Mrs. Titsy his plans for the future. And 
capital plans they were. 

Thus while night, dark and hideous, was 
setting in upon the fortunes of Ephraim 
Magar, the morning of hope was dkwning 
for some others in my story who had 
almost despaired of the sunshine. 





CHAPTER III. 

IN WHICH RETRIBUTION OVERTAKES THE 
WICKED. 

F course everybody in Middleton- 
on-the- Water knew that Magar 
was a bad fellow. The barber 
had said to himself many a time 
. so he informed several of his customers 
. " that man was not born to be drowned." 
Though, by-the-by, several men had said 
the same thing about Gripps the lawyer, 
and had made a mistake. For it seems 
that although Gripps heard the Mayor 
sentenced to death, Magar was the longest 
liver of the two. Gripps had made a great 
effort to save his friend Magar : he had 



Retribution overtakes the Wicked. 23 

not only engaged the best counsel, and 
suborned several witnesses (who were not 
called) to perjure themselves ; but in the 
famous chapel where he was wont to hold 
forth, he had himself startled the congrega- 
tion by a special prayer for the charitable 
Mayor of Middleton, who was like to' die 
the death of a martyr ; he had also laid a 
heavy bet about the matter, which he had 
doubled when the grand jury threw out the 
bill against Tom Titsy. 

Whether defeat preyed upon his mind to 
such an extent as to unseat his reason and 
prompt him to commit suicide, or whether 
he lost his way in a fog, cannot now be 
ascertained; but one night, soon after 
Magar's conviction, he walked into a pond 
near his own house, and was drowned. 
His hat floating on the rank surface of the 
stagnant pool, he was found there the next 
morning with his blue bag still in his hand, 
which was considered by an intelligent jury 
evidence sufficient of his having acci- 
dentally walked into the water. They 
returned "a verdict accordingly," coupled 



24 Stranger than Fiction. 

with " a recommendation to the owner of 
the pool to protect (by posts and rails) 
other persons from a similar fatal mis- 
take." 

So that unkind people who said Mr. 
Gripps was not born to be drowned, were 
mistaken. Mr. Northcotes, however, told 
the superintendent of the police, who told 
the inspector, who told the oldest officer in 
the force, who told the barber, that Gripps 
had only saved himself from a worse end. 
The lawyer, therefore, it will be seen, had 
few friends in Middleton. Even his 
chapel-going acquaintances were glad to he 
rid of him, because he had a mortgage on 
their house of prayer, out of which he 
made money and enforced friendship and 
" brotherly love." t 

It was not a little surprising to discover 
after Magar's condemnation how many 
people in Middleton had " suspected 
something " for years past. It was a deli- 
cate matter to speak about, they all agreed ; 
but many shrewd burgesses had wondered 
over their pipes how it was that Magar 



Retribution overtakes the Wicked. 25 

" got on in life so rapidly after Collinson's 
disappearance." 

Several people had had "their sus- 
picions" about the young yeoman's visit 
to America. The postman said it was 
true he had left American letters at 
Magar's; but he had often turned them 
over and thought they had a doubtful 
appearance. The watchman who heard 
the noises at the mill had started up in his 
sleep, as his wife could bear witness, with 
that strange midnight screech ringing in 
his ears. The man who paused a moment 
to listen on the fatal night had often thought 
" if there should have been some foul play 
at work," but had not dared to speak about 
it, or somehow had not thought to do so. 
The waiter at the inn where the three men 
met could have sworn there was "some- 
thing queer going on," but how was he to 
know ? 

The town was divided about Jennings. 
One half of it would not believe that such 
a mild fellow asL he could have really been 
concerned in killfrig his friend ; while the 



26 Stranger than Fiction. 

other half had no faith in the sneaking, 
canting, ious manner which Jennings had 
always affected, and with which he covered 
his villany, as Magar's was hidden beneath 
a cloak of assumed benevolence. 

There was no difference of opinion about 
the righteousness of the verdict against 
Magar. Only one person evinced any 
feeling about the matter. This was a 
wretched woman to whom he had promised 
marriage when he was a young man. She 
came from a town near Middleton, and 
demanded admission to his cell as a rela- 
tive. " If I am not his wife I ought to 
have been," she said in a hoarse, broken 
voice to the governor of the gaol. " It is 
true," said Magar, " let her come to me." 
Even Gripps and Magar had their 
mourners. When the jurymen went to 
view the lawyer's body, cold and wet and 
ghastly, at the body's own cold cheerless 
lonely house, they found a wretched cur 
sitting by the corpse, whining piteously, 
utterly forgetting and forgiving all the hard 
kicks it had received from its dead master's 



Retribution overtakes the Wicked. 27 

heavy boots. Gripps had his dog mourner ; 
Magar in his last hours was solaced by a 
woman. Ruined, humiliated, disgraced as. 
she had been by this hypocrite and mur- 
derer, the woman threw herself upon his 
neck, and sobbed as earnestly as if he had 
deserved her tenderness and affection. She 
never once thought of her wrongs ; I am 
not prepared to say that she would not have 
changed places with him, and died praying 
for his happiness, if she could have been 
allowed to do so. For she remembered 
when Magar had been kind to her ; when 
he came to her father's house at nights, 
and they went out together in the fields. 
They had been lovers in the early 
days ; but for a vile mischief-maker 
they would have been married in their 
innocency. Eventually Magar's own sel- 
fishness led to their living together without 
the rites of marriage. There were un- 
happily many local precedents for this kind 
of arrangement; how far it demoralised 
Magar, brutalised his nature, this setting 
law, morality, religion, and true love at 



28 ' Stranger than Fiction. 

defiance, it is hard to say ; but I suspect 
he was a brute to begin with, and his love 
of money and vulgar ambition overthrew 
him at last. 

Soon after this woman left the gaol on 
that last day, the prisoner, who had wailed 
and cried and asserted his innocence in the 
most abject way, requested to be provided 
with writing materials. He was occupied 
until far into the night, preparing a full 
confession of his crime, which he placed in 
the hands of the chaplain, on condition that 
if he were reprieved it should be returned 
to him unsealed ; and that if he were not, 
the packet should remain unopened until 
two years after the execution, when the 
contents were to be made public. The 
chaplain accepted this trust, and pledged 
himself, as a clergyman, to do his best to 
fulfil it to the letter. 

The prisoner paused occasipnally to 
listen ; but whenever he did so, one of the 
men who sat there watching him made a 
noise with his feet, or moved about: he 
was rather tender-hearted, this officer, 




Retribution overtakes the Wicked. 29 

despite his long experience, and did not 
wish the convict to hear what he heard, and 
what many people heard during that long 
nighty when the weight of some dire event 
seemed to lie heavily upon the town, and 
the thud, thud of the carpenters hammer 
sent a cold shiyer through many a stalwart 
frame. 

An evening mist hung about the Dinsley 
County Prisons, and rain fell at intervals. 
The old church bells were chiming for 
evening service, which was held there twice 
during the week : but the sound of the 
bells seemed to die away in the fog, as if 
the one little breath of air that moved the 
mist refused to carry it. In front of the 
prisons joiners were at work, watched by a 
few bystanders, who stared vaguely at 
something which loomed up in the thick 
atmosphere, and grew under the hammers 
of the workmen. At length the bells 
ceased ; the lamplighter lighted the town 
lamps ; a few stars made shambling efforts 
to peer through the murky night ; a couple 



30 Stranger than Fiction. 

of lanterns moved mysteriously about the 
ugly excrescence that was gradually de- 
forming the symmetry of a well-designed 
building, and the hammering was continued 
until the night was well-nigh worn out, and 
the scaffold had grown its full. They put 
black boards about it to hide its ugliness ; 
but when morning came, it loomed forth 
with frightful reality, a dreadful blot upon 
the world's civilisation. Black, gaunt, and 
grim, the monster, hammered into existence 
the day before, boldly challenged the day- 
light, and awaited its victim. " Blood for 
blood," it seemed to say. Every balk and 
beam stood out defiantly as if to assert the 
bloody right of sacrifice. In the presence 
of such an enemy to man it was almost 
necessary, ere man's right to set it up 
could be acknowledged, that the imagina- 
tion should wander to that dark low build- 
ing by the Middleton river, and conjure up 
the deed that had been done there, when 
the cries of the victim went up unavailingly 
in the darkness. But supported even by 
these memories, that black, dread instru- 



Retribution overtakes the Wicked. 3 1 

ment made the heart sick, and inspired in 
the minds of many who passed it, besides 
Jacob Martyn, a wish that Justice could do 
her needful work without the aid of such a 
minister. . . . Before the morning was 
far advanced, Silas Collinson was avenged. 
The monster gallows was gorged with a 
strangled corpse. 




CHAPTER IV. 





MRS. SMICK GIVES JACOB A PROOF OF HER 
FRIENDLY REGARD. 

HE is indeed a pretty girl,* said 
Jacob, looking over the way, as 
the Dinsley bells were peace- 
fully chiming for church. 
" A round face, a dimple in each cheek, 
and how graceful ! By Jove, the editor is 
right And no, yes . she's going to look 
up . no, on she goes, like Saint Cecilia, to 
prayers." 

Jacob was standing at the window of 
the sitting-room, shared in common by Mr. 
Williams and himself, when he made these 
observations. 



Mrs. SrnicKs Friendly Regard. 33 

The young lady over the way was going 
to church, and Jacob was watching her 
with marked interest. Why a young fellow 
so desperately in love as he was, and en- 
gaged, in fact, as he considered himself to 
be, to a beautiful woman, worthy the hand 
of a peer, should be wasting time and 
thought upon a girl whom he had only 
seen half a dozen times, I cannot undertake 
to say. 

As an admirer of beauty in nature and 
art, a young man has a perfect right to 
study both, and however much his affections 
might have been engaged elsewhere, I do 
not see why Jacob should not admire the 
pretty, graceful ways, and sunny eyes, and 
dimpled cheeks of Edith Winthorpe, who 
lived over the way. But surely it was not 
necessary that he should look up every 
time he saw Edith appear anywhere near 
the drawing-room window; nor was it 
necessary whenever the sounds of a piano 
came from the same quarter that he should 
make a point of opening the window to hear 
the music 

vol. in. 3 



34 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

Perhaps Edith might not have been 
called by most people a fine pianiste ; but 
Jacob thought the player fairly interpreted 
the compositions of some of the great 
masters ; so he listened, and looked at the 
same time. 

On this Sunday morning he was particu- 
larly struck with Miss Edith Winthorpe's 
graceful and pretty appearance ; and he 
wondered who her two hard and haughty- 
looking companions were. 

Mrs. Smick entered the room, oppor- 
tunely, to remove the remains of his late 
breakfast. She sat down, crossed her 
arms, and composed herself for a talk, in 
token of her desire to be friendly with 
Jacob, and of her readiness to answer the 
questions which he commenced to ask con- 
cerning the Winthorpes. 

" Oh, yes, nice sort of people as you say, 
which it were not for a neighbour to say 
otherwise, though one as has known better 
days, and can remember them when things 
were not so easy as they are now ; as 
decent a gentleman as you d wish to have 



Mrs. Smicks Friendly Regard. 35 

knowed, sir, the deceased Mr. Winthorpe, 
which was a teacher of music and drawin, 
though he might have follerd a better 
trade ; but which my poor Smick liked the 
gentleman for his kind ways, and always a 
comin to see him when he came home from 
forring parts with his ship, which traded to 
Spreadless at the mouth of the river what 
runs through Dinsley^ and which he took 
me down onst in a boat, and paid, I don't 
know how much, to get through the locks 
as is made to stop the barges from getting 
down too cheap : a good creatur, sir, though 
I says it as shouldn't, was Capting James 
Smick," and the relict of the defunct salt 
began to weep tears of particular saline 
density, judging from the perverse way in 
which they would rear themselves up into 
formidable globules at the end of her nose> 
and refuse for a long time to fall over the 
precipice that lay between that prominent 
organ and her chin. 

" But as you was a sayin, sir, the Win- 
thorpes is tidy people, though proud as 
should be humility, when you considers 

3.2 



36 Stranger than Fiction. 



the difference of a capting to a teacher of 
the pianner, as Edith, which is the youngest 
of six, no doubt plays well, which she 
oughter, seeing that she has no knolidge of 
domestick matters, beyond a dustin of the 
drawink-room, which the furniture is mosdy 
old, though good no doubt My Joanna, 
sir, though I says it myself, is more perfeck 
in all things pertainink to what a womin 
should know than all the three, which 
three died when they was young, leavink 
the three that has gone to church, and much 
good may they derive, though there was a 
time when I always went of a mornings ; 
but as I was sayin, Mrs. Winthorpe, which 
is a widder like myself, had a little pro- 
perty in her own right, and they lives on it 
pretty comfortable no doubt, though I'm 
not one, Mr. Marty n, as is a hadvocate for 
starving the belly to make the back look 
fine, and which maxim I ever tells Joanna 
to bear in mind, together with the one that 
booty is only skin deep, and a contented 
mind, and a happy disposition, and bein 
able to mend your own stockins, and do 



Mrs. Smicks Friendly Regard. 3 7 

your own cookin, is more likely to win a 
usband than otherwise/ ' 

Jacob listened attentively, though Mrs. 
Smick evidently thought she detected signs 
of restlessness in his manner. 

" No, thanky, sir, you aint a detainin of 
me ; I likes my lodgers when they does 
me the onner to consult me, and any infor- 
mation that I can give is welcome, I'm sure ; 
as I was sayin, sir, the two eldest is awful 
proud, sir, though what they has to be 
proud of beyond livin on their mother, 
which has a little property, when they 
oughter be doin somethink for themselves, 
it is not for me to say, though dressmakin 
might do something for them to help out 
their income, which, I believe, is small, 
though they did refuse to let their rooms 
when there was a great to do here, and all 
the houses was let, even to Mr. Smythe's, 
which he spells it with a why, because, he 
says, his aunt's sisters did, though I never 
knew them. * I'm not proud,' he said, 
' and if a ginny a night is to be the price, 
' why say a ginny,' which was very hansum ; 



38 Stranger than Fiction. 

but Edith, most people don't object to her, 
which she is a good deal put on by the 
elder ones, who is not much to look at, and 
has tried to get off this many a year, but 
which is on the shelf now ; and though she 
i defected in her ways, and her ankles is 
not so good as they might be, the youngest 
is not ugly. People as like dimples, which 
is certainly better than the pimples, which 
does not hiten the booty of the oldest, says 
she is nice lookin, and of the three, I 
being a young man, which of course I am 
not, would prefer her, but ' handsim is as 
andsim does/ which was a maxim that the 
late Capting as givn over his glass, which 
he was a temperate drinker, though his 
favrite toast was, " Them in our harms as 
we loves in our arts/ " 

" Mauther ! the meat's a burnin !" ex- 
claimed Joanna, dashing into the room, and 
seizing Jacob's tray and emptying the con- 
tents into the half-open dressing-gown of 
Mr. Williams, just as that gentleman entered 
the room. 

" Confound it ! . shrimps and sawdust ! . 



Mrs. Smick' s Friendly Regard. 39 

Jupiter and Jumbo ! . by all the gods, but 
this is infernally annoying," exclaimed Mr. 
Williams, shaking the bread crumbs and 
* coffee from his gown. 

" She did notknovt as you were a coming, 
which accidents will happin in the best 
regilated families, and if gentlemen will lay 
in bed and come down in their stockin feet, 
they can't expect to be heard," said Mrs. 
Smick, going to the rescue of Joanna, and 
picking up the broken pieces. 

"No, but hang it, Mrs. Smick, Joanna 
should not be dashing out like a flash of 
greasy lightning followed by a thunderbolt, 
and burying a fellow in cups and saucers/' 
and then he burst out laughing. 

" I'll pay for the damage," said Jacob ; 
" it was my fault for detaining you, Mrs. 
Smick." 

" Spoken like a gentleman, sir, which is 
more than I can say for some people," Mrs. 
Smick replied, as she left the scene of 
Joannas misfortune. 

" And so she's been enlightening you a 
a little about her neighbours," said Mr. 



40 Stranger than Fiction. 

Williams, after he had exhausted his 
laughter and dried his dressing-gown . 
" ah, and by Jove she can . talk for a week, 
sir . never knew anything like it, except an 
old landlady of mine at Pimlico (I believe 
Mrs. Smick was born within the sound of 
Bow bells), when I edited the Slasher, after 
the Smasher became defunct . she had talk- 
ing fits . came on all of a sudden . they 
used to put her to bed after the first hour 
when they found it was really the fit . lay 
her on her back and let her talk . some- 
times she'd go on all night as if she was 
wound up, and must run down like an 
alarum . one day she quarrelled with a 
cabman about a fare, and talked herself to 
death . fact." 

" Indeed !" was Jacob's only reply. 

" Well, now, I'll tell you another fact ; 
perhaps you wont believe it; the little 
sketch which you wrote last week is copied, 
in full, by the Sunday Post, with this 
instruction : ' We take the following graphic 
and picturesque sketch from the Dinsley 
Courant! Will you believe that . eh ?" 



Mrs. Smicks Friendly Regard. 41 

" No," said Jacob, " I cannot. ,, 
" You would like to believe it . young 
fellows are awfully proud when they're 
quoted . and by the beard of the prophet, 
you may feel a touch of pride at being 
noticed in the Post. I don't say Fitzatkins, 
the editor, whom I know well, has not done 
it out of compliment to me ; but take it for 
what it is worth, the sketch is devilish 
good, as I told you, and the compliment of 
our London friend is deserved . there's the 
paper, read for yourself, while I dress for 
a stroll before dinner . I came down on 
purpose to congratulate you." 

Sure enough, Williams had spoken the 
truth this time, at any rate. Jacob would 
not have been mortal if he had not felt 
some little gratification at the compliment 
paid to him by the Past. Looking- at 
the prominent place assigned to his sketch, 
Jacob felt his heart beating a little quicker 
than usual, and after reading his own com- 
position in its new place, he rose and said 
most emphatically to himself before Mrs. 
Smick's mirror : " Lucy, I will be worthy of 



42 Stranger than Fiction. 

you yet." And just then he turned round, 
and saw Edith Winthorpe pass the win- 
dow. 

" I shall go to church," said Jacob, " in 
the evening." 

" And I'll walk with you on your way 
thither." 

" Come all the way, and go in too," said 
Jacob. 

" No, my boy, I cannot to-night ; to tell 
you the truth, I rather fancy it is one of my 
sermons that will be preached ; I have 
written half a dozen for the Rev. Slocum 
Pantaway ; and I shouldn't like to hear my 
own good thoughts and moral sentiments 
murdered by his shocking delivery . no, I 
will walk down the street, because I want 
to propound unto you something for your 
welfare." 

And so the two walked out together. 
They were just the sort of men whom you 
would be inclined to look at twice if you 
had met them in the street. There was 
something rather " stagey " in the appear- 
ance of the elder one, with a cut of the old- 



Mrs. Smicks Friendly Regard. 43 

fashioned beau ; his coat blue, with brass 
buttons, his waistcoat a light drab, his 
trousers almost of the same colour, and his 
boots shining splendidly ; his hat, slightly 
the worse for] wear, stuck jauntily on one 
side of his head ; and the evening being 
rather dusty,, he wore a pair of spectacles, 
not the green protectors which he some- 
times affected ; he was marked in one or 
two places with the small-pox ; he had a 
merry eye and a trifle of whisker. 

Jacob, though himself rather a dandy, 
was exceedingly quiet in his style compared 
with Mr. Williams, and he still wore a narrow 
band of crape round his hat ; he was about 
the same height as his companion, who 
was considered to be a little over the 
average standard. 

On their way down the High Street they 
passed Miss Winthorpe, her mother, and her 
two sisters. Edith and her mother walked 
first, and Sarah and Ann, arm linked in arm, 
like a fond and loving pair, followed. Mr. 
Williams politely raised his hat to the 
party as he passed. 



44 Stranger than Fiction. 

" You know the Winthorpes, then ?" said 
Jacob. 

" Just sufficiently to be polite when we 
meet; rather a nice girl that young one, 
must say ; mind what you're about, sir ; 
you'll be over head and ears in love before 
you know where you* are, Jacob. I once 
knew a young fellow who fell in love with 
a girl in the street . she had been shopping, 
and was on her way home . he was in love 
with her at the top of the High Street, 
proposed at the bottom, was accepted . 
and a church being hard by, they went 
home man and wife." 

" Remember that I am going to church, 
Mr. Williams ; ' the nearer the church, the 
farther/ &c, . you are not particular when 
and where you let off your fibs," said Jacob. 

" Fibs ! Perhaps you do not believe 
what I said about the sermon. Well, we 
shall see, but here you are . au revoir ! 
Tell me what you think of the application 
of the text when it comes to thirdly." And 
the careless and thoughtless Williams 
passed on his way, while his friend entered 



Mrs. Smicks Friendly Regard. 45 

St. Marys, one of the five churches of 
Dinsley. 

Jacob ,sat nearly opposite the Winthorpes, 
and twice his eyes met Edith's . and once, 
during the prayers, they met those of her 
eldest sister, who looked through him, and 
said " Amen " in a sneering, snappish sort 
of way, that reminded Jacob of one of Ho- 
garth's pictures and a vinegar cruet : so 
Jacob hid his face in his book ; and after- 
wards, despite the wheezy clerk, who began 
the 'responses long before the people, and 
finished with a croak and a gasp long after 
them, succeeded in feeling devout, and then 
in becoming very miserable and depressed. 
But he was a strange, romantic fellow, this 
Jacob Martyn ; and when the service was 
over, he did not even glance towards the 
Winthorpe pew, but pushed his way out in 
an opposite direction, and went for a long 
ramble by the gaslight, until he found him- 
self on a common, by a river in which a 
few stars were reflected. 

It was a half-imaginary, half-real sketch 
of this river which had been copied into the 



fc. 



46 Stranger than Fiction. 

Post. It was the same stream that had its 
rise beyond Middleton. Jacob, who had 
wandered many an hour by its brink, and 
now knew many of the towns and villages 
which it passed on its way to the sea, em- 
bodied some of this knowledge and some of 
his thoughts and a good deal of happy de- 
scription in a sketch entided " From the 
Mountain to the Sea," which Mr. Williams 
had published in the manner already ex- 
plained. It was a graphic sketch . some- 
thing like a vigorous water-colour drawing, 
with a background roughly rubbed in. 
You could see the river, with the children 
coming down from the villages to dabble in 
the water ; you could hear the water-wheel ; 
you could see the dark sluggish stream 
crawling through big manufacturing towns, 
and then bounding off again into the 
meadows ; farther on you had pictures of 
lazy baiges drawn by horses ; by-and-by 
you came to ships ; then you met the 
salmon coming up with the tide : and after 
all this, you could not but feel that you had 
read a very natural piece of word-painting, 



Mrs. Smick's Friendly Regard. 47 

to say nothing of the bits of philosophy 
and moralising that cropped up here and 
there, and made the paper almost a sermon 
as well as a picture. 

" If it were not Sunday night," said Mr. 
Williams, on Jacob's return, " I should ad- 
vise you to write to the Post people and 
offer your services as a contributor of mis- 
cellaneous essays . been thinking the mat- 
ter over as I walked home. ,, 

" Do you think there would be any 
good in doing so ?" inquired Jacob, much 
more interested, I am bound to say, in 
this editorial hint than in the clerical ad- 
vice to which he had listened in St. 
Mary's Church. 

" Of course I do . might be the means 
of making your fortune . besides, the pro- 
prietors are the famous publishers, Messrs. 
Ginghem and Co. . who knows what the 
result might be ?" 

Jacob said he would write in the morn- 
ing ; and forthwith he began to build more 
castles in the air, which, after writing to 
Ginghem and Co. on the following day, 



48 Stranger than Fiction. 

he furnished in gorgeous and fantastic 
fashion. 

One of Jacob Martyn's old reporting 
books lies before me while I write, side by 
side with some careless notes from which I 
have transcribed a portion of this history. 
Mr. Pitman has much to answer for ; many 
a headache, many a heartache. But he has 
taught thousands to wield a special power. 
The early struggles of a beginner at short- 
hand reporting have been described once 
for all by the great master who lies under 
a plain slab in Westminster Abbey. 
Those who know the picture (and who does 
not ?) will understand how to sympathise 
with Jacob Martyn's first phonographic 
efforts. Here they are on my table . queer 
hieroglyphics even to a shorthand writer. 
Curves and lines and dots and stars and 
angles of all sorts, straggling down the 
centre of leaf after leaf, like Sanscrit gone 
mad ; with here and there a proper name 
written in English to show up the peculiar 
character of the mania. There are collec- 
tors who would give a trifle for this note- 



Mrs. SmicHs Friendly Regard. 49 

book. What would they not give for that 
in which Dickens made his first House of 
Commons notes ? Yet who but a practical 
shorthand writer could understand the 
labour, the misery, the disappointments of 
which these early note-books tell, Many 
people write shorthand ; many people can 
sit at a public meeting, and, in Pitman's 
system or Harding's, take down word for 
word all that is said, but . the reading, the 
transcription, my friend ? "Aye, there's 
the rub." Well, Jacob had long since 
achieved all this ; he had suffered and was 
strong in this respect ; and, as I said before, 
the proofs of his early struggles are now be- 
fore me . including the very note-book in 
the latter pages of which he commenced 
the report of Magar's trial. Here and 
there a leaf is turned dQwn at the commence- 
ment of an article or an essay, the leading 
idea of which had occurred to Jacob during 
some reporting peregrination. Magar's 
trial is adorned with a rough sketch of the 
prisoner at the bar. Further on there is 
an outline of the old bridge at Middleton, 
vol. in. 4 



V 



5<3 Stranger than Fiction. 

done from memory, with an indication in 
the distance of the mill and the singing 
weir, which used to join in the factory 
chorus. One of the note-books contains 
scraps of French and German exercises 
and bits of Latin, with some memoranda of 
" Spawling's Maxims/* Every page gives 
token of thought and study and hard work. 
On the last page of the latest of these re- 
miniscences of Jacob is written, "There is 
no knowing what a little genius may ac- 
complish tempered by adversity, stimulated 
with love, trained by perseverance/' 




CHAPTER V. 




"under an obligation to a quack." 

OU look gloomy to-night," said 
Windgate Williams to Jacob, 
who was nursing his left leg 
over the fire. 
" I do not feel merry," was the reply. 
"What's up . found a hole in your 
pocket . or been snubbed by that pretty 
girl over the way ?" 

" I have made an unpleasant discovery. 
" You are always doing something won- 
derful . what is it ?" 

" I am under an obligation to a quack." 
. " Yes," said Williams, waiting for further 
explanation. 

"A quack, and therefore a humbug," 

4.2 



52 Stranger than Fiction. 

continued Jacob, in the same hard, delibe- 
rate tone in which he pitched his first re- 
mark. 

" Strong words," said Williams, " strong 
enough fifty years ago to have ended in 
pistols and coffee for two . getting up be- 
fore sunrise . cold, damp, and miserable . 
twenty-five paces . bang, bang, and there 
you are I" 

" It has only recently dawned on me," 
said Jacob, "and the discovery is all the 
more galling because I have a sincere re- 
gard for him ; indeed I believe him to be a 
large-hearted, high-minded, and generous 
man in his way . in his way, mind you, Mr. 
Williams." 

" In his way, certainly," said Williams. 

" It is believed that he saved my life ; he 
has placed me in another matter under an 
eternal obligation ; and yet he is living and 
making money by deception, by fraud, by 
an imposture of the grossest kind." 

" What is it ? . out with it . what the 
devil are you driving at ?" 

" Sir, the man who goes forth among the 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack? 53 

ignorant multitude and sells them a pill 
warranted to cure every ailment that flesh 
is heir to, is a rascal, and may be even 
guilty of murder." 

" You are surely not speaking of our 
friend Moniti meliora sequamur ?" 

" I am speaking of Horatio Johnson/' 
said Jacob, seriously. " What can you say 
of a man who deludes the sick and dying 
with nostrums, the effects of which he does 
not understand ; offers them for every dis- 
ease one single medicine . some wretched 
combination that is foreign altogether to 
the malady, and while it cannot cure may 
possibly kill ?" 

" What can I say ? That he is not 
likely to do any more harm than the 
Faculty, nearly every member of which 
differs from the otker about nearly every 
disease under the sun." 

" I differ with you entirely." 

" By all means, differ. The practice of 
medicine is a series of blunders and mis- 
takes . doctors kill more than they cure . 
knew a conscientious doctor once who 



54 Stranger than Fiction. 

rarely gave his patients anything but bread 
pills and coloured water." 

"He was a humbug, then." 

" Yes ; his patients would have some- 
thing to take . they would have left him to 
starve if he had been honest with them. 
Knew another fellow who mostly gave a 
little pale brandy disguised in some filthy 
bitters." 

" A truce to your wise saws and modern 
instances ; I tell you our friend Johnson is 
a miserable quack, and that I am under a 
lasting obligation to him. I will be out of 
it ; I cannot thrive on such a foundation." 

" You forget, Mr. Jacob Martyn, that 
Johnson is an herbalist . a shrewd man, a 
student of botany, and what is more, a 
student of human nature. Years ago the 
herb doctor was an important person in 
every town ; you must not class Johnson 
with the common pill vendor." 

" I do. I will. I must." 

" You are absurd, Jacob, excuse me," 
said Williams warmly. 

" Perhaps I am ; let me be absurd. I 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack? 55 

despise myself and the herb doctor at this 
moment equally. I respect Johnson as a 
man ; is that sufficient ?" 

" It is a little better. Say you have a 
real regard for him apart from his pills, and 
then we will proceed. " 

" All right. I say so." 

" I am satisfied." 

" You are easily satisfied," said Jacob 
smiling ; " and now be kind enough 
to remit to Mr. Horatio Johnson the 
money which you have in hand on my ac- 
count, and I will as quickly as possible 
forward the balance." 

" Are you serious ?" 

" I was never more so ; and since you 
do not agree with me, I must act upon my, 
own feelings in this matter, and explain 
myself to Johnson in a letter." 

"And the Doctor will write in reply, 
commencing with his favourite quotation, 
1 Throw physic to the dogs ; and telling 
you that, as all diseases arise from impuri- 
ties of the blood, one medicine is sufficient 
for all ; and that the Oriental is a compound 



56 Stranger than Fiction. 

approved by some of the most eminent 
practitioners for that purpose." 

"He will not convince me ; and I shall 
advise him to throw his physic to the 
dogs." 

It was a severe shock to Mr. Horatio 
Johnson, the letter which he received from 
Jacob, on the morning following that red- 
letter night when the Doctor had inaugu- 
rated those changes in the prospects of the 
Titsy household with which the reader is 
already acquainted. His occupation had 
certainly never appeared to him to be as 
objectionable as it seemed to be in the 
opinion of Jacob Martyn. The letter was 
couched in friendly and delicate terms ; but 
the Doctor did not fail to comprehend it 
thoroughly. He brooded over it all day, 
and applied to his tobacco-box for advice 
and consolation, at such unseasonable times, 
that poor Mrs. Titsy began to fear he had 
repented of his recent proposal to her. 
The Doctor smoked and thought, not- 
withstanding ; and, in order to look at 
the case without prejudice, he put the 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack? 5 7 

quack, who had saved the Indian officer, 
at the bar, tried him on the counts sug- 
gested by Jacob, and found him guilty. 
Then he put himself through the same 
ordeal, and came to the conclusion that 
there might be something in what Jacob 
said, and that he would talk the matter 
over with Mrs. Titsy. 

The widow, in a little fluster of anxiety, 
heard all the Doctor had to say, and was 
very angry with Jacob Marty n. She called 
to mind, and would speak of them, (although 
the Doctor frequently bade her say no 
more), the many cases in which her amiable 
lodger had supplied many a poor family 
with what she called kitchen physic, as 
well as pills ; she mentioned more than 
one illness, in which he had paid for pro- 
fessional assistance, in addition to supplies 
of this kitchen physic of which she made 
so great a point ; and she wondered at 
Master Jacob . she would not have thought 
it of him ! 

Jacob's letter made the Doctor very 
uncomfortable ; and, eventually, he added 



58 Stranger than Fiction. 

to the plans already decided upon another 
which he thought would not only satisfy his 
young friend, but set at rest any scruples 
of conscience which had been awakened 
in his own breast. 

In the evening, he said to Mrs. Titsy, 
" You are aware, Mrs. T., that I had in- 
tended to withdraw from the active prose- 
cution of my profession " (the Doctor could 
not help being a little pompous) " before 
the arrival of that letter from my friend Mr. 
Martyn, whose opinion we all value." 

" I am ; but I beg to say " 

" Do not say it then, my dear Mrs. 
Titsy; let me have my own way this 
time." 

" Of course, Mr. Johnson, and always," 
said Mrs. Titsy, a little confused, and with 
something like a blush on her fair plump 
face. 

" Well, then, I shall give up this medical 
business altogether; the remedy which I 
have vended is undoubtedly very good for 
very many things ; I don't think I have 
anything upon my conscience in the way of 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack? 59 

having misused it ; though perhaps . but 
there . it needs no speech, my dear; we 
will be gentleman and lady in the future, 
and not soil our fingers with either trade 
or profession. Have you any objection, 
Mrs. Titsy ?" 

" O dear no, sir/' said Mrs. Titsy ; and 
the Doctor put his arm round her waist as 
gently as a young lover; but it was a 
comical sight to see. 

The next day the Doctor received a re- 
mittance from Mr. Windgate Williams, 
with a note informing him that Mr. Marty n 
found himself so very rich, on two pounds 
ten a week, that he had no further use for 
the funds invested on his account ; and that 
he would shortly remit, with interest, the 
amount which had been expended. Mr. 
Williams,' in a pleasant way, further sug- 
gested that his friend, Mr. Martyn, had 
some thoughts of starting a bank ; but he 
should advise him to devote his princely 
fortune to other purposes, though he feared 
that Jacob would insist upon buying up all 
the Dinsley Canal shares, for the express 



60 Stranger t/tan Fiction. 

purpose of fighting the railway, which had 
just been opened there, in order that the 
question of locomotion, its cost and ex- 
pedition, might be fairly and finally 
settled. 

Mr. Johnson, who greatly admired the 
loquacious Williams, was very much tickled 
with this communication ; but he felt miser- 
able on account of Jacob's view of his 
medical career ; and more especially as he 
began to be more and more convinced in 
his own mind that there was something 
in what Jacob had said. 

Meanwhile Jacob received a letter, which 
afforded him very considerable pleasure . 
so much so, indeed, that my young friend 
found it difficult to control his feelings. 

" If Mr. Martyn can make it convenient 
to come to town shortly, Mr. Ginghem will 
be glad to have a personal interview with 
him." 

" It has come !" said Jacob, bursting into 
Williams's bedroom, just as that gentle- 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack" 61 

man was preparing to descend to break- 
fast. 

" It has come ! what -has come ? An 
earthquake, or the last day ?" exclaimed 
Mr. Williams, starting round from the con- 
templation of his own face in the mirror, 
which had once reflected the rubicund fea- 
tures of the departed Smick. 

" Hurrah !" was Jacob's only reply, fol- 
lowed by a scamper downstairs, which 
eclipsed in noise the commotion of the 
thunderbolt. 

And then bang went the front door ; 
and Mr. Williams, looking from his win- 
dow, could see Jacob walking down the 
Grove at a brisk rate, and with an elastic, 
joyous step. 

" An extraordinary young fellow that," 
soliloquised Mr. Williams. " There's 
something about the boy that marks him 
down for success . he's got it in his eye. 
By the powers, although I come it heavy 
sometimes, I can't help feeling, in that 
young fellow's society, that I am in 
superior company . lots of brain and lots 



62 Stranger than Fiction. 

of activity. Somethings up this morning 
. well, we shall see." And then the 
eccentric Mr. Williams betook himself to 
breakfast. 

By-and-by Jacob returned, flushed and 
excited. 

" Well . what is it ? . found a gold mine ? 
. going to be married ? . matriculating for 
a lunatic asylum ? . or have you invented 
a new pill ?" 

" Hang the pill \ That is a sore subject, 
Williams ; don't touch it" 

" Very well . then what is the row ?" 
" You shall hear all in good time. Let 
me say, once more, it has come, sir ; it has 
arrived ; I found it lying on the breakfast 
table when I came down, as quietly and 
unassumingly as if it were the most unim- 
portant thing possible." 

" It, it, it . it, be blowed, what is it ?" 
said Mr. Williams. 

" That is it," said Jacob ; spreading out 
before the editor Mr. Ginghem's note. 

Mr. Williams read the communication 
twice; and then, making a satisfactory 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack." 63 

washing of his hands in imaginary soap 
and water, he rose from his seat, and 
walked from one end of Mrs. Smick's 
apartment to the other, in a fit of medita- 
tive delight. 

" Jack Rugabee, come, take up your 
rapier and follow after mine heels to ze 
Court," said Jacob, taking the lead in the 
pacing of Mrs. Smick's apartment, and 
laughing heartily at Williams's gait and 
manner. 

" 'Tis ready, sir, in the porch," said the 
editor, immediately fallirtg into Jacob's 
humour. 

" But I remember me," said Williams, 
stopping suddenly and assuming an air of 
great gravity, " of something else, more d 
propos to the time, which that same wise 
man has writ . ' There is a tide in the 
affairs of man ' . for you, Jacob, the flopd 
has come . launch your boat, and away 
you go on the top of the first wave . 
and you'll find a safe anchorage in the 
ports of Fame and Fortune . by Jove, I'm 
serious." 



64 Stranger than Fiction. 

Extravagant as Jacob professed to re- 
gard the editor's hopeful picture, he could 
not help believing that his fortunes were 
decidedly looking up. But he was full of 
fun at his own expense. He burlesqued 
his hopes, by outdoing the extravagance 
of his friend. He talked of having had 
an interview with Fortunatus, and securing 
the wishing cap ; he asked Williahis if 
there was any particular estate he would 
like to buy ; he wanted his opinion about 
the colour of a private brougham ; but all 
this was only a cover for the aerial build- 
ings which were really towering up in his 
imagination, and showing him bright, bright 
pictures in the future. 

The day passed delightfully. Every- 
thing looked genial and sunny. Spring 
had gradually merged into summer, with- 
out losing the freshness and beauty that 
are so invigorating and hopeful when the 
new leaves first appear. Jacob's thoughts 
and feelings were in harmony with the 
time. Even his dingy office looked sunny, 
and his work was so much like play, that 



" Under an Obligation to a Quack? 65 

he had finished it and started off for a 
ramble in the fields, long before the editor 
was on his way home. 

Sent for to London ! his ambitious 
dreams returned full upon him and gave 
inspiration to his thoughts. The famous 
letter had given his whole nature such a 
fillip, that he felt there was nothing he 
could not do to secure a footing in the 
great city, where prizes were to be fought 
for and won. 

When he reached the Grove once more, 
soft-flowing harmonies were stealing out 
into the sunshiny air from the upper win- 
dow of the Winthorpes ; and Jacob sat 
listening and wondering, and almost fearing 
that the player was becoming as interest- 
ing to him as the music. 

Edith Winthorpe had touched his sym- 
pathies. She was evidently not happy. 
Her elder sisters were both jealous of her 
good looks and her great abilities. He 
was sure of this without Mrs. Smick's in- 
formation ; and he thought how delightful 

VOL; in. 5 



66 



Stranger than Fiction. 



it would be to champion such a Cinderella. 
If he had never known Lucy, he would 
like to have been a prince for the sake of 
Edith. 




CHAPTER VI. 




JACOB STANDS ON THE THRESHOLD OF HIS 
FUT1JRE. 

E stood where his father had con- 
templated his own fatQ year^ 
before ; he stood at the door of 
the Covent Garden hotel as the 
evening shadows were beginning to fall in 
a dirty grey upon the great city Jacob 
had arrived in town that day . arrived by 
train, and been bumped and jolted to his 
hotel in a cab. Since his arrival he had 
dined ; dined where his father had eaten, 
and called for his bill and paid it with the 
conviction that this was his last journey to 
London. Jacob did not know how his 
father had suffered during that visit to 

5.2 



68 Stranger than Fiction. 

town when Jacob addressed him by letter 
to this hotel and hoped he might some day 
see the modern Babylon ; Jacob did not 
know how sad and forlorn and heart-broken 
his father had been on that last day in 
London ; but he knew that Mr. Bonsall, 
the member for Middleton, was morally 
guilty of his financial difficulties, and there- 
fore of his death. The fact troubled Jacob 
as he stood contemplating sundry loads 
of cabbages, a couple of cabs, and some 
children feeding on the garbage of the 
locality. He put an imaginary stone in 
his pocket for Mr. Bonsall, then pulled 
himself together, smoked vigorously ; and 
it was a quaint fancy in his mind that he 
was on the threshold of his future, and that 
he would knock at the door boldly de- 
manding admission. 

Jacob knew nothing of London by ex- 
perience. He had read it up and dreamed 
of it often enough, and pictured himself 
among the crowd clearing his way for 
Lucy's sake ; but that was in the old days. 
Lucy had been beforehand with him and 



The Threshold of Jacob's Future. 69 

had found a key that opened all thorough- 
fares, a talisman that made the crowd give 
way and make a passage for her. He had 
an appointment in Paternoster Row the 
next day ; he knew that was near St. 
Paul's ; he would go and reconnoitre the 
locality. " To the left and keep straight 
down the Strand, under Temple Bar, cross 
the Farringdon Road, up Ludgate Hill, 
and there you are, sir," said the waiter ; 
" all in a straight line, can't miss it, sir." 

The lamplighters were just dotting the 
Strand with feeble stars as Jacob entered 
it from Southampton Street ; the shops 
were illuminated for the night ; the famous 
thoroughfare was all alive with traffic. 
The scene wa$ new to Jacob, and it im- 
pressed him with a sense of loneliness. 
While every shop window had attractions 
for him, the traffic was bewildering. Temple 
Bar pulled him up. He could not pass it 
without a multitude of thoughts rushing in 
upon him. The national history of the spot 
did not haunt him so much as the figure of 
the great Dr. Johnson attending his lady 



fa Stranger than Fiction. 

visitors to their carriages amidst a little 
crowd of curious people gathered round the 
fetalwart form in Fleet Street Then Jacob's 
imagination filled itself with the famous men 
who had stood hereabouts having only the 
traditional shilling in their pockets; with the 
illustrious topers of " The Mitre Tavern " 
and " The Cock;" and with visions of Gold- 
smith and Garrick, which stretched out 
to the days of "rare Ben Jonson" and 
his companions who frequented " The 
Devil Tavern " on the site of " The Rain- 
bow." But Jacob found it impossible to 
stand and think and dream here ; the crowd 
hustled him, and asked him where he was 
" a shovin to ;" he therefore hurried on 
with the rest, and in due time found him- 
self in the shadow of St. Paul's. Strange 
are the tricks of memory. All Jacob could 
think about in presence of this glorious 
structure was an incident in a work of 
fiction popular with Susan Harley in Jacob's 
early youth, wherein the exploits of a cele- 
brated highwayman and one Jonathan Wild 
were narrated with a sensational power 



The Threshold of Jacob's Future. 7 1 

that had been sufficient to frighten both 
Jacob and Susan in those long past days 
anterior to the appearance of Mrs. Gomp- 
-son at Middleton. 

Among the adventures related in this 
now well -remembered work, Jacob called 
to mind how the gentleman robber had 
entered St. Paul's with his band, early in 
the morning, to the horror and astonish- 
ment of the beadle, for the purpose of 
securing the register of the marriage of the 
highwayman's father with a duchess ; and 
how the military had tracked the robbers 
into the church, and finally had a battle 
with them in the crypt ; and how, when a 
great crowd had been collected outside by 
the report of fire-arms, the gentleman high- 
wayman, after defeating the foe, had come 
forth with his band, successfully deceiving 
the crowd outside by pretending to be a 
prisoner to one of his gang, who cheered 
lustily, and told the crowd of their great 
capture. 

Having been round St. Paul's and satis- 
fied himself concerning the locality of " the 



72 Stranger than Fiction. 

Row," Jacob began again to feel creeping 
over him that sense of loneliness which 
strangers invariably experience in great 
cities. He returned and walked back again 
down Ludgate Hill, like one in a dream, 
eventually crossing Trafalgar Square, and 
passing by the very spot where his father 
had walked with his heart-breaking trouble. 

Presently Jacob found his way impeded 
by a great crowd. On inquiry, he learned 
that he was in front of a famous theatre, 
and that this was the benefit night of an 
eminent actor. Jacob therefore determined 
to do what the crowd did ; and in a few 
minutes he found himself carried away into 
the pit, where he took a seat near two 
elderly people, who almost immediately 
began to talk about the drama, as it was in 
their younger days, and to regret that as 
the great old actors died out so few great 
young ones sprung up. 

Gradually the pit became crowded, and 
the dress circle and boxes began to fill up 
gaily, budding from a few bright hues into 
quite a parterre of gorgeous dresses, in- 



The Threshold of J acoti s Future. 73 

creasing from one or two groups into 
throngs of fashionable people, who, after a 
great deal of preparation, settled themselves 
down into their seats, as if with a full 
determination of remaining there for a long 
time. Then the lights in the great chan- 
delier, which hung over Jacob's head, sud- 
denly became more brilliant, until the whole 
house radiated with a warm and ruddy 
glow. This was accompanied by a few 
bars of solemn music from the orchestra 
(the members of which had, for some little 
time, been dropping in one by one), gradu- 
ally swelling into stirring music, which set 
Jacob's pulses beating wildly, and formed 
a fitting prelude to a world of poetry and 
romance that seemed to open up before him 
as the curtain gradually rose upon the first 
scene of the most complete and beautiful 
comedy ever written. 

It had never occurred to Jacob to look 
at a bill of the play ; he was too much 
occupied with everything else ; and so 
much in a dream of wonder and hope 
about the great future, into which he felt 



74 Stranger than Fiction. 

he was entering, that he was content to sit 
there quietly and dreamily, and accept all 
that occurred. When he discovered by 
the text what the representation was, his 
thoughts, however, immediately wandered 
away from the theatre to the school at Car- 
town, where Spenzonian Whiffler had com- 
menced his study of Shakespeare, under 
the great-hearted mysterious schoolmaster. 
To-morrow, he thought, he might see that 
same Spen, for he had written to the 
General Post Office, and requested his 
school companion to meet him at the hotel. 
Then Rosalind entered, and Jacob could 
not help thinking of Lucy, more especially 
as Rosalind's appearance, her fair bright 
face and light hair and musical voice, 
reminded him of her who used to lure him 
away from rambles with Spen on pilgrim- 
ages through leafy woods in summer. 
Jacob's thoughts were suddenly recalled 
from these memories by a burst of applause, 
that was renewed again and again, while a 
figure, in motley, stood bowing upon the 
stage. This was Touchstone, represented 



The Threshold of J acoV s Future. 75 

by a gentleman who was evidently a great 
favourite. 

Jacob applauded with the rest ; but he 
did so in memory of Cartown and Spen, and 
almost with tears in his eyes, because this 
was one of Spen's favourite parts in those 
latter days, when the schoolmaster opened 
the magic book, up in the little room that 
was adorned with the theatrical pictures. 
" London with thy thousand wonders," 
thought Jacob, " I would freely sacrifice 
all, for one day at Cartown in the happy, 
happy times !" 

The play went on, and no sooner did 
Touchstone begin to speak, than Jacob 
could have sworn he was listening to Spen 
himself. This must be mere folly ; he 
rubbed his eyes, and looked and listened 
again. " Yes, yes ! it is, it is !" at length he 
exclaimed aloud ; only to be confused and 
confounded by a'cry of " Order, order !" 
and a consciousness that a great number of 
eyes had been suddenly turned upon him. 
He held down his head and waited until 
the curtain fell on the first act. Then he 



76 Stranger than Fittion. 

borrowed his neighbour's bill, and saw that 
he must be mistaken. He read that the 
performance of the evening was for the 
benefit of Mr. Paul Ferris, upon which 
occasion he was " to be supported by his 
eminent tutor. Mr. Liston Dudley (his first 
appearance since his retirement from the 
stage twenty years ago) : . Jacques, Mr. 
Liston Dudley; Touchstone, Mr. Paul 
Ferris^ 

Although Jacob found that Touchstone 
was played by Mr. Paul Ferris and not by 
Mr. Spen Whifiier. he hilly believed that 
the wit of Cartown school was here before 
him, enjoying the realisation of those 
dreams of ambition in which he had so 
ctren iadulged. when mixing Indian ink at 
the p:^np on mapping days, or rambling 
through the Cartown meadows. The fifth 
scen-e ccc^rmed him : for whose sad yet 
be~igis~r see was that which tunned a 
s^rr^wf^I ssie of recegpEaxi when the 
apcii^se s2xx*k the chandelier. \r& Mr. 
Srswjhs^fs ? 

Jacob was akaast: beside himself with 



The Threshold of J acoti s Future. 77 

astonishment and delight. He clapped his 
hands and cried " Bravo !" till he was 
hoarse. The two old playgoers were 
astonished at the young man's enthusiasm, 
though the whole house was moved with 
joy. Ladies waved their handkerchiefs ; 
bouquets and flowers were showered upon 
the stage from every box ; the pit rose to 
its feet, rose en masse, close up to the 
orchestra, and cheered frantically. Pre- 
sently the rich deep voice spoke . 

" More, more, I pr'ythee, more !" 

How well Jacob remembered those kind 
yet melancholy tones ! There were many 
others in this theatre who had not forgotten 
them ; men who were growing old, and who 
fancied they were young again, now that 
they heard once more a voice which carried 
them back for a quarter of a century, when 
Liston Dudley was the delight of the play- 
going world. 

As the action of the play went on Jacob 
could not help likening the woods near 
Cartown to the forest of Arden ; especially 



few 



78 Stranger than Fiction. 

when the Jacques of the latter was the 
philosopher of the former . the teacher who 
had guided his mind with fine maxims and 
noble thoughts in pleasant rambles through 
rural glades and woody mazes. " Many a 
time and oft," too, had Jacob heard that 
epitome of life . " All the world's a stage/' 
spoken by the schoolmaster ; but never had 
the picture seemed so striking as now, 
every fresh phase of "the seven ages," 
stamping his imagination with a vignette, 
as perfect as if limned by the painter's 
art 

The applause was like the rattle of 
falling water, and it continued for many 
minutes. 

Then came the song of Amiens ; and 
once again the old time and the old sensa- 
tions and the old thoughts agitated Jacob 
so much, that he would fain have rushed 
into the street to compose himself; but 
that might not be, for the theatre was too 
crowded to admit of any single person 
forcing a passage out. 

Jacob was, therefore, compelled to sit 



The Threshold of Jacob's Future. 79 

as calmly as his agitated feelings would 
permit, until Rosalind spoke the epilogue 
and the theatrical gates were shut upon the 
forest paradise. 

The enthusiasm of the audience now 
knew no bounds. In deference to it the 
curtain went up upon all the performers ; 
then Jacques and Touchstone, with Rosa- 
lind between them, came before the curtain, 
and it was with difficulty that Spen gathered 
up all the bouquets, and loaded the lady's 
kirtle with them. 

Then . there was a loud call for Jacques, 
who came forward to the footlights, and in 
a voice tremulous with emotion expressed 
his gratitude for the kindness of the audi- 
ence. 

" My dear friends," he said, " your 
generous recognition overwhelms me. 
My desertion of you without explanation 
makes your forgiveness more than kind ; 
I shall never forget it. Twenty years 
have passed. It was a painful event that 
dragged me from you. I am an old man 
now." 



80 Stranger than Fiction. 

The actor spoke in disjointed sentences, 
and with an evident desire to say some- 
thing that he could not quite express. 
Whenever he paused the house applauded 
him with a strange sympathetic earnestness. 

" During my exile, Fortune was kind to 
me. It threw in my way a pupil who 
awakened some of the old feelings (ap- 
plause) ; awakened a love of my early pro- 
fession so warmly that I am here (cheers). 
Paul Ferris has reunited the broken links ; 
he brought me here to-night to share these 
honours which he is modest enough to 
say you have showered upon him in 
memory of me. My dear friends, this 
reunion has cast a sunbeam on the autum- 
nal path of age (cheers). My tongue is 
not eloquent. I cannot say all or half 
what I feeL Permit me to say * Farewell/ 
(Cries of ""Xo. no." and applause. A 
voice : fc God bless you. Dudley."*) Dear 
friends, Farewell! 

|l *I woe lm isssifc Buqpgy it I oacld sit bav zem- ? 

f FaieveO! FareweDT 



K 



The Threshold of Jacob's Future. 81 

The applause broke out afresh as the old 
actor retired ; and there were tears in many 
other eyes beside those of Jacob Martyn. 

Jacob flow made the best of his way to 
the door. Half-stifled, and under the in- 
fluence of a variety of strong emotions, he 
made his way from the pit to the box 
entrance, and there inquired how he could 
send his card to Mr. Ferris. He was 
directed to the stage door, which, after 
many inquiries, Jacob found at the top of a 
damp mildewy alley. 

Following sundry shabby people, Jacob 
entered the door pointed out to him, and 
found himself in the august presence of the 
stage porter. 

" Can I send my card to Mr. Paul 
Ferris ?" inquired Jacob, 

" He's just gone on in the second piece," 
said the porter (a fat inquisitive thick-headed 
looking fellow) over the half-door which 
barred egress to his den, and enabled him 
to see who passed and repassed. 

" My business with him is of the utmost 
importance," said Jacob, deferentially, 

VOL. III. 6 



^ 



8 2 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Has Mr. Simmons nearly done ?" said 
a slip-shod woman, thrusting herself before 
Jacob. 

" No, he ain't," said the porter. 

"Will you tell him little Jane's very 
bad, and he's to come home quick ?" said 
the woman, hurriedly. 

" Worse to-night, then ?" inquired the 
porter, sinking his voice. 

" Very bad," said the woman, " we fear 
she'll not get the night over." 

" Here, you," said the porter, calling to 
a boy who was passing ; " tell Mr. Simmons 
that he's wanted at home as soon as he can 
get away." 

Woman and boy disappeared, and Jacob 
resumed his business. 

"What would you advise me to do, sir?" 
said he pacifically and respectfully, for he 
felt that he had only to win the porter's 
interest to do almost what he pleased. 

" You wish to send to Mr. Ferris ?" 

" Yes." 

"What is it?" 
Merely my card, and a message that 
Mn Martyn is waiting." 



The Threshold of Jacob's Future. 83 

" Would you like to step in out of the 
draught ?" 

Jacob stepped in out of the draught, and 
did all he could to open up a conversation 
with the porter, but this stage Argus de- 
voted his chief attention to a kettle on a 
few smouldering cinders, and to a conver- 
sation about canaries with an old fellow 
who had just limped in. 

Jacob had, therefore, plenty of time 
to examine the disorderly apartment in 
which he had been so fortunate as to 
obtain a seat. It presented to the eye 
a strange conglomeration of litter . two 
tables, a bench, two chairs, a glue-pot, a 
battered fender, a broken poker, an empty 
bottle, a yellow jug, a box, a number of old 
playbills, several dirty newspapers, a greasy 
book, a hammer, and other miscellaneous 
articles ; besides several notices, in bad 
writing, hanging from the dirty walls, one 
of which notices particularly attracted 
Jacob's attention. 

It informed daring and presumptuous 
authors that the management of this 

6.2 



84 Stranger than Fiction. 

theatre would not be responsible for the 
return of any manuscripts which might be 
left there for consideration. Jacob little 
thought how many hope-sick Triplets had 
looked at that sign, with tears in their 
eyes, and begged like suppliant slaves 
for a letter about their plays, which, if only 
enacted, would make the fortune of the 
house ! 

Men, women, and children passed and 
repassed Jacob as he stood in the porter's 
room. They were all busy and shabby, 
most of them were merry, some of them 
carried jugs of beer, some had mysterious 
parcels under their aprons. Jacob could 
hear the rumbling of scenery in the dis- 
tance, and the faint echoes of applause 
and laughter in the house. The farce had. 
just begun. 

" What's the message, Tom ?" presently 
said a man, thrusting his head over the 
porter's half-door. The questioner was 
very profusely painted, and dressed in a 
gaudy Spanish suit. 

" Is that Mr. Simmons ?" said the porter, 



The Threshold of J acoV s Future. 85 

rising from his knees after a fruitless at- 
tempt to rouse the fire into a sufficient heat 
to warm the kettle. 

" Yes, be quick . I shall be called in a 
moment What's the news ?*' 

" Well, it's bad . little Jane is worse/' 

" Poor darling !" said the actor, with a 
sigh that was pitiful ; and then Jacob heard 
a voice say, " Mr. Simmons called," and the 
player was gone. 

"Is that the father of the sick child ?" 
Jacob ventured to inquire. 

"Aye, poor fellow !" said the old man, who 
had been talking about canaries, "he only lost 
his wife six months since, and he's playing 
a comic lover . do you hear the house, how 
it's laughing ? Mr. Ferris has got him by 
the ear now, after discovering him in a 
cupboard, where a domestic is supposed to 
have hidden him. A pleasant situation 
while your heart's breaking about a dying 
baby ! Ah ! thank God, I've given over 
work, and have neither chick nor child 1"^ 

At this moment a figure leaned over the 
porter's door, which attracted everybody's 



86 Stranger than Fiction. 

attention. The old man rose respectfully 
from his seat ; the porter bowed obsequi- 
ously ; and Jacob Martyn fixed his eyes 
ijpon Mr. Spawling of Cartown, who was 
no other than Mr. Liston Dudley of London. 
But how altered now that he was off the 
stage ! Before the footlights he had looked 
younger than when Jacob knew him at 
Cartown ; but now the wrinkles in his face 
were all to be seen, his bushy eyebrows 
were as white as snow. His mouth was a 
little more sunken, the chin slightly more 
prominent ; but there remained all the 
former benignant expression. 

u Do you know if my cab is ready ?" in- 
quired Mr. Dudley. 

" It is, sir," said a voice from behind, 
and Jacob's old friend was about to turn 
away. 

" Stay, sir, a moment, if you please/' 
said Jacob, advancing and opening the 
half-door. " Do you not know me ?" 

" Your voice is familiar to me," said Mr. 
Spawling, slowly ; " but my sight is not so 
good as it was ; come a little nearer/' 




The Threshold of J acob' s Future. 87 

Jacob advanced ; and, unable any longer 
to endure the vacant gaze of his old friend, 
he suddenly seized him by the hand and 
pronounced his own name. 

Then the great actor knew him, and 
the joy at this unexpected meeting was 
mutual. 

" Why, what a fine fellow you have 
grown," exclaimed the old man, " and 
' bearded like the pard.' " 

" Not exactly," said Jacob, laughing at 
this sally at certain signs of manliness on 
the lower part of Jacob's face. 

"Well, we will not stand gossiping 
here," said Mr. Spawling ; " come home 
with me. I have refused a score of invi- 
tations to supper, and declined also to take 
any one home, feeling that I must rest and 
get this excitement over ; but you will help 
me ; we shall go back to the country, if not 
actually, at least in imagination ; come 
along;" and turning to the porter and 
putting something in his hand, he said : 
" Tell Mr. Ferris to follow us immediately 
. tell him that Mr. Jacob Martyn and his 



88 Stranger than Fiction. 

friend Mr. Spawling have gone to sup with 
Mr. Dudley." 

Jacob's old friend smiled at his own joke ; 
and presently he and Jacob were being 
driven through the busy streets to the 
north side of Regent's Park, where Mr. 
Liston Dudley and his pupil lived in happy 
companionship together. 





CHAPTER VII. 

RETURNS ONCE MORE TO THE GROVE, WHERE 
JACOB NARRATES HIS LONDON ADVENTURES 
TO MR. WINDGATE WILLIAMS. 

O you found the tide at the flood, 
as I predicted ?" said the Dins- 
ley editor, sticking a glass in 
his eye, and looking admiringly 
at Jacob over the steam of a hot glass of 

g ro g- 

" Yes ; and I had some adventures on 

the rapid current," said Jacob. 

"First about Ginghems . let's have it 
brief and pointed, like an epigram." 

" They accepted my sketches ; the title 
which they liked best was the one you liked 
best . * On the Track of a Sunbeam/" 



go Stranger than Fiction. 

v * Bravo ! go on . go on, favoured of 
Fortune." 

" Two hundred pounds, and something 
more in case it proves as successful as they 
think it may be." 

" Hurrah. go it, Midas !" 

" A guinea for every column I write for 
the Post . they must be sketches of places 
or of character." 

" Yes, Croesus . yes, gold-coiner, yes, 
yes." 

Windgate Williams rose from his seat, 
and contemplated Jacob closely. Jacob, 
in his turn, smoked and looked calmly up 
into his friend's inquiring eyes. 

" No humbug, Jacob ?" 

" None at all . truth, sir ; no romancing." 

" Go on, then." 

" An engagement to go into Wales and 
finish a book commenced by a poor fellow 
who died after the first fifty pages were 
written." 

"Why, people are actually dying that 
you may inherit ! You've not been up to 
the . Faust' trick . no, you are too young 




Jacob's London Adventures. 9 1 

for that . once knew a fellow who tried to 
sell himself to the devil. But what is this 
Welsh book ?" 

" 'The Romantic History of the Welsh/ " 

" To be followed by the * Romantic His- 
tory of Jacob Martyn ?' " 

"All in good time," said Jacob. "A 
cynical fellow whom I met at Ginghems' . 
I had luncheon there . a seedy fellow ; an 
Oxford man, I think, and a doctor . very 
clever he seemed . he told me I had better 
be a shoeblack than a literary man; my 
end would be sure to be miserable." 

" You will be an exception, Jacob." 

" The doctor said perhaps that was my 
idea; all men thought themselves excep- 
tions; every man thought every other 
man mortal but himself, and so on." 

" True ; but you are the exception, 
Jacob." 

" The seedy doctor . he was really a 
nice fellow, but awfully cynical . said how 
could I expect to meet a better fate than 
Cervantes, Spenser, Otway, Butler, Dry- 
den ? I said we lived in better days. He 



92 Stranger than Fiction. 

laughed and said I was young and hopeful, 
and that the suri had broken in upon my 
path early ; but I had better go and sweep 
a crossing, for the cloud and the storm and 
the tempest would soon be upon me." 

" Ah, he was a disappointed man . but 
a struggle in London is no joke. To be 
a bookseller's hack is to drag a chain on 
an empty stomach . lots of clever men 
starving in London. Sometimes taverns 
ruin them . but, poor devils ! a drink and 
a chat constitute thfeir chief 'pleasure ; and 
so many pretend they are doing well when 
they are dying of chagrin and want of food. 
Ah, Jacob . you are a lucky dog !" 

" Then you think I have had no trou- 
bles r 

" None, sir, none." 

" Very well ; I will not argue the point. 
Do you know Piccadilly ?" 

" I do. Once dined with Lord de Withers 
. had a house near the Duke of Allcourt's 
place . not far from Hyde Park Corner." 

" Yes, all right," said Jacob ; " I had a 
call to make in Piccadilly." 



Jacob's London Adventures. 93 

" I'ndeed ! More triumphs ?" 
" No, the lady had gone abroad." 
Jacob's voice trembled just a little. He 
was trying to be cool. He wanted to talk 
about Lucy. By this means he thought 
he might get the image of that dear face 
out of his mind. It was his only secret 
from Williams. He had almost given up 
hoping that Lucy would still think of him. 
If he could only have been told that she 
was married he would have gone with a 
damaged heart to Edith Winthorpe, and 
looked for complete repairs in time. But 
for his wonderful success in the Row, and 
the vista of distinction which it opened 
before him, he would not have dared to 
ring the Thornton bell. He did it in a 
moment of desperation. He was almost 
glad there was no one at home. 
" The lady ?" said Williams. 
" I will tell you that incident some other 
time," said Jacob, knocking the ashes of 
his cigar into the fire. 

" Now ; no time like the present." 

" Not now, thank you," said Jacob. 



94 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

" By-and-by. There is something else that 
will be quite as interesting to you. I have 
often talked to you about Mr. Spawling 
and Spen Whiffler ?" 

" Yes, and I know them by heart, school- 
master and merriman . clown and Shakes- 
peare . Petroski and ghost . friend came 
at last . and all that." 

" I saw them in London." 

" Of course . everybody sees everybody 
in London . Spen on the stage, of course." 

" Yes, and entre nous, Mr. Spawling too." 

" Poor old boy . doing the old man, eh ? 
. ah ! old men should be able to leave the 
stage when they are themselves literally in 
the sere and yellow leaf. * Superfluous 
lags / &c." 

" No ; Fll tell you a secret, Williams . 
a bit of real romance. Have you ever 
heard of Mr. Liston Dudley ?" 

" Heard of him . aye, marry that have I 
. and seen him . great man, sir . left the 
stage twenty years ago." 

" He is my Mr. Spawling," said Jacob, 
thrusting his hands into his pockets and 



Jacob's London Adventures. 95 

gazing at Windgate, with the satisfaction 
of one who communicates startling news. 

" No, no . come, no chaff." 

" I tell you Mr. Spawling is Mr. Listori 
Dudley ; and that Spen Whiffler is Mr. 
Paul Ferris, who is such an immense 
favourite in London." 

" By all the Fates, but that's a wonderful 
story! . you will perhaps believe some of 
my anecdotes now." 

" I saw Spen on his benefit night ; Mr. 
Spawling played Jacques to his Touch- 
stone." 

" Well, go on with your romance, as you 
like it, but don't chaff me." 

" I am telling you the truth in every 
particular; I supped with them, and the 
next morning carried a letter of introduc- 
tion and recommendation from Mr. Liston 
Dudley to Ginghems." 

" Marvellous ! . the whole thing h&s been 
specially arranged . the tide was not only 
at the flood, but there was a big ship ready 
fitted out and loaded to your hands . a 
sort of ' Arabian Nights' affair." 



96 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Spen and I went to the General Post 
Office and found two letters there, besides 
the one I wrote before I started for town. 
Spen had called so frequently, during a 
couple of years, for letters and found none, 
that he had . given me up ; I had treated 
his instructions, you know, as a good joke, 
and when I discovered my own stupidity, 
it was too late." 

" You are too much fn the habit of 
treating things, which you consider ex- 
traordinary, as good jokes . that affair of 
mine with the Prussian Count and the 
swindler . aye, and other incidents of Lon- 
don life . but you'll get over that kind of 
scepticism. ,, 

" No doubt ; but stay a moment ; I have 
not finished yet You will never guess 
whom I met at the hotel in the evening." 

" An acquaintance . a friend . an enemy 
.or what ?" 

" He can scarcely be said to belong to 
either category, though he swears he will 
be my friend." 

" Of course . to him that hath shall be 



. yacotis London Adventures. 97 

given . but name, name . who is the gallant 
homme ?" 

" Do you remember the jolly, pompous 
magistrate of Middleton, Squire North- 
Cotes ?" 

"Yes, with a lively recollection of the 
fear of being brought before him for the 
Star affair." 

" I found him sitting over whiskey punch 
in a lonely corner of the coffee-room ; we 
exchanged looks of curiosity for some little 
time, which ended in mutual recognition. 
You remember my telling you of the inter- 
view I had with him." 

" Yes ; the Fates preserve him !" 

"He reminded me of it, made me give 
him my address, and promise to call and . 
see him whenever I visited Middleton." 

" I always told you he was good at the 
bottom . funny and pompous, I grant you 
. not over refined . shows a most laudable 
desire, moreover, to wipe out any little in- 
justice to the father by kindness to the 
son. Well, Jacob, I congratulate you with 
all .my heart* and when you rise to be a 

vol. in. 7 



98 Stranger than Fiction. 

very great man, don't forget poor old Wind- 
gate Williams, who might also have been 
something more than he is, if he had had 
half your industry ; though he never found 
out, as you have done, the exact time 
when the tide was at the flood . if he had 
made that discovery he would have found 
no ship to embark in . and supposing he 
had found the ship, he would have been 
wrecked before he was fairly out of port. 
Fortune never did anything for Windgate 
Williams . perhaps she was right . but be- 
lieve me I am happy in your success . God 
bless you, Jacob Martyn, God bless you !" 
The Dinsley Editor was overcome at the 
contemplation of Jacob's success. " I must 
go into the next room and compose my 
feelings," he said. 

" Do so, my dear sir," Jacob replied, 
patting his friend on the shoulder. 

The Editor retired, and Jacob sat down 
to answer a letter from Dr. Johnson, which 
had been placed in his hands that morn- 
ing. 

Mrs. Smick interfered with Jacob's epis- 



Jacob's London Adventures, 99 

tolary work by stepping in to make some 
trivial inquiry, and remaining to discover, if 
possible, the secret of Jacob's recent sudden 
journey, which she had reason to fear 
threatened her with the loss of a lodger. 

Jacob speedily confirmed Mrs. Smick's 
fears ; and that voluble lady wept over the 
prospect of Mr. Martyn's departure. 

It was just as her dear Smick so often 
said, which his remarks were always natu- 
rally good, that you no sooner got used to 
a thing, not that she meant Mr. Martyn 
was a thing, but the remark was allegorical, 
as poor Smick used to say, and no sooner 
did you get use to it than you lost it. 
Never had she had a gentleman, who more 
behaved himself as sich, though Mr. Wil- 
liams was very kind, and all that, which it 
were not for a poor widow to undervalue, 
but she should never have felt his leaving 
her as she would Mr. Martyn. 

Jacob soothed his landlady by a glowing 
eulogium of her kindness and attention 
since he had had the pleasure of living at 
the Grove. 



ioo Stranger than Fiction. 

After a few more tears, Mrs. Smick con- 
tinued her discourse. 

. " It is not as I wish to make mischief, 
which were never a weakness of anybody 
belonging to me, but if you have told that 
Edith Winthorpe " 

" That Edith Winthorpe ! I really do 
not see why you should speak of the young 
lady in that manner," said Jacob, turning a 
reproachful look upon Mrs. Smick. 

" Well, of course it is not for me to ques- 
tion people's likes and dislikes, and if you 
prefer it, Mr. Martyn, I will drop the 
subjeck." 

" You niay please yourself about that, 
Mrs. Smick," said Jacob, curtly. 

" Well, I'll say no more, but it does seem 
strange that two young people, who have 
made eyes at each other so long, should 
be both tired of the Grove at the same 
time : but I wish you good night, sir." 

Mrs. Smick, after drying her crocodile 
tears, swept out of the room with a majestic 
air that both puzzled and amused him. 

Her strange words were soon forgotten 




yacoUs London Adventures. 101 

in his plans for the future. Having an- 
swered Mr. Johnson's letter, Jacob drew 
his chair towards the fire and wondered. 
He looked back to the days of the factory 
angel ; he saw Middleton in the red em- 
bers of the fire ; he walked up the long 
straggling street from the bridge, and into 
the little back garden; he heard the fac- 
tory hymn ; he saw that dear face at the 
window ; he sat beside the mail driver, and 
wandered in the woods of Cartown ; he 
watched a lovely girl gathering apples; 
he heard the clock beating away the mo- 
ments during that last day in her dear 
society ; he saw himself a wanderer in high- 
ways and by-ways ; he saw the frost and 
snow, and the ice-bound river of his hopes, 
and now, lo ! the sunshine was coming. If 
he could know one thing he would be the 
happiest fellow in all the world. Gh ! for 
a real magician's glass in which he might 
see the face of her who should be his wife I 



CHAPTER VIIL 




OF CERTAIN EMIGRANTS ON BOARD THE 
"HESPERUS;" AND CONCERNING A WELL- 
KNOWN MELODY THAT LED TO A BLISS- 
FUL DISCOVERY. 

Y the kindness of Mr. Williams, 
Jacob was enabled at once to 
throw up his Dinsley engage- 
ment ; and, on the invitation of 
Mr. Horatio Johnson (with whom Mr. 
Williams had recently spent a day at Mid- 
dleton), he took Liverpool on his way into 
the Principality of Wales, for the purpose 
of bidding adieu to a party of emigrants in 
whose welfare he was deeply interested. 




A Blissful Discovery. 103 

It was a calm summer night, when Jacob 
and the Doctor, and Mrs. Horatio Johnson, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Titsy, sat in a 
corner of the best cabin of the Hesperus, 
bound to Canada. The moonlight was 
streaming in upon them through the cabin 
window ; Mrs. Johnson was plying her 
knitting needles, and looking up occasion- 
ally to make a remark ; the Doctor was 
detailing to Jacob his views about the 
future, and the comparative ease with 
which money begot money in the colonies ; 
Tom was listening to the Doctor, and 
smiling at Susan ; while Jacob was wishing 
them all sorts of success and happiness 
whenever a lull occurred in the conversa- 
tion, and exacting promises of frequent 
letters. 

The parting hour came at last. Mrs. 
Johnson, though in her heart she could not 
altogether forgive Jacob, for we know what, 
joined in the general feeling of sorrow at 
leaving him ; but happy in their own good- 
ness and honest affection, not one of the 
four had any regrets in setting out for a 



104 Stranger than Fiction. 

new home far away from scenes with which 
were associated so many bitter memories. 
Jacob took his leave with much real emo- 
tion ; and an hour afterwards stood gazing 
at a ship that was disappearing in the 
moonlight, to be followed by other vessels 
which other people would look after and 
wave handkerchiefs at, and weep about, 
and dream of in the silent watches of the 
night. 

On the following afternoon Jacob arrived 
at the first stage in his Welsh expedition* 
and found at the post-office, Neath ville, 
according to prior arrangement, a bundle of 
proofs of his first book. To read these 
was, at that time, a labour of love indeed, 
even though the labour continued long after 
the sun had disappeared, and the moon had 
risen again . the same moon that was look- 
ing down on the emigrant ship, and making 
long white tracks on the distant ocean 
which now rolled between Jacob and his 
old friends. 

Neath ville was a quiet, mossy old place, 
with the sea in front, and on every other side 



A Blissful Discovery. 1 05 

a country studded with gray ruins of old 
walls and castles, the histories of which are 
a rich mine of instruction, poetry, and 
romance. The Flemish found the town a 
fishing village, and, struck with its many 
natural advantages, settled there, and, 
assisted by Norman allies, fortified the 
place ; but the Welsh many years after- 
wards surprised the settlers, put them to 
the sword, and razed the fortifications to 
the ground. From that period (somewhere 
about the eleventh century), until after the 
advent of Oliver Cromwell, the history of 
Neath ville had been one of great interest . 
a story of war and tribulation, of piracy and 
bloodshed, of sack and famine, of heroism 
and bravery ; and in all quarters the anti- 
quary could lay his fingers upon some fine 
memento of the greatness and the littleness 
of past ages. There was an old castle ; % a 
gray church, filled with quaint memorials ; 
some ruined walls, the remains of a priory ; 
two medicinal springs, and a variety of 
other attractions ; besides a long pictu- 
resque fringe of rocks which skirted the 



106 Stranger than Fiction. 

bay and ran out, hard and jagged, into the 
sea. 

At the period of my story, the fine sandy 
beach was not the promenade of fast gen- 
tlemen from town, looking through eye- 
glasses at fast ladies from the same place ; 
nor had the donkey driver made his appear- 
ance there. At the most fashionable hour 
in the day, Jacob saw only a few groups of 
people on the immense tract of beach which 
stretched away until it seemed to join the 
clouds at a rocky point, where many a ship 
had been lured to destruction in the dark 
days of the wreckers. 

Musing over his own thoughts, which 
were chiefly occupied with the design of 
writing a full explanation of his position to 
Lucy, and endeavouring to fix an interview 
which should be final " for weal or woe," 
Jacob was returning home one evening not 
long after his arrival at Neath ville, when, 
as if in response to the yearning of his heart, 
there fell upon his ear the faint' melody of 
a strain so familiar to him, that at first he 
thought it but the creation of his own fancy. 



A Blissful Discovery. 107 

A treacherous memory and a strong imagina- 
tion will sometimes play curious tricks with 
the senses ; but Jacob was soon convinced 
that the music which he heard was no trick 
of the fancy, but blissful reality. It stole 
over the rocks, in undulating cadences, and 
transported him back to bygone days, as 
completely as though he had been under 
some such spell as Mesmer might have 
worked, taking the reason prisoner, and 
planting the mind with whatever picture 
the enchanter willed. Jacob was again in 
the garden at Middleton, with the morning 
sun shining upon him, and the falling waters, 
and the songs of birds. 

There is a happy land, 
Far, far away. 

High over the rocks above him, from a 
noble castellated house, came the well- 
known music. As Jacob listened, all the 
sensations of hope and fear and doubt 
and dread which he had felt when he 
looked on the footprints in the snow at 
Cartown, came back for the moment to 




108 Stranger than Fiction. 

replace the first thoughts of the old 
home, and the garden-paradise. There 
was only one voice which could sing that 
song so % sweetly, so plaintively. A harp 
accompaniment added to the effect of the 
dear old melody, and with the murmur of 
the sea, as a deep bass, and Jacob's own 
strong imagination and memories of happy 
times, my readers will readily believe that 
the music was an attraction which Jacob 
did not desire to resist 

To go round by the regular path, to 
reach the house situated on the summit of 
the rocks, were a tedious process indeed 
for Jacob in his present mood. Straight 
to the house, whence the music came, was 
his only course. Away he went with the 
alaCrity of a practised climber. There had 
been a time when his mind would not, 
under similar circumstances, have strayed 
for a moment from the object of his climb- 
ing ; but now that he was an author, the 
demon of " copy," which sometimes startles 
writers at all hours, suggested to him, what 
a capital situation it would be, supposing he 



A Blissful Discovery. 109 

were writing a story out of his own experi- 
ences, to make himself fall over the rocks 
and be discovered by his mistress just in 
time to save his precious life, and with the 
timely aid to receive an assurance of her 
eternal love. 

Jacob did not fall, although his path was 
made additionally dangerous by the starting 
up, here and there, of flocks of sea-birds* 
which* filling the air with their peculiar cries* 
compelled him to pause and listen for the 
music to the source of which he was hurry- 
ing. He had scarcely reached the summit of 
the rocks when the melody changed to a 
new and an unknown one ; but, a few 
moments afterwards, when he had stepped 
aside from the full view of the room with 
its tall windows opening out upon a lawn, 
Jacob detected in the new song some 
simple words which he had written for Lucy 
Cantrill, when he was a schoolboy and 
had dreams by the Cartown river. 

I have said that the windows were wide 
open. Screening himself behind a figure 
of Neptune, which stood in the centre of 



no Stranger than Fiction. 

the lawn, Jacob looked into the room, as 
an erring mortal, tempted by Naiad strains, 
might have gazed into some sea-beat grot 
How like, and yet how unlike his Lucy, 
was the lady who now sat conjuring from 
a Welsh harp music that Ariel might have 
made in Prospero's island ! 

Jacob's heart told him quickly enough 
who the musician was. Still the old times 
did not seem so distinct, now that he 
looked upon her again, as they had ap- 
peared when he heard the factory hymn 
coming over the rocks ten minutes previ- 
ously. Tlten he had thought of Lucy as 
he saw her under the apple tree in Can- 
trills little garden by the wood ; of Lucy 
in her straw hat, simple bodice, and pro- 
vincial skirts, walking by his side with just 
sufficient coquettishness to fill him full of 
doubts and fears, and excite the wish that 
he were old enough to marry her, lest per- 
chance some more gallant knight should 
carry her off. Now he saw another 
Lucy, and yet the same. The soft blue 
eyes as of yore, the sweet full lip, the hair 



A Blissful Discovery. 1 1 1 

a shade darker, the figure taller, and that 
of a woman. It was Lucy refined, not so 
much by fashion as by education, and the 
effect of living in an aristocratic atmo- 
sphere ; it was the beautiful girl of the 
old times grown into the lovely woman, 
and bearing all the impress of the Great 
Artist's finishing touches. 

By-and-by the hand which had wandered 
over the strings fell gently by the per- 
former's side, and the lady looked upwards; 
it seemed to Jacob that her eyes were 
fixed upon him. A moment previously he 
had hurriedly decided to present himself at 
the house in the usual manner, and inquire 
for Miss Thornton, fearing that the more 
romantic fashion of walking in at the win- 
dow, after a scramble over the rocks would 
alarm her. But that might not be, for Lucy 
came forth, passed across the lawn, close 
by where he stood, and, leaning Over the 
terrace which surmounted the rocks, looked 
pensively out to sea. Jacob felt that he 
could not escape without attracting her 
attention. He walked quietly towards her, 



H2 Stranger than Fiction. 

and with his heart beating a wild tattoo, 
he whispered " Lucy." 

The lady turned upon him with a startled, 
doubtful look. Jacob stretched forth his 
arms, and in another moment Mr. Caven- 
dish Thorntons matrimonial schemes were 

scattered to the winds for ever. 

* * * * 

Jacob went to his hotel that night the 
happy fellow of whom he had once or twice 
only ventured to dream. He had told Lucy 
his story, and she had spoken something 
of her own. He needed no confession 
of her love. Of her truth and constancy he 
had sufficient evidence in the singing of 
those simple words, which had been a 
boyish tribute to her in the golden days of 
Cartown. He was certainly puzzled to 
know why she had not received his letters; 
though he was hardly surprised that her 
inquiries concerning himself had been 
unsuccessful He cared little or nothing 
about these minor circumstances now. He 
could not, however, help noticing that they 
seemed greatly to disturb Lucy, who made 




A Blissful Discovery. 113 

him promise to make inquiries concern- 
ing the letters which he had addressed 
to her at Cartown. He fulfilled this pro- 
mise at once, and by the same post wrote 
to Ginghems to say that he should not be 
prepared to send " copy " for the Welsh 
work so quickly as he had at first antici- 
pated. Neathville, he said, had charmed 
him almost beyond description. He should 
never be sufficiently grateful to Messrs. 
Ginghem for sending him into Wales. A 
world of romance had been opened up to him. 
They would be surprised when he told them 
of his great discovery in the Principality. 
Jacob chuckled at the hidden waggery of 
his letter. He wrote a most mad epistle 
to Windgate Williams, who really feared 
that Jacob's success had suddenly turned hi9 
head; 




vol. iii. 



CHAPTER IX, 





A STORM ON THE WELSH COAST. 

HE reader was prepared by a 
conversation between Lucy and 
Dorothy for Miss Thornton's 
departure from London. The 
belle of the season had either grown tired 
of the restraints of Mayfair; or she had 
seriously felt her educational deficiencies ; 
or she was bored by the Hon. Max 
Walton ; or she had a severe relapse into 
Jacob Martynism. I am hardly in a posi- 
tion to explain the young lady's reasons 
for her almost sudden determination to 
leave town. She wanted to go before her 
first season was really over ; and, above all 



A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 115 

things, she would insist upon her uncle 
keeping her retreat a secret Mr. Thorn- 
ton induced her to stay in town until Lord 
Folden and his brother, Max Walton, began 
to make their arrangements for grouse 
shooting ; but Lucy was firmness itself in 
her determination that her address should 
not be known for a long time, and that no 
visitors should be invited to Lydstep 
House. Her uncle had been a good deal 
troubled by Lucy's plans, which excluded a 
return to town for two or three years. He 
would not hear of this. Then she would 
go abroad, ever so far away, where it was 
impossible to get back for years. Had any- 
thing occurred in town to offend or annoy 
her ? No. Was there anything he could 
do to make London more agreeable to her ? 
No; she had no objection to London. 
When she felt competent by education and 
ordinary accomplishments to take her posi- 
tion in town, she would return. She was 
competent ; she was the queen of the 
season ; her accomplishments had a fresh- 

8.2 



1 1 6 Stranger than Fiction. 

ness that was charming ; she might marry 
into the noblest family in the land at once, 
if she would ; she was worthy of her name, 
worthy of all the Thornton gallery of an- 
cestral portraits, worthy of the highest state. 
Mr. Thornton grew eloquent in her praises, 
and entreated the young beauty to recon- 
sider her plans ; but Lucy kissed him, and 
was adamant. 

Lydstep House was the family residence 
of some friends of Mr. Thornton who had 
gone abroad for three or four years, 
Lucy accepted the offer of it at once, with- 
out seeing it ; and the place turned out all 
that could be desired. Mr. Thornton had 
visited his wayward niece as frequently as 
his old habits would permit. He had been 
content to hunt and shoot his grouse 
in Wales instead of Scotland for her sake 
during two seasons. Only two days prior 
to Jacobs unexpected appearance on the 
scene, he had once more arrived on a long 
visit to his lovely niece, who was accom- 
panied in her retreat by Mr. Thornton's 



A Storm on the Welsh Coast 1 1 7 

housekeeper, and two awfully clever and 
learned companion teachers of art, science, 
and languages . ladies who had sounded 
the depths of all educational systems, who 
had dived into the hidden mysteries of 
science, and who had soare<d on the wings 
of inspiration into the highest realms of 
art. Lucy professed to be a wonderfully 
earnest and industrious pupil of these ves- 
tals of learning, but she really devoted 
most of her time to music and drawing. 
Her sketch-books were full of pictures that 
she called " reminiscences. " They were 
rough studies of cottages, country stiles and 
walks, bits of brook scenery, glimpses of 
woodland nooks. One of the vestals had 
indeed expressed to the other some serious 
alarm at the monotonous and limited charac- 
ter of the young lady's pleasures. But Lucy 
in her own quiet way had impressed upon 
their minds that she was the mistress of Lyd- 
step House, and that she had a will of her 
own apart from Mr. Thornton's; they there- 
fore kept their views of Miss Thornton's 



1 1 8 Stranger tJian Fiction. 

habits to themselves, and had nothing but 
praises of her mind, her intellect, and her 
amiability for the ear of her uncle. 

A few days after Jacob Maityn's sudden 
appearance at Lydstep House, Mr. Caven- 
dish Thornton, as was his wont, having 
partaken of coffee and dry toast in his own 
apartment, went into Lucy's morning room 
to have a chat with his niece. 

" I want to talk seriously to you, sir, this 
morning," said Lucy the moment her uncle 
entered the room. 

" What is the matter, my child ?" said 
Mr. Thornton, taking her hand. "Your 
lip is trembling, and you look angry." 

" I think I am angry," said Lucy, " but 
I do not wish to be angry, only firm ; uncle, 
you have done me a great wrong, and 
yourself too." 

" Lucy, what is the meaning of this 
strange manner ?" 

'You have sacrificed me to family 
pride," said Lucy ; " accepting a trust from 
one who laid down his life for the honour 




A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 119 

of his family and the glory of his king, you 
have betrayed it ; you have allowed me to 
go on doubting the truest heart that ever 
beat, and you have almost driven me into 
marrying out of spite a person whom I 
could never love." 

Contemplating the abyss upon which her 
woman's judgment had tottered, Lucy was 
almost beside herself with anger against 
him who had stood between her and 
Jacob. 

" Lucy, you are mad, or I am dreaming," 
exclaimed Mr. Thornton, his every action 
betokening the greatest amazement 

" / am not mad, uncle ; you are not 
dreaming. It is now four years since you 
found me a happy girl, since which time 
you have made my life a burden to me." 

" Lucy, Lucy !" exclaimed her uncle. 

" What did I care for fortune, when you 
had thrust from me all I cared to live 
for ?" 

Lucy had satisfied herself, in a conversa- 
tion with Allen, that Mr. Thornton had 



1 20 Stranger than Fiction. 

intercepted ljer letters to Jacob and kept 
back Jacob's letters to herself. 

" I do not understand you, niece ; nor 
will my love for you permit me to listen 
to this language. Since first I had the 
happiness of restoring x you to the world, 
and fulfilling a sacred trust confided to me 
by my nephew and by your father, you 
have been continually in my thoughts ; it 
has been my chief delight to sacrifice my- 
self for your happiness," 

"Happiness!" exclaimed Lucy, with 
sorrowful dignity, and with a composure 
before which Mr. Thornton grew confused 
and troubled. " Happiness ! Was it not 
enough that my poor mother should die of 
a broken heart, that my dear, dear father 
should have his last moments embittered 
by your miserable family pride ? Was not 
this a sufficient sacrifice, but the Thornton 
blood, the Thornton escutcheon, the Thorn- 
ton portrait gallery should demand another 
victim ?" 

"When you are mistress of yourself, 




A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 1 2 1 

Miss Thornton," said the old man, " I will 
listen to you : meanwhile I will seek else- 
where for information concerning the 
change which has come over you. Ingrati- 
tude is not a Thornton vice. You are not 
well, Lucy ; you are not yourself." 

Mr. Thornton began to have some faint 
idea of the situation ; but he was too much 
overcome to collect his thoughts and 
meet it 

" Do not leave me, uncle/' said Lucy ; 
" I will try and be calm. Pray, sit down ; 
we must understand each other now." 

" Then be good enough without this 
strange declamation . which is an accom- 
plishment I did not know you possessed, 
my child . to explain yourself." 

" I will," said Lucy, her eyes filling with 
tears. " When you found me, I was happy, 
if I was poor. What have riches to do 
with happiness ?" 

A great deal, thought Mr. Thornton. 

" I was poor, but contented and happy in 
the love of one who, if he had neither name 



122 Stranger than Fiction. 

nor fortune to recommend his suit, would 
not have soiled his fingers with dishonour ; 
no, not for a dukedom.'* 

Mr. Thornton now saw the situation 
clearly, and at once chided himself mentally 
for thinking that he could hope to turn 
that youthful attachment which Allen had 
discovered in the first hours of their 
triumphant discovery of the Thornton 
heiress. 

" You knew of my engagement ; you 
broke it ruthlessly and by improper means ; 
you did not even take the trouble to con- 
sider whether he was worthy of my love ; 
you did not even seek to know the secret 
of my own heart; you intercepted his 
letters." 

Mr. Thornton winced at this. It was a 
blow; it struck his pride roughly; it brought 
the colour into his face. 

" Yes, leagued with your own servant, to 
make me doubt a true and noble heart ; 
and I was weak enough to believe ill of 
him. The Thornton blood was not noble 



A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 123 

enough to give me a true woman's faith 
and generosity. I have behaved like 
the wretched thing I had nearly become 
. a lady of fashion, a queen in society, 
a West-end belle. I despise myself for the 
very narrowness of my escape." * 

"Be calm, Lucy! be calm," said Mr. 
Thornton. He did not know what else to 
say. That reference to the letters was 
a blow which almost struck him help- 
less. 

Between her tears Lucy's eyes flashed 
anger, sorrow, and indignation. She 
sobbed and paced the room like one dis- 
traught. 

" And to think that I should have 
doubted him !" she went on. " To think 
that finery and jewels and those empty 
dolls in the Row should have overshadowed 
his image, should have dimmed the re- 
membrance of that last day at Cartown! 
To think that Mr. Max Walton, a lord's 
son, who makes bets on his conquest of a 
woman, should have filled the very smallest 



1 24 Stranger than Fiction. 

corner of my thoughts for a moment ! To 
think that I could not have guessed what 
had been done to deceive me !" 

" Be calm," said Mr. Thornton again, 
" you do not think what you say." 

" Oh, Mr. Thornton ! Uncle, if you 
will," said Lucy, softening. "Was this 
worthy of you ? Was this worthy of your 
great and noble ancestors ?" 

" Damme if I think it was !" exclaimed 
the old man, starting up from his seat and 
striding across the room. " I never was in 
such an infernal fix in my life. Ton my soul 
I don't quite know where I am. If they had 
told me that my niece Lucy could have 
abused her proud old uncle in this strain I 
would have said they lied. Damme ! I would 
have fought my own brother to the death 
for half the accusations she has made against 
me. But a woman ! . what the devil are 
you to do with a woman ?" 

As Lucy softened in her manner, Mr. 
Thornton began to be tempestuous. He 
had no other resource. He did not know 



A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 125 

what to do or say. Lucy having given 
full rein to her anger, now, like a woman, 
found relief in sympathetic tears. 

" Uncle, I am only a woman," she said. 
" I have been sorely tried. I did not mean 
to say all I have said. I know it is all a 
mistake." 

" Mistake, damme ! A fine mistake," 
said Mr. Thornton, marching about the 
room. 

" I know you did not mean to be un- 
kind ; you would have made me a queen 
if you could. ,, 

" Unkind, damme ! . heaven forgive me 
for swearing in the presence of a lady . 
nothing was farther from my though ts" 

Lucy followed him as he paced the 
room. 

" I have no doubt you thought it was for 
my own good." 

" Good ! . I would have died for you. 
Damme, I would have done factory work 
myself for you sooner than you should 
have been unhappy !" 



126 Stranger than Fiction. 

Lucy took his hand. The two went 
marching away from one end of the room 
to the other. 

" I could never marry Max Walton/' 
said Lucy. 

" Damn Max Walton ! . shade of the 
Thorntons, forgive me . you shall not be 
coerced." 

Lucy slipped her arm through her 
uncle's, and laid her head on his 
shoulder. 

4< Forgive me, uncle . dear uncle," she 
said in her winning voice. 

Uncle Thornton stopped suddenly. 
" God bless you, my child," he exclaimed, 
and the next moment he was fairly sobbing 
over her. 

" I could not bear to lose your good 
opinion, Lucy, to say nothing of your love ; 
it was as much that old fool Allen's fault 
as mine ; I am as big an ass as he is ; for- 
give me, darling ; promise never to say an 
unkind word again to me ; I'm only an old 
woman, a silly old woman ; I could not get 



A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 127 

on at all without you, Lucy, my dear, dear 
child/' 

The old man stroked her head and* 
fondled her hands. 

" I am so very very sorry," sobbed Lucy. 
" I ought to have explained myself to you 
long ago, ought to have told you all ; it is 
I who am to blame." 

" No, no, my dear Lucy ; say no more 
about it ; put your arms round my neck ; 
I had a little sister like you when I was a 
boy ; she died when I was a boy, too ; I 
am an old man now, Lucy, a very old man ; 
there, my dear child, there, there !" 

The subdued old gentleman rocked Lucy 
to and fro in his arms and crooned over her, 
and Lucy was stung with remorse and 
sorrow so deeply that at last she fainted 
and lay still as if she were dead. 

The shock was very brief ; Lucy opened 
her eyes at the first drop of water which 
the old man hurriedly flung in her face. 

" Don't ring," she whispered. " I shall 
be better in a moment." 



128 Stranger than Fiction. 

He bathed her temples, and kissed her, 
and chafed her hands, and the colour re- 
turned to her cheeks. 

" Let me ring for a little sherry," he said 
calmly, and wiping all traces of emotion 
from his face. 

" Yes, dear," said Lucy. 

" Bring some sherry and a biscuit," said 
Mr. Thornton. 

When the wine was brought and the 
servant had disappeared, the old man filled 
a glass for Lucy, which he insisted upon 
her drinking at once. 

" Now Lucy, one more . you must drink 
this. I am going to propose a toast." 
Lucy smiled and took the glass. 

" His health," said the Colonel, empty- 
ing his glass and turning it up German 
fashion. 

Lucy sipped her wine and looked up at 
her uncle, her eyes full of gratitude and 
love. 

4 * What has passed is to be a secret, 
Lucy." 



r\ 



A Storm on the Welsh Coast. 129 

" Yes, dear/' said Lucy. 

" And now, my child, where is he ?" 

" In Neathville," said Lucy, her eyes 
seeking the ground. 

" Thought so," said her uncle. "Let 
him come to me, Lucy . let him come at 
once." 

" Yes, dear uncle," said Lucy ; " and you 
have forgiven my rash and cruel and un- 
kind words ?" 

" We will forgive each other," he said. 
" Let us seal a bond of peace and love," 

He took her face in both his hands, 
kissed her tenderly, patted her head, and 
saying, " Let him come to me at once," left 
the room. 




VOL. III. 




CHAPTER X. 

AFTER THE STORM. 

f O lovers wandering by the sea. 
That was the picture of the calm 
which followed. Two lovers 
walking hand in hand, with the 
sea playing a quiet, soothing accompani- 
ment to their thoughts. The storm was 
over. The tempest had left behind the 
calm which always follows passion. I fear 
Messrs. Ginghem, of Paternoster Row, Lon- 
don, would not have been quite satisfied 
with Jacob's last letter if they could have 
been witnesses of his occupation just then. 
It was a sunny summer evening. The 
dreamy music of the ebbing water fell like 




After the Storm. 131 

balm upon the spirit. It awakened sym- 
pathetic responses in two beating hearts. 
It was full of a sweet solace. Lucy's 
thoughts wandered dreamily to London, 
where the season was throbbing and pulsa- 
ting and boiling up and steaming like a 
hot spring. She thought of herself can- 
tering down the Row, then sauntering 
home to dress for dinner, with Max Walton 
lingering at her side, trying to win his bet ; 
she saw herself being taken in to dinner" by 
Lord Folden ; she heard her praises being 
sung later on at night by Lady Miffits; 
and she shuddered at her narrow escape 
from a fashionable life in the Max 
Walton sense. A little more^ heart- 
lessness, she thought, a little less love of 
Jacob and the old days, and she would 
have ridden straightway into the thick of 
it ; a little looser rein, away she would 
have gone, establishing herself on that 
giddy height of vanity to which her uncle 
and Max Walton would have led her. 
She would have outshone other women 

9.2 



132 Stranger than Fiction. 

both in beauty and jewels, until a new- 
belle came to take the town by storm, and 
eclipse her, and tear her heart with jea- 
lousy. And what would have become of 
Jacob Martyn ? 

The quiet music of the ocean summoned 
Jacob's thoughts back to Middleton and 
the cottage at Cartown. There was one 
transient shadow upon his happiness just 
then. There was a pang of regret in the 
thought that his father was not living 
to see the sunshine of Lucy's face, and to 
know that his only son was going to be 
successful and happy at last. 

" And you came here quite by chance ?" 
said Lucy, after they had walked a long 
distance in a subdued happy silence. 

" Unless a kind fate, pitying my misery, 
brought me here," says Jacob, looking into 
her clear, loving eyes. 

14 Perhaps that is why it led me here 
first I can never forgive myself for 
doubting you, Jacob ! But I do not think 
I did quite doubt you. It used to make 




After tfie Storm. 133 

me very, very miserable to think that the 
day might come when I should " 

" We will not speak, dearest, of such a 
possibility. I once doubted you, Lucy, 
and then I almost doubted our good Father 
Himself; for it seemed as if I had lost 
everything in earth and heaven." 

"My dear Jacob!" said Lucy, leaning 
her head upon his shoulder. 

" Ah ! my dear, sweet girl, you will 
never know how much I love you ; and 
how grateful I am to you for the happiness 
of knowing that you love me . you do, dear, 
don't you ?" 

Jacob liked to hear her say so. 

" Love you ! my own dear Jacob ! But 
do you remember when I was a little 
coquettish, when I appeared to be angry 
at your coming to the cottage on a cleaning 
day ?" 

" Can I ever forget any moment of my 
life spent with you !" 

" How Lady Mary Miffits would stare 
to hear me talk of a cleaning day ! Poor 



134 Stranger than Fiction. 

dear ! she would not know what I 
meant." 

"Who is Lady Miffits ?" 

" No one whom you know, dear ; she 
chaperoned me through my first season in 
town, when I was the belle. They said I 
was the belle/' 

Lucy blushed, and Jacob, looking round 
to see that they had the little bit of bay 
quite to themselves, put his arm round her 
waist and kissed her. He was compen- 
sated for all his misery. How completely 
a long-looked-for, long-desired happiness 
shuts out the pain we have suffered in 
reaching the prize ! The happy land that 
once was so far away, he had reached it. 
The far-off haven that seemed impossible to 
win across a sea of storm and quicksand, 
he had gained the longed-for anchorage. 

What a story they had to tell each other I 
There were some rounded clumps of rock 
in this litde bay, and the lovers sat down 
to bill and coo and talk and repeat their 
vows, and look out upon the sea where a 



After the Storm. 135 

long streak of red gold like a path led the 
way to a land of glorious crimson. They 
were surprised to see how soon it faded 
out, the cold blue of the east gaining in- 
tensity the while, and showing at length a 
marble moon wandering in a little company 
of twinkling stars. 

It was late when they returned to the 
house on the cliffs, and Lucy was framing 
all kinds of excuses for her uncle. She 
had no idea the time had gone so quickly. 
They had so many things to talk about. 
Jacob had been parted from her so long 
that she kept him gossiping about a hun- 
dred things. She hoped her uncle had not 
been troubled about her long absence. 
She had brought Mr. Martyn to plead and 
explain for her. But the little speech was 
not needed. The steamer which had pad- 
dled out to sea while they sat in the little 
bay had Mr. Cavendish Thornton on 
board. 

" He left this note for you, miss," said 
Allen, breathing hard and staring at Jacob 



136 Stranger titan Fiction. 

" It was sudden . master's going ; but I 
were to say that he left his love for you 
and Mr. Martyn, and this note." 

" Dear uncle !" exclaimed Lucy at this 
kind and touching message, implying that 
all her hopes and wishes were realised. 
Jacob's heart beat proudly and with a deep 
gratitude. The significance of the message 
lifted him into the skies. He had come 
prepared to be proud and firm and brave 
with Mr. Cavendish Thornton ; come pre- 
pared to justify himself in what he con- 
ceived would be an angry altercation ; and 
Mr. Thornton had not only left the field 
clear but with signals of amity. Jacob's 
good star was indeed in the ascen- 
dant. 

" My darling niece," read Lucy, through 
a dim halo that gathered about her eyes, 
"we have forgiven each other; we will 
forget all that is disagreeable in the past ; 
but you will never leave your poor old 
selfish uncle." 

"My noble, good uncle, never," said 



After the Storm. 137 

Lucy, the mist gathering before her eyes 
still more densely. " Read it for me, 
Jacob." 

" Desire Mr. Martyn," continued Jacob, 
reading the letter in a voice of emotion, 
"to follow me to London in two or three 
days ; I have gone by my favourite route, 
via Bristol by steamer." 

" We saw it leaving the bay, my dear 
uncle !" said Lucy between her tears. 

" Do not be surprised at my sudden 
return ; tell Mr. Martyn it is on his 
account ; there are many arrangements to 
make. He will give me the address of his 
solicitor, and we shall soon put matters in 
proper form. There is another steamer to 
Bristol in three days from this, if he likes 
that route; or he can take the coach to 
Newport and on to Gloucester, where he 
will get a train. Tell him I am very jea- 
lous of him. If I see that silly brother of 
Lord Folden's, I will put you right with 
him ; he never thought you were very- 
much in earnest." 



138 Stranger tJian Fiction. 



"Poor Max," said Lucy, smiling now 
and looking a trifle archly at Jacob. 

" Who is Max, dear ?" said Jacob. 

"Max Walton, the Honourable Max 
Walton, sir," said Lucy, wiping away the 
last traces of her tears, "one of my ad- 
mirers." 

Jacob smiled, but for a moment he was 
jealous ; only for a moment, and then she 
finished the letter. " Ever, my dear niece, 
yours most affectionately, Cavendish Thorn- 
ton." 

" God bless him," said Lucy, at which 
moment Allen returned to say dinner was 
on the table. 

" Dinner !" said Lucy, in astonishment 

" Unless you have dined," said Allen. 

"Oh, no," said Lucy, "but " 

Allen left the room. 

" Have you dined ?" said Lucy. 

" Yes, on kisses, but without the bread 
and cheese of the proverb," said Jacob, 
taking the dear sweet face in both his big 
hands, and kissing the pouting lips. 



After the Storm. 139- 

" There ! now that will do, Jacob dear ; 
I am going to ring the bell." 

Allen returned. 

" Have the ladies dined V asked Lucy. 

" Yes, miss ; they dined with Mr. Thorn- 
ton, who ordered the table to be laid afresh, 
for two, and kept till you returned, miss." 

" Mr. Martyn, take me in to dinner," 
said Lucy, putting her fair hand on Jacob's 
arm, to the disgust and astonishment of 
Allen, who made up his mind, there and 
then, to follow Mr. Thornton to London 
with all despatch. 

There never was such a delicious little 
dinner ; never were two diners so happy ; 
Jacob could hardly believe that he was not 
dreaming. When dessert was served, and 
they were alone, Lucy said, " We must talk 
about old times to convince me that the 
present is reality." 

" Do you remember that last day at Car- 
town, when you made tea ?" said Jacob. 

" Ah ! yes, I do," Lucy replied, looking 
back at the picture which at once came up 



140 Stranger than Fiction. 

in her memory with a thousand happy 
thoughts. 

" And the clock that would hurry on 
and that dear smell of tar and the wood 
iire r 

" I have thought of it all thousands of 
times, dear ; and when you were obliged to 
-go at last, and I watched the lamp of the 
mail cart until it shone like a star and then 
went out, dear, and left me almost broken 
liearted." 

Jacob drew his chair close to Lucy's, and 
his arm somehow strayed to her waist and 
held her. 

" Lucy, dear, we will go there as soon as 
we can . eh, love ? and see the dear old 
place, the cottage, the wood, that little 
brook, and the apple tree under which 
you stood in those early days when I 
was dying of love and dared not tell 
you." 

" Yes, dear ; and do you remember the 
.gipsy tent, and . " 

Jacob started. 




After the Storm. 14 s 

" What is the matter, dear ?" 

" Nothing," said Jacob, " nothing ; 1 
spent a night or two in the encampment,, 
when I went to the cottage and found you 
gone." 

" Indeed," said Lucy ; " tell me of it. 
love ; when was it ?" 

" In the winter ; it is not a pleasant 
memory; you shall hear the story some 
other time ; at present let us only bask in 
the sunshine, dear ; we have had enough of 
the frost and snow. There, now, you 
must drink one more glass of this grand old 
wine; and we will clink our glasses, as 
Bohemians do, and toast Fortune." 

" What would Allen say if he saw us ?" 
said Lucy, laughing. " I fear we were 
never intended for Mayfair, Jacob." 

"There! I clink the glass at the top^ 
then at the bottom, then I say, c To 
Lucy/" 

"You said we should toast Fortune,"* 
replied Lucy, smiling. 

" It is all the same, dear," said Jacob. 



142 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Now I must leave you to your wine," 
said Lucy, rising, " and prepare my com- 
panions for your presence in the drawing- 
room. I have two wise ladies here who 
assist me in my studies, you know. There, 
dear, will you have coffee here or in the 
-drawing-room ?" 

Lucy looked round at her lover with 
arch sparkling eyes. Jacob's only reply was 
to kiss the mouth that asked the tantalising 
.question. 

Coffee was speedily announced, and 
Jacob followed Allen to the drawing-roQm, 
where he was duly introduced to Lucy's 
ladies, whom he found very pleasant and 
agreeable. They played, and sang, and 
talked of lords and ladies. By-and-by 
Lucy sat down to her harp and sang the 
.dear old hymn of the early days ; and, with 
the reader's permission, we will leave Jacob 
.drinking in words and music and all their 
.dear associations, and, when no one ob- 
served him, quietly wiping away some tears 
of joy. 




CHAPTER XL 




AN ACTORS HOLIDAY. 

[JACOB'S departure for London 
was accelerated, and his route 
thither somewhat changed, by a 
letter which he received at Neath- 
ville* from Paul Ferris, better known to 
my readers as Spenzonian Whiffler. This 
letter had been redirected from Dinsley 
by Mr. Windgate Williams, who, for Jacob's 
edification, had traced upon the back of 
it some wonderful flashes of wit and cali- 
graphy. 

Spen's letter was brief. It informed 
Jacob that the theatre being closed for a 
short season^ he had taken a holiday, and 



144 Stranger than Fiction. 

was to be heard of, for three days only; 
at the Blue Posts Hotel, Cartown, where 
we find Jacob on the evening of the second 
day following his blissful time with Lucy 
Thornton. 

" You must be awfully tired/' said Spen, 
emerging from the dingy coffee-room of 
the " Posts," and shaking his old friend 
warmly by both hands. 

" I am, old boy. I have had a long 
journey, but the sight of your good, kind 
face is as good as a glass of champagne." 

" Waiter, send in the supper I ordered 
as soon as you can," said Spen. 

" All right, sir ; the cook's attending 
to it" 

" And now, Jacob," said Spen, " sit 
down and tell me all about yourself. By 
Jove, I have experienced the strangest heap 
of sensations yesterday and to-day that 
ever afflicted mortal man. I have been in 
one perpetual whirl of excitement, anxiety, 
fear, happiness, depression, misery, and 
bliss." 




An Actors Holiday. 145 

" You have indeed been enjoying your- 
self," said Jacob, smiling. " How long 
has it taken to go through so much ?" 

"Two days, my dear boy; only two 
days. I seem to have lived half a century 
in that time. Apart from the immediate 
sensations of the present, my mind has 
been wandering in the past. I have been 
tumbling and somersault throwing, in 
imagination, down Spawlings garden; 
mixing Indian ink at the pump, thrashing 
that big fellow from the country with the 
greasy dinner-bag ; dodging Dorothy up- 
stairs and downstairs, and in my lady's 
chamber; doing mock heroics among^ 
autumn leaves between here and a famous 
cottage at Cartown ; wondering all sorts of 
things about you and Lucy; and, above 
all, falling desperately in love myself, and I 
am ready and willing at this moment to go- 
through the last act with real properties. 
But, just like me, I ask you to tell me all 
about yourself, and I proceed at once to- 
give you my own history. When you 

VOL. III. 1LO 



146 Stranger than Fictiott. 

know all, you will forgive my wretched 
egotism, and maybe laugh at my miscel- 
laneous sensations. But we are all strange 
creatures of impulse, and there does seem 
such a magic in this old town of our boy- 
hood, that I must be forgiven if I am not 
quite myself here." 

Spen thrust his hands deep down into 
his pockets, then removed them, stood up, 
sat down, looked at the ceiling, warmed 
his back at an imaginary fire (which 
summer had covered up with paper 
shavings), patted Jacob on the back, and 
called him a "dear old boy," and ex- 
hibited many other signs of the strange 
excitement of which he had spoken. 

Supper was brought in while the two 
young fellows conversed, but it did little 
to interrupt their animated intercourse* 
Whenever an opportunity occurred, Jacob 
told Spen of his troubles and triumphs, 
and Spen threw in at every opportunity 
snatches of his own experiences, which in 
their way were strange and interesting, 




An Actor's Holiday. 147 

but neither so varied nor so romantic as 
Jacob's. 

Spen had been hard at theatrical work 
for years. His stories were of patient 
study at home, drudgery at rehearsals, and 
hard work before the footlights, leading 
gradually up to that brilliant success of 
which we have previously heard. He 
told Jacob that there was much less of 
sentiment and romance in a theatrical 
career than the public understood. 

Success demanded very much more 
drudgery and labour than was generally 
imagined. Details of dress, of manner, of 
character, elocution, tradition, attitude, and 
a variety of apparently small things made 
up the grand whole of a leading actor. 
But Spen was not willing, evidently, to say 
much about his theatrical career. His 
talk was chiefly of the past, of their first 
meeting, and of those early days at the 
Cartown school. 

But the more exciting portions of his 
talk were associated with a young lady 

10 . 2 



148 Stranger than Fiction. 

whom he called a divine creature, a 
glorious girl, a superb woman, and other 
endearing and descriptive names . a young 
lady whom he had seen come out of the 
old school-house on the previous day with 
two little girls and a boy ; the most gentle, 
gracious, fascinating little witch he had 
ever seen in all his career professional 
and non-professional. He had followed 
her over a well-known path, and in fun 
had helped the children to gather wild 
flowers. 

" Only in fun, my dear boy, so far as 
they were concerned, but in desperate 
earnestness on my own part. What fools 
we are ! Here was I, years ago, in a rural 
paradise, with real flowers and brooks and 
woods, real valleys, real autumn tints and 
summer breezes, sighing for gaslight and 
paint, canvas meadows, mock thunder, and 
a hollow fame. It seemed to me yesterday 
as if I would give the world to live out 
the remainder of my life among the old 
real scenes, but the desire, I must confess, 




An Actors Holiday. 1 49 

was immensely promoted by the hope of 
a fairy partnership with Titania, my fairy 
queen of yesterday. You will say I have 
grown into a romantic fellow in my years 
of discretion. I suppose I've been so long 
mewed up among London bricks and 
mortar that the country takes my reason 
prisoner. 

* Jacob was more astonished now at the 
change which had taken place in Spen 
than he had been while conversing with 
his old friend in London. Although the 
jmerriman of the Cartown school had lost 
none of his animal spirits, yet the real fun 
and frolic of the old days were wanting. 
Nobody would have taken him for the 
funny man of a theatrical company. 
His face, it is true, had that peculiar, 
sallow, closely-shaven look which charac- 
terises the profession generally ; but there 
were strong lines in it which one would 
associate with tragedy more than with 
comedy, except when the face was lighted 
up by some quaint conceit, and then there 



150 Stranger than Fiction. 

was something essentially humorous in its 
peculiar dry expression. 

" Now, Spen, let us talk seriously. Drop 
this fictitious kind of personal confession. 
Let us get but of romance. Have you 
really ever thought of marrying ?" 

" Yes, indeed, I have," said Spen, with 
a 'grave twinkle of the eye. " I thought 
of it for the first time yesterday, and I 
thought about nothing else until after your 
arrival this evening." 

" Ah ! You will have your joke," said 
Jacob, laughing. " Earnest conjugal ambi- 
tion is not so sudden as that" 

" Honour bright," said Spen, " I am in 
real earnest, and you shall see the lady of 
my choice in the morning. I could not 
endure the general notions of courtship 
and matrimony. If I take a fancy to 
anything, I must have it at once. There 
is no hesitation about my character. You 
shall see ; and I never yet made a mistake 
in reading the face of man or woman." 

The night soon came to these long > 



An Actor's Holiday. 151 

severed friends, and early in the morning 
they were out among the old haunts, 
fraught to them with so many happy 
and peculiar associations. Passing through 
the churchyard, Jacob noticed a simple 
granite column marking the spot where 
Spen had told him in the old days that 
the dead clown's ghost had rebuked him 
for his ingratitude* At the base the grass 
had grown up, making a pretty natural 
fringe of green beneath the simple word, 
" Petroski." 

A bee dangling in the .bell of a kingcup 
close by made a drowsy hum, which added 
to the sweet yet solemn repose of the 
familiar scene. 

" Ah I you have a noble heart," said 
Jacob, turning upon Spen affectionately. 
11 How long has this monument been 
here ?" 

" Well," said Spen, " two or three years, I 
suppose. Poor dear old Pet. I should like 
to have had Hamlet's words about Yorick 
underneath the dear bpy's name, but the 



152 Stranger titan Fiction. 

churchwardens objected. They did not 
like quotations from Shakespeare on grave- 
stones, and it was contrary to their rule. 
Perhaps it is better as it is. Poor 
Petroski I M 

Jacob's heart smote him bitterly when he 
remembered that there was one far dearer 
to him than Petroski was to Spen, who 
might, for aught he knew, at that moment 
be lying beneath the sod unrecorded on the 
stone above. 

When first he left Middleton, cursing the 
place and his own wretched destiny, he 
thought he would come back at intervals 
privately and quietly lay a flower upon 
that grave which had closed over all the 
blood relationship which seemed to exist 
for him in this world ; but time wore on 
and he was content to sit down now and 
then with his memories, and to pay his 
tribute of flowers in imagination. But his 
heart rebuked him at sight of the tall 
column pointing upwards from the grave of 
Petroski. 



rs 



An Actors Holiday. 1 53 

" You are sad, my boy," said Spen. 
" You remind me of that time in the 
autumn when I said you would make 
a hit on the stage. Come, we must have 
no clouds in the sunshine of this day. See, 
yonder is the old school ; the bell is already 
ringing, the boys are slinking into the dear 
old doorway with their long-eared books 
and their greasy dinner-bags. Ah ! they 
are a different lot to those whom we knew. 
The boots at the Posts tells me that the 
boys get different treatment to that which 
we received at the hands of Spawling. 
Those lads yonder seem to have had all 
the sprightliness of life whipped out of 
them." 

They stood for some time gazing at the 
well-known school-house. Presently they 
went behind the building to reconnoitre. 
They hid themselves in the garden to watch 
the schoolmaster go forth to his duties. 
They had hardly sheltered themselves 
when a scantily clothed child knocked at 
the door, which was opened by an elderly 



154 Stranger than Fiction. 

woman with stiff grey curls hanging down 
each cheek and clustering about a* pair of 
spectacles that were supported by a thin, 
bony nose, slightly red at the ex* 
tremity. 

11 Good heavens !" exclaimed Jacob, 
clutching Spen's arm. 

" What's the matter ?" said Spen in a 
whisper. 

"Matter?" exclaimed Jacob, "by all 
that's miserable, it's my aunt Keziah." 

" The devil !" said Spen. 

" No, not exactly that, but certainly Mrs, 
Gompson." 

" Mon Dim / The old griffin you used 
to tell me about. Keep quiet." 

" Buy a few pegs or laces 1" said Mrs. 
Gompson, surveying the half-naked urchin 
from uncovered head to naked feet,* " cer- 
tainly not. Nothing of the kind." 

" They're very cheap, mum." 

" Cheap ! Where do you live, child ?"" 

11 Down the lane, please, mum." 

" Down the lane, eh ! Gipsy child . I 



An Actor s Holiday. 155 

thought so, Gipsy child, listen to me. 
Are you not ashamed to go about imposing 
on people in this way, endeavouring to 
injure the honest tradesman who pays 
rent and taxes by underselling him in the 
matter of pegs and laces and other mer- 
chandise ?" 

" Please, mum, I didn't mean to do it," 
said the little child, looking up out of a 
pair of black, sympathetic eyes. 

" Oh ! You didn't mean to do it ! We 
shall see. Why does not your mother 
dress you before she sends you out ? I 
declare its perfectly shocking !" said Mrs. 
Gompson, surveying the well-shapeh, naked 
legs which stood firmly and with a natural 
grace upon the doorstep. 

" Please, mum, I haven't no mother." 

" Oh ! you haven't no mother ! Why, 
you ought to be ashamed of yourself. 
How dare you go about the streets and 
lanes without any mother. And pray, 
have you no father ?" 

" No, mum." 



1 56 Stranger than Fiction. 

" Ah ! well, you're none the worse off 
for that; and you can't help having no 
mother. I dare say you'll try to make out 
that you have been a stolen child to excite 
sympathy, and impose upon the benevolent 
and tender-hearted, eh ? . the charitable 
and philanthropic people who endow 
beggary and roguery. Do you know what 
philanthropy is ?" 

" No, mum ; please, mum." 

" Ah ! I dare say you don't even know 
your alphabet I dare say you think it's 
something to eat." 

" I don't know, mum, please ; but will 
you buy . some . pegs ?" . 

" No, child, certainly not. Miss Win- 
thorpe . Edith, I say!" shouted Mrs. Gomp- 
son, turning her head into the house ; 
whereupon Jacob gave further signs of 
excitement and agitation, such as had al- 
most attracted the griffin eyes of aunt 
Keziah to the gooseberry bushes. 

" What's the matter now ?" asked Spen, 
in a whisper. 



An Actors Holiday. 157 

" Never mind," said Jacob, in reply. 
" Fate is only having & lark with us, as 
Windgate Williams would say. Let the 
magician go on; let the play be played 
out." 

"All right," whispered Spen. "Miss 
Winthorpes got her cue ; don't interrupt 
her." 

A young lady in a light morning dress 
came to the door. 

" Edith, by all that's good and beautiful T 
said Jacob. 

"My angel ! my angel !" said Speiu 
" My Titania ! The lady I told thee of." 

"Do keep quiet, Spen," said Jacob; 
" we shall be discovered." 

" You make more noise than I do," said 
Spen, " keep quiet yourself, you are almost 
shaking the leaves off that tree." 

" Mary, Mary 1" exclaimed Mrs. Gomp- 
son, looking straight in the direction of 
Jacob. " Those cats are amongst the goose- 
berry bushes again. Do go and drive them 
away, every berry will be shaken off; we 



158 Stranger than Fiction. 

shall not have enough gooseberries for a 
tart, much more to preserve." 

" Now you have done it," whispered 
Spen, " here's a go ! I will frighten her 
into fits if she comes." 

Spen pushed back his hat, lifted up his 
collar, dropped his jaw, and struck a most 
strange and idiotic attitude, which convulsed 
Jacob with silent laughter. The change 
was as rapid as it was grotesque. The face 
was quite a psychological triumph. Jacob 
was at once carried back to his early meet* 
ing with Spen. He laughed several big 
berries to the ground in spite of all his 
efforts to control himself. Fortunately, 
however, Mary was making bread, and it 
was not convenient for her to leave the 
dough in which she was plunged up to her 
elbows. The comedy was therefore not so 
abruptly closed as the two friends in the 
garden had feared it might be. 

" Miss Winthorpe," said Mrs. Gompson, 
" bring Miss Grace Wilmott and Masters 
Barnby and Trundleton here." 



An Actor's Holiday. 159 

At Edith's bidding three children under 
ten came to the door. 

"Now, Miss Wilmott and Masters 
Barnby and Trundleton," said Mrs. Gomp- 
son, surveying them with pride and au- 
thority, " I wish you to teach each other a 

little lesson. Little gipsy girl " 

" Yes, mum." 

" Do you see those nice, happy, well- 
dressed young lady and young gentle- 
men ?" 

" Yes, mum." 

" This happiness and luxury is the fruit 
not only of good breeding, but of good 
citizenship and education. Bear that in 
anind, will you ?" 

" Yes, mum," said the little hawker, 
beginning to cry. 

" I thought that would affect your har- 
dened little heart. Now Miss Grace Wil- 
mott and Masters Barnby and Trundleton, 
you see this ragged dirty little child ?" 

" Yes, ma'am," said the three in a falsetto 
chorus. 



160 Stranger than Fiction. 

" That matted hair is the result of bad 
citizenship, loose habits, non-attendance at 
church, the want of knowing a-b, ab, and 
c-o-w, cow, and other rudiments of learning, 
which lead up to an acquaintance with the 
abstruse sciences. Will you remember 

that r 

" Yes, Mrs. Gompson," said the chorus 
again. 

" Very well, that is what I call a practi- 
cal lesson of life, a true system of teaching 
social economy and the rights and advan- 
tages of good citizenship. Gipsy girl, here 
is a penny for you. You may go, and 
never come here again." 

"Yes, mum," and the child, with her 
eyes bent on the ground, went meekly one 
way, while Mrs. Gompson marched pom- 
pously in another direction leading to the 
school, satisfied that she had done her duty 
and at the same time been guilty of a little 
womanly weakness is supporting vagrancy 
with her purse. 

The griffin had hardly turned away 



An Actors Holiday. 161 

before Edith hurriedly shut the door and 
Spen darted off after the little black-eyed 
hawker. Jacob thought it best to remain 
where he was, and hold a council of war 
with himself. 

In a few moments Spen, however, 
beckoned him with both hands. Jacob 
hastened to his friend. 

" Such an adventure !" exclaimed Spen, 
his sallow face glowing with animation. 

"Well, well, what is it?" 

" I had just caught the poor little beggar 
at the same time that Titania swooped 
down upon her." 

" Who ? who ?" 

" Titania . Flora . Dorcas . Hebe . 
Miranda . heaven knows what her proper 
name is . you call her Edith. She had 
hurried out of the front door to give the 
child money, and, by the Lord ! I've kissed 
her. Now, it is no good frowning on a 
fellow ; I couldn't help it She is my fate, 
and, by Jupiter ! she shall go back to Lon- 
don with me !" 

VOL. III. II 



1 62 Stranger than Fiction. 

When Spen's boisterous declarations 
were somewhat subdued, Jacob explained 
to him all that he knew of Edith, and 
ventured to predict that she had been in- 
duced to leave home and take a situation 
as teacher owing to the unkind treatment 
and jealousy of her sisters. 

" And what do you propose to do ?" 
said Spen, his eyes full of astonishment and 
wonder. 

" To take you into the dear old house, 
my boy, and, if you are willing, formally 
introduce you to your fate." 

" Willing V exclaimed Spen with theatri- 
cal action and fervour. " Away, away ! 
my soul's in arms, and eager for* the 
fray." 





CHAPTER XII. 



HOW JACOB PERFORMED A DELICATE NEGO- 
TIATION ON BEHALF OF MR. PAUL FERRIS, 
TOGETHER WITH OTHER INTERESTING IN- 
FORMATION. . 

N second thoughts, Spen, you had 
better let me see the lady alone," 
said Jacob, when the two were 
on the threshold of the well- 
known front door. 

" My own thought, with a but," said 
Spen. 

" Well, what is the but ? Go on, mon 




ami. 



 



" Perhaps it is only c much ado about 

II . 2 



164 Stranger than Fiction. 

nothing f but you remember Claudio's 
lines : . 

" ' Friendship is constant in all other things, 
Save in the office and affairs of love ; 
Therefore, all hearts in love use their own tongues ; 
Let every eye negotiate for itself, 
And trust no agent : for beauty is a witch, 
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood.' " 

" Is it come to this, V faith ?" said Jacob* 
smiling. 

" It was the flat transgression of the 
schoolboy, that being over-joyed with find- 
ing a bird's nest, he showed it to his com- 
panion, who stole it/' 

" Fie ! fie ! Benedict's philosophy does 
not apply here. Edith is not in mine eye 
1 the sweetest lady that e'er I looked upon ;* 
she has only a second place." 

"There thou strikest home. But art 
quite sure that all is settled between thee 
and thy woodland Venus ?" 

" What ! Lucy ?" said Jacob, laughing at 
the grotesque leer with which Spen asked 
the question. 



rv 



A t Delicate Negotiation. 165 

" The same/' 

"Have no fear . Edith shall be yours, 
Spen, if you are in earnest" 

" Raise the fatal knocker then at once. 
When your embassy is over, you'll find me 
at the Blue Posts, a fortifying of myself for 
Coopid's answer ;" and away went the Spen 
Whiffler of old, cutting capers across the 
road to the intense delight of two small 
boys, a slipshod girl, and a drapers assist- 
ant. The hosier's apprentice had been to 
the big house, hard by, with a bundle of 
ribbons. His mission ended, he stood in the 
road to stare at Spen. Vainly endeavour- 
ing to support himself, during an immode- 
rate fit of laughter, upon a treacherous yard 
measure, the frail rod broke and sent the 
grinning youth sprawling upon his paper 
box, before Spen had barely pulled a single 
face at him. 

Jacob was admitted to the old school- 
room by a girl with patches of dough cling- 
ing to a pair of ruddy arms, which she 
partly shielded with a white apron. 



1 66 Stranger than Fiction. 

She didna knaw whether Miss Win- 
thorpe would see him or not. What name 
wor it ? Martyn of Dinsley ? Well, she'd 
go and tell her. He moit sit down a bit. 

Jacob sat down, and, happily, before he 
had time to become very melancholy over 
his reminiscences of the time when he sat 
in that same room with his father, Miss 
Edith Winthorpe entered. She came for- 
ward and politely bowing to Jacob, said 
quite naturally that she was very glad to 
see him. 

" Perhaps I should apologise for calling 
without an introduction," said Jacob, a little 
at a loss to explain his business. 

" I hope it is not necessary for people 
belonging to the same town to apologise 
for knowing each other in a strange 
place. " 

"Thank you, Miss Winthorpe, I like 
your frankness ; but this is more than a 
mere visit of courtesy; I have called 
upon rather a delicate business," said 
Jacob. 



A Delicate Negotiation. 167 

"Indeed," said Edith, losing her self- 
possession for a moment. 

"Oh! oh!" said the doughy domestic, 
who had been listening at the key-hole. 

Edith has since confessed that she ex- 
pected a declaration of love from Jacob, 
and that she was quite prepared to receive 
it kindly. 

"Then in the first place, Miss Win- 
thorpe, I beg to tender to you the most 
abject apologies of a friend of mine 
whose love rather outran his discretion 
this morning." 

" Indeed !" said Edith again, and this 
time, in a little confusion, rendered more 
apparent by a sudden doubt as to the mo- 
tives of Jacobs visit. 

" He is a gentleman, a man of taste and 
feeling, of noble and generous impulses. I 
have known Jiim for years ; and he has 
seen you." 

Edith blushed and began to twist her 
handkerchief round one of her fingers. 

" To be plain with you, Miss Winthorpe, 



1 68 Stranger than Fiction. 

he wishes to be introduced to you, and if 
you can like him, he is ready to marry 
you whenever you will name the day. 
There!" 

" There ! Yes, I think you may say, 
1 there/ A nice piece of business to come 
upon and to propound before one has 
spoken half-a-dozen words to you, Mr. 
Martyn," said Edith, rising and opening 
the door, to the consternation of the do- 
mestic, who was so deeply interested in the 
conversation that she stood gaping at Edith, 
with only a vague idea that she had been 
caught in the act. 

" I thought I heard you, Mary," said 
Edith, calmly ; " perhaps you will step in- 
side and take a seat ?" 

Mary sneaked away, and plunged her 
arms once more into the dough, which she 
beat and buffeted and rolled about in the 
most savage manner ; sad illustrations of 
her vtfrath being exhibited the next morn- 
ing in the flat hard cakes that were placed 
on Mrs. Gompson's breakfast-table. 




A Delicate Negotiation. 169 

Edith was not much disconcerted at this 
amusing incident ; indeed she laughed 
heartily when she had closed the door 
upon Mary, and turning to Jacob said : 
41 Well, what is this gentleman like? Is 
he handsome ? Has he money ? You see 
I am quite a woman of the world. I have 
left home to seek my fortune ; and I must 
be my own mamma and solicitor in this 
matter." 

And then she laughed again, at which 
Jacob was not pleased. 

" But I think, perhaps, it would be best 
for me to send for Mrs. Gompson and 
take her advice," she said, in a graver 
mood. 

" No ! no ! for goodness* sake don't do 
that," said Jacob. 

" But is this proper, Mr. Martyn, to call 
upon a young lady when " 

" Mrs. Gompson is my aunt," said Jacob. 

" Oh ! now you are joking ?" 

" On my honour," said Jacob, " I will 
answer to her for your conduct." 



1 70 Stranger than Fiction. 

Then Jacob begged Edith to listen 
calmly to all he would tell her ; whereupon, 
in a business-like manner, he described 
his own position and prospects, spoke of 
, his great esteem for her, and his knowledge 
of her history ; and then entered fully into 
his early friendship with Mr. Paul Ferris, 
and related succinctly all he knew about 
his friend. 

When Jacob talked of Spen's profession, 
Edith's attention became particularly ear- 
nest ; her bright eyes sparkled with enthu- 
siasm as he told the story of Spen's 
gradual success. She clasped her hands 
with delight when Jacob described his 
recognition of this old friend on that 
brilliant nighrtn the London theatre. See- 
ing how deeply the story interested her, 
Jacob dwelt longer upon this theme than 
he would otherwise have done. 

" But . but I felt very much insulted, 
sir, this morning," said Edith, checking 
her evident interest in Mr. Ferris's his- 
tory. 



A Delicate Negotiation. I7r 

8 . 

"He bitterly repents him of his conduct ; 
only pleading in extenuation your beauty 
and his love for you." 

Finally, Edith granted Jacob permission 
to introduce Mr. Ferris to herself and Mrs. 
Gompson : not that there was any necessity 
that the advice of the latter should be 
obtained; for Mrs. Gompson, besides 
having no control over Edith (who had 
only been in Cartown a few days), had 
neither the love nor esteem of her teacher ; 
and Mrs. Winthorpe was a poor weak 
woman in the hands of two hard-hearted 
stiff-necked daughters, who would gladly 
have encompassed their pretty sister's ruin,, 
and who had forced her from home, their 
cruelty almost surpassing that of Cin- 
derella's wicked persecutors. 

So, like many another girl, Edith was. 
thrown upon her own resources. She had 
obtained her present situation through aa 
advertisement, and it was quite open for 
her now, to use her own judgment and 
feelings entirely in the matter of the suit of 



1 72 Stranger than Fiction. 

Mr. Ferris, whose delicate attention in 
gathering flowers for the children had not 
.escaped her notice. His profession, which 
would have been a barrier in the eyes of 
some ladies, was to Edith one of his 
strongest recommendations. 

A girl of spirit, a good musician, posses- 
sing a fine voice and an artistic taste, de- 
lighting in operatic music, and with a 
memory filled with her father's stories of 
theatrical life when he was leader of a 
London orchestra, Edith would gladly have 
chosen the stage for her own profession 
had she known how to begin; but to mention 
a theatre at home was to incur the penalty of 
a lecture from two bad sisters and a weak 
silly mother, and all sorts of penances be- 
sides. 

Moreover, there was something in Mr. 
Ferris's manner and appearance which 
Edith liked ; and Jacob's plea in his favour 
was so eloquent, Jacob's announcement of 
his own forthcoming marriage so decisive, 



A Delicate Negotiation. 1 7$ 

and the certainty of being relieved from a 
life of drudgery so attractive, that Edith, 
weighing all things carefully, and putting 
into the scale a little liking for the man, and 
much hope that true love would follow, 
made up her mind to receive Mr. Paul 
Ferris very graciously. 

Inquiries at the inn and elsewhere led to 
the information that Mr. Spawling had 
been succeeded, as schoolmaster, by Mr. 
Gompson, from London ; who, after a little 
time, had been joined by his wife, when 
the Martyn establishment at Middleton was 
broken up. 

The town had been a good deal 
scandalised at the domestic brawls of 
this uncongenial couple, and had not Mr. 
Gompson given up the ghost, the school 
committee would have discharged him. 
On his decease, Mrs. Gompson (who had 
shown great masculine power in dealing 
with the boys during her husband's illness, 
and whose mode of instruction seemed t<> 
be more successful than his), was appointed 



1 74 Stranger than Fiction. 

head of the school, and she had retained 
her position ever since. 

" She's gotten a rum way with th' lads, 
sir/ said the rural waiter, "when she's 
goin to lick one on 'em she pitches th' cane 
from one end of the room to the other, 
and makes him fetch it : when he's 
fetched it she leathers into him like all 
that." 

" And how do the school committee get 
along with her ?" 

" Oh, she's master of them too ; they're 
all afraid on her; but she's not a bad 
schoolmissis, so fur as learning goes, I've 
Tieard say. She's up to all the new 
dodges of spelling, and writing, and'rith- 
metics." 

"Victory !" exclaimed Jacob, dashing into 
the dingy coffee-room ; " I have wooed her 
for you far more earnestly than Viola, in 
trousers, wooed the Countess." 

" But have yon succeeded ? Is it really 
victory ? If your Viola quotation be the 
fashion of it, then farewell the tranquil 



A Delicate Negotiation. 1 75 

mind," r said Spen, half theatrically, half 
seriously. 

" Go to . I have unclasped to thee the 
Book of Fate . thou may'st love her if thou 
wilt ; an* thou wilt not, thou'lt lose a wench 
of rare mettle . 

" ' Let still the woman take 
An elder than herself; so wears she to him, 
So sways she level in her husband's heart.' " 

"Methinks we are a fair and proper 
match, Jacob, I being several years her 
senior. Well speak with the maid our- 
self, good Jacob;" and Spen strode right 
royally to the fireplace, and rang the 
bell. 

" Waiter, a bottle of the best . the wine 
I spoke of," said Spen, to the clown who 
answered his ringing ; " and now, Jacob, 
without further fooling, let us discuss the 
matter. What did she say ? How did 
she look ?" 

Jacob related as nearly as possible all 



1 76 Stranger than Fiction. 

that had taken place ; and the two agreed 
to wait upon the griffin and the fairy after 
dinner. 

Meanwhile Jacob sat down to write 
letters, and Spen lit a cigar, in the smoke 
of which he tried to read his destiny. In 
his own eccentric way he loved Edith ; she 
was the first sunny thing he saw on revisit- 
ing the haunts of his youth, and it seemed 
to him that the charms of the old place 
were all personified in her. It may appear 
strange to some of my readers that this 
comic gentleman who painted his face and 
made people laugh, and whose pathos in 
real life was often almost like burlesque, 
should be so love-stricken at the first sight 
of a mere country girl. But Edith Win- 
thorpe was no ordinary person; we have 
seen how much she interested Jacob, and 
we must not forget that actors are only 
mortal after all, with hearts and minds as 
susceptible as those of other people, and 
with often a genuine romance in their 
very natures, which may lift some of 




A Delicate Negotiation. 



177 



them to a loftier and more devoted 
height of love and friendship than many of 
those who follow professions outside the 
pale of art could possibly attain. 




VOL. III. 



12 





CHAPTER XIIL 

THE BEGINNING OF THE END. 

OME months after the events 
recorded in the last few chapters, 
Jacob Martyn was taking author- 
ship very comfortably. The 
library of Mr Bonsall, which had ap- 
peared to him so magnificently cozy, was 
not more of a book-paradise than the one in 
which he was engaged upon his " Romantic 
History of the Welsh," at Neath ville, nor 
so much indeed ; for in Jacob's study there 
was a presiding angel who sat near him 
and called him husband. What were 
Jacob's troubles and trials now that his 
barque, as Mr. Windgate Williams would 



The Beginning of the End. 1 79 

put it, had sailed gloriously into the har- 
bour of Fame, Fortune, and Matrimony ! 
I really do not know whether Jacob 
deserved so much honour and happiness. 
The critics, it was true, said that his " On 
the Track of a Sunbeam " was one of the 
most charming works of imaginative genius 
since " The Tempest " and " Undine." 
His wife thought there was nothing equal 
to it in literature. The Dinsley Courant 
went into absurdly extravagant ecstasies 
about it, the reviewer closing three columns 
of pompous eulogy, by stating that "the 
editor of this journal could not conclude 
these few remarks, which fall so far short 
of the subject, without expressing in some 
manner the inconceivable delight which he 
feels in being able to inform his readers that 
Jacob Martyn, who has stamped such an 
indelible mark on the roll of Fame, made 
his first serious effort at composition 
in the columns of the Courant, which might 
in reality be 'regarded as the cradle in which 
the mighty genius had been rocked ; and, 

12 . 2 



180 Stranger than Fiction. 

to follow up the simile, we (the editor) 
may humbly take credit for being the 
literary nurse who rocked it." 

Jacob's visit to London, though it had 
led to the speedy marriage of the lovers, 
had not been quite satisfactory to Lucy's 
uncle, who not only desired that Jacob 
should change his name, but also that he 
should undertake to contest any vacant seat 
in Parliament which he (Mr. Thornton) 
might select. The old man was very grand 
about his ancestors, and the necessity for 
Jacob being something more than an author. 
Moreover, with all due deference to 
Jacob's abilities, he thought that if a man 
was an author at all he should aim higher 
than being a mere writer of fairy tales, 
which were only fit for women and children. 
He had not much respect for scribblers, he 
said, at any time, and he could only tolerate 
historians, and wits of fashion. 

Jacob would not consent to either of the 
suggested arrangements, whereupon Mr. 
Thornton bade a long farewell to the per- 



The Beginning of the End. 1 8 1 

petuation of Thorntonian greatness, and 
determined upon relinquishing all the 
schemes of ambition which the discovery of 
Lucy had for a time aroused in his mind ; 
and finish his existence in that quiet jog- 
trot fashion, which had been interrupted by 
the arrival of that never-to-be-forgotten 
letter from his brother's son, the soldier. 

This change in Mr. Thornton's plans, 
and a violent row between master and 
man (arising out of Mr. Allen's alleged 
officiousness in the matter of certain 
love-letters, which had done so much mis- 
chief), blighted the hopes of the confidential 
servant. Mr. Allen's long-cherished idea 
of marrying Lady Frumpington's house- 
keeper, when his master should have a 
companion in an aristocratic son-in-law, was 
knocked on the head, as he told that charm- 
ing damsel. With a limp, though agitated 
shirt frill> he bemoaned his unhappy lot; 
and the loving creature whom he had so long 
adored eloped the next day with the French 
cook of a bishop ; which circumstance so 



1 8 2 Stranger than Fiction. 

affected Mr. Allen, that he went into a 
violent fit of coughing and perspiration, 
and was, he believed, ever afterwards, a 
miserable valet. 

On the completion of the Welsh book, 
and the receipt of a cheque for nearly 
double the amount expected for the work, 
Lucy and Jacob paid a visit to Mr. Paul 
Ferris. Edith and Spen were a very happy 
couple, and had received such warm invita- 
tions to visit the Grove, that they had 
arranged for a triumphant tour, "some 
Passion-week, ,, to Dinsley ; where Edith 
fully intended to show Paul off before her 
envious friends, and duly patronise her 
fawning sisters, who wrote to her in terms 
of the most glowing affection, after read- 
ing in the Dinsley Courant that "the 
eminent and distinguished comedian, Paul 
Ferris, Esq., had just led to the hymeneal 
altar, Miss Edith Winthorpe, the lovely 
and accomplished daughter of Mrs. Win- 
thorpe of the Grove, in this town." They 
had treated her cards with contempt, but 



The Beginning of the End, 183 

unable to resist this paragraph, and the 
visions of a house in London, and long 
sisterly visits thither, they had poured out the 
latent tenderness of their virgin hearts upon 
Mrs. Ferris, in gushing floods of ink, on 
shining leaves of scented note-paper, sealed 
with the motto, " Though absent ever dear." 
Mrs. and Mr. Ferris did visit Dinsley ; 
but they stayed at the Norfolk Hotel, which 
was a terrible blow to the wicked sisters. 
Mrs. Ferris was a kind-hearted woman ; 
but she could not resist this bit of revenge. 
Her sisters had been more than unsisterly 
to her, they had been unwomanly ; hating 
her for her beauty, they had not scrupled 
to express a hope that it would be a 
curse to her. Her mther had not dared 
to fight for her, the elder sisters were so 
fierce in their hatred and malice. She was 
a weak, unsophisticated woman, Mrs. Win- 
thorpe. In her husband's lifetime she had 
implicitly relied upon his judgment and 
advice. When he died, she fell helplessly 
into the arms of these two daughters, who 




184 Stranger than Fiction. 

ruled her ever afterwards. They did not, 
however, during Mrs. Ferris's visit to 
Dinsley, prevent her from dining every day 
at the " Norfolk," nor from driving out with 
the actor and his wife afterwards* At 
the close of their stay, Paul persuaded his 
wife to spend a day in the Grove at her 
old home, and the wicked sisters even 
graciously consented to receive her. They 
were willing, they said in a united letter 
addressed to the Hotel, quite willing, and 
indeed desirous of wiping out the past, 
forgetting and forgiving, and hoping for a 
happy future of mutual confidence and 
sisterly love. Mrs. Ferris could afford to 
be generous, and she consented to the 
reconciliation, which Paul advised. Once 
a year, therefore, the two families had a 
personal interchange of social intercourse, 
and the wicked sisters not only forgave 
Edith, but when they visited her in Lon- 
don, became quite enthusiastic play-goers, 
while Mrs. Winthorpe grew fat and round 
and rosy, in spite of white hairs and old age. 




CHAPTER XIV. 

tWO NOVELS IN BRIEF. 

OME wise philosopher has 
pointed out that if nature is 
full of contrivances for the pro- 
motion of happiness, life is 
crowded with opposing forces. The only 
consolation is to look forward tjo a more 
perfect state of existence. Two really 
good and noble people in this story, worthy 
of the happiness which seemed to have 
been arranged for them, were utterly dis- 
appointed. Their lives were blighted 
equally, though one was an intellectual 
man, and the other an ignorant woman. 
Do you remember that sweet face in the 



1 86 Stranger than Fiction. 

old room at the Cartown school ? The 
deep blue eyes and the raven hair of her 
who was painted as Rosalind ? Jacob has 
not forgotten it ; neither has Spen. In his 
early life Mr. Dudley was intended for the 
bar ; but he had seen this young sparkling 
beauty and loved her. She became every- 
thing to him, his world, his existence. He 
gave up his profession, and devoted himself 
to the stage. He studied under a great 
master, and soon gave evidence of drama- 
tic genius. He appeared at Old Drury, 
playing Romeo to his idol's Juliet He 
felt in truth all the poetry set down in the 
text ; and afterwards, at her own home, he 
told the lady of his love. As time went 
on they became the rage. Dudleys 
Romeo, and Amy Clifton's Juliet ; his 
Orlando and her Rosalind ; his Prospero 
and her Miranda ; were marvels of fine 
acting. Then it became known that they 
were to be married, and little allusions to 
matrimony which cropped up in the text 
were caught at and applauded to the echo. 




Two Novels in Brief. 187 

The theatrical world fairly loved them 
both ; and the beautiful Amy Clifton be- 
came more and more lovely. But she was 
not worthy of the large-hearted actor. 
Hers was but a painted passion. One un- 
happy night, when the notorious Lord 
Menzwith was in the fulness of his glory, 
she fell away from her allegiance and de- 
serted her lover. The dazzling professions 
of the brilliant nobleman overcame her and 
she fled with him. 

With her mysterious disappearance from 
the stage the public heard of the dangerous 
illness of Mr. Dudley Stewart. He was 
in a fever for weeks ; when he recovered 
he was a broken-down man. 

There is no human being that is all bad. 
There are corners in the blackest hearts 
where some little virtue still remains to 
prove the divinity of their Maker. Amy 
Clifton's noble lover soon showed himself in 
his true colours; she heard of the break-up of 
poor Dudley Stewart ; and one dreary night 
in winter, an outcast and a wanderer, she 



1 88 Stranger than Fiction. 

f6und out his quiet retreat, and, imploring 
forgiveness, died in his arms, of want, 
neglect, and remorse. 

His love for this woman was poor old 
Stewart's big sorrow ; and once a year, as 
I have said, he gave himself up to it 
wholly ; but his memory was always with 
the bright, sunny, dazzling girl who had 
played Juliet to his Romeo in the days of 
his youth. 

Silly old man ! some of my readers may 
exclaim. Perhaps he was, perhaps not It 
is not for us to judge him. There is no 
knowing what you and I may come to, my 
friend. Fate has all to do with it, Dr. 
Horatio Johnson says ; and you may rely 
upon it he is not altogether wrong. I have 
just returned from a long journey. At 
starting, a young woman took a seat in a 
wrong train. The guard speedily put her 
right. If we could all of us only be put 
right when we begin our wrong journeys on 
life's railway ! If Fate, who may be taken 
as the guard, would only tell us when we 




Two Novels in Brief. 1 89 

stepped into the wrong train! That 
young woman we spoke of would have 
gone to London instead of Birming- 
ham, if the Great Western guard had 
not interfered. If Fate had only told 
Dudley Stewart that he was in the 
wrong train when he took his seat for 
the theatre on that night of Amy Clifton's 
benefit ! But you see, Fate did nothing of 
the kind, Mr. Williams would say ; there- 
fore it was his fate to go wrong. And the 
guard knew it, when he opened the first- 
class door to Lord Menzwith. 

For the present, however, we leave Mr. 
Dudley Stewart soothed and consoled in 
the company of those who love him, and 
in whose happiness his unselfish and noble 
nature finds its sweetest delight in these 
latter days, 

A pilgrimage which the happy bride and 
bridegroom made to Cartown and the 
house among the trees, a few months 
later, revealed a pathetic episode in the 



*90 Stranger than Fiction. 

married life of Will Tunster and our old 
friend Dorothy. 

It was evening when Jacob and Lucy, 
after a series of short journeys, reached 
Cartown ; but the sun was only just begin- 
ning to show golden signs of his departure 
to other lands ; so they determined to see 
Mr. and Mrs. Tunster that night. Full 
of the past, they resolved, to walk the 
old walk together, and to order a con- 
veyance to be in waiting for them, on their 
return, in the lane near the site of the old 
gipsy encampment. Lucy hung fondly 
upon Jacob's arm, and when they reached 
the bridge over the Cartown river, he 
paused to tell her how he had once stood 
there years before, when winter had stilled 
the river and covered it with ice ; and then, 
while the birds sung their evening songs 
around them, and drowsy bees and beetles 
buzzed a heavy chorus, he told her of his 
journey in the snow and the footprints 
which were not hers. Tears of sorrow and 
joy stole gently down Lucy's cheeks at the 




Two Novels in Brief. 191 

recital ; she looked through them; up into 
her husband's face, and asked him if the 
ice was really thawed at last, and the 
sunshine come ? Jacob's reply was not in 
words ; he drew Lucy closer to his side 
and they wandered down the deep green 
lane, eloquent in their loving silence. 

Highway and lane and fields were soon 
left behind ; and so also was the well- 
known stile that led to the wood, which 
seemed to stretch out its umbrageous arms 
affectionately over the children who had 
returned to its bosom. The rill, which 
had so often sung songs of joy and hope to 
the lovers in the long past days, whispered 
and murmured over the old mosses and 
pebbles ; glided by the same knotted roots ; 
chattered over the same stones ; and lost 
itself in the same leafy valley. What 
happiness to feel that there was no 
rebuke in the constancy of that familiar 
rivulet. 

They found Will Tunster hale and 
hearty, sitting on a bench in the garden, 



192 Stranger than Fiction, 

amusing himself with his time-honoured 
bugle, breathing through its old crooks the 
air which had once been so familiar to 
Lucy and Jacob, in the days of the Middle- 
ton mail. Dorothy, in a white cap and 
apron, with a shawl pinned over her 
shoulders, sat sewing close by. An old 
shepherds dog (the sight of which gave 
Jacob a pang of memory concerning Caesar, 
who died on board ship soon after Mrs. 
Titsys marriage) lay asleep at the threshold 
of the house ; a great white cat sat lazily 
watching a blackbird, that was pouring 
forth a series of full round notes in an 
adjacent copse ; and a kitten was playing 
with a reel of cotton which had fallen from 
Mrs. Tunster's knee. 

The meeting was a sad yet happy one. 
After the first surprise and the greeting on 
both sides were over, and Will had gone 
out to procure fresh cream for tea, Lucy 
rallied Mrs. Tunster about her old love- 
making, and endeavoured to elicit from her 
some particulars of her marriage. 



Two Novels in Brief. 193 

" Ah, my love," said Dorothy sadly, " it's 
a long tale and getting rather foggy at my 
time of life." 

" Your time of life, my dear Dorothy," 
said Lucy, as two fine rosy curly-headed 
fellows, bearing unmistakable evidence of 
their paternity, romped in, and then shrunk 
back, abashed at their own impudence, to 
run off laughing down the garden. 

" Ah," said Dorothy, not heeding the 
children, " I mayn't be so very old, but I 
seem to be. Well, I thank God I've helped 
to make somebody happy. To think of 
you two coming, man and wife, gentleman 
and lady, to see me again before I am laid, 
with my poor old mother, in the churchyard 
yonder !" 

" Don't talk in that way," said Lucy, 
rising and tenderly embracing her foster- 
sister." 

" Well, I ought not, perhaps," said Doro- 
thy ; " but we get soberer as we get olden 
We may say the same things as we've said 
when we were young, but we say them 

vol. in. 13 




194 Stranger than Fiction. 

solemner like. There's Will, he plays the 
same tunes he used to play when I was a 
little wench, but there's not so much life in 
them now . their sound is more feeling 
as if they had had troubles like us, and 
had got quieter and solemner than they 
used to be. Poor Will ! he has been a 
good husband to me and a good father 
to his children.' 

It required a second and a third visit to 
the Tunsters, ere Lucy and Jacob under- 
stood why a deep shadow had fallen upon 
the dear old home among the trees. My 
readers are already acquainted with Doro- 
thy's " attachment," prior to her marriage 
with Will. The sailor-boy referred to, in 
several of my previous chapters, was ori- 
ginally an apprentice at Cartown, and 
engaged to Dorothy, while both were in 
their teens. A bad master, and indifferent 
parents, had led to his running away ; but 
Dorothy was made fully aware of his plans, 
and was afterwards thrown into a flutter 
of delight, at uncertain intervals, by his 



Two Novels in Brief. 195 

characteristic and encouraging letters. The 
last she had received told her of his being 
made chief-mate of his ship, and spoke of 
his return, when he intended to put into 
the port of matrimony for the remainder 
of his days. But month after month, year 
after year, passed away, and Dorothy re- 
ceived no more tidings of her lover ; and 
at length even she was compelled to be- 
lieve, with everybody else, that he 'was 
.dead. 

My readers know what eventually 
followed ; but they do not know, that 
hardly had Dorothy and Will been married 
two years, when the runaway apprentice 
returned from his long exile, years of which 
he had spent in a foreign prison. It was 
a great trial for Dorothy, but she bore it. 
The returned sailor, in despair, would have 
carried her off, but Dorothy calmly resisted 
all his temptations. Will Tunster, honest, 
warm-hearted Will, would have given her 
up and cancelled her marriage. He only 
lived, he said, that she might be happy. 

13.2 



196 Stranger than Fiction. 

If she told him to go away, she should 
never see his face again. 

The woman having become the wife, 
was not, however, to be shaken in her 
honour and integrity. 

" I loved thee once, Tom Huntly," she 
said, " and thou knows it ; but now and 
for ever thou art as dead to me, as I 
thought thee when I stood in our old 
parish church, and bound myself, for weal 
or for woe, to Will Tunster, the mail-driver 
of Crossley." 

Nevertheless there was long afterwards 
a shadow on the spirit of Dorothy, but she 
never let it fall upon Will Tunster, though 
she could not help showing it to Jacob and 
Lucy. She was a true wife to Will, com- 
bating and conquering what she regarded 
as the unlawful bent of her affection towards 
her early love. Patiently, and with en- 
during fortitude, did the good soul strive 
to forget the past, and to love, honour, and 
obey the man who had sworn to cherish 
and protect her. In the end, as the duties 




Two Novels in Brief. 197 

of the mother succeeded to those of the 
wife, a higher and holier feeling took 
the place of respect and esteem; and 
Will Tunster was beloved of Dorothy his 
wife. 

" There are homesteads which have witness'd deeds 
That battle-fields, with all their banner'd pomp, 
Have little to compare with. Life's great play- 
May, so it have an actor great enough, 
Be well performed upon a humble stage." 




CHAPTER XV. 



A LETTER FROM MR. HORATIO JOHNSON* 




BARMINSTER, CANADA WEST, 

Tuesday, , 18 . . 

Y DEAR MR. JACOB,. This is 
the true land of liberty . bound- 
less and free : too free in some 
respects and too boundless. You 
experience this painfully when your stock 
suddenly begin to extend their knowledge 
of locality. Last week I was out for three 
days looking up some oxen which had 
shown a special desire for geographical 
knowledge ; and while I write, my worthy 
son-in-law, Tom Titsy, has been away from 



Letter from Mr. Horatio Johnson. 199 

home for more than fourand twenty hours on 
a similar expedition. But Tom is an excel- 
lent hand with a rifle. He kills birds better 
than he set up type, and Susan consoles us 
for his absence by saying he is sure to bring 
back a leash or two of partridges . which, 
let me observe, Mrs. Johnson cooks to per- 
fection. 

We had a rough voyage out ; but, all 
things considered, we stood it well. I woke 
up one night in my shirt, rowing for my life 
on the hard boards of our cabin, with Mrs. 
Johnson alarming the whole ship by her 
cries for a light I had dreamt we were 
shipwrecked, and during my desperate 
efforts to save the truest and noblest of 
women and the best cook in all the world I 
had fallen out of my berth, and continued 
my exertions on the floor, to the great dis- 
comfort of myself and the consternation of 
Mrs. J. I narrate this incident to you be- 
cause it strikes me as funny, and it may 
relieve the monotony of an uninspired 
writer like myself, who do not possess 



200 Stranger than Fiction. 

those powers which so adorn the name of 
Martyn. 

The wonders of this country must be 
seen to be appreciated. Quebec particu- 
larly interested us ; but Mrs. J. got nervous 
about the earthquake of 1663, traces of 
which are still shown to strangers. Poor 
dear soul, she fancied she felt the earth 
tremble under her, so we pushed on with 
all speed to Montreal. Suffice it to say 
that, after much travelling, much bar- 
gaining, and many strange incidents, I 
bought a farm out here at Barminster, 
where we are all comfortably setded, I 
hope, for the remainder of our natural 
lives. 

In my next letter I intend to give you all 
particulars of the extent of our dominions, 
the quality of our stock, the profit we ex- 
pect to realise by the clearance of the ad- 
jacent forest, which towers up in native 
grandeur to the skies. Our house is 
roughly built of logs and framework, but it 
is warm and comfortable, and I should im- 



Letter from Mr. Horatio Johnson. 201 

mensely like you to see us at night sitting 
round the fire and talking of Middleton. 
Sometimes I read aloud in the old Shake- 
speare, while Tom cleans the guns, and 
Susan prepares the supper, and my wife 
knits stockings for everybody. But Tom, 
as I said before, is not with us to-night, 
and we are rather anxious about him, a 
fierce snowstorm having set in, and the 
woods being dreadful mazes at such times. 
However, Tom is careful, and has, no doubt, 
found shelter with some distant neighbour. 
Winter is indeed fierce out here. I came 
home the other morning, after a ride across 
country, with the icicles hanging from my 
beard. I have cultivated a grey one since 
we parted. We are all longing for the 
summer, when we have arranged to begin 
such a vigorous attack upon the bush 
hard by as shall considerably add to the 
extent of land cleared, and upon which 
clearing I intend to found name, fame, 
and family, which shall be heard of here- 
after. 



202 Stranger than Fiction. 

Susan has just opened the outer door to 
look into the, night. The snow is coming 
down in great white patches, driven with a 
hissing noise by the wind. She thinks we 
ought to have the bell rung and the horns 
blown, for fear he may have lost his way* 
Women are naturally timid, though Mrs. J. 
and Susan have taken to our rough life 
here with a spirit that is delightful to con- 
template. However, in deference to their 
anxiety I must leave off writing to-night 
and see that the horns are blown, and well 
blown, though I feel quite satisfied Tom is 
all right somewhere. 

Moniti meliora sequarmir ! A week has 
passed away since I left off writing. The 
woman's instinct was in part right. Mrs. 
Titsy in her old remarkable way had more 
than once said she was sure something was 
going to happen on the night when I began 
writing this letter. She felt all over as if 
something were going to happen. She did 
not think it was anything very serious, but 
she had her feelings, and there was no deny- 



Letter from -Mr. Horatio Johnson. 203, 

ing them. She was right Tom did not 
return for five days from his first setting 
out We were all in the most miserable 
and abject state of alarm and anxiety about 
him. We sent out our hands to search in 
all directions, and at last they found him 
safely housed and the few cattle which he 
went after duly sheltered. 

But what a story Tom has brought home I 
I have always been a believer in the destiny 
that doth shape our ends, rough hew them 
how we may : but I am becoming more and 
more a confirmed and fixed fatalist, although, 
paradoxical as it may appear to you, there 
is not in my mind the shadow of a doubt 
about punishments and rewards belonging 
to this life as well as to the state to come. 
Tom was lost in the snow, but eventually 
the beacon light of a shanty, whose occu- 
pants had been living in the bush, brought 
him to a friendly haven. He found inside 
a woman, two children, and a rough looking 
fellow who had gone shares in the labour of 
the woman's husband. The woman was 



204 Stranger than Fiction. 

young, had been good looking, and was as 
dark as a gipsy. Her husband had been out 
for two days, having started to shoot for the 
pot. The children were fierce, black-eyed, 
sturdy little fellows. Tom got refreshment 
and permission to remain until the morning. 
He was pleased to find that the woman 
knew something about Dinsley county in 
the old land. When she found that Tom 
knew the same place, however, she was 
anxious to speak of other subjects ; but she 
had mentioned Cartown, where you were 
at school, you know, and Tom lyas so 
deeply interested and talked so much about 
the fine drives he had had with a kind, dear 
master of his through that district, that at 
last the woman talked about the green lanes 
thereabouts, and then began to cry and 
moan, and rock herself to and fro, and be- 
wail her unhappy lot. Whereupon the 
rough brute I have spoken of laughed and ' 

mocked and sneered at her, and he and 
Tom nearly came to blows about it. How- 
ever, the vagabond slunk off soon after- 



Letter from Mr. Horatio Johnson. 205 

wards, and the woman, drying her eyes, 
sat up and evidently shook off the feeling* 
that had overcome her, but would say no 
more. In the morning she begged Tom to 
stay until this man, who had gone out early 
to seek his comrade, returned, and then she 
spoke again of Dinsley county, and he 
mentioned his visit to you at Cartown 
school. She would have you described to 
her, and she said she knew you. Then 
she began to cry and said she did not know 
you. Tom got alarmed about the poor 
creature. Her two boys seized him by the 
legs and kicked him, thinking he had hurt 
their mother. They shook their little fists 
at him. In due time the searcher returned, 
and looked less brutal than when he went 
out He said he had found the master, 
this woman's husband, but they must go 
out to him as he could not cofne to them. 
Tom went forth with the rest, and not 
more than two miles lrom home they 
found, lying beside the embers of a burnt- 
out fire which had been made in the shade 



2o6 Stranger than Fiction. 

of a tree where the snow had been partially- 
cleared, the frozen corpse of Julius Jen- 
nings. 

Such are the decrees of fate . such the 
certain punishment of crime, for none can 
doubt that Jennings was implicated in the 
murder of our poor friend Silas Collinson. 
His widow now tells us she was a gipsy- 
girl . her name Miriam ; that she was mar- 
ried to Jennings according to the cere- 
monies of her tribe, her husband having 
faecome one of them. They had been un- 
able to remain in England, she says, be- 
cause of some great debt for which, her 
husband informed her, he was responsible; 
^nd after spending some years in America, 
fauying goods and hawking them, they had, 
about a year ago, come to Canada to live 
in the bush as best they could, nothing 
having prospered with them. Strange 
creatures, women ; they carry in their 
hearts the Divine inspiration. Notwith-" 
standing her association with the mur- 
derer Jennings, Mrs. Titsy and my wife, 



Letter from Mr. Horatio Johnson. 207 

Mrs. J., have begged me to let the poor, 
broken-down creature come to live with us 
. she and her fierce, black-eyed gipsy boys. 
Jennings's comrade has started off for Mon- 
treal, thinking the weather is clearing; 
but the snow has come on again, and he is 
certain to come to a similar end to that of 
Jennings, as certain as I am writing this 
strange letter to you, unless he meets with 
speedy shelter. He is evidently a bad 
fellow . bad in grain. We want all the as- 
sistance we can get, and I cannot baulk 
such a genuine piece of benevolence, so 
Mrs. Miriam . that is to be her name, we 
cannot call her Jennings . is coming to us, 
with her pair of little ragamuffins, and in 
the summer we shall rig up a more exten- 
sive establishment, which will be rendered 
absolutely necessary ere long by the arrival 
of other additions to our colonial household. 
I shall write to you again soon, and. with 
the united best wishes of all here to 
yourself and the Mrs. Martyn that is 



208 Stranger than Fiction. 

to be, I am ever yours truly, and to com- 
mand, 

Horatio Johnson. 

P.S. This has been written a fortnight, 
but no opportunity of posting has arisen 
until r to-day. I therefore open the letter 
to repeat that we are all well and happy. 
Mrs. Miriam is with us, and a good crea- 
ture she is ; and quite pretty still, so 
Susan says. The woman must have gone 
through a sight of trouble and misery. 
Her boys will make first-rate cattle- 
minders. They are up Xp all sorts of 
tricks, and their occasional laughter makes 
our Canadian home seem all the more 
homely. Yesterday some wolves, pressed 
by hunger, howled about the place. I 
confess I would rather hear the watchdog's 
honest bark. Mrs. Miriam's eldest boy 
wanted to go out and fight them. We 
shall do battle with these pests, however, by 
civilization, which comes with careful clear- 
ings. I feel quite young again with the 



Letter from Mr. Horatio Johnson. 209 

incentives to industry that are about me, 
and happier than ever I was in my life, 
and the more so that all my family now, 
in which I include Tom and Susan, have 
accepted the stupid old doctor's philosophy 
that everything happens for the best. 




VOL. III. 14 




CHAPTER XVI. 



CLOSING SCENES. 




AGAR'S precaution with regard to 
the publication of his confession 
was in the interest of an accom- 
plice. This was no other than 
the man who led the attack on the Star 
printing offices. The woman who visited 
the criminal in his last hours received 
Magar's instructions to warn the Middleton 
Bruiser, in ordef that the fellow might get 
out of the country. According to Magar's 
confession, the villain was concealed at the 
mill on that fatal 15th of November for the 
purpose of playing his part in the murder. 
Magar affirmed that this hired assassin 



Closing Scenes. 211 

struck the fatal blow. The same hand was 
employed to get rid of Susan. It was the 
Middleton Bruiser who made her acquaint- 
ance on board ship, and tried to push her 
overboard. Magar always understood that 
the fellow had accomplished his mission* 
At first the Bruiser had said so ; but pre- 
sently he told Magar the truth, and then 
sent forged letters from the States. In 
telling his story, Magar dwelt upon the de- 
ceitful part which the Bruiser had played. 
" If," said the late Mayor of Middleton, 
"he had been true one way or the other I 
should not have been in this position ; if he 
had told me that Susan Harley was alive I 
should have got away from England ; I 
might have found her out in America and 
married her. But it was not to be : I 
never was quite satisfied about the Bruiser 
except as to his doing anything for money. 
I always repented of what was done, but I 
had begun to get over the fear and remorse 
of it when that woman turned up like a 
ghost, and the terror of that moment was as 

14 . 2 



212 Stranger than Fiction. 

bad as when I heard him struck down and 
cry out . that screech which seemed to 
freeze me where I stood. It has been in 
my ears many a time, his awful scream, but 
Fd begun to get over it ; I'd begun to leave 
off slipping in his blood at nights just as I 
was getting into bed ; it had been getting 
more and more like a bad dream as I 
prospered and came to be trusted by the 
town as a magistrate. She brought it all 
back with her white face and staring eyes. 
If Fd my time to come over again I'd 
sooner be the man murdered than one con- 
cerned in his death. Julius Jennings was 
present when Silas was killed, but he struck 
no blow, and Tom Titsy knew no more of 
it than the child unborn." 

I supplement this extract from Magar's 
confession, with an episode from the second 
letter of Mr. Horatio Johnson. The end 
of the comrade of Julius Jennings was 
predicted in the letter set forth in my 
previous chapter. Here is the sequel to 
the colonial part of this history : . 



Closing Scenes. 2 1 3 

" The comrade of Jennings who made an 
effort to reach Montreal, as I have de- 
scribed, was no doubt mixed up in the Mid- 
dleton tragedy. Mrs. Miriam says that 
one night soon after the execution of M agar 
her husband brought him home. This was 
when they were living in America, and it 
was chiefly through this -man that they 
determined to try Canada. Her husband 
did not like him, but there was something 
between them which made it necessary that 
they should be friends, and when the fellow 
was drunk he used to let out incidents of 
his former career which gave her days of 
dread and uneasiness, gipsy as she was. 
He knew a great deal about Middleton, 
and on dark nights when the wind was high 
he drank hard, and then had strange fits of 
terror and fury, and cursing and praying, 
that drove Jennings almost wild. I don't 
think she knows all, but she has led a 
dreadful life with those two rascals, though 
Jennings does not seem to have behaved 
what may be called unkindly to her. But 




214 Stranger than Fiction. 

to proceed : I told you before that the 
fellow would never reach Montreal, and he 
did not. The snow came on again about 
two hours after he left, and the wind seemed 
as if it blew ice. It is fatal to fall asleep in 
such storms, but, after great fatigue in 
the cold, it is seldom that nature is proof 
against the temptation. Two days after 
his departure he was found dead in the 
snow, and on the news reaching us, which 
it did, because it was thought he might be 
one of my people,, I extemporised a sleigh, 
and Tom drove Susan over to see the body. 
This was for my curiosity and satisfaction. 
It had occurred to me that in this wretch 
she might discover her acquaintance of the 
steamer. There is more in ' presenti- 
ments ' than we are willing to admit. I 
try to laugh Mrs. J. out of her superstitious 
feelings about death-ticks, ear-burnings, 
walking- over -your -grave sensations, un- 
lucky birds, and fatal Fridays, but secretly 
I sympathise with her, and have cause. It 
came into my mind in the strangest way 



Closing Scenes. 215 

that this dead man in the snow was Susan's 
villain of the steamer, and it was so. Susan 
hesitated at first, but afterwards she had no 
doubt about it, and I believe him to be the 
villain known in Middleton as the Bruiser, 
that same rascal who was at the beck and 
call of Gripps, and whom Mr. W. Williams 
had the honour of bruising on the day 
when Gripps seized poor Mr. Martyn's 
premises." 

My story is coming to an end. Jacob's 
literary successes increased and multiplied, 
but not without much hard work. It was 
a fortunate thing that he had made a posi- 
tion with his pen, for the failure of a well- 
known bank, in which a large amount of 
the Thornton funds were invested, swept 
away nearly the whole of Lucy's private 
fortune. This was an incident in their 
lives which only tended to bind the young 
people closer together. To Jacob Lucy's 
loss was almost a matter of congratulation. 
His romantic notions of love and independ- 



216 Stranger than Fiction. 

ence had often been secretly arrayed 
against his wife's fortune. Indeed, the 
subject had more than once formed a topic 
of conversation between them. For ex- 
ample, one evening, when they were gossip- 
ing over a letter from Mr. Thornton about 
the investment of some moneys which had 
just fallen in from a lapsed mortgage (this 
was before the bank failure), Jacob said . 

" Lucy, my dear, I wish you had no 
funds to invest." 

" I know you do, Jacob, and that is the 
only subject about which we are ever likely 
to differ." 

She looked up from a book of poems, and 
laid her hand upon her husband's shoulder, 
glancing at the work he was reading; it 
was a treatise on political economy. 

" It had been the dream of my life/' 
said Jacob, laying aside his book, " to win 
you a home with my single arm . to carve 
out a way for both of us, to be your 
champion and protector, and thus to 
prove to you the strength and quality of 
my love." 



Closing Scenes, 217 

" You don't like the Thornton sovereigns, 
poor dear Jacob," said Lucy, sitting on a 
cushion at his feet, and laying her head 
upon his knees. " Suppose we give them 
away, dear, or throw them into the 
river." 

" You always laugh at me," said Jacob. 

" No, dear, I do not ; but it is curious that 
one so wise and clever as you are should 
take such an odd view of your riches." 

" Your riches, dear," said Jacob. 

" Yours, you unkind, tyrannical fellow," 
said Lucy. 

Jacob patted her brown silky hair, and 
stooped to kiss her forehead. 

" You will never look at the point 
earnestly, Lucy," said Jacob. 

How was it that Jacob was reading 
" Political Economy," and Lucy a book of 
poems ? 

" Then I will, dear, for once," said Lucy, 
taking his hand, and looking, not at her 
husband this time, but straight into the fire, 
that glowed lovingly upon her sweet, tender 



2 1 8 Stranger than Fiction. 

face. " You make money by your books 
and your writings, but you work hard, 
Jacob ; you know, dear, you are often up in 
your room writing when you ought to be in 
bed ; I have stood at the door and heard 
your pen racing over the paper." 

" My dear love," said Jacob. 

" You are not to interrupt me. I have 
heard of cases where an author has not been 
able to continue his labours from ill health 
and from many other causes ; and then, 
instead of being free, he has been borne 
down by a wife and children. Now, you 
are to hear me to the end, dear ; don't 
fidget so with your feet. Knowing the 
uncertainties of literary work, would it not 
be some consolation to you, were you a 
wife, loving your husband with all your 
heart and soul, to know that there was no 
possibility of your being a burthen and a 
care, and a drawback to the man whom you 
adored and loved ?" 

" My dear Lucy, there is good sense in 
what you say, and I have not the heart to 



Closing Scenes. 219 

oppose it. You are a very practical little 
woman ; you always were much more so 
than I could have imagined ; where do you 
get your worldly wisdom, love ?" 

" I don't know, dear ; one of my lady 
tutors was the widow of an author, a 
learned doctor of Oxford . a great philo- 
sopher; and do I not see how many 
heartrending letters you receive from au- 
thors r 

" Yes, dear, they are not all as fortunate 
as Jacob Martyn." 

" As clever, you should say, Jacob." 

" No, dear, as fortunate ; the public is a 
fickle patron, but once it takes to a writer, 
it is his own fault if he is not always a 
favourite." 

" But how long it is before the public 
makes up its mind !" said Lucy. " Here 
is a poet who is charming, full of new 
thoughts, and as musical as Moore; and 
you say his books do not sell, and he has 
not yet had a five-pound note from his 
publishers," 



220 Stranger than Fiction. 

" The public will discover his merits 
when he is dead, poor fellow. He goes 
in for fame ; I write for the present" 

It was soon after some such conjugal 
gossip as this that the ill news of the bank 
came to Mortimer House. For a moment 
Jacob felt a weight lifted off his mind ; but 
before the day was over he regretted the 
loss deeply. He did not want Lucy's 
money, and yet he was angry at the loss ; 
while, on the contrary, Lucy received the 
news with the greatest equanimity. 

" My dear Jacob, don't trouble about it ; 
there is still a little left. Besides, dear, 
you never cared for it." 

" I do now." 

" Only for my sake . only because you 
think the loss of it grieves me." 

" No, dear, for my own. If we had 
given it away, or thrown it into the river, 
as you once suggested," said Jacob ; " but 
to be done out of it in this way !" 

" There, dear ! See . look in my face . 
I believe I am happier now that it is gone. 



Closing Scenes. 



We shall love each other all the more, if 
that were possible. Think of those poor 
people who have no other resources . 
widows and orphans perhaps I" 

" You are an angel," said Jacob, kissing 
his wife. 

" A poor one, bless her heart," said old 
Thornton, who had entered the room un- 
perceived ; "a poor angel, my dear," said 
the old man, as Lucy flung her arms round 
his neck and kissed him. 

" Richer even now than many of the 
people who ride in the Row, and try to 
mask their empty purses and mortgaged 
estates in hdllow smiles and badinage? 
said Lucy. 

" Now, by my soul, it does me good to 
see you two in this spirit," exclaimed Uncle 
Thornton. " I have been in a furious 
rage for hours, and in despair, too . a 
miserable, broken-hearted dog ! If it had 
been my own money that had gone . but 
Lucy's, my dead grandson's money, hoarded 
by my brother to do justice with at 



222 Stranger than Fiction. 

last ! Good Lord ! it makes me sick to 
think of it. Give me some sherry, Jacob 
Martyn." 

Sherry was brought. The old man 
helped himself liberally. 

" Don't be downhearted, Uncle Thorn- 
ton. We are well off. I am making a 
good income. A short time since I should 
have liked nothing better than this loss. 
That money has been the only little sha- 
dow between my wife and I. But I have 
become proud and ambitious lately. I had 
been thinking of buying an estate in the 
county of Dinsley ; and I suppose I am 
being punished a little for my ingratitude. 
But it is all for the best. I shall set to 
work now in deeper earnest than hereto- 
fore." 

" There !. now that is all we are going 
to say about it. We shall take a pleasant 
house somewhere near Richmond, and live 
quietly. There . no more to-night/ 1 

" But, Lucy, my child " began Uncle 

Thornton. 



Closing Scenes, 223 

" No more about money to-night ; we 
will have some music. " 

" That is right," sa,id Jacob. " She is 
right, uncle, we will defer the subject." 

Lucy sat down to her harp and conjured 
from the glowing strings that dreamy story 
of the happy land ; and when the melody 
had taken full possession of Jacob's 
memory she sung the simple words with 
the sympathetic tenderness of the old days ; 
while Uncle Thornton nodded his white 
head to the music and sipped his sherry in 
silence. 




CHAPTER XVII. 




MR. BONSALL AS A CABINET MINISTER SEEKS 
. RE-ELECTION FOR MIDDLETON AND IS 
OPPOSED. 

NCLE THORNTON had often 
persuaded Jacob Martyn to go 
into Parliament. It was the fear 
of being compelled to abandon 
this ambitious project that made the bank 
failure seem more serious than it was. 
Within a few days of the stoppage of the 
establishment it was announced that there 
would be a dividend of ten shillings in the 
pound. Thus it was not necessary that 
the Martyns should leave Piccadilly. More- 
over, Jacob had threatened that he would 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 225 

show him how a pen which condescended 
to scribble fairy tales could also create real 
as well as imaginary golden eggs ; and he 
was as good as his word, for he made 
arrangements with his publishers for a 
series of new works, which they were glad 
to undertake on terms that were most 
advantageous to the author. 

Meanwhile a vacancy occurred in the 
representation of Middleton. Mr. Bonsall 
had been appointed a member of the 
Ministry. It was not generally the 
custom to oppose a member under these 
circumstances, but that proud old gen- 
tleman, Uncle Thornton, came in post 
haste to Jacob with the Times in his 
pocket to urge afresh his desire that 
Jacob should go in for Parliamentary 
honours. 

"This Bonsall is not popular either at 
Middleton or with his own party in the 
House ; they tell me at the Conservative 
that he is a low-bred fellow, a money- 
grubber, one of your self-made, hard-fisted 

vol. in. 15 



226 Stranger than Fiction. 

democrats who neither deserves considera- 
tion nor respect. " 

" Ah, but, Uncle Thornton, you are such 
an extreme Tory, you know," said Jacob. 
" You stand up for blood ; if you had lived 
in the days of the Stuarts you would 
have believed in the divine right of 
Kings." 

" And what would you have gone in for, 
my dear friend ?" said Uncle Thornton, 
gravely. " Surely you would not have been 
on the side of that tyrant Cromwell with 
his hollow cant and his cut-throat fingers ; 
why, Colonel Thornton, a brave ancestor 
of Lucys, fell fighting for his King at 
N e wark . and " 

" No, Uncle Thornton, Ldo not think I 
should have been a Roundhead." 

" Thank God for that !" exclaimed the 
old gentleman. 

" I should have been led away by the 
picturesqueness of the Cavaliers, but there 
is no question now about the " 

" Don't say any more, my dear boy. 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 227 

You know how I love you. You are for 
the Throne and the Constitution now, are 
you not ?" 

" Yes, yes," said Jacob, " and also for 
the people." 

"Well, well, so are we all. Bonsall 
behaved like a blackguard to your father, 
you have told me so often ; apart from 
politics and from my cherished hope of 
seeing you in the House, it would be legiti- 
mate and honourable revenge to turn Bon- 
sall out." 

" It would," said Jacob, " you have me 
there, uncle ; yes, you score twenty points 
at least when you remind me of what I 
owe to the dead . and the living. Give 
me an hour for consideration. On second 
thoughts let me go and see Squire North- 
cotes." 

" That is a friendly thought," said 
the proud representative of Thornton 
glories. 

" Bradshaw " was consulted at once, 
Lucys opinion was asked, and it confirmed 

L J 5. 2 



228 Stranger than Fiction. 

4 . 

Jacob's own views. While arrangements 
were being made to catch the first train, Jacob 
drafted an address " to the free and inde- 
pendent Burgesses of Middleton-in-the- 
Water. ,, When he arrived at the scene of 
action he found that the Squire had himself 
been invited to stand. Mr. Northcotes 
was not, however, inclined to consent. He 
thought it ungracious to oppose Bonsall 
under the circumstances. He admitted 
that Bonsall deserved it for various rea- 
sons ; and when Jacob sat down and told 
him the story of the Middleton Star, the 
Squire rattled his gold and silver, and 
swore that Bonsall should never again sit 
for Middleton unopposed, damme, as long 
as he had one guinea to rattle against 
-another in fighting him. 

The end was that Jacob put aside his 
own half-hearted designs upon the seat, 
and, with the aid of the popular author, 
Squire Northcotes sent out an address 
which astonished all parties, and threw the 
little town of Middleton into a state of 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 229 

delightful excitement. Solicitors were re- 
tained, public-houses were opened, printing- 
presses were set to work, burgess-lists 
were in great demand, ward meetings were 
summoned, corrupt palms began to itch ; 
and there was such a general upheaving of 
local sentiment as Middleton had not 
experienced since the time of Bonsall's 
return under the auspices of Mr. Augustus 
Martyn. 

As luck would have it, there was a split 
among the sitting fnember's owq friends. 
The Yellows had been in power too long 
for the maintenance of that unity which 
we are always reminded on these occasions 
is strength. The want of competition for 
corporate honours, on the part of the Reds, 
had induced the Yellows to fight among 
themselves ; and their discussions, as re- 
ported in the Middleton Gtcardian, were 
marvels of civic personality. 

A feud more particularly damaging to 
the party had sprung up concerning the 
question of a public fountain. Mr. Bon- 



230 Stranger than Fiction. 

sail, M.P., had made the little borough a 
present of ^500 for an ornamental foun- 
tain ; and the Yellows had quarrelled 
about the site. Without any interference 
from the long trodden down and dispirited 
Reds, the Yellows had split up into sections, 
each with its distinct scheme for an orna- 
mental fountain; and the excitement was 
at its height when Mr. Bonsall appealed to 
his constituents for re-election. 

The smaller section involved in the 
fountain dispute, to a man, gave their 
adhesion to the Red candidate, whom the 
Guardian described as " a gentleman who, 
whilst giving an independent support to 
our great and glorious institutions, would 
gladly aid in amending them and increasing 
their stability; a gentleman who would 
ever be found recording his vote in the 
true interests of the nation, rendering 
allegiance to the throne, and upholding 
that civil and religious liberty for which 
our fathers had fought and bled in many 
a field of carnage. Mr. Northcotes, who 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 231 

would fight under the crimson banner, had 
many claims upon the electors. Native, 
and to the manner born, he had been edu- 
cated and brought up in the locality, and 
had ever taken a heartfelt interest in the 
welfare of the ancient and loyal borough of 
Middleton. Blessed with a fortune far 
beyond that of many a rich country gentle- 
man, Squire Northcotes had travelled 
much ; he had visited foreign countries ; 
he had sojourned under the sunny skies of 
Italy, he had climbed the Scottish moun- 
tains ; he had visited the pine forests of 
America, and had slept at the foot of 
Snowdon in Wales ; but nowhere, the 
Guardian was assured, had he found a 
spot more delightful to him than their own 
little borough, which it was now his highest 
ambition to represent in the great legisla- 
tive assembly of England, and the welfare 
of which it would always be the dearest 
wish of his heart to promote in every 
possible way. The time had come for the 
honest, manly, and independent electors of 



232 Stranger than Fiction. 

Middleton to shake off the shackles of a 
clique, and send to Parliament a worthy, 
enlightened, sagacious, wealthy, and able 
man, belonging to themselves, raised 
amongst them, born in their midst . a man 
who would do credit to the State, and 
whose representation would exalt Middle- 
ton-in-the- Water to a pitch of greatness the 
height of which was almost too dazzling for 
imagination." 

Never had the Guardian been so eloquent 
in its eulogy ; and never so satirically scorch- 
ing . its satire burnt and seredthe reputation 
of Mr. Bonsall to such an extent that many 
of the excited Reds thought it would be 
impossible for him to hold up his head 
again in Middleton. "Persevering and 
industrious the hon. member had been, it 
is true," said the Guardian, " but perse- 
vering and industrious in what ? . in earn- 
ing the gratitude of a time-serving Ministry, 
by never giving a vote against them, even 
in the interest of Middleton, where her 
most ancient rights were concerned . per- 




Mr. Bonsalt seeks Re-election. 2%$ 

severing and industrious in truckling to 
the most corrupt Ministry that had ever 
sacrificed the independence and reputation 
of a great country. And for what ? for 
place and pension, for the sweets of office ! 
Would Middleton-in-the- Water ratify this ? 
Never ! ! I" 

" Three cheers for the Guardian ! Hoo- 
ray ! hooray !" cried the Reds, when the 
sprightly reporter of the local journal ap- 
peared on the nomination day. 

" Bah ! bah ! bah I" groaned the Yellows. 

The ground-floor of the old Town Hall 
was fitted up for the hustings. It was a 
hot July morning when that same reporter, 
on the principle of the eariy bird, presented 
himself at the Town Hall, with several 
others from the county town hard by, to 
give an account of the exciting speeches of 
the nomination day. 

The first to show himself upon the hust- 
ings was the mayor, who was greeted with 
three cheers. Then came the crier, and 
several civic officers. Next, bowing and 



234 Stranger than Fiction. 

smiling, and looking as pleasant as he pos- 
sibly could, came Mr. Bonsall. A storm of 
hisses and yells saluted him ; but still he 
smiled and bowed, " Place and pension !" 
shouted a man in front " Who sold him- 
self to the Government ?" shouted another ; 
and then there were a hundred mingled 
cries which the reporters tried to place 
upon their notes ; but they got no further 
than " Down with the clique !" " Monkey 
Bonsall !" " How about the five hundred ?" 
" Who stole the donkey ?" " Go home !" 
"Who robbed the poor?" "Who killed 
poor Martyn ?" " Traitor P " No more 
cliques !" " Nosey Bonsall !" Meanwhile 
the crowd grew and grew, and the summer 
sun blazed in, hot and red, upon the bellow- 
ing throng, which swayed to and fro, hither 
and thither . a sea of heads and eyes ter- 
rible to Mr. Bonsall and his supporters. 

Presently the hissing and impertinent epi- 
thets which had been heaped upon Bonsall 
were changed to cheering (only faintly in- 
terrupted by the dispirited Yellows) upon 



K 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 235 

the entrance of Squire Northcotes, who 
rattled his money, and laughed and chatted 
to Mr. Jacob Martyn, who looked as fresh 
and bright as the crimson geranium in 
his button-hole. " Northcotes for ever I" 
" The peopled friend !" " Red for ever !" 
" Down with the other clique !" shouted 
persistent bodies of factory operatives, who 
had screeched and roared at Bonsall. The 
crowd went on increasing, and, as it grew, 
so did the number of Squire Northcotes 
supporters increase, though they were 
packed in with many of Bonsall's friends. 
" Bully Northcotes !" shouted a determined- 
looking fellow near the door ! " Cockey 
Northcotes ! Bah ! bah !" A storm of hisses 
followed, but the Yellow voter soon found 
allies ; " Purse-proud Northcotes !" they 
cried. u Skinflint !" responded the Reds. 
" Who gave his servants dogs-meat ?" cried 
a blundering coalheaver. " Pump-water 
Bonsall !" shouted a shrill voice from the 
opposite side of the hall This was fol- 
lowed by a roar of laughter, and a fight be- 



236 Stranger than Fiction. 

tween a Red and a Yellow, the latter 
having sought to smother the Red laugh by 
asking a prominent supporter of the Squire 
" Who murdered his poor old mother ?" 
Two policemen made a show of interference, 
but without the smallest success ; the town- 
crier rang his bell furiously, and in vain the 
mayor waved his civic hand for silence. 

At this juncture the attention of the free 
and independents of Middleton was at- 
tracted to a gallery which had been set 
apart for the lady friends of the members. 
Suddenly the fighting ceased, and a round 
of cheers saluted the entrance of Mrs. Mar- 
ty n and Mrs. Ferris, who were conducted 
to seats by Mr. Windgate Williams, that 
gentleman being attired in the height of 
manly fashion. ' ' Three cheers for the 
ladies " was demanded and given again 
and again, and acknowledged with such 
lively sweetness by the two new occupants 
of the gallery that the other women present 
began to scandalise and hate Mrs. Marty n 
and Mrs. Ferris on the spot ; and well 



Mr, Bonsall seeks Re-election. 237 

they might, for the new comers outshone 
them all. 

Gazing on these sunny beauties was 
like a dream of fair women. So far as 
complexion- went, and bright eyes, they 
might have been sisters ; but there was a 
piquancy in Mrs. Ferris' s style which gave 
her altogether a different appearance to 
Jacob's wife, whose quiet, sober sweetness 
was a good foil for the lively little wife of 
the famous actor. Edith wore a coquettish 
hat, trimmed with ostrich feathers and 
crimson ribbon. She fixed her bright eyes 
upon Squire Northcotes, who rattled his 
gold and silver at her, and nodded and 
bowed in a manner that was quite delight- 
ful to behold. Lucy wore a pretty grey 
bonnet, and her hair was bound close to 
her head. She looked down upon the 
crowd, through her large blue eyes, and 
there was an unwonted flush upon her 
cheeks, and an expression, half fear, half 
anxiety, half pleasure on her fair round 
features, which, in Jacob's eyes, made her 



238 Stranger than Fiction. 

look more beautiful than ever. By Mr. 
Williams's advice she had delicately com- 
bined the colours red and yellow, in a 
ribbon which she wore round her neck . 
a tribute to both parties, and a tribute 
which did not go unnoticed or unrewarded. 
Mrs. Ferris had, however, insisted upon 
carrying " the colours " unqualified. 

" We must not let them see that we are 
taking advantage of their differences," Mr. 
Williams said ; and he therefore wore a 
rosette of yellow and red himself. 

So far as political feeling went Windgate 
was with the Yellows. He reconciled his 
conscientious scruples with his actions by 
joining himself to the minority in the foun- 
tain dispute, and revenging himself upon 
Bonsall for his treachery to his deceased 
friend. Jacob, on the contrary, had not in- 
herited his father's political opinions ; and 
although he had seldom had cause to ex- 
press any direct or defined views of govern- 
ment, his opinions were Red . " crimson to 
the core," he told Mrs. Ferris. 




Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 239 

1 

When an approach to order had been ac- 
complished, the formalities of the time were 
duly performed, and the candidates were 
proposed and seconded. The action of 
the gentleman who proposed Mr. Bonsall 
was eloquent in the extreme, assisted as it 
was by hoarse cries of " Chair," " Order," 
" Hear," and " Turn 'em out," " Put 'em 
under their own founting," " Who killed 
his mother ?" " Dog's meat," " Red for 
ever," " Yellow for ever." Mr. Bonsall 
said a great deal, to judge from his man- 
ner ; and the reporters appeared to be 
getting most of what he said upon their 
notes ; but the papers only succeeded in 
giving a very meagre report of his oration. 

Long before Mr. Bonsall sat down there 
was a cry of "Martyn," "Mr. Martyn." 
" Jacob Martyn." The popular author had 
been recognised, and nothing would satisfy 
the crowd but a speech from Mr. Martyn, 
and he was the only speaker who secured 
the respect and attention of the meeting. 
Squire Northcotes himself could not obtain 



240 Stranger than Fiction. 

anything like attention ; but he was much 
more successful than Mr. Bonsall ; and the 
severest thing demanded of him was, " Is 
it true you starve your servants ?" " Ask 
the servants themselves, my man ; yonder 
stands one of them ;" and amidst cheers and 
laughter the Squire pointed to his fat 
coachman, who was blushing and frowning 
at the Yellows from a secure corner near the 
platform. " Does he look starved ?" shouted 
the Squire in triumph. " No ; nor don't 
feel like it/' said the coachman,, conquering 
his bashfulness, and looking defiantly at his 
masters detractors. This was regarded as 
one of the best sallies of the day. It 
restored the crowd to something like good 
humour, and brought down a ringing 
cheer. " Does he look starved ?" said the 
Squire's gold and silver, amidst cries of 
" No, no," " Bravo, coachy," and " Three 
cheers for the fat *un." 

At length the moment came for electors 
and non-electors to hold up their hands for 
the man of their choice. The town-crier 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 241 

rang his bell ; the fat coachman wiped his 
burning face; the sun blazed hotter and 
hotter upon the open windows of the hall ; 
the Squire rattled his gold and silver ; Mr. 
Bonsall fidgeted with his hat; and the 
mayor, rising solemnly and lifting his hand 
authoritatively, demanded a show of hands 
for Mr. Bonsall. ' 

A sudden and startling array of dirty 
palms was exhibited, amidst cheers and 
yells and hissing ; and for a moment Mr. 
Windgate Williams confessed that he be- 
lieved Bonsall had won the show of hands ; 
but when the friends of Squire Northcotes 
came to hold up their hands, the majority 
was unmistakable, and the mayor's declara- 
tion was received with rounds of cheering, 
led by Mr. Williams, and acknowledged 
by the Squire, who nodded at Mrs. Paul 
Ferris, and agitated his gold and silver to 
an alarming extent. 

A poll was demanded for Mr. Bonsall, 
whereupon the contending parties separated 
to complete their arrangements for the mpr- 

vot,. in. 16 



242 Stranger than Fiction. 

row. There were fights innumerable during 
the afternoon ; rival bands of music met 
and broke their instruments over each 
others heads ; the Yellow drummer was 
thrust head foremost into his own drum ; 
and Mr. Bonsall was daringly hustled in 
the streets by half a dozen rollicking opera- 
tives from the factory that still looked out 
of its many windows on the ruin of Jacob 
Martyn's garden. 

Jacob and his friends were heartily glad 
when night came, and quiet began to put 
in a claim for consideration ; though it was 
not until morning dawned that Middleton- 
in-the- Water could be said to be in repose. 
Long after midnight mysterious groups of 
men were scattered hither and thither about 
the streets, whispering in the shadows of old 
gabled houses, or keeping watch over the 
public-house haunts of either party, while 
solitary horsemen patrolled the suburbs of 
the town, and occasionally interrogated 
pedestrians, who crept away by back streets 
on political journeys into the adjacent vil- 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 243 

lages ; for the Bonsall faction had unloosed 
their purse strings, and voters who had 
promised the Reds began to disappear, even 
before nightfall. 

A stranger visiting Middleton on this 
eventful night might have imagined the 
country to be on the eve of a great 
revolution, expecting it to burst out 
fierce and bloody on the next day ; so 
stealthily, so thievishly did men, singly and 
in groups, move about . peering into dark 
corners, peeping through keyholes, trying 
doors, and disappearing in dark alleys. 

The same stranger would have been 
highly amused could he have drawn up the 
blinds or peeped into Dr. Smythe's dining- 
room at Grosvenor House, close by the 
Cartown river, and near the scene of the 
opening chapter of this book. The Doctor 
was an enthusiastic Red. With the assist- 
an9e of Mr. Windgate Williams, he had 
induced a dozen " doubtful " voters to sup 
with him. These were " needy " men who 
had accepted bribes from Bonsall . poor 

16 . 2 



244 Stranger than Fiction. 

fellows who had been unable to withstand 
temptation. They had in other days voted 
Yellow ; but had this time promised Squire 
Northcotes, and had been " got at " by the 
other side in consequence^ 

After supper they sang and were merry. 
Mr. Williams proposed the Doctor's health. 
The Doctor replied, and proposed the 
editor's health, and in doing so alluded in 
touching terms to the once famous Middle- 
ton Star. Then he asked the electors to 
look back to the old days when Mr. Alfred 
Martyn was amongst them. They re- 
sponded heartily to the Doctor's eloquent 
appeals to their sympathy, and thus a good 
understanding was brought about Mr, 
Williams supplemented the Doctor's speech 
by a carefully prepared narrative of Bon- 
sall's conduct in connection with the defunct 
paper and the deceased proprietor ; and 
while Williams was talking the Doctor was 
paying marked attention to the creature 
comforts of his guests. The combined 
influence of oratory and wine worked won- 



K 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 245 

ders upon the sympathies of the doubtfuls. 
Some of them suddenly broke into unmis- 
takable applause at the editor's best points ; 
one cried " Shame," another shook his head, 
while a third said he wished he had known 
all this before. 

At length, when the time seemed ripe for 
definite action, Williams, leaping upon a 
chair, exclaimed, " And so let us give three 
cheers for Squire Northcotes !" It was 
cleverly done. The responsive hurrahs 
brought an angry message from Mrs. 
Smythe, which the Doctor treated with 
proud indifference, proposing renewed 
cheers for Northcotes, and " Red for 
ever!" 

As morning dawned sleep stole over the 
Doctors dining-room. The eminent prac- 
titioner was snugly reposing on a sofa. 
Mr. Williams was reclining upon two chairs 
placed across the doorway ; and the twelve 
doubtfuls were lying about in various direc- 
tions . some under the table, and some 
upon the hearth. A rubicund greengrocer 



246 Stranger than Fiction. 

sat transfixed in the Doctors arm-chair at 
the bottom of the table, gasping and snor- 
ing in happy unison with his fallows be- 
neath it 

At daylight the Doctor's man brought in 
coffee, and the doubtfuls, under the superin- 
tendence of Williams, washed themselves 
in detachments of twos and threes. Several 
complained of headache, but the Doctor 
soon made these all right. After break- 
fast they adjourned to the drawing-room, 
where the youngest Miss Smythe, who had 
been awakened purposely by the Doctor's 
orders, treated the assembled doubtfuls to 
vocal music, which in due time revived 
some of their previous enthusiasm. The 
victory was completed by Williams singing 
a song with a rattling chorus, in which the 
free and independent doubtfuls joined, to 
the great alarm and indignation of the 
Doctor's wife, who vowed she would 
never forgive this insult to herself and 
daughters. 

Then Williams, rubbing his eyes and 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 247 

looking round as if in a little doubt as to the 
position, but quite satisfied in his own mind^ 
said, " Now, my friends, one cheer more . 
who is it for ?" " Northcotes !" they re- 
plied as one man, " Northcotes for 
ever ! Northcotes, and down with the 
clique !" 

As soon as the poll opened that mornings 
the doubtfuls, with the Doctor at their head, 
polled plumpers for Northcotes ; and when 
the polling was at an end, Mr. Bonsall was 
defeated, and Squire Northcotes duly 
elected by a majority of twelve. 

It was a great fall for the. would-be 
Minister. With the sweets of office and 
the summit of his ambitious hopes within 
reach, he came to deserved grief for his 
insincerity and ingratitude. 

Jacob could not help feeling a" certain 
satisfaction in being enabled to tell Mr. 
Bonsall that he, the son of Alfred Martyn, 
had been the* chief means of his punish- 
ment. 

Mr. Cavendish Thornton, who war 



248 Stranger than Fiction. 

present, with the Hon. Max Walton, at the 
declaration of the poll, was greatly dis- 
appointed at the part which Jacob had 
played, though it was some consolation to 
the old gentleman that the leading Lon- 
don papers published articles upon Jacob 
Martyn's speech, which was pronounced to 
be full of original thought and indicative of 
legislative power. 

Mr. Martyn was strongly advised to seek 
a career in Parliament, and Mr. Thornton 
felt that after this he would be able to 
induce his dear Lucys husband to humour 
his wishes in this respect But Jacob never 
meddled with politics again ; and, in due 
time, when several little Martyns began to 
climb the old man's knees, he came dovn 
from his high estate, and confessed that 
perhaps Jacob was right in cultivating 
domestic comfort rather than seeking for the 
questionable honours of parliamentary life. 
Lucy had no doubt about the wisdom of 
Jacob's decision in the matter; and she 
was all the more convinced of it when she 



Mr. Bonsall seeks Re-election. 249 

learnt that the crowd of unattended ladies 
whom she met in society without their hus- 
bands were the wives of members of Parlia- 
ment, Ministers, and others, who were all 
occupied in governing their country. 





CHAPTER XVIII. 




WHICH ENDS THIS STRANGE, EVENTFUL 
HISTORY. 

S time wore on Jacob found it 
necessary to employ a secretary. 
When he told his wife the history 
of his relationship with Mr. Wind- 
gate Williams, she agreed with Jacob that 
no time should be lost in offering the ap- 
pointment to his early friend. 

" Well," said Windgate Williams to his 
shadow, which was reposing in gigantic 
proportions on the fire-lighted hearth of 
Mrs. Smick's first floor, " I don't think I 
can refuse it ; my experience will be valu- 



Close of the Story. 251 

able to him, and the work will be light. 
Ah, it's the way with these smart young 
fellows, they go ahead at first at a dashing 
rate, but they pull up after a while ; deuced 
clever, Jacob Martyn . there's no mistake 
about that . and he knows the value of 
Windgate Williams . that is not the 
smallest evidence of his wisdom." 

For Jacob Martyn's sake, therefore, Mr. 
Williams returned to London ; but he was 
not permitted to leave the scene of his 
distinguished labours at Dinsley until he 
had been entertained af a complimentary 
dinner by a select party of his 4 admirers, at 
whose hands he received a testimonial of 
" their esteem and regard, and of the high 
respect in which they held his eminent 
abilities, and as some small acknowledg- 
ment of the gratitude they felt in respect of 
his services in the cause of liberty and 
truth." Mr. Crooks made the presentation, 
on behalf of the numerous subscribers, in a 
speech of studied eloquence. The popular 
editor never delivered a more telling ac 1 



252 Stranger than Fiction. 

dress than that in which his thanks for this 
magnificent present were expressed. After 
telling the company that the tongue upon 
such an occasion failed to interpret the 
feelings of the heart, he delivered himself 
of an oration lasting more than half an hour, 
commenced with an audible sob, and closed 
with a palpable tear. 

Thus Mrs. Smick, deprived of her famous 
lodger, found herself called upon to adver- 
tise for a successor, " Which it were," as 
she remarked to a young greengrocer, who 
had received permission to pay his ad- 
dresses to Jumbo, "satisfactory to know 
as you are not beholding to one gendeman 
no more than another, seeing, as poor 
Smick often said, that there was as good 
fish out of the sea as ever went into it, and 
it was not as if she was a reglar lodging- 
house keeper, having seen better times, 
whereby persons might be suspicious that 
she did not buy her own tea and sugar, or 
give all the cold meat from the tables to 
the poor; but being above such ways, 



Close of the Story. 253 

gentlemen knew as her house was a home 
to them, and, therefore, her rooms was 
always jumped at by one or another as 
soon as she put her paper in the window, 
just as fast as the haddicks used to jump at 
the mussil baits, when poor dear Smick 
used to amuse himself with fishing ; but 
as I was a-saying, which it were not for me 

to " 

At this part of Mrs. Smick's edifying 
harangue on the respectability and homely 
character of her establishment, Miss Jumbo, 
who had been swallowing her mother's 
words with open mouth, and beating time 
with a hot smoothing-iron, to the delight of 
her ambitious lover, dropped the iron upon 
her mother's toes, which brought Mrs. 
Smick's remarks to such a sudden and de- 
monstrative full stop that the wretched 
greengrocer fell upon his knees and begged 
for mercy. Jumbo feared he had suddenly 
gone mad ; but the terrified dealer in 
cabbages soon afterwards explained that 
his love for Miss Smick was so overpower- 



254 Stranger than Fiction. 

ing, and his fear of losing her so strong 
upon him at the moment of Mrs. Smick's 
unexpected shriek of rage, that he was 
carried away by his feelings, which laboured 
under the sudden impression that he had 
mortally offended the lady who, of all 
others in the world, he would choose for a 
mother-in-law, Some people, who envy 
the greatness of the Smicks, and the chance 
which Miss Smick has of being married, 
say that the greengrocer is no better than 
a harmless idiot, and that Jumbo will be a 
capital match for him ; but those who 
heard his prompt reply to Mrs. Smick with 
regard to his intentions, would, as that lady 
said, " not make themselves ridiculous by 
their hobservations, which it were not looks 
that she regarded, and the young man said 
straight out that his intentions were strictly 
honourable, and a little shop of his own, 
which his father had bought him, and a 
garden, and all rent free, with two rooms 
ready furnished, and serving many of the 
gentry, which it were not everybody as 



Close of the Story. 255 

could make such a start as that, and the 
banns should certainly be put up, and let 
them as had any objectshun state it then, 
or for ever hold their peacer-' 

Long before the close of the London 
season, every year, Mr. and Mrs. Martyn 
leave Mortimer House for Neath ville. 
Jacob has purchased that pretty house on 
the cliffs above the sea. When the red 
light of the sun is fading out, and the night 
begins its silent march over the waters, the 
factory hymn may often be heard, as if 
going forth to join the twilight mists. A 
harp accompaniment breaks sweetly in 
upon the fresh child voices that are sing- 
ing the familiar words, and the thoughts 
of Jacob and Lucy go back to bygone days, 
as in a dream. The sea makes a deep, 
monotonous lullaby-humming without, in 
which Jacob seems to hear the voice of the 
Cartown river and the mill-stream's steady 
flow. Now and then the vision of a mill, 
and a miller smoking by the reedy 
pool, rises up in his memory. A boy, 



256 Stranger than Fiction. 

shadowy and indistinct, stands by the deep 
and silent water. It seems to Jacob now 
that this sorrowing youth is not himself, 
but some other being whom he is sorry 
for. The memory of his mother comes 
back with the jdreamy odour of a country 
churchyard ; and he feels a dim kind 
of joy that loved ones have gone be- 
fore to greet Lucy and himself when their 
time shall come for the happier land. His 
brightest reminiscence is of Cartown and 
the little cottage where he first stood side 
by side with Lucy, who looks up at him in 
the twilight hour, and knows what he 
is thinking. They both delight to wan- 
der in that golden age of their youth, 
decked with the flowers of hope and love ; 
while it is an ever present consolation to 
Jacob that his son will be secured from the 
miseries and perils which beset his own 
turbulent youth. 

And Jacob, with a love for his art be- 
yond that cankering desire which calculates 
what this or that thought is worth in the 



Close of the Story. 257 

market, made all that coast of Neathville a 
fairyland of romance and wonder. He 
found out all its story ; he probed the 
very heart of its mysteries ; he made every 
promontory repeat to him its legend ; he 
fought over again the battles of the ancient 
people who had lived there in the fabulous- 
days. He and Lucy knew every stone 
and leaf, every fern and shell, every weed 
and flower of sea and land, from Neathville 
to the distant headland, where the rocks 
seemed to bind sky and ocean together. 

Now and then Mr. and Mrs. Ferris visit 
their old friends at Neathville ; and whea 
they do there are not four happier people in 
the world than they. Paul says so, at any 
rate, and makes no secret of his opinion. It 
is the most delightful of all delightful 
things, Mrs. Ferris says, to have long 
chats with Lucy while the men are 
smoking their cigars after dinner. There 
is no envy between these two women, no 
petty jealousies, no differences even of the 
most trifling character . no, not even about 

vol. in. 17 



 



258 Stranger than Fiction. 

the children. Mrs. Ferris has an only son, 
a dark, sharp, black-eyed little fellow, who 
is up to all sorts of tricks that are highly 
diverting to the little Martyns ; and there 
is not one spark of envy in that full ma- 
tronly bosom of the pretty Mrs. Ferris, on 
account of the superior order of beauty 
which marks the features of Jacob's chil- 
dren. What comfortable, happy, after- 
dinner talks these must be my lady readers 
will understand. The conversations are 
frequently illustrated with little frocks and 
pinafores, picture-books and toys; some- 
times the latest fashions call for attentive 
discussion and analysis ; for Mrs. Ferris is 
a lady who confesses to a careful study of 
dress. She says Paul likes her to keep in 
the front rank with the march of fashion. 
He is so accustomed, she says, to theatrical 
display, that she really thinks it desirable 
even to pander to his taste for pretty 
dresses, good lace, and effective ribbons. 
And then the lively little matron laughs 
and shows her white teeth, in response to 



Close of the Story. 259 

Mrs. Martyn's smile at her ingenious 
excuse for annually sacrificing a little for- 
tune at the fascinating shrine of fashion. 

Last summer, when the Ferrises went 
down to Neath ville, they were in mourn- 
ing ; and Jacob and Paul conversed over 
their cigars in a subdued tone. They were 
talking of poor dear old Dudley Stewart. 
The once famous tragedian had slipped 
quietly away from them, a smile on his lips 
and his hand in his early pupil's. Paul 
said it was a solemn thing to see ; but it 
was a happy, peaceful end nevertheless. 
The day before his death the old man had 
been wandering among the scenes of his 
youth, and Amy Clifton was by his side. 
He had rehearsed snatches of scenes in 
" Romeo and Juliet," in " As You Like It," 
in " Othello," and in " Hamlet." Like a 
loving instructor, he had explained in soft, 
subdued tones the proper reading of certain 
passages in Juliet's speeches, and in the 
dear Ophelia's. For a moment he had 
been convulsed with the passion of Othello's 

17.2 



i 



260 Stranger than Fiction. 

jealous misery ; but he had relapsed, imme- 
diately afterwards, into favourite readings 
from the speeches of Orlando and Jacques. 
When he came out of this delirium he was 
as weak and helpless as an infant ; but he 
remained conscious afterwards until the 
last, and talked about his dear friends, and 
of the familiar scenes, of which they all had 
pleasant remembrances. They did not 
know when he died, he passed away so 
peacefully . " like one who only slept 
awhile and would shortly wake again," 
Paul said ; but he will wake no more until 
the Master cometh into His kingdom, when 
may God have mercy on us all, dealing 
with us not after our sins, neither reward- 
ing us after our iniquities ! 

The last notes of the journalist and 
author are transcribed. Every leaf is 
scored through with a long line, which 
begins at the advent of Aunt Keziah 
and ends with a glorious setting sun, led up 
to by gleams of glinting light that gild the 



Close of the Story. 261 

ocean's sunny path over which thought and 
prayer may travel to that happy land 
whose bright reality hath its only earthly 
prototype in true domestic bliss. 

The evening shadows gather while I 
spell out these last rough notes. The 
light is fading from the golden pathway of 
which the reporter speaketh. I hear the 
factory hymn rise sweet and low above the 
ocean's lullaby. I listen to the tender, 
sympathetic music, and rest my eyes upon 
the last faint glimmer of the sun, with a 
vague but longing hope that the music may 
live in the memories of those who have 
accompanied me through the scenes of joy 
and sorrow which I have ventured to bind 
together with the golden clasp of the well- 
known Byronic proverb, that 

" Truth is always strange, 



Stranger than Fiction." 



THE END. 
