ALL, OR NOTHING. 




CHAPTER I. 

^^ No Promise'' 

OT a minute after twelve o'clock, 
remember: A white gown never 
does suit you, and if, in addition 
to having to wear one, you're tired, you'll 
not look your best to-morrow." 

" Very well, mamma ; I won't sit up 
after twelve, I promise you . indeed, I'm 
tired now." 

"Good night, my dear." Lady Rosa 
Chumleigh frigidly kissed the smooth 
forehead dutifully bent to receive her 
salute, and turned to leave the room. 
" I shall send Brydges to you in twenty 
minutes." 

VOL. I. B 



AH, or Nothing. 



" Oh, no ; please don't, mamma," said 
the former speaker ; " I would so much 
rather be alone to-night. I . I have some- 
thing to do." 

" Indeed, what is it ?" Lady Eosa stood 
tall and awful on the threshold of her 
daughter's room. "I so particularly desired 
that nothing should be left to the last. 
Your boxes are all ready, I know, and the 
lists are made out. I cannot think what 
you can have got to attend to ; not much 
of the trouble of this business has come 
upon you." 

Lady Eosa spoke in a sharp, suspicious 
tone, and bent her brows in a frown 
which did not appear to be called for. 
Her daughter rejoined in a propitiatory 
manner : 

" No, indeed, mamma ; the trouble has 
been all yours, I'm sure, as it always is. 
But I didn't mean about my boxes, I am 
not going to disturb anything ; it was only 
just a few little things Julia is to do for 
me after I am gone . keepsakes for the 
school-children and so on . and I haven't 



" ^0 Promise.'" 



had time to write them down for her; 
that's all." 

There was no reasonable fault to be 
found with this explanation, and Lady 
Bosa, without any repetition of the " good, 
night" or the kiss, left the room. Her 
daughter held the door open until her 
mother had reached one at the opposite 
^nd of the corridor; then she closed it, 
but stood by it listening. In less than 
a minute the sound of a bell pulled by 
a strong hand came distinctly to her ears, 
when she noiselessly turned the key in 
the lock, and allowed her face to relax 
into an expression of relief. 

"She won't come back, now she has 
rung for Brydges," thought the girl, as 
she seated herself before the dressing- 
table, and gazed into the draped looking- 
glass, without seeing the image it reflect- 
ed ; " I do wonder why it is one never can 
tell quite the truth to mamma. It's her 
temper, I suppose. It certainly isn't that 
she and I .don't understand one another, 
for we do, perfectly. There has never 

b2 



AH, or Nothing. 



been any mistake at all about ' this busi- 
ness/ as she calls it in her cool way. How 
like mamma that is, though ; she never pre- 
tends, at any rate. I should not think 
there are many mothers who would talk of 
a daughter's marriage as 'this business," 
especially to the daughter herself. I 
respect her for it, though T could not imi- 
tate it, but Mr. Thornton is right ; it's 
that way of hers that has made and kept 
her what she is . 'master an' mair,' as he 
says. After all, it will be such a relief to 
get away from that . it's . it's almost 
worth it; at least, I mean it would be^ 
even if there was nothing else." 

She had spoken the last words in which 
her thoughts were framing themselves 
aloud, and her own voice roused her. She 
sat upright, looked in the glass, with 
intention this time, and began to loosen 
the coils of her hair. 

*' Mamma's right in one thing," so ran 
her diverted thoughts ; " I certainly shall 
not look my best to-morrow ; I daresay I 
shall look about my worst " . a little satis- 



" No Promise'' 



fied smile crept round her red lips and full 
curved chin, as a dexterous imp, sent on 
a comforting mission by vanity, whispered 
that her worst would not be very alarm- 
ing . "but I suppose no girl ever looks 
really well on her wedding-day." 

The face and figure reflected in the 
glass were very charming at Laura Chum- 
leigh's **best," and calculated to recall 
Lady Rosa to the observer as little as could 
be wished. Laura was of small stature, 
slightly built without being thin, and 
endowed with the graceful carriage and 
beautiful hands and feet which are sup- 
posed to indicate "blue blood." There 
was some mistake about this in Laura's 
.ase, for her father s blood was not blue, 
and her mother's hands and feet were use- 
fully ugly, as Lady Rosa did not hesitate 
to remark whenever the subject turned up 
in conversation. " Points, as vulgar 
people who frequent stables call them," 
she had been heard to say, " are all non- 
fiense, like Irish eyes and Spanish ankles, 
there never was a mesalliance in the Ness 



All, or Nothing. 



family until I made one, and a commoner- 
looking lot of people are not to be seen 
anywhere, either in real life or picture 
galleries." Laura was content to have the 
''points," without caring at all about 
whether she was entitled to them on 
scientific principles, and she secretly re- 
joiced that she was totally unlike the noble 
family of Ness. Something vivid and glee- 
ful about the girl added a delightful charm 
to her real and regular beauty ; a dancing 
brightness in her shy dark eyes ; a sudden- 
ness in the smile that flashed all over her 
face, and touched her small teeth as light 
touches the facets of cut jewels ; a rich- 
ness in the red that came up to the velvet 
surface of her clear olive skin, of an 
almost southern tint; while her profuse 
and glossy hair was of the very duskiest, 
warmest brown that ever escaped the 
harshness of black. Youth, perfect healthy 
and high spirits are important elements in 
the composition of beauty, and all these 
Laura Chumleigh possessed. She was 
within a week of twenty, but she did not 



*' No Promise y 



look a day over seventeen ; she could ride, 
and skate, and dance, as if life were no- 
thing but a succession of opportunities for 
those exercises, and she had been created 
to indulge in them; her supple and ele- 
gant little figure was full of strength and 
nerve, and she had never had as much as a 
headache since she got rid of her governess, 
and the *' lessons " which she had always 
detested. She was not quite ignorant, 
however, because she really had natural 
intelligence; and as the schoolroom time 
had inexorably to be gone through, she 
found that it was to be gone through more 
tolerably by learning something than by 
doing nothing. Lady Rosa was not to be 
"got over," and Laura's governess was 
not to be " got at ;" novels, except such as 
would have bored her dreadfully, were 
unattainable, and Lady Rosa, who took a 
singularly unprejudiced view of her 
daughter's character, had spoken to her as 
follows when she was just sixteen . 

" You have no fortune, my dear, and 
there's none coming to you from anywhere. 



10 Ally or Nothing. 

home-life, after the maternal admonition 
in the interests of a becoming bridal bloom 
on the morrow ; such were the circum- 
stances under which Laura sat brushing 
her hair before the glass, with " some- 
thing to do" between that time and 
twelve o'clock. 

Laura had brushed her hair until her 
arm ached, and then rolled it up into a 
tight ball, and taken it down to roll it up 
again into a looser ; she had fidgeted with 
the bottles, and boxes, and general in- 
utilities upon her dressing-table ; she had 
opened a tempting little velvet-covered, 
satin-lined case, in which lay a necklet of 
pearls with a diamond clasp, and closed it 
again hurriedly; she had fingered the 
smooth ivory binding of the pretty prayer- 
book which had just been sent her as a 
wedding-present by the clergyman who 
was to perform the marriage ceremony on 
the morrow, and inspected the anticipatory 
monogram on its clasp. She was dawdling, 
putting off the something which she had 
to do ; but her thoughts were busy with it. 



" No Promise'' 11 

whether she would or not, and at length 
she rose with a sigh, carried a chair across 
the room, and had just stepped up on it 
and stretched out her arm to reach some 
object which was put away out of sight 
on the dusty top of a gaunt, old-fashioned 
mahogany wardrobe, when she was dis- 
turbed by a gentle tap at the door. She 
stepped down from the chair, placed it 
against the wall, and unlocked the door 
in a moment. 

"Papa!" she said, but not loudly^ 
though she was surprised. It would have 
required more than surprise to make any 
member of her household forget the vicinity 
of Lady Rosa, or run the risk of disturbing 
her. 

*' Papa ! Come in, dear papa !" 

"I thought I should not disturb you,'^ 
said Colonel Chumleigh, as he stepped into 
the room with noiselessness due to prac- 
tice, "and I wanted to say good night 
again." 

Laura had quickly set a chair for her 
father, and she now perched herself lightly 



12 All, or Nothing. 

on his knee, and put her arms round his 
neck. The change in her face was 
Tery remarkable . it had softened and 
brightened. 

" Tm so glad," she said, laying her 
richly-coloured cheek against his grey 
head ; " I longed to say good night by our- 
selves, but I did not think you would have 
managed it. How did you manage it, 
papa ?" 

" Well, darling, you see there was a 
good deal of confusion to-day, and things 
were put astray, and I had not seen the 
papers at all comfortably; and so I said 
I should stay down and read them for an 
hour, and " 

''And you came up to me instead. 
Papa" . she unlocked her arms from 
round his neck, and began to smooth his 
hair gently with her little dark hand . 
^' there's always an awful feeling about the 
last of everything, isn't there ? No matter 
how little one cares for a person, it would 
give one a pang to be quite sure one had 
seen the last of that person, and it's the 



" No Promise:' 13 



same about places and things that one does 
in one's own life. I am not a bit fond of 
this house; it isn't like home, with other 
people's furniture and things in it; and 
yet I have a solemn sort of feeling about 
this being the very last time I shall ever 
be here as I am now, only your daughter, 
you know, and a girl, with people to look 
after me, and no one to look after. I 
daresay you cannot understand the feeling, 
papa, because you're a man." 

"Yes, I can," said the Colonel; "I 
understand it perfectly. What else do 
you suppose I have been thinking of all 
the evening, except that it is the last I 
shall ever in all my life have my Firefly 
with me, just as my own daughter, and 
nothing else ?" 

Laura pressed her lips upon his head 
with a sob. 

''Hush I you must not do that," said the 
Colonel, frightened. " You must not cry 
to-night, my darling." 

''No," said Laura, with a faint quiver of 
a smile ; " red eyes would be less becoming 



14 AlL 'jr Sjthirui, 

.# 

Still dian a wferte ^wtl7 ThsL, witkouk 
expTarnfrrgr tHe aHasbn, ^Ete wentr (m: 
** XOy we mnatii'n make eadi other miser- 
able, Db yoa know, P^P^'' ^^ drew 
herself awaT from him now, so that she 
oonid look into his face, "^ Fve been think- 
ing the rerr best of this business, as 
matnTTia calls it, is, that yoa can often 
come to me. We don't see mnch of each 
other . not comfortablr^ I mean . though 
we do live in the same house. But you 
win often come to me at my own, won't 
youT 

** I hope so." 

''Yon must promise, papa. Ifot only 
for me, you know. Mr. Thornton likes you 
no much too.'* 

" He is a very good feDow, Laura. 1 
hope you will appreciate him, and be a 
good wife to him. He is giving you a 
great deal, my dear ; I hope . I hope you 
will never give him cause to regret his 
marriage." She had never seen her father 
no moved before. 

'* Indeed, I never will, papa. I wouldn't 



" No Promise,'' 15 



if it was only for fear of vexing you. He 
is a very good fellow ; and I am awfully 
lucky." 

She had risen from his knee, and was 
standing beside him while she said this. 
Colonel Chumleigh was one of the least 
articulate of men, partly from a natural 
slowness of speech, partly from habitual 
discretion ; and though he knew what he 
would have liked to say to Laura on the 
present occasion . a golden opportunity, 
which by no earthly possibility could come 
again in their respective lives . he simply 
could not say it. 

He was a tall, fine-looking man of fifty- 
five, very grey for his age, with a fair 
complexion, and kindly eyes, still blue and 
clear ; and he looked just what he was . 
amiable and irresolute. A less portentous 
personage than Lady Eosa might have 
been "master an' mair" over Colonel 
Chumleigh, who had and deserved the 
name of a martinet in his regiment. After 
he had kissed his daughter many times, 
and left her, and was stepping noiselessly 



16 All, or Nothing. 

along the corridor to his dressing-room, he 
said to himself : 

''I wish she had said 'happy' instead 
of ' lucky/ I wish it was more of a love- 
match ; and yet " . the Colonel smiled at 
his own romantic, behind-the-times no- 
tions . *'how often her mother has remind- 
ed me that ours was a love-match, and 
begged me to observe what has come of 
it." 

When Laura had locked the door of her 
room for the second time that night, she 
picked up a newspaper, which had fallen 
out of her father's pocket. It was the 
Morning Post of that day. She laid it on 
her dressing-table without looking at it, 
and resumed the occupation that her 
father's coming had interrupted. She took 
down a small flat parcel from the top of 
the old wardrobe, blew the dust off it, and 
pushing aside all the things on the 
dressing-table, including the case with the 
pearls in it, she untied the parcel, and 
arranged its contents before her. 

These consisted of a small volume of 



'' No Promise:' 17 



selected poems, prettily bound in vellum 
with red edges, two or three ball pro- 
grammes, a bill of the play of an amateur 
performance, printed on white satin, half- 
a-dozen letters directed to "Miss Chum- 
leigh," but without postmarks, and an 
unframed photograph of a young man 
dressed in yachting clothes. Having laid 
these things out in two lines, as a fortune- 
teller "lays the cards," Laura put her 
elbows on the table . one of them was 
resting on the newspaper, its dusky 
dimples touched the list of deaths for the 
day . and leaning her forehead on her 
joined hands, looked at them intently. 

" It would not be right to keep them,'^ 
she said to herself ; "I have made up my 
mind all along that they must go. I dare- 
say Mr. Thornton wouldn't care a bit, if 
he knew about them, but he does not 
know, and I cannot tell him now, when I 
did not tell him at first. He would not 
understand ; men never do." This was a 
fixed belief of Lady Eosa's ; and Laura had 
adopted it, being an easy and convenient 

VOL. I. c 



18 All, or Nothing. 

dogma, with confidence which she did not 
invariably extend to her mother's notions. 

Presently she leaned back in her chair, 
took up the little vellum-bound volume of 
poetry, and turned over the red-edged 
leaves. The margins were broad, the 
type was quaint; the daintiest initial 
letters adorned the sweetest possible utter- 
ances of passion, of hope, of constancy ; and 
a goodly number of reckless and deeply- 
scored pencil marks, a few scribbled com- 
ments, with a date or two, profaned the 
cream-coloured margins. Laura glanced 
at some of those comments, and the colour 
deepened on her cheeks ; she fluttered the 
leaves, and turned to the title-page. On 
the opposite leaf two big capital letters 
were written in a bold hand. They were 
L. 0. 

"I ought to burn it," so ran her 
thoughts, " but it's a pity ; all the verses I 
care about are there . besides, there's no 
fire, and I should be a long time about 
burning it in the candle, leaf by leaf. I 
think I need not destroy it, if I rub out all 



" No Promise" 19 



the .writing carefully. Yes, that's what 
I'll (Jo . it will fit under the tray of that 
horrid big dressing-case. but this must 

She cut out the leaf with the capital 
letters upon it, slipped the little volume 
into the pocket of her dressing-gown, and 
went on with her task of inspection. 
After one quick glance at it she had placed 
the photograph face downwards, but she 
looked through the playbill, and the ball 
programmes, lingeringly and musingly. It 
was now the turn of the letters, and Laura 
drew first one, then another, from its 
envelope, but she put them back unread. 

'* No, no ; I must not, I resolved I 
would not. And why should I, even if it 
was not wrong ; for I know them all by 
heart." 

She made a little pile of them on the 
top of the photograph, and laid her face 
upon the pile. Her heart beat quickly, 
her light and shallow nature was stirred 
by fear, like that which she had often felt, 
when a child, at finding herself in the dark, 

C2 



20 All, or Nothing. 

and which had made her say *'Our 
Father " as quickly as she could get the 
words out. She said them now, right on 
to the end, half aloud, and rapidly, like a 
charm ; and when the last word was utter- 
ed, she gathered up the little heap and the 
other things, threw them into the fender,^ 
and set a light to them. Kneeling on the 
hearthrug she watched them burning ; she 
had to hold the taper down to the half- 
charred papers, and relight them more 
than once. 

As the last morsel of white edge turn- 
ed to black crispness, and curled itself up, 
a harmless pinch of dust, the big clock on 
the stairs and the little one on Laura's 
table came to terms about the time, and 
simultaneously announced twelve o'clock* 
Laura got up off the hearthrug, opened 
the ponderous dressing-case which Lady 
Rosa had inflicted on her . it was an an- 
cient chattel of the noble house of Ness . 
and thrust the little vellum-bound volume 
under the second tray ; took several small 
packets, neatly made up, and addressed in 



" No Proinise" 21 

her own writing, out of a drawer, and having 
disposed them in evidence for Lady Rosa's 
inquisitorial inspection in the morning, 
contrived to very nearly keep her promise 
to her mother. 

It was, however, long before she slept. 
The clocks had expressed their one- . 
mindedness about the hour three times 
after midnight, and still Laura Chumleigh 
lay wide awake, with her hands clasped be- 
hind her head and her dark eyes gazing 
out towards the late summer dawn, and 
more than once she said to herself, while 
the strange trouble again crept over her : 
*' I never said I would wait ! It was no 
promise !" 



22 



All^ or Nothing. 



CHAPTER II. 




In " The Morning Post.'' 

N the best regulated household there 
will be an upsetting of the ordinary- 
course of things, on the occasion 
of a wedding in the family. The Chum- 
leigh household was not remarkably well- 
regulated . though, perhaps because . Lady- 
Rosa was her own housekeeper. She 
prided herself on the fact, and gloried in 
the conviction that those wretches of 
tradespeople could not take her in, and 
there was no wasteiy in her kitchen. The 
household, including the Colonel and 
Laura, had had a good deal to suffer in 
the preliminaries for the wedding of the 
only daughter of the house, and there 
was a pretty general feeling that it 



In '' Tke Morning PosC 23 

would be a mercy when it was over. This 
sentiment was also shared by the Colonel 
and by Laura ; and, indeed, the latter had 
wished many times that the good old cus- 
tom of a honeymoon with a third for com- 
pany had been still in fashion, and that 
her father could have had a holiday on the 
occasion, in the society of herself and Mr. 
Thornton. To be sure she could not find 
a precedent in any memoirs or novels 
which treated of those bygone days, when 
people used sedan-chairs, and journeyed to 
" the Bath." It was always the bridesmaid 
who occupied the third seat in the post- 
chaise. 

The wedding, which was to take place 
at a fashionable and ugly church near 
Lowndes Street, was fixed for eleven 
o'clock ; and there did not seem to be any 
particular reason why the whole Chumleigh 
household should be astir several hours 
before the event. No reason, however, 
could practically be more particular than 
the will and pleasure of Lady Rosa Chum- 
leigh. So the note of preparation was 



24 All, or Nothing. 

sounded betimes, and Laura was aroused 
from her insufficient slumber by her 
mother in person. 

Lady Rosa had as little nonsense about 
her as the mother of Mr. Edmund Sparkler 
herself. She never followed the move- 
ments, listened to the words, or watched 
the looks of her beautiful young daughter 
with that silent, almost stealthy delight 
which is one of the deep delights of 
motherhood, and is enhanced by the un- 
consciousness of its object. She had never 
stood by the fair sleeper in the quiet night, 
listening to her even breathing, gazing at 
her restful face, as if this were some 
special miracle of nature wrought for 
herself alone of all the women in the world. 
She occasionally made domiciliary visits to 
Laura's room indeed, but they had practical 
purposes . at night, to see whether Laura 
had really put her candles out, or was 
breaking the domestic law by reading in 
bed ; in the daytime, to examine into the 
tidiness or untidiness of the apartment. 
. Lady Eosa opened the door of Laura's 



In " The Morning Post" 25 

room with her usual uncompromising 
decision, and called out, as she pulled up a 
Venetian blind with a great bang : 

" Laura, my dear ! Laura ! Time to get 
up. Isidor comes at nine, you know." 

Then, Laura having sat up with a start, 
her mother looked at her sharply. 

"H . m," she said, "your eyelids are 
quite red, and you look as if you had not 
had half enough sleep." 

" Tm all right, mamma, thank you," 
said Laura, rubbing the telltale eyelids. 

" You had better lie still till youVe had 
some tea, if there's any to be had." Lady 
Eosa pulled the bell-rope at the head of 
Laura's bed so vehemently that it was a 
wonder it did not come down, and went on 
to suppose they would be an hour about 
bringing the tea, and that she should not 
be surprised if there were nobody up in 
the house except herself and Brydges. 
Laura was mildly protesting that she did 
not want any tea, and would be ready in 
plenty of time for the ministrations of the 
hairdresser, when her mothers attention 



26 AH, or Nothing. 

was diverted into another channel of anger 
by the sight of The Morning Post^ which 
lay on the dressing-table. Laura knew 
perfectly well she never allowed news- 
papers to be removed from the " library '' 
. a back parlour of the furnished house. 
It was very extraordinary that she never 
could be obeyed in anything. 

" I believe mamma would scold me about 
nothing, if I were going to be hanged/^ 
thought poor Laura, and was beginning to 
offer a vague excuse, which should not 
compromise the Colonel, when Lady Rosa^ 
who had taken up the newspaper, cut the 
awkward explanation short by walking 
out of the room. Laura looked after her 
in some surprise, and presently heard the 
door at the end of the corridor opened and 
shut. 

" Much ado about nothing," said the girl 
to herself, ** and just as if this were any 
ordinary day in one's life." Here Brydges 
entered the room, and the business of the 
day commenced. 

Laura would have been much more sur- 



In '' The Morning Post.'' 27 

prised if she could have seen the discom- 
posure of Lady Rosa's countenance when 
she reached her own room, and felt herself 
free from observation. She sank almost 
with a gasp into the first chair she came 
to, and allowed the hand which held the 
newspaper to hang by her side, while she 
covered her eyes for a moment with the 
other. After awhile she seemed to recover 
herself, and looked attentively at a certain 
part of the outer sheet of the newspaper. 

*' No doubt at all about it," she said to 
herself; " there it is, plain enough ! What 
an unfortunate coincidence ; how dread- 
fully unlucky ! Has she seen it ? I think 
not; I hope not. She could not be sa 
unconcerned ; she could hardly have self- 
command enough to put on such uncon- 
cern. And yet, how extraordinary it 
would be if she has not seen it, before her 
face, under her eyes, as it must have been I 
What shall I do ? On the whole, which is 
most probable? that she has seen it, but 
has pride and cunning enough to prevent 
my finding that out . her eyelids were red ; 



28 All, or Nothing. 

I'm almost sure she had been crying, and 
Tm quite sure she had been lying awake 
-or that the printed lines lay under her 
eyes, and she did not see them." 

jigain Lady Rosa read those printed 
lines, and now she rose and paced the room, 
fitill holding the newspaper in her hand. 
Her face was plain and unamiable, with 
hard lines about it, narrow eyes, and a long 
upp^r lip, and the look of doubt and dis- 
comfiture it wore was not beautifying* 

" I can't do anything," so ran her 
thoughts. ''Whether she knows or does 
not know, I cannot do anything. At 
least, I can only prevent her seeing it, if 
she does not know already. And if she 
does, it cannot be helped. Under any cir- 
cumstances, what has happened is all for 
the best, and I have nothing to regret. 
Robert Thornton is worth a dozen of 
him." 

Then Lady Rosa put The Morning Post 
of the previous day into a drawer of her 
writing-table, which she locked, and having 
recovered her self-possession, she emerged 



In " The Morning PosC 29 

upon the scene of activity. Laura was 
almost dressed before her mother again 
entered her room; the final touches only 
were wanting to her bridal attire, and she 
was looking exceedingly lovely, in spite of 
the red eyelids and the white gown. 
Isidor had outdone himself; he was an 
enthusiast in his art, and he seldom had 
such a " subject " as Laura's shapely head. 
Mrs. White had "idealised a wedding- 
gown, fit for an angel like Laura/' accord- 
ing to Laura's cousin and bridesmaid, 
Julia Carmichael, who was enthusiastic, 
rather than accurate of speech; and one 
of Alphonse Karr's exquisite bouquets had 
arrived from Nice, in perfect preserva- 
tion. 

" I am so glad you have come, mamma,"^ 
said Laura, with a smile, as she turned her 
beautiful head, from which a cloud of lace 
drooped to the edge of her gown, towards^ 
her mother, "to settle the question of 
ornaments or no ornaments. Julia votes^ 
for the pearls, but I do not like them in 
the morning." 



so -4//, or Nothing. 



'* Did Mr. Thornton say nothing about 
his wishing you to wear them ?" 

" Not a word ; but I am sure he would 
agree with me ; he always does, you know, 
and he has such excellent taste." 

" Then don't wear them, my dear. Your 
dress is perfect, and now I must go and 
get my gown on." 

*' She did not stay a minute in the 
room," whispered Laura to Julia Car- 
michael, who was reluctantly putting the 
pearls back into their case ; " and she 
looked somehow as if she could not. I 
really do think she feels my going away at 
last." 

" She knows nothing at all about it," 
thought Lady Eosa ; '*it is always the al- 
most impossible thing which is true. That 
^ he has such excellent taste,* was much 
too hearty to have any heartburning under 
it. She knows nothing, and by the time 
she finds out what has happened, she 
won't care a straw." 

It really seemed as if Lady Rosa had 
put on a full-dress teinper with her ruby 



In '' The Morning Post" 31 

velvet gown . for of that colour and fabric 
was the costume she had selected for wear 
on a blazing day in the beginning of 
August . so meek and mild was she under 
the influence of a secret relief. 

It was allowed by the uninvited specta- 
tors in the ugly church, by the crowd of 
idlers about the entrance . who were in 
luck to have so fine a day for that favour- 
ite gratis public entertainment, a wedding 
. and also by the guests, that Miss Chum- 
leigh's wedding was a very pretty one, and 
that Miss Chumleigh was a very pretty bride. 
Nobody could see much of her, to be sure ; 
but her veil was splendid, and the dark 
hair and dark eyes did show a little under 
it; and then she carried herself so well, 
and her manner was perfect. 

As on most occasions of the sort, there 
was comparatively little mention made of 
the bridegroom. To the external crowd 
he was an accidental accompaniment of 
the occasion; and those inside noticed 
only that he was rather tall, and that his 
clothes were well cut. A bridegroom's 



32 AH, or Notking. 

natural insignificance attended Mr. Thorn- 
ton ; the usual importance with which for 
one day in her life the least beautiful, 
equally with the most beautiful, of 
girls is invested, attached to Laura Chum- 
leigh. The wedding-guests were well 
selected among the most eligible of Lady 
Rosa's acquaintance, and everything was 
quite as it ought to be. 

A general imputation of thorough world- 
liness to a large gathering of people is apt 
to be as rash as it is in its essence un- 
charitable ; but there certainly were not 
many of the persons present at Laura's 
wedding and the feast which followed it, 
who took into consideration, in the motive 
of their congratulations, what manner of 
man he was to whom the brilliant girl 
had just confided herself for life. People 
in general knew very little about him, ex- 
cept the notorious fact of his wealth, and 
that the marriage had been arranged after 
a short acquaintance. Mr. Thornton, who 
was not in any set, was a nobody in the 
sense of the cliques and coteries of society. 



In " The Morning PosC 33 

With his fortune, however, and her own 
looks and good connections on the mother's 
side, Mrs. Thornton might do anything 
she pleased, short of penetrating the very- 
inner circles, especially as she would, of 
course, keep as clear as possible of that 
dreadful Lady Rosa. Laura's mother had 
been useful as a Ness; as an individual 
she could only hinder her daughter's suc- 
cess in the novel position in which she 
might take a line of her own. 

A man who does not belong to a set, 
and who is said to know nobody by the 
persons who entertain the ingenuous con- 
viction that they and their associates com- 
pose the everybody to know whom must 
naturally be the ambition of all well-con- 
stituted minds, might fairly be supposed 
to feel more embarrassment at his own 
wedding than even the traditional bride- 
groom. There was, however, not the least 
embarrassment in the looks or the de- 
meanour of Mr. Thornton. He was, on 
the contrary, a man with whom even a 
casual observer would instinctively associ- 

VOL. I. D 



34 All, or Nothing. 

ate the ideas of self-possession and self- 
respect . a man who could never be, or be 
made to look, ridiculous. He was well- 
built, dark-haired, grey-eyed, about thirty 
years old, with a remarkably keen and 
steady way of looking at the person whom 
he addressed in an accent which had the 
strength and character of the North in it, 
without its roughness. His figure had 
lissomeness and strength, and ease entirely 
unlike the ease of the classes who have 
been called " clothes- wearing," in default of 
a more accurate definition of " the grand 
air," as it is in this day of travestie. The 
beautiful little figure at his side did not 
look at all out of place there ; and his 
glance fell upon Laura's sparkling face as 
she received the compliments of the com- 
pany, with an expression of devotion and 
of deep content, which made his face 
almost as striking, in its way, as her own. 
The wedding-breakfast was a bore to 
the chief performers in the social drama. 
Colonel Chumleigh was so dismally de- 
pressed that not even the significantly-bent 



In '' The Morning Post" 35 

brows of Lady Rosa could induce him to 
assume the virtue of sociability, which, at 
least, on that occasion, he certainly had 
not. Lady Rosa, who, although she did 
frown at the Colonel, was much less 
militant and dictatorial than usual, was 
visited by occasional fits of absence of 
mind, to which the ecclesiastical dignitary 
who sat beside her submitted with resigna- 
tion, largely assisted by the savoury meats 
his soul loved. He was, however, a little 
shocked when Lady Rosa so far forgot 
herself and him as to interrupt him in a 
lengthy description of a visit to a pretty 
place in Suffolk, from whence he had re- 
turned only the preceding d,ay. 

** On an interesting occasion also," his 
lordship explained, *'my nephew was the 
happy man . Harry Trevor, I think he has 
the honour of being known to you." 

** Yes," asserted Lady Rosa, " I saw the 
marriage in the Post I hope it is all you 
can wish." 

"Well, well," said the bishop, raising a 
fat, white hand in deprecation of the un- 

D '2 



36 All, or Nothing. 

reasonableness of such a hope; " not quite 
all, perhaps, but there are many advan- 
tages, many advantages, and all we can 
wish is not to be had here below. There 
is not much fortune, not much fortune ; 
her brother is vicar of Wold, and an old 
friend of mine. The wedding did not go 
ofE with all the delightful smoothness of 
this occasion," . here the bishop smiled 
and bowed with a similar delightful 
smoothness, . " for, just as everybody wa& 
sitting down to breakfast, poor Mr. Cath- 
cart was sent for in all haste to attend a 
death-bed.'' 

"Indeed," said Lady Rosa, listlessly. 
" Could not he have sent his curate ?" 

" Well, no ; not exactly, not exactly, on 
that occasion. It was not an ordinary 
occasion ; not an every-day summons. The 
dying person was the principal individual 
in Cathcart's parish ; in fact, the proprietor 
of Bevis " 

*' Wonderful roses are they not, so late 
in the season ?" said Lady Rosa, drawing a 
flower-stand towards her with a jerk, and 



In *' The Morning PosC 37 

disturbing alike the symmetry of the table 
and the equanimity of the bishop. '* They 
.come from Hertfordshire, and I don't think 
there are any roses like them. How diffi- 
cult it is to get the old cabbage-rose now 1 
It has become so rare that one is almost 
surprised it has not come into fashion; 
and, after all, there is nothing like it/' 

Lady Rosa ran on through half-a-dozen 
more sentences, all about roses, to which 
lovely products of nature the bishop was 
as indifferent as she was, with an appear- 
ance of almost vehement interest in her 
theme, which attracted Laura's attention. 
She wondered whether Lady Rosa was 
scolding the bishop. His lordship sniffed 
at the flower-stand which Lady Rosa had 
pulled into inconvenient contact with his 
plate, but made no comment upon her out- 
burst of enthusiasm, except a mental one. 

'* I have been told," said his lordship to 
himself, '* that Lady Rosa Chumleigh has 
the reputation of being the rudest woman 
in England ; and now I perceive that she 
deserves it." 



38 All, or Nothing. 

The crowd in the street, which had 
fluctuated as to its numbers during the 
festive proceedings inside the house, and 
had been additionally enlivened by a Ger- 
man band, Punch, and a boneless boy, who 
performed horrid antics on a piece of baize 
about the size of an Arab's prayer-carpet, 
received a large accession to its strength 
when the balcony, turned into a tent for 
the occasion, began to fill with the wed- 
ding guests, and a rumour spread that the 
happy pair were coming out. 

Laura retired, accompanied only by 
Julia Carmichael, *' the working brides- 
maid," as she called herself, leaving the 
other three ornamental young ladies ta 
amuse themselves in the balcony tent, and 
the important ceremony of changing the 
wedding-dress was performed. The bride 
was giving some final directions to Julia 
about one of those little packets which 
had come in so conveniently as an excuse 
on the previous night, when Lady Eosa 
made her appearance, and was asked by 



In " T/ie Morning Post." 39 

Laura the most disconcertlDg question that 
could have been put to her : 

" Mamma," said Mrs. Thornton, *' can 
you tell Julia where to find yesterday's 
Morning Post f " 

*' Yesterday's Morning Post," repeated 
Lady Bosa, with a very black-looking 
frown; "what can you want with it just 
now?' 

** Only to see where Florence Daubeney 
has gone to, mamma. Her aunt and Sir 
John have left town ; I knew she was going 
with them, and Julia saw their names 
among the departures yesterday, but she 
did not notice where they had gone to. 1 
thought you might have the paper, as you 
took it out of this room." 

" I know nothing about it." 

"Never mind; Julia will find it some- 
where about when all this fuss is over.'* 
Then she added, with a sweet smile : ** I 
want you to tell me that I looked nice in 
the white gown, after all, mamma. Every- 
body else said so, but I do want a little bit 
of praise from you." 



40 All, or Nothing. 

'* You looked better than you ever looked 
in your life/' said Lady Rosa, with a sud- 
den softening of her voice and face, which 
brought tears to the bride's bright eyes. 
It had been a most unsentimental wed- 
ding. 

" I wonder I ever dared to say it/' Laura 
added, when she told her husband how she 
had extracted a compliment from her 
mother ; " I suppose it was the newborn 
courage of my emancipation, and I was 
trying my wings/' 

The long day had come to a close, and 
the house in Lowndes Street was restored 
to its usual dingy orderliness. The 
Colonel was tired, sad, and silent. Lady 
Rosa was tired, excited, and cross. Julia 
Carmichael was tired, but methodical and 
conscientious, as it was her wont to be. 
Every commission which Laura had given 
her, the faithful and slightly obstinate 
cousin resolved to execute before she 
would consider her day's work at an end. 
One of those commissions involved the 
finding of The Morning Post of the previ- 



In " The Morning PosC 41 

ous day, and Julia set about looking for it 
in a methodical way, whicli meant not 
giving in until she had found it. 

After a vain search in all the lower 
rooms, and some fruitless questioning of 
the servants, Julia bethought herself of 
asking the Colonel whether he knew any- 
thing of the missing newspaper. With 
this purpose she went upstairs and knock- 
ed at the door of his dressing-room. No 
answer was returned, and Julia, thinking 
she must have been mistaken in supposing 
that her uncle was there, entered the 
room. It was unoccupied, and the door 
of communication with Lady Rosa's room 
stood open, a screen being drawn partly 
across it. As Julia crossed the room she 
could see, beyond the edge of the screen. 
Colonel Chumleigh seated at his wife's 
writing-table ; a newspaper, in which her 
quick eye recognised The Morning Post^ 
was spread upon the table before him, 
while on the far side of it stood Lady 
Rosa, bending forward, with a long, spiky 
forefinger planted on a certain spot in the 



42 All^ or Nothing. 

paper. As Julia paused, uncertain whether 
to advance or retreat, Lady Bosa tapped 
the paper emphatically, and said in a voice 
which banished Julia's hesitation : 

'* I suppose you think this business was 
not hard to manage ! Do you imagine 
everything would have gone off so well, if 
I had allowed Laura to see that ?" 



Julia Carmichael. 43 




CHAPTER III. 

Julia Carmichael. 

HE impression that Julia Carmichael 
made upon strangers in most cases 
was, that she was not very inter- 
estiug ; and that it was very amiable of 
her cousin, Laura Chumleigh, to be so fond 
of her. Perhaps this, or, at least, the 
first portion of it, was not so superficial as 
most judgments that are hastily formed 
and thoughtlessly expressed, for Julia 
was not a striking person. She was 
Colonel Chumleigh's niece, the only and 
orphan child of his only sister, and both 
her parents had been dead for a longer 
period than her memory extended to. 
She had been left to the guardianship of 



44 All^ or Nothing. 



her uncle when she was five years old, and 
was admitted by Lady Rosa Chumleigh to 
her own nursery until she reached the age 
of ten. Then she was sent, fortunately for 
her, as it turned out, to a boarding-school, 
which was not too expensive to allow of 
the charges beiug paid out of the provision 
which her parents, who had both died in 
India, had been able to make for their only 
child. 

Lady Rosa would not have thought of 
such a thing as sending Laura to a boardiug 
school, no such levelling proceeding could 
have been tolerated in the case of a Ness, 
but little Julia Carmichaers was quite 
another case. No one could say how 
things might go with her in the future, 
and she must not be brought up with any 
ridiculous notions of equality with her 
cousin. She certainly did not entertain 
any such notions, though it was probably 
only in the eyes of Lady Rosa Chumleigh 
that they would have seemed ridiculous, 
and the boarding-school experiment was 
successful. Julia Carmichael acquired 



Julia CarmiGhael. 45 

everything that was taught her, and a 
great deal that was not ; discernment of 
character, for instance, and tact ; a toler- 
ably just estimate of the difference be- 
tween reality and make believe; and a 
reasonably correct notion of what might 
be got out of life in the way of content- 
ment, and of what it was totally useless to 
look for, or expect, as a product or accom- 
paniment of life. 

The boarding-school selected by Lady 
Rosa Chumleigh as a safe place of deposit 
for her husband's niece, was a very old- 
established one, with quite a county re- 
putation, situated within a short distance 
of a large and important town in Suffolk. 
Julia was the youngest pupil the Misses 
Sandilands had ever received, and she had 
the good fortune to find favour in the eyes 
of the highly-respected maiden ladies wha 
presided over'Bury House. Her lot was in 
reality preferable to that of the cousin 
Laura, of whom she told her companions 
wondrous tales when she returned from 
the one annual visit to her uncle's house 



46 AU^ or Nothing. 

in Hertfordshire which Lady Rosa allowed 
her, and who supplied the fanciful element 
in the girl's life that could not be alto- 
gether dispensed with. She was far better 
informed, better brought up, better fitted 
to face the world than her beautiful cousin, 
and she had a truer notion of that world 
which would have to be faced. 

Julia was little more than a child when 
it occurred to her, during one of her visits 
to her relatives, to wonder how it had ever 
come about that her uncle and Lady Rosa 
had become man and wife. 

" Nobody can make a man do anything 
if he does not like," the small observer 
said to herself on that occasion, " and it 
seems to me that Uncle Chumleigh could 
not have liked to marry Lady Rosa ; she is 
so ugly, and she does scold so. At all 
events, I am quite sure he would not like 
to marry her now." 

She continued to meditate a good deal 
on this theme, and as her opportunities for 
observing how the institution of matri- 



. Julia CarmichaeL 47 

mony worked were very limited, she 
allowed her perception of it, in the light of 
a failure in this particular instance, to 
influence her general views to an extent 
which, as their data wevb not explained, 
considerably astonished her companions. 
A school-girl who had no ardent desire to 
leave school, and was inclined to think one 
would be better off unmarried than married, 
was a phenomenon, indeed, and Julia's 
heretical notions tended to render her 
unpopular. As she grew older she began 
to understand the respective characters of 
her uncle and Lady Rosa better, and to 
suspect that if there did exist in the world 
a man who could be made to do what he 
did not like, her uncle was that man. 
From this new light on the subject, to 
regarding the Colonel as the victim of Lady 
Eosa's superior strength of purpose and 
determination, and Lady Rosa as having 
married him, was not a long step for a 
reasoner like Julia. 

She liked her uncle very much, but she 



48 All^ or Nothing. 

always wondered why he had chosen "the 
service" for his profession, and how he 
had acquitted himself in a position of com- 
mand. These were points on which Julia's 
shrewdness and observation availed her no- 
thing ; she had no side lights by which to 
learn that Colonel Chumleigh was an ex- 
ceedingly brave man, and had been a first- 
rate officer. He did not retire from the 
service until some years after his niece was 
confided to his guardianship, but of those 
years Julia knew nothing. The Chum- 
leighs were in India when Captain Car- 
michael and his wife died within a few 
hours of each other, and Lady Rosa 
brought the Coloners ward to England 
with her own little girl, who was one year 
older than Julia. 

Lady Eosa did not rejoin her husband ; 
and when he brought his regiment home, 
at the expiration of the usual term of 
service, in such good condition that the 
Colonel was highly commended in the 
proper and honour-giving quarters, cir- 
cumstances had arisen which decided him 



Julia CarmichaeL 49 

to retire. A childless uncle of Lady Rosa's, 
the only one of her relatives who had not 
first regarded her love-match with disdain, 
and considered that she, for her folly in 
marrying a nobody with next to nothing, 
and the Colonel for his presumption in 
marrying a Ness, would be properly pun- 
ished by lifelong poverty, and who had after- 
wards forgotten all about them, died while 
Colonel Chumleigh was on his voyage home, 
and left a small estate to Lady Rosa. 

Colonel Chumleigh had no very distinct 
notions of how to turn himself into a 
country gentleman ; he rather thought he 
should dislike land ; he was quite sure he 
should dislike the care and trouble of it. 
Lady Rosa did not mind whether he liked 
or did not like the place ; she was delight- 
ed. All the territorial instincts of a Ness 
awoke within her, and if the Scottish 
mountains, moors, lochs, and deer-forests, 
which constituted the domains of that 
ancient house, had come into her posses- 
sion, instead of the trim, pretty little place 
in the best-wooded part of the tame and 

VOli. I. E 



50 All^ or Nothing. 

prosperous English county, she could 
hardly have been prouder, busier, or more 
dictatorial. 

The Colonel might have spared him- 
self all misgivings as to the trouble 
and responsibility that were likely to 
accompany the proprietorship of Huns- 
ford. Lady Rosa had not the smallest 
intention of permitting them to devolve 
upon him. She had never hitherto in 
her life had enough to do, and although 
she had in her some of the unwomanly 
meanness which would distinguish between 
what was her own and what was the 
joint property of her husband and herself, 
this motive did not count for so much 
in her proceedings as did the previously- 
repressed activity and the self-sufficiency 
of her disposition. She had hated India 
and '* the service." The methods and ways 
of the one had been too strong for her ; 
she had been obliged to submit to them ; 
and there was no room for her energies in 
connection with the other. 

Perhaps the only affectation of which 



Julia Carinichael. 51 

 

Lady Rosa Chumleigh ever was guilty, was 
that of making intentional blunders about 
military matters . misapplying technical 
terms, and qualifying dl\ conversation, in 
which they were correctly used, as ** Army 
lang." She would have hailed with 
delight almost any turn of the wheel of 
fortune that would have led to her hus- 
band's leaving the service . but such a 
turn as this ! She was little given to 
gratitude, or to thinking that her merits 
had met with a sufficient recognition by 
Providence ; but she certainly did bless the 
memory of the donor of Hunsford. 

Colonel Chumleigh retired, and entered 
upon an existence of chronic not-knowing 
what to do with himself. He had never 
known much about the country in Eng- 
land, and he could not interest himself 
sufficiently in the subject to learn. The 
garden, and the shrubberies, and the ferns 
were all very well; but he found the 
gardens, shrubberies, and ferns belonging 
to other people of about as much or as 
little interest to him. The place was too 

E 2 



52 All, or Nothing. 



small for sporting purposes. Indeed, the 
Colonel, who had been a noted " shikari/^ 
could not be bothered with anything but 
"big game." He liked men's dinner- 
parties, of the military order, where thej 
told heavy regimental stories, and every- 
body remembered the respective dates of 
everybody else's ''steps." 

But there was not much of that sort of 
thing to be had in Hertfordshire. The 
fact was that the Colonel had not a talent 
for pottering, and there was nothing else 
for him to do. The first-rate potterer^ 
whose lines are laid in pleasant places 
where no pressing duties contend with his 
practice of his art, is a happy man ; the 
third-rate, or perfunctory, potterer is 
bored and a bore. 

Colonel Chumleigh never rose to emi- 
nence, and he felt his deficiency very much, 
until he took to occupying himself pretty 
constantly with his little daughter, Laura ; 
and from that time things went better 
with him. The bright little girl was not 
an only child. ''Providentially," Lady 



Julia CarmichaeL 53 



Hosa would say, as if she were talking of 
the succession to Chatsworth, " providen- 
tially there is a male heir to Hunsford/* 
Lady Rosa had been much disturbed 
during the first years of her proprietorship 
by the apprehension that the place would 
liave ''to go in the female line;" but the 
birth of a sou removed that source of dis- 
content. 

It was no wonder that Julia Carmichael, 
on onie of her annual visits to Hunsford, 
should have asked herself how it was that 
her uncle could ever have married Lady 
Hosa, for a pair less fitly framed to meet 
hy nature it is rare to see. And yet theirs 
had been a love-match ; and distinguished 
by that abdication of judgment in favour 
of sentiment, which is commonly so called. 
What had become of the love ? Ay, there 
was the rub, from which so many suffer 
throughout long lives. Lady Rosa was a 
practical person, not troubled with niceties 
of feeling ; so, when the time came at 
which it was desirable to make sure that 
there should be as little " nonsense " about 



54 All^ or Nothing. 

her daughter as there was about herself, 
she did not scruple to use her own case 
for the illustration of her text and the 
enforcement of her doctrine. 

It was a pleasant surprise to the Colonel 
when Lady Rosa decidedly took to Julia 
Carmichael. She had permitted her pre- 
sence, indeed, at stated periods since they 
had been living at Hunsford, but she had 
never taken much notice of her. Tolera- 
tion, as Julia had at an early period the 
good sense to recognise, was a great deal 
to get from Lady Rosa ; and she was so 
happy with her cousin, for whom she 
entertained unbounded admiration and 
affection, she had so rightly profited by 
the discipline of a school in which, though 
she was contented she was not spoiled,, 
that she found no diflficulty in making the 
best of her position with her uncle's wife. 

With the prospect of Laura's introduc- 
tion into society, a new era of activity for 
Lady Rosa . and of disturbance, but with 
certain alleviations, for the Colonel . had 
set in. In the interests of "the heir to 



Julia Carmichael. 55 



UuDsford," who was to be sent to a public 
school, and to a university, and to have 
every advantage, and who was the only 
being his mother really loved, it was most 
desirable that Laura should marry well; 
while in Laura's own interests it was in- 
dispensable. A furnished house in Lowndes 
Street was taken, Laura was presented to 
the Queen, received some lukewarm recog- 
nition from sundry branches of the noble 
house of Ness, was much admired by 
many greater people, went the custom- 
ary round of the season, and returned, on 
its conclusion, to Hunsford, a good deal 
the worse for it in point of bloom and 
spirits ; and with no prospect of marrying 
well, for that year, at all events. 

The Colonel had found pottering easier 
work in town than in the country. He 
was not of much greater importance in 
one place than in the other, but he found 
out men whom he knew in London ; and 
then there was the club, and he liked to 
go to places with Laura, and to see her 
dance and enjoy herself. How wonderfully 



56 All, or Nothing. 

pretty his little girl had become ! A short 
time before she had been only a dark- 
eyed, olive-skinned, foreign-looking little 
creature, full of pretty coaxing ways with 
him . ways that neither her mother nor 
her governess knew anything about . and 
now she was a lovely, brilliant young 
woman, holding her own in the big world, 
and going in for its prizes ; fluttering in 
the sunshine like the bright insect 
by whose name her father called her. 
Before that first season came quite 
to a close, however, something ailed his 
Firefly. She paled and drooped, and did 
not seem to care at all about the final 
festivities; but still less did she seem to 
care about going back to Hunsford. The 
Colonel, taking courage where Laura was 
concerned, inquired of her mother what 
was the matter. Only a piece of folly, 
Lady Rosa answered him ; the usual non- 
sense that all girls went on with, she sup- 
posed, once in their lives ; fancying them- 
selves in love with men whom it was im- 
possible they could marry, unless they 



Julia CannichaeL 57 

were permitted to make themselves and 
everyone connected with them miserable 
and ridiculous. The whole thing had 
been happily discovered and disposed of, 
before it was too late ; and she must really 
beg that the Colonel would not meddle in 
the matter, or allow Laura to perceive that 
h,e was aware of her nonsense. 

Colonel Chumleigh was greatly disturb- 
ed by all this ; he had secretly cherished 
a hope that his daughter might find in 
marriage the happiness he had missed, but 
which he had not ceased to believe in, or 
to hold to be inseparably dependent upon 
love. He could not, even yet, imitate 
Lady Rosa's matter-of-fact, and calmly 
dispose of love's young dream as " non- 
sense." Nevertheless, when he heard such 
of the particulars of his daughter's " non- 
sense" as Lady Rosa thought proper to 
impart to him, he had to acknowledge that 
it would not have " done " at all. There 
was not even so much reason in this case 
as there had been in his own, and Lady 
Eosa herself could hardly feel the force of 



68 All, or Nothing. 

that comparison more strongly than the 
now middle-aged hero of her own " love's 
yofung dream" felt it. 

Julia Carmichael came to Hansford 
upon her annual visit immediately on the 
return of the family from London. Laura 
had been peremptorily ordered by her 
mother to refrain from any confidences 
with her cousin on the subject of the 
'* nonsense" that had occurred in town, 
and she had scrupulously obeyed, being, 
indeed, disinclined to speak of the matter 
herself; still the companionship did her 
good, and Julia became an element of 
harmony and relief in the household. 
When the visit was approaching its con- 
clusion. Lady Rosa informed Julia that 
she had changed her plans concerning her. 
The Coloners niece . for whom no formal 
introduction into the world would be 
necessary, and who would be useful at 
Hunsf ord when Laura should have married 
well . was to have left school at the fol- 
lowing midsummer term ; but Lady Rosa 
now decreed that the period should be 



Julia Caimiichael. 59 

abridged, that Julia was to come home at 
Christmas. 

In her unusually urbane mood towards 
the girl . a mood which was much assist- 
ed by her vexation with Laura . Lady 
Bosa found time to bestow some thought 
upon her future. She was not pretty^ 
and she would have no more money than 
would barely suflfice for her to live upon, 
according to the properly moderate notions 
of persons of her class . the smaller gentry 
. it was not therefore probable that she 
would have a chance of marriage, unless 
she had some one to manage a little for 
her. If Julia should conduct herself to 
Lady Bosa's satisfaction, it was just possi- 
ble that Lady Rosa might do the necessary 
management. She did not pledge herself, 
to herself, to anything. Time would show, 
and she should see. 

Julia Carmichael came to Hunsford for 
good at Christmas-time, and even if Lady 
Rosa had been a jealous mother, she could 
not have entertained any fear of Julia's 
interfering with her brilliant cousin. Miss 



60 All, or Nothing. 

Oarmichael was tall of stature, deliberate 
of speech, methodical in all her ways, so 
self-possessed that not even Lady Rosa 
could disconcert her ; and although there 
was a certain attraction about her face, 
in the intelligent grey eyes, smooth, almost 
colourless complexion, well-shaped fore- 
head, and sweet expression, that attraction 
was the opposite of the charm which Laura 
exercised. 

In the following spring the same house 
in Lowndes Street was again secured for 
the Ohumleighs, and Laura, in renovated 
health, beauty, and spirits, commenced her 
second season. Of the gaieties of this 
year Julia had her share, according to Lady 
Rosa's notions of what was the right 
thing for her ; and she was perfectly 
satisfied. She gave no trouble, she made 
no fuss, she really was an admirable girl, 
and she should have Lady Rosa's best 
assistance in disposing of herself when 
Laura was settled. The second season 
came to an end; the family returned to 
Hunsford; and shortly afterwards, Julia 



Julia CarmicliaeL 61 

Carmichael went on a long visit to her old 
friends at Bury House. 

When Julia returned to Hunsford, she 
was received with the usual warmth of 
welcome by Laura and her uncle, and with 
more than usual civility by Lady Bosa. 
" I am glad to see you, my dear," said her 
ladyship, '* if it were only that you can say 
more than ' yes ' and ' no ' when you are 
spoken to." The conference between the 
cousins that evening was a long one, for 
Julia had an important piece of news to 
confide to Laura. Lady Rosa's well-meant 
previsions for the future were unneces- 
sary ; Julia had disposed of herself with- 
out anybody's assistance. 

" Engaged I You don't really mean it, 
Julia ?' 

"Indeed, I do mean it. Actually and 
seriously engaged." 

" And papa and mamma not to know 
about it ! And that with Miss Sandilands' 
sanction ? Does it seem all right ?" 

'' I think so, and so will you when I have 



\ 



62 All, or Nothing. 

explained. It is to be what your mother 
hates and despises . a love-match." 

" Ah, poor mamma r said Laura, with a 
sigh. 

The story Julia had to tell was briefly 
this : The Misses Sandilands had a 
nephew, the son of their dead brother, a 
clever, energetic young man, and this 
John Sandilands was the hero of Julia's 
romance. 

'*He is as well-born as I am, and no 
better ; and he has very little money, but 
plenty of ability and courage, and he is 
willing to work as hard as he can, and to 
wait as long as he must, for me. His 
aunts were rather shocked at first when 
he told them, and that was before he told 
me, because I was under their protection 
. so right and honourable of him, was it 
not ? . but they came all right afterwards, 
and were so nice ; and they both said they 
were sure there could be no happiness in 
the world like a real love-match, though 
neither of themselves had ever had time 
to be in love with anyone. That did sound 



Julia Cannichael. 63 

melanclioly, and when we talked about it 
afterwards . lie and I, I mean . ^he said it 
made him ashamed of himself, for a great 
deal of what they had earned had been 
expended on him . not that he was in fault 
for that. And then everything was settled 
between us. John has got a very good 
ofEer to go out to Ceylon to manage a 
cofEee-plantation, which has been let to go 
almost to ruin, for a friend of his, Sir 
Wilfred Esdaile . do you know him?" 
Laura had looked up, with a slight start 
at the mention of the name, but she only 
shook her head, and Julia went on. 

" He's to have a certain salary for the 
first year, and then it is to be raised, ac- 
cording to * results,' he said ; and when it 
reaches one thousand pounds a year, he 
is to write and tell my uncle, and then he 
is to come home for me, and we are to be 
married, and to go out to Ceylon and live 
in a bungalow/' 

" And you have promised him that you 
will wait, you do not know how long ?" 

" And I have promised him that I will 



64 All, or Nothing. 

wait, I do not know how long. You see, 
dear Laura, he and I both know our own 
minds perfectly ; nothing can ever change 
them; and if there were any opposition 
here it would only make things uncom- 
fortable . it is not as if I were . their 
daughter, you know . but nothing that the 
Colonel or Lady Rosa could say would 
have the least effect on me. It ought not, 
you know, for John and I love and trust 
each other, and the only reasons that 
could be urged against us would be world- 
ly reasons, and those we have weighed and 
put aside. I shall be all I can to my 
uncle and Lady Eosa, and when the time 
comes they will see that I have done right, 
holding to my troth, but not troubling 
their house with useless discussions." 

'* Nothing . no waiting . could make you 
give him up ?" Laura asked, anxiously, and 
with a look of pain in her dark eyes. 

" Not for all the world . and yet, what a 
silly measure that is to meet my assurance 
by . for what would all the world be to 
me without him ?" 



Julia CarrnichaeL 65 

"It's a strange secret to have to -keep/' 
said Laura, after a pause, and thoughtfully, 
" and yet Tm very glad you have told me.'' 

" I could not have helped that ; in the 
first place, because we are too near and 
too much to each other for reserves; and 
then again, because I must talk of him to 
you. Think how far away he is, and for 
how long !'' 

The cousins talked much over this 
wonderful* subject, and it was constantly 
renewed bet^yeen them. John Sandilands 
was hard-working and prosperous, and by 
the time in the following year that Laura 
at length realised her mother's wishes, and 
married " well," he was beginning to see a 
term to his long engagement. 

The Indian mail that went out two days 
after the marriage of Mr. Thornton and 
Miss Chumleigh carried a description of 
the wedding, written by Julia Carmichael 
to John Sandilands. 



VOL. I. F 



66 



All, or Nothing. 



CHAPTER IV. 




" It fell upon a dayT 

OBBUT THORNTON was not in 
his own person a member of tlie 
"self-made" class who, however 
estimable and admirable, are not, as a rule, 
agreeable, especially to the hereditary 
drones of society, but he was only once 
removed from that condition. The inevit- 
able half-crown had founded the fortunes 
of his father, into whose origin he had 
never inquired; of whose character and 
career he was justly proud ; but he could 
not recall any epoch in his own life at 
which money and all it procures had not 
been at his command. The self-making 
man had fallen upon golden days in the 



'''It fell upon a day," 67 

beginning, upon the piping times of sound 
speculations, and large undertakings rea- 
sonably guaranteed by political and social 
stability in Europe, and tilings had pros- 
pered with him from his first lucky hit, 
throughout a career which had been as 
honourable as it was successful. 

The self-making process took time, and 
the eminent contractor and mine-owner did 
not consider himself well enough off to 
marry until he was a more than middle-aged 
man. Then he married a pretty and good 
girl, who was nobody in particular, and who 
lived just one year after their marriage. 
The self-made man had the usual ambition 
to found a family, and to leave an entailed 
estate ; and now he was a widower with an 
only child. He survived the pretty and 
simple young wife, whom he loved much 
better than his success or his ambition, 
and to whom he never gave a successor, 
ten years ; and during them he added land 
to land with great perseverance, buying all 
he could get in the neighbourhood of his 
first purchase, in a dull district of Dum- 

f2 



68 All, or Nothing. 



frieshire, but never residing on his estate^ 
He could not have resided on it, indeed, 
for there was no house, and although he 
was always intending to build one, and 
had plans for the projected mansion, 
numerous enough to have formed a depart- 
ment of an art-exhibition all to themselves, 
they never got beyond being framed and 
glazed, and hung upon the walls of the 
*' office " in the old-fashioned house in 
Bedford Square, in which the self-made 
man had lived through all his best years, 
and in which he died. His will was a sim- 
ple, though a stringent document. 

Besides his son, he had but one relative, 
a sister, twenty years younger than him- 
self, who had come to live in his house 
after the death of his wife, and had been 
charged with the bringing up of the child* 
To her he bequeathed the house in Bed- 
ford Square and all that it contained, 
with a sum of monev sufficient to render 
her independent for her life ; and to his 
son all his possessions besides. The landed 
estate was tied up by the strictest entail. 



'' It fell upon a day!' 69 

and a proviso was added to the dispositions 
of the will, that, should there unfortunate- 
ly be a failure of heirs male, the' husband 
of the female heir, on whom in that case 
the Mains would devolve, must bear the 
name of Thornton. This was the one 
harmless vanity of the self-made man. All 
the fitting and proper provisions as to 
trustees were duly made, and the will 
included a strong recommendation of the 
testator's only child to the gratefully 
acknowledged care of his sister, upon 
whom, in the untoward event of Robert's 
dying without heirs, all the property would 
devolve. 

The loneliness of Eobert Thornton in 
the world, which held but one human being 
bound to him by any tie of blood, was the 
drawback to his otherwise prosperous lot ; 
and the boy felt that loneliness, not only 
in his boyhood, but when the fair future 
of early manhood lay before him. A great 
deal of the simplicity of a social stratum far 
below his present place in life, existed in 
Robert Thornton's disposition, tastes, and 



70 All, or Nothing. 

notions ; he felt himself at fault among the 
persons who had lots of people belonging 
to them, and complex lives and interests 
to occupy them. It was not that he could 
not amuse himself like other people, that 
he had any touch of eccentricity about 
him, or did not know that, in many re- 
spects, he was exceedingly fortunate ; but 
he was naturally sensitive and imagin- 
ative, and he was devoid of that cynical 
selfishness which can find a compensation 
for isolation in independence. 

It would have been difficult for any young 
man of one-and-twenty to be more com- 
pletely his own master than was Eobert 
Thornton when he attained his majority^ 
and he had plenty of friends and acquaint- 
ances to let him see how very much to be 
envied they considered him. The trustees 
had done their duty by his estate ; and 
though his fortune was not so large as it 
was said to be . there had been vicissitudes 
in the value of certain of its components 
. it was large for a man without the 
obligations of rank, and who had literally 



" It fell upon a dayT 71 

no claims upon him. His education liad 
been carried out on the plan which his 
father would have approved, in so far as 
that he was sent to one of the great public 
schools, but he declined to follow up that 
phase of education by university life, and 
adopted travel instead. 

This was not orthodox, but it was 
effective ; he saw a great deal of the world, 
learned much of its history, made some 
mistakes, but committed no base actions ; 
suffered a good deal from misplaced confi- 
dence, but did not clothe himself with 
cynicism and selfishness as with armour of 
probf, because the world did not turn out 
to be all he had expected. Eobert Thorn- 
ton distinguished himself among his fellows 
as a climber of mountains, never showed a 
trace of faculty for the money-making, or 
of that interest in the process which had 
distinguished his father, and was regarded 
by the comparatively small section of 
society by whom he was discussed as " not 
a marrying man." 

Eobert Thornton was not so popular 



72 All, or Nothing. 

with women as are many men who have 
his passably good looks, his pleasant 
manners, or his fortune. He was very 
courteous to women ; he never talked 
lightly of them or believed the statements 
of men who did so ; but he did not flatter 
them, and he never seemed to experience 
the least reluctance or difficulty about 
absenting himself from their society. He 
would be seen at places where the world 
did congregate for a few weeks, would 
then disappear, and be next heard of 
from some mountain peak or hardly 
known ^'interior." This was not satis- 
factory, not all that might have been 
expected from a man who, though he was 
in some senses " nobody," might have 
created an interest in that negative circum- 
stance itself, and who at least possessed 
two of the instruments by which he could 
have hoisted himself from being nobody 
into being somebody: wealth and inde- 
pendence. 

He might have been interesting . if in- 
deed he could have escaped being ridicu- 



* ' It fell upon a day'' 73 

lous . had it ever been suspected that he 
was romantic. Exploded as romance is, 
as an admitted element of modern life, a 
secret hankering aftw it, a feeling that 
one would like to be romantic if one only 
could, is not so uncommon as may be 
supposed, and when Mr. TroUope depicts 
the mercenary and mendacious Lizzie 
Eustace indulging in vision of a possible 
Corsair, and hoping he may turn up 
among her acquaintance, he puts a^&* of 
our complex social life with his usual 
pithy realism. Eobert Thornton, how- 
ever, was never suspected of being roman- 
tic ; he kept his secret until the hour came 
for its disclosure so well that the general 
opinion concerning him was, that not only 
was he not a marrying man, but that, if he 
should ever change his mind on that sub- 
ject, he would be very unlikely to do any- 
thing foolish. Doing something foolish, 
according to the people who discussed 
Eobert Thornton, would mean his marry- 
ing for any other than the solid motive of 
interest. He was one of the rootless ones ; 



74 All, or Nothing: 

he would try for great connections, and a 
wife with family influence, no doubt. 

It was probably this very fact of his 
rootlessness which kept up, as it had 
originated, the romance in Robert Thorn- 
ton's nature. He was strangely alone in 
the world; but somewhere in the same 
world there existed the woman who was to 
be his fellow-soul; and before the light 
and warmth and sufficingness of whose 
presence the isolation of his life was to 
disappear. When they two should meet 
and recognise each other, then the music 
of Hfe would begin to sound, and its 
sweet waters to flow ; then its meaning 
would be made plain, and its worth proved ^ 
and all the questioning, and the vagueness, 
and the irresistible strange sadness, which 
even hard travel, and the commerce of 
men, and determined plunges into the 
interests, and the business, and the pleas- 
ures of life, were not able to banish com- 
pletely, or for long, would vanish away. 
Into all these things Robert Thornton did 
plunge betimes ; but he would emerge 



" It fell upon a day." 



from them, and find himself on the dim 
shore again, with the old lonely sense of 
insufficiency stealing over him, and the 
consciousness that in the transient energy 
with which he went at those things there 
was only well-done make-believe after all. 

Towards the end of the second season of 
Colonel and Lady Rosa Chumleigh's occu- 
pation of the house in Lowndes Street^ 
Robert Thornton met Laura Chumleigh at 
a garden-party, and the make-believe of 
his life came to an end for evermore. He 
was the last man of whom such a thing^ 
would have been generally predicted ; but 
anyone who had found out the secret of 
his romantic disposition would have felt 
pretty sure that sooner or later he would 
fall in love at first sight, and such a 
penetrating person would probably have 
added, " and with the wrong woman. ''^ 
He had fallen in love at first sight, at a 
later date in his life than would have 
seemed likely ; whether Laura was the 
wrong woman remains to be seen. 

Robert Thornton fell in love with Laura 



76 AH, or Nothing. 

after a fashion of which we say that it is 
very rare in these days, but perhaps the 
truth is that it was never otherwise than 
very rare ; just as true poets, great artists, 
perfectly beautiful woman, men supremely 
noble, and souls altogether saintly, are 
very rare. It was a fashion which caused 
every lighter emotion, or fantasy of so- 
called love, which he had ever felt, to flutter 
back to his remembrance, that they' might 
be regarded for an instant with incredul- 
ous contempt, and then be dismissed for 
ever to the realm of nothingness ; it was a 
fashion which, while it might have found 
fiome relief in the loftiest and most ecsta- 
tic, in the humblest and most homage-full 
of all the strains of all the poets who have 
Bung of the conqueror of gods and men, 
had its own language, impossible of utter- 
ance, and was incommunicable like the 
sense and the certainty of life itself and of 
its endless duration. 

It was not only that from the moment 
he had learned by heart through his eyes 
the loveliness of her face and the grace of 



" It fell upon a day'' 17 

her form, Laura was beautiful to him ; she 
was beauty itself, all beauty, all delight, all 
excellence. He had found her at last ; 
here, standing by the side of a shallow piece 
of ornamental water, in a highly artificial 
garden not an hour's drive from the heart 
of fashionable London, glancing at him 
over a bunch of dusky crimson roses which 
set off the colouring of her radiant face, 
and talking the nothings proper to the 
occasion with the peculiar vividness that 
belonged to her. Laura Chumleigh was, 
to this man, the realisation of an ideal, the 
fulfilment of a dream ; and it changed, he 
could not have told how, or how soon, into 
a hope. 

It seemed to the trustful nature of 
Robert Thornton that he could not be 
quite misled by his fate, and altogether 
doomed to emptiness of life and the walk- 
ing in a vain shadow ; and that, as it would 
be so with him, if their meeting were to 
have no meaning for the beautiful girl, 
who was a new revelation to him, other 
than the addition of an insignificant item to 



78 All, or JNothing. 

her list of acquaintances, their meeting 
must have a further significance. He 
was not a vain man . this was not a sug- 
gestion of conceit . but the essential lone- 
liness of his life had inclined him to fatal- 
ism, though he did not so define it to 
himself, and there was so strange a fulfil- 
ment of his ideal in this meeting that he 
accepted the good omen with a supersti- 
tious joy. 

The story of a courtship could not be 
made interesting to those who have 
^'assisted" at the wedding of the lovers, 
but it would not be fair to Laura Chum- 
leigh that it should be supposed she gave 
nothing but dross in return for the pure 
gold of such a love as it seldom falls to 
the lot of a woman to win. She certainly 
did not fall in love with Robert Thornton, 
either at first sight or on further acquaint- 
ance. They met as frequently, during the 
brief remainder of the season, and in the 
autumn and winter, as Mr. Thornton's 
ingenuity, seconded by Lady Rosa Chum- 
Jeigh's good will, could contrive that they 



" It fell upon a day'' 79 

should meet, and Laura liked him very- 
much indeed. A man more versed in the 
ways of women of Laura's world would 
have seen in that frank liking the senti- 
ment least answering to the romantic and 
absorbing passion which filled Eobert 
Thornton's heart ; but love in his case did 
not lack the *' humbleness " that is not often 
a modern attribute of it, and he was the 
least presumptuous of wooers.' 

It would have sounded to him not more 
wicked blasphemy than sorry foolishness 
had anyone suggested that he, Eobert 
Thornton, was an entirely eligible parti 
for Miss Chumleigh, and that the young 
lady's parents were of that opinion. But, 
of course, when a man is so much of an 
original as to regard the girl who has 
captivated him less as a young lady than as 
a young goddess or a young angel, the 
natural effect of that mode of regarding 
her is to obscure his sense of his own 
importance. He was most unfashionably 
slow about declaring himself, although he 
had been allowed to perceive from the first 



tf 



80 All, or Nothing. 

that there was no rival for him to fear ; 
and when at length he did so, it was im- 
possible for him to avoid the knowledge 
that the occasion was not to Laura all it 
was to him. She accepted him very pret- 
tily, very graciously, and told him she did 
not mean to be known as an engaged girl 
so early in the season, with such ease and 
frankness that he was disconcerted, and 
unequal to any protest. 

Lady Rosa Chumleigh behaved very 
well on the occasion ; she was a little 
afraid that Laura might not prove quite 
tractable, although she had acknowledged 
that she liked Robert Thornton sujE- 
ciently to get on very well with him, and 
though it was an understood thing that, 
her one chance of marrying for love having 
been lost, the matter was put entirely out 
of consideration. Still Lady Rosa expected 
Laura to recoil a little from the step which 
nevertheless she was prepared to take 
when the time should come, and Laura did 
recoil. She meant to marry Robert 
Thornton, but she would not marry him 



*' It fell upon a day'' 81 

immediately ; she liked him ever so much 
better as a friend than as a declared lover. 
She must have the rest of the season " to 
get over it." 

Deep and dire was the vexation of Lady 
Eosa, but she did not always allow her 
temper to conquer her prudence, and she 
gave the victory on this occasion to the 
latter. 

"And then, mamma," said Laura, taking 
courage on perceiving this, with the quick 
observation of the oppressed, " there's 
another thing. Mr. Thornton is very 
good to me, much better than I deserve : 
and he is very fond of me," . there was not 
the slightest bashfulness in the girl's tone ; 
there was perhaps a little sorrowfulness in 
it ; but she was as unembarrassed as if she 
had been speaking of some one else's lover 
. ''dreadfully fond of me, I am afraid, if 
deep feelings make people unhappy, and he 
is the truthfulest person I ever knew. 1 
really cannot let him be under any mis- 
take ; I must tell him " 

*' What, pray?" Lady Rosa let her 

VOL. I. G 



82 All, or Nothing, 



temper have its way now. '* That absurd 
nonsense of two years ago, I suppose ! 
You will do nothing of the sort, if you 
please. It is not usual, I believe, for girls 
to boast of their rejected lovers." 

" Mamma, mamma I you know it was not 
that !" 

" I know that a man asked you to marry 
him, and you did not do so ; the reason is 
nobody's business. And you would make 
it a point of honour to talk about the 
matter to another man whom you mean to 
marry ! I never heard of anything so 
unladylike in my life I Not another word, 
if you please !" Lady Rosa raised her 
bony hand in stern interdiction of the re- 
monstrance that was on Laura's lips. 
*' I distinctly forbid you to allude to the 
subject to Mr. Thornton or to anybody 
else, including myself." 

Lady Rosa was very far indeed from 
having a true appreciation of Robert 
Thornton, but she was a keen observer 
where it was for her interest to be well- 
informed, and she had discerned in her 




'* It fell upon a day'' 83 

daughter's suitor depth and concentration 
of feeling which would be very likely, she 
thought, to lead to his taking badly that 
information which the girl on whom he 
had set his strong and tender heart had 
intended to impart to him. She knew 
that Laura would not venture to disobey 
the emphatic injunction she had laid upon 
her. 

But, after all, this was only one danger* 
provided against; who could tell when 
others might arise in a troublesome, one- 
sided business like this. If the stupid girl 
could only care a little more for the man 
who so eminently deserved the love he 
coveted so greedily ! 

It has been seen that Lady Eosa Chum- 
leigh had reason to be better satisfied with 
her daughter's feelings towards Robert 
Thornton before the arrival of that 
blissful day which, as she put it to herself, 
got Laura off her mind. 

The bride's letters home were not 
numerous and not long, but her unofficial 
communications to Julia Carmichael were 

g2 



84 All^ or Xothing. 



considerably more expansive than those 
addressed to Lady Rosa. 

Three weeks after their marriage, Mr. 
and Mrs. Thornton, who were going to 
the Mediterranean in their yacht in 
September, arrived at Dumfries, with the 
double purpose of seeing the Mains and 
visiting Robert Thornton's only relative. 
The sister of the self-same man had retired 
from the uncongenial atmosphere of 
London life shortly after his death, having 
sold the house in Bedford Square, and had 
ever since been living in comfort of the 
kind she appreciated, in a grey granite- 
fronted abode, with a small garden and a 
little plantation of Scotch firs at the back 
of it, at a short distance from the town of 
Dumfries. The years had treated Dorcas 
Thornton very gently; her life had been 
singularly untroubled ever since the old 
time of that unforgotten great sorrow, her 
brother's death, and her pride in her 
nephew had never received a check. 

" Do you remember," wrote Mrs. Thorn, 
ton to her cousin Julia, "the delightful 




*. It fell upon a day^ 85 

description in ' Marriage ' of Lady Juliana 
Douglas's visit to her husband's Highland 
home? and of Miss Nicky, Miss Grizzy, 
and Miss Jacky? I think I am a little 
disappointed that nothing in my own ad- 
ventures on my first visit to Scotland 
. bears any resemblance to the experience 
of poor Harry Douglas's * adored Julia,' 
that Dumfries is not in the Highlands, 
that Mr. Thornton's aunt is not in the 
least like any one of the spinsters of Glen- 
fern. The town is dull, but the surround- 
ing country, though they call it very tame 
here, is delightfully strange to my eyes, 
accustomed only to London and Huns- 
ford. 

** Yesterday we visited the Mains, and 
I was consulted about the site of the 
house that is to be built ; the works are 
to be set on foot almost immediately. I 
found it difficult to form an opinion, be- 
cause I know nothing about aspects, and 
points of view, and the other things that 
require to be considered, and so I answer- 
ed pretty much at random. One thing I 



86 All^ or Nothing, 



am sure of ; that is, that I shall never 
care much to live in any house here for 
long at a time ; it must be very dull. 

" You will like to know about Miss 
Thornton. She is like a picture, and aU 
most as quiet as one. She thinks her 
nephew the most perfect of human beings, 
and provoked him to the nearest approach 
to anger I have seen in him by letting me 
perceive that she does not particularly ad- 
mire me, and that she thinks I can never 
be sufficiently grateful for the good for- 
tune that has befallen me. Nobody, I 
suppose, likes to have their gratitude 
prescribed to them, and I generally turn 
a deaf ear to the broad hints in this sense 
which Miss Thornton gives me ; but other- 
wise there is nothing whatever to complain 
of. 

** The house is wonderfully prim, neat, 
and squarely set forth ; the ' plenishing,* as 
they call furniture in Scotland, is all much 
older than Mr. Thornton, and most of it 
he remembers since he was a child. The 
old lady constantly informs me that she is 



it 



*' li fell upon a day J' 87 

merely a steward of all these fine things . 
she regards them with the greatest rever- 
ence . and that when she is gone they will 
all be his. Mr. Thornton would not be 
unlikely, I imagine, to keep all the dark 
mahogany, and the drab damask, and the 
thick glass as relics ; and it is to be hoped 
the new, house on the Mains will have 
plenty of lumber rooms. It seems the 
Thorntons originally came from this neigh- 
bourhood, and she returned to the old 
place and the old. associations after the 
death of Mr. Thornton s father. She is a 
very nice old lady, but so totally unlike 
anybody we know in her ideas and ways 
that I am sure I could not make you 
realise her in the least. But oh ! she has 
such a charming neighbour . a young 
widow . who lives in a gem of a little 
cottage close by the Stone House. Her 
husband was lost at sea, and she never re- 
covered the shock of his death. 

"Mrs. Monro . that is her name, Janet 
Monro ; 1 like it so much . ^is quite young, 
not twenty-five, and very handsome, in a 




88 All^ or Nothing, 



large, calm style. She has only one 
pleasure in life . her flower-garden, and as 
I do know something about flowers, we 
got on from the first. She was at the 
Stone House when we arrived, and she 
has been a perfect treasure to me, telling 
me what are the proper things for me to 
be interested in, and the queer Scotch 
names for everything, which you must 
learn if you want to understand what the 
servants and people say. I do so wish 
we could persuade her to come with us 
on our cruise ; I am sure the Mediterranean 
would be better for her than Scotland, 
and, as I cannot have you with me, I 
should like to have her. She knows your 
Misses Sandilands, but she never met 
you ; she says you probably knew her hus- 
band's sister, whose name was, like her 
own, Janet Monro ; she was at school at 
Bury House for some time. Do you re- 
member any girl of that name ? It was 
a good many years ago. We shall be in 
London on the 25th, and Mr. Thornton 
will take me down to Hunsford for a 



** It fell upon a day'' 89 

couple of days before we start. The 
yacht will be all ready by the 26th ; we 
shall go to Southampton a little later. 
Tell papa Mr. Thornton has called the 
yacht The Firefly r 

Julia Carmichael was not quite pleased 
with her cousin's letters; there was not 
exactly anything to complain of in them, 
but they were not the sort of letters, for 
instance, that she herself would write if 
her long engagement with John Sandilands 
had just come to a happy termination. 
There was too little about Mr. Thornton, 
and too much about other people, to please 
Julia. But, she reflected, she must not 
make herself a rule for others, and Laura 
never had any sentimental ways about her. 
She did not answer the letter just quoted 
for several days, and in her reply she said : 
*'I mentioned your new acquaintance in 
writing to Miss Sandilands, and asked about 
her sister-in-law and namesake. I remem- 
ber Janet Monro at Bury House a long 
time ago ; she went away as companion to a 
Mrs. Drummond, of Bevis, also in Suffolk." 



90 All, or Nothing. 

Mrs. Thornton received her cousin's 
letter as she was leaving Dumfries, and 
read it in the train, 

"Nothing wrong, dearest, is there?" 
asked Robert Thornton, attentive as usual 
to every look in her face. 

" Nothing at all," she answered ; and 
then she tore the letter into small pieces^ 
and held them out of the carriage window, 
to be carried away by the wind. 



In the Garden of the World. 91 




CHAPTER V. 

In the Garden of the World. 

HETHER Ceylon be reached in 
going out or coming home, its 
port is always welcome to the 
traveller. It means the end of a long 
stage in the journey, either way, and a 
beautiful country to be seen, which cannot 
but delight the more accustomed, while it 
enchants the fresh imagination, eager for 
impressions/ 

To the magical beauty and the mystic 
interest of the island of gems, flowers, and 
fables, a young man who was approaching 
Point de Galle on board a steamer home- 
ward bound from Calcutta, on a brilliant 
autumn day, was more than indifferent. 



M 



92 All^ or JSfothing. 



He was not well enough to care about the 
^' wine-dark sea," or the sight of Adam's 
Peakj a purple mass upon the sky, or to 
respond to the enthusiasm of a fellow- 
traveller . a pretty girl, too . who had in- 
sisted on quoting descriptive bits about 
Ceylon from favourite authors, as they 
neared '* that small bay, surrounded with 
lofty cocoa-palms, whose dull green be- 
comes a dazzling emerald in the damp hot 
air," which forms the harbour of Point de 
Galle. Miss Ainslie, the solemn civilian 
her papa, with the fretful, faded, hard-to- 
please lady her mother, who viewed the 
interesting young officer going home on 
sick-leave with decided disfavour, and re- 
garded all books and quotations from them 
as " stuff," had all bored him occasionally 
during their voyage ; but they were going 
" on," while he meant to wait for a Messa- 
geries ship from Colombo, and go " home " 
by the French line. '* Home " had not, in 
fact, any very particular meaning for 
Edward Dunstan, and he had taken his 
sick-leave from his regiment . he had 



In the Garden of the World, 93 

joined only two years previously in India . 
with reluctance. The doctors had sent 
him home after two attacks of fever, but 
they had not told him he must not linger 
by the way, and he had learned by letters 
which reached him during his second bout 
of fever, that by the time he should reach 
Galle a friend of his would have come out 
to Ceylon. Captain Dunstan would there- 
fore remain there for awhile, go up ta 
Kandy, see the beautiful hill country, and 
get home quite soon enough for all his 
purposes. 

The passengers on board the homeward 
steamer were few, and the Ainslies were 
the most important persons among them. 
Captain Dunstan was a good-natured young 
man enough when he was not ill and out 
of spirits, but he hated to be regarded as 
an interesting invalid, and in that light 
the Ainslies, father and daughter, some- 
what too persistently regarded him. Mrs. 
Ainslie did not think him at all interesting ; 
in fact, Mrs. Ainslie considered no one's 
invalidism interesting except her own. 



.94 AU, or Nothing. 



Mr. Ainslie was going home, after a pros- 
perous civil career in India, to reside on an 
estate which he had employed an agent to 
purchase for him, and as ' good luck . 
though, as Edward Dunstan had mentally- 
added, when Mr. Ainslie dilated upon the 
coincidence, not his good luck . would 
have it, he had fallen in with a man who 
could tell him all about it. As he was a 
slow-minded person, much given to enter- 
taining only one idea at a time, and to 
harping upon that, Mr. Ainslie made Ed- 
ward Dunstan regret, before they had been 
very long on speaking terms, that he had 
fio freely admitted an intimate acquaint- 
ance with that part of Suffolk in which 
was situate a desirable property called the 
Chantry, whose qualities the happy pur- 
chaser set forth with florid detail. 

Mr. Ainslie was a solemn, sun-dried, 
brown little man, whose lines had been 
laid in pleasant places as regarded emolu- 
ment and position. His successive ap- 
pointments had been " pucka," but likewise 
dismal and monotonous, involving much 



In ike Garderi of the World. 95 

anthoritative settling of the afiairs of the 
natives, and comparatrreh' little inter- 
course with Europeans. It is not nn- 
natural that expeiienoe of tliis kind, acting 
on a slow mind and a tendency to pom- 
posity, should hare induced Mr. Ainslie 
to entertain an exalted opinion of him- 
self, and to hold the complacent belief 
that anything of interest to him must 
needs be of interest to all well and rightly- 
constituted mankind; but persons who 
were impetuous, and disinclined to try back 
for first causes when the result before them 
was a bore, found him none the easier 
to be put up with because he was " just 
what might be expected*** 

He had lived so many years in India, 
and in out-of-the-way districts, that he 
knew nothing about English life, and, 
indeed, not much about Indian life of 
that modem sort which has succeeded 
the " John Company "* epoch ; but the 
sun-dried little man had notions of his 
own. They formed an odd medley : 
cows grazing in real green grass fields, 



96 All, or Nothing. 



county-town market-days, morning walks 
in places where one might poke one's own 
land with one's own spud, and where the 
pig, so far from being an unclean, would 
be almost a sacred animal, preponderated 
among them. 

" I should have preferred Berkshire, on 
account of the pigs," he said, plaintively, 
to Edward Dunstan, "but there was no- 
thing to be had." 

"Why, you don't suppose Berkshire 
pigs mope at home and never roam, but 
dwell like hermits alway, like Charles 
O'Malley," said Amabel. ''You can im- 
port them, can't he. Captain Dunstan? 
Do tell him they import Berkshires at 
Bevis !" 

" I can't tell him. Miss Ainslie," said 
Captain Dunstan, " because I don't know. 
I was not posted up on pigs at Bevis : they 
don't interest me in the plural." 

"Of course, I understand, only when 
they are 'pig' and dangerous, and you 
stick them yourself. How shall you ever 
settle down to lawn-tennis . that's the 



In the Garden of the World. 97 

proper thing now, my old school friends 
tell me." 

" I don't think I shall be called upon to 
try that mild alternative to * shikar;' at 
least, not at Bevis, if indeed it prevails 
there." 

''Not at Bevis! I thought, all this 
time, you were going home there." 

"Did you? I am sure I never said 
so. 

" Perhaps you did not ; but, somehow, I 
took it for granted." 

Amabel looked up at Edward Dunstan, 
who was staring at the sea in an absent 
manner, and felt slightly disconcerted. 
But she was not one to yield for a mo- 
ment to such an unaccustomed sensation, 
and she turned it off with a laugh. 

'' Here we have been, I do believe, 
worrying you all this time under false 
pretences, thinking we were to be neigh- 
bours, as Bevis and the Chantry are to 
each other. I wonder why the place was 
called the Chantry ?" 

'* Because there never was a church, or 

VOL. I. H 



98 All, or Nothing. 

a chantry, or a monk within three miles 
of it, and the people who gave it that name 
had not the remotest notion of what it 
meant." 

"Very likely. Here comes mamma, 
with a shawl on that it smothers one to 
look at," and Miss Ainslie moved away, 
leaving her father and Captain Dunstan 
together, and carrying with her a sense of 
having been snubbed, which she did not 
like. Amabel Ainslie was, however, more 
thoroughly good-humoured than Captain 
Dunstan, and as she merely liked him 
without being the very least bit in the 
world in love with him . a state of feeling 
as regards himself in which perhaps no 
modern young man ever thoroughly be- 
lieves . she very soon got over it. 

This little episode of their travelling- 
companionship took place within a few 
hours of their arrival at Point de Galle, 
and the intimation it conveyed to the 
Ainslies, that with that travelling compan- 
ionship their acquaintance might also come 
to an end, was unwelcome. The Ainslies 




In the Garden of the World. 99 

were to be received, during their brief stay 
at Galle, at the house of a civilian, of 
standing in thej service equal to that of 
Mr. Ainslie, of habit as spare, of com- 
plexion as brown, of texture as sun-dried, 
but of notions different. How any sane 
man could be induced to " retire " to the 
horrors of an English climate, Mr. Gil- 
christ could not conceive; if Ainslie had 
^'retired" from Bombay to Ceylon, indeed, 
there might have been some sense in it, 
but England ! He would give Ainslie just 
five years to live, with his narrow chest, 
too, and would be much surprised should 
he be found to avail himself of that liberal 
concession. 

The travellers landed at the picturesque 
port, where the blowingness and growing- 
ness everywhere, the smothered-in-green 
look of everything, announce the land of 
perpetual summer; farewells were ex- 
changed, and the Ainslies were conveyed 
to the house of Mr. Gilchrist, while Cap- 
tain Dunstan proceeded to the hotel at 
which he thought it likely he might find 

h2 



100 AU, or Xothing. 

his friend. Before they said good-bye, 
however, Mr. Aioslie made a slow little 
speech to Captain Danstan, which caused 
that languid young officer to feel a little 
ashamed of himself for having set the 
complacent owner of the Chantry down as 
a bore only. 

" My daughter teUs me,** said the brown 
little man, " that we have been mistaken 
in supposing that you are to be at Bevis 
this autumn, but I hope we need not on 
that account relinquish our expectation of 
seeing you again before long. It will 
give us the sincerest pleasure if you 
will come to us at the Chantry as 
soon, and stay with us as long, as you 
please." 

Captain Dunstan cordially acknow- 
ledged, and provisionally accepted the 
invitation, which was frankly seconded by 
Amabel. That young lady had somehow 
contrived to make Captain Dunstan feel 
that, although she liked him, perhaps better 
than he liked her, still the sentiment was 
mere liking ; and he was a little ashamed 




In the Garden of the World. 1 01 

of t&e soupqon of coxcombry that had 
dashed his relations with her. Mrs. Ains- 
lie said the fewest and coldest words that 
were possible on the occasion; but her 
words were always few and cold, except 
where her own ailments or her own in- 
juries were concerned, when they were 
many and vehement, and nobody minded 
them. She hoped Captain Dunstan would 
take care of himself . those recurrent 
fevers were bad things. 

" Did you say his name was Dunstan ?" 
asked Mr. Gilchrist of his infatuated 
guest, " and that he's going home on sick- 
leave ?" 

Mr. Gilchrist had met his party at the 
landing-steps, and seen Captain Dunstan. 

"Yes, but he is staying here awhile; 
goes on by the French steamer." 

" Then he's the man Bsdaile is looking 
out for. You know who Bsdaile is, Ains- 
lie ? Poor Tom Bsdaile's boy. You have 
not forgotten Tom, in our time, at West- 
minster ?" 

" I remember him," said Mr. Ainslie, 



102 All, or Nothing. 



with slow deliberation ; " he was intended 
for the Indian service, but had his pros- 
pects destroyed by coming into his uncle's 
baronetcy. Yes, I rememher him." 

" You may well say destroyed. Tom 
was not long about going out of his 
uncle's baronetcy . the wildest fool that 
ever made a short, and anything but merry 
life of what might have been an honour- 
able career. He married a very pretty girl 
without a rupee, and died when the boy 
was a baby. Several years later, the 
widow came in for a good deal of pro- 
perty ; it was lier uncle this time who 
retired in her favour, and now she is dead, 
and poor Tom's boy is a rich man. His 
affairs were well managed ; his mother 
lived on half nothing until she came inta 
her uncle's money, and then she saved the 
greater part of that. He is a good-looking 
young fellow ; I should not wonder if he 
was rather wild, like his father, but he ha& 
more brains and a better constitution 
than poor Tom . he dined with me yester- 
day." 




In the Garden of the World. 103 



" What briogs him here ?" 

" A very proper desire to see his 0W9 
estate with his own eyes. He owns a 
coffee plantation between Kandy and 
Nooralia . it went to the dogs for a time, 
after his mother's death, but he sent out a 
Scotch manager, and it's flourishing now, 
I believe. He expected to find Captain 
Dunstan here, or, at least, he thought 
it likely ; and was talking about him 
yesterday." 

'*That is a coincidence. Amabel, my 
dear, you have heard me mention that a 
friend of mine used to say, ' There are 
only half-a-dozen people in the world.' 
This is a case in point. Captain Dunstan 
knows the Chantry, and we meet Captain 
Dunstan; then we come here, and find 
that a friend of his dined with our friend 
yesterday. I daresay young Esdaile knows 
the Chantry too, and Bevis." 

'* Bevis in Suffolk, yes." Mr. Gilchrist 
spoke very drily here. " He does know 
Bevis, so do I . at least, I did, thirty years 
ago, in the early days of Admiral Drum- 



104 J.//, or Nothing. 



mond's time ; he was talking about the 
old place too, and it seenas Captain Dun- 
stan has been very badly treated. That 
was another case of uncle and nephew, you 
know." 

"We don't know," said Amabel, "he 
never said anything about an Admiral 
Drummond." 

And then she gave a little self-approving 
reflection to her own sagacity ; she knew 
there was " something " in the way he had 
taken her harmless remark about his going 
" home '" to Bevis. Who could have 
anticipated that this old Mr. Gilchrist, 
whom she was, of course, very glad to see, 
on her father's account, could possibly have 
had anything to tell them that would 
render him interesting to Amabel on his 
own? 

The spacious verandah of the best- 
managed hotel in the East . it would be 
invidious to indicate it more plainly . 
presented a picturesque appearance of its 
own, and afforded an animated prospect to 



In the Garden of the World. 105 

its occupiers on the afternoon of the 
following day, as Edward Dunstan and his 
friend . each reclining in a deep and 
luxurious Cingalese chair, with a little 
bamboo table at his elbow . smoked their 
cigarettes, and talked by fits and starts ; 
but for the most part amused themselves 
with the novel and characteristic scene. 
The verandah had many occupants, either 
in groups, in pairs, or singly, engaged 
precisely as Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and 
Edward Dunstan were engaged. Out- 
ward-bound people ; homeward-bound peo- 
ple ; rich men, travelling for amusement ; 
enterprising men, travelling fcrr gain ; 
scientific men, travelling in the interests 
of science; ofl&cials on their way to the 
scene of their employment ; and specimens 
of the genus loafer, who are to be met 
with everywhere in the world, even in 
those places which are most diflBcult and 
most expensive to reach. They are only 
loafers when they get there ; but they do 
get there, somehow. The outward-bound 
people looked healthy and interested ; 



106 All, or N'oihing. 

while the homeward-bound people looked 
faded and bored. 

That delicious cinnamon-scented breeze 
which tempers the heat of the day in 
Ceylon, but unhappily fails at nightfall, 
came floating under the wide-spreading 
eaves of the piazza, bearing many mingled 
sounds with it of strange tongues from 
the streets thronged with the puzzling 
figures of whom Sir Charles Dilke says, 
that he set down, as a rule for his own 
guidance, "Everybody that was womanly 
as a man, and everybody that was manly 
as a woman." The crowd presented an 
epitome of a great part of the world ; and 
Dunstan and Esdaile saw it as the author 
of " Greater Britain" saw it : '' Composed of 
Cingalese, Kandians, Moormen, with crim- 
son caftans and shaven crowns, forming 
its body, but including Portuguese, Chinese, 
Jews, Arabs, Parsees, Englishmen, Malays, 
Dutchmen, ' half-caste burghers, and now 
and then a veiled Arabian woman, or a 
Veddah, one of the aboriginal inhabitants 
of the isle." 



In the Garden of the World, 107 

Conspicuous among the groups were 
numerous native merchants, clad in silken 
robes of gorgeous colours and quite 
dazzling: cleanliness. A fairer scene could 
hardly be found on the surface of the 
earth than this, under a sky so lofty, 
speckless, and seemingly infinite in it& 
domed grandeur. The occupants of the 
verandah smoked their pipes of curious 
form, or more common-place cigars, sipped 
cooling drinks, borrowed from the western 
hemisphere chiefly, or ate ices flavoured 
with the delicious fruits of Ceylon, while 
one of the most ancient and unchanged 
institutions of the world was in full work 
among them. Vendors of precious stones, 
licensed by the proprietors, have their 
rights of entry into the hotel and its 
verandah ; and these chaff erers, patient and 
persuasive, were circulating among the 
visitors, each urging the merits of his own 
wares and depreciating those of his com- 
petitors with that wheedling secretiveness 
which has its utmost expression in the 
pedlar class. Some of these jewel-sellers, of 



108 Ally or Nothing. 

many races and nations of the Bast, carried 
their wares on little trays suspended from 
their necks ; others had them roughly tied 
up in bits of cotton rag, which they twisted 
about in their lean brown fingers as they 
extolled the value and beauty of their 
*' catty-eye " and '* pinkee coUal." 

The two men seated in a corner of the 
verandah were not spared the importunities 
of the jewel-sellers . one of whom, a keen- 
eyed, hatchet-faced little old man, with 
snaky brown fingers, attached himself to 
them with such perseverance that at length 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile, to get rid of him, told 
him to go and bother the other people ; he 
and his friend were not going on, and 
would look in at the shop on the next day. 
After a quick glance at the face of the 
Englishman, the Cingalese retired at once, 
with twinkling eyes ; and the next moment 
was pressing his wares on the attention of 
a fat German with a fat ring on his thick 
forefinger. 

" That voluble little fellow has very 
pretty things in his shop," said Esdaile. 



In the Garden of the World. 109 

" We'll look him up to-morrow. I haven't 
seen more curious curios anywhere. But, 
to go on with what we were saying, are 
you serious about trying a planter's 
life ?" 

"Quite serious. I can't get on in the 
army, without more money than I've got ; 
and I'm sick of it besides. There never 
was anything invented in this world so 
dull as the life in India when there's 
nothing doing. There's nothing doing 
now, or likely to be ; and then, my health 
has gone all to smash. There is no chance 
for me in England ; and, besides, I hate 
England." 

"I cannot understand that. I should 
have thought you were just the man ta 
hate anything but England. I do, at 
least, for long." 

" Yes ; that's natural. But look at the 
difference between us . between your ex- 
perience of England and mine. There ia 
nothing in the world better than the best 
that England can give a man ; and you 
have that, or almost that. I suppose you 



110 AH, or Nothing. 

don't want to be a duke or a Eothschild ; 
and, as you don't want that, youVe got 
about all you do want. And you can do 
as you like; you are as free as air, and 
more completely your own master than 
any man I know." 

"That's all quite true. Of course, I 
know I'm very lucky ; but why should 
you say there's no charm for you in 
England ? There are things there to put 
the money you wish to speculate with 
into." 

"It is not enough; and I don't know 
anything about business. Besides, in 
England I'm a failure already. I am a 
disappointed man; and that tells with 
everybody, beginning with myself. I start 
with a disability. I could not take kindly 
to a city life in London, after all that 
happened. Of course there never was 
anything of the kind, and I don't suppose 
anyone ever said such a thing ; but I feel 
as if I had sailed under false colours before 
the admiral's death . and, in fact, I mean 
to keep out of London." 



In t/ie Garden of the World, 111 

" You feel that because you are ill, and 
because you had a shock; but it is all 
nonsense. Of course you believed that 
you were to have Bevis ; why should you 
not? Everybody believed it, and every- 
body 'said the old admiral must have been 
mad, when it came out that you hadn't 
got the place." 

" It was not the admiral that was mad," 
said Edward Dunstan, very quietly, **it 
was I." 

" You !" 

" Yes, I. I don't feel up to much talk- 
ing just now, but some time or other I will 
tell you all about it. I think I will go 
and lie down now ; there's no sleeping in 
the still heat of the night here. I shall 
find you at dinner-time." 

Edward Dunstan left his friend, who 
continued to smoke with an air of more 
than usual reflection. 

"He looks ill," thought Sir Wilfrid; 
" and I don't like this notion of his. 
Turning planter, with only a small share 
in the concern, isn't lively for a man in 



112 All, or Nothing. 

a good regiment, who had twelve thousand 
a year ahead of him until two years ago. 
I should have thought anything at home 
would be livelier ; especially after two 
years in India. He has lots of friends. 
He'll soon be all right ; he is pulled flown 
by the fever. There can't be anything 
else in it." 

It was not surprising that Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile should take things easily, his 
friend's troubles included, for he had not 
any of his own ; and he was of a cheerful 
temperament. Captain Dunstan had de- 
scribed Esdaile's condition with consider- 
able fidelity, and nature had not in this 
instance been so cross-grained as to supply 
a drawback to its advantages in the young 
man's own disposition. Mr. Gilchrist was 
not far wrong in suspecting an hereditary 
turn for wildness in Tom Esdaile's boy, but 
it had not led him far wrong as yet. His 
pleasant face ; well set-up figure ; good 
manners; musical voice; and a certain 
quickness which was not quite cleverness, 
but did as well in the case of a man who^ 



In the Garden of the World. 113 

having money, did not need brains for the 
making of it, would have recommended 
him to the good graces of society, even 
without the fortune and the title which 
established him in them. 

On the following day Esdaile and 
Dunstan visited the shop of the persistent 
and voluble jewel-seller. Esdaile made 
several purchases, Dunstan but one . a 
slim and keen dagger, in a beautifully- 
wrought sheath of tortoiseshell. 

The next morning at dawn the friends 
started for Colombo, taking the coach by 
the coast road. 



VOL. I. 



114 All, or Nothing. 




CHAPTBE VI. 

A Confidence by the Way. 

IE WILFEID ESDAILE and his 
friend were at first too mucli 
occupied by the exceeding beauty 
of the road, and the distant majesty of the 
great mountain range, . on whose towering 
south-eastern peak local tradition has it 
that Adam mourned his son one hundred 
years . to interrupt their impressions by 
conversation. To both the scene was 
novel ; Sir Wilfrid Esdaile was then visiting 
Ceylon for the first time, and Dunstan had 
merely touched at Galle on his voyage 
out; and to the one, because he was in 
good health and high spirits ; to the other, 
because he was enjoying the change from 
the ship to land-travelling, and also be- 



A Conjidence by the Way. 115 

cause he was eagerly anticipating a climate 
that should revive him, the journey was 
pleasant. 

The light coach, with its four small 
horses and its shouting attendants, 
dashed along at a great pace through the 
country in which it is always summer, and 
everything and everybody are always en 
fete. The air was dazzlingly bright, and, 
as the hours went on, the features of the 
scene wore many varied aspects, all 
beautiful and full of life. The perfectly 
kept road through an avenue of giant 
cocoa-nut palms, is thickly set with native 
huts, and never winds out of sight of the 
purple sea. At short intervals it crosses 
the lagoons, where there are crowds of 
bathers, and travellers get a rapid view of 
the villages, with bazaar, and temple of that 
pagoda shape which seems, to those who 
have never seen it, impossible off a plate or 
a teapot. Buddhist priests in saffron 
robes, attended by boys clad in white, who 
hold yellow silk umbrellas over their sleek 
sage heads ; groups of Cingalese in many- 

i2 



116 All, or Nothing. 

coloured attire, on foot, and travellings 
singly in small bullock-carts, fill the road, 
which after some time lies through more 
varied scenery, and is bordered by the 
scarlet-blossomed cotton-tree and the areca 
palm. 

Dunstan had -slept soundly, in spite 
of the heat on the previous night, and 
was looking better, and more cheerful. 
His two years' experience of the east 
came to the aid of Esdaile's lack of know- 
ledge, and for some time, when they talked 
at all, it was only of the strange and in- 
teresting scene around them, and the 
curious aspect of the dense population of 
the almost continuous village that lies 
between Galle and Colombo. Esdaile was 
one of those sensible travellers who like 
to know what they ought to look for 
at certain places, and he had brought 
"Greater Britain" with him, and con- 
sulted its pages now and again, when he 
wanted to identify the features of the 
landscape. 

When the coach journey was over, 



A Confidence by the Way. 117 

Esdaile and Dunstan would recognise that 
no description could be truer than that 
which told them how they had " dashed 
through the bazaars and cocoa groves, then 
across the golden sands covered with rare 
shells, and fringed on the one side with the 
bright blue dancing sea, dotted with many 
a white sail, and on the other with deep 
green jungle, in which were sheltered dark 
lagoons." And again, how *'once in a 
while they would drive out on to a plain, 
varied by clumps of fig and tulip-trees, 
and, looking to the east, would sight the 
purple mountains of the central range; 
then, dashing again into the thronged 
bazaars, would see little but the bright 
palm-trees relieved upon an azure sky." 

Long before they entered '* the Christian 
Kyngdom of Colombo," to speed through 
its cinnamon-gardens, where the cinna- 
mon-laurel contrasts beautifully with the 
red soil, and the air is alive with dragon- 
flies and winged beetles, the conversation 
of the evening before had recurred to 
Esdaile's memory, and he tried to lead his 



118 All or N^othincf. 

friend to talk of the circumstances thafc 
had altered his prospects, and seemingly 
estranged him from England. Esdaile had 
met Dunstan at a '*good" club, and then 
at several " good " houses, and his position 
in society, even apart from the expecta* 
tions which had in some inexplicable way 
been disappointed, was well defined. But 
beyond this, and the fact that Dunstan 
was a very good fellow, and that he liked 
him, Esdaile was ignorant. When Mr,. 
Gilchrist stated his belief that Captain 
Dunstan had been " badly treated," and 
did so apropos of what *'Tom Esdaile'^ 
boy " had said to him, he spoke much more 
from his own former knowledge, and that 
remembrance of distant persons and things- 
which is kept so clear in the uneventful 
routine of life in an eastern country, than 
from anything his visitor had imparted ta 
him. 

" It would depend a good deal on what 
Sandilands tells us about that kind of 
thing," said Sir Wilfrid, " whether you 
make up your mind." 



A Confidence hy ike Way. 1 19 

" About turning coffee-planter ? Well, 
yes. I should think a good deal of his 
opinion, of course. It is not as if I knew 
anything about the business ; it is only an 
idea like another, as the French say. 
Sandilands is a clever fellow, isn't he ?" 

*' He must be. He has made this plan- 
tation of mine pay . or, at least, promise 
to pay . and it was never anything but a 
source of vexation before his time. He 
is a long-headed, quiet-tempered fellow, 
and a desperate hard worker. Not to be 
beat ; a regular Scotchman." 

"A man of no family, or fortune, I 
suppose; or he would have laid out his 
lines in pleasanter places." 

" No ; just a well-educated man, middle- 
class in birth, but of first-rate education, 
and energy enough for a dozen like you 
and me." 

'*Ah," said Dunstan, with a sigh, *M 
don't know about you. You don't require 
energy for anything, except amusing your- 
self ; but I should certainly be much the 
better for an additional spice of that 



120 All, or Nothing. 

quality. It is deuced hard to begin all 
over again." 

" It is, indeed ; and unjust too. Though 
you would not allow me to say so yes- 
terday." 

"No; there you're wrong. It is hard, 
but it is not unjust. Tm better now. This 
delightful air revives one ; and we are in 
the very realm and atmosphere of story- 
telling, ril tell you all about it." 

Edward Dunstan threw away the end of 
his cigar, while Esdaile lighted a fresh one, 
and after a glance round and ahead of the 
coach, rolling rapidly along, he began : 

" Once upon a time, a long time ago, a 
young man, named Edward Dunstan, who 
had nothing to recommend him except 
good blood, good looks, a commission in a 
line regiment, and about two hundred a 
year, had the good luck to meet and fall 
in love with the loveliest and best woman 
in the world. Her name was Helena 
Drummond. She was the only sister of 
Admiral . or, as he then was, Captain . 
Drummond, of Bevis, in Suffolk. She 



A Confidence hy the Way. 121 

had no parents living, and her brother 
washer guardian. She married the young 
subaltern, and they lived very happily ever 
after. Is the beginning of the story ro- 
mantic enough ?" 

" Quite. The parties were your father 
and mother ?" 

" They were. They lived happily ever 
after. But they did not live long; and 
my mother s brother could never be brought 
to regard their marriage with favour. It 
did not matter much to them while they 
were together, I fancy ; but when my father 
died, quite young, and my mother was left 
with me, and nothing but her small pension 
and my father's two hundred pounds a 
year to keep herself and educate me, and 
start me in the world upon, she was obliged 
to think of the future, and to regret the 
estrangement between herself and her 
only brother. I don't really know what it 
was that happened, I was only seven at 
the time, but the next thing that I remem- 
ber, after my father's death, was finding 
myself in a large country house, with fields, 



122 AH, or Nothing. 

and trees, and gardens; with water, and 
boats, and animals ; and being immensely 
delighted with all these things." 
" Did you take to your uncle ?" 
" Not particularly ; nor did he take to 
me. He was an odd sort of man. A very 
good man, I am sure, but he was not at 
home on dry land ; and he carried the 
orderliness that we always hear sailors 
praised for to a fault. I can remember 
my poor mother's nervousness about my 
destructive ways. I was a mischievous 
young dog, no doubt; I liked the house 
and the place better when my uncle was 
not there than when he was. This, how- 
ever, is all too old a story to interest you. 
My mother died just after I was sent toHar- 
row, and then I never again had any home- 
feeling about Bevis. It may have been a 
year later perhaps that my uncle married, 
and I had the sense to know that the event 
was of great importance to me. I had been 
told, young as I was, that I should come in 
for my uncle's property ; and my juvenile 
notions of my own dignity and grandeur 



A Confidence hy the Way. 123 

sprouted pretty freely. I was ordered 
home for the holidays by a short letter 
from my uncle, in which he informed me 
that I was to be introduced to my aunt, 
and that he hoped I would so con-^ 
duct myself as to merit her goodwill and 
regard." 

" Which you did not do, I presume." 
*. Precisely ; which I did not do. The 
first thing I perceived when I arrived at 
Bevis, on that memorable occasion, was 
that the house was much finer than it had 
been; new furniture, new pictures, all 
sorts of beautiful things that I had never 
seen, changed its old aspect, and the whole 
thing was on a bigger and more imposing 
scale. I afterwards came to know that 
my uncle's wife had a large fortune of hei* 
own; that he ha4 been engaged to her 
many years before, when they were both 
young, and something had happened te 
prevent the marriage . a lover's quarrel 
of some sort. They did not meet for 
years ; but, when they met, the old state 
of things revived, and they were married* 



s 



124 AU^ or Nothing. 

I enjoyed myself very much that first 
time. There were horses,, and dogs, and 
new faces, though no more visitors than 
before ; and my uncle and Mrs. Drummond 
left me very much to myself. It was not 
till just before I left Harrow that Mrs. 
Drummond showed any dislike of me ; 
she did then, however, and it has never 
varied. She has disliked me, boy and 
man, ever since." 

" And yet, as she had no children, she 
could not feel that you were interfering 
with her in any way ?" 

''True; and I did not give her much 
trouble. In a big house of that kind, 
people who don't get on together can keep 
very clear of each other, and I kept clear 
of her. She is a strong-minded, firm- 
willed woman, and she had unbounded in- 
fluence over my uncle from first to last. 
There was not much prejudice in my 
favour on his part for her to overcome, 
but what there was she uprooted; he 
hardly noticed me latterly, and after I 
went to Woolwich he never once wrote to 



. A Confidence by the Way. 1 25 

me with his own hand. I used to get 
short notes from her, generally to the 
effect that I had better be very careful in 
money matters, for that, if I exceeded my 
allowance, I need not look to them to 
pay my debts; and as I knew precisely 
what I had in the world to come into, in- 
dependent of them . that is, two hun- 
dred a year . I should be the best judge 
of the wisdom of involving myself in 
liabilities." 

" And I suppose, as a matter of course, 
you did exceed your allowance." 

" Of course I did. You are*prepared to 
learn that, naturally ; but you will not be 
prepared to learn that after all those 
lectures and warnings my uncle paid up 
for me ; and it was Mrs. Drummond who 
made him do it.*' 

"I am not at all surprised," said Sir 
Wilfrid, with a smile. *' I rather fancied 
Mrs. Drummond wasn't altogether a bad 
sort ; but only one of those desperately- 
conscientious and straight-going women . 
believers in energy and that kind of thing 



126 All, or Nothing. 

. whose bark is generally much worse 
than their bite/' 

*' Ah I but hers wasn't,*' replied Captain 
Dunstan, with emphasis, "for you know 
what her bite was." - 

" The admiral's will r Eh ?" 

*' Just that. I don't mean to say I was 
all I ought to have been, in any sense, 
and you know I started by telling you it 
wasn't unjust, though it seemed a little, 
or more than a little, hard. Mrs. Drum- 
mond was not a tyrant, you must under- 
stand, but she had a natural talent for 
governing, And my uncle had a natural 
aptitude for being governed by any wo- 
man, except his sister, who would have 
taken the trouble, and so she had the 
upper hand completely; and though she 
made my uncle pay up for me, and start 
me quite clear, she had no sort of com- 
punction about telling him that it was all 
he was to do for me. She thoroughly 
meant it, and she told me so. I cannot 
say I ever had much faith in Bevis coming 
to me. Everybody who knew about the 



A Confidence by the Way. 327 

circumstances, and that there was nobody 
else nearly or remotely related to the 
admiral, took it for granted, and of course 
the tradespeople and the money-lenders 
could not be persuaded to the con- 
trary." 

" It was said everywhere, I know," said 
Sir Wilfrid; ''and I'm sure all the women 
believed it . the mothers, I mean." 

" They never had any reason to do so 
given them by me," answered Dunstan. 
*' I never sailed, during my brief voyage on 
the treacherous sea of society, under false 
colours of any kind. People drew their 
own conclusions ; I did not suggest 
them." 

" I call the admiral an old fool myself," 
said Sir Wilfrid, coolly. .' He must have 
known it was only a case of prejudice ; 
and, if it comes to that, I don't think he 
had any right to leave the whole property 
to his wife . ^for more than her life, that 
is ; land ought to remain in the blood and 
in the name." 

*' You speak with the authority of one 



128 All, or Nothing. 

who was bom an heir-apparent, my dear 
fellow," said Dunstan, laughing, " and you 
forget that my name is not Drummond. 
If I had been a brother's son, the case 
would have been different. Of course, I 
don't mean to say that I at any time quite 
realised the truth that I should never be a 
bit better off than I was when I joined my 
regiment ; I ought to have known it, and 
acted on the knowledge, just as we all 
ought to know such lots of things, and to 
act on them ; only we don't. Well, there's 
no good in dwelling on all that now. If 
my uncle had died a year sooner, and I 
had known for certain how it was to be 
with me, I should have been saved a good 
deal." 

" How ? Had you come to grief 
agam r 

'*In the way of debts? No, not so 
very much in that respect ; but in others. 
People made mistakes about me, and I 
made mistakes about them, and I got 
heavily hit." 

Esdaile listened to his friend with 



V. 



A Confidence hy the Way. 1 29 

quickened curiosity now. Could there 
have been anything more ? he had asked 
himself the day before, when he noticed 
that Dunstan was looking so ill. There 
had been something more. Odd that he 
had never suspected anything, for he had 
seen a good deal of Dunstan from the 
beginning of their acquaintance until 
Dunstan's departure for India ; they were 
in the same set in London, and the one 
had generally known what the other was 
doing during that interval. But Dunstan 
was a reticent man in certain respects . 
never until to-day, in the conj&dence 
induced by their meeting in a strange and 
distant land, had he said a word of 
the real nature of the circumstances that 
had been discussed among their common 
acquaintance in England, in happy ig- 
norance of the facts. And it might be 
that Esdaile had never seen, knew nothing 
of, the lady. That the '' something more " 
in the case was a lady Sir Wilfrid had no 
doubt at all. 

Esdaile thought all this during a scarce- 

VOL. I. K 



130 AH, or Nothing. 

ly perceptible pause, after which Dunstan 
resumed : 

" It was soon over. All the blunders 
on all sides did not take more than six 
weeks in the making, but the whole 
business left me without any heart in me 
to face India and regimental work ; and it 
disgusted me in every way. I suppose 
you can guess what it was that hit me 
hard ?'' 

*' Of course I can . a woman," said Sir 
Wilfrid, with the grave sententiousness of 
an elderly sage, to whom no vagary of the 
human mind or accident of human fate 
can be strange or disconcerting. " Who 
was she ?" 

"Don't ask me that. It was not her 
fault, but I could not expect anyone except 
myself to believe that, and so I must not 
give anyone the chance of blaming her. 
I met her, just as one always meets every- 
body in London, and Well, it was 

all over with me very speedily." Dunstan 
laughed, by no means naturally or easily, 
^' I saw a good deal of her, and it seemed 



A Confidence by the Way. 131 

to me that there never was any desire on 
the part of her father and mother to keep 
us apart ; rather the contrary, indeed. She 
was very pretty and very bright; and I 
had every reason to think she liked me. 
I never deceived her about myself in any 
way . that I could swear; and if her 
parents questioned her, they too would 
have heard exactly the truth. Of course 
I knew that I was the reputed heir to 
Bevis, but whenever that matter was mooted 
to me I always said it was not only not 
certain, but, to the best of my belief, 
unlikely. However, people chose, I ima- 
gine, to believe and represent it as a cer- 
tainty ; and I was indebted, as I found out 
afterwards, to that for the kind reception 
I had from . the lady's parents. You were 
away at this time ; it was just before our 
<5ruise in Singleton's yacht. And, as I 
said before, my delusion had a short life, 
if a merry one. I danced with her at a 
ball one night, and had very nearly spoken, 
when she was taken away by her mother ; 
but I had been asked to luncheon the next 

k2 



132 All, or Nothing. 

day, and I meant to go, and watch for a 
chance of speaking then. I believed, and 
I had good reason for believing, that an 
opportunity would be made for me. The 
following morning came a letter from Mrs. 
Drummond, summoning me at once to 
Bevis. I was not to delay an hour ; my 
uncle was alarmingly ill, and had asked 
for me. The letter reached me at nine ; 
there was a train at eleven ; I packed a 
portmanteau, and then I wrote the words 
I had intended to speak that day. Their 
house was in my way to the station, and I 
left my letter at the door myself, with an 
explanation of my hurried departure. When 
I arrived at Bevis, I found the admiral still 
living, but unconscious. He never rallied 
again, and he never spoke to me. Two 
days later, he died. I was distracted 
with anxiety, as you may suppose. No 
answer to my letter reached me. Accord- 
ing to his directions, the admiral'g will was 
not read until after his funeral had taken 
place, and when it was read, there was no 
mention of me in the document. With the 



A Confidence by the Way. 133 

exception of a few legacies to his old 
servants, and to one or two charitable 
institutions for sailors, the admiral left the 
whole of his property of every kind and 
description whatsoever to the absolute dis- 
posal of his wife. I don't deny that it was 
a great shock to me, but I think I stood it 
pretty well. I shall always be convinced 
that, when the family lawyer left Bevis 
that evening, he carried with him the draft 
of the neat paragraph that appeared in the 
evening papers in London the next day 
recording the death of the admiral and his 
testamentary dispositions, and that it was 
written by Mrs. Drummond." 

" Sharp practice, that !" said Esdaile ; 
^'what did she do it for?" 

'* I don^t know, but I am sure she did it, 
and perhaps she did me an unconscious 
kindness by hastening my fate. I went 
back to London, and received a very civil 
letter from the lady's mother, setting forth 
that, under the circumstances, she was 
sure I would see that the past had better be 
ignored . she did not blame me; it was 




134 All, or Nothing. 

well things had gone no farther. But I 
need not describe the letter. It was per- 
fectly reasonable, and entirely heartless." 
-*' You saw the girl, of course ?" 
" Oh yes ; I saw her, in a crowd. I 
danced with her too, under the indignant 
eyes of her mother, who need not, how- 
ever, have been afraid. She would not 
have had the courage to marry me then ; I 
should not have been fool enough to ask 
her. I thoroughly realised the vast dif- 
ference between its being possible that one 
may be a rich man in time, and the 
absolute certainty that one must always 
remain a poor one. But it could not harm 
either of us that I should know she would 
have said * yes ' if all had been as right a& 
all was wrong. A hang-dog kind of con- 
solation, no doubt, but I found some in it 
and I made a considerable fool of myself ; 
talked, and -afterwards, when there was na 
chance of seeing her, wrote a lot of non- 
sense about winning fortune and her in 
time, about eternal constancy, and the 
chances there might be in the future for 



A Confidence hy the Way. 135 

true hearts. I got a couple of timid little 
notes, without a bit of assurance in them, 
in return, but still I think she really cared 
for me ; what can a girl do, you know, in 
the world of these days, and hampered as 
she is by all the ways and customs of her 
life ?" 

" For that matter," said Esdaile, '* what 
can any of us do ? You would not have 
married her then, if you could . I suppose 
you would not marry her now ?" 

"Yes, I would. Two years of another 
country, and with nothing to do but think 
of her, have changed my mind about the 
comparative wisdom or folly of venturing 
a little. However, there is no use in 
thinking about it. I am worse off, instead 
of better; and even if I do go in for 
coffee-planting and make something of it, 
it would come too late." 

'* She did not pronuse to wait for better 
times, or anything of that kind ? People 
don't, now-a-days." 

'*And she is, though quite charming, 
of her time. No, she promised nothing; 



136 All, or Nothing. 

and I only know that she hasn t married." 
'' See here, old fellow," said Esdaile, 
after a moment's pause ; '* I'm awfully 
sorry for you, but I wish she had married. 
If she hadn't the pluck to stand by you 
then, she wouldn't have it any later, you 
know ; and what's the good of hankering 
after what you can't have? This business 
has been playing the very deuce with you ; 
lending a helping hand to the fever, and 
doubling the boredom of India. You 
won't do yourself any good by going home 
if you've got this on your mind." 

"I know that," said Dunstan, sadly, 
*' and I did not mean to stay a day longer 
in England than I must, to settle some 
business. If I hit this off with Sandilands, 
I shall come but again at once. And now 
you know all about it, and we will talk of 
something else." 

He then began to comment on the beauty 
of the country they were driving through 
with great animation, which did not, how- 
ever, find a free response from his com- 
panion. Esdaile was thinking over the 



A Con^dence by the Way. 137 



little romance of real life of which Dunstan 
had just given him the outline, and trying 
to fit in the names and the characters. He 
and Dunstan had a great number of ac- 
quaintances in common ; he wondered who, 
among them, were the prudent mother and 
the timid, half-hearted daughter in ques- 
tion. The nameless young lady did not 
by any means charm Sir Wilfrid's imagin- 
ation. After a few minutes, however, he 
gave up the problem. 

" They're all alike," said he to himself ; 
^' it's no good trying to identify the parties. 
It's the way of the world ; and there's 
something to be said for it after all." 

Soon after, the scene changed to the envi- 
rons of the capital of the island, and the swift- 
rolling coach bore the travellers through 
the cinnamon gardens . where the Dutch 
burgher families arrayed in white were tak- 
ing the air, the ladies wearing natural 
flowers in their jet-black hair . to the hotel 
outside the walls, which was their immedi- 
ate destination. 



138 All or Nothing. 



CHAPTER VII. 



The Wheel of Fortune. 




HE railway line from Colombo ta 
Kandy has been pronounced to be 
" the most beautiful in the world ;* 
lying as it does through a country which 
combines all the charms of park, garden, 
and forest scenery, with a horizon of noble 
and graceful mountains. Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile and Edward Dunstan, after a 
brief stay at Colombo . where they also 
felt the astonishment that so many travel- 
lers have expressed at the spectacle pre- 
sented by vigorous cricket-playing under 
the burning afternoon sun of Ceylon . 
resumed their journey, and were met at 
its termination by a person, to making 



The Wheel of Fortune, 139 



whose acquaintance Dunstan had looked 
forward with curiosity and interest. 

Very cordial were the greetings ex- 
changed between Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and 
the dark, large-limbed, brown-eyed, auburn- 
bearded Scotchman, who had undertaken 
the management of a portion of Esdaile'& 
inheritance which Esdaile himself had re- 
garded with dismay. The new arrivals 
took their places in a rough-looking wag- 
gonette, and were driven off in the direction 
of the plantation, twenty miles away ; and 
while the employer and employed were talk- 
ing about persons and things far removed 
from the scene through which they were 
passing, Edward Dunstan, after the first 
few sentences that followed on his friend's 
introduction of him to Mr. Sandilands^ 
kept silence, occupying himself with a 
close observation of the Scotch manager. 

The result was favourable, to the mind 
of Edward Dunstan, who was easily sway- 
ed by externals, and rather prided himself 
on " taking to a fellow at once if he wa& 
ever to take to him at all." 



140 All, or Nothing. 

Here was a capable-looking man, he 
thought, with a keen, decisive face, and a 
way with him which conveyed the im- 
pression that he could manage anything 
in the world he thought it worth his while 
to put his mind to. If he had only had 
one of those big chances which come in 
the way of highly-born dunderheads, a 
man with that face, and that unhesitating, 
knowledgeable way of talking, would have 
made his mark in any of the important 
avocations of the world ; but he had not 
been so fortunate, and the next best thing 
was to make a success of a little chance, 
like that which had come to him. 

Here was a man, Dunstan thought, who 
could look through an unsatisfactory con- 
dition, like his, and see what could be done 
with it for the best. Dunstan was a good 
deal given to leaning on other people, and 
the solid independence that expressed 
itself in John Sandilands' face, figure, 
manner, and way of talking, was par- 
ticularly calculated to attract him. In 
the first place he looked the picture of 



The Wheel of Fortune. 141 

health, and that, in itself, was wonderful 
to Dunstan, who could not think how he 
managed it. Ceylon was better than 
India, to be sure ; but, all the same, there 
was always a good deal of fever about; 
and yet he could swear that John Sandi- 
lands had never had a touch of it. Hi& 
steady eyes were too bright, his skin was 
too clear, his hair and beard were too 
glossy, his long, slight, strong hands look- 
ed too cool, and , obeyed the orders of his 
brain too closely, as he skilfully drove the 
horses, that were the best treated animals 
Dunstan had yet seen in Ceylon, for the 
fever-fiend ever to have iced or scorched 
that finely-knit frame. 

The Scotchman was singularly unlike 
both his guests ; but although he had 
neither the merry and prosperous expres- 
sion of Sir Wilfrid, nor the marked refine- 
ment and somewhat pensive good looks of 
Edward Dunstan, he was a finer type of 
manhood than either. Perhaps nobody, 
not even a woman, had ever called John 
Sandilands handsome ; but then it had 



142 All, or Nothing. 

probably never occurred to anybody who 
had been an hour in his company to re- 
member whether he was good-looking or 
not. 

The bungalow was surrounded by a 
clear space of hard-beaten earth bounded 
by a bamboo paling, beyond which were 
noble trees of various species, and in the 
distance on each side spread the *' planta- 
tion '' proper. Though much superior in 
neatness and order to most dwellings of 
the kind, John Sandilands' bungalow, and 
the offices and works in its rear, had a good 
deal of the bare and comfortless appearance 
that seems inseparable from all such places. 
The beauty of the sky, the earth, and the 
climate is enough, or people seem to think 
so ; for the rest, space and shelter are all 
the houses are expected to bestow. 

Cordial relations established themselves 
between John Sandilands and Edward 
Dun Stan before the first day of their 
companionship closed, and the former 
expressed himself to Esdaile as much 
interested in his friend, ready to advise 



The Wheel of Fortune. 143 

him to the best of his ability, and to 
commence, as soon as he should wish, the 
process of showing him how things ought 
to be done on a coffee-plantation whose 
manager means to make it pay. 

" I fancy he would never make such a 
hand of it as you are doing, however," said 
Esdaile, on the day following their arrival, 
when he and Sandilands had been " going 
round," while Dunstan was resting. " He 
lias not the health, in the first place. 
You're wonderful in that way, you know. 
You might never have been off your native 
heath, for any touch of the climate there's 
upon you." 

"My native heath is Glasgow," said 
Sandilands, smiling, " and I was never well 
there. Dunstan would do here as well as 
I, if he neither smoked nor drank, and did 
not take to moping." 

"Ay, there's the rub. It is not easy 
for a man with a big disappointment in his 
life to settle down to this sort of thing." 

Sir Wilfrid Esdaile had not yet attained 
to any very clear knowledge of what " sort 



144 All, or Nothing. 

of thing " the life of a coffee-planter really 
was, but he had not seen anything to shake 
his previous general conviction that he in- 
dividually should hate it. 

*' No/' thought John Sandilands, *' this is 
rather the sort of thing for a man with a 
great hope in his life." And his fancy 
swiftly cleft the barriers of space, and 
showed him, far across the sea, the face of 
a girl, in whose widely different life a hope, 
similar to that which brightened his own, 
burned steadily. 

*'It's not easy," he replied, " for a man 
to settle to anything completely different 
from what he has been brought up to 
expect. I think a bringing up in great 
expectations is the worst of misfortunes." 

** When they're not fulfilled . yes. Dun- 
staxi has stood it wonderfully well; I 
should have gone to the bad all out in 
his place." 

Then they talked of other matters, and 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile did not say anything 
which implied that Dunstan had a cause 
of discontent and heartburning, beyond 



The Wheel of Fortune. 145 

that supplied by Admiral Drummonds 
will. 

The cofEee-plantation in which Dunstan 
thought of buying a share, was at a con- 
siderable distance from Esdaile's, and 
according to the hospitable practice of the 
island, the manager invited Sandilands 
and his friends on a visit of several 
days to him. This invitation suited 
Dunstan's purpose well, and it was agreed 
that he and Sandilands should accept it, 
while Sir Wilfrid Esdaile made one or 
two short excursions, and studied the 
resources of Kandy. After a week, 
Esdaile had had quite enough of his own 
plantation, especially as the manager 
insisted not only upon detailing to him, 
but upon making him understand, every- 
thing which was involved in the business 
of a coffee-plantation. Esdaile felt that 
he really could not stand anybody else's 
coffee, and works, coolies, and returns, 
and had therefore excused himself. A 
mail from England would be due in five 
days ; they would pick up their letters 

VOL. I. L 



146 Ally or Nothing. 

and papers at Kandy on their return. 
Captain Dunstan was indiCFerent to that 
subject, which is always of such importance 
everywhere out of London ; from the neat 
villa in an English county where you can 
only get letters twice a day, and find your- 
self unaccountably bored in the interval, 
though you are always ready to declare 
that the postal facilities of town render 
life wearisome, to the *' station " at the 
Antipodes, where the arrival of the mail is 
the one blessed break in an existence de- 
voted to sheep. Captain Dunstan did not 
expect there would be anything for him 
except bills and circulars, the only docu- 
ments people do not tire of sending, and 
for the sake of dispatching them will take 
any amount of trouble to find out one's 
most temporary address. Sandilands was 
always eager to get his bag, as a man of 
business ought to be. Bsdaile was one 
of those persons who live in a shower of 
letters and papers of all kinds ; a charac- 
teristic of certain young men, occasionally 
of the idlest. He laughed about it, and 



The Wheel of Fortune. 147 

.* _ 

said he should have at least fifty com- 
missions to buy pearls, tortoise-shell, 
amber beads, and models of outriggers. 

" I don't know a more enviable fellow 
in the world than Esdaile/' was almost 
the first observation made by Dunstan, 
after he and Sandilands had parted with 
Sir Wilfrid, and were journeying along a 
terribly bad road, but surrounded by 
exquisite scenery. " He has money and 
liberty and health, and in fact everything." 

''Such a happy temper top ; I fancy a 
man must have that to enjoy even the 
best things of life. No doubt he will get 
a good deal taken in in his time, but he 
will mind it less than most men. Nothing 
will ever sour Bsdaile." 

Five days later, the three young men 
met again at Kandy, and Sir Wilfrid was 
full of the charms and delights of the 
place. He had had a real good time of 
it ; he had met several capital fellows, and 
Mr. Gilchrist had come up there from 
Galle. 

" An extraordinary old man," said 

l2 



148 A II, or Nothing. 

Esdaile, as he and Dunstan were sitting^ 
in the verandah of the hotel ; "he knows 
everybody, it seems to me, though he 
never goes ' home/ as he still calls Eng- 
land, and most people, so far as one knows, 
do not come to Ceylon. A tremendous 
old gossip. He knows all about me, evi- 
dently, a great deal more about my father 
than I know ; and also all about you." 

"All about me!" said Dunstan; "I 
think that's impossible. I never heard of 
him until five minutes before I landed at 
Galle, and I was in his company afterwards 
for about three." 

"No matter, he knows all about you. 
If you had not told me the story of 
Admiral Drummond, his wife, and his will, 
yourself, I should have heard it from old 
Gilchrist. You had some fellow-travellers, 
it appears, who are of opinion that the 
admiral made a deplorable mistake, and that 
even as it is you are an eligible." 

" Oh," said Dunstan, laughing, but a 
little annoyed too; "that's too bad . we 
were very good friends. but " 



The Wheel of Fortune. 149 

** Meaning yourself and the fair Amabel, 
as Mr. Gilchrist calls her, with all the 
seriousness of an old-world novel. I am 
to make her acquaintance when I get back 
to England as the bearer of a lot of shell 
things from Mr. Gilchrist. By-the-by 
the old gentleman said he would look 
round, I mean . " added Sir Wilfrid, cor- 
recting himself, and with exact mimicry of 
Mr. Gilchrist's voice and manner . "he 
said he would do himself the honour of 
calling on me to-day, and would hope to 
have the pleasure of seeing my friends." 

At this moment, John Sandilands, with 
his hands full of letters, and followed by 
a native servant who carried a thick parcel 
of similar documents and a bundle of 
newspapers, entered the verandah. 

" Not a bad bag," he said, as he deposit- 
ed his papers upon one of the little tables. 
'' Heaps of newspapers and letters for you, 
Sir Wilfrid " . the servant laid them on 
the table between Esdaile and Dunstan . 
*' and something blue and business-like for 
you, Dunstan. Will you inspect them 



150 All, or Nothing. 

here? We have it all to ourselves."^ 
The verandah was indeed occupied only 
by their three selves for the moment. 
John Sandilands spread out his letters in 
an orderly fashion, and began to work 
through them methodically. There was^ 
however, one which he did not open on 
the present occasion. A quick glance 
had satisfied him that this particular letter 
was among the contents of the packet 
destined for him ; he picked it out, and 
put it away for enjoyment at a quiet time,, 
when he should have mastered the busi- 
ness matters that the mail had brought 
him. 

"Now for the commissions and the 
circulars/' said Sir Wilfrid, as he picked 
up a handful of letters, and letting them 
fall through his fingers again, detained 
one at random. 

The missive for Dunstan was addressed 
in a hand which he did not recognise, and 
he took it up with absolute unconcern. 
The contents of the blue linen-lined cover 
proved to be a brief communication from 



The Wheel of Fortune. 151 

a solicitor in London, with whom he was 
not acquainted, to the efEect that, pursuant 
to instructions received, he had to inform 
Captain Dunstan of the decease, at Bevis, 
Suffolk, of the widow of the late Admiral 
Drummond ; and also of the fact that the 
deceased lady had bequeathed to Captain 
Dunstan all the property of every kind left to 
her by her late husband. A thin letter in a 
black-bordered envelope was enclosed in 
the lawyer's calm and curt epistle, but 
it fell to the ground unnoticed as Ed- 
ward Dunstan read again and again 
the few lines that had changed his fate. 
They ended with an assurance of Mr. 
Cleeve's readiness to carry out any instruc- 
tions with which he might be favoured by 
Captain Dunstan. 

Many feelings, or rather vague sensa- 
tions, passed over Edward Dunstan . sur- 
prise, pleasure, the excitement of a great 
event, a sudden sense of change, bewilder- 
ing and almost oppressive . and yet under 
which he was conscious of a strange 
prevision of every detail of his daily life 



152 All, or Nothing. 

which would be afEected by that change ; 
yet rising above them all there was a 
sense of incredulity. This thing could 
not be : the reversal of all that had befallen 
him at the most important period of his 
life, the repeal of the sentence that had 
shut him out from the paradise of rich 
men, the sheathing of the flaming sword 
that barred him from its gates, could not 
have come to pass. He looked up from 
the letter; he passed his hand over his 
eyes, like one light-headed. For the 
moment nothing was distinct that was 
near and actual. With the wonderful 
velocity of thought and imagination he had 
sped to England ; he saw the old familiar 
scenes that had grown so unfamiliar to 
him of late ; he saw the days of his boy- 
hood, the face of his dead mother, the 
broad lands, of which he was now the 
owner ; the scenes, dreary and monoton- 
ous, of his life in India. And all this 
in a speck of time so brief that it was 
the exclamation to which he gave utter- 
ance, as his eyes took in the meaning of 



The Wheel of Fortune. 153 



the lawyers letter, that attracted the 
attention of Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and John 
Sandilands. 

" What's the matter ?" asked the former, 
quickly. " Anything wrong, Dunstan ?" 

"Nothing wrong, but something very 
strange and surprising. I can hardly 
believe it ; but Mrs. Drummond is dead . 
and " 

"And she has left the place and the 
money to a hospital, or her lapdog ?" 

" She has left the place and the money 
to me I" 

** No V exclaimed Esdaile, starting up, 
and clapping his hand on Danstan's 
shoulder. " You don't mean it ! My dear 
fellow, what splendid news !" 

" I do mean it ; though I don't quite be- 
lieve it." And Dunstan read Mr. Cleeve's 
letter aloud. 

" There's no doubt about it," said John 
Sandilands. "Nothing could be more 
certain, more sweet, or more short than 
that communication. I congratulate you 
heartily." 



154 All, or Nothing. 

"It's rather puzzling, though," said 
Dunstan; ''what made Mrs. Drummond 
change her mind ?" 

" Ah," said Sandilands, with a coinical 
look, " now you are unreasonable. It i& 
much more pleasant than puzzling. The 
old lady may have had scruples of con- 
science.'' 

" Scruples !" said Dunstan. "Not she. 
Indeed, why should anyone, in her place, 
have had any scruples ? The Admiral was 
in his right. I am glad I told you so, 
Esdaile, before this strange thing came to 
pass. The strangeness of it passes all the 
appearance of it, I assure you, odd as that 
is, for Mrs. Drummond never liked me; she 
never even tried to like me, at a time when 
it might have pleased my uncle if she had 
tried. It was the only thing she ever 
neglected to do that could have pleased 
him, I do believe, for she was a model 
wife; that I had sense enough to know 
at the time. Afterwards, it would not have 
mattered. The Admiral saw everything 



The Wheel of Fortune. 155 

through her eyes, and heard everything 
with her ears. Never mind; he might 
have done worse." 

''Hardly in your case, though you can 
certainly afford to forgive him now,'^ 
said Sandilands ; '' she has, however, made 
reparation, and very apropos. I should, 
however, imagine that she did not act on 
an impulse in this matter. Depend on it, 
you have been her chosen heir all thia 
time." 

" No, you are wrong ; though that no- 
tion must seem to everybody except 
myself the most reasonable and likely. 
But I have reason to know that she never 
intended to do anything for me. Mrs. 
Drummoud was not a pleasant person, but 
she was one of the most truthful and up- 
right women in the world, and she would 
not have allowed me, for any motive of 
dislike on her own part, to be misled all 
this time about my future, and to do the 
things I have had to do, under the obliga- 
tions of no expectations at all, if she had 



156 AU, or Nothing. 



meant all along to make me her heir." 
** When did you see her last ?" asked 
Esdaile. 

*' Once only since the time I told you 
of, after the Admiral's death. She sent 
for me, and I went to Bevis for a week. 
We were perfectly frank with one another. 
She told me on that occasion I had nothing 
to expect from her, and I told her I had 
never formed any expectations. She 
requested me to remain a few days at the 
old place, and I did so. It was very stiff 
and very slow, but she meant a kindness, 
or at all events a civility, and 1 believe I 
wanted to show her that I was not so 
much cut up by my ill-luck as might have 
been expected. I daresay Mrs. Drummond 
thought better of me on that occasion 
than she had ever thought before ; but, if 
she did, she did not express her senti- 
ments. We parted very civilly, and I left 
Bevis with a firm belief that I should 
never see the place again. So that, you 
see, I am in a position to assure you, 
Sandilands, that this is not a decision 



The Wheel of Fortune. 157 

taken beforehand, and concealed out of 
any fanciful motive, such as administering- 
to me a good lesson in self-reliance, or 
patience, or any of the virtues in which 
the old lady very correctly believed me 
to be sadly deficient." 

" Yes," said Sandilands, " I see we must 
abandon that solution, which has both 
reason and a bit of romance in its favour. 
But what did you expect she would do 
with the place ?" 

When John Sandilands asked this ques- 
tion, Esdaile was occupied in gathering up 
from the floor a number of his own letters 
and papers, scattered by the vigorous 
movement with which he had welcomed 
Dunstan's first startling announcement* 
He collected the stragglers, crammed 
them into his pocket, and backed Sandi* 
lands' question with the remark : 

'* Ah, yes, by-the-by, I have always for- 
gotten to ask you that." 

"That is just what I cannot tell you* 
Mrs. Drummond had no sisters, brothers, 
nephews, or nieces, and if she had any 



158 All, or Nothing. 

more distant relatives, I never knew it. 
She was very kind to the people about, 
and liberal to the local institutions, as 
they call them ; gave the parson any sub- 
scriptions he wanted, and all that kind 
of thing ; but I don't think she went in 
for hospitals or big charities, and it never 
seemed likely she would do anything in 
the Peabody line. The fact is, I did 
not think about the matter at all. When it 
was quite plain that Bevis was not to be 
mine, I did not trouble myself about 
whose Bevis was to be. Besides, she was 
a hale . old lady, likely to live a thousand 
years, and so she might have done, and 
welcome for me. It was the Admiral who, 
though I always maintained that he was 
in his right, gave me the unkindest cut of 
all, not Mrs. Drummond." 

'' Well," said Esdaile, cheerily, '' it's all 
square now ; and you are not much the 
worse. How odd you must feel it, old 
fellow, don't you ?" 

''I hardly know how I feel it yet; 
rather as if I were asleep, and, as Mark 



The Wheel of Fortune. 159 



Tapley says, *dreamm too pleasant to 
last.' " 

"The responsibilities of landed pro- 
prietorship," remarked John Sandilands, 
*'will very soon come to you with the 
sober certainty of waking bliss. I sup- 
pose," he added, drily, " the negotiations 
for a share in Perkins's plantation are not 
to be proceeded with ?" 

Dunstan laughed. " No, I think not. 
How seriously we were discussing it only 
this morning," he said ; " and all the time 
we were up there this news was on its' 
way. How little we ever know about 
ourselves or anybody else ! I am aware 
that I am making a most common-place 
observation, but that sort of thing does 
come very strongly to one's mind now and 
then. I suppose," he added, "I must 
instruct this Mr. Cleeve, as he calls it, 
without delay ; though I don't exactly know 
what he means." 

" He means, I take it, that you are ex- 
pected to make it known when you intend 
to return to England and take possession. 



160 All, or Notliing. 

You can write by the Messageries boat, 
you know, the day after to-morrow. Your 
letters must be ready for the morning." 

Esdaile had been leaning thoughtfully 
over the rail of the verandah, while Dun- 
stan and Sandilands exchanged these few 
sentences. He now turned his head, and 
spoke in a half- whisper : 

" Here's old Gilchrist coming along, all 
in white, and apparently as cool as a 
cucumber in northern climes. I wonder 
if he knows this particular bit of news ?" 
. " I would rather not have to talk to him 
just now," said Dunstan, retreating on the 
inner side of the verandah. "Don't say 
anything to him if you can help it. I'll 
go and think over my ' instructions ' to Mr. 
Cleeve." 

" He takes it pretty coolly, doesn't he ?" 
said Sandilands. " It is the strangest turn 
of the wheel of fortune that ever came un- 
der my own observation; the strangest 
thing I ever heard of, out of a book." 

"It is an astounding and stunning 
event ; but, my dear fellow, we, being 



The Wheel of Fortune. 161 

Englishmen and superior to the eoiotions, 
are neither astounded nor stunned by any- 
thing that befalls ourselves or other people. 
Pm uncommonly glad though; it's a splen- 
did bit of luck for Dunstan. A better bit 
of luck than you know of, as I remember 
now ; it means more than an estate." 

" What more ?" 

" A wife. Only woman he ever loved ; 
parted by the frown of fortune : re-united 
by her smile ; reward of constancy ; that 
kind of thing. How d'ye do, sir, very glad 
to see you." 

And Sir Wilfrid Esdaile advanced, with 
a pleasant deference which was one of the 
charms of his manner, to meet the old 
civilian, who was ushered into the verandah 
by a profusely polite native. 

After a little talk with Mr. Gilchrist, 
who had not yet heard the news of the 
change in Captain Dunstan's fortunes, and 
was evidently sorry to have missed an 
opportunity of bearing further testimony 
to his own admiration of the fair Amabel, 
John Sandilands also retired, and, on the 

VOL. I. M 



162 All, or Koihing, 



conclusion of Mr. Gilchrist's visit, Sir 
Wilfrid Esdaile was left alone with his 
English newspapers. They were of vari- 
ous dates, and he found a good many bits 
of intelligence, fashionable and otherwise, in 
them, which interested him ; among others, 
the announcement of the death of Mrs. 
Drummond, of Bevis. 

" After all it's very consoling and assur- 
ing to see it in print," said Sir Wilfrid to 
himself, without meaning any malice or 
ill-will to the deceased lady by the reflec- 
tion. And then he folded the newspaper 
with that particular paragraph conveni- 
ently arranged to meet the eye, in order 
that he might give Edward Dunstan the 
satisfaction of seeing it also, and opened 
a journal of a few days' later date. 

" So Lady Eosa has made her game at 
last," was Sir Wilfrid Esdaile's comment- 
ary upon something he saw there. " It 
must b*e a better thing for the girl than 
home. They say Thornton's a good 
fellow ; but I should never have thought 
she would have fancied him. Very likely 



The Wheel of Fortune. 163 

she didn't . ^if Lady Eosa did, it would do 
just as well. And Tom Dillon, too; I 
didn't think that was to be till winter 1 
Poor fellow, he was awfully in love, but he 
did look dismal when he told me how his 
Lucy had insisted on his giving up cigars 
and steeplechasing." With these, and 
sundry similar comments, did Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile peruse the passing record of the 
world from which he was undergoing a 
temporary separation. He knew almost 
everybody who was anybody, and there 
was a good deal of news afloat. His news- 
papers amused him very well until dinner, 
when the three young men met again, and 
Esdaile asked Dunstan whether he had 
written his letters. Dunstan said yes, 
they were all ready. 

"And how have you instructed Mr. 
Cleeve ?" 

" That I will give him my instructions 
in person, with as little delay as possible. 
I wish you could go home with me, Esdaile. 
It will be such dull work to go down to 
Bevis all alone." 

M 2 



164 All, or Xothing. 



*' I don't mind if I do," said Sir Wilfrid, 
in his light-minded way; "it would be 
good fun to see you as the man in posses- 
sion, and I can come out again any time. 
Besides, youVe quite done with me, Sandi- 
lands, haven't you ?" 

" Yes," returned John Sandilands, drily^ 
"from a business point of view, I have 
quite done with you ; and, I am bound to 
say, you were easily exhausted." 

"Then that's settled," said Dunstan; 
and the little party made a very pleasant 
evening of it. Dunstan, upon whom the 
excitement of the day had told, for all hi 
" cool " taking of its great event, left the 
others early, and they found many subjects 
of discussion ; among others, what Sir 
Wilfrid called "the Chumleigh marriage," 
when, by a casual observation, he dis- 
covered that John Sandilands had been 
informed by a correspondent of all the 
details of that event. 

"Are you acquainted with Colonel 
and Lady Eosa Chumleigh?" asked John 
Sandilands, apropos of a remark of Es- 



The Wheel of Fortune. 1 65 

dalle's upon the marriages of the season. 

" Yes ; I know them very well." 

''Lady Rosa's rather a Tartar, isn't 
6he ?" 

" Crim! I should say," assented Bsdaile, 
with emphasis ; " I never was so much 
afraid of anyone in my life ; and I never 
pitied anyone more than the Colonel. Poor 
old boy ! Do you know them ?" 

*' No, I know a good deal of them, in 
a way that I mean to tell you about. Miss 
Chumleigh's is one of the matches of the 



season." 



** So I see. I don't know much of 
Thornton, beyond what everybody knows, 
that he is very rich. She is an uncommonly 
pretty girl, and very nice. I had not 
heard of the engagement, so I suppose the 
affair was arranged, and got over, at the 
usual speed. But how do you come to 
be interested about the Chumleighs ?" 

Sir Wilfrid's curiosity was excited by 
the apparent anomaly of any relations 
between people of such widely-parted 
worlds as those of the Chumleighs and 



166 All^ or Nothing. 



John Sandilands, respectively ; and he 
expressed this sentiment so frankly that 
John at once told him the truth. Bsdaile 
was evidently in the way of love confi- 
dences just then ; first Dunstan's, and now 
Sandilands' ! He listened to his friend'& 
story with his usual hearty sympathy, and 
expressed very warm admiration of Miss^ 
Carmichael. 

'* Of course you understand, since you 
h^ve the pleasure of Lady Rosa's acquaint- 
ance," said John, when he had concluded 
his simple narrative, ''why it is that wa 
keep it all dark for the present, and that, 
so far from its being a breach of duty ta 
her uncle, it is really the very best thing 
Julia can do in his interests. She is the- 
greatest comfort . 



i> 



" Alleviation," suggested. Sir Wilfrid. 

'* Well, alleviation, then, he has in his. 
life, especially since Miss Chumleigh's mar- 
riage, and she could not stay in the house, 
if she opposed Lady Rosa openly." 

"Certainly not," said Sir Wilfrid, with 
energetic assent. 



The Wheel of Fortune. 167 

" So . ^there it is you see " John 

Sandilands paused, and then resumed, 
with a touch of emotion which became 
him very well ; " and you also see the fiill 
extent of what you have done for me. I 
have always wished that you should know 
it; it seemed ungrateful to leave you 
ignorant of the so much larger share of 
my obligation to you." 

Sir Wilfrid of course received this 
acknowledgment with the guilty embar- 
rassment of his class and nation, and got 
it over by a burst of congratulation, and 
a jesting remark, that John's remarkable 
resignation to the lot of a coffee-planter in 
Ceylon was not now so mysterious in his 
eyes as it had been before the great secret 
was imparted to him. 

They had a great deal to say about 
the fair cousins. As for the Thorntons, 
Sir Wilfrid opined that it would be all 
right. 

" You see," he said, with an air of great 
wisdom, ** if one goes in for money at the 
beginning, and there's lots of it, one doesn't 



168 All, or Nothing, 



get disappointed ; but it's not so safe with 
love . at least, not unless such a fellow as 
you, and such a girl as Miss Carmichael, 
are the parties to the other bargain." Sir 
Wilfrid hastened to add this admission 
with a confused consciousness that he had 
largely departed from the romantic stand- 
point of his recent utterances. 

The last waking thought of Edward 
Dunstan that night was : '' My darling, 
my darling, it has not been so very long 
to wait for me, after all !" 



^^ England^ Home, and Beauty '^ 169 




CHAPTER VIII. 

^^ England^ Home, and Beauty.'' 

OTH Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and Edward 
Dunstan would have been not a 
little surprised had they known 
that John Sandilands did not regard the 
news of Dunstan's unexpected good for- 
tune as a subject of unmixed congratula- 
tion. He liked Dunstan, though with a 
liking in which there lurked, unconsciously, 
just a little contempt ; and he had come, in 
much less time than it usually took him 
to add a fresh interest or a new occupation 
to his life, to feel solicitude about Dun- 
stan's future, and to wish to have a hand 
and a place in it. 

The young Scotchman's training and 



i 



170 All, or Nothing. 



experience had been entirely different from 
anything in the lives of the other twa 
young men that could be called trainings 
or that really was experience. He re- 
garded them as beings apart from the 
rules or theories of life as thej affected 
himself; as persons who had not had a 
chance of getting at the realities of things, 
and who were not to blame if they were 
content with sham and surface. For Sir 
Wilfrid Esdaile he had an elder-brotherly 
affection, of that old-fashioned kind which 
regards human relationships as real re- 
sponsibilities, and invests them with genu- 
ine respect. And, besides, if there were 
a subject in the world, in addition ta 
that of Julia Carmichael, on which the 
business-like, slow-spoken Scotchman gave 
the reins to his fancy and his feelings, it 
was his estimate of Sir Wilfrid Esdaile, 
and his belief in him as a favourite of 
fortune. 

Nothing could be too bright or too good 
for the friend whom he had known and loved 
from his own boyhood, whose lines had 



^' England^ Home, and Beauty'' 171 

lain in such different places from his own, 
and whose first impulse, when the power 
of wealth and independence became his, 
had been to give his friend the chance 
from which the circumstances of his life 
had previously debarred him. Nothing: 
not the heights of power . though John 
Sandilands was too wise, even in his 
enthusiasm, to think that it was in Esdaile 
to scale these . ^not the most brilliant social 
glories, not the friendship of the noblest of 
men, nor the love of the best of women I 
The latter most excellent thing John 
Sandilands used to think, sadly, might 
indeed be denied to his friend and hero, 
because there would be so little chance of 
testing it. The woman whom Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile should love and choose would be so 
fortunate, so far removed from doubt or 
trouble, that there could be no sacrifice . 
such as brings out the worth of the true 
character, or exposes the worthlessness of 
the false . no trial of constancy or patience 
to test her. Not to a prince in a fairy 
tale had things been easier and brighter 



172 All or XoAinq. 



hitherto than to Sir Wilfrid Esdaile ; and 
no shadow threatening change was cast 
from any quarter of his sky upon that 
brightness. The ease, frankness, and 
generosity of his disposition were in 
themselves elements in his safety from 
some of the worst of mortal ills. 

Sir Wilfrid Esdaile would never have to 
work and wait for the woman he might 
come to love, as John was working and 
waiting for Julia Carmichael ; and for him, 
doubtless, it was well. Such working and 
waiting would not have a charm for him, 
as they had for the sturdy and self-suffic* 
ing character of John Sandilands, to 
whom a life of ease and pleasure, such as 
he saw young men of the upper classes 
well content with, would have been in- 
tolerable. Had he been placed in circum- 
stances like theirs, John Sandilands had 
often thought, provided with a ready-made 
fortune and an inherited position in society, 
he must needs have broken those feather 
bonds which would have held and subdued 
his spirit like prison fetters, and cut out 



" England, Horiie, and Beauty ^ 1 73 

work and a career for himself somewhere, 
even though it were in the wildest regions 
of the world . probably there, indeed, in 
preference, because the rebound from in- 
tolerable restraint would have been most 
effectual. 

That Sir Wilfrid Esdaile did not evince 
any inclination to break these same bonds, 
but, on the contrary, was well content to 
lead the thistle-downy life of a man of 
fashion and pleasure, did not alter Sandi- 
lands' feeling about him. There was 
another side to his character, and that 
side he turned to his friend. The bit of 
serious purpose involved in his going out 
to Ceylon to inspect his property there 
was something . a decided step in the 
right direction. And John Sandilands 
persisted in believing, on the evidence of 
it alone, that Sir Wilfrid was really be- 
ginning to take life a little more seriously ; 
though Sir Wilfrid himself had assured 
him that it was not the plantation, but 
John Sandilands, he had come out to visit. 

In Dunstan's case all the circumstances 



174 All^ or Nothing. 



were different. Here was a man who had 
been hit hard by fate, full between the 
.yes, and might be very much the better 
for the blow. Not the sort of man, as 
John Sandilands read him off, in a quietly- 
observant fashion. he had, to be but little 
harmed bj having it his own way in life, 
but, on the contrary, likely to be one of 
the " nothing much " class under such 
circumstances. 

" There might have been a lot of work 
in him . and that mostly good," reflected 
John Sandilands, as he put away his 
papers, on the night after the news had 
reached the friends, " if this whimsical old 
lady had left her property to a hospital ; 
as it is, he will be no better and no worse 
than other idle rich men. Pernicious crea- 
tures, for the most part !" 

Julia's letter gave him food for thought 
of other than the lover-like kind. It 
abounded, indeed, in the delightful as- 
surances he longed for, and in the hopes 
he shared, and which kept up his courage 
and his spirits in the solitude of his ordi- 



" England^ Home^ and Beauty'^ 175 

nary Kfe ; but it troubled him too. He 
knew nothing at all of the people with 
whom Julia lived except through Julia's 
own report of them ; but she was clever 
in her way, and had the far from common 
faculty of conveying distinct ideas by her 
descriptions. John Sandilands knew how 
large a part her cousin Laura filled in 
Julia's life ; he knew that her share in it 
was next to his own ; and he was inter- 
ested in all that Julia told him concern- 
ing that marriage, which was so little in 
accordance with his own notions. 

One immediate result of the turning of 
the wheel of fortune in the case of Edward 
Dunstan was a great increase of vivacity 
in Sir Wilfrid Esdaile. He was immensely 
interested in the event ; there was a touch 
of the romantic and unexpected in it that 
had a charm for his imagination ; and he 
was heartily pleased on his friend's ac- 
count. Without being in the very least 
heroic in his notions, Sir Wilfrid did hold 
friendship as a somewhat higher bond 
than it is mostly esteemed in these light 



176 All, or Nothing. 



times, and, having no anxieties, and very- 
little business of his own, he gave un- 
divided attention to Dunstan's extraordi- 
nary good fortune. 

When Esdaile and Sandilands met at 
breakfast next morning, Dunstan had not 
yet made his appearance. Of course the 
other two talked about him. 

" Lucky fellow, isn't he ?" said Esdaile, 
** and I had a notion he was one of the 
unlucky ones . people whose cloth is cut on 
the bias, as I have heard that kind of 
thing expressed." 

'' Here comes Dunstan," said John, 
presently, "he looks as if the tonic had 
taken effect already." 

This remark was well-founded. Edward 
Dunstan's step was firmer, his eyes were 
brighter ; instead of the air of lassitude 
which had hung about him he had a 
braced- up aspect, which told of a light 
heart. 

He joined the other two, and they were 
speedily engaged in the discussion of the 
event of yesterday. John Sandilands was 



'^England, Home, and Beauty." 177 

well acquainted with the county of Suffolk, 
and even with the neighbourhood of Bevis, 
but he had never seen that place, nor had 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile ; and its new proprietor 
drew a lively picture of it for them. 

'* The approach is by a beautiful road, 
bordered with thick hedges and pine trees," 
said Dunstan; "and as you come up to 
the great gates . which are not great, by- 
the-by . the huge trees stand like lines of 
giants at the salute. There's a roomy old 
red-brick gate-lodge, almost hidden in 
roses, clematis, jessamine, woodbine . every 
sort of plant that creeps, and climbs, 
and blossoms, and scents the air ; and a 
great shrubbery behind this lodge-garden 
stretches away to long lines of grand 
forest trees on the right. It is a long 
drive through the park, which is not quite 
so flat as its neighbours in that part of 
Suffolk, and the trees are magnificent. 
I don't think I ever saw such Scotch firs 
anywhere; and there are noble beeches, 
and oaks, and elms, and sycamores. I 
made friends with them, each and all, 

VOL. I. N 



178 An, or Xothmq. 



when I was a boj. The house is not 
visible until you are close upon it. A low, 
long, very extensive, battlemented house ; 
the centre more than two centuries old, 
the wings added and added to from that 
time until twenty years ago, when the 
Admiral took a fit of building. It is a 
picturesque house, very roomy and con- 
venient, with a noble pillared entrance- 
hall, a fine staircase of black oak, carved 
and gilded, and a ceiling to correspond. 
Some handsome rooms lie on either side 
the hall, and there is a gallery, with some 
good pieces of statuary and a few pictures. 
I don't know much about pictures, but I 
believe Mrs. Drummond did, and she held 
these in great veneration. In front of the 
house is a wide flagged terrace with a 
stone balustrade; at the back a great 
conservatory stretches over two-thirds of 
the length of the house, and meets the long 
line of hothouses . which are, I believe, 
among the great sights of the county. This 
conservatory . I assure you, Sandilands, its 
roof-drapery of scarlet passion-flower might 



^^ England^ Home^ and Beauty y 179 

match with the splendid blooms in the 
botanical gardens here . opens on the 
park, and to the left lie the flower- 
gardens, surrounded by arched trellises of 
iron, all overgrown with roses and honey- 
suckles. A large space is laid down in the 
softest turf, which the Admiral had kept 
as smooth and trim as ever his quarterdeck 
was ; and there, again, are magnificent 
trees. There's a pinetum, with some 
marvellous conifera . I remember one 
shiny blue beauty in particular . and an 
old-fashioned English garden, which was 
my poor mother's especial delight when 
she was a girl, I believe." 

" Lots of stabling, I suppose," suggested 
Esdaile, as Dunstan paused. 

" Oh, yes. The Admiral knew and cared 
nothing about horses, but Mrs. Drummond 
saw to that department . and, indeed, to 
most others." 

" And a billiard-room ?" 

'* Yes, there's a billiard-room. In fact, 
the place is very complete in every 
respect." 

N 2 



180 All 01' Nothing. 



" Is there a good library ?" asked John 
Sandilands. 

'' Yes, I believe it is a good one. There's 
a fine room, with heavily-carved bookcases, 
all wired in like meat-safes. And there 
are busts, and maps, and globes . the usual 
thing, you know. But I hated the library. 
I am not much of a reader at any time, and 
reading at Be vis had to be done under 
penalties in the Admiral's time. A huge 
catalogue, gorgeously bound, resided in an 
ebony stand on the centre table, and be- 
side it lay a book, in which everyone who 
took a volume out of the shelves had to 
enter its name and the number of the shelf 
it belonged to. There used to be very few 
gaps in the shelves. I am afraid I shall 
rather enjoy turning the library upside 
down ; and I shall certainly burn the penal 
book." 

" Oh no, you won't," said Sandilands, 
"the instinct of ownership will be too 
strong for you." 

" I daresay you'll find room for alteration 
in other directions, however," said Esdaile^ 



''^ England J Home^ and Beauty!' 181 

**and it will be rather amusing. Bevis is 
in a good neighbourhood, isn't it ?" 

" I don't think I quite know what a good 
neighbourhood is ; but if it means lots of 
people to come and take tea on the lawn 
in the summer, I should saj Bevis is that. 
Since the Admiral's death, nobody has ever 
been asked inside the gates, I'm told." 

"Dismal rather, for Mrs. Drummond, 
wasn't it ? 

" Dismal, decidedly ; but her own doing. 
She never cared for society, and only saw 
people because the Admiral liked it." 

"And so the poor old lady lived in 
solitary state in that big house ?" 

" Yes, I believe so ; for I cannot imagine 
solitude being much enlivened by the 
presence of Miss Monro." 

"Who is Miss Monro? You never 
mentioned her before." 

" She was companion to Mrs. Drummond. 
<5uite a lady, well educated, and all that 
kind of thing. She must have had a dull 
time of it too. I never could make out 
that ' companion ' business. Two women, 



182 All, or Nothing. 



with no interests and no associations in 
common, must bore one another so des- 
perately, I should think." 

*' I wonder what has become of Miss 
Monro ; whether the old ladj has left her 
anything." 

" Ah ! that I can't tell," answered Dun- 
stan, carelessly. '*You know exactly aa 
much and as little about Mrs. Drummond's 
will as I do. I suppose, if Miss Monro 
continued with her, she has left her some* 
thing." 

" Miss Monro," said John Sandilands, iu 
the tone of one puzzling out a recollection. 
" Miss Monro, I have some remembrance^ 
some association with the name ; I cannot 
recall it just now." 

''She was a great favourite with the old 
lady, I understood," said Dunstan, ''which 
says much for her. Mrs. Drummond must 
have been difficult to others as well as ta 
me. A more perfect autocrat in a small 
way never existed, I should think, or a 
more obstinate woman." 

" And yet you yourself are a living^ 



*' England, Homey and Beauty. ^^ 183 



evidence of her weakness of purpose, or, 
at least, of her change of mind. There's 
no fault to be found in this instance with 
the exception that proves the rule." 

** I have been thinking over it all, " said 
Esdaile, ''and, notwithstanding all you 
said to the contrary, I cannot help thinking 
the old lady's change of mind was not 
altogether sudden, or her own doing. 
Suppose the Admiral left her a secret let- 
ter of instructions? You say she would 
not have had any such notion as trying the 
moral effect of a little disappointment on 
you, in the way of inspiring you with 
patience and self-reliance, and so forth; 
but perhaps some such notion may have 
occurred to the Admiral, and he may have 
enjoined it upon her. It would not have 
been inconsistent with her character to 
comply with his request under the circum- 
stances, however little she might have 
approved of it, or expected from it, would 
it?" 

Dunstan shook his head as he answered 
Esdaile, who had put this not very im- 



184 All, or Xothing. 



probable supposition to him with eager- 
ness. 

'' No," he said, " not a bit of it. She 
was asked whether my uncle had said or 
written anything about me, and she re- 
plied that he had not. This was immedi- 
ately after his death ; and she then inti- 
mated that her own arrangements .were all 
completed, and no more to my advantage 
than the AdmiraFs." 

"There's no good in any more guess- 
ing about it," said Esdaile; ''the great 
thing is that, however the impulse came 
to her, the old lady yielded to it. You 
have not had a very long spell of disap- 
pointment, have you ?" 

*'No/' assented Dunstan, with a smile 
full of content, " not very long, or, if all 
ends well now, very serious." 

*' Ends well !" said Sandilands ; " begins 
well, you mean." 

" Perhaps I do. The first thing is to 
see to the good beginning, and Esdaile 
will help me there, by coming home with, 
me, and seeing me through it at Bevis." 



''England, Home, and Beauty y 185 

'* He has not looked about him much 
here," Sandilands said, discontentedly. He 
was not very well pleased, although he 
did not blame Dunstan. 

*' No, he hasn't," said Dunstan ; ** but 
the plantation won't run away, and I must, 
and he can come out again. Very likely 
ril come too." 

"Ah," said Sandilands, with a comically 
grim expression, ''that's very likely, I 
should say !" 

" I certainly shall come out again," said 
Esdaile. 

The remainder of the morning was 
passed by the three young men in making 
the necessary arrangements, and writing 
letters. The Messageries boat would leave 
Colombo in three days ; so they decided 
not to return to the plantation. Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile's English servant was sent thither to 
bring the baggage to Kandy, and on the 
second day Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and Edward 
Dunstan bade adieu to John Sandilands, 
and took the train to Colombo. John had 
found time to write to Julia, and the letter. 



186 All, or Nothing. 



then in course of transmission to ber, con- 
tained the following passage : 

'' If I could envy any man in the world 
. but, as you know, I cannot, for no other 
is so blest as I . I should envy Sir Wilfrid. 
He is the best fellow in the world, and the 
happiest. I wonder your cousin Laura did 
not fall in love with him ; she might easily 
have done so, deeper than, by your account 
of it all, I believe her to have fallen in love 
with Mr. Thornton. He is ofE, back again, 
to England now, with Dunstan, just be- 
cause he asked him to go. He will see 
you, as soon as possible after his arrival, 
and tell you of his satisfaction with every- 
thing here, his approbation of my way of 
doing business. T have made him aware 
of your interest in these matters . though 
it was a departure from our agreement . 
because he is thoroughly to be trusted, 
and it will be very nice for you, when hie 
visits at Lowndes Street, to he able to 
speak freely to him. I wonder how 
Dunstan will get on. He takes his good 
fortune very well and simply, forsaking his 



'* England^ Home, and Beauty J^ ]87 

former groove with perfect facility ; but I 
should think he never cared for it, and i 
not a man to be very much in earnest . 
not as you and I think of earnestness . 
about anything. I was quite pleased ta 
find that Esdaile was acquainted with 
your people. He greatly admires Mrs. 
Thornton, but does not seem to know 
much about Mr. Thornton. You give me 
a charming impression of him ; does he not 
find himself out of place among the 
Lowndes Street set? I can't judge, of 
course, knowing them only from hearsay, 
but I should think they are all fribbles 
compared with him. That your cousin 
Laura should have married such a man 
raises her in my estimation. I hope she 
will be very happy ; as happy as you and 
I intend to be when the wheel of fortune 
has made a turn or two in our direction." 

The fellow-travellers had only a few 
hours to spare at Colombo before the sail- 
ing of the Messageries boat, and they avaiU 
ed themselves of the time to purchase a 
number of articles which Sir Wilfrid's 



188 All, or Nothing. 



-correspondents had begged him to bring 
back. They would be agreeably surprised 
at getting the baubles so much sooner 
than they expected, Sir Wilfrid remarked, 
observing, too, that Edward Dunstan was 
now much interested in the wares which he 
had previously regarded with indifEerence. 

" I wonder whether women really believe 
that opals are unlucky," said Edward to 
his friend, as they were inspecting the 
jewel-trays of a certain trader of whom 
they had heard a good character. 

" Tm sure they do," replied Sir Wilfrid, 
^'even if they don't acknowledge it . at 
least, under certain circumstances. I'm 
-convinced, for instance, that no girl, unless 
she were too strong-minded for any man to 
care for, would really like an ' engaged ' 
ring of opals." 

" I daresay you're right." Dunstan re- 
placed on the tray a beautiful scintillating 
stone he had been handling, and smiling 
significantly at his friend's penetration of 
his purpose, requested to be shown some 
cats'-eyes. 



" England^ Home^ and Beauty ^ 189 

'* Shall you do anytbing more in tor- 
toise-shell ?" asked Esdaile, who was labori- 
ously consulting his note-book for par* 
ticulars of a commission ; ** or are you 
satisfied with your inseparable dagger ?" 

Dunstan did not want anything more in 
tortoise-shell, and they shortly afterwards 
went on board the Boxalane. 

The voyage was prosperous. Dun- 
stan had no return of illness, and by the 
time they landed the last traces of de- 
bility left by the fever had disappeared. 
He was indeed thin and brown, but health 
had returned to him ; the tonic had done its 
work. The plans of the friends were of 
delightful vagueness, the perfection of ease 
and liberty. 

"London first, I suppose?" And the 
assent, " London first, of course !" had 
about arranged them. 

A short stay at Havre sufficed for the 
purposes of Edward Dunstan, and it was 
on a beautiful autumnal morning . when 
the slight keenness in the air, the gentle 
touch of change on the trees, the paler 



190 All, or Nothing. 



blue in the cloud-flecked sky, were all full 
of unspeakable refreshment to the mind 
and body of the travellers from the gar- 
ner-houses of the sun . that they stepped 
on board the steamer bound for Southamp- 
ton. The sea was smooth and the boat 
was a good one ; the " run " was unusually 
quick. The two young men were in the 
highest spirits. Dunstan had been talking to 
Sir Wilfrid about the extraordinary change 
that had befallen him, the absolute con- 
trast between the circumstances under 
which he had last looked on the English 
coast and those under which he was now 
approaching it. Numbers of yachts and 
shipping of all sorts dotted the fair expanse 
of Southampton Water, and the familiar 
scene ashore seemed to smile upon them 
as they came nearer and nearer to its 
crowding life and stir. 

*' Here we are," said Bsdaile, as he took 
Dunstan by the arm, when the various 
horrid noises of disembarking were at 
their full height of discordance, "and there 
they are . England, home, and beauty !" 



" England, Home, and Beauty^ 1 91 

The customary crowd of spectators wit- 
nessed the arrivals of the day ; and can 
rarely have been gratified by beholding 
individuals who less rewarded their cu- 
riosity by a miserable aspect than the two 
friends, who intended to remain for that 
night at Eadley's. 

A little later, when the day was closing 
in, Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile and Dunstan were 
looking out of a window of the brightly- 
lighted room on the ground-floor, in which 
they were about to dine, enjoying the 
strangeness, and yet the familiarity, of the 
scene, when an open carriage drew up at 
the entrance, and a gentleman stepped 
out, followed by a lady, to whom he said, 
within the hearing of the two young men : 

" It is late. I hope you have not taken 
cold ?" 

" Not in the least," the lady answered ; 
and, passing on quickly, she entered the 
hotel. 

At an exclamation from Dunstan, Sir 
Wilfrid Bsdaile turned, and saw him with 
a bright excited look in his face. 



192 All, or Nothing. 



" That is she !" he said ; " that is the 
girl I told you about . Miss Chumleigh. 
Only think of her being here ! Who can 
she be with ?" 

He had left the window, and was half 
way to the door, as if he were rushing off 
to make inquiry, when Esdaile stopped 
him. 

** Stop, stop," he said. " Take care 
what you are about. I . I am so sorry 
to tell you; so sorry you did not know. 
Miss Chumleigh is married, my dear 
fellow." 

" Married ! Laura Chumleigh mar- 
ried ?" 

"Yes, she is, indeed. How was it you 
did not know ? We certainly talked of it 
at Kandy. Yes, she is married ; and that's 
her husband with her . Mr. Thornton." 



A Bash Besobre. 193 




CHAPTER rX. 

A Bash Besolve. 

10 the excitemeDt and aD^r of 
Edward Danstan's feelings in tbe 
first fresliDess of the discovery of 
Laura's Msehood, as he persisted in calling 
it, had succeeded a profound depression, 
with which his good-humoured but unsen- 
timental companion found it hard to deal. 
Any man might be excused for being awk- 
ward and at a loss under such circum- 
stances, and Sir Wilfrid was not likely to 
feel less so than another. To him might 
have been applied with appropriateness 
Longfellow's lines : 

" A youth, light-hearted and content, 
I wander through the world," 

VX)L. I. O 



194 All, or Nothing. 



with the lucky difference that there was 
no association with his past which, on 
being evoked, had power to darken the 
face of the day to his eyes, and render his 
life valueless. Not for that reason was he 
at all disposed to make light of the blow 
that had fallen on Dunstan ; on the con- 
trary, he had sufl&cient sympathy in his 
nature to render him pitiful to griefs he 
had never felt, and tolerant of temptations 
which had not assailed himself; but he 
really did not know what to do with 
Dunstan, because he felt that the pithy 

" If she be not fair to me, 
What care I how fair she be V* 

which would, or he thought so, have been 
a powerful argument had the case been his 
own, would not have the slightest effect 
upon his friend. 

Dunstan questioned Esdaile with reiter- 
ation, under which Esdaile's patience never 
once broke down, concerning his know- 
ledge of the matter; and his excitement 
and suffering were keenly distressing to 
his friend, who imputed much of his want 



A Rash Resolve, 195 

of self-command to the weakness of his 
nerves, resulting from recent illness. 
Dunstan had been so different when he had 
been badly hit that other time ; he had taken 
the tremendous '* facer" which Admiral 
Drummond's will had dealt him with such 
pluck and coolness, that it was plain he 
had been terribly mauled by the fever, or 
he would never have given in like this. 
Thus thought Esdaile, with genuine but 
puzzled commiseration, as he strove to 
calm the excited and miserable young man, 
who walked up and down the room, asking 
rapid questions, hardly waiting for the 
replies, and rebelling with every fibre of 
his nature against the cynical cruelty of 
his fate. 

" How it happened that I did not guess 
whom you were talking of, when you told 
me the story, I cannot imagine," said 
Esdaile, after Dunstan had impatiently, 
almost suspiciously, expressed his surprise 
that the truth had so long remained con- 
cealed ; ** for I saw a good deal of the 
Chumleighs, and just about that time, too, 

o2 



196 All, or Nothing. 

I fancy ; but the truth never occurred to 
me. rm sure I might have guessed that 
Lady Rosa would be the very woman to make 
you understand that any advances to her 
daughter under the circumstances would 
be useless, but somehow I never thought 
of her ; and Miss Chumleigh, I must say 
it, my dear fellow, always seemed to me 
to be as perfectly fancy-free a young lady 
as one could see anywhere." 

'' I suppose she was just like the rest of 
them," said Dunstan, pausing for a mo- 
ment in his troubled walk; "and yet . 
no, no, she must have been frightened into 
this." 

''I don't know about frightened," said 
Esdaile, with a clear recollection of what 
Julia Carmichael had written to John Sandi- 
lands ; " persuaded, perhaps. It looked 
like that.'' 

" What looked like that ?" 

" Well, Miss Carmichael's account of the 
business. What a strange thing that 
Sandilands should never have mentioned 
it before you, but should have told me. 



A Rash Resolve. 197 



whom he had no reason to suppose inter- 
ested in it. Stop, though, I remember 
now, I saw the announcement of the mar- 
riage in one of the papers which was sent 
out to me . ^it must have been The Morning 
Postj I suppose, and I said something to 
him. That led to our talking it over ; you 
might as well have been in the room as 
not." 

" Only I was not/' said Dunstan, bitterly. 
^* Only I was to remain a little longer in 
my fool's paradise ; only the good fortune 
I was exulting in, for her sake, God knows, 
a thousand times more than for any other 
reason, was to be made a bitter disap- 
pointment by this deceitful hope. If I 
had known what Sandilands told you, I 
would never have come back to England ! 
If I had even looked at the papers ! But 
my mind was so full of what had happened, 
I looked at nothing, I thought of nothing, 
but the future that was never to be." 

"You could not have avoided coming 
back to England, my dear Dunstan," said 
Esdaile, gravely, " and though it's very 



198 All, or Nothing. 



hard to be hit like this, just as you have 
got back, you must not let it floor you, 
you know. After all," . ^he hesitated a 
little, feeling that his purposed line of con- 
solation, or at least suggestion, was just a 
little dangerous . " she could not have been 
very much in earnest, or she would not 
have been, let us say, persuadable; and 
isn't it rather a one-sided kind of business, 
to marry a girl who might possibly change 
her mind ? Don't get savage. I don't 
mean to find fault with her . girls are so 
bullied in all sorts of ways, especially girls 
with mothers like L^dy Rosa . but you 
might think a little of that." 

"Yes, I might. I might think outright 
what you are trying to insinuate to me, 
that I am better off without a wife who 
could be persuaded into giving me up be- 
cause I had been done out of a fortune, 
and would presumably have married me, if 
the fortune hadn't come just a little too 
late ! That is what you mean, isn't it ?" 

"Something like it, certainly," said 
Esdaile, who was much relieved by Dun- 



A Bash Resolve. 199 

Stan's quick apprehension, hoping that the 
truth might come home to him in this 
way. 

** Not only like it . the thing itself. And 
I daresay you are right, of course you 
must be, indeed, there is only common 
sense in that. A one-sided bargain, as you 
say ; but still, Esdaile, it does not make it 
any more bearable to think of that. If 
she had waited for me, and we had been 
married, 1 should never have known that 
there was any changeableness in her." 

The simplicity of this remark had in it 
something very pathetic to Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile's mind ; he understood from it that 
Dunstan would be hard to cure of the 
wound so suddenly inflicted when hope was 
at its highest. And he also felt that he 
had nothing left to say. 

" Who is this Mr. Thornton ?" Dunstan 
asked. *' I never met him . never saw him 
. that I know of." 

Esdaile told him all he knew about 
Robert Thornton. It was not much of his 
personal knowledge. Thornton was a good 



200 All, or Nothing. 

sort of fellow, he believed, not of their 
*' world" or set at all, and not, Esdaile 
would have thought, in the least likely to 
cut Dunstan out with a girl, if she had had 
fair play. Very rich indeed, he believed, 
all ready money and no encumbrances, and, 
in fact, a great catch for Lady Rosa. As 
for the old Colonel, he probably had 
nothing at all to do with it ; it was gener- 
ally understood that the old Colonel had 
not much to do with anything. 

" No," said Dunstan ; " if we had only 
had the Colonel to square, it would have 
come right enough. He would not have 
wanted to get rid of his daughter just 
when she was most beautiful and charm- 
ing, and the best ornament of his home, 
as these manoeuvring mothers do ; but he 
had no voice in anything, and we should 
never have expected him to assert himself 
and bring her ladyship down on him. As a 
matter of fact, we did not take the Colonel 
into account one way or the other. I 
should not be surprised if he had never 
heard anything at all about me. At all 



A Rash Resolve, 201 

events, he has heard only just what Lady 
Rosa chose to tell him." 

'* There isn't much good in discussing 
it, is there ?" said Esdaile ; " it is one of 
those things which it is quite as well not to 
investigate. I daresay you would find it 
a case of mixed motives, after all, and no 
one quite so entirely to blame as might be 
supposed at first sight." 

** Not investigate it ?" exclaimed Dun- 
stan, angrily. " What do you mean ? 
What do you take me for ? Do you ima- 
gine for a moment I mean to take it so 
coolly as all that? Have you forgotten 
that this means the utter ruin of me ? that 
the good of all that has happened is taken 
completely out of it, and everything is far 
worse with me than before ?" 

''I can't answer all those questions at 
once, my dear fellow," said Esdaile ; '* but 
I really do not forget anything you told 
me, and I do not underrate the effect of 
this disappointment on you. I merely 
mean that it is one of those cases in which 
there is absolutely nothing to be done, and 



202 All, or Nothing. 

nothing to be known. You have got to 
grin and bear it." 

" There's nothing to be done, I grant 
you," said Dunstan, more calmly, his mo- 
mentary irritation giving way before the 
kindly sincerity of Esdaile's words and 
manner ; " but that there is nothing to be 
known, I don't. I am not going to take 
this quietly, without at least knowing how 
it has befallen me. I will not be treated 
thus without at least insisting on an ex- 
planation." 

" From whom ? Do you suppose Lady 
Eosa Chumleigh would give you an ex- 
planation of her actions with respect to 
her daughter, if in reality it is she who 
has either coerced or persuaded her into 
this marriage ?" 

" I don't mean to ask her. Lady Rosa 
Chumleigh may say that she owes me no 
explanation, and have the letter of the 
law on her side ; she and I were fair foes. 
Not so her daughter, and she cannot refuse 
to tell me how it is I have been deceived 
and cheated." 



A EasA Eif^im, "SM 



VtHbale- hearrt aneae isn^rj wnrrfe wink 

ibcsajA &e was Iiccie: srv^n: tsj jmalTOi^ isbiC 
Dccnsfianf ;i W3& sk T^arfrffr w^sk dbxraccar^ 
and sow be wns ^geci tsa r^ftafing^ ur^rtncaL 

Ate. 

not riir*Ti?fe?r ?- bv sbtt Trri^gETTff eaecDr nxaxi- 
aK<L 

'^ TIlq: arg: Terr snron^ wopds.^ &? 
saoi ; ^ are- jaa cptinie: sore- tSissj are- josnt- 
fiaber ? Toa &i sec m&ke in plam to m^ 
that n&e gnrl yaa ^Gfce q. . Hrpg Ctant- 
leigliL as I Tiaw know her to ftaire been: . 
had engaged hBrseSf to jotl.'^ 

*^ Xor hisd 5&e, if by an engagenaenLir vera 
meazi a soIeoicL pnocoise-, forEciaJIr TattX&ie^ 
under peoaElcies; fxxt sbe kzceir I loTed 
her, she led me to belsere t&adi sl^ 
loTed me, aztd if Admiral DroiQaasi&anyi^s 
win had TiffX. beeoi what h wa^ ^e wodid 
hare accepted me. If she did no^ lOBaJb^ 
me a ianoal prooiise, when all had tK> be 
giren upi, that she would wait for me untrl 
better times^ at least she made an imp&d 
promise; she knew in her heart thait I 



g 



204 All, or Nothing. 

went away trusting in that promise, and 
believing that she placed the same trust 
in me ; and at least I will know whether 
this has been her own doing or another's. 
If she has been bullied into marrying this 
man, or if she has done it of her own free 
will, having preferred him to me, at least 
I am entitled to know which of the two 
explanations is the true one, and I am de- 
termined to know." 

'*And then?" asked Esdaile, quietly, 
**what difference could it make to you? 
Would you be any the less parted ? Would 
she be any the less lost to you ?" 

"No, certainly not. But cannot you 
understand, Esdaile, that there would 
be the satisfaction of knowing;. that I 
should not be perpetually tormenting my- 
self with questions and doubts ; that I 
should have a better chance of getting 
over it, if she said to me, plainly : * I made 
a mistake, and found it out. I preferred 
the other man.' " 

"It's devoutly to be hoped she may 
have the sense to say just that, then, if he 



A Rash Resolve. 205 

gets the chance of asking her, whether it's 
true or not," thought Esdaile. 

" If I knew that she had been bullied into 
throwing me over, I don't know what I 
should do, I must pity her so much. I al- 
ways did pity her ; the life of a girl, with 
all the restrictions she must live under 
with a mercenary tyrant like that woman, 
must strike any man as being an awful 
thing." 

*' Certainly," assented Esdaile, heartily, 
" even if he does not happen to care about 
the girl himself ; but it must be the deuce 
and all if he does." 

*' Of course she must have been very 
cowardly, very weak, if it was so ; but I 
suppose no man ever cared the less for a 
woman because she was capable of coward- 
ice and weakness." 

Esdaile shook his head ; but this silent 
sign of dissent passed unnoticed by Dun- 
stan, who went on rather as if he were 
talking to himself than addressing his 
companion : 

*' And if this were so, if indeed she has 




206 All, or Nothing. 



been driven to this, how dexterously cruel 
fate has been to us both, for it must have 
been just about the time that Mrs. Drum- 
mond died. If she had but been true to 
me for a little, a very little longer ! Mr. 
Thornton is, I suppose, much richer than 
I am . how strange the words sound in my 
own ears . but* as between two of us, she 
might have found courage enough to stand 
out for the man she certainly would have 
married not so long ago. That would not 
have been too much to expect from her. 
However, this is all idle ; nothing remains 
for me but to find out the truth." 

''I wish I could persuade you," said 
Esdaile, earnestly, '* that that is as idle as 
the rest; that the only wisdom in this 
matter is to do nothing, and say nothing, 
and think as little as possible. What is 
it you want to do ?" 

" I intend to see her, and learn the 
truth from her." 

'' You can't do it, Dunstan," said Esdaile, 
rising, approaching Dunstan, and taking 
him by the arm. " You cannot do such a 



A Bash Resolve. 207 



thing. Just think what might come of it. 
For one thing, you might get her into a 
dreadful row with her husband." 

Dunstan winced at the word. 

" That's not likely ; the odds are he 
knows nothing about me . has never heard 
my name. I had disappeared from the 
scene long before he came on, remember ; 
they are not likely to have talked of me to 
the favoured eligible. Why should it 
make any disturbance between them that a 
gentleman of her acquaintance, newly re- 
turned from India, requests to be per- 
mitted to call on Mrs. Thornton ?" 

" Why should it ? Well, Dunstan, I 
should have thought you could answer that 
question better than I. You know as 
much of the world as I know, and a great 
deal more of women and their ways. Who 
can tell what may or may not make a row 
between a man and his wife, especially if 
one knows nothing at all about the man ? 
He may have a devil of a temper, in the 
first place, and then, you know, in this in- 
stance, there's the quite certain fact, what- 



208 All, or Nothing. 

ever else there is, that she was in love with 
you, and that she either has or has not said 
anything to her husband about it ; now, if 
she has not, you will put her into a false 
and painful position, and if she has, I need 
not dwell upon the unpleasantness to all 
concerned." 

"And how do you think it could be 
pleasant to all concerned ?" 

** I don't think anything of the kind ; 
but after all, in a matter like this, one can 
only do the best in one's power, and that 
by looking very carefully at it all round. 
If you do that, Dunstan, I think you will 
agree with me in the end, that, both for 
her sake and your own, you had better 
not meet Mrs. Thornton." 

Dunstan made him an evasive answer, 
and Esdaile perceived that he had not 
convinced him, and that, notwithstanding 
his own good-humoured patience with his 
friend, a disagreement between them might 
probably arise from any further discussion 
of the subject. Making a private resolu- 
tion that he would get Dunstan ofE to 



A Bash Resolve. 209 

London as early as possible on the follow- 
ing day, he occupied himself in writing 
letters, and left Dunstan to his meditations 
until it was time for the friends to separate 
for the night. Then he made a final 
allusion to the subject of their discus- 
sion. 

^' Don't think," he said, ''I don't 
thoroughly feel for you because I have the 
coolness of a looker-on . I don't expect 
you to have that . but you will be ever so 
glad hereafter, if you get the better of 
yourself now." 

But Dunstan only said, " Good night, 
Esdaile," and, as his friend went up to his 
room, he turned out of the hotel door, 
and walked away in the direction of the 
water. 

His heart was full of bitterness and 
anger, which extended even beyond the 
cause of his desperate disappointment, to 
his not only guiltless but zealous friend. 
It was all very well for Esdaile to talk 
with such sound sense and cool philosophy ; 
anyone could do that. What did he know 

VOL. I. P 



210 Alitor Nothing. 



about it? He had never had a serious 
trouble in all his life, and though he was 
a very good fellow, the best of fellows, he 
was not an exception to the rule that men 
find other men's misfortunes easy to bear. 
Edward Dunstan, walking quickly under 
the serene night sky, with the sound of 
the sea in his ears and the long low lines 
of the coast lights flickering before his 
eyes, heard nothing on that night, which 
he was never to forget, but the rage 
stirring in his own heart against his fate, 
and saw nothing but the vision that he had 
cherished for so long, mocking him with 
his disillusion. 

A few hours ago, how happy he had 
been ; how bright the world had seemed 
to him ; life, how full of savour ! He had 
said to himself many times since his good 
fortune had come to him, that it was well 
for him he had been so unhappy, well that 
disappointment had come to him in the 
first instance, for thus he had learned to 
appreciate the exquisite pleasure of con- 
trast, to enjoy to the full that satisfaction 



A Bash Resolve. 211 



which those on whom destiny has never 
frowned cannot derive from her smile. 
And now ? There was a bitter derision in 
that smile, and Dunstan felt^ quite honest- 
ly, though perhaps only passingly, that if 
he had heard of Laura Chumleigh's mar- 
riage while he was still a poor man serving 
with his regiment in India, he could have 
borne the blow infinitely better. It was 
the irony of it that now hurt him so ter- 
ribly. And then, as memory has such 
power to torment, it tormented him with 
the keenest remembrance of every look 
and word of her who was lost to him, of 
every hour he had passed in her society, of 
the wordless promises, the airy nothings, 
on which he had built so fair an edifice of 
hope. She had loved him, he swore to 
himself that she had loved him, and at 
least she had intended to be true to him. 
It was not all coquetry, it was not all the 
horrid contemptible falsehood that merely 
played with him, and then availed itself of 
his absence to achieve the purpose of 

mercenary ambition. No, Laura had been, 

p2 




212 All, or Nothing. 

as he said to Esdaile, weak and cowardly. 
She must avow it to him, she must tell 
him the truth; that, at least, she owed 
him. He did not confess to himself, while 
he dwelt in his thoughts on the confession 
to which he was determined, if possible, to 
force her, how large a part in this resolu- 
tion his longing to see her again had ; he 
pretended to himself that he could lose 
love in indignation, bury it utterly out of 
his sight in the anger and the condemna- 
tion that he heaped upon her, even when 
he excused her from the blame of complete 
falsehood ; but it was not lost, it was not 
buried, it was with him living and strongs 
and it closed his ears to Esdaile's reason- 
ing, and supplied the fallacious motives 
with which he justified his obstinacy to 
himself. 

He had taken no heed of time during 
his walk, and stopping at last to look afc 
his watch by the light of a cresset which 
marked some mending operations on the 
road, he found that it was late. He re- 
traced his steps to the hotel, without having 



A Rash Resolve. 213 

decided upon how he should frame the 
message which was to procure him an 
interview with Mrs. Thornton, and, on 
entering the hall, he encountered two 
persons within a few steps of the door. 
One of these was a man of a little over 
thirty years of age, of gentlemanly ap- 
pearance, but with nothing distinguished 
or remarkable about him except indeed 
the full and musical tone of his voice, as 
he addressed his companion, a smart, 
nautical-looking young man, who held an 
unmistakably sea-going cap in his hand, 
though his light overcoat concealed his 
attire. 

" Ten o'clock sharp, then," the elder 
gentleman was saying, as Dunstan came 
in at the door; "you will pick me up 
here." 

" All right, sir. Mrs. Thornton coming 
aboard ?" 

" Not to-morrow. She cannot be ready 



fio soon." 



Dunstan passed them hastily and went 
into the room in which he and Esdaile had 



214 All, or Nothing. 

dined, leaving the door open. Presently 
Mr. Thornton passed the open door, and, 
after pausing a moment to look at the 
barometer on the opposite wall, he walked 
slowly upstairs. 

So that was the man of whom Dunstan 
had caught a glimpse as he stood by the 
carriage; that was Laura Chumleigh's 
husband. Dunstan was incapable of the 
vulgar spite which might have induced a 
meaner man to sneer at a successful rival,, 
and discover that he was elderly and ill- 
favoured. He hate^ the man, no doubt, 
or, at least, he honestly believed that he 
hated him ; but he could not say to himself 
that there was anything contemptible in 
the aspect of the rich '* nobody '* wha 
had won the prize upon which Dunstan'^ 
own heart had been so vainly set. He 
even found himself wondering vaguely 
whether Thornton was a good sort of 
fellow, and thinking that, if he were not, 
he certainly must belie his looks. 

When Esdaile and Dunstan met on the 
following morning, at breakfast, Dunstan 



A Rash Resolve. 215 

was the first to refer to their conversation 
of the previous night, and he did so with- 
out any embarrassment. 

" I am of the same mind," he said, "and 
I have ascertained that I shall be able to 
have my request for an interview conveyed 
to her, without the risk of bringing about 
anything unpleasant, for Mr. Thornton is 
going out somewhere . to some ship or 
yacht. 

" His own, no doubt ; he has a very fine 
yacht, The Firefly here, in Southampton 
Water.'' 

"Ah, The Firefly I That was Miss 
Chumleigh's pet name ; the Colonel always 
called her by it." He tried to speak 
lightly, but he winced again. "Mr. 
Thornton is going aboard with a man 
who was here last night . his skipper, very 
likely . at ten o'clock. I heard him make 
the appointment, and say that she would 
not be ready to go with him. We shall 
see him start from the window here, and 
shortly afterwards I will send up my card 
and ask her to see me." 



216 AH, or Nothing. 



Esdaile did not like it, and his looks 
said so very plainly; but he could do 
nothing. He secretly hoped that Mrs. 
Thornton would have good sense and dis- 
cretion enough to decline to see Dunstan ; 
but, remembering his friend's admission 
that she was cowardly and weak, he 
thought it was hardly likely. 

" I suppose you don't see any harm in 
that course of proceeding ?" Dunstan 
added, in a slightly aggressive tone. 

"No harm, precisely; but it might be 
awkward if you gave it the look of 
watching Thornton out of the way. How- 
ever, she will know best the sort of man she 
has to deal with, and will keep as clear of a 
scrape as she can under the circumstances.*' 

At ten o'clock precisely Mr. Thornton 
was standing in the hall, again examining 
the barometer ; and in a minute or two he 
was joined by his companion of the pre- 
vious evening. Immediately afterwards 
they left the hotel. 

'* Now/' said Dunstan, as he took a card 
out of his pocket-book. 



A Rash Resolve. 217 

'' Stay a minute," said Bsdaile. " You 
must really let jne do a little bit of acting 
here. We must account for knowing that 
Mrs. Thornton is in the house." 

He rang the bell, and put a question to 
the waiter. 

** That gentleman just gone out is Mr. 
Thornton, the owner of The Firefly^ is he 

not r 

" Yes, sir." 

" Is Mrs. Thornton here with him, or is 
she on board the yacht ?" 

" Mrs. Thornton is here, sir." 

"You're in luck," turning to Dunstan. 
*' You really have stumbled on your 
friends. I thought you could not be mis- 
taken. Do you happen to know when Mr. 
Thornton will be in ?" 

"Not till late, sir. Going for a sail, 
sir. 

"That's unlucky," again turning to 
Dunstan, '* as we must be off to-day. You 
had better ask when Mrs. Thornton can 
see you." 

Dunstan wrote a line on his card, and 



218 All, or Nothing. 



directed the waiter to send it at once to 
Mrs. Thornton. The man left the room, 
and during his absence, which lasted fully 
ten minutes, Esdaile and Dunstan did not 
exchange a word. 

The man returned at length with a 
verbal message. Mrs. Thornton would be 
happy to see the gentleman from India in 
half an hour. 



Fools' Paradise. 219 



OHAPTBE X. 



Fools' Paradise. 




Y the time she finds out what has 
happened she won't care a 
straw." Such had been the easy 
and satisfying conclusion at which Lady 
Rosa Ohumleigh atrived on her daughter's 
wedding-day, when she had succeeded in 
preventing her from learning the facts 
that had reversed Captain Dunstan's in- 
eligibility. How much truth was there in 
that conclusion? How much knowledge 
of her daughter's real nature did it re- 
veal on the part of Lady Rosa? Judging 
from Laura's general demeanour, Lady 
Rosa might have been pronounced perfect- 
ly right, and an admirable judge of char- 
acter. This, however, was not altogether 



/ 



/ 



220 All, or Nothing. 

the case; there were other iafluences at work 
with Laura besides the shallowness of her 
own feelings and the beneficent action of 
custom, on which her mother had reckoned, 
to induce her to take things quietly, and 
to conform with a good grace to the novel 
circumstances in which her marriage with 
Robert Thornton had placed her. 

Of course her ignorance of the death of 
Mrs. Drummond, and Edward Dunstan's 
succession to the inheritance of which he 
had been deprived by the Admiral's will, 
did not last long. Almost immediately 
after her return from Scotland, Laura 
heard all about the matter. It would have 
been impossible that Laura could have 
heard of Edward Dunstan's too long- 
delayed good fortune without a certain 
shock of regret . without a certain indul- 
gence in the thought of " the might have 
been " . but the effect upon her of the 
ironical action of fate in the matter was 
divided from identity with its effect upon 
him by all the distance that separates a 
passion from a preference, a purpose from 



Fools' Paradise. 221 

a fancy, and a defined life from a desultory 
one. 

The intelligence had not been conveyed to 
Laura in her husband's presence, and this 
she had regarded as very fortunate . not 
so much for her own sake as for his ; not 
because she was afraid of him . though she 
was so, just a little . but because she was 
learning to recognise and respect in him 
something of intensity and candour, which 
was not in herself, and which she would 
not wound with intention. She was glad 
she had had time to get over the first im- 
pression before she met her husband again, 
and then she began to feel a little surprised 
at the comparative ease with which she 
surmounted that first impression. If 
Eobert Thornton had been a different kind 
of man, not so serious about things, and 
not so very, very much devoted to her, and 
of such strangely romantic notions, she 
would not have minded telling him a bit, 
and the proceeding would have had ita 
advantages, because it would have made 
him understand Lady Bosa thoroughly,. 



222 All, or Nothing. 



and rendered things easier for the future ; 
but, Robert Thornton being what he was, 
it would not do. 

Laura's natural cleverness comprised 
the gift of caution, and the exigencies of 
her life under her mother's regime had 
cultivated that gift, so that even with 
Julia Oarmichael she was not completely 
thrown off her guard. The seemingly un- 
natural circumstance that the two girls 
should have lived so long in the same 
iLOuse on perfectly affectionate terms, and 
that Julia should have known nothing what- 
ever of the episode of Edward Dunstan's 
hopes and disappointment, is easily expli- 
cable. Lady Eosa had said, " I won't have 
this nonsense talked about to anyone ; I 
don't choose Julia to know that such folly 
was ever contemplated ;" and Laura had 
not dared to disobey her. She had not, 
indeed, felt inclined to do so. Laura had 
no gushingness about her; but, at all 
events, she would not have dared; and 
when the marriage between herself and 
Mr. Thornton was arranged, Laura was 



Fools' Paradise. 223 

very glad that the position had not been 
complicated by the necessity for any ex- 
planations to Julia, for she felt uncomfort- 
ably certain that, had any such been called 
for, they must have assumed a palliative 
and exculpatory form. 

Julia, if placed in Laura's circumstances, 
would unquestionably have shown fight. 
She might, indeed, have been prevented 
from marrying the man she loved because 
he was poor, if she had loved a man who 
could have been persuaded to withdraw 
his suit, as Edward Dunstan had been 
persuaded, but her persuadableness would 
have stopped there : she could never have 
been induced to marry a man whom she did 
not love. This Laura felt so strongly that, 
laying, as she did, great store by Julia's 
affection, she was glad nothing had ever 
tempted her to disregard her mother's 
command, and, for the sake of a little 
present sympathy, to render herself sus- 
pect in Julia's eyes. 

To the first feqlings with which Laura 
had learned that, at the very time when she 



i24 All, or Nothing. 



had given herself to another, Edward 
Dunstan had realised all the hopes that 
had been dashed to the ground at Admiral 
Drummond's death, succeeded a speculation 
upon the sentiments of her father and 
mother on the occasion. 

" Poor papa," thought Laura, as she 
dried the tears that had fallen, in no great 
abundance, from her eyes, "would have 
been quite content with him as he was ; 
and I am sure he felt very sorry for both 
of us. He would be sorry for Mr. Thorn- 
ton too, if he thought I should fret very 
much about it. Poor papa ! And he told 
me he hoped I should be a good wife, and 
never give Mr. Thornton cause to regret 
that he had married me ; and I promised 
him that I never would, if it were only for 
papa's sake. But mamma! I wonder 
whether she will speak of him to me. I 
wonder how and when she heard about it, 
and what she thought. I wonder was she 
at all sorry for me, or did she regret that 
she had not let me have a little more time. 
I should think she must have felt a little 



Fools Paradise. 225 

regret, for, after all, my marriage was 
only a risk and a chance then; no one 
could have known how good Mr. Thornton 
would be to me." 

Poor ''Mr. Thornton I" If he could 
have known that his wife called him by 
that formal name even in her thoughts ! 
If he could have known that gratitude of 
a tepid kind was the strongest sentiment 
he had as yet awakened in the heart 
he tried so hard and so persistently to 
win I 

A change came over Laura's mind, how- 
ever, when she and Julia Carmichael met 
for the first time after Laura's marriage, 
and Julia related to her the incident of The 
Morning Post. 

It was at Hansford, where the new- 
ly-married pair proposed to make a 
brief stay. The reception of Laura and 
her husband by Lady Eosa and the 
Colonel had been characteristic. Lady 
Eosa patronised her son-in-law, and left 
Laura to the society of her father and her 
cousin . an arrangement which suited all 

VOL. I. Q 



^6 All, or Nothing. 

i ~ . 

^ parties except Mr. Thornton. He was an 
amiable man, and he had a very proper 
sense of the claims of his wife's parents 
upon him; but he disliked Lady Eosa, 
while he liked the Colonel, and could have 
found a degree of pleasure in his company 
which was not altogether explicable, seeing 
that Colonel Chumleigh and himself had 
no pursuits or tastes in common. except 
Laura . and in that exception was the ex- 
planation of Mr. Thornton's liking for his 
iather-in-law. He knew very well that 
he owed Lady Eosa's patronage to his 
fortune ; he knew that he owed the Colonel's 
kindliness to the Colonel's belief that 
Laura's happiness was safe and assured in 
Tiis hands. 

Laura had arrived at Hunsford in a 
mutinous mood ; which had a mixed source, 
arising partly from the girlish impulse to 
display and assert her independence, and 
to show her tyrannical mother how com- 
pletely she was her own mistress, and 
^'spoiled" by Mr. Thornton, and partly 
from the development of her intelligence, 



FooU Paradise. 227 

which had taught her to understand, with 
most undesirable clearness, Lady Eosa's 
absolute heartlessness in all the transac- 
tions in which Laura had been concerned. 
She was looking brilliantly pretty . she was 
in high spirits, and she certainly did '* show 
off" a little, to the amusement of Julia, 
and the surprise of Mr. Thornton, who had 
never seen any self-assertion about Laura 
before. Lady Rosa, however, was perfect- 
ly equal to the occasion, and she put Laura 
in her place, as she afterwards expressed 
it, with such promptitude that Laura went 
meekly to the rooms appropriated to her, 
with as thorough a sense of being snubbed 
as she had ever experienced in her life. 

Julia accompanied her, and when the 
cousins were alone together they both 
laughed. 

'* It won't do, Laura," said Julia. " And 
you had better take care, or you'll find 
yourself dining at the side-table, like the 
French duchess elect, who didn't curtsey 
low enough to her mamma. Lady Eosa is 
of opinion that ' my daughter's my daughter 

Q ^ 



228 All or Nothing. 

all the days of her life.' Her * don't litter 
the room, my dear, with your things ; keep 
your bonnet on till you go upstairs/ was. 
quite in the old style." 

"It was indeed," said Laura, ruefully. 
" But then," she added, cheering up, " so 
was papa quite in the old style, and the 
dogs, and you, Julia. And I have made 
up my mind not to mind mamma." 

It was not until late in the evening that 
Julia had an opportunity of telling Laura 
about the little incident that had puzzled 
her so much. The cousins were in Laura's 
room, from whose bow- window, luxuriantly- 
adorned with climbing hop and vine, they 
could trace the course of the Colonel and 
Mr. Thornton, as they walked to and fro in 
the shrubbery, by the dull specks of fire 
emitted by their respective cigars ; and 
Julia was brushing Laura's hair . a pro- 
ceeding which was also quite in the old 
style, reminding the girls of those late talks 
which Lady Eosa had so often interrupted 
by her domiciliary visits. 

'*It was so very odd," said Julia, "so 



FooU Paradise. 229 



mysterious altogether, that I have been 
longing to find out about it. I could not 
have explained it all in writing, and so I 
just captured the newspaper, and put it 
away until I could show it to you. Of 
course I did not ask my uncle a question ; 
it would only have disturbed him, and it 
is so awkward to have overheard anything 
that'fe not intended for one. PU show it to 
jou in a minute, when I've rolled up your 
hair.'' 

Then she produced the copy of The 
Morning Post^ and the two bright heads 
bent themselves over it. Laura had sus- 
pected from the first words of Julia's com- 
munication what it was that she should 
find in the newspaper, and she had betray- 
ed noticing beyond curiosity. 

" The paper was turned up so, and this 
was the page she pointed to," said Julia. 
Laura had already recognized the para- 
graph that contained the account of the 
death of Mrs. Drummond of Bevis, and the 
accession of her late husband's nephew to 
the estate. She said, very calmly. 



230 All or Nothing. 

''That must be the paragraph mamma 
pointed out to papa." 

'* That ! But what has that to do with 
you ? Why should Lady Rosa have hidden 
it from you ? What could it have had ta 
do with your marriage ?" 

"Nothing, in reality, but I daresay 
mamma thought it might have upset me. 
I never told you, dear Julia, because she 
forbade me, but this Captain Dunstan 
cared for me at one time, and . and it 
might have come to something only that 
Admiral Drummond left all his property 
to his wife instead of to Captain Dunstan^ 
and so, of course, he could not marry." 

Julia said nothing whatever when her 
cousin paused ; she was literally too much 
astonished to speak. 

*' It was not very wise of mamma,'^ 
Laura resumed, with a little hurry in her 
tone . she had a consciousness of what 
Julia was thinking . " to conceal this from 
me ; she ought to have known that it 
would not have made any difference . 
then." 



Fools Paradise. 231 



"But, Laura,", said Julia, slowly, and 
with a steady look into her cousin's face, 
" did you care for Captain Dunstan ? 
Would you have married him, if you had 
been allowed ?" 

*' As things were ?" asked Laura, with a 
blush, " well, perhaps not. At all events, 
it is better not to talk about it now, isn't 
it ? No good can come of discussing it. 
I am very glad you told me, because it 
was not with my wish that there ever was 
any secret about it between you and me ; 
but we had much better leave it there 



now." 



Julia, though feeling that very little of 
the secret had been revealed, even now, 
could only assent. She folded up the 
newspaper, put it in her pocket, and was 
going to take leave of Laura for the night 
when a sudden remembrance struck her : 

" Laura," she said, ** this Captain Dun- 
stan is the person whom Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile expected to meet at Ceylon; I 
know that from John's last letter. He is 
coming home; you will see him. Tell 



232 A II, or Nothing. 



me only one thing; shall you mind it?" 
Great anxiety, even fear, were in Julia's 
mind as she asked this question, and they 
expressed themselves in her voice. Laura 
was not insensible to them, nor to the 
difference between her cousin's way of 
thinking and her own. 

'* Don't be afraid," she said, taking 
Julia's hand tenderly, and looking up in 
the face that was bent over her with true 
solicitude; "I don't think I shall mind 
very much. When 1 heard this, I knew 
of course that he would come home 
and that we might meet. But he knows 
about my marriage, by this time, and 
he will not mind much either, I dare- 
say. Nothing very tragical ever hap- 
pens now-a-days, you know" . and here 
Laura laughed, an unreal little laugh. " I 
daresay Captain Dunstan and I shall not 
meet for a long time, if ever, and perhaps 
he'll be married by that time." 

"Nothing very tragical ever happens 
now-a-days " . Julia's thoughts repeated 
Laura's words . " it seems to me that 






Fools Paradise. 233 

something very tragical has happened 
already." 

" May I ask you just one thing more," 
Julia said, **and then I will never mention 
the subject again, if you like. Does Mr. 
Thornton know ?" 

" He does not." 

" Oh, Laura ! That is very wrong. 
And it is very unsafe." 

" My dear Julia, excuse me if I difEer 
with you on that point. You cannot 
possibly know Mr. Thornton's disposition 
so well as I do, and I am sure he had 
better never hear anything at all about it. 
Mamma would not allow me to say any- 
thing to him before we married, and I 
certainly shall not trouble his mind now." 

" I suppose you know best, Laura, but 
it seems all wrong to me." 

At this moment the cousins heard Mr. 
Thornton's step in the adjoining dressing- 
room, and Julia, much to Laura's relief, 
took leave of her for the night. 

It seemed all very wrong to Julia Car- 
michael, who had already had her doubts 



234 A U, or Nothing. 

about the safety, and the wisdom, and 
indeed the honesty of Laura's conduct 
in marrying, with so little love in her 
heart for the man with whom she had 
undertaken to pass and to share all her 
life ; doubts whichi had become more and 
more defined as Laura's letters reached 
her, all lacking the tone which Julia's 
own feelings taught her to miss. And 
now, to discover that Laura had loved 
another . for Julia did not doubt that, 
though her direct question had been not 
answered, but eluded . had relinquished 
him because he was poor, and had allowed 
her husband, if not to believe that he was 
loved . she did not think Mr. Thornton 
could be mistaken on that point . at least 
to believe that she was quite fancy-free, 
was a great blow to her. Her different 
bringing up, and her natural rectitude of 
mind, rendered Julia keenly sensitive to 
the want of principle and the essential 
coarseness, which characterised so many 
of the lives and the deeds of the people 
who formed the society among which her 



Fools^ Paradise. 235 

uncle and aunt moved ; but hitherto she 
had supposed her own relations to be 
actuated by motives a little superior to 
those which she plainly perceived to be 
at work around her. To her, the dis- 
covery of cold calculation, fickleness, and 
the absence of anything like an apprecia- 
tion of the sacred ness of marriage, was a 
revelation of profound immorality. She 
did not, indeed, extend the full blame of it 
to her uncle, because she was accustomed 
to think of him as lacking a will of hia 
own, and ruled by Lady Eosa; still, in 
this extreme case, she could not but de- 
spise him. This had all constituted, Julia, 
thought sadly, a very bad beginning ; how 
would things go on, and how would they 
end? She could only hope that Laura 
and Captain Dunstan might not meet \ 
and she could not help wondering a little 
whether Captain Dunstan had been a very 
devoted lover, like Mr. Thornton, or had 
taken his fate with anything like the com- 
posure which she imputed to Laura. 

And then Julia was led by her reflections^ 



236 All, or Nothing. 



as indeed often happened, to contemplate 
her own good fortune, her own security, 
her own exceeding happiness in being the 
chosen of her true and brave lover. No 
hesitation would she have had at any 
time in obeying the injunction : 

Down upon your knees, 
And thank Heaven, fasting, for a good man's love. 

Her attitude of mind was most grateful 
for so immense a boon ; but, as Julia said 
her prayers that night, and afterwards 
looked at the little packet of letters which 
rested always under her pillow, there 
was additional fervour in her thankful- 
ness, lent by the feeling of safety, amid 
surroundings full of insecurity. 

Lady Rosa Chumleigh and her daughter 
had never had much to say to one another 
at any time, and their mutual communi- 
cativeness was not increased by Laura's 
marriage. Laura had plenty to say to her 
father, and the Colonel accepted her gay 
and pretty talkativeness as a satisfactory 
proof that all was right with her. He 
would have liked her to tell him that 



Fools Paradise. 237 

she was very "happy," rather than that 
she was very " lucky ;" for Laura still 
used the phrase that had jarred upon her 
father s ear on the eve of her wedding-day, 
and he would have liked to find her more 
actively and accurately interested in her 
husband's affairs and pursuits ; but Colonel 
Chumleigh was accustomed to take his 
happiness in a cracked and flawed condi- 
tion, and never quarrelled with anything 
short of utter smash. The more he saw 
of Robert Thornton, the more he liked 
him, and the deeper became his sense of 
his daughter's good fortune. Thornton's 
practical good sense and energy were 
perhaps rather oppressive to the Colonel 
individually. He was dimly aware that 
many things might be much better man- 
aged at Hunsford than they were, and 
he entirely acquiesced in the suggestions 
of his son-in-law as the two walked round 
the small domain ; but he felt at the same 
time that they never would be acted on. 
To see that a thing was wrong and to set 
it right with the least possible delay, was 



238 All, or Nothing. 



Eobert Thornton's way ; to see that a 
thing was wrong, to " mention it " to Lady 
Kosa, and, if his observation remained un- 
noticed, to forget the grievance as soon 
and as completely as possible, was the 
.Colonel's way. 

** Thornton is wonderfully clever," 
Laura's father said, more than once, 
admiringly, to Laura, and she answered, 
each time, carelessly : " Oh yes, he is, 
indeed I" But the new and admired son- 
in-law was not clever enough to change 
the order of things at Hunsford, and he 
had little satisfaction in being there beyond 
that which he derived from the contempla- 
tion of Laura's pleasure in the society of 
her father and her cousin. If he had 
somewhat of the feeling of an outsider 
himself, he was generous enough not to 
mind it ; there was less of the strangeness 
between him and his young wife . slight, 
but distinct . that had troubled him, 
vaguely, now that they were in a place 
and among people familiar to her. If that 
strangeness should be conquered, if the 



Fools Paradise. 239 

something that was wanting in Laura's 
looks and tones when they were addressed 
to him, should be supplied by her natural 
pleasure in returning for a little while to 
her old home, he would be more than 
satisfied to endure the rudeness of Lady 
Bosa^ and the dulness of the Colonel. 

. 

There was such a good time coming I A 
time of freedom and delight upon the sea ; 
of dear companionship, and the commu- 
nion with waters, which he had always 
loved ; a time when he should win all his 
wife's mind and heart, and make her see 
the beauty and the meaning of the world, 
as he had learned to see them, dwarfing 
the petty aims and interests among which 
she had hitherto lived. 

Robert Thornton had not, as yet, per- 
suaded himself that he derived from his 
marriage the perfect happiness that the 
winning of Laura was to have brought 
with it ; but he fully believed that perfect 
happiness was to come, and explained to 
himself that it was delayed only because 
the winning of Laura was not absolutely 



240 AH, or Nothing. 



complete. She was his wife, his pride, 
his lady-love ; but not yet his true and 
perfect companion, the other half of him- 
self, as in his romantic and thorough way 
of thinking and of feeling he held she 
should be. That would come when she 
should love him as he loved her, when the 
girl should have grown into the woman ; 
when all that half-childish feeling on her 
part that he was **very kind to her," and 
"so nice about things," whose frequent 
expression jarred upon him, should have 
passed away into the peaceful equality and 
entire oneness of a perfect union. Laura's 
brightness and grace had extraordinary 
charms for her husband; he was never 
disturbed by one small or jealous thought 
as she lavished them on all around her; 
the love she so little comprehended was 
all too noble for such pitifulness as this. 
But, sometimes, it occurred to him to 
wish that he had known more of her own 
particular world, had seen and heard more 
of the subjects that interested her, and so 
escaped a certain sense of his own stupid* 



Fools Paradise. 241 

ity and slowness which troubled him. It 
provoked him that he should have to ask 
her to explain an allusion which amused 
her, or that he should feel at a loss when 
she was talking gaily with the people 
whom Lady Rosa . with a discreet sense 
of the awkwardness of a family party 
where one of its members is a stranger . 
invited to meet them at Hunsford. All 
this, however, was only for a little while, 
and in the meantime it never came into 
Eobert Thornton's mind to consider that 
Laura was as little acquainted with his 
particular world, as little familiar with his 
tastes and interests ; but that the distinc- 
tion between them was that she did not 
in the least regret this unfarailiarity, had 
no wish to repair it, in fact did not think 
about it at all. 

If ever there was love all made of hum- 
bleness and of observance, it was the love 
of Robert Thornton for his young wife ; 
and his innermost misgiving, that which 
he hearkened to most unwillingly, never 
whispered to him anything more formi- 

VOL. I. R 



242 All, or Nothing. 

dable than that if, indeed, all her heart 
were not yet his, it was only because its 
strongest and deepest feelings were still 
sleeping. In time, and only a little time, 
their slumber would yield to his wooing 
voice, his tender and earnest touch; and 
then, then the dream of his lonely, pure, 
reticent, imaginative life would be fully 
realised, the satisfaction of his heart 
would be as complete, though tardy, as 
the fascination of his fancy had been. 

He was a sad blunderer in some ways ; 
lie knew, and sometimes he feared that 
Laura's girlish susceptibility, that perfectly 
innocent vanity which was one of her 
charms, and which, as regarded himself, 
he liked to believe to be a deeper feeling, 
was hurt by his thick-headed want of 
perception. She would receive a dozen 
compliments on her dress, for instance, and 
receive them with such sparkling smiles 
as proved the pleasure they gave her ; and 
lie, who had seen the "lovely" gown or 
the " delicious " wreath before anyone else, 
on whose arm she had come floating down 



Fools' Paradise. 243 

the staircase to delight the eyes of the 
assembled guests, would have been perfect- 
ly unconscious that the " lovely gown " was 
a new one, or that she had not worn the 
^' delicious " wreath a dozen times. 

On the third day of their stay at Huns- 
ford, Robert Thornton, coming into the 
drawing-room rather late, saw Laura 
handling, with many expressions of ad- 
miration, a great bunch of Cape jessamine. 
He drew near, and remarked on the beauty 
of the blossoms. 

" Yes," said Laura, " they are my favour- 
ite flowers, and Captain King remembered 
about them. He got them at Dane Vale 
this afternoon." 

Dane Vale was a show-place in the 
neighbourhood, and the party from Huns- 
ford had gone there that day. 

Robert- said, very low, and bending over 
the flowers : " It was stupid of me to 
forget that you had wished for some Cape 
jessamine ; when we were there to-day, I 
might as well have thought of it as Captain 
King." 

r2 



244 All, or Nothing. 

Laura smiled, her frankest smile, as she 
answered : 

*' Oh, it does not matter, as IVe got the 
flowers." 

The next moment dinner was announced. 
Julia Carmichael went in that day with 
Mr. Thornton, and found him an un- 
usually silent companion. She had ob- 
served the foregoing little incident, and 
she wondered whether her cousin's husband^ 
who certainly did not shine in society, and 
was a bad hand at petits soins, was inclined 
to be jealous ? It looked like it ; and if it 
were so, how could he take it, if fate should 
ever throw Edward Dunstan in Laura's 
path again, and Robert Thornton should 
come to know about him ? Julia was mis- 
taken ; there was not any jealousy in Mr. 
Thornton's meditations upon an incident 
apparently too trifling to be worth a 
thought ; there was only vexation with 
himself. 

The effect upon Laura of her visit to 
Hunsford was to deepen her feelings to- 
wards her husband on the side concerning 



Fools Paradise. 245 

which he was the least solicitous. She 
did feel so immenselj indebted to him for 
having taken her away ; she took such real 
pleasure in contrasting her present inde- 
pendence with her former thraldom; she 
enjoyed so fully every point and item of 
the contrast. It could not fail to occur to 
her that all this might have been achieved 
equally by her marriage with Edward 
Dunstan, if she had only been allowed to 
wait a little while ; and she knew very well 
. ^though she loyally strove, being a good 
gu-1 according to her lights, not to think 
about it . that she and Dunstan would have 
suited one another better than did she and 
Mr. Thornton. The latter was the best 
and kindest fellow in all the world, but 
it was uphill work; she could not deny 
that, and the very best thing that could 
have happened to her was this visit to 
Hunsford, just as she was beginning to 
feel it so; it made her so thoroughly 
thankful for her escape. 

'^ The fact is," Laura had said to herself, 
on the very day of the incident of the 



246 All or Nothing. 

Cape jessamine, ** I am a common-place, 
ordinary person, and I don t want any- 
thing out of the common in the way of 
sentiment; I suppose that must be it. 
And he was just the same; he liked the 
kind of life and amusements, and the 
everyday goings on that I liked, just the 
same as all the rest of the world, and so 
we should have got on splendidly together. 
But Mr. Thornton is a superior person ; he 
really is much better, and cleverer, and 
more serious than I or . he . or, indeed, 
anyone, and that makes him a little . what 
is it ? . tiresome, I suppose I must call it, 
for I don't know any other word that 
says exactly what I mean, though that's a 
disrespectful one. However, I must not 
think of him now, and I am bound to 
hope he is not thinking of me. The old 
lady in Scotland was perfectly right. Mr. 
Thornton is much too good for me, even 
much too good to me ; she was not more 
alive to that than I am now. 1 wonder, 
when we have done with the yachting and 
come to town, whether he will be much in 



Fools' Paradise. 247 

the house, or will find amusements out of 
doors, like other men." 

Laura would have been quite genuinely 
shocked if anyone could have divined 
her thoughts and interpreted them, briefly 
thus : " The truth is, your husband adores 
and bores you." Nevertheless, this was 
pretty nearly true. And Laura might 
have cleared the easy barrier between 
feeling vaguely that it was so, and ad- 
mitting that she felt it, but for the re- 
fresher administered to her memory by 
her visit to Hunsford. How glad she was 
to think that Julia would not have very 
much more of Lady Rosa, and of the sort 
of turnjoil which the "certain uncertainty" 
of her temper kept the house in, to put up 
with ; though Julia minded it much less 
than she did. Next to getting away for a 
walk, or a ride, with her father, Laura most 
enjoyed talking with Julia over her future 
prospects, and planning wedding presents 
on a scale which made Julia laugh. 

" But, Julia," Laura said, gravely, when 
her cousin bade her remember that there 



248 All, or Nothing. 

was some little difference between the re- 
quirements of the wife of a man in Mr. 
Thornton's position, and those of the wife 
of a man in John Sandilands', " that is 
all nonsense. Whatever I have for my- 
self, I should like you to have, and I am 
sure Mr. Thornton would wish the same." 

" So am I," said Julia, " and that 
whether he should be of your way of 
thinking in the matter, or of mine ; for he 
always wishes the same, does he not ? Ah, 
I shall not have such a model husband as 
yours, Laura. I never saw a man so 
desperately in love in my life. And people 
say that kind of thing does not survive 
matrimony. However, I am happy to say 
I never believed that." 

" Well, I don't know," said Laura, slowly. 
" It depends, I suppose, upon people's dis- 
positions. I mean whether they like 
romance, you know. Mr. Thornton is 
worse, if anything." 

" Worse ?" 

" Oh, how stupid of me," Laura laughed, 
"I mean more silly about me, always 



Fools' Paradise. 249 

thinking about me . ^you know the kind of 
thing; and, as I. am not at all romantic, I 
don't think I like it particularly. Of 
course, he is excessively kind and nice to 
me, only . only ^" 

" Only he's too much in love with you. 
That's it, Laura; I suspected as much. 
Never mind ; if there's any truth in what 
people who know the world tell us, that's 
a state of things that can't last. You will 
always have the best of husbands, you 
know, even if he leaves off being your 
lover." 

"She did not care for him before," 
thought Julia, sadly, after this little bit of 
confidential talk, "and he has not been 
able to make her care for him since. Poor 
fellow !'^ 

**How quick and clever Julia is," 
thought Laura, " though she is so romantic 
about herself and her John. I am sure I 
hope she is right. It will be so much 
pleasanter when Mr. Thornton leaves off 
being in love with me ; and it can't last 
for ever." Laura was brighter, happier, 



250 All, or Nothing. 

more deserving of her father's pet name 
than ever, after this happy thought came 
to her, and in radiant looks and the highest 
spirits she left Hunsford with her husband 
for Southampton. 



' 



He and She, 251 




CHAPTER XI. 

He and She. 

XACTLY at the appointed moment 
Edward Dunstan presented him- 
self at the door of Mrs. Thornton's 
sitting-room, and was admitted. He had 
passed the interval between the receipt of 
Laura's message and that moment in a state 
of mind which seemed to reproduce all the 
varieties of feeling that he had experienced 
since Esdaile's words had knocked over his 
hopes, like a second Alnaschar's basket, 
strewing the fragments around him, its 
separate ray of mocking brightness shin- 
ing at him from each bit of the derisive 
ruin. Anger, resentment, jealousy; the 
rebellion against fate that is one of the 



252 All, or Nothing. 

most terrible pangs we have to suffer, 
because it is so useless, and we know well 
that it is so ; scorn of the fickleness of the 
woman he loved, and of himself in that he 
had trusted that light and fickle nature ; 
but more than all, stronger than all, turn- 
ing up in the turmoil oftener than all . 
as we may note some particular fragment 
of the waste and ruin of a wreck re-appear- 
ing in the swirl of the waves . the 
bitterness of disappointment spoiling the 
taste of all his good fortune. Now, as 
he stood for a moment, divided only by 
the door from her presence, the vision of 
the last time he had seen her came before 
him more vividly than it had ever come, 
during all the days and months in which it 
had been his constant companion. For that 
one moment, the truth he had been raging 
at for so many hours seemed suddenly to 
have become impossible. It could not 
be that in another minute he should see 
Laura, the wife of another man ; no, it 
could not be. 

The room was a long one, with a wide 



He and She, 253 



. window commanding the sea, at the 
farthest end ; and there Mrs. Thornton 
was seated ; so that, when the door closed 
behind him, Edward Dunstan had to walk 
up the length of the room towards the 
well-remembered figure, the same, yet so 
different . And before he had walked up 
to the window, the thing which, only a 
minute before, had seemed so impossible 
to him, became of all facts the most real 
and evident. And yet Laura said nothing 
but: 

'*How do you do. Captain Dunstan?'^ 
and did nothing but hold out her hand. 
He could not take it ; he drew back one 
step, and Laura, without any embarrass- 
ment, substituted for the proffered saluta- 
tion a gesture which invited him to be 
seated. What had become of all his 
anger, and all his resolution to express it ? 
He could not even ask himself that 
question in his thoughts, though he put 
it to himself afterwards ; for the moment 
everything was set aside by the impression 
which Laura's look and manner produced 



254 AU^ or Nothing. 

upon him. He made a vain attempt to 
speak, and took the chair she pointed to. 

Was the great defeat this woman had 
already inflicted upon him to be followed 
up by a total rout ? He knew it had been 
her own doing now. The self-possessed 
young woman, graceful, richly dressed, 
mistress of herself and the position, who 
thus received the man whose life she had 
spoiled for him, was not the timid girl 
whom he had parted from, capable of only 
a feeble hint of partisanship towards her 
father, and the almost unresisting victim 
of her mother's temper. The fair face 
was unchanged, but he hardly saw its 
rich, dark, sparkling beauty, so startled 
was he by the revelation of change of 
another kind in Laura. Edward Dunstan 
was quite right ; there was a great altera- 
tion in her, but he antedated it, and he 
misinterpreted it. 

" You have only just returned, I believe," 
Mrs. Thornton said, ignoring his silence 
and his embarrassment, but perfectly alive 
to the alteration in his appearance, and 



He and She. 255 



reading correctly the tale of illness and 
mental suffering in his face. Perhaps she 
never took account with herself of the 
effort by which she maintained her self- 
command, and persevered in the role which 
she had resolved to sustain from the mo- 
ment in which Dunstan's request for an 
interview had reached her, and she had 
decided on acceding to it ; but if she ever 
did take such account, it must have sur- 
prised her with its revelation of latent 
energy. 

*' I have only just returned," said 
Dunstan, at length mastering himself, " I 
reached England yesterday ; last evening 
I saw you arrive here, and I have come 
to " 

" To see an old friend, who is very happy 
to welcome you back to England." 

He was quick enough to understand 
the meaning of her tone, although he was 
far from fathoming its motive. He knew 
that she intended to convey to him that 
the past was a sealed book, and that she 
had admitted him as a visitor, probably 



256 All, or Nothing. 

because that was a less embarrassing 
course than a refusal to see him would 
have been. He had no means of estimating 
either what the interview cost her, in 
regret and self-restraint, or the advantage 
over him which she possessed in pre- 
paration for the possibility of such an 
interview and of all that it might imply. 
' He believed her to be merely cold and 
callous ; he discarded pity for the weakness 
and cowardice which he had admitted as 
belonging to her character, ceasing to 
believe that she had been actuated by 
these only; he believed now that it had 
been her own doing, her own fault, and 
though he suffered no less keenly than 
before, this new phase of feeling made 
him as hard and as determined as Laura 
herself. At least she should know that 
he thoroughly despised her. Did he ? 
Was it contempt that was throbbing so 
painfully in his heart and brain ? At least 
he believed that it was, and it was all the 
better he should so believe. 

" No," he answered, *'not altogether for 



He and She. 257 



that purpose, I have come to ask you for 
an explanation which I have a right to 
expect. Remembering how you and I 
parted, you cannot deny that you owe me, 
at least, an explanation of your conduct. 
You have treated me very ill." 

"I do not think you are wise in 
demanding an explanation," said Mrs. 
Thornton, gently, '' and if you persist in 
doing so, we cannot for the future meet 
as friends." 

"I don't care about that. We could 
not meet as friends in any case ; I have no 
fancy for shams of that kind. There was 
no such pretence between us when we 
parted ; there never can be any such pre- 
tence on my side." 

" Then you have done very wrong in 
asking me to see you," said Laura, very 
firmly. " If you and I are not to meet 
as friends, we cannot meet at all. You 
can hardly wish for a scene of useless 
recrimination, and I, most undoubtedly^ 
shall not submit to it." 

Dunstan looked at her with curiosity, 

VOL. I. s 



258 Ally or Nothing. 



with perhaps just a shade of insolence, 
and rose. 

"You dismiss me summarily, Mrs. 
Thornton," he said, ** but in that you only 
exercise your woman's privilege of in- 
justice. ] have, of course, no redress, but 
you make it plain to me that you, on your 
side, have no excuse. I must obey you, 
and ask no explanation ; but at least you, 
will have to remember in the midst of your 
own happiness that you have ruined mine. 
I would rather not think so badly of you 
even yet, as to believe that you will enjoy 
the knowledge. I can declare to you, 
with a safe conscience, that my truth 
to you never wavered, and that all the 
worth of my good fortune to me was that 
it set me free to seek, or, as I thought 
like a fool, to claim you. I hurried back 
to England when the news of it reached 
me, full of the hope which you allowed me 
to cherish, to find, only yesterday, that I 
was too late." 

"Did you not know until yesterday 
that I " she paused, and this first 



He and She. 259 



sign of weakness gave him an advantage. 
If she would parley with him at all, she 
was abandoning the line she had in the 
first instance taken up. As for her, this 
was a new view of the matter ; she under- 
stood the man before her was suffering 
under a freshly-inflicted shock ; that this 
was not the fulfilment of a deliberately 
formed purpose, on which he had been 
brooding during a long journey ; there 
was not so much need as she had thought 
for being on her guard with him, and 
against herself. 

" I did not know until yesterday that you 
had married another man. Until I saw 
you alight at the door of this place, I 
believed you to be Laura Chumleigh still ; 
the girl whom I loved, and to whom I 
was hastening. It would at least have 
been more merciful to have sent me some 
warning . but you did not care, you did 
not care 1" He turned from her, and 
began to walk to and fro ; Mrs. Thornton's 
hand, hidden by a fold of her gown, closed 
tightly upon the arm of her chair. 

s2 



260 A II or Nothing. 

" I never thought of this," she said. " It 
never occurred to me but that you would 
know about me, if only from the news- 
papers, as I learned about you." 

His restless steps had borne him away 
from her at that moment, or, in spite 
of ber self-command, he would have seen 
that she was deeply moved. Had not she 
also learned the news of Dunstan too late ? 

*' I am sorry that it has so chanced . 
at least, that was not my fault, not inten- 
tional." Then she added, with a visible 
effort : " I have changed my mind, Captain 
Dunstan ; I feel that what you have just 
told me makes a great difference. I will 
answer any questions you choose to put 
to me ; I am sure you will not ask me any 
which I ought not to answer." 

He stood still at her words, facing her^ 
while she sat, with drooping head now^ 
and her bright dark eyes downcast; her 
quick brown fingers busy with the fan 
that hung from her waist. He asked 
himself, did he love her or did he hate 
her? He could not tell, but even then 



He and She. 261 



he had sense enough to know that it would 
be well for him to hate her rather than to 
love her, and better than either that he 
should put her quite'out of his life, as she 
had put him quite out of hers. The face 
that had been with him by day and in his 
dreams, had not been so sweet, so radiant 
as the real face before him now, but 
divided from him by a barrier more im- 
passable than that of time and distance. 
The dignity of womanhood had impressed 
itself upon Laura, without depriving her 
of the brightness and the grace of girl- 
hood. As he looked at her, even though 
the sense of the wrong she had done him, 
and the bitterness of his disappointment, 
were tugging hard at his heart, to tear it 
from her hold, Dunstan felt the supreme 
way of her power over him more strongly 
than he had ever felt it. She pitied him 
then . at least she pitied him ; the manner 
in which his fate had dealt him this blow 
had something in it which recommended 
him to her compassion, however indifferent 
she had been to that fate itself ; and he. 



262 All, or Nothing 



the betrayed lover . as he had persuaded 
himself to believe that he was . was 
speedily reduced to such a condition of 
submission that his anger seemed to be 
ebbing away, beyond the reach of any 
effort he might make to grasp, and hold^ 
and keep it warm, and he was actually 
grateful for her pity. He drew a deep 
breath, and, at the silent invitation of her 
eyes, he resumed his seat, despising himself 
as he did so, and asking himself whither 
had gone the just indignation that had led 
him a minute or two previously to repudi- 
ate with scorn the notion that there could 
be peace and friendship between Laura 
and himself ? There came a pause, which 
was not safe or wise for either. Laura 
ended it. 

" I said that I would answer any ques- 
tions you might ask me ; but you ask 
me none. Then I will tell you what you 
wish to know. It is soon, if not easily- 
told. I was very unhappy at home, in- 
deed I may say unwelcome . you knew 
enough of us to understand that ; there was- 



He and She. 263 



no chance w'hatever of things ever being 
different ; I had made no promise to you ; 
I thought you would know that it must be 
so as well as I knew it ; neither you nor I 
had any excuse for mistaking the unreal in 
life for the real; and I married Mr. 
Thornton." 

" After a brief acquaintance, I believe." 
" I had not known him very long, it is 
true ; bnt I knew him well enough to trust 
him." 

" With that risky charge, the happiness 
of a woman who . or I must indeed have 
been a fool, or befooled . who did not love 

him r 

He spoke hotly and bitterly. She made 
him no reply. 

"I beg your pardon. This is one of 
those questions which I have no right to 
ask, which you felt so sure I would not 
ask. Pass it by, and tell me this instead.. 
Was it altogether by and with your own 
free will ? Were you bullied into it at all ? 
At least you need not hesitate to tell me 
this ; you cannot have forgotten, or sup- 



264 All, or Nothing. 

pose that I have forgotten, the part Lady- 
Rosa acted towards me." 

" I was not bullied, I was to a certain 
extent persuaded. But, Captain Dun- 
stan,'' here Laura rallied, and from that 
moment she was far more composed than 
he ; . "I think it is best to say that it is 
not with me as you may imagine; as it 
might perhaps be reasonable that you 
should not be sorry to imagine; I am 
placed between the pain of hurting your 
feelings and the necessity for letting you 
know the simple truth, as you have insisted 
on knowing anything at all. T ain not 
sorry for my marriage ; if you had any 
idea that it was otherwise, put it away, 
and '' 

'* Did you suppose that I had come to 
you in the style of Jamie in the Scotch 
ballad, and that I should expect the ' Auld 
Robin Gray's a guid man to me ' kind of 
sentiment ?" asked Dunstan, sneeringly, 
and growing angry with her again. ""l 
assure you nothing was farther from my 
intentions. I am not magnanimous enough 



He and She. 265 



to congratulate Mr. Thornton, but neither 
am I mean enough to wish you any ill. I 
cannot quite understand you, perhaps, 
but then I am only a man ; and I could 
not have married any other woman but 
you if there had been all the world to gain 
by marrying, or all I had in the world to 
lose by not marrying her. That's the 
difference, I take it, or one of the dif- 
ferences between a man's notions and a 
woman's." 

"You can help yourselves better," she 
said, quietly, removing the question to 
impersonal ground with skill far beyond 
Dunstan's imitation, "and there is more 
than one way out of difficulties for 

you." 

" I don't know about us," he answered, 
''I am only thinking of myself. You say 
there was no promise, you have said that 
before; now do you think that is a fair 
answer to give me? Is it honest to say 
that, having consented to say anything ?" 

*' Perhaps not," and here her voice was 
troubled, and there came before her a 



366 Alitor Nothing. 



vision of herself as she had lain through- 
out the sleepless hours of the night that 
dawned into her wedding-day, saying ta 
herself, " it was no promise." 

" Perhaps not ; but it is all that I can 
say." 

"No, it is not all. There is one thing 
more, Laura 1 Forgive me ! don't heed the 
inadvertence, I did not intend to let the 
old familiar name escape my lips ; I would 
not offend you for the world. But there 
is one thing more you could say . the 
truth ! You know it, you have known it 
long . I . I have found it out at last." 

" I don't understand you !'* 

" Oh yes, you do." He spoke very 
quietly now, all the roughness and the 
energy had gone out of his speech. ** You 
understand me very well. You never 
cared for me ; you forgot me when I had 
passed out of your sight; there was no- 
thing in your heart or your conscience to 
forbid your marrying another man. I 
have no right to cherish anger against 
anybody else for any supposed share in 



He and She, 267 



what you have done for me, and I should 
be a fool to cherish anger against you. It 
was all a blunder ; I meant one thing, and 
you meant another, or rather you meant 
nothing. Let it be as if it had never 
been/' 

"You must be bitter against me, to 
speak like that," said Laura, with all the 
inconsistency of a woman, hard and 
nettled at the exact interpretation which 
was, in reality, getting her out of a diffi- 
culty which she had hitherto felt in its full 
seriousness, and making things more com- 
fortable for her than she had any right or 
reason to expect. 

" I am not at all bitter against you ; I 
have only come to understand, to see 
things as they are ; to find out that I have 
only toy self to blame; and now all that 
remains for me is to get over it as soon as 
possible/' 

"You will not find that difficult," said 
Laura, now thoroughly off her guard, 
and unable to resist the temptation to 
utter this feeble sneer, "if you believe 



268 All, or Nothing. 

me to have been so utterly insincere." 
*' In Heaven's name, what would you 
have me to believe ? Sincere, when you 
forgot me? Constant, when you are 
another man's wife? Two opposites at 
once ! No, no ; I am wise, and awakened 
now, and I read the past aright. It does 
not throw much brightness or confidence 
into the future of my life, but I must try 
to find compensation for that, and at 
least it sets you more right with me. It 
is easier to bear the knowledge that you 
never loved me^ Laura, than to know that 
you did love me, and belied that love. I 
did not think so when I came into this 
room, and might have seen the truth in 
your first look, and heard it in your first 
word ; I believe it now. It is better so. 
Oood-bye." 

It was his turn now to hold out his 
hand, and hers to shrink from his touch ; 
but she overcame the impulse, and for a 
moment their hands met. But she did 
not speak. 

" Good-bye," he repeated, and took one 



He and She. 269 



step away from her ; paused, as though he 
were about to say some other word, did 
not say it, and in another moment wa& 
gone. 

" I should have liked to have got out 
that I was glad Mr. Thornton was a good 
fellow, and that you had told me, but it 
stuck in my throat," Dunstan said to his 
friend when he gave him a much abridged 
account of the interview, on their way up 
to London. 

Esdaile, who had been fidgety and un- 
comfortable until this injudicious visit had 
come to an end, to a degree which set the 
soothing influence of his inseparable cigar 
at defiance, arrived at as correct a con- 
clusion from the scanty version which 
Dunstan gave him, with a preliminary and 
voluntary statement that he was not going 
to talk about his troubles any more, as if 
he had been present at the interview. 
Dunstan had been unable to estimate the 
influence of time in the matter ; all that 
had happened was new and fresh to him ; 
while Laura had been familiar with the 



270 All, or Nothing. 

fact that she was for ever separated from 
him by her own act, and that at the very- 
time that the only barrier between them 
had been removed by fate, since the hour 
in which she discovered what it was that 
her mother had been so careful to conceal 
from her on her wedding-day. Dunstan 
had, as was usual with him and character- 
istic of him, taken the extreme view of the 
weakness and persuadability of Laura, and 
Esdaile neither blamed him for this, nor 
regretted it. The more thoroughly Dun- 
stan was persuaded that Laura's love for 
him had existed only in his own imagina- 
tion, the sooner he would be "cured." 
Esdaile's cheery nature led him to think 
it a great pity that there should be any 
drawback to Dunstan's enjoyment of the 
good things that fortune had put so 
unexpectedly in his way, and especially 
that the drawback should be of a senti- 
mental kind. 

" That sort of thing is so hard to deal 
with," he thought; "it's like religious 
madness, next to impossible to cure, 



He and She. 271 



because it is all about one's self, and 
there's no getting at any rational side of 
it. The thing is quite plain to me, and 
it is just what I should have expected 
from what I know of the girl. She liked 
him very much, and if everything' had 
gone fair she would have been a very 
good wife to Dunstan; she did not 
particularly care for Thornton, I daresay, 
but she's a very good wife to him, and she 
might meet Dunstan every day in the 
week, and not a bit of harm come of it . 
to her. He'd make a fool of himself, 
however, so it's just as well he has taken 
the * farewell for evermore ' line about it. 
It's an odd thing that a man should be so 
desperately in earnest about a girl with so 
little earnestness in her, and it's odder 
still that I should be thinking about it, 
and acting as improvised guardian to a 
fellow like Dunstan. Comes of having 
nothing particular to do, I suppose." 

"The fact is, my dear fellow," said 
Dunstan, when he had terminated his 
narrative, and after a silence during which 




272 All, or Nothing. 



Esdaile had been coming to the above 
conclusions, " I think it is all a mistake to 
suppose that women are so much more 
capable of love and constancy than we 
are. Some of them don't know the mean- 
ing of love and constancy." 

" A good many of them, I should say," 
assented Esdaile, with an air of profound 
wisdom. 

" I only know that I shall never believe 
in a woman again." 

" Oh yes, you will, Dunstan ; it's your 
way. Only next time you must believe in 
the right woman." 

Then they really did change the con- 
versation, and Esdaile felt that he had not 
been quite fair towards Laura ; though, as 
he mentally added, it did not harm her, 
and was all for Dunstan's good. 

On their arrival in London the friends 
separated, but only for a few days. 
Esdaile was going to make some visits, 
Dunstan to " look about him," until they 
should go down to Bevis together. 



He and She. 273 



When Edward Dunstan left her, Mrs. 
Thornton lost the composure which she 
had only maintained by a painful effort 
during the latter portion of their interview, 
and gave way to tears. They sprang from 
a mingled source, partly wounded feelings, 
partly hurt pride. She had intended to 
speak so differently from the way in which, 
she had spoken ; she had anticipated such 
different words from Dunstan. She did 
not know what she had expected, but 
certainly not what had happened. More 
anger, perhaps, if, indeed, he refused to let 
the past rest altogether, but not scorn, 
and especially not an expression of dis- 
belief in her. That at least was not just. 
She did not love Dunstan now; not a 
feeling which the most proud and jeal- 
ous husbapd could be entitled to resent 
stirred her heart at the prospect of seeing 
him, or troubled her in his presence ; but 
she had loved him. Not firmly, not 
strongly, not sublimely, not with the 
persevering faith which might be all very 
natural and easy to a girl who had nobody 

VOL. I. T 



274 All, or Nothing. 

to bully and wear her out, though not 
natural or easy to Laura, living under the 
awful rule of Lady Eosa ; but in her own 
way, and according to her own power, she 
had loved him. She hoped it was not 
very wrong to cry over the remembrance 
of that love, and for his disdainful dis- 
belief in it. Laura was not poetical or 
romantic, but she did feel *' upset," as she 
would have described her sensations, by 
the dispersion of her little plan for the 
pretty and pious adornment of the grave 
of that old love which she had buried out 
of her sight. That Dunstan should deny 
that it had ever lived, died, and been 
buried, at all ! She really suffered severely 
from this rude interruption of her life of 
pleasant reality, from this sudden flinging 
back into the world of rememljrance and 
sentiment which she had left behind her. 
And, as a great deal of childishness still 
lingered in Laura's nature and ways, she 
threw herself on her bed to have her cry 
out, and in no very long time she sobbed 
herself to sleep. 



He and She. 275 



It was late in the afternoon when Laura 
awoke, with a pale face and a bad head- 
ache, for the first time in her life. She 
always had perfect health, and never 
affected any kind of illness, so that her 
husband, returning from the trial-trip of 
The Firefly to a late dinner, was quite 
distressed about her. Laura made light 
of her ailments and her looks, and, saying 
that she should be all right after she had 
some sleep, went into her room again. 

Before she left Mr. Thornton she men- 
tioned that she had seen an old friend 
that day. Captain Dunstan, who had just 
arrived from India, with Sir Wilfrid Es- 
daile. Laura thought Mr. Thornton knew 
Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile, and had met him at 
Lowndes Street. Yes, Mr. Thornton had 
met him, and remembered him perfectly, 
and was sorry he had missed Sir Wilfrid 
and his friend; they might have liked a 
sail in The Firefly. Laura rather thought 
thay had left Southampton ; something had 
been said about their being pressed for 
time. 

T 2 



276 AH, or Nothing. 

All this was said with intention, yet not 
with deceitful intention. Laura meant no 
harm at all; but, though she was not 
clever, she was intelligent, and she had 
learned, to a certain extent, to understand 
her husband. 



Bury House. 277 




CHAPTER XII. 

Bury Hou^e. 

LITTLE difficulty, which, though 
he denounced it to himself as quite 
ridiculous, was nevertheless puz- 
zling, not to say insuperable, presented 
itself to Sir Wilfrid Esdaile when, on his 
arrival in London, he wished to proceed 
immediately to the fulfilment of his promise 
to John Sandilands concerning Miss Car- 
michael. Of course he must see that young 
lady as soon as possible, but how was it to 
be done? It had not occurred to Sir 
Wilfrid to ask himself that question until 
after he and Dunstan had parted company ; 
but even if it had, he would hardly have 
liked to mention the matter to his unlucky 



278 AU,or Nothing. 

friend, the man who had just come in for 
such a splendid thing by a turn of the 
wheel of fortune. The less said to him 
about the Chumleighs or their belongings 
the better. Sir Wilfrid had been very- 
nervous and uncomfortable about all that 
business at Southampton ; it had turned 
out much better than he had expected, 
and the wisest course was to drop the 
subject, and everything collateral to it,^ 
altogether. 

Of course. Colonel and Lady Rosa 
Chumleigh would not be in town in 
September. How stupid it had been of 
Sandilands and himself not to remember 
that! Their country place was somewhere 
in Kent, Sir Wilfrid knew, but he had 
never been there, and he had no acquaint^ 
ances in the neighbourhood. He could 
not volunteer a visit to Hunsford, or 
approach the place by any indirect man* 
oeuvre. He called at the house in 
Lowndes Street, and found it arrayed in 
the regulation London livery for Sep- 
tember ; window-blinds done up in news-* 



Bury House. 279 



paper, and a couple of broken flower-pots, 
with withered twigs in them, displayed 
forlornly in a corner of the dining-room 
balcony. From the elderly female in 
charge, who was taking in her evening 
beer from a potboy with a refreshing air 
of leisure about him, as Sir Wilfrid's 
hansom drove up, he learned that the 
" last family " had left, and the house was 
in the " hagent's 'ands/' 

" It's a nuisance," thought Sir Wilfrid, 
on his way to his club, " though of course 
I did not really think she would be there. 
I should like to have been able to tell John 
in my first letter that I had seen her, and 
handed over his souvenir safely. And, by 
the way, how am I to do that ? I shouldn't 
think Lady Eosa was a person to let the 
key of the postbag out of her own hands, 
or to fail to scrutinise her niece's cor- 
respondence pretty closely . though to be 
sure she writes to John safely enough . 
they must have some way of managing 
that ; I wish I had thought of asking him. 
That hateful postbag, it is one of the great- 



280 All, or Nothing. 

est worries of country life, and one always 
knows exactly the sort of place where it 
is made a business of. It would hardly 
do for me to write to Miss Carmichael at 
Hunsford on the chance." 

Sir Wilfrid merely called at his club for 
his letters, and then drove on to his 
London abode, a comfortable suite of rooms 
in Belgrave Gardens, perfectly free from 
the effeminate frippery and contemptible 
luxury that are to be found at the present 
day in the dwellings of young men, whose 
ancestors) English worthies, would repu- 
diate such soft and silken puppies with a 
stern and wholesome disgust. Having 
told his servant, the man who had accom- 
panied him to Ceylon, that he would dine 
at the club that evening, and start for 
Scotland the next, he placed the little packet 
with which John Sandilands had charged 
him for Julia, and which he had taken to 
Lowndes Street on the least likely of 
chances, in a drawer of a Japanese cabinet ; 
and, in doing so, received a suggestion 
on the point that was troubling him. A 



Bury Home. 281 



slim box, containing a tortoise-shell fan, 
lay at the edge of the drawer, and attached 
to it was a card inscribed, in John Sandi- 
lands' handwriting : " Miss Susan Sandi- 
lands, from J. S." 

'* Of course," said Sir Wilfrid, to him- 
self, ''that's the right thing to do. Ill 
write to the old lady, and send the parcel 
for Miss Carmichael to her. She's in 
their confidence, and I daresay she knows 
by this time I am . in his, at least." 

The writing of the short letter to Julia 
Carmichael, in which he claimed her friend- 
ship on the ground of his possession of that 
of her affianced lover, and gave her a 
glowing account of John, his health, his 
work, and his prospects, adding a few 
sentences of warm acknowledgment of the 
energy and ability with which John was 
advancing his . Sir Wilfrid's . interests, 
was a very difficult task to Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile. He was not in the le^-st awkward, 
but he was in good earnest diffident when- 
ever it befell him to have in any way to 
face that ever-puzzling problem, which he 



282 All, or Nothing. 



familiarly phrased thus : " Why the deuce 
should a fellow like me be so much better 
off than a fellow like Sandilands?" If^ 
however, Julia were really as nice as John 
represented her . and Sir Wilfrid's own 
slight acquaintance with her led him to 
think that this particular lover did not in 
this instance draw quite so largely upon 
his imagination for his facts as is usual 
in such cases . she would take his letter as 
it was meant, and never for a moment 
suspect him of a patronising intention. 
He enclosed his letter to Julia in a kind 
and respectful epistle to Miss Sandilands, 
in which he did not stint his praise of 
John, and added that he was as well ac- 
quainted with Bury House as if he had 
had the good luck of his friend and had 
lived there, so closely had he studied the 
old house from the pencil-drawing . Miss 
Susan's own work . that occupied the 
place of honour in John's far away home. 
He might have added that the work of 
art in question, and a map of the planta- 
tion, which John himself had executed with 



Bury House. 283 



great care and nicety, were the only mural 
decorations boasted by the bungalow. Sir 
Wilfrid then placed the two letters, and 
the presents with which John had charged 
him, in a beautifully carved ivory and 
silver box, of which he begged Miss 
Sandilands' acceptance, and, having charged 
his servant to pack and dispatch the parcel 
early on the following day, dismissed the 
matter from his mind with the reflection 
that he was very sorry he had not been 
able to carry out the wishes of John 
Sandilands more effectively. 

The roundabout expedient of Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile had a more direct and satisfactory 
result than he anticipated. A few days 
after his arrival at a sombre castle in the 
north of Scotland, where a number of fine 
folks were assembled for the purposes of 
slaughter that fill the British bosom with 
joy in the beautiful autumnal days, a letter 
reached him, addressed in a hand of the 
kind which used to be called ** Italian,'^ 
small, sloping, old-fashioned, a great con- 
trast to the square, aggressive burliness of 



284 All, or Nothing. 

a modern lady's writing . and couched in 
the following terms : 

" Bury House, B , September, 187 . . 

''Dear Sib Wilfrid Bsdaile, . I have 
had the honour and gratification of re- 
ceiving your letter, together with the 
handsome present from my dear nephew, 
of which you kindly took charge; and I 
^vail myself gladly of the opportunity 
thus afforded me of offering you the com- 
bined thanks of my sister and myself for 
all that you have done for John. We are 
very sensible of your goodness, and we 
are equally proud and convinced that our 
nephew will prove himself in all respects 
worthy of your friendship. I had no 
-difficulty in carrying out your wishes 
vsrith respect to Miss Carmichael, as she 
happens to be with us at present. She 
begs me to thank you in her name for the 
kindness with which you charged yourself 
with my nephew's commission for her, and 
to say that she regrets extremely that she 
had not the opportunity of seeing you 



k 



Bm^y House. 285 



when you so kindly called at the house in 
Lowndes Street, formerly occupied by her 
uncle and Lady Rosa Chumleigh. She i& 
the more sorry for this, as there does not 
seem to be any probable opportunity of her 
seeing you, Lady Rosa Chumleigh having 
given up her house in town, and proposing 
to remain at Hunsford indefinitely. My 
sister and myself feel that it would be^ 
presumption on our part to invite you to 
visit us at Bury House ; at the same time,^ 
we should be deeply sensible of the kind- 
ness you would confer upon us, should it, 
by any chance, fit in with your other 
arrangements to pass a little time there. 

" Your proved friendship for our nephew 
emboldens me to trouble you with some 
information relative to ourselves. John 
being provided for, and our many years of 
toil having proved modestly remunerative, 
my sister and I have decided on giving up 
the school, to the duties of which we no 
longer feel ourselves equal, and we hope 
to pass the remnant of our days in the 
old house in which we have lived for so- 



286 All^ or Nothing. 

many years. Our pupils have therefore 
left us, these holidays, for the last time, 
and henceforth we shall be the only 
occupants of Bury House, until, as we 
hope and pray, our nephew and his wife 
shall live in it in the years to come. Bury 
House is our own property, acquired by 
our own earnings, and will be his when we 
are gone. The honour of a visit from 
you would be very highly esteemed. It is, 
of course, only on John's account that we 
should venture to ask such a favour. Miss 
Carmichael has been staying with us since 
the final breaking up of the school, and 
will remain until the second week of next 
month, when her uncle and Lady Rosa 
Chumleigh expect her to return to Huns- 
ford. We are looking forward to the 
coming of another dear young friend, a 
former pupil, who may perhaps become a 
permanent resident with us; but at any 
time, should it suit you so far to honour 
lis, we shall be ready to welcome you to 
Bury House, where there is indeed nothing 
to offer you as an inducement, beyond the 



Bury Home. 287 



assurance of the pleasure you would con- 
fer on those who are already so deeply 
indebted to you. I am, dear Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile, with the best thanks and compli- 
ments of my sister united to my own, . 
Tour obliged and grateful servant, 

'* Susan Sandilands." 

"What a dear, formal, fine old lady," 
said Sir Wilfrid to himself, after he had 
read the foregoing letter twice over, ** and 
how little notion she has of the real state 
of the case. Ingratitude is a cutting sort 
of thing, no doubt ; all the moralists and 
all the poets must be right about that . 
but, on the other hand, too much gratitude 
is uncommonly embarrassing, makes a 
man feel like a humbug. I wonder 
whether there really is very little kindness 
and consideration going about, such a 
small allowance of them seems to go such 
an amazingly long way. If our accounts 
were made up, it would b seen that I owe 
John a great deal more than he owes me, 
even in that vulgar but indispensable item, 



288 All, or Nothing. 



money. Nothing I should like better than 
to go and see the good old ladies and the 
old-fashioned place, to say nothing of such 
an unexpected opportunity of seeing John's 
lady-love. Let me see, how do I stand in 
point of engagements ? A week here, and 
then the Daunts, and join Dunstan in 
town on the 10th ; he's in no hurry to get 
to Bevis. I can do it by throwing the 
Daunts over, and I daresay it will be much 
pleasanter.'* 

Thereupon Sir Wilfrid Esdaile wrote a 
cordial letter to Miss Sandilands . really 
almost the kind of letter dear John himself 
might have written, the supremely-grati- 
fied old ladies described it . announcing 
his intention of presenting himself at Bury 
House in ten days from the date of the 
document. 

Among the pleasures of Julia Car- 
michael's life, she rated a visit to Bury 
House very high. It had its negative, as 
well as its positive, good side. It meant 
getting away from Lady Rosa Chumleigh, 
as distinctly as it meant being with the 



Bury House. 289 



dear old friends who sympathised with her 
so entirely in regarding John Sandilands 
as the most perfect and the most import- 
ant personage in all creation, and who 
decidedly "spoiled" Julia, because she was 
the beloved of their peerless nephew. On 
the present occasion Julia was disposed to 
rate the negative side of the pleasure of 
her visit unusually high, for Lady Rosa had 
been uncommonly difficult of late, and had 
an unendurably fine edge put upon her 
temper by the visit of her daughter and 
her son-in-law to Hunsford. Mr. Thorn- 
ton's polite imperturbability, and a certain 
intolerable air of considering Colonel Chum- 
leigh of chief importance, which nothing 
induced him to lay aside, had exasperated 
Lady Rosa to a pitch which almost render- 
ed her insensible to, or at least temporarily 
oblivious of, the grand fact that she had 
got her daughter off her mind, and also 
escaped scot-free from any unpleasantness 
about the Dunstan affair. 

It had been hard times for the Colonel/ 
Julia, and the household, and it was with 

VOL. I. u 



290 All, or Nothing. 



undisguised envy that the Colonel saw- 
Julia off for Bury House. There were no 
kind old ladies to ask him on a visit, and 
he could foresee nothing likely to procure 
a holiday for him, though he would have 
hailed one of his pretty frequent attacks 
of toothache . which Lady Rosa invariably 
denounced as his own fault, and a proof 
of weakness of mind . as an excuse for a 
couple of days in town, with no livelier 
society than that of his dentist. Julia 
looked after her uncle as he hurried away 
before the train started . he had a lot of 
commissions to execute in the town, and 
Lady Rosa never permitted anybody but 
herself to keep the ponies standing . with 
a sort of remorseful pity ; and yet she did 
not make things much easier for him. 

" What a life," thought Juha ; " what a 
breakneck mistake such a marriage ! And 
yet, if she died to-morrow, everybody would 
expect him to be sorry, and be shocked* 
if he let it be found out that he wasn't ; 
and she is considered a paragon, because 
she never ran away with anybody !" The 



Bury Home. 291 



idea of anybody possibly existing who 
<5ould have been induced to aid and abet 
the Lady Bosa Chumleigh in such a de- 
parture from the matrimonial laws made 
Julia involuntarily laugh aloud, where- 
upon three ladies who had previously 
taken their places in the carriage bent 
upon her looks of supercilious and dis- 
dainful wonder, and she blushingly sought 
refuge in a yellow railway volume. The 
journey, though not long, was compli- 
cated, and Julia, albeit she had been sus- 
tained by sundry refreshing peeps at 
recent letters of John Sandilands, was 
glad to arrive at her destination. 

To Julia, Bury House meant "home," 
in all the best acceptation of that 
word which had ever been within her 
reach. Her past, all that was pleasantest 
in her present, and the dearly-cherished 
hopes of her future, associated themselves 
with the old house and its inmates. At 
first, when her engagement to John Sandi- 
lands was quite recent, there had come a 
strange and delightful shyness over her 

u2 



292 All, or Nothing. 



with respect to the house, with whose 
every corner she had long been familiar ; 
it seemed so strange, so difficult to realise 
that in those rooms John had played and 
learned his first lessons, got into and out 
of his early troubles, in his childhood ; for 
he had been brought hither so immediately 
on his own birth that they could not tell 
whether his young mother, who had died^ 
stricken suddenly with death, even knew 
that '* a man had been born into the world,"^ 
of whose birth this was the price. It was 
as though she had to make acquaintance 
with them all over again, and they became 
doubly dear to her. It seemed to Julia 
that other betrothed lovers, who knew 
comparatively little of each other's past 
lives, must have much less to say to each 
other, or to write about, in the letters 
which form the best alleviation of absence, 
than she and John, who had so much in 
common even now. 

Bury House had never had the aspect of 
a school, at least of the modem order; it was 
an old, rambling, comfortable, picturesque 



Bury House. 293 



house, over-grown with greenery, with 
innumerable unsymmetrical windows, tall 
gable ends, and a roomy rustic porch, set 
down in the middle of a smooth lawn, which 
boasted some of the finest beech and wal- 
nut-trees in the county. A large garden, 
in which fruit and vegetables were more 
sedulously cultivated than flowers, and an 
orchard, both situated at the rear of the 
house, completed the little domain. 

Bury House was not more unlike the 
modern notion of a boarding-school than 
the Misses Sandilands were unlike any of 
the modern types of school-mistresses. 
There was a considerable difference be- 
tween the respective ages of the two 
sisters, but they were very like each other, 
both being small of stature, with refined, 
kindly faces, silvery white hair, and gentle 
Toices, into which thirty years of teaching 
and command had not brought one dis- 
cordant note. It was a common saying 
among the girls who were educated at 
Bury House that they never could think of 
^*the ladies'" as *' horrid old maids, but 



294 All or Nothing. 

rather as if they were nice pleasant widows 
whose husbands had died a long time ago, 
so that they had got over it, but had all 
the feeling-heartedness left.'' No doubt, 
the quicker sympathies, and the broader 
views that the girls recognised, and thus 
expressed in homely language, were largely 
due to the influence which the charge of 
the orphan child, to whom they had jointly 
devoted themselves, had exercised upon 
their lives. The cares and the duties of 
maternity had been theirs, though with- 
out its dear privileges and its impre- 
scriptible rights, and they had brought 
their reward with them. Few happier old 
ladies would have been found in England 
than the Misses Sandilands, when, the 
pleasant little bustle of Julia's arrival over^ 
they were sitting at tea in the porch, and 
hearing as nearly all about the contents 
of John's last letters as they could fairly 
expect. But Julia had, in her turn, a 
good deal to hear from them, especially 
about the final breaking-up of the school, 
and Miss Susan was the chief speaker. 



Bury House. 295 



" Of course, my dear, at the last, it was 
a little painful, and all the dear girls felt 
very, much the going away for good ; but 
it is quite surprising, and, indeed, I may 
say providential, when one comes to think 
of it, that they almost all belong to the 
county, and can come to see us one at a 
time, if they like. Miss Gordon and 
Miss Walker are well placed as resident 
governesses ; they both said they really 
could not think of going into any other 
school, after Bury House, and it all came 
much easier than you would think. The 
two maids we have parted with would 
have been leaving, at all events, to be 
married, poor silly things, so that it's no 
worse for them than it must have been." 

" Is the school-room dismantled yet ?'* 
asked Julia. 

**Ifo; it is just the same, with the 
benches and the desks, and the book-cases 
and black-boards." 

" I am glad of that. I shall like to see 
it once more. I daresay it will end in 
your keeping it locked up, and paying it 



296 All, or Nothing. 



periodical visits. You know you have a 
hankering after relics and souvenirs. 
There's John's room, a complete sanc- 
tuary." 

Miss Susan shook her head in depreca- 
tion of Julia's sauciness, and answered 
with a smile : 

" No, no ; there's a little bit of news 
connected with the school-room which we 
purposely kept back until you came. 
It's the largest room in the house, you 
know " 

"And the pleasantest, with the twin 
elms in front of the windows, and those 
lovely broad window-seats." 

" Just so. It is the pleasantest room in 
the house, and the book-room, opening 
from it, is a very nice room too. The two 
would make a pleasant sitting-room and 
bed-room, would not they ?" 

" Delightful. But there are multitudes 
of bed-rooms already, and three heavenly 
sitting-rooms. What on earth can the 
school-room and the book-room be wanted 
for ?" 



Bury House. 297 

'' Ah I that is just our bit of news," said 
Miss Jane. " We are going to have a 
permanent boarder, my dear ; an old friend 
too." 

*'I am so glad. I could not help fearing 
you would be lonely, after being * so long 
accustomed to a lot of young people about 
you. Who is it ?" 

''It is a lady, my dear." Miss Susan 
now took up the tale. *' A former pupil 
of ours finds herself in circumstances 
which oblige her to look for a home, while 
she has a small independence which places 
her above having to earn one; and her 
greatest wish is to return to Bury House." 

" Of course it is/' said Julia, in a tone 
of thorough conviction. " What a sensible 
person, and how good of you to let her 
.ome. But who is she? Was she here 
in my time ? Do I know her at all ?" 

*' Yes, you may remember her ; she was 
here before you, but also in your time. 
Her name is Janet Monro." 

" Of course, I remember asking you 
about her. My cousin Laura took a violent 



298 All, or Nothing. 



fancy to a sister-in-law of hers up in Scot- 
land. You like her very much, do you 
not ?" 

" Very much, indeed. When she was at 
school with us here she was a very favourite 
pupil indeed. We had not seen her for a 
long time when she wrote to us a week 
ago, to know if she might come to see 
us the next day, having a great favour 
to ask of us. She came, having seen it 
announced in one of the country papers 
that we had given up the school ; and the 
object of her visit was to arrange for 
coming to live with us." 

" Did you like her as much as ever ?" 

Miss Jane struck in : . 

*' Janet Monro was greatly altered since 
we had seen her last, but in all respecta 
that we could discern, for the better. We 
were so pleased with her that we could 
not refuse her, though of course we had 
not intended anything of the kind." 

" It seemed strange," said Miss Susan^ 
" that she should have been so long away, 
and not have stretched the horizon of her 



Bury House. 299 



life more widely than she has done ; but 
the little she told us accounts for it. We 
were the only friends she had when she 
left us, to go as companion to Mrs. Drum- 
mond of Bevis. Her brother was away at 
sea, and he was her sole surviving relative, 
and she made no new friends, except Mrs. 
Drummond herself, during the years she- 
lived with her." 

Mrs. Drummond of Bevis ! Julia'a 
attention was thoroughly aroused now. 
The dead woman's name had come to bear 
a strange significance to more than one 
person who had never known her in life. 
A few days only had elapsed since Julia 
had become aware of the episode in her 
cousin Laura's life with which Mrs. 
Drummond of Bevis had been so closely 
connected. She had dimly remembered,^ 
when Laura made to her the long-deferred 
revelation, that in some trifling way the 
names of the people and the place had 
previously been brought under her notice, 
but she traced the chain of association na 
farther. The only communication Julia 



300 AU, or Xothing. 



had bad from Laura . a few lines written 
just as she was going on board The Firefly 
. was a mere announcement of her own 
and Mr. Thornton's departure, in good 
health and spirits ; and the episode seemed 
to have slid back again into safe obscurity 
and oblivion. And now, here, in another 
scene, in a department of her life with 
which her cousin had nothing whatever to 
do, she was reminded vividly of the brief 
and baffled love-story, concerning which 
she had felt an apprehension, which might 
indeed be unreasonable, but was certainly 
irresistible. 

" Oh, do tell me all about Mrs. Drum- 
mond," said Julia, eagerly. " I am so 
.urious about her. I want to know why 
he left Bevis, after all, to Admiral Drum- 
mond's nephew. My uncle, and Lady 
Rosa, and Laura knew Captain Dunstan 
very well, and he has only just left Ceylon, 
where he stayed on his way back from 
India, and went up to the plantation with 
Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile. They were just about 
to leave when John wrote last." 



Bury House. 301 



" I cannot tell you anything about that 
matter," said Miss Susan, "for Janet did 
not enter upon it at all with us. The 
story of her life with Mrs. Drummond was 
an uncommon one. Mrs. Drummond waa 
a peculiar person, not easy to get on with, 
and given to strong likes and dislikes. 
Janet went from here to her, a mere 
school-girl. Mrs. Drummond had been 
attracted by her face and her voice, and 
overlooked, indeed, I believe she liked, her 
inexperience ; and the Admiral and she 
both took to the girl in an extraordinary 
way. She was treated by them like a 
daughter; and she deserved such treat- 
ment, I am sure. Since the Admiral's 
death Bevis must have been a dreary place 
enough for a young girl to live in, but 
Janet has very quiet tastes, as she proves 
by proposing to come and live with us . 
also old people, in our quiet way. Mrs. 
Drummond provided for her, not by will, 
but by a gift of money, some time before 
her death ; and there she is, tolerably 
independent, and alone in the world." 



302 All, or Nothing. 



** Is she a pretty girl ?" 

" We think her so, but she is not what 
would be called a beauty." 

" And when does she come ?" 

*'We expect to hear to-morrow. And 
we thought it would be very nice to have 
you to see about getting ready for her. 
We intend to give her the school-room and 
the book-room, because she wishes to 
have them, and also because she brings with 
her a very handsome piano and a large 
.collection of books, the gift of Admiral 
and Mrs. Drummond." 

"I hope she is not a learned lady, or 
one of those dreadful people who practise 
seven hours a day," thought Julia, with 
an unaccountable movement of ill-humour. 
Her curiosity having abated, she did not 
want this Janet Monro to come between 
her and her old friends, with rights almost 
^qual to her own, John excepted. John 
was, however, such a vast and important 
-exception that the timely remembrance of 
him checked her little bit of temper at the 



Bury Howe. . 303 



point of wishing that Miss Monro had not 
fixed to come to Bury House quite so 
soon. 

''It will be very pleasant to get the 
rooms ready/' said Julia, after a little 
pause of self-conquest. " You may expect 
me to begin to-morrow morning. We 
will have in the gardener, and clear all the 
benches and things away to the lofts, and 
you shall see how smart I will make the 
rooms look." 

The old ladies smiled approval of her 
zeal, and then the subject dropped, after 
Julia had asked one more question. 

*'How far is Bevis from here?*' 

" Only ten miles," said Miss Susan ; 
" but that was quite far enough to prevent 
our seeing anything of Janet, for Mrs. 
Drummond has never come near Bury since 
she had a tiff with the rector, and any peo- 
ple whom she visited live on the other side." 

On the following morning Julia arose 
in the liveliest spirits, and with the best 
intentions, but her mind was quickly 



304 ' All, or Nothing. 

turned in a direction with which Miss 
Janet Monro had nothing whatever to do ; 
for, while the three ladies were at break- 
fast, the parcel from Sir Wilfrid Esdaile 
arrived, and caused a great commotion of 
excitement and delight. The Misses 
Sandilands were immensely pleased with 
Sir Wilfrid's letter, and learning from 
Julia that he was completely in the con- 
fidence of their nephew, and that she was 
particularly anxious to see him, they con- 
ceived the bold idea of inviting him to 
visit them. With the simplicity of per- 
fectly good breeding, they were free from 
any apprehension that Sir Wilfrid would 
be too " fine " for their quiet household 
and simple manners, and Julia, whose 
knowledge of the ways of the fashionable 
world was very extensive when compared 
with their complete ignorance, bore the 
testimony of her own slight acquaintance 
with Esdaile to his being unaffected and 
easy to get on with. The invitation, 
destined, as we have seen, to a cordial re- 
ception, was dispatched on the same day. 



Bury House. 306 



and the second post brought a letter from 
Miss Monro to Miss Susan Sandilands. 
The young lady asked her friend whether 
she might be received at Bury House in, 
ten days from that time, adding that a 
letter from the family lawyer to the house- 
keeper had informed that functionary of 
Captain Dunstan's intention to arrive at 
Bevis with a friend within a fortnight. 

**Well," said Julia, when Miss Susan 
Sandilands imparted the contents of Miss 
Monro's letter to her, a little nervously, 
.* this is an instance of the uncertainty of 
human affairs. Instead of my quiet time 
all to ourselves and the dogs, and the hens 
and chickens, here we are in a whirl of 
business and a vortex of society, for I feel 
certain Sir Wilfrid Esdaile will come." 

Julia was right. Sir Wilfrid bade them 
expect him on the same day as that named 
for Miss Monro's arrival, and proposed to 
remain until he should be obliged to join 
a friend at a place in their neighbourhood, 
he believed, though he knew little of the 
geography of Suffolk. The friend was 

VOL. I. X 
ALL, OR NOTHING. 




CHAPTER I. 

The Bluebeard Bureau, 

ANET was very much grieved by 
the explanation that had taken 
place between herself and Sir 
Wilfrid Esdaile, and his sudden departure 
from Bevis added to her discomfiture. She 
had been so absolutely innocent of all co- 
quetry, of any intention of misleading him, 
of any perception of his feelings towards 
her, and the extent to which he was mis- 
leading himself, that she could not take 
any blame in the matter, but was en- 
tirely given over to wonder and regret . 
to wonder, genuine and deep, that she 
should have been found so pleasing in the 

VOL. in, B 



Allf or Nothing. 



sight of a man of the world like Esdaile ; 
that he should have come to love her so 
well as she could not doubt he did love 
her ; and regret, very profound and poign- 
ant, for the pain that he must suffer, from 
which she could not save him. She could 
only hope that it would not last long ; and 
that the future might hold within its pos- 
sibilities the realisation of her own hope of 
a friendship with him, untroubled by the 
remembrance of this misplaced love. He 
had read her secret, he knew why it was 
that he must not hope, must not try, for a 
reversal of her sentence ; and Janet shrank 
from that consciousness, not with any 
doubt of his honour and loyalty, but be- 
cause of the complication that such know- 
ledge brought into his own life, and the 
additional sense which it gave her of hav- 
ing crossed and troubled that life. Esdaile's 
discovery had already deprived his friend 
of his company; if he were less high-mind- 
od than Janet took him to be, it would 
deprive Dunstan of his friendship also, 
and thus become a double misery to her. 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 



She would have been thrown into dismay 
and confusion if Sir Wilfrid had again 
spoken to her; and yet she sometimes 
wished that she could see him, and could 
make up her mind to ask him . ^if only on 
account of that which his quickened 
observation had enabled him to read in 
her face on that last evening . not to with- 
draw himself from Duns tan. 

Janet possessed the excellent gift of 
sympathy, and yet in this case she was 
.entirely unable to imderstand and estimate 
the pain which the mere sight of Dunstan 
inflicted on Esdaile; and when Dunstan 
.complained that Sir Wilfrid had " thrown 
him over," and bemoaned his own dis- 
appointment, Janet felt herself guilty in 
this too, that she had, however unwit- 
tingly, come between the friends whose 
mutual regard . it really was strong and 
genuine . she had invested with loftiness, 
.disinterestedness, and constancy such as 
made up her own ideal of friendship. 

In the keen distress which Janet suf- 
fered, the dispersion of her illusion as 

b2 



-4//, or Nothing. 



to Julia's meaning, in the brief confidence 
that had marked their parting, had very 
little share. Julia had not made any 
reference to this in writing, and she would 
divine the truth, most likely, when she 
should learn that Sir Wilfrid had left 
Bevis. Janet could not tell her ; she well 
. knew how much pained she would be ; and 
now, when she fully understood Julia'& 
meaning, she felt that Julia would be 
unable to forgive her. Sir Wilfrid Esdaile 
was in Julia's eyes what he was in those of 
John Sandilands . a fortunate prince of 
fairy-tale times . and that he should ask 
and not have, that there should exist 
anyone so foolish and so ill-disposed a& 
to say No to him, would be intolerable in 
Julia's sight. He had loved her from the 
first; he had told her so, and Julia had 
seen it I But Janet had not seen it, had 
not dreamed of it ; in her absorption of 
mind and heart, she had never thought 
that to others she seemed free and to be 
won. What a world of cross purposes is 
this, thought Janet, who had but a glimpse 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 



of them ; and how hard it seemed that the 
love of a kind and manly heart, which 
would have made one for whom she was 
.day by day learning to care more and 
more, profoundly happy, should be given 
to her who could not reward or prize it. 

With this fresh access of her sorrow 
there came a resolution. Amabel should 
know the truth; there should be no 
additional delusion or heart-burning in 
this unhappy matter, if some plain speak- 
ing on Janet's part, however painful to 
her, could avert it. The bright, odd, en- 
thusiastic, hard-to-manage girl had be- 
come very dear to the friend who was so 
strangely unlike her, for other reasons 
than the almost worshipping affection with 
which Amabel regarded her. That it 
43hould fall to her lot to cross Amabel's 
path, Janet felt was also very hard ; if she 
had not been there what would have been 
more likely than that Sir Wilfrid should 
have been attracted by Amabel ; and now 
her unlucky presence had brought trouble 
and sorrow on two people who loved her . 



All^ or Nothing. 



two of the very few in all the world to whonk 
she meant anything. 

Janet had not to wait long for an 
opportunity of telling Amabel what waa 
in her mind ; her pale face and evident 
suffering brought quick questions fron^ 
the impetuous girl. 

" Something has happened to you^ 
Janet I What is it ? You have been 
crying." 

Amabel was on her knees, with her arms- 
round Janet, in a moment, and Janet told 
her, as well as she could for her tears. 

The girl's pretty face grew pale and 
fixed, but the clasp of her arms was- 
tighter as she listened to Janet's broken 
words, and gathered from them that she^ 
dreaded their significance to her. She^ 
did not interrupt them once, but when 
they were ended she said : 

'* Poor Sir Wilfrid I I knew there was^ 
trouble before him ; I saw it in his face 
from the first, and who knows better than 
I what a trouble this is! Janet 1 If I 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 



were a man and loved you in vain, I 
should kill myself." 

She loosed her hold, and sank into her 
favourite attitude upon the floor, with her 
hands clasped on her knees, and her eyes 
fixed on Janet's face. 

" And so my presentiment is out, and 
great harm has come to him." 

" And to you, dearest, to you !" sobbed 
Janet. 

"No," said Amabel, ''not to me. I do 
care for him ; I like him very much ; I 
have the strangest feeling about him, as 
if I could see something that is terrible 
in his life, dimly, through a veil ; I might 
have loved him well enough to have been 
the happiest woman in the world if he had 
loved me, or the most wretched if he had 
not, but that I have always known . 

" What, Amabel ?" 



11 



"That he loved you, dear, and that 
there would be no chance for him. I don't 
say I am quite happy, I don't say I can 
quite like my life now that he is gone away 



8 -4//, or Xothing. 



out of it . so far away, and for ever, too . 
for he TV ill never come to Be vis again ; but 
there is no disappointment; remember 
that, for I never made any mistake about 
it, and I am not broken-hearted." 

" And you forgive me ?" 

" Forgive you ! Because he loves you ! 
Yes, indeed, for how could he help it? 
Because you don't love him ? Well, that's 
another and a harder matter ; but neither 
can you help it. Don't fret about me, 
Janet; indeed, you need not, for I only 
grieve for him, and like him all the better 
that he loves you." 

" You have the most generous nature in 
the world." 

*' Not I. I am only reasonable, in spite 
of all my fancifulness, and I know some 
price must be paid for every blessing one 
has in this life. In sober seriousness you 
are my best blessing. And, Janet, I must 
tell you something; it is not only my 
presentiment about Sir Wilfrid that is 
fulfilled in this, it is a presentiment that I 
had about you also. It was the very first 



I'he Bluebeard Bureau. 



day I saw you; and you know," . here 
Amabel smiled, though with only a dim 
ghost of her usual brightness . " I, as well 
as poor Sir Wilfrid, fell in love with you 
on the spot ; and it came over my mind^ or 
my fancy, or my nerves, or whatever it is 
that receives those unaccountable im- 
pressions for which everybody except you 
scolds me or laughs at me, that either you 
would do me, or I should do you, some 
harm in days to come. It passed away 
immediately, just as a shiver . which that 
sort of thing is like in the mind . passes 
over one's body and is gone ; but it had 
been, and now it comes back to me. This 
is the harm you were to do me, dearest 
Janet ; you see, it is not much," 

" Ah, I do not think so. But, at all 
events, it is I who have done you, however 
unintentionally, harm. As for you, you 
will do me nothing but good all the days 
of my life." 

** I hope so," said Amabel. 

The two friends said much more to one 
another, but Amabel did not explain to 



10 All, or Nothing. 

Janet why it was that she had known 
from the first there was no chance for Sir 
Wilfrid. 

After this they discussed the matter no 
farther, but they were even more drawn 
towards each other than before, and ad* 
ditionally companionable, if more silent* 
To both, the inexorably bad weather was 
welcome; neither felt disposed to be 
subject just then to any scrutiny more 
discerning than that of Mrs. Ainslie, who 
recognised no ills except her own, and 
that of Mr. Ainslie, who held that the 
climate of England was enough to account 
for anything concerning anybody. The 
weather, which kept the dwellers at The 
Chantry in, did not, however, keep Captain 
Dunstan out. He came thither nearly 
every day, grumbled with Mr. Ainslie, 
sang with Miss Monro, and made himself 
generally agreeable. So the year drew to 
its close. 

Christmas had come and gone, with its 
pleasures of beneficence and its pains of 
memory, and the season, which she espe-t 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 11 

cially dreaded, had proved a happy time^ 
on the whole^ for Janet. The schools, and 
the almshouse women, the old people in the 
village, to which Bevis stood in the rela- 
tion of the ''great house,'' all theclaimanta 
of those bounties which are so much en- 
hanced by personal solicitude and kind* 
ness in the bestowal of them, were saved 
from the neglect she had feared for them,. 
as a consequence of the death of Mrs. 
Drummond, by the active liberality of 
Captain Dunstan. Janet had returned to 
Bury House a few days before Christmas^ 
but not until she had, at Captain Dunstan's 
request, furnished him with a statement of 
all that Mrs. Drummond had been wont to 
do for the benefit of her neighbours at 
Christmas-time, and arranged with Mrs*. 
Manners . who was much mollified by 
Dunstan's amended behaviour with regard 
to Miss Monro . for large benefactions of 
beef and pudding to the waifs and strays, 
towards whom Janet felt more kindness 
than the sternly-practical vicar altogether 
approved. 



12 AH, iyr XoAin^. 

A hard frost in the beginniog of January 
succeeded the Wi^t weather of the close of 
December, and the hunting with which 
Edward Dunstan had hoped to beguile the 
tedium of his stay at Beris was impossible. 
That tedium did not, however, greatly 
beset him. He made plans for the disposal 
of himself after the date up to which he 
meant to remain, and he even began to 
think about London in the season with less 
reluctance than he would have believed 
possible a short time previously; but, 
apart from the curiosity with which he 
regarded the "Bluebeard bureau," as he 
called it, he was in no particular hurry for 
the interval to pass. Bis life was, as a 
matter of fact, a pleasant one, and even 
his hurt pride and baffled passion could 
not altogether resist the stubbornness of 
facts. He had thoroughly qualified him- 
self to break the seals of the packet in 
the Bluebeard bureau. The long delayed 
message from the dead had received all 
respect and attention from him. It had 
made him regard Janet Monro with addi- 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 13 

tional curiosity, and enhanced the interest 
in her that he already felt. He remem- 
bered what Esdaile had once said about 
his sense of the arbitrariness of fate in ita 
respective dealings with himself and with 
John Sandilands, and he applied it to the 
difference between Janet's destiny and hi* 
own. 

Captain Dunstan liked the society of 
women, and especially of such as were 
womanly. He was not to be won by 
fashion, or even by the personal attrac- 
tions . which, however, rarely exist in 
such anomalous individuals . to admire 
women who hunt, who *"walk with the 
guns," look on at the slaughter of pigeons,, 
pretend to understand horse-racing, talk 
the slang of the gaming saloons, and offer 
at all points a melancholy and contempt- 
ible spectacle to those who wish well ta 
the individuals and to the human race. 
He had too much good taste, and too much 
sense of humour, to be moved to any feel- 
ings save disgust and ridicule by the de- 
plorable freaks of modern young ladyhood 



14 All, or Nothing. 

in these and other objectionable directions, 
and he had found a few specimens of the 
prevailing mode, in the neighbourhood of 
Bevis, very irksome and oppressive to him. 
Amabel and Janet were both, in their far 
different ways, on their different levels, 
essentially womanly, and much to Dun- 
stan's taste. It never occurred to him to 
ask himself whether, if he could have for- 
gotten Laura and her treachery to him, he 
should have fallen in love with either of 
them, because he could not forget Laura, 
and her treachery had closed the book of 
love for him, and put it away from among 
his studies ; he simply liked the two girls, 
and sought their society, especially that of 
Janet, with a growing pleasure. Her 
thoroughness, her simplicity, her quiet 
courage, and the utter ignorance of the 
world, which, contrasted with the con- 
siderable knowledge she had acquired 
from books, invested her with a charm 
largely aided by her grace and beauty. 

On the 10th of January, Captain 
Dunstan said to himself : " This is the day 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 15 

for the Bluebeard bureau, I will open 
the mysterious packet after breakfast." 
And during that meal, he once more 
reperused Mrs. Drummond's letter of 
instructions. 

Meanwhile, Mrs. Oathcart, at the vicar- 
^g> presiding over the vicars repast, 
which he, being a great reader of news- 
papers, rarely enlivened with conversatiou, 
was also thinking of the Bluebeard bureau, 
wondering at what time Dunstan would 
open the packet, how soon, and under 
what pretext he would reveal the secret of 
its contents to her. 

Having waited until there should be 
little or no chance of his encountering an 
inquisitive housemaid in the Admiral's 
corridor, or Mrs. Manners herself on a 
tour of inspection, Captain Dunstan pro- 
ceeded to the unused rooms, in whose 
silent and speckless orderliness there 
was something oppressive to his fancy, 
and, unlocking, for the second time, the 
little door of the central space oE the 
old bureau, he took out the parchment- 



16 Allj or Nothing. 

covered packet, on which his own name 
was written by Mrs. Drummond's hand, 
carried it to the library and began the 
examination of its contents. 

These proved to be two documents ; a 
narrow slip of paper was folded round 
each, and they were numbered respectively 
One and Two. 

Number One was a more imposing 
document than the other, and even when 
folded, and before the labelled slip of paper 
was removed, it looked legal. 

Number Two was simply a letter. 

Captain Dunstan removed the slip of 
paper from Number One, which he un- 
folded and smoothed out upon the table 
before him. It needed only a glance to 
show him that he had under his eyes a 
will. With the usual preamble, in fair 
legal text, expressed with perfect dis- 
tinctness, the document before him be- 
queathed to Janet Monro . ^who was 
named in it in terms of the warmest 
affection . ^the estate of Bevis, and all the 
other property of every kind of which the 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 17 

testatrix should die possessed. The wiU 
was duly signed and attested ; and, with 
the first shock of an overwhelming sur- 
prise, there came over Dunstan a rush of 
desperate anger. He had then been mock- 
ed and fooled ; made for three months 
to believe himself the owner of Bevis, to 
gratify Mrs. Drummond's fantastic spite, 
or her silly fancy! This thought was, 
however, but a lightning-flash ; for the 
next instant his eye caught the date of 
the will. It was six months earlier than 
that of the document by which Mrs. 
Drummond had bequeathed Bevis to him. 
His own position was secure; her in- 
tention had changed, and at sufficient 
interval to do away with the idea of 
caprice ; the sentiments she expressed in 
the letter which had been so long of 
reaching him were her final sentiments; 
again he had wronged her in his swift 
thoughts. 

He reperused the will. There could be 
no mistake about it. Janet Monro, she 
of whom Mrs. Drummond had said that 

VOL. in. c 



18 AU, or Koihing. 

she regarded her as a daughter, she who 
was in a manner committed to his care, 
had been designated as the future owner 
of all that was now his by Mrs. Drummond, 
who had only, as she said, her own free will 
to consult She was the one person in all 
the world whom Mrs. Drummond loved ; 
why had she changed her purpose towards 
her ? It was a righteous purpose. Janet 
deserved from Mrs. Drummond aU that 
she had to give ; Janet would have made 
good use of it ; her claim was a sounder one 
than his. So, in a moment of clear-seeing, 
did the truth come home to Edward Dun- 
stan. Whence had come the change? 
Eagerly Dunstan turned from the docu- 
ment, Number One, to the letter, Number 
Two. In this he would find the explana- 
tion, no doubt. 

The contents of Number Two were as 
follows : 

*'I address you, Edward, on the sup- 
position that you will have acted in con- 
formity with the communication from me 
that is to reach you with the notification 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 19 

of my death ; that you will have acquired 
the right to read these lines, and to be- 
come acquainted with a secret which must 
never be known to anyone except your- 
self. I write on the supposition that you 
have resided three months at Bevis, that 
you have won the esteem and regard of 
Janet Monro, and that you neither are, 
nor are intending to place yourself, under 
any engagement to marry. These things 
being so, the case has arisen in which it is 
my wish to make you acquainted with 
the fact which the paper marked Number 
One will reveal to you, and you will now 
receive my last communication, which I 
make to you in the strictest confidence, 
and which will have, when it reaches you, 
the additionally solemn sanction that the 
never-to-be-broken silence of death will 
have been for so long established between 
us. 

" It is to Janet Monro . to her nobility 
of mind, her disinterestedness, her firm- 
ness, that you owe the possession of Bevis, 
and of all I have left to you. You see 

c2 



20 All^ or Nothing. 



that it was all to have been hers, and you 
will readily believe the alteration did not 
originate with me. Made aware of my 
intention, she most earnestly entreated 
me to forego it ; and, failing in that, she 
positively assured me that it would be- 
useless for me to attempt to put it in 
force, as nothiug should induce her ta 
accept the legacy of the estate and for- 
tune, which she persisted in believing to 
be your inheritance by right. She suc- 
ceeded. I yielded to her earnest prayer ;. 
and, had she known that I had actually 
made the will, of which I spoke to her 
only as a thing intended to be done, I 
have no doubt she would have insisted on 
my letting her destroy it with her own 
hands, so that you might never by any 
accident come to the knowledge that it 
had existed, and that in this, too, Janet 
would have succeeded. 

" If you have gained the right to read 
these lines, you know by this time what 
manner of woman she is whom I would 
have had to fill my place here, and that 



The Bliiebeard Bureau. 2 1 



there is none which she would not adorn. 
No one, however, but yourself and myself 
.can ever know all the truth about Janet. 
And now I am going to tell you why I 
have recorded this truth, so that it should 
.come to your knowledge after such a 
preparation as I have contrived. It is be- 
<jause, having done you all the good in my 
power in one way for Janet's sake . there 
will be nothing due from you to my memo- 
ry on that score . I would like to do you 
a far greater good for your own ; and be- 
cause, having renounced the dear hope 
that she would be here after me, in her 
own right, to keep up the remembrance of 
us and the tradition of the past, the same 
hope in another form has stolen back into 
my old heart. I believe that you, as you 
will be when you read this in Janet's con- 
fidence, her friend, the witness of her good 
and blameless life, could win her for your 
wife, if you wish to do so ; and that, if you 
<Jo wish it, and do win her, the good I am 
now doing you is as far beyond what I 
have already done you as blessedness is 



22 All, or Nothing. 



beyond wealth. Should this not be so . 
should there never be a closer tie than 
that of friendship between you and Janet 
Monro, this that I am doing can be na 
wrong ; for it will make you know how 
noble a heart is that in which you will 
have secured a friend's place ; and, for the 
rest, the fancy that is not to become fact^ 
the hope that is not to be realised, they 
will remain for ever a dead secret with the- 
dead." 

Mrs. Cathcart remained at home the- 
whole of the day on the 10th of January, 
in the expectation, which she did not quite 
admit to herself, of Captain Dunstan's^ 
calling at the vicarage. He did not 
come; and the [following day also passed 
without her seeing or hearing anything 
of him. It was not until the 12th that 
he presented himself, and she perceived 
a curious change in his look and manner.. 
He entered at once upon the subject of 
which they were both thinking, and with 
straightforward seriousness told Mrs* 



21ie Bluebeard Bureau. 23 

Cathcart that he found himself unable to 
reveal the nature of that disclosure which 
had been made to him. 

" It has no present concern," he added, 
*'for anyone, and merely referred to a 
matter which Mrs. Drummond considered 
it necessary that I, as her heir, should be 
informed of. The delay in my receiving 
her first letter turns out to be of no con- 
sequence, and the whole affair is of abso- 
lutely no interest or importance." 

" You look as if you had done more 
thinking over this absolutely unimportant 
affair than you ever did in your life 
before," was Mrs. Cathcart's mental com- 
ment upon an explanation which explained 
nothing ; but she was too well-bred to let 
the slightest doubt or disappointment 
appear ; and her smiling " How fortunate," 
and immediate easy introduction of some 
subject indefinitely removed from the topic 
under taboo, set her visitor at ease at once. 
In a few minutes she found that he was 
taking the lead in the conversation, and 
that its direction was towards Janet 



24 AH, or Nothing. 

Monro. Her love for the place that had 
been her home for so long; her quiet 
tastes, her refinement, and cultivation ; 
of these things Dunstan spoke in a way 
that seemed to provoke a question. At 
last Mrs. Cathcart asked it, point-blank. 

"Have you anything particular to say 
to me about Janet ? Has anything hap- 
pened ?" 

"Yes," replied Dunstan; "and I wished 
to tell you myself, because you are such a 
good friend to her and to me. I have 
asked her to come back to Bevis. I know 
you will be glad. I have asked her to be 
my wife, and she has consented." 

Mrs. Cathcart did not sp6ak for a full 
minute ; then she said, 

" I never was more glad of anything in 
my life." And then, with striking incon- 
sistency, she burst into tears. 

" And now for a bit of news " . so ran 
the closing paragraph of a letter from 
Edward Dunstan to Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile, 
written that same night to reach him just 
before he was to leave England on an ex- 



The Bluebeard Bureau. 25 

cursion, of which nothing was settled 
except that it was to be a distant one . 
*' which will interest you, and surprise you, 
too. I shall want the cats'-eyes after all, 
and Lady Esdaile shall have another set. 
You can guess what I mean. I did not 
think of it when you were here ; but I know 
it's the best thing I can do, and that you 
will think so. I have asked Miss Monro 
to marry me . I asked her yesterday ; she 
has said 'Yes,' and she is most anxious 
you should know, and sends you all sorts 
of pleasant messages. Don't you think 
I'm right ? Of course, there's no nonsense 
about this ; that is over . well over, too, no 
doubt, and the new leaf ] have turned will, 
I hope, have no follies writ large on it. 
Nothing settled, of course ; but there is 
nothing particular for us to wait for, and 
so you must not be long away." 

At the hour when Edward Dunstan 
was writing these lines, little thinking 
of the feelings of unavailing regret they 
would arouse in Esdaile, Janet was kneel- 
ing in the deep bay of the window of her 



fiCj All, or Nothing. 



room at Bury House, her folded arms 
upon tho window-sill, her face turned 
to tilu> moonlight lying in silver bars 
upon Iho frost-bound earth, with radiant 
y^y and iK'aco and thankfulness in it, 
not. oontradictod by the tears which 
nhtuio in hor eyes. For Janet, in that 
quiot hour of unequalled happiness and 
hopo, was not thinking of her lover only ; 
not. only of tho great bliss that had come 
into hor llfo, to glorify it for evermore; 
not only of the beauty and the sweetness 
and tht^ wondor of life with love acknow- 
ItHlfftnl and roturnod in it ; but also of the 
fritnul who was gone, and the interpreta- 
tion of lun' bright, slow-falling tears was : 
** If sho nught b\it see me now ! If she 
could only know how it is with me !" 



A Granted Prayer. 27 



CHAPTER II. 



A Granted Prayer. 




F course I am delighted. Of 
course I have most heartily 
wished that it might be so ever 
since I found out that Janet cared for him, 
and I saw that very soon ; but, if you ask 
me to believe that the luck is on Janet'a 
side, then I can't, and don't." 

" What is luck, then, you impracticable 
creature, if it is not in all that has hap- 
pened to Janet? She cares for the one 
man in all the world who can restore her 
to her old home, and he asks her to marry 
him ; the match is a splendid one for her^ 
and a perfect love-match as well. I must 
say I think there never was a case of 



28 AH, or NoHiing. 

greater luck, or rather good fortune, for I 
don't like the word you are so fond of, and 
you wiU not find people taking your view 
of it, AmabeL The world in general wiU 
think Captain Dunstan has done a very 
romantic, and not a very wise thing, and 
ihat Janet is a favourite of destiny .** 

Mrs. Cathcart spoke a little irritably; 
ior the truth was, she was almost as much 
puzzled as she was pleased by the unex- 
pected realisation of her own wishes. She 
had never felt more certain of the correct- 
ness of any impression than she felt of 
the con-ectness of that which Captain 
Dunstan left on her mind when he brought 
her Mrs. Drummond's letter to read. 
He was not in love with Janet, as she 
liad previously hoped : then he comes 
and tells her that Janet is to be his wife, 
and she, though genuinely glad, feels that 
there is something wanting. This visit 
which she is going to make at Bury House 
does not afford her the unqualified pleasure 
that it ought to afford ker, and she vents 
her own contradiction of feeling upon her 



A Granted Prayer. 29 

companion, who has also a shady side to 
her sentiments on the subject. 

Amabel turns her head sharply to look 
at her cousin, and jerks the mouths of 
Jack and Jill . the ponies are taking the 
two ladies over the frost-bound ground to 
Bury House at a cheery rate . and bursts 
out with an indignant remonstrance. 

"I do believe you are going to be aa 
worldly-minded as the rest of them 1" she 
exclaimed ; *' and that you, who wi^re the 
very person to make me look for the peer- 
lessness of Janet, actually think the acci* 
dent of Captain Dunstan's being the owner 
of Bevis and a lot of money puts him on 
a level with her. Of course it is very 
charming and delightful, so charming and 
delightful that it is the greatest possible 
miracle it should have happened ; but she's 
a hundred thousand times too good for 
him, even if there had not been the other 
woman." 

" The other woman I What do you 
mean ?" 

" I don't know," said Amabel, and Jack 



50 All^ or Nothing, 



and Jill got another jerk. " At least, I do 
know ; I mean the other woman whom he 
was in love with before he went out to 
India, and whom he could not marry, for 
ome reason or other. I told you about 
her." 

" You told me about your own idea that 
such a person existed; but you did not 
know it as a fact. And besides, what has 
that to do with the matter? If there 
really was such a person, nothing can be 
plainer than that Captain Dunstan has got 
over it, whatever it was that came between 
them : he would not be going to marry 
Janet if he had not." 

 " Of course not ; but do you really not 
think Janet too good for him ? Do you 
really think they will see things alike, and 
take life on the same level ?" 

Mrs. Cathcart did not reply. She did 
not distinctly hear . she was think- 
ing. Presently she said, with great ani- 
mation : 

" Amabel, what if the other woman, as 
jou call her, were Janet herself, after all ? 



A Granted Prayer. 31 

May you not be right, and my notion be 
right also ?" 

" I never thought of such a thing," said 
Amabel, dubiously. " He had seen little 
of Janet before he went to India." 

" That is no argument against it. Love 
at first sight is at least very common, if 
it is not the rule; and several things 
make me think I have hit upon the 
truth. Janet has captivated him now, 
why should she not have captivated him 
then, when he certainly could not have 
married her, when her position with his 
own relatives would have made it very un- 
pleasant for her had she suspected or re- 
turned his feelings, when, in fact, the 
whole thing would have seemed to him an 
impossibility ? What a game . of cross- 
purposes it was, if, indeed, this was the 
case ?" 

Here Mrs. Catbcart left off rather ab- 
ruptly, for the sense of cross-purposes that 
struck her so strongly was derived from 
her own perception of the meaning that 
underlay Mrs. Drummond's letter to Dun- 



32 All, or Nothing. 



Stan and its occult purpose, and this, she 
remembered in time, must not be divulged 
to her companion. Without imparting 
the knowledge of it she could not make 
Amabel see from her point of view, so she 
wisely said no more, and was not annoyed 
when Amabel said she could not take that 
view ; she was sure Dunstan had not felt 
any interest beyond the merest polite 
good-will towards Janet when they met at 
Bury House. Mrs. Cathcart felt much 
relieved by her own new idea ; she parted 
readily in its favour with her former im- 
pression, and was ready to think that Dun- 
stan's manner was only prompted by the 
coolness and self-repression of a man of 
the world before he is quite certain of that 
success, his gladness and triumph in 
which he does not hesitate afterwards to 
display. Under the influence of this con- 
viction, Mrs. Cathcart allowed herself to 
be thoroughly happy, and listened to 
Amabel with unmoved complacency. 

** It is not that I don't like him," said 
Amabel, " for indeed I do ; there's perhaps 



A Granted Prayer. 33 

nobody I know, except Janet, that I 
should not grudge him to. But Tm going 
to get over that, and to think of nothing 
but her views of the case." 

They were met on their arrival at Bury 
House by the two old ladies, whose pleas- 
ure and importance were very great under 
the novel circumstances. Janet had just 
gone down to the gardener's house, where 
there was a sick child to be seen to ; she 
would return presently . an intimation 
which sent Amabel off to find her there, 
and they were glad to have an oppor- 
tunity of telling Mrs. Cathcart how nicely 
Captain Dunstan had behaved. 

*' Just as if our dear Janet had had two 
mothers, and we were them both," said 
Miss Susan, " he came to us, and told us 
she had done him the great honour of 
accepting him for her husband, and he 
hoped we should not object, but would feel 
satisfied that in placing her in his hands 
we might be sure of her happiness and 
welfare. So sensible, my dear madam, so 
unlike the young men one hears of. I 

VOL. ni. D 



34 -4//, or Nothing, 



assure you lie miglit have been her brother, 
speaking to us for a third party, he was 
so quiet and so respectful. What could 
we say, you know, except that we were 
delighted, and more than sensible of Janet's 
good fortune, as indeed we are, for it is 
quite wonderful." 

" So is his," interposed Miss Sandilands. 
'* No man in the world, let his position be 
what it may, could have any greater gift 
from Providence than such a wife as Janet, 
and so we told him. He seemed quite 
sensible of that, and said in the kindest 
way that he had an old acquaintance with 
her excellence." 

" And his chief anxiety " . here Miss 
Susan struck in again . ''was that there 
should be very little delay about their 
marriage. I must say he is as impatient 
on that point as any of the lovers I have 
ever read of . I never had any experience 
of them myself," added Miss Susan, with 
a pleasant smile . " and he is as reasonable 
as he is impatient, because, as he says, the 
sooner Janet is back again in her old 



A Granted Prayer, 35 

home, and everything is as Mrs. Drum- 
mond would have wished it to be, the 
better for everyone." 

" That is all as it ought to be ; and what 
does Janet say ?" 

" Here she comes to answer for herself," 
said Miss Susan, and at that moment Janet 
and Amabel passed the window. 

Mrs. Cathcart went out quickly, met 
Janet at the porch, and told her by a silent 
embrace how much she rejoiced in her 
happy prospect. The older woman looked 
with astonished admiration at the girl 
when she had gone back into the drawing- 
room with her, and stood in the midst of 
the group of friends, the very picture of 
beautiful pure happiness and hope. The 
steady light in her serene grey eyes, the 
lovely colour on her cheek, the sensitive 
smile that hovered about her lips, were all 
like herself, indeed, but like herself inten- 
sified. She said a few words of her grati- 
tude for all their kindness, but they were 
not very distinctly said. 

" My kindness, Janet," said Mrs. Cath- 

d2 



36 AH, or Nothing. 

cart, "** has a strong dash of the benevo- 
lence that begins at home in it. I am so 
rejoiced to think of you at BeTis that 
I cannot utter my feelings. And the 
vicar charges me to express his sentiments 
also." 

** I am so glad Mr. Cathcart does not . 
that he is not . dear Mrs. Cathcart, it is 
all so much too good for me ; you are all 
so much too kind to me.'' 

The motherless girl burst into a passion 
of happy tears, which was allowed to 
exhaust itself by the wise management 
of Mrs. Cathcart, who left her to Amabel, 
while she talked business with the Misses 
Sandilands. 

Captain Dunstan, it appeared, had 
pleaded successfully with Janet for a short 
engagement. The marriage was to take 
place in six weeks, and the first peep of 
the world, beyond a circuit of twenty miles, 
which Janet had ever had for so long as 
she could remember, was to be her wedding 
trip. The wedding was to be as quiet as 
possible, and the only person to be invited 



A Granted Prayer. 37 

. except Amabel, Mrs. Cathcart, and one 
friend of Dunstan's . was to be Jalia Car- 
micliael. 

The old ladies and Mrs. Cathcart form- 
ed one group, Janet and Amabel formed 
another, and these practical matters were 
discussed in the first ; but the girls heard 
most of what was said by their elders, and 
when Miss Susan told Mrs. Cathcart that 
Captain Dunstan's most particular wish 
was that Sir Wilfrid Esdaile should be 
with him on the occasion, Janet's hand 
pressed Amabel's nervously, and received 
a strong pressure in return. 

" He will not come/' whispered Ama- 
bel. 

" No, I am sure he will not, and I don't 
know what to do. Ought I to tell . him, 
or not ?" 

" I don't know. I think he will tell him 
when he refuses to come ; he will if he's 
the man I take him to be, and then he will 
live it down." 

It distressed Janet that even so much 
allusion as this to the fact that she was 



38 All, or Nothing. 

loved and sought after by another was 
necessary. She would have liked to know 
that the mere possibility that she could 
ever have been anything except Edward 
Dunstan's wife had not presented itself ta 
the mind of anyone ; she would have liked 
to feel that the words in which he had 
asked her for that heart which had been 
his ever since she had known that love 
existed among the pains, and might be the 
one sole joy of life, its savour, its prize, it& 
help, and its reward, were the only words 
with such a meaning that had ever reached 
her ears. But that it could not be so,, 
was the one little particle of alloy in 
all the measureless wealth of her great 
blessedness. 

Captain Dunstan was to arrive at Bury 
House that evening, the old ladies told 
Mrs. Cathcart ; and he talked of having to 
go to London in a few days to make some 
necessary arrangements. This was rather 
a pity, they thought, as the engagement 
was to be so short, for they had several 
old-fashioned notions on the subject of 



A Granted Prayer. 39 

courtship, and held that the time it lasted 
was the brightest time of a girl's life, that 
in which she enjoyed most of the happy 
and innocent triumphs of girlhood. It 
seemed to be the modern notion to cut 
all this beautiful sweethearting-time as 
short as possible ; and they could only 
suppose people knew best what suited 
themselves. 

'*0f course, it's very different when 
there's a beautiful home ready to bring a 
bride to, and there's nothing to be thought 
of in the way of furniture, and servants, 
and how things are to be done for the 
best ; we know there's no comparison at 
all between Janet's case and our John's ; 
but still we could wish Captain Dunstan 
were not in quite such a hurry." 

"And I could not forgive him if he 
granted Janet a single day's extension of 
leave, for I want her back at Bevis quite 
desperately," gaily answered Mrs. Cath- 
cart ; and then, Janet having recovered her 
composure, she turned to her, and the 
friends conversed long and earnestly. 



40 AR, or Xoihing. 



Mrs. Cathcart had not seen Dunstan since 
he had brought her the good news, bat 
that was by no means surprising : he was, 
of course, very much occupied, and at 
Bury House daily. 

"Did you ever see such a picture of 
perfect happiness in your life?" Amabel 
asked Mrs. Cathcart, when they were on 
their way home. 

" I really do not think I ever did. And 
what a blessing it is to think that it is 
such well-founded happiness, with every- 
thing in his character and position and 
circumstances to make it lasting." 

*' Except her innocence of life and the 
world's ways, and her wonderfully high 
ideals, and her belief not only that her 
geese are swans, for she thinks that of us, 
you know . of you and me, holds our 
plumes to be dazzling and our forms of 
unequalled grace . but that this particular 
goose . Captain Dunstan, I mean . is a 
swan of more than earthly swannishness, a 
phoenix among swans. I wish she did not 
worship him quite so devoutly." 



A Granted Prayer. 41 



"Nonsense, Amabel; if Janet did not 
worship, as you call it, the man she loves, 
she would not love him at all, it's in her 
nature ; anything else wouldn't be Janet ; 
and besides, when was any man the worse 
of being overrated by his wife, or any 
woman the worse of overrating her hus- 
band ? The risk and the evil are all the 
other way, it seems to me." 

" When they get found out, you mean," 
said Amabel, "and the joss-sticks are 
pulled up, and the incense is put away 
with the pepper and the pickles." 

They were right ; Janet did look the 
perfect picture of happiness, and she felt 
the perfect reality. The variety of her 
feelings, the wonder, the pride, the humility, 
the deep thankfulness, the new horizon of 
life, the boundless gratitude and devotion, 
the almost awful sense of a fulfilled hope 
which she had hardly ventured to admit 
as a hope at all, the many memories of the 
past with the sting taken out of them all, 
the sense of a great peace ; all these ab- 
sorbed her when her lover was not with 



42 All^ or Nothing. 



her, and formed, when he was, an accom- 
paniment as of most entrancing music to 
the unspeakable delight of his presence. 

She looked back into her short life no 
farther than to the time when she had 
seen him first and loved him . it might 
have been with her fancy, but she took it 
for her heart ; that summer-time when he 
came to Be vis, and lighted up the staid 
and quiet house, where she lived so sombre 
though so happy a life, like a sunbeam. 
He had been only a couple of weeks at 
Bevis, and she knew vaguely that the 
Admiral and he did not get on together 
very well, but what had that to do with 
her? She knew, afterwards, that Mrs* 
Drummond did not like him ; but Mrs. 
Drummond never alleged that there was 
anything in it except a matter of taste, 
and what had that to do with her ? All 
the conditions, circumstances, influences 
about Janet cohered to make of what 
might have been at first but a passing 
fancy the one great truth, the central 
meaning of her life. On three occasiong 



A Granted Prayer. 43 

only, with long intervals between, and for 
a short period, she had been in his society . 
and, while he had hardly taken any real 
heed of her, the courtesy of his always 
winning manner had prevented her feeling 
that. It was quite impossible that any 
woman could have been slighted or 
neglected where Edward Dunstan was; 
she was " the young lady of the house " to 
him, though to others she might be only 
"Mrs. Drummond's companion;" and, his 
own heart and mind full at the time of 
Laura Chumleigh, and of the contending 
hopes and fears of his position with hi& 
uncle, he won the heart of the young girl 
who had no one with whom to compare 
him, and was absolutely innocent of every 
art of flirtation and prompting of self* 
consciousness. When the time came at 
which Janet knew that Mrs. Drummond 
had determined to bequeath to her tho 
estate and fortune which she had never 
thought of otherwise than as Dunstan's^ 
the shock of terror and grief which the 
knowledge caused her revealed to her 



44 All, or Nothing. 



loving friend the secret she had not 
herself discovered. That there was any- 
thing noble, anything generous in her 
immediate renunciation of the intended 
bequest, never crossed Janet's mind for a 
moment. 

Had the Admiral's nephew been nothing 
to her, instead of being all her world, she 
would have done just the same. But the 
delight, the sweetness of the secret sense 
that she had so done this thing that he 
should never know there had been any 
thought of another but himself in the 
Admiral's place, were exquisite indeed. If 
she had not known, if the will had been 
read after Mrs. Drummond's death, and she 
had either been obliged to renounce the 
legacy, or, perhaps, for she could not tell 
whether her renunciation would have 
handed it over to the Admiral's nephew, to 
accept it and then make it over to him, it 
would have been so miserable, so dis- 
tressing; there might have been some 
foolish anger and hurt pride on his part ; 
perhaps, horrible thought ! he might not 



A Granted Prayer. 45 



have been able to forgive her for the mor- 
tification, in the infliction of which she 
would have been so guiltless ; he might 
have had some sort of sense as if she were 
his enemy. 

She allowed herself to dwell in imagina- 
tion upon this possibility for the sake of 
the delightful certainty and safety which 
the manner of her discovery and defeat 
of Mrs. Drummond's cruel kindness had 
brought to her ; it had sustained her 
under the keen grief of parting with the 
place and the innumerable objects that had 
been so dear to her ; it had been present 
with her while she carried out all Mrs. 
Drummond's directions, and waited for a 
communication from Dunstan which never 
came. 

Dreadful as it would have been to her 
had this imagined danger been realised, it 
was not the only one she would have 
feared, had Mrs. Drummond's temporary 
intention ever found expression; she would 
have feared the possibility of his gratitude 
. feared that it might have occurred to 



46 All^ or Nothing. 



him as possible that she could have accept- 
ed such a gift, and therefore that it might 
have also occurred to him as possible to 
feel grateful, obliged, and under some sort 
of compliment to her. With the repug- 
nance of a nature in which every feeling 
was thorough, absolute, complete in all its 
consequences, Janet shrank from such a 
possibility ; for she loved him with a 
strength and depth of love which could 
have brooked nothing from him but love. 

Nothing but love ! And it had come 1 
All was changed ; the earth was suddenly 
turned into heaven . all the future was 
irradiated with joy. If Janet gave a 
thought to her past fancies and fears at 
all, it was only because they crossed her 
memory when she was busy with the 
thought of how strange a fulfilment of 
that intention which she had frustrated had 
been brought about by destiny. She had 
never known her parents, but it seemed 
to her that the veil was rent that hid 
them from her in the land of light, and 
that they knew she was happy, and were 



A Granted Prayer. 47 

happy with her. The music that her heart 
made found utterance in her voice; the 
perfect trust and love which filled that heart 
touched her face with a richer and a rosier 
beauty^ 

Captain Dunstan's demeanour in the 
character of an accepted suitor was very 
graceful, and the brief period of their 
engagement passed over without any un- 
toward incidents to mar its pleasantness. 
This pair of lovers never quarrelled, there 
never arose any little jealousies or dis- 
trusts between them ; one lived in a dream 
which drew its beautiful illusion from her 
own pure, passionate, inexperienced, abso- 
lutely-surrendered heart ; the other lived 
in a pleasant enough sort of reality, seeing 
that he had laid by dreams and illusions, 
and was pleased with the consciousness 
that he had done the right thing. After 
all, he must have married and settled at 
some time, and one time was just as good 
as another, when none could make any 
real difference. 

It might have been another matter if he 



48 All, or Nothing. 

had gone up to town for the season, and 
once more met Laura ; it would not have 
been so easy by any means. And Janet 
was very nice. charming, indeed, in her 
way, very handsome, very clever, with all 
her ignorance, which her intelligence would 
speedily remove, and which was, at all 
events, infinitely better than the detestable 
knowingness of most girls, very refined, if 
unlike other people, and then so exquisite- 
ly good. He would not have thought of 
her as a wife but for the peculiar circum- 
stances, indeed ; but then he would not 
have thought of anyone as a wife, not for 
a long time, at least. In her calm, pro- 
found way, Dunstan thought, she certainly 
loved him, and she had behaved splendidly ; 
he was almost sorry that he must never 
tell her that he knew that, but it would 
never do, even if he were not bound ; there 
was something about her which made him 
sure of that . well, she should never have 
any reason to regret it, and it was most 
fortunate she was of the quiet-minded sort. 
Quand on ria pas ce qu'on aime^ ilfaut aimer 



A Granted Prayer. 49 

ce quon a . or, if not " love," then like . 
which does as well in the end. 

He wondered what Laura would think . 
Laura, who would not wait for him, when 
nobody could have known that he had no 
chance of Bevis, who would not stand a 
little bullying from her mother for his sake 
. for he believed she had married Thorn- 
ton as much to get away from Lady Eosa 
as for his wealth . if she knew that there 
was a girl, quite without friends or posi- 
tion, who had renounced a fortune for 
love of him, and so that it never should be 
known to him ? Would the contrast with 
her own conduct humiliate her in her own 
sight? At all events, though she could 
not know anything about that part of the 
matter, Laura would soon learn that he 
was not breaking his heart about her any 
longer. Julia Carmichael would tell her, 
whether with or without the consciousness 
that the information would have any 
special interest, and she would be sure ta 
add that Janet was handsome. No one iu 
the world, least of all Laura, would ever 

VOL. ni. B 



50 All, or Nothing. 



dream of any motive except or beside love 
in his marriage. And so the old lady 
would have her way, after all. The post- 
humous match-making would succeed. 
Now, if Laura had only kept her promise 
to him, that will would have gone unread 
into the fire, and Janet's renunciation 
would never have been known to him, and 
Janet herself, what would have become of 
her ? Would she have gone on living, or 
rather vegetating, at Bury House with her 
old friends, or would she, too, have adopted 
the frank philosophy of the maxim he had 
just remembered, and liked somebody else? 

Captain Dunstan was thinking desultor- 
ily on these general lines, when the answer 
to his letter to Sir Wilfrid Esdaile reached 
him. It bore a Spanish post-mark. 

" Spain ! eh I" said Dunstan. " That ac- 
counts for the delay." 

He read the letter, and his face fell; 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile at least justified 
Amabel's opinion of him. Very frankly 
and simply he told Dunstan why it was 
that, while wishing him every happiness, 



A Granted Prayer. 51 

he could not be present at his wedding. 
*' I know Miss Monro will not tell you," 
he added ; '* and as no estrangement shall 
come between us if I can help it, I tell you 
I would rather not meet her again until 
she is your wife. You know how one gets 
over a thing of this kind, and of course it 
is easier where one never had a chance ; 
but I never mean to get over my belief 
that you are the luckiest fellow in the 
world, and that there's nobody in it to 
compare with Miss Monro." 

'* Esdaile will not come to our wedding," 
said DuDstan that evening to Janet, '*and 
he tells me why. I must have been very 
stupid not to see it ; it is plain enough 
now." 

" I hope," she answered, trembling and 
blushing, " I shall not cost you your 
friend. It never occurred to me for one 
moment until he spoke to me." 

** Ah, but you are not in the least vain ; 
I remember now he was never easy un- 
less he was coming here or to The 
Chantry. We shall not lose him ; he's the 

E 2 



52 All, or Xoihing, 



best fellow in the world. Here's the 
song.'' 

Janet sang, and Donstan turned the 
pages, and no more was said, but Danstan's 
memory was busy with those days at 
Southampton, when EIsdaQe had thought 
him so unreasonable, and he had thought 
Esdaile so insensible. On Janet's white 
arm was the bracelet, with the softly, shift- 
ily gleaming cats' eyes; the bracelet he 
had meant for Laura, and then for Esdaile's 
wife. Janet looked at it, and touched it now 
and then lovingly, almost reverently; it 
was his first gift. 

** I never saw jewels of this kind before," 
said Janet, when she had finished her song. 
V Tell me about them." 

He told her, and the old time when he 
had bought them at Ceylon seemed won- 
derfully distant. 

The next day he went to London, and 
between that time and the date appointed 
for the marriage only one vexatious cir- 
cumstance occurred. 

The individual who troubled the even 



A Granted Prayer. 53 



current of events was Colonel Chumleigh. 
He got an attack of gout, and Lady Eosa 
resented his conduct so severely that Julia 
felt it impossible to leave her uncle to the 
tender mercies of his indignant wife ; so 
that she sent only good wishes and a 
marriage gift to Janet, who could not help 
suspecting that Julia was angry with her. 

On a bright cold day, at the end of 
February, the quiet wedding took place ; 
and, as the vicar joined the hands of the 
bride and bridegroom, the wintry sun 
fihone out, and a streak of its light touched 
the marble tablet on the wall of the church 
which was inscribed with Mrs. Drum- 
mond's name. Janet's glance followed the 
ray, and her heart went with it, in a great 
thrill of love and gratitude for the past, 
and hope, unsulUed and boundless, for the 
future. 

Captain and Mrs. Dunstan were to begin 
their journey from Bury House, but it was 
at the vicarage, whither the little party 
had gone to luncheon from the church, 
that Amabel took leave of Janet. 



54 A //, or Nothing. 

" Do you remember what you promised 
me ?" she said, eagerly, holding back Janet 
vet another minute, while Dunstan and the 
vicar stood patiently by the carriage door, 
" that, come what would, nothing should 
ever part you and me." 

*' Of course I remember, and now, when 
I come back, we shall be more together 
than ever." 

"Did you ever see a lovelier bride ?"^ 
asked Mrs. Cathcart of the vicar, as she 
and Amabel drew their chairs up to the 
fire, and he was preparing to leave them 
to their tea and talk. 

*' Only once," said the vicar. His wife 
smiled and shook her head at him. 

"And," he continued, "I never saw^ 
even once, so perfectly self-possessed a 
bridegroom. A handsome and a happy 
pair." 



" Tom EsdaiUs Boyr 55 



CHAPTER III. 



'' Tom Esdaile's Boy.'' 




T was a relief to Sir Wilfrid Esdaile 
to receive the letter in whicli 
Edward Dunstan told him that he 
was going to marry Janet. There was 
nothing heroic about the young man, who 
had hitherto had so much of his own way 
in life, and had not on the whole made a 
bad use of it ; but there was a certain 
generosity and large-heartedness which 
made him able to be glad that the girl who 
had rejected him, who might have made so 
diflFerent a man of him, had she accepted 
him, was not to have her life also embit- 
tered by disappointment. And at first he 
had feared that it was to be so. With the 



56 AU^ or Nothing. 

reTelation of the tmth to him, there had 
come mach more than the bitterness of the 
knowledge that it was his own familiar 
friend who had won, all nnconscionsly, 
all involuntarily, the prize which to Sir 
Wilfrid seemed just the one prize in the 
gift of fate worth the winning : there had 
come great compassion and fear for 
Janet herself. It had not 'occurred to 
him for a moment that Janet had made 
such an impression upon Dunstan as could 
lead to the result which had taken place. 
He and his friend had dropped the subject 
of Mrs. Thornton by common tacit con- 
sent, and Esdaile did not know whether 
Dunstan had got over it ; but whether or 
not, there had not been anything to indicate 
that one so utterly different had supplant- 
ed her. Esdaile 'did not think Dunstan 
more likely to be constant to a hopeless 
passion than any other man . always ex- 
cepting himself, whom a little while ago 
he would have suspected of such a senti- 
ment less than anybody . ^but his very 
winning and quietly attentive ways, which 



" Tom Esdaik\Boy." 57 

* 

might have looked to a stranger like the 
restlt of captivation, were, as Esdaile 
know, habitual to Dunstan, and just as 
much addressed to Miss Sandilands, or to 
Julia Car^ichael, as to Janet. 

Her rejection of himself was, he well 
knew, final ; he had said to himself, " She 
will n,ever change" . was not that stead- 
fastness of hers in all things, great and 
small, one of her rare charms ? . and in all 
his own pain he had grieved for hers, quite 
sincerely and unaflFectedly, and with much 
impatient murmuring at the prevalence of 
cross-purposes in human affairs, and the 
vanity of all things. Here was Janet, a 
peerless woman, throwing away love . 
which would have made him (Esdaile) the 
happiest man alive, and kept him straight, 
as he familiarly phrased it in his 
thoughts, always . upon Dunstan, who 
was in love with another woman who had 
thrown him over very lightly, to say the 
least of it, even supposing he had not so 
much reason to think that Laura really 
cared for him as he had represented. 



58 All^ fir Nothing. 



Esdaile did not hate his friend because 
Janet loved him, though he frankly envied 
him with all his heart ; and, when the news 
reached him, he was surprised beyond 
measure. The cure had been ^complete 
then, and strangely rapid ; going on under 
his own eyes, simultaneously, indeed, with 
the mending of his own broken bones, and 
he had never suspected it I Well ; so be 
it. Dunstan was a good fellow, but he 
did not deserve this last best good that 
fate had sent him ; the man who had been 
so enslaved by one so very different from 
Janet, could not give Janet such love a& 
she merited, such love as only could make 
her happy. Esdaile believed himself to be 
a common-place enough sort of a fellow ; 
until he met Janet he had never particu- 
larly wished to be other and better thaa 
he was ; but he believed that he could 
appreciate her more highly, and sympa- 
thise with her more truly . he who had 
never been in love with anyone except her, 
who had no memories of false and fickle 
fine-ladyism to blunt his perception of her 



" Tom Esdailes Boyr 59 

pure truth and fervent goodness, and to 
take the edge off his taste for those 
qualities. 

Dunstan was going to marry Janet, and 
he could write of it so coolly, and hope all 
follies . meaning love of the kind which he 
had lavished vainly on Laura Chumleigh . 
were over for him ! It seemed like a bad 
dream to Esdaile, but also a very hard and 
bitter reality ; and nothing that he had ever 
had to do in his life cost him so much pain 
in the doing as the writing to Dunstan, 
whose letter had reached him before he 
left England, and travelled with him to 
the town on the Spanish frontier, from 
whence he had despatched his answer. 

Would Sir Wilfrid have been sufficiently 
magnanimous to be glad, had he known 
that it was to his hand Janet owed that 
little push which had set the wheel of for* 
tune turning for her ? When he found 
among his papers the slim black-bordered 
envelope, addressed, in a hand which he 
had never seen, to Captain Edward Dun- 
stan, and sent it on to its proper destina- 



<J0 A lly or Nothing. 



tion, he had been glad that he was acci- 
dentally able to remoYe a cause of annoy- 
:ance and perplexity from his friend and 
from Janet ; but he had thought no more 
of it, and he never knew that to that 
trifling circumstance the woman he loved 
^nd ''grudged sair" to Dunstan owed the 
fulfilment of her heart's desire. 

Then there fell on him a great discon- 
tent and sad weariness of life, and the 
ovils of his early training, or rather the 
want of it, began to tell on him. If he 
liad not hitherto regarded life from an 
Utopian point of view, he had at least 
believed it a very pleasant sort of experi- 
'ence and institution generally, and had 
not troubled himself with the contempla- 
tion of it in any of its aspects towards 
persons less fortunate than himself. He 
was very good-natured, easy to move to a 
ready and untroublesome kind of charita- 
bleness, and, as he proved in the case of 
John Sandilands, trusty in friendship ; but 
he was not either by nature or education 
a man to bear trouble, and especially dis- 



'' Tom EsdaiU's Boy:' 61 

appointment, well, in the sense of profita- 
bly. Out of the eater comes not forth 
meat, nor of the bitter, sweetness, except 
to the tried and disciplined mind and 
will, and these he had not; so that Sir 
Wilfrid Esdaile took it ill that his sky- 
had clouded over, and sulked with fortune, 
in whose smiles he had lived hitherto, 
because her brow had knitted itself, and 
her eyes were stern. 

The first time a man learns, as a hard 
fact, by personal experience, that he can- 
not have what he wants, the lesson is 
bound to be unpleasant, and it will be 
the more so in proportion as it is long 
delayed, and in striking contrast with pre- 
vious experiences. Sir Wilfrid was a bad 
subject for such teaching ; an unruly 
pupil in the hard school of contradiction, 
impatient of pain and resentful. Janet's 
kindly message vexed him; he had be- 
lieved her wider-minded, capable of com- 
prehension of feelings which she had never 
experienced, and of sympathy with them ; 
he thought she would have some idea of 



62 All, or Nothing. 



what the hopeless loss of her meant to 
him. He believed himself much less ego- 
tistical in his love than she was in hers ; 
the harmless words in Dunstan's letter, 
which she could hardly have avoided al- 
lowing him to write, unless she had made 
the avowal to him which it was for Esdaile 
himself to make or to leave unmade . but 
this he did not perceive, or, at least, did 
not take into account . hurt him. She 
was happy, and what did it matter to her ? 
Thus the man who really loved Janet with 
a love which might have elevated his 
whole character, misjudged her, and, tak- 
ing his punishment ill, hardened himself. 
It was not that the " Amen '' to " God 
bless her " stuck in his throat ; no, he 
could be glad that she was happier than 
he ; it was that he could not be reconciled 
with his enemy. disappointment. That 
restlessness, which is our modem fashion 
of parrying trouble, seized upon him, and 
the notion of returning to Ceylon, which 
he had at first mentioned to Dunstan 
merely because he found it difl&cult to 



'* Tom Esdaile's Boyr 63 

write at all, and did not quite know how 
to account for himself, began to assume 
the form of a serious purpose. 

He would go to Ceylon, stay awhile 
with John, and go on to India, do a regu- 
lar grand tour of the country, try whether 
there was any distinction or amusement to 
be got out of the big game, and perhaps 
make his way to some of those wild and 
extraordinary places, in which everything 
is so strange that it seems impossible 
one could go on thinking the old thoughts 
and be haunted by the old scenes in them. 
He had fallen in with a few people whom 
he knew on his way through the south of 
France, and had gone on with them into 
Spain, caring nothing about them, and 
little about whither he went or what he 
looked at, but yielding to the restlessness 
of an idle man. He sometimes wished now 
that he were not an idle man, that his life 
were not all leisure, that it had some certain 
and enforced occupation in it, since pleas- 
ure, in which he had hitherto found his 
business, had become of a sudden so 



64 All, or Nothing. 



hideously vapid that he asked himself 
whether it was not the most stupendous 
of bores. He thought even that he should 
like well enough to manage that coffee- 
plantation of his, if only it were not his 
own. Altogether the state of mind into 
which Sir Wilfrid Esdaile was falling was 
one which would have been observed with 
regret by anyone who cared for him. 
Unfortunately, no one who cared for him 
was near him ; circumstances had for some 
time made of his association with Captain 
Dunstan his closest tie, and this was now 
broken, if not for ever, at least for all the 
time of distraction and unrest duriug which 
he would most have needed companion- 
ship and counsel. Under the influence 
of unhappiness, and revolt against it, the 
" wildness " for which Sir Wilfrid's father 
had had in his time a reputation, which 
was perhaps a little worse than he deserved, 
began to develop itself in " Tom Bsdaile's 
boy,"' as Mr. Gilchrist had called him. 
Sir Wilfrid drifted about a good deal just 
at this time, and when the intelligence of 



" Tom Esdailes Boyr 65 

Dunstan's marriage reached him . he had 
been expecting it, half fearing the an- 
nouncement, half longing to know that 
the event had really taken place, but 
entirely angry with himself for caring, and 
quarrelsomely asking himself what busi- 
ness it was of his . he drifted back from 
Spain with the new acquaintances who 
had added themselves to the old ones in 
whose company he had crossed the frontier, 
and found himself, without much premedi- 
tation, and in a devil-may-care frame of 
mind, among the gambling world of Nice 
and Monaco. 

In former days Sir Wilfrid Esdaile had 
never cared for gambling ; he had never 
felt the craving for any fierce aud engross- 
ing excitement, but had been well content 
with the less harmful diversions of sport 
and society. He had none of the vulgar 
love of mere gain very often underlying 
that passion for gambling, which is, by 
some odd perversion of reasoning, held less 
odious when it is free from a sentiment 
which, though mean, is at least reasonable^ 

VOL. III. F 



66 All, or XoAmg. 



and he was not a sufficiently rich man to 
lose with impunity and indifference ; 
therefore he had kept clear of that temp- 
tation. *' Fatal Zero " had not aUured him, 
while he was still as when we saw him first, 

'^ A jooth light-hearted and content ;" 

but he was drawn towards it, when in the 
fever of his disappointment he turned from 
those milder and more desultory pursuits 
which had satisfied him hitherto. 

He would go out to Ceylon by-and-by, 
he kept telling himself, when Rattray and 
St. John and Le Mesurier and the others 
should have gone back to London, whither 
he had no intention of turning his steps 
for many a day ; but for the present he 
would stay here, and do as the others did, 
who did not want to forget how much 
better and better off they might have been 
but for the cross-grained dealings of fate 
with them. And so the early spring 
found Sir Wilfrid Esdaile among the 
motley company who thronged by times 
the Promenade des Anglais or the beautiful 



'' Tom Esdaile's Boyr 67 

gardens which border the coast at Nice; 
but were frequent in their visits to the 
paradisaical pandemonium of Monte Carlo. 
He had not heard directly from Dunstan, 
but he knew from Julia that the newly- 
married pair were in Paris, and that 
they were to be in London after Easter. 
"What a wonderland must the bright city 
be to Janet, he thought, rememberiog 
the eagerness with which she had question- 
ed him about Paris, while showing him 
that so much as could be learned of its 
history and associations from books was 
far more familiar to her than to himself. 
Julia said little of Janet, and that little in 
a measured way, and Sir Wilfrid wondered 
whether she had fouod out his secret, if 
secret his love could indeed have been 
called. He had not been careful to hide it ; 
Dunstan, for instance, had he been obser- 
vant in a very ordinary degree, might 
have seen it clearly enough. At least, 
it was evident Julia did not rejoice in 
Janet's marriage. Sir Wilfrid wondered 
what she had said to John Sandilands 

f2 



68 Alitor Xathing. 

about it, and what that steady-going and 
obstinate joong Scotchman thought of 
the celerity with which Danstan had 
recoTcred from his disconsolate state. 
How well lie remembered the vague 
trifling way in which they had discussed 
the unnamed young lady of Dunstan's 
love, and the first casual mention of Miss 
Monro. 

A very bright day at the end of March, 
the sort of day which makes sojourners 
in a land of sunshine seek to increase their 
own sense of well-being by speculating 
upon what their friends in England are 
probably suffering from the weather, had 
tempted out into the pure and sparkling 
air a number of the more confirmed in- 
valids, whose presence lends a touch of 
sadness to the scene in so many places on 
the Riviera ; and the Castle Hill was more 
than usually attractive, with its palms and 
cypresses flung against a sky of the clearest 
blue, and the far-spreading prospect over 
the Bay of the Angels steeped in sunshine. 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and two of his friends 



" Tow Esdaile's Boy^ 69 

had accompanied some new arrivals to the 
Castle Hill, and Sir Wilfrid was pointinpj 
out to the ladies of the party the various 
features of a view which has not many 
rivals, when he suddenly stopped short, 
arrested by the sight of two persons who 
were advancing slowly in the direction of 
the platform. 

They were two women; the taller and 
jounger of the two leaned on the arm of 
the shorter and older, and, though walk- 
ing with manifest fatigue, had something 
of eagerness in her gait and expression. 
The sunshine seemed to bring refreshment 
to her eyes, and her fair but wan brow 
and cheeks ; her slightly parted lips 
iseemed to drink the pure delicious air as 
she came slowly on, with a graceful walk 
and distinguished carriage, although no 
-one could look at her and fail to see that 
for her the beckoning hand was raised. 
Her face was very fair, with such harmony 
of line and feature that its beauty was still 
43triking though all the bloom had vanished 
from it, with deep dark grey eyes, and very 



70 AH, or Xothing. 

rich fair hair, which lay in waved masses 
above her broad smooth brow, defined by 
the narrow rim of white under her close 
black bonnet. Her dress, which was very 
plain, was the deep mourning of a widow^ 
but of the French style, except for the 
narrow cap-rim. The older lady was a 
bright cheery-looking person of perhaps 
five-and-thirty, rather stout, with very 
black eyes, a high colour, and an ex- 
pression of vigilant kindness which rend- 
ered a plain face singularly attractive. 
Her mere manner of supporting the deli- 
cate hand and wrist resting on her sub- 
stantial arm seemed to tell of intelligent 
care and tenderness. Her attire was of a 
thoroughly English type and rather over- 
done in point of colour. It was singular 
that the sight of these unobtrusive persons^ 
who took no notice at all of them, seemed 
to affect Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and the lady 
to whom he was speaking simultaneously,, 
and with equal force, for they both started 
and stared. Sir Wilfrid, however, re- 
covered himself in an instant with a mut- 



" Tom Esdailes Boyr 71 

tered, " No ; it cannot be I" but the lady 
said : 

'. Surely, surely, that is Janet Monro ;'" ' 
and unconscious of the astonishment which 
her words awakened in Sir Wilfrid, walk- 
ed rapidly away from him, and approached 
the tall young lady in deep mourning with 
outstretched hand and the words : " Dear 
Mrs. Monro, I am equally surprised and 
delighted to meet you here !" 

A bright flush, which instantly faded, 
passed over Mrs. Monro's face, strengthen- 
ing the likeness that had struck Sir Wil- 
frid almost with bewilderment ; and a very 
sweet smile, nearly as evanescent, marked 
her recognition of the person who address- 
ed her. 

*' And I little expected to see you, Mrs. 
Thornton." 

The stout lady had fallen back a step, 
as Mrs. Monro removed the hand which 
had lain on her arm, that it might clasp 
that of Laura, and was looking with 
pleasure and interest at the brilliant face 
and the beautiful dress of the dazzling 



72 All, or Nothing. 

little person . she looked little beside 
the tall bending figure of Mrs. Monro 
. who glanced at her too with lively 
curiosity. 

''My friend, Miss Wells/' said Mrs. 
Monro ; and then Laura shook hands with 
Miss Wells, and called to Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile to come and be introduced to 
Mrs. Monro ; and the other gentleman of 
Mrs. Thornton's party, who had moved on 
to another point of view before she saw 
Mrs. Monro, returned, and Mr. Thornton 
was but little less glad than his wife to 
see the young widow in whom they had 
felt so strong an interest, the friend and 
neighbour of the old lady at the Stone 
House, far away in bleak Scotland. But 
Mr. Thornton was quick to see the change 
in the fair face and the slight figure, 
and he inquired about Mrs. Monro's 
health with real solicitude. 

Soon all the party were walking down 
the slope to their respective carriages, and 
Laura was trying hard to persuade Mrs. 
Monro that nothing would be so good for 



" Tom Esdaile's Boy.'' 73 



her as a cruise in their yacht. The Firefly^ 
it appeared, was in the harbour, and her 
owners had come to Nice only the day 
before. Laura had met several persons of 
her acquaintance already, but meeting 
Mrs. Monro was quite too delightful. 
She had so much to say and to hear. 
Where was Mrs. Monro staying? their 
hotel was on the Promenade ; how delight- 
ful it would be if it proved to be Mrs. 
Monro's hotel also ! 

But this crowning satisfaction was not 
reserved for Laura. Mrs. Monro was 
living in the old town, " to be with Miss 
Wells," she said briefly in explanation ; 
and she was afraid it would be too much 
for her to visit Mrs. Thornton that day ; 
the expedition to the Castle Hill had been 
a great undertaking for her. It was ar- 
ranged that Laura should call upon her 
.arly on the following day, and the little 
party separated. Only a few sentences 
had been exchanged between Mrs. Monro 
and Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile, but she had told 
him that she had heard much of him from 



74 AUj or Nothing. 



her sister-in-law, Mrs. Dunstan ; and as 
Janet^s new name was pronounced for the 
first time in his hearings Sir Wilfrid 
glanced at Mrs. Thornton, thinking it 
must sound strangely to her too, but she 
did not seem to have heard it. 

'' You remember," wrote Mrs. Thornton 
to her cousin, a week afterwards, '' the 
young widow whom I met in Scotland 
just after my marriage, Mrs. Monro ; she 
is here, and I fear she is in very bad 
health indeed. I was near making such a 
blunder that I must tell you about it. We 
met Mrs. Monro at the show place here, 
called the Castle Hill, and there was an 
odd, brisk, stout, kind-looking person with 
her, whom I took for a sort of superior 
maid, with a talent for the care of invalids, 
but Mrs. Monro introduced her as her 
friend, Miss Wells. It turns out that 
Miss Wells is a * character.' She has a 
large fortune, and spends it among the 
poor English at all sorts of foreign places, 
and stays a great deal at Nice, where she 
lives in the unfashionable quarter, in a 



" Tom Esdaile's Bay^ 75 

roomy old hotel, because her mother and 
sister . ^the only people she had belonging 
to her . died here, and are buried in that 
dreadfully pretty and melancholy ceme- 
tery. If there are any solitary and un- 
cared-for people among the poor creatures 
who come here in numbers for a little pro- 
longation of lifS, Miss Wells finds them 
out, and looks after them and cheers them 
up ; and she is doing all these good things 
for Mrs. Monro, who is hopelessly ill, Mr. 
Thornton thinks, but I think she may get 
better in this delightful place. 

"We have also met your hero, Sir 
Wilfrid Esdaile, and renewed our ac- 
quaintance with him. He is very nice^ 
but I wish he were not so fond of play, 
and so ready to make friends of people he 
does not know much about. He is not in 
a good set, from what Mr. Thornton has 
already observed, if, indeed, there is a good 
set here . among the playing people, I 
mean. One does see such dreadful-look- 
ing men, like the creatures with whom 
Becky Sharpe went to the ball where the 



76 All, or Nothing. 



Marquis of Steyne and his scar met her, 
and women more dreadful still, if possible. 
Sir Wilfrid gets on better with Mr. Thorn- 
ton than with me ; he is exceedingly polite 
and all that, but I don't think he likes me 
a bit. I should not have taken him for 
the sort of person you described . I mean 
merely in his ways ; he seems restless and 
easily bored, and not at all decided abotit 
what he is going to do. Mr. Thornton 
and he have been talking this morning 
about ' climbing ' in the autumn, and Sir 
Wilfrid seems quite bitten with the idea, 
though he is not an Alpine man ; I wish 
they could set about it now, for it would 
be much better for him than the 'tapis 
vert,' and the people who surround it, and 
he hasrbeen so good to you, I cannot but 
like him. 

"We had a talk about you and your 
plans yesterday, and he vows he will bring 
John Sandilands back from Ceylon, and 
there must be no more delay. He spoke 
with so much dislike of long engagements, 
and the slips between cup and lip in 



'' Tom Esdailes Boyr 77 

human affairs, that I have a notion of my 
own about him. Mrs. Monro, whom I see 
every day, is full of her sister-in-law'& 
marriage, and I have caught Sir Wilfrid 
looking at me once or twice when she has 
been asking him questions (which he 
answers in the vaguest way), very much 
as if Captain Dunstan had not kept his 
own counsel. If I am right that would 
account, considering that he and Sir Wil- 
frid are such friends, for his not being 
very cordially disposed towards me ; and 
yet what nonsense, now that he has got 
over it, and is married, like myself. It 
was a little odd, don't you think, that 
marriage ? For, after all, she was nobody, 
and he could hardly have been very violently 
in love. Men are never very good at de* 
scriptions of people, and Sir Wilfrid is no 
better than the rest ; he is vague about 
Mrs. Dunstan, but says she is wonder- 
fully like Mrs. Monro. 

** Our plans are not quite settled ; but I 
think we shall be here for another fort- 
night, and then go to Paris, and on to 



M 



78 All, or Nothing. 

London after a little time there. The 
house at Prince's Gate is neariy ready ; we 
get glowing accounts of it, but of course 
I shall put the finishing touches to it 
myself. And remember, dearest Julia, 
you must be there when we arrive. I 
wonder whether the Dunstans will be in 
town much this season . Sir Wilfrid says 
he does not think they have a house . 
at any rate, as I shall be keeping quiet, I 
shall not be likely to see them." 



Laura. 79 



CHAPTER IV, 



Laura. 




T was natural that Sir Wilfrid Es- 
daile should observe Mrs. Thorn- 
ton a good deal more closely than 
he would have done had he met her again 
merely as one of the innumerable persons 
whom one sees everywhere for awhile, and 
then ceases to see. He would have studied 
her, with considerable curiosity, as the 
woman who had made so strong an impres- 
sion on Dunstan, but later events lent her 
an even additional interest. She was the 
distant and indirect cause of his own 
haunting trouble, of the misfortune that 
had taken the good out of his life, and, as 
he was aware, when he would allow himself 



80 All, or Nothing. 

to listen to the warning, out of himself 
also. If she had but waited for Dunstan, 
if she had had just enough constancy, and 
sufficient of the spirit of the gambler, who 
always believes in a coming turn of the 
luck, his luck would not have been so dead 
against him in the one great venture that 
had really been worth making in all his 
life. And how admirably Laura and Dun- 
stan would have suited each other ! Under 
any circumstances that could not have 
failed to strike Sir Wilfrid ; but now, with 
the strongly contrasted image of Janet 
always in his mind's eye, he felt it at every 
turn ; and, feeling it, found it more than 
ever difficult to account for Dunstan's mar- 
riage, and to reconcile himself to the idea 
of it. Could he really have come to care 
for Janet ? Had he married her, for some 
inexplicable motive, without caring for 
her? In the latter case. Sir Wilfrid, 
though but little given to thinking of the 
forecasting kind, seemed in his fancy to 
see the foam and to hear the roar of 
breakers ahead. 



Laura. 81 

He admired Laura excessively, as who 
could avoid admiring the brilliant and 
animated young woman on whom life was 
smiling so brightly, and who smiled back 
at life with responsive brightness ? She 
was handsomer, or he thought her so now, 
than before her marriage; and her viva- 
city, her readiness to please and be pleased, 
and her unflagging spirits, rendered her 
charming to everybody. There was no 
more popular person among the English 
visitors to Nice that season than the beau- 
tiful Mrs. Thornton. Was she absolutely 
heartless, Sir Wilfrid wondered; did she 
take everything as lightly as she seemed 
to do; or had the marriage, in which, 
unless Dunstan had egregiously deceived 
himself from the first, her heart was not, 
turned out a perfect success after all ? 

The season was unusually fine ; even the 
habitual grumblers, who were given to 
talk of the ''treachery" of the climate, 
were satisfied for once ; and Laura enjoyed 
her sojourn with thoroughness which had 
not yet yielded to the habit of wealth, and 

VOL. ni. G 



82 All, or Xoihinff. 

the unlimited power of indiil^iig her 
wishes and &ncies. Prominent among the 
latter was her liking for lifrs. Monro ; the 
impnlsive regard with which the young 
widow had inspired her in Scotland^ and 
which had certainly been due in part to 
the slight sense of boredom that had crept 
over her in the unrelieved society of her 
husband and his aunt, revived and strength- 
ened on this their second meeting, and 
Laura derived great pleasure from the 
power of being useful to her friend. 

*' I always longed to have her with us," 
she said to Miss Wells, " away from that 
horrid cold place, and those dull skies and 
dismal mists ; and you see how right I 
was ; she is ever so much better. If she 
had only been with us at Naples and 
Palermo all the winter, she would be quite 
well by this time. Just look at her colour, 
and she does not cough once for every ten 
times she did ten days ago." 

Laura had the hopefulness and the dis- 
belief in serious illness, so long as the 
invalid can be up and about, that belongs 



\ 



Laura. 83 

to persons who enjoy perfect health, and 
she persisted in considering Mrs. Monro 
merely " delicate." And, indeed, there were 
hopeful symptoms about her now, and, at 
least, she seemed to be reprieved. She 
took long drives with Laura, and even 
went for a short cruise in the yacht ; on 
which occasion Sir Wilfrid Esdaile was one 
of the party on board The Firefly^ and was 
so attentive to Mrs. Monro and her odd- 
looking friend that Miss Wells " quite took 
to him," as she expressed it, and they were 
all doubly sorry about the rumours that 
reached them concerning Sir Wilfrid's 
wildness. But the cruise, though the 
waves were like molten sapphires and the 
sky was like a dome of turquoise, was too 
much for Mrs. Monro, and she was unable 
to go out for some days after it, so that 
Laura had to come to her, which she did 
very willingly. 

The acquaintance of Miss Wells with 
Nice, and the associations, so dear in spite 
of all their pain, that bound her to the 
place, were of old date, before the modern 

g2 



84 All, or Nothing. 



extension and grandeur of the city ; and 
she adhered to the old places and ways. 
It was a roomy and comfortable, not a 
bright or luxurious abode in which Miss 
Wells had established her headquarters for 
several years ; the modern magnificence of 
the hotels affected by the Russian, Ameri- 
can, and English visitors had no charms 
for her. She knew everybody in the old 
quarter, she would say, and everybody 
knew her : and, if the fancy should take 
her to go off to Jericho, she would have 
nothing to do but to lock her door, hang 
up her key on a nail in the dingy Bureau 
below, and go. She should find everything 
on her return exactly as she had left it 
and her comings and goings would surprise 
or concern nobody. 

The rooms occupied by Miss Wells and 
her friend, whom she had established in 
her own quarters, after a brief inspection 
had satisfied her that this was a case for 
the active exercise of her own especial 
calling, were pleasantly situated on the 
second floor of a rambling old hotel . it no 



Laura. 85 

longer exists . and they opened into a 
wide corridor which led to a staircase at 
either end. - The rooms, which were lofty, 
with tall windows commanding a lovely 
view, communicated with each other from 
one extremity of the corridor to the other ; 
and between the rooms at one end, which 
did not belong to Miss Wells, and the 
rooms at the other end, which did belong 
to her, there was, as was generally the 
case with buildings of the period of this 
hotel, merely an ordinary door, not *' con- 
demned," only locked. In this one a square 
pane of greenish glass was inserted in the 
upper panel . no one could divine with 
what purpose, for it was too high to be 
looked through, and it admitted no light, 
as the door was in the cross- wall close to 
the outer wall, while the windows were on 
the opposite side. Miss Wells had a notion 
that this unreasonable little window in the 
door had been made to enable somebody 
to watch a mad person unseen, in the time 
when the hotel was a private house be- 
longing to an old Savoyard family ; but it 



86 AH^ .r Xoikintf. 



was in the upper panel, and the inYisible 
eje in that case most have been set in the 
head of a giant. A heaTj table^ laden with 
bo<^, was placed across the door with the 
window in it; and the room, which was 
pleasant and less bare than the otbers 
of the snite, was appropriated to Mrs. 
Monro. 

Well cared for by the brisk and clever 
woman, whose warmest feelings were en- 
listed on her behalf, the young widow waa 
very peaceful in these later days. She 
was under no delusion about her own 
state ; she was quite happy in the convic- 
tion that she had but a short time to live^ 
and the serenity that came with that cer- 
tainty enabled her to take more interest 
in others than she had taken since the sea 
had swallowed up all the meaning and 
value of her life. Miss Wells's only bro- 
ther had been saved from the shipwreck 
in which Kenneth Monro was lost, and 
had brought home the intelligence ; but he 
died shortly afterwards in the very room 
which Mrs. Monro now occupied. Thi& 



Laura. 87 

was the link between the strangely-con- 
trasted friends. 

On their quiet and inevitably sad life 
Laura shone like a sunbeam, warming and 
brightening it, and was very welcome. 
She was delighted with Miss Wells, and 
proud of her conquest of that rather 
sturdy-natured person, who had a theo- 
retical aversion to fine ladies, but in reality 
regarded with pleased curiosity the faits et 
gestes of a brilliant creature of the human 
butterfly order, whose ways were so en- 
tirely different from her own. Laura's 
beauty and Laura's dress were objects of 
unwearying admiration to Miss Wells, 
whose own looks had never occupied her 
attention, and whose own attire was of a 
florid description. 

" You could not imitate that sort of 
thing," said Miss Wells ; " you must be 
born to it to dress as Mrs. Thornton does 
. just as if everything she wears was spe- 
cially invented for her ! And did you ever 
see a man so much in love with his wife 
as Mr. Thornton is ? He really seems to 



88 All^ or Nothing. 



have no eyes or ears for anyone but her. 
If she was to be spoilt, I think he must 
certainly spoil her." 

" I fancy she gets a good deal of spoil- 
ing from everyone. I am sure she does 
from you/' returned Mrs. Monro, smiling ; 
** but she bears it very well. She has a 
kindly nature, if not a deep one, and is not 
hardened by happiness." 

This was a true judgment. ^ Laura 
Thornton was supremely happy in those 
days. She had only two troubles . if, 
indeed, they could be called such. One 
was, that she could not have her father 
with her until after her return to England ; 
the other was, that Mr. Thornton had taken 
it into his head to wish that the child, for 
whose birth she might look in the autumn, 
should see the light in his own country. 
Of course, the child was to be a son ; 
everything was so prosperous with Laura 
that she never doubted that; but always 
thought of the coming baby as " he," and 
she understood, if she did not share, her 
husband's feelings. 



Laura. 89 

It was not, however, as if the house at 
the Mains was ready to receive them ; in 
that case there would be a perfect fitness 
of things, and the grandson of the self- 
made man ought to be born in the man- 
sion that in the future was to be ancestral ; 
but Laura did not take kindly to the pros- 
pect of the Stone House and old Miss 
Thornton. She thought Hunsford and 
Lady Eosa would be better than that. 
However, since Eobert had old-fashioned 
notions about her needing to be with 
somebody, and regarded the event with a 
degree of solemnity which she hardly com- 
prehended, she would not oppose his wishes. 
He was so good to her in all things, that 
he really deserved so much concession, 
and she must have a spell of dulness 
somewhere under any circumstances. So 
she behaved very well about this prospect, 
consoling herself with the reflection that 
it was still distant, and that Paris and 
London lay between, and finding a great 
deal of pleasure in her life in the mean- 
time. 



90 Alitor Sothing. 

To the childless woman for whom life 
was slowly but surely closing, Laura's 
light way of regarding the benediction of 
motherhood was strange and a little 
jarring ; but she did not blame Laura, for 
she knew, at least in theory, that this was 
the way of Laura's '^ world," and that she 
was only as the training and associations 
of her previous life had made her. She 
could even be amused by Laura's stories of 
the serious epistles with which Miss 
Thornton favoured her, and which contain- 
ed precepts of a kind which would have 
had a chance of being followed half a 
century or so earlier in the history of the 
world. Laura had a clear perception of 
the absurd side of everything, and she 
laughed unrestrainedly at the anticipatory 
anxieties of the spinster aunt who had had 
charge of Eobert Thornton's childhood, and 
who seemed to remember every hour of it 
with a distinctness which a mother could 
hardly emulate. To Mrs. Monro, who 
knew the old lady so well, the spirited de- 



Laura. 91 

scription had a pleasantly characteristic 
meaning. 

" I do believe," said Laura, '* she sees 
him in knickerbockers and the Latin gram- 
mar already.'* 

*'And Lady Eosa Ghumleigh?" asked 
Miss Wells, to whose imagination a Lady 
Eosa, with such a daughter as Laura, waa 
a most fortunate and enviable personage. 
"I suppose she is equally pleased and 
anxious ?" 

Laura was on the point of saying that 
Lady Eosa regarded the prospect of be- 
coming a grandmother with a good deal 
of indifference, but she checked herself. 
She was too well-bred to yield to the 
temptation of saying unpleasant things 
about her own mother to a stranger, how- 
ever strongly the contrast struck her 
sense of humour ; but, as a matter of fact. 
Lady Eosa had dismissed the matter ia 
three lines, briefly recommending Laura to 
take care of herself, and to be sure to see 
an English doctor wherever she might be 



92 All^ or Nothing. 

The notion of Scotland was too ridiculous. 
Why should Laura not remain in her own 
house in London ? 

The utterances of Lady Eosa were not 
sympathetic, but Laura had never expect- 
ed that they would be ; so that it was not 
any disappointed or hurt feeling which 
made her say nothing to Mr. Thornton of 
her mother's letter. It was a kind of 
shame and pity for that mother . a feeling 
different from the mere weariness and 
vexation that Lady Eosa used to produce 
in her mind. So much influence the higher 
order of character with which she had 
associated of late had on Laura that she 
began to see the soul of things, not very 
distinctly or very willingly as yet, but so 
that among friends judicious enough to 
admit that Laura could be improved . Miss 
Thornton, for instance, and Julia Car- 
michael . an improvement in her would 
have been acknowledged. 

Had she learned to love her husband ? 
Had she come to prize the love which 
raised her to such an eminence as she had 



Laura. 93 

perception enough to appreciate, and just 
a Kttle to dread, as the greatest of treas- 
ures and the richest of blessings, in com- 
parison with which every external feature 
of her most enviable lot was but insignifi- 
cant? No. Laura had learned to like 
her husband very much ; to feel as much 
respect for him as she was capable of 
feeling, for respect is a sentiment which 
needs cultivation in the mind ; and to be 
so well assured and confident of her 
own power over him that she no longer 
felt vaguely uncomfortable, and as if some 
constant effort were required of her, in 
consequence of the pedestal upon which his 
devotion and his fancy set her. At first 
she had felt that there was a standard of 
some sort in his mind which she did not 
clearly comprehend, but which she was quite 
sure she should not attain to, and she hated 
to feel this, to have an uneasy conscious- 
ness that she was not what he supposed 
her, but that uneasiness had left her. It 
would never have existed had Laura known 
what real love meant, or been able to un- 



94 All, or Nothing. 



derstand aright the love she had won. 
From the moment in which Eobert Thorn- 
ton perceived that a solitude a deux was 
not Laura^s notion of happiness, he relin- 
quished the project of continuing to find 
his in it, and she had enjoyed all the 
novelty and pleasure of foreign travel and 
society to her heart's content. With the 
yacht in attendance, they had sojourned 
wheresoever she fancied during the winter, 
and he had schooled himself into content 
with the share she gave him of her heart, 
her sympathy, and her company. He had 
expected too much at first ; she had known 
at once too much and too little of the 
world ; too much to be unconscious of its 
attractions, too little to be convinced of its 
emptiness, and wearied of its exactions ; 
he must be patient, and the paradisaical 
time would come. It would surely come 
with the child, who, if a new claimant 
upon Laura's heart, would, at least, be one 
with whom he could bear to share it, one 
of whom he could never feel the smallest 
pang of jealousy, for whom, on the con- 



Laura. 95 

trary, he might be jealous, if the deeper 
depths of his wife's nature were not stirred 
by the new and sacred touch. 

Laura had early discerned in her hus- 
band's disposition that tendency to jealousy 
which is in some cases merely an attribute 
of temper, but in others is the inseparable 
defect of the quality of strong and deep 
affections. She was a clear-headed person 
enough, and she made up her mind never 
to provoke the demon, as much, to do her 
justice, for his sake as for her own. She 
had had her little spark of romance in her 
life, and she had trodden it out, deliber- 
ately, if not altogether of her own free 
will. And she had no reason to complain 
that the reality she had taken in exchange 
had disappointed her in any way. To the 
" might have been " she never voluntarily 
turned her thoughts, after the first pain 
and bitterness of her interview with Ed- 
ward Dunstan had passed away ; and, if a 
speculation about how they should meet, 
if ever, where and when, crossed them, it 
was not attended by much solicitude. 



96 All, or Nothing. 

Laura was not of a disposition to feel 
apprehension about the future ; she carried 
out the maxim which in homely phrase 
bids us not ''bid the devil good-morrow 
till we meet him." No doubt she had 
been a little sorry for herself, and a good 
deal sorry for Dunstan, but both feelings 
passed, and only a vague revival of them 
attended her contemplated return to Eng- 
land. Charming, popular, and admired as 
she was, the most jealous husband could 
have found no fault with her ; her manners 
were quite free from coquetry, and her 
easy, eager enjoyment of all the pleasures of 
society was of the frankest and most earnest 
kind. Thus, except in the sense of a dis- 
appointed hope of what her feelings to- 
wards himself might come to be, a sense 
which was revealing to him, little by little, 
the truth that he had expected of her 
what there was not in her the capacity 
to give, Robert Thornton never felt the 
serpent's fang. 

We have seen how Captain Dunstan 
speculated on what might possibly b 



Laura. 97 

Laura's feelings concerning his marriage, 
and, though he was mistaken in supposing^ 
that her self-complacency would be rudely 
shaken, it would be vain to deny that 
Laura did hear of the event with a twinge 
of mortification. She would not have 
acknowledged it to herself, and she would 
have been profoundly disgusted at the 
bare notion that anyone could have sus- 
pected it ; nevertheless she had let it out 
to Julia. It was very soon, she thought, 
after all his protestations and his despair. 
He had got over that pretty quickly, just 
like a man ! However, she had no busi- 
ness, and no inclination to think at all 
about it ; and, though she could not help 
feeling just a little curiosity, she would 
carefully avoid indulging it by asking 
questions either of Sir Wilfrid Esdaile or 
Mrs. Monro. She was tolerably certain 
that Sir Wilfrid, having been with Dun- 
stan at Southampton, must know some- 
thing, if not all ; and if Dunstan had told 
his wife, as was not unlikely . for her 
triumph would but be augmented by a vivid 

VOL. III. H 



98 AU, or Nothing. 



picture of Laura's fickleness and mercenary 
behaviour, as he, having got over his love 
for her, would be sure to paint them . ^what 
more likely than that his wife would feel 
curious about her, and question Mrs. 
Monro. In case she did so, there should 
at least be no curiosity on Laura's side to 
report. Thus it happened that, after the 
one casual mention of Mrs. Dunstan on 
the day of their meeting on the Castle 
Hill, she was never again referred to by 
Laura and Mrs. Monro. 

The brief attack of hurt vanity from 
which Laura suffered was much assuaged 
by the reflection that the fact of Dunstan's 
marriage removed from her own path the 
one little difficulty which lay in it. She 
had nothing to fear from his impetuosity 
now ; his own fickleness, his own readiness 
to obliterate the past by a new tie, had 
amply condoned hers. It was not a very 
long step, for Laura's active fancy, from 
this consoling consideration to wondering 
where and how she and Mrs. Dunstan 
should meet, what they would think of 



Laura. 99 

.ach other, and whether Dunstan's Janet 
was as charming as her Janet. The dead 
past buried itself with wholesome celerity 
in Laura's case. She drew several pictures 
in her imagination of the meeting which, 
in the nature of things, was to be. 

Not one of those pictures prefigured, 
ever so remotely, the truth of the meeting 
between Laura Thornton and Edward 
Dunstan's wife. 

Mrs. Monro was again better towards 
the close of Laura's stay at Nice, and able 
to drive out with her friend. The Firefly 
was to make one last cruise along the 
coast, with Mr. Thornton and Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile on board, before going home. 
They were a pleasant party at the em- 
barkation. Laura, Mrs. Monro, and Miss 
Wells were to drive to Beaulieu after 
they had taken leave of the gentlemen, 
whose return was to be looked for in three 
days. 

" I am glad to keep Esdaile out of 
mischief even for so short a time," Mr. 
Thornton had said to his wife that morn- 

h2 



100 All, or Xothing, 



ing, " and you must keep him up to coming 
on to Paris with us. He is horribly reck- 
less, and the set here is worse than ever, if 
possible.'' 

The farewells were spoken, with smiles 
and good wishes on the part of the ladies. 
Mr. Thornton foretold a delightful cruise, 
and added fame for The Fire/If/. Miss 
Wells promised him that she would be 
responsible for Laura's taking care of her- 
self during his cruise. He had taken 
leave of her, and was about to step into 
the boat, when he turned back, said some- 
thing to her in a whisper, and kissed her. 
When they drove away, her . companions 
saw that Laura's eyes were full of tears. 



A Wing of the Firefly. 101 



CHAPTER V. 



A Wing of the Firefly. 




T was only an unusually emphatic 
entreaty that she would take care 
of herself during his absence, with 
a, word of reference to the hope that ren- 
dered her health doubly precious to him, 
which Robert Thornton had addressed to 
his wife at parting, and which had strange- 
ly touched her. He rarely gave expression 
in words to his absorbing love of her ; con- 
tenting himself with the anticipation of her 
wishes, and the moulding of his life upon 
her tastes. He had discerned, in very 
.arly days, with the sure instinct of a great 
affection, that Laura was unsentimental; 
and, although he never imagined that an 



102 Allj or Nothing. 



impatience of sentiment could, in her case, 
be a symptom of shallowness of feeling, he 
was extremely sensitive to the slightest 
touch of the ridiculous being associated in 
her mind with his love for her. Thus, 
while every day brought her, in the laying 
out of its hours, tributes of his affection, 
his care, his forethought, his devotion, he 
dealt little in endearing epithets, or verbal 
compliments to the beauty and the charm 
which held his heart as securely as they had 
won it promptly. 

Perhaps it was because she was sa 
bright and happy, the weather so lovely, 
the sunshine so vivid, the face of nature 
so smile-bedecked, because freedom, and 
wealth, and the power of pleasing were 
such good things to own ; perhaps it was 
because the deeper chords of her nature 
were being stirred by the new interest and 
meaning that were coming into her life ;. 
but there was in Laura's heart, whOe those 
tears stood in her eyes, a warmer and 
deeper feeling towards her husband than 
had ever been there before, and in her 



A Wing of the Firefly. 103 

intelligence a truer comprehension of him. 
She had at that moment at least a glimpse 
of the worth of the undivided love and 
perfect loyalty of such a heart as his* 
She wished he had not been leaving her. 
She felt as if there was something she 
wanted to say to him ; she did not know 
what, exactly ; it would have come to her 
if he had not gone away. A strange, 
incredibly clear, and rapid vision of her 
life since she had first seen him passed 
through Laura's mind before the brief 
silence between herself and her companions 
was broken. 

The impression of the morning was not 
transitory, and the first practical form that 
it took was one which Laura knew would 
be pleasing to her husband. After their 
drive, and when she had left her friends 
at their own abode, she devoted the re- 
mainder of the afternoon to writing to 
Miss Thornton. Laura felt herself " good'" 
while she was doing this, and she wanted 
to feel " good " that day. It was never an 
easy task for her to write to Miss Thorn- 



104 AU, or Nothing. 

ton. The old lady's views were so differ- 
ent from Laura's, and she held them with 
fio much energy and decision . she was so 
entirely ignorant of Laura's " world," and 
disposed to hold it in such slight esteem, 
that there was reasonable ground for Laura's 
remissness as a correspondent ; it was not 
all mere laziness, as Mr. Thornton said it 
was, when he gently urged her to show 
the fitting respect to his only relative. 

''Just be yourself in your letters," he 
would say to Laura, when she objected 
that it was difficult to write ; and she had 
never liked to say to him that it was that 
"just herself" which had not been fortu- 
nate enough to captivate the aunt as tho- 
roughly as the nephew. 

On the present occasion, however, her 
task was not at all difficult ; there was one 
subject which she could always make in- 
teresting to Miss Thornton, and that was 
the very subject on which she felt inclined 
to write. She would give Miss Thomtou 
a full, true, and particular history of 
Robert's proceedings . she thought of him 



A Wing of the Firefly. 105 

as *' Robert " this time, and was conscious 
of the strangeness of the word in her 
thoughts . since they had arrived at Nice ; 
she would tell her about The Firefly ; and 
finally, she would wind up by making a 
positive promise that the expected heir 
should be born in Scotland. She had not 
quite assented to Robert's wishes on that 
point, though she had no real intention of 
opposing them; she had been tiresome, 
capricious, and careless about it . not one 
of these epithets had he ever applied to 
her in his thoughts . and he would be so 
glad when he came back to know that she 
had written such a letter. And she would 
enclose one of the photographs of Robert 
that had just been sent home ; there had 
not been time to look at them. 

Laura went to her husband's room to 
find the parcel, and lingered there awhile, 
idly touching the things on the dressing- 
table, and turning over the books. A 
portrait of herself was placed upon an 
easel by the window. " If we were only 
to stay in a place for a day," thought 



106 AU, or Koihing. 



Laura, '" he would have that unpacked and 
set up." She found the parcel of photo- 
graphs, and looked at them all, selecting^ 
the best for Miss Thornton. Robert made 
a good photograph, she thought; the 
strong, placid, truthful, manly face came 
out well under the scrutiny of the sunlight. 
She propped the little card-portrait up on 
her desk, and glanced at it many times 
while she was writing, with smiles which 
would have fallen like sunbeams on Robert 
Thornton's heart, if he could have seen 
them. 

Her letter completed, it was time for 
Laura to dress for a dinner to which she 
was engaged for that evening, at the villa 
of a Russian princess. She wished she 
had not said she would go, and let Robert 
arrange that she should take Sir John and 
Lady Carteret in her carriage ; she felt dis- 
posed for a quiet evening with a book. It 
would have been quite another thing if 
Robert had been with her. Dressing was 
a bore. There were some gowns in a box 
just come from Paris, and she had thought 



A Wing of the Firefly. 107 

of wearing one of them, but she changed 
her mind. She would wear a gown which 
Robert had noticed a day or two previ- 
ously, and, as ornaments, her cats'-eyes. 
What trouble Robert had taken about 
those beautiful jewels ! . what a fine set he 
had succeeded in getting ! 

The shifting shimmer of the gems be- 
came the sparkling little beauty well, and 
never had Laura looked more sparkling or 
more beautiful than she looked that night, 
when all the new-comers at the Princess's 
reception who did not know her asked 
who she was, and all who did were anxious 
to proclaim the possession of that privi- 
lege. Laura's spirits rose high ; she was 
pleased with the company, satisfied with 
herself, and honestly wishing all the time 
that her husband were by her side. 

The moon was shining over the Bay of 
the Angels when Laura came back to the 
fashionable hotel in the Promenade des 
Anglais, and its rays turned to the likeness 
of silver wings the distant sails on the 
horizon. The Firefly's were not of the 



108 All, or Nothing. 



number, Laura knew; she was a swift 
vessel, even without steam, and was far 
far away by this time, distinguishing her- 
self, doubtless, during her last cruise for 
the season. The town, and the gardens, 
the background of hills, the jutting-out 
promontory, the wide, calm expanse of 
fiteel-blue sea under the wide, calm expanse 
of steel-blue sky, with the lesser lights 
that rule the night ablaze in it; the at- 
mosphere so clear and light that every 
object was defined with a blade-like sharp- 
ness; all made up a picture on which 
not the most accustomed eyes could rest 
without a fresh sense of calm and elevated 
pleasure. Laura looked out of her 
window at the scene for long after she 
was left alone, with a deeper feeling than 
its beauty had ever before aroused in her, 
aiid said to herself when at length she 
turned away: "And it must be equally 
still and beautiful all along the coast. A 
glorious night at sea." 

The morning showed a change; the 
wind was chill, the sky was overcast, 



A Wing of the Firefly. 109 

and Laura's daily message of inquiry for 
Mrs. Monro was answered by Miss Wells 
to the effect that she would not venture 
to go out that day. Laura had made 
some engagements, but she did not feel 
inclined to fulfil them ; she was in an idle 
mood, and disposed for nothing more live- 
ly than a visit to her friends in the old 
town. She sent her excuses to the people 
who would expect to see her, and wished 
it was not too early to call on Mrs. Monro. 
It had not occurred to Laura that she 
should feel lonely and weary just because 
Robert was to be away on a three days* 
cruise ; too lonely and weary to avail her- 
self of the precautions he had taken to 
provide for her pleasure and amusement ; 
but it was so, and the society of two per- 
sons, who had nothing at all in common 
with the bright and pleasure-loving world 
in which Laura habitually lived, was the 
only resource to which she could turn 
without distaste against the depression 
that was stealing over her. 

And, somehow, she thought differently to- 



112 All, or Nothing. 



between yesterday and to-day, to inspire 
her with thoughts such as she had never 
had previously, and make her afraid ? 
Her prosperous young life lay all around 
and ahead of her, bright and smiling like 
the summer sea of yesterday ; and it could 
hardly be that a few hours' solitude and 
a change of weather had affected her so 
strongly. 

The pleasant motherly manner of Miss 
Wells became downright petting where 
Laura was concerned, and she was amus- 
ingly interested in the " goings on " of the 
gay, busy, and great people, into whose 
ways and customs she got no more than 
side peeps, through the nooks and crannies 
of gossip. 

Mrs. Monro was asleep when Laura 
arrived, and having gladdened Miss Wells 
with the announcement that she meant to 
remain " quite hours," installed herself in 
the spacious sitting-room at the end of the 
apartment. When they had talked awhile 
of the invalid, Laura with more than usual 
seriousness, and Miss Wells cheerfully 



V 



A Wing of the Firefly. 113 

enough, though with thorough conviction 
of the hopeless nature of the case, Laura 
had to tell of the grandeurs and gaieties 
of the preceding evening, the emeralds 
and opals of the Grand Duchess, and the 
" historic " lace of the Princess. She saw 
that Miss Wells was a little worn and 
anxious, and so she exerted herself for her 
amusement, and to turn the current of her 
ideas. 

While Laura was doing this, her thoughts 
were busy with Miss Wells' life ; she was 
trying to realise its self-sacrifice, and to 
imagine in what its rewards, which were 
distinctly not tangible or ostensible, might 
possibly consist. Her large income was 
expended upon the sick and suffering, its 
'* margin" was what she allotted to her- 
self ; her time and strength, the skill and 
patience, the tenderness and cheerfulness 
which were evident to all . and how infi- 
nitely precious to those for whose service 
she lived, only the sick and sorrowing 
could tell. r-were theirs also. How did she 

do it ; and what was her reward ? With 
VOL. ni. I 



114 All^ or Nothing. 

the strange sense upon her, that had come 
yesterday, and been growing all to-day, 
that she was learning something strange 
and vague which would have to clear itself 
in her mind and then be learned in its full 
extent and meaning, Laura listened to the 
stories of Miss Wells' experiences, which 
she induced her to tell, the gossip being 
exhausted, and felt herself drawn more 
and more to this woman, so homely and so 
good. 

The long talk was uninterrupted, for 
when Mrs. Monro awoke, and Miss Wells 
left Laura and went to her, she preferred to 
be left quiet for the time. So the hours 
went on, and Laura was ^bout unwillingly 
to take her leave and return to dine in 
solitary state at her hotel, when a servant 
came to tell Miss Wells that a person, who 
was waiting in the vestibule, wanted to see 
her. Miss Wells excused herself to Laura, 
begged that she would not go away . this 
was merely a message from one of her 
poor people, no doubt ; nothing to detain 
her . and left the room. 



A Wing of the Firefly. 115 

"That is, I suppose," thought Laura, 
"one of the best women in the world; 
who never did a deliberately wrong act, 
and very likely has done very few acci- 
dentally wrong ones. And yet, if I had 
done anything awful, and was sorry for it, 
and wanted to be helped out of it, I would 
come and tell her, and be quite sure that 
she would help me. Why, I wonder? 
There's more in it than her having taken 
a fancy to me, and I to her. And if . if 
trouble and sorrow were to come to me, I 
think she would show me how to bear 
them." 

She shivered, drew her mantle round 
her, walked to the window and looked 
out, left the window and turned over the 
music that lay scattered on the piano. 
Thus several minutes passed, and Laura 
was beginning to wonder at the prolonged 
absence of Miss Wells, when the door 
opened, and Mrs. Monro, wearing a white 
Indian shawl over her widow's dress, but 
trembling with cold notwithstanding, 
entered the room. Laura greeted her 

i2 



116 All, or Nothing. 

with surprise and delight, saying that she 
had not hoped to see her that day at all. 

" And our days at Nice are getting 
few," she added, " so that I grudge one." 
All the time she was thinking how dread- 
fully ill Mrs. Monro was looking, much 
worse than she had yet seen her look, and 
that her days were also getting few. 

"I want you to stay with me this 
evening," said Mrs. Monro, who uttered 
her words with a strange diflSculty. "You 
will, I am sure. I felt so sure, that I told 
them to send away your carriage. You do 
not mind dining without dressing, for 
once." 

Her eyes wandered ; she seemed hardly 
conscious of what she was saying; she 
sank into a chair, and panted for breath, 
while the damps of suffering or of agita- 
tion gathered on her lips and forehead. 

" Of course I will stay," said Laura, 
bending over her in great distress and 
solicitude. '* I am very glad to stay, very 
grateful to you for asking me, for I was 
just thinking how dull and dreary an 



A Wing of the Firefly, 117 

evening I should have to pass, all alone, 
and I really cannot go out without Robert. 
You are in pain . you are very, very ill !" 
she added, for Mrs. Monro had uttered a 
distinct groan. 

** No, no, it will pass away in a moment.'* 
But she caught Laura's hand and pressed 
it against her own closed eyes, and she 
trembled in every limb. 

No ^ thought except of Mrs. Monro's 
illness crossed Laura's mind as she bent 
over her, in the perplexity of ignorance, 
wishing with all her heart that Miss Wells 
would come, and that she herself were 
more useful and capable of helping others. 

The person who was waiting in the 
vestibule to see Miss Wells proved to be 
one of the servants from the hotel at 
which Mr. and Mrs. Thornton were stay- 
ing, and his errand was to request her to 
accompany him on the instant to the 
presence of Sir Wilfrid Esdaile. A 
pencilled line from Sir Wilfrid, which the 
man put into her hands, confirmed the 
message, and added that the writer knew 



118 All^ or Nothing. 



Mrs. Thornton was with her, and had to 
entreat Miss Wells to come at once without 
letting her know. 

"Where is he?" This was all Miss 
Wells said. 

The man led her along the corridor, and 
opening the outer door of the room which 
adjoined the last one of her own suite^ 
and into which the senseless little window 
in the cross-door looked, let her pass 
through. 

Sir Wilfrid Esdaile, who was restlessly 
pacing the room on the farther side, came 
towards Miss Wells, showing her a face 
more changed and ghastly than she had 
over soon on a living man. She shrank 
back, and faltered out : 

" What is it ? What has happened ? 
The yacht." 

'' Yos 1 No ! Oh, Miss Wells, what are 
wo to do P Ho is dead ! How is she to be 
told ? I found out at the hotel that she 
was hoi*o, and I have come to you.*' 

Thoy stood opposite each other in silence 
for a full minute ; then Miss Wells made a 



A Wing of the Firefly. 119 



sign to him to speak, and, covering her 
face with her hands, listened. 

" The weather had been beautiful all 
day, the wind fair, and the yacht behaving 
splendidly. The night was also beautiful, 
and we stayed up talking until after mid- 
night. I left him, and went below, and 
then . I don't know quite how it happened^ 
nobody can tell exactly . there was a change 
of wind, and they were doing something 
with the sails. I know as little as you of 
such things, and can't explain anything but 
the dreadful facts ; I don't know whether 
anybody is to blame . he did not see what 
was doing, or they did not see him . he 
was struck, by the fluttering sail, I suppose, 
by some part of the tackle, at all events, 
and fell overboard. I was up in a mo- 
ment, and we saw him. . We saw him in 
the smooth sea under the bright moon- 
light ; he was keeping himself up in the 
water, and it seemed as though he could 
easily catch the ropes that were out in a 
moment. It seemed, too, only a minute 
or two, and yet an age, until a boat was 



120 All, or Nothing, 



lowered, but in that minute he had gone 
down. I was at the side, and looking at 
him. I don't know whether the men felt 
any great alarm; 1 did, but that is be- 
cause I know nothing of the sea and 
ships ; I think they had no thought but 
that he would be saved. I saw his face 
as he dropped his head and went down. 
We rowed about for hours, until long after 
it was daylight . the men did it because I 
asked them, useless as it was . then we 
brought the yacht back. There is a crowd 
at the harbour now, and all is known at 
the hotel. Thank Heaven his poor wife is 
here. How will she bear it? How is she 
to be told V 

" I don't know/' said Miss Wells, faintly ; 
and pointing to the wall with a shaking 
hand, "she is there, happy, hopeful, 
beautiful, and I don't know how she is to 
be told. I cannot do it, if that is what 
you mean." 

" Yes ; that is what I mean, " said Sir 
Wilfrid, solemnly. " Think that she is 
quite alone, except for her servants, and 



A Wing of the Firefly. 121 

that I am only a man I She must not 
leave this, and go back to the hotel ignor- 
ant of what has occurred ; she would. hear 
it in the street, or from the people here." 

/'Ah," said Miss Wells, with a start; 
** there's the danger. She may not have 
waited for me. Stay here until I come 
back." 

He remained in the fast darkening room. 
Presently she returned, and Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile saw in her face, which had lost the 
expression of terror, that she would do 
what he asked, and 'was nerving herself 
for the task. 

" I have sent Mrs. Monro to persuade 
her to remain with us ; she will not sus- 
pect her, as she knows she has been very 
ill to-day; and I could not see her yet. 
But I will do it, Sir Wilfrid, though it is 
like taking up a knife to kill her. Just 
after she has been talking out her happy 
young heart to me." 

"It is dreadful, but it must be done. 
And there are arrangements, statements . " 
Sir Wilfrid paused, struck anew by the 



122 All, or Nothing. 

awfulness of the vanishing away of the 
man who had been with them but yester- 
day, a very type of the enviable among 
human beings. If they could have taken 
Laura to him, as he lay in that great calm 
of death which at least stills the revolt and 
tempest of grief, there would have been 
less dread over them both for the result of 
what she had to be told ; but this resource 
was not theirs, the solace of the last fare- 
well was not to be hers. The bark of her 
happiness had indeed 

'* ^gone down at sea, 

When Heaven was all tranquillity." 

" When she has been told, it will be best 
to telegraph for her father ; but the first 
thing is to tell her. I will remain here." 

" No ; come to my rooms." 

He followed her at once. A little group 
of people had gathered at the head of the 
stair ; the man from the other hotel was 
talking, and being talked to, in whispers. 
There was a dead silence as Miss Wells 
and Sir Wilfrid Esdaile came along the 



A Wing of the Firejiy. 123 

corridor, and, taking no notice of them, 
entered the other apartment. 

" I have never seen you so ill," Laura 
was sajingy as Miss Wells came into the 
room, and approached Mrs. Monro and 
herself, ** and you are frightened. Is there 
anything very unusually wrong with you ? 
Oh, I am so glad you have come back. 
She is . but you are frightened too. What 
is it?" 

She let go Mrs. Monro's hand, and stood 
upright. 

" I am frightened, my dear,** and Miss 
Wells came quickly, and put her arms round 
her, "frightened for you. I have come to 
tell you bad news ; news of a very great 
sorrow . the greatest that could come to 

you." 

" Papa !" exclaimed Laura, clutching 
Miss Wells with both her hands. " Papa I 
Is he dead !" 

"No, no. Let me hold you while you 
hear it ; and try, try to bear it, for his sake, 
and his child's." 

'' Robert ?" 



124 All, or Nothing. 

She said only that one word ; she saw the 
answer that Miss Wells could not speak ; 
she lifted her hands and pushed her hair off 
her forehead, then, with a wild white smile, 
dropped between the arms that strove in 
vain to hold her, as if she had been shot. 







CHAPTEB VI- 

is totaDj impcissible for yvM^r 
uncle to go to her and I ;iim 
sure I don't know irbat is to bit> 
done !* 

Thus spoke Lady Bosa Chumleigli, in 
accents of dismay, to Jalia Carmichaol^ 
some time after Sir Wilfrid Esdaile 3 tol<s 
gram had reached Hunsf ord. The message 
arrived in the evening, and was received by 
Lady Bosa, in the absence of the Colonel, 
on the invalid list, and a prisoner to his 
room with a persistent fit of the gout, which 
severely tried Lady Rosa's temper, and in- 
variably found it wanting. Julia was with 
her, and it is needless to say that the in- 



126 All, or Nothing. 

telligence of Mr. Thornton's death caused 
them both a great shock, and keen though 
differently felt sorrow. Lady Rosa's heart 
was not sufficiently tender, nor was her 
imagination of a sufficiently vivid kind, to 
force her into a realisation of the grief and 
the terror of her daughter's position, so 
that she was not rendered powerless by the 
pain of such a picture in her mind. Happily 
her practical habits exerted their influence, 
and long before Julia could get beyond a 
horrified vision of Laura, and a dread of 
how this news might affect the Colonel, 
Lady Rosa was revolving the question of 
the moment . what was to be done ? 

"Let me see the telegram again." Julia 
handed the green paper, on which she had 
been vacantly gazing, to Lady Rosa. 

" It does not sav that Laura wishes her 
father to go to her. ' Colonel Chumleigh 
had better come as soon as possible ;' that 
is Sir Wilfrid Esdaile's own message." 

" Yes ; but Laura would of course wish 
it. She would not have been able to send 
any message of her own ; she would have 



" Too Later 127 



known nothing, been consulted about no- 
thing under such circumstances." 

" True. And there's no one there with 
any sense, I daresay ; her servants are all 
fools, and all ignorant and selfish, no doubt ; 
besides, she could not be left to them at 
any rate." 

** Sir Wilfrid has plenty of sense, and 
the kindest heart in the world ; and there 
is her friend Mrs. Monro, and that Miss 
Wells whom Laura said so much about in 
her last letter. She is not alone, thank 
Heaven ; but still . 



99 



" They are not her own people, and none 
of them can bring her home. What can be 
done ? I cannot leave your uncle. And I 
am a wretched person on such occasions, 
even if I could go to Nice.'' 

" Let me go," said Julia, by a sudden 
impulse. *' My going will be better than 
nothing. At least I can take care of her 
on her journey home. I can take Freeman, 
and start to-morrow morning. My uncle 
will not object, I am sure. Do let mB tele- 
graph to Sir Wilfrid that I am coming." 



128 All, or JSfothing, 



On reflection this did seem to be the 
best thing that could be done, and Lady 
Bosa went to the OoloneVs room on the sad 
errand of telling him what had befallen his 
darling daughter. 

The intelligence affected Colonel Chum- 
leigh very deeply. He had liked Robert 
Thornton much, and trusted him thorough- 
ly ; he had felt perfect ease and security 
with regard to Laura, founded on the 
worth and the steadiness of her husband's 
character; and it had afforded him a great 
deal of quiet pleasure to indulge in ima- 
ginary pictures . of which no one would 
have suspected Colonel Chumleigh . of 
Laura, her home, and her children in the 
future years. In all the details of the house 
that was being prepared for her in London, 
the Colonel had taken the utmost interest, 
and his chief pleasure was the reading of 
the frequent long talky letters, as Laura 
called them, which she wrote to him from 
the various points of her foreign sojourn. 
He remembered with a pang what a con- 
tinuous record of Robert Thornton's love 



" Too Later 129 



and care, of her own happiness and pros- 
perity, those letters formed ; he murmured 
impatiently against the pain and helpless- 
ness that held him back from his poor child! 
. his bright Firefly, with her wings so 
sadly singed . wondering how it was with 
her, whether in her youth and strength she 
had found a resource against the dread 
and the anguish that had overtaken her, 
sufficient, at least, to prevent her from 
being quite prostrated by them. The' 
most difficult thing for Lady Rosa and the 
Colonel was to realise that the dreadful 
event had happened so recently, that their 
daughters widowhood was not yet two 
days old. Like all who hear of a calamity 
at a distance, they felt at first as if it were 
impossible, then as if it had happened long 
ago. It was Lady Rosa's usual way to 
treat every contrariety in the light of at 
personal injury and insult, offered, whether 
by Providence or by inferior persons, to an 
individual of her exalted station and merit, 
out of spite ; but the suddenness and the 
extent of this disaster overbore her usual 

VOL. III. K 



130 All, or Nothing. 



way, and by appalling softened her. The 
father and mother talked of their child, 
far off in her great trouble, and of Robert 
Thornton, with more unity of feeling than 
was at all habitual to them. The Colonel's 
distress at being unable to go to Laura was 
keen, and he immediately assented to Julia's 
undertaking the journey that was impos- 
sible to himself. 

Many hours of the night passed in dreary 
conjecture and sorrowful reminiscence. 
They were not unmindful of Miss Thorn- 
ton, and wondered whether the sad intelli- 
gence had yet been communicated to her. 
And then they remembered what a great 
significance, in addition to its sadness, the 
death of her nephew would have for the 
old lady in the lonely house in Scotland. 

" To think,'' said Lady Rosa, " that so 
much depends upon Laura's health holding 
out now. If the baby is not born, or does 
not live, the poor old lady will be a very 
rich woman. However, there's one com- 
fort, she would certainly leave it all to 
Laura. She cared for nobody but Robert, 



'' Too Later 131 



and he cared for nobody but Laura, so 
that she will be safe, I should think, in any 
case. It will make a terrible difference to 
her, though, if she has to come in after the 
old lady. Of course there will be no 
change in any way until the child comes 
to settle everything." 

At this point the Colonel ceased to be 
able to follow the speculations of Lady 
Eosa. He could only dwell on the cruel 
destruction that might come to all the 
hopes of his daughter, on his own fears 
for her health, on the sudden setting of 
the sun on so fair a day, and his dread that 
to the early fallen night might be added a 
deeper darkness still. He was growing old, 
and Laura might be left without her father 
before long, and her mother and she never 
agreed, even when Laura was a girl at 
home, and had acted, very much for his 
sake, on the principle of ** anything for a 
quiet life.'' The Colonel was deeply 
troubled ; so deeply that it seemed to him 
all that had troubled him previously in his 
life had been mere vexations. His son's 



k2 



132 All, or Nothing. 

boyish mischief, Lady Rosa's railing, the 
'* tightness " of money from which he had 
never been quite delivered ; all these 
seemed of little account to him now, when 
one of the really tragic events of human 
existence came full upon his intimate per- 
ception, and the person concerned most 
nearly was the darling of his own heart. 

He was pleased with Julia, and grateful 
to her. She was showing good sense and 
character ; she had greatly matured of late ; 
be had noticed that more than once. She 
got on better with Lady Rosa than Laura 
had ever done, and he fancied she gene- 
rally had much more of her own way. She 
was very different from Laura, much better 
fitted to battle with the world. There was 
not much fight in his Firefly ; a fairy, 
queen-like wilfulness and sunny fortunate- 
ness had been hers hitherto ; the first blow 
dealt her by fate was a tremendous one. 
Would she be completely felled and inca- 
pacitated by it ? 

The weight of these and many 6ther 
thoughts was heavy upon the slow-think- 



' Too Late" 133 



ing Colonel, and so oppressed him that 
after Julia had taken leave of him the 
next morning, before she started on her 
journey, what with the burden of them, 
and that of his pain, he almost wished he 
could have done, as the people in the 
Bible seemed to find it so easy to do- 
turned his face to the wall, and died. 

It had occurred to Julia that it would 
be well to give Sir Wilfrid Esdaile an 
opportunity of communicating with her, in 
-case there should be anything that Laura 
wanted, and she had telegraphed that on 
reaching London she would go to Mr. 
Thornton's house in Prince's Gardens. 
This she did, and was received by the 
housekeeper, who handed her a second 
telegram from Sir Wilfrid, to the effect 
that Laura was pretty well, and most 
thankful to know that her cousin was 
coming to her. The housekeeper informed 
her that she had been instructed to pre- 
pare for the reception of Mrs. Thornton, 
who would come to London as soon as she 
was able to travel. 



134 AU^ or Nothing. 



**Aiid a sad coming home too," she 
added. 

Julia had to dispose of some hours before 
she could start for Dover, and she em- 
ployed a portion of the time in going over 
the house. It was with a half-stunned 
feeling, in which there seemed to be an 
unreal, impossible side to the awful reality 
that was oppressing her mind, that she 
wandered through the rooms. 

Though the smaller touches of individual 
taste, and the comfortable air of habitation^ 
were wanting to the house, it had not the 
more formal and staring grandeur of a 
mansion which has been fitted up by a 
fashionable upholsterer, according to a 
hardly-limited order. The decorations 
and the furniture were neither slavish in 
their following of a school, nor fantastic 
in the avoidance of sameness, and there 
was nothing to mark the vulgar exultation 
of wealth in the beautiful, costly, but 
simple abode which the son of the self- 
made man had prepared for his wife. 

Not the strictest or the most exclusive 



" Too Later 135 



of the noble Nesses could have desired a 
more perfect suite of rooms for herself 
than that of which Robert Thornton had 
carefully considered all the details that 
were to render them worthy of his Laura; 
not the self-made man, Robert's father 
himself, in the old days at Bedford Square^ 
had been content with plainer furniture 
and simpler surroundings than those of 
the rooms intended for the master of the 
house. 

Julia recognised the manliness and sim- 
plicity which she had admired in the friend 
they had all lost when she passed through 
his " own rooms," which were never to 
know him, with the pain of that loss at 
her heart, and saw how they testified to 
his contempt for the effeminacy and self- 
indulgence of the day. He disliked bric-h^ 
brae and bibelots^ gimcrackery of all kinds^ 
as much as he disliked fine clothes, and 
would almost as soon have told a false- 
hood, or maligned a friend, as he would 
have stuck china plates about his study, 
or worn a velvet morning-coat. The only 



136 All, or Nothing. 

articles de luxe in the '* own rooms " of the 
master, whose foot was never to cross their 
threshold, were books. Of them there 
was a noble store . one that would have 
astonished the self-made man, who in his 
time had not held with books, with which, 
indeed, the origin of his fortunes had had 
no connection. His portrait, in a brown 
coat, and a wig of the same colour, and 
seemingly similar texture, occupied a place 
of honour in the study, and Julia recog- 
nised in that fact also a trait of Robert 
Thornton's character. 

It seemed to her that the life that had 
been hoped for, looked for, the life that 
was never to be, came to her imagination 
rather as a vision of the past than as a 
mere phantom ; she thought of the future, 
of Laura, there, in that house, the widow 
of him who had set the impress of his 
taste and the testimony of his love so 
strongly upon it all, with inexpressible pity 
and pain. 

Julia had completed her survey of the 
upper rooms, and was getting ready to 



''Too Later 137 



resume her journey, when another mes- 
sage reached her. This time the sender 
was Laura herself. *' Pray rest for a few 
hours in Paris. Rooms are retained for 
me at Meurice's. Go there, and come on 
by the night train." 

Julia's first idea was to disregard this 
injunction. She did not think she should 
be tired, and her chief object was to reach 
Laura with as little delay as possible. She 
reckoned, however, without that trouble- 
some element, her maid. Absorbed in 
anticipation of the scene to which she was 
hastening, busy with the past and the 
future, Julia did not think about the 
weather, and was indifferent to fatigue ; 
but Freeman had no such motives for 
rising above circumstances, and she ar- 
rived in Paris in a state of physical and 
moral limpness which reduced Julia to 
the alternative of giving her time to re- 
cover herself, or going on without her. 
She would have preferred to do the latter, 
but prudence prevailed, and, fretting vain- 
ly at the delay, she drove to Meurice's, so 



138 All, or Nothing. 

heavy of heart, so weary of eye, that the 
fresh and sunny beauty of the lovely city, 
on one of the most brilliant mornings of 
an exceptionally fine spring, passed before 
her utterly unheeded, though seen for the 
first time. 

Partly in rest, partly in writing to 
John Sandilands, Julia passed the interval 
before she could resume her journey. 
When she had finished her letter, she 
took it herself to the Bureau of the hotel,, 
and while she was asking about the neces- 
sary postage-stamp, and the time of de- 
parture of the mail, a lady and gentleman, 
who had just alighted from a carriage at 
the entrance, passed through the hall to- 
wards a staircase on the right. The lady's 
face was turned away, but her tall slight 
figure seemed familiar to Julia, also the 
rich chestnut curls that clustered at the 
back of her neck, and showed brightly 
against the deep blue of her velvet dress,. 
She had but a glimpse of them ; the next 
moment the lady bad passed out of sight, 
and the gentleman coming back across the 



" Too Later 139 



hall approached the Bureau^ and met Julia 
face to face. 

The gentleman was Captain Dunstan. 
It gave her a strange shock and pain to 
recognise him ; the recollection of him had 
never crossed her mind among all the 
thoughts which had occupied it since the 
news came. 

'* Miss Carmichael ! You in Paris I 
This is an unexpected pleasure.** 

This hurriedly, while thej shook hands, 
and he saw by her face that there was 
something wrong. 

*'Mrs. Dunstan will be delighted. Is 
your party stajring here ?" 

Julia had not yet spoken an intelligi- 
able word. She now said she was merely 
passing through Paris on her way to Nice, 
to join her cousin, Mrs. Thornton. Per- 
haps Captain Dunstan had heard ? 

No; he had heard nothing. Had any- 
thing happened ? There were several 
people near, and recollection had come to 
Julia in a full tide. She could not speak 
of her errand there ; so she asked Captain 



140 All, or Nothing. 



Dunstan to accompany her to Mrs. Thorn- 
ton's rooms. Greatly wondering, he did 
80 ; and then Julia told him, with far 
more agitation than she had betrayed since 
the intelligence had reached Lady Rosa 
and herself. The mere passing of the 
knowledge on to another person who also 
knew Laura, seemed to break through her 
enforced composure. 

But the tears with which she told 
the story of Robert Thornton's death, 
and her own errand, were quickly 
arrested by her astonishment at the 
effect of the communication upon Cap- 
tain Dunstan. His quiet, rather languid 
manner had never given her the im- 
pression that he had much depth of feel- 
ing in him, or very profound capacity for 
sympathy. What was this which shook 
him now, which drove every tinge of 
colour from his face, and set his hands 
and lips trembling as a woman's hands 
and lips might tremble ; which made 
hira hardly able to utter the common- 
place, *'Very sorry, a dreadful event 



" Too Late:' 14J 



indeed!" He stood for a few seconds 
after she told him, then sat down and hid 
his face in his hands, also as a woman 
might have hidden her face. 

What could it mean, Julia asked 
herself, either that he should feel so 
much about this calamity, or that he 
should betray the feeling to her, between 
whom and himself there had been no 
confidence or particular friendship ? But 
she could not answer her own question, or 
ask it of him ; and presently he spoke 
again, in a vague kind of way, about her 
journey and her plans, asking when she 
would be in Paris again. 

" I don't know/' Julia answered. " I 
am quite ignorant as yet of my cousin's 
intentions, except that she is expected 
at her house in London. I conclude 
she will return as soon as she is able 
to travel." 

"And she . Mrs. Thornton . is alone 
there ?' 

"But for her friends, yes. But, now 
that I think of it, I am surprised you 



s 



142 All, or Nothing. 

had not heard, for Mrs. Monro is with 
her, as well as Sir Wilfrid Esdaile." 

"Esdaile! He there! How came he 
to be with them . with Mrs. Thornton ?" 

*' Did you not know ? I have not told 
you the story clearly. He was on board 
the yacht when it happened. It was he 
who sent the news to us. He had been a 
great deal with them of late." 

"I have not heard of him for some 
time." 

Again a spasm of pain seemed to seize 
him, changing all his features by its 
grip. 

*' I am sure he has been most kind. I 
don't know what would have become of 
my poor cousin if she had not had a 
friend." 

'*Ah/' he interrupted her, *' that will 
not bear talking of. And now, about 
yourself. You will not be starting for 
another hour, you will let Mrs. Dunstan 
be with you for that time. I have un- 
fortunately an engagement which I must 
keep " . he was striving hard for compo- 



" Too Later 143 



sure, with little success, and Julia felt that 
he could see her wonder . *' but I will send 
for her to come to you, or perhaps you 
would go to her. She has just come in ; 
you will have some tea with her." 

"No," said Julia, speaking on an im- 
pulse which in the time to come she re- 
membered well ; " I would really rather 
not, if you please. I don't feel able to see 
her; I could not bear to make her so 
unhappy as she would be . for I know 
how she feels for others . at our first 
meeting. Pray don't ask me to see her. 
Captain Dunstan ; pray don't trouble her 
by letting her know I am here. She 
does not know my cousin ; she did not 
know the poor fellow who is gone ; she 
will not be upset by hearing of it only in 
the ordinary course. I have no right 
to trouble and grieve her; and, indeed, 
it would distress me more, and make 
me less fit for my journey. Tell her 
afterwards, give her my love, and say to 
her that we shall meet in London. I am 
sure to be with my cousin there." 



s 



144 All, or Nothing. 



** If you are quite sure you would rather 



not- 



) 



" I am, indeed, quite sure. And pray 
say nothing to Mrs. Dunstan. She might 
be hurt; she might not understand, in- 
deed, I could not see her. And I know 
you will excuse me if I ask you to leave 
me now ; I have several things to attend 
to before I go." 

She held out her hand in fare- 
well, and he took it in silence. When 
he had left the room Julia felt op- 
pressed by the sense that there was a 
sort of secret which she understood but 
dimly, if at all, between herself and Cap- 
tain Dunstan. 

He went to the Bureau, wrote a line 
upon a card, and sent it to his wife, then 
went out across the busy Eue de Eivoli, all 
alive with the bustle and gaiety of Paris in 
the springtide, into the gardens of the 
Tuileries. He walked liked a man in a 
hurry, like a man pursued, but it was not 
on account of the engagement of which he 
had spoken to Julia ; for when he had 



" Too Later 145 



reached the river terrace, he went no 
farther, but walked up and down under 
the tender green canopy of the prim beau- 
tiful trees, heedless of the loiterers there, 
many of whom looked inquiringly at his 
handsome, weary face, with the bent brows 
and the frowning troubled eyes. There 
were many elements in that storm which 
was let loose in his heart . rage, pity, forbid- 
den love, resentment against his fate . and 
their work was wild with him ; as all their 
voices gathered into one utterance, which 
drove and goaded him by its intolerable 
whisper, " Too late ; too late !" 



VOL. in. 




]46 All^ or Nothing. 



CHAPTEE YII. 



''Whatisitr 




HE spring was abroad in all its 
tender and hopeful beauty when 
Captain Dunstan and his wife 
came home to Bevis. The place that 
Janet loved so much wore at that season 
the aspect she loved best ; when the leaves 
upon the trees were just unfolding their 
pale tints, and there were breaks and vistas 
in the plantations not yet filled by the 
plentitude of the rich robes of the summer. 
The old English garden was very prolific 
of spring flowers, and the slender reed- 
like plants that have a dozen different 
names in the various English counties, 
where they are growing scarce, and the 



'' What is it r 147 



beds of the lilies of the valley were ^ 
crowded with the fairy bells and the dark 
close-wrapping leaves of the purest and 
sweetest of flowers. There was a pleasant 
stir of life and expectation about the place, 
and the house had a brisk air of prepara- 
tion. Probably, if Captain Dunstan had 
not himself been little more than a stranger, 
his marriage with Miss Monro would not 
have been so well taken by his neighbours 
and his dependants ; but they all knew more 
about Janet than they knew about him, 
and public opinion was almost unanimous 
in her favour. 

Mrs. Manners was in a condition of high 
importance and self-complacency. She did 
not approve of bachelor households ; being 
an exemplary person in her own sphere, 
she preferred having a lady of the house, 
who knew when things were properly done, 
and could appreciate the blessing of a 
thoroughly good housekeeper, with the 
active thankfulness by which such a boon 
ought to be acknowledged, and would not 
regard it merely with the taken-for- 

l2 



148 AH, or Nothing. 

granted air that occasionally tried her 
patience in the case of Captain Dunstan. 
Then, she knew the ''ways" of. the new 
lady of Bevis, and they were pleasant and 
considerate ways. To ber household 
Janet would be welcome, and she was not 
one to hold such an assurance in light 
esteem. 

There was something more than formal 
attention to orders in the preparations that 
were made for her, and many little fancies 
of hers, in the old times, were remembered 
and carried out in the arrangement of the 
rooms in the Admiral's corridor for her 
occupation ; a fact which Mrs. Manners 
pointed out with much complacency to 
Mrs. Cathcart and Miss Ainslie, who called 
at Bevis to ascertain when Captain and 
Mrs. Dunstan were expected to arrive. 

" I never saw the place looking more 
beautiful," remarked Amabel, as the two 
ladies stepped out on the stone terrace 
from the library window ; " the very spirit 
of rest and peace seems to dwell upon it 
to-day." 



''What is it r 149 



They took their way to the vicarage 
through the park, talking of Janet, and 
speculating as to whether they should find 
her changed at all by her introduction to 
the world of which she had previously 
known nothing. 

"One caii never tell by letters," said 
Amabel, " unless they're the letters of some- 
body with a special talent for writing them, 
which Janet hasn't; but I cannot help 
thinking she is more bewildered than 
pleased by Paris. She will get on better 
next time she goes there." 

" 1 fancy she will stay at home a good 
.deal. Janet will not get into the fashion- 
able ways, depend upon it," 

" She will do whatever Captain Dunstan 
likes, and he will be bored at Bevis-" 

'* Amabel, you don't like him. Why ?" 

" Yes, I do. I like him well enough, 
but I think of him now exactly as I have 

 

always thought of him, and I am afraid 
Janet will not find me half enthusiastic 
enough about her husband." 

"Don't distress yourself, my dear," said 



160 All, or Nothing. 

Mrs. Cathcart, drily, and with an air of 
matronly superiority which she occasion- 
ally assumed when she thought Amabel 
would be the better for a little snubbing ; 
'* Janet will not want anybody to be 
enthusiastic about her husband. Her own 
enthusiasm will suffice for her, and for him 
also." 

"Oh, I daresay," answered Amabel,, 
quite indifferent to the snub ; " but for all 
that I should not like her to know as well 
. as you do, for instance . that I think 
she is a million times too good for him,, 
and a great deal too fond of him. How 
nice it is to think," she added, with great 
animation and a sudden change of topic, 
" that by this time to-morrow we shall have 
seen her, and in a few days we shall have 
settled down into the habit of seeing her, 
mistress of Be vis, and the happiest woman 
in the world." 

*' How delighted the old ladies at Bury 
House will be !" 

" Yes, won't they ? And that reminds me 
to tell you a piece of news. Miss Carmichael 



''What is it r 151 

is coming to Bury House next week. Janet 
will be very glad of that. We shall be all 
. or nearly all . together again." 

" Yes, with the exception of Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile, and he will come down to Bevis 
before long, I daresay." 

**He cannot, for some time, at all 
events, for he has gone out to Ceylon 
again.'' 

" Indeed ! When and where did you 
hear about him ?" 

*' On Monday, when I drove over to 
Bury. I met that dear Miss Susan at the 
post-office, and did half an hour's shopping 
with her. You have no idea what friends 
we are ! She told me all the news, and 
there is really a good deal of it, in addition 
to the strictly parochial intelligence with, 
which Miss Susan is always supplied. 
Julia Carmichael is coming to Bury House ; 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile has gone to Ceylon; 
the plantation that Mr. Sandilands . the 
incomparable nephew of his incom,parable 
aunts . is managing is doing so well that 
he is much better off, and the marriage 



152 All, or Nothing. 

is likely to take place in the autumn." 

" But not here, I suppose ? Miss Car- 
michael would be taarried from her uncle's 
touse, would she not ?" 

**I don't think so; nothing is settled 
yet, I fancy. I promised that I would go 
and see Julia very soon after her arrival, 
80 I shall hear all about it then." 

" It is very soon for her to be at Bury 
House again. I thought I understood 
from the dear old ladies that she was not 
allowed to make them more than one visit 
in the course of the year, and that this was 
one of their mild grievances." 

'* That was the case, but things are all 
changed, it seems, by the death of Mr. 
Thornton. You remember he was drowned 
somewhere in the Mediterranean ; and his 
poor wife . Julia's pretty cousin, whom 
she used to talk about . came back to 
England. Julia went to her, and took 
care of her ; she behaved very well indeed, 
Miss Susan Sandilands says ; and then 
Mrs. Thornton went up to Scotland . to 
her husband's place, where his aunt lives, 



''What is it r 153 



I believe . and now Colonel and Lady Bosa 
Chumleigh are going to join her there, and 
so Julia got a little bit of extra leave, and is 
coming to Bury House." 

"I remember she used to speak very 
highly of Mr. Thornton. It is a sad 
story." 

" Sir Wilfrid Esdaile was on board Mr. 
Thornton's yacht when the accident hap- 
pened, and he behaved with the greatest 
kindness to poor Mrs. Thornton ; made 
overy arrangement for her, and came back 
as far as Paris with her and Julia." 

" I wonder whether he saw Janet there ? 
She did not mention him at all in the two 
letters I have from her. But of course 
she did ; he would be sure to see Captain 
Dunstan." 

"I have no idea," said Amabel, who 
would have been glad to know that the 
friends had met. But she had little hope 
that they had; she believed herself too 
well acquainted, by force of sympathy, 
with Sir Wilfrid's feelings, to expect that 
he had " got over it " to the extent of being 



154 All, or Nothing. 



n 



able to see Janet just yet, in all the bright- 
ness of her bridal happiness. 

" The sad story of poor Mr. Thornton, 
she added, **is an illustration of the saying^ 
about an ill wind, for her cousin's great 
trouble has had a good effect on Julia's 
prospects." 

" Indeed ! How is that ?" 

" I wish I could relate the matter to you 
as Miss Sandilands related it to me/' and 
Amabel laughed at the recollection. " It 
was very funny to observe her anxiety ta 
put everybody concerned in the best possi- 
ble light, and to avoid censuring anyone, 
though it was quite plain that some blame 
must attach somewhere. I could not help 
thinking of Jane Bennet, in ' Pride and 
Prejudice,' when she hits on a happy com- 
bination by which it is just possible that 
Mr. Darcy and Wickham may both be 
right. Miss Susan's dilemma was this. 
If Julia was not wrong in keeping the fact 
of her engagement to Mr. Sandilands con- 
cealed from her uncle, because she was 
afraid of how Lady Eosa Chumleigh would 



" What is a r 155 



take it, Lady Rosa must be a rather des- 
potic and uncomfortable personage. But 
far be it from Miss Susan to admit anjr 
such evident alternative ; and you should 
have heard her amplifying and explaining, 
and all the time perfectly inaccessible to 
the consideration that it could not possibly 
matter to Lady Eosa Chumleigh what I 
thought about her temper, and her ' ways/ 
with her family. It all came to this, that 
the engagement was divulged by Mrs. 
Thornton, who can do anything just now 
with her mother, and Lady Rosa took it very 
well indeed. Mrs Thornton, and the baby 
that is coming, and the fortune that depends 
on the baby, are of paramount importance. 
Julia may marry whom she pleases, and ga 
to Bury House if she likes. That is the 
real meaning of it all. Here we are at the 
gate, and there is his reverence, reproach- 
fully posted at the window looking for us,, 
and, like Mrs. Gamp, ' droppin' for his ' 
tea.' " 

With her usual acuteness, Amabel, 
though she was acquainted with Julia 



158 All, or Nothing. 

about anything . but he was a quick 
observer ; and the brightness he had often 
noted of late in Janet's face, a lambent 
light of the countenance, which no one 
seeing her could have failed to remark, was 
certainly there no longer. 

The arrangements made for her met 
with entire approval from Janet, and when 
she joined her husband in the library 
before dinner, and he politely hoped she 
had found all right, she tried very hard to 
answer as if there had been nothing want- 
ing to this coming home. But he had not 
gone with her to the rooms that were so 
familiar and so strange; he had not 
looked or spoken as though he had the 
remotest comprehension of ber feelings ; 
this coming home might have been to him 
the taking up of his abode in an hotel, or in 
somebody else's house let furnished. He 
was perfectly kind; he was faultlessly 
polite; there was not the smallest objection 
to be taken to his manner towards his 
wife. But it was *' manner." This was 
not the first, though it was the most sig- 



" What is it r 1 59 



nificant occasion on which Janet had folb 
that between him and herself thoro wiiH 
an unacknowledged, incomprohormiblo 
barrier. What was it ? She asked liorH^lf 
the question with remorseless itoriition j 
she sought the reply in unrolontiu^ Htilf- 
examination ; and resented its 0ViiHiv(MmNi4 
by unceasing self-reproach. Sho nuf^hl/ 
have found that reply easily onoujfh, If nIim 
had only examined why it was that a ha 
could not put the question to hliUHolf j liiuli 
finding it, have exchanged the tornuiut i)t 
doubt and misgiving for an ontiro vMu* 
quishment of hope. But she did not think 
of this ; she had so little knowledfjfo out* 
side of her own experience to guido hap, 
her single-heartedness was so complete, 
that she could not divine or dread any 
cause for the sure and certain blight that 
had fallen on her, except some fault, some 
shortcoming, some unfortunate error or 
deficiency of her own. 

Did her husband find fault with her 
then ? No ; there had never been a word 
of dissension, of disagreement between 




160 All, or Nothing. 

them. No hasty squabbles, no tiffs had 

come to break the decorous calm of their 

life together; and, if Dunstan had been 

called upon to name an instance in which 

Janet had given him the slightest ofEence 

or annoyance, he could not have done so. 

He would have protested, indeed, that she 

was incapable of anything which could be 

found fault with by the most fastidious. 

And he would have been profoundly 

amazed had he been told that she was not 

happy ; for he behaved very well to her. 

He had not been false to the compact he 

had made with himself when he came to 

the resolution that the best thing he could 

do would be to marry Miss Monro ; and 

Edward Dunstan had a keen sense of the 

respect and observance due to himself, 

necessary to the preservation of himself 

from self-reproach. The fates were indeed 

against him; the one woman whom he 

loved . for he never hesitated to say so to 

himself in his thoughts . he had twice lost, 

the. first time by her marriage, the second 

by his own ; but that was his own trouble. 



" What is it r 161 

his own deep, bitter, abiding trouble, 
which, after the fashion of a companion of 
the kind, not to be routed or shaken off, 
filled his life with profound ennui. His 
wife, however, had nothing to do with 
that . certainly nothing to suffer by it . 
and Dunstan was untroubled by any mis- 
giving of the excellence of his own con- 
duct. Janet was a more silent person 
than he had imagined her to be, less easy 
to amuse ; she had not been so much de- 
lighted with all she saw in Paris as he 
expected ; on the whole, he fancied her 
intelligence had been a good deal overrated 
by her friends ; and there was a strange 
sort of timidity about her at times which 
he hoped she would get over, for it was 
decidedly bad form ; but she was very 
good, and . it was no fault of hers ! 

Dunstan felt quite magnanimous when 
he repeated this to himself, as he fre- 
quently did, persuading himself that he 
was honestly rallying against the con- 
suming distaste for his life and it 
surroundings that had hung about him 

VOL. III. M 



162 All, or Nothing. 

ever since the passion of regret and revil- 
ing of fate into which his interview with 
Julia drove him had subsided, and under 
the full influence of which he had come 
back with his wife to Bevis. 

Several times during their stay in Paris 
there had come over Janet an almost 
terrifying sense of loneliness and strange- 
ness . one which she had tried to put away 
from her as we thrust back the phantoms 
that come to us in the sleepless dark. 
How should this be, when she had done 
with strangeness and loneliness for ever . 
when she was Edward's wife ? It was only 
because she knew nothing of the worlds he 
had lived in, only because she had so little 
acquaintance with the incidents of his past 
life, and the persons concerned in them, 
that now, when they were away from the 
only place with which she was familiar, 
they seemed to have no subjects of thought 
or conversation in common, and there was 
a distracting kind of newness in all their 
topics and surroundings. Perhaps it was 
also because she was so isolated an indi- 



" irhai is il r 163 



vidual ; she had no &mily stories to tell ; 
there was no taking on of fresh interests, 
no adding to the ties and charities of life, 
and her husband seemed to have no 
curiosity about her. She could not recall 
a question of his relative to the many 
things which, when two lives become united 
and merged for ever, might be supposed to 
be of interest. However that might be, 
Janet, true as steel to the lofty love and 
the stainless faith that were in her, the life 
of her life, put the intrusive feeling from 
her with all her might ; he loved her, he 
had chosen her, she was his wife. Was 
there not the fulness of joy, of content, of 
blessedness, of companionship, of home in 
the fact ? What right had she to admit 
a misgiving, to listen to a suggestion of 
want or incompleteness in her life ? It 
would be treason to him, and utter ingrati- 
tude, if she did so, and she would not . 
no, she would not. 

But steadfast and strong as was bor will, 
there was something stronger still. It 
was that incomprehensible barrier which 

M 2 



164 All, or Nothing. 



existed between herself and her husband. 
She blamed herself, wildly and blindly. 
She felt at times as though it were some- 
thing which she was striving to tear down 
with her hands, a prison wall closing upon 
her; the realization of the ghastly story 
of the woman who sat bound while the 
workmen reared the vault around her, and 
it rose, layer of stone by layer of stone^ 
from her fettered feet to her shrinking 
eyes. And this when she had been his 
wife for but two short months, while the 
friends who loved her were thinking of 
her happiness in its first bloom of romance 
and wonder and beauty, and the external 
circumstances of her lot had not a flaw in 
all their harmonious order. What was it 
that came thus like a nightmare to sweet 
sleep, and spoiled it all ? Janet was not 
merely learning the ordinary lesson of 
human experience, that the worship of a 
human being is idolatry, and that it in- 
volves the sure and certain penalty of that 
sin . a penalty which is generally speedy 
as well . though she worshipped her idol 



" What is it r 165 

with all the old fervour, with a poignancy 
of pain added, beyond analysis by her 
simple wisdom, which indeed was only 
feeling. No ; there was something more. 

Never had that sense of loneliness and 
strangeness come so strongly to her as on 
this day, from which of all days it surely 
ought to have been banished. She was 
back again in the dear home of the past, 
and it was her own, the gift to her of the 
husband she loved ; it was to be the scene 
of their future, the sphere of all her duties, 
of all her joys, of such sorrows as might 
indeed be in store for her, but they were 
hidden for the present. She ought to be 
happy, she would be happy, she must be 
happy. 

But Janet was only gay, and that by an 
offort which Dunstan, had he been think- 
ing at all about her, could not have failed 
to perceive. She talked more than usual, 
and sang not quite so well, pleaded fatigue 
as an excuse for the failure of her voice, 
and left him early. 

A note from Amabel Ainslie lay on 



166 All^ or Nothing. 



Janet's toilet-table, and she took it up 
eagerly ; almost as if in it she should find 
that true welcome home which somehow 
she had missed. It was an affectionate 
little missive, and it did Janet good. 
Strange that she should feel the need of it 
when all things seemed to be at their 
very best. Strange that when she stood 
gazing from the window of the old 
familiar room, over the familiar scene, 
serene and beautiful in the moonlight, that 
restless question which haunted her rose- 
from her heart to her lips, and she said 
aloud : " What is it ? What is it ?" 



On the Stone Terrace. 167 




CHAPTER VIII. 

On the Stone Terrace. 

GOOD deal of animation prevailed 
at Bevis after the arrival of Cap* 
tain and Mrs. Dunstan, and the 
fine spring weather facilitated the visiting' 
which was to be expected under the circum- 
stances. Mrs. Drummond had lived in 
such retirement that many of Janet's 
neighbours had never made acquaintance 
with her in the old times, but saw her first 
as the lady of Bevis. She made a favour- 
able impression upon all these persons ; 
they pronounced her to be handsome 
and attractive, a little absent in manner, 
perhaps, and singularly quiet, which was 
not to be wondered at in the case of a girl 



168 All, or Nothing. 



who had lived entirely with old people, 
and had not yet had time to get over the 
effect of that association, and to feel her 
own freedom and importance. Captain 
Dunstan was already popular, as, indeed, 
he deserved to be, for his tastes were 
sportsmanlike, his manners were good, his 
prejudices were few, and his political 
opinions were rather neutral-tinted. He 
might be said to possess almost every 
requisite for the winning of general favour, 
and to be free from the angles that either 
knock others, or are knocked against by 
others, in the case of the best-intentioned 
individuals. 

Oq two points there was absolute uni- 
formity of opinion. The first was Janet's 
dress. This was the subject of general 
commendation. Mrs. Dunstan displayed 
perfect taste in her attire, which was at 
once rich, simple, and becoming ; and 
several ladies had contrived speedily to 
ascertain that she was not indebted for 
that result to the hateful services of a man- 
milliner. The second point was the 



On the Stone Terrace. 169 

demeanour of the young couple. This 
was pronounced to be perfect ; no nonsense 
about it, though theirs was well known to 
have been a love match, but the pleasantest 
attention to everybody, and just what there 
ought to be to each other. 

That Bevis was not to be forsaken for 
London by its owners until late in the 
season, when they were to go to town for 
a few weeks, was also taken well by the 
neighbourhood. Janet had been over-tired 
in Paris, and, as Amabel had discerned, 
rather bewildered than pleased. It would, 
however, be more correct to say that she 
was at first pleased, and then bewildered ; 
for the latter condition set in when the 
restless questions began to put themselves 
ceaselessly to her : What was it that had 
come between her husband and herself ; 
what was it that had changed the glory of 
her noonday into twilight ? Whence came 
this intangible, indescribable alteration 
which she felt in every nerve, with every 
heartbeat, from which she could no more 
turn her thoughts than she could keep her 



170 All, or Nothing. 

eye from seeing the objects before, or her 
ears from hearing the sounds around them? 

Thenceforth she had been beset by that 
kind of confusion which comes of trying to 
listen to two sounds at once, or rather of 
trying to hear the one, and to shut out the 
other, which will not be excluded. Then 
the splendours of art and the associations 
of history, the beauty of the fair city, the 
novelty of society and movement, all lost 
their attraction for her, and there stole 
over her and took possession of her great 
dread and weariness. She strove against 
them, she especially strove to conceal any 
of their symptoms from Dunstan ; follow- 
ing out the programme of each day as he 
arranged it with unquestioning acquies- 
cence, but losing day by day all interest 
in the scene around her, and gradually 
coming to have a great longing to be back 
again at Bevis, and a great shrinking from 
the idea of London. 

When they should be at Bevis, among 
all the familiar objects, in the scene of 
their daily duties, she must surely come to 



On the Stone Terrace. 171 



understand him better, and learn how to 
please him; she would be undisturbed 
there in that study. As if she ever ceased 
from it ! So that, when Dunstan told her 
he did not care for going up to London 
until near the end of the season, she was 
perfectly well pleased, and would have 
given much to tell him that she should 
never wish for anything other . better 
there could not be . than to remain always 
at Be vis with him. She did not tell him 
so, however ; she had never gotten into the 
way of saying out to him what there was 
of this kind in her heart ; and that which 
had been strange and difl&cult before, the 
inexplicable something that inspired her 
questions soon rendered impossible. 

There was coming to Janet, through the 
strange and secret source of her inexplic- 
able suffering, a fault from which she had 
hitherto been singularly free . the fault of 
self-consciousness. A blight, not to be 
seen or felt save by herself alone, had fallen 
upon her ; .and she sought in herself for 
its origin until she became occupied with 



172 AU, or Sothing. 

herself to a degree which would have been 
impossible to the Janet of the past, the 
Janet whose heart, though irrevocably 
given away in the sense of a woman's 
abiding love, was free from self, and full 
of service, and her spirit chainless and 
lofty. A change was passing upon these 
qualities of her fine nature ; the shadow of 
the eclipse of her faith and hope. She 
was constantly thinking about her own 
looks, her own dress, her own manners; 
the effect she produced, and the attitude 
of her husband's mind towards her. 

Janet, who had been accustomed to the 
knowledge that her face was fair, just as 
she had been accustomed to the know- 
ledge that twenty-four hours made the 
day and night, but to concern herself 
no more about the one fact than the 
other, took to thinking about her looks ! 
She would often gaze wistfully into the 
glass, comparing the face that looked back 
at her to-day with that which she had 
seen yesterday, and dreading lest the 
answer to the haunting question might be 



On the Stone Terrace. 1 73 

found in the rejBiection there. She was 
altogether wrong in that surmise; her 
husband still admired her quite as much 
as when her beauty had first taken him by 
surprise ; more, indeed, perhaps, now that 
it was fittingly adorned with rich attire. 
Only he did not think about her fair face 
when he was looking at it, any more than 
he thought about the familiar objects which 
beautified the scene of his daily life. 

Janet, who had never given a thought to 
her personal adornment beyond that intui- 
tive regard to neatness and appropriate- 
ness which is inseparable from the habits of 
a gentlewoman, took to thinking about 
clothes. She studied the dress of other 
women, she observed the vagaries of 
fashion, she wondered whether it could be 
that she ofEended her husband's fastidious 
taste by making unconscious blunders in 
an art of which she was so ignorant. She 
was again altogether wrong in that sur- 
mise; she had good taste in dress, and 
Dunstan recognised it. Only he did not 
think about her dress when he saw it, and 



174 All^ or Nothing. 



when she again wore a gown or a jewel 
because he had chanced to notice it, he did 
not see that she was wearing the gown or 
the jewel. 

Janet, to whom a serene unembarrassed 
bearing, as free from affectation as it was 
free from boldness, was as natural as breath- 
ing, began to think about her manners ! 
Had something awkward in her, something 
unlike the ways and the tone of the 
^* world" in which he had always lived, 
something which betrayed her want of skill 
and custom, and had not been apparent in 
the quiet life from which he had taken 
her, annoyed her husband, chilled and 
humiliated him, against his will, perhaps 
hardly with his knowledge? Janet had 
read of such things, such dreadful things, 
in novels, limited as her acquaintance with 
fiction was; and in her secret soul she 
regarded herself, in comparison with Dun- 
stan, as "the beggar maid" in comparison 
with the king who married her ; for, on the 
side on which Janet was humble, her 
humility was thorough. 



On the Stone Terrace. 175 

Tliere was a side on which she was 
proud, with a thoroughness of pride in 
which there might be terrible power for 
evil; but she knew nothrag of that in 
herself when she took to studying herself, 
and, among other baseless &ncies^ poU'* 
dered that one, whether her manners were 
not unconsciously provincial and distress- 
ing to Dunstan. And, again, in that sur^* 
mise she was altogether wrong. Her 
frankness, her gentleness, and her quick 
intelligence were aQ blended and expressed 
in Janefs *'ways," and her husband had 
never found a fault with her, although she 
was undeniably a distinct personage; aU 
though . 

Thefaduonof hergracefahiess was not a followed rule. 

It would have ceased to be gracefulness 
had she been able to make up her mind 
which was the " style " most likely to be 
admired by Dunstan among the varieties 
which her sojourn in Paris enabled 
her to observe, and had set about 
imitating it. He might have noticed such 
an imitation, but, also, he might not ; for 



176 All, or Nothing. 

he did not notice her " ways," he had not 
observed that she had gained confidence by 
her intercourse with the world, without 
losing in sweetness and simplicity; he 
marked no change in her. He did not 
love her; she did not strongly interest 
him. He knew she was handsome and 
good ; he would always behave well to her, 
and take care she should have everything 
she wanted ; she was all he could wish 
for as a wife, except the only woman he 
did wish for ; that, however, was not her 
fault, nor his, but the fault of Fate ; 
and sometimes he did not mind it very 
much, while at others he wished he was 
dead. 

To the outer world not the smallest 
indication of the state of feeling of 
either the one or the other was given ; the 
surface of these two lives was smooth 
and sunny. And, as for the question that 
haunted Janet, what was it but *' a senti- 
mental grievance " after all, and we know 
that a sentimental grievance, though it 
may divide nation against nation for sue- 



On the Stone Terrace. 177 

cessive centuries, and condemn races to 
comparative poverty and obscurity, is not 
worthy of consideration by hard-headed 
and practical people. 

To the two persons who really knew her 
well, and whose interest in her went far 
beyond that of the people who saw every- 
thing at Bevis in the rosiest of rose-colour 
. to Mrs. Cathcart and Amabel Ainslie . 
there was something not quite satisfactory 
about Janet's looks and ways. The Vicar's 
impression was confirmed by the observa- 
tion of his wife ; the expression of Janet's 
countenance was changed ; and she looked, 
now absent and again anxious, as she had 
never looked in the old time. Very likely 
it was the responsibility of her new posi- 
tion, Mrs. Gathcart thought, knowing that 
Janet was not one to take anything of the 
kind lightly, and feeling that she herself 
should genuinely hate a big place and a 
large establishment ; but, whatever might 
be the cause of it, the alteration was there, 
unmistakable by anybody who knew Janet 
so well as she did. But that Janet's rela* 

VOL. III. N 



178 All, or Nothing. 



tions with her husband were anything but 
perfect, never occurred to Mrs. Cathcart. 
It could not, indeed, have occurred to any- 
one, for Captain Dunstan's demeanour to 
his wife was just the same as it had been 
during their brief engagement, and who 
was to guess that they had so little 
to say when they were left to them- 
selves ? 

Mrs. Cathcart was quite vexed with 
Janet's calm and indifferent way of answer- 
ing her questions about Paris ; she hoped 
it could not be possible that Janet was 
getting a little spoilt, and inclined to what 
she might suppose to be the fine-ladyism 
of indifference to scenes and objects 
which must have been surprising and de- 
lightful to her inexperience. But even 
her apathy in regard to the wonders and 
delights of Paris did not strike Mrs. Cath- 
cart so unpleasantly as her absent-minded- 
ness when things of nearer interest and 
import were in question ; she actually 
seemed like a person trying to listen to two 
speakers at once when the Vicar was telling 



On the Stone Terrace. 179 

her about the new arrangements for the 
choir-practising, and the Vicar's wife had 
the properest sense of the laches involved 
in any inattention to the Vicar. 

Amabel Ainslie had seen the change in 
Janet as quickly as Mrs. Cathcart saw it, 
but she viewed it differently, and thought 
over it with a strange feeling of apprehen- 
sion. Janet had not said one word to her 
of anything but content, and Amabel felt 
certain that she never would ; but she had 
been vague with her also, and Amabel un- 
hesitatingly assured herself that Janet was 

 

not happy. 

" It is his fault," she said to herself ; ** it 
is his fault. I cannot guess, and I shall 
never know from her, but there is some- 
thing wrong. No one but he could make 
her unhappy, now that she is his wife;. her 
worship of him has that in it that no one 
else in the world can do her real good or 
harm. It is he ! But what can it be ? 
I cannot but guess and wonder. He 
seems, he is, so nice . a little too perfectly 
polite for my fancy, but then that is a 

n2 



180 All, or Nothing. 

matter of fancy, and very few people 
would agree with me . but he does not 
know much about her tastes and ideas, 
that is pretty plain. He looked so strange 
when I asked him what he thought of 
her songs . I don't believe he knew she 
ever composed one ! Ah I Janet, Janet, I 
hope you have not married the wrong- 
man." 

On the joyful occasion of the visit of the 
old ladies from Bury House to Bevis^ 
where they arrived in the smartest carriage 
that Mr. Jones of the "Bell Inn" could 
turn out, Janet felt more nearly happy 
than she had been for some time. For 
it had come to that ; she had to per- 
suade herself that she was happy; she 
had to silence the haunting voice by a 
strong effort of her will. What had be- 
come of the golden radiance which had 
shone all around her? . where was the 
dream-world of bliss? The radiance had 
faded, the dream-world had vanished, quite 
noiselessly, with no shock, no threat, but 
only the lightless void remained after the 



On the Stone Terrace. 181 

one, the chill of awakening after the 
other. 

On that day, however, it was almost as 
if the former glow, the old vision, were 
there again, for Janet could not but see 
that her husband was thoroughly pleased, 
and that he exerted himself to please. 
How kind, courteous, and attentive he was 
to the Misses Sandilands ; how ready to 
echo all their delighted comments on 
Janet's good looks ; how quick to prevent 
her being embarrassed by their eager and 
unsuspecting inquiries respecting Sir Wil- 
frid Bsdaile ; how ready to assist her in 
showing them the house and gardens ; 
how kindly interested in all they had to 
tell of their nephew and his prospects ! 
After all, this could only be for her, only 
a proof of his love for her, leading him to 
be careful for those who had befriended 
her. She would try to remember this, to 
hold it in her mind when the spectre rose 
and the voice haunted ; to remember, above 
all, that he had chosen her ; she, who had 
not an advantage of any kind to tempt him 



182 All, or Nothing. 



any motive except love. No, she must be 
mistaken ; some dreadful temptation wa& 
at work within her. 

Thus Janet pleaded her own cause with 
her own self, while the old ladies were 
walking, in wondering admiration, through 
the long line of succession-houses, or 
surveying the beautiful prospect from 
the terrace, or giving Mrs. Manner& 
infinite credit for the preservation in 
which the venerable furniture was kept^ 
or admiring the fitting-up of Janet's rooms. 
The piano and the books which were Mrs. 
Drummond's gift had been sent back to 
Bevis from Bury House, and now occupied 
their former places. Wider experience 
and more fastidious taste than those of the 
old ladies might have pronounced Janet's 
home beautiful, and all that could be 
desired. 

"You will let Julia come to us soon^ 
will you not ? " Janet asked Miss Susan, 
when the visit was drawing to a close.. 
" You know she disappointed me before^ 
and she must make it up to me now." 



On the Stone Terrace. 183 

*'Assoonas you like, my dear Janet/' 
was Miss Susan's reply. *'We shall be 
glad that she should have so great a pleas- 
ure ; and, indeed, she must want some 
pleasant society, some happy faces to raise 
her spirits, after the painful scenes she has 
gone through." 

'' True. I have not heard particulars, 
but it must have been A^-ery trying for 
Julia." 

'* Of course you have not heard par- 
ticulars, my dear; I should have been 
much surprised had Julia distressed you 
by telling you all that sad story, at 
a time when, if there ever can be such a 
time in the life of human beings liable ta 
death and sorrow, the remembrance of 
them ought to be put away. And I am 
not going to talk to you about it now, or 
to let you think about it." 

" She was very young, and very happy,'' 
said Janet, not heeding Miss Susan's pro- 
test, "and it all came to an end in a 
moment. How dreadful !" 

" Not all, my dear. We must not say 



184 A U, or Nothing. 

all. Jt is a terrible bereavement, but poor 
Mrs. Thornton has many blessings left.*' 

*' Blessings ! and her husband gone ! 
What can be blessings to her without 
him ?" 

''Parents and friends," said Miss Susan, 
seriously; ** health, youth, fortune; and 
then, you know, or perhaps you may not 
have heard, she has her child to look for- 
ward to . a great consolation, and a tie 
to life, however great her trouble." 

" Do you think so ?" said Janet, but 
absently, almost as if she were talking to 
herself. "I cannot imagine there being 
any consolation for such a loss ; I cannot 
believe that there could be any tie to life 
when that one is broken which must be all 
or nothing." 

With a look of great tenderness in her 
sweet old face. Miss Susan laid her 
shrivelled palm on Janet's soft white hand, 
as she said in a low voice : 

" It is just like you to feel like that ; 
but you are only a wife as yet, my 
dear." 



On the Stone Ttrrace. 185 

Captain Dunstan had been talking to 
the elder sister while these sentences were 
exchanged between Janet and ^liss Susan, 
but Janet, raising her eyes as the last was 
spoken, saw in his face a look of strange 
distress and disturbance which set her 
heart beating fast and heavily, with the 
vague dread that she had displeased him. 
The look passed in a moment, but it 
had stayed long enough to overcast all 
the calm and gladness she had been 
feeling. Presently the old ladies drove 
away in state, perfectly happy, and much 
delighted with their visit ; and Janet and 
her husband, who had accompanied them 
to the carriage, returned into the house. 
She was making up her mind to ask him 
how she had offended him, whether it was 
the sentiment she had expressed, or the 
fact of her uttering it . a fault, it might be, 
in the world's code of manners . which had 
disturbed him, when he took up his hat 
and said to her with the utmost ease, as 
if nothing whatever had occurred to 
trouble him : 



186 All, or Nothing. 

" I have to speak to the Vicar on some 
business, and I shall just catch him if I go 
now." 

The spectre rose more plainly than ever 
before Janet, the haunting voice pressed 
its question with more intolerable itera- 
tion. What was it in her that was parting 
them, and was he resolved that she should 
not ask him ? But Janet had not offended 
Dunstan ; he had paid no heed to what 
she said ; the disturbance in his face had 
been caused by no words of hers; and 
now, as he walked in the direction of the 
Vicarage, but not with any purpose of 
seeing the Vicar, he was not thinking of 
her at all. He had spoken with even un* 
usual gentleness, just because he was not^ 
just because she did not matter to him ;. 
just because, when he too was beset with 
a spectre, and when a haunting voice most 
pertinaciously whispered, " Too late !" he 
made a scrupulous point, in the futile 
honourableness of his uninstructed con- 
science, of repeating to himself : " It is no- 
fault of hers." 



On the Stone Terrace. 187 

On the day after Julia Carmiohaers ar- 
rival at Bevis on her promised visit, she 
and Janet went to the Vicarage ; but Janet 
only remained with Mrs. Cathcart, Juliia 
returning to the house to write her letters. 
That day Janet was indisputably not look- 
ing well, and she did not deny that she had 
been feeling ill. " At least, not exactly ill, 
but strange," she explained; "what Ed- 
ward calls 'moped,' and therefore I am 
especially glad Julia has come ; she is so 
pleasant and amusing." Mrs. Cathcart 
had an afternoon engagement which made 
it impossible for her to walk home with 
Janet, and she took leave of her at the 
little gate in the park wall, of which, each 
possessed a key. Mrs. Cathcart lingered 
for a few minutes on her own side of the 
gate, watching the tall slender figure 
moving onward under the branches of the 
great elms, and noting, as she had often 
noted before, its grace and steadiness. 
When she had reached a point in the 
avenue which they called the " dip," Janet 
turned, waved her handkerchief in fare- 




188 All, or Nothing. 



well, and disappeared. Mrs. Cathcart re- 
turned to the house, thinking that she 
wished Janet were quite well, and not 
^* moped," that she hoped that nice Julia 
would do her good, and that it would be 
a great pity if delicate health should come 
to mar the perfection of the arrangement 
for which Mrs. Drummond had so dexter- 
ously schemed by securing the residence of 
her heir at his estate for those three im- 
portant months. And then she dropped 
that thread of thought, never to resume it 
in all her life again. 

Janet walked on under the branches of 
the great elms, more and more slowly as 
she ueared the upper end of the stately 
avenue where the shrubberies commenced, 
by passing through a portion of which she 
could gain a small flight of steps leading to 
the stone terrace. This was the shortest 
way to the house, and she was glad it was 
not longer, for there was a strange dis- 
tressing sense of exhaustion over her, and 
her sight was dim. Once or twice her 
steps grew uncertain, and she felt as she 



Oil the Stone Terrace. 189 

so well remembered to have felt that day, 
in the grounds at The Chantry, when Sir 
Wilfrid Bsdaile told her the story it sa 
much grieved her to hear. She got through 
the shrubbery, hardly conscious of her 
movements, ascended the little flight of 
steps, and found herself on the terrace, 
within a few yards of the windows of the 
library, which were open. A garden-bench 
was set against the wall of the house close 
beside the window nearest to her ; in front 
of it paced Argus, the peacock, " high and 
disposedly." She saw a flash of colour as 
thebeautif ul tame bird's tail swept her dress^ 
then saw no more, put her hand out, caught 
hold of the bench, and sank down upon 
it, quite senseless. 

When Janet recovered consciousness, 
and the first utter vagueness after a swoon 
passed off, to be succeeded by the absolute 
weakness that holds the whole body 
fettered, she remained half sitting, half 
lying, but motionless. She could not 
speak, she could not lift her head or raise 
her eyelids. One arm hung over the rail 



190 AH, or Nothing. 

of the bench, and so kept her balanced ; 
she tried to move the other, but she could 
not. Presently the sound of voices came 
to her ears, voices distinct, and close to 
her. Two persons who must have been 
within two or three feet of her, and just 
inside the window-sill, were talking in 
earnest tones. They were Julia and Dun- 
stan ; and Janet, motionless, speechless, 
spellbound, heard every word they said. 



A Statement by Julia CarmichaeL 191 




CHAPTER IX. 

A Statement by Julia CarmichaeL 

jHB following is an exact statement 
of the circumstances that occur- 
red during my stay at Be vis. I 
set them down here in the order in which 
they took place. It is a relief to my mind 
to recapitulate them thus carefully for 
John's reading, as in doing so I shall be 
able to reduce my responsibility, in a mat- 
ter which is of pressing and painful im- 
portance to me and others, to its true 
proportions, instead of being, as I some- 
times am, oppressed by a terrible misgiving 
that it was all my fault. 

'* I arrived at Bury House at the begin- 



192 All, or Nothing. 

ning of the second week in May, and a 
week later I went, at the invitation of Mrs. 
Dunstan, to Bevis. I looked forward with 
great pleasure to this visit ; and previous 
circumstances had invested the occasion 
with an interest which led me to regard 
Janet with close observation. She received 
me with the utmost kindness, and, during 
the short time that we were together on 
the first day, 1 did not notice any symptoms 
of ill-health or unhappiness about her. It 
was late in the afternoon when I arrived 
at Bevis ; there was not much time before 
dinner ; some people dined there that day, 
and it was not until the following morn- 
ing at breakfast that I was struck with a 
change in her appearance. She was look- 
ing very handsome, I thought, but far from 
well, and something dispirited and re- 
strained about her manner impressed 
me painfully. I learned from something 
which was said at breakfast that Captain 
Dunstan was going out to dinner on that 
day. It was arranged that Janet and I 
should walk down to the Vicarage after 



A Statement by Julia Cannichael. 193 

lunclieoii. When Captain Dunstan had left 
us I asked her whether she was feeling well, 
and she said not quite, but a walk would 
do her good. She then proposed to show 
me the house and gardens. 

"I ought to record in this place that 
there was not either in her demeanour 
or in that of Captain Dunstan the slight- 
est trace of any disagreement or disunion 
between them. She was gentle and sweet, 
as she always was, but there was a decided 
change in her, and I could not help wonder- 
ing whether he was aware of it. I dwell 
on my perception of this change, because 
I was led by it into saying what I did 
afterwards say to him. The house interest- 
ed me very much, and Janet told me all 
about the former disposition of it, in Mrs. 
Drummond's time. She was cheerful, but 
not elated and talkative as I should have 
expected her to be, and she said very little 
respecting herself or her own feelings. 
She left me to attend to some matters^ 
connected with her intended call at the 
Vicarage, and after luncheon, at which 

VOL. III. o 



194 A S, or Nothing. 

Captain Dunstan was present, Janet and 
I set out together for the Vicarage. Be- 
fore leaving the dining-room I had chanced 
to say that I must write some letters be- 
fore post-hour, and Captain Dunstan in- 
vited me to use the library for that pur- 
pose, adding that I need not mind about 
post-hour, as he was going to Bury, and 
would take my letters. 

" We took the private way through the 
park, along the avenue of elms, and Janet 
talked a good deal, not of herself or 
her position, but of my prospects, and 
a little of my cousin, Mrs. Thornton. 
Although Laura had been a frequent sub- 
ject of conversation between us formerly, 
I would not have spoken of her now, had 
not Janet done so, because I concluded 
that Captain Dunstan had told his wife of 
the circumstances in the past connected 
with himself and Laura, and that it was 
just possible she might feel some reluct- 
ance or awkwardness about the mention 
of her. However, Janet introduced the 
subject, and after a little I perceived, to 



A Statement by Julia Carmichael. 195 

my great embarrassment and regret, that 
she was not aware that her husband and 
Mrs. Thornton were even acquainted. 
This seemed to me unaccountable, but 
an instant's reflection showed me that, 
whatever his reason might be, it was not 
my business to reveal to his wife what 
Captain Dunstan had concealed from her, 
and therefore I said nothing on the point. 
Janet questioned me closely about Laura, 
and spoke with her usual feeling and 
sympathy of Mr. Thornton's death. 

" Mrs. Cathcart was expecting us ; no- 
thing particular happened while I remain- 
ed, but that was for a short time 
only. I left Janet with Mrs. Cathcart, 
and returned alone to the house by the 
same way. I went at once to the library, 
and began to write my letters. The 
weather was very fine, and the French 
windows, giving like doors upon the ter- 
race, were open. A table was set ready 
for my use close to one of the windows, 
and I had been writing for more than an 
hour, when Captain Dunstan crossed the 

o2 



196 All, or Nothing. 

terrace from the garden side, and asked 
me whether he might come in for a few 
minutes' talk with me. I was a little 
surprised, but I said, Yes, I had written 
all my letters, and they were ready for 
him. 

" I could not tell how it was that he 
began to speak of Laura. I had almost 
made up my mind, if the opportunity 
offered, to say something to him about the 
awkwardness to myself of Mrs. Dunstan's 
not knowing that he and my cousin were 
acquainted ; still, when he introduced the 
subject abruptly, I was completely taken 
aback. I impute to my being confused, 
and to his perceiving it, the unfortunate 
conversation that ensued, for I have no 
doubt his first intention was merely to 
question me about the sad event which had 
taken place at Nice, and that he was not 
aware I had any reason to believe him 
to be, or rather to have been, especi- 
ally interested in Laura. He looked so 
strangely at me that I had to attempt to 
explain the confusion into which a very 



A Statement by Julia CarmichaeL 197 

natural-seemiDg question had thrown me, 
and I said something to the effect that it 
would have been better if this subject had 
been openly talked of before Mrs. Dunstan. 

'* I have no apology to offer, either on 
his part or my own, for the revelation that 
followed; my business is to narrate, not 
to excuse it. Perhaps it would not 
have been excusable under any circum- 
fitances . perhaps its peculiar gravity was 
lent to it by the event ; at least, it was not 
unnatural . at all events, it was inevitable ; 
and, for the fault of it, he and I are both 
suffering, and also another, who had no 
part in that fault. 

" What I learned from Captain Dunstan 
was, then, that he had never ceased to love 
my cousin Laura. Plainly stated, there 
is the truth ; but it is indispensable for 
me to record here that he acknowledged 
it with vehement emotion, the result of 
the revulsion against self-restraint, of the 
yielding to the strong temptation of my 
presence. I had but lately left her, he 
said, and it was so long since he had heard 



198 All, or Nothing. 

of her. I had never seen Captain Dunstan 
under the influence of any strong feeling 
before, and I was excessively surprised and 
shocked. He found that I was aware that 
he had seen Laura once since her marriage, 
and he protested that he had tried hard ta 
forgive her treachery to him, and even 
to forget her since then. He recapitu- 
lated all the circumstances of their brief 
love-story, telling me much that I had not 
previously known, and dwelling emphati- 
cally upon the hardness of his destiny in 
having the fatal decision of Admiral 
Drummond against him reversed too late. 
He then referred to my meeting with him 
in Paris, on my way to Nice, and spoke of 
his feelings in a manner which distressed 
me very much, dwelling upon the pur- 
suing destiny that had divided him from 
Laura. Here it becomes necessary that I 
should repeat the words which were said a& 
exactly as I can. 

" ' You little know what you told me- 
then, that I had again lost her, or, at least, 
had lost the chance I might have had. It 



A Statement by Julia CarmichaeL 199 

was hard, was it not? The first time she 
would not wait for me ; the second time 
I had not waited for her !' 

" ' Hush ! hush ! For heaven's sake think 
of what you are saying ! Why do you say 
such things to me, to yourself ?' 

" ' I don't know ; I can't tell ; something 
stronger than myself makes me do it. You 
say she has never once spoken of me all 
this time . never mentioned me. Does 
she think I do not care for her sorrow ?' 

" ' Indeed she does not, believe me, but 
she remembers nobody, thinks of nothing 
except the loss she has sustained.' 

" ' I suppose so ; no doubt you are right. 
And so it ought to be. Living and dead, 
Thornton is the winner.* 

'* * What a dreadful state of mind you 
have let yourself fall into I' And then I 
added, by an irresistible, miserable impulse, 
' What, in heaven's name, induced you to 
marry poor Janet ?' 

'* ' Ah ! what?' Captain Dunstan moved 
from the place where he had been stand- 
ing, and, leaning against the window-jamb, 




200 All, or Nothing. 



spoke very distinctly. ' You think I was 
very wrong to marry her ?' 

*' * I think you were very cruel and false 
to her, and very foolish. You did not love 
her; you knew she loved you. Did you 
marry her for the sake of pity?' 

***No, Miss Carmichael, I married her 
for the sake of gratitude.' 

"'Gratitude!' 

*' 'Yes. What has driven me to speak 
thus to you I don't know ; but as I have 
done so, T will be thorough ; I will tell 
you all about it. There's nothing to come 
of telling you, there's nothing to hope for 
from that, or from anything; but I will 
tell you all the same. You are right ; I 
did know that Janet loved me ; I had it 
from the very best authority ; and I owed 
to her Bevis and all it meant. It was no 
fault of hers that the good was taken 
out of it ; and her love for me enabled me 
to make her the only possible return. If 
Laura had waited for me I should have 
never known that I had incurred a debt of 
gratitude to Janet, which I could not in- 



A Statement by Julia CarmichaeL 201 

deed pay, when I did become aware of it, 
in love, but which shall be faithfully dis- 
charged, so help me God ! It was she 
who, by refusing the inheritance herself, 
made me master of Bevis, and, though I 
had no heart to give her, I could restore 
her to her home, secure her position in the 
world, and make her happy. That Mrs. 
^ Drummond wished me to marry Janet, I 
knew from Mrs. Drummond herself, and 
it has turned out very well. Janet, who 
deserves to be happy, for she is very good, 
is happy as my wife, and I. I am. 
Well, we need not mind about that. I 
must say again that I have not the re- 
motest idea of what has made me say 
all this to you. I have, of course, been 
wishing to hear the particulars which you 
have told me, and intending to ask you 
for them, but I never contemplated the 
possibility of betraying myself in this way, 
and I suppose it will not be easy for you 
to forgive me for having done so.' 

** * That is nothing. What it is not easy 
to forgive is what you have done to her. 



202 All, or Nothing. 

Oh, Captain Diinstan, how could you be 
so cruel or so stupid ? What is the estate 
you owe to her, as you tell me, in com* 
parison with the heart she has given you 
to be broken ?' 

" ' Broken ? And why ? You don't take 
me, I hope, for the sort of person who 
could visit his own disappointment on a 
woman who is not only blameless, but 
everything that is excellent . too faultless, 
indeed? I daresay you hate me, Miss 
Carmichael, but you need not despise me 
unnecessarily. Janet is quite safe with me, 
I assure you. Your own observation 
might tell you that. I do not think slie 
has an ungratified wish, an unconsulted 
taste ; if she has, it is her own fault, cer-. 
tainly not mine/ 

" * You are trying to justify what cannot 
be justified. You have taken the pure 
gold of a perfect love and trust from her, 
and given her false coin in exchange.' 

" ' You are talking . T suppose I must 
not say nonsense, for politeness' sake . . 



A Statement by Julia Carmichael. 203 

but, at all events, like a romantic girl. 
Janet will never be unhappy, I hope ; she 
never shall be, if I can prevent it ; and I 
daresay, if Thornton had not died, I should 
not have regretted my marriage for my 
own sake ; but I never thought of such a 
thing happening as that, and it completely 
overset me. What I now have to do is 
my very best, so that I shall never have to 
regret it for Janet's sake.' 

' ' I need not repeat what I answered to 
this ; it did not affect events ; I need only 
set down that I said what was in my 
heart, in very strong and earnest words \ 
urging upon him that the only hope, the 
only chance of safety for Janet's peace and 
their joint future wafe, not only the success* 
f ul concealment of the passion which ha 
guiltily cherished in his heart, but its 
eradication. I don't know what I said, 
where the words came from to me ; I was 
all the time a prey to bewildering distress 
and pity, and to a dim vague fear. Captain 
Dunstan listened to me very patiently, be- 
coming calm and like himself again while I 



204 AU, or Nothing. 



was speaking ; and when I paused he said, 
in his usual tone . 

" ' If I make no answer to all you say, 
it is not because I disregard it ; it is be- 
cause I am a man, and you are a woman, 
and you don't understand. We must never 
speak of this again ; it must be like a 
dream to both of us. Let me only say 
that I count upon your friendship for 
Janet, and that, however mad and foolish 
my conduct of to-day may lead you to be- 
lieve me, you need have no fear for her.' 

" He took up my letters, and left the 
room by the door which opened into the 
entrance-hall, leaving me overwhelmed 
with distress and perplexity. I sat there 
I don't know how long, hardly able to 
bring my thoughts into any sort of ar- 
rangement, and chiefly conscious of the 
wish to get away from Bevis as soon as 
possible. With what pleasure I had come 
thither, as a complete breaking away from 
and contrast to the scenes through which 
I had recently passed, and how strange a 
connection had established itself between 



A Statement by Julia CarmichaeL 205 

them ! It would be impossible for me to 
remain ; I could not hold so anomalous a 
position ; besides, when the strange mood 
that had prompted Captain Dunstan's un- 
sought and unwelcome confidence should 
have passed away, I, of all persons in the 
world, would be the least pleasing in his 
sight. It was impossible that he should 
ever feel at ease with me again. I must 
devise some excuse for going away, which 
should excite no suspicion in Janet's mind, 
though, indeed, how should any suspicion 
come to it ? 

" Time passed ; the evening drew on. 1 
heard the sound of carriage wheels, and 
concluded that Captain Dunstan was gone. 
Still Janet did not come to look for me in 
the library, and I remained there, glad of 
every minute's delay before I must see her 
sweet, unconscious face again . remained 
after the room had been lighted, and until 
it was time to dress for dinner, and still 
Janet did not come to look for me. 

'* At length I went upstairs, and passing 
by the end of the Admiral's corridor, on 




206 AU, or Nothing. 



my way to my own room, I observed Janet*3 
maid stooping down and apparently listen- 
ing at the door of her mistress's room. 
She perceived me, and said, 

" ' The door is locked, and Mrs. Dunstan 
does not speak. I have knocked several 
times. I am afraid she is ill.' 

'''Mrs. Dunstan has not come in,' I 
answered. * I left her at the Vicarage.' 

" Janet had certainly come in, however ; 
the door was locked on the inside, and 
also that of the dressing-room which com- 
municated with Janet's own sitting-room, 
and in the latter we found the hat, gloves, 
and shawl she had worn that afternoon. 
We rattled the handle of the door, and 
called to her several times without effect ; 
but, just as I was becoming seriously 
alarmed, the key turned, and Janet opened 
the door, supporting herself by it, though, 
and showing us a face so ghastly that 
her maid uttered an exclamation. She 
was wrapped in a white dressing-gown, 
and her hair was loose ; her eyes were 
dim and contracted, her face was ashy 



A Statement by Julia Carmichdel. 207 

pale, except for one burning red spot 
upon each cheek-bone ; her lips were livid, 
and she was shivering. I shall never for- 
get the white figure in the doorway, against 
the dimness behind her, facing the lights 
of the bright, pretty sitting-room. 

" ' Janet, what is the matter ? Are you 
ill?' 

" ' I am afraid I am. I have been lying 
down.' 

'*She spoke each word faintly, with a 
pause between it and the next, and in a 
voice quite unlike her own. Those were 
the last coherent words she addressed 
to anyone for many days to come. Dr. 
Andrews was in the house when Captain 
DuQstan came home late that night, and 
she was then quiet, but it was the first of 
many nights of watching and anxiety, 
during which her mind and her speech 
were not occupied with actual things, or 
with us who were about her, at all. 

" Dr. Andrews was of opinion that the ill- 
ness had not come so suddenly as it had 
seemed to come ; and Mrs. Cathcart told us 



208 All, or Nothing. 

that she had not thought Janet looking well 
when she was at the Vicarage in the after- 
noon. In answer to the doctor's minute 
inquiries, no one could tell him anything 
of the interval between Janet's leaving 
Mrs. Cathcart . which I found she had 
done earlier than I supposed . and the 
moment at which I and her maid ascer- 
tained the fact of her illness; no one 
had seen her come into the house, and 
Captain Dunstan, concluding that she was 
with me in the library, and being rather 
late for his dinner engagement, had not 
looked for her before he went out. 

" On the dreary days which followed I 
need not dwell. They had this effect on me, 
personally, that they removed every shade 
of embarrassment from between myself 
and Captain Dunstan. There were times 
when I hardly recalled what had passed, 
so intently was my mind set upon the 
hand to hand, foot to foot, inch by inch 
fight in which she and we were engaged 
with that insidious and terrible foe which 
had stricken her. I pass on to the 



A Statement by Julia Carmichael. 209 

time when she began to recover. Then^ 
her mind being * clear, though weak and 
passive, as it seemed to me, I especially 
observed two things; the first, that she 
was sensibly distressed by Captain Dun- 
stan's presence ; the second, that she was 
better, more restful, and more refreshed 
when Amabel Ainslie was with her. She 
would smile faintly when her husband 
entered the room, and answer his inquiries 
gently, but she never asked him a question, 
and she never inquired for him in his ab- 
sence. 

" To me she was always gentle, and 
painfully grateful, but she would lie, or sit, 
for hours, holding Amabel's hand with her 
own eggshell-like fingers, speaking little, 
but listening to her friend's pleasant talk 
Amabel read aloud to her occasionally, bufc 
I do not think Janet listened ; she would 
keep her eyes closed all the time. She was 
at her best when Amabel could be with 
her. The first wish of any kind that she 
expressed was that Captain Dunstan should 
go to London as he had proposed to do ; 

VOL. III. p 



210 All, or Nothing. 

and this she conveyed through Amabel. 
He went up to town, it being then late in 
June, and Janet was regaining strength. 
I could not but observe that she was ex- 
ceedingly nervous when he was going 
away, and that, either by accident, or by 
her own contrivance, they were not alone 
for a moment. No allusion had been made 
by Captain Dunstan or myself to the 
events of the day on which Janet's illness 
commenced, and I now bade him farewell 
for an indefinite time, as I was to return 
to Hunsford the following week. 

*' From the hour of her husband's depart- 
ure I observed a singular alteration in 
Janet. Her nervousness subsided, her ab- 
sent manner changed, she improved in 
strength daily ; but a settled sadness took 
possession of her. 

" On the day before that on which I 
was to leave Bevis two letters arrived ; 
one was for me, the other was for Janet. 
The first announced, in Laura's own hand, 
the birth of Laura's son. A joyful and a 
sorrowful mother was my cousin, and the 



A Statement by Julia Carmichael. 211 

few lines, in which I read both joy and 
Borrow, touched me very nearly. The 
second announced, in a hand which Janet 
did not know, the death of her sister-in- 
law, Mrs. Monro, at Nice. I was afraid 
of the effect that the intelligence might 
have upon Janet, but she took it very 
quietly. Amabel was with her for part of 
that day, and I heard Janet say to her : 

" ' There is not now anyone of kin to me 
in the whole world.' 

'* She talked to me more than usual, on 
the day before I was to leave her, of my 
future, and of John, never of herself, and 
she made no mention of her husband. 
The oppressive consciousness that had re- 
vived in my own mind, when the pressure 
of anxiety about her life and health wds 
removed, prevented me from naming him. 
We bade each other an affectionate adieu, 
and I saw Janet last standing at the top 
of the great avenue in her deep mourn- 
ing dress. She waved her hand to me, 
while I leaned from the carriage-window 
for a parting look. 

p2 



212 All, or Nothing. 

" The remainder of what I have to set 
down here is but hearsay, therefore shall 
be brief. 

"Two days after I left Be vis, Janet 
drove into Bury, and drew out of the bank 
the whole of the money standing; in her 
name there. On the third she told her 
maid that she was going to London, and 
would not require her to go with her, but * 
would send her instructions afterwards. 
She then left Bevis, taking ouly a travel- 
ling-bag, and was driven to the post-oflBce, 
where she got out of the carriage, and put 
a letter into the box with her own hand, 
thence to the railway- station, where she 
arrived only just in time to take her place 
in the train. 

"No instructions reached Janet's maid, 
no communication of any kind was made 
by Mrs. Dunstan to her household; and 
when, after several days had elapsed, Mrs. 
Manners wrote to Captain Dunstan, ex* 
pressing the surprise and uneasiness which 
the silence of Mrs. Dunstan was occasion- 



A Statement by Julia Carmichael. 213 



ing at Bevis, her respectful remonstrance 
received a startling reply. 

" As soon as it was possible for him to 
reach Bevis after the receipt of the house- 
keeper's letter, Captain Dunstan arrived 
there, and it very shortly became known to 
the household that Mrs. Dunstan had not 
joined her husband in London. Nothing 
more became known to them, except, in- 
deed, that their mistress had incurred no 
blame of that kind which involves disgrace, 
by what she had done. * Something be- 
tween them that nobody knows anything 
about,' was the general supposition ; ' but 
he respects her as much as ever, and if she 
never comes back it will be her fault, and 
not his.* 

" In the centre compartment of the 
old bureau in Janet's dressing-room, 
where she habitually kept her keys, and 
which was unlocked, there was found a 
small parcel, addressed to Captain Dun- 
stan. It contained a bracelet of gold 
set with cats' eyes, and a letter. Of the 



214 Ally or Nothing. 



contents of that letter only a few lines 
were ever made known to anyone except 
Captain Dunstan himself, and with them 
only I am concerned here. The writer said 
that she was aware, if search were made 
for her, there would be little hope that she 
could elude it, being so unequally matched 
against the resources of such search ; but 
she earnestly begged that none should be 
instituted. She asked this as the one only 
compensation that could be made to her. 
When freedom should have been restored 
to Captain Dunstan by her death, he would 
be apprised of it; she would take order 
for that. For the interval and for the rest 
she implored peace. 

"Captain Dunstan, whose distress and 
remorse were extreme, left no means untried 
to discover Janet, despite her prayer; but she 
had had too much the start of inquiry, and 
all was unavailing. From no quarter could 
he obtain intelligence of her; the only 
friends she had, the old ladies at Bury 
House, were horror-stricken and absolutely^ 



A Statement by Julia Camiichael. 215 

ignorant ; her only relative had died among 
strangers in a strange land. 

*' These are the facts that I have tried 
to record ; of the feelings they have given 
rise to it would be equally vain and impos- 
sible for mo to say anything." 



216 All, or Nothing. 




CHAPTER X. 

All, or Nothing. 

OUNDED, she had fled ! The in- 
stinct of the stricken creature who 
would fain hide from the herd was 
strong in Janet, and fostered by all the as- 
sociations of her past, fed by the qualities 
and the defects of her character. Many a 
woman not nearly so good as she, not so 
lofty, not so single-minded, would have 
better borne such a blow, would have seen 
the fair structure of her faith, her hope, her 
trust, and her happiness levelled to the earth 
by one fell stroke, and have turned her, 
after the first shock of the devastation, 
to the building up, out of the shattered 
fragments, of some sort of shelter for 
her forlorn head. Many a woman not so 



All, or Nothing. 217 

good as she, not so lofty, not so single- 
minded, would have applied the test of 
duty and likewise the standard of expedi- 
ency to the position, and, with whatever 
sufFering, made up her mind to her fate. 
With Janet, however, no such thing could 
be. It would be impossible for any words 
to convey what she suffered in the interval 
between the laying, by Dunstan's words, 
of the hauntiug question that had pur- 
sued her since a very little while after 
her marriage, in the deep grave of a 
dreadful certainty, and the merciful drop- 
ping of the veil of illness between her and 
external things. The agouy of a score of 
deaths was in that uprooting of all the 
foundations of her life, in the fear and 
loneliness of a lost heart, cast out from the 
fire and food of love, to cold which shall 
not abate its rigour, and hunger which 
shall not cease to gnaw for evermore. 

Her first coherent thought, when the 
numbness that had held her bound while 
the " lep'rous distilment " was poured into 
her ear gave way, and she could move, 



218 All, or Nothing. 



was that she must get away at once ; and 
while she lay upon the floor of her room, 
her face downwards on her hands, and 
when she dragged herself to the door, with 
a horror of confronting JuUa in which 
there was the beginning of frenzy, her 
brain seemed to be turned into an anvil 
on which a hammer was beating, and the 
echo of every stroke said, '* How ? how ?" 
When she emerged from the stupor of ill- 
ness, it was with a perfectly clear recollec- 
tion of all that had occurred, and it was 
to resume in undiminished weight the load 
that had been lifted from ofE her for the 
interval during which life and death were 
contending for the possession of her. She 
experienced then that sense which at one 
time or another comes to most of us, the 
sense of a dual existence in which there 
is no relation between the condition of the 
body and that of the mind. There she lay, 
calm and quiet, a model patient for quies- 
cent answering to "treatment," gaining a 
little in convalescence each day, and all the 
time ruin and desolation were in her hearty 



All, or Nothing. 219 



and in her mind was a fixed purpose, at 
utter variance with all that surrounded 
her. She used to feel glad in those daya 
that she was so weak ; she could havo 
suffered more had she been stronger, but, 
as it was, she had many an interval of 
vagueness, in which the tired mind rested, 
many a doze of the thoughts, and, though 
their wide-awake complexion never changed, 
there was relief in the sense of somethings 
deferred which came to her with those 
lapses. 

Then, too, she was so closely watched,^ 
the tending of her was so faithful, that she 
was bound to absolute self-control, and 
that was very well for her. Had anything 
been evident in her which was not readily 
to be accounted for by her illness, sho 
would straightway have been questioned 
by Julia, or by Mrs. Cathcart, or perhaps, 
if mention had been made of it to him, by 
Captain Dunstan himself; and from the 
possibility of that she shrank with dread 
which would have impelled her to any 
amount of effort at concealment. The 



220 All, or NoMng. 

very truth and loyalty of her were danger- 
ous to her now, for they precluded even 
the perception by her of a middle course, 
dictated by any thought for circum- 
stances : they brought her face to face 
with her own belief and her own declara- 
tion that in the tie of marriage there must 
be found all, or nothing. She must get 
away ; but how ? 

This was the question that haunted 
her now . since the first one had been 
silenced by the terrible answer . all the 
beautiful long days of early summer, 
while the woods, and the fields, and the 
gardens she so dearly loved were putting 
on their fairest garments of greenery and 
delicate-scented blossom, for the gladden- 
ing of her eyes, when they should shine 
with the old brightness of health and 
youth. This was the question that haunt- 
ed her in the night, when those eyes were 
held waking by her trouble in the brief 
darkness, to close for their respite of quiet 
sleep only just before the early dawn. 

Janet had at times the strangest feeling 



All, or Nothing. 221 



as though he were dead, a feeling which, 
when the spell of it was on her, did not 
yield to his presence. After she became 
able to observe what was passing around 
her . how much he had been with her 
during the worst of her illness she never 
asked or knew . she was aware that he 
came several times during the day to in- 
quire how she was, to sit a little while in 
her room, speaking softly with her attend- 
ants, or with Julia or Amabel . for either 
was almost always with her . but he spoke 
little to herself, and did not seem surprised 
at her silence. 

At first the sight of him, and the sound 
of his voice, caused her such intense pain 
that she could conceal it only by a super- 
human effort, and thence arose her habit 
of keeping her eyes closed while he was in 
the room, a habit which escaped notice, 
except by one person. Amabel observed 
those closed eyelids; she heard the sigh 
that accompanied the lifting of them when 
Captain Dunstan went away. 

When several hours elapsed without her 



222 AH, or Nothing. 

seeing him, Janet would get that strange 
feeling over her as if he were dead, or, 
still more frequently, as if she herself were 
dead, and all that had happened was 
left behind in a world with which she had 
nothing henceforth to do, but whose sha- 
dowy memories pursued her with unrelent- 
ing urgency, and put her to unremitting 
pain. This was the more tranquil of the 
two moods between which she alternated, 
and it became less frequent as she grew 
stronger, and drew nearer to health. The 
other mood was one of fierce and fiery 
suffering, in which the past mocked, the 
present tortured, and the future terrified 
her . one in which she recounted to her- 
self her own story with all the bitterness 
of deadly jealousy, and all the sickening 
anguish of despair. 

The past that mocked her was a past in 
which she had dreamt but one dream, 
cherished but one love . in which she 
might have been happy with her dream, 
with her love, asking for nothing beyond 
them. The friend who had filled her life 



All, or Nothing. 223 



with blessings had however unconsciously 
overthrown them all by one action. Janet 
did not know, or care to know, how it was 
that Mrs. Drummond had made that 
revelation to Dunstan which had been 
the ruin of the life she longed and 
purposed to bless ; she did not know 
how it was that her old friend had found 
out the secret of her love. When from 
her heart arose the cry, " Oh, my dear 
one, how could you have done this to me ? 
How could you, who know me so well, 
know me so little?'' there was not 
mingled with it any blame of Mrs. Drum- 
mond. She had read the girl's heart, and 
had laid open the page before another 
reader, and so, with the best intentions, 
she had undone the work of several of her 
own past years. 

Very diflEerently did Janet think of Dun- 
stan. Against him, at times, there rose 
up in her heart a hot and bitter anger . 
such anger as can only co-exist with love, 
because its agony could have no more 
superficial source. He knew she loved 



224 All^ or Nothing. 



him, and he married her for the sake of 
" gratitude." The word was his own ; he 
had made the avowal in her hearing. He 
had done this false, horrible, cruel thing, 
against which her love, her pride, her dig- 
nity, her modesty, her self-respect revolt- 
ed almost equally. Because she had given 
him money, and he owed her " gratitude,'* 
he had taken herself, and never asked her 
consent to the transaction. He had de- 
ceived her, he had utterly sacrificed her to 
his own pride, to what he supposed to be 
his conscience, his sense of what he owed 
to her and himself. He had done this, 
because, the woman he had loved being 
unattainable by him, it was comparatively 
easy for him to discharge his debt in this 
way. 

Janet's proud heart, its gentleness over- 
borne for the time by the stronger feeling, 
was wrung with the agony of this thought. 
He had so little understood, so little cared 
to understand her, that he had not felt he 
was doing her a wrong, deadly, unspeak- 
able, unpardonable, though it were never 



All, or Nothing. 225 

to be revealed to her in this world . a 
wrong which every day of their lives 
passed together, while she lived in the 
fool's paradise of a lie, intensified. He 
had thought to repay her for fortune by 
marriage . how had he proposed to repay 
her for love ? What a base imitation was 
that which had indeed never quite deceived 
her, although she had not known the origin, 
or been able to define the nature of the 
disappointment, and the doubt that had 
beset her ! 

What a pure and single-hearted devotion 
had hers been ! With what humility and un- 
bounded grateful joy she had loved him, 
regarding herself as the most absolutely 
fortunate of women, and resting in the be- 
lief that the love which had been his sole 
motive for marrying her, must, although 
it could not approach her own, be the 
strongest and the deepest of his feelings, 
too 1 When the sense of disappointment 
with which she had vainly struggled im- 
portuned her most, when the doubt which 
she vainly resisted made most head against 

voii. m. Q 



226 All^ or Nothing. 



her peace, she was wont to assure herself 
of this. He had married her because he 
loved her ; and if ever anything so dread- 
ful as his coming to regret it should hap- 
pen . ^for the haunting whisper took this 
form sometimes . the fault would be her 
own. 

But now there was no more of this 
humble, deprecatory mood for Janet, a 
mood which, perchance, had no catas- 
trophe disturbed it, might have helped her 
much in that inevitable transition from an 
unrealizable ideal to the actualities of a 
very tolerable sort of life, as human lives 
are, which in the ordinary course of ex- 
perience and training lay before her. By 
becoming her husband, Dunstan had^ done 
her an intolerable wrong, the only wrong, 
perhaps, which he could have done her, 
without finding any plea for him in her 
heart, which was so entirely his ; and the 
very unity of her nature, the absolute absence 
in her of the faculty of comprehending com- 
promise, made it impossible that she should 
regard that wrong in what others would call 



All, or Xothing. 227 

a reasonable light. She had been the victim 
of a polite sham from the first ; it had all 
been nothing ! Among the many sources 
whence Janet drew waters of bitterness 
during those terrible days, was that of her 
own increased knowledge of the way of 
looking at things common to her husband 
and to the " world " he had lived in, to 
which he belonged, from which she was 
altogether alien. 

Unless she could conceal from him what 
she had learned, and get away without an 
explanation, she might have to endure the 
torture of remonstrance from him, of per- 
suasion, perhaps of incredulous surprise; 
and that she could not bear. He had 
married her from "gratitude," without 
love, he had married her loving another 
woman, and he would, it might be, say to 
her that this indeed was so, biit that she 
should have no cause to complain of him 
. had he not said just that to Julia?. 
that she must make the best of it; that 
married people, with good tempern, and 
good manners, and a good fortune, might 

q2 



228 A n, or Nothing. 

get on very well together without romance. 
She had heard more than once some such 
treason and blasphemy as this spoken in 
the world of which she had had a glimpse, 
and she had revolted against it, even a& 
only an external heresy, which in no way 
could profane the sanctity of that loyal 
love which was poor Janet's sole religion. 
To hear such treason and blasphemy fro^ 
him would be more than she could, more 
than she need endure; she must do any- 
thing rather than incur the risk of having^ 
to listen to it. He would try to keep her 
with him, for the sake of appearances, out 
of consideration for the world which he 
prized and deferred to, the world which she 
neither loved nor hated, but simply did not 
take into account at all ; which had no 
meaning for the bereft and betrayed heart, 
that had been worshipping a phantom which 
had made itself air. He would not resort 
to unkind means, for Dunstan was essential- 
ly a gentleman, but persuasion would tor- 
ture her, and reason would be the most 
terrible kind of folly to a woeful mind like 



All, or Nothing. 229 

hers. She was, however, certain he would 
respect her last request, that she might be 
left unmolested, when the thing was done 
and over, and the gulf was set between 
them. She never asked herself how she 
was to bear the separation from him, how 
the long, slow days would pass with her. 
It had all become impossible,, it was all as 
though it had never been, save for the 
falsehood, and the ruin, and the pity of it. 
And there was no form or shape in the 
future for her who, held in bonds of pain 
and weakness by the present, was bent only 
on flight from the treason and betrayal of 
the past. ^ 

How the horrid tenacity of her memory 
tormented her! Sbe had taxed it but 
little, save with records of Dunstan, and it 
held them with scrupulous faith. She 
lived again through every hour of the time 
before the news of Mr. Thornton's death 
reached her husband, and she realised that 
from the moment at which he had learned 
that fact the question which had haunted 
her had taken voice. Then, trying to see 



230 All, or Nothing. 



clearly into a mental condition hardly com- 
prehensible by her transparent truthful- 
ness and oneness of soul, she discerned 
that the husband who had loved her never^ 
whose debt of " gratitude " had unexpect- 
edly become so irksome, because the bar- 
rier between himself and the woman whona 
he had loved always was removed, would 
surely come to hate her. From that hour 
there had been before his mind's eye the 
image of Laura, not as the wife of another^ 
parted from himself by her own act and 
choice, hopelessly out of his reach, the ob- 
ject of a regret, vague and fading, . deadly 
wrong to Janet as such an image was, . 
but the mocking picture of what might 
have been but for Janet's importunate 
love and his own disproportionate and un- 
timely "gratitude." Thenceforth Janet's 
presence became an active evil ; his wife 
was no longer the mere obligatory accom- 
paniment of his fortune and position, she 
was the living obstacle to his happiness, 
the woman who stood between him and 
Laura, free now, and to be won. How, if 



AU^ or Nothing. 231 

Laura were tvoh, and once more by another, 
and the pangs of jealousy were again ta 
seize on Dunstan as, together with the 
pangs of despised love, they had seized on 
Janet ? 

From the picture that her imagination 
conjured up she shrank with terror ; from 
the thought that he might come to hate 
her . after the polite and disguised fashion 
of household hatred among people of the 
world, no doubt, but with all that repul- 
sion in it which his 4ove of Laura would 
lend to the feeling. He would come to 
hate her when he should see, beside her, 
the aerial image of the woman who, but 
for her, might sit at his table, and slumber 
on his breast . the woman whose husband 
had been happy, and had loved her, and 
was dead ! 

Yes, he would hate her, and nothing 
that she could do could hinder that hatred. 
For she could not die. Until great suffering 
comes to the young, they are apt to flatter, 
themselves that if it should come they will 
be sure to escape from it by death ; but the 



232 Alitor Nothing. 



first tight grip it takes of them teaches them 
that it is not so. While Janet was very ill 
she had no memory of her sorrow, and 
when she awoke to it clearly, without 
transition, she knew that she was not going 
to die. Yes, he would hate her, and with 
cause, for she must, while she lived, repre- 
sent to him the weapon of Pate wherewith 
he had been opposed and defeated. And 
she must bear that knowledge ; but at least 
she need never read it in his face, hear it 
in his voice, look at 'him with the know- 
ledge that it was stirring at his heart. 
Freedom to him or to herself it was not in 
her power to give ; but she could go far 
from him, and, until his freedom should be 
granted him by the hand that cannot err 
from justice and from mercy, no word or 
sign from her should reach him more. 

With all her senses perfectly untroubled, 
and with her friends about her, Janet, 
living in a world infinitely apart from 
them, made her plans. Sometimes she 
wondered, in a vague way, that it did not 
grieve her to think of a parting for ever 



All, or Nothing. 233 

between herself and those friends : it did 
not; she loved them, she knew all their 
solicitude and care; she knew that they 
would grieve when she was gone ; but she 
felt no grief on that account. There was 
no room, there was no strength in Janet's 
heart for any divided sorrow. 

Julia had been brave and truthful in 
what she said to Dunstan; she under- 
stood in part what he had done ; she had 
at least a true woman's perception that 
for a man to marry from any other 
motive than love is a cruel deed, and an 
outrage, however disguised, to honour. 
Janet was grateful to Julia, and she liked 
to think, whenever she could divert her 
thoughts from their centre of pain, of 
Julia as a happy wife. That would be 
soon, they told her, and then Julia would 
forget her, or, at least, she would cease to 
grieve about her. 

And Amabel? It was different with 
regard to her; numbed as were Janet's 
feelings, all but one, she was not insensi- 
ble to that difference ; she did not forget 



234 All^ or Nothing. 

the promise she had made to Amabel, 
or how strangely Amabel had pressed 
her for a renewal of it on that wedding- 
day from the remembrance of which she 
shrank in terror. Janet did not mean to 
be unfaithful to that promise. Janet 
knew that, no matter to what pain she 
should have to put her, she might 
trust Amabel, and many an hour did she 
lie still, or sit in the deep old-fashioned 
arm-chair by the window . as she had seen 
Mrs. Drummond sit, musing, in the bygone 
years . and, holding the girl's hand in 
hers, ponder over the project which was ta 
be put into execution when her strength 
returned, with a great pity and hope for 
Amabel in her poor tired heart. 

'*It will be hard on her at first," Janet 
would think, '*but it will be well for her in 
the end. Sir Wilfrid will come back with Mr. 
Sandilands, and he will come to his friend 
when I am here no longer . I daresay he 
will blame me heavily, even if he knows 
all about the woman whom my husband 
loves, for men stand by men . and he will 



All, or Nothing. 235 



fall in love with Amabel this time. She 
"will be very happy with him ; she will not 
fret about his passing fancy for me, for she 
will not have been deceived." 

All this time Janet was unaware of the 
close scrutiny with which Amabel was 
observing her, and she little thought how 
nearly that curious gift of intuition and of 
sympathy which her friend possessed was 
enabling her to discern her secret. " There 
is an arrow in her heart/* Amabel had said 
to herself early in Janet's convalescence, 
*' and the hand that shot it is her hus- 
band's." 

From that moment, without questioning 
her by so much as a look, she seconded 
Janet's wishes. No less clearly than she 
perceived Janet's state of mind, did Amabel 
discern that the intimation of Janet's wish 
that he should go to London was welcome 
to Captain Dunstan ; and that there was 
something more in his acceptance of it 
than the not unnatural gladness with 
which a man escapes from a scene of dul- 
ness and illness, when things are on the 



236 All, or Nothing. 



miDd, and he can take a holiday credit- 
ably. 

When the intelligence of Mrs. Monro's 
death was sent to Janet, those with her 
felt great uneasiness with respect to the 
effect that it might have upon her. It 
affected her but slightly. She said little 
to Julia on the subject, and Julia supposed 
she had so long looked for the event that 
she had grown accustomed to think of her 
sister-in-law as for ever passed away out 
of her own life. But Amabel knew better ; 
to her Janet said, briefly, 

*' She has her wish at last, and he too. 
Am I to grudge that to them for my poor 
sake ?*' 

There was no sorrow at all in Janet's 
heart for her sister-in-law; on the con- 
trary, she thought of her with unselfish 
congratulation, with sinless envy. There 
was one in the deathless world whose 
heaven had been incomplete until she 
joined him there. To Janet the deathless 
world itself could never throughout all 
eternity give that especial happiness. 



All, or Xothing. 237 

That night Janet took from a drawer of 
the old bureau a packet of letters. Among 
its contents were all those which Mrs. Monro 
had written to her since she left England. 
There were none of very recent date ; there 
were some of years ago. From the latter 
Janet selected a few, which she placed in 
a pocket of her travelling-bag ; from those 
relating to Mrs. Monro's sojourn at Nice 
she made some careful memoranda, and 
then she burned the letters. 

^  * *  * 

The train by which Janet travelled to 
London, arrived in time to enable her to 
cross the Channel the same night. The 
steamer which carried her to Calais waa 
that one in which she and Dunstan had 
crossed to Dover on their return to Eng- 
land. A dreary wonder fell upon her a& 
she recognised the cabin and the stew- 
ardess, and felt absolutely secure from 
recognition herself, as well she might, for 
who, even though the constant press of 
strangers had not intervened to blunt 
impressions, could have seen in the pale- 




238 All, or Nothing. 

faced, sad-eyed young woman in deep, 
plain mourning, her hair completely hidden 
by the white border of an English widow's 
cap, who sat in a comer of the cabin,, with 
a leather bag at her feet, the beautiful, 
richly-dressed, assiduously waited-on lady, 
whose servants had made such a fuss 
about the amount and quality of accom- 
modation for her and themselves, and 
whose equipment included every accessory 
of travelling fashion. 

Twenty-four hours after she left Bevis, 
Janet was seated in the parloir of a humble 
little convent in a remote quarter of Paris, 
where the surroundings are of a squalid 
enough order, but where high walls shut 
in and lofty trees shelter the quiet, unseen 
lives that are passed in teaching the chil- 
dren of the poorest among the poor, and 
succouring the aged sick. In a superior, 
but still humble, portion of the house, a 
few ladies resided as boarders, and Janet 
was waiting to see if she could be received 
among the number. Presently a mild, 
grave woman, in the dress of a religious, 



All, or Nothing. 239 



entered the room, holding in her hand a 
faded letter. It was one of those which 
Janet had put away in the corner of her 
travelling-bag. She bowed to Janet, who 
rose, with nervous anxiety plainly to be 
read in every feature, and said, in French, 
" Our Reverend Mother remembers Ma- 
dame Monro perfectly . that dear little 
widow who was here with us in her first 
days of great mourning . and she sees that 
Madame is of her family and dear to her. 
This letter is enough ; our Reverend Mother 
will receive Madame." 




240 All, or Nothing. 




CHAPTER XI. 

A Question of Identity. 

FEW weeks after the death of Mrs. 
Monro, Miss Wells, having hung up 
the key of her apartment in the 
Bureau of the old hotel at Nice, set out in 
that independent fashion which she prized 
so highly . not, indeed, for Jericho, but on a 
sufficiently vague expedition. She needed 
change and recreation ; the last task of 
her self-appointed work which she had ac- 
complished had cost her a good deal, and, 
if she was to go on, she must not fret or 
look back, and, above all, she must take 
care of her own health. She would have 
a pleasant ramble among mountains some- 
where, but first she would go to Paris for 



A Question of Identity. 241 

a few days. It was rather warm weather 
for Paris, where there was no sea to 
temper heat which Miss Wells did not 
mind at Nice, but that could not be helped. 
It was not her way to let herself be influ- 
enced by considerations of that kind ; she 
had something to do at Paris, and when it 
was done, she would begin to take her 
holiday. 

As she journeyed up to the beautiful 
city in a crowded and stuffy train, Miss 
Wells arranged in her methodical mind all 
that she meant to do in Paris, and the 
order of it. The business she had under- 
taken first, then a visit to a certain hos- 
pital, where she should get some useful 
hints, a few hours at the Salon, a few min- 
utes in each of the great churches, a few 
purchases at the Bon March^ a drive in 
the Bois, and then she would be off to the 
mountains. She meant to go to an hotel 
in the Rue St. Honor^, and to set about 
her business early the next day. 

" Barri^re de la Glanci^re," said Miss 
Wells to herself, as she looked over some 

VOL. III. E 



242 AU,or Nothing. 

memoranda in her pocket-book. " I have 
not a notion where it is, but I daresay it 
will be a pleasant drive. And I am going 
on a pleasant errand. How glad they will 
be to get the money for their poor old 
people, and how pleased at her remem- 
brance of them ! It was a fine act of hers, 
too ; there is a great deal of self-denial in 
that hundred pounds." 

Miss Wells' business in Paris was the 
fulfilment of a request made by Mrs. 
Monro shortly before her death. She had 
saved out of her very limited means . she 
possessed only a small annuity, which died 
with her . one hundred pounds, and this 
sum she had confided to Miss Wells for a 
special purpose. She had no relative in 
the world except Mrs. Dunstan, and to her 
she wished a few of her personal effects to 
be sent ; but the money she had saved she 
was free to dispose of, and it was to be 
given to the first friends whom she had 
found in her great trouble, by the hands of 
the last friend, who would see her safely 
through that trouble. Every other wish 



A Question of Identity. 243 

which she had expressed had been faithfully 
carried out by Miss Wells, who was now about 
to fulfil this one. She felt rather curious and 
a little hurt about this Mrs. Dunstan, who 
had taken no notice of the " letter in which 
she had written her the particulars of her 
only relative's death. The receipt of a 
packing-case, containing the articles sent 
to Bevis from Nice . not immediately after 
Mrs. Monro's death, but when Miss Wells 
became convinced that Mrs. Dunstan did 
not mean to write . was formally notified 
to her by Captain Dunstan, but no other 
communication reached her. Even that 
dear, lovely Mrs. Thornton, who had been 
so fond ,of Mrs. Monro, had not written a 
line, and though she was in such trouble 
herself. Miss Wells thought she might 
have done that ; indeed, her own trouble 
would but have been a reason the more. 
It was very strange, considering all that 
they had gone through together, and Miss 
Wells felt a curious, contradictory kind of 
retrospective pity for the loneliness of her 
dead friend, who was so little missed or 

b2 




244 All^ or Nothing. 

remembered. She almost wondered that 
nice Miss Carmichael had not written, but 
she felt she must put these things out of 
her head ; she had been particularly in- 
terested in a certain set of people wha 
chanced to come in her way, but she wa& 
not going to be disappointed because they 
had soon and easily forgotten her. 

In this healthy frame of mind, Miss 
Wells set out on her expedition to the 
distant region of Paris wherein her busi- 
ness lay. 

A porte-cochere in a lofty, dingy wall, 
above which the gently- stirring boughs of 
some fine acacia-trees were visible, admit- 
ted Miss Wells to a peaceful scene. Three 
sides of a large piece of ground, which 
combined the features of a lawn and a 
garden, were enclosed by the main build- 
ing and the wings of a very old house, 
with a leaden roof, tall narrow windows, 
and a flagged verandah. A superb acacia- 
tree occupied the centre of the lawn, where 
two or three wicker chairs and a light 
table strewn with needlework indicated 



A Question of Identity. 245 

that the inmates of the house were wont to 
make a summer drawing-room of the 
smooth green sward under the spreading 
shade. 

There would be some delay before Miss 
Wells could see the person for whom she 
inquired, and, the lawn being vacant, she 
asked to be permitted to wait there in the 
cool air, rather than in the parloir. She 
took one of the wicker chairs and sat 
patiently under the shade of the great 
acacia, feeling pleasantly the stillness and 
seclusion of the place, in which no one 
seemed to be stirring, though, as she knew, 
there was plenty of busy life within those 
walls. She had been there perhaps a 
quarter of an hour, when a slight sound, 
the sweeping of a woman's dress upon the 
green sward, caused her to turn in its 
direction. No doubt the person whom 
she expected to see was coming to her; 
a low-lying branch hid the approaching 
figure, but she discerned a plain black 
skirt. The next moment the figure came 
from behind the tree into full view. A tall, 



246 AH, or Nothing. 



slight, youthful form, clad in deep moum-i 
ing ; a fair, delicate, pale face, surrounded 
by a widow's ,bonnet, which hid the bright 
hair, revealed themselves to Miss Wells, 
who sprang up with an exclamation of 
almost terrified surprise, and gazed at the 
lady with mingled fascination and recoil. 

*'I beg your pardon, I have disturbed 
you; I came for my work," said the lady, 
as she passed Miss Wells, with a bow, and 
approached the table. But Miss Wells,, 
from whose florid face the colour had 
vanished, and who was trembling quite 
visibly, made no conventional reply. 

" For God's sake tell me who you are I" 

No answer. 

''Pray forgive me, I don't mean to be 
rude, but it is impossible . ^the likeness is 
so remarkable ; I never saw such a things 
and she was very dear to me !" 

"She! Whom?" 

" Janet Monro." 

As they had come to her that day at Tha 
Chantry, as they had come to her that 
other day upon the terrace at Bevis, so tha 



A Question of Identity. 247 

ringiDg in her ears, the dull throbbing in 
her heart, came to Janet now, warning her. 
She caught at a chair and sank into it with 
a deep sigh, to the great alarm of Miss 
Wells. 

"Ah! mon Dieu, is it that Madame 
Monro finds herself ill ?" 

This question was asked by the person 
whom Miss Wells had come to see . a 
kindly, middle-aged woman in the dress of 
a religious, who had joined them unper- 
ceived. 

" Madame Monro ! Is that the name 
of this lady ?" 

" Yes, yes, this is Madame Monro* 
Ah, she is better ; it is nothing. It is the 
heat, and she is not strong. See, she is 
quite revived. Pardon, Madame, you 
wished to speak with me." 

" I did ; but is it well to leave this lady ? 
Are you better ?" 

She addressed Janet in that tone, solicit- 
ous but firm, which seldom failed to inspire 
liking and confidence, and Janet opened 
her eyes, with a faint smile. 



248 AU^ or Nothing. 

*' I am quite well now. It was nothing, 
only the heat." 

"Remain where you are," said the re- 
ligious, **and when Madame has told me 
her business, we will return to you. Poor 
little lady," she added, as she conducted 
Miss Wells to the parlour, " she has had 
her troubles, I fear, like all .in this sad 
world, but she is at peace here, and she 
comes to us recommended by an old friend." 

They entered the house, and were hidden 
from Janet. 

She was recovering from the shock of 
the words that had been spoken to her, 
but only to bewilderment and fear. Had 
her term of rest and peace come to an end? 
Who was this stranger, kindly-natured 
and good indeed, if her face and her voice 
might be trusted, who evidently held a 
clue by which she might trace Janet's 
identity ? Supposing she were to use it, 
and, discovering her secret, consider that she 
ought to reveal it ? Then what could come 
to Janet except the miserable dread that, 
from any of those motives which were so 



A Question of Identity. 249 

small and meaningless to her, her husband 
might disregard her prayer. 

She tried to think that she was fright- 
ening herself for nothing ; the stranger 
had come to the Reverend Mother on 
business of her own ; she would forget the 
accidental likeness that had struck her so 
strongly, in the claims of that business, 
and, seeing Janet no more, would think of 
her no more. Then Janet rose, with the 
intention of going away, but found she 
could not walk a yard, or stand steadily, 
for the ringing and the throbbing, and 
when she sat down again she could not 
think at all clearly, but knew she must 
wait until somebody should come who 
would help her to get back to her room. 
She had heard somebody . she supposed it 
was Dr. Andrews . say, during her illness, 
that it looked as if she had had a shock, 
and that she was a bad subject for shocks. 
She must be so, indeed, when an occurrence 
such as this could make her so ill and 
helpless. 

Miss Wells acquitted herself of her com- 



250 AU, or Nothing. 



mission, and was well rewarded by the 
gratitude of the Reverend Mother, who 
asked her many questions about the young 
widow who had cherished so lasting a re 
membrance of her sojourn in the little con- 
vent. It was curious, she said, except 
that the finger of the good God was to he 
seen in everything, if it were but looked 
for, that they were able just then to do 
something in memory of their benefactress. 
The poor little lady out there . the Rever- 
end Mother pointed to the window . had 
come to them in the character of a relative 
of Mrs. Monro, asking them to receive her 
as a boarder for Mrs. Monro's sake, and 
they had done so. 

'* Indeed !" said Miss Wells, *. and when 
was that ?" 

She had not mentioned the date of Mrs. 
Monro's death, and the Reverend Mother'^ 
answer let in a flood of light upon her by 
informing her that this relative of Mrs. 
Monro's had been received at the convent 
within ten days after that event. 



A Question of Identity. 251 

*' What was her precise relationship to 
Mrs. Monro?" 

" She was her cousin, of the same name^ 
too, as she tells me. She will be cheered 
when she learns this curious circumstance ; 
and she needs it. She has no friends iu 
Pari^." 

What had happened ? Of Janet's iden- 
tity Miss Wells had no doubt. That the 
mysterious fact of Mrs. Dunstan's being 
where she was implied some great misfor- 
tune, she felt equally certain ; and the recol- 
lection that the friend she had so lately lost 
had loved this only relative, stirred strong- 
ly in Miss Wells' heart, a heart which 
never shrank from anyone in sickness or 
sorrow with  aonse of strangership. 

At this moment the Reverend Mother 
was told that somebody else wanted to see 
her, and Miss Wells availed herself of the 
opportunity to return to the lawn, and, as 
she said, introduce herself to her country, 
woman. 

Janet was still sitting where they had 



252 All^ or Notliing. 



left her, her head lay wearily against 
the tall back of the deep wicker chair, her 
hands lay idly in her lap; she was the 
very image of lassitude and hopelessness, 
far more sad to see than ever her name- 
sake had been, even when she was fading 
most rapidly. 

Miss Wells went close up to her, and 
dealing promptly with the nervous appre- 
hension in her grief-stricken face, said, 

" I am Martha Wells ; it was I who 
wrote to you from Nice. Janet Monro died 
with her hand in mine. Will you not trust 
me, Mrs. Dunstan ?" 

In England, as elsewhere, time was 
running on, and the first impression made 
by the events that had occurred at Bevis 
had passed away. Captain Dunstan had 
been solicitous only that it should be 
understood, in the fullest possible sense, 
that his wife was not to blame for the 
separation between them, which it soon 
became known had taken place. 

For this very reason Janet was all the 



A Question of Identity. 253 

more severely blamed, especially as the 
rights and wrongs of the matter were 
but imperfectly known, and the most 
charitably-disposed towards her supposed 
she must be mad, and that Captain Dun- 
Stan was hushing it up. At all events, 
it was plain that he felt it very severely, 
and that there was an end to all the pleas- 
ant prospects of Bevis proving an " acqui- 
sition " to the neighbourhood. 

Captain Dunstan did feel Janet's flight 
very severely . as a terrible blow to his 
pride, and an extraordinary revelation of her 
character. It was not only that he had never 
suspected the existence of such love and such 
jealousy, of such an exalted and impossi- 
ble ideal in her mind as would render the 
knowledge of his motives for making her 
his wife intolerable to her, while yet she 
should be perfectly secure from anything 
that could be regarded as want of kindness 
and observance on his part ; but he had 
never believed in feelings of the kind at 
all, on anyone's part, out of a romance. 
Of course he knew she loved him; Mrs. 



254 AU, or Nothing. 

Drummond told him so, and she herself 
had owned it in a very sweet and becom- 
ing manner when he " proposed " to her, 
and many times besides during the brief 
engagement, which he had found, to tell 
the truth, rather irksome. But that she 
should take things in this tragic way 
astonished him. It hurt him keenly, too, 
and made him think, as he had never 
thought before, of what the vows and the 
promises of marriage mean, how awful 
they are, how lightly taken and how ill 
kept, even when there is no open or defiant 
breach of the letter of them. He had 
always behaved well to Janet, and he did 
not doubt that he should have continued 
to do so; but he could not deny to 
himself that he had always been thinking 
of another woman, and that she had 
accused him truly, convicting him out of 
his own mouth, and left him, her interpre- 
tation of their respective positions being 
granted, justly. 

It was more the manner of it than the 
action itself that he regretted so vividly. 



A Qitestion of Identity. 255 

Perhaps the unsuitability between them 
would, under any circumstances, have 
proved too great for comfort, but in that 
case there would have been a middle 
course so easily taken, one adopted by lots 
of people every day, without scandal or 
gossip, or the unpleasantness of this 
method of hers. He was very seriously 
troubled about Janet, and oppressed by 
the fear that she might be actually suffer- 
ing in material ways while her retreat 
remained undiscovered. Of course he 
should find her some day ; he never really 
doubted that ; and in the meantime he was 
most anxious that it should not be suspected 
that he did not know what had become of 
her. And it was not suspected beyond 
the small circle of those who knew the 
fact. 

The shock and surprise of the desperate 
step his wife had taken, and the success 
which attended her intention of con- 
cealment, had the effect of very con- 
siderably clearing his moral vision; and 
Janet, if it would have been a satis- 



256 All, or Nothing. 

faction, might have had that of knowing 
that ghe was perpetually in his remem- 
brance, and, in a strange sort of way, an 
object of curiosity, a subject of questioning 
to him, as she had never been before. It 
was as though he had married one woman, 
and his wife had turned out to be another 
just as she vanished from him ; that other 
a less gentle, less perfect, less complaisant 
being indeed, more wilful, but more in- 
teresting, more individual. And yet, in the 
bottom of his heart, when Edward Dunstan 
mused upon the revelation of Janet's love, 
and what her ideal was, he thought . if it 
had only been the right wotnan who had 
loved him thus ! 

Events had also marched with time, and 
late in the autumn Julia Carmichael and 
John Sandilands were to be married. 
John had come home with Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile, and the wedding was to take place 
at Hunsford. Dunstan and Esdaile had 
not met since Esdaile's return, but they 
were to meet soon, for Dunstan had asked 
Esdaile to come to Bevis after the wedding, 



A Question of Identity. 257 

and Esdaile had promised to do so. John 
Sandilands and Julia were also to visit 
him before they left England, It would 
be a strange meeting, and Dunstan would 
be glad when it was over. 

Sir Wilfrid Esdaile and Amabel Ainslie 
were the only guests at Hunsford in addi- 
tion to the bridegroom, and the wedding 
was a very quiet affair, both because the 
parties chiefly concerned wished it, and on 
account of Laura, who had come from 
Scotland to be with her cousin on the 
occasion, and to take leave of her. 

Lady Rosa Chumleigh was in an un- 
precedentedly amiable mood. She liked 
John Sandilands ; she was very glad to 
get Julia disposed of, and, since things had 
been so comfortably settled by the birth of 
her grandson, she had been on unusually 
good terms with Providence . persons of her 
kind sometimes are affected in this way by 
what they feel to be an escape. She was more 
disposed to let the Colonel approach nearer 
to the realisation of his ideal, a quiet life, 
than she had ever been before within his long 

VOL. III. s 



258 AU, or Nothing. 



but little varied experience. Julia looked 
very well, and was very happy in her quiet 
way, and John Sandilands had a piece of 
news to tell her when they had left Huns- 
ford ; it had been especially stipulated that 
he was not to tell her sooner, which would 
make her happier still. 

Sir Wilfrid's wedding-present to his 
friend was a splendid one; it was the 
coffee-plantation. John was going out to 
manage his own property now. Sir Wilfrid 
had hit upon this conclusive and satisfac- 
tory method of redressing, to a certain 
extent, that inequality between his own lot 
and that of John Sandilands which had 
always been a puzzle to him. 

'* Considering he has just married the 
only woman he ever wanted to marry, 
and that she is quite ideally suited to him, 
Tm inclined to think the weight has got 
into the other scale now," said Sir Wilfrid 
to himself, a little ruefully, as he entered 
the house after he had speeded the happy 
pair on their way, and done a little good- 
natured pottering with the Colonel. 



A Question of Identity. 259 

He found Laura in the morning-room with 
Amabel. The infant was sleeping in his 
lace-bedecked cradle beside the hearth, and 
Sir Wilfrid having been indulged with a 
peep at him began to talk with Laura of 
the wedding and of present matters first ; 
then of the past ; of the dark days at Nice, 
of Julia's arrival, of their journey back to 
England, of the friends whom they left be- 
hind. 

" If 1 had wanted reminding of it, which 
1 certainly did not," said Sir Wilfrid, *' I 
should have had it all brought before me 
by the sight of Miss Wells and Mrs. 
Monro.'' 

'' Miss Wells and Mrs. Monro ?" 

"Yes. I saw them for a moment; it 
was on the platform at Fontainebleau only. 
As we went by, I put my head out of the 
carriage and waved my hat ; but I can't 
tell whether they recognised me. Miss 
Wells looked just the same ; Mrs. Monro 
very wan and ill ; it was only a glimpse, 
but I saw that, I am sorry to say. What 
accounts do you get of her ?" 

s2 



260 All, or Nothing. 



He paused, and glanced from Laura to 
Amabel. The former was staring at him 
in unmitigated astonishment ; the face of 
the other was suffused with a peculiarly 
vivid sample of what Amabel called her 
*' unfortunate blush." 

''What have I said?" asked Sir Wilfrid. 

** That you saw Mrs. Monro with Miss 
Wells, on your way home with John. It 
is impossible." 

" But I tell you I did see them ; there is 
no doubt about it ; I saw them as distinct- 
ly as I see you and Miss Ainslie." 

*' At what date was that, Sir Wilfrid ?" 

" The fifteen of August." 

"Mrs. Monro," said Laura, solemnly^ 
" died at Nice in June ?" 

" Died ! Died in June ? Mrs. Thorn- 
ton, you must think me mad, if you will, 
but I most emphatically declare that I saw 
her, in her usual dress . the English widow's 
cap, I think, caught my eye first . with 
Miss Wells, standing on the platform at 
Fontainebleau. Pray don't doubt me ; 



A Question of Identity. 261 

pray don't laugh at me ; I tell you the exact 
truth." 

"Laugh! I am not likely to laugh at 
fiuch a thing. What can it mean ?" She 
put her hand to her brow for a moment, 
and thought, the next she exclaimed, 
*' Amabel! It was Mrs. Dunstan ! She 
has been with Miss Wells all this time ! 
Rely upon it, it was she. Oh, Sir Wilfrid, 
jou have found her !" 

" Thank God !" said Amabel, in her 
heart, while her tears fell silently, . 
^* thank God, she will be persuaded, she 
will come back ; it will all come right ; 
and yet she will know that I kept my word 
as faithfully as she kept her promise.'' 



262 All, or Nothing. 




CHAPTER XII. 

The Window in tJie Wall. 

. 

MABEL AINSLIB had grieved 
mucli over Janet's flight. No- 
other fulfilment of a prevision, 
and there had come such to her, or she 
had fancied them, was ever so unwelcome 
as the conviction that the marriage in 
which she had foreseen unhappiness was^ 
not happy. No other effort had ever been 
so painful to her as that by which, accept* 
ing the fact that Janet could not but do as 
she had done, Amabel had resolutely kept 
Janet's secret through all the wonderings 
and conjectures that followed. Only to 
Captain Dunstan and to Julia were the 
real circumstances of Janet's departure 



The Window in the Wall 263 

koown, and it was never suspected that 
Amabel had any further knowledge. She 
accepted without comment Mrs. Cathcart's 
suggestion that the matter could not be 
discussed with any profit, and she scrupu- 
lously avoided it. Of Captain Dunstan 
she had seen very little since the early 
summer. Janet had not been mentioned 
between them. 

In the consultation which ensued on Laura's 
convincing elucidation of Sir Wilfrid's sur- 
prising statement, Amabel joined, without 
letting it be discovered that she had previ- 
ously known anything, by earnestly entreat- 
ing Sir Wilfrid to carry the news to Cap- 
tain Dunstan, and to accompany him, if, as 
no doubt would be the case, he should de- 
cide on immediately going in search of 
Janet. 

" I believe there is no one in the world 
who could speak to her with such effect as 
you could," said Amabel ; " and she is too 
just to refuse to see you. None of us can 
tell whether she might not entirely refuse 
to see Captain Dunstan. And then Miss 



264 AUy or Nothing. 

Wells thinks so highly of you, she will take 
your view." 

It was agreed that this should be done. 
Laura thought there was a very perceptible 
readiness to accept Amabel's judgment on 
that and every other point, on the part of 
Sir Wilfrid Esdaile. Laura was interested 
in this strange story more than she had 
expected ever to be interested in anything 
again, but it was not until afterwards that 
she came to the knowledge of the large 
part she herself had played in it. 

On the following morning Sir Wilfrid 
Esdaile left Hunsford, and the first meet- 
ing between the friends since that memor- 
able day on which he had quitted Bevis a 
rejected suitor to the woman who he now 
hoped would be restored to her husband 
through his means, took place a few hours 
later. 

Dunstan met him at the railway station, 
and, before they reached Bevis, Esdaile, to 
whom he had not meant to mention Janet 
at all, had told him the news. Two days 
later they left England together, and 



The Window in the Wall 265 

travelled with but little delay to Nice. 
Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile was readily recognized 
at the hotel in the old part of the town, 
whither he proceeded, unaccompanied in 
the first instance by Dunstan, and, on his 
inquiring for Miss Wells, he learned that 
she was not there just then. Miss Wells 
had been a good deal away from her head- 
quarters of late, since shortly after the 
English lady's death ; she had gone away 
then for three months. 

*' Did she return alone ?" asked Sir Wil- 
frid, of the proprietor of the hotel, who 
held his eccentric English locataire in great 
respect, and was ready to give any informa- 
tion to a friend of hers. 

No, not alone, and the strange thing 
was that the lady who came with her 
might have been the twin sister of the 
poor little lady, so sad and gentle, who 
died in the summer. They had all been 
astonished . it was like seeing a ghost; 
but, after all, there was nothing surpris- 
ing ; the new lady was the near relation 
of the other, and of the same name. The 



266 AU, or Nothing. 

proprietor never wasted time in the vain 
attempt to pronounce that name. 

After a short stay, Miss Wells went 
away again, taking her friend with her. 
No, he could not tell his excellency where 
they had gone to ; Miss Wells never sent 
them an address, she never had her letters 
forwarded when she was away, and he 
could not say positively when she might 
be expected to return. But yes, there 
was no doubt at all that she would come 
back, only the exact time was uncertain, 
and it was also sure that she was not re- 
turning alone, for she had given orders 
about certain changes in her rooms, on 
account of the new lady. This was satis- 
factory to a certain extent, and Sir Wil- 
frid proceeded bo act on the information 
he had elicited. He inquired whether the 
rooms adjoining Miss Wells* apartment 
were vacant, and learning that they were, 
engaged them for himself and a friend 
from that day. He then wrote a few 
words on a card, which he put into an 
envelope addressed to Miss Wells, to be 



The Window in the Wall. 267 

given to her immediately on her arrival. 
In fact, he saw it tucked under her key, 
which hung on its numbered hook in the 
Bureau, before he returned to Captain 
Dunstan, at the H6tel de France, and re- 
ported progress- 
To them both it was a disappointment 
to find that they must wait, and for an 
uncertain time, before they could hope to 
see Janet. They had discussed the mat- 
ter very little, hardly alluded to it during 
their journey, and now the very closeness 
of the confidence between them, and the 
associations of the past, rendering them 
averse to speak upon the subject of which 
they were thinking most, the delay, with 
its restraint, its uncertainty, and its pro- 
longed excitement, became irksome to 
them. There was a ready resource ; time 
need not hang heavily on their hands, and 
with the sight of the place the former fas- 
cination of the gaming-tables revived for 
Esdaile. Dunstan had no particular taste 
for gambling, but he was restless and 
nervous, and he wanted to kill time. 



268 All, or Nothing. 



Three, four, five days passed away ; the 
weather was very fine, there was no sign 
of Miss Wells' return, and when the regu- 
lar inquiry, made by Sir Wilfrid each 
morning, had received the regular reply, 
the two young men would leave their dull 
hotel for the fashionable quarter, and soon 
find themselves with the rest of the world 
at Monte Carlo. 

It seemed as if fate were bent on play- 
ing Sir Wilfrid Esdaile an ill trick by this 
delay, for he not only fell into the old 
temptation, but the devil's luck declared 
itself for him, and he won largely and con- 
tinuously. Presently he came to be talked 
about among the frequenters of the place 
of the lower classes, just as a gentleman 
who is lucky on the turf, becomes uncon- 
sciously a hero, to the theoretically horsey 
idlers who lurk and slouch about the 
places where the mysterious transactions 
in which he has won distinction are carried 
on. 

Their sojourn at Nice had lasted for ten 
days, when Esdaile, having turned into 



The Window in the Wall. 269 

the Bureau one morning, as usual, to ask 
his invariable questions, found himself a 
spectator of a household row. The stern 
and business-like lady who presided in the 
Bureau, the proprietor of the hotel, and a 
waiter, the identical person who was in the 
habit of waiting on Bsdaile and Dunstan, 
were the parties to the quarrel. Esdaile 
immediately withdrew, having heard only 
the curt and determined order of the pro- 
prietor to the misdemeanant to " make his 
packet, and go on the field." The man was 
civil and quick, though an ill-looking 
fellow . a Nizzard of the h^rd and dark 
type, and singularly taciturn. Bsdaile 
had noticed him, because, as neither Dun- 
stan nor himself had a servant with him . a 
precaution against talk being carried back 
to Bevis, suggested by Mrs. Oathcart . 
he had been in constant request. The 
man passed him presently, as he stood 
at the porte-cochere^ with a civil bow, and 
Esdaile returned to the Bureau. The irate 
proprietor was no longer there ; the lady 
in charge was adding up a column of figures 



270 All, or Nothing. 



with angry energy, and, intermptdng her- 
self to answer Sir Wilfrid's question, she 
could not repress an allusion to her griev- 
ance Never was there known such a 
corvee as the managements of those garqons 
now-a-days. And Giuseppe had been a 
pearl, a true pearl until now, when his 
insolence all about a nothing, a miserable 
little nothing, had procured him his conge, 
for the patron never would suffer inso- 
lence. And a nothing! Anyone would 
think Giuseppe had done it express for 
the very purpose of being turned out 
But she begged pardon . no, there was no 
news of Miss Wells this morning more 
than another. Presently Dunstan and 
Esdaile went out for the day. 

The business of the hotel, not very 
brisk, went on just as usual. Giuseppe 
and his packet, of modest size . he car- 
red it, with a scowl, past the Bureau 
. were gone, and the afternoon was 
drawing towards dusk. There was no 
noise and no stir about the entrance or 
in the court of the old hotel, and for the 



The Window in the Wall. 271 

moment the Bureau was unoccupied. This 
must have been a moment watched for by 
a man who, entering boldly enough through 
the open gateway, paused in front of the 
green- curtained glass-door and listened for 
a moment, then boldly entered. He was 
not in the room a minute, but he came out 
of it with a key hidden up his sleeve, and 
then he quietly turned to the staircase on 
the right, and with perfect unconcern 
ascended it. True, Giuseppe was a dis- 
missed servant, and he had no business 
there ; but, if anyone should meet and 
question him, there was a ready answer in 
the io completeness of his packet . some- 
thing forgotten in the comhles where he had 
slept, and his ;ieglecting to use the stair- 
case de service would be only an imperti- 
nence the more. Fortune, who, if she 
favours the brave, is not always unkind to 
the dishonest, was propitious to Giuseppe ; 
he met no one, he experienced no alarm, 
and ho let himself into the little vestibule 
of Miss Wells' apartment with perfect ease 
and safety. He then passed, with a 



272 All^ or Nothing. 

noiseless tread, through the suite of rooms, 
and reaching the last of them, profited by 
the still lingering light to make certain 
arrangements in a business-like manner. 
The furniture of the room had undergone 
some alterations since the time of its occu- 
pation by Mrs. Monro ; but the large 
table, with its ranges of books and papers, 
was still in its former place, across the 
door of communication with the adjoining 
apartment. Giuseppe cleared the books 
and papers away, and, having thus light- 
ened the table, he very slowly drew it 
along the wall, so carefully that a passer- 
by in the corridor outside must have had 
quick ears indeed to hear a sound, 
leaving the door free. Tl\en he easily 
picked the old-fashioned lock, and, opening 
the doors, looked into the room on the 
other side. 

Apparently he only wanted to look in 
just at present, for he softly shut the door 
agaio, and, having deposited a pocket- 
lantern and a box of matches on the floor 
in a comer, he selected a particularly 



The Window in the Wall 273 

comfortable chair, and placing it in the 
shelter of the bed-curtains, so near to the 
wall that any sound in the next room 
would be audible to him at once, he safe 
down and waited. Waited, while the 
darkness fell, and the stars came out, and 
the unoccupied rooms turned chill and 
ghostly ; waited with set purpose, and 
patience which would have been becoming 
to a good action. One could not account 
for accidents, but he had taken his pre- 
cautions admirably, and the causes he 
might have had for fear were reduced to 
their minimum. He munched a slab of 
chocolate, amd waited. The ordinary 
noises of the hotel, as night fell, came to 
his ears ; then the entry of the chamber- 
maids into the adjoining room, and their 
departure ; then no sound for a long while. 
And then the sound that Giuseppe was 
waiting for. 

It was that of the voices of the English 
excellencies, who were such good friends 
and good comrades . in his ordinary busi- 
ness Giuseppe would not ask better than to 

VOL. III. T 



274 All, or Nothing. 

serve them . and one of whom was so 
wonderfully lucky at the tables that it 
might almost be believed he had drawn a 
good number pour tout de bon but for this 
stroke of extraordinary business which 
Giuseppe was about to do, thereby cross- 
ing the luck of the English excellency. 
He waited while the friends talked, he 
heard them laugh (his ear was at the key- 
hole now), he heard another sound, sweet- 
er than any laughter, the clear, musical 
clink of gold, as the English excellency 
who had the devil's luck threw a handful 
of tinkling pieces on the table ; he heard 
the only English phrase whose meaning he 
knew, *' good night," spoken by each, and 
then there was silence, and he waited 
again ; waited a long while, it seemed to 
him, for the light to be put out in the 
room of the excellency who had the devil's 
luck. 

At length it occurred to Giuseppe that 
perhaps the excellency did not intend to 
put out the light at all. With cat-like 
agility and noiselessness he climbed on the 



The Window in the Wall 276 

table, and, standing at the end of it, 
steadied himself with one hand against 
the door, while he looked through the little 
window in the wall. Looked into a large, 
dingy, but not uncomfortable room, well 
lighted, and with a pleasant fire of deep 
red logs upon the open hearth. In front 
of the hearth was a fauteuil of the 
traditional red velvet, and in it reclined 
Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile, sound asleep ; a half- 
smoked cigarette between his lips. Giu- 
seppe's eager gaze first took in every feature 
of the scene ; then dwelt with all the eager- 
ness of greed upon the table at Esdaile's 
elbow. There, scattered in careless pro- 
fusion, lay the devil's luck, in the form of 
a heap of gold and notes, and a bulky 
pocket-book. An open book also lay upon 
the table; and Bsdaile had been cutting 
its pages open; with a curious paper-knife, 
too, for it was Dunstan's dagger, that fine 
thin blade in a carved tortoise-shell 
sheath which he bought at Galle, in the 
days before he was rich enough to lend an 
ear to the blandishments of the traders in 

T 2 



276 All, or NoMng. 

"catty eye/' and '*pinkee coUal." An al- 
cove, which contained the bed, and across 
which the curtains were snugly drawn^ 
faced the door in the wall. 

As things were going, Giuseppe might 
have long to wait ; the English excellency 
slept with such unembarrassed ease in hi& 
fauteuil that, while the, fire kept the tem- 
perature even, he was not more likely to 
wake than if he were in his bed. Time 
was growing precious, for, although 
Giuseppe knew a way of getting out of 
the hotel without resorting to concierge 
or cordon^ he would rather not avail him- 
self of it, if he could contrive to slink out 
again by the entry as he had slunk in. 
He stepped softly down from the table, 
gently pushed the door open, and glid- 
ing through the aperture, approached the 
table without making the slightest sound. 
At this instant one of the red-hearted 
logs tumbled over and struck the ash- 
tray, rousing Esdaile, who opened his 
eyes and shifted his position. Still as a 
stone stood Giuseppe behind him, holding 



The Window in the Wall 277 

his breath, his eyes glitteriDg and terrible. 
Bsdaile moved again, threw his arm 
out, and knocked the open book ofE the 
edge of the table. It fell just behind him, 
and the dagger dropped at Giuseppe's feet. 
Slowly, with utter noiselessness, he bent 
down and felt for it on the ground, but 
without shifting his eyes from Esdaile's 
head, showing above the back of the faU' 
teuil. Again Esdaile moved, and this time 
he pushed the chair upon its castors so 
that he was turned half away from the 
hearth, half towards the door in the wall, 
and only a movement as instantaneous as 
it was noiseless enabled Giuseppe to shift 
his own ground and escape detection. 
That half-turn of Esdaile's, rendering 
Giuseppe's retreat by the door in the wall 
impossible, made a difference of immense 
import in the situation. Giuseppe's inten- 
tions, in the scheme which he had been 
contemplating for several days, had been 
strictly limited to robbery. The English 
excellency asleep, Giuseppe would enter the 
room, secure his booty, leave the room in 



278 An, or Nothing. 



the same way, replace the table to bai* 
the door of communication, restore every- 
thing to its usual appearance, and decamp 
in safety. But now the man whom he had 
come to rob was only half asleep, facing 
the table on which lay the devil's luck, and 
half facing the door. 

*'So much the worse for him . his luck 
has turned. I shall have to kill him now/*^ 

With this thought, Giuseppe . his hand 
closed upon Dunstan's dagger. fell back, 
step by step, until he had reached the 
alcove. He glided behind the curtain, and 
waited until the swift moments should 
decide whether Esdaile would wake up 
completely, or drop into a deep sleep again. 

Long after the sober business of the 
old hotel was supposed to be concluded for 
the night, there arose a hubbub in the 
Bureau, and the concierge was loud in pro- 
test, and vehement in apologies. Miss 
Wells and her friend had arrived ; no 
preparation was made for them ; no mes^ 
sage had been received. 



The Window in the Wall 279 

*' That comes of trusting people to send 
one's messages," said Miss Wells. " Hence* 
forth I do my own wiring." 

It was most unfortunate, but it could 
not be helped. Miss Wells and her friend 
had been detained for several hours in con- 
sequence of an accident on the line, which 
was also unfortunate, for her friend was 
far from strong. 

A small procession escorted the ladies 
to their apartment, with luggage, lights, 
and a basket of firewood. With everything^ 
it seemed, except the means of getting into 
the rooms, for the key, with the right 
number on its leaden label, taken ofE the 
numbered hook in the Bureau, would not 
unlock the door, and consternation ensued. 
There was nothing for it but to fetch a 
locksmith, and in the interval Miss Wells 
seated herself on a box and opened her 
letters, while the lady of the Bureau, with, 
whom nothing had gone right that day 
since Giuseppe's unaccountable conduct,, 
took such care as she could of Janet. One 
of those communications which had been 



280 -4//, or Nothing. 



awaiting Miss Wells gave her so much 
satisfaction that she was ready to meet 
every inconvenience with good humour. 

"I accidentally discovered that Mrs. 
Dunstan is with you," . were the vrords 
written on Esdaile's card . "to the great 
relief and joy of us all. I am here to see 
jou on behalf of Captain Dunstan . staying 
in the house. Say nothing to her, but let 
me know when you can see me.'* 

How thankful Miss Wells was ! How 
doubly glad that the person to intervene 
in this matter, which caused her so 
much anxiety, was Sir Wilfrid Bsdaile, 
the friend of the former dark days, and 
a paragon of perfection in her eyes. She 
looked upon Janet as she would have 
looked upon one who was going through 
the phases of a great illness, and concern- 
ing whom the bystanders had sore need of 
hope and patience. The "turn" would 
come, and then the convalescence ; she felt 
sure of that ; meantime her care and tend- 
ing of that sick soul, for the sake of Janet 
herself, for the sake of her dead friend, for 



The Window in the Wall. 281 

the sake of her own mission in life, had 
been most tender and most vigilant. And 
now the " turn " was near ; with her hus- 
band's message would begin the healing of 
Janet's '' grievous wound," and the dawn 
of better days for her, when she should be 
brought to accept this mortal life as it is, 
to discard her dreams of it as it can never 
be. 

" I will see him to-morrow," said Miss 
Wells to herself, "while she is taking a 
long rest." 

The door was now opened, the luggage 
carried into the ante-chamber, fires were 
lighted, and, while Miss Wells, in the 
^alle-a-mangeTj was discussing the pos- 
sibilities of supper, Janet found her way 
to her own room, and, declining any aid, 
fihut the door upon the bustle of their 
unexpected arrival. Except for the light 
she carried, the room was dark; the 
gloom was grateful to her, and she set 
the candle-stick on the lofty mantelpiece, 
took ofE her bonnet and cloak, and seated 
herself with her back to the feeble light 



282 AU^ or Nothing. 



in a chair which stood near to the walL 
She was very tired, but her thoughts were 
clear, and they were following a track on 
which they had been all that day . the 
track of investigation of her own will, of 
the meaning of herself and her life, of 
perception that she had been altogether 
wrong, not so much in what she had done 
as in the theory, the scheme of possibili* 
ties which she had constructed for herself, 
on that track which, after many windings, it 
may be, or perhaps with inconceivable 
quickness, leads the human spirit into the 
great liberty and the great light of the 
message : 

.* I am the Lord thy God, and thou shalt 
have no other gods but Me !" 

" No " other simply . not the fairest 
fancies, not the loftiest ambitions, not the 
purest affections. That was the liberty,, 
that was the light towards which Janet 
was being led along the track of her 
thoughts, and the emancipation, the dawn 
were close at hand. She was thinking, 
with a curious clearness, considering the 



The Window in the Wall 283 

surroundings, when a strange and startling 
sound, coming from the other side of the 
door, caught her ear. It was a deep and 
dreadful groan, and it drew Janet up, 
rigid and horror-stricken, on her feet. 
Only for an instant did she stand thus, the 
next she had ^rceived that light from 
the inner room was reflected on the little 
window in the wall over her head. Once 
more came that dreadful sound. It never 
occurred to Janet that the door was un- 
locked, though with the instantaneous 
perception of terror she saw that the 
table was drawn away ; and with a great 
exertion of strength she pushed it suffi- 
ciently far back into its former place to 
enable her to stand on it and reach the 
glimmering glass. In a moment she was 
looking into the room, at this : 

Sir Wilfrid Esdaile had fallen forward 
on the table where the gold and the notes 
had lain, his arms stretched out, his face, 
white and ghastly, lying on his right arm ; 
he was bleeding profusely from a wound 
in the neck, and the dagger had beeu 



284 All, or Nothing. 

thrust under one of his nerveless hands. 
For one moment Janet saw only this, and 
.ven as she tried to utter a cry, but was 
seized with the dreadful dumbness of 
horror, she felt the door against which her 
body was pressed shaken, and the latch on 
the other side moved. Then she shrank 
away for an instant, and again a desperate 
efEort to push the door open was made ; but 
the weight of the table with her own added 
to it resisted the attempt, and the assassin, 
suddenly apprised that his plan of retreat 
was foiled, stepped back from the door 
into her sight. She saw him plainly; it 
was the hotel- servant, Giuseppe. 

For one instant he looked about him, as 
if at bay, the next he walked quickly 
towards the other door, which was on the 
same side as the hearth, and opened into 
an ante-room giving on the corridor. 
But something arrested his steps ; he slid 
back, and in a second was again hidden by 
the curtain of the alcove. 

Then Janet, stone-dumb, with bursting 
eyeballs, and icy hands clutching the wall, 



The Window in the Wall 285 



saw the door on the same side as the 
hearth open, and a man enter the room. 
She heard the exclamation he uttered as 
he rushed across to the fauieuil, and raised 
Esdaile's lifeless body in his arms. He 
saw the wound, he saw the dagger, he 
knew what it meant; the fool who had 
done this forgot that, although men kill^ 
they do not rob themselves, and where 
was the money, the devil's luck, gone 
to ? He rolled a handkerchief tight and 
pressed it against the wound, and tied 
another handkerchief over that, not dar- 
ing to let the blood flow while he gave 
the alarm . all this with incalculable quick- 
ness, and bending over Esdaile, with his 
back to the alcove. Then Giuseppe stole 
out once more, and Janet saw him. He 
must get out of that door by which the 
man had come in, unseen, if possible ; if 
not, then the other excellency's luck would 
have turned also, and he should be obliged 
to kill him too. So Giuseppe swung his 
strong blue cotton pocket-handkerchief 
into a wisp, and knotted the ends in a 



286 All, or Noting. 



trice, and glided out with it ready in his 
hand. 

He was close upon the group beside the 
liearth ; the door lay open, the man's back, 
as he bent over his friend, was turned to- 
wards him ; in another moment he would 
have crept past and out into the darkness, 
into safety, but Janet, who saw his terrible 
face, and the knotted throttling cloth, and 
could see in them no other design than 
murder, burst the bonds of her dumb 
terror, and dashed her clenched hand 
through the little window in the wall with 
a loud and piercing cry . '' Edward ! Ed- 
ward 1" It had hardly rung through the 
room ere Dunstan had the assassin by the 
throat. 

There was no hope from the first, and 
they all knew it. She could hardly have 
survived the shock, the doctors said, even 
though she had not been fatally injured 
l)y the fall, as Miss Wells knew she was 
when she lifted her. She suffered little, 
and was very quiet, speaking so seldom that 



The Window in the Wall 287 

they were not quite sure of her conscious- 
ness at times ; but they took the chance of 
it, and said everything very quietly to her 
which they wanted her to know, especially 
that Esdaile was recovering, apd that 
Amabel would soon be with her. She was 
little moved, but she understand them ; 
and she would listen when Dunstan spoke, 
and follow him with her eyes when he 
moved about the room. They thought 
she did not remember where she was, but 
fancied she was at Bevis, for she said, on 
the third day, very distinctly, 

*' I should like to see Mrs. Thornton 
just once ;" and then, when they assured 
her that Mrs. Thornton would certainly 
come to her, she dozed for a few moments, 
and said, on waking, "We will walk on 
the stone terrace, and I will tell her." 

Miss Wells telegraphed to Laura, and 
she started for Nice at once ; but Janet 
was not there any longer when Laura 
arrived. In the same room where she had 
been told of Robert's death, Laura stood 
beside the fair fading form in which the 



288 All, or Nothing. 



lofty and loving spirit of Dunstan's wife 
had dwelt for its few earthly years. 

''You saw her living?" she whispered 
to Amabel. 

*' Yes. I was here a few hours before. 
I heard her last words ; they were very 
feeble, but quite distinct . ' Thou shalt 
have no other gods but Me.' " 

There was a long silence, then Laura 
asked . 

" How does he bear it ?" 

" I did not think he could have felt sa 
much about anything." 

" Poor fellow !" 

Laura laid rich roses on the pillow by 
the side of the fair calm face that would 
never shrink with pain from the thought 
of her any more, and went away back to 
England. 

" She was worth a million of me/^ 
thought Laura, as she caught the last 
glimpse of the Bay of the Angels, and the 
sun was shining on the sea, as if winter 
and wreck were not, *' and Robert was 
worth a million of Edward Dunstan, and 



The Window in the Wall. 289 

yet they are gone, and we are left. Why ? 
Ah me ! why ?" 

But it did not come to Laura's mind 
that perhaps just that difference of value 
may have furnished the why. 

 * *  4|e # 

In the wide, shady verandah of John 
Sandilands' bungalow, which has a com- 
fortable, not to say elegant, appearance 
in these days, when Julia, who requires 
something more of her abode than space 
and shelter, rules there well and wisely, a 
party of three are enjoying the cool and 
scented evening air. It is a year after the 
events which are now a tale that is told. 
The party is composed of John Sandilands, 
Julia, and Mr. Gilchrist, who has the live- 
liest regard for these young people, and 
is happily convinced that they would not 
go *'home," even if they had made their 
fortune. Mr. Gilchrist, arrayed in a suit 
of white, almost too spotless for belief, is 
walking up and down the verandah with a 
springy and juvenile step, and his face is 
rippling all over with smiles. John and 

VOL. III. u 




290 All, or Nothing. ' 



Julia are ensconced in their respective 
big Cingalese chairs, and a bamboo-table, 
laden with letters and newspapers, stands 
between them. 

'' Read it out again for me, my dear," 
says Mr. Gilchrist, coming to a stand-still 
by Julia's side, '* though it is all in her own 
letter, and how she wore my poor coral on 
the happy occasion, I should like to hear 
it read out again." 

Julia smilingly complied. 

" * On the 9th instant, at St. Stephen's 
Church, South Kensington, London, by 
the Rev. Charles Cathcart, Vicar of St. 
Mary's, Wold, Suffolk, Sir Wilfrid Esdaile, 
Bart., to Amabel, only daughter of Claudius 
Ainslie, Esq., of The Chantry, near Bury, 
Suffolk.' Amabel was married from Mrs. 
Thornton's house in Prince's Gardens, you 
know," added Julia. 

*' Very nice indeed, very nice," said Mr. 
Gilchrist, " only Ainslie might have hinted 
in it at his thirty years as a civil servant. 
* Late of Bombay ' would have been grace- 
ful, I think. However, that's a matter of 



The Window in tU Wall 291 

taste. The matter of fact is that the best 
girl in the world has got a husband almost 
worthy of her. The second time he came 
out I felt sure it would be all right with 
Tom Esdaile's boy." 

And Mr. Gilchrist walked off and 
smoked many congratulatory cheroots 
among the oleanders. 

" John !" said Julia, after they had both 
been silent for some time, " do you think 
Laura will ever marry him ? Do you 
think he will ever ask her?" 

'* I don't know. I don't think. Not for 
many a day, if ever." 

" And then, suppose each of them should 
come to contrast the other with a vanished 
figure ?" 

"Not much fear of that, my dear. 
They would be very happy, I should say, 
admirably suited, and, as he is always to 
be lucky, she would be just a little too 
good for him." 

" You are a little hard on Captain Dun- 
stan, as I used to be. No, John, the only 
two persons absolutely matches in feeling 



292 AU, or Nothing. 



and in purpose whom I have ever known 
were Janet and Mr. Thornton. And they 
never even met." 

" Of course they did not. What would 
you have ? But Janet never would have 
been happy, for she must always have 
looked in human nature for what is not in 
it, and expected from the world what it 
has not to give." 

" We are very happy, John !" said Julia^ 
with a little remonstrance in her tone. 

" Very, my dear love ; as happy as we 
can be. But life, as Janet dreamed of life, 
and love, as Janet would have had love, 
mean heaven, and heaven is not here." 



THE END. 
