A GOLDEN SORROW. 



CHAPTER I. 

CANDIDATES. 

Miriam Clint was about to leave school. She was not glad 
of it. She was eighteen years old, and had her notions and 
visions about " coming out," like other girls of her age, and 
especially of her appearance. The time to which these no- 
tions would naturally have tended, and these visions soared, 
was at hand, and yet Miriam Clint was not glad This 
is a paradox which requires explanation. Miriam had every 
reason to believe that her visions would remain entirely 
unfulfilled ; she had good cause to like the school at which 
she had passed eight years in tolerable comfort to herself, 
and harmony with her surroundings; but she had no cause 
whatever to like home, or to anticipate that it would be more 
endurable when she should have returned thither " for good," 
than it had been during her dismal holidays. 

Miriam was not of a sentimental disposition, but she had 
strong feelings, and a good deal of decision of character . a 
combination which made her a favourite at Miss Monitor's 
school. She was in earnest in her likes and dislikes ; and 
being as good-natured as a clever, healthy girl usually is. 
especially when she is freely acknowledged to be much 
prettier than her companions, her likes were moifc Ti\iTC\stQ>\}& 
than her dislikes. Thus, there was commotion axvd ftsma^ *x. 



2 A Golden Sorrow. 

Crescent House, Hampstead, when it became known that Mr. 
Clint had refused to accede to Miriam's petition for " one 
more half," and that she was to go home immediately. Miriam 
became more emphatically than ever a " poor darling ; " and 
Mr. Clint, her father, who had always been considered a 
" horrid man," now received public mention as an " old brute. 1 ' 
There was less injustice in this designation than usually attends 
a sweeping censure. Mr. Clint was an old brute. Until within 
three days of breaking-up time, Miriam had hoped to gain her 
father's consent to her remaining at Cresent House, not be- 
cause she wished to remain, and counted on his indulgence 
for that reason, but because she honestly believed he must dislike 
the prospect of her return as much as she did. 

" It is impossible I can ever be anything but a tremendous 
bore to papa," she said, frankly, to Miss Monitor, with whom 
she was on confidential terms. " Every one bores him, you 
know, but Walter and I bore him above and beyond everybody 
else. I suppose it is just for appearances' sake he wants me 
home, and I can't help hoping he won't be able to resist the 
temptation of getting rid of me for six more months." 

Miss Monitor shook her tight little head, and replied, . 

" My dear, I should not count on that, if I were you. If 
your papa is having you home against his inclination, or even 
without it, for appearances' sake, I can only say it is the 
first time I have ever heard of his making such a sacrifice. 
No, no, Miriam ; depend upon it, you will have to go." 

Miss Monitor was right. Suspense in the school-room, and 
hope in the breast of Miriam and her young friends, were put 
an end to by the arrival of the post on the following morning. 
Miriam opened her father's letter, and the first glance settled the 
question. 

" The Firs, 3rd June, 18.. 

" D r Miriam [' There ! ' was the girl's mental commentary ; 

'he is always more ill-tempered than usual when he uses 

abbreviations ! What ill-tempered and ill-bred things they 

are I '] . y#u /lave given me the trouble of writing two letters in- 



Candidates. 3 

stead of one. Dortt do that again. You will come home as 
arranged, on the 6th ; I have put an adv* for a maid in some 
m 9 papers, and directed applicants to call at Cres* House to-mor- 
row between the hours of 12 and 4. From among them you will 
select, with Miss M.'s advice, a suitable person to attend upon you, 
make your clothes, 6r*c. Wages ^20. The person you select 
must be ready to come here with you on the 6th. You will come 
by express, leaving Lond. B 9 * at 11 a.m. . Y r ' truly, 

" Reg. Clint." 

Tears of anger rose in Miriam's eyes. " It isn't only that 
he refuses my request, but he puts it aside in such a cold, 
contemptuous way," she muttered ; " I shall never be able to 
care for him in the least, or get on better with him ; and I did 
mean to try. It's well for Walter he's a man ; he can do as he 
likes ; he is not obliged to stay at home, and put up with 
papa. I don't wonder at him ; I couldn't blame him for any- 
thing I " 

" Miriam," said Miss Monitor, entering the room with her 
accustomed precision of step and manner, but with a decided 
increase of the winter-apple colouring of her plump cheeks, 
" I need not ask you what news you have. Your father treats 
me with scanty courtesy, and I suppose blames me for your 
unwillingness to go home. He might recognize that at least 
you have been happy here." 

"He doesn't care, dear," said Miriam, flinging her arms 
round Miss Monitor's prim little figure with energy that 
caused that lady to rock upon her tightly shod little feet, 
and obliged her to rearrange her collar, her apron, her cuffs, 
and her neck-ribbon. " He doesn't know anything about my 
being happy or unhappy, and as for gratitude ! . well, never 
mind . Tm grateful, and I always shall be." 

" I am sure of that," said Miss Monitor ; and then perhaps 
remembering that the tone in which they were discussing 
Miriam's father was not the most appropriate to their mutual 
relation, she changed it for one of admoniUorv tbx&^& ^SScv 
consolation. Miriam listened with i\\-d\si\sfc& YCKgtfae"^^ 

b 2 



4 A Goldeii Sorroiv. 

and showed how very little she understood the principle of 
that filial obedience and reverence which Miss Monitor was, 
with some inconsistency, endeavouring to instil into her, by 
assuring her impetuously that she would do her very best to 
" put up with " her father, for Miss Monitor's sake. 

Miss Monitor had some reason to be offended with Mr. 
Clint His letter to her contained the following words : 

" D r Madam . Be so good as to acknowledge by return the 
enclosed cheque for am 1 of y r ace*, and to send Miss Clint home, 
according to my directions. . Y" truly, 

" Reg. Clint." 

Miss Monitor was not a high-minded woman, but neither 
was she a humbug. She did not " train the minds of her 
pupils," as the modern style of prospectus has it, to any 
transcendental heights of principle or feeling; she made no 
professions of horror at the notion of a lady's boarding-school 
being a speculation intended to pay, for she had intended hers 
to pay, and it was paying, and no woman in the world knew 
better than she did that no school could be really like home, 
if home were all it should be. But she knew equally well, 
and practically, that honesty is the best policy ; and she was 
honest, according to her light. She liked Miriam Clint, but 
she had no accurate comprehension of either her strength or 
her weaknesses ; and she could hardly have been expected to 
understand how much the girl, who would have genuinely 
preferred to remain at Cresent House rather than return to 
her father's roof, stood in need of pity. To Miriam, duty 
translated itself by " devoirs," and pleasure meant going to 
select evening parties, and occasionally to a concert, with one 
or two other favoured pupils, under the auspices of Miss 
Monitor ; and taking riding lessons in the early summer morn- 
ings, with her particular school- friends, on which occasions the 
riding-master was accompanied by his pretty young wife. 
Nothing could be more proper or more pleasant, Miriam then 
thought. She hated leaving all this, and she hated the thought 
of the home she was going to. 



Candidates. 5 

The position of affairs seemed to absolve Miss Monitor and 
Miriam from any bonds of conventional restraint. 

" I never was a hypocrite about it, was I, dear ? " said Miriam. 
" Don't you remember, long ago, when we did our composi- 
tions for Mr. Walker, I never would write letters about the 
pleasures of home and the delights of the country ? There is 
no pleasure in home to me, and I always did and always shall 
hate the country." 

" Don't say that, Miriam," said Miss Monitor, with a wise 
shake of her hand. " You would like it very much if you were 
married to a country gentleman with a nice property." Miss 
Monitor's own vision of ultimate bliss was retirement to a 
cottage, with a cow and poultry-yard. " Depend on it, that 
would make all the difference. And, remember, you must 
have gone home in order for that to happen. You couldn't 
have married here." 

" I'm not so sure of that" said Miriam impetuously ; then, 
recollecting herself, she added with some confusion, " At least 
. I mean something might have turned up, you know. How- 
ever, it is all over now, and there's no good in talking about it ; 
but of one thing you may be certain, if ever I marry a country 
gentleman, he must be well enough off to take me away 'from 
the country . no rurality for me? 

The dialogue was interrupted by Jane, a trim parlour-maid, 
who informed her mistress that a "young person" had called 
about the maid's place for Miss Clint There was an additional 
shade of respect in Jane's manner of mentioning Miriam, a 
recognition of her added dignity in the prospective possession 
of an own maid. 

"Take her into the waiting-room, and say I will see her 
presently," said Miss Monitor ; who added, when Jane with- 
drew, " Go and smooth your hair, Miriam, and make yourself 
tidy before you see this person. It would never do for her to 
see you looking like that" 

" Oh, what can it matter ? " said Miriam ifc\>&Y\o\^ , vev 
the thoroughness of her ill-humour arid discoxvtertL ur W\e. 



6 * A Golden Sorrow. 

question is, whether she will suit me, not whether I shall suit 
her." 

" There is a little of both in the question, my dear," replied 
Miss Monitor decisively ; " and it is a/ways worth every one's 
while to make a favourable impression." 

This was a lesson which Miss Monitor might be fully trusted 
to administer to her pupils. 

Miriam ran upstairs to her own room, as the bedroom she 
shared with only one little girl, the youngest pupil, might fairly 
be styled. There were no signs of packing about . she had 
retained sufficient hope to put that off to the last moment- . 
and the room was neat and lightsome. 

" She . this she, or another . may do all that now" mused 
Miriam; "I may as well begin to make her useful. Well, it 
is some comfort to be allowed to choose for myself; papa 
might have inflicted some horrid old witch of a woman upon 
me. In that vile place, it will be something to have a decent 
person to speak to, even if it's only a servant ; anpl I won't 
have her if she is not nice-looking." Miriam was smoothing 
her hair, and looking at her face in the glass. It was a hand- 
some face, but not one easy to describe, or rather, to realize from 
description, for it had a great variety of looks, and was not 
equally pleasing in all. It was not an unrefined face, but it 
wanted that last touch of refinement which only a habit of 
lofty and unselfish thought gives, and it was not quite frank. 
It was a face which would have pleased a painter more than 
a physiognomist, though it did not lack either intelligence or 
purpose. 

Miriam Clint was tall and well-formed, with a firm, upright 
carriage, and a full, pillar-like throat. Her face was not beau- 
tiful, if one is to bow to the regular-feature theory of beauty, 
for her nose belonged to no particular order, but was simply a 
white, waxen little nose which became her ; and her mouth 
was rather large. But the short, well-bred upper lip, and the 
strong, pleasant-looking white teeth, were handsome enough to 
please anybody who was not too coldly critical ; while the eyes, 



Candidates. y 

which looked out under a broad, smooth forehead, and straight, 
dark eyebrows, were undeniably beautiful. They were not 
black, or of any of the shades of colour which are called black ; 
they were not even dark, though they seemed so, in certain 
lights, by favour of their thick dark lashes : they were the true, 
rare, wonderful golden eyes ; the eyes which painters dare not 
imitate, unless they are cunning indeed, because the colour is 
so subtle, and the light in them so living ; the eyes that are 
called hazel, but are not hazel, and brownish grey, but are 
neither brown nor grey, nor anything but golden, though they 
have sometimes small brown dots, which enhance their beauty, 
beneath the irides. These eyes were most beautiful when 
Miriam was troubled. Then they softened and deepened in a 
wonderful, touching way, and the observer would be moved to 
instant sympathy with that most becoming sorrow. 

But Miriam had not yet learned the value of this particular 
charm ; her troubles had been hitherto shared and soothed by 
her girl-companions only, and they, though loyally unanimous 
in decreeing to Miriam the palm of beauty . she certainly was 
the prettiest girl at Crescent House . were not sufficiently critical 
to understand why it was that Miriam did not look any less 
pretty when she cried,' or was " going to," than at other times. 
If, with her golden eyes, Miriam had had fair hair, she might 
have had a chance of belonging to an " order " of beauty, she 
might have claimed a "style," and been described as of the 
Venetian school, or in the genre of Petrarch's Laura. But she 
had not fair hair. She had a great quantity of rich dark-brown 
hair, very glossy, and rather " crinkly/' to use the expressive 
school-girl phrase. It was set around her broad, low forehead, 
so that the dusky, downy roots showed, and it distinctly marked 
the five points which artists bid us admire. Miriam was rather 
inclined to grumble about her hair ; she had been born too 
late for the " raven-locks " period, and was only to be consoled 
when, on close inspection, some spiral threads of vivid red 
were detected amid the shiny darkness, spiral threads which 
made little rings upon her broad temples, and eux\^ ataoM\\\sx. 



8 A Golden Sorrow. 

ears, and on the back of her neck. Her complexion was as 
unfashionable as her hair. It was not " dazzling ;" it had no 
resemblance to porcelain or alabaster. It was rather fair, and 
the blue veins showed prettily at the sides of her forehead, 
under the curved edge of her dark hair ; but she had not much 
colour, considering her perfect health, only a faint tinge high 
up on either cheek, just where women who understand the art 
apply that matchless white rouge which " rubs in " pink, and 
will stand anything. sun, dust, gas, the close inspection of the 
va/se, and even judicious tears. The looking-glass showed 
Miriam this face of hers, very pretty, she thought it, in spite of 
the discontent and vexation she was giving way to. " I must 
go home to marry, must I ? " she muttered, as she pulled her 
rich plaits of hair out, and stuck additional pins here and there 
amidst its masses. " I don't think Charley Boscombe is of 
that opinion ; but he won't do. He's very nice, poor boy, 
and I like him ; but I mean to be a rich woman, and to have 
my own way. One can't have that, if one isn't rich ; at least, 
it must only be an own way not worth having. And now for 
this ' maid '. it sounds grand ; I wonder father thought it 
necessary to be so particular about me." 

She glanced at the glass once more, and then ran down- 
stairs. The waiting-room, a small apartment behind the 
large dining-room, of a gloomy character, and provided 
with furniture of a depressing tendency, was of a " general- 
utility " complexion, and was the resort of everybody who had 
business to transact with Miss Monitor, except parents and 
guardians. For them were reserved the glistening splendours 
of the drawing-room, with its shell ornaments, its moral books 
in morocco, its grand walnut-wood piano in a speckled leather 
cover, and the portraits of Dr. and Mrs. Monitor (deceased) 
very high up on the panels at either side of the huge chimney- 
piece. 

" You understand hair-dressing, of course ? " Miss Monitor 

was saying as Miriam entered the room, and stood, in her girl- 

/jood fashion, just within the door. " Ah, this is the lady who 



Candidates. 9 

may require your services. Sit down, my dear. I have been 
inquiring into this person's capabilities " . Miss Monitor turned 
to Miriam, and the " person " did the same . " and I am rather 
afraid she is not sufficiently experienced. She makes plain gowns 
only -, would not undertake trimmed skirts. Would that do, 
my dear? Do you not think your father wishes your maid to 
be an experienced dressmaker ? " 

" I . I don't exactly know. He said in his letter. here it 
is " . Miriam produced the document from her apron pocket, 
and the "person " glanced at it quickly, then turned her eyes 
away, and sat impassive, looking at nothing . "jShe must make 
your clothes, &c" " I suppose that means all my dresses ? " 

" Then I am a little afraid," began Miss Monitor, in the 
elaborately gracious tone of a person about to terminate an 
interview with a refusal. But Miriam was not disposed to 
settle the matter so quickly. The novelty of the position pleased 
her. 

" Oh," she began, " perhaps she might do. I should like to 
know where she had lived, and what she can do. You were 
asking her whether she could dress hair. Can you ? " asked 
Miriam, speaking directly for the first time, to the " person," 
whom she had been looking at with some curiosity. The can- 
didate did not lend herself to inspection very readily. Her 
manner was shy, and somewhat embarrassed ; and her attitude, 
with down-cast eyes, and bent head, was to match. " I can't 
bear people who do not look me in the face," thought Miriam ; 
"if it were only on account of that trick, she will not suit 
me. 

" I can dress hair, madam," replied the candidate in a low, 
slow voice, " in any style. You will find it mentioned in my 
testimonial from Lady Ware." 

At this moment the great bell at the very imposing gateway 
which gave admittance to Crescent House rang loudly ; and, 
as this occurrence indicated an exceptional arrival. there was 
a smaller gate in the high brick wall, for the vise oi \raA&v 
peqple, the inmates of the house, and hab'\tua\ comsra. \K\s& 



io A Golden Sorrow. 

Monitor approached the door, and listened for an explanation. 
Presently, heavy steps crossed the hall, and there was a rust- 
ling, pleasantly suggestive of a stiff and voluminous silk gown 
traversing the shining tiles. 

" A lady and gentleman to see you, ma'am," said Jane, who 
appeared with a card on a salver ; " there's a young lady with 
them," she added significantly. 

" Dear me ! " exclaimed Miss Monitor. " Miriam, I must 
leave you. I shouldn't wonder if they had come on business. 
Mr. and Mrs. Dibley. I don't know the name. Is my cap 
straight ? " 

"Quite. You look charming, dear," said Miriam good- 
naturedly, as she gave Miss Monitor's dress a pull here and a 
pat there, towering considerably above her the while. " Don't 
keep them waiting a minute ; don't mind me." 

At the sound of the bell the candidate had moved slightly, 
and a close observer would have seen a look of eagerness 
come into her face. She was a tall woman, rather dowdily 
dressed. for a person aspiring to the smart position of lady's 
maid . in a brown silk gown, and a black shawl with a wide 
lace flounce, a garment which she huddled up in her arms in 
an ungraceful fashion, and in which her hands were completely 
hidden as she sat, in a round-backed manner, of itself calculated 
to shock Miss Monitor. During the brief dialogue between 
that lady and Miriam, the candidate watched them with intense 
anxiety, unseen by either; and when Miriam held the door 
open that Miss Monitor might pass through, she half rose, but 
instantly reseated herself before Miriam had turned her head 
in her direction. 

" As you seem uncertain about being able to make my 
dresses," said Miriam, keeping her eyes fixed on her father's 
letter, and now only wishing to get rid of the candidate as 
quickly as possible, " I fear it would be giving you useless 
trouble, and taking up your time needlessly, to go into further 
particulars." 
There was no reply. Miriam looked up, and saw the candi- 



Candidates. n 

date, with one hand stretched towards her, and the finger 
of the other on her lip. She recoiled in sudden fear, her eyes 
fixed on the woman's face ; a strange, incredible sense of recog- 
nition taking paralyzing possession of her. 

" Miriam," said the candidate, rising, " don't be frightened ; 
and, above all, don't make a noise. There's nothing the 
matter ! " 

" Good heavens ! " cried Miriam, throwing herself into 
the woman's arms, and clasping her wildly about the neck, 
" it's Walter ! '' 



12 A Golden Sorrozv. 



CHAPTER II. 

VERY SUCCESSFUL. 

" Darling Miriam ! don't agitate yourself; keep quiet," said 
the young man who wore his disguise so awkwardly, as he 
cordially returned the girFs caress, and then placed her in the 
chair in which Miss Monitor had been sitting, and resumed 
his own seat facing the door. " I have a very short time, and 
a good deal to say in it." 

" But, Walter. why ? How ? Is not this a risk ? " 

Walter Clint settled his brown silk gown becomingly about 
his lengthy limbs, and tucked his arms up in his lace-flounced 
shawl, before he replied. During this brief operation Miriam 
regarded him with an expression in which the school-girFs 
sense of " great fun " was beginning to break, in a smile, 
through her first feeling of supreme and somewhat dismayed 
amazement. 

" Of course it is a risk," he replied ; but what could I do ? 
I had to see you, and it would not have been fair to Miss 
Monitor to ask her to disobey my father's injunctions, and let 
me see you, even if she would have done it, and I don't sup- 
pose she would. Do you ? " 

" Oh yes ; I think she would now" said Miriam. "lam 
really to leave, you know, and she need not fear papa any 
longer." 

" Well, never .mind ; I didn't know that . I mean, I didn't 
think of it. I had to see you before you left London." 

" Why ? " asked Miriam, a deep flush passing over her face. 
" You don't . you can't mean to say I am not to see you at 
The Firs?" 



Very Successful. 13 

" I do mean it, Miriam. There's no good in getting into a 
rage about it, and there's no good in crying. He is obstinately 
set against me, and I cannot stand any more quarrelling and 
bullying. I don't mean to say I have not deserved a good 
deal ; but I do mean to say I have had more than I deserved, 
and there has come an end of it. I shall ask my father . at 
least, I shall get you to ask him . one thing more only (never 
mind what), and then he shall hear nothing of me, unless 
it be very good news indeed, which would surprise no one so 
much as myself; for I am one of the unlucky ones, you know." 

" This is worse than all," said Miriam, into whose eyes 
tears, which she was resolutely trying to hold back, had risen. 
" It is bad enough to have to go home at all ; but it is too 
much to be quite cut off from seeing you. How cruel ! how 
unjust ! " and now she fairly sobbed. 

" Hush, Miriam, for heaven's sake ! " said Walter. " Sup- 
pose Miss Monitor were to come back and find you in tears ! 
There's a good . girl, the best of girls to a poor devil of a 
brother who is always in scrapes. Time is running on, and 
you will have another young person looking after the lady's- 
maid's place presently." 

They both laughed, and yet Miriam was so conscious that 
there was something unusual in Walter's manner . a change 
extending to his voice. that she was afraid of what he might 
be going to tell her, and did not dare to question him. 

" I have taken a serious resolution, Miriam," he said. 
" Don't stir, dear ; they listen at doors in boarding-schools, I've 
been told, and they peep through keyholes. It must have 
come to this, sooner or later, and I have a chance now . a 
good chance. You shall know all about it ; but there was one 
thing on my mind, and no one but you could take it off. I 
have come to you to get you to take it off in this queer fashion, 
because it must be done at once, if at all, and I had no other 
means." 

" What is it, Walter ? " asked Miriam, who was \*ata ^xA 
quiet enough now. 



14 A Golden Sorrow. 

" My father advertised for a maid for you. A friend of 
mine . a person in whom I am very much interested . would 
be very glad to get the place. She will be here presently. 
Others may come before she does ; promise me you will find 
some reason for rejecting each until Rose Dixon comes to 
you, and then promise me you will take her." 

" Walter, who is she ? " 

" I cannot tell you now. Don't hesitate, Miriam ; don't 
refuse me. You were always ready to do anything for me, 
you know, in the old times, and you never had half such a 
chance of serving me as this one. You know, Miriam, I 
would not ask you to have any one near you who was not fit 
to be with you, dear ; you can trust me for that" 

Miriam listened to him in amazement. She was intelligent, 
quick, as inquisitive as most girls of her age, and no more of 
an ingbnue than was to be expected of her, considering that 
she was one of twenty girls in a London boarding-school. 
She was perfectly sensible of the necessity and the value of 
this assurance of her brother's, and with it her first feeling of 
alarm subsided, and the strong desire to please and serve him 
sprang up untrammelled. 

" I can trust you for anything, Walter," she said ; " but tell 
me one thing. Is she very young ? Will Miss Monitor agree ? 
Remember, she is to have a voice in the matter." 

" Oh, yes, I know all about that ; but I don't think you 
would have much difficulty in getting over Miss Monitor's 
objections, if she should have any, and that's not likely. Rose 
Dixon is very young and very pretty." Again there was a 
tone in Walter's voice and a look in Walter's face strange to 
Miriam. 

A bell rang sharply ; they heard Jane coming up the kitchen- 
stairs, and voices sounded on the landing. Miss Monitor's 
visitors were departing; once more the heavy rustling silk 
trailed itself over the shining tiles, and the murmur of gracious 
tones reached the waiting-room. 
"Promise me, Miriam, promise me," entreated Walter, as 



Very Successful. 15 

he rose and shook his obnoxious garments into shape ; while 
Miriam, clasping his hand eagerly, looked towards the door in 
alarm. 

" I promise, dear. I promise." 

" God bless you, darling ! Remember the name . Rose 
Dixon. You shall know all in a very short time." 

" And I shall see you soon, Walter? " 

" I hope so ; I cannot tell. If I can possibly get my father's 
leave." 

A step at the door, a hand on the lock. Miriam, in silence, 
touched her brother's cheek with her lips, deftly lowered the 
thick lace veil which was turned back over his straw bonnet, 
and sat down in Miss Monitor's chair, just an instant before 
that lady entered the room, radiant with good-humour. 

The candidate was standing in a respectful attitude ; Miss 
Clint was looking bored. Miss Monitor took in the scene 
with her customary complacent correctness. 

"My dear Miriam, I fear you have been detaining this 
young person unreasonably. There was really no occasion 
for my seeing her again. You have decided that she will not 
suit you ? " 

" Yes," said Miriam. " She does not wish to undertake 
dressmaking ; but I thought she had better wait, as she hoped 
you might know of a place for her." 

" I fear I don't know of one at present," said Miss Monitor, 
graciously : " but if you will leave your name and address . 
just write them in that book," she added, pointing to writing 
materials which lay on the table . " I will bear you in 
mind." 

Walter darted one quick, reproachful glance at Miriam ; she 
had accounted for the duration of his stay rather too well. 
But Miriam was equal to the occasion ; she perfectly re- 
membered the sinewy, manly, slightly hirsute hands which 
Walter had so studiously concealed, and knew Miss Monitor's 
sharp eyes would detect the discrepancy, though Walter stvowld. 
write the most womanly of characters, as m&eed \vs. caviN&. 



1 6 A Golden Sorrow. 

have done with ease. He possessed many small accomplish- 
ments, and a variety of handwritings was one of them. 

" Don't trouble yourself to take your gloves off," said Miriam, 
drawing the book and the inkstand towards her. " I will take 
down your address. Ellen Gamble, 6, Bayham Cottages, 
Camden Town, I think you said ? " 

" Yes, madam ; that is quite correct," was the reply. 

Miriam gravely and slowly inscribed the name and address. 
Her back being turned to Miss Monitor, she ventured on 
bestowing one glance, full of laughter, on her brother, which 
his position debarred him from the pleasure of returning ; and 
having formally taken leave of the two ladies, the candidate 
retired. 

"A very awkward-looking person, my dear," was Miss 
Monitor's comment ; " if even she had understood dressmaking, 
I should not have cared for her; something so dowdy in her 
appearance. Don't you think so ? " 

"Oh dear, yes," said Miriam carelessly; "wouldn't have 
done at all. As I am to have a maid, and am pretty certain 
to want to make a companion of her, she really must be young 
and pleasant-looking ; at all events, very different from . what's 
her name ? . this Ellen Gamble." 

" Of course, my dear. What an odd thing it is that people 
of that sort never do know when to go away, unless one 
actually turns them out ! And now I must tell you about my 
visitors." 

Miriam drew near with an expression of interest not very 
skilfully feigned, and which died away, unperceived by Miss 
Monitor, as she volubly related how the lady of the rustling 
silk had come to arrange for placing her daughter at school at 
Crescent House immediately - how all the " extras " were to 
be supplied, and how the " connexion " was of the most 
valuable description. " Not aristocracy, my dear," Miss 
Monitor explained to Miriam, whose approaching departure 
seemed to have emancipated her from restrictions of every 
Ic/nd, and elevated her from the position of pupil to that of 



Very Successful. 17 

confidant. " If you take titled people's children, they are sure 
to be out at elbows; if they weren't, they would not send 
their girls to school ; and they expect you to take off a per- 
centage, in consideration of the advantage you may derive 
from talking about their Lady Maries or their Lady Janes. 
There's no meanness to equal the meanness of great people, 
when they are not gentlemen and ladies. But a real, solid, 
respectable connexion is a very different thing. Mrs. Dibley 
has sisters in India, and brothers in China, and they all have 
daughters, who are to be sent home ; and she as much as 
said this was an experiment she was going to make for the 
benefit of the whole family." 

" I am so glad," said Miriam, trying to leave off" listening 
for the bell, and looking at the door. " My place will soon be 
filled up, you see." 

" No, no," said Miss Monitor ; " a new girl cannot fill your 
place, Miriam. Dear me, there's the visitor's bell again! 
It's lucky it's a half-holiday. I wonder who this is." 

" Perhaps another young person come to answer the adver- 
tisement," suggested Miriam. 

" I think not, my dear. People of that sort don't ring the 
visitors' bell, you know." 

It appeared, however, in a few moments, that it was a 
person " of that sort," who had so far forgotten herself as to 
ring the visitors' bell. Jane ushered in presently a young 
woman . whose neatness and appropriate attire offered a strik- 
ing contrast to the dowdy individual who had preceded her, . 
with the brief announcement, " Come about the lady's-maid's 
place, ma'am." 

" I hope this is she," thought Miriam, the moment her eyes 
rested on the face of the young woman, who obeyed Miss 
Monitor's somewhat lofty invitation to be seated \ but she did 
not venture to anticipate that lady's questions. 

" In order to save time," began Miss Monitor, " it is best 
to ask you at once if you are a good dressmaker ? TYkaxSa ybl- 
dispensabla " 



1 8 A Golden Sorrow. 

" I have been accustomed to make dresses," replied the 
young woman. 

" Where have you lived ? " 

Miriam thought there was an uneasy look in the face, a little 
trouble in the voice, as the answer came. 

fl I have lived with two ladies, madam ; they will be happy 
to recommend me, if the young lady thinks I shall suit 
her." 

Miriam interposed. She felt pretty sure this was the right 
person. 

" What is your name ? " she asked. 

" Rose Dixon," returned the other, but without looking at 
the young lady, whose eye she had avoided during this brief 
interrogatory. 

Miriam remained standing behind Miss Monitor's chair, 
looking intently at the " friend " for whose sake her brother 
had enjoined her to play this comedy, and contrived to make 
Miss Monitor understand, by sundry significant pinches and 
nudges, that she considered the new candidate an eligible per- 
son for the proposed situation. Rose Dixon was certainly 
young and nice-looking. The most serious obstacle to the 
success of the scheme actively organized by Walter, and passively 
acquiesced in by Miriam, was the danger that Miss Monitor 
rhight consider her too young and nice-looking. She was slight, 
and of small stature ; but though her dress was plain, there 
was no trace of the servant-class about her, neither was there 
any of the more objectionable pert gentility of the soubrette. 
Miriam feared that she was almost fatally lady-like, and 
could have wished for less refinement in her features, less 
harmony in the voice and polish in the accent, for a little more 
vivid red in the delicate complexion, and somewhat less de- 
pendent gentleness in the expression of the clear-cut small 
features. But her apprehensions were unfounded. She did 
not reflect that she was looking at Rose Dixon with keen 
curiosity and interest, with a foretaste of romance, a delicious 
anticipation of more to come ; whereas Miss Monitor was re- 



Very Successful. 19 

garding her merely as an applicant for a servant's place, who 
might, she hoped, suit in every essential respect, and rid her 
of any more trouble about the matter. While Miriam was 
eagerly taking in every detail of Rose Dixon's personal appear- 
ance, Miss Monitor was content with observing she was 
" genteel "-looking, and that she had blue eyes and light brown 
hair, a " nice " smile, and a pleasant, respectful manner. She 
answered Miss Monitor's questions satisfactorily, and was con- 
tent with the wages offered by Mr. Clint. Miriam began to 
feel triumphant ; and she had sufficient tact to be silent, so as 
not to embarrass Rose Dixon during the cross-examina- 
tion. 

" Gentlemen are not generally good hands at arranging such 
matters," said Miss Monitor, when she had exhausted her list 
of questions, "and Mr. Clint has forgotten that he has not 
given us time to apply to your former employers. You will 
be required to accompany Miss Clint to The Firs on Thursday, 
if she should decide on engaging you ; and unless the ladies 
in whose service you have been reside in London, it will not 
be possible to communicate with them. In that case " . 

" II ne faut pas y faire attention," said Miriam rapidly, and 
in a lowered voice ; " elle a Fair si doux et si bon que . " 

" Pardon me, madam," said the young woman, while a vivid 
blush suffused her face ; " I understand French." 

" Thank you," said Miriam frankly. " I was only going to 
say that I think you will suit me, and that, as my father has 
allowed me so little time, we perhaps might dispense with 
the usual inquiries." 

" Where do your former employers live ? Have you any 
written recommendations ? " asked Miss Monitor, very well 
disposed to take Miriam's view of the case, but still wishing to 
do everything decently and in order, so far as circumstances 
permitted. 

There was a slight hesitation, just the least possible pause 
before Rose Dixon answered, and the flush of coVomt fa&&& qn& 
of her face. 

c 2 



20 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Mrs. Waldron and Mrs. France do not live in London, 
madam, but I have a letter from each of them. ,, 

As she handed the documents to Miss Monitor, Rose 
Dixon closed her eyes for an instant, and drew a deep 
breath. 

Miss Monitor proceeded to read one of the letters, laying 
the other on the table beside her. Miriam looked at Rose. 

" This is a crisis," she thought, " and she finds it difficult." 

" Highly satisfactory ; quite so, indeed," said Miss Monitor, 
and she held up the letter she had just read, so that Miriam might 
take it over her shoulder. " Read that, my dear." 

The letter was written in a fine, feminine sloping hand, on 
highly-glazed paper with violet ink, and contained an elegantly 
worded testimony to the capacity and conduct of Rose Dixon, 
with an expression of Mrs. Waldron's regret at parting with 
her. Miriam read it, and compressed her lips . a little move- 
ment which was not lost on Rose Dixon. 

" And this is equally satisfactory," said Miss Monitor, hand- 
ing up the second letter in its turn to Miriam, who still re- 
tained the first. The two were utterly different in their ex- 
terior. The second was written on blue paper, of business-like 
make, in a thick, bold, upright hand ; and the writer's record 
of the golden opinions won by Rose Dixon was worded in a 
downright and forcible manner, which lent the document quite 
other characteristics. Miriam, still holding the first open, in 
her left hand, gravely perused the second. The impulse of 
mischief moved her, just a little. 

" This is very nice indeed," she said, looking from one sheet 
of paper to the other. " How differently Mrs. France of Not- 
tingham and Mrs. Waldron of Peterborough express themselves, 
and how unlike their respective handwritings are ! If there's any 
truth in what people say about handwriting betraying the 
character, you must have been fortunate enough to please two 
very opposite persons." 

She laid the letters on the table, emerging from her post be- 
fiind Miss Monitor's chair, and as she did so she caught one 



Very Successful. 21 

swift appealing glance from Rose Dixon's mild blue eyes, "which 
filled her with sudden remorse. 

" What a shame for me ! " she thought. " No doubt this 
is a necessary part of Walter's scheme, and she is not to blame 
for it ; I daresay it is a very hard part of it to her. At all events 
I have no business to play mine so ill." 

She began to talk eagerly to Miss Monitor. in the sense of 
its being quite settled that Rose Dixon was to be her maid 
. about the necessary packing, and the hour at which they 
must be at London Bridge Statioa Rose Dixon recovered her 
self-command rapidly, and put the letters into her pocket. 

It was also evident to Miriam's quick observation that the 
necessity for her entering upon her duties so soon was an un- 
pleasant surprise to Rose Dixon. The "wanted, to attend 
upon a young lady immediately, " of Mr. Clint's advertisement 
had not implied to her that her service was to begin from the 
following day. Miriam came to her assistance. 

" I daresay you cannot get your own things ready before 
Thursday," she said ; " so you need not mind coming here to 
pack for me. If you are here in good time on Thursday, it 
will do. They will all help, won't they ? " she continued, turn- 
ing with a smile to Miss Monitor. 

" Certainly, my dear." 

Miriam felt deeply grateful to Mrs, Dibley for having sisters 
in India, brothers in China, and a daughter requiring a 
liberal education. Never had Miss Monitor been so acquies- 
cent. Now, if she would only leave the room, if some other op- 
portune visitor would only arrive, so that she might speak in pri- 
vate to her new maid, and satisfy the intense curiosity she felt ! 
But circumstances had apparently accommodated her on the 
present occasion as far as they intended to do. There was no 
further pretext for prolonging the interview, and Miss Monitor 
rose. 

"At nine o'clock on Thursday," she said, "you will be here. 
Good afternoon." 

Rose Dixon lowered her veil as soon as s\ve YvaA ^*sssk ^^ 



22 A Golden Sorrow. 

gate of Cresent House, and walked away rapidly to the right. 
A few hundred yards from the jealous brick wall and the great 
gates, a narrow road intersected the main thoroughfare. She 
glanced and then turned, down it, and in a few minutes came 
up with a woman who was loitering about in a purposeless 
manner. The woman was tall, of a gaunt figure and dowdy 
appearance ; and she wore a brown silk gown, and a black 
shawl with a flounce of clumsy lace. Rose Dixon caught her 
arm, with a quick breath, almost a sob. 

" Well ? " 

" I have seen her." 

" Is it settled ? " 

"Yes." 

" That's a good thing. What an infinite relief to my mind." 

" Yes, Walter, it is, I know that ; I grant that ; and I like her 
face, and am sure I may trust her. But remember, though I 
am quite content to do anything to make things easier for 
you " . she looked at him with such troubled love in her eyes 
. " I do so hate, I do so shrink from this horrid deceit." 

" Don't worry yourself on that score, dearest ; it's my fault 
you know, not yours " (judicious and availing consolation for 
the woman who loved him !) ; " and, really, there's some fun 
in it too. Come, tell me all about it." 



23 



CHAPTER III. 

REGINALD CLINT. 

The Firs . as Mr. Clint's small estate was called, because one 
of its few beauties consisted of a thick belt of Scotch fir-trees, 
which effectually screened the house and grounds from the 
straight, monotonous high-road . was situated in a part of 
Hampshire which is not picturesque . a part in which there are 
few remnants of the old village-houses, with their quaint, small- 
paned windows and their red-tiled lichen-grown roofs; where 
pert, dull, pretentious, rubbishy little "villas " have sprung up 
along the iron roadway ; where the soil is naturally , sticky, 
and all the new paths are artificially blackened ; where the 
roads are mended with rubble, and the ponds are green and 
ill-smelling. A dull, flat, coarse part of the country ; and yet, 
even there, the summer was beautiful ; and The Firs . a house 
which by no means redeemed the character of the neighbour- 
hood, but was in harmony with it, being both dull and ugly . 
had lost some of its forbidding look, in the June sunshine, 
and surrounded by the thickly-leaved, bright green trees.' 
These were only middling specimens, for Hampshire ; but trees 
cannot help being beautiful, and no place in which they grow 
can be quite ugly. 

The house . ingeniously placed and constructed, so that all 
the best rooms which were not exposed to the northern were 
exposed to the eastern aspect . was tasteless in design and 
hideous in colour; a rambling, straggling, comfortless house, 
with a large, neglected garden in the rear ; a flat, scrubby 
lawn, on which cattle grazed up to within a few fed eft 'Oevs. 
windows; and a dreary pond, the edges tram\A&&. Xs 1 } ^& 



24 A Golden Sorrow. 

animals, lying blank and black on the borders of a belt of firs. 
Within that plantation, however, there were many glimpses of 
beauty to be had on that sixth day of June which was to wit- 
ness Miriam Clint's reluctant return. A path, none the less 
picturesque because it was ill-kept, wound through the lines of 
brown and flame-coloured stems, all along the boundary of Mr* 
Clint's estate ; a path bordered with rank tangled grass and 
wild flowers, with tender little twigs, untimely snapped, and 
drifted brown handfuls of last year's leaves, left there to cumber 
the ground, and lending their quota to the general effect of 
colour. 

Along this path, the figure of a man was moving, some little 
time before the hour at which Miriam and her maid were 
" due " at the railway station nearest to The Firs. The figure 
was that of Mr. Clint, a large, tall man, a little over fifty 
years of age, who looked as if life and he had not been on 
good terms. His face, remarkably handsome in feature and 
form, wore an expression of morose and habitual ill-temper and 
discontent ; and thereby accurately interpreted his customary 
moral condition. Reginald Clint was one of those persons 
who make their acquaintances (they never have friends) im- 
patiently question the designs of Providence in their creation ; 
by being intolerable to other people, and apparently un- 
pleasant and unprofitable to themselves. What are they for ? 
is a question which irresistibly presents itself to the observer in 
such cases. Here was a man who had never done a good, un- 
selfish, large-hearted action, who had never made human lives 
happier ; but, on the contrary, had contrived to render one 
human life miserable, and to mar two others to an extent which 
the future was destined to demonstrate ; a man who had no 
redeeming qualities, not even those of his defects, and for 
whose unendurable temper and consummate unamiability cir- 
cumstances were in nowise to blame. 

He had plenty of money, derived from sure sources, and 

entirely within his own control; a fair position in society, 

which, however, his odious disposition had marred, by causing 



Reginald Clint. 25 

everybody who could do so to withdraw from association with 
him ; and he had been protected from heart-sorrows by an 
arrangement of nature which left him without a heart to feel 
them. He was an ignorant, narrow, selfish, rude, discontented 
tyrant, who loved no one, but contrived to dislike a good many 
people with a bitterness which re-acted to his own discomfiture ; 
for, like all men of his disposition, he could not endure that 
those he designed to make his victims should be indifferent to 
him, or should escape him. No living creature loved him, no 
woman, child, nor dog . indeed, all animals sagaciously avoided 
him . and it is doubtful whether his splenetic nature did not 
hinder his self-love from affording him adequate satisfaction. 
There are self-complacent people who are self-sufficing, but 
there must go to the composition of them a spice of bonhomie 
which has no relation to benevolence . and in this Reginald 
Clint was utterly deficient 

From the neighbourhood he kept himself obstinately aloof . 
a benefit it was not slow to appreciate. He fulfilled none of 
the ordinary duties of a country gentleman, and he was cor- 
dially detested by all the people in his employment ; a very 
nomad population indeed, for no one would continue to work 
at The Firs, who had any chance of occupation elsewhere ; and 
the result was a badly-managed, half-productive estate, and a 
wretched, gloomy, ill-regulated house, shunned by all the fami- 
lies within visiting distance, and which had sinister repute in 
the adjacent villages as " unlucky." 

Reginald Clint was perfectly aware of his unpopularity, and, 
in his ill-conditioned way, rather liked it. He had no faculty 
for the enjoyment of society, and no intellect for the compre- 
hension of its interests. He was not an absolutely uninstructed 
man ; he had gone through the routine of school and college ; 
but the information he had received in the process might as 
well have been packed into a trunk, and put away in a garret, 
for all the good it had done him. He knew nothing of politics, 
science, art, or literature ; his fellows had no interest for him. \ 
his mind neither investigated the past tyot $<pecxi\aX&& ^oxv 



26 A Golden Sorrow. 

the future. He was a mere handsome animal ; endowed, unfor- 
tunately, with the power of making human beings unhappy, of 
influencing their destiny ; and, without either mind or con- 
science fitted for the task, he possessed authority over two 
fine, ardent young natures, full of all the impulses and capa- 
bilities of youth, and on whom the great problems of life were 
just beginning to press. 

If his son and daughter did not altogether hate him . and 
they did not . it certainly was not Reginald Clint's fault. That 
their mother had not hated him was one of those mysterious 
contradictions in human nature which will no doubt continue 
to baffle human intelligence as they have hitherto baffled it. 
Reginald Clint's wife had been dead so many years before the 
epoch at which the threads of her children's lives are taken up 
into this story, that there is hardly any room for her in it, but 
her death must needs count for one influence in the destiny 
of Walter and Miriam ; that death which, however it may have 
affected her children's future, nobody could have been so 
hard-hearted as to grudge to her. To our shallow perception, 
there are few respects in which Providence acts so unaccount- 
ably and so unsatisfactorily as in that of the selection of subjects 
for the interposition of death. In how many instances of 
unsuitable and unhappy marriages do the sufferers live to an 
old age, which would be enviable under other circumstances : 
how frequently, when one of them is " taken," it is the wrong 
one ! 

In the case of Mr. and Mrs. Clint every sort of contradic- 
tion existed. Amy Desart was a bright, clever, lively girl when 
she made the terrible mistake of falling in love with Reginald 
Clint, and incurred the horrible misfortune of marrying him. 
Her brightness and liveliness were very evanescent; they 
speedily yielded to his odious temper, and his truly infernal 
and ingenious tyranny; but her love, with that provoking 
obstinate irrationality distinctive of the passion in women, 
lasted much longer. Probably, if it had not, she might have 
lived; so that, after all, it was better for her that she was an 



Reginald Clint. 27 

obstinate fool on this point, persisting in regarding a man who 
bullied her and worried her . ordered her about as if she had 
been a slave, swore at her as if she had been a hound, degraded 
her before her servants by his coarse contempt, who never 
was commonly civil, never was indeed anything but brutal to 
her . as an object of pity for his " unfortunate " temper, and in 
fostering his inclination to make her miserable by letting him 
see how thoroughly he had the power to do so. 

Most people who knew Mr. and Mrs. Clint in the seven years 
during which she survived her marriage, held the opinion that the 
decease of Mr. Clint would be a decided advantage to his wife 
and children, and no loss to the world at large. Death did inter- 
pose at length, but it took the wrong person. It was that ever 
haunting question, " What is to become of the children ? " which 
got the better of Amy Clint at last. She was the sort of woman 
to cherish hope, to cling to delusions about herself, her own 
future, the possibilities of her own fate, but she entertained none 
where her children were concerned. She was powerless enough, 
Heaven knew, in every respect ; in this she was absolutely 
helpless. She could save herself to a certain extent from him, 
or she could do without being saved ; but the children were 
victims on whose behalf she could do nothing. When Amy 
Clint, compelled to do so by her common sense, took it into 
her heart that there was no hope for her children, that they 
must inevitably be the victims of their father's brutal temper, 
to their infinite misery and moral detriment, she speedily lost 
the power of endurance that had hitherto kept her up ; and, 
in a curiously short space of time, she died . of sheer fear for 
her children, of sheer despair. 

She was a great loss to her husband . a loss of which he was 
sensible every day. She had been the most complete and 
satisfactory victim with which fate had ever supplied him, and 
she was not to be replaced. He had, to be sure, tenants whom 
he could oppress, but they " took the law of him ;" he had 
servants whom he could bully, but they wervt aroacj \ \\a \sa& 
animals whom he could ill-use, but they were vaXua&te.* ^ 



28 A Golden Sorrow. 

ill-treatment spoiled their value. His wife had neither gone 
away nor appealed to the law (which, indeed, would not have 
aided her in those days) ; and the more he had tormented her 
the more valuable she had become as a victim. 

Of course he could have married again. His notoriously 
vile temper would not have counterbalanced his handsome 
face and his " comfortable " fortune in the estimation of young 
ladies, who, with wonderful irrationality, imagine that men will 
behave well to them who always behave ill to other people. 
But he did not tempt any one of his female acquaintances to 
this supreme evidence of folly and vanity. Perhaps the motive 
was a cautious doubt whether he might reasonably expect to 
find another woman so manageable as Amy had been ; perhaps 
he never really had a spark of inclination for any but her ; 
however that may be, Mr. Clint did not marry again. Nor 
did he ill-treat his children after the fashion, or to the extent, 
which their young mother had dreaded. In their very early 
years he neglected them shamefully, and when they came in 
his way he generally swore at them, and occasionally beat 
them, but at this point he received a lesson which availed. 
The nurses refused to remain in his service, and he found that 
result of his violence troublesome. 

It is a fact that Reginald Clint was less intolerable after his 
wife's death than during her lifetime ; forced to restrain him- 
self, for his own sake, by the removal of the one only individual 
in regard to whom a man enjoys absolute immunity. The 
children were passionately attached to one another, and neither 
exhibited the least resemblance to their father. Walter -who 
was sent early to school, and made friends for himself imme- 
diately . had much of the brightness, cleverness, and liveliness 
which had so soon been stamped out of his young mother ; but 
his nature lacked the patience, the firmness, and the high tone 
of hers. He was merry, indolent, changeable, affectionate, 
difficult to inspire with any lofty conviction or elevated motive, 
tricky . as every child who is capriciously or ill-treated inevit- 
ably becomes . mimetic, impulsive, and very good-looking, 



Reginald Clint. 29 

though not so handsome as his father, or so uncommon in his 
appearance as his sister. 

The brother and sister met only in their holidays for years. 
Miriam was sent to Miss Monitor's school in her tenth year, in 
consequence of the death of the housekeeper, who had given 
her a little elementary instruction. Long before, the child had 
come to appreciate her father's character ; and though she did 
not then, or ever, actually hate him, she regarded him with 
contempt and distaste much stronger than the feelings enter- 
tained for him by Walter, whose nature had more softness and 
less intensity, and whom his father treated much worse. The 
fact was that Miriam had more character ; she sometimes asserted 
herself; she sometimes carried a point by overt opposition 
against the gloomy tyrant ; but Walter did not. He occasion- 
ally deceived his father ; he never defeated him. 

The caprice, which was as strongly characteristic of Reginald 
Clint's nature as was his tyranny, exhibited itself towards his 
son by his refusal to send him to a university, though the boy 
had been given to understand he was to go to Cambridge on 
leaving school. But his father changed his mood, which he 
called his mind, and kept Walter loitering in suspense and idle- 
ness at home, until a new cause of bitterness arose between 
them. Walter Clint was precisely qualified, by his pleasant 
surface talents, his good manners, and his good looks, to become 
popular in a country neighbourhood, where the general dislike 
inspired by his father did not prevent his making friends. This 
was gall and wormwood to the unhappy misanthrope of The 
Firs, and he punished his son for the high spirits which offended 
him, and the enjoyment which he could not prevent, by keep- 
ing him in uncertainty respecting his intentions with regard to 
him in the future, and by placing him in what he meant to be 
humiliating straits for want of money. 

He would make him no regular allowance ; he maintained an 
inquisitorial watch on his expenditure. though even in this 
respect he was capricious ; and he took a savage pleasvix^. m 
reminding his son that he was totally dependent, on \&cc^^ax 



30 A Golden Sorrow. 

he had no " rights." The only thing for which Reginald Clint 
was ever heard to thank God was, that his father had made his 
money in trade, though he had chosen to invest it in land ; that 
it had no cursed penalties attached to its possession, so that he 
had the power of doing as he pleased with in ; not like those 
proud aristocrats who had to put up with the infernal impudence 
and extravagance of their sons : he called property on such 
terms a curse. Now, his was really property, for he could leave 
it to a hospital, or to a housemaid, if he chose ; and if his son 
and daughter dared to run counter to him, he bound himself 
to dispose of it in some such way, by the superfluous invocation 
of future penalties upon himself. The recipients of Mr. Clint's 
sentiments were, generally, his steward . he kept a large farm 
in his own hands . a retired attorney of no very brilliant repute, 
who was his nearest neighbour ; and Mr. Martin, the village 
doctor, whose professional services he needed rather frequently, 
but remunerated very grudgingly. Mr. Clint had taken to 
solitary drinking and excessive smoking. the latter at an early 
period ; the former since his wife's death, and for a long time 
without its being known even to his servants. As his temper 
and these habits were not calculated to promote his health, Mr. 
Martin was a tolerably frequent visitor at The Firs. . He de- 
spised and disliked his unmanageable patient, and felt a genuine 
pity for Walter, for whom he would have gladly foreseen a 
speedy succession to that property, which, if Mr. Clint lived 
much longer, he considered it but too probable he would never 
enjoy. 

" He always was a brute," thought Mr. Martin, on one par- 
ticular occasion, when his interesting patient had been expati- 
ating on the pleasure it afforded him to reflect that he could 
punish Walter for the crime of visiting at " that cursed old hypo- 
crite's house ".. he alluded to the pious and excellent vicar of 
the parish, the Rev. John Cooke . by leaving him a beggar. 
" He always was a brute, and he has been driving himself into 
extra brutality by drink for so long, that there's really no saying 
where he may stop. short of such madness as will enable us to 



Reginald Clint. 3 1 

lock him up, I am afraid, but not short of the madness of dis- 
inheriting this boy, and driving that high-spirited girl Miriam, 
a far more dangerous person than her brother to ill-treat . to 
desperation. How I wish Walter could get away ; that would 
be his best chance in the present and in the future. The life 
they lead is detestable; it is ruining the boy; and nothing 
would give him such a chance as absence." 

A few days later a violent quarrel occurred between the 
father and the son, and Walter left the house. Mr. Clint had 
been half drunk when the dispute arose : it was on the custo- 
mary score of Walter's having friends in the neighbourhood 
whom his father did not choose to know ; and his threats and 
violence of language had surpassed all the unfortunate 
young man's previous experience. Exhaustion and ilmess fol- 
lowed this horrible abandonment to the demon which possessed 
Mr. Clint,, and Mr. Martin was sent for. That gentleman made 
good use of his opportunity ; lowered his patient by medical 
treatment until he had no longer the physical power to be vio- 
lent and abusive, frightened him by a grave and solemn warning 
that the penalty of indulging in drink and fury to a similar ex- 
tent on a future occasion would probably be a sudden death . 
a warning at which Mr. Clint, if he had not been prostrate 
under the effect of physic, would simply have sneered . and 
then cautiously approached the subject of his future relations 
with his son. 

That he should declare he did not care what became of the 
cursed blackguard, did not surprise or move Mr. Martin ; but 
when Mr. Clint added that he might go whither he pleased, 
provided he did not enter his house again, the doctor saw his 
way. The details of the negotiation which he undertook in sheer 
kindness of heart, and because the condition of affairs at The 
Firs was inexpressibly shocking to his sense of decency and 
propriety, need not be recapitulated here. He had to manage 
the son as well as the father, and Walter was not the easiest of 
subjects when it was a question of inducing him to appbj Vvvkv- 
self to the task of embracing a career in life. Mi. Maxtm X\^ 



32 A Golden Sorrow. 

however, achieve a sort of success. Mr. Clint agreed to allow 
his son a sufficient sum to enable him to live in lodgings in 
London, and study medicine, the only profession which he 
could be induced to learn, but which he ardently hoped he 
might in the future be saved from the necessity of practising. 

Mr. Martin gave Walter some introductions to former friends 
of his own, and the young man began his new life. All this 
miserable history had been very imperfectly made known to 
Miriam ; but she understood how bitter her father's feeling 
towards his only son was, and how sternly he was bent on grati- 
fying it, when, just a year before the episode of the candidate for 
the lady's-maid's place occurred, Miss Monitor received peremp- 
tory instructions from Mr. Clint that Miriam was not to be per- 
mitted to see her brother, under any pretext whatever. During 
the ensuing Christmas vacation, when Miriam passed a dreary 
fortnight at The Firs, she had made a courageous attempt to 
induce her father to rescind the sentence of her brother's ban- 
ishment ; but in vain \ and she had been forced to console her- 
self with a hope that, on her final return home, the now existing 
unnatural state of things would come to an end. It was not 
unbecoming vanity which led a handsome clever girl like 
Miriam to believe that her constant presence must win over her 
father; but Miriam had not been sufficiently with him to 
thoroughly understand Reginald Clint. 



33 



CHAPTER IV. 

Walter's trust. 

To and fro along the path in the plantation of firs, 
walked Reginald Clint, so passing the time away, until 
he should have to go to the station at Drington to fetch 
his daughter. He was not more amiably disposed than usual. 
Miriam's brief and easily quelled attempt at opposition had 
irritated him, coming as it did after he had, with difficulty, 
made up his mind to having her permanently at home. He 
liad not been hurt at the evidence conveyed in her request 
of the nature of his daughter's feelings ; he had no tenderness 
for her, and he would have sneered at the idea of her being 
supposed to entertain any for him ; but she had ventured to 
question a decision of his, and that was not to be endured. 
She must understand that such opposition must never again 
be made or contemplated. The permanent institution of 
a woman in his house who might be bullied ad libitum, had 
long been wanting to the existence of Reginald Clint. Perhaps 
he did not go quite so far as to deliberately regard his 
daughter's return as a remedy for this deficiency, but his frame 
of mind was as decidedly menacing to Miriam's future comfort 
as it could be, as he turned into the road through a gate in 
the low external wall on the far side of the fir plantation, and 
strode away in the direction of Drington. 

When he reached the railway station, Mr. Clint looked 
sharply about him. He had ordered a dog-cart, the only 
equipage The Firs boasted, to be in attendance on \he arcvNA 
of the train, and he was almost provoked when he saw \\ Xhexe., 



34 A Golden Sorrow. 

and also a hand-cart for the conveyance of Miriam's luggage. 
Here was an opportunity for swearing at the groom lost. 
The approach of the train was already indicated by a puff of 
smoke in the distance, and Mr. Clint passed at once through 
the booking-office to the arrival platform. As the train came 
up, Miriam's handsome head was put out of her carriage- 
window ; and she nodded and kissed her hand to her father, 
who stood stolidly still, his hands in his pockets, until the 
carriage was alongside the platform. 

" Dear papa," said Miriam, as she jumped lightly out . she 
had been making very good resolutions on the way ."how 
good of you to come and meet me yourself! " 

He neither kissed her nor looked at her. "Where are 
your things ? " he said. " Where's your maid ? " 

' Those are my boxes they're taking out of the van," said 
Miriam, trying not to seem taken aback at this strange welcome 
home ; " and my maid is here." She turned towards Rose 
Dixon, who stood behind her, with a travelling-bag in one 
hand, and shawls over her arm. 

" See to your mistress's things," said Mr. Clint ; " there's a 
hand-cart and a man just outside the gate, to bring them up 
to The Firs ; he'll show you the way. . Come along, Miriam ; " 
he walked abruptly away, and his daughter followed him, to 
the dog-cart. 

"Jump in," he said, and took her almost roughly by the 
elbow, She did so, and he got in beside her, and took the 
reins. 

"How is she to get home? Must she walk?" asked 
Miriam. 

" The woman ? Oh, yes. There's no room for her here. . 
That will do, Wilkins ; let him go ! " 

He started the horse ; the man jumped up behind, and they 
were off. 

" I'm afraid she will be very tired," said Miriam timidly ; 
" Jr's a hot day, and after the journey." 
" What cursed nonsense ! " said Yier fatViei, violently. " I 



Walter's Trust. 35 

hope you and Miss Monitor have not been such fools as to 
hire a maid who can't use her limbs, and requires the treat- 
ment of a fine lady. By George, she won't get it at the Firs ! 
She looks a poor, pale, frightened creature. I hate sick 
servants; and mind, I tell you, Miriam, if you've brought one 
here, she shall be sent packing." 

" I don't think Rose Dixon is at all sickly, sir," Miriam 
hastened to say : she was frightened at the thought of how 
powerless to help Walter her father's caprice might make her 
at any moment. " She is not even delicate, she tells me. 
Only, she is not a common person in either appearance or 
manner . and . " 

Her further explanation was cut short by her father's 
pulling the horse up. The animal had picked up a stone, 
and in the necessary objurgations upon him for doing 
so, and upon the groom for not being sufficiently quick in 
removing it, the matter dropped. As they started again, 
Miriam glanced back at the station : a man was pushing the 
hand-cart, with a pile of boxes, through the side-gate, and 
Rose was walking along the footpath, a little in front. In 
another minute the road turned, and Miriam lost sight of 
her. The incident was small in itself, but so like the 
experience and the forebodings which the girl was bringing 
to her home, that it overcame all her resolutions. She 
could not rally her spirits, she could not force herself to 
assume the lively and confident air by which she had proposed 
to herself to secure an easy position, as by a coup-de-main ; 
she sat by her father's side silent, and hardly heeding the 
summer landscape through which they drove. When the 
entrance to the Firs lay close before them, she roused herself, 
and said, " I hope you are glad to see me, papa ? You 
have not said so." 

" I never make speeches about matters of course," was 
Reginald Clint's congenial reply. Miriam said no more. Her 
father pulled up at the entrance to the house, helped he* owl 
of the dog-cart, and strode into the \ia\\ \>rfat^ \vsx.> %w^% 

d 2 



36 A Golden Sorrow. 

straight to his " study," in which he never read, but sulked, 
drank, and smoked a good deal. A man-servant, a stranger 
to Miriam, appeared. She told him briefly that her maid 
was coming, and desired she might be sent to her ; then 
ran upstairs to the room which had been her mother's, 
which she had called her own since her childhood, and 
locked the outer door. Then she flung herself on the 
bed, in the inner room, and burst into tears not all 
caused by grief; anger and fear had a large share in their 
origin. 

" I shall never be able to make it better," she muttered, 
" and if he sends Rose away, it will be worse. The only thing 
I have to hope for, the only thing I can look forward to, is to 
get away, and there's only one way of doing that. I'll take 
that only way, then, the first time I can get it, at any price ; 
nothing can be so bad as home and my father." 

She got off the bed when her tears subsided, and walked 
from one room to the other, No preparations had been made 
for her return ; none of the prettiness of a modern young lady's 
dwelling cheered the dull, old-fashioned room. There were 
no flowers, no bright hangings, no draped mirrors or pretty 
bookcases .none of the things which mothers provide for the 
daughters who are coming home to them " for good," and 
which most fathers would cause to be provided for a mother- 
less girl. Miriam had not expected any preparation, and yet 
the dull, ugly room vexed her. The reception by her father, 
the silent drive home, the tumult of her feelings, had driven 
into the background the curiosity which she had been experi- 
encing to a painfully exciting pitch, during the last two days. 
She had almost forgotten that as yet she had not discovered 
her brother's motive, in inducing her to engage Rose Dixon, 
that as yet she did not know who her maid really was. 

Rose Dixon had punctually presented herself at the appointed 

time at Crescent House, Hampstead, and had easily and 

correctly assumed the functions of Miss Clint's maid. But 

there had not been a moment's opportunity for Miriam 



Walter's Trust. 37 

to speak to her new attendant unheard; the " girls," the 
teachers, and the servants all swarmed about the popular 
pupil up to the instant of her departure, and Miss Monitor 
accompanied her to the station. Miriam observed traces of 
tears on Rose Dixon's face, and there was a nervous flutter 
about her, which made her young mistress kindly anxious to 
reassure her, and to shield her from observation. The station 
was crowded on their arrival, and the noise and confusion 
were sufficiently distracting to render Miss Monitor's recog- 
nition of one figure among the crowd improbable. While that 
lady was taking two first-class tickets for her ex-pupil and her 
maid, and making the guard sensible of the propriety of secur- 
ing seats for them in a carriage with other ladies, a tall woman 
in a brown silk gown contrived to hover near them, and to 
press a hand of each unseen. 

The journey inflicted a severe trial of patience on Miriam. 
The carriage had three occupants in addition to herself and 
Rose Dixon. One was a very fine lady indeed, who signified, 
as plainly as look and gesture could convey the sentiment, that 
she objected to the presence of Rose; the other two were 
giggling girls of less than Miriam's own age, and they 
watched her with the artless and ill-bred curiosity of their 
time of life. She had not a chance of exchanging a word, on 
any but ordinary topics, with Rose Dixon, during the journey ; 
and she had been much surprised when, in answer to her 
whispered question, " Have you brought me any letter from 
my brother ? " Rose answered " No." 

The windows of Miriam's rooms were in front of the house, 
so that she saw Rose Dixon coming along the avenue, by the 
side of the hand-cart with her luggage. She looked heated 
and tired, and Miriam longed to run downstairs and save her 
from carrying any burden up to her room, but she wisely 
restrained the impulse. Presently, there was a knock at the 
door ; Miriam unlocked and threw it open. There stood 
Rose, deadly pale and trembling, and lookm^ as ft ^&.^*s 
going to faint; while the housemaid, a gtmxvvcv^ \as^AaK& 



i 



38 ' A Golden Sorrow. 

Hampshire girl, who had come upstairs to show her the way, 
started at her in wholly unsympathetic surprise. 

" How tired you are ! " said Miriam, as she took the 
travelling-bag from Rose.. "That will do," addressing the 
housemaid, against whom she unceremoniously shut and locked 
the door. Then, for the first time, the two young women 
confronted one another alone. Miriam had thrown aside her 
bonnet and shawl, and was a picture of mingled excitement, 
discontent, and curiosity. Her dark hair was dusty and dis- 
ordered; her cheeks were smeared with tears; her beautiful 
eyes were bright, troubled, and pitiful ; her strong tall form 
was shaken with the conflicting feelings within her. Rose was 
pale to her lips, and looked faint, but she was perfectly calm. 
Pain was plainly to be read in her face, but there was courage, 
there too, and something that told that the habit of endurance 
was formed in her character. 

" Sit down," said Miriam, pulling a chair forward, and push- 
ing Rose Dixon into it ; then standing before her with a hand 
on each of her shoulders, she looked into her face. " I can- 
not bear this one instant longer. Walter promised to explain 
.he has not done it ; you must. Who are you ? What are you 
to him ? " 

Rose Dixon put her hands up, and gently took Miriam's off 
her shoulders; then holding them in hers, she answered, 
as they, thus at arm's length, looked at each other, " He left it 
to me to tell you. I am your brother's wife ! " 

Miriam merely gasped. In the extremity of her astonish- 
ment she was quite unable to speak. In one brief moment, 
all the import, all the consequences, of this revelation rushed 
into her mind. The implacable fury of her father, in the event 
of a discovery ; the risk of the position Rose had undertaken ; 
even the complicated awkwardness of the relation towards the 
household in which she was involved . the whole concatenation 
presented itself at once to her keen intelligence, and inter- 
preted itself by the deep frown which instantly set itself upon 
tier brow. 



Walter's Trust. 39 

" It was not my doing that you were deceived, Miss Clint," 
said Rose, dropping Miriam's hands, and rising. " I entreated 
Walter to tell you the truth, and leave you to choose whether 
you would protect and shelter me, knowing who I am." 

" His wife 1 . his wife 1 " was all Miriam could yet say. 

" Yes, his wife 1 You surely do not doubt that ? If you 
do, I can prove it. Surely he told you there could be no 
harm to you, no disgrace in having me with you ? " . 

" He did, he did ! " said Miriam, recovering herself, and 
passing her hand over her forehead. " I do not doubt your 
word, but . but I am so bewildered . you will explain . you 
will tell me. Good heavens ! this may be a dreadful thing for 
Walter." She spoke the last sentence, almost unconscious 
that she was heard. 

" Yes," said Rose, and tears rolled down her pale face, " it 
may be a dreadful thing for Walter, and I fear, I fear, his 
plan has not been a wise one, but I could not dissuade him 
from it He dreaded leaving me quite alone ; he clung to 
the idea of your affording me protection. Believe me, Miss 
Clint, my assent was most unwilling; I shrunk from asking 
so much from you ; but Walter said you would not blame 
him for marrying the woman he loved, only because she was 
poor." 

" Nor would I," thought Miriam, " though I am not senti- 
mental, and would not marry a poor man, no matter how 
much I loved him ; but I do blame him ; I cannot forgive him 
for marrying a servant." In that fact she felt there was utter 
ruin for her brother, even apart from any vindictive course 
which his discovery of it might cause her father to adopt. 
Her silence chilled and terrified Rose. 

" Oh," she sobbed, " I wish I had not obeyed him ! . I 
wish I had refused to do this ! It must end ill. I will go away ; 
I will tell him it cannot be." 

" No, no," said Miriam ; " do not distress yourself so much. 
You must remember how utterly 1 am taken by surprise ; you 
must give me time to get over the first sYiocV ol \&Y3 xvem ^ 



40 A Golden Sorr&iv. 

little. You do not know my father ; I don't think Walter can 
have made you understand how proud a man he is, and . " 

Rose flushed scarlet. She perceived what was in Miriam's 
mind. " Miss Clint," she said, " I think you have not quite 
understood me. Your brother has done a dreadfully impru- 
dent thing in marrying me . I did not understand how im- 
prudent, or I hope I should have had the courage to save him 
by parting from him ; but he has only married a poor girl, not 
one inferior to him in birth and breeding." 

" What ? " cried Miriam, impetuously seizing hold of her. 
" You don't mean to say . though you certainly look like it . 
that you are a lady ?" 

" Certainly I do," returned the other calmly, and with de- 
cision. " I am a lady . by descent, by birth, and education. 
I don't think Walter would have married any one who was not 
so," she added proudly ; "and I don't think his sister ought 
to have suspected him of such a thing." 

" Now I don't mind it a bit," said Miriam, as she hugged 
Rose with all the warmth of her impulsive repentance; "and 
I see I must have been a fool not to understand it. Never 
mind your not having any money ; neither has Walter, you 
know. But never fear; we shall contrive to manage papa 
somehow ; and if we don't, some day I mean to have enough 
for us all. Only, how, in the name of wonder, could you ever 
think of pretending to be a servant ? How could you imagine 
such a thing ? " 

" It was Walter's plan," said Rose ; " but I knew I could 
carry it out, from what he had told me of you. I am per- 
fectly competent to be your maid, Miss Clint, as you shall see." 

" Absurd ! How can you talk such nonsense ? Walter's 
wife, my own sister-in-law, my maid; my father's daughter-in-law, 
a servant in his house ! Of course such a thing is quite out 
of the question. Only, what are we to say to papa ? How 
am I to account for you ? " Miriam began to walk about the 
room, and to pull her long hair through her fingers, as she had 
a habit of doing when she was troubled. Rose quietly laid 



Walter's Trust. 41 

aside her bonnet and shawl, opened one of the travelling-bags, 
took out combs and brushes, laid them on the dressing-table, 
placed a chair before it, and stood with her hands on the chair- 
back, looking steadily at Miriam. 

" In twenty minutes dinner will be served," she said, " and 
you must go down and dine with your father. You have pro- 
mised Walter to befriend me. You cannot betray me yet, and 
in the meantime the only thing to be done is to let me play 
my part so as not to be suspected. This evening, you shall 
know all, and then you shall take your resolution. What you 
can do for me and for him now, is to let me dress you for 
dinner, and then to go down with an untroubled face : when 
you can leave your father, you shall find me here." 

"But you?" said Miriam. "What are you to do? You 
cannot dine with the servants. It is an impossible position to 
maintain." 

" No, it isn't," said Rose. " Sit down, and let me do your 
hair." Miriam obeyed her mechanically. 

Rose gathered up the shining tresses in her hand, admiringly, 
arid began to brush them out. " I shall ask the servants to 
let me have some tea up here, on the pretext of having to 
put your things in order, and to-night we can arrange for the 
future." 

The quiet, gentle, blue-eyed little woman was subjugating 
Miriam by the simple strength of her purpose. 

Miriam's first dinner in her father's house, as a young 
lady come home "for good," must always have had some 
importance for her, but she had little contemplated its 
being such an ordeal. As she sat opposite to her father, 
she could hardly preserve her composure, or pretend to eat, 
so oppressed was she with the secret she had just learned ; 
and with the recollection of what Walter had said about one 
request he had it in contemplation to make of his father through 
her. She had never felt so much afraid of her father as now, 
when she needed to be least so. She was tired, worn out^ 
and for the first time in her life bearing the buxd^ii eft tQ^t?^- 



42 A Golden Sorrow. 

ment. Mr. Clint was in a somewhat better humour than be- 
fore, and occasionally spoke to her almost graciously. At the 
conclusion of dinner, he noticed her look of fatigue, and told 
her she might retire at once, if she pleased, adding that she 
need never trouble herself about him in the evenings . he rarely 
entered the drawing-room. Miriam, even then, could think of 
the dreary evenings there must be in store for her, and wonder 
whether he had any notion of procuring companionship of any 
kind for her ; but she made no comment, only rose to leave the 
room, he stood hesitating for a moment whether she should 
approach him, but he dismissed her with a nod, and a curt 
" good-night." 

Miriam ran impatiently up the stairs, to her own rooms, 
where she found Rose, seated in a thoughtful attitude by an 
open window, looking out upon the dreary lawn, where sheep 
were nibbling the grass, their short sharp bites distinctly audible 
in the still summer evening. 

" That's over," said Miriam, " and now we shall not be dis- 
turbed again to-night." She drew a low chair to the side of 
Rose as she spoke, and seated herself, looking up into the sad 
face of her brother's wife. 

" If Walter could only see us now," she said, " he would be 
well pleased. We have some peaceful hours before us, come 
what may. You will tell me everything now ? " 

" Everything." 

" May I ask you questions ? " 

" Ask me what you will." 

"Then tell me, how long have you known Walter? When 
were you married to him ? " 

" I have known him two years ; we have been married one." 

" Was Rose Dixon your real name." 

" No ; my real name was Florence Reeve ; but Walter 
would not let me use it ; he fears it may already have reached 
your father's ears. Rose Dixon was my mother's name," 

"J shall call you Florence, when we are alone, and you 
must call me Miriam." 



Walter's Trust. 43 

"No, no," said the other earnestly; it would be very 
dangerous. People pronounce names almost unconsciously, 
and we cannot be enough on our guard." 

" Very well," said Miriam ; " I believe you are right You 
shall be Rose, and I will be Miss Clint." 

"I wonder* if you will ever like me well enough to be re- 
conciled to having granted Walter's request ? " said Rose. 

"I think I shall like you very much," replied Miriam 
frankly ; " only, I am surprised now, so dumbfounded, I do not 
feel rightly awake, and am hardly able to understand you." 

" I shall be lonely and desolate indeed, if you do not like 
me," said Rose nervously, and with trembling lips, "for 
Heaven knows when I shall see Walter again." 

" What do you mean ? Have you no plan for meeting ? " 

" He and I parted yesterday . but for the momentary 
glimpse of him this morning," said Rose, "that also he 
left for me to tell you. He does not purpose to see either 
you or me again. He is going, in a fortnight, to California." 



44 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER V. 

FLORENCE. 

When Mr. Martin advised Walter Clint to adopt the study 
of medicine, he did so without any conviction that a future 
medical benefactor to his species was hidden under the 
good-looking exterior of his unmanageable patient's mutinous 
son. That Walter would be better behaved anywhere than at 
home, Mr. Martin was quite justified in believing; he had 
had opportunities of observing the lad, and knew that he was 
hardly to be recognized when removed from the grinding re- 
straint of his father's presence ; and it was quite evident he 
must have something to do. Mr. Clint would assuredly not 
give him a roving commission, with money enough to make 
it pleasant. But his experienced friend did not expect Walter 
to make much of his medical studies, and he by no means 
outran that modest expectation. Walter was not exactly idle 
during the ensuing year, but his occupations were not strictly 
conducive to his future welfare. 

The house in which Walter Clint lodged was a dull, grimly 
genteel, thin house, in an old-fashioned crescent in the Blooms- 
bury district. It had a large street door, surmounted by a 
dusty semicircle of glass, and decorated with a plaster cast of 
a horse of the rampant order ; and a floor-clothed hall, dingy 
and dull, but at least possessing the advantage of space. The 
rooms were numerous, and not ill-furnished ; but every article 
in them was old-fashioned, and though well preserved up 
to a certain point, had evidently begun to yield to time. 
Walter occupied two rooms on the ground-floor, which had 



Florence, 45 

been the dining-room and study ; but that was in the time of 
Mrs. Reeve's predecessor, a lawyer in good practice, and of 
convivial habits ; they were parlour and bed-room now. 

Walter had been lodging in the dull house in the dull cres- 
cent for some three or four weeks before he became aware that 
the proprietress of the mansion lived in it. He had speedily 
perceived that the domestic staff was insufficient in numbers . it 
consisted of one maid-servant and a boy, and everything which 
could possibly be omitted was left undone ; but he had never 
expected much comfort in a London lodging-house, and if he 
had less than he expected, he was of a temperament to make 
light of the disappointment That the drawing-rooms were let 
to two elderly maiden ladies, who enjoyed the luxury of a ser- 
vant of their own, Walter was aware . indeed, the proximity of 
his bedroom to the kitchen-stairs enabled him to hear all the 
quarrels and most of the confidences between Mrs. Reeve's 
Martha and the Misses Ray's Mary Jane . but he had no 
notion how the remaining rooms were distributed and occu- 
pied. 

He was not much at home. The acquaintances he had 
made through Mr. Martin's introduction were speedily supple- 
mented by others, made by himself ; and Walter was soon in 
. the easily-descending groove of a medical student's life in 
London, with the added temptation and danger that he did not 
know, for certain, whether he should ever be forced to earn a 
a guinea for himself, on pain of going without it. Among these 
acquaintances, there were some far from desirable, and Walter 
was " easily led," as the phrase which thus ingeniously palliates 
that fatal defect, weakness of character, has it. It would be 
neither profitable nor pleasant to follow the exact course of his 
experiences of London and student life ; for they were of a kind 
to foster his faults, and leave his good qualities dormant His 
entire separation from his sister was highly injurious to Walter. 
The decree which effected this was pronounced by Mr. Clint, 
after Walter had been one year in London, arvd ^\\sxl Y& \sa& 



46 A Golden Sorrow. 

further embittered his father against him by considerably ex- 
ceeding his allowance, and making application for money in a 
free-and-easy style. Mr. Clint, clinging to his favourite theory, 
that his son had no rights, and all he chose to do for him was 
of his own free grace, resented this as a double injury . r 
to his theory, and his pocket. This was terribly unjust, for it 
inflicted misery upon Miriam, who had not deserved it, and 
whose strongest feeling was affection for her brother, and it 
diminished the motive which actuated them both to endeavour 
to keep on decent terms with their father. But Mr. Clint was 
not to be influenced by any such considerations. 

After Walter had been some time in London, and when, 
if there had been any one interested in him to notice it, that 
individual would have perceived a considerable decline in 
steadinesss on his part, an occurrence took place which, 
though trifling in itself, was destined to exert a grave influence 
on his future life. He was dawdling over a late breakfast in a 
sullen and discontented mood one fine spring morning, when 
a cab stopped at the house-door, a lady stepped out and rang 
the bell, and a cabman, insolent-looking beyond the ordinary 
appearance of his tribe, hauled down a box of by no means 
imposing dimensions, flung it on the pavement, and apostro- 
phised the " fare " in a loud*tone and exceedingly bad language, . 
as Walter heard distinctly through the open window. In a 
moment he had forestalled the servant, opened the door, and 
confronted the cabman, who moderated his tone with surprising 
celerity. It was the usual case . a lady, alone, and to all 
appearance not rich. . Of course, a London cabman must over- 
charge and bully her. 

" Pray, go into the house," said Walter to the lady, " and I 
-will settle this matter." He did so by the comforting assurance 
to the cabman that he should be promptly served with a sum- 
mons, and made to pay for the luxury of insulting a lady. He 
then took up the box and carried it into the hall, where he 
found the "fare," who had by this time been joined by the 
servant. 



Florence. 47 

" Thank you, very much," said the lady, who was very young 
and exceedingly pretty, and whose tearful blue eyes and flushed 
cheeks inspired Walter with mingled emotions of admiration 
and anger. " I am so sorry to have given you so much 
trouble. ,, 

" Not the least trouble," said Walter. " I am so glad I was 
in the way-^-I seldom am at this time of day. That insolent 
brute had time to frighten you as it was, I am afraid." 

" I was startled. It is the first time I have travelled alone 
in England." 

" Ah ! " said Walter significantly. " Ladies are better looked 
after abroad, even when they don't travel with maids and foot- 
men. Now, where shall I put this box for you ? " 

" Thank you ; pray don't mind it. The boy will take it up- 
stairs presently. " 

" Upstairs ! " thought Walter. " Is she going to stay here ? 
Can this blue-eyed creature have come on a visit to the old 
maids in the drawing-rooms ? Are they going to treat her to 
Exeter Hall and oratorios ? " 

It was impossible to ask her any questions . impossible to do 
anything but bow, and retire to the shelter of his own parlour, 
whence he watched her, through a good-sized chink in the 
door, as she went up the wide stair. 

" What a pretty girl ! " Walter thought, as he walked up and 
down his sitting-room, with his hands in his pockets ; "and a 
little lady too. Who is she, I wonder ? Presently he heard the 
voice of Mrs. Reeve's Martha directing the boy to carry " Miss 
Florence's " box upstairs " to the dressing-room." The youth 
began to drag his burden up the staircase, inflicting much 
damage on the already dingy and ancient carpet in the process ; 
and Walter called Martha into the parlour, on the pretext of 
wanting to have his breakfast-things removed. 

It was not very difficult to extract information from Martha : 
she was endowed with a powerful capacity for gossip ; and in 
the course of a few minutes, Walter was placed in possession of 
all she knew concerning her mistress and Yiex aSacra, axA c>\ ^. 



48 A Golden Sorrow. 

good deal which she only guessed. The story was an ordinary 
,one. Mrs. Reeve was the widow of a clergyman, who had 
never Attained to any kind of distinction, but had died, after 
many years of unrecognized hard work in London, leaving 
her with an only child, and a very small annuity, to purchase 
at the cost of severe sacrifices. Some time after his death, 
Mrs. Reeve took the dull house in the dull crescent to 
which fate had sent Walter, by the advice of some distant 
relatives, who promised to secure a respectable connexion for 
her, and who did so for some time, during which she received 
only ladies as lodgers. But the connexion had dropped off, 
as the neighbourhood became more and more unfashionable, 
and sometimes the rooms stood empty for an alarmingly long 
period. Then Mrs. Reeve relented, and let to very- well-recom- 
mended gentlemen, of which privileged number Walter was one. 

Mrs. Reeve's only child was growing up during the earlier, 
comparatively prosperous period, and receiving from her deli- 
cate highly-cultivated mother, a thoroughly sound and useful 
education. Florence was pretty, clever, and good, with an 
affectionate, yielding disposition ; and her mother loved her 
with exceeding love and pride. For her child she was ambitious, 
as she had never been for herself; for her child she was 
discontented, though for herself she had borne ill-fortune with 
smiling readiness. Florence had a stronger will than her 
mother's, and when she saw that something more than what 
they were doing must be done to keep them out of debt, in 
which there evidently would be ruin, she made up her mind 
what that something was, and made arrangements for doing it. 

Florence Reeve's eighteenth birthday found her settled as 
resident governess in the family of a clergyman, formerly a 
friend of her father, but to whom " life had been dealt in another 
measure," where she was kindly treated, and whither her 
mother was occasionally invited to pass a few days with her, 
when she could get away from her house and its fluctuating, 
but always exacting, inmates. For one year this arrangement 
worked well, but then Mrs. Reeve's health began to fail, and 



Florence. 49 

she concealed the fact from Florence. Disorder and mis- 
management in the house ensued, and the misfortune which 
above all Florence had dreaded befell the widow . she got into 
debt. 

That word has such various significations ! It has quite a 
splendid sound in the case of the hereditary possessors of large 
estates, in which it merely signifies vice, selfishness,, hideous 
unscrupulousness, and the ignoring of every duty and obliga- 
tion, only in virtue of whose strict fulfilment society ought to 
tolerate the tremendous inequality between these people's lives 
and those of their fellow-men. It is dashing when it means 
fortune and reputation squandered by titled fools, or by women 
without one feminine virtue or intellectual attribute, in the pur- 
suit of sickening sensuality, and vapid, vulgar folly; but it has 
neither splendour nor dash about it in the more prosaic case 
of poor, struggling people, who are merely honest and unfor- 
tunate.people who feel debt an ever-present burden and an 
urgent disgrace. Mrs. Reeve was one of these. She did her 
best ; she saved and spared, she overtaxed her strength, and 
concealed her anxieties and her illness from Florence, until 
she broke down completely, and was forced to send for her 
daughter by sheer inability to attend to the house any longer. 
Walter had never spoken to Mrs. Reeve ; he was rarely in 
his rooms in the evenings, and had been less than ever in 
them of late. He had known nothing more of her than that 
she existed, and lived upstairs, somewhere above the drawing- 
rooms, and that she had once written him a timid and depre- 
catory kind of note, in which she entreated him not to smoke 
in the parlour with the door open, because the ladies in the 
drawing-rooms objected to the smell of tobacco, especially in 
the form of cigars. Walter was a good-natured, easy-going 
young fellow, not in the least brutal, and so he did not curse 
Mrs. Reeve's impudence, and the ladies in the drawing-rooms, 
and decline to consult the convenience of a parcel of 
women, but he returned a polite answer, and attewd^i \s> \k& 
request 



50 A Golden Sorrow. 

This little circumstance had inspired Mrs. Reeve with a 
favourable opinion of her lodger in the parlour ; and he had 
won a place in Martha's good graces also by his good- 
humoured readiness to put up with her deficiencies, and his con- 
siderate chariness about ringing his bell. She was quite r,eady 
to talk to him about " Missus " and Miss Florence, and frankly 
expressed her opinion that Mrs. Reeve was in a very bad way, 
and Miss Florence had not come home too soon. Martha 
concluded by declaring a total want of confidence in doctors, 
though, she remarked, she ought not to say that to Mr. Clint. 
Walter assured her she was riot insulting the learned faculty in 
his person, as he was not a doctor yet. Presently he went 
out, feeling a good deal of curiosity about " Miss Florence," 
wondering when he should see her again (soon, he thought, 
considering they were living under the same roof), and whether 
she would bow or speak to him when they met 

His curiosity and his doubts were speedily satisfied. 

During the whole of the next day, he did not see the blue- 
eyed stranger, though he went out later and came in earlier, 
with a vague hope of doing so. But he inquired of Martha 
how Mrs. Reeve was, and whether her daughter was alarmed 
about her. He learned that the doctor, in whom Martha 
declined to believe, had seen his patient, and pronounced her 
very weak ; and that Martha's conviction was, he knew nothing 
about it. " Her illness is perry . something, he says . I don't 
rightly know the word," continued Martha; "but I don't think 
much of that. It's worry as really ails her ; and, ah ! dear me 
what a many people die of worry, which the doctors calls it 
long names." 

It was past midnight when Walter let himself in with his key, 
and was surprised to find the gas-light in the hall still burning, 
and to hear sounds of moving about. " The old ladies have 
broken out, I suppose," he thought, " turned convivial ; " and 
he went towards the head of the kitchen-stairs to inquire 
whether, under these unusual circumstances, he was to put the 



Florence. 5 1 

chain up, but was arrested by a swift footstep on the stairs, and 
a voice calling to him, " Mr. Clint ! Mr. Clint ! " 

The step and the voice belonged to Florence Reeve, 
who informed him that her mother had been suddenly 
seized with alarming symptoms half an hour before . that 
Martha had been sent to fetch the doctor ; in the meantime, 
Mrs. Reeve had become apparently insensible, and she and the 
Misses Ray had vainly endeavoured to restore her . that 
Martha had told her Mr. Clint was a doctor ; and she begged 
him to come with her to her mother's room. Before she had 
said half this, they were going upstairs side by side, and 
Walter noticed that, though her face was white with fear, 
Florence Reeve was quite self-possessed. There was no 
childish terror in her manner ; she shed no tears ; and when 
they reached her mother's room, she obeyed his directions with 
quiet promptitude. 

The room was large, but scantily furnished, and comfortless. 
An old-fashioned four-post bedstead, upon which Mrs. Reeve 
lay, faced the windows. Her wan face and pinched features 
looked ghastly in the light of the candles. The Misses Ray 
were standing at the foot of the bed, looking on helplessly ; 
and when Florence and Walter entered the room, they promptly 
retired, under the impression that the doctor had arrived. 
Thus, the young man and the girl found themselves alone, in 
the dead of the night, in the presence of what ? Sleep ? 
Insensibility ? No ; Walter knew it at once ; he was not mis- 
taken, though he gave prompt instructions, which he knew must 
be unavailing, in order to gain time until the doctor and the 
servant should be on the spot They were in the presence of 
death . Suddenly, quietly, unsuspected, the summons had come 
to the citadel, and the surrender had been as sudden. For a 
few minutes, Florence was deceived ; but, as she bathed her 
mother's forehead with vinegar, something in the way the head 
turned under her hand gave her a sickening sensation of fear. 
The sponge dropped, she stood upright, \vet Vomfok i*s> 

E 2 



52 A Golden Sorrow. 

turned to Walter. " Good God !" she whispered " can she be 
dead?" 

He took her hand, and placed her gently in a chair ; she 
let him move her, she felt helpless and weak as an infant. 
" Try to bear it/' he said very gently ; " I fear she is." 

When Martha came back with the doctor, she found 
Florence sitting by her mother's death-bed, stupefied, her 
hands clasped before her eyes, and Walter kneeling silently 
at her side. 



S3 



CHAPTER VI. 

AN EXCEEDINGLY YOUNG COUPLE. 

The friendlessness of some poor " gentry people is a curious 
thing to contemplate. We do not l^flr^r understand it in 
ordinary circumstances, but when umlmal incidents occur, it 
comes out in a very impressive way. There are people who 
occupy their own little grooves, do their own little work, 
carry their own by no means light or little crosses, and who, 
when the even tenor of their not too easy way is interrupted, 
and it becomes necessary for themselves, or other people, to 
muster their resources, do not appear to have anybody belong- 
ing to them or to whom they belong. Mrs.: Reeve was one of 
this numerous class. She had lived for many years far re- 
moved from her never numerous early associations, and her 
life had had too much toil, care, and anxiety in it to admit of 
the formation of new ones, even had she not been a reserved 
and silent person. 

Thus, it came to pass that, when her sudden death obliged 
her daughter to look about her for friends and counsellors, she 
found none, except the clergyman and his family, from whose 
house she had returned so short a time before that terrible 
event But her friendlessness did not appal Florence. There 
was a period of overwhelming grief, and then one of painful 
investigation, bewilderment, utterly strange business; the 
looking into her mother's affairs ; the definition of the interval 
which lay between her and destitution. The affairs were 
simple ; the interval was short. When the lease of the dull 
house in the dull crescent had been sold, and the. fox&axfc 
was disposed of, at a valuation, to the Itvcoyoitv^ \scaxiX,^&ft 



54 -A Golden Sorrow. 

also proposed to let lodgings, and who agreed to engage 
Martha, and to accept Mr. Clint as a tenant for the parlours ; 
when all the debts, which had so harassed her mother, and 
which had been so dreaded by Florence, were paid, there 
remained one hundred pounds. One hundred pounds in the 
world ; a dangerously fair face for any unprotected homeless 
girl to possess; and the chance that her former employers 
would take her into their service again ! These were Florence 
Reeve's actual and prospective circumstances; and yet she 
did not feel friendless, she was not afraid, she was not mise- 
rable. She hardly knew how everything had been arranged. 
The doctor had been very kind, and Walter. She could not 
understand how it was that Walter seemed like an old friend 
all at once. but so it was ; ever after that dreadful day it 
had come quite naturally to her to tell him everything, and 
take his advice. She had no relatives to take her to task, 
or friends to comment upon her, because she talked freely 
with a young man who was not a relative; and she was 
satisfied, in her innocent frankness, that she needed no other 
friend than this one, who might so easily have been a wolf 
in sheep's clothing, discernible only by the keen-eyed trappers 
of society, in whose experience fleece-bedecked wolves are not 
rare. He might so easily have been ! . but he was not. 
Florence first trusted him, and very soon she loved him with 
all the strength and singleness of a finely-tempered feminine 
nature. She did not love him, or, at least, she did not tell 
herself she loved him, as soon as he loved her, and unceasingly 
assured himself of the fact. He had loved her from the hour 
in which he had been obliged to tell her the truth, that her 
mother was dead ; and he had gratitude and grace sufficient to 
recognize, with a curious sad humility, not so uncommon in 
men as women believe it to be, that this love, all unpropitious 
as were the external circumstances connected with it, was a 
saving influence, a turning-point in his life. 
The position was a very serious one, and, for the first time, 
Walter felt he had erred in failing to ccmcWiate \v\s father. 



An Exceedingly Young Couple. 55 

For Florence's sake, he would now have made any sacrifice, 
would have stooped to any concession, but it was too late for 
sacrifice or concession to avail. The fancied grievances of 
his life at the Firs had been so supplemented by the real irre- 
gularities of his conduct in London, as to render his father's 
estrangement complete. There was nothing for Walter but to 
discard all remembrance of his expectations, to live strictly 
upon his allowance, and go in seriously for his profession and 
a long engagement. At all events, he would not be wronging 
Florence by inducing her to consent to this ; she had no pro- 
spect on which this would not be an improvement. He con- 
sulted her upon the point, but did not let her discover that 
any risk to his own future was involved in such an arrange- 
ment He had too clear a perception of her disinterestedness 
and generosity to enable her to refuse him on the plea of its 
being done for his sake. He represented himself hopelessly 
alienated from home-ties, and as absolutely friendless, and, 
in that sense, independent as herself. Florence heard him 
with pure and perfect joy. Never was there a prettier or more 
imprudent love-story than theirs. They parted solemnly 
pledged to each other ; she to return to her pupils at Windsor ; 
he to resume his medical studies . which presented themselves 
now under a very different aspect, and inspired him with quite 
other feelings. 

Florence was very happy, notwithstanding the real grief with 
which she mourned her mother. Sorrow was strong ; but love, 
the stronger, had come in and conquered. She had left Mr. 
Clewer's house a pretty, bright, gladsome, timid girl, a charm- 
ing companion and playfellow for her young pupils ; she re- 
turned to it, a very lovely young woman, her beauty marvellously 
enhanced, her manner tinged with new dignity, and over her 
person and demeanour a certain nameless tender grace diffused, 
lending her an added charm, which induced Mrs. Clewer's 
" particular friend," Mrs. Dunville, to inform that lady, con- 
fidentially, that she considered Miss Reeve " unsafe." 

" Unsafe J " exclaimed Mrs. Clewer, uTvcoxiscvovas <& \*sx. 



56 A Golden Sorrow, 

sagacious friend's meaning. " Unsafe how ? Unsafe to 
whom ? " 

u Well, my dear . I don't mean to alarm you, you know : 
but your Percy is very young. and those things do happen," 
said Mrs. Dunville. 

" Oh, Percy ! " and Mrs. Clewer looked rather red and un- 
comfortable : u he is a mere boy, you know ; and I shall take 
care to keep her out of his way." 

Mrs. Dunville said no more ; but she had always had her 
doubts of dear Helen's common sense, and now they were 
confirmed. None but a fool could have made such an answer 
to such a warning. 

Mrs. Clewer's eldest son came home from college when 
Florence had been six months his sisters' governess. Her 
pupils were still children; she was surprised to find their 
brother "quite a young man." Wisdom was very speedily 
justified of her children, in the instance of Mrs. Dunville. 
Percy Clewer so distinctly and speedily " made a fool of him- 
self" by falling in love with the pretty penniless governess, 
that things became exceedingly uncomfortable for Florence, 
and Mrs. Clewer was frightened out of her small allowance of 
wits. She resorted to subterfuge, the resource of the weak, 
and found so much fault with Miss Reeve's method of teach- 
ing, with her toleration of Jessie's stoop, and Lilian's inartistic 
pose of her hands on the piano . Florence's own blue eyes, 
fair skin, and elegant figure were the real grounds of objection 
. that poor Florence was forced to take the hint, and to feel 
tjiat, with one precious, inestimable exception, she was now 
friendless indeed. She wrote to the exception, who thereupon 
took a resolution, imprudent to the last degree, but not un- 
natural under the circumstances. 

" It is the only way in which I can really protect her," 

thought Walter ; " and if I can live on my allowance, as I am 

doing now, I'll back her woman's wit, economy, and self-denial 

to make it do for two." 

Florence had told him that she was \ti daity dxead of receiv- 



An Exceedingly Young Couple. 57 

ing her dismissal. He entreated her to forestall such a 
possibility, by resigning at once, and begged her to come to 
London, where he would provide a lodging for her, and tell 
her what he had thought of as a resource for the future. 
Simply, unhesitatingly, Florence obeyed him, thereby affording 
great relief to Mrs. Clewer's troubled mind. If she had dis- 
missed Miss Reeve, she must have explained matters to Mr. 
Clewer, and that gentleman was not a comfortable subject for 
domestic explanations. Now she could tell him that Miss 
Reeve had given her notice. She did tell him so, adding, 
that she was leaving them to better herself, a white lie which 
did not disturb Mrs. Clewer's conscience . her moral sense, 
like that of many excellent women, was singularly somnolent, 
except where her domestic interests were concerned . and 
which perfectly satisfied the Rev. Jackson. Mrs. Clewer did 
not concern herself to know more of Florence . it was no 
business of hers; and really, she could not be sufficiently 
thankful for dear Percy's sake, or sufficiently cautious in future 
airangements. 

Walter Clint was of age ; Florence Reeve was an orphan, 
too unimportant to have guardians, and unpossessed of " next 
friends ; " consequently, there was no difficulty about their 
marriage. Florence was greatly startled at first, when she 
learned the plan which Walter had devised ; but it was easy 
to persuade her . and she had no adequate notion of the risk 
Walter was incurring. He seemed to be almost as friendless 
as herself, and the difficulties of their engagement were really 
greater than those of a marriage. A very short time found 
Walter Clint in the incongruous position of a medical student 
with a wife, living in a City boarding-house . all his familiar 
friends being aware of the fact, but united in an honourable 
compact " to keep it dark " in every quarter whence it might, 
by mischance, reach the ears of Walter's " governor." 

That was a pretty love-story enough, with all its prose, and 
the young couple were very happy and harmless. M\.t^ 
adaptable disposition lent itself readily to the c\v\\e\. xo>aX\xve c& 



58 A Golden Sorrow. 

their undeniably dull life, and Florence would have been per- 
fectly content if she could only have helped Walter in some 
way. She proposed to do so by giving lessons in the neigh- 
bourhood of their abode, but after a while she had not strength 
for any exertion of the kind, and it soon became necessary to 
draw upon the fund which constituted her sole worldly wealth. 
A little cottage, in as near an imitation of the country as the 
district east of London attainable by omnibus could supply, 
was taken for the young wife, and there she lived in complete 
and happy retirement. After his marriage, Walter gave his 
father no more cause for complaint in money-matters; his 
demands ceased. But Mr. Clint was no better pleased with 
him for that. He could not brook the notion that the son 
whom he had almost discarded could get on without him ; 
and he secretly chafed because the young man, whose home 
he had made intolerable to him, displayed no eagerness to 
induce him to repeal the sentence of his banishment from it 
Walter, meantime, was profoundly unconscious of, and serenely 
indifferent to, his father's state of mind. He was very happy, 
very much in love, and delighted with the knowledge that he 
had done a brave and manly thing in shielding this young girl, 
who repaid him so richly in absolute trust, and simple, un- 
questioning devotion from her sad and desolate fate. 

Walter had made no false calculation when he counted on 
the self-sacrifice and the frugality of Florence. They were 
remarkable and they availed much, but they could not ward 
off poverty and distress when Florence fell ill some time before 
the birth of her child . who only lived a few hours . and con- 
tinued weak and ailing for many weeks, requiring ease and 
nourishment, and medical attendance, all making a great 
devastation of the hundred pounds which formed their sole 
provision against a rainy day. It did not only rain on the 
young couple, it poured. Walter's own health became im- 
paired, by the absence of comforts to which he had always 
been accustomed, and by previous prolonged confinement to 
London air. 



An Exceedingly Young Couple. 59 

When Florence was recovering from her illness, and begin- 
ning to investigate their financial condition with alarm, Walter 
made a new acquaintance, who was destined to influence his 
after-life in a degree second only to that in which it had been 
affected by the young lady now his wife. 

"YouVe no notion what a capital fellow Daly is," he said 
to Florence one evening, when coaxing her to confess she 
felt well enough to allow him to invite his new friend 
to the cottage at George Lane, Wanstead. She was well 
enough, but had been unwilling to make the admission from 
economical considerations, of the drinkables to follow, in- 
volved in an invitation to tea. "He really is such a nice 
fellow, Flo, and wonderfully good-looking. Not one of your 
lady-like men, or languid swells, but a fine, tall, well-built, 
manly fellow, with features like a Greek statue, only theyVe 
plenty of meaning in them, and a voice which I'm sure you 
could not resist." 

" H'm I that would depend on what the voice said," was 
Flo's sage reply. " What is Mr. Lawrence Daly to be ? " she 
added. 

" I can't tell you. You have posed me there, little Flo ! 
He talks of being a doctor, and is studying, not so seriously 
as I am studying, though . you see, he has not such motives . 
but I don't think he will make much of it. The toiling one's 
way upward in a profession is work too slow for him, I fancy 
. he is dashing, you know. I don't mean to say he is not 
industrious ; but he's more dashing, and, I fancy . he has not 
told me much about himself as yet . he has not been very well 
treated by his family, or by some one or other. In that re- 
spect, he and I are much of a muchness. I think he will be 
off to the other side of the world some day, and come back a 
rich man." 

" But people don't get rich at the other side of the world, any 
more than here, if they have not money to begin with, do they ?" 

" True, little Flo ; but then they don't want s>o xoN&b. \a 
begin with, and they make a great dea\ moit ol \\.r 



60 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Let us go, Walter," said Florence, in an innocent half-jest, 
half-earnest way, " to the other side of the world, and make 
some money." 

Florence had found out by this time how much more ex- 
pensive a luxury life was than she had thought it ; and that her 
seemingly satisfactory calculations had excluded such accidents 
as infants and illnesses, and she was getting frightened. 

Walter took a few turns about the room, glancing at her 
with an anxious, furtive look before he answered. 

" It might not be a bad plan, Flo ; there's no getting on 
here, for people without money, or more brains than Fve got ; 
and we are always on the verge of a precipice as well. My 
father would stop my allowance, and leave us to starve, if he 
knew . " 

" Walter ! " said Florence, with a very pale face and an 
alarmed voice, " you told me your quarrel with your father 
was hopeless before. I never knew there would have been 
any chance for you. I never knew I could make things 
worse." 

" Nor can you, my darling," said Walter, hurrying to her, 
and taking her in his arms tenderly. " I never had the ghost 
of a chance of anything more than he does for me now, and 
our marriage has really been the means of my keeping that, 
for I never could live within my allowance before. If he found 
out about it, he could do no more than he might have done 
any day, on any pretext, or none. But, darling Flo, things 
are getting serious, and we must consider what it would be 
best to do." 



6i 



CHAPTER VII. 

LAWRENCE DALY. 

A few days after that serious review of their affairs had been 
held by the young couple, Walter brought his friend Lawrence 
Daly to . see Florence, and pass a quiet evening at the little 
cottage in George Lane. Florence had been rather down- 
hearted all day. She had come to the conclusion, in sober 
earnest, that something must indeed be done. Her wardrobe 
was reduced to a very insufficient quantity ; Walter's was hardly 
fit to be seen ; and sundry small debts were accumulating, until 
the whole threatened to become a large debt. What should she 
do ? They could not afford to live in any but a very cheap place, 
and very cheap places did not produce pupils requiring to be 
taught French, Italian, music, and " the elements " of drawing. 
Supposing she could make up her mind to the dreadful sacrifice of 
separation from Walter, people would not take a young married 
woman as a governess ; and, if even they would, she felt that she 
was no longer sufficiently strong to endure the stated hours, the 
formal walks, and the constant presence of noisy, self-engrossed 
children. Florence had been crying a good deal, while she 
looked over her little stock of baby-clothes, and put them away ; 
but her tears were not called forth by sorrowful remembrance 
of the hopes which had not been realized, but by the reflection 
that it would be so much better for her never again to have any 
such hopes ; it seemed so sad and dreary that she ought not to 
wish for children. " Poor little creatures ! what would become 
of them ? " thought Florence, as she turned the ke^ i^v \3&fe 
drawer in which she had placed the little shitts axv& faoO&s>.> ^x 



62 A Golden Sorrow. 

the back, well out of sight, and began to cogitate again on that 
impracticable theme, What was she to do ? 

Florence could see a little way up the pretty lane beside 
which their cottage stood, and which was turned into an arcade 
by the rich foliage of the over-arching trees, in the beautiful 
luxuriant summer-time. She dried her eyes, smoothed her 
pretty fair hair, added a ribbon to her ordinary dress, in honour 
of the festive nature of the occasion, and seated herself at the 
window, which commanded a few hundred yards of the lane. 
Her watch was not much prolonged ; she soon saw Walter 
coming along, carrying his hat in his hand, and running his 
fingers through his curly hair, as he talked to his companion 
with much animation. In a moment Florence was standing 
at the little gate, and Lawrence Daly was making up his mind 
that if a very pretty face, with a sweet innocent expression, and 
the kindest blue eyes in the world, could excuse Walter for 
such an imprudence as his marriage, he was excused. 

Florence felt the momentary shyness common to young wives 
on their first introduction to their husband's particular 
friends ; but it speedily passed away, under the influence of 
Lawrence Daly's bright manner, and his frank courtesy. It 
was not until they had made some progress in the meal which 
Florence had prepared, with sundry misgivings concerning its 
quality, that she had courage and leisure to observe what man- 
ner of man Lawrence Daly was. He was very handsome . that 
she acknowledged at once ; and even did not deny that he was 
handsomer than Walter ; the comparison being forced upon her 
as she looked from one to the other, while they talked and, 
joked merrily. He was tall and strongly built, but with an easy 
elegance of figure, so that each attitude seemed his best, and any 
kind of attire was becoming to him. His features were nearly 
faultless in outline, but not, therefore, insipid, because the faults, 
the over-height, the too massive weight of the forehead, the 
tallness of the head above the ears, while they broke the ideal 
correctness of the face, were welcome to the eye, which dis- 
covered id them the indications of supexiox intellect, delightfully 



Lawrence Daly. 63 

supplementing the mere beauty of the face. His large, full, 
resolute eyes were of the darkest grey, and remarkably bril- 
liant ; and when he smiled, the sparkle in them was fascinating, 
so full was it of life, courage, and the power of enjoyment A 
great quantity of golden brown hair curled closely all over his 
head, and he anticipated the fashion of a later date by wearing 
a fine beard, and a long thick moustache, which had never been 
injured by capricious shaving. After awhile, Florence arrived 
at the conclusion that he was the handsomest man she had 
ever seen ; then that he had the most musical, manly, meaning 
voice she had ever heard ; and, finally, he inspired her with 
a delightful security, convincing her that with him Walter, 
whom she would not have consciously suspected of weakness 
of character, or need of guidance, for the world . would be 
quite "safe." 

Florence was not aware that she was a very sensible 
little person, possessed of a great deal of penetration, and far 
stronger in courage and principle than her husband. From the 
mere entertainment of such an idea as the latter she would 
indeed have shrunk as from domestic treason. She had often 
hesitated to trust her own judgment, when it differed from his, 
and now that she felt so strongly attracted towards Lawrence 
Daly, she was rejoiced to know that there would be perfect 
accord between herself and Walter. But, though she was clear- 
sighted, Florence was not suspicious, and her enjoyment of the 
pleasant society of her husband's friend was not disturbed by any 
idea that he and Walter were talking on a systematic plan. 
During the tea-drinkingj which seemed so entirely to Lawrence 
Daly's taste, they were leading up to the introduction of a certain 
topic, which it had been resolved to discuss, and for which it 
was necessary to prepare her. Daly had done a good deal of 
profitless, desultory travel in his boyhood, and had carried back 
from it many bright, artistic impressions, which he related with 
force and spirit, very delightful to simple, inexperienced 
Florence, who did not detect that his purpose was to Caxxv&v&xvLS. 
her with the ideas of distance, of locomotion, and ol a&N^xtoax^ 



64 A Golden Sorrow. 

When the tea-things were removed, and Florence's head was 
bent over her needlework, the two men exchanged glances, and 
then Walter Clint said : 

"You remember, Flo, we agreed the other day that 
something must be done to alter our circumstances for the 
better ? " 

" Yes, Walter." 

" And that I said I should consult Daly ? Well, here he is, 
come down to hold a council of war. I have told him enough 
to make him understand exactly how we are situated, and he 
will go into it all fully with us, if you like." 

" I shall like very much, Walter," returned his wife, looking, 
not at her husband, but at Lawrence Daly. "If you have 
really told Mr. Daly all, I am sure he must think our marriage 
was very imprudent ; but I hope he knows how generous it was 
of you, and how helpless and unprotected I was." Her voice 
trembled a little, and a tear fell on her work. 

" Mrs. Clint," said Daly earnestly, " my candid belief is that 
Walter never did a less imprudent deed in his life. If I wanted 
any other proof of that than the scene before me, I should find 
it in the courage and the resolution which enable him to con- 
template a painful way out of his difficulties, and a road, though 
a rough one, to independence." 

" What is that way ? " asked Florence earnestly ; and she 
laid her work on the table ; and pushed it from her. Walter 
unconsciously moved his chair closer to hers. 

" It is by leaving England for awhile, for a few years, as I 
am about to do, and going to a country where there is a rich 
reward for hard work and endurance." 

" I proposed to Walter that we should go to some of the 
places where they say that is the case myself," said Florence 
eagerly. " Did I not, Walter ? " 

" You did, Flo ; but we don't quite mean it in that way." 

She was silent She never could exactly recall afterwards 

how it was that Lawrence Daly explained to her that she was 

to be parted from Walter, to remain m E.Ti^\atvd, while he went 



Lawrence Daly. 65 

to the modern El Dorado, whose fascination was at that time 
in its first vigour and magic. He drew pictures for her of the 
grandeur and beauty of the land of wonders ; he explained 
to her that there, by hard work and patience, courage and 
endurance, for a short term of years . that sounds so trifling 
to a man, it signifies so much to a woman . sufficient money 
might be made to enable Walter to return, to take up his pro- 
fession in a creditable manner, without the wearing anxiety of 
total dependence upon it, placing her in the comfortable and 
assured position which he so earnestly desired for her, and ren- 
dering him independent of the caprices and unkindness of his 
father. 

" It would be very nice not to be obliged to care, if he 
really did leave his money to a hospital, or to a housemaid," 
struck in Walter at this point, with a feeble attempt at cheer- 
fulness. 

Florence remembered that he had told her Daly was going 
abroad " to the other end of the world," and she began to un- 
derstand that the plan which they were " breaking " to her was 
that her husband should accompany him as a partner in his 
enterprises. She was of a submissive nature, not apt to revolt 
against anything only because she did not like it, and she felt 
instinctive confidence in Daly. Her womanly prudence made 
her more conscious of the peril of their position than was 
Walter, though he contemplated this way out of it ; and, with all 
her quietness, she felt strong admiration of courage, and sym- 
pathy with adventure. " It would not matter much to me," 
she had thought more than once during the last few weeks ; 
" but if things grew worse, he would be discontented and un- 
happy." She did not put into words that fine truth, that love 
will not sustain men under adverse circumstances as it will 
sustain women ; but she felt it as applied to Walter. 

Lawrence Daly was the chief speaker, and in his eagerness 
to cheer and comfort her he let his vivid imagination loose, 
find drew gorgeous pictures of California \ pictures in whidx^ks, 
^iscomforr, the danger, the dreariness of t\vt \orcraR?j >2w&nsx 



66 A Golden Sorrow. 

had no place, for he reckoned confidently and correctly upon 
Florence's ignorance on those points. She listened with keen 
interest ; for, though her heart was sinking at the thought of 
parting with Walter, she kept the truth from her, and let herself 
listen as though it did not exist She had not consented; 
nothing was settled, nothing was real as yet When, in after- 
years, Florence recalled that evening to her memory, it was 
with a dream-like feeling, strangely inappropriate to one of the 
most important epochs in her life. 

" Do you think of going to California merely because you 
are fond of travelling and adventure ? " asked Florence, who 
wondered whether Daly knew how poor her husband was, 
how very little money he could contribute to such an under- 
taking. 

" No, indeed, Mrs. Clint," replied Lawrence ; " I have other 
and weightier reasons. I am nearly as poor a man as Walter, 
and such expectations as I have are of a more treacherous 
nature than his. I am going to California to try to get a share 
of the gold there, because I doubt my ability to make money 
in a profession here, and because, whether I have ability or not, 
I am quite certain I have not patience for the process. I am 
young, strong, and naturally fond of adventure. I am very 
tired of my unsatisfactory life, and I see nothing more enticing 
in prospect, if I remain here. I am quite without friends, in 
the useful, pecuniary-accommodation sense of the word, and I 
am sure I shall find no gold unless I dig it out of the earth 
myself." 

" You cannot be more friendless than Walter and I," said 
Florence, with a tearful glance at her young husband's moody 
face. 

" Oh ! yes, I can," said Lawrence, " for Walter has you, and 
you have Walter, for the best of friends, and whether you are 
together or apart, you are still that to each other ; but I am 
only an excrescence on the face of society. I have no raison 
/?tire, and I think I should like to make one for myself. One 
cannot do that if one is dependent on anybody, or in an attitude 



Lawrence Daly, 6j 

of waiting for anything, whether it be living men's patronage or 
dead men's shoes. I am tired of waiting for the former, and I 
don't want to wear the latter, so I am going Westward ho ! to 
the wonderful country which is giving a fresh impulse to our 
old civilisation, and is speaking of new hopes and possibilities 
to millions of men hitherto fettered by the narrow conditions 
of life. Let Walter come with me, Mrs. Clint, and he shall 
return here, freed from any need of courting his father's favour, 
or desiring his inheritance." 

"How long would that take to accomplish?" asked Flo- 
rence, with a melancholy shake of her head. 

" I cannot tell you ; but not long, I am couvinced. AH 
accounts of the gold-fields tell us of rapid fortune or of com- 
plete failure ; there is no medium, and little suspense. I will 
tell you what I propose, Mrs. Clint. It is that you and Walter 
shall name a certain period, during which he shall try hi? 
fortunes with me ; and then, if we are not successful, he shall 
return. I cannot believe his position with his father will be in- 
jured by so bold and manly an effort ; or yours, when the time 
comes to acknowledge your marriage, by your endurance of 
such a trial. And then, if the New World has not used him 
well, he has only to try the Old World once more." 

" And supposing this is agreed to," asked Florence, " where 
is the money to come from which Walter would need ? " 

" I propose thsft he should frankly tell his father what his 
purpose is, and ask him for a sum of money in lieu of his allow- 
ance ; and," he added, observing the unmistakable expression 
upon Mrs. Clint's face, of her belief that Walter would not get 
the money in that way, " if that fails, Walter shall share the 
little I have, and pay me back with interest out of the strong- 
box of the gnomes." 

"You have very little more than enough for yourself, old 
fellow," said Walter. 

" Enough for one's self is an indefinite quantity, Walter, 
determinable by circumstances. We shall tvoV. bfc ofl\\\fc ^o com- 
fortable if we have no more between us t\vaxv 1 Y^n^ %o\\\ss&. 

f 2 



68 A Golden Sorrow. 

comfort is also an indefinite quantity ; and, I take it, you and I 
will contrive to have as much as we want." 

" That cannot be, Mr. Daly," said Florence. 

" It must be," replied Lawrence, " in the case that Walter 
requires it should be. Be reasonable, both of you, and listen 
to me. There you are, married. That can't be helped, even 
if either of you would allow it to be. You are in a critical 
position, and you must be taken out of it. There is one way 
for Walter to do it, and I have no doubt whatever he will 
succeed. He is my dearest friend. I should hate to undertake 
this alone. Who is to help him but me, if his father won't ? 
But I think his father will." 

His cheerful way of dealing with the matter disarmed Flo- 
rence, and Walter had known his friend's generous intentions 
beforehand. Insensibly she found herself discussing details 
with the two, and learning from Lawrence Daly an outline of 
his own story. It was simple, and not devoid of sadness. 

" If you understand the meaning of our Irish word ' ram- 
shackle,' you will know the kind of people to whom I be- 
longed," said Lawrence ; " if you don't, you will hardly realize 
how little chance I had of useful education or practical train- 
ing in my childhood. I come of a ' good/ meaning an old, 
family in the west of Ireland. When I arrived on the scene of 
my ancestral honours, there was little else left ; and before my 
father's death . he died young . there was notHing. My mother 
and I, and a pretty sister of my mother's . I was fonder of 
Aunt Kate than of anyone in the world . lived in Dublin, on a 
little bit of an income, which was their joint property; and I got 
some schooling somehow. I don't think my poor mother 
* minded me ' much, as another of our Irish sayings has it ; she 
was pre-eminently of the ramshackle order, and had a placid 
faith in my tumbling up somehow. It was justified by events, 
for I have tumbled up, and here I am ; but I am tired of the 
process. 

" When I was fourteen years old, Aunt Kate married ; and 
I am sorry to say I am afraid she A\d \.Vve rata deed very 



Lawrence Daly. 69 

much more for my own sake than for her own, or for that of the 
bridegroom . a rich but disagreeable party, in a large way of 
business in Calcutta, who had come home to look for a wife, 
not approving of the articles with which the market was 
glutted in those days, and had fallen in love with Aunt Kate's 
blue eyes and fair skin on his first sight of them. She had 
a great deal more than her beauty to recommend her, but I 
don't think Clibborn was the man to appreciate anything else. 
I never saw him, but I never liked him; and I think, in- 
deed I know, the marriage was not a success. He promised 
her, among other things, that he would do wonders for me ; 
and he did pay for a better kind of education than my poor 
mother, who died the year after Kate's marriage, could have 
given me. He had a sort of right to look after me a little, too, 
independent of Aunt Kate, for he was a relation of my father's ; 
the kinsmanship was very distant, I believe ; but still it existed, 
and, in fact, had led to the introduction to my mother and 
sister, which resulted in this marriage. He was not a man to 
take anything of that kind into consideration, however ; and I 
never thought anything about our tenth cousinship, to which 
Aunt Kate clung ; though, distant as was that tie, I believe it 
was the only one he had : I never heard of another relative of 
Clibborn's. 

" My aunt's plan was that I should go out to India, on 
leaving school, and have a place in the ' house ' of Clibborn 
and Co. . by that time there was no Co. But Mr. Clibborn did 
not see it : he did not want me out there ; I suppose he 
had found out that Aunt Kate did not love him with incon- 
venient fervour, and that she cared more for me than for 
anything else in the world. At any rate, Aunt Kate found her 
plan was not to be carried out ; and I am afraid Clibborn used 
me as a means of making her unhappy and ' breaking her in,' 
to an extent she was not prepared for. I hated my depend- 
ence upon him, and it was complete, for, after all, though she 
had handed over her little income to me, she could only have, 
done it by his sanction; and I cannot say much, tot w^ caw- 



yo A Golden Sorrow, 

duct in any way. I suppose the ramshackle tradition clung to 
me. Clibborn wanted to put me into a Liverpool house, but 
I would not go ; I wanted a commission in the army . the one 
idea of all Irish lads in my time . and Clibborn positively re- 
fused to buy it for me. I pronounced, then, for the sea, and 
tried it . vainly; I could not stand it . merchant-service, of 
course. I think I should have liked it, if I could have put 
in at Calcutta, and had a peep at Aunt Kate, unknown to 
Clibborn. I made up my mind to medicine, quand mime ; and 
here I was, living in lodgings, like Walter, when he and I met, 
and very soon became good friends . as we shall be ' mates ' 
before long, and camarados for ever. And now I have told 
you my story." 

" Not quite," said Florence. " You have not told me why 
you are about to give up your medical studies, and go to 
California. " 

Daly's face clouded over, and his tone was changed, as he 
replied, . 

" My aunt is dead, Mrs. Clint. She died shortly after she last 
wrote to me, now nearly a year ago. Mr. Clibborn carried out 
her last wishes, in so far as sending me three hundred pounds, 
which she had saved out of her allowance for personal expenses, 
may be said to fulfil them ; but he never took any real interest 
in me ; never cared whether I did well, or went to the devil ; 
used me, I sincerely believe, as a means of tormenting her ; and 
the few communications which had taken place between us did 
not increase our mutual esteem. My aunt's small annuity 
ceased with her life, as in my mother's case ; and therefore, you 
see, I have nothing to depend on, and am more than ever con- 
vinced I need not place any reliance on Mr. Clibborn. Indeed, 
I would not take anything more from him ; I hate the old fellow, 
for my poor Aunt Kate's sake. And there's nothing to be done 
here with three hundred . nothing that I am capable of doing, 
at least. But it will take Walter and me to the gold-diggings, if 
we manage it well. And when we come back, we shall be too 
rich to remember how poor we were vrtietv vie started." 



Lawrence Daly. 7 1 

" And Mr. Clibborn ? " asked Florence, who had listened with 
close attention to Lawrence Daly's story. 

" He said he was coming to England . retiring from business, 
I suppose. He wrote very briefly, did not say anything about 
wishing to see me, which was a decided relief to my feelings ; 
in fact, he may be in England now, for anything I know or 
care." 



72 A Goldeti Sorrow. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

SISTERS-IN-LAW. 

Florence resigned herself to her fate. She had a conviction 
that if Walter relinquished this project, and remained in 
London without his friend, he would " do no good," and 
she submitted. The next thing was to consider how to 
bestow herself during his absence. She preferred to take a 
situation in a school to going out as a governess or a com- 
panion, and made inquiries in many directions with that view. 
When her consent had been obtained, 1 when everything was 
arranged, then Walter's courage broke down, and he was full 
of misgivings about her. He was leaving her so lonely, so 
unprotected ! If he could have told Miriam the truth, and 
gained her friendship for his poor young wife ! But Miriam 
had no more power than he had, no more influence. She 
could not actively befriend her ; and as for money, their father 
was more strict and less generous to Miriam than to him. 
No; there was no help in that direction. Then it chanced 
that Walter heard from his friend, Mr. Martin, that Miriam 
was expected at The Firs, and that he saw the advertisement 
which Mr. Clint had sent to the newspapers. He instantly 
divined that the young lady for whom the services of a maid 
were required was his sister, and acted promptly upon the sup- 
position, with what success has been already told. 

If Miriam's home had been more like the ordinary homes of 

English girls of her class in life, if Miriam's father had been 

a less eccentric and eminently disagreeable member of society, 

the daring expedient to which Walter had resorted would have 

been far more difficult of execution. "But everything was ex- 



Sisters- in Laiv. 7 3 

ceptional at The Firs ; and Miriam speedily saw her way to 
securing her brother's wife against the many unpleasant con- 
tingencies of the position she had assumed. The housekeeper 
was easily persuaded, by the prospect of non-interference on the 
part of Miriam, to connive at the irregularity of the young 
lady's meals, with the exception of dinner, being served in her 
sitting-room, for her and Rose jointly. 

The girl was very good-looking and civil, and she " knew her 
place," never seemed conscious of the existence of Robert, the 
groom, in whom Mrs. Ritchie took a tender interest . ungrate- 
fully requited . and if Miss Miriam chose to make a com- 
panion of her, Mrs. Ritchie saw no reason why she should 
not have her way ; goodness knows the place was dull enough, 
and the poor young lady must have some one to speak to be- 
sides the parson, the lawyer, and the doctor. Other folks 
might come, mayhap, visiting at The Firs, but they had not 
come yet So Miriam and Rose had things their own way ; 
and though Rose acted her part to some extent, she did nothing 
that was distasteful or unbecoming. All the needlework was 
jointly done, and the circumstances of their mutual position 
afforded a topic of endless conversation between the two young 
women. Miriam won the love of simple, gentle Florence, be- 
fore they were many days together. The difference between 
them attracted each to the other. Florence honestly believed 
Miriam to be as superior to herself as she held Walter to 
be, and genuine, ingenious flattery of that kind was very wel- 
come to Miriam. They talked perpetually about Walter, read- 
ing his letters and discussing them together. Mrs. Ritchie 
did not hold with any "girls" receiving so many letters as 
those which came for Miss Rose Dixon ; but so long as none 
of them bore tokens of masculine origin, it did not so much 
matter, and all Miss Rose's letters were directed in a fine 
sloping ladylike hand. 

Mr. Clint had taken no notice of Rose Dixon, beyond a surly 
nod in acknowledgment of her salutation when they met on the 
stairs on the morning after the amva\ oi "MArvanx, *xA *. 



74 A Golden Sorrow. 

casual remark afterwards to his daughter that her maid was a 
good-looking girl. Florence dreaded this meeting quite un- 
reasonably, and was proportionably relieved when it had 
taken place, and when she found that she might live in the 
house for weeks without seeing its gloomy and miserable 
master. 

Miriam and Florence held solemn counsel over the letter in 
which Walter told his sister what was the one request he had to 
make of her. It was temperately, gravely written, and Florence 
fancied its manner and tone had been suggested by Lawrence 
Daly. This letter had come openly, addressed in Walter's own 
hand, to his sister, and Miriam knew that her father was aware 
she had received it. She looked forward with some trepida- 
tion to seeing him, though she regarded it as a good sign that 
he had not confiscated the letter. 

" Show it to him," said Florence : " I think the manly tone, 
the courage of it, and the respectful forbearance with which 
Walter alludes to himself, must touch his father." 

" I hope so," said Miriam dubiously ; " but I am afraid he 
will not believe in the genuineness of these professions. 
Papa believes that no one in the world is sincere and truth- 
telling but himself." 

Miriam went down to the dreaded, inevitable dinner in fear 
and trembling, and kept constantly feeling the letter hidden in 
her pocket, so that the gesture attracted her father's attention, 
and when they were alone, he asked her impatiently what she 
had got there. She summoned up all her courage, and 
answered, . 

" A letter from Walter, papa ; he wishes me to make you 
acquainted with the contents." 

" Indeed ! " said her father, and his brow was knit instantly 
with the frown she knew so well. " And how are the contents 
of this letter, which you disobediently receive, and your brother 
disobediently writes, likely to concern me ? " 

" Papa," said Miriam, laying her hand on the letter on the 
table before her, " I must hear from my blotter, and I must' 



Sisters-in-Laiv. 75 

write to him. You have forbidden me to see him, and I sub- 
mit to that, while I am in your house, but . " 

She was interrupted by a sudden explosion of wrath. Her 
father had been in the habit of swearing at her and Walter, 
when they were children, to their extreme terror ; but she had 
hoped that now, in early womanhood, she might be spared 
such outrageous indignity. She was undeceived. He poured 
out a torrent of oaths as he stigmatized her conduct as rebel- 
lious and insolent ; told her she had better take care how she 
disobeyed him, if she did not want to join her brother in his 
banishment from home ; and, in short, raged like the madman 
his temper made him. Miriam looked at him steadily, lis- 
tened to him for a few minutes, then rose, and darted through 
the door near her, out of the room. She told Florence what 
had passed ; and they were still talking of it, full of dismay, 
when a servant knocked at the door, and delivered a written 
message from Mr. Clint. 

" Put your brother's letter in a sealed envelope, and send it 
to me." 

Miriam obeyed her father's directions ; and when the servant 
had retired, taking the letter, the two girls sat looking at one 
another in silence, suffering such misery as only domestic 
tyranny can inflict. 

" What will he do ? " Florence whispered at length. 

" God knows. Of one thing I am certain . we shall not 
know, except through Walter. He will not tell us. One of his 
favourite devices is to keep any one who is anxious, in sus- 
pense as long as possible. " 

Miriam was right Mr. Clint returned the letter to her on 
the following morning, in a sealed envelope, but without a 
word ; and when they met at dinner, he maintained an un- 
broken silence, not only on that, but on all other subjects. 
Miriam was profoundly miserable, not because her father did 
not speak to her . she found that an infliction easy of en- 
durance . but because she felt the whole state of things so home- 
less, so degrading. This was her own nat\iTa\\Tv^\^TL2^^Vo\s^.^ 



y6 A Golden Sorrow. 

and yet she felt like an outcast, a beggar, a not decently tole- 
rated inconvenience in it. 

" He did not speak one word to me," she said to Florence 
when she escaped to her own room : " he sat there silent, look- 
ing as if he hated me, which I have no doubt he does." 

" Don't say anything so horrid," said Florence, shocked at 
Miriam's cool, convinced tone. 

" Horrid, but quite true." She threw herself into a chair, 
and tapped the floor with her foot impatiently. " We shall 
know nothing, Rose, until we hear from Walter himself the 
result of his application ; and then .when Walter is gone, I 
mean, and there is no possible danger of his finding out who 
you are . it's some comfort that he has not had quite his own 
way in everything . I intend to turn my attention to getting 
away from this as soon as possible." 

" Getting away from this ! And how ? " 

" How ? By the only means by which a girl can get away 
from a place she does not like, in the only way in which she can 
take her fate into her own hands . by marrying a man who will 
give me a home of my own." 

" That would be a dangerous experiment, unless you 
loved him," said Florence, with a pretty matronly gravity 
which became her well " Is there any one whom you do 
love, and with whom you would be happier than you are 
here ? " 

Miriam laughed uneasily. " You take everything so seriously, 
Rose. My rescuer is only ideal : he has no existence, so far 
as I know ; he certainly has to be sought and found. I do 
not care one straw for any one in the world whom I should 
ever dream of marrying ! But I can tell you this, Rose, I intend 
to seek and to find some one who will take me away from this 
hateful place, though he should be as ugly as sin and as old as 
Methuselah ! " 

Florence was rather cowed by her sister-in-law's stronger 

nature ; and she was, besides, too much engrossed in the sor- 

rowful reality of her own life, the retrospect of her past, the 



Sister s-in- Law. J7 

long, indefinite separation from Walter, her uneasy sense of 
her own false position, concerning which she never could alto- 
gether silence her conscience, to be able to make the remon- 
strance for which she felt the occasion called. She could not 
blame Miriam severely ; she could only feel that there was a 
great difference between them, and that she could never have 
proposed to herself such a way out of any position of trouble 
as a marriage without love. 

u You are much better off than I am," Miriam broke out, 
after a brief pause. " You have not got to put up with papa ; 
you only see him occasionally by accident, and could even 
avoid that with a little trouble. I have always said it was well 
for Walter, for he could get away ! And I will get away, too, if 
lean." 

Three days elapsed, during which the state of things at The 
Firs remained almost unchanged Mr. Clint did speak occa- 
sionally to his daughter, but he made no reference to Walter or 
his letter. At the end of that time Florence heard from her 
husband that he had received a communication from his father, 
couched in the sternest and coldest terms. 

I asked him, through Miriam, as you know," wrote Walter, 

to give me ^300, to join with Daly, and told him he should 
never receive another application for money from me, nor hear 
of me again if I were not successful. He tells me he accedes 
to my request ; encloses the money, and begs me to under- 
stand that he requires strict adherence to the terms of my 
letter ! There is the whole substance of his for you ; there is 
my dismissal from England ; there is my father's farewell to his 
only son ! Never mind, darling ; I don't, for I have your love 
and your truth, and you will welcome me home whether I am 
successful or not. But I shall succeed : I am full of hope and 
confidence. I have simply acknowledged, with thanks, my 
father's letter and its contents ; that is the only answer he cares 
to have from me. And now, I have nothing to think of but you 
and our long parting. " And then the letter dealt in sentiments* 
wherewith we are not concerned. Florence 7*as> nctj sA *&sx 



u 

.t 



78 A Golden Sorrow, 

she had read Walter's letter. It was a great relief that his 
father had given him the money he asked for ; that Walter was 
not to commence his new career with a debt to his generous 
friend ; but that the father and son should part thus was terrible 
to her, quite apart from the share she had accepted, out of 
obedience to Walter, in this untoward family history. 

Neither she nor Miriam could discover in the face or man- 
ner of Mr. Clint any symptom of relenting towards his son, or 
regret for his departure. When the day came on which Walter 
was to sail with Daly from Liverpool, Miriam locked herself 
into her rooms, declined all attendance except that of her 
maid . who was much pitied by the servants for her enforced 
seclusion, because her mistress was " fretting " . and sent word 
to her father that she was not well enough to appear at dinner. 
Mr. Clint dined none the worse, and left the dining-room none 
the earlier ; but when he went to his study, he set a mark 
against the date of that day in a private memorandum-book, and 
wrote out under it that terrible utterance of old Lear's, which 
says that " sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to have a thank- 
less child." It never occurred to Reginald Clint that he could 
be wrong in anything ; he never reflected that it was not fair 
to expect love and consideration from children to whom he 
had never shown either, but had invariably treated with the 
opposite of both. 

Time went on, after the day of Walter's departure, very 
slowly and painfully to the two women who loved him best, 
and whose hearts were with him on his tedious and perilous 
voyage. A long period must elapse before they could have 
tidings from him. The colour faded in Florence's fair cheek, 
and her blue eyes lost much of their brightness. Miriam, too, 
was sad and sorrowful, but she was also ineffably bored, which 
Florence was not. All places were alike to her without Walter, 
in one sense ; but, in another, The Firs was the place where she 
best liked to be. It was eloquent of Walter to her ; and she 
took a romantic pleasure in comparing every nook and corner 
of the unlovely old house and grounds with the picture which 



Sisters-in- Law. 79 ' 

his description had summoned up in her imagination. She 
liked The Firs, but Miriam hated the place. They had as little 
society as Miriam had expected, and her letters to Miss Moni- 
tor were full of this grievance. Mr. Martin, a homely person, to 
whom Miriam would hardly have condescended, if she had had 
any choice ; the " shady " attorney before mentioned ; and the 
parson and his wife, who were not to be defeated by Mr. 
Clint's rudeness, in their charitable design of being kind to 
Miriam, formed their entire circle. The " county " did not, 
since Mrs. Clint's death, visit at The Firs, and there were no 
neighbouring families of any gentility except the three afore- 
said. 

The greatest alleviation of Miriam's lot was the possession of 
a pony, a well-bred handsome animal, which had been selected 
for her by Mr. Martin ; to whose interposition, in his medical 
capacity, she owed her father's consent to such an addition to 
his expenses. It was not possible that Florence should share 
her good fortune in this respect, which vexed Miriam ; but 
Florence laughed at her vexation, drew a funny picture of the 
effect on public opinion of setting a maid on horseback, 
and was always well content to see Miriam set off, attended by 
Robert, for the long rides in the autumnal mornings, which 
left her at leisure to indulge her sad thoughts and timid hopes 
while she sat at her needlework One day, after Miriam had 
been out longer than usual, she returned in high spirits, and 
carrying a bunch of fine flowers in her hand. Florence, who 
always kept up appearances by attending her at her toilet, was 
about to take off her hat, when Miriam forestalled her by toss- 
ing it on the bed, and breaking out at once into an account 
of her " adventures." 

" Where do you suppose these flowers came from ? " she 
asked Florence. 

" Covent Garden, I should think." 

" Just so. There's a gentleman come down to the Parson- 
age, an old acquaintance of Mr. Cooke's ; he's come to look 
at Win ton. that place that's to be sold, o\ex aX ^VcS^ ^<a^ 



80 A Golden Sorrow. 

know .and he" brought such flowers and fruit to Fanny ! She 
would make me take these." 

Florence had never seen Miriam look so animated. She had 
clipped the stalks of the flowers and put them in water, and 
now she resolutely began to take off Miriam's habit, reminding 
her that she had barely time to dress for dinner. 

" You may be sure I said everything against Winton I could 
possibly think of," said Miriam. " I hate the place . a dull, 
gloomy barrack, in a sticky clay soil ; besides, the neighbour- 
hood is odious ; fancy any one who has plenty of money, and 
all England to choose from, settling down here ! " 

" How did Mr. and Mrs. Cooke like your trying to persuade 
their friend against their neighbourhood ? " 

" Oh ! he isn't a friend . he is only an acquaintance." 

" Besides, I should have supposed a new family, so near 
as Stoke, would have been an advantage to yourself," said 
Florence. 

" Oh, it isn't a family ; it's only one person. Mr. St. Quentin 
is a widower. He has just returned from India, and wants to 
buy a place in England, in Hampshire especially. Some one 
gave him an introduction to Mr. Cooke ; he won't employ any 
man of business in the purchase, and he came down to the 
inn. After they had seen him a few times, Fanny invited him 
to the Parsonage, and there he is." 

" You saw him. I suppose ? " 

" Oh yes, I saw him ; and he saw me." There was some- 
thing odd in Miriam's deliberate tone, and she smiled demurely 
as her eyes met those of Florence reflected in the looking-glass 
before which she was seated. 

" There's the bell. That will do, Rose " . she stopped on 
her way to the door^" don't look so suspicious. Mr. St. 
Quentin is not far from sixty." 



8i 



CHAPTER IX. 

A WAY OF ESCAPE. 

" Plenty of money, and all England to choose from ! " 
Miriam had thus briefly and correctly defined Mr. St Quentin's 
position. It was not an unenviable one, though she was almost 
as accurate in her guess at his age. He was not far from sixty 
years old, but he was very well preserved, and had been a 
handsome man in his youth, of an order of handsome man- 
hood of which the form lasts, and even improves. He was 
endowed with a fine constitution, and it had fulfilled its 
promise ; successfully defied the climate of India, the labours 
and vexations of a commercial career, which had, however, 
been rewarded with success and fortune, the luxurious life in 
which that fortune had enabled him to indulge, and such 
domestic afflictions as had befallen him. The latter had not 
been numerous, and Mr. St Quentin never alluded to them. 
Those who knew him best knew no more than that he had 
married in England, and that his wife had died in India. He 
had no near relatives ; he never spoke of having any distant 
ones ; and he had always been a man of few intimacies. 

Mr. St. Quentin did not make so grave a mistake in return- 
ing to Europe as many men make, in abandoning the mode 
of life to which years have habituated them, to take a place in 
a social system with which they have no longer anything in 
common. He had no plan in his mind for the revival of old 
associations, but he had a very well constructed scheme for the 
formation of a pleasant mode of life which should be entirely 
new. The sort of thing he asked of Europe, Euro^ 
could undoubtedly give him : the gratificaUoxv ol \v\* Tcatett& 



82 A Golden Sorrow. 

inclinations, and of a late-grown taste for travel' in the 
Western World. Mr. St. Quentin was only moderately anxious 
about the fulfilment of his ostensible purpose in visiting Hamp- 
shire. He would buy a place in that county if he should 
find one to suit him ; but he would not be in a hurry about it, 
and the looking for such a thing would afford him an oppor- 
tunity of making the pleasant surface sort of acquaintances of 
which he had few at present. He had been fortunate in the 
companions of his homeward voyage ; his fellow-travellers had 
got on well with him, and he had been popular. A man com- 
ing home from India, at his time of life, with a large fortune, 
and perfect health to enjoy it, is likely to be popular, if only 
on account of his rarity ; and his present visit to the highly 
respectable person so obnoxious to Mr. Clint was an early 
result of the favourable impression he made on strangers. 
Not one of his temporary associates had guessed Mr. St. 
Quentin's age so accurately as Miriam ; he had passed easily 
with them for "just turned fifty;" and he would not have been 
by any means gratified had he been aware of this particular 
exercise of that " bright intelligence " on the part of his hostess's 
young friend, which he had commended as warmly as her 
handsome face and capital seat on horseback. 

It is a favourite delusion with women that they look well in 
the saddle ; whereas, even pretty women rarely stand the test 
of the dress and the attitude successfully ; but in Miriam Clint's 
case it was not a delusion. When, as he was walking his horse 
slowly alongside of Mr. Cooke's, through one of the few pretty 
lanes in that part of the country, Miriam came towards them 
at a canter, her rare golden eyes sparkling, and her fair cheeks 
flushed with air and exercise, Mr. St. Quentin thought it was 
the pleasantest apparition he had seen for many a long year, 
and the unexpected meeting one of the most agreeable surprises 
within his experience. Miriam was on her way to the Parson- 
age, and the two gentlemen rode back thither with her. Mr. 
Cooke was too conscientious a man to indulge in uncharitable 
speaking concerning one of his parishioners -, but his wife, who 



A Way of Escape* 83 

disliked Mr. Clint on the particular ground of his impertinence 
to her husband, as well as on the general score of his misbe- 
haviour in all the relations of life, conceived herself absolved, 
by the particular grievance, from much tenderness towards 
Miriam's father. Accordingly, when her visitor questioned her 
respecting the pretty girl .with whom Mr. Cooke had shared his 
extravagant gift of flowers, sent down from London, the Rec- 
tor's wife told him a very unvarnished tale indeed. She dwelt 
chiefly on Mr. Clint's conduct to Walter, and the fatal estrange- 
ment between the father and son ; but she also drew a picture 
of Miriam's uncongenial and depressing life at The Firs ; a 
portion of her theme in which Mr. St. Quentin evinced a much 
more lively interest. 

" Am I likely to see this pleasant specimen of paternity ? " 
asked Mr. St Quentin. 

"Certainly not here. He and Mr. Cooke do not speak, 
and Miriam's visits are permitted only on sufferance, and the 
tacit condition that they are not frequent. I fancy she has 
more tact than poor Walter had, and manages her impracti- 
cable father better." 

" Tact is an especial attribute of your sex." 

" So men say. Assuredly we need it in dealing with yours. 
In this case, it is a pity Walter was not the girl, and Miriam 
the boy." 

" Is he so very weak, then ? " 

" No ; I don't think so. but she is so very strong. I never 
knew a girl of her age with anything like Miriam Clint's 
determination of character. One perceives it in everything, 
small and great." 

" She is very handsome," said Mr. St. Quentin, in a tone 
which somewhat puzzled Mrs. Cooke, but which signified that 
the speaker was disposed to regard Miss Clint's beauty as an 
excuse and compensation for so unnecessary and undesirable a 
quality as determination of character. 

No more was said on that occasion concerning Miss Clitvfc \ 
but Mr. St. Quentin took care to ride \nt\ve d\iecX\OTv oVYV^vk^ 

g 2 



84 A Golden Sorrow. 

on the following day, and this time also he met Miriam. 
She was walking, accompanied by her maid ; and if Mr. St. 
Quentin had been a younger man with quick sight, he might 
have seen that Miriam's arm rested on that of her attendant, 
which she squeezed significantly as she relinquished it. He 
might also have seen that the attendant folded up a letter 
hastily, and put it into her pocket, as she fell back into her 
proper place. But Mr. St. Quentin observed neither of these 
things ; he only saw that Miriam was there, looking blooming, 
lovely, and glad to see him. With all the grace and elasticity 
which he could muster, he dismounted, encouraged by Miriam's 
looks, and walked by her side, leading his horse. Mr. St. 
Quentin talked well; and the newly emancipated school-girl 
enjoyed his lively humour, and had no objection to the evident 
admiration, which he kept strictly within the bounds of good 
taste. She expressed her sentiments regarding the neighbour- 
hood very freely to her new acquaintance, who was careful 
to let her know that he had abandoned all idea of purchasing 
Winton. Florence walked demurely behind them, her mind 
wandering far away from them and from the surrounding 
scene; wandering back to her brief home-days with Walter, 
and onward hopefully enough . for she was of a cheerful 
temperament . to the future, when home might again exist for 
them. 

A slight relaxation of Miriam's attention, some little uneasi- 
ness of manner, which her companion was quick to detect, led 
him to take leave of her at the point where the road on which 
they were walking turned towards The Firs. Miriam was not 
aware that she had betrayed any of her inward trepidation, 
but she felt a great deal. Suppose they should meet her 
father, who was usually about the place at this hour of the day, 
and he should be in an unfortunate phase of his chronic ill- 
temper, and should insult Mr. St. Quentin, and bully her, 
which was exceedingly probable. The tact and ease of man- 
ner of Mr. St Quentin set her mind at rest in a moment, and 
he, as he rode slowly away, determined to find out the cause 



A Way of Escape. 85 

of the uneasiness he had perceived. He guessed its origin 
unassisted, and felt a good d^al of pity for Miriam, together 
with much increased admiration. 

A practical man, at Mr. St. Quentin's age, if he begins to 
think at all of taking any important step, is not likely to over- 
look the fact that he had better not lose time about it. He was 
very much pleased when other people were mistaken about 
his age, but he never deceived himself on that point. In 
his plans for the new life on which he was to enter in Europe, 
a second marriage had not had a settled point ; he had some- 
times thought of it as a possibility, but one which he was con- 
tent to leave to the chapter of accidents. He had not been a 
very devout believer in love at any period of his life, and love 
at first sight, on the part of a man of sixty, would have seemed to 
him a ludicrous and contemptible self-delusion. Yet it was 
something very like love at first sight with which Miriam 
Clint inspired him ; it was as good an imitation of the senti- 
ment as he had perhaps ever been capable of feeling, for his 
was not an elevated nature or a noble heart. There was a 
good deal of calculation in Mr. St. Quentin's disposition, and 
not much impulse, even as a young man. He had been 
very much struck by Miriam's beauty, by its fresh healthful- 
ness, its fine bloom, without any touch of coarseness, which 
he could not have tolerated, even as a refreshing change from 
the pasty, faded faces of European women in India. Then 
the story which Mrs. Cooke had told him interested him ; not, 
perhaps, on the most creditable or amiable grounds. He had 
no objection to the idea of a small and disunited family; he 
was not conscious of the distance his fancy had travelled, 
when he began to consider this branch of the subject ; it 
involved much less trouble and responsibility, and interference, 
in case- 
So far Mr. St. Quentin's thoughts had already conducted 
him, when his acquaintance with Miriam was three days 
old ; they could hardly have been more ex\>ed\t\cro& \\sA. \vfe. 
been only a third of his actual age. TYie sX.tot\&\. fe&vc^V^, 



86 S A Golden Sorrow. 

had excited in Miriam's mind was curiosity. His admiration 
gratified her vanity, which had % found but scanty aliment in her 
dreary home-life, and her fancy went to work upon his ante- 
cedents, his position, and his wealth. Mrs. Cooke could not 
tell her much on any of those points, but the next time they 
met the two women talked about Mr. St. Quentin to their 
hearts' content. 

His visit to the Parsonage lasted only one week, but before 
that week came to a conclusion he had made the acquaintance 
of Miriam's father, through the good offices of Mr. Martin, and 
had so skilfully managed the matter that his kind entertainers 
were not in the least offended that their guests should be on 
terms of acquaintanceship with a person who had treated them 
so badly. After all, the whole thing was anomalous, for did 
not Miriam visit them constantly? Mr. St. Quentin's inten- 
tion of purchasing a place was not abandoned finally, when 
he yielded to the representations of Miriam, and gave up the 
idea of Winton. When their very pleasant new friend bade 
Mr. and Mrs. Cooke farewell, with a hearty acknowledgment 
of their kindness, it was with the understanding that he would 
return to their neighbourhood in a short time. He had con- 
trived to see Miriam every day during that week, and she was 
perfectly conscious that he had seen her by contrivance, 
though the appearance of accident was admirably preserved. 
To her surprise and relief, her father had been very civil to 
Mr. St. Quentin. Even Mr. Clint occasionally grew tired of 
his sullen solitude ; and as this new acquaintance was not a 
fixture in the neighbourhood, there was no danger of his be- 
coming what Mr. Clint called intrusive and troublesome. Her 
father was more gentlemanlike in his manner and more self- 
controlled, in the presence of this polished and agreeable 
stranger than Miriam had ever seen him \ and had even 
treated her with more civility, peihaps unconsciously influ- 
enced by the deferential attention paid to her in his presence 
by an older man than himself. 
"If it were only for shaming papa into remembering that I 



A Way of Escape. 87 

am a lady, 1 cannot but be grateful to Mr. St. Quentin," . said 
Miriam to her sister-in-law, when they were discussing the 
guests who had just been speeded by Mr. Clint with quite 
exceptional politeness. " I should not be at all surprised if he 
made up the quarrel with the Cookes, and actually persuaded 
papa to forgive them the enormous offence of having been 
Walter's friends. He is really a delightful old gentle- 
man." 

" From the few glimpses of him I have contrived to obtain," 
said Florence, " I don't think he would like you to think him 
a delightful old gentleman ! Elderly, at the outside, I fancy. 
He is very handsome ; but I don't think he looks as if he had 
much heart." 

" I dare say he hasn't," said Miriam carelessly ; "but he has 
good manners, tact, and plenty of money." 

" And good taste," said Florence, smiling affectionately at 
Miriam; " for, if ever I saw admiration, and something more, 
in a man's face, I saw it in his to-day as he was talking to you 
in the garden, when I brought out your parasol." 

" That won't do him any harm, especially if he has no 
heart." 

" No," said Florence ; and then she was silent and thought- 
ful for awhile. " It seems absurd, and almost improper," she 
continued, "to entertain such an idea about a man of his 
age ; but I cannot help saying to you that I do think he is trying 
to make himself agreeable to you ; and do you think it is 
quite fair to let him ? " 

Miriam looked at the frank, fair face of her brother's wife, and 
an unpleasant feeling, remotely akin to shame, stirred within 
her. She knew quite well that Mr. St Quentin meant to 
return to the neighbourhood of The Firs entirely on her 
account ; she knew that she had allowed him to perceive that 
she was aware of it; she was conscious that, in the slightest 
possible mutual understanding on such a subject between a 
girl of her age and a man at Mr. St. Quentin's there "v-aa 
something little short of odious ; but the Y*arp \w ^focNaxe^ 



88 A Golden Sorrow. 

mind was increasing with every day's experience of her home, 
and with her growing detestation of it. 

" I am going to be quite frank with you, dear," said Miriam, 
as she placed herself on a cushion on the floor beside Florence 
. a favourite seat of hers. "It is all right that you should 
feel about such things as you do. You and Walter were young 
lovers, young husband and wife, and all the romance and 
enthusiasm of love were yours. Well, just see the price you 
have paid, and are paying for it ! I will never pay any price, 
for I will never make the purchase. It is a horrid thing to 
you, no doubt ; but I have never been in love, remember, and 
a businesslike view of things is not unnatural to me. I can- 
not endure the wretched prison-like restraint of my hateful 
home. No husband could be so hard, so impossible to put 

up with, as papa." 

Florence shook her head. 

" No, no ; I repeat it : no husband could make my life so 
wretched as papa makes it. I have no reason to believe that 
such an idea as asking me to marry him has even entered Mr. 
St. Quentin's head ; but I don't deny that I have thought I 
should be glad if it did. He is very rich, and he has no rela- 
tives to hate and envy his wife, and dispute his wealth with 
her; he is a gentleman, a man of education, and perfectly 
independent He could help Walter, and set me free from 
the bondage of this place. I could like him quite well enough, 
and I am sure he is too sensible to expect more. I could do 
my duty by him. In short, all this is folly, you know, Rose, 
and I am talking nonsense on purpose, just because you began 
it, in your wise way; but . but . if it were, by any extraordinary 
chance, to be so, it would be, at least, a way of escape." 



8 9 



CHAPTER X. 

RISKING IT. 

When Mr. St. Quentin found himself in London, his inclina- 
tion to form a second marriage, and thus make an important 
alteration in the programme he had sketched out for the 
employment and enjoyment of his remaining years of health 
and spirits, did not subside, but rather grew stronger. He was 
a rich man ; he had the means of indulging every taste he 
possessed, and no one was ever more conscious of the power 
of wealth than Mr. St. Quentin. But he believed himself to be 
free from delusion or credulity on that subject; he believed 
himself to know as well what money could not, as what it could, 
buy. Among purchasable things he did not enumerate the 
love of a handsome young girl like Miriam ; but he did enume- 
rate the handsome young girl herself, and he seriously contem- 
plated making that purchase. The investment would be less 
hazardous than most of its kind, and less onerous. Miriam 
had seen nothing of the world ; consequently, she would be 
satisfied with seeing such portions and phases of it as he should 
choose to show her, after what fashion he pleased. She had a 
very unhappy home, and therefore would be grateful to him for 
removing her from it, and substituting one in which she would 
enjoy luxury and happiness. Independence did not make one 
among the many benefits which Mr. St. Quentin proposed to 
bestow upon Miriam ; he did not include it in the bargain, 
whose items he calculated with the cold-blooded sagacity of a 
man of business, rather than with the feelings of even an 
elderly lover. He had not an exalted notion of humaxLT&tax&.. k 
and he had an almost habitual contempt iot ^womexv, \*\v\cN\\k& 



cp A Golden Sorrow. 

clever ones among them, with whom he had been brought into 
contact, detected, under all the gloss of his politeness, and re- 
sented by dislikeof him. Miriam was clever, but she had not seen 
enough of him to be able to detect him in this respect, nor had 
she had sufficient experience. Besides, he did not consciously 
despise Miriam ; his admiration, the feeling which made him 
court her for his wife, prevented that ; but there must be a good 
deal of potential contempt latent in the mind of a man of Mr. 
St. Quentin's kind towards a woman who is to be bought. 

He would do all sorts of fine things for this handsome girl, 
if she accepted him . as he had very little doubt she would . in 
a way to secure her gratitude and good behaviour. She should 
be splendidly housed, dressed, and served ; he would treat her 
in all respects well ; but he would take care that it should be 
for her interest to behave well to him in return, to consult his 
wishes in other matters than merely those in which he would 
have it in his power to enforce them; and to refrain from 
rendering the difference in their ages a source of annoyance to 
him. Miriam should have the certainty of wealth and comfort 
during his lifetime ; but whether she should continue to enjoy 
them after his death, was a point which he deliberately pur- 
posed to leave undecided. A wife from whom one does not 
expect love, had better be encouraged to behave well by fear 
of one kind or another. Mr. St. Quentin's experience of the 
motive-power of the love of wealth inspired him with well- 
founded confidence in that of the fear of poverty. His calcu- 
lations were not generous, but it would be too much to pro- 
nounce them unjust. 

No one in existence, save Mr. St. Quentin, knew what his 
wealth really was, and in what it consisted. All his business 
matters had been wound up in India, without the assistance of 
any friend, or of any English man of business. He was in 
the habit of expressing a strong dislike to lawyers, and a rooted 
distrust of them ; and whenever he boasted . which was not 
often, for though secretly vain, and fond of his money, he was 
not vulgarly purse-proud . of anything connected with the 



Risking it. 91 

acquisition of his fortune, it was of the care and persistence 
with which he had avoided them. To owe nothing to any 
sagacity save his own, to transact his own business, and keep 
his own counsel, had been Mr. St. Quentin's rule of action ; and 
it certainly had resulted in just the kind and degree of success 
which his cold and selfish nature appreciated. 

No man ever suffered less from the pressure of family 
ties than Mr. St. Quentin, and his estimation of that item in 
his fate was high and candid. Miriam might have been 
much handsomer and more charming than she was, without 
inducing Mr. St. Quentin to think of marrying her, had she 
been one of a numerous family, or had she been troubled with 
strong family affections. That her chief feeling about her 
father was a vivid desire and firm purpose to get away from 
him as soon as possible, and that any place in the world would 
be preferable, in her eyes, to her present home, were great 
points in her favour, in his opinion. He knew nothing about 
the attachment which existed between her and her brother ; 
for Miriam never talked of Walter, and Mr. St. Quentin thought 
women were certain to talk on any subject which really inte- 
rested them. Walter Clint had behaved ill, and his father had 
got rid of him, and it did not matter to Miriam. Thus, 
erroneously, did the calculating suitor sum up the situation. 
The error was an important one, but he was not destined to 
find it out then. That which was of most import to him was 
that, in marrying Miriam, he should incur no responsibility 
beyond herself. The longer he contemplated the project, the 
more it pleased him, and the less he apprehended any difficulty 
in carrying it out. 

Mr. St. Quentin had contrived that he should not lose sight 
of his friends in Hampshire, or be lost sight of by them, during 
his absence, which he resolved to make as brief as possible. 
He speedily found means to open a friendly correspondence 
with Miriam, apropos of Miss Monitor. Mr. and Mrs. Dibley 
had been as good as their word, and a pupil, mt\v ^tase. 
parents Mr. St Quentin was acquainted, was oxv \vex \w$ \> 



92 A Golden Sorrow. 

London, for consignment to Crescent House, Hampstead. 
Hence a visit on the part of Miriam's new acquaintance, 
enthusiastic commendation of Miriam on the part of Miss 
Monitor, and a letter from that lady to her former pupil, in 
which the amiability, the charming manners, the high prin- 
ciples, the accurate and elevated ideas on educational subjects, 
and the general delightfulness of Mr. St Quentin, were 
enlarged upon in glowing terms. Miriam's new acquaintance 
had, in fact, thoroughly pumped Miriam's old friend, and had 
derived from the operation the confirmation of his belief that 
Miriam would gladly accept that alternative to her life at The 
Firs which he could offer her, and that he could not have 
found a more isolated and unfriended woman on whom to 
bestow his bounty, and over whom to exercise his power, if he 
had been deliberately seeking one. 

Mr. St. Quentin did not consider that he was acting foolishly 
in making up his mind to marry Miriam after a week's acquaint- 
ance. A week, or a year, he thought, would be all the same 
in point of any real knowledge of her character to be acquired 
before marriage. It was always, under such circumstances, a 
masquerade. Besides, he did not care much about her charac- 
ter. She was clever and spirited, lady-like and amusing . he 
had seen all that in much less than a week . but he did care 
very much about her beauty, which was a patent fact, requiring 
no time to develope. He had never admired any woman so 
much, not even in his early days ; not even his first wife, a 
pretty, sentimental person, of whom he had speedily wearied, 
totally different from Miriam in style and in mind, so far as he 
knew Miriam's mind. There had been very little of his first 
wife's mind to know ; in her case, heart had preponderated, 
and to a man of Mr. St. Quentin's sort, heart becomes very 
tiresome. 

Two or three polite notes to Miriam; some parcels of choice 

seeds and cuttings for the garden in which Mrs. Cooke delighted; 

a few judicious messages to Mr. Clint, referring to his promise of 

friendly offices in respect to the p\ace mHaxa^diire . now, 



Risking it. * 93 

in reality, the last county in all England in which Mr. St. 
Quentin would think of settling . kept up the requisite commu- 
nication with them all. Miriam understood the meaning of 
all this perfectly, and acquiesced in it. Day by day her mind 
was hardening, and her conscience wilfully closing against 
the sense of the sin against herself and womanhood she 
was contemplating. If she could have endured her father's 
temper, and the internal wretchedness of her home, she 
could not have endured the ennui of her surroundings, the 
dulness, the narrowness of the existence to which she was 
condemned. The spirit of revolt was strong within her, but 
stronger still the love of pleasure, of a full, luxurious, varie- 
gated life, the realization of what she now only fancied, in her 
crude, school-girl way. The temptation, which at first had 
had only one source, now gathered strength from several, and 
shut out every consideration beyond its allurement During 
the few months which had elapsed since Miriam left school, 
she had matured with surprising rapidity. Her father observed 
this, and, in some strange way, it influenced him. It ought to 
have come as naturally to Mr. Clint to bully a woman as a girl, 
but it did not. He avoided her perhaps more, but he bullied 
her decidedly less. 

Florence was not completely in Miriam's confidence. The 
trust which Walter Clint had reposed in his sister she had 
amply justified by her unvarying kindness, her delicate con- 
sideration, her genuine affection for her sister-in-law. But the 
false position in which her husband's expedient had placed 
Florence oppressed her gentle and submissive spirit, and put 
her at a disadvantage with Miriam, whose far more daring and 
unscrupulous nature held retrospection, faltering in any pur- 
pose, hesitation in any line of action once adopted, in disdain. 
Florence's first feeble remonstrance, if it could be called a re- 
monstrance at all, was her only one. Miriam's preoccupied 
manner; her frequent musing smiles, as if caused by her 
following imaginary scenes of pleasure with deliberate fanej \ 
her comparative indifference to the discomfoits ol\vsx \\syK\e. % 



g6 A Golden Sorrow. 

in the politest terms : it is impossible but that she will refuse 
him." 

" I don't agree with you," replied his wife. " I am not sure 
that Miriam will be taken by surprise by his proposal, and I 
am disposed to think she will accept him. It is a horrid thing, 
I acknowledge," she continued, correctly interpreting the con- 
demnatory shake of her husband's head ; " but, after all, it is 
not for us to judge what price it is worth Miriam's while to pay 
for a final escape from The Firs." 

On the day before that on which Mr. St. Quentin was to 
dine at The Firs, Florence was engaged in some of the light 
tasks which her assumed character imposed upon her, and was 
going about them with less than her usual composure. She 
was expecting a letter from Walter ; the time which he had 
calculated must elapse before she could hear from him had 
expired. The letters he had written to her during the fort- 
night previous to his departure rested day and night in her 
bosom, and formed her constant solace and delight ; but she 
was wearying now for one to add to them, one which should 
tell her of his safety, of the auspicious commencement of his 
life in the New World. She was grateful for the kindness 
she met with, thankful and resigned; but she wondered 
sometimes whether, though his life was the harder, the pre- 
ponderance of weariness was not in hers. The chariot-wheels 
of time " drave heavily " with her. There was weariness in 
her eyes and on her lips, and impatience in her movements, 
as she sorted collars, and cuffs, and ribbons into their proper 
places, and smoothed out tumbled muslin skirts. 

Miriam came suddenly into the room, with a quick step 
and an elated, agitated manner. Her right hand was partly 
hidden in the folds of her dress, but Florence saw that it held 
a letter. " Is it from Walter ? " she asked, before Miriam 
could speak, and dropping a cloud of muslin out of her 
hands. 

" From Walter ? No. Oh ! my dear Rose, I beg your 
pardon; I am so sorry to have caused you such a disappoint- 



Risking it. 97 

ment ; but you know there's no post until to-morrow : to-day's 
came in hours ago." 

" I ought to have known," said Florence faintly : " Tell me 
what it is." 

" I'll tell you something else first," said Miriam, nodding at 
her with comic gravity : " the writer of this will never cause 
such tender agitation, and oblivion of postal regulations. Sit 
down ; stop shaking ; never mind that gown, and listen to 
the first proposal of marriage I have ever received." 

" First proposal ! " 

" Yes, and last, I suppose, for I mean to say yes." 

" It is from." 

" Wait a minute : you shall hear the whole production, and 
see the signature. " 

And then Miriam, having seated herself on the edge of her 
bed, with more of her old school-girl gesture and air about her 
than had been observable for a long time, read out to her 
sister-in-law a letter from Mr. St. Quentin, in which, in 
formal, but dignified and graceful terms, he asked her to be- 
come his wife. 

" Look," she went on, laughing ; " there's the signature. Not 
very satisfactory . is it ? L. C. St. Quentin. I shall have to 
ask him what his Christian name is : not that I shall ever use 
it, I'm sure. He will always be Mr. St. Quentin to me, as 
Mr. Knightley was always Mr. Knightley to Miss Austen's 
* Emma,' who ' could not emulate the elegant terseness of Mrs. 
Elton.' I shall not have precisely the same reason, however. 
Well, Rose, what do you think of it?" she asked, with a 
sudden change of manner. Her careless tone was not quite 
natural ; and she looked at Florence with furtive uneasiness 
under her smiles. 

" Are you serious ? Do you really mean to accept Mr. St. 
Quentin ? " 

" I am perfectly serious. I mean to accept and marry him, 
and to live happily ever after." 



94 ^ Golden Sorrow. 

and more than all these, certain indications that she was by no 
means so much afraid of her father as she had been . con- 
vinced Florence that the " way of escape " had a serious mean- 
ing. In her anomalous position, she could acquire but an 
imperfect knowledge of the chances for and against the success 
of such an expedient ; and, with her customary meekness, she 
thought her more clever, energetic, and impatient-spirited 
sister-in-law must be a better judge in the case than she. How 
a woman could bring herself to marry a man whom she did not 
love, would remain, in spite of Miriam's arguments on the 
special case, a mystery to Florence; but there were many 
things which she did not understand, and therefore would not 
condemn. If Miriam should really do this thing, it must 
remain one of them. 

No events occurred at The Firs during this time. Every- 
thing was uninteresting, dull, and wretched as usual, while the 
unseen elements of change and commotion were mustering. 
Florence was conscious of one slight alteration only in the 
moral atmosphere of the house . Mr. Clint w,as not rude or 
tyrannical in his bearing to her. He made a decided differ- 
ence in his treatment of her from that which he bestowed on 
the other servants. His daughter's maid was, to be sure, 
not often brought into contact with him, but he had had a 
slight attack of illness after she had been some weeks at The 
Firs, and Florence, seeing that Miriam was totally inefficient 
as a nurse, had tended him kindly and skilfully. Mr. Clint 
was not insensible to qualities exercised directly for his own 
advantage, and he expressed to Miriam his sense of Rose's 
value, with a characteristic comment upon the superiority in 
usefulness of the maid over the mistress. Miriam, whom the 
rebuke did not affect in the least, repeated the panegyric to 
Florence ; and added that it would be a capital thing for 
Walter if she (Florence) could contrive to get into his father's 
good graces on her own account. 

"And it would be good fun too," said Miriam, who enjoyed 
the /jpuwapue of the position after a fashion unintelligible to 



Risking it. 95 

poor Florence. " Fancy your captivating papa into forgiving 
Walter, and giving you both his blessing, after the good old 
fashion of the good old drama ! Wouldn't it be delicious ! I 
never heard him speak so civilly to any one in my life ; and he 
actually asked me if your room was comfortable, and whether 
you liked your place ! Depend on it, Rose, you will be the 
making of Walter's fortunes yet" 

Florence shook her head sorrowfully. " I have only marred 
them hitherto," she said. 

" Nonsense ! You have done nothing of the kind. Walter 
would never have come to any good if it had not been for 
you. He would just have grown more and more disgusted 
and dissipated, and gone to the bad altogether. I am as sure 
as I can be of anything, that only you could have induced 
him to undertake anything so laborious and self-denying as 
what he has undertaken." 

All this was consolatory to Florence, but she rated Lawrence 
Daly's influence more highly than her own. Miriam knew little 
about her brother's friend and comrade. Florence had not 
much talent for description, and he had rarely been mentioned 
between them. 

"I am very glad you don't blame me," was her meek 
reply. 

A few days later, Mr. St. Quentin returned to the neighbour- 
hood of The Firs. On this occasion he took rooms at the inn; 
and very shortly after his arrival, when he called on Mr. Clint, 
and received an invitation to dinner, he took his former hostess 
into his confidence, and informed her that he intended to pro- 
pose to Miriam. 

The conduct of their impracticable neighbour with respect to 
his son had inspired Mr. and Mrs. Cooke with judicious reluct- 
ance to have anything to do with his family affairs. But this 
did not affect Mr. St. Quentin ; he in no wise required their good 
offices, and had no intention of asking them'. 

"She will refuse him, of course," said the Rev. Johw Cc>c>Y& 
to his wife, when they had expressed theiiwanaXAe. ^yv\\\x\sx&s> 



g6 A Golden Sorrow. 

in the politest terms : it is impossible but that she will refuse 
him." 

" I don't agree with you," replied his wife. " I am not sure 
that Miriam will be taken by surprise by his proposal, and I 
am disposed to think she will accept him. It is a horrid thing, 
I acknowledge," she continued, correctly interpreting the con- 
demnatory shake of her husband's head ; " but, after all, it is 
not for us to judge what price it is worth Miriam's while to pay 
for a final escape from The Firs." 

On the day before that on which Mr. St Quentin was to 
dine at The Firs, Florence was engaged in some of the light 
tasks which her assumed character imposed upon her, and was 
going about them with less than her usual composure. She 
was expecting a letter from Walter ; the time which he had 
calculated must elapse before she could hear from him had 
expired. The letters he had written to her during the fort- 
night previous to his departure rested day and night in her 
bosom, and formed her constant solace and delight ; but she 
was wearying now for one to add to them, one which should 
tell her of his safety, of the auspicious commencement of his 
life in the New World. She was grateful for the kindness 
she met with, thankful and resigned; but she wondered 
sometimes whether, though his life was the harder, the pre- 
ponderance of weariness was not in hers. The chariot-wheels 
of time " drave heavily " with her. There was weariness in 
her eyes and on her lips, and impatience in her movements, 
as she sorted collars, and cuffs, and ribbons into their proper 
places, and smoothed out tumbled muslin skirts. 

Miriam came suddenly into the room, with a quick step 
and an elated, agitated manner. Her right hand was partly 
hidden in the folds of her dress, but Florence saw that it held 
a letter. "Is it from Walter?" she asked, before Miriam 
could speak, and dropping a cloud of muslin out of her 
hands. 

" From Walter ? No. Oh ! my dear Rose, I beg your 
pardon; I am so sorry to have caused you such a disappoint- 



Risking it. 97 

ment ; but you know there's no post until to-morrow : to-day's 
came in hours ago." 

" I ought to have known," said Florence faintly : " Tell me 
what it is." 

" I'll tell you something else first," said Miriam, nodding at 
her with comic gravity : " the writer of this will never cause 
such tender agitation, and oblivion of postal regulations. Sit 
down ; stop shaking ; never mind that gown, and listen to 
the first proposal of marriage I have ever received." 

" First proposal ! " 

" Yes, and last, I suppose, for I mean to say yes." 

" It is from." 

" Wait a minute : you shall hear the whole production, and 
see the signature." 

And then Miriam, having seated herself on the edge of her 
bed, with more of her old school-girl gesture and air about her 
than had been observable for a long time, read out to her 
sister-in-law a letter from Mr. St. Quentin, in which, in 
formal, but dignified and graceful terms, he asked her to be- 
come his wife. 

" Look," she went on, laughing ; " there's the signature. Not 
very satisfactory . is it ? L. C. St. Quentin. I shall have to 
ask him what his Christian name is : not that I shall ever use 
it, I'm sure. He will always be Mr. St. Quentin to me, as 
Mr. Knightley was always Mr. Knightley to Miss Austen's 
' Emma,' who ' could not emulate the elegant terseness of Mrs. 
Elton.' I shall not have precisely the same reason, however. 
Well, Rose, what do you think of it?" she asked, with a 
sudden change of manner. Her careless tone was not quite 
natural ; and she looked at Florence with furtive uneasiness 
under her smiles. 

" Are you serious ? Do you really mean to accept Mr. St. 
Quentin ? " 

" I am perfectly serious. I mean to accept and marry him, 
and to live happily ever after." 



98 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Then there is no use in my telling you what I think of 
it." 

" Not the least, if what you think is that I had better not 
do it. Take it as a fait accompli, you dear sentimental little 
thing ! " . here Miriam pulled Florence towards her and kissed 
her . " and bear this in mind, at all events : however this 
business may turn out for me, I've determined it shall be a 
good thing for you and Walter." 



99 



CHAPTER XL 

NEGOTIATIONS. 

Mr. St. Quentin's letter was a very proper one under the cir- 
cumstances. It said more of the writer's feelings and hopes* 
and of the recipient's merits and attractions, and less of the 
equivalent advantages in his own power to bestow, than was 
actually in his thoughts ; but that was all as it should be. 
There was a proper reference to the disparity of age which 
might, he feared, render his addresses unwelcome to Miss 
Clint ; and an assurance that, should this not prove an unsur- 
mountable obstacle, she should experience to the full all the 
happiness which being " an old man's darling " could confer. 
It was wisely and gracefully done, and it told immensely with 
Miriam ; though she guessed, correctly, that Mr. St Quentin 
did not suspect she had divined his real age. The proper 
amount of sentiment, and as much good sense as could co- 
exist with the contemplation of such a marriage at all, com- 
bined to make the letter a creditable production ; and Miriam, 
worldly-minded, ambitious, and untaught by any true love, as 
she was, felt, on reading it, that she had achieved her purpose 
. gained a great prize. 

If Miss Clint would permit him to do so, Mr. St Quentin 
proposed to call on Mr. Clint on the following morning, so 
that, should all things cohere according to his most ardent 
wishes, he might have the happiness of appearing at the 
dinner-party (which was to include the customary guests only) 
in the character of her accepted suitor. It was all perfectly 
proper and business-like, and it filled Florence with painful 
amazement and misgiving. Humble as hei \\tt\e TOTMXkRfc\N& 
been, there was genuine feeling, true poetry, t\ve u \>\tf^X\sgpX 

H 2 



ioo A Golden Sorrow. 

of love " in it: What there was in this she did not like, she 
could not approve, she was forced to fear. Miriam was not 
at all concerned respecting her father's probable sentiments. 
If he opposed her marriage, she would have plenty of courage 
to oppose him. With the prospect of emancipation before her, 
her fear of him finally vanished. 

Miriam's reply to Mr. St. Quentin's letter was in its turn a 
model of propriety, though it was as unlike what she would 
once have imagined as her first letter to her future husband as 
it could be. It was as follows . 
" Dear Mr. St. Quentin, 

" I consider myself honoured by your letter ; and I have 
no objection to your calling on my father to-morrow, in order 
to discuss the subject of it with him. . Yours, very sincerely, 

Miriam Clint." 

She handed the open sheet on which those lines were written 
in her firm, large hand, to Florence, who read them slowly, 
and gave the paper back to her. 

"Miriam," she said, infringing her own rule for the first 
time, " can you not wait a little ? You have seen so few 
people as yet. You spoke of this as a way of escape. 
Granted . but it is not the only way . another, and a better, 
may come." 

"No, no," said Miriam, as she carefully folded, sealed, and 
directed her letter. " I must not trifle with fortune. I am 
not at all likely to get such a chance as this again." 

She despatched the letter ; and Florence felt that the last 
word had been spoken. It was not until Miriam had left 
her, to go down to dinner, that Florence thought of her own 
possible or probable share in the matter. How might it affect 
her? What alteration might it produce in the position in 
which Walter had left her ? Would it be in Miriam's power 
to continue to protect her ? These were painful but inevitable 
speculations ; and Florence sat absorbed in them, waiting for 
Miriam's return. 
When Miriam found herself alone mt\v Yvst father on the 



Negotiations. ioi 

conclusion of their dinner, she addressed him with composure 
which surprised herself. 

" Papa," she said, " I have something particular to say to you. 
A circumstance has occurred which concerns me very nearly*" 

" Indeed ! What's the circumstance ? " 

" Mr. St. Quentin has asked me to marry him." 

" What ? Mr. St. Quentin, a man who is fully as old as I 
am, or, I suspect, a trifle older, propose to a girl of not quite 
nineteen ! What does he mean ? " 

" What he says, I presume. Pray, let me speak, papa, and 
let us understand each other. Mr. St. Quentin, who is, as 
you say, very much older than I am, but whom I respect and 
esteem, has asked me to marry him. If you have no objection 
to my doing so, except Mr. St Quentin's age, that concerns 
me only, and I do not regard it as an obstacle." 

" Oh ! you don't, don't you ? You're not a sentimental 
young lady, then, at least." 

" No, papa, I am not a sentimental young lady ; I have no 
nonsense of that kind about me ; and I am very anxious to 
have a home of my own. Since I am speaking to you about 
myself, I may as well speak plainly, and above-board. I am 
not happy here ; I never expected to be happy, I am not so ; 
and I hope you will not refuse to let me avail myself of this 
means of leaving your house creditably." 

" Which means, I conclude, that otherwise you will contrive 
to leave it discreditably, like your precious brother ! " 

Mr. Clint had risen, and was walking about the room with 
quick strides. Miriam, whose face was very pale and set, and 
in whose eyes there was an expression unfamiliar to her father, 
replied quietly, . 

" I have long ago come to the resolution not to discuss 
Walter or his conduct with you, papa, and by that resolution 
I mean to abide. In this matter he is not concerned, and he 
need not be mentioned I am quite sure you do not care for 
my remaining with you, and I tell you plavwVj 1 *xxv \ssfcsfc. 
anxious to get away" 



102 A Golden Sorrow. 

" I have certainly been blessed with a pair of dutiful chil- 
dren," said Mr. Clint bitterly, but, to Miriam's great relief, 
not violently. " However, that is not worth discussing. I 
understand you wish to obtain my consent to your marrying 
this Mr. St. Quentin, a man as old as I am, of whom we know 
nothing but that he talks of himself as wealthy, and seems to 
have plenty of money. You * respect and esteem ' him, do 
you ? A very pretty phrase ; but it means that you covet his 
money, arid think, by marrying him, you will secure the kind 
of life you fancy you would like, and your own way in every- 
thing." 

" I daresay you may be right, papa, but that is beside the 
question. The friends who introduced Mr. St. Quentin to 
Mr. and Mrs. Cooke are well acquainted with his position and 
fortune. They are what he represents them. I do not think 
you can have looked forward to any better provision for me 
than the one he offers me, and I wish to know whether you 
will receive him, in accordance with his request, to-morrow ? " 

Her father took two or three turns in silence, before he 
replied, "There's not much room for discussion, Miriam. 
If I have not been very kind to you, according to your no- 
tions, at least I have not troubled you with much advice or 
dictation. I don't' mean to do so now. Let Mr. St. Quentin 
satisfy me that he has the fortune he pretends to have, and let 
him make a handsome settlement on you, and I shall not 

prevent your marrying him, though I'm d d if I can 

understand you." 

Miriam instantly rose. 

" Thank you papa," she said calmly ; " that is all I require. 
I shall tell Mr. St. Quentin you will see him." 

" You had better tell him my terms too," shouted Mr. Clint ; 
but Miriam had already passed through the door, and might 
pretend to be out of hearing. 

Miriam was in a strange mood all that evening. Sometimes 

she was pleased and excited, chattering to Florence about 

London, her intention oi having a house tYvete, her carriages 



Negotiations. 103 

and horses, her dress and her amusements ; but, above all, 
the delightful prospect of leaving The Firs. Then she would 
talk of Walter, of all she meant to do for him, how he should 
come home, and he and Florence live with her, until all 
should be set right with his father, and everything be arranged 
as it ought to be. Florence was not very much more ex- 
perienced in the ways of the world than Miriam, but she had 
a clear perception that this was all romance and imagination, 
and she ventured to suggest to Miriam that perhaps Mr. St 
Quentin might not see these matters in the sanie light But 
Miriam would not listen to a doubt on that point She did 
not put her sentiments into so direct a formula ; but what 
she really meant was this : "I am going to marry an old man 
for his money, and to get my own way, and it would be rather 
too bad if I could not make him do precisely as I please ! " 

Florence, seeing that she could not make any impression 
upon her, was forced to content herself with reminding Miriam 
that no revelation of her secret must be made to Mr. St 
Quentin without Walter's consent, which it would take some 
time to obtain. To this Miriam assented, and then Florence 
approached the subject which was chiefly occupying her 
thoughts. 

" What is to become of me," she said, " during the interval 
before we can hear from Walter ? I suppose your marriage 
will soon take place ? " 

" I suppose so," replied Miriam. " But, of course, I can't 
tell. But, Rose, there need be no trouble or difficulty about 
you. You will come with me, of course, wherever I go. You 
will be under less difficulty when I am in a house of my own 
than you are here. Then I can arrange so that there shall be 
nothing at all unpleasant in your position, and we shall soon 
be able to announce the truth." 

" Pray don't deceive yourself; pray don't buoy yourself 
and me up with false hopes. If Mr. St. Quentin were to realize 
all your expectations of his generosity . and I think, ^ow \mos\. 
acknowledge they are extravagant . it v*o\i\&\>e. ma&fcessA^ 



104 A Golden Sorrow. 

Walter to confess his marriage now, and throw himself upon 
Mr. St. Quentin's kindness. In fact, he could not do it ; it 
would be the worst kind of dependence. Our secret must be 
maintained, and the only thing you can do for me will be to 
take me with you as your maid." 

" Well, be it so. You are determined to damp my spirits ; 
but you shall not succeed. I have a presentiment that every- 
thing will go well with me, and with Walter too." 

Florence smiled. 

" And you have a presentiment," she said, " that Mr. St. 
Quentin will not object to your having a confidential maid, 
to whom you are kinder and more considerate than ever lady 
yet was ? " 

" I have a presentiment, Rose, that Mr. St. Quentin will 
not interfere with either my feelings or my actions towards 
you. I shall make you as happy as you can be made, away 
from Walter, and Mr. St. Quentin had much better not inter- 
fere with me." 

" And I will keep my distance and my place, and endeavour 
to give him no cause." 

Then the sisters-in-law talked of other things, each feeling 
relieved that the momentous subject of discussion was laid 
aside for the present. When Miriam and Florence had parted 
for the night, the young wife went with a heavy, but trustful heart 
to her nightly prayers, while the young girl could not go 
through the form of words. She had no great refinement of 
mind or sensitiveness of conscience, but she felt that she 
could not ask a blessing on the events of that day. Afterwards, 
it would come more easily to do so, when she should be better 
used to regarding Mr. St Quentin as her future husband. 
Thus did Miriam cheat herself, and belie the common-sense 
that she possessed. 

Mr. St. Quentin made his appearance at The Firs on the 

following day, very accurately dressed, and, to all appearance, 

in a state of perfect composure and self-complacency. Miriam 

and Florence witnessed his arrival from Miriam's sitting-room. 



Negotiations. 105 

His equipage was a well-appointed mail-phaeton, and he drove 
the handsome pair of high-stepping bays himself, with an air 
which had just a little too much of the ci-devant jeune homme 
about it, but which did very well indeed for such inexperienced 
critics as the sisters-in-law. A magnificent bouquet of hot- 
house flowers, as carefully carried by a groom as if it had 
been somebody's son and heir, was immediately brought to 
Miss Clint, and she was informed that Mr. St. Quentin was 
in the study with Mr. Clint. 

The interview between the two gentlemen lasted longer 
than Miriam expected, or liked. If they had agreed, there 
was so little to discuss that she had expected it would have 
been over in a very short time. She knew her father was a 
man of few words, and she concluded, naturally and correctly, 
that her elderly suitor would not be unduly anxious to prolong 
the conversation. Florence had stolen away, and left her 
alone, and she sat, or rather crouched, on a low oaken settle, 
which filled up the recess formed by the old-fashioned window, 
with her elbows on the sill, looking out at the carriage ; at 
the natty groom who stood at the horses' heads ; at the 
fine, spirited animals, champing their bits, and tossing their 
heads, and throwing frequent flecks of foam about ; at the 
costly fur rugs ; at the silver mountings of the harness . a 
little too much becrested. in a word, at the symbol of wealth 
before her eyes ; and, while there was a strange sort of throb- 
bing at her heart, she thought how nice it would be to own 
this, and the riches of which it represented only a very small 
portion. 

The interview between Mr. Clint and the mature suitor for 
his young daughter's hand commenced with some mutual 
embarrassment, though with much less on Mr. St Quentin's 
part than on that of Miriam's father. The superior know- 
ledge of the world and the business habits of the elderly lover 
told, as against the morose, awkward self-engrossment of Regi- 
nald Clint, whose native manner was rudeness, as. Ya& t\&x\% 
impulse of mind was distrust. 



io6 A Golden Sorrow. 

Preliminaries being despatched, Mr. St. Quentin proceeded 
to inform Mr. Clint that he proposed to make Miriam an 
allowance of five hundred pounds a year during his lifetime 
. he entered on this branch of the subject without any inquiry 
into Miriam's own possessions or prospects . but that he did 
not intend to make a settlement upon her. 

" Then/' said Mr. Clint, " that must put an end to the 
matter. I will not allow my daughter to marry without a 
settlement." 

"I beg you to be patient for a moment," said Mr. St 
Quentin. " I do not ask you for any fortune with Miss 
Clint. ,, 

" No," returned Mr. Clint testily ; " and it would be no 
good if you did. Miriam shall not have a penny of my money 
until after my death. I don't mean to part with my money, 
or any of it, unless I see a very sound reason why. I don't 
see such a reason in my daughter's marriage, which will remove 
her from me, and deprive me of any care or attention I might 
wish to receive from her in the decline of my life." 

Mr. St. Quentin listened with something approaching to a 
grin on his features, and with all the sentiments which would 
call forth such an expression in his mind, but he merely 
inclined his head, as a signal that he was listening, and said 
nothing. 

"I have no faith in anything but self-interest, Mr. St. 
Quentin," continued Mr. Clint, with some additional surliness ; 
" and I mean my daughter, and my daughter's husband, to 
have an interest in behaving well to me." 

" If I am so happy as to become Miss Clint's husband, I 
hope we shall always be good friends." 

" That's not the question. You say you do not ask me to 
give Miriam money, and I say I never intended to give her 
any ; but when you add that you refuse to make a settlement 
on Miriam, that is another thing, and I tell you plainly that 
I will not consent to my daughter's marrying you under the 
circumstances . there must be no uncertainty fox tier " 



Negotiations. 107 

" I hope you will not persist in this view, Mr. Clint ; and 
I think I may perhaps modify it by a little plain-speaking. 
You consider it right to control a daughter by considerations 
of self-interest; is it altogether wrong to keep similar con- 
siderations before the mind of a wife very much younger than 
her husband? I have the profoundest admiration and the 
deepest regard for Miss Clint ; my most earnest desire is to 
make her my wife, but I do not ask or expect from her a 
romantic attachment, which would be absurd and unnatural 
A beautiful and well-conducted young wife is a prize such as 
seldom falls in the way of a man of my age ; but I think I 
am justified in declining to make her completely independent 
of me, in declining to put it entirely out of my own power to 
influence her by hopes or fears for the future " (here he spoke 
with slight but significant slowness). " I only claim what you 
claim, the right to make the disposition of my fortune con- 
ditional upon the degree of happiness I derive from the person 
who will be the probable inheritor of it. There is not a 
shadow of probability that my widow will not be the inheritor. 
I have no relatives, to speak of . my heir-at-law is a distant 
cousin, whom I have never seen, for whom I have already 
done all I ever intend to do, and whom I never purpose to 
see. I have all the feelings towards Miss Clint which justify 
me in asking for her hand, and I naturally have undoubting 
faith in their continuance ; but I have made up my mind in 
this instance, as in that of my former marriage, not to make 
any woman who shall become my wife so independent of me 
as to feel that she has nothing to gain by consulting my wishes 
and studying my happiness, and nothing to lose by my death." 

Mr. Clint's face, during this lengthy explanation of Mr. 
Quentin's views, delivered with perfect calmness and well-bred 
ease, was curious to behold. There was cynical admiration 
in it combined with dislike ; he was puzzled, baffled, and yet 
not wholly displeased. 

. " He is a cooler hand than even I thought him " ^fcs> ^ast 
silent reflection of Mi. Clint, as he attended to foa vct^^ ^^" 



108 A Golden Sorrow. 

able discourse, and scanned the irreproachable person and 
attire of his would-be son-in-law. " Who would think that a 
man would do so foolish a thing in so perfectly sensible a way ! 
He is one of 'the wisest fools in Christendom, ' surely." 

He did not reply immediately, and Mr. St. Quentin exhibited 
no signs of haste or impatience, though he felt both. He had 
a pleasant conviction that, backed by Miriam's determination 
to accept him, he should be more than a match for Mr. Clint. 
He did not fear her being deterred by his reluctance to settle 
an income upon her, because he judged it impossible that a 
young girl could understand its significance, and he was very 
anxious to join her in the character of her betrothed. Mr. 
Clint made him, after a pause, the exact answer he would have 
most earnestly desired, but had not ventured to anticipate. 
He said, . 

" I don't deny there is a great deal of reason in what you 
say. Suppose we refer the question of a settlement to Miriam. 
You offer good terms for the rest, and if she's disposed to risk 
it, perhaps I may be also." 

Mr. St. Quentin gracefully acceded ; and after a little further 
discussion of his circumstances, his views as to a residence, and 
his projects for the embellishment of Miriam's existence, in 
which her father was but moderately interested, the suitor 
requested permission to see Miss Clint. 

Mr. Clint, who was very glad to get rid of his visitor, told 
him he would find Miriam in the drawing-room, but evidently 
had no intention of accompanying him thither, and dismissed 
him with a reference to their meeting again at dinner. 

Miriam was in the drawing-room, looking very handsome, 
and just becomingly agitated. She rose instinctively as Mr. 
St. Quentin came into the room, and her downcast eyes and 
brilliant blush were in as perfect taste as if they had been 
assumed for the occasion. Nothing could be better than 
the demeanour of the elderly lover, as he advanced with a 
hurried step and a smile of triumph, and taking the hand 
which she neither offered nor withdrew, feivetftYj tatd \t. 



109 



CHAPTER XII. 

EMANCIPATION. 

In the small circle within which the affairs of the household 
at The Firs produced discussion, the intelligence of Miriam 
Clint's approaching marriage was received with some diversity 
of opinion, but with general curiosity. There was consider- 
able inclination to depreciate Mr. St. Quentin's wealth, and to 
wonder how a girl of Miriam's age could be so mercenary. 
Mr. and Mrs Cooke, however, took her part in all discussions; 
and the general dislike entertained towards her father pleaded 
for her, as the same sentiment had pleaded for Walter, in the 
very different direction which his wilfulness had given to his 
own fate. 

It has been seen that Mr. St. Quentin had a rational dis- 
like to delay in the transaction of any business at his time of 
life, and it followed, therefore, as a matter of course, that he 
was anxious his rash but successful proposal to Miriam should 
be followed as speedily as possible by their marriage. He found 
his hopes of her acquiescence in the arrangement which her 
father disapproved, were well-founded. Miriam was quite con- 
tent to forego a settlement, although her father told her, in the 
most amicable and unrestrained conversation they had ever 
had together, that he considered her a fool for yielding, 
and had no doubt, if she would only hold out, Mr. St. Quentin 
would give in. It was evident that the elderly gentleman was 
very much in love ; the " admiration " and " regard " he had 
expressed had developed themselves into much ^*ra\. ^rs*- 
timents, and Miriam was acquiring moie a.xvc\ mo\<i ^^ 



no A Golden Sorrow. 

over him day by day. But she told her father quite frankly that 
she would not use it in the direction of inducing Mr. St. 
Quentin to do what he had declared his repugnance to doing. 
" As long as he lives, I shall have as much money as I want," 
she said ; " and if I survive him, I think I may safely rely upon 
having enough influence over him to make him leave me well 
off." Thus the matter was left in abeyance, and the marriage 
was all arranged without the intervention of one of Mr. St. 
Quentin's aversions, the lawyers. 

" Happy the wooing that's not long o' doing." is an adage, 
more respectable, perhaps, by reason of its antiquity than of 
its absolute truth. The wooing, in this case, was effected with, 
as much celerity as was compatible with the care and pains 
necessarily bestowed upon the important business of purchas- 
ing Miriam's trousseau. Mr. Clint, having been with difficulty 
convinced that his daughter could not go up to town for that 
purpose accompanied by her maid only, was, with still greater 
difficulty, induced to go with her, and to submit to the inflic- 
tion of a three weeks' sojourn in very comfortable apartments, 
secured for them by Miss Monitor, whose pleasure and fussi- 
ness at the prospect of her ex-pupiFs marriage were extreme. 
Miss Monitor had always expected her dear Miriam to do well 
in the matrimonial line, but in doing so very well as this, she 
had exceeded her fondest hopes. To any suggestion that the 
bridegroom might, with advantage, have been a trifle younger, 
Miss Monitor would have turned a deaf ear. There was no 
danger now of Miriam's being condemned to the rurality which 
she detested, and Mr. St. Quentin's appearance and manners 
were as unexceptionable as his position and fortune. Consider- 
ing that, except on the part of the bridegroom, there was not 
the least assumption of feeling in the matter, the marriage was 
all that could be expected. 

Mr. St. Quentin was an attentive, gallant, but not importunate 

lover. He never intruded on Miriam's morning hours. His 

habits were not matutinal, in which respect he differed from 

most Indian men ; and he took a good civile to dress. t He 



Emancipation. 1 1 1 

did it well, with taste, care, and gravity, and was perfectly 
alive to the importance of the operation at his time of life. 
Without the least touch of that detestable creature, the elderly 
dandy, about him, Mr. St. Quentin always looked, as he was, 
" well got-up," and precise, from the top of his very slightly 
bald head to the toe of his well-fitting boots. This sort of 
thing takes time, and Mr. St. Quentin objected to being hur- 
ried. He liked to breakfast leisurely, to read his papers . he 
never received any letters more interesting than bills and pro- 
spectuses . leisurely ; to drive to a florist's for Miriam's daily 
bouquet without hurrying himself, and to present himself at 
Cambridge Terrace so as to have an interview of half an hour's 
duration with his betrothed, before they went out for the after- 
noon's shopping. To Miriam's great satisfaction, she found 
that Mr. St. Quentin had a liking for theatrical entertainments, 
and her father did not object to them so strenuously as he ob- 
jected to most things from which other people derived plea- 
sure. Consequently, the tediousness of an uncongenial 
association of three, in the evenings, or the awkwardness of a 
Ute-a-tHe with a lover with whom she was not the least in 
love, was frequently spared to Miriam. When the party went 
out in the evenings, Miriam was distressed at being obliged 
to leave Florence alone, but her sister-in-law consoled her by 
a perfectly sincere assurance that she never felt lonely. She 
passed the peaceful hours with her books, her needlework, and 
the interminable letters to Walter, of which she always had 
one on hand. 

The morning hours being entirely free from intrusion on 
Mr. St. Quentin's part, and her father holding himself as much 
aloof from Miriam in town as he did in the country . though 
their scanty association was less unpleasant . the sisters-in- 
law went out together, without . the door once closed behind 
them . keeping up the fiction of their supposed relative position. 
They enjoyed these expeditions very much; and Florence 
had early in their sojourn in London, taken Miriam to se.e 
the City boarding-house in which she axv4^a\X.\\M^ &nyc^ 



112 A Golden Sorroiv. 

the months which immediately succeeded their marriage. 
They had also gone to the cottage on the Eastern Coun- 
ties line, and walked up and down the lane, looking tearfully 
at the tiny garden, and the little window, from which Florence, 
her fair head framed in climbing roses and honeysuckles, used 
to watch for Walter in the early summer-time. There were 
no roses and no green leaves now, and the window was filled 
up by a ponderous chair, in which sat an imbecile old man, 
propped up with pillows, who waggled his rickety head at the 
young women as they lingered near the little gate. It was all 
so different, so unlike her recollection of it, that Florence was 
glad to turn away and lose sight of the place. 

Miriam especially wished to visit the old house in the dull 
crescent in Bloomsbury where her brother and Florence had 
first met, but there were difficulties in the way. To go to the 
house, and, if there were lodgings to be let there, to go in 
under pretext of requiring them, would be easy ; but, suppos- 
ing Martha were still in the service of Mrs. Reeve's successors, 
and that she recognized Florence, as she certainly would, and 
were thus set gossiping about her to any of Walter's former 
acquaintances, who knew nothing of his wife's position at 
present ? Miriam acknowledged that this would be a risk, not 
to be incurred without folly, and it was therefore agreed that 
she should go alone to the house in the crescent. 

One morning when the trousseau was almost complete, and 
the much taxed patience of Mr. Clint was nearly exhausted, 
Miriam and Florence set out as usual, soon after breakfast. 
Miriam had not seen her father that morning, but she had an 
uncomfortable conviction that he was in a specially bad 
humour. He had made himself almost unbearably disagree- 
able to Mr. St. Quentin on the previous evening, and had 
been positively brutal to her. She and Florence had come to 
the conclusion that he was again taking to solitary drinking, 
and were wishing that he was at home, where they could 
bring Mr. Martin's influence to bear upon him. They drove 
to the well-remembered crescent in Bloomsbury, and directed 



Emancipation . 113 

the cabman to pull up on the same side as that on which 
Florence's former home stood, but few doors higher up. 
These orders were being executed in a slow and lumbering 
fashion by the driver, and Miriam, her hand on the door of the 
cab, ready to step out, when a hansom passed them rapidly, 
and pulled up at the door of the identical house for which 
Miriam was bound. 

"There's some one going in," said Miriam, looking out 
of the cab window, but not opening the door. " A gentle- 
man. Good gracious, Rose, it's my father ! " 

" Your father ! Are you sure ? " 

" Yes, quite sure. There, he has knocked at the door ; his 
back is towards me now. . Don't get down, please " (this to 
the driver). . " A servant is speaking to him ; a tall, dark- 
haired woman." 

" Yes, yes ; that's Martha." 

" He has gone in, and the door is shut. Rose, what can 
this mean ? " 

" I don't know ; I am afraid to think ! Let us get away 
as quickly as possible ; he may come out." 

Miriam directed the bewildered cabman to drive to a 
shop in Oxford Street, and the two young women sat back in 
the cab, and looked at one another in amazement. Rose was 
the first to speak. 

" How fortunate you had not got out ! How fortunate he 
did not see you ! He has heard something, and gone there 
to inquire ; that must be it ! Just think, if Walter had not 
made me change my name ! " 

Then they keenly discussed the matter. Could it be a 
mere coincidence? They could not hope that. What had 
Mr. Clint heard, how had he heard it? Apprehension and 
anxiety took hold of them ; and Miriam dreaded their being 
kept in ignorance almost as much as she dreaded the effects 
of a discovery. 

" Depend upon it, we shall not be able to find out, if vt'% 
anything short of his knowing the whole tni\ta" 



H4 A Golden Sorrow. 

" And if he does know the whole truth . what then ? " said 
Florence, clinging to Miriam, and trembling. 

" Then he will turn you out of doors. I hope, I expect 
nothing less. Oh ! Rose, what a blessing it is to think that 
now it cannot so much matter if he does ! Fancy if what 
we think this is had happened before I knew Mr. St. Quentin ! 
What would have become of us ? But now we need not mind 
. at least, not in comparison ; for if he turns you out of his 
house, you will have mine to come to." 

The sisters-in-law had to endure their uncertainty. 

Mr. Clint did not come home to luncheon, and Mr. St. 
Quentin found Miriam in a very absent and unsatisfactory state 
of mind. There was no evening engagement, and Mr. St. 
Quentin had not been invited to dinner by her father, so 
that Miriam had to contemplate a solitary evening with Mr. 
Clint. Her mind was unusually full of Walter, and she, for 
the first time, spoke of him freely to Mr. St. Quentin. She 
was not quite pleased with his manner of receiving what she 
said. There was a decided absence of sympathy about it, a 
disposition to interrupt, with florid compliments to herself, her 
description of the affection which had always subsisted between 
her and her brother ; but no alacrity to echo her conviction 
that her father had been entirely to blame, and Walter almost 
blameless in the unfortunate rupture between them. Miriam 
was disgusted by this, but not alarmed. Old men were so 
narrow and egotistical, she thought ; it was like the sour- 
grape attitude of mind which they assume when youth has 
departed from them, to lean heavily on the faults of young 
men, and ignore their temptations ; and, no doubt, her father 
had taken pains to imbue Mr. St Quentin with his ideas re- 
specting Walter. This was the only point on which Miriam 
was mistaken. Her future husband was even more narrow 
and egotistical than she believed him to be, but he had re- 
ceived no confidences from Mr. Clint. The reserve and cold- 
ness with which he listened to Miriam were the genuine ex- 
pression of his own unassisted sentiments, zxA a. \rc\idetit though 



Emancipation. 115 

silent notification of his intention to stand aloof from the Clint 
family affairs. In popular phrase, he meant to marry her, and 
not her relatives. 

"Never mind," thought Miriam; "he is under papa's in- 
fluence now ; but when we are away from him, he will be under 
mine, and he shall be interested in Walter. One thing is 
clear ; if papa has any real suspicion, he has not imparted it 
to Mr. St. Quentin." 

A little blunder, destined to produce a large result ! 

Dinner passed over, without anything having occurred, either 
to relieve Miriam's mind or to confirm her fears ; but just as 
she was about to make her escape, and to join Florence, her 
father addressed her. 

" Miriam, I want to ask you a question. I hope you will 
tell me the truth." 

" I always do tell you the truth, papa." 

" Perhaps so. It will be for your own interest, and other 
people's, if you tell me the truth now. Have you had any 
letter from your brother since he left England ? " 

" I have not." 

" Had you heard from him shortly before he left ? " 

" The only letter I had from Walter for six months was the 
one I showed you, by his desire." 

" And . now attend to me, Miriam, and take my assurance 
that you are likely to do your brother a very great injury, if 
you mislead me . in any letter which you received from him 
previously, did he mention to you an entanglement into 
which he had got himself? Did he confide in you any in- 
tention of marriage ? Did he ever allude to the daughter of the 
person in whose house he lodged, a girl of the name of 
Reeve ? " 

Miriam's heart was beating loud and fast She glanced at 
her father's stern > frowning, discontented face as she thought, 
"Shall I risk all, and tell him? Have I any right to do 
so ? " However the swift impulse of the mmwte td!\^&X \sas^ 
decided the second question, the face she \ooVe& *X. &fco&a& 

1 2 



i6i A Golden Sorrow. 

the first in the negative. She dared not tell her father the 
truth ; a horrid vision of Florence, turned out, destitute and 
insulted, flashed, with the hesitation, across her. She replied, 
in the steadiest voice she could muster to the fortunate form 
in which Mr. Clint had put his questions. 

" Walter never told me of any entanglement. He never 
alluded, to me, to any intention of marriage. He never men- 
tioned any girl's name to me." 

Her father looked at her sternly while she was speaking, 
but she kept her countenance well. 

" What address did your brother give you for your letters 
to him, after he left his lodgings in Thirlwall Crescent ? " 

" He never gave me any other address. I did not know he 
had left them, until I got his last letter." 

" He had not lived there for a year previously," said Mr. 
Clint. 

" Indeed ! " replied Miriam. 

" That will do ; you may go now. I had a reason, which it 
is unnecessary to explain, for asking you these questions. If 
ever I discover that you have answered them falsely, it will be 
so much the worse for you. To your brother it cannot make 
much difference." 

Miriam left him promptly, and burst into tears on the stairs. 
She paused, to recover herself, before she entered her own 
room, where she expected to find Florence, in order that she 
might not alarm her by her agitation. Her mind was in a 
whirl, but the uppermost feeling was exultation at having kept 
Walter's counsel, and at the nearness and certainty of her own 
emancipation. When she had recovered herself, she went into 
her room, and there she found Florence, looking very pale 
and ill. She related all that had passed between her father 
and herself ; but, though it confirmed them in the fear which 
Mr. Clint's visit to the house in Thirlwall Crescent had 
awakened, it left them in entire ignorance of the origin and 
extent of his information. 
" There's nothing to be done," sa\4 "Nlmam, " e*K&\ft. to 



Emancipation, 117 

keep resolute silence, and go on in the most cautious way 
possible. For the few days we shall remain in London, you 
had better go out as little as possible, as papa must have gotten 
a clue from some one, and it is possible you might be seen 
and recognized. I wonder we never thought of that danger 
before. What could have been more unlikely than that we 
should have seen papa at Thirlwall Crescent ? and yet we did 
see him." 

Florence gladly assented ; and then they talked the matter 
over again, each making herself more than ever uneasy and 
alarmed in the process. The next day, Miriam had recourse 
to the good offices of the lady of the house in which they 
were lodging in the matter of her shopping, as her maid had a 
bad cold, and could not go out. 

" Has anything happened ? " was Miriam's eager question to 
Florence, on her return. 

" Nothing alarming ; only that I have seen more of your 
father to-day than in all the time since we have been in Lon- 
don. He has been ill again, threatened with gout, I fancy, 
and sent for me shortly after you went out." 

" Was there anything remarkable in his manner ? " 

"No. nothing. He seemed to be in very low spirits, and 
was perfectly civil to me . indeed, for him, really kind. You 
may imagine how frightened I was, and I suppose I looked ill, 
for he noticed my being pale, said he believed London dis- 
agreed with me as much as with him, and wished we were 
all out of it." 

Nothing more occurred to alarm Miriam and Florence. 
Mr. Clint continued ailing, and they left London a few days 
sooner than they had intended, in consequence. Mr. St. 
Quentin did not accompany them. He was to arrive at The 
Firs on Christmas Eve, and the wedding, which was to be of 
the quietest description, was to take place at Drington Church 
on New Year's day. He took leave of his betrothed at the 
railway station with perfect propriety, and soxftfc \sa\. fe&^ 
Miriam was rather pleased to find that s\ve (5l\&tvo\. k^*\s&r- 



n8 A Golden Sorrow. 

any sensation of relief and pleasure at getting rid of him. It 
augured well, she thought, for her not finding him a drawback 
to the comfort of her life in the future. 

There was not much comfort in her life in the present, 
except in such part of it as she passed with Mrs. Cooke. Mr. 
Clint was apparently bent on indemnifying himself, by 
additional moroseness and violence, for the concession he had 
made to propriety by his visit to London, and he was 
decidedly not well. Her father's looks did not particularly 
interest Miriam, but urged by Florence, she noticed them, and 
thought them bad. Mrs. Ritchie commented to her mistress 
upon the change, observing that " Mr. Clint was fallen away to 
nothing, " and now it was the general experience of the house- 
hold that his temper was " uncommon short." 

The interval before Miriam's marriage passed over. Mr. St. 
Quentin duly arrived on Christmas Eve, and took up his 
abode with Mr. and Mrs. Cooke . having succeeded in 
effecting a restoration of external civilities between the 
Parsonage and The Firs. He brought Miriam a wedding pre- 
sent of very fine and tastefully selected jewels ; and his 
demeanour was unexceptionable. Mr. St. Quentin had en- 
dured an English winter, during its milder half, very well ; 
but he had no intention of exposing himself to the rigours of 
the first five months of the new year, and had therefore 
arranged to take his bride abroad immediately after their 
marriage. The hour fixed for the wedding was unusually early, 
in order to enable the happy pair to cross from Southampton 
to Havre on the same day. 

The first day of the new year dawned, cold, frosty, but 
bright. Florence dressed Miriam in her bridal garments, with 
her usual quiet alacrity, but with a heavy heart. Miriam looked 
very beautiful, and quite composed on her wedding morning. 
The party assembled to witness the ceremony was small, but 
the church was crowded with the village people. 

The bridegroom was not so completely a secondary object 
of popular curiosity in this case as bridegrooms ^cieta^ ^x^ % 



Emancipation. J 19 

Everybody wanted to see him ; and* everybody was surprised 
when he or she did see him. Here was not " feeble old age 
tottering to the altar to unite itself to mercenary and unblush- 
ing youth," as the prospective union had been characterized in 
certain circles of the neighbourhood. Here was an upright, 
remarkably well-looking, perfectly dressed man, whom no one 
in the church would believe to be a day over fifty . how could 
people be so absurd as to say he was as old as the bride's 
father! . all devotion and gallantry to the bride. Certainly 
she was very young and pretty, but she was uncommonly lucky 
too. The marriage became popular on the spot. 

Miriam was becomingly nervous, but, for all that, elated 
and happy ; and as she passed through the gates on her way 
back to The Firs, she looked out of the carriage window 
eagerly. 

' ' Not a regretful glance, I trust ? " said the bridegroom, 
pressing her hand tenderly. 

" Oh ! dear, no," said Miriam. " I was just wondering 
whether any one in the world who had lived so long in any 
place, ever felt so delighted to get away from it, for ever, as I 
do ! " 

The wedding breakfast was over, the few guests were long- 
ing to be off, the travelling-carriage was at the door, and Mrs. 
St. Quentin was supposed to be changing her dress. She was 
really locked in the arms of Florence, who was also ready for 
the journey, and listening to her entreaties that she would be 
very careful and cautious, remembering that she must expect 
Mr. St. Quentin to behave to her as to any ordinary servant ; 
and also hearing the delightful news that, while Miriam was at 
the church, the morning post had brought Florence a letter 
from Walter. 



i 



120 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE CLOVEN FOOT. 

Miriam's married life commenced under pleasant auspices. 
Mr. St. Quentin had taken care to procure numerous intro- 
ductions in the foreign cities which he purposed to visit ; and 
as society was as complete a novelty to his young wife as the 
works of art and the monuments of history, she was amply 
provided with defences against ennui, and with the means of 
contrasting her present with her late position, largely to the 
advantage of the former. She had made an entirely mercenary 
marriage, and she did not deceive herself about it ; but as she 
was not of a sentimental turn of mind, she really was, for a time, 
quite happy. If she had ever ' been in love with any one, it 
might have been a very different thing, as she had once said to 
Florence, and repeated unnecessarily often to herself; but 
beyond a school-girl flirtation with Charlie Boscombe, carried 
on by all the underhand means familiar to school-girls, and 
enjoyable and important chiefly because it was underhand, 
Miriam had no experience of that kind. Mr. St. Quentin 
was an agreeable travelling companion ; and Miriam was too 
inexperienced to discern that all the comfort and luxury, all 
the consideration and courtesy with which he surrounded her, 
were rather tributes to his own vanity, selfishness, and love 
of ease, than to her. No doubt he loved her, after his fashion, 
and was very proud of her beauty, her youth, and the general 
admiration she excited ; and so far as he was concerned, she 
looked no deeper into her life. Her character was not yet 
formed, its strength for good or ill was still latent ; though she 
had shown herself capable of a deliberately mercenary mar- 



The Cloven Foot* 121 

riage, and of telling herself always and exactly the truth about 
it. At present, the instincts of her youth, health, and spirits 
were dominant, and she made the most of the absolutely 
new life which had opened for her. It did seem strange to 
her, in the rare intervals in which thought and reflection 
would obtrude themselves, to be actually married to a man, 
sharing his present life, the nominal partner of every interest 
and every possession belonging to him, and yet to know so 
very little of his past as she knew of Mr. St. Quentin's. 

She was set thinking of this by her long talks with her 
sister-in-law, and by discovering that though she too was now a 
married woman, and on the same level of experience of life as 
Florence, she was not, in reality, a bit more like her in mind, 
or drawn closer to her in sympathies. Florence knew as 
much of Walter's history, of his childhood and his boyhood, 
his school-days and companions, of the troubles, and hopes, 
and pranks of the time before he had ever seen her, as Miriam 
did ; and, of the later incidents, much more than Miriam her- 
self knew. Every name which had been a household word 
to Miriam and Walter was familiar to Florence ; and at The 
Firs she had recognized all the localities, and illustrated them 
by anecdotes related to her by Walter, and cherished in her 
memory with a fidelity quite mysterious to her sister-in-law, 
who had not the key to it. Miriam knew nothing about Mr. 
St. Quentin's youth or early manhood. Perhaps the difference 
in their age rendered it natural that she should feel no curi- 
osity to know, and that he should take no interest in telling 
her; but yet the fact rendered their relation artificial and 
constrained. Miriam did not suppose that her husband had 
anything to conceal ; she did not weave a romance out of her 
ignorance and his reticence, and, after the fashion of Miss 
Austen's charming heroine in " Northanger Abbey," con- 
struct a martyred wife and a reproachful conscience out of a 
commonplace character and a life of monotonous prosperity. 
But she felt that he told her nothing because he held Vx \w 
light consideration. She did not mmd \X . \1 V& ox^j \on^. 



1*22 A Golden Sorrow. 

which aims at the knowledge and comprehension of the past . 
but she learned from the fact how great a distance divides the 
experience of a woman who has married " for love " from that 
of a woman who has married from any other motive. 

" If Mr. St. Quentin and I had not strange places and new 
people to discuss, I wonder what we should find to talk about?" 
said Miriam, one evening, when Rose was arranging her hair. 
a portion of her assumed duty which she persisted in dis- 
charging. " What did you and Walter talk about ?" 

" About ourselves, I'm afraid : about our want of money, and 
the very little prospect we had of getting any ; about how glad 
we were we had run the risks involved in our marriage, and 
about all the things we would do if we were rich. Very com- 
monplace, but interesting to us. And then, we talked a good 
deal about you . I always wanted to hear about you . and Walter 
always had something to tell me. He was a most amusing and 
entertaining companion, as you know; I never could have been 
dull with his society to count upon ; and he is such a wonderful 
mimic. He would have made a capital actor. Do you know, 
I should have recognized your voice in a crowd, from his perfect 
imitation of it." 

"Ah!" said Miriam, leaning back in her chair with an 
impatient sigh, " Mr. St. Quentin and I will never have any- 
thing half so interesting to discuss. There is not a third 
person in the world he would care to hear me talk of ; and, 
except the most ordinary acquaintances, he never talks of any 
third person to me. I wonder what sort of woman his first 
wife was ? I wonder whether that was a love-match ? I wonder 
what he was like then ? " 

" You could hardly expect him to tell you much, or indeed 
anything about her," said Florence; "he would probably think 
the subject not a pleasant one." 

" What nonsense ! as if I cared, as if any rational being 

would care ! It would be a relief to have something real to talk 

about, for at present I feel as if it were all a sham. However, 

we are not likely to be reduced to the necessity of eivtextamm^ 



The Cloven Foot. 1 23 

each other. And now for a good ten minutes of compliments, 
in lieu of conversation." 

She drew her white and gold mantle over her shoulders, 
kissed Florence, and went wearily away. They were going to 
a great entertainment that evening at the house of the Eng- 
lish Minister at Naples ; and Mr. St. Quentin was more than 
usually anxious that Miriam should be well-dressed and in 
good looks. 

At Miriam's age, even if a woman has a fair allowance of good 
sense, she can endure a great amount of admiration and 
attention on the score of her beauty. But these tributes, 
in themselves welcome, are apt to pall after a time, unless they 
come from the right person. Miriam was beginning to find 
out that Mr. St. Quentin was not the right person, and she 
was very tired. when her husband had repeated the assurance 
several times a day for three months . of being told that she 
was as beautiful as an angel, and that each dress she wore was 
more becoming to her " style " than the preceding one. This 
was a slight annoyance, however, and the monotony of Mr. 
St. Quentin's admiration was atoned for by the variety of 
that which Miriam received from other sources. They had 
travelled rapidly to the south, in pursuit of fine weather, and 
were now settled for some time at Naples. Mr. St Quentin 
reserved his morning hours to his own special benefit, as rigidly 
as he had done in London, to Miriam's great pleasure and relief; 
and she really had as little to complain of as was possible. 
The gloss was upon her new life of wealth, and ease, and luxury, 
and she had as yet been visited by only a momentary occa- 
sional thrill of apprehension that it might ever wear off. She 
was accustomed, in her conversations with Florence, to revert 
to the great " consideration " of her emancipation from The 
Firs, to her being " rid of the place and of papa," more 
frequently than was quite pleasant to Florence, who had 
always feared that she would need constant remembrance 
of that "consideration." Miriam was uncorvscvavys* c& \Jfces*t 
symptoms, and had she recognized tYvem, ^o\3\& *>8\ \\sn^ 



124 A Golden Sorrow. 

been ignorant of the nature and gravity of the disease they 
betokened 

Mr. and Mrs. St. Quentin excited a good deal of curiosity, 
and, as was to be expected, some not altogether good-natured 
comment. But it was generally admitted that he was a model 
husband, devoted to his beautiful young wife, and yet so 
little foolish, so charmingly free from jealousy . a passion 
which would have rendered him equally unhappy and absurd, 
because, at his age, to expect a young girl like Miriam 
to do more than tolerate him, would, of course, be quite 
ridiculous. And she tolerated him . she really did ! The 
manners of Madame were perfectly charming . so attentive, 
so pleasant, so reverential ! If Mr. St. Quentin had been 
aware of these comments, he would have been very little 
obliged to the discerning individuals who made them. Miriam's 
enjoyment of society was very general ; as yet, she was not in 
danger of any particular attraction. As a rule, she did not 
like " foreigners," . as she, in her thoroughly English way, 
designated French and Italian people in their own respective 
countries . and the English whom they met did not interest 
her deeply. The fact was, Miriam was still so young, and so 
much occupied and delighted with material things, that she 
was as yet preserved from the real and deadly danger of her 
position. the danger of finding out that her unoccupied heart 
was craving a tenant. She honestly supposed all old men 
were as tiresome as Mr. St. Quentin, and she did not think 
about young men at all. If she had thought about them, or 
any one of them, the general notion of propriety, which stood 
in the place of sound principle in Miriam's mind, would have 
precluded the idea of the topic being a dangerous one, until she 
had been gently and pleasantly conducted into peril and suffering 
by her mingled unconsciousness and incredulity . yes, incredu- 
lity, for it was remarkable that since her marriage Miriam had 
grown more than ever impatient of sentiment, and denunciatory 
of romance. 
All this would appear to constitute a state of tbm.^ which 



The Cloven Foot. 125 

might have sufficed to tranquilize and content the most 
jealous and elderly of husbands. Nevertheless, Miriam 
discovered, with much disgust and contempt, that the ruling 
passion of her attentive, complimentary husband was jealousy. 

There had been a good deal of awkwardness in Florence's 
position, but she had expected and was prepared for it, and 
was more afraid of Miriam's impetuosity than of any annoy- 
ance to which she was likely to be subjected. It was misery 
to Mrs. St. Quentin to be obliged to allow her sister-in-law 
to sit beside Mr. St. Quentin 's valet in the rumble of the 
travelling-carriage as they drove to Southampton on her wed- 
ding day ; and she eagerly expressed her feelings, so soon as 
they were alone in the cabin of the steamer. Florence made 
light of the matter. The valet was a respectable and respect- 
ful person, who, when he found she was not disposed to talk, 
cheerfully kept silence, and punctually attended to her comfort. 
But Miriam was not to be consoled It must never occur 
again, she said, and thenceforth she took precautions which 
Mr. St Quentin considered absurd and troublesome, but did 
not as yet resent. 

" Dixon is not an ordinary person, and I am very particu- 
lar about her," was the only explanation Miriam gave when 
she made Florence travel in the carriages for "Dames 
Scutes," and ordered her meals to be served separately at 
the hotels. To interfere with his pretty young wife on a per- 
sonal point of this kind was not in Mr. St. Quentin's way ; but as 
their terms of residence in various places became longer, and 
they were more settled, he began to mark his sense of Miriam's 
over-solicitude for Rose by treating the latter cavalierly, 
speaking to her in a short, imperious way, which rendered 
Miriam uncomfortable, and making it evident that he did not 
recognize any difference between her and the other servants 
who formed their ostentatiously numerous suite. Florence's 
was essentially a mild and gentle nature, and she was little 
given to disliking people ; but she did dislike Mx. Sk. C^e^xsv. 
The cold narrow-heartedness of this maxv, >i\e ^o\v^& *&&v- 



126 A Golden Sorrow. 

ness of him, the total want of pity for human wants or sufferings 
. she had noticed early that he was lavish only where his own 
pleasure was concerned . repelled and disgusted her. She 
saw him rarely, but on those occasions her manner was uncon- 
sciously distant without being respectful ; she did not keep up 
her assumed character so well as she believed herself to do ; 
her demeanour to Mr. St. Quentin was not so servant-like as it 
should have been. 

On two or three occasions, he made remarks to Miriam 
upon the advisability of keeping servants in their proper 
place, and she took no pains to conceal her displeasure. 
At last, on a repetition of these strictures, called forth by 
his finding Miriam and Rose talking and laughing together, 
to the oblivion of time and of the fact that he was waiting 
to take Miriam out in the brilliant equipage of which he was 
so proud, her temper asserted itself for the first time. She 
told Mr. St. Quentin that she considered his remarks exceed- 
ingly intrusive and ungentlemanlike, and that she would do 
as she pleased. She looked at him in her customary un- 
daunted way as she uttered the defiant words, and she felt 
slightly uncomfortable at the look she received in return. It 
was quite outside her previous experience, and plainly expres- 
sive of sullen resentment. 

" It is better you should understand my meaning at once," 
her husband said, touching the horses up sharply as he spoke ; 
" I don't recognize your right to find fault with my interference 
in any matter connected with our common life. I shall inter- 
fere when I think proper, and I think proper now. I do not 
like this woman ; you are too familiar with her ; she is too 
familiar with you ; she has not the manners or bearing of a 
well-trained servant You cannot be ignorant of the impro- 
priety of making a companion of your maid ; or, if you are 
ignorant of it, I think it is time you should learn it from 
me. 

Hot anger was in Miriam's heart, but she kept it down for 
Florence's sake, and tried to turn the conveisaUoiv. But this 



The Cloven Foot. 127 

did not suit Mr. St. Quentin ; he thought he had gained his 
point, and wished to improve the victorious occasion. He 
harped upon the subject, until Miriam could no longer forbear, 
but sharply told him she had heard quite enough of the matter, 
on which nothing that he could say should alter her mind, 
and that she begged he would consider it exhausted. 

She said nothing to Florence of what had passed ; but her 
sister-in-law was too sensitive and too acute to fail to notice 
the oppression of spirits under which Miriam evidently laboured. 
She pondered over it, quite unsuspectingly, and was filled with 
forebodings and misgivings. Had Miriam already begun to 
repent of her bargain? Was she finding out that she had 
bought wealth, luxury, pleasure, even freedom itself, far too 
dear? 

" I remember," said Miriam to Florence that evening, apropos 
of nothing, . " I remember to have read in some book, 
once on a time, that there is a kind of jealousy which is the 
result of love, and a kind which is the result of temper. I 
can fancy the one to be flattering if felt by a person one loved, 
but the other must be intolerable." 

" I should not like the one much better than the other," 
said Florence gravely, " for it would equally imply distrust, and 
what greater insult than that can be offered to a woman ? " 

" True," said Miriam moodily ; and then she sat silent for a 
long time, twisting the tassels of her girdle between her fingers, 
with her eyes fixed upon the ground. 

From that day forth Miriam knew that her husband watched 
her, and that he had a rooted dislike to Florence. A few weeks 
later, a letter from Walter was sent to their Italian address from 
The Firs. It was directed to Miriam this time, and contained 
a letter for Florence. The sisters-in-law were reading their 
respective letters, in Miriam's dressing-room, when Mr. St. 
Quentin returned unexpectedly, as Miriam afterwards believed, 
intentionally, and entered the room. Florence was sitting 
on a sofa in the deep embrasure of the window, which wkv- 
manded a fine view of the far-famed bay *, axvc\ ^xcvaxa. ow 



128 A Golden Sorrow. 

a low footstool beside her. They were both disturbed and 
agitated, and bright tears were standing in Florence's eyes. 
She instantly started up, as Mr. St. Quentin came inside the 
door and stood looking at them with stern displeasure. 

" Leave the room, Dixon," he said coldly ; " I wish to speak 
to Mrs. St. Quentin." 

" Return in five minutes, if you please," said Miriam ; " I 
want to dress then. . Pray, what have you to say to me ? " 
she continued, in a far different tone, to her husband. *' Has 
anything new or extraordinary happened ? " 

"I don't suppose it is either new or extraordinary," he replied, 
"that you should act against my injunctions. I find you 
again in unbecoming confidence with a servant Pray, who 
are the correspondents whose effusions are the joint property 
of yourself and your maid ? " 

"I don't know what you mean, Mr. St Quentin," said Miriam, 
with an unsuccessful attempt at calmness. 

" Oh yes, you do. You were each reading a letter, and 
talking over it, when I came in. as unexpected as I was un- 
welcome. I insist on knowing who wrote those letters." 

" Do you suppose I scrutinize my maid's correspondence ? " 

" Nonsense ! There is something between you which I am 
determined shall not remain concealed from me." 

" You had better ask Dixon who are her correspon- 
dents," said Miriam, in a tone of the most insolent con- 
tempt. " That would be such a suitable proceeding ; so gentle- 
manlike ! " 

" Whom her letter is from, is a secondary consideration ; 
though I shall learn that too, if I think fit to do so. My 
present question is to you, and I will trouble you to answer 
it. From whom is the letter you were reading when I came 
in?" 

" From my brother." 

" I don't believe you." 

Miriam turned her back upon him, and struck a handbell 
which stood on a table in the window. 



The Cloven Foot. 129 

" Be so good as to leave my room," she said ; "I am going 
to dress." 

He took two steps towards her, his face dark with passion. 
The look was highly unbecoming to him, and would have 
revealed his age to the least acute observer. 

" It is not from your brother ; if it were, it would not be of 
interest to your maid. I believe you and she are in league to 
deceive me. And, let me tell you, if it were from your brother 
I should forbid the correspondence. Your brother is a lying, 
dissipated blackguard, and he has taken a low girl abroad with 
him, whom he has either married or pretended to marry." 

" You are mad," said Miriam, " or drunk." 

" Like your father ! No, I am neither mad nor drunk ; and 
I know and mean what I say. Show me that letter, I command 
you ! " 

Miriam was not far from her husband, but the table was 
between them. She slipped adroitly to the end of it, and 
reached the open window ; drew the disputed letter from her 
bosom, and tore it into shreds. As Florence entered the room, 
she saw the fragments go fluttering downward through the 
air, and Miriam's great golden eyes flashing scornful triumph 
upon her husband. 



130 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

DEFEAT. 

Mr. St. Quentin left the room without another word. Miriam 
rushed to the door, slammed and locked it with unmistakable 
emphasis, and then related the story of this serious matrimonial 
misunderstanding to Florence, only suppressing Mr. St.Quentin's 
reference to Walter's suspected marriage. Florence heard 
Miriam's account of what had happened with dismay. With 
all Miriam's faults . and they were numerous and increasing, in 
the fostering false atmosphere of her life . she was " thorough." 
Nothing could be more perfect than her fidelity to Walter's 
trust, her attachment to Walter's wife. These feelings made her 
self-sacrificing, acute, ready-witted, and reticent. All the pas- 
. sionate temper within her was roused by her husband's con- 
duct, and yet she did not forget that Florence would be ren- 
dered more unhappy if she told her all. Whatever was the 
ground of Mr. Clint's suspicion, and whatever its extent, it had 
evidently fallen short of the truth in one respect, and outstripped 
it in another. So long as he continued to believe that the girl 
he suspected of being Walter's wife had gone with him to 
America, Florence's position would remain secure. But, 
equally to the surprise and consternation of Miriam, she 
found he had imparted his suspicions to Mr. St. Quentin ; and 
the ground on which she had built a superstructure of delusive 
power, in which she had taken refuge as in a stronghold, 
crumbled around her. 

Where were her promises to her sister-in-law now ? Where 
was her power to fulfil them ? " If papa should turn you out of 
his house," she had said, when cotitem^Valvc^ ^ V\afc had then 
seemed to be the very worst that co\M Yva.\ypwv, " >ftvw. ^flW*. 



Defeat. 1 3 1 

mine for you to come to." " Was all this changed ? " she asked 
herself, because the old man she had married, in order to have 
her own way, had suddenly lifted the mask of smooth amiability, 
and shown his teeth in a snarl. 

There was plenty of fight in Miriam, if fight should prove 
to be all that was needed ; but she was too clear-sighted, 
in spite of her inexperience, to believe that it would be all. ' 
Showing fight is a matter for two people only ; but in this case 
there were three, and Miriam could not suffice to Florence, or, 
as she instantly felt, Florence to herself. If Mr. St Quentin 
chose to insult her, and make the position untenable, what 
could Miriam do to prevent it, short of revealing that secret 
which her experience of her husband's character convinced 
her it would be highly dangerous to reveal ? 

" We must be more careful : I have been dreadfully incau- 
tious, I confess," said Miriam. " I ought to have told you the 
first time he complained of my familiarity with you, but I was 
afraid of hurting your feelings. " 

" You see how hard a false position is to maintain," said 
Florence with a sigh. " I fear it will soon cease to be possible." 
My dear, dear sister, we must think of some other resource 
for me ; indeed this will not do. In all our calculations, we 
never thought it possible that I could be made a subject of dis- 
pute between you and Mr. St. Quentin." 

" I hope you may prove the only one," said Miriam, impa- 
tiently ; " but I begin to think there will be a good many strong 
points of difference between Mr. St. Quentin and me. As to 
your entertaining any idea of leaving me, it is simply impossible. 
Our faith is pledged to Walter on that point We must both 
be more cautious, and you must keep out of his way as much 
as possible." 

Florence assented, with a heavy heart. " It never was right," 
she thought, " and it never can be made right, and it never can 
come right. Oh ! if it were but over ! If my Walter could but 
come back to me ! " 

This first quarrel was made up, of course, YniV. foe \ec.w\c&v*- 



132 A Golden Sorrow. 

tion afforded an illustration of the influence of the disparity of 
age between Miriam and her husband. There was an awk- 
ward slurring over of mutual offence, there was a cold, set 
courtesy, but no heartiness, no genuine unrestrained feel- 
ing of regret and reparation ; and ever afterwards there was 
an indefinable difference in their mutual relation. Mr. St 
Quentin admired Miriam as much as ever, was as proud of her 
beauty and brilliancy, and as tiresomely anxious that both 
should be recognized to his glorification ; but he distrusted her, 
and he betrayed the fact. Jealousy was making havoc with 
him. He genuinely disbelieved Miriam's statement about 
the letter, and the circumstance set his suspicious mind off 
on a tormenting track of imaginary grievance. What was the 
tie between her and this insolent servant, who so far outstepped 
her place ? Of course it was Dixon's knowledge of a previous 
love-affair of Miriam's. They were conspirators, these two, 
against his happiness and his honour. What did he know of 
Miriam's girlhood? Miss Monitor's testimony was the tes- 
timony of an interested witness . she was responsible for 
Miriam's good behaviour. Neglect at home and eight years in 
a London boarding-school comprised the history of his wife, 
so far as he knew it. He felt the full import of this reservation, 
and his self-tormenting faculty set itself to work. He began to* 
think of his first wife, so short a time dead, and yet, until now, 
so utterly forgotten. He had known she did not love him ; but 
he had never had any fear, doubt, suspicion concerning her, 
during tneir marriage, or before it. She had been quite amen- 
able and obedient, and, if not very happy, had not troubled him 
about it He had felt no jealousy in her case . of course he 
did not call it " jealousy " in his thoughts . she had been en- 
tirely dependent upon him, and never endeavoured to elude 
or decrease that dependence. Mr. St. Quentin was not very 
far from that fatal stage of affairs at which a man calls himself 
a fool for having married his wife ! Miriam did not love him 
either, had never pretended to love him ; and he was at least not 
such a fool as to grumble about that \ but sbfc N*as xvot uian- 



Defeat. 133 

ageable, she was not dependent ; she went her own way, and 
had her own will, and cared nothing at all for his tastes or 
opinions. She enjoyed her life thoroughly, and his share of it 
was as little as she could contrive to reduce it to, not nearly so 
important as that of her obnoxious maid. 

What was this correspondence, so unbecomingly shared 
between the mistress and the servant ? It never occurred to 
Mr. St. Quentin to believe his wife's statement that the letter 
he had seen was from her brother. Rose Dixon's part in the 
matter set that aside at once. How was he to find it out ? If 
he could have secured the cover of the letter, he would have 
sent it to Mr. Clint, and asked him whether he knew the hand- 
writing ; but Miriam had destroyed the cover also. The inci- 
dent remained rankling in his mind, long after the tacit recon- 
ciliation between him and Miriam, and he so fed his distorted 
fancy upon it, that to her most careless words and looks he 
assigned motives and meanings of which she was both innocent 
and unconscious. 

Even the ingenuity of jealousy and uneasy self-love could 
not discern in Miriam's conduct any cause for her husband's 
distrust and suspicion. Her frank and free enjoyment of a 
society in which she had no intimacies, with which her relations 
were merely superficial, might have been thoroughly reassuring 
to any reasonable mind. She was always amused and amusing, 
ready to enter into any scheme of enjoyment*; she appreciated 
to the full the luxury of her life, and was usually in high spirits, 
and radiant with health and beauty. This order of things was 
hopelessly opposed to a theory of a prior attachment, aban- 
doned from mercenary motives, and renewed, in the form of a 
dishonourable intrigue, under the shelter of marriage, to the dis- 
comfiture and misery of a confiding husband. But the mind 
of Mr. St. Quentin was no more or less reasonable than the 
mind of any individual abandoned to a mean passion, and this 
was the absurd fiction he fabricated, when his marriage 
with Miriam was not yet a year old, and acXM^J^ ^wu^fc. 
himself up to believing, as a positive trofo. TVs. focX,, n*\v\.Ocv 



134 <A Golden, Sorrow: 

even he could not ignore, that it was impossible for him to fix 
upon any individual, amcng the Englishmen whom they had 
met in foreign cities, as the object of this attachment, the 
sharer of this intrigue, did not shake Mr. St. Quentin's belief in 
his bugbear. How could he tell that Miriam had never previously 
seen any one of the men whom she met at Florence, Naples, 
Rome, and elsewhere, ? Aided and abetted by Rose Dixon, 
and with all the facilities of the perfect freedom he had allowed 
her, from the first, in his blind faith and credulity, there was no 
deception which she might not practise safely and successfully. 
This was a sheer delusion, and there was a strong probability 
of its growing into a mania, but with the cold craftiness which 
existed in him, though it had hitherto been but little exercised, 
Mr. St Quentin concealed the real spring of his altered mood 
and changed action, and thus hoped to deceive Miriam. He 
did deceive her, however, for a short time only. 

One of the first results of the condition of mind into which 
Mr. St Quentin worked himself, was the curtailment of Miriam's 
morning leisure. He took to interfering with her disposition of 
her time, to capricious demands upon it, and to a sort of fidgety 
espionnage which disgusted her. In material respects, Miriam 
had nothing to complain of She had the full value of the bargain 
she had made ; his promises were fulfilled, even beyond her 
expectation, because her girlish imagination had not fully com- 
passed the solid and enviable realities of the position in which 
her marriage had placed her ; but Miriam was " bored to death " 
by his presence when he was with her, and by the anticipation 
of it when he was absent. 

Partly in consequence of this pervading boredom, and partly 
because without congenial companionship she could not 
keep up her interest in "foreign parts," Miriam wished 
to return to England in the second year of her marriage. 
She had never exacted from Mr. St Quentin any specific 
promise on the subject; but it had been understood that, 
the process of acclimatization accomplished by a year on 
the Continent, he would " setta" Vfc '&ngaxi& % T\ve. ojies- 



Defeat, 135 

tion of place had been left undecided, at Miriam's request ; 
she had expressed her sentiments concerning the pleasures 
of rurality to Mr. St. Quentin with entire frankness, and he 
was not, at that period, inclined to oppose her or them. A 
house in a good part of London, and the free enjoyment 
of the pleasures of the metropolis, were now Miriam's great 
objects ; and it was, therefore, with excessive anger and keen 
disappointment that she received a peremptory negative from 
her husband, when she suggested their making a move in the 
direction of England. He had mo intention of returning 
thither, he said, and he wished to know what was her motive for 
proposing to do so. Miriam replied that her motive was suffi- 
ciently plain ; she was tired of foreign travel, and wished to go to 
England. Instantly, he began to speculate upon some hidden 
reason for this most straightforward proceeding. Some one was 
gone, or was going to England, and Miriam wanted to get there 
too ! 

His surveillance of Miriam increased in strictness and 
cunning with this supposed discovery, and she frequently ex- 
pressed her annoyance to Florence, accompanied with the 
remark that she had been a fool not to suspect, in time, that 
the smooth complacence of Mr. St. Quentin was not of a 
durable kind. But she did not acknowledge to Florence that 
she had penetrated the motive of his conduct, and found it to 
be jealousy ; the instinct of the woman, the pride and self- 
respect inseparable from the wife, withheld her from so humi- 
liating a disclosure. That her husband should dare to insult 
her by a doubt exasperated Miriam . who was proud, impul- 
sive, and by no means logical . as deeply as though she had 
married him from such exalted motives as would have entitled 
her to absolute respect. But Florence did not require an 
explanation from Miriam, in order to understand the position. 
The instincts of the woman and the wife were equally strong 
in her case, and she was in full possession of the whole matter, 
and also of the dislike and distrust with which Mr. St, Q\i&cl 
regarded herself. 



136^ A Golden Sorrow. 

" I hope she may not find out that she has exchanged one 
kind of tyranny for another, more intolerable, and from which 
there is no eseape," Florence would think, when Miriam 
indulged in strictures upon Mr. St Quentin's " tiresomeness " 
and "obstinate ways." " May Heaven preserve her from 
temptation ! she is in an awfully dangerous position." 

It was an unpleasant shock and surprise to Miriam to find 
that her power was not absolute . a shock from which she 
recoiled into perfect silence upon the matter in dispute. If 
this spirit of opposition were still further roused, and should 
extend in other directions, all her calculations would be 
defeated ; not only the small ones, with trifling results, to be 
worked out by her supremacy, but the big sum of all, the 
calculation on whose correctness she had staked her life, 
her youth, her happiness. " To marry an old man, and 
find myself unable to rule him, would be too bad a fate," 
Miriam would mutter to herself, as if by protesting that a thing 
would be " too bad " she could do away with its existence ; and 
very stubborn and sullen grew her resolution that she would 
not be beaten. 

Such was the situation of affairs when Miriam received a 
letter from Mrs. Ritchie, the housekeeper at the Firs. 

" Honoured Madam " (so ran the letter), " / am sorry to have 
to tell you anything which will cause you trouble, but 1 consider it is 
my duty to let you know, if Mr, Martin has not done so, that Mr. 
Clint has not been well lately" (" Drinking, of course," was 
Miriam's mental comment.) " He forbade anything to be said 
about it, but that was some time ago, and since then he has had a 
bad attack of fever, and is lying, at this present writing, in an 
exhausted state, his recovery not being satisfactory to my mind ; 
indeed, I am not sure whether it is a recovery at all. He is much 
wasted ; and even before this last attack, he had not left the house 
for several weeks. I take as much care of him as lean, and Mr. 
Martin comes regular ; but I think, honoured madam, you ought to 
be informed of his illness, in case it would be a satisfaction to you to 
r<f/u/7?f<? Tfol?irs, and see to him yourself 1 make bold, considering 



Defeat. 137 

all things, to tell you that Mr. Clint has frequently spoken of you 
lately, and, though he has never said so, not being that kind of 
gentleman, lam sure he would be very glad if you could come. He 
reads a little, and seems at times very solitary. I remain, honoured 
madam, your obedient servant, 

" Phcebe Ritchie. " 

This letter caused Miriam a genuine pang of fear and 
sorrow. Supposing her father were really seriously ill, and 
were to die without her seeing him again ; neglected, alone, 
save for hired service, which, in the case of a man like 
him, could not be expected to be zealous, heartfelt, or efficient ! 
Without an instant's doubt or hesitation concerning the proper 
course of action, and without one thought of the coincidence 
between the wish she had been urging and the return to Eng- 
land thus suggested, Miriam went in search of Mr. St. Quen- 
tin, and communicated to him the contents of Mrs. Ritchie's 
letter. Miriam spoke on this occasion with more warmth and 
less formality than there had been for a long time in her man- 
ner to her husband. She was moved by a right and generous 
impulse, and the half-pitying, half-remorseful feelings which 
actuated her were reflected in her speaking face, in her bright, 
tearful eyes, and in her rapid and unstudied words. Mr. St. 
Quentin listened to her with unmoved politeness, sarcastic 
scrutiny, and entire unbelief. 

"I suppose I may prepare to start immediately?" was 
Miriam's question in conclusion. "I will tell Mrs. Ritchie 
when to expect us, and write to Mr. Martin to prepare 
papa." 

" You will do nothing of the kind," said Mr. St. Quentin. 
" I have no more intention of returning to England than I had 
a month ago. This cleverly apropos letter does not change 
my mind in the least." 

" What ! " exclaimed Miriam. " Do you mean to say that 
I am not to go to my father ? ' Cleverly apropos letter ! ' Do 
you dare to insinuate that this letter is not the truth ? " 

"I mean to say that I shall not return to a E*n^ax&." 



138 A Golden Sorroiv. 

" Then I will go by myself." 

" You will do so at your peril. If you go, you never return 
to any home of mine ; and, considering your frankly avowed 
abhorrence of your father, I hardly believe you will adopt a 
course which would have that result. I don't believe a word 
of Mrs. Ritchie's letter ; I believe this is a concerted plan of 
yours . you have a taste for confidences with servants,' you 
know. and that that letter has been written to order. a 
childish expedient to induce me to yield to your wishes, 
when you saw that you could not have your own way so entirely 
as you intended." 

" Your meanness is beyond my comprehension," said Miriam, 
looking at him with infinite disdain, her stately head drawn up, 
and her fine face . whose girlish sweetness was rapidly passing 
away . pale and set, " and beneath my anger. It provokes only 
my contempt." 

" Indeed ! I am unfortunate in incurring so lofty and be- 
coming a rebuke from a lady who has been so suddenly con- 
verted into a model of filial affection and solicitude," said Mr. 
St. Quentin, with a savage sneer ; " but I can bear my misfor- 
tune. Be quite assured of this, in me you have not a chance 
of finding the proverbial * old fool ' for whom you evidently 
take me." 

The hand in which Miriam held the letter extended towards 
him dropped to her side, and a visible shudder of disgust crept 
over her. She stood for one moment uncertain, as though she 
were going to speak, then turned abruptly away, and left the 
room. 

" What shall I do, Florence ? I am completely puzzled. 
I know I ought to go to papa ; I am sure the case is a bad one, 
and my right place is beside him now. But I cannot be sure 
that there is any change in his mood ; and he might only be 
savagely angry with me, if I returned to The Firs unasked, and 
incurred the penalty of a separation from Mr. St. Quentin by 
doing so. I suppose this man has power to carry out his threat ? 
But no matter ; I have paid too Yi\gh a pi\ct for what he had 



Defeat. 1 39 

to give me " (there was a strange disturbance and loathing in 
her face), " to risk the loss of it all now, for the sake of going 
to my father, who never cared for me, and who would certainly 
be furious. And yet, that this old man should refuse me ; 
more than that, should dare to insult me with so ineffably mean 
and low a suspicion ! How does such baseness come into 
people's heads, I wonder ? If I give in to him in this, I shall 
never be able to carry any other point. Florence, what must 
I do?" 

Florence, who had been listening to her with silent tears, 
raised her gentle eyes to her face, and said, u Miriam, I will 
go to Mr. Clint." 

" You ! " 

" Yes. Listen to me, my dear sister. You can trust my care 
of him, and you know I will tell you the truth. If I send for 
you, come to your father at all hazards . I cheerfully accept 
that responsibility . but otherwise, do not press this disagree-, 
ment with your husband to extremities. Mr. Clint was never 
rough with me, and I feel sure I can manage him ; and Mrs. 
Ritchie and I are very good friends, Never fear but that I 
will do my duty to Walter's father and yours. Mr. St Quen- 
tin has no power to control my movements. I shall be in 
safety in the place where Walter wished me to be ; nothing 
can possibly happen to me ; and indeed, indeed, you will be 
better without me now. Yes, Miriam, I will go." 

" And so I am beaten, and he wins at all points. Florence, 
I never hated my father, when he made me most wretched ; 
but I do, I do hate this old man ! " 

" Hush ! my dearest ; hush ! " 



140 A Golden Sorrow, 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE GOLDEN STATE. 

" I write of a land of wonders," says an American author. 
" I write of California while she is still youthful and full of 
marvels ; while her population is still unsettled ; while her 
business is still fluctuating, her gold abundant, and her birth 
fresh in the memory of men and women who have scarcely 
reached their majority. I write of her while she still offers 
a wide field for the adventurous, the enterprising, and 
the young, who have life before them, and wish to com- 
mence it where they may have the freest career, in full sight of 
the greatest rewards for success, and with the fewest chances of 
failure." 

It was at this period in the wonderful history of the Golden 
State that Walter Clint and Lawrence Daly left England to 
seek their fortune there. They were young and imaginative, 
adventurous and ambitious, although in different ways ; the 
enterprise had other charms for them than that of its professed 
and principal object. the acquisition of gold. Lawrence Daly 
had the stuff in him of which the pioneers of civilization are 
made. He would have exchanged the city for the desert, with 
alacrity, any day; and the disappointment, the final solu- 
tion of the long-drawn spell of uncertainty, which set him free 
to make the exchange if he chose, was secretly welcome to 
him. Walter was of a different stamp, and of a feebler nature ; 
but he had caught from his friend some of his enthusiasm, and, 
in addition to the strong practical motive that had decided 
him, there arose before his fancy a vision of the great new 
country, and the wild free life there, witYv \\s &tao\ote yvcns\v^ 



The Golden State. 141 

which had power to charm him even when he most completely 
appreciated the price he must pay for its realization ; . the long 
separation from Florence. 

To her, indeed, the heaviest portion of this trial was allotted. 
It is always so to those who remain. An absolutely novel 
journey, full of adventure and possibilities, with an arduous 
struggle, and the chances of a splendid success at the end of 
it, ennobled by a high and independent purpose, was enough 
to fire a more listless fancy than Walter's. He had not such- 
rich and varied intelligence, so highly cultivated a mind, as 
Daly's, nor was there so much of daring and endurance in 
him ; but he was exactly calculated to follow the lead of a 
superior intellect ; and his sweet temper, complying ways, and 
general easy-goingness, made him a congenial companion to 
Lawrence. 

Although society had become to a certain extent organized, 
and the tide of reckless vagabondism, which had poured itself 
forth over California on the first discovery of gold, had some- 
what abated under the steadily repressive influence of the ab- 
solute necessity for hard work and the action of a wonderful 
system of police, the place whither the friends came from the 
other side of the world to seek their fortunes, was wild and 
wonderful. " Undefined ruffianism " abounded in it still, and 
that extraordinary mixture of savage roughness and epicurean 
luxury, which is one of the strangest features of " mining " 
life. 

When, in after-days, Walter Clint's wife learned the true 
story of the caravan journey from the coast to the mines, 
performed by Walter and Lawrence, she wondered that no 
subtle influence had conveyed to her a sense of its danger, its 
toil, and its privations. Her husband's letters touched but 
lightly upon these, while dwelling upon the wonderful and 
beautiful, the grand and terrible- objects which occupied their 
attention. He wrote of the mighty mountains and the bound- 
less plains ; of the plateaux where dee* axA \yaSaka 's&S^ 
abounded, and whence the Indians YvaA T*nfc ^*X Xa^ 2 *- 



142 A Golden Sorrow, 

banished ; of the deep rich green of the cotton-wood groves ; 
of the sycamore and the honey-locust, too soon passed; of 
the yellow earth, the yellow grass, and the groves of giant sun- 
flowers. , He bade her follow their track, in fancy, over 
the Great Plains, so full of life, so lonely, and yet never 
wearisome, with all the grandeur of monotony, and yet con- 
tinual change ; where the sparkling atmosphere, the never- 
failing breeze, the solitude which no words can paint, the 
boundless prairie swell, convey an idea of vastness almost awful, 
but quite delicious. 

Of the places through which their toilsome road lay, Walter 
wrote much to Florence. of the companions of their journey, 
little. The rough, wild, wicked men, as some of them were, 
though many were only harmless, honest, and hard-working ; 
che bad language, the toil, the danger, the irresistible despond- 
ency which sometimes attacked them, sure accompaniment of 
severe fatigue and over-taxed nerves ; the sense of utter re- 
moval from all the habits of their former life, both physical and 
mental. these things he did not tell her. They would have 
terrified Florence, for whom indeed the idea of wild nature had a 
strong charm, but that of undisciplined human passions and 
lawless human life had unspeakable repulsion. 

The journey had no exceptional features. Some years ago, 
every such journey seemed a marvel, and every detail was 
eagerly sought. Use has lessened the marvel, and the 
story has since been told so that none can hope to rival its 
narrator. 

They had entered on their adventurous undertaking with 
but vague information to guide them, and little definite 
notion of the best modes of proceeding. But they had 
found intelligent companions, and gleaned a good deal of 
knowledge on their toilsome way, and had resolved to try 
Placer County. They allowed themselves only a short inter- 
val of rest on their arrival at San Francisco, after the two 
Jong sea- voyages and the crossing of the isthmus. The strange 
and exciting aspect of the great Pacific city , the restless flood of 



The Golden State. 143 

its feverish life, the amazing variety of character, the ex- 
traordinary contrast to every experience of their former lives, 
had unbounded attraction for the two young men. But they 
had neither time nor money to spare for the indulgence of their 
curiosity. The most interesting and romantic portion of their 
adventurous journey lay before them when they joined a 
miners' train bound for Placer County. 

"The whole county. is rugged and mountainous, and much 
of it is covered with heavy timber;" thus ran Walter's de- 
scription ; " the diggings are likely to last for many years. 
There is probably no part of the state where the single miner, 
without canital, has a better chance to dig gold with a profit. 
This is exactly the place for us, and we have determined to try 
our luck there. Three men travelling with our caravan are 
also bound thither. I am getting this letter ready, by bits and 
scraps, to be despatched from Carson City, when we shall 
have emerged from the desert. It is a dreadful place, but it 
has shown me one spectacle which I can never forget. Try to 
picture to yourself a glittering plain, stretching as far as the eye 
can reach, in irregular humps, no level ground, no field, no 
house, no tree, no green, not even earth, only an incrustation of 
salt and mud, flawed and fissured here and there. This plain is 
bounded, in the far, dim distance, by lofty mountains of fantastic 
outline; but to the right and left it has no bounds, and touches 
the sky like the horizon at sea. We were plodding along beside 
a waggon in silence, two days ago, oppressed by the solemn, im- 
mense solitude, when an Indian, the chief of some ' braves ' of a 
friendly tribe, whom we have met, pointed to a certain spot on 
the horizon ; an action which surprised me, for the Indians seem 
to me to be totally insensible to the. abounding natural phe- 
nomena of their wonderful country. 

" I looked, and saw before us a stately river, whose banks 
were skirted with pyramidal trees resembling poplars. Its water 
was so beautiful and limpid, the green avenues appeared so fresh, 
that we panted with longing to reach them. Socrcv Nfos. \\m^x 
seemed to expand and overflow on a\\ s&es, tettv\\xv% *. *. 



144 A Golden Sorrow. 

which bathed the foot of fantastic mountains. Islands with 
festooned outlines rose from the bosom of this unknown ocean, 
which was ploughed by vessels of every shape, their while sails 
swelling to an invisible breeze. Headlands with sinuous, uneven 
crests, and their sides pierced with mysterious grottoes, stood out 
from the mountains like the flying buttresses of an old cathedral. 
In a little bay, in one corner of the picture, enormous whales 
gambolled on the surface, and spouted up the water in silvery 
showers. In the foreground of this marine landscape rose 
elegant habitations in the Italian style, which seemed to be 
set in the midst of leafy trees. Then it was an army on the 
march, with its staff gorgeously equipped, its band, its artil- 
lery, its squadrons commanded by chiefs decorated with waving 
plumes. There were also droves of cattle which quietly grazed 
beside fat sheep and bounding goats. Whirlwinds of dust rose 
in lofty columns to the sky, and were reflected in the mirror 
of the waters Some of the men of our caravan had seen 
wonderful mirages in America, Africa, and Oceania, but they 
said that this one far surpassed them all. Nothing was wanting 
to captivate the eye, and the details were metamorphosed so 
quickly that the pencil could not reproduce them. 

" Every one in our caravan perceived the images in the 
same way . the Indians as well as ourselves ; these images were 
so clearly defined, that we were at first sight borne away by the 
charm of the illusion, and were a few minutes before we could 
recognize that it was a mirage. The phenomenon began at one 
in the afternoon ; the wind was blowing from the south, we were 
journeying to the east. It was more particularly towards the 
north that the mirage was the most distinct and the most 
animated. The sun was shining, and the sky cloudless, but the 
atmosphere did not appear to possess its usual limpidity. At 
three o'clock the curtain fell on this fairy scene, and we were 
brought back to the reality of a horrible salt desert" ' 

Lofty hills, their summits crowned with dense woods, peopled 
with deer, dose in a valley which might, for its beauty and its 

1 See M. Jules Rimy on CslifotmsL. 



The Golden State. 145 

seclusion, be that in which Rasselas learned wisdom and weari- 
ness. Far beyond them, rolling stretches of wooded land lie 
basking in the golden sunshine, which touches with its splen- 
dour the mighty crests of the giants of the Sierra. From the 
encircling hills, many sheer descents, through richly wooded 
depths, thickly strewn with huge granite rocks, lead to the leve 
plain . of vast extent, cultivated at the sides only, irregular and 
picturesque, forming a wide-stretching strand for a river, bor- 
dered with willow-bushes, which runs through it, and throws 
off many a little rivulet, to wander through the green and 
brown expanse. One of these rivulets, its flat banks fringed 
with poplars and willows, meanders through the plain, and 
passes by the foot of an enormous mass of auriferous rock, 
which, worn by the constant action of water, has split into 
fragments, crumbled, loosened, and set free its veins of gold. 
A streamlet gushes from its recesses, and swirling amid the 
roots of overhanging pines, forms a basin at its foot, surrounded 
with green turf, and then rushes away in a glittering little cas- 
cade, over a fall of a few feet, to swell the rivulet. The 
beauty of the scene could hardly be exceeded, even in the 
Golden State, which has been declared to be " unsurpassed in 
the world for climate, scenery, and soil." It is a busy scene, 
as well as beautiful. The plain is studded with miners' huts ; 
and men in every variety of costume, of many nations, and all 
periods of life beyond childhood and short of actual old age, 
are pursuing their unvarying, absorbing task . gold-finding in 
Placer County. All stages of the operation are going on simul- 
taneously over the vast space occupied by the valley. The 
claim belonging to Lawrence Daly and Walter Clint is one of 
those known as " river bed," and their hut is situated on a 
little strip of stony land, like a slab of stone embedded in 
shallow earth, which juts out at the foot of the huge mass of 
rock already mentioned, and overhangs the rivulet, a few hun- 
dred yards below the basin and cascade. Behind the hut^ 
which is of adobe, and in nowise different iiom Xtae. o'Caec&Nsv 
the valley, the rocks rise abruptly with t\\e\i scaXXetsk c^nots^ 



146 A Golden Sorrow. 

of fir and pine, and stretch on for many miles, while the sur-< 
face of the plain is furrowed and seamed by the relentless 
search of the gold-seekers. 

The door of the hut is closely shut, and there is no sign of 
any activity or life about it In its immediate neighbour- 
hood, are all the appliances of the occupation of the in- 
mates. For the moment, stillness and idleness reign, and the 
only living creature visible is a large dog, who lies across the 
doorway, in an attitude of quiet vigilance, his pointed muzzle 
resting on his outstretched forepaws. 

About a mile farther down the valley, there is a cluster of 
huts, forming a kind of little town, wirh a rough palisade en- 
closing it ; and in the centre, is a long, low, shedlike building 
as large as six huts put together, from whose roof floats the 
banner of the Stars and Stripes. A motley crowd of men, 
horses, waggons, unyoked oxen, bales, casks, and inquisitive 
dogs, occupies the space around this . the most imposing build- 
ing in the locality. It is known as " The Store," it contains 
everything, and is the general resort of everybody. Between 
this cluster of huts and the solitary one with the sentinel dog, 
the rivulet sweeps round, and enormous boulders jut out from 
the body of the rocky hill, so that the hut is isolated on that 
side, and shut out from all knowledge of the busy, swarming 
crowd beyond it. It looks very quiet and peaceful with the 
evening coming on, full of the indescribable beauty of that hour 
on the Pacific shores ; and something of neatness and order 
about it indicates that it is not tenanted by low, fierce, or 
ignorant specimens of the miner population. 

As the evening advances, two figures make their appearance, 
coming round the jutting boulders, and advancing to the cot- 
tage. The sentinel dog pricks up his ears, rises, and inspects 
them. One is familiar to him, the other is not, but the 
stranger arrives in company with Walter Clint, and Sambo ac- 
cepts the fact as a certificate of his character and a guarantee 
of his intentions. The stranger is a young man, very little 
older than Waiter, but taller and stoutei. "Rfe\\as reAWv^a. 



The Golden State. 147 

red bushy beard, and small sharp grey eyes, with sagacity of 
the cunning sort in them. He wears a motley costume, in 
which, through the roughness and carelessness characteristic 
of the manners of the place in this respect, there shows the 
former " fastness " of a peculiar type of man, less harmless than 
the " loafer " proper, and yet not belonging to the avowedly 
dangerous classes either. He wears a checked shirt, and a 
flashy tie with a horseshoe-pin, and though his boots are high, 
and worn over his trousers, they are not miners' boots. 

Walter Clint is altered in appearance since that day when he 
took silent leave of his wife and Miriam at the railway station 
at London Bridge. He could not personate a candidate for a 
lady's-maid's place now, with any hope of success. His fair skin 
is tanned to a healthy brown ; his hands are more than ever 
muscular and hirsute ; and his figure has developed into undis- 
^guisable manliness, under the influence of constant exercise and 
hard work. There is no mingling of the past and present in his 
attire; the red shirt, wide-leaved straw hat, and capacious 
boots, all mean business, and nothing but business. The two 
walk briskly on, and Walter enters the hut, preceding his com- 
panion, . who looks curiously about him, with a sharp ob- 
servant glance, . into the room on the right of the doorway. 
A bare, plain room, but clean, and not quite devoid of com- 
forts, although they are of a makeshift kind, and testify to the in- 
genuity rather than to the wealth of the inmates. From stout 
iron hooks in the rafters, which form the ceiling and the roof 
at once, a hammock is slung. In the hammock lies Lawrence 
Daly, dozing, not sleeping, in the uneasy semi-consciousness of 
low fever. He lifts his heavy eyelids, and looks stupidly at 
Walter, who says to him, . 

" I succeeded in finding Dr. Deering, and have brought him 
with me." 



L 2 



148 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

SPOILED FIVE. 

" Has he been long ill ? " asked the man who had come in 
with Walter, after he had looked closely at the sick man 
in the hammock, who seemed unconscious of his pre- 
sence. 

" Only two days. I went to look for you, as soon as he fell ill, 
but I could not find you. They said you had gone to Placer- 
Ville." 

" They were wrong ; I was out prospecting with some new 
chums. How was he taken ? " 

" Shivering and sickness, just at sundown ; and light-headed 
during the night I dared not trust myself, in this climate, 
though I have done some doctoring in my time in England, 
and was very uneasy until I made you out this evening." 

Walter then proceeded to tell Deering how he had ventured 
to administer only the simplest remedies, and Deering 
approved. 

" It's fever," he said ; " the regular thing, and no mistake ; 
but he'll do; he'll pull through. Has a fine constitution, I 
should say. Doesn't drink at all ? " 

" No," said Walter ; " eats and drinks very little at any 
time." 

" So much the better. That will stand to him now. He 
will be much worse than this, though ; you must be prepared 
for that. He has been light-headed, you say ? " 

"Yes, very; rambling in his talk ; trying to get out of his 
hammock ; distressed in his miid. 'WetvX. otv *o ^xvv^x." 



Spoiled Five. 149 

" Ah, indeed. You are very tired, yourself, are you not ? 
No rest, I suppose ? " 

" Not much. There's no one here to help, except Spoiled 
Five, who is not a bad hand at nurse-tending, only he's terribly 
afraid of any one who's off his head \ about the only thing he 
is afraid of, I fancy." 

" Where is he ? " asked Deering, looking round. 

"Washing some clothes, down yonder," replied Walter. 
" Shall you want to send him for anything ? " 

" I think not. The case is not a complicated or a bad one, 
though I daresay it seems so to you, who are not accustomed to 
this kind of fever. I will just have another look at him." 

Lawrence Daly was very ill indeed. The swift, sudden fever 
which belongs to the climate and the occupation, had knocked 
him. down just forty-eight hours previously, after some pre- 
liminary menace in the way of thirst and languor. He had 
borne the fatigue of the journey, and the toil of the new life in 
the New World, perfectly well hitherto . with unflagging 
strength and spirits, and Walter saw him succumb to this 
sudden illness with uncontrollable fear. His affection for 
Daly had grown with every day of their close association. The 
hard and rough life they had shared had not produced a 
hardening or roughening effect upon eithei of the young men, 
nor had the many scenes of hardship, violence, and severe 
struggle which they had witnessed blunted their feelings. It 
was with keen agony, such as nothing in his previous life had 
caused him to feel, that Walter had recognized the fever in 
Lawrence Daly's case ; and he permitted Deering to see the 
relief which his favourable opinion afforded him with perfect 
openness. 

This rather amused Deering. He did not believe in any- 
thing with particularly vivid faith, and in friendship he was a 
confirmed unbeliever. To " Every man for himself," the first 
half of that cynical proverb, he would have accorded cordial 
assent ; as to " God for us all," he did not b^l\SN^. \sx **. 
God, and the second half did not concern \yytcv. ^^w^x^s&- 



150 A Golden Sorrotv. 

Walter as a very " soft party," quite a novel specimen of the 
digger ; and noted, in his quick, observant way, several little 
precautions for the comfort of the sick man, made with much 
ingenuity and completeness. 

" Are you brothers ? " he asked. 

" No," replied Walter ; " we are friends and comrades. We 
came out from England together." 

" Ah ! well . you'll go back together, as far as this fever is 
concerned. What is your friend's name ? " 

Walter told him ; and they had some desultory talk about 
the place and its prospects, while Deering prepared some 
medicine which he had brought, and administered it to Daly. 

"Have you been here long?" asked Walter of his com- 
panion, who seemed disposed to linger and talk. " I did not 
hear of you until last week, when Spoiled Five told us of the 
accident at Snake Gulch." 

"That was a bad business. I have been in the country 
three months . a long time for me. I'm a regular rolling-stone, 
and, accordingly, have gathered no moss, though I'm always 
rolling in search of it. I shall roll down New Mexico way 
next." 

"Is it not rather a short trial of a place, only three 
months ? " 

" Yes ; but it is not so much the place as myself I give the 
trial to. I came up with the intention of digging, but I 
couldn't stand it ; and you are so confoundedly healthy here, 
it seems to agree with you all so well, there's not much to be 
done in doctoring. An odd fever, like our friend's here, or a 
blasting smash like the Snake Gulch business, is about all that's 
going; and these things are too accidental in their character 
to give one solid encouragement." 

" Especially if * one ' is a rolling-stone," said Walter, smiling. 

" Just so. I'll be going now. Keep him cool and quiet. I 
shall look in, in the morning." 

So saying, Deering went out of the hut, and took his way 
down the valley, now twinkling all over mtYvV^cvXs^wi^xdsthe 



Spoiled Five. 151 

cluster of huts surrounding the store, whence the sounds of 
anything but select revelry, and fun both fast and furious, were 
borne towards him. They were welcome to Deering, who was 
a cautious gambler, and in the habit of picking up not a little 
of that kind of moss, of which he denied the possession, 
among the miners, from whose uproarious gatherings he 
was rarely absent, though he had no fancy for sharing their 
serious toil Walter Clint and Lawrence Daly had frequently 
heard of him during the three months he had passed in that 
part of the country ; stories of his luck at monte and euchre, 
and of his skill as a doctor, had reached them ; but he was, 
until now, personally unknown to them. 

Walter returned to the side of his friend, partner, and patient, 
who was still slumbering, in the uneasy, fitful sleep of the 
fever, 

"What had 1 better do?" he muttered. "I cannot leave 
him. He will be much worse, very bad indeed, this Deering 
says, and I dare not leave him. And yet, it is not safe to keep 
the gold. Spoiled Five has warned me twice. The waggons 
start on Thursday ; I must make up my mind by then." 

Walter's face was troubled by more than Lawrence 
Daly's illness, as he sat beside the hammojck. Daly rambled 
less than on the previous night; the medicine had calmed 
him to some extent, but there was no rational talk between 
them. Towards morning, Walter himself slept soundly, and 
was roused only hy the dog's vociferous welcome of an 
arrival at the door of the hut. Walter had thrown himself on 
a locker, which stood under the window of Daly's room, 
and contained the greater portion of their worldly goods, and 
had fallen asleep with his head in an angle of the wall. He 
sprang up, aching and confused, and with a horrid sense of 
having neglected the sick man. Had-he been asking vainly 
for water ? Had he been suffering, untended ? Apparently, 
neither. His appearance was unchanged ; and Walter, after a 
glance at him, admitted the person who had krvockfe&. 

This was a short, thick-set man, very \am,mftv^^oO*wV^^ 



152 A Golden Sorrow. 

of red hair, and only one eye. The blind side of his face was 
much disfigured by a rugged scar which traversed the cheek- 
bone, and by the loss of the eye, which had been de- 
stroyed by an accident, and in place of which there was now 
only an ugly seam, crooked and leaden-hued. The right and 
sound side had a pleasant expression, and the one bright brown 
eye had a surprising, contradictory merriment in it, confirmed 
by the uninjured handsome mouth and strong white teeth. 
From the fingers of the left hand the ends were missing; 
they had suffered by the same accident which had crippled him 
and destroyed his eye ; and the circumstance had inspired the 
wits of the diggings with the happy idea of calling him " Spoiled 
Five." 

He was as well known in the valley as the " innocent " of an 
Irish mountain village is to all the country round ; and, con- 
sidering that he had come out there from Ireland a strong young 
man full of health, energy, and industry, and had been reduced, 
within a month of his arrival, to a state of entire helplessness 
and hopeless dependence, without the remotest prospect of ever 
seeing his native land again, " Spoiled Five " was a wonderfully 
contented individual. In that rude and cosmopolitan place 
his affection for the old country never declined ; among that 
lawless and godless crowd, his fidelity to the old faith had never 
faltered. He picked up a livelihood by making himself gene- 
rally useful, and it was quite wonderful what he could do with 
his one " good " hand and its maimed fellow. Washing, car- 
pentering, tailoring, in the modified and modest form of 
mending, cooking, a surprising readiness in repairing every- 
thing that went wrong with vehicles of all kinds, a by no means 
comtemptible knowledge of farriery, and a wonderful knack of 
"minding" the sick . these were some, but only a few of 
the accomplishments of Spoiled Five. He made a very good 
living for himself by their employment, and had become quite 
an institution and a tradition of the place. He was the oldest 
inhabitant now. Many men of many nations had come there, 
and hadma.de their pile, and gone away, 01 \vavm^ failed to make 



Spoiled Five. 153 

their pile, had likewise gone away to other parts of the 
Golden State, or to other occupations. Many had died there 
of injuries, or disease, or drink, but Spoiled Five remained, con- 
tented enough. The old folks at home, for whom he had been 
bent on making a pile, were gone to their rest, and there were 
to be no new ties in life for him. He hated yellow-men and 
" loafers," but otherwise was always on very good terms with 
the mining population of the fifty or sixty miles of the valley 
over which his habitual wanderings extended . for he was very 
migratory . and he had of late attached himself particularly 
to Walter Clint and Lawrence Daly. Spoiled Five's one eye 
was a quick one, and had recognized immediately on their 
arrival that the new chums were gentlemen, and that Daly 
was an Irishman ; and he was very useful to them in the first 
days of making acquaintance with their strange location and 
their wild neighbours. By this time it was generally under- 
stood that they had the first claim on the services of Spoiled 
Five. 

" How is he to-day ? " asked the lame man, as he came in 
with singular noiselessness, and deposited on the locker several 
miscellaneous articles which he had brought up from the store. 
Walter gave him a report of the patient, told him Deering's 
opinion ; and the two proceeded to prepare breakfast, and 
to attend to Daly's wants. The adobe hut consisted of two 
good-sized rooms, divided by a passage terminating in a door 
at either end, and a long low apartment in the rear, which 
served as kitchen and storeroom. This latter was the scene of 
Spoiled Five's operations, while the friends talked together. 

"Your head is clearer to-day, Lawrence." 

" Yes, for a while, but I feel uncertain and giddy. That 
medicine stupefies me. I must speak to you while I can. 
Don't stay with me, Walter, I entreat you. Remember the 
warnings we have had. Take the gold to the station when the 
waggons go. Spoiled Five will remain with me ; you can trust 
him, surely, to do all that is necessary ? " 

" Don't be uneasy, my dear fellow," sai&Vt&X&x sn*ssn.^ \ 



154 A Golden Sorrow. 

" the gold will be all right. No one knows anything about the 
nugget, and we are not worth the risk of robbing, for the rogues , 
are in a great minority, fortunately, and would have no chance 
of escape. Spoiled Five has been misled by his imagination 
this time. You will be all right in a week or so, and then I 
can go." 

"It is very unfortunate that I should be knocked up just 
now," said Daly, turning his hot eyes wearily on his friend, and 
passing his hand across his forehead, as though he were trying 
to clear away a mist which hung before him, " when our unex- 
pected success has come. What does Deering say ? " 

" That you will be all right very soon ; that you must be 
looked after, and must not excite yourself." 

"Ah, yes," said Daly; and then he turned his head, 
made another effort to clear away the mist, and remained 
silent. 

Deering had judged Daly's case correctly. When he arrived 
the next day, he found the patient much worse ; the fever was 
running its regular course. So it went on for many succeeding 
days, during which the acquaintance between Walter and the 
" rolling-stone " doctor ripened into a semblance of intimacy. 
It was, however, only a semblance, being one-sided ; for whereas 
Deering learned many particulars of Clint's previous career, and 
the history of his life at the gold-mines . for Walter was reticent 
only on the subject of his marriage, which he never mentioned 
. Walter learned nothing more about him than the general 
rumour had already told him, and Deering's free-and-easy de- 
scription of himself had confirmed. 

The story of the enterprise of the two young men had nothing 
in it to distinguish it from that of hundreds of others who had 
undertaken similar arduous experiments. It had included dan- 
ger and discouragement, tremendously hard work, very repulsive 
associations, many things which had not entered into their cal- 
culations, much welcome excitement, great vicissitude, and on 
the whole, up to the present time, a fair measure of success. 
They were not, indeed, making a rapid fartuiYS *, \.Yvy ws:e not 



Spoiled Five. 155 

of the number who furnish the romance of Californian history, 
of the heroes of the " Frisco " gaming-saloons and gold mart. 
They had been nearly two years at the mints, had been work- 
ing six months in their present claim, and had begun under 
tolerably favourable conditions. They were not dissatisfied, 
but the pile was far from being made yet, though they had sold 
three lots of gold to the bankers at the nearest station, and were 
collecting another, intending to take it thither in company with 
several miners who were going on a similar errand, and were to 
have started in a few days, when Daly's illness came 
on. 

They had been working, one day, since the early morning, 
and at some distance apart, each hidden from the other's obser- 
vation by a high intervening bank of earth, when Walter, resting 
from his labour at the sluice, heard Daly shouting to him. He 
ran quickly to the turn of the ravine where his partner was at 
work, and found him bending over a mass of mud and clay 
which he was knocking about with a pick. 

"What is it ? " said Walter, scrambling to Daly's side through 
the abounding clay and slush. 

" It is a nugget ! " replied Daly ; " and unless I very much 
mistake, it means home for us, Walter . at least home for you 
and England for me ! " 

" Ye're looking mighty cheerful to-night, Misther Clint," said 
Spoiled Five to his patron, late that evening, when he dropped 
in upon one of his innumerable errands. He might have lived 
in their hut altogether ; but he never would be persuaded to do 
so, preferring his own " little bit of a place," a curiously tiny 
cabin under an abutting crag half-way between the solitary hut 
and the " town." " Maybe it's letters has come, somehow ; 
though I haven't hard of any." 

" No, Five," said Walter, laughing ; " there are no letters that 
I know of. Do I look very jolly ? " 

" Bedad, ye do, sir ; ye look as if ye'd found the four-laved 
shamrock." 

" Don't know the vegetable in question, Y\n^. NOaaSC* \\. 



156 A Golden Sorrow, 

like ? What colour is it ? Yellow ? Anything like what we're 
looking for all day long here, and find so precious seldom, and 
so little of it ? Eh ? " 

Walter was going on in his gay, reckless way, when he was 
checked by a look from Daly, and stopped, rather awkwardly. 
Spoiled Five, busily engaged in feeding the dog, was not so 
much occupied as to prevent his seeing this look. He replied 
as if he had not seen it. 

" Misther Daly can tell you. Sure, he's offen hard tell of it 
at home. More betoken, there's them here that's seen it, and 
afther that, other things that was plazin' to them, and brought 
out the luck. Don't ye mind the fella that struck goold down 
in Mariposa County ? " 

"No," said Walter. "At least, I don't know whether I've 
heard of the chum you mean." 

" It was long afore you came. He was attacked by a robber 
an' he got his arm loose an' fired at him. Didn't the first bullet 
hit a spot of rock just behind the robber's showldher; and didn't 
he get another offer at him, and do for him wid the second ? 
And then, didn't he look to see what was makin' the rock 
shine so mighty bright where it was sthruck, and didn't he find 
quarts of goold in it ! " 

" Gold-bearing quartz, you mean, Five," suggested Daly. 
" Maybe so, Misther Daly ; but anyhow, it was a boy from 
County Westmathe that done it, and he had a four-laved sham- 
rock round his neck, along wid his scap'lar ; and if Misther 
Clint doesn't know what that is, sure you do, sir." 

" Yes, yes ; I know all about it, Five ; but I don't think the 
shamrock is a growth of these parts. Take your glass, Five ; 
it's there on the locker." 

Spoiled Five took up the small pewter measure, called by 
courtesy a glass, and having pulled a lock of his shock hair to 
the gentleman . for he had not discarded the customary cour- 
tesies of his country, even amid such discouraging surroundings, 
. said, as he slowly turned the liquor round and round, 
" Thank ye, sir ; and here's your YveakYv, ax^l ^fcsxW Clint V 



Spoiled Five. 157 

(his once bright brown eye was full of fun and meaning). 
" Whatsomever yez has found, here's wishin' ye full and plenty 
of them." Whereupon he promptly departed, and took his way 
to his " own little bit of a place." " Isn't that quare, now?" 
he said to himself. " There's Misther Clint 'ud tell me in a 
minnit they'd found a nugget o' goold ; and there's Misther 
Daly, that comes from my own townland, and he'd hide it from 
me av he could. Musha, then, them English isn't so 'cute 
after all ! " 



158 A Golden Sorrow- 



CHAPTER XVII. 

WARNING. 

Previously to that evening, Walter had received certain hints 
from Spoiled Five which occasioned him some uneasiness. 
In his desultory, exceptional sort of life among the busy com- 
munity, all labouring after a similar fashion for a common 
end, the maimed man heard and saw much which he was not 
suspected of knowing. It was fortunate for him that he was 
unsuspected : he might otherwise have incurred some risk, 
for it was extremely improbable that the dangerous members of 
that mixed community would have understood that paradoxical 
fidelity which was one of his chief characteristics. 

Ireland is prolific of " informers ; " the executive has, 
unhappily, never been at a loss for those despicable and corrupt 
tools with which to do the inevitable dirty work of government ; 
and yet there is no country in the world in which the " in- 
former " is held in such ruthless detestation. No matter what 
befalls him, however terrible his fate, the popular verdict is 
<; served him right." The wretch who betrays his fellow-men 
for the government pay is a moral leper, a creature absolutely 
apart, and debarred from all human pity, one who earns 
his wages carrying his life in his hand, and when he loses 
it, is just so much dead carrion. There is nothing in the 
social system of France more admirable, which makes a deeper 
impression on the foreign observer, than the parental and filial 
relations as we see them there : and yet there is no country in 
the world in which the hideous crime of parricide, held by the 
ancients to be virtually impossible, is so frequent, or perpetrated 
under circumstances so appalling, ajidiiomm^N^^^^raN^A. 



Warning. 159 

How are these two paradoxes to be explained ? Of a surety, 
the French and the Irish nations possess the defects of their 
qualities. 

Spoiled Five had the true Irish horror and hatred of an 
" informer," carried to its extreme ; for, supposing he had been 
mixed up in any equivocal transaction, not only would he have 
regarded the betrayal of a comrade as an entirely damnable 
sin, but he had a deeply rooted aversion to being a party to 
any kind of detection whatever. He was a perfectly honest, 
sober individual himself, singularly industrious and tranquil in 
all his ways, and so little given to conviviality, that he some- 
times risked his popularity with his rough though rarely unkind 
employers, by his lack of disposition to drink and smoke, and 
his scanty appreciation of howling joviality. But he had 
a native lawlessness in him ; he hated police, and he would 
lend a hand to the rope which was to hang a spy, any day ; 
while his usual vigilance and keen intelligence would be 
suffered to slumber strangely, if the matter in hand were the 
bringing of any other kind of delinquent into "trouble." 

Without fully understanding his character in these respects, 
Walter Clint had an impression that, in conveying to him a 
warning that he would do well to send the dust lately washed 
to the nearest station for purchase by the bankers without 
delay, Spoiled Five had given a strong proof of his attachment. 
He had not made any explanation, but had merely pressed 
the matter as an earnest request, muttering something vague 
about " quare people " being about. Walter had told Daly 
what Spoiled Five had said, and found him unwilling to attach 
any importance to it. Everything had been very quiet lately, 
and they had not had reason for apprehension in conse- 
quence of the isolation of their hut. Neither rumour nor 
their own observation led them to believe that there was any 
fresh element of disorder, any addition to the average of row- 
dyism, in the place. They had not a large quantity of " dust " 
ready, and, but for the finding of the nugg^X, y?\v\Ocv ^a&, ^cvs?5 
had no doubt, of very considerable value, tYve^ ^o\j\& Tv\.\*aN^. 



160 A Golden Sorrow. 

thought of profiting by the approaching opportunity of trans- 
mitting what they had to the station, with the security afforded 
by numbers. But the finding of the nugget made all the differ- 
ence, and it was arranged that Walter should join the expedi- 
tion. 

It was with singular approbation that Spoiled Five heard 
this. Of course it confirmed his impression that some piece 
of exceptional good fortune had befallen the partners ; and when 
the correctness of Deering's opinion was made manifest by Daly's 
increasing illness, the man's vexation was proportionate to his 
short-lived satisfaction. It was clear that Walter could not 
leave his friend, who continued for many days unconscious 
of his presence, and in a state of troubled delirium positively 
appalling to Spoiled Five, who, if he was not, as Walter had 
said, afraid of nothing else, was very distinctly afraid of that. 

" Holy Virgin ! " he would say> with awe, which made the 
ejaculation half a supplication, " listen to him now ! Isn't it 
dhreadful to hear him goin' an like that ; it's he must have the 
bad mind, I'm afeerd, though his ways is so quiet and aisy." 
It became so evident to Walter that their faithful assistant 
was becoming seriously shaken in his good opinion of Law- 
rence, by his wild ravings and denunciations of imaginary 
enemies, that he endeavoured to keep him away as much as 
possible. Deering laughed at the man's ignorance and at 
Walter's consideration, much to the indignation of Spoiled 
Five. 

" Nothing to do with his thoughts, or with his past life, his 
goin's on hasn't. Ay, bedad, I'm goin' to believe that, amn't 
I, for him or any docthor ! Maybe there's no Miss Kate, then ; 
that's on his mind for some rayson best known to himself ? 
And who's that ould Clibborn he tuk me for last night, I'd 
like to know; and let a roar out of him as if he was stuck 
wid a knife ? Sure, they say when a man's dhrunk he tells 
the truth, and why wouldn't he tell it when he's mad ! Av 
it was the docthor there himself, I'm thinkin' he wouldn't be 
pleasant to listen to." 



Warning. 161 

After a few days, Daly's illness took a favourable turn, and 
he began to mend rapidly. Walter had suffered very much 
from fatigue and anxiety, and was in great need of rest, 
when, late one night, after he had almost begun to despair of 
Spoiled Five's return from the store, whither he had gone 
several hours before to make some purchases, the man came 
in, and said, seriously, that he had something important to tell 
him. His manner effectually roused Walter. 

" Is Misther Daly asleep ? " Spoiled Five asked* 

" He is. Why ? " 

" Because he mus'n't hear what I'm goin' to say. Come out 
behind the house with me, sir, av ye plaze." 

Walter complied. 

Spoiled Five planted himself against the low wall, and, taking 
.hold of Walter by the sleeve of his red shirt, said, in a 
low but decided voice, from which his habitual drawl was 
almost entirely banished, . 

" Misther Clint, you and Misther Daly has known me for 
a good bit now; did yez ever know me to pry into your 
affairs, or to make yez an impident answer, or to tell yez a lie ? " 

" Certainly not, Five ; nothing of the kind. You have been 
our best friend in this strange place, and perfectly trustworthy." 

"Thank ye, sir; that's hearty, anyhow. Well, then, ye'll 
listen to what I tell you, and you'll be said and led by me-? 
Won't you ? " 

His ugly disfigured face and his maimed figure acquired 
intense expression from his earnestness. 

" Won't you ? " he repeated, tightening his grasp on Walter's 
sleeve, and slightly shaking him. 

"I think so, Five. But you must speak out before I 
promise." 

"I'll spake out, at laste in as far as I can ; but you'll have 
to take my word, and not ask me for raysons, or for proofs, 
for that's just what I can't give you. There's quare people 
about, and the best men in the Placers is gone to t\\fe ^\aX\src^ 
and yell mind what I tould you afoie, M\s\\\et CX\s\\."* " 



1 62 A Golden Sorrow. 

Walter nodded assent. He was listening eagerly, watching 
the man's scarred face intently. 

"There's disappointed people here; and when men has 
come all across the world to do the kind of work that's 
goin' here, and meets wid disappointment, if they're anyway 
bad at all, they're not far off desperation. I can't say more 
about that, and I won't I don't know what you and Misther 
Daly found, nor where ye found it ; I didn't ask you, and I 
don't want to know." Walter was going to speak, but Spoiled 
Five stopped him by a quick movement of his mutilated 
hand. 

" No, sir ; don't tell me. I beg and pray of you not to tell 
me. Whatever you found, and wherever you have it, if it's 
about the premises, hide it . hide it, sir, somewhere away from 
the hut, and let no one but yourself know where it's hid. Do 
it at once, sir ; do it as soon as there's light ; that will be in 
an hour ; don't let me know anything about it. Let me mind 
Misther Daly . I'll lie on the floor in the room, and he'll never 
know it isn't you ; or, if he calls you, I'll have some excuse 
ready . but do it, Misther Clint, do it, if you want to bring 
what you've got safe home to them that's waitin' for you an' 
it And tell me nothin' at all about it ; that's all I ask, for 
my own sake." 

" But," said Walter, as Spoiled Five loosed his hold upon 
his sleeve, and stood waiting his reply, " you will surely tell 
me what you apprehend, and who are the dangerous parties ? " 

" No, sir ; I won't I'll tell you nothin' but what I have 
tould you. But if ye don't mind me, if you don't be said and 
led by me, you and Misther Daly will only be sorry for it 
once, and that'll be all your life long." 

He glanced up, along the frowning face of the huge rock 
which rose, a black mass, behind the hut, towards the clear, 
steel-like sky, already beginning to flush at the approach of 
the swift- coming morning, then limped into the hut, and 
softly entered the room in which Daly was sleeping the deep, 
restful sleep of convalescence, curled Ynrcvs^ w\> oxv xbfe&KK 



Warning. 163 

beside the locker, and resolutely shut his one eye, in dogged 
determination, if not in slumber. 

Walter remained motionless on the little stony plateau at 
the back of the hut, where Spoiled Five had left him. He 
had no longer any inclination to treat the Irishman's warning 
lightly. No suggestion presented itself to him of the quarter 
from which danger was to be expected, or the form in which 
it might come ; but he was entirely convinced by Spoiled Five's 
manner and words, and he resolved to act at once upon his 
counsel. 

The light was spreading over the face of the sky before 
Walter, now all unconscious of fatigue, left the spot, having 
matured and considered his plan of action. He stepped 
down into the rugged road, and from thence rapidly 
climbed a stony path which led to the brow of a ravine, 
forming a portion of their claim', distant about a quarter of a 
mile from the hut. The place was perfectly silent and solitary, 
the mining tools were lying about, the whole scene was peace- 
ful. He gazed from the top of the ravine at a spot where the 
rugged earth was scooped deeply out under the ragged edge, 
and after a few minutes' search, his eye lighted on the spot 
he was looking for. This was a large piece of rock which stuck 
out from the earth ; and exactly beneath it, at an interval of 
about six feet, there was another . the two forming natural 
slabs, by whose rough sides were clumps of stringy, harsh, 
brownish vegetation. The lower of the two slabs was so 
placed that a strong active man might reach it by a spring 
from the winding path, a dry water-course, that led upwards 
into the ravine, on the side opposite to that from which Walter 
had approached it. He once more looked cautiously all round, 
and then rapidly retraced his steps to the hut. 

A couple of hours later, when Walter had lain down to 
rest in his hammock, and Lawrence Daly was thinking of 
getting up, when the hut and its surroundings wore a most 
unusual aspect of stillness and idleness, Yteexm^ raa&YN^ .a^ 
early visit to his patient, found Spoiled Ywfc *\\vfc% ^ * 

m 2 



164 A Golden Sorrow* 

wooden bench before the door, arrayed in a rough leathern 
apron, and cleaning all the arms belonging to the establish- 
ment 

" I'm doubly glad to find you quite off the sick-list," said 
Deering, after he and Daly had talked for some time, " because 
I shall have no hesitation about starting to-morrow." 

" To-morrow ! Are you going so soon ? " 

" Yes ; going to Sacramento, and thence on the ' roll ' I told 
Clint I meant to try, down New Mexico way." 

" And when to England ? " 

" That the Fates only can tell. I have no particular wish 
to get back. Have you ? " 

" Well . yes . I think I have. I don't take very kindly to 
any other country for long at a time. In that sense, I'm a 
wanderer too. But we can't go back until we've got what we 
came for." 

They talked of the prospects of the county, and of the 
State generally, and exchanged some common-places about 
the chances of their meeting again. Presently, Walter, who on 
awakening had heard their voices, came in. He was looking 
pale and tired. He wore a short canvas coat over his digger's 
shirt, and in one of the gaping dog's-eared pockets there was 
a small green leathern case, considerably the worse for wear, 
which served the manifold purposes of purse, portfolio, and 
house-wife. He shook hands with Deering, and seated him- 
self in his favourite place on the locker, with his head 
against the wall. Daly told Walter that Deering was leaving 
the place on the following day, and Deering offered to take 
charge of any letters they might have ready to be mailed at 
Sacramento. 

This was a welcome offer to Walter; he had written to 
Florence at intervals during Daly's illness, and also to Miriam, 
and was glad of an opportunity of securing a comparatively 
early despatch of his letters. They were ready ; he had only 
to put that intended for Florence into a cover, enclose it in 
the letter for Miriam, and direct botVi to Mxs. **&. Q\\etiC\x^ *x 



Warning. 165 

The Firs, Drington, Hampshire. The letters were in the 
leather case in his pocket, and he* got writing materials, which 
he placed on the locker, and then pulled out the case, pro- 
duced the letters, and was about to write the addresses, when 
Deering interrupted him. 

" What's the matter with your wrist, Clint ? " he asked. 
" It is bleeding, and you are smearing your letters with blood." 

" Bleeding ! " exclaimed Walter, holding up his hand, and, 
in doing so, pushing the letter-case, which he had mechanically 
closed, off the locker, whence it fell on the floor. " So it is ! 
I cut my wrist with a bit of stone this morning, and, washing 
my hands just now, set it bleeding again. It's a nasty deep 
three-cornered cut too." He was twisting a handkerchief 
round it, when Deering said, . 

" Stay ; I'll do it up for you ! " He took out of his pocket 
a leather case containing a few small surgical instruments, and 
a provision of lint and sticking-plaster, and with the aid of 
these materials fastened up the cut in Walter's wrist, after a 
fashion which the latter declared to be very comfortable, al- 
though it caused him to write the names, "Miriam" and 
"Florence/' upon the several letters intended for his sister 
and his wife, in a formal and constrained manner. This done, 
and the letters confided to Deering, Walter cleared away the 
writing materials. 

The three young men talked on for a considerable time. 
There was no very strong or real liking between them ; but 
they were of the same class, living among men who, for 
the most part, belonged to inferior classes ; and the kind of 
association which theirs had been, if it had less bearing on 
the future than the associations of less exceptional phases of 
society, had greater importance in the present. When at 
length Deering announced that he must go, and was taking a 
cordial leave of Daly, combining good wishes with some final 
professional instructions, Walter declared his intention of 
accompanying him a bit of the way. Kfc^cawVi ^.^\\\sv^s^. 
the bluff, he said ; and they were \ea\m^ \H\e \aax \.a^fcaRs- 



1 66 A Golden Sorrow. 

when Deering observed his leather instrument-case lying on 
the floor, in front of the locker. He picked it up, put it into 
his pocket, and they went out. 

At first they talked exclusively of Daly, but after awhile, 
observing Walter shade his eyes with his hand, though his 
broad-leaved Panama hat sheltered them already, Deering asked 
him if he felt ill. 

" No," said Walter ; " it's only the glare of the sun : it is 
hotter than usual to-day, I think ; and I was up all night, and 
feel queer." 

" Indeed ! Was anything wrong with Daly ? " 

" No," Walter answered, rather confusedly ; " I had some- 
thing particular to do which kept me up, and I was always 
bad at doing without sleep." 

" I should say so," said Deering quietly, " for you are in- 
clined to stagger now ; only you are guarding against it at 
every step. Don't come any farther, I beg ; and don't neglect 
yourself in any way just now. You're overdone." 

He stood still as he spoke, and put out his hand. They 
had reached the bluff by this time, and, with some friendly 
words, they parted, Deering walking quickly on, and Walter 
watching his receding figure so long as it was in sight. 

" He's a queer, restless fellow, and rather a bad lot, I 
suspect," thought Walter. " I wonder whether I shall ever 
see him again ! " 

"What the devil was he doing," thought Deering, "that 
kept him up all night, and made him look so confused ? I 
don't think he rightly knew what he was saying. Shouldn't 
be in the least surprised if he were in for the fever ! " 



167 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

BETWEEN DARK AND DAWN. 

A day or two later, the friends held a consultation over 
their affairs. Daly was sufficiently recovered to make it safe 
to do so, and they had a good deal to discuss. Walter took 
care not to inspire Lawrence with the degree of uneasiness 
which Spoiled Five's warning had communicated to himself. 
He told him that he had buried the nugget for its greater 
security, and found Lawrence rather disposed to laugh at 
his caution. Their talk turned on England, on the possi- 
bilities of the future, and on those absent ones to whom their 
success would make such a difference. There had been so 
much of the hard and practical in their life, that they had 
long left off day-dreaming, and it was a relief to indulge in it 
again for awhile. It was pleasant to talk of how Walter could 
go home, and claim his wife, and leave his father to make 
friends with him, or not, as he chose. He probably would 
not choose : men of his sort o temper chafe more under the 
knowledge of the independence of others than from any other 
cause. Florence had told Walter in her letters that Mr. Clint 
was civil to her in her assumed character; but that was no 
reason why he should pardon the assumption of it. He 
must build no castles on that foundation ; but it did not matter 
very much ; he could not care much now. He had come to 
think of pecuniary independence of his father as the one 
end to be desired and won. They were talking of the change 
in their respective looks since they had left England. 

" I look rather cut up just now, don't I ? " Lawrence askfi.<L 
" Indeed you do. Your face is Yvatf as \crcv^ *%am asSx^ras^ 



1 68 A Golden Sorrow. 

and as thin as a razor. But you will be all right in a few 
days." 

" It doesn't much matter/' said Lawrence, with a slight tone 
of regret in his voice. " There is no one to fret over the 
spoiling of my beauty ; and you will go home with yours im- 
proved. You see, that's the great difference between you and 
me ; you have so much to .go home to, and I have so little. 
Nothing, indeed, except for your sake and your wife's . I never 
can forget how that brave little woman trusted me . I might 
just as well stay here, or anywhere, as go there." 

" I wish you had known my sister," said Walter, after a 
pause. 

" What put that into your head just now ? Do you think 
we should have fallen in love with one another, and made 
things comfortable by two stolen matches in the family instead 
of one ? " 

" Not exactly ; and yet 1 don't know. I think you 
would have liked Miriam. I wonder how she could ever 
bring herself to do what she has done. It was so unlike 
her ! " 

" There I think you are wrong," said Daly ; " if I may say 
so, knowing your sister only from your description. I fancy 
she is ambitious and determined, and that she could not 
endure the sort of life which you yourself, even with a young 
man's comparative liberty, could not stand. She gave you 
much that sort of explanation, did she not? I think it is 
satisfactory." 

" I don't. Of course she could not stand the life ; but to 
get out of it in that way was unworthy of her. I can see, 
in every line Florence has written to me about it, how she 
regards it." 

" No doubt ; but you must not expect every woman. not 

even your sister . to be endowed with such delicacy of mind 

and simple good sense as your wife's. She is, in addition to 

all this, a romantic person, and believes in love to an extent 

not warranted by human experience. Mis. Sfc. Quentin 



Between Dark and Dawn. 169 

may like her husband well enough, though not so much as 
your wife would think necessary." 

" Perhaps so ; but she doesn't write like it, and Florence 
does not write like it. It is only by experience that any 
woman can come to understand what she does in marrying 
for any other motive than love ; but instinct ought to have 
taught a girl like Miriam that it must be a losing game. She 
never mentioned his name in her last letters to me ; they were 
full of her travels, and her acquaintances, and of everything 
but her husband and her home. ,, 

" Perhaps she is not of a domestic turn. There are such 
women, though Mrs. Clint would not like to believe or admit 
the fact." 

" I can't tell whether she is or not. She never had a 
home she could love while she and I were together. But 
she has a fine nature, with all her self-will and worldliness . 
she certainly is thoroughly worldly . and is generous and true 
beyond any woman I ever met." 

" True to you, you mean . true where she loves ; otherwise, 
there is evidence against her abstract truthfulness of character 
in her marriage, I think." 

" Yes, there is. I did mean true to me. Perhaps she is 
not a very frank person in general. I daresay she would not 
be altogether scrupulous about the way of doing anything 
which she or I wanted to have done. But I cannot blame her 
for that, having profited by it, as I have done. She has be- 
haved splendidly to Florence. Poor girl ! it has been a weary 
time for her, even with all Miriam's kindness and sympathy. 
What would it have been without them ? " 

" Thank heaven, it is nearly over for her and for you 
too." 

" For her and for me ! " said Walter, looking up in surprise 
at Daly. " Why do you say that so distinctly ; as if the time 
had not been long for you too, and is not for you drawing to 
an end ? " 
Daly laughed. "You are as sharp as a ^omxv^to. 



170 A Golden Sorrow, 

and as suspicious. I may as well tell you I hive been think- 
ing of sending you home without me ; only thinking of it as 
yet We were talking, just now, of the very different motives 
of your life and mine. I have not much there, and I have 
nothing here ; but Deering has been talking to me, and has 
bitten me, I think, with his rolling-stone fancies. This New 
World is so large, and I have seen so little of it. There's 
something irresistible to me in the idea of the vast space, and 
the immense variety of the human race one may see." 

Walter was much distressed to find such a purpose had 
presented itself to Daly's mind, and endeavoured to persuade 
him to relinquish it, by every means in his power. Daly told 
him again that he had not made up his mind, but had merely 
been set thinking by Deering. 

" A bad lot he is," said Walter, " though he did pull you 
through the fever. A cunning, dangerous fellow, I'm sure, 
who never did any one any good." 

" He does not seem to have done himself any," said Law- 
rence. "He does not let out much about himself; but he 
has been roaming about since he was eighteen . he did tell me 
that much .and seems no nearer settling down than at first. 
I daresay he has led a queer life, if one could only know 
about it." 

" Which one can't. And yet what a way of worming things 
out of other people he has ! I didn't like him a bit, and yet 
he knows as much about me as I should tell to the person I liked 
best. he knows all about me, in fact . except that I'm married 
. and I daresay he has a pretty general notion of your past 
and present also." 

" Yes ; I have nothing to hide. certainly not a sweet, pretty 
little wife, as you have . and, as he seemed interested about 
our friendship and partnership, I told him our story . * short 
and simple annals of the poor ' . and how that old ruffian in 
India had treated me. He said rather a good thing, by-the- 
bye, characteristic of him, I fancy : ' Why the devil didn't you 
go out to India, and make it deuced u&\>\easax& fat t\\$ old 



Between Dark and Dawn . 171 

* 

screw? You'd have brought him to reason that way, and 
done it much cheaper that coming out here.' It wasn't worth 
while to explain to him that I did not look at it in that light. 
He would have made himself unpleasant in some way to old 
Clibborn, no doubt " 

" I am sure he would," assented Walter. "I wonder Deering 
hasn't got on better ; he's the sort of man that ought to get 
on, if there's any good in pushing and self-assertion." 

" I fancy the vagabond strain in him neutralizes those 
undeniably useful qualities." 

Then they talked of the probable value of their nugget ; of 
when the next opportunity for conveying gold to the station 
under safe escort would be likely to occur; and when they 
might hope to receive letters from England. It was now a 
long time since any communication from home had reached 
them, and Walter was getting very impatient. He did not 
even know where Florence was. When he had last heard 
from her, she was at Naples, where Mr. and Mrs. St. Quentin 
meant to remain for the winter and the early spring ; and from 
thence return to England. Her letter was written only a short 
time before that of Mrs. Ritchie had come to create an entire 
change in her life, actual and prospective. They referred to 
its contents, and to Florence's mentioning that Miriam was 
sitting for her portrait to a painter at Naples. 

" She is very handsome, is she not ? " asked Daly. 

" Yes ; I think so. Her features are not very regular, and 
she has not much colour, people say ; but I think her face 
lovely . the expression is so bright and fearless ; and her eyes 
are splendid . large golden eyes. Can you imagine an eagle's 
eyes, with all trie brightness left in them, and a great deal of 
exquisite softness added, on occasion ? " 

" It is not an easy effort of imagination, but I think I can. 
That is just the kind of beauty I have imagined sometimes, but 
I never really saw it. But, Walter, a woman like your sister 
must have married a rich man ; she iv\T c.oxA^l \&n^ \tfts.^ 
happy in an obscure position." 



172 A Golden Sorrow. 

" No," said Walter carelessly ; " I suppose not. At all 
events, she has done it, and there's no use in grumbling." 

" How glad she will be to welcome you to her home ! 
Where is St. Quentin's place ?" 

"I don't know that he has one. Neither Miriam nor 
Florence has said anything about it ; and as to her welcoming 
me, that must depend in a great measure on my venerable 
brother-in-law. I have rather a curiosity to see the old fellow. 
I daresay he is not a bad sort, if he were not Miriam's hus- 
band." 

" There you go again ! One would think you were her 
mother, you are so hard to please. You have just said, 
very sensibly, that, as the deed was done, there was no use in 
grumbling ; and there you are, grumbling again ! " 

" I beg your pardon, old fellow," said Walter, with his usual 
gay good-humour, " for bothering you with my guesses and 
forebodings about the fate of a woman whom you never saw, 
and perhaps never will see, though I hope you may. I have 
been boring you horribly all this time." 

" Indeed you have not. Everything that interests you 
interests me also, and I have the utmost curiosity to see 
Mrs. St. Quentin. Moreover, I am not at all inclined to doubt 
that it is much better for my peace of mind that I shall see 
her first, if I see her at all, as Mrs. St. Quentin. How very 
white and tired you are looking ! " 

"I am tired. I think I will turn in for a good night's rest, 
and so get rid of my headache." 

Nothing was said between the two of the care as tender, and 
the watching as vigilant, as any which a woman might have 
bestowed, lavished by Walter on Daly ; but between these two 
words were not needed. Their hearts were knit together in one 
of those friendships that have the gravity, dignity, and sim- 
plicity of the higher class of male character, united with that 
partial affection which women feel for one another. It had 
grown out of a casual association into one of the most enduring 
ties which human feeling can create, axui *\t ^was> ^w^ nm*> 



Between Dark and Dawn. 173 

injured by the great superiority of Lawrence to Walter. Just 
before they parted for the night, Daly said, . 

" I don't exactly understand where it is you have hidden our 
nugget, Walter. You must show me the spot to-morrow." 

" I made an exact memorandum of it in my pocket-book, 
like the man in Edgar Poe's story ; only it's not in cipher . 
and also that I don't mean any one else to read it. Nothing 
like being businesslike, you know. But as to showing it to you 
to-morrow, it is out of the question. It's a good way up the 
ravine, and a steepish climb to get within sight of it. Don't 
flatter yourself you could do the distance, or anything like it, 
even on the level, as yet. Deering cautioned me about your 
tendency to imagine yourself too well, and tire yourself." 

The solemn beauty of the night was at its deepest and 
grandest, and the isolated hut itself was hardly more tranquil 
than the clustered dwellings lower down in the* valley. A 
great hush had fallen on all the striving and labour of the 
place ; and the murmur of the streamlets, inaudible by day, 
save at the falls, might be heard under the awful height of the 
sky. The great rifts in the rocks, the ditches, the dams, all 
the appliances of the search in which the population of the 
great valley worked their bodies and strained their minds to 
the utmost, looked like deserted ruins, gaunt, ugly, and desolate 
in the midst of nature's vastness and majesty. 

If the solitary hut had had less rude and prosaic surroundings, 
it might have been accounted picturesque : but as it was, it was 
only solitary and grim. Walter Clint was not destined to the 
good night's sleep that was to cure his headache. A strange 
restlessness was upon him, against which his resolution to 
sleep was powerless, and all his efforts to control his mind, 
and force it into pleasant tracks of thought failed. Why 
could he not think of home and Florence, of the success 
which had come to him and Daly, and the possibilities which 
that success opened up for his future ? Why did all these 
subjects of reflection seem unreal, waveiiw^ fo^ca&ta&,> sA 
a)l sorts of trivialities . quaint sayings of Spc&e& Y\n^ ^kxs^ 



174 A Golden Sorrow. 

of miners' gossip, the colour of Deering's neck-tie, little bits out 
of books he had read long ago, rhymes which he and Miriam 
had made when they were children, the face and voice of a 
lecturer whom he had heard at one of the medical schools in 
London, innumerable trifling occurrences of yesterday, of 
last year, of ten years ago . why did these things come 
rushing and tumbling into his aching head in crowds? 
If they would even have come one by one, so that he might 
think of each separately, for the instant of time which it 
would require, and get rid of it ! But there was no such 
relief. These crowding ideas were worthless, silly, teasing; 
but he could no more separate, disperse, rid himself of them 
than he could govern the movements of the insects that 
filled the dazzling air in the golden evenings. They wearied 
him inexpressibly, but he was powerless under their swarming 
attacks The hiding of the nugget . he would think of 
that ! He was determined to think of that He had 
done it; he could not exactly, or indeed at all, remem- 
ber why, but he had done it, and of course he could think of 
it, could recall every little incident of his task. No; he could 
not. When he tried to retrace in his fancy the path by which 
he had ascended the ravine, he found himself a young boy 
again, running along by the hedge which bordered the road 
leading from The Firs to Mr. Martin's house at Drington. 
Here was Mr. Martin feeling his pulse, desiring him to put 
out his tongue, promising him jam with his physic. Very odd! 
A little while ago, he was a long way off, with a man whose 
name he ought to know, but could not remember, in a distant 
country, where were great mountains and a pitiless desert, 
broad rivers and herds of strange beasts, rough men and a train 
of waggons. He had been riding among them only a minute 
since, and before that he was working at the sluice out there. 
Out where ? How could there be a sluice, and miners' tools, 
a locker, and a man with red hair and a red beard, in the little 
garden before the cottage in George Lane, where Mrs. Reeve 
was lying dead? He must get up, and see atao>& to- 5 V 



Between Dark and Dawn. 175 

could not permit it The captain of the ship would not allow 
such encumbrance ; how came those things on the deck ? He 
must turn out . it was his watch. 

How was this ? He was on land, not in a ship, but striving 
to burst open a locked and barred door, but whether he was 
wildly anxious to get in or out of the place which the door 
defended, he was not sure, he only knew that there was urgent 
need of him at the other side of those locks and bars. He 
struggled with all his strength, and, it seemed to him, with 
the strength of many others besides himself, to wrench them 
open, for there were whispering voices calling to him, and 
stealthy steps creeping up to him, and now he must fly. And the 
locks and bars ! Stay ; he had the secret of them ; they were old 
acquaintances of his ; he had slid through them many a time when 
he was a boy. Why, he was a boy now, and he must get out 
of the house noiselessly, to escape from his father. The bolt 
is slipped, the key is turned, and Walter stands on the stony 
plateau, the huge rock frowning blackly upon him, and the awful 
steel vault of the sky, a million miles, it seems to him, above 
him. To be sure, it is up there he wants to go ; he knows all 
about it now ; that was what was whispered close to him ; and 
he rushes out with a shout, and flings his arms up, as though 
they were wings, and he were trying them, but is tripped up, 
and brought down prone upon his hands and face, by some- 
thing which lies in the deep shadow. He utters no sound, 
but clutches at this substance, and lies, partly beside, partly 
over it, shuddering, until, in another minute, Lawrence is on 
the spot, and investigating that heap by the light of the steel 
vault and the stars. Besides Walter, it consists of a dead dog 
and a dead man : of Sambo, dexterously choked by a loop at 
the end of a long line ; and Spoiled Five, whose skull has 
been shattered, probably by the butt-end of a pistol. 



176 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

MARKED " IMMEDIATE." 

To drag the living man away from the dead, into the hut, as 
speedily and with as little injury to his insensible body 
as possible. for Lawrence was too weak to lift Walter, 
and could only drag him by his arms . to lay him down 
within the entrance, and replace the fastenings, was Daly's 
first action ; his second, to blow a shrill blast upon a metal 
whistle . the concerted, well-known signal of danger and dis- 
tress. He then fetched his revolver, all the chambers charged, 
laid it on the ground beside him, and once more resumed his 
efforts to bring Walter to consciousness. The interior of the 
lonely hut presented a strange spectacle, as Daly, ghastly 
with horror, and weak with recent illness, strove, all alone 
with his seemingly dead friend, to loosen the clenched 
teeth, and unclose the stiffened hands, ignorant whether 
desperate enemies were at hand, and without any clue to the 
crime which had been committed. What had brought Spoiled 
Five there ? Had he come hither with any evil intention, or 
to watch and protect them ? These and innumerable other 
questions had presented themselves to Lawrence Daly, to re- 
main unanswered, before he had the relief of seeing Walter's 
eyes unclose. At length they did so. It was only for an in- 
stant They closed again, but as he groaned and shuddered, 
at least life was in the man. Once more Daly sounded 
his whistle, long and loud, and this time Walter started and 
writhed at the noise ; struggled into a sitting posture on the 
floor, and stared at Lawrence, without the least recognition 
in his burning, glassy eyes. He groaned Y\eaN\Vj agaiti and 



Marked t. Immediate" 1 77 

again, but made no resistance while Lawrence half led, half 
dragged him to his hammock. By this time there was a stir 
in the valley, and men carrying torches were coming along the 
road towards the hut. There was security in the sound. No 
attack having been made before the alarm was given and 
acted upon, none was to be apprehended now. The 
murderers had evidently decamped. Daly put on some ad- 
ditional clothing, and waited, listening eagerly for the aid that 
was coming. The voices and the torches drew ' nearer, the 
tread of many feet came up along the stony path, past the 
bluff, and close to the plateau. The dawn was already spread- 
ing, and in a few minutes a crowd of eager men sur- 
rounded the hut, and were clamorously demanding particu- 
lars of the murder, which Daly was quite unable to give them, 
while a few were minutely examining the body. 

They were a rough lot, and horrid sights, in a general way, 
affected them very little ; but this one roused the indignant 
compassion and disgust of every man among them. It was 
such a dastardly crime to kill the maimed man who was so 
useful, so harmless, so familiar to them all. Every man among 
them knew Spoiled Five, and his preference for Daly and Clint 
was also well known. Daly could tell them no more than 
that the murdered man had had vague apprehensions of dan- 
ger to them from some quarter which he had not indicated, 
and had presumably been watching the hut, without their 
knowledge, on this fatal night Lawrence accounted for him- 
self on the occasion, thus : he had slept soundly after part- 
ing with Walter, until awakened by a noise at first inexpli- 
cable to him. Thinking, for a moment, it must have existed 
only in his fancy, he listened for a repetition of it ; then in- 
stantly started up, and rushed out at the back of the hut, 
where he beheld the spectacle already described. 

A minute search of the premises was instituted, but no clue 
to the perpetrators of the crime was found. While some of 
the party carried the murdered man itvto tta^ YaaX, *axA\&^ 
him on a rough table, one of them betYvo\^X\\vnv oVybs^s*-- 



178 A Golden Sorrow. 

ing the dog, which had been kicked aside, and was lying 
against the outer wall. The man moved the poor dead brute 
with his foot, turning him over on his back, and then bent 
down and minutely examined the loop and line with which he 
had been choked. 

" Whar wer this yer dog when you come out ? " he asked Daly, 
who replied that Sambo was close to Spoiled Five's body: 
they were in a heap together ; he could not tell more exactly 
than that. The man pushed the dead dog over to the spot 
from which the dead man had just been removed, and, taking 
the end of the long line, he walked away with it to the four 
points in succession, carefully examining the ground in each 
distance. On the fourth occasion, he lifted up his head with a 
satisfied air, and, dropping the line, lounged into the hut with 
his hands in his pockets. 

" The dog was chucked up from yonder," said he to Daly. 
"There's good hiding behind that bit of crag, and some- 
body's been stain' agin the bush, for it's squeezed flat. The 
trick's been done by a chum with a tidy notion of the meanin' 
of the lasso. I guessed it when I saw the loop, so well greased 
and taut." 

And then, thinking, probably, that he had given enough 
time and consideration to this matter, about which so many 
others were busying themselves, the speaker lounged away. 

The rude but usually effectual forms of justice, as practised in 
the State, were all complied with in this case, but without result 
If a momentary suspicion lighted on Walter Clint as the pos- 
sible perpetrator of the deed, it was only momentary. There 
was no conceivable motive ; and Daly's account of the anxiety 
which the unfortunate man had shown for the safety of their 
" dust," even in the modified form in which only he was aware 
of it, combined with the acquaintance with all the good 
and bad characters in the place that Spoiled Five was well 
known to have, removed the crime in one sense from the 
category of mystery, A plot to rob the tenants of the isolated 
hut had no doubt come to his knovjte&. W\* ^wAvax \&ea 



Marked " Immediate? 1 79 

of honour and fidelity at once hindered him from betraying, 
and prompted him to prevent it at the risk . at the cost, as it 
proved . of his life. Daly's conjectures were as endless as 
they were unavailing. Did the murderers know of the exist- 
ence of the nugget ? Had they come for that, as well as for 
the " dust ; " and had Spoiled Five met them, and told them 
their search would be vain ? Had they murdered him, in re- 
venge for his having circumvented them ? How much likeli- 
hood there was in these suppositions, he could not know un- 
til Walter should be in a condition to tell him whether Spoiled 
Five had admitted to him more knowledge of their success 
than the ambiguous sentence which he had spoken to them 
jointly," Whatever yez has found, here's wishirC ye full and 
plenty of them /' until he could learn from Walter whether the 
murdered man had any cognizance ofWalter's morning's work in 
the ravine. How soon their success had lost its flavour ! With 
what horror and bitterness it was dashed ! Of how little value 
the gold seemed to him now . when, of the two human 
beings who only, out of all the swarming multitudes on 
that vast continent, had loved him, one was a disfigured 
corpse, and the other was in the deadly gripe of fever. Of how 
little value ? Of none ! He loathed it ! He was glad to 
remember that he did not know where it was, that it was 
put away, out of his keeping, out of his sight, in the earth 
again, somewhere . and that it could trouble him no more, 
until these calamities should be overpast. 

The murderers kept their secret as securely as the earth held 
its treasure. They were not detected, though suspicion lighted 
in several directions, and much increased vigilance was en- 
forced. Even upon that lawless community, it produced a 
grave impression that the perpetrators of so dastardly a crime 
should go unknown, and unpunished, in the midst of them ; 
and the victim was daily missed among his familiar haunts. 
They buried him in a green and peaceful spot in the valley, 
already peopled with many dead, and thexv. \V ^ras &&&n^c%& 
that no man knew his name. Lawrence and ^ &\&c VaA. wsN^st 

K 2 



180 A Golden Sorrow. 

heard it . he had been " Spoiled Five " by traditional usage 
long before they came to Placer County. A rude wooden 
cross marks the place of his burial, bearing the familiar name 
cut deeply into its transverse beam, in perfect good faith, 
unassociated with the smallest idea of irreverence. 

There was no lack of help for Daly in the task he had now 
to fulfil. There was general and genuine sympathy for the 
friends, who were getting such a strong turn of trouble, and any 
number of rough miners would have been available in Walter's 
need. For many days Daly had no hope that he could recover. 
The fever was so unlike that which had attacked himself, so 
much worse, more violent, more exhausting ; and it had been hard 
for him, a stronger man than Walter, to fight with it and beat 
it. Had he even yet beaten it? he sometimes asked himself, 
when he felt lassitude and depression invade his powers, alike 
of mind and body, making him despair of everything. But they 
told him he must expect to have these sensations for many a 
day to come. And they told him that Walter would recover, 
long before he could bring himself to hope for such a possibility, 
and had told him so many times while yet he refused to believe 
it. 

It was hard to look at Walter, and think that health and 
vigour could ever come to him again. For some time, indeed, 
reason seemed to be totally extinguished. He altered so 
awfully in appearance that Daly dreaded to look at him ; and, 
when he was not before his eyes, was haunted by the distorted, 
yellow, hollow, foolish face . the face that was not Walter's at 
all, but a dreadful mask fastened on his body by the fever- 
fiend. a mask which sometimes grinned idly, and sometimes 
was set in a grim despair, but never, never once, through long 
days and nights, looked like Walter, or ceased to be foolish 
and mad ; for its grin of laughter, and its grim lines of grief, 
were alike motiveless and unmeaning. 

Daly's mind was constantly occupied with Florence. 

How was he to write the truth to her when Walter 

should be gone? This was in tYvfc frtsX toy*, ^aea. \\a 



Marked " Immediate" 1 8 1 

was hopeless . The candid, confiding face of the young wife, 
when she had schooled herself to the great sacrifice of parting 
with her husband, rose up before his mental vision, and abode 
there, until he could bear it as ill as the actual sight of Walter. 
There was in that look such trust in Daly, such innocent 
obedience, that the remembrance of it was painful How 
should he tell her ? If Walter died, what would her fate be ? 
Daly could secure her from absolute poverty, and*rescue her 
from her false position in Reginald Clint's house ; but where 
should she find home and friends, if the truth were known, if 
the foolish project hitherto carried out by- the brother and 
sister were overthrown ? He had not been a party to Walter's 
plan for putting his wife under his sister's protection . he had 
known nothing of it until it was successfully carried out. And 
now he felt that Walter's death would change the entire aspect 
of affairs. Mrs. St. Quentin, with all her affection for her 
brother, her generous kindness to his wife, and her fidelity to 
her promise, was not a free agent He would be the young 
widow's only efficient friend She should have the whole of 
the produce of the joint toil of himself and Walter, and he 
. would begin over again on his own account. For many days 
his meditations were of this dismal kind, and it was while 
all the appearances were strongly against Walter's recovery 
that the party who had gone down to the station with " dust " 
for the bankers, returned, bringing with them a great bag of 
letters for the miners. 

Daly's usual share in the excitement that such rare occa- 
sions produced was great. He had no strong ties to England 
or Ireland now, and though he had made arrangements . in case 
of any communication being addressed to him by Mr. Clib- 
born . for its reaching him in the New World, he regarded 
such a contingency as so improbable that its existence as a 
possibility excited no emotion of expectation or suspense 
within him. But he was anxious and interested for Walter's 
sake, and on this occasion doubly so. &\v$^oi\&% ^^fcss: 
should recover, if not to convalescence, aX \sasX to tc&sjs^ 



1 82 A Golden Sorrow. 

and wake up to the cares which were now obscured by his 
illness, it might be of infinite importance to have letters from 
home to soothe and divert him. So Lawrence heard of the 
arrival of the letter-bag with anxious hope. 

He could not leave Walter, to go to the " town ; " but it was 
not necessary. Many a volunteer would have run down and 
back, even in working-hours, for letters for the lone hut, and 
Lawrence knew he should have them quickly, if any there were. 

It was evening, and Walter, who had been restless and ram- 
bling all day, had become quieter. His wan and sunken face 
was not, Daly thought, so unlike its former self, as it had been 
in the morning. The crisis of the fever was near : he had for 
some hours entertained a hope that Walter's strength might 
suffice for the passing through it . and was now watching him 
intently. 

He was alone with the sick man, which rarely occurred, as 
since the miserable death of Spoiled Five, their neighbours 
had been liberal of visits and services. There was perfect 
tranquillity immediately around the hut, but from the distance 
came the innumerable sounds of mining life in its play-hours, 
and under circumstances of unusual excitement. Ah occa- 
sional murmur of uneasiness, or a moan of pain from the sick 
man, was the only sound within the hut. The little cottage 
in George Lane, where he had seen Walter's wife for the first 
time, came back vividly to Lawrence's remembrance. He 
thought of her pretty young face, timid, but not weak, of her 
unaffected composed manner, and of her womanly sympathy 
when he told her the simple story of his life, hitherto so wasted 
and disappointed ; and a longing came to him, stronger and 
greater than before, that that young life might have brightness 
and peace in it. It would be cruel, needless, he thought, 
that such a harmless creature should be made so miserable. 
He was full of heartsickening compassion for her unconscious- 
ness of the doom which might be impending over her. 

He heard men's steps and voices, and being presently called 
by his name, went out in the front of t\vs W\ T^jo miners 



Marked " Immediate." 1 83 

had come up, bringing some letters and a welcome batch 
of English newspapers. The letters, three in number, were all 
for Walter; one was directed in Miriam's hand, two in 
Florence's. The men left him in a few minutes, and Law- 
rence went into the hut, examining the postmarks on the 
letters. The latest was on one of Florence's letters; she 
had written " Immediate " on the back, with several lines 
dashed under the word. 

"Poor child!" thought Lawrence; "she fancies her plea 
of urgency would be heard out here ! If she only knew that 
poor Walter cannot read this, now that it has come to 
him!" 

He placed the letters carefully in the locker, and looked 
over the newspapers while he waited for the arrival of the 
woman who had undertaken to watch by Walter for that night 
But he had not read for many minutes when he threw down 
the paper, hastily took out the letters, and selecting that one 
which was marked " Immediate,'' broke the seal, and read the 
first lines, . 

" My own Walter, . Our separation is at an end. This is 
to tell you that you are to come back at once.' 1 



184 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XX 

MRS. DIXON. 

" Well, here's a letter from Mrs. St. Quentin at last ! " said 
Mrs. Ritchie, the housekeeper at The Firs, to a satellite house- 
maid, one morning towards the end of spring, when even the 
neighbourhood of Drington was looking beautiful, and the 
gloomy old house was touched by the all-pervading sunshine 
that its perverse construction and position could not enable it 
altogether to evade. 

"She's took her time," remarked the satellite, not deeply 
interested in the matter; "but master don't care, seeminly. 
He wouldn't break his heart if she didn't come back. I've 
heard him tell her she knew no more about illness than a 
dog or a cat, nor, indeed, so much, for they could keep quiet 
when they was wanted to." 

Mrs. Ritchie was not attending to these remarks. She was 
reading the long-expected letter, and when she came to its con- 
clusion, she turned back to the beginning, and read it through 
again before she spoke. 

" Well, I'm sure ! " was her first observation, awakening the 
curiosity of her companion, who glanced eagerly at the 
document. 

" Well, I'm sure ! What next ? " 

" What first ? / should like to know, if you don't mind telling 
me," said the satellite with impatience barely tempered by 
respect. 

" Mrs. St. Quentin ain't coming at all ! And I telling her 
about Mr. Clint, as plain as I could \" 



Mrs. Dixon. 185 

"Why ain't she coming? Won't the old gentleman let 
her?" 

Mrs. Ritchie was too much surprised to remember her own 
dignity, and the impropriety of such a designation for the son- 
in-law of the house. 

" I don't know why she is not coming ; she does not tell me. 
She only says she cannot come ; but she is sending Mrs. Dixon 
to take care of Mr. Clint." 

" Lor ! " 

"Yes, indeed. Well, it's their business, not mine, since! 
IVe done my duty by writing to her. Mrs. Dixon will be 
cleverer than I take her for, if she can manage him, or mind 
him. It's more than her elders, or betters, ///// say, can do." 

The satellite was still looking at the letter with greedy eyes ; 
and Mrs. Ritchie condescended so far as to read it out for her. 

" I am very much obliged to you for writing to me, and dis- 
tressed at the account which you send me of my father," wrote 
Miriam. " It is unfortunately out of my power to return to 
The Firs at present, and yet I am very unwilling that you 
should have the entire trouble, fatigue, and responsibility of his 
state of health thrown upon you. I have therefore deter- 
mined to send Mrs. Dixon, to England, and she will assist 
you in any nurse-tending which my father may require. You 
will remember that she is a person to be depended on, very 
handy in case of illness, and that my father has once or twice 
availed himself of her services. You will not, of course, let 
him know that I have sent Mrs. Dixon to The Firs with this 
purpose in view, as he might not like it. It will be enough 
that he should know that I request his permission for her to 
remain at his house, where she will make herself generally use- 
ful, until Mr. St. Quentin and I return to England. I think 
my father will make no objection. I depend on you to 
arrange all this, and am sure you will find Mrs. Dixon very 
steady and useful. I have directed her to post this letter in 
London, so that you will be prepared for bet ams^ n^ 
shortly after it reaches you . " 



1 86 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Lor ! " interrupted the satellite ; " Mrs. Dixon may come 
to-day, perhaps. Where's she to sleep ? " 

Mrs. Ritchie had a reason of her own for not answering this 
question immediately. She was a shrewd and a kind-hearted 
woman. The first quality made her aware of the difficulty of 
obeying certain injunctions contained in a portion of Mrs. St. 
Quentin's letter which she had not thought proper to read 
aloud ; and the second made her very desirous of complying 
with them. The other servants had not been jealous of Rose's 
privileges while Rose's mistress was in the house with her, to 
keep her almost entirely occupied with herself, and make 
her more of a companion than a mere maid. But Mrs. 
Ritchie had too much experience to expect that they would 
be satisfied that Mrs. Dixon should be treated with extra con- 
sideration under the present circumstances. And yet Miriam 
had written : " You will, I am sure, make Mrs. Dixon as com- 
fortable as possible. She has had a good deal of trouble, I 
believe, in her life ; she likes to keep very much to herself, 
and she is not very companionable with any of the other 
servants here. She will be more useful if she is left entirely 
to herself, and has the charge of my father's rooms. I dare- 
say it will not be any additional trouble to let her have my 
former rooms, until I can come, and, as you will remember, 
she always had her meals there." 

" She's no loss downstairs, anyhow," was Mrs. Ritchie's re- 
flection, " for she's nothing but a poor, pale kill-joy of a creature, 
and never wants to lay her needle out of her hand, and have a 
bit to eat, or a spell of chat, like another. Still, they won't like 
it. However, that's neither here nor there : it is a great thing 
for me to get some one to take him off my hands . and they 
must lump it. I'm not going to offend Mrs. St. Quentin for 
their fancies and feelings." 

So, when the satellite repeated her question, Mrs. Ritchie 

said, with an air of mature consideration, "I think, Susan, 

the best thing I can do is to give Mrs. Dixon the room 

Mrs. St Quentin had. She can keep a\\ Yuex xv^^Ve^otk and 



Mrs. Dixon. 187 

traps in the sitting-room, and be out of every one's way there, 
and not far off Mr. Clint, if she really takes to looking after 
him, and he will let her." 

"As you please, m'm, of course," said Susan, sniffing; 
" but I never did hear of a lady's-maid being given a best 
bed-room." 

" You'll hear of it now, and see it too," said Mrs. Ritchie 
briskly, for she had no notion of her authority being disputed ; 
"and what's more, I think I shall give Mrs. Dixon her meals 
in her own room. She has very prim ways with her, and I 
remember Miss Miriam telling me she had made it a point, 
when she went to the school to be engaged, that she was not 
to have her meals with men-servants. She was brought up very 
strict, it seems." 

" Very nonsensical, / should say," remarked Susan, with a 
decided sniff this time. " Poor servants have little enough to 
amuse them, without making hermits of themselves." 

" Thafs true ! " assented the housekeeper heartily ; " and if 
she prefers to shut herself up, I'm sure we shan't miss her . nor 
Robert neither. However, we shall see when she comes. 
Open the shutters, Susan, and dust the rooms out, at all 
events. I must go and tell Mr. Clint what Mrs. St Quentin 
wishes." 

" I wonder how he'll take it ? " 

" I don't know, I'm sure ; it depends on his rheumatism." 

"And on his. temper," muttered Susan, as she slowly as- 
cended the stairs, while Mrs. Ritchie crossed the hall towards 
the dining-room. " Mrs. Dixon must be a regular soft one, or 
uncommon fond of Mrs. St. Quentin, to come back here, after 
she had got away, without her; and to attend on that old 
brute. I'd see him and his daughter farther first, I know ; 
and Robert will think the same." 

Things were thus shaping themselves so as to render the 
fulfilment of her task less difficult than she could have hoped 
or expected; while Florence was travelling t<yn3x3& *Wft. 
Firs. 



1 88 A Golden Sorrow. 

Her courage had not ebbed under the trial of parting with 
Miriam, or the little disagreeables of her solitary journey. 
Mrs. St. Quentin had been much distressed by the necessity of 
Florence's travelling alone; but that latter put that consideration 
so completely aside, as to make Miriam feel it had done dis- 
credit to the common sense of both ; and she made her see 
the needless risk of commenting upon it to Mr. St Quentin. 
That gentleman received the intelligence of Rose Dixon's 
intended departure with unfeigned satisfaction, and plumed 
himself upon having carried a point quietly but firmly, 
which it would have been ungentlemanlike to have insisted 
upon vehemently. He had never been able to discover 
what it was that Rose Dixon helped his unexpectedly un- 
manageable wife to " carry on," nor had he been able even to 
make up his mind as to what it was that he suspected her of 
" carrying on " with this perfidious aid ; but he felt that it 
would be a great relief to get her out of Miriam's company 
and his own sight. The demon of jealousy might not torture 
and tempt him so keenly then. At all events, it would be 
much easier to watch his wife, when she should have no one 
familiar with incidents and associations of her past life, to en- 
courage her, and to help to delude him. The replacing of 
Rose Dixon by an Italian woman, a total stranger to Miriam, 
should be his task : she must not speak a word of English . 
Miriam did not speak Italian with sufficient fluency for con- 
fidences . and the woman should be in his interest. Mr. St. 
Quentin relaxed his teasing vigilance towards Miriam from the 
hour in which she coldly announced the news to him, and the 
sisters-in-law had a good deal of almost unrestrained com- 
panionship during the week prior to their parting. Florence 
had a curiously keen perception of the state of Mr. St. 
Quentin's mind, and it filled her with apprehensions for 
Miriam ; for she felt that Mr. St. Quentin's morbid jealousy 
would be only allayed by her departure, but would again re- 
sume its active sway over him. The time passed without her 



Mrs. Dixon. 189 

dwelling much upon her own actual circumstances, until she 
found herself in the train travelling from London Bridge to 
Drington. A terrible sense of loneliness, dreariness, and ap- 
prehension came over her as she stood alone upon the platform 
where she and her husband had exchanged that dumb farewell, 
where his hand had so closely grasped, so reluctantly quitted 
hers. and sight had seemed to be struck from her eyes as her 
yearning gaze lost him in the crowd. 

Florence left her luggage at the Drington Station, and walked 
up to The Firs. A thousand emotions agitated her, a thousand 
fears assailed her. Inexpressible sadness was in all her thoughts 
of Miriam, and of the " way of escape " she had taken, as 
Florence feared so rashly. How young they both were, her 
sister-in-law and herself, and how friendless ! Many a vision 
came to Florence of the possibilities of the future, before 
she turned in at the wide, low, green gate, with its heavy 
transverse bar; . swung back with a sound oddly familiar 
after all those months of absence . and began to discern the 
gloomy house in the dull plateau of unkempt grass. But not 
one of them prefigured, ever so faintly, that which was really 
to come to pass. 

A great fear fell upon Florence while she stood at the door 
waiting for admittance, a fear which she summoned up all her 
strength to dispel. After all . the first deception of her posi- 
tion being irrevocable . she was at least doing the best she 
could. Walter's father should be a sacred charge and duty 
to her ; she would endeavour so to serve and tend him, 
that if discovery should arise, she could plead for herself and 
for Walter something like a fulfilment of the filial relation 
on her part, even though done under false pretences. Her 
natural sweetness and gentleness would be certain to help 
Florence through the complications of a difficult position, but 
she was not able to take them into account. 

Mrs. Ritchie received Mrs. Dixon with civility, and 
invited her to tea in her own room, though she e^ax&s&^Na 



190 A Golden Sorrow. 

her great relief, that she was to have Mrs. St. Quentin's former 
quarters. It did not require much skill to baffle, while seem- 
ing to satisfy the curiosity of the household concerning the 
lately married couple. A vivid account of the glories of foreign 
lands, of the entertainments at which Mrs. St Quentin was an 
admired guest, and the generally " jolly " life she was leading, 
sufficed. Of course, the old gentleman was very proud of her? 
Of course. And so he ought to be. Then it was Florence's 
turn to be inquisitive, and yet to keep a painful restraint upon 
her anxiety, lest it should pass the bounds of what she 
might be supposed to feel. Mrs. Ritchie was ready to give 
her full particulars, and also ready to indulge in specula- 
tions of her own, and to cross-question the new arrival 
respecting the exiled son. Did Mrs. Dixon know what 
news of Mr. Walter was contained in that letter to Mrs. St 
Quentin which had been sent on to foreign parts ? Did 
Mrs. St. Quentin think her brother would return and be 
reconciled with his father? Mrs. Dixon was in ignorance 
on these points, beyond the general fact that Mr. Walter was 
doing well out in the gold country. An awful place, Mrs. 
Ritchie had heard, where people were murdered as often as 
not, and nobody ever got hanged for doing it. She really 
wished Mrs. Dixon had known Mr. Walter, for she never 
expected him to come back any more . her feelings and 
her dreams went against it, and she was an uncommon sharp 
dreamer. It was not to be denied that Mr. Walter had been 
hardly used ; and there wasn't one in Drington, as knew any- 
thing about it, who did not think so, as well as she. . He had 
been rather wild, had he not ? Wild ! Why, bless Mrs. Dixon's 
heart, not he . only free, and natural, and high-spirited, as a 
young man ought to be, and more given to liking the neigh- 
bours, and being sociable with them, than to hating everybody, 
and making himself hateful to them, like his father. Mrs. 
Ritchie knew no other fault of his. He was a handsome, free- 
handed young gentleman . not over-wise, but nobody's enemy 
except his own. It was not easy to ascettsAw erasxVj ^Y\a& 



Mrs. Dixon. 191 

Mrs. Ritchie meant by the last clause in her description, and 
Mrs. Dixon seemed anxious to know. Well, he was not very 
steady, perhaps, and might be easily led, and Mrs. Ritchie 
thought he would be the better for a friend at his elbow. She 
hoped he might find good friends for the time he would have 
to live in those dreadful foreign parts . and once more, being 
complacently convinced that Mrs. Dixon would never now 
enjoy the opportunity of becoming acquainted with her mis- 
tress's brother, she lamented that she had not been at The 
Firs " in his time." 

Florence did not see anything of Mr. Clint on that evening. 
He had been better during the past week, and had taken 
Mrs. Ritchie's communication of Miriam's request with an 
unusually good grace. He was neither surprised nor con- 
cerned at the prolongation of Miriam's absence from England. 
It was her affair and St. Quentin's, not his ; if they liked to 
throw away money on living uncomfortably among dirty 
foreigners, he did not blame them for doing so. He did not 
want them; there was no love lost between them. Indeed, there 
had been but little of that valuable but unmarketable com- 
modity lost between Mr. Clint and any human being, in the 
whole course of his life. 

On the morning after her arrival at The Firs, Mr. Clint sent 
for Mrs. Dixon. He wished to speak to her in the study. 
Florence had gained in good looks and health by her sojourn 
abroad, and the quiet grace of her figure, and mild, pathetic 
beauty of her face, were set off by the plainness and pro- 
priety of her dress. As she stood just inside the study door, 
and Mr. Clint looked at her from his place by the writing- 
table before a distant window, he muttered, almost audibly, 
" By Jove, she looks like a lady ! " 

Her mental comment upon him was of a different 
nature. Mr. Clint was altered since Florence had last seen 
him, on the day of his daughter's marriage, in a manner and 
to a degree which she immediately, and rightly .> vto^v&rA \s> 
his growing propensity to drink. His Yv&ti&sot&^j- ^ teaosxfc^ 



192 A Golden Sorrow. 

were swollen, his eyes were glassy and unsteady, and his figure 
looked shrunken and stooped He had been ill ; and pain, 
she knew, makes terrible havoc, but Florence did not hold 
rheumatism accountable for all she noticed in Reginald Clint's 
face and form. 

He spoke to her civilly, and told her to take a seat; he 
wished to ask her some questions about Mrs. St. Quentin. 
She complied ; and he asked her about Miriam's health, looks, 
and enjoyment of foreign travel. He spoke abruptly, but with- 
out surliness, and looked at her closely, but not offensively, as 
she replied. 

" That will do," he said, after an interview which had lasted 
a quarter of an hour ; " you may go. I am glad Mrs. St. 
Quentin sent you here. You' are welcome to remain as long 
as you like. I hope they make you comfortable ? " 

" Thank you, sir ; I am perfectly comfortable." 

" What room has Mrs. Ritchie put you in ? " 

" Mrs. St Quentin's former room, sir. I have a great deal 
of needlework to do for my mistress, and Mrs. Ritchie allows 
me the use of the sitting-room." 

" All right ;" and Mr. Clint dismissed her with a nod which 
was, for him, quite friendly. 

In Miriam's former sitting-room there stood a piano. It 
was an old-fashioned but sweet-toned instrument, and Florence 
had beguiled many hours in playing upon it the music which 
she and Walter loved. The performer had always been sup- 
posed by the servants to be Miriam, and no remarks were 
made. A few days after Mrs. Dixon's arrival, Mr. Clint sum- 
moned Mrs. Ritchie to his presence, and asked her who it 
was whom he heard playing on the piano overhead. Mrs. 
Ritchie told him the performer was Dixon. 

" Dixon ! An accomplished person, to be sure ! " 

" I shall tell her you don't wish it, sir," began Mrs. Ritchie. 

" Tell her nothing of the sort. Who the devil told you I 
don't wish it ? Why shouldn't the girl play the piano if she 
chooses ? Leave her alone." 



Mrs. Dixon. 193 

"'Very well, sir ; but you seemed to think a servant . " 
" Nonsense ! She may have learned music, or had it in her 
by nature, and be none the worse servant There ; you may 

go." 

Mrs. Ritchie was very glad to go. She went straight to 
Rose Dixon, and told her what had passed. The latter was 
alarmed at the possible result of her imprudence. The truth 
was, that, forgetting the incongruity of the exercise of such 
an accomplishment with the station she had assumed, she had 
yielded to the strong temptation of solitude and a piano. 

" He was very much surprised, as was natural ; but he says 
you're to play as much as you like . though it do seem like 
giving you leave to forget your place. It's wonderful that you 
can get so much good of him, I'm sure." 

"I . I was not always brought up to be a servant, Mrs. 
Ritchie," said Florence timidly ; " at one time I hoped to be 
a governess, and I learned music, that I might teach it." 

"Ay, indeed . that explains a many things. Well, Mrs. 
Dixon, if you had been in as many places as me, and seen as 
much of governesses, you would know that you have not lost 
so much as you may think A servant's is a much easier life." 

" I know that," replied Florence. 

Mrs. Ritchie repeated to the satellite the explanation of 
Mrs. Dixon's out-of-rule conduct. Susan received it with a 
sniff, and remarked that " eddication needn't have made her so 
uppish ! " 

On the following day, when Florence was availing herself of 
the permission she had received, and the strains of sweet and 
solemn music were floating on the external air, through the 
open windows of Miriam's room, Reginald Clint came round 
the angle of the house-wall, and stood, leaning against a post in 
the rough railing which kept off the grazing cattle . listening. 



194 ^ Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

INFLUENCE. 

The one touch of humanizing taste about Reginald Clint 

was a love of music. As a young man he had been a not 

despicable performer on the violin, and had sung well. But 

the essential unsociability of his disposition, the moroseness 

which prevented his ever deriving pleasure from the sources at 

which other people found theirs, was stronger in him than the 

taste for music, and he gradually relinquished the exercise of his 

own talent, and the enjoyment of that of others. His wife 

knew nothing of music. If she had been a fine performer, and 

had loved the art, he would probably have contrived to torment 

her through it; as it was, he made her deficiency in that 

respect a constant grievance. Miriam had been taught the 

harp and piano, in the regular routine of " extras " at Miss 

Monitor's ; but music was not in her. She played from notes 

correctly, even expressively, but she could not converse with 

the taut strings, or the ivory and ebony tablets, winning them 

by the subtle spell of touch to be the interpreters of the desires 

of her heart, the yearnings of her fancy, the problems of her 

mind. Miriam's music was an accomplishment; Florence's music 

was an inspiration. Reginald Clint had never been touched 

or interested by the one ; he had hardly had patience to listen 

to Miriam's playing; but by the other he was fairly fascinated. 

As he stood listening to the sounds, now solemn and mournful, 

anon gay and triumphant, something long forgotten, or sternly 

set aside in the rough selfishness and cynical unbelief of his 

life, seemed to steal into view again, and timidly claim his 

attention. 



Influence. 195 

"That's real music," he muttered; "that's the kind of thing 
I used to think about, and long for, when . when there were 
any women about, and they were giving their feeble mimicry of 
it It has been born with this girl, and not ill cultivated. Yes, 
that's real music," he repeated, as Florence dwelt upon one 
grand chord, and then, releasing note after note, let it pass away 
in a murmuring ripple of sound. She had finished for the 
present, and Reginald Clint* with a glance upwards at the open 
windows, gave himself a shake, and continued his way to the 
fir-wood. 

That evening he sent a quantity of music to Florence, old 
songs and out-of-fashion compositions of Italian and English 
composers, which he had loved in his youth. They had lain 
on the topmost shelf of a bookcase for years, and he had for- 
gotten their existence. Now he had them dusted and conveyed 
to Mrs. Dixon, with an intimation that he hoped she would 
study such of them as she liked. Again Mrs. Ritchie won- 
dered. Here was a totally unheard-of piece of politeness and 
attention on Mr. Clint's part, and to a servant ! She was destined 
to a further surprise on the same subject before very long. 

Mr. Martin's tolerably frequent attendance at The Firs had 
not been slackened of late. He could not do Mr. Clint much 
good ; there was but one thing to be prescribed in his case 
with any hope of effect . abstinence from intoxicating drinks, 
and he knew well his patient was incorrigible on that point. 
But he needed such medical care as Mr. Martin could give, 
exclusive of the one act of the will which lay solely within his 
own power, and the doctor never quite lost sight of the interests 
of the absent son ; never entirely ceased to hope for an oppor- 
tunity of pleading his cause with effect, backed up by some 
favourable intelligence of his career, to be produced in evidence 
of his having become steady, industrious, and persevering. 
Mr. Clint himself had never been any of these things to a re- 
markable degree, but that fact by no means tempered his 
expectations of them from Walter, or mollified his &s^fcasN&^ 
towards him. 

o 2 



196 A Golden Sorrow. 

Mr. Martin was disappointed by Walter's silence. He had 
not written to his friend in that part of the world, and he 
thought that looked bad. He knew that he had not written 
to his father, but he had not expected him to do do. The 
doctor was aware of the terms on which Mr. Clint had given 
his son the money for which he had asked. But Mrs. Ritchie 
had told " Mr. Walter's " friend of a letter from that dreadful 
foreign country which had come for Mrs. St. Quentin, and he 
very much wished to learn the nature of its contents. Arriving 
at The Firs shortly after Mrs. Dixon's return, he met Mrs. 
Ritchie in the hall, and she told him that Mrs. St. Quentin's 
maid had preceded her mistress to England, and was then at 
The Firs, and that she had heard about Mr. Walter, who was 
getting on well, and had dug a good deal of gold. With a 
brief expression of pleasure at the intelligence, Mr. Martin 
turned into the study, where he usually found his patient. 
Mr. Clint was there, in his accustomed place, sitting in a deep 
arm-chair, with his feet upon a second chair, a cigar in his 
mouth, and a tumbler of brandy-and-water at his elbow. 

" That's bad at this hour of the day," said the doctor, whom 
Mr. Clint had saluted with a curt nod. 

" I daresay it is ; you've told me so often enough, but I can't 
help it. It is the only thing which relieves those infernal pains 
all over me." 

" It has more to do with causing them. How are you to- 
day ? " 

" Much as usual. Won't you sit down ?" 

Mr. Martin took a seat, and regarded Mr. Clint with a quiet, 
meditative gaze. 

" How's the cough ? " he asked. 

" Bad. constant, especially at night, and fatiguing." 

" How have you been sleeping? " 

" Infernally 'ill . walking about my room for hours sometimes, 
because I'm too restless to lie in bed, and falling asleep when 
it's time to get up." 

' Just so. . You have heard from Mxs. Sfc. C^rrtm? " This 



tt 



Influence. 197 

sudden change of topic was as eloquent of Mr. Martin's mean- 
ing as he intended it to be ; especially as he pointed it with a 
significant glance at the brandy-and-water, and a deprecatory 
shake of the head, familiar and odious to Mr. Clint. 

"Yes," replied his patient irritably; "she has sent her 
maid to remain here until she comes to England, and the 
woman says Miriam is all right." 

" I am glad to hear it. Is this maid the girl who went away 
with her ? " 

" Yes . Dixon. A very superior sort of person. You re- 
member I told you how useful she was when I was ill in Lon- 
don, and she is quite an acquisition here." 

" I remember. I must have a talk with her." 

Then the desultory conversation took another direction, and 
Mr. Martin did not make any allusion to Walter. He did not 
like Mr. Clint's appearance, which indicated, to his experienced 
eye, the imminence of another fit of illness. He left him 
before long, and, as usual, unattended, and found Mrs. Ritchie, 
also as usual, hovering about the hall. 

" He isn't well, I'm afraid, sir ? " she said. 

" No, indeed, he is not," replied the doctor. . " Can I see 
Mrs. St Quentin's maid ? I should like to have a few words 
with her." 

Mrs. Ritchie replied that she would call Mrs. Dixon down 
immediately . she was in the upstairs sitting-room; but Mr. 
Martin prevented her by going upstairs himself instead. 

Florence had been busy with the needle-work which so ably 
assisted her in her assumed character; and when Mr. Martin 
knocked at the door of her sitting-room she was standing beside 
the central table, which was covered with snips of muslin and 
ribbon. She looked very pretty, and young, and sorrowful. 
He introduced himself, and the motive of his visit, with his 
customary directness, and then startled Florence by asking her 
abruptly if she could tell him anything about Mr. Walter Clint 

"He has written to Mrs. St. Quentin" ste \^v&^^>&sv ^ 
quickly-beating heart. 



198 A Golden Sorrow. 

" So I heard. Will you tell me what you know of his letters ? 
You need not hesitate, I am an old friend of his, and quite in 
your mistress's confidence." 

A whole tide of recollections swept over Florence's mind . 
of the history of her husband's boyhood, and the part which 
the kind doctor had played in it. How hard it was to speak with 
Walter's best friend, of Walter, in the correct tone of respect- 
ful indifference ! She told him as much of Walter's enterprise 
as she thought he would have wished her to tell, and replied 
to Mr. Martin's remark, that he had surely been sufficiently 
successful to warrant his writing to his father, that Mrs. St 
Quentin had told her that Mr. Walter Clint had made up his 
mind not to communicate with Mr. Clint for another year, 
when he hoped to do so in the spirit of the promise he had 
made. 

Mr. Martin was walking softly to and fro before the windows, 
his head bent downwards, and his hands clasped behind his 
back. He stopped, and looked up when she said this. " I 
perceive you are in Mrs. St. Quentin's confidence altogether," 
he said, u since you know how Mr. Clint and his son parted. 
I have no doubt that confidence is well placed, and that 
I am safe in imitating it. Walter Clint calculates in this 
matter with the cheerful confidence of a young man, and 
Mrs. St. Quentin has not seen her father for more than a 
year. I was about to write to her, when Mrs. Ritchie told me 
that she had, very properly, done so 3 and that circumstances " 
(he looked very sharply at Florence here, but she bore the 
scrutiny calmly . the secret of Miriam's fatal mistake was not 
to be surprised from her) . " unexplained circumstances have 
prevented her coming to England. Mrs. Ritchie believed, 
good woman, that Mr. Clint wished for the society of his 
daughter. I am convinced that, in this, she is entirely mis- 
taken, and that in sending you, as a substitute, Mrs. St Quentin 
has done a very sensible thing. Now, Mrs. Dixon . I am right 
in the name, I think ? " 
" You ore right, sir." 



Influence. 199 

" I am going to speak quite plainly to you about Mr. Clint. I 
am very glad you are here. He likes you, and I have never known 
him to like any other human being. The time is coming, not 
slowly, when all his independence and moroseness, all his 
violence and suspicion, must give way, under severe bodily 
suffering ; and then, if you have the courage, and the charity, 
you may amply repay his daughter's confidence and regard by 
taking care of him. You have had a slight experience of him 
in illness. are you brave enough to venture on a prolonged 
experience, and of a very serious nature ? " 

" I am," said Florence, with tears in her eyes. " Quite ready, 
for his daughter's sake. But . is he so very ill ? He can go 
about as usual, and keeps his customary hours . at least, so 
far as I know." 

" Just so ; but you know very little. Walter Clint must not 
defer the making of his peace with his father for another year, 
if he wishes to make it this side the grave. You may tell Mrs. 
St. Quentin this, and bid her communicate it to her brother. 
I have endeavoured to get at Mr. Clint's thoughts in reference 
to his son more than once lately, but I have failed. There is 
something in the case which I do not understand, and yet I 
thought I knew it all . I saw enough of it, Heaven knows ! . 
some new cause of bitterness in Mr. Clint's mind, which he is 
keeping hidden from me, and when I say that, I imply that 
it is hidden from every one. Walter Clint ought to know this, 
and to remove it, without any more than the inevitable delay* 
for the time in which his father will have an opportunity of 
changing his mind about him, of altering any dispositions he 
may have made to his detriment . I know nothing on this 
point, recollect, but I have a very strong conviction. will be 
short." 

" Do you mean that Mr. Clint is in danger of death ? " 

" He is 4n an early stage of ' an incurable internal disease," 
replied Mr. Martin solemnly, " of which, I think, he is not 
quite unconscious, though he has never put a C3^^C\sy& \ \x^ 
and it is very improbable he would listen to m^ \i \ vOvVwas^ 



200 A Golden Sorrow. 

I hinted some weeks ago, that it might be well to have another 
medical opinion ; upon which he flew into a rage, and declared, 
with many oaths, that no doctor but myself should ever darken 
his doors, and that, if I did not like the trouble of attending him, 
I might take myself off also. It is rather difficult to resist such 
an invitation, but I have resisted it for many years, and I shall 
resist it to the last. Tell Mrs. St. Quentin that, if you please. 
He may keep up, and about, and the people in the house with 
him may not perceive any material alteration in him for some 
time yet, but nothing, except the relinquishment of his habits, 
would give him a chance for the prolongation of his life. The 
complete break-down may come soon and suddenly, or it may 
be deferred some time, for he is a strong man still . but happen 
it must ; and if you have come to take Mrs. St Quentin's place 
you ought to know what that implies, and to be sure you are 
equal to it." 

" I will obey your directions implicitly," said Florence ; " and 
if I can only induce Mr. Clint to allow me to attend him, I am 
not afraid of failing in doing so." 

" A delicate young creature," thought the doctor, " for such 
an undertaking, but with something so steady and staid about 
her, too, that I daresay she will do it admirably. A great turn- 
up of luck for Clint, that his daughter has sent this young 
woman in her place ; she will be worth a dozen of Miriam. 
Why can't 6he come I wonder ? Won't, perhaps . or has caught 
an elderly Tartar." 

He continued aloud : " You can write to Mrs. St. Quentin 
exactly what I tell you. Assure her that all in my power to do 
shall be done, and especially urge her to represent the condition 
of his father's health to her brother ; that an attempt may be 
made to put an end to the unnatural state of things between 
them." 

" Is there anything I can do just now ? " 

" No," said Mr. Martin, " there is not. Try to ingratiate 
yourself with Mr. Clint, to let him get used to you. I suppose 
you know all his peculiarities? " 



Influence. 201 

Florence replied that she did, and told Mr. Martin some 
particulars of Mr. Clint's illness in London. 

" Just so," he said ; " and next time it will be worse, and 
the time after worse again, and so on, until there will be no 
next time. I will say good-bye now, Mrs. Dixon, but I am 
coming to dinner to-morrow, and by that time I suppose you 
will have written to Mrs. St Quentin." He left her, and as he 
went downstairs, he too thought, like Mr. Clint, " She looks 
like a lady." 

Florence sat down forlornly, and covered her face with her 
hands. A vision of her old home in her childhood, when she 
had no notion that such family disunion, misery, concealment, 
cross-purposes, could possibly exist . a keen, sorrowful remem- 
brance of her dead mother, came to her. " Why were such 
things ? " she thought " Why was the world so dreary, which 
was also so fair ; and life so troublesome, which had such ele- 
ments of happiness in it ? " And no answer came to her but 
tears, and the cry in her heart, " Walter ! Walter ! " What was 
she to do ? That question did not long perplex her. She was 
to do her duty to Walter's father and to Miriam, to watch for 
an opportunity of effecting a reconciliation, if possible, having 
previously endeavoured to procure her husband's permission to 
tell Mr. Clint the whole truth. 

She wrote her letters . one to Walter, one to Miriam . and 
walked down to the village to post them. On her return, as 
she was passing the lower range of rooms, to enter the house 
by a side- door, she observed Mr. Clint in his accustomed 
place in the study window, and saw that he was looking languid 
and ill She had fulfilled her self-appointed task of aiding the 
housemaid to arrange his rooms in the morning, but had not 
seen him. Now he perceived her, and opening the long window 
asked her to step into the room, as he wished to speak to 
her. 

Mr. Clint's study communicated with the formally-furnished, 
unused drawing-room by a folding-door, ^Yv\ck ^*s \*sssa&^ 
locked, and over which a curtain always Yvut\& ^Vsre&cfc. w 



202 A Golden Sorrow. 

that the curtain had been drawn back, and the door was stand- 
ing open. 

" I heard you playing on the piano upstairs/' said Mr. Clint. 
" You play very well indeed ; it is a long time since I have 
heard such music, indeed since I have heard any worth listen- 
ing to." 

" Thank you, sir," said Florence. " Mrs. Ritchie told me 
you were so kind as to say you did not mind my using the 
piano, and that you sent me some music." 

" Will you try whether the piano in there is a good instru- 
ment, and not too hopelessly out of tune ? " 

Florence instantly complied. The piano was so placed that 
the performer was not visible from the study. She touched 
the keys, running over a brilliant voluntary of chords. The 
instrument was a good one, and in fair order. Florence told 
Mr. Clint that she found it so, and he desired her to go on 
playing. She complied, and he returned to his study. She 
played on and on, giving herself up to the pleasure of the 
music she was making, so as to be almost unconscious of the 
presence of the mute, listening figure in the adjoining room. 
When she had been playing nearly half an hour, the external 
door of the drawing-room opening into the hall was cautiously 
pushed a few inches ajar, and the face of Susan, the housemaid, 
appeared at it for a moment unseen. 

A brief glance sufficed to show her Mrs. Dixon at the piano, 
the door of communication open, and the curtain drawn back. 
She could not see Mr. Clint, but she surmised that he was 
there, and going out by the side-door she peeped through one 
of the windows of the study from the outside, and satisfied her- 
self of the fact Then she hastened to relate this portent to 
Mrs. Ritchie, who received it with provoking indifference. She 
had taken her cue from Miriam's letter, and her resolution 
from the instructions of Mr. Martin. 

" You mind your own business, Susan, and leave Mrs. Dixon 
to mind hers/* she said to the satellite. " She knows what 
she's about" v 



Influence. 203 

" I daresay she does," muttered Susan, indignant at being 
snubbed on Mrs. Dixon's account ; " indeed I have no doubt 
of it. But I wonder whether Mrs. St. Quentin knows what 
she is about ? I don't think she can, or she would remember 
there's more old fools than one in the world." 

From that day forth Florence was summoned to the drawing- 
room every afternoon to play on the piano for Mr. Clint's delecta- 
tion. Mr. Martin was made acquainted with this newly-found 
resource for his patient, who required his services still more fre- 
quently as the days went by. They brought some improvement 
in Mr. Clint's spirits and temper ; indeed, all the inmates at 
The Firs had so much reason to congratulate themselves on the 
influence which Mrs. Dixon exerted, that small jealousies gave 
way to the strength of self-interest But they could all see that 
the sullen and imperious master of The Firs was ill and suffer- 
ing; they could all trace in his features, at once bloated and 
wasted, in the increasing shapelessness of his figure, and the 
listlessness which was growing upon him, until all his life became 
a mere desultory loitering, the slow poisoning of his besetting 
sin. Against that nothing was strong; he could keep his tem- 
per under, with Mr. Martin's threat in his ears of the possible 
result of letting it loose ; but he could not keep from drink ; 
that demon had got hold of him securely long ago, and his 
gripe was not to be loosened. 

Florence told Miriam all the truth. The alienated daughter 
learned it with a sincere and decent sorrow, but without any of 
the keen agony which it must have caused her had she loved her 
father. Miriam did not suffer distance and separation to delude 
her ; her former home was not one whit less distasteful to her 
in memory than it had been in fact ; her father's characterwas 
in no degree less odious. She had only begun to doubt whether 
she had exchanged for the better, whether she had not accepted 
a more wearing slavery. In one respect she could not deceive 
herself . the present one was incomparably more degrading. 

" I cannot come to you," she wrote to Floretvcs. ycl ^n^ 
letter; "he is unmanageable on that pomt, axA Wras* \s 



204 A Golden Sorrow. 

much at stake to take the alternative he offers me. Oh, Flor- 
ence, how I hate him ] I am almost afraid to think how I hate 
him ! " 

So the time went on, and each day made Florence more use- 
ful to her husband's father, and more powerful with him. Mr. 
Martin told her she was like that boy-shepherd of the tribe of 
Judahwho charmed the evil spirit out of King Saul. 



205 



CHAPTER XXII, 

FROM MIRIAM TO FLORENCE. 

"H6tel Bristol, Paris, May, 186. . 

"My dearest Rose, . You will be very much surprised to 
learn that I am in Paris, but your astonishment cannot sur- 
pass mine at finding myself here. I don't think I could ever 
get enough of Paris ; so, of course, I am not at all sorry about 
the move. I will tell you the history of it all, which is simply 
this. We were getting on very well at Rome . a dear old place, 
which I liked immensely, if it were only because it is so re- 
spectable, so different from the vagabond southern cities . and 
I had got into a very pleasant English set, with whom we 
arranged all our plans for Holy Week. I think I must have 
told you about them. Sir John and Lady Duffle, of Duffle . 
Lincolnshire people ; Captain and Mrs. Bainbridge ; the Gray- 
dons, and others. We made a charming little coterie, and I 
was brushing up my music considerably, for Claude Auchinleck, 
Colonel Bainbridge 's nephew, is fanatico, and we had musical 
parties almost every evening. He insisted on practice, too, I 
can tell you ; and I was very glad of the opportunity. As to 
the place itself, it is too charming. I was so sorry I had 
always hated Roman history at Miss Monitor's, and thought 
mythology a bore ; for I really felt quite ashamed of my 
ignorance when I found myself in the place where the heroes 
had their triumphs, and the gods their votaries. But those 
dear Lays help one wonderfully, keeping one up to who 
was who, and what was what ; and between them axA Haw- 
thorne I got on very well, thougla 1 oitexv saw 0*a&& 



206 A Golden Sorrow. 

Auchinleck pulling his moustache to hide a smile, when I 
made some hazardous guess or other, a couple of centuries 
wide of the mark or the man. I'm sure I don't know how he 
came to be well informed, for he is only in the army, but he is. 
Altogether it was very pleasant, and I had quite regained my 
spirits . though you must not think I had ceased to be sorry 
for the loss of you . and to think there was really a change 
for the better in Mr. St. Quentin, that he had made up his 
mind to let me alone, and be rational ; and I was beginning 
to dislike him much less, in consequence . for, you know, I 
am not ill-natured, and get over things easily, some things, at 
least . when everything came to an end in a sudden explosion- 
"It is really so ridiculous, and at the same time so 
humiliating, that I can hardly tell you what happened. Mr. 
St. Quentin heard Claude Auchinleck say something one day 
about knowing the neighbourhood of The Firs very well, and 
then it turned out that he had been quartered at Winchester, 
and, having friends in our part of the country, had seen Dring- 
ton and the Cookes, and visited them and a few other people 
living quite near The Firs. He was, I suppose, in one of his 
worst humours . his good ones, as I have found to my cost, are 
rare and superficial . for he took it into his head that Claude 
and I were old acquaintances, and that I had hidden the cir- 
cumstance from him, pretending to have met Claude for the 
first time at Lady Duffle's, in Rome. My dear, you never wit- 
nessed such an absurd scene in your life, only that it was more 
annoying than funny, and that I lost my presence of mind in the 
first instance, through sheer amazement, and did not treat him 
with the contempt he merited ; I made up for that afterwards, 
but not effectually . one cannot try back with perfect success 
on a sneer ; it is weak, if not spontaneous. He made a com- 
plete and pitiable idiot of himself. openly declared his belief 
that I habitually deceived him about my friends and my cor- 
respondence. harping on the old string, you see, darling . and 
ended by ordering me to leave Rome instantly. We should go, 
he protested, and without making o\xt destination known to 



From Miriam to Florence. 20? 

any one. What did I do ? I laughed, having shaken off my 
first stupor of astonishment. What did I say ? That I would 
not leave Rome until after Holy Week . until, indeed, all the 
engagements I had at present undertaken were fulfilled . for 
any command, threat, or entreaty that he could utter. He 
uttered a good many of the first two, I can tell you ; what a fool 
I was to be taken in by his mild voice and courteous manners ! 
.but my blood was thoroughly up, and he could make nothing 
of me. I did not condescend, just then, to give him any 
assurance about Claude Auchinleck; I merely sneered and 
laughed, and put the thing aside, as being much too con- 
temptible for my notice ; and then calmly told him / would not 
leave Rome. Of course he stormed, and said I must, that he 
would force me to do so. To this I replied that he had better 
not try, for that I had fully made up my mind, having endured 
one insult from him, to endure no more, but to return to my 
father's house the moment he attempted to inflict another 
on me. And, oh ! Rose, how I did wish I had been telling 
him the truth ! How I did wish I had the courage to do it ! 
And how much ashamed of myself I was when I knew in my 
inmost heart I was telling him a falsehood, and that I should 
not do anything of the kind. 

" ' I will leave the hotel,' I said, ' and go to every human 
being whom we know, intimately or slightly, in Rome, and tell 
them the story of your conduct. What will be thought of you, 
do you suppose? How will men regard the man who is 
avowedly terrified if his wife meets an old acquaintance, and 
whose mind is so evil that he constructs old acquaintances out 
of every stranger ? Public opinion, it strikes me, will back the 
woman who will not submit to be accused of lying and dis- 
honesty by a husband to whom she has always behaved well 
and dutifully. ' This was a complete random shot, but it hit 
him hard and true. He turned quite white, and when he 
answered me, which was not for some time, it was in a totally 
different tone. I was satisfied with the result, though it seec&K&. 
to me odd that he should understand me so Yl\&& *s \\*&kto 



208 A Golden Sorrow. 

that anything would tempt me to talk to strangers about 
my matrimonial grievances. But there is a coarse-minded- 
ness about him, which exists, I suppose, in most men of his 
selfish and conventional stamp ; and as it served my purpose, 
I did not complain of it on this occasion. I had found out, 
through it, a weak point in his character, which might prove 
again, as now, a useful discovery. He is much afraid of public 
opinion, very desirous of maintaining credit for the amiability, 
generosity, and high sense of honour, which I really believed 
him endowed with when I married him. Don't laugh, when you 
come to these words, Rose, thinking I am making out a case for 
myself. I don't mean to pretend that I would have refused to 
marry him, if I had known then, as well as I know now, that he 
was neither amiable, generous, nor highly honourable . I merely 
maintain that I did believe him to be so. He is now awa*re that 
I have found him out, and I am not sure whether he cares very 
much ; but I am quite sure he does care very much that other 
people should not be enlightened also. When I saw the salu- 
tary effect produced on him by my threat, I yielded so far as 
to assure him that he was utterly mistaken, that I had never 
seen Claude Auchinleck until we met in Rome, and that I 
should never injure my own sense of self-respect so far as to 
deceive him in anything of the kind. I am perfectly certain he 
did not believe me, and that his suspicion remains firm and 
unchanged to the present moment 

" The scene ended in his giving in, so far as our stay in Rome 
until nearly the end of April was concerned, and by my consent- 
ing to leave Rome then. I did not much care about staying 
longer; but I was not prepared for his proposing that we 
should go to Paris ; I could not resist saying to him, ' Take 
care ; you do not know how many old friends I may be casually 
introduced to in Paris. Had we not better go to Greece or 
Russia ? ' He took no notice of this, I must confess imper- 
tinent, speech of mine, and he has been quite civil to me ever 
since. I use the word civil advisedly. Don't be too much 
shocked, dear, good, and wise little woman, tha*. you are, when 



From Miriam to Florence. 209 

I say I am in hopes he is leaving off caring about me. It will 
be such a relief if he really does leave off altogether. I shall 
be quite content, and he will be far happier, and everything will 
go on smoothly. If there be a bore which is altogether in- 
tolerable in life, it is the love of a man whom one does not love. 
I never understood rightly what the magnitude of the bore had 
been until I found that I was ceasing to hate Mr. St. Quentin, 
when he left off being in love with me ; and now, I have no 
doubt, we shall be quite a model couple. That Jrie has left off, 
is quite certain ; I am no longer told that I am beautiful, until 
I could almost find it in my heart to wish I could be ugly, for 
a change ; and I am allowed to dispose much more freely of 
my time. I daresay Bianca, the lumpish, sulky, but not un- 
skilful Italian girl who replaced you, dearest, as my maid, 
imagined herself, and was supposed by him to be, an efficient 
spy upon my actions ; but, as I had nothing to hide, she might 
earn her credit and her money to her hearts content, for any- 
thing I cared. The whole thing, of which he fondly believed 
me utterly unconscious, was merely amusing to me. I flatter 
myself, if I really wanted to carry out any little scheme of my 
own, as in the case of one you and I know of, it is not an 
' active and intelligent official ' of Bianca's calibre who should 
prevent me. So I amuse myself and keep them occupied. I 
hid a carefully-folded note from my dressmaker in the inner- 
most recesses of my casket the other night, having previously 
allowed Bianca to see me draw it, with elaborate caution and 
tenderness, from the folds of my corsage, and then I dropped 
the key of the casket on the carpet before I went out I hope 
she brought the note to Mr. St Q., and that he fully appreci- 
ated the value of the prize, and paid for it accordingly. How 
vexed you will be with me, dearest Rose, and yet I know you 
will laugh ! I must do him the justice to say that all this non- 
sense has never interfered with his liberality to me. My own 
allowance is not half the money I have the absolute disposal of, 
and as I like his money, and do not like his love, \t\%fott>s&atot. 
that they are not regulated in proportion. 



210 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Here we are, in charming rooms, and in the best situation 
in all Paris. I enjoy it very much indeed, and am rather 
popular. Mr. St. Quentin is very good-humoured, and does 
not bother me. If I had you here, I should feel that my 
visions were being realized at last. That will come soon, I 
trust. If the accounts from Walter continue good, we shall 
soon be able to make the truth known. I am delighted, but 
not surprised, to hear that you are getting on well with every 
one at The Firs ; because it is what I could never do, there is 
all the more reason for your doing it soon and easily. I won- 
der were there ever two women in this world so different as 
you and I ? It is very sad to read your account of papa, but 
I am not much alarmed. It is quite wonderful how men hold 
out against drink . especially when they have violent tempers, 
and get their own way in everything. He was always very 
strong, but not fond of much bodily exertion ; and as to the fits 
of gloom you describe, he has been subject to them as long 
as I can remember, only he had not any one to play and sing 
him out of them. He never cared a straw for my efforts in 
that line; and, indeed, I believe he was right, for I am no 
musician. We ought to have letters from Walter soon. Now 
that you and Mr. Martin are such good friends, you might per- 
haps find an opportunity of pumping him about papa's sus- 
picions of * Florence Reeve.' I have never forgotten Mr. St. 
Quentin's saying that Walter had taken some girl with him to 
America. I wish I might venture to bring up the subject again, 
but one never knows where a suspicion might arise, and it is 
better to be patient on the safe side, especially as there is a 
good chance that our patience may not be taxed much longer. I 
think you would find Mr. Martin could give you information of 
how papa came to know or suspect anything, and how much he 
either knows or suspects. But do not try to find this out, un- 
less you can entirely trust your nerves and your countenance, 
for Mr. Martin is a * smart ' man. It is not easy to deceive 
him. I know, because I tried it a few times in trifling matters, 
in boyish scrapes of Walter's, and I a\te& sv^&a&j . Wa ikwvjs 



From Miriam to Florence. 211 

found me out, and told me so, before I had committed myself 
to unlimited fibs. So be careful, dearest Rose, and don't run 
risks ; for, mind you, I don't believe anything would induce Mr. 
Martin to connive at your remaining in so false a position, and 
he would be horribly angry with Walter. 

" I hope you are diligently executing all the needlework you 
took home to do for your exacting and imperious mistress. I 
wish you could see Bianca's face sometimes, when I practise my 
clumsy tongue in her dialect, by dwelling on your perfections, 
and by ridiculing her ideas of dressing my hair. I sometimes 
entertain her in this way when Mr. St. Q. thinks proper to 
assist at my toilet ; and it is quite funny to see (in the glass) 
the looks she steals at him. I did this, when I was not cer- 
tain whether she was in his confidence, and wanted to find out. 
The experiment succeeded perfectly. Dear creatures ! If they 
only knew how easily I could hide anything I chose from their 
puny ingenuity, and with what ease and certainty I found tJum 
out, how vexed they would be ! Neither of them has sufficient 
sense of humour to be amused, as I should be in their place, 
by such a discovery. 

" It must be dreadfully dreary for you at The Firs, my dearest 
Rose ; though I know you will say it is not Why are you so 
even-tempered and cheerful-spirited under such circumstances 
as yours ? Don't imagine I am blaming you ; I am only won- 
dering at you. Good Heavens ! If, in the first place, I could 
love any man as you love Walter,. separation from him would 
drive me wild ; and, in the second, a quiet life, such a quiet life, 
under the circumstances, would make me a complete lunatic. 
Graceless as I am, I can admire you, and, and . no ! I was 
going to say what is not true, that I can wish to imitate you. 
I cannot. I do not feel the desire to be what you are . I 
am of the earth, earthy . of the world, worldly ; and you have 
a considerable dash of the heavenly in your composition. I 
do believe I am more worldly since you left me ; that I love 
money, and fine clothes, good living, jewels, horsey ^IV \s,x&&s> 
of show and excitement, much more t\van , wYtex^etfc ^^\.c>^^Kt 

p 2 



212 A Golden Sorrow. 

That is certainly a testimony to you, if it is a bad sign in your 
most affectionate sister, 

"Miriam St. Quentin." 

" P.S. . This ought to have been posted three days ago, but 
was neglected. Things are not quite so comfortable. I danced 
three times with a certain Count Scalchi at the De Mouchy's on 
Tuesday, and met him at dinner next day, when he made him- 
self agreeable. Mr. St. Quentin is watching him now, and I do 
verily believe he believes the man followed me hither from Rome. 
It is like nothing that ever happened, except the plots of the 
Spanish romances, and the plays of the Restoration, and, after 
all, they did not happen ! Fortunately, he cannot make me un- 
happy, but he may make me ridiculous, by making himself so. 
I wonder is he a little * cracked ' ? He positively looks quite 
thin and yellow, and ever so much older than he used to look. 
I should not be surprised if he would not remain in Paris now, 
if this craze lasts. What dreadful inconstancy he must suspect 
me of ! Not to him, cela va sans dire, but to Claude Auchinleck, 
and the mysterious gentleman who preceded him in my light 
affections, for whose effusions he would persist in mistaking poor 
Walter's letters. He never got the better of me on that point. 
By-the-bye, do you remember wanting me to show him one 
sheet of a letter from Walter, a safe sheet, in which you were 
not mentioned (it was almost all about his friend, Mr. Daly), 
in order to convince him that it really did come from Walter, 
and I would not ? I never did, and I never will. If he per- 
sists in this present fit of absurdity, and makes any move, I am 
determined it shall be to England . and I shall carry my point, 
if I have to do it, by threatening to run away with Scalchi, who 
would be exceedingly unlikely to consent to the arrangement" 

Florence read this letter from Miriam with many contending 

feelings. The affection for herself which it expressed touched 

her deeply, but the picture it contained of Miriam's life, and 

tier feelings, alarmed her. She cou\d tioX Y^\>rav%^o\x^d 



From Miriam to Floreme. 213 

by it, but at the same time she was heartily grieved She did 
not believe that Miriam felt Mr. St. Quentin's distrustful and 
insulting jealousy so little as she pretended to feel it . pretended, 
not only to Florence, but to herself She had a proud nature, 
and would wince under the insult of suspicion, however she 
might scorn the person who suspected her. And her strong 
sense and wholly unsentimental turn of mind would render a 
weakness, even if amiable, intolerable to her. How much more 
a weakness that was anything but amiable, and exceedingly in- 
sulting ! 

" Her life is much drearier than mine, in reality, ,, thought 
Florence, " and has more real danger in it. I do not know 
from whence the temptation will come, or in what shape, but I 
am terribly afraid for Miriam." 



214 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

FROM FLORENCE TO MIRIAM. 

The Firs, May, 186. . 

"My dearest Miriam, . Your letter has surprised me very 
much. I suppose I must not venture to tell you what else it 
has done ; but I think you can hardly have expected it to 
leave my mind as easy as it found it. I cannot help thinking 
you are persuading, or forcing, yourself into that sort of hard 
frivolity . I don't know any other name for it . which is in 
reality not a bit like you. You cannot make me believe that 
you are really satisfied to think yourself less dear to your hus- 
band than you were ; if it were only for your pride's sake, I 
am sure you would not welcome such a conviction. The mere 
notion of its being the case is indeed absurd : a man so 
entirely devoted to you, to be changed, rendered indifferent, 
by a ridiculous notion, quite as humiliating to himself as to 
you. You will laugh, and say how like me it is to be impressed 
in the first place by the sentimental aspect of the circumstances 
related in your letter. The sentimental aspect of a relation 
which must last all one's life, and is the most important in life, 
always seems to be worthy of attention ; for, after all, a good 
deal of us is sentiment, you know, and cannot be got rid of. 
I cannot think it, and I am sure it is only a result of the 
queer notion Mr. St. Quentin has taken into his head. I 
have always heard and read that jealousy is the most unac- 
countable of all passions, and I can easily imagine its prompt- 
ing a man to a kind of reprisals . the * if you don't care for 
me, I don't care for you/ kind of thing. But, rely on it, your 
power over your husband's feelings \a t^sXYj TO&tak&u, and if 



From Florence to Miriam. 2 1 5 

you would only use it wisely you would both be happy. I 
do not mean by that a * model couple* in your sense. I 
pity him very much, I must say : there is something in my 
own heart, happily for me, never yet roused, which fills me 
with compassion for jealous people : they must be so miserable ; 
and I never could blame Mr. St Quentin for disliking me. 
You ought to be able to pity him. He can't help it, I sup- 
pose, and perhaps he may consider that a kind of side-winded 
compliment 

" I cannot tell you the pleasure with which I learned that 
you are in Paris. It is such a relief to know that you are so 
near, to know that you could come, if it were necessary, at 
something less than the cost in fatigue and inconvenience of 
a journey from Rome ; for I must tell you, before I go on to 
other subjects, that I don't agree with you that there is no- 
thing to be immediately alarmed about in your father's state of 
health. You can have no idea of the panic I get into some- 
times lest he should die without being reconciled to Walter, 
without seeing him, without learning the truth from his son. 
There is nothing so dreadful as aeath, when an unreconciled 
quarrel remains ; and I am sure Walter, little as he thinks so 
now, would feel it dreadfully. Besides, he is, though not 
wholly, yet gravely, in the wrong. I feel that more and more 
deeply every day, and not all that my utmost efforts can ac- 
complish can ever atone for the deception which Walter has 
practised on his father. I don't mean in my being here . that 
is quite a secondary matter; the original deception of our 
marriage is what I mean ; and far above my own loneliness 
without him, my solicitude about him, and longing for his 
return, is the desire I feel that he and his father should not 
part for ever estranged. I pray more earnestly for that than I 
ever prayed for anything in my life. I see a good deal of Mr. 
Clint now, every day, and I watch closely for any indication 
that he is thinking of Walter, or is softening towards him. I 
have not found any, with all my watching ; but perhaps he k 
on his guard, being suspicious of me. 1 \&ve& Y\fc S& *. \fias*. 



216 A Golden Sorrow. 

who would resent its being surmised that he had changed his 
mind, and, of course, he cannot doubt but that I would tell 
you anything I could find out. 

" Indeed, dear Miriam, he is failing. Mr. Martin is, I am 
convinced, aware that his state is precarious, although he still 
persists in going about, and there is no apparent alteration in 
his ways, or in the ways of the house. What you say about 
his being a strong man, and resisting his terrible habit for a 
long time, is true ; but I am not sure that the breakdown is 
not all the more complete and hopeless when it comes. I 
have had much less difficulty than I could have anticipated in 
getting into the position I hoped for here. The servants don't 
like me, of course . it is not to be expected that they should 
. but then they dislike and fear him so much that they are 
quite satisfied with any arrangement, however it may savour 
of favouritism, which removes in some degree the task of wait- 
ing upon him off them, and puts it on me. The last time he 
was confined to the house for three days . of course, after a 
bout of solitary drinking, which he said was gout . I answered 
his bell, as if by accident, and told Mrs. Ritchie I thought 
there was no other servant about ; and that 1 had no objection 
to do so habitually, when I was in your room, and therefore 
close to his. The result is I attend on him constantly, and 
since then he has been better, and I have been requested to 
resume my piano-playing in the evenings . which puzzles the 
servants, I can see ; but Mrs. Ritchie condescends to approve, 
and that is all the backing I require. He is more morose 
than ever. Mr. and Mrs, Cooke have honestly kept the pro- 
mise they made you, and called on him several times ; but he 
invariably refuses to see them, on the plea that he is not well, 
and he sees literally no one but Mr. Martin and Mr. Standish. 

" I met Mrs. Cooke in the village one day last week, as I 

was turning away from the post-office after posting a letter to 

Walter, and she stopped to speak to me. You have always 

told me she is a very nice woman, and I trust your judgment 

and your taste implicitly; but I musV confess Ida tart, like her. 



From Florence to Miriam. 217 

There are times when not all the effort I can make enables 
me to retain the mental attitude of my position towards others,' 
and I am quite conscious that, in judging Mrs. Cooke, I 
did not distinctly remember that I was Mrs. St QuenthVs 
maid, being spoken to by the wife of the rector of the parish, 
and I made her short and indifferent answers. I did not think 
her manner pleasant, and the way in which she looked at me 
was decidedly not so . it was almost suspicious, and, if I might 
say so, impertinent. She was curious to know whether your 
father corresponded directly with you, and quite unnecessarily 
emphatic in expressing her opinion that Mrs. St. Quentin 
ought to be informed of the extreme seclusion in which her 
father lived, and how very undesirable his friends considered 
it One would have thought, to hear her, that I was keeping 
your father shut up for some sinister purpose of my own, and 
that she wanted to make me understand that she had found 
me out. At all events, she did not impress me agreeably, 
and I gave her no information, and, I suspect, as little satis- 
faction. 

" My life is very monotonous, but I like it, like it better 
than any other kind of life, while Walter is absent ; and I 
know I am useful to your father. I think, sometimes, he 
drinks less, has less time, in fact, in which to drink. He is 
never violent with me, but sometimes doggedly sullen, so that 
I know not whether I have offended him, or what is the matter 
with him. His looks are very much changed. Dear Miriam, 
I am a bad hand at description, but I must tell you that his hair 
is thinner and more grey, and it looks lank and damp. His 
face is red and yet pale ; there is a livid hue about it very 
often, like a thin, ashy shade over the blood-red flesh ; and his 
lips are loose, blue, and seldom quite still. He never walks 
without his stick now, he leans heavily on it, but with an un- 
steady hand, the veins and fingers of which are thickened and 
coarse. His eyes are sometimes bloodshot, and generally dim, 
except when he is angry about anything, then the^ caxv ^asfc 
still ; and his voice is uncertain and vieaksx. W&kel V^. "^ 



218 A Golden Sorrow. 

shaking off the effect of a real fit of drinking, he is as hoarse as 
a raven. He takes some pains to conceal the quantity he 
drinks. He keeps the key of the wine-cellar as religiously as 
usual, and puts in the empty bottles out of sight as far as he 
can. Mr. Martin says he never knew the desire for conceal- 
ment, which he calls * a remnant of decency,' to last so long, 
in the case of a man addicted to this vice, and he instructs me 
to let him suppose me to be ignorant of the truth as long as 
possible. I shall be all the more useful to him, Mr. Martin 
says, when concealment ceases to be practicable, if he can, up 
to that time, preserve the figment of self-respect ; and besides 
this, there is a kind of restraint in it . it is not much, but it is 
something. 

" He had a dreadful attack last week, but I did not see 
him in it. No one did, except Mr. Martin and Robert. It 
did not last long ; and Mr. Martin said it would have fright- 
ened me uselessly, and probably led, had Mr. Clint discovered 
my knowledge of it, to his dismissing me from the house. 
Fancy if Mr. Martin could have surmised the weight and 
meaning of such a probability to me ! He was in abject fear 
they told me, they could not make out of what, and he clung 
to them, trembling, with the most heartrending entreaties that 
they would not leave him, until they succeeded in stupefying 
him. Then, the waking ! the appalling lassitude and misery, 
and the manifest decrease of strength since the attack. 
Miriam, I feel convinced he is dying, not by such slow de- 
grees as Mr. Martin prepared me for at all, and that there is 
nothing to hope for except a briefer period of a less kind of 
suffering. 

" I considered all you said to me maturely, and being quite 
satisfied that I might safely trust my nerves and my counte- 
nance, I endeavoured to find out whether Mr. Martin knew 
anything of the object of your father's inquiries at Tredegar 
Terrace. 

" I told him my mistress had avowed to me that she feared 
something had occurred still iuxlYvet to qo&ta&t tV\a mutual 



From Florence to Miriam. 219 

feelings of her father and her brother, but that, unless Mr. 
Martin was aware of the circumstance, she had no means of 
ascertaining whether her conjecture was correct. Mr. Martin 
replied, . 

" ' I suppose I may tell you anything which I would tell 
Mrs. St Quentin ? ' 

" * I am entirely in her confidence in this matter/ I said. 

" ' Well, then/ continued Mr. Martin, * she had better 
know the truth. Mr. Clint has told me all about it. His 
son . such a nice fellow, Mrs. Dixon ; if he had only a little 
more sense, and a little less complaisance . fell in love with 
the daughter of the person in whose house he lodged in Lon- 
don ; and after her mother's death, this young lady went out 
as governess to some family which she left under peculiar cir- 
cumstances. I never believe one woman's account of another, 
as I told Mr. Clint, when he told me that the woman whose 
brats the poor girl taught said she was 'indeed a dangerous 
inmate / which meant, no doubt, that Miss Reeve was an at- 
tractive creature, and the lady herself, a Mrs. Clewer, was an 
elderly catamaran ; and I daresay Miss Reeve was all right. 
The thing came to Mr. Clint's knowledge in an odd sort of 
way. A letter addressed in a common hand, like a shop- 
man's or a servant's ,was sent to The Firs, directed to W. Clint, 
Esq., and opened by Mr. Clint ; it contained a letter, written 
in the most lover-like terms, to Miss Reeve (Miriam, I did 
keep my countenance, I assure you I did), signed with 
Walter's name, and addressed to Miss Reeve, at Mrs. Clewer's. 
There was a second letter, from that no doubt estimable per- 
son, in which she informed the poor girl that the [letter had 
been found at the back of a drawer in the room formerly occu- 
pied by her, and that she, Mrs, Clewer, in restoring it to her, 
felt it her duty, as a mother and a decided Christian, to 
point out to her the error of her ways, and to inform her that 
it would be out of her power, should she ever apply to her 
for a recommendation, to give her one. The lady added tVafc. 
she presumed the best way to make s\xce ol Xta^ \sX\sx \wS&.- 



220 A Golden Sorrow. 

ing its owner, and to make her aware that she was detected, 
was to send it to the deluded young man whom she had evi- 
dently led astray from the paths of duty and wisdom. Accord- 
ingly, Mrs. Clewer had forwarded the whole budget to Mr. 
Walter Clint, at his lodgings at Tredegar Terrace ; and the 
servant there, who, it seems, knew his father's address, but 
had lost sight of him for some time, redirected the letter to The 
Firs. Mr. Clint immediately wrote to Mrs. Clewer for infor- 
mation respecting Miss Reeve, and received in return one of 
those exquisitely malicious, piously foreboding, effusively 
vague letters characteristic of women of a certain class of 
mind, when they are puffed up with the fond notion of being 
of some importance, and see their way to a safe indulgence in 
spite. This occurred some time before Miss Clint's marriage ; 
and Mr. Clint went up to London with his mind full of it, and 
returned brooding over it, I am convinced, together with all 
the rest of Walter's misdemeanours, real and imaginary. It 
is only within the last week he has told me about it.' 

u l And what did you say ? ' I contrived to stammer out. 

" * That it was all rubbish ; that Walter had naturally, and 
no doubt honourably, admired a pretty girl, whom he had 
met under very provocative circumstances ; and that Mrs. 
Clewer was an unamiable, spiteful woman, whose ostentatious 
ignorance of * what had become of Miss Reeve/ was the exact 
Tesult of her own conduct to her . depend on it, the woman 
who wrote that letter after she had left her, treated her ill 
while she stayed . and that it was a boyish folly, without any- 
thing disgraceful in it He had an absurd notion that Walter 
might have married this poor girl, but I reasoned him out of 
that.' 

" * How did you manage that, sir ? ' I asked. 

"'Well, indeed, without much difficulty. I had only to 

represent to him that no one knew what Walter's circumstances 

were better than he did ; he was perfectly aware that he had 

not given his son the means of keeping a wife, and that, as a 

fact, his son had no wife, but "had &one o\ft m\h\ *.\aak^ corca.- 



From Florence to Miriam. 221 

panion to the gold-diggings. I think no argument could be 
simpler or more conclusive than that ? ' 

"I assented. Dearest Miriam, imagine how I was longing 
to get away from him ! ' You may tell Mrs. St. Quentin all 
this, as, I suppose, she knows what I said on your arrival ; and 
tell her she need not be uneasy ; there is absolutely nothing 
in it.' 

" Imagine my reflections, though I cannot be identified with 
this calumniated Florence Reeve ! Conceive what Walter would 
feel if he knew of Mrs. Clewer's letter ! Do you wonder that 
I sometimes feel the restraining bands of time and space almost 
insufferable, as if I must, by a mighty effort of my spirit, burst 
them and be free . free to join him, to see him ! But weary 
weeks and months must wear themselves away before the seal 
is taken off my lips. 

" You draw a picture of me, dearest Miriam, as much too 
flattering as your picture of yourself is false to the reality. I 
did laugh, I confess, at your story about the note from the 
dressmaker ; but would it not be better to face this craze of 
Mr. St Quentin's openly, and thus shame him, or reason him 
out of it? Of course you are very careful to give evil tongues 
no chance of maligning you. If he is known to be a jealous 
man, your conduct will be very closely scrutinized. It seems 
to me that I have grown wonderfully wise of late. Lawrence 
Daly used to say that nothing would ever teach me the ways of 
the world ; but I am learning them . that letter of Mrs. Clewer's 
was a whole class-book to me. 

" I shall be anxious till I hear from you again. Don't vex 
Mr. St. Quentin too much about Count Scalchi. I wish he 
would come to England, buy the ' place ' he talked about when 
he first came, and that you would i settle down.' I know you 
cannot bear the word, but I have a notion, dear Miriam, after 
all the knocking about you have had, you would find the thing 
very tolerable. I have no home news for you. The place 
looks neglected and melancholy. Your fathfci, \.\\ovv^Vfc ^ji^.% 
out every day that he is up, in all v?eat\\eis,\\ax^j sn*x <sc&s.vs 



222 A Golden Sorrow. 

the garden, and seems to care nothing about it. The path on 
the border of the fir plantation is his invariable promenade ; 
there he walks, slowly and alone, by the hour together. If he 
would read it would be a resource for him, but he never reads, 
not even the newspaper, I think. I must conclude now. 
Write soon again. 

" Your affectionate sister, 

"Florence Clint." 

While Florence was occupied in writing this letter, Mr. 
Clint was walking, in the listless, depressed, desultory way 
which had become habitual to him, up and down the path on 
the edge of the fir-wood. He looked ill, feeble, and angry. 
Muttered exclamations of impatience escaped him from time 
to time, and he shook his stout stick with something of the 
gesture which, a couple of years before, made a stick, in the 
hand of Reginald Clint when he was in a passion, an un- 
pleasantly suggestive weapon. 

" What the devil is keeping the man ? " he would mutter. 
" Not business . he cannot put me off on that pretence." 

Presently the individual he was by this time wildly objurgating, 
appeared. Robert was conducting him towards the fir-wood, 
when Mr. Clint stood still, and shouted at them, . 

" That will do, you fool. Do you suppose he does not 
know a road when it lies before him, or me when he sees me ? 
Go back, and mind your business. . Soh ! you've come at last, 
Standish, have you? I have expected you this hour." 

" I could not come sooner," replied Mr. Standish . a tall, 
thin, self-possessed man, who took Mr. Clint's impatient spleen 
very quietly . as he joined him. " Do you mean to discuss 
the important business, on which you tell me you wish to con- 
sult me, here ? " 

" I do," replied Mr. Clint shortly. " Just give me your 
arm, will you ? " 

The other presented his arm, without much alacrity ; and 
Mr. Clint, shifting his stick to the \rfl tax&, \raetfA &m3e) 



From Florence to Miriam. 223 

upon it, as he turned .into the walk, and pursued it in the 
direction leading away from the house, talking low and earnestly 
to his companion. That gentleman did not pay any remark- 
able attention to his words at first, but after awhile he began 
to listen with marked even startled interest, and, with bent 
brows and keenly-searching eyes, to question the speaker 
closely. 

Mr. Standish was a lawyer. 



224 <d Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

FRIENDLY OFFICES. 

Life within the gates at The Firs went on very quietly, to out- 
ward appearance, and was so full of anxiety to Florence that 
her mind, with the one great exception of its straying over the 
sea to Walter, was concentrated upon it She knew nothing ; 
she cared nothing about what went on without. But the 
moroseness and the exclusiveness of Reginald Clint had not 
banished the influence of gossip among the inmates of his house 
and their village acquaintances. They had, perhaps, rather 
intensified the need for the loosing of tongues in every direction 
in which either information or surmise could be distributed ; 
and the master of The Firs would have been astonished if he 
could have known how much people who, he would have 
positively declared, knew nothing at all about him, contrived 
to say. 

That Mr. Clint was a bad father, had been a bad husband, 
and was not likely ever to be anything but a bad man, were 
facts so well known and frequently discussed in the neighbour- 
hood that they had quite lost the charm of novelty ; but an 
entirely fresh impetus had been given of late to the gossip of 
the place, and its motive power was poor unconscious Florence. 
She went on her way, fulfilling her appointed task, which was 
becoming day by day more difficult and painful, and she was 
furnishing an inexhaustible theme of surmise, suspicion, and 
detraction to a number of people of whose existence she was 
hardly aware. 
The falseness of her position, though, in one of its aspects, 
never absent from her mind, m oftvexs tknsx qkk>\to& \k> 



Friendly Offices. 225 

Florence. So intent was she upon the one purpose of her 
life that she did not perceive the surrounding facts and im- 
pressions, and she failed to remark the manifest silence and 
restraint of the servants towards her, because they were just 
what she wished for, and by freeing her from a constant 
necessity for acting, left her all the more time for thought, and 
the furtherance of her project. She did once or twice notice that 
Mrs. Ritchie spoke sharply to her, and that she was never asked 
to join her on any of the occasions which had been impossible 
to avoid, and which had taxed her gentle patience so severely ; 
but she merely observed these facts, they made no impression 
on her. 

In the meantime a very pretty little commotion was in pro- 
gress in the village, and even for some distance outside it, and 
before very long Mr. Martin became aware of it, and of its 
origin. The indignant public had convinced itself that Mr. 
Clint, for whom no esteem or compassion had ever been felt, 
was in danger of falling "a victim to the arts and fascinations 
of his daughter's confidential maid," and that Mrs. St. Quentin, 
owing to her injudicious selection of a young and pretty woman 
to fill the place she herself ought to have occupied, was not 
unlikely to find herself accommodated with a step-mother. It 
was just the sort of thing a man like Mr. Clint, excluded 
himself from society, would be likely to do ; in short, there 
were many people who asked, with Susan, whether Mrs. St 
Quentin thought there was only one old fool in the world, when 
she had made sure of her husband ? This question had sug- 
gested itself, in the first instance, through the instrumentality 
of Susan, who, without feeling any positive dislike of Mrs. 
Dixon, had an uneasy jealousy and suspicion of her, which, of 
course originated in her unacknowledged intuitive consciousness 
of that young person's superiority. She had no deliberate in- 
tention of slander, or even of ill-nature, in- the first whispers 
which she set abroad, subsequent to her discovery of Mrs. 
Dixon at the piano in the drawing-room ., but \.Yve. ^^g^s&arcv 
thatMr5. St. Quentin's maid was "playing a.mcfc\*ftfc^BBR. 



226 A Golden Sorrow. 

of her own," found such popular favour that Susan could by 
no means resist multiplying her observations, and detailing 
their results with considerable exaggeration. 

The perfect quiet of life at The Firs, and the seclusion of it, 
were dangerous in the sense that they threw Florence off her 
guard, that she appeared as she was, a refined and high-minded 
young lady, and by degrees ceased to remember the technical- 
ities to which she had trained herself for the maintenance of her 
assumed position. This told seriously in support of the theory of 
her designs upon Mr. Clint ; for whereas she was unconsciously 
resuming the externals of her real station, she was supposed to 
be practising for the station to which she nefariously aspired. 

It would be difficult, in any case, to trace the progress of a 
rumour originating in one class of society, to the knowledge of 
another, and its adoption by that other. In this particular 
instance it would be impossible. Mrs. Cooke tried to trace it, 
but she failed ; it had passed through so many channels before 
it reached her through the medium of the village school-mistress, 
a few days before that on which she had met Florence in the 
village, and produced so unpleasing an effect on her. Circum- 
stances were against Florence, it must be confessed, since the 
way of the world is to take a bad motive for granted, but never 
to recognize a generous one, except under the pressure of over- 
whelming proof; and Mrs. Cooke, a sensible woman, and not 
in the least ill-natured, felt some concern for her friend Miriam. 
There was another point to view, to be sure . whether any 
woman, with a good character and a decent education, would 
not be so much too good for Mr. Clint as to be fairly held to 
have purchased the worldly advantages involved in becoming 
his wife at a very high price indeed ; but Mrs. Cooke could 
hardly be expected to consider the matter in that aspect. Class 
prejudices have such tremendous power over women that it 
would be almost impossible, to the most reasonable among 
them, to discern that marrying a " gentleman " might be not 
only a condescension and a sacrifice, but an actual degradation, 
on the part of a " servant" 



Friendly Offices. 227 

As it was, Mrs. Cooke felt much indignation with Mrs. 
Dixon, contempt for Mr. Clint, compassion for Miriam, and 
indecision as regarded herself, She had forgotten her hus- 
band's intuitive credulity about Miriam's intention of accepting 
Mr. St. Quentin, or she might have been prepared for his re- 
ception of the exciting item of village gossip which she now 
retailed to him. He merely remarked that it would be a great 
pity any decent woman should become the wife of such a man, 
but that he supposed the poor girl wished, like her mistress, 
to " better herself." 

" Like Miriam ! " exclaimed Mrs. Cooke, aghast at the com- 
parison. " What can you mean ? " 

'^How can you ask ? Miriam Clint married an old man to 
better herself. \t is the word that shocks you, my dear, not 
the fact ; and this young woman may, perhaps, if this story 
you have heard of her anomalous position at The Firs be the 
truth, be scheming, without assistance, to do what Miriam was 
backed up in doing by every one." 

" But, my dear John, think of the difference . think of her 
position ! " 

" But, my dear Fanny, think of his age, his character, and 
his habits ! " 

" It is impossible you could approve ! " said Mrs. Cooke, 
rather bewildered. 

" I certainly do not approve ; but, supposing this gossiping 
story to have any foundation, which I do not believe, you 
should bear in mind that vulgar but veracious proverb, that 
' what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.' " 

The immediate result of this conversation was a letter from 
Mrs. Cooke to Miriam, which sufficiently accounted for the 
impression produced on Florence by her interview with that 
lady. She had indeed been regarded with suspicion, and pur- 
posely reminded of her station. " It is the most exquisitely 
funny complication," wrote Miriam to poor Florence, "that 
ever occurred. I am so possessed with the corcv\ca\\\^ <& ^aa. 
idea that I can hardly take a serious view o V5aa mcoTc&R2M*. 

Q 2 



228 A Golden Sorrow. 

it might have led to, if we had found it out sooner, when the 
time which will set it all to rights was farther away. I laughed 
until I nearly cried over the letter ; and Mr. St. Quentin had 
one of his most severe fits of curiosity about it, but I need 
hardly say he did not get the slightest satisfaction. My dear, 
romantic, sentimental, devoted Rose, to think of you being 
solemnly and circumstantially accused of scheming to make 
papa marry you ! Undue influence, indeed ! * Oh, Sir Pitt ! 
Sir Pitt ! I . I am married already ! ' . only it is Amelia who is 
in the scrape, and not Becky. I cannot fancy anything more 
amusing : and how like the people at Drington to get up such 
a story ! Just think of all your care and kindness being thus 
interpreted ! Of course it is not worth being annoyed aoout 
for one moment, and it will certainly increase the piquancy of 
the ' situation/ when the truth comes out. There is no chance, 
I had almost said no hope, of its coming to papa's ears . no 
one ventures to talk gossip to him . but if it only could, just 
imagine the rage he would be in ! I am sure it would be 
quite a revelation to him that any one had ever dared talk of 
him and his affairs ; and I could find it in my heart to wish, 
for once, to see him in one of his very finest frenzies. I flatter 
myself I have answered Fanny Cooke's letter with admirable 
discretion. She most sincerely believed she was doing her 
duty in writing to me. I fully recognized her zeal and fidelity, 
and then went on to say that I was about to repose a confid- 
ence in her which would at once convince her that the rumour 
she had heard was utterly unfounded, and relieve her from 
anxiety on my account. I told her that my confidential maid 
had a prior attachment of long standing, to a young man with 
whose merits and fidelity to her I was intimately acquainted. 
that the engagement had already subsisted some years, and 
that Mrs. Dixon had entered my service, and subsequently as- 
sumed her present responsible task, in consequence of this es- 
timable young man's absence in a foreign country, from which 
he hoped to return sufficiently well off to enable him to put an 
end to their separation . that Mis. "Dyxd\s> akten&ax&ft. ckv my 



Friendly Offices. 229 

father was an immeasurable boon to me, and that I most ear- 
nestly hoped no ill-natured gossip might ever come to her 
ears, rendering it impossible for her to continue to do me this 
great service. Admire, I beg, my dear, the ingenuity with 
which I have told nothing but the truth, and yet completely 
routed Fanny's suspicions ! You have a prior attachment, you 
have been engaged to Walter for some years, and he does hope 
to put an end to your separation. Depend upon it, Fanny 
will be very kind to you in future, and will put down the vil- 
lage gossip with a high hand. We may safely trust her for 
that. I was so much amused at the whole business, and so 
preoccupied with my letter to her, that I have no doubt Mr. 
St. Quentin is convinced I am * carrying on ' some deep-laid 
scheme." 

It would be difficult to describe the feelings with which 
Florence read this letter. They amounted to positive horror, 
and included some of the very keenest suffering through which 
she had ever passed. The shock of the discovery that she 
was suspected of a design, which not all the force of her rea- 
soning upon the absolute ignorance of her true history by all 
around could cause her to think of without a horrible sense of 
its outrageous nature, was much increased by Miriam's mode 
of treating it. There was something so keenly hurtful to her 
delicacy, to her feelings of every kind, in this cruel rumour, and 
Miriam could regard it only in the light of a joke ! She felt 
as if she must needs sink" under this trial, as if it were quite 
too much for her, the filling up of her cup with a draught too 
nauseous to be drunk. She shut herself up in her room, and 
wept the bitterest tears that had ever fallen from her eyes, 
tears which had an unreasonable kind of humiliation in them. 
She could not possibly bear this, she thought, and yet, what 
^ could she do ? To go away would be to lose all she had striven 
so hard for ; and, yet to remain under such a suspicion, 
watched by the servants, every action imputed to a motive 
which she shuddered to think of, notw\tta\aKu&Yk% \\& ^osax^ 
impossibility. could she do that? SVie v*as \otk*^ ^Bssfc 



230 A Golden Sorrow. 

things in her mind, and was feeling quite sick with crying, when 
she was told that Mr. Martin wished to see her. She went 
downstairs quickly, without giving a thought to her red and 
swollen eyelids and pale cheeks. 

Mr. Martin glanced sharply at her, as she entered the study 
where he was alone. Mr. Clint had not yet risen. The doctor 
had had a hint from Mrs. Dixon, on the previous evening, that 
he was in one of his very bad fits. These had recurred of 
late more frequently, and he now made few attempts at con- 
cealment, and no efforts at all at self-control. 

" H . m," said Mr. Martin, audibly ; adding, in his thoughts ; 
"she has heard it, and has been crying her pretty eyes 
out." 

He asked her a few questions about his patient, and then 
said, . 

" I have not met many sensible women in my life, but you 
are one of the most sensible women I have met. Now, I am 
going to speak plainly to you. Some foolish people here have 
been telling lies about you, prompted by idleness and igno- 
rance, and in some degree by jealousy." 

Florence sobbed. 

" You have heard this, and you were in doubt about what 
you ought to do. I am right, am I not ? w 

" Yes, sir." 

" Now, this is what you ought to do. You are of incalcu- 
lable value here, you are doing your duty admirably, and no 
reasonable person who has ever spoken ten words to you 
could believe one word of this nonsense. If you allow it to 
influence you, you will be very unkind to Mrs. St. Quentin, 
and very cruel to this unhappy man, who has nothing but in- 
creased suffering before him. I took it for granted you would 
act consistently with your character, before I said anything to 
you ; and I have effectually prevented your being annoyed, by 
informing Mrs. Ritchie that the gossip had come to my ears, 
and that if it reached Mr. Clint's ever so faintly it would 



Friendly Offices. 231 

cost all the servants at The Firs their places. I believe they 
are thoroughly ashamed of themselves, and that you will have 
no annoyance whatever. You will promise me to think no 
more about it ? " 

" I will try," said Florence, simply. 

" That's right. I will go and see Mr. Clint in his room ; 
I cannot wait for him any longer." 

Mr. Martin came out from that visit to his patient looking 
very serious. Their interview had been long and unpleasant. 
The doctor had never told Reginald Clint before, in so many 
words, that he was drinking himself to death, surely, and now by 
no means slowly. He had told him soon this occasion, and in 
the plainest and most emphatic terms depicted the sufferings 
to which he would inevitably subject himself. The man's 
appearance was more ghastly on this occasion than he had 
ever seen it. A fixed, yellow hue pervaded his skin, and hard 
red blotches marked his sunken cheeks. He had made an 
attempt to dress himself, but had been too sick and giddy 
to succeed, and Mr. Martin found him lying on his bed in his 
shirt and trousers, exhausted, feverish, and in one of his most 
sullen and dangerous moods. But he had to deal with the 
only person who had never been afraid of him. 

" I suppose you mean that I can't recover, in any case ? " 
asked Mr. Clint, with a fierce glance at Mr. Martin, instantly 
turning away. 

"I do mean just that; but your life might be greatly 
prolonged, and your pain much alleviated, if you would use 
the reason which you still retain, and give up drink. If you 
would even moderate your indulgence in it, it would make a 
great difference to you during the remainder of your life." 

Reginald Clint raised himself up, hitched his back against 
the bed, and turned towards Mr. Martin, griping the bed- 
clothes in his coarse, bony, yellow hand. His voice was 
hoarse, partly from illness, but still more from passion, as he 
said, scowling the while as few but he could secret . 



232 A Golden Sorrow. 

" What is it that possesses you to talk such cursed nonsense 
to me ? You know me long enough and well enough to know 
the folly of it. Give up drink 1 Do. you know what drink 
has been to me?" 

" I think I do. The destruction of your body and mind." 

" Don't trouble yourself about my mind, that's not your busi- 
ness. It has served my turn, and it will serve it yet. You 
can't make me out a madman, you know." 

" Not yet, perhaps," said Mr. Martin, with grave and delibe- 
rate emphasis ; " but you are coming to that. You certainly 
will come to it, if you have a few more such fits as this has 
been." 

" So that I shall not be able to arrange my affairs, eh ? . and 
your worthy favourite, my good and dutiful son, who has not 
sent me a line for nearly two years, will come in for my pro- 
perty, without any trouble. Is that your meaning ? " 

" Not exactly. You are a long way off the state of mind in 
which a man ceases to be competent to make an unjust will. 
The power to do wrong lasts long, unhappily. But you are day 
by day destroying your judgment, deadening your conscience, 
and reducing yourself to a lower level of intelligence." 

" Hah ! Well, as you are concerned only with my body, let 
me tell you, once for all, and pray remember it practically, for 
you will be spared a deal of talk, and I a deal of listening ; / 
will not give up drink, and I will not drink less, so long as I 
feel disposed to drink as much. There is nothing else I care 
for ; there's no man, woman, child, animal or thing of value 
to me, in comparison with drink . or, indeed, of any value at 
all, and life without drink would be a rotten bargain. You 
won't get me to make it." 

" Good-bye," said Mr. Martin, abruptly, and he turned to- 
wards the door, without the least effort to disguise his disgust. 

Late in the evening, Mr. Martin received a note from Mrs. 

Dixon. She was directed by Mr. Clint to request that Mr. 

Martin would come to The Firs at twelve o'clock on the follow- 

ing day without fail. She added a lev* yjot&s ot^Yvst o^x^wavutf. 



Friendly Offices. 233 

to the effect that Mr. Clint had been very ill all day, and had 
eaten nothing. 

At noon, the next day, Mr. Martin presented himself at 
The Firs. He found Mr. Clint in his study, seated at his writ- 
ing-table, on which lay a large folio of foolscap, covered with 
writing in law hand. Mr. Standish was in the room, and he 
bowed, without speaking, to Mr. Martin, who was surprised by 
a certain formality in the appearance of both gentlemen. 

" How do you do, Martin ? " said Reginald Clint, looking at 
him with a queer expression. " I am all right, you see, and 
have sent for you quite in a friendly way. None of your d . d 
doctoring to-day. I've taken your advice, though, in one re- 
spect, if I've neglected your physic ; in fact, I had had the same 
bright idea myself, and I have sent for you to ask you to wit- 
ness my will." 

Mr. Martin looked incredulous and uncomfortable. Mr. 
Standish spoke. 

" Yes, Mr. Martin ; this is Mr. Clint's will, for which he 
favoured me with instructions some little time ago. He par- 
ticularly wishes for your signature as one of the witnesses." 

" If any other, friend . " Mr. Martin began, but Mr. 
Clint interrupted him. 

" D . n it, man, don't you know I haven't a friend in the 
world but yourself? What objection can you have ? " 

" I have none," said Mr. Martin, with a mental calculation 
of the use of codicils, in case he should find out that Walter 
was ill-treated by this document, and gain the chance of in- 
fluence by his complaisance. 

" Why couldn't you say so at first, then ? Now for the other 
witness. Mrs. Ritchie will do." 

" Hadn't you better employ Mrs. Dixon, if you don't want 
this talked about ? " suggested Mr. Martin. 

" Mrs. Dixon. No . I . I think not," answered Mr. Clint. 
His tone was embarrassed, and a quick glance passed between 
him and the lawyer, who slightly shook his he&L "Y^s&kx. 
to employ Mrs. Ritchie." 



234 -A Golden Sorrow. 

" As you choose," said Mr. Martin. 

The bell was rung, and there was an embarrassed pause. 
Mrs. Ritchie came, and had the service which was required of 
her elaborately explained. She complied with her master's 
request, with that amusing mixture of pride with apprehension 
of mysterious consequences peculiar to persons of her class 
who are called upon to " sign " anything, and in a few minutes 
the proceedings were completed. Then Mr. Martin went away 
at once on the plea of business, leaving the lawyer and his 
client together. 



235 



CHAPTER XXV. 

WHERE IS WALTER? 

With the certainty that under any circumstances his life could 
not be much prolonged, it might have been supposed that 
some soft, regretful feeling would have come to Reginald Clint 
He might have been less morose and cynical, less obstinate in 
his conviction that, in the long-standing quarrel between him- 
self and his fellows, he only was in the right, they absolutely 
and wilfully in the wrong. But if any observer had indulged 
such an expectation, it would have arisen from- an imperfect 
conception of the man's character. We are too apt to regard 
sickness and sorrow as* direct agents for good in themselves, 
whereas they never absolutely turn aside the ordinary current 
of one's moral life ; they are what the person who experiences 
them makes them. Reginald Clint believed what Mr. Martin 
had told him ; indeed, there was a warning voice within him 
heard, but in the sense of warning unheeded, which affirmed 
the truth of the doctor's words. Nobody but himself could 
tell how difficult he. who, until a comparatively late period, 
had been a strong man . sometimes found it to live ; how easy 
it would have seemed to him to relinquish the effort, and allow 
that deadly nausea, that terrible tremulousness, that overwhelm- 
ing weakness, to have their full way. And they wanted him to 
give up drink ; to give up the only thing that checked all these, 
and pulled him back from the abyss he so constantly neared ! 
He was not such a fool as not to know that it was also the 
origin of the deadly evil which he felt . within his frame, but it 
was too late now ; he knew it would always have beetv to>^ \a\s., 
at least ever since the time when, \f an \n\x\x^\W^n&vs&. <^V*as> 



236 A Golden Sorrow. 

wife's pale face, as he remembered it in her welcome coffin, 
and his wife's rosy face, as he could not forget it on her wed- 
ding-day, arose before him, he got rid of them both by the agency 
of drink. He would keep off the big bouts which shook his 
nerves, and inflicted those dreadful attacks of fear upon him, 
but he would do no more ; and he was not afraid of death. 
There might be another life, perhaps ; he did not know or 
care much about that ; Reginald Clint had not in him even 
" the beginning of wisdom ;" at all events, he was getting tired 
of this present world. People died very easily sometimes, with 
the aid of drink, and he did not like pain. He had had a 
good deal of it already, more than any one knew about ; he 
wanted to have as little more as possible, and as to avoiding it 
by giving up drink, he knew better ! At all events . and he 
came steadily back to this in his thoughts . he would not, and 
he could not. 

He did not. Within three weeks after the making of his 
will, Reginald Clint had brought himself to a state which, if he 
had deferred that proceeding, would, in all probability, have 
invalidated it. His temper, so far from being softened, was 
more than ever intolerable, and his tyranny such that there 
was great difficulty in keeping the domestic staff together. 
Florence bore the brunt of much of this, putting herself as far 
as possible between him and those whom he had habitually 
maltreated with his tongue, though never so grossly as now. 
Her task was a hard one, full of most repulsive duties, . for 
disease spared nothing to the dying drunkard, . and there was 
no one to share them with her. In after-days she wondered 
how she was sustained in courage and in bodily strength through- 
out that time, with its ever-present horror and its agonizing 
suspense. 

Miriam was informed of her father's state, but Florence 

found herself obliged to add that Mr. Clint would not receive 

her unless she came to The Firs alone. He positively refused 

to admit Mr. St Quentin into the house. This was a novel 

development of his extraordinary tempei, ax&'Uta. "Ntosfta. eA 



" Where is Walter?" 237 

Florence were equally at a loss to account for it. But they 
presently discovered that he had, by dint of long brooding over 
the matter, conceived a violent animosity against Mr. St 
Quentin, in consequence of his victory over him respecting the 
conditions of his marriage with Miriam. He had been beaten 
on the point of the settlement ; and his morose, ill-conditioned 
mind, beginning now to be touched with positive disease, ever 
seeking nutrition for its spleen and ill-will, had fastened on this 
fact with peculiar avidity. Miriam might come if she chose, 
but not the plausible old cheat she had married, and whom 
she would find out some day. She had been in such a hurry 
to get away from her father, that she had allowed herself to be 
fooled ; let her take care she was not left in the lurch alto- 
gether. They could not extract from him any expression of a 
desire to see his daughter; beyond "she may come if she 
chooses," he would not go. 

Miriam would have gone to The Firs gladly, even on such 
slender encouragement as this ; but she was destined to feel, 
in this instance, the full weight of the yoke under which she 
had heedlessly and credulously placed herself. If her father 
was obdurate, so was her husband, and he had a threat to use 
which was potent "You go nowhere without me. If you 
leave my house, without my permission, on any pretext what- 
soever, you need never return to it Let there be no further 
discussion of the subject." Miriam had ascertained that this 
was no vain threat, no imposition on her credulity, in the true 
spirit of a petty tyrant, but that he had the power to carry it 
out. So she submitted, and hardened her heart against the 
man who thus treated her . well-nigh driving him mad by her 
carefully-displayed contempt She wrote to Florence full par- 
ticulars of the battle, and, acknowledging Mr. St. Quentin's 
victory, declared her intention of rendering it more costly to 
him than any number of defeats. Florence in reply entreated 
her to write no more in that strain ; she felt she could not bear 
it, in the deep gloom of the terrible episode thiow^cv ^Nxu&v ^sa. 
was passing. Miriam hardly understood YVorekc^ toSoxv^ 



238 A Golden Sorrow. 

but she respected them, and for some weeks their correspon- 
dence was almost limited to the despatch of bulletins on the 
one side, and the acknowledgment of them on the other. 

Reginald Clint asked no questions about his daughter. 
Whether he thought of her with affection and regret, or with 
bitterness and resentment, no one could tell. He was generally 
taciturn, even with Florence, but, at the worst stages of his ill- 
ness, he was pleased when she was with him, and uneasy in 
her absence. 

The night had come, cool, calm, and silent, after a day of 
much suffering to the dying man, and of incessant fatigue to 
Florence. Mr. Martin had left the house shortly before, and 
Florence's watch was soon to be relieved for a few hours by a 
hired nurse, who had now been in attendance for some days. 
Mr. Clint had been asleep for a little while, and Florence, who 
was sitting by his bed, had allowed her weary lids to close for 
a few moments. When she opened her eyes she found the 
sick man had turned, and was gazing at her intently. A change 
in his face caught her attention immediately. 

" Do you want anything, sir ? " She approached him as she 
spoke, expecting the usual craving demand for stimulant, which 
it had long been useless and impossible to resist. But no such 
demand was made, nor did the dim, sunken eyes turn eagerly, 
as they had always hitherto turned on waking, towards the 
spot where the bottles were kept. He still looked at her, but 
did not reply. She held back the curtain, and inspected him 
more narrowly. The change struck her still more forcibly, but 
it was not a painful alteration ; it consisted rather in general 
unlikeness to the face she was accustomed to see than in any 
threatening symptom. 

" Where is Walter ? " 

He spoke the words slowly and distinctly, his eyes still fixed 
on her face. No answer. Florence never knew whether her 
body started, or in any way betrayed emotion, but she felt as 
if she had been shot 
" Where is Walter ? " 



" Where is Walter?" 239 

She gently kneeled down beside the bed, and answered him 
in a soothing tone, notwithstanding her terror : " Don't you 
remember, sir? Mr. Walter is in California." 

" I forgot." 

He closed his eyes, and dozed for awhile . how blue and 
sunken his face was, how irregular his breathing I. and she 
knelt perfectly motionless beside him. It was the first time 
she had heard his father pronounce her husband's name. 
Presently he roused himself, and sighed heavily. 

" Are you in pain, sir ? Can I give you anything ? " 

" No ; I am in no pain . but my head is heavy. I thought 
Walter was here. I suppose I was dreaming." He spoke very 
slowly, and with gaps between the words. Then, after another 
pause, he went dh : " I must have been dreaming that Walter 
was here, and there was something he wanted to tell me. I 
have not seen him for a long time." 

" So I have heard," Florence ventured to say. 

" I thought he would have come back sooner, but I suppose 
he is doing no good out there." 

" I have been told that your son is doing well, sir, and that 
he hopes to return very soon, and prove to you that he has 
profited by his experience." 

" Ah ! " . in a vague manner . " it will be too late soon." 
He drew his breath heavily, and his chest laboured. Florence 
rose, gave him some wine, which he drank without eagerness, 
and then quietly resumed her former attitude. " Walter and 
Miriam," he said, " Walter and Miriam." 

" Should you be glad if they were here, sir? Do you wish 
to see your daughter ? Do you want her ? " 

" No ! " but there was no fierceness in his tone, no scornful 
repudiation of feeling; " I don't want her. I don't want any 
one but you" 

No words came to Florence. 

" I have not been so blind and insensible as you may have 
thought me. I know very well what you have beew to \s\s~ V 
might have died like a dog in a ditch \ \X \\a& ^o\\^cA<3t ^^ 
and I don't want any one else now." 



240 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Oh ! sir, don't say that ! If only for my sake, don't say 
that ! " Florence had found words now, and was holding his 
passive hand in both hers, while still the ghastly eyes gazed 
into her face. " If I have been of any service, of any comfort 
to you, I ask for only one acknowledgment, for only one reward. 
Let me tell your children that you have thought of them with 
affection, that, whatever the cloud was which came between 
you and them so long ago, it has quite cleared away. Let me 
tell them this . to the daughter who will come to you at once, 
and to the son who will not be long in coming. I hope, I 
pray, I believe, he is on his way already. But whether he 
comes soon, or not until he cannot hear it from your own lips, 
let him know that he is forgiven. Whatever his faults towards 
you were, he has deeply, bitterly repented of them; he would 
give all the world can ever bring him to undo them, or to know 
that they no longer dwell in your memory." 

Unheeded, unconscious tears were streaming from Florence's 
eyes, and falling on her hands, and on that one which she 
held . 

" Think of his long banishment from home, of his kind and 
loving heart . I do not think you ever knew him rightly . and 
spare him the anguish of knowing that you had left him un 
reconciled to him, that there was bitterness in your heart. I 
pray that you may be left with us until he comes home ; but 
lest it may not be so, say some words of comfort for him to 
me. Do say them . ever so few . here, now, to me I " 

Her earnestness hurried her away from all caution and re- 
straint, and yet she did not lose sight of her patient's state : 
her voice was not raised, and she knelt quite still. 

" I dared not mention his name," she went on, " though I 
have so longed to speak it to you, all these months ; but now, 
now that you have spoken it to me yourself, I do no wrong. 
Give me a message of reconciliation to your son." 

" Give you the message ? What do you know about my son ? 
Why axe you pleading his cause ?" 
Florence took a desperate resolution. ^\v^ YraA wot any 



" Where is Walter ? " 241 

doubt that Mr. Clint was dying. His son should not carry 
through life the burden she had found well-nigh intolerable 
for a few years. She resolved to tell him the truth. 

"Sir," she said, "you have to forgive him many things, but 
one thing above all, and it is because of that great fault, that 
great sin against you, that I am pleading to you now. Only 
for that I should not be here, and Walter would be beside 
you. I entreat you to pardon him, and me too, for I am 
Walter's wife ! " 

" Walter's wife ? You ! " 

There was surprise in the feeble voice, but not anger. There 
was something like awe, but not scorn. 

"Yes, I . I, the girl you were told about. I, Florence 
Reeve. ,, 

She laid her head upon her hands, still folding his, which 
he did not withdraw, within them ; and there was no sound but 
her low sobs for some minutes. It was all over now ; she had 
done the worst or the best she could, which it was circum- 
stances must decide ; but whatever that decision might be, she 
was, at that supreme moment, conscious of a sense of relief. 
Her head was full of whirling thoughts, and her heart was beat- 
ing fast with fear and anguish, but the burden both had car- 
ried so long was gone. No matter what else might happen, her 
husband's father could not now die wilfully deceived by his 
only son. 

" Married to you ! And you here like a servant ! " He 
spoke low and faintly, but she caught the sounds. " Tell me 
all about it. Don't be afraid." 

Then she told him, without moving'from her kneeling attitude, 
without loosing his hand, but checking her tears, and speaking 
in the soft, distinct voice which had been very pleasant to 
Reginald Clint for a long time. She went back to the death 
of her mother, and dwelt on Walter's conduct to her at that 
time ; and then she told of the circumstances which had led 
to their hasty and imprudent marriage. Mr. Clint ^.^xssrA. \a 
understand her narrative perfectly, and to Whorw \X. ^>&v -a&.w 



242 A Golden Sorrow. 

tion ; she knew that he had in his mind the points of compari- 
son between it and the story he had heard from Mrs. Clewer. 
Only one thing she did not tell him . that she had been led to 
believe the separation between Walter and his father complete 
before she knew him. She would shield herself from no par- 
ticle of blame, but him from all she could. 

" We were both very young, sir," she pleaded simply, and 
now with perfect composure, " and very lonely, and we loved 
each other very much. I had no friend or protector except 
Walter, and he did this wrong thing for my sake. And then, 
when he had to leave me, because we were so poor, he wished 
to leave me near the only friends he had . for indeed Walter 
always knew you would be good to me, if the truth came out, 
and, and . if he never came back. And this too was done 
hastily, and because we were in a kind of desperation ; and it 
was my fault, because I was foolish, and afraid of being left 
quite alone. I know I don't deserve that you should forgive 
such a great deception, but you will forgive Walter . for it was 
all my fault ? " 

No answer. But no withdrawal of the eyes, nor of the hand. 

" When I came back here, and you began to be ill, and were 
so kind to me, I determined to deceive you no longer ; but I 
could not tell you the truth without Walter's leave, and I 
wrote to him, and entreated him to let me tell you, and ask for 
your pardon for both of us. His letter must come to me soon, 
and I know what he will say in it, and how thankful he will 
be to know that I have besought you for him." 

" Who knows of this ? " He spoke with difficulty, but her 
quick perception discerned the inflection of the old jealous 
pride in his tone. How many of those who lived in daily con- 
tact with him were aware of the trick that was played upon 
him ? To how many had he been an object of ridicule ? 

" No one. Not a living soul but Miriam, and Walter, and 
myself. She has been the truest and the best of friends to me, 
and I sorely need her pardon too, for she did this for Waltei's 
sake." 



" Where is Walter?" 243 

" For whose sake have you been to me all that she never ' 
was, or could be, or Walter either ? " 

In all his life Reginald Clint had never spoken with such 
dignity, or such softness, as in these few words, which held 
Florence spell-bound. When she replied, it was in the lowest 
whisper, . 

" For Walter's sake, sir 1 , and for your own, because I love 
you." 

Again there was a long pause, and then Reginald Clint 
turned restlessly, and with, a moan of pain, and said, . 

" I believe you. There was one other woman in the world 
once who loved me . that is a long time ago . but no one else. 
Not Walter, and not Miriam, only their mother, and you." 
He laid the hand he had drawn away from hers upon her 
bended head. " I forgive him, for your sake ; and I bless you, 
my child ! " 

While Florence was still kneeling, speechless and weak with 
many emotions, there came a knock at the door. She rose 
and noiselessly admitted the nurse, who said at once, on see- 
ing her face, " Is he worse ? " 

" I think so," whispered Florence. " Come and see." 

They stood together on the side of the bed nearest the 
door. His face was turned away, and he seemed to sleep. 
They interchanged looks, but no words. Florence resumed 
her former position, and there was profound stillness, until 
Mr. Clint opened his eyes and said to her, . 

"Who is there?" 

" Only the nurse. You do not mind her ? " 

" No ; I don't mind her ; but don't you leave me. Stay 
with me until the morning." 

" I will stay with you," said Florence ; and she drew her 
chair close to the bed, where his waking glance could fall upon 
her. The nurse sat within the shadow of the curtains on the 
other side, and thus the two women commenced their silent 
watch. 

It remained unbroken for some Yiouts. It ^a& \aaxcj ^&& 

R 2 



244 A Golden Sorrow. 

since Reginald Clint had had so much sleep, or such freedom 
from pain. 

In the early morning he muttered a few words, and Florence 
bent over him to catch them. He was not asking for anything, 
and the words had no meaning that she could discern. He 
was only saying, " After all, I have done him no wrong ! " 

He never spoke again, coherently. A few hours more, and 
his sleep had deepened into stupor, and after two days the 
stupor sunk into death. 



245 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

" AFTER ALL, I HAVE DONE HIM NO WRONG." 

Immediately after it was made known in the village of 
Drington that Mr. Clint was no more Mr. Standish presented 
himself at The Firs, and asked to see Mrs. Dixon. The state 
of mind in which the event, ensuing so rapidly upon the dis- 
closure she had made, had left Florence, was exceedingly pain- 
ful. She had an intimate, consoling conviction that her hus- 
band's father had not received her communication with dis- 
pleasure, but this conviction she could not impart to any one, 
and she suffered extremely from the dread lest the revelation 
she had been irresistibly impelled to make should have in 
any degree, by the mere action of surprise, accelerated Mr. 
Clint's death. The end had come so unexpectedly, it had 
almost stunned her ; and her position of responsibility, unbacked 
by recognized authority, was quite agonizing. In the very 
presence of the dead man ; as she watched the bloated features 
settling into the calm which lends dignity even to such a wreck as 
Reginald Clint,' the question would arise : What was she to do 
now ? He was dead ; not, indeed, as she had dreaded so that 
her powers of feeling seemed engrossed by that one terrible 
fear, without forgiving Walter ; but nothing, except in point of 
that sentiment, was altered. He had forgiven Walter, and 
blessed her ; but let the dispositions he had made, if there 
were any such, in the time of his fiercest anger, his most obsti- 
nate estrangement, be ever so hard and unjust, they must re- 
main unchanged now. It had happened according to the 
desire of her heart, but it was all too late. 

There was something more appaWVcig to Ytotexvce. \^ *&&& 



246 A Golden Sorrow. 

death than in any other which had ever signified anything to 
her. Here was the stillness, the solemnity, the decorum, the 
circumstance, the ceremonial of death . but no grief. A decent 
regret on the part of three or four persons, a formal gravity of 
demeanour observed by the dead man's servants, and tem- 
pered by much conjecture about their chances .of mourning 
and gratuities. But grief there was none. No riven hearts 
shrinking from the thought of a new day, to arise on their 
unwelcome life, yearning with horrid anguish over the least 
little remembrances of the one, so lately all-engrossing in 
action, as well as in thought, and suddenly become so terribly 
unreal. Could there be anything so dreary and dreadful, 
Florence thought, as a house of mourning wherein were no 
mourners ? 

She had gone through the few sad, formalities, and was rest- 
ing, after having written to Mr. St Quentin, to request that he 
would communicate the fact of her father's death gently to 
Miriam ; and had just decided that she would consult Mr. 
Martin with respect to her own immediate movements, when 
she was told that Mr. Standish wished to see her. She went 
to the study immediately, and there she found the lawyer and 
Mr. Martin. Mr. Standish was seated in the place which Mr. 
Clint had habitually occupied, and the circumstance gave 
Florence's tender 'heart a stab. The place of him who lay 
there, upstairs, white and silent, already knew him no more. 
Florence bowed to the two gentlemen, and Mr. Martin placed 
a chair for her. 

"You wished to see me, sir?" She addressed Mr. Stan- 
dish. 

" Mrs. Dixon ? " 

She bent her head in assent. 

" I received instructions from my late client, Mr. Clint," 

said the lawyer, with a formal civility which made Florence 

uncomfortable, "to make the contents of this memorandum," 

producing a paper as he spoke, " known to you and Mr. Mar- 

tin as soon as possible after his decease. Xow \^\*i %^ ^A 



" / have done him no wrong." 2. 

as to take them into account in making the necessary mela 
choly arrangements." 

Mr. Martin made no reply ; and Florence had nothing 
say. Mr. Standish then read the memorandum, which w 
signed by Mr. Clint, and consisted merely of a few line 
directing that his funeral should be very private and very plai 
and that, prior to it, his will, which he had placed in the cu 
tody of Mr. Standish, should be read. 

" When it suits you to have this done," said Mr. Standisl 
addressing Florence, " I shall be happy to attend for the pi] 
pose." It was evident that she was expected . to act in tr. 
absence of any direct representative of Mr. Clint. But si 
appealed to Mr. Martin, who undertook to do all that w; 
necessary ; and it was finally arranged that the will should 1 
read on the day before the funeral, by which time Mr. ar 
Mrs. St. Quentin would probably have arrived at The Fix 
This agreed to, Florence rose and left the room, feeling a litt 
curious, and disturbed by Mr. Standish's manner, which wa 
with all its formality, not quite respectful. 

The hours dragged on, as they always do drag on while tl 
dread presence of the dead is with the living, heavily* an 
wearily. On the third morning Miriam and her husban 
arrived. Mr. St. Quentin's sense of decorum did not fail hii 
on an occasion in which there was no real sadness to him. H 
conducted himself with perfect propriety, but Florence w* 
conscious of the displeasure with which he observed his wife 
incautious greeting of her supposed maid. Mr. St. Quenti 
had a peculiar faculty of making his anger felt without tram 
gressing good manners, by cold, ironical politeness and wel 
arranged contempt, which Florence remembered, and undi 
which she had often cringed. She felt his anger in the sligh 
ing glance which passed over, but never lighted on her ; in th 
slighting tone of his bare acknowledgment of her ; the " Ho 
do you do, Dixon ? " which made Miriam's face burn, and he 
eyes flash. When the sisters-in-law found themselves to^esiss 
Miriam burst into a bitter complaint of llix. ^X Qxusc&sit* ^ 



248 A Golden Sorrow. 

duct towards her, even before she inquired of Florence the 
particulars of her father's death. 

" I do really believe he is mad," she said, " though there 
isn't much consolation in thinking so, since I cannot get rid 
of him by the conviction : he certainly is the most hateful and 
persecuting old man in existence. Do you notice how his bad 
heart and odious, suspicious temper are telling on him, Rose ? 
He is shrivelling up into such an ugly old man ; I am sure he 
looks many years older than poor papa did." 

Florence was silently thankful that Miriam was never to 
know what her father had looked like in the last days of his 
life. The face had been hidden away for ever before his 
daughter's arrival ; and there was nothing to disturb that merci- 
ful process, to which the very best among us must owe so much 
one day, by which death blots out the memory of faults, and 
fixes the memory of every claim which the departed had to 
urge upon the affection and regret of his fellows. 

" He is looking old." 

"Yes, and wicked . downright wicked. Ah, Rose, how 
wise and right you were when you warned me, in this very 
room" (she glanced around it forlornly), "that the way of 
escape I seized upon so eagerly might not be a way to happi- 
ness." 

If Miriam had but known that the tyrant she had been so 
anxious to flee from had only a short time to live, how much 
might have been spared her ! She did not think out this 
thought, but no doubt it was there, lurking in her mind ; and 
Reginald Clint was, in this respect, reaping what he had sown. 

Miriam heard Florence's account of her revelation to Mr. 
Clint with great interest and emotion, and without any partici- 
pation in the misgivings from which she was suffering. To 
Miriam's mind, the few words which her father had spoken 
were satisfactory and conclusive. Making the fullest allowance 
for his state at the time, and the near approach of his death, 
Miriam was not to be convinced that if her father had felt 
angry he would have concealed it, 01 \>exv \\\&\\r& \s^ wj. 



" / have done him no wrong." 249 

sentiment of gratitude to or consideration for Florence, to 
express any other feeling than anger. The last coherent words 
he had uttered . " After all, I have done him no wrong/" . 
duly reported to Miriam, were as inexplicable to her as to her 
sister-in-law. If they alluded to the rumours he had heard 
about Walter and Florence Reeve, they were not to be under- 
stood, unless he actually believed that a marriage had taken 
place ; and any other meaning they might have had was com- 
pletely out of the reach of the two young women. They might 
have been merely rambling, semi-conscious words, but Florence 
could not regard them as such ; faint though their tone, their 
manner was purpose-like. There was no conclusion to be 
arrived at ; they had to close their discussion where they com- 
menced it. The whole of this day Miriam passed in seclusion 
in her own rooms. She had left Bianca in Paris, and Mrs. 
Dixon seemed to resume her former functions naturally. It 
was agreed between the sisters-in-law that after the funeral the 
truth respecting Florence should be told to Mr. St. Quentin. 
Miriam was much distressed by the necessity for the disclosure, 
but she had no choice. Florence was now homeless and 
unprotected, and Miriam must provide for her in some way, 
until her brother's return, let the terms of Reginald Clint's will 
be what they might. That Mr. St. Quentin would not permit 
her to fill her former position in his house Miriam felt assured, 
and she expected her to prove still more obnoxious as Walter's 
wife. The night closed around hearts full of anxiety, and dis- 
turbed by heavy care, in the house where lay the dead man 
for the last time but one. 

'"I am particularly directed, by the terms of this memo- 
randum, to request Mrs. Dixon's presence at the reading of the 
will," said Mr. Standish, when, on the following day, he met 
Mr. and Mrs St. Quentin, Mr. Cooke, and Mr. Martin, in the 
dining-room at The Firs, for this prearranged purpose. 

At this announcement Miriam looked surprised, and Mr. 
St. Quentin looked angry and aggrieved. 

"A most extraordinary direction, I tkvj&X. wj? ^ ^o^-^^' 



250 A Golden Sorrow. 

turning himself about pompously in the huge red-leather chair, 
which he had assumed with a president-of-councii kind of air. 
" What can she have to do with the matter ? " 

" That may perhaps be explained," said Mr. Standish. " With 
your permission, Mrs. St. Quentin, I will send for Mrs. Dixon." 
He stretched his hand towards the bell, but Mr. Martin pre- 
vented his ringing it. 

" Stay ! " he said ; " I will go and fetch her f and left the 
room for the purpose, with an odd look of sudden intelligence 
in his face. He found Florence in the anteroom to that in 
which the coffin was awaiting removal, and told her his errand, 
adding, " There may be something agitating and painful for 
you in this, my dear ; but you will, I am sure, be as you always 
are, patient and strong and self-possessed." 

Florence glanced at him, as the unusual appellation in so 
unusual a tone passed his lips, but she said nothing; she 
merely rose, walked down the stairs by his side, and, obedient 
to his gesture, passed into the dining-room in advance of him. 
Miriam, who was extremely pale, greeted her entrance with a 
faint smile, Mr. Standish bowed, and Mr. St. Quentin said, with 
disdain, . 

" You can sit down, Dixon. You are required, it seems, to 
hear Mr. Clint's will read." 

Mr. Martin placed Florence between himself and Miriam, 
and, with a queer glance at Mr. St. Quentin, said to Mr. Stan- 
dish that they were all ready and attentive. The lawyer then 
untied the outer cover of a parcel of no great size, which lay 
on the table before him, and broke the seal of a large blue 
envelope. It was evident that Mr. Clint's will was no volumi- 
nous document ; and the reading of it, after the accustomed 
preamble, did not occupy five minutes. 

The will was as clear as it was concise. The testator be- 
queathed all the property, of every kind whatsoever, with an 
exception hereafter to be mentioned, of which he died possessed, 
to " the best, [kindest, truest woman it had ever been his 
fortune to meet; to her who Yiad aXtev\ate& \Jcvfe\*sx \elw\>^ ofc 



" / have done him no wrong? 251 

his life, when both his children had forsaken him ; to the only 
person in the world in whose disinterested services he had 
confidence, and to whom he now tendered this acknowledg- 
ment ; to the young woman known as Rose Dixon, formerly in 
the service of Mrs. St. Quentin, the testator's daughter." The 
will appointed Mrs. Dixon sole executrix, and Walter Clint's 
name had no mention in it. Miriam's had a place, but an 
inconsiderable one. Mr. Clint bequeathed to his daughter the 
sum of one thousand pounds, and certain jewels which had 
belonged to her mother, with the agreeable proviso, which Mr. 
Standish read out with an irrepressible twinkle of satisfaction in 
his keen grey eyes, that the money was to be allotted to her 
sole use and benefit, as the testator did not wish any advantage 
to accrue from him to the " wealthy cheat " his daughter had 
married. 

Florence did not faint She could not stand, or see, or 
speak, but she was conscious . conscious that Mr. Martin had 
taken firm hold of her . that Miriam, with a cry of " Oh, my 
darling ! " had thrown herself on her knees beside her, and was 
clasping her round the waist and crying wildly . conscious that 
Mr. St. Quentin had struck the table violently, and declared, 
with a great oath, that the will was an unparalleled infamy, too 
bad for even the drunken madman who had made it, and that 
Walter Clint should break it . conscious that Mr. Cooke and 
Mr. Standish were profoundly silent. 

Presently the room became steady, it ceased to swim before 
her eyes, and she found Miriam, rudely grasped by Mr. St. 
Quentin, and forced up from her kneeling attitude beside her ; 
but Mr. Martin did not loose his hold of her. 

" How dare you disgrace yourself in this way ? " said Mr. 
St. Quentin to his wife, in a voice half-suffocated with anger. 
" What do you mean by calling this woman endearing names, 
by putting yourself on a level with a vile schemer, who practised 
on your mad and drunken father, and has done her best to rob 
yourself and your brother ? A woman of whoxxv 1 ^r^^ \^a^ 
the worst opinion, and would have turned o\& ofc. \s>^ V<3*s>W 



252 A Golden Sorrow. 

she had not left it for her own purposes. What do you mean 
by it, I say ? " 

" Mr. St. Quentin," said Mr. Martin quietly, " if you are not 
conscious of the extreme indecorum of your conduct on the 
present occasion, and of the impropriety of your language, it 
becomes necessary for me to remind you that we who are 
present cannot permit you to behave in this manner. You 
must not apply such language to Mrs. Dixon." 

" And who the devil are you, sir, that you should dictate to 
me?" 

" I am Mr. Clint's oldest friend, and one of the witnesses to 
his will." 

" You ought to be ashamed of yourself to acknowledge it." 

" I had no knowledge whatever of its provisions. I am not 
prepared to say that I approve them ; but I am prepared to 
say that the description which Mr. Clint has given of Mrs. 
Dixon is as correct as the epithets you have applied to her are 
unmerited." 

" Indeed ! My wife's servant seems to have made an ex- 
traordinaryimpression. I believe you are a bachelor, and have 
money to leave away from your relatives. You and these gen- 
tlemen " . indicating Mr. Cooke and Mr. Standish, with a sneer 
. " are, of course, at liberty to think and act in this matter as 
you please. As for me, I consider this house no fit place for 
my wife, and I shall remove her from it forthwith." 

" Hush ! my dear ; keep quiet," whispered Mr. Martin to 
Florence, who, shrinking into the recesses of her chair, and 
trembling, seemed to be trying to speak. . " I conclude you do 
not mean that Mrs. St. Quentin is to leave her father's house 
before his funeral ? " he added coldly. 

" I do mean it ; I will not attend the funeral of the dis- 
reputable old drunkard, who was such a fool and such a scoun- 
drel as to be led by the nose by a woman in this way." He 
turned suddenly on Miriam : " You will get ready to leave this 
house in half-an-hour, and during that time I forbid you to have 
any conversation with this person." 



" / have done him no wrong? 253 

During this angry dialogue Miriam had stood quite still 
beside Florence's chair, not touching her, not looking at her, 
but following every gesture of Mr. St. Quentin with her great 
golden eyes, filled with anger, disdain, and a terrible dislike. 
After he had pulled her up from her knees, she had shaken 
his hand from her arm, with a loathing shudder, as if a toad 
had touched her ; and, even in that moment, he had been 
conscious of the action, and of the disgust which it betrayed. 
Miriam had never been so completely off her guard before ; he 
noted the fact, understood it, and never forgot it. 

When he uttered this peremptory order she made one step 
forward, and confronted him, her face entirely colourless, her 
lips set, her eyes gleaming. 

" I will not leave this house," she said, in a low, harsh voice, 
uttering every syllable with deliberate will ; " either now, or at 
any other time, in obedience to you. Your detestable beha- 
viour has broken down every barrier of restraint which would 
have prevented my speaking openly before these gentlemen, 
my father's friends and my own. I will remain here, and I 
will see as much as I please of her " (she touched Florence's 
hair with a caressing hand), " whom my father loved, who was 
more to him than I ever was, or would have known how to be ; 
whom he has rewarded, to the best of his ability, and whom he 
appreciated at her proper value. . Gentlemen !" Miriam made 
a gesture with her hand which directed their attention from 
.herself to Florence . " in a short time you must have known 
the truth, which Mr. St. Quentin's intemperate language obliges 
me to disclose before we had intended it to be proclaimed. 
How false every word he has uttered is, you are all aware ; you 
need nothing to strengthen your conviction of that ; but even 
he will be ashamed of himself when he learns that this lady, my 
beloved friend, called here Rose Dixon, is Florence Clint . my 
brother's wife . and that before my father died he knew it." 

Mr. St. Quentin did not leave The Firs ; but neither did he 
attend the funeral of Reginald Clint. He had beew %oro\s^w^. 
hotly pursued of late by a much-dreaded eweta^ , faXsk ^ ^^ 



254 d Golden Sorrow. 

most cherished pretensions to youthful energy and fascination 
. gout. Aided by the stormy emotions to which he gave their 
passionate way, it came up with him, and dealt him a hard 
blow. He found himself condemned to the double humiliation 
of being Florence's guest and Mr. Martin's patient. 

When the wonder and excitement of these events had some- 
what subsided, Florence and Miriam, comparing notes of their 
feelings, found that in the case of each the first conscious im- 
pression made by the reading of the will had been its elucida- 
tion of Mr. Clint's mysterious words, its explanation of how 
indeed, " after all, he had done his son no wrong." 



255 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

LETHE. 

" Are you awake, Walter ?" 

" Yes. Have I slept long ? " 

" Three hours. And a sound refreshing sleep, I hope ? " 

" I feel much the better for it. I am getting on very well ; 
am I not ? " 

" Very well indeed; you will soon be quite yourself again. 
Do you feel equal to a short palaver now, or shall"we put it off 
until to-morrow ? " 

"Oh! no ; I am quite able to listen, if not to talk much. 
Is there any news ? " 

Walter Clint asked this question carelessly, in a casual kind 
of way, not by any means with the eagerness and intensity of 
one just returning to the active interests of life, of one from 
whom they had been shut out through many long weeks of 
severe and exhausting suffering. It was not thus that Law- 
rence Daly had expected him again to take up the thread of 
life ; it was with far other anticipations he had watched him 
gradually reviving to impressions of surrounding things, and 
resuming somewhat of his old familiar looks. The time had 
seemed intolerably long and wearisome to Daly, even when the 
first apprehension had subsided, and hope of Walter's recovery 
had taken its place. The unshared burden of the two secrets 
. that of the death of Walter's father, and the extraordinary 
turn of fate which had made the disinherited son the owner of 
all his father's property; and that of the hidden nugget . weighed 
heavily upon him. He longed exceedingly for the mc^sse^x. 
when they might be freely discussed \>stowwxv. \v\\as>& ^s&> 



256 A Golden Sorrow. 

Walter ; when they should revert to the hopes which had 
preceded this time of trouble, and find them strengthened and 
perfected by the strange, unexpected intelligence from The Firs. 
Lawrence had little or no apprehension about the effect which 
his father's death might produce upon Walter. There was such 
ample compensation in the narrative contained in Florence's 
letter, and the chances that any better understanding should 
ever exist between the father and the son had been, by Walter's 
own admission, so infinitesimal, that there was little to fear. It 
would be a shock to Walter, and a transient grief; but the 
good news was lasting, and a full realization of all he could 
have hoped . a secure, happy, comfortable home ; and a safe 
future for his young wife and himself; an end of their trials and 
of their separation. Daly had almost persuaded himself that, 
even in his languid, half-conscious state, Walter must perceive 
that something unusual was occupying his mind ; but it was 
not so. Walter was quiescent, incurious, and even now, when 
directly appealed to, only moderately interested. There was 
no trace of the impatient, desperate eagerness to get away, to 
begin that homeward journey rendered possible by the acquisi- 
tion of the nugget, which Daly had been prepared to remon- 
strate with and control. 

The letters lay in the locker, and Daly sat near it, intending 
to take them out at the appropriate moment. Walter's wistful, 
thin, pale face, looking very handsome, notwithstanding its 
wanness, was turned towards him, and his head was supported 
on one almost skeleton hand. His hollow blue eyes were scan- 
ning Daly's face and figure, which still showed traces of the 
illness he had gone through, though his recovery had been 
comparatively rapid, and he had not suffered physically from 
his late watching and fatigue. 

" I have had a worse bout of it than yours," began Walter. 

" Yes ; very much worse, and lasting three times as long. 

Since you have been ill, several things have occurred which I 

want to tell you about ; and first . there will be no difficulty, 

as soon as you are able to trave\,a\>ouX^oMT ^\^%to\taug&tul." 



Let/ie. 257 

" No difficulty ! What do you mean, Lawrence ? " 

" I mean that strange things have occurred in England. 
Letters have arrived. Don't you remember we were expecting 
them just when you took the fever ? " 

"Yes, yes; go on : give me the letters." 

"Presently. You must let me tell you something about 
them. First, there is a great change in all your prospects, 
Walter." 

" Is . is my father dead ? n 

" He is," said Daly solemnly, utterly surprised by the ques- 
tion, for Mr. Clint's death had not been likely, according to 
the former letters they had received. Walter said no more, 
but covered his face with his hands, and lay quite still. 

"This must be a great shock to you," Daly began, after a 
long pause ; but then Walter interrupted him. 

" I don't think it is, Lawrence. I cannot explain or under- 
stand why, but in some strange way, during my fever, I think 
I knew it. I tried to tell you once or twice, but I could not 
be certain whether I knew it, or had dreamed it. However 
that may be, it is not a shock to me. My poor father ! It 
was not a happy life. I trust it ended better. And now he 
cannot forgive me, and I cannot tell him I was not the bad 
fellow he believed me. It is all too late." 

Daly was not sorry to see that there were tears in Walter's 
eyes, and that his lips were trembling. 

"It is not too late. This is the surprising news that I have 
known all the time you were in the fever, and have so longed 
to tell you. It was your wife who was with your father in his 
last days, and she told him all the truth, and got from him 
his forgiveness for you* and his blessing for herself." 

" Good God ! Florence with my father . and she told him ! " 

" Yes ; she told him, like the brave r true woman she is, and 
so saved you both from the burden, of self-reproach and regret. 
She is the wisest, as she is the best of women. Here are her 
letters ; I opened this one . marked immediate . when v Qli 
were in the earliest stages of the fever, \}ca\\^\V^^^ ^x>& 



258 A Golden Sorrow. 

announcement of your father's death in a newspaper which 
came with the letters." 

Daly put the little packet into Walter's hand. He looked 
at the covers, the seal of one was unbroken, but he could not 
yet open them. 

" What has become of her ? " he asked. " Tell me." 

Daly told him. He related the contents of Florence's nar- 
rative, not, indeed, in the words of the wife, whose sacred and 
self-sacrificing love had been so freely poured out in the letter 
in which she summoned her husband home, that Lawrence felt 
as if he had been almost guilty of profanity in reading the 
words intended for those beloved eyes only ; but clearly and 
convincingly. No more anxiety for Walter as to what had 
become of his wife, from whom he was bidden to accept his 
rightful inheritance. The brief nervousness of astonishment, 
the brief bewilderment of mingled and contending feelings, 
passed rapidly away, and Walter was able to read the letters, 
which gave him a clear account of all that had happened, but 
from which he gathered that there had been one, of urgent im- 
portance, written by Florence, which he had never received. 
She spoke of her great anxiety for the arrival of his permission 
to tell his father the truth, in reply to her letter, in which she 
had repeated to Walter Mr. Martin's warning. That letter 
had not reached him. Had not Florence obeyed her instinct, 
with what bitterness the good fortune which had befallen them 
must have been dashed ! 

The first bewildering emotions subdued, Walter and his 
friend talked freely of the prospects thus changed, and of the 
future, so unlike any they had thought of. Daly told Walter 
how hard he had found it to keep all this news to himself, 
while awaiting the moment of convalescence in which it might 
be safely imparted ; and how anxiously he had looked for some 
disposition on his part to ask questions, and take up life once 
more from the active side. At this Walter smiled languidly, 
and said that he had not thought much of anything past, 
present, or future ; there had been m\&c^\e \m^xe^\<yas float- 



Lethe. 259 

ing about him, but not thoughts, like that one about his father's 
death, and he had not been able to feel anxious ; he believed 
anxiety was a doubtful privilege of health, which vanished before 
illness. At least he had not been able to feel it, either about 
himself or any one else ; it had awoke on behalf of Florence 
only with Lawrence's words. 

Even now there was no impatience in his mind. Daly, 
while he could not resist the pleasure of talking and letting 
him talk about The Firs, about his childhood, and his boyhood 
there, about all that he and Florence would now do to render 
the place pretty and pleasant ; in all which plans the presence 
of Daly was an understood thing . was afraid of the effect upon 
Walter. Now he would surely begin to count the intervening 
hours, and to fret at the remains of weakness, and the necessary 
delay before beginning the return journey. But the day wore 
on, and the young men still discussed the strange turn of their 
fortunes, and there was no nervous excitement about Walter 
to justify Daly's apprehensions. 

" There are two sides to proverbial philosophy," said Daly, 
in the course of their long talk ; " and we, at least, are in case 
to bear witness that if ' it never rains but it pours,' the shower 
is sometimes golden. How strange it is that this unexpected 
solution of your difficulties, this fitting recognition of your 
wife's merits, and our own stroke of luck, should have occurred 
all about the same time !" 

" Our own stroke of luck I " repeated Walter. " What do 
you mean ? Not our two fevers, surely ? With all your cheer- 
ful philosophy, I don't think you can reckon them as lucky." 

The slightest possible misgiving arose in Daly's mind, as he 
replied, . 

" Fevers ! No, of course not Why, Walter, what can you 
be thinking of? I am speaking of our nugget." 

" Our nugget ! What nugget ? Have you been finding a 
nugget ? " 

" Certainly not. One is almost enough, I should thinks fcrc 
us to expect, especially with a run of \weV to ic&owr 

s 2 



260 A Golden Sorrow. 

An indescribable fear stirred among Lawrence's nerves as 
he spoke thus cheerily. 

" One almost enough ! My dear fellow, I have not the 
slightest notion what you are talking of. Do tell me, pray ; I 
am prepared for anything after what you have told me." 

" You are prepared / Why, Walter, you are incomprehen- 
sible ! I am talking about the nugget which we found, and 
which caused us to determine on your returning to England in 
any case ; of the nugget which you concealed, you know, be- 
cause you could not leave me in the fever, to go with it your- 
self to Placer-Ville. ,, 

A puzzled look in Walter's face, an uneasy straining of the 
eyes, but no light of returning memory or comprehension. 

With increasing trepidation, Daly went on . " I am speaking 
of that nugget. You surely remember it, Walter ? Don't you 
recollect the day we found it, and how delighted we were . 
and how you were warned of the bad state of things in the 
valley, and that we had better send off our dust as soon as 
possible . and then I was taken ill, and Spoiled Five came to 
you with another warning, and you hid the nugget ? " 

The tone in which Daly put these questions was full of dis- 
tress and apprehension, more so than he knew, and it was re- 
sponded to by Walter's painful, troubled, striving face. 

" I don't know what you mean," he said ; " I have not the 
least notion of what you are talking about. I remember the 
dust, and I remember the time being fixed for sending it to 
Placer- Ville. But I don't know anything more. Where is 
Spoiled Five ? Is he not here ? I have not seen him since 
I have been ill." 

" Good God ! " thought Lawrence, " this is too terrible ! 
Am I to bring her husband back to her a madman ? " 

" What is the matter, Lawrence ? Why do you not answer 
me ? Where is Spoiled Five ? And where is Sambo ? He is 
not here, I know; the dog's bark I sometimes hear is not his." 

"Spoiled Five has gone away," replied Daly, preserving his 
calmness by a desperate effort, and mo\m^v&to ^^ntvoti in 



Lethe. 261 

which Walter could not see his face. " He has gone a long 
way off down the valley, to do some hut-building. You re- 
member, I daresay, that he was very much afraid of anyone 
who was ' off his head/ and when we both took to being so, 
in the fever, it was too much for Spoiled Five. Sambo is dead, 
poor fellow ; he was killed by accident. " 

" Poor Sambo ! And so Spoiled Five is gone ! What a 
queer thing fever is, and how it sets one off on all sorts of 
imaginary tracks ! I remember having a horrid notion that he 
had come to some harm, and being haunted with a longing to 
know all about it, and yet afraid to ask . one of the phantom 
horrors of the fever ! I wonder when he will return . before 
we go, I hope. Perhaps we could induce him to come with 
us ? Flo would give him free quarters at The Firs, I am sure." 

Lawrence could not command his voice sufficiently to reply. 
The wooden cross, with its rough inscription, in the green 
God's-acre which had been spared to the dead out of the 
swarming valley, seemed to stand before his eyes. Walter 
went on speaking a few disjointed sentences before he could 
interpose with another effort to arrest his attention.- 

" But to return to the nugget. Try and recall those days 
before you were taken ill. You remember Deering, the doctor 
whom you brought to see me, and who went away with the 
dust-waggons to Placer-Ville ? " 

"Yes," answered Walter, hesitatingly; "I have some recol- 
lection of him." 

" And yet none of the nugget ? None of your coming in 
and finding him with me, and giving him your letters to your 
wife and your sister, and walking with him as far as the bluff? " 

" No," said Walter ; " none." 

" And yet you were, to all appearance, quite well that day, 
and for some days later. Have you no remembrance of tell- 
ing me where you had been that morning, and what you had 
done ? " 

" I have no remembrarice of anything about tfeafc. Nxo^V 
Waiter answered slowly, after painfaX ^actOcflx^ yel \sb>\ssss^ 



262 A Golden Sorrow. 

Daly took up his right hand, and looking carefully at it found 
on the wasted wrist a white mark, the cicatrix of a healed cut 
He made Walter look at it, and asked him if it did not make 
him remember something . how he had cut himself with the 
rough rock in burying the nugget, and how Deering had dressed 
the cut with lint and plaster? But Walter, looking wistfully 
at the scar, and with the same painful groping in his unrespon- 
sive memory, declared that he remembered nothing of the 
matter. And, as he repeated this assurance again and again, 
there came a strange nervousness and avoidance into his 
manner, which Lawrence observed, but could not interpret. 
He shaded his eyes with his hand ; and then, when Lawrence 
came within his sight again, looked at him from beneath that 
shelter, with a keen, searching, anxious glance, in which there 
was suspicion. 

" Tell me this story of a nugget, which I ought to know, 
and have forgotten," he said at length, when a long series of 
questions from Lawrence had been severally answered with 
the same protest of oblivion. 

Lawrence complied ; and all the time he was relating the 
incidents which had preceded the murder . of which he care- 
fully kept clear . Walter watched him closely from under his 
hand, and by degrees a look of comprehension came into his 
face, the expression of one who has arrived at a conclusion, 
painful indeed, but with the grim satisfaction in it of the solu- 
tion of doubt, the termination of uncertainty. 

" And where was it I told you I had buried the nugget, in 
obedience to Spoiled Five's warning ?" asked Walter, when 
Daly had recapitulated all that had occurred. 

" You did not tell me anything about that," said Daly. " I 
was only getting well at the time, and you said very little 
about it, only just enough to put my mind at rest. Then 
came your own illness ; and now you must do your best to 
remember where the nugget is, so that as soon as you are able 
to be about we may get it, and wind up our affairs here with- 
out delay." 



Lethe. 263 

" Very well," said Walter ; " I will try to recall the place 
and the circumstances, when my mind is a little clearer ; but 
I am tired now, and I really cannot think of anything but 
Flo's letter. So suppose we don't talk about it for the 
present " 

"All right," said Daly, who was terribly disturbed and per- 
plexed, and wholly unconscious of the anxious and apprehen- 
sive, regretful affection with which Walter was at that moment 
thinking of him. to the exclusion of the strange events which 
had befallen. 

" What a dreadful thing this is ! " ran Walter's thoughts. 
" Daly has never recovered that fever . he has a fixed delusion 
in his mind ! What shall I do ? There is nothing in it but 
to humour him, and keep him quiet, and to get him away as 
soon as possible." 

Nothing more was said about the nugget that day. On the 
following and two or three succeeding days Lawrence tried 
by many indirect means to strike the dumb chord into sound, 
but in vain. Walter avoided all attempts to lead up to the 
subject with a skill the origin of which Lawrence was far from 
suspecting, and which completely baffled him. 

For some time the distress which this peculiar mental affec- 
tion of Walter's caused his friend was so keen that he could 
think of nothing but its significance as regarded Walter him- 
self; but as he lay awake, pondering over it, on the second 
night after he had discovered it, he bethought himself sud- 
denly of the double importance and value of the memorandum 
which Walter had made in his pocket-book. As soon as it 
should be safe to bring forward the subject again, the sight of 
the memorandum in his own handwriting would, no doubt, 
remove the temporary cloud which had fallen upon Walter's 
intellect, and which had not invaded any other province of it, 
so far as Lawrence, by the closest investigation, could discern, 
and enable them to recover, without delay, the precious 
deposit, concerning which he had until now been so in- 
different. 



264 A Golden Sorrow. 

Early on the following morning, Daly made search for the 
pocket-book among a lower stratum of multifarious objects 
which had lain for weeks in the locker undisturbed. He 
found it, a shabby folding-case of green leather, spotted with 
grease, rubbed at the corners, and strongly scented with 
stale tobacco. With an instant misgiving Lawrence Daly 
opened it, and found, not the collection of motley articles 
familiar to him as the contents of Walter's pocket-book, but 
the small surgical instruments, the roll of lint, and slab of 
sticking-plaster, which he remembered to have seen in Deer- 
ing's possession. 



265 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

FOR ENGLAND, HOME, AND BEAUTY. 

The result of Lawrence Daly's discovery was that he resolved 
to preserve perfect silence on the subject of the nugget, unless 
by some fortunate accident Walter should give an indication 
of returning memory. He immediately took the precaution of 
telling such of the miners as Walter was likely to see, that 
they must not talk to him of Spoiled Five, because the fever 
had weakened his nerves, and he could not bear it. The 
roughest and most heedless among them would not have re- 
fused compliance with his request Walter had tired himself 
out, on the day after he had read Florence's story, by writing 
to her at great length, in order to avail himself of an oppor- 
tunity for despatching letters which then occurred. When at 
length he threw down his pen quite exhausted, it was with the 
remark, that he ought to have written to Miriam, but he was 
too tired ; Miriam must wait. 

" She will be disappointed," said Daly ; " lie down for a bit, 
and let me write from your dictation. I shall like it ; it is 
quite a new sensation for a lonely fellow like me to write a 
letter, even though it's not my own." 

Walter gladly assented ; and the letter, a short but em- 
phatic one, was written and folded to be enclosed in Walter's 
imposing despatch, addressed to " Mrs. Glint, The Firs, 
Drington, Hampshire." It was the first time Walter had 
written to his wife under her real name, and he looked 
quite fondly at the superscription, before he held out the docu- 
ment for Daly to take and seal. 



266 A Golden Sorrow. 

" What shall I write on this ? " asked Lawrence. 

" Oh ! just ' Miriam/ " 

Lawrence complied He, too, wrote the name very slowly, 
very distinctly, and he looked at it when it was done. 

While the friends were busy with their preparations for 
departure, and Walter was taking it for granted, without the 
least suspicion or misgiving, that Daly was to accompany him 
to England, and share his home, always, if he chose, but at 
least for an undefined period, Lawrence was much occupied 
in debating with himself what he should do. In reality he 
entertained no purpose of going to England. Why should he? 
Walter had become independent, by an extraordinary and 
fortunate accident ; but his own position was not very materi- 
ally better than it had been when they came out to the 
Golden State. The few hundreds of pounds which would be' 
his share of their joint acquisitions . exclusive of the nugget, 
which had but mocked him with an illusory success, a mirage 
of the mine . could not do much for him. Should he induce 
Walter to intrust his share also to him, and try his luck in the 
speculating world of New York, always reserving a sufficient 
sum to enable him to resume the old work, in the same or 
some other district ? It would be hard for him to part with 
his friend ; and Walter would feel it so too. But Walter had 
an entirely new life to face, fresh ties to form, old associations, 
of a date anterior to their meeting, to renew, and would soon 
cease to miss the familiar companionship. Lawrence had 
none of these things in the Old World ; to him the New was 
as homelike, and it offered better chances. He would wait 
awhile, until the associations of their present life should be 
broken through, and novelty had had its effect on Walter, 
before he would undeceive him ; and, besides, he had some- 
thing to do at San Francisco, which was the first point they 
were to make in their return journey. 

Deering had said he was going to " roll down New Mexico 
way," a sufficiently vague indication of his intentions, and one 
which would, had it been carried out, Yva.\e. ^c\\\&&& Law- 



For England, Home, and Beauty. 267 

rence from any hope of finding him. But he had heard, from 
some new chums who had arrived at the gold-fields during 
Walter's illness, that Deering had been seen at Sacramento, 
where he had been playing high but unsuccessfully, and that 
he had told several of the party that his intention was to go to 
San Francisco and take charge of a ship for New York . being 
inclined to give civilization and Wall Street another trial 

Lawrence determined to find Deering, if possible. He 
took it for granted that this man had Walter's pocket-book in 
his possession. If he had missed his instrument-case he 
would have come, or sent back to the lone hut to fetch it ; but 
finding the unsuspected substitute he would be content, and 
go away without a notion of his loss. On the recovery of the 
pocket-book depended his sole chance of finding the nugget, 
and removing the cloud of oblivion froni Walter's intellect. If 
he should succeed in recovering the clue to the hidden gold, 
he thought of proposing to Walter that they should part at 
San Francisco, when he would return to the scene of their 
toil and secure it in their common interests. 

In many imperceptible ways Lawrence tried experiments on 
Walter's memory before they commenced their journey, but 
they were all unsuccessful. In everything connected with 
the incidents which immediately preceded the fever it was a 
blank. 

When they were fairly on their way . when the life of the 
lone hut, and the busy, toiling mining settlement, shut by the 
great mountain ramparts within the beautiful, desecrated 
valley, had been left far behind them . the impatience for 
which Daly had looked began to manifest itself in Walter. 
The time seemed endless to him which at first he had hardly 
admitted to be tedious, and misgivings crowded fast upon him. 
By the time they reached San Francisco Walter was almost ill 
with impatience, and Lawrence began to feel doubtful about 
the propriety of leaving him, even if he should find out Deer- 
ing, and discover all he wanted to know. 

To any one not aware of the strange ga \nYa&T&Rx&Rs^. 



268 A Golden Sorrow. 

there would have been no reasonable cause for inquietude 
about Walter, but Daly never forgot that fact, and he asso- 
ciated with it an irritable and impulsive manner which had 
come upon Walter. He could conceal from Florence the 
whole of the circumstances connected with the nugget, if they 
should ever meet, and the evil be still unmended ; she need 
never be aware of her husband's loss of memory ; but, sup- 
posing he were to show other symptoms of a mental shock or 
twist, one of those mysterious disarrangements of the mystic 
mechanism of the intelligence which baffle science . what 
then? That could not be hidden from her, and Lawrence 
dreaded to think of what she would suffer. In his bodily 
health he was very well, but the fever had considerably altered 
his appearance. He looked much older than he really was, 
and his once luxuriant chestnut-brown hair was thin, and 
thickly sprinkled with grey. Daly had remarked upon this 
to him, wondering whether it was an ordinary result of the 
kind of fever he had had ; but Walter had told him it was 
hereditary ; at all events, his mother's family all turned grey 
in their early manhood and womanhood, and he should 
not be surprised to find Miriam white. He talked to Law- 
rence a good deal about Miriam, speculating gaily upon the 
surprise and discomfiture which must have been sustained by 
Mr. St Quentin, and his probable feelings towards himself. 

On their arrival at San Fransisco, Daly set about inquiring 
for Deering without loss of time. He had a sufficient inkling 
of that gentleman's character to enable him to make a very 
fair guess at the sort of places in which he was most likely to 
be found, or to be " heard of." His intuition was not at fault, 
and in a few days he had discovered all that it was necessary 
for his purpose to know. He must travel farther, if he would 
find Deering, who, after a few weeks passed in all the wildest 
and most dissipated scenes of " Frisco " life, had sailed, only 
six days before the arrival of Lawrence Daly and Walter Clint, 
for New York. 

This was unfortunate, but not sucYv a. contretemps *& \i 



For England, Home, and Beauty. 269 

appeared. Lawrence felt reluctant to part with Walter, while 
so great an interval of time and space lay between him and his 
home. " What does it matter about me ? " he would say to 
himself, half carelessly, half bitterly. " There's no woman, a 
thousand times too good for me or for any man, waiting for 
me ; there's no one to mind whether I go back to the Placers, or 
on to New York, except Walter, and I x will go with him ; I will 
see him safely off to his pretty wife and his good fortune, and 
then . we shall see ! " Deering had gone to Panama in charge 
of a passenger-ship as surgeon, which did not look as if the 
rolling-stone had yet disproved the proverb; and would be 
sure to be heard of at the agent's, and other places frequented 
by the ship's officers. 

The arrangements for their sailing to Panama by the first 
ship were speedily completed, and then Lawrence carried out 
another project. There was resident at that time in the chief 
city of the Golden State a certain Dr. Drewitt, famous for his 
treatment of nervous disease. His practice was very extensive, 
for the nerves are sorely tried by the toils and the pleasures of 
life in that golden country, which ought to be the easiest in the 
world to live in, as it is incomparably the most delightful. 
But drink and excitement, the mad, murderous violation of the 
laws of health, the ill-treatment of the mortal machines by their 
unruly tenants, are too common there, and Dr. Drewitt's hands 
were full. Lawrence called on this gentleman, and told him 
all the circumstances connected with Walter's sudden and 
extraordinary loss of memory. Dr. Drewitt listened to the 
narrative with attention and interest to the end, when he asked 
Lawrence whether he had been quite over the fever at the time 
it attacked Walter, and whether any intimation of danger to 
the dust they had on the premises had been conveyed to him 
at a time when his own mind was under the influence of ill- 
ness? At these questions Lawrence smiled, perceiving the 
drift of the doctor's speculations. 

"You think, perhaps," he said, "that the screw \<S5^ ycv 
this matter may be in my brain, and not m ftvaX. ol tkj *c\ea&. 



270 A Golden Sorrow. 

. that I may be under a delusion, and he not the victim of a 
sudden interruption of memory. But it is not so. I am quite 
aware that, if such were the case, I should assert the contrary 
as calmly and as strenuously as I am asserting it now, and 
therefore I will say no more on that point : but, if you will 
allow me, I will at some future time inform you of the result of 
the search I am bent upon making for Deering and the pocket- 
book." 

Dr. Drewitt kept a steady gaze fixed upon Lawrence, whom 
it by no means disconcerted. " There are two sides to every 
story, wise people say," remarked the doctor; "and I may 
perhaps wish to learn both sides of this one. Tell me as pre- 
cisely as you can what was the latest impression, to your know- 
ledge, made on your friend's mind before he received the shock 
which brought on delirium ; and what length of time intervened 
between his telling you about the concealment of the nugget 
and the commission of the murder." 

Daly informed Dr. Drewitt precisely on these two points, 
and told him that he had reason to believe Walter had felt the 
approach of illness before the night on which the murder was 
committed. Then the doctor, having taken a short time to 
consider his replies, told him that in certain cases of fever this 
partial and special loss of memory on the subject of the latest 
strong impression made upon the mind was, though not fre- 
quent, of occasional occurrence. It was an unaccountable 
phenomenon, and might be removed, as it had come, suddenly, 
at any time . perhaps years hence; or it might never be 
removed, and there was no help for it It did not necessarily 
imply any further injury to the brain, and was consistent with 
sound general health. 

When Daly had taken his leave, Dr. Drewitt remained for 
some minutes leaning against the mantelpiece in his consulting- 
room, in an attitude of cogitation. Then he took out of a 
press underneath a row of book-shelves an armful of news- 
papers, and selecting a few, after examination of their dates, 
searched carefully through theix cotataxv*. He soon found 



For England, Home, and Beauty. 271 

what he was looking for, and began to read steadily. When* he 
had done reading he put away the newspapers, and proceeded 
to make some notes in a book which he took from a locked 
drawer. 

" Mr. Daly is in the right," he said to himself, as he dipped 
his pen in the ink ; " the other evidently knew nothing about 
t^e murder. The newspaper accounts of it entirely confirm 
that part of Mr. Daly's story ; and that being positively, the 
remainder is presumptively, true. Very hard on him, if he does 
not find this other man ! And certainly one of the oddest of 
the many odd things which have come in rny way. When Mr. 
Clint called on me this morning, and explained that he had 
come to consult me, in all possible privacy, about the mental 
condition of a friend whom he had reason to believe the victim 
of a delusion, a fixed idea . and I told him, as I have just told 
Mr. Daly, that there was nothing to be done, I never doubted 
the truth of the story for a moment I wish I could see more 
of this case ! It only proves once more what I learn every 
day . how much less wise I am than people take me for. 
No doubt I shall hear more of it, for, though he behaved 
most admirably, Mr. Daly winced under my suspicion, and 
will be so anxious to convince me that it was unfounded 
that he is certain to let me know the result of his search. 
A very strange and valuable addition to my collection of 
puzzles." 

The advice which Dr. Drewitt had given to each of the 
friends tallied so exactly that it produced perfect harmony 
of action. Each was watching the other, in unspoken hope 
of a possible result, and the subject most frequently in the 
thoughts of both was never alluded to by either. 

During their tedious voyage Lawrence enlightened Walter 
respecting his own intentions. At first Walter was both 
angry and hurt; but by degrees Daly made him see and 
acknowledge the unreasonableness of his expectation that 
their life could be any longer in common, and he svjfc>\s&*^ 
Daly then proposed that Walter stiou\<l m\xv\sX \ ^wsk^^n* 



272 A Golden Sorrow. 

share of the proceeds of the " dust " they had found, for 
investment in some of the American enterprises which he 
had been studying of late, and to this Walter gladly assented. 
He had great reliance on Daly's judgment, which was not 
lessened or injured by his perception of that strange delusion 
which had grown up in Lawrence's mind since the fever, of 
whose persistence he was perfectly aware, though Lawrence 
was so careful never to allude to it, and from any hint of which 
Walter shrunk with an uneasy nervousness. Indeed, he had 
the same sort of nervous feeling, though not to anything like 
so great an extent, about all reference to their life at the gold- 
fields. It had become not only indistinct, but distasteful to 
him ; and as it was inevitable that he and Lawrence should 
talk about it, he began to think he could be reconciled to a 
separation from his friend, which would lessen the vividness of 
their associations with a life which had become so suddenly 
and unaccountably painful to him to recall. And then Law- 
rence had promised to come to England after three years at 
the outside. 

The voyage was irksome to them both, but especially to 
Daly. Walter slept a great deal ; he had acquired the habit 
of much sleep since his illness, and had pleasant plans and 
prospects during the waking hours ; but things were dreary with 
Lawrence. 

The ship was small, their fellow-passengers were uninterest- 
ing, the voyage was long; and when, having crossed the 
isthmus, they had once more embarked on the other side, and 
were steaming to New York, Lawrence assured himself that, 
even if he should find the clue to the hidden treasure, he would 
not undergo the toil of the journey again, while the small sum 
he could command should show any inclination to increase and 
multiply. He would be satisfied with it, and leave the gold in 
its grave. 

On their arrival at New York they went to the post-office, 

with a vague hope of finding letters. It would be like Florence, 

they thought, to have written again oxvVJ&fe O&axais.. &ad she 



For England, Home, and Beauty. 273 

had done so. There was not much news in her communica- 
tion, which was full of hope and joy in the prospect of her 
husband's r eturn, and contained many affectionate assurance 
of welcome to Lawrence Daly. She gave a droll description 
of Mr. St. Quentin's humiliation under the levelling rule of the 
gout, of his unwilling civility to her, and the haste with which 
he had departed, accompanied, sorely against the grain, by 
Miriam, so soon as he could extract an admission from Mr. 
Martin that it would be safe for him to travel. The St. Quen- 
tins were in Paris, and Miriam only less impatient than Florence 
for Walter's return. 

At length the term of the long companionship of the friends 
had arrived. The last words had been spoken, the last hand- 
clasp exchanged, and Lawrence Daly, feeling very forlorn, was 
standing on the levee, watching the lessening form of the 
Cunard steamer, as she ploughed the blue water, long after he 
had ceased to distinguish Walter's figure on the deck. 

The levee had been much crowded, but it was getting clear. 
The people who had had business to do there had done it, and 
gone away ; and the people who had no business, and there- 
fore stayed longer, grown tired of loafing and looking at ships, 
and listening to steam-hisses, were going. Through the lessen- 
ing throng a man came towards Daly, unobserved by him, as 
his gaze still followed the ship, and stood by his side, silent, for 
a few moments. Then the man touched him lightly on the 
arm, and spoke to him, and Lawrence Daly, turning his head 
sharply round, saw Deering. 



'V 



274 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

WELCOME HOME. 

It would have been impossible to turn The Firs into a pretty 
spot by any method short of such a root-and-branch reforma- 
tion as the pulling down of the old house, and the construction 
of a new one on a totally different plan and in another aspect. 
But it was possible to materially improve the ill-favoured, 
neglected place, and Florence turned all her attention to doing 
this, during the interval which must elapse before Walter's 
return. It was a part of the fidelity of her nature that she 
never forgot the tastes, the fancies, the lightest-expressed wishes 
of those whom she loved ; and the defects, shortcomings, and 
ugliness of The Firs had been well known to her long before 
she had ever seen the place, which was now her own property ; 
and she was familiar with all Walter's ideas of what he would 
have done, had it been his. 

One of the most common forms in which such a morose and 
sullen temper as that with which Reginald Clint had been 
cursed exhibits itself, is an unreasonable and captious jealousy 
concerning the possessions of its victim, which resent a sugges- 
tion as an aggression, and the least manifestation of interest as 
a wrong. A constant uneasy suspicion that somebody wanted 
to interfere with him, a totally uncalled-for spirit of protest that 
his possessions were his own, possessed him. He would fret 
and fume for hours at a careless suggestion from Mr. Martin 
that the trees were too thick in one of the plantations, or that 
the pond below the clover-fields would be the better for clean- 
ing. He affected extraordinary secrecy in. all his affairs, and 



Welcome Home, 275 

changed his employ'es so often that no one ever took any real 
interest in the place. Miriam and Walter understood him 
perfectly in these respects, and had early learned to abstain 
from saying or doing anything to imply a common interest in 
The Firs, or the assumption of even the most trifling authority 
within its gates. In the case of Miriam this indifference was 
perfectly genuine. " If the house were on fire, and I had got 
safely out of it, I should not turn my head to see whether it 
was burned to ashes or not," she had once said to Florence. 
This was but slight, if any exaggeration ; but it was not so with 
Walter. He had a lasting regard for the old place, and though 
he truly believed his father would leave it away from him, he 
had never arrived at contemplating that contingency with total 
indifference. Hence Florence's acquaintance with his ideas of 
what might be done for the improvement of The. Firs. The 
terms of Mr. Clint's bequest to her did not impose any condi- 
tions ; and, in a very short time after the donor's death, Miriam 
suggested to Florence that she would do well to get Walter's 
consent to selling the property on his return. The neighbour- 
hood was a rising one. Whole rows of staring, ugly, red brick 
houses, and diminutive villas, with vivid Venetian blinds, and 
top-heavy porticoes, had sprung up between The Firs and 
Drington Station. The Firs would be valuable building-ground. 
But Florence did not take kindly to the suggestion. Miriam 
did not know how much Walter liked the place, and what 
pride and pleasure he would take in carrying out all his old 
plans for its improvement. " Besides," urged Florence, " you 
must remember that I do not hate rurality as you do." 

" No, indeed," Miriam had replied to this ; " you are just fit 
for it. Only I don't think you will ever have your own meat 
killed on the premises ! My dear Rose, all your muttons are 
pet lambs, and you will let the fowls die of old age ! It is a 
fine thing to be in love," she went on, somewhat irrelevantly. 
" I do believe you could live happily with Walter in a back 
kitchen or a snail-shell, if he had everything he wanted^ and h& 
was perfectly comfortable." 

T 2 



276 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Of course I could," replied Florence, seriously ; and then, 
after a moment, she smiled : " I won't answer for the back 
kitchen, Miriam ; I'm afraid I should be a nuisance there ; I'm 
horribly afraid of beetles." 

" I don't believe you're afraid of anything, except Walter's 
being delayed, or something happening to him. There, the 
colour has gone from your face in a moment ! Ah ! well, that 
is the only thing / fear either, so that we are alike there. And 
you really are going to begin your renovations as soon as you 
get rid of us . a precious incubus we are to you ! " 

Florence protested earnestly against this. Miriam she dearly 
loved, and Mr. St. Quentin had been decently civil to her. 
She had hoped they would remain until Walter's return. Surely 
Miriam must feel that the house and all in it was as much hers 
as it had ever been. 

"An unlucky comparison 1" said Miriam, with an uneasy 
laugh. " If I had ever felt as much at home at The Firs as I 
feel now, I should not have been in such a hurry to escape 
from it You must not be deceived by Mr. St. Quentin's 
civility, my dear: it does not mean much of anything probably, 
but what it does not mean is that I am to have the indulgence 
of being with my brother. He cannot endure the mention of 
him ; if he finds out I have heard from him, he sulks for days 
together. He is more jealous of him than he is of you. The 
fact is, notwithstanding all my praiseworthy and persevering 
efforts to mislead him, I believe he has not succeeded in per- 
suading himself that I have a lover, therefore his jealousy is 
obliged to feed itself on my one real and acknowledged affec- 
tion : and the aliment is decidedly unwholesome. I . can't 
altogether blame him for being rather savage, though he did 
bring it on himself, for, of course, if I have not succeeded in 
persuading him that there is something real which I am hiding 
from him, he must know I have been deluding and laughing at 
him." 

" Miriam, Miriam, a dangerous game ! " 

"Florence Florence, don't pieariaA It". \\sre. Miriam's 



Welcome Home. 277 

face changed and darkened . " if you could know how degrad- 
ing and detestable a lot mine is, you would wonder I could 
play at any game less serious or final than drowning myself ! 
As for my seeing Walter, I don't expect it, unless he comes to 
me, undeterred by Mr. St. Quentin's exquisite facility for making 
people uncomfortable. No, no ; depend upon it, I shall be 
permitted to come here only as a bribe for future good be- 
haviour. Well, it cannot last for ever, that's one comfort . not 
but it may last my time." 

Then she left Florence, and did not afterwards renew the 
conversation. She was right, as has been seen, in her surmise. 
Mr. St. Quentin took her away, and Florence was left, with 
even increased misgivings about his sister's future, to her en- 
grossing and delightful preparations for Walter's return. 

The lawn was transformed after a fashion which its late pro- 
prietor would have regarded as wasteful to the last degree. A 
deep sunken fence, faced with stone, and surmounted by a 
handsome railing, over which numerous plants were in time to 
climb and twist, would henceforth keep the cattle at a distance, 
rendering them picturesque but not intrusive ; and the ground 
thus subtracted from the purposes of severe utility was turned 
into just such a flower-garden as Florence and Walter used to 
sketch, Alnaschar-like, in their cottage in George Lane. Light 
paper and hangings, and some pretty new furniture, did won- 
ders for the gloomy sitting-rooms ; and no one would have 
recognized the study, a room which had, as Florence knew, 
more unpleasant associations for Walter than any other in the 
house. 

When the changes were all made, Florence still had plenty 
of time on her hands to think of the strangeness of her position, 
and, having thought it out, to grow used to it. Acting on the 
concurrent advice of Miriam and Mrs. Cooke, she had dis- 
missed all the servants, and engaged others. They had been 
liberally treated, but of course they were discontented, and 
equally of course they were censorious. Susan was irxu^tvfcsss^. 
also, and took occasion to mention pieft.^ ^fAsSfcj \sl S&& \ns\^- 



278 A Golden Sorrow. 

bourhood that there was more in all that affair at The Firs than 
people understood, or thought for. Only Mrs. Ritchie was 
equal to the occasion . she resigned ! It would be a false 
position, she observed, for Mrs. Walter Clint and for herself, 
and she had, all her life, avoided false positions. So she 
departed from The Firs ; and whether Robert attached himself 
to her fortunes, as he had given her every reason to believe he 
would do, or whether he kept his often plighted troth to Susan, 
this chronicle does not record. 

Florence found ardently zealous supporters in the small 
world of Drington and its environs. Probably it would never 
have occurred to her to care or inquire what people, of whom 
she knew nothing, thought of the strange events in which she 
was so deeply concerned. She knew little of the world, and 
was so far from being self-engrossed that she would not have 
regarded herself as a subject for anybody's curiosity had not 
Mrs. Cooke enlightened her. That excellent woman, who was 
very much distressed by the remembrance of her own uninten- 
tional mistake, made amende honorable in the handsomest 
and frankest manner to Florence, and became her very sincere 
and efficient friend. Mrs. Cooke had not only the legitimate 
prestige of her position, but she was personally popular and 
influential, and when she was resorted to by the ladies of her 
acquaintance, in the agonies of their curiosity amid the con- 
flicting rumours afloat in the neighbourhood, she related the 
ture story with much pathetic effect, and never failed to de- 
clare her belief that the neighbourhood had gained a " decided 
acquisition " in Mrs. Walter Clint. 

" You can easily imagine the difference it makes to Mr. 
Cooke and myself to have such a charming neighbour at The 
Firs," she would say to each questioner, and then hint at the 
pleasure.it would give her to invite the individual in question 
to meeiTMrs. Clint at dinner at the Rectory, when she should 
be going, out again. In a short time, people who had never 
before been inside the gates of The Firs were asking Mrs. 
Cooke how soon they might venture to caW. oxk^VyteYLce*, *x&. 



Welcome Home. 279 

long before Walter's return his pretty, gentle wife had become 
a general favourite. The committee of the Ladies' Book-Club, 
a most exclusive institution, under the rigid censorship of a 
literary lady . who had written " quite an immense deal," but 
had not appeared in print, because her family considered that 
sort of thing " low " . had invited her to become a member. 
The Drington Dorcas meetings were brightened by her sweet 
face, and aided by her busy fingers. Mr. Martin was her sworn 
ally ; and Mr. Standish confessed to that gentleman . who had 
never liked him, and henceforth, rather unreasonably, disliked 
him more than ever . that he had believed the scandal about 
her until the day of the reading of the will, and that then he 
was ashamed of himself 

" And so you ought to be," was Mr. Martin's brief com- 
ment. 

" You must recollect Clint's will was a very extraordinary 
one, and I had never seen her before it was made, and only 
once afterwards for a few minutes." 

"Ha/fa. minute ought to have been enough to make you 
ashamed then of such a belief," said Mr. Martin, irascibly. 
Whereupon Mr. Standish called to mind the coarse sarcasm 
which Mr. St Quentin had uttered in his wrath, with refer- 
ence to Mr. Martin's bachelor condition, and murmured to 
himself, " I should not wonder if the old nabob were right, 
and Martin were spoons on her too." 

It was on a beautiful day in early autumn that Walter Clint 
returned to the home from which he had been so unjustly 
banished, to find the utmost desire of his heart fulfilled. He 
had reached Liverpool on the previous evening, telegraphed 
his arrival to Florence, and started by the earliest train in the 
morning. A serene stillness was over the face of the earth 
and the calm, blue sky. The trees . with their many-tinted 
foliage, sad when looked at singly, but gorgeous in their grand 
masses, overspread with countless shades of brown, and rus- 
set, and gold . were quite motionless, and the few leares* 
which fell ever and anon dropped si\entty otv^fc ^*s&. <t*scs^ 



280 A Golden Sorrow. 

travelled far in the deep stillness of the weather, and Florence 
leaning out of an open window at the top of the house, could 
hear the monotonous rattle of the train many miles away. The 
sun was declining, the delicious scents of evening were blend- 
ing with the air. As Florence leaned out, breathless, and 
feeling, now that he was really coming, that it could not be, 
that it was all a dream, and yet, at the same time, that nothing 
else could be, that this was the one truth, she heard the grating 
of wheels, and saw the dog-cart she had ordered to be sent 
for Walter driven rapidly down the avenue. She could not 
stand another moment. On her knees by the window-sill she 
watched now, and heard the two sounds . the monotonous 
rattle of the train as it neared Drington Station, and the rapid 
whirl of the wheels of her own carriage on the road. Presently 
both ceased. 

She had put off her heavy mourning for that day, and wore 
a white dress with black ribbons. Her fair brown hair was 
curled upon her neck, as Walter had liked to see it, as she 
had not had the heart to wear it during his long absence. 
Good God ! his long absence ! . how long, how terrible it had 
been ! She only realized it now . now, when it was all but 
over. How had she ever lived through it ? It seemed utterly 
impossible that she could have endured it. All the pangs 
of this dreadful time, this cruel waste of their brief lives, this 
irreparably lost treasure, seemed to be mingled with the assur- 
ance and the expectation of that hour. She had planned 
this event, this meeting, a thousand times over, and now not 
one incident would resemble her fancied sketch of it. She 
was to have looked at herself in the glass, and finally touched 
up her dress before he came, and run down to meet him at the 
door, when she should hear the dog-cart return. But the 
sound of wheels is on the road now, and Florence cannot stir. 
She cannot think of what her dress is, or how she looks in it, 
or whether everything is right downstairs. An extraordinary 
tremor and weakness have hold of her ; she shrinks from the 
intensity of her own joy ; the vrtvoVe oi \h^ ^asX v& vcv. >tassfc, 



Welcome Home. 281 

moments, and yet there is inextricable confusion of thought in 
them too. The sound of the dog-cart is in the avenue, but 
Florence cannot stir. All the doors are open below, and, 
ringing clear through the surging and beating in her ears, she 
hears Walter's voice. " Where is she ? " he says, and some one 
answers : and then swift footsteps flee up the stairs, and cross 
the room, and Walter holds her in his arms ! 

# # # # * 

" Oh, Walter ; to think of your having had that frightful 
fever, and my never knowing anything about it! To think 
that you might have died, at the very time I was preparing for 
your coming home ! How awful ! how awful ! " 

" My darling, don't cry so. You are crying as if it had all 
happened, whereas none of it happened. I am quite well, 
and with you, and everything is a thousand times happier and 
better than we ever could have hoped for." 

" I know, I know, and I am thankful ; I am happy, but you 
must let me cry a little, until I can get over it, Walter. I seem 
to see it all, and live through it, even now, and the terror of a 
great escape from a fearful danger is upon me." 

" 77 was a bad fever," said Walter, trying to check her very 
unusual vehemence of emotion by speaking carelessly ; " but 
I am none the worse for it, though, of course, I am changed. 
But then, you must remember, long journeys and hard work 
and time tell on one, little Flo ; and if I am thin and brown, 
and my hair is grizzled, there are reasons besides the fever. I 
assure you I am perfectly well ; I wish I could say as much for 
Daly, poor fellow ! He was hit hard, in earnest." 

" He said in the letter he wrote for you . how little I 
dreamed there was any cause for your employing him, beyond 
the hurt hand you pleaded ! . that he had been ill. Was it a 
fever like yours ? " 

" A much worse one it must have been, though it did not 
look so at the time, and he was not ill nearly so Iotv?^ ^x^C 
. here Walter's face grew puzzled and dow\.casX. . ^\v&V?& 



282 A Golden Sorrow. 

never recovered it, in one serious respect. His mind has 
never been clear since." 

" Walter ! Can it be possible ? Oh, poor fellow ! " 

" It is very sad. But do not mention it to any one ; it may 
be all right by the time he comes home ; and even now no- 
body but myself could tell that he has a fixed delusion in his 
mind, for he is perfectly rational in every other respect, and it 
is only to me he would mention the absurd notion he has 
conceived." 

" What is it, Walter ? May I know ? " 

" You shall know as much as I do, my darling," replied 
Walter, in an embarrassed, uneasy tone; "and then let us 
drop the subject, for I don't like it, as you may suppose. 
Lawrence fancies that he and I dug up a big nugget at our 
claim, and that I buried it somewhere while he was ill. He 
bothered me with innumerable questions when I was recover- 
ing from the fever, and, though I persisted in avoiding any 
reference to it, I could see his mind was quite full of the 
craze up to the time we parted. Of course, it made me very 
unhappy." 

" Then there was no "foundation at all for such a notion ? } ' 

" Not the slightest." 

" Walter," said Florence, after a pause, " is this . his [mind 
being quite clear on every other point . insanity ? " 

" I don't know," answered Walter hastily ; " it is certainly a 
craze, but I don't think it amounts to that? 

" Thank God ! I must always love Lawrence, for your sake 
and for his own, and regard him as my dearest friend, what- 
ever befalls . but . you never found out what a coward I 
am?" 

"No indeed, little Flo, I never did; and considering the 
scenes you have gone through here, I should think no one else 
ever did." 

" Ah, but they might have done so. I am dreadfully afraid 

of any one whose mind is in the least disordered. It is weak 

and wrong, I know, and I vnsYi I cou\& %*x on \\, \nx tmj 



Welcome Home. 283 

flesh creeps, and my heart quails at the mere thought of being 
with a mad person." 

"Don't talk, don't think of Daly as tnad," said Walter; 
"he will be all right when he conies home. Let's talk no 
more about it." He rose, sighed, and walked about the room. 
Florence followed him with her eyes. His face was sad and 
puzzled. 

" His happiness is not perfect," she thought. " This is a 
great grief to him. What had I better do ? Not ask him 
questions about their life abroad, which would direct his mind 
to this misfortune. And yet I did so long to know every par- 
ticular. However, that must be given up." 

It was never very difficult for Florence to resolve on giving up 
her own wishes on any subject. She mentally made the sacrifice, 
and adhered to it. Walter was now standing beside the glass 
door of the study, which opened no longer upon a narrow, 
rough, gravelled pathway, but upon the smooth shaven, green 
grass-plot of the new flower-garden. His profile was turned 
towards her, and as she looked at him she realized, for the 
first time, how much he was altered. Climate, hard work, and 

1 

illness had indeed been busy with him. The brightness of 
youth had gone from his face, and there was no startling con- 
trast between the thin features and embrowned complexion 
and the prematurely grey hair. Florence's heart overflowed 
with thankfulness as she gazed at him. She was convinced 
that she must indeed have been very near losing him. Pre- 
sently he said, with a shake of his head, as if discarding a pain- 
ful impression, " What was your last news of Miriam ? " 

" I heard from her two days ago. There was nothing par- 
ticular in her letter. She seems to be enjoying herself in her 
own way." 

" I don't understand her or her way, I confess. I cannot 
reconcile myself to that marriage of hers ; and . I'll tell you 
what, Flo, I shouldn't wonder if the old man left her nothing, 
or next to it ; or if he does leave het his x&owe^ ^ ^ax V^. 
hampers it with some condition to destroy Hts nsSma? 



284 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Oh, Walter, do you think he would be so wicked ? " 

" Yes, I do ; and I'm not quite sure it would be so very 
wicked if he did, either ; at least, of course it would be spite- 
ful, but not so entirely unjust. You must acknowledge Miriam 
tries him a good deal ; and as she undeniably married him for 
his money, as there never was a plainer case of bargain, I 
think she might keep her part of it a little more liberally. ,, 

"He worries and degrades her by his senseless jealousy." 

" No doubt ; but who suffers by it most ? " 

" He does ; I suppose." 

" Of course he does. How happy we might all have been, 
as things have turned out, if Miriam had not made this great 
blunder ! However, that is another unpleasant subject ; and 
I will neither talk nor think of it. I will think," he continued, 
seating himself beside her, and encircling her with his arms, 
" only of the wonderful fortune which gave a fellow like me 
such a wife as my little Flo." 

They were very happy. 



28s 



CHAPTER XXX. 

THE LIE CIRCUMSTANTIAL. 

" Nothing is so likely as the Improbable, and therefore I ought 
not to be surprised," said Lawrence Daly, as he shook Deering's 
hand with a cordiality which owed its origin mainly to the sense 
of strangeness in a strange place being relieved by the sight of 
a face, known, if not familiar. " But I am ; for you are the very 
man I wanted to see, and have been inquiring after, ever since 
we reached New York." 

" Indeed !" said Deering, with a sharp glance at the speaker. " 
" Your inquiries were not successful, I should think, for there's 
not a more thoroughly ' unknown ' man in the Empire City. 
Why did you want to see me ? I caught sight of you as you 
came off the gangway, but could not make my way to you sooner. 
How are you now? All right again? You look as if the 
voyage had picked you up considerably." 

" Completely. I'm all right again." 

" And your chum, Clint?" 

" He is all right too, and is off to England. Did you not see 
him on the deck, at the top of the gangway ?" 

"No ; you were half-way down when I recognized you. And 
so he's gone home, is he ? You've done well then, I presume. 
No offence in asking; remember, I'm an Englishman, and 
therefore capable of conceiving that there may be." 

" None whatever. We have not, as a fact, done remarkably 
well, and certainly could not have struck work so soon, but for 
a series of strange circumstances. Which way are you ^qvr^V' 

It appeared that Deering was gomg i^o^V^^m^^ws&s*-* 



286 A Golden Sorrow. 

and so they walked back together, in the direction of Tre- 
mont House, Broadway, where Daly and Walter had been board- 
ing since their arrival in New York. 

" No," continued Daly, " we were very moderately prospe- 
rous, except in one respect ; and that exception forms a strange 
story, even in this land of the wonderful, in nature and adventure. 
One bit of good [luck came to us just before I took the fever 
only to be lost again. Do you remember Clint's going to fetch 
you that time ? " 

"Of course I do ; and the Irish fellow who was about your 
claim/the man with a maimed hand. He was murdered after- 
wards. I saw an account of it in the papers." 

" Yes, poor fellow, he was. That was the worst of all that 
befell us. His death was indirectly caused by our piece of 
transitory good luck." 

" Indeed ! How was that ? " 

Lawrence Daly began to tell him their story. Deering list- 
ened in profound silence, not interrupting him by either a ques- 
tion or an exclamation, but glancing at him from time to time 
from under his bushy, red eyebrows, with close, curious, and 
suspicious scrutiny. 

" The murdered man knew all about the finding of this nug- 
get?" he asked at length, when Daly had reached the episode of 
Spoiled Five's death and Walter's delirium. 

" I don't know; I can't tell. He said one thing which seemed 
like it, but I have no certain knowledge. It was just before my 
own illness." 

"But Clint must know. The man was somewhere about 
your hut, the day I was there last; and, by-the-bye, the shock 
of the murder no doubt intensified Clint's fever, and acted 
directly on the brain, but it did not cause it. You may take 
my word for that." 

< ' Take your word ! Why ? " 

" Because the seeds of fever were in him that day. Because 
I knew he was ill, when he walked out of the hut with me. 
Because I distinctly remember thinking ^tew Iba.de him good- 



The Lie Circumstantial. 287 

bye at the bluff, that I shouldn't wonder if he was in for the 
fever." 

"You might have told him so, and warned him; or turned back, 
and contrived to let me know, if such was really your impression." 

" What would have been the good ? " said Deering, carelessly. 
"It had to come, and, I could not have waited to pull him 
through it. It all came right in the end, it seems." 

" No ; it didn't. Wait awhile, and you will see that in other 
respects than the murder of poor Spoiled Five, it came very 
wrong in the end . so wrong that I am still on this side of the 
world, with my fortune to make, and the best I can to do with 
Clint's share of the little we did make ; for the nugget is gone, 
hopelessly gone, unless you can help me to recover it." 

"I ! " exclaimed Deering, standing quite still in his astonish- 
ment, and looking at Daly, as if in doubt whether his words 
were meant for an affront. " What the devil do you mean ? 
What do I know about your nugget ? " 

" Nothing . and yet you must give me the clue to it, if I am 
ever to recover it. You remember the day you came to tell us 
you were going, and took some letters for Clint ? " 

" Yes, yes ; I remember perfectly ; but what . " 

The two men had been standing still, but people began to 
hustle them, and Daly, taking Deering's arm, walked on. 

" Clint had just returned then from hiding the nugget, and he 
had made an accurate memorandum of the spot in his pocket- 
book. Have you any recollection of his taking out the book in 
your presence ? " 

Deering perceptibly started. There was no doubt about it ; 
the arm which Daly was holding revealed the sudden tremor of 
the man's nerves. But he answered, slowly and unmoved, . 

" Yes, I recollect What then ? " 

" You were going to dress a cut in his hand . a cut received 
in hiding the nugget . and you used a green leather instrument- 
case for the purpose." 

" Which I must have lost on that occasion, for I never could 
find it afterwards." 



288 A Golden Sorrow. 

" You left it in the hut. And now comes the strangest part 
of my story. Clint's mind became affected in the fever, and 
when he recovered he had entirely lost all recollection of the 
finding of the nugget, of his having concealed it, and, in short, 
everything about it. I was not much distressed by this at first, 
except for his own sake, for I remembered that the pocket-book 
would guide me to the place, and when I could show him the 
gold he would be all right again. But I looked for Clint's 
pocket-book ; it was not in the locker, and I found instead of 
it. this." 

He took from a deep breast-pocket the small green leather 
instrument-case, and again stood still for a moment Deering 
did not start now; he took the case from Daly's hand, and 
turned it over carelessly. 

" I knew what was coming," he said. " I always had an idea 
I had dropped this in the hut, and picked up the old empty 
pocket-book I found, days afterwards, in my pocket, by 
mistake." 

" Just so. You have it still ? " asked Daly, eagerly. 

" No, indeed ; I have not There seems to be quite a fate 
over the thing. I lost it on board ship ; it fell out of my pocket 
one day when I was leaning over the side, watching some dol- 
phins in a gale, and I very nearly went over with it. . But don't 
look so glum, man ; it was no loss to either you or me, for there 
was nothing in it" 

" Nothing in it ! Are you sure ? " 

" Cock-sure. I remember Clint's taking the letters of which 
I took charge out of it. A paper of needles and some pack- 
thread were its sole contents, when I looked into it next, at 
Placer-Ville." 

" Was there no sketch, no memorandum ? " 

" Nothing of the sort. Not a scrap of paper of any description. 
If there had been, of course I should have sent it back. I should 
have known then, for certain, where I had picked up the pocket- 
book, and what had become of my instrument-case. Of course I 
guessed, but neither was woitYv foe tto>3ta\fc of ax\ ^ctvan^e." 



The Lie Circumstantial. 289 

" Very extraordinary ! " said Daly. " Clint gave me an 
account of his hiding the nugget, as clearly as I am speaking to 
you now, and most emphatically told me he had entered the 
particulars, with every needful indication, in that unlucky 
book." 

" Precisely so. And you are bewildered at finding that he 
had done nothing of the kind ! . bewildered, though you have 
just told me Clint's mind became disordered in the fever, which 
was on him at that very time, and that he has lost every trace 
of memory of the whole transaction ! But if you think, you will 
cease to be bewildered. There is, in reality, nothing very sur- 
prising in the matter ; the whole thing was a delusion of 
Clint's. There's the explanation in a word." 

" How could that be ? I found the nugget. It was in my 
possession, in my own keeping, for* days before I fell ill ; and 
if Clint did not hide it . if the whole story of the concealment, 
and the memorandum in the book, be a delusion, what had 
become of the gold ? It was gone ; 'there is no more mistake 
about that than there is about our having found it. How can 
you square that fact with your theory ?" 

" Very easily, my dear fellow, though I am sorry to say it, 
for your sake. I explain the case thus . partly from the cir- 
cumstances you have just related to me, and partly from my own 
observation of Clint on the day I saw him last, which was the 
day of the supposed concealment of the nugget, and immediately 
after that concealment He was ill then : I saw it . saw it 
within a few minutes after we left the house together . saw it 
in his walk and in his eye . heard it in his voice, and almost 
told him so, if I remember rightly, certainly hinted to him that 
he would do well to take care of himself. The delirium was 
coming on then." 

" But three or four days elapsed between that and the 
murder ? " 

" No matter. There is nothing more subtle, more baffling, 
more impossible to account for, than the origin and ^H^g%5& *& 
these fevers. I have known cases o vW\x \^yr% ^sstxaaxfc. >. 

\i 



4 



290 A Golden Sorrow. 

the system for weeks, ay, even in these climates ; there would 
be nothing surprising in that in England. You had both been 
anxious to get your gold down to Placer- Ville ; Clint had had 
mysterious warnings from the lame man . a vagabond, no doubt, 
with a mental reservation in favour of not being a party to rob- 
bing you, if he could avoid it . " 

"No, no," interrupted Daly; "you must work out your 
theory without that element, You did not know Spoiled Five ; 
/did. he was no vagabond." 

" Very well, then, he wasn't . as you please. At least, it 
is quite plain he knew what people who were vagabonds 
were doing, or intended to do. He put Clint on his guard ; 
and Clint's brain, already in the gripe of the fever, manufac- 
tured a whole sequence of delusions out of the warning. 
Depend upon it, he no more buried the nugget than you did. 
What can be more conclusive on that point than the fact that 
the memorandum he told you such a consistent story about 
had no existence ? If a portion of his story be proved false, 
there is every reasonable presumption that in the case of such 
a story none of it is true. His oblivion of the romance con- 
cocted in his sick brain is a proof that he has regained his 
senses, not that they remain incomplete." 

Daly shook his head with obstinate incredulity. " It won't 
do," he said ; " your theory won't do. Remember, it is not 
only the hiding of the nugget, and all the circumstances of the 
murder, all the occurrences which preceded, accompanied, and 
followed the shock he received, which he has forgotten ; but 
the finding of the nugget, the very existence of it, all the cir- 
cumstances jointly and equally known to us both. To be 
right, yo\j must account for that." 

"J&ink I can account for it," returned Deering. "The 

safety or the nugget was the chief anxiety, the last strong en- 

grossing^, impression on his mind, an impression sufficiently 

strong tm^to create the delusion I am satisfied the whole story 

he Wd r- f v0tx was. Reaction, in such a case as this, would be 

We *" J and complete. ObYmcm ^om\& wx&& tawrsv ***& H*& 



The Lie Circumstantial* 291 

whole of the matter, if it invaded any portion of it. Perhaps 
your medical studies have not embraced these subtle subjects ? 
Perhaps you have not had any extensive experience of mental 
disease or phenomena ? " 

This suggestion told immensely. There was nothing more 
opposed to Daly's disposition or practice than pretence of 
any kind. The assumption of knowledge which he did not 
possess would have appeared to him simply fraudulent as well 
as impudent To so keen an observer as Deering, a man 
accustomed to every kind of fraudulent assumption, from base 
coin to spurious reputation, the transparent frankness and 
gentlemanly quiet of his manner had probably revealed this. 

" You are right so far," Daly answered. " I have never 
studied those branches of medical science, and am quite 
ignorant on the subject." 

" Whereas it is a speciality of mine, if I may lay claim to 
anything so distinguished as a speciality. I have no doubt 
whatever that I have made a correct guess in this case 
Deuced hard on you, I must say, to have had the gold stolen." 

" But how could it have been stolen ? The dust was all 
right. The thieves and murderers had not got in." 

" How do you know ? You tell me you heard a noise, and 
rose and went out in the direction of it, and found Clint lying 
insensible over the murdered man's body. You can only con- 
clude that he too had been roused by a noise. He can give 
you no information ; it is all a blank to him. Don't you think 
it very likely it was the thief, or thieves, who awoke him ; and 
that it was in pursuit of them, or him, Clint staggered to the 
door and fell ? " 

" I never did think of the case in this light before," said 
Daly. " As it never occurred to me to doubt Clint's story 
about the nugget, I never had an idea that any robbery had 
really been committed. But, as you put it, I must say it looks 
exceedingly probable." 

"Does any other solution, considering the meavovaxN&axsL 
turns out to be a myth, look at all ptoba\A^" ^^^T>^x*>% 

u 2 



292 A Golden Sorrow. 

" After all, that is the way to take a thing of this kind // 
must be explicable, because it has indisputably happened ; and 
the only explanation /can discern, consistent with facts, is the 
one I have just offered. I must say again, it is deuced hard 
upon you. Clint need not care so much : in the first place, 
he knows nothing about it ; and in the second, if his memory 
comes back to him on the point of the finding of the nugget, 
he need not fret, if he has come into the good thing you say 
by his father's death." 

" I almost hope his memory may always remain under that 
cloud, unless indeed, it should presage any further mental 
disorder." There was a question in his tone, if not in his 
words, and Deering answered it carelessly, lightly, after a 
fashion from which the other shrank. 

" Oh, never fear ; he'll do well enough. A man is none the 
worse with a hiatus in his brain, if he has a good income, 
nothing to do, and a wife who believes in him. A country 
squire can get on as well cracked as whole, I should say." 

' Daly made no immediate reply ; but after they had walked 
on a little further, he said, . 

" If Clint had not been hiding the nugget, how do you 
account for the cut in his wrist that morning ? " 

" I don't account for it. What occasion is there for account- 
ing for it ? It would be a mere waste of ingenuity, like many 
of the things one troubles one's head about You were both 
in the habit of doing rough and dirty work every day of your 
lives. How often have you had cut hands, and smears of 
blood on your sleeves ? " 

" Often indeed." 

" I should think so. That moving incident need not disturb 
our conclusions." 

Daly then told Deering that he had consulted * Dr. Drewitt, 

and what that gentleman's opinion of Walter Clint's case was. 

" If you are right," he continued, " and there is a growing 

conviction \n my mind that you are right . I have uncon- 

sciously misstated the case. It \s a. tomc& ^ycn^t *h*&, *& ^qu 



The Lie Circumstantial. 293 

put it. It is the cessation of a delusion, and not the existence 
of one. Dr. Drewitt seemed very much interested about it, 
and pressed me, as if he really meant it, to communicate with 
him if there was anything to tell. I think I ought to write to 
him, place the hypothesis you have just stated before him, and 
point out that I may have unconsciously misled him," 

" No, no j don't do that," said Deering, with a look at his 
companion, which was a mingling of a sneer and a scowl. 
" His interest was merely professional manner, depend upon it 
I know old Drewitt. not a bad old fellow, but a regular 
charlatan : would persuade you your headache was an intimate 
grief to him, and dissect his best friend with perfect composure. 
Don't gratify him; he has not a particle of delicacy ; you would 
probably find the correspondence published in a puffing paper 
or some medical gazette before you were out of the country, 
with names and dates complete." 

Considering that Deering knew nothing whatever of Dr. 
Drewitt but his name, he had drawn rather audaciously on his 
fancy in this sketch, which was remarkable for its entire and 
absolute unlikeness to that very estimable roan. But Deering 
had all his wits about him at all times ; and, following up the 
train of certain considerations which had been occupying his 
mind during the preceding conversation, very rapidly came 
the reflection that it was advisable this romantic story of a 
buried nugget and a lost memory should be known to as few 
people and as little discussed as possible. He was rather 
anxious for Daly's reply, but when it came it satisfied him. 

" Dr. Drewitt impressed me much more favourably, I must 
say ; but as you know him, I suppose I was mistaken. The 
publicity of everything in this country would, perhaps, emanci- 
pate him from the restraints a man in a similar position at 
home would feel imposed on him. I will not communicate 
with him until I get home, at all events. Then, if there is 
any decided change in Clint, confirmatory of his opinion, I 
must write to him, according to my promise." 

" When do you think of going back to TLx^^ax&3 " 



294 A Golden Sorrow. 

" I can't say/' answered Daly, with a disconcerted, nervous 
sort of laugh. " It seems odd that the decision of that ques- 
tion should ever have rested with a man so nearly a stranger 
to me as yourself; and yet it did. The clearest and most 
decided idea I had in remaining in New York was the hope 
of finding you, and of recovering the pocket-book. If you 
had not lost it, we might have done something in the specu- 
lative line here, and had the nugget to fall back upon, for I 
need hardly say I should have expected you to accept an 
acknowledgment at my hands of so great and important an 
obligation. But that is all over now." 

He lifted his hat, and pushed his thick dark hair off his 
brow, then ran his fingers through his beard, and threw back 
his broad shoulders with a gesture familiar to him when he 
regarded a matter as decided and done with. 

By this time they had reached Tremont House. Daly asked 
Deering to dine with him, but he was not sorry that his invita- 
tion was declined. They parted, having made an engagement 
to meet on the following day ; and Daly went into the house, 
and up to his room,, feeling that the events of the day had 
been rather too much for him. He would need time and 
solitude to think them out clearly. 

Deering, too, sought his much humbler quarters, where he 
had, however, the facilities he required for leading the kind of 
life he led of choice. He was hampered by no "respecta- 
bilities," checked by no surveillance of decorum or refinement. 
And among his reflections was this one . whether, if it should 
prove that there was anything to be made out of Daly . any- 
thing, he meant, in the present, apart from the prospective 
gain, which, with all the means and plans for its acquisition, 
was already assuming definite shape in his imagination . he 
would not do well to change his quarters. Daly evidently 
knew very little of New York, but he was in a fair way of 
learning. Deering had had an instinctive consciousness that 
Walter Clint had suspected and distrusted him, but that con- 
sciousness had not included "Daty, vtao t*2& tenm^^ &*Nrcc 



The Lie Circumstantial. 295 

man of the two. But Deering knew the difference between 
the perceptive powers of a man in illness and a man in health, 
and gave it its full weight " A man rarely dislikes his doctor, 
if he cures him," he thought ; and certainly there had been no 
dislike of him in Daly's manner that day. 

" I'll see if I can't make him go away just when it suits me 
he should do so . no sooner; and no later," Deering said to 
himself, as he entered a room at once dingy and flashy, whose 
artistic and literary contents would have furnished the least 
acute observer with clear indications of his character and 
pursuits. 

He carried a chair across the room, placed it in front of a 
tall, gaunt press, and standing on it, contrived, with some 
trouble, to pull down a shabby old valise, which had evidently 
seen much service, and had been pushed well out of sight 
against the wall at the top of the press. He flung it on the 
floor, and turned it over with his foot, to rid it of a portion of 
the encumbering dust ; then placed it on a table, and turned 
out its motley, valueless contents, until he found the object of 
his search. He came upon it in a few minutes ; and sweep- 
ing the valise and all the scattered rubbish down upon the 
floor, he lighted a gas jet over the stove, locked the door, and 
set himself to long, serious study of certain closely-written 
memoranda and roughly-drawn lines, dotted with figures, which 
occupied two pages of a green leather pocket-book. After 
his study had lasted some time, he smiled slowly, and mut- 
tered, . 

" Yes, that will do ; perfectly clear and easy, with my re- 
collection of the place. If that fellow hadn't let out the value 
of this before he asked me for it, he might have done me out 
of it easily." Then he turned to the written paper again, with 
the reflection, "There's no such d . d fool as your perfect 
gentleman." 



296 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

INFORMATION REQUIRED. 

The loneliness of a great swarming city, where the faces are 
strange, and one is excluded from the interests which engross 
every human being one meets ; where one might drop out of 
the concourse, and not be missed for one instant by any living 
soul, fell heavily on Lawrence Daly. During their short 
sojourn together in New York, Walter and he had been so 
much occupied with one another, the imminence of separation 
after their long and close companionship had never been 
absent from their thoughts, and they had hardly observed the 
surrounding scene. But Walter was gone now, and Daly, 
though not an ungracious, unsociable man, felt very thoroughly 
alone. He knew the feeling was to some extent voluntary, 
that when he should really rouse himself to look into his affairs, 
and take any steps in the direction of business, he should find 
no lack or difficulty of association ; but just yet he did not feel 
disposed to make the effort Very seldom in his life before 
had Lawrence Daly deliberately given way to the indulgence of 
a weakness, but he did so now, to the indulgence of the weak- 
ness of discontent. 

He did not envy Walter his lot, in the sense of feeling any- 
thing but joyful sympathy with his happiness, and pleasure in 
his good fortune ; but he did feel a great longing for a little 
of similar sunshine in his own life. The tide had set against 
him, somehow, just when it turned for Walter, and he mur- 
mured against this. There was nowhere in the world a home 
where he would be welcomed, in right of himself ; there was 
not a. woman in the world tVie pu\ses oi wYvosfc Yieax*. c&rc&d be 



Information required. 297 

stirred by his step, his voice, his smile. Lawrence Daly had 
now frittered away his feelings in flirtation, and a " grand pas- 
sion," with its stormy delight and pangs, had never crossed 
his life. He had never been well enough off in the past to 
contemplate the possibility of marriage ; and this last failure 
made him think he had better dismiss the idea permanently 
for the future. It did not much matter, in the abstract form, 
in which only Daly thought of marriage, but, he thought, rather 
bitterly, it might have mattered very much. If, instead of the 
blank life, whose strongest interest was his interest for Walter 
Clint, his life had been blesssed with the love of a woman . a 
gentle, sweet woman like Florence, or a handsome, brave, 
impetuous, somewhat ungovernable woman like that golden- 
eyed Miriam, of whom her brother was so proud and fond . 
why, then, he would have put this disappointment right away 
out of sight, and gone to work, to win a home and a provision 
for her. But, after all, what did it matter to him? It was 
this very feeling that it did not matter which made it hard to 
bear. Evidently, Lawrence was out of sorts. 

Under these circumstances, Deering got the chance of form- 
ing a sort of intimacy with him, which, under any other, he 
would not have succeeded in establishing. He was linked, in 
a slight but still important manner, with the old life, from 
which Daly had had no conception it would be so painful 
to break away ; and he was a wanderer, like himself, though, 
unlike him, no stranger to the ways of New York. They 
met again and again, and Deering gave Daly some by no 
means ill-considered or insincere advice concerning the invest- 
ment of the comparatively small sums at his disposal, on his 
account and Walter's, with a view to the speediest returns con- 
sistent with safety. The intermittent fever of speculation was 
in one of its hot fits just then in the Empire City, and the only 
difficulty was that of selecting among the innumerable schemes, 
of hitherto unequalled brilliancy and extent, by which every- 
body was to make a fortune. Daly dabbled in one, ck. ^nr<5> *& 
the most reasonable of these, and did wdX. ^fc^^X^asKrceosk 



298 A Golden Sorrow. 

to like the place, to make friends, to get over the desolation 
and the desultoriness which had at first beset him. He had 
heard of Walter's arrival, and of the flourishing state of things 
in general at The Firs, and, in answer to a cautiously written 
letter, addressed to Florence, and in which he had requested 
an answer from her own hand, he had received a report of 
Walter's health which satisfied him that he was well, but that 
no reawakening of the memory on the subject on which it had 
so suddenly and mysteriously sunk into slumber had taken 
place. 

"I have only two faults to find with Walter," Florence 
wrote, near the end of a pleasant letter, which brought her 
pretty face and sweet voice back to Lawrence's remembrance 
with tantalising freshness : "one is that he looks so much 
older than his years. the other is that he is growing very 
lazy." 

" The fever accounts for the one, and ease and prosperity 
excuse the other," thought Lawrence. " I wonder how the 
golden-eyed Miriam gets on." Presently there was a reference 
to her in Florence's letter : . 

" We are still always expecting Mr. and Mrs. St Quentin, 
and they are still always not coming. He has been ill lately, 
Walter bids me tell you, with gout, and takes the most violent 
remedies, in order to be able to go out into company. He goes 
about to all sorts of places with Miriam. I hope they will 
come to England soon, but I have given up counting upon it 
Walter says he has only one thing besides to wish for . that 
your time was up, and you were safely home at The Firs. And, 
indeed, dear Mr. Daly, so do I heartily wish this also." 

" A good, kind, genuine, womanly letter," said Lawrence to 
himself, as he folded it up. " It makes a fellow feel less lonely 
and lost to get such a letter as this. Walter means me to un- 
derstand that he is confirmed in his notions of the St. Quentin 
menage, of course. The old gentleman stifles his gout in the 
interests of his jealousy, no doubt." 
Daly had completely adopted Tteerv* x^orj ofcxJaa. occur- 



Information required, 299 

rences at the gold-diggings, and had come to regard the loss 
of the nugget with composure, as he might have regarded any 
ordinary loss by robbery. As time went on, it did occur to 
him sometimes to think it strange that he knew so little of 
Deering, apart from their joint transactions ; how reserved and 
taciturn the man was in everything which related to his past 
life, his family relations, or his future prospects ; whereas he 
had been tolerably expansive in his own communications with 
Deering. He remembered that Walter Clint had made a 
remark of the same kind to him one day, and had accompanied 
it with an expression of dislike to Deering. As for Mr. Deer- 
ing himself, he found the acquaintance with Daly, to which he 
had contrived to give the appearance of intimacy, both useful 
and pleasant, and it was quite remarkable with what curiosity 
and interest he collected from Daly's conversation every detail 
which could serve in the construction of the history of his past 
career. Daly was so much the opposite of an egotistical man, 
that the collection of these details was not an easy matter ; 
indeed, it demanded considerable tact, in which Deering some- 
times broke down, so that, if Lawrence had not been as little 
suspicious as he was egotistical, it must have struck him that 
his friend was strongly actuated by curiosity. But the two 
qualities combined acted in the interests of Deering's purpose. 
Daly was not put on his guard by any overweening notion of 
his own importance, and he never suspected Deering of any 
ulterior object. Thus it came to pass that, in process of time, 
Deering had arrived at a knowledge of all the events in Daly's 
history sufficiently accurate and minute to have served for the 
compilation of one of those wonderful dossiers, which are the 
terror of French delinquents, and the objects of envy and ad- 
miration to French romance-writers. 

" You'll excuse my saying so," he remarked to Daly one 
evening, when they were smoking sociably together on a cer- 
tain well-known balcony, " but I think you acted rather rashly 
in respect to the nabob ! You cut the paintet ttare. \s** 'ab- 
ruptly and too completely. It you YhA. \taex\ \>a& ^ Ns&r. 



300 A Golden Sorrow. 

more knowledge of the world, I fancy you would have given 
him more time, wouldn't you ? " 

" What for ? To keep a promise to a dead woman which 
he had persistently broken while she lived ? Where would 
have been the sense of that ? I should have gained nothing 
by it, and lost my own self-respect. No, no ; notwithstanding 
the loss of the nugget, I am better off now than I should have 
been, loafing about, and waiting for the favours of such an 
uncommonly treacherous and shifty old providence as Mr. 
Clibbbrn. ,, 

" I think I understood you, that, in addition to his having 
married your mother's sister, he is a relative of your own ? " 
There was an unaccountable eagerness in Deering's face as he 
asked this question, to which Daly replied carelessly, . 

" He is a distant relative, but the nearest I have ; and I 
am the nearest he has, I believe." 

Then they dropped the subject. 

About this time Mr. Deering had an unusual amount of 
correspondence on hand. Ordinarily, he neither wrote nor 
received letters which implied anything beyond the business 
he was engaged in, and the rather low pleasures with which he 
diversified it. But he had taken to looking out for mail-days 
of late, and it might have been observed that he was pre- 
occupied at such times, and additionally attentive to Daly and 
watchful of him. 

Lawrence was not an eager reader of newspapers. A very 
superficial perusal of the news from Europe sufficed for him, 
and, if the Atlantic cable had existed in those days, he would 
probably have dispensed with journalistic literature altogether. 
He could no more have devoured the contents of the myriad 
sheets of news and comment, of correspondence and general 
topics, of novelties and gossip, as the Americans devoured 
them, than he could have smoked and chewed as they did. 
Sometimes, when there was news from the Golden State, he 
went at it eagerly enough, feeling about it as he had felt, 
when he and Walter were &exe,ahaa\.Yfe^TA,^&^Gfe <&Vi 



Information required. 301 

ways of the forsaken world beyond the two oceans. But in 
general he was indifferent, and this peculiarity Deering, whom 
few things escaped, had soon noticed. 

There had been no news of interest for some time, and 
Lawrence was less than ever anxious to know what was in the 
papers, when one day, at the public dining-table, he heard 
some people talking of great floods which had done consider- 
able damage in a district of Placer County. There had been, 
it appeared, great atmospheric disturbance, tremendous rain, 
and a sudden swelling of the river and its tributary streams. 
One of the gentlemen present had had a letter containing parti- 
culars, and finding Daly interested in the subject, he detailed 
them. It was strange and pleasant to Lawrence to hear again 
the names and places he had been so long familiar with. In 
the evening he read a long and flourishing newspaper version 
of the occurrence, and sat looking at the words with his 
thoughts far away, amid the grim desolation of the scene. No 
lives had been lost, but a good deal of damage had been 
done by the flood, and Daly would have liked to know how 
their former claim and the lone hut had fared in the turmoil. 

" I wonder whether it is still standing," he thought, " or 
whether the waters poured into the ravine, tumbled down the 
face of the old rock there, and swept it away with them. I 
wonder whether the whole aspect of the place is changed. 
The lone hut is of too little importance to be mentioned here, 
I suppose. If Deering is right . and no doubt he is . it does 
not matter ; it never could have mattered, in one way or the 
other ; but if Walter had really buried the gold, [and really 
had made a memorandum of its whereabouts, it would not 
have availed now, according to this. These tearing floods 
efface huge landmarks in a few moments ; who can tell how 
this one may have changed all the features of the small space 
within which his choice of a hiding-place lay. . There I am, 
trying back on that old scent again, after all my resolutions, 
proving to myself, often as I have protested the coivtrax^ Vw* 
hard it is to recover a downright, knocV-dowa. Wow oV^^*- 



302 A Golden Sorrow. 

I ought to be quite over it by this time, especially as I am 
turning our dust to some purpose, thanks to Deering mainly. 
He's a clever fellow, and I think a better one than Walter 
fancied him. The flood did a good deal of damage in Cobb's 
Valley, I see : I wonder if it swept over the burying-ground, 
and tore up the headstones ; in that case poor Spoiled Five's 
wooden cross . the memorial of him to a whole race of 
strangers . is gone too." 

Lawrence and Deering had a good deal of business in com- 
mon just then, and when they met next day, they began to 
discuss it at once, and no mention was made of the news of 
the great flood in the Golden State. Daly thought of it after- 
wards, and was glad he had not talked about it. 

"lam determined I will not," he thought ; " it would only 
tempt me into talking of that unlucky nugget to Deering 
again, and I am determined henceforth it shall rest." 

And so a word that might have availed much, remained by 
the decree of fate unspoken. 

Mr. Deering had been deeply engaged with his correspond- 
ence before he went to his appointment with Lawrence on the 
day in question. It was not voluminous, and it was not various, 
but it was exceedingly engrossing, and Deering had apparently 
reached a puzzling stage in it He walked moodily about a 
room, very different in its decorations from that which he had 
abandoned, after prudential calculation, cogitating intently, 
and turning his eyes from time to time upon the large paper- 
strewn table at which he had been sitting. 

" It is too soon," he muttered . " too soon to tell him, to 
induce him to go to England. There is a good deal to be done 
with him here yet, and the other thing will keep . will be all 
the better for keeping, indeed . until I have made all there is 
to be made here out of his resources and my own. The 
prize is safe enough ; it will not slip away, but this opportu- 
nity might. No, he must not know : he must not go yet ; it 
is too soon. If the time had come, I wonder whether he 

vdd go and put in his claim, ox \>e. ma.^rai\m<3vxs> & *e- 



Information required. 303 

nounce it. He is fool enough for anything of that kind, and 
that would be a stopper. Let me see." 

He halted beside the table, and took up a large sheet of 
foolscap, on which certain slips cut from newspapers, in dif- 
ferent kinds of type, and varying in length, were pasted. He 
was perfectly familiar with them, and yet he read them 
over slowly and half aloud. A thin slip, containing merely 
the name of the newspaper from which it was extracted, and 
the date of its issue, was pasted half an inch above each of 
these paragraphs : . 

The " Times? Wednesday, July . , 186.. 

" Information required. . Any person who can give in- 
formation respecting Lawrence Daly, who left England, in 
186 . , for New York, it is supposed, with the intention of pro- 
ceeding to the Far West, will be handsomely rewarded on 
communicating with Monsieur Caux, Rue de la Fleche, 
Paris." 

The " Times? Monday, August . , 186 . . 

" Lawrence Daly, who left England in 186 . , is earnestly 
requested to communicate with his nearest relative. He will 
find compliance with this request very much to his advantage, 
Address, L. C, care of Monsieur Caux, Rue de la Fleche. 
Paris." 

" New York Herald? September . , 186.. 

" Information concerning the whereabouts, or, if he be not 
living, the death of Mr. Lawrence Daly, supposed to have been 
in the city of New York, in the Summer of 186 . , is earnestly 
requested, and will be handsomely paid for by Monsieur Caux, 
Rue de la Fleche, Paris." 

"New York Sentinel? September . , 186.. 

" L. D. . If you will let me know where you are, you shall 
not regret it. My promise to ' Aunt Kate ' shall be yet fulfilled. 
Let bygones be bygones, and write at once to me, under 
cover to Monsieur Caux, Rue de la Fleche, Paris." 

" A clever calculator, no doubt, could tell exactly how taaxv^ 
to one the chances ought to have \>teiv *m ^no> olXV&s}^ 



304 A Golden Sorrow. 

seeing all these, and of my not seeing the first of them. But 
Calculation is gravely out sometimes. If I had seen the 
second and not the third, it would have made a considerable 
difference to me. A hundred pounds when I place Monsieur 
Caux and Lawrence Daly in direct communication, and the 
strictest secrecy observed concerning the date of my reply to 
the advertisement. After all, was it weak of me to stipulate 
for that ? When I have got all the money there's to be had 
out of Daly's dear repentant relative over there, and all the 
money there's to be had out of Daly himself here, what does 
it matter to me what he thinks of me, especially as I hope he 
will have before long been my unconscious benefactor to an 
extent of which we are at this moment both in ignorance. 
The pear is getting ripe ; it will soon be time to shake the 
tree, but not yet. The repentant relative must suffer a little 
more remorse and suspense first, until we see what's coming of 
Ontarios y at all events." 

He huddled up the scattered papers, and locked them into 
a drawer. Then, struck by a sudden thought, he stood for a 
moment with his hand on the key. 

" It's cutting it rather close, this delay. Just suppose 
Walter Clint should see the advertisement in the Times, and 
volunteer the required information ! By Jove ! that would be 
a crooked turn of my luck. However, one must risk some- 
thing, and I don't risk money. But there's not much time to 
spare now." 



305 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

AN OLD MAN'S DARLING, 

In a vast and splendid apartment on the rez-de-chaussee of a 
fine hotel in Paris, belonging, not to the extravagant latter days 
of the Second Empire, but to its more solid middle period, we 
find Miriam St. Quentin, a year after her father's death. How 
much resemblance does she bear to the handsome school-girl, 
who, hardly five years ago, looked at her bright young face 
in the glass before she ran down-stairs to take her first in- 
dependent step in life . the selection of a waiting-maid ? How 
much, in mind or person ? What marks has time set upon 
her face and upon her heart, in that progression to which 
standing still is as impossible as it is to the waves of the sea ? 
It was the early winter-time, and the air was clear, bright, 
and crisply cold. Miriam was in her boudoir . a large room, 
with a richly-furnished conservatory at one end, where there 
was a crystal fountain with an alabaster basin, wherein gold 
and silver fish disported themselves, and an aviary tenanted 
by bright-winged birds; where there was a background of 
strange tropical growths and feathery frondage, from which 
banks of gorgeous blossoms, and velvet leaves, with cunningly 
disposed lights dispersed among them, sloped downward, and 
surrounded the fountain in semicircular form, with an interval 
of marble mosaic. The air was warm and perfumed; the 
feathery rain of the fountain mingled its sound with the cooing 
voices of the doves nestling behind the silver wires of their 
cage; beyond the silken curtains lay the boudoir, in which 
every modern luxury was accumulated for the pleasure of it& 
owner. Things at once beautiful axul \rcfcc!\o\j& t&rX "&\& ^^ 



306 A Golden Sorrow. 

on every side, and on all was set the impress of supreme good 
taste, in harmony of colour, of design, of arrangement. A 
wood fire burned upon the wide hearth, and a glass screen 
framed in an ivy wreath of malachite stood between it and the 
low chair in which Miriam was sitting. She was leaning for- 
ward, her eyes fixed apparently upon the rose-coloured reflec- 
tion of the flame in the sheet of crystal, her hands clasped 
round her knees. Miriam had not yet laid aside her mourn- 
ing ; her rich, plain dress was black, and its soft thick folds 
well became her full, dignified figure. Five years ago Miriam 
Clint had been a handsome girl, to whom probably no one 
would have applied the much misused term " beautiful." Now 
she might have claimed the epithet, fairly, in most of the 
positions and expressions of her face and form. The con- 
summate ease and tranquillity, the assured self-possession, the 
habit of being implicitly obeyed, the entire and placid con- 
sciousness of importance to which all self-assertion is super- 
fluous, of a thoroughly prosperous and well-trained woman of 
the world, were all discernible in Miriam St Quentin. "A 
hasty, ungraceful movement, a loud tone, a vehement expres- 
sion, a gaucherie of any kind, would have been as impossible 
to her as if she had been born and reared in that calm world 
of impassive greatness and social importance wherein such 
things have to the vulgar eye no existence. Clever and 
resolute as she was, when she had made her bargain with the 
future she had determined that not only would she have all 
the good things of this life with which her marriage could pro- 
vide her, but that she would get out of them the very most 
they could be made to yield. And so she studied, not only 
what the women of the great world . who had wealth, luxury, 
taste, and freedom . enjoyed, but after what fashion they 
enjoyed them. She had a great deal more ability than most 
of them, and, at this time of her life, quite as little heart as 
any, and she learnt the ways of them and of their world with 
much readiness and completeness. Composed, proud, exquisite 
in tact and manner, Miriam was no^ a.\raxx^&^w^\^ whom 



An Old Man's Darling. 307 

all " society n everywhere admitted to be u perfectly charming, " 
and who had not an intimate friend in the world except 
Florence, whom she had not seen for ten months. 

The touch of time, while it had improved her actual beauty, 
added refinement to the features which had no classical 
regularity, touched the broad temples with finer lines of thought 
and knowledge, deepened the searching glances of the glorious 
golden eyes, and set a mark of will and decision upon the soft, 
full, delicately-tinted lids, had told upon her too. Miriam had 
nothing girlish left about her looks. She was a woman in the 
full bloom and strength and pride of her beauty, but a woman 
who looked every hour of her years, who was as completely, 
though not so widely, separated from girlhood as from age. 

She sat still, gazing on the little sparkles of flame reflected 
in the sheet of crystal. The streak of colour beneath her eye- 
lids was as delicate as ever ; but it had deepened to-day into 
a rosy flush, and there was a sparkle in the fixed eyes which 
might have told an observer that Miriam's mind was not so 
idle as her hands. 

The velvet table by her side was heaped with books ; books 
in English bindings, brochures in their paper covers ; a salver- 
ful of cards and unopened notes vainly asked for her attention 
. she heeded none of them. Presently, disturbed, it seemed, 
by the chiming of a timepiece, she rose, and walked slowly 
into the conservatory, pausing before the aviary, and idly 
watching the fluttering of the birds. 

" What does it mean?" she muttered; "what does it mean? 
I think and think; I turn in my mind every particle of knowledge 
I have managed to acquire respecting the past ; I watch him 
closely ; and yet / know there is something going on that I 
cannot fathom. The alteration in his manner, everything, 
confirms me in this belief He has almost ceased to watch 
me. Why ? There never was any cause, except in his own 
suspicious mind and depraved imagination. But whence the 
change ? " 

She beckoned to the birds, and put "hex %&%<* ^SdkswjS^^ 

x 2 



308 A Golden Sorrow. 

bars of the cage. The bright-winged creatures came and 
pecked at them, nibbling the rosy finger-tips, and fluttering 
with joy. She presented a perfect picture of happiness, beauty, 
leisure, and luxury in the framework of that beautiful scene ; 
and yet she was troubled, uncertain, nervous, afraid. No 
trace of any of those feelings was to be found in her composed 
mien or on her beautiful face, but she knew they were there, 
and she was doing battle with them by the aid of reason, and 
getting worsted, for they had their origin chiefly in impressions 
which defied her judgment. 

" I must and will find out what he is doing," so ran her 
thoughts. " Bianca does not know, poor ignorant wretch ; 
she is only fit for the post of spy, not for the position of con- 
fidante. His skilful stroke of tyranny, as he thought it, in 
forcing me to keep her in my service, has been a consummate 
failure. As if she could have hindered me from doing any- 
thing I chose to do, or discovered anything I chose to hide ! " 
A faint disdainful smile crossed Miriam's lips, and in the same 
instant she chirruped to the birds, and smoothed a ringdove's 
sleek head with her fair fingers. " Who is this man who calls 
here so frequently, and has long conferences with him in his 
study, and what are these papers he is perpetually brooding 
over? Can he be meditating treachery towards me? His 
relaxed vigilance and his increased gentleness are quite enough 
to set any one who knows him so thoroughly as I do, on the 
alert. My mind is so full of this, I can think of nothing else. 
It makes me forget even Florence and Walter. And I cannot 
tell her, I cannot trouble her peace and joy, after her long 
trial. And, besides, what is there to tell ? It is all suspicion ; 
there are no facts to lay hold of, or facts so few and so slight 
that I could not so place them before her as to give them the 
weight I know they nave.'' 

She sighed, and raising her hands higher on the wires of 

the cage, leaned her forehead against them, and so stood for 

many minutes profoundly stilL From this attitude the en- 

p trance of a servant, to announce XtaaX \vex caxxsa^. ^-aited^ 



An Old Maris Darling. 309 

roused her, and she returned to the fireside in the boudoir, 
opened the notes which lay on the table, glanced over them, 
threw them into the fireplace, and slowly left the room. 

A splendid carriage, turned out in the best possible style, 
with superb bay horses, and servants in long coats and valuable 
furs, was drawn up under the wide glazed portico. Presently 
Miriam appeared at the top of the short flight of steps, where 
orange- trees stood in majolica tubs on either side. She was 
ceremoniously escorted by Mr. St. Quentin, who handed her 
into the carriage with a polite and audible expression of his 
regret that he did not feel sufficiently well to accompany her 
in her drive. The carriage turned out of the great echoing 
gateway, and Miriam was thinking, " What a pleasant drive I 
shall have ! only I wish I knew what it is that has made him 
change his tactics so completely. The result is so pleasant 
and welcome, I wish I could be satisfied there is no danger 
in the cause/' 

How has time dealt with Mr. St. Quentin since that re- 
markably well-preserved gentleman has been in possession of 
the choicest blessings of existence . a large fortune, freedom 
to enjoy it according to his own tastes, perfect leisure, and a 
beautiful young wife ? It is a little more than five years since 
he returned to England, and he has no cause to complain of 
any undue havoc in his well-cared-for personal appearance. 
Perhaps no one would be likely to guess his present age so 
far short of the truth as almost every one had guessed it five 
years previously. But he was not, even yet, irrevocably in 
the category of " old men." Partial friends and toadies might 
still designate him an " elderly gentleman," and strangers be 
introduced to him and Miriam without having their sense of 
incongruity quickened into actual disgust. His figure was 
still upright and active, and his hair plentiful, though grizzled. 
His correct, tasteful, appropriate style of dress, entirely free 
from affectation of youthfulness, was also as free from careless? 
ness, and he was altogether a " personable" taasu N^ <5ss>Rfe 
observers, famiiiar with Mr. St. Quen\As* vpjewaaBRfe ^x^R- 



3io A Goldeti Sorrow. 

period of his return from India, might have noticed that he 
did not look so amiable, so ready and easy to be pleased, as 
in those, days ; that he was more silent, and seemed at times 
to have " something on his mind," of a nature inconsistent 
with the general prosperity of his condition. 

There was not the least suspicion afloat among the society 
in which Miriam and her husband lived that their marriage 
was not a happy one . happy, that is to say, in modern society's 
sense of that word. They were not supposed to be romanti* 
cally attached, but that kind of thing was never thought of 
among well-bred people, even when no discrepancy of age 
existed. Mere vulgar honest love did very well to cheer the 
existence of the lower classes ; but it did not count in the 
fine, gay, luxurious, great world, in which there is not the 
least occasion for two persons to bore each other, if they 
happen to disagree, or to have had enough of one another, or 
severally to prefer somebody else, and where all these con- 
tingencies may be provided for with perfect decorum. It was 
allowed, on the other hand, that the reciprocal demeanour of 
Mr. and Mrs. St. Quentin was simply perfect On his side, 
alertness, attention, well-bred gallantry ; on hers, consideration, 
frank kindliness, with just the slightest touch of that delightful 
deference to his age, which was so very charming. The 
aplomb, and the perfect freedom of a wife,- combined with 
something gently respectful, which caused every one to re- 
member that she was young enough to be his daughter. There 
appeared to be a wonderful accord in their tastes. That 
Miriam should enjoy society, and should be seen wheresoever 
the fashionable world gathered itself together, was of course 
quite natural ; but Mr. St. Quentin was in this, as in every 
other respect, a model husband. He went everywhere with 
Miriam, and he seemed to like it. He had nothing of the 
henpecked husband. Then, her dress was superb, and her 
jewels enough to make angels envious ; there was nothing in 
Paris better than her equipage -, of a surety, Mrs. St Quentin 
was a fortunate woman* 



A n Old Man's Darling. 311 

Mr. St. Quentin belonged to a cercle y where he played occa- 
sionally, decorously. He rode a fine horse, sitting well, 
and looking less than his age in the saddle No one 
could accuse him of a deficiency in the .virtue of hospitality ; 
in that respect he subscribed implicity to the laws of society, 
and took care never to be on the debtor's side ; but yet he was 
not popular, as his wife was in a superficial way. His was a 
cold and selfish nature, and this truth . which more surely than 
all besides alienates affection and friendship . was understood 
and felt, so that Mr. St Quentin had no friends. His real 
relations with Miriam were known to themselves alone ; even 
Bianca's acquaintance with them was superficial, and though 
she regarded them with all the coarse misconception of a 
mind at once vicious and ignorant, she was in reality far from 
estimating aright their deadly discord and animosity. Of 
late Miriam's letters to her sister-in-law had contained no lively 
allusions to Mr. St. Quentin's ridiculous jealousy, no mischie- 
vous record of her perverse playing upon this dangerous weak- 
ness. Florence observed the omission with thankfulness, but 
she was wise enough to make no comment upon it. 

" Dear Miriam has found out her error, and she is repairing 
it. Everything is right between them, and nothing is now 
wanting to my happiness," thought Florence, in her simple 
way : she to whom to discover a fault in her own conduct, and 
to confess and rectify it, were natural and simultaneous opera* 
tions of the conscience and the will " I thought he could 
hardly fail to appreciate her thoroughly, when once he had 
gotten the better of his besetting sin and folly. " It never 
occurred to Florence that there are people who cherish 
their besetting sins, even when they know them perfectly, and 
make idols of their leading follies. 

Miriam's change of tone was in reality due to a very diffe- 
rent cause. The matter had become too serious for jesting 
and had developed features concerning which she could not 
consult Florence. There were times when she sexvorosk) V** 
lieved Mr. St Quentin to be mad, ox YieaxY] *o, wA^^^' 



312 A Golden Sot row* 

rooted uneasiness had taken possession of her mind. Their 
private relations were as bad and unnatural as their demeanour 
in public, though without any mutual arrangement ( or under- 
standing, was faultless. Each could trust the pride of the other 
on this point thoroughly* At home they rarely met There 
was no more interference with Miriam, no curious inquiries 
into her correspondence, no spying out of her ways. But this 
change did not reassure Miriam, though it relieved her. Mr. 
St Quentin's presence had become disagreeable to her ; her 
liking for him had died away before the contempt with which 
he had inspired her. It would have been too much to expect 
a girl like Miriam to be logical ; too much to expect that she 
would have recognized the reasonableness with which a man 
may conclude that a woman whom he knows he has bought is 
not to be trusted. It was only too true that she had come to 
hate him; but she had hated him with less bitterness and 
consistency when he worried her and insulted her by his sus- 
picions, bored her mercilessly with his company and his flattery, 
than now, when he was perfectly polite, distant, and estranged. 
It made Miriam desperately angry with herself to know that 
she was afraid of him. She had almost pitied the old man at 
times, when, in his absurd jealousy and determination to watch 
her, he had run serious risks rather than allow her to go out 
without him, and yet had scornfully refused her offer to relin- 
quish her engagements and remain at home. But now all was 
changed. She had no more pity for him, but serious apprehen- 
sion for herself. She had unfettered liberty of action, and yet 
she had never felt less free. Something she was ignorant of 
was in the atmosphere of her life, and to natures like hers only 
the unknown is terrible. 

Mr. St. Quentin had never mentioned Walter Clint's name 
to Miriam since they had left England. When she learned 
that her brother had returned to The Firs, she told Mr. St. 
Quentin the fact. He replied that he wished to know nothing 
whatever about Mr. Walter Clint, and that he forbade any 
further mention of him* or Vvis mfe . ft^ ot\& \*as *. *st&csa&K. 



A n Old Maris Darling* 3 1 3 

liar, the other an adventuress. It was after this that he relin- 
quished the former system of spying upon her, and their 
domestic life underwent a complete alteration. 

But though Mr. St Quentin kept aloof from her, and in- 
truded no more upon her occupations . thus depriving her of 
the means of knowing how his own time was passed . Miriam 
became aware, by various little indications, that some matter 
was of interest to him which had formerly not existed. Mr. 
St Quentin's "business" had been conducted with much 
simplicity and celerity, and had chiefly consisted in the sign- 
ing of cheques. Miriam knew that his money was princi- 
pally invested in Indian securities, but that he always had a 
large sum on deposit at the Bank of France. He was in the 
habit of receiving a few letters from India occasionally, but 
he carried on no active business transactions now with that 
country, and Miriam was aware that his fortune was growing. 
He was a more wealthy man than when she had found in 
his wealth a way of escape. 

Perhaps it was money-making, speculation of some sort, 
which was engrossing him now. Avarice, said to be the favourite 
vice of age, was laying its hold on him perhaps, and that of 
other and lesser passions was loosened. If so, it was avarice 
without its customary exterior. He did not save money be- 
cause he was making it' He was ostentatiously profuse in his 
expenditure, and Miriam had more and more luxury in her 
life, and the command of much larger sums, every shilling of 
which she expended recklessly, than formerly. In her extra- 
vagance he never checked her. Her love of luxury and 
adornment he seemed to regard with pleasure, not easily to be 
reconciled with his indifference to herself, and the silent, rigid 
estrangement which he was apparently determined to maintain. 
Every wish, every fancy of hers, was punctiliously gratified by 
him, when such wishes or fancies lay outside the limits of her 
individual control. Only in the one particular of going to 
England, and thus having an opportunity oi ^\x\%V^\st^^st. 
did Miriam feel herself powerless ', and "KYoicbk^* ksR& *s*> 



314 .A Golden Sorrow. . 

the point made her understand that she and Walter knew the 
truth. It was therefore with surprise, not unmixed with 
uneasiness, that Miriam, one evening about this time, heard 
her husband speak to a lady, at a dinner-party at their own 
house, of the probability of their being in England at Christ- 
mas. The lady expressed her sentiments of congratulation at 
this prospect of participation in the " so-English pleasures " of 

the season, and went chattering on about all that English 
people are supposed to do and to feel at that extremely 

unpleasant time of the year. Mr. St. Quentin listened, and 
explained courteously ; but Miriam was perfectly aware that 
he was watching her, and highly as she resented his having 
taken this means of informing her of his intentions, she pre- 
served an appearance of perfect unconcern. Next day, she 
said to her husband, . 

" Do you intend that we shall go to England this winter ? " 

" I do," he replied. " You heard me say so last night, I 
think ? " 

" Do you mean to remain there any time ? " 

" That will entirely depend on circumstances. I am going 
to England for a special purpose, and my movements will be 
regulated accordingly." 

" Am I to be informed of this special purpose ? " 

" You are not. It is no affair of yours." 

Miriam glanced at him with a contemptuous smile, and bent 
her head. 

" I wish to give you fair notice," she continued, " that when 
we go to England it is my intention to see my brother. I am 
entirely resolved on this point. Nothing will make me alter 
my resolution." 

" You can see your brother and whom you please, when we 
go to England," said Mr. St Quentin. And with that their 
interview came to an end. 

Miriam was confounded by this turn of affairs; but she 
maintained her composure, and bravely hid the smarting wound 
to her pride. This had occurred severed da.^ *%^ ^A^lxcvaxoL 



A u Old Man's Darling. 3 1 5 

had not received any intimation from Mr. St. Quentin of the 
time at which he intended to leave Paris. She sickened with 
anger at being obliged to endure this sort of thing from the old 
man with whom she had intended to have her own way so 
completely, but no human being ever saw a look or heard a 
word expressive of her disgust 

On this day, when her carriage had driven away, Mr. St 
Quentin went direct to her boudoir, and having closed the 
door, stood with his back against it, deliberately surveying 
every detail of its luxurious adornment A bad, cynical smile, 
accompanied the slow travelling of his eyes from point to point. 
Then he walked across the spacious room to the silk- curtained 
archway which formed the entrance to the conservatory, where 
the fountain was showering down its tinkling rain, and Miriam's 
birds were fluttering behind the silver wires. From this point 
he again surveyed the room, and now he laughed a low, evil 
laugh. 

" She likes all this," he muttered. " What taste she has ! . 
and what a love of luxury and ease ! She shall have it, plenty 
of it, as much as she likes, for awhile. No fear of her giving 
this up ; no fear of her running away from this ; no fear of her 
giving up money, even for love." 

His well-preserved, good-looking old face was a sight to see 
for vindictiveness and cunning. He smoothed it and his grey 
hair all over with his hand before he left the room, and went 
to keep an appointment with a person who had visited him 
occasionally of late, and whose visits formed an item in the list 
of Miriam's anxious misgivings. 



316 A Golden Sot row. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

REVOLT. 

When Miriam returned from her drive, she asked of the foot- 
man in attendance in the hall, who had called during her 
absence. The footman mentioned only one name, but it gave 
Miriam something to think of. 

Mrs. St. Quentin received that evening, and did so with a 
grace which would have surprised her friends at Drington, and 
filled Miss Monitor with amazement. Deportment and man- 
ners of that style never came out of any London school, but were 
the result of Miriam's steady application of her keen intelligence 
with a fixed purpose. She was as elegant and refined a woman 
as she was handsome ; and her social success was perfect. It 
would be a great mistake to suppose that Miriam was positively 
unhappy because her management of Mr. St. Quentin had not 
proved so skilful and successful as she had intended it to be, 
or that she experienced any of the forlorn dreariness in the 
midst of all the good things of this world, which comes to 
those who have, " instead of fruit, chewed bitter ashes." She was 
uneasy now, and vaguely apprehensive, but she enjoyed her 
life for all that, and had not the remotest notion that there 
might, in one moment, arise for her a spectre in her path, 
which must turn all this gold-bedecked existence of hers into 
aching bitterness and regret, and that the spectre's name was 
Love. Long after, Miriam knew how merciful fate had been 
to her, and what tremendous temptation and danger had been 
spared her, in the days when she really believed in money, and 
never thought about love. 

The reception had neaiYy coxae to axv &., *xA ^toxvaxs^ 



Revolt. 317 

looking superbly handsome, was standing in the centre of the 
salon, surrounded by a group of talkers, about to disperse. 
The subject under discussion was handwriting, and an English 
lady had just remarked that the handwriting of all French 
people seemed alike to her ; she could not believe in the truth 
of a pretension to the discernment of character from it ; though 
it might be possible in the case of English caligraphy. 

" That is only because you are not accustomed to French 
writing, Mrs. Denison," said Miriam. " It is just in the same 
way that so many faces look the same to one, seen in a crowd, 
and yet, examined in detail, are all different. French people 
call our style ' English writing,' just as distinctively as we call 
theirs ' French.' " 

" It makes no difference to me," said the lady whose talent 
in the divination of character from handwriting had given rise 
to the conversation, " to what nation the writer belongs, nor 
whether I can read the words. The truth is, I can only read 
two languages. my own (French) and Spanish. I do not un- 
derstand a word of English or German, and yet I have fre- 
quently been singularly correct in my interpretation of character 
from handwritings in both these languages." 

Miriam was politely interested. A whimsical idea struck 
her, and an amused smile played upon her lips. She had in 
her possession a letter, written by the hand of one person at 
the dictation of another. If there really was anything in the 
pretensions of this quasi-science, here would be a good oppor- 
tunity of testing it. Could the mere formation of words on 
paper, with pen and ink, unguided, uninspired by the actual 
writer, emanating from the mind and intention of another 
person, convey to the diviner any impression of the character 
of an individual who had acted in a merely mechanical capacity ? 
Or would the absence of meaning, to the writer, render the 
handwriting all blank and meaningless to the diviner ? If the 
latter should prove to be the case, Miriam would feel there was 
more in this pretension than any amount of desct\^\i<^ , &>fc. 
might partake, more or less, of happy acc\tex&.> co\A. \xs& 



318 A Golden Sorrow. 

her to believe. She immediately expressed much interest and 
curiosity respecting the strange faculty of Madame de la Salle, 
and an eager desire to see it exercised. But Madame de la 
Salle did her divination seriously, and explained that she 
always required to be quite alone and undisturbed when she 
applied herself to the practice of her art. So the envelopes 
and half-sheets of letters which had begun to emerge from the 
pockets of some of the members of the group surrounding 
Miriam retired into obscurity again, and the subject dropped. 
But presently Miriam drew Madame de la Salle aside, just 
within the drapery of the arch which divided the salon from 
her boudoir, as the boudoir was divided from the conservatory, 
and asked her if she might send her a sample of handwriting 
on which to test her skill. Madame de la Salle would be 
delighted. 

" It is a letter, written in English," said Miriam. 

"So much the better; it is all the more convincing, if I 
succeed. If I shall send you a good description of your cor- 
respondent ; hold . do not tell me who it is, or whether you 
care at all for the writer, or not . taken from writing of which I 
cannot understand a word, you will not think any longer I am 
what you call . it is your grand English word, I do know that 
much, for everything you do not comprehend. a omebogP 

Miriam laughed, and assured Madame de la Salle she should 
put the most absolute faith in her report. " I wonder," she 
thought, " whether it will bear any affinity to the description of 
Daly, I had from Florence, and which Walter had supple- 
mented once or twice." It was arranged that she should send 
the letter to Madame de la Salle on the following day, and the 
lady retired. Shortly afterwards, Miriam being alone, and 
the impression made by this little incident remaining on her 
mind, she thought she would put the letter in an envelope at 
once, ready to be sent to Madame de la Salle in the morning. 
A slight incident, destined to have a considerable result. 

A cabinet of ebony and silver, with grotesque handles, formed 
W&e of the ornaments of Mxnaxsta XxHitarat, ra& to& ^r. ^jca^. 



Revolt. 319 

tacle of the few letters she considered worth preserving. She 
seated herself in front of this cabinet, and opened the lock . 
which was of a cunning device, and formed the orifice of the 
mouth of a grinning dragon .with a silver key attached to her 
watch-chain. The opened doors, lined with fine inlaid-work, 
of the same precious materials, but of more minute pattern than 
the exterior, disclosed a row of shallow drawers, whose locks, 
miniatures in their ornaments of the master-lock, were subject 
to the same key. Miriam had no distinct recollection of the 
drawer in which she had put away the letter she was searching 
for, so she began to pull them out, one after another, leisurely, 
commencing from the top, and lingering, as one is apt to do, over 
a search of the kind, opening letters for which one is not look- 
ing, turning over forgotten odds and ends, and letting one's 
mind yield to the old associations revived by such things. 

The letter which Miriam was looking for was not in the top 
drawer, nor in the second. She lingered a long time over the 
third. It contained a medley of papers and trifles . small 
trinkets which Miriam had worn in her girlhood, but which 
were far too valueless and insignificant for Mrs St. Quentin. 
A dreadful cornelian brooch, given her by Charley Boscombe, 
and for which she had been forced to invent an imaginary 
origin, was among them. She took it out, and looked at it 
smiling. " Just imagine my ever having thought that thing 
beautiful," she said to herself; " and actually telling the most 
abominable lies that I might be allowed to wear it ! And the 
lies were all for its own sake, too, not for Charley Boscombe's. 
I never cared a straw about him. I wonder what has become 
of him ? There, it may stay in its corner." And so she put 
the brooch back, and went on with her search among the 
papers. But the letter was not in the third drawer. It was 
the same thing with the others. And at last Miriam sat before 
the cabinet, the lower drawer of the row open before her, its 
late contents in her lap, and her hands hanging idly down. 
The letter was not there ! Miriam did not keep papers, excss^v. 
her bills, which were all in her wriUng-\.a\A^ m\fo. \kx Ocv&o^fc- 



320 A Golden Sorrow. 

book and her household documents, in any other place ; she 
had no papers but these. Either the letter she was searching 
for was in that cabinet, or it was lost She had received the 
letter in question in Mr. St Quentin's presence ; and, after 
reading a few lines, she had left the room, and finished the 
perusal in her bedroom, with locked doors. She had cried over 
the letter, she remembered, and Mr. St. Quentin had watched 
her all the remainder of the day with unbearable pertinacity ; 
and had . apropos of the remark that her eyes looked as if she 
had been crying, and that their beauty was not enhanced by 
the circumstance . asked her from whom this letter came, 

" From my brother. You have bidden me not to mention 
him. Why do you oblige me to do so ? " she had replied, 
angrily. 

Mr. St. Quentin had answered never a word. 

Miriam further remembered that she had carried this letter 
about with her for some days, in its envelope, which had been 
addressed to her by Florence, and posted at Drington. She 
remembered the date. The letter ought, if she had put it 
away with her accustomed regularity, to be in the packet con- 
tained in the last drawer but one. She had sorted the whole 
of that packet . some of its contents were in envelopes, some 
were not. Again she went over them, carefully ; and there 
was Florence's envelope, containing a blank sheet of paper. 
Then it flashed across her memory that, some days after the 
receipt of the letter, she had ordered Bianca to bring it to her, 
with the other things then in the pocket of a morning-gown 
she had just taken off, and had added it to the packet in the 
drawer of the cabinet, without opening the envelope. 

It took Miriam a good deal of time to recall these small 
incidents, and to make herself perfectly certain about them. 
But when she had the circumstances before her, the explana- 
tion of them came with a flash. Her face turned pale and rigid, 
and she drew one deep breath. Then she rose, slowly replaced 
all the contents of the cabinet, closed and locked its doors, and 
left the room. 



Revolt. 321 

Mr. St Quentin's rooms were on the opposite side of the 
vestibule. Miriam knocked at the door of the dressing-room, 
which was opened by her husband's valet, who looked con- 
siderably astonished at beholding her. Mr. St. Quentin, in a 
superb dressing-gown, was sitting by the fire, reading, and the 
wax-lights shone on a toilet apparatus to the full as luxurious 
as Miriam's. Mr. St. Quentin looked up from his book, as 
much surprised as the man, to whom Miriam said : . 

" You may go. I wish to speak to Mr. St. Quentin." 

The valet obeyed. Miriam walked up to the fireplace, laid 
her arm upon the mantelpiece, and, looking down at her 
husband with a frown on her face, said : . 

" You employed Bianca to steal a letter from me several 
months ago. I did not find it out until to-night. Where is 
that letter?" 

Mr. St. Quentin shut his book, and flung it on the floor. 

" What do you mean ? " he began. 

Miriam's fingers tapped the velvet-covered slab, as she said, . 

" You had better give me back that letter, and explain your 
conduct. You don't like scandals, you know, and you prize 
the good opinion of the world. So do I, in a measure, but not 
beyond measure ; not enough, for instance, to be induced to 
live in this house an hour beyond to-morrow, unless you give 
me back that letter." 

"Are you mad?. are you mad?" 

" Not in the least ; but I think you must have been when 
you ventured on treating me after such a fashion. Come, Mr. 
St. Quentin ".her fingers tapped the velvet slab anew . u give 
me the letter which Bianca stole from me by your orders." 

Mr. St. Quentin looked very old and very ugly as he 
answered her, glancing obliquely at her handsome figure and 
scornful, pale face. 

" You deceived me; you lied to me about that, as you have de- 
ceived and lied to me a hundred times before. It was my rigjht 
to find out your disgraceful deceit by every meaxys> m tcc$ ^<^n^x" 

"Even by bribing an ignorant servant, to asX. as ^<svnx ^T 



> 



322 A Golden Sorrow. 

I am edified by your morality, but I am not going to discuss 
it. Nor am I about to endeavour to disabuse your mind of the 
monstrous delusion under which you labour. It is not worth my 
while. I merely require the restoration of my brother's letter." 

" Your brother's letter ! . you impudent, lying jade ! How 
dare you venture to try such a barefaced imposture upon me ! 
I know enough about your brother's letters . when your lover 
wrote to you under the convenient cover of your brother's 
wife's masquerade in my house ! How dare you tell me this 
lie now ! " 

He was almost inarticulate with rage. Miriam had started, 
as if he had struck her, at his words of coarse abuse . the first 
he had ever used to her . but she let him go on. 

" Your brother's letter ! You must have forgotten it, or you 
would not venture on so clumsy a cheat as this. But you have 
gone too far, madam, much too far. The rdle of the com- 
plaisant husband does not suit me any longer, as you will find. 
I will yet discover who the man is for whom you have deceived 
me from the first, and defeat all your calculations." 

Miriam looked at him with quite unaffected wonder. Her 
anger had almost passed away in amazement and contempt. 
So had her vague fear of him. This was beyond bearing, and 
she did not mean to bear it. 

" I have not deceived you," she said calmly. " You have 
deceived yourself. You are the victim of senseless jealousy 
and contemptible suspicion. There is not, there never was, 
any man in the case. I confess I have sometimes amused my- 
self by making you think there was, and thus befooling you and 
your spy. I am sorry for it ; I did it, quite unconscious of the 
depth and seriousness of the canker in your unhappy mind. 
You have no right to insult me, though I did marry you with- 
out love for you. It was a fair bargain. I did not deceive you 
then . I have not deceived you since. Your mad and foolish 
jealousy first displayed itself about my brother. It was proved 
to you, beyond even youi po^wet to ^s^vA^that the confidence 
and the correspondence 70U Vtaeiv xfcssswsA ^t*, .&***&. &&. 



Revolt. 323 

with him only. That might have satisfied you, I think, and 
cured you of your folly. Do you think, because I am your 
wife, and ought never to have become so, I have no self-respect 
on any subject ? Do you think I have no conscience to hear 
and to obey ? " 

" I think you are a liar," he answered "her brutally. " I 
think you are lying now, as you lied then, you and your con- 
federate. I have the worst opinion of you, as I have of your 
brother, and I would not believe either of you on your oath. You 
think you can deceive me now, but you are mistaken. You think 
I have no means of convicting you. But I have a specimen of 
your brother's handwriting in my possession, and if the shameful 
contents of the letter which you claim, and which you shall not 
have, were not sufficient to convict you of so gross and impudent 
a fable, the writing would do so. It is not your brother's." 

" I know that. Give me back the letter." 

She had removed her arm from the mantelpiece, and was 
now standing before him, her hands by her sides, twisted in 
the folds of her gown, as though she were trying to keep down 
a gust of passionate anger. 

" I will not." He rose, pushed back liis chair, and con- 
fronted her. A horrid sight, with his grey hair and anger- 
flushed old face. 

" Is this a final reply, Mr. St. Quentin ?" 

" It is. I will never give you that letter." 

" Then I will never give you an explanation of it. Think 
what you will about it, inflict as much torture upon yourself by 
means of it as the ingenuity of jealousy and suspicion can 
suggest I hope these resources may prove fertile. Never, 
from this hour until that of your death or mine, will I tell you 
the truth, or any part of it, concerning that letter ; and I will 
never pardon your conduct to me to-night. You have spoken 
words to me which I know you have often wished to speak, 
but you did not dare. You have overcome that scruple, and 
so much the worse for you ! " 

She turned her back upon him, as \v xeoirafo&ik. > tt^ 1 

Y 2 



324 A Gojden Sorrow. 

done on the occasion of their first quarrel, when she had torn 
up the letter, and flung it out of the window, and had her 
hand on the lock of the door before he said : " Stay ; what 
do you mean ? " 

" You shall know to-morrow. " 

She found Mr. St. Quentin's valet in the ante-room, and sent 
him to his master, then went to her own room, where Bianca 
sat yawning and sulky. Miriam gave the woman one look, 
which had a surprising effect. She started, and asked her 
mistress, timidly, what had happened. 

" Nothing that you need know," was the answer. " I have 
found you out to be a thief; I have always known you to be 
a spy. You . you will leave my house to-morrow, and my 
room this moment." She held the door open with one hand, 
and pointed to it with the other. Cowed by the disdainful 
anger in her eyes Bianca left the room without a word. 

Miriam locked the door, and sitting down at her toilet-table 
began to take the pins out of her hair. 

" So it has come to this " . thus ran her thoughts . " that 
I must give it all up. There is a price which even I, who 
have not learned to think less about it, but more, cannot con- 
sent to pay for wealth. I shall return to The Firs ; Walter 
and Florence will receive me gladly, I know, and they will 
never reproach me. After what he has said to-night, the sight 
of this hateful old man will be for ever intolerable to me. I 
could not endure it, for all he has to give. I have indeed 
realized all Florence's misgivings ; but even she, when she 
hears this, will say I have done well. What was it he called 
me, this accomplished gentleman, whose manner to his wife 
is so perfect in society. ' an impudent, lying jade/ was it not ? 
I don't think my father ever called me that, or thought it of 
me, in his worst temper. Mr. St. Quentin shall not say those 
words to me twice, nor any words like them, ever again. It 
is hard to have to own myself beaten ; but there are harder 
things than that, and I can but choose the least hard. I will 
write to Walter to-morrow, at\&te>\ \C\mA<a cw^^^c^\a^xs. 
away, and I know he m\\ do Sfc. ^ore. ft*a^ ^aa^ \ \snrs* 



Revolt. 325 

he will never reproach me with the unlucky ending of my 
great speculation. 

" What were the words of the letter Mr. Daly wrote for 
him ? I hope they were sufficiently ambiguous to confirm Mr. 
St. Quentin in his belief in their origin, if he has set to work 
to read them, in order to nourish his wrath, the moment I 
left him. There was a grateful reference to my fidelity to the 
promise I had given him, during the time which had seemed 
so unendurably long ; an assurance of the unchanging love 
which he cherished for me; a reference to the time when 
neither of us had any consolation but the other ; and then he 
said that, though all the circumstances were so entirely changed, 
he and I should always be the same, and that I should be re- 
warded for my truth to him. Yes, I think that was all ; and there 
was no signature, and the letter began with * My own dear 
Miriam.' No doubt it has made Mr. St Quentin uncomfort- 
able ; and if this occurrence did not make me quite certain 
that the old man's ruling passion is hopeless of cure, and 
must continue to beset my life in a way which, for the insult 
and the living lie of it, would be quite intolerable. I should 
be a fool to throw up my cards at this stage of the game. 
But I know myself, and I can't stand any more." 

Miriam slept soundly, notwithstanding her discomfiture, 
and awoke at the usual hour next morning with her mind 
unaltered. 

She dressed herself without assistance, and then rang for 
Bianca, who came to her pale and silent. She paid the 
woman her wages, added a gift for travelling expenses, if she 
chose to return to her country, and dismissed her. The 
thing was done in five minutes, and Bianca never ventured a 
remonstrance, or named Mr. St. Quentin. 

In a few minutes after Bianca had left her the valet came 
to tell her that Mr. St Quentin had been very ill all night, 
and was then in the agonies of a severe fit of gout. At that 
moment a doctor was with him. 

The attack proved to be a serious oxve, axA. \J&c\axsiL* ^o^sx 
was indefinitely postponed. 



326 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

A CRISIS. 

The crowd of people who find some unaccountable sort of 
pleasure, arising probably from a subtle amalgamation of 
idleness and spite, in watching the landing of suffering fellow- 
creatures from the floating dens of misery in which mankind 
submits to be conveyed from Calais to Dover, was not so 
numerous as usual. A merely stormy day has a tendency to 
attract these ill-conditioned loiterers, as promising more 
specimens of ludicrous distress and dishevelment, richer op- 
portunities of taking human beings at their utmost disadvan- 
tage, and enjoying with impunity the pleasure of ridicule. 
But a day which is both wet and stormy . a day on which. the 
puddles are blown about, and hats and bonnets are first 
drenched and then blown off, on which umbrellas are un- 
manageable mockeries, and the wind cuts the skin off your 
face, while the rain slaps it . a day which combines these 
qualities subdues the popular ardour, and quenches in some 
degree the unspeakable vulgarity of our English sea-side 
populace. 

It was on such a day, when the wind and the rain were 
doing their utmost to add to the miseries of a crowd of pas- 
sengers packed like cattle on the deck of a Calais steamer . 
when the darkness of a wretched winter's evening was rapidly 
coming down upon the scene, which had only a few stragglers to 
witness its details of extreme discomfort . that Mr. and Mrs. St. 
Quentin arrived at Dover. The gas, just lighted, was flicker- 
ing behind the lamp-glasses in the gusts of wind ; the portefs 
and hotel servants, waiting fox Xtafc caTKK\% c& ^kOQrax^^rece 



A Crisis. 327 

staggering about, beaten and half-blinded by the wind and 
rain . no more inhospitable welcome to one's native land 
could be imagined. Miriam and her husband were not among 
the tired, draggled, miserable crowd on the deck ; they had no 
intention of proceeding to London by the tidal train, but were 
in the stifling saloon below, meaning to land when the con- 
fusion should have somewhat subsided. 

On one of the hard, narrow sofas, covered with furs and 
soft warm rugs, lay Mr. St Quentin ; and by his side, on 
the rocking floor, regardless of the foul atmosphere and horrid 
surroundings, knelt Miriam, with a stern, set anxiety in her 
face, holding a tuft of cotton saturated with some strong re- 
storative essence to his nostrils. They were alone in the 
cabin, their servants were on the deck, and it was evident 
that Mr. St. Quentin was very ill. But little of his face was 
visible as he lay shivering underneath his wraps, but that little 
was ghastly and distorted with pain. Several of the passengers, 
as they escaped from the foul air of the cabin to the compara- 
tive relief of the wet deck and the driving rain and wind, had 
glanced with pitying wonder at the prostrate man and the 
kneeling woman. What reason of sufficient urgency could have 
induced them to cross the Channel in such weather ? It had 
been very little better when they left Calais than it was now, 
when they were within three minutes of Dover. What reason, 
indeed ? Only the inconceivable, hopeless, irresistible obsti- 
nacy of a sick man with a fixed idea; than which there 
never was a worse or more unanswerable reason. 

Nearly a month had elapsed since Mr. St Quentin had 
been taken ill at Paris ; and during the whole of that time 
he had fixed his mind, from some motive to which Miriam 
had no clue, on getting to England. He suffered very much, 
and by no means patiently. As soon as he succeeded in ex- 
tracting from his medical attendants an admission that he 
might travel without actual danger, he insisted on leaving 
Paris ; and he was very near disproving the accuracy of their 
opinions, for he was so ill and so much ^&ia&\ft^\s^ ^afc 



328 A Golden Sorrow. 

time they arrived at Calais, that he was obliged to remain for 
several days. 

Those were dreary days for Miriam, full of heartburning, 
of suspicion, of fear, and of regret On one of them she 
made a discovery. Mr. St. Quentin wanted to write a letter, 
but had found himself unable to do so, and was obliged to 
have recourse to the services of his valet, who shortly afterwards 
came to Miriam and asked her anxiously whether she thought 
it would be safe for his master to " cross " on the following 
day. 

" To-morrow ? " exclaimed Miriam. " Of course not I 
should say it would be impossible. But why do you ask ? " 

" Because, madam," replied the man reluctantly, " Mr. St 
Quentin has written to a gentleman, a lawyer, from Lincoln's 
Inn . Mr. Ross, of Messrs. Ross and Raby . making an ap- 
pointment with him at his chambers for eleven o'clock on 
Thursday. This is Tuesday, ma'am, and there is only to- 
morrow." 

" Has Mr. St. Quentin said anything to you about his inten- 
tion ? " . 

" Not yet, ma'am ; but he directed me to return, as he had 
some orders to give me." 

" Messrs. Ross and Raby," said Miriam, absently, not heed- 
ing what the man had last said ; " I don't know the names. 
Are they a firm of solicitors ? " 

" I suppose so, ma'am. Mr. St. Quentin looked them out 
in the Times' sale of lands and houses advertisements, and 
desired me to write to that address." 

" Then you think he does not know these gentlemen per- 
sonally ? " 

" I think not, ma'am. When Mr. St. Quentin told me I 
was to write a letter for him he was looking down the adver- 
tisement columns of the Times, and he said to himself : ' Ross 
and Raby ; I think I have heard of them : yes, they will do ; ' 
and then he dictated the letter, and I put their address on 
it" 



A Crisis. 329 

" Ah, yes," said Miriam ; and recovering herself with an 
effort she told the man she would see Mr. St Quentin pre- 
sently and dissuade him from attempting to cross, in his 
state of illness. Already the weather was unfavourable, and 
threatened to be worse. 

She did see Mr. St. Quentin, and she attempted to dissuade 
him from his purpose, but in vain. He was coldly, sulkily, 
immovably determined. She left him, feeling uneasy, but yet 
persuaded that he could not be, in reality, so ill as he appeared, 
or he would not subject himself to the risk and suffering of so 
great an exertion. On the following day, though the weather 
was worse, and he did not appear to be any better, he per- 
sisted in his purpose, and was taken on board the steamer 
with an amount of difficulty which Miriam expected to find 
considerably increased when it should come to getting him on 
shore. 

The steamer was alongside the pier ; the wretched, draggled, 
dizzy, tired passengers had landed, and were dispersing, and 
Miriam's servants had ordered rooms at an hotel, and had the 
luggage carried thither. Mr. and Mrs. St Quentin were the 
last persons remaining on board. He still lay moaning on the 
narrow sofa, and she still knelt, holding a restorative to his 
nostrils. But he must be moved now, and with much difficulty 
he was carried on shore to the hotel ; his face being completely 
covered, and his form merely a mass of wraps. There was a 
good deal of bustle on their arrival, and Miriam ordered the 
men to take him at once to his room. This was done, and 
the assistants were dismissed, without any one present having 
seen the face of the sick man. 

Presently he recovered a little strength, and the first use 
he made of it was to order his valet to despatch a telegram 
to Messrs. Ross and Raby, directing them to send a confi- 
dential clerk to Dover on the following day . "a person 
competent to take instructions for the preparation of a will, ,, 
were the words of the message . as he was detained there h<$ 
illness. 



330 A Golden Sorrow. 

" I feel I shall not be able to travel for some days," said 
Mr. St. Quentin ; in which the doctor, who was presently sent 
for to see him, so entirely coincided that he told Miriam he 
was astonished Mr. St. Quentin had outlived the journey from 
Paris. 

Miriam was inexperienced, and had never yet associated 
any serious idea with Mr. St. Quentin's illness. All old men 
had gout, she believed ; and of course, if he would persist in 
taking doses of powerful and dangerous medicines to check it, 
instead of staying quietly in his bed, and suffering decently 
like other people, she supposed he must expect to be much 
worse than other people ; and that was all she had thought 
about it. But he had suffered such agonizing pain in Calais, 
and had been ill after so different a fashion from anything 
she had seen before, that she was very much alarmed, and 
began to feel quite bewildered by her solitude. The doctor 
was decisive about the impossibility of moving his patient 
for several days, under the most favourable circumstances, 
and Miriam entreated him to tell Mr. St. Quentin this. The 
invalid was much disconcerted, and declared his abhorrence 
of being at an hotel. He detested such places ; he was sure 
he should never get better in one of them. He was told 
plainly that even a short journey by rail might and probably 
would kill him. Could it harm him to be removed from the 
hotel to lodgings, or a house, as short a distance off as such 
accommodation could be procured ? That, the doctor said, 
might be possible, if he had a tolerably good night. It was 
then agreed between Miriam and the doctor that the best 
arrangement possible of this kind should be made on the fol- 
lowing day, to pacify the patient, though, the doctor thought 
it right to warn her, he did not anticipate that it would be 
advisable to allow Mr. St. Quentin to make even so much 
exertion. 

Then, in her turn, Miriam employed the telegraph. She 
^ent the following message to Walter : . 

" We are at the Grand Hotel ax \>qnsx. ^fa. St. Quentin 



A Crisis. 331 

is dangerously ill. Can you come to me ? I beg of you to 
come, if possible, by the first train to-morrow." 

The closing in of the night around illness, suspense, and 
watching is always terrible, even in one's own home, with all 
the quiet, sympathy, and consideration which home implies. 
Miriam never forgot the closing in of the night in that strange 
place, with all the discomfort of an hotel, of strange faces, 
unsympathizing servants, and her own overwhelming fatigue. 
She was not old enough to do without sleep, or to endure 
broken rest, and she had never felt so tired in her life. The 
rolling of the steamer was in her head, she was sick and giddy, 
but her mind was clear enough, and busy with her position 
and its future probabilities. The disposition of their rooms, a 
sitting-room and two bed-rooms, all three communicating with 
each other, was fortunate. Mr. St. Quentin had been placed 
in the inner room, and the next was for Miriam. It was not 
until every preparation had been made for carrying out the 
doctor's instructions during the night that Miriam had even 
the relief of changing her dress. She was looking ill and wan, 
and her face bore an expression of concentrated care and 
anxiety. Mr. St. Quentin was in an alarming state of pain 
and exhaustion for several hours, but then became much 
easier, and Miriam yielded to the persuasion of her maid, an 
Englishwoman, who had replaced Bianca, and permitted her 
to take the post of watcher beside the sick man until the 
morning. Miriam was staggering with fatigue, and her fear of 
falling asleep and neglecting the patient decided her. She 
saw the valet before she left her husband's room, and instructed 
him to go out into the town on the following morning, and 
endeavour to procure apartments, or a furnished house, ready 
for immediate occupation. At length her aching head was 
laid upon her pillow, but it was long before she slept ; her 
limbs twitched from fatigue ; her restlessness was distressing, 
for she wanted to think, if she might not sleep. 

This was, she felt sure, a crisis in her life. Not so muck 
because she might be about to \ose \vex \i^c^T^\s>ax.\Kaaaafc. 



332 A Golden Sorrow. 

whether he lived or died, it was plain to her he was going to 
decide her fate. He was about to make a will, and on 
that will must depend the solution of the question whether 
her " great speculation," as in her thoughts she had bitterly 
called her marriage, was a failure or a success. If he did not 
secure to her by this will the continuance of the wealth she 
had enjoyed since her marriage, then she should have sacrificed 
her youth, her beauty, her conscience, incurred the degrada- 
tion of a loveless marriage, and exposed herself to the male- 
volknt ridicule of the world, for a few years of luxury and 
pleasure, just enough to unfit her for humbler things and 
simpler enjoyments. She was sorry for Mr. St. Quentin. She 
did not like to see him suffer ; but there was no stronger feel- 
ing than natural compassion in this . no softening of the mis- 
trustful anger with which she recalled his late conduct, and 
speculated on his present intentions. She had no reason to 
think that the sufferings he had undergone, or her assiduous 
attendance on him during these latter days, had had any in- 
fluence on his feelings towards her. He was tranquil and 
easy, but not sleeping, when she left his room, and she had 
said a few kind words, and taken his hand. But he had only 
muttered something inarticulate in reply, and drawn his hand 
coldly away. This had not hurt her ; she cared nothing for 
him ; but it had kept up the alarm she had never ceased to feel. 

For a long time Miriam lay awake, hearing, through the open 
door, the occasional murmurs, moans, or impatient questions 
of the sick man, and the soothing answers of the watcher, or 
her quiet movements in the adjoining room ; but at length, 
when the wintry dawn was not far off, she fell asleep, and 
awoke, reluctantly, only at the appointed hour, when her maid, 
looking pale and weary, came to rouse her. 

Mr. St. Quentin had been very ill towards morning, but the 

pain had again yielded to remedies, and he was quiet now. 

Miriam arose, put on a warm dressing-gown, and took her 

place beside him, dismissing her maid to rest 

"Do not come down untt\ I ssxv& fox ^^" $&&*&.. " IC 



A Crisis. 333 

he refuses to have a nurse, I must get the doctor to speak to 
him and persuade him." 

The doctor came early, and was not encouraging. Mr. St. 
Quentin was greatly reduced in strength, and there was such 
debility about the action of the heart that the utmost care and 
quiet would be necessary. Miriam explained that Mr. St. 
Quentin was expecting a gentleman from London on business. 
Must he be refused admittance ? The doctor looked embar- 
rassed. It would certainly be better that he should have 

nothing to excite or agitate him ; but still . Did Mrs. St 

Quentin know whether the business in question was important ? 
Very important. It was to give instructions for his will The 
doctor looked exceedingly grave. He was very sorry to find 
that his patient had so anxious and imperative a duty on his 
mind, but he could not, considering the immense importance 
of such business, and the extreme uncertainty which, he felt 
himself bound to acknowledge, attended Mr. St Quentin's 
present state, absolutely prohibit the lawyer's visit. He would 
see Mr. St Quentin again, when this trying ordeal had been 
gone through. He then left Miriam, deeply impressed by his 
gravity of look and manner, and in great perplexity. 

She knew nothing about what her position would be, what 
her legal rights, if Mr. St. Quentin should die without having 
made a will, and she had every reason to believe, if he did make 
a will, it would be most unfavourable to her. What should she 
do ? Was it in her power to do anything ? 

Mr. St. Quentin's valet had come to attend on his master, 
and was in the room when she returned to it He was going 
out soon on the business with which she had charged him, A 
servant came to the door with a telegram. 

" Bring that to me, Bolton," said Mr. St. Quentin. 

It was from the firm of Ross and Raby, and informed Mr. 
St. Quentin that a confidential clerk would wait on him at noon 
on that day. Mr. St. Quentin then said he thought he could 
sleep for awhile, but gave orders, as emphatic as in his <N<>k. 
state he could make them, that the g<exti\&\&axL Sxom ^kssssc^ i 



334 A Golden Sorrow. 

Ross and Raby was to be brought to him immediately on his 
arrival. He fell asleep very soon, and Miriam sat, hidden 
from him by the bed-curtains, listening now to his breathing, 
anon to the ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece, sometimes 
to the wind and rain. She wondered there had been no mes- 
sage from Walter. Perhaps he would arrive at the same time 
with this lawyer from London ; but it did not matter. Then 
she read the telegram again. The confidential clerk of Messrs. 
Ross and Raby was not coming direct from town . the message 
said " from Deal." No doubt he was already in the neighbour- 
hood on business. She would look at the Railway Guide, to 
find out by what train Walter might arrive. The book was in 
the sitting-room, and she rose and passed through her own 
bedroom with a noiseless step, leaving the doors unclosed. 
She found the Railway Guide, and was looking over it, leaning 
on the table, when she heard steps in the corridor close to the 
door, and one of the hotel servants turned the handle gently, 
and looked in. Then he threw the door open and said : " Mrs. 
St Quentin is here, sir." 

Miriam turned her head and saw Walter. 

It was a strange meeting. They spoke hurriedly, cautiously, 
lest they should disturb the sleeper. Miriam could not close 
the doors, lest he should call for anything, for he was alone. 
They looked long in each other's face, and they both sighed. 
Miriam led her brother to the farthest extremity of the room, 
and seated herself beside him, encircled by his arms. How 
handsome he was looking, she thought, but so much older ; 
and how strangely grey his hair was, almost as grey as Mr. St. 
Quentin's. Eager question, and answer as eager, soon placed 
Walter Clint in possession of the circumstances under which 
his sister had summoned him, and confirmed him in his general 
impression of Miriam's married life. Then she acknowledged 
what her purpose had been, until Mr. St. Quentin's illness had 
prevented its accomplishment, and received from Walter a 
hasty assurance that she should come to him and Florence 
when she pleased. Miriam \ia& so mwta. \o *ttj \*> \msv^ ^ 



A Crisis. 335 

immediate circumstances were so pressing, that she lost all sense 
of his long absence, and made no allusion to his adventures. 
Beyond the surprise of the first moment, and the sense of the 
alteration in the faces, present to the minds of both, there was 
no strangeness after a little while. Miriam told him that Mr. 
St. Quentin had as yet made no will, and that a lawyer was to 
arrive in little more than an hour's time to make one, and that 
she had reason to believe she should be left with only a bare 
pittance. 

" How do you know ? " asked Walter. " What horrible 
treachery and injustice ! " 

" I will tell you. I have seen some memoranda of his. they 
are there, in that desk . on the floor . at this moment, by which 

it is evident he means Hush ! what's that ? Did he call ? " 

She arose, went to the open folding-door, and stood listening. 
Mr. St. Quentin did not call, did not speak. After a minute 
of deep silence, she was moving back towards Walter again, 
when they both heard a distinct and peculiar sound. It was 
not articulate. it was like the noise, half clicking, half grating, 
which a clock makes an instant before it strikes. She stopped, 
and again stood perfectly still, then said : " It certainly comes 
from his room. I shall just look at him, and be back in a 
moment." 

She went quickly, but quite noiselessly, Walter's eyes follow- 
ing her through the intervening bedroom ; but, as she passed 
into her husband's room, she partially closed the folding- 
doors, and Walter lost sight of her. 

There was no repetition of the sound. Miriam looked about. 
All was precisely as she had left it. The sick man was lying 
huddled up, and with his head bent downwards, turned towards 
the wall. The rain splashed upon the windows, and the wind 
rumbled in the chimney. Miriam passed round the head of 
the bed with a light step, kneeled down on its other side, 
between the bed and the wall, to look closely at her husband, 
arid found herself gazing into the fixed, setv^^s^ ^j*^ ^c&a. 
open, and upon the fallen, ashy feaXuits ol a. teaASasfc- 



336 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

ONCE MORE A WAY OF ESCAPE. 

Not a scream, not a sound betrayed Miriam's awful discovery 
to the listener in the sitting-room. One heavy thump of her 
heart, one rush of blood into her head, and she remained 
kneeling, perfectly motionless on the floor between the bed 
and the wall, holding her temples tightly between her hands, 
and looking, with fixedness little less than their own, into 
those wide open eyes. In such moments there is no time ; 
then, at least, the spirit escapes from its bonds. It might 
have been five minutes, it might have been as many hours, for 
all that Miriam knew, that she knelt there, spellbound, her 
limbs heavy and cold, her head whirling, but not lost, not 
confused. It had come, then. Was this the worst that could 
have happened? This awful occurrence did not violently 
break the chain of her immediately previous thought ; on the 
contrary, it continued and strengthened it. Was all lost, in 
this case, that had been in danger? Not a sentiment of 
grief, hardly a passing touch of pity, came to Miriam, as she 
knelt, during those few fearful minutes, by the side of the 
dead man. It was indeed " the hour and the power of dark- 
ness." 

She arose with a slight shiver, and went to the mantelpiece. 
At that moment the timepiece chimed . eleven silvery strokes. 
And the lawyer was to arrive at noon. One hour only, if 
every other chance should cohere, for what she had to do. 
She locked the door which opened from Mr. St Quentin's 
bedroom upon the conidoi, and Ywnxt^ coig^sx.^ ^kx>&&k. 



A Way of Escape. 337 

folding-doors which communicated with her own room, she 
went back to her brother; but before she approached him, 
she looked out of the sitting-room door. No one was near ; 
the corridor was quite empty, and she observed that there 
were no rooms precisely opposite theirs, only a staircase, and 
some large presses in the wall. As she came up to Walter, 
who was reading a newspaper, he said, " Is all right ? " laid the 
paper aside, looked up at her, and sprang up. 

" Good heavens, Miriam ! what is the matter ? " 

A mirror on the wall showed her her ghastly face. 

" Hush ! " she said, and laid a strong hand upon him, forcing 
him back into his seat. " Don't speak above your breath. 
Be calm and collected, for my sake. He is dead/" 

Walter shrank from her, and was silent in horror. 

" Yes, he is dead ! He has died without a struggle." 

" Impossible ! And we two here, so near him ! Let rrie 
see ! " 

" No, Walter. I tell you it is true. Do you think I can 
be mistaken ? I have been beside him, looking into his face 
ever since ! You must not see him : you must not go near 
him ; it is no question of that now ; and you must be perfectly 
calm, and able to help me quickly. We have not an instant 
to spare." 

The colour had utterly deserted her face, but her eyes 
were sparkling with intense eagerness and entreaty, and the 
ringers of her right hand held his shoulder like a vice. 

" Help you ! What do you mean ? Had not we better call 
some one, and send for the doctor at once ? " 

" No, I tell you ; no, no, no ! What good can the doctor 
do to a dead man? Besides, he's coming presently. Oh, 
Walter, my brother, listen to me ! I am young still, and all 
my future hangs upon this hour, and is in your hands ! Oh, 
Walter, you don't know, you cannot know what my life has 
been, and how tremendous this blow is to me ! You know 
what I married him for, Walter . to get away from, korc^a..* .asA. 
to be rich. He bribed me with sucYv piom\sss> 3xA\\& \xv^s^ 



338 A Golden Sorrow 

me basely ! He persuaded me . for I was vain, and proud of 
my power over him . that he would dower me all the more 
splendidly that he did not bind himself to anything \ and I 
believed him, though papa told me I was wrong. Wrong ! I 
was a fool ! And he has suspected and insulted me all these 
horrid years . yes, for though I have had plenty of money and 
plenty of pleasure, they have been horrid years ! And I am 
to lose it all ! " 

" But how do you know, Miriam ? " asked her brother, who 
had been unable to interrupt her vehement appeal, all the 
more impressive and terrible that she never raised her voice, 
or loosened her grasp on him. " And what can be done ? " 

" I know, I know ! " she resumed. " I have watched him, 
in one sense, while he watched me in another. He has been 
in correspondence with a man in America. I don't know his 
name, and I don't know what about, but I can guess ; and he 
meant to leave all his property away from me." 

" What relatives are there ? How is his property circum- 
stanced ? " 

"I don't know; I only know that it is very large, and 
mostly in Indian securities. He has no relatives ; lam sure 
of that He often told me he had no claims on him, abso- 
lutely none ; and it was only out of spite to me he would have 
left his money to a man he never saw." 

" How do you know that ? " 

" I don't know it, perhaps. at least, he never actually told 
me so in as many words . but I am morally certain of it 
He has repeated to me, over and over again, that no one in 
the world had any claim on him ; and this correspondence 
shows it is no one in England he has been looking after. In 
a moment, Walter,! will prove to you that I am right" She 
glided away from him, crossed the adjoining room, and, with 
just an instant's hesitation, passed through the folding doors 
which hid the bed and its awful tenant from his sight. In 
another minute she returned, carrying a key. The travel- 
ling-desk she had pointed ouX Xo ^NaNtet^ q^^^k*^ She 



A Way of Escape. 339 

opened it. took out a few papers. mere slips of memoranda . 
and knelt by Walter's side, showing them to him. " Here are 
the proofs of his treachery to me. Read this : . 

" C advises English lawyer. Mem. , to look out for a good 

firm. In last letter from D , return of L D was 

promised, on receipt of fee and specific statement of intentions" 

u And read this, written at Calais. written only three days 
ago, when he was so ill, and yet determined to cross, because 
he was in such haste to be cruel and treacherous to me. I do 
believe he felt that he was dying, and that his great fear was 
lest the villainy should not be accomplished. 

" Mem., shortest form of will for present use. The whole of 
my property, of whatsoever kind, all invested moneys, furniture, 

plate, horses, carriages, to L D , with the exception of an 

annuity to Mrs. St. Q of two hundred pounds, to be paid by 

L D , and secured by him to her, on his taking possession 

of my property, in any way he thinks proper. Sole executor 
L D ." 

On a third slip of paper was the name and address of the 
firm of Messrs. Ross and Raby, solicitors, of Lincoln's Inn. 

" This is horrible indeed, my poor darling ! " said Walter, 
looking forlornly at the memoranda; "but it is a comfort to 
think he has not carried out this intention; and though you 
may have some trouble, you must be well off. The law makes 
a secure provision for a widow under such circumstances, and 
in this case there seems to be no heir." 

" No heir, Walter ! Who is L D , do you suppose? 

Of course he is the heir, the heir-at-law, the man who would 
have come in for Mr. St. Quentin's money if he had made no 
will at all . the man in America. I am sure of it . he never 
had a friend he would have neglected all those years, and then 
suddenly taken to looking after. And I am to lose all, or 
nearly all, and to bear the disgrace, the humiliation of this, for 
him, for a stranger ! What right has he to come in, and rob 
me of the wealth for which I have paid so \veacr} m^V^m^ **. 

price ? No one knows of these memoi&ii&au TVas> C - >Bfc 

z 2 



340 A Golden Sorroiv. 

mentions must be the man who came to see him in Paris so 

often lately ; a sly, sleek, horrid man he was : C stands for 

Caux, of course. He had done no business for him, it is plain. 
He tells him to employ an English lawyer to rob me . and in 
his hurry to act on this advice, he has died before he could 
accomplish such wickedness. Caux has drawn no will for 
him, there is no will ! Walter ! " . she rose from her knees, and 
clasped him round the neck, hiding her face from him, as she 
spoke with passionate rapidity, close to his ear . " you will not 
let any of this villainy be done to me ; you will save me from 
the bitterness of all this misery without any reward ; you will 
remember how you trusted me with Florence, and how I 
deserved the trust ! Won't you, Walter ? " 

" I will . I do," he said, trying to see her face ; but she held 
him closer, and spoke lower and more rapidly. " But what 
can I do, Miriam? I don't know what you have in your 
mind." 

" And time is flying," she murmured. " I will tell you." 
She lifted her head, and looked at him straight and unabashed. 
" At twelve o'clock a clerk of Messrs. Ross and Raby's will 
be here, in obedience to a message from . him . to take 
instructions for a will. This man has never seen him ; no ser- 
vant in the house has seen him. He was carried here from the 
boat yesterday, with his face covered ; and except our servants 
. one is out, the other is asleep . no one has seen it Walter ! 
in the old days, in which I always helped you and loved you, 
and was staunch to you, no matter how much I was reviled or 
punished on your account . in those old days, I say, you were a 
good actor ; you could dress, and speak, and look a part well, 
and there was no handwriting you could not imitate, besides 
writing several hands of your own. Remember the letters 
Rose Dixon brought to Crescent House. Have you lost your 
old skill, and your hand its former cunning ? " 

" Good God ! Miriam . do you propose " 

11 That is what I propose, btotVver \ it is quite safe, and it 
injures no one . remembet Yvoro "W ^o>^V^^ YK^a^^^ 



A Way of Escape. 341 

She held him now, with a hand griping each shoulder, and looked 
at him full, with her commanding, gloomy eyes. " When this 
lawyer comes, he shall be introduced to you, instead of his 
real client. the firm know nothing of him, not even his hand- 
writing ; it was his valet who wrote the letter to them. not 
even whether he is young or old ; but yon can easily look 
much older than you do now, and the light need not be 
strong ; and you shall give him instructions to draw a will . 
you have the model ; it is easy and simple > it is only a few 
lines; it will all be done in a few minutes . and two of the 
hotel-servants, who have not seen . him. can witness it The 
lawyer will go away, and then you, and then the truth shall be 
told. No one will be wronged, Walter. This unknown man 
knows nothing of his chance, and never can have expected 
such a chance to arise; and I. I shall have the reward, the 
bare pay, I may call it, for all this horrid life, which is done 
with, and I shall owe it all to you. to you, Walter, who owe so 
much to me ! " 

" Miriam, this is madness. Do you know what you want me 
to do ? This is a felony." 

" And felony is a word! What has he done to me I What 
would he have done if he had lived two more hours ? Think 
of that. Walter, and of the base treachery it means ; and think 
of your own happy home, of Florence, of the child that is 
coming, and of all you have, while I have nothing ; if the law 
gives me anything, I must have it with the sting of suspicion, 
of calumny . and do this thing for me, dearest Walter, for your 
sister, who has done and borne much for you ! /did not need 
praying, Walter, when you came to me in disgrace, and asked 
me to do that for you, for which my father would have turned 
me out into the streets, if he had discovered it ! I needed no 
prayers, and I never faltered, not then, not after, when this 
old man heaped insult and suspicion on me, for Florence's 
sake ! " 

" But, Miriam " He hesitated, covered Yv\& Ws. ^oSfc. 

his hands. 



342 A Golden Sorrozv. 

" Time flies," she said " Walter, will you not help and save 
me ? Will you be cruel and selfish, and treacherous too ? " 

There was a moment's silence, then Walter, disclosing a face 
as white and troubled as her own, said, . 

" Show me how it is to be done, and I will do it Let what 
will come of it, Miriam, I will do this for you ! " 

She kissed him without a word. Then, with inconceivable 
rapidity and quietness, she placed writing materials before him, 
and collected several books which lay about the room, travel- 
ling literature from book-stalls, and French brochures, and 
opened them in a row, at the top of the blotting-book . dis- 
playing the fly-leaf of each. A formal inscription was written 
exactly in the middle of every one of these. Then she went 
to the desk again, and took out a cheque-book, in which were 
a number of blank cheques, signed. In all these signatures 
and inscriptions there was hardly a trace of variation in the 
characters, forming this name . 

Lucius Clibborn St. Quentin. 

" Copy these," she said. " It is an easy hand, the most for- 
mal I ever saw. And read the memoranda again. I will be 
with you immediately." She instantly withdrew, and Walter 
bent over his task. She went into the room in which the old 
man lay dead, and collected, from the dressing-table and the 
chairs, several articles of his clothing, and such dressing things 
as had been unpacked last night, and carried them into the 
adjoining room. In a moment she swept away her own toilet 
apparatus, the gown, bonnet, and wraps she travelled in, and 
every trace of a feminine presence in the room, locked them 
into a wardrobe, and replaced them by the things belonging to 
Mr. St. Quentin. Then she pulled the blinds down, and par- 
tially drew the bed-curtains, arranging them so as to interpose 
between an occupant of the bed and the view of any person in 
the sitting-room. Her movements were wonderfully swift, but 
her thoughts far outstripped them. In those few minutes. 
which defied her reckoning, evet^ <kteil of the scheme she had 
conceived . who can teW mtiam ^wYfcX a& *\\A^sa&s. \k&ss& 



A Way of Escape. 343 

after her eyes had met the dead eyes . had presented itself to 
her. Two "supreme points of vantage were hers ; she only 
knew that anything had occurred within these rooms, and no 
one had a right to enter them, unbidden by her. She might 
even keep the lawyer's clerk waiting, if it should be necessary ; 
she was not absolutely tied to time. She was not insensible to 
the danger of the deed she meditated, but she fairly balanced 
the chances, and they were heavily in her favour. There was 
in the disposition of the rooms only one slight risk. Supposing 
the servants who were to be summoned to witness the will 
should, in relating the circumstance to their fellows, mention, 
in the hearing of the housemaid who had attended them, that 
Mr. St Quentin was in the outer room ? It was a risk, but 
only a little one, and when it came into Miriam's mind she 
dismissed it. The chances were very much against such a risk 
occurring, and she must trust something to chance. 

A knock at the locked door of the room in which the dead 
man lay ! Miriam heard, and replied to it instantly by turning 
the key, and confronting with a warning gesture the person who 
knocked. It was Bolton the valet. She stepped into the cor- 
ridor, and softly shut the door. 

" I thought I should have found Mrs. Haines here, ma'am," 
he said, " as they told me Mr. Clint had come. ,, 

" Haines is asleep, I hope," said Miriam. " What is it ? " 

Then Bolton explained. He had not found a house or 
lodgings in the vicinity of the hotel, but had heard of a house 
about two miles away, on the coast Should he go and look 
at it, or would Mrs. St. Quentin think it too far away ? If his 
master could be got into a carriage and moved at all, that dis- 
tance would make no practical difference. Miriam assented, 
and felt, with a thrill in her veins, that here was another point 
in her favour. The lawyer might propose to employ Mr. St. 
Quentin's own servant, rather than a stranger, for the purpose 
of witnessing his will, and here was the valet himself proposing 
what must take him out of the way, without any ^^\x^<&&asw3^ 
on her part She told Bolton that sYie ^tvUx^j a^^^k^ 5 ^ 



344 A Golden Sorrow. 

and begged he would go and see the house at once, and inspect 
it very carefully. The man was turning away, and she about 
to open the door when he said : " I beg your pardon, ma'am. 
I suppose there is no change ? " 

" No,'' replied Miriam ; " there is no change." 

Once more she went into her own bedroom, and looked 
carefully round. All was in the disorder proper to a man's 
room ; she had but to add the order which should attend 
illness. She was getting used to what she was doing now, and 
the tenacity of her will stilled her nerves. Without a tremor 
she carried the medicine-bottles and glasses, the cups and the 
flannels, all the sad, significant appareil, away from the dead 
man's bedside, and arranged them in a corresponding place in 
the outer room. Only a few minutes had been consumed in 
these rapid arrangements, and while she was making them 
Miriam's gaze was constantly turned upon Walter, sitting with 
his back towards the open folding-doors, now writing busily, 
now thinking, his head resting on his hands. At length she 
went to him. A sheet of paper, on which the formal inscrip- 
tion on the fly-leaves before him was accurately copied several 
times, lay on the blotting-book. Miriam put her arm round 
his neck, leaned over his shoulder, and studied the lines of 
writing minutely. 

" Perfect ! " was the one word she said. Then she shut the 
books, threw them into a corner, twisted up the sheet on 
which Walter had been writing, put it into the fire, where it 
was instantly consumed ; and, turning to W r alter, took him by 
the arm, saying, "Come. In ten minutes this man will be 
here." 

She led him into the adjoining bedroom, gave him an 
embroidered dressing-gown of some soft Indian stuff, and a 
crimson silk nightcap, which she pulled over his forehead, 
leaving only a ring of his prematurely grey hair showing 
beneath its border, once more kissed him, said, " Call me 
when you are ready, and be quick ! " and returning to the 
sitting-room, stood near the &ooi,^\\\te,x\%\^%&^^ 



A Way of Escape. 345 

In a few minutes Walter called her, softly, and she went to 
him. His appearance took her by surprise, justly as she had 
calculated upon his powers of representation. In the bed, in 
a judicious half-light, lay an old man, propped up with pillows, 
which yet seemed to give him no support sufficient to coun- 
teract the exhaustion which pulled him down from off them ; 
his shrunken figure seemed lost in the folds of the Indian 
dressing gown, whose embroidered sleeves hung over the large, 
hirsute hands, which certainly had no appearance of strength. 
Again she said one word . " Perfect ! " and placed a chair 
near the bed, with a little table beside it, on which were writing 
materials and a handbell. Then an idea struck her ; she flitted 
back into the sitting-room, and brought one of the railway- 
books, with the formal inscription on the fly-leaf. There was 
no reason why it should not lie, open, among the medicine- 
bottles, left there by the sick man's attendant, and within 
reach of the sick man's eye. He noted this approvingly, but 
said nothing. Then, as a step sounded in the corridor, Miriam 
waved her hand to him, and the next instant had flung herself 
into an arm-chair beside the fire in the adjoining room, having 
closed the folding-doors as she passed. She was looking ill 
and worn, wan with anxiety and fatigue ; her hair was in dis- 
order, pushed back from her white face anyhow, but this was all 
as it should be. She leaned back in her chair, and closed her 
eyes, as she replied to a knock at the door : " Come in." 

It was a waiter, followed by a short, fat, bald-headed gentle* 
man, whom he announced as " Mr. Clissold." 



346 A Golden Sorrozv. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

ONCE MORE RISKING IT. 

" You are the gentleman from Messrs. Ross and Raby, whom 
Mr. St. Quentin is expecting, I think ? " said Miriam, as Mr. 
Clissold made her a formal bow. Her first glance at the con- 
fidential clerk was reassuring. The sole expression of him, in 
physiognomy and figure, was stolidity. There was no reason 
to fear his penetrating observation on her appearance, dress, 
or demeanour. His dull, protuberant eyes rested on her 
without seeming to see her, and not a muscle in his red face 
moved. If he had found her weeping violently, or practising 
the last valse step, attired in the brown robe of a Carmelite 
nun, or arrayed in the tulle and spangles of an opera-dancer, 
it would have been all the same to Mr. Clissold. He was not 
sent to see her, and in any business, and therefore solely recog- 
nizable sense, he did not see her. 

" Yes, ma'am," was his reply. 

" I am sorry to say Mr. St. Quentin is very ill I will inform 
him that you are here." 

u Thank you> ma'am. Clissold, of Ross and Raby's." 

" Will you take a seat for a few minutes ? " she said, indi- 
cating a chair. He complied, without the least change of 
expression ; and Miriam went into the bedroom. 

il He has come," she whispered, bending low towards 
Walter. " I don't think there's any risk. If he is like what 
he looks, he is a mere machine." 

"Send him in," said Walter -, and his sister, in the midst of 
her strongly-restrained exc\\.OTtf2ci\. *xA \&y&&& ^as^aa^ ^as, 



Once more Risking it. 347 

conscious that he had some sense of amusement in the playing 
of his dangerous part. 

" Will you have the goodness to come into Mr. St. Quentin's 
x room ? " said Miriam to Mr. Clissold, who was sitting upright 
on his chair, slowly knocking the edges of the soles of his 
boots together, and neatly fitting the tips of his thumbs and 
forefingers into a heart-shaped pattern. " I must beg of you 
to cut this business matter, whatever it may be, as short as 
possible. He is quite unfit for business, indeed." 

" That," replied Mr. Clissold, standing up all of a piece, 
and looking straight before him, " is for Mr. St. Quentin to 
decide. I am only sent to receive his instructions." 

Under other circumstances Miriam would have said "Brute!" 
in her own mind, but this particular kind of density served 
her purpose just then ; so she said nothing, but preceded Mr. 
Clissold into the presence of his client. 

" This is Mr. Clissold," she said, softly. " I will leave him 
with you, and shall be in the next room if you want me. . Take 
this chair, if you please." 

There was no questioning, no speculation in the look which 
Mr. Clissold bestowed upon the client of Messrs. Ross and 
Raby, as he complied He placed his feet in convenient con- 
tiguity for tapping, and arranged his finger and thumb tips 
into a heart-shaped pattern, while he waited for the sick man 
to enter upon the business for which he had been sent to 
Dover. 

Miriam returned to the arm-chair by the fireside, and tried 
to remain still ; but she could not On the whole her nerves 
were wonderfully under her control, but just so far they re- 
belled. She could almost forget what was actually being 
done, at least she could force herself to a mechanical thinking 
of something else, while the great fact was there, unconfessed. 
And she could rely upon herself to go through with all that 
must come after, until she should have peace and the full 
reward ; but she could not keep her limb* *\$\. % \^\ks^ ^*x^ 
not in motion they must tremble, So s\ve \o*^, && v***^^ 8 ^ 



348 A Golden Sorrow. 

room from end to end, but her footstep made no sound. 
There was a hard and constant ticking in her throat, and her 
lips were dry. Twice she stopped beside a table where there 
were water and glasses, and drank water, but still her lips and 
throat were parched. Sometimes she could hear the harsh 
monotone of Mr. Clissold's business-like voice ; but the sound 
of the client's never reached her. 

After some time the handbell was struck, and Miriam an- 
swered the summons. 

Mr. Clissold was writing at the little table. The client was 
lying back upon the pillows, seemingly much exhausted ; and 
the light in the room was dim, an hour after midday. Great 
gusts of wind and rain swept round the house with a hoarse, 
moaning sound. 

" Do you want anything ? " asked Miriam of the client, who 
signed to Mr. Clissold to reply, and turned his head aside, 
breathing hurriedly. 

" We shall require two persons to witness Mr. St Quentin's 
signature to a certain document, ma'am," said the confidential 
clerk, in a tone as unmoved and unintelligent as though he 
had not the smallest notion of the contents of the document 
then under his hand. 

" Very well," said Miriam. " Shall I do for one ? " 

"Well. no . ma'am ; you won't," answered the confidential 
clerk deliberately. 

" I will send two servants, then," said Miriam ; and turning 
to the sick man, she said gently, . 

" I suppose you would have preferred Bolton, but, unfor- 
tunately, he has gone out, and will not be in for some time. 
Shall I send two of the hotel servants to you ? " 

" Yes, yes," said the client faintly, with the impatience of an 
invalid about answering questions. 

Miriam rang the bell, and when the waiter came she told 
him what was wanted Would he and one of his fellow- 
servants witness a signature fox Mi. St Quentin? The man 
assented respectfully. One oi foe \q^\\\*^*s> ^i\s^*x>fcsa. 



Once more Risking it 349 

moment, and he called him in. He hoped the gentleman was 
better; they had understood that Dr. Ashley did say he 
was very poorly indeed. Miriam answered the civil inquiry 
with a quivering lip, and the two men went into the bed- 
room. 

Then came a few minutes, which she felt she could not 
outlive twice; and the two waiters came out They looked 
grave and important, and evidently regarded her with com- 
passionate curiosity. 

"The gentleman is very bad, surety" said the older man . a 
model of respectability, who wore shoes cut so low that it was 
a wonder he could keep them on. " If you please, ma'am, 
are there any orders for dinner ? " 

Miriam managed to give some orders ; and the men, wholly 
unsuspicious, left the room, and exchanged confidences, in the 
corridor, to the effect that " he " was a deal too old for " her ;" 
that she was surprising cut up about it ; and that she wouldn't 
find no difficulty in providing herself with No. 2, for she was 
uncommon nice-looking. Also, that they didn't care how 
many old parties made their wills at the Grand, and asked 
them to witness them, if all the lawyers had orders to stand a 
sovereign apiece, like this one, which he was to have his lunch 
in the coffee-room, immediate, because he was going up by the 
express. 

Miriam resumed her restless walk, and presently Mr. Clis- 
sold appeared, coming through the folding-doors. There was 
perhaps a shade more deference perceptible in his demeanour 
towards her, as if he discerned in her a future client of import- 
ance to that Ross and Raby in whose interests all his wooden 
being was merged. Again he made her a formal bow, as she 
stood still, facing him. 

" Is your business completed, sir ? " she asked. 
" It is, madam," he replied, buttoning his tight coat, and 
making the presence of a thick paper in his breast-pocket 
evident by the process . " satisfactorily so. 1 w^v ^<sw. sgaak. 
morning, ma'am, and leave my besX Nr\^e& . *xA ^aoafc * 



350 A Golden Sorrow. 

Messrs. Ross and Raby . for Mr. St. Quentin's speedy re- 
covery." So saying, he went down to his luncheon in the 
coffee-room, before leaving for London by the express. 

" Get up, Walter, quick ! " said Miriam ; " the doctor will 
be here immediately, and Bolton coming back, and I cannot 
keep my maid upstairs much longer." 

Miriam went into the room to him, saying all this in a burst 
of nervous hurry, which Walter understood as well as she did ; 
but he did not second it. He was weak, worn out, and unable 
to congratulate himself or her on the wonderful success they 
had achieved. He had but one wish . to get away ; and 
Miriam saw it. She smothered the pang the consciousness 
cost her ; she thrust back the impulse which would have led 
her to thank him effusively, and to pour out all the compli- 
cated feelings which were in her heart "Not yet," she 
thought ; " that will be for another time. There is too much 
to be borne and done now, before I can realize that I am free, 
independent, rich, and safe." * 

Walter dressed himself rapidly, and then drank a good deal 
of wine, while Miriam restored the rooms to their former 
appearance. This was harder work than the task of their 
first arrangement. Through all her exultation, all her elation, 
and the triumph of her success, the over-wrought nerves were 
beginning to make themselves felt ; and when she passed into 
the dead man's awful presence, to replace the clothes he had 
worn but yesterday, and the golden gewgaws of his toilet, an 
irrepressible shudder shook her. Was there any change in 
the face ? Then she remembered, with a start, to have heard 
that the eyes of the dead should be closed soon after the life 
has left them, or they will refuse to close. What if those wide 
open eyes should remain wide open in the coffin, and under the 
close-packed clay ? Miriam knew she must get the remainder 
of her task done quickly, when such fancies as these were 
beginning to scare her. He had lain there too long untouched; 
it was time he were streaked and straightened for the grave. 
She did not look toyjaids tiafe cot^, \ss& \^\$^ ^j^ the 



Once more Risking it. 351 

room the appearance it had worn when her maid had quitted 
it, poured the portion of the medicine, which should have been 
administered had the patient lived to take it, into the fire, and 
rejoined Walter. He did not look up as she came inland he 
spoke without raising his eyes. 

" Well, Miriam, this is done. Mr. Clissold has taken the 
will with him to London. It is a terrible thing, but I suppose 
it will be all right." 

" I am sure it will be all right, dearest Walter," said she, in 
her softest tones of persuasion ; " it is bare justice to me ; 
things are different according to circumstances. But we must 
not talk now. Don't you think, Walter," she continued, 
suggesting the very thing her instinct told her he wished, but 
did not care to say he wished, " it would be well for you to 
go away at once ? In all that I have to attend to now, I feel 
I shall be better alone. You had better get away on foot out 
of this town ; so that, if it be proposed to send for you, you 
may not be found. The rain has ceased, and the wind is going 
down. You shall hear from me, to-morrow." 

She brought him his coat and hat, and hurried him away. 
He hardly spoke, but held her tightly in his arms for a while. 
Then he left her, and it chanced that he did not meet any one 
on the staircase ; but the porter was opening the front-door to 
give egress to a gentleman just as Walter set foot in the hall. 
He paused, and waited until this gentleman had descended 
the steps, and turned away; and then, having leisurely in- 
spected the state of the barometer, he too went out, and 
turned in the opposite direction. This gentleman was Mr. 
Clissold, who, as Walter correctly guessed, had taken the road 
to the railway-station. 

" I hope you have had a good sleep, Haines ? " said Miriam 
to her maid, whom she had summoned immediately on Walter's 
departure. 

" Yes, ma'am ; I am quite rested." 

"I am exceedingly tired : and as Mr. St. Quentiiv \s ^nS^ 
sleeping. has been sleeping, indeed, faese Vwo \aass . ^^^ 



352 A Golden Sorrow. 

shall arrange my hair, and then take my place beside him, 
while I rest a little, until the doctor comes." 

" Mr. St. Quentin has had no return of the pain ? " 

" No return." 

Miriam sat patiently while Mrs. Haines brushed her hair, 
put it away in smooth braids, and changed her dress. She 
even spoke a little, in a low voice, about the business on which 
Bolton had gone out, and how much longer it was likely to 
detain him. Then she lay down on a sofa in her bedroom ; 
and Mrs. Haines, having made up the fire, and inspected the 
medicine-bottles, seated herself behind the bed-curtain, in 
awful, unconscious proximity to the dead man. 

During several minutes of agonizing endurance Miriam lay 
still, her arm thrown across her eyes, waiting for the scream 
with which she expected Mrs. Haines to announce the dis- 
covery she must soon make. A few minutes of profound 
silence elapsed, and then Miriam's ear detected the slight 
rustling of the woman's dress, and strained itself to follow 
every movement. If the discovery did not come soon, she 
should not have strength to hold out ; a dull, sickly sense of 
faintness was stealing over her even now, and the palms of 
her hands were cold and clammy. The next sound was the 
click of curtain-rings, as the intervening curtain was cautiously 
withdrawn by the watcher, alarmed by the stillness. Miriam 
heard the slight creaking of the bedstead as she leaned over 
the huddled-up figure, with its back towards her, leaned further 
yet, heard her step behind the head of the bed, and the whisk 
of her gown against the wall . followed in her imagination the 
close, rapid examination which ensued . heard her say, with a 
gasp, " My God ! " and, feeling her approach, shut her eyes 
firmly, and threw her head back in a perfect imitation of sleep. 
In a moment the woman was beside her, shaking her gently 
by the shoulder. Miriam roused herself, and sat up, meeting 
her maid's pale, scared face with a start. 

"Oh, madam ! . I . I fear something dreadful has happened ! 
I . I was frightened at not YvsafK^ ^\. ^x.A'^vxse&.va. breathe, 



Once more Risking it 353 

and I went round to look at him, and, indeed, ma'am, it's no 
use deceiving you, he is gone ! " 

" Gone ! " 

" Yes, ma'am. Come and look at him yourself." 

Miriam stood up in a blind, uncertain sort of way, catching 
at the woman's gown ; and at that moment the sitting-room 
door opened, and Dr. Ashley appeared Mrs. Haines called 
to him loudly, and he came quickly into the bedroom ; but 
before he could reach her side, or ask an explanation of the 
looks of the two women, Miriam's hold of her maid relaxed, 
and she fell in a heap upon the floor. 

Ten minutes later, and just as the express train was about 
to start, a railway official, accompanied by the waiter who had 
announced Walter's arrival to his sister, ran along the platform, 
looking into the carriages, and crying out, " Any gentleman of 
the name of Clint here ? " No gentleman answered the appeal; 
and the train puffed its way out of the station, leaving the 
official and the waiter looking disconcerted. " He ain't there," 
said the latter ; " I should have known him in a moment" They 
turned away, talking of the event which had occurred at the 
Grand ; and Mr. Clissold, undisturbed by the commotion, 
went on his prosperous way to London, the bearer of an ex- 
tension of business to Ross and Raby. 

Everything was done most decorously, and in perfect order. 
After the terrible shock Mrs, St. Quentin had received, Dr. 
Ashley regarded absolute quiet as indispensable. In Mrs. 
Haines he found a sensible woman, who did as she was told, 
and was not over-excited by other people's affairs. Miriam 
was removed to another floor of the Hotel, as soon as she 
recovered from the merciful fainting-fit which had divided the 
general attention between the dead and the living, and all the 
necessary steps were immediately taken. The doctor could 
not say the lamentable event had exactly surprised him ; he 
had considered Mr. St Quentin's condition highly precarious^ 
as he had told Mrs. St. Quentin, axvd Ytft YoA. tl* ^ss^qx 
the immediate cause of death was es!bras&CL wsoaws^ssox 



354 A Golden Sorrow. 

upon Mr. St. Quentin's having travelled when in an unfit 
state. 

He was very kind to Miriam, and ready to be useful to her 
in every way, and he admired the clear-headedness and self- 
control with which she gave her directions, when bodily weak- 
ness had passed away. He communicated, by her desire, with 
Messrs. Ross and Raby, informing them of Mr. St. Quentin's 
decease, and requesting them to act for her in a professional 
capacity. He also wrote to Walter Clinton, requesting him to 
come to Dover. 

The reply to this letter was written by Florence, and ad- 
dressed to Miriam. It was constrained, but Miriam knew this 
was inevitable. Florence's mind would be disturbed by her 
knowledge of the truth respecting the marriage thus suddenly 
terminated, and the sense of what that termination ought to 
be to the young widow. So she said very little on that point, 
but told Miriam that Walter could not come to her. He had 
returned from his brief visit to Dover in a highly nervous state, 
and with a heavy, feverish cold, which had since increased, 
and rendered his leaving the house impossible. If Miriam 
wished it, Florence would come to her. 

" And leave her darling husband ill ! and travel here, to be 
with me under such circumstances, in her condition, poor 
child ! No j certainly not," said Miriam, who knew in her 
heart that the last thing she wished for now was Walter's 
presence, and the last thing but one the presence of Walter's 
wife. So she wrote to her sister-in-law that she had found 
friends, and all the help she needed, and she would not have 
her come on any account. When everything was settled, she 
would pay them a long visit at The Firs, but it might be a little 
time first, as she was Mr. St Quentin's sole executor, as well 
as his sole heir ; and as the bulk of his papers were in Paris, 
she might have to return thither direct . that would depend on 
the counsel of her legal advisers ; " besides which," she added, 
"dearest Florence, I ieeV, Xtaou^aA caxaiot explain it, that, for 
the present, it is best I sYvou\&\*t ^oax& &<? 



Once more Risking it. 355 

Not a difficulty presented itself to Miriam. Messrs. Ross 
and Raby conducted her affairs with promptitude and ease. 
All the customary announcements succeeded that of Mr. St 
Quentin's death. No creditors presented themselves . not a 
claim of any kind was made. Mr. St. Quentin's property was 
in order so admirable as to be incomprehensible to the legal 
mind, considering he had never, until literally the day of his 
death, employed a lawyer. Miriam had no difficulty in ascer- 
taining, from his few perfectly-arranged papers, the exact 
amount and distribution of the wealth to which she had suc- 
ceeded. In her capacity of executor she examined all Mr. 
St. Quentin's correspondence. It was not voluminous, and it 
was exceedingly uninteresting. If she still felt any of the 
curiosity respecting his former life, and his first wife, which 
she had once expressed to Florence, it was destined to remain 
ungratified. There was not a letter, not a memorandum, 
relating to it ; the only memento of the past which she found 
among Mr. St Quentin's possessions was a miniature portrait, 
in a drawer of an Indian desk he carried about with him, but 
never used. It represented a fresh, beautiful face, with grey 
eyes, black hair, and a fine complexion. Miriam had never 
heard a personal description of the first Mrs. St Quentin, but 
she took it for granted the portrait was hers. 

One word was engraved upon the oval frame . Kate. 



a a 2 



356 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

HALCYON DAYS. 

The condition of a young, handsome, and rich widow has 
been pronounced by some cynical writers to be a very enviable 
one ; and certainly, when the husband, who has had to die in 
order to bring about that pleasant state of things, has not been 
beloved, there is a good deal to say on that side of the question. 
Miriam St. Quentin was young, handsome, rich, and a 
widow. Was she happy in her emancipation and her wealth ? 
" The world " . as the few people who know anything about 
one call themselves, and as we call them . would have been 
shocked just at first if it had been said that she was. It had 
really been such a model marriage, and Mr. St. Quentin such 
a dear old man, she must feel it very much ! Miriam's de- 
meanour as a widow was no less commendable than her con- 
duct as a wife. The period of seclusion which custom and 
her own good taste assigned to her would not more than 
suffice for the planning and organizing of her future life. She 
still believed in such possibilities. A plan formed in haste 
had succeeded so thoroughly for her, that she was convinced 
she had only to set about the construction of an elaborate 
scheme, at leisure, to be equally secure of its realization. If 
there was any point on which her mind was thoroughly made 
up, it was that she had done no moral wrong. She knew she 
had broken human laws ; but they are not infallible, and their 
intention is the prevention and the redress of injury, injustice, 
and cruelty. They cannot \afe& ^cco\h& oC wery vagary and 
contrariety of circumstance, an& mo&fcj ^assas,^^ rass^ 



Halcyon Days. 357 

ingly. Mr. St Quentin had meditated a great injury, injustice, 
and cruelty to her, and she had prevented his carrying out 
that intention ; against the law, indeed, because its formula 
was not with her, but not against its spirit, which is that of fair- 
ness and honesty. 

She would do a great deal of good with her money. That 
intention figured largely in her plan. Among her vague 
notions of religion was an idea that God Almighty demands a 
tithe of all the possessions of the rich for His poor, and that 
penalties would be found, at the great settling of accounts, to 
attach to the neglect of this obligation. She would not 
neglect it, but fulfil it to the letter, and then go beyond it, 
into the spiritual realm of charity, including personal ministra- 
tion and active sympathy. Miriam had no idea of restitution 
or reparation in all this ; she genuinely believed in her own 
right ; but charity was a use for wealth which was very plea- 
sant to her. She had always helped the poor largely from her 
private resources, but she had never known Mr. St Quentin 
to do so. Well, this should all be changed There should 
be a fixed system, and then a liberal margin. 

Of course Miriam made up her mind that she would not 
marry agaia All young widows form this resolution. Either 
the lost happiness is never to be replaced, or the memory of 
it impaired, or the new and delicious freedom is never to be 
sacrificed to another venturesome risk : this is according to 
former circumstances. But Miriam had another reason, in 
addition to the second of these two, for arriving at this resolu- 
tion. Henceforth there must be a secret in her life; not 
burdensome to her, indeed, justified by her own knowledge, 
but to be known only to herself and Walter. No third person 
must ever share it If she were to permit herself to love any 
man. and she would now marry only in obedience to that 
unknown sentiment and impulse . she must impart that secret 
Instinct told her this would be impossible. You see, Miriam 
had as yet learned only elementary lessons from Vife^ -axA. ^& 
was still applying the line and the plummet \fc *x^ &&. A 



358 , A Golden Sorrow. 

which Fate was to the real arbitrary builder, while she was to 
look on, helpless and amazed. 

She was not an absolute unbeliever in love ; she was too 
sensible to slip into any cynical jargon on the subject She 
knew that love existed, and formed the great principle, motive, 
and reward of many human lives. As a passion she had little 
comprehension of it, and no esteem for it ; but as a strong 
and abiding sentiment she regarded it with admiring respect. 
But Miriam knew that one " could not have everything in this 
world," according to the trite, wise old saying, and she thought, 
on the whole, one might do very well without love. Her 
marriage had not been unhappy for want of love ; she was 
quite sure she should never have missed that, or thought 
about it at all, if other drawbacks had not existed. And so, 
without undervaluing it in the least, she quietly put it aside, 
out of her calculations, in the scheme she was constructing for 
the future. 

Miriam intended to have a house in London. She would 
retain the apartment in Paris, and divide her time pretty 
equally between the two capitals. She had not acquired a 
taste for rurality, and she was tired of travelling about the 
Continent of Europe. Far off, in the recesses of her fancy, 
there lurked visions of more extended travel, when she should 
break conventional bounds, and see the ancient wonders of 
the earth in the East, and the modern achievements of science 
in the West ; but these projects were in the far future. She 
had to set her new life going, to surround herself with fresh 
interests and duties, and make for herself a place in the sort 
of society to which she chose to belong. In visits . which 
she did not, somehow, contemplate as very frequent or much 
prolonged. to The Firs she should find quite as much English 
country life as she cared for. In occasionally sharing the 
home of Florence, Walter, and their prospective children . 
there was only one baby at The Firs as yet . she should have 
enough of the domesticities to preserve her from unwomanly 
callousness and isolation. 



Halcyon Days. 359 

Miriam had passed four months in Paris, after her return 
thither subsequent to Mr. St Quentin's death. During two 
months of the four she was not alone. Miss Monitor had 
realized the dream of many years of dreary drudgery in the 
providing of young ladies with every accomplishment under 
the sun. She had made enough money to retire from the 
occupation which many good people, whose destiny has not 
obliged them to keep schools, consider so very ennobling. If 
the honest, collected testimony of school-mistresses could be 
procured the result would probably be found to be the very 
reverse, and these often excellent women would acknowledge 
that nothing is so conducive to a sordid turn of mind and a 
general attitude of insincerity. 

Miss Monitor was perfectly honest about it all. She was 
not only unfeignedly delighted to have the cottage and the cow 
. for which she had longed as persistently as Warren Hastings 
longed for Daylesford . but enchanted to have done with the 
occupation itself She had never liked " girls ;" she inclined 
to believe nobody ever did like them, except their own 
mothers, and that in moderation, and she was frankly thankful 
to have done with them for evermore. 

" Talk of breaking-ups and holidays, my dear ! " she said 
to Miriam : " what was their escape to mine ? Fm sure it was 
a glimpse of heaven to feel the house so silent and so empty, 
and to see the box-room rid of their trunks ! It didn't last, 
though ; there was the cleaning-up for them to come back, 
almost as soon as I had got it well into my mind that they 
were gone." 

It was a great treat for Miss Monitor to go to Paris in the 
clear, early spring-time, and to be shown everything, except 
the theatres and " company," as she called it, by Miriam. She 
did not object to the exceptions; the theatres would have 
horrified, and French "company" have puzzled her; and 
Miriam was exquisitely kind to her good friend. To think of 
her having ever been afraid of Miss Monitor, and "having 
regarded her as an emporium of mys\mo>3& X^tv^^V- 3 ^^ 



360 A Golden Sorrow. 

Monitor, who, in reality, was the simplest-minded of women, 
though knowing in her own former department . and in com- 
parison with whom Miriam was a perfect sage in knowledge 
of the world. Now that no ulterior educational object was 
included in her visits, Miss Monitor enjoyed the museums, the 
buildings, the picture-galleries, the historic monuments, with a 
delicious intensity ; and the long drives in Miriam's luxurious 
carriage, when, well wrapped up in furs, and regardless of time 
and temperature, the friends visited all the environs of Paris, 
were especially delightful to her. 

There was only one particular in which Miriam did not fulfil 
Miss Monitor's expectations; she never talked of her late 
husband, that most gentlemanly and admirable person, who 
had always been to Miss Monitor the beau-ideal of all that one 
could wish a husband to be . who was, well, just a little older 
than might have been desired. She would have liked to hear 
"all the particulars;" but Miriam did not indulge her with 
any. With this one exception, Miss Monitor's visit to Paris 
had been a perfect success. It was within a few days of its 
close now, and Miriam was thinking, with reluctance, which 
she did not closely analyze, that she ought to accompany her 
friend back to London, and make her long-deferred visit to The 
Firs. 

Miss Monitor's cottage and cow were at Blackheath, and 
their proud proprietor was most anxious that Miriam should 
visit her and behold her in all the glory of possession. Miriam 
. was tempted to accede to her request; the cottage would 
furnish a sufficiently-retired base of operations for her, whence 
she might proceed to select her own house in London, con- 
veniently communicate with Messrs. Ross and Raby, and 
when she must, go on to The Firs. 

When she must / Had it come to this with Miriam, and 

had she never asked herself why, and how ? She had been 

wildly anxious to see her brother, and be with him ; she had 

been prepared to make his conduct respecting Walter the 

subject of sl quarrel between Ytecsg\t wid. Yisx \a.te husband, in- 



Halcyon Days. 361 

volving consequences which she could not calculate ; and now 
she had an indescribable, unconquerable shrinking from the 
idea of seeing Walter, a shrinking which extended to Florence. 
Why was this ? Why should she contemplate calmly . when- 
ever she was driven to the contemplation of it at all, more 
rarely as the time went by . the deed in which they had been 
accomplices, and yet be unable to contemplate calmly the 
prospect of being brought into daily contact with Walter? 
Why, above all, should she shrink from seeing Florence? 
Miriam could not quite shut out those questions ; they would 
ask themselves of her ; but she dismissed them with a shrug 
of her shoulders, and that ready, convenient word of explana- 
tion, "Nervous !" 

On a bright day, one of the latest in March, as crisp, as 
clear, as cold as that day, months ago, of which she is in some 
unaccountable way reminded, Miriam is in her boudoir, with 
the conservatory at the end, where the fountain is shedding its 
tinkling tears into the alabaster basin, and the bright-winged 
birds are fluttering and cooing behind the silvery wires of the 
aviary. 

A brisk wood-fire is burning upon the hearth, and Miriam's 
writing-table is drawn close to the fireplace. She has been 
very busy this morning. In anticipation of her absence from 
Paris. for she has made up her mind to go to England with 
Miss Monitor . she has been looking into her affairs, and 
setting aside sundry sums of money for various charitable 
purposes. Her table is covered with account-books and 
papers, but it is very orderly for all that ; and a row of little 
piles of napoleons and five-franc pieces is ranged at her left- 
hand. These are to be given to her almoners, two Sisters of 
St. Vincent and Paul, who visit the poor and sick in her neigh- 
bourhood, and who will come presently to receive this liberal 
contribution. 

Miriam looks very handsome in her widow's dress, which 
has none of the eccentricities and exaggerations of the modern 
fashion in "weeds." Her bright Yi&vc S& *T&&tfCefc3 \sAr&. 



362 A Golden Sorrow. 

under the crimped borders of her cap ; and her large, limpid, 
golden eyes and broad, low, white brow are dignified, and lent 
an additional serene beauty by the severe framework in which 
they are set. The cabinet of ebony, ivory, and silver stands 
at her right hand, between her chair and the fireplace. Its 
doors are open, one drawer is pulled out, and any one who 
cared to inspect its contents would find among them the 
miniature of a handsome lady with grey eyes, black hair, and 
a fine complexion, whose name was Kate ; the letter written 
by Lawrence Daly, at Walter's dictation, which Miriam had 
discovered among Mr. St Quentin's papers ; and a number 
of enigmatical memoranda, in which figures fill a considerable 
space, and which appear to refer to certain payments made at 
irregular intervals for some unspecified purpose. 

But the memoranda which Miriam showed to Walter at the 
Grand Hotel at Dover are not there ; she has destroyed them ; 
and all the events to which they referred, together with the 
rage and terror, the suspense, excitement, and the triumph of 
that time, are as utterly gone and lost sight of as they 
are. 

Just as Miriam has concluded her pleasant task, Miss 
Monitor comes in, brisk and bright, tight and talkative as 
ever, and full of the instructions which she has despatched to 
her cook at the cottage at Blackheath. 

" Only that Ruth has had her feelings blunted by cooking 
for a girls' school for eight years, and is not easily put out, she 
might be alarmed at the idea of such a grand visitor as you, 
my dear ! " said the happy little lady. 

" I hope she has not left off making small currant dumplings 
sprinkled with powdered sugar," replied Miriam. " If you only 
knew how often I have wished for one since ! " 

" Dear me ! The idea of any one ever wanting to eat any- 
thing again one has eaten at a school-room dinner ! " said 
Miss Monitor simply. " You shall have them, my dear, and 
then you will find out how nasty they are. Mercy on us, 
Miriam I Is all that money tot Vhfe SvsfcsxfcY* 



Halcyon Days. 363 

"All that money is for the Sisters' poor people," said 
Miriam ; " and it is sadly little among so many." 

" Well, my dear," said Miss Monitor, admiringly, " I must 
say it is delightful to see money in such good hands as. yours. 
And it is more than I expected of you, much as I liked you, 
for you were not very thoughtful or considerate, in the abstract, 
I mean . not unless you knew people, and liked them indi- 
vidually . in the old times. I think Mr. St. Quentin's in- 
fluence and example must have done you a great deal of good, 
strengthened and developed your character. Don't you think 
so, Miriam?" 

" I suppose it did," answered Miriam, indifferently. She 
was not to be tempted into talking of Mr. St. Quentin, and 
presently the conversation turned upon their journey ; upon 
the pleasurable business of selecting a house for Miriam in 
London ; and upon all that Miriam was to do and to enjoy 
when she should have the house. She was in high spirits that 
day ; she was really happy. She did not talk to herself about 
it, but she thoroughly appreciated the difference which it had 
made in her life to be free from the presence of a person whom 
she had come to dislike. She felt this so strongly that she, 
who had never known love, sometimes asked herself . when the 
subject would persist in pressing upon- her attention, would 
not be put away . whether the presence of the beloved could 
be such an ever-delightful, conscious, precious source of happi- 
ness as the absence of any one to dislike ; the freedom of daily, 
hourly, jarring chords in one's existence. Everything seemed 
to be going perfectly smooth and easy with Miriam now, and 
she looked like it, handsome, grand, happy, generous, authori- 
tative. Of future possibilities for her heart, she had neither 
hope nor fear ; of future possibilities for her intellect, she had 
great store of hopes and plans. 

Mr. St. Quentin's notion of pleasant society had not com- 
prised intellect. Fashion, if not of the very first rank, of a 
very good second rank, he had aspired to with some success^ - 
and he did not mind its being combmsd. m\N\ ^x&&fcs^ && Vs*. 



364 A Golden Sorrow. 

the most part it was. Miriam did. She had delightful visions 
of the society of " clever" people, of a charming house which 
should be frequented by charming creatures who wrote books, 
painted pictures, composed music, and understood the art of 
conversation. She had heard the word " Bohemian " some- 
where, and she believed she knew what it meant. There 
should be no Bohemianism in her " literary and artistic circle f 
all the artists, authors, composers, and talkers should be quite 
respectable, but highly gifted. She revealed these great de- 
signs to Miss Monitor, who received them coldly. Miriam 
was hardly ever silly, and a little silliness once in a way was 
easily pardoned by her good friend. 

" You can try it, my dear," she said, dubiously. " You may 
remember I told you my father was an author . in the solid, 
biographical line . and he is as much forgotten as if he had 
been one of the modern three-novels-in-three-volumes-each-a- 
year-people. He used to say there was no such mistake as 
literary society ; no duller people anywhere than authors atid 
artists, chiefly, I suppose, because they are generally very tired 
with hard work, and want people to amuse them. I can't say 
I cared for any of them whom I used to see when I was a 
girl, especially if I had liked their books or their pictures very 
much before I made their acquaintance. They certainly never 
amused me. However, as I said before, you can try." 

Miriam thought this was all rubbish, and resolved that she 
would try. 

The last few days in Paris were very pleasant to their friends. 
Miriam was rather sorry to leave her pretty rooms when the 
time came, even for the prospect of novelty in her London 
home. She loved them, she prized everything in them. She 
was very generous, but she had acquisitiveness largely de- 
veloped in her character. If she had been a man she would 
have delighted in adding field to field, in flocks and herds, 
and in money-bags, though she would have dispensed their 
contents with a liberal hand. Being a woman she loved her 
furniture, her rich carpets atvd Ytexv^c^ >^ \*aS&aL things 



Halcyon Days. 365 

which filled her rooms, her plate, and her porcelain, her 
equipages, and her jewels. She would have shared them 
lavishly, but she loved them every one, she who had never 
known what it was to love, beyond the calm circle of kindred, 
and had no notion of a power which could smite the idols 
from their place in her heart, and dash them into dust. 

A few hours after Miriam and Miss Monitor had left Paris, 
a well-appointed but plain coupe drew up at the great gate of 
the hotel, and a gentleman stepped out and accosted the 
concierge. This gentleman was a dapper personage, of middle 
height and spare figure, with a clean-shaven face and shrewd, 
observant eyes. He was dressed with an accurate plainness 
and elaborate neatness which gave him somewhat the air of 
an Anglican clergyman of High Church principles. Since 
Mr. St Quentin's death this gentleman had not been seen at 
the hotel, and the present concierge, being new to the place, 
did not know him. After a few minutes' parley the dapper 
gentleman committed a card and a letter to the care of the 
concierge, got into the coupe again, and was driven away. 

At the same moment one of Mrs. St Quentin's servants, 
whom she had left in Paris, came in at the porte-cochere. 

" Hold ! " said the concierge. " Here has been a little Mon- 
sieur inquiring for Madame ; and much chagrined at her 
departure. He has confided to me this letter and card, to 
be sent to the address of Madame." 

The servant leaned on the ledge of the little window through 
which the concierge addressed him, and inspected these articles. 

" Hold ! " said he . " Monsieur Caux ! Why comes he 
hither again ? It used to be for Monsieur only." 

" Who is he . this Monsieur Caux ? " 

The man laughed. 

" What know I ? Ask that in the Rue Jerusalem." 

" Ho, ho ! . is he there ? That understands itself . these 
old gentlemen, as they tell me Monsieur was, have live.^^ 
ordinary, and find agents who may Y>^ \x>a^\.^ n c55\sn^kskc&- 
But why " 



366 A Golden Sorrow. 

" I have changed my mind," said a clear, quiet, polite voice 
behind the servant's shoulder, causing him to start away from 
the aperture, and the concierge to look up surprised, " and will 
forward my letter to Madame St. Quentin myself, if you can 
give me her address in England." 

" Certainly," said the concierge, on whom the mention of the 
Rue Jerusalem in connexion with the name of M. Caux had 
produced a salutary effect. "Perhaps Monsieur will copy 
the address himself;" and he laid a book open before M. 
Caux, from which that gentleman transcribed on one of his 
cards Miriam's address at Blackheath; while he was doing 
this the servant went on into the hotel. 

" That is much better," said M. Caux, as he carefully re- 
placed the letter in a case, full- of neatly-folded papers, sus- 
pended in the carriage within easy reach of his hand . " much 
better. She might take no notice of a written application, 
but she can hardly refuse me a personal interview, demanded 
on the strength of this. There may be something to come of 
it, and there may be nothing . time will show. The old 
gentleman paid me in full ; I have no claim ; still this may 
be worth another fee to me, and it will certainly keep until 
she returns from London." 

" Madame had left Paris that morning," had been the answer 
of the concierge to M. Caux's question. Only a few hours, only 
an unpurchasable, immeasurable, irreparable space between her 
and the knowledge she might have gained of the truth ! The 
letter which M. Caux had decided to retain till her return was 
addressed to himself, and consisted of only a few lines, dated 
from New York, three months before, but which, by some 
accident, never explained, had not been posted until the last 
mail. The lines were as follows : . 

" L D intends to go to England in the spring, and 

will then communicate with Mr. St. Quentin". 



3^7 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

A TERROR OF GREAT DARKNESS. 

On a bright, soft, April day Miriam arrived at The Firs. She 
had chosen her house in London, and set decorators and 
upholsterers to work upon it. She had brightened up Miss 
Monitor's life by her visit to the cottage, her. admiration of 
the cow, and her promise to repeat these kindnesses; and 
now she had come, with reluctance, but with good courage 
also, to the ordeal of meeting Walter. It seemed to her that 
this was the only thing she should have to dread henceforth 
in life, and that the meeting, the first look into each other's 
eyes, the first few minutes passed together, without the pre- 
sence of any other person, over, this phantom. for she held it 
a mere phantom . would be laid, like the rest, and her way 
would be quite plain. So, when the time which had been 
arranged for her visit came, she went to the trial calmly. 

Florence was in great delight. The prospect of having 
Miriam in her old home with Walter, in unrestricted freedom, 
all the former misery and dissension utterly gone for ever ; and 
that most wonderful of all babies to be shown to his aunt, was 
as much happiness as Florence could desire in this world, now 
that her Walter was at home " for good." She did not actually 
say to herself that it was very pleasant to make up their family 
party without Mr. St. Quentin ; she would have been shocked 
to find herself thinking anything so dreadful, but she certainly 
was a little curious to see how Miriam looked in her weeds, 
and fully expected to find her in capital spirits. Florence 
was a pretty picture in those days. Ixv \)c^ t\frnss& *& > brs- 
happiness, the realization of her x\votou^>| tacL\x&&& -As^ 



368 A Golden Sorrow. 

her beauty had matured, and the added self-possession of her 
manner took nothing from its gentleness and its grace. She 
was as busy as a bee, but she was not fussy, and she was not 
narrow. Her whole heart was centred in her home and its 
beloved inmates ; but her intellect overstepped that boundary, 
and Florence Clint was as perfect an example as could be 
found of a true woman who, incapable of the moral discord 
implied in deserting her own sphere, assiduously aspires to the 
best standard of duty and culture within it 

The sisters-in-law were both beautiful, each in her own 
style and way; but there was more than the difference 
between them of stature, complexion, and temperament 
There was the difference between the childless wife and the 
mother; between the woman who has never loved, and the 
woman who from girlhood has borne the sacred burden of 
solicitude and care for another, the weight of a double life. 
When Florence thought most lovingly of Miriam, she pitied 
her most for this. And Miriam did not pity herself in the 
least. She had never wished for children, and she had been 
content to do so without love in the past, and contemplated a 
picture in which it was to have no place with complacence. 
The spectacle of Florence's domestic happiness would have 
for Miriam no drop of bitterness, no suggestion of envy. 

Miriam had expected to find Walter at the station at Dring- 
ton, and had prepared herself to get over the only nervousness 
she anticipated having to feel during the drive to The Firs. 
But Florence was on the platform when the train came up, 
without Walter; and then Miriam thought her brother was 
shrinking from the meeting even more than she was. Florence 
was not surprised. As they were rattling along in her pretty 
pony-carriage she told Miriam he was delighted she was 
coming, but he was dreadfully lazy. sometimes it was really 
too bad . and he hated driving the ponies. Miriam asked if 
he rode. But it appeared he did not ; he hated riding, said 
it shook him, and made Yvvs YvesA a.0&&. Ha liked staying in 
the house best, it seemed, axvd \*as * tatA <& ^asjvm ^a. 



A Terror of great Darkness. 369 

baby that he was to be forgiven for apparent laziness on that 
account. Miriam thought it was very real laziness, and de- 
cided in her own mind that Walter must have altered very 
much since his " digger " days. The two women looked fur- 
tively at one another during the drive \ and Miriam then told 
Florence frankly she had not believed she could have grown 
so very pretty, so much more than pretty ; but Florence did 
not tell Miriam she had been curious to see her in her weeds. 

Walter met them at the door, and he greeted Miriam with 
frank, unembarrassed affection. Her heart beat heavily, and 
she felt that her face turned exceedingly pale as she returned 
his kindly kiss, and looked into his eyes for that pang of recol- 
lection which she was prepared to find there. But she did not 
see it. There was not the slightest shrinking of his eyes from 
hers, not the most fleeting change of colour or hesitating in- 
flection of the voice. He bade her welcome as if they had 
met last under the most ordinary circumstances, and was so 
spontaneously cheerful and unconcerned that Miriam found 
it difficult to impute his demeanour to self-control. She felt 
there was much greater power in that way in herself than in 
Walter, and yet she could not on this occasion reach such as 
his composure. They all entered the house together; and 
Florence went for the wonderful baby, leaving Walter and 
Miriam together in the study. 

" Now," she thought, " there will be a reference. Now he 
will say or look something, and then it will be over for the 
future." 

But he neither looked nor said anything. He talked of 
her house in town, and pointed out some improvements in 
Florence's flower-garden. And then Florence came in with 
the baby, and after a family offering of incense to that small 
divinity, they adjourned to dress for dinner. Miriam was 
relieved, and yet puzzled ; she could not understand her 
brother, she felt somehow as if this man were not Walter. 
Their brief, eventful interview at Dover had been so mo- 
mentous she had had no time to tVivck oi YCvrc^vo xs&s- \se>\*. 



3^0 A Golden Sorrow. 

of the change in his appearance ; except his grey hair, she had 
not observed any. But she did now ; she noticed his indo- 
lent manner, his sleepy expression, and his look of age. She 
must question Florence about his health. 

At dinner, Walter was very lively and agreeable ; but Miriam, 
observing him closely, saw that there was a curious indecision 
about him. There was not much carving done at table, but 
Florence did it all. Walter paid no attention to anything but 
his own dinner ; and even about that was slow and awkward, 
letting his fork drop, and upsetting his wine-glass. As the 
ladiefc were leaving the dining-room, Florence leaned over his 
shoulder, and said : . 

" Don't be long over your wine. Miriam wants to hear all 
about the gold-diggings to-night ; so don't go to sleep here." 

" Does he go to sleep after dinner?" asked Miriam. 

" Indeed, he does," replied Florence. " Isn't it a horrid 
habit ? Almost every evening I have to go and shake him up ; 
and sometimes he falls asleep after luncheon. Indeed, I often 
tell him he has quite an unfair allowance of sleep in his 
life." 

" Do you think that is safe, Florence ? . good for him, I 
mean ? What does he really do, dear ? What are the occu- 
pations of his life?" 

"The occupations of his life ? Well. I can hardly tell you. 
He is not agricultural, you know, so we've let the home-farm ; 
and he's not fond of gardening . it makes his head ache. A 
great many things make his head ache since he had that terrible 
fever." 

" Does he manage the place well ? . look after things, and 
all that?" 

" Well, indeed, I cannot say he does," said Florence, laugh- 
ing ; " he says I do all that sort of thing better than he does, 
and that it tires him. He does not even care about the stables. 
I'm afraid, Miriam, I must confess he's lazy; but you must 
not blame him. He had to work so hard for such a long time! 
And he is so sweet-tempeted, axA *o tocA <& \ftJs<j and me, 



A Terror of great Darkness. 371 

and no trouble in the house. You won't mind him being what 
he calls ' all about ' a good deal, will you, Miriam ? He is 
not a bit like other men, interfering with women's occupations 
and bothering them." 

" I shan't mind it in the least, dear," replied Miriam, who 
was thinking . " He may not be a bit like other men, but he 
is also not in the least like my brother Walter." And she 
went on . " Is he fond of reading ?" 

" He does not care for reading to himself, but he likes me 
to read to him, and I do, when I have time. But I have been 
threatening him to leave off lately, he falls asleep so often." 

" That was a very bad fever, was it not, he had just at the 
time our father died ? " 

" Oh, yes, dreadful ! You may imagine how frightened I 
was when he was ill in the winter, after he left you at Dover ; 
and Mr. Martin said it was a strange kind of fever, with which 
he was not familiar. I did not tell you at the time, because 
you had so much to distress you," said Florence, in her simple 
way ; " and it would have been time enough for you to know, 
if it had been absolutely necessary to alarm you about him ; 
and it did not last long. Mr. Martin said, when Walter re- 
covered, that he had treated the fever almost at random ; but 
he had certainly treated it successfully. He was very weak 
and quiet for a long time, and seemed rather indifferent about 
everything except me, and baby, when baby came; but it left 
no bad effects, thank God !" 

" I am not by any means so sure of that," thought Miriam. 
" Was he delirious in the fever ? " 

"Oh, yes: his mind wandered awfully. But Mr. Martin 
said that was better. There must have been stupor if it hadn't. 
He frightened me first, and made me think it was not a 
feverish cold, but fever, by talking about an old man in an 
Indian gown and a red night-cap making a will, and looking 
in the Times for somebody to leave his money to. . Why, 
Miriam, you are as pale as death. Perhaps you. &<y&!\. >Sk& \s* 
hear about anything of that kind." 

B b 2 



372 A Golden Sorrow. 

" I do, indeed . I do. I only turned pale at the idea of 
Walter having been in such danger." 

" As I have done many a time, when I have thought that he 
ftiight have died of the first fever out in that horrid place ; and 
Mr. Daly too ; and we might never have heard anything about 
either of them. And he must have died, if it had not been for 
Mr. Daly. I wish you could hear Walter tell the story himself; 
but he must not. I never mention it to him." 

" Why ? V 

" Because it distressed him so much. Mr. Daly, you know, 
had the fever before Walter took it, and he never quite got 
over the effect of it. He is, or was, when Walter and he parted, 
a little eccentric . it was a delusion . which grew up in the 
fever, and never left him. I will tell you about it some other 
time ; I must go and wake Walter now. If I didn't, he would 
sleep there for hours." 

With a sweet, happy smile on her untroubled face, Florence 
left Miriam, who was much, though vaguely disturbed by what 
she had just heard. Subsequent observation of Walter did 
not tend to reassure her. Before her first day at The Firs had 
reached its conclusion, Miriam's mind was so fully engaged in 
puzzling speculations concerning her brother, that she had 
ceased to think about the mutual associations between herself 
and him, for the indications of which she had so painfully 
looked. 

Walter came back with Florence. He had been asleep, he 
acknowledged, and perhaps that accounted for his looking dull 
and stupid, and for an uncertainty in his gait which his sister 
observed at once. During the whole evening he sat still. He 
talked to them, and was very happy ; but where was the rest- 
lessness so characteristic of men in health, when they are 
under no restraint ? If Walter had walked up and down, in 
his old way, while he told them his Californian stories, Miriam 
would have liked it much better. Florence sat on a footstool 
beside his chair, testing her head against his knee, looking up 
at Miriam ; and -when Vve p&use^ a&Vs. dtaci &&^tai *. name 



A Terror of great Darkness. 373 

or a word, she smilingly supplied it. And this not only when 
the topic was his Californian adventures, but when, later, they 
strayed into ordinary subjects of conversation, and Walter 
would pause, not from the suspension of the mechanism of 
speech called stuttering, but from an evident lapse of memory. 
Then Florence would speak the last word, and he would go on. 
Again, for a few moments, before they separated for the night, 
Walter and Miriam were alone together. This time she deter- 
mined, anything being better than the vague, mysterious alarm 
which was creeping over her, to lead him directly to the subject 
in her thoughts. 

" Walter," she said, " will you let me tell you how much 
I felt about meeting you, after all that had passed, 
and." 

" Of course, I know ; but don't talk of it, Miriam. I would 
have come to you, in your trouble, if I could, but I was very 
ill, you know. Caught cold, and had a fever. It really was 
not my fault." 

" Would have come to me, Walter? Why, you did come 
to me ! " 

"Yes, yes; I started, after you telegraphed, of course ; but 
there was nothing in that, you know ; I could not go on, and 
indeed I hardly know how I got home. But don't let us talk 
of it, Miriam ; I hate unpleasant subjects." 

Miriam obeyed him. Indeed, she could not speak. To 
utter astonishment was added a thrill of indescribable dread. 
For a moment she actually felt afraid of Walter himself, sitting 
there, in his chair, before her, perfectly calm, and making her 
this unaccountable reply. He was talking of the second time 
she had sent for him ; she, of the first, and yet, the second 
summons had been by letter, not by telegraph. Miriam said 
no more ; but, when Florence was with her upstairs, in her own 
old room, she questioned her as closely as she dared about 
Walter's illness. Florence answered her freely, and, being 
skilfully led up to the point by Miriam, told her it was su.cJx'&sn. 
odd thing that Walter had foigottetv aW. atocwX Ya& V2c^rvo^^s^^ 



374 A Golden Sorrow. 

to Dover, and was at the utmost distress at his inability to 
comply with Dr. Ashley's summons. 

" Mr. Martin said it was part of the delirium of the fever," 
added Florence, " and told me not to talk to him about it at 
any time ; and so, of course, I have not done so. Let me 
brush your hair, Miriam, for the sake of old times ! " 

Then the two young women drifted into a sentimental, 
reminiscent conversation, which, however, did not so far 
divert Miriam from the matter in her thoughts but that 
she resolved to discuss it with Mr. Martin at the first 
opportunity. 

The opportunity offered itself the next day but one. Mr. 
Martin and Mrs. Cooke, and many others among the neigh- 
bourhood, who had once stood aloof from The Firs, but had 
been won, to a man and a woman, by Florence, were all 
anxious to see how the young, handsome, and rich Mrs. St. 
Quentin looked in her weeds. The result of this laudable 
curiosity was an impromptu luncheon party at The Firs, and 
afterwards a general stroll in the gardens and plantations . 
where the young, green tassels were beginning to hang them- 
selves out. Miriam detached Mr. Martin from the party, and 
entered upon the matter in her thoughts with characteristic 
promptitude and directness, by asking him to give her a 
detailed account of Walter's illness at the time of Mr. St. 
Quentin's death. 

Mr. Martin complied ; and Miriam learned from his narra- 
tive that her brother had been ailing from the moment of his 
return to The Firs, and that delirium had set in very rapidly. 
He described the wandering of the mind, and repeated much 
to which she had the key. Mr. Martin acknowledged that he 
had believed Walter's mental condition to be unsound for some 
time after Florence thought him perfectly well again, but he 
had no suspicion that anything of the kind now existed. He 
had not seen much of him since his recovery, having been 
away from Drington for nearly three months ; in his profes- 
sional capacity he had, smce \i\* xstaaxxi, n\&\\&&. w^ <&. 



A Terror of great Darkness. 375 

sovereign and all-absorbing baby, and he had not taken parti- 
cular notice of Walter. Miriam, who could not explain the 
chief source, the real inspiring cause of her disquiet, laid great 
stress upon his somnolence and indolence ; but she did not 
impress Mr. Martin very seriously. 

" The truth is, my dear," he said, " I am accustomed to 
regard Walter as such an uncommonly lucky dog, that I am 
not surprised to find him turning out an uncommonly idle one 
also. With such a wife to adore him. a woman as clever as 
she is good ; nothing that must be done, to do ; plenty of 
money ; the remembrance of very hard work, which makes a 
holiday life apt to prolong itself, and a fine natural capacity for 
indolence . you must permit me to remind you, my dear, that 
Walter never liked work of any kind . I really think we need 
not put his laziness down to any more recondite cause than 
content" 

" Do you think it is content that makes him look so old, 
ten years older than his age, and at least five years older than 
climate can account for? Is it content that makes him drop 
all sorts of things out of his hands, and look vacantly at 
them when they fall ? Is it content that makes him lie down 
on the sofas all about the house, whenever there's no one 
to watch him, and rouse him up, and that renders him almost 
insensible to pain ? " 

" What ! " said Dr. Martin ; " Walter insensible to pain ? 
He used to be quite the reverse." 

" He gave himself one of the worst cuts I ever saw, this 
morning, with a broken pane of glass in the conservatory, and 
I don't think he knew he had cut himself I was close by, 
and I knew nothing, until I saw blood on baby's frock, and 
found it came from Walter's hand." 

" That's bad," said Dr. Martin. " Anything more ? " 

" Many things more. He hardly ever speaks without stam- 
mering, and he constantly stands with his eyes shut. Florence 
notices none of these things ; she is always with huxv,> *xA x^ 
the most serene-minded and adaptive ol \*om^\. "^es&s*. 



376 A Golden Sorrow. 

Mr. Martin, pray attend to this . he eats a great deal more than 
he ought to eat." 

" My dear Miriam, this is one of your French notions." 

" Indeed, it is not. I think French people habitually eat 
more than English people . it is my observation. I don't like 
the quantity he eats, or the way in which he eats it. You 
dine with us to-day ; will you promise me to watch him, and 
judge for yourself? " 

" I will." 

They rejoined the party ; and Miriam saw that Mr. Martin 
kept an unseen watch upon Walter during the whole of that 
day. In the course of the week he came several times to The 
Firs, and though he said nothing to her on the subject, she 
was satisfied that he was steadily taking observations, and that 
those observations were leading him in the direction of .the 
apprehensions which she, for a reason far outweighing any 
within his ken, entertained more and more keenly day by day. 
The unconsciousness of Florence, while it was most fortunate, 
touched Miriam deeply. When anything odd, unusual, un- 
couth, in Walter's demeanour made itself apparent, Florence 
was only anxious to conceal it, if possible ; and if that was not 
possible, to account and apologize for it in some simple way. To 
keep him from the possibility of being blamed by others was her 
object ; it never occurred to her to read the meaning of these 
things to himself. 

When Miriam had been a fortnight at The Firs, during which 
time Mr. Martin had rarely allowed a day to elapse without a 
visit, he said to her, . 

" When is your house in town to be ready for occupation ? " 

"At the end of next week, I expect." 

" I advise you to go there, to hasten the preparations by 
your presence, and to dispense with all superfluous arrange- 
ments. My dear Miriam, you are right about poor Walter. 
I have watched him too closely to be mistaken. You must 
get him and Florence up to London, immediately, on the best 
pretext you can devise. WVierv. ^o>i ^ N ^ ^foasa. ^&ss& % ^ns. tkssjl 



A Terror of great Darkness. 377 

be told the truth, and the best advice in the profession must 
be procured without delay. There has been too much already 
. though, God knows, I don't ! whether it is ever of much 
use in such cases." 

"God help him and her !" said Miriam. 

And so the first blow was dealt by Fate to that fair structure 
of hope and purpose which Miriam had built ; a blow which 
caused it to rock and tremble to its foundations. This involved 
all whom she loved in the world. They were not many . two 
human beings only . but Miriam loved her brother and his 
wife with all the intensity and depth of such concentration ; 
an4 the agony, not only of her own suffering, but of the in- 
tolerable, terrible compassion she felt for them both, almost 
overpowered her for awhile. But the demand for action was 
too imminent, the necessity for concealment was too absolute, 
to admit of any yielding on Miriam's part which the utmost 
strength of her will could subdue. She bore it, not blindly, 
not listlessly, but with a keen-sighted intelligence which looked 
it through and through, which saw it all, and foresaw it all, 
every phase of the humiliating withdrawal of the animating 
spirit from the form of the one, every successive wrench in the 
process of the breaking of the strong, loving, simple heart of 
the other. 

Of a truth, her palace of pride and pleasure rocked and 
reeled. 

Three days later, Miriam was in London, at her house in 
Lowndes Square, where a few rooms had been prepared for 
her occupation. A pretext was found for getting Florence up 
to town, in Miriam's wish to avail herself of her taste in the 
finishing of the house. Unconscious Florence was quite 
pleased. She wished Walter had shown more interest about it, 
but he merely assented. He would brighten up when he found 
himself in town. A day was fixed for their arrival with the 
baby and their servants. Mr. Martin was to come to London 
also, but without their knowledge, and not to M.vs\axx^ VwiSR.. 
He would arrange for a consultation ^*vOs\ o.v\2o^ *\xsnks^ ^ 



378 A Golden Sorrow. 

physicians, and then Florence must be told . something . must 
be to some extent prepared. 

" If she does not read it in my face the moment she crosses 
the door," said Miriam half aloud, as she stood leaning her 
head on her raised hands, turned with their open palms against 
the wall, in a room of her London house, as she stood, one 
night in Paris, by the wires in her aviary, in the perplexity of a 
far less trouble. " I could bear it for him, but I cannot bear 
it for her. Oh, Florence, Florence ! " 

A bell rang loudly, and Miriam started from her forlorn 
attitude, and looked into the street, with a momentary terror 
lest they had already arrived. Absurd ! They could not be 
here for hours yet. How she dreaded seeing Walter now ! 
What had that former dread, which she had almost forgotten, 
been to this ? If he should be more vacant, more indolent, 

more forgetful, more gluttonous ! If What else must he 

be ? There could be nothing else but sinking lower and lower 
until the blank was reached. How awful ! how awful ! Would 
to God that he, her brother whom she loved, might die first ! 
She turned her white, miserable face at the sound of a step. A 
servant approached her, with a card on a salver. 

" Are you at home to that gentleman, ma'am ? " 

She took the card, and read : " Mr. Lawrence Daly." 



379 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

L D . 

They had been an hour together, these two, who had never 
met before, but to each of whom the idea of the other had 
been familiar for years. It was surely a kind Providence that 
had sent Lawrence Daly to Miriam at such a moment, and his 
coming was a good omen. He was the one person in the 
world who knew and loved Walter as she did r perhaps better, 
with the deeper knowledge, and the fuller love of close com- 
panionship and a common life. He had known Florence in 
her early time of trouble, and he would pity and aid her in 
this, a far drearier and darker day. A friend to lierself in her 
great loneliness, a counsellor in her great perplexity . all these 
thoughts had come in an instant to Miriam as she read 
Lawrence Daly's name, and were strengthened with her first 
glance at him. 

And Lawrence ! What were his thoughts as he stood in the 
presence of that " Miriam " who had been a " phantom of de- 
light " to his fancy, for many a day before she " dawned upon 
his sight " ? How had he pictured her to his imagination, in 
those days when he and Walter used to talk about her in the 
lone hut, and in the later time when he learned that his friend's 
beautiful sister was a widow ? He could not have put his own 
fancy into words, but it certainly had not resembled this 
reality. a pale woman, with a face in which grief and dread, 
and a kind of relief and pleasure too, were contending; a 
woman as oblivious of herself, of any effect she mvgjzA. ^wj&aR&i 
as if she had been old and ugly, w\vo, vftvite ^fcfe \s*fcak ^^^^ 



380 A Golden Sorrow. 

and spoke to him, and welcomed him with an outstretched 
hand and kind words, was so evidently seeing something else 
in her mind's eye that she instantly communicated a sensation 
of fear to him. Was she even beautiful, this Miriam . of whose 
face he had drawn many an aerial picture . as she stood there, 
in her long crape dress, clasped with jet, and her widow's cap, 
which had fallen off, and was clinging by its crimped edge to 
her rich bright hair, until she pulled it on, and tied the strings 
under her chin, in perfect unconsciousness? Perhaps not; 
he could not tell ; but so much was certain, that ever until the 
end, whenever he chose to do so, Lawrence Daly could bring 
her before his mind's eye as he saw her in the first minutes of 
that first interview. 

They had been an hour together, and Miriam had told 
Lawrence how it was with Walter, and he had received the 
intelligence with such emotion as had in some strange way 
comforted her with the soothing sense of a shared sorrow. 
And he had told her the story . of which poor Florence had 
been able only to give her a garbled version and a bare outline 
. the story of the nugget and the murder, and of Walter's 
mysterious oblivion. She listened, with a new sense of awe 
creeping over her. Once more Walter's nerves had been sub- 
jected to a great trial, and again that wondrous, inexplicable 
gift of memory had failed him, had been withdrawn from him. 
As Lawrence described first the doubt, and then the fear, and 
finally the terrible certainty with which he had noted this 
mental change in Walter, an eager longing awoke in her to add 
her testimony also, to tell him that she could understand . she 
had suffered from them all. The bond of absolute secrecy 
between her and the mind over which a veil was being slowly 
but surely drawn, began to be intolerable to her. The story 
itself interested her vividly, and the calm, manly way in which 
Lawrence spoke, quite unaffectedly, of the loss of the gold, 
and the necessity for further exile in which it involved him, 
impressed her deeply. He knew she was expecting Walter's 
arrival in town . he Yia&\veax& VJaal feom ^s*^wC\\5^^\vose 



L D . 381 

address he had procured in Paris, and at whose cottage he 
had called on the previous day . and he had come to Mrs. St. 
Quentin's house hoping to find his friend there ; but learning 
that she was as yet alone, he had not been able to resist the 
temptation to introduce himself. If he had not found her in 
such trouble. trouble which no one could so truly estimate 
and share as he, he should have had to ask her forgiveness. 
She assured him, frankly, that she had never thought of him as 
a stranger, and that his name was a household word at The Firs. 

" Literally, a household word," she repeated, " for the baby's 
name is . Lawrence." 

The slightest tinge of colour came to her cheeks as she pro- 
nounced the name, which sounded to him like delicious music. 

" Poor child, ,, said Lawrence ; " poor young wife ! " 

"And she loves him so. oh, how she loves him ! I cannot 
imagine how she will ever bear it." 

"/ can" he said, solemnly. "I have seen Mrs. Clint 
endure sharp trial for his sake, with a self-sacrificing simple 
courage which I have never forgotten. She will bear this . far, 
far worse than anything which has gone before . also for his 
sake, with the same." 

Miriam told him everything. They talked of the past, the 
present, and the future of Walter and his wife, and Lawrence 
gave her some hope. It might be a long time before Walter 
should grow worse, and in his present state there was nothing 
which would expose him to general remark, nothing which 
would make Florence very unhappy when she should be recon- 
ciled to the first painful truth that her Walter was unlike other 
people, and changed from his former self. Miriam listened to him 
with growing confidence. This friend of her brother's was a strong 
man, with a kind heart, brave and gentle ; she knew so much 
of him long ago, when Florence used to talk to her about Daly. 
He was unlike all the other men she was acquainted with, 
simpler, more kindly, more serious. It was true that she saw 
him, for the first time, under very peculiar circumstances \ Vs^ 
nevertheless, she felt that no otYvex mm ^wt V*k *n*x Nbrsrwt^ 



382 A Golden Sorrow. 

would have, in the given case, been just the same as he 
was. 

Was he at all like the picture her fancy had painted of him ? 
Florence's description of him had been very vague, as a 
woman's description of any man, except the one she loves, is 
apt to be, and Miriam had retained no more of it than the 
facts that he was tall, and had a long, fine brown beard. As 
she grew calmer, and their conversation took a more settled 
tone, Miriam began to study his appearance, and to recognize 
how handsome he was ; of how noble and grand a presence. 
Where had she seen a face, not exactly like Lawrence's face, 
but of which his reminded her ? A face with fine, clear-cut 
features, a broad forehead, and " level fronting f dark-grey 
eyes, sweet and piercing, under dark brows and shaded with 
thick, dark lashes. Very strange and beautiful eyes, with a 
man's courage looking out of them, and a woman's pity. No 
wonder Florence had trusted this man, and Walter had loved 
him. 

" Did he speak of me often ? " Lawrence asked, as Miriam 
was describing her visit to The Firs. 

" Very often ; but I had been warned by Florence to say 
nothing of. of the story you have told me, because it dis- 
tressed him, and so, much of the most interesting part of your 
life in California was not discussed." 

" I understand. Poor Walter thought I had got a craze, 
and now I shaU never be able to undeceive him." 

" I suppose not," said Miriam ; and again, as many times 
before during their interview, unheeded tears ran down her 
cheeks. " There will be no possibility of correcting an im- 
pression made on his poor mind now." 

" Not only for that reason, which, I trust, is not so decisive 
as you fear," said Lawrence, " but because the clue I hoped to 
obtain is lost" 

And then he told her the sequel to the story of the nugget ; 
his meeting with Deering at New York, and the final loss of 
the pocket-book. 



L D . 383 

t 

" I had to relinquish the hope of finding the gold then," he 
continued, "and to apply my mind to turning our dust to 
some purpose. I had Walter's share as well as my own, you 
know. And I have not done badly, on the whole. I shall 
give the poor fellow an account of my stewardship before I 
return." 

" Are you going back to America ? " 

" Yes ; I have got into a groove there, and I shall keep in 
it until something worth having has come of my 'pegging 
away.' There is no particular object for me in England now . 
unless, indeed, I could do something for Walter, but I fear 
that is taken out of my hands . and I shall return before long. 
Some day or other, I mean to revisit the old place, when this 
wonderful railway which is to join the Atlantic and Pacific 
shores shall be finished ; and perhaps, if I am not too rich to 
care about it . than which nothing can be more unlikely . to 
try once more to hit upon the spot where Walter buried that 
Will-o'-the-Wisp, our nugget I have made a drawing from 
memory of our hut and its vicinity, the cliff, the ravine, and 
the claim generally. I will bring it to you. It will interest 
you to get an idea of the place where Walter lived so 
long." 

" It is very hard," said Miriam, " that Walter, who owes his 
life to your care, should have been the means of obliging you 
to forsake your own country. " 

Lawrence looked very sad. 

" I don't think Walter has much to thank me for, Mrs. St. 
Quentin, if it be with him as we are forced to think it is. It 
would have been better for him, perhaps, if he had died of the 
fever in the lone hut." 

" Oh, no ! " said Miriam, and her eyes sparkled for the first 
time, within his sight of them, with their beautiful brightness . 
" Oh, no ; better far as it is for her. for Florence. He came 
back to her ; she has had much happiness . a good store for 
remembrance, if it is to have no added day \ arvd \1 Vv& <^c^ 
only live, live anyhow, if he only is, axw&. \s Hers,3a&Hi^\. 



384 A Golden Sorrow. 

happy still, I am sure she will. Anything . anything for her 
rather than life without him ! " 

Since when had Miriam learned the worth and the meaning 
of love? How had her calm appreciation, the deliberate 
judgment of an outsider, become obscured ? What had taught 
her, all of a sudden, to read the heart of a woman like Florence, 
hitherto a mystery to her, vaguely beautiful indeed, but which, 
nevertheless, she was content to leave unsolved ? 

Lawrence looked at her, and wondered . wondered at the 
sudden transition of look, of attitude, of colour, which in a 
moment revealed the beauty, the brilliancy, the life with which 
his fancy had invested her ; wondered at the intuition which 
made this woman, who had never loved . so Walter had told 
him, but, after all, how did Walter know ? . who had certainly 
made a marriage the very opposite of Florence's . free of the 
whole motive and mystery of Florence's life. 

" You are right," he said, " and I was wrong. Perhaps, for 
the moment, I was thinking of Walter himself only. But . to 
return to what you said . I am not so much of an injured 
individual after all. I have no ties, and have been more or 
less of a waif always. The strongest bond between me and 
my country, or rather between me and England . for I am an 
Irishman, you know . is Walter." 

Those sweet and piercing dark-grey eyes, with their dark 
brows and lashes, were, then, the " Irish eyes " she had heard 
people talk of. Where had she seen them in a picture ? Was 
it in an artist's studio in Paris ? So ran her truant fancy while 
he was speaking. 

" He told me you had no relatives." 

" I have none. The last individual with whom, so for as I 
know, I might have claimed kindred, died six months ago, 
though I did not know the fact for nearly three months after- 
wards. I was in the Southern States at the time, and did not 
hear of it until I got back to New York. May I tell you a 
story about myself, Mrs. St. Quentin . or shall I go away now, 
and come again another, Aacy"*" 



L D . 385 

" No, no," she said hurriedly. " Pray, stay with me ; pray, 
go on ! You will remain and see Walter, will you not ? " 

" If you wish it. If it will not harm him." 

" I don't think it can ; he is only too impassive. Then that 
is settled ; you will stay." 

Her manner was abrupt and nervous. He imputed it, and 
so did she, to the agitation of the expected arrival. At all 
events, whether it would be wise for him to see Walter or not, 
it was certainly as well that Miriam should not be left alone. 

They were sitting, one at either side of the fireplace ; and 
Miriam now pushed her chair back . the flame was catching 
her face. A large green carriage-fan lay on the mantelpiece, 
and Lawrence rose and handed it to her unasked. She thanked 
him, and sat, holding it in her left hand between her face and 
the fire, looking up at him. 

He began, with a smile, half sad, half comical, " I told Mrs. 
Clint all about myself once. I wonder whether she repeated 
any of my not very moving history to you ? " 

" She did," said Miriam. " Florence told me about your 
mother's death, and your expectations from a relative in India, 
who disappointed them. I think she said you had had no 
communication with him for a long time, and had given up all 
hope of his keeping his promises, before you went abroad with 
Walter." 

" That is a perfectly correct outline of the story. But, not 
very long ago, this interrupted communication was renewed, 
under rather singular circumstances. The relative in question 
was not only a relative, but also a connexion by marriage. He 
married my mother's sister, my best friend, and the only 
human being whom I loved, or who loved me. He deceived 
and cheated her for a long time with delusive promises of what 
he would do for me ; but she died, nearly seven years ago, and 
then it was all over. There was nothing more to be looked 
for in that quarter, except, in the very unlikely event of the old 
gentleman's dying without a will, my succession to his ^rc*^3N^ 
as heir-at-law. Upon this possibility, Yiq^n,\xn^ <so&sxs&s 



386 A Golden Sorrow. 

my mind to dwell for a moment. Though his wife was dead, 
and he had no child, there was no likelihood, even supposing 
he did not marry again . as I felt certain he would, and as he 
actually did . that he should not have many to prefer before 
me, whom he had never seen, and against whom I believe 
him to have been deeply prejudiced. In fact, I am quite 
certain he hated me, very nearly all through his life, and 
would have gone on hating me until the end of it, but for the 
interference of some influence or other, which I have vainly 
tried to trace. Once I did think I had traced it ; but a ques- 
tion which I casually asked of a lady . the only lady, except 
yourself, I have seen since I came to London . was answered 
in a manner to disperse that notion, to my regret" 

Miriam did not quite understand him. There was some- 
thing more in his voice and manner than the story he was 
narrating, as she followed it with a secret nervousness for 
which she could not account. There was something which 
seemed in an inexplicable way personal to herself in what he 
was saying. 

He continued: . "Pray, bear in mind, for otherwise you 
will fail to understand my story, and myself, that I never enter- 
tained the remotest expectation of succeeding to my relative's 
property, and that when, a few months ago, the circumstances 
occurred which I am about to relate, the notion was, if possible, 
more utterly removed than ever by the discovery that he had 
married in the interval, as I expected him to do. A few 
weeks after I met Deering at New York I began to tire of his 
society. He was a man I never liked, belonging to the tribe 
of ' smart men,' whom I detest, and troubled with no delicacy 
of mind whatever. I am too old a traveller to be thin- 
skinned, and I don't mind inquisitiveness as a general rule ; 
but my patience gave way under the perpetual cross-question- 
ing of Deering . one of the most secret, stealthy, mysterious 
fellows in the world about his own affairs, of which I did not 
want, of course, to know anything . and I said to him I 
believed he must V\ave aoms mcfcws, tot \msi% ^^ ^u^^vrel? 



L D . 387 

curious about me, my ancestors, and my antecedents. I didn't 
half mean it, and I was sorry, in half a second, for having said 
it But it seemed I had hit a blot. The whole mystery of 
Deering's interest in me was revealed . not that he would not 
even then, I believe, have gone on concealing it, only that the 
moment had arrived at which I must needs appear upon the 
scene. The interest was of a pecuniary nature. It turned 
out that Deering's attention had been attracted by an adver- 
tisement in the Times, repeated in some New York papers, in 
which information was required concerning a certain individual, 
whom he at once identified with me, and that he had been 
for some time in correspondence with the agent in Paris to 
whom this information was to be supplied. He did not defend 
himself in the matter, he did not think he required defence ; 
nor do I think so. He argued, very justly, that whatever I 
was to hear to my advantage would not be increased if the 
information came direct from me . which indeed it couldn't 
have done, for I never saw one of the advertisements, and 
should, but for Deering, have been in perfect ignorance until 
this day . and that it could not be decreased by his having 
turned an honest penny by supplying the information. How 
many honest pennies he actually did turn I do not know, but 
a good many I don't doubt ; and he and I parted no worse 
friends because he had made some money out of me in that 
way, and one or two other ways . and because I positively 
declined acting on his advice. I always suspect he had 
pledged himself to produce me bodily, and had been paid in 
advance, but he succeeded in producing nothing but my hand- 
writing." 

"What was this man's advice to you?" asked Miriam, in a 
low voice, as she took the fan in her right hand, interposing it 
between her face and his. 

" His advice was that 1 should go to Paris at once, and 
present myself to the agent. But why should I have done so, 
Mrs. St Quentin ? The relative who was no^ ^jfo^Ysw^SsK. 
me, from a motive which I could not. \mfeis\axA,'V&& ^skjsn^i 

c c 2 



388 A Golden Sorrow. 

trifled with, and disappointed me before, and I had gotten 
over it, lived it down, prospered moderately, and at least 
worked hard, without his aid. How should I know what were 
his intentions now ? I had no further claim upon him ; he 
had married again . a young wife, too, but this time a young 
wife who knew nothing about me, who was nothing to me, 
whom he could not torment and rule through me, as he had, 
I firmly believe, tormented and ruled his first wife. I was 
not going to yield one scrap of my independence, to abandon 
my least intention for him; he might mean something . in 
which case his meaning would keep;. he might mean nothing 
. in which case I should not be put to inconvenience. I told 
Deering my mind plainly ; and then I perceived that Deering 
must have made all he expected to make by the transaction, 
for he did not urge me. He pressed me on the point of going 
to England in the spring . I was then just about to go down 
South, and he got me to write a few lines to the effect that I 
would do so . and we parted. When I returned, I found the 
whole thing settled for me. Deering had heard from the 
agent in Paris ; my letter had never reached him . I suppose 
it had been mislaid by Deering, or somebody to whom he 
had trusted to mail it . however, it did not matter, for the 
information was no longer of value to any one. The wealth, 
which only a freak of fortune or a dernier ressort of the law 
could ever have made mine, had gone into much better hands, 
which, I pray, may long administer it" He rose and ap- 
proached her, drew the fan away with courteous gentleness, 
and held out his hand. 

" Mrs. St. Quentin, I thought you knew . until Miss Monitor 
told me that you did not . that your husband's name was 
Clibborn; he changed it to St Quentin because there was 
once a general of that name of kin to his mother, and it 
sounded better: I knew nothing about that until Deering 
found it out from Caux . and that his first wife was. my aunt 
Kate." 

Miriam sat before Yivm, x^oUox^^^^\v\\^i^x^. ^V^made 






. L D . 389 

no movement towards taking the hand which he held out, 
though she saw it, and oh ! wretched woman, saw the smile, 
drawing her heart from her bosom into his, which went towards 
her with the hand  

He coloured, drew back, and said : " I beg your pardon. I 
have offended you. I should have told you this in some 
other way." 

She only said with a gasp for breath, and an increase of her 
frightful paleness : " You are L D ." 

He did not understand her, and he was alarmed. What 
had he done ? What cruel folly to try her nerves in any way, 
when they were already so tried by grief and anxiety. 

" I entreat you to forgive me," he stammered " I did not 
think . I fancied it would please you to know there was 
another tie between Walters friend and yourself. I " 

" Hush !" she said, in a voice so hoarse and unmusical 
that its sound still more alarmed him. " It is no matter ; it 
is no fault of yours. Don't mind me." She stood up, catch- 
ing at the mantelpiece with her left hand. " Please to leave 
me for the present, Mr. Daly," she said, " and not to speak to 
me. I have changed my mind. You must not meet Walter 
to-day. I will write to you. But go now, pray go." 

He lingered for a moment, but her face told him it was best 
to obey her, and he went without a word. 



390 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XL. 

SWIFT RETRIBUTION. 

So it had come ! A horrible, swift retribution, which revealed 
while it punished her sin ! Miriam sat like a stone statue, 
after Lawrence had left her, thinking, with intensity unmeasured 
by time, to which a minute's duration was like a year's agony, 
of that which had befallen her. The event she had relegated 
to the past, the thing that was gone and done with, the trial 
she had come through . they were here, in horrible, actual 
presence of her, under a terrific form which her imagination 
could not have conceived. How often must she have been 
near touching this truth, which, had she touched it, would 
have saved her ! What a film of accident had hidden it from 
her! All was plain to her comprehension, and yet all was 
confused to her senses; she had not understood the details 
clearly, and yet she could not have endured Lawrence Daly's 
presence one more minute without losing her senses. She 
needed them more than ever now. What a small thing might 
have saved her, even the mention of the name of her brother's 
companion to her husband ! At the thought of the old man 
the painful frown upon her set face deepened. She hated him 
now, she hated him in his grave . and of late she had forgotten 
him. She had been glad sometimes to feel that the remem- 
brance of him did not trouble her . did not recur for many 
days together, and then but vaguely, and without bitterness. 
It returned now, when this dreadful blow fell upon her . this 
Wow, whose weight and terror she did not yet understand to 
the full . and with it the Yvate ^\ac)tv &&\o&\*.taN*&'%& lon^ 



Swift Retribution. 391 

since conquered If he had not been so brutal, so sneering 
about her brother ; if he had not shown such utter indifference 
to her feelings, such cold contempt for Walter ; if he had not 
made him and his story a prohibited subject, all must have 
been revealed, and the man to whom he sought to make re- 
paration discovered in Walter's friend, who had saved Walter's 
life. But it was not reparation to Daly, but revenge on her, 
the old man had sought. When, in the torrent of her thoughts, 
this one rushed hot and bubbling to the surface, Miriam 
clasped her hands upon her head and groaned : " Revenge on 
me ! Oh ! my God ! has he not had it ? " 

How nearly she had touched the truth, that night in Paris, 
when she had discovered that Bianca had stolen the letter 
which Daly wrote to her for Walter ! What was that he had 
said about the old man's second wife? "He had married 
again, this time a young wife, who knew nothing about me, 
whom he could not torment and rule through me, as he had 
tormented and ruled his first wife." And yet it was through 
Lawrence Daly he had tormented her, had driven her to the 
deed she had done. If he had given her back that letter on 
that night, and she had given him the explanation she had 
refused . what then ? Ah ! who could say ? But, at least, 
not this horrible, hopeless, irremediable calamity. 

He was Walter's friend, the man who had rescued him from 
ruin in London, the man who had saved his life in the Golden 
State . and Walter had for his sake, and under her instructions, 
robbed him of his inheritance. Robbed him ! Yes. Miriam 
used no palliative forms of expression now. What had become 
of her theory of the forgery ? What had become of her argu- 
ment that the felony was only a name, and she might offend 
against the formula of the law, while keeping its spirit un- 
injured, its intention undefiled ? What extraordinary sudden 
enlightenment was this ? Because Lawrence Daly was the 
injured man, and he her brother's friend, why should her mind 
undergo such a revolution as that implied in hex t^^ks^s^. 
that her act of " simple justice, in sdf-tefetvcfe? to& ^ *s*- 



392 A Golden Sorrow. 

mous crime? An "L D "existed somewhere, she 

had always known, intended by her husband to be his heir, to 
her detriment and discomfiture. Had she not injured him f 
She had taken no thought of this ; she was no more capable 
of abstract ideas than other women . if the philosophers who 
so complacently vivisect them be right. But the truth which 
came to her in this dread shape . whence its form was derived 
she did not yet ask herself . she saw fully, knew through and 
through, and pressed its sharp arrows, with all the force of 
her will, into her conscience and her heart 

Unbounded horror, unspeakable remorse ! These were the 
occupants of her soul, as Miriam sat by the fireside in her new 
home that day, on every side of her the signs and tokens of 
the wealth she loved, and had done this thing that she might 
have it and enjoy it Remorse, not yet repentance. She had 
not yet come to see the wrong done to her own soul ! her 
mind was busy, to the point of exquisite torture, with her 
crime against this man . this man with the god-like smile, and 
the voice sounding as no other voice had ever sounded in her 
ears. What a terrible vindictive fate was hers, and with how 
sudden a rush it had come upon her ! Only a little while 
ago . the sun that had risen upon her sleepless anguish of 
expectation and fear had not yet gone down into twilight . 
and she had thought nothing could add to her grief for Walter 
and for Florence. And now ? Now she was catching, wretch 
as she was, drowning in this sea of remorse and terror, at the 
shred of comfort supplied by Walter's loss of memory-! 

He would not remember when Lawrence Daly should have 
told him that the old man who had disappointed his hopes, 
and turned him adrift upon the world, was the same old man 
to whom his sister Miriam had sold herself for money (in her 
dismay Miriam was quite merciless to herself, and would not 
take the mixed motives which had led to her marriage into 
account), that he had personated this old man, and forged a 
will in his name. The calamity which had come upon him 
would save him from any ^ax\. <& \ft\ax ^c^ tos> ^Sfexw^ and 



Swift Retribution. 393 

always must suffer. What was that sound her lips had formed? 
" Thank God !" Was she then driven to such desperate straits 
that the affliction which had been to her " as a terror of great 
darkness," only^ a few hours ago, was turning to her sole source 
of consolation, her sole chance of endurance and concealment? 
Yes, it was even so ; and while Miriam's heart ached with the 
thought, her judgment compassed the measure of her dismay 
and defeat by it. 

Florence ! Had she forgotten Florence, while she had thought 
that it was better her brother's intellect should be clouded, and 
his prime of manhood turned to helplessness and decay, than 
that he should know what he had done for her, in all its extent 
and its consequences ? Had she forgotten Florence, for whom 
she had been suffering such agonizing compassion ? Yes, she 
had forgotten her for awhile ; but when she remembered her, 
she did not think differently. Something told her that if 
Walter had proved unable to keep the secret of their crime, as 
she had no doubt he would have proved when Daly's identity 

with the L D of the memorandum should have been 

revealed . the knowledge of it would have been far worse to 
Florence than the future with which she was threatened could 
ever be. She had interpreted Florence aright to Daly. While 
her husband lived and was hers, she would not be entirely 
unhappy. But, to know him for what he was, however plau- 
sibly extenuated, a felon, a forger, would break the heart that 
loved him, as surely as that heart was holy and pure. Then 
there tumbled into the torrent of her thoughts this importunate 
question : Why ? She wanted to go on, to think about her- 
self, to form some plan of action, but she could not Why ? 
What was this which existed in Florence, and set her above 
the earthliness of love, while it kept fresh within her all its 
tenderness, and sweetness, and self-devotion ? There was no 
answer yet, but it was to come to Miriam at no distant period. 

Who shall tell the warfare of thought which raged within her 
tortured mind as she sat there, so still to all orafc**x^ ^*sx.- 
ance? As well attempt to paint t\vfc fonxv^Vhfe xe^^s^^^ 



394 A Golden Sorrow. 

fantastic fury of the storm-clouds when a hurricane is abroad, 
or the leaping of the waves it lashes. After a time she rose, 
and, pursued by a terrible perplexity, began to pace hurriedly 
up and down the room, like one lost, holding her head in her 
hands. The whole thing had suddenly become unreal, inex- 
plicable, impossible to her. Had she done this deed ? How 
had it come to pass that she had done it ? She, a lady, edu- 
cated and dwelling in decencies, to whom the mere idea of 
deliberately breaking the law, rendering herself amenable to 
the penalties under which " common people " constantly fell, 
of committing a vulgar crime, was so impossible that, even 
when she had done it, it had not been, in her eyes, a vulgar 
crime, and she had never thought about the penalties. Could 
it be ? Was it real ? She leaned up against the wall breath- 
less, and horrified, as the power of something external to 
herself came over her with full conviction, and she felt as one 
might feel who had committed a murder while walking in sleep, 
and awoke dabbled with the blood of the victim. Thus Miriam 
gained her first insight into the deadliness of temptation, learned 
the awful lurking possibilities of human nature, the terrible 
irrevocableness of an evil deed. " Dead is dead." And 
worse ; she could not bury this dead thing . it was all around 
and about her, a maddening, haunting presence. She did not 
know that its sepulchre could be only when remorse should 
have changed to repentance. 

In her hurried, distracted walk, she caught sight of a time- 
piece. Walter and Florence would arrive in half-an-hour. 
How she had dreaded Jhat moment, which now she dreaded 
only lest she should not be able to control herself sufficiently 
to ward off suspicion ! She went to her room, and her maid 
dressed her ; and she agreed with Mrs. Haines that she was 
looking very pale and tired ; and she went downstairs again, 
and received her brother and his wife with great self-command. 
But Florence thought her looking " shockingly ill j " and Mr. 
Martin, who came in the evening, reprimanded her sharply, 
and told her he had expected \>s\x&\ x&vug* dt\\eu 



Swift Retribution, s 395 

There was not much change in Walter. He was very dull, 
and indifferent, and sleepy. But Miriam observed speedily 
that Florence was not altogether unconscious. She tried to 
rouse him, seemed anxious, watched him with sad eyes ; and 
when he- heard from Miriam . who had to strive fiercely for 
composure in telling him. that Lawrence Daly was in London, 
and would see him the following day, and only said "All 
right," appearing to forget it the next moment, she was quite 
evidently distressed. This was better; their task would be 
easier. That night Florence, pleading the fatigue of her 
journey, avoided seeing Miriam alone ; and Miriam wrote to 
Lawrence Daly a few formal lines, inviting him to visit her 
brother and his wife on the following day. Then, for the first 
time in her life, she lay broad awake until the morning. There 
were to be many sleepless nights for Miriam, and long days of 
perplexity and suffering, before she learned to mourn, not that 
her sin had "found her out," but that she had "done this 
great wickedness against God" 

" You would not deceive me, I am sure ? You would not 
be persuaded that anything so cruel could be kind or just ? " 
pleaded Florence to Mr. Martin and Lawrence Daly, many 
days later, when she had been told the truth, and when the fiat 
had gone forth that her Walter must be, for the few years he 
would probably have to live, one between whom and his kind 
there would be an increasing separation. She had borne it 
well, submissively, she who was so proud of him ! But her 
mind was haunted by one fear, which she now sought to allay. 
Would they ever take him away from her? Would those 
doctors send him to strangers, to try for cure, who might indeed 
be very wise, and even gentle, but who would banish her from 
him ? She had avowed this fear to Mr. Martin and to Law- 
rence, to whom she clung with the old trust intensified a 
thousandfold. But they were now reassuring her. 

" Indeed, we would not deceive you, or consent to your 
being deceived," said Lawrence, pressing her ^a&Vssft. YkA \sv 
his, and looking through eyes dimmed m^X^xV\x^^V^^^w^^-- 



396 A Golden Sorrow. 

beseeching face. "You will never be asked to part with 
Walter : on the contrary, all our hope and trust are in you. 
He will never need any other care than yours, and it may be 
that will avail for a long time. Don't fear this, dear Florence ; 
it will never befall you." 

" Thank you," she said, turning her eyes first on him, and 
then on Mr. Martin, with submissive gratitude which' wrung 
their hearts. " Then I can bear it very well. I could bear it, 
if God willed it otherwise ; but I am very thankful that I may 
have my Walter with me ; that He has made this light to me 
. so much lighter, I mean. And . and . I don't think he will 
ever be unhappy, for he will always, you know, be the same to 
his little world . to me and baby." 

Then she left them, and went to him J and while the two 
men stood, unable to say to one another what was in their 
minds, Florence was kneeling beside her husband, with her 
arm encircling his head, as he slept the heavy sleep from which 
it was so difficult to rouse him, and her sweet lips murmuring, 
close to his changed face, delighted thanksgiving, as of a 
mother over her infant. Wonderful inarticulate words of love 
and prayer that, for the mind darkened upon the earth, the 
soul might be white before the Throne. 

Walter, and Florence, and Miriam were to go abroad soon, 
to certain baths in a remote part of Germany, which they were 
advised to try for Walter. He was quiescent and easily 
managed, but he displayed a growing disinclination for any 
society but that of Florence and his child. From the first he 
took little' notice of Daly ; and gradually ceased to care for 
Miriam's presence. Florence remonstrated with her on her 
resolution to accompany them to Germany. Why should 
Miriam leave her new house, and change all her plan of life, 
to go with them ? She knew it was to be with her; but how 
little they could be together ! She should be always occupied 
with Walter ; and Miriam must not think, while that was so, 
she ever could be ux\ha\>\yy. The innocent sufferer, she on 
whom the family calamity feWmtV *&\\&<g!fcoro& ^ns^s*.- 



Swift Retribution. 397 

ing and comforting the other, out of the treasures of her self- 
devotion and of God's grace. But Miriam was determined. 
If she were only to see Florence occasionally in the day, and 
to say " good morning " and " good night " to her, she would 
go. She cared nothing for her house now, and her plans of life 
were all laid aside. 

Since their first interview Miriam and Daly had never been 
alone together . this by Miriam's contrivance. So he had not 
been able to solve the mystery of her dismissal of him on that 
occasion, and the painful impression of it remained. He took 
infinite blame to himself for the manner in which he had told 
her his story ; he had laid stress on the injuries Mr. St. Quentin 
had done him, and she, doubtless, thought he included the will 
in the category, whereas nothing had been farther from his 
intention. If he could have made her understand that the 
most he had expected, if he and Mr. St. Quentin had met, was 
a kindly recognition, and that he regretted nothing but that he 
had not had the chance of shaking the old man's hand, and 
relegating bygones to the region of bygones. Had she sus- 
pected him of coming to her in the contemptible character of 
a complainant, of a disappointed expectant P If so, it must 
have been the fault of his own manner ; and yet, the mere 
notion was somehow derogatory to her. How could she regard 
this old man's wealth as of such importance . to him, he meant, 
or to herself . as to give it such a place, in such an interview, 
under such circumstances ? Why did she not regard the coin- 
cidence that there was a connecting link between her dead 
husband and her brother's friend as the trifling matter which, 
though interesting, it really was ? He could not forget, though 
he would fain have forgotten, Walter's strictures upon Miriam's 
marriage, and upon her love of luxury, her over-estimate of 
wealth. It must be some inexplicable feeling of this kind, 
some absurd, unworthy notion of a claim, or a censure upon 
her inheritance, which had caused her offence with him. Law- 
rence laughed at the idea, but the laugh was tkoft. ^t^ss^-m^ 
the annoyance was, and also keen. 



398 A Golden Sorrow. 

He would explain himself fully, and rectify this, at the first 
opportunity ; there must be nothing in his mind to dim the 
image he had set up there of Miriam. But she never gave 
him a chance. She met him with graceful coldness ; her man- 
ner was perfect, and utterly wanting in all he desired to find in 
it, so that he asked himself if the frank confidence, the intimacy, 
the emotion which had characterized their first meeting, had 
existed in reality or in his presumptuous fancy ? She treated 
him with the utmost courtesy, as Walter's friend, and never 
for one moment lowered the barrier between him and herself, 
which rendered any recurrence to the circumstances of their 
first interview impossible. He was puzzled, disappointed, dis- 
heartened, and only the sad need in which Florence stood of 
his sympathy and help, and her perfect trust in him, hindered 
his taking an abrupt leave of them all, and returning at once to 
America. 

Only slight reference was made to the relationship which 
had existed between Lawrence and Mr. St. Quentin. Walter 
had heard of it without interest, and soon apparently forgotten 
it, and Florence had said little about it. If he were not forced 
to believe that Miriam resented it, since she inexorably kept 
him at a distance, Daly might have thought she also had for- 
gotten it. He saw her almost every day, and every day he 
felt that it would be better for him to see her no more. Fate 
had not been propitious to Lawrence Daly. Of all the women 
in the world, his world at least, Miriam was the only one whom 
it was absolutely forbidden to him to love. He had never 
loved, never imagined that he loved any woman, until now. 
And now that one impossible, unattainable woman had taken 
such full, utter, immediate possession of his heart, and his soul 
and his senses, that all life to come must be one dead level of 
aimless endeavour, unprofitable labour, mere waste, because 
she would never love him, never belong to him ! He was a 
strong man, reticent and brave, a man who knew how to take 
the training and punishment of life, as they ought to be taken 
by those who are going up Yagjast to >to& %pftA&tas k s& ite 



Swift Retribution. 399 

Master ; but he winced, and writhed, and shuddered under the 
infliction of his fate. He knew the warp in her character, for 
he was not a blind lover, . of the kind who, when their eyes 
are opened, are most unreasonable tyrants to women, . but 
clear-sighted, who loved her y not a glorified fancy of her, and 
it made the circumstances more fatal than they must otherwise 
have been, had he entertained even the faintest hope that he 
might win her. How would she, warped as her mind was, by 
her false estimate and love of money, regard a profession of 
love on his part . he who would have been her husband's heir 
but for the will which gave all to her ? Perhaps her cold, 
resolute avoidance was intended as an intimation to him that 
such an expedient for the remedy of his disappointment, in 
which it was plain she persisted in believing, was not within 
his reach. 

When this suggested itself to him, Lawrence Daly's power of 
endurance ceased, and he resolved that, not even for the sake 
of Florence, would he remain longer in London. On the 
following day he told Mrs. St. Quentin and Florence that he 
was going to Liverpool on Friday . it was then Monday . and 
should sail for New York on Saturday. Florence dropped her 
needle-work, and began to cry; but Miriam, sitting idle, was 
quite unmoved. 

" It must have come some time," he said, taking Florence's 
hand ; " and you are going away so soon, it is but a few days 
earlier than you would have left me. You will send me good 
news from Germany, and next year, if things go well with me, 
I will come and see you." Not a word, not a look in all this was 
addressed to Miriam, who might not have heard it, so perfect 
was her composure, 

" Yes, I know, Lawrence . and you are very kind . but, all 

seems to come at once . and " Then Florence, for once 

unable to control herself, hurried out of the room. Lawrence 
fully expected that Miriam would follow her. But Miriam sat, 
her gloomy eyes downcast, in perfect silence. . 

For only the second time in tVieix \Vvcs \hssfe \**o ^^ &s*& 



400 A Golden Sorrow. 

together. After several minutes of great embarrassment to 
Lawrence, Miriam said : . 

" I think, Mr. Daly, you told me you had a drawing of the 
place you and Walter lived at, and of your claim, at the gold 
mines . will you give me that drawing ? " 

" Of course," said Lawrence, much surprised. " If you wish, 
I will give it you with pleasure. But it is a mere sketch . 
and " 

" Yes, you told me so. But I wish for it, and some day I 
mean to let Walter see it, and try whether any association with 
it exists in his mind. Don't be afraid of my doing anything 
rash ; I will watch for a good opportunity. Will you bring me 
the sketch to-morrow ? " 

As she spoke she drew towards her the cabinet of ivory, 
silver, and ebony, which formerly stood in her boudoir in Paris, 
and unlocked it. 

" I will give you an equivalent for your sketch, Mr. Daly," 
she continued, in a tone of even more than her customary 
coldness, as she drew out one of the drawers of the cabinet, 
and laid her hand on a miniature. " Look at that likeness. " 
Of whom is it ? " 

He advanced, and took the portrait in his hands. " It is 
my aunt Kate." 

" Mr. St. Quentin's first wife. It is yours. Don't thank 
me ; this, at least, is your right. Or if you will thank me, let 
it be in action." She locked the cabinet, pushed it from her, 
and rose. " Mr. Daly," she said, " I am the last person in the 
world who ought to ask a favour of you." 

" But the first," he replied, earnestly, " to whom I would 
render one." 

She bit her lip and frowned, and he took heed that she 
did so. 

" I have a most particular, a most urgent reason for request- 
ing you to defer your departure. I cannot explain it, I cannot 
even indicate it. "We ^o to Germany this day fortnight Will 
you, as the only service I ^tvaX^ e\e\ *&. <& ^w^x^caain in 



Swift Retribution. 401 

England for the same space of time after we shall have 
gone?" . 

Her tone was impassive, but the look in her eyes made 
Lawrence her slave. 

" I will," was all he said. 

" And will you tell no one that you do so at my request ? " 

" I will tell no one." 

Then she left him : and frt>m that moment, until they 
exchanged a general farewell, she was never again alone with 
him. And poor Florence thought he had deferred his departure 
for her sake. 



^ ^ 



402 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XLI. 

," OUR CLIENT." 

The days before the parting passed away without any remark- 
able incident, until the last but one had arrived. 

Walter, whom Miriam believed to be more conscious of his 
own state than the others supposed, had assented to the expe- 
dition to Germany, without expressing interest or curiosity. 
He was lying on a sofa in the drawing-room, alongside of a 
table covered with prints and portfolios of water-colour draw- 
ings, which it amused him to look at, when he was not too 
listless and sleepy to be amused by anything. Miriam had 
been sedulously cultivating this taste of his for some time, 
and took care to have new prints, photographs, and various 
kinds of drawings provided for its gratification. On this day 
Florence had gone out, about some final preparations, Miriam 
having promised to remain with Walter during her absence. 
He was rather fretful. an unusual symptom . and Miriam had 
to apply herself earnestly to the .task of amusing him, and to 
withdraw her mind, by a strong effort, from its own thoughts 
and troubles. 

She had placed some new specimens of photography, in a 
bright-coloured case, conspicuously within his reach, and after 
some time he noticed them. It was always vain to endea- 
vour to force his attention ; it must be suffered to take its own 
desultory course. He sat up, leaned his elbow on the table, 
and his head on his hand, and began to turn over the contents 
of the case. They were landscape photographs, selected from 
striking scenes, and aU charters of the world. Miriam, pre- 
tending to be busy -mfo soxc^t T&fi&ewsb^ ^rc&&ai him 



" Our Client? 403 

intently. His face was less vacant than usual; there was 
more purpose in his eyes. 

" Sand," he said half aloud, " and great blocks of building . 
the Pyramids, I suppose." He looked long at each, and laid 
them by with care, but without reading the inscriptions on the 
back. " Great trees, branches high up, and huge stems, and a 
sheet of white water. They can't bring water out rightly, ex* 
cept the still, deep pools. The sea and the moon . only the 
two of them, alone . I have seen them so, except for our speck 
of a ship, and neither of them minded that, I should think, and 
I have seen the sand-plains too." 

Miriam laid aside her work and softly drew nearer to 
him. 

" A great desert place, and a dead camel, plenty of bones 
about . I have seen something like that too. . What's this? 
Not a photograph. How has it got in here, among the photo- 
graphs ? Miriam ! " 

" Yes, dear " 

" Look at this. This is a drawing . -a pencil drawing : it has 
no business here, you know." 

She came to his side and looked at it. 

"I know this place too," he continued. "This is the turn, 
round the edge of the bluff, as you came up from the valley 
and there's the hut, and the great rock on the creek." He 
pointed to each spot on the drawing in turn, as he named it, 
and there was a gleam of the old brightness in his changed 
face. 

She listened, following his hand. 

" There's the ravine. Do you see this little path up the face 
of it, and those two rocks ? I could not climb up there now, 
Miriam, and I could not scramble up on that rock " (he put 
his finger on it), " with the other just over my head " (he put 
his finger on that too), " as I did then." 

" What did you do it for, Walter ? Were you looking for 
gold in the rocks in the face of the ravine ? " 

" No, no," he answered, testily -, " I vias t^v\c^^^nk^ 

d d 2 



404 A Golden Sorrow. 

there. There isn't any. I don't know why I climbed up 
between the two rocks, but Daly knows." 

" Did you hurt yourself? Did you fall ? " 

" No. Why should I fall ? It was a safe place." 

He laid the drawing aside, took up one of the photographs, 
and went on looking at it, and talking to himself about it 
Miriam removed the drawing, on the pretext that it ought not 
to be among the photographs, and carefully stuck a large pin 
into the spot which Walter had indicated. 

Lawrence Daly and Mrs. Martin dined at Mrs. St QuentuVs 
house that evening. After dinner Miriam showed Lawrence 
the drawing, pierced by a pin, and told him how she had 
tried this experiment. She repeated to him exactly what 
Walter had said, and added : " Whether I have succeeded or 
not . whether his memory, faintly aroused, is true or false, I 
cannot tell or guess. We shall never have any clearer indica- 
tion than this." 

Lawrence looked long at the drawing. " You have done 
this very ingeniously," he said. " I have not the least doubt 
that in that spot Walter hid the nugget. Perhaps I shall go 
in search of it some day, when I need not care about it, or 
about finding that it has been washed away into some other 
hiding-place by the flood, there to lurk for thousands of years 
more, until, it may be, a race shall possess the earth who will 
not set any store on nuggets." 

Then they talked no more about it ; and Miriam, seeing 
that he cared little for this clue, and did but assume an inte- 
rest that he might not seem indifferent to the effort she had 
made, wondered why it was so. 

They were to part that night. Miriam, Florence, and 
Walter were to begin their journey early on the following 
morning. 

Florence and Daly talked for some time together, apart from 
the others, and then Daly came forward, while Florence 
left the room, to take leave of Miriam. The one was as cold, 
as constrained, as tYie ot\ver. 



" Our Client? 405 

" I hope to see you again next year," said Lawrence, " and 
to find things better. Good-bye." 

" I have your promise, Mr. Daly . you remain in England 
for one fortnight from to-morrow. We . we may have to send 
for you, you know . if Walter should not bear the journey 
well." 

" I trust there is no danger of that ; but you may rely on 
my promise. Once more, good-bye." 

If she could have trusted herself to meet his eyes, she must 
have read in them that he loved her, and have been made . 
what she believed impossible . more wretched than she then 
was. But she did not look at him ; she only gave him a cold, 
impassive hand for a moment, and, to his " Good-bye," replied, 
" Farewell." 

Miriam left her home with the feeling of one driven away 
from paradise, after a glimpse of the radiant wonders within its 
gates. What dross had she been taking for gold all her life 
until now ! . what a vain shadow had she been walking in ! . 
how hollow had been her assurance of peace, where there was 
no peace ! . how base, poor, utterly foolish her ambition ! 
And this was not the worst of it . oh ! how far it was from 
being the worst ! This might have been set right ; she 
might have learned the truth, and put away her delusion 
for ever; she might have arisen from it purified, ennobled, 
but for the base and hateful sin which had sullied her soul ! 
To stand a criminal before the man she loved, the man who 
had taught her what was the meaning of life to women who 
were not such wretches as she . a vile thief, who had robbed 
him, to feel that the only misfortune which could be added to 
her destiny would be his love, which she might once have 
blamelessly tried to win by every harmless woman's art . this 
was her punishment ! On her knees, in the dead hours of the 
night, with eyes which could weep no more, with clasped 
hands and bowed-down head, she acknowledged its justice. 
It never could be lessened ; the sentence a^akvsfc. Yksx \>RN<st 
could be repealed; and with her sense oi Xhe &e.^&\ oS.V<et ^cs^> 



406 A Golden Sorrow. 

there must ever grow her comprehension of its astounding 
folly. Her choice had indeed, like Esau's, been " profane." 

The travellers set forth on their journey ; and Miriam's fine 
new house . the decorations on the walls and ceilings were 
hardly dry, and much of the furniture was not unpacked . 
went into the dingy livery of an " out-of-town " family's man- 
sion, when all London was in the full tide of its life, in the 
early summer. Lawrence Daly went every day to look at it, 
while he was waiting for the expiration of the fortnight during 
which he had promised to remain in England. One night) 
very late, in a fit of restlessness, he took his way to Lowndes 
Square, and fell to studying the house after a manner which made 
it fortunate for him there was no active and intelligent police* 
man in sight It was after all reasonable hours for any light 
to be visible in the basement story, or at the top of the house, 
where only, under present circumstances, lights ought ever to 
have been seen. And yet there was a light in Miriam's bou- 
doir, and the window-sash was open, with the curtains drawn 
behind it Daly watched the light, but no figure passed be- 
tween it and the window. After some time it vanished ; and 
then, in the darkness, he heard the window shut and barred 

" A servant, I suppose," thought Lawrence, as he turned 
away, " trying what it feels like to sit in a boudoir, and keep 
fashionable hours." 

The following day brought Lawrence Daly a letter, from 
Messrs. Ross and Raby, solicitors, of Lincoln's Inn, to the 
effect that they had been instructed by their client, Mrs. St 
Quentin, to request him to meet a representative of the firm 
at her house in Lowndes Square, on the earliest day which it 
would suit his convenience to name, for the purpose of receiv- 
ing from them, on her behalf, a communication of import- 
ance. 

So, then, he was to learn the meaning of the promise she 
had exacted from him. But he was not to learn it from 
herself, and he felt but a. lar^guid curiosity respecting its inter- 
pretation. He wanted to ^eX aaroj. ^^\*&ss^& \fca! he 



" Our Client? 407 

should conquer the vain longing for a love that never could 
be his by change of scene and the resumption of his roving 
habits. This is a notion which men entertain more commonly 
and more successfully than women. Miriam had no such 
hope to sustain her ; but she had not the wish either. She 
would not have loved him less if she could; in her great 
punishment was her only consolation. 

Lawrence replied to Messrs. Ross and Raby that he would 
be at Mrs. St. Quentin's house at noon the next day, and 
passed the intervening time in vague and vain conjectures. 
He kept his appointment punctually, and found Mr. Ross, a 
clean-shaven, pompous gentleman, and Mr. Clissold, already 
arrived. The three gentlemen met in the dining-room, a large 
and handsome apartment, which had been apparently taken 
out of curl-papers for the occasion. A japanned box, of im- 
posing dimensions, occupied a conspicuous place on the centre 
table, and two large plate-chests stood in a window. A flat, 
leather-bound book, marked " Inventories, " lay beside the 
japanned box ; arid a mass of keys, with ivory labels attached 
to them, completed the accessories of a scene entirely inex- 
plicable to Lawrence. He had entered the house with a faint, 
irrational hope that Miriam might be there . he felt how absurd 
it was to suppose she would return suddenly from Germany* 
and, if she had done so, that there should be any mystery 
about it . and yet he was keenly disappointed when the two 
strangers only met him. The first formal civilities over, Mr. 
Ross proceeded to discuss the business on which they had 
come. Mr. Daly was already aware that he was charged with 
an important communication to him, on the part of Mrs. St. 
Quentin, and he would make it as briefly as might be. 

" You are a relative of the late Mr. St. Quentin ? " 

" I am." 

" His nearest relative, and his heir-at-law ? " 

" I am." 

"Mrs. St Quentin ascertained, after her late husbaxvd^ 
death, that he had been endeavouim^ \o foA \a& \\nxh*&.^ 



408 A Golden Sorrow, 

Some memoranda fell into her hands, showing that he had set 
on foot inquiries with that purpose, and if he had succeeded 
he would have bequeathed to his heir-in-law, yourself, his entire 
property, with the exception of an annuity of two hundred 
pounds to her, for her lifetime." 

" Impossible ! " interrupted Lawrence ; " he could not have 
had any such intention. He never " 

"Pardon me, Mr. Daly," continued Mr. Ross, gravely 
checking him by an impressively-uplifted forefinger. " There 
is no doubt at all that the late Mr. St. Quentin did entertain 
this purpose. Why he should have changed it so shortly be- 
fore his decease it is impossible to tell ; but Mrs. St. Quentin 
believes it was because a letter which you wrote to him, an- 
nouncing your intention of coming to England, did not reach 
him, and therefore he suspected the person who professed to 
have gained information about you . a person named Deering . 
was imposing upon him, and that you had not really been 
found. When Mrs. St Quentin passed through Paris the 
other day she had an interview with Monsieur Caux, an agent 
who had acted for Mr. St. Quentin, and whom you saw, I 
think ? " 

"Yes, I saw Monsieur Caux," said Lawence, quite be- 
wildered. 

" He confirmed Mrs. St Quen tin's previous impressions by 
his account of Mr. St. Quentin's last interview with him, and 
he gave her this letter, which you will recognize." Mr. Ross 
handed to Lawrence his own letter to Mr. St. Quentin, which 
had not reached its destination for months after it was written. 
Lawrence glanced at it, and handed it to him again. 

"Under these circumstances," resumed Mr. Ross, with 
added pomposity of manner, " Mrs. St. Quentin, having be- 
come convinced that this accidental delay, leading Mr. St 
Quentin to believe he had been deceived, constituted in reality 
his sole reason for making a will in her favour, as he did . Mr. 
Clissold drew up the instrument " . Mr. Clissold, sedulously fit- 
ting his finger-tips to&eXYvex, a& Vs. sx.\^ *&& \ak\a. % with his 



. " Our Client." 409 

elbows upon it, bowed . " a Very short time before his decease, 
and that his own views and wishes, but for this accidental 
delay, would have remained unaltered, has renounced the 
legacy in your favour." 

" Impossible ! " exclaimed Lawrence, pushing back his chair, 
and starting to his feet. " It cannot be. This is an absurd, a 
fatal delusion. Nothing on earth should induce me to listen 
to such a thing ! Why should he not have left all his property 
to his wife, under any circumstances ? " 

" We cannot enter into that question," said Mr. Ross ; " we 
have only to state our client's views and intentions. Mrs. St. 
Quentin instructed us some time ago, and last Tuesday 
executed a deed of gift in your favour : here is a copy of it," . 
he raised the lid of the box, and indicated a folded paper . 
"having returned from Germany for the purpose. By this 
instrument she conveys to you absolutely the whole of the 
property bequeathed to her by Mr. St. Quentin, and of which 
we are prepared to give you all particulars, with the exception 
of a sum of five thousand pounds, deposited in the Bank of 
France. 

" And do you suppose, for a moment, gentlemen, that I 
shall accept this . this unheard-of sacrifice from Mrs. St. 
Quentin, from a lady who owes me no consideration what- 
ever ? I cannot assure you emphatically enough that I had 
no expectations whatever from Mr. St. Quentin, and that in 
no communication which passed between his agent and Mr. 
Deering, or myself, did he give the slightest indication of an . 
intention to do anything for me. I give you my word of 
honour, I had no hopes, no disappointments in connexion 
with this matter." 

" As I said before, Mr. Daly, we cannot enter into this por- 
tion of the subject. I have now fulfilled Mrs. St. Quentin's 
instructions. It only remains for me to say that Mr. Clissold 
will go into particulars with you. There are complete inven- 
tories of all plate and other valuables in this house., *ss& *&s^ 
in the apartment in Paris ; Mi. C\vsso\& ^ri& \*as& wt ^& 



410 A Golden Sorrva). 

leases and other documents ; and, as I have another engage- 
ment, I will now take my leave." 

" Stay one moment," said Lawrence. " I am quite unfit to 
speak of this now ; I am astonished, shocked beyond measure ! 
I must see Mrs. St Quentin without an hour's delay. Where is 
she ? She has been here in this house, has she not ? " 

" She was here for three days," replied Mr. Ross, " making 
these final arrangements. But she left England yesterday 
morning." 

" To return to Germany ! To her brother and his wife ? " 

" I really cannot tell you, Mr. Daly . I do not know. Mrs. 
St. Quentin did not furnish us with any address. Her business 
with us is all completely and most satisfactorily wound up, and 
we know nothing further about her." 

" But you will continue to act for me ? " asked Lawrence 
eagerly. " You will consider me your client ? " Mr. Ross 
signified that Ross and Raby would be very happy to do so. 
u And you will bear in mind that I distinctly refuse to accept 
this deed of gift ; and that, if I accept the temporary care and 
management of Mrs. St QuenthVs property, it is only in the 
character of her representative, and in her interests." 

" Very good," replied Mr. Ross ; " that is a matter for your 
own decision entirely." And then he took leave of Lawrence, 
who remained with Mr. Clissold, surrounded by the signs and 
tokens of his astounding and unwelcome change of fortune. 

Mr. Clissold proceeded to detail the particulars and the 
dispositions of all this wealth . of which Lawrence had so often 
thought, in old times, with curiosity, doubtless, and 'some little 
envy . in his dry, dull, and business-like fashion; and Law- 
rence listened, with his mind in great perplexity. Every trivial 
incident of his first interview with Miriam returned to him, 
and, feeling that there was a contrast, never lessened and 
never relaxed, between her reception of him and her manner 
to him, from the moment in which he revealed his identity 
until that of their parting he vaguely scented a mystery be- 
yond the already mysterious dic\^s\.^^^^^^0^ V. stood. 



"Our Client." 411 

This absolute renunciation of the wealth she loved, and had 
bought at such a price, on the romantic plea of carrying out 
the supposed intentions of a man. who had contradicted that 
supposition in the most positive manner by a will in which no 
name but her own was mentioned, was wholly inconsistent 
with Miriam's character, as he knew it, by report and by 
experience. 

Among the objects of value in the room was one to which 
Mr. Clissold directed Lawence's attention in its turn. This 
was a strong teak box, containing a quantity of gold and 
silver plate, and articles of ornament of fine Indian workman- 
ship. Three trays, lined with cloth, contained these precious 
things, fitted into sockets; and Lawrence turned them over 
with some curiosity, until he came to a space, like that into 
which a looking-glass is usually fitted in the lid of a dressing 
case, and which was occupied by a portrait on ivory, in a very 
elaborate gold frame. 

This portrait, evidently the work of a native artist, repre- 
sented a good-looking, elderly man, and was, in fact, that of 
Mr. St. Quentin, as Lawrence knew, from its likeness to a 
photograph which he had seen in Florence's book. Mr. Clis- 
sold admired the frame, commented upon the combined rich- 
ness and roughness of the workmanship, and said : . 

" One of the family, I suppose ? " 

" Mr. St. Quentin himself," said Daly. 

" Oh I no," said Mr. Clissold. " Didn't you know Mr. St. 
Quentin ? " 

-" I never saw him." 

" I saw him just before he died, you know. He did not 
look so ill, either, considering. But thafs nothing, I'm told, 
in cases like his; they pop off in a minute, when they're 
seemingly all right. But he was not the least like that. 
Different complexion, different eyes. Blue eyes he had, and a 
pale skin, and didn't look within ten years, even then, of the 
age of that picture. What's this ? A \>\$e \i^\ *s^ &ss^ 
with turquoise tassels. Beautiful, to xfc^V Va.*2&ss*3^ 



412 A Golden Sorrow. 

clicked his boots together under the table, in his admiration, 
and went on to the other rare and costly objects, unconscious 
that Lawrence was staring stupidly at the picture, a faint dread, 
without form or consistence, stirring at his heart. 

When Mr. Clissold's task was concluded, and he had left 
him, Lawrence summoned the housekeeper, who had been, 
he found, prepared by Miriam for his probably coming to 
reside in the house. He told her he should only occupy the 
rooms on the ground floor, and that the remainder of the house 
must remain shut up for the present. After another interview 
with Mr. Ross, Daly left England for Germany. 

"Do you really, seriously mean that you think Mrs. St. 
Quentin has done right, Florence, in bestowing upon me wealth 
which I don't want, and which I won't use, in departing 
utterly from the . her husband's specific directions . never 
mind his intentions ; the will is a fact . and in abandoning all 
her duties, in the way she has done ? " 

" I not only think she has done right, but I cannot for a 
moment imagine Miriam's acting in any other way, when she 
discovered that Mr. St. Quentin would have made a different 
will, had he known what she came to know." 

" And yet this same woman, with this far-fetched sense of 
honour, and extraordinary delicacy of conscience, married Mr. 
St. Quentin for the sake of his money, which she relinquishes 
for a scruple like this ! " 

" That is true," said Florence, little thinking what a truth 
she was uttering ; " but Miriam sees things, Miriam understands 
right and wrong, far differently now." 

"Well, you women are incomprehensible. You, too, are 
against me. I will say no more about this: I shall never 
abandon my search for her, never abandon my hope of finding 
her. Walter, you tell me, is in ignorance of all this." 

" Yes," she answered, with a heavy sigh. " It would have 
been useless to tell him. He could not have understood it." 

" No, indeed, nor any one else." 

"Do be persuaded. "Lex Vixv&x&% \T&sc&&ro& \*. ^eS&M&L 



. "Our Client" 413 

. 

So long as you do not accept it, fully and frankly, you will 
make her wretched, and part us from her, for she will never 
put herself within reach of seeing you until you have done 
so." 

" It is in vain to try to persuade me, Florence ; I am much 
more resolute in my purpose than she in hers, though she 
thinks she has made it irrevocable . stronger by all the added 
strength of my motive." 

She looked surprised, but asked no question. He con- 
tinued, . 

" You persist in refusing to tell me where she is ? " 

"Yes, I persist. I promised her. I cannot break faith 
with Miriam." 

" She will not remain long away from you. Mind, I warn 
you, I will have your house watched." 

She smiled faintly. " I am not at all afraid of your doing 
anything of the kind." 

Shortly after they parted, and Florence wrote to Miriam a 
full account of the interview. 

" Never mind, dearest Florence " . so ran Miriam's reply. 
" I only ask a year's secrecy ; and, if a woman's influence 
should intervene before, not even that. If he falls in love 
and marries, or intends to do so, I need not care how soon 
after he finds me out. Hiding is so easy. He never saw me 
except in my weeds ; I have laid them aside ; and he passed 
me yesterday on the platform at London Bridge . the platform, 
Florence, where you and I parted with Walter . so close, I 
had barely time to put my veil down." 



414 A Golden Sorrow. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

THE TESTIMONY OF THE ROCKS. 

To search for a person who has a strong motive for conceal- 
ment, without any such previous knowledge of that person's 
tastes and habits as would supply a " system " on which to 
work, is not an easy or promising undertaking. Miriam had 
no friends in London, and Lawrence had no knowledge of 
her mode of life in Paris to supply him with data for his pur- 
suit The servants left in the house in Lowndes Square were 
all strangers ; and Monsieur Caux, to whom Lawrence applied, 
was entirely unacquainted with Mrs. St. Quentin's habits or 
associates. He had seen her only once. on the occasion of 
his giving her Lawrence's own letter ; and he knew nothing, 
except that he had been employed against her interests, and 
that he did not gather from her manner that she resented 
that circumstance. 

To his first attempt, by letter, to induce Florence to re- 
consider her resolution, Lawrence received a reply which 
made him desist If he made any further reference to the 
subject Florence must close their correspondence, and she 
begged him to spare her so great a sacrifice. If Lawrence 
had not had lurking, in the unexplored recesses of his mind, 
something which was, and yet was not, a suspicion of the 
truth, an impression which he would not investigate, and could 
not banish, he might not have shrunk, as he did, from the 
employment of any other person's services in this matter. 
He had indeed no right to set detectives on the track of a 
iady in no way bound to admit him to her presence, if she 
chose to hold herself aloof txomYuscL-, ^xA^x^^sgp&have 



Tlu Testimony of the Rocks. 41 5 

yielded to the temptation to do so, trusting to her pardon, 
if he had not been tormented by a vague surmise that there 
was in this mysterious restitution and disappearance something 
more than the avowed motive. The last person who had 
seen Mr. St. Quentin alive had not recognized the portrait 
which Lawrence knew to be that of Mr. St. Quentin, and that 
person had drawn up Mr. St Quentin's will ! What did all 
this point at ? He dreaded to ask the question of himself, he 
dreaded the answer. There was a method by which he felt 
certain he could force Miriam to communicate with him, to 
come out of her concealment at all events for once. It was 
by putting an advertisement in the Times, addressed to the 
persons who witnessed the will of the late Mr. St. Quentin. 
But he could not do this. It was too near to the half-uttered 
whisper of the truth within him; it might possibly involve 
Miriam in danger, disgrace . and he loved her ! 

Lawrence went to Doctors' Commons and read the will. 
There was nothing to be learned from that He went to 
Dover, and found that the head-waiter, who was one of the 
witnesses, was still there. He was easily induced to talk of 
the old gentleman who died at the hotel so very unexpectedly, 
to the dismay of the proprietor, and of the beautiful lady who 
had so much courage and presence of mind. He recollected 
the witnessing of the will perfectly, and that the gentleman 
did seem very ill indeed, though not so bad as to prepare 
any one for what had happened. There was only one circum- 
stance connected with the event which no one thought of 
mentioning, and which had never come to Lawrence's know- 
ledge. This was the visit of Mrs. St. Quentin's brother to 
the hotel, just before the death of her husband. So trifling a 
fact did not hold a place in any one's mind, and thus the clue 
escaped Lawrence's grasp. He had taken the Indian portrait 
of Mr. St Quentin to Dover, and displayed it conspicuously 
in his sitting-room. The head-waiter was looking curiously 
at the frame while he was answering Daly's questi<y&s,> W*. 
without the slightest recognition o tiofc ia.c^ TK &ss&fe ^^ 



416 A Golden Sorrow, 

enough for Lawrence ; he would not ask him a needless ques- 
tion. 

After this, great discouragement fell upon Lawrence. He 
was not a man to grow morbidly weary of his life because its 
lines had not been laid as he would have had them ; but he 
felt the position in which Miriam's unaccountable rashness had 
placed him false and irksome. The influence of the man who 
had made his youth desultory, and dependent, and unsatis- 
factory, was still pursuing him, and his future threatened to 
be as desultory and as unsatisfactory as his past 

Why should he not go away, and give it all up, putting his 
affairs into the hands of Messrs. Ross and Raby, letting the 
London house, and leaving the money, which had hitherto 
do.ne no one any good, to accumulate until such time as he 
could entirely solve the mystery, or Miriam should have come 
to her right mind? Here was an easy way out of all his 
difficulties, and into some new mode of life, which should 
dissipate the dreariness and perplexity in which he was living ; 
with only one drawback to it, one little objection, which neu- 
tralized every advantage. He loved Miriam, and no life un- 
shared by her could be any more bearable than this, into 
which there was, after all, a chance that she might come some 
day. 

Lawrence went to The Firs, and wandered all over the 
empty rooms, and all the places which Walter used to talk 
about, and with which Miriam was associated. No one there 
could tell him anything about Mrs. St. Quentin, when he in- 
quired in a casual way. There was a story afloat that another 
will had been found, and that Miriam had been dispossessed : 
and, as no one in the neighbourhood knew the particulars of 
Mr. St. Quentin's death except Mr. Martin, who did not think 
proper to repeat them, the explanation was accepted. Law- 
rence stayed two days at Mr. Martin's house, and had no reason 
to suspect that he was better informed concerning Miriam's 
place of abode than, himself. One suggestion, not directly 
bearing on the subject, \>\ft ^\C\Ocv\A *xl ^\\x^^\^t V\im % 



The Testimony of the Rocks. 417 

Mr. Martin made. It was in speaking of Miriam's girlhood, 
and the many adverse influences which had warped her cha- 
racter, originally noble, as her act of restitution, however ill- 
judged and excessive, proved, that Mr. Martin said : " That 
Miss Monitor was an honest sort of person enough. I don't 
like schoolmistresses in general, and I think they can hardly 
be disinterested, under a special miracle ; but she was a good 
friend to Miriam, on the whole." 

" Of course she does not know where she is ? " 

" I should suppose she does not. Miriam would naturally 
calculate upon your going to her in the first instance, and she 
would hardly burden her with such a confidence. Quite 
enough to impose it on Florence, I should say." 

Miriam would naturally calculate upon his going to Miss 
Monitor in the first instance ! And he had not done so, and 
it had never occurred to him I He did not say so to Mr. 
Martin, but he determined the next day should find him at 
Blackheath. He had a kindly recollection of Miss Monitor. 
Suppose the good-natured, cheery old maid were to find out 
his secret ? What then ? He was so solitary and so miser- 
able he hoped she would, or that she would give him some 
encouragement to reveal it to her. At least there would be 
some one to whom he might talk x>{ Miriam. 

Miss Monitor's cottage at Blackheath was a pretty little 
dwelling, full of nooks and crannies, which were all filled with 
appropriate furniture, and it combined a delightful appearance 
of age with every modern convenience, and no small degree 
of elegance and refinement. The rooms opened into one 
another, and the longest flight of stairs in the building num- 
bered only ten low, broad steps. The prevailing tints of the 
furniture and hangings were warm reds and cool greens, and 
all the ornaments were of a quaint, simple fashion ; with one 
exception, which caught Lawrence's eye as soon as he was 
ushered into Miss Monitor's drawing-room, apparently to the 
displeasure of a very handsome grey parrot^ ^Iwasfc <^. ^\s*^ 
at the open glass-door window \ea&mg> Vato xh& ^0*a&s^ &&> 



4i 8 A Golden Sorrow. . 

richly-cultivated garden, fenced off by a wire railing from the 
field sacred to Miss Monitor's cow. This exception was a 
cabinet of ebony, ivory, and silver, much too splendid for its 
surroundings, and which Lawrence instantly remembered to 
have seen . where ? Surely it had stood on a table in Miriam's 
drawing-room, and Miriam had touched it on that first day ! 
He was looking at the cabinet, full of reminiscences, when 
the servant who had ushered him into the drawing-room re- 
turned, and, with much confusion and trepidation, informed 
him that she had been mistaken in telling him that her mis- 
tress, Miss Monitor, was at home. She was not aware of it, 
but Miss Monitor had gone out, and was not expected to 
return until evening. The girl spoke hurriedly, and held the 
door wide open, to intimate that the intruder was expected 
to take his departure instantly. But this did not suit Law- 
rence's views. " I had something important to say to Miss 
Monitor," he observed : " since I cannot see her, I will write 
it." Then he seated himself at a writing-table, opposite the 
open glass door, and began to write, while the unhappy 
parlour-maid looked on helplessly, the very image of misery 
and irresolution. 

Presently Lawrence heard a step upon the walk outside 
the window, and paused for a moment It was a loitering, 
proprietorial step, and the two handsome Skye terriers, who 
lay close to the window-sill, in amiable proximity to the 
parrot, did not stir or bark. There was a snipping sound, as 
of the person outside cutting flowers from their stems, and 
presently a woman stood in the open doorway, arrested by 
the sight of the man at the table, and from whose unnerved 
hands tumbled down a basket of gorgeous roses, which fell 
into the parrot's cage, and on to the dogs' noses, and all over 
the carpet. Then the parlour-maid shut the door, and fled ; 
and Lawrence looked up, and saw . Miriam ! 

Yes, Miriam, whom he had been seeking vainly, and who 
had been, all these mouths, mthio. his reach ! . Miriam, more 
beautiful than he \ia4 cvet sftea est SssL-a^^V^VAft^ 



The Testimony of the Rocks. 419 

whose face he read, even in the instant before she turned and 
rushed away, something more than surprise and fear, something 
very different from horror. She rushed away ; but in an in- 
stant Lawrence followed her, came up with her at the wire 
paling, seized her by the wrists, and fairly dragged her, with 
the force and determination of any savage, minded that his 
prey shall not escape him, inside the glass door. Until then 
neither spoke ; but when he had pulled her in, and stood, still 
holding her fast, he said one word to her, . 

" Miriam !  

" Let me go instantly, Mr. Daly ! How dare you ? " she 
gasped. 

He loosed her wrists ; he stood in the doorway, and he an- 
swered her : " How dare you do what you have done to me for 
many a day ? How dare you make me so miserable, and con- 
demn me to a false position, to satisfy your own pride, or your 
own fancy ? " 

" I did not/' she replied, solemnly, and recovering her self- 
possession completely. " It was neither my pride nor my 
fancy which dictated what I have done." 

" Then tell me what it was." 

"You have no right to command me in that tone. The 
explanation 1 gave you is the true explanation. From the 
resolution I then made you shall never move me. By what 
right do you question me further ? n 

" I will tell you presently. Sit there. " He placed a chair 
for her ; she took it mechanically ; and he stood before her, 
not releasing her for a moment from his gaze. " You have, to 
answer me some questions first. Where have you been since 
you returned from Germany, and since you sent your lawyers 
to me with your absurd story about Mr. St Quentin's inten- 
tions ? " 

" It . it was not absurd," she faltered. 

" It was ; and it was cruel . cruel to yourself and to me 
But that is not my question. Where have you b^ssi V 

" Here." 

e e 2 



420 A Golden Sorrow. 

" Here ! Good heavens ! so near me, when I have been 
wearying my soul with conjecture, and sickening my heart 
with hope, always cheated and deferred 1 Thank God, at length, 
at last, for its realization ! " 

She looked at him with timid surprise ; she blushed and 
trembled. 

" I see . I know why you did this : being so simple, and so 
audacious, you calculated, rightly, that I should never think of 
it. And now I have found you." 

" You shall not make me stay here. I will go away. You 
have no right to pursue me, Mr. Daly, I am free to do as I 
choose, and to decline such acquaintances as I think fit" 

She was making a very poor fight of it . and she knew it 
This was the most wretched, the most contemptible of shams ! 
What would you have ? Here was a guilty woman, who had 
laid all her own life waste, struggling in the strong grasp of her 
first love, in the presence of the man from whom she had fled, 
because he it was whom she had wronged, and she had learned 
that he was her master. 

" You are not free," he replied ; " at least you are not free 
from me 1 And I will tell you why, Miriam, and in doing so I 
will answer the question you asked me just now : ' What right 
have I?' I will tell you why. It is because you have bound 
me to you, and thus cannot be free yourself ! It is because no 
will of yours, no flight of yours, can sever me from you ! It is 
because I love you, Miriam, absorbingly, devotedly, as I have 
loved you since I saw you, as I believe I loved you before I 
ever saw you, and because I will win you . you who, I know, 
have never loved . if it is in love, or man, to win woman ! " 

She shrank back in her chair, and put her hand out to keep 
him away. Her eyes closed . a strong shudder ran through 
her frame ; she made a desperate effort . an effort which fright- 
ened him . to keep from fainting. At length she stammered 
out . 

" Oh, my God ! Can it be ? You do not know what I 
ajn." 



The Testimony of the Rocks. 42 1 

" I do. I know you are the queen of all women to me, the 
one woman in all the world ; my love, my life ! Miriam ! 
listen to me ; don't reject me . don't tell me the hope that has 
stirred my heart since I saw your dear eyes shining on me 
yonder is a delusion like all my life hitherto . the hope that 
you might come to love me ! " 

Her hands were clasped over her face now, and he gently 
tried to remove them. But she rose, suddenly slipped by him, 
and stood upright, looking steadily at him, between him and 
the door. 

" Hush ! " she said, almost in a whisper, and with one hand 
pressed heavily on her breast, as she steadied herself by catch- 
ing the mantelpiece with the other, in the well-remembered 
attitude of their first interview. 

" Do not say what I must not hear ; do not say what it will 
break my heart to remember. You do not know, you cannot 
conceive, how you are torturing me, how utterly beaten, de- 
feated, a wretch I am ! There is no escape for me now." 
She was growing calmer with every word, and here her eyes 
shone with the fire of a desperate resolution. " You, and yet 
not you, but my fate, and God's eternal, immutable justice, 
have hunted me down at last ! I have repented, but it does 
not avail ; I have made restitution, but it is not enough ; I 
must make confession too, and be for ever in your eyes what I 
am in my own." 

"Miriam! Great heaven! what can you mean? What 
can you be in my eyes but the best beloved among women ? " 

Again she waved him off, and something supremely mourn- 
ful and majestic in her gesture held him motionless. 

" I can be what I am, a woman degraded from her place 
among women by a base, low, and treacherous crime . a 
woman who is an undetected felon, at your mercy from this 
moment" 

Over his face there flickered the light of a sudden, terrible 
perception. 

" Who do you think it was that ictetek Y*fc. *s*. >w**^ 



422 A Golden Sorrow. 

sciously, for there was no unconsciousness, save that Lr 



D meant Walter's friend ; Lawrence Daly . who do you 

think it was who did that, and did it by an act of unparalleled 
treachery? Who do you think it was that signed Mr. St 
Quentin's will ? " 

" I don't know, Miriam," answered Lawrence Daly, in a low, 
resolute voice, and made two steps towards her; "and I don't 
care. It was not Mr. St. Quentin; I have known that a long 
time." 

" What ! You knew ! " 

" Yes, I knew ; and now, if you have anything more to tell 
me, you must tell it thus." 

She was clasped in his strong arms, she, that tall, well-grown, 
grand woman, in an embrace which made her feel as small as 
a child, as weak as a reed, and yet filled her with an awful joy, 
and a sudden glorious fear, as of one . she thought afterwards, 
when thought could take form in her mind . who wakes in 
heaven. Her head was bent back by the clasp of his arms 
around her figure ; and his kisses, full of mercy and of love^ 
stifled the sobs which shook her convulsively, as his lips 
gathered the tears from her eyelids, and his long, silken beard 
hid her face from him. There was no need for Miriam's con- 
queror to ask the lover's question. Lawrence Daly never did, 
in fact, then or afterwards, ask her if she loved him. There was 
utter surrender in the first helpless sob which heaved up her 
heart against his breast, and in the quick shudder with which 
she nestled there. 

Visitors are plenty in the Golden State of late ; mere tourists, 
people who do not come thither to toil, or to barter, or to 
gamble, but merely to see one of the grandest and most beauti- 
ful countries on the face of the glorious earth, to breathe the 
most delicious air, to realize for once that there is a land in 
which mere animal living is delightful. The romance of dan- 
ger, difficulty, toil, and wild adventure is indeed all but gone, 
but the memory of it is fassY^ axvA. xoa&3 axe the visitors now, 
brought thither commodiousYy Vj ^ ^gjax&\i^^^^\a*. 



The Testimony of the Rocks. 423 

trod the plains, and toiled through the wilderness in the old 
time. Among the number of these, last year, was Lawrence 
Daly. He was accompanied by Miriam. He had said to her 
once that, when the great railroad which was to join the Atlan- 
tic and the Pacific together was completed, he would revisit 
the Golden State. . And now she was there with him, the 
happiest of women, as she told herself many times a day, won- 
dering humbly at the great rescue that had come to her, and 
striving that her life should bear fruits meet for so real a 
repentance as hers. She had never ceased to marvel at 
Lawrence's love, and she had once told him so, venturing to 
touch the margin of a forbidden subject, by saying : " It is so 
wonderful . though you know quite the worst of me." 

" Though . or . because f " asked Lawrence, with that slow, 
gradually beaming, beautiful smile of his, which never lost its 
fascination for Miriam. 

She enjoyed this long and varied journey to the full ; and 
her expectation, her revelling by anticipation in sentiment and 
association, were at the full, when they reached the scene of 
the long companionship of Lawrence and Walter. Even the 
remembrance of Walter's feeble state could not obscure 
Miriam's pleasure. At least he and Florence were happy, 
she and Lawrence knew. 

The settlement was a busy, populous, thriving place now, 
with a town where the huts had stood in the valley, and a 
goodly row of stores occupying the site of the one emporium 
of the days of Lawrence and Walter, with constituted authori- 
ties, and many places of good entertainment for man and 
beast, and one splendid hotel, to which the English party 
betook themselves. They arrived at night ; but an early hour 
next morning found Lawrence and Miriam following, on foot, 
the windings of the valley in the direction of the lone hut. 
Lawrence had already inquired into the alterations made by 
the course of the famous flood, and was not surprised to learn 
that the lone hut, well remembered as the scexva. oi^^Tsaax&sx 
of Spoiled Five . to whose grave Vie \e& ^Kvf^sa. ^ks\%^s 



424 A Golden Sorrow. 

walk . had been partially destroyed by the rush of the water 
through the ravine and over the face of the great rock. It had 
been considered hazardous to reconstruct a dwelling in the 
same situation, and such remains as the flood had spared had 
been carried away piecemeal. When Lawrence and Miriam 
rounded the bluff, and came in sight of the stone plateau on 
which the hut had stood, there was not a trace that it had ever 
existed. 

They approached the place in silence, and stood silent for 
several minutes, gazing upwards at the rock and the grand 
sweep of the ravine. 

" The hut stood just here," said Daly at length. 

" It is all exactly like your drawing," said Miriam, whose 
eyes were full of tears, easy to be understood. " There is no 
change at all, is there, except the hut being gone ? " 

" I don't observe any. . Yes, I do, though. Look there, 
Miriam, to the right, up along the face of the ravine, at the 
exact spot where you put the pin in my drawing, where Walter 
showed you the burial-place of the nugget. Are you following 
my directions ? Yes ! Then look ; do you not see something 
which contradicts the sketch ? " 

Miriam shaded her eyes from the glorious Californian sun- 
shine, and looked eagerly in the direction which he indicated. 

" I think I see what you mean," she said. " In the drawing 
there is a space between those two stones, which lie one over 
the other there, in the ravine." 

" Exactly. Yet I know I drew their relative position cor- 
rectly, and Walter confirmed it by pointing out to you the 
space between them. That is, of course, one result of the 
flood, and would confirm me in my belief, if it required con- 
firmation, that our nugget was not stolen, but swept away by 
the waters. The undermining of the earth between the upper 
and lower rock has brought the upper one down on it." 

" What a pity the gold should have been lost ! I don't mean 
to us," she added hastily. " Vfe have more than enough of all 
the world can give, but ^aex^j &&*? 



The Testimony of the Rocks. 425 

" Yet," said Lawrence, " that nugget was unfortunate treasure- 
trove to us. It is as well as it is. You won't mind waiting 
here, Miriam, while I climb up that path, and take a look at 
the place ? I want to see whether there is any spot from which 
a man standing on the rock, under the edge of the ravine, can 
be seen. I have always suspected that Walter was watched 
that morning, intentionally or unintentionally, and that poor 
Spoiled Five was murdered, not by men who came for the gold 
to the hut, but by men who came in the night to the place 
where Walter had hidden it" 

" Is it dangerous climbing, Lawrence ? Is there any risk of 
your slipping ?" 

" Not the least, dear. I have not forgotten all the arts of a 
wild life, if there were." 

He collected some loose stones into a tolerably convenient 
seat for her, and ran across the plateau, was then concealed 
from her sight for a few minutes, and emerged, scrambling up 
the face of the ravine. 

Miriam watched him intently, following every movement of 
his alert, active figure with loving eyes, and a heart filled with 
countless and contending feelings. Once or twice he stopped, 
and waved his hand, and called to her, his voice easily distinct 
in the pure, sparkling air. She saw him spring at a tuft of brush- 
wood, and swing himself up on the projecting edge of the lower 
rock, and then she saw him stoop, kneel, lie down on the flat 
surface, and lay his head upon it, apparently peering eagerly 
into the crevices of its junction with the superincumbent mass 
of the upper rock. She saw him, clinging to the stone he lay 
on with one hand, plunge the other, and his arm up to the 
elbow, into a crevice, which she could not see. He remained 
in that attitude for some minutes, then withdrew his hand ; but 
she could not discern whether he held anything in it. Then 
he raised himself, and, standing on the rock, 'formed his hands 
into a speaking-trumpet, and shouted to her. 

She jumped up, and ran to the edge of the plateau. 

" Run down the valley, and bring the fttsfc. xaaxv^ <s^\sRX>fcK^ 



426 A Golden Sorrow. 

She obeyed him instantly, running fleetly but steadily, as so 
few women can run. On and on she sped, until, at a con- 
siderable distance beyond the bluff, she saw two men coming 
leisurely towards her on horseback. Then she stopped, to re- 
cover breath, to be intelligible when they should come up to 
her, which they did presently. She stepped out into the road, 
and told them that she had been sent to bring help to her 
husband, who had climbed the ravine, and required assistance, 
she did not know why. Then one of the two, a fine young 
fellow, who recognized the English lady he had seen in the 
town last night, set Miriam on his saddle, holding her with his 
strong arm, and striding along by the side of his horse, while 
the other galloped on to Lawrence's assistance. 

When Miriam and her escort reached the plateau, the other 
man was already beside Daly, having tied his horse to a bush. 
Miriam begged the young man who had come with her to tie 
up his horse also, and join the other two. He obeyed her at 
once, and Miriam resumed her seat on the stones. Lawrence 
was not hurt, she knew that ; she could wait patiently for any- 
thing more there was to know. 

And now, straining her eyes in the direction of the three men, 
who had not much more thaa standing-room, and were obliged 
to move with evident caution on the surface of the rock, she saw 
them lie down, each in his turn, as her husband had done, and 
grope, as she supposed, into the crevice, as he had groped- 
Then they all stood upright and talked earnestly together for 
awhile, after which they descended the face of the ravine, and 
the two men went direct to their horses, loosed them, mounted 
them, and, having gravely saluted her, rode away. Not till then 
did Lawrence approach her, with face so solemn that it awed her 
for a moment out of the power of speech. 

" Come away, my love ! " He raised her from her seat, and 
drew her hand within his arm. 

" What is it, Lawrence ? What did you find there ? " 

" A dreadful tiun& . a. human, skeleton ! A man on whom 
the upper rock, no do\&t,YvaMa^^*x&<2Da^^ 



The Testimony of the Rocks. 427 

while he was digging there between the two, unconscious of the 
loosening action of the flood." 

" Oh ! Lawrence, how dreadful ! What can you do ? " 

" Nothing. Those good fellows have gone to the town to 
give notice of the discovery. I fear I must appear at the in- 
quest, for I only can presumptively identify those dry, bare 
bones." 

"You! Who is it, then ? " 

" Deering. it must be he ! The unhappy wretch lied to me, 
came hither to dig out the nugget, and this is his terrible fate." 

" Oh ! Lawrence, how awful ! But how do you know ? " 

" Thus ! We found this in a deep crevice behind the lower 
rock." 

Lawrence Daly placed in his wife's shrinking hands Walter's 
Pocket-book. 



THE END.  
