HESTER KIRTON. 



.CHAPTER L 

A VISITOR AT EKTOlfS FARM. 

The afternoon had been unusually sultry even 
for the hot autumn of 18 . . The twisted chim- 
neys on the gaily-tiled roof of the little station 
at Driven looked redder and harder-baked than 
ever, the gables seemed to stand up more 
sharply, the waved barge-boards looked thinner 
and more like cardboard; everything near and 
about glistened with an unnatural metallic 
radiance, even to the face of the ticket-taker, . 
a pale, insolent-looking fellow, with a sprouting 
beard under his chin, something like an unhealthy 
satyr, in a blue coat and pewter buttons 

1.2 



4 HESTER KTETON. 

The train had just puffed itself out of sight 
again ; the only passenger it had deposited, after 
looking at his coat-case, lounged through the 
station; the surly ticket-taker saying he might, 
perhaps, see a lad outside to carry his trunk for 
him. 

The traveller, a tall, fashionably-dressed man, 
and singularly handsome, stood looking, with a 
dismayed countenance, at the dusty road stretched 
out before him. There was no vehicle to be seen, 
but a boy was standing near the door, evidently 
on the look-out for a job. 

*' How far to Barton's Farm, my man ? " 

*' May be a mwile, may be moor . can't tell'ee for 
sure," replied the boy, sulkily. Perhaps he did 
not feel sulky, but those loutish country lads with 
blue eyes and yellow hair, who, after a gaping stare, 
always answer questions over their left shoulder, 
are somehow suggestive of sulkiness. 

The traveller looked still more disconcerted. 

" I have a coat-case," he said ; "can you carry 
it?" 

" Show I wher't bide un Til warn ye I'll do't,'' 
said the boy : he looked far less surly now. 

The coat-case, a new dandified affair of solid 



A VISITOR AT KIRTON'S FARM. 5 

leather, studded with large brass knobs, was soon 
on the lad*s sturdy shoulder, 

" Be ye thinking to bide at Barton's Farm ? " 

" Yej, till to-morrow." 

The boy grinned. 

" I suppose Mr. Kirton has visitors sometimes?" 

*' I dwoan't know as ever the time is then," said 
the boy, chuckling. "Vis'torsI whoy, he be a 
mwiser, he be ; an old skinflint, as rich as a Jew, 
though they do tell ^" 

"There is a daughter . Miss Kirton . is there 
not ? " asked Mr. Hallam. 

" Auh ! Muss Heaster, do'ee mean ? Well, 'ees, 
but ne'er a body sees much o' she. The owld mau 
he kips she at whoam; folks do say as how he 
grudges the money to buy she gownds and such 
like fit to be seed in." 

"Is that what you mean by calling him a 
miser ? " said the gentleman, much amused. 

" Tior' love 'ee,f that bean't half." The boy fairly 
turned to look at him, for the corner of the port- 
manteau had hitherto intervened. **Whoy, a 
mwiser's a deal more nor that ; whoy, I'm blessed 
if he wouldn't like to make folk live on cheese- 
parings and bacon-rinds, washed down wi' water. 



6 HESTEB EIBTOK. 

The men thay know 'un so well there bean't a one 
among 'em as 'ud meal in th' house if he coul d 
help it ; it's a mortal wonder Mass Heaster and th' 
owld 'ooman wurn't starved long ago, and his- 
self too." 

Mr. Hallam seemed to ponder oyer this mfor- 
mation ; his pace slackened, and he let the boy get 
ahead of him ; perhaps he was considering whether 
he should find bacon-rinds and cheese-parings 
digestible. However, his mental colloquy, whatever 
might have been its subject, was apparently satis- 
factory ; for, when they turned into a shady lane 
which the boy announced as the approach to the 
farm, he looked far more cheerful than when 
plodding along the dusty road. 

Perhaps the relief from glaring sunshine might 
have occasioned this ; besides, the traveller was 
keenly alive to natural beauties, and the hawthorn 
hedge-banks between which he walked were 
covered with a profusion of wild flowers. 

It was early autumn, so the colouring was bright 
and varied, making up by these qualities for the 
absence of the exquisite delicacy of the spring 
blossoms. 

There were, abundantly, the gay scarlet poppy. 



A YISITOB AT KIBTON*S PARHL 7 

the untidy white bladder campion, the starry- 
yellow elecampane; the honeysuckle, springing 
loftily above all, enfolding many an unwary spray 
of hawthorn in its perfumed but deadly embrace ; 
while at intervals shone out wreaths of the glossy- 
leaved black bryony, whose dark green, shining 
leaves reflected its bunches of poisonous berries, 
fast assuming their many coloured tints. Lightly, 
here and there, the white bryony hung in festoons : 
that ** Honesty is the best policy" seems exempli- 
fied in this plant ; it always manages to get the 
best place. 

A clamorous barking of dogs soon told where- 
abouts the house was ; but for this, it might have 
been supposed a good way farther off still, it was 
so completdy concealed by a thick plantation of 
yoimg oaks; one very gigantic tree at the gate 
spread its broad branches quite across the lane, 
making it shadier still. Looking along the lane, 
which appeared to run a mile or more beyond 
the farmhouse, the hedges were stunted and the 
country on either side more open; and as the 
chalky path looked hot and white in the blazing 
sunshine, Mr. Hallam congratulated himself that 
his journey ended here. 



8 HESTER EIBTON, 

But the trees did not extend beyond the gate ; 
from which an ill-kept stony road led straight to 
the house itself. 

Mr. Hallam shivered as the kid of his ne\v( 
boots jarred and scraped against the rough bits of 
granite scattered along the roadj and for some 
seconds he was so occupied in picking his way 
that he did not look up at the house. 

When he did raise his handsome blue eyes^ he 
saw before him a quaint^ half-timbered manor- 
house, evidently of ancient construction. The 
timbers, above and below the windows, were set 
in a semi-circular form, producing alternate crosses 
and circles along the front; and if the spaces be- 
tween them had not been barbarously whitewashed, 
would have been picturesque enough; the house 
was surmounted by three irregular gables, the 
centre one being much the smallest The windows 
of projecting lattice-work . ^filled with very small 
diamond-shaped panes . were supported on brackets, 
and extended across the front from one gable-end 
to the other ; clumsy iron contrivances for keeping 
the lattices open hung loosely from the lower part 
of the frames, and looked cumbrous enough to drag 
window-frame and all along with them. 



A VISITOR AT KIKTON'S FARM. 9 

The door was of later date, having as heading 
a depressed arch of solid oak. 

Framed in verdure, the old farmhouse would 
have made a charming picture, but standing thus 
alone, with only a large pig-yard, knee-deep in 
black mud, on one side, behind that again a 
formal, stiff rick-yard, and on the other one field 
seen stretching away after another into flat dis- 
tance, it looked bald and cold . there was nothing 
to relieve the eye but the deep blue sky, against 
which the .whitewashed walls stood out hard and 
chalky. 

Probably in the rear of the premises there 
were bams, with tiled or thatched roofs glowing 
with the rich and varied hues successive July 
suns had burned in or on to them; and pic- 
turesque carts, and waggons, and smock-frocked 
farm-labourers might doubtless have been found 
also; but Mr Hallam was far too tired of his 
dusty walk to wish to prolong it, so he pushed 
open the little white wicket-gate in the low fence 
that enclosed a neglected grass-plot in front of 
the house, walked up the stony path in the middla 
of it, and rang a broken bell-handle beside the 
entrance door. 



10 HESTER EIBTOK. 

While he was speaknig to his guide, who 
seemed in a great hurry to get away, the doo^ 
opened slowly, and an old woman appeared in 
the entrance. 

She held the door firmly with one hand, as 
if to prevent ingress; but as she scanned the 
stranger inquiringly, she seemed satisfied that he 
had no evil intentions, and looked more placable 
. ^by nature she was evidently not meant to be 
cross; she was short and stout, with a cheerful, 
dark complexion, bright black eyes, and a merry 
looking mouth, that seemed as if it ought to be 
tnore ready with a jest than with a reproof; but 
suddenly catching sight of the boy, her whole 
expression changed to one of peevish discontent. 

*'And what do 'ee want here, yer oudacious 
young vagabond, stabbleing about the place. 
Mischief, I'll lay, when ye knows better nor I 
can tdl 'ee, that Muster Kirton, he can't stomach 
a boy about the place.* 

'^ Well, I be a-goin'. Biz, so youVe no call to 
scold," and he held out his hand as Mr. Hallam 
extended his towards him. He gave a shrill 
whistle of delight when he saw a shilling in his 
palm, and, bounding ofi^, was soon out of sight. 



A VISITOR AT KIRTON*S FARM. 11 

" Drat thay boys . ^ye'U maybe excuse me for 
saying so, sir . but they're alius where they 
shouldn't ought to be, and in pettickler here they 
bean't not allowed. Be ye a-wishin' to speak to 
the muster?" 

Before Hallam could reply, the old woman was 
put on one side, and a very tall grey-headed man 
took her place, and looked keenly and suspiciously 
at the stranger. 

Spite of *what he had heard in London, and 
of the boy's hints about Mr. Kirton, Frederic 
Hallam was pleased with his appearance; his 
clear complexion and benevolent forehead were 
not those generally belonging to a mean character ; 
but there was a thinness in the lips, and a rigid 
firmness in the lower jaw, that in one more 
skilled in human nature might hare awakened 
doubts. 

. He glanced from the young man's open, hand- 
some face to his dress, and thence to his port- 
manteau. 

Hallam raised his hat, and began to introduce 
himself, but Mr. Kirton stopped him. 

" You mistake, sir ; this is no inn for travdlers." 
^ ''Mr. Kirton, I conclude;- if you will be so 



12 HESTER EIRTON. 

lund as to look at this note, you will see that 
I do not come to you quite as a stranger.'' 

The old man drew his tall form up more stiffly 
stilly and pressed his lips more tightly together. As 
the letter was handed to him^ he eyed Hallam so 
closely again before he opened it^ that he added^ . 

**The letter is from your iGriend Mr. Goldsmith, 
who has entrusted me with some business papers 
he wishes you to sign." 

Mr. Kirton opened the envelope, and read his 
letter slowly, keeping his visitor standing in the 
sunshine all the time. He was inwardly chafing, 
and had a great mind to ask permission to enter ; 
but there was something so rigid and unbending 
about the old farmer, that he forbore.' 

When he had read it twice over, his coun- 
tenance relaxed a little, and he invited Hallam 
to come in and rest himself. The visitor looked 
at his portmanteau reposing ignominiously on the 
grass-plot; he was just going to ask Mr. Kirton to 
have it carried indoors, when the farmer said, . 

*' You can let that be . ^it's safe : when you have 
eaten a meal with us and rested, one of the men 
shall carry it where you will." 

Frederic Hallam was not easily daunted; he 



A VISITOK AT KIBTON'S FARM. 13 

Jiad generally, as he would have said, impudence 
enough for anything ; but his wish to become the 
farmer's guest just then prevailed : he would not 
risk a dispute with the reputed miser, which might 
injure his plans, though he shuddered at the 
thought of leaving his new portmanteau exposed 
to the inroads of dogs and fowls . some of the 
latter, ugly, bony-legged creatures, had begun 
to peck it already; but he was obliged to follow 
Mr. Kirton, who strode along the narrow, stone- 
flagged, whitewashed passage to the back of 
the house, where he threw open a door, and asked 
his visitor to walk in and sit down. Hallam gave 
him a packet, which he took almost rudely, and 
then left him abruptly. 

There was a stone floor and no carpet in the 
great, gaunt apartment . it could hardly be called 
a room . in former times, probably the hall of the 
old manor-house ; for tradition said that Kirton's 
Farm had been a favourite hunting seat of King 
John's . a legend hard to credit when one con- 
templated the entirely arable nature of the sur* 
rounding country. Doubtless, the house, or some 
part of it, was very ancient, and the hall, as it was 
called, seemed to have been left in undisturbed 



14 HESTER EIBTOK. 

possession of its antiquify: the walls were of dark, 
almost black, oak, panelled in small, octagonal com- 
partments; the three windows were deeply recessed 
and considerably splayed, 'so that^ althoogh the 
external aperture was small, the window recess 
itself would have formed a seat for several persons ; 
two long rough wooden trestles stood against the 
wall on one side . they had possibly supported the 
table planks of former times . and at intervals 
were ranged high oaken stools, as black and 
ancient-looking as the hall itsel What the roof 
had been {onneilj, it was now difficult to deter- 
mine, as it was ceiled between the three oak beams 
that spanned it at intervals; but its blackened 
aspect made one think irresistibly of a smoky 
chimney, and drew attention to the fire-place. 
Hallam had never met with anytlung of the kind 
before, and he walked up to it, and examined it 
closely. It must have been eight or nine feet 
across, and had on each side niches with seats 
cut in the solid wall; in the centre, from the 
red brick paving, rose two huge, ungainly metal 
dogs, eadi supporting what looked very like a 
Qannon-ball ; at the back was a massive plate of 
iron wrought in grotesque devices, and between 



A VISITOR AT KIRTOH'S FARM. 15 

this and the front, on a small raised brick plat .' 
form, were two smaller andirons ; from the chimney 
itself hung a hook, such a hook as Giant Cormoran 
thmst down the chimney when he roused the 
indignation of Jack the Giant Killer. 

Mr. Hallam, being essentially a man of this 
generation, was not romantic, and he shuddered 
when he thought of the ways of former times, and 
of the uncouth feeding this hall had probably 
witnessed; he hoped the rest of the house looked 
more habitable than Ihis barbarous relic of the 
past, for he still intended to carry his point of 
pas^g the night there. 

He was growing tired of waiting in such a 
dungeon, and although the stone floor was cool 
after his dusty walk, the oak settles were most 
uninviting to a tired traveller. 

A shuffling sound in the passage, and then the 
old servant appeared with a large coarse yellow 
jug in her hand. 

*' The master 'ud like to see ye in his room. I 
thought, maybcj you'd be dry arter your walk, sir, 
so I brougjat ye a drink o' water." 

Hallaflfl, who really was very thirsty, and had 
advanced eagerly for, as he supposed, a draught of 



16 HESTER EIBTON. 

" home-brewed/' fell back with a strong expression 
of disgust 

'^ Water, my good woman ? no, thank you, I'm 
not fond of water ; I'm afraid if I tried it, I might 
astonish my inside." 

*' Well, to be sure, now," said the old woman, 
peevishly, " and I thought ye'd be glad of a drink 
. ^some folks is more nice than wise, maybe. I 
likes water better nor beer any day." 

**I'm sure I am particularly obliged to you," 
said Hallam, who never offended any one if he 
could help it, on the ground that you cannot tell 
who may turn out useful to you in the end ; ** but 
I wonder now if you could be so very kind as to 
find me water for anotiber purpose . I mean, to 
wash my hands and face before dinner." 

She laughed. 

*' Soap and water costs nothin', so 'ees welcome 
to as much o' that as ye like; come along this 
way, and I'll find 'ee a cloth." 

To Mr. Hallam's mingled dismay and amuse- 
ment, she led him into the kitchen, another huge, 
stone-flagged place. It was evidently as old as the 
hall; they probably formed the nucleus around 
which the rest of the house had grown. It was 



A VISITOR AT KIRTON'S FARM. 17 

open to the roof^ with massive dust-covered rafters 
running across ; to one of which was fixed a rack^ 
filled with numerous sides of bacon ; while hams^ 
pig's faces, onions, &c., hung from the others. On 
one end of the rough kitchen-table, she set a yellow 
basin of the same coarse ware as the Jug, a great 
piece of mottled soap, and a rough, but clean jack- 
towel. Mr. Hallam looked aghast, but he was not 
really effeminate, though he did not mind being 
thought so, and, pulling off his coat and carefully 
shielding his scarf and waistcoat with the towel, 
he gave his face and whiskers a sluicing that fairly 
astonished Biz, and splashed her table considerably. 

** Well, you be a brave 'un at the water, you 
be ; ye takes to it like a spannel. I thought some- 
how ye'd be too much of a coddle like for that 
sort o' thing.'* 

" And why did you think so . Biz, I think the 
boy called you ? " 

He had special reasons for wishing to ingratiate 
himself with the old servant. 

*^ Well, I dunno ; there was somethink or other 
about 'ee as minded I of a cat . no offence- 
whiskers an' all, as 'ee came picking yer way up the 
road, just as if yer boots wur made o' egg-shells.'^ 

VOL. I. 2 



^^ 



18 HESTEB KIBTON. 

Hallam burst out laughing. 

"Well done^ Biz. What's your real name? 
That's a nickname^ I suppose." 

"'Ere-a-mussy . ^*tain't a name at alL I wur 
christened Elizabeth^ but Muss Heaster, her found 
Biz wum't so hard when her wur a little 'un." 

" Ah, I see ; but really. Biz, you ought to have 
a better approach made to the house," and then, to 
her great amusement, he pulled out of its rose- 
coloured, morocco case an elegant little pocket* 
comb, and, marching up to the brilliant array of 
dish-covers, one of the few ornaments of the 
kitchen, began to arrange and comb out to their 
full length his silky, auburn whiskers. "Now, 
look at my boots," he said, raising one foot on 
to the kitchen-table. " A woman of your ex- 
perience. Biz, knows better than I can tell you, 
that that boot's destroyed . isn't, in fact, fit to wear 
again; to me, as it happens, it isn't of much 
consequence, but suppose it had been a poor 
fellow to whom a pair of boots was an object . it*s 
painful to reflect upon it, it is really. Biz," and 
then, pocketing his comb, he washed his hands, 
carefiiUy polishing each finger-nail separately with 
his pocket-handkerchief, and put on his coat. 



19 



CHAPTER n. 

HESTEB. 

Mb. Eieton's study was a small room about eight 
fiset square^ little better than a closet^ eridentl j con- 
structed in the. thickness of what had once been the 
outer wall, for it could only be entered from the 
front parlour^ the door of which, as Hallam's quick 
eye told him, was next to that leading into the 
kitchen, which lay between the parlour and the 
hall on the left-hand side of the house ; the rooms 
on the other side were emply, and never used 
except for lumber. 

Biz hurried him through the parlour, so that 
he could only see that it was panelled in black 
oak like the hall, looked dingy and uninhabited, 
and had a smell of dose air about it He 
found Mr. Eirton seated on. a high stool at his 
desk, poring over some papers. He looked up at 
Hallam^ and motioned him to ^it down. 

2.2 



20 HESTER KUITON. 

^^Have you been long in Mr. Goldsmith's 
oflSce?'* 

Hallam slightly coloured. 

'^ Does Mr. Goldsmith say I have been in his 
office?" 

*' No^ he does not say so^ but that doesn't answer 
xne." 

^'I am only a tmsted friend of Mr. Goldsmith's^ 
not one of his clerks." 

'' Then what on earth does he send you down 
here for ? " said Mr. Kirton^ rudely. 

'' I came here to witness your signature to thosa 
papers I gave you^ and^ if necessary^ to sign any- 
thing you wish attested." 

**True, true," the old man muttered; "but he 
should not have sent a stranger . ^he knows I can't 
endure strangers . no offence to you, sir." 

"I am extremely sorry; how very wrong in 
Goldsmith, for I suppose he's aware of this dislike 
of yours?" 

" Well, never mind if he is . it's done now." 
Mr. Kirton disliked what he called '^palaver" 
worse than strangers. " We'd best get business over 
before dinner-time." 

Hallam thought the signing, and blotting, and 



HESTER. 21 

folding would never be over, then Mr. Kirton bid 
Iiim, almost steml j, put the papers up carefollj, as 
they belonged to Mr. GoldsmitL 

**Not that they are of any particular value,'* 
lie added, keeping his eyes keenly fixed on the 
young man, " but it would be troublesome to Mr. 
Goldsmith to replace them . troublesome, nothing 
more." 

A curious clashing sound seemed to come from 
ihe wall ; the old man made an attempt at a smile. 

'* That is Biz's signal to dinner. You see, sir, 
we're humbler folk than you're used to, I reckon : 
we've no dining-^parlours nor drawing-rooms here ; 
we eat in the kitchen, and get ou^ victuals hot 
^d hot" 

If Hallam had not been determined to dine at 
Kirton's Farm, this announcement would probably 
have induced him to take his departure at once; 
but, spite of the shocks his fastidious refinement 
had received, he began to consider the whole 
affair a good joke and a new phase of life, and 
jesolved to see the end of it 

He followed the old farmer along the stone 
passage into the kitchen; a coarse cloth was 
spread on the table, garnished with green-handled 



22 HESTBB KIBTON. 

knives and forks^ lEind common white plates and 
dishes. But Mr. Hallam's attention was attracted 
by a young girl who stood at her place on one side 
of the table, evidently waiting for them. 

He bowed, and she made a sort of movement 
in return. Mr. Kirton did not seem to think any 
introduction necessary, but pointed to a seat 
opposite his daughter, whom he called Hester. 

Hallam could not take his eyes from her face ; 
he had determined to find her agreeable, but he 
was surprised to see her so pretty. 

She was apparently about sixteen years old, 
and her tall undeveloped figure gave promise 
of much Bjrmmetry; her features were small and 
regular, and her clear hazel eyes full of expression, 
but what most surprised the critical Londoner, 
accustomed to polished socieiy, was her self- 
possession. Although quiet, her manner was 
neither constrained nor awkward. 

''She is not conceited, thank Heaven,'* said 
Hallam to himself; he felt almost piqued by her 
apparent indifference to the evidently unusual 
presence of a stranger. 

A deeper thinker would^ peiiiaps, have noted 
the firm-set jaw and chin which gave too much 



HESTEB. 2'6 

squareness to the lower part of the face, con- 
tradictmg the delicate chiselling of the nose 
and lips, and would possibly have looked for 
more masculine defects than conceit; not that I 
would implj conceit to be the sole inheritance 
of women: with far less excuse men are just 
as Tain as they are, and it sits worse on them 
. ^it comes out more broadly, whereas a woman 
will clothe her infirmity in such a mantle of 
graceful nonsense that it often seems to add 
to her charms. 

The dinner was meagre enough . ^a straggling 
raw-bcmed fowl, evidently a patriarch of the farm- 
yard, and a large piece of biM^on, or rather of 
bacon fat, for lean was not visible, surrounded 
wiih. greens, which gave out a strong unsavoury 
smell. However, the Londoner tried to make 
the best of it, and carved the greasy bacon as 
though it had been a choicer dish. 

Miss Kirton only replied in monosyllables to 
his conversational attempts, and he began to think 
her &ce was the best part of her. 

The old man noticed how carefully he was 
watching her. 

''She has not had much schooling," he said. 



24 HESTER EIBTON. 

*'but she can make butter, or pudding and pie, 
with the best o' 'em.'* 

*^Very useful accomplishments," said Hallam, 
with an inward shudder. 

Biz, who was in the act of pouring out a glass 
of ale for the visitor, nodded her head approvingly, 
but Hester coloured and it seemed more from 
annoyance than fron^ shyness. 

'^ Never mind about me, father; the gentleman 
wants to drink his ale/' 

Hallam started ; she spoke broadly, almost with 
the accent of a peasant ; he now remarked, what 
her very pretty face had prevented him from 
seeing before, that her hands, although small, 
were coarse and red* evidently from exposure. 
He noticed her gown, too ; an ill-made, washed- 
out pink gingham, which she had grown too tall 
for, the waist being much too short, and some tucks 
had been " let out" in the skirt, as was apparent 
by the fresher colour about midway down. She 
scarcely spoke again except to answer her father 
about household matters ; her voice was low and 
90ft, but her manner in speaking was go singularly 
harsh and abrupt that Mr. Hallam was glad when 
^he ceased, for either this, or the red hands or 



HESTEIU 25 

the pudding making, had dispelled his first illusion, 
nd the ale, scarcely better than vinegar, com- 
pleted his discomfiture* 

*'You don't seem famous for road-making 
hereabouts," he said to Mr, Kirton. 

''The roads are well enough . they're mostly 
wanted for carts and such like." 

*' They are not very favourable for shoe-leather. 
Don't you find that the stones knock out your 
boots terribly. Miss Kirton ? " 

*' No, I don't," she said, shortly, without looking 
at him. 

''I expect," said Kirton, with a smile, ''that 
Hester's boots are more likely to knock the stones 
out than they are to knock out her boots; my 
girl wears dumpers, Mr. Hallam, none of your 
dandified Paris kids, as I see 'em called in the 
newspapers." 

Hester reddened again and looked angrily at 
her father, but he went on without heeding her. 

"You see we're poor homely folks, sir, and 
in clothes and such like we have to choose for 
wear and not for outside show, which I take it 
is what you mostly care for in London, You 
ain't much used to the country, I should say ? " 



26 HESTER EIBTON. 

" Except when I take a few weeks' shootmg^ I 
confess I don't know much abont it . ^but I've 
a great idea^ Mr. Eirton, that I should take to 
farming immensely : I like anything practicaL" 

" Oh, you do, do you? " said the armer, looking 
hard at him. '^ K I may be so bold, whaf s your 
particular line of business now ? " 

Something in the old man's manner discon- 
certed Hallam; he seemed, behind his affected 
humility, to be indulging in a grim sneer at the 
Londoner, and to suspect his intentions, so that 
he answered with less than his usual self- 
possession.' 

*' I am in the Colonial Office . a very good place, 
you know, as one is sure of getting on." 

"Oh I that's it, is it?" said the old man. 
''You be one of them gentlemen as must wear 
good clothes, and keep respectable, and read the 
papers, and write a few letters, all at the country's 
expense; and t don't doubt now but what you 
think you work uncommon hard*" 

*'I work as hard as a gentleman need work, 
I belieye," said Hallam, nettled out of his in- 
difference. 

"Gentleman, indeed 1 Now look you here. 



HESTER. 27 

young man ; no offence^ but such a gentleman as 
you are, I take it, is uncommon like a butterfly 
as never does nothing to earn his own bread, it's 
all set ready for him. I'm a plain-spoken man, 
you see." 

" Oh," said Hallam^ laughing, for he was very 
good-tempered, '^you only consider gentlemen 
worthy of the name who live on their own pro- 
perty, and derive iheir income from their own 
acres." 

"Not exactly," said Barton; "nothing can 
make a man a gentleman who is not bom one ; 
all the borrowed feathers in the world won't do 
that," he added, looking hard at Hallam. "He 
may rub against other gentlemen, and get some 
of their polish, but it comes off again, man, at 
a hard rub . it comes off. Even for a born 
gentleman, I take it, an idle life is the worst 
thing that can happen to him ; but for one who's 
not quite sure what he is, work, sir, work, is the 
likeliest thing to happen him into what he wants." 

Hallam gulped down these very distasteful 
observations and advice in the best way he 
oould. 

" You are a very keen observer," he said, " and 



28 HESTEE EIBTOK. 

have seen a good deal of life^ I should think 
By-the-by," he continued, for the seriousness 
oppressed him, '^ do you ever bring Miss Hester 
to London? I should be charmed to show you 
some of the sights when next you come up," 
he added, looking at her; but as he said it, a 
vision of walking with that pink gingham gown in 
the streets of London, almost made him shudder. 

'^ You are very good, sir . I may say too good 
. to people you never saw before; but we've 
friends of our own in London, poor and humble 
though we be, and should be loath to trouble 
etrangers." This was said rather proudly. 
** Hester," he added, sharply, for she was sitting 
with her eyes now fixed intently on Hallam, ** those 
chickens ought to be fed again." 

Hester started; she rose without a word, and 
left the kitchen by a door which apparently led 
into the yard. 

There was silence for a few minutes, Hallam 
wished she would return; he had been quite 
aware that she had been looking at him . ^poor 
Jittle thing, it was but natural: pf course she 
had never seen any one like him before. Yes, 
it was quite possible that a little judicious training 



HESTEB. 29 

might obviate the very harsh way in which she 
spoke^ and other defects of her position. 

The pause continued^ and he became sensible 
that Mr. Kirton was waiting for him to speak. 

" What do you do with yourself after dinner^ 
Mr. Kirton?" he said^ in a jovial^ confidential 
maimer, "do you smoke? If you have no ob- 
jection, I should like to take a turn, round your 
farm with you this afternoon." 

" Very like you would," said the farmer, drily; 
*' but I ha' not got the time to spare, I'm afeard, 
and I don't smoke, and maybe you'll miss the next 
train to London if you don't look sharp." And 
then before Hallam could reply, "I'll go and 
get a lad to carry your trunk," and he was gone, 
leaving his guest with the conviction that he 
must yield his point. Biz, who was in the wash- 
house built out into the yard, already busy wash- 
ing her dishes, came in, wiping her hands on her 
apron as s#on as she heard her master leave the 
kitchen. 

" Good-by, Biz, I'm going. I hope to see you 
again some day." 

"Well, sir, and you'll be welcome to come for 
my part, if the muster's agreeable." 



30 HESTER EIRTON. 

"Oh, yes. Biz; I feel sure Mr. Kirton will be 
always glad to see me. Perhaps you'll find me 
a bed next time I come." 

Biz shook her head, and looked at him 
curiously. 

" If I was you, sir, and I comed again, Pd put 
up at the Bells down at Driven ; it's a tidy little 
place enough." 

"Ah, I'll see about tjiat; but I say. Biz, I'd 
no notion your young lady was so prettj. I 
never expected to see so charming a girl in this 
old out-of-the-way place." 

" Didn't you, though ? " said Biz ; " there now, 
and I believe muster thinks you've comed a 
purpose." 

" O' purpose for what ? " said Hallam, laughing 
to hide his consciousness. 

"Why, to make love like to Muss Heaster. 
Didn't ye see how sharp he sent her to the 
chickens?" % 

" That's an excellent joke," said Hallam, " when 
I came down here to oblige Mr. Goldsmith. I 
grant you Miss Hester is quite pretty enough to 
tempt any one to come fi*om London to see her, 
but then you see. Biz, I didn't know it." 



HESTER. 31 

'^ Well, to be sure," said Biz ;  that's what 
I've telled muster about mewing her up so, over and 
over again, and he won't listen. He ought to let 
her go about a bit, and have better gownds, and 
a little pleasuring like others; the poor child's 
reg'lar moped. Whoy, I believe you be the 
first real gentleman as she's ever seed, let alone 
spoke to." 

*' Really I " and Hallam was going to ask more 
questions, but Mr. Kirton's entrance, with the 
intelligence that a lad was at the front door 
ready to go with him to the station, interrupted 
any ftirther talk. As Kirton turned to lead the 
way, Hallam hastily slid some money into Biz's 
hand, and after taking a courteous leave of his 
host, whom he found waiting for him in the 
entrance passage, he returned to the station, con- 
siderably mortified at not having been able to 
instal himself as a visitor at Kirton's Farm. Still 
he felt he' had an ally in Biz, and he hoped a 
favourable impression had been made on Hester. 



32 HESTEB EIBTON. 



CHAPTER IIL 

FREDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYER. 

Mb. Goldsmith was a lawyer of much good^ and 
also of much evil^ repute. So far as the good went, 
he had an unexceptionable^ well-appointed house 
in Regent's Park, kept by his two maiden sisters-. 
good, quiet, religious women ; a perfect brougham, 
of the last new pattern, and some capital horses; 
his dinners and his wine were pronounced excellent 
by experienced judges ; he had a small but choice 
collection of pictures by modem artists. His 
library was filled with curiosities and rarities he 
h^d collected in his continental trips ; these took, 
in fact, the place of books there. Mr. Goldsmith 
studied human nature more than books ; he sub- 
scribed largely to all the public charities; his 
name was sure to be seen among those of the 
stewards at public dinners, and was frequent in 



PREDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYER. 33 

committee lists and those of vice-patrons ; and last^ 
not least by any means in this generation^ his 
wealth was said to be unbounded* There were 
people who said that the Miss Goldsmiths did not 
dress plainly from religious scruples^ but from 
necessity^ and that it seemed hard with all their 
brother's wealth, that they should have each but an 
allowance of twenty pounds a year, while the butler 
pocketed seventy. Also these evil-minded people 
said that the rich lawyer's morality was not so cor- 
rect as he strove to make it appear ; but these were 
minor charges. Others said, the law was not such 
a profitable business as Mr. Goldsmith appeared 
to have found it, and that an office might be made 
useful for one kind of business as weU as another ; 
at any rate the least that could be said was that 
Goldsmith had a very lucky way of investing 
money. 

He was a man with an immense circle of 
acquaintances and not one intimate friend, except 
the old farmer, Ralph Kirton. They had been 
schoolfellows : Kirton had remained country -bred, 
having by his excessive skill in farming and his 
parsimony scraped together a large fortune ; while 
his friend had become a polished Londoner, and at 

TOL. L 3 



34 HESTBR EIBTQN; 

ibe some time a man of tabstanoe. It was won* 
derful that so keenly snspicioos a nature as 
Kirton's should bring himself to trust his monej 
with anj one ; but old friendship, and the hope of 
increasing his hoards, had induced the farm^ 
io let Goldsmith have the greater part of bis 
wealth to invest. 

The lawyer was just now sitting in his office, 
deep in thought or calculation; perhaps he was 
not frowning enough for the latter. He was of 
middle height, broad and stout, and might have 
been called powerfully made about the shoulders^ 
but for his excessive circumference below the waist, 
the effect of which he enhanced by wearing an 
erect shirt frill, something like a white cockscomb; 
there was a^'Mwish look in his face; his eyes 
projected sAightly ; but his most prominent kztxjfe 
was his sallow chin, which trebled itself before it 
reached his spotless white neckcloth. 

The office was a quiet, bomdy place enough ; two 
sides of it were filled with rows of tin boxes, labelled 
with the names and initials of clients ; and in one 
comer was a huge iron safe, doubtless containing 
some extra valuable documents. 

The other two sides were occupied by the fire 



FREDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYER. 35 

place, cyver which hung a map, and the large table, 
covered with papers and parchments, at which he 
was sitting. Hiere were two doors, one icing 
him, which led on to the staircase, for his office 
was on the first floor, his dei^s occupying the 
lower story, and one close by the table leadii^ to 
an inner sanctum; the window did not tempt 
a second glance, as it looked down into a sort 
of square well, formed by three whitewashed walls 
besides its own* 

There was a smart tap at the door, and Mr. 
Hallam entered. 

He seemed on friendly terms with the lawyer, 
for they shook hands, and the young man at once 
pulled a chair close to Mr. Goldsmith's and seated 
hiuisel 

. ^^ First of all," he said, unbuttoning his coat, 
'^ m hand you over your confounded papers ; a 
nice dance to lead a fellow broiling along a dusty 
road twice iu a day ; why, I thought at least I 
should get a bed and a few day^' country air," and 
he pulled and petted his whiskers as if OHisoIing 
them for their loss* 

" Bless me I " Goldsmith affected extreme asto- 
nishment; **you don't mean to say you didn't 

3.2 



36 HESTEB KIRTON, 

oleep one night there! How very inhospitable! 
Well, I'm quite surprised ; I really am." 

*^No! are you though?" and Hallam's brow 
cleared in an instant ** I confess I thought you 
knew how matters stood, and sent me down by way 
of hoaxing me." 

*^ My dear sir I " and Goldsmith raised his hands 
deprecatingly. 

"Well, never mind; what's done and ended 
can't be mended. Anyhow it was a horrid bore, 
and I bought a new portmanteau on purpose ; and 
then as soon as we had dined . I say. Goldsmith, 
you wouldn't have liked the dinner, I can tell you 
. old Kirton told me I should be late for the 
train." 

Goldsmith laughed till his yellow chin shook 
like a jelly ; but he suddenly checked himself, for 
Hallam only joined faintly in his merriment, and 
asked whether he had seen Miss Earton. 

*^ Yes, by Jove ! that made up a little. I forgot 
to tell you I accomplished that, and she's an un- 
common pretty creature, quite a child though." 

"She must be about eighteen or nineteen, I 
think." 

'* Well, she may be, it's hard to tell, and perhaps 



PBEDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYEB. 37 

being kept shnt np may make her seem younger ; 
the servant^ a queer old fish^ told me she sees 
no one." 

'^ Ah^ is that it? I understand now the reason 
of my fiiend Kirton's inhospitality : he was afraid 
so very charming a gentleman might leave too 
deep an impression on the heart oftiis daughter." 

** By Jove, I wish I could think so, but she's 
wonderfully self-possessed, and seems as cold as 
a statue; if you're her guardian. Goldsmith, you 
should see to her, she really wants seeing after ; 
why, she wears a gown like a charity girl." 

" So much the better, if you have really serious 
thoughts about her; the less attractive she is, the 
more chance for you to go in quickly and win. I 
gave you the opportunity of seeing her ; you said 
you must marry a fortune, and I think I may 
say hers will be something better than a common 
one, but as to Ralph Kirton ever consenting to 
such a thing as giving her a farthing till he dies, 
you may whii^te^r that. Master Fred." 

"What's to' be done, then? ^Shall I run away 
with her?" * 

Mr. Goldsmith again raised his hands and his 
eyes. 



38 HESTER EIBTON. 

** To listen to you young men . well . well . 
well, and if you took so very rash and altogether 
improper a step in defiance of his wishes, have you 
not already seen enough of Ralph Eirton to he 
sure he would leave his money to a hospital or 
a charitable institution, in short, to any thing or 
body but his ftanghter? Why, sir, his will's 
something like that poker> only far more un- 
bending." 

" Well, then, what do you advise me to do? " 

** Are you consulting me professionally ? " 

" I don't care ; anyhow, so that I get an answer," 
said Hallam, laughing. 

^^Then I'll tell you something; but, mind, 
don't you let this out to Captain Fort^scue and 
half a dozen others." 

**A11 right; I can keep a secret when I 
choose." ^1^ 

" Very well ; it is to yoiiiN^n intereft to keep 
this. My good old friend has a heart complaint, 
and, consequently, his life is ^^y bad one, 
although he steajily ignores th^ fact spite of 
warning attacks, and this is why .. of course 
feeling a deep interest in Hester . am anxious to 
provide her with a kind husband and a suitable 



PBEDEBIC HAT^LAM AND HIS LAWYER* 39 

home whenever she is left an orphan^ and the onl j 
plan I conld think of for compassing this end was 
that which I have adopted^ namely^ of letting jou 
see her. Ton see I speak nnreservedlj, Mr* 
Hallam ; I must ieei a deep interest in the poor 
child, and I hope I am not mistaken in supposing 
if yon can gain her affection that you will make 
her a good and considerate husband." 

And haying delivered this ingenuous explanation 
of his motives, Mr. Goldsmith fiooriahed his 
cambric handkerchief, redolent of the very best 
eau-de-Cologne . ^be never used fashionable scents 
in business hours^ it was unprofessional 

Hallam looked hard at him, but his face was. 
hidden by his handkerchief; probably the youth 
was of a sceptical turn of mind, for he seemed 
inclined to Jaugh at Mr. Goldsmith's tender 
interest in Hester'SgJature. Or he might, in- 
deed, have- had scWF good reason for his dis* 
belief. 

" Then am ji^e^nderstood that I have to go on 
waiting and waiting till Mr. Eixton chooses to die 
and leave hiAaughter free to marry ? " 

The lawyer nodded. 

"And how, my good sir, am I to make sure in 



40 HESTEB E3BT0N 

the meantime that some one does not quietlj step 
in and carry off the prize ? " 

** Trust that to me. Kirton has so much dread, 
and justly^ of the effect of excitement^ that he, 
as you heard^ never admits any visitors, certainly 
no strangers. I wish I could say I thought you 
had long to wait, for I love and respect my old 
iiiend very much, very much indeed; so set your 
mind at rest, and leave it all to me." 

Mr. Hallam saw that his visit was considered 
ended, and he rose to go away ; but as he reached 
the door which the lawyer held open for him, 
a new thought seemed to strike him. 
. '* I say. Goldsmith, of course I don't mean to 
doubt you, but looking at it purely in the light of 
business, Fve no assurance that you'll keep your 
memory fresh in this matter." 

" My dear friend . ha I hi ha ! . ^good, good. 
you young men have wondeWW old heads on your 
shoulders, I declare. Let me see : what assurance 
can I give you ? I tell you whi|^ If I don't keep 
faith with you in this matter you may strike 
one out of the three thousand pouifds you owe 
me." 

"Will you write it?" 



PREDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYER. 41 

** By all means^ if you wish." 

And so the promise was written, signed, and 
duly stowed away in Frederic Hallam's pocket^ 
book among various other small documents which, 
probably, he would have been as unwilling to 
submit to public inspection as this one. People 
would have wondered more even than they did at 
his uniformly sunny temper and gay light-hearted- 
ness, if they could have known in how serious and 
threatening a shape he carried the black witch, 
money-worry, next his heart in that pocket-book ; 
of course, had his debts been inevitable, one must 
have- admired the hopeful spirit with which he 
bore them. But they were not; they were the 
result of self-indulgent extravagance and of that 
fatal pastime which prevents many a young man 
jfrom marrying now-a-days . a betting-book. 

His father, a fashionable London barrister, w^as 
the son of parents who had worked their way up 
to wealth from ** the ranks," and when they had 
spent a small fortune on making their son a 
gentleman, were mortified to find that he never 
asked them to his fine West End house from their 
quiet retreat in the Mile End Road, to meet his 
grand friends. 



42 HESTEB EIBXON. 

This was probably to be attributed to his wife's 
influence* for he was a dutiful, affectionate son 
before his marriage ; but young Mrs. Hallam, who 
also sprang from a paimemt race, was determined to 
oUiterate every trace of such misfortunes, both 
on her husband's side and her own. 

And in her case it seemed easy : she came from 
a distant county, but therefore suffered from the 
double disadvantage of provincial narrow-minded- 
ness and that restless assumption and self-asser- 
tion which seems to beset some people when they 
or their &.milies have risen in position ; possibly 
they cannot help it : like people of undecided minds 
settling in a new house, they take a long time to 
get used to it and cannot let things take iduear 
course and shake dpwn easily. 

However it might have been, young Mrs. 
Hallam ^^ gave herself air&" Perhaps if she had 
only known how fast news travels in these days, 
she might have been more cautious, and instead of 
talking of her father as a landed gentleman, wbo 
lived on his property, she might have remembered 
who and what was her grandfather, and, indeed, 
the early beginning of the very landed goitleman 
himself. But what she did for herself was sur-. 



FREDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYER. 43 

passed hj the efforts of her sister-in-law^ who (in 
far too much terror of her brother to tell any 
stories about her own family^ fbr^ although 
Frederic Hallam the elder gave way to his wife, 
he always gloried in the fact that he owed erery- 
thing to his father and mother) trumpeted forth the 
riches and grandeur and position of Mrs. Hallam's 
young family and relatives, till she established 
them in the minds of her friends as well-born old 
coonty people, and as no one could be so rude as 
to tell her the truth and that she was deceiving 
herself, she remained for many years in comfortable 
and self-complacent ignorance. 

It was not surprising that with so silly a mother 
and aunt, the Frederic Hallam of this story grew 
np a spoiled, only child. Hitherto lihey had not 
spoiled his sweet* temper, but they had injured his 
principles. He was sent early to Eton, and before 
he was fourteen had made himself so notorious by 
his ^scrapes and extravagances, that Mr. Hallam 
was qpetly advised to remove his son, and to 
place him with a private tutor. Thence he 
went to Cambridge . where, although not vicious, 
in ' the worst sense of the word, he was dis- 
tinguished for idleness and his love of expensive 



44 HESTER KIRTON. 

pleasures . he could not indulge in anything 
moderately. Where another man would have 
been contented with one horse, Frederic Hallam 
kept two ; his rooms were among the most 
elegantly furnished in the university ; he appeared 
to have no just idea of the value of money, or of 
the length of his father's purse. For some little 
time, his mother and his aunt supplied the 
deficiency in his allowance from their own private 
means ; but this could not last, and he was obliged 
to refer his creditors to his father. 

Mr. Hallam was very angry, and justly so ; he^- 
had given his son an income beyond what his 
actual means warranted. He paid Frederic's 
bills, telling him at the same time that he should 
alter his will, leaving him only a small yearly 
allowance, suScient to maintain hin^ till he had 
launched himself in a profession, and^ettlmg the 
remainder of his property partly on his wife, but 
so tightly that she could not transfer any of it j 
Frederic until her death, when it would iBWall to 
him ; the rest was left in trust till his son should 
be tweuty-eight years of age. 

Mr.'Hallam's object in making this change was 
to force his son to give up idle spendthriffrhabits. 



FREDERIC HALLAM AND HIS LAWYER, 45 

and if he had seen him changed^ donbtless he 
would have again altered his will; but he died 
so soon and so suddenly^ that it remained in force^ 
and about two years afterwards Frederic, who, 
on quitting Cambridge, had spent a long while 
on the Continent, found himself compelled to earn 
his own livelihood, for his mother, though still 
indulgent, had just begun to find out that her 
darling was ^* quite too extravagant," and he 'had 
so wounded his aunt Martha by his neglect that 
her presents cam more and more sparingly. 
^ A year before the beginning of this story he 
had obtained a government clerkship, and his pre- 
possessing face and manners had already gained 
him favour in his office, although even here his 
butterfly, pleafeure-seeking spirit had been com- 
mented onj^ore than he would have thought 
posgil^e ang ^^the dons," as he called the 
heads. 

A friend of his. Captain Fortescue, had intro- 
ducedjtfm to Mr. Goldsmith as a very kind, 
judicidus person, capable of giving good advice 
in%ncney matters. Hallam, however, found that 
when ^he had explained his position and expecta- 
tions, iibis gentleman was far more liberal with his 



46 HESTER EIBTON. 

mo^ey tiban his advice^ and he had launched out 
again into greater extravagance than ever; hut 
a few weeks back a *^ little mem. of account," for 
which he had been advised hy Fortescue to ask, 
had sobered him, and made him think seriouslj 
of his future* Unless he meant quite to destroy 
his property before it came to him, he must try a 
fresh course ; he knew that it would take time . 
years, probably . ^to rise to a good position in his 
office; increase of salary there was a &r off idea, 
and Frederic Hallam was essentially a present 
day man, all for speed and hurry, and ready 
money means and ways. 

He thought he would go to Goldsmith and try 
for once to get advice out of him instead of 
money* 

To his surprise the lawyer gave it willingly, 
and Frederic's visit to Eirton's Farm has shown 
us with what result. He was bent now on marrying 
for mtmej ; that was the last new idea ; it seemed to 
offer an escape from his difficulties, and, therefore, 
one to be made much of; on the happiness or 
misery it might bring he never bestowed a 
thought, and if he had, he would have told himself 
tliat he was always happy, and, therefore, any one 



FREDERIC HAIXAM AND HIS LAWYER. 47 

ought to be happy with him. For several reasons 
he determined not to mention the matter to his 
mother. If he married Hester he intended to take 
her abroad^ and polish and educate her before he 
introduced her to any one. He meant to leave 
office on his marriage and go abroad without 
giving any notice of his intentions^ and then it 
would be quite time enough to settle the next 
move ; he was not going to worry himself about it 
now ; on one thing ho had resolved during his last 
intervkfw with Mr. GoldMnith . ^to be free of that 
gentl^nan as soon as possible after his marriage^ 
for he somehow seemed to feel that so long as he 
had recourse to him so long would his pocket-book 
remain foU of painful Utile rominders. 



48 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER IV. 

PAY-DAY AT KIRTON'S FARM. 

It was a fine warm Satarday evening at Kirton's 
Farm. Hester had just come into the hall and 
put one of the oak settles ready for her father; 
she then dragged out of the parlour a small 
three-legged table, and set it in front of the 
stool ; one might have vrondered, as this was a 
regular Saturday performance, why the table was 
not left in the hall instead of being always carried 
back to the parlour. If you had asked Hester, 
she would have said, "It had always been so," 
or else, perhaps, that she did not choose a good 
table to be left in that damp desolate hall, never 
used except on Saturday, when the men came 
in to receive their wages. She pulled open the 
door of a curious little cupboard in the wall by 
the side of the fireplace, and took thence three 



PAY-DAY AT KIRTON'S FAEM. 49 

wooden bowls, which she placed on the table, 
and then stood beside it, looking towards the door 
at which she expected her father to enter. 

He did not keep her waiting long. As the 
Dutch clock in the kitchen struck the appointed 
hour, his creaking, almost stealthy step was heard 
coming along the stone passage. He had three 
canvas bags in his hands, which he placed on 
the round table, and then seating himself he took 
from under his arm two large accounirbooks, and 
an ink-bottle from his pocket, drew a pen from 
behind his ear, and handed it with one of the 
books to Hester. 

Not a word passed. The girl, standing beside 
him, still wearing the obnoxious pink gingham, 
took the pen and book silently, opened it, and 
was ready to begin. 

One of the hall windows was in reality a glass 
door, generally closely fastened, but npw on the 
latch. In a few moments it opened, and a young 
lad about sixteen appeared. 

He gave a kind of scrape, and then came up 
to the table. 

" How many days, Matthew ? ^ 

"Fulltime, sir." 

VOL. I. 4 



50 BESTEB KIBTOir. 

The fanner looked up at him sharply. 

** It can't be fiill time . why, your mother died 
on Tuesday. Toa don't mean that you went on 
woiidng all die same." 

<'Ees, I did. It bean't my &alt, sir; I hadn't 
enough to bury her, and I didn't choose to ax 
ye to gee a day's wage, sir." 

** Of course not," said the former ; " that would 
never have done, Matthew, you know. I couldn't 
have afforded it Put down six days, Hester, 
against Matthew White," he said, when he had 
consulted the boc^ before him. 

Hester looked pitifully at the uncouth boy, as, 
after having received his money (Mr. Eirton 
had emptied his bags into the bowls), he slowly 
retreated ; but she was not thinking it hard that 
he had been obliged to work at such a time, 
she only sympathized with him because he was 
motherless. 

The next who advanced was a red-headed 
Irishman, who seemed incapable of standing still ; 
he made several bows, and then stood squeezing 
his hat, balancing first on one leg and then on 
the other, relieving the monotony of this by 
vehemently^scratching his head. 



PAY-DAY AT KCBTON'S FARM. 61 

His time only came to four days and a 
half. 

Mr* Kirton, after looking at his book^ asked 
sternly how it was that he never worked full 
time, when he had a wife and young children 
to keep. 

The Irishman scratched his head harder than 
ever. 

^ Plase yer honour, that's jist the raison why 
I'm not full time." 

** And how may that be ? " 
Alick was almost the only labourer who would 
have ventured on a joke with his master. 

** Bekase I stays at home to keep the childer. 
Why, yer honour, when Ailsie's at the wash- 
tub, sure, it's not one or two of the childer that 
would fall in the fire, but de whole half dozen. 
They'd be roasted to crackling be time I left 
work." 

**Well, well," said Mr. Kirton, who did not 
believe a word of Alick's excuse, *^four days 
and a half, Hester, and listen, Alick, I'm going 
to look at your piece of work to-morrow, and I 
hope I'll find it better than the last" 

**A11 right, yer honour, and be jacres ye'd 

4.2 



52 HSTB KIBTON. 

best lose no time> or maybe the wheat '11 be 
up and growing; sure I'm not the boy to let 
grass grow under me heels^ and that yer honour 
knows." 

" Well, go your way," said Mr. Earton, as he 
turned to the next comer, a sallow, sickly-looking 
man, who walked in very slowly. 

*^How are you, Peter?" said Hester. The 
man was a favourite of hers; he suffered much^ 
and bore it without complaint. 

^^ About same as usual, muss," he said, smiling. 

" How many days ? " said Mr. Kirton, coldly ; 
he always steeled his heart against illness, there 
seemed a danger of his being called on for charity. 
He had no objection to let Hester and Biz give 
away gruel, but he was annoyed that Peter 
Stasson's pale face should have been commented 
on before him, and became perfectly blind to it 
immediately. 

*^ Five days, sir." 

Mr. Kirton knew that only severe pain would 
have made Peter give up a day's work; but he 
took no notice, and bade Hester put down five 
days against Peter Stasson. 

Hester betrayed no sign of feeling; she waited 



PAY-DAY AT KIRTON'S FARM. 53 

tni all the men had been paid^ and dismissed . till 
she bad replaced the bowls, which Kirton had care- 
ihllj emptied into his canvas bags, in their hiding 
place, and the lable in the parlour ; and then she 
joined the fanner in the yard. 

** Father,'' she said, in a voice as stem and harsh 
as his own, ** you're too hard on that man ; you 
know Peter H work till he drops down dead; 
he must, or his children will starve* You ought 
to give him a rest." 

** Hold your tongue, child, and don't be a fool. 
How can I give him rest? do you suppose I can 
afford to pay him for work he don't do ? " 

** Yes, I believe you can." She spoke without 
any excitement or feehng, but in a determined 
tone &r beyond her age. 

" Well, then, you believe wrong," said the 
firmer, avoiding her steady look. " Don't be as 
foolish, child, as the rest, and go for to think I'm 
a rich man," . he lowered his voice, and looked 
cautiously round; . "maybe you'll find out your 
mistake when I die." 

He walked away from her to the gate of the 
pig-yard, where he stood thinking for a few 
minutes. 



o4 HESTER EISTON. 

Hester remained where he had left her^ think- 
ingy too^ apparently. She had a strange expres- 
sion in her eyes sometimes^ for one so yonng; 
they were beantifnl^ dark brown in colonr^ but 
looked smaller than they were from their long 
shape ; they could not be called cunning, and yet 
they were sharply intelligent, but not restlessly 
so; there was a repose in their acuteness which 
suggested the idea of penetration^ rather than 
cunning. 

It is a curious fact, but an almost univer- 
sal one, that people with small, even mode- 
rate-sized eyes, are fiir more observing with 
regard to others^ more reticent about themselves^ 
than those whose eyes are large and promineni 
If the size and form of the eyeball be, according 
to phrenologists, a sign of the gift of language, it 
certainly regulates the use of it; for large-eyed 
people are almost always great talkers^ and we 
know that those who speak the least are supposed 
to reflect the most. 

She raised her head slightly, as though dis- 
missing an unprofitable subject, and then, as if 
determined to broach a fresh one, went across the 
yard to her father. 



PAY-DAY AT KIETON'S FARM. 55 

*^ Father^ what did that stranger gentleman want 
here on Wednesday ? " 

The farmer looked keenly at her for sereral 
moments without answering. 

" Ah ! you be like all the rest of the women, 
then, Hester, as full of curiosity as bacon's fidl of 
salt ; some of *em wouldn't ha' bided three days 
before they asked questions, though. Well, child, 
he came to see me. You didn't think it was to 
see yon, did yon ? " 

** N . ^no," Hest^ hesitated, and felt almost as 
if she had told a falsehood ; Biz had been so posi- 
tive that the young man's visit was to her, that 
she had begun to believe it. 

Her father noticed her manner. 

''I was only making a joke, child; a London 
gentleman like that don't' come down miles to look 
at a farmer's daughter, unless he means some 
harm ; which I take it no one would dare to Ralph 
Eirton. He came on bunness, I tell ye." He 
spoke very harshly, for her colour had deepened, 
and, without exactly knowing why, he felt he must 
be angry with some one. 

But Hester was not to be put off so easily. 

^^ You said last Midsumm^ day, &ther, that I 



56 HESTER EIRTOK. 

was to begin and' help you pay the men, and 
know about business ; now if this gentleman came 
down on business^ why mayn't I know what it is 
about?" 

Mr. Kirton was neither choleric nor impatient ; 
he almost always waited to hear what people had 
got to say, and thought a little before he answered ; 
he did so now. 

*^Well, child, I see you're growing a clever 
woman, and you shall learn business when your 
head is clear enough to manage it ; but ye must 
walk before ye run. This Mr. Hallam came 
down here as a clerk jfrom Mr. Goldsmith, my 
friend in London, to get my signature to some 
papers." 

" Then he is Mr. Goldsmith's clerk ; " she fixed 
her eyes on him with' a strangely incredulous 
look. 

Ralph Eirton wished she had not asked the 
question, but he did not choose to tell her a direct 
falsehood, 

^^ You heard him say at dinner-time that he 
was a government clerk." 

'' And what is that, father ? " 

" Something of the same kind as the other . ^but 



PAY-DAY AT KIRTON'S FARM. 57 

never mind more of Iiim now; come along and look 
at the brown calf, she's going away on Monday 
for good.'* 

A long talk ensued about the feeding of calves, 
&c., subjects on which Hester could discourse far 
more fluently than on any others. Mr, Kirton 
seldom talked much at a time to his daughter, 
but he knew quite enough about her to feel that 
Hallam was not a safe topic and that to show openly 
that he thought so would be the sure way to set 
her brooding over it. He felt it was natural that 
she should ask questions about this the first man 
above a servant, of her own age, she had ever 
seen under her father's roof, and especially so 
good-looking a one. How could Goldsmith be 
so thoughtless to send such a person, when he 
knew his great anxiety to keep her a child, free 
from any ideas about dress or nonsense? How- 
ever, it was done, and the less she was encouraged 
to think about it the better, and he led her off to 
talk on her favourite topics, and praised her far 
more than usual for the success of her last broods 
of chickens, for in poultry rearing and butter and 
cheese-making, Hester was, and felt herself, equal 
to any experienced farmer's wife or daughter. 



58 HESTER KIBTON, 

In all she did she was essentially clever and 
thorough ; she had had but two years' schooling 
at an obscure watering-place where only farmers' 
daughters were received, and although she was 
not allowed to learn anything but English and 
needlework, her talents showed themselves and 
were appreciated by her teachers ; but her father 
took her away at fourteen, for fear she should 
gain a taste for fine clothes and any ideas about 
love and marriage. 

Probably if he had been asked about Hester's 
fiiture he would not have found a ready answer: 
he hid her away from others just as he did his 
money . &om pure love of hoarding; doubtless 
he never questioned himself as to what a lone 
ignorant woman would do with the great wealth he 
would leave her ; but he despised education, and 
thought natural talents best left without it ; he had 
not felt the want of it, and why should Hester ? 
He forgot that times had altered since his youth 
. that in a country intersected with railways it 
would be impossible to live in the solitude and 
retirement in which his own early manhood had 
been passed. He shut his mental sight obstinately 
to any reasoning which seemed to threaten espense 



PAY-DAY AT KIRTON'S FARM. 59 

. to educate Hester and give her fine clothes 
must cost money, and he determined that she 
did not want that which he was resolved not to 
give. He loved his daughter, but it was after 
a fashion of his own. 



60 HESTER EIBTON, 



CHAPTER V. 

LUCY WEENSHAW. 

Hebteb's uncle and aunt^ Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw> 
spite of their dislike to Kirton^ had remonstrated 
with him seriously when he took the girl from 
school^ and had urged that she should be sent 
to one of a superior dass near London, where her 
cousin Lucy was being educated. Mrs. Kirton, 
Mr. Wrenshaw, and Frank Wrenshaw, had been 
brothers and sisters, but Mrs. Kirton and Frank 
had both died young, when their children were 
babies, and Lucy was left to the care of a not very 
wise mother; however, she had this wisdom, that 
she listened to advice, and, spite of her reluctance 
to part with her spoiled darling, sent Lucy to 
school at twelve years old. She was now just 
eighteen, the same age as Hester, and had left 
school about six months. She was the only per- 



LUCY WRENSHAW. 61 

mltted visitor at Eirton's Farm, her home being 
in the ne:xt market town. 

At first, when the farmer found her visits were 
becoming periodical, he looked black, and gave 
Lucy to understand that her cousin had no time for 
visits and gossip ; but that damsel had a way of 
not being put off when she had set her mind on 
anything, and she carried her point, and appeared 
at the farm w];ienever she pleased. 

There was only morning service at the little 
church at Driven, for two small hamlets were 
served by the same curate, and Hester was sitting 
listlessly in the parlour . they only used it on 
Sundays . wondering what could make her feel so 
dull and do nothing, when her name, shouted in a 
clear merry voice at the front gate, made her start, 
and look out of the window. 

'^Halloa, Hester I where on earth are you? I 
wanted you to hold the pony, child. Why, he 
wouldn't stand a minute ; Joe's at his head now." 
And Lucy Wrenshaw, flying over the stony path 
that had destroyed Hallam's boots, very hot and 
flushed with her exertions, pushed open the parlour 
door, and came in without any ceremony. 

She was as perfect a contrast to Hester as can 



62 HESTSB 3SIBT0N. 

be imagined . short and plump, with dark eyes 
and hair, a little impertinent nose, and a flexible, 
expressive mouth ; she looked as full of feeling 
and impulse, as her cousin did of calm deter- 
mination* 

And the difference b^ween them was as great 
as it ajqpeared. Spite of Lucy's superior education 
and her fashionable style of dress, she really stood 
in awe of her cousin, although she often indulged 
in boasting of her own advantages and pitying 
Hester's lot, and on her return home she would tell 
her mother ^^ how much good she had done that 
dear old dowdy of a Hester. What a pity such 
a pretty girl should be so disfigured ! " 

For Lucy was generous ; she knew and frankly 
owned that Hester was much better lookii^ than 
she was; Poor Lucy ! how she longed to be tall 
and beautiful I She was not an admirer of her own 
style of beauty, for she had beaufy, aUhough it 
depended chiefly on expression, a pair of re- 
markable eyes, a fresh clear skin. 

Hester was not yet aware of the influence she 
possessed over her cousin; she had not seen much 
of her, as Lucy had been so long at school, and 
now Hester was too much dazed with her fine 



LUCY WBENSHAW. 63 

clothes and conversation to feel her equal, much 
less her superior. 

*' Where's the goyemor, Hester ? " 

^' In the rick-yard ; he won't be in till tea-dme ; 
but won't you come in the kitchen and speak to 
Biz?" 

**Not I . I'm heaps too tired for that, and 
besides, Hestar," . she tossed her hat on the nearest 
chair . *^ I've got something important to tell you." 

^' What, a secret?'* 

Hestet's eyes grew eager, though her manner 
was calm ; curiouty was a strong, or rather weak, 
point in her nature, as it is so often in those who 
are unusually exempt from moral weakness. 

** Yes ; now, what will you give me for it ? " 

^Nonsense, Lucy, you tell me at once. I've 
nothing to give; what is it?" said her cousin, 
with assumed indifference. 

"What a creature you are, Hester 1 1 beEeve 
sometimes you're a stone; why couldn't you put 
your arms round my neck now and give me a 
kiss? I never knew anything like you; I know 
when you have a husband you'll only kiss him 
once a week." 

" Perhaps not so often," said her cousin, smiling ; 



64 HESTER KIRTON. 

** but now, Lucy, I will know this secret without 
more talk, I believe it's only about a new frock." 

/*0h, I daresay," and Lucy tosse^ her head 
with the air of a scornful beauty. *^ I've a great 
mind not to tell you, Hester, only, perhaps, you'll 
burst if I don't What do you think of my having 
a lover?" 

*^ What ! are you going to be married already, 
Lucy ? I'm sure you're a great deal too young." 

'^ Now, Hester, don't preach ; I never saw any- 
thing like you, you get the news out of one, and 
then you don't look the least bit surprised or glad, 
but begin and preach ; there are plenty of parsons 
to preach without your having a share. Come 
now, what do you think? in the first place," she 
added, softening down, for her exuberance was 
really half nervous, " don't you think it wonderful 
I should have a lover at all so soon ? " 

" I hadn't thought about it," said Hester; " but 
I don't know why it should be wonderful." 

" Well, perhaps not;" Lucy was half sorry she 
had so nearly betrayed her want of self-confidence ; 
^^ only it's very nice . isn't it? " 

" Is it ? what is the niceness ? does ^he give you 
any presents ? " 



LUCY WRENSHAW. 65 

** Yes, he does ; but, oh ! you mercenary girl, to 
think of such a thing first of all ? But what I 
think nice is he sits and looks at me, and then 
opens his mouth and sighs, and shows me bits of 
poetry in books, about eyes, which shows he must 
think mine worth looking at, and I thought . " and 
then Lucy stopped again. 

''But, instead of telling me all this, which I 
should think must be very stupid, can't you tell 
me his name, Lucy, and what he's like? " 

'* He has rather an ugly name . Jacob Bonham. 
You've heard of him, haven't you, the young 
doctor ? And do you know, Hester, I always 
thought I should like to marry an Alphonso; 
Alphonso Wilfrid Fitzgerald was the name I 
should have chosen if I could have had a husband 
christened on purpose." 

'^ Lucy I" and Hester's scorn made her cousin 
laugh, though she winced under it. 

''Well, I don't care, I do like pretty names; 
at any rate, he is tall, and he has beautiful blue 
eyes and nice fair hair." 

" What sort of a nose, as you seem to be taking 
an inventory of him ? " 

"Oh, I don't remember about his nose; I think 

VOL. L 5 



66 HESTEB EIBTON. 

it is like anybody ebe's ; bis moutb is pretty when 
it's shaty but somehow his teeiih are ugly when he 
opens it" 

^'Ahl" exdaimed Hester^ almost warmly; 
*' Lucy, you could never marry a man with ugly 
teeih? I couldn't" 

" Dear me, Hester," Lucy bridled up now, "I 
didn't know you thought of marrying, and who 
said, pray, I was going to have Jacob Bonham for 
a husband ? He walks home from church with 
mother and me, and he may haye called a few 
times to see us, and given me a few trifles, but 
I suppose a genilemaa may pay me attention with- 
out my caring very much for him ; but Fm not 
going to be cross, poor dear, when I come to see 
you," for Hester had turned away at her first 
words. "I've told you my news; I'm such a 
selfish wretch I always talk about myself first: 
now tell me yours," and she went up to her cousin, 
who was standing in the window-seat, and put her 
arm round her. 

Hester did not care for demonstrative affection, 
she was quite unused to it, but she was too 
glad to see Lucy to be unkind to her, so she 
stood quite still and submitted to be kissed. 



LUCY WEOBNSHAW. 67 

** There's no news ever here, Lucy, you know 
that well enough ; I've nothing to tell except that 
Peter Stasson's worse, and I fear he will soon die.'' 

^Ah, how Tery sad I and then what will his 
poor wife do without him? " 

^ I don't know. I was thinking what will his 
poor children do without him, and how will his 
wife manage to feed them ? Bat come and see the 
brown calf; she is going away to-morrow, she 
was going last Monday." 

" Very well, only let's go round by the front 
way, then ; if we go kitchen way, and Biz begins 
to talk to me, I know shell keep me there 
half an hour. Bat, Hester, I don't think you 
looked at my new dress; isn't it a lore of a 
muslin?" 

'* Yes, it is rery pretty; but isn't it a very gay 
colour, Lucy?" 

" My dear, that's all you know about it Why, 
it is the very height of the fashion ; I forget what 
its name is. I bought it because Jacob said he 
thought the colour was invented for dark-eyed 
beauties ; he thinks it sweetly pretty.** 

" You've creased it sadly," said Hester. 

'^Oh, that's nothing; it is so stiff that it will 

5.2 



68 HESTER KIRTON. 

stand several ironings before it goes to wash. And 
how do you like my cloak ? ^ 

*^ I do like that," said her cousin, with a half 
sigh, " much better than I do your dress ; it'll wear 
well, no doubt." 

*^ Ah, you see, dear, if you knew a little more 
about the fashions you would find it quite im- 
possible to get along without a something of this 
colour . either a dress, or a bonnet, or something ; 
but you are saved a good deal of trouble in every 
way by your quiet life." 

Hester turned away impatiently. 

" Are uncle and aunt Wrenshaw coming to see 
you this year?" she asked, as she stooped to un- 
fasten the door of the calfs house. 

'^ Not that I know of. Oh, stop I mamma said 
something about it yesterday. Why don't you 
ask them here? Aunt Wrenshaw has been ill all 
the spring ; a little country air would do her good, 
and she is your godmother too, Hester." 

*^ I was quite a little girl when I saw her last. 
I wonder if she would know me." 

'* I can tell you one thing : you must make 
uncle give you a new frock before she comes . 
she's so particular about dress ; and oh, what a pity 



LUCY WRENSHAW. 69 

you've no piano, and it is such a treat to hear 
aunt Wrenshaw play; she and I play duets 
together.'* 

** Do look at the calf; isn't he a beauty ? " said 
Hester, fondling the creature's head, 

'^ Well, I suppose he is ; but you know I'm not 
a connoisseur in stock. I don't mean to marry 
a farmer, so there's no use in knowing. But do 
you really mean, Hester, that nothing has hap- 
pened since I was here last, except Peter's 
ilhiess?" 

*^Yes, I forgot at first, and I remembered it 
while you were talking . a gentleman came," and 
Hester's cheeks and forehead became crimson, but 
she was fastening the door again, and Lucy did 
not see. She looked very pretty and graceful 
bending down, her fair skin admirably relieved 
against the dark, pitched boards. As Lucy looked 
at her she heaved a deep sigh at the thought of her 
own rather short, round figure. 

"A gentleman 1" she exclaimed, "and you 
never told me all this time. Toung or old ? come, 
Hester, I must know all about it." 

"Young and handsome," her cousin said, 
quickly; "but, if you want to hear about him, you 



70 HBSTEB XIBTON. 

should ask Biz . I believe die is in love with him 
herself." 

The old woman had gradually approached them 
as they stood looking at the cal 

"Well, Muss Lucy, and so yeVe got never 
a word for L** 

"A hundred if you like." There was decided 
animosity between these two. In her heart, Biz 
would have liked to see her young mistress as 
smart as Miss Wrenshaw, but, as it was, she 
always endeavoured to mortify the tatter's vanity 
as much as possible. " But, Biz, how about this 
gentleman who's been to see you?" 

*' Bin to see I, indeed . to see Muss Heaster, you 
means, muss. Ah, he's a real gentleman and no 
mistake: you should see his boots. Muss Lucy, 
and his hat, and the beautiful little thing he had 
for his whiskers." 

" And is he very handsome. Biz ? " 

"Handsome! that ain't half a word for him. 
You needn't try to fancy what he's like, mnss, 
because you couldn't, never having seen any one 
of the sort before." 

" How do you know that. Biz? I see heaps of 
handsome men." 



LUCY WBENSHAW. 71 

Lucy generally contradicted Bis^ al&oagh she 
rarely quarrelled with Hester's opmions, not tiiat 
she always agreed with her cousin, bat she spoke 
in that firm, almost rode, manner which can 
scarcely be differed from wiUioot involving % 
dispute, and Lucy had gained at least this 
advantage from her superior education and posi- 
tion, that she knew sometimes how to economize 
her opinion . an article in which Hester, like most 
practical,strong-minded women, was very unthrifty, 
and, as many of their disagreements arose from 
thdr differing modes of life, Lucy felt that to take 
any advantage from her real superiority would 
be ungenerous, and so she ofben held her tongue 
and let Hester say things she knew to be un- 
founded for the sake of peace. Kirton's riches 
were pretty well guessed at, spite of his efforts 
to conceal the fact, and of course it followed 
that Hester would be rich some day ; but 
Lucy knew that no money could ever replace the 
time that had been lost in her cousin's education ; 
but, as I have said, although she would not wound 
Hester, she did not choose Biz to be wanting in 
deference to her superiority. 
*^ Maybe so^ muss, but he's the top o' the heap. 



72 HESTER KIRTON. 

See here. Muss Lucy, 111 tell ye a secret Biz 
dropped her voice as Hester walked away from 
them into the kitchen. *^You can't think how- 
he's mad in love for muss there." She nodded 
her head towards the door. 

Lucy's heart beat fest ; it would be too absurd 
for her poor, shut-up cousin to have an admirer 
more of a gentleman and better looking than 
Jacob. 

*^ What is he. Biz ? is he, he can't be, an inde- 
pendent gentleman ? " 

" All I know, muss, is, his ideers is independent 
enough ; I heerd im say he wur a member of 
Government, so I takes it he be one of the Lords 
and Commons." 

** How can you talk such nonsense. Biz ? you 
must have made some absurd mistake." 

" I've made no mistakes, muss. Perhaps you be 
a-thinking," she continued, with a knowing smile, 
fixing her sharp black eyes on Miss Wrenshaw, 
whose discomfiture she perfectly understood and 
enjoyeid . servants understand human nature better 
than their masters do . "that the gentlenian he 
have made a mistake, in not waiting till you 
corned over?" 



LUCY WEENSHAW, 73 

*^ I wasn't thinking anything of the sort, and 
you are extremely pert. Biz. You get spoiled by 
such familiar intercourse with your master and 
mistress. You had better get tea ready, I think ; 
Miss Kirton said she wanted it." 

And talking till the last minute to cover her 
retreat, Lucy flounced through the kitchen, and 
joined her cousin. 

She knew any complaint of Biz to Hester was 
worse than useless, and would only provoke a 
haughty defence of her old favourite, so she con- 
tented herself with prosecuting her inquiries about 
the " gentleman " till Mr. Kirton came in to 
tea, and as he insisted that her mother would be 
anxious to see her home early, she took her 
departure soon after, feeling somehow, as she drove 
along the dusty high road, as if she did not wish 
for Jacob Bonham beside her nearly so much as 
she had done in the morning. 



74 HSSTEB EIBTON. 



CHAPTER VL 

A WAENING, 

"Father, I want to speak with you." 

** Well, speak away then," said Kirton, roughly, 
as he rose from breakfast, "and don't be long 
over it I'm off to the Croft meadows, and shan't 
be home before tea-time." 

" Then I'll come with you now, and talk as we 
go along," and before he could answer she had 
gone into the long stone passage, taken down her 
hat and cloak, and stood ready equipped for a 
walk. 

Her father looked at her inquisitively ; she was 
pale, and her lips were? set firmly as if she had 
made up her mind to carry out some purpose ; but 
Biz was in the kitchen, and Kirton, who^ rather 
from caution than refinement, never spoke to 
Hester on private matters before her, walked out 



A WAHNING. 75 

into the yard witk>ut giving either permission or 
denial to his daughter's request. 

He led the way throng the rick-yaid, where 
he stopped and gave a lew orders, then taming 
ont of it to the right strode down a white stony 
road, foil of hardened cartriits, and with a kind of 
low wall on each side, made of large pieces of 
stone piled loosely together : the perfect straight- 
ness and flatness of the road added to its doll, 
tedions appearance; even on in front there were no 
trees to break the straight line of the horizon . so 
far as eye could reach there were only vast fields 
separated from one another by these same piled-up 
stones. 

Hester walked along silently; at last either her 
iher's curiosity was too urgent, or his patience 
proved less enduring than her own. 

 Well, my lass, I thought ye were all for talk, 
and had something more than common to tell 
tome.'' 

" And so I have, fiither,'' she burst forth, her 
colour rising and her eyes brightening, as the 
excited words came pouring from her lips ; ** if s a 
shame, and a heavy shame, that I should be as 
lam." 



76 HESTER KIRTON. 

Ralph Kirton stood suddenly still, like one 
petrified, then, with an action which had become 
nsual with him of late when disturbed by any 
emotion . but of tjie significance of which his 
child was quite unconscious . he pressed his 
hand quietly on his heart Hester went on 
rapidly. 

"There is no use in saying you are a poor 
man, father, and yet you make me live as if you 
V were. Look at my clothes ; but there are things 
I mind more than dothes. I don't know how 
to do anything like a lady. I can read, but what 
have I to read ? I can write, but I don't know 
how to write a letter. Even the pretty needle- 
work that other girls can do, I can't do. I often 
wish I was dead," she continued, violendy. *' I'm 
little better than an animal." 

She did not" burst out crying as most girls 
would have done, exhausted by the indulgence 
of her passion. Hester was not nearly exhausted ; 
she stood there facing him, her hands tightly 
pressed together, feeling that by the sheer strength 
of her will she could have removed a mountain 
had it stood in her way. 

*^ Are you mad, child ? What d'ye mean ?" said 



A WABNING. 77 

the farmer, angrily. ** IVe half a mind to shake 
you into yonr right senses." 

*^Vm not mad,** . she went on walking again, 
and he found himself compelled to follow her, . 
** and I mean what I say. Til not cast up whafs 
gone by at you ; but I want to be sent to school 
for two years . to a school fit for me to go to." 

The ground seemed to shake under Eirton's 
feet as he walked along: for some time past he 
had seen that Hester had become more silent and 
unsocial than usual ; but he had been glad of this, 
it left him more leisure to pursue his own favourite 
meditations ; but now it struck him that this must 
be Lucy's vork, and he Hastened to vent his 
wrath on her with the relief len usually expe- 
rience when they can shift blame on any one else. 

"It's that popceited little fool of a cousin of 
yours that's put this iftonsense in your head. Why, 
Hester, I'm ashamed of you; I thought you'd 
more sense. So you wish to be like her, do you?" 
he continued, with a sneer. '' A lady indeed ! a 
iittlevain minx decked out in peacock's feathers 
. a parrot, who chatters as much nonsense as 
words ! Go along ; Tm downright ashamed of my 
own flesh and blood." 



78 HESTEB EIBTON. 

He had amiojed Hester, but he had not stopped 
her. 

" It has nothing to do with Lucj;, father ; she 
has never advised me to go to school: but go 
I mnst. Father, this is the first time I have ever 
asked jou to do anything for me; you cannot 
refiiseme?** 

Angry as Kirton was, his hahitnal caution 
made him control himself. 

" Well, well, child, you can*t expect me to give 
a sudd^i answer to a thing like this, and I don't 
think, after the free life you've led here, you'd 
maybe relish the tight hand a governess 'ud keep 
on you, and the way those less than yourself 'ud 
laugh at such a big girl coming to school I " 

Hester had thought about this last objection, 
and it seemed more formidable now when urged 
by another voice. 

**At least will you do this, &ther . ^will you 
think about it, and will you invite unde and aunt 
Wrenshaw to stay here a few days, and take their 
advice about it? Perhaps aunt could put me in 
some way of learning by myself; that would not 
cost much." 

But this was almost as unwelcome a proposal as 



A WAHNIFG. 79 

^pj( the first: visitors at Eirton's Farm, and, above all, 
people who managed, spite of their small means, to 

; i be perfectlj independent of him, and to enjoy life 

it f withal . ^the idea made him tremble as much as if 

lerf he had fonnd some one trying the lock of his 

JJI2 study door. 

'^Impossible, child! What do I want with 

: Robert Wrraishaw? I don't like him to begin 
with ; and he's a spendthrift, who'll come to ruin 

r; before he dies, or else leave his wife to starve.* 

'^ She'll never starve as long as I live ; she's my 
godmother." 

*^ And a precious deal of good that's ever done 
you. Now, Hester," he added, sternly, ''I've 
been patient with you . don't you go and drive 
me into such a passion as 'ull make me say what 
I'd be sorry for." 

** 111 only say this, father, and then I've done . 
I don't want you to think me undutiful neither 
. ^but you know I do my duiy by you in the way 
of dairy-work and the rest; all I aisk you is to do 
the same by me, and let me have a little change, 
and be more like other girls. I can't go on as I 
am. If you'll have the Wrenshaws and hear what 
they say, I'll not be obstinate about the school ; 



80 HBSTER KIRTON. 

but you know what I am, father, when I make up 
my mind : don't drive me foolish." 

And without another word she left him, and 
walked quickly towards home with a feeling of 
lightness at her heart that she had not been used 
to lately. 

Ralph Kirton was thoroughly perplexed and 
uncomfortable. He might and he did say, " Plague 
take the child 1 what tantrums be she in now?** 
But though he was in doubt how to act, he was 
far too much like Hester in disposition to have 
any doubt as to what her conduct would be if he 
gave her a decided refusal : there would be down- 
right open mutiny, and how to quell it at Hester's 
age he could not determine ; he knew very well 
she would live on bread and water for a year 
sooner than give in, and, meantime, the dairy and 
the poultry would go to ruin. Plan after plan 
was considered, and, at last, he resolved on writing 
to Mr. Goldsmith and asking his advice on the 
subject ; he had named him Hester's sole guardian, 
and, therefore, he had a right to consult him about 
her. What puzzled Kirton more than anything 
was that so silly and inferior a girl, as he deemed 
Lucy, should have power to influence Hester, for 



A WARNING. 81 

he still believed it was her silly talk; but he 
shrugged his shoulders and supposed it was the 
fine clothes. 

**It's the vanity," he muttered; ** they're all 
alike, the best o' em; I suppose it's in their skin, 
and they can't help it." 

All the time he spent at the Croft Meadow, and 
during his ride home . for he sent one of the men 
to fetch his pony . ^he felt the uncomfortable pre- 
sentiment of coming evil : in some way or other 
money was going to be taken from his hoards ; it 
was as if he had been menaced with the loss of a 
limb, and by the time he reached the farm he 
could almost have gone on his knees to Hester to 
beseech her compassion and forbearance; but one 
glance at her cold and now pale face when he met 
her in the kitchen, told him appeal was worse 
than useless ; the only way of making terms with 
her was by maintaining as hard and resolute a 
demeanour as her own, until he had made up his 
mind what to do. 

She did not open her lips on the subject, but 
went to bed early, only nodding her usual good- 
night to her father and Biz even more care- 
lessly than usual; kisses were rare at Kirton's 

VOL. L 6 



82 HESTES KIBTON. 

Farm, except when Lncy Wrenshaw paid a visit 
there. 

The old servant, always sharp to notice any 
change of manner, now looked at her master* He 
was leanii^ his face on his hand, as if to shade'it 
from the firelight; for the moment supper was 
over, t he candleh ad beeg, qatefilUy .extM gttishe d, 
*' Maybe we have and maybe not Are yoa j 

.taking to be cnrions in yonr old ag e ? ^L,...>>-^ ""^"^ 

j ^^Ha' you and Muss Heaster been having words 
' to-day, sir?" she always spoke cautiously and ia 
/ a subdued voice to Eirton, he had taught her to 
Vfear him. 
1 'l^-iAiJ^^No, sir, I hopes not: but, muss, her haven't 
i\ "^ ^ spoke a word scarce since her come home, 'cept 

once, when her asked how long it would take to 
lir that best bedroom, and do it up fit to sleep in." 
The farmer muttered someihing indistinguish- 
able, then he added, louder . 

^^ I thought you had more sense. Biz, than to 
be wasting your wonders over girls' fancies ; you'd 
better be minding your business, and not keeping 
up a fire till this time o' night." 

** I didn't think, sir, after living with ye a-going 
on for thirteen year, I should be grudged a drop of 



. A WABNJNQ. 83 

liot water, which Tin pettiklar in want of to-night, 
no^ that I didn't. Heigho I time was when I 
might ha' had my own kittle to bile ; bat ere-a- 
massy me, it's what's sure to. happen to them as 
slaves and slaves, and thinks for others, stead of 
thayselves." 

^' Don't be fflich an old idiot ; you'd far better 
leave off grumbling, and go to bed." 

"Oh, I'm a-going, sir, but I was a-going to 
take the fire off fust . ^there's such a deal on it, to 
be sore, to make a fuss about." 

She was able to sneer comfortably without 
being seen, as she leaned over the fire and lifted 
the few red embers out of the grate, and care* 
fully smothered them in the ashes beneath; and 
then lighting a bit of tallow candle, which she 
placed on a save-all, fixed in a battered tin 
candlestick, from a tall candle which she had 
just before relit for Mr. Kirton's benefit, she left 
the kitchen, beginning another '^ ere-a-mussy " 
before she was out of hearing. 

Kirton waited till the sound of her heavy foot- 
steps on the carpetless stairs had died away ; he 
then tried the locks of the doors and windows, 
that of the kitchen and washhouse, and, satisfied 

6 . 2 



84 HESTER KlETDN. 

that all was safe^ carefiillj raised the heavy brass 
candlestick from the table^ and^ after locking the 
kitchen-door behind him^ proceeded through the 
parlour to his study. 

He took the key from his pockety unlocked the 
door^ and drew a heavy bolt across as soon as he 
was inside the little den. It was a dingy, musty 
place, with only one dosely-barred window, high 
up in the wall, and covered with dusty cobwebs, 
for Biz and her brooms were never permitted 
entrance; there was a high office desk, covered 
with old much-defaced black leather, and an old- 
fashioned high-backed chair to match; an iron 
safe in one corner of a most antiquated form, and 
three large iron boxes with rusty padlocks ; there 
was no litter, no heap of loose papers and letters ; 
jealously closed as it was against the females of 
the household, the study would have offered 
nothing to reward their curiosity, had it led them 
to transgress rules . for the drawers of the desk 
were all fast 

Kirton raised the candle high above his head, 
and looked anxiously and suspiciously roimd, to 
make sure that everything was as he had left it ; 
he seemed satisfied that all was right, and seatmg 



A WARNING. 85 

Mmself at his desk, he unlocked it, and produced 
writing materials. 

After slowly composing a draught on a crumpled 
envelope . Ralph Barton never wasted anything . 
he sat leaning his head on his hand, while he read 
it over several times, striking out a sentence here 
or a word there, which seemed to make his mean- 
ing too plain. Kirton's argument was always, 
" Where's the good of them lawyer chaps, if they 
can't meet your intentions half way." It was a 
difficult letter to write : he did not wish his sharp 
friend Goldsmith to see that he could not manage 
his own daughter; he only wanted it to appear 
that he was anxious to give her a few educational 
advantages at the cheapest possible rate. 

The letter took him more than an hour, and 
when he had finished writing it out fairly, he 
became aware of a strange, icy sensation in his 
elbows. I say became aware, because it had been 
coming on while he wrote, and he had not noticed 
it; he felt rigid and locked in his chair, while a 
sudden sharp pain quivered through his heart ; . 
then all was numb and dead, his eyes closed, 
though he scarcely lost consciousness, but for the 
greatest temptation that could have been offered 



86 HESTEE KmTON. 

liim, a heap of bank-notes even, Ralpli Elirton 
could not have moved a finger. One hand still 
supported his head, the other held the letter 
loosely; but thej were leaden hand^ . ^he could 
not stir them ; he tried to open his lips to call for 
help, but they were dry and parched, and his 
tongue was immoveable ; the weight at his heart 
increased, he knew that it had ceased to beat, and 
with this knowledge he lost consciousness. . . . . 

When he opened his eyes, the candle had 
burned down far in the socket; his heart was 
beating in wild tumultuous leaps, that seemed 
as if they would suffocate him by their violence, 
and when he rose to his feet, he was obliged to 
steady himself by his desk . the room appeared 
swaying about with him. 

With the intuitive presence of mind that seems 
a gift of Providence to those afflicted by such 
visitations, he remembered having bought some 
ammonia on the previous market-day, in order 
that Hester might renovate one of his waistcoats, 
and this he knew he had placed in his desk ; he 
groped for it with difficulty, for he was still 
obliged to hold fast by the desk for fear of Ml- 
ing. He found it at last, and the pungent smell 



A WARNING. 87 

revived him, but he was powerless to leave the 
study, 

^' What is it?" he said to himself^ the sudden 
awful reality of death coming before him with 
a startling vividness, for, although this was the 
most severe, it was not the first of these mysterious 
wan^ings ; he passed his hand across his forehead, 
the fingers were icy and stiff, and yet all his 
pulses were beating with double life. He tried 
the ammonia again, and this time it stilled in some 
measure the suffocating throbs of his heart, but it 
seemed long to him before he could steady him- 
self sufficiently to reach his bedroom, tottering 
and staggering like a drunken man, and jBaeling so 
utterly exhausted that he could scarcely manage to 
avoid awakening Hester. He did not want her to 
know what had happened ; she and Biz would be 
for having a doctor, and that was an expense he 
was resolved to do without Next market day he 
would speak to young Jacob Bonham, the new 
doctor at Stedding; he had known his father 
before him, a farmer, a thrifiy careful man like 
himself; Jacob would give him advice without a 
fee, and so, calculating the cost even of his own 
life, Mr. Kirton got into bed and fell asleep. 



88 HESTER EIRTOK. 



CHAPTER Vn. 
A YOUNG DOCTOR. 

Jacob Bonham looked grave when be heard of his 
old friend's attack. He happened to be going 
home to dinner just as Kirton was leaving the 
market, so ihey walked up the High Street 
together. 

'* Nothing, you know, of the slightest con- 
sequence now^ he said, in a semi-mysterious way ; 
^^but if these attacks should become frequent, 
why ^" 

** Why, what?" said Blirton, abruptly, finding 
that the last sentence remamed unfinished; 
** the reason why I speak to you is to know how 
to keep 'em off, not because I care to chatter like 
a woman about my ailments; can you do any- 
thing for me . ^yes, or no? " 

'* Well, but, Mr. Kirton, that was exactly what 



A YOUNG DOCTOR. 89 

I was coming to : if youll allow me, I'll . I'll make 
you up something, and bring it round to the farm 
myself." 

** No, thank you," said the fanner ; " I'm not 
a-going to take up your time, Jacob, when I bean't 
meaning to pay for it ; you have it ready in an 
hour's time, and 111 call for it" 

The young doctor walked off; he was hungry 
and wanted his dinner, but he made up the 
medicine first, and then, taking,^ down a volume 
of Tennyson, read while he ate. 

Nature had never intended Jacob for a doctor ; 
he had pleniy of talent, plenty of goodness of heart, 
and the active benevolence almost universally to 
be found in his profession, but he was neither very 
polished in manner nor ready in speech; there 
was little that was really practical about him, 
and he indulged his dreaminess by reading poetry, 
and thinking of Lucy Wrenshaw instead of his 
patients. Perhaps another impediment to his 
success might have been found in the fact that he 
was, so long as he remained unmarried, inde- 
pendent of his profession : his father, after bringing 
him up not to expect a farthing from him, had 
left him a small competence. 



90 HESTER EIBTON. 

K Jacob had had more energy, he might have 
still retrieyed the past ; he might have trarelled, 
have sought the fellowship of highly educated 
men, have purchased even a London practice 
which would necessarily have given him the 
polish he wanted and have roused him from his 
yea-nay insouciance; but he was a man of few 
desires, he was content to vegetate; for the 
pres^it his skill seemed to satisfy the good people 
of Stedding ; they had never had a clever doctor 
before, they did not want new-9ngled notions, 
but were willing to take him as they found 
hinu 

It was a particularly healthy time just now . 
there were a few poor people certainly whom he 
ought to visit, but to-morrow wot^d do . and he 
turned again to the '^ Lotus Eaters," and made up 
his mind that he would spend the evening at 
Mrs. Wrraishaw's 

It was a pity he parted so abruptly from Mr. 
Kirton: five minutes afterwards Lucy Wrenshaw 
came up, dressed in her prettiest hat and cloak, 
for she knew Jacob was rarely away from town 
on market-day. Mr. Ejrton, however^ imagined 
that she was thus smart on account of the young 



A TOUKG DOCTOR. 91 

farmers who eame in to market^ and he took firesh 
umbrage at her vanity. 

But few people conid withstand Lucy's irank 
cordiality when she chose to show it. 

^'Ohl uncle Kirton, I'm so glad I met you 
. come in and see mamma^ and have some 
dinner.'* 

Barton was at first shrinking away unsocially, 
but he knew he was too unpopular among his 
brethren to have any chance of another invitation^ 
and, after a little pressing, he went in. It was 
only the second time he had ever entered the 
house ; and Mrs. Wrenshaw, who lived in extreme 
terror of her sarcastic rude relative, bustled about 
and scolded the maid for unpunctuality, and put 
herself and her establishment generally into that 
happy state of worry which is sure to make every- 
thing go wrong. 

The dinner came at last, and passed off quietly, 
but for Mrs. WrenshaVs perpetual talk to Lucy, 
though at her brother-in4aw. He scarcely spoke 
to her, but seemed to be studying Lucy with 
more attention than usual; her mother's perturba- 
tion kept her quiet, amd he was surprised to be 
x>bliged to own to himself that the girl had some 



92 BESTEB EIBTON. 

sense after all^ and certainly a prettier softer 
manner than Hester's. 

** Uncle," she said, taking advantage of a pause 
in her mother's incessant talk, " I wish you'd let 
me have Hester to spend a day here. If she 
came over early in the morning, I'd drive her 
home in good time after dinner . I would, indeed, 
and it would be a great pleasure to me." 

Lucy was far too clever to imply that there 
would be any advantage to her cousin in her 
proposal. 

Whether his sudden illness had softened Kirton, 
or whether he thought a change of any kind 
might bend Hester's stubborn purpose, it would be 
hard to say, but to Lucy's great delight and sur- 
prise, after remaining silent a few moments, he 
said, though not graciously, . 

** Well, she may come if she will ; but mind, 
Lucy, don't you go taking her to shops, and 
tempting her to spend money she hasn't got." 

Lucy was so overjoyed, that without a moment's 
reflection she rushed up and threw her arms round 
Kirton's neck and kissed him, a proceeding which 
nearly made him retract his consent ; he got up 
from his seat, feeling, probably, safer in his six 



A YOUNG DOCTOR. 93 

feet two inches of height, and said he must be 
going home Lucy blushed and looked awkward^ 
for, though so impetuous, she was a sensitive little 
damsel, but she said she should drive over the fol- 
lowing Saturday, and fetch her cousin, and as he 
made no opposition, took his consent for granted. 

** I'm glad your uncle has gone away, Lucy, I 
declare I am. I fed quite flustered and out of 
sorts when he's here." 

** That's your own fault then, mamma." Lucy 
generally spoke her mind to every one except her 
cousin Hester. ^^ If you take no notice of him, he'd 
take none of you, you may depend." 

'^ Take no notice I goodness gracious me, child I 
take no notice of a visitor in one's own house I 
what can you be thinking of ? " 

** Well, I don't mean exactly that, I suppose. 
I know what I mean, but I can't put it into words. 
Look here, our schoolmistress, the head one. 
Miss Colville, used to say no lady could be elegant 
who wanted repose . there that is it, mother; I 
want you to be more elegant, to have more repose." 

** Good gracious, child ! what nonsense they do 
talk at schools I* But I can tell you, Lucy, your 
poor father used to call me elegant when I was 



94 HESTEB KIBTON. 

a girl, but who wants to be elegant at forty-five ? 
However, I must say I think they might teach 
better breeding at schools, that I do, than to make 
a girl tell her mother she's awkward." 

Here Mr& Wrenshaw looked indignant and 
still more wanting in repose. 

This way of taking the matter roused Lucy's 
wrath also. 

" Mother, you know I never meant to be rude^ 
and as to saying you were awkward you know I 
didn't I don't care about the thing one way or 
another, only you seem always to get flustered 
when people come; I feel so too myself sometimeat, 
but I find if I've the sense to leave myself alone, 
and not fume myself into fiddle-strings as to what 
they'll think of me, everything seems smoother 
and more comfortable." 

'* Ah, well 1 1 suppose you know, Lucy ; I don't 
see the good of having paid sixty pounds a year 
for your schooling, unless you're to know some 
things that I don't." 

**Now, mother dear, you know I don't mean 
that ; I hate you to say that sort of thing," and 
she threw her arms round her mother's neck and 
kissed her ; sudi a kiss . ^there was scarcely any 



A YOUBTG DOCTOR. 95 

outward sound aboul; it^ bat it hurt Mrs. Wren- 
ahaw's soft round cheek, and left a red flush on it. 

** Lucy, Lucy, child I you've pushed my cap off." 

'^ Oh I never nund, you must go up and put on 
a firesh one, there's company coming to supper." 

^^ Company I oh, I dare say ! that young doctor 
s^gain, I suppose. Well, I'm sure; how do you 
know he's coming, Lucy ? " 

Lucy felt very angry, that her mother ^ould 
take this tone in speaking of Jacob Bonham ; out- 
spoken as she was herself in most things, she had 
a delicate mindyand slro shrank from any joking 
on the subject ; she had talked lightly of him to 
Hester, but each time she saw him now she felt 
more doubtful that he liked her; she looked con- 
fused, but tried to answer quite indifferently. 

'* I don't know for certain of course, but the two 
last market days he has been here, so it's natural 
he should come to-night." 

*' I wish to goodness, child, you'd opened your 
mouth this morning," said her mother, rather 
testily ; ** there's nothing in the world for supper, 
except the ham." 

" Why, there was an ocean of meat pie left at 
dinner, and I bought a cream cheese at market 



96 HESTER KIRTON. 

this morning . such a beauty ; just get a cucumber, 
mother dear, and there'll be supper for six, in no 
time." 

*' Supper for six I gracious, Lucy, you don't 
surely expect six, do you?" 

Lucy burst into a hearty laugh. 

** Oh I six and twenty if you like to fancy it, 
mother dear," and she sat down to her pianoforte, 
and began to sing ** Love's young dream." She had 
a pretty voice and had been well taught; although 
her mother persisted that the untrained wildness 
of her voice had been much better worth listening 
to ; as it was there was plenty of wildness in the 
expression : in everything Lucy resembled a wild 
plant trained to grow properly in a trim garden ; 
for a while the cultivation she had received would 
restrain her exuberance, but when once she became 
familiarized, the old freedom would burst all 
restraint and she was as eccentric as ever. 

This afternoon she was evidently putting a curb 
upon herself: she set the drawing-room so perfectly 
neat that it looked tasteless and prim ; she then 
went upstairs and smoothed every rebellious hair 
into the most glossy precision; she changed her 
collars and cuffs three times before she could decide 



A YOUNG DOCTOR. 97 

which were the most lady-like ; she said to herself 
that she had hitherto had her flighty flirty manner 
with Jacoh, and this had, of course, encouraged 
him, and prevented her from judging him carefully. 
She had nothing to say against his profession ; a 
doctor in such as town as Stedding was as much as 
she could aspire to; hut the idea that her cousin 
Hester was admired by a real London gentleman 
gave her an unpleasant feeling of envy and also 
of discontent, spite of her generous nature. 

The evening came at last, and when Mr. Bon- 
ham appeared, Lucy remarked, as she might have 
done before, only she had never thought of it, that 
he wore shepherd's plaid trousers and a shooting 
coat : she thought he might have dressed a little 
better when he knew he was coming to see ladies ; 
besides, doctors always dress in black: she had 
not found out yet that Jacob was very shy; he 
concealed it under a smiling bland manner, which 
to so careless an observer as Lucy made him seem 
at his ease. 

He came to Mrs. Wrenshaw's this evening 

feeling more self-possessed than usual, for Lucy's 

manner had been very encouraging as they 

walked home from church the previous Sunday. 

VOL. 1. 7 



98 HESTBR KIBTON. 

Doctor thoijgh he was^ Jncob managed to go to 
clmrch on Sunday evenings. He went up to 
h&r now with a genuine smile, hut her stiff recep- 
tion sent him back into his shell : he was no 
longer only shy, he was alarmed, for he thought 
he must have done something to yex her. He 
knocked a chair down as he hunried across the 
room to speak to Mrs. Wrenshaw, and, catching 
the table cover with his coat, dragged it half off, 
and Lucy's workbox along with it He turned 
fall of apdogies, but h^ expression of disgust 
effectually repelled him from making any profiSsrs 
of assistance, and roused his pride. He sat down 
by her mother, and began to talk without taking 
any further notice of Lucy. 

This was the best way of treatiog her: she 
began to think she was cross and hard upon 
Jacob, for after all most men were rather awkward 
. she sighed as she thought Mr. Hallam was sure 
to be an exception to this rule. But Lucy was 
too forgiving, she cared too much about love and 
kindness herself, to keep for long even a cold 
seeming with any one. She was just the woman 
to be trampled on by a cold-hearted man, and 
with plenty of spirit to feel the wrongs of 



A YOUNG DOCTOR 99 

others, she was, if possible, too apt to believe 
herself to blame . that is to say, too apt, for 
worldlj wisdom; in a true man this would pro* 
bably create deeper love than any witching wiles, 
or calm self-possessed superiority; but Lucy's lot 
was not yet decided^ and if she chose badly, 
chances were fearfully against her. 

"Lucy, dear, won't you sing?" said Mrs. Wren- 
shaw ; "sing ^Barbara Allen.' " 

Lucy sang; she had scarcely sufficient power 
for the touching old ballad, but the feeling she 
threw into it was infectious. 

Jacob, who had been making Tain attempts at 
turning the leaves, always taking two at a time, 
suddenly let them go altogether, buried his face 
in his pocket-handkerchief, and never thanked her 
when she rose from the music-stooL 

"Don't get up, Lucy; let's have something 
cheer&l now ; that does send one into the doldrums, 
after all," said her mother. 

"Not directly, I can't put comedy on the top 
of tragedy ; can I, Mr. B(iham ? . I'll let you down 
gently," and she began one of those exquisite 
German accompaniments which seem to mingle 
with the TCHCe itself. She sang it with the 

7.2 

116356B 



100 HESTER KIRTON. 

English words, however, which rather spoiled the 
effect; but Mrs. Wrenshaw thought the words 
the best part of a song, and could not bear to 
listen to what she did not understand. 

Lucy had not much chance of talking to Mr. 
Bonham; her mother thought it a good oppor- 
tunity of getting some advice gratis, and asked 
the young doctor about a crooked joint in her 
little finger which she said looked ominous ; then 
she wanted to know the truth of a little bit of 
scandal about the squire's eldest daughter, '* who, 
folks did say, had settled to run away with a 
spendthrift young ofiicer, and was it true they 
had been stopped ? " 

Mr. Bonham really knew nothing about the 
matter, but his denial did not serve him. 

*^ Ah, you doctors, you're so deep ; you get at 
all the secrets of all the families, and then you 
only tell 'em to those you like." 

** Really, Mrs. Wrenshaw," faltered poor Jacobs 
*^ I . I'm not particularly inquisitive." 

'*0f course you're not," said Lucy, abruptly, 
*'and mamma's joking," and then, before her 
surprised parent could remonstrate, she said, . " I 
wish, Mr. Bonham, you would call in on Saturday ; 



A YOUNG DOCTOR. 101 

my cousin Hester is coming, and I should like 
you to meet" 

The instant the words were uttered she wished 
them unsaid ; but he answered quickly and readily 
for a wonder, that he should be delighted to call 
in on that afternoon, he had to go a long round 
in the evening. 

''Well," said Lucy, with a saucy laugh that 
brought back all his shyness, " there would be no 
use in coming in the evening, we should be out." 

Poor Jacob had intended his earnest answer to 
be understood as a sign of love, but Lucy's laugh 
suddenly blurred the impression which had begun 
to strengthen in the young doctor's heart : a wife 
who would laugh at him . and he knew there was 
a good deal to laugh at in his awkward ways . 
would be a perpetual blister, and he probably 
shrank from the idea of trying one of his own 
remedies. 

He said ** good-night," far less nervously than 
usual, for it seemed to him he cared no longer 
about pleasing Miss Wrenshaw, and with a 
woman's usual contradiction she was sure she 
had never liked him so well before. 

Lucy was a great talker, at least she liked to 



102 HESTER EIRTOX. 

keep her tongae from mstiiig; she did not chatter 
an hour at a time about dress or gossip, or the 
shape of one person's ear and another's nose, string- 
ing together sentences all expressive of the same 
meaning, only constmcted of different words, till 
her listeners fdt desperate under the monotonons 
worry : Lucy talked to the purpose even when 
most excited, and her talk was generally amusing ; 
but to-night she was so silent after Jacob Bonham's 
departure, that her mother remarked it 

^ The truth is I feel stupid, mother, and I think 
we had both much better go to bed." 

Lucy's sle^ was disturbed by very unpleasant 
dreams . Jacob Bonham was persuading Hester to 
run away with him, and just as, to Lucy's despair, 
her cousin had consented, a taU gendeman with 
long whiskers appeared and declared himself to be 
Hester's brother. She woke up in that half-con- 
scious state, when the dream seems the reality, and 
began to try and remember about this brother of 
Hester's, and what he was like, whether he would 
be kind to her, and whether he would love her. No 
one would have called Lucy vain or selfish, and 
yet this craving after affection made her appear to 
think constantly of herself; deep in her heart lay 



A YOUNG DOCTOB. 103 

the conviction, that no man who knew her intimately 
could ever love her well enough to make her his 
lyife; and her honest nature told her that she 
must be so known before she would marry, her 
husband should know every failing and folly 
before he became really such. ** And so it will 
be,'* she went on, as, having at length thoroughly 
awakened, she thought over the previous evening. 
*' Now that Jacob Bonham begins to understand 
me, he cares for me no longer, and, to finish it 
completely, I am going to let him see Hester. 
Well, it is better before than after; suppose we 
bad been engaged and then he had taken a fancy 
to her, . ^ihat would have been dreadful." 



104 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

MARTHA HALLAM DECLINES LUNCHEON. 

Miss Martha HALLAMhad come to pay her sister- 
in-law a visit. There was not much love between 
these two ladies, but they had a due regard to the 
maintenance of family harmony ; they always spoke 
of each other as " dear Martha " and ** dear Louisa;" 
but they never could spend half an hour together 
without using the sisterly privilege of finding fault. 

Mrs. Hallam was a fair, blue-eyed, comely dame 
full of elegant helplessness. 

Miss Hallam was rather tall, very dark and 
slender; there was restlessness in every feature 
and in every movement. She walked across a 
room angularly, and generally contrived in her 
rapid passage to knock over a chair, or commit 
some other awkwardness ; not that she ever owned 
to this ; she never saw anything she did not wish 



r 

MARTHA HALLAM DECLINES LUNCHEON. 105 

to belieye^ and she never believed anything she 
did not choose. You could not tell Martha 
Hallam any news ; could rarely take her by sur- 
prise ; had she been told an eclipse was expected^ 
she would have answered she knew all about it ; 
in fact^ she gave one the idea that she must have 
been favoured with private information on every 
subject. 

Mrs. Hallam possessed every personal advantage 
over Martha ; but although the latter was not really 
clever^ she was both quick-witted and quick- 
tongued. Without being well-born or thoroughly 
well educated, Mrs. Hallam had that lofty manner 
and that languid indolence which impose wonder- 
folly on a great many besides the vulgar. In per- 
sonal habits Martha was probably the truer lady of 
the two. She lived in her own house . a pretty 
little villa near Regent's Park . a pattern of pre- 
cision and neatness, and while Mrs. Hallam's 
maids wore sUk gowns, lace caps, &c., Martha's 
never displayed a brooch or a bow; the extent 
of their crinoline even was limited. 

Miss Hallam could have kept her carriage if 
she chose; but she preferred making another 
use of her money. ," What were her legs given 



106 HESTER KIBTON. 

her for if she did not use them, and thare were 
plenty of cabs?'' This was a sore trial to the 
elegant Louisa. She would gladly have ignored 
the fact of cabs, exc^t as ydbides made fca 
young men ; it was provoking of Martha to per- 
sist in haying one sent for, sometimes when 
two carriages were standing at the door; it was 
disagreeable that even her friend's coachmen and 
footmen should know tbat she received a visitor 
who used cabs. Miss Hallam could easily have 
walked both ways, and sometimes did so, although 
it was rather a long distance to Wilton Place 
from Park Village; she was one of those irri- 
tating people who are never tired and never ill, 
and therefore consider such weaknesses affiscted 
and unnecessary in others. Martha HaUam would 
perhaps have called this severe judgment; but 
until we live in the Palace of Truth, people must 
be judged by what they seem, and if they per- 
sist in a hard unsympathizing manner, why, they 
must take the conseoueiK^es. 

She must have been tired to-day, thor^h she 
would not admit it; she had walked through 
the burning mid-day sun of July, and yet when 
she was ushered into Mrs. Hallam's luxuriously 



MAETHA HALLAM DECLINES LUNCHEON. 107 

fomislied drawing-rooms^ where the difficulty was 
to find a seat that was not intended to lotinge 
in^ she chose cme of those straight stiff-looking 
chairs^ with a small oblong piece of padded velvet 
in the midst of its quaintly carved back, adapted 
rather for penance than comfort. It was a very 
pretty room, not owing half so much of its 
tastefbl arrangement^ however, to its owner, as 
to her son; the chairs and sofas were some of 
them covered in violet velvet, others in chintz, 
with gay groups of flowers on a pale green 
ground: but it is useless and tiresome to make 
an invfflitory of the furniture, or of the orna- 
ments which filled the room . ^they were all rather 
elegant than showy. One contrast fixed attention 
as one entered: the charming relief given to the 
rich folds of tiie violet velvet curtains by the 
snowy muslin beneath ; and this carried the eye 
on insensibly to the massive pure white marble 
mantelpieces, so plain and so broad, the only 
carving about them consisting in the heavy bosses 
supporting each shelf. 

'' You must be tired, Martha, dear,** said Mrs. 
Hallam, as she came in; it seemed strange^ that 
she should always forget her sister's ways. 



108 HESTER KIRTON. 

*'Not at all tired, thank you; I'm such an 
excellent walker, you know, and the distance is 
so trifling . nothing to tire any one. I enjoy sun- 
shine, you know ; it never hurts me.'' 

*' So fortunate you have come to-day. You'll 
stay luncheon now, won't you? " 

*^ Luncheon I no, thank you. Why, you know, 
Louisa, I always dine at half-past one o'clock; 
how could I eat luncheon ? " 

*^I thought, dear," said Mrs. Hallam, smiling 
sweetly, now that her sister had refused, *^tliat 
you would have perhaps made it your dinner. 
I expect Frederic will come home then, and I 
knew you would like to see him." 

** Oh ! Fred's coming, is he ? Why didn't you 
say so before ? " said Martha, testily. One of her 
rules was never to unsay her own words, and 
yet she would have given up anything but her 
own will for the pleasure of her nephew's com- 
pany. " Coming away from oflSce, is he ? Well, 
I'll stay till one o'clock. He's sure to be here 
by that time, I suppose; and then if I take a 
cab, I shall be home in time for dinner." 

Mrs. Hallam shrugged her shoulders and 
looked ill-used. 



MARTHA HALLAM DECLINES LUNCHEON. 109 

** It looks SO absurd, Martha, just to go out of 
the house when we sit down to luncheon; I wish 
you wouldn't do it . I am sure Frederic will be 
annoyed." 

** Oh, no ; Fred will be nothing of the kind, 
Fred and I quite understand one another." 

Mrs. Hallam did not answer, but she writhed ; 
It was so impertinent of Martha to affect to under- 
stand Fred better than his mother did. 

"How drooping your ferns are," said Miss 
Hallam, cheerfoUy ; " you should see mine ; they 
are double the size of those." 

**Ah, I haven't your wonderful energy, you 
see," said her sister, languidly ; *' I dare say you 
renew the soil, and all that kind of thing; with 
my chest I could not undertake such fatigue." 

" Chest I fiddlestick I a little stooping over firesh 
earth would do you good, Louisa, far more good 
than reading those silly French novels you are so 
fond of; not that I do anything to my ferns, but just 
attend to them ; but then my plants always live." 

"Yes," said Mrs. Hallam, quietly, "I think 
single women's flowers and plants always do 
thrive ; I suppose it is because they have nothing 
else to do but to attend to them ; " . ^here Martha 



110 HESTER EIRT0:N. 

nearly bounded from her chair ; but Mrs. Hallam's 
silver flow of speech went on, unheeding the inter- 
ruption. " There are the Miss Goldsmitiiis, you 
know ; really their myrtles are quite surprising." 

''Pray, Louisa, don't say I know the Miss 
Goldsmiths; I know nothing whatever about them, 
except that they are all but Dissenters. I hope 
you will never repent encoura^ng Frederic to 
visit people of that kind.'* 

*' Mr. Goldsmith visits the Fortescues." 

'' I don't care who the Fortescues visit I am 
quite sure that Goldsmith's & Jew--a nasty 
yellow old cheat." 

" Ah, Martha, how can you . .^ 

'' I can always say what I mean, and I always 
shall, and I wonder that you, with your aristocratic 
notions, should encourage Fred to visit such low 
people." 

" Low people I why, they live in a magnificent 
house ; furnished far better than this is." 

''I don't estimate people as auctioneers do," 
said Miss Hallam, shaking herself angrily in her 
chair ; " my own notion is that Goldsmith's been 
a Jew broker, and as for his sisters, I can't endure 
them." 



MARTHA HALLAM DECLOJES LUNCHEON. Ill 

^' Why, I thought you just now said you didn't 
know them." 

** Ah, no, how should I know them ? the look of 
them, with their hands full of tracts, is enough 
for me." 

'^Poor things I they are very eccentric; you 
know, dear, single women sometimes are; hut still 
I cannot see bow the sisters' religious views can 
afiect Frederic's intimacy with Mr. GoldsmitL" 

*^ There are none so blind as those that won't 
see, Louisa, and you know, as I so often tell you, 
you will always look at everything through your 
own spectacles, . at least you don't wear them, but 
you will when you do." 

Mrs. Hallam was greatly relieved to hear the 
ring announcing her son's arrival ; she would have 
preferred having him all to herself, but the tSte-a-tite 
was becoming too unbearable even for her placidity. 

" Ah, aunt Martha, how d'ye do? why, I have 
not seen you for a long time." 

"That's not my feult, Fred; you know where 
I live, and how to get th^re." 

" Well, I am very sorry, indeed I am," he said, 
his handsome face assuming a half look of con- 
trition ; *' I really will come as soon as possible. 



112 HESTER EDBTON. 

but, aunt, you do live in such an out-of-the-way 
place." 

MiBB Hallam laughed, she generally laughed 
when she was annoyed. 

" I live so very far beyond Regent's Park, Fred.** 
" I don't often visit Regent's Park, if you mean 
that," said her nephew, lolling back in his chair, 
and pulling out his long silky whiskers; "it's 
a long time, I can tell you, since Goldsmith has 
given me a dinner." 

** I'm sure I am very glad to hear it" 
*^What an unnatural observation ! glad that your 
promising nephew should have a good dinner the 
less ! But I say, aunt Martha, what a pretty bonnet 
you have got 1 where did you buy it? " 

Miss Hallam was completely mollified: she had 
really no taste in dress, but she thought she had, 
and she adored her nephew's opinion ; praise from 
him was delicious, and as it was not very frequent, 
for she had spoiled him out of all deference, she 
was doubly happy to have chosen tliis day of all 
others for her visit; how she wished she could 
stay a little longer, but she would punish herself 
rather than let Louisa have the satisfaction of 
saying she did not know her own mind. Just as 



MARTHA HALLAM DECLINES LUNCHEON. 113 

she was resolving to send for a cab, a letter 
arrived for her nephew : he walked to the wuidow 
to read it, then thrust it into his pocket and 
returned to his aunt, but he now looked so per- 
plexed and worried that she felt convinced thei 
letter was from some importunate tradesman . she 
had always been very angry with her brother's 
will and fully persuaded that her sister-in-law 
might do more for Fred. 

.^Will you come and drink tea with me to- 
morrow ? " she said, in a low voice ; " I want to 
talk a little business, Fred,'* 

" I am very sorry I cannot," he replied, and he 
really was; those "business" teas at his aunt's 
were well understood by him . they usually re- 
plenished his purse; "but I find I must leave 
town to-morrow, and shall, perhaps, be away for 
a day or two." 

"Leave town!" said his mother; "why, 
Frederic, only this morning at breakfast you said 
you would take me to see those pictures in Bond 
Street to-morrow." 
" Ah, I did not know then," said Hallam. 
Both mother and aunt strongly suspected the 
letter was from Mr. Goldsmith, but neither of 
VOL. L , 8 



114 HESTER EUELTOS. 

them dared to ask. Frederic never allowed wliat 
be called petticoat interference, and was always 
rather mysterious in his proceedings. 

He was evidently anxious no notice should be 
taken now. 

*'I tell you what, aunt . 111 bestow the supreme 
felicity of my presence on you next Monday; yon 
can wait tea till eight, can't you ? " 

" My dear boy, you know your aunt drinks tea 
at five pimctually,'' said Mrs. Hallam. 

'* Fred always chooses his own hours when he 
comes to me ; don't you, Fred ? And now I must 
say good-by ; there's your luncheon bell ; what a 
cracked sound it has, Louisa I I never heard 
anything so fimny." And when the servant 
threw open the door to announce luncheon, she 
begged him to send for a cab for her, and, spite 
of all protests, departed in it without eating any- 
thing. 



115 



CHAPTER IX. 

CAPTAIN PORTESCUE. 

But Frederic Hallam did not leave town very 
early next day. After he said good-by to bis 
mother^ be told bis man to pack up a few tbings 
for binij bring them on to Captain Fortescue's 
in Jermyn Street and wait there till he arrived ; 
he then went to his office and obtained leave 
of absence^ and, hailing a cab^ told the driver he 
wanted a good turn along the Edgware Road. 
As soon as he was clear of London he took out, 
the letter he had received in Wilton Place and 
read it over again* Its contents seemed to disturb 
him strangely : he pulled his luxuriant whiskers to 
their utmost extent, as if seeking to extract their 
opinion on the matter, and then, taking off his 
left-hand glove, twisted round and round the seal 
ring on his little finger ; he then held his hand up 

8.2 



116 HESTER KIRTON. 

and minately examined it^ and its contemplation 
appeared to have soothed him. 

He presently threw up the Kttle trap and 
desired to be driven to Jermyn Street 

As soon as he arrived there he sprang out of 
the cab, and, without waiting for any ushering, 
ran upstairs and knocked at a door on the first- 
floor. 

''Come in,'' said a man's voice, and Hallam 
entered. 

The room was furnished with taste, but with 
far less expense than Hallam's own sitting-room 
in Wilton Place. There were more books and 
pictures here, fewer showy ornaments, and a 
considerable absence of neatness. The owner was 
lying on a sofa, but he started up as Hallam 
appeared. 

He was tall and elegant, rather older than 
Frederic, and strikingly diflerent in appearance, 
for he was pale, and rather melancholy looking, 
with dark brown eyes and hair, and irregular 
features; but it was a face which inspired far 
more interest than Hallam's, although it might 
not, perhaps, have commanded such instantaneous 
admiration; there was a languor, too, about 



CAPTAIN FORTESCUE. 117 

Captain Fortescue^ far more dignified than the 
rapid movements of his friend ; the one was a 
man of thought^ the other essentially a man of 
action . and yet ihey suited exactly. Fortescue 
was not vexed with Hallam's vanity^ because he 
was too really gifted to be vain himself^ and 
Hallam reverenced his friend's superior intellectual 
qualities, although he considered himself far in 
advance about dress, knowledge of the world, and 
such matters, wherein he declared Fortescue to 
be much too careless. Curiously enough, For- 
tescue consulted Hallam more than Frederic took 
counsel of him, probably because people who 
think are more apt to be troubled about trivial 
every-day questions than by those of graver im- 
portance. Hallam rarely asked his friend's advice 
except in money matters . ^he had not wanted it . 
for his were usually trivial troubles, and he 
prefeiTed managing them himself; but now he 
would have given much to be able to con- 
sult him, and yet something warned him not to 
do so. 

** You must be wonderfiilly strong, old fellow," 
said Fortescue, *^ to go rushing about in the heat of 
the sun such a day as this. Here am I dead beat 



118 HESTER EIBTON. 

and ftdly detenmned to stay on this so& till I've 
finished my booL" 

'^ Yon would not feel the heat half so much if you 
went into the air instead of mewing yourself up 
herewith abook : why I have been nearly to Kingsh 
bury and back, and I feel quite firesh and cooL" 

Fortescue got up from the sofa and laughed. 

"You look cool, decidedly. Why, you have 
bloom enough for six Hebes just now. What on 
earth took you down to Kingsbury ? ^ 

" The air; nothing but my sanitary ideas on the 
value of change of air; there's nothing like air 
when you've cobwebs in your brain. But, I say, 
Fortescue," . ^he had spoken before as if thinking of 
something else, and now he looked a little nervous 
and as if he were doing something he was ashamed 
of." look here : if you had a small property . down 
in the north, well say . and you heard that some- 
thing was going a little wnn^ vnth it, what should 
you do, eh?" 

" Do ? why, go down and look after it You, of 
aU practical, sharp people, to ask such a question! 
Why, what's the mattw with you, Fred? b the 
property a lady? I shall begin to think you are in 
love." 



CAPTAIN POBTESCUE. 119 

*^ In love I that's good. No, I leave that to a 
sentim^Qtal captain who lies on a boei reading 
poetry. Love is an artide I mean to eschew all my 
life; quite unnecessary in marriage, take my word 
for it.** 

" I cannot agree with you ; at least, I am quite 
sure I should hat^ a wife unless I loved her ; but, 
my dear fellow, we need neither of us anticipate 
evils. Have you seen our sof)>poken Goldfinch 
lately?'' 

*' No, but I must see him soon.*' 
" I tell you what, Hallam : you know I don't 
often volunteer anything, and you are supposed to 
be sharp enough to take care of number two and 
number one as well ; but I wouldn't let things go 
on long with Gk>ldsmith without squaring if I were 
you: he's all right, of course, but he might forget, 
or he might die suddenly and leave his accounts 
queer : we do hear of such things : you understand. 
My advice is, square up." 

" I wish I could square, by Jove ! I do," said 
Hallam, looking wonderfully grave &r him. 
" Hang it all, Fortescue 1 you've done away with 
all the good of my country drive. You are one of 
Job's comforters. But, look here : you wcwi't find 



120 HESTEB KHiTON. 

me for three or four days ; I'm going out of town. 
I called partly to tell you this^ and partly to 
ask you to make my excuses to your sister- 
in-law." 

** Ah, I hear you and Helena have been great 
friends lately ; you are a clever fellow with women, 
Hallam ; now I could never take trouble enough 
to be a favourite with Helena ; she wants so much 
worship ; and although she is my brother's wife, 
and, of course, I feel brotherly affection and 
courtesy towards her, she's not my sort of 
woman." 

" There's your fastidiousness again. Why, she's 
about the easiest woman to please I ever saw; 
you've only got to swear by all her opinions; 
to yield her implicit obedience, and a good deal of 
respectful admiration; not difficult the last, for, 
mind you, Fortescue, she's awfully handsome, 
sometimes." 

*^ That is just the word for her," interrupted his 
friend, laughing ; *' she is awfully handsome. But 
I detest that severe dark-browed beauty ; she would 
make a splendid Judith.^' 

*' Well, I'm not a sentimental man ; but I like 
to look at beauty wherever I see it; I'm quite 



CAPTAIN PORTESCUE. 121 

catholic in that; only I prefer it well dressed," 
and he shuddered at the remembrance of the 
** pink gingham gown." " But I must be off; I'll 
drop you a line to say when I am retunied." 

*' Are you going far ?" inquired his friend, look- 
ing rather mischievous. 

"No: ni tell you all about it some day, old 
fellow; it's a pure matter of business, believe me," 
and they parted with a hearty shake of the hand. 
Later in the afternoon, as it grew cooler, and 
having finished his book. Captain Fortescue saun- 
tered towards Mayfair to deliver his friend's 
message to Lady Helena Fortescue. 

She was exceedingly indignant that Mr. Hallam 
should venture to send her a message, and, as her 
brother told Frederic afterwards, looked cruelly 
and awfully beautiful in her disdain. 

*' People whom I honour by invitations. Captain 
Fortescue, should either make or write their own 
apologies; or rather your friend should have 
known the state of his engagements better when 
he accepted mine. I ask him here because, as 
your firiend, I wished to show courtesy to him ; 
but as he does not appreciate the distinction, it is 
a pity to waste it on him." 



122 HESTEB KIETON, 

Moat people feared Helena Fortescne; especiallj 
when her words came out in a dry^ sententious^ 
calm manner^ utterly at variance with the scornful 
anger flashing from her beautiful black eyes. Her 
face was^ as her brother-in-law had hinted^ Jewish 
in type : you looked at it more as a picture than a 
reality^ unless her anger was roused : not that she 
often gave way to unseemly bursts of passion; 
she could always curb her temper when she chose, 
for her will was as strong as any impulse ; but she 
could not control the e^ressicm of her eyes and 
mouth, and they told demoniac tales sometimes. 

Captain Fortescue, quiet, geniile, and indolent as 
he appeared, had yet to learn what fear was, either 
of man or woman ; be returned her haughty 
glance with interest now. 

^^ Helena, I can't quite see how your notice can 
confer^ distinction on mybismdJ^ 

** Possibly not; but then, Percy, you should 
choose your friends diPeren11y. Mr. Hallam, 
from what I hear, lias risen completely from 
ihe ranks." 

^ Helena I he is a gentleman, and quijbe as well 
educated as you or L" 

'^ Educated I what has education to do with it? 



CAPTAIH I-OKTESCUE. 123 

Tlie middle class mast be well educated^ tbej 
can't exist without it ; it don't signify nearly so 
much to us*" 

Captain Fortescue looked at her in undisguised 
amaz^nent; lie felt pity^abnost contempt, for her; 
his anger was also roused at her insolence. 

*^ I did not expect &is from you^ Helena, with 
all your prejudices ; so really well-bom a woman 
as you are ought to show yom: nobility by repu- 
diating such an unwise notion, which, I am sorry 
to tell you, is not really high-class in origin ; it 
sounds to me a very would-be-noble one ; I am 
sure it cannot be your own." 

She did not deign him the slightest reply. even 
by a look } and the captain congratulated himself 
that she was not his wife, and that she had not 
given his brother any children . they would cer- 
tainly have been tiger cubs rather than children, 
he thought, if they had resembled their mother. 

He soon took leave, and walked slowly home, 
wondering if he shoidd ever marry: he scarcely 
thought so ; he had never yet seen a woman he 
could make a companion of; to live as his brother 
an^ Helena did, seeing scarcely anything of each 
othdr, would not have suited him at all. He was 



124 HESTEB KIBTOK. 

happy tempered, and determined to be happj : his 
idea of marriage was a household full of love and 
peace; anything discordant or jarring, either in 
temper or tastes, would have ru9ed the calm 
of his life, and made him, perhaps, a tyrant; bat 
sympathy had singular power over him, and gentle- 
ness acted like a charm; the fault he found with 
women was, that the gentle ones were cold and 
mindless, while more ardent and high strong 
natures were often passionate and uncontrolled; 
he probably wanted a woman made on purpose 
for him. 



125 



CHAPTER X. 

"THE COPSE BIT." 

"If you don't mind what you're about, you'll 
spUl us in the ditch.'* 

Mr. Bonham started at the suddenness of the 
warning. 

Hester had kept silence during the first part of 
the way ; Jacob having undertaken to drive the 
cousins from Stedding to Kirton's Farm early on 
the evening of Hester's holiday; but as soon as 
they were clear of the town, he was so continually 
turning round to see that Lucy, who was sitting 
behind, was all right, or else to address some 
observation to her, that their progress was often 
rather zigzag than straight " It was worse than 
that just now," Hester continued; "but if you want 
to talk. 111 take the reins." 

Jacob thought he preferred being laughed at by 



\ 



126 HESTEB KIRTON. 

Lucy, to Hester's lecture . it was so harsh and so 
abrupt She had been much too ill at ease to speak 
to him during the afternoon : she dreaded being 
thought a dunce ; but anything that roused her 
contempt conquered her shyness; and she fairly 
despised a man who drove as badly as Jacob had 
been doing. Hester had been accustomed to 
horses all her life, and could ride and drive much 
better than the young doctor. Lucy was also a 
fearless "whip;" but she thought Hester very 
rude and presuming to speak so to Mr. Bonham. 
She tossed' her head: the action was lost on 
Hester, who sat beside Jacob, her eyes fixed on 
the pony. 

''I beg your pardon, Miss Eirton," he said, 
nervously; "but I suppose Bob knows the road 
pretty well by this time, doesn't ke ? your cousin 
often goes to see you, I fancy ^ 

" No, she don't ; I wish she did," was Ae abrupt 
reply. 

** I wish you would tell me. Miss Lucy, when 
you're likely to be going, and I would always 
come and drive yon home: the evenings are 
growing darkish for you to be coming home alone." 

This was an unusually courageous request 



"THE COPSE BIT." 127 

from Jacob : he felt as if Hester were a sort of 
protection; she did not seem like a person apt 
to ridicnle others. 

But Luc7 was annoyed rather than pleased^ 
and she scarcely knew why. It might have been 
that^ though she was angry at Hester's interference^ 
it had lowered Jacob in her opinion. Whoever 
she cared fer must also have the good opinion of 
mankind. Those who have a keen sense of the 
ridiculous in others are the first to shrink from 
it when aimed at themselves or those they love ; 
or, and probably this was the stronger motive, 
she thought that if Mr. Bonham were really in 
love with her, he ought to know about her 
comings and goings by instinct, and surprise her 
by meeting her instead of asking a formal per- 
mission. 

"Thank you, you're very kind," she answered, 
stiffly, " but I'm not a bit afraid of going home 
alone ; Bob doesn't require looking after, and we 
are too well known to fear any annoyance." 

Jacob had become so completely captivated with 
Lucy diujng the afternoon, that he could not bear 
this change in her tone, and, forgetting all about 
the pony and Hester's warning, he turned suddenly 



128 HESTER KIBTON. 

round to see whether her face corresponded with 
her voice. 

They were now in the pleasantest part of the 
way, for the shortest drive to Barton's Farm was 
not straight along the high road ; you could cut 
off a great angle by taking what was called the 
** Copse bit," a broad grassed road with gates at 
each end and bordered by stately elms whose 
branches stretohed nearly from side to side. The 
sun was setting behind them on the right hand, 
and the shadows of their massive trunks and 
luxuriant foliage fell across the track, completely 
concealing the uneven and grass-grown ruts ; every 
here and there was a space where some of the 
trees had perished, but they had left a record 
among their brethren, in the grassy hillocks that 
now served as headstones to their remains, while the 
brown roots veining the space around, seemed the 
inscription of their departed glories. 

They were close to one of these openings when 
Jacob's love overcame his prudence. 

He turned so completely round as to intercept 
Hester's view of the side of the road they were 
nearest to ; but she was hardly conscious of it : she 
had turned her head away, with a bitter sense of 



"THE COPSE BIT." 129 

the difference between herself and her cousin; 
why should Lucy ride and drive wherever she 
pleased like a lady^ and she be always tied at home 
like a slave : she might ride certainly^ but she had 
no fitting clothes; she could only gallop about 
her father's fields^ and the new longing after 
refinement growing in her made her shrink from 
driving the chaise-cart now; all this disturbed 
her. 

As she sat rebelling against her father's parsi- 
mony, she saw, curling like a wreath of snow behind 
the trees, the steam ofthe London down-train. Lon- 
don, what a wonderfiil place that must be ! Should 
she ever see it ? Even if her aunt, Mrs. Wrenshaw, 
ever asked her to stay with her there, would her 
father let her go ? She sat quite still, sightless and 
senseless now to outward things, debating this im- 
portant question. It was rare for Hester to be thus 
abstracted ; she had taken a leaf out of Lucy's book 
this evening : so much change and variety during 
the day had tired and confused her, and she was un- 
consciously allowing her brain the repose it needed. 
A sudden and violent jolt roused her, and pitched 
Mr. Bonham into a deep ditch, which, partially 
concealed by the swelling of the green hillocks 
VOL. L 9 



130 HESTEB SIBTOH; 

and the trunks of ifae trees, extended along ilie 
extreme edge oi iiie xoad, and which Bob had 
doselj mpproadbed. 

Hester leaned ferwaid and tried to grasp the 
reins^ bat she oooki not reaeh them; Jacob as he 
Ml had dntched at them convalsiTdy^ and bj Ihis 
means had nearly drawn the light carriage on die 
top of himself. Hester tamed to lodk for Lacy: 
she was behaving admirably^ sitting perfectly still, 
thoogh looking very frightened, so there was no 
difficulty about her. It was very hazsy*dons to 
get out, the ditdi being too wide to attempt it 
on that aide, and on ke other the carriage slanted 
np so as to present a formidable obstacle: bat 
Hester had never known fear ; gathering her gown 
closely round her, she just said, . 

"Mind, Lucy, the jerk," andjumped clear down, 
a few feet o 

She ih^i approached Bob^ who had stood as 
nearly still as the drag on the reins would allow, 
and held his head while Lucy scrambled over Ihe 
back of Hxe carriage. 

"Ill hold Bob," said Lucy,  while you help 
Mr* Bonham." 

But he had helped himself, although with con- 



 THE COPSE BIT." 131 

siderable difficulty, for one wheel was pressiog on 
his shoulder, as he lay at the bottom of what, 
fortunately for him, wsis a dry ditch ; his &ce and 
one hand were a good deal scratched and cut with 
the briers and potsherds scattered about, but he 
assured the girls that he was* not at all hurt 

" Here's a pretty business 1 " said Lucy. She could 
not help laughing, now the danger was over and 
she was assured that Jacob had no bones broken. 
" This is quite romantic, Mn Bonham, isn't it ? 
I don't see the least what we're to do; we can 
never right the pony carriage without hel^." 

''I am afraid not," said Jacob, looking very 
guilty, and involuntarily rubbing his shoulder ; " it's 
raiher heavy." 

And then he and Lucy stood still, as if they 
thought help would come out of ihe tree-tranks 

Hester had taken her full share in the laughter. 
" We can't leave the chaise here all night," she 
said, decidedly. ^^rU walk on home and send 
some of the men; at any rate, I'll get Peter." 

"No, no, Hester; you mustn't go alone; I 
promised uncle to see you home safe, and if I 
don't keep my word he'll never let me have you 
again : I'll go with you." 

9.2 



i 



132 HESTER EIBTON. 

'* Nonsense, Lucy 1 there's no need ; I can explain 
to father.'* 

But Lucy for once was obstinate. 

Jacob looked dismayed, he had not counted on 
losing Lucy. 

'* Then how will yotf get home. Miss Wrenshaw ; 
it won't do to leave Bob, I suppose ?" 

"No, that it won't, I'm sure," said Hester; '* but 
if Lucy will come with me, I can send Peter back 
with her, and then you can settle with him what's 
best to be done. Come, Lucy, if we are going, 
let's start." 

This was a dismal ending to Jacob's pleasant 
evening : instead of the delights of a drive home 
to Stedding, alone with Lucy, to be left to mount 
guard over a chaise and a pony, and probably 
this Peter would have to go back to Stedding 
with them, as he very much doubted the soundness 
of the vehicle after its tumble, and then he should 
have no opportunity of speaking to Lucy. He had 
almost resolved to risk his fate that very evening ; 
it would be easier in the dusk, he thought, than in 
broad daylight How angry he was with himself ! 
Lucy had laughed as if it were a joke, and had 
scarcely spoken to or looked at him since the acci- 



'^THE COPSE BIT/' 133 

dent; and no wonder. He felt his face^ the blood 
was trickling down his left cheek, and his hand 
would be unpresentable for several days to come. 
He had taken off one of his gloves only a few 
minutes before the accident . by good fortune the 
left one. He wondered how long the girls would be 
walking to Kirton's Farm. He wished he had a 
book, but somehow the thoughts of Lucy soon oc- 
cupied him so ftdly that he forgot time and all else. 
It was fortunate that Hester before she started 
had unharnessed Bob from the carriage, only just 
looping the reins to the back seat, so that there 
was no risk of his straying. 

Hester walked on for some distance silently 
beside Lucy, who, now that she had time to think, 
was almost choked with mortification: what could 
Hester think of Jacob's awkwardness? and she 
had felt so proud of showing him to her, and so 
pleased because he had dressed himself better 
than usual, and by this stupid accident he had 
spoilt all. 

She did not know how to break the silence ; she 
longed to find out what Hester thought of Jacob, 
and yet it would be a bad moment to choose for 
asking her ; she raised her eyes, but Hester's face 



134 HESTER EIBTOSr. 

was averted; she was looking straight on towards 
the gate at the end of the Copse Bit^ now only 
a little way aS, and as Lucy's glance followed her 
cousin's^ she saw that some one was leaning against 
the gate. Had she been less impnlsiye^ a keen^ 
survey would have shown her that, instead of a 
smock-frocked labourer, it was a well-dressed 
gentleman. 

" Oh, Hester I run, there^s a man ; hell help with 
the carriage." 

'^Hush, Lucy! dcxa't you see he is a gende- 
man," and she turned her face away so as to hide it 
from her cousin. The next moment the gate was 
thrown (^>en, and the gentleman advanced towards 
them. 

" Miss Kirton I " he exclaimed, raising his bat, 
and then holding out his hand, ** I am delighted 
to meet you again ; I have just been calling at your 
house, and was coming away quite disappointed to 
have missed the pleasure of seeingyou.* 

Hester blushed and trembled ; she literally did 
not know what to say. 

Lucy had slid her hand into her cousin's arm, 
and she now gave her a pinch ; for she guessed 
this to be the London gentleman, and was deter- 



"THE COFSE BIT," 135 

mined to be introduced ; but Hester would never 
have guessed her meaning, if Hallam had not come 
to the rescue. 

*' Your cousin " . his bow and flf>min>g glance 
w^e not thrown awaj upon Lucy . ^ must allow 
me to introduce myself.'' 

Lucy bowed. 

" I know this young lady is your cousm. Miss 
Kirton, because Biz told me you were spending 
the day in Steddingwith h^; but she said you 
would be driving home*'' 

"So we were," sa^ Lucy; "only* . ^and she 
stopped* 

. "We've been upset," said Hester; but her 
manner was so much more shy^ so much less harsh 
than at their first interview, that Hallam felt 
rdieved and thankful To his great satisfaction 
also she wore a less objectionaUe gown. 

Mr. Hallam ex^aressed the tcnderest sdicitude, 
the most anxious fear^ lest Miss .Kirton should 
have sustained any injury. 

Lucy admired him very much^ and thought him 
the most perfect gentleman she had erer seen ; but 
she could not help wishing Hester would ask him 
to lend a hand with the carriage. 



136 HESTER KIBTON. 

''Oar carriage is in the ditch^" she said at 
last 

" Ah, I see," said Mr. Hallam ; " and you are 
hastening home to get assistance." 

"We only want one man to help," ventured 
Lucy ; and she went on, spite of Hester's warning 
glance, "there is a gentleman with it now." 

" A gentleman I " said Hallam, raising his eye- 
brows. 

" Yes, a . a friend of mine," said Lucy, " who 
was going to drive me home." 

" Then," said Hallam, considerably relieved by 
this intelligence, " if you young ladies will allow 
me, I will see you safe to Kirton's Farm; it is 
getting late for you to be out alone." 

He looked at Hester, but she seemed literally 
tongue-tied. Lucy, however, was resolved to show 
the Londoner that she could talk for botli. 

" Ah, you are not used to country ways, I see ; 
"we think nothing of being out at this time down 
here." 

The conversation went on briskly enough; 
Hallam exerting all his powers of fascination 
and feeling really greatly amused with Lucy's 
ready wit and flow of spirits. At last, as if deter- 



*' THE COPSE BIT." 137 

mined to rouse Hester from her silence^ he addressed 
her personally : 

** I often think of you with envy. Miss Kirton ; 
far away from the dirt and smoke of London, 
enjoying the fresh cool air, while we are stifling in 
the noisy dusty streets." 

' Hester looked up and seemed to be meditating 
an answer ; but Lucy struck in before she could 
conquer her shyness : 

" And do you know, Mr. Hallam, Hester would 
give up her fresh air and country life Ivillingly, if 
uncle would only send her to school. I tell her 
she'd soon tire of that at her age ; don't you think, 
she would?" 

The colour deepened on Hester's cheek into an 
angry glow ; she hated Lucy just then.. She had 
told her all her trouble that aAernoon; but not 
that it might be repeated to Mr. Hallam. 

Hallam gave a start of surprise. 

** My dear Miss Kirton I what a strange wish I 
you would be miserable atschooL I have lived in 
the world a good deal longer than you ; and I am 
quite sure grown-up young ladies are happiest and 
best at home; besides, what can you want that 
school can give you ? " 



138 HESTER KIBTON. 

'^ Toa don t know^" said 'Hester, in her dd harsh 
abrupt way; her anger against Lucj bad conquered 
her shynesa for the time; ^^no one knows but 
myself. I nmst go to schooL" 

'* I wish, dear Miss Eirton, yoa would trust me, 
and tell me what makes yon so anzioos to leave 
home." 

He bent his head, almost caressingly, towards 
her, and spoke in so low a tone that Lucy conld 
scarcely hear. 

Hester's proud spirit rebelled for an instant 
against what she considered a stranger's inter- 
ference : bat she raised her eyes to his &ce, and 
he looked so kind, so brotherly, so earnest to help 
her, that she yielded to the fascination she had 
already felt 

** I . I am so ignorant," she murmured. 

^^ You must not think so," he said, eag^ly ; ^ at 
your age people often have sudi fancies, and dien 
the best way is to read ; yoa can learn now much 
more from books, than you will at school ; do you 
know grown up school-girls are my horror ? " 

Hester hung down her head; she felt over- 
powered that she should so nearly have incurred 
Mr. Hallam's horror, and have wished to do what 



'* THE COPSE BIT.'' 13f 

he considered foolish; for he seemed to her, as 
he walked bewde her, a god of beauty and every 
manly attribute; she could have knelt to the 
ground he trode on. Lucy, in her place, would, 
perhaps, have felt inclined to kiss it; but Hester 
was never demonstratiye. 

** Promise me, dear Miss Kirton,** he whispered, 
"that you wiH give up this project; it would make 
me utterly miserable, to tldnk of you transformed 
into anything I dislike." 

She did not answer him. She could not ; her 
hp quivered, but she steadied it by pressing it 
firmly against its fellow ; she needed to do this, 
for the tears had started to her eyes. 

The sudden emotion startled even herself; . she 
could not remember when she had been thus 
touched to the inner recesses of her heart : for an 
instant there came back her usual proud struggling 
against the betrayal of feeling ; but to her surprise, 
this melted away and left a soft, yielding, delicious 
sensation, which seemed to transform her. She 
looked up into Hallam^s eyes, with such a look as 
had never been seen in her own before ; a look 
that satisfied him, fax more than any wcxrds could 
do, of the wisdom and good effect of his journey. 



140 HESTER KIRTON. 

She looked so .grateful^ so loving^ and^ above ell, so 
lovely, that for an instant he forgot her breeding, 
her harsh manner, and even her red hands ; and 
walked on gdlently beside her, looking at her now 
downcast face. 

Lucy began to find herself one too many ; she 
was dreamy and inattentive ; she saw. very plainly 
that something had changed Hester, and that 
matters were advancing rapidly between her 
cousin and the Londoner, and she wished herself 
back with Jacob . no, not with Jacob ; she turned 
crossly from his image as it presented itself. but 
safe in the pony carriage driving homewards. 

There was little more said till they turned down 
the lane leading to Kirton's Farm, and then Lucy 
asked Hester whereabouts they should find Peter 
Stasson. 

Hester started ; she had forgotten all about him. 

** Peter, oh, yes I Pll go in and send him out 
to you, or won't you come in till I find him? " 

**. Oh, no 1 it would only waste time." 

Hester did not venture to ask Mr. Hallam in, 
but she lingered as they reached the gate, as if she 
wanted to defer their parting as long as possible. 

Lucy stooped down to gather some of the 



"THE COPSE BIT." 141 

crimson leaves of herb-Robert which gleamed with 
an almost blood-red tint as the light of the now 
^t sinking sun fell on them. She was always 
kind-hearted, but specially so to lovers : she felt 
puzzled, and began to think Hester had been 
very sly, for Mr. Hallam's manner was unmistake- 
able, and she had never seen her cousin so 
subdued and gentle; so she gathered a variety 
of leaves before she rejoined them at the gate. 

Frederic Hallam fully appreciated her conduct, 
and thought in his own mind that she was "a 
little brick." He did not lose an instant of the 
time thus gained. 

''Miss Kirton, I will not come in with you, 
as I have had what I wanted . ^the great happiness 
of seeing you ; perhaps it would be wise not to 
mention this meeting to Mr. Kirton." 

Hester looked up wonderingly, and with a half- 
suspicious glance that made her strangely like her 
father, but the beseeching expression of his beau- 
tiful blue eyes soflened her. She looked down 
again, confused and hesitating. 

Hallam stood still, keeping his eyes fixed on 
her, as if knowing that their glance must compel 
an answer. At last she said, . 



142 HESTBB EIRTQIf. 

'' If father asks me^ sir, I most tdU : I coaldn't 
teUalie." 

The coarse word^ har^ j uttered . for it was an 
effort to i^eak oat so boldly. jarred Hallam; 
perhaps, too, her truthful look might haye secretlj 
stirred his conscieiice to a clearer view of the 
falsehood he had been acting: he looked rst 
uncomfortable, then reproving. 

*^ Miss Eirtcm, I did not think you could suppose 
me capable of giving you bad advice, but I &ink 
it right to mention that your father told me when 
I was here before, that he disliked strangers, and 
I thought he might disapprove of your acquaint- 
ance with me. I should be sorry to be forbidden 
the privil^e of speaking to you, supposing we 
should accidentally meet Then I may bdieve . ^ 
he paused, looking at her till the magic sympathy 
of his unseen but felt glance made her again raise 
her eyes to hb . ^''that, unless you are directly 
questioned, you will not say you have seen 
me?'' 

Hester was unwilling to say yes, but the 
strange power he had over her compelled her 
to bend her head assentingly. 

*^ But Lucy ? " she said, almost as if she hoped 



"THE COPSE BXT." 143 

her cousin's knowled^ of the interview must 
prevent the need of ccmceahnent. 

" Oh^ leare me to manage with Miss Lncy ; we 
shall be great fidends, I can see : I mean to walk 
back with her^ and see her safe with this gentle- 
man^ who is keeping guard over the carriage^ and 
then jonr Peter can &llow at his leisure." 

A dark cloud crossed Hester's forehead^ and 
a strange spasm wrong her heart. Why should 
he care to walk with Lncy; Lucy^ who had so 
many more ways of pleasing than she had ; Lucy> 
who had a lover of her own? It was hard, almost 
unbearable^ and yet all the pride of her nature 
helped her . she would not let Hallam see her 
annoyance. 

!Nor did he. As he spoke, he had turned to 
look for Lucy, and Hester's brow was smooth 
before he bade her good-by. 

He pressed both her hands, and told her to 
think of hhn, for he mudi needed a faith- 
ftil fiiend, and then he drew back from the 
gate, while she passed in, raising his hat as she 
did so. 

Lucy was running after Hester to say good-by, 
but TTallflm laid his hand gently on h^ cloak ; she 



144 BESTEB EIRTON. 

turned sharply ; he had drawn, back under the 
shadow of the great oak-tree near the gate. 

"I beg your pardon. Miss Wrenshaw, but, if 
you have no objection, I will s^ you safe back 
to your carriage," and he looked as if he ^ere 
asking a favour instead of conferring one. 

Lucy fluttered and blushed with delight5 and 
she began to talk eagerly. 

Hallam was amused, for, as has been already 
said, Lucy's conversation was not mere ordinary 
talk ; she was always sprightly, often witty, in her 
remarks. 

But he at leitgth remembered that something 
had been said about a gentleman left in charge of 
the carriage, so he only walked a short distance 
from the " Copse bit " gate with her, and then he 
stopped. 

" I am afraid I must now quit your society. 
Miss Wrenshaw, charming as it is ; perhaps you 
would do me the great kindness of not mentioniDg 
my name to Mr. Kirton." 

Lucy looked surprised, not suspicious, .like 
Hester, but perfectly astonished. 

Hallam quite imderstood her. 

** The fact is, as I need hardly tell you, that old 



**THE COPSE BIT." 145 

gentlemen like your uncle are apt to be just the 

least in the world touchy. I had no time to go in 

with your cousin to-night, and Mr. Kirton might 

feel aggrieved and slighted, and I respect him so 

highly^ I could not bear this to be the case : now 

do you see my reason ? but I need not ask. Nature 

did not give you that penetrating look for nothing. 

I see that you are as discreet as you are charming; 

I hope we may meet again, and before long. Miss 

Wrenshaw, Duke Street, I think you said was 

your address. There is your friend in the distance. 

Good-by.'* 

He shook her hand warmly, and was soon out 
of sight, leaving her standing looking after him 
with as strained and anxious a gaze as if he had 
been her lover instead of Hester's. 

How handsome he was, how graceful, and what 
a charming way he had of bowing ; so much 
dignity! how she wished Jacob Bonham had 
Hiore dignity; how polite Mr. Hallam had been 
to her I Whatever could he want her direction for ? 
and if he liked her so much . and it was quite 
plain he did . perhaps some other gentleman, his 
brother, or one of his friends might see her and 
^e a fancy to her, as this Mr. Hallam had to 
VOL. L 10 



146 HBSIXR KIBTON. 

Hester. Yisions of a fine LondoB house and a 
grand marriage flitted through her hasy litde bram; 
bat the treason to Jacob was shortJived : the next 
moment she felt ashamed of it, and was softening 
to him, ahnofit patent that she had so enjoyed 
Mr. Hallam's soctety. 

. Jacob had seen her part frcmi t^ stranger, and 
now harried to meet her; jeabasj, sorprise, and 
cariosity all driving him onwards to inquire who 
ihe stranger was, with whom she seemed on such 
intimate terms. 

In his eagerness, he grasped her arm. 

Lncj was demonstrative, but she was also 
thoroughly modest, and this familiarity aroused 
her indignaticm; she shook her arm angrily. 

^* Don't, Mr. Bonham, I don't like it ; and how 
could you think of leaymg Bob ? Grood gracions 
me, it's enough to take mother home a brc^Len 
carriage, without losing Bob into the bargain." 

"I'm vCTy sorry," said Jacob; "I've been 
longing to see you again to tell you so; but who 
^. who was that walking with you that just said 
good-by to you ?" He spoke timidly, far more 
timidly than he had intended, for her rebuff had 
disturbed him. 



"THE COPSE BIT." 147 

*^ Oh I nobody you know," said Lncy, wxtiioat 
looking at him. 

'' I saw he was a stranger, but is he a . a rela- 
tion of yours ? " 

"No, only a friend ; how very curious you are, 
Mr. Bonham I " 

And Lucy pressed her rosy lips tightly together, 
as if determined to check further conversaticai, but 
Mr. Bonham was not to be silenced. 

*^ What a pity he did not come on and help with 
the carriage I " 

This was too much for Lucy, although the 
same idea had occurred to her when first they 
met Mr. Hallam* 

^'Se help with the carriage I why, bless me, 
Mr. Bonham, he's a real London gentleman; 
&Qcy his white hands tugging and pulling at the 
carriage." 

Jacob turned scarlet, not from shyness, but 
from honest anger. 

^^ The true nature of a gentleman, Miss Lucy 
Wrenshaw, is to help a lady when she is in 
trouble. Now, I take it, you are in want of help, 
and, therefore, I should have held your friend 
& tru^ gentleman if he had come to your assist- 

10.2 



148 HESTER EIBTON. 

ance: white hands can do as much work as red 
ones," and he looked complacently down at his 
own, which were usuallj as soft and delicate as 
a woman's; hat he shivered when he saw the 
injury the left one had received, and, after all, 
as he sulkily thought, on Lucy's hehalf, because 
if she had not encouraged his conversation, he 
should never have been upset; and this was the 
way she rewarded him. 

They walked silently up to the carriage. Bob 
was quite safe and contented, taking a comfortable 
supper off the grass . for the reins being long he 
could travel round a large circle. 

Not another word was said until Peter Stasson 
and a boy made their appearance, and then the 
men only talked together, for Lucy withdrew to 
a little distance, her heart swelling with indig- 
nation at Jacob's impertinence. 

With some trouble, they at last succeeded in 
extricating the carriage, but the wheels were 
injured, and though they could manage to harness 
Bob, and let him draw it gently along tlie road, it 
was quite unsafe for any one to drive. 

Lucy turned round suddenly. 

"It is a pity to detain you from your even* 



''THE COPSE Brr." 149 

ing round; Mr. Bonham. Peter will see me 
hotoe.** 

Jacob murmured some indistinct answer, and 
advanced to walk beside her, but she quickened 
her pace, and he was too proud to force his 
company on her, although he longed to be friends 
again. 

He did not know how to begin, and Xucy kept 
so near Peter, who was leading Bob, that every 
word he said must have been overheard, and he 
had no mind to be laughed at. 

Rarely in his life had the young doctor been 
so out of humour, so thoroughly savage. 



150 HB6TKB KmXON. 



CHAPTER XL 

A LOVE LETTER. 

Mb. Jacob Bonham was very unhappjr, and it was 
Bot it quiet znisary. He was so reckkssij wpetclied 
that he kept on walking up and down m his stadj 
like a caged beast more than a human being, 
and when his housekeeper appeared with the 
supper-tray, he told her abruptly to take it away 
. he did not want to be disturbed, he wanted 
nothing, she had better go to bed. 

Like many a man who has gone on from 
boyhood upwards in a calm, indolent, sleepy state 
of being, with nothing to trouble or vex him, 
Jacob, during the past fortnight, had been gradu- 
ally awakening to the two great sensations which 
distinguish life from mere existence, the intensity 
of happiness and suffering, with their attendants. 



A LOTS LETTER. 151 

Hope aad Fear; and now tliat his pulses had 
quickened^ tliat every sentient part of him was 
more keoily susceptible than it had ever been^ 
steiq)ed forwards on to the pedestal which, 
perhaps, every man's heart holds, although in 
seme it may ever remaip empty, the sombre 
figure of Jealousy, clad in the prickly garment 
which stung whichever way she turned. 

He thought of Lucy; he could Ihmk of little 
else, and he tried to tkank coolly. Why should he 
trouble himself about her ? . She treated him with 
less deference than almost any one ; shy as he was, 
and diffident of his own powers of pleasing, he 
could not help seeing that there were girls in 
Stedding, as well brought up and &r richer than 
Lucy, who were always pleased to see him, and 
either of whom would probaUy say. Yes, if he 
asked her to become Mrs. Bonham ; and yet he 
turned angrily rom the thought of them. 

How dared Lucy give him the decided enoou 
ragement she had during the first part of the drive, 
and then refuse to satisfy his questions as to whom 
she was walking with ! 

His anger, like a wreathing mist, quite obscured 
thought and judgment at this recdlectbn; and 



152 HESTER EIBTON, 

he stamped heavily, as he stood still at last on the 
hearthrug. 

But as soon as the mist had cleared awaj^ and 
Jealousy could see which way to turn without the 
fear of a false step which might have toppled her 
from her pedestal, the prickles made themselves 
felt 

What a fool he had been not to walk up to 
Lucy and this stranger when he first saw them 
just as they were shaking hands ; he would then 
have satisfied himself as to who and what he 
was, and whether he was a fit companion for 
Miss Wrenshaw. Why, after the way she had 
looked at him soon after they started on their 
drive, he had a right to throw any fellow into the 
ditch who stood squeezing Lucy's hand. 

And the mist wrapped him round again so 
completely, that had Frederic Hallam come in his 
way, Jacob's feelings would have shaped themselves 
into something more than words. 

But as he slowly recovered self-control, the idea; 
of the ditch suggested a humbling reminiscence 
and instinctively he looked up at the mirror over 
the chimney-piece, and saw his cut forehead. If 
this fellow really were what Lucy said, a London 



A LOVE I^TTER. 153 

gentleman^ he would never have believed that 
a person of such disorderly, almost ruffianly- 
appearance, could belong to, or have any right 
to interfere with, Miss Wrenshaw ; but had he any 
right ? and what an idiot he was making of him- 
self, to rave and rant against Lucy when perhaps 
she might be secretly displeased with him for his 
faint-heartedness . for the Dumbiedikes style of 
his courtship. Books said . and Jacob ruled his 
actions far more by bookish experience than by 
the realities of human nature . ^that a faint heart 
never won a woman ; and he had been very sub- 
missive to Lucy; against a harsh, rude manner 
like Miss Kirton's, he knew he should have re- 
belled long ago. Lucy was quite different and 
far more terrible to encounter ; she was almost 
always courteous, but then she so often seemed 
ready to laugh at him, and sometimes she did 
laugh, 

A cold dew rose on his forehead at the mere 
notion of declaring his love to her; he felt he 
could not speak it fairly out : he could only look 
and hint it ; and he must have time for this. How 
long could it go on ? would not she become justly 
indignant, and perhaps totally estranged? He 



154 HESTES EIBTON. 

must do somethmg to hairiien matters. Ohjwlijwas 
lie such a oowaid in bar presence ? Why should 
she not be his own Lucy ? His present intercoorse 
with her was often more a misery than a happi- 
ness. Ah ! if Ira could, think she would ever 
be brought to love him, eren a little; and then 
her sweet smiles came back, and he dwelt on evezy 
syllable she had uttered; it was maddening that 
he should have risked her good opini<m by his 
carelessness ; but he had meditated oa that subject 
long enough during his Itmdy watch by the 
carriage. 

What was he to do ? He must make up his 
mind. He seated himself at the table, leaning on 
his dbows, and plunging his hands deep in his 
hair. Some men evidently ttank their Heas lie 
there. 

He felt there was now a sort of quarrel between 
himself and Lucy : she had walked on in dignified 
silence, and when they reached the eiid of Duke 
Street she had made him a formal courtesy, and, 
bidding Peter call as he returned from the stable 
wha'e she had told him to take Bob and the brokea 
carriage, she turned away so rapidly that he could 
not have oveartak^i hei: without running, and hq 



A LOVE LETTSB. 155 

was too angry with her JQBt then for any such 
oyertore to reconciliation. 

Going cahnly over all the events of the evening, 
he came to the condnsion that she had behaved 
very ill to him, and it was her place to apologize ; 
bat then women were not expected to be as 
wise as men ; and here Jacob held himself e^ct, 
and, withdrawing his hands from his hair, put 
them in his pockets* He really did love Lncy 
with all his heart and soul, and thought her the 
sweetest little angel that drew breath. Still he 
was fond of himself, too; not personally: he 
thought himself plainer and more awkward than 
he really was, and was for ever blushing with 
self-consciousness ; but he had a high idea of his 
own reading and acquirements ; also, but this was 
a profound secret, locked in his own bosom, he 
was a Poet : he had never ventured to present one 
of his effusions to Lucy ; but she had been the 
subject and the inspiration of about half a score 
of really pretty poems . pretty ! they had neither 
body nor soul, only the mere prettiness of com- 
plexion and rhythm to commend them to admi- 
ratioB. 

Time passed on, still he could not bring himself 



156 SESTBE KIBTON. 

to a decision; but the idea of seeing Lucy the 
wife of another man would continue to haunt 
him, and was fast driving him desperate. 

He pulled out his watch ; it was past twelve 
o'clock : too late, or he really felt valiant enough 
to go at once to Duke Street, and learn his fate 
from Lucy herself; he must wait till morning. 
Morning . at the thought his nervousness re- 
turned ; in broad daylight he knew he should feel 
different ; and then he was so awkward ; he had 
never talked to any one about such a thing . he 
wondered how it was managed. At the theatre 
and in books, he knew the lover sometimes made 
the offer on his knees. This was a fearful vision. 
He wondered whether Lucy would expect it; 
there was something that seemed to him altogether 
wrong about it He rose from his chair and shook 
himself, as if to free his fancy from such an 
unwelcome picture. How was he to do it? He 
had, as we see, made some progress, slow as the 
process seemed. He had started by meditating 
how he should patch up his quarrel with Lucy, 
and now he had quite determined to ask her to be 
his wife, if he could only hit on a feasible meihod 
of making the proposal. 



A LOVE LETTEB. 157 

Suddenly he started and gave an elephantine 
hound of delight; perhaps it was fortunate that 
Lucy was not present : he had found the key to his 
casket of troubles. 

" I will write to her,** he exclaimed ; " I know I 
have a fluent pen, however tongue-tied I may be ; 
and she must answer me in writing, and then if it 
is as I dare hope, we shall meet as lovers, with all 
unkmdness forgotten; if not, why then I shaU 
leave Stedding for ever, and go out to the wilds of 
Australia.'' 

And having announced to himself this doughty 

resolution, he vowed that he would not go to bed 

till he had composed such a letter as should soften 

the heart of Lucy Wrenshaw. 

And Jacob was not long about it 

He was no composer of letters . making a 

rough draft; striking out a word here, putting 

in another there, and dovetailing each sentence 

into the other, so as to produce the smooth, 

passionless epistle some people style a "capital 

letter." Jacob was a fidget and fastidious, as men 

of refined taste are apt to be ; and he had refined 

tastes, although he wore check trousers in the 

evening, and moved awkwardly in a drawing- 



158 PESTER EIBTON. 

room; bat his was not that OTer-&stidioiisiiess 
which checks the native moven^nt of the heart 
and the affections^ which would trample feeling 
and impulse into its own narrow grooye, and call 
everything ill-bred and wrOng that does not wear 
the precise livery of its tenets. Jacob wrote firom 
his heart; every feeling inscribed on the paper 
came fresh and warm to his pen; there was 
no pausing to shape it mc^e gracefully; as he 
experienced it so it was written down. Long 
before he had finished, the tears which had been 
dimming his eyes dropped on the page, and tears 
that no man need have been ashamed of; they 
were the outpourings of a heart stirred to its very 
depths. 

His letter ran thus: . 

*' Dbakbst Luct, 

" I LOVE you, and I dare to think you know 
it ; but you do not know, you cannot dream, how 
deep my love is for you. You may scorn and 
despise it; but that fear shall not keep me from 
telling you now, how passionately, how fondly I 
idolize you. To me you are the perfecticm of all 
that is good and beautiful in woman* Dearest 



A LOVE LETTEB. 159 

Lucy, when I think of your sweet gentle face, 
hope grows strong within me ; and then I am cast 
down at the thought that perhaps another is pre- 
ferred before me. 

" Do not leave me in doubt ; if you knew how 
every hope and thought is centred in you, how 
wildly every pulse throbs at the thought of calling 
you my own, you would not lengthen the agony of 
my suspense. But do not leave me in doubt, 
Lucy, through any fear of my importunity. Should 
you find it impossible to love me, tell me this, 
and you shall never see me again . never again be 
wounded by my unwelcome intrusion ; only tell 
me the plain truth. % 

^ Yours, and yours only, 
** Jacob BoNHAM." 



160 HESTER KIBTON. 



CHAPTER XIL 

HESTEB'S SECBET. 

" I can't but be thinking what's come to you. Muss 
Heaster ; ye sit moping indoors, and hardly speak 
a word to nobody; ye're quiet enough best o' 
times, but ere-a-mussy me! I'd as lief have a 
hearse and two coflSns to keep me company as 
yotf this morning; why, what is the matter, child?*' 

Biz turned sharply round from the fire, where 
she was superintending the boiling of a large 
piece of bacon, and looked hard at her young 
mistress. 

Hester had passed the night without sleeping, 
and this had added to the restless fever created 
by the presence of a new and strange emotion; 
she had enough on her mind to keep it inwardly 
engrossed, and blind and deaf to mere outward 



HESTEB'S SECRET. 161 

things. Not only had the dormant spirit of love^ 
which the first sight of Hallam had germinated 
in her hearty been evoked to life and action by 
last night's meeting, but the depressing conscious- 
ness of a secret hung upon her. She did not 
know in what way, but she felt guilty; there had 
never been open frank confidence between herself 
and her father, but till now she had never kept 
a positive secret from him, 

Hester had none of her cousin Lucy's elasticity 
of temperament ; she had a different way of meeting 
trouble and discomfort; she did not shrink from 
it, she rather met it half way, and then brooded 
over it ; she considered it carefully, turned it over 
on every side, and if she found it was inevitable 
sate down to bear it with Spartan fortitude. Lucy 
would shut her eyes to trouble as long as possible, 
acting on her favourite axiom that " every cloud 
has a silver lining I " she would try all expedients to 
avoid it, but never allow herself to " worry about 
it," as she said ; then when trouble really came, 
she bore it cheerfully, always maintaining that 
it was not half so bad as it might have been. 
But I am anticipating, for Lucy has had few 
trials as jet. For herself, and those around 

VOL.1. 11 



162 HESTEB XIBTON. 

lier her plan was sorely the happiest If we 
dwell on a griei^ce^ we are apt to examine it 
too accurately^ and to take a magnifying glass to 
it as welL 

The old servant's inquisitive look roused Hester 
now ; the new feeling bom within her had affected 
her altogeiher . she no longer considered herself 
a child . and Biz's fioniliarity irritated her. 
Besides, what right had she to pry into her secret ? 
Hitherto she had not had much opportunity, for 
on the previous evening Mr. Eirton had been at 
home, and during the early part of the morning 
Hester had avoided the kitchen and kept by 
herself; now she had brought her sewing there; 
but when Biz spoke to her, the calico had Mien 
in her lap and the left hand with it, while the 
right remained poised a brief instant, the needle- 
point upwards between thumb and finger, and 
then sank slowly to find its fellow. 
' Hester started and looked angrily at the old 
servant, and then went on with her sewing. 

'* You make too free. Biz ; why don't you leave 
me alone?*' 

" Hightity . ^tightity ! " said Biz; "one may know 
ye^was out for a day's pleasuring yesterday. 



hesteb's SECBET. 163 

Muss Kirtcm; ye know folks alius says, * chadren's 
scrow ih' day after holiday making.' " 

Hester only drew herself up proudly, and did 
not answer. 

" Not to say as Fm surprised, so little pleasure 
as yeVe knowed, poor child, only if ye'd be a 
little more like yerself, I've got something to tell 
'ee as Fd be bound ye'd give yer ears to hear." 

Hester coloured; she could not make up her 
mind to utter the "I don't care," on her lips; 
she knew what Biz had to tell, and felt she must 
and would hear it ; how burdensome it was to be 
so tongue-tied ! 

Biz stood looking at her, smiling and pulling 
at each side of her own wrinkled cheeks with her 
doubled fists in an extraordinary manner. 

Hester was confounded; she could not com- 
pr^end this pantomime. 

Bat she still held her tongue, only she looked 
away from Biz and began to sew again. 

" Well, some folks be dummell this morning ; I 
thought, maybe, as ye'd met him., and knowed 
what I meant when ye turned so red just a bit 
ago ; but it's plain you bean't, or ye'd ha' knowed 
what I was ardoing of." 

11.2 



164 HESTER KIBTON. 

'^ Why don't you speak plain^ instead of making 
faces like an old owl?" said Hester, breaking 
bounds at last 

The old woman looked at her with a grim kind 
of smile: she was used to Hester's ways; but 
for the last year or so she had been more even- 
tempered than in her childish days. 

" Well, ye be as screw as two sticks be, and 
no mistake. Muss Heaster, and Fm a great mind 
not to tell 'ee my bit o' news." 

Hester made a struggle against her pride. 
Biz's face looked fractious, and she could be as 
obstinate as a weak mule when she chose. | 

'* Oh, news, is it? You should have said at the 
first you had news to tell, and then, perhaps, I'd i 

have listened." 

I 

'^Come, then, make a pleasant face and listen | 
now, and maybe I'll tell 'ee ; but ye aggrawated me, 
ye did, muss, by looking as if ye didn't know who I 
I meant just now. Why, there's only one gentle- 
man as ye know as pulls out his whiskers for all 
a-world as if he was a-milking cows ; they be rare 
uns to pull, that I grant ye, but I expects he hurts 
hisself maybe odd times." 

^' I suppose you mean Mr. Hallam ? " 



HESTER'S SECRET. 165 

Hester could have struck her cheeks with 
anger as she felt the warm blood rushing there. 

" Ay, ay, ye'U listen now fast enough, and ye'd 
best not stay me, for the muster, he'll be in in 
no time. Well, somewhere about six o'clock last 
evenin' I just took my walk down to the gate . 
ye know, child, I alius goes there afore I gets 
supper . and presently who should I see coming 
briskly up the lane, looking as fresh as new milk, 
but our young gentleman. He seemed quite 
pleased at the sight o' me, and I told him it was 
unlucky he'd come just then, for the muster'd not 
been gone out five minutes. I wonder he hadn't 
met he. * But where's yer young missus ? ' says 
he. I toud he ye was a-spending the day in 
Sledding town with a cousin ye had there of 
the name o' Wrenshaw, and what d' ye think he 
says next?" 

" I don't know," said Hester, quietly. 

" Why, he seemed in a caddie, and he pulled his 
whiskers as if he'd pull 'em oif, and then he says, 
^ Is it a lady or a gentleman, this cousin ? ' So I 
toud he, and then he asked me a lot o' questions 
about you and Miss Lucy and her mother, and 
whether they was rich, and I don't know what all 



166 HESTER KIBTON. 

. ^he be's a rare 'un to talk . so I thought the best 
way was to send him where he'd be likely to find 
what he wanted^ and I made a good guess ye'd ha' 
seen he^ but I s'pose ye missed. I toud he as I 
wam't sure which road ye'd be coming . ^straight 
along, or through the Copse bit ; that's where ye 
missed, I s'pose : it were a pity, it were, but what 
ye'd ha' seen he." 

Eirton's entrance broke off Biz's talk, and she 
hastened to set the dinner, and, though Hester 
longed to hear more, she was almost glad to hare 
some leisure to digest what she had been told. 

Unfortunately, or, as it seemed to his daughter, 
of set purpose, Ralph Eirton was in an unusually 
chatty humour; the truth was hc^ had just sold 
two pigs for a much better price than he expected, 
and he had the money in his breeches pocket 
He felt almost geniaL 

*' Well, lass," he said, as he came in, *^ I've not 
met ye about farm all day, where hast been? " 

** I've been nowhere, fether ; I'm sewing." 

*' Ye've had enough to do belike, chewing the 
cud of all the new-&ngled notions ye got in 
Stedding yesterday. Well, Hester, d'ye like a 
town life as well as a country one? " 



HESTER'S SECHET. 167 

^' For some things better^ and for others worse/' 
said Hester^ abruptly. 

**But ye be so grave lately, lass. When I 
were talking to Lucy Wrenshaw, she smiled in 
my &ce and made me smile again. Come, cheer 
up I I thought, maybe, giving you the outing 
might raise up your spirits a bit; but ye look as 
grave as a judge and as dull as ditch water." 

'^I'm as God made me, &ther; I don't know as 
I was ever different." 

'^Hold your tongue and come to dumer, if 
ye can't give me better answers." The farmer 
spoke angrily. **God never made any one who 
couldn't laugh when they chose." 

Hester seated herself in proud silence; a hun- 
dred answers burned and quivered on her lips; 
bat she shut her teeth tightly, and denied them 
passage. If her father called her silent, he might 
find her so, and make the best of it; she wouldn't 
speak again till she was spoken to. 

In a general way this might have gone on 
during dinner, and she might have had comfort- 
able leisure for the dream in which she had been 
living aioce yesterday . ^not a dream of the future. 
Hester bad memory stronger than imagination; 



168 HESTER KIBTON. 

she had been going over and over greedily that 
little walk with Frederic Hallam; before that^ 
she had almost unconsciously worshipped him, 
but it was the remembrance of a dumb idol, for he 
had scarcely spoken to or looked at her. All he 
had said to Biz on his former visit had been duly 
repeated and treasured; but now, all was changed, 

bhe idol had spoken, had shovm her that he 

Hester hesitated here. She longed to say loved : 
but, the idea of love between her and Frederic Hal- 
lam was too absurd ; and she shrank into herself 
as from the ridicule attached to such a thought 
She might think he liked her; he had himself 
asked her to recollect him, and had said he wanted 
a friend; and yet Lucy thought Jacob Bonham 
loved her, and Mr. Hallam had looked just in the 
same kind of way ; and at the remembrance of 
those looks, Hester's colour deepened and spread 
over face and forehead. 

** Hester I" shouted her father, in his loud, rough 
tones. He had been watching her the last five 
minutes, with afrowning, wondering looL " Hester, 
what in life ails ye? are ye sick, or scared, or 
stupid, to sit there staring at the fire, and growing 
as pale as a turnip, and then as red as a poppy, and 



HESTEB'6 SECRET. 169 

never a word spoken ? I won't have it, I say, if 
ye're not sick. I won't Lave such behaviour." 
He brought his hand heavily down on the table. 

Biz came quickly from the washhouse ; a dif- 
ference between this taciturn father and daughter 
was so rare as to excite her wonder, and she 
knew so well what Kirton's anger would be when 
fully roused, that she felt it necessary to hasten to 
Hester's succour. 

*' Go back to your work. Biz," said the farmer, 
roughly ; " ye're not wanted here." 

Biz retreated, grumbling and muttering: she 
would worry any one's life out as long as she 
could ; but there was no daring about her ; what 
she wanted in courage she usually made up in 
grumbles against the ill-usage of mankind, and 
specially of farmer Kirton. 

Hester had risen from table, half sulky, half 
defying her father's anger. 

**Are ye sick?" he said, in rather softened 
tones, for her colour flickered painfully. 

Tes, she was sick ; but she would not say so. 
Sick of that disease from which women rarely 
escape ; which, however, is usually more evanes- 
cent in a strong, self-willed disposition than in 



r 



170 HESTER KIRTON. 

a more timid and yielding one . usually^ but not 
always. Her secret, too, was stifling her: she 
was always silent and thoughtfol, hardly ever 
dreamy ; and it was tliis change that had attracted 
Eirton's attention, for there was no mistaking the 
altered expression of her eyes. 

The likeness between father and child was more 
marked than ever, as they looked at each other 
resolutely. 

" No, I'm not sick," she said, at last. 

"Then, it's all the worse," said her father^ 
pushing away the dish from him, for they had 
just finished dinner when he noticed Hester's 
blush ; ** there's something or another going 
wrong with ye, girl, and I'll get to the bottom 
of it ; ye'd best tell me at once, or FU find out 
without ye, maybe." 

'*Yes, there is something going wrong," said 
Hester, passionately ; "I told you so, in the road, 
a week ago." 

Ralph Kirton looked at her curiously; her 
passion surprised and quieted him, as emotion 
always does, in those with whom it is rare. 

** Faith, wench, I believe I'd best take ye at 
your word." 



HESTEB'S SECRET. 171 

^* What do you mean, father ? " 

Hester was not silent now; her Uood was 
rushing about too rapidly to permit the same 
strong curb she had hitherto maintained over 
tongue and action. She began to walk hurriedly 
up and down the kitchen* 

^^Are ye still in the same mind about your 
schooling? " he asked. 

Hester stopped and looked bewildered. 

It was new and strange to her to hide her secret 
wilftdly ; still, as long as silence would serve her, 
she could endure, but to frame deceit was loath- 
some, and yet it must be done now. 

^^ You told me I shouldn't be happy at school.'' 

^^ So I did ; right enough," he was rather pleased 
that his expressed opinion should have influenced 
her ; " but if ye bean't happy here, ye'd be no 
worse off at school, inaybe." 

** No, I'll not go to school," said Hester, 
sadly. 

Shame at herself had conquered her anger; she 
felt her father was the ill-used person now. 

** Then if ye stay here, ye must come to your 
senses," said Kirton. '^ I'll not have these passions 
and flights one week, and this sulkiness and 



172 . HESTER KIBTON. 

Bilence another. I thought if I gave ye a day's 
pleasuring, ye'd maybe be all the better for it; 
but it seems ye're worse, so you'd best bide at 
home, seeing it's no value to ye." 

Hester's pride fought hard to be listened to; 
but she had tasted the unspeakable happiness and 
relief which change brings to a mind oppressed 
with its own monotony, and, with this added 
burden to bear, she knew she should need it more 
than ever. 

'* Father, I am thankful to you for letting me 
go to Stedding yesterday; and . and if I went 
there often, I think I should grow more cheerful 
like. I'm sure of one thing, if I'd seen as much 
of aunt Wrenshaw . I don't mean aunt Frank . 
as Lucy has it would ha' been better for me." 

** Girls are no fit judges of what's good for 
them," said Kirton. " I never said I wanted ye 
different to what ye are when ye're like yerself ; 
but ye've not been yerself these days past* Let 
me have no more of it," and he strode out into the 
yard. 

Biz waited till he was out of hearing, and then 
came into the kitchen full of grievance. 

" The muster be put out to-day, that he be; I 



HESTER'S SECBET. 173 

s'pose, maybe^ he got out o' wrong side o' the bed 
tlie morning." 

**Hold your tongue. Biz," exclaimed Hester, 
rousing out of the reverie in which her father's 
parting words had left her ; ** what business have 
you in the matter ? Here, give me those crumbs ; 
I want them for the chickens." 

And she went out with the few crumbs the 
careful habits of Kirton's Farm occasioned on the 
dinner-cloth. Biz stood staring after her. 

** Well, them's a pair on 'em this day as ever 
I set eyes on. They's in as nice a skin as a hedge- 
hog . there be no touching on 'em, they's so sharp. 
Ere-a-mussy ! what some folk's tempers is I they 
doesn't know thayselves, but they takes precious 
good care other folks does know. A pretty caddie 
I shall have with Muss Heaster now. Ah, the 
gals is all alike when the love fit's on 'em." 

It was well the master was not by to witness 
the way Biz got rid of her feelings on the crockery, 
finally cooling herself by breaking a plate, at 
which she grumbled loudly for being so slippery. 



174 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 

Thebe had evidenily been something in ihe atmo- 
sphere of the previous evening detrimental to good 
temper. When Lucy Wrenshaw reached home, 
she was so snappish and contradictory^ that her 
mother declared she was ** as sour as . ^as^ well- 
as a crab with its claws out" 

This drew forth Lucy's indignant reproof, for 
she never allowed her mother's continual jumbles 
to pass uncorrected when alone with her. 

" Well, child," said Mrs. Wrenshaw, ** I always 
make that mistake, don't I? But I can't help 
it, it's all along o' your uncle Barton. When he 
was first married, his wife, poor dear, was as 
frightened of him as ever she could stick, and 
he used to say she walked like a crab, because 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 175 

slie came into a room with one shoulder higher 
than the other^ sideways like^ and my husband 
used to say sometimes, 'Well, if poor Janet is 
a crab, I know she's wed to a crab ; ' and so you 
see I got confused between the two." 

'' Mamma, you've told me that more than one 
hundred times. Oh, I am so tired, I've had to 
walk all the way home; I can hardly stand." 

**Had to walk? Why, gracious me, Lucyl 
where's the chaise?" Mrs. Wrenshaw's wide 
mouth opened to its widest possibility. 

*' We've had an accident with one of the wheels ; 
but Peter Stasson helped us home, and he says 
there's not much harm done." 

The buzz of exclamations and questions that 
followed made Lucy feel crosser and more un- 
dutiftil than ever ; she said she really could not 
go through the whole story till she had had 
some supper, for that she was perfectly ex- 
hausted. 

Angry as she felt with Jacob, she could not 
help sparing him as much as possible in narrating 
the accident. Her mother thought, however, that 
he must have been greatly to blame, and said 
she should tell him as much when she saw him. 



176 HESTEB EIBTOK. 

Lucj was in such a contradictory mood that 
this was a fresh offence ; but she had the wisdom 
to be silent, and, making the excuse of extreme 
&tigae, escaped to her bedroom directly after 
supper. 

She was angry with herself and with every- 
body. To think of Hester haying a lover like 
thai She thought she was a very pretty girl, 
and naive in some ways, and she always liked to 
have her good word ; but she had set her down 
for an old maid; mewed up there at Kirton's 
Farm^ who would ever have the chance of finding 
her out imless it should be any one she might 
see in Duke Street? Lucy had had her own 
little fears about introducing Mr. Bonham to her 
cousin; but Jacob's manner had soon set them 
at rest. She saw how Hester's abruptness jarred 
him, and although she wished him to like her 
in reason, she felt secretly pleased at his 
evident indifference to her society. Jacob was 
rising rapidly in her esteem, till Hester began 
to find fault with his driving. This acted ad- 
versely. Lucy had determined long ago that the 
man she chose for a husband should be a fault- 
less hero, a paragon in whom no one . ^not even 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 177 

her cousin Hester . could find any defects, and 
for Jacob to subject himself to open interference I 
The accident completed her annoyance. She 
had been too proud of him before, not to feel 
shamed by his disgrace; but still she had clung 
to the drive home alone, for, after all, his inatten- 
tion had arisen from his devotion to her. 

Her introduction to Mr. Hallam had changed 
all; he was just the hero she had dreamed 
of; he seemed to know exactly how to do, and 
when to say, everything necessary, and he was 
so handsome, and looked so sweet-tempered, 
and he was so evidently a gentleman. She 
blushed as she remembered the anxiety she had 
felt lest Jacob should advance to meet them, and 
thus be contrasted with this polished Londoner; 
and he had looked so earnestly at her as they 
parted. Of course she was not so silly as to 
think of him; but if her cousin Hester made 
such a match, why should not she make as good 
a one? But this last reflection did not render 
her any happier ; it only served to show her how 
vain she was growing; and she was growing 
sleepy, too, and it would be far better not to 
think any more about it . at any rate, to-night. 

VOL. I. 12 



178 HESTER KIBTON. 

Liiey was a much earlier riser than her mother, 
and she usually had an hour's pianoforte practice 
before Mrs. Wrenshaw came down to hreak&st 
The next morning, however, she could not settle 
to anything ; she arranged scone flowers which her 
cousin had brought her yesterday . a gift fiom 
Mrs. Stasson, for there was not sach a luxury 
as a flower garden attached to Kirton's Farm. 
Hester had no passion for such an amusement, 
and her father considered that it would take too 
much of the men's time to keep it in order. 
These were just common sweet-smelling flowers, 
such as almost every cottager's gard^i contains; 
but Lucy had a taste of her own in such matters. 
She had not thrown away the ferns and leaves 
she had stooped to gather, while Hallam was 
bidding Hester good-by, and with their help 
she now arranged a pretty graceful nosegay for 
the breakfast table. 

But still her mother did not come, and she 
stationed herself at the window. She had not 
been there five minutes before she turned away 
with a deep flush on her cheeks. Jacob Bbhham 
had passed on the other side of the street, but 
without so much as looking across; in &ct, he 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS, 179 

seemed to be walking along as carelessly and 
indifferently as possible. Well^ let htm; Lucy 
was quite sore she did not care: only, knowing 
how very tired she was on the previous evening, 
she thonght he might just have knocked at the 
door and inquired for her; but how was he to 
be expected to know manners? Poor Jacob ! his 
hold on Lucy's liking seemed uncertain. 

The d^ wore away slowly and oppressively 
to Lucy, as days always do when weighed down 
by our coming fate, for no important event in 
our lives comes upon us without some forerunner, 
some presentiment, if we did but watch for its 
warmng. 

Lucy's restlessness continued through the day, 
and she '^ mooned," as Mrs. Wrenshaw said, '' to 
a degree." Some old gossiping neighbours came 
in to talk to her mother, and to lament over the 
accident to the carriage, while Lucy sate quiet, 
railing in her heart against the misery of living 
in a country town, where every little trifling 
action or misfortone becomes at once public 
pro]^rty. 

How could her mother encourage a pack of 
old maids who had nothing better to do than if^ 

12-^2 



190 HESTER EIBTOK. 

1 chatter about other people's business^ and make 
all manner of mischief by their tittle-tattle. 

Tou see. Miss Wrenshaw was out of temper, 
and quite forgot (for she was a liberal-minded 
little soul at other times) that different people 
have, and must have, a perfect right to have 
different opinions, involving different sources of 
enjoyment, and that to some the discussion of 
their neighbomV affairs, the hearing of theur 
friends' misfortunes, and perhaps failings (for 
we will not suppose for a moment the revelation 
of vice in others can give pleasure), affords intense 
gratification, diflBcult indeed to be understood by 
those whose more cultivated instincts thirst for 
more refined enjoyment 

At length, after one or two efforts at conver- 
sation, which sounded strangely more like repartee 
than replies, she quitted the room. As she went 
into her own ^' study," as sb^adle^ it . ^a nook, 
or, in fact, a large closet wimwi|Window in it . 
her eyes fell on her hat and cloak, which she 
had thrown carelessly on the little table the 
night before, too tired or too dreamy to put them 
away. 

But for the littered appearance these things 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 181 

gave, the study would have been a pretty little 
place. It was papered with a pretty light paper, 
matchiug that in her bedroom, with which it 
communicated, not by a door, but by a sliding 
framework, also covered with paper; this, to 
Lucy's imagination, at once made her study a 
romantic retreat ; she felt a kind of heroine seated 
at her little table in a very uncomfortable high- 
backed chair which she had persuaded her mother 
to buy at a broker's, because she said it looked 
baronial; on one side were some small oaken 
bookshelves, filled with well -chosen volumes. 
After all, fond though she was of music, books 
were as yet the great passion of Lucy's life ; she 
read them strangely though, generally dipping 
in at the end, skimming the cream of the story 
or subject, but always after she had thus, in her 
mother's opinion, spoilt the interest, reading it 
diligently through without missing a word. On 
the other side of the room, facing the books, hung 
a few prints, neatly framed, and between the 
two sides, opposite the window, a basket was 
suspended, filled with dried grass and bulrushes, 
and other botanical curiosities. Lucy had plenty 
of intellectual pursuits, but as yet few useful ones. 



182 HESTER SIKTON. 

Seeing her hat and doak^ she pnt them on 
ahnost mechanically, and having done this it 
seemed natoral to go out By the time she 
reached the street door, it appeared to her that 
she had always intended to take a walk to escape 
rom the Miss Skippers' endless chatter. 

One end of Duke Street led into the High 
Street, the other up towards the open conntry. 

Insiinctiyely she turned to the latter; she 
wanted quiet to enjoy her dreamy, "moony" 
mood in peace, not to have its doud-like visions 
dispersed by the common-place talk of such chance 
acquaintance as she was likely to encounter in the 
High Street of Stedding. 

As she went on, the houses gradually lessened 
in size, then for a short bit they ceased, long 
gard^i walls occupying each side of the road; 
presently began a row of straggling, dirty, but 
very pictnresque cottages, with a low wall of 
piled-up stones in front, on which, for it was by 
this time late in the afternoon, lounged some of the 
owners of the dirty squalid little tenements, others 
leaning in front, while the children were playing 
about, or more often ^eated in twos and threes 
on the doorsteps. 



TWILIGHX MOMENTS. 183 

Lucy passed quickly along ; she wondered why 
she had chosen " Peg's Alley," as it was called, to 
walk through alone just at that time of day, for . 
the people who inhabited it were mostly a low 
drunken set However, she did not appear to 
attract much observation. 

The houses came to an end, and the road began 
to ascend steeply ; tlie banks on each side grow- 
ing higher and higher, no longer grassy as they 
had been at first, but supported, as it seemed, by 
huge blocks of stone on one side, rich in varied 
colour, as the gleams of sunset reached them 
through the overhanging bushes at the top of 
the opposite bank. From among the fissures in 
the stones the wild clematis sprang in rampant 
luxuriance, and leaping up to gain the foliage 
above it, sometimes sate there triumphant in hoary 
beauty, but as often fell back in clustering festoons, 
covered with blossoms and feathered seed*pods. 

But at length the path, apparently tired of 
climbing, stopped its ascent, as if to take breath, 
and went along evenly for about a quarter of a 
mile, before it descended to its first level. Along 
this fiat roadf the banks were no longer high and 
rocky, but fi:om the hedges grand old oaks and 



184 HESTER EIBTON. 

elm-trees spread their long arms quite across the 
road, and made a twilight streaked with golden 
gleams of light 

Lucj was roused from her dreams by the sudden 
gloom ; she thought it was time to return ; she 
wished she had not come that way ; there was a 
shorter path across the fields, but then it was lone- 
some, and she feared that worse than the rude 
remarks she might overhear in Peg's Alley. 

As she stood hesitating, she saw a figure in the 
distance coming towards her; her heart beat 
quickly, for she was far from any houses, and a 
gang of gipsies had recently passed through 
Stedding, leaving a thievish, evil name behind 
them. 

She did not like to turn back and walk home- 
wards, lest the gipsy . for it might be one . ^should 
come suddenly upon her, so she went on slowly to 
meet the advancing figure. 

A few steps nearer, and her heart beat quicker 
still, and the warm blood seemed to steal softly 
and pleasantly through her veins. 

In her relief that it was no gipsy, but one who 
would protect her even from the dreaded insolence 
of Peg's AlJey, she had quite forgotten her 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 185 

quarrel with Jacob Bonham^ and held out her 
hand cordially with a sweet smile. 

He murmured some confused apology, but in so 
hurried and indistinct a manner, he might as well 
have left it unsaid, and Lucy was too happy just 
then to enter into any explanation or discussion. 
All her hopes and fears, and the worries of this 
long, tiresome day, seemed at rest . suffused, as 
it were, by that delicious, indolent, indescribable 
sensation, which, before a woman has owned to 
herself that she loves, the presence of the beloved 
one produces, and which may be felt almost before 
she is quite aware of his presence, should that be 
unexpected. 

With scarcely a word after the first greeting, 
they walked along side by side, Lucy with bent- 
down head and heightened colour, for she felt, 
without raising her eyes, how earnestly Jacob's 
were fixed on her. She was not angry with 
him now, she only longed to ask his forgiveness 
of her petulance, to show him in some way how 
she valued his good opinion. She was glad of 
the twilight gloom of the trees : it wrapped all oui* 
ward objects but these two in its mysterious atmos- 
phere, and seemed to make them all in all to each 



186 HESTES KIBTON. 

other. She did not think this, she did not think 
at all, till the path grew lighter in front, and then 
she sighed^ for they must soon ^ei^ from under 
the shadow of those dear old oyerhanging trees, 
and she felt as if she could have walked on there 
for ever, beside Jacob Bonham. 

The sweet spdl seemed broken, too, for Jacob ; 
as the frdl sunset light streamed in upon them, he 
slackened his pace, and Lucy felt that at each stsp 
he drew nearer . closerto hen His breath was <m 
her cheek; and yet she had no power, perhaps 
no will, to move away; her whole soul, her whole 
will, seemed suddenly heat to Jacob's, but the 
shrill railway whistle made itself heard, and they 
started asunder, as if at approaching footsteps. 

Jacob had recovered himself in an instant; the 
words that had he&i quiyering on his ttmgue for 
some moments past, might still have heeoL said, 
although they would have been said less passion- 
ately. But he had lost his opportunity ; the witch- 
ing moment was over. Lucy was walking on 
faster now, her head erect,. just as she would have 
walked along the High Street of Stedding. She 
was angry with herself^ and ashamed too ; feeling 
almost as if she had be^i making love to Jacob. 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 187 

Her feelings reacted on his; he became stiff 
and constrained^ and began to talk Imrriedlj^ 
and Lucy answered at random^ almost with fli[H 
pancy^ so that by the time they reached Duke 
Street^ they had made each other equally miseiv 
able. Lucy longed to ask him to come in^ but her 
pride forbade it ; he evidently cared nothing at all 
for her^ or he would have made some excuse to 
enter^ and after her silliness under the oak-trees^ 
what would he think if she gave him any more 
^icouragement ? 

Her cold good-by completed his disappoint- 
ment^ for his hopes had never been raised so high 
as in those few delicious twilight minutes, which 
he now saw had been the creation of his own 
fancy and vanity; perhaps . and here Jacob started 
as if some one had shot him . ^when he had been 
noting the soft, loving expression of Lucy's eyes 
and mouth, and her conscious blushes, they had 
been caused by the remembrance of the stranger, 
the Londoner from whom he had seen her part 
yesterday evening. 

It is not fair to take advantage of a moment 
of jealous fury, and record all the epithets which 
he applied to the contemptible cockney; it was 



188 HESTER EIBTOK. 

a relief to have some one to rail against instead 
of Lucy^ but he reached home in a most tin- 
amiable frame of mind. 

Lucjr was even more to be pitied^ for she liad 
no one to blame but herself; and self is such an 
obtrusive, uneasy culprit, you can't quiet him . 
as fast as you stroke down one of his porcupine's 
quills, another sticks out and pricks, until you 
bestow some attention on it. The only possible 
ways of getting relief are either to maintain 
siiflBcient self-complacence to be always right, 
and so tough-proof against the quills, or else 
to admit humbly that you are quite wrong, and 
likely from your exceeding silliness often to be 
so again ; but as this last plan is very unpalatable, 
and probably impossible to weak female nature. 
Lucy could not manage it, and came down to 
join her mother in tlie drawing-room . as she 
persisted in calling it, although Mrs. Wrenshaw 
always forgot and designated it "the parlour" . 
disposed to be cross to everybody. 

Her mother was not there ; but Rachel, hearing 
Miss Lucy's step, came and told her that the mistress 
had gone out to take a turn with the Miss Skippers, 
and had left word she should be in soon. 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 189 

**But here be a letter, miss, as is come for 
you since the mistress stepped out" 

Lucy took it up listlessly ; her usual corre- 
spondents were one or two among her school- 
fellows and her aunt, Mrs. Wrenshaw. Just 
now she was not in a mood to care for a letter 
from any one, or to speculate on, the address 
being in an unknown handwriting. Indeed, she 
scarcely remarked this as she opened the envelope ; 
but then she saw that it was a man's writing, and, 
turning to the second page, there was, in a bold 
legible hand, the signature, " Frederic Hallam." 

Her attention was aroused now; her hands 
trembled, and her face flushed with excitement; 
the words seemed to dance on the page. 

She read the letter carefully once, and her face 
was not nearly so radiant as when first she saw 
** Frederic Hallam " at the end of it. 

She read it through again, and now she looked 
decidedly annoyed, and crushed the letter angrily 
into her pocket 

It was a courteous, well-expressed letter, fall 
of indirect compliments to Lucy; but it was a 
request in so many words, with no disguise about 
it, to be allowed to write to Miss Wrenshaw, 



190 HESTER EIBTON. 

and throngh her to correspond with her cousin 
Hester. 

Her first impulse was to tell her mother ; hut 
she feared she would never keep it to herself 
and it was not fair to publish Hester's secret, 
for Lucy felt pretty sure, from what he had 
said, that ^r. Hallam's presence on the previous 
evening would be kept a secret at Kirton's Famu 
And besides, what was the use of consulting any 
one? Her uncle Kirton was hard and miserly, 
but he was Hester's fiUher, and Lucy had no 
right to receive l^^ters fer her cousin which virere 
to be kept from his knowledge, even if Hester 
hersdf approved of anything so deceitfal; and 
Lucy felt sure this would not be the case. 

No, she should not take any time to consider 
it, she should write her refusal at once. It was 
very painful to write to a stranger without telling 
her mother; but what could she do? After- 
wards she would tell Hester, and warn her that 
she feared Mr. Hallam was neither open nor to 
be trusted. "How dare he," thought Lucy to 
herself, " make a cat's-paw of me, indeed I " 

Why should Mr. Hallam be so imderhand in 
his mode of wooing? Lucy liked romance; but 



TWILIGHT MOMENTS. 191 

she was sharp enough to know ihat Hester might 
be rnnning into danger if she corresponded with 
a man in a higher station than her own without 
her father's knowledge. Though she was so 
strong-minded, she did not know the world and 
its ways as well as she did ; and Lucy could not 
help feeling a little pride that she could be useM 
in advising her cousin in a matter of this kind. 



192 HESTER KIKTON. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

FREDERIC HALLAM DRINKS TEA WITH 
mS AUNT. 

'* I'm very sorry to be late, aunt," Frederic Hallam 
pulled at one of his whiskers diligently while he 
spoke, '^ but I had a particular engagement this 
afternoon." 

'* Yes," said his aunt, decidedly, but not crossly; 
she could rarely be cross to Fred; *'you had a 
particular engagement to be here at half-past 
five o'clock, and now," looking at her handsome 
gold watch, " it's nearly seven." 

" By Jove, seven ! how my watch must have 
lost^l" he drew it forth to compare it with his 
aunt's, but seeing it wanted only six minutes to 
the hour, he pocketed it again without comment 

*'I'm really sorry to have kept you waiting 



FRED HALLAM AND HIS AUNT. 1813 

SO long for your tea, why not have had it with- 
out me ? '' 

*'"What? when you said you'd dine early on 
purpose; that would have been polite, would it 
not ? How's your mamma ? " 

** She's not very well to-day ; so much languor 
and debility about her, she says." 

"Fiddle!" said his aunt; then, seeing him 
look annoyed, " what I mean, Fred, is, that your 
mother would do well enough, if she'd only not 
think about her health; just look at me; Fm 
always well, just because I have no time to think 
about myselfi Such nonsense and fancies ! " 

Hallam smiled; he did not want to vex his 
aunt this evening, and he knew this was an old 
grievance. She had excellent health, and con- 
sequently uniformly good spirits herself; and she 
would not believe in her sister-in-law's ailments, 
and what Martha Hallam did not choose to believe 
in, as a matter of course, had no real existence at all. 
But as Fred let the subject drop, she had no 
excuse for continuing it, and began to pour out 
tea in a flutter of hospitality that was pleasant to 
witness. % 

The little drawing-room, although somewhat too 
VOL. I. 13 



194 HESTER KIBTON. 

prim in its arrangements, and smart in its colour* 
ing for good taste, was the perfection of neatness 
and brightness . ^the prettj old china and silver 
tea equipage making the centre of the picture. 

Even for her beloved nephew, except on high 
days and holidays, she would not derange the 
comfort and order of her establishment by a late 
dinner-hour. So when she asked him, as she did 
on tiiis occasion, to tea, she bade him dine early, 
and then he should have iiomething to eat more 
solid than bread and butter. She had a bird-like 
appetite herself, and although the little dish of 
eggs and the tiny cold rtongue looked tempting 
and nice, perhaps it was fortunate that Hallam 
had not dined at one o'clock, or he might have 
astonished his aunt's repast by, like the .little bear 
in the story book, " eating it all up." 

Miss Hallam tried in an indirect manner to 
discover the secret of his country journey ; but it 
was not easy to .find out anything that Prederie 
Hallam did not choose to tell; his perfect good 
temper and matchless assurance giving him double 
advantage in an encounter of wits. But at last, 
finding her unusually persevering, he abruptly 
changed the conversation. 



FBED HAXXAM AHD ESS AUNT. 195 

** By-the-by, aunt Martiia,! do wish you would 
call on those poor Miss Goldsmiths." 

Miss Hallam looked aghast ; she could not be 
angry with Fred, but her indignation at such an 
outrageous proposal must explode somewhere. 

^ No, Tred, no," she said, .in her shortest, dryest 
voice; "you know I'm not fond of mew acquaint- 
anc^u" 

**Now, aunt Martha, that's what you juat are, 
and it's because you are so kind to and fond of a 
new acquaintance, .that I ask you to call on my 
friends; why, you'll do .them aU ihe good in the 
worid." 

Tred was too discreet to add, what was com- 
monly reported among his aunt's friends, that she 
had always some pet family or person on hand to 
whom she dei^oted heraelf incesssmily until they 
gaye her cause of offencQ, and then she turned to 
some one else for a wjbile, perhaps a year or so^ 
at the end of wHch iime s&ai former cast^ff 
pets would be taken into Etoar again. To a 
certain extent she was right in sayiiig she did .not 
seek new acquaintance ; she was so continually 
estranging old ones, that she was always haying to 
begin over again. 

13.2 



196 HESTER KIBTON. 

** Very Kkely I mighty" she said, now in reply to 
her nephew; ** but I don't want to." 

**Not want to do good! what an extraordinai*y 
assertion^ when yon know you are the most 
benevolent creature gomg.** 

He was obliged to look away, as he offered this 
large sugar-plum ; for the conceited wriggle with 
which his aunt had said the Ijist words amused 
him as much as it would have annoyed a less 
good-tempered person. 

** I've plenty of friends, Fred, and I don't see the 
use of running after strangers* The Miss Grold- 
smiths are very good sort of people, no doubt ; but, 
as I said before, I have plenty of friends of my 
own." 

** Well, but now look here; it's just because you 
have so many friends of your own, that you 
should take pity on these two poor ladies who have 
so few, and who are really anxious to know you." 

'^ Ladies I " Martha Hallam tossed her head and 
wriggled again in a most irritating manner. She 
had the annoying habit peculiar to some women 
of never being perfectly still; she must surely 
bav0 fidgeted or twitched even in her sleep. 
'^ I can't call such a pair of old-fashioned-looking 



PEED HAIXAM AOT) HIS AU^T. 197 

goodies^ ladies ; " then seeing Hallam look grave^ 
"I beg your pardon, Fred; I forgot iliey were 
your friends," 

** Ah ! I See where the shoe pinches," he said ; 
"you think they aite snobs; and do you know, 
aunt Martha, I always till now thought you 
superior to women's little-mindedness on these 
matters?'' 

Miss Hallam settled her flounces and looked 
red and flurried, the reproof and the compliments 
were so mingled; she was in secret awe of her 
nephew, and set the greatest value On his good 
opinion, but it did not seem the thing for him 
to lecture her on conduct. 

**No, Frederic, I am not aware that I am in 
any way prejudiced or narrow-minded . quite 
the .contrary; but I was born and bred a High 
Churchwoman, on true oonservati^ principles 
about everything, and I never have associated with 
any one professing any different principles;" . 
she stiffened her back^bone to. its straightest per- 
pendicular . ^* I'm not going to begin now." 

*^ Oh, aunt, aunt I and just because these good 
women . for they are good women . go to a different 
church, youll have nothing to say to them." 



198^ HB8TEB EIRTON; 

^' Not if I know it^" said Miss Hallaxn^ decidedly. 

Fred leaned back in his chair and whistled 
softly; he was as much vexed with his annt as 
he had ever been in his life; but he had two 
points to cany this evaiing. You probably under- 
stand him well enough by ihis time to be perfectly 
aware that he did not sacrifice a whole evening 
solely and wholly to please his aunt ; no, he had 
" other fish to fry,*' and, therefore, he forbore to 
urge her, knowing by past experience that her 
amount of contradiction was un&thomable. 

Some of her words, however, althou^ he had 
often heard her utter such sentiments before, had 
roused a new train of thought, and he sate 
playing with bis watch-chain, and lounging in 
the most comfortable chair in. the room, while 
his aunt, after sending away the tea-things^ spread 
out a huge piece of worsted work, at which ahe 
had been employed the last five or six yeazis* 

Her nephew sate thinking about Hester, and 
his recent interview with hen She bad looked 
prettier than ever; but, alas I her manner of 
speaking and awkward bearing still offended 
his ear and eye. He wished she were more 
like her cousin-^there would be little trouble. 



EBED HALLAM AND HIS AUNT. 199 

he thought, in polishing that ready-fitted, frank- 
spoken girl into anything he wanted ; she had no 
gauekerie about her, the very movement of her 
elbows was different to Hester's ;. but the corre- 
spondence would effect much. He should, tell 
Hester everything he wished her to learn or to 
do ; he did not care about a clever or accomplished 
wife, but he would take good care not to marry 
one who might bring him into ridicule. There 
was plenty of good material to work upon, he 
felt sure; he had time enough before him . time 
enough, no! . and then the remembrance of 
dunning creditors and presmng claims made him 
feel as if he could not wait patiently for Ralph 
Kirton's death* He never thought there would 
be any opposition from Hester.. 

Something whispered him to keep off the subject 
with his aunt, and yet, like a moth round the 
flame, he hovered near it,, so near that at last, 
in the midst of a desultory talk about common- 
places, he said abruptly,; . 

"I wonder if that piece of worsted work wiU 
be finished by the time I marry.'' 

" Marry ! " She dropped the shade^ of wool 
she had just selected from her basket. " You 



200 HESTER KIRTON. 

don't mean to say, Fred, you are thinking of 
marrying?" 

"No, I don't say that I am, but if I did I 
suppose there would be no harm done, would 
there?" 

She looked still more surprised. 

** Harm ! of course not ; nobody said there 
would be any harm; but you are very young, 
Fred, to be encumbering yourself with a wife 
and family, unless . tlie lady has money or first- 
rate family." 

"There you go," said Hallam, laughing. "_I 
never saw anything like you women ; you build 
such castles on a slight observation. Don't you 
frighten yourself, aunt . if ever I do marry, it will 
be for money; if I do make such a sacrifice of 
myself, it shall be for something worth having.** 

But she shook her head. 

" No, Fred, there you would be quite wrong ; 
no mercenary marriage ever prospers ; there's no 
blessing on it to begin with ; but I know you are 
only joking, my dear boy," for she saw he had 
turned away impatiently; "you're getting into 
some little diflSculties, or you would not talk of 
marrying only for money." 



FRED HALLAM AND HIS AUNT. 201 

*' I'm not getting into them, because I'm never 
out of them . how can T be with my income ? But 
now, joking apart, instead of this perpetual worry 
and borrowing and troubling my friends, if I 
could find some quiet, plain-faced, sensible girl, 
with lots of tin, don't you thiiik I might do worse? " 

His manner puzzled her ; she would not believe 
him in earnest, although it sounded strangely like 
it^ but Miss Hallam rarely took the trouble to re- 
flect ; she considered herself too sharp to require it. 

**Do worse? I should think so; of all people, 
Frederic, you must not marry an ugly wife, or 
one you don't love. You know I can't endure 
ugly people : I have never been used to them." 

" But you must be reasonable, aunt : you cannot 
possibly expect me, having no money of my own, 
to find everything in a wifeu Suppose now, just 
for argument's sake, I pick up some pretty country 
girl with a fortune large enough to cover her 
want of breeding, what would you say to that? " 

**No fortune can cover want of breeding," 
exclaimed Martha Hallam, getting excited ; " but 
I know you are onjy joking, Fred, or I don't 
know what would become of me : the idea of you 
married to anybody beneath you! I don't want 



202 HESTEB EIBTON. 

to make you vain . ^7011 are a Hallam^ and there- 
fore you have a right to good looks . ^but I can't see 
why your wife should not be well-bom and rich as 
well as pretty. But now, my dear boy, teU me 
about these difficulties.'' 

And then the real business of the evening began^ 
and before Frederic Hallam bade his aunt good 
night his heart was considerably lightened; she 
had supplied him with the means of paying the 
most pressing of his creditors, who, during the 
last few days, had been behaving so badly that 
they had made him contemplate the expediency 
of a temporal^ residence abroad, unless matters 
could be precipitated with Hester Erton* It was 
unlucky that he had &iled about the Miss Gold- 
smiths; he knew a litde notice from his aunt 
would have pleased them greatly; howeyer, he 
would try again. 



203 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE SECRET PBBSSES. 

**The mother of mischief is no bigger than a 
midge's wing," says the proverb; and thus it 
came to pass that this first little deceit had so 
warped Hester's perc^tions, that she could not 
agree with the view Lucy took of the clandestine 
correspondence. It might be that the total want 
of open dealing between herself and her Either 
had rendered her independent of his control in 
matters of opinion. Any way, she was displeased 
with her cousin for what she had done, and she 
showed it. 

Poor Lucy felt very sorry. Ready as she 
was in speech, she was usually undecided in 
judgment when it had to be acted on ; she 
always consulted others, either her mother or 



204 HESTER KIRTON. 

her aunt^ about her undertakings and pursuits^ 
and although in her impulsive waj she had said 
to herself at first that she should write and refuse 
Hallam's request, still when it came to be done^ 
she felt dismayed and uncertain, not about the 
right or wrong of the matter, but at the awful 
responsibility of doing anything so decided, im- 
known to any one else. 

Besides, it was the first secret she had kept 
from her mother ; and she loved her dearly, spite 
of her occasional pertness to her. This weighed 
on her spirits, and she felt heavy hearted too 
on account of Jacob Bonham ; and now she had 
ridden Bob over a few days after the receipt of the 
letter, to show it to Hester, and to tell her how 
she had replied to him, and her cousin's hardness 
made her feel as if she had been guilty of evil 
dealing towards her. 

** At any rate, you might have asked me first 
what I wished done," said Hester. 

" I did not think of that," said Lucy. In her 
heart she felt that her cousin's opinion could not 
have changed her mode of action in a^ matter of 
simple right and wrong; but then this did not 
shape itself directly, and even if it had, she would 



THE SECRET PBESSES. 205 

have been afraid of provoking a rude answen 
Yet when she reached home again, she felt she 
liad acted like a coward. What \^as the use of 
being Hester's friend if she dared not tell her 
the truth ? How she longed to be as out-spoken 
as Hester herself, only she wished she would not 
be so hard. 

Hard! Hester felt like a tempest after Lucy 
had left her. She had insisted on keeping the 
letter, and Lucy set no value on it, and so gave 
it to her. What a nice letter it was, thought 
the poor girl, as she read it and re-read it ; and 
she might, perhaps, have received such a letter 
once a week . ^maybe oftener . if Lucy ^ had not 
been so [silly and disobliging. Hester could not 
understand her reason. Lucy, who was always 
talking about love-stories and nonsense . she 
should have thought it just the very thing she 
would have entered into. She jsate half the 
afternoon musing over it. Biz was in the dairy 
superintending the churning, too busy to offer 
much disturbance to her young mistress's train 
of thought Suddenly a light flashed on her dark 
perplexity. Her keen observation had noted 
Lucy's annoyance at Mr. Bonham's carelessness. 



206 HBSTEB KIBXON. 

and she had also remarked her eagerness to apeak 
to Mr. Hallam. It was plain now; Lucy was 
jealous {hat Hester should have so grand and 
handsome an admirer^ and would not lend a 
hand in the matter. For an instant Hester's 
strong will roused itself^ and she ielt almost 
determined to set aside Lucy's opposition^ and 
answer the letter herself; but no, she could not 
do that . the modesly of her nature recoiled at 
ihe thought; it would be owning that she eared 
for Hallam before he had openly professed affec- 
tion for her; and a warning Toice whispered that 
the friendship he liad spoken of might not mean 
any warmer feeling. But then why want to 
write to her? He must care for her. So she 
sate still, facing the fire, spite of the -warm 
evening ; her elbows planted on her knees^ and 
her slender hands forming a resting-place for 
the soft chin. Hallam's letter to Lucy lay id 
her lap, disregarded for the present, as she mused 
over her cousin's evident jealousy. 

After all, perhaps, Lucy's refusal was a fhing 
to be rejoiced at. She wrote nice interesting 
letters, Hester knew, very different to her own stifl^ 
laboured compositions, which made her ears burn 



THE SECRET PBBSSES. 207 

and her fingers ache bdTore they were concluded 
to her satisfaction; while Lacj could sit down 
and write a note off in a few minutes, and laugh 
and talk while she was doing it Suppose Mr. 
Hallam had found her the most amusing corre- 
spondent of the two, and had transferred his 
friendship. Hester did not liko to call it any* 
thing eke. 'to her cousin? 

A slight noise behind hsr made her start, and 
squeeze the letter up in her hand; she looked 
rotmd hastily ; no one was in sight, but she heard 
a sound of clearance in the dairy which made 
her sure Biz would soon be making preparations 
for tea. So she smoothed the letter carefully 
with her hand, folded it up, and was just slipping 
it into her pocket, when her father entered the 
kitchen, so noiselessly and suddenly that she 
almost dropped the letter with the start she 
gave. 

He cast a keen, suspicious look at her. 

"What be you cramming into your pockety 
lass, that way ? " 

" Only a letter I had firom Lucy, father,** and 
Hester blushed at her unaccustomed deceit; her 
pride revolted from such a meanness. 



208 HESTEB KIUTON. 

Kirton had a great mind to ask for the letter^ 
but just then Biz came in, scolding and grum- 
bling, ** There was not half so much butter as 
there might ha' been. She couldn't think how 
'twas. When she was a gal, she worked with 
a will, but it seemed, it did, as if gals' arms 
npw-a-days was too tender for handling chiiras. 
Theyll be a getten a machine next, I reckon. I 
should like to know whatever '11 come on all the 
live men and women when the whole world's 
moved by machines." 

** You're talking nonsense, Biz," said Hester, 
who always stopped the grumbling when she 
could. ** Machines can't go by themselves ; tbey 
want a many hands to guide them." 

'.' Ugh ! I can't abear new-fangled ways, not I. 
What the gals is made of now-a-days is past 
my belief, . ^made o' petticoats mostly, I lay. 
There bean't a mossel of strength in their arms. 
Dress, dress, dress, that's all their cry ; if it 
served 'em for summut to eat, I'd think less about 
it, maybe. But there's that Faith Stasson, she 
ats her head off whenever she comes nigh the 
place to do a cast o' dairy work. She's made 
a clean dish o' that cold bacon, and no mis- 



THE SECRET PBESSES. 209 

take^ and me counting on it for to-morrow's 
dinner." 

Mr. Kirton had left the kitchen while tea was 
getting ready, but he caught her last words as 
he now came hack. 

** The bacon ate up ! That was more your 
fault than hers. Biz," he said, sternly. " I'll 
have you do your own churning, if ye can't 
manage a strip of a girl like that She couldn't 
have ate it, neither ; maybe she took it home to 
her mother." 

Hester rose at his last words. She considered 
the Stassons her special property, and she would 
not hear them unjustly accused. 

" Father, how can you say such a thing ? Why, 
Faith's as honest as I am myself." 

" Maybe she is," said Kirton. It was strange 
that, hard and stem as he was, he exacted slight 
respect or deference from his child. perhaps from 
the consciousness of how little fatherly tenderness 
he had shown her ; so true is it, that coldness and 
indiflTerence never engender reverence. *'But," 
he continued, " I wouldn't be fain to answer for 
your honesty, Hester, if ye had a sickly mother 
and hungry brothers at home." 

VOL. I. 1* 



210 . HESTER KIBTON. 

. Eormerly Hester would have tossed her head 
at this reproof, now the dishonest weight of her 
secret kept her humble. 

Her father looked hard at her^ but said nothing. 
He stood silently before the fire, and then he 
called out, " Biz I there's that room betwixt mine 
and Hester's^ that hasn't been slept in lately; 
can you redd it up without much firing and 
waate?" 

" What, the best room ! " ezdaimed Biz. 
" Ere-a-mussy, it 'ood take a week's airing, that 
it 'ood, afore a body 'ood sleep in it safe." 

** Safe 1 " Kirton sneered. ** Look you here. 
Biz I Hester has set her heart on having Mrs. 
Wrenshaw here, and I'm in a mind not to balk 
her for a day or so's visit; but, look you^ m 
have no firing and thriftless ways. Carry a pan 
o' coals through the room and pass it thro' the 
bed, and welcome, only not too much o' that; 
Ihey'U cost enough when they do come. They're 
asked for Monday." 

He turned abruptly and went out of the kitchen, 
leaving his hearers thunderstruck. 

Visitors at Barton's Farml Why, such an 
event had never been dreamed of since Hester's 



THE SECRET PRESSES. 211 

birth^ except when Mrs. Wrenshaw had volun- 
teered a two days' visit on the occawon of her 
niece's going to school, to see, as she said, that 
the poor child was not sent there in rags. 

Their wonder would have been lessened if they 
had known that it had occurred to Farmer Kirton 
that Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw were not growing 
younger, and had no children, and would have 
a little property to leave ; and he began to think 
after his talk with Hester, that, as Mrs. Wren* 
shaw was her godmother, it would be more 
natural for her to inherit this property than her 
cousin Lucy. 

The day Eirton had dined in Stedding, Mrs. 
Frank Wrenshaw had mentioned her intention 
of asking her brother-in-law and his wife to pay 
them a visit before winter set in. He dbliked 
Lucy's mother without understanding her; pro- 
bably our dislikes would be much fewer if we 
took more trouble to understand each other's 
springs of action and words . and he had made 
^p his mind that she was a grasping woman, 
^er to secure all she could for her own and 
Lucy's advantage. " Ill-doers" ever are,, and ever 
were,  ill-deemers." 

14.2 



212 HESTEB KIBTON. 

He had pondered the matter deeply. The idea 
of asking them to Eirton's Farm presented itself^ 
hut was quickly rejected as impossible : he shivered 
as he thought of the extra tea and sugar^ and 
bread and meat, that must be consumed ; it would 
be wanton, lawless expenditure in which he had 
no right to indulge. Still he was haunted by the 
unpleasant thought that Mrs. Frank, through her 
manoeuyring, nught secure for Lucy a snug little 
income which would otherwise have been Hester's. 

In the midst of his perplexity he received Mr. 
Goldsmith's reply to the letter he had written 
about Hester's wish for schooling. 

His friend strongly deprecated such a plan, and 
proposed that her father should try to make her 
home happier for her by a little cheerful society 
there; ** staid sensible people, however," wrote 
Goldsmith, "not a pack of boys and girls to fill 
her head with nonsense." 

This was agonizing: he was brought to the 
brink, but he had still no courage to take the 
plunge. The items of the Wrenshaws' daily con- 
sumption swelled and grew, till Ris sleep was 
haunted by visions of gigantic loaves and quarters 
of mutton . for he knew he dared not feed them 



THE SECRET PRESSES. 213 

entirely on bacon . rushing tumultnously from 
the kitchen^ away and out of sight and recovery, 
followed by the flocking cocks and hens, most of 
which seemed to have had their necks wrung, 

Next morning's post brought a letter from 
Mrs, Wrenshaw* She told Mr, Kirton that she 
and her husband hoped soon to be at Stedding 
for a few days, and that, as they should not have 
time to see much of Hester, they hoped he would 
spare her to them when they returned home. 

He had no occasion to ponder over this letter ; 
he took it into his little study, and seated himself 
to answer it " A likely matter he'd trust Hester 
away, and in London, too, where were lots o' 
smart chaps as would be taking a fancy to her ; 
there would be the saving of her keep, that was 
something; but he should lose her help in the 
farm and house, and then she'd want a rare rig 
o' gowns and such like; no, the only safety for 
Hester was to let her bide at home out o' the way 
o' the men." 

And, having written a decided but carefully 
worded refusal to Mrs. Wrenshaw's invitation, he 
made a fresh calculation of the household expenses 
of entertaining her and her husband there fo^ 



214 HESTER KIRTON. 

a couple of days and nights^ and, with much 
inward repugnance, decided lihat, if next morning 
lie thought well of it, they should be asked in the 
face of all risk to Kirton's Farm, for it seemed to his 
calculating brain that, if he gave them offence now 
by wilfully alienating them firom Hester, he should 
be playing Mrs. Frank Wrenshaw's own game 
for her with a vengeance. 

The bread-and-*mutton visions apparently did 
not disturb his night's rest, and we have seen the 
determination he had arrived at, to the utter 
bewilderment of Biz and even to the great surprise 
of calm, collected Hester. 

 Ere-a-mussy me I the world must be a spin- 
ning round too fast, Pm thinking, and addlin' some 
folk's brains." Biz had occasionally a shrill, spitefiil 
way of laughing at her master behind his back, 
her revenge for the abject submission she usually 
maintained towards him. ^^ To think o' the muster 
askin' visitors 1 youll excuse me. Muss Heaster," 
and, laughing still, she sate down and wiped her 
face with her apron, as if quite overcome by the 
intensity of the joke. 

^^I don't see anything absurd. I'm pleased 
aunt Wrenshaw's coming; ain't you pleased. Biz? " 



THE SECRET PBESSES. 215 

This was asked rather defiantly, as if she 
thought the old woman ought to be pleased at 
what so rejoiced her, and Biz's contradiction was 
immediatelj roused. 

*^ Pleased I yes, no doubt but what ye are pleased, 
ye as has got nothin'to do but sit and make things 
pleasant to yer friends when they comes; ye 
never thinks o' the extra plates and cups to wash 
and the rest o' it; but some folks don't care how 
much thay put upon an old woman, not thay." 

'^You're talking nonsense. Biz!" said Hester, 
decidedly. ** You know very well I shall help wash 
up, and I shall do all the extra bed-room work 
mysel" 

" And it's like enough I shall let 'eel " said the 
old woman, crossly. ^VA nice thing for Mrs. 
Wrenshaw to go to Stedding and see Miss Lucy 
a-sittin' up at her music, a-playin' and a-singin', 
and then come here and find 'ee ardoin' house^ 
maid's work, with yer frock, maybe, pinned up in 
front o' 'ee I No, Muss Heaster, ye must behave 
like a bom lady while yer aunt's here, if ye 
means her to ask 'ee back." 

Hester coloured crimson; everything in this 
speech iarred upon her pride and her jealousy of 



216 HESTER KIBTON. 

Lucy, for, although she did not know it, she was 
very jealous of her ; but she was too proud to 
answer, and stood as if she had not heard, while 
Biz went on |;rumbling. 

*^ Pan o' coals, indeed I I'd like to see the pan 
o' coals as 'ood warm a room as hasn't been slep 
in six year and more. It ought to be fresh white- 
washed, it ought ; but I'm thinkin' the muster 'ood 
go right crazy if he was to see I making a work 
about it, and he'd be sure to smell it out. There's 
some oud hangings in the press, if the moth's not 
eaten 'em right out, might serve ; but there should 
be a fire in the chimney, if ye don't wantyer aunt 
to get her death there ; she'll catch her bones foil 
o' rheumatics as it be." 

^^ Then there must be a^ good fire," said Hester, 
decidedly ; " I shall tell father so : best not ask 
aunt at all, than do her a mischief when she 
comes." 

Her heart swelled as she thought how diflerently 
Lucy would be allowed to welcome her visitors. 

" Then ye'll take it on yer own shoulders 
bout the fire," said Biz, who, to do her justice, 
was hospitable at the bottom of her heart, although 
the enforced habit of pinching and screwing for so 



THE SECKET PRESSES. 217 

many years had given her miserly habits, which 
came more naturally on first, thoughts than her 
real nature. " A good fire there ought to be, and 
that^s for certain." 

Sut she hushed as her master's stealthy step 
again approached the kitchen, and bustled forward 
with the tea . ^not before she needed, for Ralph 
Kirton indulged in a sort of homily on waste of 
time and words, as he stood with his back to the 
fire ; which she knew very well was meant for her, 
although she did not choose to appropriate it. 

*^ Blame being," as she remarked to herself, 
when she was safe in the washhouse, " the ony 
thing the muster's freehanded wi', and that he 
do fling about broadcast like the grain, he do. 
It's a lucky job for I, t'ain't in natur like the 
grain ; it don't grow, that's one comfort ; and he's 
mostly so silent that maybe, if he didn't scold a 
bit here and there, his tongue 'ood rust for want 
o' waggin'. *Soft words butter no parsnips;' 
and for sure hard uns break no bones." 



218 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER XVL 

AN EVENING AT MRS. FRANK WRENSHAW'S. 

. 

4Bt the following Monday Hester and. Biz had 
contrived to make the best room somewhat habit- 
able ; but Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw's visit was 
deferred for a day. 

They had arrived at JStedding on the previous 
Friday^ and it was settled by Mrs Frank ihat 
she would spare them for a couple of days at 
Kirton's Farm, on condition that Heater came over 
with her father to tea on this Monday evening, 
and drove the Wrenshaws back with them in the 
pony-carriage, which had been mended in antici- 
pation of the visitors. 

Ralph Kirton growled and refused to go ; but 
he said Hester could do as she pleased. 

Mr. Wrenshaw was a handsome old man ; spite 
of care and sorrow, and he had known both, his 



AN EVENING AT MBS. WBENSHAW'S. 219 

ikce only spoke of brightness and benevolence. 
His wife looked more careworn, but there was 
a sweet resigned look mingled with the calm sen- 
sible expression, more interesting than the mere 
common-place prettiness of her sister-in-law, Mrs. 
Frank. They were childless now, but they had 
not always been so. 

They both warmly welcomed Hester, although 
they said they should not have known her; and 
her uncle paid her some courteous old-fashioned 
compliments on her improved looks. 

Hester said her father would expect them early, 
so they must not stay supper; and, after a due 
amount of lamentation on this head from Mrs. 
Frank, she made a compromise and gave them 
what she called " a solid tea," which many people 
would have pronounced a dinner. 

To Lucy's dismay, her mother announced, just 
as they were sitting down to table, that she had 
met Mr. Bonham in the morning, and, as she 
-thought it would be quite stupid for Mr. Wren- 
shaw to sit down among so many ladies, she had 
asked the young doctor in to make even numbers. 

No words had passed between Lucy and her 
mother on the subject of Mr. Bonham ; they had 



220 HESTER KIRTON, 

both been so busy preparing for their visitors^ 
that nothing but their arrival had been talked 
about But, perhaps, Mrs. Frank had guessed 
that there was something wrong, as Jacob had 
jiever appeared in Duke Street since the accident 
to the pony-carriage, or, seeing his dull looks 
when she met him for the first time that morn- 
ing, she might have fancied that the dread of 
her displeasure was keeping him away. Mrs. 
Frank was so apt to take up extravagant and 
romantic notions, and to attribute entirely wrong 
jnotives to people, that it might be dangerous to 
say exactly what she thought about Bonham on 
this particular morning. What she did was 
another matter, as she spoke so loud as to be 
audible to many of the inhabitants of Stedding, 
when she asked the young doctor to join what 
she called a very select tea-party, 

" My London relatives," said Mrs. Frank, 
with an air . for, although she was upt proud, 
she liked it to be known that she liad London 
relatives ; independent gentlefolks too . ever since 
Mr, Wrenshaw had given up business and lived 
on his little property. 

Mr* Jacob Bonham bowed, and said he should 



AN EVENING AT MRS. WRENSHAW'S. 221 

Be most Iiappy^ and he looked as if he should 
ivhile he spoke; and then, as soon as he had 
gone on his way, he reproached himself for his 
.weak folly, when he had resolved to see as little 
of Lucy as possible, for he had sorrowfully 
made up his mind she was engaged to that Lon-^ 
don puppy, spite of her soft looks in those twilight 
moments under the oak-trees. 

Well, he must go now ; he had promised and 
lie never broke his word : but it should be the last 
time ; he would speak to and look at her as little 
as possible, and with visitors present there would 
he no risk of being left together; that he could 
not endure, he knew. 

His heart throbbed painftilly when he found 
himself on the threshold where he had last parted 
from Lucy. Why was he going to inflict this 
torture on himself, to see the sweet face which 
could never be his, perhaps to receive again the 
sweet soft smiles he had so fatally misinterpreted ? 
He could only hope she might be in one of her 
. saucy moods, and yet then she looked to his 
fancy prettier than ever. 

She had been rather quiet and dull after her 
mother's announcement; but directly the young 



222 HESTER KIBTON. 

doctor appeared she flushed up into an excited 
gaieiy, which struck her quiet observant aunt 
as being forced and unnaturaL Her uncle dded 
her, hawever, and they went on joking and 
laughing, till poor Jacob was thoroughly convinced, 
if he had any doubt before, that Lucy did not 
care two straws about him. 

It was very bitter, but he would try to keep 
the promise he had made to himself; Lucy need 
not fear he would persecute her with his attentions. 

He also became excited and talked a good deal 
to Mrs. Wrenshaw, and as Hester was sittiDg 
beside her aunt she was soon included in the 
conversation. She did not fed so shy of him now. 
That unlucky tumble had done much to dissipate 
the reverence she had previously felt for the 
doctor of Stedding, and Hester had a peculiarity 
common to both weak and strong minded women: 
if she once felt herself in any* way a man's 
superior, she entertained a slight contempt for 
him ever after; and superiority, either real or 
fancied . one answers as well as the other . always 
gives a certain amount of self-possession. 

She had a feeling of pity for him, too, on this 
evening ; she had not forgiven Lucy. Hester had 



AN EVENING AT MRS. WBENSHAW'S. 223 

never had much to forgive hitherto; so perhaps 
she was not practised in the virtue ; it seemed to 
her as if it were not possible she could forget her 
cousin's mismanagement, and when people are 
intolerant, they are apt to think it is because they 
have good memories. 

. And now, besides ill-using her, Lucy was 
behaving with strange caprice to Mr. Bonham. 
What she had herself told her, and the foolish 
way in which she had encouraged his inattention 
to the pony, and many other things she had noted 
during their drive, had assured her that her cousin 
cared for the young doctor ; but this evening, she 
did not seem to be even kind to him; she had 
frowned when Mrs. Frank said she expected him 
to tea. Hester thought she, too, well knew why ; 
and she began to tremble, as a new fear suddenly 
dawned. Suppose Lucy were corresponding with 
Mr. Hallam on her own account, telling her own 
version of her cousin's silence. But, although 
suspicious, partly perhaps by nature, but mostly 
from evil example, she was too just to give such 
a thought room to grow in ; and, as she looked 
up at Lucy's open, frank face, it was impossible 
not to reject it Still, she was behaving unkindly 



224 HESTER EIBTOK. 

to Mr. Bonham, and therefore Hester made un- 
itsual efforts to be civil to him 

One reason for this might have been that she 
was extremely anxious aunt Wrenshaw should 
not think her shy and awkward; she was her 
godmother, and therefore far more her properly 
than Lucy's, and, although Hester was not vain, 
she was proud, and shrank from being despised. 

"I hope you weren't much hurt the other 
night, Mr. Bonham ? " she said, presently to the 
young doctor. 

He looked up quickly, thinking what a harsh, 
unpleasant voice she had. 

^^ Not at all, thank you," and then he became 
red and dignified, and stuffed his hands into his 
pockets, and Hester felt in a moment that she had 
made a mistake. 

Lucy turned round sharply. What could 
Hester find to say to Jacob ? She began to think 
she should speak to him herself, and then she 
saw his ungraceful attitude. She turned away 
with almost a groan. No, it was impossible; she 
could not really care for a man who was so 
uncouth in some ways as Jacob. The coloured 
trousers were bad enough, when he was asked to 



AN EVENING AT MBS. WBENSHAW'S. 225 

meet Londoners, too ; why, uncle Wrenshaw had 
put on his dress suit, . but to cram his hands in the 
pockets and stand there looking red and foolish 
. she could have shaken him for doing himself so 
little justice. 

**You must come and see us when you visit 
London, sir," said Mr. Wrenshaw. 

*^ I shall be most happy to do so : I have been 
thinking lately of leaving Stedding, and trying to 
get a London practice." 

** Bless me 1 " exclaimed Mrs. Frank, with open 
eyes and mouth, ** you don't mean it, Mr. Bonham ; 
I thought you were getting on so nicely. Why, 
"what would Stedding do without you ? it would 
be like a cart without a horse ; like my carriage 
without my pony." She was fond of talking of her 
carriage, few of her neighbours could boast such 
an appendage. ^^ Bless me! I'm always making 
mistakes; I'm sure I'm quite sorry; I meant 
nothing about the accident ; I assure you, I spoke 
quite as it came." 

Jacob flourished his pocket-handkerchief, and 
thereby partly hid his nervousness; but this 
second allusion to the hateful accident was 
trying. 

VOL. I. 15 



He was surprised to be again addressed by 
Hester, to whom London seemed a sort of para- 
senow. 

"When tare you going, and where shall yon 
Kve?'' 

She spoke as if she had known him for years, 
with no womanish effort ut pleasing, without 
even a smile upon her lips, and he replied in 
ihe 'same tone, more as if he were speaking to 
a man. 

**I have not made up my mind xm either sub- 
ject . circnmstances will govern me." 

He coold not help stealing a look at Lncy; 
bnt she had tamed away, and was apparently 
seeking for some music. Either ihe exerdon 
of (looping or some other cause had flashed her 
throat deeply. Jacob felt a sudden gleam of 
hope; but when he went up to the piano to see 
if he could be of any use, she refiised his assist- 
ance so ungraciously, without so much as turning 
round her head, that he shrank away confounded 
at his own forgetful folly. Ah, Jacob 1 was it 
likely Lucy would let you see the tears which 
your sudden news had sent brimnmig to her 
eyes? 



AN EVENINO AT MRS. WEENSHAW'S. 227 

The evening was going flatly, as was natural 
wben three out of the six persons present mis- 
rmderstood each other; for poor Lucy had not 
been at all able to discover what had caused 
Hester's stiff manner towards her; too light- 
hearted herself to bear malice, she did not dream 
of it in her cousin* 

The restraint seined to Mrs. Frank a tacit 
reproach to her powers as entertainer. She 
always liked pec^le to be at full pitch of merri- 
ment, or she fancied Khey were dull. 

*'Don*t you lihink we're too qtriet?* she whis- 
pered to Mrs. Wrenshaw. ** Suppose we try iL 
round game,** she added, 'aloud ; ** we can pull 
down the blinds, you know, if you don*t Eke to 
be seen playmg cards by daylight I don't care, 
the Miss Skippers m^e a regular practice of it 
as isoon as they've finished tea . ^tbeyVe not so 
old neither. but Jemima Skipper says they can't 
see to work hy candle-light. What do you all 
say ?* She looked at her guests. 

" By all means," said the old gentleman, always 
ready to contribute to the general amusement, 
although both he and his wife would greatly 
have preferred listwiing to Lucy*s songs. 

15.2 



228 HESTER KIBTON. 

"Oh, you like cards; that's all righi Lucy 
dear . now where are they? Bless me" . ^she 
paused, rubbing her chin, her usual way of 
jogging memory . " oh, I know, Lucy, they're in 
the popery jar ; I put *em there myself to make 
them smell sweet By-the-by," she went on, as 
the fragrance spread over the room while Lucy 
was taking out the cards, *^ I wonder whether it's 
called popery because the smell's any way like 
incense ? You've had a deal of learning now, 
Hester Wrenshaw, perhaps you can tell me ? " 

Hester Kirton alone sate in happy ignorance 
of her aunt's blunder. As has been said, she 
had learned no French in her brief schooling, 
but, with her usual quick observation, she noticed 
the change in the faces of the rest Mr. and 
Mrs. Wrenshaw pressed their lips hard to keep 
the corners from smiling. Lucy tried not to 
laugh out, and was vexed that her mother should 
have made such a jumble in company, and Jacob 
flourished his handkerchief again, and buried his 
face in it 

His action fortunately diverted Mrs. Frank's 
attention* 

"You've dropped something, Mr. Bonham;** 



AN EVENING AT MRS. WRENSHAW'S. 229 

"but he assured her she was mistaken. "Ah, 
Tv^ell, it was my fancy, then. I often pull some- 
thing or other along with my handkerchief out 
of my gulf, as Lucy calls it." 

Bonham was sensitive about being laughed at 
liimself, and could not bear to laugh at others; 
and yet if Mrs. Frank recurred to the " popery " 
jar, he felt he must laugh outright, and she 
always enjoyed her mistakes to the full, blimder- 
ing in every wrong direction possible before she 
found out the right one. 

In his desperate nervousness to prevent such 
a contingency, he tried to start a fresh subject, and 
nothing would present itself but Lucy's London 
friend. He had meant to ask Mrs. Frank about 
him when they were alone together, but an irre- 
sistible impulse against his better reason now 
forced the question to his lips. 

"Have you seen your London friend again?" 
He spoke half to Lucy, half to her mother, and 
then stood mute, overwhelmed by the effect of 
his words. 

The tailor's bodkin did not work greater magic 
on Sir Piercie Shafton than this apparently inno- 
cent question on Hester and Lucy. 



230 HESTER EntTOK. 

The former crimsoned painfiillj, and then be- 
came very pale, her firmly-set mouth and hieaTing 
bosom telling of inward emotion. 

Lucy first started violently, and then looked 
very angry; but before either of them could 
speak, Mrs. Frank exclaimed, lookii^ from one 
to the other with open eyes, . 

"London fidendl . wha do you mean, Mr. 
Bonham? Why, Lucy, what's the matter . who's 
Mr. Bonham talking about? " 

As her mother spoke, Lucy had gone dose up 
to the doctor. 

** Say you mean nothing, you must," she said, 
with a flash in her eyes^ and at the same time 
a quivering lip that made him fedl guilty of some 
great ofience towards her. 

Lucy knew that had she been the doctor, she 
could have rectified such a blunder in an instant; 
but Jacob had none of her ready wit to help 
him out 

He smiled feebly, wishing himself up the chim- 
ney or under the table, or anywhere but where 
he was standings with every one's eyes fixed 
expectantly on his face. 

** I . I was only joking with Miss Lucy, you 



AN EVENINQ AT MBS. WJiSNSHAW'S. 231 

kiiQw> Mrs. Wrenahaw ; doctors are allowed that 
privilege.** 

It was lamely said, and did not deceive sharp* 
eyed Mrs. Fradc; and although her motherly 
feelings shielded Lucy &om puhUc questioning, 
she could not let them all think her so easily 
blinded* 

**0h, I dare say, doctor; very pretty indeed; 
bat what's Hester got to do with it> then . ^is it 
your joke too, Hester ? ** 

It was a hard struggle. -an instant befoce she 
had despised Bonham &r his falsehood,, and now 
what was she to do ?* But she did not deliberate 
long; almost without apparent hesitation she raised 
her head and looked steadily at her aunt. 

** Yes, aunt, you are r^ht. Lucy will tell you 
about it another time." 

"Well, I'm sure," said Mrs. Frank. The 
simple-hearted woman was more hurt than she. 
chose to show.. Lucy had never kept anything 
from her before, and Lucy . ^poor Lucy . ^was 
miserable; she dared not even look at her mother, 
she felt sure she should burst out crying if she 
did ; to think that she should have had a secret 
from her . all for Hester's sake . a secret she had 



232 HESTER EIBTON. 

found such difficulty in keeping, and that Hester 
for all reward was cross to her^ and Jacob Bonham 
had betrayed hen 

She looked up at him, intending to be full of 
indignation; but he seemed so utterly wretched 
that she pitied him. 

There was an awkward silence, no one knowing 
exactly how to break it. It was a real relief 
when Hester said, . 

"I don't think weVe got time to play cards, 
aunt, for father said he'd expect us by daylight, 
and it's coming over dark fast now," 

She addressed herself to the elder Mrs. Wren- 
shaw, knowing how useless it would be to appeal 
to Mrs. Frank. 

** I'm ready, dear. I have only to put on my 
bonnet and cloak." 

*^ Hadn't you better stay here, Katty ? " said Mr. 
Wrenshaw to his sister-in-law, who was preparing 
to follow the others up-stairs; '*if the whole 
flock goes to put on bomiets and things, it will 
take an hour or so. I know what those Mast 
words ' are ; they swell into sentences . paragraphs 
. sometimes chapters even; they're as bad as 
yeast dumplings." 



AN EVENING AT MES. WBENSHAW'S. 233 

The drive to Kirton's Farm was a silent one. 
The only talkative member of the party, Mr. 
"Wrenshaw, had a great dislike to driving in^the 
dusk^ especially a horse he was not used to ; his 
wife was thinking over old times, which the sight 
of her two nieces had recalled vividly, and Hester 
was glad to be left to her own meditations. 

She wondered whether her aunt or uncle would 
mention what Mr. Bonham had said, before her 
father. No, it was not likely, they were not chatter- 
boxes, like aunt Frank. Hester had a contempt 
for talkative people, her belief being that they 
never thought . she could not do both easily, 
therefore it seemed more natural to think others 
could not do so either. 

They were soon at the farm-gate. Hester 
jumped down and opened it, cautioning her uncle 

against the large stones lying about. 
" 111 mind, my dear : don't you be afraid," *he 

answered. He disliked being in any way schooled 

by a woman, and he prided himself on his 

driving. 

As they approached the house, the door opened 

and Mr. Kirton appeared ; a small bit of tallow 

candle, fixed on a save-all, held up above his head ; 



234 HESTER SIBTON* 

he had just sent Biz to the kltchien, half crying^ at 
the stem rebuke ha had admimsfaesed for her 
wanton extravagance; She had come to the door 
as soon as she heard tibe wheels with a pair of 
candles^ mounted up in two tall brass candlestidks ; 
'' one gave such a mossel o' light/' she said, and 
Mr. Wrenshaw might break his neck ovex the 
stones* 

Ralph Kirton helped his sisters-in-law to alight,^ 
and then shook hands with his visitors ; it was a 
formal greeting with little of heart in it 

Hester passed oa rapidly and threw open the 
parlour door ; she then, spite of her father's warn- 
ing looks, called to Biz to bring another candle, 
and asked her guests if they would not have some 
supper ; fortunately they both refused, and Mrs. 
Wrenshaw said she was tired and should be glad 
to go to her room when she had wished good- 
night. 

Poor Hester took up a candle with a heavy 
heart ^ she had done all she could for her aunt's 
comfort, but she bitterly felt the contrast the 
gaunt, bare, carpetless room up-stairs made to 
the comfortable bed-chamber at Mrs Frank's. 



2Sa^ 



CHAPTER XVII. 

DOCTOR AND NURSE. 

** I TBLL you what, Hester,** said Mr. Wrenshaw 
to his wife, as he was shaving himself next morn- 
ing in his bedroom at Kirton's Farm; *^we should 
have come here first ; we've changed our quarters 
for the worse; it's as bad as shaving with a 
blont razor." 

'^Hush, Robert I I can't bear you to say it, 
because of that poor child. Did you see how 
ashamed she looked last night, when her father 
came to the door with that wretched bit of candle 
in his hand ? " 

" Don't talk about him," said Mr. Wrooshaw, 
making a very ugly grimace; "or I shall cut 
myself, perhaps. I've a great mind to ask for my 
bill when I go away; I wish to my heart we'd 



236 HESTER KIRTON. 

" Never mind," said his wife; ^^ it will only be 
for two days, and it gives ns an opportunity 
we could not otherwise have had of seeing some- 
thing of poor Hester," 

" Seeing something ; you may well say that, my 
dear," said her husband ; *' she is pretty enough to 
look at; but she scarcely speaks a word, poor 
thing." 

*^ She might have been shy yesterday ; she will 
be more herself at home, very likely. I cannot 
help being very much drawn to her; there is 
something superior about her, spite of her imper- 
fect education." 

*^ Well," said her husband, as he sate careftilly 
stropping his razor, " 111 not question your dis- 
cernment, Hester . I don't say I don't like superior 
women, because of course I might get into trouble," 
and he looked slyly at his wife ; " but give me 
Lucy in preference to her cousin, any day. She's 
my sort of girl, so heartily full of fun and spirits; 
and yet she's neither silly nor bold." 

** She's a very sweet girl ; but I suppose it is 
because I know youll like her the best, that I'm 
trying to make you like poor Hester too: one 
thing is certain . little as I have seen of her, if I 



DOCTOR AND NURSE. 237 

were in any trouble or diflScnlty, I should much 
perfer Hester's counsel to Lucy's." 

*'And I shouldn't, with all due deference to 
you, my dear ; when I'm in trouble, I like a little 
soothing and comforting, to be cheered, in fact; 
now, I take it, Lucy 'd be the very girl for that 
Hester 'd give you good advice, no doubt, and 
expect you to go and follow it directly, perhaps 
reprove you if you didn't. The sort of way some 
mothers pick up children when they tumble . 
they set 'em on their legs with a shake and a 
*how dare you?' and perhaps add a threat of a 
whipping if it happens again. Now, my mother 
was something Kke Lucy ; I think the child takes 
after her. She used always to kiss us and comfort 
us, and blame the chair or the stairs, or anything 
but us, for our downfalls." 

Mrs. Wrenshaw laughed, but she told him he 
would certainly keep breakfast waiting if they 
talked any longer, and then she went down- 
stairs. 

Ralph Kirton tried to be agreeable, but as Mr. 
Wrenshaw afterwards remarked, he was not much 
better at it than a bear at dancing ; he had rather 
a strange notion of hospitality; he writhed when 



238 HESTER KTRTON. 

he heard Hester pressing her aunt to eat more 
bread and batter, and talked generally more abont 
the price -and scardty of pro^sions than any other 
sabject. They were still set breakfast . ^Hester had 
contrived to persuade her father to have meals in 
the parlour, during the visit . ^when Biz came in. 

* Here, Muss Heaster, yu be wanted. Peter 
Stasson's took as bad as bad, and Faith be at the 
back door a-cryin* atf H-sobbiri' like a pump, a'most" 

Mr. Eirton gave an angry grmrt. 

Hester looked up calmly. 

*'Tell Faith to wait, IT! come in a minute 
or s o ^ 

And without seeming to hurry, she told her 
aunt a few particulars about Peter, and then begged 
her to excuse her for a while ; but she dad not 
leave the table till her guests had finished; a searet 
consciousness told her that in her absence their 
breakfast might not be so satisfactory as she 
wished. 

At the back door stood Faith, a delicate-looking 
girl herself, in sad trouble. 

She was scarcely intelligible, but Hester man- 
aged to gather that her father, after several days 
of restlessness, and total loss of sleep and appetite, 



DOCTOB ASm HURSE. 239 

liad suddetily iainted diat morning, when he had 
returned home to 'breakfast 

He -was still lying, as Paith said, half dead. 
Hester bid her saddle Bob (who was to remain 
with flie carriage to re-convey the Wrenshaws 
to Stedding), and go down town at once, and fetch 
Mr. Bonham, and then she went through the 
farm, with her quick, firm step, to Peter's little 
cottage. Poor Mrs. Stasson met her at the door, 
her sickly haby in her arms; the child was 
teething, snfiering the unknown agonies so often 
disregarded as peevishness and '* fractionsness." 
The molher seemed to have lost all power of 
quieting the writhing, wailing crfeature, but 
Hester took it from her at once, and soothed it, 
swaying it gently backwards and forwards, while 
she listened to the poor woman's fears about her 
husband. 

She said she more "flian dreaded it was the feveri 
and, if it was, what would become of 'em all? for 
he so weak and that, he'd be down liker six weeks 
than one, ** and how shall I feed these ? " she said, 
looking round helplessly at four other little ones 
who stood huddled in a comer, with their fingers 
in their mouths staring at ^* Muss Kirton." 



240 HESTEB EIBTON. 

Peter's wife was a poor, helpless body, Hestef 
knew, at the best of times. She had left Stedding 
early in life for London service ; her mistress had 
taken a liking to her, and had her educated, and, 
unluckily for Peter, her pretty face had taken 
his fancy when she came down one Whitsuntide 
to see her friends. I scarcely know why I say 
unluckily ; perhaps had she been a quick, clever 
manager, she would have had a sharp tongue and 
a temper to match, and have lacked the tender- 
ness and gentleness that made her such a fond 
wife and mother. 

She was literally overwhelmed by this calamity; 
it had crushed all helpfulness and woman's wit 
out of her. 

Hester knew her too well to be surprised. 

" I'd like to go up and see Peter, Jane. Here," 
she said, beckoning the eldest boy from the 
group; he was about eight, a roguish, intelli- 
gent looking child, who immediately poked out 
his chin, and dropped his head between his 
shoulders, as if something dreadful were going to 
happen. 

" Come here," said Hester, decidedly. 

The boy looked round at his sisters, as if taking 



DOCTOR AND NURSE. 241 

niute counsel, but they only nestled their little rough 
heads closer together, grinning in that peculiar way 
for which their own word, *^ sniggering," is perhaps 
the aptest description. 

Peter, for he was the eldest, looked up again at 
Hester, and something in her eye impelled him 
slowly towards her, grasping his corduroy trousers 
with each hand as if to steady himself. 

*'Now mind what I say, Peter: be a good boy . 
sit down on that stool ; no, not on the edge ; sit 
back and make a lap; there now, mind baby 
carefully till I come down again." 

Small Peter's face looked very doleful ; he didn't 
object to baby when she was good ; but he hated 
squalling with true masculine hatred; he looked 
sullen as well as doleful, as the poor little thing 
set up a fresh cry at finding itself stationary. The 
poor mother was going to take baby again, but 
Hester stopped her. 

** Be a good boy now and rock your knees like 
so ; and if you keep baby good I'll bring you a 
bit of sugar maybe, presently.'^ 

This changed matters ; he knew "Muss Heaster'^ 
always kept her word, and by means of that extra- 
ordinary fascination children exercise over eacU 

VOL. I. 16 



242 HESTEB KIBTON. 

other he somehow or other kept the poor little 
thing tolerably quiet. 

Hester went np the creaking staircase in 
silence. Peter's room had a sloping ceOingy and 
although more in disorder than it might have 
been^ it was clean ; bat the atmosphere of fever 
was there already, that heated thickened air^ 
which makes as almost see ihe demon Disease 
present, crowding ap what empty space there 
may be, with his foal black wings. 

Peter opened his eyes feebly and looked at her. 
His mind was evidently wandering, and what he 
said was so low and indistinct, that she coold not 
catch its meaning. 

Poor Jane hid her iace in the patchwork 
curtain, and cried quietly; but she was so evi- 
dently losing all power of self->control, that Hester 
beckoned her out of the room into a smaller one 
at the back, where Faith and some of the dul- 
dren slept 

As Hester closed the door after them, Mr. 
Stasson burst into hysterical soba Poor creaturr 
she had struggled as much as her weak natur; 
could; but the strain had been too sadden foj 
her to bear up longer. 



:i 



I 



DOCTOR AND KURSE. 243 

Hester stood by patiently, and presently the 
sobs became less frequent and violent. 

'* Ah, Miss Kirton, yon don't know what it is ; 
you don't know how hard it is to see your husbwid 
no better nor a child for help . him as is so good 
ajid so tender . him as takes all the cares and 
worrits off me, and when there's a trouble or a 
^ fret, seems to make all smooth and right . ^and 
now there, he lies . ^he can't even tell me what 
he'd like, or what's right to do* Obi Peter, 
Peter 1 " and she burst into fresh sobs^ 

" Now, look here, Jane," said Hester, in a kind, 

motherly, but decided tone, as if she were years 

older than the other, ^ you mustn't fret and take 

on like this, because you're not going to be left 

alone. I shall come across every day, and see 

what's best to do. Yes . ^well," she said, as if to 

,,, check ihe poor woman's thanks and blessings, 

which came forth as freely as her tears; ''but 

there is a good deal for you to do, too, Jane. the 

,r, great thing is to keep the house quiet. Isn't 

there a neighbour would take some o the young 

ones in the day. Stay," she said, '' I'U go round 

|. to Alick's wife myself; she's a dirty thriftless 

, woman, but she is vejy kind-hearted . Vll see 

16.2 

I 
I 



244 HESTER KIUTON. 

what can be done. Mr. Bonham will tell us 
what's to be done about Peter when he comes^ 
and m tell my aunt too." 

What a blessed feeling it is in trouble to have 
some one to lean on . some one who will take 
both reins and whip too, guiding as well as 
counselling. 

Half Jane Stasson's trouble seemed lightened 
as she followed Hester down-stairs. 

The baby set up a cry, of course, as soon as 
she spied her mother; but Hester patted Peter 
on the head, and told him she would not forget 
the sugar, as he had kept baby quiet. She 
bade Mrs. Stasson send for her directly the 
doctor came, and then went round to speak to 
Alick's wife, who gladly promised to see after 
the children. 

Hester had just finished telling Mr. Wrenshaw 
about poor Peter, when Faith came to say Mr. 
Bonham had arrived. She had met him not far 
from the farm, and he had come along with her. 

Hester was glad of this interruption. Her aunt 
had protested against her plan of nursing Peter, 
on account of the infection, for she thought he 
probably had typhus fever; but Hester was 



DQCTOB AND NUBSB. ?45 

resolved to have her own will in the matter . 

it was all she could do ; she had nothing else to 

give the poor fellow, and she had not the slightest 

fear of infection ; but she felt sorry to disagree 

with her aunt, and was relieved when Mr. Bonham 

said he thought it was a low fever of a typhoid 

nature, but not typhus, and certainly not infectious* 

He seemed so alert and self-possessed as he 

gave his directions that Hester could scarcely 

believe him the same nervous hesitating person 

she had seen the night before. She had taken 

a dislike to him and had dreaded seeing him, 

but she hoped he would be of use to Peter; and 

she had not hesitated to send for him. Still it 

was very unpleasant and painful that he, an 

entire stranger, should be in possession of her 

secret, for he must be, or what could he have 

meant by Lucy's London friend; but she forgot all 

this uncomfortableness, when she met him in 

Peter's bedroom. He was no longer Mr. Bonham, 

but the doctor, and his manner inspired her with 

confidence in his skill. 

Jacob rode slowly away ; he had to make a con- 
siderable circuit before he reached home, and had 
also a commission to execute for Hester. 



24d HESTEB KIRTOK^ 

How wrongly he had judged her; lie had 
thought her cold^ hard^ and mdiffBrent to the 
feelings of others, and here she was, willing to 
sacrifice health and comfort, to nurse a poor sick 
Etrm labourer* Jacob was tender-hearted and 
generous, and this charitable dey<rtion quickly 
effaced the unfavourable impression former events 
had made upon him* 



247 



CHAPTER XVIIL 

THE LETTER DELIVERED, 

Lucy Wsenshaw was sitdng at her pianoforte 
feeling very dull and good-for-nothings wh^i 
Rachel pat her head into the room. She looked 
red and mysterious; Lucy thought something 
must be the matter. 

^^Ohl if you please^miss, there's somelhin' o' 
yonrs^ I found it under the taUe ^lis mcmingy when 
I was swe^in's and I put it in my pockety and I 
never giv' it another thought^ till I went up just 
now to clean my8el'' 

She handed a crumpled and rath soiled letta: 
to Iaxcj, looking slyly at her as she did so. 

Lucy took it and turned it to see the address^ 
and then she changed colour yividly, but i^e was 
not going tD satisfy BacheVs curiosity* She put 
the letter down beside her^ imtii the maid having 



248 HESTEB SmTON. 

no excuse for staying, took her leave . burning 
to know how a sealed note, addressed to her young 
mistress, in a man's writing, happened to be on the 
floor ; perhaps it was fortunate that the writer had 
an old-fashioned liking for sealing-wax. 

Lucy's hands trembled as she held the letter, she 
knew fast enough whose the writing was ; but how 
came the note there? She could not summon 
courage to open it, and then it suddenly occurred 
to her, that he had writt^i to reprove her for 
having a secret fi-om her mother, as if she had 
not been unhappy enough about that, as if she had 
not half cried her eyes out, when she implored her 
mother's pardon on the previous evening after they 
all went away. She opened the note in a pufifet, 
but she had to read it twice over, before she could 
take in the sense of it, and then she burst into 
tears. 

Could it, indeed, be true that Jacob loved her. 
-that she might now love him with her whole heart, 
for the manly tone of the letter made him again 
the Jacob she had known at first, before he began 
to be nervous with her. She took it up and read 
it again . how full of love it was! how diflGerent 
to that other deceitful fellow's latter I 



THE LETTER DELIVERED. 249 

She "Wished her mother were at home, for she 
would tell her at once, there should be no more 
secrets between them; she knew she would be so 
pleased, and she was just thinking whether it would 
he worth while to go out and meet her, when in she 
came radiant with smiles and importance. She had 
just met the vicar, and he had stood and talked 
five whole minutes with her. 

*^ And what an agreeable man he is, my dear, 
. so very genteel.** 

" Yes, mamma, but now I . I . ^there, read that, 
.but to yourself, mind." 

And while her mother read^ Lucy covered her 
face with her hands. 

Mrs. Frank Wrenshaw, as soon as she had read 
the letter, behaved in a most indescribable manner 
between kissing jand hugging her daughter, and 
laughing and crying, and wondering whether she 
should call Mr. Bonham '* Jacob" the next time 
they met, and as to what Miss Jemima Skipper 
would have to say . when a new thought occurred 
to her. 

''Did he leave the note himself?" 
" I don't know ; Rachel said she found it under 
the table." 



250 HESTER EIBTON. 

** My gracioQS ! how tbtj odd ! did he throw it 
in at the window ? Bat I say^ Lucy^ you mnst 
write an answer at once^ my dear. How could it 
have come? I must inquire about this." 

** I can% mamma^" said poor Lucy. *' Oh, if he 
had only said it instead of writing! ** 

^'Oh, that's nonsense," and Mrs. Frank was 
proceeding to argue according to her usual plan^ 
by bringbg forward illustrations of heac different 
friends' conduct under the same circumstances, 
when there came a double knock at the door, 
and in a minute Rachel appeared. She was 
evidendy trying nc^ to laugh, but the effort was 
not successful. 

Mr. Bonham wanted to see Mrs. Wrendiaw; 
he had a message from Miss Kirton; he would 
not detain Mrs. Wrenshaw long. 

** Yes, oh, yes, it's all right, show him in," said 
Mrs. Wrenshaw, in great excitement; and then, 
before Lucy could stop her, she slipped oAt 
through the other door, just as Rachel showed 
in Mr. Bonham. 

Lucy felt strongly inclined to run after her, 
but Jacob was in the room before she had re- 
covered from her surprise. 



THE LETTER DELIVEIIED. 251 

She rose and held out her hand as he came 
towards her but she coukl not look at him ; her 
&ce and throat were suffused with blushes^ she 
looged to cover her eyes wilh her hands. 

^I did not mean to intrude on you. Miss 
Wrenshaw,* he said, hesitatingly. "I . I had 
only to give a message from Miss Kirton to your 
mamma." He just took hc^ offered hand, and 
let it drop instantly. 

Lucy could raise her eyes now. What did 
it all mean ? He was looking at the carpet, not 
at her. Was she in a dream, or was that letter 
a crael hoax, not written by him at all? She 
trembled so that she could scarcely stand; but 
Jacob could not see it, he was still looking at 
the carpet 

'^What is the message?" she said, at last, in 
such a fluttering voice that he started; but siiH 
he did not look up. 

*' Why, Tm sorry to say, a man named Peter 
Stasson . ^you . you know him, I think," and a 
sudden flash of memory told him when and where 
he had seen the man before, and how plainly Lucy 
had shown her indifference <mi that luckless even- 
ing, ^he's very ill; and as it is certainly fervor. 



252 HESTEB EIBTON. 

and your cousin is anxious to devote herself to 
nursing him, she thinks it will he hetter for yon 
and Mrs. Wrenshaw not to go to Kirton's Farm. 
Your uncle and aunt will return early in the day." 

**l8 Hester going to nurse him? Have you 
agreed to it? Oh, Mr, Bonham, will it not he 
a risk?'' She clasped her hands, and looked 
up in his face, forgetting everything but Hester's 
danger. 

He was obliged to meet her eyes now; they 
were full of tears; she seemed to be imploring 
his counsel, and to be willing to yield to it 

He, too, felt in a dream; this was not the 
flippant^ satirical girl he had so shrunk from last 
night ; but she was waiting for his answer, and 
he must speak, although he would much rather 
have stood there, drinking in the soft sweetness 
of her eyes. 

** No ; I do not think there is any risk, I hope 
not . although, of course, nursing such an illness 
involves much fatigue and self-denial. I should 
think, from what I have seen of Miss Eirton this 
morning, that she would not shrink from either." 

A sudden spasm of jealousy crushed poor 
Lucy's heart so tightly in its iron finjgers, that 



THE LETTER DELIVERED. 253^ 

she could scarcely breathe. This^ then^ was the 
key of the mysteiy. Hester's strength of mind 
and nobleness . for poor Lucy thought the two ex- 
pressions synonymous . had robbed her of Jacob's 
love, for he had loved her, and he had written 
that letter to tell her so ; but had she not always 
told herself she was too weak and unworthy to 
fix any man's love? Yesterday evening had 
completed Hester's charm : he had dropped that 
note from his pocket, and now he would never 
know she had seen it: he would think he had 
destroyed it, as he doubtless meant to do. She 
was not angry with him, only she knew she was 
broken-hearted. She remembered how, after she 
had planned their meeting, her secret dread lest 
Jacob should prefer Hester . and now it had come 
to pass; but Hester must have been to blame. 
How greedy of her, with a lover of her own, to 
rob Lucy of all her happiness I and they would 
meet constantly at Peter Stasson's; yet she did not 
believe Hester loved Jacob . could she be a bad de- 
signing girl, after all ? . and here a sudden thought 
struck Lucy. Hester might try to conceal her 
share in the revelation of last night, by throwing 
it all on her cousin, and if Jacob recollected her 



254 HBSTEB KIBTOK. 

angry manner^ lie would believe it too ; she was 
so utterly wretched^ she could scarcely keep back 
her tears; but one thing she had resolved on, she 
would rather die than let him know that he had 
dropped that letter. 

"Ah, you have been to see Peter," she said, 
almost unconsciously. 

Jacob hardly heard her: he was thinking 
intently over all that had passed on the previous 
evening. What could have caused the change in 
Lucy's manner? She had spoken to him almost 
fiercely, and now she was timid, almost sad ; and 
then he remembered his unlucky question . per- 
haps he had made mischief between hex and her 
mother, and she was unhappy in consequence. 
The thought tore through all the fences which 
doubt, distrust, or wounded pride had reared 
round his love, and sprang to his lips almost 
without his will. 

" Miss Wrenshaw, I am afraid . in fact, I am 
sure . ^I . I grieved you last night, by asking that 
foolish indiscreet question. I ought to have asked 
your forgiveness then, but, somehow, I believe, I 
thought you were too much offended to grant it. 
and . and . do you forgive me ? " 



THE LETTER DELIVERED. 255 

"I was very silly to be angry,** said poor 
liucy^ her tears coming now, spite of her struggle 
to keep them back, " but I had never had a secret 
from mamma before, and it so grieved me that 
she should hear it from any one but myself." She 
longed to say, " it was not my secret," but that 
would be seeming to talk too much of herself to 
him now. 

Her words and manner agitated him strangely : 
she spoke as simply as a child, but how could she 
talk on such a subject to him at all, for he imagined 
that she had met Hallam unknown to her mother. 
Still he could not shrink from her confidence, 
she spoke so gently and trustingly; but it was 
hard to be treated like a brother by Lucy . ^it 
was almost more than he could bear. 

There was a pause ; it gave Lucy time to think, 
^hy should she shrink from this, the only oppor- 
tunity she might have of righting herself witli 
Jacob ? She had lost his love ; that she could not, 
would not seek to regain, but why, just for 
Hester's sake, should she lose his good opinion? 
for it struck her suddenly now, that her cousin's 
meeting with Mr. Hallam was not accidental, 
and Mr. Bonham might be thinking all this while 



256 HSTB KIBTON. 

the same thing of her ; fortunately, no lurking 
hope betrayed itself that this might b^ the reason 
of his coldness, or I am afraid Lucy's pride 
would have scorned to take any steps to recall 
his love ; she told herself she only did not want 
to lose his good opinion, so she went on, looking 
at him appealingly, . 

" Mr. Bonham, will you do me a great favour ?" 

** I will do anything in the world for you," he 
said, passionately, for her eyes had driven him 
almost beside himself again. 

" I want you not to mention about . about my 
London friend to any one, please ; he is not my 
friend at all, but," she was going on, but the 
words almost choked hen What right had he 
to such an explanation, after all? She stood 
blushing. 

Jacob started ; the mist began to clear a little, 
but his love gave no time for thought or judg- 
ment. 

He took Lucy's hand. 

" Miss Wrenshaw, did you mean what you said 
just now . ^not your friend ? " 

Lucy trembled more and more : that wonderful, 
indescribable sensation she had first known folly 



THE LETTER DELIVERED. 257 

under the oak-trees, was again taking possession 
of her ; she did not think either, but she knew, that 
Jacob loved her ; his hand trembled till it seemed 
to vibrate through her whole being. She knew 
everything now ; the magic of that grasp re- 
vealed it . his love, his jealousy, all . she did 
not want to speak, or move, or in any way break 
the soft spell of happiness . that happiness, the 
consciousness that the love we covet is our own 
. there are no words to tell the bliss that first 
moment brings. 

But the pressure of the hand that held hers 
roused her. 

** Yes, indeed, it is true,** she said, and she looked 
up at him, to clear away any lingering doubt. 

*' Then, Lucy," said Jacob, . " I must call you 
Lucy . I did not mean to say this to you, because 
I thought you cared for some one else, but I have 
been nearly mad since that evening ; perhaps I am 
mad now," he said, hoarsely, passing his hand over 
his forehead. " Will you say to me, in your own 
dear voice, that you are quite heart free ? " 

Lucy smiled. 

The smile was enough for Jacob, his arm was 
round her in an instant, and, in hurried, breathless 

TOL. L 17 



258 HE81SB JUJiTUN. 

words^ he was teUing his loTe . ^his passionate love 
for her; but poor Lacy could scarcely listai, the 
change from grief to joy had been too sudden^ and 
she hid her face and sobbed on his bosom. 

He let her cry quietly theiB a little while, and 
then he lifted np her feice. 

"Lncgr, are yon ially my ownXaey, oris iim 
aQadream?'' 

She smiled np at him. ^ Shall yon neviorbe 
sorry ?" 

" Sorry, yon little darling ? It is yon, Lucy, who 
ought to think of that ; but I cannot let you think 
of it ; it may be selfish, but I am not going to let 
you think twice about it, yon might change 
your mind;" he pressed her yet more closelj 
to him. 

'^ Poor darling, how its little heart flutti^rs I did 
I frighten you by my suddenness? I ought to 
have been more carefril ; were you very nmch sur- 
prised, Lucy?" 

She laughed and gently tried to disengage li0f>- 
self. She felt more courageous again now, and 
almost disposed to be saucy. 

<^ No, I was not really surpraed, I was -puzzled 
by your manner; after what I had jfoat read, I 



THE LETTER DBMVEEED. . 259 

thought," she said, mischievously, ^^you had 
changed your mind." 

He looked surprised, but he started in utter 
amazement, when she held up the letter to him. 

" Why, that's a letter I wrote some days ago ; 
how ever did you get it, Lucy ? " and he tried to take 
it from her. ^ 

But she held it fast, vowing she would not say 
how she got it, and she would never part with it. 
She even intimated that the letter was much nicer 
ihan he was. till he d^ared she Jiad pii^ed his 
pocket, aad ought to be punished for Buoh a trans- 
gression. 

'^ You are mine now^, dearest," he whispered, as 
he bent down to kbs her; **you will be mine 
altogether before ion^ won't you, my own darling 
Lucy?" 



17.2 



260 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

UNDER THE OAK. 

Weeks had passed by. Peter Stasson was pro- 
nounced convalescent, but it seemed as if he 
would never regain even the amount of health 
he had before his illness : a constant wearing back- 
ache rendered stooping almost an impossibility. 
But for Hester, Ralph Kirton would have filled 
up his place long ago; she was his firm fiiend, 
and would not hear of his dismissal. 

She had grown paler during his illness, but it 
had been a blessing to her in many ways. 

It had diverted her mind from the constant 
thought of Hallam, and had thus prevented the 
fits of abstraction which had so irritated her 
father. She was happy again now; she felt 
grateful [that to please her he had so broken 
through^aiy his prejudices as to invite her uncle 



UNDER THE OAK. 261 

and aunt^ and far more that he had permitted 
her to nm'se Peter. 

The father and daughter had never been so 

happy together before. Ralph Kirton noticed 

her softened manner and approved it^ although 

with his usual misanthropy he guessed she was 

only trying to get the soft side of him on account 

of Peter. He did her an injustice; but then 

Kalph Kirton only studied human nature with 

an eye to his own advantage . all better feelings 

and motives and inner springs remaining unre- 

vealed. He ought to have judged Hester better. 

If she wanted to ask a favour^ she would have 

been far more likely to do it in a proud 

blunt way, without any attempt to prepossess, 

simply because she so hated any double or false 

dealing. 

That meeting with Hallam had been a sore 
trial; but for his express prohibition she must 
have told her father ; she had quite deter- 
mined that if she saw Hallam again . and she 
longed for this greatly . she would say, at the 
risk of displeasing him, that she could not keep 
it secret from her father. 

She had come to this determination as she sate 



262 HESTBB KIBXON. 

bj Peter StasBon's bedside^ and Irstened to bis 
delirious wanderings. Sbe thought it would be 
dreadful to be seized with iUness with a secret- 
burdened mind; she saw that the inner care or 
anxiety was sure then to be revealed. Poor 
Peter, who had never grumbled to bis wife 
when in health, raved constantly of her careless, 
thoughtless ways as he lay helplesa and nncon- 
sdous on his bed. 

Hester felt ihankftd tint the poor woman* had 
not been left alone to nurse him. Her weak 
spirit might have broken at what she would have 
considered her husband's unkindness, and now 
she was fast learning, under Hester's decided, 
clear instructions, how to manage better for h^- 
self. It may be kind to do things for people; 
it is surely far kinder to make them, either by 
example or teaching, self-helpftiL 

Hester was bom to command, and she was 
exercising this hitherto dormant talent ibr the 
first time. Perhaps nothing frets and worries the 
temp^ so much as allowing a talent dther to 
rust or remain undeveloped; the very exercsse 
of it brings happiness, because it brings fell 
employment either to head or hands^ and there 



UNDER THE QA. 26a 

oan be no want of cheerfiilness where tiiiere Is 
plenty to do^ nnlesB in exceptional case& 

Lucj had written her. consin a raptorons de^ 
dcription of her happiness; she had lost all 
:reinembrance of her unhindness, but she had 
not been over to Kirton's Farm. Her mother, 
dpite of the doctor's assurances, had so greatly 
dreaded infection, that she had. forbidden Lncj's 
visits, and had gladly accepted for her an invir 
tation from Mrs*. Wrenshaw to spend a fortnight 
rith them on their return to London. Hester 
sighed when she heard of it ; it was well for the 
harmony between her and her father that she 
did not know how org^itly her aunt, and. after* 
wards her uncle, had begged, that die might 
accompany Lucy in: her vimt.. Kirton had re^ 
fused, and at last so harshly, that, old Mr 
Wrenshaw had said to him just as. ihey were 
leaving to return to Stedding,' . 

** I tell you what, Kirton,. to be plain with you, 
you're foolish, after all; you're older than either 
my wife or I, and in the case of your girl being 
left alone in the world, we are her natural pro- 
tectors ; therefore, I must say, I think the more 
she sees of us the better." 



264 HBSTEB EIRTON. 

Balph Eirton pressed his thin lips together. 

** I have never asked yon to be Hester's guar- 
dian that I'm aware of; it will be time enough for 
her to be seeking a home, when I'm taken away 
from her ; and it isn't always the oldest that goes 
first," he added, with a sneer. 

They were all three standing in the parlour 
while this talk was going on. Hester w^as out in 
firont, helping a boy to put the pony to, and then 
stowing her aunt's bag and wraps into the little 
back seat of the carriage. So she was safe out of 
hearing. Mrs. Wrenshaw pressed her husband's 
arm, for she saw his colour rising ; but he was not 
a man to nourish a grudge. He held the old 
maxim : it is better to reprove than to be angry 
secretly . a maxim sadly perverted by universal 
faultfinders; but which Mr. Wrenshaw seldom 
took advantage of. He and his wife had talked 
much to Biz about Hester and her cheerless, soli- 
tary life; and, as she was their godchild, he felt 
that he was justified in making an unusual eSort 
for her advantage. 

*^ I don't want to seem meddling in any way, 
Kirton ; but she's Janet's child, and I can't think 
so very quiet a life, without any change in it^ 



UNDER THE OAK. 265 

good for a young girl. I'd give her a few more 
advantages, if I were you ; I would, indeed. It's 
but natural you shouldn't, at your time of life, care 
about change; but you see the case is different 
with young folks ; the surest way to keep them 
cheerful and steady is to let them see a little of 
each other." His wife pulled his coat sleeve 
wamingly, for she had been watching Ralph's 
face; but the independent old man went on. *^I 
say again, I don't want to seem meddling or inter- 
fering ; but I wish you'd think it over, and let us 
have Hester every now and then.; a week or two 
at a time." 

'^ I gave you your answer just now," said Kirton, 
doggedly. He controlled the resentment he felt at 
bis brother-in-law's interference, for he thought 
the Wrenshaws must have taken a liking to 
Hester, or they would not wish to have her with 
them, *^ She's happy enough where she is ! if she 
went abroad she might get wants and wishes for 
things I can't afford to give her. Thank you all 
the same," he said, looking at Mrs. Wrenshaw 
instead of her husband ; " but I think she's best 
to keep her own home and station, for the 
present" 



266 HESTER KIETOlSr. 

His strong power over himself had enabled 
him to make the end of this speech much more 
ciTil^ both in words and tone^ than the beginning. 
But in the evenings he wrote to Mr. Goldsmith^ 
asking him to meet him at a station on the 
London side of Stedding> to make' some alteration 
in his will. Bj this means he avoided the ex- 
pense of entertaining his friend at Kirton Fann^ 
and also, what was of still greater moment, the 
chance of Goldsmith's being recognized in Sted- 
ding, or of qnestions being asked at the farm, for 
to be known to employ a London lawyer would, of 
course, suggest the probability of the rumour . 
which it was his daily effort to lire downr. that 
he was ricL 

Hester was disappointed &at she had seea so 
little of her aunt ; but Peter was in such a 
dangerous state during the first week of her 
attendance on him, that she had no leisure to 
brood over this thought; perhaps it filled her 
mind more now that he no longer required her 
services. 

** Well, Muss Heaster," said Biz one afiiemoon. 
*^ A do say, that a do, that Peter ought to do a 
deal to show how thankful he be for yer care 



UNDEB THE OAK. 267 

and yer nnssing; but ere-fu-mussy not he, I 
warrant ye . and as for Jane, she grateftd ! yon 
might as ^ell expect the conger in the parionr 
liiere to show^ gratitoode for being cleaned and 
stuffed, and made to look nice. He'd like to be 
at his nasty ways again in the river mnd, he 'ood, 
just as she'd like to go back to all she's shiftless- 



'^Well, I hope you are mistaken. Biz; she- 
seems thankful enough, at all events." 

.* Thankful I don't misdoubt, muss, but what 
she'll alius be thankful and to spare in she's words . 
words is cheap eno' . not but what I don't think 
people should be civil, but its goin's on and doin's 
I cares for more nor words and courtesyinga. 
Ere-a^mussy, there be some folk, and Jane Stasson 
be one on 'em, as wears all their feelings outsidie 
'em, and don't keep none for their innards. Ye 
can't say a word out, but ye blister she sorne* 
where ; she be hurt in a minute, but as to recol- 
lectin' what yer been a-teachin' on she. Muss 
Heaster, not she." 

Hester smiled, for aldiough Biz had probably 
more depth, or, as she said, more *^ innards " of 
feeling, she was one of the touchiest of that 



268 HESTER EIRTON. 

sensitive dass, domestic servants^ and how sen- 
sitive they are . ^but so well is the feeling hidden 
under the outward mask of calm civilitj they 
compel themselves to wear, that it often baffles 
even a keen observer. 

Spite of his rigid methodical habits, Ralph Kirton 
had a way of keeping tea waiting, which irritated 
Biz extremely. Her moral cowardice and natural 
fear of her master prevented her from showing 
this openly, but she always managed to make 
him in some way suffer for what she called, 
behind his back, such "unreg'lar goin's on." 
There was a heavy wooden stool in the wash- 
house, on which she mounted when she wanted to 
place some of her saucepans on a high shelf, and 
she used, when he had transgressed, to drag this 
stool gratingly over the inner brick floor in such 
an unnecessary manner, that Kirton was some- 
times obliged to call out that he "couldn't and 
wouldn't stand it." 

He generally preferred enduring it, as he per- 
fectly understood its motive, and the suppressed 
grumbling that was sure to follow an outbreak 
from him, was almost as unpleasant 

Even Hester began to wonder this evening at 



UNDEE THE OAK. 269 

her father's delay . at last she went out into 
the yard to look for him, expecting to see him 
come over Picket Acre field ; but he was not 
to be seen, and yet she knew he went in that 
direction. 

Perhaps he had taken a round, and might be 
returning by the road after all. 

She walked to the front of the house. It was 
growing so dusk, that at first she could not dis- 
tinguish anything near the entrance gate; but 
she heard the sound of voices, and as she leaned 
against the palings in firont of the house, shading 
her eyes with her hand, she saw that two figures 
were standing in the deeper gloom of the great 
oak-tree, apparently talking earnestly. A mo- 
ment more, and she discerned that one was her 
father, but who the other man was she could 
not distinguish. Her father held the gate half 
open with one hand, and stood in the passage 
thus made, as if to prevent the other person 
from entering. 

Who was the other ? 

Hester felt curious, and was just advancing 
towards them, when the figure in the shadow 
moved slightly away from Kirton, and stood out 



270 mSSTBB EIBTON. 

clear and difitinct in the fast waning light Who 
was it? Heater's throbbing heart told her too 
aurel/j and ahe instinetiyelj retreated and cropt 
qoickl J out of sight, agitated as ^e had neyer 
felt before, for that her father was very angry 
she was sure &om his vehement geaticnla- 
tions. 

Angry 1 Salph Kirton had suspected and 
doubted ihroi^h his whole life all those belonging 
to him, and alihoBgh he had naturally, by this 
treatment, created dec^t and cunning among 
those he employed, still his hardest suspicions had 
never been fiilly justified; in him suspicion was a 
natural growth, not the graft of circnmstance. 
And now to find that what he had almost laughed 
at himself for belieYing was a bitter truth; ihat 
all his care to seclude his child fiom the sodety 
of her kind, had been thrown away ; that 1^ had 
been blind when his sight should have bees 
keenest, roused every angry and indignant feeling 
to vehement action. 

He had taken the round by the high road, as 
Hester had surmised, and just as he reached his 
own gate, Mr. Frederic Hallam appeared a short 
distance o& 



UKDEB THE OAK. 271 

iKirton had written to Mr. Goldsmith about 
Hallam^ and the lawyer had juach tranquillized 
his mind^ by assuring him of the young man's 
aptitade for business^ and his conviction that hd 
liad thought of business only while at Kirton's 
iFarm^ so that for the .moment the uiner thought 
his Mend had sent him down widi some message, 
or private instructions (although^ as he had himself 
BoJately seen Goldsmith^ this seemed improbable)^ 
and as soon as Hallam came up with him^ he asked 
if ihis were the ciase. 

"Hot in any way; this is a visit of plea- 
Bure," replied Hallam, with perfect coolness. 
**I fomid myself in your neighbourhood, Mr. 
Kirton, and wished to renew my acquaintance 
with you." 

jKalph Eirton looked hard at him. 

"JouVe, perhaps, forgotten what I told you 
sir. I don't love strangers, jior do I consoit 
with 'em." 

" Ah^ but you can't consider me a stranger now, 
my dear sir," said Hallam, with a good-humoured 
smile, that would have made his bright frank face 
irresistible to moat men. " You will admit me as 
an old acquaintance, I feel sure, and give me a cup 



272 HESTER KIBTON. 

of tea. Allow me^" and he laid his hand on the 
gate as if to open it. 

** Not so fast, young man ; you don't know much 
of life, or you'd have learned before this never to 
be sure of anything.** As he spoke he opened the 
gate and stood facing Hallam, so that he could 
not pass, grim and stem enough to withstand any 
intrusion. 

But Frederic Hallam was resolute ; he had paid 
two fruitless visits to the farm lately, and after 
prowling about for some time, had walked boldly 
up to the house, and learned from Biz that no one 
was at home, as Hester was at the other side of 
the farm with her father, and would not be back 
till late. 

Resolute . he was almost desperate . ^his debts 
were innumerable, and this old man, by a stroke 
of his pen, could make him free from the haunt- 
ing fear of arrest, that was daily approaching 
certainty. 

It would not be the first time he had carried the 
day by consummate assurance. 

'' Mr. Kirton," he said, boldly,  I will be frank 
with you. I did not come here only to see you ; I . 
the fact is, I am deeply attached to your daughter." 



UNDER THE OAK, 273 

He looked so honest stilly it was wonderfiil 
Halph Kirton could doubt liim. 

**My daughter!" gasped the old man . the 
xmexpected declaration almost deprived him of 
Tvords.  Hester 1" 

'Tes, and I think when I "" 

*' And you have the assurance to stand there,'* 
Kirton went on vehemently, " and say to me that 
you are deeply attached to a girl to whom you 
never spoke above a word or two . whom you 
saw for about half an hour. Now hark ye here, 
Mr. Jack-a-napes," passion and fear together 
had mastered his self-control, "I know your 
game; you've heard some of these confounded 
lies people talk, that I've got money and that my 
girl' 11 have it too; she won't . she won't, not a 
farthing. I tell ye, she's a beggar; isn't she 
dressed liked a beggar? don't she live like one? 
and you dare to pretend to me, you . ^you smooth- 
spoken rascal . ^you who call yourself a gentle- 
man . ^that you want to take a girl like that for 
your wife, and make a lady of her, because-^ 
because you're in love with her ? " 

'^Now, gently, my good friend," interposed 
Hallam, in his blandest manner ; he laid his hand 

VOL. I. 18 



274 HB8TEB EIBTON. 

on the tBosmej^B sun, who threw it off indignazEtlj. 
''Don't excite yourself; look at the thing^ calmlj 
BOW. Half an hour I why, Miss Eirton's pretty 
enough to make st man; &1I in. love with her 
in five minutes; you wrong me, indeed yon 
dol" 

*'^ But Eirton would not listen, 
. *'No, no; you double-faced humbug 1 I'm nd 
doting ye^ and even if I were what you fancy, 
and had money to leave my girl, not a. &rthing of 
it should she touch unless she married with my 
consent. Be off with, ye*. you don't come agam 
under my roof- . ^you know my mind now; and 
look ye, if ever I catch you skulking here agaii^ 
I'll not leave a whole bone in your Ain." 

He raised his stick as he spoke; 

Hallam was not a coward, but he saw it would 
do his cause more harm than good to persist just 
then; his wonderful power of self-restraint did 
not fail him now.- ik never did where hia own. 
interest was concerned ; but his blood tingled at 
Eirton's coarse, insulting words; 

" You are excited, Mr. Kirton, and say things 
you don't mean ; some day you will find out how 
greatly you have wronged me, and will be sorry 



UNDER THE OAE: 275 

for your present ungenerous conduct Til say 
good-day to you,** 

He turned slowly away, and sauntered down 
the lane, while the fanner sank against the gate- 
post, almost suflTocated by the violence of the 
conflicting passions within. 



18.2 



276 HESTER EIBTON. 



CHAPTER XX. 
KIBTON'S BESOLTE. 

Ralph Eibton stood leaning against the gate. 
Not to think over what he had heard . fixed 
thought was impossible jnst then . the passion he 
had partly let loose was not half exhausted ; he 
felt it throbbing through all his frame^ and dilating 
his heart till it seemed to be choking him. Bodj 
and mind were mingled in a wild chaos of resent- 
ment About what? 

He scarcely knew yet ; he only felt that he had 
been betrayed. He suspected everybody, and he 
did not know how far the mischief might have 
spread. 

He told himself this as the inward tumult 
became less yiolent ; it stiU continued to rage, but 
the outward trembling was not so apparent. 

At length . he hardly knew how long he had 



KIBTON'S BESOLVE. 277 

been there . he rose from his leaning posture, and 
-walked slowly towards the house. 

Did Hester know of this fellow's visit? was she 
expecting him ? had there been meetings . clandes- 
tine correspondence? . ah ! and he suddenly remem- 
bered the evening he had watched her stealthily 
rom the doorway, as she sate reading a letter ; and 
-when he had come in quickly and quietly, to sur- 
prise her, she had crumpled it into her pocket with 
some careless excuse. This rascal had been writing 
to her, filling her young head with flattery and 
trash; now he understood her passionate fits and 
moody silence. And Goldsmith, did he know, or 
was he duped too? No, . the miser argued to 
himself, . Goldsmith could not know of it; most of 
his money was already in his hands, and in the 
event of his own death, the rest would come to his 
care, until Hester was of age. It must be to his 
interest to keep her unmarried as long as possible. 
Yes, yes, that was a good stroke of policy. Lucy, 
was she in the secret of these visits ? 

He started to find himself at the kitchen door, 
still in. such a tangle of doubt ; he had gone round 
the house mechanically. 
He stood still with a sudden efibrt, as one reins 



278 HS8TEB EIBTON. 

in a horse on the hrow of a hilL What should he 
do? Speak to Hester; the idea scarcely crosBed 
his mind; straight, open dealing ^was not Salph 
irton's habit 

He must watch her closely ; question Biz as to 
what she might have heard or observed. There 
was Peter Stasson too; Hester's interest in him 
had been lately greater than erer ; perhaps he was 
in this Hallam's pay-^-who could tell what system 
of deceit had been practised by them all against 
him ? He shook again with mingled terror and 
rage, as he thought this. 

And yet Hest^'s tmihfal h&e, and her rough 
bluntness from diildhood upwards^ seemed to force 
themselves on his memory, and to tell him he was 
wronging her; that in her, at least, was no deceit 
But this excuse for her was only weak foUj. 
Parents always made Bxcuses for their cbildien, 
he knew that Still 'it -was not. likely that young 
spendthrift . ^he felt sure he was one . ^he looked 
like it . would have dared 1 come after Hester if 
he had not had some encouragement Everj 
moment strengthened his doubtis^ and heaped jftesk 
fuel on the fire of his suspicions. 

His hand was sax the door, and still he had not 



\ 



KIETON'S BESOJLYB. 279 

dficided what to do^ and lie must befoi*e lie went in 
to Hester* 

He walked back again to the angle of the house, 
jand stood there^ determined not to move till his 
mind was made up. What had come over hmi ? 
This decision^ so utterly unknown to him^ irritated 
hini almost as much as his suspicions. He had to 
stand there some minutes^ before he could force his 
.mind to obey his will^ before he could steady his 
purp<^e rom the swaying mov^oa^it that seemed 
to p.trvade his whole frame* 

^Sifter a while he slowly turned towards the door 
' again; he bad determined not to speak to Hester 
till he had altered bis will; be would affix a codicil^ 
disinheriting ber entirely, if she married without 
bis consent, or, in the event of bis death, without 
Goldsmitb's; And if sbe married Mr. Hallam, 
cutting ber oflp with SOL a year, to prevent the 
utter misery such a marriage must entail upon 
her. He had long ago settled what to do with bis 
money in the event of Hester's death before his 
own ; it would be parcelled out between a hundred 
different charities and public institutions, so as to 
be of no special benefit to any. Perhaps be thought 
thus to save his memory even the peproacb of 



280 HESTER KIKIOX. 

being considered rich. But i .^ vuld watch the 
girl closely ; ah I and Biz too ; wi 1 if that old fool 
had been artful enough to deceiv . ]iim, she should 
suffer for it ; she should turn out a un^'?. Hester 
had grown woman enough for them >. manage 
very well without her, if they took Faua c'^-asson, 
who'd want no wage at all, but be glad * come 
for the sake of her victuals. 

He opened the door and went into thft i'tcrn, 
well inclined to pick a quarrel with Biz,  .!. - '; 
the women exclaimed so loudly at his app. . :c 
that he was silenced for the moment 

"Father, father!" cried Hester, "what '^ 
you? you're as white as death." 

"White! do 'ee call he?" chimed in Biz; "it's 
white sure enough, but its full o' green and yaller 
streaks, and look at his throat, it's a'most purple. 
Ere-a-mussy, master, sit 'ee down, and loose yer 
handkercher, and I'll run and get ye a burnt 
feather." 

Hester had untied his cravat while the old 
woman spoke; but, spite of his ghastly complexion, 
the veins that stood out on his forehead and 
throat like knotted cords, and the cold faintness 
he felt, Kirton would not own that he was. ilL 



KIRTON'S BESOLVE. 281 

They were not to bother over him ; he had had 
a long trudge by the high road^ he said; flat- 
walking always tired him more than the fields. 
He should be all right again when he'd had a cup 
of tea. 

Hester looked at Biz, but the old woman said 
nothing; if the master liked to be ill, why he 
must take his own way; she wur not a-goin' to 
thrust her head into a tiger's mouth, to make sure 
his teeth were sound, not she. 

*^ Tea's all set now. Muss Heaster, and has been 
this hour." And then she made her escape into 
the washhouse as if she dreaded a storm. 

But Hester felt alarmed. 

'^ Father, it's no use saying you're not ill, I'm 
sure you are ; let me send for Mr. Bonham." 

" Stuff, childl I tell you I'm a bit tired, that's all. 
Send for the doctor, indeed! and who's to pay 
him when he comes ? " He tried to smile . it was 
a ghastly grimace. 

*' Father, if you saw your face you'd say, best 
pay a little money than run the risk of a fit, and 
that's what may be over you." She spoke in her 
hard, stem way ; it seemed to her wicked to throw 
away life for the sake of saving money, but she 



282 HESTEli EEKTOK. 

also felt just then^ Bpite of her cold mannerj how 
much she really loyed her fiither. 

He made her no answer^ but looked at her 



"Give me some tea," he said at last. He 
drank it down thirstily, but she noticed how the 
cup shook in his hand. He seemed annoyed by 
her scrutiny* 

" You fill cups so full," he grumbled. '* Such 
waste, they're sure to spill when they're oveiv 
filled ; there, that'll do, child: why don't ye drink 
yer own tea instead of garping at me like a frighted 
firog?" 

She tried to swallaw^ but the tea -seemed to 
choke her. 

" Father, I can't; Fm anxious about youj" she 
said more tenderly than she had perhaps ever 
spoken. ** Isn't there somethlug you torild take 
better than tea?" 

" All I want, child, 's rest and quietu.jss/' \. 
said, gruffly. The implorii^ expression of  " 
eyes had disarmed his anger. ** I'll be all rigu 
to-morrow when I've had a sleep." 

No more was said til the meal was over. Then 
Kirton looked at his watch, and said they were 



KIRTON!s iEESOLTE. 283 

so late, they'd not want supper, Hester could 
tell Biz, they'd best all get to bed betimes. 

He went into his den as soon as he felt the 
physical power to do so, and fetched out a huge 
account-book . his usual substitute for the solace 
of a pipe, an extravagance he never indulged 
in. Hester sate on the opposite side of the fire 
on a low stool, her lap full of stockings, for, besides 
her own and her father'fi^ she had, since Peter's 
illness, undertaken to help Mrs. Stasson in her 
weekly mending ; it was no easy matter to dam 
the enormous holes, sometimes iavolving the loss 
of the entire beet by the light of a single tallow 
candle, especially as io->night, her father's sight 
seeming dimmer than usual, he puUed the candle 
so near him. 

As she looked up every now and then, as if to 
take in a &esh supply of light, she contiDually met 
his eyes, not fixed openly on her, but 'in sly covert 
glances; he seemed trying to make out her 
thoughts, or suspicious of what she might be doing. 

Just as she lit her candle^ and was going up 
to bed, with the usual nodded good-night to her 
father, he said abruptly, with the same stolen 
glance at her, . 



?84 HESTER KIRTON. 

" How long, maybe^ is it since that young 
spark came down here on Goldsmith's business ? " 

*'Near upon two months or more," she said, 
nf ter a moment's pause ; then she coloured deeply, 
she could not help it 

*^ Do you call to mind what his name was ? " he 
said, looking at her more decidedly now. 

"Yes: Mr. Hallam, father." She knew they 
had met, and she felt desperate. ** Why are you 
asking me these questions, father? you have some 
reason for it." 

Directly the words were spoken, she would 
have recalled them if she could . ^they seemed 
to have escaped without her knowledge. 

To her great surprise, her father did not heed 
them ; he dropped his eyes and said, care- 
lessly,. 

"There, go to bed, child; I'm tired to-night, 
I tell 'ee. Good-night" 

The relief to Hester was so unexpected that she 
stood still, wonder-struck. Then she bent down 
over him, and kissed his forehead . a rare caress 
for her. 

" I hope youll be better to-morrow, father," she 
said, and left the kitchen. 



285 



CHAPTER XXI. 

A SUMMONS. 

Hester passed a sleepless night. 

What could he the meaning of her father's 
manner ? She must have been wrong in imagin- 
ing that he was angry with Mr, Hallam ; if so, he 
would not have spoken of him so quietly. Had 
Mr. Hallam been making friends with her father, 
been asking leave to come and see her, as Jacot 
Bonham did Lucy? had he consented? . she 
could not believe in such happiness. But would 
it be happiness? would not it be constant heart- 
bumiDg and mortification to see him, with his 
refined notions, annoyed by all the meannesses 
which had so fretted her during her aunt's visit ? 
She was sure Mr. Hallam was used to much 
finer ways than her uncle's and aunt's even. No, 
it would never do for him to visit at Kirton's^ 



286 HESTEB iSmTON. 

Farm; and yet how she longed to see him once 
more, to be quite sure he had not forgotten her; 
he had asked her to be his friend; she would 
never forget him at any rate. But then her 
father's gestures and subsequent agitation showed 
that he had been angry. What would come of 
it ? She fell into a short, disturbed sleep eveiy 
now and then, but always to start awake again, 
with the feeling that something dreadful was 
going to happen to her, for that an explanation 
with her father of some kind was impending, she 
fjslt sure. 

Morning came at last, rosyH^itreaked. and 
cheering. Early riser as she was,^ die had some- 
how overslept herself this moming^^ She had not 
l^pard her father's awakening tap at her door, 
and her room was so fiill of sunshine when 
she opened her eyes that she sprang out of bed 
in alarm . it must be past six o'cloek. 

She looked out of the window to see if bar 
father was about ; there was no one croising the 
farmyard; all lay still in the sweet, unbroken 
calm and clear light of early morning. As 
Hester looked at it, it seemed impossible lliat 
care or worry could thrtost 1iiemselye& into such 



A SUMMONS. 287 

a scene of peace. During the tiightf a large 
web had been spun across her lattice; she could 
not open it without destroying the frail, beautifiil 
manufacture, and although she was not troubled 
with her cousin Lucy's vivid imagination or 
admiration for such things, she felt unwilling 
to break it: it looked like silver lace as. the 
sunlight glittered on the dew-drops frosted over 
its surface. 

Voices below the window roused her to ftiE 
consciousness, and broke tlie peaceM spell that 
had held her there. She dressed herself hastily^ 
and, as she did so, came the remembrance that 
something disagreeable was before her. Would 
her father speak that morning about Mr. Hallam, 
or would he let it go on ? She thought the latter ; 
she knew he disliked to speak openly,.and although 
she wished it over, she too closely resembled him,, 
not to feel glad that she had time to consider: 
something or other might happen to prevent any 
explanation at all ; she should rejoice if it were 
90, and then came the remembrance of his pale 
face ; she wondered how he felt this morning. 

She found Biz in the kitchen in. a very cross- 
mood, but then Biz. shared the habit so com- 



288 HESTEB KOLTOS. 

mon to her sex of being always cross before 
breakfast 

''Vm late/ said Hester. ''Has father been 
in from his rounds yet?" She felt anxious^ if 
he were angry with her, that he should have no 
further cause of displeasure by being kept waiting 
for break&st 

'' I dwon't knaow,'' said Biz* '' It's hard enough 
to have everything to see to an' all, without being 
expected to know everything as welL" 

Hester usually set the breakfast things, which 
this morning were already placed. She did not 
attempt to conciliate the old woman, it was not 
her way; she stood still thinking a moment 

Biz looked at her angrily* 

" Well, Muss Heaster, I should think the muster 
had best know as you's down and ready, or, 
maybe, he'll be a-writing his fingers off, a-waiting 
and a-waiting in that there den, a nasty old hole 
as it be." 

**In where?" said Hester. The idea of her 
father being in-doors at that time in the morning 
was startling enough to rouse her from even the 
dreamy mood that possessed her. 

"Why, in his fusty old writin'-place ; where 



A SUMMONS. 289 

else would he be likely to be in-doors, Muss 
Heaster ? " the old woman sneered, as openly as 
she dared. " Why, when I got down this morning 
there wam't a bolt nor a bar undone, 'cept the 
parlour-door, and I looked in there, and the little 
closet door's shut fast.** 

" It always is shut Perhaps father went out 
through the hall, or by the front door, he'd never 
be in writing the first of the morning, Biz ; how 
can you say such a thing ? " 

, " Well, then, please yerself, muss ; go and try 
the other doors. Not but what I don't see as how 
he mayn't be a-writin', or countin'. I make no 
doubt he'd had unked news last night, by the 
look o' he. Not a soul's touched thay bolts." 

"Perhaps he's ill," said Hester, her senses 
airly roused. It seemed strange to her that this 
was the first time she had thought of his illness 
as likely to keep him in-doors. 

She ran up to his bedroom; the bed was 
untouched, had not been slept in, but then Kirton 
was a man of peculiar habits, and if he rose by 
any chance a few minutes earlier than usual, he 
would give the spare time thus gained to making 
his own bed, so that Biz might have leisure for 

VOL. L 19 



290 HESTER KIRTON. 

something more profitable in the dairy or else- 
where. Hester gave a rapid glance round the 
room . ^there was nothing to show it had been 
occupied during the night Without feeling 
really frightened^ a strange chill and nervous 
trembling crept over her; she felt her teeth 
chattering as she went down-stairs again^ but by 
a strong effort she checked this^ and went into 
the kitchen. 

" Ere-a-mussy, Muss Heaster, 'ee looks as 
white, as white " 

But Hester did not listen. She quickly went 
into the hall> and thence to the front door to 
assure herself that the fastenings had not 
been removed, and then she stood still a few 
moments, her clear, practical mind now fully 
roused to the fact that something unusual had 
occurred. 

The first idea that presented itself seemed 
the most natural, and she at once acted on its 
suggestions. 

Her father had said more than once last night 
that he was over-tired, he had gone into his study, 
and had fallen asleep there. Without stopping to 
argue with herself the possibility of this or of 



A SUMMONS. 291 

his having slept so long, she went through the 
parlour to the little door, and tried the handle. 

It was, as she expected, locked on the inside. 

She knocked boldly and firmly at first, for he 
might be sleeping soundly. 

There was no answer. She went on knocking, 
but her hand became tremulous in spite of herself. 

"Father, father," she called, putting her lips 
close to the door crack, *' don't you hear me ? it's I, 
Hester." 

There was no answer, and she threw herself 
with all her strength against the door, and shook 
it by the handle. 

Still there was no movement or answer; the 
dead weight of silence was fast numbing her 
faculties. 

" Ere-a-mussy, what's the matter? isn't the 
muster inside?" said Biz, who, becoming inquisitive, 
had followed her. 

The voice roused Hester, and again she called 
in an agonized voice, and again tried to force open 
the door, but in vain. 

What had happened ? 

She stood still to think what was to be done. 
This was the only entrance ; there had once been 

19.2 



292 HESTEB KIKTON. 

a sliding panel from the kitchen, but her father had 
had that securely nailed up and whitewashed oyer; it 
would be hard to find now ; the only window was a 
narrow slit high from the ground, not wide enough 
for even a child to get through, and grated besides. 

There was but one way ; she must transgress all 
her father's rules, and fetch a man to break open 
the door; he had always enjoined the strictest 
silence with regard to this den, and as none of the 
farm servants ever went into the parlour, they were 
ignorant of its existence, for as the study was 
built in the thickness of the wall, the door in the 
parlour might have been supposed only to com- 
municate with the kitchen, doubtless its original 
intention. 

Hester was soon across the farmyard; but 
agitated as she was, she was still coUected, and 
outwardly calm. The first two men she saw, were 
passed by as unfit for her purpose. But coming 
out of the rick-yard, she met Alick, the tall broad- 
shouldered Irishman. 

She bade him follow her at once, withcmt giving 
any reason for her words. 

Alick pulled his hair and stared. He was not 
aware of having committed any particular mis- 



A SUMMON& 293 

demeanor lately, but going into the farmhouse 
was inseparable in his mind from words and wages ; 
'^ words ^ being the term he applied to the severe 
lectures his master was accustomed to bestow on 
him^ and this was not Saturday he knew well 
enough. 

He followed Hester's quick footsteps lumber- 
ingly^ scratching his head as he went, and when 
be found himself in the parlour, looking round, 
with an awe of the darkness (for the shutters were 
still unopened) that made him uncertain where to 
step. 

Hester turned round now. " Stay, you cannot 
see," and she took down one of the parlour shutters. 
" You see that door, Alick. I want you to burst 
it open the best way you can, and then go into 
the kitchen, and wait for me. Do you want 
anything to break it open with?" 

"By the powers, no, miss; now by your lave, 
if yell stand a one side," and almost without a 
pause, he ran back a few steps, and then dashing 
forward, sent the wdght of his powerful shoulder 
against the door. 

It groaned and creaked, but it did not yield. 

The Irishman rubbed his shoulder and uttered an 




HESTER KIKTON. 

ition of surprise, and then he rushed at it 
with greater vehemence. This time with 
; there was a louder crash, and the lock of 
the door gave way. 

Hester's hand was on Alick's arm in a moment 

*' Go into the kitchen, Alick ; I will come to 
you." 

Biz, who had been taking down the other 
shutters, now stood trembling for the result of 
this invasion of the master's den. 

Hester shut the parlour door, and looked into 
the study. Her father's desk was fixed on the left, 
and she saw him sitting before it on his high-backed 
chair, quiet and unmoved by all the noise. 

She went up to him. 

His pen was in his hand . had he fallen asleep 
writing? 

One narrow streak of light from the high 
window fell on his side-face and down his arm, 
like a golden riband. 

Was it the light, or was his face a most un- 
natural colour? She leant nearer, but gently; 
she feared to wake him suddenly. His face was 
ghastly. 

'^ Father 1" 



A SUMMONS. 295 

She touched his hand . it was chill as ice. 
Suddenly her own words flashed back upon 
her ; it wais the fit she had so dreaded. 

In an instant she had darted to the kitchen, and 
bid Alick fetch Mr. Bonham as quickly as possible, 
and then come back. 

She hurried again to the study, pushing by Biz, 
who stood helpless and awestruck at the door. 

But as she tried to take off the loosely tied 
neck-cloth, for he had not fastened it up again 
since last night, her hand touched his chin ; the 
marble coldness appalled her. Was it . could it 
be . Death that chained her father there ? 

The light was still partial, but she threw herself 
back on the desk to see his full face plainer . and 
then she sank on the floor . ^not fainting, but with 
a groan that brought Biz, at length roused from 
her mute terror, to her assistance. 



END OF VOL. I. 
HE8TEE KIKTON. 



GHABTEJR L- 

MARRIED. 



^* HELBNA,.do yon remember Hallam^ your de^atedi 
admirer last season ?" 

^'I am not aware that I encourage ^devoted 
admirers/" said Lady Helena Forteseue^ witH 
the deliberate mannira* some women have when 
they tell a falsehood, aaidf are determined not 
to be contradicted, "bat I rami^nber your^ friend 
Mr. Hallam perfectly.'' 

Captain. Fortescue looked hard at biff sistisr^inr 
law, but he looked with a certain admiration also^ 
for her coolness surpassed belief; she met his 
eyes unflinchingly . her virtue was unimpeachable 

20.2 



4 HESTER KIETON. 

. and if she liked admiration she was not obliged 
to confess it to her brother-in-law. 

''Well, we won't argue the point," and he 
laughed; "he went abroad suddenly last winter 
. I never inquired much about it . his man of 
business was very mum on the subject I heard 
he was well, so I thought it best not to be 
inquisitive, thinking he would turn up again in a 
month or so, or I should hear from him." 

" And have you not done so ? " 

Lady Helena thought her brother-in-law was 
getting prosy. Spite of the contemptuous way in 
which she had spoken of Hallam, she had liked 
his attentions, and was interested about him. 

*^Not a syllable, though I had suspicions of 
what has happened; but yesterday I met Mrs. 
Hallam, his mother, and I asked her where Fred 
was, and what he had been about. had he 
married? "The question seemed thoroughly to 
upset her; however, after a bit she recovered 
herself, and told me she was just going home: 
would I come with her? She lives in Wilton 
Place; you know ; I've been there once or twice 
before." 

His sister-in-law looked oppressed with the 



MAEBIED. 5 

length of his story, and took little pains to conceal 
her impatience ; however, he went on. 

*^ She told me all about it ; that sly Fred has 
married a fortune." 

*^ Indeed ! '* She shrugged her beautiful shoul- 
ders. '* I hope there is not an old woman tacked 
to it.'* 

"A very pretty young one; don't look incre- 
dulous, Helena, there is a but, although not about 
age. His mother's distress is that she knows the 
bride is perfectly uncouth and unformed ; in fact, 
she has made her out in her own mind a sort of 
country bumpkin ; but she has not seen her, and 
no doubt exaggerates the evil, for we know how 
eaigeante the mothers of only sons are apt to be. 
However, one thing is certain, the girl is not 
well-bom." 

" But where did he meet with her ? while he 
was on the continent?" 

A little interest showed through her indifference 
now. 

"No, it seems he heard of her last summer, 
went down with an introduction to the father, who 
by-the-by was an old miser, and when he died 
suddenly soon after . aiid here comes the old story 



6 HES*BE KIETON. 

. Hallam displayed a wonderfiil amount of interest 
in the poor little creature, who, of course, fell in 
love with him, and they were married." 

" I don't think she is to be pitied,'* said Lady 
Helena, "if she be what her mother-in-law says, 
and those rich girls are always ugly or unre- 
fined; no doubt, it is a great catch for her to 
have married your friend." 

"I don't know," said Eortescue, slowly, ''I 
never can find it in my heart to congratulate a 
woman on being married for her money, as I 
shrewdly suspect this one was." 

"Ah, and how about the money, is it his or 
hers?" 

" Oh I the guardian saw to that Goldsmith. 
you know Goldsmith . he does things for Gerald ; 
he has not chosen to give Fred the whip-^hand, 
although I believe they have something handsome 
to start with ; the rest is tied up till she's of age." 

" Her guardian ! why, Percy, it seems a pity you 
did not find out this treasure, instead of letting 
your jfriend get the start of you." 

"Thank you, no. J don't think even gilded 
awkwardness and ignorancewouldreconcile me to 
either." 



MARRTKO. 7 

"At any rate, your friend is fortunate in some 
ways; if she's young, no doubt .he does very 
much as he likes, but how long have they been 
married, and where are they now ? ^ 

''Mrs. Hallam was not explicit about dates; 
my own notion is that they were married early 
ia the winter, and that he took her abroad at once ; 
at any rate, they have only just returned, and 
are in lodgings in Gloucester Place. But Mrs. 
Hallam either would not, or could not, tell me the 
number. I think she repented having told me so 
much." 

''Perhaps he means to polish his diamond a 
little before he introduces her," aid Lady Helena, 
pityingly. " What afate he has doomed himself io." 

Captain Fortescue did not answer ; he was 
unusually quiet during the rest of flie evening, 
and as his brother went to sleep after dinner, his 
sister-in-law found him a dull companion, and was 
glad when he took his leave earlier than usual. 

As he went down the steps, his mental exclama- 
tion betrayed where his thoughts had been wan- 
dering during the evening. 

" 111 dine with them to-morrow." 

When he reached his lodgings, he found a note 



8 HESTER KIRTON. 

on his table firom Mrs. Hallam^ begging him not to 
mention to any one anything she might have said^ 
in her agitation^ abont her son's marriage^ at least 
anything nnfavonrable. She had felt so over- 
powered at having to communicate the intelligence 
to her beloved Frederick's dearest firiend^ that 
she feared she had said far more than she was 
justified in saying. She had only meant to express 
that her new daughter was rather unused to 
society. She heard she was very charming, quite 
what her son's wife ought to be, &c &c The letter . 
ended by hinting that the young couple were so 
much devoted to each other, at present, that they 
did not intend to visit 

Captain Fortescue's lip curled. 

**Tou are a day too late, Mrs. Hallam, and 
unless Fred keeps his wife under lock and key, I 
prefer to judge her with my own eyes." 



CHAPTER IL 

MBS. FBEDEBIC HALLAM. 

Captain Foktescue did dine next day in Glou- 
cester Place. He went to call on Mr. Goldsmith 
to ascertain the truth of Mrs. Hallam's story, and 
met his friend coming out of the lawyer's oflSce. 

He thought Hallam tried to avoid him at 
first, but Fortescue was not going to be put 
off easily. His warm greeting and hearty con- 
gratulations were irresistible, and they were soon 
walking westward, arm-in-arm, on the old firiendly 
terms. 

Hallam scarcely mentioned his wife, and seemed 
rather anxious to avoid Fortescue's congratula- 
tions; after he had asked him to come to them 
at seven, and be introduced to Mrs. Hallam, he 
changed the subject so abruptly, that Fortescue 
could not return to it 



10 HESTEE KIRTON. 

His curiosity was now ftilly roused, but he was 
con'founded, when, instead of the awkward country 
bumpkin he expected to see, he was presented to a 
slender, gracefully formed girl, whose deep mourn- 
ing dress heightened the beauty of her very 
transparent complexion. 

*^ By Jove, she's lovely 1 "he mentally exclaimed, 
as a second glance told him she had pretty eyes 
and delicate, well-cut features. 

But what most surprised Fortescue, a fastidious 
judge of manner, was her calm self-possession and 
the repose of her attitude. There was no rest- 
lessness, no fidgeting, none of the awkward 
shyness of a country girl. 

She. was silent certainly, but a yoimg bride 
is not expected to be talkative; she answered 
easily and naturally, however, when he spoke to her. 

By-and-by, during the diimer, he noticed that, 
when spoken to by her husband, Mrs. Hallam's 
cheeks flushed^ and an evident desire to please 
. gave a nervous hesitation to her manner, and 
whenever this happened, Fortescue also remarked 
ihat his friend's cheerfulness seemed to flag, and 
that he became silent and pre-occupied. He knew 
or guessed how shy Hester was, and he was 



KB& EBEDEBIC HALLAM, II 

dreading that ahe would break down in utter 
confusion ; but be bad yet to learn the strength 
of will with which bis wife controlled all outward 
manifestation of terror, for she felt really afiraid 
of Captain Fortescue, knowing him to be ; the 
''grandest^, as well as the most intimate of tier 
husband's friends. I 

"Do jou intend 1 live in town, 3|r| 
Hallam ? " 

*'I hardly know yet,** said Hester, and she 
looked across the table at her husband. 

Hallam turned his head quickly to speak to the 
servant standing behind his chair, and Fortescue 
felt that the movement was intentional. He could 
not imagine what was the matter with his friend; 
it was impossible he could be ashamed of such 
a wife as that ; he had never seen him in so un- 
social a humour. 

*^ Do you like London or the country? " he said 
to Mrs. Hallam. 

"I don't know yet," she said, with a smile. 
**I have always lived in the country; London 
seems very black and dirty." 

*^Tou are in a dull part of town here ; if you 
were nearer the parks you would like it better. 



12 HESTER EIBTON. 

but you will find plenty to amuse you soon . there 
will be all sorts of things going on in another week 
or so : the opera, balls, exhibitions, and so forth. 
I suppose, as you have lived in the country, the 
opera will be new to you ? " 

Hallam was listening now, and was evidently 
determined his wife should not answer. 

"Ah, yes, Hester, we'll go to the opera some 
night soon. I hate lionizing with all my heart, it's 
an awful bore ; but I don't mind the opera for once 
in a way." 

Mrs. Hallam smiled up at her husband . she 
looked prettier than ever. Fortescue thought if 
he had so charming a wife he should never be 
able to refuse her anything she wished for ; when 
she looked at her husband, there was such an 
infinite trust and reverence mingled with the 
timid affection he had noticed at first. 

Hallam was watching him, and was evidently 
gratified at the attention paid to his wife. 

**I tell you what, Fortescue, you'd better go 
with us to the opera. We'll have a box, you 
know, and then you'll tell Hester all about it : I'm 
a horrid fellow for taking people about; it bores 
me to death." 



MRS. FREDERIC HALLAM. 13 

Bat it evidently was not the prospect of going 
to the opera that had so pleased Mrs. Hallam. 
She did not look vexed or disappointed now^ but 
a shade came over the brightness of her face^ and 
the timid^ uncertain look returned. 

Much as he liked to look at her^ and interested 
as he felt, Fortescue was not sorry when she left 
the dinner-table. Hallam made no allusion to 
his wife or to his marriage, so bis friend did not 
like to mention either. Fred's thoughts seemed 
to be full of betting and making up a party for 
Tatton races. 

** I thought new-married men gave up that sort 
of thing," said his friend, after listening to him for 
some time. 

"What! races? Not a bit of it Why, Hester's 
as fond of horses as I am, and takes quite an 
interest in them." 

*' I don't mean races, but betting. I've given 
it up, although I'm not married, and if you'd take 
my advice, Fred, you'd do the same." 

** Ah, it's all very well, my dear fellow : you've 
had your fling, and I'd have made you such a 
promise cheerfully six months ago ; but, you see, 
times are altered now. It would be hard, indeed, 



14 HESTEB KIRTOK. 

to grudige me a little sport tibe first time Tve had 
the chance of going into it properly. By Geoige ! " 
he said^ rubbing his hands^ and looking more like 
himself than he had done nnce the beginning of 
dinner, "it will be glorionsi I say, old fiallow, 
yonll go down tbo, won't you? " 

^^No," said Fortescue, laughing; "I tell you: 
Fve cnt the whole Concern, and I can't put myself 
in the way of temptation even for you, old fellow,** 

'.^ Well, but if you go with mc you may keep 
me out of mischief.** 

" You know better than that, Fred : yon always 
take your own way, and pretend to take advice 
all the while. Besides, Tm not going to stand by 
with empty pockets and see you venturing your 
tiiousands, Mr. Millionnaire."' 

Hallam muttered something^ which sounded, like 
** I wish they were thousands ; ^ but they were 
just going up-stairs, and his friend did not catch 
his distinct meaning; 

He thought, for a newly-married man, Ehllam 
was singularly inattentive to his wife. At the 
tea-table he had no little cares for her, and she 
seemed accustomed to dispense witii them, and 
was rising to take her husband's tea-cup across 



MKS. FREDERIC HALLAM. 15 

the room^ when Fortesoue offered his assistance. 
She thanked hun in evident surprise. 

^^ Ah> you'll spoil Hester,'* said Hallam, lazily, 
as he met Fortescue half-way and took the cup 
from him. '^ You see she doesn't care about that 
sort of thing." 

** No," she answered! ** Tve always been used^ 
to wait on myself. I don't think I should like the 
trouble of many servants." 

**Are servants a trouble?" said Fortescue, 
amused at her simplicity; ''I hear people say sa 
sometimes, but to me they seem to take all trouble 
off one's hands " 

*'Tou see," said Hallam, interposing; he was 
lying- now full length on a sofa^ ''we've been 
living in hotels ever since we've been married, 
so we know nothing of housekeeping yet" He 
looked at his wife as he spoke, but she was 
pouring out another cup of tea and did not meet 
his eye. 

" Well, perhaps I know nothing about it," she 
said, as if fearing she had spoken presumptuously. 
"I've never been used td more than one servant, 
so I don't know much about the trouble they 
giv^" 



i 



16 HESTER KIKTON. 

" Hester, are you ever going to give me another 
cup of tea?" said her husband, in a peremptory 
tone that seemed to startle her. She went for 
his cup at once, and Fortescue was too wise to 
relieve her of the trouble this time. She looked 
pale and nervous when she returned to her seat, 
and there was a perceptible restraint during the 
rest of the evening. 

When Fortescue rose to go, Hallam said he 
should walk part of the way with him and have 
a cigar. 

They walked on some time in silence, and then ^ 
Fortescue said, . 

**How about the oflSce, Fred; do you go there 
again now ? " 

*^ Not I ; do you think I [should ever have tak^ai 
a wife, unless I could shake off desk slavery ? no, 
I'm a free man for the rest of my life, barring old 
Goldsmith's interference." 

" Really ; but I hoped you had done with him." 

**No such luck: the fact is, Percy," he said, with, 
more of his old^'ifrank manner than he had shown 
previously, "the old fellow has not used me 
fairly, I think. He set me all square to start. 



MRS. FREDERIC HALLAM. 17 

that was to his own advantage, as you know ; but 
he's so managed matters, or he pretends that old 
Kirton so managed them, that not one penny can 
either my wife or I touch till she comes of age, 
without the old parchment's consent." 

** And how do you live at present? " 

**0h, he makes us a tolerable allowance; it 
would suit a moderate man like you, without 
encumbrance; but the truth is, I shall soon be 
as hard up as ever. At present my wife, of course, 
doesn't want money, which is lucky." 

Fortescue did not answer; he was wondering 
whether he could ever have consented to give up 
his independence and live on his wife's fortune. 

**I say, Percy, don't be so strait-laced, but 
change your mind and go down with me. I've 
half promised to buy Hester a saddle-horse with 
some of my winnings ; won't that be generous ? " 

Fortescue laughed. 

" Ah, you don't see the generosity of buying 
her presents with her own money : but you forget, 
. ^what I gain by betting is my own, my own 
legitimate lawful earnings; besides, I hold with 
the old saying, what's hers is mine and what's 
mine's my own." 

VOL. IL 21 



18 HESTB KIBTON. 

He threw away the end o his cigar and twirled 
bis long silkj moustaches. 

*. And when Mrs. Hallam comes of age, how is 
the property setikd then ? " 

^*0h . that was all done in the father's will: 
the money is absolutely tied on Hester and her 
children, not giving me even a life interest without 
her consent and Goldsmith's; but of course I 
shall see that I have the control of the prc^rty 
then ; if people underi^and each other, you 
know, these things are easily settled between man 
and wife. I don't doubt Goldsmith, but I like 
to be my own master, and if he continues to 
manage affairs afterwards, this might be difficult, 
and he might make mischief between me and 
Hester," 

*' I see, but will Mrs. Hallam consent to such 
a plan ? Do you know in your place I should be 
glad that my wife's money was out of my 
power." 

*^ Ah ; but then, Fortescue, you are romantic ; 
you always were. I am a calm, common-place 
. selfish if you like . man of business, and when 
I want money it seems to me pleasanter to find 
it in my own pocket than in any one else's; 



MES. FREDEEIG HAJLLAM. 19 

besides, what can a woman know about business ? 
If you were in my place you'd think just as I 
do. It's one of the most wonderful things in 
human nature to me the way in which people's 
judgment always ia biassed by the diflPerent posi- 
tion from which they look at things." This 
seemed to Frederic Hallam an unanswerable 
assertion. 

*' Hardly always ; there must be such things as 
abstract right and abstract wrong." 

" I told you just now you were romantic, you 
jump so to extremes. There can be nothing 
wrong in any case that I was thinking of. If you 
study human nature a little you will fmd that 
self-interest is the universal law on which people 
found their opinions. I'm not talking of boys, 
but even in their case the same argument holds 
good: in betting for instance; they think it ad- 
vantageous . a good speculation . or they wouldn't 
do it." 

"I don't think so; they bet for the fun and 
excitement of the thing, and because others 
do it." 

"Not a bit of it. Besides, my dear fellow, 
I was just going to prove to you that it's nothing 

21.2 



20 HESTER KIRTON. 

but self-interest . in other words, what we each 
think right . ^ihat makes you and me differ on this 
point : you, having outgrown the delusive visions 
of boyhood, see plainly that betting is too great 
a risk; I, on the contrary, being able to stand 
against the risk if I have ordinary luck, see in 
it a sure means of profit It is wrong in your 
eyes because ruinous, and right in mine from the 
opposite reason ; and, if you watch people closely, 
you will see this carried out in other things 
besides betting. 'What's one man's meat is 
another man's poison,' is true enough in many 
ways." 

'* Well," said his friend ; he knew Fred too well 
to argue with him in one of these moods, "I 
shall bid you good-night, or Mrs. Hallam will 
forbid my visits if I keep her sitting up for 
you." 

*'Not she . she's in excellent training. My 
dear Fortescue, it must be a man's own fault 
if his wife sits up for him. Always begin your 
married life as you mean it to go on, and you'll 
find no trouble. * A fellow must be a fool who 
can't manage his own wife." 

He laughed with the happy self-consciousness 



l^mS. FREDERIC HALLAM. 21 

of success in his own case, and, after shaking 
hands with his friend, walked home, meditating 
on his betting arrangements. 

*^I wish I could get Fortescue to go down 
with me," he said. *^I don't half like the set 
I've got; but there's one comfort, I was never 
yet done in my life . they must be knowing hands 
to trick me, I think." 

And then his thoughts went back to Goldsmith* 
He was not satisfied with that cautious gentle- 
man's treatment of him . he must see him to^ 
morrow. 

Before the marriage, when money matters had 
been settled between them, the income that 
Goldsmith had named as sufficient for himself 
and his wife, till the latter came of age, had 
seemed to him then liberal and adequate; but 
since his return from the Continent he had dis- 
covered that it was quite impossible they could 
live on it . at any rate in Lpndon. He knew 
very well that Hester longed for a country life, 
and Goldsmith had hinted his willingness to 
purchase an estate for them before she attained 
her majority, if they would undertake to reside 
upon it; but the notion of sinking into a mere 



S2 HESTER KIRTOl^r. 

country squire was intolerable to Hallam. His 
wife was attentive, and datifal, and loving, but 
to be shut up with her in a country house from 
month's end to month's end would be a penance he 
was resolved not to inffict cm himself. As far 
as he could see, they had not a single pursuit 
or sympathy in common, except that Hester was 
fond of riding. He smiled to himself as he 
wondered what pursuits or tastes she had ; except 
reading and plain sewing, which he detested to 
ee a woman engaged in, she did not appear to 
do anything like other women of her age. He 
had given her music lessons in Rome, but they 
seemed wasted . she had a defective ear both 
for time and tune, he had laughed at her 
failures, and she had soon given up. He was 
not sorry for it : he was an accomplished musician 
himself, and had a rich and highly-cultivated 
tenor voice, and he knew liat Hester had wished 
to learn music that she might play the accom- 
paniments of his songs . a notion which made 
him shudder when he foimd she was not acutely 
sensible of the difference in sound between one 
note and another. Had she persevered, possibly 
this faculty might in some degree have been 



MBS. FEEDEKIC HALLAM. 23 

cultivated. Her strong will would have helped 
much towards it, hut at present that will was 
chained to her husband's likings : it was enough 
for her if he expressed disapproval, and, as he 
evidently shrank from her musical attempts, she 
discontinued tiiem. 

He proposed that she should have lessons in 
drawing, but she would not attempt this. She 
said when she and Lucy had tried together as 
children to copy the cows and pigs in the farm- 
yard, Lucy's effort had always succeeded, while 
hers had remained the most incomprehensiUe 
hieroglyphics ; but she told him if he would let 
her take lessons in French and German, and give 
her a good English governess, she should be very 
thankfuL 

BLallam shrugged his shoulders at her want 
of taste ; he thought accomplishments the most 
suitable pursuits for a lady. Study of any more 
earnest kind, he had always fancied detestable; 
however, it would serve to amuse her, and take 
her off his hands, for he fotmd her a dull com- 
panion, and was always in terror when they were 
in. Paris, or any firequented city, lest he should 
meet some English friends, and be compelled to 



24 HESTER KIRTON. 

introduce her to them, in her unfledged state, as 
he called it. So he told her she was welcome to 
do as she pleased, provided she did not grow 
clever and turn into a blue stocking. 

Without reasoning the why and wherefore to 
himself, he felt that the money spent on these 
lessons had not been wasted. Her manner of 
speaking had greatly improved ; but for that one 
little allusion to her home life, he had been sur- 
prised and pleased at her behaviour with Fortescue, 
a man whom of all others, he considered likely 
to make an uncouth person nervous, from the 
excessive courtesy of his own manner. 

He might have known if he had reflected . ^for 
Frederic Hallam had plenty of sense, although 
he chose his own way of using it . that probably 
his friend's extreme deference and courtesy to 
Hester had done more to give her self-possession 
than any mental efibrt on her own part The 
pleasure of being appreciated before her husband, 
and by his particular friend, had made her very 
happy. 

Hallam wondered if she would be as collected 
if he took her to see his mother ; if so, the sooner 
it was over the better. He had that morning 



MRS. FREDERIC HALLAM. 25 

received a note inviting him to do so, and hinting 
that after what he had said of his wife, perhaps the 
more she saw of her mother-in-law the better. The 
note had not pleased him, and he had destroyed it 
without comment, although Hester had looked 
up expectantly, when he said it was from his 
mother. Suppose he took her there to-morrow, and 
if they seemed to get on pretty well together, left 
her there for the day. Of course he should not do 
so if the poor girl seemed shy or frightened, for 
Frederic Hallam meant to be an exemplary hus- 
band . from his point of view . and as to being 
unkind to Hester, he was determined that he would 
neither be so himself, nor permit it in others ; no, 
not even in his mother, and the sooner she knew 
it the better. Of course he must check his wife, 
and reprove her tor such a gaucherie as she had 
committed this evening, and he was not afraid 
that, once, warned, she would make the same 
mistake again. 

But then there was Goldsmith to be seen after. 
How could he take Hester to Wilton Place, and see 
him as well, for Mrs. Hallam had expressly said 
he was to bring his wife in the morning, and he 
knew her too well to transgress in a trifling matter 



26 HESTER KIBTON. 

of time or place, although he would not have 
hesitated about anything more serious. 

" This comes of getting married," he said, as he 
opened the door with his latch-key ; ** it is such a 
bore to have to take women anywhere." 



CHAPTER m. 

THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 

Hesteb had attained her wish : she was married 
to a man whom she loved^ and she was fast gain- 
ing, by undaunted perseverance and energy, flie 
educational advantages she had so longed for. 

When she found her father was indeed taken 
from her, the first impulse, when she recovered 
from this sudden blow, had been to write to her 
nnde and aunt Wrenshaw; she never thought 
of Mr. Goldsmith, but Mr. Wrenshaw did; imd 
before he ^obeyed his niece's summons, he sent 
the sudden news on to the lawyer, justly imagining 
that he knew more of Kirton's affairs than any one 
else, and probably would have to settle them. 

Mr. Goldsmith reached Kirton's Farm nearly 
as soon as the Wrenshaws did, and very speedily 
announced to them tliat he was appointed Hester's 



28 HESTER KIETON. 

sole guardian, and that until she was of age she 
was to reside with him and with his sisters, and, 
he was very sorry to add, on no account to be 
allowed to visit any of her relatives. Mr. Wren- 
shaw looked both surprised and grieved to hear 
this 2 but all other feelings were soon merged in 
the intense surprise with which both he and his 
wife heard the amount of Kirton's wealth ; it 
seemed fabulous that a man who had' lived as he 
had done, should have amassed such' a fortune. 

By his will, Hester was to have a yearly income 
till she came of age, subject to Mr. Goldsmith's 
regulation, and although, in the event of her 
ntarriage, the property was settled unreservedly 
on herself and any children she might have, still 
she was advised in all matters to be guided by 
him. It seemed to Goldsmith's practised eye, 
when he examined the papers in the study, that 
his old friend had been seized by death in the 
act of adding some codicil to his will, although 
there was nothing beyond the heading of the 
sheet of paper before him on the desk to support 
such a conjecture. 

For a man who had so doubted mankind, his 
trust in Goldsmith appeared remarkable ; the best 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 29 

solution to it lay in the good opinion Kxrton had 
held of the strength of his own constitution, spite 
of the warnings he had had frequently of late. 
He was persuaded that the strange feeling about 
his heart arose from indigestion, and that he should 
outlive all his contemporaries, very likely those 
younger, including Hester herself. It may seem 
an unusual feeling for a father to have had with 
regard to a child ; but Kirton never felt so little 
affection for Hester as when he looked upon her 
as the destined heir of his dearly cherished 
unknown riches ; he almost hated her then ; it 
-was far pleasanter to contemplate himself as her 
probable survivor. * 

Mr. Goldsmith was civil and urbane to Hester's 
uncle and aunt . begged them to take their own 
time about remaining . to make themselves per- 
fectly at home; but it was so evident that he 
was, and considered himself, master there, that, 
spite of her unwillingness to leave poor Hester, 
Mrs. Wrenshaw, after a few days, consented to 
her husband's wish that they should return 
home. 

" And do you remark," said the irate old gentle- 
man, when they were seated in the fly which was 



30 HESTER KIRTOK 

to convey them to the station . ^for Mrs. Frank 
Wrenshaw and Lucy were still with them, and 
were keeping house in their absence, so they had 
no excuse for remaining at Stedding . " that the 
smooth-tongued old Jew of a fellow, never once 
asked us to go and see Hester when she lives 
in London ? But I shall go, I pan tell him ; I shall 
just make sure the child's properly treated." 

But things happened adversely. 

When the Wrenshaws returned to town they 
found Mrs. Frank bent on taking Lucy to Paris, 
and they were easily persuaded to accompany 
them. Jacob Bonham came over and fetched the 
two Stedding ladies home again ; but Mr. Wren- 
shaw was so delighted with all he saw in Paris 
that he persuaded his wife to winter there . Jacob 
Bonham having undertaken that a friend of his 
should occupy the Wrenshaws' London house 
during their absence. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw's heart ached to think of Hester 
left alone among strangers ; but her husband said 
he believed she would get cm better with the 
Goldsmiths, if she were left alone with them at 
first, especially as that clause in her father's will 
had forbidden intercourse with her relations. 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 31 

But Hester was not destined to have much 
acquaintance with the Miss Goldsmiths. 

She begged so hard to stay at Kirton's Farm, 
that Goldsmith consented she should remain there 
for a few weeks. It need scarcely be said that 
Mr. Hallam soon made his appearance^ at first 
apparently to help Mr. Gt)ldsmith, but soon as a 
friend of Hesta:'s. 

When next it was proposed that she should 
take up her abode . in the lawyer's house in 
Regent's Park, she consented without reluctance. 
The dulness and restraint were far more irksome 
than anything she had felt at Kirton's Farm, 
but all was forgotten in the sunlight of Hallam's 
presence. He was a tolerably attentive lover, and 
she had very soon promised to be his wife, and 
then he persuaded her that the education she so 
longed for would progress far more speedily on 
the Continent than in England, and that by 
waiting till the year of her mourning waa ful- 
filled, she would be losing valuable time; in short, 
his eloquence was irresistible. Hester had felt 
aggrieved with her aunts, and with Lucy, for going 
abroad just when she had needed their sympathy; 
and Mr. Goldsmith tocJc good care that she should 



32 HESTER KIRTON. 

not hear from them ; so that after sending two 
letters to Lucy, which never reached their destina- 
tion, as Goldsmith led her to believe her cousui 
was still abroad, Hester gave up writing in proud 
resentment at their unkindness and neglect. 

So the first news her relations heard of Hester, 
was that sent by her at a venture to her cousin 
Lucy, at Stedding. She was to marry Mr. 
Frederic Hallam in a fortnight, and would wish 
her cousin to be her bridesmaid; but as Mrs. 
Wrenshaw was not asked to accompany her daugh- 
ter, and the letter was very formal and cold, she 
refused to allow Lucy to go. She thought a child's 
wedding, so soon after her father's death . hardly ^ 
three months . most indecorous and improper ; and * 
Lucy was so busy just then in preparing for her 
own marriage, that she scarcely regretted her 
mother's prohibition to attend Hester's, although, 
as she said, it seemed sad for the poor girl to be 
married among strangers. But Jacob did not 
leave her much leisure to think of other people ; 
he was always in Duke Street, and at last Mrs. 
Frank Wrenshaw wrote to her brother and sister 
in Paris that she really thought they had better 
make haste and come over, as Mr. Bonham seemed 



THE SHADOW OP A CLOUD. 33 

in a hurry to be married, and so far as his 
patients were concerned, she tliought it would be 
a good thing over, for he neglected them sadly, 
and she was sure somebody would be poisoned 
some day, with a wrong dose of physic. 

So that, although Hester received congratulatory 
letters from all her friends, she did not see any 
of them before she went to Italy with her husband ; 
and although Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw felt anxious 
about the husband she had chosen, they were so 
full of Lucy and her happiness, that their thoughts 
were naturally diverted from a niece who appeared 
to care so little to keep up any intercourse with them. 

It was a relief to learn from Lucy, that Mr. 
Hallam was an old acquaintance, one who had 
loved Hester before she was known to be an 
heiress. Slie did not think it necessary to mention 
his letter to her, and it comforted her uncle and 
aunt greatly, that she had not fallen a prey to some 
designing fortune-hunter. 

Mr. Wrenshaw was not a man who listened to 
evil reports, and he told his wife that although he 
had a personal dislike to Goldsmith, from his 
Jewish appearance and oily ways, he believed him 
to be a respectable man, and his sisters good reli- 

VOL. n. 22 



34 HESTEB KIBTON. 

gious women. In her own mind Mrs. Wrenshaw 
doubted, from what she heard of them, whether 
these ladies would influence Hester for good. 
She had not been brought up to think much of 
religion, and good as the Miss Goldsmiths 
really were, and beneficial, doubtless, as their 
doctrines were to themselves, her aunt felt almost 
sure that she would dislike to have all daily- 
talk salted with texts, and to have tracts and 
'^ words in season" crammed into her pockets 
and her ears on every occasion. 

And Mrs. Wrenshaw was right. Spite of her 
unimaginative practical mind, Hester had a keen 
admiration of the beautiful ; it was not essential to 
her happiness, as it would have been had she been 
gifted with a more vivid fancy, or more intense 
powers of enjoyment Still the aspect of the two 
Miss Goldsmiths was so repelling as almost to 
disgust her on her first inkoduction to them ; they 
abjured all vanities ; among others, that of wearing 
any cap or head-dress ; but even then, as Hester 
thought, they might have braided their hair 
smoothly, instead of wearing it in rough untidy 
curls, which looked as if a hungry dog had beQ 
trying to make his dinner off them. They were 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 35 

kind^ but they looked shocked and distressed when 
they found that she was ignorant of all that they 
considered indispensable. Unfortunately, they had 
a talent for preaching in chorus, and as each tried 
to be heard, she waxed more and more dogmatic, 
till they enlisted Hester's obstinacy against them ; 
and when once she had made up her mind they 
were wrong, they might go on talking for ever. 
She could sit there in silence certainly, but deaf 
to all that was being said on each side of her. 

She found ready sympathy in Mr. Hallam, who 
used to turn *'the old prigs," as he called them, 
and their opinions, into far greater ridicule than 
Hester would have dreamed of. for she shrank 
from laughing at holy things as much as she 
did from hearing them made the subject of 
common talk. With all her self-will, there was 
reverence in her nature, as there is in all deep 
natures, and it had safe shyness about a careless 
handling of sacred words and things. But as yet 
the shyness went much toa &r : religion was to 
her an abstract quality, detached from daily life 
altogether; she meant to be religious some day, 
when she grew older, and should understand more 
about it; but there it stopped, and she was quite 

22.2 



36 HESTER KIRTONr 

sure she could never take to such a religion as the 
Miss Goldsmiths'. 

Poor, good women! how little they knew the 
harm they were doing ; for, naturally as Hester 
talked about them to Hallam, she found it im- 
possible not to laugh at his ridicule of them, and, 
by degrees, she joined him ; he must be right in 
all he said and did, he was so sweet-tempered, 
so generous, so much better than she was; he 
was religious enough for a young man ; and thus, 
gradually, the awful feelings about death and 
a Aiture state, which her father's sudden death 
had stirred in her heart, faded away as this, world 
and its delights became each day more real and 
dear to her. 

As women are, Hester^^^s just the woman for 
such a man as Hallam to have married if he had 
truly loved her. She was. not troubled with 
Lucy's ardent nature, not was she very exacting 
of small attentions, but she was watchful and 
observant and of a jealous disposition, and she 
soon noticed when he began to leave her more 
and more to herself; though it cut her to the 
heart, she loved him too much to resent it ; she 
felt her ignorance and awkward ways annoyed 



THE Shadow of a cloud. 37 

him, and studied harder than ever to improve 
herselfi Her pride, too, prevented her from being 
troublesome. When they were abroad, he always 
told her that the museums and picture-galleries 
she so much wished to visit would give her no 
pleasure until she was better versed in the asso- 
ciations connected with them, and he seemed to 
be afraid when there, that she would say or do 
something to betray her ignorance, 

Hester was always humble on this point: she 
was too real not to acknowledge the great 
difference of education between herself and her 
husband. Sometimes his decisions surprised her ; 
she thought that she should have acted differently 
imder such circumstances^ but these were only 
thoughts, they never took the shape of suggestions. 
And fortunately for her that they did not; for, 
with all his good temper, Frederic Hallam was 
the last man who would have brooked interference 
with his opinions. She used to think at first that 
these ideas of hers resulted from ignorance; 
but as her intellect developed each day more 
rapidly, as it brightened more and more from 
the rust its long idleness had accumulated, her 
Judgment became also more acute and defined^ 



38 HESTER EIBTOK 

and she felt that in some way or other her hus- 
band's affection had become alienated from her. 

He had made so many protestations of his love 
at the time of their engagement^ that although she 
had always secretly wished for more assurances 
after marriage, she had told herself she ought to be 
satisfied, trying to feel persuaded that, when she 
was more his equal, he would think better of her; 
and sometimes she thought this longing for greater 
love was what she had heard called romantic when 
she was at school . ^for Hester seldom read novels. 

But, since her return to London, she had not 
been nearly so happy. She had received two 
letters from Lucy, and the description of her 
happiness was so intense, so glowing, that it made 
her cousin's heart ache. 

She gave one of the letters to Frederic to read, 
but, after getting tiirough the first page, he had 
laughed and said it smelt so strongly of bread and 
butter he could not stand it. * 

Hester looked up surprised. 

" I mean, it reads school-girlish, a sort of got-up 
thing ; I'm quite sure you'd have too much sense 
to write such romantic nonsense." 

He did not look at Hester as he said this, or 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 39 

her sorrowful expression would surely not have 
escaped hun. She was thinking how different 
must be her description of her husband's love for 
her^ for Lucy's letter was all Jacob and his love^ 
from beginning to end* 

On the morning after Captain Forfcescue's visit, 
Hester heard again from her cousin ; she did not 
offer her husband this letter to read . ^he was deep 
in his favourite BelVa Life. However, he listened 
when she spoke to him. 

" Frederic, do you know that Lucy . of course, 
I mean Mr. Bonham, too . ^wishes us to go and 
spend a few days with them soon ? " 

*' Quite impossible,, my dear, aa^far as I'm 
concerned, at present" 

** Ah, but there is no need to answer directly, 
as she says she shall send a proper invitation 
when they are ready for us." 

" It would be a great pity to ask us before," 
said Hallam, laughing; ^^ but, Hester, I want you 
to go out with me this morning." 

Her face was radiant i& an instant, and without 
any of her usual calm restraint, she went up to 
him and kissed him. 

^ There," he said, patting her on the shoulder. 



40 HESTER KIBTON. 

still good-hmnouredly, but with much of the action 
with which we check the over-fondness of an 
aflfectionate spaniel, **sit down on the sofa, like 
a good girl, and I'll tell you all about it Oh, 
stop, just let me see what this is," as a paragraph 
at the end of the column next the one he had. 
been reading, caught his eye. 

Hester pressed her lips together: she looked 
iBtrangely like her father at this moment; but 
Hallam had finished his paragraph, and went on 
speaking. 

*^ Look Aere; I want to take you to call on my 
mother; there now, don't look frightened, because 
you needn't^ be a bit I thought you managed 
famously yesterday. I've not said we're going, 
and so she won't be expecting us, I hate all 
ridiculous fusses, and so do you, I know. Put on 
a nice dress, that's all, and your last new bonnet ; 
you look best in that" 

Hester did not answer ; she stood beside him, 
thinking. 

" Why, what's the mlitter, child ? don't you 
want to go ? " he said, impatiently. 

*^ You said a week ago, Fred, that you did not 
mean to let your mother see me at present. You 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD, 41 

should wait till we had a house of our own, I 
thought, from what you said, she would not 
^perhaps care to see me yet I should not like to 
go, unless she is willing I should do so." 

" Now, don't be silly, Hester, like other women, 
and take up a prejudice against your mother-in- 
law, just because she is your mother-in-law. You 
must like my mother, you cannot help it, she is 
so fond of me.** 

" I will try," said Hester, with a bright smile 
at his last words, and she went to change her 
dress. 

She shrank from the idea of this visit with 
more than her accustomed shyness. Supposing . 
and this was sure to be case . that Frederic's 
mother thought her quite unworthy of him . her 
idol. It was one things io think this herself, 
and quite another to bear it from another 
person. 

She stood before her looking-glass, puzzled by 
the new and strange feelings that rose within 
her, and yet they were . more strange than new. 
The defiant, haughty ^irit, which had formerly 
broken out in rare but, when it did show itself, 
intense rebellion to her father's will, now asserted 



42 HESTEB KIRTON. 

itself^ and made her believe, against all her best 
eflPorts, that it would be impossible for her to 
conciliate her husband's mother, or appear to any 
advantage before her. It is, perhaps, the most 
. unlucky foreboding that can possess any woman, 
because it is sure to come true. Vanity has 
probably something to do with it, but not all: 
there is a worthier emotion mingled, when, as 
in Hester's case, there is the consciousness that 
the best and noblest feelings have been rudely 
checked ; that when the heart was fuU of 
jfrank, generous love, which, if it had been as 
freely received and transplanted into a kindred 
soil, would have taken ineradicable hold there, 
it has, on the contrary, been choked by the cold 
indiflference thrown on it; even if it has escaped 
the more sudden witl^scuig of dislike and con-> 
tempt. 

A withering, not like that of autumn leaves, 
for this knows no spring of renewed growth ; it is 
not sullenness, it is not pride ; a very warm, loving 
disposition, meek as we|l as gentle-willed, may 
sometimes succeed in overcoming the shrinking 
human nature has from offering again what has been 
once unkindly rejected, and be beloved at last in 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 43 

return ; but even then^ there will never be the 
confidence^ the same power of spreading out the 
treasures of one's heart in the sunshine of a truly 
appreciating affection; there will always be a 
certain amount of timid mistrust. If mothers-in- 
law would ponder this, and take their sons' wives 
to their hearts at once, not expecting to find them 
faultless, butfondly accepting them, faults and all, 
as now and for ever the same flesh and blood as 
their husbands, their equals in all things so far as 
man and woman can be equals; how much future 
sorrow they would many of them spare themselves. 
How truly would they gain for ever two children, 
instead of losing one, for if a man loves a woman 
as he ought to love his wife, his future affection 
for his mother is mainly influenced by her conduct 
to her daughter-in-law at the outset. 

And Mrs. Hallam's had been very unkind. 
She knew nothing of the real objections to her 
son's marriage . ^that his heart was not interested, 
although this probably she would have said 
mattered little, provided the match was a good one 
. good, standing for rich in her vocabulary . ^and 
suitable in other ways; nor did she know firom 
personal observation, that Hester was ignorant 



c 



44 HESTEB EIRTON. 

and unformed in manner ; but she was so exces- 
sively angry and annoyed to find that her son had 
actually engaged himself to a girl whom she had 
never seen, and whose family and connections were 
not to be talked about, that she refused to be 1 1 

present at the marriage. I ^ 

The story she had told to Fortescue about 
Hester was partly imaginary, partly from the 
gossip of a mutual friend, who had called on 
Mr, Goldsmith during the engagement, and had 
been introduced to Hester. 

In his heart Frederic Hallam was just as well I id 
pleased that Hester should have a little time for I sc 
improvement and softening down before his mother k 

** saw her ; but still he resented the refusal, and i 

thought it in very bad taste. He invited his 1< 

aunt; she was far more cordial, although she ti 

reproached him with his mysterious ways; she 
^aid she should like to see Miss Kirton very ^ 

much if Fred would bring her to call, but she 
could not become acquainted with the Miss 
Goldsmiths, and this must happen if she called 
in Regent's Park, or attended the wedding. 

Hallam was not sorry, but he aflfected to be 
huffed in the note he wrote in answer, and said 



1 



THE SHADOW OP A CLOUD. 45 

he could not now introduce her to her niece till 
their return to London. 

He had no fear about his aunt becoming recon- 
ciled; she was not thoroughly selfish, and if he 
seemed happy as a married man, he thought she 
^ould be sure to behave well to Hester. 

The notion that there were two sides to the 
question . that Hester might not choose to be tole- 
rated and patronized . ^had never once occurred 
to him. 

At her own request, she had written to her 
mother-in-law soon after her marriage; she had 
so longed all her life for a mother, that she was 
resolved not to give up the chance of winning 
Mrs. Hallam's affection without an effort ;, the ^'' / 
letter was plain, straight-forward, and sensible . ^ 
like all Hester did or said. but the handwriting 
was cramped and the wording (imgraceful ; her 
husband offered to compose a letter for her, but 
her thorough honesty came in the way of her 
desire to please, and gained the day. 

A large-hearted woman would have prized and 
fostered such an overture, but there was nothing 
large about Mrs. Hallam senior, mentally or 
morally; she pronounced the letter ill-bred and 



46 HESTER EIBTOK. 

presuming, and never replied to it, except by 
commenting on it to her son, imagining or pre- 
tending to imagine him ignorant of it: she 
apparently forgot how much more really ill-bred 
this was than poor Hester's letter. 

Hester was by no means gentle-willed, and 
when she had said she would try to like her 
mother-in-law, she knew she could make no 
spontaneous advances; once repelled, hers was 
not a nature ever to risk a second rebuff; now she 
wished anything would happen to prevent this 
dreaded meeting; she felt as hard as a stone. 

**But after all," she thought,/* it is better over; 
after the first I shall not care about it, and it will 
"^ be so delightful to have a long walk with Fred.** 

Her eyes fell on the boking-glass, and she 
smiled with pleasure that she looked so well Ihat 
morning, just when Fred could not help looking 
at her as they walked together. She had nev^ 
thought herself handsome till he had taught her 
to do so, and now she valued her beauty, not 
as some women do, to be displayed to the utmost 
possible extent to all beholders, but as something 
belonging to her husband, a treasure that she 
must be careful of^ because it was his. 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 47 

After she was dressed she stood a few moments 
thmking of Fred; how wonderM his love for her 
must have been^ that not even her ignorance nor 
her poverty-stricken appearance had checked its 
ardour. She ought never to be dissatisfied with 
him or his ways, when she thought of the im- 
mense sacrifice he had made in marrying her; 
what a true proof of his love he had given 
in that, whereas she had nothing but gain on 
her side. 

At any rate she could and would try to-day 
not to say anything about her former domestic Ufe, 
and so ofiPend him as she had done the previous 
evening. 

She was rather disappointed to find they were 
not to walk. Her husband had sent for a carriage 
while she was up-stairs; he had told her she 
should have one of her own soon ; but the longer 
he stayed in London, the more certain he was 
that they could not manage with their present 
income ; therefore, any large extra expense would 
be imprudent, until Goldsmith became more 
reasonable ; besides, he really meant to buy 
Hester a horse out of his anticipated winnings at 
the races, and one for Martin. He had one of his 



48 HESTER KIRTON. 

own, of course, a man could not get along without 
a horse ; but she would soon have hers now^ and 
then she would be independent. 

He was very silent during their drive ; he had 
rarely been so long without seeing his mother, 
and, although the tone of her yesterday's note had 
not pleased him, he felt a natural yearning to be 
friends with her again. 

The drawing-room was empty when they were 
ushered into it. Hester looked perfectly calm and 
self-possessed, but she could not see anything 
distinctly at first, so great was her inward 
agitation. 

I do not suppose, to a timid person, there is 
any mental agony to equal a visit of this kind, to 
one you are anxious to stand well with, and 
who, you feel more than half sure, has prejudged 
you unfavourably ; but, to a woman, if there be 
any depth in her character, it seldom occurs with- 
out working a change. The intense mental efFoii; 
at self-control hardens the whole nature, the will 
especially ; it may be a strengthening . it is not a 
beneficial process. 

Her husband looked kindly at her, and pointed 
out some water-colour sketches and likenesses. 



THE SHADOW OF A (3L0UD. 49 

dispersed about the rooms . she could not see 
anything clearly ; her sight seemed dim^ and her 
senses confused* 

A moment more . the door opened, and 
rustling silk entered* She saw her husband 
spring forward to meet a lady, who threw her 
arms round him and kissed him with elaborate 
tenderness; then they both came towards her. 
Her husband took her hand, pride was forgotten, 
and she looked up in his mother's face, with a 
timid, imploring look ; she could not help feeling 
daughter-like, spite of the rebuff she had received. 

She saw a pretty, silly face, trying to look 
imposing and dignified; and as Hester leaut 
forward for a mother's kiss, Mrs. Hallam just 
touched her forehead with her lips, saying as 
she did so, . 

" I hope you will make my son happy." 

There was perhaps nothing in the words to give 
offence, and yet they checked Hester's good resolu- 
tions completely, and froze the warm, rising feeling. 
They were words not spoken impulsively, but 
sounded as though got up for the occasion. Much 
as she loved her husband, it seemed to Hester that 
happiness ought not to be one-sided in marriage; 

VOL. n. 23 



50 HESTEB EIBTON. 

that it was his datj to make her happy^ toa 
Pei^ps this is often the corner-stone of mischief 
between mothers-in-law and their daughters-io- 
law; they show plainly a doubt whether the 
young wives will make their sons happy . whether 
they are^ in fact^ good enough for them; ees choses 
se pement : probably all good, loving wives wilT 
own themselves inferior to, and undeserving of, 
their husbands ; but then as long as we are subject 
to human infirmity, it is one thing to confess, 
another to be accused. In all human relations, 
the secret of dislikes and disagreements is, that 
we all forget Adam's fall, and judge each other as 
angelic, not as human beings. It was plain to 
Hester that her husband's mother did not look on 
her as a daughter. 

And then they all sate down, and there was a 
pause. 

'* I got your note yesterday, mother," said 
Hallam, " so I thought we would come over early, 
and be sure to find you in. What are you going 
to do with yourself to-day ? " 

He had settled in his own mind that he should 
leave Hester in Wilton Place ; his mother could 
easily take or send her home; it would be a good 



THE SHADOW OF A CLOUD. 51 

opportonitj' for them to see a little of each other^ 
bxit her answer disarranged his plans. 

** I have friends coming to luncheon/' said 
^ilrs. Hallam, " and we are all going to the flower- 
ahow afterwards." 

"Bj Jovel I quite forgot the fete. I say, 
Bester, you'd like to go, wouldn't you? " he said, 
after a pause; "who are the people going with 
you, mother ? " 

"Lady Hilsdeen and that elegant girl of hers : 
you must remember her, surely, Frederic, and we 
are to meet Sir John and Lady Fletcher at the 
gardens." 

** Well, th^, you'll just have room for one ; I 
wish you'd chaperone Hester. She has not been 
anywhere yet, and I'm sure her bonnet will do. 
Let me look at you, child ; she only wants a gayer 
parasol and gloves, to be all right; but I'll choose 
those for her in some shop or other, and send them 
here as I go back; she'll do then, won't she?" 
he added, seeing how disturbed his mother looked. 

" My dear, I was not thinking about your wife's 
dress," said his mother, in a voice with a good 
deal of reproach in it "I should be very glad 
to be of service to her in any way, and if you 

23.2 



52 HESTER EIBTON. 

could accompany us it would do very well, but 
already we shall be four ladies to one gentleman, 
and "^ 

Hester had walked up to her husband; she felt 
too much annoyed to be any longer timid. 

** Fred, I would rather go home with you : I do 
not care for this flower-show.'* 

It was said in the old, hard, abrupt way he 
had scarcely noticed in her smce their marriage, 
and Frederic Hallam started. What would his 
mother think? 

*^ Still," continued Mrs. Hallam, as if there 
had been no interruption, although she had also 
started at the determined voice, "if you cannot 
go, Frederic, I will take care of your wife, if you 
particularly wish it" 

There was a grandeur of benevolence in her 
face as she spoke, from which even a meeker spirit 
than Hester's might have shrunk. 

"No, thank you," she said, looking straight 
before her in the awkward, dogged way in which 
shy people often offend, forgetting how a smile in 
the face of the person addressed will smooth away 
the hardness of words ; " I will not be a trouble to 
you, and I had rather not go without Frederic." 



THE SHADOW OF A GLOUIX 53 

Mrs. TTaHam smiled in a saperior and pitying 
manner. TTallam would hare r^nonstrated with 
liis wife, bnt this smile stopped him. He put 
a strong restraint (m himself, and walked to the 
window, and looked into the street for a minute. 
However annoyed he might feel jnst then, his 
mother should not see it 

**Well, then, Hester," he said, **we won't 
hinder my mother: perhaps it's as well you don't 
go. When will you come and see us, mother? ^ 
he said to Mrs. Hallam. 

** You must dine with me first, you know,** she 
said. ^^ Come one day soon, and I will ask your 
aunt Mairtha to meet you.** 

When this was settled, they parted, and this 
time Mrs. Hallam withheld her glacial kiss, nor 
did Hester make any movement to show she 
expected it 



54 HESTER EIBTOK. 



CHAPTER IV. 

LUCY'S LECTURE. 

Mr., or, as he was called by the country people. 
Dr. Bonham (a distinction, by the way^ which 
he might have attained easily enough had he 
cared about it) lived in a comfortable, old-fashioned, 
red-brick house in the best part of the High 
Street, Stedding. one of those quaint, peculiarly 
English-looking houses, suggestive of Christmas 
cheer, and every other sort of national geniality. 
It had a stone cornice and quoins, and a carved 
semicircular door-heading, which, projecting from 
the face of the wall, and being also deeply re- 
cessed, looked like a huge camar shell, and made 
a snug resting-place for the chrysalides of garden 
whites and other adventurous butterflies, hidden 
by the deep .mass of shadow in which it lay . a 
shadow which struck the eye vividly when the 



LUGY^ IBCTI]B& 55 

fiill blaze of sunshine ^ on the outward semi- 
circular moulding . a shadow into which one 
longed to creep for cool refreshment id real 
midsnmmer weather. 

The door-stone was raised two steps aboye the 
level of the street, bnt then you stepped down 
again into the hall^ looking like a great chess- 
board with its squares of black and white marble ; 
a ponderous brass knocker glistened in the centre 
of the door, requiring some strength of wrist 
to raise it. On either side the haU was a hand- 
some square room . one the dining-room, the 
other, on the right, Jacob had had divided, and 
kept one-half nearest the hall for his library and 
writing-room, and the other for his surgery, with a 
separate street entrance. 

The staircase on the right side of the hall was 
broad and easy-going, of dark oak, uncarpeted 
and very slippery, one short flight sweeping half 
round at the top, and leading by a broad passage 
to a square, landing bung with engravings and 
photographs. Opening from this was the drawing- 
room, a pretty, tasteful place, with nothing hand- 
some or costly about it, but so arranged as to set 
everything in the room in the best possible light 



56 HESTER KIRTOK^ 

All strangers who entered the room for the 
first time remarked with surprise that, although 
the hall and front rooms were almost on a level 
with the street, from the drawing-room windows, 
which opened to the ground, you stepped easily on 
to the lawn, sloping for some distance in the midst 
of the pretty garden. The truth was that the 
garden was raised artificially till it met the rising 
ground beyond, and thus the flowers in it had 
the advantage of a far purer atmosphere than 
would have been the case, had it been below 
instead of on a level with the chimneys of the 
lower part of the town. As yet, flowers were 
scarce, but bushes of red and white lilac, long 
ringlets of golden laburnum, and the snowy 
masses of gueldres rose looked lovely in the spring- 
sunshine. These were in the shrubberies on 
either side, but on the lawn itself in the distance 
stood a red and a white hawthorn, and nearer 
the windows a standard double-blossomed cherry- 
tree covered with its exquisite flowers. 

But pretty as the garden view was from the 
drawing-room, Lucy seldom sate there. Her 
favourite place of occupation was her husband's 
study, and here on this May morning she was 



LUCY'S XECTUBK 57 

Bitting diligently working at a shapeless piece of 
-French cambric, on part of which she was sewing 
Some delicate lace. Jacob stood leaning on the 
inantel-piece gazing admiringly at her and her 
Work, and, I am sorry to say, doing nothing else. 
She did not raise her eyes, but sat there appa- 
rently unconscious of his presence for a few 
minutes, only with a graver face than usuaL 

" What makes you so silent, my pet? " he said 
at last, tired of waiting for her to look up ; for he 
believed in the soft spell which forces the person 
you love to meet your eye if you only look 
lovingly and long enough ; he had found it always 
so true with Lucy, hitherto, that he thought she 
must have some reason for not looking up. They 
had been married four months, but their honey- 
moon was not nearly ended yet. To some hus- 
bands and wives, life itself is one enduring honey- 
moon, which outward trials cannot embitter. 
Lucy looked at him now, but there was a shade 
of sadness in her beautiful eyes. 

** Why, I have been thinking for several days 
past that I have been wrong, Jacob." 

" Wrong 1 you are never wrong, you know; 
let us hear this wonderful secret." 



58 HE8TEB KDCroX. 

^I doo't like to tdl 700, and yet I mmi, 
dearest*' She thieir her wofk oa the taUe^ and 
gofaig np to her husband, pat bodiher anna round 
him, and leant her head against him. ^I have 
been wrong in thinking yoa were so, andnottell- 
ingjonof it'' She jnst glanced up, and seeing his 
colour rise, she went on quickly: ^ Don't be vexed, 
darling, now I have said so much I must go on. 
I think you ought to go your daily round earlier; 
fiir if you started at nine instead of eleyen, you 
would be back sooner for dinner, and then you 
could start again earlier in the afiemoon, and all 
those poor people who come for their medicine in 
the evening, need not be kept waiting; that boy 
in the surgery never b^ins anything till you come 
back, I believe." 

** I did not think you would have tired of me 
so soon, Lucy," he said, reproachfidly, holding 
himself straight upright, so as not in any way to 
return her caress; for the time he fdit quite 
hardened against her. 

** Oh, Jacob I now if you are going to be 
naughty, the very first time I find fault with you 
the least bit, I've done; but it seemed to me dis- 
honest to be thinking this of you, and not to say it" 



LUCY'S LECTUBE. 59 

**Whicli comes to this," hie said, disengaging 
himself and walking away from her, thoroughly 
vexed, ^^ that yon consider it necessary to teach me 
how to manage my business; many a wife would 
rejoice in a husband who loved her so much^ that 
he could not bear to leave her; but I suppose you 
have taken it into your head, it is idleness." 

He was turning to leave the room. Poor Lucy 
had begun to cry quietly at these first unkind 
words from her husband, but she looked up again 
now. 

*^ You are really angry with me, Jacob, and 
perhaps I spoke in a fooli^ hasty way ; but indeed, 
indeed, I would like to keep you here all day, if I 
did not think it wrong; " then seeing that he was 
still going away, she darted forward and caught 
his arm. " Jacob, you are not going without say- 
ing you foi^ive me . suppose anything happened 
while we were apart to either of ib. oh, you 
darling, you could not, could you?" 

Jacob bent down and kissed her, but not 
heartily; his pride had received a deep wound. 
It cannot be denied, he had rather a sulky temper 
if interfered -with, although generally he was 
very forbearing. She came to the door, as she 



60 HESTEB KIRTON* 

always did when the gig was brought round, and 
her heart seemed to be trying to leap out through 
her eyes in the farewell glances she gave him, but 
she saw he was angry with her still. 

And yet Lucy was right. Jacob had been sadly 
neglecting his business ever since his marriage. 
Every week he got more lax, and both visits and 
medicine had fallen sadly into arrears. Lucy saw 
all this, and her remarkable quickness fully appre- 
ciated what the results might be; her vivid 
imagination already painted a rival doctor stepping 
into Jacob's practice, and besides all this, for Lucy 
was not mercenary, it seemed to her that work of 
one kind or another was what mankind was sent 
on earth to do, and that work was safest and best 
which belonged to our lawful calling; enjoyment 
and relaxation were good slaves, but evil masters. 
Apart from this, Lucy's fears would have been 
justifiable, had they been influenced by pecuniary 
reasons. The greater part of his father's money 
Jacob had expended in the purchase of the 
practice, and of the house and grounds they now 
occupied. They were living with the utmost pru- 
dence and economy, with only one maid-servant, 
Jacob of course having to keep a groom; but 



LUCY'S LECTUEB. 61 

"^fore very long, there would be fresh expenses, 
^^d another servant must be kept. Lucy did not 
<^alcalate all this; it was not in her nature to 
anticipate evil; but she felt strongly that her 
husband was not doing his duty, and she had 
worked herself up to the belief that she ought 
to tell him so. 

Perhaps she might have been less abrupt, but 
there are men . and among the best living . ^who 
are always slightly irritated when first told of their 
faults ; so perhaps the way of doing it does not 
much matter, so long as it is a loving way. 

Lucy felt more unhappy than she had done 
since her marriage ; she was vexed with Jacob and 
disappointed in him, too. She had learned to con- 
sider him perfect, and now her idol was flawed ; 
but this mood soon changed, and she felt she had 
been to blame for her idol worship. Must he not 
be himian, and beset with infirmities like other 
human beings ? Lucy had had the benefit of her 
aunt Wrenshaw's occasional teaching wliile she 
was at her London school ; a greater aid to her 
married happiness than she was probably aware 
of. And now she was able to put this teaching 
to a practical useTN^witt). her warm temperament 



62 HESTEB KIBTON. 

and love of romantic readings she would probably 
have expected ber husband to be on aU occasions 
as faultless a paragon of manbood^ as King Arthur 
himsel When one looks some years back^ one 
wonders how the young women who smiled and 
wept over the perfections of Sir Charles Grandison^ 
Thaddeus of Warsaw, and Lord Orvill^ could 
have ever reconciled themselves to human hus- 
bands at alL But as language-masters tell us we 
can only acquire correct pronunciation from having 
it taught us in a slightly exaggerated manner, per- 
haps even the tete exaUie expectations these types 
of husbands created were preferable to the matter- 
of-fact, too practical views of girls now-a-days. 
Romance, at any rate, cannot be laid to their 
charge; the great fear is, that as the demand for 
chivalry becomes extinguished, the virtue itself 
will also become extinct in England, as it has long 
ago in France. 

Lucy grew more and more vexed with herself 
as she remembered how beautifully Jacob had read 
the " Miller's Daughter " to her that very morning 
. he had certainly stayed at home an hour after 
that . but what right had she to keep guard over 
her husband, and measure out his time for him ? 



LUCY'S LBCTUKB. 63 

She was getting quite spoHed, and should soon be 
Trhat she held in horror, a *^ set-you-to-rights,'' 
strong-minded woman. She cried a little more, 
and then went on with her needlework, quite obli- 
vions of all the sage reasons by which she had 
persuaded herself into scolding her husband, as 
she called it^ and resolving to have it comfortably 
out with him as soon as he returned. 

She had lost all traces of tears by the time her 
mother looked in to pay her daily visit There 
was a troubled look on Mrs. Wrenshaw's comely 
Eice, that instantly roused Lucy's attention. 

**What is the matter, mamma? you look as if 
something had happened." 

^* Well, my dear," . ^Mrs. Wrenshaw untied her 
bonnet strings and threw ihem wide apart, a fa- 
vourite habit when heated with walking . ^^ it's this 
alarm about vaccination really quite flusters me." 

**You mean about small-pox," said Lucy; 
" Jacob is vexed with you because you won't be 
vaccinated; he says ifs selfish of any one who 
has not had the disease not to undergo vaccination." 

** Well, I know," poor Mrs. Wrenshaw looked 
greatly perplexed; *^he told me as much last Sun- 
day ; but then, as Jemima Skipper says, it's one 



64 HESTEE KIRTON. 

thing to be done from tlie cow direct, and anotheiT* 
from these babies. She says . and she's clever, yon- 
know, Lucy . don't you remember those little blue 
paper books she wrote . that these babies are all 
worn out, and they may fill us full of all sorts of 
horrors. No, I can't, and you may tell Jacob; 
I'll have nothing worn-out vaccinated into me; 
nothing but a good healthy cow." 

Lucy laughed, and assured her mother that if 
she would change her mind, Jacob would under- 
take to find a nice healthy baby. 

But she only shook her head, and declared her 
intention of abiding by Jemima's opinion, and then 
she examined and admired Lucy's needlework. 

"Oh I by-the-by," she said suddenly, as she 
sat pinching up the lace round the little sleeves 
between her thumb and finger, to make it lie flat, 
"I knew I had something to tell you: old Biz 
came to see me yesterday ; she goes on against 
your poor uncle Kirton worse than ever." 

"I'm very sorry," said Lucy, "because I'm 
afraid she'll get a habit of doing it, even when she 
sees Hester." 

" Well, I don't know if it's fair to blame her, 
I'm sure ; but it does seem hard, when she'd served 



LUCY'S LECTURE. 65 

him faithfully for thirteen years, and really, poor 
old soul, did try to make the best of things, that 
he should have left her a paltry five pounds." 

** He probably expected that Hester would do 
as she has done. Jacob says she ought to be very 
comfortable all her life on such an allowance." 

" Not a bit of it, my dear; Biz knew all about 
the will, as every one else did. Why, it was 
town-talk, child, and every one's impression was, 
that your uncle expected to outlive both Hester 
and that Goldfinch. I don't wonder at the old 
creature being rusty about it ; though I'll own it's 
bad taste to be always speaking against the dead. 
It makes one [shiver to think what she may say of 
one, when one's in one's coflSn." 

** Well, but, mamma dear, it won't much matter 
what Biz says of any one ; she's known to be cross 
and crabbed." 

"Lucy, my dear, I'm surprised at you; it must 
always matter a great deal what every one says of 
us ; why, w% might as well all be Mrs. Jones at 
once." 

** Poor Mrs. Jones I do you know, Jacob says, 
she is a very nice woman, and that if people 
jivoided her less, she would be less eccentric ? " 

VOL. n. 24 



66 HESTEB EIBTON. 

** Ah 1 pack o' nonsense I I've no patience with 
Jacobs he's just like all the men ; if a woman's got 
a pretty face, or even a clever tongue . ^for Mrs. 
Jones is none so pretty-Hshe may do what she 
pleases. I don't hold with widows, and I never 
did, as you know, Lucy ; one of the things I felt in 
losing your poor dear father, was that it left me a 
widow, and I should grow foolish like the rest of 
'enu But really, Lucy, don't you have anything to 
say to Mrs. Jones . things are getting serious in 
that quarter." 

*^ Why, has she been giving away any more 
dinners ? " 

"I don't know anything about dinners," said 
Mrs. Wrenshaw, looking very virtuous and in- 
credulous. 

** Oh, yes, mamma, only you've foi^otten. one of 
her greatest crimes in the eyes of the Miss Skippers 
was because she was seen at dinner-time going 
out with a bason covered with a cloth ; they said^ 
you know, she ought to have waited till it grew 
dark, and yet Jacob told me that the poor girl 
she visited would have sunk after her illness, but 
for Mrs. Jones's kitchen-physic" 

*^ Jacob 1 " . ^but seeing a decidedly annoyed look 



Lucres LECTURE. 67 

on Lncj's &ce at this second slighting mention 
of her husband^ she went on: . ^'^Well, I was 
going to tell yon something I've heard to-day. 
Last nighty it must have been late, for it 
was quite dusk, as Jemima was sitting at the 
window " 

^ Looking after other people's business instead 
of her own, as usual,** said Lucy, who detested 
gossip, and wished her mother would talk some- 
thing else. 

*' Now, Lucy, don't be so ill-natured ; ever since 
you've been married, you've never a good word 
for my friend Jemima. I can't think how it is, 
but single women and young brides seem as if 
they couldn't abide each other. However, as I 
was saying, Jemima was sitting at the window ; 
Jemima sits at the window, she says, because 
since they've given up cards, they never light 
candles till it's quite dark, and she has such au 
active mind, she can't bear to sit dreaming and 
doing nothing but think, as her sisters do. Well, 
there she was sitting last night, when she saw 
a tall young man . she's quite sure he was a 
stranger . go and knock at Mrs. Jones's door, and 
who should come down to open it but Mrs. Jones 

24.2 



I 



68 HESTER KJHTON. 

herself: It was getting so dusk she could not have 
told who it was, only luckily Mrs, Jones had a 
candle in her hand. The man darted in, in a quick, 
mysterious way, and, my dear, he stayed there 
a long while, and when he went away, Mrs. 
Jones let him out at the door herself. It was very 
strange, wasn't it ? Now, you know, of course, 
as Jemima says, he might be a brother or a 
relation of some kind, but those sort of things 
don't look well : to say the least of it, they make 
people talk My dear, what's the matter ? " 

Lucy had started up, her face scarlet with 
indignation. 

^* Oh, mamma, mamma, this is too much. The 
Miss Skippers will get into trouble, if they don't 
take care." 

Mrs. Wrenshaw looked confounded; she was 
not so quick-witted as her daughter, but she was 
not dull, either. 

*^ The person," went on Lucy, her lip quivering 
with the scorn she felt for Miss Jemima Skipper, 
** who called on Mrs. Jones last night, was Jacob ; 
her maid, Mary, had been suddenly seized with 
epilepsy, and she got Carter, the chemist's boy, 
to run for Jacob. It was some time before he 



\ 



LUCY'S LECTUBE. 69 

thought her well enough to be left, and then, 
dear, kind fellow, he went and got old Mrs. 
Cooper, the charwoman, to sleep in the house, for, 
he said, although Mrs. Jones behaved admirably, 
he saw she was terribly frightened." 

"Well, now, to be sure," said Mrs. Wrenshaw; 
"but, Lucy, my dear, you don't suppose Jemima 
would have said such a thing if she had not felt 
sure herself; you see, it was all from its being so 
dusk, but FU go and tell her at once." 

" Yes," said Lucy, " or she'll go telling some 
one else, and, dearest mother," she added, putting 
her arm round her neck and kissing her, " don't 
think I dislike Jemima ; she's your friend, so how 
could I? Lonly wish she would try to believe, 
what I am sure is true, that we always see the 
worst half of good people; we don't know any- 
thing about the little conflicts and struggles that 
go on inside them. I wish you would call on Mrs. 
Jones, mamma ; you'd do her good, and then if 
you were her friend, you could advise her about 
those little follies in dress and other things which 
annoy you." 

Mrs. Wrenshaw made no promises, and she 
also offered no remonstrance; but Miss Jemima 



70 HESTEB KIBTON. 

was utterly aghast at the warmth with which 
her friend espoused the pretty widow's cause, imd 
also at the serious way in which she said that 
.people ought to he sure beyond a doubt before 
they repeated anything against their neighbours. 

*^ You see, my dear Jemima," said the comely 
dame; the excitement, and the flush it had 
brought, made her look quite handsome; "Fm a 
widow myself, so I have a fellow-feeling for 'em ; 
maybe, there'll be some scandal about me next" 

Lucy wished to be alone, to greet Jacob on his 
return, so she had not pressed her mother to spend 
the rest of the day, as she usually did when her 
husband was going his long country round, and 
.would not return till evening. 

It was the longest day she had ever known. 

What a remarkable change love . such love as 
Lucy's for her husband . effects in a woman's whole 
nature. She had no longer a separate existence ; 
nothing interested or pleased suflSciently to arrest 
attention, unless shared with Jacob in the same 
way. No mere personal grief, or suffering, or 
disappointment, touched her as it did before her 
life was bdund up in his ; but anything, however 
^trifling, that related to him, even her mother's 



LUCY'S LKCTUKE. 71 

depreciatory words that morning, grieved and 
wounded her. Her very liveliness and amusing 
talk, one of her most distmguishing characteristics 
when with others, seemed almost to Iiave deserted 
her now, except in her husband's presence. He was 
her soul . her inspiration, as she often told him. 
She fdh; stiff, and hard, and unlike herself when 
without him. 

People say that men are .often deceived in the 
women they marry ; I do not believe this where 
there is true love. There is, as no one will deny 
who has ever felt it, a holy, purifying atmosphere 
in true Love, which elevates the character and 
aims of both man and woman ; and if we look at 
marriage in its true light, as a sacrament, we may 
reasonably hope and believe that the deception, 
as it is falsely called . or rather the better reality-. 
will continue, and that a faulty woman maybe 
almost an angel in her husband's eyes, simply 
because she is enabled to be one to him, and no 
woman striving in the right way will be content 
or able to subdue her faults towards one person 
only ; they must gradually lessen altogether. 

It was six o'clock at last. Jacob always had 
his dinner on these long days at one of the large 



72 HESTEE KIRTON. 

farms on the other side of Stedding, but Lucy 
knew he would be glad of his tea ; how extra care- 
ful she was this evening that everything should be 
exactly as he liked it There was no looking-glass 
in the study, and she had already been twice up- 
stairs to see that her hair was in perfect order, and 
as Jacob hked, when she heard the welcome sound 
of wheels. 

The way in which .he met her kiss showed her 
he was no longer angry with her, but the maid 
was coming in and out, so she would wait a while 
before she spoke. Jacob was so silent that it 
made her nervous: she began to think perhaps 
reconciliations were foolish things, that it would 
be better to say nothing, but slip quietly back into 
the old loving way they had together. Just as 
she was hesitating she looked up, and met her 
husband's eyes; they were so sorrowful that she 
was close to him in an instant. 

"You are unhappy about something, darling; 
what is it ? " she said, in her fond petting way. 

" I've been unhappy all day," he said.. *^ I was 
as sulky as a bear this morning, wasn't I, you 
old pet?" 

And then of course Lucy said she had been 



LUCY'S LECTURE. 73 

most ta blame, and after they had settled that, she 
wondered whether they should ever disagree 
again, and to her great dismay Jacob said he 
thought they most probably should, but that, if 
he could help it, it should not last for more 
than a minute; he told her that she had been 
perfectly right in the advice she had given him, 
at which Lucy felt glad and sorry too, for now 
she should see less of Jacob than ever, she feared ; 
and yet it must be right for a man to attend to 
his business. 



74 .HESTEB EIBTON. 



CHAPTER V- 

OUTWITTED. 

Fbedebic Hallah walked to Mr. Goldsmith's 
oflSce in a very unusual state of mind; he felt 
decidedly cross and irritahle. 

He had not taken the slightest notice to Hester 
of the sort of disagreement that had occurred 
between her and his mother; it would only make 
things worse and do no good ; he would take very 
good care they should not meet often, and he 
should give Hester a caution before she went 
there to dinner. 

But the evident repulsion between his mother 
and his wife had struck him forcibly, and again 
he wished that he had not been so hasty about 
his marriage. 

He was not blind to his mother's faults or her 
silliness, but he loved her at present a great deal 
better than he loved Hester, and, although his 



ODTWITTKD. 75 

pride and natnral contradiction helped his kind* 
Leaitedness in taking his wife's part outwardlj^ he 
knew yerj well that if ahe and Mrs. Hallam came 
to open disagreement, his heart would be with his 
mother. 

Frederic Hallam by nature was good-tempered ; 
of all things he hated what he called ^^domestic 
rows; " the occasional disputes that arose between 
his mother and his aunt Martha always worried 
him,, and to think that for the rest of his life 
he was doomed to continual bickering between 
his mother and his wife made him, for the time, as 
unhappy as his sanguine temperament could be. 
. He had not spoken one word to Hester till 
they reached Gloucester Place, and then, hastily 
getting .out of the cab, he handed her into the 
house, and, just saying he should be home to 
dinner, he turned away. 

Before he reached Goldsmith's office he had 
persuaded himself that his forebodings were 
nonsense: women never agreed at first; his 
mother was jealous now, but she would soon grow 
fond of Hester . that is to say, if .Hester behaved 
herself. When he remembered her awkward 
abrupt refusal to go to the fete^ he believed he 



76 HESTER KIRTON. 

had been wrong not to give her a good scolding 
at once ; he could not have told himself why, but 
at this moment the remembrance of the strange 
likeness between Hester and her father suddenly 
seemed to rise before him : the square, well-defined 
jawbone and compressed lips . for during the 
visit in Wilton Place he had remarked how tightly 
she pressed her lips together . and he shivered 
involuntarily as he thought of his future life. 
He remembered this foreboding afterwards. 

Mr. Goldsmith was alone and apparently engaged 
in some profound calculations, but he rose at 
Hallam's entrance, and, extending both hands, 
shook his client's heartily, declaring himself, in his 
thick unctuous voice, delighted to see him. 

" I hope my charming ward is quite well, eh ? ** 
and then, without any reason, he threw his head 
back so that his shirt-frill projected like the breast 
of a Pouter pigeon, and indulged in a long low 
laugh, which made Hallam in his present mood 
feel inclined to knock his head against the wall 
of his own office. 

*^ Oh, yes ; she's quite well, thank you ; but I 
say. Goldsmith " . he laid his hat and gloves down 



OUTWITTED. ?7 

on the table, for his head was aching with the 
unusual load of thought that had been pressing on 
it, and, besides, he contemplated a long visit . 
**why didn't you answer my note?" 

*' My dear friend " . the lawyer rubbed his white 
^oignees-lookiiig hands together, the brilliant on 
his little finger darting out rays of light in the 
process, as if it liked it . " I can give you two 
reasons for my silence : in the first place, I was 
away, and only returned yesterday ; and in the next 
I felt that I could explain myself better viva voce.^^ 

** Well, what is the explanation ? satisfactory, I 
hope," said Hallam, eagerly. 

" My dear friend, what can I say to you? J wish 
you'd tate my advice." 

"That's just what I came here for," said the young 
man, with a forced laugh, " only I want it gilded." 

 Ha ! ha ! ha ! " Mr. Goldsmith fell back in his 
chair for full enjoyment of his friend's joke. " No, 
really, Mr. Hallam, you grow too sharp for me. 
What does Mrs. Hallam junior say to these 
jokes?" Then seeing that Hallam was awaiting 
his answer with determined impatience, he crossed 
his legs, and putting his palms together, rested his 
hands on his knees, and grew serious. " The long 



78' HESTER KIRTON, 

and ihe short of it is^ Mr. Hallam^ jon'd better 
take my offer. Let me sink so much . ^you or your 
wife shaU name t^ sum . in the purchase of this 
country place I spoke of. Take my word for it; 
you'll not only be able to manage with your 
present income, but you'll save money . positively 
save money . which I shall be able to turn to 
account for you, by-and-by." 

^ There's no use in talking of it. Goldsmith, Pm 
a Londoner to ihe back-bone, and you'll never find 
me burying myself in a country house, among 
pigs and poultry, where I should grow as slow and 
narrow-minded as pec^le do who move perpetually 
in their own little circle." 

Mr. Goldsmith was either in a mirthful humour, 
or he thought laughter the best way of parrying 
his client's demands, for he relapsed into another 
of his peculiar attacks, which HaUam bore with 
greater equanimity ; he had had time to recover his 
coolness, and he well knew that without it he was 
no match for Goldsmith. Finding the lawyer did 
not speak, he went on. 

** By the terms of Mr. Kirton's will, it appears 
to me that you could grant ns any allowance you 
please, till my wife is one-and-twenty. It seems 



OUTWITTia>. 79 

absurd and unreasonable that, in a conple of years' 
time^ we should be suddenly put in possessicm of 
a large im^ome^ and now hare the bare means of 
existence.'* 

*^ Lai^e incomes-bare means of existence I excel- 
lent! Pardonme,mydearfiriendI The truth is" . 
he went on, after having buried his face iii his pocket- 
handkerchief.^* that, evea after your wife comes 
into possession of her fortune " . ^he laid a stress on 
the pronoun . ^^ it is still actually imder my control, 
for you have only to refer to my dear old friend's 
will to see that your wife is advised to consult me in 
all things ; and moreover, my dear sir, when first I 
proposed your present income, you seemed quite 
satisfied with the sum I named^ so that I feel sur-^ 
prised to hear you now term it * a bare means of 
existence.' Remember, also, that your wife's 
mcHiey is absdutely settled on herself, when she 
comes of age." 

Mr. Goldsmith was not laughing now, he was 
almost serious in his earnestness. 

" Then you positively refuse to increase iL I 
want to give Mrs. HaUam a carriage and horses, 
and a good many other things; I see no way of 
doing so at present." 



80 HESTER KIRtON, 

" But, my dear sir," said the lawyer, in his oiliest 
tones, "although, from conscientious scruples, 1 
may refuse to set aside what I know to have been 
my lamented friend's wish in regard to the amount 
of your income, I never said I should refuse to 
accommodate vou with a small additional sum 
. from time to time." 

Hallam hesitated; something Fortescue had 
said on the pre\dous evening recurred to him 
forcibly. 

*^ I had rather borrow money of Goldsmith as a 
poor man, than as a rich one. Don't have any 
more of that sort of thing." 

*^ Literally, pay you for the use of my own 
money," he said, looking the other keenly in the 
face. " You're getting too sharp for me. Goldsmith." 

*^ I beg your pardon," said Goldsmith, looking 
puzzled; *^I thought we were talking of Mrs, 
Hallam's property just now." 

" That's good 1 What's Hester's is mine, I take 
it; we're one now, thanks to your talent for 
match-making." 

There was a petulance in the tone, spite of tlie 
young man's smiling face, which roused Goldsmith's 
curiosity. 



OUTWITTED. 81 

*^Yes," he said, rubbing his hands slowly 
together, while the serpent tongues of light seemed 
to Hallam, who was just estimating the probable 
worth of the gem, venomed in their sudden 
darting radiance, *^ that is one of the things on 
which I congratulate myself, although the amount 
of devotion you displayed, my dear friend, before 
your marriage, and the sudden growth of your 
love, showed me that there is no such thing really 
as match-making." 

Hallam got up impatiently, and took a couple 
of turns up and down the office before he could 
answer; he would have recovered himself, and 
have been able to reply with his customary 
nonchalance, but the lawyer, for some reason or 
other, seemed determined to get at the truth, 
and he continued, in a soothing, deprecatory 
voice, . 

"Not that I doubt for a moment that, had my 
charming ward been introduced into society, she 
would have inspired universal admiration . created, 
in fact, a perfect furore." 

"I wish to Heaven you'd tried, then, before 
you forced me into marrying her." 

" My dear friend ! why, it was your own seeking, 

VOL. IL 25 



82 HESTEB KIBTON. 

Bless me^ bless me! is your memoiy so short? 
Have you forgotten that little memorandum which 
bound me^ under a penalty^ to keep my friend's 
daughter unmolested by admirers. How could I 
think anything else but that you were desperately- 
in love?" 

' " You dare not persist in it. Goldsmith ; I was 
wrong to marry as I did, perhaps. That only 
concerns myself now; but to you, I made no 
pretence of wanting anything but Ralph Bjrton's 
money." 

The lawyer looked surprised, not at such a 
revelation . he knew what was coming long before 
^. but that so thorough a man of the world as, for 
his age, he esteemed Hallam, should have com- 
flitted himself so deeply. Perhaps, one sure 
way of detecting the mask so many of us wear, 
is the flush of surprise that peeps from beneath 
it at any ingenuous or seemingly uncalled-for 
avowaL 

. Hallam saw his mistake almost before the words 
and their full meaning had been comprehended by 
-Goldsmith. He thought the lawyer's surprise 
that he did not truly love his wife unfeigned ; and 
as he had conscience enough to feel that he ought 



OUTWITTED. 83 

'to do so, it seemed like inflicting a double wrong 
on Hester, that any one else should know ii If 
^ere was one thing in the world from which he 
fiirank with a feeling almost of terror, it was that 
ste should ever learn that his first devotion to her 
had been feigned . how mercenary his motives had 
l^en (he did not know how truly this showed his 
appreciation of her character) . and now he had 
placed himself in the power of the man who stood 
^ the nearest relation possible to her. 

But his principle was never to act on impulse, 
tmless some extraordinary circumstance made it 
justifiable, and he resolved to think over the matter 
before he put such a dangerous weapon against 
himself into the lawyer's hand, as he should do by 
asking him to hold his tongue. He began to feel 
that somehow Fortescue's warnings about him 
were not so unfounded as he had thought. 

After a few more words relative to the loan he 
required. Goldsmith continuing to protest that 
money never had been so scarce . whereas, from 
what Hallam had heard, he believed that if he had 
taken him a few thousands to invest, he would 
have vowed that it never was so plentifiil . ^he 
took his leave, feeling much less self-satisfied even 

25.2 



84 HESTER KIRTON. 

than when he entered the oflSce, except that he 
had the power of increasing his risks, for the 
sake of purchasing Hester's carriage and horses; 
at least this was what he told himself when he 
lounged into Tattersall's. 



85 



CHAPTER VL 

A WIPE'S DUTIES. 

Hiss Maktha Hallam had been 'terribly discon- 
certed -when she learned that her beloved nephew 
had really married a ward of Mr. Goldsmith's . 
her Fred, who might have married any lady he 
chose to select ; and, besides the vexation of such a 
connection, there was a mystery and suddenness 
about the whole thing she did not like at all. 
Deeper still lay a secret misgiving she would 
scarcely confess to herself, much less to any one 
else, founded on tiiie remembrance of a conver- 
sation one evening, between herself and her 
nephew on the subject of marriage. Had he . 
was it possible he had . married some girl only for 
her money ? With all her faults, Martha Hallam 
possessed one virtue worthy of note in the nine- 
teenth ceAtury . she was not a money worshipper ;. 



86 HESTER KIRTON. 

she did not estimate her friends only by the size 
of their houses, the luxury of their furniture, the 
number of their carriages and servants, or, and 
perhaps this is the lowest and meanest way we can 
value people, by the style and expense of their dress. 

She had thought a good deal and sounded a 
loud flourish about her brother's marriage, and 
had liked her sister-in-law all the better for having 
a fortune ; but in her secret heart she had rather 
wished it had not been derived from trade; she 
was not ashamed of her father and mother, but she 
wished the Hallams to rise in the scale of society, 
and she was keen-sighted enough to see that 
money is not all-powerful for that purpose; 
and as to Fred, she considered that his mother's 
fortune, and her own, would be quite suflScient for 
him, till his manners and his talents raised him to 
some post of honour and distinction in his own 
country, or at one of the principal Courts of 
Europe. This was the career she desired for him, 
and his patt to this would be much smoothed by 
marrying into a good old family ; ** none of your 
new nobility." 

Martha Hallam had a way not uncommon 
among those who have lately risen, of designating 



A wife's duties. 87 

these as upstarts ; she nright probably have winced 
"Under the term nouveaiuc riches^ but *^she had 
never given herself airs, thank goodness, and could 
not be called either a mushroom or an upstart," 
and so she would go on trying to break each end 
of the same stick And now, if, after all her 
calculations and pretty web-weaving, Fred had 
married some raw country girl, who could not 
trace a generation beyond her grandfath^ ! 

Martha Hallam was one of the wise people who 
pride themselves on being obstinate . they call 
it firm and consistent. She had determined not 
to have any acquaintance with the Miss Gold- 
smiths, and, therefore, she would not be present 
at her nephew's wedding. She was equally 
determined now that she would see and judge 
her new niece for herself before she heard Mrs* 
Hallam's opinion. They did not always agree 
about Fred ; he was a Hallam, therefore he could 
not do wrong in his aunt's eyes; but then his 
mother was a Reed, and the Reeds were richer 
than the Hallams, therefore their ways must be 
"righter." Mrs. Hallam's father lived on his 
own property; in fact, he was the richest, most 
influential man in the neighbourhood. She had 



88 HESTER KIRTON. 

been accustomed to see his word law, and there 
being no real gentry localized there, she had 
never received any of the wholesome " snubbing '* 
which, when administered in gentle doses, is, no 
doubt, very good for every one. She had met 
with it in London, but then she had attributed 
it' to the ignorance of people who did not under- 
stand her true position, and very much to her 
husband's low birth and his want of self-assertion. 
Perhaps she was right there . ^humility is sadly at 
a discount among the virtues now-a-days. We 
live in an age of self-help. No man waits for 
another to blow his trumpet; and, instead of 
economizing our opinions, we are fond of riding 
them at full trot, however lame and shambling, 
over those of others, who may either not have 
the same amount of presumption or who are not 
so readily full of words. 

Miss Hallam and her sister were equally gifted 
in this respect; therefore they seldom differed 
openly; if they did, it nearly amounted to a 
quarrel, as neither would be the first to yield. 
But Mrs. Hallam had the compensating virtue 
of a cold temperament in a woman . a calm, 
peaceful temper; she was silly but not sensitive; 



A wife's duties. 89 

and so they agreed on the whole better thau 
might have been expected by any one who was 
only acquainted with the spinster's powers of 
irritation. 

The day after the unlucky visit in Wilton 
Place she arrived in Gloucester Place. 

Hallam was not at home, but he had often 
talked of his aunt to Hester ; moreover, she had 
sent her a set of ornaments on her marriage, 
pretty and becoming enough to propitiate any 
bride. Hester's reception was, therefore, much 
more cordial than it had been to her mother-in- 
law, who had called an hour previously and had 
taken Fred away with her. 

The old lady expected to find Hester worthy 
her nephew's taste, yet she was surprised; she 
looked lovely as, with her cheeks tinged with 
the pink flush of excitement, her dark brown 
velvet-like eyes glistening through their fringe 
of black lashes, she sat quiet, nothing loth to 
listen w^hile her new aunt descanted on Fred's 
perfections. 

*^ I don't ask you if he makes a good husband, my 
dear; he couldn't do anything else, I'm sure; and I'm 
sure, too, you're a good and happy wife. you look 



90 HESTER KIRTON. 

like it. I'm so glad to have seen you, my dear.'* 
She bent forward and kissed Hester again ; in her 
surprise at her beauty and grace, she had quite 
forgotten her dread of a mesalliance. " You must 
come very soon and spend a long day with me, 
and Fred shall come to tea and fetch you home, 
or I suppose he can manage an early dinner now, 
as he has given up office. I always dine early. 
You shouldn't sit with your back to an open 
window, my dear : you'll have a stiff neck if you 
do. And so you've lived in the country all your 
life . know nothing about London ways at all, I 
dare say. You must be very glad to get the 
chance of coming to London." Martha Hallam 
had a great contempt for country people. 

*^ I might have come before* I've been asked 
to stay in London." 

Martha thought this allusion, as she supposed 
to the Miss Goldsmiths, trying. 

"Yes, yes; but one cannot judge much of 
a place when with mere acquaintances only ; you 
will find London very different now." 

" I think I should have enjoyed myself very 
much," said Hester, warmly, and determined to 
explain hersel " I should have been with uncle 



A wife's duties. 91 

and aunt Wrenshaw, and they are my dearest 
friends." 

Miss Hallam was rigid in an instant. What 
want of taste and tact in Hester to allude to her 
friends, who might be shopkeepers or something 
equally unmentionable I In her uncertainty of this, 
however, her duty was clear : she would not say 
anything that would annoy her new niece, but 
she must teach her by her manner, that hence- 
forth her husband's family and friends must be 
her first consideration and all-sufficient. 

" Oh, my dear, you mustn't have dearest fiiends 
now who don't belong to your husband," she said, 
laughing ; " indeed, I always thought young wives 
were so devoted that they could see no merit in 
any one but their husbands." 

^* Nothing could ever make me give up uncle 
and aunt Wrenshaw," said Hester, so decidedly 
that the old lady started. 

*^ A bad, brusque manner," she thought to her-: 
self; *^ her looks and her breeding don't agree." 

Yesterday, perhaps, Hester would scarcely have 
said as much in her aunt's favour, for she had felt 
hurt and grieved by tiieir long silence ; but she had 
received a note that morning, which seemed to show 



92 HESTER KIRTON. 

that at any rate some of her letters to Mrs. Wren- 
sbaw had miscarried : the note said that she might 
expect them any day, as they were most anxious 
to see her, having heard of her arrival in town 
from Lucy, and it breathed such warm affection 
that Hester's heart was longing to be once more 
with some of her own people. This would have 
been incomprehensible to Martha Hallam; she 
considered that, when a woman married, she be- 
came, body and soul, her husband's property ; that 
thenceforth she ought to love his parents, his 
brothers, his sisters, relatives and friends, as well, 
if not better than her own, simply because they 
belonged to him, forgetting that nature is never to 
be coerced so far as the affections are concerned, 
and that it would augur ill for the strength of a 
woman's love and constancy to her husband, if she 
could in a few weeks or months uproot all the 
holy and tender associations of childhood and 
youth, and supply their place with new ones. 

"I don't suppose, my dear, that Fred would 
ever make you do anything you really disliked," 
she said, gravely ; " but when a woman loves her 
husband as she ought, it never comes to making . 
his slightest wish is law." 



A wife's duties. 93 

Hester felt annoyed, she scarcely knew why ; 
but as she never bandied words by way of relieving 
her feelings, she decided that Miss Hallam was 
silly and prejudiced, although she was Fred's 
aunt, and remained silent 

"Have you had many callers yet; scarcely, 
though, I suppose ? ". 

" Only one besides Mrs. Hallam ; a very nice 
gentleman. Captain Fortescue, dined here the day 
before yesterday." 

"Captain Fortescuel ah, yes, he is a nice 
person ; a very first-rate man indeed. I expect 
youll find Fred will be always with him, if he's 
in town." 

"J hope not," said Hester, laughing; "I shan't 
like being left alone always." 

" Oh, my dear, my dear, don't you make that 
mistake, the great mistake of young wives ; never 
interfere with your husband's enjoyments. Why, 
before my brother, Mr. Hallam, married, he 
and I were quite as attached as any husband 
and wife could be, I'm sure; but he used often 
to go out without me, and I never grumbled, 
and when he went into the country or to the 
Continent, he usu,ally went alone ; I never 



HESTEB KIRTON; 



inch 

tiie 



should have expected him^ as a rule^ to take me 
with him." 

It seemed as if the conversation were full of 
stumbling-blocks. 

Hester tried to get on more open ground. 
, ** Was my father-in-law your only brother, or 
had you any more y " yH 

*^ There was one other sister, who died young; 
we never knew much about her^ No, my brother 
and I were all in all to each oth6r; I don't suppose ^ 

any brother and sister ever loved each other as 
we did ; it is always so in small families ; quite 
impossible in a large family, where there are so 
many to love, that there should be the same depth ^ 

of feeling ; it is more on the surface there, more 
frittered away." 

" And yet," said Hester, thoughtfiilly, " I have 
heard it said that large families are usually the 
most united in affectbn of any, because they axe 
generally so much less selfish." 

Captain Fortescue and her husband had had an 
argument on this subject, and Hester had listened 
eagerly, and, almost unconsciously, had adopted 
the captain's views as her own. 

Miss Hallam began rapidly to protest against 



I 



I 



A wife's duties. 95 

TOch a nation, bat the arrival of visitors finished 
the discussion; the door was thrown open, 
and, to Hester's joy, Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw 
entered. 

In her delight at seeing them, she forgot all 
about her new aunt; but as soon as the first 
inquiries had been made and answered, she saw 
Mr. Wrenshaw glancing towards the stranger, 
and she introduced them to each other. She 
blushed and felt very nervous; it was the first 
time she had been called on to perform such a 
task; but she had watched Fred carefully, and 
knew it ought to be done, in a case like the 
present. 

Miss Hallam evidently considered it unneces^ 
sary ; indeed, a grievous mistake ; for she gave the 
most frigid and rigid of bows, completely frustrat- 
ing Mr. Wrenshaw's attempt to shake hands, 
by keeping her own stiflSy in the folds of her 
dress. 

Spite of this rebuff", the cheerful, happy- 
tempered old gentleman, always slow to take 
offence, tried to enter into conversation with 
her, while Hester and his wife were talking ; but 
he found it impossible to get anything but mono- 



96 HESTER KIRTON. 

syllables in reply to liis observations. Martha 
Hallam had far too much self-respect ever to 
talk to people she knew nothing about^ and who 
might possibly be butchers and bakers . universal 
courtesy and she were strangers. 

With all his good temper and tact, Mr. Wren- 
shaw had a keen insight into human nature ; he 
soon guessed the secret of the lady's rudeness, and, 
turning his back upon her, left her to her medita- 
tions, earnestly wishing she would go, as of course 
there were a great many questions he wished to 
ask Hester, which her new aunt's presence pre- 
vented. But he did not quite understand Martha 
Hallam ; she did not mind any patience or trouble 
80 long as she accomplished her object, and she 
considered she had a greater right in her nephew's 
house than his wife's relations had; in fact, she 
scarcely saw what business they had there ; she 
was quite sure Fred had not asked them, and, as 
has been before said, whatever Martha Hallam 
felt sure of, must be right. It was quite enough 
that her nephew should have married this country 
girl, should have given her the honour and glory 
of the name of Hallam, without being surrounded 
by a set of ill-bred relations, as she was certain 



A WIFE'S DUTIES. 97 

they were. So she sat stiff, and straight, and 
sflent, till Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw fancied she 
must be spending the day, and that there was 
no use in remaining longer with the hope of any 
private talk. Miss Hallam scarcely acknowledged 
their farewell bows, and Hester followed them out 
into the hall to have a few last words ; but there 
sate a man awaiting Mr. Hallam's return, so she 
could only speak still in the same reserved manner, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw went away with 
heavy hearts, for they feared thpir niece was not 
happy . at any rate, she did not seem quite her 
own mistress. 

Martha Hallam said nothing to Hester about 
her visitors, and, although perhaps in some ways 
this was a relief, it galled her that they should be 
ignored altogether. 

She talked much about refined reading and 
elegant pursuits, and seemed to take for granted 
that Hester must depend entirely for companion- 
ship in her husband's absence on herself and 
Mrs. Hallam. But she became aflTectionate on 
this topic, and, kissing Hester, again assured her 
that it should not be her fault if she were 
lonely. 

VOL. XL 26 



98 HESTEE KIRTON. 

When her new aunt left, Hester could scarce 
tell whether she liked or disliked her; { 
thought she meant to be kind, but she certaii 
had not formed a very high opinion of her gc 
sense or courtesy. 



99 



CHAPTER VIL 

THE SHADOW DEEPENS. 

Hestbb was growing dailj more Kke her hard 
and reserved old sel Her love for her husband 
at first seemed to h^ive changed her whole nature, 
for she worshipped hnn almost slavishly ; in her 
heart she did so still; but he spent so little of his 
time with her now, that she had scant opportunity 
of showing her devotion. It seemed strange to her 
that when she had worked so hard to fit herself to 
be his companion, he should avoid her society 
more and more. Except for this she had no 
positive cause of complaint against him. He was 
generally kind, and cheerful, and courteous. 
Warmly affectionate he had never been, so that 
she did not miss. But a secret tmsatisfied longing 
for something more confiding, more united in their 
mutual relation, was felt, although not acknow- 
ledged, by her. 

26.2 



100 HESTER KIRTOX, 

She had never indulged in the romance self- 
created in an imaginative mind, ^vithout books 
or outward helps, and from her deeply felt infe- 
rioritj, she possibly would have acknowledged 
that she must love her husband better than he 
could be expected to love her. Still she thought 
husbands and wives should be one, and it 
puzzled her to understand, as time went on, hpw, 
if Fred loved her at all, he could be happy to 
stay away so much from her, when no actual em- 
ployment forced him to do so; while she sate 
counting the hours till his return . far more dull 
and listless than those of her old life . for now it 
seemed as if she were so bound up in him that 
she could not enjoy life alone. 

So she would pass her time; and then, when he 
came in, fresh and bright, sometimes with a 
present he had brought as a surprise, always in 
such cheerful spirits that she soon found herself 
laughing heartily, and feeling a child again beside 
him, instead of the premature woman she had been 
all the morning . then she would take herself 
seriously to task for her discontent and ingratitude, 
and give up for the time all her half-formed reso- 
utions of appealing to him about his indifference. 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS. 101 

and, as it seemed, changed aflTection. Half-formed 
resolutions in a character like Hester's may be 
cast aside or forgotten, or rather, smothered out 
of sight for the time ; but it is for the time only ; 
they are never formed hastily, like those of an 
impulsive nature, and therefore they have, from 
being suppressed and kept back, struck deep root, 
and will, in spite of many checks and interruptions, 
grow up sturdy plants at last 

She had few visitors. She had lunched with 
Miss Hallam, and dined with her mother-in-law ; 
but Fred had, to her keen disappointment, en- 
gaged himself elsewhere. He often dined out now, 
and poor Hester had found Mrs. Hallam's society 
more irksome than anything she had yet met with. 
Shy as she was, she was not really timid ; but it 
seemed to her that at Wilton Place she was in a 
microscope, and she felt more awkward than she 
had ever been in her life. If she rose to walk 
across the room, it was impossible to do it easily 
with those cold placid blue eyes watching every 
movement, to see how it was executed. In all 
that concerned physical skill, Mrs. Hallam senior, 
from practice and association, had the advantage; 
Jut when she tried to draw from her daughter-in- 



102 HESTEB EIBTON. 

laWjT without seeming to ask direct questions, 
some particulars of her early life, Hester was 
more than a match for her. Her own pride and 
reserve in speaking of herself came to the aid of 
Hallam's warning, never to talk of the farm, or 
of her life there; and when she said Good-night, 
she lefb her mother-in-law puzzled to decide 
whether she were the dull obtuse person her 
answers would have pronounced her, or, as she 
felt more inclined to believe, a very artful, deter- 
mined. youBg woman. 

Thenceforth Mrs. Hallam considered she had 
been repulsed and aggrieved by her new daughter, 
and treated her in a kind of ill-used manner. She 
did not venture to complain openly to her son ; he 
had so sternly rebuked her first attempts at finding 
fault with Hester, that she dared not repeat them 
at present. Besides, she v^as displeased with him ; 
he seldom came near^ her now, and he ought to 
have broken through any engagement to dine with 
her, when she had given him a formal invitation. 
It was very bad taste to say the least of it : ** Poor 
fellow I " sighed his mother, '^ it is the sad ePect of 
unrefined association, for I feel certain that girl is 
low-bom.'* 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS- 103 

HesternowdislS:edher mother-in-lawwith allthe 
strength of her nature ; there was a slight jealousy, 
too, mingled with it; she saw how fiilly his mother 
possessed the attributes lier husband was most 
solicitous for in her . she was thoroughly graceful 
and elegant. Hester looked so in repose, but she 
was conscious of being still awkward in her 
movements. Then Mrs. Hallam was an accom- 
plished musician, and here there was perfect 
sympathy between mother and son ; and last, not 
least, although Mrs. Hallam was not by any 
means talented, she had a pretty way of talking, 
a light easy manner of saying frivolous nothings, 
far more likely to please most men than the most 
sensible conversation. 

Hester found her new aunt more tolerable, 
although Martha Hallam was always ready to 
depreciate everybody and anything not essentially 
hers, or belonging to her family. Still she had a 
warm heart underneath this fault-finding, and, after 
all, she could not help being fond of and taking an 
interest in Fred's wife. So she had striven to make 
her niece's visit pleasant, and had thus soothed, 
although she had not obliterated, Hester's resentful 
remembrance of her conduct to the Wrenshaws. 



1 04 HESTER . KIRTOX. 

At one time she had thought of complaining of 
this to her husband, ibut she lovearhim too well to 
vex him willingly, and it would centainly grieve 
him to hear of her aunt's rudeness. . 

She contented herself with mentioning that her 
aunt and uncle had called, and asking him when 
he could take her to see them. 

He looked grave and told her there was no 
hurry. He had never seen them, and imagined 
Hester's uncle and aunt as unpresentable as her 
father had seemed to him ; besides, he had deter- 
mined, till she was of age, and the management 
of her money satisfactorily settled, she should not 
have any adviser but himself. 

Hester rebelled secretly ; but Fred did not say 
it unkindly ; he even kissed her and asked her if 
she were tired of him that she was so anxious 
to be running after her relations, and an un- 
solicited kiss from Fred made the day a white 
one in Hester's memory. Lucy would have 
triumphed to see how thankful her proud, un- 
demonstrative cousin was for the .slightest fond^- 
ness. '*rv 

She sate now listening eagerlj^. x'he dinner-, 
hour was near, and he had not returned home. 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS. lOo 

Slie started up as she heard him come in, and 
ran out into the hall to meet him^ bat he turned 
away. 

She went np to him with a happy smile, and 
clasped his arm with both her hands. 

" Oh, Fred, dearest, I thought you were never 
coining. How late you are ! " 

He drew his arm away abruptly, and muttered 
he wished she would not make such an exhibi- 
tion of him, and then went up to his dressing- 
room* 

Hester followed, for she thought he was ill. So 
he was in mind. He had been trying for two 
days to see Goldsmith, and bad been denied 
admittance in such a manner that be was con- 
vinced it was intentional, and as he returned 
home, thoroughly out of temper at what he called 
the ** Jew's insolence," he met a friend wjxo 
confided to him that it had oozed out some 
trickery was contemplated towards the horse on 
which he had betted very largely. He had never 
felt so tborojifijlily entangled and outwitted in his 
life: he be to believe that Goldsmith was a 
shuflBUbg oltf'scodndrel, and then, when he reached 
bjome and wanted to be quiet, it was too much that 



106 HESTEE KIETON. 

Hester should forget all self-respect and rush 
out like a school-girl, and make love to him 
before the servant. 

Frederic H!allam was not often seriously out 
of temper, but, when he was, he closely resembled 
his mother: he became fastidious, cold, and 
imkind to every one ; the only way was to leavo 
him to himself; but poor Hest^ had not learned 
this way of managing him. 

She followed him silently upstairs into their 
bedroom, out of which his room opened. 

*^ For patience sake, Hester, do leave me alone. 
I have scarcely time to dress before Fortescue 
comes, without your coming to worry me.'* 

She had seen him in this sort of temper before, 
but then she felt that she had given him cause 
for vexation. Now she was blameless, and, spite 
of p her love. Pride rose against what she con- 
sidered injustice, and in an instant her manner 
changed. It may be all very well for a woman 
to assert dignity, but it is hardly a quality likely 
to conduce to domestic happiness. Hallam 
thought she had never seemed so hard and un- 
loveable as now. She drew herself up to her 
fuU height, and saying, "Very well, then, if 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS. 107 

yon don't want me^ ni go downstairs," quitted 

the room. 
Oatside the door, she met her maid, who told 

W Captain Fortescne was in the drawing-room. 
Hester swept past her, for she knew her face 

oonid not be natoral-looking, and the prying semi- 

impertin^ice of this woman was one of her great 
annoyances. She had never complained of her to her 
hnsband . her nature was too prond for complaint ; 
besides, he had fonnd Parkins for her, and it seemed 
nngracioos to complain of his gifts ; bat she had 
quite resolved that as soon as this country place 
was purchased, about which Mr. Goldsmith had 
spoken to her &e only time she had seen him 
since her arrival in town, she should discharge 
Parkins and have Faith Stasson in her place. 
Faith would soon leom to be handy, and she 
bated to be waited on as much as Parkins con- 
sidered necessary. In many ways, it often seemed 
to Hester that her maid was the greatest lady of 
the two ; by herself, she would never have 
dreamed of half the requirements Parkins con- 
sidered indispensable. She was sure it would 
be economy to get rid of her, and, besides this, 
she had the uneasy feeling that this woman had 



103 HESTEB KIRTON. 

seen her from the first, knew all her awkwardness 
and all her mistakes; it would be very un- 
pleasant to have her as a perpetual reminder 
when she took the head of her own establishment, 
for it had been tacitly agreed between her and her 
husband that they were not to have a home of 
their own till she had grown more used to the 
w^orld's ways. 

After all, Hester wronged the woman; she 
pitied her mistress far more than she thought 
slightingly of her, although she might consider her 
a trifle too industrious for a lady born ; but she 
confided to Hallam's man-servant that she thought 
his master a very careless husband, and one who 
deserved that things should go wrong, 

Hester paused a moment before she entered 
the drawing-room; she had always had a slight 
contempt for what she called Lucy's wheedling, 
coaxing ways, and yet instinct told her that if 
she were not too proud, too awkward for it, an 
aiBFectionate petting manner was more wifely than 
cold. haughtiness; still, sorry as she was for their 
disagreement, she felt that it would be a tacit 
falsehood to be the first to make friends : it would 
be owning herself in the wrong. 



THE SHADOW DJ:EPENS. 109 

Captain Fortescue soon set Iier at her ease, and 
before her husband appeared had drawn her into 
an animated account of her visit to the opera a 
few nights before. 

"I was so very sorry not to be able to go with 
you; Hallam should have let me know sooner; 
and you really were pleased ? " 

" Yes, very much ; only I should enjoy it more 
if the words were English ; I am not forward 
enough yet in Italian to follow the meaning." 

" But you can admire the music without caring 
about the sense of the words, can you not?" he 
Said, smiling. 

" I am afraid you will think me very literal, 
but I can't," she said, blushing; she was not stiff 
and hard to Captain Fortescue ; he was so entirely 
courteous to her, that she never felt shy with him. 

Hallam now came in; his friend saw how 
cloudy he looked, but he had just met the same 
kind friend who had poisoned Fred's hopes of 
success at the races, so he wisely kept the con- 
versation from sporting matters. 

"My sister-in-law wants to know when she 
may call on Mrs. Hallam," Fortescue said, during 
dinner, looking at his friend as he spoke. 



110 HESTER KEBTON. 

^ Oh I does she ? Tell her she'd better wait till 
we're in a house of our own. We doa't intend to 
visit while we're here, you know"; at least, my wife 
doesn't ; or, stay. 111 call on Lady Helena myself 
and explain." 

^^ Is that the beautiful Lady Helena Fortescue 
Mrs. Hallam told me of? " said Hester. 

** Some people admire her greatly," said Captain 
Fortescue, smiling, " but I am not one of the 
number." 

** By Jove, Fortescue 1 I can't think what you 
mean ; I saw her in the park yesterday, and she 
looked handsomer than ever ; besides, it's not mere 
beauty in her case . she looks so thorough-ired." 

He had spoken pettishly, and partly to get 
rid of some of his angry feelings towards Hester, 
and yet the moment the words were uttered he 
felt they were ungtterou& 

His wife turned very pale and pressed her lips 
tightly together; aad she did not join in the 
conversation until it had turned on other topics. 

Frederic Hallam must have been in a very 
irritable state, for he frowned at so^ie trifling 
gaucherie of Hester's during dinner. He was 
still thinking of the difference bdiween her vad 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS. Ill 

Lady Hdena, and how impossible it would be to 
fatroduce Hester in that kind of society. 

As soon as she left the table he asked his friend 
to go with him to the theatre. 

"Tour sister said she had a box at Drury Lane 
to-night, and asked me to look in." 

''What, with Mrs. Hallam? that will be an 
excellent way of introducing her to Helena." 

*' Oh, no ; I d(m't think Hester would like that 

^^ of thing; she is sadly shy, as you may see; 

^^G would rather go to the theatre quietly with 

^^ afiother evening; besides, I'm not going 

^ tie myself to take my wife ev^ywhere, I can 

^^ti you: you won't do it when you marry, 

* Ortescue." 

" As I have no intcnticm of marrying, we won't 
^gue that question ; but it isn't fair to leave Mrs. 
Ballam to spend her evening alone." 

^ Oh, my dear fellow, she doesn't mind ; she's 
used to it; or, well," he said, as some slight com- 
punction for his late neglect and unkindness to 
her again made itself felt, ^^ why don't you stay 
and make yourself agreeable? I shan't be away 
long, only, when I've pledged my word to a lady, 
I like to keep it" 



112 ' HESTER KIRTON. 

Fortescue was annoyed. He knew Lady 
Helena's determination to be worshipped ; although 
strong in her severe virtue, or, more truly (for she 
had little shielding love for her husband), safe in 
her coldness, she only bestowed an occasional smile 
in return. 

He often thought, if he were Gerald, he would 
not allow so many danglers round his wife. He was 
angry with Hallam for persisting in his admiration 
now that he was married, and to such a wif^ 
thought Fortescue, as he looked at Hester, " as 
superior to Helena, in all except style, which she 
will soon acquire, as a diamond is to tinsel." 

Hallam did not go with his friend to the 
drawing-room, and his wife's manner puzzled 
Fortescue, for she seemed rather pleased to hear 
that her husband had gone out, than disappointed 
that he had left her. 

In reality, she was so tired of lonely evenings 
that it was a relief he had chosen this one when 
she had a companion, as it gave her some hope 
that the next might be spent at home, and she 
was unwilling that Fortescue should notice Fred's 
unkind manner. Probably going out (Fortescue 
had not said where he was gone) would make 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS. 113 

Mm quite himself again ; his anger never lasted 
long. 

She was surprised to find how pleasantly the 
evening passed without him. 

For the first time in her life, she was enjoying 
the conversation of a well-read, highly-educated 
Dian, too nobly gifted himself not to appreciate and 
take delight in drawing out her powers of re- 
flection and observation, and suflSciently blase 
^ith society to enjoy keenly the freshness of her 
remarks. 

He made her talk of much that she had seen in 
Italy and Switzerland, and from him she gathered 
^ith eager interest many bits of information con- 
cerning the history and antiquities of many of the 
Remarkable cities she had visited. 

"But Hallam surely told you these things ? " 

'*My husband hardly ever had time to go any- 
where with me ; " then noticing his look of surprise, 
she checked herself and added, " you know, if I 
had not been so ignorant, I ought to have heard 
some of these things from the guides; but I had 
never learned Italian till after my marriage." 

She looked up at him as if she expected he 
would be astonished at her ignorance, but he was 

VOL. n. 27 



114 HESTER KIETON. 

completely fascinated. He felt sure she possessed 
latent, though uncultivated, mental power, while 
she was so simple still, so thoroughly unaffected in 
all she said and did. He longed to know more of 
her and her past history, and he thought that in the 
frank, confiding mood she was in, she would readily 
have satisfied his curiosity; but Hallam had sa 
clearly shrunk from the subject that Fortescue felt 
he had no right to cross-question Hester about 
what her husband probably wished unknown. 

Hallam did not return till his friend was leaving. 
He was more dieerful, but his manner to his wife 
seemed as cold as it had been at dinner-time. 

Fortescue walked slowly home. He wondered 
how long Hester's devotion to her husband would 
stand such a strain upon it. She had avoided 
rather than sought the mention of his name; but 
her eyes, when she looked at him, and a sort of 
undefinable manner when in his presence, con- 
vinced Fortescue that she worshipped him. 
. ^* Strange creatures women are . strange, unac- 
countable creatures ! " 

He shrugged his shoulders; somehow or other 
his friend had sunk in his esteem lately, since he 
had seen him with his wife.; 



THE SHADOW DEEPENS. 115 

^* I always liked Fred for liis social companion- 
able qualities ratlier than because any great 
sympathy existed between us. He is one of those 
men one's heart opens to of its own accord, so 
thoroughly good-tempered and bright, but that's 
not the sort of thing to take women, at any 
rate such a creature as that I'm fairly puzzled 
to imagine how she has managed to make him 
into an idol; it must be a simple case of 
in&taation, and, unluckily, quite one-sided, I'm 
afraid. Master Fred shows very bad taste: 
ttat girl 1ms only half developed mentally; in 
&ct, she's only beginning to do so ; she^ no more 
be able to make a companion of him than she'll 
%9 and I'm afraid her love won't stand the 
revelation of her idol's inferiority, if she gets no 
love or devotion in return." 

And he congratulated himself that he had never 
married, and wondered whether the infatuation of 
love was strong enough to blind women lastingly 
to their husbands' failings, and came to the con- 
dosion that the only chance for this would be in 
a case where the love was equal cm both sides ; 
therefore he agdn shrugged his shoulders, and 

thought Fred had better mind what he was about. 

27.2 



116 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

HESTER SPEAKS. 

Hester had the forbearance to wait till next 
mornings before she spoke to her husband. After 
she left the dinner-table on the previous evening, 
she thought over all that had passed, and made up 
her mind that she must in some way have 
offended him, and that it would be better to ask 
what it was about An indistinct feeling of dis- 
content and unhappiness, a glimpse of the cloud 
of coming evil, weighed on her spirits. He had 
certainly stayed at home much more in Italy than 
he did now. Was it^and an imcomfortable 
thought traversed her brain, she was not fertile 
in inventing troubles, although she liked to ponder 
over them . ^was it that, now he was near his 
own friends again . fine fashionable people like 
Lady Helena Fortescue . he saw the difference 



HSTES SFEAES 117 

l)etwee]itfaemaiidlKsseif? Pou'He^er! this was 
acrud dKMight, bnt Yortescue came upstairs so 
soon diat she had not had time to OHisidar it fnlly. 
Hallam aj^ieared at leakfast earli^ than usual, 
so it seemed a good o^ortnnitT. 

She did not go up to him, or nse any litde fcmd- 
ling wa J of softening her appeal ; if she had Texed 
^, it had been nnwillioglTy and she felt he had 
^e no atonem^it for his nnkLodness. 

Tred, why were you so angry with me yes- 
terday?" 

A shadow of some kind most have come across 
the reverence of her love, for she did not feel 
timid, or as if she were afraid of offending him. 
"Angry was I?" he scarcely raised his eyes 
I from his newspaper. The silence that followed 
seemed to attract his attention; he looked up, and 
Hester's pale face and determined expression 
aroused him to the full consciousness that some- 
thing unusual was happening. 

*' Eh ! what 1 angry 1 " he repeated, as if awaken- 
ing from sleep. *^ Yes, I remember I was cross 
because I wanted my . dinner, and I'd been bored 
about business. You mustn't mind about such 
trifles, my dear girl, really you mustn't," he added 



118 HESTEB KIBTOK 

seriously, for the expression of her face annoyed 
him, she seemed to be taking such a very high 
hand in the matter. *' I'm a good-tempered fellow, 
and so you've not got used to it ; but you should 
see what some women have to take quietly. I 
dare say it is not the last time you'll find me cross 
before dinner ; only take a word of advice, Hester, 
as you've recurred to disagreeables yoursdf. 
always leave me alone at such times, I hate to be 
bothered when I'm cross." 

The servant came in with the letters ; so Hester 
had time to think over her reply. This way of 
answering her appeal had quite disconcerted her 
view of her wrongs. He seemed to think he had 
a right to be cross, and that she was fortunate 
that he was not so often. 

He might be right Hester felt how ignorant 
she was of the behaviour of married people, but 
this was the slightest part of her complaint. What 
she wanted explained was, why, when he seemed 
so frank and open to every one, was he so reserved 
towards her ; and why did he seem to care so little 
. or, more truly, not at all . ^for her confid^oce? 
Captain Fortescue had made her feel that she 
could entertain her husband, if he would only stay 



HESTEE SPEAKS. 119 

at home sometimes, and talk to her in the same 
way. He could teach her so much that she now 
spent hours in diving into books for; her thirst 
for knowledge had become insatiable lately ; but 
then if he did stay at home, he always went on the 
sofa after dinner, and slept a great part of the 
evening. 

There were several letters for him this morning, 
and only one for her, and she sate thinking before 
she looked to see who it was from. But before he 
had finished reading the last and most important 
looking of his letters, an exclamation of pleasure 
from Hester made him look up. 

 Who's your letter from ? " 

"From Lucy; and, Fred, she wants us to go 
down and stay a few days with them next week ; 
will it not be delightful ? " 

"Very delightful, no doubt But, my dear 
child, your cousin Lucy must live sadly out of the 
world, not to know that next week is Tatton races, 
and to expect Londoners to bury themselves in the 
country just as the season has begun in earnest 
sounds like a Joke." 

The smile vanished from Hester's face. 

" But, Fred, you did not say so when her last 



120 HESTER KIRTON. 

letter came, saying she was going to ask us soon ; 
you said I might write and thank her, so I think 
we are pledged to go." 

"You may think what you like," said her 
husband, " but I'm not going to give up Tatton for 
any country cousins whatever ; but I tell you what, 
Hester, if you like you may go down to Stedding; 
you can take Parkins, you know." 

Hester's self-will had not often been called into 
action since her . marriage, but it was fully roused 
now. It seemed to her that she had been led into 
giving a tacit promise to accept Lucy's invitation, 
and that now she must break her word. 

^^ But, Fred, we could put it oflP till the week 
after the races; shall you not be able to go then?" 

** Certainly not ; so don't worry any more. You 
had better write to-day, and say you will go to 
them next Monday ; the change will do you good." 

He turned to leave the room. 

" Don't go, I want to speak to you, Fred." Her 
cheeks were flushed, and she spoke in her harsh 
sententious way. *^ It seems very strange that you 
should send me away from you, so soon after we are 
married. I don't understand it; you won't let me 
go to aunt Wrenshaw here in London, who would 



HESTEB SPEAKS. 121 

love me, and make me happy, and yet you seem 
glad to send me away altogether." Her eyes filled 
with tears, but her pride kept them back. 

" Good heavens ! " Hallam looked thoroughly 
annoyed now. ^^What on earth do you mean 
Why, I myself heard Goldsmith tell you, that the 
last alteration your father made in his will was to 
desire that you were not placed under the care 
of your uncle Wrenshaw. He had some good 
reason for this, you may be certain, and I have 
considered it my duty to keep you apart." 

" My father did not forbid all intercourse 
between us," she said, slowly and distinctly ; " but 
what I should like to know is if you really want 
to get rid of me, because, unless you do, I had 
rather not go to Stedding without you." 

If Hallam had told the truth, he would have 
said, yes. Her manner was so haughty . so un- 
like anything he had ever seen in her before . 
that he shuddered, and felt a positive dread and dis- 
like of his future life with her. He believed when 
once women took to lecturing their husbands, they 
never lost an opportunity of exercising the talent 

" What a fuss you are making about nothing. 
What on earth do you mean by such folly? 



122 HESTER KIETON. 

Really, Hester, you ought to know better. Do 
husbands and wives never pay country visits 
alone, do you think?" 

^* I don*t know, but I have been wanting to tell 
you for some time, that I am not happy ; not as 
happy as I think you would like me to be. I see 
little enough of you, and now you seem to wish to 
send me away altogether.** 

Hallam by a strong effort repressed his im- 
patience, and the angry words that were in his 
mind to speak : Hester's manner had some- 
thing serious and impressive in it, that mastered 
him in spite of himself. He walked to the 
window and frowned at the opposite houses. 

After a minute or two he turned round. 

" How can you be so silly," he said, in a caJnMr 
tone ; ** I nevr said you were to go to Stedding 
unless you liked; only I must be away two or 
three days next week, and I thought you would 
not like being alone." 

** But I could go with you." 

Hallam was confounded. What change had 
come over his quiet wife, she seemed to be inclined 
to manage him completely. 

.^No, Hester, you must allow me to be the best 



HESTER SPEAKS. 123 

judge of the society into which I take you. I am 
going to Tatton races, if you must know, with a 
party of gentlemen, and I don't think all of them 
fit associates for my wife ; but if you like," he 
added, as a new idea occurred to him, ^* you can 
stay with my mother while Fm away ; I know she 
would take good care of you." 

"No, thank you," she said, proudly, for she 
keenly felt how he had evaded her question ; " I 
don't mind about being alone, Fred ; I ought to be 
pretty well used to that, I think ; at any rate, I 
would rather be quite alone than with any one 
who despises me as your mother does." 

" Hester, you are possessed this morning, I 
believe . if you have kept your own counsel, what 
on earth can my mother or any (me else find to 
despise in you ? " 

The words were well chosen, and they soothed 
her for the moment, but he said them as coldly 
as if he were speaking to some indifferent person. 

** I did not say she had any right to behave as 
she does ; but she thinks I am beneath her, and 
I hate people who do so; and it is so false to 
pretend to kiss me and treat me like a daughter, 
and ihea to wound me by ill-natured words." 



.124 HESTEB KIRTON. 

" Stop, stop, Hester ! don't go so fast ; you must 
not take up an imfounded prejudice against my 
mother; you don't understand each other yet, 
and you've seen so little of each other, I don't 
wonder." 

She went on as if he had not spoken. 

*^ I will not see your mother alone any more, 
Fred, till she treats me diflPerently ; and as to your 
aunt . I did not mean to tell you, but it seems as if 
I had better, or you will say I have taken up 
a prejudice against her too . she has not been 
unkind to me, but she almost insulted uncle and 
aunt Wrenshaw, the day they came here. They 
mayn't be her friends, but ihey are mine, and I 
love them, and I should think you would wish 
your wife's friends treated with respect ; at least 
I thought husband and wife were one and the 
same, but your relations don't seem to think so." 

However aggrieved he might be by her way of 
speaking, the truth of the last sentence was indis- 
putable ; his mother's manner had greatly annoyed 
him, and he could quite believe it was worse 
when he was out of the room ; however, he felt he 
must say a word for his aunt. 

" Ton are unreasonable, Hester ; people never 



HESTER SPEAKS. 1 25 

take to their relations by marriage at once ; aunt 
Martha is silly and eccentric . ^almost all old maids 
are, unless they are very humble-minded . ^but 
she's a kind-hearted creature^ and she told me 
herself she was very fond of you, and if you would 
just humour her and let her patronize you a little, 
you would get on famously. But now look here, 
I don't like disturbances; I shan't be home till 
dinner-time, and I'm going out directly after on 
business. I give you my word, it is on busi- 
ness, Hester. I tell you this, that we mayn't 
have another fuss. I am sure you'd take things 
quietly, if you knew how very unpleasant it is 
to me to be spoken to as you have spoken this 
morning ; so shake hands, and make up your mind 
it's all fancy and nonsense about my wanting to 
get rid of you. I'm off now," and with an 
unusual kiss, he left the room. 

Hallam wondered to himself how it was that he 
had not given his wife what he would have called 
**a good blowing up." The longer he reflected 
upon their morning's conversation, the greater be- 
came his surprise. That she, an ignorant country 
girl of nineteen, a mere child in every way, should 
dare to lecture and set herself in opposition to 



126 HESTER KIRTON. 

him, when he had dcme her the unspeakable 
service of marrying her, and making her more 
of a lady than she could have possibly been with- 
out his help, utterly overwhelmed him. 

He had noticed a change in her manner lately ; 
she had grown quieter, harder, and more abrupt ; 
but she had not been very well, and he thought 
perhaps she wanted a little change of air. Still it 
was most unreasonable. He had hired a carriage 
for her, so that she could drive out every day if 
she liked ; he had taken her to the opera, given 
her some new bracelets and a necklace: what more 
could she widi for ? 

** I believe it's a struggle for power," he said 
to himself; " I don't blame her for trying, women 
always do it ; but if a man throws himself away 
on a country girl, the least he expects is to be 
master in his own house; perhaps it would be 
wiser to let her. see a little more socieiy; she'd 
soon find out that husbands are not expected to 
be tied to their wives' apron-strings firom morning 
till night It's odd; she is the last girl I should 
have expected any temper from ; however, I should 
think after what I said she'll be carefal ; still it's 
impleasant to feel she has a temper; however. 



HESTEai SPEAKS. 127 

^te is so fond of me that for her own sake she'll 
i^p it in check." 

Still he felt dissatisfied with the way he had 
oehaved; it seemed to him that he ought to 
lave been more angry, and it was equally un- 
pleasant to be conscious of the revolution that 
had taken place in his ideas about her. Do as 
he would, he could no longer regard her as the 
half-formed, inferior creature he had married only 
a few months ago. 



128. HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE TRUTH. 

Hester had surprised herself quite as much as 
her husband; she did not understand nor could 
she control the sudden *^ Berserker "-like anger 
that had prompted her to speak as she had done ; 
she had been subject to it as a child, then for a 
time it had passed away, but, as we have seen, 
it had once returned in her home-life after she had 
first seen Hallam. She did not regret anything 
she had said to him, only she wished it had beea 
said differently. Why was it? what could it be? 
She felt sure that with Mrs. Hallam, whom she 
disliked, she could never be tempted to anger . 
she should always have power to control herself. 
It was strange that only with her father and with 
her husband, the two beings she had loved best, 
she should have given way to it Poor Hester 1 



THE TRUTH. 129 

she did not remember the effort it had cost her 
to speak on each occasion. It is a hard task to 
foot up a statelj pine-tree^ but when once that 
18 accomplished, 'ware the fall ; it.thnnders down 
the side of the mountain, not to be arrested by 
any intervening obstacle. 

She had told Fred now all that was on her 
mind . she hoped he was not offended past forgive- 
ness . but no, he had shaken hands and kissed 
her at parting ; she would try and remember his 
advice ; she thought if he loved her there would be 
little trouble in following it, and now that she had 
Said she disliked being left alone he would, no 
doubt, make more of a companion of her. If he 
loved her . as yet she did not really believe in 
his want of love, although misgivings, shadowy 
forerunners of the truth, would trouble her; she 
xesolved to try and be as gentle as possible to 
atone for her angry words; after what he had 
said, it would be better not to take any notice of 
their quarrel, but look cheerful and contented. 

She kept her resolution, and Hallam was sur- 
prised and pleased, and when he went out, came 
back again to say he should be home early. 
He was glad she had the sense to avoid a scene 

vnT.. TT. 28 



130 HESTER KIRTON. 

or an explanation ; he really did not mean to tie 
himself to stay at home any more than before ; but 
he thought he should humour her for a few dayft, 
especially as he intended to stay away the whole 
of the race week. 

He was, therefore, glad, on the whole, that the 
dispute had happened. Hester's spirits were cer- 
tainly more cheerfid, during the next few days, 
and one evBuing that he spent at home, when 
Captain Tortescue was there, instead of going to 
sleep, he exerted himself sufficiently to take his 
full share in the conversation. And Fortescue 
decided that what had taken place before was 
exceptionaL 

Hester was happy again; it was plain to her 
that if her husband saw more of her, the con- 
fidence she so much desired would soon be estab- 
lished between them, and fi-om what he had said, 
she felt sure that even if they did not settle 
in the country this year, they should go away 
together in the autumn, to some place apart i&om 
these fashionable frknds, for whom she felt an 
equal dislike and awe. 

On Monday morning, the day preceding thai; 
on which Hallam intended to go to Tatton, he 



THE TBUTH. 131 

left home as iisual soon after breakfast. Hester 
was standing at the dming-room window^ study- 
ing the weather; for Captain Fortescue,on the pre- 
vious evening, had been extolling the beauties of 
Surrey, and she was meditating a long drive. She 
had a keen appreciation of landscape beauties, 
although, from her want of artistic taste, she had 
little eye for the picturesque, either in form or colour, 
or for minor natural beauties, such as wild flowers 
or plants ; distant views and fine trees she could 
admire, but she had always thought Lucy trifling 
and foolish, for peering into hedges and ditches, 
when they were walking together, or raving about 
the wild grace of a common bramble bush* 

Suddenly her husband passed the window, and 
came up the steps; between surprise and joy, 
Hester lost all presence of mind; she had been 
looking forward to hours of solitude ; it seemed 
as if the sun had suddenly burst from behind the 
bank of clouds she had been studying. Without 
pausing to reflect, she had darted out into the hall, 
and opened the door before he could knock. 

At the same moment, Paridns appeared on the 
staircase. 

Hallam did not speak, but his look of intense 

28.2 



132 HESTER KIBTON. 

annoyance recalled Hester to herself, and Parkins* 
alarmed expression as she hurried forwards to 
close the door again, confirmed her in the con- 
viction that she had committed some grievous 
crime against the proprieties of life. 

Her husband did not speak till he had closed 
the dining-room door upon them both, and then 
he turned to her with a look of his mother in his 
face, that made her almost shudder. 

** Hester, I must beg you to remember that you 
have servants of your own, and that there are 
plenty belonging to this house ; if you do not care 
for the opinion of any stranger who might have 
been passing, at least recollect my feelings, and 
do not disgrace yourself in this manner again. 
Good heavens! suppose my mother had seen you!'' 

*^ I will not do it again," she said, gently, for 
she was vexed that Parkins had been a witness of 
her mistake. *^ I was so pleased to see you, Fred, 
I forgot all else." 

** Well, never mind, only don't do it again. Just 
give me my new cardcase, will you, and see that it 
has cards in it. I took out this empty one this 
morning; that's a little thing you might see to^ 
Hester." 



THE TRUTH. 133 

She flew to fetch his cardcase. He had the love 
of being waited on peculiar to some men, rarely 
to those of a very unselfish, tender nature . ^I mean 
where their wives are concerned. Hester was 
willing enough to do what he wished, unbidden ; 
but then her ignorance of society and its ways 
made her, of course, unable to anticipate all his 
requirements. 

The cardcase was soon found, and he was gone, 
but the little incident had left a very unequal 
impression on his wife's mind to that which it had 
produced on his own. 

She thought it was a pity she had been so hasty 
in acting, without staying to think first ; but she 
had told Fred she was sorry, and there was an end 
of it ; and, after all, there could be no real harm 
in opening the door to her husband because she 
w^ glad to see him home again ; if there were, the 
rebuke was greater than the fault. 

But Hallam was seriously annoyed. 

Hester had always seemed so calm, so self- 
possessed, so free from any girlish folly or 
romance, that he had never imagined, with all her 
short-comings, she could make him ridiculous. 
He could not bear to be laughed at, and, with. 



134 HESTER KTRTON. 

the usual inconsistency of a man who makes a 
m^alliance, he considered any infringement of the 
conventions of society a heinous offence against 
good breeding. 

His ruffled mood increased when he found 
admittance again refiised him at Mr Goldsmith's 
office; however^ this time it seemed that the 
lawyer really was out of town, for his head clerk 
vouchsafed the intelligence that he had gone down 
to Stedding, to look after some property in that 
neighboorhood* 

Hallam immediately guessed he had goiie to 
look after ihe farm, which, for the present, had 
been put under Peter Stasson's care, at Hester's 
express request. He knew very well that her 
great wish was to have the farmhouse put in 
thorough repair, and furnished for a future home 
for them; but. to this he was decidedly opposed, 
although, with hi& usual easy way of managing 
matters, he had not contradicted her when she sug- 
gested the idea. But now he was angry and thwarted, 
for it was almost indispensable that he should see 
Goldsmith again before he left town. He won-^ 
dered what he was doing at Eirton's Farm : it wa/i 
only a short time ago that he had told him ii 



. THE TKUTH 135 

was just returned thence . surely he could not 
he plara^ning such an absurdity as their residence 
there. He chafed like an untamed horse at the. 
subjection in which the lawyer seemed resolved 
to hold him till Hester came of age. It was unen- 
durable to be no longer a free man in atiy 
way, to be tied to a wife for whom he did not 
feel strong liking (Frederic Hallam had never 
thought about the possibility of being in love with 
any woman yet), and whom he was now becoming 
ashamed of; if this sort of thing was to go on till 
she came of age, he knew he should dislike her. 
Bis idea in marrying a fortune had been tiiat 
there would be plenty of means to render th6m 
independent of each other ; a large house to begin 
with, so that if their tempers did not suit, they 
need not often meet; then would come the 
infinitude of distractions and pleasurable occu- 
pation which riches always entail. He had never 
intended to lose any of the freedom of his life 
by marriage ; but he had taken a one-sided view 
of the question. He had not considered that his 
wife might be unfit for, or that she might shrink 
from, the fashionable world in which all these 
engrossing pursuits (which, if he had reasoned it 



136 HESTER KIRTON. 

out, were intended to fulfil the place of a husband's 
love and companionship) were to be found; he 
began to think of Hester now as a pale, voluntary- 
prisoner, to whom he was fettered by anything 
but chains of roses or even of gold. 

He forgot all his life of debt and anxiety, and 
sighed for the time when he had no wife to inter- 
fere with his comfort and his liberty. 

" Ah, Fortescue ! " he exclaimed, as he met his 
friend just as he reached Piccadilly; **what a 
lucky fellow you are to be a free man still ! " 

Fortescue took his friend's arm, and they saun- 
tered along together under the trees. 

" What's the matter now, Fred ? you don't look 
yourself; and what soii; of freedom are you con- 
gratulating me on ? To tell you the truth, I'm not 
a fit object for it just now, if you're talking of 
money." 

*^ Money, no 1 I was not thinking of money 
then. though to be hard up is bad enough . I 
mean you are wise not to have married, that's 
all." 

Fortescue looked serious. Hallam had often 
advised him: it seemed a fitting moment to give a 
little counsel in return. 



THE TRUTH. 137 

*' You must pardon me, Hallam ; but of all men 
I should have. thought you might have been con- 
gratulated on your marriage." 

*^ You mean because of the money." 

"No, the compliment is strictly personal." 

Hallam looked round to be certain no x)ne was 
Mrithin hearing. 

"I have kept this to myself as long as I could 
bear it, but now I must tell some one . and it had 
better be you than any one else, old fellow . 
I>ecause I know you are safe. I don't like my 
\vife." 

There was a pause. " I am very sorry to hear 
^ou say so," and Fortescue . looked really con- 
cerned. 

" Look here, understand what I mean ; she's all 
very well, . a nice, pretty girl and all that; but it 
will cost mo a fortune to get her educated. I've 
spent I don't know how much already. Why, 
she can't even dance. You must see yourself; 
she makes a courtesy like a charity girl." 

It did occur to Fortescue, whose was the money 
spent, after all ? He said,. 

*^ Well, but she is very young, and all these are 
superficial grievances. Mrs. Hallam has,^ I feel 



138 HESTER EIBTON. 

persuaded, so much natural abiliiy and good sense 
that you might make anything of her." 

He spoke earnestly, and yet, strangely enough, 
it seemed to him that he was not really anxious 
for a better understanding between Hester and 
her husband. 

Hallam answered, impatiently, . 

" I wish her good sense would teach her a little 
self-control, then. This morning I went back for 
something I had forgotten, and, by Jove, she came 
fl^ng out Uke a school-girl, and opened the street- 
door to me herself." 

Fortescue laughed. 

" That does not seem a very serious offence ; 
some men would be thankful if their wives were 
BS fond of ibem." 

" Oh, nonsense, Percy T I always tell you, you 
are romantic ; people don't bother themselves 
about fondness and love, and that sort of thing, 
in their wives, in real life, as ihey do in books. at 
least if they do it's all pretence . Fm no hypoerite," 
he said, earnestly, for his friend's contradiction was 
leading him to say far more than he had at first in- 
tended. **I never meant to make a love-marriage. 
My belief is, love-marriages are twaddle.*^ 



THE TRUTH. 139 

Fortescue felt that he ought to saj something 
fw the wife. 

" Listen to me, and don't think me impertinent, 
because you began the subject yourself. It seems 
to me, you see too little of your wife to care 
much about her." 

Hallam shrugged his shoulders* 

"I should have thought," Fortescue went on, 
**that, with your taste and judgment about manner, 
and your wife's evident devotion to you, you 
Xnight soon, by a few judicious hints, rectify the 
little errors you complain o Think how young 
you both are; and if you begin now, by taking no 
pains to find a companion in your wife or to fit 
her to go with you into society . which last," he 
added,, reluctantly, for he felt strangely unwilling 
that Hester should lose her present simplicity, in 
his eyes her greatest charm, ** as you value con- 
ventional manners so highly, would be your wisest 
course . let me finish," he added, as Hallam 
turned away . "how wiQ it. be with you both 
twwity years hence? Instead of having adapted 
yourselves to each other's ways and tempers, you 
will have both grown hard and selfish, even if 
nothing worse happens." 



140 HESTER KIRTON. 

** Fortescue, youVe turned parson ; but if you 
knew how heartily I am wishing just at this 
moment that I'd never seen her, that I'd never 
been ass enough to marry at all, you'd understand 
my speaking out as I have done. I haven't said. 
Heaven knows, half or anything of what I feel or 
what I suflFer from ; only understand this in so many 
words . I don't want to excuse it, I beheve I was 
wrong, but it's done now . I never cared two straws 
about her before I married her . it was only the 
money; and now don't let us talk any more about 
it . it's a hopeless case, which talking will not 
cure." 

" Our Toads part here," said his friend, abruptly, 
" so good-by. . When do you start ? " 

" The jfirst thing to-morrow morning. I wish 
you'd come. I go alone, of course, with Faulkner 
and that lot" 

**No, I can't change my mind now; in fact, I 
have several engagements for the week." 

" Well, it's the first time I shall have gone down . 
without you," said Hallam. He was sorry already 
for the vehemence with which he had received 
his friend's advice. "But if I find out anything 
to-morrow that you can turn to any account 



THE TRUTH. 141 

on Wednesday morning, I'll drop you a line. 
Good-by.'' 

Fortescue was glad to be alone. to be freed 
from his friend's unwelcome company. No ; he 
could scarcely call him his friend now; his soul 
had been disappointed and revolted by all that 
Eallam had said. 

To a man of such refined honour as Percy 
Fortescue, it seemed a living lie to marry a 
Woman solely foir her money, and when he thought 
of Hester, it was impossible not to feel anger 
against the man who could speak of her as hep 
husband had done. 

And there was another feeling that he wanted 
to be alone to understand. Spite of his wish to 
see Mrs. Hallam happy and duly appreciated, 
there mingled in bis anger with his friend a 
feeling of relief; and now, as he turned into the 
park to have his musings to himself, he thought 
he had been hard on Fred. "Was it his fault if he 
could not appreciate or understand such a mind as 
Hester's ? A delicious pleasurable sensation stole 
over him as he recalled the last conversation he 
himself had had with her, and the thorough sym- 
pathy she had evinced in his opinions and tastes. 



142 HBSTEE KIETON. 

He had been spending much of his* time in 
Gloucester Place lately ; he hoped Hallam would 
not stay away a whole week v he supposed it would 
not quite do to call in his absence, for Hesflber's 
society was becoming essential .to him, FortesQue 
had never had a younger sister, and his feeling 
for her was just what he should have entertained 
for one . she was so entirely free from <ioquetry, 
he had no fear she would mistake his attentions ; 
besides, spite of what he had just said to Hallan^ 
he believed she was coM, and would never care 
much for her husband or any one else, except as a 
friend ; and therefore, as her husband shrank from 
taking the first place in her finendship . disliked 
her even . why should not he be the guide and 
counsellor she so much wanted, and enjoy in 
return the charm of- seeing sueh an intellect 
develope under his fostering care? 

He did not stay much to analyse his feelings, 
and he resolutely, or more probably unconscioudyj 
shut his eyes to )AiB ful^e ; for the present Hester 
was neglected, probably unhappy; it was his 
duty to brighten her life. His theory did not 
proceed to show how this duty had devolved on 
him ; but then theories, viewed through the delusive 



. THE :TRUT3. . 143 

glass of inclination, are apt to be more imperfect 
and fiiulty than we imagine. Captain Fortescue 
did not know it, but he was really in love for the 
first time in his life. Had he known it, he would 
have avoided Mrs. Hdlam's society, but he was 
'blind. 



. . 



144: ' HJSSTER KIBTOK. 



CHAPTER X. 

self-deceivjid: 

Good-natured Mrs. Frank Wrenshai?^ was in* a 
state of consternation when Lucy told her the 
contents of Hester's letter. 

** Not coming, ain't they ? then it's a great deal 
too bad," she exclaimed; ** after she'd promised to 
come and all; and you and Rachel sitting up^ 
sewing trimming on that new* dimity bed, and 
all the carpets beat and muslin curtains, and 
getting the spare room so nice. Well, I never; 
and I'd ordered, last market-day, two couple of 
fowl, and nosegays, and I don't know what all, 
to be brought in to-morrow, thinking you'd be 
sure and want 'em. I tell yo1i what, Lucy, you 
may say what you please, but your cousin 
Hester's grown stuck-up ; she's been mounted up 
so high with all these London folks, that she can't 
stoop her head down to see such as you and me 



SELF-DECEIVED. . 14*5 

are . her own flesh and blood, too; I've no 
patience with such fancies, saying she'll come 
one week, and then changing her mind the next ;, 
shilly-shallying nonsense, it makes me as cross as 
.as a blue baboon." . 

Lncy was sa^ly disappointed, but she could not 
at by and hear Hester blamed. 
. ** You must remember, mother, you never liked 
poor Hefeter, and I think you are hard upon, her 
How ; she has faults, of course . everybody has, 
but I never saw her shilly-shally about apything; 

tod Jacob says " 

** Ah, of course, Jacob thinks something 

Afferent to what I do. Really, Lucy, for a girl 

"Vvho used to be fond of having her own way, I 

^on't believe you've an idea of your own in your 

lead, that I don't It's Jacob says this, and Jacob 

thinks the other, till I sometimes feel as if he was 

my husband, too, and I must believe all he says." 

"Well, mother," Lucy had turned very red 

during her mother's speech, " and usen't you to be 

just the same with my father ? " 

**0h, but that was quite a diflFerent thmg; 
why, he was your own father, Lucy ; you're 
surely not going to compare any one to him." 
VOL. n. 29 



I 



146 HESTER KIBTOK. 

Lucy burs* out laughing, in spite of her veiar 
tion that her mother should speak slightingly of 
Jacob. 

" Wdl, mainma^ there never can be any use in 
talking of one's husband ; no one else ever sees 
him with one's own eyes ; but for Hester's sake, I 
should like you to hear "wkaA Jacob says about this 
letter ; may I l^ell you? " 

** Yes, yes, mj dear, of course," said Mrs. 
Wrenshaw, already rather ashamed of what she 
had said ; for she was both fond and proud of her 
son-in-law, although it was irritating to have his^ 
opinion so constantly quoted against her own. 

^'He thinks that poor Hester has not been 
allowed to accept our invitation, and that probably 
her husband wishes her to give up her owa re- 
lations altogether." 

" "Well, I never ! " exclaimed Mrs. Wrenshaw ; 
*^and fix>m what I can make out, he owes everything 
to the poor child. I believe he hadn't a penny to 
buy boots with when he married her; but still,. 
Lucy, I say again, Hester ought to hold her own ; 
however, Jacob's wrong in oneway; the husband 
, can't shut her away from all of us. Old Biz told 
me some time ago that she believed it was a settled 



SELF-DECEIVED. 1^ 

thiig, that, after a bit, they were to live at Eorton's 
Parm.'' 

" But, mamma," Lncy looked incredulous, ** how- 
can Biz know ? " 

*' Well, I don't know, my dear, I didn't ask her ; 
only she seems positive about it ; and now, Lucy, 
don't you go contradicting every word I say. It 
seems to me, you make amends for giving up your 
own way to Jacob, by not letting me have anything 
light about me." 

^^ Mamma, don't," Lucy stood still for a 
mom^ot, struggling with her waywardness ; then 
she threw her arms round her mother's neck. 
**I beg your pardon, and I'm very sorry; but 
mother, dear, I believe I can't help these 
naughty fits, if you find &ult with Jacob. There, 
I know what you are going to say . ^you do it ta 
prevent me from spoiling him ; but you may trust 
me, mother," she said, wiping away her teJus, "I 
.do not idolize my husband. I will tell you, if it 
will make you happier, that I can 'see his faults,, 
although I like others to be blind to them ; but he 
would not be human if he were perfect, and one 
thing I am sure of . the nearer and closer we 
are to a person, the more truly arfe we: able to 

29.2 



148 HESTER KIRTON. 

appreciate their good qualities, and to see 
how completely these counterbalance any tiny 
failings*'* 

*^ There, there," said her mother, kissing her, 
'^ don't excite yourself, there's a dear child. You 
know I love Jacob very much. Good gracious me ! 
what will he say if he finds you with red eyes when 
he comes in ? I don't know what's come over you, 
you cry twice as easily as you used to." 

** Do I ? " said Lucy, smiling ; she thought to 
herself that her mother was mistaken, but she 
would not contradict her again. ** When did you 
see Biz ? " she inquired. 

** Oh, she came to see me yesterday, poor old 
thing ! Rachel had met her in the street, and told 
her about Hester's being expected, and she seemed 
quite in a fuss about it . talked about Mr. Hallam's 
whiskers, and his boots, and the way he curled 'em 
in a dish-cover." 

**She was very much pleased at the idea of* 
seeing Hester, I suppose," said Lucy, laughing. 

**Yes, but you know she's always got a 
grievance ; she keeps 'em ready made, I believe, 
to suit all occasions. She said she thought Miss 
Hester might have written to tell her she was 



. SELF-DECEIVED. . 149 

coming. Why, in course, she'd have had a new 
gown and a paper put up in her parlour, as she 
made no doubt Mr. Hallam and his wife would 
take tea with her." 

" Which I very much doubt, even if they ever 
come at all, although it wouldn't do to tell Biz so, 
poor old creature." 

"Well," said Mrs. Wrenshaw, looking guilty 
and confused, "I . I told her so, my dear, and she 
began to cry and to make such a piece of work, I 
didn't know how to stop her; and when you think 
about the thirty pounds a year, and the cottage 
and all, and the way she goes on about blackbeetles 
and toothache, she really is a discontented old 
worri-cow." 

" Jacob says . " began Lucy, but here she re- 
membered, and began to hunt diligently in her 
work-basket for some seemingly undiscoverable 
reel of cotton. " Oh, by-the-by," she continued, 
"don't you think, mamma, it might be as well not 
to mention this intended visit of Hester's to any 
one else ; you know what a place Stedding is for 
making mountains out of molehills." 

"I'm sure I never said anything of the sort, 
Lucy. I think Stedding's a very good sort of 



150 HESTER KIRTON. 

place; nobody in this world ever got gossiped 
about who didn't deserve it. However, if you 
wish the thing to be made a mystery of, of course 
I shall say nothing, every one knows what a quiet^ 
safe person I am. Of course I told Jemima 
Skipper that you expected your cousin, but then 
she never gossips." 

**You might as well have told all Stedding,** 
was on Lucy's lips ; but she checked herself before 
the words were uttered, and her mother went on : 

" I shall tell her now, that the visit is deferred, 
that'll be the best way, won't it? Of course, I 
shan't say what I think, I shall leave her to form 
her own arguments. Why, good gracious me, 
here's Jacob ; how late it must be I " 

Mr. Bonham came in, looking not quite' so 
happy as be usually did to find himself at home 
again. He was tired and hungry, much too tired 
to talk, and the sight of his mother-in-law was as 
unwelcome as the sight of any one but Lucy 
would have been. But Mrs. Wrenshaw did not 
remark this. She refused her daughter's inifita- 
tion to stay and drink tea with them ; but, although 
she said " good-by,^ and let Jacob rise to open 
the door for her, she kept him standing quite ten 



SELF-DECEIVED. 151 

nunut^ while she expatiated on the folly of 
marrying above one's station, and the impossibility 
of Hester's happiness. At last she noticed his 
wearied look. 

^ Good gracious, you're tired out, and I keeping 
you standing all the while ; I'm sure you're glad 
to get rid of me, aren't you now ? " 

And then she went away, not home though, but 

to her friend Jemima; and soon furnished that 

able architect with the materials for a first-rate 

I 
scandal. 

*^ I'm sorry I kept mamma so long, dearest ; it 
was my fault." 

** Oh, never mind, so long as I get some tea,' 
said her husband, considerably mollified at finding 
himself treated as the aggrieved person, when he 
was conscious of the ungracious looks he had 
bestowed on his mother-in-law. 

Lncy did not say another word till he had put 
on his shppers and drank a cup of tea, and then 
he told him what Bia had told her mother. 

" I heard that said before the marriage, Lucy, but 
I did not tell you, because I felt sure it would end 
in nothing. Is it likely that, with their means of 



152 HESTEB KIRTON. 

living, and the power to purchase an estate wheiv 
ever they please, with a gentleman's house on it iu 
good repair, such a man as Mr. Hallam would 
consent to spend the large sum necessary to make 
the farmhouse even hahitable ? Besides, Lucy . I 
don't want to vex you, darling . but your cousin 
Hester, judging even by her letter, is a very 
diflferent person from what she was at Kirton's 
Farm." 

** Oh, Jacob ! I'm sure she writes as affection- 
ately as ever," said Lucy, indignantly. 

It was a sore subject, for, although she had 
defended him to her mother, she thought, in her 
secret heart, that Jacob was unjust to Hester. He 
certainly always had something to say against her ; 
perhaps, young husbands are rarely fond of those 
among their wives' friends who possess influence 
over them. 

" Now, don't look cross, Lucy, or you'll make 
me savage. Come and sit here, you old pet ; there 
now," he added, as he put his arm round her; 
" you'll listen to reason now, won't you? What I 
mean is . only you are such an impulsive monkey, 
there's no saying a word, sometimes" . Lucy nestled 
her head on his shoulder, by way of asking for- 



SELF-DECEIVED. 153 

.giveness . ** that Hester is a lady now, and may 
possibly not care to be reminded of bygones, as 
Kirton's Farm must infallibly remind her ; and 
for the same reason, darling, I would have you on 
-your guard; don't expect much of Hester; you are 
so sensitive, that I know how any slight coldness 
will make] you suflfer; far better make up your 
mind at once to give up Hester's affection; your 
paths in life are quite different, and are not likely 
to bring you together." 

*^But, Jacob, suppose you are mistaken ; and, oh 1 
suppose, worse than all, that the poor thing is not 
happy. that her husband does not love her as you 
do me . will it not be very selfish to give her up 
till - she has shown plainly she no longer cares 
for me?" 

" In my opinion she has done so ; this letter is 
too cold and guarded in its tone to be written by 
the unformed girl I remember as your cousin. 
Depend upon it, she's a woman of the world by 
this time . and now give . me another ; cup of tea, 
darling." 

Neither of them spoke for a little while. Theirs 
Was a love of such perfect sympathy that, though 
they had only been a few months married, each 



154 PESTER KIETON. 

knew the other's inood^ without need of explana- 
tion^ or fear of being misunderstood. 

To Jacob the delight of sitting in perfect sil^ice, 
watching his wife's movement, and her pretty 
little ways, was intense ; or, if she were in a talk- 
ative mood, he would sit looking and listening, 
with just a stray word or two of answer, till she 
often told him she believed, if she repeated the 
same jokes and stories a hundred times, he would 
always fancy them new. Sometimes she insisted 
tthat it was her turn to be amused, and that he 
ought to talk to her, or she should become an 
inveterate chatterbox. But he had always the 
plea of his hard work during the day ; he had to 
speak constantly, and she had so much rest f(r 
her tongue ; he always gained his point : perhaps 
women don't dislike talking so very much, after 
all. Lucy certainly did not. 

Jacob sat now thinking of the difference between 
the cousins, and iow much love Lucy's ardent 
affectionate nature had lavished on<me whom he 
believed to be as cold as a stone. It made him 
cSad, too, to think, how his darling would suffer^ 
when she became practically convinced of tibis 
truth, for he knew how deeply sensitive her 



SELF-DECEIVED. 155 

feelings were^ althougli to others this was coni- 
pletelj hidden under her laughing vivacious 
manner. He should be glad when it was all over, 
jsati she was reconciled to the loss of her cousin* 
Probably he was not aware of the hidden jealousy 
he had for Lucy's affection for any one but 
Jbimself; but then, poor man! this was not bis 
fault . she worshipped him so entirely, that she 
had made him exacting. 

Lucy was thinking how much she should like to 
go up to London, and see Hester, and find out if 
she really were unhappy. She had written to 
her aunt "Wrenshaw, asking if she had seen her, 
and her aunt had answered her letter^ without 
taking any notice of the inquiry. I have said 
that Lucy was imaginative in early childhood, and 
since she had left school (practical routine having 
dispersed her day-dreams, so long as school life 
continued) she had lived in an unreal world, 
for ever forecasting events, and building scenes 
and incidents upon them, coloured with the bright 
or^ombre tints of her fancy. Now, as she bent 
over the fire, making Jacob a firesh piece of toast, 
she conjured up a sorrowftd picture of her cousin, 
married to a husband who did not aj^reciate her. 



156 HESTER KIRTON. 

rfor she remarked that Frederic Hallam's name 
-was rarely mentioned in his wife's letters ; probably 
forced to associate with uncongenial people ; and 
oh 1 perhaps hardest of all to Lucy's free mind, 
obliged to live in a dingy London house, without 
any garden or any flowers; this last idea was so 
overpowering that she could not keep it to herself. 

 Oh, how dreadful to think of I " 

" What ! that you've blackened my toast against 
the bars, while you've been mooning?" said Jacob, 
who had been watching her. 

** No, you naughty boy, and I've hardly blacked 
it at all ; but think of that poor dear Hester with- 
out any flowers." 

Jacob laughed. " Why, you little goose, I expect 
she has much better flowers than you have, and 
besides, I know by instinct she's not a woman to 
care about flowers." 

'^ Jacob! but you mean bought flowers ; as if 
there ever can be the same sentiment about 
flowers that you don't rear yourself." 

"And yet I have, seen you waste an immense 
. amount of superfluous admiration, which w^ould 
have been far better bestowed on me, on the wild 
flowers, we gather in the hedges." 



SELF-DECEIVED. 157 

''Ah! wild flowers, that's quite diflTerent; 
why, there are no flowers so beautiful as wild 
flowers. Think of wood anemones and garden 
ones, will you venture to compare then, sir? or* 
snowdrops either; and look at that nosegay of 
dog-roses and ferns, that I gathered this morning ; 
will you find anything to beat its freshness and 
degance ? " 

'' Well, it does look tasty, but that owes some- 
thing to the arrangement, I fancy; but if you 
placed a hothouse bouquet beside it, the want of 
bright colouring in your wild friends would make 
them dowdy." 

Before Lucy could utter her indignant remon- 
strance there was a ring at the surgery-bell. 

''Poor darling, and so tired as you are," said 
Lucy, tenderly ; " I thought I was going to have 
you to myself this evening. I shall just go' and 
see who it is, for I believe James went out after 
you came home, and if it's nothing of consequence 
I shall make whoever it is wait till he comes 
back; he's sure not to be long." 

But after a short parley, Jacob heard her 
returning and evidently not alone; heavy hob-^ 
nails sounded on the uncarpeted floor, Lucy 



158 HESTER EIETON. 

having l^fl; the inner door, which shut the surgery 
&om the house, ajar*. 

She came in smiling,, followed by Peter 
Stasson. 

" It's only Peter, dear, so I thought he could 
come in here withDut disturbing you." She 
gathered up her needlework and went away 

Peter was a much healthier looking man now ; 
he had less hard work to do and more ta eat . 
enough to make any one look healthier, perhaps. 
By Hester's express desire, as has been said, he 
had been, appointed head man at Kirton's Farm 
under the occasional superintendence of Mr. 
Goldsmith, with much better wages than Farmer 
Barton had ever paid him ; and now, spite of his 
wife's shiftless ways, her superior schooling became 
of service ; they occupied part of the farmhouse, 
and were able to ^nd the diildren to school in 
the daytime, so that by evening she was no 
longer an over-worked, weary woman, but able to 
help Peter with his farming accounts, which Mr* 
Goldsmith inspected rigorously once a month. 

He had come up now to get some medicine for 
the pain in his back left by the fever. 

Jacob prescribed the necessary remedies, and 



SELF-DECEIVED, 159 

gave him Trhat medicine ha required^ and after 
asking a few questioi^s abont the children, he 
lioped Peter would depart; bat the man lingered. 

**What is it, Peter? can I do anything else 
for you?" 

"Well, doctor, I do want a word more wi' 
ye. Folks ha' been a-tellin' I that Muss Heaster 
be a-comin' for to stay along o' you and yur 

missus ; and I ^ 

" Ton want to know when she's coming ? Well 
then, Peter, . for the present not at all ; she 
cannot leave London just now; in fact, I don't 
e:q)ect we shall see her in this part of the world 
for a long time to come." 

" Ye'll excuse me, doctor, but Mr. Goldsmith, 
when he wur down at farm, he seemed to think 
us shouldn't bide there much ^nger ; he said us 
must turn out soon to make roonufor Muss Heaster 
and her good man." 

" What ! did he say they were going to live 
at Kirton's Farm ? Impossible," said Mr. Bonham, 
surprised and annoyed out of all self-possession. 

" Well, doctor, he didn't quite as much as say 
&r good-an-all," said Peter* *^My mussus's 
notion wur that thay be thinkin' o' comin' for 



160 . HESTER KIRTON.. 

the summer-time loike, and real hearty usll all be^ 
to see Muss Heaster again, God bless her ! " 

'^WeH, goocf-night, Peter. If I were you, I 
wouldn't set my heart upon her coming ; I've 
no belief Mr. Goldsmith was in earnest, or if he 
were, there's no saying Mr. Hallam may be of 
the same way of thinking ; I don't think Kirton's. 
Farm would suit his notions." 

'^ There bean't no love lost atween the doctor 
and Muss Heaster's good man, I'm thinkin'," said 
quiet, observant Peter to himself, a&he trudged 
back to Kirton's Farm. 

Jacob Bonham stood in the surgery, thinking 
over what he had just hefard, and confused with 
the uaental tumult in his mind the news had 
created. He felt that it would be most injurious 
to his peace, would perhaps destroy all his 
domestic happiness, if the Hallams took up tlieir 
permanent residence at Kirton's Farm. He was 
sure he could never like Frederic Hallam or make 
a companion of him ; besides, he was just the sort 
of man who would patronize, and patronage was 
to Jacob, with all his easy debonnaire ways, what 
it is to most right-minded men, insufferable. 
Then Hester, he knew,' did not love his Lucy as 



SELF-DECEIVED. .161 

she deserved, and if they had to meet often, and 
as neighbours they would do so, he could not 
suffer his darling's feelings to be hurt by slights 
and coldness. But he would not believe they 
were coming to the farm, Jacob was not the 
only man who has hesitated to give credit to what 
he does not wish to -happen ; no doubt Mr. Gold- 
smith had not spoken decidedly . a story never 
loses in the telling . and Mr. and Mrs. Hallam 
might be quite unconscious of any intention of 
revisiting the farm. 

At any rate the best and kindest way was not 
to tell Lucy what Peter had said . she would be 
sure to write to Hester and urge her to come 
. and after the slighting way in which their 
invitation had been treated, there was no need 
that she should write to her cousin at all. 

He was surprised not to feel quite calm and* 
easy when he had made this determination. Was 
it because this was the first secret he had ever kept 
from his wife ? But her smiling face, when she 
came downstairs again, soon chased away the cloud 
of disquiet. 

Perhaps it was a pity she came so soon; if the 
cloud had swelled and blackened, the lightning 
VOL. IL 30 



162 HESTEB KCRTON. 

ray of truth might have darted from it, and have 
helped him, by its momentary brilliance, to analyse 
his motives more closely than he was in the habit 
of doing, for good as Jacob was, he was not very 
earnest-minded as yet 

One of his unconfessed causes of disHke to the 
Hallams and their influence over Lucy was, that, 
beside the husband, he feared to feel awkward 
and country-4)red ; and another reason, that his 
independence revolted from the acquaintance of 
those so much richer than himself. He was not 
afraid of feeling envy of their riches, but he had 
disliked inviting th^n to his house, lest they might 
think he wds courting tiiem for the sake of their 
wealth. 



163J 



CHAPTER XI, 

THE EVE OF THE ST0R5L 

Hbstek was really dull and lonely; sdie had 
begged her husband so earnestly to send her news^ 
of his safe arrival at Tatton, that she had received 
a few hastily written lines the momkig after his' de- 
parture, but two whole days had gone by since then^ 
and there were still two more to be passed alone. 

She was pamed asnd surprised, too, at not 
hearing from Lucy. Jacob wronged Hester when 
le thought her insensible to hes cousin's affection ; 
she had not cared much for it before her marriage^ 
jealousy of Lucy's superior advantages and educa- 
tion had often made her repel her demonstrative 
We ; bu;t then her whole nature was lediargic and 
Trndevdoped. Now that die had known what it 
^as to love herself, she felt gratefbl when sh^ 
ii^ected OB Lucy's fimdness, and had resolved on 

30.2 



164 HESTER KIRTON. 

a different line of conduct towards her, when she 
should be once more at Kirton's Farm. But as 
day after day went by, and no answer came, she 
grew anxious and unhappy. Too proud and 
reserved to risk the chance of a rebuff by writing 
again, she told herself that, after all, Lucy's was a 
shallow nature. Many people, besides Hester, 
seem to think there can be no depth, and only 
evanescent warmth, in an impulsive temperament, 
forgetting that this is a physical rather than a 
mental attribute, and may be found united to the 
most unswerving constancy. 

Hester had been jealous of Lucy formerly, but 
not of her love for her ; it had been so plainly 
shown, so freely given, that she assumed it as a 
personal right. She had not thought enough of 
it to doubt it. But now her jealousy took another 
direction ; Lucy's love for her own husband had 
made her selfish; she had merely asked her to 
Stedding as a formal compliment . did not care, in 
fact, whether she went there or not ; if she had 
been still the Lucy of old times, she would have 
written an ardent outpouring of regret, when she 
received Hester's letter. 

There may be, and doubtless are, much bitterer 



THE EVE OF THE STORM. l65 

feelings ; but human nature is wrenched severely 
.when an unexpected defection of this kind forces 
itself on our conviction. We think ourselves . ^nay, 
have abundant proof . that we are loved, petted, 
almost idolized, by the admiring reverence of a 
friend, for whom (sometimes, because we have an 
innate, although unconscious, shrinking from a 
shallower nature than our own, oftener perhaps* 
because our hearts are otherwise occupied) we do 
not feel an equally warm affection ; we are content 
with loving them; they are our friends for life, 
dearer perhaps than any, except wife, or husband, 
or child. Suddenly, how or why, we know 
not, we wake to* the certainty that we are de- 
throned. It is not like the treachery or the 
coldness of our nearest and dearest, the one who 
shares our heart of hearts . -for I do not believe 
there is room for more than one in its inmost re- 
cesses . but still it is bitter : the shock to self-love 
is as great as that to affection ; we are discrowned; 
our smiles, our opinions, are no longer valued ; we 
did not know till we lost it, how dear all this was. 

One calls this disillusion . one gets used to it as 
one grows older, but it is a heart-hardening 
process. 



166 HESTEB XIRTOlff. 

Beyond tke uiasatisfied feeling abatri; her hus- 
band, which had been growing so mudi stronger 
of late, this defection of Lucy's was really 
Hester's first lesson in life's dece^; it seemed 
as if she had lost something that was hers 
of right, and she locked upon Jacob Bonham 
as a thief who had stolen away her cousin's 
love. It seemed doubly cruel when she was feel- 
ing lonely jind deserted without her husband. 
If Fred had only taken her to S tedding all would 
have been right between her and Lucy ; and now, 
by the time they went to live at Kirton's Farm 
(for she still hoped for fliis), Lucy would be per- 
fectly indifferent whether she ever saw her again. 
She could not write. it would be mean and 
cringeing to beg for an affection that was plainly 
on the wane ; besides, what good would come of 
it; it might make Lucy hypocritical; she might 
profess what she could no longer feel, rather than 
seem unkind . 'no, she would not write. 

But this resolution made Hester harder and 
dder. Self-dependence ngrely softens a woman, 
and her husband was included in this change of 
feeling. 

She wondered if other husbands left their wives 



THE EVE OF THE STORM. 167 

to be as dreary and lonely as she was. Certainly 
in this instance it was her own doing. , She had 
refiised to go to Wilton Place, and that same 
morning she had walked out with her maid in the 
Keg^it's Park, and as she returned saw that 
Mrs. Hallam's carriage had just driven up to her 
door ; without deigning any explanation to Parkins, 
she walked quickly up the street again, nor turned 
till she felt sure the unwelcome visitor must have 
driven away. 

*^ She did not come from kindness," said Hester 
proudly, to herself; *^ she only came to pry into 
how I employ my time in Fred's absence. I 
should wish her to thiiik that I go out and 
amuse myself; it will show her I am quite inde- 
pendent of her, and give her sometlung to talk 
about'* 

She thought to herself that no one, not even 
Fred, knew how diligently she liad been turning 
to account the many solitary hours she had 
passed, in hard work for her French and Italian 
masters. She was taking lessons in German, too, 
but she knew her husband did not care about 
travelling in Germany, and therefore she was more 
desirous of perfecting herself in Italian, in the 



168 HESTER KIRTON. 

hope that they might revisit Rome, although her 
own choice would have led her to the more difficult 
language ; perhaps she would have enjoyed the 
conquest over its grammar more thoroughly than 
she would have appreciated its literary treasures ; 
as yet, she preferred learning to reading. But 
who does not enjoy the development of a new 
faculty? It is not vanity . but it is among the 
most exquisite of purely human sensations, to 
make acquaintance, as it were, with this stranger 
in one's own mind . to see it struggling into life, 
daily growing in strength, finally walking alone, and 
dragging us along with it, forced in some mys- 
terious, incomprehensible manner to set it free . to 
give it utterance. The intellectual part of Hester's 
memory till now had scarcely been tried ; it was 
delightful to her to find how much it could retain. 
She began to speak French more than correctly 
now . with elegance ; her pronunciation improved 
daily, but her accent was faulty and monotonous; 
her keen intelligence told her that a few months* 
residence in Paris among French people would do 
more for this than any teaching, now that she was 
such a proficient in the language, although her 
professor shook his head, and hinted that unless 



THE EVE OF THE STORM, 169 

this was attempted at a much earlier age, it would 
be useless, 

Hester was" resolute. She knew she should 
Hover be a musician or an artist, but she was 
determined to excel in something. 

This morning her resolves had taken a more 
definite form. She had found, on her return from 
lier walk, a few lines from her aunt Wrenshaw, 
telling ^er that she and her husband were on the 
eve of starting for Paris, where they intended to 
stay some months, as they had let their house and 
furniture to a friend. 

Oh ! if Fred would only take her to Paris in 
the autumn, as he had once promised he would, 
how intensely happy her life would be I She 
should be able to talk French all day long, for he 
Would be sure to make some acquaintances, and 
then if he went out and left her, instead of being 
dull and lonely as she was now, her aunt would 
always be within reach. She smiled at herself the 
next minute: aunt Wrenshaw lived in London, 
and yet they never met. Probably Hester felt 
by instinct, what so many people experience in 
reality, that a singular amount of sympathy and 
liking will spring up between those who meet on 



170 - BESTi JKIRTO^. 

foreign ground, though they never dreamed of 
being even cempanionable on their own soil. 

Perhaps the separation of his . wife ifrom lier 

ft 

aunt had been almost as great u :mistake * of 
Frederic Hallam's as his marriage. she Vauld 
have been Hester's good genius.* She would at 
any rate have spared her these hours of selfi- 
communion, so unprofitable wiien bent earth- 
wards. She would have given her the Jove lier 
heart was secretly, though unconsciously, pining 
for, and would have prevented the scorching 
process it was now undergoing,, and which a strong 
unelastic eiature rarely recovers from. 

But Hester had not jnuch leisure to meditate 
this aft^noon. Her French master was coming 
.at three o'clock, for a two hours' lesson. She was 
working extra hard in Fred's absence from home, 
and this afternoon she became so interested in the 
course of study planned for the next two days, that 
she hurried through dinner, resolved .to work all 
the evening. 

So absorbed had she become in composing a 
French letter to her husband, that she did not 
hear a knock at the street-door, nor feet on the 
Starrs, and she started in great surprise, when lihe 



/THE BVE OF THE ST0B3L , 'iTl 



<irawing-room door was thrown open^ and Captain 
Portesexie wgiis announced. ' . . * . 

She blushed brightly as she rose to welcome 
hun ; there had been no possibility of hiding her 
books and dictjonarj^ so he must know her secret 
She had considdlred herself so .perfectly free from 
evening visitors during Fred's absence. 
. A flush came into Captain FortesQue's &c^ also, 
and he did not look as self-possesded ai^ usual ; hxsi 
Hester was so intent upon* securing his secrecy 
thlit she did not observe it. 

He apologized for such an intrusion, but Mr. 
Hallson had asked him to deliver a ihessage . 
personally. 

The colour died out of Hester's cheeks;^ she 
began to fear her husband was ill ; but she did not 
^peak, 

"He sends his lovie; he is quite well, and will 
p^haps stay away some days longer." 

*^I expected Mr. Hallam the day after to- 
morrow," she said, abruptly. 

She felt angry with Fortescue, it seemed to her 
ihatsheought to have been written to instead of him. 

** And you are very much disappointed^ I fear. 
You must be dull so much alone." 



172 HESTER BiBTO^JT. 

** Oh, no," said Hester ; she could not bear pity 
even from Captiain Fortescue, *^ Of pourse I miss 
my husband greatly ; .but you sioe I have plenty . 
to do in his absencfe ; " she pointed t6 her books. 

Fortescue looked as if he did not understand,* 
and Hester, after efljoining him nbt -to betray her 
secret, told him how she spent her lonely hourg^, 
and how anxious she was to surprise her husband 
with her progress. 

He 'listened in astonishment dnd* admiration : At 
her age, with her attractions, to have the resolution 
and self-denial to forego all lighter occupation and 
recreation, and work as- hard a^ a school-girl, and 
for what? to gratify and surprise a man who had 
no love for her, and who would not tippreciate the 
sacrifice. 

He did not reply; he was musing ov^ his 
friend's indiflference to so much loving devotion. 

Till now he had fancied Hester cold, but Jhe 
warm light in Jier eyes and the -eager flush on 
her cheeks betrayed her love for her husband to be 
far deeper than he had ever suspected. 

The revelation irritated him, he scarcely knew 
why; he had inscsnsibly grown to fancy himself 
necessary to Hester's happiness, and yet her 



^ ^ 



THE EVE Of the storm. . 173 

tlioughts were not with him now. How could she 
be so slavisl} a^. to bestow affectioa where it was 
neither valued nor returned?. SiireJ/, if she 
. shgwed a littl# spirit and .resentment, Fred might 
be brought back to his duty. . 

He felt the. ardent desire we experience, when 
we hear a thoroughly undeserving, person praised, 
to undeceive. Mrs. Hallam, to open her eyes to 
the tnlth, or gather, to the falsehood of he^ 
husband's conduQt towards her, . ^];)ut how could he 
speat of such things to a wife ? He had scarcely 
ever felt so contradictory. . Must he let her go on 
in blindness, lavishing all .her love where it was so 
completely wasted ? 

Hester looked up,- surprised at his continued 
silence. * ' 

** But, perhaps, yoi; think I am ilot making any 
progress," she said, doubtfiiUy, for Fortescue still 
held a, page of French manuscript in his hand ; 
** and, perhaps, he will not think sp either." 

Fortescue laid the paper down with an im- 
patient gesture ; he could scarcely restrain himself 
from speaking out. 

"I should not think it of much consequence 
what Hallam tlynks about i9^ 



174 HESTER KIRTON^ 

^Why not? I dotft rmderstand you," said 
Hester, her* head thrown back^ aud her eyes 
fixed on him with*a look of dignified surprise; 

** I meant . ^that . that *aS he is nbt certainly so 

good a French scholar as you must be by. this 

 
time, his judgment cannot much signify* He is , 

not much of a linguist, I believe." Fortesciie 

reddened, and spoke with hesitation. 

His manner puzzled h^r. She had thought he 
loved Fred almost as well as she did ; it was the first 
time any one hd ventured to speak disparagingly 
of her. husband, and her indigbatfon was roused. 
But Hester rarely spoke or acted upon impulse. 
Captain . Fortescue's words meant more than *they 
unplied ; his manner had been strangely variable, 
and he had seemed ill at ease. Perhaps Fred had 
quarrelled with him, but thqn he would not have . 
made him the bearer of a message from him. At 
any rate, she did not choose to hear him find fault 
with her husband. 

**What is the matter. Captain Fprtescue? is 
there any . anytHiilg wrong between you and 
Fred? You are the last person I should have 
expected to blame him." 

Fortescue's pride was now rousod by her harsh 



THE EVE 01* THfi STORM, 175 

. abrupt inannei*Vhe saw^'he had displeased her, 
bat she had chosen him, or he considered that she 
had choi^n him, for her &iend and adviser, and he 
must jnstify his words. Her cold, stern, expectant 
look gave* him little time to reasbn with himself. 

** I beg ^our pardon, Mrs. HaDam," he * said, 
v^y seriously, ** there has not been any. quarrel 
between your husband and. myedlf, although I 
have taken upon me to remonstrate with him 
lately about his conduct'* 

^ His conduct," .repeated Hestei^ to herself, so 
overcotiae by surprise at his. daring as to haiVe no 
jpower of answering readily. . 

.."Mrs. Hallam, you have honoured me with 

your friendship,^ or I should shrink from saying 

thik,. I have rfepionstrated with your -husband, 

as his intimate friend^ abput 'his. neglect of so 

. good and loving a' wife as you are. I have seen 

it with the greatest pain." . ' 

SBe stood speechless ; every . right and true 

feeling warring against what, she felt to be an 

imwarrantable interference, and above all pre- 

vsdled deep, intense mprtification that he shmild 

have seen and commented On what her heart too 

airely told her was the tjath. 



176 HESTER KIRTON. 

There was a dead silence. 

At length Hester spoke ;, but- her words came 
slowly at first, as if she were lost in thought.- 

" What business is it of yours. Captain For- 
tescue ? " she said> all the old unpolished abrupt- 
ness of her* early girlhood returning in this moment 
of intense feeling, rendered harsher still, perhaps, 
by the strong cijrb she was yet able to maintain 
over the passionate anger that was fast rising. 
*^No one asked you to interfere between me 
and Mr. Hallam ; and I beg , you wiH not call 
yourself my firiend. I do not want a frierict who 
speaks against my husband when he is away. It 
is not friendship either, but impertinence, to speak 
as you have done." 

Fortescue was too self-convjcted, too deeply 
mortified with himself, to, attempt a reply; he 
gave one glance at Hester, whose darkening face 
was fixed on the door, as if to show her^^agemess 
for his departure, and (Juietly bowing he left her 
alone. 



177 



CHAPTER XII. 

WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 

It was not altogether from indifference that 

Frederic Hallam had not written again to his wife. 

When he started on that Monday morning, all 

looked bright and promising, so far as the weather 

and the equipment of the drag were concerned, 

and he was in high spirits ; but when the party 

reached the railway station, he was annoyed to 

find a man waiting with a note from Mr, Faulkner, 

stating th|fc he and one of hii friends, the only 

two miJgffaMirs of the set with whom Hallam was on 

intimat^ terms, and with whom he cared to associate, 

would not be able to accompany them to Tatton, 

An undefined feeling of dislike and distrust of 

the rest of the party gathered in^ his mind as he 

looked at them, and he had half a mind to withdraw; 

and when two *^ horsey "-looking men, with bullet- 

TQi.. n. 31 



178 HESTEB KIRTON. 

heads scantily covered with hair, and cheeks like 
a quarenden apple, presented themselves as friends 
of the others, and candidates for the places left 
vacant by Faulkner's defection, he felt still more 
reluctant to trust himself alone in such company. 
But the heavy risk depending on the race, faith 
in his own sharpness, and his sense of good- 
fellowship, prevailed; nor could he well draw 
back now. Moreover, once at Tatton, he might 
easily find more congeal associates, and probably 
. ^here a bright idea occurred to his inventive 
mind, always on the look-out fcwr expedients . 
there would be something to be learned worth 
knowing from the set he was among at present 

So lighting his cigar, and casting care to the 
winds, he was soon deep in conversation with one 
of the apple-cheeked personages above mentioned. 

As soon as they^had reached Tatton stai;ion, and 
were again mounted on their yehkigg {or the 
course was some distance from the railway, they 
found themselves in the thronged road always to 
be found in the vicinity of *^ the races.^ 

Among the numerous carriages filled with air 
and fashionably dressed ladies that they passed on 
their way, he recognized Lady Helena Fortescneu 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON, 17*9 

She looked first surprised^ and then pleased . 
nnmifitakably pleased . Hallam fancied^ to see 
ium^ and he returned her bow with empresaement 
and his winning smile. 

She was really pleased to ee him again; he 
had not kept his promise of callmg on her^ so that 
dae had fancied he was going to shut himself up 
till the awkward^ over-grown country girl he had 
married . for she knew she was this. was polished 
and presentable. She had never forgotten the 
first account her brother-in-law had given her of 
Hallam's marriage; that it was one of purely 
mercenary motives. Fortescue had not seen her 
alone since; no one ever had much opportunity 
of seeing Lady Helena alone in the height of the 
London season, and even if he had, he would have 
been chary of praising Hester to her ; she could 
not tolerate praise of any woman too young to 
be her grandmoth^, and something made him 
dread the ridicule with which she would have met 
his admiration of a country-bred girL 

Lady Helena had felt secretly pleased to see 
Hallam alone at the theatre; but then he had 
evaded her inquiry afier his wife, by saying she 
had another engagement; this was, of course, 

31.2 



180 HESTER KIRTON. 

possible; still, although Lady Helena was not 
likely to encourage the admiration of a married 
man, it was pleasant to her self-love, that, after 
having admired her, he had not lost his taste so 
sadly, as to be in love with his country wife ; and 
his being at the races alone was a proof of this ; 
at any rate, his coming to Tatton a day before- 
hand was suspicious evidence. She was staying 
with friends in the neighbourhood, and should 
therefore, in all probability, see a good deal of 
Mr. Hallam during the race week. 

But to her surprise, she did not see him again, 
either that day or the next, although she visited 
the race-course ; but, on the third day, the great 
day of the races, she suddenly saw him among 
the gentlemen on a drag which had lately placed 
itself beside her carriage. 

He returned her bow, far more gravely and 
coldly than the last time ; but she was determined 
lie should speak to her, and she beckoned him round 
to the other side, so that she could talk without 
being overheard. 

He obeyed the summons, though he showed 
no haste in doing so, and had nothing to say 
when he came. 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 181 

** You look grave and sad, Mr. Hallam ; I hope 
you have no cause for anxiety." 

Hallam laughed, but in a forced, unnatural 
way. 

*^ You know. Lady Helena, we men have some- 
thing more serious at stake, when the Tatton Cup 
is run for, than a few pairs of gloves." 

** I ought to know it," she said, looking 
pointedly at her husband, who was sitting on the 
box-seat, eagerly studying a note he held in his 
hand; "if there were no Tatton Cup, Mr. Hallam, 
it might be much better for Mr. Gerald Fortescue. 
You are a lucky man; you see I only brought 
my husband an empty title, whereas your wife is 
said to have filled your purse ; and also seems to 
give you full leave to empty it without her 
supervision. I should not trust my husband 
alone at Tatton Races," and then she laughed 
unpleasantly. 

Her words and manner were equally annoying. 
Why need she talk of his wife at all ? he had never 
mentioned her of his own accord, and her allusion 
to the money was in very bad taste. 

" I don't suppose Mrs. Hallam cares about the 
races," he said, carelessly"; ** at any rate, she is 



182 HESTER KIBTON. 

much better at home ; " then looking towards his 
friends, he said, " if yon will excuse me, I must 
say good^ay ; I see I am waited for," and 
raising his hat, without even waiting for the 
hand-shaking he would once hafve so much valued, 
he returned to his seat, nor did he again look round 
at Lady Helena during the remainder of the day. 

I have said before enough to intimate that die 
was not a woman to make an enemy o^ and now she 
was very angry. That she had brought Hallam's 
reply on herself by her covert impertinence, was 
nothing. Lady Helena was not likely to judge 
herself severely ; there is no knawing what secret 
under^:anding she maintained with her conscience, 
but even her husband had never heard her own 
herself in the wrong ; perhaps, she thought that 
with so weak and, at the same time, so stubborn 
a mind as Gerald Fortescue's, if she once betrayed 
consciousness of a flaw in the harness in which 
she held him, he might snap it beyond her power 
of readjustment. 

Now she looked beautifully terrible in her 
anger. That a nobody like Mr. Hallam, and one 
who had degraded himself by a miaalliancey should 
dare to bandy words with her, to administer 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 183 

reproof to her^ fiur lie had almost said Tatton 
race-course was not a fit place &r ladies^ was not 
to be endured^ His sabseqnent contemptuous 
indifference to^ her presence de^ened the insult 
. neglect was a thing she never pardoned . and 
aa it lek h^ no immediate means of vengeance^^ 
her anger rankled into hatred. There could be 
only one reason for Hallam's behaviour . he toas 
in love with his awkward country-bred wife after 
all . and ta the wound his contradiction had in- 
flicted was added the deeper sting to her imperious 
vanity, that anoiher woman's influence should 
enable any man so completely to resist hers, 
although she were his wife. 

She would be revenged on them both. She 
wondered what sort of creature this could be, who, 
married only for her money,/ was yet able to 
fascinate a man whose taste had been refined by 
the society of such a woman as hersel 

" She mu^ have some power and strength of 
will, too^" mused Lady Helena; *^mere prettiness 
and good^nature would not subjugate Mr. Hallam. 
It would be too much trouble,, or I should Hke to 
show her how changeable he is^ I wonder what 
she is like.'' 



184 HESTER KIRTON. 

And then she went on pondering the possibility 
of Mrs. Hallam being aware that her husband had 
not married her for love. If she were of a strong 
decided nature^ snch a revelation would surely cut 
short the domestic felicity she seemed to be 
enjoying. Lady Helena hated shams, and there 
was no sham so absurd as that of people who 
affected a turtle-dove fondness six months after 
marriage. Why did she and Mr. Fortescue live 
on such excellent terms ? Simply because they saw 
so little of each other, and because there had never 
from the first been any nonsense between them. 
She was one of those women . one hopes they are 
rare, although there are such . who never reason 
under provocation, or make the slightest effort 
towards self-government; but only, like fabled 
fiiries, lash themselves into something nearly re- 
sembling madness, with the snaky coils of passion, 
pride, and self-will, no matter how small the 
provocation. Lady Helena's fiat had gone forth, 
that her will was to be sovereign law to all around 
her. She had willed, almost unconsciously, to 
retain the admiration of Frederic Hallam, and to 
ignore the existence of his wife ; and now that he 
should not only dare to slight her, but to hold up 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 185 

that wife's example as one she might do well to 
follow . for so she had interpreted his reply . was 
an offence to be signally revenged, and she threw 
herself back in her carriage to meditate on the 
means. 

Hallam meanwhile was plunged in gloomy 
thought ; if Lady Helena had not been too angry 
she might have considered that his serious face and 
captious behaviour were hardly those of a happy 
husband. 

During the two days that he had passed in the 
society of his new acquaintances, the younger of 
them had so ingratiated himself by his simplicity 
and off-handed frankness of manner, that Hallam 
had given up all idea of joining another party on 
the race-course. This man, who was, he imagined, 
far more wealthy than he seemed, had offered in a 
lazy sleepy way to take such large odds against 
a horse, that his companion asserted to be far more 
likely to win than either of the favourites, that 
Hallam, thrown off his guard, and forgetting all 
prudence in the prospect of so easy a harvest, 
risked far beyond the sum he had tried to extort 
from Goldsmith, and about which the lawyer had, 
to the last, declined making any definite promise. 



184 HESTER KIRTON. 

And then she went on pondering the possibility 
of Mrs. Hallam being aware that her husband had 
not married h^r for love. If she were of a strong 
decided nature^ such a revelation would surely cut 
short the domestic felicity she seemed to be 
enjoying. Lady Helena hated shams, and there 
was no sham so absurd as that of people who 
affected a turtle-dove fondness six months after 
marriage. Why did she and Mr. Fortescue live 
on such excellent terms ? Simply because they saw 
so little of each other, and because there had never 
from the first been any nonsense between them. 
She was one of those women. one hopes they are 
rare, although there are such . who never reason 
under provocation, or make the slightest effort 
towards self-government; but only, like fabled 
fiiries, lash themselves into something nearly re- 
sembling madness, with the snaky coils of passion, 
pride, and self-will, no matter how small the 
provocation. Lady Helena's fiat had gone forth, 
that her will was to be sovereign law to all around 
her. She had willed, almost unconsciously, to 
retain the admiration of Frederic Hallam, and to 
ignore the existence of his wife ; and now that he 
should not only dare to slight her, but to hold up 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 185 

that wife's example as one she might do well to 
follow . for so she had interpreted his reply . was 
an offence to be signally revenged, and she threw 
herself back in her carriage to meditate on the 
means. 

Hallam meanwhile was plunged in gloomy 
thought ; if Lady Helena had not been too angry 
she might have considered that his serious face and 
captious behaviour were hardly those of a happy 
husband. 

During the two days that he had passed in the 
society of his new acquaintances, the younger of 
tliem had so ingratiated himself by his simplicity 
and off-handed frankness of manner, that Hallam 
tad given up all idea of joining another party on 
fte race-course. This man, who was, he imagined, 
far more wealthy than he seemed, had offered in a 
^azy sleepy way to take such large odds against 
^ horse, that his companion asserted to be far more 
likely to win than either of the favourites, that 
Hallam, thrown off his guard, and forgetting all 
P^^dence in the prospect of so easy a harvest, 
^sked far beyond the sum he had tried to extort 
from Goldsmith, and about which the lawyer had, 
^^ the last, declined making any definite promise. 



184 HESTER KIRTON. 

And then she went on pondering the possibility 
of Mrs. Hallam being aware that her husband had 
not married her for love. If she were of a strong 
decided nature, such a revelation tvould surely cut 
short the domestic felicity she seemed to be 
enjoying. Lady Helena hated shams, and there 
was no sham so absurd as that of people who 
affected a turtle-dove fondness six months after 
marriage. Why did she and Mr. Fortescue live 
on such excellent terms ? Simply because they saw 
so little of each other, and because there had never 
from the first been any nonsense between them. 
She was one of those women. one hopes they are 
rare, although there are such . ^who never reason 
under provocation, or make the slightest effort 
towards self-government; but only, like fabled 
fiiries, lash themselves into something nearly re- 
sembling madness, with the snaky coils of passion, 
pride, and self-will, no matter how small the 
provocation. Lady Helena's fiat had gone forth, 
that her will was to be sovereign law to all around 
her. She had willed, almost unconsciously, to 
retain the admiration of Frederic Hallam, and to 
ignore the existence of his wife ; and now that he 
should not only dare to slight her, but to hold up 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 185 

that wife's example as one she might do well to 
follow . for so she had interpreted his reply . was 
an offence to be signally revenged, and she threw 
herself back in her carriage to meditate on the 
means. 

Hallam meanwhile was plunged in gloomy 
thought ; if Lady Helena had not been too angry 
she might have considered that his serious face and 
captious behaviour were hardly those of a happy 
husband. 

During the two days that he had passed in the 
society of his new acquaintances, the younger of 
tliem had so ingratiated himself by his simplicity 
aud off-handed frankness of manner, that Hallam 
tad given up all idea of joining another party on 
fte race-course. This man, who was, he imagined, 
fer more wealthy than he seemed, had offered in a 
'azy sleepy way to take such large odds against 
a horse, that his companion asserted to be far more 
Jikely to win than either of the favourites, that 
Hallam, thrown off his guard, and forgetting all 
prudence in the prospect of so easy a harvest, 
^sked far beyond the sum he had tried to extort 
from Goldsmith, and about which the lawyer had, 
^^ the last, declined making any definite promise. 



184 HESTER KIRTON. 

And then she went on pondering the possibility 
of Mrs. Hallam being aware that her husband had 
not married h^r for love. If she were of a strong 
decided nature, such a revelation would surely cut 
short the domestic felicity she seemed to be 
enjoying. Lady Helena hated shams, and there 
was no sham so absurd as that of people who 
affected a turtle-dove fondness six months after 
marriage. Why did she and Mr. Fortescue live 
on such excellent terms ? Simply because they saw 
so little of each other, and because there had never 
from the first been any nonsense between them. 
She was one of those women. one hopes they are 
rare, although there are such . who never reason 
under provocation, or make the slightest effort 
towards self-government; but only, like fabled 
fiiries, lash themselves into something nearly re- 
sembling madness, with the snaky coils of passion, 
pride, and self-will, no matter how small the 
provocation. Lady Helena's fiat had gone forth, 
that her will was to be sovereign law to all around 
her. She had willed, almost unconsciously, to 
retain the admiration of Frederic Hallam, and to 
ignore the existence of his wife ; and now that he 
should not only dare to slight her, but to hold up 



) 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 185 

that wife's example as one she might do well to 
follow . for so she had interpreted his reply . was 
an offence to be signally revenged, and she threw 
herself back in her carriage to meditate on the 
means. 

Hallam meanwhile was plunged in gloomy 
thought ; if Lady Helena had not been too angry 
she might have considered that his serious face and 
captious behaviour were hardly those of a happy 
husband. 

During the two days that he had passed in the 
society of his new acquaintances, the younger of 
tliem had so ingratiated himself by his simplicity 
and off-handed frankness of manner, that Hallam 
had given up all idea of joining another party on 
the race-course. This man, who was, he imagined, 
far more wealthy than he seemed, had offered in a 
lazy sleepy way to take such large odds against 
a horse, that his companion asserted to be far more 
hkely to win than either of the favourites, that 
Hallam, thrown off his guard, and forgetting all 
prudence in the prospect of so easy a harvest, 
^ked far beyond the sum he had tried to extort 
from Goldsmith, and about which the lawyer had, 
to the last, declined making any definite promise. 



184 HESTER KIRTON. 

And then she went on pondering the possibility 
of Mrs. Hallam being aware that her husband had 
not married her for love. If she were of a strong 
decided nature, such a revelation tvould surely cut 
short the domestic felicity she seemed to be 
enjoying. Lady Helena hated shams, and there 
was no sham so absurd as that of people who 
affected a turtle-dove fondness six months after 
marriage. Why did she and Mr. Fortescue live 
on such excellent terms ? Simply because they saw 
so little of each other, and because there had never 
from the first been any nonsense between them. 
She was one of those women. one hopes they are 
rare, although there are such . who never reason 
under provocation, or make the slightest effort 
towards self-government; but only, like fabled 
fiiries, lash themselves into something nearly re- 
sembling madness, with the snaky coils of passion, 
pride, and self-will, no matter how small the 
provocation. Lady Helena's fiat had gone forth, 
that her will was to be sovereign law to all around 
her. She had willed, almost unconsciously, to 
retain the admiration of Frederic Hallam, and to 
ignore the existence of his wife ; and now that he 
should not only dare to slight her, but to hold up 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 185 

that wife's example as one she might do well to 
follow . for so she had interpreted his reply . was 
an offence to be signally revenged, and she threw 
herself back in her carriage to meditate on the 
means. 

Hallam meanwhile was plunged in gloomy 
thought ; if Lady Helena had not been too angry 
she might have considered that his serious face and 
captious behaviour were hardly those of a happy 
husband. 

During the two days that he had passed in the 
society of his new acquaintances, the younger of 
them had so ingratiated himself by his simplicity 
and off-handed frankness of manner, that Hallam 
had given up all idea of joining another party on 
the race-course. This man, who was, he imagined, 
fer more wealthy than he seemed, had offered in a 
lazy sleepy way to take such large odds against 
a horse, that his companion asserted to be far more 
likely to win than either of the favourites, that 
Hallam, thrown off his guard, and forgetting all 
prudence in the prospect of so easy a harvest, 
risked far beyond the sum he had tried to extort 
from Goldsmith, and about which the lawyer had, 
to the last, declined making any definite promise. 



186 HESTER KIRTON. 

But then Hallam had argued there was no risk in 
what he was doing ; in fact, unless the very worst 
luck befell him, it was certain gain, and would 
richly cover any losses he might incur on his 
first ventures. But on the morning of this day, a. 
few words of a whispered conversation, accidentally 
overheard, had made him anxious. He looked 
hard at the speakers ; there could be no mistake 
about them; they were his two apple-cheeked 
acquaintances. It was quite plain from what they 
had said, that they were acting unfairly by some 
one; but when he went up to them suddenly, they 
seemed in no way confused, and the excessive 
cordiality of their greeting convinced him that he 
was not to be the victim of their schemes. 

** It's in the nature of these men," he thought, 
**to live on the ill-luck and mistakes of their 
fellows ; it's their trade, in fact ; but then I believe 
they are to be trusted sometimes, and when they 
are, of course their kiformation is worth having. 
I know enough of human nature to be sure it was 
nothing but contradiction, because his friend and 
I praised up Sunbeam last night, that made that 
fellow Triggs take such odds against him. I 
believe I'm safe to win." 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 187 

Still with all this plausible satisfactory reason* 
ing, he was very anxious and restless ; if . and he 
scarcely dared to face the if . he lost, he should 
he completely in Goldsmith's power, and his 
pride revolted from the idea of applying to his^ 
mother or his aunt ; beades, how could they help 
him ? These debts, supposmg tliey should prove 
so, must be paid at once, and how could any 
such feeble aid as thdrs Uqmdate so vast an 
amount ? 

But Care and Frederic Halkm never could 
consort for long together, and he was soon eagerly 
excited in watching the atart,. which was some 
time in acccnplishing.. 

At last the horses: were fairly o& 

It seemed an instant . and then where was 
Sunbeam? He strained his eyes eagerly over 
the course; the horse was emphatically "no- 
where ; " but he saw her come in lame, isome time 
after all was over. 

The whole scene spun round before Hallam's 
eyes ; he had lost before, but then he had never 
made so fearful a venture: still he would not 
abandon hope altogether ; the other horse that was 
to run for the Beechwood stakes in the afternoon 



188 HESTER KIRTON. 

must win; he knew all about that; and in his 
excitement he positively increased the odds he had 
taken in its favour. 

His two new friends had said in the morning 
they were pledged to join another party at dinner- 
time, and Hallam felt relieved by their absence. 
Whether he had been duped or not, his simple- 
looking friend had certainly had the best of it. 
It gave him an aguish feeling when he thought 
how triumphantly Goldsmith would sneer. He 
would look upon him as a mere boy not fit to be 
trusted with money. But why need he be be- 
holden to Goldsmith in the matter ? could he not 
raise the sum he wanted on the security of his 
wife's inheritance? But, then, that inheritance 
was so entirely in the lawyer's hands, and had 
been kept such a secret, that he scarcely saw 
how this was to be effected without Goldsmith's 
knowledge, and in that case he might as well 
go to him direct. 

The unusual worry and annoyance were telling 
upon him, and when dinner-time came, he drank 
far more than he was accustomed to, in the hope 
of reviving his flagging spirits. 

They did revive almost madly, and then came 



WHAT HAPPENED AT TATTON. 189 

the excitement of the race in which he had so deep 
an interest 

He was not dull or care-worn now. 

Even Lady Helena as she glanced up, spite of 
her angry feelings towards him, was obliged to 
confess how very handsome, how animated he 
looked, as bending eagerly forward he stood, 
watch in hand, his eyes strained in a fixed gaze 
on the horse on which now his fate depended* 



190 HESTEE KmTOX 



CHAPTER XIIL 

A FENCING MATCH. 

Captain Foktescue, as he walked tome after his 
interview with Hester, did not feel that it was 
himself that his legs were carrying. . Surely he 
had been bewitched, transformed into some one 
else. That he, fastidious, almost over-strained, 
in his delicacy about interfering in the affairs 
of others, should by some strange fatality or 
glamour, as it now seemed to him, have been led 
to utter so gross an impertinence to a wife . it was 
the first error he could ever remember to have 
committed against good-breeding. What could 
have prompted him, or rather what power was 
it that had dragged the words to his tongue? 
for it had seemed to him that against his actual will 
he had been forced to speak of Hester's husband. 

And what end had it served ? 

It had mortified and degraded him in his own 



A TmCJNG MATCH. * 191 

eyes and in hers. Instead of giving the good 
advice, which he tibotight she reallj needed in 
order to secure better treatmait from such a 
man as Hallam^ he had just said enough to make 
her miserable; fear if she were happy and contented 
with her lot . and what right had he to suppose^ 
when he recalled the expression of her eyes when 
she talked of surprising her husband, that she was 
not? . ^he had shown her ihat others saw what she 
did not feel, and must have occasioned her the 
keenest mortification. The belief ihat he had 
given Hest^'^ain was rilore intolerable than the 
remembrance of his own imwarrantable behaviour. 
He felt that he could not meet her again with 
any composure for some time to come ; he did not 
know why, but the longing for her society seemed 
to have passed away, now that it was evident his 
was not necessary to her happiness. 

By degrees, as his self-love recovered from the 
shock he had himself administered, he began to 
reflect upon Hester's conduct in the matter, and 
decided that she had] been very very rude and 
coarse in her way of speaking to him, and that, 
however fascinatmg she might be, she certainly 
was not a lady. 



192 HESTER KIRTON. 

Why not avoid all chance of seeing her again ? 
The season would soon be over now ; he was tired 
of London already; why need he wait? he had 
plenty of country invitations, some from people 
who rarely visited London at all, and therefore 
would be especially glad of his presence when all 
their neighbours had deserted them. He had 
scarcely ever seen the country in June; he 
thought it mast be very charming and refreshing 
after the dust and heat of London. 

He was surprised the next day to receive a note 
from Lady Helena ; he read it twice over before 
he could recover himself, and then he was as 
much at a loss as ever to guess its true meaning, 
yet if a stranger had read it, he would not have 
remarked anything worthy of wonder in its simple 
wording. 

It was a request to her brother-in-law, to call 
on her in the course of the day, as she so much 
wanted to talk to him about Tatton races. 

**I wonder what she really does want? Tatton 
races, too ! " thought Percy Fortescue, as he pre- 
pared, as soon as the afternoon cooled, to obey 
her summons ; " fortunately for my complaisance, 
I have an engagement within two or three doors 



A FENCING MATCH. 193 

of Gerald's, or I fear I should not have obeyed 
her ladyship so punctually.'* 

Helena Fortescue had never before made herself 
so agreeable to her brother-in-law. 

She was pleased and surprised with his ready 
compliance. She had feared he would, with his 
usual penetration, have suspected some hidden 
motive in her request To say truth. Captain 
Fortescue was perhaps, in general, less courteous 
to his sister-in-law than to any other lady of his 
acquaintance ; and this not becau^ she was his 
sister-in-law . he was so real a gentleman, that 
he would have thought this gave her an addi- 
tional claim on his good-breeding . but because 
he saw that she did not make Gerald happy, 
and that she was an extravagant and heartless 
woman. 

Besides, as he had never paid her any of the 
worship she lived for, she had never tried to make 
herself fascinating to him, and he was not a fair 
judge of her powers of pleasing ; true in this case, 
as in so many others, that if we do not take the 
ti'ouble to unfold our best qualities to our fellows, 
theirs will be hermetically sealed up from us for 
ever. 

VOL. n. 32 



194 HESTEB KIRTON. 

But wbetherj as has been said, his ready call 
pleased her, or that, for some reason she really 
wished for his good opinion, she was thoroughly 
cordial and sist^ly. 

She gave so vivid and animated an account of 
the races, that Fortescue was greatly amnsed, and 
quite entered into the ludicrous picture she drew 
of some of the scenes she had witnessed. 

Presently Fortescue asked her if she saw Hallam 
there. 

"Yes, I B0 him,** said Lady Helena, "and 
I was sorry to see him there without his wife." 

** I can account for that : he told me he was 
pledged to go with a set of rather fast men ; it 
would not have been at all the sort of society for 
her to have been mixed up with." 

'^Oh, I fancied, from the story you told me 
about your friend's marriage, that she was pro- 
bably a person he would not much care to be 
seen in public with." She spojke wilt a smiling 
indifference. 

'^ I had not then seen her, and I believe, Helena," 
he added, forcing a laugh to hide the discomfiture 
he felt, that she should have broached so painftd 
a topic, ''you and I have both lived long enough 



A. FENCING MATCH. 195 

in the world to be aware, that what is said bj 
the omnipotent and nbiqnitoas they is not always 
to 'be depended on. I have often thonght,** he 
went on, ^^that it might be nsefnl, and amusing 
also, to book all that the immortal ' they ' is re- 
ported to hare uttered on any given topic ; it would 
probably be found that the list contained innumer- 
able words, actions, and motives, which the persons 
mentioned or accused would truly plead as being 
among ' Things not generally known * to them." 

Lady Helena smiled, but she i^pip not to be 
diverted from her purpose. 

** The story was false, then, and it is entirely a 
marriage of aflfection ? " 

She tried to compel truth out of him by her 
earnest fixed look, but he had turned away . ^he 
did not care to meet her eyes just then . and 
affected to be deep in the examination of a piece 
of old china on the table. Had he noticed her 
eager, passionate expression, he would have been 
more guarded in his answer. 

*^ I never yet asked Mrs. Hallam the question, 
but she is charming enough to command the love 
of any man." 

Helena trembled visibly, between anger and 

32.2 



196 HESTER KntTON. 

impatience to hear more. Still he did not look at 
her, and she was obliged to say something to 
continue the subject. 

" I am more and more surprised. From his 
manner one would scarcely have imagined him so 
verj'- devoted a husband ; ^ and then she threw down 
her eyes, for she saw Fortescue start, and could 
not quite brave his look at that moment. How 
easily a falsehood is suggested by a conscious look 
. a timid manner . while the strongest assevera- 
tion, where ^ face is not dressed in fitting livery, 
fails to convince I 

Captain Fortescue at once imagined that Hallam 
still cherished his former admiration, and had 
resumed the homage he had formerly paid to his 
sister-in-law, and, although he knew her too well 
to dread that she would give him any serious 
encouragement, it grieved him that Hester was 
wronged by any devotion shown by her husband 
to another woman. 

He felt angry with Helena, and determined to 
mortify her triumphant vanity. 

" Men do not generally parade their afiection 
for their wives," he said, with an irrepressible 
sneer. *^ But what I am telling you now, Helena, 



A FENCING MATCH. 197 

you may rely on as true. Mrs. Frederic Hallam 
is the loveliest woman I ever saw, and is as clever 
and fascinating as she is beautiful." He felt a 
double pleasure in saying this. 

He looked keenly at her, but her woman's wit 
had guessed his intention. She was used to fenc- 
ing matches with Percy Fortescue, and, except a 
slight movement of the lower jaw, her face was 
calmed and immoved . her eyes bent on the 
ground. 

** Why did you not tell me this before ? " she 
said ; " you give me quite an anxiety to see this 
paragon. I shall insist that Mr. Hallam brings his 
wife to see me." 

" You would not judge her favourably, I think, 
at first sight ; she is shy with strangers. You had 
better ask her to your next reception, Helena," he 
went on, feeling that the best way of preventing 
any intimacy with Hester would be to arouse 
dread of her rival charms ; *^ she would make a 
sensation, I can tell you." 

Spite of her rigid self-control, the light flashed 
from her eyes now. But she was determined he 
should not see that she was jealous of a country 
girl. 



198 HESTB KIBTON. 

" Ah I very likely, but I don't intend to give 
another reception this season/' she said, languidly. 
"Gerald'* ill-luck at Tatton has settled that 
question. But where do your friends live ? They 
have a house of their own by this time, I 
suppose." 

^ No, they have not . they are still in lodgings." 
He felt strangely unwilling to tell her where 
Hester lived, yet it was an absurd reticence, as if 
such a woman as Helena would care to make 
the acquaintance of one out of her *^ set," and, 
moreover, younger and more beautiful tiian she 
was. 

^^ Ah I then you need not tell me. I remember 
you said before. No. 60, Gloucester Place." 

He set her right as to the number, which, by the 
way, she had guessed at ; for in her now settied 
desire to see Hester, she dreaded lest innumerable 
olistacles should come in her way. Probably if 
her brother-in-law had evaded tiie question, her 
quick intelligence would soon have obtained the 
clue she sought, and which she knew was not to 
be found in the Court Guide. 

" I think," she said, throwing herself back on 
her sofa, with what really was a sigh of relief 



A FENCIKG HATCH. 199 

from the iieyere mental eflbrt she had maintained^ 
but whidi she meant to express weariness, ^ that 
this country lady should feel highly flattered by 
the length of tune we have been (Hscussing her ; 
if you were not so impenetrably indifferent, Percy, 
I should begin to suspect you admired her yourself. 
But now tell me what you think of my new 
purchase, which I see you have been examining so 
attentively." 

He nearly let the china fall. Her words 
sounded so like irony, and yet they were aimed at 
random, merely to glide gracefully to some other 
topic, without giving him any suspicion of the 
real subject of her meditations. 

He soon after found an excuse for leaving ; it 
seemed as if every moment she might make some 
fresh allusion to Hester, and he wished to avoid 
the pain it caused him. He felt troubled and 
anxious enough as it was. If he could have seen 
Helena a few moments after he left her, he would 
perhaps have regretted his praise of another 
woman's beauty, and have thought that the cloud 
on his spirits was one of those mysterious 
warnings so often sent to us as the herald of 
coming storm. 



200 HESTER KIRTON. 

His sister-in-law had succeeded in one point 
She had so completely discomfited and disturbed 
him, that he quite forgot to wonder afresh what 
had been her object in seeking this interview. 



201 



CHAPTER XIV. 

HESTEE'S VISITOR. 

It is difficult to describe the eflTect Fortescue's 
words had produced on Hester; she would have 
found it difficult herself to say which was the 
feeling that reigned uppermost of the throng that 
now agitated her mind beyond any power of will 
to quiet. 

Perhaps the strongest, at any rate the most 
vehement, was proud anger against Captain 
Fortescue. His interference and his suspicions 
were as unjustifiable as the slighting manner in 
which he had spoken of her husband. No, 
nothing could be so bad as that ; how dared he . 
he to whom Fred was always so kind, so full of 
praise and friendship? And then . for she still 
loved her husband dearly ; she was still partially 
blind to his faults . she compared him mentally 



202 HESTER BIRTON. 

with Captain Fortescue, and thought how in every- 
way Fred was his superior. She had had too little 
of her husband's society to find out his intellectual 
deficiencies, since her newly awakened powers had 
enabled her to prize and estimate truly what she 
would have called scholarship. She believed 
Fortescue to be mean and jealous ; the truth was, 
he envied Fred his frank light-heartedness, his 
power of difi'using merriment at will. She did 
not go &rther and inquire the reason of his 
jealousy ; as yet she was free from vanity, and she 
was too angry to think abotU; him at all, elcept in 
regard to his rudeness* * 

She did not analyse her feelings sufficiently to 
know how much mortification had to do with 
her wrath. But as days wore on, and she 
grew calmer, her heart became more and more 
depressed ; the future looked sadly blank and 
dreary. Spite of the assurances Fred had given 
her, it was strange and startling, that the thoughts 
and doubts which had be^i growing up so steadily 
in her mind should be uttered to her from 
wiiliout, by a person, too, who had been kinder 
to her than any one since her marriage, and 
who seemed to have forced himself, as it were^ 



HESTER'S VISITOR. 203 

out of his usual quiet gentleness to speak them 
at alL 

Her eyes fell upon her books ; would her 
husband care for all the labour and pains she had 
taken ? She rose and paced the room impatiently : 
how could she bear this suspense?. Fred would 
not return for some days . and yet how could she 
speak to him of what his friend had said ? 

But she would not allow herself to continue in 
this state of doubt and dotation; she sate down 
determined to come to some decision as to her 
conduct to her husband* 

It was not an easy matter: her thoughts were 
tangled and confused, as they had never been 
before ; she began to think she would put off this 
wearying self-commimion till next morning, and 
try for this afternoon to throw her mind again 
into her studies; but she disliked procrastination, 
it was foreign to her character, and she had 
just resolved to bend her rebellious will to its 
unwelcome task, when the sound of carriage- 
wheels rolling up to ^the door made her pause 
and listen. 

The street door was opened before she could 
ring, or she would have refused to admit a visitor ; 



204 HESTER KIRTON. 

she only knew of Mrs. Hallam who would be likely 
to call on her in a carriage, and the rustling of 
silk on the staircase as the visitor mounted to the 
drawing-room, confirmed the belief. 

She was surprised when Lady Helena For- 
tescue's card was brought down to her. 

She felt really nervous now ; she had a secret 
dread and jealousy of this woman, whose manner 
Fred considered so perfect She looked hesitat- 
ingly at her dress, a plain black silk, which, she 
feared, was perhaps not quite grand enough to 
see Lady Helena in. Had she been more self- 
conscious, she would have known that nothing 
could have set off her graceful figure and trans- 
parent skin to better advantage. She was very 
tall now, and as she threw back her head before 
she entered the drawing-room by way of asserting 
to herself her recovered self-possession, her 
cheek still flushed with excitement, she looked, 
as she advanced towards her, about the loveliest 
creature Helena Fortescue had ever seen. 

She had thought and listened to Captain For- 
tescue's praise with much reservation, thinking it 
was intended to tease and vex her. She was 
mortified beyond endurance to find it exceeded by 



HESTER'S VISITOR. 205 

the reality, and greeted Mrs. Hallam with the 
most reserved dignity. 

" She had seen Mr. Hallam at the races ; had 
had a good deal of talk with him there, and had 
thought his wife would like to hear that he seemed 
to be quite well and enjoying himself extremely. 
She supposed he had not yet returned." 

More than one of the phrases of this speech 
annoyed Hester. She had no ready wit to thank 
Lady Helena for her thoughtfulness, and then turn 
the conversation to other things. She thought 
how very handsome she was, but how fierce 
looking, and that she certainly had a very dis- 
agreeable manner. So she said simply, but in 
her harsh abrupt way, in reply to the last words, 

"No, I wish he would come home." 

' Lady Helena could smile now in superior pity, 
that so fair an outside should be coupled with so 
plebeian and unformed a manner. " Not a bit of 
savoirfaire about her, I see," she said to herself. 
*^ A mere child, and I suppose he treats her as one. 
Where could he have found her ? " 

*^ You are not an exacting wife, I hope, Mrs. 
Hallam ? " This was said with a tone and smile that 
roused Hester's pride, already suflSciently irritated 



206 HESTER KIRTON. 

by her morning's meditations^ to action. She 
pressed her lips firmly together, as Helena went 
on : ** I am snre Mr. Hallam will return as soon as 
he possibly can." 

What was her object in irritating Hester, for if 
she had studied her character for months, she 
could not probably have taJcen a surer way. She 
hardly knew how intense a feeling of dislike and 
jealousy this girfs loveliness had created within 
her. Fortescue's words had aroused her curiosity, 
although, as has been said, she scarcely believed 
them ; and she thought it would be a fair revenge 
for Hallam's conduct to her at the races, to go and 
see his wife, whom she felt sure he was ashamed of, 
and wished to keep hidden ; and if she found her, 
as she expected, a foolish, frightened country girl, 
she should amuse herself by making a little 
mischief, and letting her believe he had been very- 
happy away from her. 

Hester did not answer. She felt too angry to 
speak, but merely bowed her head. 

'^I am surprised," Lady Helena went on, 
" that you did not accompany him to the races. 
I assure you I think it is quite a wife's duty to go 
everywhere with her husband." 



HESTER'S VISITOR. 207 

Heater raised Her head, and looked at her tin- 
waveringly. She did not understand why all this 
was said; only she felt that it was very insufferable, 
and must be stopped. 

*^ I suppose," she said, with a calm determination 
that made the other look in wonder, "that 
husbands and wives have not always the same 
ideas about duties." 

*^ Probably not; but, excuse me, I scarcely 
understand you." 

" I mean that what may be your duty in r^ard 
to Mr. Fortescue, may not be mine towards my 
husband." 

Lady Helena had never been spoken to so 
bluntly before in her life; her overbearing 
haughtiness and imperious temper had always 
prevented her from hearing the truth, and had 
Hester been less overwrought, she would have let 
her words pass without comment, although she 
might have wondered at their insolence. 

Now she saw plainly, by the ehange in her 
companion's face, that she had worked some 
mighty mischief. Her eyes flashed, and she 
literally trembled with passion . passion, too, which 
might and must have vent ; for who was there to 



208 HESTER KIRTON. 

stay its utterance whose opinion was of the 
slightest value to her, and human opinion was the 
only self-controlling power Lady Helena's temper 
obeyed? 

*^ You forget, Mrs. Hallam, that a far larger 
share of duty is due from you to your husband, 
than from others, to whom perhaps it is to be 
regretted you should have ventured to compare 
yourself." 

Hester did not answer, but as Lady Helena rose 
from her seat, she rose also, as proud, as defiant, 
and far more self-possessed than her visitor. 

They were about the same height, but Lady 
Helena's form was far more fully developed than 
Hester's, and there was a velvet-like ease in her 
movements, which the other as yet wanted. But 
still scarcely any one could have preferred the 
dark-browed. Eastern beauty of the one face to the 
pure, delicate, refined loveliness of the other. 

" I don't know what you mean," said Hester, 
after a pause, feeling insulted and surprised at 
once : what was intended by this pointed referenccT 
to her husband? . "nor do I care to know," she 
continued, for she thought her visitor looked 
wicked, and she wished she would go. 



HESTER'S VISITOR. 209 

"But you must know, I intend you to do 
so. I never speak in riddles that I cannot explain," 
said the other, with flashing eyes ; " and I want 
to teach you, what it is a pity your own sense does 
not, that you should not have compared yourself 
.with me. I was married for myself, not for my 
money." 

Her eyes sparkled triumphantly, as she pro- 
nounced the last words with deliberate emphasis. 

.^ How dare you insinuate what you know to be 
false?" exclaimed Hester, passionately, and she 
advanced a few steps towards her. 

" It is no falsehood . it is the truth," said Helena 
Fortescue, fixing her eyes steadily on Hester's 
troubled face, in which she thought she saw the 
confirmation of her own words. ** And now, good . 
morning," she added, sweeping towards the door. 
** If you do not believe me, ask your husband 
when he returns, . dare him to contradict my 
words, and to say he married you because he loved 
you." 



VOL. XL 33 



210 HESTER KIRTOK. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE BOLT FALLS. 

Hestek Gould not have told how long she had 
been standing mute and motionless after Ladj 
Helena's departure. In such a moment she 
might well question the reality of time, when 
all that made life real, worth possession to her, 
seemed gone . crushed out of her heart She did 
.not try to rouse herself from the dull, blank torpor 
that appeared to have paralyzed both mind and 
body; an inward dread of what the awakening 
would be kept her still, as if she feared the move- 
ment even of a finger might arouse her. 

But this could not last, although, as sensation 
began to return, Hester wished that she could 
arrest it, that she could in any way end a life that 
now seemed to her unbearable. 

Strange, that with her doubting, incredulous 



THE BOLT 'FALLS. 211 

mind^ free from any imaginative or impulsive 
weaknesses, she should at once hare received as 
trath the assertion of a stranger* 

Alas I the ground was ready for tfhe seed cast 
upon it. 

But, as the power of thought returned, with a 
mighty eflFort of will, she arrested it ; she walked 
deliberately up to the mantelpiece, and looked a t 
the clock, then she rang the bell. 

** Parkins, send for a cab, directly." 

** Yes, ma'am ; anything else, ma'am," said the 
woman, surprised out of her customary indiffer- 
ence. If her mistress was going to demean her- 
self by riding in a cab, at least, she ought to 
accompany her ; but Mrs. HaUam's stern *^ No," 
and injunction not to lose time, were so unlike 
any words she had ever heard from her before, 
that she obeyed in silence, convinced that some 
serious calamity had happened, and that Lady 
Helena Fortescue had been its messenger. 

Hester was dressed to go out, when the maid 
tapped at her door. 

" I do not want you. Parkins ; you can go." 

"There's nothing the matter, ma'am, I hope? '* 
Parkins could no longer restrain herself. 

33.2 



212 HESTER KIRTON. 

*^ Nothing : you can go," 

But when the cab arrived, she lingered at the 
door, in the hope of hearing where Mrs. Hallam 
wa's bound to ; for, of all things, she thought it 
most discreditable and improper for her mistress 
to go out driving alone in a cab so late in the 
afternoon 5 but she was disappointed, Mrs. Hallam 
only pointed with her finger the direction the 
man was to take, and then threw herself back, 
pulling down her veil. 

As soon as the cab reached Oxford Street, she 
let down the front window, and touching the 
driver's arm, told him the address of Mr. Gold- 
smith's ofiice. She had once heard her husband 
say, that the lawyer occasionally remained there 
till six o'clock, and she had determined to take the 
chance of finding him, so she sate, as the cab sped 
rapidly eastward, counting the minutes which still 
remained to her. 

Counting them with her eyes, her mind was 
counting up other things. As soon as thought 
had recovered its power, like lightning had come 
the remembrance of that previous intimacy of her 
husband's with Goldsmith, under pretext of which 
he had introduced himself at Kirtou's Farm. The 



THE BOLT FALLS. 213 

lawyer must be able to tell her whether her 
marriage had been the mockery that woman had 
asserted it to be. But still she resolutely kept her 
thoughts from her husband, or his conduct. She 
was only bent on discovering the truth, and she 
was counting up all she had ever seen or heard of 
Goldsmith, and trying to decide whether she could 
depend on his evidence. 

It was a fierce, hard battle : the agony would 
rise, would plead to be listened to ; but she thrust 
it back tearlessly, steadily ; she knew if once she 
let it have its will, her self-mastery would be over, 
and though the veins in her throat seemed swell- 
ing to suffocation, and those on her forehead 
bound it tightly like knotted ligatures, she kept 
her sway. 

As she left the cab, she met Mr. Goldsmith 
coming out of his office. He started back in 
amazement. 

" Why, bless my soul, Mrs. Hallam ! my dear 
young lady ! who would have thought of seeing 
you ? What is the matter ? " 

" I can go in, can't I ? " She spoke in a quick, 
determined tone, that showed Goldsmith some- 
thing serious had happened. 



214 HESTEE KIBTON. 

Without answering, he led the way to his 
private room, and asked her to be seated. 

^* I am delighted to see you, my dear madam- 
delighted; but it is by the merest chance you 
found me. If I had not stayed to answer a letter, 
that, in the common course of things, should have 
been left till to-morrow, I fear you would have 
had a fruitless journey; and now, may I have 
the pleasure of knowing what has brought you 
here?'' 

His usual smile was checked, for Hester had 
risen from her seat and stood looking at him 
with an intensity of expression that frightened 
him. She was very pale, but her eyes were 
unnaturally bright and restless, and her lips were 
pressed together so tightly that they looked as 
colourless as her cheeks. 

Still she did not speak; she seemed to be 
searching the man's soul with that earnest glance, 
and to be troubled at not finding what she sought, 
for I have said before Mr. Goldsmith's was not 
a face calculated to inspire implicit trust. 
. He felt alarmed, and turned yellower than ever, 
looking over his shoulder as if he expected to 
see some one. Had she lost her senses, or what 



THE BOLT FALLS. 215 

made her stare iii that way? her coming to the 
oiBSce alone too; he began to return her earnest 
gaze; but her first words showed him that she 
was not insane. 

**Mr. Goldsmith, you must excuse me; I know 
I am acting in a strange unusual manner for so 
young a womMi ; but when you have heard me, 
you will say I am justified in my conduct'' 

He began to deprecate any such idea, using his 
white handkerchief and smiling; but she bent her 
head gravely and went on, . 

" I want to know, Mr. Goldsmith . and I charge 
you to answer me truly, by the memory of my 
father, who I believe was a good friend to you," 
Goldsmith shivered slightly under her earnest 
words . ^* whether you had ever mentioned me to 
. to Mr. Hallam as a suitable wife, before he came 
the first time to Kirton's Farm ? " 

He could not help changing countenance a 
little. 

** My dear young lady, what is the drift of this 
question ? it involves so much. You must excuse 
me, but I must know what you are aiming at 
before I can answer you in any way satisfactorily." 

Hester looked at him scornfully. 



216 HESTEE EIRTON. 

" If I only want the truth, I cannot see why the 
end signifies." 

" Ah, so like a woman I " The lawyer rubbed 
his hands, and then buried his face in his pocket- 
handkerchief. ^^ You must excuse me, Mrs. 
Hallam" . Hester shrank from the sound of her 
own name . " if I say I can hardly take upon me 
to recollect all I may, or may not, have then said 
to my young friend in reference to so very 
charming a person as yourself." 

She walked straight up to him and held him 
by the arm with a firm grasp, as if sh% feared he 
would slip away from her and leave her question 
unanswered. 

^^You are not answering my meaning, sir. 
You know what I want you to tell me about, as 
well as I do. Now, Mr. Goldsmith, look at me; 
I am young and ignorant and friendless, but I 
have a strong will, and I never yet formed a set 
purpose that I have not accomplished, so far as 
it depended on myself: if I understand my father's 
will rightly, I shall depend wholly on myself after 
I am of age ? " 

"Precisely so, my dear young lady . subject 
always to my counsels, which I feel convinced 



THE BOLT FALLS. 217 

you are too sensible ever to require. I begin 
to see daylight," he continued to himself; *^ some 
money trouble in which that precious spendthrift 
has involved her already . poor thing, poor thing I 
. and she's tired of him." He smiled to himself 
as if the idea were not unwelcome. 

" Well, then, it will of course be in my power 
to continue to employ you in the management 
of my affairs or not, as I may think fit." He tried 
hard to interrupt her, but she would not hear him. 
"Now, Mr. Goldsmith, listen to me. For my 
father's sake and for my own I wish to trust you 
.implicitly, but this must rest entirely on your 
truth to me. I tell you plainly you must choose 
between me and . and". rher voice slightly faltered 
. ^^my husband in this matter; you cannot, from 
what I have been told, keep faith with both to-day . " 

" What have you been told, and who by ? " 
interrupted the lawyer, as the remembrance of the 
little agreement he had drawn up for Mr. Hallam 
and which he had never seen destroyed, flashed 
across his mind. 

"Never mind what I have been told, or who has 
told me ; you are only losing time, Mr. Goldsmith. 
I thought you would have understood that I was 



218 HESTEE KIRTON. 

in earnest when I said I had a strong will" She 
looked so sternly at him that he absolutely felt 
afraid of flinching from her steady gaze. " Once 
again I ask you, in the plainest words I can use. - 
did Mr. Hallam marry me because he loved me, 
or was it a plot, a pre-arranged plan, because he 
needed money, and knew that I should be rich ? " 

Goldsmith stood speechless, unc^tain how to 
act ; he could not force himself to answer truth- 
fully, he did not dare to tell her a falsehood in 
her present mood. 

** I will make it still easier for you," she said, 
his* silence strengthening her certainty of the 
worst ; her blood seemed turning to ice, and her 
heart felt leaden* **If .my father had suspected 
my attachment and refused his consent to our 
marriage, left his money away from me, would 
Frederic Hallam have married me then?" 

She spoke firmly, but so dispassionately, so 
unlike a woman, that it was impossible she was 
speaking of any one she loved. It might have 
been, for anything there was of emotion in her 
manner, of some one she had never seen. 

Still Goldsmith's habitual caution made him 
hesitate. 



THE BOLT FALLS. 219 

" But will you not tell me so much as this," he 
said, after having rapidly calculated which side it 
would be the best policy to take in this dispute . 
** what end are you aiming at? You cannot get a 
separation from your husband on such a ground 
as this." 

" I am not thinking of it," said Hester, sadly . 
oh, so sadly! her sternness could scarcely be 
maintained, now that each moment she felt more 
and more convinced of the truth of the accusation. 
" Once more . will you or will you not help your 
old friend's child ? I am not judging you hardly, 
you are Mr. Hallam's friend, and I respect you 
for trying to defend him. But you are my 
guardian, and therefore should in this matter take 
a father's part towards me. Oh, sir I" she con- 
tmued, passionately, clasping her hands as the 
intense emotion, so long subdued, found vent in 
words, ** do not mind my hardness . I could not help 
it . but tell me . tell a woman whose heart will not 
bear this fearful doubt any longer; tell me, I 
entreat . I implore you . if I have good reason for 
my fear." 

** You have," he said, carried out of himself, by 
her impassioned manner, too strongly to wear his 



220 HESTER KIRTON. 

usual precautionary mask ; " but," he added, as he 
saw the colour, which had risen with agitation, fade 
to ashy whiteness, while her whole frame quivered 
as if struck, ^^ who is to say that warm affection 
has not, or at any rate may not, replace the former 
feeling?" 

" Hush I " she said, quietly ; " no more words 
now ; you might have spared me some before, Mr. 
Goldsmith." 

She turned to leave the office, slowly and 
heavily. 

*^You will allow me to dischai'ge your cab, and 
to take you home. We shall find my carriage 
waiting by this time." 

She only shook her head, but when he repeated 
his offer, the stem look returned, and he dared not 
insist, although he felt unwilling to let her depart 
alone. 

" How strange in one so young I " he thought, 
as he seated himself in his brougham ; " I must be 
careful ; she requires no common management." 

He need not have feared how she would get 
home; Hester was neither faint nor hysterical 
when she reached Gloucester Place. 

It was dinner-time, and she came downstairs. 



THE BOLT FALLS. 221 

and went through the formal mockery, as if no 
blight had fallen on the flowers of her young life's 
happiness, as if she were still the same girl she had 
risen in the morning. But then she gave orders 
that she was not to be disturbed again . she 
required nothing more; and the words were uttered 
in a stem strange tone of command, that made the 
servants wonder at the change that had come over 
the young lady. 

A change indeed. She felt stunned ; she had 
no tears to loosen and carry off the oppression, 
that clung about her heart and brain, as if to 
suffocate her. She could only think . think . 
think. 

Strangely distinct among all that had happened 
since, stood out in memory the day of her father's 
death ; this seemed so like it She had sat then 
motionless beside him, wondering sometimes if it 
were a nightmare-like dream, and if it would not 
soon be over. She had never known either, how 
dearly she had loved her father till she lost him, 
and now she felt too she had not known before 
how dearly she had loved the man she thought her 
husband was. There was a dreadful justice in 
her character. justice untempered. with mercy . 



222 HESTER EIRTON. 

and she knew it She would have given much 
now to be only a gentle, loving, forgiving woman, 
but it was impossible ; and she was far too real to 
give way to vain longings for what might not be. 

She looked upon what had happened as a 
punishment sent to her, for what she had often 
thought of . the readiness with which she had 
listened to Frederic Hallam, so soon after her 
father's death. How soon she had forgotten her 
grief in his society I Not once had she troubled 
herself to think whether he was the son-in-law 
her father would have chosen, although . and 
she started now as, in the intensity of her retro- 
spection, the thought was forced upon her . she 
remembered how abruptly and decidedly he had 
checked all inquiries concerning him, after his 
first visit to Kirton's Farm. At last tears came 
stealing down, as she thought that, in that iron 
nature of her father's, which had seemed to repel 
human love and sympathy, there had, at any rate, 
been truth and honesty, for had lie ever owed any 
man anything ? " How far more precious than 
mere alluring outward show I " thought Hester, and 
her tears ceased suddenly, as the picture of what 
she now considered her husband rose before her. 



THE BOLT FALLS. 223 

She had just been pitflessly severe to herself, 
&r she really had been deeply saddened by her 
fiither's death* But, with the usual error of singu- 
larly just natures, she was hard in her judgments, 
would not admit excuses ; and her husband's crime, 
as she called it, seemed to her unpardonable. 
The Frederic that she had loved, that she still 
loved, was not her husband. She could see the 
two characters side by lude, and as circumstance 
after circumstance . noted, although till now with- 
out ftill comprehension . ^uncoiled from memory's 
inner recesses, she decided that the one she 
had worshipped had been but a fair mask . a 
brightly painted seeming of the corruption within. 
She was married to a man who could both speak 
and act a falsehood . who still regarded her, not 
as a wife to be loved and honoured, but as a means 
of raising money for his self-indulgent extrava- 
gance. And then her fixture life spread itself out 
before her, and she asked herself, gravely and 
firmly, if she could pass it with such a man as she 
had just been contemplating. The answer did not 
come readily. Once she thought . it was love's 
last effort, before the gates were finally barred 
against him . that when she saw her husband, old 



224 HESTER KIRTON. 

feelings might return. He might . and here was 
a ray in the darkness . yet learn to love her ; but 
the withering scorn that sprang up against herself, 
for such worse than childish weakness, stifled the 
hope even in its birth. 

*^ Have I not appealed to his love and his truth, 
and has he not lied to me ? " was the stem answer 
she made herself. 

But resolve seemed difficult. She could harden 
herself against him ; still no definite answer 
would come as to how she must act. She sought 
no comfort, no guidance, but in herself; self- 
contained, self-reliant, hour after hour she sate; 
not worried or doubting, but confident, when these 
brain-clouds of weakness and emotion should have 
passed, that she should see her way clear before 
her. . . . . 

Here was a resolve at last, and a refreshing 
thankfulness cooled her fevered brain as it came. 
She would think no more to-night. She would go 
to bed and sleep ; in the morning her brain would 
be clearer, and her mind more calm. 

But although the will may be and is almost 
omnipotent in such natures as Hester's, it is not 
quite so. She tried to sleep, and at first sank into 



THE BOLT FALLS. 225 

what seemed likely to be unbroken slumber. But 
it did not last. she started into sudden wake- 
fulness. In a moment sleep seemed to have 
left her. All her lost hopes . all the sorrow 
for the happiness she had fancied her own in her 
husband's love. concentrated in a sudden speech- 
less, tearless agony. If she could only die . and she 
thought she must, for surely this was the pain of 
heart-breaking she had heard of . and then she 
searched back into memory, clung as a drowning 
wretch might for refuge from this pain ; but all 
aid seemed futile and helpless, when she tried to 
grasp it, as straws floating along the river. Like 
a poor drowning wretch, I said. Hester was in 
far worse plight, as yet she was more like a 
grand old heathen, in her blind self-reliance, 
than a baptized Christian. 

She felt she was hopeless . friendless; so she 
seemed to be, as far as regarded human sympathy, 
and she sought for no higher love or help. 

For a moment she thought of Lucy. Should she 
go to her ? But how could she reveal to any of her 
own relations that her grand marriage had been a 
mockery and a falsehood from beginning to end ? 
And, besides, the thought of Lucy .and Jacob, and 

VOL. U. 34 



226 HESTER KIRTON. 

their happiness, was a fresh agony. Ah 1 how much 
happier to have been as poor as her cousin, then 
perhaps some one would have loved her for herself, 
someone . ^who . were not all men the same? Jacob 
seemed to make Xucy happy now, but who could 
tell what the end might be? Perhaps it might be 
better that A^ trial had come so soon ; the longer 
it had gone on, the harder it would have seemed to 
endure. Now she had said good-bye to Love for 
ever, and yet, deep down in her heart . almost 
unknown to herself . lurked a desperate hope ihat 
it might not be true ; that something in her hus- 
band's face, when he returned, would tell her he 
had married her because he loved her .... 

So the night slowly wore away . a night of 
agony sufficient to change a young blooming girl 
into a hard, determined woman. 



227 



CHAPTER XVL 

MB. GOLDSMITH'S MEDITATIONS. 

Fbedekic Hallam did not stand long bending 
his eyes on the flying horses. 

In a few moments his fate was decided^ and 
he knew all was lost. But after the first severe 
mortification at his want of luck or skill, which 
seemed to affect him quite as much as the actual 
loss of money, his fertile brain, over-excited by 
the day's events, began to plan some mode of 
extrication from his embarrassments. The first 
thing to be done was to write to Goldsmith, and 
tell him plainly that unless he supplied him more 
liberally, he should raise money elsewhere on 
his wife's property; . and then he was far too 
exhausted to go on thinking, and at Tatton there 
was plenty of amusement to be found for those 
who sought to get rid of importunate care. 

34.2 



228 HESTER KIRTON. 

Sooner than he expected on the second day, he 
received Goldsmith's letter. 

The lawyer expressed his extreme regret at 
his being again in want of money, but intimated 
that it would be in every way desirable that he 
should once more apply to him before he carried 
his threat into execution. 

Looking at Hallam's face as he read this letter, 
any one would have thought his cares at an end. 

** I've brought the old Jew to his senses, have I, 
at last," he said, joyfully; "now I'll just make 
him settle this little business and double our 
income as well ; that will enable me to live com- 
fortably, and also to refund the interest to Hes- 
ter's account. I begin to see Goldsmith was a 
much cleverer fellow than I took him for, whei 
ho tied the money so tightly on her; he said it 
was for my sake, because he saw I shoujd always 
be careless with money, and, therefore, whatever 
scrapes I got into, I should always be secure. 
After all, what's hers is really mine; poor little 
thing, I believe she'd sign her soul away to please 
me. I wish she were diflferent, a little more 
childlike and lively ; " (he forgot his last rebuke) 
" but she's growing such a woman, that perhaps 



MR. goldsmith's MEDITATIONS. 229 

by the time she really is of age, I may find her 
less easy to manage ; however, there's no time to 
lose now." 

He was soon on the road to London, and, 
sending his man home with his luggage, took his 
way straight to Goldsmith's office. 

It was still early, and the lawyer had been 
seated in deep thought ever since he reached his 
office . thought of an unusual kind, too. 

Hester had made a far deeper impression than 
she was aw^are of on the subtle schemer, w^ho, 
both by nature and profession, was accustomed to 
harden himself against emotion. But he could 
yield to its appeal in this case without any betrayal 
of weakness. Hester was his client, par excellence; 
his interests were bound up in hers far more 
closely than she knew of, and although it would 
have been more congenial to him to have persisted 
. in an evasive reply on the previous evening, yet 
for once the truth served his purpose better than 
any double-dealing. And yet he did not feel easy. 
Her words, ^^your dead friend's child," haunted 
him, and he seemed to see her grief-stricken 
eyes wherever he turned. He had always thought 
her cold and childish; but had he and Hallam 



I 



230 HESTER KIRTON. 

both been mistaken^ and did she love her husband 
like any other fond, foolish woman, after all ? If 
she did, what an agony of mortification and despair 
he must have inflicted on her ; for Mr. Goldsmith 
had seen a good deal of women in his time, and 
knew what depths of grief they were capable of. 

Hester's face would haunt him this morning, 
not for its own sake only; it carried him back long 
ago, to the village where he and Ralph Kirton 
had both been bom . to a quiet seat in the church- 
yard under a broadly spreading yew-tree . a 
young girl, almost as fair, although more rustic 
looking than Hester, sate there, her head on 
the shoulder of a youth about to seek his for- 
tunes in London; how sad her blue eyes were, 
how full of coming sorrow, when she said, " Don't 
forget me, Godfrey; oh, don't forgot me, or my 
heart will break ! " He remembered he had kissed 
her and vowed eternal truth and constancy; but 
even then his heart had been more full of his future 
than of her present. and what had happened? 
His ftiture had become a present brighter than he 
could have pictured; she' was of the past now, for 
he had soon forgotten Her, her heart had broken . 
and she was ai' refrt. 



MR. goldsmith's IOa)ITATI0NS. 231 

He sate now, wondering if this grief would 
prove as fatal to Hester. He felt uneasy and 
restless, he wished he could get her out of his 
head . ^that calm self-controlled grief, for her eyes 
told him it was grief, had moved him far more 
deeply than any passionate outburst. 

It was strange that he should have felt so 
uneasy, when he must have known how much his 
mediation might have still availed between Hester 
and her husband. Who shall say that it was not 
that very knowledge that made him uneasy? 
Was he really so very anxious to see his friend's 
child happy in her married Hfe? The unusual 
emotion which seemed to be mastering him this 
morning, answered*^ Yes;" but when he considered 
her position fully in relation to himself, he found 
so much weighty argument on the other side, 
that his restlessness returned strongly, and he 
started up and paced his office. 

No man, even of Mr. Goldsmith's type, makes 
up his mind to a downward step without a 
struggle. But where feeling onZy has to fight the 
battle against self-interest, the strife will not be 
very long, nor its issue doubtfiiL 

He had just turned his attention to some matters 



232 HESTER KIRTOK 

of business, when a clerk came to say Mr. Hallam 
was below, and wished to see him. 

^^ Ask him to come upstairs." 

He took one more restless walk across his room, 
and then stood facing the door to await his 
visitor. 

Frederic Hallam looked far more radiant, more 
like himself, than the last time he had visited his 
wife's guardian. 

But Mr. Goldsmith did not allow him to begin 
the conversation. 

His face seemed to have elongated, and to have 
become suddenly jaundiced, as the door opened to 
admit his visitor, and his voice expressed deep 
commiseration, not unmixed with reproof, as he 
deplored Hallam's ill-fortune at the races. 

**Well, never mind," said Hallam, cheerfully; 
** better luck next time ; but it makes plain to you, 
I should think, that I was right when I told you, 
you cut our means of living too close ; honestly. 
Goldsmith, you will savB yourself and me a good 
deal of trouble and annoyance, if you just double 
the figure at once." 

" My dear sir ! " exclaimed the lawyer, hands and 
chin both expressing his surprise, *^ I hoped these 



MR. goldsmith's MEDITATIONS. 233 

losses would have sobered you down, brought 
you into bounds, but you ar^ worse than ever. 
Dear me, dear me ! now I wonder," he continued, 
looking furtively at Hallam, *^ what my charming 
ward would say to this little proposition of yours ; 
but, of course, it has been mentioned between 
you." 

Hallam laughed. 

*^ Now, Goldsmith, you are too absurd ; in the 
first place, I've not seen Hester since I went to 
Tatton, and in the next, is it likely I should talk 
business to her ? Why, what on earth can she 
know about it ? " 

A strange light gleamed in the lawyer's eyes 
when Hallam said he had not seen his wife ; he 
paused for a few moments before he replied, . 

f* And yet, my dear sir, Mrs. Hallam must be 
called on to understand businesfs, and before very 
long, too, nor do I think you will find her unapt. 
You are aware that, after she comes of age, her 
signature will be absolutely necessary in any 
httle business matters." . 

The excitement of his rapid journey, and the 
relief Goldsmith's letter had- given him, had 
thrown Hallam off his guard; but now there 



234 HESTER KIRTON. 

was something in the lawyer's look and tone that 
struck him as hostile. When he spoke again, it 
was in a far more guarded tone. 

" You said you wished me to come to you, so I 
imagine you haye some proposition to make ; but 
mind you. Goldsmith, I must square these Tatton 
matters off-hand." 

The lawyer shook his head mournfully. 

** You must allow me to remonstrate with you, 
Mr. Hallam, indeed you must," the words sounded 
humble, but the tone was insolent. *^ Dear me, 
dear me I if my poor old friend could but see how 
the iSne fortune he built up is being gambled away 
without any benefit, that I can see, accruing to his 
daughter, surely he would not rest in his grave." 

Hallam chafed, but still he kept his temper. 

" Stay a- moment, Goldsmith ; did you exact any 
promise from me, when I married your friend's 
daughter, against betting, or did you not rather 
recommend a rich marriage to me as a safe means 
of indulging in such amusements? But, now, I 
didn't come here to recriminate ; you may make 
your mind easy about me ; I don't mind saying 
I've had a smart lesson this time, and I dare say 
I shall be more careful ; but it would be much 



MR. GOLDSMITH'S MEDITATIONS. 235 

better to tempt me to be prudent, and this you 
might do, by doubling our income at once." 

The lawyer looked at him as if he thought he 
had taken leave of his senses, but Hallam went on 
before he could interrupt 

**Yes, I should certainly learn to economize, 
because I greatly desire to pay regular interest for 
the money with which you are now going to settle 
those debts; perhaps in time I may be able to replace 
the whole sum. I think it will be a far better 
plan to have it advanced to me at once, than to be 
'constantly troubling you with money transactions.'* 

Mr. Goldsmith stroked his chin meditatively 
with his thumb and his two first fingers. 

** You are speaking, I presume, of your wife's 
fortune," he said, slowly. ** Well, it would, as you 
say, save trouble . always supposing Mrs. Hallam's 
consent attainable to such an arrangement." 

** Jwill answer for that," said the young man, 
Jiaughtily ; " but at present I believe the increase 
of income rests mainly with you. And I am quite 
as anxious to get one point settled as the other." 

" Well, now," said Goldsmith, still reflectively, 
as he lounged back in his easy-chair; ** I always^ 
prefer settling one thing at a time. How is this 



236 HESTER KIRTON. 

matter to be settled ? will you drop me a line, to 
say when I can wait on Mrs. Hallam ; or how 
shall It be?" 

" Oh, there is no occasion to worry Hester too 
much with business before her time," said Hallam, 
smiling. " She will do all I want, so don't tease 
her beforehand. You just draw up what's neces- 
sary, and send it, and I'll see that she signs it" 

**Her signature is not required at present, 
although I prefer consulting her on so important 
a matter. You must excuse me, my dear sir, if I 
appear somewhat formal. It is the first time I have 
been called on to take such serious steps in behalf 
of my fair client, and I should wish to have an inter- 
view with her before I come to any decision. I 
am sure Mrs. Hallam will expect it of me." 

Hallam looked hard at him . what did he mean? 
. it would be a nice thing for him to begin to 
meddle between husband and wife, and yet he was 
too quick not to see that it would not do to quarrel 
with him. 

** Suppose you dine with us this evening ; won't 
that do ? " he said, carelessly, as if not choosing to 
^ee the doubt of him the lawyer's words had implied. 

'* Thank you ! no ; I always prefer to settle these 



MR. goldsmith's MEDITATIONS. 237 

little tilings in the morning. Shall we say to- 
morrow morning, at any time most convenient to 
Mrs. Hallam, or " 

*^ Very well ; I'll send you a note in the course 
of the day; but let me have this clear: directly 
you hand me over what I have asked you for, you 
will take into consideration the other plan, which is 
really quite as important. You can't fancy what a 
thing it is, or how absurd it makes a man look, to 
be always hard up, and yet to feel, he has a right 
to be spending thousands. By Jove I it's not the 
thing at all." , 

Mr. Goldsmith shook his head, and sighed ; he 
was in a dolorous mood this morning, from which 
Fred could not rouse him. 

" Such a sum," he murmured; ** really, I assure 
you, my dear sir, I had to read your letter twice, 
before I could believe you could have incurred such 
a venture. But you said just now, you expected 
I had a proposition to make you ; and so I have. 
If Mrs. Hallam is so indulgent to your extrava- 
gance, as to consent to your having the means of 
paying for it at once . so much the better, no doubt 
.although, as I said before, it grieves me to the 
very soul, to see my old friend's fortune made 



238 HESTER KIETON. 

ducks and drakes qf. But in making this pro- 
position to Mrs. Hallam, you must be very careful 
. very careful, and must remember that you are 
altogether dependent on her generosity for any- 
thing besides the annual payment made you out 
of the property." 

Hallam bit his lips, and thought, ** Insolent 
Jew, my day will come ; " but his power of self- 
control kept him outwardly calm. 

*^Not much fear of my forgetting it, all things 
considered," he said, bitterly; *^ spite of all your 
plausible reasons, I consider it was a mistake to 
make a man dependent on his wife," and he rose 
to go. 

*^ A moment more ; you seem to forget that 
you will very soon be of age, according to the 
peculiar provisions of your father's will, and that in 
due time you must inherit both from your respected 
mother, Mrs. Hallam senior, and from your aunt: 
would not that suffice ? " 

Hallam shrugged his shoulders; he did not 
choose to tell Goldsmith that the greater part 
of his father's inheritance had been anticipated 
long ago. But the lawyer, who guessed as much, 
went on, unheeding him. 



k 



MB. GOLDSMITH'S MEDITATIONS. 239 

" Your notions, doubtless, may have influenced 
your wife's; but, carefully as she has been brought 
up, I apprehend that the mere mention of such 
a sum as you require will shock and grieve her 
beyond measure." He paused, and, from the 
shelter of his handkerchief, looked sideways, at 
the young man, and, seeing an impatient gesture, 
he went on : " Taking this into due consideration, 
my proposition would be that you do not mention 
the matter at all to her, but allow me gently to 
arrange it for you, when I see Mrs. Hallam." 

Frederic Hallam, throughout their interview, 
had not been insensible to the change in the 
lawyer's manner; he had been too worldly-wise 
to resent it hitherto, but this was more than he 
could bear, as the lawyer intended it to be. 

^^You are very kind and considerate, Mr. 
Goldsmith ; but I see you don't quite, as a single 
man, comprehend the terms on which husbands 
and wives live together ; as I told you before, I 
think your preliminary meeting with my wife 
wholly unnecessary; she will, of course, do all 
I wish in this matter. And now I won't make 
any further trespass on your valuable time." 

And with a hurried leave-taking he departed. 



240 HESTER KIRTON. 

Mr. Goldsmith looked after his visitor as he 
closed the door with a peculiar and very un- 
pleasant smile, slowly rubbing his chin the while, 
and decided, in his own mind, that his dear young 
friend had become far less sharp-witted since his 
marriage. 



241 



CHAPTER XVII. 

HUSBAND AND WIFE. 

Tbederic Hallam walked along towards his 
Lome, irritable and excited, and very mncli 
dissatisfied with himself for being so. 
. But for Goldsmith's words, he would have 
<;onsidered it the most natural thing in the world 
.to ask Hester's consent to any arrangement in 
his favour; he did not feel under any obli- 
gation to her, it was all the other way. What 
sacrifice had she made in marrying him ? How- 
ever, it was absurd to be annoyed about it 
Goldsmith meant nothing; he was an old prig, 
-and liked to show his power ; still there had been 
s. very unpleasant look in his face several times 
-during the interview ; perhaps it was natural he 
should be reluctant to emancipate any one from 
his clutches, for Fred vowed to himself, if only 
VOL. n. 35 



242 HESTER RIRTON. 

his income were doubled, he would take good 
care to hve within it : all else apart, he began to 
feel ashamed of having, as Goldsmith said, ^' made 
ducks and drakes of so much money." 

After all, he owed him a mere trifle now. The 
ready money paid down to his account at the 
time of his marriage, had been nearly all devoted 
to liquidating the lawyer's claims upon him. The 
young man thought of this as he walked along. 

'^He got a great deal more by my marriage 
tihan I did," he said to himself. 

He seemed to prefer walking this morning; 
it seemed to give him more time to think. 
Of course, nothing that Goldsmith had said 
could give him any real hesitation in speaking to 
Hester about money matters, and yet he evidently 
was not impatient to reach Gloucester Place. He 
had returned a day sooner than the time named in 
his letter. Hester would be surprised to see him; 
he hoped she would not make a scene by rushing 
out to the street door, or anything of that kind. 
She meant it all for the best, but it was a siUy 
thing to do ; if it were not for this worry about the 
money, he should be rather {leased to see her 
again, poor little thing I 



HUSBAND AND WIFE. 243 

Meditating in this discursive &shion^ he arrived 
at home. 

Parkins was coming down-*stair8 aa the streetr 
door was opened. 

She started to see her master. 

*' We did not expect vou till to-morrow, sir.** 

"Ah, no; I suppose not; how is your mistress?" 

^Not very well, I think, sir; at least she don*t 
look well. I'm glad you've come home^ sir." 

And the discreet damsel threw open the door 
of the dining-room. 

^ Not here? then I suppose my mistress is up- 
stairs in the drawing-room." 

*^No, never mind, I'll find her; your mistress 
won't be frightened ; it's better than coming home a 
day too late, you know. Parkins," he said^ smiling ; 
and he walked up-stairs alone. 

Hester was sitting in the drawing-room. She 
rose as he entered, but she looked self-possessed, 
evidently not frightened nor surprised. In some 
mysterious way, we generally are warned of our 
approaching fate. I do not mean that thare is 
any visible token, but whether it be that the 
previous expectation has so wrought on our 
nervous system, as to render its perceptioos 

35.2 



244 HESTER KIRTON. 

tmnaturally acute^ or that there is a mysterious 
sympathy between persons, which makes each 
cognisant of the approach of the other, it is 
certain that Hester had sat expecting her hnsbiand 
for the last two hours. 

With the natural contr^iction of human nature, 
he felt disappointed that she was not surprised. 
But her great beauty struck him unusually. She 
had more colour than he was accustomed to see 
her with; for she had flushed deeply as he 
entered, and as she still stood after his greeting, he 
thought she certainly was quite as dignified in 
appearance as Lady Helena, although her move- 
ments might be less graceful. And he could not 
help feeling proud of her. Her first words dis- 
pelled the charm ; they were so harshly uttered. 
She had schooled herself to be calm and just 

*'Are you hungry? Did you breakfast very 
'early?'* 

*^ Yes, perhaps I might as well have a glass of , 
sherry and a biscuit. I can have it here, you 
know ; I never eat luncheon." 

He threw himself comfortably into an easy- 
chair, and thought, as his wife walked to the bell, 
^that she would in time be a very fine woman, and 



HUSBAND AND WIFJB. 245 

do him credit But she certainly was the most 
silent, ondemonstrative creature he had ever met 
with. Still that was a siult quite on the right side. 

** Well, how have you been, Hester, while 1 was 
away . all right? Fortescue gave you my mes- 
sage . ^hasanyone else4)een?'' 

"Captain Fortescue called one evemng," she 
tamed very pale again now, ** and yesterday Lady 
Helena Fortescue called also." 

** What on earth " . ^began Hallam, impatiently ; 
and then noticing his wife's earnest look, he said, 
" You didn't see her, did you ? " 

" Yes, I saw her, and talked to her." 

**Not much, I should fancy," . ^his wife's senten- 
tious manner annoyed him. '^You don't seem 
particularly glad to see me, Hester." 

'* I am very glad you are come." 

"I declare," he said, with one of his sweet 
smiles, ^* you have grown more cut and dried than 
ever, while I have been away. I must not leave 
you alone so long again, must I, littie woman ? 
You've got quite moped." 

The soft colour flitted over her cheek once more, 
and her eyes looked softly into his. 

** Now, where would you like to go this after- 



246 HESTEB EIBTON. 

noon ?" he continued. *' Pve only got a tiresome 
note to write to old Goldsmith^ and th^i 111 do 
exactly what you like, tiie r^t of the day." 

Her heart gave a joyful leap, and her lips 
dimpled into a trustful smile as he spoke ; but 
Goldsmith's name made her compress ihem tightly 
again. 

Hallam did not see the change ; he went straight 
on, without looking at her. 

**By-the-by, Pm in want of rather a large 
sum just now; I've had ill-luck at Tatton . ^it's 
a bore, for I stood to win immensely. and Gold- 
smith thinks the best way is to take it out of what 
is coming to us, you know." 

She looked hard and stem enough now, and the 
colour faded entirely, but until she spoke he did 
not raise his eyes ; then the change struck him. 
What had happened ? she had grown ten years 
older in his absence. 

'* Is this Mr. Goldsmith's own plan? " 

" We both thought well of it." 

" Then why is it mentioned to me ? " 

"Because of some legal nonsense or other, 
which requires your consent; just a form, you 
understand?" 



HUSBAND AND WIFE. 247 

: **(Mj a form . jba, I want to tmderstand 
exactly ; if I reftise^ you cannot have the mcmey i 
18 that what yon mean ? " 

Indolent as Frederic Hallam felt after his 
hnrried jonmey^ he started to his feet in sheer 
astonishment That a girl^ a mere child in matters 
of business, should at once have seen the only 
part of the transaction he wished her to be igno- 
rant of, completely puzzled him. What could 
have put such an idea in her head ? 

*' You're joking" now," he said. *'I told Gold- 
smith I would find out from you what you wishedjt 
and when you would see him, so that no time 
might be lost. Shall I say to-morrow morning, 
at ten o'clock?" 

. Her remark had annoyed him, and he did not 
make this request quite so courteously as he other- 
wise would have done. 

** I wish to speak to Mr. Goldsmith alone, before 
I consent to anything,** said Hester, gravely. 

He looked vexed now. 

*'How absurd, Hester 1 What is the use of 
making all this ftiss ? Don't you understand that 
this is a debt of honour, which must be paid 
as soon as possible? You don't suppose I should 



248 HESTEE KIRTON. 

wish to spend our money unnecessarily ; however, 
as you seem to wish to become a woman of 
business, I can explain the matter to you as well 
as Goldsmith can." 

He threw himself into his chair again, ani 
turned towards her. She had grown paler than, 
he had ever seen her, but she did not seem faint,> 
only as if her face were chiselled in marble. 

 Why, what is the matter with you, Hester? 
are you ill ? youVe as white as a sheet.'* 

" Fm not ill," she said, " but I want to say 
a few serious words to you. J prefer hearings 
these business matters you speak of from Mr. 
Goldsmith, and, as the money you want is mine, 
I think my wish in this matter should be studied.". 

He could not bear it; he forgot air prudence, 
all forbearance. It had never entered into hisr 
calculations that Hester could consider her 
interests separate from his, and he told her so, 
adding that he thought she ought to remember 
all he had sacrificed in marrying her, and try 
at least to be a dutiful, yielding wife on a point 
where their interests must be mutual, and that 
she should not talk at random on subjects about 
which she could know nothing. 



HUSBAND AND WIFE. 249^ 

^'I am not talking at random," she said, so 
slowly, so calmly that it quieted him in a moment 
** I have had time for thought during my lonely 
hours lately, Frederic Hallam. I am no longer 
a child, and I have been trying to learn the true 
relations that ought to exist between husband 
and wife. In yours towards me," and her lips 
quivered with the passionate scorn she could 
no longer suppress, ^' there has been falsehood 
from beginning to end." .... 



250 HESTER EIRTOS. 



CHAPTEEXVm. 

FREDERIC HALLAM PAYS HIS DEBTS. 

An hour had passed^ and still Mr. Hallam re- 
mained in the drawing-room. 

Parkins^ curiosity and excitement had been 
roused to a most unusual point . to a point 
which had by this time carried her to the landing 
by the staircase window. 

At firsts as she stood in the hall beneath^ she 
heard Mrs. Hallam speaking in indignant, earnest 
tones, and then the husband's voice seemed to 
break in angrily, but she was called down to 
dinner at this juncture, and, for the time, her 
curiosity subsided. But when she came up- 
stairs again, all sound had ceased. There was 
dead silence in the upper part of the house. 

Perhaps they had parted; perhaps her master 
had come down into the dining-room ; she knew 



FBEDEBIC HALLAM FATS HIS DEBTS. 251 

he had not gone ont^ for she had not heard the 
street*door close. She stood for a moment, and, 
while she hesitated, came the sharp, quick tread, 
followed by the ring of the postman, and the 
dick of the letter-box. 

Here was what she wanted: an excuse for 
going into the dining-room. 

But it was empty, and she saw that the letter 
was only a pamphlet open at each end. 

She dared not venture into the drawing-room 
to disturb her mistress in her present mood about 
a trifle like this, and again she asked herself 
whatever could have happened to make Mrs. 
Hallam look and speak as she had done since 
Lady Helena Fortescue's visit 

But again there were voices upstairs, and, as 
I have said. Parkins followed their sound. 

They were not speaking loud now. Mr. 
Hallam seemed to be giving short, sullen answers 
to what his wife was saying; but they evidently 
had both resumed self-control, and did not wish 
to be overheard ; all was confused murmur, except 
the different tcmes of the speakers. 

Parkins felt desperate. It had been a risk, 
knowing, as she did, Hester's sudden, rapid move- 



252 HESTER KIRTON. 

ments^ to venture upstairs at all ; but as the boy 
who climbs the orchard wall for one apple, seldom 
returns without filling all his pockets, so, having 
braved one risk, she determined to go close to 
the drawing-door, and try if the sounds were more, 
audible. But before she reached it, there was a 
sudden pause and movement within ; she hesitated^, 
and well for her that she did so. 

Hester's voice, in loud, distinct tones, said,. 

" On those terms, and those only, I consent to 
remain with you as your wife ; when you have 
decided, I will write to Mr. Goldsmith." 

The next moment the door opened, and she 
stood close to Parkins, who aflFected to be coming 
upstairs, with the letter in her hand. 

Hester's face was deeply flushed, her lips 
scarcely visible, so tightly were they pressed 
together. She started, and looked severely at the 
woman, who, in positive fear, forgot that tlie paper 
was addressed to Mr. Hallam, and put it into 
Hester's hand. 

*^ This is for your master ; he is in the drawing- 
room ; " and she had passed up to her bedroom 
before Parkins recovered from her flutter of terror. 
Had she been less frightened, she must have beenr 



PBEDERIC HALLAM PAYS HIS DEBTS. 253 

struck by the strange change that had passed over 
Mrs. Hallam. 

Still, she was anxious to see her master. ** What 
had he heen doing, and how could Mrs. Hallam 
venture to speak in such a way as that to her 
lawful husband?** 

Frederic Hallam did not turn round when the 
door was opened. He was standing in the farthest 
window of the back room; his forehead pressed 
against the sill, and both hands clasped behind 
him. Parkins could not see his face, but the 
attitude in which he stood, with bent head and 
shoulders, half crouched, as if all manhood had 
been crushed out of him, touched her. 

There was something in his manner and tem- 
perament that had always made him popular with 
inferiors. Parkins felt quite sure, whoever was 
to blame, it was not Mr. Hallam, and without 
trying to disturb him, she laid the letter on the 
table, and left the room more gently than she had 
entered it 

She was not one of the gossiping class ot 
servants ; she was rather one of those who observe 
land note accurately and silently all that happens 
among their employers^ and she had sense enough 



254 HESTER KIBTOK 

to feel this matter was too serious to be talked 
about^ either to Martin or the, servants of the 
house; but she saw some change was impending, 
and watched anxiously to see how all would 
end. . 

There was much coming and going for several 
days; letters and messages &om and to Mr. Gt)ld- 
smith's office, and, finally, came that gentlemiaii 
himself. 

But he had cmly a short interview with Mrs* 
Hallam, and although he came late . after six 
o'clock. he was not asked to stay dinnier. 

The next morning, Mrs. Hallam summoned 
Parkins, and asked if she objected to a country 
life, supposing that her wages were considerably 
increased. 

The woman hesitated ; she feared Mrs. Hallam 
now ; but there was something in the whole story 
that interested and &scinated her; she felt as if 
she must see it to the end, so she said she had no 
wish to leave. 

And in a week's time it was known at his club, 
that before the season was over, Frederic Hallam 
had either purchased or rented an estate about 
eighty miles &om London, and that he had gone 



FBEDEBIC HALLAM FATS HIS DEBTS. 255 

there with his wife . gone there, it was said, 
without communicating his intentions to any 
one. 

Some said it was all a myth, that he had 
had serious losses on the turf, and had slipped 
off quietly to the Continent; others contradicted 
this, and declared positively that he had paid 
his debts. While others . and this tale began in 
Lady Helena's morning-room . said that he was 
heartily ashamed of his awkward wife, and had 
really buried himself alive with her in this 
country house; and these prophesied that next 
season he would reappear am^ng them as free a 
man as ever, having left Mrs. Hallam to cultivate 
cabbages. 



END OF VOL. II 
HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER I. 

FATHER AND CHILD. 

It was a bright spring morning, not that early 
time when we almost wonder how the rash young 
leaves can venture to cast off their scaly covering, 
and bare themselves to nipping winds by day and 
cruel night frosts, but genial warmth, in which 
even a few early brimstone butterflies disported 
themselves among the blackberry bushes on each 
side of the stately old high road. Just at this 
point, it was picturesque as well as stately. It 
had been ascending gradually for nearly half- 
a-mile, and now, the hill having become too steep 
for^t to keep pace with, it took its way,OY>T*\kst> 



4 HESTER KIRTON. 

a way had been cut for it, through the top of the 
hill, so that lofty, almost perpendicular, banks 
of bright yellow earth rose on each side, crowned 
with thick pine woods. Except just at that 
time of year and day, when the sun over-topped 
the tall trees, the road lay in deep shadow 
. a quiet valley, up whose sides clambered 
the aforesaid brambles, tangled with sloe-bushes, 
on some of which rampant ivy had established 
round tree-tops, glittering with mingled light and 
shadow. 

Wild flowers were scanty. A few steps farther, 
after passing the crest of the hill, the road opened 
suddenly on the left; a tall, white hand-post, 
standing on a triangular piece of turf, protruded 
like a tongue from the green wood path, telling 
travellers, of divers tempting villages behind and 
before them, while a shorter limb, pointing into 
the pine wood itself, bore on it the simple in- 
scription, " To Uplands." 

The green path led through the heart of the 
wood ; there were bye-paths in plenty, but they 
wound and twisted themselves out of sight in too 
allurincr a manner to entice any experienced 
traveller to pursue their meanderings, lest they 



FATHER AND CHILD. 5 

might prove as bewilderingly delightful as Hama- 
dryads ; only an ardent lover of flowers could not 
have resisted straying from the path, now that 
the pines were replaced by noble English forest 
trees, occasional glimpses of open space between 
the spreading roots of beeches, whose leaves had 
scarcely unfolded their silken verdure, reveal- 
ing patches of deep green feathered foliage, 
crowned with the lovely trembling blossoms of 
wood anemone, or closer nestling almost into 
its mother earth, the delicate wood sorrel, with 
its exquisite three-fold leaf and scarlet stem. 
Violets, too, were abundant in the wood, and blue- 
bells, and primroses, and, in grand masses, sitting 
queen-like on its handsome, spreading leaves, the 
snowy-flowered garlic. But, after a while, the 
brambles grew closer and closer to the path, 
and the trees met nearer over-head, although, 
from the lessening of the green gloom in front, 
it was plain the wood was ending. 

At length, the path turned suddenly to the 
right, and stopped at a white gate, on the other 
side of which was Uplands itself . a noble park, 
well planted with stately trees, grouped with 
no common skill. A winding path led up and 



6 HESTER KIRTON. 

down the many undulations to a point where 
the trees stood more closely together, and were 
yet more vividly contrasted in foliage. Spring 
was still in the glory of its fresh livery: the 
tender green of the elms and limes looking yet 
brighter beside the broad leaves of Spanish 
chestnut and gloomy Italian pines. Through the 
verdure of these closely-grouped trees, appeared 
at intervals the Tudor gables and twisted chimneys 
of the house itself. Leaving the path, and walking 
close up to the trees on the left, might be seen, 
through the spaces between their trunks, the com- 
paratively modern frontage of a comfortable 
family mansion; a broad-grassed ditch surmounted 
by an iron chevaux-de-frise divided the lawn from 
the park. Such a lawn! not cut up into fanci- 
fully-devised flower-beds, but a broad, smooth 
expanse of turf, the monotony relieved by huge 
baskets here and there formed of the subverted 
roots and part of the trunks of what must have 
been majestic beech trees, their twisted, pic- 
turesque wreathing filled with scarlet and white 
and golden tulips, making quite an eastern blaze 
of colour. Returning to the guidance of the foot- 
path, it led through a large, swinging gate, 



FATHER AND CHILD. 7 

parallel with the right-hand angle of the house 
to the entrance-gate . fronted by a broad, grassy- 
level, sloping down from which, and extending 
a considerable distance to the park gates, was 
a noble avenue of Spanish chestnut trees . the 
principal entrance to Uplands. 

The house was far more picturesque on this 
side, evidently built in the early days of James L, 
with irregular gables, projecting oriels, and quaint 
chimney stacks. There was a charming old- 
fashioned English garden here, separated by a low 
red brick wall from the broad ditch into which 
the grassy trench changed as soon as it had 
reached the entrance-gate . probably the remains 
of the moat of former times . for Uplands boasted 
a more remote antiquity than any brick and 
mortar evidence about it would have substan- 
tiated. Beyond this side of the house, but adjoin- 
ing it, were the out-buildings and stable-yard ; a 
high irregular pile, evidently the most ancient part 
of the building, surmounted by a clock-turret, the 
grotesque old face of which was rendered almost 
indistinct by a quaint Latin inscription. 

The stable-yard, seen through the open-arched 
entrance, lay in deep shadow, throwing by its 



a HESTER KIRTON. 

relief, a still more vivid brightness on the low 
wall, which turning at right angles at the entrance, 
made a parapet to the bridge over the ditch. The 
wall had been, and was still in some places, red 
brick, but patches of grey lichen had crept over 
it, which the sun's intense heat had changed into 
gold and brown. Here and there were tufts 
of dark green moss in full blossom ; wall-flowers 
nodded on the top, or peeped out among the 
crannies, while an overgrowth of snap-dragon not 
yet in flower, and trailing dog-rose and bramble, 
gave token what a study of colour the old wall 
would be, when the year had grown a little older. 

Turning from the sun-blaze of colour, to re-- 
fresh the eyes in the cool arched shadow, there 
stood in it now, a picture literally framed in by 
the rugged brickwork in front, to which the 
quaint stable buildings formed a fitting back- 
ground. A gentleman, holding a little child by 
the hand . the gentleman was singularly handsome, 
but the intense, all-engrossing devotion, with 
which he was bending over the child, arrested 
the eye more than his own striking appearance. 
The little boy, who seemed to be between two and 
three years old, was evidently trying to explain 



FATHER AND CHILD, 9 

something about the great blood-hound standing 
beside him. His fearless attitude, one delicate 
hand laid firmly on the creature's head, while, 
pointing eagerly with the other, he was asking 
some questions about his favourite, was almost 
startling; in size he looked a mere baby; his 
limbs, though small, were rounded, but he was 
one of those rare children, whose face makes all 
else forgotten ; an exquisitely fair and transparent 
skin ; light sunny auburn hair curled close to his 
head; but for the hue, more like rings of silk- 
worm's silk than aught else, A faint tinge of 
colour in each cheek would have made you exclaim 
. even when little Ralph was drooping his eyelids, 
as he often did . cc What a lovely child ! " but 
when he raised those long black lashes, it was 
scarcely possible to believe that the large lustrous 
dark eyes, in whose liquid depths there seemed to 
be already thought as well as intelligence, could 
belong to a child not yet three years old. The 
beauty of both the parents was wonderfully 
blended in the child. 

Frederic Hallam . for although nearly three 
years older than when we last saw him . he was 
not too much changed for instant recognition, had 



10 HESTER KIRTON. 

thrown himself down on the grass as soon as they 
had passed the bridge, and drawn little Ralph into 
his lap. 

t( And so you think, my boy, poor Bevis has 
been crying." 

The child looked up at him quickly, and then 
nodded his head gravely, to show that his father 
had at last caught his meaning. He lay still a 
minute or two, while Hallam looked earnestly at 
him, and then struggled himself free. 

And finding he was free, he ran away, calling 
"Beewee," as he named the dog, to follow him; 
then suddenly spying a butterfly . probably the 
first in his young experience . he was off in pur- 
suit of " the dear little bird," as he called it. 

His peals of soft laughter, and shrieks of delight, 
were almost wild in their exuberance; At times 
he seemed, to his father, more like a fairy child 
than a reality. There was something unfathom- 
able in the depth of those exquisite dark eyes. 

They were like Hester's, and unlike them; 
larger and more expressive . at least the expression 
was less self-contained. As that child grew to 
manhood, the wonderful depth in his eyes might 
indicate a somewhat reserved character, but not a 



FATHER AND CHILD. 11 

distrustful one ; rather a mind that would withhold 
its treasures from casual observation, to pour them 
forth eagerly at the prompting of a kindred spirit. 

His father lay on the ground watching him, as 
he ran eagerly in pursuit of the butterfly, tossing 
his straw hat in the air, and shrieking out unin- 
telligible words, in the excess of his excitement 
and delight Hallam sighed as he thought of his 
extreme delicacy, and the difficulty there had 
hitherto been in rearing the fragile, beautiful child ; 
and tears sprang to his eyes as he felt, with an 
agony no one who is not a parent can understand, 
how hard it would be to yield up this treasure 
again.J\ Perhaps there is no doctrine so difficult in 
practice, so easy in theory, as that our children 
are only lent us, not really our own. /And then 
he thought how different his existence would be 
without Ralphie, and he wondered whether the 
new-found inner-life that his child's hand had 
mysteriously guided him into, would be a mere 
baffling labyrinth without him, whether he should 
return for refuge from the disappointment that he 
knew would then make itself more deeply felt, to 
the world and its dangerous pleasures. \ 

Till the child had stolen into his heart so deeply 



12 HESTER KIRTOX. 

as to make its welfare the beginning and end of 
each day's thought and action, Frederic Hallam 
had often said he had no heart at all; he had 
never felt the power of Love, and, therefore, did 
not believe in it After the memorable interview 
with his wife on his return from Tatton, he had 
accepted tacitly, and for ever, that there was no 
hope of mutual affection in his married life. What 
passed in that interview was never disclosed in 
words, but the results spoke for themselves. 
Frederic Hallam's debts were paid entirely; for 
the first time since he went up to Oxford, he 
was a free man ; his means of living were also 
evidently enlarged ; but, as has been said, to the 
surprise of most of his friends, before that London 
season was over . in fact, within a week from 
his return from Tatton, . they learned that the 
Hallams had left town suddenly for some country 
place, which they intended to rent for three years. 
"If, at the expiration of that time, we find a 
country life suits us," Hallam wrote to Captain 
Fortescue, "we shall purchase either Uplands 
itself, if the owner will part from it, or some 
other place in the country." 
From impulse, probably, rather than from any 



FATHER AND CHILD. 13 

reasoning process, although he had declared such 
things would be distasteful to him, Hallam had at 
once thrown himself, with his usual vitality, into 
agricultural studies and country pursuits, and al- 
though, at first, he found the business of entertain- 
ing country neighbours, and returning their visits, 
a very wearisome routine after the sparkle and 
variety of a London life, he had a keen sense of 
natural beauties, and soon became enthusiastic in 
his admiration of the lovely scenery in the neigh- 
bourhood of Uplands. 

He had always been a sportsman, and now he 
took to hunting with a zest that surprised some 
of the old members of the hunt, who looked 
upon him as a mere Londoner* His garden, 
too, was a fertile source of enjoyment, and his 
gardener found that his master was soon as well- 
informed on the subject of new and rare plants as 
himself. 

He seldom went to London, but when he did 
so he was sure to visit the flower-shows, and order 
fresh stores of rarities for his conservatory. But 
he could not bear to leave Ralphie now that each 
day made the child dearer and more interesting, 
and as Hester resolutely opposed taking him to 



14 HESTER KIRTON. 

London, on account of the fatigue of so long a 
journey, his father had not left home for several 
months. 

In less than a year, the term for which they 
held Uplands would have expired, and then where 
would they go? Whenever he asked his wife's 
opinion on the subject, she always declined giving 
it, till nearer the period of their departure, saying 
it would be mere waste of words, as no one could 
possibly tell what might occur in the interim. 

Hallam's own wish was to purchase the pro- 
perty ; they had ascertained that the owner 
was quite willing to sell it, being wedded to a 
roving life ; but he knew that if he expressed 
this desire, it would be sufficient to provoke his 
wife's contradiction ; he had learned by experience 
that there was no peace in opposition to her now 
imperious will, and peace was very dear to Frederic 
Hallam, even if he could not have love with it 

Disappointment had not soured him, gradually 
his whole tone of mind had changed; at first the 
constant estrangement between himself and Hester 
had been an annoyance; his pride had revolted 
from the position in which he was placed; but 
although she retained the control of her property 



FATHER AND CHILD. 15 

when she came of age, she prevailed on Goldsmith 
to settle such an income on her husband as should 
make him independent of her, so long as he lived 
as he did at present Her wonderful talents, 
which seemed to him to have developed suddenly, 
had much impressed him, and this generosity 
touched him. He scarcely knew how deeply 
interested he had become in watching the growth 
of his wife's character, or how steadily and 
certainly he was learning to love her. 

Yes, to love her, spite of her unvarying coldness 
and hardness towards himself; and as yet he 
scarcely knew how much of his passionate love 
for little Ralphie was due to the child's resemblance 
to his mother. 



16 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER II. 

RETROSPECT. 

"When are you going to invite r my mother, 
Hester ? I thought I heard you talking about it." 

Mrs. Hallam looked up from the blue and 
yellow review, which she had been reading for the 
last hour, apparently quite unconscious that her 
husband had entered the room and seated himself 
on a sofa near her. 

"Yes; but I did not know there was any 
especial reason for hurry," she said, quietly. 

How beautiful she had grown ; the advantages 
of perfect dress, and the polish of good society, 
had given her all she wanted externally, and a 
journey to the continent, the previous autumn, had 
added that indescribable something which few 
women possess,who have not mixed with foreigners. 
It had been especially beneficial to Hester ; her 



RETROSPECT. 17 

manner was slightly grave, and although, of 
course, that is a safer error than mere chattering 
frivolity, I imagine that smiles may preach as 
salutary doctrine as frowns or stiffness ; at any 
rate, if frivolity be carried so far as to repel, it is 
from want of heart or feeling beneath ; but a hard 
unbending manner may, and often does, cover a 
wealth of mind and sentiment which would benefit 
the very people alienated by so disagreeable a rind. 
This foreign journey had been taken with some 
neighbours, a family named Crathie, who were 
enthusiastic admirers of their beautiful friend. 
Mr. Hallam had been asked to join the party, 
but he said it was quite impossible they could 
both leave little Ralphie, who was constantly 
ailing through the autumn and winter months. 
For once departing from the rule he had made . 
ever since his wife had told him in the memorable 
interview before they began a country life, that she 
must henceforth despise him . never, if possible, to 
thwart her inclinations, so that there might be no 
open cause of quarrel between them, he opposed 
this journey, and promised if she would only wait 
another year, when Ralphie might travel, that he 
would take her wherever she wished to go. It 
vol. in. %1 



18 HESTER KIRTON. 

was impossible they could both go, and he thought 
her place was with her child. 

Hester listened calmly till he had ended. She 
told him he had spoken too late ; she had made all 
her preparations, and could not disappoint her 
friends, and then left the room, evidently to avoid 
further discussion. 

Probably, if he had not already begun to love 
her, and to fancy that at times he saw a change 
in her manner towards himself, he would have 
persisted in withholding his consent, and have 
brought matters to a crisis; but he longed so 
much for her aflfection, that he would not run any 
further risk of alienating it. Perhaps the tem- 
porary absence might bring back some of her old 
feelings towards him. 

It often happens that the praises of others first 
awaken us to the full perception of the merits of 
those we live with ; at least, there are some people 
who do not venture on a decided opinion, till 
number has given value to it Frederic Hallam 
was not so weak as this, but probably the uni- 
versal admiration his wife excited, both in the 
country and in London . for they had passed 
one season in town since Ealphie's birth . had 



RETROSPECT, 19 

weight with him; certainly, if he thought the 
change in her wonderful before, he was astonished 
when she returned from Paris. 

She had been away for several months, and the 
improvement both in her manner and looks was 
striking, but it mortified and pained him deeply 
to find her as cold, as indifferent to him as ever. 
It was evident that the pains and care she had 
lavished on self-culture had not been taken for 
him. Is it to be wondered at, if he worshipped 
her spite of her treatment of him, that she was 
popular everywhere, and although considered 
sarcastic and eccentric by women, was idolized by 
men, on whom, however, her lofty bearing and 
a manner totally free from coquetry, imposed due 
restraint; it was as if she would have said or 
rather made her husband feel, . 

.. See what a treasure might have been your own." 
More than once since he had begun to think 
more deeply, he had tried to show Hester, that, 
however independent she might be in worldly 
matters, still that no wife can ever be independent 
of her husband, or emancipated from his control, 
so long as they two remain one ; but the writhing 
scorn with which she had answered, silenced hvm\ 

S7. * 



20 HESTER KIRTON. 

he knew her superior powers of reasoning would 
be sure to triumph, and while she would maintain 
her calm self-possession, her sarcasm would rouse 
his pride to say far more than he intended. If she 
were only a passionate woman, he thought things 
might have been different ; he would have braved 
reproaches, even a storm, sure, with the tears that 
followed, to find some softening towards him, but 
it seemed hopeless now ; the real cause of his re- 
luctance to press matters more closely, or seek a 
reconciliation, was that he feared to know the 
certainty of what he dreaded, that she was utterly 
indifferent to his love ; and as he became more and 
more conscious of the falsehood of his marriage, so 
she seemed to him more justified in resenting it. 

It was fortunate that his nature was sanguine 
and joyous, or he must have become soured by 
such continued restraint and absence of sympathy. 

He was anxious to see his mother, she had not 
stayed at Uplands since Hester's return, and he 
wanted her to see the change in his wife; even 
she, he thought, would admit that she had become 
very distinguished-looking. 

In answer to Hester's remark, he said, . 

" She told me, in her last letter, that she was 



BETROSPECT. 21 

not well, and should be glad to get away from ' 
London, just at this gay time, for a while. If we 
don't ask her, she will go somewhere else." 

"That would be absurd," said Hester, who 
Kked her mother-in-law far better than in former 
days ; the elder Mrs. Hallam's reverence for riches 
having overcome her repugnance to Hester's want 
of connections, she had treated her with more con- 
sideration. " I shall write and tell her she must 
come to us at once ; she ought to have been asked 
sooner, I wonder you had not thought of it." 

"I have written to her this morning, so you 
can enclose it, if you like," he said ; " or, stay, 
I shall not send my letter now, as I shall see her 
bo soon." 

He had really written to invite his mother to 
fix the time of her visit, in case he should find 
Hester unwilling to do so; but he thought it 
would make matters go smoother with Mrs. 
Hallam, if he allowed Hester the full credit of 
the invitation. 

" I shall leave her to name her own time," said 
Hester, .S so, perhaps, it may not be just yet" 

w But I must go up to town next week," said 
her husband,  and I thought I would. ^&tbo&&& 



22 HESTEB KIRTON. 

her to return with me; she likes an escort, you 
know. Hester, will you go with me? " he added, 
after a moment's pause. 

" Oh, no, thank you ; you know our arrange- 
ments never suit . I care nothing about these 
flower-shows you are so fond of^-perhaps I may 
return to town with your mother, but I have not 
thought about it yet. I am going to drive now, 
and I shall take Ralphie, unless you want him." 

" No, oh, no; the drive will do him good," said* 
Hallam ; and moving with a graceful stateliness, his 
wife left him Sone to think. 

And he was full of bitter thoughts against her, 
for she had just inflicted a keen disappointment. 
He had been thinking lately that if they went 
alone together to London for a little while, with 
not 6ven Ralphie to come between them, the 
reconciliation he longed for might be effected; 
he should see more of Hester than he could at 
home, where her days seemed purposely planned 
out so as to separate her pursuits from his, and 
he should be able to assure [himself, whether any 
remains of her former love lingered beneath her 
habitually cold manner. Her last words were 
almost sufficient to prove that there was no hope 



RETROSPECT. 23 

of this. Surely if a wife loved her husband 
at all, she could not help showing some sympathy 
in his pursuits ; it would be so easy for her to take 
a little interest in his flowers; but he did not 
understand how trifling all this seemed to Hester. 

So long as her rooms were well furnished and 
arranged with due formality, she was satisfied. 
She cared not for, perhaps despised, the elegant 
superfluities, if you will, that betoken woman's 
presence in a dwelling. Some of the most en- 
dearing links in love's chain are not necessarily 
useful. Hester was very real in e^rything ; but 
there may be too great a preponderance of one 
good quality. 

He mused with a heavy heart on all this, and 
he thought it might have been better if he had 
said at once to Hester, that he wished her to 
accompany him to London ; but then, if she had 
decidedly refused, he could not have borne it; 
he should have reminded her of her duty, and 
they should haye quarrelled ; anything better than 
that. A secret feeling told him that matters 
could not long continue as they were at present, 
that his feelings would burst from the control 
under which he held them, and then Yrtta& 'nfktoXSl 



24 HESTER KIRTON. 

ensue? He could not bear to think of it, for if 
he found it impossible to effect a reconciliation 
with Hester, they must part; they could not live 
the past year over again. 

" But where is the use of dwelling on the black 
side of things?" he said to himself, cheerfully. 
" Every one must have some trial or trouble. I 
wonder if other married couples are often cir- 
cumstanced as we are, or if ours is a rare case." 

And then he went on thinking over the married 
people he knew, and their apparent happiness ; and 
one remarkabte difference struck him between 
Hester and other wives ; they were usually sur- 
rounded by affectionate relations ; the husbands 
seemed quite as much to belong to their wives' 
families as to their own ; in fact, he knew it was 
the received creed, that a wife never amalgamates 
with her husband's people, as he does with hers ; 
and he wondered it had not occurred to him 
before, that in alienating Hester from her own 
relations, he had checked and narrowed her sym- 
pathies. The colour rose to his forehead; he 
remembered his wish to separate her from the 
Wrenshaws, till she came of age, lest their 
influence might be adverse to his own, in the 



RETROSPECT. 25 

management of her property . truly a fruitless 
precaution. 

Mrs. Bonham had written to congratulate Hester 
on Ralphie's birth, and had told her that she was 
also a mother ; but he recollected that his wife had 
seemed annoyed, and had thrown the letter con- 
temptuously aside ; he believed she had not an- 
swered it, and he remembered, with regret, how he 
had first put a stumbling block in the way of her 
relations with Lucy. 

Her uncle and aunt, Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw, 
had lived abroad ever since he and his wife had 
come to Uplands, so that he could not feel they 
had been neglected; but as he thought of Lucy's 
bright affectionate face, and the warmth of some 
of her former letters to Hester, he wished he had 
not been so hasty, and that that invitation to 
Stedding had been accepted, the refusal of which 
had apparently caused the estrangement between 
the cousins. 



26 HESTER KIKTOX. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE POET. 

Jacob and Lucy had been more fortunate than 
their wealthy cousins. They were just as much 
in love with each other as when we first knew 
them, and they had three rosy, healthy darlings, 
instead of poor little solitary Ralphie. 

But they were all girls, ami this was a great 
disappointment, not so much to Jacob or Lucy as 
to Mrs. Frank Wrenshaw. She did think Lucy 
might have done better than she had ; in her own 
case, to be sure, there was some excuse, seeing 
her poor dear Frank had died, out of what 
Mrs. Wrenshaw called, ss the necessary course of 
things ; " but to have three children, one after 
another, and not a boy among them to be brought 
up to his father's profession, was vexing indeed. 
Except for this one complaint, Mrs. Frank was a 



THE POET. 27 

most exemplary grandmother, spoiling and over- 
feeding the children to her heart's content, and 
never allowing any one to find fault with them, 
but herself. 

"I tell you what, Jacob," said Lucy to her 
husband, u between you and mamma those children 
will be ruined." 

Jacob, who was occupied in feeding his second 
daughter . aged one year and a half . with straw- 
berries, affected deafness to this appeal. 

Lucy, junior, a demure-faced maiden of three 
years, with round blue eyes and firir shining curls, 
the eyes being almost overwhelmed by the super- 
abundant cheeks, which made a pouting rose-bud 
of her pretty mouth, lifted her eyes from her 
plate, and looked gravely at her mother. 

" What is ruined ? " she said. 

And the next little one, with its mouth full of 
strawberries, echoed the question, of course, with an 
importance that made both Lucy and Jacob laugh. 

" It shan't be ruined, at any rate," said Lucy, 
pressing her youngest . a baby of a few months 
only . closer to her ; for, on Sunday afternoon, the 
little ones had dessert with papa, and baby came 
in and placed the part of an excited spectator . 



28 HESTER KIRTON. 

"Grandmamma will be here directly," said 
Jacob, looking at his watch ; .t now, little Lucy, 
put grandma's chair all ready." 

The small Lucy gave a reluctant look at her 
strawberries, but still she bustled out of her high 
chair, holding cautiously by the edge of the table. 

The chair was placed there ready, but Jacob 
seemed to think that the little creature ought 
to be encouraged in the notion that it was all her 
doing, because she drew it one inch nearer the 
table. 

"That will do, darling," said her mother; 
(t good little girl . kiss mamma." 

Lucy held up her wee mouth, repeating gravely, 

" Dood ittle dirl . isn't me clever ? " 

In which idea both the proud parents were, of 
course, delighted to coincide. 

" There's granama . now run and open the 
parlour door, Lucy." 

And in came Mrs. Frank Wrenshaw, looking 
as young and bright as ever ; almost as young as 
her daughter, for matrimony and its attendant 
cares, had not benefited Lucy's health . spite of 
her happiness. 

There was the same bright look, but her cheeks 



THE POET. 29 

had lost their bloom, and her shoulders some- 
what of their roundness; her hands were no 
longer the white dimpled playthings they had 
been when Jacob married her; but then Lucy 
had been no make-believe mother. Her whole 
character had greatly changed since we last saw 
her, and the change was in nothing more percep- 
tible than in her manner to her mother. There is 
nothing that seems to make a parent's love truly 
appreciated, till we have children of our own ; 
then, how each loving care we render, how each 
heart-throb of affection teaches what has been felt 
for us. Happy, if the knowledge come before it 
is too late to try and atone for the stings and 
wounds, which even if we have been, in the 
world's eye, good children, our waywardness, 
our caprice, and, above all, our impertinent words, 
must have inflicted. 

Till the birth of her first baby, Lucy had 
scarcely realised how great her mother's tender- 
ness was. Mrs. Frank shone in a sick room : she 
was not absurd there; she obeyed the doctor's 
instructions to the letter, with a gentleness and 
an absence of fuss and worry, greatly conducive 
to the progress of her patient, and by her self- 



30 HESTER KIRTON. 

control . for it is self-control for a talkative 
woman not to chatter . and ready thoughtfulness, 
she rose higher in her son-in-law's good opinion 
than he had ever thought possible. He began to 
understand now where some of his darling wife's 
virtues came from. She was very superior to her 
mother, because she was never silly, but still he 
was now so fond of Mrs. Wrenshaw that he could 
generally tolerate her silliness ; she has no husband 
to keep her in order, thought Jacob, and she has 
those Miss Skippers to fill her head with their 
nonsense. 

And now, as she came in for her regular Sunday 
visit after afternoon church, he was as much 
pleased to see her as the children were, although 
it was hard work to get her to take saiy notice 
of any one except the baby. 1 How perversely 
mothers and grandmothers always cling tcuthe 
youngest, as if they thought every one "but them- 
selves wished to ill-treat and neglect those soft, 
rose-dimpled morsels of humanity ; but little Lucy 
and Alice had no intention of being neglected, 
and "granama," as they called her, was obliged to 
turn round and listen to them in order to free her 
silk gown from their strawberry- stained fingers. 



THE POET. 31 

"Bless you, my poppe t," she said, stooping 
to kiss Lucy, while she lifted Alice on to her lap. 
.. Alice wants strawberries, doesn't she a 
darling?" 

" Des," nodded Alice, repeating the words after 
her own fashion, which her grandmother pro- 
nounced to be as plain as plain could be, and then 
proceeded to dive into her pocket for the weekly 
packet of sugar-plums. 

Lucy meekly protested that Jacob had already 
given them too much fruit, and that the sugar- 
plums had better be put away. 

.t Too bad of him, it is," said Mrs. Wrenshaw, 
looking slily at her son-in-law, " but I don't see 
the fairness of punishing the children for his 
naughtiness, so they shall just scramble for the 
sweeties while Matty clears away." 

"Come into the garden, grandmamma, and 
I will gather you some roses," said Jacob ; " they 
are coming into bloom fast in this warm sun- 
shine." 

* " You come too, Lucy," said her mother, u I've 
something to tell you while the chicks are busy 
with their sugar-plums. Now, what do you think 
Jemima told me this very afternoon ? " 



32 HESTER KIRTON. 

" I don't know,'' said Lucy, feeling utterly at 
a loss to keep pace with Miss Skipper's stores of 
information. 

"Well, now, you must try and guess; some- 
thing about some one you used to care for very 
much, Lucy." 

"Not Hester, mother!" 

" Well, it's next to being about Hester, because 
it's one of the family, who'll, of course, know all 
her goings on. Well, Jemima says that Miss 
Hallam is coming to stay with the Ainsworths, 
and, of course, it will be proper for you to call, 
being a connection." 

" I don't know that," said Jacob. " Of course, 
Lucy can call on Mrs. Ainsworth, as she often 
does, but I should much rather she did not make 
her call to Miss Hallam." 

" Perhaps it may be no relation," said Lucy, 
feeling a strange longing to hear something about 
the friend who seemed so estranged from her. 
"Hallam is not a common name, but still it 
belongs to more than one family." 

"No, my dear, I assure you, I said exactly 
the same to Jemima, and she persisted that 
Dorothy Ainsworth had told her that the Miss 



THE POET. 33 

Hallam who is coming to stay with them is 
own : aunt to the Mr. Hallam who married our 
Hester." 

"But," said Lucy, looking earnestly at her 
husband, "you do not object, do you, Jacob, to 
my calling while Miss Hallam is in S tedding? I 
do so long," she continued, and the tears glistened 
in her eyes, "to hear something about poor dear 
Hester. I always believe the letter I wrote to 
her was lost." 

" Here are the roses," said her husband, stopping 
before a tree laden with crimson clusters, " and 
here is one for you, Lucy. Give me baby, I want 
to see if she has grown any heavier ; you can send 
Susan for her when you go in." 

Lucy knew from his manner that her husband 
did not wish any more said about Hester, and she 
went in-doors to make tea, wondering that so 
forgiving a temper as Jacob's could nourish so 
deep a grudge. 

But it was not so : he avoided any allusion to 
tbe Hallams, because of the dislike he had at one 
time felt to the prospect of an intimacy between 
his wife and Hester; he had often congratulated 
himself on keeping the secret of Peter Staaaarais. 

vol. m. Sft 



34 HESTER KIRTON. 

news about Kirton's Farm ; for he felt sure that, 
if he had told it, Lucy would at once have written 
to express her delight, and, after all, would have 
been disappointed. How we all grope in the 
dark ! Who can say that Lucy's silence was not 
the chief cause of Hester's dislike to revisit 
Kirton's Farm, and who shall say if she had 
revisited it, how beneficial would have been the 
influence of her cousin's bright, loving, hopeful 
nature. It was, at first, Lucy's one great trial, 
that her husband could not be brought to a 
favourable opinion of Hester, and as a man's 
likings and dislikings where the wife is impression- 
able, generally prevail, she had gone so far as to 
acknowledge to herself that perhaps she should not 
think as highly of her cousin now, as in former 
times; but still she must always love her, 

The party was soon assembled round the tea- 
table. Lucy's drawing-room was the pride of 
her heart, and the children were never allowed to 
drink tea there; therefore they were again in what 
even Lucy now called the parlour. It was won- 
derful how one by one she had yielded all her 
little nonsensical ways ; with the exception of the 
dreamy fits which she could not quite conquer, she 



THE POET* 35 

had become what Miss Jemima Skipper called " a 
plain-spoken sensible young woman." 

"Alice is not high enough," said Mrs. Wren- 
shaw, * are you, precious one ? n 

To which small Lucy of course replied, . 

te Itfle Alice not high 'nuff pecious." 

Her grandmother was searching among some 
music books and folios, on an old-fashioned what- 
not, and presently drew out a book, which she 
thought would just do to raise Alice. 

In trying to arrange it under the child, without 
removing her, Alice slipped from her chair, and, 
as her grandmother tried to prevent her from 
falling, the folio slid from her hands. 

"Gracions me," exclaimed Mrs. Wrenshaw, 
S why, the book's bewitched ; it wants sewing up, 
Lucy." 

Lucy looked, and gave way to an uncontrollable 
fit of laughter; but Jacob's dismayed face soon 
restored her composure. All around her and her 
mother lay strewn sheets of manuscript covered 
with Jacob's handwriting. She tried to collect 
them as quickly as possible, but not before her 
mother's sharp eyes had seen that verses were 
written upon them. 

as. a 



36 HESTER KIRTON. 

She picked one up. 

"Why, it's poetry, in your writing, Jacob. 
Well, I never ! " she exclaimed, fixing her eyes on 
the doctor, who looked a picture of guilty con- 
fusion ; " to think of a father of three children 
making such a Tom Noddy of himself !. Sir 
Erardo8 9 a Romaunt in ten Cantos, . romaunt, 
indeed, another way of spelling rubbish. Jacob, 
Jacob, so sure as men or women take to scribbling, 
so sure they come to ruin. Why, there'll be 
Lucy taking to it next, and letting the baby 
tumble in the fire, or giving it the ink bottle to 
play with. Oh, Jacob! why, do you know, I 
caught Lucy writing a drama, I think she called 
it, when she was twelve years old ; so I just put 
it all in the fire, and declared I'd tell every one if 
she ever tried again. I knew fast enough she'd 
never grow up respectable if she took to that sort 
of trash." 

"But," said Jacob, recovering himself, and 
speaking rather stiffly, " I really think we may 
all employ our leisure as we like, and, besides, I 
meant to. to sell that poem when it is finished." 

 Now don't, Jacob, or I shall never leave off 
laughing at you*; sell your pills, not your poetry, 



THE POET. S7 

sell ! fiddle-faddle ; you'll sell that 'romaunt' . what 
on earth such a word means, I'm sure I can't tell 
. to the butterman, I expect, for waste paper, 
only don't sell it in S tedding; once it got known 
you'd been such a goose, why you'd lose all 
your practice at once. I wonder what Jemima 
Skipper 'd say ; surely, Lucy, you don't hold with 
such tantrums . a doctor writing rhymes ! " 

"Well, mother, I agree with Jacob, that he 
has a right to employ his leisure as he likes 
best." 

" And I say," said Mrs. Wrenshaw, warming 
in defence of her own opinions, "that his leisure 
might be better employed in amusing you and 
reading to you when he comes home than in 
writing twaddle about knights and cantos." 

"But, mother," said Lucy, laughing, " suppose 
nothing amuses me so much as to watch him 
write, and hear him read it aloud to me afterwards 
. and I help, too, sometimes ; don't I, Jacob ? " 

" I believe she could write better than I can, if 
she chose." Jacob had recovered his good temper, 
although he had felt the attack on his poetry 
more than he would one on his professional skill. 
" But I quite agree with you, that the subject had 



38 HESTER KIBTON. 

better not be mentioned to the Miss Skippers, or 
an j more at all. I know it would be considered 
unprofessional, and therefore I never mention it* 

" Well, all I can say is,* said his mother-in-law, 
feeling exceedingly aggrieved at what she con- 
sidered obstinacy, u that one business is enough at 
a time for any man. You'll write poetry instead 
of a prescription, some fine day, Jacob, and then 
you'll wish you'd listened to me. I only know 
if I'd had the least idea of what was in that 
book, when Lucy was up-stairs last time, I'd have 
been tempted to burn every bit of the senseless 
scribble. Good night, my darlings," she said to 
the children, who were being taken away to bed ; 
"poor little dears, I hope you'll not come to harm 
from if 

** I beg your pardon, Jacob, if I was rude about 
that poetry, but it did put me out," she said, as 
later in the evening he came to the door to let her 
out, when she had said good-by'e to all. .. You 
know I love you very much, but you know what I 
always think of you ; there never was a man who 
worked so hard when he was at play, or played 
so hard when he ought to have been at work." 



v 



39 






CHAPTER IV. 

AN INSINUATION. 

" Why, Hallam, you are the last man I expected 
to see in town ; I fancied you had turned hermit ; " 
and Captain Fortescue took his friend's arm, with 
the warm pleasure we feel when we meet an old 
friend after a long separation* 

" I have only just arrived from Uplands," said 
Hallam, equally pleased to see his friend; "we 
missed you the year before last, when we spent a 
few weeks in town . you were in Ireland with 
your regiment, I think ? " 

The friends were not good correspondents . 
their letters had been few and far between ; and 
if Hester's name were mentioned at all, it was in 
so casual a manner, that Fortescue could not 
have judged whether Hallam's feelings remained 
unchanged. 

The subject was painful . new interests had 



40 HESTER KIRTON. 

come between him and his dream of friendship 
for his friend's wife, and without having forgotten 
him, Hallam's face seemed more like a memory 
than a present fact. Fred made him dine with 
him, and before they parted that night, Fortescue 
confessed to himself, that he liked his old friend 
better than ever ; only he thought his spirits less 
equal than they formerly were. 

He was puzzled at this, for, from the terms in 
which he spoke of his child, he thought he must 
be happy in his home life. Some great change 
had taken place in him . he had kept to the inr 
tention he had announced, had forsworn betting, 
and seemed to have become a steady family 
man. Fortescue attributed the marvel to Hester's 
influence. It was strange that her husband should 
scarcely mention her. 

" And which of you is this wonderful paragon 
like?" said Fortescue, laughing ; when, for about 
the twelfth time, Hallam had launched forth in 
praise of little Ralphie. 

" Well, I suppose you don't find it very amusing. 
You see I've become an ordinary father, after all ; 
but if you only saw him . who is he like? I 
scarcely know who his eyes are like . the rest of 



AN INSINUATION. 41 

him is every inch his mother ; but his eyes . some- 
times, Fortescue, I think he can't live, they are so 
wonderful." 

Fortescue laughed again. 

" I can't help it, Fred, it is so amusing to listen, 
and to think it is you, Hallam . you, who used to 
have such a horror of even visiting where there 
were any children." 

" It is the same in this as in most other things ; 
make a thing your own, and then see how it rises 
in value." 

Fortescue thought he had heard that saying 
applied to everything but a wife, where perhaps 
the motto . 

'Tis expectation makes a blessing dear, 

may be more apposite ; but although Hallam did 
not mention his wife, his conversation was so much 
less selfish and worldly, than in former times, that 
his friend felt a respect for him, which had, 
perhaps, never mingled with his previous affection. 
It was pleasant to hear from his own lips, that he 
was quite free of Goldsmith, in fact had no debts 
at all. 

They met again the following morning, and 



42 HESTER KIRTON. 

Hallam pressed his friend to come down and get 
some shooting ixx the autumn. Fortescue hesi- 
tated . he had an undefinable reluctance to see 
Hester again . at any rate he should like to he 
quite sure how matters stood between husband 
and wife, before he became their guest He felt 
almost convinced that the change in Fred was to 
be attributed to the happy quiet life he led; and 
that the excitement and bustle of London de- 
pressed him, as excitement often does, when we 
are unused to it Still he felt too anxious that it 
might be so, to refrain altogether from the subject, 
spite of their last conversation under the trees in 
Piccadilly. . He had been speaking of the Hallams 
to another friend that morning, who had met 
Hester in Brussels, and had been charmed with 
her beauty and her style. 

u I suppose it is not the fashion for husbands 
to rave about their wives as they do about their 
children," he said ; " but I heard a most enthusiastic 
description of Mrs. Hallam just now." 

"You had better come down and judge for 
yourself," said his friend, but his smile seemed 
forced. " I do not think you will say she could 
easily be overrated." 



AN INSINUATION. 43 

He turned the conversation easily and rapidly 
to other things, and seemed so pinch gayer than 

on the previous evening, that Fortescue felt more 

* 

puzzled than ever* Surely, in the renewed con- 
fidence that had sprung up between them, deeper 
far, and more earnest than it had ever been before, 
if Fred's love for his wife were what so many 
little hints and casual allusions had made him 
imagine it to be, why should he speak in such a 
cold, guarded manner ? It was so unlike his open- 
hearted frankness about other things, and he 
might have seen that Fortescue had made an effort 
to broach the subject, and therefore, one would 
have thought, would have tried not to evade it 

He was leaving town for a few days. Hallam 
said he should be at Uplands before his friend's 
return, but he tried hard to make him fix a time 
for his visit 

" It will, perhaps, be your last chance of seeing 
the place, and the country round is worth looking 
at ; we can stay on till November, I think, though 
our term expires in June; but we don't want to 
go away just when the garden is at its best," 

" I wonder you go away at all ; why don't you 
buy it?" 



44 HESTER KIRTOX. 

" There has been some talk about it, but 
the owner asks rather a long price. I should 
like nothing better than to end my days at 
Uplands." 

The friends parted; Fortescue wondering at 
this new trait in Hallam's character; formerly 
change was essential to his restless, roving nature. 
He must be happy, thoroughly and entirely so ; 
nothing else could make a man contentedly forego 
London and all its endless variety; but then 
Captain Fortescue was essentially a Londoner; 
and as, when we look at the outside of a painted 
window, we only see an intricate, undefined-like 
mass, so is it impossible for those whose tastes and 
sympathies differ, to form any correct judgment 
of the happiness and enjoyment of each other. 

Neither Captain Fortescue nor Hester had the 
same capacity for enjoyment as Hallam : I believe 
this to be a gift more than an acquisition ; there 
are people whose perceptions of the beautiful, 
both in nature and art, are almost painfully 
intense, and these, generally speaking, extract 
the keenest enjoyment from human pleasures . I 
do not say worldly pleasures. such people will 
enjoy a day in the country, a chat with an old 



AN INSINUATION. 45 

friend, as ardently, even more so, than the most 
elaborately devised amusement; they are born 
with the faculty of keen enjoyment, and they 
usually manage to eschew disagreeables. 

Frederic Hallam was essentially happy-natured, 
and as he now walked towards Wilton Place, all 
his anxiety about Hester seemed lightened, in the 
contemplated pleasure of showing little Ralphie 
to his mother, and witnessing her delight at the 
improvement in his health. 

Meanwhile, Captain Fortescue was on his way 
to Goldsmith. His brother Gerald had become 
so involved in betting transactions, that he had 
been obliged to leave London rather suddenly, 
and Lady Helena had accompanied him. Several 
of his numerous engagements with Mr. Gold- 
smith remained unsettled; and Fortescue, who, 
from some deeply-founded, although unproven 
reason, greatly distrusted the lawyer, had under- 
taken to arrange for his brother. 

Mr. Goldsmith received him with his usual 
suave courtesy, but he buried his face so con- 
tinually in his pocket-handkerchief, was so depre- 
catory with his hands, and seemed so involuntarily 
restless, that his visitor doubted him more than ever. 



46 HESTER KIRTON. 

He was very hard to deal with, would not even 
grant the time he had often allowed to Fortescue, 
and refused entirely to renew for the largest 
amount 

(. I scarcely expected this of you, Goldsmith ; in 
my time, you must have made quite profit enough 
out of me, to enable you (I don't say to induce, 
for I know, with you rich men, the more you get 
the more you desire) to grant my brother more 
liberal terms." 

"My dear sir," said Goldsmith, eyeing him 
with his head slightly bait on one side, "you 
must be joking this morning. If all gentlemen 
were as careful and prudent as yourself, society 
would go on in a far calmer and more equable 
manner. You never lived far beyond your means, 
as a rule ; it was only for the exceptions you visited 
me, I think. only the exceptions." 

He laughed so heartily at this idea, that the 
tears must have come, for he wiped his eyes with 
his pocket-handkerchief 

Then, seeing Fortescue look impatient, he 
went on, . 

" Forgive me ; but I esteem myself obliged to 
you, my dear sir, for your introductions ; many of 



AN INSINUATION. 47 

my best clients have come to me entirely through 
your recommendation." 

Fortescue winced . in other words, he had 
helped Goldsmith to ruin many of his clients; 
if this were true, it would have been a satisfaction 
to have shaken him. 

u I believe you give me more credit than I 
deserve," said he, scornfully; "except my friend 
Mr. Hallam, I have no remembrance of sending 
any one to you." 

" Well, but it comes to the same thing, Captain 
Fortescue," said the lawyer, smiling ; he perfectly 
understood and enjoyed his annoyance. "You 
brought Mr. Hallam, and he sent others . you see 
my debt remains the same. Have you ever been 
to Uplands ? " 

"No, I have not," said Fortescue ; some irresis- 
tible impulse made him determine to conceal the 
feet of his friend's presence in London . perhaps a 
lurking dread of Goldsmith's baneful influence, 
for he well knew how, at the outset, the lawyer 
had encouraged Fred's betting propensities. 

" A fine place . a very fine place, indeed." 

u I wonder they do not buy it ? " 

Goldsmith raised both hands. 



48 HESTER KIRTON. 

"Couldn't, couldn't, possibly, my dear sir. 
Why, in the first place, your friend was so 
over head and ears in debt, that Mrs. Hallam's 
fortune will take some time to recover the hole 
made in it, and in the next I think the money's 
far safer where it is." 

Fortescue was strongly tempted to ask where 
that was ; but a slight flush on the lawyer's cheek 
warned him that he was personally interested in 
the matter; if he betrayed any suspicion he would 
be on his guard again. 

"Ah! I was away at the time Mrs. Hallam 
came of age. I never heard how that business 
was settled." 

Goldsmith looked at him searchingly, but he 
appeared so calm and indifferent, that he believed 
he was merely asking to satisfy his curiosity. 

" I thought every one had heard the story," he 
said; "your friend hoped to have it all his own 
way, but he was mistaken. Mrs. Frederic Hallam 
is a noble-spirited woman, with far too much 
respect for her father's memory to yield up his 
property to be made ducks and drakes of." 

It was so utterly unlike the usual mystery 
of the man to speak thus openly of his client's 



AN INSINUATION. 49 

affairs, that each moment Fortescue's suspicion of 
him increased ; but he only looked inquiringly. 

" I am sorry to say it, because he is your friend, 
Captain Fortescue; but I greatly fear" . he 
buried his face for a moment^-" that my poor 
friend's child was most unfortunate in her choice 
of a husband. I have reason to believe" . he 
looked hard at his visitor . " that he married her 
entirely for her money. She has done marvels 
for him . marvels . made sacrifices such as few 
women would have ventured on. Poor thing, 
poor thing! she little knows with what result; 
no, Captain Fortescue, I could not, knowing all 
I do, far more than poor Mrs. Hallam does, sanc- 
tion the purchase of Uplands . " 

Fortescue could hardly restrain himself, as he 
heard these insinuations against his friend. 

et I fancied from what you said just now, and 
from what I had also heard, that Hallam was 
living quite within his income." 

u What a thing fancy is," said the lawyer, and 
he shook his head with mournful emphasis. 

" Then do you mean to assert, Mr. Goldsmith, 
that Frederic Hallam is as deep in debt as ever ? " 

"My dear sir, I assert nothing; yow e%oxtf& 

tol. in. % as 



50 HESTEB KIBTON. 

expect me to tell tales of my clients. Who is to 
say why Mr. Frederic Hallam pays me sudden 
and secret visits? It may be for friendship, for 
advice, for anything but money." 

" Then he does visit you," said Fortescue, as 
carelessly as he could ; "have you seen him lately ?" 

"I really must decline exposing my client's 
affairs, even to so deeply interested a friend ; but 
I can answer your last question. No, I have not 
seen Mr. Hallam for some time past" 

" Then you are expecting to see him now?" 

Goldsmith threw his head back, and laughed in 
his peculiar silent way. 

" Well, Captain Fortescue," he said, recovering 
himself and laying his head on one side ; " what 
should you say, now, as a man who has been about 
town some years, who knows something of the 
world? The spring of the year offers some 
attractions to a betting man, eh ? 

" Ah then, you know Hallam still bets. I had 
heard that he had quite given up that sort of thing." 

The lawyer relapsed into another silent laugh, 
which lasted so long that there seemed to be a risk 
of suffocation. 

.t You must excuse me," he said at last. * But 



AN INSINUATION. 51 

you are not quite so innocent as to believe that, 
I think, Captain Fortescue ? " 

" I always believe well of my friends. But I 
must be going, Mr. Goldsmith." He evaded giving 
any direct reply, and after some more conversation 
about Gerald Fortescue's affairs, he left the office. 

He felt utterly confounded. Something . he 
could scarcely say what . but an irresistible in- 
fluence had prevented him from being open with 
the lawyer. Which had deceived him, Hallam 
or Goldsmith ? and then he thought of the two 
men, and it was impossible to hesitate. With all 
his faults, he had always considered his friend 
truthful and honourable; besides, when he had 
asked him if his present visit were connected with 
any racing transactions, Hallam had replied so 
promptly and frankly, that he had quite given up 
betting . no .he could not believe he had purposely 
deceived him. Why should he do so? What end 
would it serve? However good we may be, it is 
wonderful how often the rule of expediency sug- 
gests itself as a fitting measure by which to try 
our fellow-men. 

He walked on, feeling perplexed how to act ; 
the longer he reflected on the lawyer's ambiguous 

S9. * 



52 HESTER KIRTON. 

words, the stronger grew his belief in his friend's 
innocence, and again came the question . what 
motive could Goldsmith have for misrepresent- 
ing matters? Fortescue knew that Hallam had a 
fixed income totally independent of his wife ; and, 
if he lived within it, what possible transactions 
could take place between him and Goldsmith? 
Besides, his friend had only that morning said 
that he and debt were strangers, and likely to 
continue so. 

But, then, if Goldsmith talked in this way to 
him, he would probably do so to others ; at any 
rate, Hallam ought to know what was said, and 
have the power of silencing such falsehood, if it 
were falsehood, and if it were not, after all, 
Fortescue asked himself, what business was it of 
his? A week ago he would have declared himself 
almost indifferent to Frederic Hallam ; but now it 
was different; sight had quickened love, he felt 
more, and deeper, affection for him than he had 
ever done, far more esteem than for his own 
brother; . he would not believe ill of him . it 
seemed cowardly to allow him to be slandered 
without giving him warning. 

Suddenly he remembered how the lawyer's sallow 



AN INSINUATION. 53 

cheek had flushed, and he at once saw, or thought 
he saw, to the bottom of the mystery. Hallam 
had probably ridiculed Goldsmith, and given 
him mortal offence, and he revenged himself 
by speaking against him; and yet he wondered 
how he dared to do so openly. If he had known 
how entirely Goldsmith believed him to be alien- 
ated from Hallam, he might have been less sur- 
prised ; and, shrewd as the lawyer was, he had not 
calculated on Fortescue's unworldliness ; he him- 
self would have been afraid to tell a man any- 
thing he had heard against him, for fear of being 
dragged into what might turn out awkwardly; 
and he judged the captain by himself. It seems 
easier for the simple and straight-forward to see 
through intrigue than for the intriguer to com- 
prehend the ways of sincerity. 

Fortescue resolved to see his friend before he 
left town. He sent a note to his hotel, asking 
him to come round that evening, as he was him- 
self to start early the following morning. The 
man returned with the note. Mr. Hallam had 
left town that afternoon hurriedly, had paid his 
bill, and driven away with his luggage in a cab . 
the people did not remember where, but believed 



54 HESTER KIRTON. 

it was to a railway-station : there were so many 
persons coming and going just at this time of year 
. it was impossible to keep count of them. 

Fortescne's heart sank. Had Hallam gone to 
the races, after all ? He had no leisure to pursue 
inquiry : he was only in town for a few days, and 
must return next morning, but, at any rate, he 
could and would warn Hallam to beware of 
Goldsmith if he ever had the opportunity, mean-' 
while he wrote to him to Uplands before he went 
to bed, telling him what had taken place between 
himself and the lawyer. 



55 



CHAPTER V. 

BALPHIE. 

Hester sat bending over the crib in which Ralphie 
lay, listening for his breathing. Hitherto, it had 
been loud and irregular, but during the last two 
hours it was scarcely audible. She had taken off 
her dress, and sat wrapped in a loose white gown. 
Paler than ever, her fair hair strained back from 
her temples, anxious watching had made her look 
years older already ; and the likeness between her 
and the quiet sufferer was very apparent now : his 
long lashes lay almost unnaturally dark on his 
white cheeks, the lips pressed closely together . 
how soon the mouth tells of health or sickness 
in a sleeping child . they were not rosy, but 
almost black with fever, as were also the circles 
beneath his closed eyelids. 

He had been taken ill soon after his father's 



56 HESTER KIBTON. 

departure, and the country doctor . an old-fashioned, 
ignorant man . had treated it lightly as a slight cold. 

Although Hester loved her boy, she never 
lavished a mother's caresses and tenderness on 
him ; at least no one had ever seen her do so, nor 
was she, like most young mothers, over anxious 
about his health. Her husband's care on this 
point almost excited her contempt She had two 
nurses for little Ralphie, and she was scrupulously 
careful in investigating the ventilation and arrange- 
ment of the nurseries; also, at stated times, he 
came to her in the drawing-room, but no one had 
ever caught Hester fondling her boy as mothers 
only can fondle ; that is, mothers in general, for 
Frederic Hallam's tenderness with his child 
equalled that of any mother. After all, men can 
be more intensely tender than women, although 
all do not show it to their children, and, if they 
do, it is rather to the girls than to the boys. 

Therefore, the nurses had felt surprised when 
the child became decidedly ill, to hear their 
mistress say she should not leave him again until 
the London doctor, for whom she had telegraphed 
to her husband, arrived. She might well look 
pale and exhausted ; she had been by the child's 



RALPHIE, 57 

bedside now for many hours, latterly her sense of 
hearing strained in different directions. She was 
listening eagerly for carriage wheels, and also with 
far deeper anxiety for the imperceptible breathing 
of the child; suddenly it flashed upon her that 
he had lain thus since the morning, undisturbed. 
The doctor had said sleep was more necessary 
than food; but suppose he were mistaken, and 
she had no confidence in his skill ; the child might 
be sinking from mere inanition, was it that . 
that had caused the strange change in his breath- 
ing? She bent closer and closer, there was no 
audible breath; she put her hand on the little 
heart, there was still a languid movement : for the 
first time a strong terror seized her . he was dying 
perhaps. How should she tell Fred his child was 
dead? He had left him safe and well in her 
charge; he would look on her as Ralphie's 
murderess. Why had she not thought sooner 
how long he had been without food, and yet the 
doctor had said the fever must be starved while 
it was so high. She looked eagerly round, there 
was some milk and water on a little table near ; 
she put her arm under Ralphie's head, and tried 
to raise it ; it was like fire in its scorching heat 



58 HESTER KIRTON. 

"Ralphie, darling, Ralphie," she murmured, 
"papa's coming; Ralphie, wake up and see 
papa.** 

She knew, as if by instinct, the sure talisman of 
her boy's lore, for, although he tyrannized over 
his father, the child loved him passionately. 

No answer came, the little limbs seemed to 
Hester to be growing set and rigid; she tried to 
open the closely pressed lips, but the jaws were 
firmly pressed together, and resisted all her efforts, 
weakened by the terror of hurting the unconscious 
sufferer. 

She looked round again in the mechanical way 
in which people seek in some mortal peril for 
outward help, and as she did so, her eyes fell 
on her open de$k, where she had written the 
telegram. 

She gently laid the child's head on the pillow, 
and passing swiftly round, took up the quill pen 
from the desk, dipped the feathered end into 
the milk and water, and again raising his head, 
she touched the lips several times before they 
unclosed, and then she managed to drop the 
liquid from the end of the feather into the mouth. 
Little by little, the rigid jaws relaxed and parted, 



RALPHIE. 69 

the eyes opened slowly, but without any ray of 
intelligence, and as they did this for the second 
time, her sharpened sense heard the wheels at 
last. They came nearer and nearer, but she 
dared not withdraw her arm from Ralphie ; she 
felt that the slightest movement might extinguish 
his re-awakened life. So she stood, . still as the 
senseless child, almost as white as her dress, 
waiting for what she felt would be her boy's 
doom* 

It seemed long to her before the door opened ; 
the nurse just looked into the room, then went 
away, and, after a few moments, Frederic Hallam 
entered, followed by a stout, middle-aged man, 
with remarkably intelligent eyes and a square 
massive head. 

He bent over Ralphie for a few moments, 
asking for more light as he did so, for the blinds 
were drawn down. Then turning to Hester, he 
asked sharply and rapidly, how long the child had 
been insensible, and what nourishment it had 
taken. He started back at her answer, and threw 
up both his arms. 

"You're killing him," he said, roughly; "the 
only chance for that child now is constant susten- 



60 HESTER KIRTON. 

ance, if it be only a tea-spoonful at a time. What 
did you say you gave him with the feather? " 

It was wonderful how his manner subdued her ; 
she answered as meekly as a child. 

 Milk and water ! " said the doctor* with a 
contemptuous emphasis; "it should be brandy, 
ma'am, and must be, if you want to keep your 
boy. Will you be so good as to put note a tea- 
spoonful of brandy into a wine glass of water." 

" But, doctor," said a gentle, plaintive voice 
behind him, " I never heard of giving so young 
a child brandy; there must be fearful risk of 
increasing the fever." 

The doctor only looked at her in his quick 
decided way, and turning to Fred said, . 

" The fewer here the better ; leave your wife, 
she knows what she's about" 

Mrs. Hallam looked aghast at such uncourteous 
treatment; but she submitted to take her son's 
arm, and allow him to conduct her to her bed- 
chamber. 

The stupor lasted, and for longer than a week 
Ealphie's life seemed to be more than doubtful. " 
The London doctor had warned Hester em- 



RALPHIE. 61 

piratically that medicine could be of scarcely 
any service in comparison with nourishment, in 
fact, that recovery depended entirely on the vigi- 
lant care with which the child was nursed ; and 
except for a few hours of necessary rest, she 
rarely left the room. And yet even at such a 
time as this, when a mutual sympathy seemed to 
be drawing her again towards her husband, she 
was as coldly on her guard as ever, as if she 
feared to let some hidden feeling escape. 

Spite of his absorbing anxiety about the child, 
Hallam was greatly touched by her unremitting 
care and watchfulness, still to him, disposed to 
take the most favourable view of her conduct, 
her devotion seemed more like the enforced ful- 
filment of duty than the outpouring of maternal 
affection. 

His mother apparently could not refrain from 
expressing her opinion. She was herself one 
of those women with feelings always on the 
surface ready for use. I am not sure whether 
she considered feeling of any value, if kept out 
of sight She could not understand or sound 
the deeps of a self-repressed heart, too intense 
in its affection to expose it to common eyes- 



62 HESTER KIBTON. 

There is a medium between these natures, and 
a happier one, I think, both for themselves and 
others. One expects a woman's affection to be 
demonstrative, although, it need not be so 
displayed, as to excite ridicule; but there is 
something that savours as strongly of self-love, 
in the woman who so represses feeling as to 
grieve and disappoint those dear to her, as of self- 
conceit in her who makes a lavish display of 
wifely or motherly devotion. The only superior 
claim of the former is, that we believe this 
article to be a genuine one; the latter we 
consider merely imitation silver-gilt 

But Mrs. Hallam considered herself, or perhaps 
it is more just to say, wished others to consider her, 
a model mother. She had undergone an immense 
amount of petty interference (spite of her rich 
connections) from her sister-in-law in the manage- 
ment of Fred, and it was right and fitting she 
should have her turn again. To women of very 
shallow understanding and limited powers of 
intellect, there is probably no occupation more 
delightful than either mentally or practically setting 
their neighbours to rights. When we are young 
and still smarting from the pricks of some well- 



RALPHIE. 63 

meaning busy-body, who . his feelings being only 
skin deep . passes for " such a kind, good-tempered 
creature," weresolve, when the powerof interference 
falls to our lot, that things shall be quite different ; 
how magnanimous we will then be, how large- 
minded ; in fact, we shoot a load of paving stones 
in the road of our future, which would take a life* 
time, and a most conscientious one too, to lay 
properly. 

The older one grows, the more impossible does 
it become to judge what one's opinions would be 
under differing circumstances. A Bight and a 
Wrong there must always be, a Truth and a False- 
hood ; but, between these, how wide a plain spreads 
itself, over which different shades of opinion are 
riding a steeple-chase blindfold. One asks oneself 
sometimes, is there such a thing as beauty, as 
age, as talent, as worldliness, or simplicity of 
heart, as sincerity or courtesy. When one sees 
how that little piece of coloured glass each neigh- 
bour wears in his eye changes the hue . nay, the 
very quality of the attribute . what can one do 
in such a turmoil? Must we distrust our own 
judgment, and cling to that of each of our fellow 
creatures in turn, with whom we may chance to 



64 HESTER KIRTON. 

feel sympathy, or who may obtain a temporary 
influence over us ? 

I do not think so ; we may distrust our own 
judgment on high grounds, and especially if we 
allow it to be guided by impulse or self-will, and 
also because we see that it is unconsciously influ- 
enced by outward circumstances. The preaching 
our own opinions, vivd voce, seems the worst evil, 
if we can only have sufficient self-control and 
courtesy to economise them, we may learn very 
much from our neighbours; their very follies, 
and narrow-minded enunciation of their own 
theories, may serve to warn us against similar 
absurdities. 

Mrs. Hallam, however, did not share one 
weakness of her sex ; if she interfered, it was per- 
sonally ; she did not screen herself behind other 
people's opinions, and try to make you swallow the 
unpleasant potion, rechauffi. 

tc Frederic, does Hester ever kiss Ralph ? " Mrs* 
Hallam did not choose to call him .. Ralphie." 

Her son started, he and his mother were 
walking up and down the garden on the moated 
side. She had been vainly trying to persuade him 
that his child would recover. 



RALPHIE. 65 

" Yes, mother, of course she does ; she would 
scarcely be the devoted nurse she is, if she were 
not very fond of him." 

u Ah, well, that does not follow, my dear 
Frederic ; you are such an affectionate fellow, that 
you think all others the same ; but, you know, I 
always did consider Hester cold, and I think so 
stilL I do not think I have ever seen her kiss 
the child." 

It was a hard position for Hallam: could he 
contradict her, when his heart was aching with 
longing for the love his wife would not give ? 
Would not . there was the secret of his sorrow . 
he knew too well that Hester could love if she 
chose ; she had worshipped him once. The doubt 
that tormented him was whether her love was, 
indeed, cold and dead for ever; whether her 
unforgivingness would for ever render it im- 
possible for him to re-awaken it from slumber. 

u There are people," he said, at last, " whose 
feelings are just as warm towards their children 
as others who make more fuss in displaying them* 
I pet that little darling," . he turned away his 
head, his voice quivering as he spoke . "more 
than his mother does, and yet I could not havs? 

vol. in. 40 



66 HESTER KIETON. 

nursed him as she has done ; it is only motherly 
love and instinct that can anticipate wants and 
possible evils." 

" You're quite mistaken, Frederic ; nursing is a 
gift which comes to people naturally. In any case, 
Hester would be an excellent nurse, nothing shows 
it more than her reluctance to divide her charge 
with any one. Really, she is quite strange about 
it ; I went into the room just now as quietly as 
possible, and suggested, in the lowest possible 
whisper, that toast-and-water should be occa- 
sionally substituted for these constant stimu- 
lants " 

"I am sorry you went in, mother. Hester 
told me yesterday, she wished for no one but 
nurse and myself, and she is only following out 
the doctor's instructions." 

" My dear Frederic, you must not spoil your 
wife ; I speak, my dear boy," and she laid her soft 
white hand tenderly on his shoulder, . "I speak 
out of the effusion of a mother's love. You 
are the child's father as much as Hester is it's 
mother, and you have as much right to govern 
in the sickroom as she has ; really her manner to 
me just now was quite wanting in common sense." 



BALPHEE. 67 

" Just the quality I consider Hester so very 
gifted in." 

His mother shrugged her shoulders. 

.t What has come oyer you, Frederic? Three 
years ago you used almost always to see things 
as I did ; bow, perhaps, you consider it right for 
your wife to insult your mother in her own 
house." 

u Mother! you know I could not," he said, 
affectionately drawing her arm though his ; " but 
even if poor Hester has been a little abrupt and 
hasty with you, you will excuse it, I know ; she 
is so over-wrought and anxious that I can only 
wonder at her calmness. I know this morning, 
after my last night's watch, I was nervous and 
excitable enough to quarrel with any one." 

"Oh, your wife said nothing, but I consider 
that at least she should have answered me. She 
only looked at me in that hard, cold, reproving 
way she can when she chooses, and pointed to 
the door . pointed so steadily and determinedly, 
that I was obliged to leave the room. It was 
not proper behaviour from a daughter towards 
a mother, Frederic," and Mrs. Hallam hid her 
eyes with her handkerchief. 

40.* 



68 HESTER KIRTOX. 

If he had not been a dutiful son, he might, 
perhaps, have thought it scarcely kind behaviour 
in his mother to upbraid him with Hester's con- 
duct when he was so torn and depressed with 
anxiety for little Ralphie ; but he had learned so 
to long for affection, and by nature he was so 
peaceful, that he only felt sorry his mother and 
his wife should have come into collision ; and a 
little judicious soothing, and an assurance that 
probably the child was restless, and therefore 
she feared he might be disturbed, smoothed Mrs. 
Hallam's offended . not dignity, because she really 
had none that was real . but the pretension which 
supplied its place, and prevented her from lecturing 
her son as she had intended. 

She had only stayed at Uplands once before, 
and that was during Hester's absence . Frederic 
Hallam shrank from exposing his domestic un- 
happiness . so that with her remembrance of the 
former terms on which they lived, Mrs. Hallam 
had been grestfljr struck by the marked change 
in Hester's manner to her husband, even in the 
slight opportunity she had had of seeing them 
together. Nor only to her husband ; she seemed 
to "rule all with a quiet firm hand, to which they 



KALPHIE. 60 

submitted implicitly. Parkins was now head- 
nurse, but although the same managing despotic 
person towards her fellow servants, she was a 
changed being in her manner towards her mis- 
tress ; perhaps she was the best proof of Hester's 
strength of purpose. Most girls would have 
chosen to dismiss a servant who had given herself 
.S airs," and might have an inconvenient remem- 
brance of the difficulty her mistress had found in 
fitting herself to her new state of life ; but Hester 
recognized Parkins's talents, and real worth, and 
probably thought that the surest way of silencing 
any gossip about herself and her husband, was to 
attach her interests so firmly to theirs as to make 
her wish to remain with them. All this Mrs. 
Hallam saw, and she grew more and more puzzled. 
She had fully intended to speak seriously to her 
son on the subject of being ruled by his w T ife, 
but for the present he had averted what would 
have been a trying discussion. She resolved to 
watch them very closely when Ralphie was better, 
and to write to Martha Hallam and ask her 
advice. 



70 HESTEB KERTON. 



CHAPTER VI. 

A VOW. 

Hallam smiled sadly to himself after his mother 
went into the house. He had often asked her 
question mentally, and being persuaded that no 
one could help loving Ralphie, thought it was 
a part of his wife's contradictory nature, or rather 
her determination, not to sympathize with him 
in any way, that she showed so little love for 
their child. If Ralphie had seemed fonder of 
his mother, he would have thought she petted 
him when he was not hy; but the child's pre- 
ference for his father was too evident, and yet 
if Hallam had been a deeper thinker, or what 
would have served the same purpose, had accus- 
tomed himself to analyze as well as to observe 
human nature, he might have known that the 
true secret of Ealphie's preference besides the 



A VOW. 71 

instinctive knowledge children have of those who 
love children, was the difference of their natures. 
The child resembled his mother as nrach in 
mind as in body, and consequently the same 
qualities had power over his affections. 

Hallam probably could scarcely have said when 
he first began to love Hester . but he was learning 
every day, more and more deeply, how closely 
united was his love for his wife and child . it 
would have been impossible now to tell which he 
loved in the other. He wandered into the stable- 
yard, then out through the arched entrance, and 
over the bridge on to the grass in front of the 
avenue. 

But he turned sharply away as he remembered 
the last time he had played there with Ralphie. 
What would he give to have his darling for 
one half-hour again? and then came the un- 
speakable agony . the dread which makes the 
strongest man's courage fail . that the hand of 
Death was on his child. For the little fellow had 
been very weak all day, and the London doctor, 
who had come down again to see him, had said 
that a few hours w r ould decide the result of his 
illness : he would either sink or rally. 



72 HESTER EIRTON. 

It has often been said before. and yet in liis 
own experience each seems to realize, for the first 
time. how much harder any cross, any anxiety 
is to bear when it involves a necessity for passive 
resignation. There was nothing to be done for 
Ralphie, absolutely nothing the doctor had said, 
but to hope for the best. And this nothing seemed 
to Frederic Hallam so very hard to bear as he 
walked beside the moat which, still bounded 
by the picturesque low wall before mentioned, 
extended for some distance along the whole range 
of fruit and vegetable gardens, and turning in a 
sharp angle at their furthest extremity, followed 
their course round two other sides till it again 
reached the front, where a dry grassed ditch took 
its place. 

The ground at the farthest boundary of the 
fruit gardens was rugged, and broken into little 
steeps and hollows, overgrown with gorse and 
brake. In some places, where the upper ground 
had evidently crumbled away, the hollows were 
deeper, clothed at the bottom -with soft green turf, 
while at the top the rough edges of bright yellow 
gravel were fringed with that peculiarly long fine 
grass one only finds on commons. The heather 



A VOW. 73 

and ling were just beginning to put out fresh 
green shoots, and in some places the ling had a 
few early blossoms ; but the purple wealth of an 
August common was wanting; the hedge-rows 
and meadows are doubtless richest in flowers in 
April and May, but there is no time like autumn 
for the heathland, with its glorious contrasts of 
colour. 

It was all alike to Hallani as he walked along, 
his hands clasped listlessly behind him, his head 
bent on his breast. Suddenly the brake rustled 
beside him, and in another moment something 
rough and warm pressed against his hands, and 
then Bevis's cold nose was thrust searchingly 
into them. 

The; creature had been restless and uneasy from 
the day he had missed Ralphie, and more than 
once had refused to accompany his master on 
a walk, turning back continually as if in search 
of his little companion. He would spend hours 
on the grass where they usually played, snuffing 
all about and trying to find the scent in each 
direction, then, standing baffled for an instant, 
would begin again as unweariedly as ever. But 
to-day he seemed in a different mood ; he walked 



74 HESTER KIRTOX. 

quietly beside Hallam, his long ears drooping and 
his head depressed; his master turned presently 
and looked at him. 

" Poor old dog, you miss Ralphie, don't you, 
Beewee?" 

Either the child's name or the father's sad face 
as he pronounced the dog's pet title refreshed his 
memory, and Bevis laid himself down at Hallam's 
feet, and uttered that prolonged melancholy sound 
which only a bloodhound can give tongue to. It 
seemed to Hallam like the death-wail of his child. 
Hitherto he had borne up bravely, for one of his 
impressionable temperament. However, as the 
quinquuna tree is always found in low unhealthy 
places, so those who are the most impressionable, 
are, by God's mercy, the most sanguine also. 

J[t seems to be the lot of strong enduring natures, 
like Hester's, to look on the black side of things, 
to take any short cut, however gloomy and dreary, 
to meet evil half way, while a buoyant spirit will 
go a long way round to avoid it, if by so doing 
he can keep on a broad sunshiny road. 

But when the dog raised his head and looked 
in his face, his large mournful eyes filled with 
tears, Hallam could bear up no longer ; he was 



A VOW. 75 

standing on the brink of one of the hollows, and 
turning from the dog, he plunged suddenly down 
it, Mid throwing himself on the turf, burst into 
an agony of grief. 

The dog did not come to comfort hid master, 
perhaps he thought it right that all should 
lament for Ralphie; he stood still, his head 
and long ears drooping almost to the ground; 
but when, after a while, exhausted by the 
violence of his grief, Hallam raised himself and 
looked round, the creature came quietly and 
licked his hands in quite a different way from 
his usual lordly behaviour . for Bevis was not 
playful or gentle with any one but Ralphie ; but 
in such sorrow as Hallam's, the out-pouring of 
a heart which could no longer bear its burden, 
he wanted perfect solitude, and Bevis, finding his 
advances disregarded, withdrew again from the 
hollow, and walked slowly away among the bracken, 

" Why was this sorrow sent him ? " . we ask this 
question sometimes in impatience, but how often 
the answer comes like a revelation. 

Here in this wild solitude, with nothing to 
distract his concentrated sense, through eye or 
ear, except such sights and sounds as were too 



76 HESTER KIRTON. 

familiar to disturb him, Hallam sate as if waiting 
for a reply. 

And then as none came, his evil angels crowded 
round, and, unconscious of his prompters, he told 
himself it was very hard that every joy should 
be dashed away, just as ho was ready to drink 
it. It had been the same with Hester, just as he 
had found out her good qualities, and could soon 
have brought himself to love her . for had he not 
loved her, spite of all? . she had learned to 
despise him ; and, after all, he went on proudly, 
there was nothing to despise in him now; how 
different his life had been since Kalphie's birth, 
and since he had come to Uplands. But what 
if the child died ? His friend the rector . Fre- 
deric, had not reckoned him up among his good 
influences, although he often said to others, what 
a happy thing it was to have among them  man 
who lived up to so high a standard as Edward 
King . had told him that very morning, after he 
had paid his daily visit to the sick room, that 
he ought to prepare himself for the worst ; and 
that if Ralphie were taken away, it would be in 
love and not in anger. Hallam's heart rebelled 
against this ; he was no hypocrite ; he said he 



A VOW. 77 

could not be resigned to such a loss. He knew 
that Ralphie was the firm ground to which were 
anchored, and kept from shipwreck, all his good 
purposes, all his n$w-found unselfishness and for- 
bearing endurance of his wife's conduct, and more 
than this, all his repentance for his former worldly 
life and deeds. If Ralphie were taken, he must 
drift away back among the breakers and be lost ; 
he could see only a life of sin and sorrow before 
him, if his darling died. 

But although at times the best of us may thus 
be tempted by the specious clouds which thrust 
themselves between our souls and their true light ; 
if we have really prayed and tried to live well, 
instead of being content with good intentions, we 
shall not be left to the mercy of our invisible 
enemies. 

Hallam sate still thinking, or rather trying to 
think, in that hard, dry-minded state, when every 
faculty becomes sullen and debased ; and it seems 
impossible that warmth and love to either God 
or man can ever re-visit the heart A torpor 
appeared to be creeping over his limbs also. 

He rose to his feet, and as he did so, there was 
a tremulous movement in the green cushion on 



78 HESTER KDftTON. 

which he had been lying. Hundreds of tiny 
white and yellow flowers, streaked with purple, 
raised their fragile heads again, and looked up to 
heaven as brightly as before, a* if in thankfulness 
for their release. Even through the midst of his 
gloom, the remembrance came to Hallam that he 
had heard of this little flower, and how brightly 
it always up-sprung after a weight that would have 
destroyed the life of many; be stooped and gathered 
some, and then slowly left the hollow. His heart 
swelled in the wider, freer atmosphere, and as he 
looked at the little eye-bright again, and remem- 
bered what Ralphie's delight would have been to 
And it, the weight was lifted, and tears once more 
filled his eyes, but they brought soothing with 
them. He sank down on his knees; if nothing 
could be done for Ralphie by mere human aid, 
was not prayer far more efficient than any mortal 
care could be? He prayed earnestly that the 
child might be restored to him, and then in the 
very prayer itself, as if fearing he was asking too 
much, he added, if God so willed. 

And as the charmed circle in which he knelt 
widened, and the evil shadows withdrew, with 
frowning baffled faces, his mind grew each moment 



A VOW. 79 

clearer, and lie saw truly that Ralphie was not 
the rock on which he trusted ; he was rather the 
anchor which held him fast to the better land, the 
beacon which had been in mercy shown, to lead 
him on by its borrowed light. And what was his 
repentance worth, if it had not brought him to 
acknowledge that he owed an atonement for past 
offences; and if this were to be his destined 
punishment, ought he to struggle and rebel, he 
who was growing each day more and more keenly 
alive to the besetting infirmities of his nature? 
But try as he would, he was only human; the 
sharp agony came again, the unutterable longing 
that he might have this one blessing spared 
to him ; and amid this came also a more searching 
question . what if Ralphie were to be taken away 
for his own sake, from parents who could not live 
lovingly together? It was a startling question, 
but the answer followed rapidly. If it were not 
right for Ralphie to witness such a life, could 
it be right in God's eyes? Was it safe to live 
it ? Could he ever tell himself he had truly re- 
pented of the past, till he had made atonement for 
it ? Till this morning he had well-nigh forgotten 
how black that Past had been. Then, in turning 



80 HESTER KIRTON. 

over an old pocket-book, he had found, in an 
inner pocket, hidden out of sight, the agreement 
written by himself for Goldsmith to sign. He 
had shrunk with horror at the discovery of such 
baseness ; but for this written witness, he would 
not have believed he could have meditated such 
treachery* 

Now he drew the paper forth, and tearing it in 
pieces, scattered it to the wind, and with bowed head 
and clasped hands solemnly there, on the lonely 
heath, Frederic Hallam vowed that if Ralphie 
were once spared to him, he would humble his 
pride to the very dust in seeking a reconciliation 
with his wife. 

Tea was waiting when he returned. Hester 
had sent down word that she should not leave her 
charge even for a moment, and he found his 
mother quite uneasy and fidgety at his long 
absence as he passed from the lawn through the 
open library window on his way up-stairs. 

He paused at Ralphie's door, and listened before 
he entered; a large screen hid him, and he had 
opened the door noiselessly. There was a sound 
of lamentation within the room, his first impulse 



A VOW. 81 

was to rush forward, fearing some evil to Ralphie ; 
but Hester's voice, in broken, agonized tones, re- 
strained him ; it seemed as if he dared not break 
suddenly in upon her sorrow. 
< " Oh, my child, my boy ! " he heard indistinctly 
murmured, as if she were smothering the sound 
on his pillow, " shall I lose you just when I love 
you best ? Oh, how can I bear it ? " 

And then came a sobbing silence. It seemed 
to Hallam that he had been specially led there . 
that now was the moment of reunion ; but he 
would not intrude on her suddenly : the singular 
outburst from one so reserved and guarded as 
Hester, had never been meant to be overheard, 
and she should not be wounded by his knowledge 
of it. 

He leant against the door, and, turning the 
handle more loudly than usual, entered the room 
slowly from behind the screen. 

Had his ears deceived him? Hester sat beside 
the little bed, with the same cold, passionless face 
she always wore in his presence. For an instant 
his soul shrank back; how could he tempt a 
quarrel (for any overture on his part had hitherto 
provoked bitter words) beside his dying child ? 

vol. iu. 4\ 



82 HESTER KIRTON. 

But what had he just vowed? He went up to 
Hester, he saw her eyes were swollen with 
weeping, and tried to take her hand; coldly, 
slowly, she withdrew it, and rising moved away 
from Ralphie's bed, beckoning her husband to 
follow her. 

"I atn not very tired, thank you," she said, 
in what she wished to be a softened manner, but 
which the strong restraint she maintained ren- 
dered painfully repelling. "I do not wish to 
leave him for an instant ; both nurses are within 
call; I will send for you directly there is a 
change." 

"I cannot leave him now," said Hallam, cut 
to the heart by her evident wish for his absence, 
when he thought they might each so have sup* 
ported the other. 

se Then we must not speak," she said, simply ; 
" the slightest shock to the brain now would be 
fetal." 



83 



CHAPTER VII. 

, MARTHA HALLAM AT STEDDING. 

The wonder of the Misses Skipper was at its 
height. Miss Hallam had arrived at the rectory, 
and had been seen to bow to Mrs. Wrenshaw and 
her daughter as they came out of church on 
Sunday morning. What was going to happen 
next? Was this family difference . the favourite 
source of lamentation with Miss Jemima and 
her sisters; in fact, so stock a topic, that I 
scarcely know how they would have enjoyed the 
last three years as they had done, without it . 
" was this," as Miss Jemima in her happy choice 
of words would certainly have said, "going to 
become a thing of the past ? " and I am afraid 
a disappointed feeling crept over the minds of 
the three ladies, for, if a reconciliation were to 
take place between the Hallams and the Bonhams, 
there would be no blame to attach anywhere . - 

41.2 



84 HESTER KIRTON. 

no possibility of echoing and re-echoing those two 
favourite sentences,  There are always faults on 
both sides," and " One story is good till another is 
told." 

If they had known Martha Hallam better, 
they would have thought her courtesy still more 
surprising: it was so foreign to her whole cha- 
racter and the nature of her prejudices to seek 
fresh acquaintance. What had served her father 
and mother before her would do for her ; 
nothing would persuade her that society . in 
other words fellowship with fellow men and 
women . -would not involve what she pleased to 
call "the levelling principle;" if she *could 
only have submitted the crooked corners and 
angles of her mind . which had been allowed from 
childhood to grow unmolested until they had 
become distortions . to the lathe of contradiction 
and contrary opinion . which can only be 
administered advantageously to such a temper 
as hers in mixed society, from the self-control 
the presence of strangers enforces on the most 
wilful . many new and interesting thoughts, 
infinite enjoyment of the mind and talents, 
and, above all, the sympathies and affections of 



MARTHA. HALLAM AT STEDDIXG. 85 

others might have been opened to Martha 
Hallam ; but, moving thus in one narrow special 
circle of friends, who all knew her too well to 
contradict her openly, although they probably 
laughed at her behind her back, she kept to her 
original creed, that she and all belonging imme- 
diately to her were infallible, and in only believing 
what she chose to believe. 

But she had some Popes, some few privileged 
individuals from whom to promulgate the te they 
say," which has such mighty power over the 
credulous many, and the Ainsworths were among 
these. 

Therefore when Mrs. Ainsworth told her of 
the high estimation in which she, her husband, 
and indeed all the Stedding people held Mr. 
and Mrs. Bonham, she remembered that she was 
in some way connected with these favoured 
people, and that it would be well to distinguish 
them by her notice; hence had come the greeting 
witnessed by Miss Jemima and her sisters, and 
hence also a dignified acquiescence when Mrs. 
Ainsworth suggested they should call on Mrs. 
Bonham. 

" I think it would be only kind. I know poor 



86 HESTER KTBTON. 

Mrs. Bonham has felt very much the estrange- 
ment from her cousin; you could tell her a 
good deal about her, of course. It is not your 
place to call first," she continued, for, although 
good and charitable to the poor, the wife of 
the rector of Stedding was a formal and rigid 
exacter and renderer of ceremonial duties, for 
the neglect of which she frequently reprimanded 
her far more liberal-minded husband, " but, with 
this coldness in the family, Mrs. Bonham would 
scarcely like to call." 

"I should think not," said Miss Hallam, draw- 
ing up her prim figure with an emphasis perfectly 
understood by her companion ; it said, as plainly 
as words could do, by implication, " I should like 
to see a mere country doctor's wife calling on 
me, Martha Hallam, of London." 

" And," Mrs. Ainsworth went on, " as, perhaps, 
she may wish to ask you many questions entirely 
relating to family matters, I shall just introduce 
you, and then call for you again in half an hour's 
time, that is, if you would like such an arrange- 
ment." 

" Well, it might be as well ; there are one or two 
things I should like to say to this Mrs. Bonham." 



[MARTHA HALLAM AT STEDDING. 87 

It had come into her busy brain that there 
might, after all, be some communication between 
the cousins; she would not believe that any 
woman would so completely alienate herself from 
those among whom she lived, as, from Mrs, 
Hallam's account, Hester persisted in doing, 
tinless she had some other object on which to 
bestow her affections. She felt very angry with 
her niece just now. On hearing of Raphie's 
illness, she had at once written to ask if she 
should not go down and assist in nursing him; 
.and Fred, her own darling nephew, for whom she 
had done so much, had been made by his wife . 
she was sure it was no voluntary act on his part . 
to send her a polite, though decided refusal. 

It cwas incredible ! her assistance had never 
been refused before; she was such an excellent 
nurse, so well accustomed to children ; well, they 
might ask long enough before she took the pains 
to revisit Uplands. She had forgiven Fred; it 
was not his fault, of course, except that he ought 
not be ruled by his wife ; but when Mrs. Hallam's 
letter came confirming the last idea, and speaking 
of the change in Fred's spirits, Martha felt 
strongly moved to journey to Uplands at once, 



88 HESTER KERTON. 

and remonstrate with the young wife on her 
husband's want of cheerfulness. However, after 
all . for Louisa was extremely fanciful . it might 
be the natural depression caused by the little 
boy's anxious state, not that she believed him in 
danger, oh, dear, no ! mothers and grandmothers 
always exaggerated childish complaints; it was 
just a feverish cold, as the doctor had said at first. 
Of course, if they would make a fuss, and send for 
a London doctor, the poor man was obliged to say 
something to earn his fee, and the more danger he 
created in imagination, the greater would be the 
merit of the cure, 

"Just the way with all doctors," as she re- 
marked to Mrs, Bonham, in giving her an account 
of the matter without at all considering her inad- 
vertence. 

She had been agreeably surprised in Lucy ; she 
had not in any way expected to see, as she after- 
wards expressed it, " so pretty and tasteful a little 
woman," and the neat, well-ordered house, and 
pretty, simply-dressed children, whom she met 
just returning from' their walk, clad in brown- 
holland skirts and jackets, so that they might 
scramble after wild flowers, were all duly appre- 



MARTHA HALLAM AT STEDDING. 89 

ciated by one who fully valued " the nicenesses " 
of life. 

Lucy received her courteously, but with none 
of the flutter she expected her appearance would 
create, and if she did feel nervous inwardly, it 
was not at Miss Hallam's high and mighty con- 
descension in calling, but because she w T as at last 
going to hear news of her absent cousin. 

She was greatly disappointed to find that she 
was expected rather to give information than to 
receive it. 

" I have not seen my niece, Mrs. Frederick 
Hallam, for a very long time ; she is a fine, tall, 
elegant young woman. I should rather say, 
perhaps, gives promise of elegance, but she is very 
abrupt : was she always abrupt, Mrs. . I beg 
your pardon . I always forget your name." 

Lucy smiled ; perhaps she thought it a pity 
Miss Hallam should forget the name of the person 
she was speaking to. 

"My cousin Hester had always a reserved 
manner. She thinks a great deal more than most 
people do." 

" Ah ! she is your cousin, you know ; of course 
you think a good deal of her ; but I should have 



90 HESTER KIRTON. 

said from her manner that she had seen very 
little society hefore marriage." 

She had underrated Lucy's intelligence; like 
lightning flashed on her quick perceptions that the 
purport; of this visit was to discover Hester's 
antecedents; she thought she began to see why 
her cousin had broken with her own family; 
if her surmise were correct, at any rate, Miss 
Hallam should get no satisfaction from her. 

"We were a good deal together before mar- 
riage," she said, quietly, " and were always great 
friends. How do you like Stedding ? " . 
.;- And each time Miss Hallam returned to the 
charge, she managed to evade her inquiries, and 
yet with such quiet courtesy that her visitor, 
though feeling inwardly foiled, could not really 
have any cause of complaint against her. 

There was something that attracted her, spite 
of herself, in Lucy ; she was so lively, and seemed 
to take the same cheerful view of things that 
she herself did. She almost felt inclined to con- 
fide in her, and tell her that Fred was no longer 
happy with her cousin ; but then she remembered 
that her sister-in-law had distinctly said in her 
letter that he was fonder of his wife than ever, 



MARTHA HALLAM AT STEDDING. 91 

and would not hear a word against her. She 
could not bring herself to own to Hester's cousin 
that Fred's happiness was dependent on his wife's 
love; no, Martha Hallam's creed for husbands 
and wives was, that no love could be sufficient 
for a wife to give to her husband, and in return 
she ought to be thankful and content with any 
crumbs of affection he might deign to throw over 
his left shoulder, supposing, of course, the man 
to be a Hallam. 

The half hour slipped away while she was 
still undecided, and Lucy was eagerly showing 
her baby and expatiating on its health, skin, 
number of teeth, and other perfections in which 
young mothers claim universal sympathy from 
womankind, and Lucy was very enthusiastic on 
the topic, when in came Jacob Bonham. 

He walked straight up to his wife and kissed 
her ; he had not seen her since breakfast time, and 
he and Lucy had always kept 'up lover-like ways. 
But when he turned round as Lucy introduced 
him to Miss Hallam, and held out his hand to 
her, she seemed to be afraid that the operation 
was about to be repeated on herself, her face 
puckered into a most reproving aspect, and, 



92 HESTER KIRTON. 

keeping her hands firmly pressed together, she 
merely bent stiffly in answer to his greeting. 

Lucy could scarcely help laughing : but Jacob 
came to her assistance. 

"I passed Mrs. Ainsworth and your mother 
walking together, Lucy," he said ; " I think they 
will be here soon." 

Almost as he spoke came Mrs. Wrenshaw's 
short imperative knock, and, full of bustle and 
smiles, rosy health and eager curiosity, she 
ushered her companion into the drawing-room. 

Miss Hallam tried to keep her at a distance by 
stately courtesy; it was quite enough to shake 
hands with the Bonhams ; but really this person, 
no relation of Hester's, only her aunt by 
marriage, was more than she felt called on to 
tolerate. But Mrs. Wrenshaw was not be awed ; 
with her happy, insensitive nature she quite 
omitted to receive what Miss Hallam's silence 
and coldness were intended to convey; she 
thought the poor lady was shy at finding herself 
among strangers, and only laboured the harder 
to entertain her while Mrs. Ainsworth, Jacob 
and Lucy were talking parish business. 

" I declare, ma'am, I thought we were never 



MARTHA HALLAM AT STEDDING. 93 

to have the pleasure of seeing you ; I am so glad 
we've met: it seems so much more Christian- 
like, in every way, for connections to be friendly 
together. I'm sure I scarcely know though," 
she went on, "the exact degree of relationship 
between you and me, Miss Hallam ; let me see, 
I'm Mrs. Frederic Hallam's aunt, and you are 
Mr. Frederic Hallam's aunt ; can you make it out, 
I can't It comes to a something, but I don't 
know what." And she burst into a fit of laughter. 

"No," said Miss Hallam, shaking her head 
grimly, and feeling that she couH not possibly 
tolerate such freedom, " I do not see that I have 
the honour of being in any way connected with 
you, madam. Mrs. Ainsworth," she said, rising, 
" I fear we are taking up Mrs. Bonham's valuable 
time," and, managing to escape Mrs. Wrenshaw's 
proffered hand in the general farewell that followed, 
she departed with her friend, feeling that she had 
been grievously insulted by Hester's vulgar aunt 
by marriage. 

" What a nice pleasant-spoken person Miss 
Hallam is!" said poor unconscious Mrs. Frank 
to her daughter; " painfully shy though: she quite 
makes grimaces from nervousness." . 



94 HESTEE KIRTON. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

BIZ AT UPLANDS, 

Hester sate alone in her own study, a hand- 
somely furnished room, but with little about it to 
betray female habitation. 

There were books, but they were chiefly educa- 
tional or philosophical volumes, a few of the 
heavier magazines, strong substantial -looking 
writing materials, and several brass-clasped ac- 
count books . for Hester regularly overlooked 
her bailiffs accounts; her husband had offered 
to relieve her from this charge, but she declined 
his assistance; he had the garden and flowers and 
the gardeners' expenses to control, she said, it 
was well for her to have an occupation also. 

She sate now at her writing table with an open 
letter before her. It was from Miss Hallam, and 
had arrived that morning, enclosed in one to her 
.mother-in-law. 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. 95 

Wordy, ill-expressed, and diffuse, it yet seemed 
to possess wonderful power over Hester. She 
read it, and read it again, and each time was 
plunged into deeper thought than before. 

She was pale and thin from her constant nursing, 
but still there was a slight flush on her cheek, and 
a light in her eyes, that spoke rather of pleasurable 
than of painful anticipation. 

And was this description a true picture of Lucy's 
lot ? Lucy, whose affectionate letter, written to con- 
gratulate her on her child's birth, she had treated 
with indifference as an overture to reconciliation, 
simply because she was rich and because Mr. 
Bonham thought it wise for his wife to be friends 
with her wealthy cousin. From her own experi- 
ence of it, Hester so hated poverty that it was im- 
possible to her to imagine others could be happy 
unless they were rich ; now, as she read her aunt's 
minute description of this bright, loving, happy 
home, a keen feeling of jealousy rose in her heart. 

" She always was happier than I ; she had a 
kind mother, a good education, and all she wished 
for, and now she has a husband and children who 
love her; it is unjust she should have every 
blessing in the world." 



96 HESTER KIRTON. 

The last words calmed her. Her aunt's letter 
did not say that Lucy was rich in what the world 
calls blessings. She said the house was neat but 
very simply furnished, and that the chief orna- 
ments in the drawing-room were a few of Lucy's 
own sketches, some pretty books, and a profusion 
of flowers. Miss Hallam had taken delight in 
saying all this, as her niece's want of taste in 
arrangement and minor details had been a very 
sore point with her, knowing how Fred cared 
about such things. " People can not be really 
happy without money," argued Hester ; " it is all 
very well now, but when Lucy has six children 
instead of three, how are they to be clothed, and 
fed, and educated, if means are so scanty now ? " 
. So people are apt to argue who have little 
practical faith in God's goodness, and who cannot 
believe that to those who implicitly trust in his 
love, using, of course, to the full extent, every 
talent He has bestowed, the burden will never 
press too heavily . as their day, so will their 
strength be. 

But Hester saw only the black side. 

Poor Lucy would in time become a mere drudge. 
Even the affection her aunt described so minutely 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. 97 

would not compensate for such incessant daily toil. 
Hester's heart had hardened during this long 
abstinence, for, in resolving not to love her hus- 
band or believe in him again, she forgot that she 
deliberately nourished Revenge, and any one 
deadly sin is never satisfied to be shut up in the 
soul alone, but soon calls his fellows around him, 
and Self-Love first of all. 

But still she was not satisfied with her own 
argument. She took the letter up and read it 
again ; this time more carefully than ever, and 
when she came to the description of Lucy's smile 
when her husband entered, and the light that 
sparkled in her eyes . for Miss Hallam declared 
that she seemed quite another creature in his 
presence . (although, for her part, she thought he 
was too affectionate to be quite gentlemanlike,) 
Hester clasped her hands fervently together, and 
wished that she had not married a gentleman, or, 
at any rate, that her husband had loved her. 

" And did he not love her now ? " 

This was a question that had first forced itself 
upon her in the solitude of her child's sick room, 
dating from that night . burnt into her memory 
. when the fever reached its crisis, and when, 

VOL. III. 42 



98 HESTER KIBTON. 

returning from his lonely ramble on the heaih- 
land, Hallam's eyes had told his wife far more than 
her repelling manner had allowed him to speak 

She had seen little of him since then. The crisis 
favourably passed, the child's progress towards 
recovery had been singularly rapid, and his 
father had insisted on sleeping in his room, and 
spending a great part of each day with him. 
Hester was ordered complete rest, and as much 
air as possible . the confinement had tried her 
severely, and, although she would not own it, she 
felt weak and languid. 

She rode or drove the greater part of each day, 
and Mrs. Hallam generally acoompanied her, so 
that she rarely saw her husband alone. 

But if he did love her . what then? could she 
ever love or trust him again . the man who had 
taught her the sad reality of falsehood under the 
most sacred form of love? No. It was impos- 
sible. Hester had mot knowingly been acting a 
part all this time. She told her husband she 
despised him, and *he told herself so till she ber 
lieved it ; or, perhaps, it is more true to her nature 
to say, that she willed to despise him, and therefore 
she did so. She had accustomed herself ever since 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. 99 

that fatal revulsion of feeling, when scales seemed 
suddenly to have dropped from her eyes, to look 
upon him as a mere frivolous man of fashion, 
without any reading or mental resources in which 
she could sympathize ; his love for flowers was to 
her childish, as day by day she plunged deeper 
into abstruse and philosophical studies . all lighter 
pursuits became trivial and unworthy of any- 
thing so exalted as a cultivated Iranian intellect 
Intellect . that is to say, intellect in the shape of 
learning and acquirements . was the idol she 
worshipped even more than wealth. If her hus- 
band read anything it was only a novel, or some 
equally trifling book. 

Hester considered that there was far greater 
talent in laborious historical or biographical com- 
pilations, with, perhaps, scarce twenty pages of 
original composition, than in the most brilMant 
creations of genius. She had none of the Divine 
<35lft within her, and she could not understand its 
value, or distinguish between it and the pains- 
taking plodding of second or third rate talent, 
and wherever this gift, or the power of appre- 
ciating it, is entirely wanting, tiiere is sure to be a 
narrowness of mind and judgment, and harsh 



100 HESTER KIRTON. 

opinion of others. Those whose lively imagina- 
tion sharpens their sense of ridicule, may laugh 
at their neighbours, but they rarely judge their 
motives severely, or fancy they understand the 
workings of their brother's mind better than he 
does himself. 

Hester was surprised at herself to-day when 
the question of her husband's love had first 
presented itself. She had not believed in hi3 
previous steady quiet life, looking on it merely as 
the result of necessity, as, since his father's 
legacy to him had been realized, he could expect 
no further assistance till his mother died. She 
had still said to herself she did not believe in it 
She had grown used to her own solitary unloving 
existence, she hated change, and scenes, and ex- 
planations ; besides, it would be worse than ever 
if, after a reconciliation, she found herself, as she 
fully believed she should do, unable to respect 
him sufficiently to return his love. But this 
picture of Lucy and Jacob haunted her; why 
should they have a happiness superior to hers? 
surely, however weak he might be, Frederic . she 
never called him Fred now . was equal to Jacob 
Bonham, and surely she was superior to Lucy. 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. 101 

She stopped here suddenly. What part did Lucy 
seem to have in this happiness; there was no 
word in aunt Martha's letter of the young wife's 
talents, or learning, or prudence, or even house- 
wifely skill, although, perhaps, what was said in 
praise of the children's appearance might hint at 
that, and yet her aunt said distinctly that Hester 
would be glad to hear how happy Lucy made 
her husband, and what a pattern wife she was. 
How could aunt Martha know this ? And then 
came the description of the joy they seemed to 
feel in each other's presence. She wondered if 
Frederic felt happier in hers . was she glad if he 
came unexpectedly into her study? No; she 
was not, and her absent look and constrained 
manner always told him he was unwelcome. 

And yet, how or why she scarcely knew, 
ever since those lonely watches during Ralphie's 
illness, when the sick-room had been kept so 
darkened, that she could not plunge herself for 
resource against inward conviction into her 
favourite studies, her thoughts had dwelt much 
upon her husband, and she had awakened to the 
perception of what she might have known long 
before, had she not resolutely excluded him 



102 HESTER KIUTOX. 

from her thoughts as well as from her affections. 
that he was an entirely changed man. 

But the fearful doubt begot of her father's 
suspicious nature, which for awhile her new belief 
in human love had lulled asleep, rebuked her 
sharply for her weakness, and whispered to her 
softening heart that all this was unreal^ and that 
if, after having been once wilfully deceived, 
she should be so weak-minded as to trust her 
husband again, he would take advantage of it, 
to ruin the fortune which Mr. Goldsmith assured 
her, with care, she might yet bequeath to her 
child. 

Troubled with these conflicting thoughts, she 
could not settle to anything this morning; she 
felt angry with herself that the chatter of a 
foolish person^ like aunt Martha, should so dis- 
turb her. 

There was a tap at the door, for her study was 
not to be rashly invaded* and Parkins entered* 

She had grown into a comely^ stouts kindly- 
looking woman; probably country air and good 
health had aided in softening her temper. 

She was smiling now *as if she bore good 
news. 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. 103 

^If you please, ma'am, there's an old woman 
come from Steddmg; she says her business is only 
with you, and I was to say her name was Biz." 

To Parkins's surprise, the colour rose in her 
mistress's face, and then she turned so white that 
the woman thought she was ill, and advanced to- 
wards her. 

u No, I am not faint," said Hester, controlling 
herself with all the strength of her stubborn will. 
u I believe," she went on, " you were right, Parkins, 
in what you said this morning; I want change 
of air; the least thing startles me. Bring the 
old woman here, and bring her something to eat . 
yourself, mind." 

Parkins looked inquisitive, but she said nothing, 
and left the room. 

Hester sank back in her chair. 

What was all this ? was it her destiny forcing 
her onward along a new path she had never in- 
tended to tread? just as long-crushed-back feel- 
ings seemed striving to lift their bruised heads and 
put forth fresh shoots of hope and love, to have 
this witness f all her early days and feelings for 
her husband thrust upon her; for she knew how 
closely the old^woman had watched her in the first 



104 HESTER KIETON. 

days of her acquaintance with Kallam ; and in 
Lucy's absence at the time of her father's death, 
and of Hallam's frequent visits to Kirton's Farm, 
Biz had been her only confidant 

Before the estrangement between herself and 
her husband, when she still cherished the vain 
hope that Kirton's Farm would be their future 
home, she had often written to the old servant ; 
but when Lucy's silence had made her shrink from 
exposing her unhappiness to one who no longer 
cared for her, she had determined to efface as far as 
possible all former recollections from her mind, and 
contented herself with sending Biz her quarterly 
remittance with a mere formal paper, to which the 
old woman was to affix her mark. 

She could not imagine what had brought her to 
Uplands. 

When Parkins reappeared, before Hester spoke 
to her visitor, she desired that she might not be 
disturbed for the next three hours. even by Mr. 
Hallam. 

Biz, wonderfully smartened up externally since 
we saw her at Kirton's Farm, stood looking at her 
in open-mouthed surprise. 

"You hardly know me, I see," said Hester, 



BIZ AT INLANDS. 105 

smiling and holding out her hand; "but I don't 
find you much changed, Elizabeth." 

" Call me Biz, Muss Heaster, if it be yeself as 
is growed so fine and stately. Ere-a-mussy, the 
first look I ketched on ye, I thought 'twur the 
queen sheself a -looking so tall and so grand; 
and how do 'ee find yeself, muss, now ye've growed 
so great? It be a long bit since I seed ye. Ye 
looks a bit pale though. " 

Not a shade more of reverence than in the 
old kitchen at Kirton's Farm. Biz was hungry, 
and therefore querulous after her long journey, 
moreover, she considered that she ought to have 
been asked to Uplands long ago. 

" I am not quite so well as usual, and my little 
boy has just recovered from a serious illness. You 
shall see him presently." 

"Well, I be a bit curious to see he, sure 
enough ; but it bain't he as I be corned all this 
way to see ; it's your muster, Muss Heaster. Him 
and I wnr alius good friends, ye mind." 

The words grated. It was so long since she had 
deferred, even in thought, to her husband, that she 
coloured with anger at the old woman's words. 

" You had better have something to eat." 



106 HESTER KIRTON. 

But Biz went on. 

" 111 just tell 'ee a bit that's in my mind fust. 
There wur a meddlesome old body in Stedding 
last week, or I baint sure I 'ood a corned; but 
I says to her I wanted to see your muster, and 
she tells me I mustn't think o' such a thing as 
going to Uplands* and that it 'ood be resumpshus, 
she says." 

" Who did you say ? " asked Hester. It was 
a deep mortification to think that perhaps Biz 
had told the history of her first acquaintance 
with her husband to Martha Hallam . far worse 
that his family should know how she had loved 
him than that they should become acquainted 
with her early poverty and rough ways, although 
she also shrank from that as a sort of disgrace 
now. 

"Why, she said she wur yer muster's aunt, 
Muss Heaster. I was comin' along street, dnd 
who should I see but Madam Ainsworth, the 
parson's lady r and a tall sart a scrag of a may- 
pole wi' her* and she says, . Here's some one, 
Mrs. Black, as knows yer niece,' and the other 
tossed up her head, for all the world like a 
fidgety horse when the flies settle on him, and 



BiZ AT UPLANDS. 107 

says she> c l am the aunt of Mr. Hallam.' Ye'd 
ha' thought that she meant the Sultan o' Chinee 
or the Pope o' Borne to see the way she had. 
So I says, *Oti, fee you, ma'am? then it's like 
enough you can tell I where he bides just now.' 
' At Uplands, of course,' she says, and she looked 
as if she thought I'd no call to ask questions. 
But you know as well as I,. Muss Heaster, it 
bean't the cock as crows the loudest as has the 
longest spurs, or the best dung-hill to scratch at, 
so, says I, for I knew she was nou't but a stranger, 
so she'd no rights nor titles over I in Stedding, 
says I, c Is Muster Hallam to be found at Uplands 
easy like?' This seemed to set she over; she 
hustled and rustled sheself about like a peacock 
spreading out his tail i* the sun, and she says, 
* I'm sure I can't say, my good 'ooman ; it's no 
business o' yourn, nor mine neather, that I can 
see,' and off she went. Now, you see, Muss 
Heaster, as I said afore, I bean't coomed to see 
you^-ye've never asked I so to do," and the 
old ill-used look Hester so well remembered 
came back like a heavy cloud, "but I coomed 
to see that handsome-faced young gentleman as 
used always to have a kind word for I in them 



108 HESTER KIRTON. 

ould times at Kirton's Farm. I've got petticUer 
business to speak to he about." 

Hester smiled at Biz's story, but, oh, how her 
voice and words brought the old days back ! 

"Well, you shall see him presently." She 
wondered in her own mind what this business 
could be that had induced Biz to incur such a 
fatigue and expense. "Now, Biz, you must eat 
something." 

A hearty meal, and a glass of wine, did won- 
ders. Biz at last softened, and even said Hester 
had grown " a finer creetur " than she ever ex- 
pected. She fully confirmed Miss Hallam's account 
of Lucy's happiness. 

" Ere-a-mussy, Muss Heaster, . ye see, it'll 
alius be Muss Hester, I be too old to change 
ways. thay two be like a pair o' lovers, they 
be," said the old woman. "It's too sunshiny 
though to last, I say. I don't hold wi' a man 
being alius petted and humoured up in all his 
ways till he thinks hisself the cock o' the yard; 
not I: he'd maybe think twice as good of she 
if she wur harder to please." 

"But isn't he kind to her, then?" said Hester, 
with a sort of lingering hope that the bitter drop 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. 109 

night be the same in all married life, although 
lifferently developed. 

" Kind ! why didn't I tell 'ee thay wur a pair 
:>' lovers? What I means is, that husbands and 
strives should foller the reg'lar rule. Thay wur 
uever meant, at least none as I've seen, to live 
in peace and quietness. Your father and mother 
didn't, I can tell 'ee, Muss Heaster, and she was 
a good sort o' wife, and yet he was alius having 
words about suinmat or other. I wonder how 
it is wi' you and your muster?" she said, looking 
hard at her, as Hester's colour rose. "Ere-a- 
mussy ! how fond you used to be o' he, and how, 
when you 'spected he down, you used to walk 
to and fro, to and fro along the lane till he 
coomed in sight. I be bound now," she added, 
" you've tired on he a'ready, and it's a shame, 
muss, if so you be, for he's a real gentleman 
wi' his heart i' the right place. That sweet smile 
o' his'n did me alius good to see." 

And then, to Hester's great surprise, she told 
the purport of her visit In addition to t}ie 
annual sum of thirty pounds a year which she 
received from Hester, Mr. Ainsworth had lately 
called on her and paid her ten pounds, which he 



110 HESTER KIBTON. 

said she would receive half-yearly from Mr, 
Hallam during his lifetime. She was not to 
take any notice of this to her neighbours, as 
Mr. Hallam did not want a fuss made about it; 
but Biz could not write, and she thought the 
pretext of thanking Mr. Hallam for his kind- 
ness, and making sure it was to continue, would 
enable her to carry out the plan she had so long 
cherished of visiting Uplands. It had been a 
sore trial to her pride to be aljvays obliged 
to profess . when asked questions by fomer 
gossips . that she knew nothing about "Mnss 
Heaster" since her marriage. Her anger at 
Hester's long silence had greatly overcome ay 
affection she felt for her; but now that she saw 
how queen-like she looked, and what a grand 
place it was, it seemed to increase her own im- 
portance that she had once been Mrs. Hallsm's 
only servant 

Hester could not believe she heard aright 
After making Biz repeat her story word for 
word, she rang the bell impetuously ; she would 
not stop an instant for thought, she must see her 
husband at once* 

She was surprised to find how time had slipped 



BIZ AT UPLANDS. Ill 

since the old woman's arrival; even if she 
lid have borne the fatigue, Biz could not return 
Stedding till next morning. 
In answer to her mistress's inquiries, Parkins 
d that Mr. Crathie had driven over, and had 
ten Mr. Hallam away with him, and that he 
[d he should probably not return for a day or 
He had asked for Mrs. Hallam, but Parkins 
d told him she was not to be disturbed. 



112 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER IX. 



HOPE. 



Hesteb's love for her husband was not then so 
dead as she imagined; she stood almost over- 
powered at the keen disappointment of finding 
that she could not at once thank him for his 
thoughtful kindness to her old servant ; nothing 
he could have done would have touched her as 
this did. She was unable to detect any double 
motive in it, and her heart swelled with pride as 
she thought of the change that must have taken 
place in her husband. 

He must love her, or he would not have done 
this ; and if he did, ought she not to try to love 
him ? but even if she did, would he believe her 
now ? She had repelled him too often ; she could 
not humble herself to risk a like repulse. 



HOPE. 113 

Feeling, emotion, passion, all seemed set free 
and struggling together in her heart and brain. 

She scarcely listened to the old woman's de- 
lighted remarks on Ralphie when she took her to 
his nursery. 

"The young muster favours 'ee most, Muss 
Heaster ; he's yur eyes as like as like ; not 
but what his father's face 'ood ha' shown un- 
common well in a child, with his blue eyes and 
fresh cheeks. Is Muster Hallam as likely looking 
as he wur yon time he coomed to Kirton's Farm ? " 

How vividly the words brought him back 
before her; that evening when he had met her 
and Lucy in " the copse bit," when she had almost 
worshipped him and thought him made of different 
clay to any human being she had ever seen before 
. could such a feeling ever return? No ; it was 
but the illusion of extreme youth and ignorance, 
and she sighed deeply. 

" Ere-a-mussy, Muss Heaster! what can 'ee have 
to sigh for, I'd like to know ? ye as has got all 'ee 
wants without the asking, and '11 this fine place be 
the young muster's after you," she said, turning 
from the sleepy child, for he had just been put to 
bed as they entered, and looking out over the park. 

vol. in. 4i 



114 HESTEE KIRTON. 

"No," said Hester* slowly, as if struek by 
a sudden thought, u unless we purchase it; we 
only rent it now*" 

" Breharmuasy I more's the pity>" said Biz ; hot 
Hester made no answer. 

She took tha old woman back to her study, and 
went again and looked at Ralphie. He was in a 
sound healthy sleep already. 

She sent the nurse into the Best room, and sat 
down to think. 

Did she wish, or did she not wish for a recon- 
ciliation with her husband ? 

Yes, she did wish it In the first place it would 
be much better for Ralphie if his parents were 
of one mind. She did not expect* she dared not 
hope, they should ever be united in heart and affec- 
tions^ as Lucy and her husband were ; the time for 
that had gone by ; but she seemed suddenly to feel 
that she had nourished her resentment quite long 
enough, and that the time had come for showing her 
willingness to forget and forgive the past. She did 
not consider that she had anything to ask pardon 
for ; her only difficulty was, how the reconcilia- 
tion . she would not yet own to herself how she 
longed for it . was to be accomplished, without 



HOPE. 115 

an awkwardness which might make matters 
worse. 

But Biz's question about Uplands had fired 
a new train of thought, impulse rather, which she 
felt constrained to act upon. 

Why not purchase Uplands at once? . she 
knew^ how Fred longed for it . and present it to 
him as the first step towards a better life. 

It was rare for Hester to take a sudden resolve; 
but this evening she seemed strangely carried out 
of herselfi She looked at her boy, he seemed to 
smile in his sleep, as if approving her thought. 
She paused for some time longer, and then rang 
the nursery bell. 

^Parkins, let old Mrs. Black sleep in the next 
room, and tell Ffan^ise to be ready to start with 
me by the nine o'clock train to London to-morrow. 
Master Ralph seems so well that I think I can 
trust him to you, especially as Mrs. Hallam is 
here. I shall return in the evening, if possible ; if 
not, early next day." 

Parkins looked electrified; but she knew her 
lady too well by this time to remonstrate; she 
took her revenge by ridiculing the transports of 
the French maid, who, after several months' 

43. * 



116 HESTER KIRTON, 

confinement in what she called cette campagne 
ennuyeuse, rejoiced she was at last to accompany 
her mistress to London* 

Mrs. Hallam received Hester's announcement 
with quiet displeasure. She had been left to 
herself all day far more than she considered 
right Hester had just appeared for dinner-time, 
and had then returned to her room. 

" Surely, Hester, you will not go to London 
without consulting your husband." 

"I shall be home again before he is. I am 
going on business which cannot be delayed." 

st Did Frederic know you were going ? " 

"No." 

a I am really afraid he will think it very 
strange; however, I suppose you think you 
know best." 

" I am sure I do." Hester resolutely took 
up a book as if to forbid further discussion ; and 
her mother-in-law, feeling extremely ill-used and 
discontented, was afraid to urge her further. 

Early next morning the same carriage took 
her and old Biz to the station, as there was a 
train going to Stedding soon after the London 
train's departure. 



HOPE. 117 

Hester had almost resolved to send an affec- 
tionate message to Lucy ; but then she had sent 
none to hen Biz had not told any one where 
she was going, for fear of being stopped. She 
did not tell her young mistress this, now that 
she had been favourably received by her. 

If Hester had not been so pre-occupied, she 
might have wondered how Biz enjoyed the 
novel luxury of driving in a real carriage ; but 
whatever the old woman felt, she was not going 
to betray any surprise or admiration; to recur 
to bygones now would have lessened her own 
importance and Hester's. 

Only when they were parting, she said, . 

" Do ye ' reckon ever to see th'ould place 
again, Muss Heaster?" 

"I don't know . I can't tell," said Hester, 
for she felt that she was on the verge of an 
enterprise which might change all the tenor of 
her future ; " but, Biz, if I go near Stedding, I 
will manage to see you . now good-by'e. I'm 
very glad I have seen you. I will tell Mr. 
Hallam you came to thank him." 

Biz looked after her as the train glided out 
of sight. She admired her greatly, and could 



118 HESTER KIETON. 

hardly believe her the same being whom she used 
to scold so freely in former times, for tearing 
holes in her gingham frocks; but somehow the 
fractions spirit of the old woman, always 
seeking for invisible wounds and scratches, felt 
aggrieved by the irresistible awe she felt in 
Hester's presence. 

"She might ha' bid a body bide till she 
coomed back; maybe she wur feared I'd he 
telling o' the Farm ways and such like, but she 
might ha' knowed I better; there be plenty to 
let 'ee down a peg, without setting yer own hand 
to the work." 

As every station brought Hester nearer to 
London, she felt happier and lighter-hearted. 
A thrill of youthful impatience, long unknown, 
ran through her veins; her face had lost its 
habitually stern, self-<5ontrolled expression; she 
looked agitated, and yet more at peace with 
herself than she had done for some time past 
And sundry terrors, common to weak woman- 
kind, but utterly foreign to her masculine tem- 
perament, now, as she drew near her journey's 
end, flitted through her mind. Suppose Mr. 
Goldsmith should be away, and that she should 



HOPE, 119 

have to refcnrn to Uplands *with her purpose 
unfulfilled ; her determined will rose against such 
a delay to her impatience ; he must be summoned 
back, let him be where he might. Something told 
her that nothing less than her own personal in- 
fluence would decide him to so large a disbursement 
as the purchase-money of Uplands, .and yet, look- 
ing at it in every way, it seemed to Hester that it 
was the wisest course to pursue. With her present 
feelings towards her husband, her property would 
surely be as safe in his hands as in those of a 
lawyer ; and if she made Uplands his own, self- 
interest would urge him to improve the estate 
in every way. The next instant she blamed her- 
self for the half doubt the last suggestion implied ; 
and setting her foot firmly on the hound-like sus- 
picions which had been so used to fosterage, that 
they would scarcely be kept at a distance, she 
resolved to tru^t fully or not at dl 

Most young women would probably have shrunk 
with timidity at the noise said bustle of a great 
London station, where there was no one to meet 
them, or to care for them ; but Hester was fear- 
lessj and had unlimited corifidenoe in the power of 
money. She did not leave anytning to Frax^oise, 



120 HESTER KIRTON. 

but, beckoning a porter, and slipping something in 
bis hand, was soon installed in a cab with her, 
and on the way to the hotel they had stayed at, the 
last time they were in London. 

Here she deposited Franchise, and then drove 
on to Mr. Goldsmith's office. 

She was indignant with herself for being so 
uncollected and impatient ; but try as she would, 
she could not refrain from imagining her hus- 
band's surprise and pleasure, when she told him 
what she had done ; for she did not feel now as if 
she could wait as she had at first intended, till the 
title-deeds were engrossed. Lawyers were always 
so long and troublesome in all they had to do. 

It surprised her to hear that Mr. Goldsmith was 
at home and disengaged. Accustomed to antici- 
pate evil, it seemed as if all were going too 
smoothly for a good result to arise. 

She shrank from seeing him ; but for her un- 
bounded confidence in her father's discernment, 
and her distrust of her husband, she would 
long ago have wished her affairs freed from his 
control. 

She followed the clerk so closely that she 
entered as her name was announced. The lawyer 



HOPE. 121 

started rather than rose from his chair, his 
pale face turning yellow and then almost leaden 
from surprise at the sight of his visitor. He 
looked behind him rapidly, first over one shoulder, 
then over the other, and finally burst into one of 
his fits of silent laughter. 

"You must excuse me, my dear young lady, 
indeed, you must; but . bless my soul," and he 
surveyed her with evident admiration, " I didn't 
expect a visit from so charming a lady." . She 
looked impatient, and no wonder ; there are some 
men by whom it is not pleasant to women to 
be admired, although probably from long habit in 
the misuse of their eyes, they are all unconscious 
of giving offence, and the lawyer was one of these. 
. u I hope Mr, Hallam is well ; is he in town ? " 

" No, I came up alone, to see you on a business 
matter." 

"Ha, ha," he again laughed, for some time, 
taking refuge behind his pocket-handkerchief; 
" but why did you take the trouble, my dear lady ? 
had you sent me a line I would have run down to 
Uplands with all the pleasure in life." 

.. That would not have served my purpose ; I 
have private business with you, and I have no 



122 HESTER XIRTON. 

wish at present that Mr. Hallam should know 
anything about it" 

The lawyer's face lengthened, and his flaccid 
double-chin waggled mournfully as lie shook lis 
head. 

"Dear, dear, I regret extremely," h said, * I 

had hoped " and then he buried Ins fece in 

his handkerchief, managing, however, to watch 
Hester's face as he did so. 

She looked haughty and displeased. 

4S There is no cause for regret, Mr. Goldsmith; 
I simply wish to make my husband a pneseat, 
and don't want him to know it beforehand, that 
is all." 

Goldsmith's face twitched, and he again looked 
nervously over each shoulder, but he did not 
interrupt her ; he seemed afraid of making an- 
other false move. 

" We like Uplands so very snuch, and our 
friend Mr. Orathie, who constantly bears &om 
Sir Rupert Joy, says he still is willing to seB 
it ; therefore I shall be very glad if yon will at 
once communicate with his agent and purchase 
it for us, as our present term of it has nearly 
expired." 



HOPJL 123 

The lawyer's face had grown paler and paler 
as she proceeded, and he now looked almost 
ghastly. 

As a refuge from her inquiring glance, he 
buried his face this time completely in his hand- 
kerchief, and at last wiped his eyes solemnly, and 
cleared his throat in a husky manner. 

"How soon can it all be done, Mr. Gold- 
smith?" She was not pleased with his manner, 
but she imagined he was thinking her proposal 
over. "I wish to let nay husband know the 
purchase is in progress when I return." 

u Never, madam, if my advice is to be taken . 
never." ^Ee rose as he spoke, and struck the 
table with his hand emphatically. 

Hester thought him extremely absurd; she 
had expected some opposition, but this was too 
much; he had listened to her suggestions when 
she was younger and less experienced . he should 
not thwart her now ; if he thought to frighten her 
by a theatrical manner, he was mistaken. 

So with far more dignity than he had wer seen 
in her, she said, . 

"I did not take this journey to argue the 
matter, Mr. Goldsnyth, but only to ask you to 



124 HESTER KIRTON. 

make the purchase, and I wish you to he as 
speedy as may suit with your convenience." 

Goldsmith had watched her closely while she 
spoke, and there seemed to be a slightly vindic- 
tive expression in his eyes as her lips curled with 
her last words. 

But only for an instant, even if it had been in 
his face at all. The next moment he had clasped 
his hands entreatingly, and was standing before 
her. 

"My dear young lady . I may say, my dear 
child, for I have known you from your earliest 
years . if you are at present, so far as seeming 
goes, living peacefully and happily with your 
husband, spare yourself, spare him the misery, 
spare your infant child, the ruin the purchase of 
Uplands would entail." 

"I do not understand you, Mr. Goldsmith/ 
said Hester, now thoroughly angry, "nor what 
you mean by these allusions. If years ago it 
was my misfortune to be obliged to speak openly 
to you of my husband's errors, your own good 
feeling should, now that his life is entirely 
changed, keep you silent on what has gone 
before." 



HOPE. 125 

Mr. Goldsmith shook his head with the deepest 
commiseration, and almost wrung his hands still 
clasped together. 

.C Do not drive me to extremes," he said, at 
last. "For your dead father's sake, let this 
matter rest; your property is safe, at present, 
do not expose it to the risk of being gambled 
away. . There . there, I have said too much, but 
you cannot fail of understanding me now." 

Hester had turned deadly white as his meaning 
reached her. For an instant she felt as if sense 
and sight were both going, and she grasped 
eagerly at the table beside which she sate, for 
support ; but when Goldsmith advanced still closer 
with expressions of regret, the intense dislike she 
had felt for him ever since he told her the true 
story of her marriage, brought strength. He 
should not see that he had the power of giving 
pain, but in that moment how keenly she wished 
she had listened to her husband's request, that 
she would withdraw her confidence from Gold- 
smith. She had refused, partly from respect to 
her father's memory, and partly becausa, as she 
considered Frederic wrong and ill-judged in other 
things, he must be so in this* 



128 HESTER EIRTON. 

"Do you know what you are saying?" She 
sate stiffly upright in her chair, and spoke very* 
sternly. 

" Too well, too well, ray poor child ; but you 
are treating me as if I were an enemy, whereas 
God knows I am your best and only friend in 
this. I would saye you from ruin ; above all, I 
would save your innocent child from the conse- 
quences of that ruin which must be imminent, 
if you purchase Uplands." 

She looked at him as if she would find out 
truth, deeply as he might hide it from her; but 
now he did not flinch or change colour under 
the searching scrutiny. 

* Ton knew what you were saying, sir ; do you 
know what you are doing ? . Stop, I will tell you. 
You are trying to destroy a man's fair fame, his 
truth and his honesty, by which he has won 
back a wife's trust and esteem." Even now she 
would not say love, and Goldsmith noticed it 
"But you scarcely know me yet. Dare to utter 
anything against my husband which you cannot 
prove, and you shall be punished for calumny 
by the law of the land. Do not shelter yourself 
under the hope that I or my husband shall shrink 



HOPE. 127 

from any exposure,, however open ; he should not 
if he would." 

Que of her old: tempests of passion swayed 
Hester now. She had risen to her feet, and 
wiik flashing eyes, quivering nostrils, and flushed 
cheeks, looked as, Goldsmith had rarely seen a 
woman look before. But she did not frighten 
him; he seemed rather to think it a piece of 
consummate acting, far more pleasing than her 
calm,, scornful, suspicious mood. 

"'What a pity so fine a creature should be so 
thrown away/ 7 he said to himself. To Hester 
he made no immediate answer; he understood 
her quite well enough to be sure that, left to her- 
self* she would feel shame for such ungovernable 
passion. He walked up and down the office, with 
his eyes bent on the ground, and one hand grasping 
\&& chin. And when he turned to where she still 
stood ia profound silence now, he smiled kindly. 

" I am used to deal with human emotion, Mrs. 
Hallam, and I can quite understand yours ; it is 
justifiable and natural, and I should not have 
thought well of you, had you shown less. Your 
only error has been . and it is, of course, one on 
the right side . in allowing a fair seeming to 



128 HESTER KIRTON. 

blind you so completely to what has really been 
going on." She did not attempt to interrupt him 
now, and stood with her lips firmly pressed 
together, listening, but with downcast eyes, " Still 
not one word more shall pass my lips if you are 
disposed either to doubt me, or to wish matters to 
remain as they are." 

As we have seen, Hester's early education had 
not been likely to impress her with any of the 
sacred reverence which should fence in a husband 
from his wife's suspicions. They had gone to 
church, and there the religion of their marriage, 
and her regard for its sacramental virtue, had 
ended. Her respect for him at first had arisen 
from his outward superiority, and the halo with 
which young love always surrounds the object of 
its worship ; but when this golden mist faded, and 
revealed the flaws in the idol it had enshrouded, 
she thought herself permitted to judge her hus- 
band as she would have done any other offender. 
He had forfeited every right to her obedience, 
and although he had understood her quite well 
enough to refrain from asserting his authority, 
she would not have obeyed it, if he had. He was 
a man, and she a woman, and they had each a 



HOPE. 129 

right to govern themselves ; therefore, none of the 
scruples which might have troubled a dutiful wife 
who looked upon her husband as her lord, set by- 
God in authority over her, troubled Hester now ; 
only she paused a moment, with the caution 
habitual to her tf hen not over-excited, before she 
answered, . 

" If you can prove that my husband lives 
knowingly beyond his income, I will listen to 
you." 

"I can prove far more than this," said Gold- 
smith ; he seemed excited as he spoke, possibly 
from the doubt implied in her answer ; " do you 
remember the large amount you empowered me to 
make away with out of your capital, to settle his 
debts when you came of age." 

She bowed her head. 

"Nearly at the same time, as you doubtless 
remember, Mr. Hallam came into possession of 
his father's legacy, which, at your request, I also 
freed from the claims he had allowed to accumu- 
late ufon it; and a certain income has been also 
paid ever since to you each, separately, out of the 
residue of your shattered property . you best 
know how regular and correct those payments 

vol. in. 4A 



130 HESTER KIBTON. 

have been. judge, then, of my surprise and 
grief when your husband applied to me to pay 
gambling debts almost equalling those can- 
celled." 

He watched her eagerly as he spoke. 

Hester shuddered with doubt and fear, but her 
suspicious curiosity was now too fully roused to 
allow her to hesitate. She only sate down again as 
if to show she was a patient listener. 

" At first I thought of applying to you, 
that you might use your influence to save him, 
but then I could not tell how it. might be be- 
tween you ; you might be cognizant of all, and 
greatly resent my interference . and I lent the 
money." 

"Where is its acknowledgment?" said Hester, 
faintly. She felt so deadly sick and cold as the 
lawyer went on now in a quiet compassionating 
voice, that she feared each moment to lose con- 
sciousness. 

.t Patience, my dear child, I am coming to that. 
I advanced this one sum, and received your hus- 
band's receipt for it. To my great surprise, he 
called on me a short time ago . do you remember 
his coming to town, about the Ascot week, I 



HOPE. 131 

think?" She bowed her head. " He called then 
and repaid the money." 

" But he was not at Ascot ; he went up to see 
his another." 

"So he told me," said Goldsmith, gravely; 
"but, my dear young lady, your former experi- 
ence, when we went through that sad business 
together, might have convinced you that betting 
and gambling can go on anywhere. I have told 
you the plain facts, and leave you to judge ; but, 
perhaps," he added, suddenly, as a new idea 
seemed to strike him, "you know how he came 
by the money as well as I do." 

A tap at the door stopped her answer, and gave 
her time to think. Why should she take his word 
in this way, plausible as things might seem. 

A clerk entered, whom Mr. Goldsmith sent 
away after a few hurried words. 

"I know nothing," she said; "I had every 
reason to suppose my husband not in debt," and 
she thought of his present to Biz ; but now it 
seemed to take another shape; perhaps he had 
sent it as hush money to his conscience, for she 
had consented to remain with him as his wife 
solely on the agreement that he would give up all 

44.* 



132 HESTER KIRTON. 

gambling; "but, Mr. Goldsmith, you said you 
would give me proofs. I do not doubt your word, 
but I think I ought to have decided proof." 

He had watched her eagerly while she spoke, 
and his face turned a shade yellower as she said 
the last worcls. 

" You might trust your father's old friend, cer- 
tainly, without farther question ; but, as a man of 
business, I cannot blame you for not doing so. 
Worldly wisdom is a sign of early development 
of the reasoning powers in a woman, and circum- 
stanced as you are, and are likely to continue, 
you need it more than any one I know. For 
. proofs I can satisfy you doubly. First, do you 
remember Captain Fortescue? I think you saw 
him often when you were first married ? " . 

She merely bowed. Any allusion to that sad 
time made her anxious and doubtful ; besides, her 
interest was too breathless now to interrupt him. 

"Unfortunately, he is somewhere in France; 
but I daresay I could learn where, if you wished 
it. He will confirm, in every particular, what 
I have told you; for he knew everything, al- 
though he is bound, in honour, not to speak; he 
told me he dared not visit at Uplands, for he 



HOPE. 133 

feared your scrutiny." . Her heart sank now, 
despairingly. How many invitations Fortescue 
had refused. . " But, my dear Mrs. Hallam, I can 
offer you other proofs. I do not believe in your 
husband's Ascot success. I have discovered since 
that his repayment to me was simply a blind, 
because, I suppose, I remonstrated on his broken 
faith towards you, and led him to fear I might 
write to you on the subject ; he has put himself 
into the hands of one of the most notorious money- 
lenders in London, to whom he already owes large 
sums." 

" Tell me the man's name ; I will go there at 
once." 

" Stay a bit This man is a harpy, and claims 
usurious and unlawful interest ; if you mix your- 
self up in the matter, and let him see your deep 
interest, your property is as certainly ruined as if 
you purchased Uplands, which would soon be in 
his hands. Your only way to deal with a man of 
this kind is to show yourself indifferent, and to let 
him suppose there is nothing to be expected from 
you; in that case he will squeeze your husband 
as dry as he can, and then if he finds we are 
determined he will probably compromise. But 



134 * HESTER KIRTON. 

the question now is, how you will act with regard 
to Mr. HaUam." 

Hester started shuddering. She sate for a few 
moments still and silent. 

"I must have time to think, Mr. Goldsmith. 
What did you say was the name of the money- 
lender ?" 

He told her, and seeing her still lost in thought, 
added, as if stung by her want of confidence, . 

"If you can remain in town long enough, I 
could, no doubt, procure you your husband's sig- 
natures; but, of course, if suspicion is to be 
avoided, this cannot be done hastily. 

But Hester turned from the proposal. 

w I do not know why I should doubt you," she 
said, sadly; "but still, swear to me solemnly, 
Mr. Goldsmith, that you have told me the truth, 
and that your motive in doing so has been for my 
good, and I will rest satisfied." 

Outwardly she was calm, but she knew by that 
very stillness how much misery his next words 
might bring. 

She looked earnestly at him ; he trembled visibly, 
but it seemed to be with emotion, and stood silent 

Suddenly he caught her hand. 



HOPE. 135 

"Bless you, my dear child, for relieving an 
old man's heart ; you do not know, you cannot tell 
how cruel it is to be doubted when you have 
done all in your power to serve. If it be any 
comfort to you in your sorrow, most solemnly d 
I swear to all I have this day told you, and 
that it has been to spare you misery . and now," 
he said, in a less constrained voice, " be guided 
by me . do not settle these claims at once." 

"I have no intention of doing so," she said, 
dreamily ; " I am not likely to see much of Mr. 
Hallam for the future ; " and then she stood still, 
pressing her hands together as though she would 
break them ; presently she drew a deep breath. 

"I wish especially to know where Captain 
Fortescue is to be found. In the mean time 
I suppose I need scarcely ask you to maintain 
the strictest silence about what has come to my 
knowledge. I should not wish my visit here to 
transpire for at least a fortnight." 

" It shall never be mentioned, my dear lady, un- 
less you desire it ; as soon as I learn where Captain 
Fortescue is, I will forward his address to you." 

She rose slowly, pulled down her veil, and 
prepared to leave the office without speaking. 



]36 HESTER KIRTON. 

He held out his hand ; she allowed him to take 
hers for an instant, but it was lifeless in his grasp, 
and quickly withdrawn, and without another 
word, except to bid him tell the cab-driver to 
take her whence she came, they parted. 

Goldsmith stood looking after her, at first 
smiling . but only for an instant : then the per- 
plexed, troubled expression returned. 



137 



CHAPTER X, 

HESTER'S RESOLVE. 

It was pouring with rain that evening when 
Frederic Hallam returned to Uplands. He went 
straight to the nursery, where Ralphie gave him 
a far warmer greeting than usual : he had been 
so accustomed to his father's constant presence 
lately that he scarcely knew how to spare him. 

"Where's mamma, Ralphie?" He looked 
round, as if expecting to find Hester watching 
beside her boy. 

"Mamma all gone," said Ralphie, gravely; 
" Ralphie all alone." 

Hallam looked at Parkins for an explanation, 
she told him her mistress had gone to town 
on business, and would probably not return till 
the folio wing^day; she said nothing about the 
old woman . it might be some private business or 



138 HESTER KIRTON. 

charity of Mrs. Hallam's. Parkins knew better 
than any one that this young husband and wife 
had never been one in confidence or pursuits, and 
she thought it safest only to repeat what she had 
been told to say. 

Hallam felt chilled and pained. He had made 
up his mind during the drive home that his 
mother would soon leave them: he had heard 
her say she was going to Switzerland with the 
Fletchers early in the following week; he and 
Hester would be alone then, and that should be 
the beginning of their new life. 

He had not felt so happy for a long time. His 
heart beat like a lover's ; and husband though he 
was, some of a lover's uncertainty had lingered 
in it as he rode up the avenue, and springing 
from the saddle, entered through the stable-yard, 
impatient to seek Hester. 

Gone to London ! What could she have gone 
for? It was so extraordinary to leave home in 
his absence in this sudden way. 

He played with Ralphie for a few minutes, 
and then disregarding, for the first time, his earnest 
request to " stop a little longer," he wished him 
good-night, and went to the drawing-room. 



HESTER'S RESOLVE. 139 

. Mrs. Hallam lay gracefully on a sofa, with her 
handkerchief to her eyes. 

He went up to her, and asked \rhat was the 
matter. 

She wiped her eyes softly, and, raising herself 
a little, looked at him and shook her head. 

"My dear Fred, I am grieving for yon, not 
myself*" 

"Why, what's the matter now?" he said, 
laughing in his old, eheerful way; but he felt 
sure that something unpleasant was coming. 

His mother sate upright now, and looked at him 
with a sorrowful expression. 

"My dear Frederic, will you sit down and 
listen to me ? I have something very special 
to say." 

He sat down unwillingly. Ever since his 
marriage he detested these requests, which had 
hitherto resulted in complaints of Hester, and 
just now it struck him that, in his surprise and 
anxiety to learn particulars of his wife's journey, 
he had kept on his wet clothes . for he had ridden 
home through the rain . and was shivering. 

" Well," he said, before his mother could speak, 
" I am rather in a hurry; but how about Hester's 



140 HESTER KIUTON. 

journey . do you know anything about it ? Did 
she leave a message with you?" 

" There, that's exactly what I mean ; and then 
you ask, ' what's the matter?' It is enough to 
try any mother with heart or feeling, my poor 
boy, to see you set at nought in this way, and 
neglected before your own servants." 

Frederic Hallam bit his lips, and pulled his 
whiskers nervously. He did not think Hester 
had acted rightly, but then he greatly wished his 
mother would mind her own business. 

" Did Hester leave a message ? " he said, 
abruptly. 

"Oh, no; and when I remonstrated and said 
I did not think you would like it, she was so 
contemptuous and haughty, that really one would 
imagine she does not feel herself accountable to you 
or to any one for what she does. It is not right, 
indeed it is not, Frederic, for a handsome young 
woman to be going off to London, with only a 
maid servant, directly her husband's back is turned. 
If a woman once gets talked about, it's all over 
with her in country society, as you will find." 

"My dear mother, you are mixing things up 
together," he said, still trying to laugh it off; 



HESTER'S RESOLVE. 141 

"just now I thought you were anxious for my 
sake, and now it seems to be for Hester." 

He got up and walked to the window, as if 
to show he was tired of the subject. 

His mother's tears were really flowing now. 
Some women have an ever-present power of 
crying . and of crying prettily, too . without the 
ugly sobs, and swollen eyes, and mouth distortions 
which make a tearful woman detestable. She 
followed him to the window, and laid her hand on 
his shoulder. 

" My dear boy," she said, soothingly, "you can- 
not suppose I am blind. I love you far too dearly 
not to see that you- have given your affections to 
a woman who does not love you in return." . 

" Mother," he interrupted, hoarsely, " I cannot 
suffer this." 

But she would go on. In such a matter she 
was sure to triumph. 

" I will not dwell on this part of the subject, 
Frederic ; if she is so wilfully blind to her own 
happiness, it is not in my power to open her eyes ; 
but you have no right to suffer her to take your 
place, and to rule you completely." 

He did not answer her at once, he was so 



142 HESTER KIRTON. 

thoroughly vexed; and, although his mother's 
unkind neglect of Hester when they were in 
London had greatly weakened his love for her, 
still she was his mother, and had a right to his 
forbearance. 

"The old saying, f it is ill meddling betwixt 
husband and wife,' holds good still, I suppose," 
he said, "my dear mother." She had turned 
away as he spoke. "I love you too well to 
discuss this subject: we must agree to differ 
about it privately." 

" Then you really mean to let things remain as 
they are ? " 

" I really had rather not talk on the subject 
at all," he said, wearily, but still maintaining his 
self-commnd. 

" Very well ; then don't blame me or think me 
unkind if I say I would rather leave before 
Hester's return. I know that my staying or 
going is perfectly indifferent to her ; in fact, she 
thinks only of herself and " 

" Mother," said Hallam, with more indignation 
in his tone than his mother had heard for years; 
"you say that, when you saw her in Ralphie's 
illness " 



HESTER'S BESOLVE. 143 

"Ah me! I see I might as well talk to the 
wind." 

She was thoroughly put out ; good tempered 
as she usually was, she liked her dignity to 
be respected, and much as she worshipped her 
wealth, she disliked her daughter-in-law's supe- 
riority ; perhaps there is no offence so great in a 
silly woman's eyes as that of unmistakably superior 
talent in one whom, in some other ways, she con- 
siders scarcely her equal. Mrs. Hallam did not 
know before how great her dislike was. As she 
felt at present, she would gladly have separated 
Fred from his wife for ever ; and her sense of her 
own importance led her to think that he might in 
time be influenced by her marked disapprobation 
of the way in which things now existed. 

Her son only said, . 

"I should be very glad if the subject were 
ended," and then, scarcely pausing for a reply, he 
went to his dressing-room. 

But he did not change his damp clothes at once. 
His mother had told him unpleasant truths, but 
they had been truths for all that. 

Still, if his hopes were realized, all would be 
right; but he would not explain to his mother 



144 HESTER KIRTON. 

the reason of Hester's changed manner ; or of the 
consciousness of wrong-doing which caused him 
to bear it, however unwillingly. He had never 
confided the secret of his marriage to any one but 
Goldsmith and Fortescue, and it need never be 
known now. He smiled sadly to himself at his 
mother's urgency about Hester's want of love ; in 
former times, when she had planned many and 
many a match for him, love or mutual happiness 
had never been mentioned in her calculations. 

He was sorry she should leave Uplands with 
angry feelings ; but it was better she should go. 
Frederic Hallam had none of the misjudged 
notions of dove-tailing one person's disposition 
into another's, that make so much mischief in 
families; if people could not agree, he thought 
they were better apart, and he had quite given 
up the idea that Hester and his mother could 
ever sympathize. 

And in some ways it would be a relief to him 
now to be spared a witness of his meeting with 
his wife, for he was really angry with hen 
Hitherto, her contemptuous words hacKbeen 
uttered when they were alone; she had never 
publicly set him at naught; their habit of out- 



HESTER S RESOLVE. 145 

ward self-control, which had probably hindered 
their reconciliation, helped the fair seeming of 
their life; but this was a decided step taken 
without his sanction or approval. 

He thought deliberately over the events of 
yesterday. He remembered for the first time 
that as he went towards her room to bid Hester 
good-bye . for his intention was to sleep at Mr. 
Crathie's . (his wife would have deemed leave- 
taking very absurd and superfluous, if he had been 
only going away for a short time) . he met Parkins, 
who toJd him her mistress had asked not to be 
disturbed, even by him, for at least three hours. 

It had been so usual for Hester to shut herself 
up when engaged in deep study, and to be ex- 
ceedingly annoyed when disturbed, that although 
he felt disappointed, he had not been surprised ; 
but now it appeared to him that he had been 
wrong, and that he ought to have entered the 
study. What right had a wife to shut herself up 
from her husband ? His mother said truly, he had 
been too weak and yielding in all these things ; but, 
then, if Love returned, would they not right them- 
selves? Surely, then, Hester would seek him 
instead of shunning him. 

vol. in. 45 



146 HESTER KIRTOX. 

He walked across the gallery to the nursery, 
and called to Parkins. 

"When did you say your mistress would re- 
turn ? " he said, carelessly. 

" To-night, sir, or to-morrow morning." 

"She took some one with her besides Fran- 
coise ? " 

He asked it as a question, but Parkins under- 
stood him to be asserting his knowledge of Biz's 
presence. 

" Yes, sir, old Mrs. Black." 

Hallam turned round and looked hard at her. 

" Whom did you say ? " he said, closing the 
nursery door, as if unwilling that any one but 
himself should hear her answer. 

"Old Mrs. Black, sir." Parkins felt rather 
alarmed by his earnest manner. " An old per- 
son who came to see mistress yesterday morning, 
and slept here, and went away with her to-day." 

He only remembered the old servant under the 
name of Biz; he had quite forgotten her sur- 
name. 

" What sort of a looting person, Parkins? You 
did not mention her before." 

"Didn't I, sir? Well, perhaps not. I don't 



HESTER'S RESOLVE. 147 

know that any one but me hardly knew about 
her being here. I'm sure Mrs. Hallam didn't, 
for she had a bad headache, and didn't get up 
to breakfast, and I waited on her myself, for 
her maid has been away for a two days' holiday, 
and has only just come home." 

Hallam had time to recover himself during this 
speech, but Parkins, who seemed anxious to change 
the subject, suddenly exclaimed, . 

" Why, sir, you've never changed your things 
after all, and you're as white as death: shall I 
come and set light to the fire in your dressing- 
room?" 

"No; oh, no." He wished to be alone, and, 
spite of Parkins' repeated injunctions, for, like all 
the other servants, she dearly loved her master, 
he was some time yet before he took off his wet 
clothes. 

Who could this old woman be, to take Hester 
from her home in this sudden way ? He did not 
choose to ask any more questions ; he wished he 
had not seen Parkins at all. 

However, it was his mother's last evening : he 
must not let her spend it alone. 

Mrs. Hallam remarked how he slrivered, and 

45.* 



148 HESTER KIRTOX. 

complained of cold during the evening ; and when 
he bade her good-night, she told him his lips were 
burning . he said his head ached . and thinking 
that he probably took Hester's conduct more to 
heart than he chose to admit, she took no further 
notice. 

He accompanied Mrs. Hallam to the railway 
station early next morning, and then drove to see 
a farmer at some distance, whose stock Mr. Crathie 
had mentioned in terms of high praise the day 
before. The weather was cold and showery for 
the time of yepr; but he was restless, and felt 
that he must fill up the time with active occu- 
pation till his wife's return. It was luncheon time 
when he again reached Uplands. 

Hester returned home that morning. To 
Fran<joise's infinite disgust, she travelled by the 
very earliest train, and so only just missed her 
husband. 

It was an inexpressible relief to find him absent 
and Mrs. Hallam gone; during her homeward 
journey, and in the previous time after she left 
Mr. Goldsmith's office, she had tried to decide 
on some line of conduct, but nothing would 
take defined shape; all plans crumbled away 



i 



HESTER'S RESOLVE. 149 

directly she tried to reflect upon any one of 
them. 

The only idea that stood out from the shrouding 
blackness of her despair was that she must be 
freed from her husband's presence . she did not 
think of divorce or of any setttled separation ; all 
she wanted was to be free from daily companion- 
ship, nay, from the sight of one whom she despised, 
and yet whom she equally despised herself for not 
hating. 

She went mechanically to the nursery and kissed 
Ralphie; the child, spite of all her recent care, 
did not cling to her as he bad done to his father ; 
but Hester was too self-absorbed to notice this. 

After awhile she went down-stairs into her 
study. How hateful that room was to her now ; it 
seemed as if months had passed by since she had 
sate there, dreaming of a happy future with the 
man who now, to her proud sense of honour, had 
sinned beyond any possibility of forgiveness. It 
would have been impossible to Hester to break 
her plighted word ; therefore she had no mercy, 
no thought that a repenting sinner ought to be 
more dearly cherished than a just high-minded one 
who has never been in like manner tempted* 



150 HESTER KIR TON. 

Her eyes fell on a letter, evidently placed to 
attract her attention. Mrs. Hallarn had put it 
there on the previous day ; it had come enclosed to 
her in a letter from Martha Hallam, who had 
received it from Mrs. Bonham. 

Hester knew the handwriting ; it was from her 
aunt Wrenshaw, and its affectionate tone soothed 
her while she read. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw apologised for her long silence; 
she said that, not hearing from Hester, she had not 
liked to trouble her with letters, as the last two 
or three she had sent had remained unanswered. 
Hester had never sent to her since her estrange- 
ment from her husband ; she said she wrote now, 
because Lucy had heard from Miss Hallam that 
Hester had passed very near Arden, last autumn, 
when she was in France; perhaps if she had 
known that her uncle and aunt bad been living 
there for nearly three years, she would have paid 
them a visit: Mr. Wrenshaw hoped much that 
Hester and her husband would go and see them 
the next time they went to France ; they had a 
nice house, and would do all in their power to 
make them comfortable. 

There was a yearning motherly strain in the 



HESTER'S RESOLVE. 151 

expression of all this that made her long to 
be a child again, and to lay her head in aunt 
Wrenshaw's lap and tell her all her sorrow, as 
she had once done ; when as a little girl she was 
sent to school against her will ; the only time in 
her reserved life that she had really opened her 
heart to any one ; probably, although she did not 
know it, this was the link that bound her to her 
aunt Wrenshaw. 

As she sat thus thinking . she had done little 
else for the last day and night . the link grew 
stronger and stronger, and seemed to be drawing 
her with mighty, irresistible force to one who she 
felt loved her. 

"The only creature who ever did love me," 
she said mentally, and her lips quivered, while her 
heart felt heavy and swollen with the tears that 
would not come. 

But a defined purpose was shaping itself and 
she felt for the time relieved from the crushing 
pressure of her misery. 

Long before her husband returned, her resolu- 
tion was taken. 



152 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER XL 

HESTER LEAVES UPLANDS. 

"Who was this old woman who came here and 
went away with yon, and why did you go ? " 

Frederic Hallam said this as soon as luncheon 
was over, and the servants had withdrawn. 

His wife's constrained, severe greeting had 
irritated him almost beyond endurance, when he 
thought her so much to blame. 

" The old woman was my old servant, Eliza- 
beth Black ; she came here to thank you for your 
kindness to her ; but I would rather not say why 
I went away. Her visit was quite unconnected 
with my absence from home." 

"I really think, Hester," he said, his colour 
rising at her contemptuous tone, " that you should 
be more open with me. I don't acknowledge 
jour right to" do these eccentric things." 



HESTER LEAVES UPLANDS, 153 

"Very likely; but circumstanced as I am, I 
cannot move exactly in the beaten route that 
other women tread. But now I want to speak 
to you," she said, as if quite enough had passed 
on the subject. "I have a letter from my aunt 
Mrs. Wrenshaw, asking me to visit her at Arden 
where she is staying ; my health and spirits have 
been severely tried lately, and in every way I feel 
that I must have a decided change of scene. 
Have you any objection against my accepting this 
invitation ? " 

There was a pause before he answered. 

" Do you intend to travel alone ? " For there 
was a defiance in the tone of her request, that 
had awakened him to the fact that some strange 
change had again taken place in his wife. 

"With Franijoise," and she moved as if about 
to leave the room. 

"I repeat, Hester, that I greatly prefer you 
should not do these eccentric things. You set 
people wondering and talking more than you are 
aware of. It is neither right nor pleasant." 

" Very possibly," she answered, without looking 
at him, and his anger rose almost beyond control. 

" I wish, IJester, you would be less sententious. 



154= HESTER KIHTOX. 

If you would even fly in a passion, like any other 
woman, it would be better; then we could come 
to some sort of explanation ; but you are so cold- 
blooded, you are enough to provoke the quietest 
fellow going." 

She smiled scornfully. 

" I might remind you, that in former times you 
said it was unladylike to lose one's temper; but 
that would be idle now." 

Hallam started up with a violent effort at self- 
control. He restrained himself, although an 
irritation he could scarcely master, and which 
he had never before felt, was gaining hold of 
him. 

" You are ladylike enough for any one, as far 
as the world goes," he said, abruptly ; " but I wish 
you were more like a woman. What I mean is 
this : I wish . I ought to say I insist . that you 
should put off this journey for a month ; by that 
time Ralphie would be strong enough to travel, 
we could all go together, and all scandal would 
be avoided." 

"You have heard me say that I am above 
scandaL" Her voice still sounded hard and un- 
moved; his evident wish to accompany her had 



HESTER LEAVES UPLANDS. 155 

not touched her, it had only increased her anxiety 
to be free. 

" But you are not the only person to be con- 
sidered. Come, Hester, be reasonable." He 
walked up to her, and laid his hand on her arm. 
In that moment the remembrance of his vow 
made him determine that there should be at least 
an explanation between them; but his head 
throbbed and felt confused, he was no match for 
Hester just then. "I beg of you to put off this 
journey for a month. I . I don't want to be left 
alone." He said this without looking at her, as 
if the words had escaped. 

She laughed bitterly, and withdrew from his 
touch. 

" Say that it suits you we should travel to- 
gether. Do not invent any sentiment, it is a 
mockery now. I tell you, I am not well, and 
for many reasons I wish to be alone with aunt 
Wrenshaw. If you prevent me from leaving 
you at once, I feel that I shall be seriously 
ill. You know me too well to think me fanciful 
about my health. There are many things," she 
added, in a gentler tone, " which had better be 
explained between us; but . but " Her voice 



156 HESTER KIRTON. 

trembled slightly. " I think if we were apart for 
a while, and wrote fully to each other* it might 
be good for both." 

Her lip quivered as she spoke. 

"I think," he said, "that you are mistaken, 
and that a wife's place is beside her husband. 
Still, if you really feel that your health requires 
an immediate change, I will not oppose your 
wishes; only you must not travel alone with 
Fran^ise, but that can be arranged. I wish we 
might both leave Ralphie. I have been feeling 
lately, Hester," and spite of her determined 
coldness, he took her hand in his and pressed it 
fondly, "that a happier life is dawning for us, 
and I had hoped," he added proudly, as she with- 
drew her hand, " that you shared this wish." 

" Pray say no more," she said, in an abrupt 
harsh voice; "write what you will when I am 
gone ; if you urge me now you will make me say 
what can never be recalled. It is understood, 
then, that you consent to my leaving Uplands the 
day after to-morrow." 

She left the room without waiting for an 
answer. If Hallam had followed her then, he 
might have wondered still more at her conduct; 



HESTER LEAVES UPLANDS. 157 

but he would not have accused her of want of 
feeling, as he now did. 

Locking herself in her bed-chamber, she threw 
herself on her knees, and hiding her face on the 
coverlet, burst into passionate weeping. 

What was it ? Was she bewitched, or what evil 
influence was over her, that she should so long to 
believejher husband innocent ? She could not be 
so base so worthless as to love him spite of all. If 
Goldsmith had not made his revelation, how happy 
they might have been, for her husband's manner 
confirmed her belief that he was ready to ask her 
forgiveness, and tell her he had learned to love 
her. Still she never thought that he had anything 
to forgive, or that it was wonderful that his love 
had so patiently endured her coldness : self-blame, 
and self-distrust were feelings still unknown to 
Hester Hallam. Her own want of self-command 
surprised her; she had resolved that morning that 
although for the present she must be freed from 
her husband's presence, yet that she would not 
decide her ultimate fate until she had seen Captain 
Fortescue ; then if his account confirmed Gold- 
smith's; she scarcely knew how she should act. 
To leave Ralphie in his father's hands entirely, to 



158 HESTER KIRTON. 

be brought tip by a man devoid of truth and 
honour, would be impossible; yet, unless she 
returned to her husband, she saw no means of 
retaining any influence over the child ; and she 
shrank from this alternative with tears that flowed 
from the acknowledgment of her own weakness, 
more than for sorrow for him and his crime. Could 
she be, then, so infatuated as to shrink from the 
influence of this man, who had forfeited for the 
second time all claim to her good opinion ? No, it 
was impossible; she rose from her knees, and seated 
herself in a low chair beside the bed. Her tears, 
rare visitants, violent and stormy as they had been, 
had calmed her. She persuaded herself that she 
was not well ; that the shock of Goldsmith's reve- 
lation had unnerved her will, and clouded her 
judgment ; that away from Uplands she should 
see things more as they really were . now she 
must be vigilant against any explanation or recon- 
ciliation with her husband before she had seen 
Fortescue* 

The next day passed listlessly for both, each feel- 
ing that their estrangement had widened, Hester 
alone knowing why. Hallam was greatly depressed ; 
he feared that his petulant manner had increased 



i 



HESTER LEAVES UPLANDS. 159 

her dislike ; for there had been something in the 
way she had shrunk from his touch which 
deeply wounded him. As we know, it had pro- 
ceeded from a fear, an inward shrinking from 
what she had at this moment felt to be an irresis- 
tible influence; but she could not have sought 
out, if she had tried to do so, a more effectual 
barrier against her husband's affection. 

Once again, when next morning she bade fare- 
well to little Ralphie, her courage nearly failed her. 

" Mamma not go away again," he said, in his 
sweet plaintive voice ; '* mamma come back soon 
to Ralphie." 

But she heard her husband's step in the gallery, 
and resolutely forced back her tears : she so 
dreaded lest he should take advantage of any 
appearance of weakness* ' 

When they reached the hall . he had followed 
her silently down-stairs . he satdy. , 

"Hester, come ia here a moment," and led 
the way into the library. 

She could not refuse him then, for all the ser- 
vants were grouped round, ready to see her depart. 

"I am going with you to the station,; Hester," 
he said, very gravely ; " but it will be too late 



160 HESTER KIRTON. 

then. If you knew how ill I feel, I think yon 
would put off this journey even now." 

He looked earnestly at her. 

She was cold and impassive. She could not 
bear men to complain of illness, and she thought 
this might, after all, be but a subterfuge to pre- 
vent her going. 

He went on rapidly, his cheeks flushing while 
he spoke. 

" I am not able to say all I wish. I should, 
probably, only arouse your scorn and anger, and 
I wish to part kindly with you; but . Hester, 
if you would have stayed with me now, we might 
have gone on more happily afterwards." 

He did not take her hand, or throw his arm 
round her; but there was a manly earnestness 
of love in his face and voice, before which her 
pride melted. He had not asked her pardon, but 
yetibr the moment Love triumphed. 

She threw both arms round his neck, and 
kissed him as she had not done for years. 

" There may be happier times yet," she whis- 
pered. " I go in the hope of them . I cannot say 
more ; there, you must not come with me now ; " 
and, closing the door behind her, she. stepped into 



HESTER LEAVES UPLANDS. 161 

the carriage, where all was ready, and told Martin 
to drive offl 

Many times during the journey to the coast, 
she felt that she must return . must begin that 
new life that she yet believed poible; but as 
distance widened between her and Uplands, doubt 
revived. One by one, Goldsmith's accusations 
returned, and the earnestness with which they 
had been uttered. She wondered that she had 
gone back at all to Uplands: it would have 
spared both Fred and herself much misery if 
she had written to him from London, and gone 
straight to France to seek for Captain Fortescue. 
Then it occurred to her that her husband could 
probably have given her a clue by which to find 
him; but she had heard that Lady Helena and 
her husband had gone to live at Nardes some 
months previously . a fashionable French bathing- 
place not very far from Arden, although on a 
totally different line of route. 

They reached Arden without much delay or 
difficulty ; but when Hester inquired at the hotel 
where they stopped for Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw, 
she found that they had gone to Nardes for a 

vol. in. 46 



162 HESTEB K1RT0N. 

fortnight, and had only started the previous day. 
They seemed to be well known at the hotel, and 
the garqon said that, although there was no railway 
or diligence traffic between Arden and Nardes, 
there was the malle-poste. "Monsieur and 
Madame Raipshaw had so travelled ; there 
would be room for madame and her maid, if 
the other servant and some of the baggage could 
be disposed of. The malle-poste would be starting 
in an hour, but that would be too soon for 
madame; she would rest a day or two, so as 
not to be too much exhausted." 

But Hester was in no mood for delay or rest 
She was soon settling with Martin to travel back 
by diligence . there being a difficulty in finding 
other conveyance to the coast-town whence they 
had come . and to proceed by railway or in the 
best way he could thence to Nardes. 

The man hesitated. 

"Will you travel alone, ma r am? My master 
particularly said I was not to leave you without 
protection." 

Was it affection, she wondered, or a dread that 
she might be trying to escape from him, that had 
made Frederic so anxious* 



HESTER LEAVES UPLAKDS. 163 

"You see it cannot be helped, Martin; there 
is only room for two, and I could not trust 
Fran<joise as I can you. I shall find my uncle 
at Nardes, and shall be quite safe with him till 
you arrive." 

She had told her husband not to expect to hear 
from her for at least a week, and it did not occur 
to her that it was necessary to tell him at once of 
her change of route. 



46-2 



104 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER XII. 

WAITING AT THE GATE. 

Fbederic Hallam had told the truth when he 
said that he was ill, and before the day closed 
in . the long weary day that succeeded his 
wife's departure . ho began to feel that the shoot- 
ing pains in his limbs and a burning throbbing 
in his temples, and an indisposition to exertion, 
were symptoms of a more serious nature than 
he ever remembered before. For, although like 
many men of his bright complexion, delicate and 
unable to endure hardship, he had never had a 
serious illness. $ 

He would not send for the village doctor ; oh, 
no ! he was convinced that Ralphie would 
not have been so ill if he had been properly 
managed at first; if he did not feel better next 
day he should telegraph for Dr. 



WAITING AT THE GATE. 165 

In one way his illness spared him; his head 
was so confused that he had no power of con- 
centrated thought, and when at night he fell 
into broken fragments of slumber, he seemed 
to be always pursuing some idea that he could 
not clearly grasp, and yet which he felt himself 
bound to master. Whether it had been growing 
through the night, or whether it was a fresh 
vagary of his wearied brain, when he awoke 
in the morning, or rather aroused from the 
dreamy stupor in which the long night had been 
passed, it was with a fixed determination to 
revisit Kirton's Farm. 

He rang for his railway guide before he had 
finished dressing^ and found that, by starting very 
early, he could reach Driven in time to ride over 
to Kirton's Farm, and return to Uplands late in 
the evening. 

Probably through the haze of his fast clouding 
senses, there glimmered the suspicion that he was 
about to do something strange and unusual; for 
when Parkins brought Ralphie down to him at 
breakfast, he merely told her not to keep the 
child up to see him, as he should not be home till 
night. 



166 HESTEB KIRTON. 

Parkins was a cautious, quiet woman, too much 
bound bow to her employers to discuss their affairs 
with her fellow servants; hut she had Hot been 
blind or xmobserrant during the last few days, 
and had come to the conclusion that her master 
and mistress had quarrelled, and that Mrs. Hallam 
was not likely to return home in a hurry. Her 
master was her favourite, and was therefore, of 
course, the least to blame, and when she saw how 
pale and haggard he looked this morning, she felt 
very angry with her mistress. 

" You don't look at all well, sir," she said, with 
the familiarity nurses seem to consider their right 
when health is in question, and letting Ralphie 
stand on the tabic beside his .papa; "it's my 
opinion, sir, you took a heavy cold that day you 
forgot to change your things. It never does to 
sit in wet things. You ought to nurse yourself a 
bit, sir." 

* No, I don't feel well. A ride across country 
will do me good. You can leave Master Ralph, 
and tell them to bring my horse round ; I don't 
want Simon/' 

Parkins went away, shaking her head. She 
did not at all approve of the way things were 



WAITING AT THE GATE. 167 

going on at Uplands; first her mistress starting 
off all of a sudden to London, next to France; 
and then her master, evidently with an illness 
ovr him, setting off to ride about alone, no one 
knew where, for a whole day, and without so 
much as saying where he was going. 

She delivered her message, and then went back 
for the child. 

"You will come back to-night, sir," she said, 
looking hard at him. 

" I told you I should do so," 

And he spoke in such an abrupt decided way, 
that, just lifting Kalphie for a good-bye kiss, she 
went away without reply. 

He was certainly about to do something very 
unusual, and had Parkins known what he medi- 
tated, she would have given her opinion more 
decidedly, at the risk of making him very angry. 

I have before said that Frederic Hallam was 
accomplished in all manly sports and exercises; 
and yet, hitherto, he had never been reckless or 
careless of his health. Now he proposed, ill as he 
felt, to take a long fatiguing railway journey ; to 
allow himself a bare hour's interval, which he 
meant to employ in visiting Kirton's Farm, and 



168 HESTER KIRTON. 

then to take the same long journey home. He 
thought he would take his horse with him ; he 
should find him useful in riding round the farm. 

Some confused notion of old Biz and her 
journey to Uplands must have flitted through his 
thoughts, for when he reached the station he had 
persuaded himself that he should find the old 
servant at Kirton's Farm. 

Many times during that day did little Ralphie 
and his dog, who was with him more than ever 
since his recovery, go out along the avenue in 
hopes of meeting his father; and then, tired of 
waiting, sit down under the lofty chestnut trees to 
rest, patting his companion's head, and saying 
sadly in his sweet little voice, . 

" No use, Beewee, pap-pa all gone." 

Parkins, sitting at needlework under the shady 
trees, let him spend the whole afternoon thus ; but 
the little fellow's sadness made her at last feel 
that a change of ideas would be desirable, and, 
taking his hand, she prepared to return to the 
house. 

"Come along now, dear, we'll play on the 
grass a top with Beewee." 



WAITING AT THE GATE, 169 

But Ralphie would not leave the avenue, he 
shook his head* 

" Ralphie, stop, see when pap-pa comes," was 
all the answer he vouchsafed her, and calling to 
Beeweeto follow him, he ran towards the entrance 
gates. 

There the little creature stood resolutely till 
past his usual bedtime, shading his eyes with one 
tiny hand, and looking down the road before him ; 
with the other, he every now and then patted the 
great dog as he stood beside him, as if to encourage 
his patience ; and, although he took no notice of 
Parkins, he said softly and lovingly to his dumb 
friend, . 

st Not long now, Beewee. Pap-pa come soon." 

But morning came, and still his father had not 
come back to Ralphie. 



170 HESTER KIRTOX. 



CHAPTER XIIL 

AT KABDES. 

The malle-poste clattered over the round stones 
of Nardes, jumping Erancoise nearly into her 
mistress's lap, and stopped at last in the court-yard 
of a large comfortable-looking hotel. 

There were plenty of loungers about, who all 
turned to look at the beautiful^ well-dressed 
Englishwoman when she stepped from the vehicle. 
A buzz of curiosity followed her as she dis- 
appeared under the portico, for among the ways 
of killing time at Nardes, none is more in favour 
than that of discussing everybody's looks and 
dress, and understanding everybody's business 
better than he does himself. 

" Anglaise, pur sang" said one gentleman, whose 
small stature, fiercely twirled moustache, and 
stiff gait, seemed to announce his military pro- 



AT NABDES. 171 

fession, but who really was a clerk in the Douane 
of Nardes, and who, thus raised a step, and but a 
step above the shop-keepers, delighted in asserting 
his importance and individuality in the most ap- 
proved fashion of the day. It is plain that those 
old-fashioned doctrines about humility, and taking 
the lowest place, and talking as little as possible 
about oneself and one's belongings, were not 
intended for this superior and enlightened age. 
"Nous avons cJiange tout cela," both in England 
and France. Our donanier, Monsieur Simon, 
was a lady-killer, and he already began to cal- 
culate at which of the soirees to which he was 
admitted, he might possibly have the opportunity 
of fascinating the lovely Englishwoman. 

" Pas si mal" said another, the son of the chief 
banker of the town, who was coming from the 
hotel as Hester entered with another gentleman. 
"But why is it," he continued, u that these English- 
women never smile ? They think enough of them- 
selves, one may see that by their manner, and the 
way they claim, as an established right, place ana: 
dames; but for all that they do not make the most 
of themselves." 

Mcmsieur Adolphe L Bouchet had spent three 



172 HESTER KIRTON. 

weeks in London, and therefore was a great 
authority in such matters, although, perhaps, with 
the quick insight into character which both 
Frenchmen and Frenchwomen possess, three weeks 
will teach them more than three months in France 
would to one of our ordinary, dignified, self-con- 
scious countrymen. A Frenchman does not suppose 
that every one is looking at him, criticising his 
dress, his looks, and, above all, his accent. He is 
perfectly aware of his own importance ; but then 
it is, and has always been, such a recognised fact 
that it does not trouble him; he is more bent 
on making himself agreeable from a species of 
courteous vanity in which we are deficient ; and 
then he seeks, as the chief object of his existence, 
to amuse himself; and any one who does this 
sincerely, with no arrikre pemfo, is pretty certain 
to be amusing to others. And being free from 
himself, he has all his faculties under command 
to observe others. 

Monsieur Bouchet's companion, a country 
cousin from the interior, who had seen few 
English, had been struck dumb with the sight of 
Hester's beauty. 

ft Perhaps/' he said simply, in answer to his 



AT NARBES. 173 

cousin's assertion, "the lady would be too beautiful 
if she smiled: she would then be an angel." 

"Bah! Th&>phile. I am thinking now it is 
possible these Anglaises have ugly teeth, and 
that is why they cannot smile ; we will see at the 
theatre, for Levassor is here, you know, and she 
must laugh at Levassor." 

"And if she has ugly teeth, my friend," said 
his literal cousin, " she will laugh behind her fan." 

Hester, meanwhile, found herself again disap- 
pointed. An English lady and gentleman answer- 
ing her description, had applied for rooms on the 
previous day ; but Monsieur Montoreau, the host, 
with shoulders raised to his ears and uplifted hands, 
had been obliged, to his deep sorrow, to confess 
that there was no place to be had, and had sent 
them to the Hotel de TEurope, a little further 
down on the other side of the street. He wished 
madame to receive the assurance of his infinite 
regrets, and accompanied her to the entrance gate 
to point out the Hotel de PEurope. Her appear- 
ance caused a second lull in the talk among the 
group of idlers, not from any fear that she might 
overhear the admiration she had excited . a 
Frenchman seems to consider that an " Anglaise" 



174 HESTER KIRTON. 

can swallow any amount of flattery . bat in order 
that they might, by a closer scrutiny, satisfy them- 
selves that they had not overrated her attractions. 

Their fixed gaze annoyed her, and she raised 
her head proudly, and walked on with a quicker 
step. 

This excited Monsieur Simon's admiration be- 
yond control: he launched into an extasy of 
praise, and compared Hester to about half-a-dozen 
goddesses at once* 

u She is then more beautiful than your English 
Miladi," said a friend. 

"Je crois bien" repeated Monsieur Simon, 
several times, with scornful emphasis. "It is," 
he continued, striking his breast vehemently, *as 
Aurora beside the dark-browed night . as Venus 
beside Thalestris . ah, she is divine,, adorable." 
Then smiling, and checking himself as he saw 
smiles on the feces of some of his hearers, al- 
though they were too polite to laugh . te Messieurs/' 
he said, bowing with his hand on his heart, "I 
am poet, and the sight of such an irresistible 
beauty awakens the divine flame in my soul ; but 
it can only be expressed in verses*" 

And after he left them still the other idlers 



AT NARDES. 175 

did not laugh; they were mostly younger than 
Monsieur Simon, and admired him as a genius, 
who some day would prove a beacon to his 
native town, as it was known that all the stray 
pieces of rhyme which appeared in the Messager 
de Nardes, were the offspring of his inspiration, 
although there were some of the more educated 
townspeople, among others Monsieur Bouchet, 
who had not lingered among the idlers, but had 
walked on in advance of Hester and her maid ; 
for M. Adolphe had seen her look of annoyance, 
. who attributed these poems to a very diligent 
perusal of Andx6 Ch&iier, rather than to any 
inward promptings. 

M. Simon, the little douanier, watched Hester 
enter the Hotel de PEurope, and after satisfying 
himself that she had taken up her abode there, 
departed to his bureaus, resolved, if possible, to 
gain an introduction to her in the evening prome- 
nade on the Jtifa 

" For*" as he said to himself, a she is probably 
one of these English veums voyageuses, and no 
doubt knows everybody here." 

Hester had been shown into one of those 
comfortless* but gaudy -looking rooms, where 



176 HESTER KIRTOX. 

looking-glasses in elaborately gilt frames, with 
girandoles to match, and a couple of pendules on 
marble tables, seem to express, that looking at 
themselves, and keeping appointments, are the 
chief wants of travellers. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw came in soon, but she did not 
know her niece, and made her a formal courtesy. 
Hester had merely given her name to the waiter, 
and it had, of course, reached her aunt's ears under 
a new form. 

It was very painful just then not to be welcomed 
immediately . in her over-wrought state, Hester 
felt as though she must leave Nardes at once; 
but in a moment her aunt had recognized her, 
and then the warmth of her greeting atoned for 
her first stiflhess. 

"I do not think your uncle will know you, 
either. You are grown such a woman, Hester." 

Mr. Wrenshaw was away, she said. There 
was a review at St. Arlaix, about twenty miles 
off, and he had gone to see it, and would not 
return for a day or two. It was doubly delightful 
to see her dear niece, when she had been counting 
on two long dreary days without Mr. Wrenshaw. 

"We shall be two doleful widows together, 



i 



AT NARDES. 177 

Hester, dear, and must try to keep up each 
other's spirits." 

Not a word of reproach to her niece for her 
long silence. She only seemed overjoyed at 
Hester's affection in accepting her invitation so 
frankly, and, though she asked kindly after her 
husband, she made no comment on his absence. 

Hester felt like a hypocrite. In her rare in- 
tercourse with aunt Wrenshaw, she had always 
been drawn to frankness with her; and when 
as they were sitting together in the evening, 
Mrs. Wrenshaw said, . t( I am so glad, my dear 
child, for your sake, that we secured a sitting- 
room at once, for the place is filling fast. At 
first we thought only of having a comfortable 
bedroom, and using the table-<Fh6te ; but that 
would not have been nice for you . you are not 
used to makeshifts " . Hester said abruptly, . 

 Aunt, I must tell you the truth. I did not 
come here on purpose to see you. I had another 
reason." 

"What was that?" said her aunt, without 
raising her eyes from her knitting. 

But finding that no answer came she looked 
up. 

vol. in. 47 



178 HESTER DBTOX. 

Hester's head was bent, and her face hidden 
between her hands. 

In a moment the ball of cotton had Mien to 
the ground and the pins lay idlj in her lap, as her 
aunt laid one hand gently on Hester's shoulder. 

" What is it, my dear child," she said, in that 
soft, earnest tone, which only those who have 
been mothers can use, and which seems as power- 
ful in winning confidence, as it is gentle in its 
manner of doing so. 

The voice, the gentle touch, the Wing fearless- 
ness . for, after all, had not it been the secret 
curse of Hester's life, that all who knew her well, 
feared her . pierced straight through the barriers 
her pride, and coldness, and intense reserve had 
reared on all sides of her heart, till it seemed 
well nigh for ever fenced away from human 
sympathy. 

Closer the hands were pressed over the eyes, 
and tighter the slender fingers clasped the burning 
forehead, yet through these last outward helps, by 
which the proud woman sought to shield her 
sorrow from the gaze of others, nature forced its 
way in hot tears and bursting sobs, that seemed 
too strong for such a young tender frame to bear. 



AT NAfiDES. 179 

Mrs. Wrenshaw was distressed and surprised. 
She had been used to deal with gentle, loving 
natures, and this passionate vehemence frightened 
her. 

She took the wisest course she could ; she did 
not attempt to check or restrain what seemed 
to be the outpouring of an overburdened heart, 
but sate patiently beside her, waiting till the yery 
violence of the emotion should bring calm, 

But when Hester, having checked her sobs, 
rose to go away, her aunt stopped her. 

"Stay here, dearest," she said, "no one will 
disturb you, and you need not fear that I shall 
press you with questions, Hester, if I find that 
you are unwilling to tell what causes this un- 
happiness." 

Hester sate down again, but she did not speak 
for some time. Her tears ceased, but she kept her 
eyes fixed on the ground with a look of hopeless 
misery. 

"I will tell you all some day, aunt Hester," 
she said at last ; "now it seems hardly right to do 
so, until I have decided how to act" 

"I must ask you to tell me one thing," said 
her aunt, gravely, for something had ^rarei 

4u . i 



180 HESTER KIRTON. 

her in the tone of the last words. "You have 
not come here in opposition to your husband's 
wishes, or because there is any estrangement 
between you? Forgive me, my dear child, for 
asking this," for Hester had coloured deeply, 
" but it seemed strange to me to hear you speak 
of deciding on your own actions." 

"I came here with my husband's consent," 
said Hester; "but I scarcely understand why 
you should be surprised at my deciding for 
myself; surely every woman is the best judge of 
what her own conduct should be." 

Mrs. Wrenshaw looked at her in astonishment. 
Could this be the shrinking, timid girl whose 
silence she had always attributed to a conscious- 
ness of her own deficiencies? She had been 
much struck by the change in her niece's manner 
and appearance, but she had attributed the almost 
haughty self-possession with which she gave 
her orders, to the position she now occupied 
as mistress of Uplands; she had not suspected 
the inward self-will and self-reliance from which 
it sprang, nor the over-weening pride in her 
own intellect which made Hester unwilling to 
submit to any control save her own. 



AT NARDES. 181 

" No, I do not think so ; certainly, no married 
woman can judge so well for herself as her 
husband can." 

Hester's lips curled, and yet for the first time 
a faint doubt of herself arose. Could this be 
the aunt Wrenshaw whose talents and education 
had always seemed dream-like to her childhood? 
To be as clever, as well-read, as aunt Hester, 
had then seemed more than she dared to hope; 
and now, in her highly gifted superiority, she 
despised her for submitting her will to that of 
any one, or rather she tried to despise her. As 
she looked in her aunt's face, she felt that, though 
sorrow and suffering had left few traces of mere 
facial beauty, there was a cheerful peace, a look 
of deep happiness, she had never seen in her own. 

There is a singular fascination about some 
women . and it does not belong to any particular 
type among them ; it may be found among the shy 
and reserved, and also among franker, warmer 
natures, but I think it seldom exists except in a 
very loving temperament . I mean the power of 
winning the confidence of others, without any 
effort of their own, sometimes almost contrary to 
their wishes. Troubles, sorrows, heart-breaks, joys, 



182 HESTER KIRTON. 

are poured out to them, as if the speaker were 
irresistibly impelled like Columbus, in search of a 
new world, to seek the unseen unspoken sympathy, 
he feels sure of finding. 

It is dangerous to pass an evening alone with 
one of these persons; they are not inquisitive, 
because, as I have said, they rather shrink from, 
than seek, the responsibility which confidences 
entail; but, however reserved you may be, if you 
have any secret sorrow or trouble pressing you 
down, it will be strange if you do not strive, mud 
as it may be against your previous resolutions, to 
share the burden of it with your friend. 

Hester fell under this spell, although she rebelled 
against it. She did not answer at once, but sat think- 
ing, while Mrs. Wrenshaw resumed her knitting. 

.S I have dropped so many stitches," she said, 
u that I must go to the other window to get better 
light : I am knitting your uncle's winter socks; he 
likes my knitting so much better than those he 
buys." 

Hester sighed ; how many times her aunt had 
referred to him, while she, except in reply to 
Mrs. Wrerishaw's questions, had not mentioned her 
husband's name. 



AT NARDES. 183 

She began to see that they argued from different 
points, and consequently could not understand each 
other's feelings. 

u But, aunt," she said, after a long silence, 
u what you said just now would of course be true, 
where a husband'* judgment is equal or superior 
to a wife's, and also when he is able to appreciate 
the principles on which she acts." 

It had grown very dark where Hester was 
sitting; she could not see her aunt's pained, sur- 
prised lodL 

" I don't understand you," she said, quickly ; 
"husbands and wives ought to understand each 
other, it is their duty ; but, even supposing this is 
unhappily not so, it is always a wife's place to 
submit to her husband." 

" Supposing she does not consider him honour- 
able, is she to trust him? " said Hester, bitterly. 

And then she wished the words unsaid. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw did not answer; she longed 
most earnestly thai her husband were at home to 
counsel her in this matter; she was so accus- 
tomed to look to him for guidance, that she felt 
only half herself without ham. 

She was sure that there was something very 



184 HESTER KIRTON. 

wrong between Frederic Hallam and his wife, 
and yet she was so afraid of thinking matters 
worse than they really were, that she dared 
not hazard any conjectures; she had always 
imagined that Hester loved Mr. Hallam very 
dearly; had she not given up all her own 
family for him? Mr. Wrenshaw had said the 
young man had had a view to her money in 
marrying, and, considering how greatly she was in 
every way his inferior, it seemed probable; but 
still her aunt had fondly cherished the notion 
that any man must eventually learn to appreciate 
Hester for her own sake; and when she saw her 
refined, beautiful, all that she considered the wife 
of such a man as Frederic Hallam ought to be, 
she had not at first doubted that they were 
perfectly happy in each other's affection. 

Her niece's unwillingness to speak of her 
husband had roused an uneasiness which her sub- 
sequent words had deepened into fear. 

The street was very dark now, and the pas- 
sengers and traffic had gradually diminished to 
an almost unbroken stillness. 

.t I will ring for lights," she said rising, when 
they had sat some time longer in silence. 



AT NARDES. 185 

"No, don't have lights, aunt " . Hester spoke in 
the old hard, abrupt way. 

Her aunt started; she could scarcely see her in 
the darkness, and she could have fancied her again 
the uncultivated girl at Barton's Farm. 

"Then I will close this window," she said, "for 
it grows chilly to a rheumatic old woman like me. 
How heavy they are," she said as she pushed the 
cumbrous lattices together, "and what bolts ! except 
that they shut from inside, and have panes instead 
of lozenges, do you know, Hester, they remind me 
of the windows at Kirton's Farm." 

How glad Hester was that the room was in 
darkness then. 

" Have you seen the Farm lately ? Oh, no ; I 
forgot how long you have been in France. Aunt 
Hester," she said, suddenly ; " I want you to tell 
me if you have met with a Captain Fortescue here 
or at Arden?" 

The question surprised Mrs. Wrenshaw, it 
seemed so irrelevant 

"Not at Arden, and you forget I have only 
been here two days," she said. " I scarcely know 
any one yet ; but stay, there are some people of 
the name of Fortescue here ; I have heard their 



186 HESTER KIRTON. 

names mentioned ; in fact, I believe I am to meet 
them at a soiree to-morrow at Madame de Sakt 
Charles. You will hare to go with me, Hester; 
you will create quite a sensation." 

Hester smiled bitterly. 

"I did not count on going into society, aunt; 
but if there is a chance of seeing Captain 
Fortescue, I will gladly go. I thought you said 
you did not know any one.* 

" No, I don't ; but when we arrived hare we 
met a friend of a very old friend of ours, Mrs 
Snody, and she insists on my going to this party ; 
but I think it was a Lady Mary, or a Lady Some- 
thing Fortescue, that she said I was to meet 5 * 

Hester sickened with disgust and disappoint- 
ment Could she face that cruel woman who had 
poisoned all her happiness ? and yet where Lady 
Helena was, her brother-in-law might possibly be* 
or, at any rate, she might learn where be was, if 
she could make up her mind to speak to her. 

"It is, no doubt, Lady Helena Fortescue. a 
hateful woman whom I detest" 

" Oh, my dear child, you are not in earnest," 
for her manner was frightfully vehement 

"Yes, I am, aunt Hester. She did me, three 



AT NAKDES. 187 

years ago, the greatest wrong one woman can 
. do to another. You do not expect me to 
forget it" 

"But you surely have not cherished revenge all 
this time. Hester, my dear child, you are greatly 
changed." 

"Yes, I am changed; and it is chiefly Lady 
Helena's work. But I do not cherish revenge ; I 
have no wish or intention of punishing her for the 
injury she did me, therefore I have forgiven her; 
to forget is another matter, it is out of one's 
power. I shock you, I see, aunt Hester ; but you 
will not wonder some day. When I have seen 
Captain Fortescue, and I earnestly hope to do so 
to-morrow, you shall know everything ; that is, if 
it be as I fear." 

Mrs. .Wrenshaw felt anxious to know more ; but 
she saw that it would be unkind and useless to 
question Hester further. 



188 HESTER KIRTON. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 

Madame de St. Chables was a stout, well pre- 
served widow, nearer sixty than fifty years of age; 
but as her hair was scarcely grey, and arranged in 
becoming close curls, so as to conceal the wrinkles 
about her eyes, she might have passed for a good 
deal younger, had she been thinner ; directly she 
moved, her unwieldy size destroyed the youth- 
ful illusion of her face; and therefore Madame 
de Saint Charles moved as little as possible in 
society, and usually contrived to give her soirees 
when her young sister-in-law, Madame de Camille 
Laurent was paying her annual visit to Nardes. 

For Madame de Camille Laurent received 
charmingly, and she knew it ; and as her good 
middle-aged husband . she was very much attached 
to him, though he was twenty years her senior. 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 189 

was quite as fond of lively society as she was, 
they liked their sister's little receptions, and 
greatly enhanced the amusement to themselves 
by encouraging her to mix her guests more 
unscrupulously than she would otherwise have 
done. 

For it is to be understood that Madame de 
Saint Charles was noble, and that the prefix to 
the name of Camille Laurent was a genuine denot 
derived from the purchase of a small farm, digni- 
fied by the name proprMti, some twenty acres in 
extent, the possessor having been originally a 
grocer or butcher named Duval or Dupont, the 
Jones' and Browns of France ; such things, as 
we know, are common enough in France, where 
the native impudence of one man will ennoble 
a whole family. But this family was really 
old, and had distinguished itself formerly both 
in camp and council. Madame de Saint Charles's 
grandfather had been a peer of France ; but in 
the Revolution he had lost all, and although his 
daughter had swallowed her pride and married 
a wealthy avocat, when he died suddenly and 
left her a comparatively young widow, she found 
herself obliged to live with strict economy. 



190 HESTEB KIRTON. 

Her brother had been more fortunate, and had 
managed to keep his post through all the changes 
of dynasty. He was not rich ; but he and his 
wife lived very comfortably in Paris, where, in 
right of their position by birth, they enjoyed the 
best society of the capital, and were far more 
liberal in their notions than their provincial 
sister, who, besides the distinction of feeling 
herself "the best blood in the town" had also 
the exclusiveness generally to be found in those 
who have lost caste by a mesalliance, and who are 
for ever trying to scramble up into their own {dace 
again ; or at least to assert their high and mighty 
claims. 

It became, then, a sort of httte among those 
families in the town who were ambitious, to obtain 
invitations for these soirees. To Madame de Saint 
Charles' credit be it said, especially in an age 
like the present, she was no money worshipper, 
and, fond as she was of the English, she knew 
very well that the best appointed houses in the 
town, and the best hotel, were usually occupied 
by parvenu John Bull and his train of carriages 
and servants. Still she was sometimes deceived; 
people managed to get letters of introduction to 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 191 

her from others who ought never to have given 
them ; and Mrs. Snody was one of these. With 
the quick discrimination of a Frenchwoman, 
Madame de Saint Charles would have been de- 
lighted to receive Mr. and Mrs. Wrenshaw; but 
she looked inquiringly at her sister as Madame 
de Camille Laurent, gliding gracefully through 
the now assembling guests, came up to greet the 
new arrivals, headed by Mrs. Snody. 

Madame de Camille Laurent had been roused 
from a confidential talk with her dear friend of 
the moment, Lady Helena Fortescue, by a subdued 
murmur of admiration. 

She had hoped that Lady Helena would be 
the centre of attraction to all the young men, 
whom the fair deputy hostess was rather at a 
loss how to amuse . there were so many of them. 
In her kindness of heart, and her utter disre- 
gard of consequences . for, safe back in Paris (as 
she told her husband in the charming, sparkling 
way to which he never could refuse consent) 
what could it matter to them whom they had met 
at Nardes . she had invited several strangers. 
Men were scarce as yet, for the season was only 
beginning . I mean the sort of men Madame 



192 HESTER KIRTON. 

de Saint Charles thought worth inviting . but then, 
as Madame Camille justly argued, . 

" Crinoline and head-dresses will not do alone ; 
they must be talked to, or I shall lose my repu- 
tation for arranging the most charming soirks 
of Nardes." 

And, among others, she had been graciously 
pleased to persuade her husband to invite our 
little douanier, Monsieur Simon, not, as she ex- 
plained with much fluency to her scrupulous 
sister-in-law, in regard of his position . that was 
of course inadmissible . but as a poet and a man 
who might be an honour to his native town. 

"In Paris," she said, "we adore genius; it 
opens all doors, let the possessor be whom he 
will ; and believe me, no soiree ever goes so well, 
or with so much spirit, as where there are artists, 
authors, poets . people, in short, who, being con- 
stantly obliged to use their mental faculties, have 
them always bright and ready ; their tongues are 
not rusted, or their ideas either." 

This was a hyperbolic view of Monsieur Simon, 
but he had won Madame Camille's good graces 
the year before by jumping into the water, or 
rather stepping knee-deep into it, after her parasol, 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 193 

thereby damaging his new pantalon, and had 
afterwards written some verses on the occasion 
in the Messager; and although sweet Madame 
Camille was not vain . for a Frenchwoman . still 
she could not forget (who does really?) the self- 
devotion he had shown . and this was her reward.' 
M. Simon had been standing hitherto in mute 
but ecstatic contemplation of his dark-browed 
idol, Lady Helena, the tallest woman in the 
room, and of course in his estimation the best 
worth looking at, although most men would have 
preferred the slighter make, the charmingly 
piquant face, and graceful winning manner of 
Madame Camille herself. She was very pretty 
by candle-light. Her m&te complexion was then 
of a dazzling whiteness ; her luxuriant raven-black 
hair, brought round her head in a coronet without 
any other ornament, and her plain white dress 
of some soft gauzy fabric, showed to advantage 
her lovely neck and arms. She might have been 
called too pale ; but the brilliant red of her lips, 
which seemed ever smiling, relieved this, as did 
also the animated expression of her soft long 
brown eyes. 

Lady Helena had far more regular features . 
vox. ill. 4ft 



194 HESTER KIRTON. 

more tetnt, as Monsieur Simon would have said; 
her figure was more finely developed. She looked 
well in repose; but then she was overdressed, 
and her insufferably haughty expression was still 
more apparent beside the smiling, courteous 
Frenchwoman. 

She, too, had remarked the buzz and earnest 
gaze directed towards the post where Madame 
de Saint Charles sate enthroned; but she saw 
some ladies entering, and Lady Helena was not 
inquisitive. She had come alone that evening, 
her husband having also gone to the review at 
St Arlaix. Madame Camille had expressed her- 
self au ddsespoir. 

" I know you English always prefer to go out 
with your husbands," she said, just before she 
left her friend. 

And then Lady Helena felt it dull to be alone. 
She liked society, although in her now im- 
poverished circumstances she could no longer 
receive ; and she cared for admiration and adora- 
tion rather more than ever, because, perhaps, 
she felt her charms were waning, only she did 
not to-night approve of that little Monsieur 
Simon's presence. He had been hovering about 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHAKLES. 195 

her at a respectful distance ever since her arrival 
at Nardes some months ago, and so let him 
hover. She had no objection to that, bnt to 
find him in a salon, so near to her that every 
moment she expected he might speak, was more 
than she liked. 

She turned round to see if he were still 
there. 

He was gone, and not alone. The whole bevy 
of gentlemen, hitherto clustered like a group ot 
devotees on a ffete day before the image of the 
saint commemorated, had disappeared; there 
was no one near Lady Helena but old, toothless 
M. Dupuy, with his red ribbon and his snufl 
box, and she turned away much more quickly 
than usual, lest he should take her glance for an 
invitation to come and talk to her. 

Spite of her pride and indifference, she could 
not help looking across the room to discover the 
cause of this unusual desertion. 

She heard M. de Camille Laurent's singular 
voice . admixture of bass and falsetto . with which 
he seemed to be singing a perpetual duet with 
himself, speaking in his most adulatory tones to 
some one, near whom there were so many gentle- 

4$. i 



196 HESTER KIRTON. 

men that it was impossible to see through them. 
After a time, and when, in compliment to the 
English visitors, tea was brought, Madame de 
Camille again approached, bearing a cup of tea 
herself for this distinguished guest, loaded so 
plentifully with sugar that the topmost lump was 
visible, and which she assured her friend she had 
sucrie for her herself, as English people liked 
everything sweet 

"I never drink sugar, thank you," said Lady 
Helena, ungraciously. She had just through 
the group of men caught a vision of a very 
beautiful woman engaged in animated conver- 
sation with Madame de Saint Charles and her 
brother, and felt extremely annoyed and neglected. 
The face seemed familiar, but she could not recall 
where she had seen it, and yet that stately but 
graceful head, its fair, waving hair brushed back 
from the temples, those delicate features and 
singularly transparent skin, were sufficiently re- 
markable to be recollected. Lady Helena felt 
sure that her rival . for it was, doubtless, this 
new star that had robbed her of her admirers . 
was a distinguished person ; there was no possi- 
bility of mistaking her style . it was perfect. 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 197 

"Who is that," she asked Madame Camille, 
" talking to your husband ? " 

.S Ah, that lovely creature, she is English ; 
possibly among your friends, Mrs. . Mrs. . com- 
ment, I forget your English names, it is Hallam, 
I think, and the lady with her Mrs. Rainshaw." 

The name was said plainly enough for Lady 
Helena, and set every nerve quivering with jea- 
lous pride. This was Frederic Hallam's despised 
wife. 

.t Has she a husband here ? " she asked. 

We never really forgive those we have injured, 
or, if we think we do, we cannot endure that they 
should stand well in the opinion of others; she 
resolved to make sure of this stranger's identity 
with Frederic Hallam's low-born wife, and if it 
were as she thought, she would take very good 
care not to be troubled with Hester's presence 
in any salon she might honour with hers. 

cc I do not know ; I never saw her before. She 
came with a Madame Snody . tenez, la voUa." 

" Mrs. whom did you say ? " said Helena For- 
tescue, as a loud-talking, handsomely dressed 
woman emerged from the group, and advanced 
towards them. 



198 HESTER KIUTOX. 

" That is Mrs. Snody," said Madame Camille, 
with a doubtful smile. " I do not think she is 
of your society ; she is a cousin of some gentleman 
who has been a lord mayor, and my husband tells 
me your lord mayor is not a person of the highest 
distinction. 

* No, not exactly." Lady Helena felt too much 
annoyed to laugh, as M. de Camille Laurent, 
speaking excellent English, approached, beside 
the cousin of a former lord mayor. Mrs. Snody 
now seated herself beside her titled countrywoman 
in a flutter of delight at finding herself on equal 
terms with any one who was a lady in her own 
right 

But although he persevered at first in speaking 
English, Mrs. Snody was not going to lose such 
a chance of displaying her French ; perhaps she 
took thje opportunity of practising it in the hope 
of improvement With all his politeness, her 
accent was so detestable that Monsieur de Camille 
Laurent could scarcely understand her. 

She was trying to make him comprehend that 
ehe had a son with her, whom she had wished to 
bring to the party, but that "pauvre chose, il a le 
mal a les dents . pauvre chose, pauvre chose ! " she 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 199 

repeated, shaking her head, and appealing to 
Lady Helena, 

The polite Frenchman bowed and looked con- 
cerned and mystified ; but Lady Helena was less 
courteous. She saw that directly he went away 
Mrs. Snody would attack her. She looked at 
Monsieur de Camille Laurent, and laughed. 

" It is incroyable, is it not ? " she said. .S Will 
you gratify my curiosity, and take me to see 
those lovely flowers ? " and, rising, she swept past 
her countrywoman, and left her in disappointed 
solitude. 

Much as Hester had shrunk from the idea 
of meeting Lady Helena, when once she had 
determined to accompany her aunt, she had also 
resolved to address her enemy, should she have 
the opportunity of doing so ; and when she saw 
the moderate-sized room, and how people moved 
about, rarely remaining fixed long anywhere, she 
made up her mind that it would be easily 
effected. 

When she first entered, she had been amused 
with the sensation her appearance created, and 
then she had been interested in observing the 
tasteful decorations of the room. 



200 HESTER KIRTON. 

She found herself very soon acquainted with 
almost every one, and was just going to ask for 
Lady Helena when she saw her with M. de 
Camille Laurent. 

Helena Fortescue gave her a cold scrutinizing 
glance as she passed on towards some flowers, 
grouped in a species of alcove which formed one 
end of the room. 

To her surprise the glance was firmly returned, 
and Hester bowed . bowed, not in any timid or 
deprecating manner, but with a sweet con- 
descending smile. 

For the first time in her life the proud woman 
was surprised out of her self-possession; she 
returned a stately courtesy, and when M. de 
Camille Laurent asked if she had known that 
charming Mrs. Hallam in England, she hesitated 
in her reply, not from fear, but from an unusual 
prudence. 

He was evidently a great admirer of beauty, and 
yet he was not as devoted to her as she considered 
fitting ; he had married a young wife, and there- 
fore youthful charms would be sure to attract 
him, and he was just now the leading man at 
Nardes. On the whole, she thought it safer and 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 201 

wiser to tell Madame de Camille Laurent about 
Hester's antecedents, and not her husband. 

.e Yes ; she is a pretty creature, is she not? You 
French gentlemen are more easily pleased than 
our English ones. Mrs. Hallam would be more 
a lady's. beauty in England than a gentleman's." 

They had reached the end of the room, and, 
turning again, were just repassing Hester. 

Hester looked up at M. de Camille Laurent 
with ona of her rare but winning smiles. 

"Y have already forgotten," she said as he 
stood before her awaiting her commands, for he 
imagined, too, that Lady Helena would wish to 
speak to her countrywoman, " the name of this 
beautiful village you say we ought to visit? " 

" You must not stand," said Madame de Saint 
Charles, and she made room on her sofa for Helena 
Fortescue between herself and Hester. 

It was not a large party; although the room 
was small, it might have been much fuller, and 
nearly all the men were gathered round the new 
idol. At first Helena had thought that, by per- 
sisting in her isolation, she should mark her 
contempt for her rival, and finally triumph, but a 
nearer glimpse of Hester's beauty had stimulated 



202 HESTER EffiTON. 

her audacity, and she resolved to place herself 
near her, and carry away her admirers, as it were, 
by a coup-de-mcdn. 

Hester just waited for M. de Camilla's answer, 
although she did not take in the sense of what he 
said ; she was so afraid of missing the chance of 
speaking to Lady Helena. 

.S Is your brother here with you ? " she asked, 
in the easy, straight- forward manner in which we 
address an intimate, rather than a person seen only 
once, and then under painful circumstances. 

Helena Fortescue had expected resentment, fear, 
reproaches, anything rather than this lofty equality, 
asserted, too, in a tone as polished as her own ; 
perhaps for the first time she was dealing with a 
woman whose power of self-control was stronger 
than hers ; for there was no trace of resentment in 
Hester's countenance, and she felt her own brow 
was lowering ; if she could have believed such an 
impossibility, she would have said this country girl 
despised her. 

u You mean, I imagine," she said, haughtily. 
for at any rate the by-standers should not say that 
she treated Mrs. Hallam as an equal, . " Mr. For- 
fescue's brother : are you acquainted with him ? w 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST, CHARLES. 203 

Hester smiled 

<f You have a short memory, I see," she said . 
it was useless now to keep up an appearance of 
cordiality, although she was resolved to curh any 
outward betrayal of anger . .( Captain Percy For- 
tescue is my husband's most intimate friend." 

.. Ah, and you are, therefore, deeply interested 
in him." 

"No," she could not help colouring slightly, 
" but I should like to see him on business if he 
is in Nardes." 

There was a slight quiver in her voice, which 
betrayed that her indifference was assumed. 

A hundred conjectures flashed through the 
other's brain ; but whether any of them were true 
or false, she was resolved Percy Fortescue should 
not meet her; it would be an excellent way of 
ridding herself of this girl, whom she began to 
hate . to put her on a false scent. 

" He left Nardes, yesterday, with my husband, 
but he will not return here ; I think, he is bound 
for the Italian lakes, and will possibly go on to 
Sicily." Now Captain Fortescue had left it un- 
decided whether he should not return before he 
went on further. 



204 HESTER KIRTON. 

" Are you sure of this?" said Hester, fixing her 
eyes upon her; "perhaps you have his next 
address," she said, after a pause. 

"I regret to say I have not," said Helena, 
regaining her self-command as the other became 
earnest. s( It is a pity, is it not, when you are so 
deeply interested to know where he is to be 
found?" 

Her sneer brought a deep flush to Hester's face, 
but the next instant she raised her head loftily, . 

" I am deeply interested in knowing where 
Captain Fortescue is to be found ; you are quite 
right in thinking so, Lady Helena, and I shall 
really be thankful to you, if you can help me in 
my search." v 

There was no possibility of mistaking Hester as 
she said this. Her face spoke the most perfect 
purity and dignity, and Helena's eyes fell before 
its earnest glance. 

t. I have told you all I can about the matter," 
she said, sullenly, and turning completely away. 

The surrounding group, if they had not under- 
stood all that passed, had diligently studied the 
two faces, and had rightly read a noble indepen- 
dence in the one, and jealous dislike in the other; 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 205 

for, to do Helena justice, mere want of birth 
would not have provoked her insolence, unless 
her passions were previously roused. She could 
be a lady when she chose to show herself one. 

Monsieur Simon had got into conversation with 
Mrs. Wrenshaw, to whom he expressed his 
devoted admiration of her niece, so that she had 
scarcely remarked Hester's earnest conversation ; 
but now following the douanier's eyes, she saw the 
flush on Hester's cheek, and overheard her last 
words. 

As soon as she could, she spoke to her by way 
of interrupting what she felt sure was painful 
when she saw who was her companion, thereby 
crowning Monsieur Simon's happiness. Ah, yes, 
he was right, when those eyes smiled at him ; they 
were far sweeter than Lady Helena's ; they were 
not certainly so much "des yeux de keepsake? but 
he felt less afraid of them, and then he asked 
Hester if she meant to bathe. 

ts No," she had no present intention of doing so. 

He was disappointed to find some exaggerated 
compliments unappreciated. 

He could not have imagined that blue eyes could 
have looked so cold, so indifferent to his admiration. 



206 HESTER KIBTON. 

He had been about to compose a poem, com- 
paring Hester to a golden-haired Nereide, but then 
as he reflected, sea-nymphs might be justly 
supposed colder than more earthly beings, and her 
queen-like manner completed her charms in his 
eyes. Poor little fellow, he was hopelessly in 
love before the end of the evening, and so 
were all the rest, and yet Hester gave them no 
encouragement ; but the heart of a Frenchman is 
inflammable, only, like lucifer matches, the blaze 
is soon out and over. 

There was something about Hester that kept 
even Frenchmen at a distance, intense and un- 
bounded as is their admiration for beauty, and 
especially that of fair English women. They 
seemed to content themselves with mute worship, 
after having exchanged a few words with her. She 
received their homage with such perfect indiffer- 
ence . as so completely her due, that their vanity 
was not in any way flattered, and if she had not 
been so rarely beautiful, as Frenchmen they 
would probably have found this wearisome ; but 
then, although indifferent, she was not haughty; 
and Lady Helena, as each moment she per- 
ceived more fully the universal court paid to Mrs. 



A SOIREE AT MADAME ST. CHARLES. 207 

Hallam, looked darker and sterner than she had 
ever looked before, as the poetical Monsieur Simon 
whispered to one of his friends, . 

" Like Medea beside Creusa, or Queen Eleanor 
and Rosamond Clifford." 

Her ill-temper stiffened her face, and contracted 
her brows, and at last finding the position she 
occupied utterly intolerable, she left the party 
early, without having had the opportunity she 
desired of warning Madame de Camille Laurent 
against Hester. 

Her departure was a greaf relief to Mrs. Snody, 
who had felt thoroughly snubbed ever since 
Lady Helena laughed at her. 

She came across to the others now, she had 
been afraid to move before . what is it that 
makes some people stationary as statues, as if they 
had paid for one particular chair, and meant to 
keep it? . and addressed herself to Monsieur de 
Camille Laurent. 

" Aimes iu cette dame, monsieur ? " she said, in 
her loud voice. 

Every one looked round, and several of the 
gentlemen smiled ; but Mrs. Snody went on 

iinnmirmnclv . 



208 HESTER KIHTON. 

" Eat-ce qu'elle te plait, a toi? she said, with 
emphasis. 

It was impossible to help laughing. Even the 
ever polite M. de Camille Laurent smiled so 
apparently, that Mrs. Snody began to see she 
had made some serious mistake; and Hester, 
suffering for her countrywoman, whispered to 
her aunt that she thought they had better go, as 
it was getting late ; and under cover of the com- 
pliments and regrets this produced, Mrs. Snody's 
victim escaped her, while the rest of the party 
consoled themselves for the absence of the Eng- 
lish ladies, by an exciting game at lansquenet. 



209 



CHAPTER XV. 

A FISSURE IN THE ROCK. 

Well might Hester have seemed strangely cold 
and indifferent to the admiration she had excited. 
Only her pride sustained her from betraying 
utter despair, when she found that her hope of 
seeing Captain Fortescue was fruitless ; but there 
was an expression in his sister-in-law's eyes, before 
which she would sooner have died than evinced 
any emotion. She would heap scorn for scorn on 
the woman who had again insulted her. She was 
too overwrought and too free from vanity to 
value the triumph she had gained in robbing 
Helena Fortescue of her admirers, and driving 
her from the field ; but still it was gratifying to 
feel that they had met as equals, and that she had 
felt herself superior to her enemy. 

But as soon as she and her aunt were alone m 
vol. m. \*b 



210 HESTER KIRTON. 

their apartments, all this was forgotten. What 
should she do now ? She stood still in the middle 
of the salon clasping her hands together, and 
trying to think. But in the agony of fear lest 
Fortescue should escape her, thought swayed 
restlessly, it seemed impossible to reconcentrate 
it. Suddenly an idea started from the confusion 
as clearly as if a ray of light had fallen on it 
alone. Lady Helena knew where to find Cap- 
tain Fortescue, only she bad resolved to with- 
hold this knowledge . how was she to force it 
from her ? She saw that, with such a character, 
nothing but submission would avail, and could 
she bend to her ? Yes, she could do anything to 
know whether Fortescue had been aware of her 
husband's conduct. Could she persuade her aunt 
to go to Lady Helena (she knew very well she 
could not bring herself to do it) and get the in* 
formation she wanted. She would try. 

"You are wondering why I keep you here, 
aunt, when I said just now it was late. I must 
speak to you before we separate to-night You 
saw me with Lady Helena ? Well, she and I had 
best not meet again ; but I want you to go to her 
to-morrow." 



A FISSURE IN THE BOCK. 211 

"Me, my dear child?" exclaimed Mrs, Wren- 
sbaw ; " why, she does not know who I am." 

" You can say you come from me, to entreat 
her as a favour to give the address of her brother- 
in-law, Captain Fortescue." 

Mrs. Wrenshaw looked at Hester, surprised 
and anxious. 

" What is this gentleman to you, Hester, that 
you are so eager to see him," for she remembered 
her niece's previous question, 

"He was, and is, I believe, my husband's 
dearest friend." 

"And is it by Mr. Hallam's request you are 
seeking him now ? " 

" No, it is not," said Hester. She felt despe- 
rate, hemmed in by obstacles on all sides, which 
it seemed impossible to remove. 

"Hester," her aunt spoke very seriously, "I 
love you, and trust you ; but it seems to me that 
I cannot act blindfold in these matters. Sup- 
posing that T obtained this address for you, what 
would be your next step ? " 

" I shall immediately write to Captain Fortescue, 
or, if he is not very far off, get you to take me to 
him." 

49.2 



212 HESTER KIRTON. 

" I cannot promise to do it," said Mrs. Wren- 
shaw ; " at any rate, not till I have consulted your 
uncle." 

"Aunt Hester," she said, passionately, "you 
do not know what you are about, if you hinder 
me now. Uncle Wrenshaw's return may be 
delayed, and Captain Fortescue will have travel- 
led far away, where my letter may be weeks 
reaching him. Speed is my only hope . it is the 
only thing I ever asked of you, aunt Hester," she 
said, in a tone of vehement reproach ; " and, if 
you knew the consequences, you would not 
refuse." 

Mrs. Wrenshaw was strangely perplexed ; this 
mystery and agitation formed such a new feature 
in her tranquil life, that it seemed more like a 
dream than reality. She paused to think. 

"Then you refuse to help me," said Hester, 
passionately, although her will could not believe 
that it was at length resisted. 

" Listen to me and calm yourself, Hester," and 
Mrs. Wrenshaw sate down quietly. "Things 
cannot go on in this way any longer between us . 
it is impossible for me not to be aware that there 
is some serious cause of difference between your- 



A FISSURE IN THE ROCK. 213 

self and. your husband." Hester started. " At 
first I did not press for your confidence, because 
it seems to me that, in trials of this kind, any 
third person's interference is unwise, and often 
increases the trouble, whatever it may be; but 
now that you are about to consult a stranger, a 
young unmarried man, who has no claim on your 
confidence, I tell you plainly, that you would 
do more wisely to consult me, instead." 

"I cannot," she said, wildly and scarcely 
knowing what she said, for the strain upon her 
self-control during the evening had weakened 
its power, and she was swayed by the tempest 
of passion she had hitherto kept in check. 
"You cannot help me . you cannot prove my 
husband's innocence or guilt. Oh, God help 
me!" she exclaimed suddenly, as if maddened 
by her powerlessness to persuade. " Oh, aunt 
Hester . aunt Hester, I will tell you all, and then 
you must help me . you cannot refuse." 

She threw herself on the ground beside 
Mrs. Wrenshaw, and burying her face in her 
lap, poured out the whole story of her wrongs, 
beginning from her, marriage, and ending with 
Goldsmith's last accusation against her husband. 



214 HESTER KIRTON. 

Her aunt listened, sad and hushed* And she 
had thought that Hester, grown careless in her 
happiness, had given up her relations, because 
she was so attached to her husband that she 
cared for no love but his. 

She asked her gently now why this had 
been, 

"Do you think 1 could bear you should all 
know my misery? " was the proud answer. 

" But, if I understand you rightly, your hus- 
band's conduct has been kind and affectionate 
since you have lived at Uplands; has there 
been ncf decided reconciliation between you." 

"No, how could I trust him again, when he 
had deceived me so cruelly ?" 

"And yet from your own showing you were 
about to do so when you saw Mr. Goldsmith ? * 

a It was a folly, a weakness, and I have been 
justly punished for yielding to it. Why should 
I forgive a man who has poisoned all my belief 
in human nature, who has never even asked 
for forgiveness?^ 

w Hester ! it seems to me your husband 
has by his conduct been offering the truest 
atonement I fear, my \yoor child, that your 



A FISSURE IN THE ROCK. 215 

unforgivingness towards him equals his first 
error." 

"I might have expected this," said Hester, 
raising her head proudly ;  every one has always 
been against me ever since I was born; no one 
has ever loved me.." 

" Hester, dear, you are not yourself now, and 
that makes you unjust," said her aunt soothingly. 

" And," continued Hester, interrupting her, 
" does not this discovery show that I have been 
right, and that he is not to be trusted ? " . 

"Even if this is true," said Mrs. Wrenshaw 
firmly, " who shall say that your tenderness and the 
happiness of his home might not have preserved 
him from further temptation ? But, Hester, how 
did your husband reply to this charge ? " 

Hester looked up bewildered. 

*< I do not understand you," she said ; " my 
husband was not present when Mr. Goldsmith 
told me this." 

" Yes, but on your return home, when you 
repeated to him what you had heard." 

" I said nothing to him, aunt Hester ; I left him 
as soon as possible afterwards*" 

Mrs. Wrenshaw drew back with the sudden 



216 HESTER KIRTON. 

repugnance with which we shrink from seeing 
the faults of those we love. 

" Hester," she said, in a tone of such deep feel- 
ing that her niece raised herself in fully wakened 
attention, "do you know what you have done? 
You have not shown your husband as much mercy 
as is vouchsafed to the worst criminals ; in the pride 
of your own judgment, you have condemned him 
unheard." 

Hester started to her feet 

" You are mistaken," she said, harshly; " I have 
not entirely condemned him till I have seen 
Captain Fortescue." 

" Do not wait for that, my dear child, as you 
value your future happiness, but hasten back to 
Uplands ; if your uncle were here, he would tell 
you better than I can, that we do not trust in 
Mr. Goldsmith, or believe him to be quite an 
honest man. I have never seen your husband, 
but from what you tell me of his conduct during 
these three years, both to his wife and child, I am 
inclined to believe him the best man of the two* 
Does he go to church, Hester? " 

She blushed deeply, as her aunt's meaning 
Hashed upon her. 



A FISSURE IN THE ROCK. 217 

c ' I believe he thinks far more about all those 
things than I do, since he has seen so much of 
Mr. King, our clergyman ; but I don't see any use 
in it, if he has been deceiving me all the time." 

" Why will you not force yourself to believe 
him innocent? to me it seems plain that he is so; 
are you sure that you do not really think so too, 
only you cannot bear to own that your judgment 
has been in fault." Hester shook her head, but 
her aunt went on : "I think you are in too agitated 
a state to return at present ; if you will be guided 
by me, you will write at once to your husband, 
entreating him to pardon your harsh unforgive- 
ness and headstrong wilfulness. Oh, Hester if you 
love him still, and I think you do, can it be difficult 
to make any sacrifice to produce such happiness 
as you have never yet had in marriage ? I have 
known the truest happiness for twenty years, and 
I tell you that no other earthly joy can weigh 
against it for a moment. Think what you are risk- 
ing; how do you know that your husband will 
forgive you, if you insult him by persisting in this 
doubt of his honour ?" 

Frederic's parting look and words came back to 
Hester then. 



218 HESTER KIBTON. 

" He does not know I doubt his honour now, 
and he lores me too well not to forgive me," she 
said dreamily, and then stood thinking* 

Mrs. Wrenshaw did not interrupt her; she 
earnestly hoped that a stronger Power than hers 
would yet bring this unhappy, erring pair together 
again, although Hester's conduct was incompre- 
hensible to her gentler nature. 

After a while Hester said, . 

"I cannot go back till I have seen Captain 
Fortescue ; you do not understand how full of 
doubt I am. He was with my husband during that 
visit to London, and he could not have deceived 
him; besides Mr. Goldsmith said Captain Fortescue 
knew everything. If he will tell me this is false, 
then I will believe Mr. Goldsmith is a dishonest 
man, and he can no longer have the direction 
of our affairs. I will consent to wait tiU my 
uncle's return; I am sure he will see matters 
as I do. Do not feel angry with me, aunt 
Hester," she said, as her aunt turned sadly away. 
S( I love and respect you for all you have said, and 
I will think of it, but I have never found myself 
wrong yet. It is very hard to feel that I have 
been so now ; you must give me time." 



219 



CHAPTER XVI. 

A TRUE FRIEND. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw looked earnestly at Hester when 
she came in to breakfast next morning, but she saw- 
no signs of relenting in her contracted forehead 
and tightly-compressed lips* Poor girl ! her head 
ached, and her whole soul was weary ; she longed 
for peace, but she could not bring herself to see, 
among the tangled skein her own self-will and 
self-love had meshed around her, the only clue (for 
humility generally keeps itself like its emblem, 
the violet, out of sight) which would have led her 
safely to her rest 

All through the day she continued in a restless 
silence; the only allusion her aunt ventured to 
make to the subject was by asking her if she meant 
to write *to England. "Not yet," was the hard, 
repelling answer, and Mrs. Wrenshaw felt it was 



220 HESTER KIKTON. 

best to leave her to herself; she could pray 
for her, but she saw that further discussion 
would do more harm than good. 

She thought her husband might return on the 
evening of the next day, and she told Hester 
so on the following morning. 

" If he does not, aunt Hester, I can wait no 
longer," was her abrupt reply. 

There had been rain on the previous day, so 
that they had only taken a quiet evening walk up 
the street in which their hotel was situated, one 
end of which joined the jetie, and the other 
stretched away into the high road beyond the 
town. But this morning, as there was broad 
sunshine, and all looked bright and tempting 
out-of-doors, Mrs. Wrenshaw proposed a walk: 
she thought it would be of use to Hester, and 
divert her thoughts from their fixed melancholy. 
She had shopping to do, she said, and they would 
go to the market and buy some flowers before 
the sun faded them. 

They had bought several bouquets made of 
mignonette and clove carnations edged with a 
profusion of jasmine, arranged with exquisite 
taste, and they were just turning into the 



A TKUE FRIEND. 221 

milliner's, who, having heard already of the 
beautiful English lady, was delighted beyond 
measure to see her enter, when Hester, who was 
following her aunt, looked round, and started 
suddenly. 

Standing close beside her, in conversation with 
a French gentleman, was Captain Fortescue. 

Her aunt looked back for her, but Hester 
did not move or speak . she seemed spell-bound. 

His friend soon left him, and Fortescue was 
moving on quickly when she sprang forward, 
uttering his name. He turned, and mechanically 
raised his hat, but Jie evidently did not recognize 
her. 

"Will you wait for me one moment?" She 
spoke hurriedly, and then, joining her aunt, asked 
her if she would at once return to the hotel with 
her, or if she should take Captain Fortescue there 
alone. 

Poor Mrs. Wrenshaw was frightened. She 
had so hoped all would have gone on quietly 
until her husband's return, but when she looked 
in Hester's face, she saw there was no chance of 
delay. 

Excusing herself to the disappointed, expectant 



222 HESTER KIRTON. 

milliner, she followed Hester, who had already 
recalled herself to Fortescue's memory, and asked 
him to accompany her home. 

As he walked beside her, it seemed difficult for 
him to believe this beautiful, lofty-mannered 
woman the Hester Hallam of three years ago, 
and Fortescue felt that what had been to him 
her greatest charm. her fresh naivete . was gone 
for ever. 

She seemed to have grown ten years older, and, 
beautiful as she was, he thought the expression 
of her face too firm and decided for that of a 
woman. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw placed herself quietly near one 
of the windows as soon as they reached their 
room, and Hester, without pausing to seat herself 
or to request her companion to do so, asked hiin 
abruptly if he remembered meeting her husband 
in London in the previous year. 

"Perfectly," he said, rather surprised by her 
earnest manner; "and, Mrs. Hallam, I ought to 
compliment you on the change matrimony has 
wrought in him," and he smiled. 

She looked impatient. 

" Stop, Captain Fortescue ; this is no time for 



A TRUE FRIEND. 223 

idle compliments, I have been told that you 
knew that my husband was betting deeply at 
that time, and had much involved himself in 
debt." 

He started in such utter and unfeigned surprise 
that she could not doubt him. 

"Your husband . and, Mrs. Hallam, I would 
stake my life upon his honour . told me most 
positively when I last saw him that he had en- 
tirely ceased to bet since he had lived at Uplands, 
and owed no man anything. Stay," he added, as 
a dark suspicion wakened, "who told you this, 
Mrs. Hallam ? As my name was called in ques- 
tion, I have a right to ask." 

" Mr. Goldsmith told me," she said ; her heart 
was beating so wildly with hope and fear that she 
could scarcely stand without support, and she 
grasped at the back of a chair. 

Fortescue saw her agitation; he began to under- 
stand that something serious lay under this, to 
him, unnatural conduct on a wife's part 

"You had better sit down, Mrs, Hallam," he 
said, kindly ; he looked across at Mrs. Wrenshaw, 
who was sitting behind her niece, but so far off 
as not to mingle in the conversation ; but she only 



224 HESTER KIKTON. 

shook her head, as if to say she had better not 
speak. 

He seated himself, and Hester followed his 
example mechanically. 

" I expected that only such an unprincipled 
scoundrel could have coined such a falsehood. 
When I last saw my dear friend Hallam," he felt 
just then a douWe love for the man who seemed 
to be abandoned by his wife, and a wife who he 
felt sure was deeply loved by him ; " I also saw 
Goldsmith, and he tried to make me believe the 
story you have mentioned; but you will excuse me 
if I say I was not so ready of belief, and I was 
so convinced that Goldsmith meant ill to your 
husband, that before I left town I wrote to him 
at Uplands, urging him to be on his guard and 
to have the state of your property clearly ascer- 
tained ; I never received an answer to that letter. 
Perhaps, as I left town soon after, it may have 
gone astray ; I only hope mine fulfilled its 
purpose. 

Thought upon thought, memory on memory, 
crowded upon Hester till mental'sight was blinded, 
and all was darkness. She looked vacantly at 
Fortescue, and pressed one hand on her fore- 



A TRUE FRIEND. 225 

head, as if she were seeking the key of this 
mystery. 

" But what," she said at last, slowly and pain- 
fully, " could have been his motive in slandering 
my husband to me?" 

" I cannot tell, there might be many reasons ; it 
is better, far better, Mrs. Hallam, that I should 
not know any details. Of one thing I am quite 
sure: if, as from your manner I fear, there has 
been no explanation with Goldsmith, you ought 
not to lose a moment in returning to England, 
and urging your husband to take legal advice in 
the matter. I believe your presence is absolutely 
necessary for this, or I would offer to go to 
England for you, as I could travel faster than it 
would be well for you to do. I am not speaking 
without warrant ; since I left London things have 
come to my knowledge which make me sure that 
Goldsmith is not to be trusted, that he is a ruined 
man ; but," he added, suddenly looking full at her, 
" as I said before, I would venture my life on your 
husband's honour, and his love for his wife and 
child." 

The words were spoken involuntarily in strong 
indignation against the woman who could trust 

vol. m. 5^ 



226 HESTER KIRTON. 

the words of so false a man as he deemed the 
lawyer, uttered against her husband's good faith, 
for although he was of course ignorant of much, 
he could broadly guess the main facts of what had 
happened. 

"You wrote to warn my husband," she said, 
as if thinking aloud. "Yes . yes . your letter 
must have come when our child was ill, and, 
doubtless, Fred threw it aside, scarcely taking in 
its contents. I see you blame me, Captain For- 
tescue, and you are right; but it was hard to 
believe a man faithless in whom my father placed 
such implicit trust, and who had not deceived me." 

Crushed as she was by this revelation, it had 
not yet done its work ; like all unimpulsive natures, 
she was slow to receive impressions, and she could 
not bear to see her fault or to own it. 

Fortescue bit his lip ; it was not his place to 
teach her ; once before, when his feelings for her 
were far different, he had been sufficiently rebuked 
for interference ; besides, there was her aunt to 
advise her. So he suppressed the answer that he 
longed to make, for she roused his deep indignation. 

"If I can be of any service to you in the 
business, for Hallam's sake, do not scruple to 



A TRUE FRIEND. 227 

employ me ; " then, seeing that she took no notice, 
he went up to Mrs. Wrenshaw, and begged her 
earnestly to hasten her niece's departure, " She 
scarcely realises how much depends upon it," 
he whispered, and, taking a formal leave of 
Hester, he departed, wondering at the change 
years had brought, and thinking how utterly 
miserable such a woman must make both her 
husband and herself, spite of all attractions of 
mind and person, for he was not a man to have 
considered her fortune one of Hester's charms 
. if he had married, it would have been for 
happiness, not money. 

And then he thought of Fred, and wondered 
how much misery he had known ; and amid all 
came the bitter remembrance that he had been 
the means of introducing him to Goldsmith. 



50- 



228 HESTER KIBTON. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

ALMOST CONQUERED. 

Long after Fortescue had left her, Hester remained 
in the same dull stupor. Reaction had at length 
succeeded to the over-excitement and agitation of 
the past week, and she was for some time literally 
unable to rouse herself. 

At first Mrs. Wrenshaw left her quiet, but 
when for more than an hour she had remained 
in the same silent, motionless attitude, she bent 
over her and kissed her, stroking her fair hair 
with a soft, caressing movement 

But no tears came, she only sighed heavily. 

At last she took her aunt's hand, and kissed 
it quietly. 

" You see you were right, aunt Hester, and I 
was wrong. You, who are good and humble, 
cannot tell what it costs me to say this. For- 



ALMOST CONQUERED. 229 

give me! I would not listen to your gentle 
persuasion, and Captain Fortescue was deter- 
mined I should be convinced. He did not spare 
me. Well," she added, drawing herself up, "I 
suppose he had a right to be angry. He has 
been a true friend where I have been faithless ; 
believing when I doubted ; but then he has never 
been deceived. Now, do not look sad, aunt Hester ; 
I have learned a lesson to-day which will keep me 
from hard judgment and doubt for a long time 
to come. I will go back to Fred to-morrow." 

"God bless you, my dear, dear child," said 
her aunt, who could not control her tears, and 
she drew Hester fondly to her as she whispered, 
.. And you will ask his forgiveness, will you not, 
my darling, for all that has gone before ? " 

Hester drew back. 

"I will not deceive you," she said. "I have 
been wrong to take any one's word against my 
husband, without giving him the opportunity of 
justifying himself, and wrong to leave him as I 
did. I see this plainly now, and for this I will 
ask his pardon as earnestly as you could wish; 
but stay," she continued, as her aunt again kissed 
her, in the fulness of her joy, (( I know you will 



230 HESTER KIRTON. 

not be satisfied when you have heard all, and 
yet I cannot help it. I cannot see that I have 
been to blame in estranging myself from him 
for what he did at first. He had sinned deeply 
against me. You surely do not mean to say that 
I was to trust him at once, as if he had never 
proved himself unworthy " 

" There is no use in arguing about bygones, 
Hester ; but, as . you ask me, I think in your 
place, and loving your husband as you did once, 
I should have felt unable to give up the hope 
of winning his love by the fervour and strength 
of my own. It is very difficult for one person 
to judge for another in matters of feeling, as we 
are none of us alike; but I am quite sure you 
were wrong to nourish resentment during three 
years; and I think, dearest, you would lay a 
surer foundation for future happiness if you could 
think you needed pardon for it." 

.S I cannot be a hypocrite," said Hester, turning 
away. "I am willing to weigh that against his 
first deceit, and consider them both cancelled ; I 
cannot promise more, and, indeed, I think, aunt 
Hester, we may be happy now." 

" God grant you may," said her aunt. 



ALMOST CONQUERED. 231 

She turned round and kissed Mrs. Wrenshaw 
mare warmly than she had yet done, and her 
aunt tried to feel satisfied there was no use in 
urging her further. God's mercy alone, she 
thought, could fully soften that proud heart, and 
in His own good time, she doubted not that it 
would be done. In the meantime, her own heart 
overflowed with thankfulness at the prospect of 
this speedy reconciliation, for from what Hester 
had said of her husband, she believed he would 
be satisfied with any, the slightest, atonement 
on her part. It was strange to Mrs. Wrenshaw 
when she thought of her previous feelings to 
Frederic Hallam, and of the warm love which had 
suddenly sprung up in her heart towards him. 

It seemed to Hester now as if to-morrow 
morning would never come. She rang for Fran- 
$oise, and superintended her packing with an 
interest that surprised that active, but sorely dis- 
appointed damsel. She had a great mind to 
turn restive, and refuse to return to England, 
for she had already found several attractions at 
Nardes; but Hester was not a mistress to be 
trifled with: besides, she kept her so constantly 
employed, that she had no leisure even to specu- 



232 HESTER KIRTON. 

late on the advantages and disadvantages of such 
apian. 

Night came at last, and for the first time since 
she left England, Hester slept soundly ; and she 
looked so different next morning, that her aunt 
congratulated her on her improved appearance. 

She was in much brighter spirits too ; she had 
not written to Frederic, she said; she should tele- 
graph her arrival in England, and ask him to 
meet her at the Uplands station. At first she 
had thought of waiting for him in London, but 
as she could travel home by a shorter route across 
country, she thought it might be better for them 
before they took any decided steps with regard to 
Goldsmith to talk the matter over at Uplands ; for 
Mrs. Wrenshaw urged upon her the prudence of 
not giving the lawyer any warning of her purpose. 
She did not scruple to tell her niece, that after 
what Captain Fortescue had said, she believed 
Goldsmith had purposely alienated her from her 
husband, in order to possess undivided control 
over her money, and then Hester remembered it 
was not till after she had desired him to purchase 
Uplands, that he had warned her against Fred. 

Before she started, came a note from Captain 



ALMOST CONQUEKED. 233 

Fortescue, offering, if he could be of any service, 
to accompany her to England. 

Hester smiled faintly. 

" No," she said to Mrs. Wrenshaw, .t he means 
well, but I had rather be alone. I have much to 
think about before I reach Uplands. You will 
answer him for me, will you not, aunt Hester ? " 

One of Franchise's admirers was a waiter at the 
other hotel, and it soon transpired among the 
daily group of idlers, that the beautiful Mrs. 
Hallam was already leaving Nardes. Monsieur 
Simon was in gloomy despair. He had composed 
three verses of his poem, but the other two were 
restive : the ideas, as he told a friend whom he 
was holding tightly by the arm . were ready, 
were there, in fact, and he touched his forehead ; 
but they were too grand, too magnificent to be 
restricted in conventional metre. He thought he 
must write it all over again in Alexandrines, 
and then seeing his friend smile, he crossed his 
arms, gloomily over his chest, and drooped his 
chin upon them. 

" You do not sympathize . you are not poet." 

" No, Dieu merci, I am not ; but still I under- 
stand what you mean. Pluck up courage, man ; 



234 HESTER KIRTON. 

you're not the first by scores, who has found his 
brains larger than his tongue was glib. Let us 
go and see the last of your inspiration, it will 
freshen you up perhaps. " 

And when Hester stepped on to the deck of the 
steamer, she found herself surrounded by her 
admirers, who bowed an enthusiastic farewell. 

Mrs. Wrenshaw would gladly have accom- 
panied her to England, but she was now in hourly 
expectation of her husband's arrival, and she 
could not leave Nardes without his consent 

" Good-by'e, aunt," Hester said, as they finally 
parted, " you have been very good to me. Some- 
times I think that if I had the reverence for my 
husband that you have for yours, I might be a 
happier woman." 

The white cliffs were soon in sight, and Hester's 
heart beat quicker and quicker, with a joyful 
anticipation she no longer tried to subdue, though 
it seemed so strange* so new to her, to indulge 
any loving or tender feeling towards her husband, 
that she could scarcely persuade herself it was 
not wrong to yield freely to it Hitherto in 
returning home, it had been Ralphie whose greet- 



ALMOST CONQUERED. 235 

ing she had thought over and longed for : now the 
child's image was almost obliterated beside the 
father's, grown so suddenly dear ; for she hardly 
yet owned to herself that she had never ceased to 
love him, although she had tried her utmost to 
stifle her love. 

She telegraphed to Uplands before she took her 
seat in the train, which must now in a few hours 
bring her to her husband. She seemed to have 
lost all her usual calmness; she consulted her 
watch constantly, and even put it to her ear, 
thinking it must have stopped. 

Time went on slowly. 

But as she approached nearer and nearar home, 
this excited joy subsided . there was her promise 

to her aunt, and Hester's rigid honour felt that, 

. 

in all the rapture of meeting, it must be fulfilled. 

She must explain her conduct to her husband, 
and ask his forgiveness for it. She wished now 
she had written from Nardes . but she had told 
him he would not hear from her for a week, and 
she had waited in the hope of seeing Fortescue first 
. a letter would have spared so much. 

Supposing Fred had guessed, or in any way 
learned the truth, was deeply offended by her 



236 HESTER KIRTON. 

doubt, and received her coldly . sternly. She 
knew she could not humble herself before him. 
and then what would happen. She almost wished 
she could return again to Nardes, and write him 
all, and then his anger would be over before she 
reached Uplands. WJiat could have made her 
such a coward? And then she thought of the 
parting look her husband had given her. No, 
he would not be stern or cold, although he might 
be deeply grieved that she could have doubted 
him. She half wished she had not made the 
promise. She believed so strongly now in her 
husband's love for her, that she felt she need only 
throw herself into his arms, and tell him she loved 
him, and all would be well, and he would never 
require an explanation of her conduct. But she 
had given the promise, and she must keep it, and 
she should keep it fairly and honourably, without 
taking advantage of Fred's affection. She should 
tell him at once ; before she confessed her love for 
him, he should hear of her fault 

Even yet she thought more of herself than of 
her husband. 

The train sped on and on, and the movement 
renewed her excitement Sometimes she felt as 



ALMOST CONQUERED. 237 

if the engine must be stopped at once, that she 
might have leisure to dwell more calmly on what 
was before her ; and then again she wished that 
several hours' journey still lay between her and 
her home. If she had had more time, she should 
be better able to judge exactly what she ought 
to do. 

How apt we all are to forecast words and 
actions, never considering that all is over-ruled for 
us, and will be . if we only strive to act rightly, 
without in any way considering self. what is 
best 

At length, and as it seemed to Hester, sooner 
than she expected, and before her mind was 
decided, they reached the station. Her heart 
beat as if it would suffocate her. 

She put her head out of the carriage window, 
and looked eagerly round . there was no one on 
the platform but some porters and the station- 
master. He did not see Mrs. Hallam, but 
beckoned to Martin as he got out, and taking him 
into a corner, talked with him for a few minutes. 

Hester waited impatiently till Martin came up. 

" What is it ? " she said. " Where is your 
master?' 1 



238 HESTER KIRTON. 

" He has not come himself to meet you, ma'am/ 
said the man, touching his hat ; " but your pony- 
carriage is here already." 

She felt greatly disappointed. She had so 
counted on seeing Fred's face the moment she 
arrived; still it was a sort of reprieve, she had 
been thinking how painful it would be to delay 
her explanation, and yet she could not have made 
it till they reached home. 

Martin asked if he should drive her, thinking 
she might feel fatigued after the journey, but she 
took the reins, saying it would do her good, and 
was soon going fast towards Uplands. 

The road lay up the steep hill mentioned at the 
beginning of the volume ; but instead of taking 
the bridle path, indicated by the finger-post, the 
carriage-way took a more circuitous route; de- 
scending the hill, and making a long sweep to the 
left, it arrived in a broad level road at the great 
iron gates, at the foot of the chesnut avenue. 

This gate was visible a long way off, and the 
vane on the lodge glittered in the bright after- 
noon sun, making it look nearer than it was. 
The sunlight dazzled Hester's eyes as she 
strained them eagerly, in the hope that Fred 



ALMOST CONQUERED. 239 

might be waiting for her at the entrance gates. 
The weather had become much hotter since the 
morning: a few butterflies flew lazily from one 
sprig in the hedge to another; the gnats sing- 
ing their sharp chorus louder than ever, and 
the green and blue dragon-flies flying in their 
singular angles, and coming upon you when you 
least expected them, were the only things that 
seemed to rejoice in it. The ponies were almost 
maddened by the swarm of flies that followed their 
course. 

Hester screened her eyes once more with her 
hand, and this time she fancied die saw some one 
by the gate. 

The next moment she smiled at her own folly in 
imagining she could distinguish persons at such a 
distance. If there were any one, it was probably 
the lodge-keeper. Fred would be sure to bring 
Ralphie to meet her, and he would not bring him 
beyond the gates, out of the shadow of the trees 
in such blazing sunshine, for although the beams 
were becoming horizontal, the heat was still intense. 

The white dust . the soil was chalky in this 
road . flew up in clouds, as the ponies, feeling 
themselves in sight of home and of freedom from 



240 HESTER KIRTON. 

the stings of their tormenters, dashed along at 
fall speed . it was almost blinding, and made 
Hester long to be under the cool green shade of 
the avenue. 

She could not see clearly before her for the 
dust now ; but as she reached the gates she knew 
that there was some one awaiting her, besides the 
old lame man who kept the lodge. 

The gates were wide open, and the ponies went 
on rapidly, but Hester pulled them in and forced 
them to stop. Martin was at their heads in a 
moment. 

She looked round. 

Coming up to her from the gates were little 
Ralphie, Parkins, and Bevis. 

Where was her husband? 



241 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 

On the morning that Frederic Hallam left 
Uplands, with the intention of visiting Kirton's 
Farm, Jacob Bonham set out on his daily round 
in a more serious mood than usual. 

Ever since Miss Hallam's visit to Stedding, he 
had remarked a depression in Lucy's spirits; 
she was cheerful; it would have been difficult 
to Lucy to be otherwise, so blessed was she with 
the habit of only seeing the best side of things ; 
but the old dreaming fits, which the cares of house 
and children seemed to have almost banished, had 
returned, and with them a tendency to sigh, which 
Jacob thought marriage had cured. 

On the previous evening he had spoken to her 
about this, and she had confessed to him that, from 
little hints Miss Hallam had let fall, and much 

VOL. III. 5\ 



242 HESTER KIRTON. 

more from what old Biz had seen and commented 
on, that Hester was not happy with her husband. 

"And, Jacob," she said, bursting into tears, 
" you cannot think how I feel for her. She had 
such a joyless, dull childhood compared to mine ; 
she knew so little love ; and now, darling, to think 
of her being disappointed in the greatest of all 
human happiness, is more than I can bear." 

Jacob drew her closer to him and kissed her; 
they were walking up and down their garden in 
the cool, dim evening light. 

"But, dearest, I understand that your loving 
little heart . no, it's not a little heart, is it ? itk a 
large full heart, which would love all the world if 
the world would only let it . I can quite under- 
stand that this seems hard to you, as you always 
want every one to be as happy as yourself ; but, in 
the first place, you have no certain proof and, in 
the next, Hester has put it quite out of your 
power to help her." 

.t Ah, but that's it," said Lucy, looking up at 
her husband ; ts it seemed right to give way to 
you at the time, hard as it was ; but I have been 
thinking lately, that you were so angry with 
Hester for paining me, and seeming to throw back 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 243 

my affection, that perhaps you did not judge as 
calmly as you usually do about things, and that 
if I had persevered, we might still have been 
friends." 

"Then, really," said her husband, trying to 
smile her into a happier mood, "you have been 
grieving not to have been a more self-willed little 
woman than you usually are, which I consider a 
very superfluous regret; in fact, making a little 
goose of yourself." 

Lucy shook her head. 

"I can't laugh about it, dearest; it haunts me 
too much. You don't know Hester so well as I do. 
I was a dreamy, unrecollected, wild, unobservant 
creature, before I married you ; but I always had 
what you call my quick insight into people's cha- 
racters, and you can scarcely imagine the reserve 
of Hester's. I have thought a great deal over 
what old Biz has told me. She says Hester is 
haughty and proud and cold, and as grand as 
a queen ; and that she never smiles, and seemed 
to avoid speaking of Mr. Hallam or of old times ; 
and, joining this to Miss Hallam's unkind remarks, 
I feel sure my cousin is not happy. Now, Jacob, 
any woman must be happy whose husband loves 

51.2 



244 HESTER KIHTON. 

her, whatever else may happen; and I believe 
that, instead of her having shrunk from us all 
from pride . it has been . well, it has been pride- 
but of an excusable kind: she could not bear 
our pity." 

ts But still, Lucy, I cannot see how you could 
have prevented this." 

" Yes, Jacob ; if I had persuaded you to let me 
write to her again and again, I should have con- 
quered her at last. No one can resist affection 
when they are longing for it, and this must be the 
case with the poor thing, if matters are as I fear. 
If I had written, perhaps, she would have come to 
see us, or, at any rate, to Kirton's Farm ; and who 
knows, seeing us two so happy might have made 
Mr. Hallam fonder of her ; now, you needn't laugh 
and call me romantic ; you know I'm very often 
right about love." 

"You're almost always right, are you not?" 
said Jacob ; " and now it's supper-time." 

But, though through the rest of the evening he 
kept his wife's attention too cheerfully amused for 
her to return to the subject, it weighed upon him 
during his morning's drive. 

He could not feel comfortable or altogether 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. , 245 

blameless; lie remembered and understood more 
clearly now, his dread lest his wife should per- 
severe in her entreaties to keep up a friendship 
with her cousin ; he remembered also the secrecy- 
he had on that account maintained about Peter's 
hint of the Hallam's intention of living at Kirton's 
Farm . his fear that, if Lucy persevered in writing 
to Hester, it might become impossible to the latter 
to resist the longing to renew former ties and 
associations. Why had he feared and shrunk 
from all this? 

Jacob was a far better man now than when 
he married Lucy Wrenshaw; is not any man 
the better for living with and loving a good, 
religious woman ? He had learned to look 
into his own heart and to be humbled by the 
sight of the hitherto unknown Evil there ; he had 
learned to make the passive Good there act, 
and had, at any rate, made the active Evil pas- 
sive, if he had not yet succeeded in uprooting it 
- . a combat in which some of us may not triumph 
till the hour of death. 

He was not so likely to be blinded by self- 
deceit now as on the night when he had deter- 
mined to separate Lucy from her cousin ; and 



246 HESTER KCRTON. 

a quick flush of shame burned on his cheek, as 
his then unworthy motives . started into sight 
Was it too late to make atonement . too late 
to see if his sweet, loving wife might not be 
of use to Hester? He feared that if she wrote 
to her cousin now, it might seem as if she were 
courting her because she was rich, and it was 
hard for independent Jacob, who had never 
owed anything in his life to any man, to make 
up his mind to this. 

But soon his conscience reminded him that he 
had just now wished the past undone ; there could 
be no atonement without a sacrifice, and it would 
be better to bear even this stigma than not to 
make one effort towards reconciliation, Lucy had 
written once since to congratulate her cousin on 
Ralphie's birth ; but the letter had been altered at 
his instigation into a formal, lifeless epistle, little 
likely to win Hester. 

He roused himself, and found his horse had 
sunk into a dull, leisurely trot, very unlike his 
usual pace, for Jacob had rarely driven carelessly 
since his memorable upset in "the Copse Bit." 
He thought of it now as he caught himself 
"mooning," with the reins in his hands, and 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DKIVEN STATION. 247 

wondered what Lucy would say when she heard 
of it 

"And I have a stiff day's work before me, 
too," said the doctor ; " no time for loitering." 

He reached the common he was bound for, 
and, giving his horse to a ragged boy to hold, 
made his way to a group of squalid-looking huts 
inhabited by turf-cutters. 

There were scores of children here, all suffering 
from that scourge of infancy . whooping-cough . 
which rarely leaves the healthiest child as it found 
him, and lays the seeds of disease and death in so 
many where it does not itself destroy. 

It must have required a large stock of patience 
to listen to the complaints of these ignorant 
mothers, who were all far more ready to accuse 
the doctor for the slow progress towards recovery 
than to thank him for any alleviation his skill had 
procured their suffering little ones; and also it 
required considerable forbearance to find that his 
best remedies had in many cases been neglected 
and set aside for the nostrums of some old crone, 
who passed for a st wise woman " in the locality. 

But Jacob was used to this, and, though he 
could speak sternly where he saw neglect, or 



248 HESTEK K1KT0N. 

anything decidedly injurious to the patients, he 
generally had a kind word and a cheerful smile 
for all. 

He had settled with Lucy to alter their dinner- 
hour and wait till six, as there was death in 
the house where he usually dined when on these 
long excursions, and he naturally avoided going 
there, so that hy the time he reached Driven 
Station on his way home, he was tired out, and 
exhausted. 

There was a man waiting at the corner where 
the road branched off to the station ; he touched 
his hat, and Jacob saw that it was Peter Stasson. 

"What is it, Peter?" he said, checking his 
horse; " nothing the matter at the Farm, is 
there?" 

He earnestly hoped there was not, for he was 
far too tired and hungry to wish to return upon 
his road. 

"Nothing at the Farm, doctor," said Peter, 
looking very serious; "but you be wanted up 
yon', bad enough," he jerked his thumb over his 
shoulder towards the station. 

The man's manner puzzled Bonham, there was 
a sort of mystery about it. 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 249 

He drove up the little ascent, and then waited 
till Peter came to hold the horse 

" Where do you mean, Peter ? " 

"Here, sir," said the man ; "but I want to speak 
a word first. There was a gentleman in the 3. 
train, as had booked his ticket for Driven Station ; 
but he was so bad when he got here, that he could 
neither speak nor stand ; he just said, c Kirton's 
Farm,' and they sent a boy down for me ; and, to 
the best of my belief, sir, it's Muss Heaster's 
husband." 

In a moment, Jacob was in the little waiting 
room, and there, extended on as many chairs as 
they could find, a railway rug rolled under his 
head, was Frederic Hallam. Bonham had never 
seen him distinctly, but he felt sure from all he 
had heard that Peter jras right in his con- 
jecture. 

He was not quite unconscions, but seemed in 
great suffering. He evidently knew that Jacob 
was a doctor, and seemed to be relieved by his 
presence. 

Bonham stood meditating for some minutes 
after he had felt Hallam's pulse, and looked at him 
attentively, and then he walked out of hearing, 



250 HESTER KIBTON. 

and beckoned to the station-master to follow 
him. 

" You sleep here, don't you ? " 

"Well, doctor,' and what's that to do with it? 
you don't think I've got accommodation for a sick 
man, do ye ? " 

" No," said Jacob ; " but I suppose you don't 
mind lending me a pillow, if you have one ? " 

The man grumbled, but after a bit, he produced 
a pillow, dirty certainly, but soft enough for Jacob's 
purpose. 

With a broken chair and the pillow he managed 
to make a reclining seat in the gig for the sick 
man, so that his head was supported, and then, with 
the help of the two men, he lifted him in, and tell- 
ing Peter he was going to take Mr. Hallam to his 
own house for the present, he drove gently away. 

At first he had felt strangely puzzled how to 
act. He feared that Hallam was on the brink 
of a serious illness, and he dared not incur the 
risk of taking him the long journey back to 
Uplands; besides, there was no train again till 
late in the evening, as that by which Hallam 
had meant to return had started while he lay 
ill and half unconscious before Jacob's arrival 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 251 

He knew that the sick man had no friends in 
Stedding : it most be his duty to take him home, 
even at the risk of the illness proving infectious. 
He would have done as much for a stranger 
similarly circumstanced, for the county hospital 
was miles away, but Hallam had a double claim 
upon him, he was Lucy's cousin by marriage. 

The air revived the sufferer: he was able to 
say a few words to Bonham, and when they 
reached the surgery, with Jacob's help and his 
assistant's, he walked to the parlour. 

Making him lie down on the sofa, Jacob went 
in search of Lucy. 

She was fall of thankfulness that her husband 
should have been, as it were, sent that way in 
a time of such need, and had soon a bedroom 
ready close to their own. The children she 
sent at once to her mother's, telling Jacob she 
should go round in the afternoon and arrange 
for their remaining there, as she meant to nurse 
Mr. Hallam herself. 

By the next day his symptoms had become 
so much more alarming, that Bonham, without 
waiting any longer for Hester, to whom they had 
at once written and despatched a telegraphic 



252 HESTER KIRTON. 

message, sent for a doctor from London, not 
choosing, although he felt competent to manage 
the case himself, to take the entire responsibility. 

Next morning brought the doctor, but no letter 
or message from Uplands. However, by an early 
train arrived a servant with clothes for Mr. Hallam, 
and a letter from Parkins. 

She would have come herself, she said, to nurse 
her master, but she dared not leave the child, 
or take him so long a journey without his parents' 
leave; besides, he was best away from a sick 
house. She then told them of Hester's sudden 
departure for France, adding that she had for- 
warded Mr. Bonham's letter and message to 
Arden, poste restante, as she did not know that her 
mistress had left any more definite address. She 
was sure she would return at once, and she had 
written at the same time to say that Mr. Hallam 
was at Stedding, and with whom. 

She added that no letter had come from 
Mrs. Hallam since her departure. 

Jacob and Lucy looked at each other with sad, 
perplexed faces. Hallam was far too ill to be 
spoken to, or questioned on the subject. The 
doctor had entirely approved of Bonham's treat- 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 253 

ment, but had cautioned them that any excite- 
ment would make the delirious wandering from 
which he suffered during the night, continual 
and probably violent Jacob had sat up in his 
room the previous night, and had been moved 
almost to tears by the fond endearing terms in 
which Hallam implored Hester to return to him, 
and be again the wife she was when he married 
her, and his earnest entreaties to forgive him, 
and give up her coldness, and show her real 
feelings for him. 

There was much mingled in broken snatches 
that Jacob could not understand : allusions to 
Ralphie, who, he seemed to think, was with him 
also. And then he would start up suddenly, 
urging Hester to go to the child, who needed her 
more than he did. Then he would talk of Kirton's 
Farm, and Goldsmith. 

Jacob had not mentioned this to Lucy; he 
knew how it would distress her, and, after all, 
from what he had seen of delirium, a great deal of 
it might be imaginary. But Parkins's letter con- 
firmed his worst suspicions, he feared Hester had 
left her husband in anger . perhaps for ever. 

They were in the dressing-room whieh led into 



254 HESTER KIRTON. 

Hallam's chamber, Jacob softly closed the door 
between, 

"You feel sad and anxious, Lucy, and so do 
I; but you must keep up a cheerful heart, and 
put on a bright face, or you are no fit nurse for 
Mr. Hallam. He is in that state when the 
slightest rousing of thought or attention may do 
terrible mischief, and for that reason, sad as 
your cousin's absence seems at such a time, I 
am thankful to be spared her sudden appearance 
among us just yet Although dreadfully weakened, 

neither R nor I fear this actual illness so 

much as the consequences which sometimes in- 
ternally result from it, and these may come almost 
without a warning." 

" But then, surely, I ought to write to Hester ? " 

"By all means, and write as strongly as pos- 
sible to urge her return ; but in an obscure foreign 
town like Arden, letters often miscarry, and I 
was thinking whether we ought not to send for 
some of Mr. Hallam's own family." 

" I can ask the Ainsworths about them, but, I 
believe, of near relations, there are only his mother 
and his aunt. Mrs. Hallam, I know, is in Switzer- 
land ; Miss Hallam told me she had either gone, or 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 255 

was just going, when she was in Stedding. I 
suppose the Ainsworths know where she went 
to from them ? But, Jacob, don't you think we 
are better without her ? " 

For Lucy, like any other good nurse, had 
a horror of help and conflicting opinions in a 
sick room, and she had seen enough of Miss 
Haliam to know that she would be very obstinate 
in her opinions. 

.t We must not think about ourselves, dearest ; 
we have no right to keep his relations away from 
him." 

" Not even if they do him harm ? Jacob, that 
woman's silly little laugh would destroy me if I 
were ill." 

fs Perhaps not if she were your aunt, and you 
were used to her. I promise you that I will 
keep guard over Miss Haliam when she arrives, 
and if I think she is injudicious or interfering, 
I will forbid her in the sick man's room. You 
forget my authority there is indisputable." 

Lucy was not convinced, but she yielded and 
returned to her post, striving to keep her thoughts 
from dwelling on Hester's absence from her hus- 
band, and her extraordinary silence. 



256 HESTER KIRTON. 

Sometimes when he seemed awake and con- 
scious, or when taking medicine or food from 
her, Hallam's eyes rested on her face with a 
searching inquiring expression, and his lips moved 
as if about to question; but he was too weak, 
and soon relapsed into the sort of listless waking 
dream in which his days passed. 

When Mrs. Frank Wrenshaw came that after- 
noon to give her daily report of the children's 
health, Lucy asked her to go to Mrs. Ainsworth, 
and ascertain, if possible, where Miss Hallam was 
to be found. 

But Mrs. Frank shook her head. She dearly 
loved any excuse for getting sole and undivided 
possession of her grandchildren, and letting them 
enact as much small mischief as children usually 
delight in committing when they are certain of 
applause, although Mrs. Frank would have been 
virtuously severe on the like misdemeanours in 
any one else's grandchildren than her own. Still, 
spite of the privilege thereby enjoyed, she thought 
Jacob's conduct Quixotic. What had Mr. Hallam 
or Hester ever done for Lucy that she should 
take to nursing a stranger, and turn her house 
into a hosDital ? 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 257 

"Of course Jacob knows best, my dear: in 
your opinion lie always does; but I should 
have thought it was doing quite enough to 
take Mr. Hallam in, without having his whole 
family." 

"But, mamma, it's only Miss Hallam." 

"Well, and I thought you didn't much like her 
when she was here. I know, when I said I thought 
she was a nice kind of body, only nervous . and 
that would be very bad in a sick-room . you looked 
as if you didn't agree with me. However, I sup- 
pose you know your own affairs best About the 
children, they can stay as long as they like and 
welcome. You mustn't be angry with little Lucy, 
either, only, perhaps, it's better to tell you . but 
while I was playing with Baby this morning . 
when Faith's upstairs helping Rachel, I look after 
them . the little mite whipped up my scissors and 
cut Alice's front hair short to her head, and when 
I told her she mustn't touch scissors . they were 
naughty, sharp things that would hurt little girls . 
she answered, in her pretty little sedate way, that 
she knew that, for she'd been cutting pussy's hair 
first, and so she has . a great square patch right off 
the poor thing's back ; it was enough to make one 

vol. in. 2 



258 HESTER KIRTON. 

die of laughing to think of such a mite being so 
clever and knowing." 

Lucy involuntarily pressed her hand over her 
eyes, 

" Ah, mother, she is too little to be trusted with 
scissors, indeed she is." 

" Ah, my dear, that's just what I said ; but you 
may depend it's not the first time she's had them, 
or she wouldn't be so apt at using them. Well, 
well, she is a forward young chit ; but I'll go now, 
and bring you word about poor Mr. Hallam's 
aunt" 

Lucy earnestly wished at that moment for Miss 
Hallam's presence, which would give her liberty 
to watch a little over her children. She did not 
doubt her mother's care ; but she knew that her 
love for babies was so intense that she was apt to 
forget the presence of the others when playing 
with her special darling, and her quick imagination 
suggested that Miss Lucy's next experiment might 
be tried on her sister's eye-lashes. 

Mrs. Ainsworth was not sure of Miss Hallam's 
whereabouts; she had left them to spend a few 
days with some friends with whom she had pro- 
mised to make a, tour among the English lakes, 



WHAT HAPPENED AT DRIVEN STATION. 259 

and thence, if fine weather lasted, to proceed to 
Scotland, so that there was no saying with any 
certainty where she was just then. 

Jacob told his wife she could only write to the 
first address, and trust to the letter being for- 
warded ; it seemed strange that all near and dear 
to Hallam should be so widely scattered, but then, 
as he observed, " Londoners are never to be found 
in the autumn." 



51.^ 



260 HESTER KIKTOX. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

TO STEDDING. 

Standing there in the chestnut avenue, with 
little Ralphie pressed closely to her bosom, Hester 
listened while Parkins sorrowfully told all she 
knew about her master's illness,- partly gathered 
from Mrs. Bonham's letters, aiid partly from 
Mr. King the rector, who had been over to 
Stedding twice to see his friend, and was very 
anxious and down-hearted about him, Parkins 
said. 

" Shall Martin go round for the rector at once, 
ma'am?" she continued; "for he said he was 
to be let know, directly you arrived." 

Hester had stood in perfect silence, only 
pressing the child closer to her, but without a 
word or a caress ; the sudden horror had numbed 
her senses ; she roused now. 



TO STEDDING. 261 

" No, I don't want Mr. King; I only want you, 
Parkins. I am going to Stedding at once." 

The woman began to expostulate, but her 
words died away in an indistinct murmur, when 
she looked in her mistress's face, and again felt 
the irresistible sway of her resolute will. 

Still holding the child, who looked wonderingly 
at her, with his deep earnest eyes, she stepped into 
the carriage again, and telling Parkins to get up 
behind, bade Martin drive to the house. 

The movement pleased Ralphie, and unlocked 
his tongue from the surprise his mother's manner 
had caused. 

"Where pap-pa?" he asked, inquiringly. 
"Poor pap-pa, all gone . all gone." 

She was almost overpowered, but always accus- 
tomed to restrain emotion before others, the man's 
presence checked her tears. 

As soon as they reached the house, she bade 
Martin not unharness the ponies, and then told 
Parkins to pack as quickly as she could, what was 
necessary for herself and the child, and to join 
her in the library. 

ss But oh, ma'am," said Parkins, imploringly, 
"you cannot travel again to-day; you are tired 



262 HESTER KIRTON. 

out; you must be faint from hunger, too, and would 
you take Master Ralphie such a journey so late 
as this?" 

" Hush," said Hester firmly ; .. I cannot con- 
sider him at such a time ; we ought both to be at 
S tedding now, there has been delay enough;" then 
seeing how sad Parkins looked : " You may send 
me some wine," she said, " and some bread too ; 
you are right, I must eat, I may want strength." 

She still kept Ralphie in her arms, and as 
Parkins closed the door, she sank down in a chair, 
and holding him from her for an instant, gazed 
fixedly at him, as if she were striving to see his 
father's image in the lovely little face ; then she 
caught him to her, and kissed him passionately 
again and again, till the child cried in fear at her 
strange wild manner. 

" Ah, Ralphie, you are happy, you can cry ; 
mamma's heart is breaking." 

Parkins herself came in with the wine and bread, 
and Hester was calm in an instant The servant 
told her mistress that it would be useless for them 
to start at present; there would be no train to 
Stedding before eight o'clock, and even then they 
should not arrive till after midnight. She ventured 



TO STEDDING. 263 

another piteous look at Ralphie, but Hester took 
no notice of the appeal. 

." It does not signify about waiting, Parkins, I 
shall start directly you are ready. I must tele- 
graph to Mr. Bonham to announce my arrival; 
besides, I had rather be at the station than here." 

It seemed^to her just then as if every moment 
spent in inaction were wilful delay; she thought she 
should not feel this so much at the station . a stage, 
as it were,' on her journey. Besides it would be 
well that the Bonhams should be prepared for her 
coming by the telegram. 

Calm and business-like in her plans as ever, 
even then. 

But she let Martin drive now, and gave Ralphie 
in charge to Parkins ; it seemed as if she must at 
last be alone. 

Alone . had she not always been alone, although 
the strong fibres of her heart's love had once struck 
down deep into what they had fancied nourishing 
pasture ; had they not withered among the stones 
and rubbish, instead of forming a firm lasting root? 

Was she then to be alone for ever? 

Was this her first cup of joy, for a weary time 
untasted, save in anticipation, to prove the bitterest 



264 HESTER KIRTON. 

trial, the most impossible to bear of any grief yet 
laid upon her. 

Some people, as blows fall one after another, 
. whether it be from some unseen comfort which 
takes the outward shape called resignation, or that 
skins thicken under the lash of misfortune; or 
that a consciousness of failings makes the punish- 
ment seem less than is deserved . grow used to 
troubles and trials, and only feel double joy, when 
any unforeseen and unexpected good comes like 
angel's visits, few and far between. 

But with Hester it was not so. 

She had resolved at last to humble her pride, 
to ask her husband to pardon her, and it seemed 
as if she had made atonement for her fault . it was 
very hard that this unutterable grief -should be 
laid upon her, just when she had made up her 
mind to try and be more like her aunt Wrenshaw ; 
a better, a more religious woman during the rest 
of her life. 

These thoughts tossed and troubled through her 
mind, on the road to the station, over-topping, as it 
were, for the time the grief which had hitherto 
seared her heart completely, and pent up all its 
tears. 



TO STEDDING. 265 

But it was only the foam cresting the waves, and 
obscuring them for a while, and, as it curled 
angrily forwards, bearing with it the tangled sea 
spoils, which had hitherto clouded and fouled the 
purity of the water beneath, . , . . 

The station-master told her she would have to 
wait a full hour and a half. 
. " Could she not have a special train ? n 

" You could have such, no doubt, and welcome 
from Stedding here, ma'am; but we're not pro- 
vided with them in these small places." 

She made no answer, except by telling him the 
message she wished sent to Jacob Bonham. 

Till this was despatched there had been a motive 
for exertion. Now it seemed as if she must lose 
her senses in that dull, lonely place before the 
hour and a half had expired. 

She went into the waiting-room, and took 
Ralphie from Parkins. A secret instinct made 
her feel that she was quieter, less rebellious with 
the child pressed close against her heart. 

Ralphie shrank from her; he was sleepy and 
tired, and he had not forgotten his mother's face 
in the library. Parkins, too, held him back. 



266 HESTER KIRTON. 

" He grows heavy with sleep, ma'am, poor little 
dear ; and you're not used to nursing him." 

Just then the words struck Hester like a well- 
deserved reproach. She turned away abruptly out 
of the room, and paced up and down the platform. 

There was still daylight, although it was a good 
hour darker than usual, the station-master said; 
the sun had set behind a dense bank of clouds, 
which in different shades of dark grey, looking 
like a huge mass of wrought iron, was fast 
spreading upward, gathering to itself every par- 
ticle of vapour near, and infusing into it its own 
deepening hue. 

Just then a porter lit the signal lamp, and a 
shrill whistle rang through the air. 

Hester walked towards the approaching train, 
thankful for any outward distraction, in what 
seemed an endless monotony of waiting. 

<*The down train from London, ma'am," the 
station-master said, in answer to her lc>oks ; " it 
stops here." 

The bell was rung, and in another few moments 
the renewed screech of the engine as it slackened 
speed, told that it was going to stop. 



TO STEDDING. 267 

Four passengers alighted; two of them were 
labouring men, who had, probably, only come a 
short distance. But the others were gentlemen, 
and as one of them asked the station-master if his 
trap were not waiting, Hester recognized the voice 
of their neighbour Mr. Crathie. 

She drew back quickly under the roof of the 
platform, where the light was by this time very 
indistinct, and seating herself in a corner, and 
pulling down her veil, felt sure she should escape 
observation. Just then she could not have spoken 
to Mr. Crathie. 

The train had come in early, and the station- 
master brought word that there was no carriage 
^waiting.. 

The two gentlemen walked up and down, talk- 
ing in a low voice, and gradually drawing more 
under the shadow of the roof. They came so near 
to Hester now that she could hear what they said, 
but they were too deep in talk to notice her. 

She paid no heed to them till the sound of her 
own name made her start and listen eagerly. 

" Yes, they are the people who live at Uplands ; 
a young married couple," said Mr. Crathie; "that 
scoundrel had the management of the wife's money ; 



268 HESTER KIRTON. 

she was an heiress, I wonder if they are at all 
prepared ; if not, it will be a great shock. I sup- 
pose it will all be in the Times to-morrow." 

" Certain to be. It is in to-night's papers," said 
his companion; "but if these people are friends 
of yours, J should let them know to-night or 
early to-morrow; they might by some chance 
miss it; and if this rascal Goldsmith had much 
to do with them, they should lose no time. Al- 
though, depend upon it, he is miles on his way 
across the Atlantic by this." 

" I'll let them know at once . but come along," 
said Mr. Crathie ; " there's my trap. Look alive, 
porter." 

And while Hester still sate, breathless and 
stunned at what she had heard, they had left 
the station. 

And this was the man she had trusted, to whom 
she had listened eagerly when he defamed her 
husband's honour. For the first time in all the 
trial she had been undergoing, Hester felt really 
humbled . crushed to the dust by the bitter proof 
of her error. So deep was her shame. for each 
moment that she reflected, Goldsmith's image 
seemed to blacken, and Fred's to become more 



TO STEDDING. 269 

like an angel's in the truth of his love for her . 
that, spite of her care for wealth and power, the 
actual loss of fortune seemed a trifling evil, 
beside her sense of the deep wrong she had done 
her husband, and her longing to implore his 
pardon for it. This, then, was Goldsmith's motive 
in refusing to purchase Uplands ; he was probably 
at that time a ruined man. 

She had sate completely absorbed and insen- 
sible to all that was passing round her ; but she 
felt now that some one was standing before her, 
trying to attract her notice. 

She looked up . it was the station-master. 

"I beg pardon, ma'am, but don't you think, 
seeing how the weather has turned, that I'd 
best send a porter up to the house for your close 
carriage. You won't think of travelling to-night, 
ma'am, will you ? " 

Hester started up. The stirring breeze was 
gone now, and the air felt hushed and still. 
During the last five minutes it had grown suddenly 
darker.- except one broad band of green light on 
the horizon, the grey cloud-bank had overspread 
all the sky, and formed a lowering canopy . which, 
as Hester walked forwards to the edge of the 



270 HESTER KIRTON. 

platform, seemed to bulge downwards over her 
head in a metallic-looking protuberance. 

Before she could answer the man's question, a 
livid streak of forked lightning darted from it, 
and seemed to strike the rails at her feet The 
station-master grasped her arm, and pulled her 
under the shelter of the roof, while an instantly 
following crash of thunder bellowed round them, 
and shook the little building. 

Hester went in search of Ralphie. In general, 
lightning storms greatly affected his little sensitive 
frame ; but now he was deeping soundly* Poor 
Parkins was trembling with terror. 

t. Ah, ma'am, stay here, pray ; don't leave me 
alone; pray don't, I shall die of fear. You'll 
go back home, won't you? Oh, ma'am, do, for 
mercy's sake ! Oh ! there again ! " and another 
flash darted its ghastly light through the room. 

"Hush," said Hester, gently, "it would be 
cruel to wake him now ; I will make one of the 
men come and stay with you . this place stifles 
me." 

Sending one of the porters in to Parkins, she 
returned to the edge of the platform, and stood 
looking at the sky. 



TO STEDDING. 271 

There was a fainter flash, and the station-master 
said he hoped it was passing oyer ; but the instan- 
taneous crash that overpowered his words, showed 
he was mistaken. A moment's intense lull . 
then a jagged stream of blue flame leaped from 
the dark mass overhead, and seemed to strike the 
roof above them. The whole building rocked 
and the ground shook under their feet, even 
amid the awful roar of the thunder, there was a 
sound of falling timber. 

Hester did not fall, but she felt faint and 
unable to move for several minutes. The station- 
master recovered himself sooner, and raising a 
lantern from the ground, ran rapidly along the 
front of the building. The day signal-pole, within 
twenty feet of where they were standing, had 
been shivered to pieces. 

Hester saw it plainly, and even in that awful 
moment her thoughts were so fixed on the coming 
train, that she asked the man to look whether any 
of the fragments had been scattered over the rails. 

" The train will be here directly, now," he said, 
and he ran to the signal-lamp, and turned it to 
" danger." 

Another flash, and another, and before Hester 



272 HESTER KIRTON. 

had returned from seeing if the uproar had 
wakened Ralphie, the engine came up ; the 
lightning flashes making it brightly visible for an 
instant, and leaving light enough to make its 
demon-like approach . screeching as if in harmony 
with the elements . awful. It seemed just then 
to Hester as if all evil powers were let loose to 
prevent her journey to Stedding, and she would 
not be conquered by them . no, though the storm 
should increase tenfold. If the train went on, 
she would go with it . and before Parkins had at 
all recovered from her terror, she found herself 
getting into one of the carriages, followed by her 
mistress. 

The lightning flashes ceased for a few minutes, 
while the sky grew blacker and blacker. Some 
heavy drops fell, as if unwillingly, but they be- 
came more rapid and frequent, and soon the rain 
streamed down in torrents, which threatened to 
penetrate the roof of the carriage . it rattled 
strangely, too, against the windows, and was evi- 
dently charged with metallic pebbles. 

" Thank God, ma'am, the lightning's over," said 
Parkins. " I'm sure, I thought as the last hour 
was upon us." 



TO STEDDING. 273 

As if by a spell her words seemed to have stirred 
nature to fresh strife. Flash succeeded flash, 
lighting up the carriage vividly for an instant, 
scarcely realized . before another still more lurid 
returned. The roar of the thunder was less 
tremendous ; they probably heard it less, amid the 
whirr of their own movement and the dash of the 
rain against roofs and windows . and so, on they 
went through that fearful storm. Parkins, half 
dead with terror, and Hester insensible to peril 
from without, the agonized dread gnawing at her 
heart, that she might be, after all, too late. 

There was war without and within. Only the 
little child slept peacefully through the sad night's 
journey. 



vol. Hi. Eft 



274 HESTER KIBTOK. 



CHAPTER XX. 

CONQUERED. 

It was past twelve when Hester reached Jacob 
Bonham's house. She sprang out of the fly and 
rang the bell herself, timidly, as if fearing whom 
she might awaken. She was utterly hopeless. 
The fatigue she had undergone, previous to 
the shock of the storm, had almost overpowered 
her. She felt that she was too late, and when 
Jacob opened the door himself, it seemed to her 
that it was but to break the tidings gently. 

He took her hand, and she looked up in his 
face. 

No, the worst was not come upon her; her 
husband still lived, or Jacob Bonham would not 
have had a smile upon his lips. 

"You must come to Lucy first," he said. <c Mr. 
Hallam is at present asleep, and may not be roused 
from it." 



CONQUERED. 275 

She looked wistfully at him. 

" You shall see him presently ; but I must see 
you quite composed and quiet first. Is that your 
little boy?" and he took Ralphie from poor ex- 
hausted Parkins. 

He led the way towards the parlour, but Lucy's 
arms were already round her cousin, and as she 
drew her in Jacob gently closed the door upon 
them, while he himself took Parkins and Ralphie 
to their room, and sent Mattie to get them all 
they wanted. 

" Poor, poor darling ! " sobbed Lucy. 

The fond pressure, the fonder kiss, unlocked 
that oppressed, sorrow-laden heart. She broke 
away from Lucy, and threw herself on the sofa 
in such a paroxysm of agony as her cousin had 
never witnessed. But in heart Lucy was glad 
to see it ; she had so feared that all love was at 
an end between the husband and wife. As soon 
as Hester's sobs became less frequent and her 
tears flowed in a more natural manner, she went 
up to her, and tried to soothe her with the best 
words her loving heart could prompt; Hester 
seemed comforted ; she could not speak, but she 
kissed Lucy and looked inquiringly at her. 

5^. * 



276 HESTER KIRTON. 

"He is very ill, dearest . so ill that Jacob 

telegraphed this afternoon again for Dr. . 

He will he here to-morrow." 

" Will he know me ? " said Hester, so humbly 
and quietly that one could scarcely have imagined 
it herself that spoke. 

She felt deeply humbled that Lucy, whom 
she had accustomed herself of late years to look 
down upon as an inferior, should have been 
fulfilling her own duty to her husband, and 
should meet her so lovingly without a word of 
reproach for the past. 

Lucy looked pained by the question. 

st I cannot tell," she said, " he varies so ; if 
he were to see you to-night it might increase his 
delirium, but I think we can manage to let you 
look at him." 

" But I may stay with him to-night, Lucy ? " 

" You are not fit for it, dearest, but we will 
ask Jacob," said her cousin, doubtfully ; u he is 
master, you know," she added, with a smile. 
"And now, whether you are hungry or not, 
I must insist on your eating something." 

Jacob came in while she was speaking; he had 
heard from Parkins of Hester's hurried return 



CONQUEBED. 277 

to England, and of the fatigue she had that 
day encountered, and he felt that she must 
be thoroughly overwrought and unable to bear 
suspense. 

He told her that Ralphie was none the worse 
for his journey, and would be soon asleep again ; 
and then he asked her to follow him. 

She trembled so as she rose, that he drew her 
hand within his arm and led her upstairs. 

She seemed not to see anything until Lucy 
gently touched her, and pointed through an 
opening in the curtains. 

There lay indeed her husband; but oh, how 
sadly changed ! pale to whiteness, his lips purple 
with fever, and the features drawn and pinched as 
if with suffering. His eyes were closed, but he 
was not sleeping, for he murmured confusedly, and 
as Hester bent eagerly, thirstingly forward, he 
distinctly pronounced her name. 

It was well that Jacob Bonham had kept her 
hand within his, or she would have thrown her 
arms round her husband in that moment of 
agony ; it seemed to her that he must be dying, 
but that her love could hold him back to earth. 

The pressure of Jacob's hand and his warning 



278 HESTER KIETON. 

gesture called back her recollection, and after 
a few minutes she submitted quietly to be led 
away. 

It was more difficult to yield when the doctor 
insisted on her lying down for a while ; but when 
she resisted and said she could not leave Fred 
again, he told her that, cruel as it seemed, 
he must oppose her even entering his room 
till she had slept soundly for at least two 
hours. 

She would only, he said, make herself thoroughly 
unfit to nurse her husband at all if she persisted 
in watching now ; and if he should wake and see 
her agitated, and in her exhausted state she could 
not help being so, the consequence might be 
fatal. 

At last she yielded, although she said it would 
be impossible to close her eyes ; but Jacob was 
right; and when Lucy went to look at her a 
short time after, she was sleeping as soundly as 
little Ralphie. 

When Hester opened her eyes, the sun was 
shining brightly into the strange room. She 
could not recall all that had happened ; but an 



CONQUERED, 279 

instant's thought brought it back, and with a 
sense of guilt and fear that she had slept so long, 
she rose and dressed herself hurriedly. 

Before she had finished, Lucy tapped at the 
door, and presently came in with Ralphie by her 
side. 

"I have brought your boy to welcome you," 
she said ; " what a sweet fellow he is ! " 

The childish face was full of eager delight at 
seeing everything new and strange, and he began 
to tell his mother what wonders he had met with ; 
but Hester kissed him gently, and then turned 
to Lucy. 

" He is still unconscious," said her cousin. " I 
do not think, from what Jacob says, that he has 
opened his eyes since you saw him ; he has been 
with him all night." 

"How good you are!" said Hester, as she 
kissed her. 

Jacob met her with a far more anxious ex- 
pression than on the previous evening. He did 
not tell Hester, because it seemed needless to 
alarm her before the London doctor's authority 
confirmed his fears; but there had been symp 
toms during the night which made him dread that 



280 HESTER KIRTON. 

his patient was sinking, and that there was little 
hope of recovery. 

He did not refuse Hester when she told him 
that she could not leave her husband again, but 
let her take Lucy's place by his bedside. 

In the bright morning light, in the joy that 
she should see him again, she, the usually de- 
spondent Hester, had hoped to find him less 
changed than on the previous evening; but as 
she stood now beside the bed, bending over him, 
the shock w r as almost worse than when she was 
more over-wrought. It was not possible to believe 
that this could be her Frederic ; the husband from 
whom she had parted so short a while ago. 

Is there any agony like that of watching by 
our nearest and dearest, when they are changed 
almost beyond recognition, and are insensible to 
our tenderest words and looks ? 

It may be said the agony is sharper when we 
have been denied the privilege; but then it is 
an imaginary sorrow; we regret we know not 
what; we fancy a hundred tokens of affection, 
. acts of devotion we could never have shown, and 
to which the sufferer would have been senseless. 
We have not in that case stereotyped on the 



CONQUERED. 281 

mind, branded into the heart, the pale stricken 
face, the wasted limbs, the unmistakable signs in 
every feeble movement, every gasping breath, of 
all that our darling has undergone, is still 
bearing. 

And yet who would barter these sharp pangs, 
this agonized remembrance, for any relief which 
compelled them to leave their post ? 

So Hester felt. Spite of all the anguish, she was 
happier than she had been before she knew of 
Fred's illness. He was all her own now, her 
darling; the fresh green memory of her early 
love seemed to cool the arid remembrance of 
those three years, when love had been a desert, 
with no one resting-place for weary thought to 
look upon. 

If she could but live over those years again . 
but she would not waste her thoughts in idle 
wishes, bitterly repentant as she felt. 

On her knees beside him, and pressing the 
wasted hand, which seemed powerless in hers, to 
her lips, she solemnly vowed, if life were spared 
him, to keep her marriage promises . for had she 
not sorely broken them ? Till she saw him lying 
there, when all that had gone before, each link 



282 HESTER KIRTON. 

firmly riveted, passed before her in one brief 
moment, she had not realized this ; it had seemed 
to her that it would be a merit to make her 
husband's life happy, not a sacred duty which 
she had taken an oath to fulfil. 

Yes, she would be a good wife now, a better 
mother to little Ralphie ; and it must be so ; God 
was too good, too merciful, to take her Fred from 
her, when she had at last learned his value. 

But God was merciful to the good. How dared 
she hope for mercy ? No . oh, no ! She could 
hardly restrain the shuddering sobs that shook 
through each limb. 

But there were steps approaching, and Lucy 
came and gently whispered they must go away 
for a little, while the doctors came in together. 

It seemed hard to lose sight of him even for an 
instant, but she yielded. 

She told Lucy she must see the doctor after- 
wards, and her cousin went into the hall to 
watch for his coming downstairs, while Hester sate, 
her face covered with her hands, for there was 
a stillness in Jacob's face as she passed that 
awed her. Could it be that her husband was 
really worse ? was there no hope ? 



CONQUERED, 283 

It seemed a weary waiting. At length, to her 
surprise, she heard a carriage drive away, and 
Lucy came into the room. 

She looked sadly, oh, so sadly, in her cousin's 
face, but for a moment she did not speak. 

Then she went up to Hester, and kissed her 
reverently and tenderly. 

" Jacob will tell you, dearest ; Dr. wished 

not to see you." 

She knew what they meant her to understand, 
but she could not receive it. 

She kissed Lucy, and then rising, went silently 
upstairs to take her place again beside her hus- 
band. 

Jacob was waiting for her on the landing. 

" Hester," he said, it was the first time he had 

called her so, "shall I tell you what Dr. 

fears, or has Lucy done so ? " 

" There is no hope, then ?" she spoke in a strange, 
abrupt voice. 

"He may linger some hours yet," he said, 
speaking very gently, "but I fear we must not 
hope for more." 

Except that she grew paler, she seemed un 
touched. 



284 HESTER KIRTON. 

.S Will he ever know me again ? " in the same 
harsh voice. 

"I think so; I hope so. Stay," lie said, as 
she was passing into the room, "consciousness 
seems to me to be even now returning, I am 
here within call, but I will not come unless you 
wish it You can give him this as he revives," 
he put a phial in her hand; "the quantity is 
marked." 

The permission to be alone with her husband 
in the first moments of his awakening, struck her 
with a death chill ; it did not matter then, his doom 
was seated. Slowly, almost fearfully, she stole 
round to the bedside. 

There was no apparent change, except that the 
position was a little altered, and the breathing less 
difficult. 

She fixed her eyes on his face, and presently . 
how long after she could not have told . the eye- 
lashes quivered, and the breath was drawn more 
deeply. Slowly his eyes opened, not rayless and 
unconscious, as Lucy had described them, but 
with a painful, strained look of tho ught, that, as 
they gradually settled on Hester's face, concen- 
trated into fixed wonder. 



CONQUERED. 285 

Trembling with the excess of her joy, fearing 
almost to breathe, lest the sound should frighten 
the wakening spirit, she poured out the cordial 
with an unsteady hand, and, gently raising his 
head, put the glass to his lips. 

It seemed to revive him greatly; he feebly 
raised his hand, and passed it before his eyes, 
as if striving to waken from some painful 
dream. 

Before, she had felt that, but for fear of waken- 
ing him, she must have thrown her arms round 
him, and pressed her lips to his ; now she dared 
not, she was too guilty. 

His lips moved, and she bent eagerly forward. 
" My Hester," he murmured ; " my own 
now." 

.S No, no," she sobbed, throwing herself beside 
him, " not worthy to be called yours. Oh, Fred, 
Fred ! you cannot love, you cannot forgive even, 
such a guilty creature as I am. I am not fit 
to be your wife. I showed no mercy, and I 
deserve none." 

He raised his hand, and laid it on her head. 
" Bless you, my darling ! kiss me. I need for- 
giveness too." 



286 HESTER KIRTON. 

She laid her cheek on his, wound her arms 
round him, and so they lay still, happier in that 
mute, feeble embrace, than they had ever been 
before . . . . 

Again she whispered an earnest praj-er for his 
forgiveness. 

u Hnsh, my darling," he said, fondly, a that is 
all over now." 

"Yes, you can . you do forgive," she sobbed, 
convulsively ; " but God will not . my hardness, my 
pride . and you so good, and loving, and noble." 

He stroked her cheek fondly, as she lay sobbing 
beside him. f 

" There is no love like God's, my Hester, only 
trust Him." 

His breathing grew more painful, he whis- 
pered, 

" Ralphie." 

She rose gently, and gave him once more the 
reviving draught, and then going to the door, 
asked Jacob to fetch Ralphie. 

He brought him in his arms, and HaUam 
stretched out his hand to Bonham. 

" It will soon be over," he said, " you will be 
good to her and to him. God bless you. I 



CONQUEEED. 287 

know you now; I knew your wife. Where is 
she?" 

Jacob went to call her, and Hester held Ralphie 
to kiss his father. The child looked awe-struck, 
but he kissed the wasted cheek, and stroked it 
with his tiny hand. 

" God bless you, darling ! " and then he turned 
away his face. 

Lucy came in, and pressed his hand; and 
then they left the husband and wife, . now at last 
one . together, 

" You will not murmur, dearest," he whispered, 
when her face was again close to his. ce It is His 
will to take me, and it has been joy . my Hester 
. to have seen you once more. I know that I am 
dying; I heard the doctor say so, and it is best." 

She could [only weep, hot blinding tears, she 
could not keep them back now ; she was not 
vehement, or rebellious, but it seemed as if it could 
not be that he was leaving her. 

The hours passed on, and still he lingered. . . . 

The sun shone in more and more brightly 
through the shaded windows, filling the room 
with warm light. It fell on the pale face, defining 
' still more sharply the wasted features. 



2 83 HESTER KIRTON. 

How happy, how calm he looked . like the 
sunshine that filled the air. No! he could not 
he taken from her now. 

Just then the church clock struck four. In the 
stillness of the room, it seemed to Hester that its 
solemn vibration was too awful to bear. 

The sound roused her husband from the insen- 
sibility that was stealing over him. 

He opened his eyes and looked at her ; oh, how 
tenderly ! The hot tears came again, blinding 
her; but he did not weep. He looked happy 
still. Even her agony did not disturb the calm 
that was surely more than earthly. 

"My Hester," he said, softly, "my own one 
. we have both loved and suffered . we have 
both sinned ; but I far most, and first. That is 
over, darling, . it is such mercy to have seen you 
once " 

He paused, exhausted. 

Strive as she would, she could not speak or 
check her tears . she could only kiss him, and 
gently press her cheek against his. 

He whispered presently that Lucy should read 
the prayers for the dying, and Hester rang the 
little bell Jacob Lad placed beside her. 



CONQUERED* 289 

Lucy came, and as Hester listened, she grew 
calmer, more resigned .... 

The day was dying now, the sunlight had 
faded, except a few lingering gleams: and still 
he lingered. 

Suddenly a bright smile crossed his face, . 

"You will come to me, darling . and Ralphie 
with you.*' 

She tried to answer, but she could not . sinking 
on her knees she hid her face beside him. 

She thought she heard him say, " Thank God," 
and there was a deep shivering sigh, then silence. 
. A little while afterwards she knew that he was 
taken to his Rest. 



THE END. 
