ELINOR DEYDEN'S PROBATION. 



PROLOGUE. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE SQUIRE AND HIS WIFE. 

SPRiNGf-TiME was oo the woods^ unfolding the 
exquisite green tints of leaves trembling at their 
first exposure to the light ; Spring-time was in 
the air, scenting it with that nameless sub* 
dued fragrance, as exhilarating as any aromatic 
stimulant ; Spring-time, too, was plainly marked 
in the white, and blue, and golden enamelling 
the wild flowers made among the dry carpet of 
last year's leaves; and the bright little river 
that sparkled over the grey stones below the 



VOL. I. 



1 



2 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

hanging wood, seemed to chirrup as it went 
along . that something better than bare branches 
mirrored themselves in it now. 

Not that its chirrup was audible, unless you 
stood quite close beside it. The thrushes and lin- 
nets were holding a concert in the wood, and 
hundreds of warblers were joining in the chorus 
of melody. 

A rustic bridge, partly overgrown with ivy, 
crossed the river almost in front of the great 
house beyond the lawn that faced the wood ; 
and coming down towards the bridge, from 
among the trees, were the Squire of Flairs and 
his fair young wife. 

He must have been at least fifteen years older 
than she was . too old a husband, you might 
have said at first, for such a childlike sylph of a 
girl. As she darted forward now, calling her 
dog to follow her, her white dress floating 
lightly round her, and her dark curls borne 
back over her shoulders by the breeze, she 
looked fairy-lik in her loveliness. 

Mr. Dryden was not handsome, but he was 
tall and stately, with a face that, although well 



THE SQUIRE AND HIS WIFE. 3 

featured, had not by nature anything winning 
about it; but as he hurried after his wife, 
the fondness that beamed all over it corrected 
your first impression, and made you decide that 
they were a well-matched pair. 

" Naughty Lettice !" he said ; but he drew 
her hand so gently and tenderly through his arm, 
that his scolding was plainly not earnest. " I 
shall have you fainting and frightening me again, 
if you run such wild races with Morven." 

She looked up at him from under the broad 
brim of her hat. No wonder he hung over her, 
bewitched by the fascination of those lustrous 
brown eyes . eyes that have such an exquisite 
mingling of joy and sorrow in their expression, 
that you never can analyse the mixture of feeling 
their gaze creates . eyes that seem to tell of sure 
sorrow and early death, and yet in whose depths 
lurk both passion and playfulness. 

" No, I will not faint." Her voice was very 
sweet and childlike. " I would not give you so 
much pain.'' She smiled up at him with a 
look of gratitude, almost as if he were her 
father. 

1.2 



4 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

He smiled back at her, and pressed her arm 
closer to his side . but he gave a little sigh, too 
-^-and then he looked at her as if he wanted to 
be questioned about that sigh. Who could have 
said Mr. Dryden's face was not winning now? 
.the intellect and truth stamped thereon were re- 
vealed forcibly, as ardent, wistful love shone out 
through his eyes. Gazing at the pair as they 
stood thus, you began to doubt whether the 
graceful piece of loveliness, toying with Mor- 
ven, with her dainty fingers, were capable of 
comprehending or appreciating the nobility of 
mind, the intensity of affection his utter self- 
abnegation revealed. 

He waited . but she only spoke some playful 
words to her dog. He longed to ask his wife 
if she really loved him . if she would ever again 
find his companionship the restraint it had 
appeared in the early days of their marriage ; 
but it seemed to him that the time for such 
heart-to-heart communion had not come, that 
by pressing for more confidence than she was 
beginning each day to give freely, he might 
frighten back the timid, child-like nature as 



9g!9mmammmmmmaammeamm9ssr^ 



THE SQUIRB AND HIS WIFE. 5 

effectually as the east wind closes the open- 
ing buds of Spring. Still he watched her, and 
hesitated, and, while he waited, opportunity 
passed . opportunity which, if we only knew it, 
is to most of us our life's one treasure ; yet, as 
it chiefly keeps in the midst of the deep stream 
of life, we nine out of ten of us miss it, for fear 
of the risk we should incur in taking a header 
for its seizure. I 

Lettice spoke eagerly. 

"Oh, there is Karse, and I want to say 
something very special to him." 

" And I must speak to him too ; so you shall 
have your little say out, and then he and I can 
settle our graver business by ourselves." 

He was accustomed to her ready submission, 
and her reluctance surprised him. There was 
such a beseeching look in the deep soft eyes, 
that he answered as if her request had been 
spoken. 

" My darling has some other wish . tell me 
what it is, Lettice ?" 

She blushed, and looked down while She an- 
swered. 



ELINOR DRYDEa^'s PROBATICW. 



"Only I want to speak to him last . it is 
about Ailsie, you know, the .girl he loves so 
dearly in Scotland. I believe he will socm ask 
you for leave of abs^ce, and . ^and . I thought 
it would be pleasanter for him to talk to me 
9fter he had settled his business with 
you. 

" Yes," her Jjusband spoke almost mechani- 
cally, and then moved forward to meet Karse, 
or Ben, as he called him. 

A fine athletic looking fellow, about thirty 
years old, with the clear hale complexion and 
bright freshness in the eyes, that tell of an out- 
door life with plenty of variety in it. 

Mr. Dryden's business, strictly relating to 
kennel affairs, was soon despatched, and then he 
passed on to give Lettice the opportunity she 
had asked for. 

He was in no hurry that she should rejoin 
him. Her words had given him a new insight 
into her cliaracter, and he wanted to think this 
out. 

She must love hiip miore deeply than he 
fancied, or she would never understand so well 






THE SaUIRE AKD HIS THTE. 7 

how to sympathise with another man's lov. 
Her mother had pledged her word to him 
that Lettice had never loved before she 
saw him, or he would have recurred to a sus- 
picion that had often haunted him before mar- 
riage, that his wife's heart was pre-engageA 

But Mrs. Butler, his moUier4n4aw, had 
assured him that Lettioe's extreme youtii, joiiaed 
to her timidity, alone caused the restraint she 
seemed to suffer from in those early days. Mr. 
Dryden had thought this restrdnt might have 
been lessened if Mrs. Butler would have left 
him and Ld;tice alone together sometimes ; but 
this, she maintained, was contrary to the code of 
society in which she had been brought up ; and 
when Colonel Butler's sudden death shortened 
the time of the engagement, he had decided to 
be patient with her whims till he was really 
Lettice's husband. ^ 

But he had never once ceased to regret this com- 
pliance. Lettice showed him no mc*e confidence 
as a husband than she had done before marriage. 
Moreover, she shrank from his passionate ca- 
resses with a terror that wounded him deeply, 



8 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

and which for a time made him, too, cold and 
constrained towards her. 

They had married abroad, and this had been 
the state of things between them when they 
came to Flairs. But then Mrs. Butler had 
never quitted them till lately, when Mr. 
Dryden had suddenly become aware that she 
stood between him and his wife's love; 
and although the parting had <!aused a lasting 
estrangement between the Squire and his mother- 
in-law, and had for a time made Lettice miser- 
able, every day, almost every hour, gave Mr. 
Dryden some fresh cause for thankfulness that 
Mrs. Butler's influence was removed. 

He had never loved till he saw Lettice, and 
then the mighty passion that swayed him ab- 
sorbed every other feeling of his life. Like 
most men who do not love women early, he had 
almost idolised the one friend of his boyhood 
and school-life, Stuart Palmer, the younger son 
of a baronet, whose lands almost joined the 
Dryden property. They had been always toge- 
ther, till Wentworth Dryden, being by some 
years Stuart Palmer's senior, went up from Eton 



THE SQUIRE AND HIS WIFE. 9 

to Christ Church, and thence into the world ; 
but still the friendship had lasted unchanged till 
now. Certainly Palmer had been out of Eng- 
land for more than a year, but in his all-engross- 
ing love for his wife, Mr. Dryden had entirely 
forgotten him . had forgotten even to wonder at 
the long silence that had grown up between 
them. Except this one friend, he had no ties 
to withdraw any thought or care from Lettice. 

The old Squire and his wife had died a few 
years ago ; he had never had a brother, and of 
his two sisters one had died in infancy, and the 
youngest, Elinor, when only sixteen, had eloped 
with the son of a country attorney. Her father 
had never forgiven the disgrace thus brought 
on the spotless fame of the Drydens, and Elinor 
Markham's name had been erased from the 
family record, and was never pronounced at 
Flairs. 

Her brother Wentworth had been very fond 
of his pretty silly sister, much younger than 
himself, but he had rigidly kept the promise 
exacted by his father; and, although letters 
sometimes passed between them, he and Mrs. 



10 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Markham had not seen each other since her 
flight. 

A huge beech tree spread its branches, 
quivering with butterfly-like leaves, over the 
wide lawn that stretched down from the 
house to the river's edge. Mr. Dryden stood 
baieatibi its shade, wondering . scarody be- 
lieving ail the happiness that lay before him 
. in his wife's increasing affection ; she was 
so much more at ease, spoke so much more 
freely to him, and no longer shrank timidly 
from his love : a little while, only a little 
while longer, and he would not hesitate to pluck 
away the thin veil which still hid her heart's 
secrets. He was slowly and surely winning her 
love, and he felt confirmed in the creed he had al- 
ways held about women . sorely shaken as it had 
been by the first part of his married life . the creed 
that if a wife be pure and good, and heart-free, 
her confidence is more surely won after marriage 
than before ; he knew too little of women to re- 
flect that marriage itself may seal up some con- 
fessions best revealed beforehand, and, strongly 
as Love had mastered him, he had yet to learn 



THE SQUIRE AND HIS WIFE. 11 

the wild, fetterless power of choice it will 
evoke from the heart of the most timid girl. 
He had very arbitrary notions about women. 
Perhaps, setting aside the disgrace brought on 
his name by his sister's conduct, the worst part 
of it to him was that any girl of position should 
dare to choose a husband except through the eyes 
of her parents. His Lettice had been a dutiful, 
loving daughter, the best earnest he could desire 
in a wife. 

So he stood under the beech tree, contem- 
{^ting the sunrise of his happiness, while the 
storm-cloud that was to wreck it had already 
passed the horizon. 



CHAPTER 11. 

, THE GERM OF MISTRUST. 

Mrs. Dryden's fair face was paler and more 
thoughtful when she joined her husband under 
the beech tree. 

He laughed at her for her interest in Karse's 
love-making, but she made no answer, except 
by a rather sad smile. 

" You must be tired,*' the Squire said, ** and 
I am going in-doors, too, for I have not looked 
at a letter this morning.'' 

He took her in by a little winding stone stair- 
case, near the angle of the house ; it was seldom 
used, and Mrs. Dryden shivered at the damp 
chill after the warm flood of sunshine. 



THE GERM OF MISTRUST. 13 



" Yes, it is very cold and damp ; but it leads 
straight into the North Gallery :' and the tender 
husband thought to himself that he would have 
the unused staircase ventilated and matted, so 
that it might prove a short and accessible way 
to the garden. 

Pushing open a swing-door, when at length 
they reached the second flight of the closely- 
twisting, spiral staircase, they entered a matted 
gallery, hung on one side with quaint old pic- 
tures of dead Drydens, 

" I will go and fetch my letters, and bring 
them to read in your morning-room." 

He held open for her one of the many doors 
that led into the gallery, and then passed him- 
self through a curtained entrance at its extreme 
end, and went into his own study. 

He did not stay even to examine his letters, 
he wanted to be with t^ettice again ; and he hur- 
ried back to her with the packet in his hand. 

He opened the door through which she had 
passed into a little ante-room, leading into her 
bed-room . a vast chamber, pannelled with white 
and gold, and sumptuously furnished. On the 



14 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

left was the entrance to his own dressing-room, 
but he turned to the right, and passed through 
an arched opening, screened with muslin cur- 
tains, lined with . rose-colour. The room he 
came inta seemed worthy to be dwelt in by even 
so lovely a lady as Mrs. Dry den. There 
was no sumptuous magnificence, only the 
elegance of refined taste . flowers in vases, 
growing naturally, suspended in graceful baskets, 
and filling the air with perfume . birds . pic- 
tures . china . all the nameless atoms that de- 
light cultivated eyes and senses . musical instru- 
ments, too, were there, for Lettice loved music ; 
and, lounging on a low seat in the midst of all, 
sat the queen of this little paradise, her hat 
laid aside, and her rich brown curls drawn 
slightly back from the white temples by a fillet 
of blue riband. 

Her husband stood and looked at her, and he 
thought how little justice any painter could 
render to that pure, transparent skin, those ex- 
quisite features, and, above all, to the soft, 
yielding grace displayed or rather betrayed by 
every movement. for there was such an entire 



THE GBRM OF MISTRUST. 15 

expression of modesty that she seemed more 
like a shrinkifig wild flower than even a lily of 
the garden. 

He turned away abruptly, half ashamed of 
his delay, and sat down to her writing-table to 
read his letters. Several were laid down beside 
him, without comment, but the one he now 
took up was read with deep interest, judging by 
his compressed lips and earnest expression. 

" Lettice, my darling," (he kept his eyes on 
the letter while he spoke,) " I feel ashamed of 
having been so selfish as to forget everything 
but my own happiness . " 

" Oh, no ! I can never believe you selfish ;" 
her eyes glistened, as they glanced up at him. 

He got up, and went to her, and stood strok- 
ing her hair while he talked. 

" Yes . even you will blame me, I am afi-aid ; 
you would scarcely have thought that till I knew 
you, my darling, I was in constant correspond- 
ence with a dear fi'iend, the companion, in fact, 
of many years of my life, and yet I have never 
even mentioned him to you ; this letter tells me 
that he has been ill; lymg between life and death, 



16 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

in Italy ; however, he is coming home, and you 
must help me, Lettice, to make it up to him. I 
do not fear that you will be like wives I have 
heard of, jealous of your husband's friend . ^you 
will soon love Stuart Palmer as I do, for you 
owe him some reparation . you have usurped 
his place." 

She did not answer, but he felt the soft hair 
slip away from his fingers. 

He looked down at her ; she was lying back 
in her chair, pale and still, with closed eyelids. 

" Lettice ! Lettice ! what is it, my darling ? 
speak to me." 

His hoarse voice told the agony he suffered, 
but she did not stir ; he felt her hands . they 
were cold, and, as he loosed them, fell into her 
lap, lifeless. 

He summoned help, and then sent off a man 
on horseback to Starby, for the doctor, but some 
time passed before Mrs. Dryden opened her 
eyes. 

When she did look round her, she had a wild, 
startled expression; but her husband's fond words 
seemed to charm this away. 



THE GERM OF MISTRUST. 17 

"When you are better, my darling," he 
whispered, ** I will scold you for running as you 
did, this morning ; you are not strong enough 
for any fatigue." 

The doctor confirmed his words; he felt 
Mrs. Dryden's pulse, and pronounced her to be 
in an extremely nervous, excitable state, arising, 
in his opinion, from debility. He should advise 
the Squire to take her to the sea-side, or, at any 
rate, to try a more bracing air. 

Dr. Jones said this by his patient's bed- 
side. 

" You think I ought to take Mrs. Dryden 
away at once ?'' 

" Well, yes. Squire ; I suppose you can always 
leave home when you choose." The doctor 
laughed, and thought to himself, '' Your bread is 
buttered on both sides." 

" Yes, I certainly can ; but " . he hesitated ; 
" the truth is, I wanted just to have shaken 
hands with Palmer, first. By the bye, Jones . 
but of course all Starby knows the news by this 
time.Sir Richard is dead ; just before his mar- 
riage, too, so my old friend is master of Ler- 

VOL. I. 3 



r 



I 



18 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

mouth ; I should like to have seen him on his 
first arrival." 

" Take my advice, and don't wait for that," 
said the doctor ; " the report in Starby is that 
when the news of his brother's death reached 
Genoa, Sir Stuart had a relapse, and, let me tell 
you, typhoid fever's an uncommonly ugly com- 
plaint to relapse into, especially when you have 
possibly nothing but Italian doctoring to count 
on. 

The doctor went away on his round . that 
daily monotonous journey of a country practi- 
tioner, a man who has more demand on his 
sympathy with his fellows than any other human 
being. . His thoughts now stayed behind him, 
in Mrs. Dryden's bed-room. 

" How fond he is of his wife ! I hope she's 
good enough for him; if ever there lived an 
upright, high-minded gentleman it is the present 
Squire. I had no notion he was so tender- 
hearted, either . not for his wife only . why, 
when he spoke of seeing his old friend again, 
his eyes were glistening. I can't quite make 
Madam Dryden out; I'm afraid she's fuU of 



THB GERM OF MISTRUST. 19 

nervous fancies, and that isn't quite the sort of 
thing for the Squire ; the only fault I know in 
him, he's a little too formal, and that don't at all 
do for weak nerves ; well, there's no mistake 
about her beauty, though I should like it a trifle 
more robust." 

In a day or two the colour came back to 
Lettice's cheek, but she did not recover her 
spirits. Mr. Dryden began to think Flairs was 
too dull for his wife . he would have liked to 
follow his father's example, and to live among 
his own people ; well, this might come when his 
darling's health grew stronger ; now she must be 
his first care and thought . they could reside 
occasionally at Flairs, but he would be more 
watchful in future . he ought to have found out, 
without Dr. Jones's help, that she was getting 
into a low, nervous state. 

He was sitting in his writing-room with these 
thoughts, and Lettice came gliding in. Her old 
timidity had returned since her illness, but that 
was natural ; he began to be sure when they got 
away from all past associations, and turned over 
a fresh page of life in some place full of the 

2.2 



20 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

sunshine and gaiety that seemed so to belong to 
her age and her beauty, he should really possess 
his wife's love ; even now, through her timidity, 
there was a daily increasing effort to please him, 
a gratitude for his unwearying devotion that 
touched him deeply, although it left his heart 
hungering more than ever for the something 
which her eyes had told him she was capable 
of bestowing. 

"Are you strong enough to travel, Let- 

tice r 

The colour flushed her cheek. 

"Oh, yes, quite; I can be ready as soon as 
ever you please." 

How pretty her childish eagerness was . it 
was plain she had completely tired of Flairs. 
He smiled; it was delightfal to be able to 
make her happy. 

"No, I think you must settle everything, 
Lettice . the journey, the starting-day, and 
all." 

He had taken one of her hands, as she stood 
beside him ; he felt the soft fingers dose ner- 
vously oti his own. 



nM^^MM^Pi^K^^ 



THE GERM OF MISTRUST. 21 

" I aiH quite ready, indeed I am ; I can be 
ready to start, to-morrow . shall we not go 
somewhere, a good way off ?" 

How earnest and excited she was ; with all 
his love for her, he yet felt stung that she should 
so shrink from Flairs. 

He had almost asked her why this was so, 
and then he yielded to his self-set habit of never 
speaking on impulse, 

" We will see." He opened a map that lay 
on the table, and seemed to his wife to be 
poring diligently over it. 

He was thinking about her, instead. 

Did she dislike Flairs for itself, or for its 
dulness; or was it only the dulness of being 
shut up with him, she shrank from . ^and again 
came the doubt, from some unknown cause 
stronger than ever, would his wife ever love 
him ? . was not this undefined restraint between 
them caused by her love for some one she had 
known before her marriage? 

Doubtless it is wrong to speak habitually 
on impulse, and yet wrong things, even in com- 
mon life, may be used rightly . the burning fluid, 



22 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

which, injudiciously or largely employed, destroys 
the strongest texture, applied with discretion, 
removes the stain which blemishes and takes 
all beauty from it. 

If Mr. Dryden had understobd the nature of 
women, he would have known that the door to 
his wife's confidence must be opened for her. 
that her timidity made her all too weak for 
spontaneous effort, and that every day and hour 
confidence was withheld the hinges grew more 
rusted, and obstacles . nothing if removed as 
they came. were graduaUy heaping up a barrier 
against it. 

He would have known, too, that this very 
giving way to impulse on his part would have 
made him more human, would have brought 
him down to her level . to the sympathies 
of her age ; but, instead of yielding to that 
which he would have considered an ungoverned 
petulance, he stified, with all his strength, the 
fierce feeling jealousy that had spoken so 
loudly and daringly, and forced his attention to 
the map on the table. 

He showed Lettice several places on the sea- 



THE GERM OF MISTRUST. 23 

coast, but still her eyes looked wistfully north- 
wards. 

" Could it not be Scotland ?" she said pre- 
sendy. 

" It is the wrong season ; we shall scarcely 
find the leaves out ; vegetation is so much later 
there than with us/' He looked up and saw 
her disappointment. 

Had he not said she should choose, and after 
all they were only going in search of change. 
He smiled, and told her in his tender petting 
manner that she should have her own way in 
all things. 

She bent down her sweet face to be kissed 
for thanks, and whispered to him that he had 
made her very happy, and that she should give 
orders about her preparations at once. 

He rose and opened the door for her, and 
then he went back to his seat full of newly- 
kindled hope. He saw now that this journey 
would help his wishes : Lettice and he would be 
far more constantly thrown into each other's 
society in travelling, than even in the quiet life 
of Flau^-*where his duties as a landholder, a 



24 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

magistrate, a neighbour^ all contributed to sepa- 
rate him from his wife. The idea of it had 
plainly done her good already. She had looked 
brighter and more girlish as she left him. 

In two days time they were on their way to 
the Border. Karse was to accompany them as 
far as Jedburgh^ and then after a few weeks' 
holiday would return to Flairs, with his Teviot- 
dale bride. 



CHAPTER III. 



ESTRANGEMENT. 



Dr. Jones had prophesied rightly. The shock 
of his brother's death broke down Sir Stuart 
Palmer's newly-gained strength, and a full 
month passed away before be was strong enough 
to travel to Lermouth. 

And when he came, he was still such an in- 
yalid that the festivities of his welcome had to be 
greatly shorten^. 

There was a good deal of talk among the 
upper household of Flairs, respecting their mas- 
ter's absence at such a time. Nothing, it was 
affinned, could have afforded so decided a proof 



26 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

of his love for Mrs. Dryden, as this desertion of 
his old friend. 

Most of his servants had grown grey at 
Flairs, and all knew how intimate the tie had 
been between him and the new baronet. 

It was plain that Sir Stuart knew of his 
friend's absence, for not even a message came 
to Flairs from Lermouth during the short time 
he stayed there. 

And when he went away to London, the 
Flairs household sagaciously remarked that the 
country would have seen more of Sir Stuart 
Palmer, if the Squire had stayed at home. 

But their sagacity was soon roused from dis- 
cussing Sir Stuart's movements. 

Karse, or as he was called Mr. Karse since he 
had been appointed head-gamekeeper, brought 
his young wife . his winsome Ailsie . home to 
the pretty cottage the Squire had built for 
him on the high ground above the hanging 
wood. 

The gamekeeper had never been popular 
among the household. He held himself so 
very " high/* and now he seemed to wish to 



ESTRANGEMENT. 27 

isolate his wife completely from all communU 
cation with the great house. He told the 
steward and the housekeeper that ** the mistress 
had looked rosier and bonnier by far when she 
left Jedburgh than when she left Flairs, and 
that she had been rare and kind to Ailsie." 

Hete was another proof of Mrs. Dryden's 
want of judgment, thought the pompous old 
servants . " cockering up a young thing like that 
till sheM never know her own place again." 

But when the novelty of Mrs. Karse had 
worn away, and there was nothing left to disturb 
or enliven the monotonous gossip of the Flairs 
household, the prolonged absence of the Squire 
and his lady became noticeable. They had left 
Scotland already . they were in France now. 
They were for ever travelling from one place to 
another. It had not been a habit of the Dry- 
dens to absent themselves in this continuous 
fashion; and Starby looked grave as well as 
Flairs. 

At length, about the middle of Decem- 
ber, news came that they were returning, 
orders to prepare their own apartments, 



28 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

but DO directions for the reception of visi* 
tors. 

This was sorely puzzling, for the Christinas 
hospitalities of Flairs had been noted through 
the county ; in his father's time the young 
Squire had been a hearty promoter of the fes- 
tivities of the genial season ; and again, a feel- 
ing of dislike against the new Madam Dryden 
stirred in the household. 

But when at last, all marshalled for her recep- 
tion in the great hall, they saw her arrive^ a 
sudden feeling of surprise and pity subdued the 
rising discontent. 

She stepped feebly from the carriage, and 
walked silently through the avenue left for her, 
to the staircase. 

So pale . so sad . so heart-stricken. 

Was this the fair young bride the Squire 
had carried away from Flairs in early June ? 

No wonder he had striven by every eflFort that 
change of scene and climate could afford, to bring 
back her blooming loveliness. 

But when Dr. Jones called in the Christ- 
mas week soon after their return, to offer 



ESTRANGEMENT. 29 

bis usual coDgratulations, the alteratioD in the 
Squire impressed him quite as forcibly. 

He looked ten years older. Tbere was a 
stern sorrow in bis face, tbat no one bad ever 
seen tbere before, and when he spoke the change 
was even greater. There was no cordiality, no 
kindling into life ; even when a topic of interest 
was started his look and manner were alike icy 
and repelling. 

Whether this would have thawed in the 
genial atmosphere of society, no one bad a 
chance of knowing. 

The numerous invitations tbat greeted their 
return home were unhesitatingly refused . 
'* Mrs. Dryden's health unfitted her for society," 
and by degrees old friends and neighbours grew 
tired of reiterating civilities so pertinaciously re- 
sisted. Strange stories were rumoured of mutual 
unbappiness between the Squire and his wife ; 
but as not even Dr. Jones had ever succeeded 
in seeing them together since their return to 
Flairs, the stories did not grow, and by many 
were disbelieved. It was but natural that the 
Squire should look aged and anxious, now he found 



30 ELINOB DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

what a delicate young creature he had married ; 
and if he gave up society, it was only a proof 
of his untiring devotion to poor Mrs. Dryden. 

" Anybody who had any eyes could see she 
was in a decline/' said the Starby gossips, 
when she sometimes drove through the small 
town, spite of Dr. Jones's oft-repeated warning 
to " mind their own business, and not to sit in 
judgment on other people's lungs." 

A strange maid and man-servant had accom- 
panied the Squire and his wife home, and there 
was no satisfaction to be gleaned out of either 
of them. 

The maid was a broad Scotchwoman, and she 
at once struck up an alliance with Mrs. Karse, 
which sealed the unfavourable impression her 
reserve and abrupt answers had made on the 
household. 

Mrs. Dryden sometimes visited Karse's cot- 
tage, and when she came back she looked more 
cheerful ; but generally she would sit for hours 
in her morning-room alone . thinking. 

Thinking of what? . of something plainly 
which blanched her cheeks, and enlarged the 



ESTRANGEMENT. 31 

scared dSation, which people dow remarked^ in 
her beautiful eyes. 

If her husband went into her room, she never 
addressed him ; and if he spoke to her she an- 
swered with an indifference almost amounting 
to sullenness. 

About three weeks after their return home, 
the Squire came suddenly into his wife's 
room. 

" Lettice, I am going to London for a week, 
or perhaps rather longer. Can I do anything 
for you there ?" 

" No, thank you !'* 

She did not even look at him, or pause be- 
tween the stitches of her delicate needlework. 

He knew that his presence was irksome to 
her, but such entire indifference stirred him. 

" I do not ask you to go with me, Lettice ; 
for some time past it has seemed to me that a 
temporary absence would give you . would give 
us both time to reflect on the unhappy estrange- 
ment that has come between us." 

He tried to speak kindly; but his natural 
stiffness of manner^ increased tenfold by his 



32 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

unhappinesSy made his words soand very hard 
and reproachful. 

A weary look came over her face, and she 
held up her hand deprecatingly to stop any fur- 
ther appeal. 

He took the hand in his. What would he 
have given then to dare to take his wife to his 
heart and insist on knowing every secret of hers; 
but he could not do this ; h^r manner towards 
him had altered so strangely and suddenly, that 
he often feared her brain was slightly affected ; 
and the slightest demonstration of affection on 
his part always increased her coldness. Now 
she drew her hand away without looking at him. 

"You need not fear, Lettice." His voice 
showed how deeply she had wounded him. '' I 
was not about to force any unwelcome demand 
for explanation on you. I came to say good'* 
bye to you . and now I am going." 

He went, and almost as soon as he reached 
London, learned that his friend Sir Stuart was 
supposed to be on his way to Lermouth. 

There seemed to be a spell on their meeting ; 
but the Squire wrote at once to his old friendi 



ESTRANGEMENT. 33 

entreating him not to leave home again till hi 
own return to Flairs . he hoped to be there by 
the end of a fortnight. 

No answer came. Palmer had always been 
a bad correspondent, and during the past year 
his letters had entirely ceased. But it was 
well known to his friend that he had travelled 
incessantly till his illness. Since then Mr. Dry- 
den had lost trace of him. It ^as possible that 
he might not be at Lermouth now, or that, 
counting on his old friend's speedy return, he 
shirked the trouble of writing. 

The Squire's heart yearned towards him, al- 
though he shrank from exposing his domestic un- 
happiness to his friend. How he had longed at 
one time to show him the exquisite wife he had 
chosen. That was all past and gone, but Sir 
Stuart's friendship would be doubly valuable 
now. By the time he had accomplished the 
object of his journey his heart felt greatly 
lightened. Lately he had begun to think him- 
self hardened against human affections and 
sympathy ; but the almost joyful sensation 
with which he received his lawyer's news . four 

VOL. I. 3 



7 



34 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

days sooner than he expected it . that his pre- 
sence in London was no longer necessary, taught 
him how strong was the tie that bound him to 
his early friend. 

There was no need to announce his arrival. 
He should start as soon as possible on the fol- 
lowing day, and tal^e Palmer by surprise. 



CHAPTER IV. 



JEALOUSY* 



When Mr. Diyden reached Flairs, late in the 
afternoon, he went straight to his wife's morn- 
ing-room ; it was empty, and so was her bed- 
room. He rang for her maid. 

The grave Scotchwoman announced that her 
mistress was better . had seemed in better spirits 
lately. She thought she was indoors, and 
then she went to look for Mrs. Dryden's hat, and 
gave it as her opinion that she must have gone 
out by the turret staircase. She herself had been 
sitting at her sewing in one of the rooms at the 
other end of the gallery ever since dinner-* 

3.2 



36 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

time. She must have heard her mistress pass 
the door, if she had gone by the great staircase. 

" You are sure your mistress is out, then ?" 

" Yes, sir." 

He hesitated a moment. 

" When she comes in say that I am returned 
from London, and that I have gone on to Ler- 
mouth. I suppose Sir Stuart is there still ?" 

" Yes, -sir/'. , 

It struck Mr. Dry den, as he passed down the 
turret staircase, that he might have asked the 
last question of one of the men-servants, and 
also that he might have inquired whether Sir 
Stuart had been to Flairs to ask for him. 

But as soon as he found himself across the 
river and climbing the hanging wood, fairly on 
his way to greet his friend, he felt as impatient 
as a boy. His eyes glistened, and memory 
turned over leaf after leaf of past years ; every 
step of the ground he was treading recalled 
some freak of boyish mischief, some daring 
adventure shared with his friend; and then 
had come their school life . the pertection of 
their friendship. He smiled to himself, as he 



JEALOUSY. 37 

thought how Utde we really know the value 
of what we seem to prize most highly, and 
he began to speculate on the present . should 
he find his friend much changed, chilled from 
his warm heartiness and enthusiasm into a 
courteous, self-contained man of the world ? 

He had soon reached Lermouth. Sir Stuart 
was not at home. He had gone out two or 
three hours ago. without saying when he might 
be expected to return. 

Mrs. Dryden's maid had sat at her sewing, 
with the room door ajar, so that she might be 
ready to give the Squire's message to her mis* 
tress directly she returned. How very long she 
was in coming. 

At last she thought she heard footsteps ; she 
put down her work to listen. 

Yes, there were certainly footsteps coming up 
the little turret stairs; but they were heavier 
than Mrs. Dryden's. Had she been one of the 
village girls, a strange footstep in that place 
might have frightened her; for tradition re* 
ported the North Gallery haunted ; but she was 



38 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

a stranger, and stout-hearted. She only fancied 
some intruder was venturing where he had no 
business, so she almost closed her door and 
peeped through the chink thus made. 

The turret door swung open . it was the 
Squire, after all. 

He kept the door open, and Mrs. Dryden fol- 
lowed him slowly and seemingly against her 
will. 

The Squire's face was white and set as marble ; 
but Mrs. Dryden looked flushed with anger, a 
strange, new expression on her sweet face. 

The maid had never remarked any semblance of 
affection between this unhappy pair, but hitherto 
there had been no apparent strife. She was, as 
I have said, a reticent woman, and now she was 
thankful that no one but herself had seen those 
two faces . either a tempest had passed over 
them, or it was surely coming. 

When at last her mistress's bell rang she was 
not surprised to hear that Mrs. Dryden felt too 
unwell to appear at dinner ; she was lying down, 
so the maid could not see her face, but her voice 
had an unwonted determination in it. 



JEALOUSY. 39 

And this change continued. People wondered 
what had happened to the pale, meek, drooping 
woman ; her looks, her manner, her voice, had 
all gained a defiant haughtiness, especially when 
she addressed her husband^ . there was no 
longer the same dead silence between them. 
Mrs. Dryden asserted her own will now, and 
although her husband's love had plainly left him, 
at times he yielded as if he still wished to please 
her. One change in him was very remarkable ; 
before his journey to London they had each gone 
their own way, only meeting at meal-times . 
now, if Mrs. Dryden strolled out into the Park, 
in a few moments the Squire was sure to follow 
her . not near enough to bear her company, but 
keeping her always in view ; and if his wife per- 
ceived him, her lovely lips would curl with 
scornful pride, at the dose watch he kept over 
her. 

March came, and Mrs. Dryden drooped and 
faded beneath the keen east wind. 

She had kept her room for l^veral days, no 
one seeing her but her maid, when her husband 
entered, unannounced. 



40 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" I came to enquire for you . " he stopped 
suddenly, the change in her looks shocked 
him into silence. 

Her sofa was drawn close to the fire, and she 
lay on it, pale, almost ghastly, with one small, 
bright red spot on each cheek . her eyes were 
closed, and showed how black and deep were 
the circles beneath them ; but at the sound of his 
voice she opened them languidly. 

" I fear you are very ill . will you not see 
Dr. Jones?" 

She held out her hand. 

" Wentworth, Dr. Jones will not do me so 
much good as you can." 

An ague-like trembling ran through him ; if 
this had come but six months sooner. now his 
love was cold and dead. 

He looked down into her eyes, fully raised to 
meet his own. Even his jealous mistrust 
yielded to the unflinching truth he read there ; 
but still the time was gone by when he could 
have met Lettice half-way ; she must explain 
her own meaning. 

" I have never had faith in Dr. Jones, I do 



JEALOUSY. 41 

not believe in country doctors; if I consult 
him he will say I must stay at home and keep 
quiet in my present state." 

"Every one else would say so, Lettice; I 
believe travelling is always forbidden at such a 
time." 

She sat upright on her sofa, and shaded her 
eyes with her hand . then she looked up at him 
again. The pleading appeal in her voice moved 
him deeply. 

" Wentworth, do you remember how you 
used to love me ? I know that is gone now, but 
I have sometimes thought that if I had been 
braver and had trusted you, we might have been 
less unhappy. I have been thinking these last 
few days, thinking over all your conduct to me, 
and I do not believe you really think evil of me. 



now.*' 



He turned away while she spoke, and leaned 
his elbow on the mantel-shelf; as she went on, 
his face was hidden in his clasped hands. 

" I cannot promise to love you as you expect 
to be loved, but some day, . when my baby is 
born, . I will tell you everything." 



42 ELINOR DRYDEN'8 PROBATION. 

She saw him start slightly, but he did not 
look round. 

" I have a great kindness to ask of you, now. 
You think I look ill . do you know, Wentworth, 
that I feel as if I should die, if you do not take 
me away from Flairs ?" 

She waited, but still he neither moved nor 
answered. Then she rose up from her sofa, 
and almost tottered towards him. 

She clasped her hands round his arm to sup- 
port herself. 

" Speak to me . do not keep me in this sus- 
pense . I am not deceiving you; I believe if 
you take me once more to the north, I shall 
learn to love you . if I stay here, I shall die before 
your eyes, and I shall not die alone, remember." 

Mr. Dryden raised himself and looked at the 
delicate, pleading creature. All the old passion 
was sweeping over him with a force that alarmed 
him into self-restraint ; in the face of all his un- 
extinguished doubt and suspicion was he in one 
moment to be cajoled by a few sweet words, 
spoken to attain a certain end. 

But when his wife's eyes fastened themselves 



JEALOUSY. 43 

on his, doubt and mistrust melted before their 
sweetness ; he kept a tight rein on impulse, but 
he bent down, and kissed her forehead ; then he 
said gently . 

" If I think you can bear a journey, Lettice, 
I will take you where you wish." 

" You promise ?" she said, eagerly. 

" I promise," he spoke very solemnly ; " and 
if I keep my promise will you keep yours ? will 
you give me the confidence I ought to have had 
long ago, so that there may be at least peace 
between us ?" 

" If I live, Wentworth, there shall be more 
than peace." 

She broke into long, vehement weeping ; he 
soothed her almost with his old tenderness, and 
finally left her comforted with the promise, that 
if her health had mended by the end of the 
week, without consulting Dr. Jones or any one 
else, he would take her to the Highlands. 

He felt strangely uneasy and perplexed, but 
he told himself that this was a case in which 
he alone could judge ; by travelling slowly 
and with great care, all evil results might 



44 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

be averted, and they could return to Flairs 
in sufficient time for the heir to be born there. 

Not one of the old servants knew how far the 
Squire proposed to take his invalid wife; he 
shrank from exposing himself to Dr. Jones's 
opposition and comment. With the same maid 
and man who had returned with them, they set 
forth on this new journey, in the first bright 
days of cold, early Spring, 



BOOK THE FIRST. 



SEED-TIME. 



CHAPTER I. 

ELINOR MARKHAM. 

The writing-room at Flairs was neither strik- 
ing in its dimensions, nor handsome in its 
furnishing, but it was an enticing place to re- 
main in. 

It was a long room, with a projecting fire- 
place of carved oak at one end, and a deep 
three-sided bay window, with narrow panes full 
of painted glass, at the other. 

On each side of the fire-place were recessed 
* doors, screened with heavy curtains, to secure 
quiet from passers-by in the stone gallery out- 
side, and from these curtained doors to the 



48 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

window ran bookshelves, filled with volumes 
chiefly of modern appearance, for this was essen- 
tially the " writing-room ;" the library itself 
opened from it by a small doorway on the left 
as you faced the fire-place, screened like the two 
others with a heavy red curtain. 

That curtain was moving now, and presently 
a slender hand appeared slightly withdrawing it. 
A minute more and the cloth folds were violently 
pushed aside, and a young girl stood in the 
doorway. 

Dark-skinned, with the hair and eyes of a 
gipsy, she was remarkable, rather than pretty ; 
so slender in form, so wonderfully intelligent in 
face, it was difficult to picture Elinor Markham 
as ever having been a child, or to associate 
her in one's mind with the dimpled repose 
of sofl, plump babyhood. 

She stood hesitating, surprised at the sudden 
daring which had nerved her to dash the curtain 
aside, and invade her uncle's solitude ; one hand 
still grasped the heavy cloth folds, while her 
great, black eyes wandered round, as if they were 
taking an inventory of all she saw. She was 



ELINOR MARKHAM. 49 

trying to gain a moment's respite before she 
looked at her uncle. 

Mr. Dryden sat at a table beside the fire, with 
his back towards her ; he did not move, his head 
remained bent over the half-finished letter on 
his desk. 

He knew who the intruder was, and he was 
far too angry with Elinor to speak to her at 
once. 

To a more timid nature, this silence, the com- 
plete ignoring of her presence implied by it, 
would have been a more effectual rebuke than 
words, and she would have retreated ; but Elinor 
had been, as she thought, grievously wronged, 
and her Self- Will was determined on con- 
quest. 

The warm blood glowed through her dark 
skin, the slender fingers tightened over the 
curtain, and she shook back her masses of curls 
so vehemently that her hat fell to the ground. 

A strange sudden look of beauty came into 
her face, as her eyes turned flashing on her 
uncle. 

" Uncle, I want to speak to you." 

VOL. I. 4 



50 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

But even then Mr. Dryden did not turn 
round. 

He was, as he had always been, studiously 
courteous in manner to women, even to so very 
young a girl as linor, but he was hard and un- 
forgiving when any right of his was invaded, or 
when anything that touched him personally was 
interfered with. 

Elinor's throat throbbed and crimsoned, till 
she felt almost suffocated ; but though she told 
herself that ^' this was hateful injustice,' and that 
if she chose she could make him turn round," 
something kept her from advancing boldly into 
the room. 

Mr. Dryden folded his letter, addressed and 
sealed it, then he rose and turned round towards 
Elinor. 

His face was sterner, now, than it used to be, 
fifteen years ago; his deep, grey eyes had a 
suspicious glance unknown to them in former 
times, the furrow between them had deepened, 
and the almost grim lines stamped round the 
firm mouth gave a hardness which contrasted 
unnaturally with the delicacy that his in-door 



ELINOR MARKHAM. 51 

student-habits of late years had restored to his 
complexion ; but although from the want of 
breadth above the eyes, and other tokens, it 
might have been argued that Mr, Dryden was 
prejudiced and bigoted in his opinions, yet it 
was impossible not to realise, in looking at him, 
that you were in the presence of a perfect gen- 
tleman, a gentleman not only by birth, breeding, 
and schooling, and he had all these, but one 
who bore the innate stamp of nobility. Although 
the sorrow that had hung over the last years of 
his life had prevented his high and rare qualities 
from shining out among his fellow-men as they 
had done ; still the remembrance lived in 
the hearts of all who had once known him, 
spite of the isolation in which he preferred to 
pass his life. 

In that last journey to Scotland, when love 
and peace in his married life seemed nearer, 
more real than they had ever come before, Let- 
tice died. By a sudden accident . her carriage 
overturned in a rocky glen, in the Highlands . 
she had sustained so serious an injury, that both 
she and the infant born just afterwards, perished. 

4.2 



52 ELINOR DftYDEN's PROBATION. 

It was long before the Squire could force 
himself to revisit Flairs, and when he came he 
was scarcely to be recognised. 

In even the common affairs of life he now 
betrayed so hard and suspicious a temper that 
his old servants and dependents shook their heads 
gravely, and said "sorrow had worked sore 
changes in the young master." All but one . 
Ben Karse, the gamekeeper, never had a word 
to add to these discussions, or, if questioned, 
he answered that " he never fashed himself 
about changes ; time changed all men." 

Mr. Dryden fixed his eyes sternly on 
Elinor. 

" Come here." 

He pointed to the hearth-rug, on one side of 
which his table was placed. 

She had started as he spoke, and let the cur- 
tain fall; she glanced back at it for an in- 
stant, as if meditating a retreat, then straighten- 
ing her arms against her sides, she went forward 

boldly. 

Mr. Dryden looked surprised as she stood 



ELINOR MARKHAM. 53 

there, facing him, her eyes fixed resolutely on 
his, and her whole countenance expressing 
injury. 

" What is the matter ?" 

He did not mean to have said it . he had not 
intended to give her the opportunity of speak- 
ingy but simply to administer so sharp a reproof 
as should prevent her from repeating the offence 
of intrusion. 

" Why, uncle ! Northover won't let me go 
on the other side of the river ; you know I have 
often gone there with Mamzelle and the Fraii* 
lein, and if my governesses think it right to take 
me there, ought such a person as Northover, a 
housekeeper, to interfere with me ? I . I . think 
she is very impertinent." 

She had tried to speak calmly . for this was 
not Elinor's first complaint against Northover, 
although it was the first time she had ventured 
on an intrusion to prefer it . but her lips and 
throat quivered with agitation. 

Mr. Dryden had not studied human na- 
ture much, still he saw that something was 
amiss with Elinor, and he had a discomforting 



54 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

perception that she was very impetuous and 
self-willed. 

" Hush ! Northover is not impertinent ; she 
means well, and in this case she only obeys my 
orders in forbidding you to cross the bridge 
unless some one is with you." 

The girl's eyes flashed, and she set her teeth 
till her lips scarcely showed themselves. 

Mr. Dryden spoke in a harsher voice than 
Elinor had ever heard from him before ; he was 
revolted by her display of self-will . it seemed 
to him utterly unfeminine. 

" Your governess will return in a fortnight ; 
during her absence you have the rest of the 
park to roam over. Do not come to me any 
more with complaints of Northover, I cannot 
listen to them ; you may go away, now, Elinor, 
and remember in future that this is my private 



room." 



He said the last words gently, as if he felt 
for the shame with which she must listen to such 
a reproof ; but presently, as he watched her 
dogged look, when she turned towards the door- 
way, he spoke quickly and sternly . 



ELINOR MARKHAM. 55 

" Elinor, have you any especial reason for 
wanting to cross that bridge, or is it only wil- 
fulness?" 

The allusion to her temper set it ablaze, and 
it leaped forth high above all restraint or con- 
cealment. 

" Isn't it reason enough to want to be free, 
not to be like a slave, watched at every turn ? if 
my Skye strays over the bridge he is free to do 
it . I have not even the liberty of a dog." 

She hid her face against the curtain, for she 
was standing in the doorway again, and pressed 
her head closely into its folds. 

Mr. Dryden felt puzzled; he had not the 
slightest idea how to deal with her. The Fraii- 
lein must be neglectful, and it would be well to 
give her a reproof when she returned to Flairs. 

" Elinor . I am surprised and shocked. I 
thought you must know how to conduct your- 
self at your age. Pray never forget yourself in 
this way a^gain." 

But almost before he had finished, she darted 
off, slamming the library-door behind her with 
violence, although, thanks to its cloth covering. 



56 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

she could not make her exit as noisy as she 
wished. 

Her uncle looked very unhappy. 

It might have been better, he thought, if he 
had seen more of Elinor since he had taken her 
from her own home, to educate as his possible 
heiress ; but the women of the Dryden race had 
always been kept in the seclusion of the nursery 
and the schoolroom, and therefore the surest 
means of making Elinor Markham that which 
he wished her to become . a genuine Dryden . 
was to follow family maxims. 

When he at last returned to Flairs, a 
childless widower, he began to consider the 
feasibility of adopting an heir. His sister, as 
has been said, eloped with a young lawyer, 
named Roland Markham, when only sixteen ; 
and to avoid the chance of any son sprung from 
such a stock inheriting Flairs, Mr. Dryden cut 
off the entail before his own marriage. 

The old Squire had made his son promise 
never to acknowledge Roland Markham as a 
brother, or to tolerate his presence at Flairs ; Mr, 
Dryden had obeyed his father's command to the 



ELINOR MAKKHAM. 57 

letter, and as he did not choose to run the risk 
of seeing her husband, he and his sister 
had never met since Mrs. Markham*s marriage. 
But in childhood she had been a great favourite 
with her brother, and little by little she had con- 
trived after her father's death to make advances 
which had eventuated in a tolerably regular cor- 
respondence. 

Thenceforth the Squire was duly informed of 
the arrival of each new member of the Mark- 
ham family ; and he always sent a liberal chris- 
tening present, although he resolutely refused the 
office of godfather. 

No . he was willing to show a kindly feeling, 
but he could not countenance a mesalliance. 
He shrank from seeing his sister sunk probably 
to her husband's level ; and this was not entirely 
caste prejudice, for Markham was the son of a 
village attorney, and inferior both in breeding 
and education to many of his class. The Squire 
shrank, too, from seeing the children, perhaps with 
the faces and characteristics of Drydens marred, 
he felt sure, by the plebeian blood which must 
betray its presence in every word and gesture. 



58 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION, 

A Markham as a Markham he could not have 
endured ; but_ he had always heard that women's 
natures were docile and flexible. Little by little 
a project took form and colour in his mind, and 
ended some years after by a proposal to his sister 
to educate her daughter Elinor at Flairs, if the 
parents would consent to an entire separation 
during his lifetime. 

There was little danger, Mr. Dryden told 
himself, that a girl brought up at Flairs amid 
ancestral associations, would ever wish to ex- 
change them for a home with such a father as 
Roland Markham. 

He only promised to provide handsomely for 
her. It would be time enough, he thought, to 
name her as his heiress if she fulfilled his hopes, 
although he stipulated that she should bear the 
name of Dryden as long as she remained at Flajrs. 

The Markhams had already six children, and 
they showed no hesitation in accepting the 
Squire's offer. 

Elinor was sent to Flairs, and presented to 
her uncle. His first glance told him how much 
she resembled her father. The sudden invin- 



ELINOR MARKHAM. 59 

cible repugnance that rose in his face had laid 
the first stone of a barrier that had never been 
surmounted either by unde or niece. He 
avoided her in the hope that separation from 
her family, and a refined education, would so 
change her outward bearing, her loud voice and 
impetuous manner, that he should find in her 
the sympathy he so much desired ; and Elinor 
was glad to escape the presence of her serious, 
quiet uncle, whose very courteous stateliness was 
a reproof. 

But why at his age had Mr. Dryden resolutely 
closed his eyes to the possibility of a second 
marriage ? It seemed strange that a man so 
reserved and so fastidious should have delibe- 
rately chosen instead, the responsibility of 
bringing up a girl of whose disposition he knew 
nothing, a girl whose high spirit . gossip said . 
needed the utmost care of a mother. 

Here was a mystery, which for some years 
past had aflforded constant food for wonder in 
after-dinner talk to the worthy matrons of the 
county in which Mr. Dryden was decidedly " the 
best match.'' 



CHAPTER II. 

THE NORTH GALLERY. 

Elinor dashed along the library . a noble, 
rarely used room . and passed through a door 
on the right-hand, into the dining-room which 
commanded the western side of the park. She 
flung away from the window again with a deeper 
frown than ever ; her eyes looked almost small 
as the heavy, rather coarsely marked brows were 
drawn down on them. It was too hard ! 

Over the north and west sides of the domain 
she might roam at will ; but the sparkling river 
that bounded the flower-garden on the east, and 
divided one half of the park from the other, 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 61 

could only be crossed by the forbidden bridge, 
and at this time' of year, when the great beech 
tree, the wonder of the county, was leafless, 
Mrs. Northover's still-room windows commanded 
the river, and the whole of the eastern side of 
the gardens. 

The house was a hollow square ; the small, 
well-like court within was flanked at three of 
the comers by projecting circular turrets, con- 
taining spiral staircases, by which the stone gal- 
lery which ran round three sides of the mansion, 
communicated with the floors above and below. 

The whole of the northern side of this gallery, 
except the small study at one end where Mr. , 
Dryden saw his steward, assembled his house- 
hold for family prayers, and administered justice, 
was unoccupied, except on the rare occasions 
when a state visitor might perhaps for one night 
inhabit the haunted-looking, richly furnished 
bedrooms, which now wrapped in their brown 
holland coverings looked strangely cold and 
inhospitable. 

Elinor passed on until she reached this North 
Gallery, and then flung herself on the floor, and 



62 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

sobbed with the vehemence of mingled sorrow 
and passion. No one had ever seen her thus, 
since she had come to Flairs, although the 
dark doud of her expression had often warned 
both her governess and Mrs. Northover of the 
lightning it heralded ; but either her indomit- 
able pride, or the whisper which children 
hear so much more plainly than those with 
whom the lights of Reason have deadened the 
strivings of Spirit, had warned her to suppress 
an outward show of anger. She was always 
safe here. Once a month . not so often in 
winter-time . Northover and her maids visited 
the unused gallery, and dusted and inspected all 
the rooms but two ; at other times it was left 
undisturbed ; a crimson curtain drawn across it, 
just beyond Mr. Dry den's study door, shut it oflf 
on the east side, and at the other end a door 
opening on the winding staircase closed it effec- 
tually against all intruders. Mr. Dryden never 
entered it. The old servants said it was because 
his wife's apartments had been among those now 
so seldom occupied, and the younger ones main- 
tained that it was haunted, and that a spirit walked 



THB NORTH GilLLERY. 63 

in the rooms that were always locked. Perhaps 
Northover herself wrfs the only one who would 
have ventured there after sunset. 

Elinor had heard some of these stories, but 
had not greatly heeded them. Now as her 
sobbing gradually subsided, and she sat on the 
ground looking at the grim array of family por- 
traits on the gallery wall, dimly lighted by the 
dusty window panes opposite. she began to 
wonder if they had any consciousness, and 
whether they, too, would pronounce her ill-bred, 
or whether they would agree with her and con- 
sider her ill-used. 

There was one auburn-haired youth in plate 
armour, grasping a sword ; he had bright blue 
eyes and a firm-set, rebellious-looking mouth. 
The expression caught by the painter was a half- 
checked smile. Elinor sat gazing up at him, re- 
membering all the stories she had heard of him, 
and she began to think he would never have 
been handed down from one generation to 
another, as '' the dauntless, the valiant Hubert 
Dryden," if he had consented at sixteen to 
cage his limbs within limits prescribed by others. 



64 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

 

and had obeyed the tyrannical commands of 
those who knew no better than himself. 

What right had Northover to interfere about 
the park ? She never stirred out of the house 
except on Sunday, and as to uncle^ . he hadn't 
an idea beyond books and horses . how could 
he judge what was fit for girls ? Here her 
cheeks flushed, and she tossed back her head, 
trying to shake off the rein of some contradic- 
tory yet irresistible memory ; but it would not 
be shaken off. It rose before her clearly that 
Uncle Dryden knew how girls should be- 
have, better than any one. Elinor inherited 
some of her father's want of refinement; but 
she had the instinctive appreciation which almost 
all women share in different degrees for the evi- 
dence of refinement in men, and she would 
rather have been cruelly illtreated by her father, 
supposing that his good-nature could have per- 
mitted unkindness to his children, than have 
heard Uncle Dryden call her unladylike. He 
was so very hard. 

" Oh, if I only had some one to be kind to 
me . somebody who would think everything I do 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 65 

right. Uncle does not care enough. Northover 
cares too much ; and as for Fraulein, as long as 
I learn my lessons and there is a good dinner 
she is content ; she can cry over the people in 
the novel she reads, but she never thinks whe- 
ther I am happy or not. I wonder how Unde 
Dryden would like it if I were to run away, as 
mamma did, . only I should run home.** 

She looked up at Hubert Dryden . his lips 
seemed to curl at such a foolish thought. 

No . she had seen her home once again, 
when her mother was very ill ; and after a two 
days' visit had begged hard to be sent back to 
Flairs. The meagre slovenly household ar^ 
rangements ; her father's rude, boisterous man- 
ner and broad jokes ; the noise and disorder of 
a house full of children who had no regular 
nursery control . shocked the child now habitu- 
ated to the luxury and solemn order of Flairs ; 
and when she returned thither, she felt convinced 
as she told the pictures in the North Gallery, 
that she was quite a Dryden, and had nothing 
Markham about her. Only at times like this 
she longed for her mother . not as other child- 

VOL I. 5 



66 ELINOR DRYDEM's PROBATION. 

ren who have never left that tender guidance, long 
for the daily help and watchful care they never 
have to ask for ; Elinor wanted her mother's 
love. Well . some day when she was mistress 
of Flairs, for this idea her father had care- 
fully implanted during her brief visit . her 
mother should live with her always . she would 
not call her ill-bred. 

" What could Uncle Dryden mean ? Are 
courage and daring ill-bred ? How could any 
one endowed with a lofty heroic spirit be what 
Northover calls * well-behaved f Ridiculous ! 
Why, there's old Sir Fulke in the library ; he 
looks as if he'd never once felt afraid in his life, 
and he's about the most famous Dryden of them 
aU." 

The next moment she had opened the door 
of the turret staircase. She went down the first 
steps quickly ; but when she reached the next 
door leading to the ground-floor, she did not pass 
through it, but descended the closely twisting 
stone steps some way further till she came to 
a low dark-arched passage. She paused here 
and listened. The passage went out into the 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 67 

park ; but . Elinor had only discovered it by 
accident. It was chiefly used by men-servants ; 
its darkness made it a dangerous outlet, there 
being no pause or landing in the stone corkscrew 
which wound down to a waste of unused cellars 
below. 

Once outside, however, she was safe. No 
garden lay on this side, and she kept along 
close by the the wall of the house until she 
reached its eastern angle. There, a little way 
on was the beech tree. She darted across the 
open ground between, feeling perfectly safe from 
observation, till she reached the flower garden, 
which was divided from the park to the outer- 
most branches of the beech tree by a high, closely- 
dipped wall of yew. The lawn on which the 
beech tree stood, and which was gay in summer 
time with innumerable flower beds, sloped down 
to the river's edge, so that in leafy June it would 
have been easy to creep along to the bridge, 
under the trailing beech branches bending their 
silken weight of foliage into the water below. 
But now there was risk of discovery. As 
Elinor looked across at Mrs. Northover's win- 

5.2 



68 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

jdow she smiled at her own hesitation . why, it 
was scarcely visible . an evergreen rose tree 
trained against the house had overgrown it so 
completely ; and if she were seen, what could it 
signify ? She was no coward to go skulking 
about her own property . for she knew it would 
be hers. Let Northover say what she liked 
about *' behaving," surely she must know 
better than a housekeeper. 

A momentary thought of Mr. Dryden*s dis- 
pleasure was put away imperiously. All he 
wished . this her keenness had already taught 
her . was that she should grow up a Dry den. 
She would show her uncle she was not ill-bred, 
by her proud lofty spirit. 

She had soon stepped across the ivy-grown 
bridge, peeping down at the leaping fish among 
the grey stones, for the water was very clear, 
although a little further on it bubbled and 
whitened in clouded fury round a grey fragment 
of rock, which seemed trying to stay the hurry- 
ing current from rushing down, to add to the 
foam and spray of the little fall below. 

Elinor liked to watch the waterfall, she de- 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 69 

lighted in placing bits of stick, small boats . she 
had once even sent her hat . to be swept down 
by the furious whirl of the water, but to-day 
this amusement was too tame for her restless- 
ness, and she hurried on. 

There was a narrow path along the river, and 
from this the hanging wood towered to the 
steep heights above . not straight up . there 
were many valleys and undulations between, 
nooks for primroses, and smooth spaces for 
wood anemones, and all the other charming 
hints by which coy Spring betrays her presence. 
Now the trees overhead were leafless, although 
their tracery was thickening with the brown and 
red buds that seemed to be asking in soft whis- 
pers if the time were come for unfolding their 
green ofispring ; the broken dry twigs snapped 
under Elinor's feet as she trod hastily along the 
brown ground, stumbling every now and then 
in her eagerness over the spreading roots, 
concealed by heaps of decaying leaves and 
moss. 

Elinor went on, springing now from one trunk 
to another, now over a fragment of rock that 



70 ELINOR DRYDBN's PROBATION. 

seemed, like many another scattered among the 
trees, to have fallen from the clouds, or to have 
been heaved upwards from the bosom of the 
river. The last bit she had to climb was almost 
precipitous, and just as she had taken a vigorous 
step forwards, the branch overhead, to which she 
was clinging, snapped; she saw a sort of 
hurdle fencing at the top of the ascent, and 
sprang up desperately, stones and earth slipped 
away beneath her, as her right hand closed on 
the lowest bar of the fence ; the rail was small, 
she could grasp it entirely, but it seemed as if 
her wrist must break with the strain on it. In 
an instant she felt it clasped, and saw another 
hand held out; before she knew that she 
had seized it, her feet had regained a firm hold . 
she drew a long breath, and looked up. Pressed 
close against the hurdle was a boyish face that 
seemed to Elinor too beautiful to be real . a 
face with large liquid dark eyes, shining through 
tangled sunny curls, the cheeks a-glow with 
excitement, while the scarlet lips strained apart 
as the breath was drawn with slow intensity 
through the clenched, even teeth. 



THE NORTH OALLERY. 71 

" I'm safe now," said Elinor, recovering her- 
self before her deliverer had found the use of 
his tongue. 

"Not till you're over/' he said, roughly. 
** Catch hold with your right hand here . now 
your left . now pull your legs up again, set your 
foot on the fence, and over you are." 

She threw herself panting on the grass ; now 
that the danger was over she realised it, and her 
heart throbbed quickly, but she soon sat upright, 
and looked round at her companion. 

He was leaning against the hurdle, staring at 
her, as if he doubted whether she were real 
flesh and blood, like himself. She thought he 
looked younger than she was ; he was clearly a 
village boy, his rough shoes and sun-burned 
straw hat and dress showed that . but how 
wonderfully beautiful his face was. She had 
never seen it before, and yet what did it remind 
her of ? she felt, spite of her usual haughtiness 
to inferiors, inclined to treat this boy as an 
equal . not because he had saved her life, 
but from the strange, mysterious sympathy 
roused within her by his face. 



72 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" Thank you for helping me ; if you had not 
been there I should have broken my neck, you 
know/' she smiled up at him. 

When Elinor smiled you forgot her rather 
harsh features and her haughty expression, she 
looked so irresistibly sweet, and her strong will 
made the fascination more enduring than that 
exercised by a prettier, feebler face. 

The boy moved uneasily from one leg to the 
other, but he dropped his fixed gaze, and turned 
his face half away from her. 

Elinor's smile changed into one of scornful 
pity; how shame-faced and awkward he 
was! 

" Who are you ?" she asked, authoritatively ; 
" and where do you come from ?" 

He did not look shame-faced as he turned 
round at her words; his eyes searched hers 
with a steady look, as if questioning her right 
to the tone she had used. 

Elinor felt abashed for an instant^ and then 
very angry with herself for being so. 

" Are you deaf ?" she said, sharply. 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 73 

" No," said the boy, " I was wondering where 
you came from." 

Instead of being angry, she laughed. 

" Well, we don't seem to find answers be- 
tween us; cross-questions, you know, always 
bring crooked answers. I am Miss Dryden, of 
Flairs ; now, perhaps, j ouTl teD me who you be- 
long to/* 

" I live with Ben !" he pointed towards one 
of the plantations. Elinor knew that the head 
gamekeeper lived thereabouts, although she had 
never been near the place. 

"Is Ben your father, then?" she coloured 
with mortification at the surprise of finding who 
he was. Elinor was romantic, spite of her 
pride, and while she talked to him she had de- 
cided that this boy was better than he appeared. 
But a familiar name is as disenchanting some- 
times as Ithuriel's spear. Good, honest *' Ben" 
was far too common-place to have anything to 
do with romance, and she rose up hastily, as she 
spoke. 

" I shouldn't call him Ben, should I, if he 



74 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

was my father?" he spoke rather sullenly, 
without looking at her. 

Elinor's face flushed ; it was too much that a 
boy like this one should speak to her as an 
equal. 

" Say ma'am, sir, when you speak to a lady," 
she said in her haughtiest manner; '^is Ben 
your uncle or your cousin, or are you dnly his 
servant ?" 

The boy faced round at her . not with flash- 
ing eyes or any of the anger she * secretly ex- 
pected, but with a firm, half-amused expres- 
sion on his lips, that puzzled and irritated 
Elinor. 

" Whichever you like, ma^am ;*' he drawled 
out the word, while he glanced at her from head 
to foot, as if searching for some outward sign of 
the dignity that required such an appellation ; 
then he turned abruptly away, and springing 
over the hedge that divided the field in which 
they were fi*om the copse that skirted it, he 
vanished. 

Elinor stood still, in an excited state of 
mingled pleasure and annoyance. Her feelings 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 76 

were usually in a tumult when she roused from 
the long dreaming fits in which her days slipped 
away ; dreams oflen of the past, when she 
peopled the deserted rooms and galleries of 
Flairs with the living representatives of the old 
pictures on the walls . dreams which sometimes 
had become so real that she had rushed in white 
terror back to the inhabited part of the house to 
escape the sounds of the rustling silk and clank- 
ing spurs she had heard so plainly through the 
door of the White bed-chamber. After such a 
rousing she would be what the Fraiilein called 
" wool-gathering " for several days, and would 
spend her play-hours out of doors, with her 
dogs. running races with them, as wild and as 
irrepressible in her mirth as they were, but 
no mood lasted long ; she soon found herself 
again, either in her beloved gallery, or in the 
library, to which she was allowed access if she 
kept quiet. 

There the dreaming recommenced, but these 
were dreams of the future ; there were no 
ghosts in the old library unknown to Elinor . it 
was the theatre of a busy history, but the story 



76 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

was her own: at one time she would parade 
queen-like from end to end of this long room, 
bowing and smiling graciouily to crowds of 
imaginary adorers, who were all dying of love 
for Miss Dryden of Flairs, for she should be 
beautiful in another year, she knew it. In some 
of those novels the Fraiilein was so fond of, 
slender, dark eyed girls, always developed into 
graceful, beautiful women . oh ! how Elinor 
longed, thirsted, prayed for beautji. It is terrible 
when an ardent and keen perception of the 
beautiful is linked with a face that mocks the 
ideal of the possessor, but with the usual error 
of an unrestrained imagination, the belief that 
some day must see its glowing pictures realised, 
she hugged herself in her ideal future . some- 
times, surrounded by universal admiratioti . 
sometimes, adored, idolised by one who . should 
be the perfection of manly beauty and talent . 
one in whom she should at last acknowledge a 
superior, whose will should enchain hers, and 
yet who would love her so madly as to be 
willing to die for her sake. 

As she stood with eyes fixed on the 



THE NORTH GALLERY. 77 

spot where her preserver had disappeared, 
it seemed to her tha^ she was in a trance ! what 
had just been happening to her . had she been 
asleep and dreamed . was she asleep now ? she 
shook herself as the sudden doubt came . the 
place she stood in showed her she was awake* 
All round her stretched the park, a broad level 
bounded with ploughed and pasture-fields, here 
and there among them spaces planted park- 
wise, and skirted with copses where the timid 
hares yet lingered, spite of the agricultural 
sounds so near them. 

Elinor turned round suddenly, and bent over 
the hurdle. There was the broken branch 
hanging midway in the descent, and just below 
it rose the sharp rugged mass of stone over 
whiob she had last climbed ; she could not help 
shuddering as she thought that she must have 
fallen first on that stone, and then stunned, per- 
haps, at any rate bleeding and helpless, she 
should have dashed head foremost down the 
steep way, receiving fresh injury from each jut- 
ting piece of rock or stout limb of tree that 
might oppose, but could not stay her fearful 



78 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

progress, till she fell, crushed out of human 
form, on the rocks beneath the waterfall. It 
seemed impossible that a mere peasant-boy 
should have rescued her from such a fate 
. what a pity he was not a grown-up gentle- 
man. 

" I will ask Northover who he is . only . " 
no, she should not mention her accident, for this 
would surely cause a stricter watch to be kept 
on her movements : the *^ only" to herself went 
on, " Somehow or other I must see him again 
. he is very rude and unmannerly, but what a 
striking face he has . he interests me ; besides, 
he saved my life, I believe I ought to reward 
him . there's the last present Uncle Dryden gave 
me, when the Fraiilein said I'd taken to work- 
ing hard ;" the colour spread quickly ovef her 
face. " How foolish I am . as if a boy like that 
is troubled with pride . as if he would not jump 
for joy at having money given him ;. I must be 
turning idiot . I declare I felt ashamed just now 
when I fancied his looks if I offered him 
money ; how absurd I am !" 

She started off at a quick pace, finding 



THE NORTH GALLERY. ^79 

her way back to the bridge by a rough cart- 
road , and reached the gallery by the same path 
she had taken on leaving it, without meeting 
careful Mrs. Northover. 



CHAPTER III. 



Maurice's home. 



Ben, or Mr. Benjamin Karse, sat over his fire, 
apparently reading a book by its light, only he 
turned over some of the leaves so quickly, and 
at other times dwelt so lingeringly on a page, 
that you began to think it must be either a 
dictionary, or a book of reference. But the 
collapse of one of the fragrant pine logs into 
the glowing ashes beneath, caused a sudden 
flame, which lit up the cottage and all within it, 
with an instantaneous broad glare, very different 
to the red flicker in which objects had been 
scarcely distinguishable . blazing on dark brown 



Maurice's home. 81 

walls, and showing out their decorations, imple- 
ments of all sorts for the slaughter of game and 
fish . ^leaping in tongues of flames that lit up 
the projecting rafters hung with wading-boots, 
nets, drags, pouches, flasks, straps, and all the 
multifarious necessities of a sportsman. Now 
it played clearly and distinctly on Mr. Karse's 
book, and made it look like an illuminated mis- 
sal, so vivid and brilliant-hued were the flies that 
filled its pages. The blaze must have shone out 
plainly, too, through the lozenge paned casements, 
and have warned unwary trespassers that Mn 
Karse was stirring. It seemed to concentrate 
on him as he stood up, roused from his employ- 
ment by the sudden glare shining on his hale 
fresh complexion brighter than ever in its light, 
his piercing dark eyes, his well-shaped mouth, 
and a nose which suggested the idea of extreme 
independence. In a woman such a nose would 
have been saucy ; in Ben Karse it stamped his 
face with the honest open expression of his 
nature. His hair and beard w^e more grey 
than black; but this had been the work of 
sorrow rather than of time. His wife . his 
VOL. 1. 6 



82 ELINOR DRYDBN*S PROBATION. 

Ailsie . had gone mad in giving birth to her 
first child, and had never recovered her reason. 
She was in the county asylum, and the baby in 
the churchyard at Starby. 

Some years ago he had taken a holiday to 
visit his Scotch relations . for Karse's family 
came from the Border, and he sometimes 
dropped here and there a word in the soft 
Teviotdale accent. He had brought back a 
companion with him . the lad who sat on 
the opposite bench studying a similar book to 
his own. The light showed in the face bent 
over it the same beauty of countenance that had 
charmed Elinor's fancy. He looked less of a 
peasant now . his clothes were not so homely, 
and his curls were no longer tangled . but he 
was not so picturesque. 

" WeD, my lad," said Ben, " I think it's time 
we were both going to roost. Ye're but trying 
yer young eyes with the firelight. It's eight 
o'clock and more. To-morrow I must be off 
early to Starby. I'll be back plenty soon 
enough for dinner; or, may be ye'U du the 
same as last time, and go on till two o'clock or 



Maurice's home. 83 

mair, and then be wondering what had set ye 
hungering." 

" No, Ben, I'll not try that again ; and I've 
]eamt to cook better since. It was the book's 
fault, you know. I couldn't leave it off. I wish 
we'd got another shelf of 'em." 

Karse pushed one hand into his hair, and 
stroked his chin with the other in a puzzled, 
thoughtful manner. 

" I sometimes wish you'd followed my advice, 
Maurice^ and gone to the village school. I've 
learned ye almost all I know." 

" A deal more than that deaf oaf of a school- 
master 'd have done." The boy spoke with 
laughing contempt. 

" That may be, lad ; but ye're grown up lone- 
some. I fear me some day ye'll want the fel- 
lowship with lads like yoursel ye should ha' had 
younger." 

" Not I, Ben. Where'd been the use of put- 
ting me to school ? I'd ha' spent half my time 
in going to and fro ; and if the master 'd laid a 
finger on me, you know as well as me what 
would ha' happened. I'd ha' capsized him safe 

6.2 



84 ELINOR DRYDBN's PROBATION. 

and sure before all his scholars. Good-night, 
Ben ; I'm sleepy." 

He had lit a small tin lamp while he stood 
talking. His resounding tread was on the little 
staircase in an instant, making it shake and 
creak as only the thundering force of a boy's 
foot can. Ben gathered the logs closer on the 
fire, with a long iron three-pronged instrument 
that served for poker, toaster, and various other 
uses. He looked thoughtful . almost sad . as 
tne blaze once more brightened, and he sat gazing 
into it, muttering broken fragments of sentences 
that seemed not to belong to each other, but to 
relate to different thoughts as they flitted through 
his brain. 

"A proud sperrit . yes, I should say she had. 
. And how the lad pines after the sight of 
i\im . . 'Twas a rare unlucky mischance. 
What call had she on this side of the river ?" 
Then a long pause and a deep sigh. " F<dks' 
secrets is their own ; but hate 's a bad bosom 
friend." 

He Sat thinking for some time longer still, 
and roused himself with a start at last, to put 



Maurice's home. 85 

on a block of coal from a basket which stood ia 
the corner, and to heap the cinders over it ; 
then he cleared the table of Maurice's books and 
papers which lay in scattered confusion, and set 
his breakfast ready for the morning 

There was no sign of morning when Karse 
re-appeared cautiously groping his way lamp in 
hand, but not lighted, for Mr. Karse was accus- 
tomed to early rising, and could dress himself as 
well in darkness xis in light. 

A few blows on the coal block soon started 
the fire into life. This done, he lit his lamp, 
unbarred the door, and took his kettle to fill 
from the draw-well outside. The glisten of his 
hair and beard, when he came in, showed that 
he had performed his ablutions at the same 
time. A prolonged whine followed his re- 
appearance. 

" Quiet, Brutus, can't ye." He went to the 
door again, speaking as if to a fractious child. 
" Would it be reasonable to study ye before your 
betters ? * Hout-tout, doggie, the two-legged 
child mun be cared for most, ff I unchain 



86 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ye before Maurice wakens, what ull ye do but 

make a scratching ^pd a tantivey enough to wake 

a dead lad. Fm up to your tricks . ^lie down/* 

So when Maurice lumbered downstairs, he 

found all the dogs in yelping impatience for 

their breakfast, which as a matter of course he 

gave them before he took his own. Although 

he wore the dress of a gamekeeper's boy, he led 

about as independent a life as could be imagined 

. when he was not shooting or fishing with 

Ben he sauntered about the park. He could 

always bring word where the first covey had been 

hatched, where the wood-pigeons had nested; 

and as to kisects, he was as well informed as 

any naturalist about their dwellings and their 

ways. In. spring-time he made the cottage gay 

with wild flowers, and in summer with festoons 

of climbing plants. His great delight hitherto 

had been in daring sporting achievements ; but 

lately, during the long evenings, he had become 

a reader. Ben's library of amusing books was a 

small one, but it was well suited to please a boy. 

" Robinson Crusoe," " Belzoni's Travels," " The 

Adventures of Marco Polo," "The Castle of 



Maurice's home. 87 

Otranto," "SandfordandMerton," "The Vicar 
of Wakefield," "The Arabian Nights/' and 
"The Seven Champions of Christendom/* 
These were all; but they were read and re- 
read with an avidity that made him deaf, 
dumb and blind, to all outward things, as he lay 
stretched on the tiled floor, straining his young 
eyes in the blaze of firelight. Ben said he 
spoiled the boy in all else, but he had a few 
rigid rules which he maintained resolutely : one 
was, that his books should not be taken out of 
doors to read; another^ that Maurice should 
keep out of sight of Mr. Dryden, and of Flairs 
itself. Maurice rebelled against some of these 
prohibitions. As to crossing the river, he 
didn't care about that. No one could care 
to look at a prim house full of a heap of 
stuck-up smart servants, as from Ben's account 
they must be. He could see the park on the 
forbidden side was as flat as a pancake ; not 
to be compared to any one of his favourite 
glens in the hanging wood, or to the high ground 
on which the cottage stood. 

But it was very hard to be told he must avoid 



88 ELINOR DRTDEN'b PROBATION. 

Mr. Dryden. He had lived a long time at Flairs 
without coming in contact with the Squire ; but 
their sudden meeting one day had inspired him 
with feelings of deep admiration for this the first 
gentleman he had seen face to face. When be 
reached home he could talk of nothing else ; but 
it was plain th|| Mr. Dryden had not been as 
favourably impressed, for when a few days after 
the boy threw himself in his way, he passed 
him without notice, and in the evening Ben 
gave his young cousin warning to keep out of 
the Squire's sight. 

'' He's a good master, and a Christian man, 
Maurice ; but he's proud and reserved, and can't 
abide to have his loneliness disturbed. He's 
had a deal of sorrow. I'd ha' given up all I've 
got that ye hadn^t made this mischance, for if 
the Squire once takes to misliking, he's tough 
at it. For the love o* me^ lad, if ye won't do 
it for yer own, keep out of his sight." 

Maurice obeyed in the letter, but he seldom 
lost an opportunity of seeing Mr. Dryden when- 
ever it could be done unseen, and the stealthy 
mystery thus necessitated, gave a strange fasci- 



Maurice's homb. 89 

nation to the footstqis, or the horse's tread, of 
this object of his boyish worship. 

Ben's training might have made another boy 
selfish. With the exception of some summing 
and writing, and spelling, to be got through in 
the course of the week for him, no tasks were 
laid on Maurice but such out-door employment, 
as he dearly loved. An eld woman, one of the 
cowherds, came and " did up" the cottage every 
mornmg; all else Ben saw after. He could 
not bear Maurice to wait on him. '' Puir lad, 
hell have to make his own way soon enough 1" 
he'd said to himself that morning, as an excuse 
for setting the boy's breakfast things. ^Tll 
make it easy for him while I can. I've got to 
be father and mother to him at once." 

A joyful barking and snuffing told that 
Maurice had let loose the dogs. An eager-faced 
pointer, near the cottage-door, begged hard for 
liberty, as the boy stood examining the state of 
a honeysuckle and wild clematis, which he had 
transplanted himself in the Autumn, in the hope 
of making a flowery porch to the thatched 
cottage . a vine had been there some time longer. 



1 



90 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

and had shot up past the bed-i'oom, and throw- 
ing itself over the eaves, lay resting on the roof 
above, ready, when summer-heat wakened it, 
to mingle its exquisite foliage with the many 
tinted moss-covered thatch, where green and 
grey, and violet-brown and gold, formed a warm 
relief and set-off to the white-washed walls 
below . over which, however, some briars and 
roses were beginning to creep. 

" Quiet, Bessie ; you don't think I'd go and 
leave thecottage with no one in charge. Ye ought 
to feel proud, ye foolish thing, ye ought to be a 
safer housekeeper than these puppies, who un- 
derstand nothing but their own business." 

The dog seemed convinced of misbehaviour, 
its tail dropped in penitent fashion ; but the sight 
of the frolicsome gambols in which its com- 
panions followed Maurice as he strode off, 
* elicited a dismal and prolonged howl, and then 
a sharp angry bark of dissatisfaction. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE SQUIRE AND THE GAMEKEEPER. 

Ben got through his Starby business sooner 
than he expected ; he had to call at the clergy- 
man's house afterwards, with some birds the 
Squire wished left there, but the village of 
starby was soon traversed,-one long, straggling 
street was crossed at its extreme end by another 
containing the church, the parsonage, and a few 
houses of better class ; then it stretched away 
at either end into the open country. 

Starby was about six miles distant from 
Flairs ; the inhabitants were all tenants of Mr. 
Dry den, and the church preferment was in his 



92 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

gift. There was another village, with a small 
church attached, about two miles on the other 
side of the property, but this was in the gift, 
and built on the manor of Sir Stuart Palmer, 
the nearest neighbour Mr. Dryden had, and yet 
the only one from whom he seemed utterly 
alienated. 

'' It's one of the most strange twists one gen- 
tleman ever took up against another," said Ben, 
to himself, as, after bidding good-bye to the 
housekeeper at the rectory, with whom he had 
been enjoying a prolonged chat over her break- 
fast, he at length turned homewards; ^'if 
there ever was a fine-looking, sweet-natured 
gentleman, it's Sir Stuart . not like our Squire 
for book-learning, but see him take a fence or a 
gate, Fd back him again the country ; I've seen 
'em together at the meet. Sir Stuart bows as 
friendly as can be, and our Squire in general 
makes as if he didn't see him . 'ud do anything 
to shirk him ; I can't make it out . why, what did 
the rector say to me this morning, talking of that 
poor family as were burned out, * Squire Dryden's 
a real Christian gentleman/ and yet-^" 



THE SQUIRE IND THE OAMEKEBPER. 03 

He had just reached the Park-lodge, and saw 
the gates opening, and the Squire on horse- 
back. 

Mr. Dry den turned his horse round and into 
the Park again as he acknowledged Ben's greeting. 

" Walk by the side of me, Karse." 

Not one word more till they were out of sight 
of the lodge. Ben could not tell what ailed the 
Squire . the line between his eyes and the fur- 
rows round his mouth were deeper than ever, 
and he was strangely pale ; he reined in sud* 
denly, and dismounted. 

Karse took the bridle from him mechanically, 
feeling more and more mystified. 

" Karse/' Mr. Dryden spoke in a strange, 
forced voice, '^ I told you that lad of yours 
must be kept out of my way, out of my 
sight ;" his voice grew more natural as his anger 
escaped control. He raised his hand to check 
the man's eager ' answer ; " I know you've bid 
him do so, but he disobeys you, he . he way- 
lays me." 

The last words were spoken with such an 
intensity of displeasure that Ben felt angry too. 



94 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" I'm Sony, sir, you've such a prejudice again 
the lad ; he's good and handsome, and a credit 
to be seen on any gentleman's land." 

" I neither know nor care what he looks 
like . I wish no h^rm to him, but I will not 
see him. I told you if you'd a fancy to bring 
him up to your own craft you might do so, so 
long as you kept him out of my sight, and 
from any communication with Flairs, and if this 
can't be, Ben, if you can't manage a mere 
lad . " he seemed to recoil again, the same 
unutterable dislike withering every trace of 
benevolence from his face . "he had best re- 
turn to the place whence he came." 

" No . no . no . Sir, for God's sake, no. I 
have got to love Maurice, and to cling to him, 
till, if I were to know him thrust out on the 
world with them as cared naught for him, it's 
not long I'd bide here wanting him. I can't 
help it . I can't help loving him. No, sir, 
if ye can't bring yersel to stomach the sight 
of a boy whose only fault seems to be that he 
loves to set his eyes on ye as ye ride by . ^ye 
needn't send him so far as where he camed 
from," 



THE SQUIRE AND THE GAMEKEEPER. 95 

" What do you mean ?'* he did not speak 
so angrily, he seemed eager for some unex- 
pected proposition. 

" Why, sir, it 'ud part me from him, sorely, 
but in some ways, it might be for his good ; 
a friend of mine, a head keeper, told me he'd 
been looking out for a better sort of lad to 
train up and help him with his accounts and 
that, so if you chose I could transfer Maurice 
for a while, without troubling you, sir. I 
couldn't promise to part from him, altogether." 

At first Mr. Dryden had listened assentingly, 
but the downcast, confused look on Karse's face 
roused him to sudden suspicion. 

" I don't like mysteries," he said, coldly ; " I 
must know where he would be sent to." 

" Well, then, sir, it's not far off ; I was 
thinking of Sir Stuart Palmer's." 

In an instant Mr. Dryden's face suffused ; 
almost livid with passion, he gasped . 

" At your peril, Karse ; if you dare to place 
him under such protection, I will not answer for 
the consequences to yourself." He stopped, 
making a strong effort at self-control ; '' a 



96 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

master who only Uves on his property three 
months in the year is not a good one for such a 
youth ; keep him, then . shut him up if he 
disobeys you, as you would an untrained hound, 
. for his own sake let him avoid me." 

With a deep emphasis on the last word, he 
sprang into his saddle, and galloped off. 

Ben looked after him sternly enough at first, 
his shaggy grey brows drawn close together. 

" Dare ! ye're the first man. Squire, as has 
ventured to use such a word to me these twenty 
year and mair, and if it were not for . " 

He checked himself, and walked slowlv on 
towards his cottage. It lay far away from the 
road, in a little clearing, surrounded on all sides 
by a thick ash wood. He crossed several mea- 
dows, a copse, then a bit of open waste land, 
beyond which rose the graceful stems of the 
young ash trees, girded in by a thorn hedge. 
Karse stooped and unlocked a gate which formed 
a closed entrance to the wood on this side, and 
then he stood resting his folded arms on the 
gate-post. 

" No use in being angry, neither . I should 



THE SQUIRB. AND THE GAMEKEEPER. 97 

only be as hasty as the Squire, and of all men I 
should have the most feeling for him, for our 
troubles have been really the same though they 
look different. What has soured him has made 
me think less of little plagues and troubles ; 
and there's this to be said . I've got an even- 
tempered kd for a comforter; and the Squire 
. he's been and sorted himself with a skittish 
young girl. I believe those sort o' lassies are mor- 
tal like cats, drawing-room pets when they have 
their own wiD, tigers when they find themselves 
behind the bars . it might ha* been different 
with Ailsie's." 

His head sank lower till it rested for a minute 
on his arms ; but he soon stood erect again, and 
dashing the back of his hand roughly across his 
eyes, walked firmly on through the trees. He 
looked grave even when he saw the thin wreath 
of smoke blue; and shadowy against a dark pine 
tree behind the cottage. He was thoroughly 
upset and puzzled by Mr. Dryden's vehement 
dislike to Maurice. 

" He's a good hater, that's sure," for he 
thought too of the anger he had shown when 

VOL. I. 7 



98 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Sir Stuart's name was mentioned. " I'm glad 
it's gone no farther," he said ; " somehow I've 
always kept the lad out of Sir Stuart's way, for 
he'd likely have fancied Maurice, and that 'ud 
ha' bred offence. It can't be that. Ah" . a 
ray of light brightened some of the darkness 
which confused him, "I see how 'tis . the 
Squire's heard what fell out yesterday, between 
Maurice and the young lady. May be she went 
home and chattered about his handsome face, 
. small blame to her if she did. Well, I'll see 
about it." 

Maurice was sitting when Karse entered ; he 
saw that the boy looked both downcast and 
angry, as if he had been punished for some offence 
he had not committed. He nodded at Ben as 
he came in, but he did not speak, and his cousin 
was puzzled how to begin. He had found out 
long ago that Maurice had, as he expressed it, 
" a bushel more brains than he had," and felt 
the reverence a simple open nature always has 
for one more lofty and self-contained. 

He hoped the boy would begin by complaining 
of Mr. Dryden's avoidance, for he had done this 



THE SQUIRE AND THE GAMEKEEPER. 99 

before, but he waited now in vain. Dinner- 
time passed, and Maurice seemed after a bit to 
force a more cheerful manner, and asked ques- 
tions about Ben's expedition to Starby ; but he 
only got dry short answers, followed by a search- 
ing almost imploring look, instead of the ques- 
tion the other shrank from asking. 

Maurice seemed quite unconscious of any 
unusual manner in his cousin ; he only started 
up rather sooner after dinner and went out say- 
ing he was going to take a look at some young 
thrushes. He did not come in again till supper- 
time, and then he was full of wonders : he had 
taken his gun with him, and he brought in a 
hare, which Ben told him was only fit for soup ; 
he had found a springe set, and had destroyed it ; 
and he showed in triumph the first spray of 
blackthorn. 

But Ben saw that when he had talked off his 
temporary excitement the sore ill-used look re- 
turned, and the swelling heart was too full for 
words . the instant he had finished supper he 
said he was tired and should go to bed. 

Karse looked at him earnestly, but Maurice 
avoided his eyes. 7 . 2 



100 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

*' Fm thinkin', my lad," Ben spoke, with a 
simple earnestness that quelled the boy's pride, 
" that either youVe wronged some one this day, 
or some one's wronged you. Take my advice, and 
don't carry such a bedfellow upstairs wi' ye as a 
secret." 

Maurice flushed red . his eyes burning hot 
with the tears his manhood kept back ; he 
stood fingering the lamp he had placed on the 
table ; but he did not speak. 

" Come, come, laddie," Ben laid his hand ten- 
derly on the arm nearest him, " this trouble 's 
too much for ye ; give me half of it." 

There was a sort of suppressed sob gulped 
down hastily. Ben waited in silence. 

" I see you know what's happened . it's best 
said nothing about," said Maurice, hoarsely. 

" How came he to see you?" said Ben, anxious 
to spare him. 

" Why because . because . Ben, Vol just a 
fool . and that's all about it." 

He threw himself in a chair, as if tired of the 
subject, but Karse kept silent and presently he 
went on . 



THE SQUIRE AND THE GAMEKEEPER. 101 

" IVe told you before . I can't explain it to 
myself . it's like in some of the stories IVe 
read; I could love the very horse he rides. 
Many and many 's the time when I hear him 
coming Tm obliged to hold fast by something to 
keep myself from running in his way. Often- 
times Tve hid behind a hedge to see him pass 
through a gap I'd made for the purpose. I don't 
know what set me on to it to-day . it was like 
a power forcing me, that I couldn't stand against. 
I heard his horse's tread ; it was just in the open 
park ; there was nothing to hide me but the 
trunk of the great oak, and then I couldn't 
have seen him. For a minute I'd a mind to 
stand right in the midst of the road, and brave 
it out ; but then I thought of you, Ben. I was 
afraid of getting you into trouble on my account, 
so I clambered up the old trunk instead ; when 
I got up I saw . now there's no leaves on 
the branches . I couldn't hide much . however 
he was coming up fast, so I felt I must lie still and 
take my chance that he wouldn't look up. Per- 
haps, neither he wouldn't have . but you know 
the great branch that stretches across over the 



102 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

road. Well, I lay straight and still on that, 
keeping nay eyes fixed on his face as he came 
up. He looked so sad . so unhappy. In a 
minute I thought more about him than where 
I was . and I moved. Off went a dry twig 
with a snap, and fell down just before him. 
He reined his horse in, and looked up. I tried 
to say, ' I beg pardon, sir,' for the horse might 
have shied." . 

Maurice paused. His breath came short and 
loud. 

" Oh Ben," he burst out at last, " I know I 
did wrong, but not such harm as to deserve the 
look he gave me. He muttered something that 
sounded to me like a curse, and then he dashed 
on at a wild mad pace, as if some one were at 
his heels. Oh, Ben ! what have I done," cried 
Maurice, his nostrils and lips quivering, " to de- 
serve such hate ? . for you may say what you 
like, Ben, the Squire hates me." 

He threw himself down on the chair again, 
pressing his forehead on the hard wooden rail, 
that formed the back. 

Ben tried to give what comfort he could . it 



THE SQUIRE AND THE GAMEKEEPER. 103 

might be that being denied an heir himself the 
Squire disliked all boys. Then Mr. Dryden was a 
great stickler for obedience. At any rate, it was 
his express wish, and all would go well if Maurice 
kept out of sight for the future. The bo/ made 
no reply, unless a slight writhing movement 
might be so interpreted. Ben cleared his throat 
and went On ; he felt it necessary to say some- 
thing more, and yet he shrank from inflaming 
the wound. 

"I've been thinkin', Maurice, as I came 
home . " he cleared his throat again . " that, 
perhaps, if what you spoke about yesterday, has 
been mentioned, it may have given offence up at 
the house . I mean about Miss Elinor." 

Maurice started up . his head thrown back 
proudly. 

"I've wished oftentimes I'd been born a 
gentleman, Ben . I'll never do so again. 
Gentleman, so it seems to me, is only another 
name for a tyrant . if one's to get scowls and 
hard words for saving life. I take no merit for 
it, as you know, Ben ; but that fine stuck-up 
Miss must have broken some of her bones be- 



104 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

fore she reached the bottom, I fancy if I 
hadn't helped her. Let her keep clear of me, if 
they're afraid the touch o' me 'd poison her dain- 
tiness . for that's I suppose your meaning." 

He . lit his lamp hastily, and turned to go 
upstairs. 

" You're hasty, Maurice . you know I couldn't 
have such a meaning. All I wanted you to take 
in was . don't have nought to say to her . she 
looks haughty and sly both ; and dear lad, don't 
be angered wi' me. If you see her again, as likely 
you may, don't tell me nought on't ; it only 
breeds words atwixt us. I can trust you, 
Maurice . say Good-night." 

He threw both arms round Ben, vehemently, 
and then ashamed of such an unusual demon- 
stration, snatched his lamp from the table, and 
hiirried upstairs. 



CHAPTER V. 



Elinor's proposal. 



" Well, I think you might speak to me, in- 
stead of being so sulky, you rude boy." 

Her vehemence made Maurice turn round 
with an amused smile on his lips, although an 
instant before, when he had unexpectedly come 
face to face with Elinor, as he vaulted over a 
gate, he had turned away as from an object of * 
dislike. 

" Why do you call me a rude boy ?" he 
said. 

** Because, if you had had any manners you 
would have said, ' Good morning, ma'am.' " 



106 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROJATION. 

She spoke in a sharp cutting voice. It jarred 
Maurice, and increased his dislike. 

" Very well," he said, sullenly and awkwardly 
enough ; for he had the consciousness that she 
was able to use her tongue much more easily 
than he could. " Perhaps I haven't got man- 
ners . most likely not . for I don't care to speak 
if I must * ma'am' and * sir' every minute." 

" Ah, that's it, is it ?" She was not con- 
temptuous now. She was determined to win 
this handsome savage into more courteous be- 
haviour. " Well then, I don't mind about 
* ma'am' if you will remember to say * Miss Dry- 
den,' every now and then." 

Maurice's smile broadened. He looked full 
at her now, and Elinor felt uncomfortable, . 
if such a thing had been possible, she would 
have thought this ignorant boy was laughing at 
her. 

There was a short silence. She was tempted 
to go on and take no further notice of him, but 
the same feeling of association . the haunting 
likeness of his face to what dream or memory 
she could not recall . swayed her more power- 



Elinor's proposal. 107 

fully even than it had done a week ago. She 
must find out something about him. 

** You know my name," she said ; " but I 
don't think you have told me yours." 

" Maurice Karse." 

He looked so indifferent as he stood there, 
leaning against the gate, so utterly unconscious 
of her presence, that her mortification increased. 
However she was clever enough to see that airs 
of superiority would not avail her. 

"Are you an only child, or have you any 
brothers and sisters ?'* She saw his face soften 
rather sadly, . and she triumphed. His inde- 
pendence and rudeness, as she called it, piqued 
her. She was resolved to conquer it. " How 
do you amuse yourself all day ?'* 

This was the first time she had spoken natu- 
rally, without patronising, and Maurice's pride 
was soothed. 

" Why, sometimes I find it hard enough to 
amuse myself all day." 

" Oh, don't be silly . I didn't mean that. I 
should like to find any one who could amuse 
themselves all day. I mean, do you dig, or 



108 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

shoot, or read, or . I suppose you havn't any 
horrid prosy old lessons to learn ?" 

" No, I haven't. I sometimes wish I had ;. 
but I shoot, and other times I read. I havn't . " 
he stopped abruptly, and then went on . " a 
chance of reading much." 

" Why, haven't you many books ? Ah, that's 
a pity in some ways . but for patience sake, 
don't wish you had got lessons to learn . les- 
sons . " and Elinor raised her head and cleared 
her throat, " only serve to confuse dull people 
and to fetter real geniuses." It was so pleasant 
to get a listener, that she felt benevolently dis- 
posed towards him. "lam sorry you haven't 
books enough, as you like them," she said, putting 
her head on one side in a meditative, motherly 
manner. There seemed a fine opportunity here 
to forestal some of the Lady Bountiful dramas so 
often rehearsed in the library . if he cared for 
reading, why shouldn't she lend him a few 
books ? "I can lend you some, if you like." 

Maurice looked at her eagerly. ** We have a 
good many, but I've read them through and 
through." 



Elinor's proposal. 109 

" Poor fellow . that must be dull work. I 
have a whole room fuU of books of my own/* 

His eyes sparkled, and he looked at her with 
delight ; but then some painful remembrance 
clouded his face. 

" Thank you, Miss Dryden." He laid such a 
formal stress on her name, that Elinor wished 
he had left it unsaid. '' But it might offend 
your uncle . if you lent me books, and I should 
be sorry to get you into trouble." 

" Trouble . get me into trouble !" She really 
looked dignified, and Maurice felt an involun- 
tary admiration of her as she drew her head up 
proudly. ** That's impossible . I'm my own 
mistress. Mr. Dryden never interferes with me. 
My books are my own, and I may lend them to 
whom I please. Why I've lent some to the 
steward'^ niece, who lives at Starby ; why 
shouldn't I lend them to you ?" 

Maurice felt as if half the hungering delight 
with which he bad been anticipating the pro- 
mised books was gone, now that the thought of 
Mr. Dryden's possible displeasure hung over it ; 
and he still looked dissatisfied, but Elinor ima- 



110 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

gined that her allusion to the steward, which 
she had thrown out by way of keeping him in 
his place, had had its due effect. 

" Can't you come up to the house for them ?" 
she said ; '' I can give you some this afternoon 
if you like." 

" No, thank you, I can't do that." 

"Why, what are you afraid of? No one 
would eat you up." 

" I'm afraid of nothing." He colom'ed, and 
the tears nearly forced themselves into his eyes. 
Angry as he was with Mr. Dryden, he was still 
afraid of braving his open displeasure. He told 
himself it was for Ben's sake, but was it so 
altogether ? 

"Ah, that can't be, or you would. Oh, 
don't be a coward ; I hate boys who are cow- 
ards, and you don't look a bit like one," for 
Maurice had reddened at the epithet. " Come 
up to the house at once ; there is a low 
door at the corner, near the beech tree, 
where no one else but me ever passes. If you 
go to that door and run up a little staircase 
you'll find there, till you reach . let me see, how 



Elinor's proposal. Ill 

would you know the door ?. oh, I see, Til leave 
it open ; you'll find yourself then in my own 
private gallery, where no one thinks of in- 
truding." Elinor felt as if she grew taller while 
she spoke; "and there are beautiful pictures 
there. You could amuse yourself by looking at 
them till I came with the books." 

" No thank you," said Maurice, firmly. 
There was an adventurousness about the plan 
that pleased him, but his pride interfered. " I 
never go where I'm not asked.'* 

"How tiresome you arel" His opposition 
made her determined that the plan just origi- 
nated in her fertile brain must be realised. 
" Don't I ask you to my own special part of the 
house" . she did not add self-appropriated . 
" where no one ever ventures to intrude ? Be- 
sides, it is not only for the books . I could 
show you a great many interesting things . a 
portrait of Mary Queen of Scots . I suppose 
you've heard of her ? if not, I'd soon teach you 
all about her . and Sir Walter Raleigh, and 
King Charles the First, and Archbishop Laud, 
and ever so many morCi besides scores of Dry- 



112 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

dens, in the old dining-room that's never used 



now." 



Maurice hesitated . it was a hard trial, the' 
wonderful craving which people call thirst for 
knowledge, but which seems more like a sixth 
sense in its omnipresence, and the power it ex- 
ercises . had newly dawned within him, and now 
told him with imperious voice that one of the few 
decided chances of self-instruction he was likely 
to meet with was being offered to him. Eli- 
nor's words had quite changed his feelings to- 
wards her, and with the just reasoning so often 
found in a boy, so rarely in a girl, he decided 
that a person who could talk fluently about 
things of which he was wholly ignorant had 
some claim to her assumption of superiority, 
even though it were so insolently asserted. 

Elinor^s impatience increased, but she re- 
strained it, lest Maurice might leave her in the 
sudden way he had done before. 

"Then you don't care for the books," she 
said in a disappointed voice ; " you know 1 want 
to be useful to you, because you saved my life. 
You may not think I am obliged to you, but 



Elinor's proposal. 113 

I am, though, and I don't know how else to 
do it. I said nothing about the accident at 
home ; they might ancy I couldn't take care of 
myself, and wanted a keeper. I meant to have 
lent you * Ivanhoe,' and * Quentin Durward,' 
and * The Scottish Chiefs,' and * The Mysteries 
of Udolpho/ and ever so many more, full of 
knights, and tournaments, and mysteries, and 
battles, and beautiful ladies, and murders, and 
everything delightful." 

Maurice was touched that she had any feeUqg 
of obligation to him. 

" You are very good to me," he said. How 
beautiful his eyes were now that his gratitude 
glistened in them. " I don't want to be un- 
grateful, but I can't go up to Mr. Dryden's house 
unknown to him." 

" Very well . look here," said Elinor, so de- 
lighted with his changed manner, that in her 
eagerness, . her words running a race with her 
ideas, . she spoke as fast as possible, wholly for- 
getful of consequences of any kind, " PU bring 
you some books to-morrow ; the day afler that 
my governess comes back, and . and . she 

VOL. I. 8 



114 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

doesn't like this side of the river . FU speak to 
uncle Dryden about your coming to the house. 
If he objects I'll let you know; but if you 
don't hear from me by the time youVe finished 
the books, you just bring them to the place I 
told you about, and I'll give you some more. 
There, are you satisfied now ? . I must say, you 
are very particular." 

" Yes, indeed, thank you," said Maurice. 

She thought his thanks poor and cold for 
the mighty favour of her condescension. Clever 
as she was, she lived too much within her own 
self-love to care what others felt, or she must 
have marked a quivering of the eyelashes and 
an ardour in the eyes themselves, that told far 
deeper feelings than words could have uttered. 
She turned away affronted. Now she saw she 
had lowered herself, and she said " Good morn- 
ing" very stiflSy, and walked away without once 
looking back. 

Maurice felt disappointed ; he was too young 
to analyse feeling, or he might have been sur- 
prised at the change that had come over him 
respecting Elinor. His first thought as he 



Elinor's proposal. 115 

stood still leaning against the gate, was one of 
self-congratulation. He need not tell Ben about 
this, he had himself prohibited the subject, but 
the anticipation of the new books banished 
every other recollection, and he should soon 
have the treasure in his possession, for some- 
thing in Elinor's manner made him sure that 
she would keep her word. 



8.2 



BOOK THE SECOND. 



GROWTH. 



BOOK THE SECOND. 



GROWTH. 



120 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

the centre of the hall, armed cap-a-pie . in the 
suit that an ancestor had worn valiantly at 
Agincourt, and seemed lost in contemplation 
of it. 

Mrs. Northover looked still more sharply 
at her . 

" Whereas your governess, Miss Dryden ?" 

Elinor laughed. 

" Why . do you want her ?" 

" That's not an answer, Miss Elinor. When 
I lived with Viscountess Whitby, and I asked a 
question of one of her young ladies . ah, they were 
young ladies . I always received the sweetest of 
answers. The Viscount would say from time to 
time, * Northover,* . he was a most friendly gen- 
tleman, was the Viscount ; ' is the young ladies', 
my daughters' behaviour pleasing to you ? ' 
* Certainly, your lordship,* I'd say ; and then 
he'd say, * That gives me satisfaction ;' and walk 
away quite gratified.'' 

 And if I'd been his daughter," said EUnor, 
her eyes blazing now with indignation; *^I 
should have thought him a mean-spirited old 
spy. The idea of any gentleman taking his 



MRS. NORTHOVR. 121 



servant's word before his child's . that's too 
ridiculous, Northover ; but you can't have the 
Fraulein now, if you want her. I'm just going 
to my music." 

She bounded up stairs, and almost before 
Northover had made up her mind to follow her, 
bad banged to the door leading into the gallery 
at the top of the great staircase. 

" Young termagant !" said the housekeeper. 
Although interfering, she had a placid tem- 
per, except when very much roused ; and then 
those sharp, dark eyes could be almost as full 
of lightning as Elinor's : but in general, her 
sense of propriety, and what she considered lady- 
like deportment, kept her under control. " I've 
the best mind in the world to complain to the 
Squire. I don't believe that FroUin half does her 
dooty; whenever I've chancedto go into the school- 
room . it ain't often, certainly . but she's been 
sitting asleep ; and, I'm sure, with such a girl 
as that, she ought to be as wakefiil as a weazle. 
Perhaps it ain't my business; but then my 
opinion is, that where people's minds haven't 
sufficient occupation in their own businesses^ 



122 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

they're bound to make use of 'em on others'. 
I've a very great mind to speak to the Squire !" 
Here Northover stood in deep confabulation 
with what she called her mind. " The worst of 
the Squire is, that he's so uncommon polite. 
not that I object to politeness in gentlemen . 
dear me, no ; but if he'd only look a little vexed 
or surprised, or something of that, it ud give 
one an opportunity of . speaking ; but he's just 
like glass . smooth all over . there's not a cranny 
to creep in at. Just that, * Yes, Northover . yes 
. well, I'll bear it in mind ;' and then he looks 
first at his papers, and then at the door . all in 
a polite, gentlemanlike way, to be sure, but a 
way as makes me feel I'd as soon run against a 
wall o' ice, or one o' them Polar bears as lives 
on top of it, as open out my mind to Squire 
Dryden in his study." 

There was another pause. She could not 
bear to leave such a tempting opportunity unim- 
proved, and yet she did not see her way clear. 
Suddenly she seemed enlightened ; her head 
became unscrewed from the twist that had held 
it so firmly on one side. 



MRS. KORTHOVER. 123 

" The fact of the matter is, that she's left too 
much to herself ; if sheM some one to talk with 
as was some way her superior, she'd perhaps 
not be so stuck up and tiresome. Poor thing, 
it aU comes, no doubt, from her not being quite 
a lady bom. To think of her ma . a Miss Dry- 
den of Flairs, taking up with a person as had 
got to earn his living ! Well, the best of my 
belief is, if this one's let to run so wild, she'll 
do something of the sort. Now, there's that 
pretty little Miss Brownlow, she came here once 
. why shouldn't she be a bit more with Miss 
Elinor ? Yes ; I shall speak to the Squire my- 
self about it !" 

After all, it was a consoling feeling that one 
head was, as she expressed it, ^' screwed on the 
right way" at Flairs. 

Elinor was singularly restless and contradic- 
tory. Nothing was right either in the school- 
room or out of it. Maurice had returned the 
books, but when he had reached the North 
Gallery, he had seemed anxious to be gone again, 
and, spite of her daring, Elinor had felt relieved 
when he went away, although she tried to seem 



124 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

perfectly at her ease with him, and said she had 
made it all right with her uncle ; but the whole 
time she had been in breathless anxiety lest the 
Squire should appear at the end of the gallery. 
It might be the consciousness of this double 
dealing that disturbed her now. She had sim- 
ply asked her unde if she might not call the 
North Gallery her own, as she liked to roam 
in the deserted bed-chambers, and to look at 
the Drydens, and he had given his consent, 
smiling one of his rare smiles at the girl's fancy. 
Something told her that the gamekeeper's cou- 
sin would not have been, satisfied had he known 
the truth; but Elinor never held parley with 
her conscience if she felt dissatisfied ; that is to 
say, if she could not help feeling the pricks by 
which it sought to get a hearing : she always 
charmed away the " mopes," as she called it, by a 
gallop on Muslin, or a race round the park with 
her Skye terrier. 

For a time the meeting with Maurice had 
been of use. It had roused her out of herself 
and taught her that even she might be depen- 
dent on the services of those she thought so 



MRS. NORTHOVER. 125 

inferior. And had she left off here, all might 
have been well. 

The boy's manner had changed ; he treated 
her with far more deference . although there was 
still an equality in his way of speaking that 
jarred Elinor. She consoled herself by remem- 
bering that no one was present at their in- 
terviews, and that as he became better edu- 
cated his reverence for her would deepen^- 
never in her life had it occurred to her that any- 
thing could happen out of the bounds of her 
imaginings, or beyond the control of her will. 
She would have been very happy for the new 
interest thus thrown into her life . at sixteen 
(Elinor was close upon that birthday) any new 
and sudden friendship throws a glow over all we 
do and all we loak forward to doing, . but it was 
so difficult to see her protege. The Fraiilein 
put continual obstacles in her way; she had 
taken a dislike to wood-walks . the home side 
of the park, the high road towards Starby even 
was preferable. Elinor rebelled . but still not 
with her former violence, she did not wish to 
rouse the Fraiilein's suspicions. Once, as has 



126 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

been said, Maurice had ventured to the North 
Gallery, and once since, in the afternoon, when 
she was supposed to be in her favourite haunt, 
and Mademoiselle Altschul indulged in her ac- 
customed after-dinner nap, Elinor had rushed 
across the bridge, and by a less precipitous, 
though still dangerous, path, had reached the 
fence where she had first met Maurice . she 
found no Maurice there now, but she placed tht 
books she had brought with her on the ground. 
This was a fortnight ago . she began to think 
him very ungrateful . she had taken so much 
trouble for him. He had told her he found it 
difficult to understand Ivanhoe and some of the 
other books, from his ignorance of history, and 
although this was a difficulty which would never 
have occurred to Elinor . her creed being the 
fatal one common among idle minds blessed 
with fertile imaginations, that knowledge is a 
gift, not an acquisition, and that geniuses and 
talented people need not stoop to the drudgery 
necessary to those of more limited capacity . 
still she was too anxious to win Maurice's friend- 
ship, and also, though she would not have owned 



MRS. NORTHOVER. 127 

this^ too much in awe of him to refuse consent ; 
so when he said he would rather borrow some 
good histories from her than all the story-books 
in the library, she had positively dragged two 
great history books up all that way, and he had 
not tried to come and thank her. 

On the third day after her dispute with Mrs. 
Northover, the housekeeper knocked at the 
school-room door. 

A sleepy voice bade her come in, and added, 
as if such an intrusion were not desired^ that 
Miss Dry den was always in the North Gallery 
in the afternoon, 

Northover closed the door behind her, and 
then stood looking at it. 

*' I think the Squire*s bewitched, that I do ;" 
she jerked out her words, for they were uttered 
audibly, as if she meant them to go through 
the door panels : '' couldn't he find an English 
woman fit to teach Miss Elinor . first we had a 
frippery fidget of a French girl, and now we've 
got this lazy, sleepy Frollih, . clever, indeed, 
well, she ought to do something with her brains, 
that's sure, she never does anything to speak of 



128 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

with Dothin' else, except at meal-times, and then 
she don't forget her inside. All I know is . " 
she went on to herself, as she walked briskly to 
the North Gallery, " a young lady 'ud be doing 
much more the ways of a lady born if she sat 
up beside her governess of afternoons, learning 
pretty bits of fancy work and such like, than 
wandering about just as she pleases ; as sure as 
my name's what it is. Miss Elinor '11 grow up 
unreg'lar, and unconstituted." 

She found Miss Elinor standing on one leg, 
the other twisted, corkscrew fashion, round it, 
eagerly devouring the contents of what looked 
like a penny journal from its small type and pic- 
tured pages, but as Northover entered the 
gallery Elinor crushed the paper up in her hand, 
although she lounged still more indolently against 
the wall. 

" What can you want here, Northover, I sup- 
pose you know this gallery is my own, now ?" 

'' Oh, indeed ! well, I came to fetch you, 
Miss Dryden . there's a young visitor come to* 
see you." 

Elinor only thought of Maurice, and her joy 



MRS. NORTHOVER. 129 

that he had not forgotten her blinded her 
to the utter improbability of his seeking her 
through Northover. 

" Where is be ?" sh'e- pushed passed North- 
over in her eagerness . she was hurrying towards 
the hall to meet him. 

" He . Miss !- Mr. Brownlow has not got any 
young gentlemen as I ever heard of . it's the 
young lady from the Rectory, Miss Cecil, has 
come to spend the afternoon with you, Miss 
Dryden." 

The disappointment was too sharp and sudden 
for her small stock of self-control. 

" Who on earth dared to ask that little brat 
to visit me ? does she venture to think I want a 
baby for a companion ?" her passion almost 
choked her . she stood still, panting, her eyes 
flashing at Northover. 

" Well, I am surprised. Miss Dryden ; I'm 
sure you're too much the lady to be impolite to 
your young visitor . your uncle had invited her 
to see you; now come down, there's a good 
young lady, and see Miss Brownlow ; she's very 

VOL. I. 9 



130 EUNOR DRYDEN's PROBATION, 

pretty manners, I can tell you, for all she's shy 
. and she's none the worse for that." 

" Shy . well-bred girls are never shy . Made- 
moiselle always said so." 

" Are you coming, Miss Elinor ?" the house- 
keeper had passed on and stood holding the 
curtain up at the other end of the gallery. 

Her uncle's name had quieted Elinor ; she 
did not dare to refuse to see this unwelcome 
visitor, but she followed the housekeeper with 
sulky dignity, and without answering her. 



CHAPTER II. 

A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 

NoRTHOVBR threw open the drawiDg-room door, 
and Elinor started back at the picture that occu- 
pied the hearth-rug. 

Mr. Dryden stood there. *not frowning or 
sad-looking, but bending down a smiling face of 
courteous welcome to his young visitor. 

Elinor had not seen Cecil Brownlow, except 
at church, for more than a year, and she remem- 
bered her a pretty, timid child, whom she had 
abashed by her loud, imperious ways. Could 
this lovely, bright-haired angel . for that was her 
first impression of her . be really her former 
playfellow ? 

9.2 



132 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

The face was raised in eager reply to Mr. 
Dryden, and the exquisitely cut profile and head 
(for her hat lay beside her) were shown to per- 
fection . the pure, transparent skin looked yet 
whiter against her high blue merino dress, and a 
riband of the same colour kept back the ripples 
of her fair sunny hair from the broad, low fore- 
head . a forehead that spoke of all kinds of in- 
tellect, wide and deep. 

Her passionate love of beauty possessed 
Elinor for one moment . then a sudden, vehe- 
ment impulse of jealousy mastered her. Her 
uncle never bent over her in that courteous 
manner . he was looking almost handsome . 
almost like the picture of himself in the gallery . 
and all for a little goose, about thirteen years old 

He turned round as Elinor came up to the 
hearth-rug ; it was fortunate that she looked at 
Cecil, or she must have noted the dissatisfaction 
that came into his face, as he contrasted her 
haughty expression with that of his sweet, young 
visitor. 

Cecil's smile vanished: she was small and 
fragile, and she looked up at Elinor with a 



A VISION IN THE NORTH OALLEHY. 1 S3 

mixture of fear and shyness that increased Miss 
Dryden's dislike. 

" Elinor, Cecil says she has been told some of 
the legends of Hubert Dryden, and she has a 
great desire to see his picture ; will you take her 
to your favourite gallery. Mr. Brownlow says 
we may keep her for a few days, if we can 
make her happy." 

Cecil smiled up at him . a happy trustful 
smile, that seemed to move him strangely . he 
bent down and kissed her forehead, and then 
turned abruptly away and left the room. 

"Then you've left off being shy, Miss 
Brownlow ?" 

" I don't know," said Cecil simply ; she felt 
very shy just then, and vexed with herself for 
the feeling, when Mr. Dryden had been so kind. 

" Little idiot," said Elinor to herself. 

They were soon in the gallery before Hubert 
Dryden's picture, it was growing dusk so rapidly 
that the white faces on the walls began to show 
out in rather ghastly fashion from their sombre 
backgrounds. 

Elinor had almost overcome her jealous dis- 



134 ELINOR DRTDEN'S PROBATION. 

like in the pleasure of being listened to by so 
rapt and intelligent an auditor, when in the 
midst of one of her most supernatural legends . 
that of a beautiful dame whose picture was sup- 
posed to have been destroyed, and whose headless 
body was said to haunt the White Bed- Chamber 
at night . Cecil started and then turned very pale. 

" Why, what's the matter ? you don't mean 
to say you believe ghost stories ?'* 

" Hush, pray don't !" said Cecil, whitening as 
her deadly fear grew into certainty ; '' do you 
hear nothing ?" 

Elinor turned as white as her companion, and 
could hardly repress a shriek. 

There were footsteps slowly and distinctly ap- 
proaching from within the room next the White 
Bed-Chamber, 

Cecil's knees seemed to give under her . she 
felt suddenly hot and then deadly cold, a faint 
swimming sensation came over her eyes, and she 
fell insensible at Elinor's feet. 

Before the frightened girl could call for help, 
the door next the White Bed-Chamber opened 
slowly, and revealed . Maurice Karse. 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 135 

His lips were parted as if to address Elinor, 
but his eyes fell on the lifeless Cecil, and he 
stood gazing in speechless wonder. 

But Elinor had instantly recovered herself. 

" You ticesome boy," she said angrily, " you've 
frightened us both to death ; how long had you 
been in there ?" 

Maurice reddened. 

" I'm sorry," he said, " if I've frightened her ; 
hadn't you better call some one ?" He stooped 
over Cecil as if to raise her. 

'^ Leave her alone ; what business is it of 
yours ?" All Elinor's haughtiness was in her 
face in a moment, and Maurice became dumb 
and rigid under its influence. " Go . go . go ! 
why don't you go ? if they come and find you 
h^re you'll get horse-whipped, and I . " she 
checked herself just in time, it would not do 
to let him suppose her amenable to any 
authority but her own . " I shall be sorry," 
was spoken more gently, although still with the 
urgent manner that would compel speed. 

But Maurice seemed as if he would not be 
compelled; he looked very angry and threw 



136 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

back his head as haughtily as EliDor could have 
done. 

" You call yourself a young lady/' he said, 
his voice thick with passion, " and yet you don't 
speak the truth/' Elinor's eyes flashed, but he 
went on unheeding her. "I said to you I 
wouldn't come up here unless the Squire gave 
leave for it, and you said he had, or at least/' 
he 'went on putting aside her attempt at denial 
by extra strength of voice, ** you promised to 
say if he had refused, before ever I came, and 
now I see he did refuse. I tell you what, Miss 
Dryden, I've a mind to stay here till the Squire 
comes and tell him the truth from the very be- 
ginning." 

He looked so resolute, standing there with 
his young face full of indignant sorrow, tears of 
mortification at having, as he considered, fallen 
into such a trap . shining in his eyes . 
and both hands clenched as if to do battle 
against all who might attach an evil motive to 
his presence in the gallery, that Elinor was 
fairly quelled, although she felt that his charge 
was unjust. But she was essentially gifted with 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 137 

the resource of invention which seems born with 
some girls, to develop with their womanhood 
into the spirit of intrigue. 

'* How selfish you must be," she said, " you 
know for your sake I can't call for help, for fear 
of getting you into trouble, and all the while 
this poor child lies suffering/* 

She had aimed a chance arrow, but it went 
straight to the innate chivalry that lay deep in the 
boy's heart. In an instant a feeling of remorse, 
almost of horror, at his own selfishness had 
conquered all else ; he looked tenderly, reve- 
rently, at the lovely unconcious Cecil. 

" Child !" be murmured, " she looks more 
like an angel ;" and brushing past Elinor without 
another word, he was gone. 

Only just in time ; the sound caused by the 
closing of the turret staircase door had scarcely 
died away, when the red curtain at the other 
end of the gallery was completely drawn aside^ 
and her uncle came towards Elinor. 

He paused a moment, and then without 
stopping for questions he raised Cecil and car- 
ried her into his business room, which, as has 



188 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

been said, was just at the eastern angle of the 
gallery, shut off from it by the curtain, a room 
never entered by Elinor except for family 
prayers. 

She stood on the threshold strangely afraid to 
enter it now ; she did not know whether Cecil 
had been completely insensible, whether she had 
seen or heard Maurice, how much it would be 
wise to tell, how much to keep back ; as yet 
she had rarely since she came to Elairs been 
guilty of deliberate falsehood, although her home 
education had been rather mental than moral, 
and the law of expediency being the code of at 
least one of her parents, a sharp witted girl like 
Eliuor had early found outward help in quieting 
the voice which struggles so hard for hearing in 
a child . quieting but not stifling . it struggled 
hard now, and the terror inspired by Cecil's 
deathlike stupor, seen more plainly in the clearer 
light, helped to urge her to confession. 

Mr. Dryden had rang the bell directly he 
reached the hearth-rug, then he turned round to 
Elinor. 

''Come here and unfasten her dress;'' he 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 139 

spoke very sternly. " What have you done to 
cause this ?" 

If Mr. Dryden had ever watched over a child 
of his own, he would have known how ably he 
was playing the devil's part now. I say Mr. 
Dryden . ^for spite of all he was a good man . 
there are thousands of parents who live all their 
lives through wrecking each child's soul, by 
suspicion of their truth ; happily there are 
natures in whom truth is so powerfully and 
fearlessly developed that no suspicion, however 
crushing, can bar her passage to the open day, 
but in others she must be believed in, aye, even 
sometimes against a parent's own conviction, 
before she finds courage to walk naked into the 
daylight of inquisition. 

Elinor's truth had been early overlay ed by the 
specious trimmings and borders deceit can so 
cunningly embroider, blending the tints at the 
edges so that they are scarcely distinguishable. 
It would have required much warmth, much 
tenderness, to make it venture boldly forth 
stripped of these disguises, which, alas, she 
knew the use of too well. Mr. Dryden's words, 



140 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

unconscious as they were, set the seal on the 
struggling avowal, which a more patient and 
loving manner might have elicited, and her 
answer to his question stamped the character of 
her future life. 

" I . no, uncle ; she got frightened at no- 
thing, and fainted." 

The door opened, and Northover came in 
followed by two maids and a footman. It was 
so unusual for that bell to ring at that hour, 
that the household expected to find either 
their master in a fit, or else the house on 
fire. 

Cecil's state required no explanation. North- 
over at once took possession of her with the 
masterful delight in her own resources which 
in some women quite shuts out all sympathy 
for the sufferer to be attended to, in the honour 
and glory to be reaped from the attentions 
bestowed. 

Sending off the maids for sal-volatile, cold 
water, hartshorn, feathers, and a fan, she told 
Mr. Dryden he'd much better go and take Miss 
Elinor with him. 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 141 

He walked away towards the writing-room 
with a lingering step, as if unwilling to trust ' 
Cecil's recovery to other care than his own; 
th^n not hearing her footsteps, he turned to 
look for Elinor. She had not followed him, 
and he went back to find her. 

" Come with me, Elinor ; you are not wanted." 

'* Please to let me stay, uncle ; 1 want to stay 
with poor little Cecil." 

Even this was not wholly true ; she longed 
to hear what Cecil's first words would be . 
whether they would criminate her by declaring 
Maurice's presence in the gallery. 

"No, Elinor, it is best to leave her with 
Northover," he added, in a lower voice, as she 
came up to where he was waiting for her a 
little way from the open door ; " I wish-to speak 
to you alone." 

Almost for the first time in her life Elinor 
felt the presence of Fear, the abject nerveless 
thing that quenches all earnestness and harrows 
all generous impulse in the mind over which it 
spreads its clammy, trembling, yet tenacious 
grasp. When they 'reached the writing- room it 



142 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

seemed to her that it would be better to sink 
down lifeless as Cecil had done than to confess 
the truth to her unde. 

He gazed earnestly, sternly at her ; the h^^d 
lines deepened round his mouth, and his eye- 
brows contracted. She changed colour rapidly, 
and Mr. Dryden's anger rose ; he thought he 
had been deceived ; he fancied that something 
had been done purposely to frighten Cecil. 

'* Elinor, you must tell me the truth ; some- 
thing more than you say must have happened 
to make this little girl ill. Surely the staircase 
door closed just as 1 entered the gallery. I 
heard a fall, and I came to see what was the 
matter, and then it seemed to me that some one 
else was speaking to you, or were you quarrel- 
ling with Cecil, Elinor ?" 

She wished she had not told that first story, 
but she could not unsay it now, she must per- 
sist in it. Uncle was more angry than she had 
ever seen him ; still she hesitated. He stood 
beside the fire-place, looking so very tall and 
grim, so very like old Sir Fulke, that she could 
not get her words out. 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 143 

Mr. Dryden looked grave^ more pained than 
angry, 

'* Elinor^ speak the truth. I can forgive any- 
thing but deceit ; for that I have no pardon." 

Her struggle was over. What was the use 
of owning that she had deceived him, when he 
said himself such a fault was unpardonable ? 

" I have told you the truth/* she said, forcing 
herself by a desperate effort to meet his eyes 
boldly ; " I was telling Cecil the story of Lady 
Hilda Dryden, and how she always walked 
about without a head, and all of a sudden I saw 
her look strange, and she said, ' Hush 1 do you 
hear nothing ?' and then down she fell, just as 
you found her." 

'' And you are quite sure you were alone with 
her when she fainted ?" 

"Quite." 

It was easy to answer this question, for 
Elinor was not aware of Maurice's neighbour- 
hood when Cecil fainted. 

Mr. Dryden stood still thinking. 

"I ought to have cautioned you," he said 
gently ; " Mrs. Brownlow told me that Cecil's 



144 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

shyness arose not so much from being an only 
child, but from her singularly excitable, nervous 
temperament ; but I could not have thought it 
so easily worked on. You had better not tell 
her any more ghost stories. Now go, my child, 
and see how she is. I am sorry I doubted you, 
Elinor." 

She looked down, her cheeks burning with 
shame. All that was good in her rose in pro- 
test against the deceit, but the sense of relief 
was too great, and had he not just said such a 
fault was unpardonable ? Still, conscience urged 
her loudly, and almost conquered fear. She 
stopped on her way to the door, and looked 
back. Mr. Dryden was not watching her ; he 
had turned to his desk, and had his hands full 
of papers. She dared not go to him and own 
that she had been acting a lie. She closed the 
door behind her, and the sound seemed to hurry 
her on, to stifle the restless discontent she felt 
by action. After all, was it not better to begin 
afresh, to maintain for the future a perfectly 
open and truthful course of conduct towards her 
uncle, than to have a scene and a fuss which 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 145 

would only tend to lower her in his opinion^ 
even if he forgave her ? and at Elinor's age few 
have realized that the Future, in which all is 
easy, becomes as difficult when Present as the 
Now which is slipping into the Past. She 
walked quickly to the study. 

Cecil had quite recovered her senses ; she sate 
in Mr. Dryden's arm-chair very white and still 
and languid. Just as Elinor came in she was 
begging Northover in a quavering voice to send 
her home at once. She started with nervous 
terror as Elinor came suddenly into the room. 
The poor child shrank from her spite of her 
kind words ; to her Elinor was inseparably con- 
nected with the spectral sounds that had so 
terrified her in the North Gallery. 

A feeling of remorse, that urged her to make 
reparation somewhere, influenced Elinor now. 
She knelt beside Cecil with her hand in hers, 
holding out all sorts of inducements to persuade 
her to remain at Flairs . she would have a bed 
in her room ; Cecil should not be left alone a 
moment, and to-morrow, if sheliked> she should 
ride Muslin all day. 

VOL. !. 10 



.146 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

But no persuasions or remonstrances could 
quiet the nervous agitation which for the time 
had quite overthrown Cecil's self-control. She 
was no longer shy ; she told Elinor she must 
and she would go home ; and she told Mr. 
Dryden when he came in to see her, that if she 
stayed there she should not sleep all night, and 
that nothing would do her any good except 
being sent home at once. 

She shrank from Elinor, evidently with a 
decided dislike ; but as Mr. Dryden stooped 
down over her, trying to sooth her with gentle 
words . for it hurt his pride grievously that she 
should refuse to pass even one night at Flairs . 
she took his hand in both hers, and while she 
held it closely clasped, she implored him again 
so earnestly to send her home directly, that he 
yielded, told Northover, spite of her admonitory 
shakes of the head, to have a carriage ordered, 
and himself accompanied the frightened child to 
the Parsonage. 

" Well," said the housekeeeper, " it's past 
belief; the Squire's like a lamb with a blue 
ribbon towards that fanciful child. I don't 



A VISION IN THE NORTH GALLERY. 147 

want him to spoil Miss Elinor . not I, indeed ! 
A spoiled girl will grow up a stinging nettle for 
some one; but I don't hold with partiality 
where it's not due, neither." 



10.2 



CHAPTER III. 



SIR STUART PALMER. 



Sir Stuart Palmer rode up the street of 
Starby on his great powerful black horse, and 
taking the left hand road when he reached the 
church, dismounted at the Parsonage gate and 
rang the bell. 

He stood there waiting, tall, erect, perhaps 
with too much superfluous flesh about him, but 
still a fine hale specimen of an English country 
gentleman in the prime of life: his clear 
bright skin spoke of active health; his deep 
set eyes and massive forehead^ of intellect and 
mental culture ; and his small, well cut mouth 
bespoke refinement. To these gifts he did not 



SIR STUART PALMER. 149 

join those of patience or extreme forbearance, 
as was soon manifested by the sudden and vehe- 
ment pull he gave at the bell-handle when he 
found no attention paid to his first summons. 

" Why don't they keep more servants ?" he 
said to himself as the vision of a maid's head 
at one of the upper windows, and its hasty 
withdrawal, showed that she was probably en- 
gaged in up-stairs work, and wished to satisfy 
herself whether the summons was worth atten- 
tion. 

Sir Stuart's eyes travelled over the front of 
the Parsonage, and the survey seemed to mollify 
him. Although it was a poor looking place as 
a house, much had been done to beautify it in 
the way of natural adornment. It was summer 
time, and on one side of the door a climbing 
rose carried thick clusters of crimson flowers 
up to the second storey ; oh the other the in- 
numerable rose-tinted tufts of a smaller white 
rose were just bursting into flower ; and covering 
the space from the ground to the lower windows 
was a wealth of convolvulus, nasturtium, and 
rose-coloured pea-flower, the common blossoms, 



150 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

which only ask a little care to clothe the most 
unsightly objects with their loveliness. The 
house would have been both ugly and mean- 
looking if left to itself. It had grown by de- 
grees^ reminding one of a mollusc who increases 
his shell with his internal requirements, not 
always with regard to external symmetry. The 
windows were of all sizes, the roofs also of the 
different parts did not agree in height, and yet, 
except in summer time, the house lacked the 
picturesque effect which might have resulted 
from irregularity. 

" Is your master at liome ?" 

This was said to the servant, when she at last 
appeared, less impatiently than could have been 
expected ; but Sir Stuart had had time to think, 
even after his last impatient summons, and he 
was not a man to waste such an opportunity, 
much as he was disposed on ordinary occasions 
to act upon his first impulses. 

He was soon in Mr. Brownlow's study . 
a httle room looking on to the back garden, 
and letting in through its open windows the 
exquisite perfume of flowers, and the twitter of 



SIR STUART PALMER. 151 

birds . not their song, for it was July, when 
woods and trees become so suddenly dumb, by 
the silence of their inhabitants. It was a plainly 
furnished room, in which everything having the 
good taste to be contemporary, there prevailed a 
universal self-respect ; there was not even a 
fresh gilded book, to reveal by its glitter the 
dowdiness of all around it. 

So Sir Stuart Palmer thought as he sat chat- 
ting with the parson ; but when Cecil darted in 
through one of the open windows which reached 
to the ground, her face flushed with eagerness, 
her hat, which had fallen back, showing her 
hair glistening with light, it seemed as if a sun- 
beam had suddenly illuminated all that was bare 
and meagre, to show what unfit surroundings 
they were for such brilliant beauty. 

But as her blue eyes settled themselvjes on 
her father's visitor, some of the sunshine faded 
out of Cecil's face, and her shy look came 
instead. 

" Don't you know Sir Stuart Palmer ?" Mr. 
Brownlow said ; and the girl went up and shook 
hands, with due lady-like propriety. 



152 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

Sir Stuart smiled. He was a quick observer, 
and he had seen her change of countenance. 

" I'm not the person you expected to find, 
am I, Cecil ? Now you know Fm not." 

Cecil blushed. 

" No. I thought it was Mr. Dryden." 

Sir Stuart laughed, but not heartily. 

" You are very fond of Squire Dryden, then, 
are you ? I thought he made himself dis- 
agreeable to all woman-kind. But now, Brown- 
low, if you're coming with me this morning, 
let's make haste. I only want you just to look 
at the place, and say whether you don't think it 
ought to drained. If you agree with me, then it 
had better be done as soon as I can get the money, 
or I believe it will breed a fever some day." 

While Mr. Brownlow went to order his horse, 
his visitor talked to Cecil. 

" And so, Mr. Dryden is a favourite of yours. 
Miss Cecil Brownlow ? Rather a harsh look- 
ing pet for so dainty a little damsel. I should 
have thought his black-eyed niece, now, would 
have been more in your way. She seems lively 
enough. Is she a friend of yours, too ?" 



SIR STUART PALMER. 153 

Cecil was shy^ but she had the rapid way of 
reading character which is intuitive with some 
people, and which is often remarkable in chil- 
dren. Perhaps their elders are more apt to hide 
than^to betray a faculty so likely to alienate the 
confidence of others. 

She noticed the repressed irritation with which 
Sir Stuart uttered the Squire's name, and the 
hovering interest which seemed to keep him 
speaking of him. 

" I hardly know Elinor Dry den ; but I like 
Mr. Dryden because he is so kind to me. Don't 
you like people who are kind to you ?" 

Something in her words, or the tone of them, 
seemed to reprove him. 

"That's right, Cecil; always speak well of 
your friends," he said heartily, and then went 
on talking to her till Mr. Brownlow's summons 
called him to mount his horse. 

They rode along some way in silence, till 
they reached a bit of marshy land at some little 
distance from the village. Mr. Brownlow quite 
agreed with his friend on the necessity of its 
drainage, but he estimated the expense so much 



154 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

more highly than Sir Stuart had done, that the 
latter declared it must stand over for a year or 
so, till he could afford it better. 

"Meantime, Brownlow, you must put up 
prayers for cool summers and frosty wintefs. I 
wish Dryden would offer to purchase that waste 
bit ; it would fit into his land just as neatly as 
it does into mine, and he'd set it all right at once 
with his superfluous thousands. By-the-way, what 
on earth has made your little girl so fond of him?" 

He came back to the subject wit]i a pertina- 
city that showed how Cecil's preference had irri- 
tated him. He was a universal favourite with 
women and children ; and, although not vain, 
he felt sore that anyone should usurp his special 
prerogative. To him the child's liking for Mr. 
Dryden was incredible. , 

" He has always been kind to her ; and this 
spring, when she went to Flairs on a visit to 
his young niece, Cecil was taken ill, and Mr. 
Dryden showed a tenderness towards her that 
one could hardly have expected." 

'^ Tenderness I I didn't think he had such a 
quality." 



SIR STUART PALMER. 155 

Sir Stuart must have irritated his horse just 
then, for the splendid creature curvetted restively, 
and seemed as if a very little would make it 
quite unmanageable. 

Mr. Brownlow did not answer directly. He 
was considering the best way of approaching 
a delicate subject. 

" I believe there's only a cold feeling between 
you and the Squire, is there . no quarrel, I think?" 

Sir Stuart laughed in a hard, short way, as if 
the words were a mockery. 

** Quarrel ! He's never given me the oppor- 
tunity of fastening a quarrel upon him. By 
Heaven ! when I think sometimes of what I've 
submitted to tamely from that man, I wish the 
old duelling days were still among us, and that 
I might fight it out under my own oak trees." 

Mr. Brownlow looked very seriously into his 
face. Sir Stuart had reined in his horse in the 
middle of the road. They had gone on past 
the waste ground along the highway which 
separated the two parks, and were now near the 
Lodge-gate leading to Karse's cottage. 

" You're not speaking seriously," the clergy- 



156 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

man said, " or you would make me very an- 
xious. I wish, Palmer, you would tell me the 
whole story of your disagreement. Of course, one 
hears different versions; and it has always seemed 
to me a wretched state of things, that the two 
landowners of this part of the county should be 
as you and Dryden are ; but you know I have 
only been here a few years, and therefore I have 
no personal knowledge of what may have caused 
the feud." 

Sir Stuart had trotted on briskly while his 
friend spoke ; but Mr. Brownlow kept pace with 
him, determined that he should not evade an 
answer. 

He looked round impatiently, as if about to 
refuse any explanation. Then the clergyman's 
earnest face seemed to trouble him, and his eyes 
drooped moodily. He checked his horse into 
a walk. 

" Yes, I feel what you want to say. Brown - 
low, although you haven't said it . that it's not 
christian-like to go on bearing malice from one 
year's end to another. Well, I'll tell you, as a 
clergyman, what I wouldn't own to anyone else. 



SIR STUART PALMER. 157 

God only knows*' . he said the words reverently, 
and yet with an agitation that showed the sub- 
ject was stirring deep feeling . "how often I 
have offered fellowship to Wentworth Dryden, 
and how invariably he has repelled me." 

Mr. Brpwnlow was thoroughly surprised ; he 
had seen Sir Stuart bow formally to the Squire, 
but he had thought there was no wish on either 
side to renew the old friendship he had heard 
spoken of. 

He scarcely knew what to say next . he could 
not allude to the scandal which was said to have 
originated the quarrel between the two friends, 
and yet it seemed as if Sir Stuart was ready to 
open his heart to him. 

" I believe you were dear friends once?" 

Sir Stuart's handsome face flushed. 

" Friends ! I cannot remember when we were 
anything else ! at Eton and at Christ Church we 
were everything to each other . we did not meet 
much afterwards, because he was older, and so 
left Oxford -before I did, and then I spent sudh 
a long time in Italy . I tell you, Brownlow, it is 
the remembrance of all this and of some atone- 



158 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ment I owe him, too, that has made me submit 
to his overbearing pride as I have done." 

"Atonement!" . Mr. Brownlow spoke very 
gravely . " then you confess to having wronged 
him r 

" I confess to nothing," said Sir Stuart, with 
a hltlf smile at the clergyman's eagerness ; then 
he went on again, impetuously, " I will tell you 
one thing, Brownlow, that I would not breathe 
to any one else. I see you have heard all the 
gossip which has mixed my name up with Mrs. 
Dryden's, and like the good man you are, refuse 
to believe in scandal. I will tell you something 
that no one else could tell you, that I sometimes, 
even now, upbraid myself for not having taken 
her boldly away from the bondage that broke 
her heart." 

They had been riding along very slowly, while 
Sir Stuart spoke . now he galloped on despe- 
rately, as if in chase of something. 

Mr. Brownlow did not attempt to follow him 
-*-he was lost in wonder at the depth of feeling 
suddenly revealed in a man whom he had 
thought too light-hearted and sanguine to feel 



SIR STUART PALMER. 159 

earnestly or permanently any trial or sorrow. 
He had fallen into the common error of sup- 
posing that depth is always the accompaniment 
of coldness and reserve, and that therefore Sir 
Stuart had less real feeling than Mr. Dry den, but 
though he now saw his mistake, the reconciliation 
he wished to eflfect seemed further off than ever. 

Sir Stuart's confidence had shocked him 
greatly, and had revived all the doubts respecting 
Mrs. Dryden, which he had refused to believe in, 
but though Mr. Brownlow was essentially a good 
man, his mind was too feeble to cope with those 
whose powers were greater than his own. 

While he was still pondering the meaning of 
his friend's words, Sir Stuart rode up again. 

" You see, now, Brownlow, why it would be 
worse than useless to press this subject . you 
only stir up strife. You're coming up to lun- 
cheon, aren't you ?" he saw Mr. Brownlow rein- 
ing up his horse at the entrance of the Lermouth 
avenue. 

" Thank you, no ; my wife is less well than 
usual even to-day. I'll go home to dinner, for 
I must be out all the afternoon." 



160 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

He rode home deep in meditation. The 
account he had heard was that the Squire's 
marriage had proved unhappy because Mrs. 
Dryden had given way to frivolous vanity, and 
had courted the admiration of Sir Stuart. No 
one had ever spoken of Sir Stuart's love for her 
except as an after consequence, and Mr. Brown- 
low had hitherto disbelieved the whole story, 
and had imagined that the quarrel between the 
friends might have some other origin ; now he 
felt very sorrowful and very anxious to know the 
whole truth. 



CHAPTER IV. 



THB MARKHAMS. 



A GIRL rather younger than Elinor Dryden sate 
** practising " at a very shabby pianoforte, in an 
old-fashioned neglected-looking house, near one 
of the squares on the north side of London. 

About the house, about the room and its 
furnishings there \vas the faded unmistakable 
stamp, telling that all had seen better days, were 
in fact among " the has beens ;" but, besides 
this, there was something else that offended 
the eye more than faded damask, thread-bare 
carpeting, or dingy paper-hangings, . over 
everything hung the blight of slovenliness . and 

VOL. I. 11 



162 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

neglect. The clouded mirror reflected no bril- 
liance into the room ; the fire-irons were dull 
and specked with rust ; the hearth-rug lay 
crooked, and the carpet bore traces of want of 
sweeping ; the paper shavings in the grate . 
it was bright July weather . were soiled and dis- 
arranged, as if they had served for playthings to 
some mischievous kitten. 

There was some smartness about the room . 
a pair of hand screens, worked in wool and 
beads, and elaborately fringed, a footstool em- 
broidered on leather, some knitted woollen chair- 
backs.-**birir they looked out of place, as if they 
bad com^ on a visit and would be sorry to stop 
where they were unappreciated . the touch of a^ 
neat, tasteful hand was. not visible anywhere. 

The girl at the piaopforte turned round and 
IjDoked at the clock on the mantel-piece. 

" Bother the thing . I forgot it hadn't been, 
wound up ; I wish mamma would remeno^ber it, 
ojr else trust me with the key. Aren't they ever 
qoming down ? I'm sure it's past breakfa&t-time, 
long ago." 

She jumped up and shut the piano with a. 



THE MARKHAMS. 163 

bang which must surely have disturbed its ner-* 
vous system. 

She would have been pretty had she looked 
less like a doll ; a delicate complexion, blue eyes, 
and fair hair curling in small ringlets, a small, 
inexpressive nose and mouth, gave her face the 
monotony even children tire of in their waxen 
pets ; her hair was smooth, and Ijer dress tidier 
than might have been expected, judging by her 
surroundings, but the last was very shabby . 
still there was a trimness in the set of her collar 
and waistband that indicated Miss Adelaide 
Markham to possess some amount of self- 
respect. 

A heavy footstep sounded outside the door, 
and then her father looked into the room. 

" What, down already, Addy I come and give 
me a kiss, my little bird, and just run up to your 
mother, dear . she's mislaid her keys, again, this 
morning," 

Any one could see at a glance that Roland 
Markham had been a very handsome man, and 
his brilliant complexion and eyes, white forehead, 
and .large, busby whiskers, were still ouich ad- 

11.2 



164 EH^OE dryden's probation. 

mired, but self-indulgence had stamped his other 
features with a swollen coarseness that had 
changed him greatly for those who remembered 
the good-looking youth who had stolen the heart 
of Miss Elinor Dryden. 

She, too, had altered since those days; she 
had been in youth a very pretty likeness of her 
daughter Adelaide, but ill health had made 
her very thin and hollow-cheeked; her nose, 
too, looked drawn and attenuated, and by day- 
light the exquisite white of her skin had a yel- 
lowish tinge. 

She was smiling now, as she came into the 
dining-room, where breakfast was laid on a very 
rumpled table-doth. 

" After all, Roland, where do 'you think they 
were found ?" She held up the missing keys in 
triumph. " I felt siire Td laid them down, 
somewhere, and so I had, on your chest of 
drawers, and you'd put your hat on them." 

" Well, make haste, now, there's a good girl," 
said her husband, " and give us all some break- 
fast ; any one but you, Nell, would have looked 
under a hat." 



THE MARKHAMS. 165 

" And any one but you, Roland, would hang 
your hat up in the hall instead of walking up- 
stairs with it on your head ; it is so ungentle- 
manlike/' 

'* There, that'll do," said Mr. Markhara, 
roughly ; he and his wife " got along," as he 
would have phrased it, easily enough together, 
except when she alluded to his want of breeding 
before the children, and as she in her heedless- 
ness often cast this reproach upon him, bickering 
was not an unusual element in the Markham 
family. 

Poor Mrs. Markham, she had perhaps always 
been too silly to miss mental companionship in 
the man whom at sixteen she had so wilfully 
chosen as her guide through life, but yet after a 
while, as the familiarity of daily association 
stripped away the halo which had surrounded the 
lover, hitherto only met in hasty, stolen inter* 
views, she began to miss something, she could 
not define exactly what, and so settled with her- 
self that it was because he had not been born a 
gentleman that she at times felt ill at ease with 
him 



166, ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Doubtless this prevented entire sympathy, as 
every woman who marries an inferior must 
speedily discover, the craving for which . if she 
loves her husband . soon drags her down to his 
level ; but there was something more than 
coarseness and want of polished courtesy amiss 
in Roland Markham, something the infection of 
which was infinitely more degrading. 

Without being exactly dishonest he was 
thoroughly loose in principles, wearing them like 
an outer garment, always ready to slip oSy 
according to the atmosphere of circumstances ; 
and yet although he was for ever planning 
some wonderful stroke by which to better his 
fortunes, he had hitherto failed in every specu- 
lation. 

Spite of her pretty face, he would never have 
eloped with Elinor Dryden, had he believed in 
her father's stern unforgiveness, and that after 
settling just enough on his disobedient child to 
keep her and her children from actual poverty, 
he would disinherit her. He had tried to 
make advances to her brother as soon as he 
came into possession of the estates, but he ^on 



THE MARKHAMS. 167 

found that nothing was to be gaiaed from 
Wentworth Dryden by mancBuvring ; what he 
chose to do he would do unsoixcited ; he posi>- 
tively refused to acknowledge l^e existence of 
such a person as his sister's husband, and 
Markham was too much b man of the world not 
to &el, after bis first rebuff, that he was not in a 
position to daim brotherhood with Mr. Dryden 
of Flairs. 

Now all his hopes were centred in Elinor, 
. she was more like him than any of the 
other chiklren . ^he was very proud of her, and 
had determined that although her uncb might 
train her up as he chose, and perhaps make her 
for awhile ashamed of her own people, still she 
should marry a husband of her Other's choosing, 
and that husband it seemed to him it would be 
an act of retributive justice to find among his 
own kindred. 

"Addy, there's the postman; do run and 
open the door, child ; Jane's overslept herself, I 
know, and she's all behind-hand as it is" 

Mr. Markham gave a grunt of dissatisfaction 
as his wife spoke : it was strange, certainly, that 



168 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

two following days never could go regularly in 
his home ; there was always as he said '^ a screw 
loose somewhere ;'' perhaps it was difficult for 
anything to be tight where all went on in the 
easy slip-shod style of for ever deferring what 
was difficult or unpleasant to be done to the last 
moment . from paying tradesmen to ordering 
the dinner. No one could have complained of 
monotony in the Markham household ; there was 
daily variety, even if it were not always of a 
pleasant nature. 

" Give me the letter, Addy/' her mother held 
out her hand for it. " Your papa's got his news- 
paper, so it doesn't matter if it's for me or for 
him." 

Mr. Markham looked up quickly and laid 
his hand on Adelaide as she passed. 

** That's a likely joke, Nell . what's yours is 
mine, as I've often told you . what's mine's my 
own." 

" And this is my own," said Adelaide, tri- 
umphantly ; " it's not for either of you, it's 
for me . from Elinor." 



THE MARKHAMS. 169 

" Make haste and read it/' said her mother 
with brightening eyes. 

Roland Markham stretched out his hand to 
take it, but Adelaide skipped out of his way. 

^* Good gracious, DQamma, you'll never guess 
what's going to happen to Elinor." 

Mr. Markham flushed very red ; he forgot for 
the moment his daughter's extreme youth, and 
he made up his mind that his darling project 
had been forestalled. 

" Going to be married, you don't mean it ?" 
he said, angrily. 

" My dear Roland, how can you ? why she's 
a mere child." 

" She's nearly as old as you were, ma," said 
Addy with a toss of her head that implied that 
she herself, although a year Elinor's junior, was 
not to be slandered by any imputation of childish- 
ness, ^^but it's nothing about marrying; it's 
what she's much too old for, I'm sure ; she's 
going to school." 

" To school ! poor dear child ; I must say I 
think it's too bad of Wentworth to send a child 
of mine to school." 



170 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

Mrs. Maii^ham almost began to cry with 
vexation. 

" Don't be a fool, Ndl ; why I think it's the 
best move I've heard of, in many ways." H 
was sitting with one elbow on the table, resting 
the side of his head in his upturned hand, he 
tapped his forehead now with his forefinger as 
he repeated his words. 

" In many ways that a woman's illogical mind 
can't see." 

" I don't care about logic, I care about 
nature," said his wife in an aggrieved voice, 
" and I must say I think from first to last 
Wentworth's conduct has been unnatural about 
Elinor. He asked for her, I'm sure we liever 
offered to part with our first-born." 

Mr. Markham smiled, galled as he had beesa 
by the Squire's treatment of him, he could not 
help remembering how joyfully that offer had 
been received, and how relieved the mother, 
with her hands full of babies, past and present, 
had been to be rid of the strong-willed tur- 
bulent child, who submitted to no rule except 
her own. 



THE MARKHAMS. 171 

"Well, and now don't you see, you silly 
woman, that we have a much better chance of 
seeing Elinor at school than when she's mewed 
up at Flairs, for of course he won't send her to 
school in the country, she'll either come to Lon- 
don or go to Brighton, you may depend." 

" Oh, no, papa," Addy broke in, but her 
mother answered over the top of her words, a 
habit rather frequent among the Markhams; 
however, as Mrs. Markham rarely got the 
word, it is hard to comment on her having 
done so. 

" You don't comprehend me in the least, 
Roland, nor do you seem to see what a different 
position Elinor must occupy to' the rest of her 
family ; why she's a Dryden now, and I should 
like to know who ever heard of a Dryden going 
to school, it's not done among people of our 
class, I assure you, at least, I mean . " her hus- 
band was looking at her with the teazing smile 
upon his lips that always excited her anger . he 
could never command her respect unless he put 
himself in a passion, and then it is hard to say 
whether the silence his violence produced was 



172 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

respect or fear . " I mean among those of the 
class I might be in now, if I had not been so 
sadly foolish . " 

"Well, having been foolish once," he said 
laughing, for he was very seldom hard on his 
vnfe before the children . it may be because he 
did not wish to provoke her revelations . as he 
still nourished the hope of one day assuming 
what he considered his proper position, "I'd 
leave it off for the future ; it stands to reason 
the girl will get better taught at school than she 
could be with one solitary governess at Flairs, 
where she's much too far from any town to get 
masters or anything of the sort/' 

" I should like to know then how I managed, 
and how all the Drydens before me got 
taught/' 

" Well, we won't inquire too curiously into 
that ;" he looked at her as if to see how much 
more teazing she would bear, " but you must 
remember, Nell, that girls now-a*days must be 
educated, or they must go to the wall ; the world 
has got so wise that female ignorance has gone 
out of fashion, although, as far as I'm con* 



THE 31ARKHAMS. 173 

cerned, my dear, I think if a woman can play 
and sing and sew, and see after her husband's 
comforts, that's all that's wanted. I'm sick of 
this talk about women's minds, it may do for 
the ugly ones ; all a pretty woman's got to do 
is to be accomplished, and when she marries to 
mind her own business." 

Mr. Markham's ratio of accomplishments 
being limited to playing, singing, and sewing, it 
is to be supposed his estimate of womankind 
was slightly Mohammedan. He stretched out 
his hand for Elinor's letter. 
. " By George," he exclaimed when he read it, 
" why couldn't you open your mouth, child ; why 
the old rascal, . what the devil do you think ? 
he's going to send her to Germany, Nell." 

"Really, Roland, I muiSt remind you that 
such expressions are not fit for Addy to hear, 
and that my feelings should be a little studied 
when you speak of my brother Wentworth." 

" Hang your brother Wentworth," he went 
on coarsely ; for all his plans seemed frustrated 
by what he had been reading, ** Hear what 
the child says . " 



174 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

'' You will be surprised to learn that I am 
going to school . to some place in Germany . 
there's no use in sending you the name, you 
couldn't pronounce it if I did. I'm so tired of 
the Fraiilein and Northover that Vm glad . 
although in some ways I'm sorry. Uncle Dry- 
den says I shall have no time for writing letters 
while I'm away ; he means to come and see me 
pretty often, I believe, and he will send you 
word about my health. Good-bye to you all. 
I believe I am rather pleased on the whole to 
have the advantages of foreign travel ; it wiB 
give me a tone and finish I could not acquire in 
England. My love to all. 

" Yours affectionately, 

"Elinor Dryden." 

"That's what I call being sent into exile, 
and no mistake ;" and Mr. Markham, having 
licked his lips and then wiped away any traces 
of breakfast that might, linger there with the 
back of his hand, looked at his watch. " Just 
run up and get my hat, will you Addy ? I'm 
half- an- hour late as it is." 



THE MARKHAMS. 175 

Mrs. Markham had made no comment on 
the letter ; she had only taken it eagerly from 
her husband as if to see whether he had not 
left out some little special word of remembrance 
or tenderness . she sighed as she laid it down 
beside her. 

" Well, what do you think ?" he spoke im- 
patiently, as if it were impossible she could 
hold any opinion but his own. 

"I suppose it's all right," she said sadly, 
"but, Roland, I'm afraid it doesn't make any 
difference to us where Elinor lives, she will never 
belong to us again.'* 

Adelaide's entrance checked his answer, not 
so much from any reticence inspired by her 
presence, but because the sight of his hat re- 
minded him of his hurry. 

As soon as he was gone Addy took up her 
letter, folded it carefuHy, and put it in her 
pocket. 

"You seem proud of that letter, child." Mrs. 
Markham felt curious to know what effect it had 
produced on her. 

" I'm glad to have it, mamma. I'm fonder 



176 ELINOR DRTDEN'S PROBATION. 

of Elinor than she i^ of me, but she must love 
me too, or she wouldn't have written to say 
good-bye." 

Mrs. Markham sighed again, 



. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 

Ever since the afteraoon when his sudden 
appearance had given such a shock to the 
nerves of Cecil Brownlow, Maurice had steadily 
refused to visit the North Gallery. 

At first, Elinor tried to conquer his repugnance 
by a threat of not lending him any more books, 
but she found this was lost labour with the strange, 
reserved boy. Whatever he might have felt, 
directly she assumed a haughty, superior tone, 
and told him not to expect her to bring him any 
more supplies, he turned away with the cold in- 
difference he had shown at their first meeting . 
an indifference telling of self-command, so foreign 
to her own nature, that she had no key to its 

VOL. I. 12 



178 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

meaning. Sometimes she thought it arose from 
pride ; but what had he to do with pride ? No, 
it was most likely stupidity . and she hated 
stupid people . therefore it was best to overlook 
it, and try to improve his mind. Why was not 
everyone gifted with her own brilliant fancy and 
quick discernment. What lumbering slow- 
coaches men were in finding out anything, 
and yet with all her quickness and decision, she 
could not feel quite sure about the motive that 
had decided Maurice rather to run the risk of 
giving up the books he longed for, than to re- 
visit the North Gallery. Was it fear ? No, it 
could not be that. 

And when she tried taunts, and told him he 
was afraid of being horse-whipped, there had 
come into his face a look, and into his eyes a 
brightness, that made her somehow keep silence 
spite of herself. No, he was not a coward. 

" How fast he gets through his books !*' she 
said to herself one afternoon, when for about the 
twentieth time since her first promise she was 
crossing the bridge with fresh volumes. " He's 
certainly much fonder of dry books than I am. 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 179 

That dull, old Froissart, that I took him for the 
sake of the pictures, I believe he's read it all 
through, for he said he should like Philip de 
Comines, because it would go on with it, and 
some Chronicle or other which he ought to 
have had before Froissart. But then, people 
who are not born geniuses must plod on and fill 
their brains with acquired learning ; they never 
know the inspiration by which, genius leaps at 
once to knowledge ; well, if he plods away for 
ever he'll never catch me up, that's one comfort." 

Elinor drew herself up here with what she 
fancied was queen-like dignity, and rehearsed 
the speech which should show Maurice, that 
however hard mere talent might labour to store 
its brains, still that the very process of such 
acquisition must dull and debase the intellect, 
and prevent the result attained from ever equal- 
ling real inspiration. 

Maurice now often met her half-way in the 
hanging wood between the river and the heights, 
so that she seldom had to scramble up the glen 
in search of him. 

It was July, and the trees hung their canopies 

12.2 



180 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

everywhere, changing even the colours of the 
sun's rays as they struggled through the exquisite 
verdure into a cool green light. 

Stretched on the brown carpeting left by last 
year's leafage, Maurice lay at the foot of a huge 
beech-tree, whose grey and green trunk bore re- 
cords of roughly-cut initials. So intricate was the 
crossing and recrossing of the branches overhead, 
that the air scarcely found a passage, and on the 
writhing, far stretching roots of the tree, large 
scales of fungus had formed, growing one above 
another, as prismatically radiant as the feathers 
in a peacock's tail. Maurice was deeply absorbed 
in examination of these as Elinor approached. 

She had been conscious lately of a great 
change in their relative positions. Her respect 
for him had augmented . spite of all contrary 
reasoning . with every " dry" book he asked for, 
and he treated her with far more easy equality 
than on their first acquaintance. Somehow or 
other she had signally blundered in the scheme 
laid down for this boy's education nearly six 
months ago, and yet it was not for want of 
good resolutions beforehand. 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 181 

" It must be because I am, as the Fraiilein 
says, so impulsive. If I were more silent and 
guarded myself, I should be able to manage 
this strange boy. It would be much better if 
he came to see me in the gallery . there he must 
be overawed ; but here, I'm afraid he is ignorant 
enough to think he has as much right to the 
woods as I have, and that we meet as equals. Til 
begin again to-day. He shall learn his place." 

She had often made this resolution before, 
but it had remained a resolution. To-day, as 
she came in sight of Maurice, she said to herself 
it should begin, to work. 

The boy turned round as the crackling leaves 
crumbled under her feet, and smiled up at her as 
he saw the books she carried. 

But he was too full of lazy enjoyment of the 
leafy sunshine . too much lulled into the drowsy, 
exquisite languor, caused by the wood atmo- 
sphere, the humming of the insects, and the 
softened sound of the waterfall carried there by 
the sparkling river over which the wood hung . 
to trouble himself to move just then, even to 
relieve Elinor of her burden. 



182 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

She did not attempt to lay the books down. 
She stood still, defiant and erect, with an angry 
frown on her face. 

After a few minutes' pause, during which 
Maurice took no notice, she found herself re- 
duced to the humiliating necessity of stating her 
grievance. 

" Well, Maurice, I must say there's one thing 
you don't learn from your books." 

Her petulant tone roused him. He raised 
his eyebrows and looked at her inquiringly. 

" How stupid you must be, sir. Don't you 
see that I've got my arms full of books . books 
for you too ?" 

Her eyes were flashing with anger. She had 
thought his inattention was assumed. But he 
sprang up now, reddening at his own rudeness. 

" I beg your pardon . let me take them. I'm 
very much obliged to you for bringing me so 
many." 

" Yes, indeed, you ought to be, for that thick 
one, ' Elegant Extracts,' is very heavy ; but I 
brought it for the sake of one story in it . the 
best story I ever read, only there's no end to it." 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 183 

" What's it called ?" 

Elinor took the book from him, and turned 
over the leaves. 

" Oh, here it is . ' Sir Bertrand, a Fragment/ 
Now, if you don't dream of that story, and try 
to make an end to it, I shall say you've not got 
an ounce of imagination or romance, either." 

" Have you made an end to it ?" 

" N . no." Elinor had not expected this 
home question, and it roused her to observe 
that Maurice was again on perfectly equal terras. 
It was insufferable . he must be kept in his 
place. " But, really, I cannot see that what I 
do is any rule for you." 

The boy gave one of the calm expressionless 
glances that puzzled her. 

" I expect if you could have made an end to 
it you'd have done it," he said. 

" You are very impertinent . but I think I 
have spoiled you by giving way to your foolish 
fancies about not coming up to the house. 
When you have read these books, you will be 
kind enough to bring them back to the North 
Gallery. Do you hear?" 



184 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Her eyes, and the sudden flush in her face, 
would have told Maurice how angry she was, 
without the loud vehement tones of her voice ; 
hut these last seemed to rouse his spirit. 

" I've never meant to be rude to you, Miss 
Dryden, and Tm thankful to you for all the 
trouble you've taken, and for lending the books ; 
but as to coming and sneaking into the Squire's 
house without his knowledge, it's what I can't 
and I won't do for all the books in the world." 

This was too much. Although the glow in 
the boy's face told the honest feelings which were 
being spoken, proud, passionate Elinor saw in 
his words only an insolent ingratitude towards 
herself. 

" You won't . won't you, rude clown that you 
are ; but your conduct is a just reward to me 
for my condescension . as if a lady would ask a 
boy of your class to do anything wrong ! Go 
away now !" she stamped her foot impera- 
tively, carried away by her sudden passion, " and 
avoid me for the future. I don't want ever 
to see such an ungrateful, ill-mannered person 
again. Do you hear me . when I teU you to 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 185 

go away?" She raised her voice, as her anger 
grew beyond all control. 

Maurice 'stood still, fixed as a statue, and for 
an instant the passionate girl imagined that her 
words had at length found some vulnerable point 
in him ; but she quickly saw that his eyes 
looked beyond her . that their strained gaze was 
fixed on something of which she was uncon- 
scious, and which made him deaf to her words. 

As rapidly as the thought came, she turned 
round. If she had been less excited, she must 
have heard, some minutes ago, as Maurice had 
heard, the sound of approaching footsteps ; but 
her passion had made her insensible to all except 
itself, and she started with fear and surprise, 
when she saw her uncle. 

He was standing beside the beech tree ; he 
did not look violently angry, but so stern, so 
cold, so stately, that even Elinor's haughtiness 
quailed. 

" Elinor, you had better go up to your room 
. I will speak to you presently. Stay." . Just 
as she was turning away, he laid his hand on 
her shoulder. " I want first to ask you" . this 



186 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

was to Maurice; and Elinor fancied the tone 
seemed less stern than when speaking to her . 
" why you refused so firmly to visit the North 
Gallery ?" 

It was the first time in his life that Mr. Dry- 
den had ever spoken to him, and Maurice could 
not answer ; his throat swelled, it seemed as if 
tears must come with his words. Though he 
tried hard for utterance, he stood there speech- 
less, and the Squire's brows knit into a heavy 
frown. 

" Answer me," he began in a voice that told 
how strong a curb he had hitherto put on his 
indignation ; " or" . he raised the walking-stick 
on which he had leaned, as he stood contem- 
plating them both. 

But Elinor threw herself forward, and caught 
her uncle's hand in hers. She knew Maurice 
hesitated because he would screen her falsehood, 
and she had been reading the signs of agitation 
in his face while he hesitated to answer. 

" Uncle, he's not to blame. . I asked him to 
come up to the house to get books, and he will 
not, because he can't bear to vex you ; and he 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 187 

thinks you wouldn't like it, though I told him 
you . you wouldn't mind." 

The sound of her own voice had given Elinor 
courage, or she would not have risked the last 
words. 

Her uncle looked at her, as if confounded by 
her want of shame. 

" Silence !" he said, harshly. " You can go 
now ; this is not a fit place for me to speak to 
you in." 

He stood and watched her till she was out of 
sight, for she had not ventured a moment's de- 
lay. Then he turned slowly, and looked at 
Maurice. 

. The boy had not moved. A quick flush had 
risen in his cheeks when he heard Elinor's 
generous defence of his silence; for he knew 
thatsomething besides honour towards her had 
kept him speechless. Now, as he felt that Mr. 
Dryden was about to question him, a quiver ran 
through his body, as if a spasm of pain had 
seized him. 

Mr. Dryden seemed not to know how to be- 
gin ; but the books at his feet helped him. 



188 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" Gather up those books," he said. " Did 
Miss Dryden bring them here to-day ?" 

" Yes, sir." There was perfect respect in 
his manner, but there was nothing servile. 

*'Take them to the gate-keeper's cottage, on 
the other side of the park, and say they will be 
sent for. It appears," he went on, in a hard, 
cold voice; keeping his eyes now steadily away 
from the boy's face, " that you've not been the 
most to blame in this matter; but still, you 
have gravely transgressed orders." Maurice 
tried to speak. " You had better not attempt 
excuses ; you know well that you are forbidden 
to hold intercourse with any of the Flairs house- 
hold, much more to thrust . yourself on my 
notice, or that of my niece." 

" Oh, . sir !" but Mr. Dryden had turned 
away, heedless of the agonised voice ; and when 
he heard the boy*s footsteps coming nearer, he 
waved him off with so stern a look, that Mau- 
rice stood still, awe-struck. 

Before he roused, the Squire was out of 
sight, and the boy's senses seemed to come back 
clearly. What good could he have done by jus- 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 189 

tifying himself? It could only have been at 
the expense of Elinor . and after her generous 
pleading, too; he was thankful to have been 
spared a hearing. 

He leaned against the beech tree, and his young 
heart swelled and yearned for solace and sym- 
pathy in this first great grief. Till the door 
was thus closed upon it, he did not know how 
warm had been the sunshine in which his mind 
had ripened lately. His whole life had changed, 
every moment that he could spare fi-om the 
light tasks Ben set him had been devoted to 
reading . and such reading ; he had not known 
his blindness till it had been removed . his igno- 
rance, till his mind was peopled with facts and 
fancies ; but he had wetted his lips at the stream 
of knowledge sufficiently to kindle the never- 
dying thirst which must be suflFered from to be 
fully realised. It was maddening to feel that 
the tide had suddenly ebbed; that it would, 
perhaps, never again flow into the parched 
craving mind that yearned for its return. What 
was before him ? A life of stagnated misery . 
for such by contrast seemed now to him the 
unvaried future. 



190 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

There arose in his heart a great cry, an irre- 
pressible, anguished desire for the mother he had 
never seen . who, Ben said, had perished at his 
birth. He clasped his arms wildly round the 
tree trunk, pressing his breast against it, as if to 
stifle emotion. 

" Oh, my mother ! if I had you to love, I 
should have something to live for !" 

Mr. Dryden walked fast through the wood, 
trampling down the blackberry arms, and other 
clinging obstacles that beset the short cut he 
took through the underwood to the bridge, with a 
hard, determined tread, as if his strong will 
were asserting its power even over the harmless 
plants and sprays, whose crushed, bent heads, 
showed the way he had taken. 

Except in that short interview with Ben 
Karse, it was long since the fiery passions . the 
inheritance of his race . had been roused in the 
master of Flairs. Ever since his marriage, he 
had seemed so calm, so gifted with polished, 
though cold self-possession, that the old people, 
who remembered his high-spirited father, with 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 191 

bis warm friendships and implacable dislikes, 
often sbook tbeir heads, and gave it as their 
opinion that *' Master Wentworth had none of 
a Dryden about him." If tbey had thought of 
the extraordinary alienation that had come be- 
tween him and the friend of his youth, they 
might have considered he inherited at least one 
of his father's qualities. But both he and Sir 
Stuart were solitary men, with no neighbouring 
womankind to chatter their feud into public 
property; and perhaps a good many family 
facts stand on no other legs. There had been 
no possibility of exaggeration here, and very little 
said about the matter. Neither the Squire or 
Sir Stuart were men whose names might be 
trifled with, or who would be likely to brook 
speculation on their private affairs. So when 
the county had wondered why after Mrs. Dry- 
den's death the old friendship was not revived 
between the neighbours who had been like bro- 
thers in their youth, no more was thought or 
said, except that they were rarely asked to meet, 
and when this was unavoidable, their manner 
towards each other was sometimes commented 



192 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

on, and always to the disadvantage of the 
Squire. 

Those who thought the worst of him on 
these occasions would have found justification 
for their charge of overbearing temper, had they 
watched him now as he passed over the bridge, and 
then, slackening his pace, stood a few moments 
under the far-stretching beech tree by the river 
side, before he crossed the lawn on his way to 
the house. 

No self control could relax the heavy frown, 
or the rigid grimness that squared his chin, till 
it looked massive with determination. Had 
Elinor studied how to stir up his nature to strife, 
she could not have done it more effectually. 

When first he had given Ben leave to bring 
his young cousin home, a thought had come to 
the Squire, that it might not be desirable for 
Elinor to find a play-fellow so near her own age 
at Flairs ; but the boy was very young, and in a 
position of life so far removed from her own, that 
it was impossible they should ever have the 
opportunity of speaking even to each other. 
Still the nameless something . the something 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 193 

that his servants had first remarked^ when their 
master returned to Flairs after his wife's death, 
when his hair had become suddenly grey, and 
all brightness and joy had for ever feded fi-om 
his life, leaving in their place the shadows of 
indifference and mistrust, now made him leave 
nothing to chance, which foresight could render 
certain ; and Karse and Elinor's governesses re- 
ceived instructions about their charges which 
for several years had kept the two children igno- 
rant of each other's vicinity, and might have 
done so till the end, if the Fraiilein's mother 
had not died, and Elinor had not profited by 
her freedom from restraint to defy her uncle's 
commands. 

His first impulse was to send Maurice to sea. 
But for Elinor, his passion would perhaps have 
vented itself in his instant chastisement ; and as 
he stood thinking now, he wished that he had dis- 
regarded her interference. Such a punishment 
would have driven the insolent, daring boy from 
his sight for ever. But this was only momentary ; 
a quick flush of shame came, as he remembered 
that the lad had stood still, not shrinking even 

VOL. I. 13 



194 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

from his uplifted walking-stick ; and, besides, he 
was not caught in any act of delinquency ; he was 
on his lawful side of the river. It was galling 
beyond endurance to find him speaking fami- 
liarly to Elinor ; but if she sought him in this 
way . wrong and degrading as it was . it could 
scarcely be said to be the fault of the boy. As 
to her, Mr. Dryden thought of her mother, and 
he shuddered. 

" I will send her home at once . I have done 
with her; it is impossible to run the risk of 
another such a marriage, and who can say where 
this unhappy girl's tastes may lead her to 
choose a husband, and then the Drydens must 
sink into a bye-word so far as their women are 
concerned. Oh, my God !" he exclaimed, and 
the words came out of his heart's depths, tear- 
ing open in their passage the hidden wounds 
whose healing had hardened all sentient parts 
nearer the surface into indifference, " why am I 
to be outraged thus ? Is my honoured name 
indeed to perish with me ? Is it my doom to 
be the last of my race ?" 

The trailing branches of the beech-tree hid 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 195 

him as he bent his head^ and his chest heaved 
with the strong laboured sound that only men- 
tal agony can force into utterance. 

When the paroxysm was over, he smoothed 
his face more into its usual aspect, and walked 
out into the sunshine. 

But he did not go towards the house, he 
kept instead along the bank of the river, leaving 
Flairs on his right hand, divided from the 
path he was following by a wide and thickly- 
planted shrubbery which fringed the garden on 
this side, and soon found himself in the pre- 
cincts of the stables. 

He called to a groom, and ordered his horse 
to be brought out. As long as there was any 
chance of observation, Mr. Dryden rode slowly 
and steadily along ; but on the southern side of 
the park, towards Starby, where the ground ap- 
proached the sea, it rose in broad downs, seldom 
used as a foot-way on account of the sudden and 
precipitous ravines that intersected them. 

Here he urged his horse into its utmosi 
speed, as if trying to escape from some invisible 
pursuer, till the animal stopped suddenly and 

13.2 



196 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

stood still, quivering and covered with foam on 
the crumbling edge, of what looked a most 
deadly descent, a precipice of rock, with only 
one or two projecting shelves, where a few 
blades of grass and such wild plants as seek the 
scantiest nourishment had lodged themselves, 
but which afforded no support, no grasp to foot 
or hand in the perilous descent. 

Mr. Dryden reined up the panting beast as 
suddenly as he had urged it onward. He sate 
for a few moments almost motionless. What 
was this that had happened to him ? Had not 
his dearest feelings been sufficiently outraged ? 
Was the honour of his race to be again sported 
with by a woman ? . and then he checked 
himself. This comparison was mere exagge- 
ration, the wrong of former days was too 
deep and deadly to be likened to the folly of a 
child. 

He turned homewards, no longer frowning, 
but with a deepened harshness in every line of 
his face. 

Elinor waited all that day in terrified expecta- 
tion^ but her uncle did not send for her. Next 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 197 

morning, however, she received a summons to 
the writing-room. 

She went in trying to look as unconcerned as 
she could. 

" Elinor, 1 have resolved to send you to 
school." 

" To school ! But, uncle " 

School with its rules and its discipline was 
too intolerable to be accepted without a protest. 
In her utter surprise she forgot to be relieved 
that the Squire did not look angry. 

" Hush, Elinor** . his voice had a sad ring 
in it that fixed her attention . sternness would 
have roused her will into resistance; the as- 
surance that her conduct had grieved her uncle 
touched her generosity, or, at least, so much of 
the natural gift she had left unspoiled by her 
unchecked self-indulgence. He went on . "I 
am not about to force this upon you. It is 
still in your power to return to your home for 
ever. In taking you from it I took the sole 
charge and responsibility of your education till 
you should attain your majority. I wished you 
to become under my own eyes a worthy member 



198 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

of the Dryden family. From the unhappy 
tastes you have evinced, it appears better for the 
accomplishment of this object, to send you for 
some time to come from Flairs ; for in sending 
you to school now, I do not contemplate your 
return here during any holidays that may 
occur. Do not interrupt me, Elinor; I shall 
require you to speak when I have done. I fear 
your present instructress may have been as 
negligent on one point as another, and that 
your progress wants looking to. Also, at your 
age you require advantages not to be had here. 
Weigh well this last consideration before you 
decide. If you choose, instead of following the 
course I have marked put for you, to return to 
your parents, I shall consider you no longer as 
my adopted daughter, but it will be my duty to 
provide for you suitably in the event of your 
parents' death or your marriage. Only once 
more I warn you that the decision you make 
now is irrevocable as regards you, although*' . 
he looked full at her, raising his head, which 
had hitherto leaned on his hand . " I reserve to 
myself the right of guarding your conduct more 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 199 

scrupulously for the future, and also of warning 
you that a second offence of this nature cannot 
be pardoned by me/' 

Elinor hung her head ; the last words had 
shown her so clearly how deeply she had sunk 
in her uncle's estimation that she felt unable to 
answer, only anxious to escape from his pre- 
sence, and the feeling of shame his earnest eyes 
caused her. 

Mr. Dryden felt surprised; he had been 
afraid of vehemence and passionate self-justifi- 
cation, for he reproached himself in some way 
for the loneliness which had perhaps urged her 
to fellowship with a companion of her own age. 
His face softened, and there was no longer the 
same strained voice when he next spoke. 

'^I am not a man to make professions, 
Elinor, and for the present I will not conceal 
from you that you have alienated me. Perhaps 
it may help you in self-control if I tell you that 
I have not been able to take the same in- 
terest in you since one day this spring, you 
showed what I considered a haughty and un- 
womanly spirit here in this room when I for- 



200 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

bade you to cross the bridge. . You see now 
what your disobedience, either thbn or after- 
wards, has led you into, for remember this, 
child, all your life : the first step in wrong- 
doing we all take with our eyes open, our hands 
free ; the last we are urged on to, blindfolded by 
our own unlicensed self-will . bound and gagged 
by the Evil One. Go now. I do not ask you 
any questions about the past. If you decide 
upon remaining with me, let it be cancelled be- 
tween us. I think I have shown you how you 
may regain my esteem, but do not force your 
nature. Take a whole day . two, if you wish . 
for your decision, and I will arrange for you to 
leave Flairs as soon as possible afterwards." 

He rose and opened the door for the shame- 
struck, silent girl, and as she passed him he 
touched her head gently with his hand, and said 
reverently, " God bless you !" 

He had a look of withered hope, of keen dis- 
appointment as he closed the door after her. 
His strong, reserved nature had made an un- 
wonted effort to win a return of confidence ; 
and yet, as he told himself, he had no right to 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 201 

feel disappointed ; he had almost said she had 
better not speak, he was too much ashamed 
of his weakness to own that he had longed 
for some token of repentance, some demonstra- 
tion of affection, something that would have 
shown that Elinor desired his love and esteem. 

The regret was momentary; or if it lived it was 
put back strongly, to wear out a stifled existence 
with the other pent tendernesses of Mr. Dry- 
den's nature. He rang the bell, and told the 
servant who answered it to beg the Fraiilein to 
favour him with a few minutes' conversation ; 
and when he had terminated the interview he 
sent for Northover and told her he wished 
Miss Dryden's wardrobe to be well looked to, as 
she was going to school for a year. 

But although the housekeeper put her small, 
inquisitive head on one side, and bent her 
bird-like eyes and nose into their keenest powers, 
she came out of the writing-room mystified. 

" Well," . she shook herself just as a bird 
ruffles its plumage, . " there have been times, and 
those that have thought me a sootable person to 
put confidence and consultations in. Something's 



202 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

gone wrong, that's plain, and how the Squire ever 
thinks to get it straight by his simple wits, in- 
stead of taking a woman's to help 'em, is past 
belief. Why he might as well match one o' the 
fat carthorses against that fast-trotting grey he 
rode out on yesterday, as think a man's wits 
could match a woman's. Not that I'd set women 
up against men . bless you, no, three half o' 
'em is too light and flimsy to be named in the 
same breath as a man ; for though slow-gobg 
they're sensible . but there is women . well, 
well, some folks are blind, and keep their eyes 
open for wear, not use." 

But she was not going to give the matter up 
so easily, and she walked straight upstairs to 
Elinor's room. 

She found her quiet, subdued, much unlike 
herself, but obstinately silent as to her destina- 
tion, or the cause of her exile from Flairs. 

Elinor had not yet made up her mind what 
answer she should give her uncle. If she had 
stayed a little longer in the writing-room . if 
Mr. Dryden had then urged her to open confes- 
sion . this might have been a fresh starting-post 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 203 

in her life ; might have relieved her from the 
burden of deceit which snowball-like will increase 
unless removed entirely from where it has accu- 
mulated. But she was not one to retain im- 
pressions deeply. Almost before Northover ap- 
peared, her uncle's words had faded, while she 
tried to set side by side the pictures of her 
future life, so that she might choose between 
them. 

" No . I cannot go home, it is all so poor and 
wretched ; there would be mamma, but nothing 
else. Adelaide is . well, she may have changed, 
but she used to be a self-denying idiot . always 
making herself and everybody round her uncom- 
fortable ; and my father . " She put both 
hands up to her temples, pushing her hair back 
from them. " I wonder whether I should like 
him now. He used to be dreadfully vain. He's 
very handsome though." She jumped up from 
the foot of her bed where she had been sitting, 
and went to her looking-glass. " Yes . I am so 
much like him that I believe I shall be handsome 
after all . although not a bit like a Dryden." 
She looked away from her own image, and co- 



204 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

loured. Her uncle's words still haunted her, and 
she felt ashamed to be so trifling. No^ she 
would and must be a Dryden, and if she 
took that resolution, all good and great quali- 
ties belonging to the Drydens would grow 
up in her as a matter of course. School life I 
. there was the bitter pill. Still it was not 
probable that many rich heiresses would be sent 
to school . she should be queen wherever she 
went ; there would be some pleasure in ruling 
others. At Flairs there were only her maid and 
her dog to obey her, and it would be some- 
thing to get away from Northover. Maurice . 
she sat quite still again while she thought of 
him. After all a great deal of the pleasure 
of seeing him had arisen from the romantic 
dread of discovery, and this had come ; and it 
seemed to her that Maurice had benefited much 
more by the friendship than she had. Each 
time she thought of her decision the vision of 
school life was effaced by the dazzling picture 
beyond . her return home . as the beautiful, 
all-accomplished heiress, fascinating every man 
who should venture near the halo of her 



THE MEETING UNDER THE BEECH TREE. 205 

charms, and yet remaining untouched herself; 
for though no word of her uncle's had given such 
hope, she was firmly persuaded he meant to 
make her his heiress. 

Jjong before evening came she had written 
him a note, in which she expressed her willing- 
ness to go to school, and her desire to retain his 
good opinion. There was in it no repentance 
or sorrow. Elinor considered that by taking her 
banishment meekly she wiped out the memory of 
her disobedience. As to her acquaintance with 
Maurice, surely she had a right to patronise and 
educate any country boy who might fall in her 
way. 

A sudden tinge of colour rose in her cheek 
as she told herself this a few days after her in- 
terview with the Squire, and she turned round 
suddenly to superintend her maid's packing . 
glad to divert her mind from thoughts and re- 
flections that would not take the shape she 
wanted. 



BOOK THE THIED. 



THE TWO FRIENDS. 



CHAPTER I. 



ELINOR AT SCHOOL. 



Time had slipped away^ as it always does. 
rapidly to the middle-aged . slowly to the young 
waiting for their turn on the scene of actual 
life. Summer had come back, and winter had 
begun again, since Elinor had left Flairs. To 
Maurice, perhaps the time had passed away 
more uneventfully than to any of those men- 
tioned in this book. At first the loss of his 
reading had been seriously felt, and Ben had 
scarcely known what to make of his sullen looks 
and ways ; but afler a time, the boy confessed 
to him how greatly he had been indebted to 

VOL. I. 14 



210 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Elinor, and implored for books in so impulsive 
and unusual a manner, that Ben, although at 
first completely scared by finding how the Squire's 
wishes had been disregarded, began to see that 
if he did not humour the lad in what was really 
a harmless pursuit, there would be a risk that 
a boy so resolute in his nature might seek for 
less legitimate amusement. 

" He'd never fancy consorting with the village 
lads," said Ben, '' and he sha'n't begin it if I 
can save it." 

He might have puzzled long how to meet the 
difficulty, but for Mr. Dryden. 

Spite of his dislike to Maurice, he had been 
greatly impressed by the boy's firm refusal to 
visit Flairs at Elinor's request, and when he saw 
the books he had read, he felt as if he ought in 
some way to supply the loss he had occasioned. 

He spoke of Maurice to Mr. Brownlow, and 
asked him to do what he could to put him in 
the way of educating himself, and expressed his 
willingness, if hereafter he should show talent 
superior to his station, to foster it and forward 
him in life ; only he added that the boy had be- 



ELINOR AT SCHOOL. 211 

come a source of annoyance to him, and that 
therefore he should wish all Mr. Brownlow did 
in the matter, to appear spontaneous, and not as 
in any way coming from the Squire ; also that 
he did not wish Maurice to be going backwards 
and forwards to Starby. 

Therefore it always seemed to Mr. Benjamin 
Karse a curious chance, that a few days after 
Elinor's departure, the clergyman of Starby called 
at his cottage to ask his advice about an old 
gun belonging to one of his parishioners, and 
seeing the shelf of books, enquired if Maurice 
(who had undertaken the cleaning of the gun) 
were fond of reading. Before Mr. Brownlow left 
the cottage, he had promised to lend him any 
books he wished for ; and when Karse went to 
the Parsonage to fetch them, the clergyman said 
he should always be glad to explain what the 
boy found difficult ; only Maurice was not to go 
to the Parsonage. 

Mr. Brownlow's visits to the cottage became 
more and more frequent, his interest growing 
as Maurice's remarkable powers developed under 
his help ; and by the time winter came the 

14.2 



212 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

youth had begun to study hard at an old Latin 
Grammar, found among Karse's treasures, and 
after a while to get bits of construing ready for 
the Rector's visits. 

By the time at which this chapter opens . the 
November of the second year since his first meet- 
ing with Elinor . his mind had grown almost as 
rapidly as his body, and its cultivation, however 
irregular and scanty, had given a refinement to 
his speech and a gentleness to his manner, that 
would greatly have surprised his first instructress. 

She had not revisited England during the 
interval ; her uncle had gone to see her in the 
holidays, and had travelled about with her, 
showing her most of the principal cities of Ger- 
many. Her education had made some progress 
. her quick wits had gathered a vast smattering 
of general information, but adhering to her fatal 
creed that true genius need not stoop to the 
helps and means essential to the cultivation of 
mere talent, or rather yielding to the real idle- 
ness of mind to which this assumption of genius 
(often, in the case of a woman, founded on a 
vivid imagination, a clever tongue, and plenty of 



ELINOR AT SCHOOL. 213 

self-belief,) was a convenient and showy cloak ; 
she applied herself steadily to nothing, managing 
always to evade anything like work, although she 
contrived at a vivd voce examination to succeed 
far better than she deserved. 

Christmas was coming fast now-. the period 
her uncle had fixed for her re-establishment at 
Flairs. She had grown much better friends 
with him in their travels, although there were 
still at times startling differences of opinion on 
points which Mr. Dryden regarded as of vital 
importance, and which made him determine that 
she should not be considered of age tiU she was 
twenty-three years old. 

Elinor had given herself up to the wildest 
anticipations . in a few weeks her uncle would 
come to fetch her, she should bid adieu for ever 
to those long, bare, carpetless rooms, where 
everything seemed to go in parallels, to the cheer- 
ful, even-tempered, but inflexible superintendent, 
whose plump cheeks the warmest kiss in the 
world would not have impressed or deepened 
in colour (at least so her pupils fancied), to the 
whole tribe of professors considered by Elinor 



214 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

the roughest, most growling set of men the 
world contained. How refreshing it would be 
to look at Unde Dryden's delicate skin and fair 
features^ and thoroughly gentlemanlike appear- 
ance, after being accustomed to their slovenly 
ways and uncourteous manner. As to the 
girls, her companions (she had many adoring 
slaves, not one friend capable of giving her a 
word of counsel), she was going to exchange 
their feeble, tepid admiration for something 
better. for a crowd of worshippers. yes, at last 
to realize those dreams so often rehearsed in the 
library at Flairs. 

She had found it necessary . even to maintain 
the place she kept in her studies . to practise the 
deceit began at Flairs, and now, although she 
premeditated nothing, and looked upon herself 
as a model of a frank, impulsive, generous na* 
ture, she laughed at the notion of '^ telling 
Uncle Dryden everything." 

Those weeks of dreamland w^ere happier to 
Elinor than she knew, though while they passed 
they seemed to her a weary waiting for bright 
realities. 



ELINOR AT SCHOOL. 215 

And while she had been frittering away her 
talents and opportunities without any higher 
defined purpose in life than that of gaining ad- 
miration . food for her restless, mastering vanity, 
her once pupil, Maurice Karse, was improving to 
the utmost the slender means afforded him of 
cultivating his talents and storing his mind. It 
was the old fable of the Hare and the Tortoise. 

Mr. Dryden's letter came sooner than she had 
looked for it. Her doubts and fears were over, 
and yet after she had read the carefully weighed 
words, she seemed no longer free. 

Her uncle announced to her his intention of 
making her his heiress. " Hitherto," he said, 
"you have borne the name of Dryden, by 
courtesy, and in deference to my wishes ; when 
you reach your three and twentieth year I shall 
secure that name to you, legally, and should you 
marry, your husband must also bear it. But 
Elinor, I hope you will not resent the conditions 
I attach to this promise. I am gratified by the 
improvement which has taken place in you, but 
I wish to treat you in every way as if you were 
indeed my child. On my own daughter I could 



216 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

not have suffered the slightest blame or sus- 
picion of blame to rest^ therefore I ask you, 
Elinor, to study my wishes in this respect, not 
so much for the sake of fulfilling to the letter 
the conditions on which the inheritance of the 
Drydens becomes unalterably yours, as for that 
of realizing my dearest wishes, and winning for 
yourself my high esteem as well as my earnest 
love ; I merely ask you to keep yourself entirely 
free from any entanglement or engagement until 
you are three and twenty. I will not force your 
incUnations in the matter of marriage. for I 
suppose you wiU wish to marry, but I claim the 
right of helping your choice. I could not receive 
any person unknown to me as my adopted 
child's husband." 

There was little more in the letter, except an 
affectionate assurance of the pleasure with 
which he should welcome her at Flairs. 

He should probably fetch her from Lutzstein 
himself, in the course of a few weeks. 

" Well," exclaimed Elinor, " I never heard of 
anything half so ridiculous ! three and twenty, 
indeed . why, I shall be an old maid by that 



ELINOR AT SCHOOL. 217 

time ; mamma married at sixteen ! but after all 
how can an old bachelor like uncle be expected 
to know anything about girls ?" 

Still it was delightful to feel sure, for a secret 
misgiving had often tormented her in the midst 
of her loudly asserted pretensions, and the flutter 
of excitement caused by this, obscured the 
earnest mingling of warning and affection in 
her uncle's letter. 

Long after she went to bed that night Elinor 
lay awake, planning the dresses and bonnets she 
intended to purchase in Paris, so as to appear 
with fitting splendour as the heiress apparent 
of Flairs, 



CHAPTER II. 

THE RUN THROUGH BUCKLBBRIDGE WOOD. 

A FINE, bright November morning, sparkling 
with the many coloured light thrown out by the 
rime that still clung to the trees and bushes, a 
sparkle, however, that did not cheer the heart of 
Sir Stuart Palmer as much as it would have 
done that of any one less addicted to the '^ noble 
science." 

But as the sun rose, with height gaining 
power to make its influence felt, a brown hue 
re-appeared on the trees, and green on the grass 
and still fresh and unnipped shrubs, and the 
Baronet thought, as he turned from the window 
to his solitary breakfast-table, that after all the 



RUN THE0U6H BUCKLEBRIDGB WOOD. 219 

alarm was a false one, and that there was safety 
from frost for the present. 

The meet that morning was to be at Buckle- 
bridge Common^ three miles off^ and after that 
there would be a good ride to the nearest cover ; 
but Sir Stuart was no make-believe sportsman 
. although he lived so much abroad he knew 
every cover in the county, and every bit of 
ground for miles and miles around. He had 
some hard riding before him, for the ground be- 
tween Bucklebridge Common and the cover was 
very up and down, the sort of country in which, 
if a man does not stick close to the hounds, 
he'll lose them, or find it hard work not to part 
company. 

" Just the pace I like, generally," he said to 
himself, " and, except the wood at the top of 
Bucklebridge hill, there's nothing to stop it, but 
for a few ploughed fields or so it's all open 
country, and yet I don't feel quite up to it this 
morning . I believe I'm getting old and lazy." 

He rang a small silver bell on the table, and 
instantly the gong sounded. 

Sir Stuart passed through a door at the 



220 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

end of the room into a small apartment with 
long, narrow, pointed windows, fitted up like a 
chapel or oratory. In it a group of servants 
stood waiting for their master ; it was easy to 
see on their faces, as he entered, the reverent 
love they bore him. 

And no wonder . he was a model master, and 
as he stood before his reading desk, dressed in his 
bright scarlet coat, and spotless cords and boots, 
he looked the perfection of an English gentle- 
man, and the sincere earnestness of his reve- 
rence, when he knelt to offer up the prayers of 
the assemblage, showed that he was a genuine 
christian too. 

Prayers were soon over, and breakfast, and 
then the horses were brought round. 

Because of the rapid riding before him. Sir 
Stuart would not mount his favourite, massive, 
black horse, but had ordered, to his groom's 
vexation, a more active, spirited beast, a bright 
chesnut, which stood at the door now, her rest- 
less, glaring, white eyeballs and mischievously 
laid ears confirming the man's assertion that she 
was " in her tempers." 



RUN THROUGH BUCKLEBRID6E WOOD. 221 

" Oh, she won't show them with me, An- 
drews ; she never does with me . you're too 
fond of touching her, and she'll go without 
that." 

Oflf they went across the park, where the 
rime, now changed into brilliant drops. gUttered 
on the grass blades, between which, every now 
and then, a hare's nose peeped, carefully watch- 
ing to see who the intruders might be, and then 
the bright brown creature having made herself 
sure that no dogs were to be dreaded, would run 
in her sidling fashion across the path. As they 
neared a grove of lofty evergreen oaks and firs 
a magnificent pheasant started forth on his 
golden jewelled wings with a whirr that sounded 
long after he had passed out of sight. The 
road they were taking was merely a bridle-path, 
leading to one of the smaller park -gates, and the 
solitude was quite undisturbed by any human 
sights or sounds. 

On they went along a stony road between ' 
brown hedgerows, behind which stretched away 
the hilly downs, variegated by woods, which be- 
ginning humbly down in the valleys crept up th^ 



222 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

sides of the hills, making those thus clothed far 
loftier than their grassy neighbours. 

The ground grew more level as they neared 
Bucklebridge Common . a wide waste . covered 
in most parts with furzebushes and an under- 
growth of heather and brake, now brown and 
shrivelling. 

There was already a large assemblage, a good 
sprinkling of ladies in it ; some were evidently 
there in earnest, not merely like the lounging 
dames in the carriages to see the hounds throw 
off, but for the real business of the morning. 

Almost all the gentlemen rode up to meet 
Sir Stuart as they saw him coming, and almost 
all the numerous smock-frocked crowd touched 
their hats reverently as he approached. There 
was one man who made no effort to greet the 
new-comer, although he was not engaged in talk 
when Sir Stuart rode up. 

It was the first time these two had met for 
months, for Mr. Dryden had spent much time 
abroad this year, and Sir Stuart had also been 
absent. As he turned now after shaking hands 
with Cecil Brownlow and her father, who were 



RUN THROUGH BUCKLEBRIDGE WOOD. 223 

riding up from the other side of the common, 
he met the Squire face to face, and the clergy- 
man's remonstrance . spoken a year ago . came 
strongly to his mind, he bowed to his old friend, 
and smiled frankly as he did so. 

Mr. Dryden raised his hat with stiff military 
punctiliousness, and turned towards a carriage 
near him. 

In it sat Mrs. Spencer Brangh ton with her three 
unmarried daughters . possessing more blood and 
bone than beauty, and all four hailed the Squire 
of Plairs' approach with an eagerness not quite 
compatible with their aquiline dignity, an eager- 
ness that seems the inevitable and fatal inherit- 
ance of some women as soon as they are con- 
scious of fading charms, and which often defeats 
its own object more surely than the autumnal 
look itself. 

They were profuse and tender in their inqui- 
ries for Elinor. 

They had seen her once at a fancy bazaar 
at Lynbar, and she must certainly have in- 
gratiated herself in their favour rapidly, for 
they had simply met in a crowded part of the 



224 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

room, and after the exchange of a few words, 
had each passed on their way. But then the 
Spencer Branghtons not being able to live up 
to their position, staid much at home, and their 
mental resources being bounded by novel-reading 
and embroidery, and a little harp and piano 
playing, the sight of a new face . especially one 
in any way connected with the ''best match 
in the county," doubtless became a never-ending 
subject of interest, for however the Squire 
might eschew female society, he was none the 
less " desirable.'* 

But Mr. Dryden had caught sight of his little 
friend Cecil by this time, and raising his hat he 
soon released himself from his worshippers, his 
thorough self-control both of feature and man- 
ner, hid his eagerness to escape, or he might not, 
perhaps, have found it so practicable. 

He thought he had never seen anyone look 
so lovely as Cecil, She was nearly fifteen now, 
but like most fair complexioned women, looked 
far younger, and her father unconsciously kept 
up the delusion by mounting her still on the dimi- 
nutive white poQy she had ridden from a child. 



RUN THROUGH BUCKLEERIDGE WOOD. 225 

There was a fearless innocence in her man- 
ner with the Squire, that might have puzzled 
standers-by had a poor parson's daughter like 
Cecil been worth watching; they would have 
seen that he, so cold, so precise to the rest, 
could talk and smile freely with this pretty little 
girl, who, though she would have been abashed 
by the lofty Miss Spencer Branghtons, alwajs 
felt that a kind friend and protector was beside 
her in Mr. Dryden. She was chattering and 
laughing heartily as she pointed out some ab- 
surdities her quickness had discovered among 
tbe^sportsmen. 

The field had now mustered, and after a little 
talk between Sir Stuart and the Master of the 
Hounds, who had ridden up to where the hunts- 
man stood with his whippers-in beside the 
bounds, the signal was given, and in an instant 
they were away, the huntsman in the midst of 
his pack, and the horsemen closely following at 
full speed . looking to the narrowing crowd, as 
it gazed after them, specks of scarlet and yel- 
low, and white, and brown, as horses, dogs, and 
men went briskly down the first hill-side, the 
. VOL. I. 15 



226 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

wind carrying back the chorus of the hounds, 
mingled with the crack of the huntman's whip, 
and after a while the sound of his horn. 

They had reached the cover side, and spite of 
the huntsman's efforts to quiet the pack, their 
clear ringing music became uproarious as they 
dashed over the hedge; in another moment 
two of the older hounds dashed out again, and 
plunging among the underwood beyond, were 
soon in fiill pursuit ; the rest followed in a 
clamorous chorus, which the huntsman's horn 
and outcries encouraged as he galloped after 
them. Few of the gentlemen's horses would 
plunge into the tangled growth of furze and 
bramble, and they rode round to the point to- 
wards which the fox was plainly bound . the 
summit of a hill, crowned by a ploughed field 
just in front . Sir Stuart, Mr. Dryden, and others 
taking a severe fence and ditch on the left, 
while the more timid riders made for the high 
road which skirted the ploughed field aforesaid 
on the right. 

But there was a sudden check in the hunts- 
man's speed, and the dogs' tuneful chorus lowered 



RUN THROUGH BUCKLEBRID6E WOOD. 227 

into a discontented whine long before their fol- 
lowers had joined company with them . the fox 
had been headed by some women picking stones 
just below the brow of the hill, and doubling to 
the right had crossed the valley in which the 
high road lay, and was now without doubt 
making fast for Bucklebridge wood, about a 
mile beyond ; the only hope was in speed, they 
might overtake him before he got to earth, and 
with scarcely the pause of a moment, they were 
riding at a break-neck pace down the hill 
towards the road which separated them from the 
wood. On swept the whole field, those who 
were best mounted keeping in advance, and 
taking the fence round the wood . which the 
huntsman and Sir Stuart Palmer had shown 
them the way over . without hesitation. It was 
an ugly fence though, leaning inwards towards 
the wood, with a wet ditch on the outer side, 
and the timid riders and those not sure of their 
horses, and those also whose enjoyment of fox- 
hunting is theoretical rather than practical, and 
who can dispense with spectators when a fence 
is in question, hung back and preferred riding 

15.2 



228 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

round to a gate which was known to exist on 
the other side of the wood. All the ladies had 
cleared the fence and were out of sight . perhaps 
their presence might have shamed those who re- 
mained into taking the leap. 

The others went on through the wood, guided 
by the cries of the dogs and huntsman. Sir 
Stuart was now in advance of the latter, and 
not far behind him, bidding fau* to outstrip even 
the vicious looking chestnut, rode Squire Dry- 
den. The chestnut's speed depended greatly on 
the length of her stride, and this was constantly 
impeded in the thick wood, where occasionally, to 
follow the scent closely, they had to wind in and 
out among the trees. With her ears laid back 
and her eye-balls glaring more than ever, she 
looked thoroughly discontented, as her master 
slightly slackened speed and looked round him. 

He had reached the centre of the wood, a 
green opening from which five grassed alleys 
diverged to meet and bind together the narrow 
bridle paths by which it was intersected . the 
sounds of the pursuit had suddenly become 
faint, and Sir Stuart hardly knew which path 



RUN THROUGH BUCKLEBRID6S WOOD. 229 

to take. There came a heavy gallop behind 
him, and up rode Mr. Dryden. It was the first 
time for years they had met alone, but the ex- 
citement of the chase carried Sir Stuart above 
all the icy barriers their long estrangement had 
produced. 

" Holloa, Dryden," he said, " whereabouts 
are we ?" The words were scarcely uttered be- 
fore a sharp ringing cry from the huntsman came 
up to them, followed by the dogs in full chorus. 

** Down there." Mr. Dryden pointed with his 
whip to the centre alley on the right, and simul- 
taneously the two riders were skimming along it 
side by side. 

And they had no time to lose. When Sir 
Stuart distanced the huntsman, the latter had 
taken a path which instead of winding upwards, 
led suddenly down to the bottom of the wood ; 
the hounds were already scrambling over the 
fence, and by the time Sir Stuart and the 
Squire had reached open ground, there was the 
whole pack in full cry, lengthening in the distance. 

In a few strides they were beside the hunts- 
man, and then Sir Stuart shot eagerly be- 



230 BUNOR drtden's probation. 

yond him, his quick eye having caught a 
glimpse of the fox just two fields a-head. 
There was something else in front too, a glim- 
mer of red tiles and chimneys; they were 
close upon a village. As he neared the high, 
broad hedge that separated him from the road, 
and prepared to take it, the chestnut swerved 
round abruptly, almost unseating Sir Stuart. 

Forgetful of his own words about her in the 
morning, he faced her round to the hedge 
again, struck her sharply with his whip, and 
setting his spurs vigorously, lifted h^r over. 

Mr. Dryden and the huntsman were half a 
field behind, the other horsemen only coming 
on in the distance. 

Thes9 two looked eageijy forward: there 
were the hounds evidently close upon their prey, 
a field or so beyond the hedge ; but there was 
no one in pursuit. 

Not a word passed between the two men now 
riding abreast ; both drove eagerly at the hedge 
where it was broken and flattened by Sir Stuart's 
leap. 

On the stony high road, he lay still, seem- 
ingly dead, his horse standin^beside him. 



CHAPTER III. 



THE TWO FRIENDS. 



At the door of the village inn, his head bent 
down low, his hands clasped behind him, Mr. 
Dryden had been standing waiting ever since he 
had seen Sir Stuart's body laid on a bed in 
charge of the doctors. There had been two 
readily summoned from among the sportsmen ; 
one, a clever London surgeon, and the other 
the Starby practitioner. A few of the foremost 
sportsmen, scenting something amiss by the 
disappearance of the huntsman and his com- 
panions from the now open line of chase, had 
stopped to inquire the cause, but the greater 



232 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

part had swept heedlessly on, too absorbed in 
their exciting sport to notice anything extrane- 
ous to it. Mr. Dryden dismissed the hunts- 
man as soon as he could get eflScient help, and 
now stood silent and aloof from the knot of 
scarlet-coated whisperers near the sign-post. 

Huw ominously it seemed to him to creak on 
its hinges ; perhaps the thought was suggested 
by the pertinacity of a raven belonging to the 
house, who hopped up every now and then as if 
to examine the Squire's top-boots, giving a 
croak by way of greeting. 

The leafless trees on either side of the house, 
the green stained door-stone, the muddy post 
beside the horse-trough, all spoke in hopeless 
voices to Mr. Dryden, telling him that the time 
for repentance was past, that he and his es- 
tranged friend had parted unreconciled. 

There was on his face . studiously turned 
away to hide itself from the rest . the anguish 
of despair. He was not considering just then 
the dead or dying man's sins against him, what- 
ever they might be, he was overwhelmed with 
the awfulness of the stroke^ In the prime of 



THE TWO FRIENDS. 233 

life and health, without an instant's warning, to 
be cast into the jaws of death. The Squire 
was a brave man. brave to heroism . but he 
trembled visibly as he stood before the inn 
door. 

A voice beside him made him start. It was 
the Starby doctor. 

*' He is sensible now, and has asked for you." 

" Is he ? Is tliere any chance of recovery ?" 

The doctor shook his head. 

" He may last twelve hours, but I doubt his 
surviving this night. It is concussion of the 
spinel-one may say death is beginning already. 
You must go to him, Mr. Dryden ; your name 
was the first word he spoke, and you have no 
time to lose." 

The Squire turned still paler, though he tried 
hard to steady his working features. Now it 
seemed to him that he could not voluntarily see 
Sir Stuart; and five minutes ago, when he 
thought his lips closed for ever, he had felt that 
he could not bear their silence; that nothing 
could purchase too dearly an hour of his old 
friend's life. 



234 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

But the doctor's earnest look and the touch 
of his hand on his arm constrained his repug- 
nance. He turned anxl followed without a 
word of answer. 

How strangely distinct everything appeared 
in this interval of strong and suppressed feeling ; 
how obtrusively all the surroundings of the 
place attracted his sight, and through that re- 
mained engraved on his memory. How well 
he recollected afterwards that he had to step 
over a tabby cat and her kittens on the landing 
up-stairs ; that the landlady, gay in a pink 
ribboned cap, had stood curtsying as he 
passed along the sanded passage, within her 
open bar-window ; even the shining mahogany 
counter, and glittering pewter, and brilliant 
glass, were all stamped on his remembrance. 

Now as he sat in the writing-room at Flairs 
leaning on one elbow of his chair, looking fixedly 
into the hot coals as if to conjure, from the 
changing forms the red glow threw upon them, 
the events of that busy and fateful morning, 
it seemed to him that be bad not so clearly de 



THE TWO FRIENDS. 285 

fined a picture before him of what had come 
afterwards, after the matted passage up-stairs~* 
all else was merged in the look of the eyes 
strained to meet his as he approached the bed. 
Both hands were paralysed, but the head turned 
slightly towards the Squire, a frank, loving 
smile on the lips ; then the eyes glanced at the 
two medical men on the other side of the 
bed. 

" I must be alone with him," he said very 
distinctly, although in a low tone, **and we 
must not be disturbed.'^ 

The Starby doctor looked in the face of the 
London surgeon as if he were about to protest 
against the patient's request, but he saw an 
almost imperceptible raising of the eyebrows 
and shoulders, which indicated to him that the 
absence or presence of medical aid was of little 
consequence evermore to him who lay there 
dying. 

Dying . ^yes ; his face had escaped all bruise 
or injury, but the seal of death was set there. 
The eyes were still bright and full of deep love, 
which shone out on his old companion as be 



236 ELINOR dhyden's probation. 

approached the bed, taking him back to evening 
strolls by the river- side, and long afternoons in 
the pla3dng fields, and all the dear enjoyments 
of the golden hours of youth ; but he came dose 
up, and he saw the already sunken temples and 
the sharpened nose, the undefinable look, which 
no one who has once seen it can mistake again. 
Wentworth Dryden had seen death very close 
once before, and some remembrance connected 
with that other time made him now shiver and 
recoil from the bed as soon as he stood be- 
side it. 

" Wentworth, you must listen to me . ^it is 
the last time." 

" The last time 1" . would these words so ten* 
derly, so thrillingly spoken, always haunt his 
ears as they did now ? He clasped his hands 
over his eyes, but the large, hot tears came 
trickling through his fingers. He was asking 
himself again in the agony of remorse . that re- 
morse to whose sharp sting is added the dull, 
leaden certainty that repentance is useless now 
. there is no place for it, nothing left for it 
to do, no one to whom it can restore estranged 



THE TWO FRIENDS. 237 

love . why had he been so blinded? Why, 
by his own miserable self-delusion, had he de- 
prived himself of the dearest, noblest friend any 
man was ever blest with? For although he 
had hardened his own heart and repulsed every 
overture, how much love had lived on in Sir 
Stuart's, his dying words had shown. 

And a bright strange light came suddenly 
into Wentworth Dryden's face; he rose up, 
reverently, and then sinking on his knees, poured 
out thanks to God in broken words, uttered 
through tears . for the great mercy that had 
been vouchsafed him this day. 

Some time still he knelt, praying silently; 
when he rose up again his eyes were red and 
swollen, but there was an unusual sweetness in 
their expression. 

The hard, rigid lines of his mouth had re- 
laxed, the furtive glance under the overhanging 
brow was gone . there was thorough transform- 
ation, like that which must have appeared in the 
Pilgrim's face when he had laid down his bur^ 
den at the house Beautiful ; except that Mr. 
Dry den looked as if he had slain his secret foe, 



288 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

and were no longer in fear of ambush or sur- 
prise. 

Yes, the dishonour which had crushed all 
trust in, and love for, others from his heart was 
blotted out for ever ; it was to the Squire as if 
years had been removed with the terrible sus- 
picion, the to him certainty, which had made 
him feel degraded among his fellow men . he 
could mingle with them again with a freer heart, 
a more erect bearing ; and, besides this release, 
a new unlooked-for joy had opened to him this 
day ; but, almost while his eyes were lit up with 
this exhilaration, deep, unalterable sorrow re- 
turned to them. 

By his own aot . by listening to the prompt- 
ings of his own ungoverned jealousy . he had 
deprived himself of the dearest right of nature. 
He might know that it was his, but he must 
rest satisfied with his own private knowledge ; 
He could neither acknowledge his fault publicly 
nor make reparation for it . could not this last 
be done ? it must, it should be possible. 

And then the remembrance of his written 
promise to Elinor came back officiously; she 



THE TWO FRIENDS. * ' 239 

was his adopted child henceforth, and as such 
must inherit all his possessions. 

'^ But I can do something/' he said, at last ; 
" very little, it may be, but still a token of the 
repentance which I must now carry to my 
grave/' 

After prayers that night, long after the house- 
hold had gone to rest, he sate up in the little 
justice-room reading and re-reading yellow letters 
of faded writing, which he took from an iron 
safe in one corner of the room. 

These letters were all enclosed in a foolscap 
wrapper, on which was written in his own for- 
mal, neat hand, '* To be burned, unopened, after 
my death.". 

Tears fell on the letters as he held them dose 
to decipher them, and twice he kissed them, 
not with the passionate remorse he had shown 
earlier in the evening, but with loving, reverent 
tenderness. 

When he had replaced them in their envelope, 
and in the safe, he lighted a small lamp, and 
carefully extinguishing the wax caqciles on the 
table, left the justice-room. 



240 . ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

His own bed-room was .upstairs, on the east- 
ern side of the house, but instead of going 
straight along the passage, which would have 
brought him to the little staircase leading to it, 
outside the now deserted school-room door, he 
turned round to the right, and raising the red 
curtain, passed through the opening into the 
North Gallery, 

Two o'clock . three . ^four . struck by the 
heavy hammer of the stable dock, sounded 
through the still night, and were re-edioed by 
various voices within the house, from the silver- 
belled clocks upstairs to the brazen- tongued, 
American time-keepers below ; but still the red 
curtain did not move. What had become of 
Mr.-Dryden ? had he gone to rest in one of 
those vast, unaired bed-rooms . or, like Cecil 
Brownlow, had he seen a ghost, and was he 
lying, stretched insensible, as she had lain ? 

There was no one up or about to ask the 
question, or to solve it. 

Just as the three-quarters past four ran out, 
the red curtain was lifted again, and Mr. Dry- 
den came forth and passed towards his own 



THE TWO FRIENDS. '241 

chamber, so wan, so white, and trembling, that 
any of the household who had seen him issuing 
thence would have been confirmed in their belief 
that the North Gallery was haunted. 



VOL. I. 16 



CHAPTER IV. 

THB SQUIRE AND THE STUDENT. 

It had beea Sir Stuart's special request that his 
old friend should follow him to the grave ; and 
now that all was over, Squire Dryden took his 
way down the avenue, and passing through the 
great gates, crossed the high road which sepa- 
rated Lermouth Park from Flairs. 

The dead man had no near kindred ; all would 
pass away to distant, unknown relatives, whose 
name even was different from his own. 

Mr. Dryden stood looking back, then he 
turned suddenly through a small side gate, 
opening it with his own key. How sad a fate 



THE SQUIRE AND THE STUDENT. 243 

Sir Stuart's seemed . to perish from among his 
fellows, and to be thus the means of installing 
an alien and inferior race in the home of his an- 
cestors : and then the Squire^s thoughts turned 
to Elinor . although he could make her a Dry- 
den, in name, he had a keen perception that she 
would never thoroughly imbibe the spirit of 
honour and refinement so inseparable from his 
ancient family. He sighed and shook his head 
as he walked on. 

" How can refinement be learned ?" he said, 
" or honour, either ? no, they must be inbred. 
poor Elinor, I fear they must be inborn, too, to 
be real." 

For a few moments there came over his face 
the old look of distrust and disquiet, which had 
left it since the night of Sir Stuart Palmer's 
death ; but it cleared away, and through it shone 
out an ineffable content, a glad thankfulness, 
which suited so well the dreamy eyes and pen- 
sive forehead that, to one who then looked on 
the Squire's face for the first time, it would have 
been incredible that in their place had reigned 
the hard, suspicious expression which had made 

16.2 



244 ELINOR drtden's probation. 



him feared by men and women alike . by every 
one but Cecil Brownlow and Ben Karse. 

There was in his eyes, as he took the narrow 
path leading to Karse's cottage, the liquid gleam 
of benevolence, as if gratitude for mercy vouch- 
safed impelled him to seek some object on whom 
his thanks might vent themselves in blessings. 

It seemed to meet him in the shape of 
Maurice. 

The Squire started as the boy rose to his feet. 
Although November, the air was soft and calm, 
and he had been lying on the ground, reading, 
under an ash tree that stretched its boughs 
across the path, and as Mr. Dryden had advanced 
without seeing him, they stood dose, face to 
face. 

They had not met so since that August after- 
noon, in the hanging wood ; but Maurice was 
now nearly eighteen, and fully as tall as the 
Squire; his remarkable beauty had developed 
with his growth, but there was a slightly melan- 
choly expression in his face in repose which 
scarcely suited his age. 

His eyes drooped as they met Mr. Dryden*s ; 



THE SQUIRE AND THE STUDENT. 245 

not with fear so much as from some repressed 
emotion which swam in them and quivered on 
the dark fringe of lashes that almost touched 
his cheek. 

The Squire was moved too ; he had become 
first very pale, then a fiery glow of either 
anger or excitement reddened even his forehead, 
but he stood quite still, pressing his hands firmly 
together, till the pale look returned. 

They seemed both tongue-tied, and again it 
was Maurice's book that helped Mr. Dryden's 
utterance. 

" What is this . what are you reading ?" he 
said, without any greeting, but as if they had 
stood there talking some time. 

With the words came the power of move- 
ment ; as he spoke he laid one hand gently on 
the book the young man held, his forefinger still 
keeping the place where he had been reading. 

Maurice looked up startled. The voice and 
manner were both so gentle . so unlike the 
Squire's former behaviour towards him. Their 
eyes met, and again the youth felt that strange 
fascination subdue him, of which in former days 



246 ELINOR dryoen's probation. 

he bad spoken to Ben . a fascination which had 
seemingly lost its power since his mind had given 
itself up to study, and since he had kept out of 
sight of the Squire. 

His answer came involuntarily. 

" It is Virgil, sir." 

Mr. Dryden took it from his hand. 

" And can you understand this well enough 
to find pleasure in reading it, or are you study- 
it as a task ?" 

Maurice reddened, and Mr. Dryden turned 
paler as he stood still looking at him. 

"I suppose . at least Mr. Brownlow tells me 
. that it is a book easy to understand at first, 
but not easy to be thoroughly enjoyed. I 
can't do much more than make it out yet, 
Sir. 

The determination that took the place of his 
disappointed look as he began to speak, told that 
he would do something more than ** make out," 
before very long. 

The Squire did not speak again directly . 
when he did, it seemed as if he wished to 
change the subject. 



THE SQUIRE AND THE , STUDENT. 247 

"Should you like to leave this place?" he 
said abruptly. 

Maurice's lips' parted. The Squire had not 
spoken or looked angrily, and yet it seemed that 
because he had met him once again he was about 
to fulfil his old threat and send him into exile. 

His independent nature revolted against such 
an act of tyranny, and his eyes flashed. 

Lately he had often wished to live where his 
sources of information and opportunities for self- 
culture would be less bounded, but it was to his 
contradictory human nature one thing to enter- 
tain such a wish himself, quite another to have 
its gratification forced on him by the will of 
another. 

" No," he said, bluntly. 

Mr. Dry den stood so long without answering, 
that the boy's patience gave way, and closing his 
book he took a step forward ; but the Squire's 
hand was laid firmly, not ungently, on his 
arm. 

" Stay, Maurice." It was the first time the 
Squire bad called him by name, and his heart 
beat so fast, that he was indignantwith himself for 



248 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

his own weakness. He would not look up, for 
lie felt that the Squire's eyes were fastened on 
his face. *' You must hear my proposal before 
you give any answer, and when you have heard 
you had better think before replying ; also you 
can consult with Karse, whose opinion you natu- 
rally value/* 

He sighed, and stopped a few minutes ; then 
he turned and walked slowly towards the cottage, 
Maurice following now with eager interest. 

Presently the Squire went on . 

"Mr. Brownlow gives me a very pleasing 
account of you. He says that your talents and 
tone of mind would fit you for a far higher 
position than that you may have looked for. 
He says, also, that with your thirst for know- 
ledge and quickness in gaining it, you may yet 
by close study become a scholar.'* 

Maurice's face glowed, and his whole body 
quivered with excitement ; but he was too much 
absorbed by the Squire's words to speak. 

Mr. Dryden waited an instant, as if for his 
reply, and then went on, without looking at his 
eager listener, . 



THE SQUIRE AND THE STUDENT. 249 

** Of course, in what I have said, I take it 
for granted that Mr. Brownlow is correct in 
telling me that you are dissatisfied with your 
present position, and if so, I scarcely understand 
your reluctance to leave Flairs ; for you can't 
become a scholar here, young man." 

The last words were spoken with some of his 
old harshness. Like all of us when meditating 
benevolence, obstacles in the channbl in which 
he had resolved it should flow, irritated him. 

A perception of that future he had sometimes 
dreamed of . a future filled with books and 
study, and contact with men of letters, or at 
least with minds in which he should find the 
reflection of his own sympathies . stirred in 
Maurice now. His eyes swam with a gush of 
sudden emotion, as he looked up at Mr. 
Dryden. 

" Oh, sir, forgive me what I said. I did not 
understand you meant good to me." 

"You are not to blame;" the Squire spoke 
with an agitation that he tried to control, and 
which nearly ^lastered him, for his voice was 
hoarse and indistinct ; "- but you must see for 



250 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

yourself that it would be much better to go to 
London, and study hard with a professed in- 
structor, than stay here and pick up what you 
can from such irregular teaching as Mr. Brown- 
low's constant occupation enables him to give 
you. He has begged me to place you with his 
brother. Hush T for eager thanks were 
bursting from Maurice's trembling lips. '' Re- 
member what I said . talk to Karse after I leave 
him, and then either he or you can write me 
when you will be ready to go to London ; but I 
prefer that you should write. I suppose I shall 
find Ben alone ?" He paused at the little gate, 
and then forcing a smile he nodded at the youth 
to show he wished his absence. Maurice stood 
for a moment as if about to speak, and then 
impelled by the strange power that now held 
him in complete thrall, wandered slowly away, 
asking himself whether he was asleep or awake, 
or whether the whole were not some trick of 
his imagination. London ! . the word itself 
was enough to set his vivid fancy to work . 
to study under Mr. Erasmus Brownlow, of whose 
learning even his brother spoke with reverence ! 



THE SQUIRE AND THE STUDENT. 251 

this seemed to poor Maurice as bright a prospect 
as vacation to an overworked student. 

Other visions, too, thronged before the sight 
of his brain. In that crowded whirl of life. 
that city of his dreams . should he meet with 
Elinor ? . Elinor, whom he regarded still with 
strange, contradictory feelings. She had created 
his first exquisite joy. She had caused, if she 
had not been the active instrument of his first 
great sorrow. In his thoughts she dwelt, in- 
vested with the radiance a boy's romance so 
generously flings round its first female idols, a 
dark bright enchantress, who would (so his 
rapidly maturing judgment, conquering the sore- 
ness and prejudices of their former intercourse, 
told him,) to her equal, betray none of the inso- 
lence he had so greatly resented. The extreme 
seclusion of his life had taught Maurice little of 
the difference of caste. His exclusion from 
Flairs he had attributed, since his developed in- 
tellect had begun to reason, to his cousin's de* 
pendent position and Mr. Dryden's personal 
dislike to himself. He came so little in contact 
with inferiors, except the under-keepers and the 



252 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

people employed in field-work . for Ben had suc- 
ceeded in completely isolating him from village in- 
tercourse . that he was rarelv called on to reason 
the other side of the question. In theory, now, he 
felt himself Elinor's equal, and sometimes won- 
dered whether the change of which he was con- 
scious, without being vain, would be apparent to 
her. But she was not the only vision that 
mingled with his future. 

Floating dimly, yet always in the sunniest 
nook of his pictures, came a pale, sweet face, 
with closed eyes and fair hair . the face he had 
seeen in that dream-like visit to the North Gal- 
lery at Flairs. He had not spoken of the ad- 
venture to Ben, and so he had no chance of 
discovering the name of Elinor's visitor; and 
as he never went to Starby, going on Sundays 
with Mr. Karse to a small church beyond Sir 
Stuart's park, it did not occur to him that 
the fair angel-like girl had sprung from^ his 
own neighbourhood. Ben always told him 
that London was the fountgiin-head of beauty, 
wit, knowledge and wealth, therefore Maurice 
argued, if he were ever to see this fair vision 



THE SQUIRE AND THE STUDENT. 253 

again, it would be in London. As yet, his 
feelings for Elinor were too much founded on 
gratitude, and the strong wish that urges a 
noble nature to return benefits conferred . to 
deem it treason to her to cherish this other 
remembrance. 

And so he went on through the ash wood. 
No leaves there now to intercept the outside sun- 
shine, which gave back so true and glad a re- 
flection of his musings. 

An hour later, Mr. Dryden issued from the 
gamekeeper's cottage- His face looked very 
sorrowful ; but there was an elasticity in his 
tread, that spoke rather of hope than abiding 
grief. 

Karse stood at the gate, looking after him. 
His hands clasped, his eyes raised to heaven, he 
was uttering a prayer^ for his lips moved, though 
no words came. The tears rolling down his 
hale, sunburnt face told that it was a thanks- 
giving. 

" It 'U be the makin* of the lad. and TH 



254 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

never believe but he won't turn out a credit 
to 'US alt . " he said, as he went slowly back 
into his cottage ligain, when the Squire could 
no longer be seen. 



BOOK THE FOUKTH. 



IN LONDON. 



CHAPTER L 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 



Elinor had been doomed to suffer two great dis- 
appointments. A few days after Sir Stuart's 
funeral, her uncle had written to her again, telling 
her, that, Instead of keeping Christmas at Flairs, 
he proposed they should spend it together in 
Paris, as for many reasons . specially for his 
health's sake . it would be well for him to leave 
England at once, and when he reached Lutzein, 
as soon as the first greetings were over . be told 
her abruptly, that he did not intend to settle at 
home again for two years, and that he had made 
arrangements for her to remain at school till 
VOL. I. 17 



258 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

then . except the vacations, " which/* he tried 
to speak as pleasantly as he could, seeing her 
utter dismay, " we must work very hard in, as 
I have promised myself to show you much of 
what is best worth seeing in Europe." 

The disappointment was too keen, she forgot 
all restraint, all her awe of him, and gave way 
to a burst of hysterical sorrow, so vehement and 
prolonged, that her uncle thought it best to 
leave her to herself. 

He left her with a conviction of the utter 
uselessness of treating women like reasonable 
beings, and resolved for the future that any im- 
portant communication should be made to Elinor 
in writing. 

Now he thought it best to send for the 
superintendent . he supposed she would know 
better how to deal with a passionate girl than he 
did, and he asked her to point out to Elinor the 
utter folly of distressing him and herself by 
oppostion to his wishes. 

He was really very sorry for her disappoint- 
ment, but he forgot that he had not told her 
this ; bad she submitted patiently be might 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 259 

perhaps have done so, but this want of gentle- 
ness confirmed the shrinking he had felt from 
Elinor ever since the day she rebelled against 
his prohibition to cross the river . when he had 
been struck by her growing likeness to her 
father. 

He had seen bitterly then that although he 
could never shrink from the charge he had im- 
posed on himself; yet it might be well not to 
seek disappointment by encouraging affection 
for the child of a man he so much despised, and 
that it was far more likely they should remain 
on good terms if he left her to herself, than 
they should do if he won her confidence and 
discovered the thorough want of sympathy he 
suspected between her nature and his own. 
When they met again after this outburst Elinor 
had recovered herself, and was ready to do all 
he wished. 

As they travelled together he was pleased with 
her intelligence, and amused with her wit and 
liveliness, and they became better friends . 
although at times she alarmed and annoyed him 

17.2 



260 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

by her encouragement of the slightest attention 
or admiration called forth by her growing ele- 
gance and fascination. 

Just before they parted for the last time pre- 
vious to his return to England, she had given 
such open encouragement to a French baron . 
who Mr. Dryden felt persuaded was an adven- 
turer . that he took her back to Lutzein a week 
sooner than he had intended, and then following 
the plan he had laid down, as soon as he re- 
turned to England, he wrote her a long letter, 
pointing out the folly and impropriety of her con- 
duct, and reminding her that should she become 
entangled in any love affairs of her own seeking, 
before she obtained her majority, she would have 
forfeited her position as his adopted daughter . 
although he should still think himself bound to 
provide for her future. He thought this would 
test what there was of noble feeling in Elinor, 
and also her affection for himself. 

He had quite determined to choose her hus- 
band, but for many reasons he did not wish 
Roland Markham to divine his intentions. 

But now the two years were passed and Eli- 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 261 

nor felt sure that nothing could occur to prevent 
her return to Flairs. To a girl of her age . to 
any one whose character is unformed , a period 
of expectation is perilous. 

It seemed as if she could not give her atten- 
tion to anything but the bright future awaiting 
her. To a creature so gifted as she felt herself 
to be, what mattered a few weeks more or less 
of study ? and so she took her own course, heed* 
less of the bent brows of the professors, and the 
remonstrances of the superintendent . to the 
rich English heiress Elinor had always pro- 
claimed herself, the good, placid lady never 
ventured on direct reprimand. 

The girl lived in such a self-created world, 
that she had imbued her intimate associates with 
a fervent belief in the truth of her imagined 
future, for the realisation of which many of 
them were nearly as impatient as she was herself, 
and when the long expected letter arrived from 
Flairs, it was brought to her by an eager tribe, 
hungering for its contents. 

It came just a week before her uncle was ex- 
pected to arrive, but the contents were crushing 
to her expectations. 



362 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

Sir Stuart's procrastination had revenged 
itself on the village, the unnatural mildness of 
the autumn weather, continuing even into De- 
cember, had fostered the festering corruption of 
tbe undrained waste land ; no kindly frost laid 
its iron hand on the exhalations mingling unseen 
every evening with the early gloom that enve- 
loped Starby. Some of the older folks, less 
busy and more observant than the young ones, 
thought they never remembered such a succes- 
sion of foggy evenings, and many complained of 
unusual headache and giddiness when windows 
were opened to let in the early morning air, still 
heavy with the poisonous vapour. 

But country people are slow-witted, and no- 
body thought of putting " that and that toge- 
ther," and deducting future evil therefrom. 

Presently a lad whose work daily led him past 
the waste ground, came home at dinner-time, 
his *' head and limbs ached sore," he said, he 
could not stand to his work ; before morning he 
was raving in delirium that frightened the Star- 
by doctor . in* the evening he was dead. His 
mother said he had got a chill, and the doctor 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 268 

agreed with her, so the body was left utiburied 
for nearly a week in the two-roomed cottage, 
and no precautions taken against infection. 

They would not have availed. Something in 
that lumbering heavy-bodied peasant lad had 
roused the fever demon, which had bred, and 
grown, and strengthened as it lay sleeping in the 
undrained waste land . its heavy breath rising 
in vapour far beyond it. Now wakening tho^ 
roughly it found its lodging too small, and sail- 
ing on its filmy oozing wings in search of fresh 
quarters, hovered over the doomed village. 
Before Joe Lutter was buried thirty persons of 
varying age and sex lay death- struck in the 
adjoining houses. 

Like most of us under occurrences of awfiil 
moment . which, in looking back to, we wonder 
had not at once roused us to foresee and strive 
to stem their possible consequences . Mr. Dry- 
den was slow in believing that a fever, which 
might prove as fatal as the plague at Eyam, bad 
settled on the village. 

He heard that there was illness there, and 
passing Mr. Brownlow's house, rang to make 



264 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

inquiries . the rector was out with some of the 
sick. Mr. Dryden did not notice bow white 
and terrified the girl looked as she said so. 
Mrs. Brownlow had died two years ago, so the 
Squire had grown into the habit of asking for 
Cecil, and leaving his messages with her. He 
asked for her now. 

'^Ohy sir, Miss Cecil was sent away this 
morning." 

" Sent away ! where ? what for ?" A strange 
foreboding of evil awakened in him suddenly at 
these words. 

" To London, sir, to her uncle." 

" Do you know why she went away ? is she 
quite well ?" 

The quick earnest words made the girl stare 
at him ; she had no idea the Squire cared so 
much for Miss Cecil. 

" Oh yes, sir ; quite well, thank you ; per- 
haps,'^ . she dropped her voice and looked over 
her shoulder to make sure against listeners, . 
" master might have sent her to Town, so that 
she mightn't be ill, you see, sir ?'* 

The girl's manner showed she had something 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 265 

to conceal, and Mr. Dryden turned away, feel- 
ing that he could not pry into Mr. Brownlow's 
secrets, and still not guessing the truth. He 
was in a dreamy, pre-occupied mood, or he 
would have sought for the clergyman at once, 
instead of riding straight home. 

At the hall door stood the butler, looking 
frightened and anxious. 

" If you pleese, sir, there's a note in your 
writing-room from Mr. Brownlow. The mes- 
senger who brought it said it was of immediate 
importance." 

The man had plainly more to say, but the 
Squire turned away hastily, his lips rigid with 
the effort he was making to keep them from 
quivering. He thought the letter was from 
Maurice's tutor. 

There lay the note on his own special writing 
table. It only held a few lines : . 

" Do not come near the village, nor allow 
any of your servants to do so ; there is malig- 
nant fever here, and it must not spread. Send 
us a better doctor, if one will venture, and pray 
for us. God bless you and us. 

"John Brownlow." 



266 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

A look of deep anxiety came into the Squire's 
face, but the expression was easier . less bitter, 
than when he entered the writing-room. 

His first movement was to stir the fire up 
into a blaze, knocking about the logs as he did 
it ; then, having thus given his thoughts time 
to settle themselves in their new channel, he 
leant against the mantel-shelf, forcing them to 
work promptly. 

The first thing to be done, was to write to 
Elinor . she must remain at school for the pre- 
sent; the next, to take measures for getting 
another doctor ; the third, to send for the stew- 
ard and Northover, and forbid most impera- 
tively any egress from the park on the side of 
the village, for at least a fortnight to come; 
and also to make necessary arrangements for his 
own absence. Then he rang for his man, bade 
him pack his portmanteau, and have it strapped 
on to his saddle as soon as his horse was ready, 
he should not require a groom. 

The servants stared at each other, but the 
steward was in too great awe of his master to 
speak. Northover, however, as she walked 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 267 

slowly towards her own room^ reflected that she 
had allowed herself to be treated as a child, and 
had not exhibited any of her valuable strength 
of mind. 

^' I don't hold with blindfold orders," she 
said to herself. " Fever . well, it may be ; but 
how do they know it's infectious, and how are 
the sick to be cared for without some superior 
woman to superintend arrangements ? And I 
hold it to be clean against the Gospel to shut us 
out from going to church on Sunday. Besides, 
what's the good of the Squire's running risks ? 
he can't be a quarter as useful in a sick room as 
I can. Poor man ! he's like the rest of 'em. - 
sadly in want of female counsel." 

She went back to the writing>room, and 
hinted . the Squire looked so sternly sorrowful 
that even she dared not speak out . that she 
considered he was going to commit a great im- 
prudence, and also she faintly suggested that 
she should like to go to church on Sunday. 

The first part of her sentence was left un- 
answered ; but at the last words, the Squire 
looked at her earnestly. 



268 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

" Northover, I thought you more sensible ! 
You heard me tell the steward to read the 
church prayers in the large dining-room ?" 

" Oh, it's all very well, sir ; but you'll excuse 
my saying, I've been used to my parson and my 
preaching all my life ; and I can't see that a 
dummy of a man, like Mr. Tomkins, is any use 
to my soul. Why, if we mayn't go down to 
Starby, couldn't we go across the river to that 
little church the other side of Sir Stuaii; Pal- 
mer's park ?" 

Mr. Dryden looked at her; but with her 
right foot planted considerably before her left, 
her head thrown back, and her hands clasping 
her waist, she looked so thoroughly contradic- 
tory and obstinate, that he gave up the idea of 
reasoning with her. 

" For the present, Northover, you must con* 
tent yourself with what I have said. I shall 
see what Mr. Brownlow thinks right and wise 
to do. Now you must leave me ; my time is 
very precious." 

He had greatly alienated himself from his 
household by his hard and impenetrable reserve ; 



4 



THE FEVER WAKENS. 269 

yet to some of the older ones he was still the 
Mr. Wentworth of his youth ; and the change 
all had noticed in him since his return home, 
had done much to strengthen this feeling, and 
to attach younger ones. Now almost all ga- 
thered into the hall as he rode away unattended ; 
for he would not risk any life except his own. 
His last words were, that there was to be abso- 
lutely no communication between Flairs and the 
stricken village. 

Mr. Dryden was not acting from any enthu- 
siastic impulse, but from what he considered 
stern, but necessary duty. Except Mr. Brown- 
low and the Doctor (the lawyer's family 
had gone to a town about twenty miles 
off, to spend their Christmas), there was no one 
in the village to give efficient advice or assist- 
ance ; and the Squire felt that these two would 
be wholly occupied in their respective vocations 
beside the sick and dying. He knew that sana- 
tory measures would be required . a head to 
plan them, too, and means to execute them ; 
and the people of Starby were mostly his tenants, 
and therefore his charge in their time of need. 



270 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

And yet^ although he had decided on this step 
deliberately and calmly in his writing*room at 
Flairs, a dread terror . that awful shrinking 
which seizes us when we hear of the sudden 
death of a friend, or of the very young, came to 
Mr. Dryden now, as he reined in his horse at 
the Rector's gate. 

The result of all this was contained in the 
few hurried lines in which her unde exhorted 
Elinor to bear her share of his anxiety by re- 
maining peacefully at Lutzein, till danger was 
over. 



CHAPTER IL 



ELINOR AT HOME. 



It was the first week in January, clear, but not 
cold weather, for it had been one of those 
winters that seem always trying to freeze, and 
can't ; still the young Markhams had found, 
standing at the hall door and peeping out of the 
narrow glass windows on each side, a sufficiently 
chilly amusement, and rejoiced in a prolonged 
howl of delight when wheels at length stopped, 
and the fly, in which their father had started 
some hours earlier, drew up with more than one 
person inside. 

They squeezed on one side, as be came up 



272 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

the steps with a lady on his arm ; this could not 
be the sister Elinor they were looking for . she 
was so tall and grand, with her long, rustling, 
black silk dress, and her rich lace veil. The 
criticism of the juveniles was not favourable, as 
she swept along to the dining-room door, at 
which her mother and Adelaide now stood. 

The children were a boy and girl, the youngest 
members of the family, four other girls having 
died younger. 

"She's not much,*' said the boy, with a 
sturdy look of aversion on his broad face . not 
improved in expression at present by his having 
.flattened and reddened his nose against the win- 
dow panes. 

" I should think not, indeed," said the girl, 
with a toss of her head, strongly suggestive of 
Elinor in her childhood ; " why, Fred, she took 
no more account of either of us than of two 
heaps df dirt." 

" I expect, Mary . " Fred looked a thorough 
republican, . " that now her name's changed to 
Dry den, that's what she does think us . common 
clay, and herself fine china-ware." 



ELINOR AT HOME. 273 

" Well/' said Mary, " from what I saw she 
don't look half as like china as Addy ; why, 
she's as black as a gipsy." 

The parlour door opened, and Adelaide 
beckoned to them. 

" I say, children," she whispered, " you're to 
come in and see Elinor; but good gracious, 
Fred, your face and hands are black . ^and look 

ft 

at your apron, Mary : well, I can't come and set 
you straight," she said, after a moment's pause^ 
during which her listeners had waxed rebellious, 
" run and make yourselves tidy, there's dears ; 
and then try and come into the room nicely, and 
mind you walk straight up to Elinor, and kiss 
her." 

Adelaide's spare moments, and those, too, 
which could ill be spared, were always appro- 
priated by some member pf the family. 

Mrs Markham had begun her married life 
with a fixed determination . at least what she 
considered such . of being a good poor man's 
wife and a capital manager ; but although she 
could theorise very prettily when talking to Ade- 
laide, her practice was spasmodic. She soon 

VOL. L 18 



274 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

grew tired of surveillance and aUowed the bills 
and dust to increase, till something more than 
ordinary, probably her husband's remonstrances^ 
awakened her anew to her duties. 

And yet she was not an idle or extravagant 
wife . ^she darned the stockings, and mended 
all the clothes of the family, but she wanted 
both energy and recollected ness . the last, per- 
haps, a more fatal want than the former to a 
woman in her position. But her children loved 
her dearly, and as they stood now both fighting 
over one towel, Mary declaring that Fred had 
taken all his dry out of the middle, he ex- 
claimed . 

" I tell you what. Poll, if Elinor don't treat 
Ma like china I shall just teach her manners . 
she isn't to crow over us here; if we are com- 
mon clay, I'm not ashamed of it, only Ma isn't 
I'm half sorry I washed my face . common clay 
ware always is dirty, and red, too." 

" Hush !" said the little girl, " and don't call 
me Poll before Elinor, she might think us 
vulgar." 

They \vere at the foot of the stairs now, and 



ELINOR AT HOME. 275 

Mary ran forward and opened the dining-room 
door, to prevent him from answering. 

Elinor had written to her uncle^ and declared 
it to be perfectly impossible for her to remain 
at Lutzein during the holidays ; the loneliness, 
the cold^ of a large, empty mansion \vould kill 
her, and be far worse than the fever. She im- 
plored her uncle not to risk his own life, but to 
come over and join her either in Dresden or 
Paris . the Superintendent was en route for 
France, and would take charge of her to either 
city ; or, in the event of his refusing to leave 
Starby, would cross to London, and take her to 
her father's house . her uncle had always pro- 
mised that when her education was finished she 
should pay them a visit, why not now? She 
would remain quietly at home and refuse to mix 
in any society, and she hoped that she had so far 
profited by his counsels as to be esteemed worthy 
of trust. 

When Mr. Dryden received this letter he 
was so burdened with care and thought for the 
dying villagers, among whom his days and nights 
were now passing, that it came almost as a relief 

18.2 



S76 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

from his difficulties, for he had felt very reluc- 
tant to leave Elinor quite alone, it seemed alike 
unkind and imprudent. Three months before 
he would have thought companionship with 
Roland Markham most injurious ; now, fettered 
as he was by circumstances, he said to himself 
that surely Elinor's father would wish Elinor's 
welfare, and would not utter before her unworthy 
sentiments. 

Mrs. Markham's and Adelaide's delight was 
unbounded ; in the latter's heart there lay hiding 
itself, even from herself, a shivering fear lest this 
visit might mar happiness long dreamed-of, but 
the girl's generosity triumpho^d, and as she 
sat beside Elinor, on the sofa, fondling one of 
her hands, she thought the joy of having a sister 
was beyond any other she had felt. 

Roland Markham stood on the hearth-rug, 
with his hands behind him, listening attentively 
to all Elinor said, and glancing furtively at her 
every now and then. His wife sate leaning 
back in one corner of the sofa, with tears of 
thankfulness rolling down her cheeks. 

She had often reproached both herself and her 



ELINOR AT HOME. 277 

husband for yielding their eldest child, and had 
considered her, spite of Roland's contrary as 
surance, quite lost to them ; but to have her 
thus restored, handsome, well grown, with a 
self-possessed, dignified manner, that carried the 
poor lady back to the recollections of her youth, 
seemed too much, and she could only sit 
quietly looking at Elinor, and wondering at the 
transformation years and education had effected. 

Her husband's voice broke the spell ; it was 
painful to see how completely she identified 
Elinor with Mr. Dryden, and how memory, 
blunted by habits of daily intercourse, roused a 
sensitive shame of Mr. Markham's coarseness. 

But to her surprise, Elinor, instead of wincing 
under his jokes, looked up in his face and smiled. 
Her mother did not comprehend that Miss 
Dryden saw much more vulgarity in the thread- 
bare carpet^ and in Adelaide's old-fashioned 
gown, than in her father's smart sayings. She 
had already privately decided that her mother 
looked like a doll, and Adelaide like a drudge, and* 
that in them she could only look for affectionate 
companionship. Her father was rough, certainly. 



278 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

but then be was a bandsome man, with a ready 
speech and a certain amount of swagger, that 
impressed Elinor and yet left to her the com- 
fortable feeling of equality she could never 
quite have with uncle Dryden. 

" Well, old woman," and for the first time 
for many years Mrs. Markham shrank from the 
familiar address ; " I hope we shall have some- 
thing to eat soon, for Elinor and I are both 
sharp-set ; arn't we, Elinor ? come, Addy, your 
sister would like to take off her wraps, and 
make herself comfortable, I dare say." 

Adelaide started from the dream-like worship 
she had been indulging, only to fall into fresh 
admiration, as Elinor rose gracefully and moved 
slowly towards the door. 

** What a difference to be sure," said their 
father, as the door closed on the two girls; 
" why, Addy hardly ever goes across a room 
without knocking something or another over, 
but the other one moves like a queen. By Jove, 
what a pair of eyes she's got." He pulled out 
his own whiskers complacently, " after all Elinor 
was very like him," was his mental conclusion^ 



ELINOR AT HOMB. 279 

 

''She's a distinguished looking girl/' said 
her mother, more thoughtfully than usual, " but 
Roland, I only hope she has as good a heart as 
Addy's.'* 

" Come, Nell, don't be sentimental . a heart's 
rather a hindrance than a help to a girl in 
getting on in life, now-a-days . I'm sure you've 
found it so, old woman," he added, kindly, for 
the tears sprang to her eyes at what she felt 
was injustice to Adelaide ; " if you had had less 
heart, you'd have married some lord you didn't 
care a farthing for, and lived in clover ;" he 
stooped and kissed her, and Mrs. Markham 
wondered how she could have felt ashamed of 
him five minutes before. 

Adelaide ushered her sister into her bed-room 
with a beating heart. She felt how poor and 
mean it must seem after all the grandeur Elinor 
was used to, and she gave a sidelong, wistful 
look to see whether she was vexed at it. 

But Elinor was smiling brightly . she saw 
her sister's look and understood it; after all 
she began to think she should like Adelaide. 

" I'm afraid you'll find it small/' said the 
latter timidly. 



280 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" Oh, no, . indeed, I think it all looks very 
pretty and nice. I am sure I shall be very com- 
fortable, dear." She kissed Adelaide as she spoke, 
and though the girl was still too shy to return 
her caress, her look showed her delight . she 
removed her sister's bonnet and doak and put 
them away for her, pointing out to her at the 
same time what drawers and shelves had been 
cleared for her use. 

Elmor stared. *' Oh, then, is this room 
generally occupied ?" 

"Yes, I sleep here, bnt we thought you 
would prefer a room to yourself; I can make 
more space for you if you think you shall want 
it." 

^* Thank you, I am to engage a maid, I be- 
lieve, and then she will unpack and all that sort 
of thing. I have in one small box all I shall 
want for a day or two." 

'' A maid ? oh, Elinor, I should love to wait 
on you." 

" My dear Adelaide," she stroked her sister's 
soft hair affectionately, " do you think I could 
let you take so much trouble ? and I am sure 
you have plenty to do." 



ELINOR AT HOME. 281 

" Oh never mind that . here, if you'll give 
me your keys and tell me which box you want 
first, I'll soon get it, for dinner will be ready 
directly.'* 

Elinor protested, but her sister was off when 
she gathered which box was wanted, and scorn- 
ing help, had dragged it up-stairs as soon as 
she had removed its covering. 

" My dear Adelaide," said Elinor from the 
fire-side, where she* was lounging in the one 
easy chair, *' do you know that you will utterly 
spoil your hands." 

" Never mind, I do far worse than this some^ 
times . besides, you know, I must be useful, for 
I can't be anything else." 

Her earnest simplicity touched the other. 

" Yes you can, dear, you can be very love- 
able ; now do leave off being useful, to please 
me, and come and tell me a few things here by 
the fire." 

Adelaide looked lingeringly at the half un- 
packed box. 

" Well then be quick, dear Elinor ; as it is, 
dinner will be ready before I've finished." 



282 ELINOR drydbn's probation. 

** Nonsense, child ; I must dress and they 
must wait. Now I want to know whether papa 
is as good-tempered as he seems." 

Adelaide's head drooped, she looked awkward 
and uncomfortable. Being child to Roland 
Markham it was not to be expected that her 
ideas about reverence to parents had been cul- 
tivated, and that she had not thought over her 
father's foibles, but it seemed to her unpleasant 
that the veil, which she hoped the restraint of a 
new inmate would draw over certain family 
peculiarities, should be raised by way of preface 
to Elinor's intercourse with the home circle. 

" You know, Elinor," she said at last slowly 
. her sister's bright penetrating glance forced 
the words from her.-" it's of no use my trying 
to deceive you . only I wish, if you don't mind, 
that you would find things out for yourself; you 
see it makes me feel like a tell-tale to find fault 
with papa." 

Elinor smiled . she was answered . but there 
was something so new and fresh in her sister's 
truthfulness that she became more and more 
attracted towards her. 



ELINOR AT HOME. 283 

** No . no, Addy, I won't ask any unpleasant 
questions ; but do you know if you make such 
frightfully mysterious answers, I shall be fancy- 
ing all sorts of horrors here . the Castle of Udol- 
pho on a small scale ! you're a dear, good, little 
thing, though," she put her arm caressingly 
round the young girl as she leaned over her 
chair. " I tell you what we'll do, as soon as 
dinner is over we will just come up here and un- 
pack the rest of that box. I have some presents 
for you, and for them all." 

" Oh, thank you, but." 

" Why do you say * but ?' " Elinor spoke 
imperiously, she had meant to enact the first 
chapter of Lady Bountiful, and it was hard to be 
baulked at the outset. Adelaide saw how her 
brows knit, and how impatiently her sister's foot 
tapped the brass mounted fender . she felt that 
she was thought ungrateful or indifferent. 

" Some one . a friend of ours is coming this 
evening, and would like to see you, I know ; so 
I thought." 

** Oh," linor threw back her head and tried 
to look as dignified as possible, " I had better 



284 ELINOR drydbn's probation, 

tell you at once Adelaide that you must Bot 
ask people to meet me here. I promised Unde 
Dryden that I would just stay quietly at home 
with mamma, and not mix in any society." 

The colour tingled in Adelaide's face, she 
looked on Elinor as a superior being, but she 
held her father's creed about Uncle Dryden. 

" I think uncle might trust you to your own 
parents then, without exacting any promises. 
James Fisher is papa's cousin, Elinor ; surely 
your own flesh and blood can't harm you." 

But as she ended her sentence, Adelaide's 
eyes fell before her sister's, and the glow of colour 
spread over throat and temples more in confusion 
than in anger. 

" Well done, Addy, always stand up for your 
own people. I see we shall get on, for I'm a tho< 
rough radical ; money is the only thing necessary 
to get on in life, although of course you know, 
dear, till he has formaUy declared me his heiress, 
I must conform to uncle's rules ; but if such a 
question is not among the unanswerable ones, 
what sort of a person is this Mr. James 
Fisher ?" 



ELINOR AT HOME. 285 

The dinner bell rang loudly, and although 
Adelaide well knew there was no need of baste 
. as her father invariably kept dinner waiting, 
. she affected great concern, and so hurried her 
sister that she could not repeat her question. 



CHAPTER III. 

MR. DRYDEN AT STARBY. 

And meantime the fever raged at Starby, and 
Mr. Dryden remained there strengthening and 
encouraging all by liis presence, and chiefly the 
clergyman and doctors, froni whom he took all 
cares, save those for the souls and bodies of their 
patients. 

It was his example and authority which pre- 
vented many of the terrified villagers from 
leaving their homes, and thus spreading the in- 
fection. It was the Squire also who provided 
that necessary supplies of food should be brought 
to the cross-road leading from the nearest town^ 



MR. DRYDEN AT STARBY, 287 

and left there. Besides these and many other 
sanitary measures, he took his turn in watching 
by the sick and the dying, his vitality seemed 
inexhaustible, it was as if all the life and 
energy he had suppressed under the calm 
stoicism and reticence of the last twenty years 
had found vent now and carried him on through 
days and nights of incessant labour. 

Northover would not have believed her eyes 
if she had seen her cold, stern, indifferent mas- 
ter hurrying along from one cottage to another, 
a bottle of wine under one arm, and some broth 
or other restorative in his hand. happy indeed 
to find a case were such remedies availed, for 
the disease was deadly in its effects, very few of 
those who were stricken ever rose again from 
the beds on which they had fallen prone . with 
bursting temples and flushed cheeks and shivering 
frame. And the terror these well-known symp- 
toms caused helped the fever-demon to consum- 
mate his work, there was so little hope, such 
apparent certainty of death among the poor 
terrified people, that they made no struggle for 
life . ^in many cases refused all remedies . and 



S88 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

gave themselves up like sheep to be slaugh- 
tered. 

Mr. Dryden perceived this fatal symptom 
before his fellow-labourers did, and his strong 
sense where anything practical was concerned, 
at once told him that remedies availed little 
against its sombre power. Both he and the 
London doctor he had sent for lived at the 
Rectory, but they did not often meet, except 
beside the sick, or at the hurried and interrupted 
meal times. 

One evening . just a fortnight after his arri- 
val at Starby, the Squire met Mr. Brownlow at 
the Rectory gate. 

" I have been trying to get quiet speech of 
you these two days," he said. ** I have some- 
thing very urgent to say, if you can spare me 
a few minutes.'* 

** I can spare you just half-an-hour/' said the 
clergyman . looking at his watch, his pale face 
and sunken eyes showing how his incessant 
labours were telling on him, '^ and then 1 must 
go to poor Mary fiiunden's, the third child died 
this morning, and I fully expect to find that 



MR. DRYDEN AT STARBY. 289 

she herself is sickeuing when I go back. She 
has made up her mind there is no escape for 
her." 

" Ah" . the Squire drew a long breath ; 
" that's just what I wanted to speak to you 
about. Don't you see, Brownlow, that this 
apathy, or fatalism, or whatever it may be that 
the people have about recovery is destroying 
them as much as the fever itself. I haven't 
spoken to the doctors, but I'm sure they would 
say so too." 

"Yes," j5aid the Rector, shaking his head, 
" we must all feel that ; but beyond our prayers, 
I cannot see any cure for it. Remonstrance 
only irritates them." 

Mr. Dryden did not answer, and they both 
went into the little study and flung themselves 
into chairs, overdone with the day's labour. 

The Squire felt disappointed ; he could not 
bring any tangible charge against his pastor, 
but he was oppressed, as we all are, when the 
weight of any care which ought to be more 
fitly dealt with by another rolls back on our- 
selves. He knew that it was impossible to be 

VOL. I. 19 



290 BLINOR DRYDBn's PROBATION. 

better, more self-denying than his companion, 
but he felt just tiow how great would have been 
the help of a more energetic and decided wiU. 
His moody reverie was disturbed by the doc- 
tor's entrance. 

"You're right, Brownlow," he said, as he 
came in ; " that woman Blunden is seized, and 
there's been such a previous pull on the system, 
that I expect it will make short work with her . 
she's insensible now ; but even when she comes 
round she will be far more trouble than the 
children. She looked on herself as doomed 
three days ago." 

" That carries out what I have been saying, 
Brownlow, and unless some way is found to stir 
uphopein these people, your remedies are useless." 

The Squire spoke with a sort of bitter vehe- 
mence that startled his companions. He was 
much less accustomed to scenes of death and 
suffering than they were, and it seemed to him 
impossible to be patient under such a visitation, 
that the progress of death must be arrested, and 
that they were all supine, if not worse, for not 
striving to battle with it. 



MR. DRYDEN AT STARBT. 291 

Mr. Brownlow looked sad and helpless ; the 
doctor seemed to be studying Mr. Dryden with 
the keen insight of his profession into peculiarity 
of temperament ; he saw how impossible it was 
for these two men to understand each other. 

" You mean," . he spoke to the Squire,. 
'' that some outward stimulus, some distraction, 
should be given to these poor creatures, but 
then, sir, it is too late to preach and exhort when 
the fever has got hold of them.*' 

" Well, we are all conscious of that." 

Mr. Dryden spoke angrily ; he did not see 
that the doctor was trying to put him on the 
right track ; the other went on as if the re- 
joinder had been courteously spoken. 

" Yes ; and therefore I agree with you, that 
something should be done beforehand. Stay, 
Brownlow, could you not have up some twenty 
men and women, and hold forth to them in 
your own garden. I think you were right to 
stop the church-going. It fed the fever, but 
no doubt something in that way would comfort 
them." 

Mr. Brownlow did not answer at once. 

19.2 



292 ELINOR drydbn's probation. 

Since his wife's death . ^he had always consulted 
her on all occasions . he had got into a habit of 
pondering deeply and silently any suggestion 
made by others ; judgment was twice as diffi- 
cult to form unaided by her tender yet firm 
mind. 

Mr. Dryden was silent too, he was very defi- 
cient in the inventive faculty ; he only felt in- 
tensely ready and willing to aid any scheme that 
might be proposed. 

The doctor left them and went on his rounds, 
and still the two men sate gloomily over the 
fire. At length the clei'ygyman rose and walked 
across to where his friend sate. 

" Forgive me," he said, *' for what must seem 
to you like negligence towards the souls in- 
trusted to me, and thank you for reminding me 
of my duty. I don't know how you found it, 
Dryden, but I'm not half the man I was when 
I had my Cecil. I begin to see now," he said 
reverently, " why she was taken away. Depend 
upon it, we. are all meant to walk alone, and if 
we will cling to props, why . why, they must 
be wrenched from us." 



MR. DRYDEN AT STARBY. 293 

He looked expecting some touch of sympathy 
from his widowed friend, but there came so 
dark a cloud over the Squire's face, so stern ^ 
glance from his eyes, that the clergyman stood 
hesitating and ashamed of the emotion he had 
betrayed to such a listener. 

Mr. Dryden got up from his chair and walked 
to the window; There were feelings at work in 
him which he felt his face might betray,; and he 
^id not care to submit them to observation. 
He cleared his voice harshly before he answered. 

" I dare say I seem cold and abrupt, but I 
was not so happy in my marriage as you were, 
Brownlow. I am not a man calculated to win 
a woman's love or confidence either." 

He faced round suddenly, and then spoke in 
his usual calm matter-of-fact way. 

" I think you were about to say you had hit 
on some plan for these poor people. I should 
be glad to listen to it." 

Mf. Brownlow started, his thoughts had 
been travelling far from the memory even of 
his dead wife. All the vague whispers and 
mysterious stories he had heard when first he 



294 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

came to Starby about Mr. Dryden's short and 
unhappy term of wedlock had thronged to his 
mind; Sir Stuart's confession, too, recurred, 
and set him wondering what had been the true 
secret that seemed to have shortened the poor 
lady's life and shed a lasting gloom over her 
husband's, but the Squire's words roused him. 

" Yes, I ought to have thought of it sooner. 
What do you think of my assembling the people 
in the Ash Glen every Sunday . those who can 
walk as far, of course ? The sea breeze that 
comes up the Glen would keep the air pure, 
and the distance would prevent any of the sickly 
from trying to join in the service." 

The proposal sounded like an inspiration, and 
it WSU3 quickly settled to carry it into execution 
on the next Sunday. 



CHAPTER IV. 



AUNT JANE ANN. 



Miss Jane Ann Brownlow had a decided 
attack of what she called 'Uhe fidgets." At 
their early dinner she had run the risk of dis- 
turbing both her brother's and Maurice's di- 
gestion by sudden and unexpected darts to the 
window, followed by a precipitate return to her 
chair, not venturing to confess the motive of 
her restlessness, lest her demure brother should 
repeat for the tenth time at least that their niece 
could not possibly arrive before three o'clock; 
so when Maurice asked what she was so eager 



296 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

about, she replied quickly that she had ''got 
the fidgets/' 

It is not fair to tell tales, but if Maurice had 
been closely questioned he would have said that 
the verb " to fidget" was one his good friend 
and sworn ally, Miss Brownlow, must have 
learned to conjugate early, there was so little 
repose about her, either mental or physical. 
Except for a certain restlessness in her large, 
bright, grey eyes, you would have thought so 
plump and comely a lady would have taken life 
easily. She had a massive square head and face ; 
the lower part of this (she was fast approaching 
middle age) had become rather too full, but the 
broad brow, well marked, though somewhat too 
sbaggy eyebrows, and finely cut nose and 
mouth, stamped the rest of the face as intel- 
lectual rather than sensual in expression. She 
must have been handsome once; her com- 
plexion was still very pure and transparent- 
looking, but the bright brown locks that had 
contrasted with it were grey, almost to white- 
ness ; the peculiar golden tint across them re- 
calling the sunshine that had once been there. 



AUNT JANE ANN. 297 

Her head-gear was quaint, but it suited her 
. a triangular piece of nnuslin, or lace, laid flat 
on her head, two of the comers hanging down 
in front, and the other behind, gathered in just 
between the ears, to keep it in place. Miss 
Brownlow was no friend to haberdashers; she 
spent very little on her dress at all . nothing on 
finery. Her lace was valuable, and had been in 
the family for generations ; but, with the ex- 
ception of a massive cornelian brooch . an in- 
taglio, bearing three heads of Augustus . her 
grey dress of some soft woollen stuff, was quite 
unornamented. 

Spite of the plump and rounded outline of 
her figure, there was a masculine abruptness 
both in her movements and her voice that had 
at first repelled Maurice. His notion of a 
woman was at present idealistic; and Miss 
Brownlow's hearty greeting, and warm, motherly 
manner on his first arrival, although they had 
excited his gratitude, had checked his sympathy. 
Boys are strangely contradictory, especially at 
sixteen; the very qualities they crave tor in 
others, if proffered too lavishly, offend their 



293 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

fastidious taste. Refinement with them, as in 
Maurice's case, is often a natural gift, hidden 
under a careless, and sometimes a homely man- 
ner. It might have been the reason that Miss 
Brownlow, spite of her good looks, and her 
small independence, was still single, that she 
had always had the frank cordiality towards 
men which suited her present age, although it 
must have been far less feminine younger ; but 
it is hard to make some women understand that 
men do not care to be sought, and are apt to 
suspect a motive in such warmth and in- 
terest in their pursuits and welfare, even where 
such suspicions are wholly undeserved. To those 
men whose female ideal is very pure and high, it 
is as if a goddess had stepped down from her pe- 
destal, to mingle with the vulgar herd of her 
worshippers. Women often do not miss the 
reverence they wilfully throw away ; and if their 
demeanour only re-acted on themselves, . it would 
be of less consequence, fiut then analogy steps 
in, and frequently the whole female society in 
which a man moves, is judged by the want of 
reticence of a few of its members. 



I 



i 



AUNT JANE ANN. 299 

Miss Brownlow reverenced mankind * most 
implicitly, although she had a way of laughing 
i: at their foibles, which used at first to make 

: Maurice's ears tingle ; but as years and educa- 

i tion had developed his mind and talents, the 

I * tables had been turned : and although the good 

I lady scarcely loved him as warmly as she did at 

first, from a secret uneasy consciousness that 
I his tact and good ta^te were greater than her 

own, she admired him both for his own sake, 
and as her brother's chefd'ceuvre in the shape of 
a pupil. She worshipped Erasmus, the sage of 
the family, kept his books in order . for, like 
many another sage, he was not the neatest of 
men . sympathised in all his pursuits, attended 
to his aquarium, brought up young nurseries 
of caterpillars, and watched over their subse- 
quent existence as fondly as a mother. 

Erasmus was as learned about insects and 
reptiles as in Greek and Hebrew ; and in his 
quaint, discursive talk, rambled from one subject 
to the other, more like a butterfly than the 
sober old moth that he was ; but start the sub- 
ject of the origin of words, or any topic involv- 



800 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ing a discussion of the difficulties of language, 
and you found at once the theme of attraction 
for the moth. He would persevere till he not 
only grew hoarse, but had also completely wearied 
out his listeners, spite of the recondite wisdom 
he displayed. 

His sister's restlessness had roused him out 
of his usual abstraction, and his clear blue eyes 
twinkled merrily as he exchanged a glance of 
mutual intelligence with Maurice. 

" Have you told Karse that you expect your 
niece to-day, Jane Ann ?" 

"Now, Erasmus, what provoking mar-plots 
you wise men are. I meant Maurice to be sur- 
prised ; and now " 

" Well . well, and so he will be. You need 
not say anything more, I suppose. He and I 
are going for a walk . are we not ?" 

The first words had been spoken with such 
unusual testiness, that his pupil looked up in 
surprise. Perhaps Mr. Brownlow thought it 
quite unnecessary that Cecil's visit should be 
made in any way important to Maurice. He 
looked upon her simply as a new scholar . a 



AUNT JANE ANN. 301 

fresh mind on which to experimentalise. The 
notion of any interest excited by the meeting of 
two young people of different sex under his 
roof did not stnke him as in any way remark- 
able. 

"Yes, it's all very well of Erasmus," said 
his sister, nodding her head gravely, as soon 
as the master and his scholar had departed ; " I 
suppose he thinks that it won't disturb that 
youth at his studies to have a lovely young 
creature like Cecil flitting about the house ; and 
she, of course, has been far too well brought up 
by that poor, dear, proper mother of hers to 
give any encouragement to a youth in an 
inferior position ; although, upon my word" . 
and here Miss Brownlow nursed her chin medi- 
tatively . "he's very good-looking, and most 
gentlemanlike . thanks to Erasmus ; not that 
the boy ever was vulgar, quite the reverse ; only 
there were little roughnesses and uncouth ways 
one scarcely notices now-. he was one of Na- 
ture's gentlemen, I suppose. Well, if I were a 
girl . I don't know . but I don't think I should 
have hked to have been shut up in a house with 



302 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Maurice Karse, if I mightn't have said * yes/ 
when he made love to me, with those wonder- 
ful eyes of his. Oh, dear me, there'll be a 
heart-ache somewhere. I wish Cecil could have 
gone to Mary, at Oxford." 

But Miss Brownlow soon brightened. 

She had a true love for her niece, and greeted 
her with a warmth that brought tears to Cecil's 
eyes . for she felt very sad and desolate, as she 
thought of her father in his lonely home. 

It had tried both faith and obedience too, to 
leave him exposed to the deadly infection ; for 
although the fever was only in its first stage, 
still she knew urgent cause alone could have 
decided him to insist on this separation. 

It was very comforting to listen to her aunt's 
sanguine views and bright talk. Miss Brown- 
low had the unwonted discretion to be sOent 
about Maurice; and as Cecil knew that her 
unde took pupils, she was not surprised to see 
him come into the drawing-room with a stranger. 

She looked at him as soon as they were all 
seated round the tea-table (where her aunt had 
presided for nearly thirty years, without ever 



AUNT JANE ANN. 303 

learning the secret of making good tea, from 
the difficulty she found of concentrating atten- 
tion when good talk formed a counter attraction), 
and decided that he was handsome, but very 
silent. 

Well he might seem silent. He was rapt 
far away in a cloud-like memory that he could 
not grasp distinctly. Had he dreamed, or where, 
in what other life, had he seen that virginal head 
. that pure, lovely face, so full of high purpose 
and deep thought? Suddenly he caught the 
word Flairs. Mr. Brownlow was telling his 
niece, that in a letter he had received that day, 
her father spoke of Mr, Dryden's resolution to 
devote himself to the people of Starby, and to 
isolate his own household at Flairs from the 
infection. Cecil had broken her journey, and 
stayed two days in Oxford with her aunt ; so 
this was fresh news to her. Her uncle was too 
much engaged in answering her questions to 
look at Maurice, or she must have remarked 
his unusual agitation. 

He flushed, and then turned pale again. A 
look of shame and confusion changing the whole 



804 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

expression of his face. Yes, he remembered 
now where he had seen Cecil Brownlow, for she 
must be the dream-child that had so haunted 
him in days gone by. It was her face that he 
had seen looking angel-like, as she lay swooning 
in the North Gallery at Flairs. And how had 
he chanced to see her there ? The hot glow 
seemed to scorch his eyes, as he remembered 
that he had been there by stealth . an unautho- 
rised intruder. He felt as if he could sit still 
no longer ; he must go away out of the house, 
till Cecil should have departed. Suppose Mr. 
Brownlow began to speak of his life at Flairs . 
to mention him as a poor dependant on Mr. 
Dryden's bounty. For a moment it seemed as 
if he could not bear it, as if he must be Cecil's 
equal ; but this feeling could not last long in so 
noble and self-possessed a mind. He told him- 
self that let his parentage be what it might, he was 
Cecil's equal, so long as he did nothing to disgrace 
the breeding and teaching bestowed on him . 
' for in his highest flights his most ardent longings 
after refinement . that seeking after the beauti- 
ful, not merely things of beauty, which is the 



AUNT JANE ANN. 305 

sure test of genius . he had never once felt 
ashamed of the link that bound him to. the old 
gamekeeper; so that no false feeling on that 
score troubled him now. Still, after he had 
calmed his agitation, there remained an unde- 
fined but unconquerable dislike to the idea of 
Cecil being made acquainted with his former 
place of abode. 

But Miss Brownlow had been watching him 
for some minutes, and now as he looked up and 
met her eyes, she laughed at him. 

" Really, Mr. Karse, I must say, considering 
that Erasmus and Cecil are burying themselves 
in butterflies, you might take a little compassion 
on me and honour me with some conversation. 
In the first place, I believe I quite forgot to tell 
you about the fever, didn't I ? It's a very good 
thing for you, young man, that you don't go 
home for vacations, or you see you'd have been 
there now. Why, my dear Maurice," she said, 
kindly, " is anything the matter ? you look all 
colours." 

*' Does that young lady . ^your niece I mean 
. know that I come from Flairs ?" 

VOL. I. 20 



306 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Maurice stammered and reddened in a man- 
ner that Miss Brownlow could only attribute to 
the disturbance created in his faculties by the 
presence of her niece, and following her usual 
bent of judging for herself, ipstead of consulting 
in some measure the feelings of those she wished 
to set right, she looked at him satirically for a 
moment, and then laughed. 

" No . I don't see how she can ; but I'll teD 
her directly if you won't look so conscious ;" 
and before he had recovered from his annoyance 
at her laughter, she turned to Cecil. 

" Cecil, allow me to present you to Mr. 
Maurice Karse, who is anxious you should 
know he comes from Flairs." 

Mr. Brownlow and Cecil turned round from 
the butterflies they were examining. They both 
looked surprised, but Erasmus looked vexed also. 
His sister knew as well as he did that Mr. Dry- 
den had thought it best they should only men- 
tion Maurice as Mr. Karse, without any details 
about his birth or connections, as if the young 
man should ftilfil his expectations and rise by 
his own exertions to a higher position, his 
humble origin might militate against him. 



AUNT JANE ANN. 307 

How could Jane Ann be so thoughtless ? 
He knew very well that Cecil had not the 
slightest clue to Maurice's identity with the boy 
she might perhaps have casually seen in her 
childhood ; and as he looked quickly at Maurice 
his annoyance deepened. 

He stood still, robbed of all self-possession by 
the revelation he had so desired to withhold^ and 
it was not all pride that made the wound so 
deep. It seemed as if Miss Brownlow*s words 
had opened a gulf between him and Cecil, which 
nothing could bridge. Should she ask and dis- 
cover his real position, to her he must ever be 
the dependant on Mr. Dryden, but for his bounty, 
his paid retainer ; for what could he else have 
done but take service as gamekeeper at Flairs. 

Cecil bowed to him in acknowledgment of her 
aunt's words ; but his constrained, confused man- 
ner checked her speech. Before Mr. Brownlow 
had made up his mind how to act . usually a 
long process . Maurice murmured some excuse, 
and left the room. 



20.2 



CHAPTER V. 



ROLAND MARKHAM's DETERMINATION. 



Adelaide Markham felt puzzled, and for so 
humble-minded a person, decidedly discontented. 
She was still under the spell that Elinor threw 
over all those who approached her ; but she was 
restive beneath its influence, and then as the 
uncertain swaying of her morbid mood turned 
another phase of mind uppermost, she thcugbt 
Elinor must be right, and that her cousin, James 
Fisher, was but an ordinary mortal atter all, 
while she had seen him with different vision. 

The sisters* talk beside Elinor's bedroom fire, 
on the night of the first introduction, had been 



ROLAND MARKHAM's DETERMINATION. 309 

short; but to poor Adelaide most UDsatisfkc- 
tory. 

She did not dare to ask direct questions, but 
she hovered near the subject, spite of her sister's 
apparent dulness and inclination to talk of her 
travelling experiences. She did not know that 
Elinor was watching her timid efforts with in- 
finite amusement, and partly from natural con-* 
tradiction, partly from a real desire not to wound 
her sister by disagreement, she was purposely 
avoiding mention of the evening visitor. 

But though Adelaide was timid, she was re- 
solute when once she had made up her mind 
that a thing was right to be done. To ensure 
true love between sisters, she felt there must be 
confidence, and a confession quivered for utter- 
ance now, if Elinor would but open a way for it. 
The young sister waited, growing more and 
more nervous and excited ; but at any rate, if 
all could not be said, just then, that she wished, 
she must do her duty by James . his presence 
must not be slightingly passed over, like that of 
some ordinary acquaintance. 

At last Elinor yawned very audibly . 



310 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

" Adelaide dear . it is getting very late/' 

" Yes, Elinor." Then in the hard, abrupt 
voice which will come to nervous persons when 
they broach a subject about which they desire to 
be specially pleasant, " You've not said how you 
like James Fisher." 

Elinor was very tired. Without even a glance 
upwards, which would have shown her Ade- 
laide's averted face and trembling lips, she 
said . 

** Oh, I'm quite disappointed. I expected 
something much less second-rate. He is vain 
and shallow." 

" Good-night." Adelaide's voice was choked, 
if her sister had not been too much absorbed 
in her own thoughts to notice it. 

She left the room quickly, as anxious to be 
free from Elinor's. presence as she had just now 
been to linger in it ; and running upstairs to 
her own room, she sat down to try and realise 
what had been said. Anger, or what she called 
just indignation, rose strongly . 

*' Elinor had no right to speak with contempt 
of any friend of ours ; if that is what she calls 



ROLAND MARKHAM*S DETEKMINATION. 311 

lady-like conduct, I'm glad I was never taken 
away from home to be made a lady of. Why 
James is our own cousin." 

And then the craving for the good opinion of 
others, which so weakened growth of mental 
power in Adelaide, and obscured the deamess 
of her judgment, reminded her how many 
people Elinor had seen and known, and how 
narrow was her own experience. 

Love argued on the other side, that she had 
been a coward not to defend James at once. 
After all, her sister was a stranger who had little 
claim on her beyond natural affection. 

But Elinor's influence was too potent for this 
mood to last with her timid, loving sister. If 
Adelaide could only summon courage to tell 
her the truth, her feelings towards James must 
change.* 

" Never mind," she said to herself next morn- 
ing, " I've done mischief once by abruptness. I 
must wait for an opportunity now." 

When he came again, and Elinor spoke more 
civilly to him than she had done before, he had 
scarcely a word or look for Adelaide ; but she 



312 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

did not care for this . she had begged him to 
propitiate Elinor, and was he not obeying 
her. 

Spite of the awkward silence about him, 
which she had found herself unable to break 
since that unlucky evening, she felt happier. 
She would be patient and reserve her confession 
until James should have grown quite into Eli- 
nor's favour. 

Gradually as the novelty of the home party 
wore off, Elinor began to find the quiet, unevent- 
ful life irksome, and to hail even Mr. Fisher's 
visits as a break in the long dull evenings. Her 
mother's affection had been very soothing at first, 
and between herself and her father existed the 
singular mutual attraction one sees in relatives 
#ho have lived much apart, and whose charac- 
ters are alike. 

They studied each other carefully, understand- 
ing motives at a glance, which to others who had 
known each for years, would have been undis- 
coverable. But the result was not equal : Mr. 
Markham's admiration of his daughter's talents 
and judgment increased daily, and she grew very 



ROLAND MARKHAM's DETERMINATION. 313 

. 

fond of her father ; but she was much cleverer 
than he was, and as this first restraint wore off 
she shrank from his laughing boasts of the clever 
strokes of policy in the way of making money 
and gaining the good opinion of the world, thit 
might be acquired by the careful wording of a 
sentence. It shocked her at first as something 
strange, although she had so often misrepre- 
sented things to serve her own purposes ; but 
she was young still, and she often felt that 
though she loved her father, and his open 
hearty manner best, her respect was still her 
Uncle Dry den's. One seemingly trifling cir- 
cumstance sometimes puzzled her : h^r father's 
talk was far more restrained in Adelaide's pre- 
sence than when alone with her ; but then her 
self-love satisfied her that this was but natural, 
and that parents are always most at ease with 
the child they love best. 

'* Poor dear mamma is brim-fuU of love and 
affection, but a man like papa requires the sym- 
pathy of equality of mind, and I am quite sure 
he cannot have that from either her or Ade- 
laide. Poor Addy ! I wish I could love her as 



814 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

she does me, but she should not talk ^ good ' so 
much ; if she only knew how it bores when one 
is planning and thinking, and I can't tell her 
so when she sits affectionately with her arm 
round me . oh dear me, I like home ; but it has 
its drawbacks. I begin to wish that assumptive 
Mr. James Fisher would come oftener ; at any 
rate he is a little variety." 

She stood thinking, and then began to cal- 
cuhte how many weeks there were to Easter, 
and to speculate on the possibility of persuading 
her Uncle Dryden to take a town house for the 
season, and permit her to realise some of her 
picturings. 

It was near dinner time, and for a wonder 
Elinor was dressed and down-stairs before either 
her mother or Adelaide, the Markham family 
had no unnecessary formalities about them, but 
scrambled down one after another, without much 
regard to punctuality. 

As Elinor stood before the fire, her handsome 
. silk dress rustling as she drew it up so as to 
warm each slender foot in its turn, her father 
camie in. 



ROLAND MARKHAM's DETERMINATION. 315 

*. Why, Nell, you have got the start of them 
to-day ; how well you look ; have you been for 

* 

a walk to get that bloom on your cheeks ?" 

" Yes, I went for a walk, mamma was afraid 
of the cold. Papa, I wish she had a carriage, 
she gets moped staying in-doors." 

This was said rather searchingly, for her father 
had boasted the day before when alone with her 
of some unexpected success he had met with in 
" shares," and with her supreme ignorance of the 
value of money, it seemed to her that her 
mother's position, both for appearance and 
comfort, would be greatly benefited by a car- 
riage. 

" I wish she had, * if wishes were horses,' . 
you know the end, don't you, Elinor ? No, my 
dear, we'll leave that for when you're mistress of 
Flairs ; bless my soul, we shall all have a fine 
time of it then . what's the use of shaking 
your head ? stuff and nonsense, Nell, you're not 
the girl I take you for if you're mock-modest ; 
you've only got to play your line easily now, and 
you may wind that precious uncle of yours round 
your finger." 



316 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

" You don't UDderstaDd Uncle Dryden, papa, 
he will never let any one manage him, besides, 
he has told me openly, that although as long as 
I live at Flairs he likes me to be called Miss 
Dryden, and regards me as his adopted child, 
still I am not to consider myself his sole heiress, 
unless I marry to please him." 

An ugly word was on Mr. Markham's lips, 
but he thought better of it, and only snapped 
his fingers. 

** You know as well as T do, Nell, that it*s 
nothing but the humbug of a miserly old bache- 
lor, for he's little else. If you don*t get Flairs, 
who does? You're next of kin after your 
mother, at any rate, unless you think he'd prefer 
Fred. Fred was not born when he took a fancy 
to you, or your nose might have been put out 
of joint. No . no, you'll be mistress of Flairs, 
linor, as safe as the bank, and you'll not forget 
your father nor your mother either, I know my 
dear, and may the time not be long in 
coming . " 

" Oh, papa, that seems like wishing for 
uncle's death." 



ROLAND MARKUAM's DETERMINATION. 317 

" And if I did," a dark shade gathered on 
Roland Markham's face, and completely altered 
its expression, " I should do no more than he 
has done ever since 1 married your mother. I 
hate Wentworth Dryden. I make no mouths 
of saying it, and I think he has acted a base, 
unnatural part in separating parents and child, 
as he has done, for his own ends." 

Elinor's eyes flashed now, her father's anger 
would have frightened a more timid woman, but 
there was no self-restraint in it . it was too 
much like her own to alarm her. 

" You seem to forget what Uncle Dryden has 
done for me, and even supposing he does not 
make me his heiress, he will settle a very hand- 
some income on me even if I don't marry as 
he likes." 

"As he likes? which means . I know the 
old tyrant, . that you exercise no choice in the 
matter at all, and will submit to be handed 
over like a lamb to any titled noodle whom 
he may select for you. Elinor, if you marry 
a man you don't care for simply to please 
your Unde Dryden, you'll be a fool. Marry 



818 ELINOR DRTDBN's PROBATION. 

a coronet and welcome to please yourself and 
your own ambition, but if you submit to be the 
slave of that . '* 

His wife's entrance with Adelaide stopped 
him, and prevented Elinor's angry reply, for 
she was disgusted beyond the power of imme- 
diate utterance, but disgusted far more by her 
father's rudeness and coarse words than by his 
ingratitude. 

Mr. Markham's vehemence seemed to have 
exhausted him, for he was very silent through 
the dinner, and in the evening went to sleep. 
Later when James Fisher came in and seated 
himself beside Elinor, his host apparently 
again dozed off, but it was only pretence, 
and as he watched the ' young man's efforts 
to engage his daughter's attention, and her 
consciousness of his adftiiration, a bright keen 
light glittered in Roland Markham's half- 
closed eyes, and his lips were pressed firmly 
together. 

" I swore to be revenged," he said, '* when he 
refused to call me brother, and I will be, by 



ROLAND MARKHAM's DETERMINATION. 319 

Jove ; the next generation of Dry dens shall 
have more Markham blood in them than Elinor 
has, or I'll know the reason why." 



END OF VOL. I. 
ELINOE DEYDEN'S PEOBATION. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE PODALIRIUS. 



Mr. Beownlow duly lectured bis sister^ re- 
ceived his sister's assurances of contrition and 
her promise to parry Cecil's curiosity, should she 
evince any about Maurice, and then felt himself 
at liberty to relapse into his abstruse studies 
and researches. Occasionally his mind might 
be said to go out of print . for there was no 
possible means of getting at it, so utterly had it 
the power of detaching itself from all physical 
connection. In some ways he was perhaps the 

1.2 



ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 



best instructor Maurice could have had; he 
reverenced genius although without it himself, 
and knew how to turn to account the highest 
flights ^ of the youth's imagination : but then 
again Maurice would have done better with a 
less learned, more methodical, and practical 
teacher, who would have had no sympathy with 
his dreams and extraneous pursuits. He was 
a very gifted youth, but considering that Mr. 
Brownlow had taken only one other pupil during 
the past two years, Maurice might have been 
forwarder than he was in learning. He was a 
passionate lover of music, and Miss Brownlow 
seeing this, had kindly volunteered aid in teaching 
him the necessary beginning, but she found that 
her pupil's taste far surpassed her own, and at 
the same time she saw that his facility in 
acquiring any melody that touched his fancy 
would render music for him a mere amuse- 
ment, instead of its affording him new diffi- 
culties to master ; besides this, his eager 
pursuit of natural science of all kinds, happily 
as it chimed in with his tutor's tastes, broke 
in constantly on the close habits of study, 



THE PODALIRIUS. 5 

which could alone repair the loss of early 
education. 

Maurice was never idle, but he was frittering 
away great mental power by using it in too 
many ways at once, fulfilling the old tniism. 
Erasmus was half aware that something was 
wrong, and had it been set him as a problem, 
or in the form of an ancient inscription, or the 
name of some originally shaped grub, he would 
probably have searched on till he discovered the 
clue to the mischief, but unless it were placed 
before him as study, he never could fix his 
mind long enough on any living subject of in- 
terest to elucidate it. 

Meanwhile, these pursuits and the reading 
they necessitated, helped to cultivate and en- 
large the youth's mind, and to keep him content 
with the quiet, uneventful life at his tutor's. 

"Well, now," said Erasmus after he had 
watched a moth through its dying agonies, 
and pinned it out carefully on the setting 
board, " it's one of the most beautiful dispensa- 
tions of Providence conceivable, that those ex- 
quisite creatures can't feel, are positively created 



6 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

without the suffering power inseparable from 
the higher orders of created beings; they've 
no more sentience than a turnip . Shake- 
speare was wrong, I think, for once" . his sister 
shrugged her shoulders ; " I am inclined to 
think" . he put his head on one side, wagging 
it gently while he spoke, " that those are the 
three gradations : man suffers physically, 
mentally, and instinctively ; animals suffer in 
their bodies and their instincts, having both ; 
but these creatures and their like do not even 
suffer in body." 

" And I believe you are mistaken," said his 
sister, " by your own very argument. Why, 
nature never jumps two stairs at once, one link 
always connects another ; so you must find me 
a class of creatures having body and instincts too, 
who suffer only in body, before I can admit that 

 

insects having only a body do not suffer at all." 
" Well, now, Jane Ann, my dear, you're a 
woman, and therefore could never argue reason- 
ably. I never argue with women, Maurice, 
there's no use in it ; while a man deliberates 
slowly on the next step to take, so as to keep 



THE PODAURIUS. 7 

his chain of reasoning intact and clear, she-. 
the female I mean . takes a bold leap over the 
marshy, unstable ground she was finding un- 
steady, to high and dry land quite on another 
side of the subject." 

'^ And I should like to know if it is not because 
a woman's wit is so dear and sharp that she 
sees straight a-head of her for miles, and can 
leap direct to her point, while a ponderous 
brained man is making his way inch by inch 
upwards ?" 

"But, aunt," said Cecil, who had grown 
amused by the discussion, "is there not more 
sureness in the course of the lumbering waggon 
than in that of the balloon ?" 

"There, now, Cecil, you're too high-flown 
for me. I don't mean Erasmus, because he's 
always right, and I was only teazing ; but men 
in general might learn a great deal more from 
women than they appear willing to do." 

" Are you sure they don't ?" said Maurice, 
. " only as we none of us like the help of any- 
thing weaker, we rarely give credit in the 
right quarter, although we may pocket and turn 



8 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

to future use the hints that irritate us when 
read or spoken." 

" You and Cecil are nice defenders of your 
respective sexes. Well, I suppose 1 must see 
to the safe keeping of this unfeeling beauty." 
And she walked away with the moth. 

Erasmus bustled after her in a few minutes. 
It was a rare specimen, with an unpronounceable 
name, sent him as a grub from Brazil, which, 
after much care and anxiety, he had succeeded 
in developing into the full-grown insect, and he 
could not trust it long out of his sight. 

It was not the first time that Maurice had 
found himself left alone with Cecil. After the 
first evening he had managed only to see her 
at meal times, but finding no reference made to 
Flairs, he gradually shook off his discomfort 
in the charm of her presence. She was so 
very sweet and bright, and there was such a 
thorough absence of frivolity or even conven- 
tionality in all she did and said, he found 
it impossible to resist her influence. Maurice 
thought, in his fanciful way, how like she was 
to the wild briar roses he had trained round the 



-A 



THE PODALIRIUS. 9 

gamekeeper's porch. It was a new, delicious 
sensation to be with a woman at all, for Miss 
Brownlow's ways and talk were so extremely 
masculine, that he spoke to her very much as 
he did to her brother. But to Maurice her 
niece was made of different clay. He felt 
almost timid in her presence ; and now, as she 
turned smilingly towards him, his heart beat 
quickly and the colour rose in his cheeks. 

" I should not have thought women's advice 
would irritate," she said ; " men seem generally 
to consider our notions ridiculous." 

" I don't think you would ever irritate any 
one." Maurice looked at her as she spoke with 
the sudden intense admiration that anything 
bright and fresh in nature is sure to kindle in a 
lover of the beautiful. 

" I am afraid you have forgotten how I teazed 
you about variety of occupation a few days ago." 

" No, indeed." He looked very earnestly at 
her. ** I have thought over it since, and I wanted 
to ask you to explain yourself." 

Cecil blushed. 

" I think you attach too much value to my 



10 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

opinion. I never thought of offering you advice ; 
only for myself, I am sure I could not acquire 
anything unless I gave all my soul, all my 
energies, to its mastery." 

Her eyes sparkled with enthusiasm, and 
Maurice remembered that when he first began 
to study at Flairs he had been filled with the 
ardour that inspired Cecil now. He kept silent, 
hoping she would speak again. It was exqui- 
site to watch the varying expression on her 
lovely face. 

But Cecil fancied he was vexed, although she 
had spoken in ignorance that her words applied 
so nearly to him. 

" I beg your pardon for preaching" . her 
clear, grey eyes looked softly up at him, and 
the colour deepened on her cheeks ; " but when 
I am alone with my father, I have a childish 
habit of speaking my thoughts out, giving them 
shape, perhaps, to hear how they will bear word- 
ing and criticism before I let them grow into 
opinions. I believe I was doing this just now." 

She smiled up in his face with a sweet, plead- 
ing look, and Maurice thought how bright life 



THE PODALIRIUS. 11 

would be if she were always beside him ; how 
her simplicity and earnestness would spur him 
on to what he felt he might become if he had a 
definite purpose to strive for. 

Her loveliness, the exquisite grace of her 
movements, and the gentleness which set him 
so completely at his ease, wrapped him in a 
witchery, like that of sudden falling off to sleep 
after long waking ; it is so blissful, it seems so 
short, we scarcely believe it has been. 

The almost chivalrous devotion of his manner 
towards her had freed the relations between 
them from restraint. Cecil had become greatly 
interested in her uncle's pupil, he was so tho- 
roughly unlike any one she had seen before. 
His changeful moods even increased this in- 
terest ; she wondered what caused the long, 
sudden reveries, or " mooning fits," as her aunt 
called them, which occasionally possessed him. 
It seemed to her that Maurice had mastered the 
pursuits which as yet her unassisted taste 
had led her merely to contemplate as future 
subjects of study or resource, and sometimes it 
seemed that all her favourite books and authors 



12 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

were Maurice's also. No wonder she thought 
that with so much similarity of taste and opinion 
they should enjoy each other's society. 

She did not understand that the strong sym- 
pathy which possessed her would have made 
any, the most frivolous talk, congenial ; but had 
she been vainer . more self-conscious . she must 
have become sensible of a peculiar influence 
exercised over her by Maurice. By degrees her 
arch sauciness forsook her when with, him ; she 
became subdued and thoughtful, or if he grew 
animated and eloquent, she would sit drinking 
in his words, as if she could never tire of list- 
ening. 

They were both almost silent now. Moment 
after moment slipped by, and still they were left 
together. It seemed to Maurice as if such 
happiness must be like Heaven. 

He lingered in the drawing-room on the pre- 
tence of finding some book of reference for his 
evening studies. He could have found it if he 
had tried, but then he must have gone away 
from Cecil, She had offered to help in his 
search, and every time she asked him any ques- 



THE FODALIRIUS. 13 

tion about it, and he turned to answer, their 
eyes met, and her sweet glances made his heart 
throb so wildly, that he was fast forgetting 
everything but the delight of gazing at her. 
Perhaps it was well that before the book was 
found, the door opened, and Mr. Brownlow 
almost rolled into the room ; his left hand 
plunged violently into his stiflF, grey hair, as if 
he were resolved to pull it all out, and his right 
holding a card-board box with a glass top, on 
which his eyes were fixed. 

" Here, Karse, my boy . Maurice, where are 
you ? Ah, my darling ! ah, my beauty ! did I 
ever think to have you perfect ? Well, to be 
sure, it is the greatest wonder . the most unex- 
pected . why, Maurice, I say . well, but you 
don't seem moved. You don't seem to see." 

He uttered the last words slowly, tapping the 
box gently with the forefinger of the hand he 
had withdrawn from his hair, which stood up 
wildly on end, as if alarmed at the danger it 
had escaped. 

" I beg your pardon, sir, but what is it ?" 
Maurice was still dreaming. Mr. Brownlow's 



14 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

entrance had been so sudden, that he had not 
realized it. 

" It ! Why, you incurious youth ! Cecil, 
have you no curiosity either ? It is the desire 
of my eyes . the lamented of my heart. my 
Fodalirius . my Podalirius, that I had given up 
for dead; and he must have emerged some 
hours, for see, his wings are full grown.** 

"He's very handsome," said Cecil, looking 
over her uncle's shoulder ; " but I saw plenty 
like him last year, when papa took me to Cam- 
bridge." 

" Plenty like him . plenty like my Podalirius ! 
Cecil, my dear, you're a woman, or I should 
have called you a fool. * I'd give you every tooth 
in my head, and both my eyes into the bargain, if 
you could show me an English Podalirius now- 
a-days. Do you think this beautiful creature" 
. he passed his hand caressingly over the box 
. " is a native ? Not a bit of it . not a bit of 
it ; he came over to me a few months ago from 
that frog- eating country over the water we call 
France, where one of the few natural produc- 
tions that surpass those we possess, is this rare 



THE PODALIRIUS. 15 

papilio. The papilio you mentioii is another 
sort of creature, first cousin to this, if you 
please ; Homer makes their namesakes brothers 
you* know; . Macbaon is a handsome, showy 
fellaw enough, but remark the creamy delicacy 
of these wings . the soft clearness of the grey 
streaking. Cecil, my dear, if you ever go mis- 
taking a Podalirius for a Macbaon again, you . 
you don't deserve to be called my niece !" 

He sat down, placed the box on the table, 
and wiped his forehead ; and then looked per- 
plexedly at a note, crumpled in the palm of his 
right hand. He smoothed it, read the address, 
and held it out to Cecil. 

" I quite forget how I came by it, my dear ; 
but it must have arrived some time ago, for I 
have been holding my Podalirius in that hand 
ever since I went away. I hope the delay is not 
of consequence." He coloured like a school-boy. 

The hand-writing was large and decided, but 
quite unknown to Cecil ; and even when sha 
opened the note, she had to look on to the sig- 
nature, before she could discover her corre- 
spondent. 



16 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

There was a troubled look in her face as she 
turned to her uncle. 

" It is from Elinor Dryden. Aunt and I met 
her out this morning. She tells me she is 
staying at her father's house, and she wishes 
me to call on her." 

But her uncle was blind and deaf just then 
to all but the increasing wings of his Podalirius. 

If Cecil had looked at Maurice^ she might 
have been struck by his changed face. 

He stood still, as rapt as his tutor from all 
passing distraction, by the strange memories 
the name of Efinor Dryden had evoked. 



/ 



CHAPTER II. 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 



Mr. James Fisher rang the bell at Mr. Mark- 
ham's^ and when the maid let him in, he lounged 
up to the drawing-room, without waiting for 
announcement, as if assured of welcome. 

It was cooling to this self-confidence to find 
that there was no one in the room to greet him ; 
but the check was only momentary. There 
was a looking-glass, and it is to some people as 
pleasant to contemplate themselves, as to look 
at others. 

The glass showed him a man of more than 
middle height, with square shoulders, but a ra- 

VOL. II. 2 



18 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

ther loosely built figure ; a head that promised 
much talent, and a face which, though supporting 
that promise in solidity and breadth of forehead, 
contradicted it by the uncertain, mean character, 
of the lower part of the face. The very way in 
which he shuffled up to the fire-place, and ar 
ranged his fair hair and whiskers, as if by stealth, 
gave a key to one part of Mr. Fisher's dispo- 
sition ; and this moral enervation was corporally 
developed in excessive laziness with regard to 
the business of ]ife. He professed himself a 
law student, waiting to be called to the Bar ; 
but besides living in chambers in the Temple, 
where he read novels, and smoked, he did not 
trouble himself in any way to advance his in- 
terests. He was an only child, and had just 
enough to live on sparely. How he managed 
to find money for luxuries was difficult to divine ; 
he certainly took as many meals at his friends' 
expense as possible, and this was not difficult. 
He was a very agreeable person, well read in 
light modern literature, and with a good deal of 
almost feminine taste in many ways ; and al- 
though men regarded him with a slight admix- 



"HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 19 

ture of contempt and distrust, he was a universal 
favourite with their wives and daughters . more 
especially the latter. He had that decided gift, 
or talent, which seems to ensure success among 
women . of rarely mentioning them in terms of 
praise to each other, and without in any way 
compromising himself, to make each think sHe 
was the only object of his admiration. He was 
not a special flatterer, but his usual manner was 
so lazy and indifferent, that it became impressed 
with a double charm when roused into actual 
homage ; and there was a tender melancholy 
in his handsome blue eyes, doubtless very trying 
to female susceptibility. 

But a rustling on the staircase announced 
Elinor's approach, and Mr. Fisher dexterously 
moved himself away from the looking-glass. 

She did not seem greatly pleased to see him, 
but his manner towards her expressed more than 
pleasure . there was mingled in it deep respect 
and hidden tenderness. 

He talked on indifferent subjects, while Elinor 
gave languid answers, turning away as she 
warmed her hands over the fire ; but as the door 

2.2 



20 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

opened and Adelaide came in, she looked round, 
curious to see the greeting between the cousins ; 
it seemed the reverse of that between James 
Fisher and herself. 

A bright smile lighted up the monotony of 
the young girl's face, and as she advanced she 
raised her eyes to his with a timid, loving look 
that made her prettier than Elinor could have 
thought possible ; it did not seem to move Mr. 
Fisher . he smiled and shook hands, but it was 
more the smile of welcome we give to an indif- 
ferent acquaintance, and something in it jarred 
Adelaide, ishe looked at him earnestly and en- 
quiringly. 

He did not glance round ; he knew that 
Elinor was watching, and he took good care not 
to meet her sister's eyes. For a moment Ade- 
laide hesitated and seemed inclined to leave the 
room again, then she sat down beside her cousin, 
although a constrained look told that it was an 
effort to do so. 

There was a slight silence, and then he asked 
Adelaide why she had given up her sing- 
ing. 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 21 

" I don't care to sing since I have heard 
Elinor ; sing, Nell, dear, won't you ?" 

Elinor hesitated ; she liked to show off her 
splendid voice to James Fisher, but she suspected 
her quiet sister of an innocent little ruse just 
then. 

She sang, however . better even than usual, 
and at first Mr. Fisher listened, but before she 
had finished she -saw, although she affected not 
to look away from the piano, that he and 
Adelaide were in earnest talk. She saw too, 
that her sister was flushed and animated, and 
that her cousin was either deprecating or deny- 
ing her assertions. 

She wished her song over . what could those 
two be so eager about . but just as she ended, 
her mother came in. 

" Oh, Elinor dear, have I lost your song ? you 
must give me another then . you know I may 
not hear you many more times," she said re- 
proachfully, for Elinor's discontented look was 
on her face ; " when once you leave us, who can 
say if we shall meet again ?" 

Elinor was touched by the tremble in her . 



22 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

mother's voice ; she turned round and kissed 
her, and then sang Mrs. Markham's two favour- 
ite songs, one after another, without further 
asking. 

Hitherto Mr. Fisher's admiration had been so 
evident that she had accepted it as a right with- 
out troubling herself to seek to please him, 
except by spending extra time and care in dress- 
ing for the evenings he was expected. It 
seemed natural that his manner should be more 
devoted and less intimate towards her than to 
the rest of the family . it was his homage to 
her superiority. 

But she felt surprised, and full of an uncom- 
fortable, new sensation when she left the piano, 
and saw that James Fisher went on talking to 
Adelaide, without even turning round to thank 
her for her song. As yet it had never fallen to 
her share to be second, and the feeling of slight 
was hard to bear. 

She seated herself beside her mother . an- 
swering at random, though she succeeded in 
looking interested. 

At last she asked her mother a question which 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER. 23 

she knew could not be answered without apply- 
ing to Mr. Fisher ; he turned round to Mrs. 
Markham, and his eyes rested on Elinor : she 
was in her favourite position, leaning against the 
corner of the mantel-piece in an attitude which 
showed perfectly the graceful lines of her figure, 
and the rich masses of hair coiled round the 
back of her head ; her face was averted, and Mr. 
Fisher felt something was wrong. He spoke to 
her . she gave a careless, almost haughty an- 
swer, without turning her head. 

Mr. Pisher forgot everything else ; he rose 
and went up to the fire-place. He under- 
stood women quite well enough to know that he 
must give Elinor time to recover herself, and 
also that he must not betray the slightest con- 
sciousness that she had taken offence. He asked 
her to sing again, and she said she was tired . 
but when a few minutes later her mother joined 
in the request she unbent her stateliness, and 
moved towards the piano, making it very 
plain that she was not going to sing to please 
him. 

He followed her and hung over her, turning 



24 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

the leaves and whispering rapturous words of 
praise, till carried away by the excitement of 
singing, and by the flattery which was becoming 
a necessary part of her life . she smiled up at 
him as she had not done yet. It has been said 
before that Elinor's smile had magic in itj it 
bewitched James Fisher out of all the forced 
devotion he had been paying, he thought her 
the most beautiful creature he had ever con- 
quered, and for the rest of the evening he re- 
mained chained to her side, while Elinor, glorying 
in the power she saw she exercised, had never 
felt herself in so charming a mood ; her mag* 
nificent eyes looked brighter than ever, a soft 
tinge of colour glowed through her clear, dark 
skin ; she was animated with such fire and 
vivacity that even her mother . usually so quiet 
and unobserving . decided that Elinor was fit to 
be a queen, certainly she was the most remark- 
able girl she had ever seen. 

She was in the midst of a racy description of 
a table d'hote scene she had been a witness to 
in her summer holidays, reproducing the airs of 
a superbly dressed Englishwoman, whose fluent 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 25 

German, and assumptive manner had impressed 
most of the company with the conviction of her 
extreme distinction, but who, when presently 
joined by her husband, proved to be the wife of 
Mr. Dryden's tailor . when her eyes rested on 
Adelaide. She was listening to Elinor's story, 
and trying to join in the laughter it excited, 
but effort was painfully apparent, her eyes were 
fixed and distended, and her face looked ghastly 
in its whiteness. 

Elinor did not trouble herself to reflect, she 
.stopped suddenly. 

" Addy, are you ill ? come nearer the fire. 
Whatever is the matter with you ?" 

Almost before the gaze of the listeners had 
been attracted to her, the blood rushed over the 
poor girl's face and temples. For an instant 
she seemed stunned by the shock of this public 
betrayal of her feelings, for like all of us when 
we have something to conceal, she fancied her 
secret written legibly on the blushes that would 
burn, spite of the suffocating efforts she made 
to repress them. She had thought herself so 
safe, sitting beyond the full range of lamp-light ; 



26 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

Elinor's words had surprised her unarmed, as 
defenceless as if suddenly awakened from 
sleep. 

But before either of them could approach her 
she had recovered . desperation came to help 
self-command. 

" Fm not ill, I'm quite well ; but I've some- 
thing to do for Fred . I had forgotten it." 

She was gone before either of them could 
speak. 

It all passed so quickly, that Mrs. Markham's 
suspicions were not roused to see anything un- 
usual. Elinor was not satisfied, but she pre- 
ferred keeping the matter quiet ; perhaps Mr. 
James Fisher's thoughts were most troubled . 
Elinor saw the uneasy watch he kept on the 
door. He lingered unusually long, although he 
knew the master of the house was not expected 
home, and although poor Mrs. Markham's eye- 
lids drooped, and she plainly found it hard to 
suppress a yawn. 

He lingered and lingered. Elinor wondered 
if he could be waiting for Adelaide to come 
back. At last she even grew tired of talking. 



f^ t ^*. 



J 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 27 



<. 



Addy's gone to bed, mamma," she said ; 

we shall see no more of her to-night." 

" Gone to bed ? without bidding good-night ?" 
Mrs. Markham tried, spite of her drowsiness, 
to rouse to the consciousness of something un- 
usual. Elinor saw it. 

" Don't you trouble about her, mamma. I 
saw she had a head-ache. I'll go into her room 
and see that she is all right, if you will promise 
me not to worry yourself." 

Although Mrs. Markham was sleepy, the 
little common sense she had, had not deserted 
her, and Elinor had been quite long enough at 
home for her mother to have . observed that 
although she was always ready and willing to 
employ the rest of the household in ministering 
to her comfort, she maintained her guesti^hip too 
implicitly to inconvenience herself for others. 
But before she could dispute her daughter's ar- 
rangement, Mr. Fisher came up to them and 
said " Good-night." 

He would not allow his cousin to ring the 
bell ; he had no idea^ it had been so late, the 
servants no doubt were in bed ; at any rate he 



28 ELINOE DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

would not trouble them ; surely he could let 
himself out. 

With what a strange stealthiness he dos^d 
the drawing-room door, and then crept down- 
stairs slowlv, and with almost the velvet tread 
of a cat. He paused on the last landing and 
listened ; the clock on the kitchen stairs beat 
with the loud distinct throbs that seem to tell 
it is conscious of having the whole surrounding 
atmosphere to itself. Again he listened in 
tently. 

" Yes, the servants are all gone to bed/' he 
said to himself. " She is gone too." 

He drew a long sigh of relief, and came still 
carefully, but less noiselessly, down the last 
stairs. 

Just before he reached the bottom he stopped 
suddenly and listened ; was it fancy, or had he 
heard the slightest possible click in the handle 
of the dining-room door ? 

It must be fancy . there lay his hat on the 
hall bench ; in another moment he should be 
safe in the street. 

But before the thought had passed, the dick 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER," 29 

was repeated, and Adelaide Markham stood 
facing him. 

She was very pale, but there was so much 
deep sorrow in her face, that the irritation he 
felt at sight of her was subdued as he looked 
closer. 

His first impulse was to hold out his hand and 
say " Good-night ;" Adelaide shook her head. 

" I will not keep you long, if you will come 
in here, James." 

As he followed her, he thought how differently 
Elinor would have . spoken. She would have 
commanded and he should have obeyed in a 
rapture of delight, and yet it was something to 
know that he was all in all to this trembling, 
delicate-looking girl. 

She began to speak at once, as soon as he 
had closed the door. She was afraid he would 
try to escape her. 

*' James . I want to tell you something. Per- 
haps I had better have done it before ; but it 
seemed so mean and unworthy to grudge Elinor 
your liking . but . but . " 

" Addy, my dear child !" . he took her hand 



30 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

caressingly between both of his, . " what is all 
this you are making yourself miserable about ? 
. some sad delusion, I am sure. Come, tell 
me what is the matter/' 

She loved him so very dearly, that his quiet, 
calm words . for the sight of her growing agi- 
tation restored his self-control . seemed to con- 
vict her for an instant of exaggerated fancy; 
but the memory of facts was too recent. 

" I don't want to complain," . she tried to 
keep down her sobs, and partly succeeded, al- 
though large, swelling tears would blind her 
sight until they fell heavily over her cheeks on to 
his hand as it held hers . " but is it not better 
to have a clear understanding?" He tried to 
interrupt her, but she dared not listen again. 
She knew she should be robbed of all power to 
say what she felt must be no longer delayed. 
" Please let me speak, James . indeed I must," 
she went on fast, the colour rising in her pale 
cheeks, with eagerness, for she scarcely believed 
he would let her say all she wanted. " I always 
knew, when she came . your love must change ; 
.I think you have only cared for me because 



"how happy could I BE WITH EITHER." 31 

you have known nae a long time, and because 
there has been no one else here to care for, as a 
companion. Hush !" she laid her other hand 
on his arm, " I am not jealous of Elinor . it h 
only natural, it is perhaps a thing that must have 
happened, that you have become as fascinated 
by her as tfie rest of us have. But," . ^she took 
her eyes off his face, for she knew what she had 
to say conveyed reproach, and she loved him too 
well not to shrink from the chance of wounding 
him, . ** if you do love her, James, I should like 
you to say so openly to me . then . then . there 
could be no fear of any misunderstandings be- 
tween you and me again." She drew a deep 
breath, for the hardest part was said, and yet 
there was something still . she longed to ask 
him to give up the tender looks, the caressing 
words he had bestowed on her this very evening, 
when during Elinor's first song she had tried to 
come to some explanation with him, and he had 
soothed her into silence. 

But this was very bitter to her weak human 
nature, even though reason said these things 
were but seemings, and she would be happier 



82 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

and better without them. How could she by her 
own act banish them for ever ? She dared not face 
a future without his love . for what else had she 
been living all these months ? But this Spartan 
eflFort was spared her. 

James Fisher clasped the other hand with its 
fellow, and drew Adelaide close to him . 

" My poor, dear girl, you are letting the mor- 
bid fancies I warned you against grow till they 
destroy your better judgment. Did you not, 
yourself, before your sister's arrival, ask me to 
care specially for her as your sister, and after- 
wards, when you had seen her, you told me she 
required a great deal more attention and observ- 
ance from men than you did, because she had 
always had it. Surely , my own dear little Addy, 
you are not jealous if I try to please her in 
obeying you, and then get drawn on by Elinor's 
amusing talk to pay her sometimes too exclusive 
attention." He stooped and kissed her forehead. 
It was a rare mark of affection, for they scarcely 
ever met alone, and Adelaide blushed and trem- 
bled, with the strange mixture of fears and 
pleasure that thrilled through her. " I suppose 



"how happy could I BE WITH EITHER." 83 

all women, even the best of them, are alike," he 
said, smiling ; " even my Adelaide is a little jea- 
lous." 

" Oh, no, indeed." 

But he went an . " It is not the women that 
are loved the best who get the most attention 
and devotion before others; their very good 
qualities prevent them from exacting it. Haugh- 
tier, more capricious natures must be waited 
on and studied and flattered, although they 
exhaust patience and seldom command re- 
spect." 

After all, spite of her determined self-abnega- 
tion, it was very healing to her wounded heart that 
this slight shadow of blame should be cast on 
Minor. She wondered it had never struck her 
that there were two sides to the question, and 
that Elinor might have so tried to engross his 
attention, that without being neglectful he had 
no choice left. This new light spread fast over 
the gloom of her sorrow, and when he whispered 
tenderly . " You quite see what I mean . do you 
not, love ? and you'll not go on encouraging these 
foolish fancies, which must make us both un- 

VOL. 11. 3 



84 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

happy " . Adelaide felt that she had been unkind 
and unreasonable, and that James was all that was 
excellent and forgiving. She said so with a fiill 
heart as she wished him good-night. He took 
an affectionate farewell, without answering her 
words, but his face worked uneasily as he walked 
towards his chambers in the Temple. 

Adelaide went back into the room and took 
her candle, then carefully glancing round her she 
closed the door gently and went upstairs. There 
was a look of peace^ of content, on her face now 
that had not been there lately. She was wholly 
distrustful of herself, but she never doubted 
others. She did not attempt to examine or sift 
her lover's conduct ; there might have been an 
underlying consciousness that it would not bear 
it ; but she did not realise this. She could and 
would trust hini implicitly . there was no use in 
looking back, when it was so happy to look for- 
ward. She had to pass Elinor's room on her 
way to her own, and she stopped before the 
door. Would it not be better, more honest, 
more sisterly even, to say plainly that she was 
engaged to James Fisher ? No, she must not 



"how happy could I BE WITH EITHER." 35 

say that. James had always objected to the 
word; he said they must rest content with 
" understanding each other ;" and besides, he 
had forbidden her to utter a word about it till he 
was able to speak openly to her father. But 
that was when no one else's happiness was risked 
by silence. Now it was very diflferent. Think- 
ing of him as Adelaide did, it seemed to her 
that Elinor would very soon love him dearly, if 
she were not warned ; and besides, if her'sistec 
knew the terms they were on, would she try 
to attract him, as she had done to-night ? 

But this last reason for speaking seemed so 
mean and selfish, that she almost resolved to 
pass on in silence; and then it suddenly oc- 
curred to her that if she withheld all confidence 
from Elinor, she was not treating her like a 
sister in this matter. Besides, she knew very 
well that Elinor had seen her agitation; how 
much better to be open and honest at once. 

She went into the room quickly, afraid of 
changing her mind again ; but Elinor was not 
there. The French maid she had engaged since 
her arrival was sitting half asleep in her young 

3.2 



36 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

mistress's easy-chair. Adelaide did not stop to 
ask questions, but went swiftly upstairs to the 
little room she now shared with Mary. 

Elinor was sitting shivering, in the fireless 
room, wrapped in a blanket she had snatched 
from the bed. 

" Oh, you tiresome child ! I thought you were 
never coming, and I promised mamma to see if 
you were ill or not. Now, Addy, you'll please 
to tell me the truth ; why did you go off in that 
white way this evening, making us all feel ner- 
vous ?" 

Adelaide had not counted on questions, and 
this was a very^ difficult one to set aside. She 
had not intended to touch on the grievance of 
the evening, but to let her sister draw what in- 
ference she chose from her confession. 

She hesitated ; but her straightforwardness 
helped her through her shyness. 

" Fm so glad you're here, Nell dear ; only we 
must whisper, or we shall waken little Mary. I 
went into your room to look for you . IVe 
something to tell you, Elinor." 

A guilty feeling brought the colour into her 



w^mmmmsm^t^^^i^m^^^sm^^^^^s^.i ,.i . w.iww 



"HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 37 

r 

sister's face. She was afraid of what Adelaide's 
next words might be. 

" And I've something to tell you. I don't 
think it is proper for my younger sister to go 
off apparently to bed, while all the time she is 
holding stolen interviews downstairs." 

It was impossible to know whether she spoke 
in play or earnest, but the way was smoothed 
for Adelaide's next words. 

" Don't you, Nelly, dear ?" She clasped her 
sister's arm with both hands, and laid her cheek 
on her shoulder, so as to escape the fixed gaze 
Elinor bent on her. " But you would not think 
it wrong or surprising, if I had told you, as I 
ought to have before, dear . but I was silly and 
afraid . that James and I are. " she stopped, 
for Elinor suddenly straightened herself, and re- 
leasing her arm, looked at her steadily . her 
eyes flashing. 

"Adelaide, do you mean that you are en- 
gaged, and that you and all the rest have been 
keeping it a secret from me? It is the un- 
kindest . I might say the basest . conduct I 
ever knew of." She went on passionately; 



38 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

surprise, mortified vanity, and an uncomfortable 
sense of having been duped, lashing her on into 
one of the ungovernable tempests that still pos- 
sessed her when her pride and self-love were 
deeply wounded. **No, Adelaide, I must go 
now; don't attempt to stop me; it is useless 
to affect sisterly confidence, when you let me 
suppose I could read your whole heart, and yet 
have been keeping all it held a secret." 

If Adelaide had not been frightened she 
must have smiled as Elinor swept towards the 
door, still wrapped in her blanket, with the 
manner of a Medea. But the poor girl had 
never seen any woman in such a passion before, 
and she only felt how much blame rested on 
herself for giving pain to Elinor. 

" Stay, Nell, dear . pray, pray listen : we are 
not really engaged, and no one knows anything 
about it, . we only understand each other." She 
went on more quietly as she saw her beginning 
to listen ; " and James said I must not breathe 
a word to any one." 

" Then why does he allow you to tell me ? 
ril have nothing more to say to him/' 



" HOW HAPPY COULD I BE WITH EITHER." 39 

She spoke very haughtily, for she was furious 
at the deceit practised on her by Mr. Fisher. 
He had, then, so misinterpreted her condescen- 
sion this evening as to think it better to permit 
Adelaide to give her this warning, to prevent 
her own affections from becoming too far en*- 
tangled : it was^ indeed, a piece of merciful con* 
sideration. Oh, if she could see him that in- 
stant and relieve herself of the scorn . the just 
wrath that was swelling her heart, till she felt 
nearly stifled. 

'* He has not allowed me* I am not sure he 
will like it when I tell him what I have done ; 
only it seemed as if I must, Elinor." 

Elinor had calmed slightly, but she was still 
too much excited to think of what she said^ 
and it was a relief to vent her wrongs on some 
one. 

'^ You would not have said a word about it if 
you had not been jealous, Adelaide; afraid . be- 
cause I tried to be kind and cousinly to . to 
James Fisher" . it cost some trouble to speak 
of him civilly . " made an effort, indeed, to do 
so . that I wished to attract him to myself* 



40 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

You never made a greater mistake ; he is the 
very last person who would take my fancy. 
But there is one thing I wish to say" . she 
had again turned towards the door, and now 
looked back at Adelaide, who stood shrinking 
beside Mary's bed, feeling there was too much 
truth in EHinor's words for hereto deny them . 
" don't repeat to James Fisher what you have 
been telling me." She paused a moment to 
find a more valid reason than the first that had 
occurred to her rapid mind. " If neither papa 
nor mamma know of this arrangement, it seems 
much better to keep it secret from every one. 
I am a careless person in some ways, and if he 
knew what you have told me, I might perhaps 
find myself talking to him about you before 
mamma, and then think how she would be 
wounded to hear it from me first. I sha'n't go 
to bed till you have promised me this." 
" But I always tell him everything." 
" Oh, you silly child, he'd love you much 
better if you didn't. He's just the man who 
would prefer a woman who could manage her 
own mind and his into the bargain. If you 



"how happy could I BE WITH EITHER." 41 

lean on James Fisher, Addy, he'll soon get tired 
of you. Good night . no, no, I'm not angry with 
you now, but I hate scenes and explanations" . 
for Adelaide tried to throw her arms round her, 
looking utterly penitent and wretched. " Make 
haste, and get into bed as fast as you can, or 
you'll look as pale as a ghost to-morrow, and 
that wretched little Mary is awake." 

Adelaide could not go to sleep so easily ; it 
was hard work finding out who had been right 
and who wrong, through this, to her, strangely 
eventful evening. It was much the easiest, and 
she believed the best way, to take all the blame 
on herself. She felt heavy-hearted ; her happi- 
ness with Elinor was disturbed : although both 
of them might keep from mentioning the sub- 
ject, still it must lie there. 

Elinor might have contrasted Adelaide's bed- 
chamber with her own warm, comfortable room, 
with its bright fire and toilet candles, standing 
ready lit on the pretty little table which her 
sister had decorated with muillin and lace trim- 
ming in her honour, but it never occurred to 
her to trouble herself about the sacrifices made 



42 ELINOR DRYDEn'S PROBATION. 

for her by others, neither did it occur to her 
now as she sat moodily in front of the fire while 
her maid uncoiled her magnificent length of 
hair, that she had been making her sister mise- 
rable to gratify her own vanity. She only in- 
veighed mentally against Adelaide's folly in 
having entangled herself with a man without 
any prospects, and who she believed did not 
really cafe for her, while as to him . she was 
obliged to turn her thoughts forcibly to another 
subject to maintain even outward self-control. 

The lively French girl who stood behind her 
brushing her hair made several efforts at con- 
versation, but in vain ; and when her mistress 
dismissed her, she declared to herself that 
" Miss Dryden, etait d'unefierte'^ her shoulders 
supplied the rest of the sentence as she went 
away shrugging them nearly to her ears. 



CHAPTER III. 

RIVALRY. 

"Miss Dryden and Miss Markham," said 
Bunce, Mr. Brownlow's boy, throwing open the 
door of Miss Jane Ann's sitting-room. 

Now Bunce had no business to have done^ 
as his mistress would have said, "any such 
thing." 

He knew as well as boy could know that the 
drawing-room was the place for strangers he 
had never seen before ; for albeit a methodical, 
praise-worthy person in the way of keeping 
things and folks strict and straight, Miss Brown* 
low dearly loved to surround herself in her own 



44 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

den with litter of all sorts, from loose sheets of 
MS., for she indulged in scribbling, to baskets 
full of grey flannel petticoats for the poor. But 
then Bunce, or Buttons, as he was sometimes 
called, was a self-willed youth of fifteen ; his 
mistress had, as he considered, injured his dig- 
nity by telling him that morning he was a very 
careless monkey for breaking a window, and he 
took his revenge now. 

" Bother the boy !" 

Miss Brownlow could not suppress the ex- 
clamation. She was setting a despatch box of 
her brother's to rights, and the table was strewn 
with heterogeneous heaps of cork, pins, the 
skins and outer coverings of chrysalides, stray 
wings and legs of beetles and other insects, 
lumps of camphor, . all the refuse of last year's 
collection. 

As Cecil came forward to greet her visitors 
while her aunt scrambled the rubbish into a 
heap, even Elinor, who rarely admitted the 
beauty of others, was struck by her charming 
face and manner. 

Miss Jane Ann was enchanted with Elinor ; 



RIVALRY- 45 

anil as usual, when she had made any new or 
pleasant discovery, her impulsive nature knew 
no rest till every one else was aware of it. 

She jumped up suddenly. 

" Excuse me, my dear, I'll be back directly.'* 

Elinor thought she must be a little crazy. 
She turned to look at Cecil, who was telling 
Adelaide of her uncle's noble self-devotion to 
the inhabitants of Starby. 

Tears glistened in the girl's eyes as she 
spoke, and Elinor's conscience pricked her a 
little. She had scarcely thought of Uncle Dry- 
den's safety, or that he was incurring any spe- 
cial risk. 

But now Miss Brownlow came rushing back, 
followed by her brother. 

The sage bowed profoundly to his patron's 
niece ; but, as Cecil at once saw, he was think- 
ing of something else. He shook hands with 
the sisters, and then seemed not to know exactly 
what next was expected of him. 

" We won't keep you, Erasmus, for I know 
you're busy. But now, do tell me, Miss Dry- 
den," she caught his hand, and turned him 



46 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

round full face to Elinor ; " did you ever see 
two brothers so unlike? It is wonderful, 
isn't it? Ah, but it's a long while since you 
saw John Brownlow . isn't it, now ?" She had 
become dimly conscious that it was not quite 
well to allude to Erasmus's superior looks before 
John's daughter; so she released her brother 
from Elinor's inspection. 

He roused up sufficiently to ask how her 
uncle did, and to inquire for Mr. and Mrs. 
Markham. With all his abstraction, he was 
more alive to the courtesies of life than his 
voluble, ready-witted sister was. He began to 
perceive, also, that Miss Dryden was handsome ; 
and he soon discovered, as every one else did, 
how very easy it was to talk to Elinor. She 
had quite the art of making les frais of a con- 
versation, without taking the lion's share of it ; 
and Erasmus, now wakened up, found himself 
in the midst of a lengthy account of his first 
impressions of Paris, when be suddenly saw the 
time by his sister's clock. 

^' Bless my soul, Jane Ann, that clock's surely 
wrong !" He had left off in the middle of a 



RIVALRY. 47 

sentence, and began tugging at an old gold 
watch, nearly as large as a bun, which had be- 
longed to his great grandfather. "Dear me, 
dear me, I hadn't an idea it was getting on so. 
You will receive my excuses, young lady . stern 
duty calls me" . he made quite a courtly bow 
to Elinor ; " the charm of your society has made 
me oblivious that I ought to have been at the 
British Museum by this time ; my young friend 
will be waiting for me/' 

" What can you and Maurice be going to do 
at the British Museum again to-day ?" Miss 
Brownlow was very much excited, or she would 
scarcely have called Erasmus to account before 
strangers. 

He looked rather surprised. 

" Well, my dear, it was the last visit that has 
caused this. We then saw" . he raised his 
finger and looked round, as if addressing an 
audience . "among a wondrous diversity of 
coleopterse, two specimens, which I maintain to 
be wholly and totally distinct . the Ilyhius aler, 
and the Dyticus dimidiatus . whereas my 
young friend persists, with all the ardour and 



48 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

pertinacity of youth, that we saw but one insect 
. the Dyticus^ and that what I noticed was 
merely an insignificant specimen of the same 
beetle. Now I am surprised" . Erasmuses eyes 
sparkled, and he looked as eager as if the youth- 
ful qualities just named were not wholly confined 
to his pupil. He was close beside Elmor, 
and he grasped her arm, to enforce a hearing. 
" I am very much surprised to find that such a 
youth as Maurice Karse, with sense enough to 
give preference to the study of Coleoptera, over 
that of the more showy and attractive Lepidop- 
tera, should fall into so superficial an error. 
But I must away, ladies . I go to convince 
him.'* 

This time he really did go . in such haste, 
that Elinor could not put the question that had 
been hovering on her lips ever since she heard 
the name of bis pupil. 

But directly the door was closed, it came. 

" Did not your brother say, Miss Brownlow, 
that his friend's name was Maurice Karse ?" 

" Yes ; he is his pupil." 

" His pupil, oh ?" She paused, as if not 



RIVALRY. 49 

quite decided on the prudence of saying more. 
" There used to be a boy of that name at Flairs, 
but this must be a different person/' 

Elinor's voice sounded so strangely meek, 
that Adelaide looked round at her in surprise ; 
but they were sitting beside each other, opposite 
to Miss Brownlow and her niece, so that she 
could see her sister's face. 

Miss Brownlow looked up and down, and 
then at Cecil. There was no way of escape. 
She must tell the truth, and caution Elinor. 

She spoke in a stage whisper : . 

** Yes, it is the same, only your uncle, Mr. 
Dryden, does not wish anything special to be 
said about it ; therefore, perhaps, if you were to 
see him, or speak of him, you would not ay I 
had mentioned it. He's a charming youth, 
and a thorough gentleman." 

EHnor's eyes had followed Miss Brownlow's 
when she glanced at Cecil. The fair, earnest 
face had a slightly troubled expression, and now, 
as she darted another rapid glance, she saw 
a deep flush, either of confusion or vexation, 
overspreading it. The spirit of intrigue, born in 

VOL. II. 4 



50 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Elinor, and nourished by the talk and reading of 
her French governess, sprang up eagerly now on 
the scent of what she fancied was a discovery. 
Here was a romance far inr)ore interesting than 
Adelaide's. This quiet, sweet-looking, lady-like 
Cecil was certainly in love with the cousin of 
the gamekeeper at Flairs. She must, indeed, 
have refined taste. 

Mingled with her sarcastic contempt was a 
feeling of injury. She had a prior riglit of 
interest in Maurice to any one. Ah, and if he 
saw her again, this would vindicate itself. She 
must be very careful not to betray her intimacy 
with him . he, for his own sake, would be mute. 
But how very strange her uncle's silence had 
been. She felt a sudden, incomprehensible 
dislike to Cecil : she spoke almost vehemently 
as she answered Miss Brownlow. 

" Indeed ! He must have altered very much 
since I remfiembcr him. He was quite ordinary 
and common, then." 

While she spoke the words, she knew, al- 
though they might be literally true, they were 
really false, and that there never could have 



RIVALRY. 51 

been anything *' common" about Maurice Karse ; 
but she was too much annoyed to be just, and 
she wanted to crush something like shame into 
that mock- modest girl, who had so far forgotten 
herself as to fall in love with a gamekeeper's lad. 

To her utter amazement, Cecil turned and 
looked her full in the face, with a sdf-possession 
she could not have maintained, had Eljnor^s 
surmise been a true one. 

" I am surprised at that" . she spokfe 
quietly ; " Mr. Karse seems such a very gifted 
person, that I should have thought he must 
always have been remarkable." 

"Yes, he's very clever." Miss Brownlow 
saw how Elinor's face had darkened and con- 
tracted, and she tried to snK)oth matters. " Of 
course Erasmus has done wonders for him. 
He was very different, certainly, when he first 
came here ; but if you knew him. Miss Dryden, 
you would think him, I dare say, as charming 
as we do . he's quite a pet of mine. By-^the- 
bye, I dare say he'd like to see you ; he's so 
fond of your uncle." 

" Oh, no, thank you ; I don't suppose he'd 

4.2 



52 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

care about it. I should rather fancy" . Elinor 
gave another quick glance at Cecil, who sus- 
tained it unflinchingly ; '^ that he would not 
care to be reminded of Flairs, if he is as much 
changed as you say ; besides, I really know 
nothing of him. But come, Addy ;" she rose, 
and went up to Miss Brownlow . " we are mak- 
ing quite a visitation, we must really say good- 
bye" . she forced her face into a smile as she 
approached Cecil, who had flushed almost an- 
grily at her last sentence. " Good-bye, Cecil, 
we must try and be good neighbours when I go 
back to Flairs. It seems so very long since we 
have seen each other." 

It was such a relief when she went away. 
Cecil had never felt her gentle nature so 
thoroughly stirred. Elinor had the peculiar 
faculty common to both bad and good people of 
rousing strife in the hearts of others ; a chronic 
acerbity of manner will do this, and a nervous 
want of self-control also, but as frequently it is 
the bitter spring beneath, the secret, perhaps 
unknown jealousy, the want of charity which 
prompts us not to let our neighbour think too 



RIVALRY. 63 

well of him or herself, which creates that indes- 
cribable atmosphere of iDtercourse from which 
he goes away sore, ill-used, far more disposed to 
be vain and self-asserting than as if he had been 
more genially treated. 

Cecil found her ideas in a tempest, whirled 
round and round with indignation at what she 
felt was unjustifiable pride and presumption. 

She thought to herself how different Elinor's 
own lot in life would have been but for her 
Uncle Dryden, the contrast of Adelaide Mark- 
ham's plain dress and quiet manner beside her 
showy stylish sister, had struck her forcibly. 

But Cecil's anger never lasted, and she smiled 
now at the result her own strictures had led to ; 
the words she had spoken of Maurice Karse 
would have applied almost equally to Elinor 
Dryden ; in any sphere of life she must always 
have been remarkable. And her dislike would 
have been subdued, at any rate as much as was 
in the power of her weak human nature, if her 
aunt had been judicious. 

" What a fascinating person Miss Dryden is 
.so clever too ; she is positively witty at times. 



54 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

How charmed your Uncle Erasmus was, and no 
wonder/' 

Cecil was surprised at her own cross contra- 
dictory feelings. She could not speak heartily, 
and so she remained silent. 

Her aunt glanced up quickly . she saw clearly 
^ough how the matter stood, so she told her- 
self. Cecil was a very sweet girl, but after all 
she was ** country," and had some provincial 
narrow-mindedness. There was almost a foreign 
ease about Elinor's manner which had alarmed 
her niece's simplicity ; it would be well to point 
out the advantage of such an acquaintance. 

" It will be very pleasant for you, my dear 
child, when you return to Flairs, to have so 
agreeable a neighbour ; she will brighten up the 
whole county, or I am much mistaken." 

.' She is a very stylish person," and there 
Cecil stopped, feeling too unlike herself, and too 
dissatisfied at what she considered her own 
jealousy of Elinor Dryden, to be an agreeable 
companion for her lively aunt. 

Most fortunately some fresh visitors, shown 
thds time into the drawing- rbom> required Miss 



RIVALRY. 55 

Brownlow's presence, and she and Cecil did not 
meet again till tea-time, when Maurice and Eras- 
mus maintained so unbroken a discussion on the 
subject of water- beetles, that Elinor's visit was 
forgotten. It was amusing to see how far more 
cool and self-possessed the young disputant was 
than the old one ; while Erasmus reddened and 
spluttered in his eagerness to get out the long 
sonorous Latin w^ords by which alone he conde- 
scended to mention the tiny creatures under 
argument, Maurice sat smiling in amused pa- 
tience : he considered that opinion had as much 
right to two sides on general subjects, as his 
coat had, and therefore, although he felt confi- 
dent of the correctness of his own, he thought 
his tutor's ought to be listened to. 

Cecil noted this. Elinor's words had made 
her study Maurice with unusual attention this 
evening ; there might be a slight roughness of 
manner about him, and also a want of ready 
attention to the little courtesies of life, but this: 
last seemed to proceed quite as much from his 
habits of dreamy reverie, as from ignorance. 
She began to justify herself for her irritation/ 



6 . ELINOR DRYOEN's PROBATION. 

and to decide that Elinor was presumptuous and 
mistaken. At seventeen it does not take long 
to transform liking into admiration. She could 
not help pitying Maurice as he sat opposite to 
her ; his beautiful brown eyes were scarcely me- 
lancholy now, so mirthful was the glance that 
beamed from them, as he looked occasionally at 
Cecil and her aunt, to sec if they were following 
the discussion. 

And then she asked herself what he was to 
be pitied for. Gifted, handsome, in a fair way 
of possessing all the attainments of a scholar 
and a gentleman, with health and strength to 
carve his own road through the world ; was she 
so foolish as to pity him because a girl like her- 
self . for what else was Elinor . chose to fling 
the reproach of humble birth . that she sup- 
posed was what she meant . at him, as if on the 
contrary such an overcome impediment woijtld 
not rather increase by contrast, the lustre of any 
greatness he might achieve. 

And yet although she wound this reasoning 
up to a period, she pitied him still . and she 
could not tell why, something seemed to warn 



RIVALRY. 57 

her from seeking the reason, and also to warn 
her . as the servant entered the room with 
letters and disturbed her reverie, that she had 
been thinking about Maurice Karse, a great deal 
more than was necessary. 

She looked up and met her aunt's penetrating 
eyes, she could not help blushing deeply, but the 
letters caused an immediate diversion of atten- 
tion. One was for Cecil, the other for Miss 
Brownlow, both from the aunt at Oxford. She 
said she was growing very fidgety about her 
dear brother John . alone in the midst of the 
fever, and that she thought Cecil ought nut to 
be so far away from him at such a time. She 
did not wish her to return to Starby, but as 
Oxford was so much nearer to the village than 
London was, it woukl be much better for her 
niece to join her, till the fever had passed away. 

The idea was sensible, and had Miss Mary 
Brownlow been so too, it would have been much 
better, but she was more of a worry than her 
sister Jane Ann, with less intellect. Her letter 
to Cecil was so interspersed with dark hints and 
words, scored under, that the poor girl began to 



58 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

feel miserable that she had been induced to leave 
her father at all. She wanted to return to 
Starby at once, but Miss Brownlow was sturdy 
in her refusal. 

" You shall go to Oxford, dear, to-morrow, if 
you wish, but it would be sheer madness to 
return to Starby ; besides, it would be in direct 
opposition to your father." 

Cecil said she should be glad to go at once to 
Aunt Mary, and then she rose and left the room, 
saying something about packing. Her uncle 
remonstrated with his sister for aUowing her to 
depart in such haste. 

Miss Brownlow nodded and frowned, and 
with sundry jerks of her head towards Maurice, 
who was standing with his back towards them, 
pondering in his own mind the chances of Cecil's 
return to the drawing-room, she made the sage 
understand she could give him good reasons for 
her conduct if she thought proper so to do . 
and if they were alone. 

At least this was what he understood, being 
but a man. Had he been female, he would 
doubtless have guessed that this pantomime re- 



RIVALRY. 59 

ferred also to Maurice, and that Jane Ann was 
most anxious to get Cecil out of the way of his 
fascinations. 

Her niece's spirited defence of him to Elinor, 
her long musing fit, and sudden blush just 
now, had determined the strong minded spinster 
that Cecil was just like any other girl, and 
fancied herself " in love " with Maurice Karse, 
while she believed he didn't care two straws 
about her, and this was putting . as she ex- 
pressed it . '* the cart before the horse," and must 
be remedied. 



CHAPTER IV. 



OLD COMPANIONS. 



Miss Brownlow would have pronounced her- 
self a prophet if she could have seen Maurice a 
few evenings later. He did not see Cecil again. 
He had to attend a lecture next morning, and 
when he caoie in, he found she had just started 
for the Railway Station with her uncle and 
aunt. 

It seemed as if all the light of his life had 
gone out, or as he felt truly, he had never lived 
before ; he could not go back to the tame emo- 
tionless existence he had led before her bright 
presence came amongst them. 

His tutor found him strangely absent and 



OLD COMPANIONS. 61 

dreamy ; he seemed to have lost all taste for his 
usual pursuits. 

A few days after her departure, as he was 
walking silently beside Mr. Brownlow, that gen- 
tleman came to a dead stop. 

** God bless my soul, my dear Miss Dryden, 
you must excuse my not having perceived you 
afar. I am . well " . he dropped his voice to a 
whisper, "just the least in the world near- 
sighted, or such a mistake would not have oc- 
curred.*' 

Elinor smiled. She was very well dressed, 
walking had given her a slight colour, and her 
eyes sparkled with animation. Maurice looked 
at her in surprise, he could not believe this to 
be the thin dark-faced girl he had known years 
ago, but he was far less changed, and Elinor 
knew him at once. 

Cecil's manner about him had excited her 
curiosity, but she had not expected to see any 
one like Maurice. She was walking with Ade- 
laide, the French maid a few yards behind, in 
one of the quiet old-fashioned squares near the 
British Museum, so they could stay and chat for 



62 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

a few minutes without fear of interruption with 
Mr. Brownlow and his pupil. 

Had the meeting been in a room, or before 
keen observers, Elinor might have felt puzzled 
how to act, now she merely followed her im- 
pulses. She turned from Erasmus just as he 
was beginning to speak. 

" You don't remember me, Maurice?" 

She smiled, and held out her hand. 

It seemed to the youth as if the great bug- 
bear of his life . his early acquaintance with 
Miss Dryden . had suddenly vanished. What 
could there be unpleasant in memory beneath 
such a smile as that and such a frank greeting ? 

He answered it as frankly. 

** Yes, I recollect you now, Miss Dryden, but 
you are a good deal changed."" 

''For the better it is to be hoped, in all 
ways," she said, laughing. The youth's look 
and manner had fascinated her with the old 
power of former days. Then after a few more 
words had passed, she gave him one of her 
witching smiles. ** Will you come and see us, 
Maurice ? Mamma wiU be so glad to see you 



OLD COMPANIONS. 63 

any evening. Will you conoe to-morrow ? You 
can perhaps give me later Starby news than I 
have received." 

"No, indeed . I am rather uneasy at not 
getting any news ; but I shall be very glad to 
call on you, Miss Dryden, as you are so kind as 
to ask me>" 

And before rasmus could condense his won- 
der and curiosity into words, Elinor had given 
the address of her father's house, shaken hands 
with both gentlemen, and passed on ; but al- 
most before she was out of hearing, Erasmus 
recovered his scattered wits and poured forth 
question upon question with such rapidity and 
excitement, that there was no chance of reply 
until he had fairly run himself down. 

How on earth had Maurice ever become ac- 
quainted with the Squire's niece ? and what did 
she mean by calling him Maurice ? and did he 
think he was wise in mixing himself up with a 
family like the Markhams, people whom the 
Squire disliked ? and sundry other questions 
and remarks, which amused Maurice while they 
annoyed him. 



64 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

His tutor was very much vexed at the result 
of the meeting. Elinor's ready recognition had 
renewed the charm of her first appearance, and 
he was just meditating some recondite speech, 
when suddenly she had turned all her looks and 
words to Maurice, and he had been forced to 
stand by and say something civil to Adelaide 
Markham, which, sage though he was, he would 
much have preferred saying to her brilliant sister. 
A shy, awkward man himself, he shrank from 
timid, nervous women with a mixture of fear 
and dislike ; he felt himself ill-used by their 
inability to set him at ease ; he pitied Adelaide 
now for letting his sentence fall to the ground 
uncombated by one of the graceful nothings 
with which Elinor would have drawn it into an 
amusing war of words. All this had been vex- 
ing, but this was nothing to the fact that Mau- 
rice had accepted Miss Dryden's invitation. 
What was to be done ? He was the youth's 
tutor ; but how could he forbid his intercourse 
with others ? or even if he could be so uncour- 
teous, would Maurice, at twenty years of age, 
consent to be treated like a child ? and yet Mr. 



OLD COMPANIONS. 65 

Dryden had hinted that he wished him to be 
kept out of Roland Markhatn's way. 

He knew next to nothing of the previous 
intercourse that had existed between the Squire 
and his protege. The former wrote only dry, 
brief business letters inquiring into the youth's 
progress, and testifying his approbation at the 
report received, in the enclosure of the half- 
yearly cheque ; it was possible that Maurice 
might have been admitted at Flairs as the play- 
fellow of Miss Dryden, when they were both 
children. But they were not children now, and 
either the sight of Elinor had awakened an 
unusual interest in her future, or he was much 
more astute than he had proved himself respect- 
ing the daily association of his niece Cecil with 
Maurice Karse. 

He wished Jane Ann were at home to consult 
with. However, Elinor had a mother who 
surely ought to know about proprieties and 
those *' sort of frailties," as he termed them. 

His curiosity tried in various ways to learn 
the extent of Maurice's previous acquaintance 
with Elinor; but he had roused the youth's 

VOL. II. 5 



66 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

pride, and with it a reserve that baffled all in- 
quiries, so that he saw him sally forth the next 
evening, without having gained from him any 
satisfactory information. He consoled himself 
by writing to Mr. Dryden. 

Mrs. Markham had shown herself very de 
sirous to surround Elinor with all the little ob- 
servances that she considered requisite for a 
Dryden. If she did not walk out with her 
daughter herself, she took care she should 
always have a maid with her, thereby eliciting 
the pertness of little Mary, who asked if EKnor 
did not behave as well in the street as Addy, 
who could always go out alone. But in one 
respect Northover would have pronounced Mrs. 
Markham sadly deficient. She greatly preferred 
sitting over the fire downstairs with her husband 
to playing propriety in the drawing-room with 
her daughters. And Roland Markham was so 
eager to give his scheme fair play, that he 
generally contrived to make her stay with him 
longer than usual, when he knew James Fisher 
had arrived. 

Elinor did not think it necessary to tell her 



OLD COMPAIIIONS. 67 

mother she had invited Maurice, and Adelaide 
was so full of regained happiness, that she only 
counted the hours, and found the day unusually 
long and wearisome till evening. James, per- 
haps, would come, and she forgot everything 
else in this hope. 

He had come to Ashe Street once since her 
explanation with him, and had devoted himself 
entirely to her. It is possible that Elinor might not 
have been so determined to improve her acquaint- 
ance with Maurice Karse, if she had not begun 
to find her evenings dull. She was too much 
offended with her cousin to seek to please or 
attract him, and she told herself magnanimously 
that she was making a sacrifice of her own 
amusement to Adelaide's happiness; for of 
course she had only to smile, or even address 
him specially, and James Fisher would return 
to his aUegiance. 

When Maurice arrived, Mr Markham was 
asleep, and as the maid who had received her 
orders from Elinor showed the strange gentle- 
man at once to the drawing-room, without an- 
nouncing his arrival downstairs, Mrs. Mark- 

5.2 



68 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ham concluded that it was only James Fisher, 
and went on with her knitting. 

Maurice found Elinor alone, and in a few 
minutes she bad made him fet>l quite at home, 
and as if she were some very old and dear friend. 
She completely ignored, all that had been painful 
in their previous intercourse. 

^* It seems so natural to call you Maurjce. You 
must tell me if you prefer me to say Mr. Karse." 

She said this as she heard what she thought 
was James Fisher's knock, when she knew their 
tete-a-tete would soon be interruped. The 
smile that went with the words was very in- 
toxicating. But something, he could not tell 
what, in the sound of his own name, stirred 
Maurice painfully ; it seemed to bring back a 
dim vision of Elinor's former haughtiness^ and 
to warn him against the passionate admiration 
that was mastering his senses. He had been 
sitting with her nearly an hour, and it had 
passed like a moment. He did not know how, 
but he had been drawn into speaking of himself, 
of his pursuits, and 'of his future, with very un- 
usual openness; for Maurice rarely spoke of 



OLD COMPANIONS. 69 

himself. He was reticent by nature, and he 
had never till lately lived among women. 

Before he could thoroughly awaken to this 
indistinct warning, Elinor had turned from 
greeting James Fisher who came into the room 
with Adelaide, and again devoted herself to his 
amusement, and her pleasure in this was the 
greater when she saw her cousin's eyes straying 
every now and then across the room, jBven when 
he ought to haVe been listening to Adelaide. It 
was a triumph to show that she was quite inde- 
pendent of him, and not obliged to play third, 
as she had been the last time he came. 

She had not introduced the two young men, 
and Maurice presently asked who he was. 

Elinor hesitated. She knew that Maurice 
must have remarked the other^s stolen glances 
and restless manner, and she resolved that it 
was better to tell him Adelaide's secret. She 
would perhaps have found it difficult to offer a 
good reason for this confidence. She thought 
she was condescending to Maurice Karse ; it 
would have seemed too ridiculous to own that 
he exercised some strange power over her. 



70 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

*' If you won't tell any one, I'll tell you a 
secret." 

Maurice smiled. " I have never kept a 
secret yet/' he said ; '' I suppose I have not the 
faculty." 

** I should think quite the contrary ; you have 
a stronger character than most men, I am sure : 
now listen . that is my sister's promised hus- 
band." 

She put her lips close to his ear . he felt the 
light pressure of her hair against his own. 

The slight action seemed to give her flatter- 
ing words a warmer character . it made him 
believe that what she had been telling him was 
true in a deeper sense than he had at first 
thought, that she had never forgotten him, and 
had always looked on to the time when she 
might claim him again as her friend. 

Maurice was not vain, but he must have been 
a very unnatural youth of twenty if he could 
have resisted Elinor's winning manner and the 
flattering notice she lavished on him. It was 
the first time he had been so singled out ; for 
although he had accompanied Miss Brownlow 



OLD COMPANIONS. 71 

to a few stiff tea-parties, he had scarcely mixed 
at all with young people, and he had never met 
with any one like Elinor. 

He had seen Cecil Brownlow, and he had 
began to love her . ^but this was a different feeling; 
his nature was stirred in a different fashion : Cecil 
was so much younger, and she had never given 
him cause in any way to think that she cared 
specially for his society. But he quite forgot 
her now. He was at the age when it is most 
flattering to be sought, and he had just the dis- 
position which would be slow in seeking the re- 
gard of others . he had no vanity to minister to, 
but he had two weak points, pride and reserve. 
Elinor was scarcely older than he was . ^yet her 
intercourse with the outer world had given her 
the advantage of several years' experience. It was 
very gratifying to be treated as an equal by one 
whom he honestly acknowledged as his superior. 

It was the sudden blinding intoxication that 
tnany of us must suffer, which we believe to 
be sober earnest, and it gave a brightness to his 
eyes, and an ardour to his manner that 
strengthened the charm of his presence to 



72 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Elinor. Both of them started as from some 
delicious dream, when Roland Markham and his 
wife came upstairs. 

Elinor saw an angry flash in her father's eyes, 
as he took in quickly the respective distribution 
of the four young people, and then looked hard 
at her for explanation . but she was neither 
abashed nor frightened. 

" This is an old acquaintance of mine, Papa 
. Mr. Karse, a friend of Mr. Brownlow." 

Mr. Markham bowed stiffly, and Maurice 
thought Elinor's father, a very uncourteous, 
disagreeable person, but her mother's kind 
greeting soothed him, and for a little while the 
evening went on peacefully. 

Roland Markham stood on the hearth-rug, 
looking gloomy and discontented, while Elinor 
sang, and Maurice turned the leaves. When 
the song was ended, and even while the youth 
was imploring her to sing another, he turned 
abruptly to Adelaide, and told her to go and 
play a duett with her sister, ^* and I think you 
might turn over the leaves this time, James ; 
you seem to have grown lazy." 



OLD COMPANIONS. 73 

He spoke in a sharp, satirical tone ; it was 
impossible not to see that he was vexed. Ade- 
laide rose in eager obedience, her lover followed 
her, and Maurice yielded up his place. 

He did it very unwillingly . he thought 
Roland Markham was treating them all like a 
pack of children, and he had no mind to submit 
to such tyranny. 

It was plain Mr. Markham had merely asked 
for music in order to speak to him unheard by 
the others, for he began almost as soon as he 
had engaged him in conversation. 

" Where did you know my daughter formerly, 
Mr. Karse ?" 

The question was so abrupt, that Maurice 
scarcely knew how to answer it, without hesita- 
tion, but the sneer his delay produced drew it 
out more quickly than he intended. 

" I knew Miss Dryden at Flairs." 

" Indeed !" this was said very insultingly ; for 
Roland Markham began to fear that his brother- 
in-law had been working secretly, too, and that 
his scheme had been forestalled. "I never 
heard of you from Elinor either." 



74 ELINOR DRYDBn's PROBATION. 

Maurice's eyes flashed. 

" Probably not/* he said ; " we were both 
very * young, and did not see much of each 
other.'* 

" And may I ask whether you still live in the 
country, or whether you are fixed in London ?" 
He said this more civilly . the youth's manner 
warned him that bullying would not serve his 
purpose. 

" I am with my tutor, Mr. Brownlow, at pre- 
sent, in Bedford Place/' 

" Do you intend to go up to Oxford, or what 
line in life do you mean to choose ?" 

He was resolved to find out what position 
this boy held, for he now quite believed him to 
be a scion of one of the families in Mr. Dry- 
den's county. After all, although he did not 
choose him to pay court to Elinor, it might be 
worth while to make the acquaintance of " a 
rich young swell,'' as he mentally classed 
him. 

" I don't know," said Maurice, hurriedly ; 
then resolving to break through the false posi- 
tion in which he found himself, he said . 



OLD COMPANIONS. 75 

" My future depends chiefly on Mr. Dryden, 
of Flairs. I owe him very much already." 

Roland Markham started^ gave him a sharp, 
searching glance. "Mr. Dryden!" he said, and 
then turning away, uttered a long, low whistle. 



CHAPTER V. 



THE ASH GLEN. 



Twice during the week, and twice each Sunday^ 
Mr. Brownlow assembled the villagers for 
Divine worship in the Ash glen. 

It was a very deep, narrow ravine, open at one 
end to the sea, and spreading away at the other 
into the rocky downs which surrounded it ; 
one of the marvellous fissures one sees in 
wild thinly habited districts, so jagged and 
broken that it almost seemed as if the mighty 
yawn by which it had been opened to the light 
of day, had been recent, and that by a reverse 
process the scattered and picturesque masses of 



THE ASH GLEN. 77 

rock which rose abruptly from the earth like the 
ruins of a primseval temple, might be agaia 
swallowed up into oblivion, like the castle of St. 
John. 

But there was one token which marked that 
years had gone by since Nature had made 
this deep furrow on the fair landscape. -halt- 
way up the precipitous side of the glen, be- 
hind a lofty, grey boulder, stood a magnificent 
ash tree, spreading its feathery branches on all 
sides as if proudly conscious of its undisputed 
empire. It was leafless now, but the swelling 
buds could already be traced along the graceful 
branches. 

The sharp-pointed crag below had been 
severed by some storm or crash into portions, 
one of which had broken off midway, and lay 
at the foot of the whole mass, forming an easy 
access to the horizontal surface its fracture had 
created. 

On this natural pedestal, the sharp outline of 
the jutting crag on his right hand, and the ash 
tree behind him, its branches canopying his 
head, Mr. Brownlow knelt, robed in his sur- 



78 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

plice ; he was uttering the petition in the Litany, 
. " In all time of our tribulation, in all time of 
our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day 
of Judgment,** . and with the responses of the 
congregation, swelling up to where he stood, 
were mingled suppressed sobs. 

The villagers were ranged below, each a few 
feet apart, except where there was more than 
one member of a family present. these knelt 
together ; in many instances only two or three 
survivors out of a large group of children. 

Mr. Dryden was kneeling and slightly facing 
the villagers, and exactly facing the clergyman. 
His clear, piercing voice led the responses of the 
rest. As the "We beseech thee to hear us, 
good Lord," rose again in mournful cadence, 
the women and children gave a wailing soufid 
to the supplication breathed forth so earnestly by 
the deep, strong voices of the men, and the lap- 
ping waves on the shingle, faintly heard at the end 
of the gorge, seemed a melancholy echo of all. 

The prayers ended, Mr. Brownlow rose and 
gave out the words of the hymn, " Rock of 
Ages.'* It rose slowly at first, but gradually as 



THE ASH GLEN. 79 

the singers began to feel the application of the 
words to their own state of trial and sorrow, 
they sang it with a fervour and an intensity of 
expression that overpowered the lapping of the 
far-off waves on the shingly beach. 

There was a deep stillness, and then all bent 
their heads as their pastor addressed them " in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost." 

" And now. Lord, what is my hope ? Truly, 
my hope is even in Thee." 

This was Mr. Brownlow's text, a verse so 
sadly familiar to those who had been listening 
to it during the past week spoken over what 
remained of their loved departed ; for although 
no concourse was permitted near the graves of 
the fever-stricken, the members of each family 
assembled in the entrance of the churchyard, 
and listened to the burial service, while the 
carts which held the coffins toiled up to a high 
hill-side overlooking the sea, far from any human 
vicinity. 

The women, many of whom had lost hus- 
band or chiklren . in some cases both . sobbed 



80 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

and shuddered as he began, and many of the 
men drew their bands across their eyes, as bitter 
and tender feelings strove for expression, but 
before he had finished his brief, simple address, 
a holy calm, a hushed stillness spread over 
them all . the preacher's words had taken them 
out of themselves and their narrow range of care, 
and dread, and forethought . he had shown them 
that prayer is ever answered in the way that is 
b^t, and that this trial would be removed from 
them when it had accomplished its work. 

He gave them his blessing, and while they 
still knelt in prayer Mr. Dryden felt some one 
touch his arm. He started . he was kneeling 
on a broken crag not easily accessible when 
already occupied. He turned his head without 
rising, and saw that a tall woman, her head 
muffled in a shawl, had succeeded in touching 
his arm by mounting over a broken stone. 

He rose quietly, and signed to the woman to 
follow without disturbing the kneeling people. 

It was impossible to descend to the bottom 
of the glen without following a sheep-track that 
led in a zigzag direction towar4i the sea, but 



THE ASH GLEN. 81 

upwards there was a tolerably straight path 
which led almost in a perpendicular, line to the 
range of downs overhead. 

Mr. Dryden signed to the woman to precede 
him. He imagined her to have come on some 
errand of life and death from the village, and he 
marvelled at the daring route she had chosen, 
for the villagers reached the glen by a sloping 
road which wound along its whole extent, about 
a hundred feet above the river, through the 
ravine. 

But as he followed her he became conscious 
of a strange familiarity in the woman's figure ; 
long before, they reached the top, he felt sure 
that it was Northover, the housekeeper at Flairs. 

The scenes of sorrow, and suffering, and 
self-denying devotion he had been living amongst 
had worked strange changes in the Squire's 
stern, suspicious nature : it would be truer to 
say these had fostered the softening influence 
produced by his reconciliation to the friend of 
his youth, but he was far from meekness still, 
and his anger rose instantly at such a flagrant 
act of disobedience. 

VOL. II. 6 



82 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

He restrained the expression of it till they 
both reached the table land at top, and as sup- 
pressed wrath is rarely modified in the process 
of restraint, he looked stern enough when he 
turned round and feced Northover, to have 
frightened a less determined woman. 

But she was blessed with that triple shield of 
self-assurance, self-conceit, and bluntncss of feel- 
ing, which makes women thus gifted invulner- 
able. She confronted her master with the air 
of a heroine. 

" He's dying, sir . at least, Tm so told. I 
don't pretend to have seen him myself . not I. 
I remembered your pertickler injunctions re- 
specting fevers and such like ; but still, hearing 
he was dying, and knowing it might be soon 
just as well as not, it did seem my dooty, at the 
risk of mortal life and Umb, to make known his 
dying wishes in respect of you, su*. 

" Who is dying, Northover ? . You have not 
come here tu tell me that the fever has reached 
Flairs ? What business have you here at all ? 
you whom I left in charge of the rest. I cannot 
tell you how surprised and displeased I am." 






THE ASH GLEN. 83 

There is no possibility of saying what the 
housekeeper felt ; she and her feelings had long 
been accustomed to keep their own secrets, but 
a sUght tinge of colour on her sallow cheeks 
might have been brought there by her master's 
rebuke. His impatient manner hurried her 
answer. 

" Well, no, sir, not in the house." She tfrok 
no notice of the rebuke, considering that the 
only part of his sentence intended for her could 
be the question as to the fever. She always 
made allowance for men ; their heads were not 
balanced as well as her own. 

Putting the well-adjusted member on one 
side she looked at him with her sharp, glit- 
tering eye. 

'* I'm thankful to say we've no fever at 
Flairs ; not that it would have stopped there if 
it had come. There's ways . ^you know, sir, 
there's ways" . here the sharp eyes winked with 
superior intelligence, but she saw the Squire's 
lips trembling with an interruption . " it's Ben- 
jamin, sir, that I came about . Mr. Karse^ as 
soine of the servants call him." 

;. 2 



84 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

"What of him? . TeD me at once, for 
Heaven's sake." 

The Squire's agitation moved her at last ; 
she had forgotten all the stories she had heard 
of the strong attachment that existed between 
her master and his gamekeeper. To her Mr. 
Karse had always seemed a very proud, " up- 
pish" kind of person, quite above his place, and 
not knowing how to treat a superior female. 

" Well, sir, they do say he has the fever. at 
least, the poor old creature who works for him 
told the gardener so this morning . and said 
that some one . I forget who . had told her to 
mention it two days before, but she was afraid 
to go up to the house." 

" And why could not you have sent one of 
the men here, instead of coming yourself? 
there would have been far less risk for the gar- 
deners than for one who lives in the house 
itself." 

While he spoke, he had turned towards the 
village, but then seeming suddenly to remember, 
he paused. 

" Stay, you had better go back straight to 



THE ASH GLEN. 86 

Flairs, send a supply of such things as are 
necessary for Karse to the bridge in two hours' 
time ; and, Northover, change your own clothing 
before you mix with the rest of the household ; 
that will do . I have no time to lose." 

He hastened on, leaving his housekeeper 
speechless. 

" Change my clothes ! perhaps the Squire *d 
better have come home and changed *em for 
me . pack of nonsense, just as if a fever's to be 
took in the open air ; and not a word about the 
way I managed to avoid the people by scram- 
bling down and up, more like a cat than a 
Christian . but bless you, there's some as has 
but three senses, and some as has got those as 
the others don't miss.'' 

So Northover returned to Flairs, feeling her- 
self an unappreciated martyr . perfectly ignoring 
the truth, that she had eagerly snatched at the 
first opportunity of seeing the " field-preaching," 
as she termed it ; for although actual intercourse 
had been prohibited, in some way or other 
rumours of what was happening in the village 
reached the gate-keeper's lodge, on the Starby 



86 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

side of the park, and Northover's indignation 
had waxed dire and dreadful when she learned 
that though *^ an unconsecrated dummy/' like 
Tomkins, the steward, was thought good enough 
to minister to her soul, *' the low-lived people 
of Starby had reg'lar service in a surplice, when 
they'd much better have been at home, minding 
their sick." 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE squire's nursing. 



Two days and two long sleepless nights had 
passed since Mr. Dryden bent his head to enter 
Karse's cottage. When he reached his old ser- 
vant's bedside, Ben. lay in a stupor, which the 
old woman, who seemed to have established her> 
self as nurse, said had lasted nearly all day. 
From her answers he very soon made out that 
the patientj if left to her tendance, would be 
suffered to die without loss of time, as she 
wound up all her information with the assertion 
that " it were useless to fret a dyin'^ soul . it 
were the Lord's will to take him." 



88 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

The Squire left her as he had found her, half- 
asleep over the wood fire, and mounting the 
uneven, creaking stairs again, he stood, think- 
ing over the diflferent women in Starby, husband- 
less and childless now, whose sad experience 
would qualify them for fever-nurses . but a groan 
and then a violent movement of the hitherto 
senseless form on the bed, made him step 
nearer. In a few moments more he had to 
exert his utmpst strength to keep Ben from 
dashing himself against the wall of the cottage, 
as he called, in a wild, shrieking voice, for 
Maurice . his boy . his child. But as Mr. 
Dryden bent over him, fearful of a return of the 
paroxysm, the muttered ravings that succeeded 
his first wild outcry filled him with sudden 
dread. Horrible as was the aspect of poor 
Ben's face, with its blackened lips and blood- 
shot eye-balls, the deathly white of the Squire's 
was even more appalling ; beads of perspiration 
stood out on his forehead while he grasped at 
the bedclothes, as if for support. Gradually the 
muttering ceased, and stupor again fell on the 
sufferer, but before an hour had passed the 



THE squirb's nursino. 89 

Squire went down again into the room below, 
and giving the woman a note hastily written in 
pencil, told her to go to Starby as fast as possi- 
ble, and fetch the doctor whose name was out- 
side the note. The doctor came, and was 
electrified when the Squire announced his inten- 
tion of nursing the patient himself, without any 
assistance but that of the old woman whom he 
had found in the cottage. 

He was such a patient, gentle nurse; the 
days and nights passed, alternating between 
heavy stupor, during which stimulants and 
restoratives had to be administered without the 
patient's volition or consciousness, and sudden 
raving fits, which sometimes taxed the Squire's 
strength severely ; Ben addressed him frequently 
as his wife, his darling Ailsie, and then bade her 
suddenly go to help the madam, the poor lady, 
whose husband had deserted her. Then the 
whiteness returned to Mr. Dryden's face, and 
sometimes he stretched out his hand as if, for- 
getting the weakness of the raving man, lying 
there helpless, he would stifle the words before 
they could again be uttered. 



90 ELINOR DRYDBN's PROBATION. 

But one day there came a steadier look 
in the patient's eyes. Instead of the fixed, 
sightless stare, or the wild, restless glances of the 
last few days, they seemed to rest on the differ- 
ent objects in the room, and take in their 
reality. Mr. Dryden's lips quivered as he saw 
Ben's glance gradually travelling round to where 
he sate, at his bed-head ; would he recognise 
him ? and if he did how would it be ? had those 
accusations been mere delirious fancies, or had 
facts, which he believed known to himself alone, 
now become so public as to have reached his 
faithful servant in the distorted form in which 
he had uttered them ? 

The wistful, seeking eyes had reached his 
face ; they looked long and earnestly, then they 
brightened, and a faint smile broke out over the 
disfigured features. The lips moved, but even 
when the Squire bent his head down dose, he 
could scarcely hear the words . 

" God bless you, Master Wentworth." 

He never heard his own name now . how 
could he . all of near kin had left him ; the 
only living flesh and blood belonging to him, his 



THE squire's nursing. 91 

sister, he had resolved not to see again ; this 
might have made the sound impressive, but there 
was another reason for the heart-wrung an- 
guish that spread over his face. 

He thought Ben was dying, . it was only 
the third time he had stood by a death-bed, and 
each time he had been . ah, how well he remem- 
bered it . called on by his Christian name. A 
visible shudder, mingled with the anguish . 
those two dying appeals could never be for- 
gotten . what would this be ? If it were what 
he dreaded . even though it should prove Ben's 
last request, he would not, he could not promise 
to grant it, he must be left to himself ; he could 
not be urged on beyond his nature. But the 
blackened, parched lips moved again, and Mr. 
Dryden, roused to the perception that he was ne- 
glecting his self-imposed duties. He moved 
gently away, and returning with the peculiar 
quietness some men have in sickness, he put a 
restorative to Ben's mouth. 

The sick man drank eagerly, then he spoke ; 
this time his voice was distinct, though 
feeble. 



92 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" Thank you, many times, sir, for all youVe 
done, and forgive me, Squire, for many's the 
hard thought I've had against you, though I 

always loved ye." He stopped here, and Mr. 

 

Dryden said gently, " Oh, hush, Ben ; no need 
of that :" but there was an eagerness in Karse's 
face that could not be mistaken, and the Squire 
did not try to check him when he went on again 
in broken sentences . 

** Squire, it's Maurice I think about, maist, 
that puir lad, he has ne'er done ye an ill turn. 
ye've done vera handsome by him in the way of 
learning, but a crumb o' love's worth all that, 
and mair." . He stopped, exhausted ; still Mr. 
Dryden did not try to check him. The Squire's 
eyes gleamed with excitement, and his face was 
very pale ; it seemed as if he were determined 
to plumb the depths of Ben's secret knowledge; 
he put the stimulant to his lips again. The eyes 
brightened, and the lips seemed unglued from 
their rigidity. Mr. Dryden bent down his head 
to listen. 

** He's had nane to love but mysel', and now 
I'm leavin' him . won't you try to love the lad a 



THE squire's nursing. 93 

wee, Squire, for my sake ? . gifts choke us when 
they're all crust, with no loving words to make 
the crumb." A glimpse of sudden strength 
came upon him, and he stretched out his 
shaking, thin hand to seek his master's. 

Mr. Dryden clasped it warmly in his ; but 
Ben must have the assurance in words. 

" Won't you try to love him ? . You'd not 
find it hard, if you knew the lad's heart" ' 

His poor, weak fingers tried to press the 
Squire's. The light faded out of his eyes ; he 
lay wan and exhausted, with still the same be- 
seeching gaze. 

Mr. Dryden turned his head aside. He could 
not bear that even Ben should see the agitation 
throbbing in every feature. It robbed him of 
all calmness, all the characteristic dignity which, 
however kind he might have been, had till now 
come between him and his old servant. There 
was a complaint in his voice as he answered 
Ben's appeal . the wounded human utterance of 
man to man . in self-justification, where he 
feels harshly judged. 

*^ I will always be his best friend . have I not 



94 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

shown myself so ? You are hard upon me, 
Kai*se ; love must come by nature." 

He looked round as he spoke, and the satis- 
fied expression told him he had said enough. 

There was perfect silence long afterwards. 
The Squire sat forgetting his patient, one elbow 
resting on the bolster, his face nearly hidden in 
the up-turned hand, while Ben lay so very still, 
that it might have been thought his spirit had 
departed. 

But it was not so. When the doctor's step 
.below roused Mr. Dryden from what had been 
plainly very painful thoughts, he saw that his 
patient lay in a deep, refreshing sleep. 

The doctor said it was possible that danger 
was over, and that he might recover if he did 
not sink from weakness ; and he took his leave, 
not without telling the Squire how much his 
absence had been felt in Starby. 

He need not have reminded him. The Squire's 
anxiety had not been wholly on Ben's account. 
Whispering all through the watchful days and 
nights had come the wearying question, whether 
he were justified in leaving his charge and au- 



THE squire's nursing. 95 

thority over the many for the sake of one, be he 
ever so highly valued ? and then came the sting- 
ing doubt. was all this vigilance and zeal, which 
outsiders would set down to his noble devotion 
to an old and faithful retainer inspired by any 
higher motive than fear . fear lest the ravings, 
exaggerated as he knew them to be, should be- 
come the common talk of the county ? A few 
years before, he would have regarded any ru- 
mour with disdain . as a thing only iStly treated 
when trampled into the mire it sprang from. 
But now there were reasons why he wished, if 
the truth must be told, to be his own spokes- 
man, and not to be falsely prejudged in the 
minds of men. 

He went back to Ben's bed-side. The mus- 
cles of the face had relaxed; the breathing, 
though deep, was regular and easy. The crisis 
must be passed. There could be no longer any 
fear of delirium. 

He glanced round the room, to see that all 
the patient needed was at hand, and then went 
quietly down-stairs. He laid his injunctions on 
the old woman not to leave the cottage till his 



96 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

return, and bade her go up every now and then 
and look at Mr. Karse ; telling her what to do 
in the event of his awakening. 

Then he started for Starby. The fresh free 
air almost overpowered his relaxed muscles. It 
seemed as if the way lengthened before him. 
He was thoroughly exhausted before he reached 
the Parsonage. 



CHAPTER VII. 



A DREAM. 



Maurice Karse walked home from Mr. Mark- 
ham's house, swayed by a rising tempest of 
UDgovernable feeling. He had never felt the 
two extremes of pleasure and pain so keenly. 
He told himself as he hurried along, heedless of 
any obstacles he might meet^ that the few last 
hours had been like'Heaven and Hell. 

And with the proneness we all have to think 
of our injuries rather than to reckon our bene- 
fits, he felt that the bliss of Elinor's presence 
had been effaced by her father's insolence. He 
went on angry, dissatisfied with himself for not 

VOL. II. 7 



98 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

having silenced him more haughtily ; but how 
could he ? and, besides, he shrank from a quar- 
rel with Elinor's father. 

The sound of a church clock striking elevei 
warned him. He had told Mr. Brownlow he 
should be home early. 

But when he reached Bedford Place, he found 
that the sleepy sage had already gone to bed ; 
the whole house seemed asleep; there was 
not a sight or a sound to come between him 
and his painful remembrance of what had hap- 
pened. 

Yes, there was something. He passed his 
hand across his forehead, as if to clear away the 
weariness that oppressed him ; and he thrilled 
with delight as the long, warm clasp in which 
Elinor had let him hold her soft,- slender hand 
came back to his remembrance. What a glo- 
rious creature she was ! How could he think 
of the petty annoyances he had undergone when 
she had called him her friend . had even accepted 
his admiration ! for Maurice was conscious that 
he had never dared to look at any woman before, 
as he had that night looked at Elinor Dryden. 



A DREAM. 99 

How long would it be before he could see her 
again . before he could sun himself in that ex* 
quisite smile that had seemed to wrap his senses 
in bliss, or watch those graceftJ movements, 
and the brilliant play of expression in every 
feature? He felt that he could scarcely pass 
another day away from Elinor ; and then the 
remembrance of her father returned, and he 
snatched his candle, and rushed up to his bed- 
room, reckless of the slumbers of his tutor. 

He reached his room, and set down his light ; 
and he felt there was no use in going to bed. 
He could not sleep with all these tangled cir- 
cumstances surrounding him, like the meshes 
of a spider*s web. Love, in the fiery madness 
of the passion, throbbed in his veins, and he 
knew it . knew that he loved Elinor Dryden, 
the daughter of a man who had insulted him, 
and the niece of his benefactor . of the Squire, 
who would as soon dream of giving him Flairs 
itself, as of permitting him even to address her 
as an equal. 

For a few minutes he struggled to be free, 
but the elixir worked too strongly. The re- 

7.2 



100 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

membrance of Elinor's last glance^ of that hand 
clasp, came back, soothing with delicious sweet- 
ness the restless disquiet. Yes, he would win 
her! There was a noble independence about 
her that vouched for her perfect truth. She 
loved him . was not that enough ? And Mau- 
rice's heart bounded with a passionate joy, that 
almost forced tears from his eyes, as he thought 
of what Elinor's love must be. 

He sat down, and tried to see his posi- 
tion. He could not, he would not, if he could, 
win her as her uncle's dependent ; he must be 
free, and how was this to be? Not for a 
moment did Maurice think of asking help from 
any one. He would consult Mr. Brownlow ; 
he knew that there were scholarships to be tried 
for, means by which he might fit himself to 
instruct others, for a time, till his pen should 
achieve for bim his own future. This had been 
a day-dream for months past, but now it stood 
up as a fact to be realised. And Elinor, she 
would wait, she would be his best genius . his 
inspiration ; they would lead together that poet 
life so fascinating to young dreamers, and per- 



A DREAM. 101 

haps so really true in its blessing, to hearts 
which keep no craving corner for worldly va- 
nities. 

But there was present difficulty to face. He 
could not continue in a false position with Ro- 
land Markham, and yet he shrank from expos- 
ing his history to a man whose coarseness had 
shown itself so plainly ; and, after all, what 
could he tell him really about himself? 

Maurice had often thought of his parents. 
They had both died young, Ben said. He had 
no early remembrances except of the woman 
Karse had taken him away from, and this 
was so hazy and indistinct that he could not 
be sure how much of it was personal me- 
mory, and how much he had gathered from 
Ben, While he lived his dreamy out-door life at 
Plairs, he had been content to let the question 
rest. Since he had been with Mr. Brownlow he 
had asked Karse once or twice to tell him all he 
knew about himself; but he had learned nothing 
except that he was probably better off than as if 
his parents had lived, " in respect of the learn- 
in' he was gettin'." 



102 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION* 

Very soon ajfter his removal to London, the 
Squire had written to ask him not to revisit 
Flairs for at least two years, and though Mau- 
rice had found this a very hard and tyrannical 
request, Ben had acquiesced in it so strongly, that 
he had been obliged to submit ; and his inter- 
course with his old friend had been confined to 
the rare letters received from him. 

Now that all his manhood was roused by the 
sudden growth of Love . a growth which had 
given him the strange sensation of fuller powers, 
more matured judgment, of added years . he 
saw that he had been supine and indifferent in 
his want of curiosity. If he were Karse's cousin, 
who was Ben himself? He knew the warm 
regard in which the Squire held the old man, 
and the independent bearing of Ben towards 
him ; that might be his Border breeding, but 
still he was infinitely superior to others of his 
class, and had always prevented Maurice from 
associating with those who might have been 
thought fit companions for him. Maurice had 
frequently considered all this before, but the sort 
of moral earthquake his nature had just under- 



A DREAM. 103 

gone, seemed to have displaced every idea, and 
now as he tried to restore order in his brain, a 
new light fell on its altered arrangings, shewing 
gaps and discrepancies hidden by long wear and 
obscurity. 

He must see Ben before he could again fac e 
Roland Markham ; but although the two years 
had expired, Mr. Dryden had written to his tutor 
forbidding his return to Flairs, till the fever had 
disappeared from Starby. He would write to 
Ben at once ; and he sat down to the little table, 
the sole confidant of his literary efforts. But 
Ben was no hand at writing ; besides, what 
would be necessary was a close cross-questioning, 
a personal influence whicl) might by some agi- 
tating remembrance quicken and arouse hitherto 
unrevealed and forgotten circumstances. 

No . he must go to Ben himself. 

He longed to be at Flairs. There he could 
have walked out in the broad moonlight that 
lay gleaming on the roofs of the opposite houses, 
instead of being pent in with his throbbing head 
and feverish fancies. The sickness we most of 
us feel in early spring . the longing for green 



104 ELINOE DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

trees and fair flowers, and the song of birds, 
stirred Maurice as it had so often before since 
he had given up his free life ; and mingled with 
it now, came the longing to visit the scenes of 
his first meetings with Elinor. 

Elinor. and as her bright image came fully 
before him,' ways and means, and inquiries and 
misgivings were merged or rather hidden by the 
rays of light that encircled the glorious vision. 
In his passionate idolatry he could have knelt 
down and worshipped this ; and forgetting all 
but her, he at length lay down in the hope that 
she might visit his dreams. 

But he was disappointed: his imagination 
only refracted the mo^e disturbing parts of the 
evening's meditations. He was in Elinor's 
home, struggling to free himself from the 
strong grasp of Roland Markham, while Elinor 
and the rest gibed at him in contemptuous mock- 
ery of his efforts. Then came sudden darkness, 
and a pause rather of exhaustion than refreshing 
sleep. 

He seemed to awake suddenly. Surely he was 
broad awake now, lying there in the moonlight. 



A DREAM. 105 

He looked round him. He was no longer in his 
own room, and as memory tried to picture what 
had been his surroundings when he lay down to 
sleep, he knew that that faint mass of ideas had 
been dreams . this was reality. He was again 
a child, lying on the hard ground in front of the 
cabin beside the lake. The moon silvered half 
the expanse of the quivering water beside which 
he had so often played, and glimmered on the 
rugged outlines of the hills that shut it in on 
its further side ; their base and the half of the 
lake that washed it was black in its intensity of 
shadow. The fearful terror of darkness . that 
sharp agony of vivid imagination . fixed Maurice's 
gaze in breathless horror on the shapeless, inky 
mass beyond the restless silver ripple. He had 
never suffered from this fear since his early 
years ; now with the feeling of childhood it 
returned. 

He lay intently watching . it seemed to him 
that the darkness was no longer uniform ; in 
parts greyer shadows were visible amid the 
blackness ; they moved backwards and forwards 
along the edge of the water. His strained sight 



106 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

almost failed him, and he dared not relax its 
intensity ; he knew that within that shadow lay 
the secret either of his past or future life. But 
the silver ripples suddenly dulled, then faded 
away into a grey shadowy mass as a huge black 
cloud swept over the moonlight. The still calm 
was disturbed by tlie rising fury of the wind 
which came howling and shrieking through the 
clefts in the now almost invisible hills. One 
after another the scattered heavy rain-drops of 
approaching storm fell on Maurice's face ; yet 
he lay still, always watching for what was com- 
ing to him from the other side of the lake. 

It came, but not with any startling sudden- 
ness or dreadful terror. Two figures . one erect 
and stately, the other bent and broken . passed 
him slowly, as they gradually separated them- 
selves from the depth of shadow. The first 
went on firmly without turning its head ; the 
other bent over him and seemed trying to clasp 
him in its arms, but unable to do so. Maurice's 
terror felt suddenly unloosed, and he sprang to 
his feet, but the figure passed on behind the 
cottage ; the other was already out of sight. 



\ 



A DREAM. 107 

He knew that these were his parents, and he 
rushed after them, feeling sure that they had 
come to resolve his doubts about himself. As 
he reached the angle of the cabin, behind which 
the last form had disappeared, another figure 
glided up from the lake, and in an instant stood 
between him and his pursuit. As he started 
up, the mass of vapour whirled by the wind, had 
again let the moon shine out, and Maurice saw 
that it was Cecil Brownlow. He tried to push 
past her, but he became conscious of being sur- 
rounded . other forms had followed Cecil closely, 
and now grouped beside her. He looked eagerly 
among them for the two first, but he could not 
identify any of these with them. 

As he stood looking, they faded away, all but 
three . Cecil and Ben, and another, whom his 
heartf knew before the moonlight fell on her face, 
for it was Elinor. At the sight of her his 
childhood vanished . ^he was a man, even more 
passionately more ardently loving than he had 
thought himself; he took her hand, but when 
he tried to draw her close beside him he found 
that it was Cecil's that he had clasped so 



108 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

warmly. The moon was again overcast, and 
but for the difference in height of the two 
figures, he might have mistaken them. Before 
he could release Cecil's hand it was taken from 
him, and Elinor came forward, drawn it seemed 
to him by her uncle. He sprang forward to 
meet her, when a shock threw him backwards . 
the earth trembled under his feet, and a chasm 
yawned between himself and Elinor. His body 
swayed, and his mind seemed to rock in the 
dread of losing her. Gathering up his strength 
he tried to leap the gulf that parted them, but 
it was beyond his power to reach the farther side. 
Down . down he sank into utter darkness, fast 
becoming insensible. Suddenly he felt his wrist 
grasped and his whole body drawn slowly but 
irresistibly upwards, to the light. Mr. Dryden 
had rescued him, but his face had the stern, un* 
forgiving look Maurice so well remembered. 

He awoke . the pressure on his wrist was no 
imagination. His tutor was trying vainly to 
rouse him, and the sunshine told him how far 
he had slept into the morning. 



CHAPTER VIIL 

MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 

Roland Markham passed nearly as disturbed 
a night as Maurice did, with no sweet love 
visions to soothe the anger that possessed all 
his faculties. he was angry with every one, with 
Elinor for receiving visitors without consulting 
him first, with Adelaide for appropriating James 
Fisher's society, with James himself for letting 
a mere boy come between him and Elinor, and 
with his wife for neglecting the due superin- 
tendence of her daughters. 

Poor Mrs. Markham was thoroughly alarmed 
at this charge brought against her, for he had 



110 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

roughly bade the girls be off to bed without 
good-nighting or nonsense, and she asked him 
what could have happened to vex him. 

" Vex ? Good Heavens, Elinor, you're enough 
to provoke a saint. Vex me ? enough to pro- 
voke any man to fury to come up into his own 
drawing-room and find a young fellow he knows 
nothing of, hanging about his daught.ers . con- 
found his coolness ; anybody but me would have 
kicked him out of the house, I believe." 

. " But Roland, dear, it isn*t likely we should 
know all the people Elinor does, and she said he 
was a friend of hers." 

He muttered something he was possibly 
ashamed to say louder, and then told her she 
ought to be ashamed' of herself to leave Elinor 
to her own devices in the way she did. " Mind 
you, Nell, you look surprised, and I dare say you 
are, it's the first time I've troubled myself to 
meddle in any fid-fad of etiquette, but I'll not 
have young men coming in at all hours they 
'Ichoose, and sitting alone with my girls. What's 
that about James Fisher? Yes, of course I 
don't object to him, he's a relation ; besides, if 



MR. MARKHAM PATS AN EARLY VISIT. Ill 

Elinor did take a fancy to him, she might do 
worse, but to see her languishing those eyes of 
hers at a boy, who can't give a reasonable ac- 
count of himself . whom I shrewdly suspect to 
have no right to any name at all. It's the 
very . '* 

Poor Mrs. Markham was crying heartily . 
never a very difficult process with her when she 
was either frightened or annoyed. 

He stopped, looked at her half savagely for 
an instant, and then seemed to change his 
mind. 

" There, Nell, don't make a piece of work ; 
you know it always puts me out if you 
cry. 

She was quite as unhappy at his implied wish 
about Elinor and James Fisher, as at his rebuke. 
She had found out Addy's secret long ago, but 
several hints which had lately fallen from her 
husband had made her think it would be wise 
to keep her discovery to herself, while Elinor 
remained with them. 

His next words made this impossible, for 
although Mrs. Markham had been persuaded to 



112 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

deceive her parents, she was always frank and 
open with her husband. 

" There's another thing, too, I'm vexed about ; 
it seems to me that Fisher cares as much for 
Addy at times as he does for Elinor. Adelaide's 
just the sort of simpleton to fancy a man in love 
with her, when he's nothing of the kind. I've 
known girls of the sort, I can tell you, so I 
should be glad if you'd drop a hint about it's 
not being right to interfere between a sister and 
her lover. Make Addy believe' it's selfish, or 
something of that, and she'll give it up at once. 
Now, Nell, there's no use in your looking miser- 
able, and turning up your eyes as if I was hard 
on the girl, but you'll never persuade me a man 
with eyes in his head like Fisher, would neglect 
such a girl as Elinor for good, little, ordinary 
Addy, unless she sought him." 

Mrs. Markham was trying to summon as 
much dignity as she could into her pretty insipid 
face. 

"You are angry, Roland, and that makes 
you unjust ; till Elinor came you never found 
fault with Adelaide as you do now. I don't 



MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 113 

think it's fair/' . and the wounded motherly 
feelings swam out of her eyes again, and fell 
over her cheeks, . " to be always drawing com- 
parisons and making contrasts between the girls ; 
but if it is to be done, then I must tell you, 
Roland, that although you are so clever, you 
are mistaken if you think Elinor would make 
James as good a wife as Addy would, or . " 
and the secret burst out in a small feminine 
triumph, "that he cares nearly as much. for her 
as he does for her dear, good, little sister." 

Having delivered herself of this speech, and 
considering what Roland Markham's anger could 
be, it was a decidedly courageous achievement, 
Mrs. Markham retreated up-stairs, leaving her 
husband to digest his wrath before he followed 
her. 

But this was impossible. His wife's words, 
and his own observations during the last few 
days had made it difficult not to believe them, 
showed him that all his schemes might be over- 
thrown by the very person whom he counted on 
to aid in their execution. Adelaide, how dared 
she come tangling the strands of his web ? and 

VOL. II. 8 



114 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

what a fool James must be to prefer her to so 
glorious a creature as her sister. He paced up 
and down before the fire. No, James Fisher 
was not a fool ; surelv he must understand him 
when he had known him, and managed him too, 
ever since he was breeched. If things had not 
gone too far with Adelaide . stuflF, what was the 
use of an " if?" girls' hearts didn't break now-a- 
days . a little change of scene and a new lover 
would be a capital cure. Well, Adelaide dis- 
posed of, he had but to hint to James Elinor's 
prospects with regard 1;o Flairs, to make him as 
eager for the match as he was himself. The 
only possible drawback was Elinor herself; was 
it likely that any engagement known to Mr. 
Dry den, but to be kept secret from others, ex- 
isted between her and that dark-eyed, handsome 
youngster ? . and here Mr. Markham fell into a 
deep reverie ; when he roused from it, his anger 
was fiercer than ever ; it was, perhaps, well for 
his wife that she had fallen sound asleep before 
he joined her. 

Mr. Markham got up much earlier than usual, 
and had left the house before either his wife or 



. I 



MR. MARKHAM PATS AN EARLY VISIT. 115 

Elinor appeared. To Adelaide, who made his 
breakfast for him, he spoke more kindly than he 
had done since Elinor's arrival among them . 
that is to say he was less rude. There was no 
positive hardness or brutality in this man's 
nature ; he had simply no sensitiveness himself, 
and did not believe in the existence of delicate 
feelings in others ; " that sort of thing," he said, 
'' was all sentiment and bosh." So that when 
his senses were annoyed by the contrast the 
demeanour of the two sisters offered, his im- 
pulsiveness vented itself in daily, requests to his 
younger daughter . not to come into the room 
like a crab, not to look as if she were going to 
be hung if a stranger spoke to her, and above 
all, when she shook hands to look people in the 
face ; which requests, and many others doubtless 
improving to Adelaide had they been judiciously 
administered, yet being delivered aloud before 
the younger children, servants, or even chance 
visitors, somehow seemed to have a contrary 
effect, and rather crushed out of the timid girl 
the little self-respect she possessed. But this 
morning, although she had a frightened remem- 

8.2 



116 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

brance of her father's anger on the previous 
evening, she was not called on to endure the 
sharp suffering, inadvertence of this kind can 
inflict . suffering as keen as the lash itself; and 
while the flayed victim moves about by stealth, 
robbed of all the grace a free independent bear- 
ing gives to almost any young woman, the in- 
flicter lolls back in his or her chair, serenely 
unconscious of the mischief done . a mischief 
which frequently is life-long. 

On the contrary, her father praised the coffee, 
praised her early rising, and even said just before 
he went away, that he wished Elinor would take 
pattern by " such a good, little girl." 

Adelaide was very happy, at least till her 
morbidity plunged her into a tangled endeavour 
to discover how much of this enjoyment was 
pure, and how much alloyed by the secret plea- 
sure of discovering that there was one point on 
which her father thought her superior to Elinor. 
Poor child, she was in the right way, but as yet 
she sorely hindered herself, by her want of trust 
in other help than her own. 

Roland Markham ^valked along briskly ; he 



MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 1 ] 7 

felt pleased with himself this morning, as a lazy 
man does who finds he is stirring two hours 
earlier than usual. Adelaide's smiling face too, 
had made him feel happier ; it seemed a foretaste 
of the ease with which a little management and 
petting would reconcile her to the trial she would 
now be called on to bear. 

But he turned his thoughts restlessly away : 
girls always had half-a-dbzen love affairs before 
they made up their minds ; it was mere folly, 
womanish nonsense in him to think so much 
about it Still he grew more and more dis- 
quieted and irritable as he approached Mr. 
Fisher's chambers. Adelaide's eyes were too 
much like her mother's for him to find any 
difficulty in reading their expression, and he had 
seen her look at James, lately, with a devotion 
that was quite unmistakable. 

This had not greatly troubled him, till his 
wife's hint as to Mr. Fisher's own attachment 
came to show him how easily all his plans might 
be irrevocably overturned. 

He stood hesitating a few minutes, when he 
reached the second floor, occupied by bis cousin. 



118 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

As a rule, James was easily persuaded . es- 
pecially by Mr. Markham . hence the advantage 
of his marrying Elinor; but he was just the 
sort of man to resent interference about any- 
thing he had set his mind on, in a quiet, obsti- 
nate way, that might entirely defeat Roland's 
present plans. 

He must not be precipitate ; ' he must go to 
work covertly, so as to throw Fisher off his 
guard. 

James sat yawning over a luxurious break- 
fast, in a handsome silk dressing-gown and 
needle- work slippers, the offering of one of his 
numerous admirers. A French novel was care- 
lessly slipped under some severe looking law 
book, as his cousin came in. 

" You Roland ! why, what can have happened 
to start you from your sleep before the day's 
aired ?" 

" The truth is" . Markham spoke with that 
wonderful hearty frankness which often carries 
an air of sincerity along with it . " I couldn't 
sleep ; I was so bothered with what happened 
last night." 



MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 119 

" Happened last night ?" Mr. Fisher yawned 
again, as if uncertain whether his memory was 
quite awake yet, and looked up in Roland's face. 

"Why, I mean that young fellow coming 
and thrusting himself into my house, without, 
invitation, or leave of mine or anybody else's." 

** Are you quite sure he*d not been invited 
by any one ?" His cousin noticed the repressed 
eagerness in Fisher's tone, although he still 
affected the same lazy indifference. 

" Not likely. He's a protege of Wentworth 
Dryden's, it seems ; and, I suppose, finding out 
that Elinor was in town, he thought it a good 
opportunity of ingratiating himself with the 
heiress of Flairs, . a most monstrous liberty, 
in my opinion." 

" What does your daughter think ?" 

Roland Markham grew confused, in spite of 
his profound diplomacy. 

" Who do you mean . Elinor ? Of course 
she's kind hearted, and was civil to the boy, 
whom I believe she knew something of when 
he was much younger. But Elinor's a bit of 
an aristocrat, let me tell you. She don't like 



120 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

that levelling style of manner any better than 
I do." 

" You, Roland, why I always consider you a 
thorough radical !" 

Markham grew more and more nettled. 

He was losing his time in arguments wholly 
irrelevant, and had a dim idea besides, that his 
pliable cousin was turning it to his own purposes. 

He felt that he had better consider a little 
before he answered ; and while he hesi(ated, 
Fisher went on : . 

" It struck me that Elinor . Miss Dryden, I 
mean . was on very friendly terms with this 
Mr. Karse ; in fact, I fancied they quite under- 
stood one another." 

It seemed as if Pisher intended to throw his 
cousin off his balance this morning. If he bad 
not that intention, his chance hits were very 
successful. Mr. Markham reddened, and then 
turned pale with passion, almost as furious with 
Pisher's daring, as at the danger he suggested. 
He tried to laugh, and succeeded as well as men 
of his uncontrolled temperament do, when they 
think to hide their real feelings. 






MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 121 

" You're joking, of course, James ? It's lucky 
Elinor don't hear you. Why, she'd as much 
think of engaging herself to a raw boy like that 
as . well-T-as you would think of attaching your- 
self to Mary or Adelaide ; one idea would be as 
preposterous as the other. No; I should like 
Nell to marry young, but a girl who is heiress 
of so much wealth must not throw herself away 
on a nobody like young Karse. Ha, ha, the 
joke's rather too broad, James !" 

Mr. Fisher looked not quite pleased to be 
laughed at, but he did not refuse to father the 
joke so positively thrust on him. He seemed 
to wish the subject changed. 

" I thought you told me once that the Squire 
had not executed any deed or will, appointing 
your daughter his heiress ?" 

" No, I didn't say that . I couldn't have said 
it. What I did say was, he had never confided 
such a settlement to me, as I consider he should 
in common courtesy have done. Of course, 
his whole conduct towards the girl betrays his 
intentions plainly. Why, I believe, but for this 
fever, he'd never have suffered her to remain 



122 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

a night under my roof . the old scoundrel !'* 
. his face darkened, as it always did, when this 
topic was mooted. *' I believe he wants her to 
care for no one in the world except himself. I 
believe he wanted to coop her up at Flairs until 
he'd got her safely married to some titled sim- 
pleton, who'd neglect her, and break her heart, 
and run through the property. Of course, Eli- 
nor's good enough for a lord . I know that ; 
but I have my own ideas about her future ; and 
I think that suspicious old fool may find himself 
outwitted for once." 

He did not look at Fisher during this 
rather long speech ; he was so bent on balanc- 
ing an ivory paper-cutter on his forefinger, and 
then letting it tap the same measured number 
on the table, that perhaps he did not see that 
Mr. Fisher had risen, and walked to the fire- 
place, so that he no longer faced him. If Mark- 
ham had turned his head suddenly, he would 
have seen first a look of wretched disquiet, and 
then an eager, intense interest in his cousin's face. 

He was self-conscious, for he passed his hand 
across his eyes when he spoke. 



MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 123 

" Do you mean, then, that you think she has 
settled it for herself already ?" 

" Confound it, no !" He only looked up for 
an instant, and then turned to the paper-cutter 
again . his words coming out with the dry sound 
that indicates we are saying what we mean our 
hearer to construe by our own mental foot-notes, 
but which we ostensibly intend to bear a dif- 
ferent interpretation. If the hearer's acuteness 
spells out the foot-notes, well and good ; but he 
must not suppose they exist, except in his ima- 
gination. " She's only twenty, and besides a 
few French fools and German gluttons, I don't 
think she's had much in the way of male so- 
ciety. I suppose she saw some English in her 
travels, but they seem never to have stayed long 
enough in any place to make a lasting acquaint- 
ance." 

" Just so. What do you mean by what you 
said just now, then ?" 

The words were inquisitive, but their sound 
expressed the most lazy indifference. 

Something in them, however, made Mr. 
Markham turn round and face his cousin. 



124 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Fisher's eyes drooped beneath his, and a satis- 
fied smile came into Roland's lips. His smile 
was usually of that physical kind which seldom 
reaches the eyes. 

" I mean this/' he had resumed his former 
attitude. " I think it quite likely before Nell 
returns to Flairs at all, that some Londoner may 
be struck by her, and may succeed in winning her 
affections, for although she's the most heart- 
whole girl of twenty I ever came across, she's 
iust the sort to be generous, spite of her ex- 
pectations, in promising herself to a man who 
loved her for herself . but mind you, she'd want 
a man's whole heart : no half-devotedness would 
do for her. What lots of it she'll get when 
once she mixes with the world ; a glorious crea- 
ture like that isn't seen every day/' 

No answer came, and Mr. Markham looked 
at his watch, found out that he should b& late 
at his office . he had better be moving, so he 
departed, going down the stairs in a more self- 
satisfied frame of mind than he had gone up 
them. 

It would have been more natural as well as 



MR. MARKHAM PAYS AN EARLY VISIT. 125 

easier, to so coarse- minded a man, if he had 
openly told Fisher he wished him to marry his 
daughter Elinor, but there was nothing simple 
in Roland Markham ; it was from him that 
Elinor inherited her innate love of intrigue . 
he always preferred a crooked path to a straight 
one ; he imagined that if he seemed anxious for 
such a marriage his cousin might suspect its 
desirability, and on the other hand, if he posi- 
tively forbade an attachment between Fisher and 
Adelaide, mere opposition might deepen that 
which already existed. Altogether he felt satis- 
fied ; his conscience no longer pricked him about 
his youngest daughter. If James now trans- 
ferred his affections, it would be plain that 
Adelaide's was not a nature capable of retaining 
them, and the same kind of thing might have 
happened after marriage, and made her wretched 
for life ; he had said nothing definite one way 
or another to bias his cousin, the onus must 
rest entirely with himself. 



CHAPTER IX. 



BEN. 



The winter seemed to have awakened, or at any 
rate, had resolved to assert its power before 
Spring came to send it into its usual banish- 
ment. Very late in the day, though, the morn- 
ings had grown long and bright, the leaf-buds 
were swelling, crocuses of all hues made the 
flower-garden at Flairs like a brilliant piece of 
enamel, before the frost came. It was plain he 
had come at last in earnest, as terrible in his 
fierceness as if he had been caged up in the 
Polar regions, and had just broken loose. 

Very bitter and hard to bear by frames un- 



BEN. 127 

strung by their usual winter seasoning . but 
fraught with hope, because of its very severity, 
to the fever-stricken village. 

Maurice had left London by an early train, 
and he was now walking fast along the ice- 
bound road, leading from the station to Flairs. 
He had not spoken of his journey to Mr. 
Brownlow . he meant to return the same even- 
ing, so that there was really no risk, as he should 
not go near Starby ; but he knew his tutor 
would have opposed his wish to see Ben, and he 
could not sleep again till this night- mare of 

doubt was removed. 

ft 

His brain was still excited, and his whole 
body fevered by his last night's vision ; the bitter 
cold was refreshing, although it pierced through 
all his wraps and numbed his fingers as he tried 
to open the little side gate near Sir Stuart's 
park. 

He pushed through it, and found himself 
once more at Flairs. It bore no welcoming face, 
there was a hard, grey look on sky and earth . 
a mourning for the long banishment into which 
the sunshine had departed. The north wind 



128 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

. 

drove steadily into Maurice's face, as if to turn 
him back, and at intervals a few unwilling snow- 
flakes fell, seemingly afraid of the bitter atmo- 
sphere. 

A chill feeling crept over him ; Nature was 
echoing the warning of his heart, that his quest 
would be fruitless. 

The little gate in the enclosure brought the 
warmth back ; he should see Ben in five minutes 
now . his dear, old, foster father : he almost 
forgot the object of his journey as the home-like 
feelings of aflPection asserted themselves. 

He walked gently over the dry twigs near 
the cottage-door . he wanted to give the dear 
fellow a surprise. He raised the l^tch, and went 
softly in. The old woman sate nodding. over 
the fire just where Mr. Dry den had left her on 
the previous day ; he had not returned since, for 
the exertion and fatigue had completely over- 
powered him, but a younger woman had been 
sent to supply his place, one whose husband 
had been taken from her in the early days of the 
fever. 

Before Maurice could get any coherent answer 



BEN. 129 

from the sleeper, the nurse hearing a strange 
footstep came quickly from the sick-room. 

A great fear came upon Maurice . then he 
guessed all, and, passing the woman, was 
springing up-stairs when she pulled him back 
and obliged him to listen to her. 

She told him of Mr. Karse's recent danger 
and of the precarious state in which he still 
continued ; she could not say how much harm 
might not be done by a sudden shock. Maurice 
hesitated . if she had talked of the danger of 
infection to himself he would have broken away 
from her hold . now he stood still, thinking. 

** You say he is quite awake and sensible ; 
well, then, tell him Maurice is coming up-stairs 
to see him . it will do him good instead of 
harm ; and be quick," he saw the woman's look 
of reluctance, " or I shall be there before you 
have told him." 

Ben looked so ghastly . his wan face dis- 
coloured by the purple rings below his eyes and 
round his mouth, that the youth shuddered as 
he stood at the bed foot, gazing at him. 

The next moment he had clasped the meagr 

VOL. II. 9 



130 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

hand held out to him, and covered it with kisses. 
The woman went quietly out of the room, hold- 
ing up her hand by way of caution to Maurice. 

"Why didnt they tell me?" he almost 
gasped, for the agony of grief which yet he felt 
he must suppress, was choking him ; ''oh, dear, 
dear Ben, I never knew you were ill." 

He pressed the hand he held over his eyes to 
hide them, but Ben felt the hot tears which had 
sprung there. 

" My puir lad," he said, faintly, " it's a bless- 
ing to look on your bonny face, but Maurice, 
ye daurna bide here, it's the fever, and maybe 
just the look on me's done ye harm already." 

"I'll not leave you again," said Maurice, 
firmly ; " do you think, after all you've done 
for me, I'll leave you to strangers, Ben ? don't 
ask it.'^ 

He rose from his knees, and seated himself 
deliberately beside the bed, as if determined to 
carry out his resolution. 

The sick man turned his face feebly round 
towards him. 

" I'm not left to strangers, Maurice . the 



BEN. 131 

Squire's tended me all through more like a 
woman than a man ; . I've known it, for all the 
straying of iny wits. He only left me yester- 
day . bless him, he'll soon be back again.*' 

He spoke very slowly, pausing for breath to 
return between every sentence, but his voice 
was firm and distinct. 

The last words roused Maurice, and recalled 
the purpose of his visit, but how could he dis- 
tress and disturb Ben, now ; and yet he felt 
some uneasiness at the thought of meeting Mr. 
Dry den. He had not seen him since he left 
Flairs. The few letters he had received had 
been kind, very grave, and formal : it was a 
strange revulsion, but Maurice felt keenly as he 
sate still, awaiting his benefactor's arrival, that 
Mr. Dryden's active dislike had inspired more 
affection than thfe benefits so coldly conferred . 
a little more personal interest would have light- 
ened the obligation that weighed more and more 
heavily, and which he could not make up his 
mind to shake off. 

" I could have taken anything from him, 
once," he said to himself; " there is no pain in 

9.2 



132 ELINOR DEYDEN^S PROBATION. 

the favours of those we love, but the Squire 
won't even let me give him thanks or aflFec- 
tion . it makes the debt too heavy : he does not 
treat me like a free m^n : but for what I owe 
him, I would tell him he is a tyrant, for I don't 
suppose he knows it." 

He had sate musing quite forgetful of Ben, 
quite unconscious that the sunken but intelli- 
gent eyes were watching every change of mood. 
He started as Ben spoke again. 

'.Ye've no lost yer auld gaits, I see," he 
said, smiling ; " ye're just gane daft a wee ; eh, 
Maurice ; I thought ye'd have thought a heap 
about the Squire's care and guidness to your 
auld friend." 

Maurice roused up with a desperate struggle 
at attention and concentration of thought, in 
which he found it hard to conquer. 

" Oh, yes . yes, I heard all you said, dear 
Ben, and I thought it very kind; in fact, it 
shows more heart than I gave the Squire credit 
for." 

A sudden light shone out of Karse's eyes, 
and a flush came into his face. 



BEN. 133 

" Shame on ye, then, lad ! ye're the last I 
ever thought to hear say a word against him . 
him that has done for you all that your heart 
most wished for. Oh, Maurice !" he went on, 
his agitation giving him strength so that he 
turned his head completely round on the pillow. 
" Have ye deceived me all these years ? . have 
ye a black spot like that in yer heart, and I not 
knowing of it ?" 

" Hush, Ben !" spite of the excitement he 
felt, he knew Karse must be calmed ; " Pm not 
ungrateful ; and, besides, I didn't come here to 
complain of Mr. Dryden. Now I sha'n't tell 
you any more" . he smiled, and the sweet look 
soothed more than his words . "unless you 
keep silence, or when the Squire comes hell say 
I've done you harm instead of good. I mean, 
that he always seems so cold, so anxious to 
check affection, that 1 wonder at his showing it 
even to you ; only, dear Ben" . he took up the 
wasted hand and kissed it tenderly . " I sup- 
pose no one could help loving you. Perhaps," 
he went on, anxious to divert the invalid's 
thoughts from what he felt must produce dis- 



134 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

cussion, " Tm jealous of the Squire's nursing ; 
it seems as if no one but I had a right to take 
care of you, Ben, who've been father and mo- 
ther both to me." 

He had not meant to say this; he knew 
directly he saw Karse's state that to venture 
near the subject of his dream would be to put 
himself in the way of temptation, but the words 
seemed to escape from his lips without his will, 
and to bring back with them each figure of the 
dream with vivid reality, followed by all the 
painful uncertainties he had been trying to for- 
get. If he spoke another word he should break 
all his resolutions. 

Ben looked searchingly at him ; he lay back 
now exhausted ; the temporary excitement had 
left him paler than ever. He whispered to 
Maurice, and pointed to a medicine bottle on 
the table. 

This revived him, but still he lay silent, deep 
in thought, for his brows contracted, and his 
mouth closed, as if with the effort of rousing 
memory. 

^' Father and mother/' he said at last, open- 



BEN. 135 

ing his eyes and keeping tbem fixed on Maurice, 
" puir bairn, it's hard on ye not to have known 
them, to have been robbed all yer life of the 
sweetest part of it. Will ye know them when 
ye meet them in Heaven, or will ye pass them 
by, and cling to me there ?" 

The look of pain, of almost anguish, that 
wrung all natural expression out of the youth's 

 

face made Karse's lips quiver ; he thought it had 
reference to himself. 

" Ye think Fm passing there, lad ; I hope 
so" . he spoke very reverently; "but we can 
only hope, my bairn ; at least, such as I am 
dare not do more. I'd have liked a few words 
with the rector and his prayers, but His will be 
done . if I need them I shall have them. He 
knows what we want and what we've no need 
of. He is all our help." 

He paused, and Maurice was too deeply 
affected to undeceive him at once, for he had 
not dreamed that Ben would not recover. 

" There's been often something on my mind 
to say," Ben went on, more as if communing 
with himself than heeding a listener, " and I've 



136 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

always meant to leave it till the last. Is it the 
last now ?" he said. Maurice dared not speak, 
there was an awe in Ben's manner that im- 
pressed on him the helief that he had been too 
sanguine, and that his only friend would not 
recover. *' I've kept it back, lad, I don't know 
why ; sometimes it seemed like telling the 
Squire's secret, but it may be he thinks you 
know it all the while. It's come to my mind 
he must, since he's done so much for ye." 

Maurice's eager interest showed itself in his 
eyes, though he strove hard to keep it back. 

" You're exhausting yourself, Ben ; you will 
tell me some other time." 

Ben looked at him to enjoin silence . he went 
on . 

" There are no some other times left for me, 
lad. When the Squire sent me to fetch you . 
ah, ye never knowed that before" . Maurice had 
started up with surprise . ** he thought the 
woman that nursed ye would be dead betime I 
reached ye, but she weren't quite. She said to 
me when I told her what I'd come for, * I hope 
the Squire '11 be kind to a poor child that's kin 



BEN. 137 

to him, DOW he's neither father nor mother left 
to care for him/ When it came near the end 
with her I said . ^ You're sure he's neither 
father nor mother ?' . and she answered . ' No 
father, and his mother dead ; he's kin to him 
as sends ye.' " 

Maurice tried to speak, but Ben's look 
checked him. He lay still some time trying to 
gain strength for what more had to be told. 
His voice was very feeble when he spoke again. 

" Are ye listening, lad ? . All the Squire said 
to me was, * Ben, I wish the child well fed and 
cared for, as ye would bring up a boy of your 
own. Keep him away from me; he's the son 
of one who did me deadly injury, and the look 
of him 'ud bring it all back.' " 

The last effort had exhausted Ben; the 
deathly whiteness that spread slowly over his 
face, the drooping eyelids, and relaxation of the 
lower jaw, seemed to Maurice tokens that all 
was over. He ran to the door and called for 
the nurse. 

She was frightened, but not so much as he 
had been. She told him he must leave Mr. 



138 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Karse to her ; that if, when he recovered con- 
sciousness, he saw him, it might bring back 
the emotion that had caused this faintness, 
" For I dop't think, sir," the woman said re- 
proachfully, " that you've minded all I've said 
to you." 

He left the room and went down-stairs in 
silence. He felt so utterly confused, so thrown . 
off his balance by all he had just heard, by re- 
morse at having, jn his eager interest, suffered 
his dear old friend to exhaust his newly-found 
strength, that he had neither sight nor hearing. 
He sank down quietly on one of the wooden 
settles by the fire, never heeding the sound of 
approaching footsteps. 

Nor did he notice that the old woman, wake- 
ful enough now, rose to her feet, and after 
listening a moment, raised the latch of the door 
and went outside the cottage. There was a 
murmur of voices, but Maurice noticed nothing. 
Stupefied with the impossibility of realising all 
he had just been listening to, he sate quite still, 
leaning his head against the angle of the pro- 
jecting chimney. 



BEN. 139 

The old woman came bustling in^ but he 
scarcely roused even when she spoke. 

" That's the gentleman, Squire." 

Then Maurice became conscious before he 
saw distinctly, that a tall man was standing in 
the entrance just behind the woman. 

He glanced up, and recognised Mr. Dryden. 

The Squire looked very grave, and there was 
more agitation in his manner than Maurice had 
ever seen before. 

" How came you here ?" 

'' I wanted to see Ben ; I did not know he 
was ill, or I should have come before." 

An angry flush rose to Mr. Dryden's forehead. 

"Has not Mr. Brownlow told you that I 
wished . that I- desired" . he said the last 
word sternly, for there was a proud look of re- 
sistance in the young man's face he had never 
seen before . " you would never leave London 
so long as the fever lasted ?" 

" Mr. Dryden, not even the respect I owe 
you ought to make me neglect Ben ; no one has 
so great a right to care for him : he is the only 
father I have ever known." 



140 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

He looked proudly up in the Squire's face ; it 
seemed to him then . spite of his obligations . 
he could never love the man who had, he now 
knew, hated him for his dead father's sake, and 
to his surprise, his undaunted bearing had its 
eflfect. 

Mr. Dryden's lip quivered, his eyes drooped 
before Maurice's steady gaze ; he stood still a 
few minutes in thought before he answered, 
even then he did not look up. 

" It is natural and right you should love him, 
but you can do him no good by staying here ; 
on the contrary, you will give him a fresh 
anxiety. If you really love him, Maurice, as I 
believe you do," he looked at him now almost 
beseechingly, " you will go away at once, and 
run no further risk. I will write to tell you 
every day how he progresses ; surely that will 
content you?" 

But Maurice stood still. 

" You're very kind, sir, but why should I 
care so much for life as to neglect a plain duty, 
just to save it ? and it's an even chance if I take 
the fever after all." 



BEN. 141 

" And if you do take it," Mr. Dryden spoke 
with a strange eagerness, " you forget that you 
bring a fresh patient where we have already too 
many to attend to, now that our nurses are 
sickening." 

His impatient tone stirred Maurice's rebel- 
lious feeling ; but the last words touched him 
. they were so sadly spoken. 

He remembered all he had heard of the 
Squire's noble self-devotion, he saw how worn 
and tired he looked, and he felt ashamed of his 
hard feelings towards him. 

" But I could help you, sir, if I stayed ; you 
look sadly fagged; do let me stay and help 
you ?" He spoke with the singular frank smile 
that Miss Brownlow had pronounced quite irre- 
sistible, looking straight into the Squire's eyes, 
and again Mr. Dryden bent his head, this time 
in visible agitation, and it seemed to Maurice 
that tears were in his eyes, as he answered. 

" You can help me best now, Maurice, if you 
have any real regard for me, by going at once 
back to London, and relieving me of all anxiety 
for your safety . not all," he forced himself to 



1 



142 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

smile as if to take any reproach oat of his words, 
*' till I hear that you are safe and well, this 
rash journey of yours must give me some fear 
for its result." 

He held out his hand. Strive against it as 
he would, the irresistible influence he had strug- 
gled with in his boyhood . an influence which 
had at times subdued even the self-will of Eli- 
nor . conquered Maurice now. 

He felt that the Squire had at last discovered 
the way to control him, and that there was a 
genuine tone of interest in his anxiety to send 
him away; he let him lead him outside the 
cottage. 

" You will let me know how dear Ben is ?" 
he said. 

** I will. Write to me as soon as you reach 
town ; ygu shall hear to-morrow evening about 
Karse. Now, good-bye," 



CHAPTER X. 



love's dawn. 



And while Maurice's sudden passion for Elinor 
had mastered him, so that his ardent desire to 
create a future for her, had awakened determi- 
nation to solve all doubts about himself, Cecil 
Brownlow stayed quietly with her invalid aunt 
near Oxford. 

The life was very dull . ^Miss Brownlow's 
health prevented her from receiving visitors, and 
with the exception of a little occasional shopping, 
Cecil had no interruption to the musings of her 
solitary walks. In vain she tried not to muse, 
to rouse herself by outward sights and sounds, 



144 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

to notice the change that almost each day 
brought in the hedges, to listen to the increasing 
chirping of the birds, and the music of their 
morning and evening songs, to stop and inhale 
that indescribable perfume . the incense that 
heralds spring; she did all these things, 
but they were not spontaneous, she seemed 
forced to them as an escape from her own 
thoughts. She did not dare to ask herself 
boldly why she lived in this unusual disouiet, so 
unlike the pure self-communings of her Vormer 
life. If she had been compelled to give a rea- 
son, she would possibly have said frankly, that 
she was alarmed at the hold the memory of 
Maurice Karse possessed over her, but to her- 
self she was severe to sternness. She felt and 
knew . as women only can know .although 
to themselves even they will deny the con- 
sciousness . that if she were to allow herself 
to discuss the right or wrong of thinking of 
him, the mischief would grow ; it was only by 
forcing her thoughts away that she could hope 
for peace. 

On the first day of her arrival, as she sat 



love's dawn. 145 

waiting for her aunt's appearance, there had 
come a sudden recollection of his looks and 
manner on the previous evening, and she won- 
dered if he would miss her. And then came 
the remembrance of her Aunt Jane Ann's 
laughing warning on her first arrival, not to let 
Maurice Karse fall in love with her. Cecil's 
cheeks grew hot as she remembered disgraceful 
stories she had heard of girls who had loved 
men in a lower rank of life than their own, and 
how she had always considered that such things 
could not happen if the woman maintained her 
own self-respect, and the next riiinute she smiled 
at her vanity. Why need she fear that Mau- 
rice's peace would be disturbed by her absence ; 
they would miss each other as two people 
brought up without companions must miss 
such unusual society, but that would be all . 
and then her aunt's entrance had ended her re- 
flections. 

Was it only the remembrance of the disquiet 
those reflections had caused that made her under- 
go such constant strife to avoid their recurrence ? 
If Cecil had been told she loved Maurice Karse, 

VOL. II. 10 



146 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

she would have denied it, but with some women . 
especially those whoseimaginative gifts are stronger 
than their opinion of their own attractions . ^there 
IS a stage of feeling, the precursor of the love 
which lies with folded wings deep in their hearts, 
hidden from their own knowledge, but ready to 
soar forth in answer to love. Such women will 
never give their affections unasked, but when they 
do give them, they give all ; they venture all their 
wealth on the one cast. They do not love from 
gratified vanity or admiration, or any of the 
motives that influence others ; their fervid ima- 
ginations long ago . perhaps in childhood . 
created to themselves an ideal to be worshipped, 
an image to theni of the Good and Beautiful . 
which they but too often pass their lives in vain 
search after; hence their utter indifference to 
those who love them, but who fail to realise 
their imaginings, and hence their misery if 
tempted to wed against their own convictions. 

Cecil had been a dreamer from childhood, 
and from her mother's ill-health had been left 
too much to herself. As she grew older, she 
struggled against the romantic dreams of earlier 



love's dawn. 147 

days, for she felt their enervating influence on 
her daily life. 

But now, though she tried not to think of 
Maurice, trb^re were looks and words which 
would come back . looks that had spoken glow- 
ing, unfeigned admiration ; and then she turned 
from such remembrance troubled at her own 
vanity. His words were harder to banish, and 
besides these, ideas shared in common, which it 
was impossible now to dissociate from him, 
would recur with an obstinacy that puzzled 
her. 

Every former resource had become distasteful 
or else proved a snare to bring him to her mind. 
If she read she found herself wondering what he 
would think of such and such a passage ; and 
even the outward distraction she soug^ in her 
rambles would often lead her insensibly to recall 
his glowing descriptions of Nature. 

If she had been still unconscious &he would 
have cherished these thoughts and have found 
the monotonous life at Kin try a dreamland of 
happiness ; but the perpetual struggle with her- 
self was wearing and depressing. 

10.2 



148 ELINOR DMDEN'S PROBATION. 

Cecil began to think time passed more slowly 
at Kintry than anywhere else. 

A sentence in her Uncle Erasmus's letter to 
Aunt Mary, disturbed her strangely, and yet she 
could have given herself no satisfactory reason 
for such disquiet. "Tell Cecil," he wrote, 
" that Maurice and I met her charming friend, 
Miss Dryden, yesterday, and to my surprise they 
greeted one another as old friends. I believe my 
pupil is to spend an evening at Mr. Markham's 
house." 

What could Elinor want with Maurice, after 
the slighting manner in which she had spoken 
of him? Cecil decided that first impressions 
were always the true ones, and that she was 
quite sure she did not like Elinor Dryden, spite 
of her charming manner and amusing talk. 

Even her selfish, complaining aunt noticed 
the change in her spirits ; but with the usual 
dislike of a confirmed invalid for the ailments of 
others, she decided that Cecil was getting over- 
anxious about her father, and that her pale fece 
and heavy eyes were caused by fretting. She 
was partly right . for the long separation was 



LOVE*S DAWN* 149 

becoming very trying to the loving daughter, 
and at times it seemed as if she must rebel, and 
set off for Starby at once; but the dread of 
weakening her father's hands and overtaxing his 
strength by adding to his anxieties, restrained 
her, and so the days passed wearily on in the 
perpetual mental conflict, or rather flight from 
it, which was growing too hard to sustain. 

Cecil found herself constantly longing for 
post-time . the only excitement of the day. Her 
father's letters had been lately shorter and less 
hopeful. He seemed anxious about Mr, Diry^ 
den, too. In the letter that met her on her 
arrival at^Kintry, he said there had been a plao 
of bringing both her and Elinor Dryden to 
Flairs ; but the imprudence of Northover, Mr 
Dryden's housekeeper, had defeated this, so they 
must be content with patience for a while*^a 
patience which so far as her meeting with Elinor 
went, Cecil felt would not be taxed by waiting. 

Elinor had received the same news, only mor9 
detailed. Her uncle had related Northover'si 
foUy in risking the danger of infection to the 
whole household merely to gratify her own curi* 



150 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

osity. He told Elinor how much he regretted 
having permitted the housekeeper to return to 
Flairs ; but, since this had been done, it was ne- 
cessary now to wait and see the result of her im- 
prudence. If in a week's time she showed no fe- 
verish symptoms, Elinor was at liberty to return. 

Elinor was in no hurry. Home was no 
longer so dull as it had seemed at first, and she 
shrank from the prospect of being shut up 
at Flairs with a " silly prudish girl like Cecil 
Brownlow," without even the enlivenment of her 
uncle's presence. 

She had been strangely fascinated by Maurice. 
Sometimes it was impossible to believe him the 
rough, wayward, country lad who had saved her 
life, and whom she had tried to benefit ; and at 
other times when she recalled his ways and looks 
they seemed to bring back freshly the irresistible 
attraction she had always felt towards him. 

She was surprised and almost annoyed to find 
how much she resented James Fisher's desertion. 
He was inferior to Maurice both in mind and per- 
son ; but he had mixed more with the world. 
Maurice's admiration was gratifying enough, but 



love's dawn. 151 

he had none of the soft- voiced^ insidious flattery of 
her cousin. Something that seemed apart from 
herself warned Elinor that she could never do 
wrong in James's eye, but that the slightest 
falsehood or deceit would be judged hardly by 
Maurice Karse ; and yet, although this convic- 
tion might have taught her how much higher 
was his claim on her respect and esteem, she 
felt that his thorough ignorance of society, of 
women and their ways, took all value from his 
praise, but that the good opinion of her cousin 
was a thing to be coveted and not lightly thrown 
away. She did not want to make Adelaide un- 
happy ; still it did not appear that there was an 
authorised engagement between them, and if he 
had merely returned to his former allegiance 
from remorse at Adelaide's evident sorrow, he 
could not be permanently attached to her. 

But these meditations were not the cause of 
Elinor's present perplexity. 

She sat in the study . a small dingy room 
behind the dining-parlour, looking out on the 
backs of the houses, with a foreground of 
leads on which a protuberance glazed at top 



152 ELINOR DRYDBN's PROBATION. 

suggested the notion of an imprisoned Cyclops, 
who did the kitchen work. 

Adelaide was hearing Mary's lessons, while 
Elinor sat before a desk strewn with bills and 
scraps of paper on which she had been vainly 
trying to add up the sum total. 

Her brows were knit . her eyes contracted ; 
presently she pushed her chair vehemently away 
from the table. 

'* I was never meant for this counting-house 
drudgery," she said, forcing a laugh. " You're 
quick at accounts, Addy ; do add these things 
up and see what they come to. Til take Mary's 
lesson." 

Mary tossed her head. She had no belief in 
Elinor's teaching powers, though she thought 
her grand and clever. Elinor had no patience 
with the imperfect lesson, and when Adelaide 
looked up from her task, she saw the younger 
sister crying, and the eldest flushed and angry. 

" Oh, Addy, Nell's so cross," sobbed Mary. 

*' Adelaide, be so kind as to send that child 
up-stairs . her impertinence is intolerable." 

But Mary did not wait to be told. She 



love's dawn. 163 

flounced out of the room, turning round as soon 
as her hand was on the lock of the door, to tell 
Elinor that she'd no business to be cross with 
her lessons when she couldn't even do her own 
sums without Addy's help. 

Elinor restrained her wrath till the child was 
out of hearing. 

" Adelaide, how shamefully you are bringing 
up that little vixen ; such self-will and such an 
unrestrained temper are quite intolerable. Dig- 
nity in a woman is one thing, but rebellion 
against the opinion and control of elders is 
insupportable." 

The flashing eyes and angry tone struck 
Adelaide forcibly, as a comment on Elinor's 
own words. 

"You will find that quite right, I think," 
she said, pushing the long list across the table. 
Then she went on nervously . " You . you don't 
mean to say you owe all those things, Elinor ? 
Why there are among them all the presents 
you've given to us." 

Elinor rose out of her chair, looking stately 
and surprised. 



154 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" Tm not angry with you, Addy, but you say 
very strange things sometimes. The price of a 
present is the affair only of the giver, and ready- 
money payment is a thing only thought of 
among the lower classes. You will know 
this when you come to have money of your 
own.*' 

Adelaide shrank from her sister's words as if 
they had struck her in the face. 

" Then, Elinor, I'm glad to belong to the 
lower class you speak of, for I could not bear to 
Uve in debt !" 

She sighed, for she was beginning to under- 
stand the insolence of tradesmen and the half 
whispered discussions so frequent between her 
father and mother ; but then, the atmosphere of 
debt she lived in was caused by necessary ex- 
penses ; it seemed to her that it was much worse 
for Elinor to run wilfully into it for trinkets and 
presents. 
. "In debt! Adelaide, my dear child, don't 
be an idiot," Elinor laughed, playfully, to show 
what an excellent humour she was in ; " one 
would think I owed hundreds of pounds . and 



love's dawn. 155 

don't you suppose that Uncle Dryden gives me 
all I want. I should have written to him to 
double my allowance weeks ago, only I don't 
want to worry him during the fever ; now, what 
are you looking so prim and solemn for . your 
face is a yard long :" and she drew her own 
mouth down in comical imitation. 

Adelaide was coming across the room with a 
look full of eager entreaty, but Elinor's words 
jaYred her, and made her change the tone of her 
answer. She was not angry, but the rebuff to 
her timid nature made her abrupt and con- 
strained. 

" Then I think you mustn't study him any 
longer ; a man has been here three times already, 
asking for Miss Dryden, and Jane always says 
you are not at home ; yesterday I was crossing 
the hall at the time, and I interrupted to say you 
were up- stairs, but Jane contradicted me so 
decidedly that I felt quite surprised to find you 
reaUy were in the drawing-room." 

*^ And what business can it possibly be of 
yours ?" 

Elinor's tone was so scornful, that Adelaide 



156 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

literally trembled with the fear of offending her, 
though she felt it must be done. 

"' I did not think it was my business ; I 
thought it was some impostor, and I only wished 
Jane would get rid of him without telling stories, 
but I see now that he only came to be paid what 
is owing to him or his master. Oh ! linor I 
if you can't get the money to pay him at once, 
let me take back my bracelet and mamma's 
brooch, and all the things you have given tA 
papa . I'm sure they could not bear to be the 
means of your running in debt ; it seems so 
dreadful for a young person like you." 

" Young person like me ! really, Addy, you 
are complimentary ;" she drew up her tall, grace- 
ful figure, and threw her head back . she looked 
very unlike an ordinary " young person," as she 
stood now facing poor, blushing Adelaide. 
With her eyes filled with tears, and her lips 
trembling, the younger sister appeared fuU of 
guilty shame, while Elinor's flashing eyes, and 
pale, self-controlled face might have passed for 
indignant innocence. " Listen to me," she went 
on in a hard, Resolute voice that compelled atten- 



love's dawn. 157 

tion ; " by what right do you set yourself up as 
a judge over me ? I am answerable to no one 
but my Unde Dryden, and if he is satisfied you 
must be so too ; do you know that if you were 
to carry out your mad project, you would de- 
nounce me as a swindler and a cheat, and de- 
stroy my character for life . will you never learn 
worldly wisdom, Adelaide ?" 

It was painful to watch the flickering colour 
that seemed as if it could not stay on the other 
girl's face . it literally trembled there ; at that 
instant every bit of Adelaide felt afraid of the 
words that sprung on her tongue, and would be 
uttered, spite of her efiPbrts to stifle them. 

" I don't want ever to learn it ; I don't want 
to be one thing, and try to seem another. Stop, 
Elinor," for her sister tried to sweep past her in 
the tempest of wrath excited by these words. 
^' I do not think you are a cheat and a swindler, 
but I think you deceive your own soul." 

" Soul . Addy ! if you knew the uncontrollable 
disgust I have to saints and preaching-women 
you'd be quiet ; it is you who are self-deceived : 
you forget all about the Pharisee and the Pub- 



158 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

lican; you've never been put in the way of 
temptation . ^you don't know what it is. After 
all, Mary Magdalene was fond of fine clothes 
and jewellery, and yet she found more favour 
than any." 

Adelaide stood still, silent from surprise ; she 
had meant to tell her sister that she considered 
herself as what she intended to be, rather than 
as what she was, but always so full of sensitive 
self-consciousness that the slightest rebuff, just 
or unjust, sent her into a morbid enquiry as to 
which of her failings had led her to merit it ; 
she now at once acknowledged Elinor's reproach 
. she had been like the Pharisee . she had been 
judging one as hardened in self-love and extra- 
vagance, who repented so deeply ks to liken 
herself to her who was chief among sinners. 

With much of good in her, with little of 
guile, she was yet incapable of benefiting Elinor. 
Her deep, sisterly love, so singularly warm for a 
girl of eighteen, might have pleaded, and at 
length have won attention to her earnest 
humility and self-denial ; but the jealousy and 
distrust which had arisen respecting her lover 



love's dawn, 159 

bad checked demonstrative affection between the 
sisters, at least for a time, and although Elinor 
was not sensitive, she was exacting, and she 
knew by the absence of small signs and tokens 
that Adelaide's love for her had changed. 



CHAPTER XI. 

MR. fisher's perplexity. 

When Roland Markham disturbed his cousin 
at breakfast, he disturbed a good deal more than 
its digestion. 

If there were any special human enjoyment 
coveted by James Fisher . I say any special one, 
for he dearly loved aU the soft resting-places and 
" honeysuckle arbours " on life's journey . it was 
to be left in peace, not to be interfered with or 
worried, or to be shown that he ought to adopt 
any definite line of conduct, or that others had 
feelings which might be wounded to the quick 
by any inadvertent behaviour of his own; 



MR. fisher's PBRPLBXITT. 161 

he hated serious views of life : he would doubt 
less have considered ** the Psalm of Life *' i^ 
horribly bad taste ; that slight faults, or what he 
would have called such, might be as injurious to 
the happiness of others as downright sins, would 
have sounded to him sheer nonsense ; to look 
into his own heart to search his conscience- 
would have been troublesome ; if he ever thought 
of such a necessity . and perhaps here and there 
a sudden death, a sermon, a stray sentence in a 
book may have suggested it. he put it aside, 
with the assertion that such discipline might be 
good for light-hearted, shallow, excitable men, 
with no deep thought or sentiment, but to what 
he considered his reflective, self-contemplative 
temperament it would be poisonous in its de- 
pressing tendency. 

Now he felt utterly helpless and unhinged ; 
why had Roland come at all in his vulgar, coarse 
materialism. defining passing thoughts into re. 
cognised feelings, and forcing him out of the 
happy pastime he might have enjoyed between 
Elinor and her sister, into avowing a decided 
preference for one or the other ? 

VOL. II. 1 1 



162 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

It had been so pleasant to be adored by 
Adelaide . she was so young and innocent that 
he felt no scruple in appropriating her first affec- 
tions ; he had never spoken to her of marriage, 
he shrank from such a sacrifice. Marriage! 
why with his limited income it would deprive 
him of all his necessary enjoyments . he could 
not keep his health, he knew, if he gave up his 
horse, nor his spirits if he no longer went to his 
club or to the opera ; besides, Adelaide did not 
tjxpect it : he was her dearest friend, her Men- 
tor, and if she loved him more than he loved 
her . " Well," he said to himself, looking in the 
open desk he now sate before at several closely- 
fastened packets of letters, " she is not the first. 
There can be no harm in kindness to women. 
I would not wound or grieve such a dear 
little girl as Addy for the world, and it must 
make her unhappy if I go to see her less 
often, and she is so young . if I ever marry 
some one else she'll so soon get over it." 

These ideas rather floated than passed through 
his mind ; it would have been painful to give 
them visible shape. His creed respecting girls* 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 163 

Hearts, analysed, would have been found very 
similar to a popular theory about earth-worms . 
they are very tender, and will bleed aod break 
easily ; but once broken, they can live on severed. 
If he had reasoned on this, he might have de^ 
duced the origin of coquetry, and have shown 
why a woman, whose first love has been trifled 
with, is merciless . she is henceforth double- 
hearted. 

He had wasted his own feelings in so many 
transient loves and likings, that his heart had 
really been cut, as it were, to bits,* and had no 
power of strong emotion left. Still, all that 
there was of passion in him had been stirred by 
Elinor Dryden. Her wit, and the charm of her 
conversation, made him think beyond this, that 
she would prove a valuable and amusing life- 
companion to any man. 

But the roused mood that Roland's visit had 
caused, made him now, fatiguing as it was, 
sit down seriously, and try to place the two sis- 
ters side by side, and choose between them. 

He liked money for the ease and luxury it 
procured . not for itself ; and his first thought, 

11.2 



164 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

as he began his task, was of Elinor as Adelaide's 
sister, not as heiress of Flairs. 

It seemed to him that she possessed every 
qualification which could gratify a man's taste, 
and pride, and senses ; but still she stood out 
distinctly as an object of worship, rather than as 
a woman whose whole consciousness of self 
would be merged in devotion to her husband . 
try as he would to turn his thoughts from Ade- 
laide, she rose, clouding Elinor's image upon 
his mental sight, as the fond, humble, clinging, 
yet supremely useful creature he thought a wife 
should be. Yes, in all these respects she was 
well suited to him. She was a pretty, well-in- 
formed little girl, too, whom any man might be 
content to possess. But, how could he marry a 
girl without a penny, however self-sacrificing ? 
and then the remembrance of Elinor's queen-like 
movements and graceful self-possession mastered 
him again. How brilliant a home she would 
make! But she would require dress, and 
jewels, and all the wealthy and luxurious ap* 
pendages her sister could live without ; and for 
the first time Roland's words recurred sooth- 
Dgly . she would be heiress of Flairs ! 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 165 

He did not quite know what this implied. 
He had heard of the grandeur of the Drydens ; 
but, as is always the case when a woman has 
married into a lower sphere than her own, he 
felt disbelieving and levelling, when poor Mrs. 
Markham indulged him with recollections of the 
state and splendour in which her girlish days 
had passed. He knew Roland himself to be a 
boaster, and as he was too incurious and lazy- 
minded to inquire for himself, he had grown to 
consider the Drydens of Flairs to a certain ex^ 
tent apocryphal, until his first meeting with 
Elinor. 

Then, spite of the intier lack of refinement 
which a better bred man would have detected, 
he recognised in her loftiness, her ease, even in 
her haughty temper, the tokens of a caste unlike 
his own . the stamp of a society he had never 
mingled among since he left the University. 

Heiress of Flairs ! If he did not fully com- 
prehend the value of this title, at least he knew 
that it meant afiiuence, carriages, horses, ease, 
and comfort, without any balance of exertion on 
his side for their attainment. He had mixed 



166 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

too little in good society to care as yet for the 
position of a landholder, or the inheritance of an 
ancient name. Thought went on now with 
bent head, tracing back each sentence of Roland 
Markham's, and at last paused at one with as 
dead a stand as a pointer . what had he meant 
by outwitting Squire Dryden ? Slowly piecing 
it all out, and then stringing the scattered frag-* 
ments of talk, he began to see his cousin's 
meaning, and to be aware that Roland's visit 
had been part of some well-planned scheme. 
It seemed to him, that to thwart Mr. Dry den's 
wishes, he would marry Elinor to the first man 
who proposed for her; but then, with her 
attractions, would not any one so needy as he 
knew Markham to be, seek for a richer suitor 
than himself? and, on the other hand, if might 
be that Elinor could not marry without her 
uncle's consent, and Mr. Dryden might not con- 
sider him a suitable match. He might last for 
thirty years to come. Was it likely that she 
would ever wait for him, even if he wooed her 
into a promise now, exposed as she would be on 
her return to Flairs ^o the homage of men in 



MR. FISHER*S PERPLEXITY. 167' 

the same dass as her uncle ? The prize was 
radiant, but it dazzled his eyes. He felt like 
the fox with the grapes ; he did not yet love 
Elinor well enough to risk peace and quiet for 
her ; or, rather, he cared still so much for Ade- 
laide, that it seemed a pity to lose her for what, 
after all, might be beyond his reach. 

It is a profanation of the word to speak of 
Lo^e at all in connection with his feelings : 
but such were his thoughts ; and, like most men 
who mistake sentiment for feeling, he considered 
himself capable of earnest devotion, if an object 
could only be found to inspire it. 

Still he felt strangely puzzled ; so clumsy an 
arrangement seemed quite unworthy of his 
scheming cousin. He must see him again 
soon, and find out exactly what he meant ; and 
if he really were determined to promise Elinor 
in marriage before she returned to Flairs, she 
might be free to choose for herself. If this 
were true, why should not he take his chance ? 
At any rate, he was first in the field ; it was 
not likely she could really love this young Karse. 
He believed that, woman-like, she had only en* 



168 ELINOR dryden's probaxion. 

couraged the boy because she was jealous of his 
own attention to Adelaide^ and perhaps because 
the fellow was good-looking. 

Two or three engagements stood in his way, 
or he would have spent that evening in Blooms- 
bury, and have resolved his doubts. Elinor 
and Adelaide were not his only amusements ; 
there was a large family of young ladies, more 
than one of whom believed herself beloved by 
Mr. Fisher, blushed at his entrance, sighed 
when his visits became less frequent, and lived, 
in short, that sort of foolish, time- wasting ex- 
istence which such girls call being " in love ;" 
but Fisher would have said h6 was not to 
blame for this. If he bent over one sister at 
the pianoforte, and whispered soft speeches, it 
was surely her fault if she attached undue im- 
portance to what he only did from kindness, 
" to please her, poor thing ;" or if he lent an- 
other a book with a stray sheet of MS. verses 
inside, if she chose to interpret into love what 
was only done to gratify her vanity, it was 
clearly no fault of his ; he was sorry for them, 
but it was his one weakness, as he told him- 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 169 

self; he could not be unkind to a woman, and 
it was natural to think that the withdrawal of" 
such special nniarks of his favour must blight a 
woman's happiness. 

But the engagen^nts were fulfilled at last, 
and he found himself at Uberty to seek his 
cousins. 

As he approached the house he became con- 
scious that he was following some one whose 
appearance revived unpleasant associations. Al- 
most before he looked up, that strange anti- 
pathetic shrinking which the presence of some 
persons will inspire affected him ; but when he 
glanced over the young man's figure, he was 
not surprised. Without seeing his face, he re- 
cognised young Karse. 

Was it possible that he, too, was on his way 
to visit Elinor ? . the idea was too irritating to 
dwell on; but still the unwelcome apparition 
kept on a-head, crossing every square, and 
taking every turning that he himself must neces- 
sarily follow to reach Mr. Markham's house. 

Fisher grew so anxious that it was almost a 
relief when Maurice, springing forward as if 



170 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

impatient for admittance, dashed up the steps 
and knocked at Roland Markham's door. 

And then as he turned round and faced his 
follower, a look of annoyance spread over his 
face, although his " Good evening" was more 
cordially spoken than Fisher's. 

For as he thought next minute, had not 
Elinor said that this was her sister's lover, and 
why, in such joy as that which now filled his 
soul, should he permit any cloud of vexation to 
come between him and the image of Elinor . 
his Elinor? Away, now, with the crouching 
fears that had kept him speechless ; he was kin 
to Mr. Dryden, and there had been something 
in the Squire's manner that told him that if he 
continued to merit his good opinion the claim of 
blood would not be denied. Across his wild 
exultation came at times a feeling of shame at 
his ingratitude to Ben in this eagerness to cast 
off the ties that hitherto had seemed to bind 
them closely. " But I shall love him just as 
dearly," argued the bright-eyed stripling to 
himself ; " perhaps more so, for the weight of 
dependence and servitude lifted, has unsealed 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 171 

my heart, and doubled my love for every 
one.'* 

He had had no leisure for any thought except 
that of Elinor and love, since he left Karse's bed- 
side. A few lines from the Squire had relieved 
his anxiety on Ben's account. Love, to his 
young imagination, unfettered by convention- 
alities and the social arguments that pluck every 
feather from its wings, was a gift of God. He 
did not trouble himself about the future ; he 
loved Elinor so dearly, that she must love him 
in return; his love would compel hers . they 
were made for each other. Hers was the high, 
lofty nature he needed to quicken his sometimes 
flagging inspirations ; but would she, so bright, 
so beautiful as she was, love him . him whom 
she had first known as a mere village lad? 
Still, this only fired his romance ; he felt sure 
the very contrast would deepen her interest. 
ah, after to-night he might perhaps say her 
love. 

Only Mrs. Markham was in the drawing- 
room when they entered, and to Fisher's sur- 
prise . for he knew his cousin's dislike to an 



172 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

early after dinner summons . she bid the maid 
tell her master of the two gentlemen's arrival. 

'* More to the purpose if she'd sent for the 
girls," growled Fisher to himself, as he drew 
an easy chair close to the fire ; ^^ and yet I 
don't know, I'd better have it out with Ro- 
land." 

Roland, however, did not appear ; he sent the 
maid upstairs with a message to his daughters, 
and then again to the drawing-room with a 
pencilled note to his wife, the reading of which 
seemed to cause great disquiet to Mrs. Mark- 
ham. 

She looked at her two visitors, and evidently 
tried to execute some commission respecting 
them, and then looked down at her note again. 
Fisher came to her assistance. 

" How is Roland this evening ?" 

" Oh, yes, that's what he wishes me to tell 
you ; he hopes you'll, excuse him, at any rate 
till after tea ; he's got some sadly tiresome ac- 
counts to look over." 

" Can't I go down and help him a bit ; he's 
often been glad of help before." Fisher almost 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 173 

moved towards the door ; he was so anxious to 
get his course clear. 

" Oh dear no, James, on no account ; he*ll 
not be long I dare say, and besides," . here she 
stopped again, looking confused, as if she were 
going to say something she had been told to 
keep secret . she was greatly relieved by the 
entrance of Elinor. 

Miss Dryden greeted both her visitors with 
equal cordiality ; seemingly she was quite uncon- 
scious of. Maurice's trembling eagerness as his 
hand clasped hers for a moment, but she looked 
archly at Fisher and spoke to him. 

" I am afraid you are disappointed only to see 
me, but papa wants Adelaide's help with his 
accounts ; she'll come presently." 

This was said in too low a voice to be over- 
heard by her mother, or distinctly by Maurice 
. who stood much nearer . but he was too full 
of joy to be captious then ; he caught Adelaide's 
name, and conjectured Elinor was the bearer of 
some message between the lovers. 

His heart and mind were as busy as his eyes 
in drinking in the picture she made as she stood 



174 ELINOR DRYDEN^S PROBATION. 

before him . a full length picture, for it was not 
on Elinor's face that admiration chiefly rested ; 
the graceful undulating lines of her tall figure, 
which the sweeping folds of her dress blended 
into, and seemed to carry off with no abruptness 
of ending, or if the eye followed them upwards 
along the exquisitely moulded shoulder to the 
round smooth throat, on which her queenly head 
was so perfectly placed, the massive plaits of 
hair called for fresh admiration, as coiled round 
and round they glistened in dark and perfect 
smoothness ; the only fault that could have been 
found with Elinor's hair, was this uniformity of 
tint, and this unruffled smoothness ; there were 
none of the varieties of hue . the golden streaks 
that tell of the sun's kisses in childhood . or of 
the chiselled waves that display such gradations 
of colour so gloriously ; but then this very 
straight smoothness spoke the silken richness 
of the tresses coiled in such dark profusion. 
It has been said before that her features were 
irregular, and her skin dark, and by day- 
light rather sallow . but no lover of Elinor 
Dryden's was likely to note these minor details ; 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 175 

her eyes were face enough for any woman, al- 
ways changing, and seemingly to fresh beauty 
.now liquid with tender softness, with that 
sort of incipient tear in them that seems like a 
glistening diamond ; now if she were roused to 
enthusiasm or anger, flashing their brilliancy 
into the hearts of those who gazed on them, or 
when their intellectual power revealed itself most 
strongly . although perhaps this was their least 
beautiful aspect . they looked steadily, observ- 
ingly, into other eyes, as if seeking their secrets. 

They did this now to James Fisher . he 
winced under their questioning, and murmuring 
something which no one could hear, went up to 
Mrs. Markham. 

' Maurice felt angry with himself for the 
timidity that came over him again beside Elinor. 

On his way he had felt so bold, so hopeful, so 
determined to pour out all his heart to her with 
a fire that should be irresistible; now as she 
turned away, her lip slightly curved at her 
cousin's evident want of self-possession, Mau- 
rice asked himself how he dared aspire to the 
love of so beautiful a creature. Almost uncon- 



176 ELINOE DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

sciously his high elation drooped, and the bright- 
ness of his face clouded. 

If he could only see Elinor alone; why 
should he not ask for such an interview ? not 
now, the sudden mistrust young men feel towards 
each other about women, tied his tongue com- 
pletely from asking such a boon in Fisher's 
hearing, but he would find an opportunity during 
the evening . or he would write. 

He spoke to Elinor, but he soon found he 
had not her undivided attention. Her eyes 
kept on straying towards her mother and Mr. 
Fisher. 

Maurice grew angry. Why should she care 
to listen to the talk of a man who never could 
be anything to her ? But Elinor heard " Flairs" 
and " my brother Wentworth," and her fertile 
brain was conjecturing what possible interest 
her cousin could find in either, except with re- 
ference to herself. That he was very much in- 
terested his bent, listening head and eager man- 
ner plainly told. 

Maurice could bear it no longer. 

Starting from the ordinary words which 



MR. fisher's perplexity. 177 

seemed to have no power to fix her attention, 
with an abruptness that surprised EUnor, he 
said . 

" I am just returned from Flairs. I saw 
your uncle," 

" Saw my uncle ! . ^Where ? . ^how ?" 

Elinor spoke the first words dreamily ; then, 
as her quick wits took in place, and time, and 
circumstances, her eyes flashed brightly. 

" You have been among the fever then ? you 
ought not to have come here." 

She recoiled from him . for they had been 
standing close together, and Maurice had drawn 
nearer still with his last words. Had he been 
less in love, he might have wondered that 
Elinor's first thought should have been fear for 
herself, rather than any enquiry for her unde ; 
but he could think of nothing but her then. 

** Don't be frightened. I waited several days, 
and even Miss Brownlow says I am quite safe 
now. I went to see my dear old friend, Ben. 
You remember him, don't you ?" 

Elinor still looked ill-assured, and kept 
aloof. 

VOL. II. 12 



179 L1^(0il l(Y]EN'8t PROBATION. 

^* I sn terrify afraid of infection ; are yoi 
qmite surQ you are $afe ?" 

" Quite. I must have felt some symptoms by 
^hi3 time, wd I never felt so well or happy in 
my life as I do just now ;" even Elinor's eyes 
fell beneath his '^" but you did aot answer 
my question about Ben." 

Something either in her facQ, or because be 
had forced bis way to the topic that bad seeoojed 
a barrier betwei^u them, restored Maiiirice's 
courage. 

Elinor's dread of the feyer sank in bier v^con- 
der at his audacity. That his advantages (^ 
education, and her excessive coudescension, had 
helped him to conquer the difiidei^ce he must 
otiierwise have felt in addressing her at all 
could be understood ; but then bow careful and 
tender she had been io^ sparing bi$ feelings by 
her avoidance of any ren^embraace^ of their 
early intimacy, and here he was talking opedy 
and unblushingly of his cousin the gamekeeper. 

Had she after so many years of exp^isnoe 
fallen again into the error of her girlhopd ? had 
she stooped below her dignity, and caused this 



MR. nSHER's FEBPLEXmr. 179 

low-born youth to imagine she considered him 
her equal ? The curse of her nature, her proud 
temper, roused at the thought. She admired 
Maurice as much as ever, and was just as vain 
of his devotion, but he must be taught the 
difference between them at once. 

'^ I remember him, of course/' she said. She 
could keep her voice steady, although her rising 
colour and the flash of her eyes were beyond her 
control. " Why should I forget him any more 
than any other servant of my uncle's? He 
was your cousin, if I remember rightly, and 
brought you up from a child.'' 

It would have seemed natural for Maurice, at 
once to tell her of his discovery, and of the error 
undef which he had been living ; but there was 
something so stinging, so almost hateful m her 
pride, that his own rose like adamant against it. 

He changed his mind in an instant How 
dare she despise Beou She i^hould not be gra^ 
tified by knowing, by even suspecting that he 
was glad to be quit of the rdationship . a glad- 
ness f(* whidi he indeed despised himself. -oh! so 
intensely now. He would not tell her his secret; 

12.2 



180 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

he would compel her to like him, to love, at any 
rate to honour him as the gamekeeper's cousin. 
Whether his own love would survive the process 
he did not inquire curiously just then. his wrath 
was too deeply stirred. 

He gave her back her glance as proudly . far 
more firmly. 

" You are right/' And he went and stood 
beside Mrs. Markham. 

It all passed so quickly, and the words had 
been spoken in so low a tone, that nothing had 
been overheard; yet, as Fisher looked up in 
the young man's face, he knew that he had been, 
as he would have called it, " snubbed " by his 
cousin Elinor. 

Fisher had been vainly trying to find out some* 
thing definite about Flairs, and the heiress-ship ; 
but Mrs. Markham seemed either thoroughly 
ignorant or bewildered on the subject. The fas- 
cination of Elinor's presence, with no counter 
attraction in Adelaide, or dread of collision with 
a rival, drew him across the room to her now. 

She smiled one of her sweetest, most magical 
smiles^ and he felt there was no retreat left for 



MR. fisher's perplexity, 181 

him. Heiress or not, no creature had ever ex- 
ercised so strange a power over him, and his soft 
yielding nature abandoned itself to the sweet in- 
fluence. He spoke almost in a whisper . his 
usual habit with women. He had the gift, the 
serpent gift some men possess so rarely, of flat- 
tering with an imperceptible caress of tone that 
doubles the meaning of the words. Even the 
proud Elinor hungered after the clogging honey. 
At first she had meant to punish Maurice for 
his daring, by withdrawing her attention from 
him and bestowing it on her cousin ; not, as she 
told herself, from any feeling of coquetry, 
but simply to assert her dignity, and to make 
him feel his presumption ; but by degrees her 
proud eyes drooped, her cheeks glowed, as she 
sat and listened. If she had looked across the 
room she might have been startled by the fiery 
indignation . the intense scorn that strove for 
place in Maurice's countenance, while he stood 
watching her and saw, too, that when his rival 
bent over her till his lips nearly touched her 
cheek, Elinor did not shrink away. She only 
blushed a shade deeper. 



182 ELINOR DRYDBN's PROBATION. 

He at first had tried to talk to Mrs. Marki* 
bam, but ber knitting . sbe was expt^rimental* 
izing on a new, intricate pattern this eTening*^. 
rendered her a slightly incoherent companioni 
although the spasmodic efforts she made at con- 
versation showed a desire to keep him beside 
ber. 

But he could not stand it much longer. He 
must go . he was unwilling to be thought dis- 
comfited and abashed by Elinor's haughti-* 
ness ; but he could not bear to witness such 
treachery. Had not she told him that this man 
loved her sister, and was she not striving to 
attach him to herself? for, like the rest of us, 
in his anger justice quite forsook Maurice. he 
never thought of Fisher's influence ; he looked 
on him as a foolish victim to Elinor's vanity, 
ensnared from his proper allegiance. 

Why should he stay and witness her heart- 
lessness? besides, in the temper in which he 
felt himself, he knew he could not submit to 
ber father's insolence. 

So he took his leave, half inclined when be 
reached the door to turn back again, for the 



4 t 



MR. fibher's perplexity. 183 

look of triumph on Fisher's face told him 
plainly how much his rivalry was dreaded. 
It had been very hard to bear Elinor's cold 
good-night, beneath the eyes of his triumphant 
enemy. 

At the stair-foot he met Mr. Markham and 
Adelaide. 

" What, going already, Mr. Karse ? Have 
they done anything to affront you ?" 

Roland Markham laughed as he spoke ; but 
the words jarred. It seemed almest as if Eli- 
nor's father knew what her conduct had been, 
and then he thought of poor betrayed Adelaide, 
and bow soon the es^er excitecnent wdtild fado 
out of her face when she sdw what was hiappen* 
ing in the drawing-room. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THB LAST SERVICB IN THE ASH GLEN. 

I 

It was a bright Sunday morning, and the Ash 
Glen was again full of movement, as the vil- 
lagers ranged themselves beneath the fractured 
stone they now called " the Pulpit." The air 
was drier and colder than it had been; the 
women shivered and muffled their hands in 
their shawls, as they stood about waiting for 
Mr. Brownlow's appearance ; but they were less 
listless in movement, less despairing in face. 
Death was not so frequent among them. The 
clergyman was very late this morning ; and when 
at last he came in sight, he too seemed to feel the 



THE LAST SERVICE IN THE ASH GLEN. 185 

change of weather . he looked pinched with 
cold. 

. Mr. Dryden was late also. He had been to 
see his old gamekeeper^ whose recovery was 
a very slow one . hindered doubtless by his agi- 
tating interview with Maurice. There had been 
so many questions to ask, so many directions to 
give the nurse, that the Squire had been forced 
to spur his horse to full speed till he reached 
the brow of the hill, whence he must descend 
on foot. His face was all a-glow with exercise, 
and as he took his place near the clergyman, the 
contrast made Mr. Brownlow's pale, hollow 
cheeks seem almost ghastly to those who stood 
closest. 

He began the service, but his voice sounded 
weak and strained beyond its power. There 
was more cadence in it than usual, for its only 
fault was monotony, and as he read the verse of 
the Psalm . " Oh that I had wings like a dove," 
there was a depth of pathos in his tone that 
moved his hearers strangely. 

A vague sense of something unusual crept 
over most of them, in the midst of their 



186 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

devotion ; even Mr. Dryden looked round more 
than once at his pastor. But save the deathly 
pallor, and the more than ever devout counte- 
nance, there was nothing to cause disquiet in 
Mr. Brownlow's appearance. 

Suddenly, while all heads were bowed, there 
came a longer pause than usual-*-a pause recal- 
ling the thoughts that were straying-. arresting 
those that were fixed in prayer ; then a sound 
more like sobs than words. There came a mo* 
ment of doubt and hesitation ; but before the 
disturbed, terrified people had risen to their 
feet, Mr. Dryden stood beside the fainting man 
whose head had sunk powerless on the fractured 
stone. 

The Squire looked round for help, but the 
people stood terror-struck, incapable either of 
movement or comprehension. Then a frenzied 
cry from a woman, standing among the nearest, 
spread the awful contagion of Fear . she snatched 
at her two children's hands, and looked round 
with wild, frightened eyes at her neighbours. 

" Run, run fast for our lives !" she screamed ; 
" it's the doom come on us. it's the fever !'* 



THE LAST SERYICfi IN THB ASH GLEN. 187 

As if the pestilence were in bodily shape 
among them, at her words the whole assembly 
turned to fly from the Glen. 

Hitherto they bad, in coming and going, 
avoided any close contact, and had stood or kndt, 
while the service lasted, several feet apart ; but 
now in the speed urged by their terror, they 
rushed pell^-mell . a closely herded rout, some 
of the children stumbling and falling over 
the broken fragments of rock that strewed the 
Glen. 

At first the Squire waited, with the calm, 
unimpulsive determination so usual to him-*. he 
who did not know Fear was slow to believe her 
power. Some of these men . all of whom had 
in their time benefited by his ministrations, 
would help to bear their Pastor home. But 
when he saw all turning away . even those, 
ashamed to join the rapid flight of the foremost, 
slinking one behind another. ^all standing far- 
ther and farther aloof from himself and the 
inanimate form whose dead, nerveless weight he 
knew he could not sustain alone, he delayed no 
longer. 



188 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

He could not move from the fixed, strained 
posture, by oieans of which he prevented the 
body from falling sideways down the declivity, 
but his left hand was free. He raised it high 
above his head, and spoke out loudly . 

" Shame on you, Starby men ! will you leave 
him who has tended your wives and your little 
ones in their last hour, to die here alone ?" 

Some of the men stopped, looking dogged 
and unwiUing : a woman who had stayed among 
the hindmost jogged her husband's arm, push- 
ing him towards the pulpit, following herself 
the lead she gave. Four or five other men 
fairly turned when they saw some one else will- 
ing to run the risk . perhaps they were ashamed 
to be outdone in courage by an old woman. 
Then Wentworth Dryden's long practised self- 
command helped him well . giving to his orders 
the clear calmness that must ensure confidence 
and obedience in the executors. 

He told one of the men to stand near, ready 
to help him if he needed help ; the woman was 
to hasten back to Starby, and see that the doctor 
and the servant at the Parsonage were prepared 



THE LAST SERVICE IN THE ASH GLEN. 189 

for Mr. Brownlow's arrival. The other men 
were to bring hurdles from one of the sheep pens 
CD the far-stretching Downs. He told them 
exactly where they would find the nearest, and 
then as his assistants hastened off to their 
tasks, he turned to look again at his friend. 

Was this Death itself ?. The livid pallor, the 
inaudible breathing, the utter lifelessness of each 
pendant drooping limb, struck terror to his 
heart, that it was so. And he could do nothing 
to solve this awful doubt . nothing but loosen 
any throat pressure caused by ^he neck-cloth. 
He felt that if life still lingered its hold was so 
feeble that the slightest strain might snap it 
altogether, and so he stood still in dumb patience 
waiting the return of his messengers. 

They came, after what had seemed a dreary 
waiting, and Mr. Dryden, still with only his left 
hand to guide and direct, showed them how to 
fasten the hurdles together, so as to make a 
sort of litter. Then with an exertion, the strain 
of which told on his muscles for weeks after, he 
gently and gradually lowered the senseless form, 
till it rested securely on the coats and. jackets 



190 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

which by the Squire's orders the men had placed 
on the rough hurdles. 

He chose out the oldest and quietest, 
showed them how to raise the litter without 
giving a sudden shock to its burden, and then 
bidding them take the downward path, he 
walked silently beside Mr. Brownlow. 

Always hard in judgment, he had harboured 
stern thoughts against the cowardly people who 
forgot all gratitude in selfish fear ; but now, as 
he walked slowly on, suiting his pace to that of 
the bearers, it seemed to him, too, that the end 
had come . that there was no more hope for 
Starby. For the last few days there had been a 
lull in the pestilence, and this colder temperature 
had raised the doctors' hopes high ; but, if their 
I^KStor were thus suddenly cut down in their 
midst, who could say how far terror. the mixed 
flight of the congregation, and the absence of 
his comfort and counsel,. -might not tend to 
revive it in its first direful form ; for it never 
occurred to Mr. Dryden to think that he him- 
self was the stronghold of the people, and that 
Without his Strengthening presence, his helping 



THE LAST SERVICE IN THE ASH GLEN. 191 

guidance, Mr. Brownlow's resources would 
have been exhausted long ago. 

Selfish the Squire might be. and he was 
selfish on some personal points . but of his own 
value^ as a man, he had no self-consciousness, 
although he knew that his wealth and his posi- 
tion were often of service to others. 

As he moved slowly along, his thoughts grew 
darker and more painful. He had to consider 
the first steps to be taken. If when they reached 
the Parsonage, the doctors should confirm his 
fear . that life had fled ; and as he thought, 9 
new and tenderer sadness came across his 
anxiety . Cecil . that bright sweet blossom^ 
only to be associated with sunshine and happi- 
ness . the creature alone left on earth, who had 
crept into what the blight of his life had left 
him of a heart . he must crush her ; . it would 

. 

be his lot to bruise and wound her fond loving 
nature by the tidings of her father's death. No, 
he could not, he would not do it ! Why was it 
his curse . his doom . to be forced to bring pain 
to all who had loved him, or whom he had 
loved ? And then recovering himself from this 



192 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

strange, sudden outburst, so rare, alas ! now to 
his iron-schooled temper, he told himself that if 
needs must be . ^if there were indeed no hope, 
or but little left of life, then the very tenderness 
of his love for Cecil would fit him to inflict this 
sore wound with less of bitterness than another. 
And while all this turmoil of doubt and dread 
and agonised sorrow wrenched and tore at his 
heart, the men who walked beside the Squire 
noted his stern, firm bearing, and even tread, 
and settled with themselves how truly it had 
been said that good as he was, *' he had no more 
of softness or pity than one of the grey stones in 
the Ash Glen." 



CHAPTER XIII. 



CECIL. 



Cecil sat by her father's bedside. The sun 
that chequered the white dimity curtains, as it 
shone through the small lattice panes^ fell on 
her hair and face with a brightness that might 
have made you think the year was months older. 
The hair still rippled in glistening waves round 
her head, but it was bound tightly . more 
to keep it out of the way, than as if ar- 
ranged to advantage. Her soft woollen dress, 
too, came down to her wrists, without any white 
relief, against the small hands, almost like a 
child's in the pink prettiness of their dimples. 

VOL. IT. i3 



194 ELINO DRYDEN*8 PROBATION. 

She sat still . so very still, looking intently 
at her father ; but though the face she gazed at 
was pale and fever stricken, though there were 
the dark rings round the features, and the 
pinched lips and nose, that might have alarmed 
an older watcher, there was hope in the bright, 
young eyes, and the eager, parted lips, as 
she bent down her fair head, to listen to his 
breathing. 

At seventeen . and Cecil was not much older 
. how can we believe that those we love best 
must leave us ? The heart stands still at the 
mere suggestion, and then beats on in rapid, 
vehement action, asserting the falsehood of such 
a fear. No, death is impossible! it cannot 
come near us then . something must be done, 
it must be arrested ; for the young ever seek in 
action a refuge from the suspense of thought : 
and Hope is so strong . it has not' been bruised 
and battered by many downfalls . its bright 
pinions, radiant with rainbow tints, are all un- 
sullied, and bears us ever to the sunny vistas 
of what Must and Ought to be . soaring in 
gleeful blindness out of ken of the dark, shrouded 



CECIL. 195 

sorrow that Shall be ! for is it not inevitable ? 
and if we ask ourselves iil soberness the ques- 
tion, are we not all the gainers by these very 
stains and scars that tell where the quivering 
flesh has been stricken ? The knowledge may 
be long in coming, for flesh and spirit both 
strive against the chastisement . nay, for a while, 
rebellious thoughts, and world-hardened hearts, 
may seem to negative this ; but in God's own 
good time he will show us why our best loved, 
our all of blessing, has been taken away, and 
will makes us own that all was done in Love 1 

But this hard lesson . the lesson that chas- 
tens the gay spirits of the boy and girl into 
the subdued cheerfulness of the man and woman 
. was still unlearned by Cecil. Her mother's 
death had brought deep sorrow, but her last 
iUness had been so gradual, Death had been 
looked for so long before he came, that there 
had been less of shock than of sadness ; and 
then Cecil's energies, and warm, loving heart, 
bad so taken her out of herself, in the desire of 
comforting her father, that the loss at the time 
had been less felt than afterwards ; and the 

13- -'i 



196 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

retrospect of sorrow is so different to its sure 
anticipation . time takes so much sting away, 
brings so much of comfort. Even now, while 
the bright eyes filled with tears, as Cecil thought 
what a blessing and solace her mother's pre- 
sence would have been in this trial, she could 
give hearty thanks that she had been spared so 
much ^ffliction-^-ah, and her father, too! for 
how it would have added to his cares, if his wife 
had been exposed to the infection. 

Cecil had no thought of risk to herself. Mr. 
Dryden had at once written to her, telling her 
of her father's critical state. He felt bound to 
do this, the doctor gave such slight hope of 
recovery ; but he advised her not to come to 
Starby . he would send her daily intelligence. 
At present her father showed such slight 
signs of consciousness, that her presence could 
be of no actual comfort to him, and so far as 
nursing him went, she, of course, would be far 
less efficient than those whose daily occupation 
it had been during all these sad weeks. 

Cecil's reply was to start directly she received 
the letter ; and before her arrival, Mr. Dryden's 



CECIL. 197 

fears on her behalf had become modified. There 
came a sudden lull in the fever-^-no new case 
declared itself in the village. Had it exhausted 
itself, or was this last victim a sufficient holo- 
caust to its ri^pacious appetite ? Still ^here was 
the risk that she might take the infection from 
her father ; and valueless as the one life seemed 
to be in comparison with the other, the Squire^ 
could not suppress a mortal shiver of fear^ when 
he saw the fau* young girl take her place by the 
bedside. 

Mr. Dryden came into the room now, steal- 
ing in so softly, that Cecil looked up surprised 
at his sudden presence. 

Bending forward to listen yet closer, and 
satisfying herself there was no change in the 
breathing, and that her patient was still uncon- 
scious, she glided softly to the other end of the 
cGamber, and taking the Squire's hand in both 
hers as she passed him, obliged him to follow 
her. 

He was surprised to see her smile, 

" Ah, you have not looked at my father yet," 
she said softly ; her face sparkling with the 



198 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

pent-up hope^ she had been longing to pour< 
out to some one more sympathising than the 
nurse; for the woman had shaken her head doubt- 
fully when Cecil affirmed that the morning light 
had shown her how much better the patient 
looked. " Oh ! dear, dear, Mr. Dry den, I think 
he will do well, now ; his face looks so much 
calmer, and he lies so much more still ; and his 
breath, instead of struggling as it did last night 
when you went away, is faint and low. I can- 
not hear it, unless I bend down and listen." 

" Ah 1" a spasm of pain contracted the 
stern face as he turned it from Cecil's scrutiny, 
and went up to the bedside. She was follow- 
ing him, but he motioned her back. Then in 
his turn he went up t6 her, and taking her 
hand, led her not only away from the bed, but 
outside the door into the little gallery that com- 
municated with the sleeping-rooms. 

Cecil looked surprised, almost restive; he 
felt the small soft fingers move uneasily in his 
strong clasp ; but Mr. Dryden through life had 
been accustomed to act without vouchsafing 
explanations, at any rate, till he thought them 



CECIL. 199 

requisite. He looked into the next room, the 
door of which stood ajar ; the slight creak with 
which it opened made a woman lying on a sofa 
there start up quite awake. 

" Martha, have you had any sleep ?" 

" Plenty, thank you, sir. Miss Cecil never 
left me till four o'clock, and she came back 
again at seven ; and by the look of the morn- 
ing, it must be nigh upon ten now." 

" Not quite so late. Still, if you are awake, 
you had better go in now. I want to speak to 
Miss Cecil." 

He and the nurse were looking into each 
other's faces, but Cecil did not see the grave, 
significant glances that encountered each other. 
The bright sunshine had helped her hope; a 
dull, misty sky would have perhaps depressed 
it. She saw nothing of warning in the Sqtiire's 
wish to speak to her ; it was his confirmation 
of her belief in her father's recovery ; he doubt- 
less thought this quiet sleep best left undis- 
turbed : they had not had a moment's talk since 
her arrival three days ago . it was his kind plan 
for giving relief to her anxiety. If he thought 



200 ELINOR DRTDEN's . PROBATION. 

her father still in danger, he would not take 
her away. 

It was almost the first time she had gone 
into the study since her arrival, and with her 
heart full of warm hope, it seemed as if the 
faded room had a cosy, home look, fiill of wel- 
come. Her elastic spirits rebounded from the 
pressure they had been forced into, and she 
almost laughed with joy as she looked at the 
Squire. 

" How long will it take him to get well, do 
you think? . How long will it be before we 
have him here sitting in his own chair again, 
and watching my gardening through the win- 
dow r 

Mr. Dryden went up to the window she 
pointed to, and stood looking through it as in- 
tently as if he saw some one gardening there 
now. 

He was fairly puzzled and disturbed. He 
almost thought Cecil heartless. He, chastened 
by sorrow, by years of doubt and suspicion, 
could not in any way realise the great heart- 
leap by which her joy had carried her at once 



CECIL. 201 

on to the firm ground of trust and relief in what 
she hoped for . a phase of mind at any time 
puzzling to a man of his age, how much more 
so to one who had forfeited the power of trust 
at all. 

He had brought her there to tell her that he 
had seen the doctor who had visited her father 
just before she took the nurse's place that morn- 
ing, and that his opinion was that Mr. Brown- 
low was slowly sinking, would probably not last 
out another day, that he would sink from simple 
want of power to rally again ; but this sudden, 
apparently certain idea of his recovery was an 
obstacle he had not counted on. He knew she 
had been hopeful throughout, but he had 
trusted that her own singular quickness would 
have detected the change in the symptoms, and 
prepared her for the end, and instead of this, 
she had entirely misinterpreted them. 

Then came into Mr. Dryden's head, what 
wiU come to us all sometimes when our thoughts 
are seemingly most full of the joys and griefs of 
others, a glimpse of self . the sort of glimpse 
the golden edge of a cloud will give of the 



203 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

blackness of its centre, an indication rather 
than a distinct view. this was the first con- 
sciousness he remembered of having ever 
shrank from giving a fellow-creature pain. He 
might not have taken pleasure in doing it be- 
fore, but he had fulfilled it as one of the in- 
evitable duties of which life to him consisted. 
Duty, what else was there to live for? 
Those who set up any other standard, or who 
talked of amenities as things to be fused in 
along with the harder stuff, were either fools or 
knaves. But whence it came he knew not ; 
at once in his bosom sprung to its full height 
and growth the softest, most remorseful pity 
for Cecil. He could not tell her, he could not 
crush this butterfly hour of gladness, so soon to 
* be shrouded in the sable veil of mourning. 
Why must his hand inflict this deep bleeding 
wound on the soft, fair, young creature he 
would have given h\$ life to save from suffer- 
ing ? If Mr. Dryden's heart had not been for 
ever seared from the love of women, and if 
he had first known Cecil in womanhood in- 
stead of the baby plaything she was when her 



CECIL. 203 

father came to Starby, perhaps the strange, 
strong love he bore her would have had an ad- 
mixture of passion in it ; now it was all fatherly. 

" How long do you think ?" repeated the sweet 
voice. 

He answered her question as if he were 
thinking of something else. 

" I don't know, I am not good at guessing," 
and he bent his head down again. 

Cecil was well used to his abrupt, reserved 
ways ; one great secret of her influence over 
him was her perfect comprehension that he must 
be left alone, that his moods could not be forced 
into what others considered necessary and fitting. 
She saw that she had asked him a question she 
should have reserved for the Doctor, when pro- 
bably his head and heart were full of anxiety 
for many others besides her father ; for although 
she had heard that the fever had stayed its 
ravages, she knew that Ben Karse and many of 
the people remained in a very precarious state. 
She stooped down and fondled the old tabby 
cat, that sat looking into the fire heat. 

The Squire felt how coldly he had spoken. 



204 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

and he knew too that Cecil would not disturb 
him again till he turned round and spoke to her. 

What was he to do ? It would kill her per- 
haps to let the blow fall without a warning ; 
must he be the one to do it? but this was 
only a whispered thought. If she must be 
told, no one could do it with the same love as 
himself. Still he could not go to it of set 
purpose, he must let other topics imstring the 
rigid pain he was bearing, or his manner of 
telling would be cruel instead of kind. 

He turned round from the window, and came 
close to her. 

" Have you had your breakfast, Cecil ?" 

" Yes, thank you ; you are so kind to think 
of me/' He made a gesture of impatience . he 
always avoided thanks ; his own nature shrank 
so from giving them, that he scarcely believed 
in their reality from others. . " But nurse has tea 
ready for me when I take her place in the morn- 
ing ; every one seems to try to spare me trouble." 

She looked up earnestly in his face . there 
was a slight quivering of her lip; she would 
gladly have wept out her joy and thankfulness, 



CECIL. 205 

now that the sound of another voice had stirred 
her sympathies almost beyond control, but she 
did control them with a strong effort ; she would 
not alarm Mr. Dryden, or let him think her 
imhappy, for the world. 

He saw the quivering lip, and strangely moved 
out of himself by reproachful fear that he had 
grieved her. grieved her, his darling, when her 
cup of sorrow would so soon be brimming over 
in a bitter tide . he bent down and kissed her 
smooth forehead. 

For an instant she shrank back, and the 
colour flew into her cheeks. No man except her 
father . not even her Uncle Erasmus . had ever 
before kissed her : but the terror was only mo- 
mentary ; she took his hand in both hers, and 
pressed it gently. 

'' I am so glad to be here again," she said, 
** you cannot think how long and anxious the 
days seemed when I got back to Oxford." 

" Got back to Oxford ? I thought you were 
there all the time. I wrote to you there." 

" I went there at first. Did not ps^a tell you ? 
Ah, I suppose you had very little time for talking. 



206 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

Aunt Jane let me have no peace until I went on 
to London, and as papa made no objection, and 
I had not seen either Uncle Erasmus or Aunt 
Jane for several years, it seemed my duty to go, 
and afterwards I returned to Kintry. But," fal- 
tered Cecil . for a darker frown came into Mr. 
Dryden's face than she had seen there before . "do 
you think I was wrong to go so far from Starby ?** 

The Squire had turned away from her again 
while she still spoke, and had resumed his old 
place by the window. No outward sign, ex- 
cept that dark frown and his silence, told the 
fierce conflict that was raging, the anger and 
disappointment he was mastered by. 

When at last he did turn round and speak, 
Cecil's pale scared face helped to modify the icy 
coldness of his tone. 

" I suppose you saw your uncle's pupils 
sometimes ?" 

.* Yes, every day ; that is, . one pupil : the 
other always went home to dinner, and in 
the evenings." 

" Then you saw," he cleared his throat as if 
the words stuck there, . " Maurice Karse often." 



CECIL. 207 

He fixed his stern vigilant eyes on her. How 
could she help blushing under such a look, had 
the question been of the most trivial kind ? the 
vexing consciousness of rising colour now made 
it spread over throat and face, even up to her 
forehead. 

Mr. Dryden could have gnashed his teeth in 
anger. What had passed between these two ? 
But he stood to all outward appearance calmly 
waiting for her answer. 

" Yes, I saw him every day, but,'* she went 
on proudly, for she resented the Squire's sus- 
picion, " I was only in London a fortnight.'* 

Her manner roused Mr. Dryden to conscious- 
ness of his own ; roused too the hidden chivalry 
buried out of sight long ago, which only Cecil 
had power to recall to existence. 

" I beg your pardon," the Squire spoke quite 
humbly, " you are of course free to go where 
you please, only I felt angry with your uncle 
and aunt for letting you mix on equal terms 
with a person who is your inferior in the eye of 
the world ;" he saw the lips parted, eager with 
an interruption, and he went on in a more na- 



208 ELINOR DRYDBK'S PROBATION. 

tural voice . " We won't speak of this again, 
Cecil ; you and I are too good friends to nourish 
disputes about anything. I can quite imagine 
that your Aunt Mary is a duller companion than 
your Aunt Jane." 

" Oh, yes," . Cecil smiled, she was so relieved 
to see her friend himself again, that her anger 
at what she thought narrow-minded prejudice, 
softened . " you may laugh at Aunt Jane and 
call her eccentric, but she is so really good and 
unselfish, that you wish to be only half as 
excellent." 

'' I should have thought my little Cecil well 
oflf in these very qualities herself." 

" You spoil me, you know," said Cecil ; then 
a graver shade came over her changeful face, 
and she looked up earnestly at him. "You 
told the nurse you wanted to speak to me ; had 
you any special reason, dear Mr. Dryden ? or 
was it only because you thought a change of 
scene would do me good ?" 

It must come now. He could not tell her 
a felsehood, and yet the very perfectness of her 
reliance taught how his words would crush out 



CECIL. 209 

the bright hope that had been sustaining 
her. 

His head moved restlessly as if to escape her 
gaze, but as he glanced at her face he sav^ a 
quick look of fright come into it, and then a 
slight cry burst from her lips. 

"My poor, dear child/' . he grasped her hands, 
gathering them between his own, as if he would 
infuse his strength into her nature. 

He had hoped for passionate weeping ; he 
knew . at least he had heard . that tears were 
a great solace to women ; but Cecil did not weep, 
her face grew pale and stiffened, and her eyes 
dilated painfully. If she would only cry or 
speak, Mr. Dryden felt his task would be much 
easier. 

She did speak presently, but with an eflfort as 
if her throat were dry and exhausted. 

** Is there no hope ?'* 

" None." 

He put his arm round her, and tried to draw 
her to him ; he wanted her to have pity on her- 
self, to break in some way the sudden frost that 
had congealed her senses. She stood up s.raigiit, 

VOL. II. 14 



210 ELINOR DRYDEk's PROBATION. 

stiffy insensible to his appeal, but seemingly quite 
collected, when she spoke again. 

" How long will it be coming ?" 

He felt constrained to answer her questions 
as laconically as she put them ; even to himself 
it was strange the power this young girl's self- 
control exercised over him. 

" I fear to-night, but he may last longer." 

" Then I ought never to have left him," said 
Cecil, and she looked almost with indignation at 
the Squire. 

His saddened eyes, his worn face, the touch- 
ing mixture of affection and entreaty where 
she was used to see only the lines of calm 
thought, melted the hardening, swelling heart, 
and brought away some of the burden that was 
stifling her. 

She snatched his hand again, and kissed it 
passionately. 

" Oh, forgive me, dear, dear Mr. Dryden. I 
ought not to blame you ; it is my own blindness 
that has deceived me." 

She sobbed the words with the tears that now 
came gushing out to her relief, but she had soon 



CECIL. 211 

mastered them, soon wiped away their traces 
at the thought of the little time left her ; and 
then, trying to look cheerfully at the Squire, as 
if to show him he might trust her self-com- 
mand, she went slowly up-stairs to her father's 
bed-room. 



14.2 



BOOK THE SIXTH. 



SHAJ)OW 



CHAPTER I. 



A CHANCE MEETING. 



Elinor stood, dressed for walking . she had 
sent up to Adelaide's room to know if she would 
accompany her. In another minute her maid 
brought the message . 

*' Miss Adelaide has a bad head-ache; she 
cannot go.'' 

Elinor was glad to be alone . she did not ask 
any questions about her sister ; and she went 
out to walk in one of the dismal square gardens 
near. 

" Whenever will Maurice come again ?'' she 
thought ; " was he really offended ?" and then 



216 ELINOR DRY den's PROBATION. 

she began to wonder whether her father had 
been rude to him when they met on the stairs ; 
for although Markham had not expressed any 
opinion, he had been so sulky for a couple of 
days after Maurice's first visit that she knew 
how much it had annoved him. 

She must manage that neither James Fisher 
nor her father should be present the next time 
Maurice called ; and she walked round and 
round the dingy old garden, meditating how this 
could be brought about. 

She could not mistake James's devotion, but 
there was no use in making Maurice a witness of 
it. It was plain poor Addy had deceived her- 
self. 

" These quiet girls are strangely sentimental 
and fanciful 1 however, of course it is only fancy, 
and she will give up all idea of caring for him 



now." 



If she had gone up to see her sister she might 
have realised that this " giving up " was not 
so easy a matter as she imagined. 

Adelaide was in her room, but she was not 
lying down . she had just risen from her knees. 



A CHANCE MEETING. 217 

her face wrung with hopelessness ; it was vain 
to pray against the bitter feelings that would 
rise towards Elinor . frightening the poor girl's 
timid nature by their vehemence. 

She had fought bravely against emotion on 
the night of Maurice Karse's last visit, when 
she followed her father into the drawing-room, 
and saw James and Elinor sitting together, and 
she had said Good-night so naturally to her 
cousin that he believed her quite unsuspicious. 
Fortunately she had broken through the nightly 
talks beside her sister's fire ; she shrank from 
finding herself alone with Elinor now. 

She scarcely knew how she had dragged 
through the last few days. James had come 
once again, and she had slipped quietly away 
to bed, and, to her relief, no one had remarked 
on her disappearance. 

And now she thought that she had not 
counted all the cost . she had not reckoned 
James's visits among the miseries she had to 
suffer. 

Elinor might not go back to Flairs for weeks, 
and as long as she remained in London this 



218 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

torture would go on . no, she could not bear it ; 
and yet she must never betray her secret : if 
James were to become her brother no one must 
know how she had loved him once. 

" It is so cruel . -so very, very hard," she 
sobbed, as she stood leaning against the door of 
her room ; " James loved me till she came . he 
would love me now if she went away, and she 
does not love him . she cares and thinks more 
about her friend Mr. Karse. What is it about 
Elinor that makes me not love her when I see 
men near her? am I jealous? am I so mean, 
so foolish as to compare myself to her?" She 
drew a long, sobbing breath, and stopped to 
think. *' No, it is not that, it is because she 
seems to think all men her property ; she is so 
sure that they must think her beautiful, and like 
her better than any other woman . I saw it 
even with that old Mr. Brownlow. Cecil is 
lovely . lovelier than Elinor, but I do not think 
she would be so . so bold. Oh ! what is coming 
to me I I don't seem to know right from wrong . 
how can I say that a stranger whom I have only 
seen once is more womanly than my own sister !" 



A CHANCE MEETING. 219 

Then came the thought of the dull, dreary 
blank that life without James would be, and 
the certainty that he loved Elinor better than he 
had ever loved herself. 

In this misery Adelaide wondered at her own 
insensibility to the wretchedness of others ; how 
often she had heard and read of lives blighted 
as hers was by disappointments . disappoint* 
ments in love; in children, where a son, for 
whose well-doing parents have spared neither 
spirit nor flesh for the hardly-earned gains they 
expend on him so liberally, turns out a dunce, or 
worse ; in speculations . a merchant, whose very 
existence slips away with the failure or dishonesty 
of others ; in success . artists and authors who 
toil on, staking their health, their life almost, on 
some venture which has required incessant work, 
and, harder still, incessant thought, to bring it 
to perfection. 

All these and other visions passed before her 
mind. She always told herself she hated 
worldliness, biit how like she had been to the 
world in her thoughtlessness of others' sorrow. 

It is not true that misery always deems its 



220 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

own burden heaviest. There is a healthy soul 
discipline in some, in most sorrows, which by 
lowering our own standard of desert lets us see 
when the first blinding tears are over, that things 
might have been worse, and this not from elastic 
hope as impervious to the rain-drops of mis- 
fortune as caoutchouc itself to material showers, 
but from the very humbling I have spoken of. 

If we had been dealt with as we deserve, or 
if such and such a trial had been added to the 
one we now endure, how much more we 
should have suffered. I do not say this mood 
will last, but it will come to those who do 
not harden their hearts wilfully against it, by 
fits and starts. It soothed Adelaide for a while, 
but then all was again unendurable. She must 
go through this weary day and many others with 
no vista of hope beyond. She must face Eli- 
nor, and try to resent her conduct as little as 
she could, for any open speaking between them 
now must make matters worse. 

A light tap at the door, and her mother entered. 

Adelaide had caught up a brush and was 
smoothing her hair . she only half turned 



A CHANCE MEETING. 221 

round, with a desperate effort to look cheerful 
and at ease. 

Mrs. Markham's naanner was very unusual. 
She did not speak at first, but stood still, finger- 
ing the back of the chair from which Adelaide 
had risen. Was she going to ask questions ? 
A mist began to thicken before her daughter's 
eyes, her head felt confused and giddy; she 
must speak or laugh, or do some desperate thing 
to arrest the explanation she foresaw on its way. 

Instinctively Adelaide felt her mother's timidity 
to be as great as her own ; if she could only force 
herself into courage she might conquer yet. 

" Do you want me, dear mamma ?" 

"Yes, Addy; I thought you were lying 
down. How is your head now, dear child ?" 

If Mrs. Markham had had the courage to 
put her arm round the trembling girl she would 
have yielded ; as it was, the tender, beseeching 
tones, the look she knew there was in the eyes 
she dared not meet, tried her sorely, but she 
struggled on. 

" Quite well, thank you ; I think I have been 
helping papa too much with his accounts, my 



222 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

head and eyes have both felt heavy for several 
days." 

She could look round by this time and face 
her mother with a smile, and poor Mrs. Mark- 
ham, although only half satisfied, for she loved 
Addy too tenderly to be wholly deceived, still 
found no power to ask the painful question she 
had intended. 

" Ah, you think so !" and she retreated to- 
wards the door, feeling almost as frightened of 
Adelaide as shQ always was of Elinor . so firm 
a barrier had this withdrawal of confidence built 
up between them . then as the yearning of 
motherhood again gave her the courage which 
had urged her up-stairs, she said, almost im- 
ploringly, " you are sure it is only the accounts, 
darling?" 

But Adelaide had her back turned now, and 
was brushing her soft, smooth hair into a 
tangled confusion . she could trust herself to 
answer bravely. 

" Quite, thank you ; and thank you, too, for 
coming to see after me." 

Mrs. Markham was still not satisfied . 



A CHANCE MEETING. 223 

she had watched the attachment springing 
up between James Fisher and her youngest 
daughter, with motherly pride and interest, but 
ever since her conversation with her husband 
about them she had fancied there was a change 
in Adelaide. 

She had grown silent and pale . her appetite 
failed her, she was spiritless with the children, 
and seemed always trying to be alone. Mrs. 
Markham was not clever nor recollected, but she 
was observing, and although she did not arrive 
at the conclusion quickly, she had lately made 
up her mind that there was, as her husband 
would have phrased it, " a screw loose " between 
Adelaide and James. 

She went down-stairs, and seated herself in 
front of the fire, meditating on the best means 
of winning her daughter's confidence. 

She was not long left in peace. Elinor 
came in, her eyes sparkling, her cheeks with the 
rare bloom on them that so much enhanced her 
beauty. A slight shiver ran through Mrs. 
Markham, as she thought of the contrast be- 
tween her two children  



224 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

Elinor might be cold and haughty, but she 
was certainly a very distinguished looking young 
woman. Mrs. Markham remembered a timid, 
gentle Sir Henry Forrester, whom her parents, 
she had been told, intended her to marry. She 
could never have hesitated an instant between 
him and Roland. Why was she so hard on 
James Fisher now ? 

None of Mrs. Markham 's children showed 
her much observance ; but Elinor scarcely ever 
took the trouble of answering her. To-day, 
however, she was unusually gracious, and sat 
chatting till dressing time. 

She had walked round and round the square 
till her patience was exhausted, and still she 
could devise no plan for bringing Maurice to 
her father's house, when she could be quite sure 
of James Fisher's absence. She could write to 
him, but it would be too great a condescension ; 
and yet, when she remembered the pride of 
his parting look, she did not believe he would 
come again, without being specially asked to 
do so. 

The thought led her back to that evening. 



A CHANCE MEETING. 225 

Why did she want Jo see him ? His insolence 
had been intolerable. And then came back, 
also, the remembrance of the love his eyes had 
told so plainly, and how much handsomer his 
eyes were than her cousin's. Let him be a 
relation of Ben Karse, or of whom he would, 
there could be no comparison between him and 
any admirer she had ever had, so far as ap- 
pearance went ; and his genius, too . there must 
be something remarkable about him to make 
her feel so anxious for his good opinion. She 
must see him again . but how ? 

Suddenly she remembered that in that first 
desultory talk, to which she had paid such little 
heed, he had told her that on certain days in 
the week he read at the Museum, in the after- 
noon. She stopped short in her walk, and tried 
to recollect . yes, this was one of the days. In 
ten minutes she could be in the street he must 
pass through on his way to Mr. Brownlow's. 
And suppose any friend of her Uncle Dry den's 
met her walking alone in London. she drew 
her veil down, and hesitated an instant. 

It was an absurd thought. No one who had 
VOL. n. 15 



226 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

known her at Flairs would recognise her now ; 
and none of the fashionable people she had 
mixed with in Vienna and Paris would ever 
come to such an out-of-the-way place as Blooms- 
bury. Mr. Brownlow or his sister were her 
only risks, but she was very far-sighted, and 
they were not people to be easily overlooked. 
She looked at her watch ; it was just the time 
at which Maurice had said he left the Museum. 
She fancied he had mentioned this with a slight 
emphasis, as if inviting what she now contem- 
plated, and the fancy had made her afect a 
greater interest in James Fisher's talk with her 
mother. She had no more time to deliberate 
.there was not a moment to spare. 

She looked down the street first, and then, 



drawing a long breath of relief, towards the 
Museum. Yes, there he was, walking fast to- 
wards her, with the springing, elastic tread she 
had remarked first at Flairs. He was looking 
in an open note-book in his hand, and did not 
see Elinor till he came up to her. 

He started, and then was passing her with a 
grave bow. 



A CHANCE MEETING. 227 

There are some men from whom no teaching 
could ever elicit grace ; but in Maurice it was a 
natural gift. It completed his attraction for 
Elinor. 

She smiled up at him reproachfully, and 
stood still. 

He forgot all his resolutions, and they had 
been vehemently taken, against ever s^ain put- 
ting himself within reach of her fascinations ; 
and he found himself shaking hands with her. 

** I thought you had left London/' she said, 
with the half timid manner so bewitching in a 
self-possessed woman. '' You have not been to 
see us for a week.'' 

Maurice's face altered. Her words destroyed 
the present illusion, and took him back to the 
past. 

'' I felt myself an intruder. Miss Dryden, and 
that's a feeling I don't care to have twice." 

He looked as if he w^e ready to bow and 
pass on. How exactly he reminded her of the 
Maurice Karse she had known at Flairs. Still 
a boor at heart, then. But she had determined 
to conquer him, so it would not do to quarrel. 

15.2 



228 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

She knew by instinct that she dared not 
laugh at Maurice^ as she did at her cousin. 

" Shall I tell you what I think, Maurice ?" 

" Yes, if you like ;" he still spoke sulkily, and 
as if her words were indifferent to him. 

Elinor's eyes sparkled, but she controlled 
every other sign of indignation. 

" Well, then, I think you are very exacting. 
You forget that in my father's house I must be 
attentive to all his visitors. I told you Mr. 
Fisher was engaged to my sister ; at least, I be- 
lieve there is an attachment, only it is not to be 
mentioned at present. When Adelaide is in 
the room, you must have seen for yourself, no 
one else has a chance of speaking to him ; but 
as of course I feel deeply interested in him, you, 
who know the secret, should be the last person 
to quarrel with me about it." 

The colour rose in Elinor's cheeks, but yet 
she looked straight into Maurice's eyes. 

He could not doubt her ; and with all the 
ardour of his generous nature roused out of its 
usual reserve, he accused himself of jealous sus- 
picion, quite forgetting that James Fisher's de- 



A CHANCE MEETING. 229 

votioD to Elinor had not been the beginning of 
the quarrel. 

He thought in his own mind that Fisher was 
a heartless deceiver, and was playing double 
between the sisters ; but if Elinor took all his 
looks and words for brotherly aflfection . and he 
could not doubt her own assertion . it was only 
a proof of the innocence and purity of her mind. 

He begged her pardon frankly ; and when 
she asked him if he would come in after dinner, 
the delight in his eyes showed her that peace 
was established between them. 

" You need not say you met me," she said, 
as they parted. " My father thinks it more of 
a compliment if people come unasked." 



CHAPTER 11. 



SORROW. 



Mr. Dryden is seated once more in the writing- 
room at Flairs. His looks have not passed 
through so many weeks of unrest and anxiety 
unscathed; but there is a striking change of 
physiognomy, a briskness and alertness of ex- 
pressioui a less rigid pose of reverie . tokens 
left by the life of action and resource into which 
bis hitherto studious and contemplative existence 
h d been forced. 

He looks perplexed now . he has pushed away 
the sheet of paper on which is a commenced 
letter, and leans back in his chair thinking. 



SORROW. 231 

The letter begins . "Dear Miss Brownlow," 
and although some time has elapsed since those 
words were written, still no more are added. 

It is a very difficult letter to write; no 
doubt of it ; and as Mr. Dryden now confesses 
to himself, one which he can not complete 
without consulting Cecil herself. 

While he rings the bell to summon her, I 
will tell some of the causes of his perplexity. 

As soon as possible after her father's 
death he brought the poor sorrowing girl to 
Flairs. The fever ended with the seizure of 
the clergyman ; but though the doctors pro- 
nounced infection over, it was thought better 
not to risk the presence of strangers at his 
funeral, and thus on the Squire devolved the 
whole charge of comforting Cecil. 

The quietness of her sorrow frightened him. 
She was so gentle, so utterly subdued and re- 
signed to the will of others, that it wrung his 
heart to see her. He had hoped that the change 
to Flairs would revive her, but she only seemed 
to droop more and more languidly each day. 

Mr. Dryden consulted Northover, as to whe- 



232 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

ther she thought the young lady required doc- 
tor's care ; but the housekeeper first shook her 
head, like a sagacious Newfoundland dog, and 
then putting it on one side, gave it as her opinion 
that it was nothing but " giving way." 

"You see, sir, there are those that keeps 
control over their bodies, and others that 
keeps control over their minds, and some that 
do both, though they're not common. I beg 
your pardon, sir, but there's nothing that's not 
under our own control . feelings and all the rest 
. if we only look at them the right way/* 

The Squire pleaded that Miss Brownlow was 
very young to be left without father or mother, 
and that he did not consider that she gave way 
to violent grief. 

" Bless me 1 sir," . and the head was jerked on 
one side more violently than ever, . "why, youVe 
lost both your parents, and I've lost mine over 
and over again, counting aunts who brought me 
up and so on, and if we'd given way as Miss 
Brownlow does, we'd have sunk inch by inch 
into our graves till we found the grass growing 
over our heads. If you'll believe me, sir, she 



SORROW. 233 

only wants rousing. A little wholesome talk 
now, or a little ornamental needle-work . but, 
no ! not she . there she sits hands in lap, gazing 
out into the park, as if she saw her poor pa's 
ghost minding the sheep." 

But Mr. Dryden could not agree to this view 
of the subject. 

When he found that Northover was not 
uneasy about Cecil's health, he decided that the 
shock had been too sudden, and although she 
had borne up at first, the reaction was now tell- 
ing on her, and that this torpor and supineness 
were the natural results of the wrench her whole 
nature had suffered. He felt most unwilling 
that she should, at any rate for the present, be 
removed from his own guardianship and from 
the quiet seclusion of Flairs. 

But on the previous day he had received a 
letter from Miss Jane Ann Brownlow. In reply 
to his account of Cecil's state, and his wish that 
she should remain with him, she enclosed a 
letter written by Cecil's father at the beginning 
of the fever in Starby, in which, in the event of 
his death, he entrusted his child to her care and 



234 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

that of his brother Erasmus ; and Miss Brown- 
low suggested that, however obliged they might 
be by the Squire's kindness, their home ought 
to become Cecil's as soon as possible . ^* very 
likely the change would do her good/' 

It was a very common-sense, practical letter, 
doubtless, but it was expressed in a determined 
cut-and-dried set of words, that could only have 
been written down by a strong-minded woman. 
Decided, opinionated words are unpleasant 
enough when spoken, but written in a formal^ 
though female hand, they seem thoroughly 
odious. The Squire respected Miss Brown- 
low, but he always shrank from her as men of 
his fastidious type do from strong-minded, 
strong-willed women. He did not object to 
female talent ; but he detested contradiction and 
management. If Northoyer had not possessed 
a more than ordinary share of tact, spite of her 
eccentricities and an ever-present safety-valve to 

her tyranny, in the shape of " that dummy," 

. 

Tomkins the steward, she would not have main* 
tained so long a reign at Flairs. 

One thing was very plain to the Squire: 



SORROW. 235 

Miss Brownlow had decided hastily. Maurice's 
term of residence with his tutor would not ex- 
pire tin the following autumn, and he felt quite 
sure her father had never intended Cecil to be 
brought up with Maurice Karse. As the Squire 
thought of this, and remembered Cecil's con- 
fusion on the day of her father's death, a look 
almost of agony passed over his face. 

'^ It might have been . " he said, and the 
hard look told of a fierce, inward struggle. '^ It 
would have fulfilled my dearest wishes for them 
both. but it is too late. I will take it as my 
curse, my punishment for what has gone 
before !" 

For a long time he leant forwards on the 
table, his face buried in his hands. Then he 
rose suddenly and paced up and down the room. 
He was debating a momentous question with 
himself . affection and inclination urging one 
set of claims ; pride, what he considered justice, 
the other. It was not a pure question of right 
and wrong ; the* alloy of many warring motives 
was too powerful to let conscience speak dis- 
tinctly. She had beeti so long stifled that her 



236 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

voice could not be trusted in this matter, even 
if it could be beard at all. 

He could neither decide nor conquer, at least 
not then. Sternly forcing his mind back to his^ 
occupation, he again seated himself at his writ- 
ing-table, and re-read Miss Brownlow's letter. 

No . it could not be. If her aunt did not 
know what was fitting for a motherless girl, he 
must act a father's part to Cecil. She had not 
seen much of Maurice as yet ; and if they never 
met again she would forget all about him. So 
he argued, with the iron despotism of a man 
unused to deal with women's hearts ; but after 
the emotion she had shown it would be utter 
folly to shut her up for nearly a year, 
with such a youth as Maurice, and cruel 
to both. All other considerations apart, what 
could Miss Brownlow be thinking of in risking 
an attachment between two young people, at 
present wholly unprovided for. Cecil had a 
mere pittance . just enough to keep her from 
dependence; and Maurice's future, so far as 
she knew, must depend on his own exertions. 

He was not kept long waiting after his sum- 



SORROW. 237 

mons to Cecil. She came in pale, heavy eyed ; 
her long trailing dress, with its deep crape border, 
seemed to drag her down to earth with its 
weight ; the round, slender throat looked pain- 
fully white and delicate against the intense 
blackness ; so did the small hands, hanging 
listlessly on each side of her, but she was lovely 
still, though her loveliness was too transparent 
and unearthly. 

Mr. Dryden rose, and placing a chair for her, 
he led her to it with as much courtesy as if she 
had been one of the stately dames hanging 
framed in the North Gallery. 

" I sent for you, my dear, to know whether 
you would like to stay a few months here with 
me, or whether you would rather go at once to 
the house of your Uncle Erasmus ? I have a 
letter from yOur aunt on the subject." 

His voice was not quite firm as he reached 
the last words. Suppose she decided against 
remaining with him after all ? Well, in that 
case he must find another tutor for Maurice ; 
he did not choose to show her her father's letter. 
She might have a superstitious feeling about 



238 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

obeying it ; he was resolved to leave her judg- 
ment unbiassed. 

Cecil looked up in surprise ; there seemed a 
kind of stupor in it that gave a painful ex- 
pression to her face, as if she were trying to 
understand something beyond her comprehen- 
sion, but there was no blush, no conscious look. 
Mr. Dry den saw she was not thinking of Mau- 
rice, and he sighed, half with relief, half with 
disappointment. 

" Oh, to stay here if you please . ^unless I am 
a trouble to you ; am I, dear Mr. Dryden ?" 

The look of sudden distress, and the gather- 
ing tears almost overcame the Squire, but he 
answered her cheerfully. 

" Why, you are quite a comfort to me, my 
child ; it is very much to a lonely man like me, 
to have something young to talk to, sitting 
opposite him at meal times, though I fear it is 
dull for you." 

" You are so very kind," . and she burst in a 
sudden fit of hysterical sobbing, which in her 
weak btdte she could not control. 

He was frightened, and he moved towards 



SORROW. 239 

the belly but Cecil caught bis hand and held 
bitn backy telling him as well as she could, that 
she was best let alone. 

He yielded, as be almost always did to her 
slightest wish, and walked to the window. He 
had a strong aversion to tears, even in Cecil ; it 
was hard for him to believe that she could not 
have prevented this paroxysm . the thought 
helped her composure more than he knew. 
When next he spoke there was no longer the 
tender thrill in his voice that had moved her so 
strangely. 

" Well, then, Cecil, I will write to your aunt 
and tell her we have settled for you to remain 
here, at any rate till the autumn. I am going 
to send for Elinor at once, she will be glad to 
find she is to have you for a companion ; and 
Cecil, I think if you rode with me every day, 
instead of staying in-doors so much, it would 
do you good. What do you say about it? 
Very well then, my dear, we will ride over the 
Downs to Stirmouth this afternoon." 

By this time he had seated himself at his 
desk again, and Cecil felt she might go. 



240 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

She loved the Squire dearly, and had never 
felt afraid of him before, but there was some- 
thing in the solemn grandeur of Flairs . the 
severe politeness of Northover, the automaton 
and speechless exactitude of the rest of the 
household, and the isolation in which their 
master lived among them . that was gloomy 
and depressing. So far as her own personal 
feelings were concerned, the dead stillness of the 
house was soothing. She could not even hear 
her own footsteps on the thickly carpeted stairs ; 
the only sounds were those caused by the rustle 
of her dress on the matting of the long stone 
galleries . there was no outward disturbance to 
the nursing of her grief. It seemed to Cecil 
that she had nothing left to live for, that her 
place in existence was crushed away ; she had 
no 'duties left to fulfil, there could be no use in 
living for herself 

If she remembered Maurice, it was to shud- 
der that during the last few weeks of her father's 
life, her thoughts had been diverted from him 
by a stranger, one of whom Mr. Dryden had 
almost forbidden her to think at all. I am not 



SORROW. 241 

sure that if Cecirs sorrows had been less over- 
powering, she might not have dated the slight 
awe with which she now regarded the Squire, 
from that very conversation ; but her heart was 
so deadened to every other affection, but that 
which now clung so agonisingly to those who 
could return it visibly on earth no longer . that 
she was lifeless to other feelings. Even the 
prospect of living under the jsame roof with 
Elinor . from whom she had always shrunk with 
decided aversion . scarcely stirred her, gave 
her no more of pain than the prospect of a 
daily ride with the Squire . and riding had 
always been her favourite amusement . gave her 
of pleasure, after her , long severance from all 
country pursuits. It did not signify what hap- 
pened, she was only grateful to be left undis- 
turbed, grateful when the formal meals were 
over, and when she was once more alone in her 
room for the night. 

Mr. Dryden was so accustomed to pass his 
evenings in either reading or writing, that it 
was natural to him to imagine Cecil would do 
the same. He felt afraid ot her grief, and 

VOL. II. 16 



242 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

awkward at interfering with its indulgence ; and 
yet as days went on, he sometimes doubted 
whether it was quite right to yield to her . 
whether, as he had self-elected himself her 
guardian, he ought not to take a father's au- 
thority also. But all his life long he had 
shrunk from explanations, and their subsequent 
awkwardnesses. 

Dread of an awkwardness ! How many loving 
hearts has that selfish fear torn asunder . hearts 
that a few honest, tender words would have 
welded into one ; how many fathers would joy 
in children and grandchildren, who now live 
alienated from their offspring for lack of the 
fervent unselfishness which would have braved 
an awkwardness. How many brothers live as 
strangers because they could not summon the 
manliness which would have bared one heart to 
the other, and showed each the wounds he had 
all unwittingly inflicted. Well, there is one 
comfort, if the people are good people, if the 
shrinking proceeds as much from natural un- 
conquered temperament as from selfishness, all 
will be made right some day . ^in Jerusalem the 



SORROW. 243 

Golden there will be no secrets^ no unrest, no 
morbid cares. 

This is an exaggerated strain for Mr. Dry- 
den's reserve towards Cecil, still he might have 
spared himself much former suffering by re- 
sisting this very failing. 



16.2 



CHAPTER III. 

MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 

The Squire's prejudice against Miss Brownlow 
would have been doubled if he had seen her 
read his letter ; her handsome mouth . at least 
its upper part . rose till it nearly touched her 
nose, and her face and figure stiffened them- 
selves into an attitude which would have been 
greatly admired in those ** stocks " of former 
days, in which our grandmothers practised cour- 
tesies for the minuet. 

"The fidgety old jfrump/' she exclaimed, 
throwing the letter across to her brother, 
" teaching me propriety, indeed !" then with a 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 245 

sudden remembrance of Maurice's presence at 
the breakfast-table, she stretched out her hand 
in terror, lest Erasmus should . ^in an absent 
mood, proceed to read the contents of Mr. 
Dryden's missive, aloud. 

But Erasmus was not absent this morning, 
and was astonished at his sister's behaviour, to 
which he had not the slightest due. 

" Who is your correspondent, Jane Ann, and 
why do yoii call him names ?" 

She pretended to read her letter again with 
80 much absorption, as not to hear him. 

Maurice saw that he was not wanted, and he 
presently sauntered out of the room, although 
his tutor implored him to stay and examine one 
of the greatest entomological curiosities he had 
ever met with, a Vanessa lo ! caught alive in 
the month of February. 

" And a very good specimen too/' said the 
sage, pulling out and wiping his never absent 
magnifying glass. " Come, Maurice, you must 
have a look at him. Why! bless my soul, 
the boy's gonel hopped away like a grass- 
hopper." 



246 i&LiNOR drtden's probation. 

" And a very good job too. Really, Erasmus, 
you get so stuffed up at odd times with grubs 
and beetles, caterpillars and chrysalides . ^to say 
nothing of butterflies and moths, which you 
seem to make small account of now . that I 
wonder how you keep any room in your brains 
for Latin and Greek, and such things ; as to 
the common affairs of life, I suppose you think 
it my province to look after them. Well, per- 
haps it is," . this was said more quietly, her little 
explosion of wrath against her dearly loved 
brother evaporating at the sight of the ludicrous 
perplexity it occasioned, for Erasmus adjusted 
his spectacles, then took them off, and wiped 
them, and having replaced them on his nose, 
took up the magnifying glass also to obtain ^ 
clearer view of his sister's meaning. " Perhaps 
it is," she repeated, " only you do put me out 
when you won't take a hint.'^ 

"A hint!" Erasmus's eyes rolled in uttar 
bewilderment. " My dear Jane Ann." 

"There, don\" and she laughed, all her 
anger giving way in the desire to restore his 
composure; "I mean, that I wanted Maurice 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 247 

to go away, because Mr. Dryden's Iqtter refers 
to him." 

" Eh, what ? Bless my soul ! nothing amiss, 
is there ? Mr. Dryden's not going to remove 
him, is he ? Why, the next six months' read- 
ing is the very cream of the whole thing ; just, 
in fact, what we've been working up to." 

" Don't frighten yourself." He tried her 
patience a little by starting off on a false scent. 
" He doesn't want to take Maurice away, but 
he refuses to let Cecil come here." 

" Eh, what ? But I thought you had settled 
she was to come. Poor dear child, she can't 
live by herself," 

" No ; but now do listen, Erasmus, or you 
will never hear the right story. Your precious 
Squire . I should like to shake him . thinks I 
am not a sufficiently proper and duennaish per- 
son to have the charge of my niece Cecil. 
Upon my word, I should think as I've kept 
myself out of harm's way all these years, I might 
be trusted." 

Miss Brownlow stopped, fi^eling t^iat her in- 
dignation was more than she could manage. 



248 EUNOB dbyden's probation. 

"But you must remember, my dear, you 
have always had me to help you," said her bro- 
ther, with his grave smile. 

The joke restored her equanimity ; the notion 
of Erasmus's interference with her propriety was 
too amusing. 

" You'd have been a capital help if I wanted 
it. Now, if the Squire had doubted your 
power of managing matters he would have hit 
the mark, for I believe you never dreamed that 
Cecil and Maurice could fall in love with each 
other." 

" Oh, they have, have they ?" and Erasmus's 
eyes twinkled as if he really were growing in- 
terested at last. 

"Good gracious me, no! . At least," . and 
here a shade of trouble came over her comely- 
face . " I hope not. No, it can't be," and she 
pursed up her mouth with the stern determina- 
tion with which a woman puts forth the true 
feminine logic that what she does not wish to 
be is not 

" Why can't it be ? . is there any objection ? 
I'm sure they are an uncommon nice-looking 
pair." 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 249 

" Patience me, Erasmus, what are you think- 
ing of? . to think of you turning match-maker 
at your time of life, and Mr. Dryden turning 
into an old maid at his, is enough to . well, it*s 
sufficiently remarkable. But now you really 
must not be so imaginative, but only listen." 

And then she read him the letter through, 
not of course leaving it to his own unassisted 
judgment to comprehend. She would have in- 
terpreted the right, i. e., her own meaning, of 
everything and everybody, to all the world, if 
she could. There never was so philanthropic 
an exponent of the views and motives of man- 
kind. 

" I suppose it is as you say," said Erasmus, 
fairly talked into submission ; " but my first 
impression was, that Mr. Dryden thought more 
of sparing future sorrow to the two young 
people than of reproving you ; but I won't con- 
tradict you, my dear, so there's an end of it." 

And as he saw clearly that another torrent of 
explanation was impending, he made a speedy 
retreat, thinking w^hat perhaps other men, 
blessed with as good, devoted sisters as Miss 



250 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Brownlow, have thought before, " What a bless- 
ing that there is a study in the house into 
which no one can enter without permis- 
sion." 

He looked at Maurice, whom he found 
lounging at the window, with awakened curi- 
osity, as he would have done at some rare 
" specimen." It was a new light to think of 
him as a person likely to love or be loved by 
his niece; and then a bri<i:ht idea irradiated 
Mr. Brownlow's often misty mind. Maurice 
had been most unstudious and moody lately. 
perhaps he was pining after Cecil. The new 
world of life his sister's talk had opened had the 
same interest for him in its strangeness that a 
sensation novel would have to a middle-aged 
recluse : he felt an intense curiosity to know if 
his last guess were correct. 

*' Maurice," he said suddenly. 

The youth looked up, evidently roused from 
an unpleasant reverie. 

" What are you thinking about? I'll wager, 
now," said Mr. Brownlow, going back in thought 
to his own young days with the fresh simplicity 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 261 

of a man wholly unused to the world, " that 
instead of Plato you have been studying the 
composition of a Valentine. You haven't much 
time to lose, you know ; the day will soon be 
here." 

Maurice started. This was quite a new phase 
of mind in his tutor. Had he heard of his 
attachment to Elinor ? And then as a sudden 
conviction crossed him he looked uncomfortable 
and angry, and answered sulkily that he had 
never had anything to do with Valentines, and 
certainly didn't mean to begin such nonsense 
now. 

It was gall and wormwood to see his grave 
tutor smile down at the paper, as if he knew a 
great deal more than he chose to tell. Maurice 
was glad it was one of his museum days ; he 
should be alone in the afternoon, at any rate. 
He had taken up a course of Universal History 
lately, but I fear his reading was sadly disturbed 
by visions of Elinor Dry den. It was extremely 
irritating this morning to see how suddenly his 
absent tutor had waked up, and to be obliged 
to control his dreaming fits. 



252 ELINOR dryden's pf oration* 

He took his hat and went out rather before 
his usual time. 

He had spent a very pleasant evening with 
Elinor. Her father only came in at the dose, 
and even he had behaved more courteously 
than on the former occasions. Elinor had 
been delightful, . not quite the ideal creation 
that had lingered in his mind before their quar- 
rel. An abruptness of manner to her mother 
and sister had slightly ruffled the image he 
tried again to see reflected in his mind ; and 
just before he left there had been something of 
a deeper nature, something from which he in- 
stinctively recoiled, spite of the fascination that 
drew him to her. 

Just as he was bidding them good night, 
Roland Markham, in his joking way, had said^ 

" By-the-bye, Mr. Karse, who was the lady 
you were so deep in talk with this afternoon ? 
I thought it was Elinor, but some one came up 
to speak to me, and you were both gone before 
I looked round again." 

Maurice's lips had parted to answer that Mr. 
Markham's guess had been correct . he could 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 253 

see nothing to' be ashamed of in what had 
passed between himself and Elinor . but she in*- 
terposed. 

*' Papa, how could you think I should be out 
walking by myself? I took my walk in the 
Square garden to-day . nor am I in the habit of 
talking to gentlemen in the street/' 

^* Well don't be in a puflFet, Nell ; the reasou 
I thought it was you, was because . ^ No 1 1 
don't think I shall tell you ; but at any rate you 
might have felt flattered if you'd seen the lady. 
Mightn't she, Mr. Karse ?" 

Maurice muttered something, which Roland 
Markham understood merely to be a confused 
acknowledgment of his last words. He hugged 
himself on having, as he termed it, ^' put a last- 
ing spoke in the young fellow's wheel with 
Elinor ;" but he was really so angry at finding 
him there again, that when he left home nei^t 
momiDg he told both his servants that they 
should be instantly discharged if they let that 
gentleman in any more. 

Maurice walked home aghast at the daring 
falsehood. I have said before, that his ideal of 



254 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

a woman's mind was very high and pure; it 
seemed something like profanity to be forced to 
doubt her truth. Truth . why it was the very 
keystone of Love ; the honour, the very safety 
of domestic life must crumble without it. His 
vivid imagination seemed to see the spot spread- 
ing and spreading upwards till it spread even 
over Elinor's face, and blotted out all her beauty. 
He suffered terribly all that night the torture . 
which for their comfort men can only endure in 
youth . of dis-illusion ; he had been worshipping 
the false Una, and Duessa had revealed herself; 
but with morning light came calmer thoughts. 
He might have misunderstood Elinor, though 
his reason told him this was impossible ; but at 
any rate he ought to give her a chance of ex- 
culpation. He called the same afternoon. Miss 
Dryden was out, and Mrs. Markham particularly 
engaged. For three successive days he received 
the same answer. He loitered on his way to 
and from the Museum, but without success. 
Then he wrote to Elinor . not on the subject of 
her falsehood ; instinctively he knew how much 
easier he could believe her spoken than her writ- 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 255 

ten word, and he still clung to the memory of 
his former feelings strongly enough to wish to 
be convinced that she was true. 

There was no weakness in this. All Maurice 
did he did strongly, when once he was suffici- 
ently roused to put his hand to the work ; and in 
proportion to the strength of the passion, he had 
# cherished for Elinor, was the difficulty he felt in 
believing her unworthy of it, and in freeing his 
heart from its ruins. He merely wrote to know 
if he had been denied admittance advisedly, or 
whether she really had been " not at home " on 
the three previous days. 

The answer came by return of post. 

Elinor had been at home, but had not heard 
of his visits. She thought the servants must 
have made some mistake. She would take 
care^that the next time he called, in the after- 
noon, he should be admitted. She did not say 
she had questioned the servants and had learned 
her father's prohibition. If Maurice knew this 
he would never call again^ but she tried to make 
the housemaid see that her father's orders had 
only of course referred to Mr. Karse's evening 
visits. 



256 EUNOR drtden's probation. 

The letter had reached Maurice that morning. 
It was charmingly worded. There was no mis- 
taking Elinor's earnest wish to see him again ; 
but for one little trifle he would have obeyed 
her behest and have called the same day, but 
she had underscored the word afternoon, and 
coupling this with the utter absence of expla- 
nation for the previous denials of admittance, 
he could not help suspecting the truth. Sus* 
picion grows ranker than even a garden weed. 
If he had not had such grave cause to doubt 
Elinor's truth he would have hated himself for 
his hesitation now. 

It was on this unhappy, fermenting state of 
discontent and distrust, that Mr. Brownlow's 
joke fell with the effect of yeast. The dim, 
half - formed suspicions, floating restlessly, 
churned up suddenly into a fierce foam of in- 
dignation against Roland Markham. He had 
not only dared to forbid him bis house, but he 
had gone to his tutor and given some jeering 
account of his love for Elinor, turning him into 
ridicule. 

He had hardly patience to sit through the 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARtCHAM. 257 

early dinner, and then he took his way with stern 
determination in every line of his young face to 
Roliand Markham's office. 

If he had sent in his name he would probably 
have been told that Mr. Markham was particu- 
larly engaged, and that there was no use in 
waiting to see him. It seems to me that busi- 
ness men tell as many falsehoods of this kind 
as fashionable ladies, when it suits them ; but 
by one of those fortuitous accidents which hap- 
pen just as often in real life as in fiction, he met 
Mr. Markham face to face on the doorstep. He 
was leaving office early . he meant to see James 
Fisher on his way home, and get it settled aboiit 
Elinor. 

His face darkened when he saw Maurice. 

" I am sorry to detain you, Mr. Markham, 
but I shall be greatly obliged by the favour of 
five minutes' private conversation." 

Roland was taken by surprise. Maurice 
spoke with a dignity that he could never have 
attained himself. He began to think, after all, 
there must be some mistake, and that he must 
belong to one of the county families. 

VOL IL 17 



258 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

Before he had recovered himself, he had led 
the way into a private room. 

Maurice spoke directly the door was closed. 

" I have called on you, to ask you why I am 
denied admission at your house ?" 

If his manner of saying these words had been 
l^ss composed and dignified, Roland Markham 
would have thought them, spoken by a mere 
youth, the best joke in the world ; now he hesi< 
tated before he answered. 

'' If ladies happen to be out, or engaged, I 
suppose young men are usually told so," he 
said, laughing. " Really, Mr. Karse, it is very 
hard to come here and bully me for the proceed- 
ings of my womankind." 

There was a sneer in his laughter that stung 
Maurice out of his self-control. 

"Will you give me your assurance, Mr. 
Markham, that you do not object to my calling 
at your house, when I leave your office ?" He 
was resolved not to cross the Markham thresh- 
hold again without distinct permission from the 
master of the house. 

The colour flew over Roland's face. The 
assurance of this boy was rather too much. 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 259 

" I neither object, nor the other thing. lam 
not sure, however, that you would be more for- 
tunate in finding the ladies at home to-day than 
you were yesterday." 

There was no mistaking his meaning now. 
he sneered openly as he spoke. 

"Then I am to understand that you have 
taken measures to prevent a meeting be- 
tween Miss Dryden and myself? I have a 
right to ask your reason for this, Mr. Mark- 
ham." 

And he placed himself against the door 
with a determination that would have roused 
Roland's admiration, if he had not been so 
angry. He was obliged to be angry. Unless he 
gave cause of quarrel he could not get out of 
his difficulty. 

" You may understand what you please, and 
be hanged," he said ; " but first understand 
this, young man, I don't choose to be bearded 
and called to account by anybody; certainly 
not by those who thrust themselves into my 
house, among my children, without any references 
as to parentage, respectability, or even the com- 

17^2 



260 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

mon passport of society . an introduction from 
any mutual friend." 

The lightning of indignation in Maurice's 
eyes checked him for an instant, but as the 
young man tried to speak he went on, " No, I'll 
finish what I've got to say ; if you will force 
yourself where you are not wanted, by George, 
you shall take the consequences. I don't want 
you any more at my house, no more does my 
daughter, and that's the long and short of it . 
she knows what you are dangling after as well 
as I do, but if you think the heiress of Flairs 
would throw herself away upon a dependent on 
her uncle's bounty, a man with a name one 
never heard of before, why you're grievously 
mistaken, that's all ; and now, sir, perhaps you 
will be so kind as to leave me." 

"I will in one moment," The insult was so 
gross that Maurice had had time to regain his 
dignity. ** But, Mr. Markham, it is a pity you 
should also be mistaken ; if you wish to know 
my real name and position, I refer you to Mr. 
Dryden, whose explanations will satisfy you. 
In birth I consider myself your daughter's 



MAURICE CALLS ON ROLAND MARKHAM. 261 

equal . you need have no fear that I shall again 
attempt to visit your house, although you might 
have secured that result by more temperate 
behaviour, and, as I cannot believe Miss Dryden 
shares your sentiments, I shall not trouble you 
to interpret her feelings any further. Good-day, 
sir. 

" 1 wish I'd knocked him down," was Mr. 
Markham's soliloquy, as the door closed on his 
visitor, " and what's this confounded nonsense 
about Dryden ? I'll write and ask the old screw 
. no, where'd be the use ? he never answered a 
letter of mine in his life ; certainly, I never 
wrote him. a pleasant one after the first : no, Til 
worm it all out of Elinor . if she knows this 
boy's history, she's been as close as wax ; if 
he's some poor relation it looks very like ^ dodge 
to keep the property in the family. I remember 
hearing that when Wentworth Dryden cut off 
the entail before he married, just to spite any 
boy we might have . confound him ! . there was 
an heir-at-law out in the West Indies ; now, it's 
just possible, he's such a cranky, queer mixture, 
that he's raked this boy up, somehow, and wants 



262 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

to marry bitn to Elinor as a sort of double resti- 
tution to the family for cutting off the entail ; 
however^ with a little patience and a little time, 
even if Elinor knows nothing, I'll soon find out 
if that West Indian left a son ; if he did, and 
this is the boy, so much the better . it will 
double my revenge to baulk such a very great 
scheme so completely. I must speak to James 
seriously, to-morrow. Confound that young fel- 
low's insolence . I didn't give it him half roundly 
^ough . the way in which he said he believed 
himself my daughter's equal . as if he thought 
me about fit to be her footman." 



CHAPTER IV. 



DEATH. 



Mr. Dryden hurried along across the bridge^ 
and through the hanging wood, springing over 
the obstacles in his path almost as Elinor had 
done years before, till reaching the top he 
swung himself over the fencing, and passed 
swiftly on in the direction of Karse's cottage. 

For sad news had come up to the House that 
morning . Ben was dying ! at least that was the 
message he had sent to Mr. Dryden. 

He had recovered slowly from the fever, and 
although aged and broken, had regained much 
of bis former appearance and cheerfulness, but 



I 



264 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

apparently he had taken cold, for the only ac- 
count the old woman gave who now lived in his 
cottage, was that " he had been tooked with the 
cold shivers over night, and that when she went 
to him in the morning he seemed to be goin' 
fast." 

The remembrance of her despondency and 
fatalisni at the time of the fever, helped Mr. 
Dryden's hopes now ; he sent off to Starby at 
once for the Doctor, and hastened up to Ben. 

But when he reached his old servant's bed- 
side, he saw that all hope was indeed over. 
Ben w as already speechless, but not unconscious, 
for a bright gleam of recognition flickered on 
the pale, sunken face, as the Squire bent over 
his bed. 

He laboured painfully for speech, but it would 
not return. By degrees Mr. Dryden learned to 
interpret his looks, and in obedience to them, he 
sent the old woman from the room. 

But when he found himself alone with the 
Squire the sufferer's agony for speech increased. 
The Doctor came and looked at him. " Life is 
passing slowly away," he said ; " probably it is 



DEATH. 265 

only the intense will to speak what is on his 
mind, that prolongs it." 

Slowly . slowly the hours pass, and still the 
wistful gaze is strained on the Squire's face, and 
still, at times, words seem to form on the power- 
less tongue. 

Mr. Dryden pondered what it could be . he 
could not think of any weighty secret which it 
could be in the power of Karse to communi- 
nicate. It could not be anxiety about Maurice, 
for since Ben's recovery the Squire had given 
him his solemn assurance that the young man's 
future should be cared for as if he had been 
bis own son, and Karse had warmly expressed 
his gratitude. 

He blamed himself severely now for having 
forbidden Maurice's return to Flairs ; how com- 
pletely he had separated him from the guardian 
of his youth, but latterly some undefinable in- 
stinct had warned him not to receive Maurice 
while Cecil remained with him, and he had not 
chosen him to visit Ben while he could not 
admit him at Flairs. 

Perhaps it seemed strange that this idea had 



266 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

only just dawned ; Ben was pining after Maurice 
now. Could he be sent for ? no, it would be 
useless. But he might tranquillise this rest- 
less anxiety by the mention of his name. For 
it had become unendurable to witness . 
to see those earnest eyes, now more like the 
eyes of some imploring, hunted animal, fixed on 
his face, to see the lips moving in impotent 
efforts at speech which would not come, but 
died away in hoarse, inarticulate sounds. 

He proffered pencil and paper, but the fingers 
had lost power too, and fell away feebly from 
their imposed task. 

The Squire bent over the bed. 

" Ben, are you wanting to see Maurice ?" 

There came a wistful look, and then he shook 
his head ; and again there was an eager, hunger- 
ing glance. 

A sudden conviction flashed on the Squire ; 
there could be only one interpretation to that 
look. It was a question. And what question 
was it that kept this spirit lingering on the 
threshold of departure, till it should be answered ? 

Once more he forced his whole attention to 



DEATH. 267 

analyse the dying man's gaze. As he did so, 
its meaning deepened, or seemed to deepen, 
with the new key he had to its interpretation. 
to deepen into far-off thoughts ; to be question- 
ing the past, not the present. And what of 
the past . what shadow troubled Ben's soul 
now . on what event did he desire the curtain 
to be lifted, and light to shine in, before all was 
closed in darkness ? 

There could be but one, and that. 

Mr. Dryden rose suddenly from the bed-side 
and paced up and down. His face contracted^ 
and perspiration broke out on his forehead, in 
the strong wrestling in which he and his pride 
were matched. 

A sound from Ben roused him. 

The purple shadows on the face were more 
defined. The hand of Death was more and 
more visible, and yet with its approach came no 
calm ; the struggling soul had not yet resigoed 
itself to go. 

And was it true that a word from him would 
calm this agony . would satisfy this longing 
desire ? It might be so. it must be tried. 



268 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

He turned suddenly, wrenching hinoself from 
the grasp of the spiritual foe, and again bent 
over the bed, closer, much closer than he had 
bent before, till his lips touched the ear of the 
dying man, and whispered . 

"Maurice is my own son. I cannot own 
him yet, but I love him dearly, Ben. Before 
he dies, he shall know who was his father !" 

The words acted like a spell. The anxious, 
strained gaze changed softly into one of deep 
thankfulness ; the struggling, restless expression 
soothed into ineffable peace. The whisper, 
which had been, as it were, forced from the 
pale, stricken man by the bed side, had loosed 
Ben's last tie to earth ; his eyes no longer 
sought the Squire's, they closed gently, as if the 
time yet left must not be distracted by even the 
sight of earthly objects^ . and so life ebbed away, 
so painlessly, so peacefully, that even Mr. Dry- 
den could not have said when his old friend 
ceased to breathe 

He was gone, then . the only link that held 
Wentworth Dryden with any pleasurable associ- 
ation to the past . the only being whom he had 



DEATH. 269 

ever trusted, and whose faith had withstood even 
the approach of suspicion. He had not realised 
how strongly affection had clung round this 
last record of younger days, till his place was 
empty. 

The fever had, directly or indirectly, robbed 
him of the only two beings who gave a human 
interest to Flairs and its neighbourhood. Life 
looked more lonely than ever before him. 

He was very, very sad. All the gaiety he 
had summoned to cheer Cecil's loneliness flagged, 
and the pale, haggard look, came back to his 
face. 

But this did more to rouse Cecil from her 
apathy of grief than any mere forced cheer- 
fulness. 

She grew alarmed at his changed looks and 
his silence, and devoted herself unremittingly to 
his comfort and consolation. It was the first 
time in his life that the Squire had ever received 
sympathy from a woman ; and, worn out and 
exhausted as he was, he resigned himself to the 
sweet and soothing influence as entirely as we 
abandon ourselves to repose after fatigue. 



270 ELINOR DRTDEn's PROBATION. 

- The old confidence between them seemed 
once more renewed . there came no vexing 
mention of Maurice to disturb it. Even when 
the Squire wrote to tell the sad news to him, 
he did not say to Cecil what he had done. 
Open as he was to her on all subjects, it seemed 
to him wiser and safer that on this there should 
be silence, at least till time should have obli- 
terated any impression that Cecil's fancy . for 
he would not believe the wound had gone 
deeper . might have received. 



CHAPTER V. 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 



The only person wholly undeceived by Ade- 
laide's silent endurance was James Fisher. He 
had seen her lips quiver through the smiles she 
forced them into on the night when she virtually 
yielded him up to Elinor. He resolved to try 
to share his attentions more equally between the 
sisters for the future. It would be so easy to 
explain to Elinor that Adelaide's feelings must 
be studied a little. If she seemed to resent 
this, he did not quite see how he should manage 
. but he did not think she would . he believed 
her worldly wisdom to be as great as any of ber 



272 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

other gifts, and this was one of the secrets of 
her fascination for him. 

But on his next visit, as has been said, Ade- 
laide disappeared directly after his arrival, and 
he could treat resolution, and yield himself up 
to Elinor without any irksome duty plucking at 
bis conscience. 

He loved Elinor now, he told himself, as he 
had never loved before ; and yet he shrank from 
seeing her again in Adelaide's presence. Dis- 
tasteful as one sister had grown to hira beside 
the other, he yet revolted from the idea of giv- 
ing her pain. If they had only lived apart, all 
might have gone on so unconsciously, and so 
happily. As it was, a woman was such a tender, 
morbid creature, that the slightest attention 
shown to another crushed her immediately 
under a sense of her own imperfections ; for 
he had loved Adelaide too long not to be ac- 
quainted with some of the self-inflicted sufferings 
of her poor little heart, although he either could 
not, or did not, allow himself to appreciate the 
depth of her aflFection. Men soon got over such 
things, he argued, and women's natures were so 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 273 

much shallower, so much more flexible, that ia 
a few months she would forget she had ever 
cared for him, except as a cousin. 

He was sitting before a blazing fire, reading 
a novel, and meditating between the chapters 
on the perplexities of his own position, when a 
letter was brought for him . a letter he shrank 
from opening. It was from Roland, and it was 
either to borrow money, or to ask his intentions 
with respect to Elinor. 

" He is such a reckless, intriguing fellow, and 
nothing seems to answer with him." 

But when he had opened and read the letter, 
he looked more anxious than annoyed. 

It was to ask him to go to Markham's house 
that evening, to give him the best advice he 
could, to aid him in thwarting Mr. Dryden's 
schemes against Elinor's happiness. 

Something had been said at his last visit 
about a possibility of Mrs. Markham going 
away from home for a change, and Jan^es had 
secretly hoped she meant to take Adelaide with 
her. He had kept away for several days, trust- 
ing that at his next visit he might see Elinor 

VOL. II. 18 



274 . ELINOR dryden's probation. 

quite alone. If he had known all that had 
passed before Roland wrote that letter, he would 
have felt still more disquieted. 

Mr. Markham had gone home in a temper to 
quarrel with an angel if he had found one sit- 
ting at his hearth-stone, but instead there was 
his daughter Adelaide pale and heavy-eyed. 

A shadow of coming hope had made her at 
times happier since Maurice Karse's last visit. 
Surely Elinor must care for him, or she could 
not have looked at him or talked to him as she 
had done ; and Adelaide had noticed the bright 
flush on her sister's face when he went away, 
and the dreamy listlessness of her manner next 
morning, with eyes that had loved too well not 
to know the tokens. 

If Elinor loved Maurice she could not love 
James too. She wished now for her cousin's 
next evening visit as much as she had previously 
dreaded it ; but this excitement was almost as 
trying as the previous sorrow, for although her 
sister might only care for James's admiration, 
still she was toQ sure that his love had gone 
from herself. 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 275 

Her pale face irritated her father . he was 
tired of it ; he believed she was making herself 
an imaginary victim, and that James had never 
in jany way encouraged her hopes. Therefore 
he asked her in a very surly way to give him 
his writing things, and to tell the servant not to 
lay the cloth till he had written a note. 

Mrs. Markham looked up from her knitting. 

** Oh, Roland, it is just dinner-time !" 

**Dinner-time !" . he added a very unnecessary 
word, . ** I suppose dinner-time was made to 
suit me, and it doesn't to-day/' 

" Dear ! dear !" sighed Mrs. Markham. She 
was afraid of her husband's angry moods, al- 
though he rarely vented them on her, but she 
could not resist that truly feminine cowardice, 
teazing, yet not so as to get herself into trouble. 
"At any rate, you'll tell me who this im- 
portant person is who must be written to before 
dinner." 

"Oh, James Fisher. Can't you hold your 
tongue when you see I'm busy." 

" James, I'm sure it's waste of time to 
write to James, for he'll very likely come to- 

18.2 



276 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

night. It is longer than usual since he was 
here." 

I scarcely know what made Roland Markham 
look up just then into his young daughter's 
face. She was drinking in her mother's words 
with an eagerness of hope that could not be 
mistaken. He glanced quickly on to the mo- 
ther, and it seemed to him by the smile she 
gave to Adelaide that there was some secret 
understanding between the two. He was ruffled 
and angry enough to misconstrue anything. 

" And if Fisher should come here this even- 
ing," he said in the same coarse, insufferable 
manner in which he had spoken to Maurice, 
" there is no need for you to look pleased about 
it, Adelaide ; he only comes here to see one 
person, and that's Elinor." 

To his great surprise his meek daughter 
turned on him with glowing cheeks, but with 
calm dignity. 

"I know it, papa; he has shown it very 
plainly," and then she walked slowly to the 
door, and went away. 

It would be hard to tell what Roland Mark- 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 277 

ham felt ; he repressed his feelings so quickly 
that he scarcely knew what they were, except 
that if listened to, they would lead him astray 
from his darling project of revenge on Went- 
worth Dry den. A suppressed sob startled him ; 
his wife was sitting crying, hiding her face with 
her hands. 

" What in the name of heaven and earth, 
Elinor, can be the matter with you ? You've 
been glumpy and out of sorts enough, I can 
tell you, lately, without plaguing a man's life 
out by such baby nonsense. You know I hate 
it." 

" I'm not doing it to tease you, Roland, I 
can't help it; but I'm going" . and she moved 
up from the sofa . " I can't stay here with you 
after your treatment of Adelaide." 

"Oh, confound Adelaide and the whole busi- 
ness ! I'll tell you what," he said angrily, and 
he pushed his chair back from the table, " many 
a man would turn round and swear at you, 
Nell, if you led him such a life just because 
be writes to ask a friend to come and see him. 
It's more than I can stand, I can tell you." 



278 ELINOR DRTf den's PROBATION. 

Rude as he was sometimes, they rarely quar- 
relled, but his tone sounded more serious than 
usual, and Mrs. Markham hesitated. 

" I think you ought to reason, Roland, and 
not to scold that poor dear child when she has 
behaved like an angel. As to James Fisher, 
I'm sure I shall not care if I never see him 
again ; and I dare say it's very wicked and un- 
natural to say so, but I know we were all much 
happier before Elinor came." 

The struggle with which she said the words 
overcame her, and her tears fell again faster 
than ever. 

She tried to check them, for she did not 
want to irritate her husband still further against 
Adelaide, neither did she wish to reveal the 
secret the poor child had so bravely guarded ; 
but to her surprise he came up to her and 
kissed her. 

" There, don't be a soft-hearted goose, Nell ; 
you trust to my judgment for doing what is 
best for your girls, both of 'em. Why, you ve 
trusted me all your life, old woman ; you're not 
going to turn against me now." 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDIK6. 279 

What could she do, loving hitn as she did, 
but return his kisses, and whisper that she had 
been cross and silly, and that he should do 
what he liked, she was sure he knew best; 
but a sense of having in some sort betrayed 
Adelaide came over her afterwards, and she 
exerted herself surprisingly to avoid any chance 
of a quiet talk with her before dinner. 

But James Fisher did not appear that evening. 

" When Mr. Fisher comes show him in 
here," Mr. Markham said to the servant, as the 
cloth was removed on the following day : and 
his wife, taking this as a hint for the exercise of 
her promised submission, left the room, followed 
by her daughters. 

Elinor felt strongly tempted to know what 
all this meant. She liked planning mysteries 
and scheming herself, but she did not choose 
to be involved blindfold in those of other people. 
Her thoughts were distracted by Maurice; she 
was both angry and surprised that he had not 
answered her letter in person. She did not 
care to see James Fisher to-night ; she should 
be glad if he did not come upstairs at all ; and 



280 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

yet with the perversity of her strange, wayward 
will, directly she heard him arrive, her thoughts 
strayed from Maurice, and she seated herself at 
the piano and began to sing, by way of remind- 
ing him of her presence in the house. 

With what of strength there can be in a 
double heart she loved them both ; or, if such a 
state of feeling be impossible, her better self, 
her higher faculties, yearned after Maurice, 
while all that was earthly and vain clung to the 
man who so well understood the art of winning 
her. 

Mr. Markham began the conversation by 
rubbing his hands, and informing his cousin 
there was no time to lose. 

"About what? I don't understand }'0U." 
Mr. Fisher spoke sulkily ; he did understand his 
cousin perfectly, but he was determined he 
should speak out quite plainly this time, before 
he did so himself. 

" Why, in consulting together." Markham 
was disappointed, though he took care not to 
show it ; he fancied James was so deeply at- 
tached to Elinor^ that the hint of anything 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 281 

affecting her happiness, ought to have brought 
him there burning with indignation, and only 
too anxious to fall in with her father's plans ; 
" there's no time to be lost in trying to find out 
what this precious uncle of Elinor's is at, before 
we let her go back to Flairs." 

" Go back to Flairs ? You don't surely 
mean there is any chance of that yet ?" 

" Don't I ? I have reasons of my own for 
. seeing his letters to Elinor before she gets them ; 
of course, as her father, even if her happiness 
were not threatened, I am perfectly justified in 
doing this. Yesterday," he lowered his voice 
instinctively, " there came a letter recalling her to 
Flairs ; the fever is quite over, and she's to be 
moped in that dismal place until this young 
foundling . whom she is to marry . is of age." 

" To marry whom ?" exclaimed Fisher . he 
began to take the matter more to Roland's satis- 
faction. 

" Why, you have seen him here ; that young 
fellow who calls himself Karse," and then he 
told Fisher some part of his interview with 
Maurice and his suspicions. 



282 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

James Fisher sat thinking, and although 
Markham was innpatient to hurry on matters, 
he felt that he must not show this too plainly. 

" It would be easy enough, I expect, to find 
out if the West Indian Drvden left a son ; but 
even then, I can't see how your knowledge of 
this could hinder your brother-in-law's plans." 

" Why, if we could prove to Elinor that she 
was to be married to an impostor . no Dryden 
at all, in fact . do you think she would submit 
tamely ?" 

" It seems to me," . James Fisher spoke with 
an icy coldness, that showed Markham the mis- 
take he had made, . " that vour daugrhter Elinor 
is not a girl who would marry any one she did 
not choose for herself; if she cares enough for 
this Mr. Karse . or whatever his real name may 
be . she will marry him, let him be a Dryden 
or not." 

"Confound it all, man, how hasty you are; 
however, I suppose I'm treading on tender 
ground . Elinor doesn't now care a fig for 
Karse. I know her ^kes and dislikes better 
than that. But if he goes back to Flairs free, 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 283 

and perhaps disappointed into the bargain, there 
is no knowing what may be done there by con- 
stantly putting the screw on/* 

James Fisher sat irresolute. 

"But if Mr. Dryden has set his heart so 
earnestly on this scheme, it appears to me he 
would disinherit Elinor as soon as he learned 
her disobedience." 

Roland Markham's sneer surpassed itself; 
with all his craft and his spirit of working out 
his ends by intrigue, instead of by honest 
dealing, he had never yet been able to forego 
the dear delight of sneering at those he con- 
sidered less wise than himself, even when he 
had a special reason for standing well with them. 

James Fisher reddened ; he turned away from 
Markham, and began twisting an envelope that 
lay on the table. 

His cousin's mood changed in an instant. 

" You are quite right there, Fisher," he spoke 
with a sort of approving seriousness, " but I 
cannot see why he need know it. Elinor tells 
me her uncle's agreement with her is, that she 
is not to entangle herself in any engagement 



284 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

without his permission, till she is of age . the 
old fool having settled that that is not to 
happen till she is twenty-three. She is then 
to be declared his heiress, but now . stop 
a bit," for Fisher tried to speak, "Went- 
worth Drycien is not a man to eat his words. 
If Elinor is once recognised as his heiress, he 
will never disinherit her, although he may, per- 
haps, refuse to see or receive the husband she 
chooses. His notion is, I expect, that she will 
be married to this precious protege of his, fast 
enough by that time ; it used to be incompre- 
hensible to me, the way in which he shut her 
up, and then sent her into exile . but now the 
daylight comes in fast. Why, if you notice, 
Elinor had been here scarcely any time before 
that young spark w^as sent to look after her. 
By George, when I see how completely w^eVe 
been hood-winked, Fm sorry I didn't thrash 
him." 

He turned away, and began to poke the fire 
almost out of the grate; he saw that Fisher 
was deliberating, and perhaps if he w^ere let 
alone^ he might screw up his courage, but 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 285 

Roland felt that he could not leave it in doubt. 
A letter might come for Elinor by the mid-day 
post . he dared not withhold from her after to- 
morrow the one that had already arrived ; some- 
thing told him that if she knew how near her 
return was, she would not bind herself to any- 
one. This would probably be her last meeting 
with James Fisher. 

" rU tell you what, James," he said with 
such a well assumed frankness, that even his 
cousin was quite deceived, " I believe I've made 
a great mistake," . and then he stopped as if he 
needed help to get out the rest of his sentence. 

" I think you made a mistake in not telling 
me ' the nature of Mr. Dryden's conditions 
before ; is that what you mean ?" Mr. Fisher's 
manner was not encouraging. 

" Stuff and nonsense. I thought you knew 
all about it ; no, I mean a mistake about you 
and Elinor. Liking you as I have done from a 
boy, and seeing . as I thought, at least . how 
much you were taken with Elinor, I made up 
my mind you were just suited to each other, and 
I hoped you would win her ; but as I have made 



286 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

8 mistake . as in plain words this can't be, lend 
me your help like a good fellow to find out who 
and what this young Karse is, because after all 
Elinor may grow to like him, and there's no 
mistake about his love for her ; there's no shilly 
shallying about it, he'll go to work with a will 
at wooing when he gets a chance ; that's the 
only thing I like about him, and though I should 
have liked to baulk Wentworth, still, if my child 
is happy, why should I wish it otherwise ?" 

His heartiness was so well assumed, that even 
Fisher could not doubt it now. 

" But who ever said I was willing to give up 
Elinor ? If I only thought I had a good chance ; 
if I were sure she did not love that arrogant 
young upstart, I'd speak to her at once." 

" But bless my soul, James, how can you be 
sure unless you do speak to her ? I thought you 
knew a good deal about women, and their ways. 
Why, they're as sly as cats ; besides, you could 
not expect Elinor to tell you she was free, ready, 
willing, to accept your affection directly it was 
offered ? Bless my soul . bless my soul, that's 
not the way I went courting." 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 287 

" But th^e seems never a ch4nce of seeing 
her alone." 

" Isn't there ? I used to make such chances/' 
Mark ham grew more and more cavalier as he 
saw the other's excitement. " Honestly, James, 
I'm afraid you have lost your chance. I must 
give her the letter to-morrow morning, and if 
she takes it into her head to start at once, why 
she'll start, and you will have seen your last of 
her for the rest of your life." 

Seen the last of Elinor ! All his better 
feelings . which even this evening had still 
pleaded for Adelaide . were stifled under the 
sudden awakening : he could not yield up Elinor 
to Maurice Karse. As he thought of his rival's 
physical advantages, a fierce hatred kindled in 
his tepid nature, and as fierce a resolution to 
win in the struggle between them. He was 
timid and suspicious, and yet he believed that 
if she once promised herself to him, she would 
keep faith, but his own self-experience gave him 
DO hope or security without a binding pledge. 
She must regard herself as his promised wife 
before she left London. And yet he hesitated ; 



288 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

if he had known this about the Squire before^ 
he would have kept out of Elinor's way. 

Have you ever seen men climb a greased 
mast projecting over deep water, for a reward 
fastened to the end ? they know before they 
attempt it they cannot return by the way they 
came ; when they reach the quivering end of 
the wood, they must boldly plunge head fore- 
most, and swim for their lives, or they must fel\ 
ignominiously into the water without the prize, 
and be greeted by the laughter of the by- 
standers. If you watch their faces, you will 
see that in many instances the required effort 
is almost beyond them, they glare round in 
agony, craving the help . which they too well 
know cannot reach them, or if it could, would 
be withheld. 

And in making up his mind to the first de- 
cided act of his life . although he . had the con- 
solation of a doubt as to the cold shock he 
might be called on to undergo . James Fisher's 
mental torture came very near that of the mast 
climbers. 

He , stood silent, holding his chin with one 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 289 

hand, and pressing the knuckles of the other into 
the table, till Roland Markham's patience was 
exhausted. 

" Well," he said abruptly, " the fire seenas 
almost out, so I move we adjourn ; I've no 
doubt they have a better one up-stairs ; they 
must be wondering what the deuce has become 
of us ; come along, I dare say you'd like to bid 
good-bye to linor, only don't tell tales about 
the letter, you know." 

" If I come to-morrow morning will* you ar- 
range for me to see her alone ?" 

" If you really are sure you want to see her 
alone, why don't you see her to-night, my good 
fellow ? Ah, I see you know very little indeed 
about women; why in the morning they are 
cold, and languid, and listless, their circulation 
is stagnant ; but in the evening, when the blood 
is warmed with exercise and excitement, there 
is glow enough to catch at the faintest tokens of 
love. There's poetry for you.'* 

" Well, then,". and Mr. Fisher felt suddenly 
that, having gone so far, it would be easier to go 
on, than to begin all over again in the mom- 

VOL. II. 19 



290 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ing, . " shaD I find her alone now, if I go up 
into the drawing-room ?" 

" No . stay," said Markham, he was terribly 
puzzled; he was so little certain of Elinor's 
preference of Fisher . unless she were moved 
by his earnest wooing . that he felt sure the 
slightest symptom of management on his own 
part, or of timidity on the lover's, would rouse 
her haughty spirit to determined opposition. 
He stamped his foot at last in impatience at his 
own want of ingenuity. 

" I can't fetch my wife and Addy down here ; 
it would look too patent ; besides, mind you, 
James, if the thing's to be, only we three must 
know of it, or it will soon reach Dryden's ears. 
Hang it, man, can't you suggest something?, 
why, when I ran away with her mother, I had 
to plan everything, and carry it out too." 

Mr. Fisher had grown excited ; he was think- 
ing of Elinor, and how soon she might be almost 
his own . he was as eager as Roland himself 
now. 

" Look here," he said, ** it would be best for 
me to see her down here, but . " 



A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING. 291 

" But you don't imagine she'll come down to 
you, do you?" said Markham, with a rude 
laugh ; between suppressed anger and desperate 
impatience he had lost all control ; ^* really, 
Fisher." 

" Be quiet, Roland ; I don't mean anything 
of the sort : don't you suppose I have just as 
much respect for Elinor's feelings as you have ?" 
he felt inclined to say rather more, but he sup- 
pressed it. " I'm going, now, or at least I'm 
going to open the street door and shut it, but 
you needn't know that I'm not gone . now do 
you understand ? can't you go up-stairs and ask 
her to come down and fetch something for you, 
and then . " 

" Capital ! upon my word ;" Roland looked 
at his cousin with genuine admiration : '^ you'll 
do, after all." 



19.2 



CHAPTER VI. 



Elinor's letter. 



Long after her mother had left the breakfast- 
table, to go up to Adelaide, who was reported 
too ill to leave her room, Elinor sate alone . her 
uncle's open letter in her hands. At last, then, 
at last she had reached the goal of her hopes- 
she was going back to Flairs, as its mistress^ for 
there was a courtesy in the Squire's words that 
made her feel he no longer considered her either 
as a child, or a self-willed school-girl, but as a 
woman, who henceforward would share in his 
plans and daily life ; he told her, with much 
feeling, of Ben's death, as if sure of her sym- 
pathy; he spoke of Cecil Brownlow as her 



Elinor's letter. 293 

guest, and said he looked anxiously for Elinor's 
return that she might devise amusements for 
them both . amusements to Elinor meaning 
dinners, balls, social meetings of any kind, 
which would bring her before the notice of the 
county. 

And what had she done ? she had promised 
only a few hours before to be the wife of James 
Fisher. 

She had yielded, it seemed to her now, 
against her better judgment, to the persuasion 
that she must love a man who so worshipped 
her-^who she felt through life would continue 
to worship her, to idolise her, as Maurice never 
would have done. In her deep, proud mortifi- 
cation at his continued silence and absence, 
which she could not understand, for she had 
posted her last note to him herself, . James 
Fisher's earnest tenderness had been very sooth- 
ing ; but when she accepted him as her future 
husband she had not been conscious of all this. 
she had yielded to the charm of his presence, 
and to the secret belief that he could make her 
happier than any one else could. 



204 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

This morning, as in the endeavour to justify 
to herself an impetuosity she now felt ashamed 
of, she analysed her feelings for both her lovers ; 
Maurice's faults rose in strong relief . he was 
always so masterfulso hypercritical about truth; 
she still shrank with a consciousness that was 
half shame, half anger, from the remembrance 
of his look when she bad denied meeting him 
to her father ; she was gratified by his love, but 
she always felt schooled by him ; no, he never 
could have made her happy. 

What nonsense she was thinking . she started 
up and walked vehemently to the window, to try 
to let in outer sights and sounds as a help in 
flinging away such a folly ; she had been dream- 
ing or doting ever to permit Maurice to consider 
himself her lover, ever to address her as an 
equal.how deeply she had forgotten herself; 
and she hid her burning cheeks in both hands, 
and sobbed passionately. 

Her mother came in and out, but she took 
no heed, and poor Mrs. Markham softened 
towards her daughter, and went up and told 
Adelaide that poor dear Elinor was crying fit to 



slinor's letter. 295 

break her heart at leaving them. For an instant 
a gleam of hope flickered in the sick girl's eyes, 
but the next she turned her face away on her 
pillow, and something like a sob caught her 
mother's ear. 

Till then, in spite of her previous suspicions, 
she had believed in Adelaide's head-ache as her 
reason for keeping her room, but maternal in- 
stinct sharpens the dullest wits^ She stooped 
over the bed till she could see the tears rolling 
fast on to the pillow. 

" Addy, Addy 1 what is it ? you are keeping 
something from me, and it is breaking your 
heart, my own poor child 1" She put both 
arms round her, and hid Adelaide's face as she 
turned it round, with her own. 

Sobs came only as the answer; then, in 
broken words . 

" Hush, mother, I can't . don't ask me . it is 
happier, better for me not to tell ;" then, while 
her mother still urged her confession, with the 
soft, murmuring words by which we soothe 
young children, she went on more coherently . ; 
'' I will tell you why I am crying, now, and you 



296 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

sfaaU tell me if it is wicked ; dear, dear mother, 
it seems as if I never knew how you loved me, 
before. Is it wrong to be glad and thankful that 
Elinor is going ? I can't think about right and 
wrong any more ;" . she spoke vehemently : "I 
am glad . we were all happy before she came, 
and now . ** 

Mrs. Markham was so shocked and frightened 
that she began to soothe again with double 
energy, although her curiosity was restless to be 
sure of what had raised this storm in her quiet 
daughter ; like most weak women she generally 
gained her ends by watching opportunity, expe- 
rience having taught her that she had not the 
requisite firmness to compel answers. 

But though, after she had quieted Adelaide, 
she tried in various ways to elicit her secret, she 
met with no success. Only, when pressed hard 
at last to account for her ill health, she said 
fidntly. 

*^ If you could afford it, and would take me 
away from home a little while, it would do me 
all the good I want." 

And then Mrs. Markham stopped her enqui- 



Elinor's letter. 297 

ries ; she saw plainly that it was James Fisher 
Adelaide wished to go away from, and she deter- 
mined that even at the risk of exciting Roland's 
anger by such an unusual expense at such a time 
of year, her poor, wronged child should have tht; 
change she wished for. 

It was the first real anxiety . except money 
matters, that Mrs. Markham had met with, and 
it roused her out of her usual easy way of life. 

Before the train which carried Elinor and her 
maid to Flairs had reached its destination, Mrs. 
Markham had persuaded her husband, who was 
in an excellent humour at the success of his 
schemes, to spare her and Adelaide for a few 
weeks' absence from home. 



END OF VOL. II, 
ELINOE DRTDEN'S PEOBATION. 



CHAPTER I. 

ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 

The schoolroom at Flairs had been renovated 
by the Squire's orders, and under Northover's 
active superintendence had been converted into 
a very charming sitting-room for the two young 
ladies. The life the housekeeper had led the 
carpenter, who, being an original genius reared 
on the estate, was builder, painter, paperhanger, 
and contriver of everything domestic ingenuity 
required " up at the house," would take too long 
to tell. Something in the man's skill partly 
controlled her, so that a good deal of indignation 
escaped in extra scoldings to the maids^ and 

1.2 



I ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

deeply muttered asides. Still her worry was 
endless, and when the job was finished the car- 
penter told his wife he'd sooner be nibbled to 
death by ducks than live another week in the 
house with Mrs. Northover. 

She was one of those women who ought to 
be born in couples . in no other way could she 
have found a human being who could do right 
. and then she would have found fault at being 
born so. Why do we all like other people to think 
our thoughts and walk in our paths, on far more 
important topics than papering a room ? Is it 
not a want of universal love ? Call it charity, 
or catholicity, or any other name, it words the 
same meaning. Is not the great secret of want 
of happiness in each other's society the perfect 
inability of some, and the reluctance of others, 
to see that any one can be wiser than themselves, 
or to admit freedom of opinion? If three 
people are of accord, and the fourth does not 
follow suit, but plays a trump card, effectually 
silencing open contradiction, his adversaries will 
suspect a revoke ; it is so impossible that their 
play or argument could have been wrong. 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 5 

Cecil's admiration of the room when finished 
entirely failed to satisfy the housekeeper. She 
" would as soon have been doused in milk and 
water, as listen to Miss Brownlow's * very 
pretties/ and ' thank you very much, Northover, 
for the trouble you have had.' " 

It was a real relief to this devourer of praise, 
when Elinor, whose ready tact made her anxious 
to conciliate her old foe, praised everything en- 
thusiastically, from the carpet to the freshly- 
gathered nosegays of spring flowers that per- 
fumed the room ; as she declared afterwards to 
Cecil. 

" I believe you might choke that woman with 
compliments before she'd have enough ; she'd 
stand mouth open to swallow them just as a 
hippopotamus swallows buns." 

Whether by judicious praise, or by her natural 
powers of pleasing, Elinor charmed the whole 
household, from her uncle downwards. 

Mr. Dryden received her at first with more 
effort at affection than he really felt. He was 
not a large-hearted man, and Cecil had nestled 
into its warmest nook. Ben's death was still 



6 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

too recent for him to rouse into cheerfulness ; 
but he watched the two girls attentively, al- 
though he seemed to leave them to themselves. 

The perfect womanliness . the absence of the 
childlike clinging trust that had made Cecil so 
endearing . roused at first his old feelings of 
doubt and distrust towards his niece ; but day 
by day, as he observed her gaiety and good 
humour with Cecil, and saw the brightness 
slowly returning to the orphan girl's eyes and 
complexion, he warmed to Elinor, listened 
with pleasure to her lively stories, and took 
pains to show her the high place she was taking 
in his opinion. 

She did not scold Cecil for giving way. She 
took apparently little notice of her weakness ; 
but she brought a brightness, a sunshine into 
the dull old house, it had not known for years. 
She was touched by Cecil's changed looks, and 
she was determined to be kind to her, and to 
win her love. 

** There is something infectious, I think, 
about you, Elinor," Cecil said; "before you 
came everything was an exertion, and now, 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 7 

spite of all that has happened, you make life 
so pleasant, that one forgets to be ill." 

" Well, to tell you the truth, I consider myself 
your preserver." Elinor laughed with a hearti- 
ness that was truly, as Cecil had said, infectious. 
** I don't think the sort of thing you called life, 
when first I came, was worth having. P don't 
see what good it was to you . poor dear little 
thing ! I believe, between the Squire and his 
housekeeper, you had been moped to death." 

And then she bent over her, and kissed her 
with a warmth that stopped remonstrance, al- 
though in her heart Cecil was wroth with Elinor 
for such flippant mention of her uncle. 

She really loved Cecil now . half from the 
impulsiveness that always burst into sudden and 
rarely enduring friendships, and half because 
she had a secret suspicion that she had robbed 
Cecil of Maurice's affection; for although he 
could never be anything to her it was not pos- 
sible he could soon forget her. But the liking 
she felt for Cecil Brownlow was of a higher kind 
than that she had at first bestowed on Adelaide. 
" A woman . a spaniel, and a walnut-tree." 



8 ELINOR DRYDEN's PitOBATION. 

Well . the end is not palatable (at least to the 
first . ^perhaps the other two may like the pro- 
cess,) but there is truth in it. Adelaide's l-eady 
love and entire submission had been pleasant 
enough at first, but, as we have seen, they rather 
roused Elinor's tyranny than any unselfish return 
of affection ; in Cecil she found for the first 
tinie mental gifts equal, if not superior, to her 
own, and a something else that baffled her, and 
gave this girl who looked and seemed so much 
younger, a decided superiority. 

Cecil was grateful for Elinor's kindness, and 
felt refreshed by her bright amusing talk ; but 
she was not heedlessly impulsive, and her late 
sorrow had, perhaps by chastening her natural 
flow of spirits, made her more discerning. She 
was intuitively quick in reading character, and 
the very truth that made her a puzzle to Elinor 
recognised in slight but unmistakable tokens 
the presence of falsehood. She wronged Elinor 
on one point. She fancied that affection to- 
\^ards herself might be as feigned as some of 
her other qualities ; . but the very difficulty she 
found in winning Cecil stimulated Elinor's liking 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 9 

for her. She longed to tell her her secret, 
hoping that the avowal would win confidence ; 
yet when she thought of her perfect openness, 
and her warm love for Mr. Dryden, she hesi- 
tated. 

Would Cecil be generous enough to espouse 
her cause and keep faith ? if she would, how 
useful she would be ; for her constant compa* 
nionship made it sometimes difficult to receive 
and to answer her lover's letters with safety, and 
life at Flairs was so still and uniform that with- 
out those love-letters, Elinor felt she should 
stagnate. 

Mr. Dryden had decreed that six months, at 
least, should be accorded to Cecil's mourning, 
and Elinor yielded with a readiness at which she 
would have been incredulous a few weeks before. 
Though she said impatiently that her anticipated 
pleasure seemed to be a mirage . only real in 
distance, she had yet to learn that " 'tis expec- 
tation makes a blessing dear," that bon^-fide 
enjoyment exists far more in anticipation, or in 
those pleasures that start up like a covey of birds 
where we least look for them. 



10 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

But a greater compensation than Cecil's 
society for this enforced quietude, was found 
in Mr. Fisher's letters. It is all very well of 
women to fancy that only true men can write 
the passionate sentences, the caressing phrases 
that move so deeply. James Fisher wrote with 
just as much fervour as if he had not served 
a dozen years apprenticeship to love-making, 
and there is no use in saying that *' love- 
letters" are not very " nice things," . the best 
and most refined mental confectionary. It 
might be trying to one's patience and one's 
gravity to read other people's; but then as 
nothing about others is as interesting as what 
relates to ourselves and those we love, this 
would not be wonderful; our own love-letters 
must always be interesting. 

The difficulty of receiving her cousin's letters 
made them even more delightful to Elinor . she 
was far too clever to attempt a clandestine corre- 
spondence under her uncle's roof. Mr. Fisher's 
letters were addressed, Post Office, Starby, and 
Elinor could not go to seek them frequently 
without exciting suspicion, and often she had to 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 11 

live on, day after day, feeling sure that a trea- 
sure was waiting for her if she could but secure 
it. Unless she determined to tell Cecil the 
whole truth, she must not know anything. She 
did not guess how much she already suspected. 
Elinor could not always walk out alone, and 
although she occasionally sent her French maid 
to Starby for James's letters, she would not 
trust her own to any hands but those of the 
postman, whom it was easy enough to meet in 
the park out of sight of the house. 

At first she had deposited them in the letter- 
bag, believing they would escape notice ; but 
Northover's manner had suddenly and strangely 
changed towards her, and Elinor had shrewd 
suspicions that she made a practice of reviewing 
the addresses on the letters, although she did 
not suppose she would venture to do more. 
Still it had happened more than once that she 
had been obliged to give her letter to the post- 
man in Cecil's presence, and although no expla- 
nation had been asked, Elinor understood such 
perfect silence to be condemnatory, and she 
could not frame a justification . the something 



12 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

in those clear, pure eyes stopped the words be- 
fore thev came. 

She was very restless, to-day . she had felt 
sure with that strange intuition that heralds 
coming events, that a letter of more than usual 
importance was waiting for her, and yet she 
could contrive no excuse for a visit to Starby, or 
^rather to the post-house, that, at the beginning 
of the fever, Mr. Dryden had had built between 
the village and Flairs to avoid any risk of infec- 
tion . a tiny, white- washed shed, inhabited hy an 
old, deaf, cross woman, and her cat. If Elinor 
had not learned that Mrs. Jump was the new 
post-mistress she would scarcely have been so 
venturesome, but Mrs. Jump was as taciturn as 
she was unpopular, and unless Elinor roused 
Northover's suspicions there was no one at 
Flairs quick-witted enough to find out her cor- 
respondence. 

Miss Dryden had always a very courteous ready 
greeting for the country people in her walks, and 
it suited well with this urbanity that she should 
loiter for a few minutes once a week, or so, to 
enliven Mrs. Jump's solitude. 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 13 

She found Cecil so resolutely bent on sketch- 
ing the bridge in the park that she must go 
alone, and to Elinor there was in this much more 
to excite her uncle's suspicion than when ac- 
companied by Cecil. The suppressed excite- 
ment had unnerved her . she had been longing 
for four days for this letter, feeling sure that it 
lay waiting for her at Mrs. Jump's, but her 
uncle had pertinaciously accompanied them in 
their walks and rides, and there was an increas- 
ing vigilance in Northover's eyes, which made 
her unwilling to attract attention by going out 
alone at an unusual hour. She could delay no 
longer now ; the excitement was making her 
pre-occupied and silent . it seemed to her a 
miracle that Cecil had not remarked upon this 
openly. 

She left her settled at her sketching, and then 
strolled leisurely away by the river side, as if she 
had no further object in view than to watch the 
silver grey fish sparkling suddenly into sight 
from the pebbles of the clear, bright water. 

" Running on and on for ever," thought 
Elinor, " between these unchanging banks, how 



16 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

much longer must my life flow on fettered and 
barriered, before I can acknowledge Jamos as my 
promised husband in the face of the world ?" 

It was mere romance, and she knew it . she 
knew that even for the immediate possession of 
Flairs itself, she would not give up the prestige 
which would attend her introduction to the 
county as Mr. Dryden's heiress. Every woman, 
so Elinor told herself, has a right to a fair share 
of love and admiration, and if she were to 
appear among them as a promised wife, she 
should be robbed of half her attractions in th 
eyes of those long-dreamed-of victims to her 
beauty and her wit. Elinor had not mixed 
enough in society as yet to be quite cured of her. 
romance, or rather the polish of conventionali- 
ties had not yet become sufficiently firm and 
enduring to keep it below her ordinary stratum 
of thought ; for romance will often hide away 
in many a worldly, hackneyed, woman's heart, or 
what she has left of such an encumbrance, to 
start into sudden life when least expected. But 
with her it was not yet so hidden away . perhaps 
being entirely that of the fancy, less akin to 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 15 

feeling than that of the imagination^ it was 
more buoyant and less easily thrust out of 
sight. 

Some minds may find it difficult to realise 
that Elinor could love James Fisher at all, and 
yet long for the admiration of a crowd of 
strangers ; but she did love him fai^ more truly 
now. than when she had parted from him . his 
letters had doubtless helped this, and as each act 
of an intention strengthens the resolution and 
maked attainment easier, so the very effort at 
reply to his assurances of love stimulated the 
growth of her own. 

The utter seclusion in which he lived helped 
also, and coming Spring with its bursting buds 
and blossoms, and that unutterable yearning and 
swelling of the heart that always accompanies 
the languid weariness of the first Spring-time, 
nourished the germ, which a few weeks of ex- 
citement and rapid change of scene would pos 
sibly have stifled. 

She walked along the road now with her firm, 
free tread, marvelling at the change a few days 
had brought in the trees and hedges, and listen- 



16 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ing to the busy household talk of the birds, as 
they chirped their midday gossip iacessaotly from 
bough to bough. 

Her heart beat quickly when she came in 
sight of Mrs. Jump's cottage. In two minutes 
more she should have the letter. 

Mrs. Jump was deafer, and slower, and crosser 
than usual, and as Elinor stood just outside the 
door of the one-storied cottage, pinching off, in 
her impatience, the dry tendrils of the American 
creeper, which seemed scarcely to have recovered 
its planting, she heard a sound that made her 
heart beat in a different and most uncomfortable 
manner. 

It was a distant horse- tread . it might be a 
stranger, or one of the servants, but it might 
also be her uncle. 

She stepped forward eagerly, and looked along 
the road . there was no one in sight. Elinor 
had not known till then how much she dreaded 
discovery ; she had told herself that she did not 
believe in the conditions attached to her inherit- 
ance, that now her uncle had again received her 
at Flairs he could not escape making her his 



m 



<( 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 17 

heiress without an open scandal, which he, of 
all men, would shrink from creating. She had 
only to be careful for three years, and meantime 
she must contrive that James should make her 
uncle's acquaintance, fascinate him, and seem 
to fall in love with her in the most natural way 
in the world ; till now this had been to Elinor 
probable and practicable . now the whole fabric 
seemed to crumble under each nearer and nearer 
approaching hoof-tread. 

She turned quickly towards the open door of 
the cottagp. 

" Come, Mrs. Jump, you are very long this 
morning !" 

The old woman's deafness did not prevent 
her from hearing the sharpness impatience gave 
to Elinor's voice ; she gave her the letter with a 
dissatisfied grunt, and then coming out of her 
cottage stood looking after her, putting her 
blue-checked apron up to her head to shield off 
the wind. 

A loud . " Halloa, Mrs. Jump, how are you 
to-day ?" made her start and pity herself for half 
an hour after ; and she thought the Squire " right 

VOL. III. 2 

/O 



18 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

down unfeelin* for coming so sudden upon a 
struggling widder, who oouldn't help being hard 
o' hearin'." 

The Squire rode on, but the road turned just 
beyond the Post Office, and Elinor had made 
such good speed, that she was not in sight when 
her uncle frightened Mrs. Jump out of his 
way. He was in a calm, happy mood. He 
had ridden over to Starbv, to see the head-stone 
he had ordered for Mr. Brownlow's grave. 
It was a surprise he'liad planned for Cecil, after 
ascertaining her wishes on the subject. She had 
seemed so much better and brighter the last few 
weeks, that he thought she could bear the re- 
newal of grief, which a visit to her father's grave 
must cause. 

He had been talking, too, to the new incum- 
bent, and had been pleased to learn that things 
were falling into their usual course in the village. 

He turned the bend of the road, and saw 
Elinor before him. To his surprise, she did 
not look round, and yet it would have seemed 
natural that she should have recognised his 
approach. He was soon beside her, and rein- 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 19 

ing iD the horse, whose impatience at nearing 
home resented the quiet pace by sundry upward 
jerks of his head, he asked Elinor where she had 
been. 

He meant nothing by the question . it was a 
mere matter-of-fact phrase ; but she had made 
up her mind he would suspect, or that Mrs. 
Jump had chattered. She tried to look uncon- 
cerned and truthful, as she answered, . 

** Only to see Mrs. Jump." 

As she said the words, their direct false- 
hood brought the blood tingling to her 
cheeks, till even her eyes felt suffused with the 
hot glow. 

She dropped her fixed gaze ; she knew she 
could not sustain it. An instant more, and she 
would have seen the old gleam of distrust . so 
long a stranger to her unde . fixed on her, as if 
it would read the true meaning of her confusion ; 
but she neither looked up, nor risked a perilous 
silence. She talked gaily as she walked along 
beside him, of Cecil, and her vague attempts at 
sketching ; wondering how much paper she would 
spoil before they joined her : and, spite of his 

2.2 



^ 



20 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

pre-occupation, Mr. Dryden found himself obliged 
to answer in the same strain. 

But it was not in his nature to dismiss an 
idea easily, and his manner told Elinor that she 
was suspected. Still she went on with her talk 
more merrily than ever. She mimicked a gipsy, 
who had begged of her and Cecil a few days 
before, till the Squire told her that if her scarlet 
cloak were ragged, and her hat a little more 
sunburnt, she might pass for a genuine vagrant. 

" Well, uncle" . she looked up at him saucily 
. " it is what I really am . a born Bohemian !" 

" Not in principle, Elinor." 

He spoke so gravely, that she started. But 
the conversation must not grow dangerous. 

" Have you not trained me yourself ? All the 
good in me I owe you, uncle. I can't say what 
I might have grown up but for you !" 

Her eyes glistened with the gratitude she 
really felt just then, and the Squire was so 
touched by her plainly genuine emotion, that he 
did not stop to consider the full meaning of her 
words ; and if he had done so, it is possible he 
would have thought alienation from such a 



ELINOR AGAIN AT FLAIRS. 21 

man as Roland Markham only natural in a girl 
trained by Wentworth Dry den. 

He did not reply at once ; his next words re- 
ferred to her previous talk about Cecil, as if to 
make up for the want of interest he had shown 
before. 

Elinor went on, thankful he had changed the 
subject ; but the danger had been too near even 
for her courage. She grew almost sick with 
the effort of keeping off unsafe topics. 

There were the Park gates at last. She had 
come out by a little side door, from which a 
path across fields led to the high road ; but she 
made no allusion to this now. As soon as they 
were through, she turned to her uncle, and say- 
ing she should take the short way to the river 
side, she left him abruptly. 



CHAPTER II. 



DISTRUST. 



It is the key-stone that makes the arch secure, 
and Elinor, by the want of that last ten minutes' 
patience, had left out her key-stone. The fair 
arch ^hich had been gradually spanning Mr. 
Dryden's doubts gave way, and revealed them 
beneath its ruins. 

And then a sentence of Northover's, spoken 
that very morning, came back. 

He was placing his letters in the bag, which 
hung at the top of the staircase leading down- 
wards from his justice-room, just as the house- 
keeper came up from her sanctum. 



DLSTRUST. 23 

" I believe, sir, the bag would have an empty 
time of it if it wasn't for you. The young la- 
dies don't trouble it much . certainly not Miss 
Elinor." 

The emphasis on the name had annoyed 
him ; it seemed to beg the question which in 
former times he would have longed to ask ; in 
those times before Sir Stuart's death, when he 
doubted almost every one.even Northover her- 
self. Perhaps the foundation of his firm regard 
for Ben Karse had been, that he had never been 
able to doubt him ; that he had been the only 
bit of safe ground on which confidence could 
anchor in all those miserable years of suspicion. 

And yet the old leaven bad not been all 
purged. More than once as he rode to Starby 
that morning, a vague guess at Northover's 
meaning had hazarded itself; but his visit to his 
old friend's grave, and the thought of Cecil and 
her sorrow, bad banished disquiet from his ride 
home. 

Elinor's confusion had kindled fresh sus* 
picion, but had not revived that which had 
gone before ; but now her abrupt departure 



24 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

seemed to bring the parted links of distrust into 
view, and to rivet them with the force of a 
sledge hammer. 

Northover had insinuated . so he understood 
her observation . that Elinor wrote other letters 
than those she placed in the bag, and he him- 
self had seen her confusion when surprised near 
the post-office. 

What was he to do ? If he questioned Mrs. 
Jump he should destroy Elinor's character in 
her eyes, and possibly in those of others to whom 
she might relate the incident. With whom 
could Elinor maintain a clandestine correspond- 
ence ? He had never forbidden her to receive 
letters even from her father ; besides, she con- 
stantly received them from her own family, and 
tossed them over to Cecil before bis face, with- 
out any reserve as to the writer. She was so 
entirely frank, that he found it hard to persist 
in his doubts. Northover might have meant 
nothing, and Elinor's confusion might have 
been caused by surprise. 

But though he said this firmly to himself, he 
found as determined an answer; the doubts 



DISTRUST. 25 

had gained comfortable lodgings^ and had no 
mind to be put to the rout so speedily. 

Still his work at Starby during the pestilence 
had left blessed tokens. He strove with all 
his strength for mastery over his suspicion. 
He reminded himself of the blight that had 
cankered his life's best blossoms ; of the shadow 
that had darkened his hearth-stone^ because he 
had not so striven in earlier life; and then 
when he found all fruitless, and that, try as he 
would, Elinor could no longer hold the same 
spotless place in his regard, he determined that 
she should not be condemned unheard, that he 
would at least convince himself that she was 
guilty or not guilty before he harboured suspi- 
cion against her. 

He rode round to the stable-yard, and leaving 
his horse there, took the road which, as has 
been said, led through the shrubberies to the 
bridge. 

He walked along thinking deeply and sadly. 
Although he could not trust her fully till he had 
done so, he yet shrank from questioning Elinor. 
He knew so much less, of her than he did of 



26 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

Cecil, and it would be very painfol to build up 
again, by any mistaken conjecture, the reserve 
that seemed fairly broken down between them. 

He told himself aU this on his way to the 
bridge, and as he contrasted the two girls, he 
asked himself suddenly how it was that he knew 
better how to deal with Cecil than with Elinor, 
the one almost his own child, sprung from his 
own race, and the other a stranger. He had 
often felt the estrangement between himself and 
his adopted child, but he had never dwelt on it 
as any but a necessary evil, nor, possibly becatise 
he had not till now seen them constantly toge- 
ther, had he ever thought of asking himself 
whether the same love, the same tenderness he 
had given to Cecil during the last few years, 
might not if bestowed earlier on Elinor have 
produced a better understanding between them. 
The Squire was not a man likely to fling his 
own faults on the shoulders of others, but in 
the midst of his self-blame, the remembrance of 
Elinor's childhood, . wilful, haughty, untruth- 
ful, with apparently no one soft place in her 
nature for love to work on, . came back ; and he 



DISTRUST* 27 

thought that if Cecil had been as hard and as 
UDsympathising, he should have known no more 
of her than he did of Elinor. A deeper motive 
than any as to its effect, and yet a more trivial 
as to its nature, lay hidden from the Squire's 
self-communing. His fastidious refinement had 
been soothed by the soft gentleness of the one 
girl as much as it had been repelled by the 
boisterous ways and untidy habits of the other. 
Almost unconsciously he recognised her father, 
or rather what he imagined Roland Markham 
to be, in every unfeminine movement, in every 
rude word, and he had tried to see as little of 
the child as possible on her first arrival at 
Flairs, in the hope that different training would 
work a change. 

He reached the bridge before he had quite 
determined how to act. There was no one to 
be seen; only once, as his eyes scanned the 
hanging wood on the other side, now partly 
clothed with the vivid leafage of early spring, he 
thought he saw a glimpse of scarlet moving 
among the trees. 

It might be Elinor, but then it might be 



28 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

one of the gipsies who had managed to ef- 
fect an entrance a few days before, and had 
stolen in again to collect fuel. 

He turned towards the house, and walked with 
his long, rapid steps across the lawn, passing 
under the beech-tree as he had passed under it 
on that August afternoon when he had first 
learned certainly that Elinor could deceive him. 

Perhaps it was the recurrence of the old dis- 
trusting habit of mind that brought Elinor's 
first deceit back strangely now ; and as his mind 
dwelt on the whole scene, he remembered, too, 
how Maurice's fearless truth had first changed 
his feelings towards the boy he bad since so 
carefully watched over. 

" Yes," he muttered to himself, bending his 
lofty head to pass through the little door which 
had once formed Elinor's secret egress to her 
interviews with Maurice, and which now stood 
invitingly open as if to remind the Squire of its 
existence. " Those two, Cecil and he, seem 
made for each other; and yet they must not 
meet again. It is hard, but feeling must not 
stand in the way of justice. However, people 



DISTRUST. 29 

say that ' opposite natures match best,' so all may 
go well in the way I wish. His truth may 
help Elinor's." 

And then the deep, heart- wrung sadness which 
gave such^an inexplicable expression to his face 
clouded over it, as he thought how little in his 
own married life he had realised the trdth of 
the saying he had just quoted. 

He went slowly and heavily up the winding 
stairs, and pushing open the door, he passed 
into the North Gallery. Perhaps in his pre- 
occupied mood he had forgotten where the stairs 
would l^ad him, for he shrunk back unwillingly 
when he entered the gallery. 

But as he approached the door of the White 
Bed-room a sudden change came over him. 

He pressed one hand hard against his fore- 
head, as if recalling or concentrating thought, 
and stood quite stttl for a few minutes. When 
he removed his hand there was still deep sorrow, 
but the bitter look of anguish had cleared away 
from his face. 

He looked at the door, and seemed tempted 
to tumt he handle and go in ; but checking 



80 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

the impulse, be walked to the end of the gal- 
lery, lifted the red curtain which screened its 
eastern end, and turned towards what Elinor 
DOW called her morning room. 

Only Cecil was there, smiling over her 
failures. '' She had been in full balf-an^bour, she 
said, but she had not seen or heard anything of 
Elinor. 

" She probably missed you at the bridge, and 
came in by a diflferent way." 

"I think not, for I just now went to her 
bed-room, and Fran9oise told me she was still 
out walking." 

Mr. Dryden felt vexed at the sudden contra- 
diction^ these few words gave to his new-formed 
resolves. At the door of the White Bed- 
chamber he had renewed a vow . first uttered 
there . never again to allow himself to doubt a 
fellow creature until convincing and undeniable 
proof of guilt should have been produced ; and 
yet, try as he would, the glimpse of red he had 
caught through the trees would recur importu- 
nately. 

A few minutes of Cecirs bright sunshiny 



DISTRUST. 31 

talk helped him as much as his previous reso- 
lution. When he went up to his writing room, 
he decided that probably it was Elinor whom he 
had seen among the trees . and if it were ? she 
had only said she should take the short path to 
the bridge. Cecil's name had not been men- 
tioned by her ; it was his own surmise that had 
coupled her abrupt departure with an anxiety to 
seek her friend. 



CHAPTER III. 



DEBT. 



It was Elinor's red cloak that her uncle had 
seen through the trees. She had gone almost 
mechanically to the bridge, and not finding Cecil 
there, had passed over it and climbed into the 
wood on the other side, to seek a solitude 
wherein she could read her letter in peace. It 
was just the spot for the perusal of a love-letter ; 
overhead were bright budding leaves, primroses 
and early blue-bells peeped through the under- 
growth, and formed a fresh contrast to the 
brown remnants of last year's leafage ; and 
below her . as she threw herself dowa at the 



wmmmm 



DEBT. 33 

foot of a beech tree . sparkled the rapid river, 
eddying in foam flakes round the grey obstruct- 
ing stones that lay scattered at random in its 
bed. Yet spite of her pleasant surroundings, 
Elinor's letter seemed to disquiet her more 
than her uncle's suspicions. She read it over 
twice, and then laid it down in her lap, while 
she examined its enclosure. 

" It is all over with me now," she murmured, 
hiding her face between her hands. " If Uncle 
Dryden once knows of my debts, he will never 
forgive me, or make me his heiress." 

She had hoped to pay off by degrees the 
money she owed, strictly economising the 
Squire's liberal allowance, but Mr. Fisher's en- 
velope not only enclosed a threatening letter from 
her principal creditor . who knew too much of 
Roland Markham to trust his daughter . but 
also contained the intelligence that the person 
who brought the letter had learned Miss Dryden's 
return to Flairs. 

" And the next will be addressed to me here, 
or perhaps to my uncle." 

She gave a long shuddering sigh. Closely as 

VOL. III. 3 



84 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

intrigue had interwoven itself in her nature, she 
bad been very happy in the pure, calm life she 
bad been leading lately, when, . but for her cor- 
respondence with James, there had been nothing 
to conceal either from Cecil, or from the Squire, 
. the better part of her nature had had time for 
growth. And yet so vitiated had her mind 
become by the poison of her early reading and 
lax teachers, that she believed the present state 
to be exceptional and unreal, and concealment 
and clandestine ways . so long as they did not 
produce deliberate falsehood . excusable and na- 
tural. 

Before she opened her letter, she had thought 
of confiding in Cecil, and asking her to allow 
James to write under cover to her, but her only 
motive in doing this, was to prevent the recep- 
tion of letters of which she could give no ac- 
count. She would not have any more addressed 
to Mrs. Jump. She trembled again as she pic- 
tured to herself her uncle's grief at what she 
knew he would consider dishonourable. She 
did not think of his anger so much as of his 
grief, she had been very sensible of the change 



^^^^K^^^'^mimgmmm9mmmmmmummmmmmmmmmm 



DEBT. 35 

that had taken place in the Squire, and loved 
him more than she would have thought possible, 
but still she feared him, and Elinor's was a 
nature that liked to be paramount. Her love 
for her father was founded on his admiration 
and approval of all she said and did, and with 
the subtle sophistry we are so little aware of . 
but by which our self-love governs . she could 
not help esteeming the opinions of one, who, 
besides being her father, never contradicted her. 
Roland Markham's creed was that all the 
world was more or less in debt, the only free 
people being vagrants, and those who paid from 
hand to mouth. linor had listened to this, 
doctrine so frequently inculcated on her mother, 
and at first had wondered strangely at . the 
discrepancy between it and her uncle's parting 
advice, "never to owe any one a penny." Now 
as she sat thinking under the beech-tree, it struck 
her that, as the Squire was very unlike any one 
else she knew, possibly his ideas might be so 
too ; her father was a Londoner, and Londoners 
must know more of the general tone and habits 
of people than those who lived shut up year 

3.2 



36 bJlinor dryden's probation. 

after year in a lonely country house, having little 
intercourse with their fellow men. 

What would James think about it ? A warm 
glow sprang to her cheeks ; if he knew that she 
had any secret anxiety he would insist on re- 
lieving it, on paying off these troublesome 
claimants, and she could not stoop to accept 
money from any one out of her family, even 
from the man she loved. But she could, and 
would, abide by his opinion. He knew so much 
of the world and its ways ; if she could but see 
him and pour out her trouble, what comfort and 
relief it would bring. He spoke of having 
received the enclosed letter from Roland Mark- 
ham casuaUy, just because he was writing to 
her. Her mother was still absent. 

For a few moments a wild idea of travelling 
to London and back, unknown to any one, pos- 
sessed her ; but unless her uncle should leave 
home, this would be impracticable ; and even if 
he did, she could not lull Northover's vigilance. 
" One thing 1 am resolved on," she said in 
the midst of her perplexity ; " as soon as my 
uncle has acknowledged me as his heiress, I will 



w 



DEBT. 37 

get him to discharge that woman. I live in 
positive terror of her sharp, suspicious eyes." 

The result of her meditation was that, al- 
though she could not go to London, there was 
nothing to prevent James from coming to Flairs, 
except the risk of detection ; and risk, Elinor 
thought, ought only to enhance to true lovers 
the pleasure of meeting. Why should they 
not meet in the wood ? He might enter the 
park from the gates beyond Karse's cottage, 
opposite Sir Stuart Palmer's avenue. If Cecil 
persisted in this new tancy for sketching . and 
Elinor had lived long enough with her to re- 
mark that whatever Cecil began she persevered 
in . she should be free to walk where and when 
she pleased. She could describe the path 
through the wood so exactly, that James could 
not miss it ; and as there was a right of way 
across the park from those gates to the river 
below the waterfall, he might turn aside into the 
wood, without meeting any one belonging to the 
house. 

The planning this scheme had gilded the 
leaden perplexity of the afternoon's troubles ; yes. 



38 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

it was all right, and there was no use in worry- 
ing : and she sprang up from her seat under 
the tree, as blithe again as any of the chirpers 
that filled the wood with their soft twitterings. 

If James told her debt was disgraceful, she 
meant to believe him, and take his advice as to 
the readiest means of raising the money neces- 
sary to liquidate it. In her varied reading she 
had picked up the notion that a prospective 
heiress might find this easy ; but if Mr. Fisher 
confirmed her father's dictum, then she should 
quietly resign herself to consequences ; and if 
her creditor wrote to Mr. Dryden, she should 
represent to him the impossibility of living on 
so small an income as that he had hitherto 
thought sufficient for her. 

So, shaking off her anxiety, as a Newfound- 
land shakes off water, she sprang gaily down the 
sloping path, in almost the wild, untamed mood 
of former days, when she knew no cares except 
those of preparing lessons, and Northover's 
grave remonstrances about the rents in her gowns. 

Why is it that to some people, equal it may 
be in goodness, Debt wears such different as- 



DEBT. 39 

pects ? To one it is a burden, heavy at times, 
perhaps, but still not so much so that it cannot 
be shifted from shoulder to shoulder, as it 
makes its pressure felt . sometimes set aside 
altogether for a while as a thing of no conse- 
quence ; while to others Debt is a canker, a hidden 
secret, alike disgraceful and intolerable, taking 
brightness out of days and sleep out of nights, 
tiU at last it saps life as well as cheerfulness, and 
brings peace in an early grave. 

Debt is the hardest to bear of all evils, be- 
cause often the most self-inflicted. No one 
could have thought its curse rested on Elinor as 
she almost danced into the morning room, and 
upbraided Cecil for her cowardly desertion of 
her post . leaving her, as she told her uncle 
afterwards at dinner-to the tnercy of the gip- 
sies, who still haunted the woods. 

And she rattled on in such a lively strain, 
and in the anticipated happiness of seeing her 
lover was in such a tender, caressing mood to- 
wards Cecil, that Mr. Dryden's disquiet was 
completely soothed . so much light-hearted ness, 
he argued, could not cover deceit. 



40 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

When he went to bed that night, he kissed 
Elinor with unusual warmth, and offered up 
mental thanks for undeserved happiness. Hi- 
therto he had regarded his disappointment in 
his adopted child as a merited punishment. 

And Elinor went to bed happy too . so happy 
that, spite of all her resolutions, she confided 
the secret of her engagement to Cecil, in the 
vague, mysterious way in which some girls 
choose to talk of one of the greatest realities of 
life. She did not even tell her lover's name, 
and though her friend's subdued silence struck 
her as unsympathising, she never suspected that 
Cecil guessed she was speaking of Maurice Karse. 



CHAPTER IV. 

IN WHICH MISS BROWNLOW RESOLVES TO BIT 

AND BRIDLE FATE. 

It was an immense relief that the morning's 
post brought no letters for Elinor ; but her 
uncle's troubled look, as he opened one of his, 
brought back the fear of the previous day. 

Only momentarily, for after re-reading it, he 
turned to Cecil. 

" Your aunt, Miss Brownlow, is alone, Cecil 
. your uncle has gone out of town for a holi- 
day ; and she asks me to spare you for a few 
weeks. What answer am I to send her ?" 

If the invitation had come on the previous 



42 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

day, Cecil would roost likely have refused it. 
But Elinor's confession had made further com- 
panionship with her for the present distasteful. 
It was not only a certain, almost unconscious 
soreness of feeling about Maurice, but also the 
strong disapprobation she felt at anything which 
must be concealed from Mr. Dry den. Elinor 
had said, in answer to her inquiry, that her 
father approved of her choice ; but Cecil had 
heard quite enough of the story of Elinor's 
parents to think that the Squire's guidance must 
be much safer than theirs; and besides, how 
could she hide anything from her uncle, whom 
Cecil now almost idolized ? She could not 
so mistrust him ; and as her warm young heart 
swelled with indignation, she felt that it would 
be impossible to return Elinor's friendship, as 
she had hitherto striven to do. 

This temporary absence would be a real boon. 

She felt so eager to avail herself of her aunt's 
offer, that she had to put a curb on her manner, 
in the fear that Mr. Dryden might think her 
ungrateful. She said her aunt had been very 
kind to her, that she bad disappointed her be- 



MISS BROWNLOW'S RESOLUTION. 43 

fore, and that she was glad to go to her now 
that she could really be of use ; and then, seeing 
Mr.. Dryden's grave face, she said in her sweet, 
earnest voice, . 

" But you will promise to miss me very much, 
won't you ?" 

" We need not promise, Cecil ; we shall miss 
you far more than I fear you will miss Flairs.*' 

And before she could answer, he rose up from 
table and left the room. 

He was bitterly disappointed . slow and spe- 
cial in his likings he was sternly and jealously 
exacting in the return he demanded. 

Miss Brownlow's letter had annoyed him. 
She told him that her brother and young Mr. 
Karse were going on a walking tour for a few 
weeks, and added almost with sarcasm that she 
supposed Mr. Dryden would not object to trust 
her with the guardianship of her niece during 
their absence. It was a pugnacious letter . the 
writing of a woman conscious that she was not 
liked, and determined not to be the first to con- 
ciliate. Besides, Jane Ann was such a thorough 
and uncompromising democrat that it annoyed 



44 ELINOR DRY den's PROBATION. 

her to be brought into communication at all 
with a man who asserted his position as Mr. 
Dryden did. She considered birth a mere acci- 
dent, and spite of the Squire's courteous defe- 
rence towards her/ she always insisted that he 
was condescending and had no right to such a 
stately bearing. She was consistent in this 
theory; her mind was too masculine in its 
attributes to take the one-sided view ordinary 
women do of such questions. Her niece, Cecil, 
was. quite good enough to marry a nobleman ; 
but then Miss Brownlow would have considered 
her equally well mated with a farmer, always 
supposing him a scholar and unpretending. 

The only class against whom she entertained 
a caste prejudice was the rich parvenu order ; 
not because they had made their money in trade, 
that of itself would have commanded her respect 
. hard work and achievement of any kind she 
reverenced ; but because, as she said, they " aped 
their betters, assumed affected drawling manners, 
in which many a first-class lady's-maid beat them 
hollow, and were the slaves of the pampered ser- 
vants who mocked at and detected their as- 



MISS BROWNLOW's RESOLUTION. 45 

sumption." Into such a class Cecil should not 
marry, otherwise her choice should not be con- 
trolled by her. This was Miss Brownlow's de- 
termination when she sent for her niece. 

It was difficult to think her the same woman 
who had written that hard letter, when she met 
Cecil at the railway-station. She was so full of 
emotion at sight of the fair, delicate girl in 
her deep mourning, that some minutes passed 
before she was aware that a tall, stiff, sharp-eyed 
woman stood beside her niece, quietly taking in 
the whole scene, and seriously scandalised by the 
middle-aged lady's want of self-control ; " kissing 
and hugging before men, above all before rail- 
way-porters," being, Northover afterwards as- 
serted, "most perplexing and annoying to a 
correct- minded female to witness." It is possible 
that the manner in which she was allowed to 
stand unnoticed, for at least five minutes, ex- 
aggerated the view she took of Miss Brownlow's 
behaviour; for when Cecil recollecting her 
turned round and presented her as Northover, 
the housekeeper at Flairs, and her aunt asked her 
cordially to come and rest and refresh herself 



46 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

at their house, Northover with a stately courtesy, 
of which some of the hooped and powdered 
dames in the North Gallery might have been 
proud, loftily declined the honour. 

She was going on to friends of her own, who 
would grudge losing a moment of her company. 
She had the honour to wish Miss Brownlow and 
her aunt good- morning. 

" What a frightful old frump !" Miss Brown- 
low scarcely waited till the housekeeper was 
out of hearing. " She's just as priggish as 
. I beg your pardon, child, I was going to talk 
treason. I suppose you worship Squire Dryden 
as much as ever . eh ? Here's the cab . now 
jump in. Good gracious me I man, put that 
box on more securely ; it will be spinning off 
into the middle of the road and killing some 
one. Don't you hear ? . that box . " and with 
one foot on the step she gesticulated vehemently, 
only getting the ^invariable " All right !" in 
reply, till her cab was ordered to move on, and 
she was reluctantly obliged to seat herself " with- 
out having half seen after the luggage." 

But in about two minutes her head and half 



MISS BROWNLOW'S RESOLUTION. 47 

of her body were through the window aperture, 
to inform the driver that he was going at least 
a quarter of a mile out of his way . but in vain ; 
the cabman quite understood the sort of *' fare " 
he was driving ; he half turned his head with 
another " all right," emphasized by a wink, and 
went steadily on. 

**' You know, aunt, it is never any use ; they 
will go their own way," pleaded Cecil, who could 
not help smiling at the notion of taking so much 
trouble about a quarter of a mile. 

And Miss Brownlow smoothed herself down 
with the mental reservation that if she had been 
alone, and had not wanted to talk to Cecil, she 
would have made that cabman " mind " her. 

She had much to hear from her niece. The 
sad story of those last few days, which the poor 
girl had been totally unable to write any details 
of, must be told now to satisfy the affectionate 
sister ; and though it re-opened to their fountain 
head the channels of Cecil's agonised sorrow, 
still there was solace in weeping for her father, 
with one who had loved him so dearly. . 

" Nothing but your Uncle Erasmus's express 



48 ELINOR DRYDEN^S PROBATION. 

desire/' Miss Brownlow said, as they sat together 
after tea in her " den," . " could have kept me 
away from helping you, my own dear child, and 
being of what use I could to my poor dear John, 
but Erasmus was frightened, thoroughly and 
absolutely frightened, in fact." She drew one 
of the front corners of her head covering through 
her fingers . a habit of hers when about to say 
something indiscreet. " I got so angry with 
him . that I told him I believed he was nothing 
but a mistake, and that I ought to have been a 
roan and he a woman. You should have seen 
Erasmus, my dear, . he looked so grieved at me 
and so surprised, that I was knocked over at 
once, and didn't dare to say any more when he 
told me that if I went to Starby it would be in 
direct disobedience to his wishes. That's what 
comes of being calm, Cecil ; if ships can't move 
under it, of course women can't . they have not 
the ghost of a chance. If I had married, my 
dear, I never would have chosen a calm man . I 
should have had to sit with my hands in my 
lap, saying * yes,' for ever." 

" But, aunt," . Cecil could not help smiling 
through her tears at this sudden digression, . 



MISS BROWNLOW's RESOLUTION. 49 

" you always think Uncle Erasmus right, and 
would not have hina changed on any account." 

" Changed ! . good gracious me ! . Erasmus 
changed ? No, child, when will you ever learn 
that two men like Erasmus are not found in 
one world ? . it wouldn't hold 'em. I was talk- 
ing of the ordinary sort of men that husbands 
are made of, and as I suppose you will be 
taking such an encumbrance to yourself one of 
these days," . here she looked at her niece 
sharply from under her eyebrows, . " I warn 
you in time to beware of a calm man ; given a 
little temper, and if you know where to find it . 
when a man gets tyrannical, and they all do more 
or less, my dear, make up your mind to that . 
you may soon stir it sufficiently to make your 1 us- 
band say or do something foolish, then he's your 
equal for the time being, and you've a chance ; 
because, Cecil, mind you, there never was a man 
so foolish as a woman yet ; though when he is 
foolish, a woman who has any wits knows her 
advantage and doesn't lose it ; but you can't do 
this with a calm man . he never makes an ass 
of himself, and his wife bever gets the chance of 

VOL. III. 4 



50 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

pulling his ears, figuratively of course ; and worse 
than that, she never can come out wise by con- 
trast. After all said and done, I'm inclined to 
think in five cases out of six we spinsters have 
the best of it." 

She stopped for want of breath. It is im- 
possible to give an adequate notion of Miss 
Brownlow's rapidity of speech. It was not the 
flow of unmeaning gabble . the mere repetition 
of words and ideas. All she said was to the 
purpose, and enunciated in clear metallic tones, 
that rang through ordinary brains, threatening 
them with indigestion by the superfluity of the 
matter she presented to their comprehension, 
and bewildering even those which could keep 
pace with hers. She did generally in one day 
as much as most women do in two ; but she 
certainly accomplished three times her share of 
talk. 

She was very much struck by the change in 
Cecil's spirits. This meeting had brought back 
her depression. 

" You have grown rusted down there, my 
dear. Bright things always rust quickest, you 



MISS BROWNLOW'S RESOLUTION. 51 

know ; witness my steel fender. I always call 
duloess * mental damp ;' and I believe that old 
Flairs^ with its stiff, pompous ways, was the 
very worst place you could possibly go to. If I 
had only been allowed to have my own way" . 
this last sentence was a sort of aside jerked out 
as she threw her head vehemently back, and 
threw her eyes up to the ceiling. 

'* You cannot very well be dull where Elinor 
is, aunt." 

And though Cecil said this, she felt a certain 
great relief in. the separation from Miss Dry den 
at the time. 

It was only Elinor's manner that had charmed 
her. Even when her self-elected friend had 
been most demonstrative in her caressing affec- 
tion, Cecil had been able to give little more than 
gratitude in return ; she had felt nothing spon- 
taneous. But there was no effort required to 
show affection to Aunt Jane ; Cecil loved her so 
very much, though they differed on almost 
every topic, and though Miss Brownlow did en- 
tertain such incorrect notions about Flairs and 
its Squire. 

4-2 



52 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Her aunt watched the brightness returning 
to Cecil's looks and words with a maternal ten- 
derness that no one who knew her sharp, abrupt 
ways and bard, satirical speeches, would have 
thought her capable of. She descanted on the 
advantages a dry, airy London house possessed 
over a rambling, dreary old bam of a place 
smelling of people's ancestors. 

" As if there ever was anything so foolish in 
this world as a rout about ancestry . wrong, 
too. Why, there's the Bible against it. I should 
like to know what Lot's wife was transformed 
for, if it were not for looking back, when she 
ought to have looked forward." 

Her own infectious, hearty nature was as 
bracing as a sea-breeze when joined to the warm 
love that seemed to intensify daily towards the 
orphan girl. Ignoring Mr. Dryden's claims 
completely, she felt that Cecil had no one left 
but herself and Erasmus, for, as she said, 
" Sister Mary was no more good than a Judy 
doll . a well-meaning woman, but wooden- 
headed." 

This sister Mary was also unmarried, but she 



MISS BROWNLOW'S RESOLUTION. 53 

had always been an invalid, and had been 
brought up from childhood by an aunt, who at 
her death had left her a sniig little property, 
which Mary Brownlow now enjoyed in solitude. 
She liked her brother Erasmus, though she 
thought him sadly abrupt, but she dreaded the 
sight of her sister. Half an hour of Jane Ann*s 
talk was sure to give her a week of nervous 
head- ache. 

If Flairs was dull. Miss Brownlow decided 
that Kin try was much worse ; but it would be 
happier for the child to marry and have a home 
of her own. The sigh that came with this 
thought had a double regret in it, for the loss 
of Cecil and also of lingering sorrow for the un- 
realised dreams of her own girlhood. But Cecil 
should not be shut up as she had been. Miss 
Brownlow always considered that if she had 
had a fair chance she might have married, and 
had a home of her own; and however much 
she might at times choose to rail against hus- 
bands and wives, in her serious moods she 
always spoke of the Holy Estate as the happiest 
also. But then she had Erasmus ; if Cecil did 



54 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

not marry, she would be left alone in future 
years without kith or kin, and " grow as sour 
as a crab for want of something to love," she 
added, mentally. 

Why in the name of fortune if Cecil and that 
young Maurice Karse had a fancy for each other 
shouldn't they marry ? Because that old frump 
at Flairs objected, was that any valid reason 
against such a marriage ? 

What was he to Cecil ? He had a niece of 
his own, and if he didn't like her as well, more 
shame for him : people ought always to prefer 
their own flesh and blood to strangers. She 
supposed he wanted to marry Cecil to one of 
his grand friends, or . and as this new idea 
crossed her mind. Miss Brownlow, who was 
lying in bed arranging Cecil's future, started 
up and began to dress herself. It was only six 
o'clock, but she could not remain quiet with 
such a thorn in her imagination. She believed 
that . no, she wouldn't call him a name, there 
was not one bad enough . but she saw now 
through his reluctance to part with Cecil. he 
meant to marry her himself. 



MISS BROWNLOW's RESOLUTIOK. 55 

And her rapidly creative fancy-^she hud that 
femiDine characteristic . painted in warm tints 
the wrong the ahonninable old man would do 
his niece Ehnor by marrying a young woman ; 
besides, the moping misery to which he would 
consign her darling, beautiful Cecil, by making 
her his wife. 

" And if she goes back to Flairs again, and 
he asks her, as I know he wiQ, she will say yes, 
out of gratitude, and because she is too much 
of a child yet to know how she will love some 
day, and then there'll be the old story, a jealous 
husband and a broken heart, for she never could 
love that old scarecrow " . Miss Brownlow's 
anger and prejudice made her excessively un- 
just to the Squire's personal characteristics. . 
" And then she will meet some one whom she 
could have liked . no, as sure as my name is 
Jane Ann Brownlow, she does not return to 
Flairs till she is married, or, as good, to some 
one safe and sound, and why not to Maurice?" 

It will be seen that ideas speedily developed 
into resolutions of action with Miss Brownlow ; 
to use her own phrase, " She never gave two 



56 LINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

swallows at anything," when once she had de- 
termined to accomplish it. Before Cecil came 
to London her choice was not to be controlled, 
but now it seemed in every way better that it 
should settle on Maurice. What did it matter 
about their having nothing to live on ? She 
and Erasmus never spent half their own in- 
come ; why should not the young folks have 
the overplus till Maurice could earn money for 
himself? None of the Brownlows had ever 
been long-lived, and Mary's eight hundred a- 
year must come to Cecil, and then there would 
be her own and Erasmus's leavings. In fact, 
it would be quite a satisfactory match, setting 
aside the fact that the two children were made 
for each other. 

Her first impulse was to write to the Squire, 
and tell him that she feared she could not allow 
Cecil to return to Flairs ; she would be quite 
open and straight-forward just to shame his 
double-dealing : but almost as quickly came the 
certainty that the next post would bring Mau- 
rice's recall, or, at any rate, his removal from 
Erasmus's care. It was puzzling to know how 



MISS BROWNLOW'S RESOLUTION. 57 

to decide. If Maurice and Cecil really should 
love each other, it would then be her duty to 
communicate the fact to the Squire, and a grim 
smile curved her handsome mouth, and she 
settled her head-dress with extra precision, as 
she thought how very pleasant a duty she should 
find such a communication ; till then it might 
be best to remain passive ; the Squire had 
made no stipulation about Cecil's return, and 
neither had Erasmus stated the exact day when 
he and his pupil might be expected. She 
should let things take their chance. 

Her downright nature writhed at first at 
what seemed like taking an advantage of the 
Squire ; but after all, he must have seen from 
the tone of her letter that she thought his pre- 
cautions very fussy and unnecessary, and Cecil 
was the only niece she had in the world, and 
she certainly was not going to 'turn her out of 
the house till the Squire sent for her. Yes ! that 
would be the best way to leave it . Cecil should 
stay till Mr. Dryden sent for her ; in the mean- 
time Fate . that is to say, Fate bitted and bridled 
by Miss Brownlow.* might accomplish much. 



CHAPTER V. 



time's revenges. 



But before the time at which the Squire had 
expected Cecil's return, events had happened at 
Flairs which he would have been unwilling to 
bring a witness to ; events which so absorbed 
and distracted his mind, that the existence of 
Cecil Brownlow seemed almost blotted from its 
memory. 

He and Elinor had found a great blank with- 
out her. Cecil had always been ready to con- 
tribute her share to the conversation, to laugh 
at Elinor's jokes and stories ; they fell flat now 
under her uncle's faint smiles, and Elinor was 



time's revenges. 50 

not at all inclined to create amusement only for 
others . the fire of her wit refused to burn unless 
well fed by sticks of applause, or if it burned, 
there was none of the crackling sparkle that 
was its greatest charm. 

She liked her uncle, each week she spent with 
him increasing her regard. He was a gentle- 
man, and he could talk when roused and inte- 
rested, but lacking this, he was insufferably 
taciturn, not half so congenial a companion as 
her father, spite of his rough words and ways. 
The Squire, too, found the daily tete-a-tete 
becoming irksome ; with Cecil he might be 
silent or not, as he chose . he never thought of 
studying her, of being necessary to her amuse- 
ment ; but Elinor was a woman who made her 
presence felt . agreeably, it is true, but still 
requiring attention and observance that he had 
not thought of with her younger companion. 
It was in his nature to be courteous to all women, 
but he hated the trammels of society, from being 
so seldom exposed to their sway, and it seemed 
to him that Elinor brought an atmosphere of 
conventionality into the room when she sailed in 



60 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

in full evening costume. He did not understand 
the silent hint which this elaborate toilette . 
adopted only since Cecil's departure . was in- 
tended to convey. Elinor could see no obstacle 
now to enlivening the house with a few visitors. 
The best people were of course in town, and 
would not return till the end of June, but still, 
there were others who never went to London, 
and even mere country stay-at-homes would be 
a relief to this incessant monotony. It seemed 
to her that her uncle might echo her maid's 
opinion, that it was a pity to '^chiffoner ces 
belles robes pour rien du tout" French women 
certainly do not care to dress, unless they are 
sure their pains will be appreciated. 

But it was not only her uncle's want of sym- 
pathy that was making the quiet of Elinor's 
life intolerable. She had received at intervals 
two letters, respectful, but urgent, from her 
principal creditor, the jeweller, who had supplied 
the ornaments already mentioned. She answered 
the first evasively, to the second she made no 
reply, hoping that James Fisher would come and 
tell her what to do. 



. time's revenges. 61 

In reply to her request for a meeting in the 
park, he had . without exactly refusing it . 
urged that it would be an jmprudent step . it 
might precipitate matters. Elinor had fired at 
once, and much of the romance she had mis- 
taken for love, melted into dull reality when she 
felt herself engaged to a man who was not 
physically brave enough to risk the chance of a 
personal meeting with her Uncle Dryden. 

.* Is it because he only cares for me as the 
heiress of Flairs ?" she said proudly, " and he 
feels that discovery would crush such a prospect ; 
if this is his feeling, the sooner we are parted 
the better." 

Her anger swelled almost into one of the 
tempests of former days, but she did not 
seek the North Gallery now as a refuge ; she had 
lost all liking for her old haunt. She walked 
up and down her own bed-chamber with such 
fierce angry steps, that the old boards creaked 
under them. She should not answer the letter 
at all, and he might come down and ask the 
reason of her silence before he got a line from 
her. 



62 ELINOR dryden's probatiqn. 

But when day after day passed, and he neither 
caipe nor wrote, Elinor's wrath cooled ; she 
began to find that James's letters had been 
butter to the dry bread of the monotony of 
Flairs, and that the excitement they had caused 
had been very pleasant. After all, would she 
have consented to marry a struggling barrister, 
except as heiress to her uncle's wealth ? She 
had seen quite enough of a moderate income at 
her father's, to be certain that she could never 
exist on it. Well then, if she reasoned in this 
way . mortifying as it might be to her vanity, 
James had a right to the same feelings, she 
could not expect him to choose a wife without 
money ; certainly if the worst befell, her uncle 
must always provide for her ; he had said some- 
thing once in former times, when he was very 
angry, about five hundred a-year. What non- 
sense ! why she could easily spend a thousand 
on herself in six months, and people always 
spent the double of what they thought suffi- 
cient. Her father said so, and after all a man 
of the world like him must know something 
about money, though he had so little of it. 



time's revbnges. 68 

But although her anger against her lover sub- 
sided, she was resolved he should know that it had 
existed. She again told herself that her engage- 
ment had been precipitate, and that she had made 
an immense sacrifiee in binding herself at all, 
considering the imperative terms of her uncle's 
conditions. For a few moments she was 
tempted to write and cancel it, but then came 
the remembrance of the enjoyment she had 
always found in his society ; and suppose she 
met with no one whom she could even like as 
well . and s,t times she knew she did more than 
like him. Still, after all love must be a feeling 
greatly exaggerated, both in novels and poems ; 
she never experienced the strange uncomfortable 
sensations therein pictured. 

She did not know that she was much too 
full of self-worship to have room for another 
idol ; he might reign in her fancy, or if he had 
sufficient power he might kindle passion, but he 
would not reach her heart. 

No, she would not break off, she would do 
nothing hastily, she would at least keep faith 
with James till she had had a year's experience 



64 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

of what society could oflFer ; but she wrote him 
a cold, disdainful letter now, apologising for 
having nnistaken the nature of his feelings : the 
risk had not occurred to her as likely to prove 
an obstacle in his way, but now that he had 
pointed it out, she hoped he would excuse her 
want of consideration ; all this frigidly worded, 
in a f(tw detached sentences. 

The answer did not come at onre, and Elinor 
grew feverish, almost ill ; her pride reproached 
her sharply for not having broken at once with 
this man, who had so little delicacy and regard 
for her feelings. For two whole days she was 
as silent as her uncle, and more abstracted, for 
she did not notice that he was watching her 
keenly. 

On the third day her answer came. She felt 
too full of excitement and eagerness to open it 
at the breakfast table, and hurried from the 
room before her usual time, without making 
one of the excuses that she could frame so easily 
when required. 

But Mr. Dryden took no heed of her depar- 
ture. His eyes rested on one of his open letters, 



time's revenges. 65 

but they were sightless, the neat clerk-like 
writing moved in confused irregular lines, his 
senses were dizzied by the shock, only some 
figures stood out clear and distinct at the bottom 
of the paper. 

It was a small sum as to value, and yet it 
was large regarded as the extra spendings of a 
girl, who had hitherto had a fair, indeed a liberal 
allowance. 

He had noticed her fondness for jewellery, 
and it annoyed him. He had also noticed since 
her return to Flairs several ornaments, which he 
imagined had been given her by Roland Mark- 
ham. But, even supposing she had purchased 
them herself, he did not think they would nearly 
amount to the sum here mentioned. Still, that 
was nothing; what he was suffering from-^ 
suffering till his face grew white under its an- 
guished expression . was the deceit. 

If Elinor had got into debt . he writhed 
under the word . she ought at once to have 
appealed to him ; she ought not to have suffered 
such a stigma to rest upon her name for an 

VOL. III. 6 



66 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

hour ; and by the letter before him, she had 
owed this money for many months. 

He rose up hastily, crushing all his letters in 
one hand, and took his way through the old, 
deserted library to his writing-room. 

He shrank from the casual chance of meeting 
a servant in the stone gallery, who might read 
the agitation written on his face. 

For Elinor's sake he had better have avoided 
the library. 

Facing him, as he entered, the stern features 
and passionate eyes of Sir Fulke reminded him 
of the degeneracy of his race. Such an error as 
Elinor's could not have been committed by a 
former Dryden. They would have starved ra- 
ther than have spent what was not their own. 
And for what had this wretched girl so degraded 
herself and the name she bore? To feed a 
vanity the most reprehensible a woman could 
have, for it left all else at the mercy of those who 
could minister to it. He had forgotten Cecil 
Brownlow, and the revolution she had created 
in bis ideas of women. Now his lip curled 
with the old misogynic scorn, as he told himself 



time's revenges. 67 

he had only reaped the reward he might have 
expected, when he had dreamed of representing 
the Drydens by a woman. 

We have all read of the labour of construct- 
ing a dyke, and how effectually, when con- 
structed, if well watched, it will turn aside the 
course of even a mighty river; but if it be 
pierced by the cunning work of a skilful enemy, 
no prevention can withstand the force of the re- 
turning waters. They rear a crested head of 
foam, and pour through the aperture, which 
increases every instant, wave lashing on wave, 
to spread still more widely over their former 
territory. 

And all the newly-raised trust in Elinor, 
founded on the softening of his own character 
and cemented by daily study of her seeming 
openness towards himself, and her loving be- 
haviour to Cecil, was swept from existence in 
her uncle's mind by the flood of suspicion this 
revelation had let in, to seek its old channels, 
and to overspread and submerge the healthy, 
npspringing trust that had made him lately a 
happier, as well as a better man. 

5.2 



68 ELINOR DRTDEn's PROBATION. 

He stood still in the middle of the library, so 
fixed in the tension of thought, that not a 
muscle of his face moved. 

It was not only Elinor's debt that had thus 
affected him. The jeweller, with much respect in 
the way of apology, enclosed Miss Dry den's last 
letter. Its insolence disgusted the Squire as 
much as it surprised him. It was an answer 
to an announcement on the tradesman's part 
that he should apply to her uncle . Elinor 
bid him beware what he did in this respect, 
unless he wished to lose her patronage when 
she was mistress of Flairs ; which, she added, 
if he behaved with forbearance now, he might 
look for. 

He had no real, warm affection for this girl, 
and therefore he had often told himself he had 
no right to expect any from her ; but still, all 
unknowingly he had expected it, or he could 
not thus have suffered when he found that she 
already counted on his death. If it took all 
fierceness from his anger, it added bitter- 
ness to his sorrow. He was too truthiiil him- 
self to think that she might have written for 



time's revenges. 69 

mere effect, not realising the full force of the 
words to herself as they appeared on the paper, 
although she calculated the impression they 
would produce on others ; and yet, he was ac- 
tually right . the feeling had been but momen- 
tary with Elinor, but she was far too richly 
gifted not to see and realise what she wrote, as 
she wrote it. 

Presently he moved and took a few steps to- 
wards the writing-room. He must come to 
some resolution. This was not a matter to pass 
over lightly, and yet he felt as if he could not 
charge Elinor with her crime. 

Crime sounds a harsh word for what may be 
called, by those who think it so, the generous, 
thoughtless extravagance of a young girl, with 
the example before her eyes of such a father as 
Roland Markham ; but to Mr. Dryden, the 
blackness lay in the deceit towards himself, and 
the tarnish she had so unhesitatingly cast on the 
name she bore. 

It would have been nothing to her, then, to 
remain in debt for years. Sooner than deny 
herself a few worthless trinkets in the first step. 



70 ELINOR DRYDEM's PROBATION. 

and in the second, sooner than humiliate her 
pride by confession to him, she yjovld have let 
the name of Dryden remain as defaulting in this 
man's books, until his own death, or some 
chance gave her the means of payment. 

*' And 1 have seen in men to what this early 
taste for extravagance, or rather, this riot in 
spending what is not their own, leads . to every 
sort of mean subterfuge, to debt upon debt, 
which no after success in life, no inheritance 
ever frees them from. The taste grows and 
grows. If I were to make Elinor mistress 
of Flairs now, the estate would be mortgaged 
before ten years were over." 

His head drooped wearily on his breast. He 
opened the writing-room door, and went in. 

Was it to be always thus ? Was life truly 
a dreary dungeon, whenccf^here was no escape ? 
Had these fair, pleasant thoughts and feelings he 
had harboured lately been only the delusive dreams 
that visit the luckless captive, chained to the 
damp, dismal floor, whence he cannot rise even to 
reach the sunbeam that for a brief space gilds a 
strip of the wall ? For now, in his deep hum- 



time's revenges. 71 

hiing, it seemed as if he were beyond the pale 
of hope . that not one ray could reach him. 
He bad settled his own doom, chosen his own 
future, and it held him in its iron grasp. 

He sat down before his writing-desk, or, rather, 
he seemed to sink into his chair, as if in sleep. 

After a little, there came a deep, gasping sob 
. only one . *what he would have given then 
for the tears a weaker, happier man could have 
shed, he knew, while he scorned the craving. 

His one effort was to concentrate thought on 
what had to be done, not to waste it in idle pity, 
either for himself or others. 

He had never promised Elinor to make her 
his heiress unconditionally, but he had always 
felt that he virtually declared her so when he 
took her from her own home, and specially by 
this last recall. 

Ever since Sir Stuart's death, and the secret it 
had revealed, a middle course had been opened 
to him, which he had at once resolved to adopt ; 
but he shrank from this now . shrank from 
any future, in which Elinor appeared as mistress 
of Flairs. 



72 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

The very thought put new vigour in him, 
the ghastly paleness left him, and he began to 
walk up and down the room . as he always did 
when agitated. All the power of his man- 
hood rose against her. Should he, the last 
male heir of his line, be so base, so degene- 
rate, as to hand over the honour- . the hitherto 
spotless honour of his house, to a woman 
who set no store by it ? Had he already for- 
gotten how deeply her mother had disgraced it, 
and was not her daughter giving early promise 
of a more degraded career? besides, the first 
Elinor had covered her shame under the mantle 
of another name. If the second Ellinor were 
to inherit Flairs, she would be a Drydeu for 
ever ; the mother of Drydens who would prove 
cowards, for cowardly men were the sure pro- 
geny of lying women, and had not Elinor's be- 
haviour since her return to Flairs been a living 
lie? 

No ; he and Elinor must part, she must 
return to her father's home with a handsome 
provision for her lif^, but with the strict 
agreement that such provision was the limit 



time's revenges. 73 

of her expectations from him ; he would see 
her once more, and then he would try to blot 
out for ever this other great mistake of his 
life. Why was he so unjustly treated? why 
more hardly dealt with than any one whom he 
could call to mind? His father had suffered 
grievously from the misconduct of Elinor's 
mother, but his misfortune had ended with her. 
Sir Stuart's life had been saddened by one 
lasting disappointment, but he had not by any 
miscalculation created fresh unending bitterness 
for himself, while he . he alone of all men- 
had failed in gaining the love he craved, had 
rejected tried friendship, had wilfully shut him- 
self out from the solace of natural ties. In the 
only instance in which he had forced himself 
to show sympathy and interest, Elinor had 
punished him by his present suffering. Once 
be had brought himself to see that almost all 
these trials had been self-inflicted, but that was 
when under the influence of deep and purifying 
sorrow. IJow he was the injured, not the 
injurer, and neither justice nor generosity stirred 
to adjust the balance of opinion. 



74 ELINOR DRYDBN's PROBATION. 

And if he cast out Elinor, what was to be- 
come of Flairs? It would go to strangers, 
unless, . and Mr. Dryden paused in his rapid 
walking, and clasped his hands earnestly, as if 
he were struggling to be listened to by himsdf. 

And it ^Vas so. Natural affection and justice 
would be heard, often as they had been trampled 
aside, and as they spoke more and more vehe- 
mently in support of his son's claims, so the 
inward tumult over-mastered him. He looked 
helplessly round, and then retreating to the fire- 
place, he leaned heavily on the massive marble 
shelf, as still as he had been when he first en- 
tered the writing-room. 



CHAPTER VL 

MR.- FISHER PLAYS FAST AND LOOSE. 

Elinor would have been less surprised at the 
calm tone of her lover's letter, if she could 
have seen what was passing at home. I say 
calm advisedly. The wording was by no means 
cold ; but he passed by without comment her 
haughty speeches, urged her to tell him her 
troubles in writing, as aflfairs of importance 
would detain him in town for the present, and 
render it impossible for him to absent himself 
even for a day. The self-possession of the 
letter irritated her ; she thought it was more the 
presumptuous tone Maurice Karse would have 



76 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

used . James ought to have understood her 
better. A less self-confident woman would have 
taken alarm, and would have perhaps guessed 
that she was . no longer Mr. Fisher's sole 
resource. 

That " absence makes the heart grow fonder" 
may be true where love is true and strong 
also ; but Elinor's influence over Mr. Fisher 
had been more an intoxication than a senti- ' 
ment : away from its personal charm, his ardour 
cooled. 

In spite of her sorrow Adelaide had regained 
bloom and freshness in the country, and when 
he first saw her again, the rich colour his warm 
greeting brought to her. cheeks made him ask 
himself whether he had not made a mistake 
even as regarded looks between the sisters. 
Roland Markham was out, and his wife soon 
became absorbed as usual in the intricacies of 
her knitting. There was no one to help his 
conscience at reminding, so he sate down beside 
Adelaide, and asked her about her journey and 
her health, carefully avoiding all allusion to 
Elinor, till, long before the evening was over, he 



MR. FISHEK PLAYS PAST AND LOOSE. 77 

found himself, or, rather, he had unconsciously 
returned to the old half tender, half playful talk 
be had been used to coin for Adelaide. 

After all, she was so sweet, so forgiving, and 
so trusting. He began to wish he had never 
seen Elinor, that be had never come in the way 
either of her fascinations or of her prospective 
heiress-ship ; and he did not quite believe in 
the last . at least, not till old Dryden's death ; 
and then the Squire was not old, be could not 
be more than fifty, and be himself was thirty- 
five. 

It has been said before, that except for his 
own personal ease and comfort, Fisher was not 
a money worshipper. He knew his own social 
inferiority, and he was too timid-natured to feel 
sure that he could assume his position as Eli- 
nor's husband and master of Flairs with ease to 
himself. 

Adelaide did not awaken to her danger. 

Roland Markham had not said one word 
about Elinor's engagement to either herself or 
her mother ; and although Adelaide had fully 
riealised its possibility on that last sad evening, 



78 ELINOR drydbn's probatiok. 

she tried to shut her eyes to it now . at least, 
as far as she could. James might not come, 
again . he probahly would not ; but they were 
friends . once more friends. Poor child! did 
^ she think that barbed arrow could ever lie 
quietly in her side, or only quiver with the even 
throbs of friendship ? 

She was restless and excited, but she told 
herself it was the change to home, from the 
idle life she had been leading. Was it that, 
too, that made her start at every knock, and 
lung so feverishly for to-morrow ? 

She was in the school-room helping Fred 
with his lessons the next time Mr. Fisher came. 

How well she knew his knock. 

How tiresome Fred was to-night ; would he 
never understand the rule she had read over to 
him at least three times ? She felt the warm 
glow of excitement rising in her cheeks, and it 
seemed impossible to sit still and keep her eyes 
fixed on that smudged, dog's-eared Latin book, 
when she was hungering to fly up-stairs, not to 
lose a crumb of James's visit. 

She was roused by Fred's earnest gaze. 



MR. FISHER PLATS FAST AND LOOSE. 79 

" Why, Addy, how joDy slow you are to- 
night. I say, Mary, Td done my line two 
good minutes before she found it out. There, 
now, don't be cross, Addy ; if you hadn't 
frowned I was going to tell you, you looked 
as nice as the Queen of the Fairies in the pan- 
tomime Elinor took us to, with that pink colour 
in your cheeks. . My gracious, Addy, it's get- 
ting pinker ! Here's a lark ! I declare she's 
going into one of Nelly's rages I Oh, don't 
box my ears . please ma'am, don't." 

He put his hands up on each side of his 
head, laughing as only schoolboys can laugh 
when they think they have succeeded in tor- 
menting. 

The tears sprang into Adelaide's eyes. 

" For shame, Fred ! it would serve you right 
if I left you to finish by yourself ; but I shall 
stay and help you through one more line." 

Her manner and her words were so contra- 
dictory and uncertain that Fred was puzzled ; 
but he was far too lazy to reject the proffered 
help, although, as he said to Mary as soon as 
Adelaide went away, " he believed Addy's wits 



60 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

had gone wool-gathering since she'd come home 
from the sea." 

If they had, his reproof had greatly helped to 
recall them. Instead of going into the drawing- 
room, she passed up to her own room . the 
room she had yielded up to Elinor, and where 
everything served to remind her of her sister. 

She could not deceive herself. If he really 
were to be her brother, then her own feelings 
for him were full of wrong, of treachery to 
Elinor. 

She ought not to care for him more than she 
did for Fred. She dared not stay up there 
alone to face this sudden unmasking, or she 
should never have strength to go down at all ; 
and painfully as she shrank from seeing him now, 
she yet longed with that passionate contradic- 
tion that only true love knows, for a gleam of 
hope. 

Elinor and he might have become estranged, 
and then she shuddered at her own selfishness. 
If Elinor could make him happiest, James should 
.marry Elinor if Adelaide's own pleadings were 
required to win her ; only he must be less tender 



MR. FISHER PLATS FAST AND LOOSE. 81 

towards herself. By the time she reached 
the stairs again she had decided that it had 
possibly been her own fault ; in her delight at 
meeting him she had gone back to the old 
terms, and he in mere kindness had followed 
her leading. 

He was talking to her mother as she went in. 
She had an instant to master herself before he 
turned round. Then she spoke so very quietly, 
so coldly, with drooping eyelids and trembling 
voice, so much more like the pale, sad Adelaide 
who had left home a few weeks before, than the 
bright, blushing girl he had parted from so 
warmly only three nights ago, that Mr. Fisher 
stood looking at her in surprise. 

But Adelaide's mind was resolved. If she 
hesitated in the line of conduct she took now, 
she could never change afterwards. She must 
begin as she meant to go on. 

She crossed over to the table, took her work- 
basket, and sate down close beside her mother. 

Mr. Fisher bit his lip in annoyance. Mrs. 
Markham to-night was enjoying a holiday from 
the everlasting knitting. She was deep in a 

VOL. Til. 6 



82 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

novel when he entered the room, and instead of 
laying it aside, she had merely half-closed it, 
putting in a knitting*pin to keep the place. 

He knew as well as possible that as soon as 
there was some one else for him to speak to, 
she meant to go back to her story. Even while 
she listened, her eyes kept straying there, and 
then he should have Adelaide all to himself. 

One of Mr. Fisher's gifts was a remarkable 
facility of adapting his conversation to suit all 
ages. Except with men who thought pro- 
foundly, he could always talk well ; with these, 
feeling ill at ea!se, he had recourse to self-asser- 
tion, and became ridiculous. Now, interested 
as poor Mrs. Markham was in the fate of her 
heroine . who had been standing in a half- 
strangled state for twenty minutes . she could 
not help being amused by Mr. Fisher's talk ; at 
the same time, she wished he and Addy would 
sit a little further off ; there would be no comfort 
in reading, with conversation going on so very 
near her ears. 

But it did not seem to progress. Adelaide 
answered in short abrupt sentences, scarcely 



MR. f ISHtiR PLATS FAST AND LOOSE. 83 

looking up from her work. James Fisher moved 
about the room irritably; this changeable girl 
should speak to him, and look at him differently 
before they parted. His love for her was full 
of self-confidence ; he was so certain of hers, 
that he had neither doubt nor fear of removing 
this little cloud which had come between them. 
He thought perhaps the same tactics which had 
served him well with Elinor, would avail now. 
He left off studying the pictures, every one of 
which he had known by heart for the last ten 
years, and began to talk to Mrs. Markham just 
as she was calculating how soon politeness would 
allow her to go back to her book. It was too 
much for human endurance, when ten pages 
perhaps would put both her and the heroine out 
of their respective misery. She turned her 
knitting basket upside down, and then after a 
brief search among its contents, declared she 
must go and look for a pattern she had left 
downstairs. 

Adelaide was surprised and disconcerted whec 
her mother almost peremptorily refused her offer 
to se<ek the missing pattern, but Mr. Fisher, 

6.2 



84 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

who remarked that she did not leave her book 
behind her, quietly appreciated Mrs. Markham's 
manceuvre. 

The instant her mother disappeared he went 
and sat down by Adelaide. He would have 
liked to take the poor trembling girl into bis 
arms, and ask her why she was so cold and 
strange, but conscience pricked too keenly, and 
reminded him that some little explanation must 
be offered before he could expect her to believe 
him ; besides, he did not want to break with 
Elinor. 

" Are you not well this evening ?" he drew 
nearer to her as he spoke. 

Adelaide longed to be able to say her head 
ached, but it did not. She felt almost delirious 
with happiness, and yet she must thrust it from 
her. She tried to look at him steadily. 

*' I am quite well, thank you ; the change has 
done me good." Her eyes fell beneatb bis, her 
courage was ebbing fast under the deep tender- 
ness that filled them, then a sudden thought of 
Elinor helped her. '^ You hear from Elinor 
now, very often, I suppose ; have you h^d c^ letter 
to-day ?" 



MR. FISHER PLATS FAST AND LOOSE. 86 

The words came in the hard, unpleasant tone 
that timid people mostly use when urged beyond 
their courage; they entirely overthrew James 
Fisher's calculations. After all his strict injunc- 
tions of secrecy, had Roland Markham betrayed 
his own secret ? 

"Who told you that your sister wrote to 
me ?'' he said. Adelaide thought he was vexed 
with her abruptness, but she could go on now, 
she was desperate. 

"No one told me, but I thought, I imagined, 
you loved Elinor, and wished to marry her." 

There was such a sudden gleam of hope in 
her eyes as she said this, that his way seemed 
dear again. 

" Shall I tell you what you are ?" he said, 
bending over her and whispering in soft stealing 
music that seemed to fetter sense and speech 
while she listened. " A darling, trusting girl, 
with only one fault : want of confidence in your 
own power of attracting and retaining.'' He had 
got possession of one of her hands now, and 
was caressing it tenderly. '^ Men cannot always 
explain themselves without compromising others, 



86 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

and saying things which would be both cowardly 
and conceited. I only ask you to trust me, my 
child ; whatever you may see, whatever you may 
hear, believe in me only. Will you. promise 
this, Adelaide ?" 

And she promised, without another question, 
without another word of explanation ; how could 
she help it, when he drew her close to him and 
whispered that no love but hers could mak^ 
him truly happy ? 

She felt, puzzled afterwards ; had he really 
not loved Elinor, or had he found what Adelaide 
felt firmly persuaded of, that Maurice Karse was 
preferred to him, and instead of a loving parting 
from her sister, had that last evening-r. which 
bad made her so unhappy . witnessed a quarrel 
between them. 

But had she not promised implicit faith and 
trust, even against the evidence of her own 
senses? Whatever had happened, she had nq 
right to unravel it ; every moment ought to be 
full of thankfulness for the great joy re- 
Stored. It was almost more than her mind 
could grasp 



MR. FISHER PLAYS FAST AND LOOSE. 87 

And meanwhile Elinor in her regal sense of 
power, thought she should let Mr. Fisher's letter 
wait a few days before she answered it; the delay 
would at least serve to show him his mistake in 
trusting so confidently to her affection for him, 
if impatience did not bring him down to beg 
forgiveness in person. 

She would give him the chance. Meantime 
she wrote a long letter to Cecil Brownlow, en- 
treating her not to betray the confidence s\m 
bad placed in her, as it was most important the 
matter should b&kept quiet for the present. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE OLD QUESTION. 

When Cecil read Elinor Dryden's letter, she 
was not in a mood to receive its contents with 
any answering flow of sympathy or friendliness. 
She read every word of it carefully, and then 
crumpling it up, threw it in the fire. 

"My dear Cecil, burn a note before you 
answer it? It's plain you'll never be an old 
maid." 

" I think I shall then, aunt, though I don't 
like the word. You seem happy enough, and 
why should I not be the same ?" 

" You talk nonsense at times, child, as well as 



THE OLD QUESTION. 89 

other folks. A man's not a calf just because 
he happens to be born in a byre, and if your 
name's Brownlow it doesn't follow that you 
have the same vocation that I have." 

" I don't know anything about vocations," 
Cecil spoke drearily, without a spark of her 
usual manner ; " if I'm half as good and useful 
as you are, I've no doubt I shall make a toler- 
able spinster." 

*' Good gracious, child, what's the matter ? 
I thought the prospect of a little change would 
brighten you up. I believe you are quite sorry 
at the idea of seeing your uncle and Mr. Karse 
to-night.'" 

" I'm very glad to see Uncle Erasmus, but 
I. I don't care about strangers, you know." 

They were in Erasmus's study, and Cecil 
could keep her face turned away from Aunt 
Jane's sharp eyes, while she arranged and re- 
arranged one shelf of books with almost exas- 
perating neatness. 

" Strangers !" Miss Brownlow nearly upset 
the ink-bottle out of which she was replenishing 
those on the table. '^ Bless the child, what is 



90 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

she talking of. Who's the stranger ? Maurice 
Karse ? Why you lived in the house with him 
for nearly three weeks, I thought ?" 

Here Miss Brownlow had at length the pru- 
dence to stop. 

Cecil turned round, her face glowing with in- 
dignation. 

" I can't help what you thought, aunt, but 

you made a grievous mistake if you thought I 

considered Mr. Karse as anything but a 

stranger . " then checking her impetuous tone, 

she went on more quietly . ** I have finished 

these books now, aunt, and if you cannot give 

me any more to do, I've promised Jane a recipe 

from Flairs, which Elinor Dryden sent me in her 

letter this morning. Though* I burned the 

letter, you see I kept the recipe." She laughed, 

as if she wanted to efface the remembrance of 

her little outbreak, and Miss Brownlow, although 

by no means satisfied with her niece's manner, 

thought it better to let her go. 

** Only a bit of girl's contradiction, just to 
prevent me from seeing how glad she really is ; 
but she has seemed dull and low spirited ever 



THE OLD QUESTION. 91 

since I told her . is it possible that that Squire 
can have said anything to prejudice her against 
Maurice ? . I shall have to say something plain to 
that old man before Fve done. . Well, and if he 
has, I shall leave them alone to work it off ; no 
middle-aged go-between ever helped young lovers 
to an understanding yet ; besides, there's a free- 
ipasonry about real love . all it wants is oppor- 
tunity, and that I'll take care of. Oh, dear me !" 

And Miss Brownlow having decided that the 
study looked *^ the thing," retreated to her den. 

Erasmus and Maurice were surprised and de- 
lighted to see Cecil. Miss Brownlow had not 
thought it necessary to say she was still in Lon- 
don, but her cold, indifferent reception chilled the 
younger man. 

The shock of Ben's death had been very 
sudden ; it seemed to him that he might have 
been summoned in time to bid his dear, old 
friend farewell : it was the first earthly parting 
be had known, and it impressed him deeply. 
He told himself that he had been too tamp 
under Mr. Dryden's prohibitions . surely he owed 
Ben more than any living being . he forgot, fof 



92 ELIKOR DRTDEn's PROBATION. 

the time^ how Karse had always secotided the 
Squire's wishes^ and urged his absence from 
Flairs; and then as time wore on, and the 
sharpness of his sorrow softened, he remembered 
that his only hope of unravelling the secret Ben 
had hinted at lay now in the Squire, and, unless 
he summoned him to Flairs^ how was he to get 
speech of him. Should he go down there at 
once and force the truth from the Squire at the 
risk of offending him for ever ? Mr. Dryden 
had said that Ben's effects had been reserved 
for Maurice, and would be delivered to him " on 
his return to Flairs," plainly hinting at some 
future time when his presence there would be 
expected. 

Was it expected now ? 

He consulted Erasmus, although he had not 
much faith in his judgment as to practical mat- 
ters ; but his tutor was so decidedly opposed to 
his approaching Mr. Dryden without a decided 
summons, that he forced himself to endure sus- 
pense yet a little longer. 

Elinor's silence, and avoidance too, of him . 
for he considered that she could easily have 



THE OLD QUESTION. 93 

cleared herself in his eyes if she had wished to 
do so . left her stained with the falsehood his 
own ears had listened to. 

At twenty we are not prone to excuse the 
faults of others, and Maurice's truth was so 
entire and rigid, that this flaw in Elinor's had 
blackened and destroyed the fair image he had, 
as he now saw, ignorantly worshipped ; but the 
cure of his blindness was wounding rather than 
healing, and he had gladly accepted his tutor's in- 
vitation to spend a few weeks among the woods 
and hills, although the woods were as yet but 
scantily clothed, and the weather was far from 
genial. But the quiet and loneliness fed his 
discontent . he was really relieved when the time 
of return came. 

They had been home quite a week, and still 
Cecil kept the same formal, constrained manner 
towards him. At first Maurice attributed it to 
her recent sorrow, but it seemed as if any 
attempt on his side at sympathy or at a revival 
of their old intercourse, increased what he began 
to see and feel was fixed dislike towards himself. 
Miss Brownlow was puzzled too, but she wisely 



94 ELINOR DRYDBn's PROBATION. 

concluded that it was best to take no notice, and 
also not to throw them too much into each 
other's company, lest Cecil's suspicions should be 
roused. They were together now, however; 
Maurice had been trying in vain to make Cecil 
talk to him, bearing gently and lovingly with 
her evident indifference . almost it seemed dis- 
like . towards him, till his patience seemingly 
tired out, he turned abruptly to the table, and 
took up a book. 

^' Did you know that when I was at Flairs I 
was constantly with Elinor Dryden ?" 

Cecil was surprised at herself quite as much 
as Maurice was ; but she was so indignant at his 
hypocrisy that she could bear it no longer. 
What did he mean by singling her out in this 
way, when he was or ought to be thinking only 
of another woman ? 

For several days past she had accused h^^elf 
of conceit, and resolved that Maurice's manner 
meant nothing but common politeness, but she 
could hardly be mistaken now . or if she were 
mistaken, he must alter . it would be far better to 
quarrel at once with him than keep up a mere 



THE OLD QUESTION. 95 

pretence of civility, and receive attentions which 
he ought not to dare to oflfer her. 

She had not felt bright or happy once since 
his return; the sooner this pretence between 
them was given up the better. and yet the sound 
of her own words startled her. 

Maurice only said " Were you ?" and then he 
stood looking at her, as if waiting for the end 
of her sentence. 

Cecil felt in a dilemma : suppose she was 
mistaken after all. With more of her old 
sprightliness than he had seen since his return, 
she looked up in his face. 

''You have grown strangely indifferent, I 
think ; are you not at all interested to talk of 
her ? or . '' for his manner was calm and un- 
moved . " of Mr. Dryden, either ?' 

" I hear from Mr. Dryden, myself." Maurice 
spoke coldly enough now. 

There was a pause, for he felt bewildered 
in trying to guess Cecil's drift . then, as a sud- 
den enlightenment broke upon him, he said, 
looking fixedly into her eyes, *' Did Miss Dryden 
speak of me, then, to you ? . I beg your pardon, 



I" 

99 



96 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

I was very abrupt just now, but you puzzled 



me. 



He seemed to wait eagerly for an answer, but 
Cecil did not know what to say. ^ Elinor had 
spoken of Maurice, but in the special conversa- 
tion of which she was thinking his name had 
not been uttered. 

'^ I am not certain ;" she hesitated, but 
Maurice's look made her feel she must go on. 
" Mr. Karse, I am sure you understand me, and 
I think you will agree with me, that I ought 
not to say any more." 

Maurice stood still, listening, trying to gather 
in some definite meaning from her words. 

" You must excuse me. Miss Brownlow ; I 
am very stupid, I know, but I am utterly at a 
loss . I do not understand you at all." 

For a moment she hesitatedf^why should she 
not believe him ? then, ashamed and indignant 
at her own weakness . for had not Elinor a far 
greater claim on her regard? . she said stiflBiy . 

'* Really, . I am afraid I cannot make my 
meaning plainer " and she walked out of the 
room. 



THE OLD QUESTION. 97 

Had he spoken the truth? or was he so 
trifling as to wish to please her when all his 
thoughts should have been filled with Elinor 
Dryden. 

She sate in her room trying to decide, long 
after she left Maurice, and every moment the 
inclination to believe him became more irre- 
sistible. 

Still there was no relief in this; it would 
have been far easier to believe him insincere : 
then he would have become totally indifferent to 
her, and the restraint in which she kept herself 
would have ended. 

It was all very well to tell herself she would 
not think about him, but when she was listening 
to her Aunt's best stories she roused to find that 
she was calculating the time that would elapse 
before she saw Maurice again. 

They rarely spoke to each other now. 

Even Erasmus remarked that Cecil had grown 
shy and quiet, and that Maurice had turned silent, 
but the more vigilant Jane Ann noticed how her 
niece's eyes fell and how her colour deepened 

VOL. III. 7 



98 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION, 

.vhen Maurice made his appearance in the draw- 
ing-room. 

But she went on her way, taking no notice, 
although she began to think they were a long 
time making up their minds, and felt impatient 
to bring matters to a crisis. 

Why are such people as Miss Brownlow al- 
ways anxious to hurry the course of love, 
with its half-realised delicious mingling of joy 
and distrust ? Leave it alone, ye whose blood 
has cooled, whose pulses beat far more feverishly 
in the adding up of thousands than in antici- 
pating the keenest joys of love. All is haste in 
middle life . and remembering this, young lovers^ 
and how little space the world's turmoil and 
speed will yield you afterwards, rest in the 
brief elysium while you can, and enjoy your 
happiness to the full. 

Maurice was troubled and irresolute . a state 
of mind so foreign to his nature, that its very 
existence was a vexation. 

In the beginning of his discussion with Cecil 
he had hoped that a few frank, outspoken words 
might overthrow the barrier her constrained 



THE OLD QUESTION. 99 

manner had raised ; but instead of. this it had 
seemed that she was resolved to pick a quarrel 
at any price. The manner of her last words 
stung his pride deeply, but she looked so lovely 
as she spoke them, that perhaps they only 
strengthened his determination to win her love. 

Maurice, like all men of his type, was aa 
enthusiastic admirer of beauty, from a field 
daisy upwards ; and although he seemed to 
avoid speaking to Cecil as much as possible, 
he often sat or stood gazing at her, drinking in 
every detail of her loveliness. He wondered 
that Elinor's beauty had enslaved him. The 
remembrance of the one seemed to him a 
dark spangled splendour, full of glowing colour 
and of everything that suggested warmth and 
excitement ; the contemplation of the other was 
such ijerfection of happiness that he could not 
endure interruption while he indulged it. Cecil 
looked so very pure and child-like . it seemed 
to Maurice, sometimes, that it would be useless 
to talk to her of love. 

But day by day passion was growing with 
these long gazing fits. More than once he left 

7.2 



100 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

the room abruptly. To remain near her and 
not to tell her of his love, was beyond his 
power. 

The opportunity came before he expected it. 

Cecil had been trying to read ever since her 
aunt left the room, conscious that Maurice's eyes 
bad left his book to fix themselves on her face. 
All at once he spoke, and at the same time flung 
the book down and came and stood beside her. 

" Miss Brownlow, shall you live here always ?" 

Cecil was frightened by his abruptness ; but 
she had become accustomed to guard her feelings 
from Maurice's observation. 

" I am not sure." She tried to smile, as if 
the subject of her departure were quite indiffe- 
rent to her. " I believe Mr. Dryden is kind 
enough to wish me to return to Flairs." 

It seemed to Maurice that she said this pur- 
posely to wound him ; that she tried to remind 
him of the difference between them ; that she 
was the guest and intimate friend of the Squire, 
while he was only his dependent . not even ad- 
mitted to his table. 

His jealousy broke through all restraints. 



THE OLD QUESTION. 101 



" And you wish to return to Flair, then ? You 
prefer that stately grand life to being here ?" 

His angry words drove away the cautious 
guard Cecil had hitherto maintained over the in- 
ward tumult caused by Maurice's silent devotion. 
There was no fear lest she should misunder- 
stand him now ; he was displeased, and she could 
not bear that he should think hardly of her. 

" I never said so . I never thought so. I like 
best to be here." She looked up timidly, and 
yet eagerly, as if entreating him to believe her, 
and then she shrank away from the sudden 
change she saw in his eyes. '^ It is natural to 
like to be with my uncle and aunt." 

Her eyes were full of tears, and she blushed 
at the last words, half conscious of their un- 
truth ; but Maurice only heeded the gentleness 
of her answer. 

" You think me a rough, rude boor," he went 
on impetuously ; " I must seem so to you, and 
I must risk your thinking so, for I cannot keep 
silent any longer. I have been longing to speak 
for days past, but I was afraid you would not 
listen." 



102 ELINOR DRT den's PROBATION. 

He stopped abruptly. Cecil's blushes were 
glowing crimson ; she felt as if she must stay 
the words on his lips. 

" You mean because of what I said the other 
day . and, Mr. Karse, I am not sure that I ought 
to listen now." 

But her looks contradicted her words ; there 
was no coldness, only trembling downcast con- 
fusion ; and with the hope of her love, a ray of 
enlightenment came to Maurice. 

" I am not sure, but I fancy you are under 
some mistake about my relations with Miss 
Dryden ; there cannot be a greater mistake than 
to suppose there is any tie between us. Will 
you listen to me now, Cecil?" he paused . 
there was no sign of avoidance or anger . only one 
of the small dimpled hands stole over her eyes 
as if the light shone into them too brightly. 
Maurice went on passionately : " Will you say 
you like to live where I am ? Will you even 
say you can be happy with me ? Will you let 
me try to make your happiness ?" 

He bent down over her and took one of her 
hands in his with a gentleness very unlike the 



THE OLD QUESTION. 108 

fire of his words, as he went on with that rapid 
eloquence which visits silent men in moments of 
deep emotion, and which is so strangely thrilling 
to the listener. " I know how utterly unworthy 
I am of you, how rough ray early training has 
been, and how little I am capable of speaking 
fitly to one so full of softness and refinement ; 
but Cecil, if you knew how much your words 
and example have helped to raise me since I 
first saw you, you would believe in your own 
power over me for good. I loved you then, but 
not as I do now ; my tirst feelings for you were little 
more than fancy ; since there has come passion, 
and for an unworthy object. Now I love for the 
first time, as I did not know I could love before. 
Will you believe this, dear . dearest Cecil ? . 
will you forgive me ? . Will you trust your life 
and your happiness to me ?" 

His head was bent down so low now, that her 
faint "yes'* sounded close in his ear. She tried 
to be brave and look up frankly, but she could 
not. The sudden joy had almost overpowered 
her, and her hand seemed as if it would press 
over her eyes. 



104 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

But Maurice drew it gently away, he must 
*ee those sweet eyes, confess the Love he hardly 
yet believed in. Holding the little hand in his 
firm warm dasp, his other arm stole lithely round 
her waist, and drew her close to him. Then 
the blue eyes opened widely for an instant, as the 
virginal fear, his touch aroused, fled out at 
them ; the crimson on her soft cheek deepened, 
the fringing lashes drooped again . but if the 
touch alarmed, it subdued. The wild bird that 
lives in a woman's heart, fluttered for a moment, 
and then folded its wings submissively, as Mau- 
rice drew her sweet face close to his own. 



BOOK THE EIGHTH. 



HARDEST. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE PICTURE IN THE WHITE BEDCHAMBER. 

When Mr. Dryden roused from that deep still- 
ness, his face looked almost as deathlike as the 
grey marble on which he had been leaning. 

He did not send for Elinor. He went steadily 
and determinedly to the entrance of the North 
Gallery, a; id passed through the red-curtained 
entrance to the door of the White Bedchamber. 
He did not hesitate with his hand on the lock 
now, he unfastened the door and went in quickly. 
Early as it still was, the light was indistinct from 
the closely-drawn blinds yellow with age, which 
shrouded each window ; it would have been more 
so but for the pale, almost ghastly, hue of the 



108 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

walls . a dead white, pannelled into large irregu- 
lar divisions by what had been broad gold lines, 
now corroded and black. The profuse gold de- 
coration on the huge antique bedstead of richly- 
carved light oak had shared the same fate. Two 
Cupids lay supported in the air by a garland of 
carved roses and leaves, one of them holding 
the golden torch of Hymen, which the other 
seemed struggling to reach ; but the torch was 
blackened, and so were the horns of plenty and 
the doves, clustered round the top of the massive 
fluted pillars that upheld the lofty canopy. 

Mr. Dryden went straight to one of the win- 
dows before he looked right or left, and drew 
up the blind. The light came in, but not freely, 
. it seemed to know its presence was not wanted 
in that deserted place, and the dust and cob- 
webs that covered the glass hindered its passage 
besides. Dust was everywhere . every footstep 
raised it. 

As Mr. Dryden turned from the window he 
faced the bed, and his eyes fell on the Cupids. 
They seemed to be smiling at him in mockery. 

He moved away hastily with a suppressed 



THE PICTURE IN THE BEDCHAMBER. 109 

exclamation, and advanced to the farthest side 
of the room beyond the bedstead. Here was a 
wide, old-fashioned fireplace, screened from the 
light, and from any draught that might be sup- 
posed to travel round the foot of the bed, by one 
of those huge Indian screens one only sees in 
museums and old country houses ; the ground 
was chiefly white, but monsters of every ima- 
ginable form and hue disported themselves 
thereon, with protruding eyes and swollen 
bodies, relieved here and there with strangely 
drawn flowering plants and uncouth representa- 
tions ^of waves. On the left of the fireplace was 
a tall, oblong space, covered with a stiff, black 
curtain. Mr. Dryden drew a key from his 
pocket, and fitting it in the side of the oblong 
space, the black curtain glided away, and showed 
itself to be the outer covering of a picture. 

The picture of a very young and very lovely 
woman. There was youth ia every full and 
rounded limb, and in the soft peach-like bloom 
on the skin. There was youth^ too, in the pro- 
fusion of dark-shining hair, and in the full firm- 
ness of the rosy lips, but the expressioq w^s too 



110 ELINOR DrYDEn's PROBATlOlf. 

sad for the years, and made the picture painful to 
look at by the very contradiction it suggested. 
The fresh loveliness seemed to protest against 
the sad heart it enshrined, almost to implore 
deliverance from something as foreign to its na- 
ture, as its own freshness was to the faded waste 
around it. Involuntarily you looked closer, so 
vivid was the conviction impressed that the sweet, 
bright face belonged to another temperament than 
that indicated by the almost tearful eyes. They 
were so large and lustrous, you longed to see them 
smiling, or full of the warm love their liquid 
brown depths must have known so well how to 
interpret. No one could have gazed on the 
face unmoved, or without an irresistible desire 
to learn the fate of the young being so sylpli- 
like in ber white gauzy drapery, so sombre in the 
revelation lent by the dark sadness of her eyes. 
It was a full-length portrait, with foliage as 
background, and in small gold letters on one 
side of this were the words : " Lettice Dryden, 
born 18.. Married 18.." 

This, then, was Wentworth Dryden's young 
wife. His dead wife. How could he stand there 



THE PICTURE IN THE BEDCHAMBER. Ill 

draining his heart of feeling by the agony he 
wrung from it, torturing himself by dwelling on 
every charm, on every grace still life-like, on 
the senseless canvas, though the reality had so 
long since mouldered to nothingness ? 

There was a beseechingness in the looks he 
fixed on her face ^ it seemed as if that stern, 
hard man out of whose life youth had so early 
faded, was controlled and influenced by the 
mute beauty of this wife who had only known 

 

youth, who had passed away from his love 
before the shadow of change had come over her 
freshness. 

Love ! . who can tell the inner secrets of two 
hearts, made, or said to be made, one in lawful 
wedlock? Only God knows the intensity of 
joy, and the depth of suffering husbands and 
wives can mutually give. 

If the recalling of Love when it has been taken 
from us, doubtless for our good, leaving us with 
hearts bruised out of feeling, and eyes blinded 
to all but our own misery, if this at times mad- 
dens beyond the power of resignation which 
only time, by God's mercy^ will bring, what 



112 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

must be the anguish when union has been an- 
other name for suffering, when we look on the 
portrait of one whom we have worn next our 
heart, within it, even, and yet whose identity 
had never lost itself in ours, who has never been 
a part in that perfect and indissoluble union 
which makes but one of two natures, two sym- 
pathies, two wills, and yet who might have been 
so but for our own fault. If we had cared to 
study the nature, of the tender flower we hastily 
transplanted to a strange soil, its sensitive fibres 
might have been strengthened, its whole system 
might have been moulded to its new surround- 
ings, and instead of faded blossoms and prema- 
ture decay, the lovely flower might ha^^e bloomed 
our own for ever. 

Mr. Dryden stood in long, fixed thought ; he 
knew the story of that young heart's sorrows 
now; the face had no perplexing enigma to 
offer him, but as he looked on it a shuddering 
sigh burst from him, the fixed resolution of his 
face faded, and *a strange mixture of repugnance 
and indecision succeeded. 

He bad visited the picture but once since his 



THE PICTURE IN THE BEDCHAMBER. 113 

wife's death, and that was on the night follow* 
ing the run through Bucklebridge Wood. Then 
he had remained for hours in the White Bed- 
chamber, not gazing calmly and sadly at his 
lost treasure, but prostrate before the picture, 
he had poured out some of the grief and re- 
morse which Sir Stuart's confession had made 
his companions for life, and with them much of 
the jealous suspicion which had wound itself so 
closely into his nature. The shock, the sudden 
overmastering surprise of learning aU which 
that confession had told him had uprooted set- 
tled convictions, and what he had thought inera- 
dicable aversion, and he had left the North 
Gallery that night with a heart full of deep 
sadness, softened towards his fellow-men, and 
humbled into an earnest purpose of repara- 
tion. 

And some of these thoughts had now returned, 
but the first glow had faded from off them, and 
their execution seemed more difficult than it 
had seemed then, 

" Reparation" . the words came slowly . fol- 
lowing the passage of his thought . ''nothing 

VOL. III. 8 



114 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

that I could offer would be reparation, but this 
would be none ; it would rather be a blazoning 
of what shall never be uttered publicly. Let 
me bear what blame I will, her memory shall 
not suffer." 

So wistful a tenderness shone over his face as 
he stood looking on the picture, that he was 
scarcely recognisable as the hard, grey-faced 
man who had entered the White Bedchamber. 
The tenderness was sorrowful, but the rigid 
lines about his mouth were all unbraced, and 
his brows had smoothed from the sternness that 
knit them so closely. 

It had always been said of him that he never 
swerved or faltered from a purpose, and yet a 
glance at the sweet sadness of that face seemed 
to have overturned all that he had forced him- 
self to with so much effort. 

He paced slowly down the length of the 
room, startling the dust so seldom disturbed 
there, his footsteps sounding with hollow dis- 
tinctness on the old oak flooring. 

His last determination with regard to Elinor 
had been to see her once more, and then to 



THE PICTURE IN THE BEDCHAMBER. 115 

send her away from him ; but there seemed to 
be in that room a spell against suspicion and 
resentment. Both tried to be heard, but a sud- 
den perception that he ought first to listen to 
her own exculpation roused itself in his mind. 
He would do nothing hastily . he could not. 
Moreover, Elinor had not, as he now saw, com- 
mitted the faults which he bad specified as the 
condition of forfeiture, and setting her aside, the 
whole future disposal of Flairs was iavolved in 
hi^ present decision, and this would be irrevoca- 
ble, for he could never go back from his word 
once solemnly pledged. 

He turned to the window, closed the blind 
again, and slowly left the room. However 
much that mute interview had softened his 
anger, he felt still strangely averse to an ex- 
planation with Elinor. As he passed out at the 
eastern end of the gallery, he looked towards 
the passage leading to the morning room. The 
expression of dislike came over his face that he 
had subdued while he stood looking at the pic- 
ture in the White Bedchamber. 

He felt that he must be calmer before he 

8.2 



116 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

could listen p^ttiently to her excuses, whatever 
' they might be, and there was much to be accom- 
plished first. He went into his business room, 
took some papers and letters from an iron safe 
there, and then carrying these with him to his 
writing-room, he rang the bell, and gave orders 
that he was not to be disturbed by any one. 

He went on writing . for hours still writing- 
additions seemingly to the bundle of papers he 
had brought from the iron safe. 

Hour after hour passed, and he sate there, 
only varying the incessant monotony of his oc- 
cupation by reading over the few last pages of 
his manuscript. He seemed to erase often, and 
when he did so it was with frowning brows and 
stern mouth, as if he were dealing strict justice 
on some one. 

The dressing-bell sounded, for a moment he 
hesitated with a lingering look at his papers, 
then he rose, locked the door leading to the 
library on the inside, and also that which led 
into the gallery, when he had passed out- 
side it. 

Elinor was pre- occupied and silent at dinner- 



THE PICTURE IN THE BEDCHAMBER. 117 

time, but still she saw that the shadow of some 
change had fallen on her uncle. Was he ill ? 
or were her fears realised ? Should she be 
obliged to confess after all ? 

She tried several subjects of twlk, and as each 
fell lifeless from want of response, her hopes 
sank and sank. The dinner had never seemed 
so long before. Surely the butler was not so 
slow and pompous every day. 

But as soon as she rose to leave the room, 
unhoped-for succour came. 

" You must excuse my absence this evening, 
Elinor ; I have business which will detain me for 
some hours." 

He purposely avoided saying good-night. 
Elinor did not notice the omission ; her heart 
gave such a sudden bound of relief as she lis- 
tened, that she could scarcely suppress an ex- 
clamation. 

She wanted to be alone as much as her unde 
did ; she must think over every possible chance 
of safety ; above all she must be perfectly pre- 
pared for an explanation with the Squire, for she 
was qertain now that Mr. Dry den knew the truth; 



CHAPTER II. 

BLINOR AND THE SQUIRE. 

For several days time passed on, and the 
explanation was still delayed. 

Still Mr. Dryden pleaded to himself the 
excuse of bui^iness, and went to his writing 
room every evening. Long after all the house- 
hold slept he sat there writing page after page 
of manuscript, not rapidly as if copying from 
a book or some record of memory, but with 
long pauses of hesitation and difficulty. 

It was no labour of love. When he rose 
from his desk his face had the sad, worn look 
of one who has passed a night of hopeless 



ELINOR AND THB SQUIRE. 119 

watching for life or death, and after he had 
carefully locked the fast thickening packet in his 
desk and had gone to his room, he could not 
sleep, he could not even lie down on his bed 
till he had somewhat freed himself from the 
haunting ghost-like past his labours had evoked. 
His room was peopled with it, and yet only by 
an endless repetition of one figure ; whichever 
way he turned there met him that graceful 
white-robed girl, her rich dark curls held back 
by a blue fillet, and that sad anxious gaze ever 
seeking his. 

He knew what it was asking him, and though 
he meant to obey the spirit of its prayer, he 
would not do this in the letter. He tried to 
allay the restless dissatisfaction within, stirred 
up by those vision eyes, telling himself that his 
silence was for her, that the end would be the 
same, and that when he lay beside her, as once 
he had never thought or wished to lie, all his 
secret would be told to those whom it alon^ 
concerned. But in vain . and when his labour 
was at last over, and after carefully destroying 
what had evidently been a previous shorter re- 



120 ELINOE DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

lation of the same events, he folded and sealed 
the fresh manuscript, he looked as dissatisfied, as 
unhappy as ever. 

Even when, with as firm a hand as the gradu- 
ally increasing emotion that had beset him at 
this last evening's task had lefk him, he wrote 
outside " Not to be opened till after my deathj" 
there was no trace of the relief one might have 
expected to see on the face of a man who has 
completely achieved a hard and uncongenial 
work. 

It was long after midnight when this was at 
last accomplished, but when Mr. Dryden had 
deposited the packet in the iron safe, he was 
conscious of a strange throbbing, not at his 
heart only, every muscle and sinew seemed to 
have been overstrained, and now suddenly re- 
leased, quivered back to its accustomed place 
with a tremor that was almost sickening. 

He stood leaning against the safe in wonder 
at his own weakness, for the physical trembling 
was not its only manifestation ; large warm 
tears swelled slowly from his eyes, and trickled 
down his cheeks. For a few moments they 



ELINOR AND THE SQUIRE. 121 

eased the aching misery he had been bearing so 
bravely, but the exhaustion that followed their 
strange unwonted presence became faintness. 

When at last he wearily reached his own 
bed-room, the darkness was merging fast into a 
broad grey expanse, breaking more and more 
towards the east into fleecy masses, that seemed 
chased by the rising day-god. 

The Squire opened the window and looked 
out ; the hushed air . not fully wakened yet . 
came in with a cold stillness that revived, though 
it could not brace. He shivered and closed the 
window. In that grey glimmer he looked fuU 
ten years older than when he began his task a 
week before, as if life blood from body and 
spirit had alike been drained. 

Elinor had passed some restless days of 
alternate hope and despair. She saw her uncle's 
change of look and manner, and yet she dared 
not remark upon it. Let what would happen, 
tlie explanation should come naturally, no act or 
word of hers should hasten it. 

The silence between them grew more and 
more oppressive. She could not reconcile the 



122 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

evident disquiet, the sunken eyes and hollow 
cheeks' that became daily more remarkable, with 
the displeasure caused by her extravagance. 

Some deep sorrow . to which she was not 
admitted . was slowly wearing away her uncle's 
life. 

"It is his own fault," she said resentfully, 
" if I do not lighten his sorrow for him ; his 
own act is fast restoring day by day the cold- 
ness that estranged me from him in childhood." 

But a sharp sudden fear passed through her 
when she was at last summoned to the writing- 
room. She had almost began to hope that her 
fault was buried safely, and that it had had no 
part in her uncle's strange behaviour. If after 
all he had discovered her engagement to 
James ! 

She went into the room in a soit of stunned 
silence. She took the chair her uncle gravely 
placed for her, and then she sat and heard in 
the same unwakened stupor, the charge brought 
against her, and the proofs adduced. 

Mr. Dryden paused and looked at her ; her 
eyes were widely opened, as if they too were 



ELINOR AND THE SQUIRE. 123 

striving to take in his sad reproachful words, 
but except for their strained gaze at vacancy, and 
the quick heaving breath . which rose and fell 
with fluttering eagerness . she might have been 
hearing some fact in history, or some abstract 
reasoning. There was no change of complexion, 
no trembling mouth, nothing to indicate the 
presence of Fear. 

Was she, then, completely hardened, lost to 
all sense of the degradation she had brought on 
her name ? 

He had told her all her fault . of disgrace, of 
deception, and broken faith with him . not 
harshly ; for reasons of his own he tried now to 
be as lenient as he could. But when he saw 
her unchanged posture . the absence of any 
shame or sorrow, he went farther. 

I have said that he paused and looked at 
her ; then he spoke again ; and this time, there 
was a pain in his voice, a shrinking from the 
very words he said, which before their sense had 
reached her ears, found its way to her heart. 

But when she gathered in his full drift, when 
she saw that her thoughtless, hastily- written 



124 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

words had suggested that she was not only 
counting on his inheritance, but calculating on, 
and rejoicing at, the prospect of his death, the 
spell that had held her speechless, broke. 

She threw herself on her knees, and clasped 
one of his hands to her so vehemently, that he 
could not have freed it without violence, exclaim- 
ing, with a passion that alarmed her uncle, that 
her foolish words had only been used as a threat 
to enforce the jeweller's silence. She implored 
him to listen . for he turned his head away, 
distressed by her agitation . not to forgive her 
fault, not to take her back into his favour . 
her rapid utterance began to be choked by 
sobs, as she went on with the frenzied eager- 
ness, that dreaded he might all at once refuse to 
listen . 

" I know I dare not, cannot ask for forgive- 
ness ; but, in mercy, believe, that I could not 
have harboured such a thought as that ! Oh ! 
uncle, uncle" . she kissed his hand, while her 
tears streamed down on it . ** you could not think 
me a murderess, and should I not be one in in- 
tention if I had counted on the end of your life ? 



ELINOR AND THE SQUIRE. 125 

I am ungrateful, deceitful, vain ; but I am not 
so base as not to love you !'^ 

Vehement, convulsive sobbing choked her 
words ; but her imploring, streaming eyes, told 
that she had not half uttered the agony of her 
repentance. 

Mr. Dryden bent forward, and tried to raise 
her ; but she shook her head, only clinging to 
his hand, as if its touch gave her hope. 

He was deeply moved by her self-accusation, 
though he shrank from the wildness and aban- 
donment of her grief . shrank both from its 
present manifestation, and from the strength of 
passion it revealed. Her violence seemed more 
to be dreaded than her extravagance. 

Could such an uncontrolled nature as this, he 
asked himself, in shocked silence, ever fulfil 
steadily and calmly the duties of a wife and a 
mother ? He could not understand a tempera- 
ment with which he had no sympathy, but he 
tried to give some comfort. 

He begged her to be calmer . to rise, and 
listen to what he had to say ; for he could not 
talk to her while she remained kneding. And 



126 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Elinor rose humbly, with swollen, stiflTening eye- 
lids, crushed for the moment out of all her 
pride, except that which whispered, her unde 
had not been generous . had not sufficiently 
felt the depth and effort of her humiliation, or 
he would have met it less coldly. 

Is not this one of the severest tests we apply 
to human friendship? Elinor's case was an 
exceptional one, but how often, in confessing a 
minor fault . in confiding our own nervous mis- 
givings, we expect man to be God-like ; and then 
we cry out against want of generosity. There 
are hearts . and when we meet with them, we 
should, if we are wise and grateful, thank God on 
our knees daily for such a boon . which never 
forget that to bear others' burdens, is to fulfil the 
whole law of Christ. But in general, if we must 
bear blame, it is happier for us to resolve to bear 
it bravely and unsupported by human sympathy ; 
and for our misgivings, to trample them deep 
in our hearts, and let them writhe and die there 
silently. 

But Mr. Dryden spoke at last. He told her 
that he believed her ; but then he checked the 
violence with which she tried to show her grati- 



ELINOR AND THE SQUIRE. 127 

tude for this, and asked her to be calm, if she 
could^ and, looking into her own heart, to tell 
him whether, if he trusted her again, he should 
reap the same reward ? 

" Stay, Elinor'* . he spoke more firmly ; and 
he got up from his chair, and went and stood 
opposite to her. " Do not be in a hurry to pro- 
test and vow amendment, for I may only offer 
as a reward what you may esteem less preferable 
than a free life, uncontrolled by me." 

" I have deserved it," she said, sadly ; " but, 
uncle, you could scarcely punish me more bit- 
terly than by such words." 

He was moved deeply at last ; for the firat 
time he thought he saw entire submission. He 
spoke more gently. 

" Listen, if you can, without interruption. It 
seems to me, for I have studied you more deeply, 
perhaps, than you are aware of, that your prin- 
ciples are unfixed to any decided standard of 
judgment, and your temper and impulses wholly 
uncontrolled. You are more than twenty years 
old, Elinor. If you do not want to be the slave of 
your own passions, the sport of any sudden, un- 
govemed impulse all' your life long, you will put 



128 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

yourself to school to-day, and work hard and un- 
tiringly to conquer self. If I did not see in you, 
also, vital energy, and a strong, decided will, 
frankly, I should have little hope of your success ; 
but although you have not absolutely forfeited 
my conditions, I cannot make you heiress of 
Flairs on such a contingency. I must choose 
another representative to bear the responsibility 
with you." 

He bent his eyes keenly on her ; but if she 
felt any shock of disappointment, she was already 
exerting the control he had evoked, for she sat 
passive, her hands lying listleisly in her lap, her 
drooped eyelids still wet with the tears that glis- 
tened on their fringes. 

Mr. Dryden hesitated; there seemed some 
obstacle in the way of his further speech, for he 
walked up and down the room once, while he 
deliberated. 

'* I have some explanation to give you on this 
head," he said at last ; " but I think, for you 
and for me, it will now be more easily written 
than spoken. I will send it to you this evening, 
and you can let me have your answer as you like 



ELINOR AND THE SQUIRE. 129 

best : only, do not decide hastily against any 
proposal I may make to you. Control yourself 
first, and do not be guided by impulse." 

She rose falteringly and turned to go away, 
so unlike her usual queenly self, that his pity 
had a touch of remorse in it. 

He held out his hand, and as she placed hers 
gently in it, she was resolved to show him her 
self-mastery had begun. He drew her nearer 
and kissed her forehead ; then great, hot tears 
rolled down her cheeks, so fast and thickly, that 
she turned hastily away, for fear she should 
again arouse Mr. Dryden's remonstrances. 

Poor blind mortals ! How little these two 
could ever know of each other. Just then she 
might have thrown her arms round him . have 
lightened her heart of its other secret, and he 
would have forgiven her. It was one of Life's 
opportunities for Elinor, and, like all others in 
turn, she missed the tide. 



VOL. TTT. ^ 



CHAPTER III. 



THE PLOTTERS. 



Roland Markham's face was not pleasant to 
behold ; it was always an effort with him to 
keep a sneer off it, and now he made none-^he 
rather seemed to have called the evil spirits in 
from every side, and to have given his features 
up for distortion. Anger {ind baffled cunning 
were there, but below these glowed a revengeful 
passion that expressed itself in his fiery, blood- 
shot eyes. 

He flung a letter down, and dashed his 
clenched fist on it with a noise that startled 
his companion. 



J 



THB PLOTTERS. 131 

" Curse him," he said, " why is he to win 
every race ? why is he to rob and cheat me and 
mine in this fiiir-seeming, honest way, for ever ? 
Confound yoUy James, have you not a word to 
say ? are you going to sit down tamely under 
this?" 

Mr. Fisher had heard from Elinor, and had 
brought the letter to Roland's office. He did 
not wish the contents to reach Adelaide's ears ; 
if she learned that Elinor had broken faith with 
him, she must also learn that faith, had been 
plighted, and that to herself he was only a for- 
sworn traitor; and now that all was over, he 
saw that he had been deceiving himself . that he 
really had loved Elinor, and that he could not 
bear to yield her up without a struggle ; and 
he told Markham so in answer to his ques- 
tion. 

" Then what the devil do you mean to do ?" 

For in his blind rage it seemed monstrous 
that Fisher should have come off straight to 
him, calmly to communicate intelligence which 
ought to have carried him down to Flairs, to 
insist on justice being done to Elinor. 

9.2 



132 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" I don't know," said James ; and again there 
was silence between the two men. 

Silence of anxious thought on the one side, 
utter inability to shape feeling in words on the 
other. 

Just then Markham was furious with the 
whole world . uncontrollably so with his own 
special portion of it, Wentworth Dryden, Mau- 
rice Karse, his daughter Elinor, and Fisher . all 
had wronged him, all had helped, either actively 
or by their passive yielding to the will of others, 
to baulk the darling cherished scheme of re- 
venge, which he had nourished so long. 

The reader is getting impatient, and so it is 
best to say at once the purport of Elinor's 
letter. 

She wrote to her lover that it was not her 
uncle's intention to make her his sole heiress, and 
she therefore released James from his promise ; 
that her uncle had other views for her, and that 
she was determined not to marry against his 
will. 

She exhorted Fisher to remember that any pain 
he now felt would be forgotten if he reflected on 



THE PLOTTERS. 133 

the misery so poor and so extravagant a wife 
would have caused him. " I could not have loved 
a man long," the letter ran, " had I found him 
powerless to gratify all my tastes and wants, nor 
would you be happy under the galling pressure 
and daily mortifications inseparable from^ a 
limited income. Believe me, I am less selfish 
in freeing you now, than you think me." She 
ended by recapitulating her uncle's long con- 
tinued goodness towards her, and asked if it 
would not be most ^ungrateful and unnatural to 
resist his will now. 

No wonder they both felt as perplexed as they 
were angry ; for, underlying this cold-blooded 
reasoning was a tone of deep regret, as if to 
make Fisher feel, that although from the highest 
and purest motives . his own happiness and her 
duty to her uncle . she thus renounced him, still 
that she was the sacrifice . bleeding inwardly 
from the wounds that others might accuse her 
of dealing. 

" And why^ in the name of Heaven, does she 
not write to me?" Roland went on angrily; 
" ril tell you why, Fisher, if you have not found 



134 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

out for yourself . she's afraid to do it. I sup- 
pose you are not quite such a flat as she seems to 
think you are. Fve been making up my mind 
in these last few minutes while you have been 
sitting there arranging your whiskers;" he 
spoke with a concentrated bitterness that both 
startled and annoyed his listener. ** You'll ex- 
cuse the strength of the language^ but you're 
a fool ; you may think I go through the world 
with my eyes shut, but I don't : I told you 
once, that if you played fast and loose with 
Elinor she was not the girl to stand it^ and 
that's just what you have done since her sister 
came home. I have heard of it, and so has 
she, you may depend on it, and when Flairs is 
offered to her with only the penalty of a hus- 
band attached to it . which I expect you will 
find is the real meaning of her letter . she 
throws you overboard. Serves you right !" he 
went on rudely, regardless of Fisher's eager 
words : " you have not behaved well to either of 
the girls, even supposing you care nothing 
about Adelaide ; but you have behaved far worse 
to me, who stood by you all through, even 



THE PLOTTERS. 186 

to the length of buUying that young fellow, 
when I believe he was in real earnest about 
Elinor/' 

" Stop, Markham." Fisher had roused for 
once out of the apathy in which he usually 
passed through life . ^giving offence, as he said, 
to no one. *' You are going too far ; if I fell 
into your plans in this matter, became your 
tool, in fact, it was from love of your daughter, 
not from a mercenary desire to see my wife 
mistress of Flairs ; so far as she is concerned I 
am sorry, very sorry that she should lose her 
expectations, but if she is still willing to abide 
by her engagement to me, I cannot see that 
this loss hinders its fulfilment; in fact, it 
hastens the prospect of such a fulfilment." 

Mr. Markham could not quite control the 
intense surprise his face expressed now. Had 
Fisher then entertained no suspicion of the 
part he would have been called to play as his 
son-in-law? could he for a moment suppose 
that Elinor was fitted for such a sphere as 
that of the wife of a struggling barrister ? his 
singular rapidity of thought checked the rising 



136 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

scorn before it found vent in words ; if James 
were so unsuspecting, and all could yet be de- 
feated, it would be a pity to quarrel utterly . to 
say words that never could be unsaid; if he 
must risk the loss of Flairs he could be revenged 
oh Wentworth Dryden. 

He spoke in a much calmer voice in reply. 

" Well, man, why do you not run down to 
Flairs and say all that to Elinor ? such disin- 
terested love would move a much harder heart 
than hers, I fancy ; do this quietly . keep out 
of Dryden's way you know, and leave off 
flirting with Adelaide, which I frankly tell you 
I object to, and I think you may win Elinor 
yet, and, unless I greatly mistake, live at Flairs 
after all. Have you no suspicion," he turned 
sharply round on his cousin, who was look- 
ing at him with eager interest, " as to who 
the heir must be ? the heir, and as I feel every 
instant more sure, Elinor's destined husband 
also." 

Their eyes met in one long, steady look, but 
Markham stopped the answer that came to 
Fisher's lips. 



THE PLOTTERS. 137 

" Yes, I see you do . the less we talk about 
it the better ; because to Elinor you had best 
know nothing. I think something nnay be 
done, but you must see me again before you go 
to Flairs, and you had better leave me alone 
now ; you see she says sole heiress, which, I 
take it, means that if she won't marry to please 
him he'll only give her half the property ; now 
go, there's a good fellow." 

And Mr. Fisher had no resource but that of 
going away unsettled and discontented; he 
could not bear to yield up Elinor tamely, and 
yet there was truth and sense in what she said ; 
but if there were the slightest chance left 
he would strive his utmost to win her back, 
although the notion of seeking her clandestinely 
at Flairs was an extremely distasteful one ; 
yes, he was convinced now he loved Elinor, and 
therefore he supposed, after what Roland had 
said, he must throw Adelaide over finally ; 
poor little girl, it would be very unkind . he 
knew she prized his visits, and looked forward 
to them ; it seemed both hard and unnecessary 
to deprive her of such an innocent pleasure^ 



133 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

but he could not disregard her father's positive 
prohibition. It was a reprieve that there was 
no immediate need to hurry off to Flairs . 
meantime he could pave the way by writing 
to Elinor. 



\ 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE squire's proposal. 



On the evening following her interview with her 
unde, Elinor received a letter from him. She 
laid it down on the table beside her, and looked 
at it. It seemed to her that the fate of her 
future life was in that sealed envelope . for the 
Squire had said he should wish her to decide 
for herself. 

" And it is something of importance," she 
said sadly, " for he told me not to hurry in 
making up my mind. Oh dear ! what a dif* 
ficult life mine has become lately." 

She leaned her head on her hand ; it ached 



140 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

and throbbed. The excitement of the last few 
hours bad not really tried her so much as the 
strain of expectation during the past week. It 
had come now . the dreaded something she had 
been waiting for, and with it the weary lassitude 
of reaction. 

She stretched out her hand and opened the 
letter sharply. The first words relieved her 
fears. The Squire alluded to her fault, but in 
very gentle words ; he let her see, without ex- 
actly saying so, that the concealment had grieved 
him more than the fault itself; he had trusted 
her fully, he said, and for the future he hoped 
she would so trust him. 

Elinor breathed deeply . " But that would 
have settled the matter, I should have thought 
Whatever has he filled two more pages with ? . 
Oh, I forget, 1 am to decide something." 

The next page was plainly less satisfactory ; 
her brows knit and her cheeks flushed angrily ; 
but when she reached the bottom, she smiled 
a half-flattered, half-vexed look on her bright 
face. 

" Well ! to think of Unde Dryden, of all men, 



THE squire's proposal. 141 

turning match-maker. It is the most ridiculous 
arrangement I ever heard of; . Maurice Karse 
too . whatever could make him choose him? 
Well, I'll finish it before I begin to think." 

The Squire reminded Elinor that he had re- 
served to himself the right of helping her in 
her choice of a husband . a right he said which 
he did not mean to have exerted so soon, but 
these last circumstances had shown him that it 
would not be well for Elinor to be left solely to 
her own guidance should he himself be suddenly 
taken away from her, and he therefore thought 
it better to tell her at once that his choice had 
fixed on Maurice Karse. "In marrying you," 
said the Squire, " he will take the name of Dry- 
den, and I shall consider him, with you, as 
joint inheritor of Flairs. Do not think this pro- 
posal premature or unnatural ; it has been long 
and well considered, and but for what has lately 
happened would have been brought before you 
more gradually ; but my health is much impaired 
Elinor, and it would give me infinite relief to 
see you and Maurice promised to each other at 
once, and to feel that your ftiture was secure. 



142 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

You have seen Maurice, and have conversed with 
him, and I ask you to trust me frilly and entirely. 
If you have taken up against him any decided 
prejudice, it will be better to tell me so at once ; 
but I can scarcely think this is probable. You 
shall not be hurried, nor shall you see Maurice 
more frequently than you wish ; but I remind 
you again that the life of a man of my age is 
uncertain, and it would be a great comfort to 
me to see you promised to each other, without 
delay, and to feel that by complying with my 
wishes in this matter you have secured to your- 
self your position at Flairs." 

" Position at Flairs 1" Elinor was not wholly 
mercenary ; but to give up Flairs, and all her 
long-cherished, long-lived-in dreams of luxury 
and position . to sink at once and for ever into 
a lower sphere of life . ^for she saw that only as 
Maurice's wife could she regain her uncle's con- 
fidence . was a very bitter trial. But would not 
James's love compensate for all ? would it not 
be truly heroic to give up all for his sake ? . 
And then the remembrance of the shifts and 
contrivances and anxieties, daily, petty, wearing 



THE squire's proposal. 14S 

anxieties she had witnessed in her own house, 
came backi and some of the sweetness vanished 
from her cup of bliss. Her uncle stated the 
income he proposed to settle on her in case she 
could not bring herself to fulfil his wishes ; and 
Elinor felt that considering how she had deceived 
him, it was generous beyond her expectation ; 
but still, spite of her deceit about James Fisher, 
she felt angry and deeply mortified. 

She flung the letter away from her, and threw 
herself back in her chair. 

''He tells me to take time to think," she 
said ; " and it is a good thing he does tell me 
so. If I followed my own impulses just now, 
I'd march downstairs to the writing-room, and 
tell him I won't marry a ready-made husband 
to please him or any one. What a detestable 
idea! . it is taking me in, too." 

But when she went to her desk and read the 
carefully preserved letter on which, in her own 
large, clear writing, were the words " Conditions 
of my Heiress-ship f^^ she could not say Uncle 
Dry den had acted unfairly. It was quite possible 
he had always meant her to marry Maurice, and 



144 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

that was why he had bound her so strictly not 
to fall in love with any one else. 

She took up the other letter again. Mr. 
Dryden bade her think well and patiently on 
both sides of the question. What was the 
other ? . 

To marry a man who had shown that he 
loved her passionately ; to be mistress of Flairs, 
and to obey and satisfy her uncle ; in other words, 
to be free and independent for the rest of her life. 

Elinor kept her thoughts steadily fixed on this 
line of argument, and while she did so a hundred 
specious excuses helped her self-conceit. 

She did not state these reasons for rejecting 
James, as I have stated them ; they would have 
sounded practical, utterly matter-of-fact. 

This was the way in which she saw the matter, 
after a long pause of thought. 

She owed an atonement to the Squire, and 
that atonement should be the sacrifice of her 
future life to his will, although that will must 
for ever separate her from the lover of her choice. 
She might in time " learn to love " Maurice ; 
but he could never, never make her as happy as 



THE squire's proposal. 145 

James would have made her. She might be free 
and independent, so far as money was concerned, 
but she should have to submit her will to Maurice's 
. to be a submissive wife. Conscience whispered, 
but so faintly, that she scarcely retained the sense, 
that Maurice would develop every good there 
might be in her far more than her cousin would ; 
but another thought sprang up to claim atten- 
tion . if she professed willingness to be aflianced 
to Maurice, her uncle need never know of this 
other secret, and the last explanation had cost 
her too much shame and humiliation to make 
another endurable, even in anticipation. She 
could consent to obey him with perfect truth. 
There was no need to expose all her past feel- 
ings to Mr. Dryden. When she sacrificed her- 
self so nobly and entirely for his sake, surely she 
had a right to choose her own way of doing so ? 
Did no thoughts of the chill that had come over 
her lately, with regard to Mr. Fisher, help these 
resolutions ? If so, it was unconscious even to 
herself; . but the motives of self-deceit wear 
very white garments of such an opaque texture, 
that it requires a searching eye to detect the 

VOL. III. 10 



}46 ELINOR PRTDEN's roOBATION. 

black realijty that lurks beneath ; and this pro- 
bably hindered Elinor from thinking, as a less 
heroic woman might have thought, of her broken 
faith, or of the blight she might thus cast on 
her rejected lover's life. On the contrary, to- 
wards him even she was self-sacrificing, for how 
could she burden and drag him down into medi- 
ocrity ? Doubtless he would find soma oth^ 

4 

heiress to console him for her loss. 

The prominent thoughts in her mind now, as 
she sat quietly in the morning-room awaiting 
Maurice's arrival, were the noble sacrifice she 
had made to please the Squire, and the expected 
arrival of Maurice Karse; Her uncle had re- 
ceived her submission with entire eonfidenoe ; he 
seemed resolved to try whether full, frank trust 
would not beget its like. He had told her that 
Maurice wa$ not so unequal to her in birth as 
she might imagine ; that he was in fact . 
although from peculiar circumstances it had 
been necessary for 9 time to keep this secret . a 
Dryden, and then his quiet Vletermined look 
came into the Squire's face, and warned linor 
against further questioning. She was surprised ; 



THB squire's proposal. 147 

ai)4 yet ever since she had seen Maurice in 
London her old fir^t imaginings that he wu 
better than he seemed, had at times returned, 
only she had fancied that Ben himself was better 
jbom, and merely lived as he did at Flairs, in 
willing obscurity. 

Maurice a Dryden ! She no longer shrank 
from the idea of seeing him as the death*kneU 
to her feelings for James ; a keen interest was 
awakened in what seemed to her a bit of real 
romance. Had the Squire been ignorant in 
former times of the boy's parentage, and was it 
this discov^y that had made him interest him^- 
self in his education, for from Maurice's own 
admission he owed everything to the Squire ? 

Her thoughts strayed back to the time when 
Maurice had been treated, both by herself and 
her unde, as a gamekeeper's lad . Elinor could 
not resist a slight shudder. Was her uncle 
quite sure now? and then she recalled Mau- 
rice's noble face and lofty bearings and told 
herself these could not exist without gentle 
blood. 

But the day passed away and he did not 

10.2 



148 ELINOR DBTDEN's PROBATION. 

come. Next morning's post brought much 
perplexity both to Elinor and her uncle. 

Mr. Fisher wrote to appeal against her deci- 
sion. He said that if he were perfectly in- 
different to her loss of fortune, surely it need 
not trouble her ? He implored her to see him ; 
he would come down to Flairs whenever she 
pleased, and then he trusted to convince her 
that she was sacrificing them both to a mistaken 
unselfishness, and an overstrained sense of duty. 
Elinor felt herself persecuted ; as it was, it was 
very hard to bear ; why need James write and 
make her task the harder? for although she 
vehemently told herself that his name was 
written on her heart . she might in time like 
Maurice, but he could never efface the remem- 
brance of her former lover. still she had grown 
eager about Maurice's coming, and deeply in- 
terested in the half-revealed mystery that seemed 
to overshadow him. Now she had a remorse 
in thinking of him at all ; James was plainly un- 
happy, and also disposed to question the necessity 
of what she had done. 

But where was the use of disquieting herself? 



THE squirb's proposal. 149 

Elinor decided at last that delightful as it might 
be to take a last farewell of her cousin, still the 
risk would be too dangerous, he must not come 
to Elairs. She had made up her mind once, 
why not close it firmly against such appeals? 
they could but harrow her feelings and increase 
the efforts of her sacrifice. No, she was in the 
path of duty, she would follow it to the end. 

She sat down directly she left the breakfast- 
table, and wrote a firm refusal to James's offer 
of coming down to Elairs. 



CHAPTER V- 

ROLAND MARKHAM's DISCOVERt. 

The same post that carried Elinor's first letter 
to her rejected lover, broilght to Maurice Karse 
a summons from Mr. Dryden to start as sooa 
'as possible for Flairs. 

The letter was kindly worded, but was more 
peremptory than explicit ; it merely asked him 
to come with as little delay as possible, and said 
that the Squire wished him to remain for some 
time. Th6 last words were very unwelcome. 
To leave Cecil just as he had won her to love 
him, to move out of the warm sunshine of her 
presence into the cold stately atmosphere that 



ROLAND MARK^AM's DISCOVERT. 151 

^as iDsepsffable from Mr. Drydeni seemed im- 
possible at first. 

The lovers bad taken Miss Brownlow into their * 
confidence ; but when Maurice proposed to speak 
to bis tutor, she interfered, and. told him to 
leave all to her . Erasmus must see how things 
were going on, and that it was better he should 
fid out for himself, meantime she would pre- 
pare the way. 

" I will let ydu know as soon as I have talked 
to him," she said ; " that will give you time, 
Maurice, to get a litde speech ready ^ and rattle 
it off without any stammering/' 

Being resolved in her own mind to interpret 
her brother's silence as consent, she thought tbe- 
longer it was left undisturbed^ the better ^ 
honestly, her courage failed her novi^ that fnat* 
ters Were settled, for good and excellent as he 
waSj Erasmus had turned restive on h^ hands 
beffore now, and if h^ retained any rea>embrance 
ol that unlucky letter of Mr. Dryden's he 
might compromise matters greatly ; probably 
his first step woiidd be to send Cecil back to 
Flairs. 



152 ELIKOB DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

When Maurice told them at dinner-time of 
his summons. Miss Brownlow felt for once 
checkmated ; had rasmus been sly enough to 
write and warn the Squire, and was Maurice 
sent for to be lectured, and probably placed with 
another tutor? She could hardly believe the 
last suggestion, for she knew how anxious her 
brother was to send his pupil direct from him 
to Oxford. 

To her surprise, both Mr. Brownlow and 
Cecil urged Maurice to start at once for Flairs, 
without delaying for another day, and when the 
lovers were left alone together, Cecil continued 
to wish what Maurice declared to be impos- 
sible. 

** You do not know the Squire as well as I 
do, dearest/' she said, clasping both her little 
hands round his arm, while he stood looking 
down into her fair upturned face, wondering if 
he were dreaming, or if such a prize were really 
his ; '' you may have known him as long as I 
have, and yet from all you say, you do not 
understand him so well; he hates to be 
deceived or thwarted. I do so wish that you 



ROLAND MARKHAM's DISCOVERT. 153 

would go to him at once, to-day even, and tell 
him openly of our love/' 

And while Maurice was assuring her that he 
meant to have no secrets from Mr. Dryden, and 
was reproaching her also for her impatience to 
send him from her, words were passing almost 
within hearing that were to change the whole 
story of his life. 

As Mr. Brownlow crossed the hall, the street 
door was being opened, and he found himself 
face to face with Roland Markham. 

They had just a bowing acquaintance, Mr. 
Brownlow having studiously avoided any inti- 
macy with his patron's brother-in-law. 

Erasmus gave such a look of dismay at his 
unexpected visitor, that a less impudent man 
would have hesitated before he forced an unwel- 
come entrance ; but Markham had shaken the 
philosopher heartily by the hand before he could 
recover himself, and then looking towards the 
study door on the right as if he knew by instinct 
where to go, he said . 

** Can you give me two minutes ? I really 
won't detain you longer." 



164 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

As soon as the door was safely shut on them, 
he said he had business of importance to com- 
municate to Mr. Maurice Karse, whom he be- 
lieved to be an inmate of Mr. Brownlow's house. 

Erasmus hesitated. Ho did not like what 
he had heard of this man ; but still Maurice was 
no longer a child-^he must mix with good and 
evil in the world, and learn to distinguish for 
himself. 

*' I will send him if he can spare the time, 
but I believe he is going down into the country 
this afternoon. 

Markham could scarcely suppress an excla- 
mation . he was on the right track. 

** Yes, I knew it/' he said, " that is just what 
I wanted to see him about. Perhaps if he goes 
to-day he would trouble himself with a small 
commission for my daughter, who, I believe, 
you are aware, lives with her uncle, Mr. Dryden, 
of Flairs." 

Mr. Brownlow was taken by surprise, but 
his simple dreamy nature was not fitted to read 
Markham's. He understood the words to udeAn 
only what they stated. 



ROLAND MaAKHAH's DlStOVZtt. 155 

" Yes, yes," he answered, " I had the pleasure 
of being introdnced to Miss Dryden in the 
winter; if I may presume t6 stty so, she is 
one of the most charming young ladies I ever 
saw." 

"I believe that's ft general opinion," said 
Roland. He was trying to decide whether it 
Would be wise to Sound Erasmus as to Maurice's 
feelings; but no, pupils and tutors were not 
Dkely to know each other's secrets. "Then 
you think your young friend will give me half a 
minute ?" 

He looked at the clock on the mantelpiece 
itnpatiently. He knew that if Maurice meant 
to reach Flairs that evening he would soon be 
on his way to the railway station ; and unless 
he had thoroughly deceived himself, he had that 
to tell the young man which wotild separate 
bkn from Flairs for ever. 

Erasmus saw the look, and left; the room to 
&tch Maurice, while Markham once more ran 
over his own chain of evidence, to make sure 
that there was no missing or defective link. 

To find Mauribe starting for Flairs had riveted 



166 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

conviction on his morning's speculations. From 
the time James Fisher left him he had perse- 
veringly followed out the suspicions aroused by 
Elinor's letter. At, first it was all darkness ; 
although his thoughts had naturally flown to 
Maurice, still he could give himself no tangible 
reason for the surmise. All his own and 
Fisher's efforts had failed to discover that the 
West Indian Dryden had left any child . had 
married, even. Who, then, was this heir, who 
was to be foisted into the property, and to whom 
Elinor was to be sacrificed, for she had under- 
lined the word " sole " in her letter, therefore 
there must be some one with whom she was to 
share the property. But he could find no due 
to lead him forward ; he seemed to be only 
pulling at a loose thread, thereby tangling the 
skein into a confused and inextricable mass. 

With all his dislike to Wentworth Dryden, 
in his secret heart he had looked on him as an 
open adversary ; but this . supposing it to be 
what he feared . seemed a deep, well-laid 
scheme; it would fulfil Elinor's expectations, 
but how ? in such a manner as to exclude all in- 



ROLAND MARKHAm's DISCOYERT. 157 

terference or participation on her father's part, 
vioxxld make her, in fact, entirely dependent on 
her husband, who would doubtless be bound 
over by the Squire to hold him, Roland, at a 
safe distance for ever. 

There was yet another hypothesis. Some- 
how . he could scarcely have told in what shape 
the information had reached him . he had 
learned that, since the fever at Starby, Dryden 
had become a changed man. It might be that 
in the fervour of what Mr. Markham was 
pleased to call his " middle-aged saintship/' he 
thought of selling the property after his death, 
and bequeathing its proceeds to hospitals or 
charities, or " some of the other Tomfooleries 
that plunder relatives of their dues now-a-days." 

But this accorded ill with all that he had 
heard of the Dryden pride of race. The Squire 
could never brook that aliens in name as well 
as blood should stand in his place ; besides, 
there were Elinor*s words plainly pointing at 
some marriage planned by her uncle. Some- 
thing was under all this, something which pos- 
sibly had been long in existence, but to which 



158 eui^qr[j)rtpen's PR09ATIOM4 

he had been bliuded by the certainty he felt 
about Elinor. He did not waste his time in 
conjectures as to the possibility of any sudden 
rupture between herself and her uncle ; he be- 
lieved that both he and his daughter had been 
systematically deceived throughout, and that as 
she was nearly twenty-one, Dryden had thought 
it best to prepare her for the shock that mu^ 
then come upon her. Markham forgot that 
she WHS not to attain her majority for two years 
longer. 

But why had Elinor broken off her engage- 
ment? His first idea that her disinheritance 
was in some way connected with her marriage, 
was, he felt sure, a step towards finding out 
Dryden's secret, for after qiore than an hour's 
thought it had come back. 

Stop . ^a glimmering shone through crevices 
of doubt . would it not come more distinctly ? . 
yes, it was coming . it was coming. He held 
his head tightly grasped in both hands, his eyes 
closed, fearing, but not allowing himself to feel 
the fear of distraction, following along with 
rapid, stealthy dexterity the due, the con- 



EOLANP MABKH All's DISCOVERY. 159 

victioD now which he was resolved to put to the 
test. 

People had often said that a mystery bung 
over Mr. Dryden ; but this to Markham had 
hitherto meant no more than that he had made 
a loveless marriage^ and had been bitterly dis- 
appointed to be left so soon a childless widower. 
Now he asked himself if there might not be a 
mystery after all, and if there might not have 
been a reason for Mrs. Dryden*s undisguised 
unhappiness. Was Maurice Wentworth Dry- 
den's unacknowledged son, and had his mother 
stood between the Squire and the love he owed 
his wife ? 

And as the idea grew into distinctness, Mark- 
ham's passion became uncontrollable. He put 
a strong curb on himself to prevent its issue in 
words that might have been overheard in the 
outer office. 

But it must cut the knot of the difficulty. 
He felt sure that Elinor's proud spirit would 
not stoop to such a marriage, and that Went- 
worth Dryden would not dare to leave^ Flairs 
solely to Maurice, if he were threatened with 



160 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

exposure. Did the young man know his own 
position ? And as Markham recalled the lofty 
tone in which Maurice had referred him to Mr. 
Dryden when he questioned his right to visit at 
his house, he decided in the negative. In an 
instant the power of keen, intense revenge on 
Went worth Dryden showed itself to his greedy 
sight ; he could have shouted for joy. 

Here was the end of the clue he had been so 
long and patiently seeking for. 

He started up and took his hat. He must 
see the hoy at once . tell him the disgrace of his 
birth, and sow hatred between him and his 
father. 

And then he hesitated. What did he know 
of this young Karse? He might rejoice in 
finding himself the son of a rich man on any 
terms. Perhaps in his secret heart Roland 
Markham thought that with no legitimate heir 
to bar his way to parental affection, it would be 
merely fastidious pride that would resent the 
wrong done to bis mother. I do not say Mr. 
. Markham would have felt this in his own case, 
but it is one of the wonderful parts of us human 



ROLAND MABKHAM'S DISCOVERT. 161 

beings, that although we always expect our 
Deighbours to see facts and opinions through 
our medium, in scanning their motives and con- 
duct we rarely use the same metre we employ 
for our own. 

But Markham felt that this was a question 
that only personal inquiry could solve. He 
thought even if he found Maurice willing to 
bear the stain of illegitimacy, he might yet 
foment discord between him and his father. 
If he could persuade him to one open act of 
disobedience or rebellion to the narrow, iron 
rule which he considered the Squire exercised 
so unrighteously over all around him, he be- 
lieved he should destroy Maurice's chances, and 
that if Elinor then strove hard she might seciu*e 
the position she had so justly looked forward to 
as a right. 

His first step must be to see Maurice, and 
learn from him how far he was cognisant of 
what was happening at Flairs, and then how 
much he really knew about himself. This 
was to be the master-stroke of his life, and no 
hurry or excitement must rob him of a fraction 

VOL. III. ] I 



162 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

of the clear-sightedness he knew he could prac- 
tice whea necessary. 

He was very self-possessed and calm when he 
reached Mr. Brownlow's door ; but this sudden 
news of Maurice's journey, and the confirmation 
it gave to his suspicions, almost broke the strong 
rein he had laid on his impetuosity. 

On his way to the house he had recalled his 
last interview with young Karse, and it seemed 
to him that he had some apology to offer for 
his behaviour ; but pride had never come in 
Markham's way in his life, when he had a special 
end to serve. Now, as he stood waiting for 
Maurice, he asked himself again why Wentworth 
l)ryden had adopted Elinor, if he had never 
meant to make her his heiress, and the answer 
came clearly and distinctly. 

" I have been robbed of my child ! that she 
may be brought up for the wife of his bastard,** 
.he muttered a deep oath, . "to be used as a 
cat's paw, as a mere conveyance to transfer the 
property where he dared not have settled it 
legally. By Heavens ! I'll baulk him yet, let 
the cost be what it will." 



CHAPTER VI. 



A REVELATION. 



The door opened briskly, and Maurice came in. 
Roland saw in an instant that he was neither 
forgiven nor forgotten ; bat he saw too enough 
in the determination and frankness of the noble 
young face to give him hope that Maurice might 
prove, skilfully used, his best weapon against his 
father. For as he looked at him, he saw or 
fancied he saw a resemblance, not to Mr. Dryden 
himself, but to his own wife's father . the 
haughty old man who had so sternly refused 
forgiveness to his disobedient child. Only the 
dark eyes and brown hair were unlike those of 

11.2 



164 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

the fair-haired race whose pictures he remem- 
hered to have seen in his youth. 

He stepped forward at once to meet Maurice, 
and with a smile that likened him strangely to 
Elinor, he made a full and hearty apology for his 
conduct at their last interview, taking the oppor- 
tunity to lay the first stone of the barrier he in- 
tended to set up between him and his daughter. 
He said that he was worried beyond endurance 
when Mr. Karse called ; that he also knew that 
another person was devoted to Elinor, and also, 
..here he paused and looked hard into the 
young man's eyes ; to his utter surprise they 
expressed neither anger nor disappointment ; so 
he went on, resolved to see if the indiflference 
were real or feigned . and also to whom he had 
strong reasons for believing that his daughter 
was equally attached.^ 

A strange quick look of inquiry shone out of 
Maurice's eyes, but not a shade of r-egret showed 
itself, either in voice or manner, as he frankly 
accepted Mr. Markham's excuses. 

Here was one fear laid at rest. Here was 
one motive the less to incline the young man to 



A REVELATION. 165 

obedience. But he felt be must go on now to 
tbe other questions, for Maurice was evidently 
hurried . be had not even sat down. 

" I have one or two things to ask you/' said 
Roland in a soft, subdued voice, '* if you can 
spare tbe time to listen to them. I will not 
detain you long." 

Maurice was greedy of the last minutes thus 
robbed from Cecil ; but he sat down in a sort of 
resigned sulkiness. 

" You are on the point of starting for 
Flairs r 

'' Yes ;" and then half-ashamed of bis moodi- 
ness, Maurice said carelessly, ''Mr. Dryden 
wishes to see me at once." 

"Ah . a sudden summons . I see," said 
Roland. 

Something in the tone, or it might have been 
the consciousness that he had spoken of his 
private affairs to a person so strange to him as 
Roland Markham, brought back Maurice's 
thoughts from their wandering. He looked at 
Markham, and then he saw that he had not 
come merely to make an apology for his rude* 



166 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

ness, nor, as his tutor had told him, to ask him 
to undertake a commission to Elinor. 

Roland felt too, that the game was fairly 
started ; he had only to bring it down cautiously. 

** I am going to put a question which, from 
me, must sound very uncalled for, but which, as 
it nearly touches your interests, I should be glad 
to have answered freely ; have you any idea 
why you are sent for ?" 

.He still spoke very softly, and Maurice telt a 
strange sensation of coming evil mingle with his 
dislike of this man ; he hesitated a minute. 

'' No, only that I have not been at Flairs for 
some time, probably Mr. Dryden wishes to see 
more of me than he has as yet done.'' 

'* He has not seen much of you, then ? I 
thought you told me you had always lived near 
him . I fancied even that you referred me to 
him. that he knew all about you." 

His dreaminess had left Maurice now; he 
looked hard at Markham. 

'' You must excuse me, but unless you have 
any very important reason for all these questions 
Vm afraid I cannot enter into them." 



A REVELATION. 167 

Roland Markham bore the haughty look and 
tone with unruffled composure, but he had to 
keep a tight rein on his upper lip just then, as 
he thought how soon he could lower this young- 
ster's pride. 

" You can best tell me whether they are or 
are not pertinent questions, Mr. Karse ; if you 
are thoroughly and entirely acquainted with your 
own family history, they are, of course, merely 
oflScious suggestions, but if you are not, then 
perhaps they are worth answering." 

He looked so serious, so confident in his own 
knowledge, that Maurice felt thrilled with the 
strange, awful sensation we have all gone 
through on the brink of a revelation. For an 
instant his good angel whispered him to wait, to 
ask any questions he had to ask at Flairs, but 
then how little he understood the Squire; if 
this man really could tell him anything about 
himself, might not such knowledge help in the 
explanation he meant to ask for as soon as pos- 
sible after his arrival. He was only twenty, 
and had seen little of the world. 

'* I possibly did tell you I had always lived at 
Flairs . I was brought up there, but not by Mr. 



 



168 ELINOR DRYDEM's PROBATION. 

Dryden, though . " he hesitated now, for it 
seemed like a betrayal of Ben's confidence, and 
yet, if this man knew all about him, he 
must be aware of the relationship his old 
friend had revealed; still he hesitated . then 
strung up to determination by the expres- 
sion he saw lurking in Markham's face, he 
said impatiently : ** I think, instead of ques- 
tioning me, if you mean well to me you had 
better be frank, and say exactly what you may 
have heard about me. I will set you the example, 
Mr. Markham. I know scarcely anything about 
myself. I have always been an orphan." 

Just then Markham would have given his 
right hand for a calm, unmoved spirit ; his 
blood coursed along with such lightning-like 
rapidity that the mad pulse-beats in his throat 
and temples confused thought. 

Strive as he would he knew that a tell-tale 
gladness must be glittering in his eyes. 

He looked down on the carpet ; was it only 
from fear of exposing his own emotions? or 
was there lingering, somewhere in his heart, a 
reluctant pity for the honest manliness he was 
about to crush into shame ? 



A REVELATION. 169 

"I will do as you ask," he said, " if you will 
answer this one question. Am I to understand 
that Mr. Dryden has taken sole charge of your 
education and bringing up ?" 

" Yes, I believe so." 

With all his assumed self-command, and his 
assurance of its positive necessity, Markham 
could not restrain the peculiar whistling sound 
by which he expressed significant surprise ; but 
it had more effect than he expected. 

" I have answered you, Mr. Markham," . the 
veins in Maurice's forehead swelled round and 
blue as his passion rose, . " and now I shall be 
glad if you will say plainly what you mean, 
without any more beating about the bush." 

" I mean this," . and as Maurice stood up, tall 
and defiant, his proud, young head thrown back, 
and his eyes fixed sternly on his companion, 
Markham rose too, feeling that the time for self- 
restraint was over, and that he might, at last, 
give his tongue freedom ; . " that you must have 
been very blind not to have suspected, long ago, 
the secret of the Squire's interest in you . who 
but he could have had any interest in your life, 



170 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

or in keeping your birth a mystery ?'* Then, 
seeing the utter bewilderment of Maurice's face, 
he went on, " I beg your pardon, I fancied you 
knew all, and were trying to deceive me, or I 
would have been less abrupt." 

" Knew all what ?" Maurice's voice was thick 
and hoarse ; he grasped Markham's arm as if 
he feared he*would escape him. 

Roland was brave, physically, but he dared 
not trifle longer with passion like this. 

"That Wentworth Dryden is your own 
father." 

The hold on his arm was loosed, for Maurice*s 
hand dropped nerveless to his side. 

He stood there with widely- opened eyes and 
parted lips . striving to gather in the sense of 
the words whose full meaiting did not at first 
reach him . he seemed to be waiting for some 
explanation, but Roland was resolved he should 
speak. 

" I don't understand you ;" Maurice said 
slowly, in a dreamy voice, that showed how far 
his consciousness was from the present. 

"I wish to Heaven you did, then, Mr. 



. REVELATION. 171 

Karse;" Roland laid a pitying emphasis on 

the name that seemed to rouse his listener. 

" I told you a plain fact which, in my opinion, 

you ought to have been told long ago ; you say 

you have always been an orphan . I can't tell 

you who your mother was . " the tiger-flash in 

the youth's eyes warned him that he began to 

comprehend at last, . " but the Squire of Flairs 

is your father ; although, of course, you have 

no right to the name of Dryden." 

 

Even to the last he kept his voice steady, lest 
any, the least, exultation should make his 
listener suspect the truth of what he had told 
him. 

He stole a glance at him to see how he bore 
it. The blood had mounted to his temples, for 
even his forehead was crimsoned, but there was 
no visible agitation on his face. 

He had fdlen a little way back from Mark- 
ham, when he let go his arm, but now he 
walked close up to him, and looked at him 
resolutely, in the eyes. 

"You have come here, to-day, Mr. Mark- 
ham, for the purpose of telling me that I am 



172 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

Mr. Dryden's illegitimate sod ;" his face turned 
deadly white as he said the words, " but I can 
scarcely make out why you have done so ; be- 
fore you leave this room you will be kind 
enough to tell me your motive." 

His manner was threatening, and Roland's 
anger rose. 

*' I have never submitted to Wentworth 
Dryden," he said, insolently, " and I'm not now 
going to submit to . you . but I meant to an- 
swer the question you have put of my own free 
will. I told you of the disgrace attached to 
your birth because I do not choose you to marry 
my daughter, and I do you the justice to think 
that such a stigma would silence your hopes 
about her; now I will not detain you any 
longer." 

He went out of the room, but Maurice 
scarcely noticed that he was gone; he stood 
still, the waters of misery had closed over his 
head: sight . hearing . all outward sensations 
lay deadened under the cold, heavy pressure. 

How long he stood there he never knew, or 
when he staggered into a chair. Mr. Brown- 



A REVELATION. 173 

low was absorbed in writing in the opposite 
room, as unconscious as Maurice of Markham's 
departure. It was time to start on his journey ; 
but still the leaden pressure arresting thought 
either of the past, or for the future, continued. 
I said the waters of misery had closed over him, 
and there was the sightlessness and the gurgling 
noise in his ears and throat, which made the 
image real. 

It was all darkness and bewilderment ; and 
then he seemed suddenly to wake into the full 
agony of consciousness, when Cecil came up to 
him. 

She stole into the room so. gently that she 
did not disturb him. His back was towards 
the door, and she began laughingly to tease him 
for his delay, and told him her aunt said he had 
not a minute to lose if he wished to catch the 
train. But she saw his , face now . it was 
death-like, and its fixed rigidity made it still 
more unlike life than even its ghastly white- 
ness. 

In a moment she was kneeling beside him, 
dasping->his cold hands in both hers, and pressing 



174 ELINOR DBYDEN's PROBATION. 

them against her heart, as if she would quicken 
sensation by the rapidity of her own life-blood. 

Her touch was electrical. Light shone into 
his eyes, the paleniess faded off his face, and for 
a moment he returned the pressure of those 
soft, loving hands, so fondly striving to bring 
warmth into his own. 

Then he flung them both from him, and 
looked into Cecil's face with such a horror of 
agony as he might have had after the commission 
of a crime. 

But Cecil was not utterly terrified. She was 
shocked and frightened,'for she feared that either 
some serious calamity had befallen Maurice, or 
that he was very ill; but he was her own, and 
nothing could evermore make her shrink from 
him. Before he could repulse her, she had 
thrown both arms round him, and looking up 
in his face, implored him to tell her what had 
happened. 

She felt the strong frame against which she 
leaned quivering, and then came deep, heart- 
breaking sobs . sobs Cecil had never heard be- 
fore . the helpless cry of a heart that as yet can- 



A REVELATION. 175 

not find vent in tears. She would not let him 
see her terror, yet more closely and fondly she 
wound her arms round him, pressing her cheeks 
against his, and soothing him with all the fond 
words that come to a woman's lips, when she 
tries to comfort. 

For a moment he stood passive, not return- 
ing her embrace, but still suffering it: then 
writhing, as if stung to madness, he held her 
from him by both arms, and stood, looking 
down into her fair, upturned face. 

The sweet eyes were glistening with fast 
coming tears, though the quivering nostrils and 
slightly compressed lips showed how bravely she 
was striving to repress them. There was a som- 
bre passion, a remorseful sorrow in his face, 
that would hsyve made any but a true woman 
shrink from him ; but, fearless in her own truth, 
she thought only of him, and how she might 
best calm his grief. 

For a moment neither spoke. Then Cecil 
tried to smile up in his face. 

" Maurice, dear, dearest ! tell me what this 
is . what is this sorrow that has come upon us ?" 



176 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

*'Us!" he laid a bitter, mocking emphasis 
on the word. " You and I must separate, Ce- 
cil ; there is no tia now, and you must ask no 
question, for I have no answer . none" . ^he 
spoke sharply and sternly, he saw soft, pleading 
words forming on the rosy lips ; " none that I 
dare give you, except that I am utterly base . 
utterly unworthy of your love 1" 

He released her arms while he spoke, and 
turned away. 

Just as he reached the door, he looked at 
her, and Cecil spoke . she had a hard battle 
to keep back her tears, but she did keep them 
back. 

" Maurice, dearest ! come back ! If you have 
ever loved me at all, will you answer me one 
question ?" 

He looked round wearily. He could not 
resist the soft, pleading words, though angry 
with himself for his own weakness. He had 
meant that to have been his last look at Cecil 
Brownlow, but the agony and choking tears in 
her voice would be listened to. She went on, 
trembling more and more. 



A REVELATION. 177 

" Are you parting from me for any fault of 
mine . or is it because you have left off loving 
me . or " 

But she could not finish. All the woman's 
pride she had tried to summon at this sudden 
rejection, deserted her. Till that moment she 
had not known what Maurice's love was to her, 
or how completely her soul had ^one out of her- 
self, to mingle with his. She could not see 
him now, for the hot, blinding tears streamed 
forth with sobs that almost stifled. 

His stubborn face, had never melted at her 
words, it softened now, but Cecil could not see. 
Quick, burning shame, came with the vehement 
passion of grief; and the tears streamed throngh 
the hands that hid her eyes. 

Then she felt his strong arms round her . 
felt herself held tightly . so tightly, to his heart, 
that its fierce beats were almost painful, while 
one hand pressed her head against his bosom. 

He did not speak, but Cecil's dread was past. 
She might soothe him now . he loved her ! He 
was hers still ! 

She felt hot, heavy drops, falling on her hair, 

VOL. III. 12 



178 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

and she thanked God in her heart . for she bad 
feared for Maurice's reason. 

But when, as she felt his heart throbs lessen, 
she ventured gently to raise her head and look 
up, she saw still the same agony of sorrow. 

Slowly, very slowly, helped more by her own 
quick divination than by his reluctant words, 
she drew from him Roland Markham's asser- 
tion ; and then, when he suddenly felt she had 
divined it, Maurice again put. her away from him, 
and told her they must be strangers . that she 
was too pure to share the fortunes and life of an 
outcast. 

Cecil's eyes flashed brightly up into his, but 
he turned away, as if the cloud of shame which 
must be ever his portion, had already settled per- 
manently between them. 

" Shame on you, Maurice 1" she said ; *^you 
would brand your own mother with disgrace, 
without decided proof! No, I will not believe 
this story. Your mother may have been wronged 
. too easily deceived . but never guilty 1" She 
went up to him and took possession of one of 
his hands. ^* You shall not cast me from you. 



A REVELATION. 179 

Maurice ; even if this be true, do you think I 
could leave you ? Is there no Heaven for out- 
cast children, that you should hinder me from 
trying to make your life, while I can, a Heaven 
on Earth ?" 



12.2 



CHAPTER VIL 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD. 



When Elinor had finished the letter in which 
she forbade Mr. Fisher's visit to Flairs, she felt 
puzzled how to dispose of it. The weather was 
stormy and wild, rain falling in streams, that 
made it impossible for her to leave the house 
without exciting an observation she did not 
care to tempt, and yet, unless she could meet 
the postman, she must place her letter in the 
open post-bag, and this hung all day long at the 
top of the back staircase, just outside her uncle's 
juscice-room. For some time past she had been 
conscious that Northover watched her more 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD. 181 

keenly than ever, and when she had placed her 
last letter to James in the bag, she had turned 
round and found the housekeeper suddenly 
coming up-stairs^ although she had not heard a 
previous foot-fall. Was it possible that her 
uncle had set this woman as a spy upon her 
actions? No, this was impossible. It was 
more likely that Northover was curious to find 
out whether Mr. Dryden's unusual seclusion had 
been caused by any quarrel with his niece; 
Elinor had always feared the sly determination 
of this woman's eyes, and she shrank from 
putting herself in her power, just at what 
seemed the climax of her fate. 

She walked up atid down the room in rest- 
less anxiety, and then there came a light tap at 
the door, and Northover appeared. 

By an instinct . which she repented when it 
was over . Elinor threw a loose sheet of blotting- 
paper over her unfinished letter. The hawk- 
like eyes looked keener than ever, and the lips 
screwed themselves so closely as almost to be- 
come invisible. 

Bift Northover seemed merely to have come to 



182 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

make one of her usual complaints against the flir- 
tations of Elinor's maid, which she aflSrmed were 
disturbing the morality of the household, and 
were a sort of thing Flairs wasn't used to. 

" Though what the men caa see in her, is 
more than I can tell. It isn't that she's got 
any looks to spaVe^ . a little undersized scrap of a 
thing, as dark as a beetle, too, and it isn't, so 
far as I see, that she's much to say for herself, 
unless in her own outlandish talk, . it's her 
tricks that do it." 

" What do you mean by tricks, Northover ? 
You seem desperately hard on poor Fran9oise." 

" There then, ma'am, I mean the w^ay she's 
got of throwing up her eyes just at the right 
time, and clasping her hands together, and 
shrugging up her shoulders, and always having 
a smile ready for every one ; it's quite irritating, 
just as if sober-minded, respectable folks can 
keep a stock of ready-made smiles always fit 
for use ; and if you'll believe me, she takes in 
all the men by what they call her sweet ways . 
nasty tricks, I call 'em. The single men I've 
nothing to do with, though they are fools for their 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD. 183 

pains, for she'll throw 'em away like a pan of 
skim-milk when she's tired of 'em, but the married 
ones are as bad. I believe now, if that girl 
held up her finger, they'd every man John of 'em 
run to London and back.'* 

" Well then, I hope they will not," said Elinor 
calmly, " or there will be no one left to bring in 
dinner ; but Northover, I cannot see how I can 
interfere with the men, and I ought not to be dis- 
turbed with stories about them. It seems to 
me that as housekeeper, all this devolves on 
you. As you bring no specific charge against 
Fran^oise, I must decline mixing myself up in 
the matter." 

" Very well, ma'am ; very well, Miss Dryden, 
of course if you countenance such conduct, 
things will be worse still, but my opinion is, you 
should dismiss her at once, if you wish to pre- 
vent scandal." 

The housekeeper looked wrathful, and 
Elinor hesitated. She would have made some 
sacrifice to keep the peace with her, but she 
could not part with Frangoise, the girl had such 
perfect taste, and was unusually clever and dex- 



184 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

trous ; besides, she bad posted too many letters 
to James Fisher to make it wise to send her 
away until Elinor's own future was quite safe. 
No, she must try and calm Northover. 

" Scandal, Northover ? you take things up 
80 strongly ; remember you were young once 
yourself, and liked attention, and all that sort 
of thing, no doubt ; be reasonable. Is it not 
fair to let the young ones have their turn too ? 
I expect in your time you had plenty of admi- 
ration r* 

And having made the eflfort of paying what 
she considered an extravagant compliment to a 
plain, middle-aged woman, Elinor bent over her 
desk again. 

If she had looked round, she might have felt 
more disquieted even than before the house- 
keeper's entrance. 

Northover drew herself up, throwing her head 
back with a jerk that would have been uncom- 
fortable to one unused to the habit. She looked 
very pale, and stood still a minute, then she 
seemed to decide that no answer was necessary, 
and left the room in silence. 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD. 185 

Her veins must surely have been filled with 
quicksiltrer that day, she seemed to be perpetu- 
ally fetching and carrying some imperceptible 
article between her room at the foot of the back 
staircase, and her bed-chamber at the top of its 
second flighty and each time . unless some one 
happened to be passing . she peeped into the 
letter- bag. 

The stormy day, full of rain and wind, to 
which the lead coloured, swiftly moving clouds 
gave no hope of abatement, had caused, as it 
seemed, a general restlessness in the household 
of Flairs. 

Mr. Dryden was in his writing-room, but he 
was no longer still and calm. 

The morning's post had brought him a letter 
from Maurice, and after reading it, his agitation 
had been terrible. Anger and fear and keen 
disappointment distracted him by turns, but 
beyond all these was the gnawing remorse that 
by his own act he had forfeited that which he 
dreaded it was now too lalfe to reclaim. 

The letter was short and respectful, but its 
determination could not be mistaken. Maurice 



186 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

thanked the Squire for all the benefits he had 
bestowed on him, but for the future he wished to 
make his own way in the world ; if what he had 
been told were true, the Squire would not be at 
a loss to understand his conduct : the only way of 
proving its falsehood would be at once to tell him 
who he really was, and the names of both his 
parents. But if it were true, he wished to be 
spared such a confirmation of disgrace, only he 
must know if the name of Karse were really 
his own. 

At first it seemed to Mr. Dryden that the 
secret he had kept at the cost of his life's 
happiness, had been betrayed . but by whom ? 
Had he talked in his sleep ? Had his papers 
been ransacked ? This was only the first hurried 
questioning of surprise; he knew that both were 
impossible means of betrayal in a man of his 
peculiarly cautious habits, his only confidant had 
been the picture of his dead wife, as he read 
the letter again, its meaning struck him from a 
new point of view: Maurice had been told 
some falsehood, or he could not have still sup- 
posed his name to be Karse. 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD* 187 

Some one had been at work, and why should 
he call the boy foolish and proud ? Was not 
the last fatal gift his right by inheritance ? 

Gradually, as anger and disappointment soft- 
ened and gave place to thought, he began to 
search back for a clue to this change in Maurice. 
It came with the suddenness of light. 

Roland Markham was the only person who 
would take the trouble to mar his plans. He 
had proved himself what the Squire had always 
suspected him to be . a cunning, unscrupulous 
liar. 

And yet, what motive could have prompted 
him ? The Squire had heard from Mr. Brown- 
low of his pupil's acquaintance with the Mark- 
ham family; and much as he disliked his 
brother-in-law, he had thought it well for 
Elinor and Maurice to have the opportunity of 
meeting. Although for some years past he 
had planned their union, he had purposely 
avoided all mention of Maurice to his niece ; till 
the discovery of her debts, and her want of truth 
showed him how little hold he possessed on her 
confidence, be had not thought of hurrying 



188 ELINOR DRYDEN'S PROBATION. 

matters ; but when that came it had seemed to 
him wiser to ascertain at once if his plan for the 
disposal of Flairs could be carried out, and to 
make himself sure of Elinor's obedience for the 
future. 

But Roland Markham knew nothing of all this. 
The Squire had forbidden Elinor to write to her 
father until all was settled between herself and 
Maurice ; and he could not bear to doubt her 
after their last interview in the writing-room . 
even supposing that Markham kept a spy among 
the household, who had in some way gleaned 
the substance of what was happening . he could 
not see his motive for interference. Surely the 
inheritance of Flairs was what he coveted most 
for his daughter. 

But he had no time to lose in reflection. 
His own tenure of life was most uncertain. 

Maurice must be master of Flairs, and the 
only way of securing this quietly and without 
arousing an inquiry which would have disturbed 
the Squire's pride was his marriage with Elinor. 
And why should not their marriage . at any rate 
their betrothal . take place at once ? Only a 



NORTHOVER ON OUARD. 189 

few days ago, he had himself thought Elinor full 
of charm and fascination ; and what had she done 
to forfeit his good opinion ? She had been foolish 
and extravagant, but then (so his wishes argued) 
all women were the first and perhaps the last also, 
if they had spirit and opportunity. He had told 
her once that she should always remain at Flairs, 
if she married to please him and did not entangle 
herself in any love affairs. Her recent submis- 
sion to his wishes proved her obedience in this 
respect. She had proved herself trustworthy on 
this one point, and he wag bound to keep his 
word towards her. 

He did not anticipate any opposition on 
Maurice's part to this union. There had been 
something in Elinor's manner that indicated a 
consciousness of the youth's admiration. 

He must write to him at once and require his 
immediate presence. 

This was what he wrote : . 

" Maurice, . You have no right to 
the name of Karse. Your true and lawful 
pame is Dryden* You speak of disgrace ; there 



190 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

can be none attached to you, or to your birth. 
I fear you have listened to some one who has 
tried to sow discord between me and you. You 
owe me no thanks. I had much reparation to 
make to the son both of your father and your 
mother ; but if you think you owe me anything 
give me this one proof . return at once to Flairs, 
and ask me face to face the questions you want 
solved, and if I can I will answer them. It is 
not only for this that I require your immediate 
presence ; you can, by coming speedily, render 
me the greatest service one man can render 
another . rest from such anxiety as I pray you 
may never know." 

The letter was finished and despatched. It 
was impossible Maurice could arrive till next 
day ; but it seemed to Mr. Dryden that he must 
fill up the intervening time. His excitement 
was beyond any control he could exercise ; he 
had calmed it by almost unnatural strength 
while he wrote the letter ; but now it returned, 
mastering thought and shutting out all present 
feelings in the doubtful future, for he could not 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD. Iffl 

disguise from himself that the issue of to-morrow 
was doubtful. that unless he could preserve his 
secret, Maurice would be totally estranged. He 
clung to the hope of preserving it with the tena- 
city of a drowning creature. He had only to be 
firm and observant, and he should soon discover 
what had roused the youth's suspicions. Firm ! 
Sometimes in this long tedious day the Squire 
asked himself seriously if his senses were leav- 
ing him ; his mind seemed as agitated, as restless 
as that of an impulsive girl. 

He sent for Northover. 

Yes . she had executed the orders he had 
given her, and had seen that the rooms in the 
North Gallery, next the White Bedchamber, 
were duly prepared for the visitor he expected. 

" For Mr. Fisher ?" . The sharp, inquisitive 
eyes expressed that she ought to have been told 
the name of anything so rare as a guest at Flairs. 

Mr. Dryden looked up in astonishment. All 
this time he had shrunk from giving utterance 
to the name of his expected guest, and yet he 
must say it sooner or later. 

" For Mr. Dryden." 



192 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

Northover started in such surprise, that he 
went on . " A young relative of mine^ who will 
probably stay here for some weeks." 

And then the Squire took up a newspaper. 
He considered that the housekeeper had exceeded 
her province. She stood still a moment longer. 
Fisher was certainly the name on Miss Dryden*s 
letters ; after spending so much time and trouble 
and sleepless vigilance to confirm her suspicions 
. for she was convinced now that Elinor was 
carrying on a clandestine correspondence . ^must 
she give up this opportunity of exposing it all 
to the Squire ? 

While she hesitated he looked up. 

There was the old stem, reserved look in his 
eyes she had missed since Sir Stuart died ; it 
frightened her almost as much as if she had 
met a ghost in the North Gallery, and she left 
the writing-room without a word. 

" Good gracious ! patience," she said to her- 
self as she hurried to her own sanctum, " Fd as 
lief have walked up to a cannon as have told 
him I'd meddled with the letter-bag. Folks say 
the devil's in old Sir Fulk's eyes in the picture ; 



NORTHOVER ON GUARD. 193 

but I should say he had a fancy for changing 
his lodgings. Tm positive^no Christian gen- 
tleman ever looked as the Squire did just now, 
without help from below." 



TOL. III. 18 



CHAPTER VIII. 



REJECTED. 



Maurice walked quickly across the park, feeling 
much like a man suddenly awakened from sleep. 
But for the bright, brief episode of Cecirs love . 
life might have been a dream sincci the last time 
he visited Flairs. He had come, then, full of 
the chafing soreness of dependence, his mind 
bent on discovering the secret of his birth, and 
also on making his own unaided way in the 
world. He had gone back to London proud 
and happy, relieved even from the feeling of 
dependence on a stranger. Since then he had 
known greater misery and more intense joy than 
he thought earth held for him, and now what 



tlfiJECTED. 195 

were his feelings ? By a strange fatality there 
seemed a wonderful sameness in his present 
anticipations to those with which he left Ben's 
cottage, with one marked difference. If any- 
thing had been wanting to teach him the con-> 
trast between his feelings for Elinor and his love 
for Cecil, he would have found it now. Cecil 
had become so all and everything to him of pre* 
sent and future, that though to please her he 
had obeyed Mr. Dryden and had accepted the 
truth of his written assertions, he was thinking 
far more of her sweet face and her tender parting 
words than of unravelling the mystery of his 
birth; while before he had been so eager to 
prove himself Elinor's equal, that her image- 
had been obscured hf the tumult of joyful pride 
Ben's story had evoked. And Ben, dear Ben, 
it seemed so hard that he should not see him. 

Still, when his mind wandered back to the 
Squire's letter, his heart swelled with deep, 
quiet thankfulness. It had been such un^ 
utterable relief to think of his mother without 
shame, for even Cecil scarcely knew how the 
cruel doubt had scorched the freshness of hia 

13.2 



196 ELINOR DRY den's PROBATION. 

faith in women. He had loved this unknown 
mother with true boy's love, with a heart and 
soul worship, that pictured her an ideal of purity 
and gentle beauty. He had suffered far more 
for her shame than for his own birth, so deeply 
and keenly, that at first it had been almost im- 
possible to receive the assurance of his error. 
If Cecil had not pleaded so urgently for^the 
Squire's truth and honour, he would have 
been hard to convince. Now, spite of the still 
remaining mystery, he thanked God earnestly 
for this fresh blessing, and asked himself why 
he should have so much granted him at once. 
It seemed, then, as if Cecil's love ought to have 
sufficed for all else. 

For the first time in his life he stood at the 
hall entrance of Flairs. He rang, but the broad, 
low-browed door wa^ open, and he passed into 
the hall. His eyes glanced from one wall to 
the other, covered with strange antique weapons, 
some of which bad been stoutly wielded at 
Crecy and Poictiers ; and then on that stalwart 
knight, who with his charger in full steel pano- 
ply, represented the Dryden who fought at 



REJECTED. . 197 

Agincourt. Ben had made the legends of the 
Drydens familiar to Maurice before his first meet- 
ing with Elinor. The young man's heart swelled 
now with blameless exultation. Thev were his 
ancestors . the blood that ran in his veins had 
been shed gloriously, and always with honour. 
He looked reverently again at the time-honoured 
relics, and vowed that if he lived he would add' 
fresh lustre to the name of Dry den. 

Just as he reached the foot of the broad 
staircase, dimly lighted by the stained glass 
window fulj of heraldic emblems, Mr. Tomkins 
appeared from, one of the side doors, and ad- 
dressing Maurice as Mr. Dryden, said the 
Squire would expect him in his writing-room 
when he had taken some refreshment. 

The man's quiet solemnity, the noiseless 
stairs, with their deep, soft carpeting and 
sombre atmosphere, oppressed Maurice. He 
said he would prefer being at once shown to 
the writing-room. 

But Mr. Tomkins knew his routine of duty, 
and was not going to depart from it. 

He merely bowed suavely, and conducted the 



198 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

visitor to the dining-room, condescending to 
wait on hira himself, with the same oppressive, 
noiseless, voiceless seriousness. 

Finally, when he saw that hospitality was 
satisfied, he offered to shew the way to the 
writing-room, 

Maurice's thoughts strayed on before him to 
its occupant. By some strange perversity be 
seemed to have escaped from the influence of 
Cecil's pleading, and to think of the Squire as 
the hard, loveless tyrant who had so stubbornly 
rejected his boyish worship. If he^ could have 
seen Mr. Dryden in these hours of anxious wait- 
ing, his heart must have softened. 

The Squire had passed nearly the whole night 
in deep, earnest self-communion. When we feel 
ourselves on the threshold of some momentous 
change in life, we strip off flimsy disguises and 
worldly garments of wisdom, and pass through 
it in the nakedness of truth. 

He had not again visited the picture . he 
dared not, but still his wife's sweet face, her sad, 
haunting eyes were before him, urging him to 
do what he bad resolved and laboured that he 



REJECTED. 199 

might not do. His mind had been so overtaxed 
lately by the constant struggle he had no power 
to quell, and by the engrossing interest the dis- 
covery of Elinor's deceit had awakened in her, 
that it was scarcely strange he had not remarked 
that Maurice's letter was dated London, although 
he bad written to him supposing him to be still 
absent with his tutor. 

Now he sate counting the moments^ for he 
was aware that his son had arrived* The ex- 
dtement of the previous day was mastered, but 
it had left traces in his increased paleness and 
rigidity of features. At last he had conquered, 
he had stifled that mournful pleading ; he would 
keep his secret while he lived. Afterwards-^ 
well, afterwards was provided for. Would the 
sad eyes rest now ? 

There was a sound of footsteps in the stone 
passage. Spite of the matting outside^ and the 
curtained door within, the Squire he^d them, 
and he rose up to receive his visitor. 

He forced a smile to his lips as Maurice en^ 
tered, but it faded away in the anxious, pene- 
trating gaze with which be strove to read tbe 
young man's feelings. There was a simple 



200 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

firmness about him that baffled scrutiny; to 
outward appearance, at least, there was no trace 
of agitation or timidity. 

A few questions and answers about Mr. Brown- 
low and his journey, and then came a pause. 

They sate on either side of the fireplace, and 
though they seemed to shrink from looking 
each other full in the face, both had taken note of 
the change since their last meeting. It seemed 
to Maurice that the Squire had grown much 
older ; his hair had whitened, and his face was 
thinner and more colourless ; and Mr. Dryden 
meanwhile was thinking how nobly his own 
manly race would be pierpetuated by so well- 
developed a type of English strength and beauty. 

But the silence was lasting too long. 

"Maurice,'' he said, and then for the first 
time his listener's countenance became troubled, 
" you have some reason to be discontented with 
me, . for my . my early harshness towards yoUj 
and also for having brought you up in ignorance 
of your birth." 

His words came with much effort, and he 
stopped and looked down on the carpet 

Maurice spoke eagerly. 



REJECTED. 201 

"No, sir, not the first; I only require to 
know the names of my parents ;" he longed to 
add specially his mother's name, hut an in- 
stinctive feeling of reverence kept him back. 

A look of deep sadness . so solemn that it 
thrilled through the young man's heart . came 
into the Squire's face. 

" That to me is the painful part, Maurice, of 
what I have to do ; but first let me proceed as 
I began. My excuse for all I spoke of just 
now is this . till I sent you to Mr. Brownlow, 
I believed you to be iUegitimate," . Maurice 
started, and the colour rushed to his temples 
almost as it had done when Roland Markham 
had made the same assertion, . " and I therefore 
considered you had no right either to the name 
or breeding of a Dryden. It was a grievous 
mistake, and perhaps it is offering you some re- 
paration to say that I have suffered grievously 
for having committed it. Your father you 
never knew . your mother did not long survive 
your birth. Both, in my eyes then, had erred 
so deeply, that if the death of the person in 
whose charge you were placed, had not left you 



202 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

friendless, I believe I should not have brought 
you to Flairs. When I discovered my mistake, 
it seemed to roe better that you should not 
assume your own name until education had in 
6ome way repaired the wrong unintentionally 
done you. I think this is accomplished, and 
that you are quite worthy now of the name of 
Dryden." 

Mr. Dryden had paused several times in 
saying what he had evidently studied and pre- 
pared beforehand, and Maurice felt distrustful 
and dissatisfied. He tried to interrupt, and to ask 
again the name of his parents, but the Squire 
stretched out his hand to entreat patience. 

** You may have heard from Ben that when 
I married I cut off the entailed succession to 
this property, so that your being a Dryden, and 
my nearest male relative, gives you no right to 
its inheritance; but, Maurice, I have decided 
on making you partly my heir . with one con* 
dition onlv attached, a condition which I believe 
you will not find a hard one." 

Maurice was greatly moved . he had never 
anticipated more from the Squire's bounty than 



REJECTED^ 203 

perhaps the help bis name and influence might 
afford on his first outset in life, but before his 
gratitude could find any words the remembranoe 
of Elinor overcame him, 

" I should not have known how to thank 
you for so much goodness," he said, " but I 
cannot fulfil your wishes, Mr. Dryden, if you 
are putting me in the place of your niece, . of 
Elinor." 

There was a hesitation, almost an awkward- 
ness, about these words that confirmed the 
suspicions Elinor had excited in her uncle, in 
their recent mention of Maurice, respecting his 
love for herself. 

The Squire smiled. 

'^ I had never promised Flairs unconditionally 
to Elinor," he said, '* but still I am not going to 
rob her of any just expectations she may have 
formed." 

'^ Mr. Markham told me," said Maurice, 
slowly, for he felt sure now that he was not the 
son of Wentworth Dryden, and he began to 
see that the man who had deceived him on 
one point might equally deceive on another; 



204 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

" that you had promised to make his daughter 
heiress of Flairs, on condition she was given up 
to you to educate and adopt as your own." 

The smile died from the Squire's face, and he 
flushed deeply ; he evidently had to struggle 
hard with his anger before he spoke again. 

" Roland Markham is, and always was, an 
unprincipled man, who would tiever scruple to 
say what best suited his own purposes. I pro- 
mised Elinor that she should remain at Flairs if 
she married to please me, but her father knew 
nothing of this. Was it Mr. Markham who 
tried to poison your mind against me before 
you wrote your last letter . have you any ob- 
jection to repeat what he told you ?" 

There was an anguish of eagerness in the 
Squire's eyes as he asked this; it troubled 
Maurice. 

" You are right, sir, in supposing it fo have 
been Mr. Markham, but I would rather not tell 
you what he said. I see now that it was false, 
but it would be very painful to me to say what 
it really was." 

The Squire was disappointed ; he felt bitterly 



REJECTED. 205 

that he could not win Maurice's confidence, and 
till he had it he shrank from what he still had 
to say. But it must be said sooner or later-. 
better volunteer it than yield it on compulsion. 

" You have asked me one very painful ques- 
tion, Maurice ; I hoped that as your parents 
were always unknown to you, you would have 
considered me as at least an adopted father." 
He stopped, and looked almost imploringly at 
the firm, young face before him . for once he 
seemed to recognise the power of an equal will. 
" If you knew at what cost I should unfold 
their sad history, you would spare me ; when I 
am dead, you shall know all, will not that con- 
tent you? you may not have very long to 
wait." 

Maurice rose up from his seat . his face was 
full of trouble . dark suspicions and anxiety 
took place of the calm self-reliance that had 
been there. 

" I cannot understand you, Mr. Dryden," he 
said, passionately ; " if my silence on this is the 
condition annexed to the inheritance of Flairs^ 
then I must resign it altogether/' 



206 ELINOR DRYDEn'S PROBATION. 

But the deep sorrow in the pale, care-worn 
faee touched him with a stronger power than 
words. Strive as he would against it, the old 
fascination he had conquered in youth was upon 
Maurice now, and was mastering his resolve to 
know what common sense told him he ought, 
both by right and duty, to ascertain. 

" I had hoped diflferently ;" the Squire's voice 
was broken by some repressed current of feel- 
ing: **I hoped when you were assured that 
you were bom in lawful wedlock, that I myiself 
witnessed your parents' marriage, you would 
have been satisfied ; and Maurice, you must be 
satisfied so far, till certain circumstances are 
fulfilled . I cannot tell you what you ask; 
then if you still urge it, I will tell you all you 
seek to know, at the cost of my own peace . 
and, it may be, of yours also. Are you con- 
tent ?" 

Maurice did not look so. 

" But these circumstances . if their fulfilment 
depends on me . why not explain them to me, 
at once ?" 

''I propose to do so;'' the Squire smiled 



REJECTED. 207 

sKghtly at the young man^s impatience, " but 
you are not the only person concerned. I am 
now going to explain to yon the condition on 
which I propose to make you my heir.** 

Without another word he got up and went 
oot of the room. 

Maurice stood still, discontented with Mr. 
Dryden, and more so with himself. Then the 
only qtiestion he had come down to Flairs to 
solve was to remain unanswered . a mystery ; . 
and the reason given was totally inadequate, in 
his eyes, to the importance of the thing refused, 
a mere sentimental regard for the Squire's feel- 
ings ; what was there about this man ? he had 
bewitched Cecil, and he believed that he exer- 
cised some strange, irresistible power over him* 
self. Maurice hated mysteries, with all the 
open-heartedness of youth . he had no dark 
comers in his heart as yet, into which the sun 
must not shine, and over which memory felt 
eased and thankful to let cobwebs accumnlaOe. 
It was ridiculous and incomprehensible that sa^ 
simple a request should be denied him; he 
should make another appeal to the Squire, 



208 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

and find out, at any rate, how long these cir- 
eumstances would take to fulfil. One sen- 
tence had given hioi great relief and peace of 
mind . Mr, Dryden had been a witness to the 
marriage between his father and his mother. 
He had not known, till he heard this, how much 
he still doubted. 

He must tell the Squire at once his own 
love for Cecil Brownlow, and her promise to 
become his wife ; but to tliis he did not an- 
ticipate objection, only it was due, both to 
Cecil and to Mr. Dryden, to mention it without 
delay. 

He was picturing her delight when she 
learned that he was to become the Squire's 
adopted son ; when Mr. Dryden came back 
he held the door open for some one to pass in, 
and Elinor entered. 

She never looked more charming, as she 
went forward to greet Maurice a blush rose on 
her cheek, and a soft, timid look came into the 
brightness of her beautiful eyes. 

He had forgotten her presence at Flairs, and 
he felt very awkward and ill at ease. Again 



REJECTED. 209 

the dream-like feeling returned, and it seemed 
to bim to be still a dream, when the Squire, 
with the courtly grace he knew so well how to 
assume, presented Maurice to Elinor as the 
fair condition be had spoken of, and told them 
both, that though such an event as their mar- 
riage might for the present be only a future 
thought, still his wish was to see them acknow- 
ledged and affianced lovers. Still the dream 
continued its night-mare like pressure. The 
touch of the Squire's cold fingers, as he took 
his hand to join it to Elinor's, awakened him. 
He drew it quickly away, just as Elinor had 
yielded hers unresistingly to be placed within it. 

The Squire's eyes literally blazed with sudden 
anger. Elinor stood haughty and defiant, the 
deep red which had suffused her whole face 
fading suddenly away to whiteness. 

Maurice spoke at once. 

" You have taken me by surprise, sir. If 
you had waited five minutes longer, I should 
have told you what must have prevented this." 

The Squire's voice came with a hoarse, strange 
sound. 

VOL. III. 14 



210 ELINOR DRYOEN's PROBATION. 

"Nothing can, or shall prevent it." And 
then he stopped, although those stern, strong 
words seemed to have forced an utterance. 

They all three stood silent for some moments. 
The Squire's words had roused the determioed 
dumb pride hidden in Maurice's nature; but 
Elinor's was stung to madness. 

Her uncle had told her that Maurice was a 
Dryden. in every way her equal ; but what of 
that ? Any man should have . until now, 
Eilinor would have said must have-^considered 
himself honoured by the oiFer of her hand ; but 
this boy, whom she remembered only as an in- 
ferior, on whom she had heaped obligations that 
must make him her inferior for ever . a low- 
bred boor, that he should dare thus to insult 
her in her uncle's very presence ! 

Her eyes flashed brightly, and she looked 
from one to the other. As she did so, and saw 
the swelling pride in the face of each, a strange, 
hitherto unmarked resemblance struck her. In 
mien, in expression, in gesture, in some features, 
even, they were wonderfully alike; and as his 
eyes looked fearlessly into the Squire's, Elinor 



REJECTED. 211 

m 

saw, with a wonder that almost hushed her pas- 
sioD) the secret of the strange influence Mau* 
rice's face had from the first exercised over her. 
But for his liquid, dark eyes, he was the couUf 
terpart of Hubert Dryden . the idol of her 
girlish worship. 

But all this was a momentary conviction. 
Pressing her hands tightly together, she addressed 
Mr. Dryden : . 

" Uncle, you will excuse me if I refuse to 
prolong this interview. Jf 1 had not thought 
your presence a protection against insult, I 
should not have consented to it at all." 

The hard scorn with which her words were 
spoken would possibly have cured Maurice of 
any wish to prosecute his suit, even if Cecil had 
not stood in the way. But he flushed deeply, 
as if only just aware of the indignity he had 
oflFered her. 

" I beg your pardon, Miss Dryden," he said, 
frankly, turning his back completely on the 
Squire ; " for what may seem want of courtesy, 
but it seemed best for both of us to speak out. 

i4-2 



212 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

You must forgive my hasty manner. I was 
taken completely by surprise." 

Without a word or a look, only showing that 
she heard his words by keeping still as a statue 
in erect haughtiness/ she listened ; and when he 
left off speaking, passed on to the door, her 
form seeming to gain in amplitude as she swept 
slowly by. 

Maurice sprang forward and held the door. He 
would willingly have followed her and insisted on 
her forgiveness. After all he had heard both 
from her father and from Cecil, he thought she 
ought to grant it. But his anger was deeply 
roused against Mr. Dryden, for making him the 
victim of so foolish and ill-judged a surprise ; 
he could not leave him till he had compelled 
some explanation. Elinor would not have lis- 
tened then ; the sense of his words had not 
pierced through the raging tumult of her pride 
and her anger. 

Maurice walked back to the Squire. 

"When you left me just now" . he spoke 
with far less courtesy than he had used at first 
. " I was going to tell you, Mr. Dryden, that I 



REJECTED. 218 

am no longer free . even if I acknowledged your 
right to give me away to any one you may 
choose for me^and I absolutely deny this. 
Cecil Brownlow has promised to be my wife, 
as soon as I can make a home for her." 

" Cecil I" . It was spoken with a bitterness of 
sorrow that mastered the stormy anger for a 
while. Mr. Dryden stood gazing at the young 
man so sadly, that Maurice had no heart to pro- 
ceed with his reproaches. But suddenly a new 
hope dawned, and the Squire's sunken eyes lit 
up with animation and energy. . " It cannot be, 
Maurice. I have no fault to find with Cecil. 
She is all that I could have wished for your 
wife ; but I knew it could not be, and so I tried 
to keep you apart. Remember, you are a Dry- 
den, and with us family honour weighs above 
every mere feeling. You can have seen but 
little of each other, and you must forget that 
little. I had decided years ago, that your mar- 
riage with Elinor would be the only way of re- 
conciling your conflicting claims. I cannot set 
aside these well-considered reasons in a moment. 
Elinor is angry now, and justly" . and here the 



14 ELINOR DRTDEN'S PROBATION.' 

Squire's own anger rallied; "for I must tdl 
yoU| Maurice, that I can scarcely excuse your 
conduct. But time will bring her round. only 
understand this, and it will save discord between 
us, . you shall not be hurried or coerced, but 
you can marry no one but Elinor." 

Then Maurice's indignation found words. He 
told the Squire that he was cancelling all past 
benefits by his present tyranny . that he should 
gladly renounce kinship with a family who could 
break faith to those they loved in obedience to pride 
of race. that if his marriage with Elinor were the 
condition of his inheritance, he could never fulfil 
it, and Mr. Dryden must seek another heir. 

He spoke eagerly and earnestly ; there was 
manliness as well as decision in his refusal. But 
Mr. Dryden was too much bent on carrying out 
his purpose to be touched by anything but 
compliance. 

He assailed him with reproaches, but Mau- 
rice looked only more determined. Then the 
Squire tried entreaty, and showed him the sd^* 
fiishness there would be in linking Cecil's life to 
such an up-hill lot as his own must prove. 



REJECTED. 216 

Maurice made no sign of relenting, till the 
Squire at last insisted on his obedience in this 
matter. 

Then his eyes brightened, and his lips parted 
to answer. 

" Stay, I have not quite ^ded." . The Squire's 
tigitation had grown into a passionate vehe- 
mence, strangely unnatural to bis habitual calm. 
" You have never known a father, Maurice . 
have I not tried to be one to you ? I am the 
head of your house . your nearest male relative. 
This gives me, surely, a claim on your obedience. 
You are young, and, from circumstances, more 
inexperienced than your age. I give you the 
benefit of my life's wisdom, when I warn you 
not to let mere inclination . a passion of a few 
days' growth . decide your fate. I tell you, 
Maurice, you may be laying the foundation- 
stones of a perpetual remorse. But why do I 
stay to reason? Maurice, I command your 
obedience. Write to Cecil at once, or I will do so. 
She will yield unmurmuringly to my wishes ; 
and then, in some months longer, if you wish 
it, when change of scene and distance will have 



216 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

cured you of this fancied love, you will return to 
Elinor, and wonder how you ever thought of 
any one eke/' 

" I must speak, Mr. Dryden" . Maurice had 
grown chafed and restless under the enforced 
silence. . " I have loved Elinor, or, at least, de- 
ceived myself into thinking that the mere excite- 
ment of passion was love ; but when I saw 
Cecil again, I knew that I had loved her first, 
and truly ; and now, nothing . not any lapse of 
years, could change my affection. It may sound 
a weak confession, but I believe I must love her, 
even if she ceased to love me. I beg of you, 
sir, to listen to me a minute longer. I cannot 
acknowledge that you have any claim to my obe- 
dience. I shall always owe you duty and grati- 
tude, but these cannot control my will, or my 
affections. I should be more Sony to disap- 
point your expectations, if I thought by doing 
so I had prevented what might possibly have 
happened ; but I cannot think this. Miss Dryden 
is angry now, but in her heart she rejoices at my 
refusal." 

The Squire was too overwrought to notice 



REJECTBD. 217 

this allusion to Elinor. The marriage must be. 
Why should he listen to the opposition of a boy 
of twenty ? 

" You have had no time for thought, Mau- 
rice ; we will not continue the subject now, but 
by to-morrow I hope you will think differently. 
1 find I was mistaken in supposing that you were 
attached to Elinor, for I had no intention of 
taking you by surprise. I have made up my 
mind that you shall inherit Flairs, and that you 
shall do this as the husband of Elinor, and 
surely you will not cross my will? If you 
knew how gladly in acknowledging you as my 
heir 1 would admit you to the full privileges of 
a son, .1 think you would be less stubborn ; now 
let us part for the present.'' 

He pointed to the door, for his agitation 
warned him not to prolong this scene, lest he 
might say what he had decided was best kept 
silent, but Maurice did not obey the mute sign, 
he stood facing the Squire, he was trying to 
curb his pride ; after all he owed much to this 
hard obstinate man, and he did not want his 
last words to be spoken angrily. 



218 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

" If I leave you now, Mr. Dryden, it will be 
for the last time, for I feel you will not forgive 
what you call my disobedience. I cannot give 
up Cecil. I would do much to retain your 
good opinion ; as to Flairs, that is another 
matter, I have never expected it, and so I am 
not disappointed, but I wish with all my heart 
you would see this more reasonably, and then, 
I think you must confess, I have a right to 
choose my own wife. Even if I did not love 
Cecil, I could not be happy with Elinor." He 
stopped and looked at the Squire : still the 
same hard resolved mouth and frowning eyes. 
" Will you not let me part friends with you, 
sir ? I have never thanked you perhaps enough, 
for all you have done, but it is not want of 
memory for your benefits that has decided me 
now. I cannot give up Cecil, neither can I 
acknowledge your claim to the obedience you 
could scarcely expect from your own child." 

There was almost tenderness in the wistful 
look he gave, as he slowly passed Mr. Dryden 
on his way to the door. 

A trembling like that of ague passed through 



REJECTED. 219 

the irame of the tall, grey-haired man, trying, 
as he stood there, to harden himself against this 
last appeal to his better feelings. It was one of 
the throes of nature, starved, denied of her 
rights, and agonised into motion by seeing the 
seal about to be set on their restoration. 

Mr. Dryden's lips moved, but no sound camje 
from them. Maurice had reached the door, and 
it seemed to the unhappy man that he could not 
prevent his departure. 

Maurice turned round once more. 

" Will you at least say good-bye ?" 

Then the weight lifted, and the Squire's words 
came rushing forth with a fiery vehemence that 
awed his listener as much as their sense did. 

^^ No, ungrateful, rebellious boy ; as a son 
you must fulfil my bidding, and must give up 
your own headstrong will ; stay and learn what 
I had meant you to know only at my death ;-^. 
you are indeed my own son 1" 

Both men stood speechless after Mr. Dryden's 
last words, and then like lightning the convic- 
tion flashed on Maurice that Roland Markham 
had spoken the truth. 



220 ELINOR PRTDEN's PROBATION. 

A deep shame and a strong indignation 
against the man who called himself his father, 
came upon him, overcoming all surpiise. 

"Then if this be true," . he avoided the 
Squire's eyes by an instinct he could not as yet 
understand, . " by what right did you say my 
name was Dryden ?" 

At first the Squire seemed bewildered, his 
anger had exhausted itself in the effort of con- 
fession ; he looked earnestly at his son, but when 
he saw his flushed cheek, and his evident avoid- 
ance of his own gaze, he guessed his thoughts. 

" By the right of truth," . he spoke very 
slowly and sadly, he wished to force conviction 
into the youth's mind, and he began to see this 
might be difficult, . "you are my own child, 
Maurice, and your mother was my lawful wife." 

And then he looked again at his son, as if at 
least expecting some slight acknowledgment of 
his new-found claims. 

But none came. The story was to Maurice 
utterly wild and incredible. Why had it been 
delayed till now? He stood silent, lost in 
meditation, for a moment he once glanced up 



REJECTED. 22] 

to see if there were any signs of mental dis- 
turbance in Mr. Dryden, his assertion sounded 
more like the creation of a madman than sober 
sense^ but he did not raise his eyes again. He 
had met a look almost imploring, so full of 
entreaty, that it shook his conviction far more 
than the Squire's words had succeeded in doing. 
Should he follow his original plan of departure 
in utter disbelief of what sounded so incredible ? 
or should he require Mr. Dryden to confirm his 
assertion by proofs ? 

The Squire's impatience left him no time to 
decide. 

The irrevocable step against which he had 
all his life struggled, had seemingly changed his 
Bature, or perhaps the tide of freed emotion, so 
long pent in and repressed, now that the flood- 
gates were lifted, rose so high as to bear before 
it and obliterate all the safety marks of self- 
control and self-respect and cautious firmness, 
which had been his special gifts. Just now he 
was . mentally considered . by far the youngest, 
most impulsive man of the two. 

" Maurice, I see you doubt me/* he spoke 



222 ELINOR drydbn's probation. 

with eager rapidity, " but I can prove what I 
have said. I can prove to you and to the whole 
world, if you require it, the truth of this asser^ 
tion, but I would rather prove it only to you, 
Maurice, and perhaps when you have satisfied 
yourself, you will agree with my silence towards 
others/' 

Again the same troubled look clouded the 
young man's eyes. What need for this mys- 
tery if all were fair and upright ? but he felt 
compelled to speak. 

" I beg your pardon, sir, if I seem unnatural 
and hard of belief, but I cannot help it, it is all 
so new and strange, that I cannot in any way 
realise it." 

There was a look of exceeding bitterness in 
the father's face. Let no one suppose that Mr. 
Dryden had pictured a romantic scene between 
himself and his long denied son ; he was too 
devoid of imagination to have indulged in any 
such folly, but still he saw his only child before 
him at last, fairly and freely claimed, and he 
yearned with the strange hunger of nature for 
some token, some acknowledgment, however 



REJECTED. 228 

mute, of the affection he had so long put away 
from him. 

He bowed his head, submitting to what was 
now inevitable. If Roland Markham could 
have seen the deep humiliation of that bent 
head, the tearless agony in those sunken eyes, 
he might have felt amply revenged in the pun- 
ishment of the man, who had with his own 
hand carved out the doom of those moments. 

Suddenly Maurice looked up. As he looked 
his face softened, and a look of doubt came 
into his eyes, but he made no step forward. 

" I do not blame you," his father said. " In 
your distrust now, I am reaping the reward of 
my own . but delay is only giving us both pain. 
I will lay before you the proofs I spoke of, at 
once." 

He brought from his justice-room the care- 
fully sealed-up packet, and placed it on the 
table, before Maurice had succeeded in regaining 
the mastery over himself; he tried to speak, 
but his father stopped him. 

" Not now, not till you know how far you 
have been sinned against, and my justification ; 



224 EUNOR drtden's probation. 

if you find it impossible to excuse what is set 
down io this packet, you can best tell me so in 
writing, but," . he found it hard to go on, his 
voice shook so painfully, . " if on the contrary 
you can forgive your own father, then come and 
tell me so . you will find me here." 

He raised the curtain over the library door 
while he was yet speaking, as if he were afraid 
Maurice would try to prevent his going. 

But the young man's eyes were fastened on 
the packet before him, on which were written the 
words " To be read only after my death ;" he did 
not even look round. 



CHAPTER IX. 



THB SEALED PACKET. 



" To my Son^ Maurice Wentworth Dryden. 

" When you read these pages, Maurice, I shall 
be beyond the reach of your reproaches, and of 
any just anger you may feel at the long denial 
of the rights of your birth and position. Re- 
flection will in time show you that ever since 
I have really considered you my own son, I 
have tried, so far as was possible, to repair this 
wrong. My silence has hitherto prevented 
the faintest shadow from resting on your mo- 
ther's name. God knows, and to Him I leave 
the decision of right and wrong between us, 

VOL. HI. 15 



226 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

that it is for her sake, and hers alone, that I 
have denied myself the solace and pride of 
owning you before the world. I have studied 
your character far more deeply than you ima- 
gine, and I have always felt hopeless that any 
private recognition would satisfy a nature so 
like my own. I did not feel sure that the 
knowledge of the truth might not cause an utter 
separation between us. If I have erred in this 
past your forgiveness, I must trust to God only. 
He knows that I have borne this as my earthly 
punishment as resolutely as I could. One more 
word before I begin this sad story. It is told 
you as a sacred duty, but it is also told you as 
a warning. a warning, remember, from the 
grave . never to suffer jealousy or suspicion to 
be even listened to, if you would not let their 
poisonous tongues lick every drop of happiness 
from your life. 

" In the White Bedchamber, in the North 
Gallery at Flairs, her bedchamber once, you 
will find your mother's picture. You may 
judge what she seemed to me six months before 
that picture was painted. 



THE SEALED PACKET. 227 

" I had been spending some months abroad , 
and in my travels met for a few days with a 
very dear coUega friend of mine, Stuart Palmer. 
But I wished to prolong my stay in Rome, 
while he pushed on to Naples, where he ex- 
pected to meet friends. He did not tell me the 
names of these friends, and I, knowing him to 
be of a restless, roving nature, thought he had 
tired of ^ Rome, and left me only for the sake of 
variety. He was Mr. Palmer then, a younger 
brother with a slender income and no expecta- 
tions, his brother being on the point of mar- 
riage. Do not pass over this part of my story 
as irrelevant ; you will find by-and-bye that it 
nearly concerns you. 

" I lingered in Rome some time after Palmer 
had left it, and after visiting all the principal 
cities of Northern Italy, I went back to it again 
before my departure for England. I had been 
abroad for more than a year, and my absence 
was greatly complained against. 

" On the first evening of my return to Rome 
I met your mother. It was summer-time, and 
this had determined me on not deferring my 

15.2 



228 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

journey. I had gone into the gardens of the 
French Academy in the evening, for the day 
had been intolerably hot, and jsate down to rest 
on one of the benches. [ had sate there a long 
time, the gardens were almost deserted, when 
I heard voices approaching. A group of three 
persons came slowly towards me, and one stepped 
out from the rest and called me by my name. 
He was an old. college friend whom I had never 
greatly liked, and my first feeling was that of 
annoyance at having met him ; but away from 
home, an English face was welcome, and when 
he asked me to join his party, I did so wil- 
lingly. 

" When you have looked on your mother's 
picture you will in some measure realise my 
feelings. I was presented to her and to her 
mother, but I seemed bewildered. Her mo- 
ther, Mrs. Butler, talked to me, but I hardly 
knew what I answered. Even now the strange, 
magical fascination of that evening is as fresh 
as though it had lately happened. 

" I teU you all this as my justification, Mau- 
rice, for a blindness that may otherwise seem 



THE SEALED PACKET. 22^ 

inexcusable. Remember^ too, that I had never 
really loved before, that my passions were 
in the full vigour of their manhood; and 
lastly, remember the almost more than earthly 
beauty that seemed ready to be mine for the 
asking. 

" Looking back on it all at this distance of 
time, it seems marvellous how fast our intimacy 
grew, though I have since thought it was pur- 
posely hurried on. We drove together on the 
Corso, and in the evening, by moonlight, beyond 
the city. Each day I grew more and more 
determined that Lettice must be my wife. She 
was very bright and happy with me, till my 
manner shewed her the state of my feelings. 
Then she became shy and reserved, and seemed 
to avoid me. 

" Her father. Colonel Butler, a fine old Irish- 
man, was at times almost imbecile from expo- 
sure to the sun in India. Her mother, who 
must once have been nearly as beautiful as her 
daughter, was the governing principle in the 
family, . not obtrusivdy so . she seemed to 
me, till my marriage, one of the gentlest and 



230 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

sweetest of women, with a few scrupulous no- 
tions of propriety, which at times irritated me, 
but still most amiable. My only cause of com- 
plaint was the impossibility of seeing Liettice 
alone, even for an instant. I longed to know if 
her shyness, which now grew daily, would con- 
tinue when she was unrestrained by her mo- 
ther's presence. 

" But I must hurry over this beginning. I 
asked Mrs. Butler if she could explain her 
daughter's seeming dislike to me. May God 
forgive me if I wrong her, but without saying 
it in plain words, she made me feel that what I 
had taken for aversion was the modest shyness 
of first love. This, of course, drew from me 
what only Lettice's coldness had delayed, a 
declaration of my own desire to. marry her 
daughter. 

" Mrs. Buder hesitated at first on account of 
Lettice's age . she was not quite seventeen ; but 
as doubt naturally only increased my eagerness, 
she agreed to allow us to become at once en- 
gaged lovers. Marriage, she said, must not be 
thought of till the Colonel's attack had passed 



THB SEALED PACKET. 231 

away, and he was in a fit state to give his con- 
sent to it. 

" I was intoxicated with my sudden happi- 
ness. I have since thought I was madly selfish, 
or I should hardly have construed your mother's 
deathly whiteness and nervous trembling into 
the usual agitation of her position. To my dis- 
appointment I found that Mrs. Butler's scruples 
would not even then allow us a moment's 
privacy; and at times I fancied your mother 
rebeUed against this surveillance in her heart as 
much as I did openly. I can well divine her 
reason now. 

'^ She was, I thought, very calm and passive, 
but I attributed this to her extreme youth and 
to the sort of awe with which her mother told me 
she regarded me. A longer engagement would 
probably have told me the truth, but our 
marriage was unexpectedly hastened. We had 
settled to return to England together by way of 
Paris. Some days before we reached that city, 
Colonel Butler had a sudden seizure, and died. 

" I then learned what I might have known 
sooner if I had cared to inquire, that his affairs 



232 ELINOR drtdbk's probation. 

were hopelessly involved ; that, in fact, he lived 
abroad, because he had not the means of main* 
taining his position in England. An annuity, 
some of which would have been due in a few 
weeks, died with him, and all that was left to 
the widow was her pension, the first year of 
which, she told me, would barely serve to defray 
recent expenses. 

'^ It seemed to me that the only course open 
to me, setting inclination entirely apart, was to 
marry Lettice as soon as we reached Paris, and 
to offer Mrs. Butler a home at Flairs. 

" She was very grateful ; she only begged me 
to spare her daughter to her wholly for the 
short time that now remained. It seemed a 
natural request, then, so soon after losing her 
husband, and yet I see a double motive for it 
now. 

" I pass over our marriage and our return to 
England. My old neighbours said foreign 
travel had made me graver^ and one among 
them told me I was too staid a husband for 
such a lovely girl-wife. I felt grave and sad- 
dened, Maurice ; I began to think that all per^ 



THB SEALED PACKET. 288 

feet happiness is in anticipation. I could be 
alone with your mother now, and yet it seemed 
as if no love, no worship, could conquer her 
shyness and her fear. How I worshipped her 
with an idolatry that was perhaps sinful, I tell 
you to prove that, at any rate, at first I tried 
to make her life a happy one. 

*' It is hard to go back to the beginning of a 
feeling. I can scarcely define the first growth 
of my suspicion that your mother had never 
loved me. Spite of Mrs. Butler's assurances, 
I had felt, even before marriage, that Lettice did 
not return, or even appreciate, the passion I felt 
for her ; but then I believed, and I believe still, 
that, so long as a woman is heart free, she may 
learn to love any husband presented to her by 
her parents, and be far happier as a wife, than 
one whose more ardent and ill-regulated feelings 
render her more exacting. 

'^ Still I began to get impatient for increased 
affection. I had noticed a sudden deep sadness 
in her manner soon after our engagement ; and 
as this wore off, I fancied she grew more at- 
tached to me. About three months after our 



234 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

marriage this sadness returned. One day I 
canoe into her room, and found her crying bitterly. 

" She would give no reason for it, and I grew 
angry, and insisted. Suddenly, and almost for 
the first time unasked, she threw her arms 
round me and implored me to forgive her, and 
not to tell her moth^. 

'' I made up my mind at once. For some 
time past it had seemed to me that Mrs. Butler 
exercised too strong a control over her daughter. 
Now I decided that she v^as the bar to our 
happiness. 

" Before the week was over, I told my mother- 
in-law that Lattice's health required change, and 
that I should prefer travelling alone with her. 
Mrs. Butler was displeased ; but I had never 
been accustomed to submit to any woman's dic- 
tation, and I made no attempt to conciliate her. 
To my great surprise and annoyance, Lettice 
opposed the separation. It roused a spirit of 
resistance I had not supposed her capable of ; 
but I felt she could not judge for herself as I 
Gould, though I suffered far more than she knew, 
whan I saw her grief at parting from her mother. 



THE SEALED PACKET. 235 

** I thought change of scene would be her 
best cure, and I resolved to take her at once 
away from Hairs, although I was very sorry to 
miss the expected return of my friend, Stuart 
Palmer. His life had been as full of vicissitude 
as mine since our parting. 

" While I was too much engrossed by my 
love for your mother to care for any other living 
soul, or even to wonder at the silence of so dear 
a friend, he had been seized with a dangerous 
fever at Genoa, and had lain there for weeks 
between life and death. By the time he re- 
covered sufficient  strength to travel, his elder 
brother died, and he suddenly found himself in 
possession of the family property. The shock 
tried his strength so severely, that his journey 
was again delayed. I had not even beard of 
his illness till the news of Sir Richard Palmer's 
death . rnched me ; and then I told Lettice all 
about my friend, and expressed my hope that 
she would form an exception to the usual rule 
of wives, and look upon her husband's old com-^ 
panion as a brother. I was still reading my 
letter, and I said, smiling, . 



236 ELINOR DRY den's JOBATION. 

" * For, you know, you have usurped his 
place.' 

'* She did not answer, and I looked at her. 

''She lay back in her chair, so white, so 
ghastly, that I thought she was dying. I sum- 
moned help, and in the excitement of succouring 
her, I forgot, till afterwards, what our conver- 
sation had been about. 

*' Mrs. Butler had left us before this, and 
we had been much happier since her departure. 
I saw Lettice had lately seemed delicate and 
easily tried. I decided that Flairs was too 
dull and lonely for the continued residence of 
any one so young as my wife, and we left; it at 
once. 

" I took her to the North, and, to my joy> 
she grew for a while almost as bright as when I 
first saw her, and less and less indifferent to my 
love. 

" We had settled to spend a few weeks in 
Edinburgh. 

" Hitherto, Maurice, I have written without 
self-reproach, and my task has been light in 
comparison ; but now I ask you to remember. 



THB SEALED PACKET^ 237 

as yeu read, what it must have cost me to write 
my own condemnation to my own child !" 

The writer must have paused here for a 
period of time. The writing no longer covered 
the sheets in straight, unbroken lines ; it seemed 
more as if detached thoughts and recollections 
were set down, as their jagged, broken outlines 
were forced from the unwilling memory. 

" Can I ever forget what must come next in 
this record . the pleasure party at Hawthomden 
. the warm and graceful admiration our cour- 
teous hostess e^xpressed to me of my fair young 
wife? 

" * Mrs. Dry den is as good as she is lovely !' 
she said ; ' but I know you are wishing to 
show her all our lions, and I cannot wonder at 
it. I would not spare her to any one else I' 

" I was rejoiced at the permission. I had no 
wish to be a jealous or suspipioqs husband, and 
yet, at this, the first large, social gathering of 
entire strangers in which Lettice had appeared, 
I felt almost angered by the undisguised admir- 
ation she excited. 

'' 1 had mY0t beei) rom^ptic, but I bad longed 



2d8 ELINOR DttYDEN^S FROfiATION. 

for a quiet day with Lettice among the beautifbl 
woods of Hawthornden. It had been a great 
disappointment to find a large party invited to 
meet us. 

" Your mother seemed to enjoy it. She was 
willing to take my arm and admire all I showed 
her ; but she kept on calling my attention, in 
her pretty, childlike way, to the gay effect pro- 
duced by the bright dresses flitting through the 
trees beside the river ; and often I noticed that 
she looked wistfully over her shoulder, as if she 
wished to be with the rest of the party. 

" We were crossing the bridge. Your mother 
was looking along the right bank of the river, 
when, coming up to us from the contrary direc- 
tion, I saw my friend Stuart Palmer. We were 
some yards distant, but our eyes met. In his . 
so it seemed to me . was an expression of pas- 
sionate anger. He turned away abruptly by the 
way he had come. 

" I stood still, stupefied. It was like a vision. 

" I turned round to look at Lettice. She was 
still gazing along the river bank. I bent over 
her, to see her face. No, she had not seen Sir 



THE SEALED PACKET. 239 

Stuart ; there was no new emotion there, and 
his sudden appearance must surely have attracted 
her attention. But she looked weary, and I 
fancied was longing for more amusement than 
she found with me. I had thought she would 
prefer the natural beauties of the place to Ros- 
lin, where I knew the greater number of the 
guests would congregate ; but she told me now, 
that she had seen so many pictures of the cha- 
pel, that she should like to examine it herself. 

" I think, soon after she said this, we were 
summoned to dinner. I asked our hostess if 
she knew Sir Stuart Palmer. 

" * Yes, he is in Edinburgh, and I asked him 
here to-day. But he is still an invalid, and is 
perhaps afraid of joining an out-door party/ 

" I could not shake off the strange presenti- 
ment of evil that the sight of my old friend had 
created. 

" The days were short now, with long moon- 
light evenings. 

" A proposal was made during dinner that the 
chapel should be visited by moonlight. 

^' After SQme discussion this arrangement 



240 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

was agreed on, although the ladies were warned 
against the damp, unearthly chill they would 
find there. 

*' I made up my mind Lettice should not run 
such a risk, and I proposed to her to drive there 
in the yet remaining daylight. 

" She said . * Yes, if you like,* cheerfully ; 
but the tears were in her eyes. I felt angry . I 
thought her too childish. 

" I believe she really was the attraction of the 
day, for when it became known that we were 
going to Roslin at once, most of the party who 
had left it unvisited, followed us there. 

"I see now, that my mind had been so 
greatly disturbed by the strange meeting with 
my friend, that I took a crooked and distorted 
view of everything. I had not wanted to show 
Roslin to Lettice in a crowd. I knew that I 
could tell her more of its history and legends 
than any one present. T was glad of any oppor- 
tunity of improving her neglected education, 
and she seemed always pleased to listen ; but 
now I found myself one of a throng of fashion- 
able idlers, all bent on extracting as much 



THE SEALED PACKET. 241 

amusement as possible from the absurd cicerone 
of the place. He was worse than absurd. I 
was angry with Lattice at first, for laughing 
with the others ; but I felt comforted when she 
turned in disgust from the profane irreverence 
with which the man explained the exquisite 
sculptures in the chapel, and looked at me. My 
jealous discontent melted, and I hoped she had 
not noticed it. 

" I saw she was glad when I led her away to- 
wards the place where the high altar had stood. 

" The last gift I ever had from her, the last 
look of friendship . for I doubt now if she ever 
felt love . she gathered there. Through a 
widening crack in the broad altar stone had 
sprung a bramble, and on it there still re- 
mained a few delicate blossoms. 

" * I shall gather these, Wentworth,* she said, 
. in memory of my happy day.' 

" How sweetly she looked up at me then. I 
felt how selfish and jealous I had been, and I 
asked her to give me the flowers to keep. 

'* She looked incredulous, and then as if she 
had wronged me, she said. 

VOL. III. 16 



242 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

" * You don't know how glad I am that you 
do not think such thoughts silliness.' 

" It seemed to tear away a great veil . for the 
first time it struck me that I might perhaps not 
have taken the right way to win her . I had 
perhaps been too exacting, and had looked on 
her love too much as a right. 

" I saw by her quick blush and smile how 
much my answer pleased her now. 

" Evening had come on fast, and when we 
turned round we were alone in the centre of 
the chapel. Lettice looked frightened. I re- 
member teazing her and asking her if she really 
expected any of the mailed St. Clairs to start up 
in the full panoply in which tradition says they 
lie buried. But she looked so really terri- 
fied, that I took her to the open door of the 
chapel, while I returned to its farthest extremity 
to see if there were yet daylight to examine one 
of the brasses about which a discussion had 
arisen at dinner-time. 

" When I came back to Lettice, I found her 
so white and trembling that I blamed myself 
for leaving her, and I hurried her back to the 
rest of the party. 



THE SEALED PACKET. 423 

' " The moon's rising was to be the signal of 
general return to Hawthornden ; for when we 
came out of the chapel, we found the rest of the 
party we had left busy in finding carriages and 
arranging places therein. 

" I became separated from Lettice, and when 
the moon rose some of the men with whom I 
was talking proposed to walk to the house by a 
nearer way than that taken by the carriages, 
which were now beginning to drive off. I was 
going to look for your mother and tell her my 
intention, when one of the party told me I might 
spare myself the trouble, as she had just driven 
oflF with our hostess. 

" I did not see your mother on my arrival; but 
all the party had not assembled, and I grew 
deeply interested in a debate that was carried on 
among some of the gentlemen. I remember being 
surprised* to find how late ii had grown, and I 
went to seek Lettice, blaming myself for having 
left her so long among strangers. 

" I believe dancing had begun in another 
room, and not seeing her anywhere I passed 
through the rooms to where the sounds of 

16.2 



244 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

the music led me, when a person, I suppose the 
chief servant, came up to me. 

" He believed I was Mr. Dry den, Mrs. Dry- 
den had been taken suddenly ill, and had gone 
home. He did not tell me he had been desired 
to withhold this information for at least an hour. 

" I hurried away as soon as I could. I wa3 
not frightened, but I knew what an effort it 
must have cost my timid, gentle wife, to contrive 
her own departure among so many strangers. 
I was glad she had had sense to do it, though I 
blamed myself again for keeping away from her. 

" You who have known me as a stern, unlov- 
ing man, will hardly believe the tender speeches, 
the fond soothing that I hurried home to offer 
. thoughts never to be spoken. 

" Your mother's maid met me. Her mistress 
had returned very poorly, she said ; but she 
hoped now she was sleeping quietly. * 

** Sleeping quietly . she looked like majble in 
the fixed rigidity of expression as I gently drew 
aside the curtain to gaze at her, except for a 
painful flushed streak on the one upturned cheek. 
There was none of the repose of sleep on her 



THE SEALED PACKET. 245 

face, and for an instant I. thought her eyelids 
quivered as I bent down over her. 

*' If I could I would omit the story of the 
next few months. Never, Maurice, from that 
night did your mother give me one word or 
look of love. She was silent to suUenness, 
except when she gave way to such long passion- 
ate weeping, that I feared for her life. 

"To all my appeals for explanation, she 
opposed the most obdurate silence. The doc- 
tors . tor at first I imagined it might have a 
physical cause . shook their heads after a short 
attendance, and ordered their favourite panacea, 
change, 

" But at last I grew fairly wearied out, and 
we returned to Flairs. I could not make up 
my mind to send for Mrs. Butler, who was 
now living abroad. A horrible idea at times 
possessed me that Lettice had inherited her 
father's malady, and I dreaded to hear it con- 
firmed. I thought this fear, then, the worst 
man could be called on to suffer. I tell you it 
was ease . bliss, contrasted with the hell of feel- 
ing that lay before me. 



246 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

"It was Christmas when we returned to 
Flairs, but the openly unhappy terms on which 
I now lived with your mother, made it impossible 
to receive any guests. I was glad of a business 
excuse to go to London for a fortnight. I hoped 
absence might change her manner. When I 
reached home, I went to your mother's room, and 
learned that she had not returned from a walk. 

" I heard also that my old friend had come 
down to Lernaouth. I resolved to find out if it 
were really he whom I had seen for that brief 
instant in Scotland, though I shrank from letting 
him know my unhappiness, 

" I went over to him at once, but he was not 
at home either. 

" You know what a little way separates the 
gates of the two perks. 

" As I rode out of his avenue I saw him 
coming through my own gate striding on with 
folded arms and his hat pulled over his face . 
even in the momentary glance I thought he was 
in great agitation. . 

" I called to him, springing from my horse 
as I did so. 



THE SEALED PACKET. 247 

" I saw the same face I had seen at Haw- 
thornden : but now there was an evil intent 
in it. 

" He passed by me like the wind. I hesi- 
tated whether I should follow him, but in such 
fierce anger, before I could explain away any 
offence he might have taken, he might say or 
do what I could not forgive. 

" I went on towards home. I was sad and 
wearied . wife and friend alike estranged. What 
had I done to be so heavily burdened ? 

" Instead of following the road, I passed 
through the hanging wood aSong the river. 

" Leaning against the trunk of the great 
beech- tree . where I saw you with Elinor . 
was Lettice. Oh God ! why did I not die 
then, and leave her to freedom and happi- 
ness. 

" AU seemed clear to me at one glance. Your 
mother loved my friend, and they had taken ad- 
vantage of my absence to meet. 

" If I had waited but one moment ! 

" I sprang forward, maddened. I said . I 
could never remember what . and then I asked 



248 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

your mother how she dared meet Sir Stuart 
privately in my woods. 

" Her eyes flashed back at mine as they had 
never done before. She said I had spoken 
falsely ; but as I was capable of suspecting her, 
she would meet Sir Stuart whon and where she 
pleased. 

" She tried to pass me ; I grasped her arm 
rudely, and led her to the house. 

** I saw it all now. During my absence she 
had met him . she loved him, and his love for 
her was the secret of his present conduct, but 
it had been the same in Scotland when Lettice 
knew nothing of him. How was I certain of 
this ? With exotic growth suspicion clung to 
every thought and memory, and I recalled her 
agitation at the first mention of his name . . 
her illness in Scotland. Fool, idiot that I had 
been . she should at once confess when she first 
saw him. 

'' But she would not answer this question. 
Her manner towards me had undergone a total 
ohange; there was no longer the shuddering 
aversion I had lately met with ; she was not the 



THE SEALED PACKET. 249^ 

timid, sullen, wayward girl of the last few 
months. She seemed reckless of my anger, 
hardened against me and all the world. She 
told me she was pure and stainless, and that if 
I insulted her with doubts she would at once 
leave me, and seek her mother's protection. 
She said I dared not upbraid her, for I had lost 
the right to do so. 

" I believed her pure, spite of all my jealous 
anger. Her eyes met mine fearlessly, but her 
scorn maddened me into seeming not to be- 
lieve. 

** I hated myself then as much as I hated Sir 
Stuart. I watched every letter, every move- 
ment of my wife's with greedy, jealous suspi- 
cion. I had never thought well of women . the 
conduct of my sister had perhaps influenced 
this . now I utterly mistrusted them; and yet 
the longer I reflected, the more probable it 
seemed, that your mother had no previous 
knowledge of Sir Stuart. 

" It was some relief when he left the neigh- 
bourhood, but how could I tell he was really 
gone ? It might only be a ruse. 



250 ELINOR DRY den's PROBATION. 

" For, Maurice, the evil intent in his eyes 
gave some right to my suspicions, and how 
could I hope to rival him, my superior in 
everything likely to please a woman . a woman 
who hated and shunned me, whose very love 
for him had sprung from the unhappiness I 
caused her ? 

" But I cannot dwell upon the depths of 
misery in which I lived those months. No 
wonder if Lettice hated me, I had become a 
morose and gloomy jailer. I knew I should 
soon become a father, and sometimes a hope 
came that this child might bring peace if it 
could not Bring love; though to myself it 
seemed as if I no longer wished for her love, 
and that mine had died in the past. 

^* Just about the time when she was least fit 
to travel, she spoke earnestly to me about our 
unhappiness, and expressed a wish to revisit 
Scotland. I should not have consented, but I 
heard that the man I now feared as much as I 
hated him, would soon be again near Flairs; 
and besides, Lettice hinted that after your birth 
she would be open with me. 



THE SEALED PACKET. 251 

" Go on, Maurice, hastily, for the end is 
more than I can dwell upon. 

" Your birth was hastened by our carriage 
being overturned in a wild, lonely district near 
Abergeldie, for your mother insisted on going 
still northwards ; and lately, free from the haunt- 
ing fear of other influences, I had striven to 
gratify her wishes. When we reached the small, 
lonely inn where we only proposed to take fresh 
horses, I found she could proceed no further." 



 



Here came another break in the .manuscript, 
and the after writing was hurried and indis- 
tinct. 

" Maurice, by next day your mother was 
dead . in that lonely place, among strangers, 
ignorant peasants . better so it seemed to me. 
they were likely to be slow-witted, and might 
mistake my agitation for sorrow. 

" Maurice, when your mother's maid, who 
had been both doctor and nurse to Lettice, 
brought you to me at the qottage door where I 



252 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

had rushed from the bed-side, it was as much 
as I could do to keep from dashing you against 
some of the unpicked masses of stone in the 
road. 

" You will shudder at such ferocity, but 
listen. 

*' During our journey your mother had told 
me she wished you to be called Maurice- Went- 
worth, her father's name and mine, and I had 
promised to consent. As soon as possible after 
your birth she sent for me, and made me repeat 
this promise. She was dying then, but I did 
not know it. 

" The woman held vou in her arms, but I 
had eyes only for Lettice. For a moment it 
seemed as if she were indeed at last my 
own. 

" I thanked her fondly for the blessing 
she had brought us both, but she stopped 
me. 

" * Not thanks, Wentworth,' she whispered, 
* only pardon ; and if you cannot pardon me, 
love my child . it is mine, too, remember.* The 
look of deep sorrow^ of perfect humiliation, in* 



THE SEALED PACKET. 253 

stead of restoring coDfidence, roused again the 
fearful jealousy of my nature. 

" It must have shown in my face. 

" She tried to stretch out her hand, and the 
last words came in a faint whisper. 

" * Remember . he was my first love . -long 
ago . forgive me for loving him too well. I 
know now how deeply I have sinned towards 
you . ^but forgive me.' . . . . 

" The rest is all confusion. I remember the 
mistress of the inn led me out of the room, and 
told me the lady's life hung on a thread ; and 
the next thing that stands out clearly was the 
resolution I made beside the cottage door look- 
ing down the wild, lonely glen, her last words 
beating on my brain, that I would never own 
you as my son, and that no one should ever 
know your mother's shame. 

" If I had not sworn solemnly to keep these 
vows. Sir Stuart's life would not have been safe 
on my return. 

" Even if I would, I have no power to relate 
the state of mind that followed . I believe it 
was partial insanity. I went abroad for some 



254 ELINOR DRYDEN^S PROBATION. 

years. Soon after ray return, I heard that the 
woman in whose charge I had placed you was 
dying. 

" I believed the worst . I believed Sir Stuart 
to be your father. The mystery of your mo- 
ther's sudden dislike to me in Scotland was all 
now accounted for. She said she had loved 
Sir Stuart long ago. They must have met at 
Hawthornden, and her pretext of illness for 
quitting the party had all been feigned. I 
longed to question Mrs. Butler about their first 
acquaintance, tut this would have revealed my 
suspicions and my dishonour. And yet, Mau- 
rice, I still loved your mother. Her last words, 
to remember you were her child, still haunted 
me. I dared not let you take the outcast fate 
that seemed threatening you. The news, too, 
had come so suddenly, that I had no time 
for deliberation. I believed I might trust 
my faithful servant Ben, with a part of my 
secret. He went to Scotland to fetch you, and 
to bring you up as his own relation. All he 
knew was that you were the child of my bitter- 
est enemy, whom a scruple of conscience in- 



THE SEALED PACKET. 255 

duced me to befriend. But with a secret dis- 
trust even of myself, I wrote at once to my 
sister, and offered to adopt her eldest child. 

" You know all the rest. You understand 
your seclusion, a^d my rigid avoidance of you. 
It was not only hate, Maurice. I saw you once 
on your first arrival, when you were unconscious 
of the keen agony your face caused me. You 
had your mother's eyes, and I dared not meet 
them. 

" Did you hear it said just about the time I 
sent you ^ to London, that the Squire was a 
changed man, that at last he had got over his 
deep sorrow for the death of his wife ? 

" Can you fancy how a convict feels when 
after years of penal servitude in a chained gang, 
his irons are struck off, and he is declared 
free ? Sir Stuart's death had brought me this 
freedom. 

" In one sad, painful half-hour, Maurice, I 
learned that I had wronged friend, wife, child, 
alike unjustly ; that the man who now so hero- 
ically increased tenfold his sufferings to leave 
peace of mind with me . me, the robber of his 



256 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

earthly joys . had been the accepted lover of my 
wife before I ever saw her ; that when the in- 
creasing warmth of my manner alarmed Lettice, 
she wrote to warn him, and also to tell him 
that her mother had forbidden her to cor- 
respond with him. 

" It seems she was unguarded enough in her 
simple innocence to tell her mother what she 
had done, and that both Sir Stuart's reply and 
his letter to me were intercepted. 

" Mrs. Butler wrote to him herself haughtily, 
declining the honour of his alliance, and an- 
nouncing her daughter's engagement to me, 
before it actually happened. She also suc- 
ceeded, by a series of manceuvres for which I 
did not think she had capacity, in persuading 
him that we had gone to Genoa, for she had 
read his frank, high-spirited nature rightly, and 
guessed that when he found his letters unan- 
swered, he would follow them. 

" There, as I have said, he was seized with 
fever, and by the time he was able to under- 
stand what passed around him, we were married. 

'^ Mrs. Butler's next move was to persuade 



THE SEALED PACKET. 257 

her daughter of Palmer's faithlessness. Her 
task must have been very difficult at this time, 
for Lettice confessed to Stuart that she con- 
sented to our engagement only on her mother's 
assurance that nothing else could save her 
poor imbecile father from a prison ; and then, 
when in her after terror she wanted to draw 
back, Mrs. Butler must in some way have falsi- 
fied matters, for she showed her daughter a 
letter in which Palmer's approaching mar- 
riage was plainly stated. ^ It is probable his 
name may have been substituted for that of his 
brother^ or the letter altogether forged. It 
:eems strange that Lettice should have trusted 
her mother so fully. 

'^ If she had only feared me less, all might 
lave been explained, and this would have been 
f we had seen each other more unrestrainedly. 

" I feel you will hate your mother's mothw, 
Maurice; and yet she only followed her own 
views of things. She was a mere woman of 
fashion ; she considered the highest and noblest 
of a mother's duties was to place her daughter 
as high in the social scale as possible by her 

VOL. III. 1 7 



258 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

marriage. She knew that at any moment her 
husband might be taken suddenly from her, and 
that then she and Lettice with her must sink 
into obscurity, where her daughter's remarkable 
beauty would only succeed in attracting attentioa 
which might perhaps include insult. Stuart Pal- 
mer was a younger son, and it was only his im- 
petuosity that had prevailed on her even to give 
a temporary consent to his suit ; but he told me 
he was persuaded by what he learned after- 
wards, that Mrs. Butler took her daughter to 
Rome solely to meet me, and that our first 
interview was planned and watched for. It is 
possible. 

" When I was summoned to his bedside, I 
believed I was going to listen to the confession 
of my own dishonour, and to be implored for 
forgiveness. I have told you what I learned 
there, but I have not told you all. 

"Altogether, before my marriage, he wrote 
to me three times, but of course my mother-in- 
law was prepared for his interference, and the 
letters never reached me. 

" He had met us by accident at HawthorndeDt 



r~- 



THE SEALED PACKET. 259 

but having seen us, be was resolved to know 
from Lettice whether she had been as faithless 
as her husband. 

" He found a sharp-witted gipsy child, who, 
I remember, had been noticed by the ladies 
in the early part of the day, and when I left 
Lettice standing alone at the door of the chapel, 
the boy slipped a note into her hand, bidding 
her say where she would meet the writer when 
the moon , rose. The note added, that if she 
refused a private meeting, she should give it in 
her husband's presence. 

"She sent word by the child, that after the rest 
had gone she would meet him in the chapel. How 
she contrived to hide herself while the carriages 
drove off, and to brave her terrors in that lonely 
place, I could* never comprehend ; but the in- 
tense excitement, and possibly fear of a quarrel 
between Stuart and me, urged her on. 

" He was generous enough to confess to me 
that at first she maddened him by entreating 
him to leave her, and not to alienate by his pre- 
sence the affection she was beginning to feel for 
her husband. 

17.2 



260 ELINOR DRYDEn's PROBATION. 

" Then he asked her to see plainly what she 
had done, and painted me fully to her as the 
false, traitorous friend who had stolen the pro- 
mised wife of the man he professed to love as a 
brother, knowing her to be promised. He said 
be had to reiterate it many times before she 
would believe him, or confess that she loved 
him still. Then, he said, she became suddenly 
desperate, and told him if he would promise 
never to see her again, she would always love 
him, and never pardon me. 

" He promised, though he said he knew he 
could not keep his word, and they parted. 

" He wrote to her, but she never answered 
him in all that long, weary time, when her 
heart must have been slowly breaking, with 
the conviction of her husband's* falsehood to- 
wards the man whom, I believe, she still fondly 
loved until his return to Flairs. 

'^ But then she changed. They had met once 
for a few moments only before my return, and she 
had reproaehed him with breaking his promise. 

''He owned that, knowing my absence^ he 
wrote and implored her to meet him again in 



THE SEALED PACKET. 261 

tiie wood, in order to take a last farewell. 
When he told me this he was dying, Maurice, 
and he solemnly declared he meant never to see 
her again after this last interview. He was too 
little self-conscious to know the strength or sub* 
tlety of his own passions. Before the interview 
was over he had implored Lettice to leave me, 
to leave England with him, and to become his 
wife in some distant country, where no one could 
question her right to the name. 

** At first she did not understand him ; then 
she recoiled, with a look on her face that, he told 
me, he had never been able to forget. 

'^ She bade him begone, and never thrust 
himseff upon her again. She said he had 
destroyed all her trust in any man's goodness; 
that she shrank from him far mor6 than she. did 
from me, for he had done worse. I had robbed 
my friend, but 1 had not tried to dishonour him. 
So vehement were her reproaches that he dared 
not urge her further, though he left her vowing 
he would see her again. You know now the 
meaning of the evil look I saw in his face when 
we met at the park gates. 



262 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

" Perhaps, Maurice, had I been less ready to 
accuse your mother, she might in her agitation 
have freely told me all when I found her under 
the beech-tree. God only knows ; it is useless 
to speculate on what might have been. 

" He never saw her again face to face, though 
he told me he constantly watched for an oppor- 
tunity, but she never ventured across the river, 
and he was still too careful of her reputation to 
try to meet her where they would have been 
observed. How little we either of us knew 
of what, she whom we both loved so madly, suf- 
fered for our sakes. 

" I knew that Ben, by my orders, had always 
kept you out of Stuart Palmer's sight. He so 
seldom visited his property that this was easy, 
and now when I saw him dying, I did not even 
tell him uf your existence. I would not cloud 
our last moments together, when all the fond 
affections of boyhood seemed intensified and re- 
newed by our mutual repentance and sorrow, by 
telling him how I had blighted my own life, had 
given myself a perpetual remorse. 

"When he thanked God so fervently that 



THE SEALED PACKET. 263 

her purity had preserved him from actual sin, I 
could not tell him how far my suspicions had 
led me. 

" For, Maurice, in this new light thrown on 
your mother's feelings towards me, I seemed to 
myself a monster of suspicion and indulged 
jealousy. 

" It was hard to lose him, but in my heart I 
thanked God for this punishment. It seemed 
some expiation ; and how could I have ever 
shared my shameful secret with him ? 

*' You know the rest. You know that, hard 
as it must have seemed to you, I decided at 
once to separate you from Flairs, for the sake 
of your education, and also that no one might 
recognise in the future Maurice Dryden, Ben's 
proteg^. There was not much fear of this, for 
you had lived in such perfect isolation from all. 

" Before Ben died, I had promised him that 
I would care for your future as for that of my 
own child ; and as I said this, it seemed to me 
that he looked at me with a strange inquiring 
glance, but I turned away. If Ben had any sus- 
picions, there was no occasion to satisfy them. 



264 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBATION. 

41 

* 

He was the only person at Flairs in whom your 
mother had ever betrayed an interest, and I 
believe in that remembrance arose my strong 
regard for him. 

"But, Maurice, he knows all now . I told 
him all when he lay dying. 

"Still, my living punishment remains. I 
have a son, in whom I discern all the promise 
that gladdens a fathe/s heart, and yet I can 
never claim him as my son. I may never once^ 
even at my death-hour, hold him to my heart 
or hear him call me father. 

" I have told you all, Maurice. As she bid me 
remember that you were her son, so I ask you 
from my grave to remember that, however 
blindly and erringly^ still I loved till my death 
the angd who was your mother. 

" May God in mercy bless you/* 



CHAPTER X. 



FATHER AND SON, 



Maurice sat stupefied with the last page of 
the manuscript open before him. 

Mechanically, like an echo, these words seemed 
to repeat themselves . '' The angel who was your 
mother," . " Mother" . the name he had longed 
to speak all his life. Was he only to know it as 
a theme of heartrending and bitter sorrow ? 

This was his first defined thought ; but soon 
through this new crowd of events and ideas 
loomed one of deep thankfulness, broadening as 
it reached him till it seemed to efface for the 
moment all gloom . all sorrow^ 

His mother was pure-^no shame rested on 



266 ELINOR DRYDEN*S PROBATION. 

her, nor could ever rest ; for who would ever 
know him as Mr. Dryden's son ? This was 
bitter, but it must he. 

At times, while he read, his anger had risen 
high against his father. It seemed to him that 
no man with any heart could have made a girl 
his wife so obviously against her will, without 
suspecting a previous love. 

But the end softened him ; and by his own 
pride Maurice knew what it must have cost that 
stern, proud man thus to humble and bare his 
inmost feelings. He forgot the Squire's tyran- 
nical claims on his obedience, and the price at 
which he had owned himself his father. It 
seemed as if at least he owed him some affection 
for the confidence he had bestowed. 

He raised the curtain of the library door, and 
went in. 

His father was seated just under the picture 
of old Sir Fulke ; his face as pale and bloodless 
as that of the stern old soldier. He neither 
moved nor looked up as Maurice advanced; 
only the hand that rested on the arm of the 
chair trembled visibly. 



PATHER AND SON. 267 

Maurice saw it. He threw his arms round his 
father, and he felt the whole frame quiver in his 
strong grasp. 

Few words at all passed between the new- 
found father and son . none on the subject of 
Cecil, till both had gazed long and reverently 
on the picture in the White Bedchamber. 

As his father reclosed the panel, Maurice 
looked round the room. This then had been 
his mother's bridal chamber. Here probably 
some of her bitterest tears had been wept. 
For a moment a hard unforgivingness rose 
against the man who had cropped this fair 
young flower, only to blight its beauty by harsh 
suspicion. 

His father's voice roused him; he led the 
way through a door, beside the picture, into two 
other rooms arranged for habitation, and he told 
his son these were intended for him ; but he 
carefully locked the door through which they 
had passed. 

" You may have heard it surmised," he smiled 
faintly, ^^ that the North Gallery is haunted. I 



268 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

suppose if it were known that one room in it is 
perpetually closed, this would be esrablished as 
a fact." 

He paused . for in the first moments of re- 
union, in the first joy his lonely^ hungering heart 
had known for so very, very long, it was hard 
to rouse discord, and yet delay was impossible. 

His voice sounded strained and hard again. 
. " Maurice ! . now you know and have ac- 
knowledged the claim I have on your obedience, 
you will no longer refuse it." 

His son's face darkened. It was strange to 
see what strong resolute lines were traced al- 
ready round his mouth. 

" Father," he said at last, " be merciful ! You 
have taught me that you know what Love is . 
can you not feel for mine ? I cannot give up 
Cecil. Can you not see that if I were forced to 
tnarry Elinor, my life would be the same living 
misery which destroyed my mother ?" 

Mr. Dryden started as if some one had struck 
him. 

" No !'* he said, after a while ; " it is diflfe- 
jtent-^there would be no deception here; no 



FATHER AND SON. 269 

miserable after- remorse for what might have 
been prevented. I promised to make Elinor 
my heiress, if she married as I wished. You 
must share Flairs with her. If you are what I 
believe you to be, you shrink as much as I do 
from the stain the avowal of your birth must 
bring on your mother's name . and without 
that avowal, how can I treat you as my son ? 
If you marry Elinor you take the name of 
Dryden as her husband, and you both become 
my children without arousing inquiry." 

" But there is yet another way," Maurice 
spoke eagerly ; ** make Elinor your heiress . , 
only reserving for me what you may think 
fitting ; or, do nothing for me. let me carve out 
my own place in the world. With Cecil as my 
aim I am sure of success." 

The likeness between the two faces showed 
itself strangely now through their different ex- 
pressions . the one, beautiful with youth and 
impassioned hope ; the other, worn and withered 
with sorrow and disappointment. 

They looked at each other fixedly, each seeing 
the other's opposition written in his face . each 



270 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

dreading and shrinking from the issue, and yet 
each resolved not to yield. 

" Has your own determination, Maurice, 
taught you nothing, then ?" The Squire's 
voice was hurried and agitated. "Do you 
think that years of trial and bitterness have 
softened my will when it is once bent on what 
is right and just?" 

He had strained the new cord too tightly, 
and it gave way. 

" But is neither right nor just," said Maurice, 
impetuously. " Is it right to break Cecil's 
heart ? Is it just to break my own faith ? I 
would rather " 

He did not finish . not because of the rising 
anger in the Squire's face, but because there 
came a decided rapping at the door leading into 
the Gallery, followed by Northover's voice, in- 
quiring if she could see the Squire. 

She would not be denied, and Mr. Dryden 
opened the door in dignified wonder at her per- 
sistence. 

*' If you please, sir, it's something you must 
look to." 



FATHER AND SON. 271 

" Well, then you had better say what it is/' 

"Alone . to you, if you please, sir;" . and 
she looked at Maurice, who was walking into 
the other room, when the Squire stopped 
him. 

" You can speak before Mr. Dryden." 

Northover bridled and looked as if it would 
be the height of impropriety ; but the reflection 
of old Sir Fulke in the Squire's eyes quickened 
her tongue. 

" Very well, sir, then it's this. You took no 
heed to what I took the liberty of remarking 
about Miss Elinor. Now, if you'll believe me, 
she is talking to a gentleman under the beech 
tree." * 

The Squire started. Was his pride never to 
be spared these deep bitter wounds ? 

" Hush !" He spoke sternly. " What does 
it concern you, Northover, to whom Miss Dry-' 
den speaks ? I believe I know who this person 
is, and I shall probably be able to dismiss him 
more easily than Miss Elinor, will." 

He had paid the jeweller's bill ; but it oc- 
curred to him that Elinor might not have told 



272 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

him of all her debts, and that this was some 
importunate tradesman. 

'' Keep silence about this, Northover, and 
another time be careful how you nourish 
groundless suspicions/' 

He went out of the room, and down the 
little winding staircase, very sick at heart. 

Maurice stayed behind. He knew his pre- 
sence must be painful to Elmor; 



CHAPTER XI. 

MR. FISHER PINPS HIS WAY TO FLAIRS. 

Elinor had not sought her own room when she 
reached the gallery. The blood rushing through 
her veins seemed to scorch her with its heat. 
She must breathe the free air, if she would not 
suffocate under this intolerable humiliation. 

Scorned ! rejected ! She had felt so sure of 
Maurice's love, and the thought of it had done 
much to reconcile her to her sacrifice. What had 
happened to change him ? All this she asked in 
short, passionate questioning, as she hurried 
along. She had just self-restraint enough left to 
avoid any risk of being seen by the servants, and 
passed through the North Gallery, down the old 

VOL. III. 18 



274 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

deserted staircase she had so often used in child- 
hood. It seemed tedious to-day, or she was 
less fearless in treading the broken steps ; but 
at last she stood safe outside the great yew wall 
that screened the flower-garden from the park. 

The chilly air was grateful to her fevered 
head. Hurrying along, she had said she would 
think when she found herself alone and under 
the free sky ; but now, thought was impossible. 
Surging, tumultuous, almost frenzied, passion 
swayed her ; she half buried her head in the dark 
green yew hedge, aod sobbed . hard, heart- 
breaking sobs . which gave no relief^ except to 
the mere animal part of her pride. 

Then, as she tried to look her situation in the 
face, her passion ceased . but only for a moment 

It returned with ahnost convulsive strength, 
shaking her frame till she was glad to ding to 
the hedge for support. 

She stood there a long while, insensible to 
sights and sounds. 

Meanwhile Northover's head peeped cautiously 
from the door by which she had issued, and 
was as suddenly withdrawn. 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAT TO FLAIRS. 275 

Some time afterwards, invisible from where 
Elinor stood, but plainly to be seen from any of 
the windows of the North Gallery, or from the 
little door, a man appeared in the distance 
coming across towards the river from the north 
side of the park. 

Strangers sometimes struck out of the foot* 
path across the open ground, to see the far- 
famed beech-tree ; but this was a rare occur* 
rence when the family was " down." 

This person seemed to be making for the tree. 
Instead of going straight to the river, he swerved 
to the right, taking a slanting direction, which 
would soon bring him in sight of Elinor. 

By degrees, as her violence wore itself out, 
her sobs grew less. She raised her head, and 
looked round her, almost surprised to find all so 
stiU, while she was full of storm and unrest. 

A new feeling, the offspring of real sorrow, 
awoke in her. Oh, if she had only one friend 
in the world to open her heart to now ! Her 
father . no, he must never know her humili* 
ation . no one must ever know it. She did not 
think even of her mother, or Adelaide* She 

18.2 



276 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

wanted help . she roust punish Maurice. It 
would be as basely tame to sit quietly under 
such an insult, as for a man meekly to receive 
a blow in the face. 

And the remembrance bore her thoughts 
back to Maurice. He had loved her once, far 
more passionately, it had then seemed to her, 
than James had done. His last words came 
back. Was it jealousy that withheld him ? 
For a moment hope returned, and she saw herself 
the mistress of Flairs, and the wife of Maurice. 
But, no; backed by Mr. Dryden's influence, 
even if he had deemed his suit difficult, he would 
have urged it. Disappointment . that cold, 
white, crawling worm, ate into her heart like a 
canker . ^a canker worse than the sorrow of 
death, for that is God's ordinance and disposing. 
This, to our finite wisdom seems chargeable to 
our own short-comings. 

Elinor writhed now, as she remembered her 
haughtiness to Maurice. Was he revenging 
himself for that ? No, he looked . even in her 
anger she owned this . too much like Hubert 
Dryden to have any mean or spiteful feelings 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAY TO FLAIRS. 277 

about him. But the insult remained the same 
.it was cruel, dastardly. If she were but a 
man, to revenge it ! 

A sound . the feeling of a presence near her . 
roused her to look up. Within a dozen yards, 
but unconscious of her neighbourhood . for he 
had determined not to look round till he reached 
the beech tree . was James Fisher. Was she 
awake? Could it indeed be, that when she 
thought herself most desolate, a friend, able and 
willing to take her part, had come to her help ? 

She looked about her. There was no one else 
in sight ; but then, no one else, except the 
Squire or herself, was likely to visit that un- 
frequented side of the house, eflFectually parted 
from the flower garden, nearly to the river's 
edge, by the high yew hedge. 

She would have liked to prevent James from 
reaching the beech tree. Once under its broad, 
leafy shade, they were safe ; but the open space 
all round it would make his return thence more 
liable to observation. But why should she care ? 
He was all that was left to her. She must sink 
or rise with him now, for ever. 



278 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

In a moment she was beside him. 

In her heart Elinor thanked God when she 
found he had not received her last peremptory 
letter. Perhaps he would never know that she 
had refused him a last farewell. But she had 
no time to linger over explanations now, or to 
ask why he had entered the Park by a gate on 
this side the river. 

It was indeed soothing to listen to his tender 
reproaches and protestations, and to witness his 
delight when she told him that she could never 
give him up for any one. 

" But you must. prove the truth of your love. 
You must love me only for myself. I have no 
hope of Flairs now, and I would not marry 
Maurice for Flairs twice over. I will never for- 
give him, James. Oh ! if I were only a man, 
to give him the punishment he deserves !" Her 
face was flushed, and her hair disordered, but she 
looked beautiful in her passionate vehemence, 
and Mr. Fisher told her so. She went on ra- 
pidly . "James, will you take my quarrel on 
yourself ? . you are my best friend 1" 

" I will do all I can" . her excitement roused* 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAT TO FUIIRS. 279 

his caution ; " but first, my darling, you must 
calm yourself, and tell me exactly how this inso- 
lent boy has offended you." 
. She stamped her foot with impatience. She 
was far too much overwrought to think of 
management. 

"' I did not expect this ! I should have 
thought the very notion of insult to me would 
have made you more angry than I am myself. 
But, perhaps you have not understood. I tell 
you that Maurice Dryden, as he calls himself, 
has grievously and grossly insulted me. I will 
swear it, if you like !'* 

"You are unjust to me, Elinor. Men are 
never so impulsive as women are, my darling 
girl. You have only to say what you wish me 
to do . if you still prefer not to answer my ques- 
tion as to the offence given." 

Elinor's lip curled. It seemed to her that 
Mr. Fisher ought to have been all a flame to 
revenge her . that the idea of the slightest affront 
offered to her should have transported him be- 
yond any need of prompting, and she told him 
very haughtily, be could choose out of two 



280 suNOR dryden's probation. 

things . he must either horsewhip Maurice, or 
send him a challenge. 

Mr. Fisher raised his hands in deprecation ; 
but though he forced a smile, he grew a shade 
paler under Elinor's penetrating glance. 

" You are not in earnest, dearest ? A chal- 
lenge is a thing of the past. No sane man 
could resort to such a foolish and romantic pro- 
ceeding ; and one can't horsewhip a man in cool 
blood, my Elinor. If this young upstart will 
only offer me reasonable provocation, you may 
depend TU not be wanting. At best it's an 
ungentlemanlike performance, but in cold blood 
.reaUy " 

Elinor's colour had varied ; but as she broke 
in now, her lip trembled, as it seemed, more 
with sorrow than with scorn. 

" Cold blood ! How much insult does it take 
to warm yoiu'S, James ? Look here" . she struck 
her hands sharply together . " if you saw Mau- 
rice give me such a blow as that, would you be 
in any way moved to chastise him ? Well, then 
.don't stop me, now . I tell you, James, he 
has offered me a deeper insult ; and if you will 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAY TO FLAIRS. 281 

not take my quarrel on yourself, I feel that I 
cannot love you . I cannot even like you." 

A sudden exclamation from Mr. Fisher stopped 
her. He was looking towards the house, and 
Elinor perceived her uncle coming directly to- 
wards them. 

She started, but she did not look alarmed. 
She drew a deep breath. At last all deception 
was ended. 

'' That is my uncle, James, and I am glad all 
concealment will be ended, and I shall be freed 
from his persecution about Maurice, for I know 
he would still have persisted, and it gives you an 
opportunity of declaring yourself openly to him.^' 

She looked into her lover's eyes for his answer. 

But Mr. Fisher's eyelids drooped. He felt 
strangely perplexed and embarrassed . girls 
were so foolish ; they never realised that diplo* 
macy would effect more than stubborn oppo- 
sition ; but he was obliged to speak. 

** Don't you think, dearest, that it might be 
better for me to avoid coming into sudden ool 
Usion with your uncle. I believe he has a very 
haughty temper, has he not ?" 



282 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

His hesitating manner . an undefinable shrink- 
ing away from her aroused her more than his 
words. 

The Squire was still at some distance, and 
with his slow measured tread would take several 
minutes yet to reach them. 

She tried to believe in her lover's courage, 
and the protection it would afford her against 
her uncle's anger ; . tried against the quidc 
feminine instinct which drove the truth into her 
heart, thrilling the sensitive fibres with an agony 
that was insupportable. 

*' I don't understand you," she said quicldy. 
*^ I cannot deceive my uncle by passing you off as 
another person. What is it you wish me to do ?" 

He answered without looking at her, although 
he must have surely felt how intensely her eyes 
were seeking his. 

" Nothing . I only think it would spare you 
much annoyance, if I were to go. I can find 
the way over the bridge you told me of. I 
oould not, you know, interfere between you and 
your uncle. I . I think he will be less angry 
if he finds you alone. It would be a pity to 



u 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAT TO FLAIRS. 283 

make a quarrel, and you will write and tell me 
what happens." 

He turned away almost before his words were 
all spoken. Elinor stretched out her hand and 
caught his arm for an instant ; then she let it 
fall as if she had touched a reptile. 

"Yes . you can go . you had better go. 
You are free of me for ever ! All the prefe- 
rence you ever won from me was against my 
first impression . my better judgment. It is 
the most lasting disgrace of my life^ that f 
have stooped to believe in a coward." 

He stopped spell-bound by her words.not 
spoken vehemently^ but with a calm deliberate 
scorn that whitened her face, even to the lips ; 
then he quailed, as a coward always does quail 
beneath a woman's contempt, and hurried off 
rapidly towards the bridge. He had reached it 
before the Squire joined hi^ niece, 

Elinor did not turn one glance towards Mn 
Fisher. She stood still, her hands pressed to- 
gether, her face pale and wrenched with that 
soul-centred agony, which . may God help us 
under it . though we generally bring it on our- 



284 ELINOR drtden's probation. 

selves^ we need, so far as requisite endurance is 
concerned, only to feel once in our lives. 

But her uncle was very near the beech-tree 
now . the pain must be trampled on awhile. 
She^ at least, would be no coward. 

She stepped out to meet him, from under the 
trailing branches. 

"You need not ask any questions, uncle," 
she said in a defiant voice, for she felt that 
she must do battle with all the world if she 
would keep self-respect from sinking in the 
fierce, hard struggle going on within. " I will 
tell you everything. That man sneaking off in 
the distance, I had promised myself to before I 
returned to Flairs. He came here to-day by no 
appointment of mine, and I asked him in return 
for my love to revenge the insult Maurice offered 
me just now. You may judge if any reproach 
from you can humble me further. His answer 
has been what you see . to leave me here to 
bear the full brunt of your anger alone, because 
he feared to meet you. You will say I deserve 
this, and anything else that could happen for my 
deceit and folly. God knows ! . perhaps I do/* 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAY TO FLAIRS. 285 

r 

She paused and looked in his face, while her 
own quivered in every feature with the restless 
agitation she was keeping down by her strong 
will. 

Mr. Dryden did not know how to answer her. 
Her impassioned manner had kept him silent. 
He had not seen her so fearless since her child- 
hood. Was this truth at last ? and had the rest 
been only well acted deceit ? 

He either thought this, or the nobler part of 
his nature forbade him to reproach her. 

He bowed his head gravely. 

'' You will tell oie the name of this person, 
Elinor ?'' 

" Mr. Fisher . a cousin of my father's." The 
last words sprang from a womanly longing to 
give some excuse for an intimacy begun under 
her father's roof; but then she crimsoned with 
shame at being of the same blood with one so 
unworthy. 

" And you have now parted for ever ?" 

She made a mute sign of assent . it would 
have choked her to speak of him again. 

" I have nothing to say, linor/' said her 



886 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

uncle, simply ; *' but you had better go in 
now." 

There was no reproach in his tone ; but there 
was sorrow . a sorrow that forced its way to her 
heart, through the desperate girl's pride and 
passion. 

" Not yet, uncle. I have not yet said all I 
must say. I must thank you for the past, and 
for what I feel a hundred times more . your 
goodness to me now." Her voice trembled, but 
she steadied it and went on with increasing 
vehemence . " Uncle, you cannot think I could 
still live at Flairs. You cannot desire this. I 
have broken my compact with you. I have for- 
feited every claim on your interest or your love, 
and I promise you I will bear the blame. I 
have loved you, uncle," . she could hardly con- 
quer the rising sobs now . " more than you will 
think so false a nature could love ; but I can 
love while I deceive. I must always love you ; 
but you could never love me, for you could not 
love where you could not fully trust I could 
never satisfy your expectations, unless life be- 
came a perpetual hypocrisy. I am not good ; 



MR. FISHER FINDS HIS WAT TO FLAIRS. 287 

but I may grow better if I have less motive to 
appear so^ and that cannot be in this place . '' 

She seemed not to have finished speaking, for 
she paused, looking earnestly at him. 

Then, just as he was about to answer her, 
she snatched his hand with both hers, kissed it, 
and before he could detain her, passed swiftly 
out of sight. 



CHAPTER XII. 



THE DAY AFTER. 



Mr. Dryden was deeply unhappy, keenly mor- 
tified : he had hardly a word to spare for Mau- 
rice ; but as soon as breakfast was over he shut 
himself up in his private room, to think again 
over what had happened, and to write to his 
niece. He had been thinking all night, as 
any one might have seen who looked at his 
pale, sunken eyes ; and like many things over 
which we brood and mourn, and cannot in any 
way induce ourselves to accept as inevitable, 
thinking, in > this case, was simply lost time ; 
the deed was done, and could neither be blotted 
out or undone. 



THE DAY AFTER. 289 

The Squire had walked up and down by the 
river-side for some time after Elinor left him on 
the previous day, trying to comprehend and to 
find some excuse for her conduct. He did not 
intend to speak to her until he had quite re- 
solved what line he had best adopt towards her. 
For the present, at any rate, a union between 
her and his son was impossible, and he believed 
Elinor was right in wishing to leave Flairs ; but 
if she did this, she must be placed in safer 
keeping than her father's. If she had known 
how severely her uncle blamed himself for his 
negligence in allowing her to spend so long a 
time in her own home, she would not have 
feared his reproaches. 

He felt that Roland Markham's want of 
principle must prove a snare to such a mind, 
and plan after plan revolved through his brain 
without any question about Elinor's willing sub- 
mission. He never imagined that she consi- 
dered their last meeting had snapped all ties 
between them, and left her free tu choose her 
own path in life. 

VOL. III. 19 



290 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

The dinner bell roused him, and he went in. 

Neither Maurice nor Elinor appeared. 

The former had left a message to say he 
should not be in till evening. Miss Dryden 
sent word that she was in her room. 

But the Squire did not send for her . he 
was glad she had the good taste to stop away. 
He felt disappointed that Maurice should be 
absent . almost vexed . but if he had not been 
so pre-occupied, he might have guessed the 
truth, that his son would not pain Elinor by 
his presence, while they both remained at 
Flairs. 

When he had sent away his scarcely-tasted 
dinner, he again went through his scene with 
Elinor, and for the first time her extreme agita- 
tion recurred to him vividly. Before, the dis- 
grace, the distress of the whole situation, both 
to him and to herself, had thrown her manner 
out of sight. Above all, her repeated falseness 
had attracted his reflections, but now it was dif- 
ferent. How very vehement she had been . 
almost wild . and how strangely she had thanked 
him, and assured him of her love. A sudden 



THE DAY AFTER. 291 

thought glanced through his mind, and he laid 
his hand on the bell. 

Then he checked himself, and went straight 
to Elinor's bed-room. 

He knocked twice, but there was no answer, 
and he went in. 

The look of the room was enough ; he hardly 
needed the little note on the table to tell him 
that she had left Flairs for ever. 

And now, as has been said, he sate next day 
thinking this over, and wondering what new 
mortification Fate would hurl against him. 

Mr. Dryden could not stoop to deceive, and 
when he said to Northover . 

" Miss Dryden is gone to London ; she wishes 
her luggage packed and sent after her," the cun- 
ning housekeeper knew as well as possible that 
Miss Elinor " Had turned out just as bad as 
her own ma, and gone and run away.'* 

In her private mind she decided it was with 
the gentleman under the beech-tree, but she 
had the prudence to keep this hypothesis to 
herself. 

The Squire had just finished a long letter to 

19.2 



292 ELINOR drydbn's probation. 

his niece. Spite of his vexation at her unseemly 
flight, he wrote tenderly and kindly, though 
there was reproof for what had been really 
wrong in her conduct. But when he tried to 
warn her against Roland Markham's example, 
his pen faltered and stopped. . Suddenly he felt 
he was the last person to interfere between a 
child and its father ; he told her she would find 
he had settled a sufficient income upon her for 
life, and if she married with his approbation, 
he promised to increase this, but he said not 
one word of Maurice. Even now convinced of 
her want of principle, and keenly feeling that he 
could never have married such a woman him- 
self, he mourned over the hopes he felt com- 
pelled to relinquish. 

He had just sealed his letter, when a servant 
appeared. 

The man had been only a few months at Flairs, 
and was probably quite ignorant of the family 
history, for he threw open the writing-room 
door as if he had brought Mr. Dryden the most 
delightful surprise in the world. 
' The Squire looked up astonished ; it was 



THE DAY AfXBR. 293 

agaiqst all laws to show any intruder into his 
sanctum ; but the announcement that followed 
explained the man's daring. 

" Your brother-in-law, sir, Mr. Markham." 

Roland entered with a short, quick, uneasy 
step, as if be expected to be pulled up pi^ the 
threshold, while the Squire remained sitting, 
partly from his extreme surprise, partly because 
he would not give the slightest sign of greeting 
to the intruder. 

But Roland did not wait for this. 

" You are quite aware why I've come, Went- 
worth Dryden," he said, almost before the door 
was closed on him, he knew the familiar name 
would make the Squire writhe ; " what's the 
meaning of this rascally treatment of piy girl 
Elinor ? She's about the best heart that ever 

 

beat, and pretends it's all her fault, but I know 
better. I can see what it is as plain as I can 
ee you." 

" Mr. Markham,". the Squire looked for a 
moment fully at the man who in his eyes had 
brought such disgrace on bis bouse,. a doujble 
disgrace now, for might not Elinor's faults be 



294 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

attributed to inheritance and example, her unde 
thought so, . " you have done wrongly in coming 
here. " You will do worse by remaining, or by 
forcing any discussion upon me. Any explana- 
tion you wish for can be transacted in writing, 
or with my lawyer. I decidedly decline to give 
you my reasons now for anything I have done." 

He looked away froiiv Markham before he 
finished speaking. When last he had seen him 
(it all came back . he remembered it well), he 
had stood beside his father, old Markham, the 
attorney, in the Justice room at Flairs . a hand- 
some, bold-looking youth, to whom he had 
felt an instinctive antipathy. A vulgar style of 
beauty, perhaps, but he could scarcely have 
believed that sensual indulgence could have so 
lowered and imbru|ed its expression, while the 
life of perpetual shift and subterfuge had given 
a knowing, almost sinister, look to the eyes, 
in which, spite of his abhorrence of the man 
before him, the Squire recognised a strong like- 
ness to Elinor. 

His steady aversion had been founded on 
truth then, for this man's face spoke his 



THE DAY AFTER. 295 

character. He thought of his poor sister, and 
sighed. Was it possible she could still love or 
cling to Roland Markham ? 

Bilt he was quickly roused by his brother-in- 
law. 

He flung himself into a chair, and refused to 
leave Flairs . to leave that room even . till his 
demand was complied with. His wife's income 
was settled on herself and her children for life, 
therefore he had no fear of injuring them by his 
insolence, and he thought Wentworth Dryden's 
fastidious pride would be willing to compel his 
silence for the sake of his heir. 

He had dropped his blustering tone, thinking 
it as well not to irritate the Squire beyond en- 
durance, and again asked him to give his own 
version of Elinor's return to Flairs, and Mau- 
rice's sudden appearance there. 

Mr. Dryden made him no answer ; he seemed 
resolved to ignore his presence after he had 
pointed out' the means by which he might ob- 
tain redress. 

Markham's anger rose . 

" I have asked you twice, Wentworth Dryden, 



296 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

as one man has a right to ask another, why 
after taking my child from me, and promising 
to adopt her, you send her back to me suddenly, 
and without condescending to make me aware 
that you have chosen another heir. I gave 
you the option of telling the story your own 
way. I was willing, in fact, to give you a 
fair hearing; but, by Heaven, your pride is 
worse than even I believed ! Are you and I 
made of different clay, do you think, that you 
should dare to treat me as you do ? But as you 
will neither reply or listen to me, the whole 
world shall hear, that my child has been sent 
from Flairs for no fault of hers, but to make 
way for an impostor, your own illegitimate son." 

He paused to see the effect of his words, but 
he was far too impulsive to understand Went- 
worth Dryden. The blow cut through to his 
heart, showing him at one glance an interpreta- 
tion which he had not dreamed of, that might 
be put upon his conduct, yet outwardly he gave 
no sign of the wound, except by increased cold- 
ness, and by rising slowly from his seat. 

''Mr. Markham" . he spoke with a calm 



thb; day AFTEit. 297 

dignity that the other QOuld not have attained 
had he tried . "this had better end. If you 
have come here only to insult me, I think you 
have shown bad taste and bad judgment . do 
not interrupt me. But as I suppose you would 
be loath to propagate slander, knowing it to be 
such, and knowing, moreover, that such a pro- 
ceeding entails penalties, I tell you that the 
gentleman whom I have chosen for my heir, 
was born in lawful wedlock, which if it were 
necessary he could prove in a court of justice. 
I believe you have never had cause to doubt my 
word, and I declare to you solemnly, that 
Maurice Dryden, as he will hereafter be called, 
is not my illegitimate son. If you had asked 
these two plain questions, I should have an- 
swered them at once, without necessitating the 
amouqt of bully and swagger which you see has 
frustrated the avowed purpose of your intru-* 
sion on me " 

" By Jove, Dryden, your language is a little 
too strong," blustered Markham ; but the 
Squire went on firmly . 

" For I distinctly refuse any detailed explana- 



298 ELINOR dryden's probation. 

tion of my parting with Elinor. You know " 
. he laid an emphasis on the word . " that 
from me you had no right to expect she would 
inherit Flairs, and from herself you have pos- 
sibly already learned that she has even forfeited 
the conditions on which I had hoped she might 
do so. But " . he touched the letter on the 
table . " she will learn by this the provision I 
have made for her, which your interference. 
and I must add insolence, Mr. Markham . can 
neither make nor mar." 

He saw an ill-repressed smile curling Roland's 
lip, and he went on . 

" After the insult you have oflfered, I advise 
you to leave me at once. If you spoke it in 
any hope of inducing me to buy your silence 
you must see your mistake. Whether derived 
frQm others, or coined by yourself, it is simply 
one of the blackest falsehoods that one man 
ever devised against another, and as such must 
take the usual fate of unsupported falsehood- 
contempt. Now I will ring for the servant to 
show you out." 

And all this while, at every word he spoke, 



THB DAY AFTER. 299 

the wound bled inwardly. It might be that the 
depth of pain gave a yet nobler, loftier dignity 
to his manner, for when the servant appeared 
Roland Mark ham departed more quietly than 
could have been expected, only grumbling out 
. that it was very well to say so, but it would 
be an ugly story to live down. 

But the real talisman that produced his 
silence . though the Squire had not thought of 
this . was the sealed letter on the table. Till 
he knew its contents it might be as well, in his 
own familiar language, " to shut up." He knew 
in his heart that Dryden would not break his 
word when once pledged to another ; but it 
would not be breaking his word to re- write that 
letter. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



JOY. 



M/iURiCE found his father in an almost death- 
like state of insensibility. The blow had been 
so sudden, and the trials of the last few weeks 
had been so incessant and over-strained, that 
Nature gave way under the overwhelming 
pressure. 

But when Mr. Dryden came to himself, he 
had no mind to shrink from the pain that had 
crushed him. 

He told Maurice plainly of Roland Mark- 
ham's suspicions, and offered to publish the 
truth, if his son thought this scandal likely to 



JOY. 301 

gain credit. There vas a nervous working in 
his features, which showed the suffering he rnqst 
have gone through, before he could have re- 
solved on such a sacrifice . a revelation which 
his whole life had been spent in guarding 
against. 

But Maurice did not need this to decide him. 
He told his father that his own knowledge of 
his birth was sufficient for him. He had never 
lived in the world, and he was totally indifferent 
to its opinions, and even on the low ground 
of expediency he could not see that the telhng 
his mother's story would establish his legitimacy 
With people who were resolved to dispute it. 

And then he checked himself, for he felt how 
painful this must be to the Squire. 

His father looked at him long without speak- 
ing. Then he opened his arms and folded 
Maurice to his heart for the first time fervently, 
and with the full trust of a parent's love . a 
love mingled with admiring reverence. There 
was something in his son's perfect forgiveness, 
in his noble ungrudging resolution to bear 
through life any stigma which his father's act 



302 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

had engendered, that he could scarcely realize. 
It moved him strongly ; and when Maurice 
urged him to go to his room, and rest for some 
hours, after such an unusual illness, he shook 
his head . 

** I must write two letters first, Maurice ; and 
then, perhaps, I will do as you say. But" . he 
smiled fondly in his son's face . " I think you 
must leave me; my happiness is almost too 
much for me, now." 

Be held out his hand, and Maurice left him 
after that silent pressure, which repeated to him 
his father's love and trust. 

He brushed the tears from his eyes as he 
strode across the flower-garden, and over the 
little bridge. What did he care for Markham 
and his vile slanders? Just then, his heart 
was so full of love for his father, that even Cecil 
herself was not thought of. " If Ben had only 
lived/' he murmured, as he went up through 
the old wood towards the gamekeeper's cottage ; 
" how proud and happy he would have been." 
He had passed the previous afternoon in ram- 
bling over every well remembered haunt^ and 



JOY. 803 

each had vividly recalled the memory of his dear 
old friend. 

He thought DOW, as he strolled towards the 
cottage, that Flairs had but one want . nothing 
linked it with Cecil, except that one remembrance 
of her vision-like face in the North Gallery. 
There was much in the wood itself, and the level 
above, to remind him at every step of Ellinor ; 
and it. was painful to him to be so reminded. 
After all, she had been his first benefactress, 
and he had been the means of driving her from 
Flairs ; for, although the Squire oflFered no ex- 
planation, he had told his son that Elinor would 
not return. 

Deep in his heart Maurice thanked God that 
he had loved Cecil instead of Elinor ; but still, 
the feeling of ingratitude, of ill-requited obliga- 
tion, was painful. And yet Roland's threat had 
done more to reconcile him to his father's deci- 
sion about Elinor than any persuasion. To re- 
store her expected inheritance now, would be to 
acknowledge the truth of Markham's slander, 
and tacitly to bribe him to silence. And be- 
yond this, with the assurance of his father's love 



804 ELINOR DRTDEn's PROBATION. 

bad come a willingness to submit to his judg- 
roent| which surprised Maurice himself. Id a 
day or two, when the Squire seemed himself 
again, he resolved to ask what had been decided 
for Elinor, and how far it would be possible to 
settle such a sum upon her as would make the 
disparity in their prospects less unequal. 

He was more eagei^ to talk of this than to 
revive the subject of Cecil with his father. A 
true instinct told him to trust the Squire really, 
and not to disturb by any impatience or self 
will, the warm, strong love, that held them fast 
together now. 

And for the two days that followed Elinor's 
departure, his own studies and Ben were the 
chief subjects of talk . for both father and son 
were thinkers . and the very sight of each other 
at present provoked reverie and remembrance 
rather than conversation. 

On the third day Maurice received a sudden 
summons to the writing-room. He obeyed it 
hastily, with a secret dread that he might find 
his father as he had found him after Markham's 
departure. There had been a nervous excite- 



JOY. 305 

ment about him in the morning, which had 
puzzled and disquieted his son. 

But at the door of the writing-room Mr. 
Dry den stood ready to receive him. 

" You will not quarrel with me to-day, Mau- 
rice" . and he smiled . a smile that looked away 
from his son to some one else who stood beyond 
him. 

It was Cecil. Blushing, trembling with joy 
and emotion, his Cecil now. 

At least, that was what he called her when 
he took her to his heart, and kissed her, just as 
if the Squire had been any where else. And 
then he turned to his father, and thanked him 
with his eyes far more than words. 

Mr. Dryden smiled at them both. 

.* You give me thanks, Maurice," he said, 
" for what was not mine to give, and what". 
he looked slyly at Cecil . " you seem quite ready 
to help yourself to, without any leave from me. 
But I don't blame him, my child" . he bent 
down, and kissed her forehead ; '^ I love him all 
the better for having chosen you." 

Cecil took his hand and kissed it, just as she 

VOL. III. 20 



306 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

had done before, a<^ the time of her fhther's 
death. 

^* I think I have an older claim on your love 
than he has/' she said, Iboking archly at Mau 
rice; "you were my fether before you were 
his/' 

"And I almost believe," said Maurice, when 
the Squire had left them to join Mr. and Miss 
Brownlow, who were awaiting him in dutiful 
mystification in the drawing-room, "that you 
Ibve my father better than you do me, even 
now." 

"Perhaps I do," Cecil laughed; "but then, 
I know him better Was I right or wrong, to* 
bid you go to Flairs, and trust him ?" 



CHAPTER THE LAST. 

When Elinor found that in spite of all her 
faithlessness her uncle meant still to befriend 
her, she was deeply moved, and for -a time she 
sorrowed more acutely that she had forfeited 
her right ito his love than to his inheritance. 

But hers was a nature in which good once 
developed would manifest itself in action rather 
than in thought or regret for past errors. 

She told her mother- . ^for the present she 
shrank from her father's counsels . that she 
wished to begin life again, and that this would 
be done best by leaving England, and with it 
the ties and associations of the past. She told 
her mother, too, with an openness that fairly 

20.2 



308 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

astonished poor Mrs. Markham, the whole story 
of James Fisher's double-dealing . for her acute- 
ness guessed the part he had acted towards her 
sister . and pointed out that the only way of 
freeing Adelaide from the fascination he still 
possessed over her, was to prevent the chances 
of their meeting. 

She had to argue long and patiently, and for 
Elinor the last trial was the hardest. Her mo- 
ther maintained that James had loved Adelaide 
through all, and had only been attracted from 
her by the fascination of Elinor's presence. 

It was very hard to hear this, especially as 
facts seemed to prove its truth ; but when her 
mother tidded that James and Adelaide might 
still be hap()y, she resolved that her sister should 
not be linked to one so unworthy. She was 
unwilling to appeal to Adelaide herself; she 
knew, by instinct, that so meek and confiding a 
nature would be very slow to believe the faith- 
lessness of the man she loved ; and Elinor craved 
now so ardently for affection, that she shrank 
from an explanation which might create a last- 
ing barrier between herself and her sister. 



ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 309 

But to her surprise she found an ally in her 
father. When his wife mentioned Elinor's pro- 
ject to him, with much dread and deprecation, 
for she anticipated an immediate refusal, he de- 
clared that i); was what he had been planning 
for years, just the thing to suit him ; that he 
was sick and tired of working to support so ex- 
pensive and helpless a family, that they should 
get the children more cheaply taught abroad, 
and that if Elinor chose to contribute towards 
the common fund, he could see every prospect 
of comfort in her proposal. 

And when he found how generously his 
daughter was disposed to act, he gladly agreed 
to her one stipulation, that they, at any rate . 
the female part of the family . sliould leave 
England at once : she longed for change, for 
refuge from thoughts of the past ; above all, to 
be separated from the neighbourhood of her 
false lover. 

Had she known all, she could not have de- 
vised a nobler return for her uncle's conduct 
towards her. His separation from English ties 
and associations silenced Roland Markham most 



310 ELINOR DRTDEN's PROBi^TION. 

effectually ; and although at first stratige mmours 
of all kinds arose respecting Mr. Dryden's 
adopted son, still, by degrees, they died away, 
when no one oould bring forward any Gertam 
foundation for them. 



EPILOGUE. 



It is evefning. but the air is still fiill of light, 
aye and oft movement^ and that soft languorous 
murmur made by the quiet humming of gnats' 
wings, tired by the fievce vehemence of their 
noonday sport. The air stirs gently as the 
moths flit past. The leaves on the trees are 
stilly waving, a lullaby to the wearied day as it 
reclines on tiie edge of Earth. Soft cooing 
notes come througb the wood, blending with 
Uie quiet murmur rather than as distinct sounds. 
All is hushed^ subdued to mellowness . all but 
tiie rich orange and blood-red light that, pan* 
nelled by the tree stems, streams across the 
river. Its brilliance almost effaces the fair 



812 ELINOR DRYDEN's PROBATION. 

landscape, which for the moment it turns to 
broad masses of gold relieved by deep purple 
shadows, and completely dazzles the eyes of a 
group who are watching its glories, half-way up 
the hanging wood. 

Mr. Dryden and Cecil, and two children are 
resting under an ash tree. She looks scarcely 
any older, and certainly not a whit less bright 
and lovely, as she shades her eyes with her hand 
and gazes across the river. For they have 
strolled some way beyond the bridge, and 
Flairs comes no longer between the^ and the 
glowing sunset. 

And although Mr. Dryden*s hair is greyer, 
there is no other sign of age to mark that 
some years have passed over him. The life- 
long cross he bears, in his powerlessness to 
claim before the world the son he now almost 
idolizes, has softened and subdued his proud 
bearing ; but there is a brightness in his eyes, 
an alertness in his movements, as he defends 
himself against the joint attacks of his two 
grandsons, that may well weigh against a few 
white hairs. 



EPILOGUE. 313 

With peals of laughter, in^vhich their mother 
joins as she turns round from gazing, . the 
children pelt him with burrs, flowers, and all 
the light missiles their baby hands can grasp,, 
their rosy faces glowing, and their bright hair 
shining in rufSed glory round their heads. 

But there is a crackling sound among the 
trees above them, and a well-known shout calls 
them away to fresh prey. Their uncle Eras- 
mus is a far more unwilling victim than their 
grandfather. 

He is helpless as a cockchafer in the power of 
children, and when one of his tormentors dives 
into his pocket, and. rushes off with the spoil, 
he grows desperate, although he makes no 
effort at pursuit. 

" Bless my soul ! . here, Maurice . Cecil- 
one of you come to this child. Bless my soul ! 
he . why he's got my chloroform ! and, well . 
well . well . he's given the box of pins to the 
little one, and he'll swallow *em !" 

But Mr. Dryden is the only person who has 
any ears for his complaint, and the delinquents 
are soon captured. 

VOL TIL 21 



314 ELINOR DRYn' PROBATION. 

Maurioe aad his wife wander on beside the 
sparkling river. She da^ both hands round 
his arm as th.^ stand a moment stilL 

'* I used to think," she said, *^ that happiness 
must be full of great sorrow as weU as intense 
joy ; that true bliss could not continue where 
life was unchequered by shadows ; but now I 
see it may be like our river^ bright for ever, and 
yet for ever varied by the trifling obstacles that 
stem its course, only to urge it on more joy- 
ously still." 

Maurice smiled, and bent down and kissed 
her for an answer. 



THE END. 
