THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE BROKEN HERO. 

THE English tourist who stays for even two or three days at 
Lucerne is sure to steam up that short arm of the lake-cross 
which points to Kiissnacht, where, according to fame and 
chronicle and Schiller, William Tell sent the arrow into 
Gessler's heart. He will probably take a carriage and drive 
along the road, between vines and apple-trees and beehives, 
until he reaches the memorial chapel with the daub, like a 
public-house sign, outside it, representing the death of the 
tyrant, and exhibiting, conspicuous in the foreground, a 
floundering, supplicating woman, whom the guide or driver is 
pretty sure to describe as Tell's wife, but whom the tourist, 
consulting, like all the world now, his Schiller for history, 
knows to be Armgarfc, the wife of the imprisoned peasant. 
Perhaps he is disappointed with the tame, rural, and orchard- 
like appearance of the quiet little ascending road, with its 
modest green banks on either side, and thinks it very unlike 
indeed to the wild ravine full of jagged rocks, avalanche- 
menaced and thunder-blasted, which he had learned from 
Schiller to picture as the Pass of Kiissnacht. So, it may be, 
he returns straightway to the lake and to Lucerne. But if he 
still keeps on, leaving Lucerne and Kiissnacht bebind, and 
pursues the apple-bordered road, he will very soon break out 
upon a charming and, supposing him new to the place, a very 
unexpected sight. Beneath his feet, as he emerges from the 
trees, lies the tiny lovely Lake of Zug . so quiet, passionless, 



- TUE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

and dreamy, that it reminds him of Grasmere or Killarney,. 
rather than of the waters that lie blue and glowin<* under the 
fierce white glare of Alpine snows. And, still following the 
road that now skirts the lake, he sees at last, full in front of 
him, at the farther end of the pool, and nestling quite down 
to the edge of the water, a quaint, odd-looking old town with 
glittering spire and red roofs, rather G-erman than Swiss of 
aspect, and apparently enjoying a genuine Teutonic sleepiness. 
Perhaps the town, if one were to enter, would prove un- 
inviting and dirty, with noisome gutters and abounding in 
queer smells ; but to those who, like the present writer, have 
only gazed from a picturesque distance and never entered, it is 
all charming . a sleeping town, so close to. the waters of a 
transparent lake that you can hardly distinguish the reflected 
houses beneath the surface of the pool from the realities 
above ; and both look equally dreamy and fairy-like and 
beautiful. 

" Now, that is just the place, I think, for some one who 
really wanted to retire from the world, isn't it t If I were 
some disappointed man I would go and live just there, and 
never leave it until I died ; and then they should bury me 
near the edge of the lake." 

" Yes ; but I don't much believe in retiring from the world. 
Why not live in the world, and do some good there 1 " 

" But a disappointed man, you know, dearest, or woman, . 
somebody who really could not bear up, and was broken 
down ! " 

" Why not endeavour to work off his disappointment, or 
hers, by trying to do some good for somebody 1 " 

" Yes ; but suppose, you practical dear . suppose somebody 
who had done all the good he could do, or wanted to do, 
and could do nothing more 1 ? A defeated hero, suppose? 
Come, that's just to! A broken hero, world-defeated perhaps, 
with an ungrateful country that would not be saved, let him 
try his very best ; and at last he goes away, not an<*ry, you 
know, but sorrowful and resigned . and so he lives here . and 
he floats over the lake in a boat, and he communes with nature 
of evenings like this, and he knows nobody, and is alone. I 
think the idea is delightful. Is not this the very place for 
im J 

Her companion laughed . (we need hardly say that the last 
speaker was a woman) ; his laugh was full, genial, manly ; and 



THE BROKEN HERO. 3 

he looked down at her as she stood by his side with a fond, 
indulgent, admiring expression. He was very proud of her, 
and delighted in her ; most of all, perhaps, when she talked 
some romantic feminine sort of nonsense ; for she did not often 
thus indulge, but was usually rather earnest, eager, and, in a 
certain sense, practical. He was a tall, well-built, fine-looking 
man, with thick curling hair fast growing grey, . indeed, quite 
white in some places, . and closely-clipped grey whiskers. One 
might have called him stately, but that there was something 
about him too genial, good-humoured, and friendly, to warrant 
the cold impressiveness of such a word. Although grey- 
haired, he was fresh and strong and straight ; a man of fifty, 
perhaps, who would have looked quite young still, but that his 
hair had prematurely lost its colour. His companion was 
perhaps half his age, and about half his size. She was a 
beautiful little dark-haired, dark-eyed woman, with refined 
and delicate features and pale complexion ; only a faint trace 
of colour in it here and there, just like the first slight blush 
of the dawn in a pallid sky, . of which, it need not be ex- 
plained to any poetic reader, her eyes were the stars. She was 
exquisitely dressed, . all trailing silk and feathers and chains and 
what not, . a charming figure for a drawing-room, or even a 
table d'hote at the Schweizer Hof, but looking a little odd and 
out of place on the road by the Lake of Zug. Some women, 
and more especially little women, seem so inseparable from fine 
clothes, that one can hardly help thinking they must have 
been literally . not figuratively . born in the purple of glisten- 
ing silks and phosphorescent velvets. Yet this was a strong 
little woman too, well able to hold her own, and do her work 
in the world ; and her husband and she had had no carriage 
from the steamer's pier at Kiissnacht, but had walked thu3 far, 
and meant to walk back again. 

" Perhaps somebody is looking down on our own little lake 
at home, Myra," said the husband, "and fancying it just the 
place for a broken hero's retirement ; and yet we are not quite 
lonely there, nor very dejected, nor out of work; and we don't 
creep into bushes there to groan and die." 

" No ; but it has not the lonely, placid look of this, some- 
how. I always associate our lake and all about it with our 
work, which I love, and our constant duties and occupations, 
and life seems all energy to me there. Here it seems all repose 
and doing nothing . only, I suppose, because the place is strange 

B 2 



4 THE WATEEDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

to me. Of course, 1 could not imagine my broken hero at 
Lucerne . he might as well be found in Regent Street. But I 
do delight in the idea of imagining him here ; and I shall 
always picture him to my mind as a solitary figure somewhere 
on the bank of this dear little lake. When I get home I will 
paint him some day in water-colours and send him to the 
Exhibition . where I dare say they will never let him in. No 
matter ; I will paint him . if I have time." 

" Dear little Myra, I fear your round of parish work has 
sadly eaten up your time for art. Sometimes I think it a 
pity." 

" Then pray don't think it so any more," she said, looking 
eagerly up at him. " I love my round of parish work . I de- 
light in having my duties, as you have yours. What do I want 
with painting, or care about it . except now and then as an 
amusement ? All that sort of thing is nonsense, and I hope I 
have thrown my nonsense away." 

Her husband almost sighed ; and looked down at her with a 
tender expression of something like compassion as well as 
love. 

" The nonsense is the brightest part of life, most women 
think," he said ; " but you are not like other women, dearest . 
happily for me." 

She pressed his arm gratefully. 

"But, now, of your world-defeated hero . your Columbus 
who has come back without finding America . your Garibaldi 
who has not entered Naples ; and who is to live and die here. 
What is he to be like ?. Like me, for instance 1" 

She laughed merrily. 

" O no, dear : you are too strong and energetic and clever. 
He must be darker, and paler, and perhaps . " 

She stopped, a little confused. 

" And a good deal younger, lassie ? Why not ? All the 
better too, to give the picture value as a fable. A man must 
be still young to be tragical and disappointed and moody. 
Your defeated hero, were he my age, would be too conscious 
of the value of time to waste any in lonely regrets. He would 
be attempting something else straightway. But your picture 
will be consistent with truth and nature. Your defeated hero 
will meditate and perhaps lament here for a season or so, and 
then, trust me, he will take to the world and work again . and 
he will win next time." 



THE BKOKEN HERO. 

"He will . indeed he will !" said she, looking earnestly up, 
as if they had been talking of some real being. 

Her husband laughed, a happy, loving laugh. 

"If you become so seriously interested in the fortunes of our 
hero . your hero, I should rather say . I shall be growing 
jealous of him presently. But I promise you I'll hold you to 
your word : I'll find time for you to paint this picture." 

" O, I can do it if you will help me, and make time for 
me, and keep me up to it. But who's to sit for the hero? I 
don't know of any one in our place who bears the slightest 
resemblance to such a creature." 

"No, neither do I. Our people are for the most part only 
oatmeal and rye, and such other homely useful growths : not 
flowers . passion-flowers especially. I am more fortunate than 
you, Myra . or should be, if I were an artist. If / want to 
paint a beautiful heroine I have not far to look."' 

"Flatterer!" She smiled delightedly as she looked up, 
knowing that from him there came no flattery, but only the 
pure and simple truth. 

They remained silent a moment. Suddenly a plash of the 
water attracted the attention of the husband, and he looked 
on the lake, then said in a low tone, " See, Myra, here comes 
your broken hero. Here he is in his own proper person." 

For a boat had been slowly approaching the shore, unper- 
ceived hitherto by our pair while they talked. A man was 
lazily propelling it with his pair of oars. 

"He is an Englishman," said Myra's husband in an under- 
tone. Myra's husband had been an Oxford man, and rowed 
well in his day ; and always in late years made a point of seeing 
the great annual race on the Thames ; and he knew an English- 
man's touch at an oar by sight, however lazily it might suit the 
Englishman's humour to pull. 

The new-comer ran his boat in upon the shore, then got out, 
doing everything slowly and rather listlessly, and pulled it up 
safe from the water. Then he arranged the oars in it, and 
came up the bank, until he stood on the road close to our 
English pair. He was a tall, broad-shouldered, slightly- 
stooping man, with dark full beard and moustache, eyes not so 
dark as the colour of his beard and his complexion might lead 
one to expect, and square forehead with thick wavy hair. A 
young man he seemed to the Rev. Dr. Alwyn, our friend, who 
now looked at him ; almost an elderly sort of person to B?. 



6 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Alwyn's young wife. He was probably not much inside forty 
years of age ; but there was a certain wasted look about his 
face which might have suggested to a worldly-wise observer 
that youth's cbymic treasure had perhaps been spent betimes. 
To any eye, however careless, he was a remarkable figure. Dr. 
Alwyn took his measure, or believed he did, in a moment. 
" Odd," he thought . " poor, perhaps : but a gentleman." 

Myra surveyed him with equal interest, but under her eyes. 
She was disappointed. " Not at all my broken hero," she said 
to herself; "yet there's something of a broken and defeated 
look about him, too." 

" Good evening, sir," said Dr. Alwyn, at once addressing the 
stranger frankly, as if they ought to be friends. " An English- 
man, I know ! I saw it at a glance by the way you handled 
the oars." 

The stranger took off his hat to the lady, showing a brown, 
muscular hand as he did so ; and showing too . what might 
have been a good deal more surprising . that the sight of a 
lady embarrassed him. He looked away from her to her 
husband, and appeared to warm a little at the sight of that 
genial and manly face. 

" Yes," he said, in slow and somewhat embarrassed tones, 
" an Englishman. I suppose we are easily recognised any- 
where." 

"And a north-of-England man, too!" said the Doctor 
joyously. 

The stranger looked surprised. 

" Yes, indeed, a north-of-England man," he replied. 

" Ah, I knew it in a moment. I knew your country by 
observing the touch of your hand . your county, I may venture 
to say, .by the sound of your voice. I am a north-of-England 
man myself, and whatever they may say of us in the south, I 
always bold that we are the friendliest of all Englishmen . at 
least to each other. I am glad to hear the tones of a northern 
-voice." 

" And so am I. indeed I am !" replied the stranger, with a 
sort of sudden burst of heartiness, which called into play a 
sweetness and geniality of expression about the lips one would 
hardly at first have expected to see, but which, as he happened 
just at that moment to meet Myra's dark eyes, kept studiously 
devoid as they were of all expression of interest or emotion, 
as suddenly subsided, and, after a moment of embarrassment, 



THE BROKEN HERO. 7 

left him again grave as before. To say the truth, she was 
uneasily considering what the stranger, if he should prove to 
be a gentleman, might be thinking of her husband's impulsive 
friendliness, and was perhaps determined that she at least- 
should not be supposed capable of any participation in it. So 
she regarded the new-comer with] calm eyes of the best-bred 
impassiveness. The latter crossed to the Doctor's side, and, as 
our pair were beginning to resume their walk, he walked along 
with them towards the little town at the head of the lake. 
He and the Doctor at all events were friends already. 

" Yes," continued the stranger, " I am glad to hear a voice 
that reminds me of the north. The fact is, I have been out of 
England for many years. I have been in Australia, digging 
and sheep-farming, and I don't know what else. But I come 
from the north . from Cumberland, in fact." 

" I knew it ! " said the Doctor triumphantly. . " I knew it, 
Myra dear ! " and he thus dragged his wife into the con- 
versation. 

" Yes, dear," she demurely answered ; and would not be 
dragged any farther. 

"There have been plenty of changes in the north during the 
last few years," the Doctor continued. " You will find a good 
deal to wonder at when you go back, if you are going back." 

" Yes, I am going back . soon, too ; but I don't expect to 
find much change in the little out-of-the-way place where I 
used|to live, and mean to live again . if I can stand it. There 
cannot be much change in hills and water." 

"Nay, railways and tunnels and steamers make a sad 
change, as you probably will find. We live close to a lake . 
not. one of the show-lakes, though . and we are every day 
expecting to find the hills behind us pierced with a tunnel, and 
a service of steamers plying on the lake, and shoals of visitors 
pouring in just as at Windermere, or there behind us at 
Lucerne. My wife is unhappy at the prospect. I can't say 
that I am, much. I am fond of nature, but I don't want her 
all to myself ; and I like humanity very well." 

" I am going to live, or try to live, near a lake, too ; but I 
hope I shall not find it too much in the clutches of humanity. 
It used not to be so. I have been staying here in the little town 
below for a few days, j ust because it reminded me of the old place, 
and is, as quiet and lonely sometimes . when the steamers do 
not happen to be coming and going . as the old place used to be." 



o THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

"Now, this is odd," Dr. Alwyn said. "It is not five 
minutes since I was thinking how much this lake is like our 
lake at home . only that ours is smaller. I was saying so to 
my wife. "Was I not, Myra 1 May I ask the name of the 
place you are going to live in ] " 

The stranger mentioned a district and a little lake in the 
borderland somewhere of Cumberland and Lancashire. Not 
one of the show-lakes, indeed, as Dr. Alwyn had observed. 
It is hardly mentioned in any guide-book. Flights of strangers 
swoop over it and around it, and hardly ever alight on it . 
hardly ever rest even a moment on its banks. The Doctor 
was delighted to hear the name . it was Waterdale ; it was 
Ms lake. 

" Here is, indeed, a coincidence ! " he exclaimed, " That's 
our lake. Somehow I expected it the moment you spoke of 
Cumberland and a lake. We are to be neighbom-s, then. Let 
me introduce myself, politely now if I can, as I have done it 
practically and unceremoniously already. My name is Alwyn 
. Dr. Alwyn . and I am rector of Waterdale." 

The stranger bowed, and reciprocated the confidence. 

" My name is Lennon . Ralph Lennon." 

" Lennon. Lennon ! " thought the Doctor. " Surely I know 
something about that name ! " But he did not embarrass his 
new friend by a pause, as if he were studying the name ; only 
at once expressed in friendly terms a hope that they might 
meet before long in Cumberland, and be good neighbours. 

Mr. Lennon stole now and then a glance at Myra, who 
walked along, calm, graceful, and silent. 

When they came near the little town, Lennon made a 
desperate effort to overcome shyness, and invited Dr. Alwyn 
to rest for a while at the small hotel where he lodged. " I 
have been staying there with a young Frenchman. a friend," 
he said; ". but my friend is away, just now, up Pilatus, or at 
the Grutli, or somewhere. The lady, Miss Alwyn, must feel 
tired ; and your way back is long. I can get you a carriage." 

" O, we are stout walkers," Dr. Alwyn replied, " and don't 
mind the distance at all." His wife had given his arm an 
eager admonition that they must not accept the invitation. 
" But I ought to have introduced to you, Mr. Lennon, not 
Mis3 Alwyn . for there is none such, indeed . but Mrs. Alwyn 
my wife." 

Lennon's confusion at this little incident was great. He had 



TIIJO ekoken hero. 9 

naturally enough taken Myra for the Doctor's daughter, and 
had not noticed or understood the Doctor's frequent references 
to her as his wife. Indeed, his embarrassment was so great 
that he was glad to get away from his new friends . or friend 
. and escape to his hotel. But the Doctor, who was only 
amused at the mistake, did not allow him to go without some 
exchange of friendly words, and hopes to meet again. The two- 
men shook hands on parting. Lennon looked doubtingly at 
Myra ; she settled the question by bowing gracefully. He 
raised his hat and went his way. 

" What a strange coincidence," observed Dr. Alwyn to his 
wife, as they returned, " that we should both come from the 
same place, and meet by chance just here ! " 

" Life is all strange coincidences," said the lady sententiously. 
" The unforeseen always comes to pass, according to somebody 
. Disraeli, I think.'' 

" What of your picture now, Myra 1 Will lie do for your 
broken hero 1 " 

"He? Who? Disraeli?" 

"Nonsense ! I mean Lennon . our friend yonder." 

" Hero ? Xo : I think he is more like a goose." 

" Come, now, I don't think so at all. I see a good deal 
of the falcon or the eagle in him. But I cannot recollect 
what it is that I know of the name Lennon. It seems familiar 
to me." 

" I think I know." said Myra. " The large old house down 
in the hollow . across the bridge, you remember . the house- 
that poor Mrs. Granger had for a season or two, and that has 
lately been unoccupied . that belonged, or belongs, I have 
always heard, to somebody named Lennon/' 

" So it does, indeed. Of course, that is it. The owner died 
before I came to the parish, and this is his son. I think I have- 
heard something of him, too ; and something peculiar. If I am 
not much mistaken, his college course was rather a queer one, 
and ended very abruptly. Do you know, Myra, I should not 
be at all surprised if he were to turn out a broken hero quite 
of your style." 

" O no ; not at all in my style. I don't think him in the least 
like the thing. What happened to him in college 1 "' 

Dr. Alwyn did not remember the whole affair clearly enough, 
and was not sufficiently sure of his man to enter into any 
particulars, which might only be spreading an unfounded story 



10 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

against an individual reputation. But he had a vague im- 
pression that Lennon had been expelled from his "University 
for some wild act of rebellion against constituted theology. 

Nothing more was said at that time, as our pair walked back 
to Kussnacht. The evening was beautiful, and some light rain 
which had fallen an hour or two 'before lent a wonderful fresh- 
ness to the air and the foliage. Every stone was the sunny 
resting-place of a basking insect ; every tuft of grass sparkled 
with butterflies and dragon-flies, and other bright-winged 
creatures. The bells of the cows tinkled pleasantly every- 
where ; and all the sights and sounds of the evening were 
cheery, gracious, melodious. Dr. Alwyn and his wife were 
both botanists, and they paused many a time on their walk to 
study and delight over some wonderful leaf, or to hail as a dear 
and familiar old acquaintance some plant which was a common 
sight to them in their own English home. They enjoyed their 
evening, and were very happy. They had been little more than 
a twelvemonth married, and life was yet a honeymoon to both. 
The difference in their years seemed in no way to divide them 
. indeed, the husband's boyish heart and unworn nature made 
him sometimes seem the junior of his wife. They had enjoyed 
the evening so much that both were sorry, without saying so, 
when the steamer at last brought them under the black 
shadows of Pilatus, and so up to the quay at Lucerne and the 
dining-table of the Schweizer Hof. 

A day or two passed away without incident. They sailed or 
steamed on the lake, and they rambled over the old bridges 
and studied the Dance of Death, and they mounted the Rigi, 
no doubt, and fell in with the usual mist, which is the one 
original sin of that Paradise of Cockneys and Frenchwomen. 

One day they returned to the hotel quite too late for the 
table d'hdte, and therefore ordered dinner for themselves. 
"While they were waiting, two gentlemen entered, likewise 
belated and in need of dinner. One was a fresh-complexioned, 
black-haired, pigeon-breasted, handsome young Frenchman, 
with moustache saucily waxed and pointed, and eyes that 
twinkled like drops of liquefied jet. The other was Ralph 
Lennon, listless and unimpulsive as before. Dr. Alwyn went 
up to him, and a friendly conversation took place out of earshot 
of Myra. Then they all came up to the table where she sat, 
and Lennon' s young Frenchman was introduced in due form. 
He was a Parisian, a member of the Jockey Club, and some- 



THE BROKEN HERO. 11 

what of a swell, travelling for his pleasure. He spoke English 
with great fluency and vivacity. 

" Madame has made the ascension of the Rigi 1 " 

He at once devoted himself exclusively to madanie. 

" Oh yes ; it was delightful." 

" Ah, true . yes, indeed ! But little . tame ; no danger ! I 
have made all the ascensions . yes, all ! It is my passion ! 
What would you have ? Lion-hunting and the ascensions of the 
mountains ! I live for those. My friend here will not ascend 
the mountains ; but he has hunted the lion with me in Algeria." 

" You will be killed some day," said Mrs. Alwyn, " and your 
life will be thrown away for nothing." 

" Not improbable. But what matter 1 One must die. "What 
lives a man for . a man like me or my friend there 1 Monsieur 
your husband . ah, well, he has something to live for ! " and the 
gallant Frenchman darted bold glances upon madame. 

It was proposed that they should "join tables," and they 
did ; and the dinner passed off very pleasantly. It came out 
in the course of conversation that Lennon and his travelling 
companion had been friends years ago, in London and in Paris, 
and that they had lately met after long separation in Algeria ; 
and after spending a few weeks together, they had agreed to 
go into Switzerland before Lennon's return to England. 
Lennon had come from Australia, overland, as far as Egypt, 
and there stayed for a little, and thence found his way to 
Algeria. 

" You don't ascend mountains 1 " said Dr. Alwyn casually to 
Lennon. 

" No ; I don't. I don't see the good of it. I am far too 
lazy. Life is not long enough, or easy enough, to allow any 
superfluous trouble. Besides, I like fine views, and nobody 
can see anything from the top of a mountain." 

" But the strange vegetation 1 " 

" Ah, true ; but I don't care about strange vegetation." 

" You are not a botanist, then 1 " 

" O dear, no ! a scientific botanist . not the least . and I 
don't want to be." 

" Why not 1 " asked Myra, almost sharply. 

" Because I am such a lover of nature that I don't care to 
spend my time pottering over the bricks of her temple when I 
can look at the whole structure, or so much as my eye can 
reach, all at once." 



12 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

"But, Mr. Lennon," broke in Dr. Alwyn, "do you forget 
the wonderful beauty in every fibre of a fern-leaf . the marvel- 
lous adaptability, the subtle mechanism 1 " 

"They tell me, too, that there is wonderful beauty and 
adaptability and mechanism in the tiniest human bone. But 
I prefer admiring Canova's Venus or Thorwaldsen's Night to 
studying a scrap of a rib-bone." 

" Illustration is sophistry coloured," said Dr. Alwyn, laughing. 

" My friend is a true heretic," said the Frenchman, who knew 
do more about botany than he did about the Philosophy of the 
Conditioned. " I adore nature . I . in the small as well as in 
the large. The eye of beauty is worth studying, is it not 1 " 
And he gazed at Myra markedly, in order that she might un- 
derstand he was paying her a double compliment ; first, by 
standing up for botany because it was her study, and next, by 
talking of the eye of beauty, which of course was her eye. 
Myra saw quite through his nonsense, and did not care in the 
least about it, being neither flattered nor offended, but liking 
his goodnatured expression and the almost childlike simplicity 
of his open admiration. But she began to think there was 
something in Lennon. His contradictions piqued her, and his 
manner puzzled her. 

" Not caring for botany," she said, gazing at him so fully 
that he looked away, " you will miss a great happiness when 
you go to Cumberland, to your home. Do you call it your 
home?" 

" No, Mrs. Alwyn. If it likes me and I like it, then it shall 
be my home. But I don't see that because a man was born in 
a place, it has any claim to call itself his home. Perhaps it 
was only his stepmother, and stony-hearted. I am fond of its 
memory though, and I dare say it will disappoint me. But I 
don't go there to study botany or anything else." 

" You go there to live among your friends and be happy, no 
doubt?" 

" No ; pardon me, I really don't. I have no friends there 
that I know of, and I don't think of being happy." 

" Then . may one ask the question ? . what do you 20 there 
for?" 

" I think, on the whole, I go there . to sleep." 

General laughter followed this declaration. Lennon alone 
remained perfectly serious, as one who has made a calm and 
practical statement of fact. 



THE BfiOKEX HERO. lo 

" I do assure you," lie said, " ic is in some part true. I am 
tired of working and going about, and making money and 
losing it and spending it ; I am tired of being excited about 
nothing ; and I am tired of being disappointed. I have come to 
the conclusion that the one duty of life which man most neg- 
lects is the duty to sleep. We don't any of us sleep half 
enough. We can't sleep in Australia : every one is too robust 
and energetic and active. You can't sleep in Africa, because 
of the heat and the flies. I have not been much in Asia : I 
dare say Damascus is a good sleepy place ; but I have lately 
thought of my old home among the mountains, and there I 
mean to sleep away some years of my life, if I can." 

" That you can't," Dr. Alwyn declared. " JSTot near us . not 
if I know it. We'll waken you up, never fear, and set you 
working at something. I am 'sure you are a wonderfully 
energetic fellow, for all your paradoxes." 

" You must not frighten him," said the Frenchman, " or he 
will beat in retreat back to his deserts and his bushes and his 
sheeps in Australia again, i" am coming over to see him soon, 
when he is ranged and settled. I will show you how to 
manage him, if madame shall not have divined the secret long 
before." 

"I should so much like to see Australia," Mrs. Alwyn 
observed. " I have always longed to see the Southern Cross." 

"It would disappoint you," Lennon answered. "Our ora 
Orion is incomparably more splendid." 

" You love astronomy 1 " 

" No, not at all ; but I love Orion. If I do not sleep all 
my autumn nights away in Cumberland, it will be Orion alone 
that can keep me awake. He is in the skies what Shakespeare 
is in literature . inexhaustible, and never to be admired 
enough." 

" I know that you are a botanist and an astronomer, as well 
as a reader," Mrs. Alwyn said. 

"And I am convinced you are a worker," added her 
husband. 

" Thanks for your good opinion. If I were vain, or wise 
perhaps, I ought to return to Australia, and then you would 
always believe that Cumberland had lost a good son. See ! 
there is Orion. Let us look at him." 

They opened the window, and went on the balcony. It was 
a glorious sight. The lake and the heavens . which was the 



14: THE Yt'ATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

finer? Our French friend cared not a rush for either, but 
stood near Mrs. Alwyn and paid her pretty compliments. 

The party soon broke up, all hoping to meet again. 

Lenhon and his friend walked by the lake and smoked, at 
first in silence. 

" But she is charming ! " the Frenchman broke out. 

" Who is charming 1 " 

" Who ? . as if you did not know ! Ah, coquin ! Who 
but madame, the wife of the venerable yonder 1 What . yes I 
I should like to be near her for ever. And you are going to 
live near her . happy Briton that you are ! But the husband . 
ah ! " and he shrugged his shoulders. 

" Don't, Theodore ; don't, like a good fellow," said his com- 
panion. 

" Don't what T 

" Go on in that silly way. I hate that sort of rubbish. 
The cant of virtue is bad ; but I do think the cant of vice is a 
great deal worse. What right have you and I to go on making 
ourselves out scoundrels when we are not so ? I am for a 
man being openly what he is . carrying his heart upon his 
sleeve, if you like." 

" Yes, I know ; it is your Shakespeare's phrase." 

" And so if we were scoundrels I should be for our talking 
scoundrel talk ; and then, at all events, our neighbo\irs might 
keep out of our way. But we are not." 

" But, my good friend, scoundrels because we admire a pretty 
woman ?" 

" No, not because we admire her ; but talking as you did 
just now, or hinting or suggesting what you don't mean . for 
you are an honest and manly fellow as ever stepped, and can't 
help your confounded French way of never looking at a woman 
without affecting the Bichelieu or Lauzun . I detest it ; and 
it doesn't suit our English married women at all. They are 
quite accustomed to be friendly with men without supposing 
that the men are all the time contemplating the possibility of 
seducing them." 

" But, allons done ! Who ever said anything like that of our 
pretty madame above 1 " 

" You did not say it exactly ; but you began the kind of 
talk that leads to it and hints at it." 

"Well, pardon then." Theodore was a thoroughly good- 
humoured fellow, always ready to make allowance for what he 



FOR ENGLAND. 15 

might perchance consider his friend's eccentric insular ways. 
" I did not mean anything. But you are going to live near 
her, that is certain ; and she is pretty ; and pardon again if I 
whisper that Monsieur the Reverend is not quite so young as 
madame his wife." 

" He struck me as being a very fine fellow. I dare say he 
would make a gallant figure in a lion-hunt, Theodore. If I 
were a woman, I think he would attract me ten times more 
than fellows like you or me." 

Theodore laughed merrily. " Thousand thanks for the com- 
pliment ! I am happy of it that you are not a woman. I am 
sure I never should be enamoured of you, if you were. I like 
you much better as a good-hearted surly John Bull, that can 
bark, but does not bite . his friends at least." 

The two smoked and walked and talked until a rather late 
hour. They were leaving Lucerne in the morning, and, despite 
Lennon's love for sleep, they were up almost immediately after 
dawn. Their rooms were high' up aloft ; and as they were 
hurrying downstairs Theodore paused mysteriously outside a 
bedroom-door on the first floor, and touched his friend on the 
arm. 

" That is her room," he whispered. " She sleeps there." 
" Indeed," calmly rejoined Lennon. " Kiss the consecrated 
threshold." 

" Bah ! You are a mere Briton. You have no soul." 
" No, but I have a stomach ; and breakfast is waiting." 
In half an hour they wex*e on their way across the moun- 
tains. 



CHAPTER II. 

FOR ENGLAND. 

THROUGH the horrid gloom of pines . the adjective comes in 
here in the classic, not the cockney sense . over little wooden 
bridges, flung across gorges where the far torrent thundered 
below ; along narrow paths, where just the one mule clinging 
close to the edge of the precipice might walk ; now in a pass 
so closely set in by the mountains that one seemed to be in the 
lowest deep of a profound valley, and yet was high up the 



.16 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

shoulder of some Alpine giant ; now seeing nothing but mist 
and blackness ; now suddenly dazzled by the snowy glare of a 
summit flashing on the view ; hearing no sound but the hollow 
roar of the pines and the tinkle of the kine-bells, and more 
rarely the crack of the muleteer's whip,. thus, at the close of 
.a day that had made glorious promise to break it in rain and 
murkiness, Ralph Lennon trudged along alone. He had parted 
from his French companion. From Lucerne they had straggled 
about . now here, now there . until they reached Chamounix ; 
and there the Frenchman, who had already made six ascents 
of Mont Blanc, fell in with a party of men he knew, who 
were about to go up, and so resolved to have a seventh ascent 
to talk of. Lennon made up his mind at once to cross the 
mountains to Martigny, walking through the famous path of 
.the Tete Noire, where only pedestrians and mules can go. At 
JVtartigny he would take the train for Lausanne and thence on 
to Geneva ; and so to Paris, and home. 

He was glad to be alone for a few hours. He had had 
enough of companionship for the present ; so he saw his com- 
panion and party a little on their way, rejected all invitations 
to go up even as far as the Grands Mulets ; and then set out 
upon the solitary journey which was to have its termination on 
the Lancashire border of Cumberland. 

Lennon was well made up for a mountain tramp. He 
carried only a few things in a light knapsack, and he had a 
good stout stick . no fancy alpenstock branded with a litany of 
.all the hills and passes and peaks in Switzerland. The morn- 
ing was beautiful ; and by the time he had got well up among 
the mountains his heart and spirits mounted too, and he felt 
light almost as a boy. The solitude was delightful to him, 
after the incessant bustle and rattle and change of hotels, and 
the unresting energy of preparation which is Chamounix's 
special characteristic. Lennon was as nearly a genuine lover 
of solitude as perhaps any man can sincerely be ; that is to 
say, he enjoyed only the society of the few whom he really 
liked, and could call his friends. He could have wished never 
to leave the side of one he loved, if such one there now were * 
but he did not like ordinary society. He was not fond of 
talking to people in general. The excuse he made to any who 
.chaffed him for his silence was, that unless to people he liked 
he had nothing to say ; and unless from people he liked lie did 
not want to hear anything. He could travel for a whole day 



FOR ENGLAND. 17 

in a railway carriage and never utter one word to any of his 
fellow-voyagers. He journeyed once a day and a night in a 
German schnellzug alone with one other man, and never spoke 
a word to him ; and when accosted by him shook his head, as 
if to signify that he did not understand, and so escaped con- 
versation. He had often acknowledged that he enjoyed 
travelling in foreign countries especially because it afforded 
him a reason for not talking to strangers. If he did nob 
understand the language, he could not talk ; and even if he 
did understand it, his resolute silence made people believe that 
he did not understand, and so relieved him from the ungracious 
appearance of being purposely silent. Yet he was neither 
ungenial nor proud nor dull ; only reserved, shy, and with 
strangers difficult of speech. 

Lennon had been in Switzerland once before, and had crossed 
this path of the Tete Noire. Perhaps the memory of that 
time was one reason why he wished now to retread the way 
alone. Then he was a college youth, revelling in the delights 
of a long holiday, and with all the world of scenery, and books, 
and companionship, and adventure, and passion opening on 
him ; now he trod the same path, a disappointed and, to some 
extent, a perverted man. Fate and his own fault had dealt 
somewhat heavily with him. Nearly all the lights which were 
beginning to flame up in the sky of his life when first he 
climbed this mountain path had gone out, one after the other. 
Only the love of nature and the love of books still remained 
clear and bright . not to be extinguished. " Friendship soon 
passed me like a ship at sea," is one of the fine lines of a poem 
which once promised greatness. Friendship had treated Lennon 
even worse than this. It was a ship which ran him down at sea 
when all seemed fair, and left him a wreck. Passion only led 
him to disappointment and something like despair. Then 
he raged for a while foolishly against the world, and men and 
women, and customs and creeds, and even, it may be, against 
Providence itself. And he flung his youth away ; and being 
designed for the Church, he distinguished himself by social 
lawlessness and theological rebellion, and was made an outlaw 
in the university sense. Then his fond and proud old father, 
who had made his money in trade, and longed to have his son 
a pillar of the Church, stormed against him, and flung him 
some money, and bade him go to the diggings, and use his 
hulking limbs in grubbing for gold ; and Lennon went to 

c 



18 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



Australia, and never saw his father again. His mother he had 
never seen. His. birth (he was the only child) was her death. 
He ought to have devoted his life to replacing, so far as he 
could, the loss he had brought on his father ; and his father 
died in the presence of strangers, his only son an exile, indeed 
an outcast. 

After Lennon's departure his father threw all away.^ Of the 
money he had made not one stiver remained at his death. 
The old house in Cumberland where he had lived as a boy was 
the only scrap of property which his father's sudden death, 
intestate, bequeathed to his son. This was almost the only 
compensating consideration to Ralph Lennon . at least he did 
not profit by the death of the father to whom he had been so 
useless and disappointing a child. 

Strangely enough, too, all he touched in Australia prospered 
with him. If he rented a few yards of river sand, gold 
straightway sparkled there. His speculations, generally made 
blindly, and for the mere sake of excitement, conquered the 
most tremendous odds, the most adverse chances, and suc- 
ceeded. Twice he was swindled out of all he had by dishonest 
partners ; but he made new combinations and experiments, 
and he became rich again. All this time he could not make 
up his mind to humble himself, and beg to be allowed to go to 
his father's house. He remained, always expecting a loving 
message and a summons. At last a message came, and a 
summons : his father was dead. 

Then Lennon's heart was smitten. The change which 
whiten's a young man's hairs in a single night was not greater 
than that which fell upon him there in Australia. Enmity, 
rancour, suspicion, bitterness, dropped away from him, stricken 
by a sacred touch. He gave up money-making, and resolved 
to go home. If he could do any good in life by means of the 
money he had made, he would do it somewhere at home, near 
his father's grave. 

He did not hurry home. There was nothing to hasten for. 
Perhaps, drawing nearer, he more and more felt inclined to 
shrink back and linger. At last he seized resolution by the 
hair, and said, " I will delay no longer ; I will go at once." 

So, having wandered thus a little off the direct track of our 
story, we come up with Ralph Lennon in the Pass of the Tete 
Noire. He had been wandering not a little, and not rarely, 
from the path. Now he scrambled up on this side to gather a 



FOR ENGLAND. 19 

mountain flower ; now he descended deep among the solemn 
pines to have a better view of some torrent, the voice whereof, 
raving in the depths below, had caught his ear and fascinated 
him. Many times there came into his mind that wonderful 
line of Goethe's, perhaps the most perfect picture in little to 
be found in modern poetry, " Es stiirzt der Fels und iiber ihn 
die Fluth," . a line exhaustive and complete in its description of 
an Alpine pass, where it simply seems that the rocks have 
been suspended in the act of falling, and the flood, not to be 
stayed, rushes wildly over them. 

But the clouds soon began to gather heavily and ominously 
round the mountains ; and soon, look where one might, he could 
see no peak of snow appearing. Gradually one could see little but 
the path before him and the pines on either side. Then the rain 
came down in torrents, and continued remorselessly. Lennon 
cared little about it ; he had camped out during many a rainy 
season in Australia ; and so he tramped along, regarding the 
complete change which the downpour and the steaming mist 
produced in the landscape as a new, unexpected, and charming 
transformation. He was getting wet to the skin ; but that 
mattered little, because he meant to walk on to Martigny, 
and there would be plenty of time for the day and himself to 
become perfectly dry before he reached the little town im- 
bedded in the valley of the Rhone. From Chamounix to 
Martigny, most readers are well aware, is a good day's walk, 
and Lennon was not yet half-way to his journey's end. 

Presently he heard voices on before him. He was not very 
glad of this, although he did not know that the fact could 
have any direct concern for him. But he became still less 
pleased when he heard English spoken. A little way ahead 
of him he saw a mule drawn up close to the side of the 
acclivity and under some pine-trees, apparently that its rider 
might have such slight shelter as the branches could give. 
There were two or three people he could see in the group 
which thus halted ; they had their backs turned to him. A lady 
sat on the mule ; and by her figure, and the splendid mass of 
dark hair he could see under her hat, he knew at a glance that 
she was Mrs. Alwyn. Her husband and a guide were with her. 

There was nothing surprising in the meeting. People who 
are making a tour of Switzerland at the same time are always 
encountering each other in this way. Go where you will, you 
meet the same groups. But Lennon was not glad to see his 

c 2 



20 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

new friends here. Dr. Alwyn he liked ; but his first sensation' 
on meeting a man he did not thoroughly know was always one 
of reluctance and discomfort. That first sensation over, it may 
be that he would enjoy the meeting very well afterwards. But 
intercourse with strangers, however agreeable he might expect 
them to prove, was always to Lennon like a cold bath. Let it 
prove ever so healthy and pleasant afterwards, be convinced as 
one may that it will prove healthy and pleasant, yet the first 
plunge is always a disagreeable performance. 

Besides, Lennon did not much like Mrs. Alwyn. He 
thought her a mere fine lady, which indeed she was not ; and 
he hated fine ladies. Then again, she just turned her head as- 
he came near, and saw him ; and he saw that her figure shrank 
together, slightly but perceptibly, as if she would gladly have 
avoided being seen by him. So she would too, at the time, if 
it were possible ; but not from any unkindly feeling . only for 
the woman's reason that she felt herself in an awkward and 
perhaps ridiculous position. She was perched on the back of a 
high mule, having a portmanteau strapped behind her ; and her 
hat and her clothes were very wet, and her hair was wet, and 
her feathers were as draggled as the plumage of a drowned 
crow. So for one instant she physically shrank at the idea of 
being caught in this pickle ; and she said to her husband in a 
low tone, which sounded like a mild protest against perverse 
fate, " O, my dear . Mr. Lennon ! " 

Dr. Alwyn was very glad of the meeting, and hailed Lennon 
cheerily. 

" So we were destined not to part quite so soon, Mr. Lennon ! 
Very glad to meet you even here . under such disastrous cir- 
cumstances. You come from Chamounix, of course ? So do 
we. How odd that we did not see you there ! And you were 
going on to Martigny 1 So were we ; my wife riding, I 
walking ; and very pleasant it was until this downpour came 
on. Is it ever going to get fine ? The guide does not think it 
will change before sunset, and he advises us to stay at the hotel 
half-way, a little further on." 

"0 yes, dear; we must stay. . Don't you think we had. 
better, Mr. Lennon 1 " 

" Yes ; I think you had much better," said Lennon, giving 
what he considered perfectly honest advice, but at the same- 
time hoping that he might be allowed to pursue his journey 
alone. 



FOK ENGLAND. 21 

"Are you bent on going on ? " asked Dr. Alwyn. 

" Well, yes ; I think so. The rain can't hurt me much. 
Indeed, I am used to even worse rain than this," 

" It couldn't hurt me either," said the stout Doctor ; " but 
Myra is tired, I know . tired of jolting on that old mule ; and 
she is getting wet." 

" Yes, dear ; but I don't mind that . only the few things I 
have in the portmanteau will be quite soaked through if they 
get much more rain . and what am I to do then ? We have 
nothing else nearer than Geneva." 

" Quite true," said the Doctor ; " we'll stay ; it is much 
better." 

He would have preferred going on ; partly out of the 
natural restlessness of men, who like to push on without 
stopping to the end of every journey, and get it done ; and 
partly, too, because a stout tramp over the mountain, with 
Lennon to talk to, would have been pleasant to him. Dr. 
Alwyn dearly and fondly loved his young wife, and she was 
much attached to him ; but then she was only half his age, and 
he was full of robust, virile, almost rough energy ; and he 
liked to talk of college times and ways . and, in short, the 
pair were not bound by that very rare supreme union of soul 
and nature which makes two people perpetually happy in the 
society of each other, and in that alone. Dr. Alwyn just now 
would have liked a few hours of the companionship of a man 
who was not the guide. But his wife's decided wishes, and the 
hint about the condition of literally nothing to wear to which 
much more rain might reduce her, were quite enough for him, 
and he ruled that the night should be spent in the seclusion of 
the auberge at the Tete Noire. 

It was not much further on, and Lennon and the guide alike 
recommended pushing for it. But the portmanteau 1 Lennon 
recommended leaving the mule and the portmanteau with the 
guide, in such shelter as could be had, while madame and her 
husband walked on to the auberge, from which they could send 
back people with plenty of coverings to screen the portmanteau 
from the heaviest rain. That would be better for Mrs. Alwyn 
than waiting there in the cold and wet, motionless. But Mrs. 
Alwyn was very tired, and in fact was too wet to get off the 
mule and drag her clogged and heavy silks and velvets along 
the road. Then Lennon urged that they should all go on, 
braving all dangers, and letting the rain do its worst. There 



22 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

really was nothing better . nothing else, in fact . to do. The 
rain did not appear likely to cease for hours. So Mrs. Alwyn 
made up her mind and switched her mule, and they all set off. 
Soon they became a merry party, and made fun of their 
meeting and their misadventures. Nothing makes people so 
friendly as a common drenching in a strange place. By the 
time they had reached the little hotel, Lennon had so com- 
pletely thawed that he declared he would go no farther that 
night, and his companions were both glad of his decision. 

They dined together, and were very pleasant. The calamity 
she dreaded had fallen on Mrs. Alwyn. Every stitch her 
portmanteau contained was thoroughly drenched, and she had 
to come to dinner in a cotton dress and an astonishingly 
frilled and trimmed white jtipon, belonging to the landlady of 
the house, and obligingly offered as a loan for the occasion. 
And very pretty she looked, although the gown was made for 
a woman twice her bulk, and the petticoat trailed behind her 
when she walked, like a stage train. Lennon thought she 
looked far pi'ettier than in her silks . and just think, ladies, 
what sort of creatures you bedizen yourselves for, after all ! 

As for the gentlemen, besides that both were constitution- 
ally weather-proof, their rain-damage was comparatively slight. 
Outer coats laid aside, boots changed for borrowed slippers, and 
a quarter of an hoiir's personal drying at the stove, restored 
them to endurable condition. 

" You won't banish me now, I hope 1" said Mrs. Alwyn, 
when dinner was over. " As we are not in England, let us 
not be bound by English ways. You don't want me away, Mr. 
Lennon 1" 

" No, indeed, Mrs. Alwyn." And indeed he did not. " I 
have been so long out of England, and have lived so much 
lately in places where we dined off mutton and damper, eaten 
on pieces of board laid on our knees, and where there were 
no ladies, that I have almost forgotten the solemn old English 
ways. I really hardly knew at first why you talked of leaving 
the room." 

" Then I am not to be banished ? I am very glad . all the 
more so as there is here no place to banish me to, except my bed- 
room, and it is such a toil, getting up there in these clothes, 
that I don't feel able to encounter it more than once in the 
course of the night." 

So she stayed and talked a good deal, and made both gentle- 



FOR ENGLAND. 23 

raea very happy. There was a piano in the room, feeble of 
tone and rattling of keys, but still a piano ; and Dr. Alwyn 
asked his wife to sing for them, which she did very readily. 
She sang sweetly . first one or two little hymns, for which it 
must be owned Lennon did not much care, but in which Dr. 
Alwyn delighted ; then two or three rather scientific affairs, 
for which neither the one nor the other cared a straw. Len- 
non's mind was far away all the time, as he sat at the window 
and looked at the black pine3, over which, the rain-stream 
having at last ceased to pour, the moon was beginning to 
shine. 

" Sing us some of your old English ballads, Myra," said Dr. 
Alwyn ; " they are fine music, and at all events one under- 
stands them." 

" Perhaps Mr. Lennon does not care for old English ballads ?" 
said Myra, turning half round from the piano in appeal to our 
friend. 

" Indeed, I like the ballad music best of all. Like Dr. 
Alwyn, I understand it. I suppose the mind of the listener 
must always help to make the music, must it not 1 Mine can 
make nothing for me out of the more scientific strains." 

" In other words, you have not been in the least delighted 
by what I have been singing?" 

Asked so directly, Lennon could not frame a quick and polite 
evasion, and so answered calmly, " Indeed, not in the least." 

Dr. Alwyn and his wife smiled at the truthfulness, and 
even the latter was pleased with it. 

She sang them one or two English ballads . soft, tender, 
sweet, melodious ; not reaching, perhaps, any great musical 
heights, nor ranging over a great variety of expression ; not 
endowed with the penetrating, passionate, quick-glancing emo- 
tion of the ballad-music of Ireland or Scotland, or even Wales ; 
but homely, truthful, and touching . music which might find 
an echo in any manly or womanly and unconventional heart. 
Lennon listened with real pleasure, and had now courage even 
to press for more. So she began another with words which 
made some old-fashioned traditional complaint about the sud- 
denness with which love grows cold when its first glow is over. 
It was not the song of a cynic, nor had it sprung from the 
bosom of a doubting age j but was the honest heart-complaint 
of an English nature at a time when the delusion that love 
suddenly changes was a sincere, accepted, lamented faith. 



24 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOUES. 

The song from its very first line seemed to move Lennon 
deeply. He raised his hand at once, as if about to stop the 
singer and ask her some question ; but he checked himself in 
time, and waited until its last echo had ceased. There was 
then silence. 

"Don't you like it?" asked Mrs. Alwyn. 

" Yes ; I like it much, very much," Lennon replied. " And 
it is an old, old friend of mine." 

" Indeed ! Then you can tell me whose it is, or where it 
is to be found. I only sing it, words and air and all, from 
memory." 

" No ; I cannot tell you anything about it except that I 
used to hear it once, and was very fond of it. May I ask, Mrs. 
Alwyn, where you heard it ? I have not heard it for years, 
except when I have tried sometimes to hum or whistle it my- 
self away in Australia." 

" I only heard it sung by a gentleman who belongs, or at 
least did belong, to our part of the country ; a friend of Dr. 
Alwyn's . or, perhaps, I ought to say an acquaintance. You 
know, Alwyn dear, . Mr. Warton. He sang it ; and you 
liked it so much . and he promised to bring the music and the 
words, but he never did." 

If the lamps had been brighter, if Lennon had not kept his 
.face turned to the window, any one present might have seen, 
at half a glance that the name was no commonplace sound to 
-him. He said, without turning round . 

" Not Walter Warton . Walter Raleigh Warton 1 " 

" Yes, indeed, that is his absurd name . Walter Raleigh ! 
Do you know him ? " 

" I did know him. We were at school together, and at 
college. I have not heard of him this long time. I . I 
hope he is doing well V 

" Yes, I think so," interposed Dr. Alwyn. " He is becoming 
rather a great man, in fact . a sort of great little man. He 
is a popular speaker and agitator, and whenever he ad- 
dresses a public meeting he is cheered ; and when he comes 
to a country town there is sure to be a row about him one 
way or the other. He is very clever indeed, quite a brilliant 
speaker . of the flash-and-rattle kind. He is sure to get into 
Parliament soon ; the Tories have made quite a pet of him." 

" The Tories ! A pet of Walter Warton ? He used to be 
a wild Radical . a Republican . a sort of Red Revolutionist." 



s> 



FOR ENGLAND. Z'O 

" Yes, I daresay : so were we all when at college, or 
emerging from it. At least, those who are Radicals now were 
furious Tories and State-Church and Divine Right True-Blues 
then ; and those who, like Warton, were Red Republicans 
then are steady Tories now. But I don't think Warton is a 
steady Tory : indeed, I can't quite make him out. He is a 
great champion of the working man, and all that sort of 
thing . on the platform a kind of spouting Jules Simon ; but 
he is now also the pet of the Tories, and he says his mission 
is to form an alliance between Toryism and Democracy. I'm 
sure I wish him joy. I wish they would get married, and go 
for a long honeymoon to the Continent, or anywhere else : I 
don't think England wants either." 

" It is a singular change," said Lennon. '. I have been too 
long out of the way of English politics to understand it. 
But . do you know War ton's wife ?" 

" His wife f ' Mrs. Alwyn asked. " No ; has he a wife V 

" Yes, he has . he had at least." Lennon's voice was in- 
distinct as he spoke. " I knew her . once." 

" He never spoke to us of his wife : indeed, we never knew 
that he was married. But we are not intimate : in fact, Dr. 
Alwyn, though he is too charitable to say it, does not much 
like Mr. Warton : and then he lives in London, and seldom 
comes our way." 

" Well, we are very good friends," said Dr. Alwyn, " when 
we meet. I chaff him a little sometimes, and he takes it 
good-humouredly, and answers in splendid sentences. He 
would declaim on your hearthrug, if you listened to him. I 
almost think I did hear, somewhere or other, about Warton's 
being married, but I had forgotten all about it. He certainly 
never said anything to me about his wife. Perhaps she is 
dead." 

" O, Alwyn ! " These two words Myra spoke in a voice so 
low that there was " nothing lived betwixt it and silence." 
Her husband looked interrogatively, but said not a word. He 
did not know what indiscretion he had committed, and had 
too much sense to ask ; but his man's sense was not a woman's 
quick perception. 

The singing and playing and talk were over for that night. 
Mrs. Alwyn presently took her leave of Lennon, and, gathering 
her trailing petticoats about her, went upstairs to bed. Her 
husband was not given to early going to bed, and as the moon 



26 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



looked bright he said he would have a saunter with Lennon 
along the mountain path. When he came downstairs ready 
for a tramp, he found to his surprise that Lennon stood at the 
inn-door with his knapsack on his back and his stick in his 
hand. 

" Good-bye, Dr. Alwyn . at least for the present ; I am 



8 



"Not going away? Not going to cross the mountain 
to-night ? " 

"Yes, indeed. I find there is a very early train from 
Martigny to Lausanne in the morning, and I can easily catch 
it if I start now." 

" But I thought you meant to pass the night here % " 

" So I did : but I did not then know of the possibility of 
getting on in the morning. And I want to get straight on to 
England as fast as possible . I must go." 

"But to cross the mountain at night . what a performance ! 
' Beware the pine-tree's withering branch . beware the awful 
avalanche ! ' Don't you remember the unfortunate young man 
in Longfellow 1 Take care that the pious monks of St. Bernard 
don't find you at break of day stretched lifeless on some crag side." 

" Not much chance of that : the path winds clear and 
straight along ; a man could hardly miss it if he were blind. 
The difficulty would be not to keep it. The moon will shine 
for some time yet, and then comes the dawn." 

" Well, if you will go, I'll walk half a mile or so with you ; 
but I am sorry you have to set off in so precipitate a way. 
You will be in Cumberland long before we get there. Our 
journey home will be an affair of very easy stages." 

" I don't know that I shall be in Cumberland so very soon. 
I have to stay a few days in London. By the way, we were 

talking of your friend Walter Baleigh Warton ." Lennon 

stopped in his speech and looked down. 

"Yes. I don't know that I can exactly call him my friend: 
but I meet him sometimes . rarely of late. Some of our Cum- 
berland folks are rather proud of him, especially when they see 
his name in the Morning Post's list of the guests at some 
fashionable gathering. But what of him 1 " 

" I am anxious to meet him. I knew him once, as I told 
you, pretty well ; and I should be glad to see him again. 
You said, I think, that you knew nothing of his family . of his 
wife V 



FOS ENGLAND. 2t 

" Nothing whatever/' 
** " I think you said that perhaps his wife was dead. Had 
you any reason to suppose so . any vague recollection, even, of 
having heard something " 

" Indeed no, not the least : I said the words in pure idle- 
ness . only as a sort of random conjecture. Pray, if you have 
any interest in Warton or his family, don't be made uneasy by 
anything I may have said. I had no reason whatever for it. 
And Myra looked at me rather horrified, I can tell you." 

Lennon's colour deepened. 

" Do you think I can easily find out Warton's whereabouts 
when I get to London ? " 

" Yes, quite easily. People of course will be out of town 
just now ; but you will find it the easiest thing in the world 
to learn all about him. Anybody interested in politics, any 
newspaper man, any Tory member of parliament, any secretary 
of a workiDg-men's association, can put you on his track. If 
it were only a little later in the year, I should recommend you 
simply to walk through the streets until you came to some 
huge placard announcing a meeting, with Walter Raleigh 
Warton as one of the leading speakers." 

" Thank you. I shall find him. And now you must not 
come any farther." They had reached a point where the path 
began to descend, and soon turned sharply round the shoulder 
of a hill. Below them lay the deep valley, its pines far down 
looking like toy trees. The white cloud-masses with the 
moonlight on thfcrn showed like the snowpeaks which had gone 
out of the landscape with the sun. 

" Good-bye. Remember Excelsior's fate, and don't let any 
avalanche rob us of the pleasure of having you for a neighbour." 

" Never fear ; we shall meet again." 

Lennon turned round the corner of the ridge, and dis- 
appeared. 

"I like him," spoke Dr. Alwyn aloud, and with emphasis. 
And he walked back to the hotel. 

He sat reading for some time, and then went upstairs to 
bed. To his surprise, he found his wife, who was generally a 
good sleeper, broad awake. He stooped over and kissed her. 
Very pretty she looked in her white night-dress. Does not 
Madame de Sevigne say it is woman's prettiest garb % 

" Alwyn, dear," said she, without giving bim time to say a 
word, "where is Mr. Lennon gone 1" 



28 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



" Across the mountain. Won't be stayed ; is resolved to 
catch the first train in the morning from Martigny. But how- 
did you know, my little sleepless watcher, that he had gone 
anywhere 1 " 

"I saw him, I saw you both, out of the window. I went to 
look out, and of course I observed that he had his knapsack, 
-and was evidently going away altogether." 

" Well, you are quite right ; he would go. I suppose he has 
stayed too long in Switzerland." 

" No, Alwyn, dear, it's not that ; it's you who have sent him 
,on his way in such haste." 

" I, dearest 1 . 1 1 On the contrary, I wanted him not 
to go." 

" You dear, stupid thing, you sent him off with three or 
four words, when you spoke of Warton's wife, and said, 
' Perhaps she is dead.' " 

" Why, what have those words to do with driving him over 
the mountain 1 " 

" Ah, that I don't quite know ; but he became alarmed 
when you said it, and made up his mind to go that very 
moment. He will travel day and night until he reaches 
England." 

" Good gracious ! " exclaimed the Doctor, uplifting hands 
and eyes in feigned awe and alarm. " The witchcraft of these 
women ! How does my wife know what Mr. Lennon is re- 
solved in his secret mind to do 1 . a man she had never seen 
the week before last." 

" Because your wife has eyes, dear." 

" Yes, that she has." Two gleaming soft dark orbs were 
looking up at him, aud dropped their lids with a smile at his 
interjected compliment. " But I still don't understand how, 
with any power of eye, you could have seen all this." 

" Well, dearest, I may be quite wrong ; but I think . 
perhaps, you know, that Mr. Lennon may have cared about 
Walter Warton's wife . may have been in love with her 
perhaps . before she married.'"' 

" O, that is it, you think 1 Well, I should never have 
thought of it. Perhaps it is so. Poor fellow ! I wish I had 
jiot said those foolish words. But who could have supposed 
that he would attach any importance to them 1 or who iadeed 
could have guessed that the matter could in any possible way 
concern hire. Your explanation looks very fanciful, Myi-a." 



FOR ENGLAND. 29 

"It is true, dear. 1 ' 

So it was. The few words spoken at random by Dr. Alwyn 
had in very truth sent Lennon speeding over the mountain, 
resolved to make no stop or stay until he reached England. 

Perhaps she is dead ! Well, what then 1 Wherein did 
that affect him so deeply ? Years ago . ever so many, it now 
seemed . he loved her, and he thought she loved him, and he 
was disappointed. She was a religiously-educated girl, firm in 
her sect and in her narrow piety : and he became odiously 
distinguished for his free ways of thought. She and her people 
were strong too in their horror of vice, even in the mild form 
of youthful extravagance : and did he not win a name for law- 
lessness ? What wonder if she turned from him and married 
a better man ? Who could blame her 1 If he had promise of 
any kind, he had not fulfilled it ; if he had talents, he threw 
them away. What right has a fellow to expect that a girl 
will give herself up, heart and soul and body, to the pro- 
tection and faith of one who cannot take care of himself, and 
does not seem to have any faith in himself? Truly, when 
girls really love a man, they do such things ; they throw their 
arms round his neck and leap with him into the struggles of 
life, as they would leap into the sea or go through the flames 
for him and with him. She did not love him so ; that was 
clear enough. She was calm and composed, quite able to see 
what she called her duty, and to follow it ; and he justified her 
decision by immediately flinging himself out of society, and 
making a fool and a rebel and a reproach of himself. He had 
nothing to complain of; and as it was evident she did not lov& 
him, he had nothing to regret. She was married, and, if living, 
was doubtless happy, and had forgotten him. 

If living ! But the mere random words which just hinted 
at the possibility of her being dead pierced him like a sword ; 
for he had come back from Australia partly to see her, though 
he did not own the intention to himself. He thought that 
years and change and struggle and much excitement and some 
suffering had purged away the vehemence of the old love, as 
they had gradually expelled the influence of the other passions 
of youth ; and he hoped that he could see her with calmness 
and be her friend, as he would be her husband's friend again 
for her sake. In Australia he had for some years petulantly 
avoided looking at any newspapers from the north of England 
which might contain tidings of the old places familiar to him ; 



30 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



and therefore he knew nothing about the career of his old 
colleague "Warton. lie had perhaps vague romantic notions 
about the possibility of Warton and his wife being poor, and 
about his contriving somehow to share with them the money 
which had grown up to him, and being splendidly generous 
and consequently happy. Perhaps he was not so very glad- 
so purely and unreservedly glad . when he heard that ^ his 
successful and happy rival was not in a way to need generosity ; 
that he had prospered in life as well as in love ; that he was a 
sort of great man, with his name, as Murger would say, " in 
the playbill:" while he, Ralph Lennon, was utterly obscure 
and unknown, his talents, which were once thought promising 
and rich, having conducted him to nothing. Lennon might 
have felt a bitterness rise up in his heart but for the sudden 
words which suggested the chance of her death. This he had 
never thought of. He always pictured her young, bright, and 
blooming, as he used to see her ; or beautiful, sorrowful, and 
pityiDg, as when last she listened to his wild appeals and 
passionate implorings, and shed tears over them, but was not 
to be softened by them. Seeing her again, he thought, would 
be like looking once more upon the vision of his own youth. 
But it seemed as strange and shocking to him to think that he 
might never see her again as to think of a life which had death 
for its final stage. So, though in a moment after he was calm 
enough to see that the ominous words had no significance, he 
yet determined that nothing should delay him now . that he 
would travel straight on, night and day, until he reached 
London, found out Warton, frankly offered him his hand, and 
bade him to forget the old bitter quarrel of ten years ago. 

Nay, he sometimes . and especially as he marched along in 
the moonlight and the shadow, and with the night-wind's rush 
among the pines still sounding sadly in his ears . he sometimes 
even fancied there was something peculiar which called him 
to England. How was it that on the Lake of Zug, where he 
was staying only for its seclusion, he should have fallen in with 
two from the very spot whither he was tending ? How was it 
that, wherever he went in Switzerland, he still met them 1 
How was it that, when he sat with them alone for once, and 
the lady chose to sing, she sang a song which brought up such 
memories to him, and led to such questions, and so to the 
utterance of the very words which thrilled him ? In all this 
was there nothing ominous and mysterious 1 Yes, there was 



IOR ENGLAND. 31 

something, as long as the night lasted ; but when morning 
flushed over the whole scene, and the birds sang, and the pines 
looked no longer spectral, and children with baskets of wild 
raspberries met the pedestrian at every turn, and the exquisite 
valley of the Rhone shone in its sunny beauty at his feet, and 
he could at last see the old tower of Martigny perched upon its 
crag, the spell of the ominous words forsook him, and could not 
be recalled. His resolution not to lag did not desert him with 
it. He remained but a few minutes in Martigny, and with the 
first train swept along the shore of the Lake of Geneva to 
Lausanne ; thence to Geneva itself; and thence from the 
poetry of nature into its brisk prose . from Switzerland into 
France. 

Dr. Alwyn and his wife were still lounging along the 
Chillon road, the wife fascinated by the Byronian castle, the 
husband absorbed in contemplation of the lake and the snows 
of the serrated Dent du Midi, when the voice of a guard 
wakened up a sleepy passenger alone in a first-class carriage 
just arriving at London Bridge station ; and Ralph Lennon 
staggered out upon the platform, and, rubbing his eyes, knew 
himself once more at home in England. 

His first feelings were not those of exultation ; indeed, far 
from it . he shuddered. It was cold, it was foggy, it was 
raining. All at once he remembered that the day he left 
England it was cold, foggy, and raining likewise. No doubt it 
was the same fog and the same shower. " In tears our last 
farewell was taken ; and now in tears we meet again." Accus- 
tomed for some years back to warm skies and bright suns, the 
dingy atmosphere and the raw cold air. raw and cold, though 
autumn was yet young . seemed to chill him to the marrow. 
What a beautiful halo always used to hang over England when 
he looked back upon her through the telescope of his memory 
across the Pacific ! Even in his moods of anger, when he 
stormed inwardly against home and all that belonged to it, yet 
how agonizingly beautiful it seemed ! . beautiful as a faithless 
mistress, whom we curse in the bitterness of our heart, and yet 
love so passionately. Now that he was actually in England 
again, what a dreary, vulgar, commonplace, disheartening sort 
of home it looked ! His heart went down like the mercury in 
a glass when a chill comes. 

" Disappointment number one," he said to himself. "This is 
dreadful. All the better : it will help to prepare me for dis- 



32 



THE WATEltDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



appointment number two, and three, and so on through all the 
rest, which I suppose are sure to follow." 

He took a railway-porter into council, and inquired about 
hotels. Several houses of which he had rather a genial memory- 
were gone long ago, he found. Great caravanseries were every- 
where being substituted. The porter recommended one which 
he named. Lennon knew it by name, for he had been reading 
a stray Times now and then on his homeward journey, and he 
saw columns of letters appearing day after day in denunciation 
of this particular hostelry ; of its rooms, its " lifts," its charges, 
its manners ; the savage ferocity of its barmaid, the withering 
scorn of its waiters, the haughty indifference of its boots. 

" Good," said Lennon grimly. " I'll go there. Nothing shall 
be wanting. I'll have a whole bath of discomfort to begin with ; 
and then, perhaps, when the first shock is over, things may 
begin to feel better. There's no place like home ; and I'll have 
as many of its peculiar joys as I can all at once. Is the lug- 
gage all up ? Then drive to the Eleanor's Cross Hotel." 



CHAPTER III. 

TOM BERRY OF SOUTHWARK. 

EALPH LENNON set himself to work at once to find out 
his old companion Walter Warton. The time, however, 
was not favourable for discovering anybody in London. No 
Directory contained any hint of Warton's whereabouts ; and it 
was the dull season as regarded meetings, and no placards on 
the walls announced great political gatherings of any kind. 
The few people with whom Lennon had any manner of acquain- 
tance in town all knew Warton's name and something of his 
public character, but nothing about his private residence. One 
evening, however, as Lennon passed down the Strand, he saw 
on a hoarding a small placard announcing in letters of very 
modest size a meeting of the working men of some trade or 
other, to discuss some question between masters and men which 
happened just then to affect their branch of industry. " Come," 
thought Ealph ; " if Warton be the sort of man I have heard 
of, these people, or some of them, are sure to know all about 
him." So he found out the place of meeting (in a back street, 



TOM BERRY OF SOUTHWARK. 33 

East-end), and he " assisted " at the proceedings. " The public" 
were "respectfully invited to attend," in order to hear the 
grievances of the workmen exposed ; and Ralph Lennon con- 
stituted the public. So far as he could judge, no other creature 
not an artisan of some kind was present. 

The room was small, badly ventilated, badly lighted, and 
densely crowded ; yet Lennon became interested in the " pro- 
ceedings," and sat them out. The meeting was conducted with 
the utmost order, although it was of course both noisy and 
demonstrative. There was but little of the sort of eloquence 
which he expected to hear ; there was hardly a word said about 
the rights of man, or the rights of laboui*, or serfdom, or the 
tyrant capitalist. The speakers seemed for the most part to go 
in for argument ; and a rough practical emulation in prompt 
logic between each successive orator and those whom he ad- 
dressed was the great game of the night ; for, although the 
meeting was entirely made up of working men, there was by no 
means a complete class-unanimity among them. Some boldly 
contended that the alleged grievance was no grievance at all ; 
some went so far as to espouse the side of the masters. There 
were evidently conservative minds and capitalist minds among 
these working men as well as among their social superiors. The 
utter absence of the imaginative and the ideal qualities, the 
unconscious instinctive adhesion to the concrete and the prac- 
tical, which usually make the average Briton so successful and 
so uninteresting, showed with peculiar force at this meeting. 

One man only . and he was somewhat older than most of the 
other speakers . made any appeal to rights and wrongs, and 
essayed an occasional flight of democratic eloquence. Most of 
the others were quite young ; he was upwards of forty. He 
was a great strong man, with an eager face, and hair already 
grizzling. He denounced social inequalities and class legislation 
with vehemence, and in language which, but for its occasionally 
high-flown style and misplaced grandiloquence of phrase be- 
traying the uneducated or the self-educated man, might have 
done very well for a much more pretentious platform. 

Lennon felt strangely attracted by this man, though the 
somewhat old-fashioned and obsolete rhetoric of denunciation 
in which he indulged made the listener smile. Especially warm 
did the speaker become when he railed at his own class for their 
apathy and selfishness. 

" Don't tell me," he exclaimed, " of your model working man, 

D 



34 THE WATEEDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

who only looks after his wife and ' his family, and never listens 
to the voice of the political agitator. I call the model working 
man a selfish humbug an' a sneak. When old England was 



-'a 



great, she wasn't made great by model men of any kind . 
fellows who only care to have good blankets to lie in, an' to be. 
patted on the head by their superiors. D'ye think the twelve 
Apostles were model working men that only thought of mindin' 
their business 1 Believe me, fellow working men, when a 
patron or a swell of any kind praises you for not running after 
politics and for holding aloof from strikes, he only wants to 
flatter and cajole you out of looking for what's lawfully and 
properly your rights, according to the grand old doctrines of 
the Constitution and the broad principles of humanity." 

There was much more in the same strain, accompanied with 
some energy of gesticulation. The face of the speaker was very 
remarkable. It was dark, stubbly, scrubby, with stiff, broom- 
like, tufty hair, cut short, and standing up in all irregular ways 
about his temples. He had shaggy eyebrows, and high cheek- 
bones, and a great broad mouth, and a black beard without 
whiskers, his face was white and lank, and scored with rugged 
lines. The eyes were bright and full and kindly, and there 
was sometimes a wonderful softness and simplicity about the 
great mouth, when its lines subsided into placidness. The 
figure of the man was strong but awkward ; he had great long 
arms and large hands, with blunted fingers. 

The meeting did not respond very cordially to the appeals of 
this speaker. He seemed an anachronism there, somehow. 
But Lennon liked him, if only for his old-fashioned discontent 
and class-bitterness. Our friend resolved to wait until [the 
meeting closed, and then speak to the orator. " He is my 
man," thought Lennon ; " if anybody here can put me on 
Warton's track, he can." 

So, when the proceedings were over, and the room began 
rapidly to thin, Lennon went up to this man, who was standing 
in excited talk with a little knot of his comrades, and touched 
him on the shoulder. 

" May I say a word to you ? " he asked. 

The man came at once, and very civilly, into a quiet corner 
of the room. 

Ralph went to the point of his business at once. " Do you," 
he asked. " know anything of Mr. Warton . Walter Raleigh 
Warton ? " 



TOM BERRY OF SOUTHWARK. 35 

The man's brow darkened in a moment. " Yes," he replied ; 
" I know him . damn him ! " 

"Pray, my friend," rejoined Lennon very coolly, " don't be so 
rude as to damn anybody who may happen to be the long-lost 
brother of the person you are speaking to. Walter Warton is 
not my brother ; but he used to be a friend of mine, and I 
cannot in decency hear him 'damned' without quarrelling with 
the damner ; and I don't want to quarrel . I want a little very 
harmless information, and if you can give it to me without 
unnecessary swearing, you will really very much, oblige a man 
and a brother." 

The good-humoured raillery of Lennon's tone brought its 
natural and genial expression back into the working man's face. 
" I'm sure I beg your pardon," he said, with simple gentleman- 
liness of manner ; " I didn't exactly mean any offence, though 
I ought to have known that such language must be an offence, 
even if Warton wasn't a friend of yours . which I'm sorry to 
hear. But all I know about him lately is that he's proved a 
humbug and a sneak, and he's sold himself to the Tories." 

"Well, I heard that he had become a Tory. But a man 
may change his opinions honestly, may he not 1 " 

" He may, if he doesn't gain by it ; if he doesn't get taken 
up by swells and patted on the back, and asked to their 
dinnei-s, and trotted out on their platforms. Never mind. 
Wat Warton's a fool . a double fool. The Tories will make a 
tool of him, and throw him away ; and I know working men 
that subscribed their shillings . ay, and their pounds . for him 
when he stood for the borough over . " (the speaker jerked his 
head to indicate locality) ; " yes, and that lost their jobs of 
work for days and days to work for him . and that would spit 
at him now, if he was to come on that platform. He'll fall 
between the two stools, mind you. Tell Wat Warton that : 
and tell him, if you like, that Tom Berry of Southwavk said so. 
I'm Tom Berry . he'll know me, never fear." 

" Well, Tom Berry, I shan't tell him anything of the sort. 
I have not seen him for years, and I only want to see him now 
in order to find out something about his family, to whom I wish 
very well. If you can tell me whers he is to be found I will 
owe you a good turn." 

" Yes ; I can tell you where he's to be found, if he's in 
town. I know his place well. Many a time I've been there 
arranging for meetings of working men and all that, and many 

d 2 



36 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

a time I've thought he talked like an angel there. 1 t's in the 
Temple. He has chambers there ; but somebody else's name 
remains up, because he doesn't want to have all sorts of people 
dropping in upon him. If you're going that way now, I am, 
and I'll show you the place ; for I don't remember the name 
or the number." 

Lennon was very glad of the offer, and began to take an 
interest in his new friend. They walked together towards 
Fleet-street. 

" Those men who spoke to-night," asked Ealph, " were they 
much of politicians 1 They did not seem to be." 

" No ; they were not. They're not the sort of men that 
Wat Warton could work upon. London is not much of a place 
for sound politics . what I call sound politics . among working 
men. Unless such as, like myself, are old enough to have the 
Chartist leaven in them, they don't much care. London's a 
dead-and-alive place for politics. The bad lot of our younger 
men here drink, and have dog-fights and ratting matches, and 
kick their wives, and all that ; the good sort go to chapel and 
lectures, and become members of temperance societies, and are 
taught to let politics alone ; and a few of them are Unitarians, 
and have Views of Life, sir, do you understand ? " he spoke 
with humorous emphasis . " Views of Life ; and [they are toe* 
high up in the clouds to care about votes and elections and all 
that sort of thing. They're good fellows, too, and one can't 
but like them, . we had few such, I can tell you when I was 
a young workman, . but they're chips in porridge so far as 
politics go. London's a dead old place. I'm sick of it. It's 
different in the North . in Lancashire and Yorkshire. Wat 
Warton's great there, I can tell you . at least he used to be. 
Perhaps they've found him out before now, as I have. But 
the North's the place. 'Ave you ever bin there ? " 

" Yes ; I come from the North . that is, from Cumberland, 
the Lancashire border." 

"Ah, yes; I see. Wat Warton comes from there, I recol- 
lect. I worked a good deal in the North myself at one time. 
But you've not come lately from there, or you'd know more 
about him 1 " 

" No ; I come from Australia." 

" From Australia 1 Maybe from Victoria ? " 

" Yes, indeed . from Victoria." 

" Ah, they've universal suffrage there ? " 



TOM BEERY OF SOUTHWARK. 37 

" Something like it, at least." 

" That's the place I'd like to live in. Where a man is a man, 
don't you know ? He was a humbug the man who wrote that, 
too, with his ' good time coming. ' Ah, if I was once there you 
wouldn't catch me coming back here." 

By this time they had reached the Temple ; and after some 
peering at the lists of names on door-posts under dim lamp- 
light, Tom Berry at last showed Lennon a set of chambers on 
the ground-floor, and told him these were Warton's. Then he 
bade him good-night. 

" I should like to see you again some time," said Lennon, as 
he held out his hand in leave-taking. 

" I'm to be heard of or found at evenings in the reading- 
room where you saw me to-night," Berry replied, in a tone 
which, however friendly, meant to say : " I am only a working 
man, but I don't go hanging after swells. If they want me 
they call on me, that's all." 

Lennon quite understood the meaning of the tone, and rather 
liked it. 

" I shall be quite sure to find you out," he said. " I want 
to have a little more talk with you. I am a stranger to 
English politics, and you can tell me all about them." 

"Ay, ay, I think I can do that right enough ; I've paid 
pretty dear for my learning in that school, and wish sometimes 
I knew as littleTof its teaching as the baby at the breast. Good 
night. You'll not find Wat Warton in now, I'm thinking ; 
and if you take my advice you'll never look after him any 
more." 

Berry nodded, and disappeared in the darkness of the 
Temple courts. His white, eager face, as he looked back a 
moment, seemed ghostly. In Lennon's mind the odd thought 
arose that his late companion was indeed like the ghost of that 
Chartism which used to live once, and shake the country with 
its loud, defiant tread, but which had long since fallen dead, and 
been laid in the dust of the grave. And Lennon, whose later 
years in England before his exile had been a season of social, 
literary, and theological Chartism, felt a thrill of something 
like affinity and pitying brotherhood towards the poor fellow 
who had just left him. He paused a moment in thought, and 
then knocked at the door of the old companion whom he had 
not seen for so many years, and from whom he had j>ai - ted in 
bitterness. 



38 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

It was a relief to him to find that Warton was not in. A 
smartly-dressed boy, -a cross-breed between page and clerk, 
opened the door, and told him his master was not likely to be 
home until late. Ralph wrote a few lines, announcing in the 
friendliest manner his arrival in England, giving his town 
address at the grim hostelry already mentioned, and adding 
that he would call again and endeavour to see Warton before 
he went northward. 

Next morning he was at breakfast in the coffee-room, when 
Warton, looking young, smooth, and dainty as ever . not ap- 
parently having added one day to his age . walked in and 
glanced sharply from table to table. Lennon rose and went to 
meet him. There was a cordial greeting, and each congratu- 
lated the other on his looks, and on his not having grown any 
older. But Lennon had seen enough to feel convinced that if 
he had not risen and come forward his old acquaintance would 
never have recognized him. To be sure, he wore a great beard, 
and his once bright complexion had darkened; but there still 
was the fact, . Warton's eye had rested distinctly and inquir- 
ingly on him as he sat at the table, and until he rose and came 
forward Warton did not know him. 

There was little time for exchange of ideas, even if much 
interchange of that kind had been likely just then. Warton 
was leaving town immediately; his cab was at the door. He 
was going to stay a few days at Coombe Castle, and came to 
insist on Ralph's giving him a night at his chambers in the 
Temple immediately on his return, which Ralph promised to 
do. Warton asked if Ralph meant to remain in England, and 
was told he did; asked him what he meant to do with himself, 
which Ralph answered with a shrug of the shoulders and the 
word " Nothing." 

" By Jove ! Lucky fellow ! Brought home wealth from the 
Antipodes 1 " 

" Wealth enough for me. I have worked my time, and now 
I mean to rest." 

" O, you shan't rest, I promise you ! We'll find something 
for you to do. Repose ailleurs is our motto here just now. I 
am so much concerned that I have to go out of town to-clay. 
But I am immersed in politics, and I am not a Croesus from the 
colonies who can afford to rest. Good-bye . for the hour. 
You'll not fail to come that night ; we will have a long talk 
over old times." 



TOM BEERY OF SOUTH WARE. 39 

Lennon winced a little at the allusion to old times. It was 
only as Warton was actually going that he asked after W arton's 
wife. 

" Mabel is perfectly well, I am glad to say, now. Her health 
is not always very good, and we have, therefore, to find a little 
place in the country for her and the children. She does not 
like town ; it does not agree with her, this hideous atmosphere, 
or with the children. It will be a pleasure to her to hear of 
your return to England." 

With the words, Warton pressed his friend's hand gently yet 
fervently, then jumped into his cab, waved his white hand, and 
drove away. 

Ralph Lennon sauntered listlessly, vacuously, back into the 
breakfast-room. He looked out of the window ; he took up a 
sheet of the Times and glanced gravely down its columns, and 
was not aware, until a waiter handed him another sheet, that 
he had been attentively studying the supplement. Then he 
looked through the columns of news for form's sake, his mind 
taking in nothing which presented itself at the mind's glass 
door, the eye. He put the paper clown at last, relieved to be 
decently rid of it. Then he lounged into the smoking-room, 
and was glad to find it vacant. He sat in a rocking-chair, 
lighted a cigar, smoked, and began to think. 

A blank, cold disappointment had fallen on him. Why ? 
He did not know. What had he expected or wanted ?. He 
could not guess. Perhaps people returning home after long 
absence generally expect to find the home more actively and 
dramatically interested about their return than it is. Perhaps 
the friendly, easy reception with which Yfarton had greeted 
him was not exactly what Lennon expected. The impression 
with which it left him was certainly one of entire personal in- 
significance. He might come or go, and the old friends or old 
enemies were unconcerned. Perhaps the real secret of the blank 
lay in the four or five days which must intervene before Lennon 
could meet his old acquaintance again, and hear even a word of 
his old love. He might as well have been for these days still 
in Switzerland or in Algeria or in Melbourne. So near, and 
yet so far ! It was a vexation and a disappointment . all the 
more so because he could hardly embody it in distinct thoughts 
and look it fixedly in the face. 

So, if he remained in town, there were at least five days 
before him with nothing to do ; and his only acquaintances in 



40 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOUBS. 

London a few colonial agents, the town partner of a northern 
attorney, and a Chartist working man. 

" No," he said, and he rose from his chair and flung away his 
cigar with a burst of determination ; " I could never stand it. 
I'll go down to Cumberland at once, and have a look at the old 
place ; and I'll be back in time to meet him. Nobody wants 
me here just now, . or anywhere, indeed, for that matter. But 
I can't spend five days dragging through these hideoiis streets, 
and looking out of these dreary windows. I'll go and see the 
poor old place again." 



CHAPTEE IV 

WALTER WAKTON'S HOME. 

TWENTY miles to the south of London, on a railway which 
runs to the sea, there lies a pretty town, which, unlike 
most other small and old towns, had grown considerably 
through its proximity to the line. It happens too often that 
when a railway passes close to such a town it only sweeps up 
and runs away with whatever poor little business the place 
may once have had. The tourist, the commercial traveller, the 
agent, the locomotive business man of any kind, who must 
some years ago have stayed a night there if he had anythiDg 
whatever to do in the town, now makes his arrangements to 
get through his affairs in a couple of hours, and is off by the 
evening train somewhere else. But the town which is now to 
be spoken of had had the rare good luck to make a special 
profit of that which had been the commercial ruin of so many 
of its fellows. In fact, it was fortunate enough to be exactly 
suitable as a home for the families of a large class of Londoners, 
who liked to stow their wives and children, and after business 
hours themselves, just as far away from the city of smoke and 
fog as it was possible to get to in time for a late dinner or a 
substantial tea. It is the fond mania of a great number of 
nice, soft, motherly women that health cannot possibly be had 
for their children or themselves if they do not live quite out 
of London ; and although, as a matter of fact, a small semi- 
rural town is usually about the worst-drained and most in- 
salubrious sort of place engendered by modern civilization, and 



WALTER WARTON's HOME. 41 

although, as a whole, our much-abused metropolis is one of the 
healthiest places man, woman, or child can abide in, yet it will 
take some generations before the majority of British mothers 
get to know that a well-drained lane is a better place to live 
in than a damp hill-side or the neighbourhood of a marshy 
meadow. So this little town we are now talking of became a 
favourite succursale, or chapel of ease, to London ; and a little 
removed from its original cluster of queer, quaint, ancient, and 
grass-grown streets, lined with houses of red brick, there soon 
grew up a perfect colony of detached and semi-detached villas, 
with stucco fronts and plate-glass windows, and tall rows of 
steps, on either side of which stood for adornment plaster urns 
filled with flowers. 

For the most part these tenements were, in their external 
character, as mild, monotonous, and conventional as the soberest 
Briton could desire. They were brick-and-stucco symbols of 
respectability. One could almost imagine an irregular and 
poetic fancy taking cold and dying at the bare sight of them. 
But here and there, a little off the track of this mournful 
colony of propriety, there were some irregular and almost 
fantastic houses, erected probably by some builder who, 
naturally eccentric, had been driven to downright madness at 
last by the weary sight of conventionality all around. The 
eccentric houses, be it said, were generally smaller than the 
respectable buildings. When a man gets a good income in 
Eugland, and can pay a decent rent for a house, he is as little 
likely to affect eccentricity in a residence as his wife to display 
it in her clothes. One of the very prettiest, and also one of 
the smallest, of the new houses was an odd little lodge built in 
graceful imitation of the old style which was real and sub- 
stantial in the town itself, and having, therefore, so much of 
local excuse and local colouring to atone for what Mr. Buskin 
might probably consider the insincerity of its principles. It 
was long, low, with heavy old-English porch, and plenteously 
overgrown with ivy. Its windows were lattices ; it had gables 
and weathercocks ; and not a square inch of stucco was to be 
seen anywhere about it. At its back was a garden rich in 
apple-trees and strawberry-beds and the vine ; in front was a 
sunny scrap of well-mown grass, a smooth-shaven green, which 
only a wooden paling divided from the road. 

At the close of a beautiful evening in late September, two 
ladies and two children were in this scrap of ground. The 



42 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

children, a fine boy of seven and a girl a year or two older, 
were playing with a curly little dog. The elder of the ladies 
was leaning on the railings and looking anxiously up the road. 
By the word " elder " we must not be understood to mean that 
either of the two was old, or elderly, or even approaching to 
elderliness. But the lady who counted most years . perhaps 
some thirty-odd . was very plump and matronly ; a handsome 
woman, but falling fast into that flesh-development which 
used to make poor Hawthorne shudder when he noticed the 
immature obesity of our English dames. She was fair and 
bright-complexioned ; indeed her cheeks glowed even with the 
late and mild kisses of the September sun. She now and then 
turned away from the railings, and walked up and down the 
little lawn ; and she walked heavily and breathed rather 
shortly. Just a little less flesh, and she might have been 
stately ; a little more sprightliness of movement, and she might 
have been a plump Hebe some time advanced in matronhood. 
Her companion was fair, like herself, and bright-cheeked ; but 
she was slender and shapely, with unresting, beaming brown 
eyes and a step of elastic vigour ; and she was perhaps, at 
most, some twenty years of age. 

" He is not coming by this train, Mabel/' said the younger 
woman, looking up the road ; " everybody has come, quarter 
of an hour ago." 

They were aunt and niece ; but not being divided by the 
usual difference of years in such relationships, the aunt was 
always " Mabel " to the niece. 

"No, I suppose not," Mabel said with something like a sigh. 
" He is sometimes delayed, you know, on the way from the 
station. People get talking to him, and keep him standing 
where their roads divide. But I don't think he's coming by 
this train. He will come by the next ; and I think I'm glad 
of it, for the children will be in bed then, and we'll put on 
our bonnets and go to meet him." 

" The next train is the last for the night?" the niece inquired 
with a little emphasis. 

" Yes, the last for the night. But he'll come in that train, 
you need not doubt. He said he would." 

" 0, he said he would." This was spoken somewhat doubt- 
fully . coldly, indeed. 

Mabel did not notice the expression conveyed by the tone, 
or would not acknowledge it. Indeed this good lady had an 



WALTER WARTON'S HOME. 43 

absence of appreciation of sarcasm or even irony which piety 
itself must have commended. 

" Mamma, is papa coming home to-night ? " cried the little 
boy. 

" Yes, Wat, he is. Are you not glad i " 

" O, yes, mamma . very glad, if he comes ; for you know he 
promised to show me how to mend my horse, and it's ever so 
long ago now. How do you know he's coming, mamma ? " 

" Because he said so, dear." .. 

" O, but then he said so before, mamma, many nights, you 
know ; and I stayed up for him, and he didn't come." 

" Your papa is much engaged, my dear, and cannot always 
come." 

" O ! " And there was another pause for reflection, while 
the infantile mind was gathering up a fresh argument suited to 
the change of position. " But then, mamma, people oughtn't 
to promise, you said yourself the other day, unless they were 
sure of performing. Ought they, mamma 1 " 

" But perhaps your papa did not exactly promise, dear." 

This was a dangerous manoeuvre . a complete change of front 
in the presence of the enemy. 

" Well, then, perhaps he'll come now, as he didn't promise." 

The little girl laughed at her brother's epigrammatic smart- 
ness. His mother coloured a little, but ignored the sarcasm. 

" Don't be pert, Watty," said the younger lady ; " I don't 
like pert children. . Mabel dear, I wonder you would not dis- 
courage your son's premature displays of wit." 

Mabel shrugged her shoulders, but said nothing. 

" I saw you smile, for all that, cousin Grace," pursued the 
irrepressible Watty. "O, yes, I did; I saw a twinkle in your 

His cousin cut short the controversy by chasing him round 
the little lawn and endeavouring to capture him with her 
pocket-handkerchief, lasso-fashion, he screaming the while with 
delight and laughter. At last she caught him, and at his 
earnest request lifted him on her shoulder and held him there 
with one arm, as a girl in a classic picture holds a pitcher or 
an urn. Her sleeve fell down from her white, strong, shapely 
arm, as she did so. She and the saucy rosy boy on her shoulder 
made a pretty group. 

When Watty was set on his feet again, he renewed his 
plainings for papa. 



44 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Do you see him coming yet, mamma 1 " 

" No, dear, I don't." 

" 0, I wish he would come ! I want my horse mended. I'll 
not go to bed, mamma, until it's mended. Nobody knows how 
to mend it but papa." 

" Perhaps cousin Gracie could mend it for you if you were 
to ask her very nicely." 

" O, no, she couldn't. Women don't understand anything." 

" Who told you that ? " asked cousin Grace, looking fixedly 
at him. 

" Papa said it," the urchin replied very promptly, and with a 
saucy twinkle in his brown eyes. 

" ! Papa said women don't understand anything 1 " 

" Yes, he did." 

This was given in a tone of triumph, as if the authority 
quoted must settle the question. 

Grace tossed her head slightly, and said in a quiet undertone, 
" Some women do understand some things, however . and some 
people too." Then, as if repenting of any inuendo which might 
seem to be conveyed by the words . which, however, Mabel had 
not heeded, or perhaps even heard . the young woman laid her 
hand upon her aunt's massive shoulder affectionately, and said, 
" You are tired, Mabel ; go in and lie upon the sofa, and I'll 
see the children safely stowed away in bed ; and then we'll 
walk to the station and meet Walter." 

It need perhaps hardly be said that the Walter for whom 
these ladies looked was the Walter Raleigh Warton of whom 
something was told in the previous chapters. 

Mrs. Warton accepted the offer, being one of a peculiar class 
of women whose various duties are always discharged by some- 
body else, and who are invariably put quietly on one side by 
those who love them as well as by those who do not. Espe- 
cially she was grateful to any one who managed her children for 
her ; because, though they were fond of her, she was not of the 
least importance to them. She could do nothing for them ; 
she had never done anything for them except to bring them 
into the world ; and even that was accomplished so passively 
and languidly that her own life was nigh to fading out alto- 
gether during the performance. So long as they were washed 
and dressed and amused by somebody, she was content. Even 
her religious devotion, which was her deepest feeling save one, 
did not get much beyond the careful inculcation of the words 



WALTER WAETON'S HOME. 45 

of the Lord's prayer, and a persistent ordinance that, whether 
the little ones, as they parroted its sublime words, were broad 
awake and giggling, or half asleep and nodding, . whether it 
were recited to herself or to her niece, or to the nurserymaid 
or the nurserymaid's sister (who occasionally dropped in to tea, 
and in the absence of Miss Ethelstone was pressed into the 
service), . it must always be said on bended knees and with 
folded hands formally uplifted. It would be cruel indeed to 
accuse a woman like Mrs. Warton of want of faith in the 
omnipotence of God ; yet it is doubtful whether she believed 
that He could hear the prayer of a worshipper, even an infant 
worshipper, who addressed Him in any save a kneeling posture. 

The children said their prayers that night in the presence of 
their cousin ; and they never giggled or even yawned while she 
was there ; for they felt instinctively that her senses were 
awake, and that her attention was given to them. And be sure 
they prayed for papa, though he had not come in time to mend 
little Watty's horse. 

Leaning somewhat heavily on her niece's arm, Mrs. "Warton 
presently walked out on the way to the station. There was 
something of a brightness about the poor lady's eyes . and she 
had beautiful soft eyes, and a deep sweet voice . as she set out 
to meet her husband. The one passion of her life had been, 
and still was, for the husband of her youth. To her he was 
the greatest and the best man on earth. His speeches, when 
he used to take her to hear them . ah, he was too busy now, 
and she did not live in London . always seemed to her the 
sublimest inspirations of human genius. She did not trouble 
herself to understand them ; indeed, he had a sort of way of 
conveying to her that women are not supposed to understand 
such things, and she accepted the intimation meekly, and ad- 
mired him all the more for the starlike dwelling apart of his 
serene and lofty intellect. But she admired them sincerely, and 
delighted to hear their fine rolling words thunder in her ears; 
and her feelings followed every change of mood, and quickened 
or softened, or saddened or grew angry, at the call of his 
trumpet-tone . just as people wholly ignorant of the very rudi- 
ments of music, and unconscious of any effort to follow the 
meaning of an organ or an orchestra, are yet compelled to 
respond to the successive moods of its thrilling and crashing 
intonations. To his wife Walter Raleigh Warton was Demos- 
thenes and St. John in one person. 



46 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

The two women walked to the station along a beautiful 
ascending road, which the falling leaves of some beeches were 
just beginning to strew, and through some charming little 
groups of silver birches, looking, in their now almost leafless 
gracefulness, like clusters of Naiads or nymphs unrobed for a 
plunge in the waves. The autumnal stars were beginning to 
show their faintest lights in the sky ; and the deep red and 
green lamps of the railway-station, which was far up a high 
embankment, seemed like strange fantastic coruscations in the 
heavens. 

Mrs. Warton was not a poetic woman, but some sense of the 
beauty of the scene and the calm deliciousness of the atmosphere 
impressed itself on her. " How lovely all this place looks to- 
night ! " she remarked. " I wonder Walter does not like to be 
here of'tener, or to stay here longer. But men are so absorbed in 
politics ; and he owes it to his country, he says, not to desert 
the career he has taken up." 

Her companion frowned and bit her lip, but said nothing 
as yet. 

" Patriots, you know, in old days were ready to sacrifice 
everything for their country," pursued Mabel. 

" Even their wives and their children 1" 

" Yes, dear, I suppose so." 

" Well, I think there are some now who have not at all 
degenerated, and indeed who could make the sacrifice very 
cheerfully. By the way, Mabel, Artemus Ward offers to allow 
every drop of blood in the veins of all his able-bodied male 
relatives to be shed in the cause of the American Union." 

" Does he, dear ? 0, but come, now, that is only your non- 
sense. You are laughing at me ; I was talking seriously. 
You unmarried girls are never serious. Wait until you are 
married." 

" Yes, I shall be made serious enough then, no doubt. But, 
Mabel, when did Walter write to say that he was coming to- 
night ? Yesterday 1" 

" No, not yesterday. I think it was Monday, or perhaps 
Saturday." 

This was Friday. 

" A week ago nearly ?" 

" Well, not quite a week ago, dear. But his time is so 
taken up, and he goes about from place to place a great 
deal." 



WALTEK WARTON'S HOMK. 47 

" Yes, I saw his name in a paper as among the guests of 
Earl Somebody, somewhere in the country, a few days back." 

" Did you really ?" Mrs. Warton's face radiated with a mild 
triumph. " At an Earl's in the country 1 The naughty boy 
never wrote to tell me ; but he is so modest : he never will 
boast of anything." 

" I would not go to these places if I were such a man as 
Walter." 

"Why not, dear?" 

" What does he want there 1" 

" Men in political life always have to go to these places. 
Something about parties, you know ; arranging who is to go 
in for this place and that . into Parliament. Walter hopes to 
have another chance made for him very soon. We don't quite 
understand these things, dear ; but Walter does, you may be 
sure." 

By this time they had reached the little station. They went 
in and sat down. 

" How often I have come here alone of evenings," said Mrs. 
Warton, with something like a sigh, " before you came to bear 
me company ! " 

" And been disappointed 1 " 

" Yes, sometimes ; but not always, you know. Very often I 
came just in time to find my truant and to bring him away in 
triumph, all tired and dusty, and lead him home and make 
much of him, and be very happy." 

" Well, my dear, dear Mabel, I hope you may be happy now 
. indeed I do. I hear the whistle of the train." 

" Yes, here it is, and I know he's coming." Mrs. Warton 
sprang to her feet, light for the moment as a girl. 

The train came in, and many people got out of it, some or 
most of them regular denizens of the place, who knew Mrs. 
Warton and greeted her ; but her husband was not among 
them. 

" Come away, dear," she said wearily to her niece. " I am 
so disappointed. O, if anything has happened to him ! " 

" Nothing has happened to him, you may be sure," her niece 
replied, in a tone which implied anger towards the absent rather 
than consolation or encouragement to the present. 

" Ah, you have no husband," was Mrs. Warton's commentary, 
" and you don't know what it is to be always anxiously expect- 
ing some one home who can't come when you expect him. How 



48 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

can I tell that there may not have been an accident somewhere, 
and perhaps he is killed ? " 

They did not talk much on the way home. When they 
reached the little porch of the house, Mrs. Warton said, " How 
glad I am the children are in bed ! They really would worry 
me terribly just now." 

The two women set themselves to occupation of some kind 
for the rest of an evening that promised to be very dreary. 
They kept a very modest household, two female servants being 
the entire domestic staff; and they saw few visitors. Miss 
Ethelstone had not been very long . only some year or so . 
living in the house. She had come to keep her aunt company, 
being herself an orphan, when her aunt's husband grew too 
busy in politics to come home very often. And she came to 
help to put things to rights, which were going dreadfully astray 
under Mrs. "Warton's superintendence. And finally she came 
. this being however an unwhispered, hardly understood 
reason . to share quietly and delicately her very slender purse 
with her aunt's family. She had a tiny annuity left to her by 
her father, and it had been for a long time her great ambition 
to go to Rome, and live there and study art like the American 
girl in Hawthorne's story. But she cheerfully put off the 
project for a while, until the long-expected time should come 
when Warton's genius obtained its reward, and he became a 
prime minister, or a chief justice, or a governor-general of 
India, . which he was quite certain to do ; but he must get 
into the House of Commons first, and he had not got there yet. 
So Grace came and helped his wife to manage her affairs ; and 
the first step she took was to dispense with the services of the 
daily governess, and teach the children herself. 

The two women then sat down to a night's occupation. 
Grace got the terrestrial globe and a volume of geography, and 
began to revolve the one and con over the other. 

" I want so much to study all this latitude and longitude 
business," she said, looking up with a smile at her aunt. " I 
must keep at least one lesson ahead of little Mabel, or there 
will be a hopeless break-down. I never was strong in geo- 
graphy ; and only yesterday she asked me some dreadful 
question about the latitude of something, and what it all 
meant ; and only that that providential smash of a pane of 
glass took place through the aid of Watty and his ball, I do 
believe I should have been compelled, for the sake of my repu- 



WALTER WAETON'S HOME. 49 

tation as a teacher, to say, ' Little girls must not ask 
questions ; ' or, ' Hush, my dear ; you'll know all about that 
when you grow to be a woman.' " 

The last few words of this speech fell upon inattentive ears. 
J?or a quick step was heard just then at the door, followed by 
a peculiar whistle ; and Mrs. Warton jumped up and exclaimed, 
" Why, here is Walter, I do declare ! " and ran to open the 
door herself, and give him a welcome. 

Her niece remained discreetly where she was, being indeed 
in nowise personally anxious to greet the delinquent. In a 
moment or two Mrs. Warton entered, leading her husband in 
triumph. 

Walter Raleigh Warton was a slight, shapely man, rather 
tall, with a profusion of thick dark curling hair, a colourless 
face, and a very youthful appearance. He did not look more 
than six- or seven-and-twenty years of age ; he must have been 
fully ten years older. He might fairly have been called a 
handsome man. He had beautifully white teeth, and hands as 
small and delicate and well-shaped as those of a woman ; and 
as he wore two or three sparkling rings, one might have taken 
his hand, when he laid it on the shoulder of his wife, for that 
of a woman. He wore neither beard, whiskers, nor moustache. 
If he were a fair symbol of the rights of labour, then labour is 
in its perfected illustration a wonderfully neat, clean, and dainty- 
looking affair. Close under Warton's eyes, though, if an 
observer looked keenly at them, could be discerned some out- 
lines which are only graven by age, or care, or passion. And 
the eyes themselves, naturally bright, and often made still 
brighter by a purposed earnestness of expression on the proper 
occasions, had a way of losing their lustre sometimes with an 
odd suddenness when their owner was not actually speaking. 
The light faded out of them as if the dweller within had extin- 
guished his lamps to brood awhile in the darkness. And then 
those who had best reason to study Warton's ways knew that 
he was not listening to a word which was spoken to him. 
But only his wife and her niece had much opportunity of study- 
ing him in this mood and expression. Abroad, he was gene- 
rally all energy and vivacity. Mrs. Warton set down these 
sudden fits of abstraction to the account of genius and pa- 
triotism and a political career. '%. Her niece once offended both 
Warton and her by suddenly breaking off in some amusing 
scrap of personal experience she was detailing to him with the 

E 



50 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

words, " Now, Walter, I know you have not been listening to 
a word this some time. Yon quite forgot to keep up the 
smile ! You remind me of a lady in Sam Slick, of whom it is 
said that the moment people's eyes were turned away, the 
smile dropped off her face like a petticoat when the string's 
broke. But I had my eyes on you, and I found you out. 
And now you must listen to the whole story over again as a 
punishment." 

Which he did; this time listening attentively, but not 
much pleased at even this slight discovery. 

Now Walter is being led in by his delighted wife. He kissed 
his niece, of whom indeed he was very fond ; and, moreover, 
he always liked being waited on by women. 

" Well, Grace, my wee lassie, how charming you look. 
Such roses on your cheeks ! Not to be gathered in Belgravia, 
these blooming flowers. And Mabel too ; she looks well, and 
apparently has not been pining too much for her husband. 
Ah, well ; Providence will give us rest some time ! But there 
is work to be done yet." 

He sighed a very touching sigh . suppressed it still more 
touckingly . then reposed himself in his armchair, and asked 
with genial gaiety for some tea. 

" But have you dined, Walter 1 Are you sure 1 " 

" Yes ; O yes. I dined two hours ago." 

" And where do you come from, dearest 1 We quite gave 
you up. There is no train from London now ? " 

" No, dear ; I did not come from London . in fact, I came 
from Coombe Castle." 

" Coombe Castle ! So you were there ! Grace saw your 
name in the papers. But, my dear Walter, you surely have 
not been there all this time 1 " 

" All what time, Mabel ?" 

'. All that time since Grace saw the paper . days and days 
ago." 

" Well, dear, I was there since Sunday, I think. But I was 
very much engaged . not pleasure, only politics." 

" So near . within ten miles of me for days . and did not 



come 



" I could not come, Mabel, before. I have come now." 
" And where are your things . your luggage 1 " 
.'Well, the fact is, I have brought nothing with me. It was 
:ioz worth while. I must go off again in the morning." 



WALTER WARTON's HOME. 51 

" Oh, my dear "Walter ! Again in the morning, after one 
short night?" 

" Yes, love. I cannot help it. I must go. I am deeply 
engaged just at present." 

" Are you going to London, then ? " 

Warton, be it said, always had chambers in London. 

" Yes, to London ; that is presently. But first I have of 
course to return to the castle. Now, dear, about that promised 
tea 1 I do assure you I feel weary." 

So Walter had some tea, and was well waited on by two 
women, one of whom honestly adored him, while the other at 
least did her best to follow the example. He was very 
gracious, and took his wife's kisses with a sweet patience and 
benignity, and sometimes ran his hand playfully over his 
niece's hair with a manner half paternal, half gallant. Mabel 
rattled on with all the news of the little community for the 
past few days, and asked him. countless questions about the 
castle, about the earl, about the countess, and what she was 
like, and how she dressed, and about the ladies staying at the 
castle. Suddenly, and raising his white hand with gentle 
earnestness to stay the further rush of the torrent of woman's 
curiosity, Walter said : 

" Come, now, I have something to tell you in which you will 
take an interest. I was very near forgetting it. Do you know 
who is in| town, and was asking about you t Particularly, 
most particularly anxious about you." 

" Indeed I don't know at all. Who can there be in town 
who cares about me ? " 

" Come, then, guess. Three guesses." 

" But, Walter love, I never could guess. And then I know 
it can be nobody . nobody of any consequence, I mean, in 
whom we take any interest." 

"Yes, but it is though; somebody in whom you take an 
interest . or at least who still takes a deep interest in you. 
Think of the sail that brings our friends up from the under 
world. He has come over the ocean . up from the under 
world." 

" Oh, is it possible ? You don't'mean poor Ralph Lennon? " 

" Indeed I do." 

" And so he has come back again. Poor dear Ealph ! How 
glad I shall be to see him ! " 

Mrs. Warton was still a young woman. "Women older than 

B 2 



52 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

she are capable, in real life, if not in romance, of breaking 
strong hearts with passion ; and, stranger still, of feeling their 
own hearts rent anew, or rent for the first time, with true and 
unconquerable love. She knew quite well that Ralph Lennon's 
heart once was torn with love for her, and that, refused by her, 
he flung himself away, first on what is called life here, and next 
upon the death-in-life of a far raw colony. Her heart ought to 
have beat very quickly at the mention of his name ; her cheek 
ought to have flushed a burning red ; at least she ought to 
have looked embarrassed in some way. But this good woman 
was as composed as her niece, who never set eyes on Lennon 
in her life and had not half a dozen times heard his name. 
Mabel was delighted to hear that her old lover was in 
England ; but she had no sentimental emotion whatever con- 
nected with his name. She had no secret about him at all, 
and would have told anybody who cared to hear it that Ralph 
Lennon once was in love with her, and wanted to marry her, 
but that she could not have him, as calmly and sweetly as she 
might have told of her intimacy with some schoolgirl friend. 
How he had loved, and been disappointed, she would have 
explained with just the same unembarrassed regret as if she 
were telling how he once had a fever, and had to have his hair 
cut off. 

" Poor Ralph ! I hope he will come to see me." There was 
something magnanimously simple about her pity for poor 
Ralph. " What does he look like, Walter love ? " 

'.' Strong and brown. Very much aged, I thought . quite a 
middle-aged sort of man. Yet he is young . I think younger 
by a year or two at least than I am." 

" He used to be a very handsome young man. Is he hand- 
some now, Walter % " 

" Yes, I think so . I don't know, in fact. But I believe he 
has made a good deal of money. He is very fortunate." And 
Warton sighed . a deep, sincere, involuntary sigh. 

" Not fortunate in everything, love ? Not in everything. 
He used to think you fortunate, used he not ? " 

This was said in a fondling tone, and with a hand laid 
tenderly on Walter's shoulder, while his wife's soft, loving eyes 
looked appealingly into his. She had beautiful eyes. Mono- 
tony of life, inactivity of mind and body, and the power of the 
flesh, . the literal flesh, . had not conquered these. " Only 
thine eyes remained . they would not go." 



WALTER WARTONS HOME. 53 

But Warfcon's own eyes saw nothing that was before him 
just now. "Yes," he said; "of course, yes . not fortunate 
in that way. But how strange that he should have made a 
heap of money in a few years . digging or farming or something 
out there ; and what a career it will give him here now, if he 
has the brains and the spirit to follow it ! What would some- 
of us give for the chance ! "We rack our brains, and wear out 
our frames, and make ourselves slaves, and run into all manner 
of risks, and brave disgrace . good God ! . and think we have 
talents and genius and what not ; and we remain poor, and find 
our poverty a millstone round our necks : and a fellow v/ho- 
was always a romantic, headlong sort of fool runs out to Botany 
Bay or somewhere for a few years, and comes back rich ! And 
now " . Warton's voice dropped, and he spoke in a quiet, half- 
meditative tone . "now he has lands and beeves . lands and 
beeves." 

"Are not those Falstaff's words 1" Grace calmly inquired, as 
she looked up from her globe. 

" They are ; and they are bitter words, too." 

" Yes, I suppose so. He had squandered his life away in 
folly, and idleness, and self-conceit, I think . for I always 
imagine Falstaff delighting to be the great man of tapsters and 
low companions; and then he envied somebody who once was 
a poor young fellow, perhaps, but who now has lands and 
beeves. I thought I knew the words; but I don't know 
whether I really understand the meaning of them. Do you 
think I do, Walter i " 

He put his hand under his chin, and looked fixedly at her. 
His piercing dark eyes were met calmly by hers. 

" Yes, I think you understand them," he said ; and he 
remained silent for a moment or two. 

" But, Walter," began Mrs. Warton again, " I always 
thought Ralph Lennon had talents." 

" Yes, dear , so he had . great talents, I thought at one time. 
But I used to think he wanted wisdom, perhaps, and was more 
likely to spoil a career than make it. Now he has England's 
political life before him. The way is clear . he has money . he 
may do anything and be anything ; while . " He shrugged 
his shoulners, and dropped into a haggard silence. 

Presently he looked round, and saw that his wife's eyelids 
were drooping. "You are sleepy, Mabel dear," he said, "and 
must not remain up for me. I did want a few pages written 



5i 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



for me . at my dictation . but I will not keep you up. I dare- 
say I can manage them myself, though my writing is so dreadful, 
people say they can't read it." 

" Shall I write for you, Walter ? " asked Grace. 

" Thank you . if you would . if it would not much trouble 
you?" 

" O, no ; I will do it with pleasure." 

" That's a dear girl ; and then poor Mabel can go to bed." 

" Thank you both," said Mabel ; " for . indeed I am so tired 
that I don't believe I could do anything." With all her love 
for Walter, Mabel was always glad when anybody would 
relieve her of any task which should naturally be hers. So she 
went to bed and fell asleep, and dreamed. very innocently . 
that poor Ralph Lennon had come to see her, and was very 
fond of her now, and of Walter too, and that they all lived in 
the same street, and were very happy. 

Walter meanwhile was walking up and down the room with 
his hand under his chin, or occasionally lying in his easy chair, 
and dictating some letters to his niece. They did not speak 
much of anything but the letters while the work was going on. 
He, as he leaned in his chair, sometimes gazed covertly, fixedly 
on her, and studied the clear firm lines of her mouth, and 
noted too the developing beauty of her womanhood. When 
the closing sentence of the last letter had been finished, he 
said : 

" Now, Grace, you are tired, I know, and I must not exact 
any more. I don't think I want anything else done ; and you 
are a good girl to work so late for me. You must go to bed . 
I shall remain up a little longer." 

" Are you going early in the morning, Walter V 

" Yes ; very early." 

" Then do you mean to see the children?" 

The children ! He had never asked for them. Stranger 
still, their mother had never spoken of them. 

" yes ; of course . the dear little ones. I must see them . 
to-morrow morning, before I go. They are always up very 
early, are they not ? " 

" Yes, that they are ; as I know when they come battering 
at my door somewhere about sunrise, I think, and clamouring 
for me to come and play with them." 

" You women, how happy you are ? If you only knew it ! 
You can stay at home and cultivate the domestic virtues, and 



WALTER WAETON'S HOME. 55 

be happy children always while you have children round you ; 
but we . " 

He would have gone on with some pathetic lament over the 
life of man, but the girl cut him short. 

" Don't, please, talk in that way. It is thrown away on me. 
It is nonsense." 

" Nonsense, dear child % " 

" Yes, Walter ; nonsense. You don't believe a word of it. 
You despise in your heart our trifling, monotonous lives ; and 
you despise us for leading them. Now don't stop me. You 
know I speak the truth. What hinders you from living a 
domestic life, and cultivating the domestic virtues, and all that 
sort of thing 1 " 

" Ah, you dear, impetuous, illogical women, who cannot 
understand that a man's duty is sometimes to sacrifice . " 

" Please, Walter, don't talk to me as if I were a child, or a 
working man, or . or anybody but what I am." She was actually 
on the point of saying, " or your wife," but checked herself in 
time. " I am sorry to see poor Mabel left always alone ; I see 
her pining and unhappy, and . and . in fact, I can't stand it ." 
and, as energetic girls will do when much in earnest nowadays, 
she broke into slang. 

" My dear girl, what am I to do ? A political career is the 
most remorseless mistress, and if you neglect it for a moment 
you are thrown out altogether. I have a terrible up-hill 
battle to fight. I have to court friends and supporters 
and." 

" And patrons 1 " 

" Yes ; and patrons . it is only too true. I am a man with- 
out money. I have neglected my profession, and now it deserts 
me. I talk to you frankly, because I see you are not a child, 
but a woman of sense and spirit ; and I want you to understand 
me. I am an ambitious man . it is not a girl like you who 
would blame me for that. I know I have a career before me, 
if only I can work on yet a little while. And listen, Grace ; 
it is only by patrons, whether they be peers or mobs . I try 
both . that a man like me can get on in English political life. 
If I had Lennon's money . ah, then indeed I could do without 
either. But I tell you, girl, I am compelled to go on. I can- 
not stop. I am plunged in difficulties. What would you do 
if you were like me 1 Would you renounce your career 1 
"I would," she answered vehemently. "I would renounce 



56 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

any career which had to be followed by seeking the patronage 
of lords . or of mobs either. I would not surrender my home . 
and my soul . for such a career. Give it up, Walter, give it 
up ! Your talents would soon make a way for you which would 
be free and independent, and which would never compel you to 
sacrifice your home." 

" My home ! " he said in a low tone, and he again shrugged 
his shoulders. " I suppose a home means companionship of 
thought and mind, does it not ? Dear Mabel is the best of 
women ; but do you think you could live long, Grace, on sugar- 
plums ? I can't." 

He took up one of his letters and began to glance over it. 
Grace was not inclined to continue the conversation. Perhaps 
she wished she had not said so much. So she rose and bade him 
good-night. He drew her towards him and kissed her. There 
was nothing in that. She had sat upon his knee and pulled his 
hair when a bright little child, ten years ago, and he always 
since then kissed her on meeting and parting. But there was 
an emphasis in his kiss to-night, and there was a warmth in the 
pressure of his hand, which sent a somewhat disagreeable sen- 
sation through her, and made her glad to be alone. 

" She grows a fine girl," Warton thought when she had gone, 
"and she will have brains as well as heart. A man who has a 
wife like that might perhaps give up a career for her ; or, better 
still, she would help him to make a career, and would understand 
him and keep him right. Everything is against me. I have 
nothing but myself. I am alone." 

He remained long up, thinking. When at last he went to 
bed, he took every care not to waken his wife. Her kisses 
would have distressed him. 



t5 



CHAPTER V 

WALTER WARTON'S HOPES. 



WALTER RALEIGH WARTON" was one of the might- 
have-beens. He might have been a man of genius. 
Indeed he seemed to have missed by a narrow chance the ray 
of inspiration as it descended. He was, however, a strikingly 
good imitation of a man of genius. He had the contortions of 



WALTER WARTON'S HOPES. 57 

the Sibyl. Nature gave him a glittering surface of talent, a 
passionate aspiration towards success of any kind, a deep self- 
confidence, and a thrilling, powerful voice. Therefore he started 
early in life as an orator and a politician ; and he naturally fell 
into a general career of opposition, that path requiring little 
study and little acquisition of facts. His talents would have 
suited just as well for journalism, for fiction, for law, as for 
politics . perhaps for the pulpit best of all. Anything he did 
would have made a certain impression, for a time, on what may 
be called the popular mind. It would have been showy, full of 
bright colours, sentiments which had a suggestion of novelty and 
a strong flavour of earnestness. Jean Paul Puchter compares 
some one to a lighthouse . "high, far-shining, empty." The 
intellect of Walter Warton was of this description. He flung 
himself into politics for three reasons : first, one can make a 
success there, for a time, without labour, study, or preliminary 
training ; next, he had acuteness enough to see that in England 
political life is the one only sphere in which a man without 
money or rank can possibly obtain social influence ; finally, he 
had a wonderful fluency, a ready power of turning everything 
he wanted to say into the form of a noble sentiment or a thril- 
ling antithesis, and, as has been already mentioned, a fine voice. 
Warton's father was a dissenting minister, who had been a 
working man. Warton inherited much of the fervent power 
of denunciation which had made his father conspicuous among 
Birmingham trade orators in the days of the proposed march 
upon London,- and of the Manchester blanketeers. The elo- 
quence of denunciation was not so successful when the elder 
Warton put down his workman's tools and turned minister ; 
and he subsided into a very quiet, laborious, earnest, and obscure 
preacher of what he understood to be the Gospel. He lived 
near the northern border of Lancashire, and Walter Warton 
was born and reared in Cumberland. His father saw that the 
lad inherited his own declamatory power, and thought the bar 
would be its best field of exercise. Walter insisted on going 
to Oxford ; and as his mother was a woman of some means who 
had fallen in love with the elder Warton's preaching and 
married him, and considerately died too soon to interfere with 
her son's schemes of personal ambition, the money was found 
for him. He went to Oxford, and quietly lapsed into the 
social respectability of orthodox opinions. Then he studied for 
the bar, and was called ; but before he had made much of his 



58 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

way there, his father died and left hint free, and with just 
enough of annual income to set a man astray . not half enough 
to secure him a career, or even a satisfactory living. Walter 
Warton thought the bar slow and toilsome, and deliberately 
made up his mind for politics, parliament, renown, and finally 
an appointment ; and looking coolly around him, he saw no 
other way so congenial and convenient of mounting into public 
life and a parliamentary seat as on the shoulders of the work- 
ing man. The working man, his wrongs and his rights, were 
just then becoming fashionable and influential. Warton had 
naturally many sympathies with the working man . sympathies 
which had been bequeathed to him, along with his voice and 
his eloquence, by his honest old father. His instincts indeed 
were never decidedly ungenerous where his personal interests 
did not coerce them ; and he did feel, at the beginning of his 
public career, an honest ambition to be known as one who 
loved and served the British artisan. 

But Warton had by nature and by culture unhappily very 
un-Spartan tastes. He loved luxury and the society of swells. 
He loved to dine at splendid tables, and to be waited on by 
liveried servants. He loved to have his clothes made by the 
first tailor, and to be seen walking arm-in-arm with the heir 
to a title. A woman's soft, sweet voice filled him with joy ; 
the sight of a woman's white shoulder and bosom, rising re- 
splendent out of silk and lace, was dear to him as the sun and 
shadow on a mountain side to one of the Lake poets. He 
loved perfumes and jewels and carriages and sparkling wine. 
Instincts and interests therefore combined to suggest to him the 
necessity of giving rather a new complexion and purpose to the 
character of a working man's orator. The acknowledged parlia- 
mentary leaders of the Radicals . strong, simple^ unselfish men ; 
men, too, who had plenty of money, but gave no delightful dinners 
. rather fought shy of him. They did not care much about his 
eloquence . one or two of them being orators of acknowledged 
genius and power, and valuing even their own oratory merely 
as an instrument in compelling the passing of certain desired 
laws ; and they did not seem to have much faith in men who 
had no money, and yet were not content to serve in the ranks. 
These leaders did not particularly want Warton in parliament ; 
did not care if he never got there, because they had little need 
of his eloquence ; and would have preferred some blunt ungainly 
manufacturer from the north, whose means placed him above 



WALTER WAETON'S HOPES. 59 

suspicion, and whose honest vote might always have been 
counted on. So when, after years of struggling, and stumping 
and spouting, after acquiring a popularity and a name for 
eloquence which threw artisan crowds into raptures, Warton at 
last ventured to stand for a borough so Liberal that no Tory 
had a ghost of a chance there, he found himself defeated after 
an expensive contest by a respectable local nobody, who had 
plenty of money, professed steady old-fashioned Liberalism, 
and could hardly utter three consecutive sentences at the 
hustings. 

From that hour Warton found himself drawing nearer and 
nearer to the Tories. He began to think they were the true 
friends to the working man. He began to think they appre- 
ciated talent better than the Liberals* and were less intolerant 
of poverty . as, indeed, is quite true. He found that there 
was more of the " good fellow " character among them ; that their 
manners were more refined, their doors more hospitably open, 
and their women more attractive. He became at last inspired 
with the grand idea that the country was to be saved by a rap- 
prochement between the Derby-Disraelites and the working man. 
Some popular question or another . perhaps it was the Crimean 
war . where party politics did not directly intervene, enabled him 
decently to break with his old friends, and even to declaim against 
them as, in that instance, enemies of England. He did the Tories 
good service, and they were really gi'ateful ; and he whispered 
to their understrappers that he could do better service still . . 
that he could bring the working man right over at some great 
crisis ; and they whispered the promise to some of their chiefs, 
who were not too confident, but thought there might be some- 
thing in it, and passed round the mot d'ordre that some atten- 
tion was to be paid to Warton. Attention was paid to him 
accordingly, . especially when it was found that his manners 
were gentlemanly, his hands white, his clothes made by Poole, 
and his appearance in the drawing-room unexceptionable. 

Was it mentioned that Walter Warton had no claim what- 
ever to the interjected name of " Raleigh " ? It was never 
given him by his godfathers or godmothers. He took it " for 
the sake of euphony," as Mr. Kinglake would say. His real 
names were John Walter Warton ; but he did not like the 
combination, so he dropped the " John," and called himself 
Walter Warton. Then he thought a third name necessary ; 
and he liked one which had a suggestion of greatness in it. So 



60 THE WATEEDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

he called himself Walter Kaleigh Warton, and was nearly as 
proud of the Raleigh as if it were a patent of nobility. It 
made people sometimes assume that he must be a collateral 
descendant of the great Elizabethan hero ; and indeed, at last 
Warton began to fancy there was something in the idea. At 
all events, it seemed to give him a new title to a career of 
distinction. It is hard not to feel heroic when one brandishes 
a sword, or great when one subscribes himself the bearer of an 
illustrious name. Walter Warton dearly loved to see his name 
in print, as one of the speakers at a public meeting, or one of 
the guests at a fashionable dinner ; but on the whole he would 
probably have preferred to find it left out altogether than to 
read it set down as " Mr. Warton," or " Mr. Walter Warton," 
or . worst of all . " Mr. "W. Warton." 

Mr. Hotten's History of Signboards has lately called the 
attention of all of us to an object which doubtless very few who 
walk up and down Oxford Street would otherwise have noticed 
. Hogarth's sign-painting of the Man loaded with Mischief. 
It is hardly necessary now to say that the principal object in 
the painting is a man whose bending shoulders bear, among 
other encumbrances, the weight of a very substantial wife. 
Surely that poor man might be pitied if he had to toil up 
Holborn Hill thus loaded ; more still if he had to mount the 
steps of the Monument ; more yet, if he had to climb to the 
top of a tree. Walter Warton soon began to find it difficult 
to climb to the top of the social tree carrying his plump wife 
on his shoulder. So he calmly and prudently put her down 
and prepared to mount alone, assuring her that when he had 
made his way, and established a secure place high up among 
the branches, he would help her to mount up beside him. She 
believed it, for she had a vast capacity of faith. Sincere, 
superficial, and sinless herself, she had no thought of insincerity 
or depth or sin in others. Walter Warton was intellectually 
and morally a very young man when he fell in love with her. 
Her sweet soft voice, her beautiful eyes, her white arms, 
fascinated him. He was urged on to a greater passion by 
observing Ralph Lennon's love for her, and by man's natural 
antagonism. He threw himself into the contest, and he won. 
Perhaps the first decidedly mean act Walter Warton the man 
committed was when he directed the attention of Mabel Ethel- 
stone and her people to Ralph Lennon's youthful extravagances. 
And even this act Warton persuaded himself was a conscientious 



WALTER WARTON'S HOPES. 61 

duty. CWld he see an innocent and religious girl sacrificed to 
a scapegrace aud an infidel 1 In virtue's cause a true man 
knows no friendship. 

Warton's virtue was rewarded. Mabel fell deeply and 
faithfully in love with him, and they were married ; and after 
a twelvemonth or so of tepid happiness "Walter found that he 
was bound for life to an innocent, overgrown child . an 
animated wax doll, with a tender heart and no brains. He 
began to go about in a sort of society, and he met handsome, 
graceful, clever women, who could talk with piquancy and 
force ; who read the books of the day, and knew something 
about newspapers and politics ; and had husbands and brothers 
and fathers in the House ; and could lead a man charmingly, 
artlessly up to the edge of a tender, fascinating flirtation, and 
keep him poised there in a bewildering ineffable state of anxiety 
and ecstasy. After such society, poor Mabel was like new 
milk after champagne. Let us do Warton justice. For a 
time he honestly tried hard to love his wife still. At last he 
saw it would not do, and he dropped the idea. Relieved of the 
mental struggle, he found he could put on the appearance of 
love much more easily ; and once he had satisfied his wife that 
she must live out of London, that he could not possibly spend 
every night with her, and that she had better have her niece's 
companionship, his mind was at rest. He had set down his 
load, and could climb the tree alone. Often in society he saw 
women who were in one sense crowns to their husbands ; who 
understood politics, shared man's ambition ; could make friends 
and keep them, and dexterously drop them if necessary ; who 
could advise and stimulate and guide ; who could plan and 
scheme and conquer : and sometimes Warton felt that Pro- 
vidence had been unkind to him. When Ralph Lennon came 
back to England with money and without a wife . having 
apparently all political roads thus thrown open to him . Warton 
felt for a moment inclined to become an infidel. He sup- 
pressed, however, the dreadful promptings of Satanic doubt, 
which it would be simply impossible to tolerate in connection 
with a Tory career ; and he began to think whether, after all, 
some good purpose might not be served if he could regain a 
little of his influence over his old acquaintance. A quick 
thought glanced through him : " How Mabel might help me 
now, if she had only sense ! " And he remembered with a 
sigh how fat Mabel was growing, how little vivacity she had, 



62 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

3iow quiet, innocent, and uninteresting she was. " Even he," 
thought Warton . and he knew well the difference of sentiment 
between one who has and one who has not . " even he could 
not think her very interesting now." He was glad to get 
away from his wife's house . it was not home to him in any 
human sense . and to breathe again the genial atmosphere of 
Coombe Castle, where he met men who had influence and 
money, women who had beauty and brains. 



CHAPTER VL 

THE OLD HOME. 

IN "canny auld Cummerlan'," not far off the border where 
a straggling out-of-the-way end of Lancashire interjects 
itself, . a little inland, yet when a west wind blows hardly 
beyond the sweep of the salt breath of the sea, . lies the queer 
rambling town or village of Waterdale, with the tiny lake 
behind it, where the Alwyns lived, and where Ralph Lennon 
now looked upon his early home. The town lies on the sea- 
ward side, and has straggling through it the little river 
which, beginning a thread-like " burn " away among the 
mountains, fills the basin of the lake, after plunging wildly 
through many a gully and rock-riven pass, and then speeds 
away broadening to the sea. On the inland side of the lake 
are but few houses . some dozen or so, scattered here and there, 
mostly those of poor labourers or very small farmers. But 
there is a deep pass on that side . a pass through which you 
make your way into the mountain-land, and pursuing which 
up hill and down dale far enough, you at last come upon the 
more famous lakes which are sung of the poets. One re- 
markable house stands at the mouth of this pass, some mile or 
so in from the lake. It is a large, heavy, old-fashioned stone 
mansion, with a little ground about it.ground once neatly 
laid out, now falling into drear decay. Damp and gloom 
appear to make their own of this building ; green mould is 
on the high steps, and the windows rattle at every gust. 
Lately, indeed, some one had begun painting and repairing 
and decorating the house, but stopped in the midst of the 



THE OLD HOME. 63 

work and left the rest undone. The needful operations were 
checked by imperative command of Ralph Lennon ; for this 
was his house, and he would, if he could, have had it utterly- 
unaltered. He came too late to accomplish this wish ; but he 
stopped the further progress of improvement, and he declined 
positively to refurnish the house. Some of the rooms were 
absolutely unfurnished ; he insisted that they should remain 
so. Perhaps he might not stay there long ; perhaps he would 
have the sad old house pulled down altogether, and so rid his 
life of its drear associations. But at present it was his humour 
to steep himself in those very associations; "drinking them 
like wine," filling himself with the luxury of pain, feeding on 
remorse which came too late. As Johnson did penance bare- 
headed in the market-place of TJttoxeter, Ralph Lennon 
humbled and saddened himself, and made vain atonement in 
the lonely, melancholy rooms where every object he saw revived 
the memory of his father, and the desolate recollections of a 
wasted youth. 

An old man and his wife had been left in charge of the 
house. They were rough, outspoken Cumberland people. 
Lennon retained them still, to keep house in his absence, and 
to act as his servants while he remained at home. He wanted 
no other attendance ; and, indeed, had been long accustomed 
to do most things for himself. He made arrangements to have 
such few books as he required brought from Liverpool . some 
books there were which accompanied him everywhere, and 
without which he could hardly imagine existence going on ; 
and he meant to bring back whatever personal effects he had 
in this country when returning from London after his next 
visit. So his entering into his father's house was quite a dis- 
appointment to the neighbours, who expected grand doings, 
and looked out to see " the dull old place gilt with the gold of 
a millionnaire." It had gone abroad that Lennon had 
gathered piles of gold in Australia, where some of the Cum- 
berland folks pictured it heaped up like the boulders in the 
Kirkstone Pass ; and every trunk or box conveyed into the 
old house was at once assumed to be filled with massy ingots 
of treasure. "When it was rumoured that Lennon had actually 
dismissed the workmen who were " reviving " the house, that 
he was having no new furniture, that he meant to live there 
alone and without one gleam of surrounding splendour, people 
refused to believe it ; then, when conviction was forced upon 



64 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

them, they could only explain it by the assumption that the 
returned Australian was a miser, or a madman, or both. 

Of all this, however, Lennon heard little and cared less. 
He had only two or three days to remain in the place before 
returning to London to see Warton ; and these days he spent 
for the most part in wandering about the hills and the shore of 
the lake, and his own desolate garden and more desolate rooms. 
He did not go into the town of Waterdale. Many people 
there knew him, and would have had questions to ask of him, 
aDd old associations to revive ; and he shrank from all this at 
present. He would inure himself gradually to it, he thought, 
and so it would come less embarrassing and disagreeable. He 
called upon nobody . there were not indeed more than half 
a dozen families near who were in the way of making or re- 
ceiving formal calls, and he knew that the Alwyns had not 
returned. 

The Alwyns had a handsome house, built in modern style, 
like the houses which are growing up around Windermere, with 
a smooth-shaven lawn, and a conservatory, and a fountain, and 
glowing flower-beds. It stood upon the opposite side of the 
lake to that where Lennon lived, and was indeed a contrast in 
every way to his heavy and sombre old dwelling. Lennon 
passed it once . perhaps he walked to it with real though un- 
acknowledged purpose ; and he remembered that in his time 
only a farmhouse stood there. Dr. Alwyn had built the new 
and elegant villa for his young wife, and her tastes and fancies 
had adorned it everywhere. Lennon was in a grim humour, 
and inwardly growled at the elegance, and began to make up 
his mind that the acquaintance originated in Switzerland would 
hardly warm into friendship in Cumberland. Dr. Alwyn of 
course would rank with the gentry . they were not many . of 
the Waterdale neighbourhood ; and Lennon remembered how 
often, when a boy growing into manhood, he had been galled 
by observing that his father's money was quite impotent to 
obtain for him any friendly notice from those who claimed to 
be country gentlemen. Perhaps he might have acknowledged 
that some at least of the republican and democratic lawlessness 
of his college days was due to a keen, possibly a wrongheaded, 
conviction that he had suffered personal slight at the hands of 
local aristocrats. 

Little as he cared in general for gossip, he had to talk now 
and then with his two servants, and old Mrs. Beck would 



THE OLD HOME. 65 

persist in telling him anecdotes about the neighbours. He 
asked a chance question of the Alwyns. 

" O, Doctor's a gud man, and cliver man. Folk say here he 
kens all things. His hand's a'ways open t' the poor. All folks 
here likes him and luves him." 

"And Mrs. Alwyn?" 

" Well, Mrs. Alwyn's cliver woman, and gud : but she thinks 
nae little o' hersel', and hauds her head high. Nut but she's a 
kind woman too, and a top marketer I hear ; but she fashes 
ower much fur my taste, and flytes people that might be her 
grandmothers aboot the way they keeps theer houses and minds 
theer children, and all that. Many of them will tak' affront ; 
but it's nobut a way she hes o' showin' her likin'. Young as 
she be she cen manage her husband." 

" Weears the breeks, sir," interjected Mr. Beck. "Meast of 
our wives wad do't if they cud." 

Ralph dropped the conversation . and perhaps, short as it 
was, had hardly kept up with it. For he had made up his mind 
that the Alwyns, especially the lady, " went in " for local aris- 
tocracy ; and he thought he had good reason to feel convinced 
. . a conviction now not without special bitterness . that persons 
who claimed to be of the gentry of Cumberland were not likely 
to be very genial even to the sons of people who had made 
money in trade. He kept to his own side of the lake for the 
next day or two, and wished he had chosen some other day for 
the crossing of the Tete Noire than that which the Alwyns 
selected for the same journey. 

It was lonely work, wandering about those roads and paths 
and rooms, but it was congenial to Lennon just now, and in a 
kind of way he enjoyed it. He chewed the cud of sweet and 
bitter association everywhere. Of course the place did not 
look the same to his eyes, and in some spots he had to conjure 
up the old memories, and with their aid rehabilitate the scene. 
No sensations have been more often analysed and described 
than those which fill us when we revisit, after long years, some 
place familiar to ou-r boyhood. In Ralph Lennon's eyes the 
common change marked itself. Everything looked contracted, 
pool', and mean compared with the picture which memory 
painted. The mountains were low, the lake was a pool, the 
ravines were tame ; there was a faded appearance about every- 
thing . like that of a long-disused garment which we take up 
and cannot help recognising, though it seems so worn and 

F 



bb THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

shrunken and shabby. But the memories of the father who- 
.was so kind and indulgent and tender, of the woman he loved 
in vain, of the early years which were so bright and full of 
promise . these saddened and sweetened and sanctified the 
place. He stood by his father's grave; the whole scene seemed 
the grave of his own youth. 

Yet it must not be supposed that even for the few days of his 
first home-visit Ralph Lennon did nothing but moon over graves, 
real and metaphorical. He had set his heart upon doing some- 
thing good for the neighbourhood of his early life ; and perhaps 
at present all the ambitions that once burned fiercely within 
him had smouldered down to a mere desire to print his memory 
on that obscure mountain village. He resolved to build a 
school here, an asylum of some kind there ; he ranged through 
the few scattered cottages on his side of the lake, and thought 
he would buy up the land there, and plant a little model settle- 
ment of comfortable picturesque homesteads. He had great 
ideas of carrying the peasant-proprietary system, almost in- 
digenous to some parts of Cumberland and Westmoreland, to- 
immense completeness on the ground near him ; he laid out, 
mentally, in two or three days, money enough to have beggared 
him were he another Monte Christo. There was doubtless a 
good deal of the old spirit of defiance about his benevolence, 
and perhaps he would have cherished his beneficent plans none 
the less if they directly tended to break the patriarchal tie 
between lords of the soil and diggers of it. Setting class 
against class, the crime unpardonable in the respectable eyes 
of our generation, was, for that very reason doubtless, rather a 
fascinating sin to the present mood of Ralph Lennon 4 Perhaps 
it is not impossible that the short meeting with Walter Warton, 
and the allusion to Coombe Castle, had quickened and aggra- 
vated that mood. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE OLD FRIEND. 



ON the appointed day Lennon was again in London, and 
dining with Warton at his club. Warton had not made 
his way into the stately Carlton ; nor, even if its doors had 



THE OLD FRIEND. G7 

been opened to him, would he have ventured as yet on so de- 
cided a proclamation of his change of colours. Of course he 
had not attempted in his wildly democratic days to seek out 
Brooks's ; and he was only thinking of the chances of the 
Reform, then even more restricted in its hospitality than now, 
when the gradual change began to show itself in his opinions 
which would have made it useless for him to get his name put 
up there, He belonged, however, to a small, social, not inex- 
pensive club, founded by literary and politico-literary men, 
none of them actual leaders in their way . a sort of demi-monde 
of literature and politics. Here you could have a dinner quite 
as good as anywhere else ; and you were safe from being sat 
upon by bishops, or dons, or heavy dignitaries, or solemn bores 
of any kind. A few members of parliament, of the younger 
school and of both parties, belonged to it ; a few rising lawyers, 
many journalists, many literary men, some guardsmen. And 
here Walter Raleigh Warton entertained his friend Ralph 
Lennon at dinner . and a good dinner too. 

Three other men were present i Captain Eastham, M.P., was 
one . a stalwart and gallant young county member of the Tory 
side, who late one night suddenly amazed his party, his oppo- 
nents, his father, and himself, by jumping on his feet just before 
the division, interposing between the splendid resonance of the 
Whig minister's peroration and a house longing to divide, and 
delivering a speech so racy, humorous, telling, unprepared, full 
of good sense, good hits, and roistering animal spirits, that he 
actually got a.hearing, and then thundering applause from rows 
of exulting Tories, and shouts of laughter from the less serious 
part of the Liberals, . your true Liberal takes everything gene- 
rally au grand serieux, . and finally the unexpected honour of 
a reply from another minister, who had to be put up unpre- 
pared at three in the morning to answer the new orator. The 
division, of course, was not much affected by the impromptu 
performance ; but Eastham's speech became for the time almost 
as famous as Charles Townshend's champagne oration. Hand- 
shakings and congratulations from all sides rewarded the un- 
rehearsed display ; and the only ill-natured thing said on the 
occasion was murmured by a great Conservative leader, who 
whispered, " Mon dne parte, et meme il parte bien." Eastham 
took his success very modestly, and did not even try to encore 
it. He frankly confessed that he never could tell why he got 
up to speak at all, or how he came to speak so well ; and he 

f2 



68 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

declared that when he found himself on his legs, gazing fixedly 
at unim passioned and chilling Mr. Speaker, and heard the 
sound of his own voice, it was a toss-up whether he was to sink 
collapsed and bewildered back into his seat, or plunge madly 
on. " I could never have got through a sentence if the House 
had been quiet and attentive," he used to say ; " but when I 
heard your Liberal fellows shouting at me, and saw so many of 
our own men looking up as if to ask, ' What the devil does he 
want, makiDg a fool of himself at such a time ? ' by Jove, sir, 
it maddened me, and I let myself go at it . over, anyway." 
" I've often told you," Captain Eastham would say to any of his 
Liberal friends . and he had plenty of friends among all par- 
ties . " the one great thing you Radical fellows want is animal 
spirits. You haven't got animal spirits, and therefore you 
don't use your voices or stand to your friends. You have more 
sense, I daresay, than we have, and you understand a deal more 
about figures ; and anybody with brains must know that we 
haven't a speaker fit to hold a candle to Bright ; but you want 
the pluck, the animal spirits. There we have you. If we had 
Bright, what a phalanx of young fellows he would have about 
him ! How we would cheer for him and shout down his oppo- 
nents ! Your people don't understand that sort of thing." 

Captain Eastham's notions of party deficiencies were not bad. 
He had such genial ways and so good a nature that everybody 
liked him ; and now that he had shown himself capable of 
something, there was a great idea among the Tory captains of 
promoting him to the rank of " Whip" whenever there came a 
vacancy in that bustling office. 

The second of Warton's guests was Philip Hamerfield, a 
rising writer of the politico-philosophic school. He wrote for 
progressive reviews and high-class weekly journals. He was a 
Unitarian, and had what Tom Berry of Southwark called 
Views of Life. His views and opinions suited Warton very 
well just now, for although Hamerfield despised all Conserva- 
tism as unphilosophic and stupid, yet such was the peculiar 
nature of his mental progress that it somehow brought him in 
particulars quite back to the Conservative standpoint. His 
philosophical world was clearly globular, like the orb we live 
in ; and starting, therefore, from the Conservative Greenwich, 
you were certain, if you only went far enough, to arrive at just 
the same spot in the end. Or one might adopt another form 
of illustration. Poor Albert Smith somewhere speaks of 



THE OLD FRIEND. 69 

people who were so determined to be fashionable that they 
kept going farther and farther into the "West-end, until at last 
they went too far, and tumbled right over into Chelsea. So 
Philij) Hamerfield and others of his school kept pushing so far 
and so independently into the West-end of high political 
culture, that they were actually falling over into the Chelsea 
of narrow and uncultivated Toryism. 

The third guest was the latest novelty in travel. He had 
gone wonderful depths into Asia and Africa, and lately had 
performed some special feat of discovery or other achievement 
in the Australian continent. He had brought back from his 
travels a majestic dogmatism upon all ethnological subjects, and 
all political and social questions which had or could be supposed 
to have any possible connection therewith. He settled every- 
thing by a reference to the profound and hopeless worthlessness 
and wickedness of all "native" races. To be sure, if you came 
to talk closely with him, you found that he had but a poor 
opinion of the human family anywhere. His anecdotes, which 
were many, and his philosophy, which was simple and decided, 
went to prove that man is the most debased of all living 
creatures, except woman. This, however, wa3 his philosophy 
among his friends. In his public writings and lectures he con- 
fined himself to the inferiority, brutality, sensuality, unteach- 
ableness, and cruelty of the dark-skinned peoples . the 
" native " races in short. That was the theory in which he 
most firmly believed ; for he was understood among his friends 
to reject, as beneath his notice, the popular doctrine about a 
future life. 

The traveller, Mr. Garth, had been invited by Warton, 
partly because he was a lion, and ought to produce therefore a 
good first impression upon Lennon ; partly too because, as 
Lennon came from the colony of Victoria, he ought to feel 
greatly interested in one who had explored the shores of the 
Gulf of Carpentaria. But the good intentions of the host failed 
so far. In the first place Lennon had never before heard of 
the great traveller, and in the next place one of the great 
traveller's favourite subjects of invective was the incurable 
wickedness of the Maori race. Lennon had been a good deal 
in New Zealand, and the great traveller had never set foot 
there ; but the latter settled the condition of the Maori, and 
the treatment proper to be applied to him, by reference to 
experience drawn from the banks of the Congo. Lennon being 



70 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

too lazy to argue, and the traveller too grandly dogmatic to 
condescend to argument, the latter had it all his own way, and 
Lennon soon shut up as far as that topic was concerned. So 
there was little good gained for either or for the company by 
the juxtaposition of two men who had sailed the Southern seas. 
The conversation soon therefore lapsed into politics. Women 
and politics, said the shrewd old statesman, all men can talk 
about. Mr. Garth much preferred the former topic, and had 
some very choice anecdotes touching the ways of the sex in 
savage life. But the anecdotes hung fire. Nobody liked 
them. "Warton had far too much of the true epicurean about 
him . Hamerfield had too much intellect . Lennon had too 
much soul . Captain Eastham was too manly . to relish the 
discussion of woman, even in her African state, as the natura- 
list might analyse his chimpanzee, or the agriculturist his hog. 
So politics set in ; a thing which Warton would perhaps have 
gladly avoided if he could. 

" When do you start again, Warton 1 " asked Captain 
Eastham . " put up for another borough, I mean 1 There are 
some stirring times coming, and a fellow like you ovightn't to 
be out of the House." 

" I don't want to obtrude myself," Warton modestly replied, 
" I think I have a sort of claim upon some constituency some- 
where. If no one appears to admit the claim, or inclined to 
recognize it to any purpose, I must only stand aside. I hope 
the cause can go on without me ; that is, without my presence 
in parliament. I shall be found working for it to the last, in 
or out." 

" What cause ? . whose cause 1 " asked Garth. " I don't 
understand your political jargon, you know. Your own cause? 
. or that of some party you want to serve 1 . or that of some 
rabble or another 1 Put it into English, and let us know what 
it is ; for I don't know, and I daresay Mr. Lennon does not 
understand the matter any better." 

" Not in the least," said Lennon. " When I left England, 
we were all still wild about the French Revolution of 1 848, and 
the Roman Republic, and the German Parliament, and the 
rights of man. I think universal suffrage and triennial parlia- 
ments, with a dash of communism, represented our cause then ; 
but I presume it is something a great deal more respectable now." 

" My cause," Eastham broke in, " is a good, honest, intel- 
ligible sort of thing. It is legitimate Toryism." 



THE OLD FRIEND. 71 

" And Warton's," growled Garth, " is illegitimate Toryism." 

" I have devoted myself," said Warton gravely, " to the 
cause of the working man. I wish to make him a ruler, and 
not a slave ; a benefactor, and not a beggar. You may laugh 
if you will . that is my cause." 

" Keep the fellows down," replied Garth ; " that is the only 
way. The working man is a savage ; and the savage is a child." 

" A child-Hercules then," Warton exclaimed. " In his cradle 
he can strangle serpents." 

" Splendid ! " said Garth. " Very fine, and convincing too. 
Quite settles the question, I think." 

" To a certain extent," said Hamerfielcl, the moral philoso- 
pher, " I agree with Mr. Garth . " 

" Deuce you do ! " growled under his breath the genial 
traveller. 

" The working man is as yet a child, so far as regards the 
development of his reasoning and intellectual faculties. The 
reasoning faculties, and not the instincts, must govern political 
life. I would develop these by education, and would proceed 
carefully and tentatively to intrust him gradually with that 
share of power which is his just and balanced proportion." 

" If he would only be good enough to wait," murmured 
Lennon, half yawning. " In some places he doesn't wait, and 
that's awkward ; for then he takes his own share and somebody 
else's too." 

" By a properly-adj usted system of checks . " placidly con- 
tinued the philosopher. 

" 0, confound it, don't let us get into the banking system ! " 
broke out the traveller, in perfect good faith and seriously 
alarmed. 

Everybody laughed ; and Garth felt convinced he had said a 
very witty thing. 

" I shouldn't mind giving the fellows votes," Eastham said, 
" if our bigwigs saw their way to it. I don't think it would 
matter in the least. I am not a bit afraid of the working man ; 
and on my word I don't see why he shouldn't have votes as well 
as any of us. But I don't profess to be a wise man or a great 
politician ; and I follow my instincts, which, according to 
Hamerfield, it is a dreadfully wrong thing to do." 

" That is, you follow them here ? " said Mr. Garth. 

" Yes, here, of course," Eastham replied simply. " I don't 
carry crotchets into the House. Here I have my own opinions, 



72 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

and I talk them out ; there I follow my leader into the lobby, 
and hold my tongue." 

"A man," said Hamerfield, " who surrenders his individuality, 
his independent power of judgment, is in my mind a slave." 

" Thanks for the compliment. But I thought the campaign 
against Russia rather foolish ; and I began to suspect that our 
military chiefs, or some of them, were no better than old 
women. Yet when our regiment was ordered to cross the 
Alma, I thought it rather better to surrender my individuality 
and go at my work, than set to argue the question of tactics 
with my superiors." 

" In war and politics," Garth politely remarked, " we are 
governed and served by mere machines. I often heard it was 
so ; now I begin to see it." 

" You are a Tory, Captain Eastham, I believe ; " Lennon 
asked, looking with interest at the young man. 

" Certainly. Genuine true blue." 

" And Mr. Hamerfield is a Liberal 1 '' 

"An educated Liberal," Warton interpolated on behalf of his 
friend. 

" Philosophical Radical," muttered Garth. 

" Then I only get more and more puzzled with the new 
aspects of English politics," said Lennon. "Liberalism long 
ago meant an extended and popular vote . Toryism something 
like Divine Right, and all that sort of thing." 

" You see, Mr. Lennon," Hamerfield proceeded to explain, 
" we have had reason of late years to note pi-actically the dis- 
turbing effects of the mere power of numbers in the business of 
government. Mere agglomeration of numbers does not repre- 
sent arithmetical, far less geometrical, increase of the intellectual 
force and the moral power which we find to be ordained, alike 
in the philosophical and in the religious sense, for the task of 
governing. The problem which England just now has to solve 
is to combine the maximum of intellectual and moral strength 
with the minimum of the disturbing and disorganising in- 
fluences. This I, for one, propose to do by a system of checks 
and balances, which I will not attempt to develop just now." 

" That's a good fellow," Eastham observed. " Nothing bores 
me, for one, so much as the checks and balances. Nobody 
thinks of doing anything with them in the House, and it is a 
waste of time to talk about them out of doors. Sometimes I 
think our fellows would do well to adopt the whole dodge . 



THE OLD FRIEND. 73 

checks and balances and all. It would be a capital plan of 
evading a practical change of any kind." 

The talk went on in this way. "We need not pursue it any 
further. Each man threw out his own ideas, or what he sup- 
posed to be his ideas, wholly irrespective of anything which 
might be suggested by his neighbour. The one thing which 
occupied Lennon's attention during the whole time was the 
evident desire of Warton to avoid declaring himself, or indeed 
saying anything definite on any political subject. Lennon had 
really no particular political views left in him. His early 
jtolitics had been the feverish dreams of wild, antagonistic, 
aggressive youth, and when the dreams faded they left nothing, 
or next to nothing, behind. But he was anxious to hear some- 
thing which might explain Warton's alleged tergiversation, or 
refute the charge. He heard nothing. Warton would say 
nothing one way or the other. Lennon was disappointed. He 
was studying Warton's character, for reasons wholly unpolitical. 
He was anxious to discover what kind of heart and nature 
Mabel Ethelstone had intrusted her happiness and her life to. 
Thus far the conjecture was unsatisfactory. 

Hours passed, and the friends . at least the gtiests . se- 
parated. Warton asked Lennon to stay yet a little ; to come 
into the smoking-room and have a cigar. Lennon accepted the 
invitation. He could not avoid doing so. It would have been 
to miss the purpose of his coming if he had not remained. For 
as yet he had heard no word of Mabel. 

The smoking-room was a solitude when they went in. 
Most people were out of town. It was a mere chance that 
Captain Eastham and Garth were within the confines of the 
metropolis. 

Lennon and Warton smoked for a few moments almost in 
silence . at least, only exchanging a word or two of comment 
on this unimportant thing and person or that. Lennon noted 
how worn and almost wasted under certain lights Warton's 
face seemed. As the latter sat and smoked in silence, deep 
imprints of anxiety, care, and disappointment began to come 
out under his eyes, like flaws detected by the sunlight. Sud- 
denly, and as if with a kind of effort, Warton looked up and said : 

" You will come to see us at home, will you not ? At once 
. before you leave town 1 " 

" Yes ; I mean to do so. To-morrow, indeed, if you will 
allow me." 



74 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" That's a good fellow. Mabel will be so glad. She always 
thought so much of you." 

Lennon's brown face grew a deeper colour, and he did not 
venture to look up. Warton's eye was on him, and he felt 
it. He was almost as embarrassed as a schoolboy, when his 
playmates chaff him about some girl with a satchel and 
trousers. 

" Lennon . R,alpb Lennon ," Warton went on, speaking in a 
low, thrilling -voice, admirably toned for the occasion, .' I know 
I gave you pain once. I know all that. But you do not blame 
me ; you are too manly and generous. I see that you have not 
quite forgotten the whole affair ; your feelings were too deep 
and true to pass away. But it was not my fault if I was . " he 
actually stammered over the words . " more fortunate ; as God 
knows, it was no merit of mine. You were in every way more 
worthy . and therefore you did not succeed ! But we are 
friends ? Give me your hand." 

Lennon looked up, and extended bis hand. There was a 
warm clasp. " I have wronged him," was Ralph's thought. 
And he gladdened to think it. 

" You were more worthy of her, dear old friend," Warton 
went on. " Many a time have I wished that you had been 
successful." 

There was a force of sincerity about this which startled our 
friend ; and his eyes spoke surprise and doubt. But the effect 
was not unexpected. 

" Yes, I have wished it often; for I am not worthy, as you 
would have been, of any loving woman's heart ; and I see little 
chance of making her happy, as she ought to be made. Mine 
i? a weary, wasting, undomestic, homeless sort of life. I am 
chasing the shadows of an ambition that only leads me away ; 
and I do it, as she knows, for her . to make for her such a place 
in life as she deserves to have, and ought to have." 

" Then Mabel has grown ambitious," Lennon thought. 
"She, too, wants to rise into society. Who could have ex- 
pected tbis 1 It was not thus," <fcc, &c. But he said nothing. 

" For that we sacrifice the present ; and who knows whether 
we are ever likely to be rewarded with any success ? I am a 
poor man, Lennon, and thus far a disappointed man. You are 
surprised." 

" I am indeed. I heard of you as a splendid success ; on 
the high road to fortune and distinction, and I know not 



THE OLD FRIEND. 7-5 

what. I heard of you in Switzerland as one of the rising men 
of the time." 

" In Switzerland 1 Who told you of me ? I did know 
James Fazy a little, but . " 

" No, it was no Swiss politician, or politician of any kind ; 
it was an English clergyman who spoke to me of you . 
Dr. Alwyn of Waterdale. I met him, with his wife, at 
Lucerne." 

" Yes, the Alwyns : I know them well. You saw Alwyn's 
wife ? Is she not a charming creature 1 Did she speak of 
me 1 " 

Light gleamed in Warton's eyes for a moment, and then 
went out. He purposely extinguished it, and dropped at once 
into a different tone of voice, without waiting for Lennon's 
answer. 

" And the Alwyns told you I was a very successful man ! 
Well, I daresay I seem so. . I make speeches, and I dine at 
places, and I try to get into parliament, and I don't succeed. 
So far the success is ail barren. I am as poor as when I began, 
and the party I served . served only too well, Lennon ! . if I 
had served my God as well ! . cared nothing for me ; repudiated 
me in the end." 

He jumped up and stood upon the hearth-rug, his back 
to the fireplace, his face towards Lennon. He was quite in 
earnest now. 

" Perhaps you were surprised to find me . me, of all persons 
. ranging myself even for an hour on a Tory side. But I tell 
you, Lennon, there is no hope for England, for anyone, from 
the selfish crew of calculators, economists, and sophists . splen- 
did words, those of Burke's ! . who call themselves Liberals. 
Confound them all ! What do they care for the people, or for 
talents, or for anything but their cursed commerce and cotton, 
and all the rest of it. I believed in them long enough ; but I 
don't any longer ; and they shall know it too, or my life shall 
be all a failure." 

Balph Lennon's heart warmed to the earnestness of his 
friend. He was about to make some sincere and sympathetic 
declaration, but there was no possibility of interjecting any- 
thing just yet. Warton streamed away : 

" I worked for them and spoke for them, in season and out, 
when anybody but myself speaking for them to a meeting of 
English working men would have been hooted off the platform. 



76 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

And they thanked me by repudiating me when I stood in need 
of their help ; and they put up some tongueless Manchester 
drone . some local Moneybags . to stand against me ; and the 
brute now sits in the House, fat and stolid, and never opens 
his mouth but to cry ' Hear, hear.' They only believe in 
money . and I have none. This is my! success. I am not in 
the House ; I see at present little chance of getting in ; and I 
find my way . for I have pitched my own profession and its 
chances clean overboard . growing more and more dark and 
difficult every day. Yes, old fellow, I do wish sometimes that 
you had had the success which once divided us . for it did divide 
us ; there's no use in pretending not to know that . and that I 
had been defeated and had gone to the Antipodes . or the deviL 
At least, no one would have been entangled in my fate ; and you 
might have made her happy ! Perhaps I have drunk too much 
wine, or I wouldn't talk in this way. But I'm glad of it, for 
it relieves my mind ; and there is no man on earth to whom, 
with wine or without, I could speak thus except you." 

Assuredly, Warton had not drunk too much wine. Lennon 
could not help noticing once or twice at table how remarkably 
abstemious his host was. The sin of excess in drinking was 
not one of Warton's faults. Perhaps he was too much of an 
epicure for such coarse indulgence. He only liked to sip the 
first fragrance of fine wines, as the gourmand bites the one 
supremely rosy and delicate spot from the cheek of a peach. 

But Lennon was decidedly warming to his friend. His own 
naturally rebellious nature responded to even a murmur of 
rebellion. He had for many years had a vague suspicion that 
Wai'ton acted treacherously towards him . he could not tell 
how . in the old love-rivalry ; that his rival had managed some- 
how to give him the coup de Jarnac. So one of the things he 
meant to do with the greatest caution, now that he had come 
back to England, was to study Warton's real character. But 
the heat of Warton's words carried him away. He thought he 
saw in him only pride, ambition . self-conceit, perhaps . and 
fearless straightforwardness. Warton looked handsome, grace- 
ful, young ; his voice sounded sweet and rich. " I don't wonder 
a woman loved him," thought Ralph ; " and I am sure she 
loves him still . and he her. And that is happiness." 

He would have broken into some stammering, sincere assu- 
rance of friendship and trust, and earnest wish by any means 
to serve, but that a pair of loungers came into the room. The 



THE OLD LOVE. 77 

swearing of eternal friendship, therefore, did not come off, and 
both were saved any chance of being foresworn, which was 
perhaps fortunate. 

Ralph presently rose to go away. Warton gave him a card 
with the address of Mabel's house on it. " We live mo- 
destly," he said, " but people can be happy without fine houses. 
And 1 will do better for her one day . or fail utterly." 

Ralph wrung his hand warmly, and said nothing. As he 
was leaving the place, Warton added, " I may not be there, 
perhaps . I have ever so many people to meet to-morrow ; but 
I will come to you before you leave town . and I will see you 
in the North, too, before long." 

" At last," thought Ralph, as he smoked his cigar and walked 
in the direction of Charing-cross, " I am to see her again. To- 
morrow ! " 

" He is to live near her" thought Warton, " to see her every 
day. How charming she is ! What eyes and what spirit ! 
And he is to live near her ! He has all the luck ! Well, he 
is a manly fellow, and has a generous heart. I will go to see 
him in Cumberland as soon as I can snatch a few days. They 
told him of me ! I wonder what she said." 

He sat a long time, thoughtful and depressed. When men 
whom he knew came in, he spoke but little. When the room 
began to fill, he got up and went away. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



THE OLD LOVE. 



MABEL ! " 
The word came out suddenly, unconsciously . a sort of 
low cry. All the full expression of a whole soul of feeling was 
in it. But she to whom it was addressed looked at first with 
blank surprise upon the speaker, then, recovering herself and 
mentally alighting upon something like a track of explanation, 
smiled faintly, and blushed. The speaker, however, stood 
silent and embarrassed. He had clearly made a mistake, but 
he could not explain or understand it just yet. He was 
addressing a total stranger. 



78 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

But the stranger in a moment recovered her full composure, 
and became mistress of the situation. 

"You are Mr. Lennon, I know," she said, extending her 
hand. "Allow me to welcome you without ceremony to Eng- 
land and to this place, and to introduce myself." 

The morning after he had left Warton, Ralph Lennon went 
down by an early train to the little town where "Warton kept 
what he called his home. Lennon was of course impatient, got 
down far too early, became ashamed and irresolute, looked at 
his watch, and resolved to wait a little for a more seasonable 
hour. He easily found Warton's house, and he walked up and 
down in front of it several times, until he began to be afraid of 
being noticed or watched ; and then he wandered away and 
got out into the country, among quiet lanes softly lighted and 
tinted by the autumn sun. He returned, and came towards 
the house ; and when in sight of it lingered and turned away 
again. Now that he was so near, now that the time he had so 
yearned for was at hand, he hesitated and shrank, and debated 
within himself whether he had any business in being there at 
all. Every objection that the most prudent or timid or prudish 
mind could have suggested to a weakly conscience sprang up 
within him. What if the old passion, which he believed or 
hoped lay dead in his heart, should arise out of the sepulchre 
again at the sight of her face, and the sound of her voice ? 
What if the new and purer and more practical life he was en- 
tering upon should vanish the moment she arose once more 
upon its horizon, and the old frenzy claim command of him 
again ? He positively dreaded the return of passion . disap- 
pointed passion . as a poor creature in his intervals of reason 
sickens and shudders at the thought of returning madness. 
For Lennon had studied himself through long and lonely years ;. 
and he knew that the fierce central fire of passion only slept 
and smouldered in his heart. In the core of our little planet, 
the scientific men tell us, there is even within the belt of fire a 
solid mass, kept firm and hard, amid all the fervour of the heat 
around, by the mere force of the pressure that is on it. What 
Lennon did not feel sure of was, whether in the microcosm of 
his nature there was any solid indissoluble kernel of conscience 
which the furnace of passion, however fiercely stirred, would 
work upon in vain. But at last he shook off all hesitation. 
" Too late," he said to himself, " to think of all this now. I am 
certainly not quite a boy ; and I hope I am not quite a fool. " 



THE OLD LOVE. 79 

And. then he marched resolutely towards the house, as one who 
has business there about which there need be no pretence or 
hesitation. A tax-collector could not have made his way more 
determinedly. Head bent downward, and looking neither to 
the right nor the left, he strode on. It was only when he had 
his hand upon the latch of the little wooden door in the 
"rustic" paling of the tiny lawn, that he looked up and saw 
the figure of a woman just before him. A slender, firm, shapely 
young woman, with bright short hair, thick around her head, 
and beautiful deep-brown eyes. The sunshine fell upon her 
head, upon her thick fair hair . falling on them from behind, so 
that her face and her eyes showed more distinctly in the light. 
And the face, the hair, the figure, the eyes . above all, the eyes 
. were so like those which in Lennon's memory an imperishable 
youth embalmed and glorified, that for the moment he forgot 
the lapse of years, forgot the thick and grizzling beard which 
covered half his face, forgot Australia, and the long absence 
and silence, and the dead hopes, and the promise that lay 
buried by the side of gold streams and in the pathless bush . 
forgot all, and was a boy of twenty-one again, and saw Mabel 
Ethelstone standing before him. And then there came, as 
from the lips of one who dreams, the cry of " Mabel ! " and in 
a moment Lennon came back to himself, thought he had been 
making himself ridiculous, and stood embarrassed and hesitating 
under the eyes of a pretty girl. 

The pretty girl, however, restored him to composure. 

" We have been expecting you, Mr. Lennon," she said ; " that 
is, Mabel has. Walter told us you had returned to England, 
and that you would come and see us. Mabel will be so de- 
lighted to see you. I should tell you that I am Mabel's niece, 
for I have not been very long living here, and I dare say you 
never heard of me before. I have heard of you, though, and I 
am glad to see you." 

" You must have been quite a child when I left England," 
Lennon said, as much to himself as to her. 

So confused had he become after his first mistake, that his 
mind for a while lost count of years, and he began to wonder 
whether the girl so like Mabel might not be Mabel's daughter. 
It was quite a relief to him to hear that she was only her niece. 
Then he thought what a fool he must be to suppose a grown 
woman . quite a woman, he had beautiful, rounded, shapely 
evidence under his eyes . could be Mabel's child. 



80 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Then lie asked gravely, and not ungracefully, after Mabel's 
health, and her children, and signified a wish to see ber, and 
was conducted into the house and left alone in a drawing-room. 
The truth is, Mabel was asleep, . she always slept an hour or 
so every afternoon, . and Grace herself went to waken her up. 
Kalph Lennon had a good many minutes to look at the books 
on the table . an odd mixture : for there was Mabel's Twpper, 
which she dearly loved ; and there were piles of pamphlets be- 
longing to . many written by . Warton ; and there were the 
schoolbooks out of which Grace taught the children ; and there 
was Plumptre's Sophocles, which Grace delighted to read ; and 
there were some Italian, French, and German authors, which 
she loved quite as well, and could read without borrowing the 
spectacles of any translator. 

Lennon was turning over the books when a quick footfall 
made him start and flush. There was a rustling, indeed a 
rushing, of billowy silk into the room ; a sweet, deep voice, 
called out, " O Kalph, dear old friend, welcome home to 
England ! " two warm lips pressed his cheek, or his beard ; and 
then he clearly saw Mabel Warton standing before him. And 
. dreadful thing to say to those who like to think that love is 
all spiritual and mental, and not a thing trammelled to the 
flesh . a shock went through poor Lennon's frame, and the love 
that had been kept alive through disappointment and struggle, 
and success and failure, and pain and pleasure, dropped down 
dead at Mabel Warton's feet. Dead past hope, past cure ; not 
to be revived, surely, even by that last trumpet which is ortho- 
doxically expected to unpeople so many graves. 

The illusion was gone ; and Lennon, cured of his fevered 
dream, like the man in Horace, felt bitterly aggrieved against 
the fate which restored reality and banished an exquisite and 
false imagining. 

But the full force of the shock was not appreciated all at 
once ; and Ealph soon found himself sketching in rapid outline 
the history of his past life. Probably Mabel did not care much 
about the details, and had a very vague notion of what sort of 
place Australia might be . having dropped all manner of 
acquaintance with it ever since school-time, when she used to 
be taught that it was called Australasia, and had no clearer idea 
about it than that it was a place where a traveller must inevi- 
tably fall among thieves. When Lennon talked of Victoria she 
of course assumed that he was speaking of some sort of place . a 



THE OLD LOVE. 81 

town or something out there . and not of the Queen of England, 
which would be absurd ; but beyond that she did not know, 
and did not want to know. Her interest was wholly in the 
man, in dear old Ralph Lennon, and not in his adventures. 
And while he was sketching out his life of the last dozen years 
or so, dashing off the lines rather to cover his own embarrass- 
ment than for any other reason, the good Mabel was thinking 
whether he would stay to dinner ; whether Warton would 
come to dine ; what she and her niece could do to amuse Ralph 
if he did not ; and how sorry she was that she happened to be 
asleep when he came, and therefore was not dressed ; and that 
he must have known she was dressing ; and how glad she 
was that she had put on her blue silk, because it looked so 
well. 

Then she talked a little : told him about the children, whom 
he must see presently ; about Walter being so much engaged ; 
about her niece being so good a girl, and such a comfort 
to her. 

" I hope you ai*e happy," said Ralph, hardly knowing that he 
spoke the words. 

" Happy ! " she answered ; yes ! That is, as happy as 
anyone can be, I suppose. As happy as I could be while . 
while "Walter is so much away." 

There was a look of tenderness and truth about her which 
was touching, which made her seem almost beautiful . almost 
romantic, ideal, and Madonna-like. A strange pang passed 
through Lennon's heart. 

"And you, Ralph?" she asked gently, kindly; "you are 
happy, are you not 1 And you are wise, and have sown all 
your wild oats . your foolish, boyish, wild oats ? " 

" Yes," he replied slowly, and rather sadly ; " I have grown 
wise, I suppose ; I hope. At least, I have outlived much 
foolishness, and roused myself from some dreamings." 

These words might be called the elegy of his long passion. 
They were the short funeral oration pronounced over his great 
dead love. Perhaps Mabel, too, so understood them. A quiet 
smile, radiant with true and kindly feeling, diffused once more 
a sort of ideal beauty over her face. No word of allusion to 
that chapter of the past which they two had read together and 
alone was ever again exchanged between them. 

Walton Warton did, luckily for Mabel's comfort, make his 
appearance very soon, and Lennon dined with them ; and they 

G 



82 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

even found a room for him, and insisted on his passing the 
night under their roof. The evening was tranquil and happy ', 
but Lennon went to bed with an odd sensation of blankness 
and vacuity at his heart, and was pervaded by a vague doubt 
of his having any particular business in life. 



CHAPTER IX. 

AND THE NEW. 

CHILDREN now do not read the story of Fortunio ; it is 
probably out of print ; and this writer, though remem- 
bering the tale well enough, does not know who wrote it, or in 
what collection it is found, except that it is not in the Arabian 
Nights. But it is a charming story. It is about a girl whose 
father was dead, and whose mother and sisters were in difficul- 
ties of some kind, and who, having a spirit far too high for 
inactivity and starvation, resolved to pull them out of all trouble 
by her own unaided effort and enterprise. So she dressed 
herself as a man, and went out to seek her fortune ; which she 
found in the shape of some dreadful adventures and daring 
exploits, whereby she won the gratitude of the king . the king 
of all the stories. Unhappily, however, she also won the love 
of the king's daughter ; and this was, for some reason or other, 
a deadly offence, and Fortunio was doomed to die. She was to 
be shot to death with arrows, like the wife of the Peruvian 
prince who had offended Pizarro. Now in most stories and 
plays and poems of a certain kind, it is assumed to be a neces- 
sary preliminary to death by any sharp instrument that the 
breast must be bared. Indeed, only the other day in Paris a 
despairing young milliner resolved to kill herself with a dagger ; 
and she accomplished the deed with a stern unfaltering reso- 
lution worthy of a Brutus ; only before doing it she took the 
trouble partly to bare her breast, and to put on the prettiest 
trimmed under garment, that the death and the corpse might 
be picturesque and Parisian. There was less excuse for her 
than in the Fortunio instance, because in the latter case the 
baring of the breast was absolutely essential to the story, which 
was by no means the case with the Paris heroine. But when 
Fortunio's white young bosom came to be uncovered, the king 



AND THE NEW. 83 

necessarily saw that he was dooming a girl to death, and for an 
offence which she could not possibly commit ; and of course he 
pardoned her, and she triumphed, and I think married the 
king's son in the end, and made all her family happy. 

In these days the little fairy story may be taken as a sort 
of timely parable. We are told that signs are everywhere 
visible of a feminine revolt against petticoats. Women are 
invading our monopolies and sanctuaries and privileged grounds 
everywhere ; but the moral of Fortunio may perhaps remind 
them that, do what they will, the soft bosom will some time or 
other reveal itself, and that it, their womanhood, must make 
their best success in the end. " O, if I were but a man ! " 
may be taken as the passionate aspiration, spoken or unspoken, 
of at least every other woman of spirit one meets. A great 
lady of our own time . a woman full of ambition, but kept by 
her very rank, perhaps, in a sort of background . was deploring 
one day to a confidential diplomatist that she could not make 
the politics of her country go exactly as she wished. " Ah, I 
could do something in politics," said she, " if I wore that ;" 
and she touched his manly coat. " You are far better armed 
for the purpose in wearing this," replied the statesman ; and he 
lightly shook the folds of her womanly skirt. But the world 
is filled, now more than ever, with unfavoured Fortunios, who 
long to enter the path of enterprise in man's attire, and find 
their woman's sphere painfully narrow and mean and 
pitiful. 

One of these was Mabel Warton's niece. Day by day she 
grew more weary of her narrow, monotonous, routine life, with 
its petty cares and small shifts and shabby Sisyphus struggles. 
Never having been at school, . never having set foot inside 
that hideous institution for the dwarfing of woman's mind and 
the withering of her heart, a boarding-school, . she had always 
something of a high ideal life before her, which she would have 
striven to attain if she could. She longed to be an artist. It 
has already been mentioned that her strong desire and deter- 
mination were to go and live in Rome, and study there and 
carve in marble. Art alone . the sculptor's art alone . seemed 
to offer a fair hope for the realization of anything worth calling 
perfect. Meanwhile she had to put off this desire from day to 
day, and steep her life in trivialities. She read everything 
that came in her way . literally everything, without^ attempt 
at order or purpose or study. She read leading articles and 

g 2 



84 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

poems indiscriminately ; the greatest works of the past and 
present, and the most rubbishy novel from the circulating 
library. Her process of reading the latter sort of book, how- 
ever, was very rapid and summary. She tore through its 
contents in a moment . a figurative moment at least . dis- 
embowelled it, plucked out the heart of its mystery, and then, 
if it was good for nothing, threw it away, never to be glanced 
at again. If, however, it proved to have any marrow in it, 
then she read it more carefully, got whatever was good in it, 
and left the rest to go. Thus from almost every measuring 
process of this kind her mind, like Cassim Baba's cup, retained 
some coin of gold. Her energy, seeking a suitable end, was 
always grasping around it in every direction ; and so she had 
accumulated an odd miscellaneous store of materials, which it 
only wanted some ordering and superior mind to help her to 
put to use. 

Indeed, the kind of life she was now leading would have 
precluded order of study. She read only by fits and snatches, 
and must grasp greedily all she could crowd into the time, as 
a hungry traveller at a railway station pounces on anything he 
can find close to hand, and swallows it, knowing that in a 
moment the inexorable bell will ring and he must go. She 
taught the children as well as she could ; she ordered the 
house ; she controlled and helped the servants ; she paid the 
bills ; she made the two ends meet when she could. To keep 
that household out of debt or out of actual poverty was of 
late becoming a very difficult task. To think about art and 
about tradesmen's bills at the same time is not easy even to 
the professional artist ; and poor Grace's artistic heaven was 
often confused by dull clouds of commonplace and petty diffi- 
culties. She could of course have shaken off the whole connec- 
tion in a moment, have stamped the dust from her feet, and 
gone her own way whither that led her. Her own little purse 
would have kept her somehow in Rome ; and nobody had 
any fair claim on her time or her money. But she was fond 
of her aunt . in a sort of pitying way. Mabel had been very 
kind and loving to her when she was an orphan girl ; and she 
was grateful, and could not go her own way, and leave the 
gentle helpless woman lonely. Then the children were very 
fond of her, and could be managed by her ; and she was fond 
of them ; and she somehow came vaguely to think that evil 
days were in store for them ; and her soul revolted against the 



AND TUB NEW. 85 

idea of deserting them, even for art. So she remained . 
thinking, perhaps, that if all roads led to Rome, there might 
be a path thither at last, even through such a moor of petty, 
prosaic English cares as she had now to traverse. 

She had never felt, thus far, one single throb of affection 
for any male creature on earth except her father, who was 
long dead, and little Watty Warton, who was sometimes 
as annoying to her as a gadfly. She often wished to be a man, 
but never cared much about knowing men. Indeed, she almost 
took it for granted that when you came to know a man well 
he was sure to turn out something like Walter Warton, as the 
latter showed himself in her clear, undazzled eyes. 

Miss Ethelstone felt little or no interest in the expected visit 
of Ralph Lennon. She knew that he had been a lover of 
Mabel's, and she therefore assumed that he must be a very 
uninteresting person. She quite understood Mabel, and knew 
her to be gentle, sweet, mindless, and weak ; she remembered 
her nothing else so long as she could recollect at all. She saw 
that Walter Warton never cared to talk to her or commune 
with her ; and she assumed that any man who really loved her 
must be a worthy, vapid, and commonplace persoD. Few 
women of her age . not many, perhaps, of any age . understand 
how powerful the merely womanly weapons are over men. 
They cannot comprehend how the soft light of a bright eye, 
the soft accents of a sweet voice, can not only glamour a man 
into love, but make him believe a simpering idiot is a creature 
all soul, sensibility, and intellect. They do not understand 
that womanhood has charms to men . especially to young men 
. merely because it is womanhood. There are seasons in the 
career of young and generous men when almost any creature 
with a fair face and sweet voice may take them by the hand 
and lead them where she will. Few stately oldsters there are, 
if they ever knew youth's more generous feeling at all, who 
might not make confession that there was a crisis in their lives 
when only good fortune saved them from marrying some pretty 
brainless girl out of a confectioner's shop, or some actress whose 
dramatic genius lay wholly in her shapely legs. 

Therefore Grace took little notice of Mabel's first and unsuc- 
cessful lover when he came to the house that day. She was 
friendly and kind to him for Mabel's sake, regarding him as 
somebody quite out of her own sphere altogether, and looking 
at him only with that slight indirect interest which a girl 



86 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

might feel towards one who was pointed out to her as having 
proposed for her mother ever so many years ago. 

Lennon rose rather early the next morning. He had been 
restless and unhappy. He felt humbled, somehow, and disap- 
pointed. Life looked, all prosaic and vulgar. The one deep 
sentiment of his life thus far was gone. He had clung to it as 
something that gave his better nature food to live on when 
" the dreary intercourse of daily life " was done. There is a 
secret pride as well as a luxury in sorrow. The nature which 
disdains all other egotism indulges itself freely in egotism of 
that kind. There is a sense of sublimity in disappointment 
unflinchingly borne . we like to think of ourselves as of the 
camel mutely straining beneath the heaviest load, or the wolf 
dying in silence. If we have only ourselves for sympathisers 
and admirers, if our own consciousness be the only stage we 
play to, yet there is something inspiriting, even in acting our 
part in such a theatre, to deserve the applause of such an 
audience. It is a fall to pride to find that we have really lost 
nothing ; that we ought to be rather glad, and not disappointed. 
It turns the tragedy into a farce ; or, what is worse, into an 
ordinary, unheroic business transaction. 

Ralph walked out into the little garden behind the house. 
Evidently Walter and Mabel were not yet up. The whole 
place looked peaceful, smiling, and happy. Lennon's heroic 
beneficence was clearly as much out of place as his heroic 
passion. Commonplace contentment and respectability seemed 
to reign over all. So he felt as he looked at the pleasant 
garden, on which the mild sun of late autumn was shining 
through a thin haze of early frost. 

He heard the laugh of children, and it awakened him 
healthily from the sensuous enjoyment of meditation. Lennon 
was glad. He liked the fine boy he had seen the evening 
before, and was glad to have a talk and a romp with him. He 
loved saucy, noisy boys, and in the London streets relished the 
street-sweeping, match-selling, coach-wheel-turning gamin most 
of all the ordinary features of London life. So he quickly 
followed the sound, and it led him to a little summer-house . 
one of those mock-rustic affairs which Londoners love ; which 
you buy ready-made and all standing, and set up like a water- 
butt ; and which is about the size of a good sentry-box. And 
here he found the two children, and found also . less, pei-haps, 
to his delight . their cousin. She was bai-e-headed, like the 



AND THE NEW. 87 

young ones, and was playing some game or other with them. 
She was not in the least disconcerted. 

" Good-morning, Mr. Lennon," she said ; '.' I hardly expected 
to see you up so early. "We are very early risers, the children, 
and I. Watty is delighted to see you, I am sure. Someone 
has been telling him that you saw lions, and could tell him all 
about them ; and he delights in lions." 

" O, yes, Mr. Lennon," the boy cried, struggling out of some 
handkerchief-knot in which he had been tied, "mamma says 
you saw lions." 

" Yes, Watty, often. Shall I tell you all about them ? " 

" Yes, please ; but look here. Mamma says you hunted 
lions in Australia ; but I have a natural-history book, and it 
says there are no lions in Australia." 

" No, my boy, nor are there . except in zoological gardens, 
as you have them here ; but it was in Africa." 

" 0, you were in Africa ! In the desert of Sahara 1 And 
did you ever ride on an ostrich 1 " 

" No, not in the desert of Sahara, but in other parts of 
Africa ; and I never rode on an ostrich. But I have seen 
great yellow lions, out on the sand . not in cages . and heard 
them roar, and shot at them, too." 

" 0, how jolly ! And did you kill any 1 " 

"Well, yes ; I helped to kill some, at least j and I have got 
the skin of one, which I'll show you." 

" Have you got it here 1 " 

" No ; but I have it in Cumberland, where I am living now ; 
and I should be glad to take you there with me for a while. 
Will you come 1 " 

" O, I'd like to come of all things . if mamma would let me." 

" Would you go without papa and mamma, Watty 1 " asked 
his grave sister, in tone of solemn childish reproof. 

" Why, papa isn't ever here, Maby, and mamma doesn't care 
for playing and all that. . But I'd like Maby to come, Mr. 
Lennon, and cousin Gracie, too. You'll take cousin Gracie, 
Mr. Lennon, won't you 1 " 

"I'll not go, Mr. Lennon," demurely said the little girl, 
returning to her point, " unless mamma and papa go." 

" Now, Maby, that's all your nonsense . you know we never 
see papa here." 

"Your papa is here now, Watty, dear," interposed Miss 
Ethelstone. 



88 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

But "Watty was not to be put down. " 0, we'll go, Mr. 
Lennon, never mind," he went on sturdily. " Papa won't know 
anything about it until we are back again." 

Lennon's eye rested involuntarily on the young woman who 
stood near him. She had coloured deeply, and her whole 
manner suggested anxiety and embarrassment. He came to 
the rescue : 

" Well, Watty, I hope your papa will come too. But now 
I'm going to tell you a story about a lion . a huge, dreadful 
lion ; the one whose skin I have, and mean to show you." 

How unfortunate, in one sense . how untimely, at all events 
. that Miss Ethelstone should have looked up, relieved and 
rejoiced ! For Lennon's eye again involuntarily turned 
towards her, and their glances met. And Lennon's look, 
though it endured not a second of time, said, as plainly as if 
words had expreseed it, " I see that something is wrong here ; " 
and her look replied, " I see that you know it." 

Lennon went on and told his story, making it pretty long 
too, and minute in its details ; for he knew that the longer he 
could make it, and the more completely he could absorb the 
attention of his one listener, the better all the party would be 
pleased. 

But the story came to an end at last. 

" Do you go to school, Watty ? " asked Lennon, saying any- 
thing to start a new topic. 

" No, I don't," said the boy. " But I learn, though . lots of 
things." 

" Mamma teaches you ? " 

" 0, no ; mamma don't teach us ; cousin Gracie does. We 
had a governess, but she went away when Gracie came. I'm 
so glad ; she was a nasty, cross old thing ; and she used to 
make mamma cry sometimes." 

" And what do you learn, Watty ? " 

" All sorts of things : globes, and sums on the slate . and 
Gracie's wrong in her sums sometimes, I know . and drawing. 
0, isn't she first-rate at drawing ! She drew me a lion yes- 
terday, and a man on horse fighting with him It's stunning ! 
She's going to Rome soon . and I'm going with her." 

" Do you intend to study art, Miss Ethelstone 1 " 

" I have had vague dreams of that kind for a long time, but 
they don't come to anything. I should very much like to study 
in Borne." 



AND THE NEW. 89 

" And become a professional artist 1 " 

" Yes, Mr. Lennon. I don't see why women should lounge 
idly through life ; and, at all events, I can't do it. I must 
make a living." There now, thought the girl, if he is a swell, 
and thinks I am going to set up for a fine lad}', that will let 
him know at once that he is mistaken. 

" I think you are perfectly right," Lennon quietly remarked. 
" In the country where I lived so long . Australia . women do 
not lounge away their lives in idleness. And we. I mean 
they . in that country have had their woman-artists, who have 
crossed the great ocean and studied their art in Rome, and 
come back and made a fame for themselves . at least, a colonial 
fame. I don't suppose their names ever reached England ; but 
out there we used to be proud of some of them." 

" Are you an artist, Mr. Lennon 1 " 

" No, not at all ; at least, it would be really absurd to call 
anything I do by the name of art. But I am fond of drawing 
now and then ; and above all human arts I love sculpture." 

" 0, and so do I ! " She coloured, and became quite en- 
thusiastic. " I love it better than anything. I look at a fine 
statue in delight . and despair. I should so love to make a 
group . I have the idea firmly in my mind . of CEdipus and 
Antigone." 

"CEdipus and Antigone ! From Sophocles ! " 

" There ! I knew you would laugh. Men always laugh at 
the idea of a woman being able to read Greek. But you need 
not smile in this case ; I am not guilty . I wish I were. I 
know no more of Greek than Watty does. But we have got 
Plumptre's translation, and I read it ; and the moment I read 
the grand opening line of the play . 'Child of a blind old 
man, Antigone ! ' . I made up my mind that I would try to 
make a group of that. I see the group . but only when I shut 
my eyes, though ; and I daresay I shall never see it otherwise." 
She laughed and became a little embarrassed, fearing she had 
made rather a foolish exhibition ; and she glanced doubtfully 
at Lennon's face. He was quite earnest and interested. 

" Have you made a drawing of it 1 " he asked. 

"Yes; but it did not satisfy me. I made several, in fact; 
but very hastily, and they did not come up to the mark, and 
so I tore them up." 

" Will you make another, and show it to me 1 and I will 
tell you frankly what I think of it. As I said, I am not an 



90 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

artist, but I am fond of art, and of sculpture especially ; and 
I have been in Rome, and have seen most of the great European 
statues ; and I think I could form a tolerable judgment." 

" And you would be frank with me . would give me a per- 
fectly honest and candid opinion, and not treat me like a child, 
or a girl ; I mean as men generally seem to think girls ought 
to be treated ? I want an honest judgment ; for, if these 
notions of mine are mere nonsense and vanity, the sooner I get 
cured of them the better. And I could bear it, too." 

" But suppose the idea were a delusion . suppose it were only 
aspiration, and nothing of inspiration . how should you feel 
towards the friend who told you so 1 " 

" I hope 1 should have sense enough to be grateful ; at 
least, I would try to. But what need it matter to him, if he 
did right ? " 

" Well, Miss Ethelstone, if you allow me the opportunity, T 
will run the risk of your anger, and try to give an unprejudiced 
opinion. But I warn you that my mind is already tending 
towards prejudice. I hope and trust that an earnest desire is 
in itself an evidence of capacity. Once I used to hold to this 
as a creed ; but that was in more hopeful days, ever so long 
ago, . before you were born, I daresay." 

"What nonsense! Why, you are quite young . much 
younger than I expected to find you. I thought you must be 
quite an elderly and heavy sort of person." 

" Why did you think so 1 " 

" Because . because . 0, really, I don't know." And she 
gave way- to an involuntary peal of laughter, and grew quite 
red once more. And Lennon laughed too, and the merry out- 
burst somewhat cleared the atmosphere of his temper and 
spirits. 

Just at that moment Warton, in search of his guest, entered 
the garden. He was about to hurry forward when the peal of 
laughter attracted his attention, and his eye3 rested on the 
group, composed of Lennon, Grace, and the children, one of the 
latter hanging on to Ralph's shooting-coat pocket. Warton 
checked himself, and watched the group with an expression of 
peculiar interest. Miss Ethelstone, in a bright-blue morning- 
dress, and a smart (and very cheap) straw hat, with her fair 
hair, guiltless of chignon or comb, gleaming in the pale sun, and 
her complexion heightened and expression animated by un- 
wonted interest and mirth, was a very attractive figure. So 



AND THE NEW. 91 

Warton thought. Only of late had his attention been much 
drawn towards her. To him the familiar was usually the least 
noticed and the least known. But latterly be had been com- 
pelled to notice once or twice that she was really a girl of spirit 
and sense ; he had discovered by the agency of one or two 
divining words that she had ambition and fire, and he began to 
see that she had some pretensions to beauty and figure. He 
looked at her now as she walked and laughed by Lennon's side, 
and his whole face was lighted up by some quick encouraging 
thought. 

He went forward and greeted them. 

" Miss Ethelstone has been telling me," said Lennon, " that 
she thought I was quite an aged and stupid person." 

" O no, Walter ; indeed I never said anything of the kind." 

" Well, elderly and heavy, then." 

" But that was nonsense." 

" I should hope it was nonsense," said Warton gaily. " I 
have personal reasons for it, Grace dear, seeing that Mr. Lennon 
is somewhat younger than I am ; and I don't advise you to tell 
Mabel that you consider me elderly and heavy." 

" Papa," interposed Watty, " mayn't I go with Mr. Lennon 
to where he lives, to see a lion's skin 1 I do so want to go." 

" Certainly, dear, if Mr. Lennon will be so good as to take 
you." 

"And mayn't cousin Grace go too 1 " 

" Really, Watty, I can't speak for cousin Grace. She goes 
where she likes, you know." 

" No, she doesn't, papa. She don't go anywhere. How could 
she when she has to teach us, you know, since Miss Potts went 
away 1 0, but you don't know." 

" But, Watty, I don't care about lions," interposed cousin 
Grace ; '.' and besides, perhaps Mr. Lennon would not take me." 

" Yes, Pm sure he would, if you asked him ; when you show 
him how well you can do your drawing-lessons." 

" We have been speaking about sculpture and drawing," in- 
terposed Lennon. " I was glad to find Miss Ethelstone is an 
artist." 

" No, no, Mr. Lennon, I don't call myself an artist." 

" Yes, Grace has the soul and spirit of an artist," said War- 
ton, who up to that moment had regarded any indication of 
that kind which he might have noticed in the girl as a pitiable 
manifestation of woman's inherent silliness. " She has a passion 



92 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

for art ; and I at least have always believed that a true woman's 
ambition indicates a consciousness of power." 

Miss Ethelstone fell behind with a scarcely concealed smile 
of contempt and tremulous motion of disdainful shoulder. She 
took little Mabel's hand and walked with her. " I wonder 
whether your mamma has come downstairs yet, dear ? " she said 
to the little girl ; and thus glided out of the artistic conversa- 
tion altogether. 

Warton saw and understood the meaning of her movement, 
but was only amused ; and, in fact, began to feel quite a 
heightening interest in her. But he did not proceed to dwell 
upon her good qualities to Lennon any further just then. 

They were all walking round the little garden. When they 
came near the door of the house, a rushing of skirts was heard, 
and Mabel came out. She was dressed rather tastefully, and 
looked genial, happy . and heavy. Her soft eyes brightened 
with a friendly smile to Lennon ; but they turned with the 
rapture of a first love to her husband, to whom she presently 
clung, and on whom she fawned like a loving but heavy spaniel. 
But why, when she put her hand so warmly into his own and 
allowed it to rest there kindly, and greeted him with so glad 
and cordial a smile, did Lennon glance slightly away from her 
and steal a look at her niece's face ? And was it only an absurd 
fancy which made him think he saw a satirical and odd expres- 
sion, there ? 

One thing at least he was sincerely glad of, and that was 
Mabel's evident devotion to her husband. He thought he 
could interpret easily enough the meaning of some of the little 
evidences which had forced themselves on his attention. He 
could not doubt that Warton was habitually an absentee from 
his home ; and he could not avoid conjecturing that the home 
was not so free of care as he had at first imagined. But 
Warton's frequent absence, as he was an ambitious man, and 
steeped in politics, was not surprising. Warton himself had 
prepared him to expect as much. Neither was it wonderful if, 
under the circumstances, a want of money occasionally pinched 
the household of an ambitious man to whom politics were but 
a trade. What gratified Lennon was to see that after so many 
years Mabel Warton deeply loved her husband. He supposed 
that no undeserving man could have retained that love, or 
any woman's love, so long ; and he thought that whatever diffi- 
culties might surround the household, Mabel had that which 



AND THE NEW. 93- 

to a woman is better than all other prosperity. He was sin- 
cerely rejoiced to believe that "Walter Warton must be, after all, 
a good husband. 

After all 1 Yes, after all the vague, deep, long-abiding sus- 
picions of Warton which had brooded in Lennon's mind, which 
had made him think that some time or other Mabel would have 
need of friendly counsel and a true helping hand, even though 
offered as the generous revenge of a disinterested discarded 
lover. He rejoiced to think just now that his suspicions must 
have been idle ; and it must be said that his joy over the 
thought of her husband's worthiness was all the more thorough 
and deep because he loved her now no longer . and wondered 
how it was he ever could have loved her, could have dreamed 
and hoped and raved and despaired and tried to fling his life 
away, for that dear, good-natured, honest matron who stood 
and smiled before him so sweet and friendly and uninter- 
esting. 

As he returned to London that day, he boldly faced his own 
thoughts. He lighted a lamp mentally, and went down into 
the sepulchre, and opened the coffin and looked at the long- 
embalmed dead. He brought forth his old love in his arms, 
and studied, passionless, its fading lineaments. Yes, he was 
once wildly, madly in love with Mabel Ethelstone's soft brown 
eyes and her sweet voice and her white hand ; in love with her 
gentleness, which he took for intellectual serenity; in love with 
her easy composure, which he mistook for noble self-subduing 
independence of soul; in love with her very scruples, and most 
in love of all with her tender, firm rejection of himself, and her 
complete devotion to another. For her at one time he was 
ambitious, and would have risked life gladly ; he would have 
thought it sweet to die if her eyes but moistened with a loving 
farewell. Eor her he had done more than that : he had lived 
. lived in the manly devoted hope that some time when sorrow 
threatened her, it might be his happy, unselfish, unrewarded 
lot to stand by her side and help to shield her. And now he 
found her a good-hearted, gentle, prosaic woman, whose very 
qualities of plain and homely goodness were a febrifuge and 
antidote to love. Nay, more than that, he saw that she really 
had not changed, except in matronly proportions ; that she 
must have been always much the same ; and that the Ralph 
Lennon of twenty fell in love, not with her at all, but with the 
radiant image of his own youth and fervour and vain romance 



94 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

and hopeless longing, as he saw it mirrored in the well of her 
deep-brown eyes. 

Walter Warton accompanied him to the railway station. 
Ralph, of course, had made many promises to return soon and 
see Mabel, and tell little Watty more about lions, and inspect 
the drawing of Antigone and (Edipus. 

" I often go up northward," said Warton, as they walked 
along the road together ; " indeed some of my strongholds are 
in the north, although I have not the devotion to Lancashire 
which I used to have once. I know many people near Water- 
dale ; I have been at Lowther Castle and Patterdale Hall, and 
. and other places. Now I shall have a fresh impulse to go 
there, in wishing to see you. I'll look you up there, soon 
enough ; depend on it." 

"You cannot come too soon, if you are not particular 
about accommodation. The house is sadly out of repair, 
and I have not had anything done to it ; and indeed don't 
mean to." 

" Of course not. Why should you ? You'll never live there 
very long, I should think." 

" Well, I don't know ; I sometimes think of living there 
altogether." 

" There, down in Cumberland ; buried alive in a mountain- 
pass ? " 

" Yes ; why not ? Perhaps I should be buried alive where- 
ever I go." 

" Not you ; you are quite certain to find existence there 
unendurable after a while ; you will have to come out into the 
living world . the active, the real world, the only world worth 
living in or for." 

" Where is that 1 " asked Lennon, smiling. 

" The world of London ; the only stage worth playing on, 
the only audience worth playing to. You used to think so 
once." 

" So I used ; but I have seen other worlds since, and found 
life much the same in them. You have no idea how insig- 
nificant London looks from an Australian bush." 

" Yet it is the centre of life . Anglo-Saxon life, at least." 

" Perhaps so. But the sun looks very little just now up 
there ; and the great central sun we can't see at all. To you 
who are in it and of it, London looks all-important . and it is 
all-important. But I am practically so far away from it that 



AND THE NEW. 95 

I concern myself little more about it than that old woman 
shaking the carpet yonder does about the sun." 

" Ah, you think so now, but your feelings will soon change ; 
and I look to see you deserting Cumberland and settling in 
London, and probably plunging into politics, or literature, or 
railway speculation, or something of the kind, before long. 
Meanwhile, I shall make good haste to come and spend a few 
days with you in your mountain home, before your recluse fit 
is over. May I come soon 1 " 

" As soon as ever you please, if, as I said, you don't mind 
bad accommodation. You shall be welcome whenever you 
come. I wish you could bring that fine little boy with you ; 
but I doubt whether old Mrs. Beck, my housekeeper, would be 
quite prepared to arrange for him." 

" In any case, my dear fellow, his mamma would never con- 
sent to let him out of her sight. Nor his cousin, indeed. A 
noble-hearted girl that, Lennon ; and a girl of spirit and talent. 
But for her to help us, and commune with us, and keep us 
alive with her vivacity, her good sense, and her affection, we 
should be sometimes sore pressed by the world's vexations. 
Lennon, why have not you a home 1 " 

" Of what use is it to have a home, if a man must always be 
absent from it 1 " Lennon thought. But he made no reply 
to the question ; and Warton, perhaps thinking it rather 
unlucky, forbore to press it. 

" Then I'll come to see you very soon," he continued. " You 
live near the Alwyns, I think 1 " 

" Yes . that is, not very far from them. The lake lies be- 
tween." 

" I used to meet the Alwyns a good deal in London not 
long ago . shortly after they were married. What do you 
think of them . of him 1 " 

" I only met him two or three times, but I liked him very 
much. I thought him a fine, manly, upright, intelligent 
specimen of an English clergyman." 

" Exactly ; so do I. People say he's a little, just a little 
lax . very Broad Church ; but I don't know ; I daresay it's all 
nonsense. And his wife . is she not a charming creature V 

" Yes, indeed ; a bright genial little woman. I do not 
know much of her." 

" Ah, you will come to know her when you live near. She 
is delightful. I wonder how she ever came to marry a man so 



% 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



much older than herself. He might be her father. She is veiy 
strict in her religious views . decidedly Evangelical ; and I 
fancy she guides him of late into more rigid ways of thought 
than he is naturally inclined to." 

" He struck me as being a liberal and sensible man," said 
Lennon. "I had no opportunity of observing anything of her 
views ; and, to speak the truth, all these hair-splitting dif- 
ferences of sect fail to interest me." 

" But you have renounced, no doubt, the old extravagances 
of thought ? I suppose they are only a phase of mind we must 
all pass through." 

" Perhaps." And that topic fell lifeless . still-born, in fact. 

They reached the station in a few minutes, and Lennon got 
into the up-train. Warton spoke a few very friendly words at 
parting ; and Lennon, internally angry at a coldness of manner 
he could hardly get over, did his best to be equally genial. 

Warton asked a porter a question or two about some later 
trains, and then walked slowly home. 

Mabel came to meet him, joy shining on her face. 

" Dear Walter, how glad I am you have come back ! I am 
sorry good old Ealph had to go so soon; but it is so kind of 
you to come qixickly back. Is he not changed, dear old 
"Ealph V 

" Yes, very much changed, indeed. Can you put me up a 
few things, Mabel ? I am going in an hour . by the 2.45." 

" Going, dearest 1 Going already, my Walter ? " 

" Yes, love. Didn't I tell you 1 Yes, I am going to 
Leicester. I am pledged to attend a meeting there . 1 can't 
get off." 

" O, what a sad disappointment ! And when do yon 
return?" 

" The day after to-morrow, I think." 

He preceded her into the house. She followed him, tamely 
and sadly. He saw Miss Ethelstone in one of the rooms, 
and called to her : 

" Well, Gracie dear, how do you like our old friend, Ealph 
Lennon ?" 

" Very much, indeed . for what I saw of him. He seems 
manly and straightforward ; I like that." 

" Then, on the whole, you like him ? " 

" Decidedly . yes." 

" I am very glad to hear it." And he passed on without 



TOM BERRY LEAVING HOME. 97 

saying any more ; and his faithful wife, dejected, went to make 
preparations to expedite the journey which was such a disap- 
pointment to her. 



CHAPTER X. 

TOM BERRY LEAVING HOME. 

IN the neighbourhood of Bethlehem and of the Surrey 
Theatre, on the south side of the Thames, are, as every- 
body knows, a great many narrrow streets of dingy and 
decaying houses where the poor herd and huddle until some 
new railway line invades them, bombards them, and drives 
them out. When we bombarded Kagosima, practical politi- 
cians here, who do not understand your sentimental nonsense, 
said it did not matter much because the houses were; only 
trumpery wooden affairs, and the people who lived there had 
nothing to do but just to pack up their traps when they found 
the home blazing about their ears, and set to work at making a 
new home somewhere else. The same sort of philosophy re- 
conciles some of us to the railway bombardments which every 
now and then, rattle down some acres of little streets on this 
or that side of the Thames. The houses were so wretched and 
rickety that it really cant matter to these people whether 
they are knocked down or not. But even this soothing philo- 
sophy does not apply to every instance. There are some neat, 
humble, bright homes even amid that vast acreage of dirt and 
disease. Somebody's energy and intelligence convert a squalid 
den here and there into a genuine home, tasteful in its paint, 
its neatness, its birdcage, its box of mignonette ; a sort of place 
which might, one would think, have its household gods, and be 
glad with family love. Such a little home has to come down 
too. The genial memories that haunt it cannot guard it, as 
the Latin poet pictured the memories of Hannibal's triumphs 
guarding, like spirit-sentinels, the safety of the hero's life. 
Perhaps if somebody were to paint for us the last night in such 
an old home it might not be in its way less interesting than 
the pre-Raphaelite picture we all admired a few years ago . 
the picture of the dissolute, reckless, and broken squire in- 
viting, in the presence of his sad wife, his boy-heir to pledge 

H 



98 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

him to the memories of the hall they have to leave to- 
morrow. 

Tom Berry of Southwark was about to be evicted from one 
of those rare homes which may be found even amid the dirt 
and poverty of the neighbourhood. An energetic, independent 
fellow, he always wanted, when he married, to have a house of 
his own, and hated the idea of living in lodgings, where the 
man over your head might be a drunkard who beat his wife, 
and the young person who occupied the back-parlour might 
have odd ways of staying out at night ; where your fellow- 
lodgers jibed at you if you declined to consort with them and 
fall into their ways ; and where, if you did consort with them, 
some of them were sure to dun you to become security for rent, 
or to lend them a pound until they got that new situation 
which was always just within their reach. So when Tom 
Berry married he took a small house, then almost new, and he 
paid twenty-two pounds a-year for it ; and he became, in due 
time of occupation, a registered voter for the borough of South- 
wark. He was a carpenter by profession, and a handy man iu 
many ways ; and he could adorn his house with the workman- 
ship of his own fingers . clever to handle a paint-brush or a 
trowel as well as a saw. He was a man superior to his class 
in many qualities, and he married an intelligent young woman ; 
and in the first years of his married life he had great plans for 
the education of his children . a work more difficult to accom- 
plish out of weekly wages twenty years ago than it is now. 
One idea of his was a grand local cooperation plan . so many 
families in the neighbourhood to combine, and hire, all to them- 
selves, the whole services of two really good instructors . one 
for the boys, one for the girls ; the instruction to come off 
in each of the houses successively : and thus the father and 
mother to have a dash of the benefit. But the plan never 
came to anything. It haunted his mind, for the first two or 
three years, as a thing that must soon be matured : then he 
and his wife began to shake their heads at each other ; then 
they grew hopeful ; then the hope faded ; at last it went out all 
together, and Tom Berry and his wife made up their minds 
that they were to have no children. Such a fate cannot be 
without producing some direct effect on the relations of a mar- 
ried pair to each other. Either it sours and perverts them . 
the one mentally holding the other responsible ; or it makes 
them more loving and tender than ever, they knowing that 



TOM BERRY LEAVING HOME. 99 

they are to stand side by side alone in the world so long as 
destiny allows them to stand together. Tom Berry and his 
wife were thus affected, and they loved each other deeply, and 
he cleaved to her, sometimes deserting even politics for her, 
and letting an unjust, aristocratic, and Tory world go by unde- 
nounced for weeks together for her sake ; and she clung to 
him, until the time came when she must relax her hold and be 
gone. 

When Tom Berry first learned that he must quit his house, 
it was a great vexation to him ; and he chafed at it, and pro- 
bably connected the decree in some way with the domination 
of an aristocratic faction, half Whig, half Tory, and wholly 
opposed to manhood suffrage. But there was plenty of time 
to find a new home, and make every preparation to go there ; 
and Tom was not a fellow to maunder and grumble and do 
nothing. Only something happened which much distracted 
his attention. His wife became liable to severe attacks of 
illness and faintness, and the doctor talked of some mysterious 
and dangerous organic disease. Tom thought no more of pre- 
paration to remove. He remained at home altogether, except 
for his work, and watched her. Then she got better . much 
better, and appeared likely to do well. It was during this 
interval that, moved by some question of the rights of his 
class, Tom went to the meeting where Ralph Lennon saw him. 
But the rallying was all a delusion. His wife suddenly fell off, 
grew alarmingly worse and worse. One gray mournful evening 
she sat upright in bed, looked wildly at her husband, faintly 
cried " 0, poor Tom ! " threw her arms round his neck, fell 
back, and died. 

So Tom Berry was left to set about the task of finding a 
new home alone. The time was near at hand ; but it did not 
make any matter now where he went. 

He was sitting by the bed whereon lay the dead body of his 
wife. His elbows rested on his outspread knees ; his clasped 
hands hung down, his head was bent, and he was staring at the 
floor ; at least his eyes were turned thither, but he saw nothing 
there. Sad beautiful pictures passed before his eyes, filling his 
soul with the anguish of despair. He saw a bright lad and a 
winsome lass having their happy Sunday stroll and love-making 
along the soft uplands of Sydenham (where then no palace 
stood), and over smiling Blackheath, and across picturesque 
daisy-covered Wimbledon, and where the Thames . there a 

H 2 



100 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



stream of silver . winds among the foliage of Kew. He saw a 
happy young married pair . busy, helpful, hopeful, loving . 
looking earnestly out for the baby that never came, and then 
clinging to each other all the closer for the disappointment. 
He saw many a time of trial, . when employment failed, when 
wages were low, when there was a strike, and he, furious for 
the rights of his class, took high part in it ; and the cupboard 
was sometimes empty, and the Sunday clothes at last disap- 
peared. He saw, through whatever trial, a loving hopeful face 
turned to his own. Now how sweet even the sorrow seemed ! 
how trifling and short the intervals of trial ! As he looked in 
a little glass that stood upon the table, he saw a haggard 
grizzled face and bald temples ; and turning away from that 
sight his eyes rested on the white lank cheeks of a dead woman. 
Strange, he could look almost stoically on that corpse ; it hardly 
reminded him of his wife. But there hung behind the door a 
frayed and faded old gown ; and that, or the stuff that made it, 
he bought himself . only the other day it seemed, and yet it 
was before they had any suspicion of what was to happen . and 
he brought it home to her, and she made it and trimmed it 
herself; and she wore it on the Sunday, and they went to 
Sydenham . the old Sydenham, but how changed ! And he 
felt so proud of her appearance, and told her she was looking 
younger and better than ever. So when he saw this poor old 
empty gown . this ghost of a garment . he knew it, and he 
remembered all ; and with a great burst of agony he succumbed 
to the reality of his position, and sobbed aloud. 

Some kindly women looked after the house for him in 
turns. The one who was now on duty-,-a decent old Irish- 
woman . heard a knock at the street-door, and opened it. 

A gentleman asked for Mr. Berry. 

" Sure, his wife's dead ! " was her reply ; as if that ought to 
settle the matter, death postponing all business . an Irish, not 
an English, sentiment. 

The gentleman said he knew that . he had heard of the 
death . and came not for business, but as a friend. If Mr. 
Berry did not like to see him just then, he would come another 
time. 

The woman went upstairs to Berry. 

" Tom, alanna ! there's a sthrange gentleman wants to see 
you. He's a friend, he says. Go an' talk to him, Tom ; 'twill 
do you good." 



TOM BERKY LEAVING HOME. 101 

" What does he say he wants V 

" He doesn't want anything, Tom, dear. He says he's a 
friend, and come to talk to you. He looks a rale gentle- 
man/' 

"He can't be a friend of mine. I haven't any swell 
friends." 

" Well, niver mind. He says he's a friend, anyhow. Come 
down and talk to him, alanna ; 'twill do you good ; 'twill 
rouse you up a bit." 

Tom mechanically rose and came downstairs. 

In the little passage stood the gentleman, and Tom knew 
him at once as the stranger whom he bad conducted to Wat 
Warton's chambers in the Temple. 

" Come in, sir," said he heavily and listlessly ; and he led 
the way into a little parlour, neatly kept and adorned with 
some of the coloured Christmas prints from the Illustrated 
London News, and two or three photographs, at the sight of 
one of which a great spasm passed over Tom's face. 

" I didn't come to disturb you," said Lennon ; " and in fact 
I came to you for nothing but just to see and speak with you, 
and tell you how sorry I was to hear of your trouble. I went 
to the rooms yonder where I met you first, to inquire after 
yon, and they told me what had happened ; and then I thought 
perhaps you would not object to my coming to see you, that 
we might exchange a friendly word or two." 

" Thank you, sir ; you're very kind, I'm sure ; and I'm glad 
to see you. Of course I knew you at once. It's . it's a great 
grief, this. We were always very happy. We never quarrelled, 
sir, never ; though there's many a woman couldn't have done 
with some of my ways. It's hard to have to begin life all 
over again, at my time . and alone." 

" Yes, it is a great grief ; and I am not going to offer you 
any commonplaces of condolence." 

" No, it wouldn't be any use," said Tom, shaking his head 
decisively. 

" It wouldn't. Such words either have no effect at all, or 
they are unnecessary. If a man could be comforted by any- 
thing of the kind, his grief is not very deep . as yours is." 

" Quite right, sir ; that's quite right. Are you married !" 

"No." 

" Never have been ?" 

" Never ; and never am likely to be." 



102 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Ah, then, you can't know what my loss is ; but I'm much 
obliged to you for thinking about it." 

" Well, I came to see you partly with a kind of idea that 
you might like to leave London for a little, and go to the 
North . not to-day or to-morrow, of course ; but in a few days, 
after . " Lennon stopped. He had not the courage to say 
"after the funeral." Berry made a sign with his hand to sig- 
nify that he understood. 

" The fact is," Lennon pursued, beginning to see his way 
clearer, " I am about to be very busy down there. I want 
some little building and carpentering work done . not great 
architectural work by any means, but some school-houses, and 
an improved kind of cottage, and all that ; and I want the 
help of some one who, being a skilful and practical workman, 
could give my ideas something like shape. Now, I think you 
are the very man who could help me . at least, I should like 
you to come down and talk the matter over with me. Will 
you come ?" 

" It's very kind of you." 

Then Tom stopped and began to think. His home was gone, 
in every sense. He must soon remove somewhere, and Lon- 
don would be hideous to him. It was something of a hope 
awakened within him to think of seeing the fresh country, with 
hills and river. 

" It's very kind of you," he repeated ; " and I shall soon be 
glad to go anywhere out of this. I'll go, but only on one 
condition, firm and fast, as a man." 

" What is it, Mr. Berry ? Anything you like." 

"That you don't let me do nothing for something . that 
it's a business affair, though all kindness, I know, on your 
part ; and that I'm allowed to give full value for every shilling 
I get." 

" Certainly ; I should never have thought of hinting any 
other condition." 

" Then I'll go," said Tom. " I liked you from the first, and 
I'm glad to go anywhere with you." 

So it was soon settled that Tom Berry was to go to the 
North, and take up his quarters for a little time . or a long 
time, as the case might be . with Ralph Lennon ; at least, in 
Lennon's neighbourhood. Lennon had a keen natural shrewd- 
ness about him, by which he penetrated at once the depths of 
Tom's simple, earnest nature. Perhaps it was less a quick and 



TOM BERRY LEAVING HOME. 103 

correct appreciation of character that guided him than a mere 
instinct. Himself earnest, unpretending, and manly even in 
his eccentricity, he read the heart of the Southwark carpenter 
by the light of his own nature. He quite understood, then, 
that just at such a time the one only way to divert Berry's 
mind from personal grief was to draw him into talk about a 
scheme which proposed to do good to others. So he ex- 
pounded to Berry his ideas about innovation and improvement 
down in Cumberland, and Tom grew enthusiastic over the 
scheme. It was quite new to him to meet with any one who 
had a fresh faith in any irregular way of doing good. The 
working men of England . at least, of London . have become 
terrible sceptics of late. They have seen so many shams come 
up, and so many hopeful, alluring dreams fade away, that the 
mere suggestion of any plan of improvement, political or social, 
seems only made to be laughed at. Most of the philanthropic 
teaching of England, directed lately at the working classes, 
has simply gone to tell them that it is their duty to keep quiet, 
mind their business, stay away from the public-house, avoid 
politics, and disbelieve in schemes of Reform. Tom Berry's 
own class had imbibed the teaching, and chaffed him for his 
nonsense about Chartism and the rights of Labour. As the 
black nigger uses the words " black nigger " for terms of re- 
proach, so the British working man sometimes holds it up as 
a reproach to his brother that he has a working man's natural 
notions, and hopes, and dreams. Tom was delighted to meet 
some one at last who had a flavour of the old freshness about him 
. delightful and fascinating as a memory of some of the follies 
of youth. 

As they talked over many things, a twinkle at last came 
into Tom's eye. 

" And did you see Wat "Warton that night V he asked. 

" No," answered Lennon, " not that night ; but the next day, 
and several times since." 

" Well, and what did you think of him 1 He's not much 
changed. You'd have no trouble in recognising him." 

"No; he looks just the same as ever . quite young and 
fresh." 

" Ah ! so he does. Would you think that he's nigh as old 
as me . ay, maybe as old all out 1 Well, he's not had the same 
trouble. No, nor he couldn't have." 

" No ; his life seems to have been very successful." 



104 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

"Successful? I don't know that. He has talents, you 
know. I don't believe in him now ; but I know he has 
talents." 

" Yes ; I always knew that." 

" Well, and what has he brought his talents to ? "What have 
they done for him 1 He's only made himself a. poor hack. 
Let him hang on to the Tories, and see what they'll do for 
him ! He's hard up, I believe, poor fellow ; and I'm sorry for 
that. I don't like a fellow to be hard up, whatever he is. 
But he's never suffered. He couldn't suffer." 

" Why not 1 " asked Lennon. not out of curiosity, but only 
to say something which might allow Tom to go on talking. 

" Because he hasn't the heart to suffer, sir ; because he never 
felt for any human being but himself; because, when Fortune's 
attacking him, she's only beating the wind, so long as he 
leaves his own carcass alone. Touch him there, and he's quick 
all over ! Turn him one way, and he's got the hide of 
a rhinoceros ; turn him the other way, and he's like a 
skinned eel." 

" You seem to have a strong dislike to him ; and I think 
you look at him unfairly." 

" Not a bit of it, sir. Don't you trust him. Mark my 
words : I know Mr. "Walter "Warton now ; I didn't once. I 
believed him ; and I don't know whether I mightn't say I 
loved him ; but he showed himself gradually to me, bit by bit, 
and I saw him as he was . the slippery selfish humbug. Don't 
you ever trust him, Mr. Lennon ; he'd deceive any man if he 
.could, or any woman." 

Tom was growing excited. Lennon made an effort to turn 
the conversation another way. He did not care to sit and hear 
his old friend denSunced ; and he did not want to argue that or 
any other point with a man in Tom Berry's present mood of 
mind. But Tom kept on. 

" He's going to stand for a place up in the North soon, I'm 
told. Some of the working men there wrote to us here about 
it. I gave them my opinion. The Tories are bringing him 
out. The Carlton is doing the whole thing ; and I hear it's his 
last chance. They think it would be a good thing for them to 
be able to show ' the orator of the people,' as Wat used to call 
himself, on their side." 

" Is he likely to get in ? " 

" Well, I don't know that he wouldn't have a good chance, 



TOM BERRY LEAVING HOME. 105 

too, with the Carlton's tin, and one or two big local men to 
bring him out ; but if the working chaps are true to each other 
there, they can do a deal. It's a place where some of the old 
franchises are left ; and most of 'em have votes that way . what 
working man has a ten-pound house in a country-town 1 . and 
they all have voices and throats ; and I'll put them up to 
something, I know, that'll fix him, or I'm mistaken. Warton's 
easily frightened ; I know that. He hasn't the pluck of a 
schoolgirl." 

" I see we are likely to be on opposite sides, Mr. Berry, if 
politics should break in upon its down at the North. Unless 
he really comes out a tremendous and unmitigated Tory, I shall 
feel bound to support my old acquaintance." 

" Well, sir, we can't help it. We must only differ. I'll do 
my best to forward your building work all the same ; perhaps 
it's the work I'm best fitted for, and ought to have stuck to. 
And if the thing only gives you time, and does not come on too 
soon, I've good hope that you'll have seen into Wat Warton 
before he gets on an election platform again." 

After a little conversation Lennon left poor Berry to his 
lonely house . a home no longer. It was arranged that Berry 
should come northward as soon as he could. 

" God bless yer honer ! " said the old Irishwoman, as she 
hurried to open the door for Lennon ; " you've brightened him 
up wondherful wid talkin' to him, and lettin' him hear himself 
talk. Poor Tom ! Och, yeh, 'twas she that knew that ; and 
whin anything was the matther wid him, she'd always help 
him to talk himself out of it." 

Lennon did not pay much attention to Berry's denunciation 
of Warton. It seemed to him to represent naturally enough 
the fanatical honesty of the Chartist's indignation against a man 
who, for any reason, good or bad, wise or unwise, had forsworn 
one tittle of the ancient creed and sacraments. Probably 
Warton had, in the fair development of political intellect, out- 
grown the old husk of his early opinions ; and the man whom 
you have left behind in political sentiments is no more likely 
to judge you fairly than the old friend who still trudges to 
business afoot, while you drive in a carriage to the splendid 
offices of your new limited-liability company, or canter to 
Downiug-street with your groom at your tail. Lennon 
took quite the old Irishwoman's views of the matter, and was 
glad to have been the means of helping Berry to talk 



106 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

himself, even for a few moments, out of the iron gripe of his 
affliction. 

The iron gripe closed again round Tom's heart when he was 
left alone. But he had some work to do ; and he turned to 
and went on with it. He was engaged in making a coffin for 
his wife. No hand but his, he was resolved, should construct 
this her last tenement. The best oak he could get was brought 
under his saw and his plane ; he had bought black velvet to 
cover all, and solemn bronze clasps and nails and plates to be 
its dismal ornaments ; and he sawed and planed, and made 
smooth and symmetrical, fitted in here, rubbed off there, and 
toiled with a nervous and morbid exactness, as if the dead could 
be conscious of the anxious presence of his loving hand. He 
felt a grim and ghastly pride in making the incasing worthy of 
her he was to lay there . to lay there with his own hands. 
The jeweller, working with fond attentive eye to make some 
chain or ornament worthy to lie on the bosom of his love, could 
not have been more eagerly absorbed in the finish and per- 
fection of his task than the poor Southwark carpenter labouring 
at the coffin of his wife. 

No hand but his should lay her in the coffin ; nay, no hand 
should touch her but his alone. He peremptorily, and even 
fiercely, rejected the urgent entreaties of some of the women 
round him to be allowed to wash and lay out, after the pro- 
prieties of their drear routine, the body which still held his 
living heart. He would have no old crones meddling with 
those lifeless limbs, and profaning with useless touch the sacred 
stillness of that form. He would have no ghastly and hideous 
shroud, no grim funereal corpse-gloves ; none of the conven- 
tional paraphernalia wherewith the vulgar think it religion to 
bedizen the dead. She should lie as she lay now, . just as she 
used to lie down to sleep of nights ; only a few old things that 
he had specially given her . an ornament or two, a buckle, her 
combs, waist-belts, and such like . laid with her in her coffin, 
that the presence of some mute memorials of his love might 
follow her into the central darkness of the grave. 

"I never saw such work," said his old Irish assistant and 
consoler ; " it's haythenish ; it's worse than the Turks. It's 
mad he is wid the grief, poor fellow, or he wouldn't be going 
on in such a way. Fancy a dacent woman put in her grave 
widout washing or laying out, or a taste of a shroud about her ! 
God help us, Mary Berry ! but it's you would be surprised if 



THE ALWYHT3. 107 

you was to wake up and see the state ye're in. And all out of 
his love, God help him ! Well, it's a quare place is London ; 
but sure it's aisy seen they're not Christians at all, and they 
knows no betther ! God be wid poor ould Ireland, where they 
bury the dead dacent, whativer happens to the living ! " 

So at last the whole work got done ; and Tom had his way, 
and laid his wife in the coffin he had made ; and then in the 
earth of the suburban churchyard. He came back and took a 
farewell of his lonely house, sold his few poor sticks of furni- 
ture, and gave away some trifles of clothing here and there to 
the women who had been kind to him. The walls of the 
churchyard seemed now to enclose his whole married life. 
Wife and home and all were there. He was poor as he began, 
alone as he began. All that was left to him after so many 
years of hope, struggle, happiness, and sorrow, was a memory, 
a faded old neck-ribbon, and a lock of hair. 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE ALWYNS. 

" T HAVE heard something of our new neighbour, dear . Mr. 
X Lennon." 

" Indeed, Myra ! What of him 1 I was thinking of him 
not many minutes ago." 

Dr. Alwyn put away his paper, and waited to hear what his 
pretty wife had to say. 

They had been home only a day or two, but Myra had been 
already half over the parish, making up by wonderful increase 
of energy for time snatched from duty for travel and pleasure. 
Mrs. Alwyn was not a Cumberland woman ; she came, indeed, 
from the far south-west, and had the pleasant, soft accent of the 
South, free from the homely, harsh burr of the northern coun- 
ties. When her marriage brought her to settle in Waterdale, 
she rushed with a fresh confident energy at the full discharge 
of all the duties there which she considered proper to her new 
station. They have, or had, in Australia a phrase to describe 
a certain frame of mind into which persons who had anything 
of an organizing tendency habitually fell on arriving in the 
colony. The phrase was " new-chum mism." The new chum 



108 j THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

came in with the conviction that he was in possession of a per- 
fect plan for setting everything to rights. He went with splen- 
did confidence at the reformation of all things, big and little. 
Older settlers smiled, and knew how it would end. It did end 
just so. The new chum found that, let him do his best, things 
went pretty much as before ; unless when, in some small in- 
stances, the desperate vigour of his interference succeeded in 
making them go a little worse. The vis inertice which met 
him on every side would have been enough of itself to baffle 
his best exertions, to say nothing of the fierce and tremendous 
energy of positive antagonism which he had not uncommonly 
to encounter. The new chum gradually relaxed his hand from 
the plough in so stubborn a soil ; presently he became an old 
chum like the rest, and was ready to smile over the virgin 
vigour of the next fresh importation from the motherland 
across the ocean. Mrs. Alwyn came into Waterdale filled with 
the spirit of new-chummism. She resolved to put everything 
to rights, and to restore the warped order of things all around. 
The wives of the few wealthy people who lived there did 
nothing ; had no taste for doing good ; neglected the poor, 
except so far as the occasional giving of indiscriminate charity 
was concerned ; shrank with ladylike horror from all the un- 
virtuous ; and did nothing for religion except to order their 
carriages on a fine Sunday and go to church. Even this sacred 
duty was performed only about half the year, on an average : 
for the ladies seized every possible exctise for hurrying them- 
selves and their husbands out of the place whenever they could 
. to Windermere, to Scarborough, to London, to Brighton, to 
Paris . anywhere. Among the poor, dirt, ignorance, heedless- 
ness of religion, absence from church, driuk, small-pox, and 
various other scourges and sins, prevailed. Mrs. Alwyn, who 
naturally delighted in painting, music, fine clothes, and luxury, 
girt up her loins, nevertheless, and went in for sanitary, moral, 
and religions reform. Her husband smiled now and then, but 
none the less admired and encouraged. He was an old chum, 
and was not, perhaps, too sanguine ; but he did his best to 
stimulate and to help. Personally, he had long been deeply 
absorbed in the writing of a book on the flowers, plants, and 
ferns of the neighbourhood. It was his delight . he had been 
years over it ; and he read each new page of it to his wife. It 
was always with a suppressed sigh that he laid it aside at the 
call of duty ; but he did put it aside, and he never grumbled. 



THE ALWYNS. 109 

Moreover, since his marriage and the importation of his wife, 
the calls of duty had begun marvellously to increase. For Mrs. 
Alwyn was teaching everybody to regard her husband and her- 
self as their spiritual, moral, and social instructors and helpers 
in every conceivable difficulty relating to the next world or to 
this. The result was that the duty of advising, consulting, 
consoling, scolding, and assisting began to make calls on Dr. 
Alwyn's time every other moment in the day, and the work on 
flowers and ferns had to be incessantly put away. Sometimes 
Alwyn doubted whether it would ever be finished ; but while 
he sighed he consoled himself with the thought that man has 
duties on earth which must sometimes take precedence of book- 
writing, and that the world could do without his work on 
flowers. 

" Yes, I have heard of him," Mrs. Alwyn went on. "He 
has been here. He stayed a few days, and then went back to 
London. He is coming back again . when, I don't know, and 
I believe nobody does. I am inclined to think he sets up for 
being eccentric ; and I am sorry. I don't like people setting 
up for anything. That is not the proper motive. He is going 
to live all alone in that dreadful old house across the lake . at 
the mouth of that pass ; and they tell me he is not going to 
have a single thing done to put it in repair, although he is said 
to be very rich." 

" Who told you all this, Myra ?" 

" Old Mrs. Beck, his housekeeper, or servant, or nurse, or 
whatever she is ! a good old woman, I think ; much troubled 
in body by rheumatism, and in mind by the eccentricities which 
she fears her master means to display. She came to me in sore 
perplexity because Mr. Lennon told her, when he went to 
London, that he might perhaps bring somebody back with him, 
but that she need not make any preparation, and must not alter 
anything in the rooms ; and she wanted to know whether I 
did not think she might indulge in a little pious fraud, and set 
everything to rights without his knowing it." 

" What did you advise her to do, dear ? " 

" Well, of course I told her to do exactly as she had been 
ordered, and not for anything on earth to put herself in the way 
of having to deceive. These people, Alwyn, think nothing of 
a lie. It's quite dreadful. They call us a truth-telling people. 
I suppose we are, when we are taught rightly and brought up 
well ; but I am sure the poor creatures I meet here . and down 



110 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

in Devonshire too . think nothing of any number of lies. Who 
.was it that said, the other day, the English lower classes were 
habitual liars 1 Carlyle, was it not 1 " 

" No, dear ; it was Mill." 

" Yes, so it was. I am sure I quite agree with him." 

" Well, he did not put it exactly in that naked, unqualified 
kind of way ; and then he said there was this good thing about 
them, . that they were ashamed of lying." 

" Then there I don't agree with him. They seem to me to 
take it quite as a matter of course, and never to be ashamed of 
it . women and girls especially. There is a girl up there, Bessie 
Raynes . you know her, dear ; she attended my Bible-clas3 and 
helped to teach my sewing-class ; and I was quite fond of her 
. a clever, pretty girl, and motherless too. Now she has been 
deceiving me." 

Mrs. Alwyn spoke very seriously and sadly, and put her hand 
under her chin and remained silent for a moment. 

" How has she been deceiving you, Myra 1 " 

" Well, I thought she was acting rather foolishly ; and before 
we went abroad I spoke to her very earnestly, and made her 
promise that she would be more careful, and keep more to 
herself . and she with no mother, poor thing ! . and she did 
promise. And yesterday, when I saw her, she told me she had 
kept her promise ; and now I find that she didn't, and that 
she has been deceiving me ; and I am so sorry, and so much 
afraid, and " 

Myra coloured and beat the table a little with her hand, and 
broke down in her explanation. She was only a young wife, 
and in parochial work a young practitioner, and hesitated about 
expressing her suspicions. 

" But who told you, my dear, that the girl had nob kept her 
word to you 1 " 

" It was old Mrs. Beck. She's an aunt or something of 
Bessie's ; and it was partly about that that she came to me. I 
am afraid I was rather angry, and said some sharp things to 
the poor old creature ; because, when she talked about deceiv- 
ing Mr. Lennon, I told her that was the kind of teaching she 
gave her niece, and it was that made girls liars, and left them 
with no care for goodness at all." 

" I think, Myra, dear, you had better see the girl yourself, 
and talk to her. Old people . ignorant people especially . are 
very apt to bear harshly on the young, and to misconstrue any 



THE ALWYNS. Ill 

foolish word or act of thoughtlessness. See the girl yourself, 
and talk to her: . kindly, you know, very kindly. She always 
seemed to me a very good girl, and truthful ; and I don't think 
she would deceive you . I don't think she would do anything 
wrong." 

" Ah, my dear, dear Alwyn," . she went up to him and put her 
arms round his neck, in which embrace he looked naturally very 
happy, . "how little you know of the vanity of girls and 
women . of all of us, even the best, my dear ! I suppose you 
never were vain of anything, or cared what anybody thought 
of you, or proud of anything, except perhaps of being a gentle- 
man, and doing what was right." 

"O, yes, I have been proud of something . very proud, 
too." 

" Of what, for instance 1 " 

" "Well, of my wife, dear." 

" Come, that's said to comfort me now ; and I am very glad, 
because I am rather put out. But I'll take your advice about 
Bessie Baynes. I'll speak to her ; indeed I meant to speak to 
her in any case. But I fear that only for your admonition I 
might have talked to her rather sharply all at once, and without 
giving her any time to speak for herself. And now, dear, are 
you ready for breakfast % " 

The Alwyns were of course early risers : people in Cumber- 
land are. Myra sometimes had scoured the country round on 
a pony, without the attendance of groom or squire, before 
breakfast. One of the eccentricities which she had heard of as 
likely to develop themselves in Balph Lennon's character was 
a tendency to sit up reading half the night, and sleep until ten 
or eleven in the morning. She did not like these ways. She 
thought she could never like Lennon as a neighbour or friend. 
She began to wish he had remained in Australia. 

People who profess to be very wise in the ways of women 
say that a married lady's husband has no reason to feel glad 
when the married lady begins to dislike a man, and says so. 
She may be perfectly sincere in her dislike, observe these sa^es 
or cynics ; but it is not an encouraging omen that her mind has 
dwelt on him long enough and distinctly enough to dislike 
him. Certainly Myra was preparing to dislike Lalph Lennon 
already. 

But that did not trouble her much, or occupy much of her 
mind at present. She had just now a little trouble of a quite 



112 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

different kind. It is so hard even when one acts for the very 
best to make things always go right in this best of all possible 
worlds. Candide, we know, gave up the task altogether, and 
stuck to cultivating his garden, as under all the circumstances 
the best thing he could do. There at least he was safe from 
doing any harm. You sow your seeds, and if you know any- 
thing about the matter, or take any rational care, you may 
count on certain results. The fig-tree, at all events, will not 
begin perplexing and alarming you by shooting out thistles ; if 
your hen intimates that she is about to lay an egg, you have no 
fear that she will contribute a scorpion for your breakfast. 
But in trying to keep the human garden in order, especially if 
it be a little outside the range of one's own household wall, odd, 
fantastic, and grim results are of deplorably common occur- 
rence. You are constantly sowing what in your heart you 
believe good seed, and seeing only tares come up. You pluck 
away what seems a decayed dead weed, and lo, the shriek of the 
mandrake thrills your nerves. The acorn sends up a sickly 
poppy ; the bread-fruit is a poison-plant. 

Mrs. Alwyn was too energetic, unselfish, and healthy a 
woman to keep herself wholly to the cultivation of her own 
little domestic life-garden. She went about doing good . at all 
events trying to do good ; often vexed by disappointment, 
always somewhat impatient of results, but never for long dis- 
couraged. Now, one of the things she did was to found all 
manner of classes, and have evenings of teachings and lectures ; 
and, smitten by the example of Mr. Maurice and Mr. Hughes 
and other good men in London, to bring men and women of 
her own rank, when she could, in contact with the humbler, 
to lecture to them and teach them. But Mrs. Alwyn strongly 
repudiated anything un sectarian. She went in resolutely for 
religion . her own religion . and could see little good in any- 
thing else, as indeed not many women can. Now one of her 
favourites, alike as pupil and as helper in the teaching, was the 
Bessie Baynes just spoken of, a pretty intelligent girl, left to 
the care, if one may use that word, of a rather dissolute father, 
who was a shoemaker, and who swore nearly as much as his 
brother craftsman, the owner of the parrot in our friend 
Bobert Buchanm's poem. And the classes and lectures had 
brought Bessie Baynes into the notice of a rather thoughtless 
young fellow, a son of a landowner of the place, who once 
lectured on something or other at Mrs. Alwyn's express re- 



THE ALWYNS. 113 

quest ; and he went too often into the town afterwards ; and 
he sent Bessie presents of game he had shot ; and he had been 
seen walking with her ; and people talked : nothing more, so 
far. Mrs. Alwyn advised her earnestly to avoid such company ; 
and the girl faithfully promised that she would : and now 
Myra had heard that the promise was broken. Even the 
gossips did not hint any more as yet ; but it troubled Myra 
sorely. She was grieved and angry over the deceit, and fearful 
of worse to come. So was her husband, though he said nothing 
of his fear to her ; and he resolved at once to make some effort 
at interference. This sort of thing, of course, is a story of 
every day in the experience of a country clergyman. Some 
men get used to it, and take it coolly, believing that bell, book, 
and candle cannot avert it. Dr. Alwyn never got used to any- 
thing that was bad ; never believed that bad was inevitable. 

Breakfast over, Dr. Alwyn made ready for a walk into the 
town, and through the parish generally. He cast only one 
longing look at his unfinished MS. volume . which, indeed, he 
had not dreamed of taking in hand just that day. Too soon . 
much too soon. He had had several weeks of mere enjoyment, 
pure enjoyment ; and now work must set in. The holiday 
was over, and school was to begin again. People would expect 
to be called upon by Dr. Alwyn and his wife : not great 
people . they were few, and Alwyn would have made little 
account of putting off ceremonial visits to them . but people to 
whom the friendly call of the rector and his wife is always a 
matter of pride, if made . of grief and vexation, if omitted. 
Now Dr. Alwyn, not attaching much importance to social 
conventionalities himself, was quite ready to defer with the 
utmost humility to the feelings of others on that score, when 
those others happened either to be poorer than him, or his 
inferiors in rank. So he told his wife what they must do, and 
he bade her get ready to accompany him. 

This was a part of her duties which Myra did not enjoy. 
She went through it, but she never threw herself into it heart 
and soul, as into other branches of the parochial business. 
Dr. Alwyn sometimes smiled at her reluctance, and told her 
laughingly that he quite saw through it, and that the less she 
liked the duty the greater her credit in doing it. Myra really 
delighted to do good ; but she was not sorry if the doing good 
combined with it a little pleasant exercise of patronage and 
authority. It is easy, it is bracing, it is self-satisfying, to help 



114 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

and counsel and teach the poor. There is a sense of devoted- 
ness about it, and sometimes a sense of self-sacrifice, which have 
a positive fascination for a generous nature. To enter the hovel 
or the garret where small-pox or fever cowers has often as 
inspiring an excitement in it to a brave energetic woman, as to 
climb one of the peaks of Monte Kosa or to explore a new 
country has for a man ; and the woman has the sweet addi- 
tional joy of believing that she is doing some good, alleviating 
some pang. In all such dealing with the poor . the suffering 
poor, and even the sinful poor . there is a certain dash of the 
picturesque, the romantic, the strange. Myra was an artist ; 
and the situations into which she plunged herself when she 
visited the sick, or tried to check the course of the falling; had 
almost always something which discovered an affinity for the 
artistic nature. Death is always sublime. Sin is seldom quite 
uninteresting. But the visits, the mere visits, to people whom 
you did not come to console, whom you dared not counsel ; 
who did not appear to have any sorrows or temptations ; who 
were not in any sense your equals, but must in every way be 
treated carefully and elaborately as if they were ; who were 
utterly commonplace and colourless . that was the labour, there 
was the trial ! What on earth did Myra care about Mrs. 
Roper, the brewer's wife ; and what could Mrs. Roper want of 
seeing her ? Mrs. Roper was not poor ; she was sufficiently 
well off, and'she put on a broad imitation of style in everything 
she did, while her conversation was utterly stupid, and she had 
not half an idea in her head. What possible object was gained 
by speaking twenty minutes with Jessy and Julia White, the 
saddler's daughters, two vapid gooselike girls, whose only idea 
while Mrs. Alwyn was present was to make believe that they 
were genteel, and to try to shut away all sight, sound, and sense, 
of their decent father's honest trade 1 What human creature 
endowed with the gift of reason could desire to listen to Mrs. 
Creamer's mild raptures over Martin Tupper and The Angel in 
the House ? And the airs, the clack, and the rustling silks of 
Mrs. Tracy, the attorney's wife (of course she called herself the 
solicitor's wife), were a heavy trial of a fastidious woman's 
patience. Even among people humbler than these, until one 
got down to the really poor, the great object of the women 
always seemed to be to convey to Mrs. Alwyn the idea that her 
visit was something which they had a right to expect as a duty 
and a tribute to their position, their social rank, in the parish. 



THE ALWYNS. 115 

Everybody would be a lady ; no one seemed to have courage 
enough not to be ashamed of what she was, and what her 
husband was ; all were trying to talk themselves for the moment 
into the appearance of gentility and social position. Then the 
talk of the women was all so vapid, yo empty, so infantile in its 
smallness, so old and cunning in its pretension, so absurdly per- 
sonal and egotistical and uninteresting. 

Myra writhed under it all. 

" O, my dear Alwyn," she said on their return, as she tossed 
her bonnet from her, " how I do wish I might say what I think 
just now without paining you or lowering myself in your eyes, 
only to relieve my mind just for once ! " 

" Relieve your mind by all means, dear child," said her 
husbaDd, putting his arm round her waist and drawing her 
towards him. " What do you want to say 1 " 

" To say how much I hate and detest all these people we 
have been seeing ; how stupid and petty and egotistical and 
mean they are, all of them. What silly good-for-nothing lives 
they lead ! What wretched little gabble they talk ! How 
little they know or care about anything on earth but their own 
trumpery likings and dislikings ! What affectation there is in 
everything they say and do ! What snobbery . that's the best 
word I know for it ! And how much I should like for once . 
just for once . to have them whipped all round ! " 

Dr. Alwyn fairly laughed at his wife's energy of vituperation. 
He did not think any good would come of a solemn lecture just 
then upon the Christian duty of loving even stupid and snob- 
bish neighbours. But half-jestingly, half-earnestly, he gently 
talked his wife into a more tolerant mood, and referred, not too 
elaborately or ponderously, to the many good things which even 
the vapidest and vainest of the people she raged at had been 
known to do. To him too their society was often wearisome . 
almost always inane ; but he made out something to interest 
him, discovered something of an individuality, in the flattest 
and dullest of them all. Like Sydney Smith, he never knew 
what it was to meet a bore. 

Dr. Alwyn was one of the few thoroughly unaffected men 
the civilized world holds at one time. They are very few. 
The heroic, the honourable, the strictly virtuous, are every- 
where ; the thoroughly unaffected, the men who never play a 
part, who give nature free and honest scope to show her simple 
best, are rare and strange phenomena. No better advice, and 

I 2 



116 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

none more difficult to follow, could be given to man or woman 
than to say, " Be yourself always ; do not fancy you can be 
anybody else ; do not strive to be : above all, do not play at 
being anybody else. Trust yourself and be yourself. Every 
act done, every word said, every look put on to any other end, 
is from the real purpose of your life." 

Dr. Alwyn might fairly have given such advice, for this was 
his (Unconscious practice. His nature was simple, manly, loyal. 
He never studied himself, never indulged in the baleful, sedu- 
cing, egotistical practice of self-examination . that mental and 
moral opium-eating which enfeebles, makes morbid, and de- 
bauches the timid untrusting soul. He was a scholar, and in a 
certain robust sense a thinker ; he loved science, although edu- 
cated in what Lord Derby called the pre-scientific period ; he 
read largely and liberally ; he could write a plain, manly, 
sensible article in a magazine or newspaper, such as English- 
men of his class like to read, and had done so many a time ; he 
took an interest in almost everything, although he was not 
much of a politician, and still less of a theologian. His Church 
was very broad . the broadest that well could be : it embraced 
all good people, and was only anxious to be able to embrace all 
the rest. Even on sin, when he saw it, he looked with open, 
fearless, manly gaze, pitying, but not afraid or miserably and 
morbidly ashamed ; knowing that that too is a disease which 
the true physician does not quail or blush to look upon, and for 
which care has been taken to provide a healing and a re- 
demption. He walked through life indeed with firm and 
robust tread, full of sympathy and pity, but full too of hope 
and confidence. 



CHAPTER XII. 

WORKS AND FAITH. 

RALPH LENNON was at length fairly settled at home. 
Some weeks had passed since his last visit to the "Wartons, 
whom he saw more than once during his short stay in London; 
and he was now established formally in his drear old house by 
the Waterdale lake. There he lived in a sort of hermitage, 
with the old Beck people for his domestic staff. 



WORKS AND FAITH. 117 

But of some of his neighbours he saw a good deal. While he 
was yet doubtful about the prospect of a renewal of his ac- 
quaintance with the Alwyns, the Ejector broke in upon him 
with a hearty phrase and a warm smile, and they became 
friends forthwith. Alwyn had long wanted just such an 
associate in the dull little place . a man who was at once a 
scholar and no pedant, with masculine ways and some dash of 
originality. He had a decided liking for university men ; and 
though he might have liked Lennon equally well in any case, 
yet it was the convenient basis of a bond of friendship that they 
both hailed, even at a considerable interval of time, from the 
same scholastic soil. Before a week had passed they met almost 
every day. 

At first Ralph fought a little shy of the Rector's wife. She 
was so very pretty, and dressed so very handsomely, that our 
friend could hardly believe there was anything in her, and 
assumed at the outset that between her and him there could be 
no possible sympathy. Indeed he kept so decidedly aloof from 
her, that Myra became piqued and annoyed, and " did not like 
him at all ; " but, nevertheless, was quite resolved not to 
permit her existence to be ignored, and fairly set herself to 
break down what she considered his misogynist tendencies. 
Of course she easily succeeded. Alas, there are no misogynists,, 
except among the denizens of the gynseceum. Nobody hatea- 
women but a woman. Ralph Lennon was only shy, not cynical;, 
and he soon found that there was something in Myra Alwyn 
better than a love for fine clothes. He came to like her, to talk 
frankly to her now and then, and to believe he was beginning 
to understand her. She had set out by resolving to dislike- 
him ; is it any wonder that she soon came to take a pleasure in 
his company ? 

He dined with them often ; he looked in upon them at all- 
hours ; he read in Dr. Alwyn's library ; he rode by Mrs,. 
Alwyn's side ; he lifted her to her saddle, he lifted her down ; 
he acted as her faithful honest cavalier in many of her village 
journeyings. His presence decidedly infused a freshness into 
a life somewhat monotonous and staid for one so young. The 
men of the locality were dreadfully dull ; the women seemed to 
Myra much duller. She was deeply attached to her husband, 
and could perhaps have done very well without any other 
society than his ; but it has been frankly said already that her 
love for him was a quiet glow, not an all-absorbing rapUire, 



118 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Therefore there was room for other society besides that of her 
husband : and it so happened that just at this time Ralph 
Lennon filled the place. So, having begun by scolding him to 
her husband, she then went on to praise him loudly ; and then 
to say hardly anything about him, but to look for him silently, 
and gladden when he came. 

Meanwhile to Ralph she was an interesting acquaintance ; 
perhaps a valued friend ; certainly nothing more. He had 
work of his own which deeply engrossed him, and about 
which he talked more to Dr. Alwyn than to Dr. Alwyn's 
wife. His days were passing in a congenial and pleasant 
activity. Perhaps he was about as happy just at this short 
season of his life as a lonely disappointed man could well ex- 
pect to be. 

This was his mode of life. He had positively and seriously 
set himself to work to build a model village on his side of the 
lake. This was his expiation. Aided by his stout friend Tom 
Berry, he had got masons, carpenters, and bricklayers all about 
him ; and he looked after their work for a great part of the 
day. He had resolutely declined the services of any professional 
architect, believing that any two sensible men . for example, 
Berry and himself . could plan out an ordinary cottage as well 
as Sir Christopher Wren or Sir Charles Barry, and knowing 
that many additional cottages could be raised for an architect's 
fee. He was great upon ventilation, water, and separate homes j 
and in Cumberland one is not compelled by the expensiveness 
of ground and materials to build a philanthropic barrack, and 
stow a poor colony away in it. Lennon found that a very neat 
and pretty cottage might be built on his plan for eighty or a 
hundred pounds; and two or three thousand pounds would 
therefore go a long way to the raising of a village. The raising 
of one village even would enable him to test the experiment he 
had long had at heart, and in the same process to relieve his 
mind of a weight by doing some good tor somebody in the 
world. 

Lennon's mind was long filled with a deep, almost a morbid, 
anxiety to "do some good." A devout Roman Catholic 
actuated by such feelings would have become a Trappist, per- 
haps, or gone on a mission to the Japanese ; a Protestant of our 
days, if he belonged to one school, would have relieved his soul 
by erecting an altar, lighting candles, and listening to the con- 
fessions of girls ; if to another school, would have vented his 



WORKS AND FAITH. 119 

noble passion in fierce anathemas against Popery or free 
thought. Lennon's penitential anxiety took the form of a 
passionate desire . yes, a very passion . to do some practical 
good. And one of the old strong faiths he cherished was a 
belief in the self-governing, self-purifying power of men. So he 
resolved to found, near his father's resting-place, a small com- 
munity which should base its physical happiness strictly on the 
physical laws, and its moral welfare on its own self-governing 
power. 

Dreamer as to some extent he was, yet he did not dream of 
a New-Lanark or Brook-Farm scheme. These based them- 
selves on an attempt to conquer human nature, to force or 
stimulate men into what Macaulay calls an impossible frame of 
mind. Lennon's scheme was that human nature should have 
its own way and guide itself. He meant to found at least one 
little community, where the " common sense of all " should 
rule, and where the laws of physical health should receive in 
the first instance a fair chance. Nothing grander than that 
was his idea. Rich men, paternal landowners, and peers, for 
example, build model villages often, and bring their friends 
from Belgravia and Park-lane to look at them ; but only the 
shell of the dwelling is improved, if even that, and the dweller 
is little better than the doll in a doll's house which the childish 
proprietor shows with all the pride of ownership and absolute 
mastery to her little companions. Lennon flattered himself 
that his scheme would be rather different from that ; quite the 
reverse of that in fact. 

The ground on which he was laying out the lines of his 
village was part of a little plain . a very waste . lying between 
the hills and the lake. There was plenty of room for expansion, 
if the scheme should succeed. The village might almost swell 
into a town, and pleasantly encircle the water. But, in any 
case, it was to be a town for the poor. A town of paupers is a 
common sight enough, in Ireland at least ; but a town wholly 
of poor, aud absolutely without paupers, would be something 
new in comfortable, money-getting, money-loving England. 
Each house was to be small, and was to stand apart, with a 
patch of ground its own possession . a patch of waste as yet, 
of desert sand, which the magic of property was to convert 
into a garden. Every dwelling was to be, above all things, 
perfect in its arrangements for air and water and cleanliness. 
Trees were to grow and flowers were to blossom everywhere. 



120 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Necessarily the cottages were to be of varying sizes ; but 
Lennon was anxious to have them as much as possible arranged 
on a plan to discourage, if not actually to preclude, a joint 
occupation. Of course the education of the children was to 
form a prime raison d'etre for the village. There were to be 
playgrounds, and schools, and a lecture-room, and a great tele- 
scope for the use of the classes, and divers other grand ap- 
pliances for the culture of mind and body. And the result was 
to be a model colony or village, to be established upon philo- 
sophically-cooperative and universal-benevolence principles. 

Of course he was to receive rents? He did not mean to 
rear a brood of paupers ? So he might in time come to make 
money by the speculation ? 

No. There was the odd part of the business. He gave 
away the cottages absolutely. He was never to have a farthing 
by them. The colony was to pay rents to itself . rents to be 
fixed by itself; the money was to go into the common fund ; 
the common fund to be employed for mutual improvement, and 
for extending the boundaries of the village, by buying more 
land and building other houses. Lennon was not even to be 
the patriarch or despot of the village. It was to be governed 
by itself . that is, by its self-elected committee . and rigid rules 
were to be laid down for the expulsion of refractory or ill-con- 
ducted members. Over this latter part of the scheme Lennon 
pondered long. Must the ill-conducted be always expelled ? 
Does social expulsion ever turn the ill-conducted into well- 
conducted ? After much puzzling, he came despondently to the 
conclusion that, if his scheme were to work even for a year, he 
must adopt in this respect the old-fashioned policy of the world 
he had come to reform, and begin by resolving that the righteous 
must be allowed to drive the sinners into banishment. 

In fact, Lennon was a dreamer, endowed with the unusual 
activity which really sets itself to work out its dreams. He 
was fortunate in having by his side, to begin with, one man 
who believed in him. Tom Berry, having dreamed away half 
his own life over an impossible reconstruction of the English 
Constitution on the five points of the Charter, and beginning 
at last to discover with sadness that most people had forgotten 
even to denounce or laugh at the poor Charter itself, was re- 
joiced to be one of the priests of a scheme which proposed to 
set up a model for the reconstruction of the English people. 
A village in an obscure part of a northern county could not do 



WORKS AND FAITH. 121 

a great deal in the way of example to humanity, were it never 
so perfect a model ; but Lennon and his man Friday went 
sturdily to work, on Carlyle's manly principle that if you would 
have the world heroic you must first make a hero of yourself, 
and then you have one hero at least to begin with. If you 
would have a model world, set to work and make your own 
village a model ; and so you may have one model street, or even 
cottage to start with. 

The village was marked out ; some foundations began to rise 
already ; and the neighbours lifted eyes and hands, grinned, 
sneered, wondered, and in rare cases admired. Of the better- 
class people around, some thought Lennon a madman, some a 
benevolent idiot, and a few hinted that he had picked up some 
smart notions in Australia, and that doubtless the thing would 
pay well and turn out a very handsome speculation in the end. 
The local attorney, who sustained this view, referred, in illus- 
tration of his argument, to the first-rate thing Messrs. Spiers 
and Pond, the refreshment purveyors from Australia, were now 
making of their new buffets and dining-halls at the great London 
railway stations. There could be no doubt about it, he said ; 
all those fellows from Australia had uncommonly energetic, 
clever ways about them, and pushed their schemes through 
where a slow, untravelled Briton could only realize a dead 
failure. He was, therefore, one of the few in the neighbourhood 
who were ready to accord a sincere respect to Ralph Lennon 
and his projects. 

What did the Alwyns think about it ? 

Ralph had explained his whole plans to Dr. Alwyn before 
an inch of ground was marked out. The Rector was amused, 
amazed ; could hardly believe in the seriousness of the project ; 
then began to be interested and to admire. At least, he 
sincerely admired the projector, while he felt a thrill of sadness 
and pity over what he made up his mind, in anticipation, must 
be the fate of the scheme. Dr. Alwyn had ceased to believe 
in progress made by sudden springs. 

" Can we leap over our own shadow ? " he asked Ralph, half 
sadly, half sportively ; and purposely quoting from one of 
Lennon's literary heroes and prophets. 

" No," replied Lennon ; " but Goethe never said that, if our 
shadow falls upon our work and prevents us from seeing how 
to do it, we may not take up a new position and labour in 
the light." 



122 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Dr. Alwyn did not argue the point. He was one of the 
very, very few men who would rather see a human being 
attempt to do right in his own way than do nothing because 
of the fear of going wrong. 

Myra, too, felt her own thrill of strange, half-painful ad- 
miration for the eccentric freshness and resolution of the 
projector. But a vague suspicion of the project filled her from 
the first. She feared, not that it would fail, but that it would 
succeed. She did not like the sound of the scheme. In 
Schiller's Don Carlos there is a conversation between King 
Philip and the Marquis of Posa, in which the latter explains 
his reasons for quitting the king's service. Posa speaks of 
liberty and human rights ; and the shrewd tyrant, jumping to 
no erroneous conclusion, turns sharply round and says, " You 
are a Protestant !" Myra'a rigid dogmatism was in its way as 
keen and suspicious as Philip's. When she heard of Lennon's 
schemes of beneficence, and co-operation, and individual self- 
government, she felt her heart contract, and was on the point 
of exclaiming, " This is free-thinking ! " 

"Is Mr. Lennon a Ritualist, dear?" she asked of her 
husband. 

" No, Myra, I think not ; I am sure not, now that I recol- 
lect some talk I had with him once on the subject. He is 
rather inclined to laugh at the thing and let it pass . as I am." 

" He is surely not a Roman Catholic, love 1 " 

" Nonsense, Myra ! how can you ask ? Of course he is not." 

"Then pray, dear Alwyn, what is he ?" 

" Really, I never asked him. You know I don't ask men 
like him, educated and good men, such questions, or approve 
of their being asked, or even hinted at. I assume, of course . 
in fact I have no doubt on the matter . that he is just a sound 
Protestant like you and me." 

"But you told me that he got into some difficulty when 
at college, wrote something or published something that was 
not exactly sound Protestantism 1 " 

"Yes, dear; but that was a long time ago . when he was 
little more than a boy, and was passing through that phase of 
half poetic, wholly nonsensical infidelity that we all go through. 
My dear child, I used to devour Volney in secret once upon a 
time ; and I don't know that I had even quite got out of that 
feeble condition of intellect when the Vestiges of Creation 
came up." 



WOEKS AND FAITH. 123 

" Yes, that is quite true and sensible ; and I am sure I 
should be very sorry to suspect unjustly ; but don't you think 
th«re is something rather odd about this project of Mr. 
Lennon's 1 " 

" Very odd indeed, Myra. Quite nonsensical, I am afraid. 
The village is sure to be called ' Lennon's Folly.' But I rather 
admire his energy and courage; he does not care anything 
about being laughed at, which I fear would sadly alarm and 
deter me. And then he has shown me all the details ; it really 
will not cost so very much. He counts on giving away some 
three thousand pounds. I wish none of our county magnates 
ever spent a bigger sum for a worse purpose." 

Mrs. Alwyn said no more; but she thought none the less. 

Dr. Alwyn went very often to watch the progress of the 
buildings, and had many a pleasant talk with Lennon, who, 
dressed in an old coat that would have looked becoming in the 
bush, and generally smoking a cigar, superintended everything, 
and put in many an experimental effort in sawing, plastering, 
and digging, sometimes to the great discomfort of the pro- 
testing professional workmen. Dr. Alwyn usually came away 
admiring, if not hopeful. 

Myra went up likewise and surveyed the operations. She 
was conducted by Tom Berry over the brickheaps and 
plankings and piles of stones. Lennon happened to be away 
just then ; but Berry did the honours with a grave self- 
possession that charmed Mrs. Alwyn. He thought he had 
never seen a more graceful, gracious figure, as she. picked her 
steps daintily from place to place ; and, with skirts well kilted, 
stepped lightly as Remus over yet embryo walls. He paid her 
the highest tribute his heart could give ; for he thought, with 
a heavy pang that almost broke into a sob, that she looked like 
poor, poor Mary, that day . 0, so long ago, . soon after they were 
married, when they went to Dulwich together, and she wore a 
purple gown which she had secretly made to surprise him, and 
never showed to him until she came downstairs dressed and 
ready to go. He looked so strangely at Mrs. Alwyn that she 
wondered at his gaze ; whereon he crushed down his feelings, 
and compelled his face to wear its ordinary expression. 

" How long have you been here, Mr. Berry ? " asked Myra 
as she was leaving the place. 

She always took care to learn people's names, and to call 
them by name, especially when speaking to those poorer than 



124: THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

herself. All manner of commanders . from Marlborough to 
Claverhouse . are reported to have secured the favour and 
affection of their soldiers by always taking care to remember- a 
man's name, and to call him by it. 

" Only a few days, ma'am. But I was in these parts long 
ago, when I was a young man ; before you were born, I dare- 
say." 

" Indeed ! There was very little church accommodation here 
then, I should think. You know our church, Mr. Berry? 
Have you been there 1 " 

" No, ma'am, I have not." 

" Not yet, I suppose. But I hope we shall see you there. 
Dr. Alwyn will look out for you." 

" Thank ye, ma'am. You're very kind ; but I don't go to 
church." 

" O, indeed ! I beg pardon ; I did not know that you were 
a Dissenter. There are chapels here ; and I believe good and 
pious ministers to preach in them." A splendid burst of 
liberality on the part of the lady. 

" Yes, ma'am ; I have no doubt. I hope there are good men 
among all the lots. But the truth is I never was much of a 
church-goer. If I went anywhere, I think I should go to the 
old Church . the Church of old England ; but I don't, ma'am, 
I don't go anywhere." 

" Indeed, Mr. Berry ! You will pardon me if I say I am 
very sorry to hear it. You seem so intelligent a man, so much 
superior to your . to your . " 

" To my class, ma'am, you were going to say." 

" Well, yes . to your class ; I can't think of any better word, 
and indeed I don't mean it in any unfriendly or disrespectful 
sense. But you are so very intelligent and superior a man 
that I should be sorry to think you as indifferent to religion as 
you say." 

" Not indifferent to religion, ma'am j at least I hope not ; 
but church-going mayn't be religion." 

" Certainly ; but it is one outward expression of it." 

" Perhaps so : with some people it is, no doubt ; 
but it is only one outward expression at all events, 
and there are others that come more natural to other people ; 
and maybe some don't think any outward expression necessary 
at all. But I'm fond of my class, ma'am, and I'd like to be 
proud of it too ; and I don't see that the higher classes . 



WORKS AND FAITH. 125 

excuse me, ma'am . ever took much thought to give them their 
equal rights, except the right of going to church, and that not 
on an equality neither. When they let us vote with them, 
and counsel with them, and talk up to them, and recognise our 
rights as we have to recognise theirs, then, ma'am, perhaps it 
wouldn't be so difficult to get us to pray with them. I saw 
a little book, ma'am, you left the other day with one of the 
men yonder, and I read part of it. It made a deal of complaint 
about the churches beiDg empty, and the Popish chapels always 
full. Yes, it's quite true. Perhaps you have never been in 
Ireland, ma'am ; but I have. I've seen the chapels there 
crammed every Sunday, and the poor creatures . Pagans you 
and I think 'em, ma'am . crowded together on their knees, and 
covering the whole chapel-yard ; and I've seen the great stone 
chapels with spires . chapels like churches, as big as four of 
that yonder . built out of the voluntary ha'pence of a population 
of poor peasants. And why is this, ma'am ? I'll tell you ; and 
you can explain it to the lady or gentleman . lady most likely 
. who wrote the little book. It's because the Church there is 
a democracy, ma'am ; it's the people's Church, and they love 
it, as we all love whatever is our own. That's the secret, 
ma'am. Make your Church a democracy too ; and you won't 
have to tout for the attendance of the working-man. Excuse 
me, ma'am, if I've talked too freely. I wouldn't do it but that 
I see you are a real lady, who can understand a difference, and 
put up with it. I'd never talk so to a lady's-maid. But I'm 
an old Chartist, ma'am, and too fond of talking; and I ask 
your pardon." 

"Chartist or not," replied Myra, "you have talked openly 
and frankly ; and your frankness is a compliment. But I hope 
and firmly believe you are not a free-thinker for all." 

" Free thought, ma'am, is the only thing we poor fellows 
have free, except the air and the grave ; and even them aren't 
free in London." 

Mrs. Alwyn left him. She was much surprised, not a little 
alarmed, a great deal disheartened. She had never before heard 
from living and believing lips the old vain complaints of the 
inequality of classes and the political servitude of the working- 
man. This phase of thought, now so rapidly narrowing, and 
soon, let us hope, wholly to disappear, had never before ex- 
hibited itself thus to her eyes. When the Chartists mustered 
on Kennington Common, and the scenes which Alton Locke 



126 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

describes were real, she wore trousers, and was learning to 
trundle a hoop. She had read Alton Locke since, but only in 
the spirit in which she read Ivanhoe ; and the Chartist tailor 
seemed to her as completely a figure of the past as the Saxon 
swineherd or Isaac of York. She always supposed that at 
present the working-men were perfectly contented with their 
political and social condition. She thought, indeed, that the 
wealthier classes did not do half enough for them in the way of 
education, friendly advice, good example, genial intercourse, 
and church-building. But she assumed that the good and 
honest working-man always, as an essential quality of his virtue 
and honesty, disclaimed any interest in politics, and wanted 
nothing better than to be properly governed . by his superiors. 
Working-men were of two classes . the bad and the good. The 
bad showed his badness by drinking too much beer, and kicking 
his wife in the stomach ; the good demonstrated his goodness 
by keeping sober, loving his family, and always eschewing 
politics. So Mrs. Alwyn's ideas shaped themselves. Tom 
Berry was to her a new, strange, and somewhat alarming 
phenomenon. 

If these were the ideas of the man, what might the views of 
the master be ? What might they not be ? 

Mrs. Alwyn happened to pass another day by the scene of 
the operations. Lennon was there, and saw her. He flung 
away his cigar when she came in sight, and strode forward to 
welcome her. His manner was at first a good deal less com- 
posed than that of Tom Berry had been. Half unconsciously 
and because of his embarrassment, half purposely and to hide 
the embarrassment, he put into his manner a dash of that light 
cynicism which so many men adopt when talking to women 
with whom they are not perfectly at ease and sympathetic. 
Lennon did not as yet quite understand Myra. Nor did she 
quite understand him ; but of the two her perceptions went 
nearer to the truth than his. 

" What an odd, original sort of person you have got here, 
Mr. Lennon ! " she said, in the course of a few minutes' talk 
over the progress of the buildings. " Do you know he quite 
puzzled and surprised me the other day." 

" Whom do you mean, Mrs. Alwyn ?" 

" The person who showed me all this. There he is yonder, 
talking to those masons. Your superintendent, or what is he ? 
. Mr. Berry." 



WORKS AND FAITH. 127 

" O, my friend Tom Berry." 

" Is he a friend V 

" Certainly." 

Affectation ! Radicalism ! Sentiment put on. Liberty 
and equality ! . stuff and nonsense ! I don't believe a word of 
it. So thought Mrs. Alwyn ; and she sligbtly shrugged her 
shoulders. 

" Well, your friend Mr. Berry. I talked some time with 
your friend. Did he tell you V 

" He did." 

" And he seemed to me to be a remarkable man. Although 
not perhaps educated, yet he spoke very well. What I par- 
ticularly liked about him was his entire straightforwardness 
and freedom from affectation. He was simple and manly . 
rather rare qualities, I think, when people seem to believe it 
right to affect so much of eccentricity and cynicism." 

" He is a manly, honest fellow. I liked him from the first 
moment I spoke with him. He has suffered much lately. He 
had a wife who I believe was his sole companion, and kept 
him straight in every way ; and now she's dead. She died 
only a few weeks ago ; and they had no children, and he has 
neither kith nor kin in the world." 

" Poor fellow ! I thought there was a deep shadow over him. 
Did you know them long V 

" No, indeed ; I may say a very short time. I never saw 
her. I only went by chance to see him, and I found him 
alone . or almost alone . with a dead woman. I liked him, 
Mrs. Alwyn ; so would you, if you knew him. He is a dis- 
appointed man, poor fellow, and I felt drawn to him. Do 
you know I only saw him once before the time I went to his 
house 1 But I think one cannot be mistaken about men like 
him. I knew him from the first." 

" And you brought him down here," thought Mrs. Alwyn, 
" he being a common workman, because you wished to with- 
draw him from the associations of sorrow, and to do him good. 
Just what I should have expected. But why affect cynicism ? 
why talk as if you were idle, careless, and good-for-nothing ? 
why affect anything ?" 

" It is strange," she said aloud, " that such a man with such 
a sorrow should have his heathenish views." 

"What are heathenish views, Mrs. Alwyn ?" 



128 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" His are, I think ; and I am sorry for it. Do you know, 
Mr. Lennon, he says he never goes to church T 

" Indeed, Mrs. Alwyn. I am sorry if poor Tom is a down- 
right heathen. But I suppose there were some rather worthy 
heathens, were there not? . decent sort of fellows in their 
way V 

" Yes, I suppose some heathens were good men ; but there 
were excuses for them. They were ignorant of the truth ; 
they could not be blamed. In our days education seems rather 
to be the snare." 

Mrs. Alwyn stopped. She felt that it would be ridiculous 
to get into a theological controversy, especially when she was 
likely to become angry. She was quite too young and pretty 
a woman to consent to make herself ridiculous even in the 
cause of sacred truth. The Goddess of Wisdom herself was 
woman enough to fling away the flute when it puffed her 
cheeks. Myra felt that her cheeks were reddening ; and she 
put theology aside, to take care of itself for the moment. 

But she presently went her way, thinking of Lennon, and 
admiring what she believed to be his goodness, and telling her- 
self it was only his goodness she admired, and much vexed with 
doubts and dreads about what she feared to be his want of 
religion ; for since he had come to the neighbourhood she 
watched for him every Sunday at church, and watched in 
vain. 

It so chanced that the very first of these Sundays she dressed 
with even unusual brilliancy and pains ; and he never came. 
Next Sunday, growing alarmed for his spiritual welfare, she 
watched anxiously ; and he never came. Her husband preached 
a manly, vigorous, and, in fact, touching sermon, wherein, ac- 
cording to his wont, he rattled no dry bones of theology, but 
only touched on living immortal truths . sublime eternal 
chords, to which every heart not all seared and imbruted vibrates 
in response. Myra much wished that Lennon had been there. 
She thought of Lennon all the time. She applied every sen- 
tence of the sermon mentally to Lennon, and Lennon did not 
come to church that Sunday. 

The Sunday after the conversation with Lennon was a crisis. 
Myra had made many slight and expressive intimations of her 
hope to see Lennon at church ; and he did not come that day 
. clearly never meant to come at all. But more than that. 
A day or two before, he happened to be at Dr. Alwyn's house ; 



WORKS AND FAITH. 129 

and, as chance would have it, a fragment of glowing silk of an 
exquisite purple shade lay on Myra's table, and Lennon, little 
skilled in the art of composing dress, yet could not help invo- 
luntarily remarking on the beauty of the colour. Whereupon 
Myra promptly declared that she was delighted, for she was 
going to wear a dress of that very silk next day, and was glad 
to have her judgment of it confirmed. And she did wear the 
dress ; and she looked very charming ; and she looked for 
Lennon at church . and he did not come. She went home 
wondering, vexed, grieved ; in dreadful fear about Lennon's 
religion and his soul ; in some suspicion, perhaps for the first 
time, of the nature of her own feelings. But she kept the 
dress on, and Lennon did not come ; and she wore it next 
day, and it so happened that he did not come. At last she 
went to her dressing-room, towards evening, and tore the dress 
off and flung it from her ; and then became for the first time 
all red with shame and self-condemnation, and cried bitter tears, 
and positively dreaded the approach of her husband until her 
cheeks and eyes should have ceased to be tell-tales. 

She seemed to have awakened with a sudden and fearful 
start . as a sleep-walker who just comes to her senses and finds 
herself on the brink of a river. With the shock of self- discovery 
came the instinctive retreat and escape. One of weaker nerves 
might have staggered and fallen over. Myra Alwyn had a true 
heart and a firm resolution. She made up her mind that she 
must break off her intimacy with one for whose coming she 
.began to look out so anxiously, and whose absence was a disap- 
pointment. But she had not courage enough to look this de- 
termination and its true first motive fairly in the face. The 
very necessity of such a resolution had shame in it which she 
dared not encounter. So she fell back upon the narrowness of 
her religious training, and told herself that, if Mr. Lennon 
should prove to be anything but what she considered a true 
Christian, neither she nor her husband must be perilled by the 
intercourse of an unbeliever. Nor was this quite insincere. 
Her dread of heterodoxy . at all events, of heresy . was deep- 
rooted and genuine. She was literally afraid of what the Poet- 
laureate terms honest doubt. 

This was almost immediately after the conversation about 
Tom Berry's defective theology. It was that conversation, 
indeed, which caused Lennon to keep away from Dr. Alwyn s 
for a day or two. He thought he saw clearly enough what the 

K 



130 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Rector's wife meant. He thus translated it into plain English : 
" We cannot catechise you or find fault with you about your 
religion, because you are supposed to be a gentleman, and above 
Sunday-school teaching. But if you were a working-man, we 
would insist upon knowing your views, and, so far as we could, 
making your errors penal." At first he felt vexed and offended, 
and thought he had better keep his errors and himself apart ; 
and he did remain away for a day or two, as has been related. 
Then he said to himself, " iSTo ; there is no need of sulkiness, 
and there shall be no concealment. I'll meet the matter fairly. 
They shall know, frankly and at once, the worst." 

He went up to Dr. Alwyn's the very next day. Myra was 
on the steps of the door just as he entered the lawn. She was 
in a riding-habit, and her pony was being brought round from 
the stable. She was about to scour the neighbouring villages 
on some good errand or other. 

Dr. Alwyn was, unfortunately, not at home ; and Lennon 
was disappointed. Having made up his mind to come to a 
distinct understanding, it was provoking to find that he had 
come for nothing. His face so distinctly expressed disappoint- 
ment, that Mrs. A-lwyn could not help asking whether it was 
anything very particular about which he wanted to speak with 
her husband. Lennon rushed at the opening thus made. 

" No, Mrs. Alwyn ; not anything very serious, perhaps, but 
something which I feel that I ought to say. I will say it to 
you, if you will allow me." 

" Certainly, Mr. Lennon." She was surprised, and almost 
agitated. " Will you come in 1 " 

" Thank you, no. Here, if you please." 

She came down the steps, the skirt of her riding-dress thrown 
over her arm. 

" Mrs. Alwyn, the truth is that something you said the other 
day made me think that perhaps you and Dr. Alwyn have been 
disappointed at not finding in me a sympathy. a religious sym- 
pathy, I mean . which I cannot give. I think I ought to tell 
you frankly why. To me such things matter nothing . no one's 
religious opinions could repel me from him. But I am quite 
aware . nobody can know it better . that my views may repel 
others. It is right that no one should be deceived on the 
point, else I should be ashamed to come here and talk so much 
about myself. But the truth . which I think you ought to 
know . is that my religious convictions are not yours, or those- 



WORKS AND FAITH. 131 

of most persons. Mrs. Alwyn, I am what I suppose you would 
call an infidel." 

There was ever so slight a tone of contempt in his voice as 
he spoke these words. 

" Oh no, Mr. Lennon ; that I cannot believe. You wrong 
yourself. You are no infidel. You who . no, it's quite im- 
possible." 

" I chose the word purposely, because I thought it the one 
that people who think all depends on sectarian belief would 
readily apply, i" do not acknowledge myself an infidel. I try 
to be simply a Christian. But I don't believe in the impor- 
tance of any of your sectarian dogmas. They are names . not 
things. I have paid some social penalties already for my 
beliefs ; and I will again, if necessary. Just now it would be 
hypocrisy of me to go to your church . or perhaps to any ; and 
I think it only honest to tell you frankly the cause." 

The first question that rose to Mrs. Alwyn's lips was a 
natural one : 

"Why tell this tome?" 

She put the question, and then wished she had said some- 
thing else. By you . to me. All such linkings of persons 
seem suggestive, and under certain circumstances dangerous. 

" I did not mean to tell it to you, Mrs. Alwyn, or to trouble 
you about it. But then Dr. Alwyn is not here ; and you are 
not a woman of the ordinary kind ; and I know that what 
interests your husband interests you. And besides," said 
Lennon, smiling faintly, "you have brought it on yourself ; for 
you spoke yesterday with positive alarm about poor Tom 
Berry's heathenish condition. I much fear that I am yet more 
heathenish than Tom . who appears to me, indeed, to be rather 
a man of a deep-thinking and devotional turn ; and, to judge 
by your words yesterday, you would probably think he had 
excuses for heathenism which I have not. He never was at 
college, as I was. If he had been, I am quite sure he would 
not have left it . as I did." 

" Well, Mr. Lennon, you are very frank and honourable ; and 
I might have expected nothing less from you. Of course I 
respect your sensitive dread of being supposed to conceal any- 
thing which might affect the judgment of your friends . or of 
the world. May I speak as frankly as you have done 1 " 

" I would beg you to do so as a favour." 

" Thank you. Then I must say that I thought yesterday 

k2 



132 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

you affected a cynicism, and carelessness, and scorn of the 
"world's opinion, and reluctance to be thought benevolent, and 
all that, which does not really belong to your nature. I know- 
perfectly well that you have a generous and noble heart. 
Please don't interrupt me . I am not going to say any more in 
your praise, and would not say even this, but that I bave to 
found a reproach upon it. Are you sure that you are not now 
exaggerating what you call your heathenism 1 To prove that 
they are not subservient, some men make themselves rude, and 
are brusque to an earl when they would be civil to a peasant. 
Are you not doing, in your own way, something of the same 
kind 1 To show your scorn of hypocrisy and conventionality, 
are you not magnifying dissent into hostility, and doubt into 
infidelity 1 " 

" No, I think not ; I think I am only putting myself before 
you exactly as you would see me. One can't well launch into an 
analysis and exposition of one's theologv, which, indeed, with 
me is mostly negative ; but I do honestly believe that you 
would regard my faith with dread and repugnance if you did 
know it. You spoke of doubts ; I have no doubts. I do not 
care to trouble myself with doubt of what is to us wholly in- 
soluble and unfathomable. Dissent? I do not dissent. If 
someone came to me with a new and plausible theory about the 
inhabitants of some far-off planet, could I be said to dissent from 
it 1 Not at all. I know nothing about it ; and I refuse to 
waste my time in pondering and quarrelling over a problem 
neither he nor I nor anyone else can solve, as yet." 

Mrs. Alwyn found herself sinking into unknown and dread- 
ful depths. She would plunge in no farther : that way madness 
lies. 

" I wish you would speak to my husband, Mr. Lennon. He 
is a clever man, as you know, and a scientific man ; and he 
could, I am sure, remove the doubts and delusions you seem 
to have. I wish I could ; for you would be worth converting. 
Do, do speak to him. You do not know how well he can 
explain all these seeming difficulties." 

" I quite intended to talk to Dr. Alwyn ; but only as I have 
talked to you, just to put him fairly on his guard. But in good 
truth I have little faith in polemical discussion, and hardly any 
interest whatever in it. Once, when a younger man, I was 
antagonistic and vehement enough ; and I sought out op- 
ponents, and rather rejoiced in combats of words and texts, and 



WORKS AND FAITH. 133 

wild whirling logic ; and I think I revelled in the punishment 
and disgrace it brought on me, and fancied myself a martyr 
when I was only a fool. Now I have changed all that. I 
think such controversy is just one of our temptations, like idle- 
ness and envy, and acquisitiveness and military glory, and divers 
other things ; and I pray that my feet may be delivered from 
its snares." 

" I am glad to hear that you pray for anything, and I forgive 
the tone in which you say so." 

" Thank you. I really did not mean it as a sneer, though it 
may have sounded like one. I spoke as I feel. I am muck 
obliged to you for having listened to me so patiently and 
kindly, and I have nothing more to say." 

He was about to take his leave. She hesitated over the dis- 
missal, as if she had something more to say. 

" We continue friends, Mr. Lennon? " 

" I hope so. It would be a great pain to me if we did not. 
I have lost many friends through this cause ; and it cost me 
an effort to risk the losiDg of Dr. Alwyn's frienship and yours ; 
but I trust that no such result may come. Only I thought it 
right that you should know all. The rest is for him and 
you." 

When Lennon was gone, Mrs. Alwyn found herself deeply 
agitated. She sent her pony away, and neglected her round of 
familiar duties ; she secluded herself in her own room, and tried 
to think the matter over calmly. 

People who live in London and read the weekly papers, and 
learn of the Saturday Review that one's duty to society is not 
to feel any earnestness about anything, could hardly perhaps 
appreciate the nature of Mrs. Alwyn's feelings when listening 
to and half-following Halph Lennon's confession of faith. In. 
society, doubtless, Lord Shaftesbury would meet without mental 
disquietude the author of Ucce Homo ; and the most orthodox 
detestation of Essays and Reviews does not imply a necessary 
repugnance to converse with Dr. Temple. When the Morning 
Advertiser was most fiercely denouncing the author of a certain 
famous passage in an essay on Sir William Hamilton, it is likely 
that the wife of the editor (if he has one) of that organ of in- 
tellectual culture and pure theology would have felt rather 
proud than otherwise of meeting Mr. Mill. Bat in remote 
parts of the country things are not so. There we are terribly 
in earnest, and our women are still more in earnest than we, 



134 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



There, too, we positively refuse to separate the man from his 
opinions ; the dogma is the man. 

Myra Alwyn was the daughter of a pious clergyman, the 
wife of another pious clergyman. Pure Protestantism flowed 
into her from her mother's breast ; and however Ralph Lennon's 
doubts and heresies might in reality come to be softened down, 
they could hardly be translated into pure Protestantism. At 
best they were the sentiments of a man who professed to walk 
without the aid of guidance which with her it was a sin to 
renounce. It was not merely the presumption of a man who 
declared his determination to find his way across a forest at 
midnight without the aid of guide or lamp or starlight. Such 
a man might succeed ; and if he did, his success was his vindi- 
cation. But in Lennon's case it would be equal guilt to suc- 
ceed or fail by any guidance but the legitimate and prescribed 
conductors. To arrive at the end was nothing; the indispen- 
sable obligation was to arrive there by the proper path, and 
lighted by the orthodox lamps. 

Therefore Myra shuddered and trembled . O, yes ; and 
worse than that, she blushed and was abashed, though quite 
alone ; for she could not hide from herself that she felt too 
keen an interest in Lennon's life, and that she was pierced with 
a strange pang when she put the hesitating question, " We 
continue friends 1 " 

All the greater reason for a prompt and firm resolution. So 
when Dr. Alwyn returned she told him the whole story, re- 
peating as well as she could every word Lennon had said. 

Dr. Alwyn promised to see and speak with him, but evi- 
dently did not think the thing quite so dreadful as his wife 
did. 

" Promise me one thing, Alwyn, dear," she asked with 
unwonted trepidation. 

'.' What is it, love 1 Rash promises, you know I must not 
make, even to you, Herodias." 

" Promise you will not ask him here any more . ever 
again." 

« Why, dear child, this is fanaticism ! Besides, he is a fine 
manly fellow, Lennon ; and I hope to cure him of his nonsense 
in a week." 

" Still I don't want to see him here any more . I don't 
indeed. Do promise me this, dear, dear husband . promise me 
that I shall not have to meet him any more ! " 



warton's new sensation. 135 

Dr. Alwyn laughingly declined the promise ; but he 
wondered much over the stern and unforgiving orthodoxy of 
women. He had never seen his wife so earnest on. such a 
subject before. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

warton's new sensation. 

DK. ALWYN walked over the very next day to have a talk 
with Lennon. He had no idea of treating his friend's 
supposed mental condition too seriously. The position of a 
father confessor, although growing into rapid favour in the 
Church of England, still appeared to Alwyn highly incongruous, 
unmanly, and absurd. Moreover, he knew that women of a 
pious turn commonly concern themselves about the letter and 
not the spirit of orthodoxy ; and he therefore did not yet 
despair of finding Lennon at heart a much sounder Protestant 
than Dr. Colenso. 

But all chance of any^conversation on such a subject was cut 
off; for Dr. Alwyn found that there were visitors wakening up 
with unwonted laughter and talk the ghostly old echoes of 
Lennon's house. Walter Warton had kept his word, and 
come promptly to see his old friend, and he had brought 
Captain Eastham with him ; and they announced that they 
were quite determined to make themselves at home for a day 
or two. Captain Eastham had a pretty country seat some 
twenty miles off, which Warton was j ust now making his head- 
quarters for special reasons. There was a certain borough quite 
near which happened to have a large proportion of working 
men enrolled as freemen on its electoral lists. Eastham had 
some proprietorial influence there ; and it was thought that 
Warton's name and tongue might win over the working men, 
and between the two influences the borough be annexed to the 
Tory interest. So Warton was to try his chance there. A 
vacancy was very soon expected ; and Eastham's goodnature 
had secured for Warton an opportunity of making the attempt. 
The money was to be " found," and he was to have every fair 
chance . probably his last chance ; for if he could do nothing 
with the working men he would be of no use to the Tories. 



136 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



Therefore he was glad to make Captain Eastham's his camping- 
ground at present ; and being in the neighbourhood of Lennon's 
place, he had special reasons for wishing to come that way. 
And he was glad of Eastham's company. It was not quit© 
certain how he and Lennon might get on alone. 

Dr. Alwyn was glad to meet all the party, and insisted on 
their coming over to dine at his house that very day ; Lennon's 
bachelor establishment needing no apology if it frankly ad- 
mitted itself not quite prepared ifor a friendly invasion at an 
hour's notice. The invitation was accepted : Lennon welcomed 
it because he understood it to mean an absolution for his 
theological errors ; Warton welcomed it because the unpre- 
paredness of Lennon's house struck him rather with a chill and 
dread, and he was relieved by the prospect of a really good dinner 
at Dr. Alwyn's, and the society of Dr. Alwyn's pretty wife. 

" Then you are bringing him after all ! " said the latter to 
her husband when he came back, like a sensible man, to prepare 
her for her guests. " You are bringing him, though I asked 
you not to do so." 

" Bringing Lennon 1 O yes ; you really can't be serious in 
your objection, Myra. We shall never cure heathenism, my 
love, by social exclusion ; and I really don't believe Lennon is 
one whit less of a Christian than I am." 

Mrs. Alwyn was angry . unreasonably bitter and angry. 
But she said nothing, and made no sign. She dressed with 
great care, and she resolved to receive Lennon politely but 
coldly. So she would have done, doubtless, only that poor 
Lennon, accepting, as has already been said, the invitation as a 
warm and liberal declaration of unabated friendship, was so 
unusually genial in his greeting, so delicately amicable in the 
fervent pressure of his hand, that Myra, taken at disadvantage, 
gave him a look and a touch of frank regard ; and then flushed 
all over as if she had done something wrong, and so markedly 
changed her place to converse with Captain Eastham that 
Warton's watchful eyes flashed as he saw her, and she felt in 
every fibre that Warton saw and watched her. Whereupon 
she became so uncomfortable that it needed her utmost self- 
control to enable her to discharge fittingly all the small social 
duties of her position as mistress of the house. 

The dinner passed off very pleasantly. Captain Eastham 
kept them all in good spirits with his genial and rattling talk ; 
Lennon was unusually animated ; Warton was in complete 



warton 's new sensation. 137 

happiness. For he sat next to Myra ; and she, fearful of 
having relaxed too much from proper religious severity towards 
Lennon, compensated and made atonement by almost entirely 
ignoring his existence, and allowing herself to seem engrossed 
by "Warton. The latter paid her many sweet and covert com- 
pliments, to most of which she replied by gracious and beaming 
smiles, each one of which penetrated him with hope and joy 
She was unconscious of his peculiar happiness, and, indeed, very 
seldom knew what he was saying. When she smiled most 
sweetly and graciously on him, the smile did not mean "My 
soul is of kin with yours ; " but simply, " I haven't been listen- 
ing to a word you are saying. I am thinking of something 
quite different ; but I don't want you or anybody else to know 
it." 

She was uneasy, angry, anxious. For the first time in her 
married life . a short career indeed, thus far . she felt displeased 
with her husband, and, what was perhaps worse, distrustful of 
his judgment and guiding power. And she felt still more dis- 
pleased with herself, but not as yet distrustful. An era in her 
life had come . a critical era in the life of a married woman . 
when she stood isolated in the midst of fears and doubts and 
danger which she oould not or would not make known to her 
husband. 

The party round that dinner-table were therefore playing a 
pretty little game of cross-purposes. Captain Eastham was 
perhaps the only convive perfectly on the square, open, and 
having no arriere-pensee behind the screen of his words. 

After Myra left the table, a short political conversation set 
in. Warton, however, disappeared almost immediately, and, 
found her alone and thoughtful in the drawing-room. 

" Our friends are buried in politics," he said ; " and my life 
is so steeped in the political atmosphere that I am happy now 
and then to breathe a purer air. Eastham is a rising man in 
the House." 

" I like Captain Eastham very much," said Myra. " He is 
so vivacious and pleasant." 

" Yes, Eastham's a fine fellow. But what do you think of 
your near neighbour, Mr. Lennon 1 " 

" My husband likes Mr. Lennon very much. I believe he 
has great ability. I should think it will be rather thrown away 
here." 

" Lennon has ability decidedly, and is a man who might make 



138 TilE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

some way in life . except, perhaps, for his somewhat extreme 
opinions on religious questions. At least, his opinions used to 
be extreme. I do not know for certain that he has not 
changed or modified them ; but I rather inferred from a recent 
conversation with him that he had not. It is deeply to be re- 
gretted . not of course because of any social disadvantage ex- 
treme views may bring, but upon other and higher grounds." 

" What are his opinions, Mr. Warton 1 " 

" I think a sort of spiritualised rationalism, if that expression 
is at all intelligible : a belief or unbelief compounded of Benan 
and Mill. I doubt if he defines it very clearly to himself." 

" Can a man be good who has no clear faith 1 " said Myra, 
questioning herself perhaps rather than her listener. 

" O, surely ; I think so. Let us hope so at least . although 
. a ship without an anchor is hardly a safe vessel to make a 
voyage in : but I think Lennon a high-minded man, full of 
honourable aspirations." (Warton was not simple enough to 
begin disparaging his friend in the hope of thereby turning a 
woman against him.) " I have known him a long time . with 
a great gap intervening to be sure . and always esteemed him. 
My wife, too, knew him for many years, and thinks highly of 
him." 

" By the way, Mr. Warton, that remiuds me," said Myra, 
glad to change the subject, "that you never told me you had a 
wife. I never knew it until lately." 

" Did I not 1 " He paused, gave a faint sigh, seemed to re- 
cover himself with an effort, and went on. " Surely I must 
have done so. But I seldom had the pleasure of talking to you 
except in a crowd. Never before, I think, but once . and that 
only for a few minutes, not soon forgotten . was it my fortune 
to meet you tete-a-tete. But I ought to have told you, as I 
know that you would kindly take an interest. O yes, I have 
been married these many years. I married, in fact, when very 
young." 

" I hope to have the pleasure of meeting your wife. Does 
she never come northward 1 " 

" Indeed no ; she keeps always at home, and does not live in 
London. She dislikes London, and is wholly domestic. I fear 
my ways distract her; for she does not care about political 
questions or literary subjects, and I suppose I can talk of 
nothing else. She is very good, I often think, to bear with me 
at all . she whose ways are so different." 



WARTON'S NEW SENSATION - . 139 

" Poor fellow," thought Mrs. Alwyn. " When he was very- 
young he married some silly and, perhaps, vulgar goose of a 
girl; and now she has no sympathy with him, and is no com- 
panion for him. I am very sorry." She looked this, too, as 
she sincerely felt it ; and Warton saw it in her dark eyes as she 
allowed them to rest on his for the first time with an expression 
of genuine interest. There was a moment's pause. 

"The last time I had the pleasure of meeting you," he said in 
a low tone, " we sang together. I remember our duets." 

"And so do I. Why may we not repeat them when our 
friends come up from their political discussion ? I daresay it 
will not last much longer." 

" No, I fear not . I rneaD, I suppose not. I have thought of 
our last duet many times. Does Dr. Alwyn sing ? I believe 
not." 

" O dear, no ; not a note. But he is fond of music." 

" I have a niece," said Warton, . " my wife's niece at least . 
who sings very charmingly, and is a very clever intelligent girl. 
Indeed, our house could hardly exist without her. Now her I 
should be so anxious to introduce to you." 

" I am sure I should be very happy ; really, Mr. Warton, 
there is nothing I sigh for here more often than the company of 
an intelligent woman. Your niece is a woman, I suppose 1 . T 
mean grown up . not a schoolgirl ? I detest schoolgirls." 

" no ; twenty yea.rs old I should think ; and a handsome 
girl, too." 

" Then I really hope I shall know her." 

" Some time I will take the liberty of bringing her to see 

you." 

" Thank 3'ou ; I shall be very glad. I am very lonely here 
sometimes." 

" Lonely, perhaps ; but not without sympathy. You could 
not be so." 

" Life would indeed be hard and dreary without sympathy," 
said Myra, . thinking, it must be owned, of herself, and how Dr. 
Alwyn had failed to understand her. 

" It is hard and dreary without sympathy. We cannot all 
be calm philosophers of the Stoic school, like my friend Lennon. 
Some of us are not so calm and unemotional ; not so good, per- 
haps. We are of the earth, earthy ; and we want human love 
and sympathy, and other vanities which your philosopher can 
dispense with." 



140 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



" Here come all our philosophers," said Myra, not very sorry 
perhaps that the conversation was cut short. 

The rest of the evening was bright and pleasant. When the 
company broke up, Dr. Alwyn walked with his friends half way 
round the lake ; and when he returned he sat up reading the 
Quarterly Review, in which Captain Eastham had directed his 
attention to a slashing political article by a well-known Tory 
guerilla, the purpose whereof was to indicate explicitly that 
England could never get on until the Tory party in the House 
of Commons was led by one of the old territorial aristocracy. 
It was rather late when Dr. Alwyn went to bed. His wife was 
not asleep ; but as she kept her eyes closed, and did not speak 
a word, he assumed that she was wrapt in dreams ; and he 
himself soon really slept, while she lay awake. 

Next day Captain Eastham and Ralph went out shooting, 
"Warton took a gun in bis hand, but did nothing ; avowed that 
even if he had good sight, which he had not, he never could 
hit a haystack ; and presently left his companions altogether. 
He soon found his way to Dr. Alwyn's ; and as Alwyn the 
previous night had declined joining the party, on the ground 
that he had some duties to look after in the town, Warton 
counted on finding Myra alone at home. His conjecture proved 
right ; she had not been out that morning. When she entered 
the room into which he had been shown, she looked so fascina- 
ting in her artistically negligent morning-dress, that Warton 
felt a fierce pang of admiration and Tantalus-delight shoot 
through his sensuous heart. He looked full into her eyes, and 
thought he would have given years of life to discern one ray, 
however evanescent and faint, of responsive light there. Nay, 
had her eyelids even fallen under his gaze, he would have felt 
his pulses beat with quickened fervour. But her smile was 
calm, friendly, and unconscious of secret meaning ; it was clear 
as the lake that lay not far from the windows, and almost as 
unemotional. 

" Again you have left your friends, Mr. Warton," she said. 
"What a truant they must find you! I hope they don't 
grumble, or blame me for it." 

" Not they ; I fancy they are rather glad to get rid of me. 
I am a stupid companion for sporting men : I don't care to 
shoot ; I am a dreadfully bad shot ! and . only one is rather 

ashamed to express a humanitarian sentiment just now I 

would say that I don't enjoy the killing of poor little birds " 



waf.ton's new sensation. 141 

" Then you only come to pay us a visit because it is less 
tiresome and wrong than to spend the day killing little 
birds ? " 

" Nay, I am quite willing the birds should fall in any num- 
bers, if their deaths give me a decent chance of escaping and 
coming over here. I expected to find Dr. Alwyn here . of 
course." 

Warton meant her to understand that he said this for form's 
sake, and to interpret it by the rule of contraries. She took it, 
however, quite seriously and literally. 

" Dr. Alwyn will be here before long ; and I hope you will 
stay to luncheon, then you will be sure to see him ; for he is 
very punctual always." 

" If I do not interrupt you . " 

" Oh no ; at least, not in anything that suffers by interrup- 
tion. You perceive that I don't make complimentary speeches. 
I was only touching up some drawings, Swiss sketches, and that 
sort of thing. It is an article of faith with Dr. Alwyn that I 
am an artist ; and I fear it pleases me that he should think so, 
even though I know in my heart that I have no shadow of 
claim to the title." 

" May I see the sketches 1 " 

" Indeed you may not, in their present condition ; when they 
are finished there will then be nothing in them to justify either 
parading them or making a show of withholding them. Does 
your niece draw, Mr. Warton ? You spoke last night of her 
singing." 

" Yes : she has a perfect passion for the pencil, and is, I am 
told . for I am no judge . full of promise. Her ambition is to 
be an artist ; I think rather to be a sculptor than a painter. 
I have a sketch of hers with me. I brought it to show to 
Lennon, who was kind enough to express some interest in the 
girl." 

" Indeed ! Is Mr. Lennon then an artist ? " 

" I believe so. At least, he understands all about art." 

" How strange ! He seems to take as much pains to hide his 
accomplishments as other people do to show off theirs. Why 
does he choose to force upon our notice only his bad qualities 1 " 

There was a bitterness of tone about these words which Myra 
could not wholly conceal. 

"I don't know. He is a strange creature, Lennon, and 
always was. He takes sudden likings and dislikings. The 



142 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

interest he showed in my niece is something, I fancy, quite 
unusual for him. He made her promise that she would send 
him a sketch . a design for a group which she dreams of 
executing some day in marble : and I have brought the sketch ; 
but until now I quite forgot all about it." 

" Have you it here 1 " 

"Yes. It is very small : I brought it in my pocket-book." 

" May I see it ? " 

" Surely ; with pleasure." 

He took from his pocket a small square of drawing-board, 
with two figures on it, and the faint outlines of some brush- 
wood and heath around them. Mrs. Alwyn held it so that the 
light might best display its forms and character. She looked 
at it for a long time in silence. 

" Yes," said she at last, and she struggled with a sigh, " that 
is indeed something different from mine. I could never do any- 
thing like that . never. Such simplicity, and such force and 
soul. There is a wonderful bareness about it, and yet what 
expression it has ! All seems done in a few strokes. I have 
not asked you what it is. Is it the Belisarius story % " 

" No ; it is Antigone with GEdipus." 

" Oh yes, to be sure. I heard it read once in London. What 
a beautiful design for a group ! Is this positively promised . 
to Mr. Lennon 1 " 

" Yes, indeed. My niece seldom shows anything she does to 
anybody. I do not know how Lennon contrived to persuade 
her to send him this." 

" She ought to be happy," said Mrs. Alwyn with a kalf-sigb. 
" I mean happy because she has so much of talent, so much 
power to create. She never can be lonely. She can always fill 
her life with images of beauty and nobleness, and be happy that 
way at least, if not otherwise." 

In Myra's eyes there positively sparkled a tear. She would 
have given much to prevent it from falling on her cheek, but 
that was hopeless. She turned away. 

Walter Warton saw it. " In this household," he thought, 
" there is something wrong. This woman is unhappy, and 
believes herself unappreciated." He was touched . really 
touched. A man one shade or two worse than he might, under 
the circumstances, have been glad of what he saw, and hailed 
the tear that gleamed in a wife's eye as a sparkle of hope. 



warton's new sensation. 143 

But he was only a sensuous and unwittingly selfish man, and 
he felt touched. 

" I will tell my niece," he said in a low tone, " how kindly 
you have spoken. It will make her happy ; it will make her 
love you. That alone would be happiness." 

He ventured to rise from his seat, approach her, and take 
her hand. The manner of his doing this was so entirely that 
of mere gratitude, manly sympathy, and friendship, that it did 
not even occur to her to withdraw the hand which he touched. 
It would indeed have appeared but coquetry to do so. He 
only pressed the hand warmly and respectfully, and resumed 
his seat. Myra's heart opened to him. She saw in him only 
affection and pride for his niece, and an ardour of generous 
gratitude for even a few words of sympathetic tone. She hoped 
that in his gratification he had not noticed her own strange and 
sudden emotion. 

When he held her hand in his . for that one moment, that 
lightning- flash of time . all the soul of passion was at his lips 
and in his eyes. He waited . yes, in that brief second he 
seemed positively to watch and wait . for one single responsive 
pressure, the slightest, the faintest. As the agonised watcher 
holds the mirror to the lips of the newly dead, hoping against 
hope that the lightest shade may dim its surface and tell of life 
yet lingering, so did Warton long for any almost imperceptible 
return of the pressure he gave to that white small hand. There 
was none. The hand of a sister could not have been more 
honestly calm and kindly. That ray of hope was not given. 

It was not long before Dr. Alwyn returned. It was part of 
the purpose of Warton . if, indeed, he could be said to have 
any deliberate purpose . to wait for Myra's husband. He was 
not a fool, to give anyone the slightest chance just now of 
suspecting that he paid his visit only to Dr. Alwyn's wife. 
Alwyn was glad to see him . he was almost always glad to see 
a man ; although he would have perhaps preferred Captain 
Eastbam's more robust and vivacious ways, and would have liked 
Ralph Lennon best of all. 

Next morning Wharton and Eastham came over to say good- 
bye for a while. Both promised to come that way soon again 
and often. 

It was not until he was actually leaving Lennon's house that 
Warton gave Balph the sketch of Antigone. He had forgotten 



'144 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

it until just that moment . was nearly forgetting it altogether, 
he said. Superfluously prudent, he thought it would be quite 
as well not to let Lennon suppose that he attached any im- 
portance to the whole affair, or was anxious to exhibit the 
accomplishments of his niece to a man still young and supposed 
to have plenty of money. 

Life now seemed to Warton all glowing and roseate and 
purple, with a new interest and emotion. For the moment 
his political hopes and plans were of secondary importance ; the 
cares and difficulties, and even dangers, that were darkening 
round him seemed to have vanished in an unnatural brightness 
of sunlight. The new emotion was all. Again and again he 
had broken his idol, ambition, on the altar of some sudden, 
selfish, and sensuous caprice. He did so when, as he now 
bitterly thought, he made a fool of himself, and flung himself 
away on poor Mabel. Steady purpose of any kind must have 
made him successful in life ; but even his selfishness was 
merely the unthinking selfishness of a child who opens his hand 
and lets his plaything fall into the stream, that he may greedily 
grasp by its crimson blossom some flower that grows upon the 
bank. 



CHAPTER XIV 

lennon's renewed youth. 

MANY weeks passed away. The winter had come, and 
locked the mountain-passes in snow, and then gradually 
melted into spring ; and half the spring was done. Lennon's 
model village, delayed though it was by the severity of the 
winter, was rising rapidly to completion. Many of the cottages 
were already occupied, and their newly -whitened walls were 
gladdened by the laughter of children. But as yet the village 
had not assumed any distinctive character, nor got into self- 
government. Many tenements remained to be finished before 
this could be done. There was therefore nothing as yet to 
attract attention or offend routine, or touch the sensitive nerves 
of provincial orthodoxy. 

Lennon found time passing rapidly and pleasantly, though 
he still tenanted his gloomy old house, and saw few people 
there. He rose, worked, ate, read, slept, just as suited him . 



lexno-n's renewed youth. 14-5 

sometimes going to bed with the lark, sometimes outwatching 
the Bear. He read much ; he busied himself almost continually 
with his work. He talked a good deal with Tom Berry and a 
good deal with Dr. Alwyn ; but Myra he seldom saw. He 
accepted the understanding that his want of faith condemned 
him in her eyes ; and he kept away and cultivated his garden, 
calm and practical as another Candide. In truth, he was for 
the present happy. Activity, earnestness, and hope made life 
put forth new blossoms for him. He was looking younger by 
years than when he returned from Australia. 

Walter Warton he not unfrequently saw. The preliminary 
campaigns of the expected election were being carried on, and 
they brought Warton frequently down to the North ; and he 
always found his way to Dr. Alwyn's house, and generally 
visited Ralph. He had installed himself as an accepted friend 
at Alwyn's, where his visits and his political news, and his 
gossip of London and the clubs and the universities, were very 
welcome to the Rector. He corresponded with Ralph a good 
deal, but not in his own hand. 

Warton had a happy knack of making people, and especially 
women, work for him. A former chapter showed how he 
usually, when at home, adopted his niece as his secretary. He 
always did so when there was any occasion of writing to Ralph 
Lennon. The latter therefore received frequent letters in a 
firm, free, feminine hand, which at last grew quite friendly to 
him, and which he liked to see for the mere pleasure of seeing 
it. First the letters used to come as simply dictated by Warton, 
and began " My dear Lennon," and ended with Warton's name 
in his own writing. Then Warton found that his niece could 
write a letter expressing all he wanted to say without his 
dictating every word ; and he would therefore merely ask her 
to write to Ralph on this or that subject, and leave her to 
construct the epistle after her own fashion. So Lennon used 
to receive letters at first beginning " My dear sir," and then 
" My dear Mr. Lennon," and ending with the writer's own 
name . the substance always, of course, being something which 
" Walter wishes me to ask you," or " to tell you." Sometimes 
a friendly message from Mabel would come in ; sometimes a 
big scrawling letter signed "Watty," and generally having 
relation to the homes and habits of lions, would be enclosed. 
Ralph received these communications with a vague feeling of 
pleasure and a quite new sense of companionship. 

L 



146 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

He had been in town several times during the winter, and 
spent some hour3 each time with Warton's family. Indeed he 
began to make all sorts of excuses for running up to London 
every now and then ; and his appearance at Warton's house, 
where Warton seldom was, became the regular signal for a sort 
of holiday. He brought presents to the children ; he took 
them to the Zoological Gardens, Grace accompanying. He 
took Grace alone to see picture-galleries and sculpture ; his 
visits brightened her life and his unspeakably. He felt a great 
pleasure in her society, and soon became as frank and unreserved 
with her as only a shy and sensitive man becomes with those 
in whom he truly confides, and with whom he can sympathize. 
She was so much younger that he felt, or believed he felt, only 
such delight in her company as that to which Swift, in some 
lines of tender beauty, likens the pure friendly joy Cadenus 
used to feel in the society of Vanessa. All London soon 
became, in his heart, identified with the society of Grace 
Ethelstone ; and his visits there refreshed his life, and charmed 
its sad loneliness away. 

On one of these occasions he gave his opinion of GMipus and 
Antigone. That opinion he gave truthfully and frankly. The 
sketch was crude, untaught, perhaps even audaciously uncon- 
ventional. It ignored, or did not comprehend, not merely the 
accepted conventionalities of the art, but even some of its ne- 
cessary limitations. A group in marble, modelled from this 
sketch, would be a failure. But there was splendid promise in 
the sketch. It was rich in hope and in evidence of capacity. 
Halph declared with perfect earnestness that the embryo pre- 
sence of something like genius revealed itself to him in the 
idea and even the working out of the drawing. He talked as 
calmly and sincerely as a man verging upon forty years of age 
may do to a girl scarcely past twenty. 

" If I were your uncle, I would gratify your wish, and send 
you to study art in Rome," he said. 

She shook her head simply and sadly. " I fear I shall never 
go," she said. " I could not well leave poor Mabel ; and be- 
sides, in good truth, Mr. Lennon, we can't afford it." 

" Let me be your uncle just for this once. Let me be the 
wicked uncle, and banish you from your home into the wide, 
wide world." 

" O no, that is quite impossible." 

" Why 1 Why may not I do anything to help anybody ? " 



lennon's renewed youth. 147 

" You do help many ; but this, Mr. Lennon, is impossible. 
I don't think I should much like being helped in that way 
by my uncle, if I had one ; and at all events, you are not 
my uncle. So it can't be ; and let us not speak of it, pray. 
But I am deeply obliged to you, Mr. Lennon, for I know you 
mean what you say ; and nobody has ever been half so kind 
and friendly to me as you have been." 

" Lennon pressed the subject no farther, but secretly resolved 
to approach it indirectly through Mabel or Warton. He could 
not but see that the life of the girl in that home was a weary 
one ; and as he watched it he obtained deeper and deeper 
insight into Walter Warton's nature. Meanwhile the corres- 
pondence between Warton's secretary and Ralph was kept up ; 
and as it grew, Lennon found himself sometimes glancing at a 
a looking-glass, and wondering whether he seemed old, and 
wishing himself even seven or eight years younger. But he 
flung the thought behind him, and went to work more fiercely 
in cultivating his garden. 

One day Lennon had been away, ranging somewhere up 
among the hills ; and the early sunset of spring was over before 
he returned. Staying a moment to look with parental pride 
upon the growing walls of his village, he was met by Tom 
Berry. 

" Warton's been looking for you, Mr. Lennon, twice," said 
the faithful henchman. 

" Indeed, Tom ; were you speaking to him 1 " Ralph smiled 
as he asked the question, for Tom always fled with religious 
horror the vicinity of Warton. 

" ISTot I ; no. Not likely. But I saw him pass up to the 
house ; and he came a second time. The first time he came 
there was a lady with him." 

" Mrs. Alwyn, perhaps." 

" No, no, not her ; a stranger . leastwise I never saw her 
before. A fine girl, too, I thought. It never surely could be 
his daughter . so grown up as that ? " 

" No, Tom ; if it was any of his family it must have been 
his niece." 

Warton had talked recently of bringing his niece to spend a 
few days with the Alwyns. 

When Lennon got home, he found that Warton had left a 
few lines for him, expressing a wish to see him that night, as 
he was to leave for London early in the morning. He was to 

l2 



148 



THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOUBS. 



be found at Dr. Alwyn's ; and having been twice to Lennon's, 
be could not well get away from bis bost's again tbat night. 
Would Lennon, like a good and friendly fellow, jusfc come over 
and see him ? 

Lennon crumpled the note, and did not go. He did not 
choose to intrude himself upon the Alwyns. He did not want 
explanations. He wished now that Grace bad not come, 
although the first announcement of her arrival filled him with 
gladness. He did not like to think of her as under Mrs. 
Alwyn's guidance. He murmured bitterly to himself that she 
would probably under such circumstances hear little good of 
him. He was out of humour and angry like a boy. 

No ; he would not go. He dined hastily, and then smoked, 
and then read. He read an essay by a great metaphysician on 
the Philosophy of the Conditioned. It failed to interest him. 
He glanced at the number of Punch just arrived. It was 
stupid. He pored over some accounts of workmen's wages, 
cost of materials, and such things ; and could not see his way 
into them at all. Tom Berry would have said that his mind 
could not "bite into them " just then. There were some plans 
of great improvements, which it was highly important for him 
to decide on . for or against ; and he could not turn the light 
of his attention steadily on them. He thought the room looked 
lonely and gaunt, more than it had ever done before. 

He would go down and have a talk with Tom Berry. No ;, 
he would not. He did not care to hear anything about Warton. 
Of late Tom had begun to murmur semi-articulate complaints 
about Warton's attentions to Mrs. Alwyn ; and Lennon wished 
to hear nothing of the kind. 

He got up and walked out of the bouse. Of course be 
would not, could not, go to Alwyn's ; but for all that be 
directed his steps that way, and soon came in front of the 
gate. 

He paced up and down in the cold March air of the raw 
dark night. The lights which he could see in the drawing- 
room window were mocking in their cheerfulness. He could 
not hear voices, but he could hear music. He was not wanted 
there by anyone, be thought ; and feeling ashamed of wandering 
idly round the closed doors of the bouse, be strode back again 
to his own ghostly old dwelling. 

Meanwhile Grace bad been anxiously expecting him all the 
night through, and listening for every sound which might seem, 



lennon's renewed youth. 149 

to indicate his coming. Myra, too, had in her secret heart 
wished that he might come, and struggled against the wish, 
and condemned herself for having even given it a moment's 
harbour. Dr. Alwyn was so vexed at Lennon's absence that 
he resolved to find him out next day, and ask him what on 
earth he meant by such unfriendly behaviour, and whether 
they were never to meet any more ; and even Warton 
had reasons of his own for regretting that Lennon did not 
come. 

But Grace looked out of her bedroom window that night 
vainly across the black landscape, ramparted with its serrated 
lines of hill, and wondered whether it was possible to see 
Lennon's house. For in all her life she thought she had never 
met any real friend but him. Perhaps the Alwyns would be 
her friends too, and she liked them much already ; but they 
could not be like Mr. Lennon, even when she came to know 
them well. 

While she was undressing, a letter dropped from her belt. 
It was one of Lennon's semi-official replies. She took it very 
tenderly, and was glancing over it when a light tap sounded at 
the door, and Mrs. Alwyn's voice asked permission to enter. She 
had come to be quite assured of her guest's comfort ; and of course 
the two women settled clown for a little final talk. At the first, 
Grace was burying the letter in her bosom ; but Mrs. Alwyn 
had seen it, and involuntarily smiled ; and Miss Ethelstone 
had indeed no thought of concealment, and had literally nothing 
to conceal. The smile was reflected back from Grace's eyes. 
It was contagious, and grew into a laugh. 

" Have I surprised a secret 1 " said Mrs. Alwyn. " Have I 
broken in upon a moment of romance ? Confess . and for- 
give me." 

" No, indeed," replied Grace, laughing, but yet very 
earnest ; "nothing of the kind. I am afraid I have not much 
romance in me . at least I have no time or chance to indulge in 
any. It's only a business letter." 

" A business letter to a young lady . and the young lady 
hides it in her bosom ! O, come, now ! " 

" Yes, but indeed it is. You know, Mrs. Alwyn, I am 
Walter's secretary." 

" Yes ; he told me so ; but he forgot, I suppose, to men- 
tion that you put the letters of his political agent and his 
attorney under your pillow of nights, to dream about." 



150 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" What nonsense ! I never in my life put a letter under 
my pillow. I suppose I never had one that absorbed my 
mind to any such degree. But this really is only a few- 
short lines . on business .from Mr. Lennon. Will you read 
it?" 

Fire flashed in Myra's dark eyes at the name . flashed 
suddenly, and then as suddenly went out. Miss Ethelstone 
held out the letter in a frank and simple way which was 
childlike in its truthfulness. 

" My dear child, I don't want to read your letter. I was 
only talking nonsense purposely." 

" But do read it, dear Mrs. Alwyn. Just glance over it. 
I should like you to do so." 

Myra took it, perhaps with something like eagerness. Her 
hand trembled slightly. She glanced down the few lines 
which the letter contained. It was merely an answer to some 
question asked for Warton. She laid it on the table without 
speaking. 

" I am sorry that I could not see him today," said Grace. 
" I am so fond of him." 

Myra raised her eyebrows and looked surprised. 

" Yes, he is so good and so friendly to us ; and he takes an 
interest in everything one cares for : and he is so true and 
frank and manly. Everyone who knows him must be fond of 
him, I think. Don't you like him, Mrs. Alwyn 1 " 

" I am sure Mr. Lennon is a man of high principle and 
generous nature, my dear ; and such men are not, I suppose, 
very common. We must all respect them." 

Miss Ethelstone looked disappointed. " You speak with a 
sort of reserve," she said. " Don't you like Mr. Lennon your- 
self . personally, I mean 1 Never mind about respect and 
high principle and all that. Dr. Alwyn likes him immensely 
. so he told me. I am sure you do too." 

" Yes, I do like Mr. Lennon ; that is, I have no doubt I 
should like him very much if I knew him well . and if there 
were no serious differences of view on some great questions 
which make friendship perhaps rather difficult. But I like 
you, my dear, for liking him, and for saying so in that frank 
way." She smiled. 

" But why do you smile 1 Was there anything strange in 
my saying what I thought about him 1 Dear Mrs. Alwyn, 
Walter constantly tells me I speak out too plainly ; and 



lennok's benewed youth. 151 

perhaps he is sometimes right. Your smiling seems to say 
something of the same kind." 

"No, indeed, dear . at least I meant nothing of the kind. 
Only girls are generally so nonsensical and affected and unreal 
that the frank truth comes with a quite amusing freshness." 

" I should be quite ashamed of myself if I were to conceal 
what I thought of Mr. Lennon. Bat I don't exactly under- 
stand what you mean about serious differences of view making 
friendship rather difficult. Will you tell me 1 " 

"Well, I don't quite know how to explain myself; but I 
fancy Mr. Lennon holds opinions, about religion for example, 
that would a little alarm one " 

Grace shook her head. 

" I am sure they would not alarm me, Mrs. Alwyn. Mr. 
Lennon is so generous and true and manly that I don't think 
he can believe anything very dreadful. I hope I shall not 
frighten you if I say that I am sometimes a little tired of the 
talk about beliefs and religious professions and all that. 
There is some story or anecdote I read somewhere, about the 
Athenians knowing what politeness was and the Spartans 
practising it. Now I think, in the matter of religion, Mr. 
Lennon is somewhat of the Spartan kind. I think he practises 
it . I do indeed." 

" You are quite eloquent about him, Grace." 

" Because I want to convince you, and to make you see him 
as I do." 

"Why, dear]" 

"I want you to like him just in the same way as I do . and 
I don't think you feel to him in the same way." 

Myra smiled rather sadly. 

" No, Grace ; perhaps not." 

" Indeed, I fear you are not quite, quite frank with me. 
I think there is something behind in your thoughts which you 
don't think it right to show me. I fear, Mrs. Alwyn, that you 
don't like Mr. Lennon at all ; and that very much surprises 
me, for I cannot think you are so strict in dogmatic views as 
you give yourself out to be ; and you seem to me just the 
woman who ought to appreciate him and to like him." 

" One thing I shall be frank about . I like you." 

And Myra kissed her guest affectionately and bade her 
good-night. 

" She can hardly be in love with him," thought Mrs. Alwyn. 



152 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" No girl in love speaks in that calm, open way. O Heaven 
forgive us for our secret, selfish thoughts, which we dare not 
bring into the light, and yet which God reads ! If I could 
only speak as she does ! But if God sees my weakness, He also 
sees my condemnation of myself and my resolve to conquer all 
in His name." 

" There is something strange in her reserve about Mr, Len- 
non," thought Miss Ethelstone when alone. " I fear she does not 
like him ; and I am sorry, for I am afraid I could not love any- 
one who did not like him. How strange ! She seems to me 
to have a fine nature, and some brains too . for a woman. How 
can it be that she fails to appreciate him ? " 



CHAPTER XY 

VISITORS TO RALPH. 

r\ RACE ETHELSTONE much enjoyed the first few hours 
VT of her visit to Mrs. Alwyn. The mere novelty of the 
thing was of course very pleasant ; but it had other delights 
for her than that of mere novelty. It was a glimpse of freedom 
from small and wearisome cares ; it was the breathing of a pure, 
warm, and luxurious atmosphere, after gray skies and constant 
chilly wind. Dreadfully fagging even to the young, with hope 
all splendid and vague before them, is the incessant business of 
making two ends meet which utmost endeavour can hardly 
persuade to come together. When at the end of the week the 
stone has been heavily rolled to the top of the hill, down it 
crashes again straightway, and the Monday morning begins the 
upward labour afresh. 

Things had of late been growing worse and worse in 
"VVarton's house. Money was more scarce ; everything that 
had to be bought was dearer ; bills were running up faster and 
faster. The process of reducing expenses had become a hope- 
less, pinching operation, there really was so little that could be 
reduced. Warton came home rather less frequently than 
before, and only answered letters full of practical difficulties 
with fine words of hope and promise. All the burden fell upon 
Grace ; for she had spirit and brains, while poor Mabel could 
only meet difficulties by crying, and going to bed and savin* 



VISITORS TO KALPH. 153 

her prayers until she fell asleep. The butcher, the baker, the 
candlestick-maker, the landlord, the gas-company's collector, 
the water-rate collector, the poor-rate collector, the man for her 
Majesty's taxes, . all these had to be encountered and put off 
or otherwise disposed of; and they every one came to know 
Grace's face and name, and to have quite a sort of acquaintance 
with her from frequent conference. Her own little money, 
which she received quarterly, generally melted, away in a very 
few days, and went but a very short way at best. And if the 
children and Mabel and herself were not elegantly dressed 
when Walter happened to come, his sensitive nerves and fine 
feelings were quite discomposed, and he looked as disappointed, 
displeased, and martyr-like as if he had been lavishing money 
and care on the household in vain. Indeed, it was a weary 
and thankless life for Grace Ethelstone ; and there were times 
when only the womanly difficulty of suddenly severing the 
bonds of habit prevented her from shaking the dust from her 
feet and going out into the free world. 

Therefore she was glad to be invited to Alwyn's ; glad to be 
pressed, and indeed forced, by Walter and Mabel to go . Walter 
having reasons of his own, and Mabel doing as she was bidden ; 
glad to be away from the weary house for a few days, although 
she felt a pang at parting with the children ; glad to be in a 
place where she was waited on, and had nothing to do . where 
she never heard anything about the providing of dinner, or had 
any hand in its preliminary arrangements, but merely sat and 
dined when the time came ; glad . O, so glad ! . when she 
waked in the morning, to think that she had no household 
difficulties to encounter, no bills to receive, and no duns to 
meet. The bright well-ordered home of the Alwyns, where 
there was no ostentation to alarm one and no formality to repel, 
was delightful and refreshing to her. Dr. Alwyn was a finer 
man of the paternal order than she had ever seen before ; and 
Mrs. Alwyn was a charming, appreciative, intelligent woman ; 
and life went on so actively, so vividly, and yet so smoothly. 
It was very happy and full of promise . at first. 

But she expected to find Mr. Lennon a frequent, a daily 
visitor ; and much of her expectation of happiness lay in the 
hope of often seeing him. Mrs. Alwyn's rooms were heaped 
with handsome illustrated books and costly prints, and fine 
photographs and Parian figures, and other such art-treasures; 
and Grace would so much have liked Mr. Lennon to help her 



154 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



to appreciate all these things, and talk to her about them. 
Dore's wonderful depths of darkness and ^flashes of bright sky ; 
Millais's lank and long-limbed women ; Erith's pretty, micro- 
scopic, and emasculate reductions of Hogarth to Victorian scale ; 
grand photographs of Cleopatras and Madonnas from Louvre 
and Dresden gallery ; engravings from glorious and now im- 
mortal John Phillip's Spanish scenes, and from the melancholy 
and colourless beauty of Scheffer's groups ; the pure nakedness 
of Ingres' Source ; and the sensual strength of Gerorne's im- 
perial forms . all these were to Grace as tempting as the magic 
fruits in the garden beneath the earth to Aladdin, the poor 
tailor's boy. But she wanted some one to talk to her about 
them ; and Dr. Alwyn knew so little about art that he made 
the most absurd mistakes, over which he and she were fain to 
laugh ; and though Mrs. Alwyn was clever and knew a good 
deal about them, yet somehow she did not seem to care to talk 
much over them, . they were all so old to her, no doubt. And 
she had evidently no great opinion of Mr. Lennon's judgment; 
for if Grace happened to speak of some painting or statue 
which he particularly admired, Mrs. Alwyn invariably changed 
the subject, and introduced some other work of art. 

The second day passed, and Lennon did not come. He was 
indeed cultivating his garden very assiduously at the other side 
of the broad dim lake, and smoking with a fierce, almost pas- 
sionate energy, and wondering why on earth he was less happy 
now than a week ago. 

Grace hoped and wished and expected that he would come 
all the day and evening and night, and he never came. It 
would be wrong to say that she did not sleep all that night. 
Only very great heroines in splendid romances lie awake 
literally all night. But she remained awake a considerable 
time, and felt vexed, disappointed, and anxious ; and when she 
rose next morning the sense of relief from butcher, baker, and 
candlestick-maker, from Mabel's tears and the maid's stupidity, 
did not seem nearly so delicious as on the previous morning. 

" Do you think, Mrs. Alwyn, that anything can have hap- 
pened to Mr. Lennon . anything sudden or bad 1 " she asked of 
her hostess that morning after breakfast, and when Dr. Alwyn 
had taken himself off to his study to attempt another half-page 
of the slowly-progressing Flora, 

" No, dear ; I am sure nothing of the kind has happened to 
him. Why did you think of such a thing 1 " 



VISITORS TO RALPH. 155 

" Because it is so strange, so very strange, his not coming to 
see me. Don't you think it strange 1 " 

" Yes, perhaps it is ; but he is much occupied, you know, and 
perhaps he means to come to-day." 

" But I thought he would have come at once ; it is so unlike 
him not to come ! If he only came to London for a few hours 
he always ran down by train to see me . to see us ; and this is 
so near him . and, my dear Mrs. Alwyn, so much a pleasanter 
place than ours. And he likes you so much. yes, he often 
told me so." 

Mrs. Alwyn seemed to have heard a noise on the lawn ; for 
she suddenly turned and looked out of the window fixedly. 
After a moment she resumed the conversation : 

" Do you know, Miss Ethelstone . " 

" O don't, please ! everyone calls me Grace. Mr. Lennon 
always does, though he was rather shy and distant at first. I 
told him to call me by my name. If I like anyone, man or 
woman, I like them to call me by my name," said Grace, with 
jmrdonable confusion as to grammar. She ought to have said, 
of course, " I like him or her to call me by my name ; " but she 
did as most of us do in such a case, and committed an error. 

" Well then, Grace . I am sure I like best to call you Grace 
. I had some idea . I don't know what first made me think of 
it . that Mr. Lennon was or had been an admirer, at one time, 
of your aunt, Mrs. Warton." 

" Yes ; and so he was ! It is quite true, though you would 
never think it now. It was long ago . a dozen years or more, 
I believe. He would have married her ; but she would not 
have him . and . " Grace smiled and stopped . " I don't think 
he is very sorry for it now. Mabel is one of the sweetest and 
best women I ever knew. Indeed, Mrs. Alwyn, she has no 
positive faults at all. She is as simple and good as a little 
child. But I don't think any man could much care about her. 
Mr. Lennon would do anything for her, I am sure, and is very 
fond of her ; but, 0, I don't think he is sorry that she did not 
marry him." 

" I daresay not," thought Myra ; and she kept back a sigh. 

" Don't you think I had better go to see him, Mrs. Alwyn 1 " 
Grace asked. 

" To see him, dear ? To see Mr. Lennon 2 " 

" Yes. I am so anxious about him. There must be some 
reason for his not coming, and I must go to see him. It is 



156 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

not far, and I can easily find the way, for I suppose you could 
not come. But if you could and would it would be so good of 
ypu ; and I should be so glad ; and so wotild he too." 

" But, Grace, would it not be rather odd, you going to see 
Mr. Lennon 1 " 

" Would it 1 O, surely not. Why, he is our best friend in 
the world. I do believe he is Mabel's only friend. But even 
if it would be odd, I don't mind. He won't think it odd, I am 
-sure. I know that Dr. Alwyn and you are above such non- 
sense ; and there is nobody else here who knows or cares any- 
thing about me." 

Myra thought for a moment, and then said, 

" Well, dear, if you really have made up your mind to go to 
see Mr. Lennon . " 

" Indeed I have." 

" Then I'll ask Dr. Alwyn to go with you. We can't have 
you going all alone, to get lost in the hills, or fall into the lake, 
or something of that kind." 

" You are very kind to me ; but could you not come your- 
self? That would be so pleasant." 

" No, dear ; I am veiy sorry, but I cannot go, and I am 
afraid it would not be thought quite the thing even for two 
ladies to go out paying visits to their bachelor friends. We are 
rather strong on the proprieties here, Grace ; terribly provincial 
and puritanical, in fact. But Dr. Alwyn will gladly go with 
you. Indeed, the excuse will be very welcome to him, for Mr. 
Lennon is an especial favourite of his." 

"But his work . his book, which he seems so fond of, and so 
anxious to finish ? " 

"Alas, I fear that book will never see public eye, or even 
publisher's eye. There is not a day that somebody's difficulty 
or grief or joy does not postpone it. Don't make any apology 
on that subject, my dear. There is not an old woman in the 
parish for whose sake Dr. Alwyn has not put that work aside ; 
it cannot be any grief to him to lay it down for once for a 
pretty young woman." 

Cheerily indeed did the clergyman accept the task and lay 
down his pen. He had written nearly half a page that day, 
and had hoped to do more ; but what did it matter 1 Old 
Dame Trot or Mother Hubbard would assuredly have pre- 
sently claimed his time if Grace Ethelstone had not bespoken 
it. 



VISITORS TO RALPH. 157 

Miss Ethelstone liked to walk ; and they had a very pleasant 
walk round the lake. There was a ferry to cross ; but if one 
had time to stroll round the margin of the lake, it was a far 
more delightful way of reaching the other side. The day was 
singularly bright and genial for a North-of-England spring ; 
and the east wind, which is such an abiding joy everywhere 
north of the Humber and the Mersey, was not breathing on. 
this favoured morning. Grace felt very happy, hopeful, and 
free. The spring entered her veins. Dr. Alwyn was a genial 
companion ; just the fine, gray-haired, dignified, manly form 
that sets off better than anything save masculine youth the 
figure of a graceful leaning girl. He talked charmingly of the 
place, its scenery, its associations, _its flowers and trees. He 
was one of the few men who could talk to a woman aboiit 
Nature and trees and science without boring her. 

They passed the unfinished rows of Lennon's cottages, and- 
saw the workmen busy. Grace was much interested in hearing 
of the project, and looking at the houses, which were progress- 
ing fast towards completion. Dr. Alwyn was surprised to find 
that she had never heard of the scheme before. 

" Yes, it is strange ; but then Mr. Lennon so seldom talks 
about himself." 

" But Mr. Warton, I thought, might have told you 1 " 

" Mr. Warton," Grace was on the point of saying, " seldom 
talks about anything but himself." But she checked herself 
and said nothing. 

Ralph was not anywhere in the neighbourhood of the cot- 
tages. They went towards his house. It looked lonely, stem, 
and sad. 

" What a picturesque and mournful old place ! " said Miss 
Ethelstone. " It looks as if there ought to be some grim old 
story haunting it. Indeed it ought to have a ghost. Has it a 
ghost, Dr. Alwyn 1 Does any dim white form float over that- 
dreary garden of nights, and wail at the windows 1 " 

" No, I don't think so. At least I have never heard ; and 
we are all so superstitious down here that the faintest sus- 
picion of a ghost runs everywhere, like a report of the breaking 
out of cholera. I think I may pronounce Lennon's house 
unsuspect. I can't get rid of superstition here, Miss Ethel- 
stone, charm I never so wisely." 

" 0, don't try any more. Superstition is popular poetry. 
Please don't exorcise it." 



158 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

They opened the gate and went in. 

"Now, if Mr. Lennon is not in," said Grace, "I shall be so 
disappointed." 

Dr. Alwyn knocked at the heavy door, and spoke no word. 
He would have been relieved if it turned out that Lennon was 
not at home. He was conscious of a sort of desertion of his 
friend lately . his friend whom yet he so much liked. He had 
of course noticed Lennon's marked and continued absence ; and 
he had not of late gone to see him . had not persevered in his 
purpose of talking frankly with him about the cause of the 
unexplained estrangement. He felt within himself that his 
wife had quietly, silently prevailed. Manhood had, as usual, 
made brave resolutions never to surrender, and after all had 
lowered its flag and yielded to the pertinacious, irresistible, 
pitiless petticoat. Was it not the late Madame de Girardin 
who epitomised society in her description of the place where 
every man was governed by his wife but one, and he was 
governed by another man's wife 1 Dr. Alwyn felt that he had 
become a party to something like a desertion of his friend's 
cause, and he was a little embarrassed about meeting the 
friend j ust now. 

Ralph was in, had seen them, and came himself to the 
door, striding past the aged Mrs. Beck's slower movements. 

The visitors came into his library, the only decently fur- 
nished room in the house ; and even here was hardly a chair 
which a lady might fearlessly sit on who cared about the spot- 
lessness of her dress. The room was confusedly full of books 
::nd papers and plans ; and had a gun hung up, and a revolver 
and other pistols lying about ; and the lion's skin which Watty 
so longed to see, and on which Grace's eyes fell the moment she 
entered the room ; and there were huge boots, suited for an 
Australian, standing boldly up in a corner near the fire ; and 
there were globes and a telescope and a quadrant ; and there 
stood gleaming in whiteness and serene beauty, amid all the 
confusion and debris and pell-mell incongruity, a small marble 
copy of Thorwaldsen's Night. 

The greeting was very cordial, and the sweet, clear, joyous 
tones of a girl's voice sounded wonderfully strange and musical 
in the sad old dusty place. An Italian sky could not have 
gladdened a landscape more than Grace's words made 
bright the atmosphere of the place Ralph Lennon called his 
home. 



VISITORS TO KALPH. 159 

But the conversation did not get on well except for the part 
she took in it. Between the two men there was a dim inar- 
ticulate feeling which rose up like a film or a screen. 
Neither could be thoroughly frank. Each knew that the 
other was conscious of the difficulty. 

The visitors at last rose to return. 

"We saw your walls rising as we came along," said Dr. 
Alwyn ; " your building operations seem to get on very 
rapidly." 

" Yes ; we keep at them, Tom Berry and I. We keep 
pegging away, and they do get on somehow." 

" Come and show them to us yourself, Mr. Lennon," said 
Grace, "and explain all about the whole affair. You never 
told me a word of it before, which was not very friendly." 

" There was nothing to tell, Grace. The building up of a 
few walls would hardly interest you, two hundred and odd 
miles away. But I shall be very glad indeed to walk down 
with you and trot out my hobby, until you have had enough 
of its paces. 

So they walked down to the model village, and Ralph ex- 
plained all that he meant to do, but rather hurriedly or care- 
lessly.not perhaps as he would have done if Grace and he 
had been alone. He slurred over many points ; and he never 
allowed a gleam of enthusiasm to break over the recital. Miss 
Ethelstone was somewhat puzzled, and looked so. 

" Perhaps I don't make myself quite understood 1 " he said, 
in answer to the expression in her face. 

Dr. Alwyn had just at this moment entered one of the 
nearly-finished houses. 

" Yes ; yes . I quite understand all that you say ; but 
there is something I don't understand." 

" What is that, Miss Ethelstone ?" 

" Yourself, Mr. Lennon." 

" Why ! How 1 What is your difficulty T 

" I don't know. You don't seem like yourself down here. 
You talk so coolly, and so strangely. I can't explain it ; but 
you are not the same being at all that we see you in our 
place. Why do you live in that sad and lonely old house 1" 

Lennon laughed. 

" Well, it is rather a grim and ghostly old place, I dare say ; 
and I make no doubt it looks unbearable, almost uninhabitable, 
to a stranger; but it suits me very well, Grace, I am used 



160 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



to it, you know. I was born there, and lived there a great 
many years . some of them very happy years too ; and I don't 
dislike it ; in fact I like it much. An ill-favoured thing, but 
mine own. And then, as to being lonely, why, I dare say I 
should be lonely anywhere. I feel dreadfully alone when I 
go to the Eleanor's cross hotel in London, and have to be put 
into a back bed-room six flights up, because the place is so full." 

" Yes ; but I don't mean that. You don't know anybody 
in the Eleanor' s-cross hotel . " 

" Pardon me ; I do. One of the waiters is an especial friend 
of mine. I have found out that he is a terribly discontented 
man, who thinks the order of things is fearfully warped. He 
has a settled dislike to all the institutions of his country, in- 
cluding, I believe, the Throne and the Altar : and we com- 
mune together, and mingle our griefs." 

" Nonsense ! But you do know people here ; and why don't 
you go to see them 1 Why do you live like an anchorite, or 
an Eastern saint 1" 

" I know very few people here, Grace ; very few indeed. 
I am not a sociable or convivial personage ; and I don't care 
about my fellow-man." 

" No ! and yet you are taking all this trouble to do some 
good to your fellow-man ! But just now I was not thinking 
about your fellow-man in general, only of people whom you 
know. And I, who am not your fellow-man, have a grievance 
of my own. Why didn't you come to see me ? " 

" I ought to have done so ; but there were difficulties which 
I don't care to trouble you by explaining . " 

" Because you think I have not sense enough to under- 
stand them ?" 

" Indeed for no sxich reason. But they are not all mine to 
tell. I ought to have gone to see you before now ; but I counted 
on seeing you somehow." 

" I am glad you did. I should be sorry, Mr. Lennon, if you 
thotight me ungrateful and . and stupid enough not to care 
about seeing you ; for I have not so many friends that I could 
afford to neglect one of them . the best of them : so I was 
coming to see you to-day all alone, only Mrs. Alwyn sent her 
kind and dear husband with me to take care of me." 

The kind and dear husband now made his appearance. 

" You are going to have quite a Phalanstery here, Lennon. 
I suppose this largest building is meant for schools ?" 



VISITORS TO EALPH. 161 

" Yes. We are going to have a boys' and a girls' school ; 
and men and women, I hope, will learn there too." 

" Who is going to teach ?" 

" Well the fact is, we'll all teach as best we can." 

" That is, I suppose, you will teach V 

"Not I alone, or especially. Everybody who knows any- 
thing shall teach what he or she knows. Among the whole, 
I daresay we all shall teach and learn something." 

Alwyn smiled. Teaching of that sort seemed to him edu- 
cation for Colney Hatch. 

" Mutual improvement," he remarked. .' One man discoursing 
of what he doesn't understand to others who don't understand 
him, eh ?" 

" Nothing of the sort," replied Lennon, with imperturbable 
good-humour ; " that is the established system of teaching. 
The teacher is supposed to know everything, which means that 
he knows nothing. Ours shall be true education. Suppose 
you come here and teach us the Greek grammar. Very good ; 
that you understand, and we don't ; so we are glad to be 
taught by you. But in return Tom Berry gives you, who 
have become in your turn a student with us, some lessons in 
practical geometry and mensuration, which I am sure you 
don't now understand half as well as he does." 

"And you yourself? What is your department of in- 
struction 1 " 

" 0, anything that comes in my way. Let us say geography, 
for example. I can describe what a mountain is like, or a tro- 
pical climate, or an Australian goldfield." 

"And the girls, I suppose, teach you all how to mend 
stockings and rock cradles, as their contribution to the new 
scheme of complete and practical education 1 " 

" No; the girls we are rather puzzled about just yet; we 
don't quite see our way, my ' mate ' Tom Berry and I. We 
rather avoid that part of the scheme just at present." 

" O, you can't be without a regular teacher for the girls," 
broke in Grace, decisively. " There is nothing you could in- 
duce them to learn ; and they have nothing to teach. I wish 
I might come and settle down here, and become mistress-in- 
chief of the girls' school. I don't know anything myself, but I 
daresay I could learn. By rising early, and always keeping a 
lesson or two ahead, I get on very well with the children at 
home. Do engage me, Mr. Lennon." 

M 



162 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" I don't want to discourage you, Lennon," said Dr. Alwyn ; 
" but your scheme seems to me likely to come to dismal failure. 
My dear fellow, you cannot remodel o\ir canny Cumberland 
lads and lasses, and make them into disciples of Louis Blanc, or 
Brook- Farm followers of Margaret Fuller." 

" Yet don't give up, Mr. Lennon," said Grace, boldly. " In- 
deed, I need not advise you, for I know you will not give up ; 
and my advice in any case is worth nothing, You will gain at 
least gratitude by your effojrt." 

" I doubt it," Dr. Alwyn rejoined, rather sadly ; " I never 
heard of anybody who earned gratitude by trying to persuade 
people to be good or happy in any way but their own." 

" You talk to me in this way," Lennon said, . " you who 
spend three-fourths of all your time, and I don't know what 
proportion of your income, in trying to make the people round 
you good and happy ! . There is a preacher for you, Miss 
Ethelstone, who points his friends the prudent and selfish way, 
and always walks the other road himself! Would you believe 
it, Grace 1 there is not an improvident family for miles round 
that this rigid political economist has not counselled, helped, 
and relieved ; and even if all be in vain to-day, they will come 
upon him again to-morrow, and he will lecture them gravely 
on their wickedness and folly, and open his purse and give 
them another chance." 

" I could believe anything of both of you," said Grace, with 
an inexplicable moisture gleaming in her eyes ; " anything in 
the way of goodness." 

" Anything in the way of absurdity would be better, perhaps," 
Dr. Alwyn said. " Come, Miss Ethelstone, we must leave our 
Communist philosopher and go. . Good-bye, Lennon, until we 
meet again. I wish you every manner of luck with your 
scheme ; but I don't hope for it. You are impervious to the 
dictates of common sense . and selfishness." 

He wrung Lennon's hand with a warm and manly grasp ; 
and the film which had risen between the two was scattered 
for the moment, and each saw clearly the true heart of the 
other. 

" But when shall I see you again, Mr. Lennon 1 " asked 
Grace. " I have never heard anything from you about my 
sketch ; and I want-to talk to you." 

" You shall come as often as you please, Miss Ethelstone," 
said the Rector ; " if . if Mr. Lennon is too much engaged to 



VISITORS TO RALPH. 163 

come our way, we must only walk down here and find 
him." 

" I do so wish Mr. Lennon were my uncle," said Grace, 
frankly to Dr. Alwyn, as they lost sight of the Phalanstery and 
turned homeward. 

" Do you 1 " he asked somewhat emphatically ; and he 
looked with an expression of good-humoured curiosity into her 
clear candid eyes. They met his inquiry with unclouded 
sincerity. 

" 0, yes ; I should like it of all things. He has so fine a 
nature, and he is so kind ; and he is fond of me. I wish he 
were my uncle . or I wish far more that he were my father. 
But he is not old enough for that." 

" No. Is not that a pity ? " 

But she did not answer that question so readily, and Dr. 
Alwyn was left to infer that on the whole she did not wish 
Ralph Lennon to be any nearer to the patriarchal age thau he 
was. 

It is almost a literal truth to say that Grace Ethelstone had 
never known until within the last twelve months any man but 
Walter Warton. Her father she hardly remembered ; she had 
no brother. She was a little girl when she used to sit on 
Warton's knee, and thought him splendid in beauty and virtue ; 
and it was only when, after her mother's death, she came to 
live under the roof which was nominally his that she began to 
see him truly. Then she assumed that all men were more or 
less of the same mould ; that their intellects and their pursuits 
made them contemptuous of women ; that they were ardent to 
get away from their wives and slow to return ; that between 
the two there was only at best . and that when the woman 
was very loving and docile . something of the sort of com- 
panionship which exists between man and the dog that lies on 
the hearth-rug at his feet. She accepted the condition of 
things as an inevitable decree of the ruling powers ; but ac- 
cepted it with a blending of contempt for her own sex and 
hostility towards the other. Accepting "Walter Warton as the 
type of the latter, she took Mabel for an exemplar of the 
former ; and she was hardly more inclined to blame the men 
than to despise the women. Ralph Lennon was the first man 
who treated her like a rational being and like a friend ; and 
she therefore felt drawn towards him even from the beginning. 
It was delightful to her to meet with such men as Lennon and 

m 2 



to 



164 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Dr. Alwyn. As she walked home, leaning on the arm of the 
latter, she somewhat modified the wish she had just been 
expressing. She thought nothing could be more delightful 
than to have Dr. Alwyn for a father, or even an uncle, and 
Mr. Lennon for a brother. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

REVEALED. 

MANY days after that day Grace Ethelstone walked round 
by the lake towards the Phalanstery ; and she walked 
thither alone : for Mrs. Alwyn had constant occupation, and 
Grace would not be the cause of always disturbing Dr. Alwyn 
from the culture of the Flora. And she always met Ralph 
Lennon, and they walked together for a little . perhaps by 
the lake, perhaps among the cottages ; and they were both 
frankly, unaffectedly happy in these meetings, which were 
unconcealed, open, and so far only friendly. And the days 
thus ran on ; and the visit drew to a close. 

One day Lennon was looking after his work as usual, and 
had not yet begun even to glance in the direction of the lake ; 
for it was nmch earlier than the time when Grace generally 
walked that way. But happening to look upward, he was 
aware, as the old ballads have it, of a figure now very familiar 
to him, and which came rather slowly and hesitatingly towards 
him. He strode to meet her. It was Grace ; but she was not 
in her usual spirits, and, indeed, talked with difficulty and 
evident uneasiness. 

Men naturally shy, like Lennon, always approach any diffi- 
cult question . when they do approach it . with surprising 
directness and suddenness. 

" Something has happened to you, Grace," he said ; " tell me 
what it is." 

" Nothing very remarkable, Mr. Lennon. Nothing worth 
speaking of." 

" But do tell me. You are unhappy 1 " 

" Yes, I am." She turned her clear eyes sadly on him, and 
Ralph could not but see that they had lately been swimming 
in tears. 



REVEALED. 165 

""Will you not tell me the cause? Can I do anything? 
Have you heard any bad news from home 1 " 

" No ; not bad news of that sort. I mean not deaths or 
sickness ; but poor Mabel and the children ! 0, I am so sorry 
for them . and I ought not to be here ! " 

" My dear child, do tell me what has happened ; perhaps 
I can give you advice or help of some kind." 

" Indeed I am ashamed to tell you ; and I know I ought not 
to tell it to you ; but I have no one to confide in except you. 
I can't talk to Mrs. Alwyn about it, though she is a woman, 
and so sweet and kind ; but she does not know anything about 
us . and you have known us always . and indeed I daresay," 
she said, flashing up to warmth, " it will be little new to you 
after all, -when you hear it. Mr. Lennon, we are dreadfully 
poor, as you know ; and now Mabel is in some terrible fix or 
other about money ; and Walter hasn't any ; and I don't know 
what isn't going to happen . and the poor children . and she's 
written me such a letter all about it . and there . read it, 
please ; I can't say any more." And Grace fairly broke down 
in tears, and perhaps on the whole felt relieved that the worst 
was over . that the agony of exposure she had fought against 
had fairly conquered, and that there was nothing for it but to 
cover her vanquished face with her handkerchief. 

Lennon took the letter, very much relieved indeed as to the 
nature of the trouble, but greatly distressed to see her grief. 
His impulse was to put his arms in brotherly fashion round the 
poor girl, and kiss her and beg of her not to cry ; and it would 
not perhaps have been very wrong even if he had done so ; 
but he did not obey the impulse. He turned the letter in his 
hand, hesitatingly and rather awkwardly. 

" My dear Grace, don't give way so. It's all nothing . a 
trifling affair, I am sure, not worth your thinking about ; and 
it can easily be set right. Do you really wish me to read this 
letter 1 " 

" Yes, please ; " with a half-impatient gesture. He read the 
letter : it was short, not very coherent, blotted here and there, 
written under excitement enough easily to overthrow poor 
Mabel's self-command; but it was not a very- huge business. 
Somebody wanted two hundred pounds, and if the amount were 
not paid within a few days, execution must follow ; and "Walter 
was away, Mabel did not even know where; and it would be such 
a dreadful thing for him . such an exposure when he came back. 



166 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Is that all 1 " asked Kalph. 

" Yes ; that's all, for the present. Isn't that enough 1 " She 
had had her flood of tears now, and was reviving ; and she sent 
back something like a faint smile in response to his. 

" Well, it's not a very dreadful business. Walter is away ; 
and Mabel, of course, can't get at the money until he comes 
back." 

She stole a side-look at his face to see if there was anything 
of doubt expressed in it ; but his countenance was imperturbably 
calm . apparently he had the fullest confidence in Warton's 
personal solvency. 

" And, of course, in the mean time, all Mabel has to do is to 
ask any of her friends to advance her the money. Walter can't 
be angry with her for doing so when he knows that the demand 
came suddenly on her ; and ladies don't keep hundreds of pounds 
ready in their work-boxes or desks. Any friend whatever will 
advance her the money ; I daresay she has received it by this 
time ; but, perhaps, just to make all sure, it would be as well 
if I were to give you the amount. It's only writing a cheque, 
and you can send it." 

The framing of this speech was in Lennon's mind a master- 
stroke of diplomacy. The cool easy way of treating the whole 
thing as a little difficulty only caused by Walter Warton's 
temporary absence ; the calm assumption that hosts of friends 
were ready to supply the momentary deficiency ; and the care- 
less suggestion at the close that it might be well, just to make 
security doubly sure, that he should also give the money . all 
this was magnificently contrived to take away the slightest 
appearance of conferring an obligation. Perhaps it was only 
too well contrived ; perhaps the preternatural coolness and 
carelessness were too much. Certainly Grace already began to 
feel ashamed, and was penitent for having so freely exposed the 
petty humiliating secrets of the poverty that surrounded her 
house. She crimsoned at the thought that she had perhaps 
opened herself to the suspicion of having made an indirect 
appeal to Lennon for money ; she was so much confused and 
embarrassed that she could not speak a word. 

Meanwhile Lennon, wholly unconscious of this, and indeed 
happy in the thought that his careless and business-like deport- 
ment had made exactly the impression he wanted to produce, 
was quietly and with sidelong glances investigating the contents 
of his pocket-book, in which he had that very morning stowed 



REVEALED. 1G7 

away some bank-notes. He found that he had enough of those 
papers for his purpose ; and he crumpled them in his hand, and 
seized his opportunity. 

" Perhaps, Grace, now that I think of it, it may be as well 
to save Mrs. Warton the trouble of dealing with a cheque ; 
ladies don't always quite understand these matters . and I 
happen now to have a note or two here . and if you will just 
enclose these to her when you write ; and I am going to town 
next week myself, and we can settle the whole affair." He 
endeavoured to put the crumpled papers into her hand ; but 
she drew back. 

" O don't, Mr. Lennon ; please don't ask me. You are very 
kind ; but don't ask me." 

" Why not, Grace 1 " 

" Because it pains and shames me, and shows me how wrong 
and thoughtless it was of me to have exposed poor Mabel's 
poverty at all." 

" There is nothing to be ashamed of ; and I don't think it 
can be called exposure to confide in a very old and, believe me, 
a very true friend." 

" Yes ; but when I confided it to you, I never thought you 
would suppose I was begging for . for help." 

" For shame ! How can you talk so 1 how can you suppose 
I ever thought anything of the kind ? Begging for help ! 
Would you not ask me to stretch out my hand if you wished 
to be helped across that brook there ? My dear child, you 
make this nonsensical affair far too serious. What possible 
reason can there be why Mrs. Warton should not accept a 
momentary helping hand from me just at this moment, or why 
you should interpose to prevent it 1 Come, Grace, do be a 
rational girl, and oblige me." 

" O don't, Mr. Lennon ; don't ask me, don't press me. I 
cannot and will not do it. Don't make me feel our poverty yet 
more bitter and humiliating than before." 

" You have not a friend on earth who would go farther or do 
more to save you from one moment of bitterness or humiliation 
than I would. You misunderstand me wilfully, Grace." 

" Indeed, indeed I do not." 

" Then why make an obligation and a humiliation, and what 
not, out of the offer of a temporary loan of this trifle, this 
trash ] Do you think a man would thus reject the helping 
hand of a friend % " 



168 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" I don't know, Mr. Lennon ; but I cannot take it. It only 
pains me to think of it, and makes me feel I have done some- 
thing wrong and unwomanly, perhaps, -when I spoke of the 
affair at all." 

" Then you will not let me help you 1 " 

" Ah, no . I cannot." 

They were crossing a little bridge of rude planks which 
spanned a stream that rippled musically enough in summer, 
but now rushed a roaring torrent down from some source in a 
mountain cleft to the calm lake. Yielding to an impulse of 
vexation, Lennon crushed the rejected notes in his hand, and 
tossed the little paper ball into the torrent, which soon swept 
it away. Instantly he felt ashamed of his boyish and foolish 
petulance, and hoped the girl at his side had not seen his 
action. But she had. 

" O, Mr. Lennon, what a shame, and what a sin ! That might 
have made ever so many poor families happy." 

" "Well, Grace, I confess that I am rather ashamed of my 
display of petulance ; and I am sorry to have been detected, at 
all events, which is as far an advance on the way to penitence 
as some of us ever get. Eut I repudiate the sin ; and I transfer 
its responsibility all to your shoulders. Why did you make 
-me angry, child, with your absurd punctiliousness and un- 
friendly nonsense ? " 

" Are you angry, really ; and did I offend you 1 " 

" No, you didn't offend me ; but I am angry, very angry." 

She looked seriously into his face. 

" Well, I think you are angry. I never thought you could 
.be. I did not suppose anything ever disturbed you. But I 
.hope you will forgive me. You know . you must know 1 did 
not mean to vex you, or to be unfriendly. But, Mr. Lennon, 
I could not act otherwise. You must leave me the delight of 
being independent . yes, independent even of you." 

She laid her hand upon his, timidly and conciliatingly. Balph 
looked down at the fair face with its frank and noble expression, 
childlike in its confiding, intelligent simplicity, and the bright 
eyes, in which still glittered a tear. All his vexation vanished, 
and a deep breath of new emotion swept over his heart. He 
stooped, and kissed her cheek. It was done without tbouo-ht, 
without intention ; the result of a sudden and uncontrollable 
impulse. But that kiss closed all the volume of his old life . 



KEVEALED. 1G9 

and, for joy or sorrow, a new chapter of existence opened to 
him that moment. 

As for Grace, she blushed a little, but did not start or draw 
back ; indeed, she had no time to draw back, or express sur- 
prise, or anger, or anything. She took the kiss innocently, 
and seemed to regard it as a brotherly seal of forgiveness. 

" Now I am forgiven," she said, "and I am happy again ; but 
I nrust stay no longer. I am going back to-morrow ; I must 
go back, indeed, for Mabel will be lonely and disturbed ; and 
I have remained much longer than I ever intended . and in 
truth I have been so very happy here that I am not so anxious 
to go back as I ought to be. I shall not see you again . this 
time ; but you said you are soon to be in town 'I " 

" Soon 1 " He spoke in rather a distrait tone. " Oh yes, 
very soon. I am going up in a day or two." 

" And you will come to see us 1 " 

" Yes, without fail." 

"Good-bye, Mr. Lennon." 

" Good-bye, Grace." He held her hand in his a moment, 
irresolutely. Some words seemed to be trembling on his lips. 
But they remained unspoken. He raised his hat. She turned 
and walked rapidly away. He still remained upon the spot 
where they had stood. As she reached a corner of the road 
she turned and looked back. He saw her, and signalled a 
farewell. Then she disappeared ; but he still remained mo- 
tionless. 

He remained there for many minutes, during which he saw 
neither the sky nor the sun, nor the water that rushed and 
sparkled at his feet. One thought, one form rose between him 
and the light, and filled up for the moment his whole horizon. 
A fierce wild joy, like a rushing wind, swept through him, and, 
having raved and raged for a few moments, died out and left 
the rugged surface of his nature a desert as before. For he 
knew that he loved the girl who had just left him ; and first 
recognition of a new passion in any strong nature is always a 
joy and an exultation. At least, the solitude that is called 
peace was closed in storm of some kind ; the long, long canker 
of peace was over and done. The volcanic fire of man's deepest 
affection had not burnt itself out in him, as lately he had 
thought. The soul had re-entered the sepulchre ; the dead had 
arisen. Ralph Lennon exulted in the glow of his newly- 
revived emotion, in the surviving strength and energy of his 



170 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

passion, as Durnas's prisoner of the Chateau d'lf rejoiced when 
he tested the strength he was about to use in freedom, and 
found that even fourteen years of a dungeon under the sea had 
not worn it wholly away. True, the reaction came, and Lennon 
looked face to face upon himself . upon his eight-and-thirty 
years or more, upon his life, wasted first in pleasure that 
brought no happiness, and next in labour that gave no con- 
tent ; and he thought of the bright youth, the childlike sim- 
plicity, the fresh, free, unworn intelligence of the girl he could 
not but love ; and he asked himself how it was possible that 
such a love could end in anything but barrenness and disap- 
pointment. How could she love him 1 And if she could, or if 
in her heedless youth she could be brought to fancy that she 
did, would it not be a rash and selfish and cruel thing to accept 
such a sacrifice from one who now could hardly appreciate its 
value ? 

Unconsciously he flung his hand into the air, as if he would 
toss the whole subject from him . scatter the whole dream ; and 
he strode back to his Phalanstery. Often he worked there 
with his own hands, taking lessons from Tom Berry in carpen- 
tering, from some one else in mason's work, and so on ; not 
always, perhaps, forwarding very decidedly the object of pro- 
gress, and certainly not often quite delighting the professional 
workers by Lis cooperation. This day he toiled away at one 
thing and another until his face was all grime and his clothes 
were all lime and shavings ; and when night came he tramped 
some miles up one of the passes in the hills, and wandered 
about, and lost himself, and found the track again, and got 
home long after midnight, and smoked and read until near the 
dawn, and then slept heavily until noon had fully come. And 
through all the working, walking, reading, sleeping, the common, 
vain, immemorial regret ran through his sense and soul like a 
sad symphony . the regret for youth, the youth which would at 
least have made him less unfit for her whom now he knew that 
he loved. 

And she ? After she had left him and gone a little way she 
looked back, as we have said, and saw him. When she had 
rounded the curve of the road she paused, looked both ways, 
saw that no one was near, and then came back to the corner 
again and cast her eyes to where Lennon still stood. But he 
was not looking that way. He was listlessly gazing at the 
water beneath his feet. She remained there still, and presently 



REVEALED. 171 

she saw him go away ; and he had never once looked in the 
direction she had taken. So she went on her way, cheating, or 
trying to cheat herself, as people will, into the belief that she 
was very glad he had not looked, lest he might have seen her ; 
and thus endeavouring to silence the inner craving voice that 
moaned, " Why did he not look 1 " and answered, " Because he 
was not thinking of me." For though the sensation which 
began of late days more and more to fill Grace Ethelstone's 
heart was wholly, absolutely strange and new to her, its strange- 
ness did not deceive her ; nay, that very strangeness announced 
its real nature and spoke its name. It was as new and strange, 
and yet as impossible to misunderstand, as that other new and 
strange throb which the youDg wife feels beneath her bosom, 
and which she cannot fail to know. Men and women appa- 
rently in full health, a moment ago unconscious of any inner 
and fatal weakness, have sometimes felt a strange, wonderful, 
ineffable pang of unknown pain thrill through them, and gasp- 
ing for utterance have said, " This is death ; I am going to 
die ! " and so died. Love and death have from time out of 
mind been objects of comparison and contrast. They bear this 
other resemblance, that their coming is least likely to be mis- 
understood when the feelings that announce it are most new 
and strange to the invaded heart. 

So Grace Ethelstone knew that what she felt towards Lennon 
was love, and nothing else. But she believed that he cared for 
her only as a friend . as he might care for a boy. She did not 
think that in his broad, robust, and masculine nature, . en- 
lightened by so many experiences and so much culture, haunted 
by the shades of so much suffering, and cheered by so many 
definite and practical objects, schemes, and hopes, ^-her small 
individuality could fill up much space. Had he looked back 
that time and seen her, Heaven knows what womanly hope and 
pride it might have caused to burn within her ; but now she 
mentally vowed that she never expected anything of the kind, 
and could not be brought to believe in it. Tears were in her 
eyes as she hastened home, and she dreaded to meet any one 
on the way. Yet on the whole she might almost be called 
happy. She had found her hero, whom she could worship in 
secret ; and the life of a woman is a blank until she has found 
her hero. As in the charming German story which we all 
know and admire, the soul only seems to enter the frame of 
woman through the magical inspiration caught by contact with 



172 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



some nature which she believes heroic, and yearns to and loves. 
" I must go back," thought poor Grace, " to my dull place, and 
my efforts to encourage Mabel, and my struggles and shifts ; 
and I have no one to speak to of what I feel, and I shall pro- 
bably never come here any more. But I shall see him some- 
times ; and at least he will think of me as a friend, and he will 
encourage me in my own path . and that is all." 

Mrs. Alwyn saw her cross the lawn, and noted her downcast 
eyes, her heightened colour, her hurrying step ; and she in- 
stinctively avoided meeting her guest just then. She went 
into her own room, and knelt and prayed, and wept perhaps, 
and flamed in silent anger against herself, and started like a 
surprised criminal when she heard her husband's genial mellow 
voice below. At last she schooled and conquered herself, and 
came downstairs all brightness, warmth, and affection. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

"lennox's folly." 

AS the model village began to become at last an accomplished 
fact, Lennon's difficulties with his neighbours became 
greater and greater. Mere difficulty in setting the scheme 
going and helping to work it he had fully counted on, and 
rather liked ; but he did not calculate upon the stiff chopping 
breeze of religious and moral objection which he was now to 
encounter. 

Only two months had passed away since we last saw him, 
and he was already banned by the religious microcosm of 
Waterdale. Even Dr. Alwyn, his much-enduring, tolerant, 
and patient friend, had preached against him, and condemned 
his philanthropise efforts as a godless illusion, a stumbling- 
block, and a snare. He had preached this out of the pulpit of 
his church ; and wherever he went, into whatever villa, or 
cottage, or shop, he declared his condemnation of Lennon's 
scheme as irreligious and republican, setting class against class, 
and ignoring the teachings of the Church. For when once 
Dr. Alwyn came to think that anything really was irreligious 
he gave it no tolerance. He could shut his eyes to candles, 
and his ears to questionable chantings at wrong moments . he 



" lennon's folly." 173 

was not very rigid as regards the exact size of Noah's ark, and 
he was quite content to let geology have its say, he fearing 
not ; but there were bounds to his principles of toleration, as 
there are to those of most people, and Lennon had quite uncon- 
sciously transgressed them. 

Marry, how 1 What ignorant sin had he committed ? 

First of all he followed Carlyle's advice, and took his stand 
on the alphabet. In other words, he invited to his village 
schools all boys and girls, men and women, who would come 
and receive a purely secular instruction. He taught arith- 
metic and spelling and history and geography ; and left his 
pupils and fellow-students to get their religious teaching else- 
where . -which they could easily do, for, backward as the place 
was, there was no lack whatever of machinery for the teaching 
of sectarian dogma, and the lists of the great kings and cap- 
tains of the Scriptures, and who begat whom. Truly these 
bones of theology and Jewish history Dr. Alwyn and his wife 
had begun to clothe a little with the flesh, and quicken with 
the spirit, of warm Christian faith and charity and enlighten- 
ment ; but even their approaches in that direction were over 
dusty, dry, and uninviting ground, the Waterdale instincts 
much preferring the hard and gritty old routine of teaching 
by rote and letter, which vexed not the brain and troubled not 
the heart. But against Lennon, who, as he said himself, could 
only " go in " for secular education, and thought he had better 
do that than do nothing, leaving the other work to other men . 
against him all united and combined. The ruling elders of the 
place rose as a man against unadulterated geography, and told 
all their dependents and confiding followers that arithmetic on 
its own merits stood condemned. Even Dr. Alwyn felt a 
little ashamed of his following, though not of his cause, when 
a good lady of Waterdale discovered heresy in a doctrine which 
she was given to understand Mr. Lennon taught or sanctioned 
. the belief, namely, that of the stars which were made solely 
for man's mere use and enjoyment, tapers to light his nightly 
path, there were probably certain orbs so far away that man's 
eyes or instruments could never get to see a ray of them. If 
this was not heresy, then, the worthy lady asked Dr. Alwyn, 
what was 1 And his attempt mildly and soothingly to con- 
vince her that her judgment was somewhat rash, only made 
her more wroth against the heresy and indignant with the 
heretic. 



174 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Then it must be owned that the cooperation of Tom Berry 
did not much tend to render Lennon's scheme popular with 
elders and vested interests. " Whatever a man of the sons of 
men shall say in his heart of the lords above," Tom Berry was 
very apt to say out aloud of the aristocratic, moneyed, and 
other classes who are lords above of our social system. More- 
over, he had the ill-luck to infuse a savour of his old-world 
views into whatever subject he talked about, with whomsoever 
he talked. That every evil wherewith this country is occa- 
sionally afflicted is due to the pressui'e of an aristocratic and 
oligarchical system, kept up partly by peers, partly by mil- 
lionaires, and partly by the timid or time-serving politicians 
who truckle to them, was Tom's principal article of faith. No 
Calvanist, no Hebrew, no Spanish Catholic, ever held to his 
creed with a more thorough and intolerant belief than Tom did 
to this. He made it his touchstone of all human worth. 
Blench from these principles, and you must be either a craven 
or a knave. Third way there was none. Even Lennon this 
last of the Chartists sometimes suspected in bitter and dis- 
trustful moments, when he saw him friendly with Walter 
Warton or confiding with the Alwyns ; and the more these 
latter became gradually estranged from Ealph, the more Tom 
admired his leader and rejoiced. 

The cottages did not fill. Some few families were there ; 
but the occupants most ready to offer themselves were so 
plainly of the tramp class that their application had to be 
instantly rejected ; and the resident population more and more 
fought shy of the business. As yet the vainest of dreamers 
could not flatter himself that he had accomplished any good. 
The self-governing system had not even got into operation, for 
there were not people enough in occupation to set it going. 
The schools ceased to have students. The tramp class came 
and occupied cottages here and there of nights, and could 
hardly be ejected until, desiring change of scene, they chose to 
depart of their own good pleasure. An incident occurred, too, 
which brought even graver scandal. 

Readers will remember casual mention of a certain Bessie 
Eaynes, to whom Mrs. Alwyn had been very kind, and about 
whom she once expressed herself to her husband as very uneasy. 
Bessie had been unwisely listening to the compliments of a 
young man of much better class than her own ; and scandal 



" lennon's folly." 1 75 

had come ; and Bessie had been much reproved, and promised 
to be wiser in future, and became not any wiser. 

Bessie one day left the place, and disappeared . not too soon, 
people said ; " for you know one can't help noticing, my dear," 
one virtuous matron remarked to another ; " and really when 
I saw her the night before last, I could not but see," &c, &c. 

She disappeared, and the neighbourhood thought they had a 
good riddance of her for ever ; and the young man alluded to 
had gone abroad for some time ; and people thought the whole 
thing was happily got over. But after some months had 
elapsed, Tom Berry, going one morning into one of the empty 
cottages, was encountered by a feeble moan and two wistful 
hollow eyes ; and saw a thing all rags and rain huddled on the 
floor ; and learned that wretched Bessie Raynes had been only 
wandering a helpless vagrant through the country, and had 
come back, fate-driven, to the familiar place, and, not daring to 
knock at any door once friendly, had crept from the rain-storm 
that was pouring down into the desolate cottage, and prayed 
that she might not be turned from the fireless hearth. 

Tom Berry assuredly was not the man to expel her. She 
was in his eyes now simply one other victim of a bloated and 
profligate aristocracy. the gi'andfather of her seducer, be it 
remarked, was a man who had made money in Liverpool by 
selling candles. Tom Berry told the story to Lennon, who 
insisted on his old housekeeper (whose niece indeed the girl 
was) going to look after her, and had the cottage furnished and 
warmed, and made comfortable for her, and had a doctor to 
attend upon her constantly, until her infant was born and she 
died. Whereupon Mrs. Beck, stimulated by Balph, and herself 
now somewhat penitent, gave the child over to a married niece 
of her husband's to be cared for and brought up ; and Lennon 
undertook to meet the expense of maintaining it ; and Tom 
Berry constantly went to look after it ; and 0, what a scandal 
the whole story created, and what explanations were invented 
to save human nature the pain of believing in any disinterested 
benevolence ! Indeed if the half-empty cluster of cottages had 
been the Agapemone of a Mormon colony there could not have 
been more shaking of the head and shuddering, than there was 
since the unlucky day when an outcast woman died and a 
nameless child was born there. 

So the Lennon scheme was becoming day by day a more and 



176 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

more disastrous failure. It might well have been called, as 
Dr. Alwyn predicted, Lennon's Folly. Lennon himself was 
highly unpopular all over the neighbourhood ; and at last it 
would have been difficult to name the excess of heresy and 
general wickedness which the good people of Waterdale would 
not have believed him. quite ready to plunge into. 

He held his ground however, very coolly, and by no means 
gave up the fight. 

" Time and you and I, Tom, against any three," he said one 
day (paraphrasing the words of Walter Scott) to his trusty 
henchman. 

Tom shook his head. 

" They're a rotten lot here," was the henchman's forcible 
remark. " There's nothing in them, poor creatures ; no more 
back-bone than a wet playbill. I'm sick of them all ; and if I 
was you, Mr. Lennon, I'd cut the whole wretched concern, and 
go right away back to Australia." 

But Lennon's thoughts and hopes were not now fixed quite 
exclusively on the success of his project of futile benevolence. 
He paid frequent visits to London, and was beginning to think 
himself growing younger. 

" Iso, Tom," he replied cheerily, "I'm not going to give in 
just yet. These people are dreadfully averse to novelty of any 
kind ; wait a little until they get used to the thing, and you 
may be sure they will come round. We can afford to live down 
their bad opinion." 

Tom felt inclined to express in strong terms his absolute con- 
tempt for their opinion, good or bad ; but he only shrugged his 
shoulders, and said nothing. 

" Warton's going in for the borough over at last," said Tom, 
changing the subject. 

The borough which Tom spoke of was the small town of 
JSTortbinglen, a few miles off, on which Warton had long had 
designs, and which was, in fact, his last chance of a seat in 
Parliament. We have already noticed a peculiarity about this 
borough which rendered it fitting for the purpose. It was 
essentially a working-man's constituency . one of the few which 
chance, and 1832, and freemen's franchises, and other things 
had spared ; and no man might hope to sit for that borough 
who did not please the sturdy Northern working men ; and the 
votes of these decent artisans no man might buy for gallons of 
ale or sly bank-notes slipped into the hands of ready-witted 



FOLLY." 177 

wives. Therefore there was a chance there for Warton, and a 
tempting prospect for the Tories, who had usually little hope of 
obtaining the control of such a seat. Could Warton talk over 
the working voters there into the belief that, while Toryism 
and bloated aristocracy were bad things in the abstract, and 
usually admitted to be enemies of freedom, yet at this par- 
ticular juncture of affairs the Tories, and they alone, might 
safely be intrusted with the honour and the fortunes of Eng- 
land, now imperilled by the wiles of Bonapartean diplomacy 
and the plottings of continental despotism 1 That was the 
question. 

That was the question which Tom Berry expounded now at 
considerable length, and after his own fashion, to Lennon, 
whose wandering attention, we fear, hardly took it all in. 

" That's it, you see, Mr. Lennon . there's their game. It's 
a plot, a downright plot, as much as if they swore to it over 
skulls and crossbones, as they used to at the old Coburg in the 
time when I was an apprentice, and used to take my place in 
the front row of the gallery. It's a plant, a plot, a dirty Tory 
dodge ; but I know how to spoil the game. I know a few 
chaps over in the town that are in a manner a sort of leaders 
among the workshops, fellows with the gift of the gab . and 
good-hearted fellows too, though one of 'em's a Sunday open- 
air preaching man, and another's a teetotal card . and I've 
opened their eyes a bit ; and wait if you don't see." 

" Then you don't think Mr. "Warton has any chance, Tom 1 " 

" No ; beg your pardon . I think he'd have a prime chance, 
if he'd got the pluck, the go in him ! Bless you, these men are 
so sick of the Whigs, and the sham Liberals, and the whole 
humbugging lot of Parliament spouters, that I don't know if 
they wouldn't be glad to give a chance to a decent, manly, 
outspoken Tory who stood up to them like a man. No, Mr. 
Lennon ; I think Wat Warton could make a chance if he had 
the spirit. But I know something about him ; and I know 
that the roar of a good row about his ears will knock the feet 
from under him in no time ; and you know that a crowd is 
like a horse, and soon finds out the man that can ride it and 
rein it, and delights to roll in the mud the chicken-hearted 
creature that can't." 

" Well, Tom, I am glad neither you nor I count among the 
voters, for if we did I fear we should have to take opposite 
sides. I don't myself care twopence for Whigs or Tories . 



178 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOUKS. 

plague o' botli their houses ! . and I should like to serve Mr. 
Wartou ; and so I think I should be weak and unpatriotic 
enough to give him my vote and helping hand. Confess, you 
last of the Romans, that you think me unworthy of the name 
of Briton 1 " 

" It takes a deal in these times to make anybody unworthy 
of the name of Briton," Mr. Berry remarked sententiously. 
" I wish we could make the name of Briton a little more 
worthy of honest men and free men. That's all ! " 

Lennon paid little attention to Berry's prophetic hints about 
the fate of "Warton in the approaching struggle. His mind 
was wholly estranged from politics of late ; and even the fate 
of his philanthropic chimera concerned him far less than it 
might have done a few months ago. Questioning his own 
motives and emotions . playing sadly with his own feelings, as in 
loneliness he was sometimes wont to do . he made melancholy 
admission that a private and individual love rose up between 
him and his good wishes to his race or his neighbourhood. 
The smile of a woman hardly beyond the school-girl age was 
more to him just now than the regeneration of a city. He 
could have borne any other failure with composure ; he could 
have calmly lighted a fresh cigar and puffed it unemotional 
while listening to the news of the wreck of his schemes and the 
ruin of his whole fortune ; but he could not bring himself to 
ask Grace Ethelstone to marry him, dreading the terrible reply 
that she had always regarded him as a brother or a father, or 
in some other hideous and revolting aspect, and that she could 
not love him. He saw in her bright frank ways no sign of 
love, and he dreaded to invite a decision. " Wait yet a little," 
said his heart one day ; " her affection will grow." And 
another day it said, " Coward and fool ! let the question be 
settled and done with for ever. Know the worst and bear it . 
as you can do if you will." And yet again : " For shame ! to 
think even of asking the girl, who knows nobody but you, who 
never disguises her warm sisterly affection, and who, if you 
press her, may easily mistake her feelings, or generously trample 
them under foot, and marry you out of pure good-nature, and 
find out her mistake too late . and yet all too soon. Be a man 
of spirit and honour. Do not try by that test a question to 
which common sense must tell you how to give an answer. If 
you love her, be just to her . and leave her to freedom." 

Between these impulses Lennon's resolution flickered for 



"lennon's folly." 179 

some time . now drawn this way, now driven that. Great 
souls, of course, are never thus undecided. Heroes of fiction 
never ought to be. In whatever stress of difficulty, they ought 
to see their way clear before them, and march without a 
moment's hesitation steadfastly along it. In a former work 
(which received such kindly and encouraging criticism as the 
author thinks of with gratefulness) there was a hero . at least 
a so-called hero . who on some rather important occasions of 
his life had some little difficulty and trouble about making up 
his mind. He received much critical condemnation for this 
lamentable weakness. Heroes of novels never ought to have 
any difficulty in making up their mind. They ought, at the 
worst, to achieve the whole of the operation as quickly as the 
Earl of Derby's Cabinet accomplished it last February. The 
only excuse to be pleaded is that in real life most of us do 
actually find ourselves, at certain emergencies, much embar- 
rassed as to what course we ought to take . do resolve upon 
one thing to-night, and next morning think another thing 
would be better ; and by noon reject both plans ; and perhaps 
find the question arbitrarily decided for us by chance in the 
end- . chance being to many of us the flight of birds rising from 
the left or the right, the indications of the sacred entrails, the 
omens of the stars, the answer resounding from the tripod, and 
all the other external impulses to lagging decision which even 
the heroes of the old world did not disdain to invite. 

At all events, by every example of ancient and mediaeval and 
modern hero, we may claim some pardon and indulgence for 
one who is only a hero in the conventional and circulating- 
library sense, if he hesitated a little about inviting a final and 
perhaps a fatal decision from, the woman he loved. Even 
Roland or Lancelot of the Lake might have felt less firmly 
decided about challenging the sentence of his mistress than 
about storming a castle or slaying a Saracen. 

Besides, Ralph had of late observed, or fancied he observed, 
a certain reserve and coldness in Grace Ethelstone's manner to- 
wards himself. As he waxed into warmth and demonstrative- 
ness, she waned, he thought, into chilliness and restraint. 
Perhaps she understood his attentions, and wished to signify- 
thus quietly that she could not accept them. He was distressed 
by her manner, which, of course, if it had had the slightest 
gleam of coquettishness about it, might have been encouraging ; 
and if it had seemed to be the reserve and timid embarrassment 

X 2 



180 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS, 

arising from a girl's natural wish to hide her feelings, would 
have been a source of rapture to him ; but it seemed to be 
neither. It appeared quite spontaneous, unfeigned, and real. 
The more and more be became the accepted guide and helper 
of Mabel and the family, the more Grace appeared to draw back 
from him. 

Of course, every one will have guessed that he sent off at once 
to Mabel the money which she so much needed at the time when 
he had his memorable conversation on the bridge with Grace. 
Mabel took the money delightedly ; it relieved her from 
immense embarrassment ; and she wrote Ralph a letter of 
incoherent and effusive thanks. She told Grace with joy and 
pride of the assistance she had received, and was utterly unable 
to understand the deep depression and vexation with which her 
niece received the gladsome news. Poor Mabel, when in a fix, 
never cared how she got out of it, provided there was nothing 
sinful in the means of escape ; and she could not imderstand in 
the least how anybody could object to her taking a little help 
from the liberal hand of an old and dear friend. 

" Ralph would do anything for me, child," she said with a sort 
of mild complacent triumph. " He would indeed, dear old 
Ralph ; though, of course, he doesn't care for me now at all, 
except just as a friend. I don't quite think he fully appreciates 
Walter even yet ; men, I suppose, don't forget these things for 
a long time. Anger outlives love, Grace, I tear. But he would 
do anything for me ; and I know he would be little pleased to 
think of me and the children being in any difficulty, and not 
asking him to help us out of it. Besides, you must remember 
that he is a bachelor as yet, and he really has nothing to do 
with his money. I am sure if he wanted money and we had it . " 

" Which is not likely," interjected Grace. 

" No, indeed, dear ; not likely at all, I fear, for the present 
. at least, until Walter gets a place of some kind. But I was 
going to say that if Ralph Lennon wanted money, and we had 
it, he should have it with delight from me . and from Walter 
too, Grace." 

" What^will Walter say to this beggiDg of money from Mr. 
Lennon % " 

" It's not begging, Grace ; I wonder you can talk so. Do 
you think we are robbers 1 " 

" Robbers don't generally beg, I believe, except in Gil Bias 
perhaps." 



"ltlnnon's folly." 181 

" Well, beggars then. Do you think we are beggars ? " 

" Yes, Mabel, I do. I think it is nothing short of begging 
to take this money from Mr. Lennon. I hate to think of the 
whole thing. Rather than stoop to such a transaction, I would 
have pawned my watch or sold my last dress." 

" O, for shame, Grace, to talk in such a way ; and such 
childish nonsense too, as if all the dresses I have in the world 
would bring a quarter of two hundred pounds, even if they 
were new ; and you see what my purple silk is looking like 
already, after three months ! Besides, you don't understand 
Ralph Lennon . " 

" Do I not 1 Ah, yes I do ! " Grace sighed unconsciously, 
but so distinctly, that Mabel looked at her with kindly, feeling, 
motherly eyes. 

" Well, dear, what I mean is, that you cannot think he cares 
about a few pounds lent to a friend. Only lent, you know, of 
course. Why, child, you don't suppose Walter won't repay 
every farthing of it ? " 

" Then Walter knows of it 1 " 

" yes, of course. I would not have any secret from Walter 
for all the world. We never had any secrets from each other . 
never." 

" And Walter approves 1 " 

" Quite approves. More than that, my dear, . and I only tell 
it to show how nonsensical your scruples were ; for you know 
that Walter is one of the most sensitive of men, . it was he 
who suggested getting a loan of a few pounds from Ralph. He 
said when he was going away that if any pressing demand 
shoiild be made on us during his absence, it might be as well to 
write a line to Ralph. So odd that he should have said it too, 
when I am sure he did not know that any difficulty was likely 
to occur ; for he would have told me if he had expected this 
vexatious call upon us just then." 

" He arranged it all beforehand, then 1 And he asked you 
to write i " 

" No j not exactly that. He said something about your 
being on the spot, and mentioning the matter to Ralph ; but I 
suppose it was better that you did not do anything in the matter. 
Unmarried girls cannot be expected to make such requests ; 
and indeed, Grace, I hope you will never have to make them ot 
any one." 

Grace had been glowing with shame and anger during this 



182 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

conversation. She, then, was to have been used as an instru- 
ment to extract money to pay Walter Warton's debts . and to 
extract it from Ralph Lennon ! Her cheeks burned with 
vexation and resentment. But she said not a word. To open 
up the question to Mabel would be the most futile waste of 
breath and temper. 

" Do you know, Grace," said Mabel, after a moment's pause, 
''. I sometimes think Ralph Lennon is very fond of you 1 " 

" Do you 1 " 

This was said coldly, and without the slightest emphasis of 
tone, or appearance of interest in the question. 

" Indeed I do. I grow more and more convinced of it every 
day. My dear, I don't want to influence you, of course ; but 
any woman Ralph Lennon marries ought to be happy ; and 
you would suit him, for you have brains and are clever, and 
could fall in with his ways and appreciate him, which other 
women could not do. Q, I should be so glad if I could 
think " 

" Please, Mabel, don't . O please don't talk in that way ! I 
shall never be able to look Mr. Lennon in the face if you go 
on in such a manner ! Don't, dear Mabel, don't let him think 
he has fallen among thieves, like the man who went down into 
Jericho." 

" Grace ! " 

" Yes ; that we are all determined to plunder him, and drag 
him into toils, and lay schemes and snares and base matrimonial 
plots for him, because he has money. I would never meet 
him again . never, never ! . if I thought he suspected anything 
of the kind. He has never bestowed a thought on me- . why 
should he 1 . except as a friend, as a poor girl whom he would 
serve and help in life if he could . as he would help any one, 
indeed, who wanted help. He has never thought of me in any 
other way ; and of course I have . I have never thought of 
him. Don't let us speak of it any more ; it tortures me to 
think of his hearing a whisper of such a thing . a whisper 
perhaps from one of the children . and despising us. He may 
pity us now ; I fear he cannot help that, and it is bad enough ; 
but he cannot yet despise us. Do not force him to that 
too." 

" My dear Grace, I don't quite understand you ; but of 
course I respect and like your sensitiveness. And you surely 
don't imagine / would ever say a word to place a girl, even if 



" lennon's folly." 183 

she were not my own niece, in an awkward and embarrassing 
position towards a man, even so honourable a man as Ralph 
Lennon ? No, no, you foolish child. But I was merely 
talking of what I had observed . talking of it between our- 
selves." 

" But we ought not to talk of it between ourselves, or to 
talk of it or think of it at all. It seems so mean and ignoble 
and unwomanly. I know, Mabel, that you do not mean it so, 
and would not say it if you could only see things with my eyes 
just for a moment. But pray don't speak of it any more. 
You are quite mistaken, believe me . utterly mistaken. And 
I only wish you had never thought of it at all." 

Mabel gave in and said no more ; but thought she was right 
for all that. 

Grace was seriously and bitterly grieved. 

" Why are some women, even good women, so mean ? " she 
asked herself. " "Why can they never hear a friendly word 
exchanged, see a cordial clasp of the hand given, between a girl 
and a man, but they suggest and suspect plottings and secret 
designs about marriage ? This kind-hearted and simple aunt of 
mine does not, in her inmost soul, believe one word I say. She 
thinks my heart is set on marrying Mr. Lennon, and . good 
Heaven ! . she would think nothing, in her simple, credulous 
candour, of assuming that he was actually in love with me, and 
taking him into her full confidence, and disgracing us all. 
Bather than bear that humiliation, rather than endure that he 
should despise me, or should confound me in his mind with the 
miserable schemes of our beggarly and ignoble life, I would go 
to the other end of the earth. I have stayed too long here. 
I have given up much for poor Mabel ; but I cannot give up 
my pride of independence, and I will not be shamed in his 
eyes. Whatever happens, he shall not think me mean and 
selfish and craven of spirit. I don't ask for his love" (and 
tears burst into her eyes), "but I will have at least his 
respect." 

This conversation, interjected awkwardly enough into a 
chapter of which the scene is laid in Cumberland, will serve to 
explain why Grace Ethelstone seemed to Lennon to receive 
him now with less of confiding cordiality than she used to 
show. He began to think sadly that this change of demeanour 
could have no purpose but one, that of conveying to him in as 
delicate a manner as possible her personal disinclination for 



184 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

love-making so far as he was concerned. Lennon, of course, 
had eyes . very keen eyes too . for the demeanour of those 
around hirn. Love never blinds us to the significance of our 
reception at the hands of the loved one's brother or mother or 
father, or even aunt. The dullest among us has never failed to 
gather from the looks and ways of her people whether the said 
people thought us a desirable person to become a member of 
the family. As regards Lennon, there was hardly any attempt 
at concealment. Mabel's manner conveyed, as clearly as 
anything short of words could express a feeling, her earnest 
anxious wish for Ralph and Grace to fall desperately in love 
with each other. Very little encouragement would have 
brought words in plenty from her lips to make still clearer the 
impression which her manner conveyed. Walter Warton 
seldom failed when he met Ralph to sound in a delicate and 
indirect way the praises of his niece. All this, however, was 
now only embarrassing to Lennon. He dreaded beiDg regarded 
as the benefactor of the family, whom Grace was bound to marry 
out of gratitude whenever he asked her ; and he mentally 
vowed that if once he came to know her true feelings, no word 
of his should ever tempt her to a sacrifice. " I have never 
held," he said to himself, " that a man has a right to persecute 
a girl because it is her misfortune and his that he can'fc help 
loving her. Let him stifle his love . or himself, if he can do 
nothing better ; but let her be free to choose. And I hope I 
am not yet mean enough to take advantage of any influence I 
may have with a girl's family . any old regard they may have 
for me . to persuade her into marrying me. No : she would 
have little to congratulate herself on if she married me of her 
own free and loving will ; she shall never be coerced or per- 
suaded or talked into doing anything else. If she could care 
for me . if she could ! . then I think I could make her happy ; 
and I should seem to have lived for something, and this dull 
and dreary life would be exquisite and bright. But, good 
heavens, who is happy ? Who has what he wants ? And why 
do I expect to be any better off than my neighbours ? " 

Still he had some little hope. That is obvious enough, even 
from the final question into which his thoughts shaped them- 
selves. When one asks himself what right he has to expect 
this or that, it is pretty certain that, whether he has the right 
or no, he does somehow cherish the expectation. Despair does 
not pause to interrogate itself in that sort of way. Ralph 



" lennon's folly." 185 

Lennon had some hope. He would not yet believe that Grace 
cared nothing for him ; but he shrank from testing his hope, 
and perhaps proving it false. He recoiled from the blank 
prospect which life must once more present if he should find 
the light of that one hope suddenly extinguished. And he 
found, of course, disci'eet, prudential, and practical reasons to 
justify his delay yet a little longer. " If she really does not 
care for me it will be better, far better, for her sake that I 
should not subject her to the pain of having to refuse, and 
perhaps to bear the well-meant agonizing remonstrances of 
Warton and Mabel. No . if I can save her from that it will 
be something. I am not quite a fool . I certainly am not 
quite a boy ; and though I don't pretend to much knowledge of 
the ways of women, yet I ought to be able to find out, without 
asking, whether a girl loves me or not." And then he thought 
again and again over every word she said ; he revelled in a 
Barmecide feast of glances that seemed loving, and pressures 
of the hand that might have meant sympathy ; he found flat- 
tering reasons for coldness, and coined hope out of even silence 
and absence. And then, another mood setting in, he blew all 
the golden mist and airy chimeras of lover's dreams roughly 
away, and spurned at himself as a fool, and took the worst as 
the reality, and tried to look it full iu the face. Amid the 
little trumpery vexations which were surrounding him at 
home, . the failure of his chimerical plan, the marked and 
general unpopularity and coarse disfavour with which the 
people of Waterdale received him, the almost universal re- 
proach which had come upon him just because he tried to do a 
little good, the falling-away of friends, the gibes and rejoicings 
of enemies, . it was something strengthening and elevating to 
have this sanctuary of his heart, to which he could retire and 
commune with even the hope of a love, and set up his Madonna- 
shrine, and worship it, even though with unheard and futile 
adoration. He had passed the age when men storm and swear, 
Swinburne-like, against the most high gods, and defy earth and 
skies and the inexorable Immortals, and rejoice to pelt their 
poor little detonating thunder-pellets against the cloud-shapes 
that veil the heavens. He could no longer enjoy the sweet 
consoling egotism which sees an implacable war of man against 
destiny in every chance breath that blows away some tiny 
thistledown of human hope. So his melancholy, his occasional 
heart-sickness of deferred hope, his not uncommon intervals of 



186 THE WATERS ALE NEIGHBOURS. 

blank despair, were unrelieved by any of the cheering and 
comforting vanity which makes a disappointed youth regard 
himself as a Prometheus specially punished by the gods ; an 
Ixion, chained to an eternal wheel because he had dared to 
love. Indeed, his mental condition had something of the 
peculiar discomfort about it which the noble old hero and 
humourist, Abraham Lincoln, s o pithily described after the news 
of some profound disaster. " I find it hard to bear," said the 
great President, " because I am too much hurt to laugh, and 
I am too big to cr*y." Lennon was sometimes too much hurt 
to laugh, and he was past the age for crying . even for crying 
out against Pate, and heroically arraigning the order of 
things. 

And poor Grace meanwhile had a weary time enough of it. 
It used to be one of her great delights, her self-appointed re- 
ward for dreary duties cheerfully and satisfactorily got through, 
to shut herself up in her own room sometimes, away from 
Mabel and the children and the maids and everything, and 
indulge herself in an hour of delight with her pencils, her 
drawing-paper, and her fresh young imagination. But now her 
work and her play had alike less absorbing power. She did 
not enjoy her hour of seclusion with her drawing, and her ima- 
gination ran quite away from Antigone and the classic marbles, 
and her self-culture made no progress at all. The short time 
she allowed herself for such purposes wasted itself away in 
fruitless thought and longing and pining. She would sit over 
her paper for an hour without having once drawn a pencil- 
line upon it, and then sigh and put the task away from her . 
once it used not to be a task, but a joy and a refreshment . 
and try to lose herself in the common life of the house. Once 
she was sitting and thinking sadly enough, and more than 
vaguely enough, when a noisy clattering came at the door, and 
she found herself beleagured by boisterous little "Watty. She 
surrendered unconditionally, and admitted the young invader. 
He had come to remind her of a promise to draw him a knight 
on horseback, and he insisted upon her redeeming her pledge 
before she put away her pencils ; so she drew him a splendid 
cavalier, magnificent in mail and sweejring plume, and bestrid- 
ing a rampant steed whose mane and tail might have been the 
envy of the Pair One with Golden Locks . and Watty was 
delighted. 

" 0, dear," thought Grace, half-smiling, half-inclined to cry, 



WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOUR'S WIFE. 187 

" how I wish he were a knight, and were going to the wars ; 
and that I might dress myself like a page and go with him . 
and be killed ! " 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOUR'S WIFE. 

THE clouds were thickening and blackening around "Walter 
Raleigh Warton. A storm must come, and either destroy 
his fields altogether, or carry off the bad weather and give him 
purer air and the chance of a better harvest. In plain language, 
he was near a financial crisis. He was literally steeped in 
debt ; and he could only buy even a temporary postponement 
of a crash by opening up new sources of indebtedness. He had 
started in life as a Swell Democrat, if we may use that term ; 
and he felt convinced it was the best sort of enterprise, if only 
he could just get time to round a certain difficult point and 
make his way into the smooth water of a parliamentary career. 
He had a certain pride in being a Swell Democrat ; indeed, he 
considered that he had created the part. For the role he had 
introduced was by no means to be confounded with the familiar 
part of the Patrician Democrat . the part played by the scion 
of some noble house who, from sincere conviction, or personal 
vanity, or love of novelty and adventure, becomes a leader of 
the people. This part Warton, of course, knew to be quite out 
of his line. Even the name of Raleigh and the vaguely-implied 
descent would not make of him a Charles James Fox, a Mira- 
beau, an Edward Fitzgerald, a Smith O'Brien, or even a Tom 
Duncombe. But he thought he could conceive and impersonate 
a new kind of demagogue . a refined and glorified working 
man ; a being who, while he boasted of being only one genera- 
tion removed from the working man (with perhaps some hint 
of a grand ancestral source far back in historical days, the 
stream whereof unfortunately became almost lost in the sand 
and mud of later years), should yet have the manners, the ap- 
pearance, the delicate features, the white hands of your azure- 
blooded aristocrat ; who should have the tastes, the luxurious 
habits, even the extravagance of the patrician ; who should 
smoke cigars with elder sons, walk down to the House arm-in- 



188 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



arm with county members, and talk dinner-table nonsense to 
countesses. Now he had played this part very bravely, very 
cleverly, and -with a certain fluctuating and tantalising degree 
of success ; but as yet without anything like the success he had 
anticipated. He was now rather poorer than ever ; his flir- 
tations with countesses had been but rare and passionately re- 
membered delights ; and his political patrons were beginning to 
distrust him; that is, his new political patrons . those under 
whose auspices he started in life had dropped him down long 
ago. If he could get into the House and make any kind of 
way there, and render such service to his new party as would 
secure him a permanent office, or even drag him into the ranks 
of those who are always marked for parliamentary office when 
their party is in . if he could do this, all might go well. He 
could manage to pay his debts somehow . an M.P. can get over 
many difficulties insurmountable to a poor outsider ; and then 
place of some kind would surely fall to his lot. Once in the 
House, what might not ambition and talents accomplish ? Look 
at Canning ! Look at Disraeli ! Nay, look at Bright, who 
doubtless, if he cared for office, and went the right way to get 
it, would have been a Cabinet Minister years ago. Why might 
not he, "Walter Raleigh Warton, accomplish something ? In 
fact, behind the swinging doors of the House of Commons 
gleamed for him his El Dorado. 

The one sad obstacle in his way was, he thought, his poverty. 
He writhed under poverty. He raged against it. He cursed 
it for every failure. He laid all blame on it . on it and on 
destiny. In no other country, he thought, would narrow means 
have so obstructed a man as in England. Let him borrow as 
he would, and spend as he would, he could not even seem to be 
anything but poor. Captain Eastham and others of his friends, 
when discussing his parliamentary prospects, seemed to take his 
poverty as an admitted thing, a matter of course, a fact neces- 
sarily to be considered in making the calculations. No class of 
persons in the world are more frank in admitting and discussing 
the impecuniosity of themselves and their friends than young 
men of family in England ; no class care less about money in 
estimating the relative value of their acquaintances and as- 
sociates. Warton might have known this, for he had mixed a 
good deal, of late, with the young patrician class ; and yet every 
allusion which betrayed a knowledge of his poverty stung and 
startled him. He was secretly very bitter against destiny and 



WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOUR'S WIFE. 189 

the social laws which prevented a hard-up, unprincipled adven- 
turer of showy talents from becoming at once a man of fortune 
and a Cabinet Minister. He was rather hard upon Destiny, too, 
for having allowed him to marry a poor girl without any brains, 
or for not having devised some convenient code of British mar- 
riage law which would enable him to geb rid of her now and 
look out for a woman with money. 

Now he set, as we have already said, his fate at present upon 
the chances of the coming or expected election in the peculiar 
borough described by his old associate and present enemy Tom 
Berry. This succeeding, all might yet go well ; this failing, 
then the deluge might as well come, so far as he was concerned, 
for he felt that he could straggle no more, and must succumb ; 
unless . he had just one other chance in reserve . unless Ralph 
Lennon should come to the rescue. And he saw some prospect 
of this being easily and somewhat decently arrived at, if Lennon 
would but fall in love with Grace, and marry her ; for Lennon, 
he said to himself, was just the man to let his wife do anything 
with his money if he loved her, and Grace was as good-natured 
and generous as a child. Warton's imagination and envy had 
already bestowed on Lennon the riches of a pro-consul or a 
Liverpool merchant-prince. 

So he went to work at his exciting little game of chess ; and 
as he loved excitement for its own sake, he felt a sort of plea- 
sure which counteracted to a certain degree the discomfort of 
his troubled prospects. But it takes a very exceptional man 
indeed to play chess with human beings for knights and castles 
and pawns. In making his finest scheme Warton forgot to 
allow for the breath of his own passion, which always blew 
down his pieces, and spoiled his game ; and so, just at the time 
when it behoved him to keep on the best terms with everybody 
who could in the slightest degree influence his fortunes, an 
evil fate threw him in the way of Myra Alwyn, and well-nigh 
spoiled all. 

He succeeded in arousing in her mind something like interest 
and sympathy. She thought him the victim of a boyish passion 
and an ill-assorted marriage. The manner in which he con- 
veyed this impression to her mind was so skilful that she 
believed the revelation to be the involuntary disclosure of a 
mind far too proud, sensitive, and manly to betray willingly 
the secret of its pain. Then he talked in a strain of apparently 
pi'ofound religious conviction ; and there are few women indeed 



190 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

whom the phrases and symbols of piety cannot deceive. In 
short, she pitied him, and wished him well ; and he had self- 
conceit enough to believe that he discerned in her manner the 
indications of a deeper feeling. 

Captain Eastham, whose house he made for the present his 
principal head-quarters, was much taken with the Alwyns, 
husband and wife, and was very glad to drive over to their 
house in company with Warton, and have luncheon or dinner 
there. And of course the honourable and gallant member was 
not very long in discerning that there was something rather 
too devoted and tender in the manner of his friend towards the 
wife of his other friend. Eastham was a thoroughly manly 
young fellow, and he did not at all like that sort of thing. 

" I tell you what, "Warton," he said, as they drove home one 
night, " you are carrying this a little too far. It won't do, 
man ; give it up in time." 

" Give what up, my dear fellow ? " 

" Now, don't play the innocent. Yon know what I mean ; 
for you saw me sending warning looks to-night. Glad nobody 
else noticed anything . " 

" But do favour me with some glimpse of your meaning." 

" I mean your manner towards Alwyn's wife. It is becoming 
quite marked ; and it will be sure to attract some notice from 
more unfriendly and suspicious eyes than mine, and make a 
row of some kind." 

" My good fellow, how can you talk so 1 What evil con- 
structions you fast men . men of the world . put upon every- 
thing ! I like Mrs. Alwyn much. I hope I may call myself 
her friend." 

" I hope you may . and her husband's friend, too ; for he is 
one of the finest fellows I know : and do you know, Warton, 
I don't think he's a man to stand much nonsense, reverend 
though he be." 

" But Eastham, you really have no ground . " 

" Yery likely. I am quite sure there is no ground for fearing 
any harm. If I know anything of women I take our reverend 
friend's wife to be a regular trump ; a fine, good-hearted 
woman, without a bit of evil in her, or a grain of rubbishy 
sentiment and mad French nonsense. I take it that she is as 
safe as the Bank of England. I don't mean to say there is the 
slightest danger of anything but ill-natured and silly people 
getting up a talk, which you know very well they would do 



WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOUR'S WIFE. 191 



fast enough ; and I tell you, Warton, frankly, that I think 
you have no right to give the slightest reason for such a talk. 
These are good and simple people. They have brains enough 
in literary ways and that . I wish I had as much . but he is 
not a man of the world, and she is not a woman of the world. 
They have not been much in the sort of atmosphere of smoke 
and gas and midnight, and that kind of thing, that some of us 
are rather too well accustomed to. They seem to take it for 
granted that every man means well, and is a gentleman in 
their sense . which, I suppose, is the true sense ; and pray let 
not either of us undeceive them." 

"An interesting lecture, Captain Eastham, and very edify- 
ing. Your moral philosophy, however, is quite thrown away 
on me. I hope I know how to conduct myself like a gentle- 
man." 

" I hope so too," said Eastham, calmly and gravely. 

" Do you mean this to be an insult, Eastham 1 " asked 
"Warton, in a low hoarse tone, all the blood he had rushing to 
his pale cheeks. He writhed, Democrat and Working Man 
though he boasted himself, at the slightest word which seemed 
to cast a doubt on his full title to the rank of gentleman. 

Eastham saw his anger, and was sorry to have offended 
him, especially by harping on such a string. Perhaps if 
Warton had come of a noble house, the warm-hearted young 
Tory might have given an angry answer ; but as it was he 
feared that he had hurt the feelings of his companion in an 
unmanly and illegitimate way ; and he hastened to make 
atonement. 

" Indeed I don't, old fellow ; and I should be sorry to say 
a word to annoy you. I know as well as anybody can that you 
are incapable of anything that is not honourable and manly, 
and I hope I have not conveyed any other idea. But you 
know how much better lookers-on can judge of the effect of 
most things than the performers ; and I thought it would 
be as well to give you a hint that you seemed rather more 
attentive to Mrs. .Alwyn than perhaps might seem satisfac- 
tory to suspicious eyes. One can't be too careful, you know 
. and both you and I think too well of these people to do any- 
thing which could possibly annoy or offend them. That's all. 
I didn't mean to deliver you a lecture on morals, which you 
don't want, and I am not, perhaps, exactly qualified to give. 

" Thanks. I am really much obliged to you, Eastham ; and 



192 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

perhaps you are quite right. I need not tell you, I hope, that 
I had not the least idea I was giving cause for any suspicion 
whatever. I have the warmest friendship for Myra Alwyn ; 
she seems a woman capable of understanding a man, . in that 
fact alone a rare phenomenon, Eastham ; and I did not sup- 
pose it possible that anybody could put a false construction 
upon a frank and avowed friendship, even though between a 
man and a woman. I am glad to think that she never did . 
she is far too true and pure for that. But your hint is doubt- 
less a wise one in a worldly point of view . just the point of 
view I am too apt to ignore ; and you may be sure I will pay 
attention to it." 

The present impression upon Captain Eastham's mind was 
that all this was rather too meek and innocent and eloquent. 
But he was ashamed to entertain even a momentary suspicion 
of his friend's sincerity ; and he set the protestations of inno- 
cence down to the score of Warton's habits as a teacher of the 
masses. 

So the subject dropped ; but "Warton did not forget what 
had been said, and part of it only confirmed a suspicion which 
had always been rankling at his heart, that his Tory friends 
and patrons never forgot his origin . never regarded him quite 
as one of themselves ; that to them he was the educated 
working-man's son, to be patronized and treated kindly because 
of his talents and his services : but nothing more. 

Regarding the immediate subject of the conversation, he 
resolved of course to be cautious. He could not afford just 
now to do anything which might displease Eastham, on whose 
friendship and energy he especially relied ; but Captain East- 
ham had far better have said nothing about the matter. For 
Warton, who could never believe in the possibility of any one 
talking "right out" on any subject, speaking from his heart all 
he had to say without reserve or arriere pensee, at once con- 
cluded that Eastham had observed much more than he acknow- 
ledged. In fact, he assumed that Eastham, keen-eyed, well 
trained in the world's ways, not unskilled in reading the 
thoughts and hearts of women, had seen in Mrs. Alvvyn's 
manner something that made him fear for her if brought too 
much within the sphere of Warton's influence. A hideous 
flush of rapture filled Warton's heart. He was not a Tartuffe 
. was there ever a Tartuffe, any more than a Don Quixote, in 
the real flesh? . and he did not know himself, or even suspect 



WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOURS WIFE. 193 

himself, to be a hypocrite ; nor had he any set deliberate pur- 
pose of evil in his heart just now. But he was pleased to think 
of himself as one who had at last found the only being capable 
of appreciating him, and whose fate he held in his hands. He 
loved to play with fire, to gaze across the limits of the unlawful. 
His passion of vanity was nattered and intoxicated as much as 
his passion of love was roused ; and he was dangerous now even 
to himself. The animal courage which he ordinarily wanted 
was supplied now, for the time at least, by other emotions ; and 
in his new excitement he would have rushed on danger, j ust as 
a timid man becomes reckless when fired by wine. 

So, having resolved to be cautious, he nevertheless made 
every effort to throw himself in Mrs. Alwyn's way ; and failing 
for a day or two, he boldly went to see her. An evil fortune 
favoured him . she was alone. 

She was writing letters, and she did not particularly want to 
see him or any one. Perhaps she least wished just then to see 
him. A vague instinct might possibly have already warned 
her ; but she could assign to herself no clear reason for not 
seeing him. She thought it would be hard and unfriendly not 
to see him. So he was admitted, and she gave him a cordial 
welcome. 

One of Myra's weaknesses, as we have already said, was a 
love of brilliant dressing. She was quite conscious of her 
attractiveness ; she knew there was beauty in her dark gleam- 
ing eyes, her thick dark hah', her white skin, her delicate hands, 
her small but full figure. She liked to adorn herself and ad- 
mire herself ; she never wished to be for a moment in dishabille ; 
it is doubtful even if Dr. Alwyn ever saw her in anything more 
negligent than an artistic negligence. This particular day she 
wore a morning dress of studied carelessness ; of some rich 
material or other, amber in hue and delightfully flowing in 
folds, and fastened in front with a jewelled brooch that sent 
out a myriad sparkles at every motion of the wearer. There 
was a sense of that profusion about her which, according to 
Mary Wortley Montagu, enhances so much the charms of 
beauty. She really did look very graceful and fascinating ; 
and Warton's eyes lighted up as he looked upon her. There 
was something strange about his expression as her eyes met 
his ; something which she afterwards remembered sent an un- 
comfortable sensation through her ; but it was dispelled in a 
moment, and for the time forgotten. 



194 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" I have disturbed you," said Warton ; " but I hope you will 
forgive me." 

"No . not disturbed me ; at least, I can finish what I was 
doing at any time. I expect Dr. Alwyn home in a few 
minutes." 

" Indeed ! " The word was spoken with studied carelessness, 
to convey the impression that Warton had almost forgotten 
Dr. Alwyn's existence. " I have not seen yon for days, Mrs. 
Alwyn ; and I am returning to town very soon . perhaps to- 
morrow ; and I could not leave without seeing you." 

" But you are coming again 1 We shall often see you down 
in this region ? Especially if the people of Northinglen choose 
you for their representative, you will have to come this way 
often, to look after your constituents. They are very jealous 
people in this part of the world, Mr. Warton, and exact an im- 
mense amount of attention from their member of parliament, or 
their clergyman, or indeed anybody on whom they have the 
slightest claim." 

"I am sorry for it. I do not wish to come here too 
often." 

" Indeed ? Then I advise you not to try to become member 
for Northinglen. 0, you don't know what exacting creatures 
we are down here ! Ask Dr. Alwyn . he knows." 

" I sometimes wish I had not come here, Mrs. Alwyn. 
I sometimes think it was my evil star that lighted me this 
way." 

" You don't fear to fail, surely 1 My husband says your 
chances are very good, and so does Captain Eastham. I really 
don't know much about electioneering affairs myself. I don't 
believe I ever took much interest in any election before ; but 
I am quite anxious about this, and I ask all sorts of people ; 
and they tell me you have a great chance." 

" Then you do really take so much interest in it ? " 

" Indeed I do, and so does Alwyn. I want you . we want 
you to succeed, and to find a proper field for your talents and 
an opening for your ambition. You are thrown away when 
not in parliament. Everybody says so." 

" Your words are delightful to me. I care very little 
whether I win or lose if you take so much interest in my 
fortune. Mrs. Alwyn, I have always longed for human sym- 
pathy . for a woman's sympathy, such as you can give. How 
happy are they . they who, like your husband, can find it 



WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOUR'S WIFE. 195 

always ! Some of us are less fortunate. Believe me, I feel 
your kind words deeply." 

Mrs. Alwyn looked at him rather surprised. She became 
again uncomfortable, and would have been very glad indeed to 
hear her husband's step. 

Warton had risen from his seat, and was leaning against the 
chimneypiece, gazing at her. She tried to put the personal 
question away. 

" Do you know that I was just about beginning a letter to 
your niece, Mr. Warton, when you came in ? I fear she finds 
me a bad correspondent. But it really is not my fault, and I 
am very fond of her." 

" She is happy," replied Warton. " She loves you. But, 
indeed, who does not that has ever known you ? " 

This was rather too much. Mrs. Alwyn's colour heightened. 
The truth began to force itself upon her. She would fain have 
fought against it ; but it came on irresistibly. 

" On the contrary," she said coldly, " I am not at all much 
of a favourite, nor disposed to strong and sudden likings. May 
I ask you to touch the bell, Mr. Warton ? I expect my hus- 
band, and I must give some directions." 

" A moment . one moment, Mrs. Alwyn. I shall not see 
you soon again. I must not see you. O, forgive me, but I 
cannot recall what I have said, and I read in your eyes that 
you have understood it. I do not regret it ; no, I am glad that 
you know it. Who could be near you, as I have been, and 
not feel to you as I feel 1 " 

He endeavoured to take her hand, for she had risen from 
her seat the moment he began his speech, and was moving 
forward as if to touch the bell herself. She calmly drew her 
hand back . she was very angry, but perfectly self-possessed. 

" Mr. Warton, I suppose it is in some way my fault that you 
have ventured to speak to me in this way. But I was quite 
unconscious . I am unconscious now . of having ever given you 
the slightest excuse for such an insult." 

" It is indeed in no way your fault, except the fault that 
Heaven has visited you with, and which has made me so mad 
as to offend you. But you have too good a heart not to feel 
for me and forgive me." 

" Allow me to pass, please ; I have no right to hear any 
more of this." 

" Stay, Mrs. Alwvn, one moment ! I pray you hear me, 

o 2 



196 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

and I will say nothing that even you may not hear. I came 
here to-day only to take leave of you . for ever. 1 did not 
mean to have spoken one word to betray my . my secret. But 
we must not part until you have forgiven me . until you say I 
am forgiven. What is my offence, except the indiscretion of 
speaking out what you must have known 1 " 

" These words, Mr. Warton, are but another insult. I never 
knew, I never dreamed of such a thing. If I had done so, 
you should have had no chance of abusing my confidence in your 
truthfulness and your honour. There, we have had qiiite 
enough of this." 

" But you will hear me . at least a word ! " 

" Then pray speak it quickly, and with as little of sentiment as 
may be. I am not romantic, Mr. Warton ; and I fail to appre- 
ciate scenes of this kind." 

" But you are a woman, Myra . pardon me, Mrs. Alwyn . 
and you know what creatures, what hapless creatures, we men 
are, and how we are the fools of sympathetic tones and kind 
looks. Think of what my life usually is . a blank, bare desert 
so far as love and sympathy and affinity of intellect and heart 
are concerned ; and think of what I saw, what I must have 
seen, in you; and then blame me as you will for my wild 
indiscretion ; but forgive me for that which was my only fault. 
I ask pardon in the humblest way. Do not refuse it to me. 
Remember, as a Christian woman, how weak and easily betrayed 
we are all, all . the best of us." 

There seemed to be sincerity and contrition in his tone, and 
the appeal to Myra as a Christian woman conscious of un- 
christian weaknesses overcame her. She began to think that 
his worst fault was indeed, perhaps, that indiscreet confession 
of a feeling he could not banish. " Are we responsible for our 
secret emotions 1 " thought Myra ; and a flush of conscience- 
driven crimson came over her cheeks. " Can we shut our 
hearts against every unbidden feeling? Shall we not be 
judged for what we say and do and sanction, not for the 
resisted, repelled, yet unconquerable feelings which invade our 
human hearts ? Alas," she asked herself in that moment of 
sudden conflict, " is he any worse than I, except that he has 
allowed himself to be betrayed into speech ? Shall I condemn 
him and expose his error 1 I, of all women in the world ! " 

So she spoke to him in gentle, not unkindly tone : " Mr. 
Warton, I am very, very sorry for all this. I am doubly 



WAKTON AND HIS NEIGHBOURS WIFE. 197 

sorry, because I fear it must have been in some way my fault. 
Bat I earnestly entreat you to believe that I never knew . 
never suspected anything of the kind. It is due to myself to 
say this, and to ask you to believe it. I am sure that you are 
now deeply sorry for what has happened ; and I do believe, 
however wrongly you may have spoken, that you are too much 
a man of honour and a Christian ever to allude to this humilia- 
ting subject again. Let it be forgotten between us." 

He waved his hand impatiently, but then let his eyes fall, 
and stood in an attitude of profound penitence. Womanlike, 
she felt a throb of pity for him, thus struggling with himself 
and thus humbled. 

" Let it all be forgotten ; and for my part, I forgive it. I 
cannot think I am doing wrong when I say that the unfortu- 
nate words you have spoken . aDd which I am sure you did 
not mean . shall be as if they were never said. Good-bye." 

" Then we are still friends 1 " he said in a hesitating tone. 

" Still friends, I hope, Mr. "Warton . at least not enemies." 

She bowed, and did not put out her hand. But he seized 
it ; and, before she could anticipate or prevent the action, he 
brought it to hi3 lips. Not with passion or fervour, however . 
only respectfully and sadly. She could hardly resent the 
touch of his lips to her hand, so slight, so reverential was it. 
Indeed, there was no time ; for in that instant Warton left the 
room, and she stood alone by the hearth. 

As Warton left the house, he saw Dr. Alwyn come riding 
up. He drew back, turned another way, and so avoided the 
meeting. Not that he had any sensitive or scrupulous objection 
to reciprocating a friendly grasp of Dr. Alwyn's hand. But 
he knew that to meet him would almost infallibly necessitate a 
return to the house, and perhaps a dinner there ; and he would 
not on any consideration have spoiled in Myra's eyes the 
picturesque and dramatic effect of his sudden departure. 
Prose after that poetry would be, he thought, a most ruinous 
anticlimax. 

For he left Myra's presence not repentant and despairing, 
but full of hope and confidence. He had deliberately applied 
a touchstone, and he considered the result satisfactory. The 
one thing in life which Warton could not believe in was the 
simple virtue of an intellectual woman. Of his wife's innocence 
he felt satisfied, because he knew her to be so quiet and 
stupid. But with intelligence and quick emotions always 



198 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

went, lie thought, some symphony of irregular and uncon- 
querable passion. And when Myra promised not to betray 
him, not to expose him, he read condonation, and even a 
faint and distant pledge of encouragement, in the promise. So, 
as he went, his way was lighted by a lustrous, lurid glow of 
passion ; and he was ready to follow it whithersoever it might 
lead. 

And Myra? She felt deeply grieved and humbled. Sbe 
was sorry for him, whom she could no longer respect ; she was 
sorry for herself, and ashamed ; she almost shrank from her 
husband's clear, confident eyes, as if there were some shameful 
secret hidden from him, and to which she was a party. 

But Dr. Alwyn came in that moment. 

" Anything the matter, my little woman ? " he asked. 
" You seem put out." 

" Yes, I think I am a little put out, Alwyn dear. But it's 
nothing ; and don't mind me, please." 

" Well, I know that asking questions does not tend to 
put a woman in again if she happens to be put out. But 
come . just one question, and then I'll let you alone until 
you like to make me your confidant. Is it anything 
serious 1 " 

" O, no, dear ; nothing." 

" Yet one other question " 

" "Where is your promise 1 Broken already 1 " said Myra, 
trying to look pleasant. 

"Well, just this one. Has anybody been here telling you 
any bad news ? " 

" No, dear ; I have heard no news, good or bad. Somebody 
has been here, however . Mr. Warton." 

She could not look up as she got out the words, slowly, and 
with a desperate effort to pronounce them carelessly. 

" I knew that was Warton I saw leaving the house just as I 
came up. I tried to signal him ; but he didn't see me, and 
turned away. Why didn't he stay 1 " 

" He seemed in haste ; in fact he is going up to town very 
soon ; and he only came to make a call." 

" He has not been telling you any disagreeable news, Myra 
dear 1 " 

" More questions, Alwyn 1 Again your pledge broken 1 
Come, I must not be a party to such breaking of promises, and 
so I'll not answer you another word." 



WARTON AND HIS NEIGHBOUR'S WIFE. 199 

The assumed gaiety of her manner did not at all deceive her 
husband. He was generally that best and shrewdest of 
observers, an unsuspicious observer. He never brought fore- 
gone conclusions with him to spoil his powers of observation, 
and so he seldom went astray. But though he now saw as 
clearly as the day that something was wrong with his wife, 
and that that something was connected with Warton's visit, 
he had no more idea of suspecting her of concealing any secret 
of her own than he had of turning atheist. If he formed any 
conjecture at all, it was that Warton had been confiding to 
Myra some uncomfortable story connected with Warton's 
own household ; some family difficulty or debt or dispute, or 
something of that kind. " She will tell me all about it 
presently," he said to himself; and he changed the subject- 
Perhaps he was a little disappointed when, during the night, 
his wife avoided any further allusion to it. 

Now it had not escaped the keen loving eyes of Dr. Alwyn 
that a sort of change had been lately coming over his wife. 
Probably no eyes save his alone could have seen it ; but he 
saw it, and secretly sighed over it ; and the thought of it raised 
up a new barrier between him and the completion of his Flora- 
For it often now happened that during even the rare hours 
left him by his outer duties for labour at his own loved and 
long-delayed task, he laid down his pen, and consumed his 
brief precious time in barren and melancholy thought. " She 
is not happy now ; not so happy as she was : " thus ran the sad 
burden of his thoughts. He had noted a vaguely mournful 
and dissatisfied expression many times on her face ; he had 
heard her answer in tones that showed how distraite she was ; 
he had detected a querulous note in the voice that used to ring 
so musically and so cheerfully. Why was this \ At first . 
for Dr. Alwyn was not quite a simpleton . he set all this down 
naturally and satisfactorily to a very hopeful cause, and knew 
that when wives become suddenly a little moody, fitful, and 
capricious, husbands are not always supposed to have reason to- 
mourn over these symptoms. But months passed away, and 
this conjecture died blankly out ; and Dr. Alwyn began sadly 
to think that he must ascribe Myra's melancholy to a very 
different cause. He began to think that she sorrowed silently 
over the empty quiver, each week and month making the hope 
that it might some day be no longer empty fade more and 
more. Dr. Alwyn and his wife were now nearly three years 



200 



THE TVATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



married, and the laugh of an infant had not gladdened their 
home. 

Did he never suspect that she began to find his love not 
enough for her . that she repented of her marriage with a man 
five-and-twenty years her senior 1 No ; he had not suspected 
this. She met him now, as ever, with tenderness and affection ; 
and his loyal manly soul was incapable of conceiving a suspicion 
. would have disdained to harbour it, even if it could have 
stolen its way in. That she should love him with the passion 
and glow wherewith a young wife meets a husband of years 
more nearly corresponding with her own, he did not expect. 
Let it be frankly owned, too, that few British men of Dr. 
Alwyn's age exactly want that sort of passionate love in a wife. 
They probably think such emotions irregular, unladylike, and 
un-English. Dr. Alwyn had nothing of the hero of romance 
about him ; he was simply a good-hearted, manly, order-loving 
Briton. Our friend Shirley Brooks seems rather proud to tell 
us that the heroine of his Sooner or Later, being " a modest 
English girl," and not a Frenchwoman, could never think of 
" flinging herself demonstratively on her husband's bosom and 
grappling him to her own, while she sobbed out a half-fierce, 
half-tender demand to know what rival had come between her 
and his love." No, to be sure, that wouldn't be nice for a 
modest Englishwoman to do, would it ? . that flinging herself 
on her husband's breast ? Hardly proper, one might say. 
Some of us, of course, have natures not so well regulated ; 
perhaps have a dash of some Celtic, or Oriental, or other fierce 
blood in our veins, and would like our wives all the better if, 
in some moment of doubt or fear or grief, they did thus fling 
themselves into our arms, and grapple us to their bosoms, and 
so forth. But it is only fair to say that Dr. Alwyn's ideas 
rather harmonized with those of Shirley Brooks, and he never 
expected to be suddenly grappled to his pretty young wife's 
bosom, nor did he feel called upon to do any such grappling 
business himself. "Whereon we have only to remark . and of 
course the remark applies to the people in this story and to 
nobody else . that if Dr. Alwyn had this day of which we have 
been writing, or any previous day when he noticed distinctly 
the melancholy symptoms already described, just taken his 
young wife to his bosom, demonstratively and warmly, and put 
to her " the half-fierce, half-tender demand," she would as- 
suredly have burst into tears, have disburdened her mind of its 



ON THE PLATFORM. 201 

secret, have shown him frankly and faithfully her whole heart, 
and have saved much mischief . averted, perhaps, at least one 
calamity. 

ISTo word, however, was spoken which could have led to such 
a revelation. Myra brightened up during the evening, and 
came to think less of what had happened that day ; and Dr. 
Alwyn made up his mind to the belief that after all nothing 
very particular could have occurred . only, of course, he was a 
little sorry that his wife did not tell him all about it, whatever 
it might have been. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



ON THE PLATFORM. 



" T ONLY ask of you, my fellow Englishmen, that hearing 

JL which is not denied to the meanest criminal that ever 
quailed before the eye of justice." 

So, in tones loud, thrilling, and passionate, Walter Warton 
adjured a throng of his friends and whilom patrons, the work- 
ing men, and adjured them in vain. Redoubled hisses, hoot- 
ings, and groanings followed every effort, every appeal made by 
him to obtain a hearing. 

This was at a great meeting of the working men, for the 
most part electors of the borough Warton meant to contest. 
The expected vacancy had arrived, and Warton was fairly in 
the field a candidate . thus far the sole candidate. He hoped, 
indeed, by striking a strong and decisive blow in the beginning, 
to scare away any other competitor ; and therefore he plunged 
at once at the heart of the constituency by calling together a 
mass-meeting of the working men. The meeting was held in 
a vast, drear, unadorned room, bare as a barn, resounding like 
a church . a temperance hall generally, an electioneering arena 
at periods of parliamentary crisis. The working men crammed 
the hall, and, to the utter amazement of Warton, greeted 
him when he came upon the platform with a perfect broadside 
of hisses and groans. 

He came accompanied by a cluster of his friends. Captain 
Eastham, who was an elector for the borough, and was well 
known to everybody there, was his " best man." A whole 
dinner-party of Tory gentlemen from Eastham's were with 



202 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



him. Hamerfield, the Unitarian thinker, the philosophical 
Radical, who had Views of Life, and who happened to be 
spending a day or two at Eastham's, came too, having pre- 
viously protested against being understood as identified by his 
presence with Warton's or anybody else's opinions . a protest 
rather surperfluous, inasmuch as outside a select circle in Lon- 
don nobody had ever heard his name, or knew or cared anything 
about his opinions. Shortsighted, delicate of feature, awkward, 
nervous, Mr. Hamerfield peered about him through an eye- 
glass, and made philosophical observation of everything, as if 
he were an astronomer trying to deduce new laws from in- 
spection of some distant star-clusters. Ralph Lennon, too, 
appeared on the platform with Warton ; Lennon not thinking 
it worth while to make any protest about his opinions, and not 
caring a single rush what deductions anybody made.: from his 
presence there. He sat a little behind the foremost group, 
apparently quite listless and apathetic, but in reality following 
the whole proceedings with close interest, and especially obser- 
vant of Warton's demeanour. 

Captain Eastham had been called on to preside, as an elector 
of the borough, one of the members for the county, very popu- 
lar resident landlord, general favourite and good fellow. He 
was received with much applause, and said a few manly, hearty 
words, in which he invited a hearing for his distinguished and 
gifted friend . the friend of the working man, the true English- 
man, the admired popular orator . Mr. Walter Raleigh Warton. 

Except for the one ominous burst of hisses, there had been 
yet no token of public dissatisfaction with the friend of the 
working man, the true Englishman, and admired popular 
orator. Captain Eastham was about to invite with graceful 
gesture the popular orator to come forward, when a stentorian 
voice called from the back of the hall, " Captain Eastham ! " 

There was a dead silence. The gallant Captain came to the 
front, and indicated that he was ready to hear anything the 
Stentor wished to say. 

" Captain Eastham, you're a Tory, ain't you 1 " 

" I think my friends and neighbours here all know my 
political opinions pretty well. I have never concealed them. I 
am a Tory to the backbone !," 

Some hisses began, which however the mass of the meeting 
drowned in encouraging cheers. The working men liked the 
Tory to be a Tory, and to say so. But the catechist went on : 



ON THE PLATFORM. 203 

" Then is your friend Mr. Warton a Tory to the backbone 
too 1 " (Shouts of laughter and uproarious cheers.) " Because, 
if he is, he needn't take the trouble to make any speech here. 
We don't want him." 

Tremendous applause followed this hit, and stormy laughter. 

Captain Eastham smiled, and tried to recover his ground : 

" My friend Mr. Warton is much better able to explain his 
political opinions than I can pretend to be. I should have 
thought you all knew him too well to require any explanation. 
I thought most English working men knew Walter Raleigh 
Warton." 

" Yes, we know him now ; we've found him out at last," 
roared Stentor ; and new vociferations followed. 

" This," continued Eastham, " is not a time for disunion, nor 
for squabbles about names of Tory or Radical. Our country is 
in danger ; and to the enemy who threatens us we should 
stand shoulder to shoulder, not as Whigs and Tories, but as 
Englishmen. I have not asked my friend whether he shares 
my party opinions or not." 

" Who's paying his expenses 1 " clamoured a new voice ; and 
dire confusion set in. 

" Captain Eastham ! " again, at the first pause, yelled the 
original inquirer. 

" Sir," replied the Captain, bowing politely to his wearisome 
questioner. 

" Don't you think you've said enough now, Captain 1 Sit 
down, that's a good fellow, and let your friend speak for 
himself." 

And Captain Eastham, thinking the advice on the whole 
very sensible and good advice, did resume his seat, after a few 
words of spirited but futile appeal on behalf of the abstract 
cause of fair play. 

Thus far Warton had remained quietly sitting near Captain 
Eastham's presidential chair, calmly and blandly surveying the 
audience, and in his heart rather pitying poor Eastham for not 
being able to make anything of a popular meeting. 

Warton quite enjoyed the prospect before him. He had 
immense faith in his own rhetorical powers, and revelled in 
the anticipation of a brilliant battle alone against tremendous 
odds ; to be followed, as he felt convinced it must be, by a 
splendid victory. His pulses beat quickly, and the blood danced 
racily through his veins in joyous expectation of the coming 



204 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

struggle between eloquence and numbers. He had talked over 
many a vehement meeting before, and turned hisses into 
hurrahs, and partisan foes into passionate admirers. His orato- 
rical quiver was always richly filled with those dazzling arrowy 
commonplaces which have such a faculty for hitting the average 
intellect or heart fair in the bull's-eye, and which, even when 
they fail to hit the mark, leave at least, like the arrow of 
Acestes in the JEneid, their sparkles of light behind them. 

So he was quite pleased that the meeting should be allowed 
to ferment up a good deal before he came forward to speak. 
He only wished that Myra Alwyn could be safely seated some- 
where in the hall, that she might see him go into the battle and 
singly carry all before him. 

" The meeting seems rather turbulent, does it not ? " 
whispered Hamerfield, leaning across to Warton, behind the 
back of the yet contending Eastham. " What will you do if 
they won't listen to you ? " 

" 0, I'll prevail on them to listen to me, never fear ! " was 
the calm and confident answer. 

" Seem a very rough class of persons, Mr. Lennon, don't 
they ? " said the philosopher, addressing his neighbour on the 
other side. " Now do you really think it would be quite states- 
manlike to intrust the government of a country iuto the hands 
of such a class 1 " 

" I think it would be a very wrong thing indeed," calmly 
responded Lennon ; " but it is a comfort to know that nobody 
ever proposed to doit; and I don't suppose these men here 
could spare the time to govern the country, even if we asked 
them." 

" No, of course, I don't mean that ; but when I speak of. 
government I mean the domination of a homogeneous majority. 
Don't you think a well-adjusted balance " 

" Yes ; but when the man behind the counter keeps the ad- 
justing of the balance all to himself, the outsiders are not 
always quite convinced of its correctness." 

" Now then, Warton, I've had enough of it," said Eastham, 
as he fell back from the front. " There are some determined 
bawlers there, I can tell you. I've had my eye on some of 
them. The meeting is packed, I think ; but go ahead." 

" Give them fits, Warton," ejaculated one of Eastham's 
military guests encouragingly. 

The time had come. Warton rose slowly, gracefully, from 



ON THE PLATFORM. 205 

his seat, bowed, flashed a rapid glance around the hall from 
side to side, and then advanced to the front of the platform. 
He always made it a point to look his audience steadily in the 
face before he began. Thus his quick eye was enabled to read 
in theirs a lesson which guided him in the choice of the tone he 
should take. He saw at once that there was something in what 
Eastham had said. The meeting was all against him, and was 
boisterously in earnest ; but scattered through the crowd, here 
and there, he saw faces with a peculiarly deliberate and business- 
like expression on them, as of men who had come to do a certain 
prescribed work, and who simply meant to do it. He saw many 
familiar faces too . faces of old friends and admirers in fustian 
jackets . faces that now looked most sternly at him. His heart 
a little sa.nk. 

" This will be a tough business," he thought within himself. 

" Three cheers for "Walter Raleigh Warton ! " cried the 
gallant Eastham, springing up and waving his hat. 

Acclamation of well-meant vigour began among the group 
on the platform, but was literally swept away and drowned in 
a tempest and deluge of groans and hisses. Walter Warton 
waited calmly until the storm died away, and then began, with 
the old claptrap formula that had called up so many a cheer. 

" Eellow Englishmen ! fellow working men ! " 

His clear, powerful, thrilling voice made these words soar 
over all clamour, and penetrate the farthest part of the hall. 
He had a magnificent voice, that was certain ; and, like 
Gretchen's beauty, it was his undoing. But the words had 
hardly escaped his lips when the tornado of groaning, hissing, 
yelling, stamping, thumping with sticks, set in again, and it 
would be hopeless for any organ of human mould to prevail 
above such a Babel of sound. Warton's lungs were not so 
good as his voice, and he always endeavoured not to over- 
work them. So he let the torrent sweep by, waiting quietly 
for his opportunity, and then began again . the same formula, 
evoking the same result. His words were a spell to bring 
down the thunder. Then, when he got the chance, he tried 
the appeal which opens this chapter, and it had no better effect. 
The faint and feeble sound which the best combination of 
cheering on the part of his friends on the platform could pro- 
duce was hardly distinguishable, even in Warton's ears, from 
the storm of indignant vociferation that beat upon him in 
front. 



206 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Don't give in, Warton," cried Eastham. " Take it coolly. 
Let them tire themselves out." 

"Some of the fellows are getting hoarse already, confound 
them ! " said one of his friends. 

But the Fabian policy was of no avail here. The "meet- 
ing" husbanded its lungs whenever the orator did. When 
"Warton stopped, the audience . if one may use such a word 
of a mass of persons who were determined not to hear . 
stopped too. If Warton had been a conductor presiding, baton 
in hand, over a well-trained orchestra, he could not more 
effectively have dictated sound and silence in alternations than 
he did by first trying to speak and then for a moment remain- 
ing silent. 

" The thing is all organized," said Eastham. " It's as clear 
as light." 

Ralph thought it was too, and could not help conjecturing 
that he know the name of the chief organizer. 

Warton was quite cool as yet, and held well in hand the 
reins of his self-control. He turned calmly to his friends. 

"There's no earthly hope of tiring these fellows out," he 
said ; " the thing is all prearranged. I must try another plan." 

Then he came to the front of the platform again, and fairly 
went at his speech, the tumult setting in at once with vehemence 
as uproarious as ever. But he went on declaiming, gesticulating 
with all the fluent force and ease of one who is carrying with 
him a captivated and sympathetic audience. He was, in fact, 
now trying his last chance. There are times when it is hopeless 
to attempt tiring out a hostile audience. This was such a 
time. When it becomes clear that the moment the orator 
stops to take breath, his foes will stop to take breath too, and 
that therefore their noise is not the mere inarticulate expression 
of fury, but the arranged and systematized mechanism employed 
for the express purpose of preventing him from being heard, 
then no experienced declaimer will think any longer of tiring 
out his tormentors. But there may be another chance for 
him. If he be really a distinguished speaker, a man of name 
and mark, whom people are curious to hear, he had better 
stream away with his speech, talking any rubbish he likes for 
the moment, and keeping the real oration back in readiness ; 
and the chances are that many, or most, of his enemies will 
think they may as well hear a little of the orator if he posi- 
tively is determined to have his speech out. To prevent him 



ON THE PLATFORM. 207 

from talking at all is, of course, the great thing ; but if he 
actually is talking, and will talk, why, it seems a kind of pity, 
doesn't it, that one should not, even for curiosity's sake, hear 
a little of it 1 One appears to be, in a sort of way, losing the 
value of his time and money if he lets so much fine talking run 
right away and catches none of it. It is almost as great a 
temptation to a crowd as to see a beer-barrel burst in the 
street, and all the good .liquor come streaming and foaming 
from the bung. 

So Walter Warton declaimed away, striving no more to be 
heard above louder roarings than those which Demosthenes 
made the accompaniment of his sea-shore rehearsals. He 
talked away, unheeding all the noise. Sometimes through 
the storm a fragment of resonant sentence was drifted across 
the earjj of Eastham and the group around him. 

" Gad, it's a pity they won't listen or let us hear," said one 
of the party ; " he's making a splendid speech." He was, in 
reality, talking the merest rubbish ; revelling in absolutely 
unmeaning rhetoric. In fact, he was keeping the real speech 
until there should be some chance of its being listened to. 
Now could only be heard occasional scraps about England's 
hereditary glory and the malignant malice of an envious foe, 
and the imperative necessity of locking our shields, and rally- 
ing round the ancient standard of the Commonwealth of 
Britain. 

But Warton's plan seemed wholly unavailing. If any 
momentary lull took place, deluding him into the hope that he 
might really begin the speech after all, some commanding voices 
at once resumed the cry, and the obedient clamour of a thou- 
sand throats combined in full volume again. Warton was 
getting wearied ; and, what was worse, he was losing his 
temper and becoming savage. Great beads of perspiration 
stood upon his white forehead, and after every sentence he bit 
his lips and set his teeth hard. He began to feel that he was 
being defeated, in full sight of the friends he had gathered 
round him to see his victory. The verdict of that meeting he 
knew would be fatal . a literal sentence of death to his hopes 
of the election ; but it was not that he now cared most about. 
It was the success of the immediate struggle in which he was 
now engaged. In that supreme moment he would have 
bought a victory over that brute inarticulate force of opposition 
at any sacrifice man could make. 



208 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Several times Captain Eastham jumped to his feet and claimed 
the exercise of his supremacy as chairman. He was always 
received with cheers and laughter, and good humouredly allowed 
to say his few words of vain appeal ; but then da capo. The 
storm set in as fresh as ever. 

" Gad, I never saw such scoundrels," he exclaimed, as he re- 
sumed his chair of dignity, and wiped his forehead. 

"Lots of them have sticks, too," said one of his friends. 
" Shouldn't wonder if there was an awful row here presently." 

" I'd run the risk for the chance of smashing a few of the 
fellows' heads," mildly and very sincerely remarked another. 

" Can't we have in the police 1 " suggested Mr. Hamerfield. 

" Police 1 Nonsense ! " laughed Eastham, who, in all his 
anger, rather enjoyed the affair; " what could half a dozen blue- 
coats do there 1 Besides, I suppose the blackguards %re only 
exercising what they consider their constitutional rights as free 
British citizens." 

"What care these roarers for the name of king?" placidly 
observed Lennon. 

" It's no use, Warton," called the chairman to his struggling 
and now angry friend ; " keep your breath, old fellow. Cicero 
couldn't do anything here. Give up . and shut up." 

" Never !" screamed "Warton, now excited to a kind of frenzy; 
" they shall hear me, if I stayed here all night." 

The words which had broken into a shrill falsetto, pierced, 
rather unluckily, the ears of the crowd, and excited a wilder 
outburst of fury. " Pull him off the platform ! " " Have him 
out ! " " Turn him out ! " " Pitch him into the street ! " and 
other fierce cries, came from some of the mob behind, and soon 
began to have their effect on those in front ; for some of them 
began to j ump from their seats and flourish sticks and fists in 
alarming nearness to the platform. 

" Oh, there will be a fight ! " cried Hamerfield, turning pale 
as a ghost, and jumping up. 

" Sit still, damn it ! sit still," called out Eastham. " Don't 
show the white feather, unless you want them really to knock 
your brains out. . Don't be afraid, Warton. Pitch it strong 
into them, as you are at it." 

Warton, however, was very pale. Most of Eastham's friends, 
stout young soldiers, sat like graven images, apparently as little 
disturbed by the menacing appearance of the crowd as if it were 
made up of school-girls. 



ON THE PLATFORM. 209 

Lennon happened to be the nearest to Warton, just a little 
behind. He watched very closely the looks of a few of the 
most demonstrative and fierce who were in the front of the 
crowd below. 

" You had better finish," he said in a low tone to Warton. 
" There's nothing to be done here, and the sooner we effect a 
dignified retreat the better. 1 ' 

But Warton heard nothing, and in any case would not have 
heeded. The conflicting passions of rage and fear were mad- 
dening him. He shrieked and gesticulated at the crowd, and 
flung defiance and frantic denunciation at them. Suddenly 
one man mounted a stool and sprang right on to the platform, 
like the leader of a storming-party mounting a wall. Another, 
another, and another were following ; and in half a moment a 
whole sm'ge would have swept over the platform. But exactly 
at the critical moment Lennon leaped to his feet, and seizing 
the leader fairly by the shoulders, pitched him off the platform 
back on the heads of his followers, who tumbled beneath him 
to the floor, where they floundered and blindly scuffled with 
each other. Then Lennon stood in front of the platform coolly 
and good-humouredly, confronting the crowd amid the wild 
hurrahs of the young warriors behind him, who all leaped to 
their feet and waved their hats. 

The moment was critical. Peace or war ! riot or reconcilia- 
tion ? The decision was proclaimed in a moment by a spon- 
taneous and universal outburst of Homeric laughter, and 
hurrahs as of jubilant Northern hero-gods. The crowd was at 
bottom thoroughly goodnatured and manly, and meant nothing 
worse than the stopping-up of Warton's rhetoric. They were 
immensely delighted with the pluck of the little knot of swells 
on the platform, and with Lennon's unexpected feat, and they 
cheered the hero and chaffed the overthrown besiegers with 
equal zest. 

But when Lennon sprang to his feet, Captain Eastham leaped 
up too, for a different purpose. Lennon threw off Warton's 
assailant ; Eastham caught Warton in his arms. Warton had 
fainted ; fainted, and would have fallen back on the platform, 
but that his quick friend caught him. In a moment the fact 
became known, and all was wild confusion. There were the 
usual cries for air an'd shouts for a doctor, and wild asseve- 
rations of " He's dead ! " " JSTo, he isn't ! " " Yes, he is ! " and 
so forth. At last two or three of his friends lifted him into 

p 



210 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

the room behind the platform, while the others kept the crowd 
from pressing on. So he got air, and water was poured on 
him, and a doctor was sent for ; but before this latter came 
Warfcon had opened his eyes and recovered his senses if not his 
strength. 

" The excitement was too much for him," whispered Ha- 
merfield to one of the young officers. "He is evidently of a 
highly nervous temperament. So am I." 

" Funked, sir ! " was the decisive answer of the warrior. " I 
saw it in his eye." 

Warfcon was put into Eastham's carriage. Hamerfield and 
Eastham accompanied him. The rest of their friends had a 
drag. Lennon was nowhere to be seen. As soon as he had 
spoken to Warton and assured himself that the latter was all 
right again, he disappeared. 

So ended the meeting which was to have made Warton's 
game. "Yes, I'm better now, Eastham, thank you," said 
"Warton, in answer to an inquiry, as they drove away. " I 
am quite well, in fact. But I have lost the day ; I have kicked 
down the ladder on which I meant to climb." And he sank, 
into profound silence. 



CHAPTER XX. 

DOUBLE DEFEAT. 

FOR. several days after the meeting and his signal defeat, 
Warton remained in a state of alternate excitement and 
depression. He sometimes astonished Eastham and the guests 
at Eastham's house by his reckless vivacity, and sometimes 
amazed them quite as much by his fits of despondency and 
silence. He drank wine far more freely than he was accus- 
tomed to do ; and he played cards at night, and lost money 
and plunged into debt for it, and was going on one night to 
lose more and more, until Eastham positively interposed and 
would not allow it. His host set down his unusual excitement 
to the disturbance of his once promising election-prospects ; 
but this was not the whole cause. The darker grew the horizon 
of his political hopes the fiercer burned the fires of his passion 
for Myra Alwyn. Had he succeeded in his other projects, he 



DOUBLE DEFEAT. 211 

might soon have forgotten her. But it was the law of his 
being to be always craving for new excitement ; and when dis- 
appointment came from one quarter, his restless heart instinc- 
tively grasped after another kind of hope in another direction. 
Just now it seemed that all earth could afford him no compen- 
sation and consolation for what he had lost but that which 
Myra Alwyn's voice might promise him. He sickened at the 
thought of home, and Mabel and the children, and the debts 
and the placid poverty. Anything to escape that. Better by 
far utter destruction ; better, at all events, any risk, any ex- 
citement. 

He disappeared from Eastham's house for two or three days 
successively ; at least he did not show himself to anybody 
between breakfast and dinner. Weary and haggard, he re- 
turned in time to dress and appear at table, where, as we have 
said, he drank largely, and exhibited extraordinary alternations 
of mood. In fact, each day he hurried across the country, on 
horse or foot, to the edge of the lake, and watched for Myra 
Alwyn. He would not go to her house, for he feared to meet 
her husband, and to have to endure a vapid and passionless 
conversation. 

The fourth day he was successful. He saw her leave the 
house alone. Had she gone towards the town, he would have 
been intensely disappointed. But she did not. She turned 
the other way, as if to skirt the lake in the direction where 
Lennon's house and his abortive Phalanstery lay. She walked 
very slowly, and "Warton kept her in sight till she had passed 
a branch of roads, after which the path lay straight before her, 
and there was no possibility of her deviating from it. Then 
he scrambled across some fields and ridges and rocks, so as to- 
intercept her, that he might not seem to have dogged her foot- 
steps. When he had in full view that part of the road which 
she ought to have reached, he was surprised that he could not 
see her. At last he saw that she had seated herself on a little 
flower-grown rock or mound by the roadside overlooking the 
lake. These roads were to Myra as safe as Regent Street . 
nay, far safer. She walked or rode or lingered anywhere she 
pleased among the honest Cumberland folk without needing 
escort or provoking remark. She sat there idly, unconscious 
of the nearness of any observer. Her head was turned away 
from Warton, and he could only see her dark hair escaping 
from under her hat, and the curve of her neck as she looked 

p 2 



212 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

round to the water, and the light-coloured drapery that she 
wore. Her attitude was listless, and one might say melancholy. 
Warton stood for a while and gazed at her. The whole scene 
and the seated solitary figure were strangely suggestive of 
melancholy, and struck mournfully on the eyes and heart of 
the ruined man. The day was heavy, oppressive, and hot ; the 
air was charged and surcharged with electricity. Within the 
last few minutes great masses of thundercloud were gathering 
in the sky. The surface of the lake had a pallid, leaden, and 
ghastly hue. The cry of a wild, bird, as it flew across the 
mirror of the pale water, was the only sound that broke the 
funereal silence. Warton looked from earth to sky, and from 
sky to lake, and welcomed grimly the monotonous melancholy 
with which Nature seemed to sanction his own mood. Then 
bis eyes rested again upon the one figure ; and the meanness 
of his nature became almost idealised and made sublime by the 
force of the passion which in a moment filled it. "I am nearly 
ruined," he grimly thought; " I have nothing left; but I would 
welcome, not ruin . that I dread . but death, extinction, anni- 
hilation, if I could but believe that she, as she sits there, alone 
and sad, is thinking of me !" 

He leaped from the little height on which he was standing, 
and called her name : 

" Myra ! " 

Her head was turned away, and she did not hear. She still 
sat in the same attitude, gazing listlessly at the water, never 
thinking that she sat under the eyes of an observer ; thinking 
of nothing less than of the man who was so near her, and whose 
shadow suddenly falling on her caused her to look up with a 
start. Something like alarm showed itself in her face when 
she saw Warton. He seemed excited and even wild in his 
demeanour. She was usually a fearless woman, but she did 
now cast an uneasy glance up and down the road, and saw that, 
save for her and him, it was a solitude. 

" You did not expect to see me here, Mrs. Alwyn 1 " 

" No, indeed, Mr. Warton ; I thought you had returned to 
town. I was just going to visit a few poor people alono- the 
road, but I don't think I shall go now ; it looks ominous of rain 
or a storm, I think." 

She rose from her seat. 

" Don't go just yet. Pray, don't. I have been here these 



DOUBLE DEFEAT. 213 

several days back . this is the fourth day . in the hope of 
meeting you. Myra, I must speak to you." 

" The last time I saw you, Mr. Warton, you promised me . 
you pledged me your word . that you would never speak in 
such a manner again. Am I to learn that you cannot keep 
your word ? " 

" Yes ; you are to learn it . if you will . for it is true. If I 
made such a promise, it was idle ; I could not keep it. I love 
you, Myra Alwyn . I love you like a madman ! I think I am 
going mad." 

" I think you must be when you dare to speak to me in this 
way. Let me pass, Mr. Warton ! Do not attempt to stop me." 

" You shall not pass, Myra, just yet." 

"I spared you before, Mr. Warton. I will not do so any 
more. I will expose you to the contempt and anger you de- 
serve. Let me pass ! " 

He stood resolutely between her and her way home. She 
was not nearly so brave now as she pretended to be ; and he 
saw hesitation in her eyes, and mistook its meaning. 

" Why do you speak to me, Myra, in that harsh tone % Am 
I a robber ? Am I a criminal 1 I love you, and I cannot 
help it. I would die for you. I would die with you delightedly. 
I wish the lightning that will flash soon from those clouds 
would kill us both. I do, indeed. Myra, can you not speak 
to me one kindly word . one word, to say you do not hate me ?.' 
Look at me. I am a ruined man. My hopes are gone . my 
ambition is frustrated . my home is hateful to me. I am 
ruined. It would be idle, indeed, to seek the sympathy of 
many women on such grounds as these. They only care for- 
success ; but you are not like them, you can feel for me." 

"Mr. Warton, I did feel much sympathy with you, and- 
friendly admiration for you, when I thought you were a man, 
of honour and a Christian. Can you blame me if I feel dif- 
ferently now towards you ] " 

" But you are not a saint, thank Heaven ! You are still a 
woman . too much of a woman to blame a man because he 
cannot help loving you. Do not think I did not struggle 
against this. I loved you from the first hour I sat by your 
side, when we only talked commonplaces, and I did not think 
we should ever meet again. But Eate has flung us together, 
and I yield to my destiny. No, Myra ; you shall not go yet ; 
not till I have relieved my soul by telling you all I feel," 



214 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Is there no use in appealing to your sense of honour % " 

"None, none !" 

He stamped his foot impatiently. 

" Are you not a gentleman 1 " 

He scanned her face eagerly, to discover if this was only a 
taunt. No ; it was an earnest, indignant appeal. 

" Myra Alwyn, let us at least not talk cant. Do you think 
I do not understand your nature 1 Do you think I cannot see 
that you are dissatisfied with your life, as I am 1 You are not 
happy ; you have not found your place ; your life is like my 
own . an unsatisfied blank, a void." 

" My life," she said calmly, " is far better and happier than 
I deserve. It has until now been free from insult ; it has been 
free from any contact with meanness and dishonour and wicked- 
ness. That must be my excuse for not having understood 
more readily the nature of a friendship like yours." 

" Friendship between you and me ! Folly ! You did not 
believe it . you could not have believed it. I would sacrifice 
.all the friends on earth for one warm word from you. Come, 
Mrs. Alwyn ; you are, after all, a woman, with a woman's 
heart. You are young and beautiful, and . it is idle to deny 
it . unhappy. No, don't deny it. I saw it in your very attitude 
just now. You do not condemn me in your heart, because I 
have been drawn towards you and love you. I mean you no 
harm. I would kill myself rather than injure you or offend 
you." 

" All this rhapsody, Mr. Warton, is thrown away on me. It 
does not even impose upon me ; it only offends and humiliates 
me. Please to let me pass." 

" No, I cannot . I will not ! This may be my last oppor- 
tunity of seeing you face to face. You must not leave this 
place, Myra, until at least you have spoken some word of 
pardon and sympathy . yes, and of hope." 

He seized her hand. She gave a sudden scream of alarm, 
and indeed of pain ; for his grasp was sharp and fierce. He 
covered her hand with kisses. She literally tore it from him. 
The dainty fingers were circled with many sparkling rings ; 
and as she forced her hand from his, bright blood-drops trickled 
down, starting from the flesh which was lacerated in the 
struggle between his fierce pressure and her vehement re- 
sistance. 

" Let me go," she said, her courage rising, like that of all 



DOUBLE DEFEAT. 215 

high natures, once the moment of trial had actually come. " I 
don't fear you in the least ; I only feared for you when I 
thought you had yet something good in you. I hate and scorn 
you ! No words of mine could express what I feel. You are 
a hypocrite and a coward, and everyone shall know it. I hear 
footsteps, thank Heaven ! and I will ask the protection of the 
first man that comes this way, and denounce you to him." 

Warton knew now that she was in earnest. He stood 
motionless, torn internally by anger, disappointment, and love. 
He too heard footsteps : a moment and someone must come 
round the sharp curve of the road and appear in sight. Then, 
would she really dare to carry out her threat and make a scene 
and expose him ? He would have escaped . literally fled . if 
there were any use in so base an expedient. As it was he 
stood at bay, his heart throbbing, his eyes riveted on the curve 
of the road. *. 

And she stood resolute, with clenched fingers and sparkling 
eyes and pale cheeks . a pretty picture for anyone who could 
just then have appreciated its artistic points, but one which 
Warton did not venture to look on. 

In a moment a man's figure showed itself at the curve of the 
road, and Ralph Lennon lounged slowly on. His eyes were on 
the ground. 

Both Warton and Myra instinctively started and turned 
away. Warton was about to say, " For God's sake spare me 
this ! " when his eyes fell upon her, and the words died on his 
lips. For he saw that her figure, her attitude, her hands had 
relaxed, and that her cheeks were covered with burning 
blushes. Then she began to walk rapidly, though with un- 
certain step, in the direction of her home. Warton walked 
unforbidden by her side ; his teeth were set hard, and he spoke 
not a word. They reached the junction of the roads, one of 
which branched towards Dr. Alwyn's; and they took that 
way. They still walked side by side. At last she looked 
back. Lennon had passed on the otber way. They were 
again alone ; but her house was now in sight. She then stood 
still and looked at Warton ; but there was not the same reso- 
lution in her tone as she spoke to him now. 

" I have spared you a second time . perhaps I have again 
done wrong ; but do not this time misunderstand my motive. 
I detest, I despise you." 

" I do not misunderstand your motive," replied Warton, in 



216 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

a slow undertone of bitterness and deep passion. " I under- 
stand it now only too well. I saw it in your cheeks and in 
your eyes when he, Lennon, came near ! Yes, I knew well 
before this that you were unhappy, but I did not see to the 
bottom of your heart, and find the cause there. Perhaps I 
suspected this too ; but now I know it. Will you give me 
your hand in parting, Myra 1 " 

" No," she exclaimed, passionately ; " your last calumny is 
worse than all ; " and tears flashed up in her eyes. " What 
have I done to you, Mr. Warton, that you thus persecute and 
insult me ? " 

He still stood between her and her house ; and the place, 
which was in one sense a protection to her, was in another 
way a sort of immunity to Warton. He knew she would 
hardly make a scene under the eyes and windows of her own 
house,* and he therefore ventured quietly to detain her. But 
his manner was quite changed ; he spoke with no vehemence 
now. 

"Myra, you have destroyed me; only that! You have 
given me Fate's final blow. But, believe me, I am not so 
wholly bad as you think me. I am not incapable of sympathy 
and of respect. We are both unfortunate ; only I know from 
what I have now seen that you resist your temptation and will 
conquer it, while I have yielded to mine and betrayed myself, 
and lost even your respect. One word : keep my secret, as I 
will yours. Since an evil fortune has thus flung us together, 
and thus exposed one to the other, let us at least not betray 
each other. Good-bye. I don't ask you any more to forgive 
me, and you will not ask me to forget you." 

He withdrew from her path, and without speaking a word 
she passed on. It need hardly be said that she did not look 
behind. He remained motionless for a while, and gazed 
fixedly after her ; then he lifted his hand into the air, as if he 
waved with the gesture a sort of farewell to the place and its 
associations and hopes, and he took rapidly the road that led to 
the town. Soon the storm which had been threatening so long 
broke into thunder and flame, and drenching rain shrouded the 
lake and the whole scene in a curtain of mist. He took refuse 
in a small hotel or tavern, the first that presented itself. 
Thence he wrote and despatched a note to Eastham, announcing 
that he had received some sudden news which obliged him at 
once to return to town, asking that his luggage might be sent 



SUDDEN HOPE SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 217 

on, and apologising briefly for his hasty and unceremonious 
departure. 

" And so all that chapter closes," he bitterly thought. " I 
may bid farewell to hopes of any kind there. My career is done. 
Debt and difficulty now swallow me up. One chance only is 
left . if that fails I don't care what Fate does with me." 

In fact Walter Warton accepted one defeat at least : he gave 
up the idea of contesting the borough of Northinglen. His 
friends frankly told him it was hopeless ; and he submitted to 
what he called Fate. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

SUDDEN HOPE SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 

TWO women . the same two who watched and waited for 
Mr. Warton in an early chapter of this story . watched 
and waited for him in the same place now. But with one of 
them at least a change had taken place . a change so profound 
and organic that she seemed to herself not merely to stand 
upon the threshold of a new life, but to approach it a new 
being. In all the world that lay under the stars that summer 
evening, it is doubtful if any heart swelled with a deeper, more 
thrilling, more fearful joy than the heart of Grace Ethelstone. 

She had hidden herself the greater part of the day, to be 
alone with her happiness . to get accustomed to it . to become 
able to bear its effulgence . to school herself dowD, that she 
might not burst into wild raptures about it . to learn to regard 
it as real . to learn how to conquer the fears and doubts which 
its very brightness brought with it. Since Jupiter consented 
to gratify Semele by appearing in all the radiant joy of his 
celestial presence, and destroyed the poor little fond mortal, 
human creatures seldom hear of the approach of a great hap- 
piness without some doubt and fear. Behind happiness treads 
always its shadow. 

Grace Ethelstone had received that morning a letter from 
Balph Lennon. He had cast the die ; and the principal part 
of the letter ran thus : 

" Can you, then, love me 1 and will you marry me? I come 
straight to the question. to me a most momentous one. I 



218 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

write that you may calmly and alone think over it, and ask 
your own heart, and obey its answer. I would not take you 
by surprise, or pain you, or persecute you ; but if you could 
love me, Grace, I think I could make you happy. I am 
nearly twice your age, very likely : and what I am, you see ; 
and I have beaten about the world too much to have a great 
deal of the bloom of life left on me. I was a digger in Australia 
when you were hardly out of your cradle, and I had lived many 
lives even before that, and have since ; and with all my experi- 
ence I have learned nothing of myself or of others that is 
half so precious and full of hope to me now as the conviction . 
yes, indeed, the conviction . that if you can love me, I can 
make you happy. Will you have me ? 

" I will come to London and see you the day after you 
receive this. That time will be long enough, I hope, for you to 
determine, and long enough for me to remain in suspense. 
And I would ask you not to speak of this to anyone until you 
have seen me. I want your own decision, Grace, and no one 
else's. If you can love me, that is all." 

Now this was not a love-letter in the ordinary style. It 
contained no impassioned words. It was not the language in 
which a young man pours out to his sweetheart his burning 
hyberbolical passion. Strangely enough, it did not contain one 
single protestation of Lennon's own love. Yet Grace hoped 
and believed that she perfectly understood it. Lennon wrote 
under the impression that his love for her was transparent, and 
not to be doubted. She thought she could see in it, too, the 
evidence of that proud and sensitive nature which she knew 
him to possess . that nature which disdains hyperbole as much 
as it scorns to hide its own supposed demerits or disad- 
vantages. Not even for his love would Lennon condescend to 
the cajolery of mere words. His soul shone in the letter. 
" I love you, as you know by my asking you to love me :" 
there was the whole. 

So she felt as she kissed the letter, and shed warm tears 
over it, and thought every sentence of it opened up a heaven 
over her life which hitherto had been so dull and hopeless. 
Yesterday, she was a poor girl, living the dreariest and most 
monotonous of existences ; feeding on her own heart . a lonely 
atom in the universe. Now, she was a woman, loved, and 
passionately loving ; offered happiness by one with whom she 
would have gladly encountered even misery. She could only 



SUDDEN HOPE SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 219 

hide herself away, while she strove to grow familiar with the 
reality. 

Doubts there were of course. Could she make him happy ? 
He was a scholar ; a thinking man, who had seen life in many 
shapes . had wandered, and struggled, and suffered ; and whose 
mind had ranged through a whole zodiac of experiences . of 
books, of nature, of life, of thought. Could she be a companion 
to him 1 Could her thoughts and ways have any interest for 
him ? Could she read his books, and follow his ideas ? Might 
he not come to be sorry in the end that he had ever married 
her 1 Might he not grow tired of her, and find her dull, and 
wish he had married someone better, or remained unmarried ? 

But she answered all this firmly and decisively. No ; it 
was impossible. If Ralph Lennon loved her now he would love 
her always. She was already to herself an authority and a 
dogmatist on love. On this one subject she was inspired and 
infallible : as the young mother who was at school the year 
before last, and whose first baby was born a week ago, is 
already convinced that she understands from first to last, and 
with a knowledge not to be borne down by any authority, the 
whole science and practice of the management of infancy. 

No, Grace had nothing to consider ; she wanted no hours for 
reflection . reflection was over and done. If Ralph Lennon 
stood there just now she could only fling herself into his arms. 
She was too much in love to think of any of the coquetries of 
courtship ; and . let us do justice to her and to him as well . 
she never once bestowed a thought upon the fact that she was 
poor and that he was rich. She totally forgot his money and 
her poverty. It never would have occurred to her to think 
that he cared whether she was poor or rich. 

So she only waited for him to come to give her answer. She 
did not dare yet to trust herself to talk to Mabel Warton upon 
any subject ; indeed her cheeks and eyes just now were very 
red, and she had not Sophy Streatfield's delightful art of crying 
without disfiguring herself. She felt some remorse about 
hiding half the day from her aunt and the children ; but she 
could not go into the light just yet. She heard little Watty's 
voice calling for her all over the house ; but she made no 
answer. At last he came and hammered lustily at the door. 
For a while she remained quiet ; but he continued to knock 
and call. " It is a shame," she thought, " to keep the poor 
little child there, and to disappoint him." So she opened the 



220 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

door, and Walter stormed into the room impetuous aud 
excited. 

" 0, cousin Gracie, I didn't know where you were, and I do 
want you so much ! O, look at my sword . do look at my 
sword ! I've smashed the hilt right off it, and I can't mend it ; 
can you 1 I've tried ever so much and I can't mend it ; and 
O, I am so sorry for my sword ! " 

Grace caught him in her arms, and lifted him up, and kissed 
him many times, and stammered out, half smiling, half sob- 
bing : 

" 0, you dear little Watty, you shall have a sword twice as 
fine as this, and a gun, and a spear, and anything else you 
like ; and you shall be as happy as a little king I " 

Watty opened the eyes of wonder even more than of delight. 

" But who'll give them to me, Gracie dear 1 " 

The little man's simple knowledge of the resources of the 
family, and its limited power of conferring splendid gifts, was 
an honest and timely corrective of enthusiasm. Somehow 
Grace felt herself blushing and growing shame-faced at the 
straightforward inquiry. 

" O, you'll see, Watty ; somebody will give them." 

" But I don't know," said Watty, still dubious . " I don't 
know, Gracie, who could give them. Papa isn't here, and no- 
body gives me anything but you and Mr. Lennon ; and you 
told me yesterday you couldn't give me anything for a while ; 
and it was a ship I asked Mr. Lennon to bring me, and not a 
sword." 

" Yes ; but some other time perhaps, you little unbelieving, 
practical, cross-questioning small boy : I promise you a fine 
sword . take my word for it. But in the mean time let us see 
if we can't do anything to mend this murderous weapon you 
have got here." 

The mending of the sword was accomplished somehow ; a 
mangled matter at the best, it did not seem at all artistic or 
military to little Watty. But it gave Grace some time to col- 
lect her senses, and to pour the cold water of common duties 
upon the glowing fervour of her happiness. 

Meanwhile Watty told his mamma how kind cousin Gracie 
was . that she had promised him a splendid sword, that she was 
mending his broken weapon, and that she cried when he told 
her it was broken. 

" You silly boy, what nonsense ! " said his mamma. " Cousin 



SUDDEN HOPE SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 221 

Grace cried because your little sword was broken ! How could 
you get such a ridiculous idea into your head 1 " 

" Why, but indeed mamma she did ! She regularly burst 
out crying . not roaring, you know, as Maby sometimes does" 
. and Walter laughed at the absurdity of his own comparison 
. " but crying quietly. I saw the tears in her eyes and run- 
ning down her cheeks too. Look, here she comes ; ask her." 

" Why, Grace, this little goose says you began to cry because 
his sword was broken ! " 

Grace laughed merrily at the idea. " No, not exactly for 
that ; but . " and the tears came up and sparkled in her eyes 
again ; and Mabel looked wistfully at her, but asked no more 
questions. 

Evening came on at last, and it brought a calmer and more 
self-possessed mood to our happy girl. Mabel had been ex- 
pecting Warton these two or three evenings, and felt con- 
vinced he must be coming now ; and so they waited for him in 
the little garden in front of the house. There was no talk 
now, as there used to be, of going to the railway station to 
meet him. His comings had been of late so irregular and so 
rare that even Mabel had given up all habit of thus forming 
herself and her niece into a guard of honour to receive him and 
escort him home. 

The two women walked up and down, while the children 
played on the grass. Grace felt unusually warm and tender to 
Mabel, whom she seemed now about to leave. She thought 
with the deepest pity of the poor, fond, weak woman whom 
she, hurrying to her own happiness and love, was to leave 
behind her to an ever-deepening shadow of difficulty or sorrow. 
She thought with a sensitiveness of penitence approaching to 
remorse that she had often been impatient or weary of 
Mabel's gentle ways and placid weakness ; that she had often 
felt a contempt for her, and sometimes gone near to expressing 
it. Almost as one feels towards the dying, she felt to Mabel, 
whom she was about to leave behind ; and she longed to throw 
her arms round her neck and kiss her, and beg to be forgiven 
for any chance impatience or passing ebullition of temper in 
the irrevocable days gone by. 

They walked a few turns in silence. At last Mabel said : 

" I don't know, Gracie, how it is ; but I grow more and 
more anxious about Walter. He looks so thin and worn ; and 
I am sure he has something very heavy on his mind. He will 



222 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

not talk about it to me, nor tell me anything if I ask him. 
He is so kind and considerate that he thinks it would pain me 
to hear of anything uncomfortable ; and of course it would, 
dear ; and you know how poor my nerves are, and always 
were, Grace, since I was a child. But I think it's so much 
worse when one isn't told, don't you 1 . for then one keeps 
.imagining the most dreadful things." 

" Well, dear, you know that Walter is very busy and anxious 
just now about his election, and all that ; and men must feel 
excited and anxious about these things in a way that we per- 
haps can't understand. But that will be all settled soon." 

" Yes ; but T fear it's more than that. It's a terrible thing, 
Grace, to think that your husband has some secret weight upon 
his mind which you are to know nothing of. O, my dear, I 
hope you will never have to think and brood over such a thing. 
And a woman ought to know her husband's troubles. The 
Bible itself says she ought to be his helpmate ; but O, Grace, I 
never thiDk of the words without remembering that I am not 
my poor Walter's helpmate : I never was. It's not my fault ; 
at least I can't do any better, for I don't understand the 
things that occupy him. But I often, often think what a pity 
it is poor Walter ever saw me. He might have married some 
clever woman, who could have understood him and helped him 
on, and not been a mere drag and clog on him as I have been ; or 
he might even have married some woman with money, and that 
would be something. Do you know, I sometimes think it would 
be a happy thing if I died now, while he is still young ; for 
then he might find some one to marry him who could under- 
stand him and be a help to him." 

" Dear Mabel, you must not think of such dreadful things. 
Sux-ely nobody could be more attached to Walter than you are." 

" No, indeed, nobody could ; nobody on earth could be more 
attached to him than I am. But what good is that? A 
little dog would be fond of him too. A man wants something 
better than that : he wants his wife to be a companion and a 
helpmate." 

Grace could hardly answer ; indeed, she knew nothing to 
say which could have any soothing effect. She tried some 
weary old commonplace about the difference between men's 
and women's nature, and failed to get through with it. Mabel 
went on : 

"I become so fearful too. I am always thinking that something 



SUDDEN HOP*: SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 223 

will happen to him . that he will fall sick somewhere miles 
and miles away, and die, perhaps, before I see him. You 
remember poor Mrs. Archdale, who lived in Crown Villa 
below? Her husband was away somewhere . in Dublin or 
Edinburgh, I think . and one day she got a telegram to say 
that he had died suddenly ; and she had hardly recovered 
from the faint she fell into, when there came a letter by post 
from him, in his own handwriting, to say that he was coming 
home immediately, and was longing to see her, and that he 
was well and happy, and hoped to find her so. And it was 
such an agony, for in her bewilderment she thought at first 
that the telegram must be a mistake, until she remembered 
that it was despatched hours and hours after he had posted 
his letter ; so she had only a second shock, and the knowledge 
of her misery twice over. And he was dead sure enough. I 
often think something of the same kind will happen to poor 
Walter." 

" But, dear Mabel, Walter is not in bad health, and there 
is nothing at all to give you any uneasiness about him." 

" Do you really think so, Grace, or are you trying merely to 
allay my fears ? Do you really think there is nothing very 
dreadful on his mind V 

" Indeed I think there is nothing very dreadful. I fancy he 
is in some little difficulty about money just now to meet his 
expenses ; and I think it is such a pity he should place himself 
in any difficulty of the kind when he has so much talent, and 
ought to be independent of political parties and patrons. But 
I don't believe there is anything worse than that disturbing 
him . I don't indeed." 

" I am glad to hear you say so . it comforts me. I do wish 
I could see him out of these dreadful money difficulties. I 
am ashamed to say it, Grace, but I look at every newspaper 
that comes in the hope of seeing an announcement of the death 
of that hideous old aunt of mine, that frightful old Jane Ethel- 
stone . just because there is a faint possibility that she might 
leave me or the children a few thousand pounds. I don't think 
she will. I know she wouldn't give us a farthing ; and I have 
not spoken to her or heard from her for years ; but when people 
are dying they get softened sometimes, and perhaps she might 
think of me and the children." 

Grace laughed at the remembrance of the fearful old person 
alluded to. 



224: THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" I am quite sure she'll never leave me anything, Mabel ; and 
indeed I shouldn't like to take a farthing of her wretched 
money. Let them sew it all up in a sack and bury it, and 
put a stone over it to say, ' Here lies the soul of Jane Ethel- 
stone/ as they did with somebody in Gil Bias. I don't care. 
She detests me . she considers me a lost girl ; she told me so 
when I boldly told her I meant to go to Home and be an 
artist. She asked me sarcastically whether I would not become 
a ballet-dancer, or take to wearing trousers ; and she wound up 
by saying that I was a disgrace to my family, and I think she 
added to my sex ; and she requested that when I became a 
sign-painter or a tombstone-cutter I would do her the favour 
to forget that I was a relative of hers . which I have been 
trying to do ever since." 

1 " Well, my dear, she is a very disagreeable old woman ; but 
I could forgive her all if she just turned good-natured in the 
end, and left me something to help my poor Walter with. 0, 
how glad I should be to give it to him, and to bring him out 
of all his vexations and troubles ! " 

" Now, Mabel, I am the first to be of good omen, and to 
bring you good news. Look up ! Your alarms about 
"Walter are over for one night at least . for see, here he 
comes." 

And so he did. Grace's eyes had discovered him a long 
way off. He was coming on with rapid strides. He looked 
dusty and weary. Mabel was already signalling him with 
waving hands. He nodded, and then turned his eyes down- 
ward again. 

" Here's papa, "Watty ! " said Mrs. "Warton joyfully to her 
little son. 

" O," said "Watty, looking up, " shall I run to meet him, 
mamma 1 " 

The child was rather doubtful, and not at all anxious. 
Papa came so seldom now, and played with "Watty so little, 
that his presence had long ceased to create any storm of 
delight. 

" Yes, dear, certainly." 

But "Watty began to make some disposition of his play- 
things before he started ; and the result was that his papa 
was at the gate while the boy was still on the grass. Mabel 
threw herself into his arms. "Walter brushed her cheek with 
his lips, and replaced her quietly on her feet. He also kissed 



SUDDEN HOPE . SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 225 

the children and Grace, and then said he was very tired, and 
had dined, and only wanted some tea, and took Mabel indoors. 

'.'You look very tired, Walter dear," said his wife, when 
they were alone, " and you seem unwell. Where have you 
been ; and I hope nothing is the matter ? " 

" Nothing," he replied wearily, " except the old story." 

" The old headache and faintness, dear 1 " she inquired, with 
alarm in her tones. 

" No, no. At least I don't care about that. But I am 
dreadfully embarrassed for money, Mabel ; and if I don't get 
some within a few days, I shall be in prison and ruined . 
that's all." 

" O, what a dreadful thing ! What are we to do 1 0, if I 
could do anything to help you, my dear Walter ! " 

" Yes, if you could, of course you would do it ; but then you 
can't, and I don't see much use in talking about it." 

" If that cruel old Jane Ethelstone would only help 
us, or would only die and leave us some of her wretched 
money ! " 

Walter shrugged his shoulders. Tie had been hearing of 
old Jane Ethelstone almost ever since he saw Mabel first ; 
and there was no reason why she should die now any more 
than during any of the next dozen or twenty years, and no 
reason why they should expect anything from her, even at her 
death. 

" That's the state of affairs, Mabel," he said, as he dropped 
languidly into a chair and leaned his chin upon his hand. " It 
has been threatening a long time, and now the end is close 
upon us. I am nearly ruined. And yet it would not take a 
great deal to help me over this difficulty, and enable me per- 
haps to come all right and make my way yet. A mere hand- 
ful of money, as a rich man, Mabel, would think it . a mere 
handful would make us all happy." 

It was " us " with Warton just now. " I " had all the 
pleasure, and schemed out the plans, and was to benefit by the 
success ; " we " shared the failure, and were burdened with the 
task of reparation. 

" How much, Walter 1 " his wife asked timidly. 

She was thinking, it is to be feared, that Grace would soon 
have fifty pounds coming to her, and wondering whether that 
would do any good, and whether it would be too great a shame 
to borrow it from her. 

Q 



226 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Only a trifle, in fact. Eight hundred, or at all events a 
thousand pounds, would bring me through for the present." 

Eight hundred or a thousand pounds ! Poor Mabel's coun- 
tenance utterly fell. A. thousand pounds for the present? 
As well say twenty thousand, fifty thousand, half a million, at 
once. 

" 0, Walter dear, what a great sum of money ! at least it 
seems great to me, dearest " . she saw him frown, and hastened 
to lower her tone of alarm . " because I cannot give it to you 
or get it for you. I am sure I don't know anybody on earth 
who could lend it except Jane Etnelstone, who wouldn't 
give it if we were all in the workhouse ; and of course 
except " 

" Except whom 1 Speak quickly, Mabel." 

" Well, darling, except Ralph Lennon. But then, you know, 
he has obliged us once already." 

This was the very point Warton wanted to bring her to. 
He did not like to appear, even in her eyes, as if he had been 
planning an assault on Lennon' s purse. 

"Yes, that is true. I "had quite forgotten Ralph Lennon. 
How strange that you should have thought of him ! " 

" No, not so strange, dear, when he has always been such a 
friend." Mabel was rather proud of liaving taken the initia- 
tive in thinking of anything. "I know of course that he 
would do it if we asked him ; but I did not know whether you 
would like to do so." 

"Listen, Mabel. As you have mentioned Lennon's name, I 
have something to speak to you about which concerns him. 
How do you think Grace feels towards him 1 " 

u O, Walter, I'm sure I don't know. I never asked her." 

" No ; but I thought all women had sharp eyes and quick 
senses for that kind of thing. Do you think she cares about 
him . loves him 1 " 

" I don't know whether she has any feeling of that kind. 
She was angry once when I merely jested about the probability 
of his marrying her." 

" Would she marry him if he asked her 1 " 

" I dare say she would. I don't see why she should not. I 
am sure it would make me very happy if she did, though I 
should be sorry to lose her. But does he love her, Walter 1 " 

" That I don't know. I am sure he has a sincere affection 
for her . a friendship, you understand : and I feel convinced 



SUDDEN HOPE . SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 227 

he would marry her if he got the slightest encouragement. I 
don't suppose a man like him, who has long ceased to be a 
boy, thinks very much about romantic love when he goes to 
marry a girl. Grace would suit him admirably. She is a 
clever girl, with tastes much like his own ; and he would soon 
get to love her quite as much as is necessary." 

" It would be a very good thing for her. It would provide 
for her, poor child ; but I should like him to love her, 
Walter." 

"Yes, yes, of course. So be would, no doubt; perhaps he 
does already. It would be a good thing for her, Mabel ; and 
it would be a good thing for him too ; and any true friend of 
his ought to be glad to see it brought about. It might save 
him from folly, or danger." 

" My dear Walter, save him from what 1 " 

" I don't like to say, or even to hint ; but I can't help ob- 
serving. He lives too near . Myra Alwyn" (the name came 
out with a strong effort) ; " and by Heaven I think she is in 
love with him ! " He brought the declaration out in a burst 
of vehemence, and then ground his teeth and clenched his 
hand. 

" 0, Walter, how you frighten me ! O, what a wicked 
woman she must be ! " 

He glared at her savagely, and was on the point of making 
some fierce answer ; but he checked himself, and only said : 

"My dear, we must not judge our fellow-creatures in that 
way. I said I thought or feared this ; but I did not even 
suspect anything more than a feeling on Mrs. Alwyn's part ; 
and I don't wish you, however virtuous yourself, to run quite 
into the worst extreme in condemning her. That may be the 
way of the world, Mabel ; but it need not be our way." 

"Of course you are right, Walter . you always are ; and I 
am sorry I spoke in that hasty uncharitable way ; but you are 
always so good and charitable and Christianlike. Only it 
shocked me when you spoke of a married woman . and a 
clergyman's wife too ! . being in love with anybody not her 
husband. 0, Walter dear, is it not shocking to think of 
married people having any such wrong feelings 1 " 

" Dreadful, dreadful, of course. But now we are only talking 
of possibilities, you know, and of guarding against dangers. I 
think a girl like Grace might be the means of saving from any 
possibility of danger a man like Lennon : and might be the 

Q 2 



228 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

means, too, of saving others and securing much happiness. I 
think you might have a share in such a good work, by using 
your influence over her to persuade her to see things in that 
light. There, that is all; and all this, Mabel, came of your 
having suggested the name of Ralph Lennon as that of our 
only friend." 

" Fes, dear ; and in jouv anxiety about your friend you 
have forgotten all about yourself. Just like you' ! 0, I too 
should so like to render any service to dear old Ralph ! What 
a dreadful world it is ! I think it would be the happiest thing 
that could befall Grace Ethelstone if she were to become an 
instrument in the hand of Providence to avert such dangers 
and calamities. But about your own affairs, love 1 Shall we 
ask Ralph to . to come to our aid again 1 " 

" Might it not be done, think you, through Grace 1 Might 
not she bring it about in some indirect way, if what we have 
talked of should come to pass ? Would not that be rather a 
more delicate way, perhaps 1 And don't you think she would 
herself be glad to be the means of serving us . I mean, of 
serving you and the children 1 " 

" I don't know, dear. Grace is the best-hearted creature in 
the world ; there is nothing of her own she would not give. 
But she has strong ideas of independence, and all that. Girls 
have such wild romantic notions, and don't know, until they 
go into the world and have a family, what a dreadful thing it 
is to want money, and how people have to humble themselves 
to get it." Poor Mabel sighed. " But I think she would not 
mind doing this, if things went on as we hope they may." 

" You can put it to her in some way, can you not, dear, to- 
night . not broadly or directly, but rather as a vague sug- 
gestion 1 " 

" I will put it to her, and do my best. If I cannot get her 
to see it my way, then -" 

" Then, of course, I will go directly and frankly to Ralph 
Lennon myself, and ask it of him openly as a favour. It is 
not, after all, such a great matter. But I had rather the re- 
quest did not come directly from me . or indeed directly, as a 
request, from anybody." 

This was Warton's process of reason : " Lennon is a strange, 
eccentric, independent, generous man. Let him but be in- 
duced to think that I, Walter Warton, struggling terribly with 
difficulties, would rather break down utterly than acknow- 



SUDDEN HOPE SUDDEN DISAPPOINTMENT. 229 

ledge the fact to hiin and even seem to ask for help, and he is 
just the sort of creature to do something spontaneously of the 
most generous and delicate nature." 

He did not want Grace to ask Lennon's help ; he did not 
expect or wish her to do it, Let but Mabel convey to Grace 
a clear idea of the difficulties that surrounded them, and Grace 
only allow a hint of them to escape her lips to Lennon, and 
enough would be done. 

Warton now was impatient and ardent to bring about an 
engagement between Grace and Lennon. He spoke at least 
some of his true feelings to his wife. He wished to see Lennon 
removed out of the path of the Alwyns into the cloud and 
distance of married life ; and it was always his fate to be too 
clever by half. Had he let things alone, all would probably 
have gone just as he wished ; but he was not satisfied without 
employing the agency of an additional stimulus alike to Mabel 
and to Grace. 

His wife fulfilled her mission that night. How it succeeded 
he knew when she came with pale face and tearful eyes into 
his room. How it succeeded he would have known still better 
could he have looked into Grace's bedroom, and seen her 
stretched, half kneeling, half lying, on the floor, her head 
pressed against the side of her little bed, and her figure shaken 
with cruel sobs and spasms of grief. The beautiful world of 
the morning and the day was all shattered to pieces. It had 
collapsed and disappeared. The old similitude which likens 
human hope to the child's soap-bubble impressed its truth in 
letters of fire on the heart of Grace Ethelstone. 

For poor Mabel had gone about her task in the way that of 
all others was the most distinctly doomed to frustrate it. First, 
she appealed to Grace to help "Walter and the children and 
herself out of their difficulties, until Grace flushed and shivered 
at the thought of trafficking in Lennon's love and her own, and 
she and Mabel seemed like mean conspirators laying traps to 
catch a wealthy suitor. But that was nothing compared with 
what followed. Mabel went on to plead for Ralph himself; 
and, warming with her subject, she described him as one whom 
the spells and snares of another Venusberg were threatening, 
and whom only a good wife could redeem. She alluded pass- 
ingly, but too suggestively, to Lennon s earlier years, and his 
real or supposed follies, as they had been purposely pictured to 
herself one well-remembered time ; and at last she succeeded 



230 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



in conveying to Grace's startled mind the idea of a mission 
assigned to her against which every pulse of her heart throbbed 
with antagonism. She was then merely appointed to " redeem 
and release from love that recalls and represses " one who had 
" loved too soon," and " lost love's rose, and cared not for 
glory's." Her idol, her hero, her one high-souled man, was the 
creature to whom she was thus to minister ! Her own life so 
far had taught her a dread, a dislike, and a contempt of men. 
Her father had been weak and wild, and would probably have 
made his home unhappy, but that he had the good fortune to 
die young. "Warton she saw through to the selfish sensuous 
heart, and despised. To her girlish fancy, repelled by such men 
as she had chieny known or heard of, Lennon rose up at last a 
sort of knight without reproach. And now he was pictured to 
her as just like the rest ; and she was urged to marry him 
because he was like the rest ! Her sense and spirit rose in 
revolt, and overcame. Her life, in its intellectual part, had 
been lonely so far ; and solitude always strengthens a soul 
which it cannot enfeeble. Her soul was strong enough even 
for this sacrifice. She knew that the decision she was making 
was the fate of her life's whole happiness ; but she decided. 
She said not much to Mabel ; not much, but enough. When 
she was left alone she read Lennon's letter over and over again, 
now with other eyes than those which judged it in the morning. 
"This, then," she sobbed to herself, "is the kind of love that 
even he can offer ! Rather than accept it I would die . 0, my 
God, rather than accept it, I will even live . alone ! " 



CHAPTER XXII 

"THOU SHALT RENOUNCE." 

IT was a fierce and fitful summer day . a day of thunder and 
drenching showers, alternating with sudden and burning 
sunlight . when Ralph Lennon, who had come to London the 
previous night, left his old quarters at the Eleanor's Cross 
Hotel for the train which was to carry him to Grace. His 
mind naturally went back to the bright day . not so long ago 
. when he saw her for the first time, and called her " Mabel," 
seeing in her the reflection of that pale past love now faded 



"THOU SHALT RENOUNCE." 231 

below the horizon of his life, and only remembered because of 
its refraction. Insensibly had grown upon him since that time 
the love he fait towards Grace, and which he now knew to be 
the one true passion of his existence. It had not flashed upon 
him like the concentrated rays from the burning-glass, but had 
grown warmer and brighter by degrees, commanding his in- 
tellect and his sympathies as well as his heart, and subduing 
him at last by the dear, tender, familiar glow of habit. For 
months and months she had occupied a daily increasing part of 
his thoughts, even before he had come to recognize the fact that 
he loved her or had formed any clear hope of winning her love. 
All the special objects he had in view when he came back to 
England had disappeared, or proved failures. He had tried to 
do good, and failed utterly, and was only regarded with distrust 
or contempt where he thought to be a benefactor. He had 
resolved to lead a sort of anchorite life ; and, behold, he had 
fallen in love, and was about to marry. He thought his years 
of sentiment and passion had gone for ever ; and, lo, he was a 
boy again, in feverish hope and fitful alternations of doubt and 
joy; and he could almost tremble as he felt in anticipation the 
touch of a girl's hand . a girl who was in her cradle when he 
was passionately and vainly pleading his first love. Could it 
be that the brightness of a life which seemed to have passed 
its meridian was only dawning for him 1 And if he should 
fail, what then remained 1 He shut this thought from him. 
It could not be. 

He grew intensely nervous as the train ran into the station. 
But his nervousness gave way to surprise and excitement when 
he saw Grace Ethelstone on the platform. There was no one 
else there except the porters and the station-master, and Lennon 
was the only one who got out of the train. He sprang towards 
Grace, and called her by her name. She gave him her hand in 
silence, and it trembled as he touched it. She was very pale 
. he could see this even through the veil which she kept down 
. and her eyes looked as if long tears had wasted them. His 
heart sank. This looked not like a wedding. 

" Has something happened 1 " he asked excitedly. 

" No, Mr. Lennon . nothing," she answered. " Pray don't 
think it strange if you find me here, and I tell you that I came 
to meet you. I did . I felt anxious that you should not come 
to the house. I wished to speak to you here, or anywhere . 
not there . and so I waited for you here." 



232 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" You have received my letter, Grace 1 " He spoke slowly 
and heavily. 

" I have.'' 

" And you have come here to answer it ? " 

"Yes, Mr. Lennon." 

He knew that he must prepare to hear the worst. He con- 
trolled his emotion with a strong effort, and offered her his arm 
to leave the station. The train had gone its way, and they 
were under the eyes of the few railway officials. He meant to 
lead her to the road outside, but she said : 

" There is a waiting-room here, Mr. Lennon, and there is no 
one there ; will you let me speak to you there for a moment 1 " 

She spoke with a childlike simplicity and unreserve. He 
went with her into the dull little waiting-room, furnished with 
a stony sofa, two rigid chairs, and a table on which nothing 
ever rested but carpet-bags, and adorned with a few pictorial 
advertisements of Brighton hotels and Yorkshire hydropathic 
establishments. It was lonely, dark, and silent as a little 
vault. 

There was just a moment's pause. Lennon would have given 
anything that he could break out into a storm of passionate 
appeal and protestation, but her sad expression and tone chilled 
him. She broke the silence : 

" Your letter, Mr. Lennon, was a surprise to me; but I thank 
you deeply for all you have said in it. I can never forget how 
kind and good you have been, and I hope you will believe that 
I always appreciate your motives ; but I cannot accept your 
offer, and I thought it best to come and meet you here at once, 
and frankly tell you so." 

" But you will tell me, you must tell me, something more 
than this. You will tell me . no matter in what words ; the 
harder the better . why you have resolved so suddenly to refuse 
me." 

" Ah ! I have no hard words of any kind to speak to you ; 
but I cannot marry you, Mr. Lennon . O, how I wish I 
could!" 

The simplicity of this avowal, accompanied by a sudden rush 
of tears into Grace's eyes, bewildered Lennon, and at the same 
time made his heart throb with the quickening of a new hope. 
He caught her in his arms. 

" Thank God for that word, Grace ! I will not listen to 
any more denials ; I have heard enough. I don't care what 



"THOU SHALT RENOUNCE." 233 

difficulties or objections you may think you see, you shall be 
my wife ; I will never leave you." 

She disengaged herself quietly, and said : " jSTo, Mr. Lennon, 
it cannot be. Don't think me a mere silly girl, to refuse only 
that I may be pressed into consenting ; my mind is fixedly 
made up. Only the heart knows its own bitterness ! . only I 
myself can know what it has cost me to have to make this 
resolve. But I tell you truly what I have determined to 
do, and you will not . I appeal to you . make me more un- 
happy by striving to change my purpose." 

"But you do not think, you cannot think, that you can 
leave me in this way 1 you do not believe that I can take this 
answer 1 Grace, I have set my whole life, my whole hope of 
happiness, on your answer." 

She shook her head, and something of a flush came over her 
face as she asked : 

" How many loves can a man's life comprise 1 " 

" The rest of my life shall, at least, comprise but one. 
Grace, this is not worthy of you : past follies or weaknesses or 
temptations are not to be reckoned even against the best of 
men. I cannot believe that you are thus influenced ; there is 
something far deeper behind. Tell me, I beseech of you, what 
it is that persuades you to refuse the offer I make you of a love 
that is as deep as my whole heart, and shall last out my life . 
ay, and long, long survive it, if all be not myth and fable on 
which we build our hopes. Tell me, dearest, dearest Grace, 
what secret thought impels you to reject me." 

" Mr. Lennon, I need not tell you. Your own heart must 
surely tell you. Look into your heart, and ask it what your 
motive was in offering to marry me. O, it was a generous and 
a kindly motive. I well know that . I don't mistake it. It 
was the wish to take a poor girl from poverty and give her 
a life of ease and freedom. But you don't know women yet, 
Mr. Lennon . at least such women as I should wish to be " 

"I don't understand a word of this," he interrupted pas- 
sionately. "I love you, Grace, as deeply and truly as ever 
man loved woman. I had no such pitiful motive in my mind. 
I have not any of the hyperbolical charity in me which you 
seem to describe. I love you ; and I did believe, or think, or 
hope, that you loved me. And I have nothing to offer you but 
my love. I am not young. I told you frankly in my letter 
how well I knew that we are not suited in years, or in any- 



234 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

thing perhaps ; but I thought you would overlook all that . 
and . and love me. If I was wrong in this, why spare me the 
truth ? Let me know it at once. I am not idiot enough to 
think that a gifted and beautiful girl like you . yes, like 
you ; I mean no idle compliments, Heaven knows . is bound 
to throw herself into the arms of the first man who chooses 
to make love to her. Tell me the truth and the worst at once. 
Look me in the face, let me see your eyes, and say that you do 
not and cannot love me ; and I will free you that moment from 
-any persecution of mine. I will bear my lonely life how I 
may, though beyond all words more lonely now than it was 
when first I saw you here ; and you shall be free at least from 
further importunity." 

" O, Mr. Lennon, how can you ask me 1 how can you thus 
force an answer from me? " 

" Yes ; I must even force it. I must know. I will not 
allow you to leave this place until you tell me. Grace Ethel- 
stone, do you not love me ? " 

She drew calmly away from him, and seemed to struggle 
with her emotion, that she might make a deliberate decisive 
answer. He waited for the worst, and nerved himself to bear 
it. He stood firm and fixed, with lips compressed, as a brave 
soldier may stand to receive the volley from his old comrades, 
who are drawn out to give him his doom of death. 

" Mr. Lennon, I scorn to deceive you. I prefer rather, if it 
must be, to humiliate myself. I did love you, and I hoped to 
love you always." 

An exclamation of joy broke from him, and he seized her in 
his arms, and kissed her again and again. She hardly resisted ; 
and 0, what a wild temptation it was to her to abandon 
herself wholly to his love and to her own ! But the bitter 
thought came over her that she would be only giving a whole 
heart in exchange for half a love, for the relics and embers of a 
heart ; and she wrapped herself in her almost fierce indepen- 
dence, and stood isolated again. 

From a social and conventional point of view it was just as 
well that she did so. For she had hardly drawn herself 
away, when a railway porter, trying to find occupation 
somewhere, looked into the waiting-room, glanced all around, as 
if to show official keenness and attention, and then went away 
. rather proud of the fact that there really were passengers to 
be seen in the place at a dead hour of the day, when the station 



. THOU SHALT RENOUNCE,' 



93il 



was usually as much of a solitude as Robinson Crusoe's island 
before the pious mariner touched its shores. The traffic of this 
station with the busy world was only at two regular intervals, 
like the tides. The City men ebbed away after breakfast, and 
flowed back again to late dinner or early tea ; and between 
these tides there was only a blank. 

The momentary interruption of the porter gave Grace and 
Lennon alike an opportunity of recovering their composure of 
demeanour, and a reminder that, after all, even in this station, 
walls might have ears, and porters had certainly eyes. 

" I cannot understand you, Grace," Lennon resumed in hesi- 
tating accents of strongly compressed emotion ; " you will not 
say you do not care for me . do not love me " 

" I will not say I did not love you, Mr. Lennon. It would 
not be true if I were to say so." 

" Then why refuse me 1 why torture me and yourself by so 
cruel a chimera as that which you have raised ? Do you think 
me so ignoble as to be incapable of loving ? Do you think me 
so stupidly incapable of appreciating you, as to suppose that 
anything but love could win you 1 You would not surely 
make us both unhappy for our lives because of a fantastic 
suspicion, or some perverted idea of independence 1 Grace, I 
could not have believed that you would be unjust and cruel." 

" Mr. Lennon, you are a scholar, and a man of experience 
and science, and you have talents and gifts ; but there are 
things you don't understand. You don't understand, I think, 
the heart of a woman . at least, of some women. You do not 
know how much they ask when they give their love, and how 
deeply degraded they must be when they consent to accept 
less. I have nothing on earth to give a man . nothing that 
could tempt the poorest being that works for his bread . but 
my love and my heart ; but these I could give wholly and for 
ever ; and I will never, never give them where less is offered 
in return. I have seen little life, but yet enough to teach me 
what slaves, what abject and miserable slaves, women are who 
accept less than the one love of a whole heart, or who have not 
eyes to see that they are denied it. Many misfortunes may 
happen to me, but this one never ! " 

" Then," said Lennon, " I talk in vain. I cannot hope to 
move you. I have no such fresh first love and pure heart to 
offer. I do not blame you, Grace, for setting your claims so 
high ; but I cannot meet them. You know more perhaps of 



o 



236 THE WATEEDALE NEIGHBOUKS. 

my life than I thought . more than it appeared to me, looking 
over it, I dare say, too thoughtlessly, it was of any use that you 
should know. Men regard these things lightly ; so do most 
women. I do not blame you that you do otherwise. Your 
standard is too high for me. I now know youv meaning, 
Grace. You ask me in other words : Have I anything to 
offer worthy of your pure and perfect love ? I answer, I have 
not." 

" Yet you do not understand me, Mr. Lennon ; I am not so 
vain and self-conceited. I know too well how little right I 
have to set up any such standard. I am not one of your 
saints . I don't appreciate saints. I fear I could not turn 
away, perhaps, even from a criminal, if I loved him . and if . 
if I felt that he loved only me." 

" But I love only you," exclaimed Lennon vehemently. 
" Can you not see it ? Have you no eyes to judge 1 women 
generally don't want that insight. Why have I followed you, 
and clung to you for months and months ? Have we not 
looked love to each other ? " 

" We have, . it is true ; and I cannot think of it now with- 
out feeling ashamed of my own weakness. 0, Mr. Lennon, 
have even you no sense of the cruel contempt of the love of 
men to women 1 Am I the only one to whom you have pro- 
tested such things 1 Have I had no predecessors 1 And who 
is to tell me that I should have no rivals ? What happiness, 
what blessing could come of such a marriage 1 " 

" Some one," he said sternly, " has been poisoning your 
mind against me." 

" No, no. I declare to you no. I know no one who is not 
your friend . no one who would not bitterly blame me for what 
I am doing now." 

" Yet you have heard something of me which has decided 
you. O, yes ; there are such things to be told : and one's 
friends can tell them. They can always fill up the blanks 
which our own tenderness to ourselves does not think it quite, 
necessary to supply. I dare say all you have heard is true. 
My life was not . what it ought to have been. I do penance 
for it . now, at this moment, more, far more, than ever before. 
Let it be so . I have no more to say." 

Grace's tears were bursting from her eyes. " 0, Mr. 
Lennon," she exclaimed, " how harsh and cruel you must think 
me; but think, too, how much I suffer ! I know . my heart 



"THOU SHALT RENOUNCE." 237 

and conscience tell me . that we ought not to marry ; that I 
could not believe in the endurance of your love ; that you. 
would soon begin to tire of me . no, no, don't tell me anything 
else, please ; you believe it now, but a short time would bring 
change. Ah ! you, Mr. Lennon, you men are not like us : 
love is only a plaything with you . a thing to be fondled in the 
intervals of ambition and business and pleasure, like an infant. 
Such love some women can accept, and can be happy with it 
and make their husbands happy : I could not. I could not 
warm myself on the ashes of a heart. Let us leave each other 
while there is time, before we come to scorn and hate each 
other . and I should scorn and hate any one who gave me but 
half a love, or the intervals of a love, and myself for having con- 
sented to accept such a fate." 

Yet was there not a yielding softness in her voice 1 Did not 
the tears that relieved her heart speak promise to her lover 1 
Yes, doubtless. Had Lennon, then, once more caught her in 
his arms, and passionately renewed the pledge of his undying 
love, she might have relented and gone his way, and run her 
risk, and surely not repented ; but Lennon's sensitive and 
proud nature . proud even in the uncompromising recognition 
of his own defects . was deeply pierced by her words. He saw 
in her a pure, unworldly, high-minded girl, with a heart that 
the flesh and the devil had never tainted ; and he looked back 
upon his own stormy youth- and feverish years of folly and 
heedlessness and ingratitude, and his manhood of futile peni- 
tence ; and he said to his soul that it would be a shame and 
sin to mingle two such natures. " There is no recalling the 
past," he bitterly thought ; " and you cannot mingle the pure 
and the impure if the first be true to itself. I accept my sen- 
tence." 

So he bowed his head to that which now seemed Heaven's 
judgment, and pleaded no more against it. 

" You are right, Grace," he said, with forced calmness, "and 
I accept your decision ; indeed, it was not without sore mis- 
giving and doubt that I ever ventured on thinking one so pure 
and noble-minded as you could be induced to mingle her life 
with the wreck and remnant of a life like mine. I cannot 
blame you . although your words take away from me any last 
poor chance of happiness. Good-bye. I met you here for the 
first time ; it seems only right that I should take leave of you 
here for ever." 



238 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



" Then we must not meet any more, ever again ?" she asked 
in accents broken by emotion, 

"No more, no more . unless " 

She shook her head sadly, and crushed with a decided ex- 
pression any faint hope that might for the moment have 
revived within him. She was broken-hearted, but her resolu- 
tion was firmly set. Poor Mabel's confidences, the cruel kind- 
ness of her arguments to show the need of some good woman 
taking Ralph Lennon's life in hand, had been decisive. 

" Some day, Mr. Lennon," she said, with a wan and feeble 
effort at a smile, " you will be glad of this, and will thank me 
in your heart that I saved you from the result of a sudden and 
generous impulse. And I . if I am never glad, yet I shall still 
think I have not done wrong . and as you said yourself the 
other day, when you quoted to me from one of your classical 
poets, I will order my heart to bear it." 

" Life," he replied, " to you is long and full of hope, the sun 
is not behind you ; you will be happy and forget all this. You 
consult your own happiness, and you are right." 

" 0, Mr. Lennon, how can you be so cruel ! Consult my 
own happiness, and forget ! I have trodden my own happiness 
under foot- . and we are not like men, we do not forget . when 
everything else in life is forgotten, a woman remembers her 
love." 

" When everything else in life is forgotten," he added in 
bitter tones, " the sins of a man are remembered to him." 

" Are we parting then in this way . in bitterness 1 " 

"No, not in bitterness, Grace; but I am not so good a 
Chi-istian as to be able to reconcile myself to this at once." 

" One word," she suddenly interposed, " one request. I do 
ask you, Mr. Lennon, to promise me that you will tell no one 
of what I have said to-day ; I have a reason for it, which you 
may guess. You have generously spared me reproaches from 
your own lips ; spare me also the reproaches and remonstrances 
of others." 

" I understand you ; and you may rely on my silence, even 
if I had a motive to speak, which surely I have not." 

She moved towards that door of the waiting-room which 
opened on the side of the station beyond which lay the road 
she had to walk homeward. At the door she turned, and held 
out her hand : 

" Let us part with words of friendship," she said tremblingly. 



ANOTHER APPEAL. 239 

But he pressed his lips to her forehead and then to her lips. 
" I leave you," he murmured, " with no poor words of pre- 
tended friendship. I love you, Grace, and shall love you 
always ; and it shall be at once my joy and my punishment to 
think that you might have loved me." 

And then she left the station and walked alone her road, 
and never looked back ; but agony rang a knell in her ears 
and in her soul like the chorus in Faust : "0 woe ! woe ! 
the beautiful world . thou hast destroyed it." She felt like one 
on whom the bitterness of death has fallen, and who knows of 
no heaven to follow. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

ANOTHER APPEAL. 

OF all men living, of all persons living, Grace Ethelstone 
would have wished that day, to avoid Walter Warton. 
She had a terror present to her mind all through her interview 
with Ralph . the terror of Warton's making his appearance at 
the railway-station and seeing her. She knew\ he would not 
stay long at home ; and she hoped by walking back through all 
manner of circuitous and obscure ways she might avoid him, 
and not reach the house till after he had gone ; but she was 
not so fortunate. Just as she came in sight of the house she 
saw him standing at the little gate ; in fact, he was waiting for 
her. He had told Mabel that he must speak to Grace, and 
bade his wife keep in the house. There was no turning back 
now ; and Grace was too proud to show any emotion of any 
kind under such eyes, if she could possibly help it . indeed, her 
fear of meeting him was chiefly a fear of herself, and a doubt of 
her own strength to hide her feelings. 

" You are out early, Grace," Warton said. 

" Yes, Walter. I often go out early." 

"And alone?" 

" Yes. I like to be alone." 

Warton only smiled at this rather marked intimation. 

" Solitude is the nurse of genius, Grace . so some great 
person says : Gibbon, I think . but I fear it is only in our 
younger and more romantic days we quite appreciate the 



240 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

sentiment. "Will you let me break in on your solitude for a 
moment or two ? I want to talk to you, my dear ; and I 
don't see you very often. Shall we walk this way 1 " 

" Any way you please, Walter." 

" In this direction, then ; for it will bring me a little nearer 
to the station." 

They walked in silence until they had passed some of the 
houses : then they turned into a quiet lane. Grace endeavoured 
to seem quite easy and unconcerned, and, to keep up appear- 
ances, stopped now and then and plucked a wild-flower. An 
unlucky device too ; for one which she plucked proved to be of 
a kind Ralph Lennon was very fond of, and its fragrance 
brought to her heart a sudden rush of sweet and bitter 
memories ; and Walter, looking suddenly round, and about 
to open his explanations, saw that tears had started into her 
eyes. 

" I am afraid, Grace, that Mabel has been foolishly saying 
something which pained you 1 I am very sorry ; but she 
meant it well, poor Mabel." 

" Mabel has been saying nothing, Walter, but what you told 
her to say, I suppose." 

" What has she been saying ? " 

Grace made no reply. 

" Speak, dear, and don't be childish. What has she been 
saying 1 " 

" I can't go over it all again, and I don't mean to. It 
is cruel of you, Walter, to ask me. You know what she 
said." 

"Well, I suppose, in plain words, she urged you to marry 
Ralph Lennon 1 " 

" She did. At least she. was the interpreter of the message, 
or the command, or whatever it was. She urged me to lie in 
wait for Mr. Lennon, to plot for him, to insist on marrying 
him, . because he has money." 

" Was that all 1 " 

" What more would you have ? It was not like Mabel to 
speak so. It was not she, indeed, who spoke. The advice was 
yours, Walter." 

" It was, Grace. It was mine ; and I now repeat it. I only 
wish I had spoken to you myself in the first instance, and not 
left it to poor Mabel to bungle and misinterpret. The advice 
Grace, solely for your good. If you were my 



ANOTHER APPEAL. 241 

daughter . indeed I can hardly think of you but as a daughter 
. rny advice would be the same. You have too much intel- 
lect and spirit and sense to be doomed to a poor and drudging 
life. You were made for something much better. You have 
wasted enough of your time on us : waste no more. It would 
be in vain. Think of yourself. You cannot help us. I tell 
you frankly, girl, we are ruined ! . I am lost. It will deeply 
embitter my failure and my trouble if you, so unlike other 
women, so highly deserving of something better, should be 
dragged down too." 

There was so much sincerity about his manner and his tone, 
that Grace felt involuntarily touched by it, and glanced at him 
with something of pity and respect. He saw the glance, and 
understood it. He knew that his way of putting the case was 
telling on her. 

" That is all, Grace my dear. That is my earnest advice. 
We are lost. Mabel goes down with me ; but there is a way 
of escape open for you, which you may accept with honour. 
Marry Ralph Lennon. Don't think I would advise you to 
marry a man merely because he has money. But Lennon is a 
man of brains, and of heart too ; and a woman may well be 
happy with him. You, I know, have ambition ; and you are 
too sensible a girl to believe in romantic poverty. Trust one 
who has experienced it, dear. There is no happiness where 
there is poverty." 

" 0, Walter, for shame ! I don't believe a word of it." 

" Don't you 1 Look at our home. You know all its miser- 
able struggles and shifts and meannesses, cramping the soul and 
wearing out the brain. Do you tell me there could be hap- 
piness in such a place 1 " 

" Yes, Walter, I do. I do indeed . with . with " 

" With what, girl 1 " 

" Well, Walter, with love, of course." 

He smiled pityingly. 

" I don't mean to answer you, Grace, with the usual sarcasms 
or the usual commonplaces about love escaping by the window 
when poverty comes in at the door. But look calmly at it. 
When a man's first concern in the morning must be how to 
meet the money-demands of the day, can he find a place in his 
thoughts for love ? When he lies awake at night racking his 
brain to discover some way of meeting an overdue and inex- 
orable bill, do you think he can extract comfort from the 

E 



242 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

kisses of his wife ? When she has to face the tax-gatherer, 
and talk him into waiting yet a little longer ; when the butcher 
declines to send any more, and the baker threatens with the 
County Court ; and the housemaid grows impertinent, because 
of her unpaid wages and her mistress's too obvious poverty, . 
do you think the wife is quite in a condition to enjoy a senti- 
mental walk in the moonlight, and to gaze fondly into her 
bankrupt husband's eyes 1 Grace, these little mean miseries 
kill love. It dies under them like some fine animal pricked to 
death by tiny poisoned darts. You don't understand even the 
weakness of women. There are scores of women who could 
plunge into fire with a man, and die there clasping him to the 
last, but whose love would not endure two years of mean, 
unheroic, ignoble poverty. I don't blame them . I quite under- 
stand it." 

"I don't, Walter ; and I don't want to. I don't believe any 
woman worth the name has that abject and craven dread of 
poverty. I should be ashamed of them, and' hate them all, and 
myself too, if I thought of them as you do. No ; don't argue 
it with me, Walter. I can't argue, but I don't want to be con- 
vinced by you ; and you could not convince me. Life is not all 
so mean as you think it." 

" The time will come when you will acknowledge that the 
petty evils of poverty are more demoralizing than the heavy 
strokes of fate." 

" Welf, Walter " (she was rather weary of the barren discus- 
sion), " it does not personally concern me much to confute your 
dreadful heresy. There is no poor and bankrupt lover sueing 
to me, and no rich lover either. I hope I have hands and 
brains to make myself a living somehow, and I am not at all 
afraid of being poor. I know so little of any other condition, 
that I suffer no privation." 

"But you need not be poor. You can marry Ralph 
Lennon." 

She was on the point of an outburst of anger. There was 
something revolting to her in this way of treating the subject. 
But she controlled herself, and endeavoured to answer in a 
light and careless tone : 

" Would you give Mr. Lennon himself no choice or voice in 
the matter 1 Would you recommend me to make the pro- 
posal V 

Walter thoroughly misunderstood her this time. He really 



ANOTHER APPEAL. 243 

believed that she was looking at the matter coolly and sensibly, 
according to his way of thinking, and that she only wanted a 
fair and creditable opportunity of falling in with his views. He 
was very much pleased. This comes, he thought, of talking to 
a girl as if she was a rational human being . not going on in 
Mabel's nonsensical way. 

" No, my dear, I don't recommend you to do exactly that : 
but you can easily give Lennon a little more encouragement. 
He always was a shy reserved sort of fellow ; but he is kind- 
hearted and generous, and easily won. Grace, I have so high a 
regard for him that I speak, indeed, as much for him as for you. 
In making yourself happy, you may be the means of saving 
him." 

" Then this," said she, at last breaking from all restraint, " is 
the high task you intend for me ! You ask me to throw 
myself in Mr. Lennon's way, at his feet, perhaps, and cajole 
him into marrying me ; and you encourage me to this by telling 
me that I can only save him from other women by marrying him 
myself? I would not have such a social creed, such ideas of 
women, for all the world ! Walter, you mean to do me good, 
no doubt, but you have taken a wrong way to do it. I would 
marry a man were he poor as a beggar if I loved him, and if he 
loved me, and me alone ; but I hope I shall never be mean and 
base enough to throw myself at the feet of anyone who is 
capable of being the slave of the first woman that crosses his 
path." 

" But, my dear child, you greatly exaggerate . " 

" No, no . I don't exaggerate. I understand only too well 
what you mean, and what Mabel meant. She told it to me 
plainly enough." 

" Grace, if you suppose there is anything in Ralph Lennon 
which makes him unworthy of a good wife, I tell you most 
earnestly, my dear, that you misunderstand him and do him a 
great wrong . and a great wrong as well to Mabel and to me. 
As truly as a man can speak, I do, assure you that I never knew 
anyone with a higher and more generous nature than Ralph 
Lennon. Let me do him that justice . it is only bare justice. 
He and I were once warm and close friends ; and though of 
late we have been somewhat estranged . I don't very well 
know why . I must say that I have seen no change in the 
truth and manliness of his nature. I wish I were like him ! 
Ah, no, Grace ; you may not love him, perhaps . I speak out 

B 2 



244 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

plainly ; you are no silly schoolgirl . but you must esteem 
him." 

Something of a crimson glow that flashed across Grace's 
cheek . something that sparkled in her eyes . something in the 
instant dropping of her eyelids and catching of her breath . as 
she heard the words, " You may not love him," smote upon 
Warton's attention, and brought upon him in a moment a con- 
viction he had not expected. He could not mistake it. The 
sincerity and transparency of Grace's nature betrayed her secret. 

He laid his hand gently, almost tenderly, upon hers. He 
was really touched, and for the moment actually forgot his own 
speculations and aims. " Poor girl ! " so ran for an instant the 
silent current of his thoughts, " she really loves him. I never 
counted upon this. I do wish he loved her . I hope he does. 
If he does, then there is no difficulty in making her happy, at 
least ; and even if he does not, he is a generous sort of fellow, 
who can easily be induced to marry her out of good-nature, and 
he cannot but come to be fond of her in the end." 

There was a throb of something like sincere and disinterested 
pleasure in his heart at the thought that he might perhaps be 
able to bring about a consummation which would secure at 
least one poor girl's happiness. He thought he now quite 
understood Grace's warmth of protestation against Mabel's 
well-meant advice. " She loves him ; and Mabel's talk has 
only made her think he cares nothing about her, or perhaps is 
not capable of really caring about anyone. Quite natural that 
a spirited girl should feel disappointed and angry, and should 
chafe at the idea of throwing herself at a man's feet when he 
ought to be at hers. What an idiot Mabel is ; and how little 
she understands of the nature of any human being ! Well, 
well, I think this can be all put right ; and I shall lose no time 
in bringing about the result which will suit us all." 

He had come to a stop when the expression of her face made 
such an impression on him. They were still standing, and he 
kept his hand laid gently upoji hers. She did not speak. At 
last he broke the silence : 

" Let us say no more of this just now, dear child. I am very 
glad I spoke to you about it ; but I don't want to trouble you 
by any further talk over it. Be sure, Grace, I understand 
your feelings, and appreciate them. I desire your happiness, 
but surely not at the expense of your better nature. Grace, I 
understand you at last. Do you understand me?" 



ANOTHER APPEAL. 245 

" I think not, Walter." 

" Not ! " 

" I think not. Forgive me if I speak too plainly." 

" Speak more plainly still, dear. Why do you think you do 
not understand me 1 " 

" Because I sometimes think you are sincere and disinterested 
. . and sometimes I do not." 

" Just now, which opinion do you lean to ? " 

" I hope what you say is well-meant and sincere ; but I 
cannot keep myself from thinking that behind it there is 
something I am not allowed to see." 

" Tour old prejudices, Grace. You never . at least, never 
of late . have given me any confidence, or shown me any 
warmth. You think I neglect Mabel . is not that the first 
cause of your want of confidence 1" 

" It is. I am angry about Mabel, and grieved for her. But 
what we are speaking of now is not that. Last night you 
sent Mabel to me, and set her a part to play . only she said 
more, perhaps, than you intended. You were making an in- 
strument of her, Walter, for some purpose of your own. Are 
you not also making an instrument of me V 

" No, Grace ; no, by Heaven ! . not now ! " 

"Not now?" 

" Not now. I declare it on my honour, on my soul, if you 
need such a protestation. At any time my motive . my prin- 
cipal motive, dear ; nobody in this life is influenced by one 
sole motive . was only one that every prudent father or guardian 
allows to influence him, and is respected by all the world for. 
I was arixious to secure you a promising and prosperous settle- 
ment in life . to save you, dear, from our wreck. A worldly 
motive, doubtless ; but I am a man of the world. Now I have 
another and a deeper motive . to secure your happiness." 

He spoke these last few words so slowly and with so marked 
an emphasis, that she could not mistake his meaning, and she 
reddened under his gaze. But she plucked up courage, looked 
him full in the face, and replied : 

" Walter, I am glad to believe that this is all you had in 
your thoughts. I am glad to believe it . and I do believe it. 
But I beg and pray of you, if you really desire my happiness, 
to put such thoughts wholly away. Never, O, I beseech of you, 
never try to make me happy . in that way. Indeed, indeed, 
it cannot be. Don't ask me for any explanations. You would 



246 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

perhaps think me foolish and romantic and nonsensical ; but I 
cannot make my nature anything that it is not . and " . she 
began to fear she was becoming too serious and earnest . " and 
I don't want to marry any one just yet. I prefer my indepen- 
dence, "Walter . my crust of bread and liberty, like the country 
mouse ; and please, Walter, we will not talk of this any 
more, and you will promise me not to think of it any more." 

He was anxious himself now to dismiss the subject, for he 
began to think he saw his way. That all her scruples and 
doubts and love of independence could be easily conquered he 
felt convinced ; indeed, they hardly seemed worth thinking 
about. He felt no doubt that he could bring that little story 
interjected into the volume of his life to a fit and happy con- 
clusion ; and he did not care to bind himself by any promises 
which might in the least interfere with his purpose. So he 
waved the whole question away with an easy gesture, and 
said : 

" Well, Grace, you are a girl of sense ; and your wishes shall, 
of course, be law to me. Let us say no more of this. I am 
glad we have spoken so frankly together ; and I think you 
now, perhaps, understand me better than you did." 

'. Yes, Walter, I think so too." 

" Then good-bye, dear . I am going this way ; I return to 
town at once." 

" Poor Mabel ! " sighed Grace involuntarily. 

c< Poor Mabel ! " echoed Warton ; " who would not pity her, 
Grace 1 Do you wonder that I long to help to make some one 
happy . I, whose evil fate it has been to make her so unhappy 1 
Do you wonder that life as I look at her is an agony to me 1 
Do you wonder that I avoid her and fly from her? Do you 
wonder that, looking into the future, and seeing all dark for 
her and for my children, and for all who hold by me, I long, as 
compensation to earth, as atonement to Heaven, for the evil I 
have done, to help in throwing some light of happiness over 
.your path 1 Think of this, Grace, and perhaps you will under- 
stand me better, and judge less hardly of me." 

Without further farewell he left her, and went quietly on 
his way to the station. He did not once look back, and he 
presently disappeared round a corner of the road. 

Grace looked after him for a while without moving. She 
leaned against the grass-grown wall which bordered the little 
road, and felt very weary and sad. She had walked a great 



ANOTHER APPEAL. 247 

deal and had been a long time standing, and mere physical ex- 
haustion came to the aid of mental excitement and suffering 
to enfeeble and depress her. Yet with all her own special 
disappointments and trials, her mind rested with some anxiety 
and some wonder on what she had heard from "Warton, and what 
she had seen in his face. She began to doubt whether she had 
not misunderstood him and wronged him all through . whether 
he was so utterly selfish and egotistical as she had long believed 
him to be. " I think something might, perhaps, have been made 
of him," she thought ; and then, acknowledging the reluctance 
she herself felt to endure just now the companionship of Mabel, 
recognising the impossibility of finding intelligent and respon- 
sive sympathy there, she could hardly wonder that Warton 
loved his home so little, and sought companionship elsewhere. 
Her own acute distress made her sympathetic and tolerant ; 
and she recalled with pain the kindly words . were they even but 
words . which Warton had spoken of her and the haggard look 
upon his face, and the dark eyes that burned with so ominous 
a light of anxiety and even despair. When his hand touched 
hers she felt that it was cold and damp and tremulous ; and his 
whole frame looked weak and wasted, as it had never seemed 
before. 

" How unhappy and miserable we are, all of us ! " thought 
the poor girl ; and then the full sense of her own misery rushed 
back upon her, and she remembered, too, how unhappy Len- 
non had seemed to be ; and her heart sickened and sank within 
her, and she began to doubt whether her high resolve, which 
looked so just and so inevitable in the morning, was not, after 
all, a cruel and fatal delusion. Yet again, her pride, her hope, 
her romance perhaps, came to her aid, and forbade her to 
condemn herself because she had not been content to accept 
what she termed in her bitterness the ashes of a heart. I 
am afraid she was very unjust and hard in her reflections upon 
poor Mabel. " Why did she tell me such things ? " murmured 
the wretched girl, sobbing and moaning now at last in grief 
that could no longer be controlled. " Why did she tell me 
anything about him 1 Could she not have left me to myself, 
to my own counsel ? I should have been happy if I had heard 
nothiDg. I should never have known that he was not all my 
ideal . and so he would have been perhaps in the end. And 
now it is too late, too late, and all is over ; and I have to go 
back to my miserable and lonely life, and he will forget me." 



248 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

When she had relieved her feelings for a moment by this 
burst of tears . in which she had revelled while the lane was 
lonely, and she could lean unheeded on the green bank and 
cover her face with her hands, nnwatched by prying eyes . she 
raised her head and looked vaguely, sadly, along the far horizon, 
now cleared by recent showers. In grief of any kind it seems 
the most natural impulse -to turn the eyes to the line where 
sky and earth touch, and to think of some place beyond, and 
long to go there. " Over all the hill-tops," says the poet, " is 
rest " . at least wherever there are hill-tops and sad hearts it 
is sure that melancholy eyes look to the distant range, and 
send longing hopes to some vague, imagined place of peace be- 
yond them. The sky-line of Grace's landscape rested on no 
noble peaks, or swelling, motionless billows of hills, but only 
on the gentle undulations of a soft and sloping country. But 
still there was a horizon, suggesting a place beyond ; and 
the farthest trees that could be seen had their boughs bent 
backward, and thus told of the breeze habitually blowing in from 
the Dot far distant sea; and the heart of the poor girl yearned 
for the place beyond . any place beyond . that horizon ; and 
she said to herself, " I will go away, I will go away ; " and, 
somewhat strengthened in spirit, she left the lonely little 
road and returned to the home which to her was yet more 
lonely. 

It was a trial to bear with Mabel that long day and evening ; 
for Mabel's heart was like some peaceful and dull little church 
in a country village, which only rings its joy-bells or tolls its 
liassing knell for things that concern the lord and master of the 
neighbourhood. She thought Walter was looking very weak 
and anxious, and she asked Grace perpetual questions about his 
appearance when he left her ; and she told Grace she had found 
out by chance that lately dear Walter had become liable to 
such queer fainting-fits; "and, my dear, there must be some- 
thing dreadful in that ; to see a man faint must be worse than 
even to see a man crying, and that I think is terrible ! " And 
she wondered whether he would be sure to get his dinner ; and, 
poor thing, she fretted and worried herself so much that at last 
she got fairly tired out, and went to bed very early, and Grace 
was again alone. And then she threw herself eagerly, miser- 
ably back upon her own grief, even as a j r oung bereaved mother 
steals away from those who would vainly console, to gaze once 
more on the little bed where her firstborn lies dead. 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 249 

Meanwhile, Walter Warton went his way back to London. 
He felt in somewhat better heart than of late, for he thought 
that it lay quite easily within his power to bring about a mar- 
riage between Kalpk and Grace ; and this he had little doubt 
might be the means of serving his own purposes materially. 
But he was sincerely anxious to do Grace a service. He had 
always felt a little afraid of her, because he feared that she 
saw through him ; and he longed to conciliate her, to stand 
well in her eyes, to win her gratitude and affection. He longed, 
too, for his own special reasons, that Lennon should be mar- 
ried, and thus removed out of his way ; and in fact all things 
began to look rather hopeful, and Warton thought he saw the 
clouds breaking that lately seemed to close in hopelessly upon 
him. He got into the train almost elate, and for the time 
forgot the sick sensations, the weakness, the dizziness, the queer 
heart-pains he had been tormented so much by during recent 
months ; and as he got out on the London platform he acknow- 
ledged to himself that he had not for a twelvemonth entered 
the metropolis with so hopeful a breast. 

Unfortunately for his plans, he had not been long in London 
when an event which he might have foreseen, and indeed ought 
to have expected, interposed suddenly and awkwardly between 
him and his purposes. The very next day he was a dismal, 
dejected captive in the hands of his most dreaded enemies. 



CHAPTER XXIV 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 



"HEX Lennon reached his hotel in the Strand, late on 
the day of his parting from Grace, he found a telegram 
from Tom Berry awaiting him. It was laconic. " Floods 
here : awful destruction. Xo harm to us yet." 

Lennon was a kind-hearted man ; but the sense of relief 
which the excitement gave him did assuredly overcome his 
sympathy with 'the sufferers by the floods. At that moment 
he would have welcomed with fierce satisfaction the announce- 
ment of another general deluge. He was weary of the sun. 

There was a night-train for the Xorth which would carry 
him to Kendal or Windermere. He drank a whole bottle of 



250 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

champagne in some fierce draughts, and the wine neither 
flushed his cheeks nor soothed his heart. He drove to the 
train, and was three-quarters of an hour too soon. He chafed 
and raged up and down the dismal waiting-room until people 
began to crowd in there ; and then he walked out and went to 
the further end of the platform, where there was nobody. At 
last the time to start came ; and as the train darted through 
the first tunnel he longed for a collision. Burning down a 
house to roast one's own eggs illustrates the practice of selfish 
men ; but unselfish men would sometimes welcome the thunder 
of a battle, or the crash of an earthquake, to drown their own 
grief. 

All night through he went over and over his interview with 
Grace. He thought of new and powerful appeals which must 
have moved her ; he studied with vain memory every look and 
word of hers, torturing himself with the thought that here 
perhaps . there perhaps . was hope, if he had but caught it in 
time. He answered her objections; he swore away her doubts; 
he appealed to her love, and even to her pity. He wondered 
at himself for his dulness, his want of perseverance, his impa- 
tience, his petulant pride. He was sorry he had left London 
so soon ; that he did not go back and see her again, and, if 
needs were, tear her from her foolish doubts and fears. Then 
he told himself that after all she loved him, and he bade his 
heart take hope ; and then again he said that no woman who 
really loved a man ever met his love with such scruples and such 
repulsion, and he gave himself to despair. Nor did he fail to 
ask himself who had filled Grace's heart with doubt of him. 
Warton ? Had he not always suspected Warton of having 
blackened him to Mabel Ethelstone . when she was Mabel 
Ethelstone . years ago 1 Did they not quarrel about it 1 But 
Warton always denied it. In this instance, what motive could 
Warton have 1 Grace's own lips told him as plainly as words 
could speak that her people would have wished her to marry 
him ; and indeed his own eyes and ears and observation had 
long ago made this plain to him. There surely was no reason 
for suspecting Warton. And yet of late Lennon never came 
near Warton without being pervaded by a subtle indefinable 
distrust, a sense of the presence of something like deceit and 
treachery. As he thought of this . thought of it one moment 
only to put it away the next, ashamed of giving it an instant's 
harbour . fierce vague vows of revenge came bubbling to his 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 251 

lips, and he sometimes started in fear lest some sound of 
menace had escaped his tongue and surprised his fellow- 
passengers. " Revenge ! " he said to himself bitterly. " What 
chance has a man of punishing his most treacherous enemy 
now 1 Duelling is out of fashion. as much out of fashion with 
the new polite world as I am myself." And he thought of the 
pistols which hung up at home, the old Australian pistols which 
had been his faithful friends many times in the rough early 
Ballarat days ; and he felt that it would be a joy to put one 
of these into the hand of his enemy, and take the other him- 
self, and let God or the devil show the right. And again he 
scorned himself for the meanness of supposing that he had 
any such treacherous enemy, and that poor Mabel's husband, 
his own early friend, Walter Warton, who had often all but 
urged him to marry Grace Ethelstone, could be that enemy. 

So the short summer night dragged through, in a constant 
deluge of rain brightened by frequent lightning. It was clear 
day when he began to approach the lake country ; and 
people who got in at the stations were beginning to talk of the 
dreadful succession of rainy weeks, and of the great floods in 
parts of Cumberland and Westmoreland and Lancashire. 
Ralph only slept a little by fits and starts, and when day came 
on was conscious that he looked like some haggard and wild 
night-bird dragged into the sun, and indeed was as careless 
about the matter as he was conscious of it. But he was glad 
when the railway journey was over, and he was near the place 
where there was some work to do, some excitement to be 
found. 

For years and years there had been no such spring and 
summer in England. Rain, rain, incessant rain and storm, 
had sponged the beauty out of the landscape and the noui-ish- 
ment out of the corn. " The fruits of the earth were stinted ;" 
and when rarely sun and warmth came on they were followed 
close by thunder, and then rain again. It was bad every- 
where, and people complained and wondered and suffered from 
the Cheviot Hills to Southampton Water. But it was worst 
of all in the northern counties, and worst of all these in the 
lake and mountain land. We have already spoken of the 
deluging rain which came down during the last days of 
Warton's stay in Waterdale ; and these days of rain it was 
which literally caused the cup to overflow in that region. The 
lake, the river, the mountain streams all overflowed, and the 



252 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

tide poured seaward. The little town was for the most part a 
low-lying cluster of houses, bedded between lake and sea, and 
over it the waters literally rushed. The houses of the better 
class stood on higher ground here and there, and these were 
spared. Even an inundation commonly respects the classes 
whom it is proper to consider respectable. The lanes . one 
could hardly call them streets . of poor small houses were 
flooded almost to the garrets, when they rose high enough to 
have garrets. Small hovels were in many instances swept 
clean away. In the first alarm and confusion some poor crea- 
tures were drowned. Then, in wild affright, half-naked families 
deserted their flooded homesteads, and made for the high 
ground and the hills. Then the more sensible people, and those 
whose intelligence had not been paralysed by the sudden wash 
of a sort of sea sweeping through their bedrooms at stark 
midnight, began to take order with affairs, and to concert 
measures for sheltering the houseless, and clothing those whom 
the calamity had left bare. 

Among those who never lost their presence of mind from 
the very first were Dr. Alwyn and his wife. Alwyn made as 
many expeditions up and down the town in a boat as a 
Venetian gondolier in carnival-time, and his wife was every- 
where lending a helpful hand. And they found in none of the 
local people anything like the energy, composure, shiftiness, and 
general usefulness which were brought into play at half a 
moment's notice by stout Tom Berry. 

More than that, Tom Berry was for the time master of the 
situation. For the deluge which swept over the town rushed 
away from the higher ground on the other side of the lake, 
where the Phalanstery stood ; and the flood, which now ran a 
tearing river down the mountain pass, swept by the Phalan- 
stery, and plunged on to swell the lake ; and the Phalanstery 
stood high and dry. So Tom Berry at once took on himself to 
offer the unoccupied houses . they were now nearly all un- 
occupied . as a shelter to as many of the houseless as the roofs 
could cover. 

He did not wait for authority from Lennon. 

" What's the good of wasting time, ma'am ? " he put the case 
to Myra. " Don't we know it's the very thing Mr. Lennon 
would do 1 He wouldn't like, bless yon, if he thought we lost 
any time through doubting of him. I know him. / under- 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 253 

stand him. When you understand a man in one thing you 
understand him in everything." 

" I understand him too," said Myra rather sadly. 

" Do you, ma'am 1 "Well, I don't know. There's not many 
that quite understand Mr. Lennon, but I do ; and if you do 
too, why, hadn't we better go to work and lose no more 
time about it 1 " 

So they went to work and lost no more time. Many families 
had actually to be brought down, shivering and half naked, 
from a gusty and cheerless shelter in the hills ; and many were 
bi'ought in boats and rafts across the lake ; and all were estab- 
lished as comfortably as the condition of things would allow in 
Lennon's little village. Great fires blazed on every hearth, and 
provisions of all kinds were poured in by all the townspeople 
who. could afford to help. The gentry of the place, living 
here and there at little distances, soon came to know of 
what had happened, and were quickly on the spot with con- 
tributions of money and clothes and food, and offers of per- 
sonal service. The flood had risen to its height, had done 
its worst ; composure had returned to people's minds ; and 
local organisation, extemporised chiefly under the guidance of 
Dr. Alwyn, was doing its best, when Lennon arrived upon 
the scene. 

Of coarse he threw himself heart and soul into the efforts 
that were being made. But he declined to take the com- 
mand of the Phalanstery arrangements out of Tom Berry's 
hands. 

" Tom, you villain," he said, cheerily, " I envy you ; but you 
have won the right to command here. You had the good 
fortune to be the first who found out how to make use of 
our Folly." 

" I should be a very stupid duffer," grumbled Tom, " if I 
didn't see that there were people wanting houses, and houses 
wanting people, and that the two lots ought to be brought 
together. Why, even a prime minister or a duke could almost 
have found that out." The theory that all ministers of the 
Crown were sticks, and all dukes imbeciles, was an article of 
faith with Tom, as sacred as any of the points of the loved 
and lost Charter. 

In Lennon's heart there was a sort of pride that at last his 
poor effort of speculative benevolence had come to something. 
It was no longer a thing to laugh at ; it was the first raft 



254 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

available when all else was going to pieces ; it was the centre 
now of the relief organization which the floods had made an 
inevitable necessity. Till late that night he went about from 
house to house of it, to see what could yet be done to add to 
the comfort of the inmates. Dr. Alwyn was with him. When 
they came out at last into the open air, Lennon stood for a 
moment and looked along the white rows of gleaming cot- 
tages, on which the moonlight now fell. An expression of 
something like gratification must have marked itself on his 
face ; for Dr. Alwyn, having silently observed him for a 
moment, said with a smile, 

" I know what you are thinking of, Lennon. Confess you 
are thinking about the stone which the builders rejected, and 
which yet became the corner-stone of the building . eh 1" 

"Perhaps I was . at least, of something to that effect. 
Sincerely, Dr. Alwyn, I am glad to be of some use to anybody 
or anything." 

"Come, now, you speak in a desponding and Byronic sort of 
tone, as if you had never personally done any good for human 
creature before, and as if no mortal being cared about you. 
"Why, man, you mustn't think that of us ! We have our slow 
ways and our prejudices here, and we get dreadfully frightened 
if any one talks of the Mosaic account of creation ; we think 
that smacks of science and infidelity. But you must not 
suppose we don't understand you and appreciate you. Just try 
us. Stand for the county . and I can't promise you that you'll 
get in ; in fact, I know you wouldn't ; but see if we here in 
this place don't all poll for you to a man. I would not answer 
for the women, if Mill's principles were in force. The petti- 
coat has always been a banner of high orthodoxy ; but for us, 
we would rally round you . isn't that the proper phrase?" 

Dr. Alwyn spoke in a jesting tone ; bub he wished his words 
to have their earnest meaning too. 

" I never doubted your good feeling," said Lennon ; " but I 
think somehow this place and I don't quite agree. I have been 
thinking of striking my tent, Dr. Alwyn, and seeking a 
camping-ground somewhere else." 

" I am sorry to hear it, but not surprised. I never expected 
you to vegetate here always. We shall miss you here all of 
us " . and here Alwyn's voice slightly failed him ; for he could 
not help remembering how little he had seen of his friend 
lately, and why . " but we have no right to think of you set- 



is 



FLOOD AND JFEVEE. 255 

tliug down in such a place, and throwing away your years and 
your brains among us humdrum folks. You ought to go to 
London, and plunge actively into political life. You would 
soon make a way and a name." 

" In politics i A Radical and Red Republican, and what 
not, such as I am 1 " 

" Pooh, nonsense ! you are only a Radical and Red Repub- 
lican as I was once a votary- of Shelley's Queen Mob and 
Yolney's Ruins of Empires . just because I had nothing to 
go actively to work at. Find a path, Lennon, and tread it, 
and don't vex your brain with fantastic theories of any kind. 
If you want to reach any goal, you must look at the way 
before you, and not send your eyes wandering among the 
stars. Go to London, and go straight into practical politics ; 
take up the management of our colonies, or the workhouse- 
hospital system, or the education question, or Irish land-tenure, 
or the regeneration of Poland, if you like ; and see if you don't 
soon fall into working habits, and leave dreams and nonsense 
behind. I like you, Lennon, in good faith, and I think too 
highly of you not to be sorry to see you running to seed 
here. I bone, quo virtus tua te vocat, i pedefausto." 

" I have not thought of settling in London," said Lennon 
slowly ; " I have thought rather of going to America . going 
out west, perhaps." 

" Into the forest primeval 1 Don't do anything of the kind ; 
it will be another failure, if you count your life here a failure. 
Give yourself up to human interest and the society of your 
kind. Live and work with educated human beings like yourself. 
Get married, and be happy." 

Lennon shook his head. "I'm not what people call a 
marrying man." 

" Why not 1 You seem to be just the sort of man to be 
very happy in married life. Take my advice, Lennon. It is 
not good for a man to live alone." 

" Yery like ; but man has to do things now and then that 
his physicians of soul or body don't prescribe as good for him." 

" But there is no need for you to live alone." 

" Well, I suppose I must only fall back on Sam Slick's excuse 
for celibacy. Those I would have wouldn't have me, and those 
who would have me the devil wouldn't have." 

" Come, that won't do. I believe I, even I, could name one 



256 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

who would suit you exactly, and who, I think, would not be so 
hard as to refuse." 

"No, you couldn't," replied Lennon, cutting the sentence 
short, " and it's useless trying. Good-night, Dr. Alwyn. One 
thing you may rely upon . before I make up my mind 
finally to emigrate anywhere, I'll come and talk to you about 
it." 

So they parted for that night. Dr. Alwyn went home, and 
began to talk to his wife about Lennon's determination to 
leave the place, and his apparent unhappiness. Myra was silent 
and restless, and evidently uncomfortable, and her eyes never 
met her husband's. 

" She doesn't like him," thought Dr. Alwyn ; " but I wonder 
she does not show more interest in the matter, when she knows 
how highly I think of him." 

And he sighed and thought that even the best of women 
are a little unreasonable in their ways, and that a man must 
not hope to argue them out of their likings or dislikings. 

The course of events naturally threw Mrs. Alwyn and 
Lennon frequently together during the few days of excitement. 
But they were only thrown together. They spoke to each 
other merely as ordinary acquaintances might. Her manner, 
indeed, was constrained and distant. His was just what it 
usually was to her. Indeed, he v:as hardly thinking of her at 
all. "When he did think directly of her, it was only to wonder 
how so energetic, zealous, and brave a woman could be so cold 
and formal. 

One incident must be mentioned before the floods are seen 
to subside. Captain Eastham came over at an early stage 
of the business to lend a helping hand, and made himself very 
active everywhere. Speaking one day to Lennon, he suddenly 
said : 

" By the bye, have you heard from Warton lately ? " 

" No ; not for weeks back." 

"Then you don't know of his present fix? " 

" Not at all. What is the matter 1 " 

" Well, I suppose it's no secret ; in fact it can't be, for lots of 
fellows know all about it. He's in the hands of the Philistines 
. Whitecross-street business. I'm very sorry for it . and he 
feels it sensitively . too sensitively by far. Some fellows don't 
mind it." 

" I am very sorry indeed to hear it. Does his wife know ? " 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 257 

" Luckily not ; and "Warton is, above all things, anxious that 
she shouldn't. Of course, Lennon, I need not pledge you to 
secrecy. All things considered, it is now to Warton's advantage 
that he never was much of a family man, and his being away 
from home a few days more or less won't create any special 
wonder. I don't know Mrs. Warton myself, but I believe she 
is a very nice, good woman ; and somehow I don't think 
Warton is the sort of man who ever ought to have married. 
It requires a genius for marriage to be able to make anything 
of it. I haven't the gift myself . and I doubt whether he has. 
If I were inclined to marry I think I should like to marry 
Warton's niece. I don't know whether you noticed her at all 
when she was staying with the Alwyns . you don't profess to 
be much of a ladies' man, I believe ; but she is a really fine girl, 
with plenty of talent and spirit, and not a bit of nonsense about 
her. I quite liked her ; and I am doubly sorry for this busi- 
ness of poor Warton's." 

" But can nothing be done 1 " 

" Don't know, I am sure. As far as I am concerned, nothing. 
I am quite hard up myself, and so are most of the fellows I 
know. I fear my security wouldn't do much for Warton just 
now. As for the chiefs and the Carlton and that, I don't 
believe they would advance a sixpence to Warton. Between 
ourselves, some of the chiefs don't believe in him, don't like 
him . they say he has lost any popularity he ever had, and that 
he would do us more harm than good." 

" Are his debts very heavy 1 " 

"0 no ; not what you or I or most people would call heavy. 
I wish I could compound with my hereditary enemies for three 
times the amount." 

"What is his figure?" 

" Well, I don't of course know his full liabilities. I suppose 
nobody ever made full confession to his friends on that subject. 
But I know that a thousand, or twelve hundred at most, would 
release him from the bonds of captivity just now, and give him 
a chance of another run." 

" Is that all 1 " Lennon had formed an idea of a vast heap 
of debt crushing Warton down . something hopeless to struggle 
against. His own treasure from the underworld . a very little 
treasure at the best when compared with what Waterdale 
rumour had given it out to be . had been diminishing rather 
rapidly of late. But a thousand or twelve hundred pounds 

s 



258 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

would not much affect it either way ; and he was not going to 
et poor Mabel Warton's husband remain in the hands of the 
Philistines for that much. 

" I think I can settle this matter, Eastham, . if I may put 
it into your hands. I have a few pounds just now which I 
don't want particularly . in fact I don't know well what to 
do with them ; and I should be glad to help Warton out of his 
difficulty. "Will you arrange the matter ? May I trouble you 
so far 1 " 

" My dear fellow, I shall be delighted ; I am going to town 
in a few days : but I'll write up at once, and I shall be only 
too happy to have the conduct of the business. See if I don't 
talk stoutly to some of the creditors, and compel them to 
compound." 

" One condition I must make, and I am quite earnest in 
making it . "Warton must not know this comes from me." 

" Certainly not, if you wish it." 

" I do wish it most particularly. There are reasons just 
now which might render it unpleasant for Warton, or any of 
his family, to suppose they were under what they might be 
sensitive enough to consider a sort of obligation to me." 

" He shall know nothing of it, depend upon that . at least 
for the present. I am sure, before long, be will be in a position 
to repay you. He has great talent, and I think the best thing 
he could do would be to go back to his own profession, and 
stick to it like a man. And then, after a while, he might come 
into the House, as so many lawyers do, and become Attorney- 
General one of these days. I don't know why he shouldn't." 

Lennon was not so sanguine of the future of his old friend. 
He had lost all faith in Warton's career. He had seen through 
the brilliant shallowness of his mind, and had seen too that his 
nature as well as his mind was shallow. All the steadfastness 
and fixed purpose, without which even genius can hardly suc- 
ceed, and by the help of which mediocrity can so often climb 
where genius fails to reach . all this was wanting to Walter 
Raleigh Warton, and Lennon knew it ; but he expressed no 
such doubts to Captain Eastham, who had still a sort of gene- 
rous faith in the gifts and the prospects of the orator of the 
working-class. 

" I am glad I spoke of this to you," said Eastham, as they 
were parting ; " I never thought though of expecting a helping 
hand from you. In fact, to speak the truth, I was quite under 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 259 

the impression that this Freehold Land Company of yours, or 
whatever it is" . and Eastham waved his hand in the direction 
of the model village . " had let you in rather heavily, and left 
you somewhat in the condition that Epsom and Ascot have left 
me. I am glad to find that philanthropy, after all, is a less ruinous 
weakness than horse-racing. Providence does reward virtue, I 
now see ; and as a religious member of the Conservative party 
I rejoice at the sight, although it profits me nothing." 

This conversation took place on the road near the model 
village, which was now the centre whither tended all men and 
women and organizations destined to relieve the wants of the 
poorest victims of the flood. The road was now wholly passable 
once more. The lake had receded back to little more than the 
dimensions of its original basin ; the torrent that ran down the 
pass was a brook again ; the river was beginning to flow more 
tranquilly to the sea ; and there seemed every hope that before 
many days no greater relic of the flood would be left behind 
than a few ruined hovels and a few graves. But these hopes 
were deceived ; bad had begun, but worse remained behind. 

That very night Lennon went alone through the village. 
He was thinking sadly enough over part of the conversation he 
had had with Eastham. The few words dropped by the latter 
about Grace Ethelstone had fallen on his heart as the cold 
drops in the water-torture fall on the miserable prisoner's shorn 
head. He turned over in his mind with the curiosity of bitter- 
ness the slight and passing phrase in which Eastham expressed 
his doubt whether he, Lennon, had ever noticed her. So much 
we know of each other ! So sympathetic are we with our 
friends ! So quick are we to see each other's sufferings ! 
Lennon's heart was burnt with love for that girl ; his life was 
rendered all a barrenness and a blank hideoiis sand-desert by 
her rejection of him ; he chafed at the mean regularity with 
which the routine of his existence dragged on in darkness after 
its sun had all gone out ; and his friend now coolly asked him 
whether he had ever noticed the girl, and did not even trouble 
himself to wait for an answer. 

As he passed one of the cottages a low moaning sound fell 
painfully on his ear. He stopped and listened. It was not 
the sharp cry of a child ; it was the monotonous moan of a 
suffering adult. A light burned in one of the windows. 
Lennon looked at the cottage, and studying its position and 
size, endeavoured to recollect who it was that had been housed 

S2 



260 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

there. The cottage was one of the very smallest ; and with all 
the pressure that the flood had put upon them, he knew that 
Tom Berry and his coadjutors had been careful not to over- 
crowd the little buildings. Evidently this was one of the 
cottages into which only a single family, and that a small one, 
could have been received. He came to the conclusion that the 
family in this cottage was that of a poor fellow, a basket-maker, 
who had a wife and three little children, and who had lost 
everything but the clothes they wore when the flood washed 
over their miserable bedrooms. Lennon had noticed the sickly 
and broken look of the poor fellow that very morning. The 
moaning still kept on ; and Lennon thought of tapping at the 
door and asking if there was anybody sick, when the door was 
opened, and the basket-maker's wife stood on the threshold and 
looked wildly up and down the road and at the adjoining cot- 
tages, which were now all silent and dark. Lennon went 
towards her : she knew him at once. 

" O, Mr. Lennon, my poor oald man be very bad. He been 
gan clean wrang i's heid. He's been mooanin' an' ravin', an's 
oot o' his senses, an' I fear he's nigh on to deeth. 0, what 
shall I do 1 I doan't know nowte to do, or how to send for 
doctor." 

" Don't be alarmed," said Lennon ; " perhaps he's just a little 
feverish. I'll go and fetch a doctor." 

" O, God bless ye ! for I can't leave the childer. Ooar 
eldest girl's hardly nene ; stiddy aneuf, but too yung to go or 
to leave." 

" May I look at your husband first ? " 

"O, coom in, coom in." 

She caught Lennon's hand and dragged him in. There 
indeed was a sorry sight. The poor basket-maker was moan- 
ing, tossing, and talking on the bed that had been made up for 
him. His cheeks were aflame ; his unresting skinny hands 
were burning. He was in high fever. The children in their 
night-dresses were standing or squatting about, bewildered and 
scared. For them Nature had upset herself altogether during 
the last few days, and it now seemed their fate to be always 
roused from their beds at night with flood or fever or other 
calamity. They were all too much dazed and frightened to cry. 

Lennon looked significantly at the children. " Better dress 
these, and have them removed out of this as quickly as pos- 
sible." 



FLOOD AND FEVER. 261 

" O, then it's fever my poos oald man's took with, and he'll 
die ! " 

" No, no ; don't be afraid. He'll come all right again ; but 
it's better to get the little ones out of the way, lest it spread. 
Keep up your courage ; you'll nurse your husband and bring 
him safely through, never fear. I'll go for the doctor, and I'll 
send some one to help you." 

Lennon's thoughts hardly beat time to the encouraging tune 
of his words. He feared of all things an outbreak of fever in 
the present state of affairs, with a disheartened crowd of women 
and children pent almost pell-mell into a few rows of cottages, 
and the beneficent resources of Waterdale nearly played out. 
He first found out Tom Berry, and set him to waken up some 
of the refugees somewhere and get shelter for the poor little 
children. Then he went home, startled old Mr. and Mrs. Beck 
out of their sleep, bade them get what they could in the way 
of nourishment and medicaments that might be useful in fever, 
extinguished somewhat savagely, it may be owned, a few rising 
grumbles on their part ; then made his way to the stable, 
saddled his own horse, and dashed off to the town to find a 
doctor. " for the helping brain and hand of some earnest 
energetic woman ! " he thought as he sped upon his mission. 

He made the doctor mount his horse at once and ride off, 
while he waited until the physician's steady old servant had 
saddled his steady old cob, on which Lennon returned. The 
poor basket-maker was in typhus fever. So was one of the 
children already. The other two were housed among the 
neighbours, who only contended with each other for the task of 
sheltering and caring for them. 

" It's a bad case," said the doctor to Lennon as they stood on 
the road together ; " and that's not the worst of the matter . 
the fever will spread." 

" Yes ; that is just what I feared." 

" It will be all over these houses in a day or two, Mr. Lennon. 
We'll do our best ; but how can we prevent it 1 It's idle to 
talk of removing them. There's no place to remove them to. 
This is by far the best place they can be in. The fact is that 
it has broken out already on the other side, in the town, down 
among the lanes where the flood was worst." 

The doctor remained at Lennon's house for the rest of that 
night, to be quite ready for the work that had to be done. 
His forebodings came but too true. In twenty-four hours a 



262 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

virulent typhus was raging among Lennon's villagers. It was 
indeed, as the doctor had said, on both sides of the lake, and 
certainly far worse in the town than on Lennon's side. But 
here, too, it was bad indeed, and for a time it seemed as if there 
must be one dead in every house. The medical resources of 
Waterdale were poor and small ; and the workhouse-hospital 
was quickly filled, until it began to be found out that the 
patients there died considerably faster than anywhere else, 
and then their friends fought against allowing sick people 
to enter the dreaded walls. All effort to prevent the fever 
from spreading proved futile. The incessant rains of the spring 
and summer, the soaked earth, the ruined grain, the consequent 
depression and want of work, and want of food, and poverty ; 
and then the floods, the terror and the desolation . had made 
the place a rank garden, manured and watered for fever to 
flourish in. And so it floiirished. The sick died fast, and 
panic demoralised the living. Strangely enough, the poor 
basket-maker, the first stricken down, and perhaps the feeblest 
of all, recovered. It is not strange, perhaps, though it seemed 
perfectly wonderful to many of the people, that Lennon, who 
showed the most utter disregard of all considerations for his 
personal safety, and went about as freely through fever-beds as 
the doctors and the nurses, was wholly untouched. 



CHAPTER XXY 

KNOWN TOO LATE. 

" /~\TTR. friend Alwyn has been telling me that you were 
\J dreadfully unpopular down here not long ago." 

" So I was. I think I had some months of as much un- 
popularity as the sourest cynic could desire. Of course it was 
for the most part of a passive kind." 

" But it sometimes became demonstrative and active, did it 
not?" 

"Yes, a little. Once or twice. But it came to nothing." 

"Alwyn tells me that some orthodox zealot made an attempt 
to set your model village on fire 1 " 

" Well, there was something of the kind conjectured, or found 
out, or supposed to be found out. Tom Berry made the dis- 



KNOWK TOO LATE. 263 

covery . or thinks he did . in time. Certainly, he found that 
four of the houses were on fire at one moment, with heaps of 
dry straw and shavings and resin carefully adjusted ; and it did. 
look a little as if some too ardent opponent had made up his 
mind to rid the earth of our cumbering presence." 

" Had you any reason to suspect who the fellows were that 
did it 1 " 

" Yes, I think so. In truth, I believe it was all the doing of 
one man." 

" And you took no steps to punish him 1 " 

" None whatever." 

" Did he cut the country ? " 

" No ; he is laid up now, poor fellow. "We were in his house 
to-day. He is, I have good reason to know, one of those who 
were hurt when the rush of the flood brought down some crazy 
houses in the outskirts of the town yonder." 

" Then where is he now 1 " 

"In one of the cottages." 

" Your cottages ? " 

" Yes. His wife and two children are there." 

"Why, that is dramatic or poetic justice indeed . that is 
heaping coals of fire on his head." 

" Coals of fever fire are heaped on the poor creature's head 
now. He seems to me to have been a decent sort of fellow, 
half crazed with religious fervour. He was a believer in the 
Millennium ; and I fancy he got it into his head somehow that 
my poor building speculation was a subtle scheme for the dis- 
semination of materialism and flat blasphemy." 

" Don't you feel tired of this place altogether, Lennon ? 
Don't you find your labour all thrown away 1 Don't you get 
sick of the silliness and changeableness of the people, and in- 
clined to cut the place and never come back ? " 

" Sometimes I do ; perhaps not wholly for the reasons you 
suggest. I am not ashamed to confess that I feel, or felt, dis- 
appointed at the result of my luckless scheme. I never 
anticipated any of the objections raised to it. I surveyed 
beforehand in my mind what I thought all the possible kinds 
of failure that might await it ; but the particular sort of failure 
that befell it never once occurred to me as on the cards. 

The speakers were Ralph Lennon and Captain Eastham. 
They stood at an open window of Lennon's house, and smoked. 
It was late. past midnight. They could see the lake and the 



264 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



lights in the little village, which but lately was so lonely, and 
now had become so populous. It had become so thickly 
peopled indeed that Lennon was thinking of making arrange- 
ments to turn his own house, with the exception of two or 
three rooms, into a sort of caravanserai, to receive any wan- 
dering Waterdale people for whom the cottages could not pro- 
vide. Captain Eastham and he had worked pretty hard 
already, and were now enjoying a quiet cigar and solitude. 

" Now you are quite popular," Eastham remarked . " a sort 
of hero, in fact, among your neighbours." 

" Yes ; and for no conceivable merit of mine. My building 
scheme has turned out serviceable in a way I never antici- 
pated, or could possibly have dreamed of ; and I get the honour 
of it." 

"You bear your honours meekly, and seem to understand 
the secret and value of popularity almost as well as if you had 
been half your life in Parliament. By the way, Lennon, why 
don't you go into Parliament 1 " 

"My dear fellow, what on earth do I want there? What 
could I do there 1 " 

" Well, of course, I don't mean to talk nonsense to you about 
serving your country and all that kind of thing. But I really 
think you might make a figure there. Let us put you up for 
some place here while your local popularity lasts." 
" Let us ? . whom do you mean, pray, by us ? " 
" Our people, of course." 
" Only I happen to be a Eadical." 

" The very thing we want just now ; we are dying for Radi- 
cals. I tell you, my good fellow, there is more joy among us 
over one converted Radical than over no end of faithful and 
consistent Conservatives." 

"Very likely. But I am not a convert, and don't ever 
mean to be. I mean to die impenitent, Eastham, so far as 
Radicalism is concerned. I wait for the time when my own 
views or crotchets get a chance, which time will come ; mean- 
while, you have my friend Warton." 

" No ; Warton's played out, I fear. for the present, at least. 
But that reminds me I have had a good deal of talk lately with 
your friend and faithful follower below, Mr. Berry ; and he has 
partly opened my eyes to something that was a little mystery 
to me before. I always knew there was an organised opposi- 
tion to Warton over at Northinglen that night ; but I never 



KNOWN TOO LATE. 265 

could quite understand how it was got up. Now I think I 
have discovered that your friend Berry was at the bottom of 
it all." 

Lennon laughed. " I suspected as much . divined it in some 
way or other ; but I never cared to ask. Tom has a deadly 
enmity to Warton." 

" Yes ; and he wreaked it there. Pallas te hoc vulnere . 
Pallas immolat. "" As I understand, the game was to frighten 
Warton off the ground, and by Jove I think it succeeded. I 
never saw a fellow more scared. His health is weak, I believe ; 
and he has not seemed like his old self this long time back. I 
am sorry for it . and for his present fix ; which, however, 
thanks to your helping hand, we may now look on as nearly 
over. With a fresh start, and in a new direction, he may do 
well yet." 

"He may," said Lennon very drily; "I think with you 
that he had better turn to his profession and work at it, and 
nourish some other ambition than that of getting out of his 
class." 

Eastham looked quickly round at Lennon, was about to say 
something, then stammered, turned away, and knocked the 
ashes off his cigar. 

" Come, you were going to say something," said Lennon, 
smiling ; " say it." 

" Well, I don't know. Yes, perhaps I was. You won't 
mind me, I hope ? " 

" Not in the least." 

" Then what on earth, Lennon, do you mean by talking of 
his class, and your class, and my class, and so on ? I don't 
understand it, I give you my word. You have said that sort 
of thing many times, already . twice to-day, I think. You are 
just the opposite to Warton. He gets as uneasy if anybody 
uses the word class when he is present as if his father had been 
hanged, and somebody were talking of a rope. What do you 
mean by people going out of their class ? What's your class . 
what's my class 1 I suppose we are all gentlemen ; and I don't 
see . excuse me even for suggesting the thing ; it looks so like 
impertinence ; but it's your own fault, old fellow . I don't see 
what difference there is between you and me, except that you 
have a good deal more money and a great deal more brains, and 
that you know how to make use of both, which I don't." 

Lennon felt a little embarrassed. He had talked hastily and 



266 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOUIiS. 

inadvertently of " class " difference, because it must be owned 
that subject was sharply printed on his mind. One of his 
"weaknesses was to remember too keenly the slights, or fancied 
slights, which had been put upon himself and his father years 
ago by the Cumberland gentry. But he felt ashamed of having 
betrayed a weakness which he acknowledged to himself had 
something of meanness in it. The word having been spoken, 
however, he did not intend to recall it. 

" I think there are classes in this country, Eastham ; and I 
think nobody fights his way from one into the other without 
losing a good deal of his self-respect on the road. I cannot 
help seeing that the intruder is snubbed by those among whom 
he pushes himself, and girded at by those he leaves behind ; 
and I don't want to be in the rush, and am sorry to see anyone 
I care for drawn into it." 

" Exactly. That's all very well as a general description or a 
general precept. "We English are a jealous and grudging lot 
involuntarily. The man in always scowls or growls at the man 
coming in. Nobody gets into an omnibus without seeing that 
those already in look at him as much as to ask, ' What the 
devil brings you here 1 ' Same thing in a coffee-room, in any 
place where there are chance comers . except, perhaps, the 
stalls of a theatre, where everyone has his own seat divided off 
for him, and his nearest neighbour cannot intrude. So it is 
with what you call classes, and nothing more. I believe in my 
soul that all that sort of thing people talk about classes is just 
like the old nonsense about the bloated aristocrat. I believe, 
too, it is your fault . excuse me if I identify you for the 
moment with the grumblers. inuch more than ours. Warton 
was very sensitive about his confounded class. I believe his 
father was a working man, but I never met anybody who cared 
three straws about the matter. Take my word for it, Lennon, 
all that sort of thing is out of date, and has no real place but in 
the London Journal or the Surrey Theatre." 

Lennon shook his head. " Your own political chief, your 
adored leader, is evidence the other way," he said. " You told 
me yourself how hard it is to get your party to follow 
him." 

" Yes : but it is just because they can't quite make him out, 
because he is not like them ; I suppose it's the old question 
between genius and mediocrity. He is hardly an Englishman, 
and he puzzles our heavy people ; and they have a vague notion 



KNOWN TOO iATE. 267 

that there must be something -wrong with him, as they have 
about a French novel or German theology. Class, as you call 
it, has next to nothing to do with it ; how could it ? Half our 
modern peers had tradesmen for their fathers, and the sons of 
the other half are going into business in the City." 

Lennon laughed. "I am ashamed to argue the point, 
Eastham ; it seems so weak and childish to think of such 
things at all. It looks as if a man was afraid of himself, and 
jealous of those who hailed from a different class." 

" There goes your class again ; confound your class ! I tell 
you, my good fellow, there is no such thing in the antiquated 
sense you take up. You have lived too long at the other end 
of the earth, and you don't understand how common sense has 
gone ahead here in your absence. Let us say no more about 
it . only, believe me, you are under an obsolete delusion. I 
saw this in you many times ; I saw how obstinately you kept 
away from the people round about here . the bloated aristocrats, 
you know . fellows, for the most part, who would have been 
delighted to know you, and would have understood you at least 
as well as your bricklayers and tramps and orthodox fire- 
raisers ; only you would not look at them, but kept rigidly to 
yourself and bade everybody stand off. You won't speak to 
us, you scowl at us if we come near you ; and then you insist 
that nobody in England will be received if he goes out of his 
class. I don't mean you in your own proper person, but you 
as the typical Briton of the Radical school, who is quite proud 
of the notion that he can repel the pampered minions of what 
do-you-call-it." 

And after this long exposition Captain Eastham took a 
draught of brandy-and- water, lighted a fresh cigar, and looked 
at his friend for reply or confession of defeat. Lennon said 
nothing ; but laughed, and presently passed on to the previous 
question. 

After some further talk about nothing in particular, East- 
ham, for whom a carriage had long been waiting, took leave of 
his friend, promising to return and be his helper in the present 
stress as soon as he possibly could. Next day he was going to 
London, as a great party fight was coming off in Parliament, 
and Eastham's friends were now enjoying the rare delights of 
office, and naturally very anxious not to be robbed of them all 
too soon. But he promised that the moment his chief, to 
whose personal attendance he devoted himself, could spare him 



268 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

from the House, he would return to Waterdale ; and he really 
meant this at the time. 

This conversation was one of a good many which took place 
about this time between Lennon and his Tory friend. Lennon 
found himself of late growing more and more to like Eastham. 
There was a certain fresh and frank simplicity in the latter, 
which his natural shrewdness and intimate knowledge of the 
world of London only set off to greater advantage. Eastham, 
on his side, had readily seen the good qualities, the ability, the 
manly, true nature that lay beneath the crust of Lennon's shy 
and proud reserve. So, not having one single opinion on any 
vital question in common, not mingling in the same spheres, . 
brought together only as two circles might be, just at one 
point, and reuniting nowhere else, . they respected each other, 
liked each other's ways and talk, and were, indeed, much 
better friends than old associates or social colleagues often 
are. 

The conversation just related had noticed one change that 
lately came over Lennon's life. He had been, as we know, 
unpopular, even odious, in Waterdale. When his unpopularity 
culminated . for example, about the time preceding his last 
visit to London . a Sassenach landlord, newly come into a 
Fenian county, could hardly have been an object of more open 
and sincere dislike.. It was quite true that there had been an 
attempt to burn down the poor Phalanstery ; but that attempt 
Lennon thought little of, as it was really the work only of 
one half-crazy fanatic who had gotten it somehow into his head 
that anything connected with secular and undenominational 
instruction was likely to put off the Millennium. The general 
and open repugnance exhibited towards Ralph and his hench- 
man on both sides of the lake would have been hard to bear 
under ordinary circumstances. Of late Lennon bore it very 
composedly, and sometimes [even could not help finding fault 
with himself for his indifference. For the cause was only too 
patent. He found himself armed against popular enmity in a 
panoply of his own personal emotions. The populace hissed 
him, and he cared nothing for the hisses, because he thought 
of Grace Ethelstone, and wondered whether she loved him. 
His philanthropy was shot dead by a glance from a girl's 
eye. His stoicism against public opprobrium was nothing higher 
or stronger than an absence of interest in anything but the 
woman whose simple, unaffected nature had fascinated him. 



KNOWN TOO LATE. 269 

The Knight of the Gentle Armour, who faced without fear 
the lances of his adversaries while he wore no stronger cuirass 
than his mistress's garment, might, in one sense, be a type and 
illustration of the kind of courage and constancy with which 
Ralph Lennon had confronted the worst that could be done by 
the public opinion of his Waterdale neighbours. He was 
hated, but he was hopeful and happy. 

Now all had changed. Nobody in Waterdale was any longer 
to be compared with him in popular favour. The people 
adored him. The long, true, disinterested service and labour 
of Dr. Alwyn counted for the moment as nothing when com- 
pared with the impulsive exertions and easy sacrifices of 
Lennon. It was quite true, as Eastham had said, that . the 
gentry of the place were filled with sincere admiration for 
the individual whom, a few weeks before, one of the number 
had pleasantly talked of as " the returned convict," and " the 
ticket-of-leave man." There was not a hall or castle for many 
miles round which would not have welcomed him eagerly 
among its guests. Distant Carlisle and Kendal were familiar 
with him, and claimed him as a local hero. Preston had 
frequently made allusion to him in the leading article of its 
most influential newspaper ; nay, his fame had actually reached 
Liverpool ; and a paragraph in a Manchester daily paper . a 
paper having a circulation of ever so many thousands, and posi- 
tively read in the Reform Club and the library of the House of 
Commons . had talked of him as a possible candidate in the 
Liberal interest for a northern borough. 

He bore his popularity as he had borne the ill-favour of the 
public. He did not care anything about it. He scarcely 
heeded it, or knew much of it ; and when it came in his way 
he quietly repelled it and bade it stand aside. It was of no 
avail to him. His house was as lonely.as before ; his heart was 
far more lonely, for its great hope was gone. The kind of life 
he led naturally favoured, and even compelled, a meditation, 
and brooding, and self-questioning which made that life, sad 
as it was, even more morbid ; and he was beginning gra- 
dually to lose any faith in himself, his own purposes, and his 
own nature, as he more and more clearly saw how much of 
selfishness there was at the root of everything he had done. 
It was to relieve his own mind, to perform a sort of pe- 
nance in fact, that he had gone to work at his philanthropic 
scheme in Waterdale. When the scheme failed he bore its 



270 THE WATEHDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

failure with the apparent composure of a hero and a philosopher. 
Why 1 Because by the time failure became apparent, he had 
nearly lost all deep interest whatever in the project or the 
place, and found his heart wholly occupied by the love of a girl. 
Then, when there* came another chance of utilising his re- 
sources and doing some good, he set to work chiefly that he 
might relieve his own mind of the weight of personal dis- 
appointment cast upon him when his love was repelled. At 
the present moment he could not conceal from himself that 
his heart was so filled with Grace Ethelstone as to have 
hardly any room left for deep and true feeling on any other 
subject. He looked upon the suffering that was all around 
him almost as a preoccupied spectator looks on a picture or 
a stage-play. He moved about, and worked, and projected, 
and did this for one sufferer, that for another, in a perfunc- 
tory and absent sort of manner, his heart not being in the 
thing at all. And he had the manliness to be ashamed of 
this. When anyone praised him . and most were ready to 
praise him now . he rejected or evaded the compliments, and 
felt humbled and ashamed by them. He sometimes thought of 
the old story of the monk supposed to have died in the odour 
of sanctity, and whose corpse, laid in its yet open coffin near 
the altar, amid the incense and the chanting of the almost 
adoring brethren, suddenly sat up, reanimated for a moment 
by the returning soul, and proclaimed in awful tones to the 
horrified listeners the just condemnation of him whom they 
revered. 

So it followed that Lennon was as lonely as he ever had 
been. He suffered acutely when alone, and yet could endure 
but little companionship. Be it understood that his feelings 
made no public show, and one should have known him very 
well indeed to know that any inward pain consumed him. 
Demonstrative people have an immense advantage in so far as 
they can give their emotions head, and let them tire themselves 
out, as a man of sense when his horse runs away with him 
takes care to let the animal have all the running he wants, and 
more, and so finds him easy enough to deal with before long. 
Lennon hardly ever gave his emotions head of late years, and 
so the strong passion which now possessed him threatened to 
outlast his time. It would have been a relief to him if he 
could storm and rage against fate and everything else now as 
in the old days ; but he could not. For he now blamed fate no 



KNOWK TOO LATE. 271 

more, but only his own weakness altogether ; and he was 
ashamed of himself that any passion could have so conquered 
him, any disappointment so stricken him down. 

He walked up and down his room the night after Eastham 
had left him, smoking and thinking, and sometimes glancing 
anxiously out of the window down at the cotages. Tom Berry 
had promised to come up to the house and tell him how things 
were going before betaking himself finally to his own rest for 
the night. Lennon began to grow uneasy because his follower 
did not come. He looked at his watch and found that it was 
one o'clock. He wondered whether anything evil could have 
befallen Tom, and was resolving to go and look for him, because 
Tom's punctuality in general was such that his delaying beyond 
a prescribed time was quite a matter for surprise or alarm. 
Just as Ralph had made up his mind that he really must go, 
he heard at last a step on the damp, clayey, grass-grown soil of 
what might have been a lawn or a garden in front of the house. 
He looked out, and saw a dark figure hurrying up. He went 
out and opened, the door . Mr. and Mrs. Beck had been com- 
fortably in bed for hours . and he admitted Tom Berry. Tom 
looked pale and disturbed. 

" "Well, Tom, how are things going now 1 " 

" Bad, very bad," replied Tom, shaking his head. " I don't 
rightly see how they could be looking much worse. I don't 
know what some of these poor creatures are to do. It's 
dreadful to hear the women going on, and the children. "Well, 
he's dead." 

" Who is dead ?" 

" That poor chap with his Millennium . the poor buffer that 
wanted to burn us out. God help him ! He's gone. I've just 
left his wife, and she's like one out of her mind." 

" Poor fellow, and poor woman . far more to be lamented 
than he." 

" 0, yes, he's right enough, bless you : and he took it all 
very well, and died as happy as a chap could be, talking such 
awful nonsense about his Millennium that it would bring 
tears into your eyes to hear the half of it. I was with him 
to the last. "We had become great friends latterly, we had." 

" Had he his senses ?" 

'.' In the end, yes ; an' he knew me right well, an' told me 
he'd meet me in heaven some day, though I didn't believe in 
the Millennium ; which was a deal more liberal of him, sir, 



272 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



after all, than a good many of our friends in these parts would 
be, under the circumstances. I didn't mind him much, but 
the sight of the wife and the kids rather knocked me over." 

Tom's pale face looked quite that of one who had been a 
good deal knocked over. 

" Take some brandy-and-water, Tom ; it will revive you. 
This is a sad business." 

Tom helped himself to a little brandy-and-water . a very 
little ; he was the feeblest of drinkers, although he always 
scouted teetotalism. 

" Yes, it's a sad business, Mr. Lennon, and one doesn't get 
used to it somehow. I thought, after a few days of hard ex- 
perience, one wouldn't mind it much, but I don't find that it 
comes anything easier. I wonder how long it takes to season 
a grave-digger, or an undertaker, or an 'ospital nurse?" 

Lennon was not in a position to give any statistical informa- 
tion on this subject. 

" I think, Tom," he said, after a moment's silence, " I had 
better go down and see if there is anything to be done for 
that poor woman and her children." 

" Nothing to be done for them to-night," replied Tom au- 
thoritatively. " I've seen to all that can be done . it ain't 
much, poor things ; and there's no need of your going down at 
this hour. Don't you be overdoing the business, sir. It 
strikes me you've done quite as much as is good for you, or for 
any of us, already." 
" How so, Tom ? " 

"Well, I don't quite know; but you don't look just like 
yourself lately. I've noticed it for days back ; you've been 
working too hard, and not having sleep enough, and going into 
all kinds of danger. Now don't you keep on in that way. 
You'll be getting fever next ; and then what are we to do ?" 

" Not I, Tom. Persons like me don't come to any harm in 
these matters ; only poor fellows with wives and large families 
succumb, I think." 

Toin shook his head gravely. " Seems like that certainly," 
he said, "as things go; but a man mustn't rely too much upon 
that, even though he thinks nobody would miss him. But 
we should all miss you ; and so you ought to take care of 
yourself." 

" My good fellow, I do take care of myself. I have been here 
quietly for a ^couple of hours drinking brandy-and-water with 



KNOWN TOO LATE. 273 

Captain Eastham, while you were looking after the sick. If 
that be not taking care of myself, tell me what is." 

The sound of Captain Eastham's name set Tom off on a new 
track. 

" He's a good fellow, Captain Eastham," Berry observed ; 
" a very good fellow for a Tory and a swell. I didn't think I 
could ever like one of that class so well. There's something 
open about him, and generous, and liberal. I wonder if there 
are many of the lot like him." 

" What lot i " 

" Well, the Tory lot . the aristocrat lot. I don't think there 
can be " 

" I daresay there are some tolerably decent fellows among 
the Tories, Tom." 

" I'm sure I don't know," said Tom, meditatively. " Perhaps 
there are. I suppose half these fellows don't really know that 
they are keeping the working men of England out of their 
rights." 

" I suppose they don't, Tom. I don't think Captain Eastham 
would knowingly keep anybody out of his rights." 

" But they are," interjected Tom, looking almost severely 
towards his patron. 

" Are. what 1 " 

" Keeping the working men of England out of their rights 
.aren't they ? " 

" "Well, Tom, I think the working men of England have not 
got all their rights yet. I don't quite know who is most to 
blame for it ; but I think Eastham a fine liberal fellow for a 
Tory." 

" 0, so do I. He spoke to me the other day about 
Northinglen and the election. We had a deal of talk over it ; 
and I think he managed to get out of me something about the 
way that little lot was managed, and Wat Warton done out of 
his chance." 

" Yes, Tom, so he told me. Indeed, I thought I saw your 
handiwork pretty plainly in that business. I don't know that 
it was all quite fair." 

" Why not, Mr. Lennon 1 Whose fault was it if he hadn't 
the pluck to persevere ? If he'd had the heart of a cock- 
sparrow he'd have carried all before him. You'd have had it 
all your own way, I'll wager, if you'd been in his place . or 
Captain Eastham either." 

T 



274 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Lennon felt a certain sort of compunction at having been 
in any way, though never so indirectly, a sharer in the over- 
throw and humiliation of his old schoolfellow. Truly, except 
in having imported the irrepressible Tom Berry into the neigh- 
bourhood, he had literally nothing to do with the business ; 
but he could not help feeling a twinge of regret that even in 
that remote and unconscious way he had contributed to Walter 
Warton's discomfiture and damage. He turned back to the 
immediate question of their present lives. 

" Then you think there is nothing to be done to-night, Tom, 
for anybody in the cottages 1 " 

" Not a thing. We must wait and see what to-morrow'll 
bring. It's a bad business altogether, and I wonder who'll see 
the end of it." 

There was a tone of despondency about Tom as he spoke 
these words which smote painfully on Lennon's ears. Tom was 
usually so full of courage and good heart, so resolute to make 
the best of everything in ordinary life, . perhaps because his 
way was to make the worst of everything in politics, . that any 
expression of doubt or dread came with a peculiar and ominous 
significance from him. Lennon looked keenly at him. As 
they stood now, Tom was near the door, just where he had come 
in ; and the lamp, the only lamp in the room, was so placed 
that its light fell on Lennon, and Tom was left in shadow. 
Lennon quickly but quietly changed his position, and placed 
himself where he could see Berry's face plainly, and study its 
expression. Tom was looking down now and gently beating 
his hands together . the back of one in the palm of the other 
. as he repeated almost unconsciously the words : " It's a bad 
business altogether ; I wonder who'll see the end of it 1 " His 
face was usually colourless, but just now there was a kind of 
transparent pallor over it ; and his forehead was damp, and his 
mouth was quivering and twitching. He looked up suddenly, 
with eyes of unnatural brightness, and caught Lennon's uneasy 
expression. Lennon was a little embarrassed at being thus 
caught. Tom shufHed his feet, and twisted his fingers, and 
made a grand effort to look very cheerful. 

" Take a little more brandy, Tom," said Lennon. 

" No, thank ye, sir ; I'd rather not. I . I feel so very well 
. so very well ! " 

A deeper shade came over Lennon's face. He did not like 



KNOWN TOO LATE. 275 

to hear such an uncalled-for and spontaneous assurance on 
Tom's part that he was so very well. 

" And now, sir, I think I'd better be going." 

"I think you had much better stay here to-night, Tom. 
There is a bed to spare, you know, such as it is." 

" Don't mention it ; no no. I'd much better go. I'll be 
wanted down there at all hours in the morning ; and I ought 
to be at my post." 

" But are you sure you are all right ? are you quite sure that 
you are perfectly well 1 " 

" Lord bless you, yes ! Never better in my life. You don't 
imagine anything is going to happen to me, sir 1 Not a bit of 
it. I'm a seasoned old hand ; sickness don't ever think of mind- 
ing me, because it knows I don't mind it. What's going on 
down yonder " (and he pointed in the direction of the village) 
" is nothing, one might say. You should have seen some of 
our courts in Southwark in fever time ; and them even I'm 
told are nothing to Shoreditch and Bethnal Green. There you 
might talk of sickness, where there's neither air nor water. 
Here, why bless you it's nothing ! " 

Tom's own argumentative power, as usual, somewhat brightened 
him up, and he began to look more brisk and cheery. Lennon 
hoped the fears he had been entertaining were only vague. 
Yet he would have pressed his brother-labourer not to leave the 
house, but that, in the first place,- he thought it might be a 
very unwise thing to communicate his fears to Tom ; and in 
the next place, Tom was in some ways as obstinate as a mule, 
and when once he thought he ought to be somewhere, or to do 
something, argument and exhortation were wholly thrown away 
upon him. So Lennon did not attempt to resist Tom's de- 
termination to return to his post, which post was part of a 
cottage, now more than half occupied by a poor family, of 
whom Tom was patron and care-taker. 

Tom went away, and whistled as he went . not for want of 
thought, nor to keep up his spirits, but to give Lennon the 
notion of a man positively exuberant with health and strength. 

" He was uneasy about me," thought Tom, as he trudged 
rather heavily along. " I saw it at once ; but it's all nonsense. 
I'm a little tired and queer, that's the whole of it. In the 
morning I'll be all right . I think. I'm not going to give in 
and take fright for a bit of a cold shiver, anyhow ; but it's kind 
of him. Ah, I wish I saw him looking a good deal better than 

t 2 



27G THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

he does now. I hope he's not going to get knocked over. No ; 
I don't think it's that is wrong with him . not that sort of 
fever. "Who'd 'ave thought he'd take such a thing to heart so?" 
So, pursuing his thought, whatever it was, as to the reason 
for Lennon's altered condition, Tom reached his home, opened 
his door as softly as he could, and crept qiiietly in. He felt 
very faint and queer, and the moment he got into bed fell 
into an odd, unrefreshing, semi-lethargic kind of sleep, in which 
he seemed to be half awake and to be talking to himself all the 
night through. 

"When Berry left the house, Lennon looked after him until 
he wholly disappeared in the darkness. Then Ralph returned 
to the room in which Tom had found him ; and he began pacing 
up and down as before. " I fear that poor fellow has been over- 
exerting himself of late," he thought. " I hope nothing bad is 
going to happen to him. "What an unselfish being he is ! What 
a rebuke and reproach he is to most of us ! I never thought 
about him these last few days, or how he might overtask 
himself, or what danger he might be in ; because my mind was 
filled with my own trumpery grievances and disappointments. 
That's a regular genuine hero . that poor fellow ; and he does 
not know anything about it himself; and who appreciates him 
or cares for him 1 Not I, certainly, seeing that I never heeded 
for days back what became of him. Truly I have reason to be 
proud of myself, and I do well to set up for philanthropy and 
beneficence, and all the rest of it . I who could have seen all 
around me go to ruin so long as I thought Grace Ethelstone 
cared for me ! . I who, while half a village is dying close at 
hand, can hardly bring my mind to think of anything but my 
own disappointment because that child could not be talked into 
loving me." 

He leaned out of the window, and looked long and thought- 
fully down upon the village. The lights were all extinguished 
there now ; but a late moon was arisen, and the white walls 
shone in her rays. Every house could be seen separately, sur- 
rounded as it was with its little special garden and enclosure, 
which Lennon had hoped to find one day all blooming and' 
happy. He had gone to work to make a little terrestrial para- 
dise, a tiny health-island and Happy Valley ; and behold it had 
come to be useful at last . in the capacity of a fever hospital ! 
It would require some heart, he thought, to bear quite up against 
such satirical strokes of Fate. Bat a model village turning into 



MYRA MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND PROFITS BY IT. 277 

a lazar-bouse is perhaps a fitting appanage for an elderly philo- 
sopher who falls in love, is disappointed, and turns into a 
maundering fool. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

MYRA MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND PROFITS BY IT. 

II TYRA ALWYN and her husband were active with the 
JjX earliest and the best of those who did battle against the 
pestilence. But their efforts were for the most part confined to 
their own side of the lake . to the town ; and Lennon saw but 
little of them. Tom Berry, who often had to go into the town, 
made enthusiastic reports of them, and seemed ready to admit 
that the hired priest of a State Church might be a brave man, 
a charitable man, and a Christian. 

Myra always welcomed a word from stout Tom Berry, for 
whom she had come to have a high admiration, and who actually 
began to feel a sort of veneration for her, fine lady though she 
was. And°as he always told her something of Lennon's doings, 
even if only a dozen words passed between them, she knew that 
her distant fellow-soldier in the fight was still on his feet, 
unhurt and active. 

But there came an interval during which she saw nothing of 
Tom Berry. Days passed away without his making his appear 
ance, and she began to grow uneasy. It was a strange thing 
that she could not bring herself to speak to her husband on 
the subject, and ask him to go and see if his friend Lennon 
was ill. 

One evening . an evening she remembered long after . she 
came home late and tired and melancholy. She had been to 
see some sick families, and felt weak and dispirited, so much so 
that Dr. Alwyn insisted on her returning home, and leaving 
him to make other visits alone. He promised her that he 
would endeavour not to be late. She sat in the library where 
he generally wrote and worked, and where he and she some- 
times had tea of evenings when they were alone. It seemed 
less dismal now to sit there than in the large and dreary 
drawing-room. It was a dull heavy evening of late summer. 
She sat idly over a cup of tea that was growing cold, and 



278 THE WATEEDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

longed for her husband to come home, and wondered if she was 
going to take fever, and wondered if Lennon was sick. 

The maid who came into the room when she rang for 
lights looked so big with some piece of news, that Myra at 
once said : 

" Well, Jane, what is it ? " 

" Please, ma'am, David " (the groom) " says there's some one 
sick at Mr. Lennon's." 

" I knew it ! " exclaimed Myra, standing up, all flushed and 
trembling. " Who told David ; what does he know about 
it?" 

"Well, ma'am, he says he met somebody who told him that 
the fever was at Mr. Lennon's, and that old Mr. Beck and 
Mrs. Beck ran away with fright ; and he saw Mr. Beck after- 
wards, and Mr. Beck would not wait to tell him anything, but 
only said if people brought fever into the house when they 
needn't do so, he and his missis weren't going to be cut off for 
anybody." 

"What brutes!" 

" Yes, ma'am. I alv/ays thought Mrs. Beck a hard-hearted 
bad old woman, ma'am, after the way she went on to poor 
Bessie, her niece." 

Myra stood for a few seconds irresolute, and with beating 
heart. She looked at her watch. She saw that she could 
hardly expect her husband back for two hours. " Too long to 
wait . too long," she said to herself. " He would be the first 
himself to blame me if I waited so long. Why should I not 
go ? Were it a common stranger I would not delay half an 
hour." 

Then she turned to the girl : 

" Jane, tell David to get my pony at once, and bring it 
round. Let him not lose a moment . he is to come with me." 

She wrote two lines to Alwyn, saying she had heard bad 
news of Mr. Lennon, and had made up her mind to go and find 
out the truth for herself, and try to give some help if necessary, 
and that she hoped to return immediately; and then in five 
minutes she had on her riding-habit, and was ready to mount 
her pony. All melancholy, morbidness, qualmishness, dread of 
coming fever for herself, had disappeared, swallowed up in the 
strong excitement and anxiety and the eagerness to give her 
woman's help in the hour of danger. " There ia no one with 
him," was the thought that came up again and again in her 



MYKA MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND PROFITS BY IT. -279 

mind. " He is left uncared-for, and he will die, and I did not 
know of it in time . and I might have saved him." 

" It is not wrong to go to him." Thus, too, she told herself 
as she impelled her spirited little pony faster and faster over 
the rough and broken road. " It cannot be wrong. I go to 
him only because he is sick, perhaps is dying, and has no other 
woman near him. I had conquered all . nearly . before this. 
I avoided meeting him; I shrank from him; I made him 
think that I disliked and dreaded him until I saw that he drew 
back from me, and thought me a cold and narrow-minded and 
miserable creature. No human eye or intelligence could ever, 
ever have pierced to my true feelings ; and I was penitent even 
for what I felt and what I could not help. And I am penitent, 
and Heaven knows it, and sees that my motive now is sincere 
and pure, and will bring me through all trial, and strengthen 
me not to betray myself, and will forgive my weakness, and 
teach me to conquer it in the end." 

She never for a moment thought of the possibility of anyone 
but Lennon being the victim of fever in Lennon's house. 
Indeed, if the story was true that his old housekeeper had 
deserted him, there was no one else that she knew of living in 
the drear old building. 

It was now quite dark as she rode through the fever-stricken 
village, followed by her groom. She rode past many houses 
where at another time she would have stayed to inquire for 
some suffering inmate ; but now she never drew bridle there. 
At last she came in sight of Lennon's house. It was desolate 
as the halls of Balclutha. The fox looking out of the window 
with the rank grass waving over his head would have seemed 
quite as natural and appropriate a spectacle there as among the 
ruins of the Ossianic heroine's natal castle. Only in one win- 
dow a light twinkled. 

Myra dismounted, and motioning to her groom to keep 
back, she ran up the grass-grown dank stone steps herself, and 
knocked softly at the door. The dismal echo seemed to rever- 
berate through her own heart. The knock brought no answer. 
She knocked again a little louder, then again louder still. At 
Jast she heard the sound of coming feet, and a heavy tread in 
the hall, and the door was opened by Ralph Lennon. 

In the dusk and gloom she did not at first know who it was, 
and the confusion of her thoughts dazed her vision. She only 
saw that a man stood there. It might be Tom Berry, or the 



280 THE WATEEDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

doctor, or anyone but the man who really stood before her. 
Nor did Ralph at first know who his visitor was. Her broad- 
leaved cavalier hat quite shadowed her features, and the skirts 
of her riding-habit, gathered over her arm, confused the out- 
lines of her figure. It was her voice which told her name. 

" How is Mr. Lennon ? " she asked, almost breathless. " I 
have heard that he is sick. Is he very ill ; and can I do any- 
thing?" 

" Mrs. Alwyn ! " 

The blood rushed to Myra's heart and through her cheeks. 
She could hardly stand with excitement and surprise. 

" O, Mr. Lennon ! I never thought to see you thus ! " 

" Why, why have you come here ? Mrs. Alwyn, you 
must not cross this threshold or stay here a moment ; why 
have you run such risk 1 " 

" I came because they told me . somebody told me . that 
you were in fever, and that your servants had deserted you. 
Why should I not come 1 What is the danger 1 " 

" Fever is here, Mrs. Alwyn ; and death, I fear, will shortly 
be here ; and you must not venture into our danger." 

" But you are well . I thought to find you dying ! And 
who, then, is sick ? " 

" My poor friend, my poor faithful friend, Tom Berry. 
Caring nothing for himself, he is now a victim ; and because 
he only thought of others, so now he is deserted and left alone. 
Yes, that cowardly and base old man and woman deserted the 
house because I brought him here." 

" Then is there nobody . literally nobody . in the house but 
you and he ? " 

" Nobody, since noon to-day. They promised to send some- 
one, but no one come3. The people here are debased by their 
panic terror." 

" Thank Heaven I heard what I did, and came ! " 

" Thank Heaven indeed ; and thank you, Mrs. Alwyn, for 
your courage and your generous kindness. But you must not 
remain here running useless risks. Enough that you have 
come ; your coming relieves me from a cruel difficulty. You 
will see that proper assistance and attendance are sent ; and I 
shall never forget that you came when no other living creature 
ventured near. Now, good-bye. No, no, you must not 
sta}'." 

She had come into the hall. " You do not think I am a 



MYRA MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND PROFITS BY IT. 281 

child," she said, " or an old woman like Mrs. Beck ? You do 
not suppose I am afraid of fever 1 By how many fever-bed- 
sides do you think I have been to-day ? Can men never 
understand women ? " 

" But your husband . what would he think of your exposing 
yourself to useless danger 1 " 

" I know what my husband would think if he heard that I 
turned away from the bedside of any human creature whom I 
could help because there was a chance of my catching a breath 
of infection. I know what he would say if he heard such a 
thing, and believed it ; only I know, too, that he couldn't 
believe it. Pray, Mr. Lennon, don't think you can teach 
women another kind of principle from that which you practise 
yourself. You don't do selfish and cowardly things yourself ; 
believe me, neither do I. For the present . that is, until you 
find a better nurse . I mean to look after poor Tom Berry ; 
and I hope, with Heaven's help, we may bring him safely 
through." 

Myra was now quite too composed and resolute to give the 
least chance for further remonstrance. She told Lennon, first 
of all, to let her see poor Tom ; and Lennon led the way to 
the room where his friend was lying. It was Lennon's own 
bedroom : Myra saw that at a glance, by the books and papers. 
Tom was tossing from side to side, and was delirious. He was 
talking now to "Mary," his dead wife, and bidding her keep 
up her courage, and telling her things would come right enough 
soon . never fear ! Then he was remonstrating with some of 
his fellows on their apathy and their down-trodden contented- 
ness. Then he spoke as if to Lennon, and said some voluble 
words in a low tone, of which only a few were intelligible to 
Myra. But she heard distinctly . ." You take care of him, 
Mr. Lennon. Never trust anything to Wat Warton. He's 
a man to play you a nasty trick some day. Mind what I 
say." 

The colour came crimson to her face, and she dreaded to look 
up for a moment. 

" How long has he been delirious ? " she asked, after a 
pause. 

" Only a few hours. Do you think him in danger, Mrs. 
Alwyn? O, my poor fellow . my poor, honest, manly Tom 
Berry ! One of the finest creatures I ever knew. I brought 
him here, Mrs. Alwyn . brought him here to die ! Everything 



282 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

has gone wrong with me since I came here; and is this poor 
fellow now to be a victim ? " 

Lennon's emotion was a strange and touching sight to Myra. 
She had never supposed that he could thus be moved. It 
filled her with a kind of alarm, and at the same time threw 
upon her a consolatory and soothing part which she had never 
expected to have to perform for him. He had always seemed 
to her so cold and self-contained, that she hardly knew how to 
deal with him now that he appealed to her in a faltering and 
husky voice for encouragement and sympathy. She laid her 
hand gently and soothingly on his arm. Compassion always 
puts out its hand and touches the object it would heal and 
strengthen. 

" Dear Mr. Lennon, you need not, I am sure, fear the worst 
for this poor fellow. You know how many recover every day 
. after all, only the few die ; and poor Tom was always so 
strong, and, unlike many of our people here, so temperate, that 
I cannot think there is much fear for him. But you know- 
that we must not stand here lamenting over him. We must 
do something." 

" Yes, yes. What can we do ? " 

" First, you had better leave me here . I am certainly a 
better qualified nurse than you ; and you take David's horse 
and go to the dispensary, and get one of the doctors to come at 
once, and give some directions about a nurse : and, in fact, 
they'll tell you at the dispensary all about it. David can walk 
back and tell Dr. Alwyn what has happened ; for, indeed, Mr. 
Lennon, I left a message for my husband which will alarm him. 
I heard that you were in fever, and I came here at once. Now 
go." 

" And you will remain here alone 1 " 

" Why not 1 I am not afraid of fever ; and if I were, it 
would be none the less dangerous because somebody remained 
to take care of me." 

Lennon disappeared. He was relieved by being set to do 
something. He gave Myra's groom her message, and then 
started on his own mission. 

Myra did not fear being alone ; the presence of Lennon em- 
barrassed her, although the earnestness of the duty she had 
undertaken swallowed up conventionality and small feelings of 
any kind. She had had, even before the present outbreak of 
pestilence, some experience of fever-beds, and she knew there 



SIYKA MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND PROFITS BY IT. 283 

was nothing to do for Tom Berry just now but to keep him 
cool and give him water, and let the pure air from the hills 
breathe in now and then through an opened window. It was 
melancholy work, however, sitting by that bedside in the 
lonely summer night, with the darkness of the mountains gloom- 
ing through the panes ; until at last a sad white moon came up, 
and, gliding on like a Banshee, almost startled Myra at first 
with .its livid sepulchral light. "Pale angel of destruction," 
the Aladdin of the Northern poet calls the moon as it looks in 
upon him through the bars of his prison. Myra, watching by 
the bedside of a fevered man, felt the full meaning of the words. 
The sad luminous face gazing in seemed to her excited fancy 
like that of the death-angel come to look upon the ruin he was 
doomed to make. 

Tom Berry broke out every now and then into a fresh out- 
burst of semi-articulate talk. There was a great deal about 
Lennon in it, and about Warton . and at last Myra caught her 
own name. 

" Tell you again, he is a downright scoundrel ! Don't you 
see the way he follows her . Mrs. Alwyn, Parson Alwyn's 
wife ? She's a brick of a woman, too, though I took her for a 
fool once ; and she has spirit enough to cow Wat Warton if ever 
he shows himself to her in his true colours. I see it . I under- 
stand 'em all ; I understand Mr. Lennon, and I'm proud to 
know him. Something's wrong with him now . can't think 
what it is ; that girl must have refused him . like her impu- 
dence ! He's mad about her . I saw it long ago. He never 
speaks a word . O, no ; he has no talk ; but I saw it. She's 
a pretty girl, too, and clever, and if she wasn't Warton's 
niece I might like her, and be glad to see him married to her. 
What's her name 1 I can't remember it. What's her name, 
again 1 " 

He raised himself in the bed, and looked with eyes of impa- 
tient inquiry at Mrs. Alwyn. He did not recognize her in the 
least, but seeing somebody there, he put his question, " What's 
her name, I'm asking 1 " 

" Grace," replied Mrs. Alwyn softly. 

" Grace what 1 " 

" Grace Ethelstone." 

"JYes, to be sure ; how did I manage to forget it ? . I'll 
forget my own name next ! My head's queer. Grace Ethel- 
stone . a pretty name, too. He's mad about her, Mr. Lennon 



284 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

is. He's wild in love with her, Mary ; and she must have 
thrown him over, or they must have had a quarrel, and that's 
upset him. Don't you remember, darling, that quarrel we had 
once . long ago . when I thought you wouldn't marry me, and 
I got drinking, and then I got into a fight, and all that? 
You're very well now, Mary, quite well now. You were very 
sick a little while ago, but the fresh air will set you all to 
rights again. I'll get a job of work down in the country, and 
we'll be in the green fields for a bit, girl." 

Then the talk began to grow more and more voluble, less 
and less coherent, until at length it lost itself in mere babble- 
ment, and finally was hushed altogether. But Myra had heard 
enough to convince her that there was more than a gleam of 
meaning in the poor fellow's words. She felt a deep pang of 
shame and grief to think that any eyes and heart but her own 
should have possessed themselves of the purpose of Warton's 
attentions to her. She thought with dread of the hired nurse 
coming to hear such talk ; and if she could possibly have ven- 
tured on such a course, she would have insisted upon remaining 
at Berry's bedside herself, and alone, until he recovered. But 
even the sensation called up within her by the allusions to her- 
self and to Warton did not diminish the surprise and emotion 
with which she heard that Ralph Lennon loved Grace Ethel- 
stone. And she believed it ; and she was glad of it. To say 
that she heard it without one pang of personal pain would be 
idle. Virtue, alas, cannot so inoculate our age but we shall 
have our touches of heart-disease, and our morbid shootings of 
shameful pain. But this first wrongful natural pang over, 
her healthy womanly sense returned, and she was glad that 
Lennon loved, and refused to believe that his love could fail to 
prosper. 

Is it incredible that a watch of some few hours should have 
purified a woman's heart of the one slight taint that was in it, 
and left her with an affection which was all clear and true and 
friendly, and could bear the light of Heaven ? Is it incredible ? 
Yet in this case it is true. All that was disinterested, loyal, 
and magnanimous in Myra's nature rose up within her when she 
heard that Lennon too loved, and the supremacy of her better 
self was vindicated. With her head buried in her hands, she 
found relief during the struggle in profuse and passionate wo- 
manly tears . tears which, perhaps, even Virtue need not have 
been much ashamed of; and she felt herself restored to life 



MYRA MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND PROFITS BY IT. 285 

again. The crisis of her fever had come and gone while poor 
Tom raved and tossed on the bed over which she watched. 

Lennon returned after a long delay with the doctor and a 
nurse. Mrs. Alwyn must return home. She had not had time 
even to change her habit . and think, ladies, what it is to do 
the duties of sick- nurse with ever so many yards of cloth skirt 
gathered up over your arm ! Her groom had to be sent on 
another errand back to the dispensary, which was now kept 
open all night ; and Myra would not wait for his return, but 
declared she would rather impose on Mr. Lennon the trouble 
of escorting her home, or ride home alone, than stay any longer. 
"My husband has not yet returned," she said, "and I should be 
very glad to get home before him, and save him from such an 
alarm as the note I told you of, Mr. Lennon, would have caused 
him. Come with me." 

Lennon was surely not unwilling. Perhaps if the doctor 
had spoken unfavourably of Tom Berry he might have felt an 
inward struggle against a proposal to leave his friend even for 
an hour. But the physician was very hopeful, and there was 
really nothing to be done for Tom but to leave him in the care 
of the nurse. 

It was past midnight when Myra and Lennon rode by the 
lake. The night was bright, and they rode fast. 

" My mind is much relieved, Mrs. Alwyn," said our friend. 

" And mine," she answered, with half a sigh. 

" I think poor Tom will recover ; and if he does I am sure 
he and I owe his life to you. How kind and thoughtful and 
brave you are ! I never . " and he stopped awkwardly. 

" You never thought I had anything in me worth knowing?" 

" 0, pardon me, no. I was not going to say that." 

" No matter. I don't care to have it amended. We mistook 
each other, Mr. Lennon ; let us own it frankly. I took you 
for an infidel, did I not ? Did you not give yourself out for 
one 1 And now I know you for a Christian. Ah, if we had 
many such ! You took me for a mere, formal, good-for- 
nothing " 

" pray, Mrs. Alwyn, spare me . don't be cruel. Do spare 
me." 

" At least you did not understand me ; and I did not under- 
stand you. Let us know each other better henceforward. Let 
us be friends, Mr. Lennon." 

She turned her face and looked fully, fraukly on him. The 



286 THE WATEBDALE NEIGHBOUIiS. 

moon-rays fell upon her white forehead, her thick dark hair 
gathered up under her hat, her full deep eyes swimming in 
tears. 

" Let us be friends, Mr. Lennon ; " and she held out to him 
one gloved hand. 

He stooped from his saddle, took the hand in his, and pressed 
it reverently to his lips. 

" To me," he said, " you shall ever be the first and best of 
friends." 

Did any gleam of the thoughts that filled her soul shine upon 
him out of the struggle of expression that her feelings wrote 
upon her trembling lips and in her eyes ? Did he then for the 
first time. catch a glimpse of her meaning and her heart ? Per- 
haps so, for a strange, almost startled expression flashed across 
his face. But whatever thought may have arisen within him, 
he beat it resolutely down, and only took her hand and calmly 
touched it with his lips, and said the few quiet words we have 
written. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 



A PEW weeks went by, and the aspect of things was as 
much changed in the region of the lake as the face of the 
sea on a soft sunny morning after a night of storm. The fever 
had done its worst, and was gone. The flood was beginning to 
be a memory. The model village was a sort of convalescent 
hospital. The grass was growing thick and green already on 
the frequent new-made graves, among which we are glad to say 
none had been opened for Tom Berry. Thanks to assiduous 
care and kindness and skill, Tom had recovered, and was now 
beginning to walk about again quite sturdily. The fever had 
passed over the heads of Lennon and Dr. Alwyn and his wife, 
and laid no hand on them. Soon the old appearance would 
return to everything, and only those who had to mourn for the 
dead would think much of what had been. 

Lennon had resolved on abandoning wholly his futile philan- 
thropic scheme. Determined to leave Waterdale altogether, he 
begged to be allowed to bequeath the Phalanstery to Myra 
Alwyn, to administer it in whatever way she thought best. 



WART0N MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND DOES NOT PROFIT. 287 

" I make you ray executor," he said. " You can turn it to 
some account . I cannot. And Tom Berry will remain to be 
your steward." 

,. " Beg pardon," interposed Tom, " but there was a distinct 
understanding that I was 'to go abroad too. I'm going to 
Australia, where a man can have the rights of a man. I'd 
do a deal for this good lady, but she wouldn't ask me to stay 
here when I've my last chance of going where there's some- 
thing like freedom." So Tom put his resolution not to leave 
Lennon. 

" But I don't know yet that I am returning to Australia," 
said Lennon. " I have thought rather of the United States." 

" The one thing I always longed for," calmly replied Tom, 
" is to live under the star-spangled banner. I like it now more 
than ever, seeing that it doesn't wave over any slaves. Mr. 
Lennon, I'm there." 

" If Mr. Berry will not remain to help me," said Myra, " I 
must only do my best with Dr. Alwyn's assistance. But, in 
any case, Mr. Lennon, I accept with pleasure the office of your 
viceroy here . if my husband will allow me." 

"Ay, marry," Dr. Alwyn struck in. "As if he did not 
know his place and his authority too well to attempt any re- 
fusal ! I am only a constitutional sovereign, Lennon . I am 
allowed to reign on condition that I don't presume to attempt 
to govern." 

" It is certain that you will go ?" said Myra; " that you leave 
England 1 " 

" Quite certain." 

"And alone?" 

" No, not alone, it seems ; for my friend Tom here insists on 
accompanying me." 

" Well, you do right, Lennon,'' said Dr. Alwyn. " To remain 
here would be only to stagnate . for you, I mean. You have no 
place here. We can convert your failure into a success. We 
know our Pappenheimers down here . and you don't, although 
you are native and to the manner born. They will only move 
here to the old music, Lennon. Thank Heaven that we can 
move them at all ! Your new philosophy won't grow here ; 
and let me speak frankly out and say I am glad of it, although 
I believe you are as good a Christian as the Dean of St. Paul's. 
Go and do something, Lennon. Find a stage somewhere, and 
play on it ; and let us far off here read your name sometimes in 



288 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

the playbill; and send us a friendly line now and then, and 
perhaps come and see us once or twice iu a lifetime. Become 
famous if you can ; but, famous or obscure, you will always be 
the same to your friends here." 

Had Dr. Alwyn looked at his wife while he spoke thus he 
would have' seen tears in her eyes. Bub neither he nor she 
would have been ashamed. One of the things that gave him 
the greatest pleasure of late was to see that his wife had 
quite got over what he thought her dislike. her unreasonable 
dislike . of Lennon. He set down the change entirely to the 
opportunities Myra had lately had of observing the generous 
and disinterested qualities which Lennon possessed. The good 
clergyman was delighted to see his wife and his friend at last on 
terms of cordial and avowed friendship. The conversation just 
reported was one of many which happened to take place about 
this time. 

Myra was much perplexed about Lennon's intended departure, 
and his apparent severance from Grace Ethelstone. The sub- 
ject was one she could not venture to approach directly ; but 
when she did once or twice say something to Ralph about 
Grace, she saw quite enough in his manner to satisfy her that 
Tom Berry's delirium spoke the truth. But she hoped soon to 
have an opportunity of seeing Grace herself, and she thought 
she might, in friendly confidence, learn something from her. 

For the little party was about to break up for a while. Myra 
Alwyn had been peremptorily ordered by her physician to seek 
change of air and rest at some warm sea-side place after her 
late exertions and fatigue, and it was arranged that she should 
spend a few weeks at Folkestone. 

Dr. Alwyn had some business matters to look after in Scot- 
land, in connection with the affairs of a deceased relative to 
whom he was appointed executor, and that done he was to join 
his wife in the south. Lennon was going for a few days to 
London, to consult his lawyers, and make some arrangement 
about the disposal of what property he had still left, previous 
to his leaving England. He longed to be away. Only the 
urgent pressure of his friends induced him to consent that they 
should all meet once more on the old ground before he finally 
quitted England. 

So they scattered and went their ways ; and Lennon was 
once more in the Eleanor's Cross in London. Seated at the old 
table in the coffee-room, where he sat that first morning when 



WARTON MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND DOES NOT PROFIT. 289 

Walter Warton found him, he was vaguely thinking over the 
disappointments that had fallen on him since that day. The 
coffee-room was given up to himself and the waiters who 
flickered incessantly in and out. Other people had business or 
pleasure to follow, and had deserted the hotel immediately 
after breakfast. Lennon had only a late appointment to keep 
that day, and did not well know what to do with himself until 
the time arrived. He had read all the morning papers . at 
least he had read as much of them as he could by any stress of 
vacuity be induced to read . and had even glanced over some 
of the journals of the previous evening. He was standing up 
to go into the smoking-room, there to puff an hour away, when 
he heard his own name mentioned by somebody who was 
speaking to one of the waiters at the door ; and in a moment 
Walter Warton entered and held out his hand. 

" I met a man last night," said Warton, " who told me you 
were in town, and I took the chance of finding you here at 
your old quarters. I have long been anxious to see you." 

" Have you been ill ? " Lennon asked involuntarily ; for 
Warton was looking very pale and haggard, and his hand was 
tremulous and hot. His dress was less careful and elegant than 
it used to be ; the words " breaking up " seemed written on 
every line of his face . in his sunken, glittering, restless eyes, 
in his forced and wan smile, in his coat, his necktie, his gloves, 
his hat, in everything about him. 

" No, not ill, Lennon ; not illness of any bodily kind ; but 
I have been troubled and tried in many ways. I have been 
disappointed, Lennon . cruelly disappointed ! You cannot 
know what such disappointment as mine is. No matter ; we 
can't talk here . you were going into the smoking-room, I 
think 1 Let me go with you." 

They went into the smoking-room. Cigars were brought ; 
and Warton ordered brandy and soda-water, of which he drank 
a mighty draught, and then rang the bell and ordered some 
more. 

" I make myself free of your quarters, Lennon," he said, with 
a ghastly smile. 

Lennon only nodded. He was much distressed at Warton's 
appearance . and of all men else he would gladly have avoided 
Warton at the time. 

" Listen, Lennon, old friend," Warton began, striking the 
table heavily with his hand. " You know what going to the 

IT 



290 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

devil is ? You went half-way along the road yourself at one 
time ; but you stopped at the turning of the paths, and came 
back ; and you were only a boy then. Well, I am not a boy now ; 
and I am going to the devil ; and I shall never turn back." 

" Come, come," said Lennon, " you must not talk in this grim 
sort of way ; things are not so bad as all that." 

" You don't know " 

" Well, I have heard something . just a vague hint, perhaps 
. that you were a little embarrassed in money affairs . debts, 
and all that. But everyone has to pass through something of 
that sort ; and you have plenty of time and talent to retrieve 
yourself." 

" No ; it's not the debts alone. The worst of these are paid 
off or staved off. Eastham managed that for me somehow. I 
have always found Eastham a manly, kindly fellow ; though 
how he managed to raise the money I don't know, for he is 
sadly dipped himself just now. No, it's not the debts, Lennon. 
I am played out ! My career is done. The infernal Tories 
have thrown me over . flung me away like an old glove ! I met 
Disraeli the other day, close, face to face, and he cut me dead. 
He looked me full in the face, and passed on. By Heavens, 
Lennon, that man was my political idol ! Eastham has done all 
he can for me ; but the word has gone round. They have de- 
liberately thrown me over . for ever. I am almost ashamed to 
say it, but Eastham begged hard for a place of any kind for me 
. a colonial judgeship, a consulship, anything at all . and he 
was flatly refused. And to think what I have sacrificed for 
these men ! " 

Lennon writhed under these confidences ; for while be pitied 
Warton, he felt more and more his transparent worthlessness. 
He could only see in him one who tried to be a valuable traitor 
and failed, and then bemoaned himself that he had received 
no reward for his futile perfidy. 

" What a happy fellow you are," went on the confiding 
Warton, " to have nothing to do with politics ! Serve a party, 
Lennon, and you'll find yourself as badly treated in the end as 
if you were engaged in selling your soul for a heartless woman. 
Ah, Heaven ! But this will only tire you out . you don't take 
any interest in all this sort of thing 1 " 

" I don't want interest in the matter," said Lennon, rather 
coldly j " but I always thought, Warton, that you were playing 
a foolish game, and I must say a wrong game. I gave you my 



WARTON MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND DOES NOT PROFIT. 291 

opinion on that point long ago . when you asked me, and not 
before. Of all the Job's-coruforter class, I myself least like the 
people who are always in a hurry to say ' I told you so,' when a 
friend has gone wrong ; but I always thought, Warton, you 
were out of your element when you threw away the principles 
that made you strong ; and I must say frankly I think you had 
no business among the swells. Confound it, Warton, what 
have you and I to do with earls and cabinet ministers ? " 

" I don't quite see that a man's being born of humble parents 
need prevent him from rising in the world, and asserting his 
place as a man." 

" No ; and neither do I. But I don't call it asserting my 
place as a man to pay tribute to rank by hunting after it. Best 
upon yourself, Warton . your own intellect and your own 
ability . and you will bring yourself all right yet." 

"I cannot; I have heard just such advice before, Lennon, 
more than once. ] have heard it many a time from Grace 
Ethelstone. Ex oribus parvuhrum, old fellow ; out of the 
mouths of babes and sucklings are we solemn seniors sometimes 
admonished. But it's too late. My game is over. My health, 
is gone too. That confounded fainting-trick which so ruined 
me at that meeting in Northinglen . a scene and a collapse I 
have never thought of since without humiliation . that trick 
has grown upon me ; and I nod my eyes grow dim sometimes, 
and black spots dance before them " 

"You are over-worked and over-excited. Go home, Warton, 
and remain quietly there for a few weeks with Mabel and the 
children. You will soon get strong again ; and then turn to 
your own profession manfully. You will find friends who will 
help you on. If I were your physician I would prescribe three 
months of quiet, unbroken, happy home life." 

" Home life, Lennon, looks charming to you, I daresay, who 
do not know what it is. To me it has lost its savour . long 
ago. I am not happy at home . there, don't look virtuously 
horrified ; I am not going to make you any terrible confidences j 
but it does relieve my mind a little, even to be able to hint at 
the truth to anybody. Do you know, Lennon, I have often 
thought lately that there is a good deal more meaning than we 
imagine in what these Ritualist fellows are doing with their 
oral confession? I wish I could talk to anybody . even a 
Bitualist priest. exactly all that I feel; I think it would 
relieve me." 

u2 



292 THE WATBKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" Well, I am not a Ritualist, nor a priest," said Lennon ; 
" but I tell you frankly, I think an evening of digging in your 
garden with your children would do you infinitely more good 
than any sickly disburdenings of your soul. A plain, frank 
question, Warton . can I serve you in any way ? If I can I 
will, for the sake of old times, and Mabel and the children." 

" No, Lennon, you can't. No, by Jove, and you sha'n't ! I 
am not going to draw on your good-nature, especially when I 
can see only too plainly that our old friendship is stone dead, so 
far as you are concerned . don't say a word, man ; I see it all, 
and I neither blame you nor wonder. I have no claim on you, 
Lennon, except that you have a memory of old times, and a 
gleam of kindly feeling for poor Mabel. I did hope for a long 
time that you might have thought of my niece, Grace Ethel- 
stone. I did indeed ; and believe me, Lennon, if you had loved 
her and married her, you would never have regretted it ! " 

" Miss Ethelstone," said Lennon, " has not a friend on earth 
who thinks more highly of her than I do. But we who are not 
young, Warton, we can't expect girls like her to think of us as 
anything but patriarchs." Lennon's effort to say these words 
in a cheerful and careless tone was a grim sight to see. But he 
remembered his promise to Grace . the promise that he would 
save her from remonstrances and complaints at home. 

" Ah, but you are wrong, Lennon ; Grace is not like other 
girls. You do not know what she thought of you. Mabel 
knows it, and I know it. It's a shame for me to betray her 
secret ; but she loved you." 

" It is not true," said Lennon, losing all self-control. " You 
are mistaken. Warton, you are deceived. She never cared one 
rush about me ; or if she did, some traitor and liar set her heart 
against me ; and by Heaven, Warton . I must speak out . I 
more than once suspected that you were that traitor and liar ! " 

Warton was utterly bewildered by this outburst of emotion. 
It came so unexpectedly, it seemed so uncharacteristic, that it 
was Warton's first and natural impulse to believe it a simulated 
passion. He had not time to collect what he ought to say, 
when a waiter came in and handed across the table a telegram 
for Mr. Lennon. 

Lennon took it, opened it almost without looking at it, read 
the name, then fixed his attention steadfastly on it, and read it 
over two or three times. He let it fall on the table, and 
remained for a moment silent, hesitating, and thoughtful. 



WARTON MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND DOES NOT PROFIT. 293 

Warton's keen eyes ccmld scan every line of the message, and 
he read it ; for the first fugitive glance he threw upon it 
showed a name which made his eyes light up and his heart 
palpitate fiercely. 

The message was dated from Folkestone, and was sent to 
" Ralph Lennon, Eleanor's Cross Hotel, London," from " Myra 
Alwyn, Shingle Cottage, Folkestone." And it contained these 
words : 

" Come to me at once. Leave everything and come here. I 
shall expect you to-night." 

And Warton, who of late always followed the movements of 
the Alwyns as well as he could, knew perfectly well that Dr. 
Alwyn had gone to Scotland. 

He grasped the edge of the table fiercely, to keep down his 
passion. The room seemed for a moment or two to float round 
and round him ; strange heavy sounds sang dully in his ears, 
and the air seemed filled with innumerable black specks and 
bright balls dancing tormentingly round him. For there smote 
upon him the hideous conviction that he had been deceived, 
that the love he had so audaciously thrust upon her had been 
rejected with contempt, not because it was sinful, but because 
it was forestalled. This, then, was the reason for Lennon's 
conduct with regard to Grace Ethelstone ! Warton identified 
her wrongs in a moment with his own. He had been mocked 
and flouted all through. The high-minded and virtuous Mentor 
who had just been preaching to him had then not only jilted 
his niece, but superseded him in the love of another man's 
wife ! He could not doubt it. The proofs were damning j but 
even in that wild and whirling moment of confusion and 
amazement he resolved that he would have greater proofs yet. 

Had Ralph Lennon not been quite wrapped up in his own 
conjectures and perplexity, he must have been struck by the 
expression of Warton's face ; but he was wholly absorbed in 
the unexplained message he had received, and bewildered by 
its genial peremptoriness. He had come to understand Myra 
Alwyn far too well not to know that there must be some clear 
and cogent reason to explain the summons ; but he was utterly 
unable to conjecture what her motive must be. So he saw 
nothing of the conflict of emotion that raged over Warton's 
pale and haggard face. 

" I must leave town, I fear, for a short time," he said to 
Warton. " I have just received a telegram which calls me 



294 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

away rather peremptorily. Will you excuse me for a moment, 
Warton ? 1 want to see about a train, and to write a line." 

Warton only nodded. When Ralph came back into the 
smoking-room, two minutes after, there was nobody there. 
Warton had gone and had left no message of any kind. Len- 
non had thought his manner all the day so strange, that he 
was hardly surprised at this fresh exhibition of eccentricity. 
He pitied Warton, and was sorry for him ; but the distrust 
and dislike he had begun lately to feel towards him Lenuon 
could not conquer. He breathed more freely now that his old 
acquaintance was gone. 

And yet as he sat in the train which was rushing to Folke- 
stone, and drew himself up in the seat near the window, re- 
joicing, as was his wont, to find himself alone, he thought with 
some remorse over his cold and harsh demeanour towards 
Warton. The haggard face, the tremulous hands, the restless 
eyes, haunted him. There was something sinister, ominous, 
and unnatural about Warton's whole appearance. Lennon's 
north-country birth and childhood brought him under the 
shadow of the old superstitions, which are as inseparable from 
the mountains as the mists that surround them. He was 
familiar with the deep expressive phrases which had floated 
down from Scotland, along with the weird fancies they em- 
bodied ; and he knew what it was to be "fey"' . to walk, as it 
were, under the visible shadow of death ; to look and speak 
and act as a man who felt himself devoted and doomed . conse- 
crated in the old classic meaning of the word. And he thought 
as he sat in the train . and he thought of it many and many a 
time after . that Walter Warton was " fey " that day. He 
deeply regretted now that he had not entered more warmly 
into the poor fellow's confidences ; listened to the story of his 
difficulties ; been less eager to find fault and blame ; shown 
himself more frank and urgent in his offers of assistance ; given 
at least a genial sympathy instead of a cold and lifeless atten- 
tion. For the sake of Mabel, his old love . whom once, strange 
as it now appeared, he did indeed love, O, so deeply and so 
absurdly ! . he might have done that much. For the sake of 
her whom now he loved with so different and so profound a 
passion, he might have turned less coldly towards one 
whose misfortune must at least increase her unhappiness. 
" Have I only played the Pharisee's part," thought Lennon, 
" after all 1 Have I set myself up for independence of conven- 



WARTON MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND DOES NOT PROFIT. 295 

tionality and scorn of the world's shabby morals only to turn 
against this poor fellow in his failure, whom I did not repudiate 
when he seemed to be successful 1 " And then he consoled 
himself with the old words : " Next time ! Only wait until 
the next time we meet ! The moment I return to London I 
will seek him out, and speak frankly with him, and try to be 
his friend." 

So filled was he with thoughts of Warton that when he 
got out at the Folkestone terminus, and lingered a moment up 
and down the platform, in a kind of vague expectation of some- 
body coming to meet him, he actually fancied he saw Warton 
cross the line. He really did believe for a moment that the 
pale worn face and glittering eyes flashed across him and dis- 
appeared somewhere. 

"My eyes are made the fools of my other senses," thought 
Lennon, scorning at his own fancies as usual. " I have treated 
poor Warton badly, and my conscience brings a ghost after 
me. I must make atonement when I get back." 

Nobody awaited him on the platform. This was not a tidal- 
train, and there were not many passengers, and there was none 
of the wild crowding and rushing and dragging of luggage 
and ringing of steamers' bells and puffing of steam which most 
of us have come to regard as identical with Folkestone. The 
platform was empty in a few moments, and Lennon saw that 
there was nothing to be gained by waiting there. A railway 
porter directed him to Mrs. Alwyn's address . a cottage by the 
sea, distant only a few minutes' walk. It was a beautiful 
autumn evening, and the rays of the sinking sun fell aslant 
upon the sea ; and Lennon could discern faint across the quiet 
water the earthy cliffs of Boulogne. He did not quicken his 
pace. Now that he was on the spot, he tantalised himself after 
his usual fashion, and rather shrank from the disclosure, what- 
ever it might be, which was to explain the summons he had 
received. But there at last lay the cottage, straight before 
him . a pretty imitation of Elizabethanism, with " Let furnished 
by the month or for the season" emblazoned in every brick 
and gable and pane of it ; and there, to settle the matter, was 
Mrs. Alwyn's own maid, whose face he knew perfectly, stand- 
ing at the gate. Now then for the mystery ! He went up to 
the gate. O yes, sir, Mrs. Alwyn was in. He was expected. 
He went in and disappeared. 

Disappeared ? From whose eyes ? From two keen, dark 



296 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

eyes, fierce -with the fire of jealousy and hatred, which had fol- 
lowed him. 

When Lennon left Warton alone, the latter could no longer 
restrain his feelings. He would not wait to meet Lennon. 
The latter only remained away while he was finding out the 
time of the next train's departure for Folkestone. ButWarton 
rushed into the street. The glare and noise of the Strand at 
that glowing hour of the bright autumnal day a little recalled 
him to composure, and at least external self-control. He made 
up his mind in a moment. He would watch Lennon and follow 
him . convict him and expose him. And her . yes, expose her ! 
He would ruin and destroy them all. He would brand her in 
the very eyes of her husband. She should have cause to curse 
the day when she flung him from her and threatened him. 
Ah, God ! did he not suspect her even then 1 How could he 
ever forget the change which came over her on the road by the 
lake that day . that hateful day, never to be forgotten . when 
he came in sight 1 And Lennon ! This was his virtue and his 
honour and his loyalty ! The hypocrisy of another seemed 
dreadful in Warton's eyes ; and he could not think any mea- 
sures unfair or wrong which tended to expose such a man. 
AVarton gnashed his teeth with savage joy at the thought of 
the destruction he was about to create. "I shall be like 
Samson," he muttered, with fierce satisfaction, "and pull down 
the pillars of their respectability and their virtue with me." 
For he quite included Dr. Alwyn among his enemies, and was 
hardly less bitter against him for being Myra's husband, than 
against Myra herself, or Lennon, for being . what he believed 
they were. 

Even fear no longer controlled him. It shot across him now 
and then with the admonishing glare of a danger-signal, but he 
heeded it not. He knew Lennon of old, and knowing how 
generous and patient he was, knew also how stern and fierce he 
.could become ; and he thought, " If I expose them all, Lennon 
-is capable of killing me, here in this open street." But he was 
not to be deterred now, even by fears like that. 

He bought a railway-guide, and found that the next train for 
Folkestone started in an hour. He drove straight to London- 
Bridge station, had more brandy, and then went into the 
second-class waiting-room. Lennon, he felt sure, would be im- 
patient, and therefore early. In fact, Lennon reached the place 
half an hour before the train started. He had waited only to 



WARTON MAKES A DISCOVERY, AND DOES NOT PROFIT. 297 

write a few lines to his solicitor, and to send a telegram to Tom 
Berry, asking him to come to town at once and see the solicitor, 
in the event of his, Lennon's, not being able to look after the 
business in time. Warton peered through a corner of the win- 
dow, dreading lest any evil chance should send Lennon into 
that room. At last he saw Ralph get into the train. "Warton 
darted out, took a second-class ticket, jumped in as the train 
was moving off, and was carried away. In his fear lest Lennon 
should escape him he leaped rather prematm-ely out on the 
Folkestone platform, and had nearly come into collision with 
his quarry. He darted across the line and, as he felt confident, 
eluded observation. Then, keeping Lennon always in sight . 
an easy task, as Ralph did not walk quickly . he followed him 
at a distance to Mrs. Alwyn's cottage. 

And near that cottage he waited for hours. The sun went 
wholly down, and, the quick darkness of a late summer evening 
coming on, with something of a chilly sensation, the beach was 
soon cleared of promenaders and nursery-maids and sand-delving 
children. Warton had a lonely time of it while he lingered and 
watched, eating his own heart. 

When it became quite dark he lay flat on the strand, his feet 
to the sea, his face turned to the cottage. There he knew he 
could not be seen by anybody coming out. A i long bitter 
watch he had. It must have been full half-an-hour after he 
had heard a clock strike eleven that at last . at last . he heard 
the door open, and presently saw two figures, a male and a 
female, stand upon the steps. He could not hear a word, nor 
could he, in the darkness, have identified the figures. They 
remained a few moments in close conversation ; and then at 
last Warton distinctly saw the man take the woman in his 
arms and kiss her. And he could see that she clung around 
him. Then his eyes swam and his head throbbed ; and he 
next saw the man come down the steps and pass out of the 
gate alone. The man walked slowly towards the sea . towards 
where Warton lay prone. and turned back and gazed at the 
cottage. Then he turned again, and Warton saw his face 
distinctly. It was, of course, Ralph Lennon. Had Lennon 
looked down he might easily have seen the croucher on the 
strand; but Warton took care at once to conceal his face. 
Lennon did not look down. He glanced vaguely out to sea, 
turned and regarded the cottage once more, and then strode 
rapidly away towards the town. 



298 THE WATEflDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Warton had now no doubt. Indeed it would be too much 
to say that his mind, since the incident of that day, admitted 
any doubt ; but he came to Folkestone to have his conviction 
made certainty ; and now it was certainty. It was as clear to 
him that the woman he saw was Myra Alwyn as that the man 
was Ralph Lennon. It has been many times shown that from 
the first hour he heard that these two were acquainted he had 
a vague and constantly recurring suspicion. He thought he 
understood human nature thoroughly, whereas he only under- 
stood the natm*e of one man. He resolved every question in 
the study of motive and character by unconsciously and in- 
stinctively referring to what he himself would have desired or 
done under similar circumstances. As certain dreamers, brood- 
ing over phenomena which are purely subjective, create out of 
their own morbid mental condition whole systems of spiritualism 
and demonology and phantomology, and what not, so Warton 
constantly confounded what he saw in his own heart with ob- 
servation of human character. A profound egotist, he was 
unable to conceive of any nature otherwise constituted than his 
own. He wholly wanted that dramatic and constructive power 
which might help even a selfish and sceptical man to construct 
for himself the idea of a disinterested and loyal nature. Thus, 
when once he had formed a suspicion, his mental presumptions 
were all in favour of its correctness. There was nothing 
in him to suggest its improbability. Whether his nearest 
friend was an utter hypocrite and traitor ; whether the woman 
who seemed purest, and whom he himself loved best, was really 
a liar and a wanton . these were with him mere questions of 
evidence. There was no preliminary revolting improbability 
about them. The thought of Lennon's perfidy and hypocrisy, 
of Myra's wickedness, maddened him, because it told of wrong 
done to him ; but he saw nothing in either the man or the 
woman, in any man or any woman, to make him recoil with 
disgust from the thought as something too monstrous to be 
entertained. And it is consoling to feel assured that, dread- 
fully wicked and weak and deceitful as we all are, men and 
women . for so our satirists and cynics tell us . the keen 
observer who explains everything beforehand by reference to 
some sinister impulse is sure to be out in his reckoning at least 
a dozen times as often as the simpler being whose first impres- 
sion is to assume that men and women wish to do well. 
Many things in life were against Walter Warton. Selfishness, 



WHAT HE SAW. 299 

sensuousness, want of perseverance, impatience, the constant 
desire to reap without sowing, the continual impulse to pluck 
up the flowers in order to see how they were growing . these 
characteristics were terribly against him. But perhaps his 
most fatal snare in life was his incapacity to believe in, or even 
to realise, the idea of human truth and goodness. 

So he tortured himself, and cursed at fate and Heaven and 
his friends, or enemies . they were now all the same . and 
even his home and his children, and the memories of his youth, 
as he crouched that stern night on the Folkestone strand : 
while Ralph Lennon stood for a moment near him . so near 
that Warton stretching out his right hand might well-nigh 
have touched Lennon's foot. The heart and the eyes of each 
man were filled and dimmed by his own absorbing feelings. 
A halo of hope and joy shone around Lennon. The sky and 
the sea were sun-illumined for him. He felt as if he " could 
have taken the great world in his arms and kissed it." He 
was enchanted with everything, with every one ; earth seemed 
all filled with love and friendship ; he could have clasped with 
the most fervent good-will the hand of the stricken wretch who 
grovelled near his feet, and who hated him and cursed him. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

WHAT HE SAW. 

ALL this time what had become of Grace Ethelstone ? A 
little of her history will explain very easily any seeming 
mystery about the sight which Warton saw as he glared from 
the Folkestone strand. 

Time had worn itself wearily away during weeks and weeks 
of Grace's darkened life. After her rejection of Lennon she 
went back and resumed her small sad routine of monotonous 
occupation in Warton's household. One only hope and pur- 
pose sustained her . the determination to get away from all old 
scenes, to leave England, and to engage in some artistic toil 
which should occupy her mental and physical resources toge- 
ther. Added to all the other discomforts of her present life, 
there was the fact that her round of vapid wearisome domestic 
duties left her mind free to feed upon its sorrow. So her dis- 



300 



THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 



appointment and regret preyed upon her like the vampire, and 
sucked the blood from her veins and the glow from her cheeks. 
She became pale and thin and nervous. Nay, she even became 
what the true heroines of romance never do become under any 
trial or torture . impatient and irritable. The boisterous im- 
portunities of the children were intolerable to her ; she actually 
hid from them when she could, until she grew remorseful for 
having deserted them, and then sought them, out and tried to 
play with them, in the old way, and broke down, and could not 
bear the pi*essure upon her nerves and heart any more, and 
had to escape again. Of course the children soon saw the 
change, and pitifully complained to their mother that cousin 
Gracie now did not like to play with them any more. 

Mabel, too, must have observed the change even with her 
own eyes. She hovered round her niece like a large, loving, 
and agitated bird. She did not ask questions, but she looked 
them, which was infinitely more trying. Of all the aggravating 
and agonizing petty torments the sad heart knows, one of the 
very worst surely is the consciousness that its struggles are 
anxiously watched by somebody who does not venture to ask a 
question or to express sympathy. Whenever Grace looked up 
she found Mabel's large brown eyes fixed upon her with an 
expression oddly compounded of curiosity, bewilderment, and 
pity ; and then the eyes, being caught in the fact, looked away 
with sudden embarrassment, and their owner made the most 
elaborate and transparent attempt to seem as if wholly occu- 
pied in the consideration of some object quite at the other end 
of the room. 

Poor Mabel's heart and mind were so transparent that her 
mental mechanism resembled that of the little skeleton clocks 
whose movements and machinery are naked to every eye. 
Therefore Grace could always discern perfectly well what 
Mabel was thinking of, and Mabel's efforts to extract gently 
and unperceived the root of Grace's sorrow were, from their very 
simplicity and ingenuousness, a cruel tantalization. 

" Tell me, Gracie dear," she said one day, " what do you 
think of that Mrs. Alwyn 1 " 

" Think of her ? " 

" Yes ; I mean do you like her 1 " 

" 0, yes ; how could I help liking her ? She is so very 
kind." 

" Do you think she is a very nice sort of woman 1 " 



WHAT HE SAW. 301 

" She is very pretty, and very friendly, and clever, and does 
a great deal of good, I believe." 

' : Is she what you would call a very good kind of woman . 
the kind of woman one would like to be 1 " 

Grace smiled a rather wan smile. 

" I think so ; I am sure she is very good, and I suppose we 
should all like to be pretty and good, Mabel . shouldn't we ? 
I should feel very proud, I know, if when I looked in my glass 
it gave me back such a face as Mrs. Alwyn's." 

" Yes ; but I don't mean that, and I am sure you have 
no reason to envy anybody on that score. But what I 
mean is, I believe gentlemen admire Mrs. Alwyn a great 
deal ; and I was curious to know whether she seemed the 
kind of lady who would encourage that sort of thing. I am 
sure I should hope not ; but I thought perhaps you might 
have noticed." 

'.' Indeed I don't know anything about it, Mabel ; I never 
thought of observing. Mrs. Alwyn seemed to me to be kind 
and friendly to everyone, and to be very much attached to her 
husband. In fact, she appeared to me to act veiy much like 
any other married woman ; at least I didn't observe any par- 
ticular difference." 

" Then you liked her, Grace ? " 

" Very much indeed. I am not very fond of women in 
general, but I liked her much." 

" And do you like her still ? " 

" Why should I not, Mabel ? " 

" Then you don't believe all that about her and Ealph Len- 
non ? " 

At last the question had come direct which Grace had been 
expecting for moments, and vainly trying to fence off. 

"0, Mabel, how can you ask me such questions? What 
good is there in talking of such things? I don't believe a 
word or a hint against Mrs. Alwyn. I believe she is one 
of the best of women. How can she help it if. if men like 
her and admire her ? I am sure I should admire her if I were 
a man." 

" Yes ; but a married woman, Grace ! " 

" Can a married woman help being pretty and clever and 
bright ? " 

" Ah, yes, that is all very well ; but you know what I mean, 
Grace ; and you know very well that when a woman is married 



302 THE WATERDALE tfEIGHBOUKS. 

she ought not to think of being attractive in anybody's eyes 
but her husband's." 

" I don't believe Mrs. Alwyn does." 

" O ! " 

A solemn pause . followed this ejaculation. The ejaculation 
itself meant to express wonder and incredulity kept down by 
discretion and that Christian charity which thinketh no evil. 

Grace did know perfectly well what her aunt meant. She 
knew that Mabel's meaning, put into plain English, was this : 
" I think I have found out at last what your trouble is, Grace. 
I think you are fonder of Mr. Lennon than you would acknow- 
ledge; and I am afraid he is fascinated by an odious, wicked married 
woman ; and I pity you from my heart ; and I should like to 
talk to you and comfort you, if I might venture on the subject." 
All this was unspeakable humiliation and pain to Grace ; and 
this, or something like it, happened almost every day. Good 
lack ! it is a trying and tormenting thing to be watched even 
by sympathetic eyes, when the sympathy is awkward ; and 
mindless kindness is sometimes as much more painful than 
cunning malignity as a chance wound from an honest splinter 
of domestic firewood hurts more than the clean cut of a hostile 
sword. 

Or sometimes the trial would come in a different way. Per- 
haps Mabel and Grace were sitting alone, when little Watty 
would storm into the room, holding up a sheet of note-paper 
heavily ruled with wavy pencil-lines, and blurred with huge 
round-hand characters, and blotted with frequent daubs of ink. 

" Look here, cousin Gracie ! I've been writing to Mr. 
Lennon ; and I think the spelling is all right . two b's in 
' double,' Gracie, aren't there ? . and now I want you to put 
it into your letter and send it to him . and please may I close 
up the envelope myself?" 

" But, Watty, I am not writing to Mr. Lennon to-day." 

" O, aren't you ? " 

Great disappointment of expression. 

" No, dear." 

" Well, to-morrow, Gracie. Keep it for me till to-morrow. 
A.nd please let me see when you are putting it in, and let me 
close up the envelope- . I always like to close up the envelopes 
. and then I'll go with Jane to put it in the post." 

" But, Watty, I am not going to write to Mr. Lennon to- 
morrow." 



WHAT HE SAW. 303 

" ! And when, Gracie dear ? for I want my letter to go 
away at once." 

" Indeed, Watty, I don't quite know." 

" Aren't you ever going to write to Mr. Lennon any more?" 

" 0, really I don't know ; I suppose so, dear . I don't know." 

" Why, you don't ever write to him now ! It's ever so long 
since you wrote to him. . Mamma, why doesn't Gracie write to 
Mr. Lennon now 1 " 

" I don't know, dear. Little boys ought not to ask questions 
. you know that very well." 

"Indeed no, mamma . at least Gracie doesn't think so, for 
she often said I might ask her questions if I liked." 

" Yes, Watty," interposed Grace, with an attempt at mirth- 
fulness ; " but then I did't say that I meant to answer every 
question you asked." 

" Well, but do tell me this, Gracie . do tell me this ! Tell 
me when you are going to write to Mr. Lennon, and why you 
don't write to him now as often as you did." 

" I wrote generally for your papa, and he is not at home 
now." 

" Yes ; but, Gracie, you know Mr. Lennon said he would be 
glad if I wrote to him as often as I liked, and you would send 
the letters with yours." 

" Well, Watty," said Grace, with an ill-suppressed sigh, and 
very weary of the dangerous argument, " I will put your letter 
into an envelope, and direct it to Mr. Lennon for you, if you 
like, and you shall seal it up yourself." 

" Thank you, Gracie. That's very kind of you ; for I do so 
want this letter to go. Will you write anything ? " 

"No, dear." 

" Well, then, just do wait one moment, Gracie. I want just 
to finish this, and I'll bring it in to you." 

Watty darted away ; and Grace knew that Mabel's eyes were 
fixed curiously, sorrowfully on her, and she chafed as she heard 
her aunt heave a heavy sigh. 

Back came Watty in a moment or two. " Look, Gracie ; I've 
put another line or two at the bottom. I wonder if he'll be 
able to read it." 

Grace took the letter and read the postscript : 

"P.S. Dear Mr. Lennon, this letter is all Mine for I asked 
cousin gracie to write to you and cousin gracie said no. So it 
is only my letter and cousin gracie did not do a word of it." 



304 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Out of the question that this letter could go ! So there had 
to be much dreary argument with pertinacious little Watty 
before the matter could be got rid of for that day. 

Grace knew that if Mabel had not some strong suspicion of 
the truth of the whole affair, she would infallibly have asked at 
once why her niece did not write any letters to Ralph Lennon 
now. The question might have been trying, but the marked 
avoidance of it was worse. And Grace could not bring herself 
to make a confidante of poor Mabel. That kindly simple 
.nature had no power of attracting confidence to itself; it could 
give nothing in return but those weak condoling words which it 
is the natural fault of the strong and spirited to despise and 
to find only irritating. 

Grace's determination to leave England grew and grew, and 
became a new source of aggravation because of the difficulties 
which seemed to stand in its way. These were mental and 
moral difficulties altogether ; indeed were summed up in the 
question, how to leave Mabel and the children. A selfish per- 
son would have thought nothing of them ; and even an unselfish 
person would have been quite entitled to consult her own hap- 
piness and her own future, where no direct claim of duty com- 
pelled her to stay. But Grace found it hard even to approach 
the subject with Mabel ; and in the darkening fortunes of the 
little household it seemed like a recreant and cowardly desertion 
to go away and leave them. If only a ;breath of prosperity 
blew upon the house, then indeed Grace would resolutely 
announce what she meant to do, and go. But only new and 
bitter blasts of adversity began to rush over it. Days and 
days went by, and there was no word of "Walter Warton. 
Letters to his chambers in town remained unanswered. 
Mabel's misery became so intense that it was pitiable to see ; 
and it made the house unbearable. Since she discovered that 
her husband's health had lately been weak, and that he had 
had fainting-fits, she filled her mind with daily and nightly 
visions of him lying sick and perhaps dying, with no one to 
look after him. At last she said she would go up to town, 
to his chambers ; a somewhat spirited resolve for her, because 
Walter had the strongest objection to being looked after by 
his womankind ; and, moreover, a journey to London was quite 
a fearsome expedition for Mabel to undertake. 

Grace offered to go and bring all the news. She had a sort 
of presentiment that something might have occurred which it 



WHAT HE SAW. 300 

would be as well for Mabel not to hear. Even when little 
Watty offered to accompany her she refused the escort, and 
preferred to go alone. Walter's own many hints and expres- 
sions almost prepared her for what she was to hear ; and she 
thought it would, be only prudent to hear it first alone, and 
turn it over in her mind before she communicated it to 
Mabel. It was instinctive with everyone who came into close 
relationship with Mabel Warton to think of her and treat her 
as a child, to guard her against shocks, to keep her placid and 
untroubled. 

So Grace went to London. She knew the way to Walter's 
chambers very well, and knew the main tracks of the metro- 
polis tolerably ; and she was not wildly nervous at the corners 
of streets or haunted by rustic fear of hansom cabs and thieves. 
It was a great relief to her to get away from home for a few 
hours . a greater relief still to be doing something which might 
give help or comfort to somebody. She almost forgot her own 
trouble sometimes . only Sometimes ; for many buildings she 
passed, some of the streets she walked through, certain book- 
shops and picture-shops and photographers, reminded her very 
cruelly of Ralph Lennon, and the happy, happy days, the dear 
delightful holidays, when he brought her to town, and they 
went to the National Gallery, or South Kensington, or the 
Water-colour Exhibition, or the French and Belgian Gallery in 
Pall Mall ; and when he ivould take her into book-shops and 
buy her some new book that everyone talked of ; and when 
life for the first time began to seem vivid and joyous and 
purple-tinted. There was a confectioner's shop in the Strand 
which Grace remembered well as she passed it ; not that there 
was any romantic association or artistic aroma hanging about 
its tarts and its Bath-buns, its decanter of port and its de j 
canter of sherry ; but one day, when Watty formed a part of 
the company, that youth was gratified by being taken into the 
shop and largely fed on the most destructive pastry ; and the 
memory of the place was now the memory of Lennon, and of 
love lost and hope crushed to death. So the unromantic shop 
was made in a moment as sacred and as sad as a mausoleum ; 
and Grace, going in for dear and melancholy old acquaintance' 
sake, tried to eat a Bath-bun, and failed as completely as 
though it had been compounded of dust and ashes ; and she 
hurried out of the shop, and dropped her veil to hide the tears 
which she felt might hardly be repressed any longer. 



oUt) THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

She made her way as quickly as she could towards the 
Temple, and, " like one upon a lonely road who walks in fear 
and dread," she " turned no more her head," because she 
knew that the ghosts of happy and dead days were every- 
where lying in wait for her. She was just entering the gate 
of the Temple which opens into Essex Street, when a handsome 
young man with a fair moustache drew back politely to let her 
pass. She hardly looked at him, but he recognized her at 
once, took off his hat, and addressed her by name. Then 
she saw that it was Captain Eastham. 

" You are coming to look for Mr. Warton, Miss Ethelstone, 
I venture to think ] " he said. 

" Yes, indeed," she replied, a little surprised at his words, 
and the anxious kind of expression which accompanied them. 

" Then I am very glad I met you ; for I can save you the 
trouble of walking any farther, and of mounting some very 
dark and crazy stairs. I bave just been to War ton's chambers, 
and he isn't in." 

" I am so sorry ; but I think, Captain Eastham, I shall have 
to mount the stairs and wait for him. I suppose he will soon 
return." 

" No, Miss Ethelstone ; pray don't waste your time. I 
don't think he can return until very late." 

" But he is in town 1 " 

" 0, yes, decidedly. Yes, he is in town ; but indeed I don't 
think there is any chance of your seeing him to-day." 

Grace's face wore such an expression of anxiety and alarm 
that Eastham could not fail to see it. 

" I think I had better be frank with you, Miss Ethelstone, 
he said, " and trust to your good sense not to make any unwise 
use of what I tell you. I know Warton is very anxious not to 
alarm his wife unnecessarily. He is in town, and he is quite 
well . that you can tell Mrs. Warton ; but at present he is in 
some little difficulty, or I should rather say he was, for it is all 
on the point of arrangement now. If you come to-morrow, or 
the day after at farthest, it is very likely you would see him 
here. I can assure you that the difficulty, such as it was, is all 
over now ; and I think you had better not know any more 
about it. And pray remember that I am one of Warton's most 
intimate friends, and only use the privilege of friendship in 
talking to you at all about affairs of this kind." 

" I am much obliged to you, Captain Eastham. I appre- 



WHAT HE SAW. 307 

ciate your kindness; but this is very, very degrading." She 
stopped suddenly, fearing to say too much and to put it too 
strongly. 

" Unfortunately we men are rather too well used to such 
things to mind it much. But, believe me, I would not have 
said a word of this to you, but that I saw from your manner 
you would either have found it all out, or suspected something 
much worse." 

" O, don't suppose I feel anything but grateful to you, 
Captain Eastham, for telling me. I could not have gone back 
to Mabel . to Mrs. Warton . without knowing something . 

and " She again became embarrassed. 

"Are you returning home at once, Miss Ethelstone 1 " 
" Yes ; I have nothing else to wait for in town." 
" You go by London Bridge ? " 
" Yes." 

" May I see you to a cab ] " 
" Thanks." 

He walked with her into the Strand, called a cab, and put 
her into it. Standing at the cab-door, he said : 

" Have you heard lately from our friends in "Waterdale . 
from the Alwyns 1 " 

" No, indeed : and I have been slow and remiss about writing 
to Mrs. Alwyn." 

"Ah! they have had heavy times there lately; you have 
heard of the floods 1 " 

"No, not a word." Of late no newspaper ever entered 
Mabel's house. 

Eastham told her in a few words. " I only came from the 
scene the other day," he said : " Mrs. Alwyn behaved like a 
regular trump . a heroine I mean ; and Lennon's houses are 
turned to good account at last. What a fine fellow Lennon is ! 
I never knew a manlier fellow. Gad, he makes one ashamed 
of the sort of life one leads." 

" Mr. Lennon is a very good man;" And he offered me his 
love, thought Grace, and I rejected it; and she felt very proud, 
and ashamed, and wretched. 

" Yes, he's very good ; but he has sense and spirit, too, 
which somehow good people don't generally have. I fear our 
friends are not over the worst of it yet. only beginning, in 
fact ; for before I left Waterdale fever had broken out in good 
earnest. I hope our friends will escape ; but they are sure to 

x 2 



308 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

be, each and all, in the thick of the danger. As soon as I can 
contrive a pair . do you know what a ' pair ' is, Miss Ethel- 
stone ? . I'm going down again. I'll range myself under 
Lennon's banner and try to do something ; I don't mean to 
keep out of the fight. So, Miss Ethelstone, if you should hear 
of our all being dead one of these mornings, you need not be 
surprised . and it's not worth weeping for. Indeed, I am 
inclined to think it's not my luck to fmish-up half so credit- 
ably, and in such a cause ; therefore, my display of valour and 
devotion is cheap. Good-bye." 

He closed the door, bowed, and the cab drove off. He had 
talked purposely in a rattling reckless kind of a way, in the 
hope of diverting Grace's attention from her private vexations ; 
and it must be owned that so far as Warton's difficulties were 
concerned he was perfectly successful. 

Think what Grace's feelings were as she journeyed home ! 
Need it be said that she at once pictured Ralph Lennon as the 
fore-doomed victim of fever 1 Need it be said that the mere 
thought utterly shattered the whole foundation on which she 
had rested the resolution that sent him from her 1 Bitterly, 
bitterly did she now reproach herself. Pride, vanity, mean 
suspicion now seemed the sole impelling motives of a conduct 
which once showed as if it were governed only by principle 
and right feeling. " I might have had the right to be near 
him even now," she said to herself; and she envied above all 
human beings Mrs. Alwyn, who could take a share in the 
work and the danger. " What wonder if he should admire 
her, and think highly of her?" poor Grace asked of herself; 
"she is brave, and I know she is good and generous and 
devoted. She goes into danger, she lives for something, . and 
I stagnate here, no good for any purpose, for any human 
creature ; and when I had a chance of winning the ri^ht to 
stand by his side I threw it away like a miserable, self-con- 
ceited, suspicious fool ! Ah, I did not understand him . 1 am 
not worthy to understand him ; and if he lives through this he 
will forget me, and if he dies I shall not be near ; I shall hear 
of it days and days after, perhaps, as one who had no share in 
his life, no right even to be told of his death ! " 

For it would be superfluous to say that Grace Ethelstone 
now regarded the Waterdale calamities exclusively as they were 
likely to affect Ralph Lennon. Flood and fever were only or- 
dained to come that they might smite him, or that, even if 



WHAT HE SAW. 309 

they spared hiin, they might banish her from his memory. 
She was a girl full of generous and sympathetic feeling, but 
just then it must be owned that she thought little of any other 
sufferers whom the water and the pestilence threatened, but 
only of Ealph Lennon's danger. When she remembered Mrs. 
Alwyn it was with envy, and, perhaps, with some secret, far- 
down, smouldering sense of womanly anger and jealousy towards 
one who was so blessed as to share the danger that threatened 
him. Captain Easthanfs words of praise when he spoke of 
Myra Alwyn came back to her memory ; and she thought, 
" He, too, will praise her . has praised her . perhaps will con- 
trast her with me, and remember that I misunderstood him, 
was thankless to him and deserted him ; and he will despise 
me." 

In such condition of mental torture Grace Ethelstone reached 
the now dismal house which she called her home. She was 
able to assure her aunt, on Captain Eastham's authority, that 
Walter Warton was quite well . only greatly occupied ; and 
the story of the flood and fever in Cumberland served at least to 
distract Mabel's attention for the moment. In a day or two 
after came a purposely reassuring letter from Walter. 

Every day now Grace took care to get a paper. Of course 
it told her nothing. A London daily journal concerns itself 
little about the calamities of a Cumberland village. She 
did find one day a small paragraph alluding to the floods and 
the subsequent outbreak of fever, but it gave no hint as to 
the evil results of either. Days and weeks wore on, during 
which her misery sometimes seemed greater than she could 
bear. She grew thin, pale, and even haggard. Her eyes grew 
brighter, her step became languid. Mabel might have been 
greatly alarmed by the change in the appearance of her niece, 
but that Walter had not yet come, and Mrs. Warton was ab- 
sorbed in her own grievances and her own fears. So there was 
little sympathy, no companionship, between these two women ; 
and Grace was nearly as desolate as if she lived in a howling 
wilderness. It is one of the peculiar trials of a woman's life 
that she can so seldom do anything but wait and bear. Cus- 
tom, education, the rock of inexorable etiquette to which her 
sex . Andromeda like . is bound hand and foot, rob her 
troubles of even that bracing element of excitement which the 
difficulties he has to battle against provide for a man. The 
husband or brother goes out to fight, and falls, at all events, in 



310 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

the beat and passion of active endeavour. The lot of the 
woman is to be tied to the stake, like the Scotch girl in the 
doubtful scrap of Covenanting history, until the rising tide 
comes slowly, cruelly in, and at last swallows her up. 

Grace Ethelstone was a girl of spirit and energy. Mabel 
Warton was a feeble fond heavy creature ; but in this regard 
they were on an equality. The one could but wait and watch 
and maunder and fear for her absent husband ; the other could 
only feed her heart on terror for the fate of the lover whom in 
any case she seemed to have hopelessly lost. 

At last, one memorable day, a light streak suddenly flashed 
in upon the cold and leaden sky of Grace's life. The postman 
brought her a letter, which she seized with eager joy, even 
before knowing whence it came. As we have spoken of 
women's special trials, let us not forget to mention one of their 
special advantages. They are glad to hear the postman, and 
they like receiving letters ; whereas to a man the prospect of 
his letters is a bore and an infliction. The reason requires no 
philosophy to find out. Your wife's letters come from her 
friends merely, and are all pleasant gossip or interesting family 
news. Your friends do not write to you to gossip with you, or 
tell you of what is going on : people only write to you when 
they have business with you . as a rule only when they have 
claims to remind you of or favours to ask. Observe how 
eagerly a woman snatches at her letters . observe with what an 
air of doubt, satiety, discomfort her husband take up and turns 
over his allotment, well knowing that, be they never so many, 
there will be hardly one among them which anybody could find 
pleasure in reading. 

Grace, then, took her letter eagerly. It was in a woman's 
handwriting, and she knew but one woman who was likely to 
write to her. It must be from Mrs. Alwyn, though it bore 
the Folkestone postmark. It was from Mrs. Alwyn, and 
Grace's excitement when she had turned in the first instance 
to the end of the letter, and read the signature, was very keen. 

Many a time of late days she had thought of writing to Mrs. 
Alwyn. Were there no other reason to prompt her, she was 
absolutely in need of some one to help and guide her in her 
scheme of leaving England. How to set about going to Italy ; 
how to get there ; what to do when she got there . were tor- 
turing puzzles to a girl who had never in her life made a 
journey alone, or gone anywhere out of England. She had 



WHAT HE SAW. 311 

had vague ideas once or twice of cutting off her hair, getting 
boy's clothes, and, thus relieved of the social inconveniences of 
womanhood, taking the first train and steamer for the Con- 
tinent anywhere, and trusting to Providence for the rest. But 
this scheme, on calm consideration, seemed hardly satisfactory ; 
and she often thought of Mrs. Alwyn as the one woman she 
knew who could help and counsel her. For some days back 
she had almost forgotten all this in her anxiety about Lennon's 
present dangers ; and Mrs. Alwyn became in her eyes the one 
only woman who could tell her anything of him, and under- 
stand her feelings. "Yet again and again she found that she 
could not bring herself to write to Myra Alwyn. No ; there 
had been that said of her which the pride and bitterness of 
Grace's heart declared must divide them. Grace did not 
believe a word that was hinted or spoken against Mrs. Alwyn; 
but if, ^yLennon admired her, and had her companionship in a 
time of trial, enough ! If he admired her only too much . and 
what was more likely ? . then with what heart could Grace 
bring herself to appeal to such a friendship 1 No ! She 
actually began more than one letter to Myra Alwyn, striving 
to school herself into magnanimity and Christianity and what 
not ; and she only tore them up in anger and despair ; and at 
last boldly asked of herself, " What is the use of this ? I am 
only a woman, with a woman's love, and spite, and jealousy. 
I cannot be anything else, and I will not pretend to be." 

So her heart leaped up with surprise and fear, and some- 
thing like hope, when she opened the letter and saw Myra 
Alwyn's name. 

This was what she read : 

" My dear Gkace, . I have been for a long time thinking of 
writing to yon, and I have been quite as long expecting to hear 
from you. Unfriendly creature, why do you not write? 
Perhaps you will retort upon me ; and perhaps there would be 
a little, only a little, justice in the retort. But we have had a 
heavy time of it lately, as you must have heard, and our poor 
little community seemed marked out for calamity after calamity. 
First we had floods, and then we had fever; and our poor 
people suffered cruelly from both. So many suffered, and so 
many perished, that I feel a sort of scruple even about express- 
ing gratitude for our own escape, and the escape of those we 
.value most, and who were in most danger. It seems something 



312 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

like selfishness to rejoice that we were unharmed when so many- 
suffered. One should thank God for it in silence ; but I tell 
you, because you will be glad to know. 

" One of those who were in great danger was poor Mr. Berry, 
whom I think you know . Mr. Lennon's protege, or, as Mr. 
Lennon himself would say, his friend. And I am glad now to 
echo the words, for I have learned to understand Mr. Lennon 
better in every way than I did when you and I last spoke to- 
gether about him. Mr. Berry was very bad, and, indeed, at 
one time it seemed as if he could not recover ; but Heaven 
spared him, and he is quite restored now. Mr. Lennon was 
not attacked by fever at all, although nobody could have taken 
less care to guard himself; and Dr. Alwyn, too, who was in 
danger from morning to night, came off quite unharmed. 

" But it so happened that I spent a few hours in helping to 
nurse poor Berry ; and they who watch over fever-patients 
often hear truths they did not expect, as well as wild delirious 
ravings. I heard from Mr. Berry's lips, my dear Grace, some- 
thing about which I want so particularly and so earnestly to 
speak to you. I am now staying at Folkestone for a few days, 
as I was ordered imperatively to take change of air. Will you 
come and pass a day or two with me . as many days as you can 1 
I am very, very lonely here ; my husband is in Scotland, and I 
don't know a creature here, and I don't want to ; but I do 
want you to come and pass a little of the time with me. In- 
deed, I am selfish in this ; but I must see you, dear, and there 
are special reasons why I want to see you soon ; therefore, I 
am sure you will not refuse me, but come as soon as ever you 
can. . Affectionately yours, 

" Myka Alwyn." 

Grace's heart beat strangely as she read this letter, and, of 
course, she read it over again and again. Her first impulse, we 
are sorry to say, was not to go. Her spirit resented deeply the 
bare idea of the kind of rivalry which had been suggested to 
her unsuspecting heart as unconsciously existing between Myra 
Alwyn and herself. But a moment of reflection allowed purer 
and more generous feelings to arise, and she recognised in Mrs. 
Alwyn a true-hearted woman, with a noble nature, whom it 
was well to know, whose friendship it was a pride to have. 
And then came with these better thoughts the refreshing con- 
soling hope that at last she had found perhaps some woman's 



WHAT HE SAW. 313 

heart to which she might confide the trials and disappointments 
and struggles of her own. At least Myra Alwyn could tell 
her what to do with her life, could help her wavering con- 
science in deciding whether she ought to leave Mabel or not, 
and could show her in any case how to make existence better 
than a vain repining, a prolonged regret. She did not think 
very much about that part of Myra's letter which related to 
the words Tom Berry had let fall in his delirious hours. She 
had heard many times casual and vague allusions to an early 
political association between Berry and Walter Warton, and 
she rather fancied tbat it was something concerning the latter 
she was to hear, and which, perhaps, she was to be the medium of 
conveying in some graduated and softened way to Warton' s wife. 
That anything Tom Bex - ry had said could affect her personally, 
it never occurred to her to suppose. But she assumed that it 
was somehow a duty to go and hear what Myra had to say ; 
and that thought alone would have decided her. 

She told Mabel of the invitation ; and Mabel received the 
news with upturned eyes which expressed amazement and other 
emotions the owner of the eyes did not care to put into words. 
The amazement was even increased when Grace declared that 
she meant to go. 

" I am sure, Grace, you are very good," was the sole and sig- 
nificant comment of her aunt . a comment which sent a flush 
of pain and anger across her niece's face. Marvellous and 
inexhaustible is the pain-giving power of the good and the 
dull. " Weak creatures too have stings," says Schiller's hero. 
Perhaps the keenest of the stings are those which are used by- 
weak creatures who have no idea of stinging at all. 

But, her comment over, Mabel was really glad that her niece 
should have a day or two of change and relief from the moping 
monotony of the life that had lately been hers. Besides, Mrs. 
Warton was anxious to hear all the news of what had lately 
passed at Waterdale, and what had happened to Ralph Lennon, 
and how about Tom Berry, whom she remembered well as 
" a devoted follower of Walter, my dear, long ago, before you 
were grown enough to understand politics. And, indeed, I 
often meant to ask Walter about him, for I heard nothing of 
him this long time, only I forgot it all. One has so many 
tiresome and vexatious things to think about, that really, Grace, 
I begin to be afraid sometimes that I am growing quite 
egotistical and selfish." 



314 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

So Mabel sped the going of her niece. When Grace next 
day was kissing the children, and about to leave in a specially- 
ordered " fly " for the station, Mabel threw her arms around 
her neck, and said : 

"O, dear Grade, how I hope something good is going to 
happen to you ! " 

Grace smiled very sadly. 

" And, Gracie dear, while you are away, do think of me and 
pray for me . pray that I may see my dear Walter again before 
you return, and that he may be well, and we may meet you 
with some good news ; for I have had such miserable dreams 
lately, and I can't imagine why he stays away so long ; and I 
always think that he has fallen sick somewhere, or perhaps is 
dead." Her eyes were suffused with tears. 

"Dear Mabel, I wish I had not thought of going until 
Walter came back. No . I'll not go. It will be time enough 
when he comes." 

" 0, no, Gracie ! Don't make me think myself so foolish 
and selfish. No . don't say another word . good-bye, dear ! . 
Go on ! " 

These last words were spoken to the driver. With an ut- 
terly unwonted effort of energy, Mabel literally dismissed her 
niece, and cut short all possible remonstrance. 

" I think something good is going to happen to her," Mabel 
said to herself, as she stood upon the little grass plat and 
watched the departing vehicle. " I don't know why ; but I 
do think something good is going to happen to her ; and I 
wish I didn't feel so miserable about Walter." 

It was evening when Grace reached Folkestone, and was 
welcomed by her friend. Mrs. Alwyn allowed the hours which 
still remained between day and darkness to pass away in con- 
versation over all that had happened in the way of pestilence and 
deluge since they last met ; and only when they sat alone in 
the deepening twilight, and when the two women could scarcely 
see the hue of each other's faces, did she approach the one 
purpose which she had most at heart. She came to it, at last 
directly . not without a flush on her cheek, and something 
of a tremulous motion on her lips. 

" Grace dear, why don't you marry Mr. Lennon 1 He loves 
you." 

And then, before Grace could recover from the surprise of 
the sudden question, Myra told her all she had heard and 



FAITHFUL UNBELIEF. 315 

guessed, and at last discovered ; and spoke of Lennon's man- 
liness and truth and goodness with a fervour which brought 
tears into her own eyes as well as into those of Grace. And 
all was spoken so tenderly, and with such a delicate friendli- 
ness, that Grace could not refuse her confidence if she would ; 
and at last . at last . Myra learned the one supreme reason 
which had influenced Grace in her heavy sacrifice. She learned 
that Lennon had been credited with love for her . for Myra 
Alwyn . and she learned too, piecemeal, from what lips that 
story had come. And without betraying excitement or anger, 
without breathing a word or hint of what she knew of Walter 
Warton, Myra calmly and firmly crushed the whole story. 
Perhaps there was a certain slight, almost imperceptible bitter- 
ness of expression in the tone of her voice when, dismissing 
that part of the subject for ever, Mrs. Alwyn said : 

"My dear, Mr. Lennon never cared for me, or thought of 
me, any more than he did of any poor woman in the village . 
or of the Queen of Sheba." 

And there the conversation closed. Mrs. Alwyn never said 
a word about the subject next day ; and to Grace it only seemed 
as if she had learned, too late, that she might have been happy. 
"What was done was clone, and there was no recalling it now. 
She had wronged Ralph Leimon and herself; and Mrs. Alwyn 
had told her that Lennon was going to leave England, and so 
all was over. 

But that evening came Ealph Lennon, summoned by tele- 
gram, to Folkestone. And this was how it happened that, 
when he arrived and asked for Mrs. Alwyn, he was shown 
into a room where he found not Myra Alwyn, but Grace Ethel- 
stone. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

FAITHFUL UNBELIEF. 



DR. ALWYN had got through his business in Scotland 
pretty quickly, and hurried down southward to spend a 
few bright days with his wife on the Folkestone shore ; but he 
paused for a little in London. He really had a day or so to 
spare, and he positively would at last do something about finding 



316 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

a good publisher for the long-contempiated Flora. After all, he 
began to think, it is very hard to work steadily at a book until 
you have arranged for its publication. Once fix a time, under- 
stand that the printer must have it precisely at the appointed 
day, find the proofs of the earlier chapters come pouring in 
upon you, and the printer sending messages for more of the 
MS. ; and then a man is put on his mettle, he really goes to 
work with a will, and he gets the thing positively done at last. 
Therefore Alwyn resolved that he really would not leave 
London until he had made positive engagements, and put 
himself actually into harness. He meant to indulge himself in 
a little luxury too ; the book should be handsomely printed, 
and it should be rich in illustrations, most of which were to be 
the work of Myra ; and one or two, of perhaps a rather more 
pretentious style, he had compelled Grace Ethelstone to promise 
that she would do. This was to be his one work ; and as he 
knew there was not a ghost of a chance of its paying . in fact, 
he made up his mind that all the copies would have to be given 
away . he resolved that he would treat his friends and the 
scientific reviewers handsomely, and give them something fair 
to look at, as well as, he hoped, tolerable to read. And if . 
well, he was not sanguine or over-expectant . but if it should 
after all turn out a success, and be acknowledged as such by com- 
petent critics, and received into literature, and reproduced in 
popular-science editions, and give to the nauie of Alwyn a mild 
scientific lustre . why that, of course, would be a splendid 
result, and he had not lived in vain. If not, then he had 
merely done his best, and failed, like better men ; and Myra 
and his friends would have the book to read in handsome print 
. and the flowers would bloom along the edges of the lake all 
the same. 

In any case he would arrange at once for the publication of 
the book, and so bind himself to its prompt completion. From 
his hotel in Jermyn Street he despatched a telegram to his 
wife, to tell her of his arrival in town, but that for very, very 
particular reasons, of which more hereafter, he did not think he 
could leave London that night . perhaps not until the following 
evening. For he looked upon the rinding of a publisher . 
although he was about to publish at his own risk . as a difficult, 
racking, and slow business ; and, indeed, was nearly as nervous 
about presenting himself with his order for printing, engraving, 



FAITHFUL UNBELIEF. 317 

advertising, and publishing, as a maiden from the country with 
her first novel. 

He walked down the Haymarket and Pall-Mall to the 
Strand ; then he suddenly bethought him of Ralph Lennon, 
who he had no doubt was in town, and it seemed a happy idea 
to take Ralph into council, and go with him to the publisher. 
For Ralph knew something of science, and had, as he learned, 
in earlier days written for reviews and mixed with literary 
men . and, more than that, had once published a volume of 
fierce youthful poems, the general object of which was to find 
fault with the arrangement of Providence, and to let off the 
crackers of youthful scepticism in the face of Heaven. Lennon 
had at the time been a passionate student of " Queen Mab," 
and some of his college friends assured him his verses were 
quite as fine as Shelley's. But even their Promethean icono- 
clasm and indignation failed somehow to arouse the admiration 
or the pious wrath of critics; and a little volume of Sunday 
school-hymns could not have received less attention at the 
hands of the reviewers. But the fact that Lennon had pub- 
lished anyhow any sort of book naturally made him an 
authority on publishing, and a valuable guide to one ambitious 
in that way ; and so Dr. Alwyn resolved to find him out, and 
take him into council. He knew Lennon's hotel, and he 
turned in there and inquired for his friend. This was the day 
but one after Lennon had left town. 

No ; Mr. Lennon was not there ; had not been there since 
the day before yesterday ; but was undoubtedly returning, for 
nearly all his luggage was there. A gentleman had been 
asking for him two or three times yesterday, and a person had 
just been to look for him, and left a message to say Tom Berry 
was in town, and would come in the evening. " 0, here is the 
gentleman again, sir." 

" Not come back 1 " said Walter Warton in a strident voice, 
and looking at nobody. He had kept calling, not that he 
wanted to see Ralph Lennon, but that he wanted to be sure 
that he was still absent, to have heavier and heavier proofs 
against him. 

"Why, Warton, is it you?" said Dr. Alwyn, advancing. 
" Glad to see you ! On the same errand as myself, looking for 
our long-lost friend ? " 

" Dr. Alwyn ! Where have you come from 1 " 

" From Fife, my liege ; at least, from Scotland." 



318 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

" And when 1 " 

"Last night, or rather this morning." 

" You have not been to Folkestone ? " 

" No, not yet ; and I fear I can't get there to-day, and I am 
sorry for it, because my wife will be lonely." 

" A savage smile crossed Warton's livid face. They had now 
reached the street, and Dr. Alwyn saw with amazement how 
haggard and wild his companion looked. He seemed like a man 
who had not slept or even undressed the previous night. His 
eyes were bloodshot, his beard was unshaven, his hands were 
dirty . yes, actually dirty. 

" I am glad I met you," exclaimed Warton. " I want to 
speak to you. I must speak to you. Not here : five minutes 
alone . anywhere . but we must be alone." 

" Certainly, anywhere you like ; but what is the matter 
with you ? Are you ill, Warton, or have you any bad news to 
tell ? Has any misfortune happened to you ? Are your family 
all well ? " 

" O yes, yes ; all quite well. Everybody quite well, except 
you, Dr. Alwyn, and me. I can't talk to you here. Will you 
give me five minutes' conversation or not ? " 

" Certainly ; I have said so. But I hate mysteries and sur- 
prises, Warton ; and I must know one thing at once. Have 
you any bad news for me 1 Is my wife well ? " 

" Well, O yes ! Mrs. Alwyn is quite well. When I saw 
her last, only the day before yesterday, she was quite well, and 
happy." 

" Then I have no more fears or conjectures, and I don't 
even ask whether what you want to say relates to yourself or 
to me. Where shall we go 1 " 

" To my chambers, in the Temple 1 " 

" My hotel is nearer . Jermyn Street." 

" Then come there." 

Warton hailed a hansom, and they got in and drove to the 
hotel. Neither spoke a word on the way. Dr. Alwyn had 
heard something lately of Warton's difficulties, and felt no 
doubt that the purpose of their mysterious conference had some 
reference to his companion's own affairs. 

They got out, and Alwyn led the way to his small sitting- 
room, handed a chair to his friend, and then said cheerily, 
" Now then, Warton, for your portentous communication. 



FAITHFUL UNBELIEF. 319 

Business first, if it is to be business, and we can talk of other 
things afterwards." 

Warton sat down and thrust his hands into his pockets, and 
stared at the carpet. Then he glanced at the table, and made 
a motion with one hand, as if to stretch for something which 
ought to be there, . he needed a little stimulant to his courage 
now that the time had come, . and shrugged his shoulders 
despondingly. At last he drew a long breath, and seemed to 
have screwed himself up to the task he had undertaken. 

" Dr. Alwyn, I have something painful to tell you ; but you 
will not blame me. Perhaps at first you will not believe me. 
I do not ask you to hear me patiently . no man could hear 
very patiently what I have to say ; but I do ask you to hear 
me." 

" Out with it, man ! The prologue is, I feel no doubt, 
a good deal worse than the performance. Out with it at once, 
Warton . don't be eloquent." 

" Did you expect to find Ealph Lennon here in London ? " 
" Yes ; I did. What then 1 Has anything happened t o 
him 1 " 

"You don't know where he is now?" 

" Surely not ; but your manner makes me anxious 
to know." 
" You shall know. Mrs. Alwyn is in Folkestone ? " 
" Yes. What of that ? " 
" Is she alone 1 " 

" She is. What has this to do with the matter ? " Dr. 
Alwyn did not like this sort of cross-questioning. There was 
something sinister in it. His usually clear brow darkened, and 
his lips contracted. 

" She is not alone, Alwyn ! I tell you you are deceived. 
Ealph Lennon is with her and has been these two days. 

" It's a lie ! " exclaimed Dr. Alwyn, springing fiercely up, and 
looking for the time once more like the Alwyn of five-and- 
twenty years ago who pulled stroke-oar at Oxford, and was 
not unskilled to stand up to the sturdy aud muscular bargee. 
" It's a lie . a . a . downright lie !" (O, what a narrow es- 
cape that from the use of a stronger expression !) " And what 
do you mean . and how dare you, sir, come and make your 
insolent insinuations about my wife 1 " 

Warton had not up to this moment felt quite assured that 



320 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Dr. Alwyn . clergyman though he was . might not knock him 
down at the first brunt of the revelation. He had a nervous 
dread and horror of physical violence. Therefore he felt much 
relieved now that the worst danger was over. He thought he 
could manage the rest easily. 

" I said I did not expect you to be patient. How could I ? 
You are angry with me ; but you will soon transfer your anger 
to its proper object. Alwyn, I use no insinuations. I tell 
you what I know, and no more. I tell you that your wife 
telegraphed to London asking Lennon to come to her. I 
tell you that he went to her. I tell you that he has been with 
her since the day before yesterday." 

" I don't believe a word of it. It's all a confounded mistake 
of some kind, and you ought to be ashamed, Warton, to talk 
such detestable things of a lady . a lady the latchet of whose 
shoes, sir, you are not worthy to unloose. Go away, "Warton, 
and let us not meet any more . anywhere. I tell you again, I 
don't believe it . not a word ! Tell the liar who told you this 
stuff that he is a fool for his pains; and, stay, don't tell me 
who he is ; I had much better not know." 

" But I swear to you it is true ! It is as true as that God 
is in heaven ! I saw the telegram with my own eyes . I saw 
Lennou go into Mrs. Alwyn' s lodgings . and I saw him leave 
her at midnight." 

" You saw all this . you ? How came you to see what hap- 
pened at Folkestone 1 ' 

" Because I suspected Lennon . and . and I watched and 
followed him." 

" O !" A sort of faint light seemed somehow to break 
upon Dr. Alwyn. " You watched and followed him ! You 
have quarrelled with Lennon 1" 

" No, Dr. Alwyn," replied Warton with a bitter smile ; 
" your conjecture is a failure, and it is not much of a compli- 
ment to me ; but let that pass. I have not had one word of 
quarrel with Lennon. We are good friends." 

" It is because of your good friendship then that you come 
and tell me this . this singular story ! It won't do, Warton. I 
don't know how you have been deceived . I don't know 
whether you are trying to deceive : I am not sure whether you 
are madman or scoundrel ; but this I do know, your story is 
not true. I don't believe it." 

" This is the very blindness of incredulity. I tell you I saw 



FAITHFUL UNEELIEF. 321 

Lennon with my own eyes . I watched him . I saw him come 
out . I saw what I don't care to describe to you " 

" No, you had better not ! " 

" You are deceived ; you are made a fool of. I suspected 
this a long time ; now I know it." 

" Listen, Mr. Warton ; and whatever comes of this conver- 
sation it must be the last we ever have. I cannot divine your 
motive ; you may have a good motive, though I cannot believe 
any man ever yet acted as you seem to have done from a 
motive wholly good. But I owe it to my wife to pledge my 
honour even to you that, if you are speaking sincerely in this, you 
are utterly mistaken. I know Myra Alwyn. Even if all that 
you say be literally true, there is some honest and just expla- 
nation of it. That explanation I at least shall await patiently. 
I am sorry you came and told me of all this, because it ends 
our acquaintance . of necessity. I cannot continue any friend- 
ship with a man who, from whatever motive, could speak so of 
my wife . of my dear, dear true and pure wife. It is the 
first time, sir, I have ever listened to this sort of thing, and 
it shall be the last." 

" This passes all belief," said Warton, springing up. " I 
pity you, Alwyn, for being so blind and so deceived. But you 
are a model husband . that is one thing certain. Go on and 
believe ! I am sorry I told you anything, the advice is so 
completely thrown away. I accept your renunciation of friend- 
ship. I release you from any acquaintanceship or even recogni- 
tion. I have told you of the base and wicked plot that is being 
played out at your expense, and your answer is insult. Believe 
and believe ; your eyes will be opened some day." 

" Stay a moment." "Warton was about to leave the room. 
" You must have had some motive in this. I tell you again I 
don't believe in high-minded men playing the part of detectives ; 
and^I am sure there was some secret reason for your doing 
what you have done. You say you have long suspected this. 
You say you watched, and followed, and all that. Why 
did you suspect ? Why did you watch ? Why did you feel 
called upon to constitute yourself the critic of my wife's 
conduct 1 " 

" Do you really want to know 1 " replied Warton, turning 
back with wild passion in his eyes. His reception, the utter 
failure of his attempt, his fury at what he thought Alwyn's 
wilful blindness, were driving him to despair. " Do you really 

Y 



322 THE WATEKDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

want to know 1 Then I'll tell you . there is nothing in it to 
shake your nerves. Because I loved your wife ; and I told her 
so ; and she flung me off and scorned me ; and I knew it 
must be for him ; and I watched him and her, and I found 
them out ! " 

For a moment Warton fully expected, as the light of Dr. 
Alwyn's clear gray eyes flashed on him, that he was about to 
receive a blow which would dash him to the ground ; but he 
hardly heeded even that just now. 

There was, indeed, a fierce momentary struggle in Alwyn's 
heart. But the habits of the clergyman prevailed, and the 
strong clenched right hand was dropped. 

" That explains all," he said calmly. " You can go now. 
No words of mine could express the contempt I feel for you. 
Even if I were not a clergyman, I doubt whether I should not 
be degraded by inflicting on you the punishment you deserve. 
But don't delay a moment here ; I cannot long answer for my 
self-control." 

He pointed to the door and turned his back. When he 
looked round again, Warton was gone. 

Then Dr. Alwyn sat in his armchair, and buried his face in 
his hands. Indeed, it is not unlikely that tears were for a 
while in his eyes. He felt that his wife, his home, their life, 
and their love had been degraded by the hideous dialogue he 
had just been forced to carry on. Never, never before did he 
conceive it possible that a doubt could enter any human mind 
of the purity of the wife whom he so loved, and of whom he 
was so proud. He grieved for her, felt shamed for her, that 
she should be thus suspected, thus calumniated, even by one 
who had avowed so base a motive. And he felt too a sicken- 
ing distrust and disgust of the world and its ways. If it was 
true what that man had said . that he had dared to make love 
to Myra all the time that he, Myra's husband, trusted him as a 
friend, regarded him as a Christian and a man of honour . 
then what a hideous maze of deceit and wickedness had been 
spinning around a pure and quiet home ? And Myra 1 . did 
she know it . had she kept it secret, from whatever motive, 
from him 1 Was not that wrong to do i Is there anything 
whatever which a true wife may lawfully keep as a secret 
from her true husband 1 Ah, no ! he sadly thought, there is 
no such thing. Such concealment is all wrong. And did 
Myra conceal 1 



FAITHFUL UNBELIEF. 6Z0 

Whatever might be the truth which be had yet to learn, he 
could believe nothing bad of her. If she had concealed any- 
thing from fear or prudence or delicacy, or whatever other 
motive, it was unwise, it was a mistake, it was a fault. But he 
could as soon doubt of the truth of the Gospel he daily taught 
and read, as of the purity and goodness of his wife. 

He had with him a book which was far more dear to him 
than even the cherished Flora ; in which he found higher 
thoughts that in his Shakespeare and Chaucer, and a more con- 
soling influence than the serene stars of midnight diffused. 
And he opened it to calm his agitated mind ; and on the first 
page whereon his eyes lighted he read some words that seemed 
as if they spoke to him for his absent wife, and ordered him to 
have no doubt of her truth and faith : 

" For false witnesses are risen up against me ; and such as 
breathe out cruelty." 

" Let the lying lips be put to silence, which speak grievous 
things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous." 

" My lovers and my friends stand aloof from me, and my 
kinsmen stand afar off." 

" They also that seek for my life, lay snares for me ; and they 
that seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine 
deceits all the day long." 

It seemed to him almost as if he heard the voice of his wife, 
sweet, clear, and tender, read out these words to him in answer 
to any secret half-formed doubt that might have crept into his 
startled soul. And he felt rebuked, ashamed that even for 
half a moment the mere breath of such a doubt could have passed 
over him. He felt no' doubt anymore. He was satisfied of 
the truth and faith of the woman he had married, who was not, 
indeed, he sadly acknowledged, the wife of his youth, as is the 
Scriptural phrase, but who had, of her own free choice, given 
her youth to him ; and to whose love he at least brought the 
love of a heart that was always young in its feelings. No, he 
thought with pride, the man did not live whose word could be 
evidence against her purity and honour to raise a doubt in the 
heart of her husband. . 

He kept the volume open before him, and his eyes and his 
thoughts rested on its consoling, strengthening passages. So 
much did it help to calm his mind, that he began to think of 
Walter Warton as one afflicted by some strange mental delusion^ 
which indeed his disordered wild appearance seemed of itself 

y 2 



324 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

to indicate ; and Alwyn pitied him, and reproached himself as 
having erred in driving away as a slanderer and a culprit one 
who needed care and watchfulness as the victim of a shaken 
reason. 

He must have remained some time, perhaps an hour, thus 
silent and thoughtful, sad, indeed, and shaken in nerves, yet 
secure and serene of soul, when he was disturbed by a knock 
at the door. He glanced quickly round the room to see that 
all was orderly . he had a steady-going middle-aged English 
gentleman's veneration for order under whatever circumstances 
. and then he called out to the disturber to come in. 

The door opened, and Ralph Lennon entered the room, 
looking unusually bright and vivacious, and holding out his 
hand. 

"I hardly expected to find you in town so soon," said 
Ralph ; " but I came on chance, and I was so glad to hear 
that I had made a lucky venture. I would not wait to send 
up my card, but insisted on coming straight up. I have some- 
thing good to tell you . congratulate me beforehand. But 
what is the matter ? . have you been ill 1 " 

He came to a sudden pause, and looked anxiously at Alwyn's 
pale face and disturbed expression. 

Alwyn had for his part scanned his friend's face a moment 
with penetrating gaze. He read nothing there but frankness 
and honesty. 

" No, Lennon, not in the least ill ; I am glad to see you. 
Tell me your good news ; but first give me your hand." 

Lennon thought his friend must have known the good news 
already, for the warm pressure which his hand received seemed 
as, if it spoke a silent fervent congratulation. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

"o, that's sudden!" 

TXT ALTER WARTOE" rushed into the street after his 

\ V abortive interview with Dr. Alwyn. He had, however, 

to stop for a few moments, and then to walk very slowly, for 

the palpitation of his heart came on so fiercely, and came, too, . 

accompanied with such a difficulty of breathing, that he could 



" o, that's sudden !" 325 

hardly move. He had some vague idea of going to his cham- 
bers, and lying down there upon a sofa, and getting some 
brandy . and then thinking out the situation calmly, if he 
could. As yet he was too fierce and bitter against all the 
world to feel how deeply and how uselessly he had degraded 
himself. But he had a dim sense of ruin hanging over him ; 
of shame and hatred following him ; of friends turned into 
enemies; of the whole circle of society in a conspiracy to 
tempt him and deceive him, cause him to betray himself and 
then cast him off. At the present moment he hated Alwyn 
perhaps most of all ; for he had expected to see Alwyn flung 
like himself into a passion of wrath and despair, and, lo ! 
Alwyn had looked calmly and trustingly to the image of his 
absent wife, and refused to believe himself wronged. Perhaps 
Warton's only clear thought at present was a resolve to go to 
work again to find proofs irrefragable, to force Alwyn's eyes 
open, thrust the truth down his throat, confound all his enemies 
together, and then . let what would come. 

He was just about to hail a passing hansom when some one 
caught him by the arm. Turning impatiently, almost savagely 
round, he saw the handsome genial face of Captain Eastham. 

" Why, Warton, I have been looking for you in no end of 
places ! Glad to find you at last. But what's the matter, old 
fellow 1 You look dreadfully cut up." 

" Nothing, nothing at all, except a headache, or something of 
that kind. I am glad to see you, Eastham. Which way are 
you going ? I was just about to drive to the Temple." 

He earnestly hoped his friend was going some other way. 

" I'm going westward. But don't be in a hurry. I suppose 
I may now openly congratulate you, may I not 1 " 

" Congratulate me ? What do you mean, Eastham ? " 

" Don't look so angry. I didn't suppose it was such a pro- 
found secret. The fact is, Warton, I've just come from Folke- 
stone . on my way from Paris .a flying visit there of a day ; 
and I've heard the whole thing, and seen the parties to the 
conspiracy too . and, by Jove, I envy one of them. So I 
know it all, and you needn't make any more mystery about it." 

"Eastham, I don't know what the devil you are talking 
about. If there is anything very funny in all this, I tell you 
candidly I'm not in a condition to understand humour just 
now. Pray spare me." 

" How serious and wretched you look ! I fear, Warton, 



326 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

something is really wrong -with you. And you positively tell 
me you know nothing of all this 1 " 

" All what 1 " 

" About your niece and Lennon . that they are to be mar- 
ried " 

" Lennon and Grace to be married ! My God ! Eastham, 
you are mistaken . you are talking nonsense ! If you only 
knew . and, by Heaven, you shall know ! Lennon and Grace ! 
No, it can't be ; and it shan't be ! " 

" Why not 1 I always thought Lennon and you were the 
warmest friends. This I do know, Warton, whatever may 
have happened since, that Lennon has behaved like a true 
friend to you. And as for this business of the marriage, I can 
tell you . and I don't know why you are ignorant of it . that it 
is as certain as that you and I are talking here. Lennon him- 
self told me ; and so did Mrs. Alwyn ; and . why, confound it, 
man, I've seen the bride-elect, and congratulated her ; and a 
charming girl she is ! What a sly fellow Lennon is ! I never 
suspected anything of the kind, or . who knows ? . there might 
have been a rivalry and a duel." 

" I beg of you, Eastham, to tell me coolly one thing, for my 
mind is all distracted. Where did you see Grace Ethelstone V 

" At Folkestone, of course . with Mrs. Alwyn. The fact is, 
it seems, there had been some misunderstanding, or lovers' 
quarrel, or something of the kind, and Mrs. Alwyn . who, 
between ourselves, is a regular trump and a delightful little 
woman . she set to work to make it all up, and of course she 
succeeded. Miss Ethelstone had been staying with her for 
some days, and she got Lennon down there too ; and you know 
the rest ; and you see before you, Warton, a blighted being," 

"You are sure of all this, Eastham . sure beyond all doubt?" 

" Sure beyond the remotest possibility of doubt. unless Mrs. 
Alwyn and your niece and Lennqn and I are ail lunatics 
together. I was longing to see you to congratulate you. For, 
let me tell you, Warton, you are more indebted to Lennon 
than you think. I feel bound to tell you this now because of 
the way you have spoken, which I don't understand, and was 
very sorry to hear. The other day when you were in a fix 
down yonder, it was Lennon came to the rescue, and did it un- 
asked, and in the most delicate and handsome way." 

" Lennon came to the rescue ! Lennon gave the money ! " 

" Lennon, and no one else. He asked me not to tell ; and I 



" o, that's sudden 1" 327 

didn't ever since, and would not now bnt that your words and 
manner show me you are under some delusion or other about 
him which ought not to exist." 

" You are certain of this too . quite certain 1 " 

" The whole thing was done tljpiough me." 

" Then, Eastham, I am the most unfortunate wretch and the 
basest devil that ever lived on the earth ! " 

" What do you mean ? What have you done 1 " 

" Eastham, I have been mad . mad ! I made a fool of myself 
about Mrs. Alwyn. Yes, I did ; and I exposed my folly to 
her; and she snubbed me and scorned me; and I lost my 
reason. I thought I found out that Lennon and she were 
secretly meeting ; and I followed him to Folkestone ; and I 
never knew Grace Ethelstone was there. O, Heaven ! why 
did they deceive me ? . why did they make a secret of it, and 
destroy me 1 I thought Lennon went there for her. for Myra 
Alwyn . and I became insane with passion ; and this very day 
I told her husband what I thought I had discovered ! " 

" Told Dr. Alwyn this horrid story 1 " 

" Yes, I did. I told him I had found out that Ealph Lennon 
was at Folkestone with his wife." 

" Then upon my soul, Warton, you are the greatest scoundrel 
and the most unfortunate wretch I ever knew. I hardly know 
whether most to pity you or despise you. I was your friend ; 
but you cannot expect that I or any gentleman could call you 
a friend ever again. You should never again presume to come 
into the society of men of honour or modest women. My last 
and earnest advice to you is to go and drown yourself or blow 
your brains out ! " 

Eastham literally flung him away ; for Warton had grasped 
him by the arm, and seemed about to essay some pitiful plea or 
justification of himself. Warton stood for a moment and looked 
after his former friend, as the latter hurried indignantly west- 
ward ; then Warton shrugged his shoulders. "He is a good 
fellow, Eastham," he murmured feebly to himself ; " and he 
once liked me well. Now I have lost him, as I have lost 
everyone. Everyone ! Nobody will ever look at me again ! 
It is all over ! All over with Walter Raleigh Warton !_" And 
as he walked slowly down the street he kept murmuring over 
and over again the name " Walter Raleigh Warton," " Walter 
Raleigh Warton," as a man might keep whispering to himself 
the name of some lost love. Indeed that name did represent 



328 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

poor "Warton's one only true love . one only abiding and 
earnest hope. His love had been not so much himself as the 
Eidolon he had raised of himself, and which, poor wretch, he 
symbolised in the name of Walter Raleigh Warton ; his hope 
had been to make that name a sound of influence, a signal of 
applause. 

It was at the Pall-Mali end of the Hay market that he met 
Eastham. He crossed the street and walked slowly along by 
the National Gallery and down Trafalgar Square. He stopped 
a moment at Morley's Hotel, and looked into the hall, and re- 
membered one time . ever so many years ago . when Ralph 
Lennon and he dined together there joyously in their college 
days ; and he remembered the look of the hall then, and some 
old figures which used to be there, and were gone now ; 
although he had been there scores of times since, and never 
noticed [any change. He found himself looking vacuously 
into shop-windows, and then wondering what he was looking 
at. He glanced at the Eleanor's Cross Hotel in the Strand, 
and tried to hurry past it ; but he could not walk quickly. 
His heart beat so fiercely that he thought the people who 
passed him in the street must hear it, and he could hardly 
breathe, and he had a horrible headache ; he must get home to 
the Temple. He might have called a cab ; but he seemed now 
to have an instinctive dread of its rattling motion. No, he 
would walk slowly, until he got a little better. He feebly 
thought he should like to be at home . really at home . lying 
in bed, and with Mabel to nurse him ; and he should like to 
hear the children talk round his bedside until he dropped off to 
sleep. He did not think much now about his position, or his 
prospects, or the shame into whidi he had plunged himself. 
No, he was conscious of nothing more than that he felt weak and 
queer and giddy, and wanted so much to lie down somewhere. 
Still creeping en, he suddenly began to fear he was about to be 
sick, or to faint, and he had a vague consciousness of turning 
down the first quiet street he found . one of those leading to 
the river . to get out of the crowd and noise and observation of 
the Strand. He walked a few paces down the street, and 
looked feebly about for some railings to hold ; for his eyes 
began to swim, and he saw the white clouds dancing about in 
the blue sky, and the pavement seemed to heave up and down, 
and the houses to go round, and there was a singing, hissing 
sound bursting through his ears. He murmured " Water . 



" o, that's sudden!" 329 

give some water ! " as if anybody could have heard him, 
or would have heeded ; and then he saw some people coming up 
the street, and he made an effort to steady himself and move 
on. All this occupied hardly a second ; yet it seemed to him 
a long, queer, dreamlike struggle, fie stepped forward a pace 
or two, but became more unsteady ; his head throbbed fiercely ; 
he could see nothing but flickering motion all around him ; the 
singing in his ears grew louder and louder; then a keen, 
strange, electrical pang shot through his heart, and he stag- 
gered about for an instant and fell on the pavement. 

" Hillo, Bill," shrieked a ragged street-urchin, " here's a 
lark ! Here's a swell all mops and brooms ! " 

" 0, my eye ! " exclaimed Bill, rallying to the cry ; " run for 
Bobby and a stretcher ! " 

" Dear, dear, what a sight ! " said a decent, pallid, poor 
woman, who came out of one of the houses bearing a bundle of 
washing. " A gentleman, too ! Don't, boys ; perhaps he is 
sick . perhaps he is in a fit." 

" 0, such a fit ! " exclaimed one, capering wildly about the 
prostrate man. 

"No, missis, he's drunk," said the other. "I follered him, 
an' I seed him staggering along." 

"I wish there was a policeman near," said the woman, 
looking up and down the street in vain. 

A respectably-dressed man who was just passing the Strand 
end of the street looked down, and seeing that something was 
"up," came towards the little group. He was a dark-com- 
plexioned man with short lank hair ; and he was rather too 
well-dressed not to make it apparent that he was of the 
artisan class, unused to the constant wear of broadcloth. 

As he came on, he saw that a person in the attire of a gentle- 
man was lying on the pavement. 

" Is he drunk 1 " the new-comer asked, with scorn in his 

voice. 

But before anyone could answer, he had seen the face. 

" Why, my Heavens ! " said Tom Berry, " it's Wat War ton ! 
He stooped down, raised the fallen head upon his knees, and 
then cried out : 

" My God A'mighty, he's dead ! " 

******* 
Just at that moment on the outskirts of a little town south 



330 THE WATERBALE NEIGHBOURS. 

of London two children were playing on the grass in front of a 
house we know. Their mother had been watching them for 
some time ; but the postman had brought a large business-like 
letter addressed to her . to her specially . and she had gone 
into the house to read it. 'Presently she came rustling out, all 
flushed with excitement and joy : 

" Children, children, such good news as I have ! 0, how I 
wish Grace were here to listen ! But you both must hear it. 
Listen, Maby ; listen, Watty ; and put away your horse for a 
moment. Your old grandaunt, my aunt Jane Ethelstone, is 
dead, and here's a letter to say she has left us ten thousand 
pounds ! Ten thousand pounds ! So we shall have money 
enough ; and your poor papa will never have to go away from 
us any more. My clear, dear Walter will be out of all his 
difficulties now, and he will stay with us always, always ! 0, 
how good Heaven is, and how happy we shall all be when papa 
is always with us ! " 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

DEGENERATION OF THE HEART. 

~\ /iTYPA ALWYN was happy. Perhaps the most fortunate 
jLVJL of our people in this book could not have been more 
happy. For she believed that she had been (under Providence, 
she took pious care to say) the instrument by which Ralph 
Lennon and Grace Ethelstone had been brought together ; and 
she regarded herself as by that much of good cleared of the 
secret sinfulness whereof she was conscious. Poor woman, her 
sinfulness surely was very slight. Was it sin at all to have felt 
for a few short moments or months the pang of an irregular 
affection, and to have utterly conquered it and crushed it, and 
out of its trampled leaves extracted gracious perfume and 
goodness 1 Yet she felt that she had been guilty of some 
wrong ; and if only the heart knows its own bitterness, the 
heart may be presumed too to know its own evil. Perhaps the 
chief source of her compunction lay in the fact that she had 
doubly, although very harmlessly, deceived her husband . once 
positively when she gave out that her doubts of Lennon's 
orthodoxy were her sole reason for avoiding his company ; once 



DEGENERATION OF THE HEART. 331 

negatively when she suppressed the story of Warton's ill- 
omened attentions. But she had sense and womanly shrewd- 
ness enough to know that one of these secrets at least she 
must keep in her own breast, and that the utmost relief she 
could find must be in appeasing her own conscience. So the 
moment she discovered that Lennon and Grace loved each 
other, and were likely, for some strange cause or other, to be 
separated, she resolved to devote herself to heal that breach, 
and bring that pair together. That would be her most ap- 
propriate penance, her most fruitful expiation. And she 
accomplished the task, and was happy. 

We do not say that her happiness was unmix ed with sad- 
ness ; no happiness men and women know ever is, even for a 
moment. It may be that as she looked at Grace Ethelstone, 
and saw her given up wholly in heart and hope to a passionate 
and romantic love about to be made perfect in union, she did 
sometimes stifle a sigh, and did perhaps think her own calm 
married life just a little prosaic and colourless. But she was 
no heroine of French romance, and indeed no sentimentalist at 
all ; but an energetic young Englishwoman, busy in her life, 
and who, if she sometimes involuntarily suspected that she had 
missed the crowning grace of existence . that perfect love of 
mutual passion which literally blends two natures and two 
destinies into an insoluble one . only made up her mind the 
more firmly to turn to account such blessings as she had, and 
at least cause useful household plants to grow where the passion- 
flowers might not bloom. 

When Dr. Alwyn arrived at Folkestone his wife kissed him 
more tenderly and warmly perhaps than she had ever done 
before. Nor was that the only embrace he received ; for Myra 
insisted that Grace Ethelstone should kiss him too, which that 
obedient young woman did with apparent good-will. And Dr. 
Alwyn wondered within himself whether he should ever have 
a daughter of that age, and like her. Of which good fortune . 
to anticipate events a little, and dispose beforehand of our 
coming happiness . we are glad to believe there is now reason- 
able chance. The quiver is not, after all, to "be empty for ever. 

But this night that we speak of, this event was not yet 
shadowed forth. Kalph Lennon and Dr. Alwyn had dined in 
town, having first consulted a publisher about the Flora, and 
then came to Folkestone together. The whole group sat in a 
room with a great bay window overlooking the sea, and talked 



332 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

calmly . as English people will do under such circumstances . 
of things far away from the hearts of all. There was still a 
shadow on Dr. Alwyn's soul from which he could not wholly 
emerge, and his wife's eyes often sought his face anxiously, and 
seemed to find something discouraging there. Yet he did his 
very best to be in good spirits ; and if his wife observed any 
gloom or anxiety in him, neither Ralph nor Grace did. It is 
likely, indeed, that these two were not continuously occupied in 
watching the expression of Dr. Alwyn's countenance. 

One of the ladies sang, the other played an accompaniment. 
Dr. Alwyn watched them with a curious, inquiring, thoughtful 
expression. They were both very young . his wife certainly the 
elder by some years, but looking now just an equal and com- 
panion of her friend. Both were handsome women. His wife 
was smaller, more petite of figure, with whiter face and fore- 
head, with thick clustering dark hair massed about her head and 
neck. Grace was tall, fair, of full figure, and stately, with short 
brown hair that must be allowed to curl as it would, and could 
not be massed or mastered in any way ; and lucid steady eyes 
of deep brown. Certainly, as the two women stood or sat to- 
gether, she did not look the younger of the two. And one was 
the girl he had just then wished to have for a daughter . and 
the other was his wife ! Raising his eyes to a mirror, he 
caught a glimpse of a large worn face, with bare forehead and 
thick gray hair . gray in its best places, and snow-white in 
others . and melancholy, unlovely eyes looking sadly into his . 
and, O, this was his own face, and he was the gray old husband 
of the dark-haired, pretty young creature who sat there in front 
of him ! And he had heard to-day, for the first time, that men 
made love to her . that they suspected others of making love to 
her ; and he learned that the thing, however sinful and criminal, 
was not wonderful, or contrary to the laws of animal nature ; 
and he began to open his eyes to the sad ludicrous truth that he 
was a heavy old clergyman married to a pretty, fascinating 
young wife. He was sorry when the singing was over, and 
there was a chance that the thoughts which were at his heart 
might betray themselves in his face. 

His reflections were destined to be suddenly disturbed. A 
knock was heard at the door, and a servant presently came in 
to say that a person was there who had come from London, and 
wanted to speak to Mr. Lennon particularly. 

" It must be Tom Berry," said Lennon. " I telegraphed for 



DEGENERATION OF THE HEAET. 333 

him to come to town ; but really, poor fellow, I quite forgot 
him." 

" Mr. Berry, . my patient ! " exclaimed Myra. " Bring him 
in, by all means. I am delighted to see him." 

So she waved Lennon back, and went promptly out herself, 
and returned leading in our old friend Tom Berry. Tom was 
quite too firm in his faith about nature's equality and the 
inborn dignity of man to feel much discomposed, under ordinary 
circumstances, at any introduction to society ; but this time he 
did look confused and even excited. 

" Beg pardon of the company, I'm sure," he said, " and sorry 
to disturb ; but I have some very bad and strange news, and I 
thought I had best " 

Here his eye fell upon Grace Ethelstone, and he stopped in 
sudden surprise, and endeavoured to make telegraphic signs of 
comprehensive import to Balph. 

It was too late. Grace had seen the expression, and noted 
the sudden pause. She turned pale and trembled. 

" It is something that relates to me," she said. " Something 
dreadful has happened. O, tell me at once ! Don't, pray, 
keep me in suspense. . 0, Ralph, make him tell me the worst 
at once ! " 

" Speak out, Tom," said Balph, calmly. " Let us know all. 
Miss Ethelstone had better hear it now, whatever it may 
be." 

'.' Well, miss, . I'm sure I wish I hadn't had to tell it ; but 
Mr. Warton has been taken very bad. and. and . " 

" And he's dead ! " said Grace. 

" God's truth, miss, he's dead ! " 

" 0, poor Mabel ! 0, the poor little children ! " 

Lennon caught her in his arms. Shaken and startled as he 
was, Lennon was the one whom the news least horrified. What 
thoughts went through the breast of Myra and her husband 
neither might speak even to the other. 

Dr. Alwyn first spoke. 

" Are you sure of this, Mr. Berry 1 I saw Mr. Warton to- 
day, and was speaking to him." 

Grace sprang up eagerly and looked from one to the other. 

Tom Berry soon put aside all hope. " I found him, _ he 
said " lying in a street off the Strand, dead. He had only just 
fallen. The doctors say he had a fit of some kind. I helped 
to carry him to the 'orspital, and I identified him ; and 1 



334 THE -\7ATERDALE neighbours. 

saw the papers and letters that were on him. God help us 
all ! it was an awful thing." 

" God help us all, indeed ! " echoed Alwyn. " I saw the 
man alive, and spoke with him this morning ; and now it is 
hardly nightfall, and he lies dead." 

Myra, looking in her husband's eyes, now fixed on her, read 
that he knew something he did not speak of. She went round 
rather timidly, and laid her hand appealingly on his. He 
pressed her trembling fingers affectionately ; absolvingly, she 
thought ; and unseen she raised his hand to her lips and 
kissed it. 

" I must go to poor Mabel ! " said Grace, looking up to 
Lennon with tearful eyes. 

"You must indeed, dearest, but not to-night. Somebody 
must first tell her what has happened. Nothing has been told 
her yet 1 " he said, looking inquiringly at Berry. 

" No, Mr. Lennon ; I took care of that. ' I thought you 
would be the best person perhaps . or Dr. Alwyn maybe." 

" O no," interposed Grace. " Please let me go at once, Ealph, 
and tell her. It is dreadful to do ; but I think I had better 
tell her. I understand her best, and I can try to comfort 
her." 

" Yes, Grace is right," said Myra. " She shall go, but not 
to-night. Give the poor lady, poor Mrs. Warton, this one 
night's rest in ignorance of her affliction ; to-morrow morning- 
Grace shall go." 

It was settled thus. Lennon and Tom Berry returned to 
town that night. 

" They say it must have been disease of the heart," said Tom 
Berry, as they walked together to the railway station. " Fatty 
degeneration of the heart the doctor says it's likely to come 
out. I don't believe a word of it, Mr. Lennon ! Poor Wat 
Warton was ruined from beginning to end, and killed at last, 
I think, for the want of a heart. If he'd had any sort of 
heart, sir, he'd ha' been alive and well, and maybe rich and 
happy to-day." 

Tom was not talking satirically or scornfully, or even meta- 
phorically, but in sober earnest, and as one who confidently 
pronounces his serious judgment on a difficult case. 

" He couldn't help it, poor fellow," he went on moralising. 
" He had nothing very bad in him, only he just had no heart 
. that was all." 



DEGENERATION OF THE HEART. 3of> 

Lermon only shook his head, and said nothing. He pre- 
ferred not to hear of Warton's faults and wants just now. He 
remembered when he and the dead man were friends, and then 
friendly rivals, and then rivals friendly no more ; and he could 
not think without deep emotion over the strangeness of the 
fate which had brought them together in close relationship 
once again, only that he might be present at the last scene of 
his old companion's life-tragedy. 

Meanwhile Walter Warton lay at the Charing Cross Hospital, 
a livid fearful spectacle ; all his ambition, and egotism, and 
passion, and hope having gone out in ignoble death. The story 
of his fate had already found its way about the clubs, although 
it did not get into any of the evening papers. Men told each 
other of it in smoking-rooms and libraries, and over late 
dinner-tables. It made its way too into the lobby of the 
House of Commons ; and Shavers, M.P., asked Wynter, M.P., 
about it. 

" I say, Wynter, you knew Warton, didn't you ? " 

" Warton ? What Warton 1 Warton of the Legation at 
Florence?" 

" No, no ; Warton, the Democrat. He who stood for 
Northinglen the other day." 

" 0, that Warton ! Warton the Tory, you mean. Fellow 
who used to spout at the working men's meetings, and then 
turned Tory, and was taken up by the Carlton people. Yes, I 
knew him ; what about him ! " 

" Only that he's dead, that's all. ' 

"Dead? When?" 

" To-day, I hear." 

" What did he die of? . Toryism on the brain ? " 

" Poisoned himself, I am told. He was found dead some- 
where, Millingbury says, with a bottle in his hand containing 
essence of something or other. They say he was dreadfully 
dipped in railway affairs." 

"Not a bit of it. Pursued by remorse I should rather 
say." 

" Another John Sadleir business, Millingbury says." 

" Here's Eastham . it concerns him and his friends . and he 
ought to know." 

Captain Eastham was hurrying across the lobby to_ get an 
orano-e, which he meant to quarter in order that it might re- 
fresh the lips of his chief, who was taking a rhetorical survey 



336 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

of the home and foreign business of the past six months, pre- 
vious to the close of a long and weary session. 

" I say, Eastham, you knew Wartori, who came out under the 
wing of your people for Northinglen 1 " 

" Yes ; what of him 1 " 

" He's dead." 

" Dead ! Impossible ! Who says so ? " 

" Shavers says so." 

" Millingbury told me." 

"It can't be. It must be some mistake. I don't believe 
it." 

" Eastham thinks a man becomes immortal when he turns 
Tory," said Wynter. " Settle it among yourselves. If the 
man is dead, I'm sorry as far as that goes ; but he is no loss 
to us, and, personally, I always thought him a spouting 
humbug." 

And this was "Walter Warton's epitaph, pronounced just 
outside those doors to pass between which he would at one 
time have willingly staked his chance of ever entering the gates 
of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

Eastham traced the story to its source, and found out its 
reality. He jumped into a cab and hurried to Charing Cross 
Hospital. As he was entering, he rushed against Lennon, who, 
followed by Tom Berry, was just coming out. 

" Is it true . have you seen him, Lennon ? " Eastham asked 
feverishly. 

"It is true ; and I have seen him." 

" He is dead ? " 

" Dead. He fell in the street this afternoon ; some heart- 
disease it seems. Poor fellow ! You remember his fainting that 
night on the platform at Northinglen 1 " 

"To be sure . I remember it now . I had forgotten all 
about it. I won't go to look at him now . I know enough. 
It would make me sick to see him. Do you know, Lennon, 
when I heard this I felt exactly as if I had received a gun- 
shot wound 1 I felt as if I had killed him . unfortunate 
fellow ! " 

" I don't understand. What had you to do with it ? " 

" I met him to-day in the street . in the Haymarket . and 
we quarrelled. It was not my fault ; but I did tell him my 
mind very sharply ; and I left him in a passion ; and it could 
not have been long before this terrible thing happened." 



DEGENERATION OF THE HEART. 337 

Bat Lennon never knew the cause of the quarrel and his 
own innocent share in it ; that secret Eastham faithfully 
kept. 

So did Dr. Alwyn keep the secret of what had been told to 
him by the man now dead. That night, when Mrs. Alwyn 
and her husband were left alone there was a sad uneasy 
silence for a moment : then he looked to her and began in a 
low serious tone . 

" Myra ! " 

" Yes, Alwyn," his wife replied very meekly and depreca- 
tingly. 

" You did wrong, dear, iu not having told me at once what 
you knew about this most unfortunate man. Stay, let me 
speak. I don't blame you . I know it was a delicate and painful 
subject, such as a woman shrinks from speaking of. But you 
ought to have told me ; there ought to be no secret between 
us. One evil thing it has done . a small thing, perhaps, in 
itself, but to be regretted . is that from it other secrecies have 
grown. I have heard something which I should rather not 
speak of, even to you, for the present ; some time you shall 
hear it too, but not now." 

Poor Myra was all crimsoning and palpitating, and had no 
Fatima desire whatever to explore the secrets of that one sealed 
closet. j 

" This I hope and believe will be our last time for having 
secrets from each other. I will not ask you to promise " 

" No, indeed . indeed you need not. I will never again have 
any secret from you, my dear, kind, noble husband. I did it 
far the best, dearest . indeed I did ; but it shall never be again. 
0, forgive me ! " 

She threw herself into her husband's arms. 

" You have confidence in me, Myra ! You don't look on me 
as a dreadful old fellow . too old for sympathy. and . and . 
love ? " 

" For shame, to ask me such a question, or to have such a 
doubt ! O, Alwyn, I love you better than all the world ! " 

And it was true ; and she was absolved ; and the volume of 
the past was clasped, not ever to be reopened. 

They talked awhile, more calmly, of unfortunate "Warton and 
his sudden fate, and the position of his wife and orphans. 

" They will have a stanch friend in Lennon," said Dr. Alwyn. 

"And in Grace," added his wife. "Except in a worldly 

z 



338 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

point of view, he is not much of a loss even to them. He was 
an unprincipled and wicked man." 

" My dear," replied her husband quietly, " if he was wild, 
let us remember, as Dr. Johnson said of another poor creature, 
that he is so no more." 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

lennon's first and last untruth. 

" TVEAR GRACE, how glad I am you have come ! I was 
JL/ dying to see you. I have such good news for you ! " 

These were the words with which Mabel Warton, all flushed 
and glowing . and, it must be owned, puffing too . with happi- 
ness and eagerness, greeted her niece the morning after the 
night of the last chapter. Then she saw Grace's pale face, and 
eyes purple-fringed from tears and sleeplessness, and she saw 
that a tragedy of some sort was written there ; and she sud- 
denly stopped in her speech, affrighted and aghast. 

Grace put her arm round Mabel's neck and brought her into 
a quiet room ; and the whole was soon told. Grace had the 
spirit and sense to spare the unfortunate woman the racking, 
sickening prelude of torture which sagacious people think it 
right to inflict by way of preparing the mind of the sufferer for 
the blow that is to come. The whole news came upon Mabel 
with a merciful swiftness and calmness. Let us say no more 
on that subject. Does a man still suffer torture after his neck 
has been severed by the axe 1 I don't know. Did Charlotte 
Corday really feel shame and agony when the executioner smote 
the cheek of her guillotined head ? I don't know. I could 
not describe the sensations if I did know. I cannot now 
describe the sensations of a poor, weak, loving, widowed 
woman, who had only one idol in life, and learned now all in a 
moment that she had lost it for ever. 

One good thing was, that the death of her husband did not 
mean starvation or the workhouse for her children. This she 
came to be thankful for after a time, but just now she thought 
nothing of it. Indeed, in a worldly point of view, she was far 
better off now than ever she had been. She had money enough 
to live on, and to bring her children up well ; and strong kindly 
hearts and brains cared for her interests and theirs. The boy 



lennon' s first and last untruth. 339 

will be a railway engineer yet, and perhaps will make a name ; 
the girl will never go to a boarding-school, but will be all the 
better taught at home, and will very often go on long visits to 
her cousin Grace in England and abroad. For it is not pro- 
bable that cousin Grace and her husband will spend much of 
their time in England, for a few years at least. They are to 
live for a while in Rome, and Grace is to study art there, and 
become a famous sculptor. So she intends. But the sculpture 
never comes to anything. Antigone never grows to complete- 
ness. While the artist was at work over the marble form there 
appeared the first of a succession of little living forms, and the 
chisel, alas, was flung away for the pap-spoon ! To be resumed, 
of course, some other time. To be resumed when Ralph gets 
leisure to begin another volume of poems, or to become the 
exponent of new theories for the regeneration of the human 
race. To be resumed when Tom Berry, now the active manager 
of the Waterdale cottage property, sees the dream of his youth, 
the glorious Charter of the People, become a reality . the start- 
ing-point of a new agitation for the attainment of the equality 
of man. To be resumed when Myra Alwyn has completed her 
exquisite painting, never yefc begun, of the Broken Hero by 
the lone Swiss lake. 

All this, of course, is anticipating. But it is only antici- 
pating what every rational reader must expect; and when 
things have come to that pass that no rapidity of condensation 
on the author's part can possibly finish the story as fast as the 
reader can finish it for himself, it matters little how, or how 
soon, we come to an end. Ralph Lennon, of course, married 
his second love . indeed, in the true sense, his only love. They 
went abroad for a while, and after travelling from country to 
country, took a long rest at Rome. But Lennon was not a 
man who could lead an idle life, nor was his wife a woman who 
could encourage even love-in-idleness. He will return to settle 
in England, probably ; will engage himself in politics, and even 
in money-making of some kind ; and very likely will ultimately 
represent the borough of Northinglen in the House of Com- 
mons. But it is not probable he will make any great success 
there as a debater. His life was one which had few successes, 
except the one worth all others earth could give him . the 
winning of a heart that could unite with his and be true to him ; 
and even this sticcess came not soon, but somewhat late to him. 
The best of his life was its Indian summer. 



340 THE WATERDALE NEIGHBOURS. 

Ralph Lennon was a truthful man ; but it is only just to 
record here that he once spoke a false word. It was thus. 
When Grace and he, after their marriage (which was delayed 
some months by Warton's death, and the necessity of caring for 
his widow), were taking leave of Mabel, Mrs. Warton of course 
wept and prayed for their happiness. 

" But you will be happy, Grace, my dear," she said ; " for you 
are marrying the best of men, except my own dear Walter. 
Ah, Ralph, you will not forget him . your old friend 1 You 
knew him since he was a boy. Did you ever know so good and 
pure a man ? " 

Ralph was staggered by this sad home-thrust, and he would 
have evaded reply if he could . But Mabel looked wonderingly 
and almost impatiently at him, and pressed her question : 

" Did you, Ralph, ever know any one . any man, I mean . 
so good and pure as my poor Walter 1 " 

Ralph stooped down, kissed her, and said in a low tone, 

" Never, Mabel ; never ! " 

This was the first, and let us hope the last, falsehood ever 
told by Ralph Lennon. Under the circumstances, perhaps he 
may be forgiven. 



THE END. 
