MY ENEMY'S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER I. 

RETROSPECT ; AND MIST. 

It is a wet Sunday evening in the leaden heart of 
London. I am now in the Bloomsbury region ; 
and perhaps I need hardly say that nothing on 
earth could be more dull, dingy, and unpicturesque 
in itself than the prospect from my windows. Yet 
just now, in the deepening gloom of a rainy dusk, 
I seem to look on something not unlike one of 
the most picturesque and romantic scenes where- 
on my eyes have ever rested. " Ich weiss nicht 
was soil es bedeuten ;" but the ridges of the 
houses opposite begin to show through the steam- 
ing mist fantastically like the outlines of the hills 
I used to see every day years ago, and the broad 
blank lying between me and over the way may 

VOL. I. B 



2 my enemy's daughtee. 

easily enough seem filled by the stretch of bay 
I have watched when it lay wild and drear on 
the wet evenings of late autumn like this. The 
kindly, loving, artistic fog and rain, which now 
hide all but the faint and softened outlines of our 
street, have clone this for me ; and lo ! in Blooms- 
bury I am looking upon sea and hill once more. 
The very sounds of London city-life come to help 
out the illusion. That cry of the oysterman be- 
low is a good deal more like the scream of some 
sea-bird than most theatrical imitations are like 
the reality. The church-bells clinking and toll- 
ing for evening service are to me now the bell of 
the church to which I used to be conducted when 
a boy on Sundays, and with which so many of the 
associations of my after-life inevitably connect 
themselves. It used to be a dreadful ceremonial, 
that service, to us boys, on the fine Sundays of 
summer. It was bad enough in winter ; but in 
summer it became unspeakably more torturing. 
There was a window in the church close to where 
we used to sit . poor little weary, yawning mar- 
tyrs . and the branches of an elm flapped unceas- 
ingly on the panes. Tantalus-torture was it to 
watch the tender, lucent leaves, free in the glo- 



retrospect; and mist. 6 

rious air of May or June, as they flickered across 
the window, and seemed to whisper of the blue 
sky and the shingly strand and the waves of tran- 
sparent emerald which they could see and we 
could not ; while the organ pealed and the clergy- 
man preached the long sermon to which we never 
listened. I do not know how it is, that when I 
thus sit alone of nights and do not feel inclined 
to read, or steadily to go to work at something, 
every object I see, flame, cloud, or even chimney- 
pot, reminds me in an indescribable, irresistible 
way, of some object belonging to the dear dull 
little seaport town where I, Emanuel Temple 
Banks, was born some five-and-thirty years ago. 

I have now written my full name, but it is 
long since I have been known otherwise than as 
Emanuel Temple. I pruned my name down to 
its present brevity for reasons which shall be ex- 
plained in due time. I was called "Emanuel 
Temple" because my mother had a proper wo- 
manly objection to commonplace or vulgar names, 
and since we could call ourselves nothing better 
than Banks, resolved that we should at least have 
euphonious and elegant Christian names. There- 
fore, instead of becoming, as was suggested, John 



4 my enemy's daughter. 

Banks and Peter Banks, my brother and I became 
Emanuel Temple Banks and Theodore Eustace 
Banks respectively. I scarcely know by what pro- 
cess Theodore Eustace and myself were brought 
up. We were the only children . I the elder by 
a year . and my father died when I was six years 
old. He had owned fishing-boats, and was doing 
well, until, at the instigation of my mother, he 
unfortunately took to immature building specu- 
lations, and failed accordingly, fishing-boats and 
all going down in the land-wreck. Indeed, my 
poor father did not remain long after the ruin of 
his venture, and my mother had to live by mak- 
ing gloves and trying to let lodgings. She had 
been a genteel woman of her class at one time ; 
and being engaged in one of the few pretentious 
millinery shops in our little town, was regarded 
by her friends as having made quite a sort of 
mesalliance when she married my father, who was 
then only a good-looking young boat-builder, with 
a fine voice for singing. She was very sentimen- 
tal then, was poor mother . so she has often told 
me . and those were the days when the heart of 
sentimental womanhood was divided between the 
Corsair and the Lady of the Lake. My mother 



RETROSPECT J AND MIST.  

loved both, but leaned to the Corsair; and found 
a resemblance between that hero and my father. 
To her latest days she was fond of repeating 
whole strings of "My own Medora," and Ellen 
and James Fitzjames . and I doubt much whether 
Locksley Hall and Maud are often recited and 
raved about and glorified in the shops of pro- 
vincial milliners just now. Poetry and romance 
seem to have taken a terrible grip of the female 
heart at that time, and to have released the 
squeeze in our clays. 

Besides being romantic, my mother was like- 
wise religious . a combination which also does 
not seem to flourish in our time. Heaven only 
knows how painfully she laboured and strove to 
give and get us some education in religion and 
poetry. She loved her sons dearly, weakly, and 
her most passionate prayer of nights was that 
they might never, never leave her. The dearest 
wish and ambition of her heart would have been 
that one of the two might become a gentle clergy- 
man, and the other, whatever his ordinary pur- 
suits, a churchwarden. If she had lived until 
now, ' what a Eitualist she would have been ! 
Her prayers for the future of her sons were no^ 



6 

even half granted. One of the sons went, very 
young, to America, and became a Eationalist. 
The other came up to London and turned opera- 
singer. 

As soon as I could write a decent hand, some 
good-natured person got me a situation in the 
office of an attorney and land-agent. I began as 
the youngest and lowest of clerks . a sort of cross 
between a messenger and a scrivener's apprentice 
. never, of course, intended to develop into that 
pretentious grub the articled clerk, who in his 
time develops into the attorney. I had five 
shillings a-week to begin with, and I think the 
head clerk had a hundred and fifty pounds a- 
year. Perhaps, but for subsequent events, I 
might have worked up to hold that position, and 
receive that emolument, in my turn. Indeed, I 
mounted very steadily up to thirty shillings a- 
week, but there I stopped and got off the ladder. 
Before I had attained that eminence, however, 
my brother, who had tried one or two situations 
unsuccessfully, and was always alarming my 
mother with his longing and projects for going 
to sea, compromised matters by resolving to seek 
his fortune in America. My mother had to con- 



RETEOSPECT J AND MIST. 7 

sent at last . indeed, hard times allowed her no 
choice . and some poor outfit was scraped to- 
gether. It was arranged that I must stay at 
home and work for mother until her sons should 
become wealthy men, when we were to live in 
one country and one home, and she was to keep 
house for both. We had much crying and feeble 
keeping-up of each other's spirits, and we parted 
full of grief, but not without hope. Theodore 
Eustace took with him the latch-key of our door, 
with which he used to let himself in of nights, 
promising himself and us that he would return 
before long, laden, doubtless, with wealth, arrive 
unexpectedly, and opening the door softly, steal 
in upon my mother and me as we sate some even- 
ing by the fire and talked of him. 

He wrote to us when he got a situation in a 
dry-goods store, Broadway, New York, and very 
soon after, when he lost it; when he went out 
next and became successively a hawker, a railway- 
clerk, a photographer, an electro-biologist, a news- 
paper correspondent, and a farmer. In each suc- 
cessive calling he was most positively to succeed, 
and to make up for all the time . never very much, 
that was one comfort . which he had lost in the 



8 my enemy's daughter. 

vocation just abandoned. He never remitted any- 
thing except a sketch of a forest clearing, and a 
dried rnusquito as a specimen of the animal life 
of the New World. I think my mother placed 
the musquito's corpse tenderly in her bosom. 
He has sown all his wild oats long since. He 
was lately married for the third time, and I be- 
lieve got money, or property of some sort, with 
each of the wives. He was just the sort of bright, 
exuberant, reckless, blundering, soft-hearted fel- 
low whom a certain kind of women, and all dogs, 
and all animals of tender natures indeed, instinc- 
tively take to. He has many children, and is 
well-to-do now and steady. He still writes, al- 
though at long intervals. He says he has the 
latch-key still, which I doubt . Theodore Eustace 
was seldom very literal in his statements. But 
even if he has, it will never open the door for 
which he meant to use it. Were he to return to 
our old street, so sunny and pleasant in summer, 
with its glimpse of the sea through every lane, he 
would find no creature there whom once he knew ; 
and the place itself would know him no more. 
The little row of houses in which we lived has 
been pulled down long since to make way for 



RETROSPECT ; AND MIST. 9 

more pretentious habitations . marine residences, 
semi-detached villas, sea -side boarding-houses, 
and the like. In my own season of success I 
often contemplated a tour through America as a 
" star." I thought of setting New York wild 
with admiration, filling my brother's heart with 
ecstasy, and cramming his house with presents. 
Something, however, always intervened to post- 
pone the journey, and before I had finally made 
up my mind, the best of my voice had gone, and 
my reputation was pulled down, like our old 
house, to make way for a new erection upon a 
more secure basis. 

From my father I had inherited a good voice, 
etprceterea nil. There are families through which 
a good voice appears to move in order of primo- 
geniture ; and I have observed that a fine tenor, 
thus bequeathed, rarely seems an inheritance 
w T hich brings much worldly providence or pro- 
sperity. My father was always under the im- 
pression that he only wanted a lucky chance to 
have made him another Incledon, who was of 
course his hero, and whose rolling, quavering, 
florid style, unknown to this generation, he did 
his best to imitate. I cannot help thinking the 



10 my enemy's daughter. 

fishing-boats and the building speculations would 
have fared a good deal better if my father had had 
no more voice than a grasshopper, and had there- 
fore found no admiring idlers to persuade him 
that he was another Incledon. However, it is 
quite certain that at an early age my voice became 
remarkable ; and some of my father's whilom ad- 
miring idlers did generously take me in hand 
and provide me with not very inadequate train- 
ing. My mother's dread of my developing power 
was turned into confidence and pride when I be- 
gan to sing in the choir of our church on Sun- 
days. I paused not in my progress until I had 
actually been promoted to the post of j)rlmo 
tenore there, at a remuneration of twenty pounds 
a-year. 

This seemed to us what sea-coast people call 
" the third wave" of promise, on which we were 
to be safely lifted into prosperity. But it came 
a little too late. My mother's life had long been 
on the wane. Grief, anxiety, poverty, late long 
sewing, had been doing for years their combined 
best with her, and at last she utterly broke down. 
I was nineteen years old when I found myself 
watching, in the gray of a cold spring morning, 



RETROSPECT J AND MIST. 11 

with our clergyman and one or two kindly old 
women, by the side of the bed in which my 
mother recovered at last from all sickness and 
all sorrow. A pale, wan ray of the rising sun 
gleamed upon the cold face whereon so little of 
the sunshine of happiness had rested. A quaint 
little burial-ground clings and straggles along the 
side of one of the hills which rises over the 
bay. You may count every tombstone and grave - 
hillock from the deck of any of the fishing-boats 
that toss in the surf beneath. Many a monu- 
ment is erected there by the widow of some lost 
skipper or mate in memory of the husband whose 
bones have been tossed ashore on some Pacific 
island, or have been gnawed and mumbled by the 
Arctic bear. There we laid my mother, disturb- 
ing for the purpose some of the ashes which had 
been coffined when my father was buried. I came 
away from the grave alone. The scene I saw as 
I turned away is before me now. I see it clearly 
. as clearly as then. The hills . we used to 
think them mountains . that embraced the long 
narrow stretch of bay in their arms ; the far line 
of the horizon; the straggling white town just 
under my feet ; the strand whereon lay the 



12 my enemy's daughter. 

hauled-up fishing-boats; the merchant-brigs and 
the coal-schooners anchored; the one war- sloop ; 
the tree -tufted summit of one hill, conspicuous 
among its bare and bald companions; and over 
all the gray sky breaking faintly into sunlight . 
as over my own life the mist of sadness and 
loneliness just breaking a little with the purple 
light of youth. 

I am not going to write of my grief and lone- 
liness. I suffered bitterly and heavily, but the 
passing away of a year or so softened the grief 
into a gentle memory. At twenty I was full of 
hope and spirits again, secretly perhaps even 
proud of my desolate independence, and believ- 
ing myself a personage of rare endowments, de- 
stined to some special and wonderful career. But 
because of my mother's death, and other and 
earlier associations too, the gray days of spring 
have always worn for me the most melancholy 
and dispiriting aspect. I see the early spring, 
not in budding brightness, and beauty, and hope, 
as poetical' people tell me they see it, but dim, 
dreary, boding, suggestive of loneliness, asso- 
ciated with partings, graves, and death. 



CHAPTER II. 

CHRISTINA BRAUN. 

I was, then, an attorney's clerk all the week- 
days up to five or six o'clock, and a singer of 
sacred music every Sunday, . a singer in that 
same little church the sermons and the bough- 
shaded windows of which used to distract me so 
when a boy. 

I was growing a sort of little celebrity in our 
small town because of my voice and my supposed 
musical genius. I mean that I was getting to 
be known among all that small middle class 
whose highest reach towards society was the pa- 
tronage of the clergyman's wife or the attorney 
and his family. Our town was divided morally, 
and indeed one might say geographically, into 
three sections. There were "the townspeople," 
. ourselves, . who lived in the streets on what 
I may call the middle terrace of the ascent on 
which chance had placed us. We were all tra- 



14 my enemy's daughter. 

ders, shopkeepers, clerks, master carpenters, a 
few engineers, two or three teachers of French 
and music, a good many principals of small Eng- 
lish schools, a good many civil servants of the 
unpretending class. Beneath us stretched, reach- 
ing to the water's edge, and straggling away 
rather towards the rising sun, a lower plateau of 
population, consisting of publichouse - keepers, 
rope -makers, block -makers, fishermen, sailors, 
and nondescript poor people of all kinds . poor 
people avowing and indeed going in for pauper- 
ism. Above us, and stretching away westward, 
were the villas and mansions of the gentry, the 
swells who only came into the town to buy at 
the shops, or to reach the sea. Of these it is 
enough to say . for this story has little to do with 
the aristocracy of the earth . that a nobleman who 
owned nearly all the country round and half the 
town was the apex of the pyramid, and the base 
was formed by the fashionable doctor of our dis- 
trict, the attorney in whose office I worked, two 
or three clergymen, the collectors of customs and 
excise, and a few retired naval officers. Now 
these three sections were each a world to itself. 
Nobody on the higher plateau knew anything 



CHRISTINA BEAUX. 15 

about us except as people who made things or 
had things to sell ; we knew little of the lower 
plateau except in an equally general sort of way. 
Therefore when I say that I was becoming a sort 
of small celebrity, I mean of course only in my 
own middle sphere. The gentlemen and ladies 
above knew and cared just as much about me and 
my like as the tarry lads of the lower town did, 
or indeed as the crabs and star-fish on the beach 
might have done. If any grand personage or 
grand personage's wife had been attracted by my 
singing at church some day, and had been good 
enough to ask the clergyman who the singer was, 
the answer would have been, "Only a young man 
from the town," and that would have settled the 
matter. That was enough to know ; that was all 
anybody could want to know. 

But I was getting to be talked about among 
people of my own world. I used to be invited 
out to small evening parties, where, lonely as I 
was, . and at this period having reached the cyni- 
cal stage, and being professedly scornful of earth's 
joys, . I went very delightedly. I bought kid- 
gloves, and wore my collar turned down. Those 
were not days when even a musical aspirant could 



16 my enemy's daughter. 

venture upon a moustache in a town like ours, or 
I doubt not that I would have wrestled with Na- 
ture to extract by unknown philtres and essences 
the precious ornament from her gift. Of course 
I was a good deal vain of my voice and my per- 
sonal appearance. Kind heaven, which had taken 
from me so much that was dear, had left me 
youth's delicious consolation . vanity. Had I not 
been such a self-conceited ass just then, I must 
needs have been very unhappy. 

"We used to practise . we did not call it "re- 
hearsing" . three or four times a week in the 
choir of the church, the organist being intrusted 
with the keys for the purpose. "We" were gene- 
rally four. First was Miss Griffin the organist, 
who could sometimes pipe a flat and feeble note 
of her own. Miss Griffin was a spinster fast fall- 
ing into years . nay, it seemed to me then quite 
stricken in years, although I know now that she 
could not have been far past thirty. But she was 
very old-maidenish in appearance, with dull hair 
done into old-fashioned spiral ringlets : a sharp- 
nosed and perhaps frosty, but withal very kindly, 
little dowdy. Next in years . but with such an 
interval ! . came our bass, . a stout young fellow, 



7 



CHRISTINA BEAUX. 17 

son of a master carpenter. Then came the tenor, 
Emanuel Temple Banks ; and last came the so- 
prano, a girl of German parentage and birth, 
Christina Braun. 

Christina, I should think, was then just a 
little younger than myself. She was the daughter 
of a German toy -maker, who . half -mechanist, 
half-artist, whole dreamer . had striven to make 
and sell playthings of a new kind, with a scien- 
tific, philosophical, and moral purpose about them, 
for the aesthetical entertainment and culture of 
children. The philosophical toy -maker did not 
succeed in winning much of the sympathy of our 
town for his refined and lofty purpose. He failed 
altogether, became bankrupt, gave up all struggle 
thenceforward, and resigned the conduct of exist- 
ence into the hands of his daughter, who sang in 
churches and chapels and elsewhere for the means 
of living. 

I used to think Christina a wonderful young 
person because she had been born in Germany, 
and could speak German. She had at this time 
been many years in England, and must have been 
quite a child when she left her native country. 
We used to pronounce her name as if it were 

vol. i. c 



18 MY enemy's daughter. 

similar in sound with the name of the familiar 
substance sold in pork-shops. Being at this time 
of my life still rather shy so far as girls were 
concerned, I knew little or nothing of Miss Braun 
for months and months, but that she had a strong 
voice and fine eyes, and that she had a happy 
capacity for talking freely enough when anyone 
chose to speak, and remaining contentedly silent 
when no one did so choose. She was a remark- 
able girl to look at. She had a great fleece of 
fair hair thrown back off her forehead, and only 
kept up in some way or other from falling about 
her shoulders and waist, which indeed it did more 
than once in the choir, to the great annoyance 
and scandal of Miss Griffin, who, I think, by the 
look that came into her eyes, always regarded 
this little mischance as a pure piece of coquetry. 
Christina had beautiful deep-shining eyes, dark- 
gray in colour . much darker indeed than the 
tinge of her hair would have led one to expect. 
She had a bright complexion and a rather large 
mouth, from which issued when she sang a strange 
and almost startling voice : we used to consider 
it somewhat coarse. I don't think I thought her 
a handsome girl; I rather fancy she seemed to 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 19 

me all hair and eyes. But I have hardly any dis- 
tinct impression of our earliest meetings, and I 
positively cannot by any effort of memory recall 
my first sight of one who afterwards exercised 
such an influence over my life, and whom I once 
so deeply loved. There is no mystery about the 
story I purpose to tell, and I make known at once 
that everything in my existence which is worth 
recording is in some way associated with the 
memory of Christina Braun. 

We four, then . Miss Griffin, our basso, Chris- 
tina, and I . used to foregather in the church- 
choir of evenings ; and after having practised as 
we considered long enough, would very often con- 
clude by going to Miss Griffin's to tea, and there 
compensating ourselves with the newest operatic 
pieces for our enforced devotion to sacred music. 
Miss Griffin and her mamma taught music, and 
some of their pupils used to help us out occa- 
sionally with duets, trios, choruses, and the like. 
I remember nothing particular about the mamma, 
except that she was an odd, vivacious, flighty little 
old personage, who could speak French. I don't 
know why she considered it proper always to ad- 
dress Christina Braun in French, or why she 



20 my enemy's daughter. 

assumed that a German girl must necessarily be 
able to understand that language. But she al- 
ways did so. "Eli bien, Christina, chere petite," 
was her usual greeting ; and during the course of 
any conversation, if she had occasion to address 
a word to the tall and plump chere petite, Mrs. 
Griffin always lapsed into French, and Christina, 
with perfect docility and gravity, as regularly re- 
plied in the same tongue, which she seemed to 
speak with fluency. 

Sometimes I was the only gentleman among 
all these ladies ; and this, perhaps, may partly 
account for the slight attention I used to bestow 
upon Christina Braun. Our bass singer did not 
always come with us to Miss Griffin's, and even 
when he did he was not much of a squire of dames 
or demoiselles. On entering the little drawing- 
room . first-floor front, over a bonnet-shop . he 
usually laid his hat somewhere on the ground, 
sat on the edge of a chair, swallowed his tea, 
bending far over the table for the purpose, and 
generally said nothing more than "Yes, miss," 
or " No, miss," in answer to any question ad- 
dressed to him. He was a fine-looking young 
fellow, tall, robust, manly; and, although scarcely 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 21 

older than myself, he had his face already fringed 
with a luxuriant, soft, black beard, the possession 
of which I secretly envied him. Silent as he 
was in general, I could notice that when he got 
side by side with Christina Braun he could talk 
well enough to her; and almost always when he 
came to Miss Griffin's, I observed that he took 
charge of Christina to see her to her home on 
our early breaking up. I think I was somewhat 
amused at the time by observing this fact and 
founding conjectures on it. The polite reader 
need hardly be told that a much loftier position 
in society is asserted by a lawyer's clerk than 
could possibly be claimed even by the most pre- 
sumptuous carpenter ; and I therefore felt myself 
warranted in taking quite a lordly and patronising 
interest in the love-making of my humble ac- 
quaintance ; for I felt convinced that our stout 
basso was in love, and I envied him that privilege. 
Yes, more even than his beard did I envy him his 
state of mind and heart. At this season of my 
life I had begun to long to fall in love. I envied 
every young man whom I saw on Sunday evening 
with some girl hanging on his arm or walking 
with downcast eyes by his side. I trolled out to 



22 MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 

myself of nights the words of " Sally in our 
Alley;" and I envied the hero of the ballad, for 
all his harsh master and his jeering neighbours. 
If some woman would only love me, walk thus of 
Sundays with me, lean on my arm, blush when 
I spoke ! Nay, if some woman would even reject 
my love, blight my young hopes, crush me in the 
bud, reduce me to despair ! At the stage of 
mental and moral development I had then reached, 
despair and ruin seemed on the whole a finer and 
more enviable destiny than success and joy. To 
Jive in love would be happy; but to die for love 
would be the lordliest fate. 

My life seemed safe enough so far as love's 
despair could threaten it. I had no one to love. 
I could not, no I could not, love Miss Griffin, 
strove I never so wildly. I feel well assured she 
would have accepted gladly the poorest tribute of 
homage, even if it lasted but a few short weeks, 
to cheat her into the belief that she had not quite 
passed out of date, and could yet move at least 
one heart. All our literature and our moral les- 
sons now ring the changes upon the nobleness of 
self-sacrifice. "What finer self-sacrifice could any- 
one make than to persuade a kind and true-hearted 



CHRISTINA BEAUX. 23 

old maid of a certain age that lie had really fallen 
in love with her, and brighten her life by giving 
up his own to sustain the beatifying delusion? 
A more pious fraud could not be accomplished 
than to practise such a generous piece of cheating 
on such a woman as poor, elderly, warm-hearted, 
loving, unloved Miss Griffin. I commend the 
idea to some novelist. Why not make a story 
out of it ? But I own that, even had the idea 
occurred to me at the right time, I should not 
have dreamed of putting it into practice ; and 
even if I had dreamed of it, I should never have 
done it. 

There was none of Miss Griffin's pupils who 
could have served as an object for my adoration. 
They were all in trousers and short frocks ; and 
at that time of my life girls in trousers were my 
abhorrence. 

When haply my thoughts sometimes turned 
to Christina Braun, she seemed too calm and si- 
lent, and too fond of music. In those days I did 
not much care for any singing but my own. 
There are only too many people who, if they would 
but confess it, are in just the same state of mind 
. people who have, of course, none of the true 



24 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



artist's love of music, as, honestly, I never had. 
People like us in that way often delight in our 
own singing, if we can sing, not out of mere self- 
conceit and egotism, but because to us that music 
which our own voices give out is the fullest ex- 
pression, the strongest invocation, of feeling and 
association. Many tenors of the richest tone, 
and sopranos thrilling up to the ceiling, have I 
heard without feeling one throb of the emotion 
which used to swell within me long ago as I sang 
old church-hymns or new sentimental ballads of 
love, longing, and despair for my own delight, 
and quite alone. But it was easy enough even 
for me then to see that Christina Braun loved 
music for its own sake, and, like most persons 
who do thus appreciate and love it, she seemed, 
to ordinary observers, to care about little else. 

Apart from all this, however, I had arranged 
in my own mind that Christina Braun and the 
carpenter's son were what we used to call " sweet- 
hearts." 

After some time I began to observe that Chris- 
tina ceased to make one in our mild gatherings in 
Miss Griffin's drawing-room. Indeed the latter 
lady and I sometimes had tea tete-a-tete . or nearly 



CHRISTINA BBATJN. 25 

so, her mother only flitting flightily in and out . 
and it was dull entertainment for both parties. 
I would gladly have evaded all such soirees, hut 
that I was ashamed or unwilling to desert poor 
Miss Griffin, and perhaps did not always know 
what to do with myself or where else to go. The 
time for sitting alone in contented gloom, and 
smoking a pipe long evenings through, had not 
nearly come as yet. 

Sometimes a fearful thought crossed my mind. 
Could it be possible that Christina imagined Miss 
Griffin and I were lovers, and liked to be left 
alone ? I tried to shut out this alarming idea. 
I vowed not to go any more to a tete-a-tete tea ; 
I even attempted awkwardly to pay a mild atten- 
tion to Christina herself, in the hope of thus re- 
pelling suspicion. I invited her to come with me 
to a concert somewhere . we had not the rules of 
Belgravia or even Bloomsbury to govern our social 
relationships there . but Christina refused in so 
decided a tone as to make my doubts a dead 
certainty. I began to feel convinced that I had 
guessed but too well. Christina must suppose 
me deeply in love with Miss Griffin . perhaps so- 
lemnly engaged to her . to Miss Griffin, whose 



26 my enemy's daughter. 

age was so undeniable, and who carried the stigma 
of old maid branded on her very skirts and ankles ! 

One evening we three . we three! . walked 
home together, as usual, but were unusually dull 
and silent. Christina declined entering when we 
arrived at Miss Griffin's door . this time indeed 
the invitation being very faintly pressed. I was 
plucking up heart of grace to make my excuses 
too, when Miss Griffin cut me short by a look of 
portentous mystery, and the words, "You really 
must come in, Mr. Banks ; I want to speak to 
you" . words which, however, were not spoken 
until just after Christina had nodded her head to 
us and gone on her way. 

I followed Miss Griffin upstairs in perhaps 
something like an agitated condition of mind. I 
did not quite know whether under certain circum- 
stances strong-minded ladies not young did not 
think it allowable to interrogate young men touch- 
ing the nature of their intentions. 

Miss Griffin was anything but a strong-minded 
woman, and just now did not seem to have been 
thinking about me at all. She burst out with her 
communication all at once. 

" Mr. Banks, I must send Christina Braun" 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 27 

(pronounced, as I have said before, " Brawn") 
" out of the choir. She must not sing with us 
any more." 

Did I feel relieved to hear that the question 
was of Christina's rejection, and not of my ac- 
ceptance ? Perhaps so. But I certainly felt 
much surprised. 

" What on earth has she been doing ?" 

"I am so sorry to hear it; indeed, it's quite 
put me out ; you can't think how much." 

"Yes; but what is it ?" 

"I am afraid she is not a good girl. She 
sings every night at a singing-house !" 

"At a singing-house?" 

"Yes; a common low singing -house, Mr. 
Banks . and I don't see what there is to laugh at 
. a horrid place where soldiers and sailors and I 
don't know what . all sorts of low people, in fact 
. go in and drink and listen to her. It's been all 
found out; and Mr. Thirlwall (the clergyman) 
says he can't have a girl in the choir who sings 
for soldiers and sailors in a common drinking- 
house. I don't know what to do about it; and 
I declare it has put me in such a way, you can't 
think. Perhaps she is not so bad ; and then it's 



28 my enemy's daughter. 

all very well for Mr. Thirlwall to talk, but, my 
goodness, who is to fill her place, with such a 
voice as she has, and such an ear for music ? 
But I can't keep her unless she promises never 
to go there any more." 

" Then you have not spoken to her yet about 
it?" 

" No, not yet. I thought I would ask you 
something about it first. I thought perhaps 
you could advise me ; you, who are a man of 
business and know something about the world." 

"Well, I am sure I don't see much harm in 
the whole affair, and I think Mr. Thirlwall is a 
venerable goose. Miss Braun seems a very quiet, 
respectable sort of girl" (I thought of the carpen- 
ter's love-suit, and felt quite a lordly spirit of 
patronising pity); "and then what can she do if 
she's very poor and has no other way of living ? 
The reverend man does not expect her to live on 
fifteen pounds a-year, paid in rather irregular 
instalments ?" 

"Yes, that is all quite true ; and indeed it is 
just what I said myself to Mr. Thirlwall . only of 
course I put it more politely . and he says it is 
true too ; for he's a just man, Mr. Banks, though 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 29 

you always seem inclined to laugh at him. But 
what can he do ? He has been preaching from 
the pulpit time after time against those very sing- 
ing-houses, and how can he have people looking 
up from their seats in the church, and perhaps 
some of them recognising a singer from such a 
place among the faces in our choir ? You know 
yourself that would never do." 

It occurred to me at the moment that perhaps 
the worshipper who visited the wicked singing- 
house, and was thereby enabled to recognise one 
of its performers, would have scarcely a clear right 
to object to the chorister who sang there. But 
I saw no use in urging this point to a logical con- 
clusion, and merely suggested that perhaps the 
place was not so dreadfully bad after all. 

" That is what I was just thinking of. I 
should really like to know something of it. It 
would never do to give up the poor girl without 
knowing whether there is any harm in what she 
is doing. I actually thought of going there my- 
self; I did really." 

"0, you can't go, that is quite out of the 
question ; but if you like I'll go, and bring you a 
faithful report." 



30 my enemy's daughter. 

" That is what I should like of all things. I 
can depend upon your judgment. And at all 
events one ought to know something about the 
right and wrong of the affair. I believe in law, 
Mr. Banks, a person is innocent until you can 
prove her guilty." 

" That is considered one of the great princi- 
ples of British law, Miss Griffin." 

"Yes; and I think it's very proper too; and 
I only wish people would do the same in every- 
thing else as well as law." 

It was settled, then, that I was to visit and 
report on the obnoxious singing-place. I had 
heard of it once or twice before ; and of sundry 
of its predecessors which had all in succession 
withered and disappeared. Up to this time I had 
never been out of my native town, and of course 
had never been in a singing-saloon. Our town was 
an unspeakably dull spot. At this time it was 
not even visited by a railway, and it depended for 
its sole excitement upon the changing of a regi- 
ment in the barracks or the occasional visit of a 
war-frigate to the harbour. Owing to the social 
and topographical peculiarities I have already 
mentioned which divided us, like all Gaul in Cae- 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 31 

sar's day, into three parts, any sort of amusement 
which might be devised for the gratification of 
the floating population in the lower plateau, was 
not likely to excite either interest or alarm in the 
higher regions. Our middle class were little given 
to revelry. Every window in their quarter was 
duly shuttered and barred by eleven o'clock, and 
their warmest stimulant was a controversial ser- 
mon. But of late there had unquestionably been 
some stir created by the successful establishment, 
after many failures, of a famous singing-saloon, 
modelled after the fashion of metropolitan dissi- 
pation. Not a noisy, harmless "free-and-easy," 
where Snug the joiner and Quince the carpenter 
might smoke their pipes and be knocked down in 
turn for their favourite and special song; where 
Bottom the weaver might deliver his choicest sen- 
timent, and Starveling the tailor might have the 
formal permission of his wife to remain half-an- 
hour later on the Saturday night. This was not 
the sort of thing that now invaded us. It was a 
place where professional singers . women too, look 
you, nearly as bad as dancers, not to say actresses 
. came and sat on a platform, and sang for money. 
This was then a dreadful innovation. The sing- 



32 my enemy's daughteb. 

ing-saloon itself is now well-nigh obsolete. The 
rising generation hardly knows what it was like. 
The music-hall with its plate-glass, its paintings, 
its private boxes, its concerted music and its cham- 
pagne, has banished it ; and the audacious novelty 
of my young clays is a forgotten, fogeyish old in- 
stitution now. But this particular place of which 
I speak was really creating something like a stir 
among our quiet and respectable burgesses just 
then. It was established immediately inside the 
frontier line of our Alsatia ; and it is certain that 
some of our fathers of families had been to visit 
it, and had talked with quite a dangerous slyness 
of its attractions, and had made up parties with 
some of their friends to go and see it again. All 
this created naturally a considerable fluttering of 
angry petticoats in domestic circles, and brought 
severe and direct condemnation from offended 
pulpits. And so I had heard of the place in ques- 
tion, and had even been making up my mind to 
visit it before chance sent me there as the special 
commissioner of Miss Griffin. 

The following night I went alone, and had no 
difficulty in finding the place. Indeed, when you 
began to descend from the old square, which was 



CHRISTINA BBAUN. 33 

the last stronghold of respectability and middle 
.class, down a steep street with steps breaking its 
precipitate fall, a street that was the main artery 
of the lower town, you came almost at once upon 
the obnoxious saloon. It was in a large public- 
house, occupying a corner where a cross -street 
ran off, and showing, like Janus, a double front. 
The place looked cheery enough from the outside. 
The night was chill and wet ; and the bright 
crimson curtains draping the windows of the 
upper room where the musical performances were 
going on, tempted one with visions of ineffable 
comfort and warmth out of the wintry plash and 
drizzle of the sodden streets. I went upstairs. 
There was no payment at the doors, the musical 
entertainment being supported in the recognised 
style by indirect taxation levied upon the "orders." 
I entered the Circean bower. It was but a small 
and poor imitation of a Strand or Covent Garden 
Cave of Harmony, but as it had looking-glasses, 
crimson curtains, velvet cushions, a platform with 
footlights, and an orchestra, it seemed splendid 
enough in my confused provincial eyes. I gave 
an order for something in a rather ineffectual 
attempt at a careless tone, and dropped into the 

VOL. I. D 



34 my enemy's daughter. 

first available seat. There was rather a numerous 
audience, including, however, only one or two 
sailors and no soldiers. Most of the company 
seemed to me to he smart young artisans, mingled 
with elderly tradesmen of the unpretentious class; 
and there were a few young assistants from shops 
who looked quite swellish in their well-made 
clothes and gloves. No ladies were there; Miss 
Griffin would have presented herself in vain. 
Most of the company were smoking, by which I 
was innocently surprised to find that the singers 
were not in the least disconcerted. Of the "audi- 
ence," a very few were actually listening to the 
music ; the greater number were chatting uncon- 
cernedly round their little tables; one or two 
were asleep. I had, however, listened with the 
gravest appearance of interest to a sentimental 
and a comic song before I came to myself suffi- 
ciently to observe even this much of the aspect 
of the place. 

When I said there were no women present, I 
meant, of course, among the audience. For when 
I began to look collectedly around me, I saw that 
there were girls on the platform, and that among 
them was Christina Braun. She was dressed in 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 35 

white . poor white muslin only; but she seemed 
to my eyes to be wearing a magnificent costume. 
Her arms and shoulders were bare, and were both 
white and plump, and her fleece of light hair fell 
around her. She presently came on to sing, and 
she seemed to be a favourite, for she was wel- 
comed by a burst of applause, and most of the 
company stopped their talk, while some demanded 
silence by tapping their pipe-bowls on the table. 
Christina sang in clear and strong tones some 
ballad . not at all a Circean strain, but some good 
moral-purpose song about universal brotherhood 
and being kind to our neighbour. She sang it 
with sweetness and force, but with hardly any 
indication of feeling, certainly with no gleam of 
emotion perceptible in her eyes. Being, however, 
vehemently encored, she chose, as seemed to be 
expected, a totally different kind of song. It was 
what we used to call a "nigger melody" . a sort 
of novelty then, with a refrain about courting down 
in Tennessee, or Alabama, or some other such 
place. 

I scarcely knew what it was all about ; but I 
soon knew that I had never heard such spirit, 
such archness, such wild wayward humour, such 



36 my enemy's daughter. 

occasional ebullitions of tender thrilling emotion 
conveyed in song before. No, never ! Night 
after night had I heard this girl sing her devo- 
tional hymns in the clearest tones, vacant of any 
emotion whatever; but now, as she sang some 
trumpery little serio-comic love-song, her dark- 
gray eyes gleamed and filled with light; under 
her shadowy long lashes the eyes sometimes 
looked so dark and deep as to seem in startling 
contrast with her bright fair hair; her voice 
swelled, soared, sank, shaded itself away into an 
infinite variety of expression ; she gave life and 
speech to the very rattle of her banjo ; she made 
the ballad utter a thousand emotions which were 
no more in the words she sang than in the in- 
strument she struck, or the smoky, beery crowd, 
whose glasses jingled with their noisy and honest 
acclamations. What a soul of feeling, what a 
capacity . deep, boundless, daring . a capacity for 
love and triumph, and passion and sorrow . spoke 
in the tones of that voice and the flash of that 
eye! 

For me, I felt partly as I used to feel when 
sitting alone and singing, only with how much of 
a difference ! With what a change from dreamy, 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 37 

vague, and fluctuating emotions, idly rolling in 
like the waves on the windless shore, and the 
warm, tumultuous, passionate rush of the new 
tide of love and youth and manhood breaking in 
upon my life at last ! I began life, I began love, 
with the hearing of that song ! I daresay it was 
poor, coarse, untutored singing ; untrained, and 
even in some sense uncouth, it must have been ; 
commonplace it certainly was not. I know that 
I heard the singer unnumbered times in the 
prime of her years and her triumph; and I do 
not believe I ever recognised her genius more 
clearly than when I heard her sing that poor 
little ballad in the public-house of the old sea- 
port. My rapture must upon that occasion find 
some outlet, and I therefore made instant ac- 
quaintance with a dull and elderly man near me : 
he seemed to me, I don't know why, to look like 
a saddler. 

" Splendid !" I exclaimed, addressing him. 

"Yes, pretty tidy," rejoined the dull man \ 
and he looked round for the waiter and knocked 
his empty glass against the table . a signal for 
a refilling. 

" I know her," I added confidentially. 



38 my enemy's daughter. 

" Know who ?" asked the dull man. 

" Her . the singer." 

" Ah !" He did not seem to care whether I 
knew her or not. 

" She's a foreigner," I added, especially proud 
of knowing a foreigner. 

"All, I never liked the French. I don't believe 
in 'em. By what I can make out, they ain't good 
for much." 

" But she's not French . she's German." 

" Don't like Germans, they're a dirty set. 
They eat candles, I'm told." 

This irrelevant and detestable observation so 
utterly disgusted me, that I withdrew at once 
from the conversation. 

I should much have liked to wait for the close 
of the entertainment and to speak to Christina ; 
but I feared she might suppose I had come as a 
spy or tell-tale, so I slunk very much indeed as 
if I were a spy or tell-tale from my seat, which 
was near the door, and went downstairs. I did 
not gain much by my caution and my flight, for, 
descending rapidly, I ran against someone coming 
as rapidly up, and I recognised my friend the 
basso, the bearded young carpenter. We saluted 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 39 

each other, but he did not seem particularly glad 
to see me, and he ran past without staying to 
speak a word. I wished I had not met him, for 
I feared that in the too-probable event of poor 
Christina's dismissal, he might regard me and 
report me as a spy, and I had an instinctive 
knowledge that he had come to see her home ; 
and I envied him . nay, already I almost hated 
him. 

Drizzling and dismal as the black skies were, 
sloppy and slushy as the streets were, I did not 
hurry home. On the contrary, I turned deliber- 
ately away from home, and straggled, like the 
town, downhill to the water. From the door I 
had just quitted I could hear the creaking of the 
spars of ships that tossed and dragged at their 
anchors, the whistling of the sullen wind through 
their cordage, the heavy surge of the waves along 
their sides. A few strides down an oozy lane, 
and I could see the lights at mastheads, and even 
discern through the mist and darkness the white 
tops of the rushing waves. I made my way, 
stumbling among upturned boats and anchors 
and chains, down to the very edge of the water. 
The town was not well-lighted anywhere : towards 



40 my enemy's daughter. 

the harbour its darkness grew Cimmerian. The 
inhabitants had all that mysterious objection to 
seeing their seaward way at night which used to 
be so common a characteristic of people living in 
seaport towns in the years when French treaties 
were not. Indeed, many of our people would 
have abolished moonlight if they could, although 
these very same persons were strangely given to 
lurking about the shore and staring seaward at 
extraordinary hours of the night. This night, 
however, no stealthy figure peered from the 
strand : I had it all to myself, and I exulted in 
being alone. 

Born as I was within sound of the waves, it 
has always seemed to me that in any hour of deep 
emotion I ought to rush to the seaside, and make 
the noisy water my confidant. This night I felt 
that I must find the shore, and relieve my new- 
born passion by mingling its utterances with the 
roar of the waters. Alone on that strand what 
strange fooleries I enacted ! I stamped up and 
down the shore, I sang wild snatches of Chris- 
tina's song, I shouted mad fragments of inco- 
herent melody and semi - articulate words of 
passion and love. I was mad, and I was happy; 



CHRISTINA BRAUN. 41 

this at last was living. All the delight that an 
explorer may find when he first breaks into a 
new sea . that a Bedouin may feel when he first 
mounts an untamed horse . I felt, now that I 
knew myself to be tossing at last on the waves 
of passionate love. 

Lucky for me that I was alone, and that the 
night was so dark. Anyone seeing my gestures, 
hearing my cries, must have taken me for a luna- 
tic. I waited on the strand until my emotions 
had worked off their first vehemence ; perhaps I 
waited too until I thought the entertainment at 
the singing-saloon must be nearly over. Then I 
went back to the street whence I had come, and 
watched the people coming out. After the last 
of the audience had melted away, came out a 
cluster of the performers ; among them I could 
clearly enough distinguish the figure of Christina 
. I had keen eyes for her form now . and my friend 
the basso was escorting her home. A strange, 
fierce pang shot through me. I had learned to 
feel two new passions in a few short hours . love 
and jealousy. 



CHAPTER III. 

A SEA FIGHT. 

I did not go near Miss Griffin next clay. I post- 
poned making any report of my previous night's 
visitation. What report could I make hut that 
I had heen present at a very dull and harmless 
entertainment ? unless I chose to add the truth 
. that I had come away madly in love with the 
eyes and the voice of a girl whom I had heen in 
the hahit of seeing three or four times a week 
for months and months, and ahout whom I never 
hefore cared a straw. Mine was certainly not love 
at first sight, hut it had all the suddenness and 
unreasoning fierceness of that romantic form of 
the passion. I have not read in hooks much 
ahout such a love as mine, which neither flamed 
out at the first glimpse of the ohject, nor grew 
up with the gradual development of intimacy and 
appreciation. I was as one who walks in the 
sun of some tropical climate uninjured and un- 



A SEA FIGHT. 43 

heeding for days, and whom suddenly, in some 
unexpecting moment, a flash, sharp as the cleave 
of a sabre, strikes and cuts down. Yes, my love 
was like a sunstroke. I do not know how to 
describe it better. 

Of course I went again to the music-house ; 
I went the next night. The company was of the 
same general character; the singers were the 
same. The moment I entered I saw that Chris- 
tina's eyes turned on me, and I blushed like a 
great girl. Some male singer came on with his 
dreary comic song, and she disappeared from the 
platform. Had she gone for the night ? What 
a cruel disappointment ! I stared disconsolate 
and confounded into my beer -glass, and was 
positively pitying myself for my privation, when 
one of the waiters, who were perpetually buzzing 
about the tables to remind any laggard guests 
of the necessity of renewing their orders, came 
up to me, and leaning over my shoulder, said, 

" Lady wants to speak to you, sir." 

I started. 

"Lady !. what lady?" 

"Profesh'nal lady, sir. Behind the platform, 
sir. This way, please." 



44 3IY enemy's daughter. 

I followed him* I was crimson all over, and 
did not venture to look up, fearing that the eyes 
of a whole curious company must be fixed on me. 
As a matter of fact, I don't suppose anybody in 
the room took the slightest notice. I was 
trembling with anxiety, hope, fear, surprise, ex- 
citement of the most complicated kind. The 
waiter drew aside a curtain for me, and I entered 
a small sanded room, or rather a mere space, be- 
hind the platform ; and I saw Christina there 
alone. 

She had her head turned away when I came 
in : at the sound of my entrance she looked 
quickly round, and there was an angry light in 
her deep-gray eyes. 

Her first words utterly abashed me. 

"Why do you come here?" she said, in a 
voice purposely kept low, and with the foreign 
accent more strongly perceptible than usual, owing 
to the kind of excitement under which she spoke. 
" Why do you come here to watch me and tell 
bad of me ? Have I ever done you any harm ?" 

" Christina, . Miss Braun, I mean, . how 
can you say such a thing?" and I broke down 
in mere stammering. 



A SEA FIGHT. 4D 

"Have you not come here to watch me . to 
spy on me ?" 

"No. I have not, indeed." 

"It's a lie!" she exclaimed, so loudly that 
I involuntarily glanced in the direction of the 
audience, fearing the words must have been 
heard. "It's an untruth. I know you were sent 
here." 

" I was not sent here. Miss Griffin asked me 
to come here ; and . " 

" And you came !" 

She made a triumphant gesture expressive of 
conviction and scorn. I certainly felt not unlike 
a detected spy; and I looked, no doubt, very 
foolish. 

" Yes, I came ; but I did not come to . to 
find out anything bad, or to do you harm. I 
came to do you good; and Miss Griffin only 
wanted to do you good." 

" Thank you both." She laid a malicious em- 
phasis on the word ' both.' " I am much obliged 
to you both. Heartfelt thanks to you both. But 
I don't want anyone to try to do me good." 

" I wished to be your friend." 

" I have not many friends . I am poor and 



46 my enemy's daughter. 

miserable; and I have an old man to support 
whom I love and whom I would die for ; and 
you come and find out that I am trying to make 
a living, and without wrong to anyone, or myself, 
or God, and you tell of me at the church. Go 
away; it is not like a man. It is not like an 
Englishman." 

"But I swear to you, Miss Braun, that you are 
wrong and unjust. You don't know me, or you 
never would speak as you have done. I am 
utterly incapable of the wretched meanness you 
think me guilty of. I wish I could say all I feel, 
but I can't . I can't ; and I daresay I look to you 
like a convicted spy, or an idiot, or something 
equally abominable." 

" You came last night to see if I was here ?" 

" I did." 

" So ! You saw that I was here ?" 

"I did." 

" Then was that not enough? Why did you 
come again to-night ?" 

"I came to hear you sing! Heaven knows I 
came for that and nothing else. It . it delights 
me. I could not stay away. I will come again 
and again, unless you bid me not. But do not 



A SEA FIGHT. 47 

bid me not to come, for I would rather he dead 
than not hear }-ou sing." 

" Hush/' she said in a low and gentle tone, 
" they outside may hear us." As I found courage 
to look up, I saw that her lips were tremhling and 
that her cheeks were crimsoned. Had my burst 
of sudden eloquence not been interrupted, it would 
infallibly have ended with a fervent declaration of 
love then and there. She imposed silence on me 
by a gesture which had, I thought, as much en- 
treaty as command in it, and then said, " I must 
go ; it is my time to sing. But I believe you ; 
and I was wrong and angry. You don't know 
what it is to be a poor girl, trying to live honestly, 
and watched and suspected. I beg you for par- 
don. Good-night." 

She disappeared ; and I heard her voice in a 
moment thrilling from the platform. I, too, came 
in front again, and found my way back to the seat 
I had left. 

I would have sat the whole entertainment out, 
but that I hated the idea of meeting the young 
carpenter and seeing him give his arm to Chris- 
tina. I waited and waited, every moment dread- 
ing to see him make his appearance. Often as I 



48 my enemy's daughter. 

turned towards the platform, her eyes never met 
mine. At last I made up my mind and left the 
room. Luck was against me ; at the door helow 
I met my rival. This time he did not pass me 
with a salute. He looked fiercely at me, and his 
lips quivered with excitement. 

" What d'ye come here for?" he asked. 

" What's that to you ?" was my schoolhoyish 
reply. I was not in years much beyond the 
schoolboy age. 

" It's this to me . look here, it's this : you 
come here to watch that girl, and spy upon her, 
and fetch and carry stories about her, to get her 
dismissed from the choir ; I daresay that's why 
you come here." 

"You are a liar!" was my fierce reply . "an 
impertinent liar !" 

He turned pale ; but not at all with fear. 

" Do you mean to say," he asked, " that 
you've not been sent here as a spy on her ?" 

" I mean to say nothing to you, or any fellow 
like you, except just what I have said." 

"Yes, you can talk in that way here" he 
said significantly; "but would you say so any- 
where else ?" 



A SEA FIGHT. 49 

" Anywhere you like ; and the sooner the 
better." My pent-up feelings sought any manner 
of outburst as a relief. 

" Come this way, then." 

My rival led the way, down the oozy plashy 
lane I have already described, to the strand. It 
was nearly as dark as the night before : it was 
quite as lonely. The few twinkling lights at the 
far mastheads of anchored vessels alone broke 
the gloom. Unless we stood pretty close together 
we could hardly see each other, and my foe strode 
on so impatiently that I sometimes lost sight of 
him altogether for a moment, and I was once or 
twice almost under the necessity of having to 
raise an undignified halloo. How he managed to 
get on without stumbling I cannot imagine ; every 
other moment my feet were tripping over huge 
stones, or coils of chain, and once I literally fell 
forward right over an upturned boat. I began to 
think the whole proceeding rather an absurd one ; 
but I had been grievously insulted, and although 
now a minion of the law, professionally bound, 
one would think, to abstain from deeds of vio- 
lence, yet it must be remembered that I was the 
son of a boat-builder who had been a sailor in 

VOL. I. e 



50 my enemy's daughter. 

his day, and that not many months ago I was 
a schoolboy. Yet I much wished the duel to 
come off quickly, and while my blood was up ; 
for I felt the ridiculous features of the business 
becoming every moment more impressive, and I 
began to think that an attorney's clerk boxing 
with a carpenter . a poetic and musical young 
lover fighting a vulgar rival with fists . would 
be outrageously absurd, unpicturesque, and un- 
heroic. 

At last my pertinacious and thrice - accursed 
tormentor came to a pause on a clear spot, or 
what seemed clear. 

" Now then," he said, " there's nobody here. 
What have you got to say? Are you not a spy 
and a sneak ?" 

This was too much ; and as I had given my 
answer in words before, I thought a repetition 
of it would be mere tautology. I was glad, too, 
to bring my scruples and hesitations to a violent 
end. I simply hit out, and caught my antago- 
nist fairly on the left eyebrow. 

Then began the fight. It was hearty, vigor- 
ous, and funny. I don't know whether many of 
my readers have fought a battle on the seashore 



A SEA FIGHT. 51 

at an advanced hour of a dark winter night. The 
sensations it produces are decidedly odd, tanta- 
lising and bewildering ; but it has its peculiar 
enjoyment too. At least, this battle of mine 
seemed a positively delightful relief from my pre- 
vious frame of mind. I very soon found that my 
antagonist was far stronger than I. He had in- 
deed arms of iron ; and he took his punishment 
with unruffled countenance. The punishment 
was pretty hard, for he had no gleam whatever 
of scientific knowledge, and exposed himself con- 
stantly to a smart blow on the face. But he 
seemed to care no more for the blows than if 
they had been the pepperings of a hail-shower, 
although, dark as it was, I could see that his 
face was bleeding in many places. His mode of 
fighting was an odd and self-acquired process 
altogether. He never hit straight out, but level- 
led huge, tremendous, swinging blows at the side 
of the head, literally leaping off his feet at each 
stroke, so as to lend it a more furious momentum. 
I was inclined to laugh at first, but I soon found 
it was no laughing matter, for the first touch I 
got of one of these odd blows . and I only got a 
touch, for I sprang aside in time . nearly knocked 



SSm  f ILLIN01S 



52 my enemy's daughter. 

all my senses clear away. If he had been prompt 
to follow up his victory, the combat was over 
there and then ! As it was, I felt pretty sure 
that should I be unlucky enough to come in for 
the full force and swing of one of those swash- 
ing blows, it would be enough for me ; and I 
tried with desperate energy all such resources of 
science and strength as I had to bring the fight 
to a conclusion. He bore my hammering as 
coolly as if he were of iron ; and alas ! I think 
he acquired at last a sort of rude notion of strata- 
gem wholly his own. He threw himself quite 
open in the most tempting fashion to one of my 
straightforward blows, took it without even shak- 
ing his head, and while I was in the very act of 
giving it, suddenly leaped upright, swung his 
huge flail of an arm, and crash across the side 
of my head came all the full fury of his blow. 
Meteors in a moment danced and sparkled all 
around me; stars, comets, flashes of lightning 
blazed upon my eyes ; thunders indescribable 
rattled round my ears and brain ; the earth heaved 
beneath me; the dark sky came crashing down 
upon me. I seemed as if I were cast loose from 
all gravitating principle and whirling through 



A SEA FIGHT. 53 

space, now head up, now heels up . and at last 
I came with a cruel bang down to earth again 
. and then I felt for half a second a soft, sweet, 
melting sensation of languid rest, like that pro- 
duced to a bruised man by the bleeding of a vein, 
and I just heard something like a shriek, and 
then I was asleep. 

The plain practical English of all my sen- 
sations was that I had been fairly knocked off 
my feet by a stunning blow, had fallen with my 
head crashing against a stone, and had then and 
there fainted. 

When I opened my eyes I saw at first nothing 
but the stars. I remained feebly contemplating 
them a moment, as if that were all I had to 
do in existence. Then I saw some dark object 
interpose itself between me and the constellation 
of Orion, and I recognised the face of my con- 
queror, and I think I endeavoured to frown de- 
fiance ; but the face was in a moment withdrawn. 
Then I somehow became conscious that a soft 
hand was passing along my forehead, that a hand- 
kerchief, or something of the kind, was pressed 
gently but firmly on the place where the stone 
had cut me ; and at last I came to understand 



54 my enemy's daughter. 

that I was lying on the beach with my head in 
a woman's lap. 

Unconsciously I spoke half aloud the word 
" Christina !" 

" 0, thank God!" said Christina's own voice,, 
4 'he's alive." 

"Yes, thank God!" muttered the deep voice 
of the poor basso; "I didn't mean to do it,, 
Christina . I didn't indeed. I wish he had done 
it to me." 

" For shame !" replied Christina, still in a 
sort of whisper. " Shame to you. so strong and 
huge . to fight with him." 

I began now to see things a little clearer; 
and I scrambled to my feet, still somewhat stag- 
gery, perhaps, but quite able to speak up for 
myself. 

" It's no fault of his," I said ; " and I'm quite 
well able to fight him. Look at his face, Miss 
Braun, and see if he hasn't got the worst of it.. 
And it was all my fault, too." 

Christina rose to her feet. "Now, shake 
hands," she said, "and don't be fools any 
more." 

My antagonist advanced sheepishly and held 



A SEA FIGHT. 55 

out the brawny fist which had proved such a 
rough playfellow. 

"I . I hope you'll forgive me," he said, with 
one glance at me and another at Christina. "I 
was quite wrong altogether ; and I know it now, 
and I'm sorry. I'm sure I don't bear any malice, 
if you don't ; and . and . how do you feel now ?" 

I assured him, in all sincerity, that I bore 
no malice whatever ; and I likewise affirmed, per- 
haps not quite so sincerely, that I felt perfectly 
well . never better in my life. Indeed, I was 
recovering fast. I had only had a stunning blow 
and a cut head. At twenty years one soon gets 
over such trifles as these. 

I then learned that when Christina was leav- 
ing the singing-room she inquired for her regular 
escort, and was told that he had gone down to- 
wards the strand with me. Something led her 
to suspect that we had quarrelled, and she fol- 
lowed us, but arrived only in time to witness the 
ignominious fall and utter defeat of one combat- 
ant. I ought to have been delighted at my de- 
feat, for it brought such tender interest and 
anxiety about me ; but I was not delighted. The 
one thing present to my mind all through was 



56 my enemy's daughter. 

that I had been " licked," and that she saw it. 
"Earl Percy sees my fall," is the reflection that 
lends most bitterness to the fate of the old hero 
in the ballad. What is the humiliation of a chief 
before any foe compared with that of a youth 
who is beaten under the very eyes of the girl 
he loves? The pity and kindness of Christina 
were bitter to me. 

On the other hand, my rival's victory did not 
seem to have crowned him with joy. He had a 
crestfallen, humbled, spaniel-like demeanour. We 
both walked home with Christina, who insisted 
on giving me her arm instead of taking mine, 
on the ground that I must be far too weak not 
to need support. 

When we reached her door I heard my con- 
queror say to her in a low tone, 

" You are not angry with me any more ?" 

"No," was the answer, given, I am bound to 
say, in anything but a forgiving tone. " Why 
should I be angry ? Good-night !" 

" Ah, but you are angry. Don't, Christina !" 

" Good-night." 

He was going away, depressed and silent, 
when she called him back and held out her hand. 



A SEA FIGHT. 57 

" No, Edward, I am not angry. I was, but 
I am not any more." 

"And may I come for you to-morrow night ?" 

"If you like!" 

"If I like!" 

He turned away rejoicing. 

She held out her hand to me without saying 
a word. But her eyes met mine : and somehow 
I went away rejoicing too. 

Next day I called upon Miss Griffin. I hardly 
knew what to say to the good spinster, and was 
much in hope, as I passed up through the bon- 
net-shop, that the organist might be not at home. 
She was in. I went upstairs and knocked at the 
little drawing - room door. Just then I heard 
voices inside, and I would have retreated ; but 
it was too late. Miss Griffin's shrill tones were 
heard : 

"Is that Mr. Banks?" 

"Yes, Miss Griffin." 

" Come in, Mr. Banks, please." 

I entered. Miss Griffin was standing up near 
her piano, on which she rested one hand, the 
fingers of which were excitedly playing an imagi- 
nary and rapid tune on the walnut. Christina 



58 my enemy's daughter. 

Braun stood in the middle of the room, and 
looked flushed and angry. My face flushed more 
deeply than hers at the mere sight of her. Miss 
Griffin's mamma was playing with a parrot in a 
corner. Seeing that Christina and Miss Griffin 
had evidently been engaged in exciting colloquy, 
I made for the mamma, and would have at once 
pretended to bury myself in conversation with 
her, but she waved me off with the back of her 
hand and with a warning gesture directed to- 
wards the two principal personages in the room, 
as one who should say, " Forbear, young man ; 
something highly important is going forward. 
Disturb it not by idle words." So I stood trans- 
fixed and said nothing, and no one said a word 
to me. 

" There's no use in talking, Christina Braun," 
Miss Griffin went on ; "I can't have you singing 
any longer in my choir unless you give up that 
horrid, odious, abominable place. Mr. Thirlwall 
won't have it ; he would not allow me to have any- 
one who sings there." 

" What harm is that place ?" Christina asked 
in a tone half-pleading, half-angry ; " I would not 
go there if I could help it. I go there, believe it, 



A SEA FIGHT. 59 

not for my pleasure. I go there because I must 
live, and my father must live. You have not a 
father, Miss Griffin." 

Mamma pursed her mouth, raised her eye- 
brows, lifted her hands, and silently appealed, 
first to me and then to the parrot, against the 
boldness of this remark. It seemed positively to 
insinuate a comparison between Christina's father 
and the late Mr. Griffin. 

" And," added Christina, " they pay me more 
money than the church can give." 

"0 Christina!" 

(t I speak to no one there." 

"But you must know it is not a proper place 
for a girl." 

" I do not know that it is not a proper place. 
Did we not often sing songs, . yes, well, and also 
play waltzes, in the choir when there were not 
people praying below ?" 

" Christina, it isn't the singing of the songs, 
as you know very well ; it's the people . the kind 
of people who go there." 

" I do not speak to the people, they do not 
speak to me, except they who sing as myself." 

"Beally, Miss Griffin," said I, striking in, 



60 my enemy's daughter. 

"there is no harm whatever in the place, and I 
think it's quite absurd and ridiculous of Mr. 
Thirl wall to go on in such a way. He's a regular 
old idiot, I think, and an ancient humbug too." 

" Thank you, Mr. Banks ; I am much obliged 
to you for your kind and respectful way of speak- 
ing of our clergyman, and the considerate manner 
in which you assist me in keeping up the dis- 
cipline of the choir. For you, Christina, you do 
not know what may become of you." 

"Nothing will become of me, God helping, . 
nothing of harm. And I may as well begin, Miss 
Griffin. Once I shall go upon the theatre and 
sing there . " 

At this point Miss Griffin seemed to think the 
discussion had gone quite far enough. She ceased 
to beat her silent tune upon the piano ; but she 
came round to the front of the instrument, de- 
liberately took off the music-book which stood on 
the little frame, shut the book up, put down the 
frame, and then closed the piano with a solemn 
bang. There was no obvious occasion for this 
performance. I interpreted it to be a sort of 
formal and ceremonial act of excommunication. 

It seemed, however, to have relieved Miss 



A SEA FIGHT. Gl 

Griffin's mind of some of its anger. She turned 
to Christina now with an expression of face rather 
grieved than severe. The excommunication once 
fairly done, she seemed stricken with pity for the 
outcast. 

"Well, Christina," she said, "if I am to 
understand that you will not give up that place . " 

" Will not give it up ? I cannot give it up." 

"Then I am very, very sorry; and I would 
keep you if I could . indeed I would, although 
perhaps you don't think it now ; but I must not 
do it, for you see, Christina, if you have a father 
to support, I have a mother, and I can't battle 
against what people say ; and so we must part. I 
hope you will do well, Christina, wherever you go ; 
only I do hope you will never be tempted to sing 
in any of those Eomanist places, whatever they 
may offer you ; and remember to be a good girl, 
and never to give up your church." 

"The church," said Christina, with a flash of 
something like scorn crossing her face, " has given 
me up, I think. But I blame you not at all, Miss 
Griffin ; you were very kind to me always . 
always." 

Poor Miss Griffin was quite dissolved in tears. 



62 my enemy's daughter. 

The very kindliest of mortals, she was in anguish 
at the part she had to play in the transaction, and 
still more, I fully believe, at the thought of the 
awful ruin of all heavenly prospects which she 
clearly saw impending over one who refused to 
follow the behests of her clergyman, and who sang 
nigger-melodies for sailors. 

Christina bade Miss Griffin good-bye ; and both 
were in tears. Then the outcast walked towards 
Miss Griffin's mamma and held out her hand. 
But the mamma's dignity was hurt at the dis- 
obedience and disrespect, and she drew back, 
executed the most formal of bows, and said, 
" Adieu, mademoiselle." 

Then came my turn. Christina held out 
her hand to me, and her eyes met mine. I took 
her hand and pressed it to my lips. A slight 
shriek from mamma testified to her sense of my 
scandalous conduct. Miss Griffin was absorbed 
in tears and did not see it. 

Christina left the room, and I hurried after her. 

"Mr. Banks," I heard Miss Griffin call out, 
" please don't go yet. I want to speak to you 
particularly . about the choir." 

" In five minutes, two minutes, Miss Griffin," 



A SEA FIGHT. 63 

was my retreating answer ; and I relieved myself 
by adding, in a lower tone, " the choir may go to 
the devil." 

I overtook Christina at the door. 

She abandoned the choir, then and there, never 
reappearing within its precincts. 
. And I went that night, and many nights suc- 
cessively, to the condemned and fatal singing- 
saloon. 

In little more than a week a considerable 
change was brought about in the relations of the 
personages of this story. There was first a sort 
of break-down in the arrangements of the choir, 
and one Sunday the audience had to be content 
with merely an instrumental performance. Soon 
a new bass, a new tenor, and a new soprano glad- 
dened the pious ears and hearts of the congre- 
gation. For immediately on Christina's abandon- 
ing the choir Ned Lambert did what I had felt 
sure he would do . he gave up his post and sang 
bass for that congregation no more. I had made 
up my mind never to go near the place again, 
once Christina abandoned it; and I was only 
sorry the sacrifice was not a far greater one (really 
it was not quite insignificant), that I might have 



64 my enemy's daughter. 

had the proud consciousness of voluntary martyr- 
dom. 

The affair created quite a little stir in our 
microcosm. It was talked of for fully three weeks 
. at least, three Sundays. I attended church the 
first Sunday, as unprofessional worshipper, in the 
hope that Mr. Thirlwall might make some allusion 
to us in his sermon. But he did not, and I was 
disappointed. Many eyes were turned on me, 
however, and people coming out of church and 
passing me whispered and shrugged their should- 
ers ; and I felt rather proud. The general con- 
clusion of the congregation was that we three . 
Christina Braun, Edward Lambert, and myself . 
were simply going to the devil. 



CHAPTER IV. 

" FAR ABOVE SINGING." 

Me. Beaun and his daughter still occupied the 
house in which the former had endeavoured in 
vain to win the childhood of our town to philosophy 
and science by the royal road of amusement. Our 
childhood absolutely refused even toys, if any 
manner of instruction and moral purpose were to 
come with them ; and therefore, while Mr. Braun 
still technically occupied the house, his actual 
occupancy was confined to three small rooms on 
the second-floor. He had been driven back in 
this way from stage to stage, his domain growing 
gradually smaller and smaller, like the Pope's, 
until even the little Leonine City now left him 
seemed itself only the final halting-place before 
absolute surrender of all temporal endowment. 
The shop was let to a watchmaker ; the first-floor 
was occupied by a hair-dresser ; and as one of the 
plates on the street-door bore the name of "Miss 

VOL. I. f 



66 my enemy's daughtee. 

Muncey, milliner," and I sometimes did meet 
lank and lymphatic young women on the stairs, I 
had to infer that the third-floor . the garrets, in 
fact . constituted the work-rooms and show-rooms 
of Miss Muncey. 

The little sitting-room occupied by the Brauns 
was perhaps as poorly-furnished an apartment as 
any could well be which did not proclaim actual 
destitution. A few of the poorest cane-chairs, and 
not more than a few; an arm-chair, covered with 
the cheapest flowered calico ; a central table of 
deal, with a faded, over-washed cover; these and 
an infirm sofa made up the principal part of the 
stock of furniture. There was, however, a piano 
of good tone . a relic of better clays . with which 
Christina would not part, and which indeed was 
her sole capital and " plant" as a musician. There 
were always flowers in the room, and botanical 
specimens carefully pressed and tastefully dis- 
played; there were two or three pretty vases of 
Bohemian glass ; there was Mr. Braun's flute, 
really a handsome article, with old-fashioned 
silver keys ; there was his pipe, huge, and like- 
wise silver- mounted : these and other stray pro- 
perties gave an appearance to the room which at 



"far above singing." 67 

least suggested refinement, and something like 
ornament. And I should not surely omit to men- 
tion a beautifully-carved and polished book-case, 
small, but of genuine oak and admirable work- 
manship ; and I knew the moment I saw it whose 
hand had wrought it, and whose gift it was. " It 
was given to my father," said Christina to me 
afterwards, "not to me. I would not have taken 
it, though I know poor Ned would have been 
vexed by a refusal, and so I am glad he didn't 
offer it to me." 

It was easy to understand, after an evening- 
spent in this little room, why the burden of life 
had fallen so heavily and so early upon my poor 
Christina. Her father had entirely given up all 
idea of struggling any longer with the world, 
although he was far from being too old for stout 
and stiff exertion. He was the gentlest and the 
feeblest being I ever met. He was a small, very 
small man, with a pale, thin, clearly-marked, 
handsome face ; a benevolent, mild, and placid 
expression ; soft, silky, scanty gray hair ; and 
large, dark, gray-blue eyes. His eyes were pre- 
cisely like his daughter's, much darker than his 
complexion would have led you to expect ; but 



68 my enemy's daughter. 

there the resemblance ceased. Mr. Braun spoke 
English admirably ; he played the piano and the 
flute well ; he was an accomplished botanist, and 
knew a good deal about chemistry and astronomy. 
He talked much of flowers, of stars, of the poetry 
of nature, of shadows and sunrises, of beautiful 
and gentle things generally ; and of the poets and 
writers who sang and discoursed of such things. 
When he was not playing his flute, he commonly 
sat and smoked his pipe, the bowl of which rested 
on the ground, all the evening through. He 
always rose early, and walked on the hills or by 
the sea ; rose none the less early though he had 
been out on the strand watching some planet or 
constellation till long past midnight ; and while 
Christina provided him with the means of living, 
he repaid her with fresh flowers, and observations 
on the heavens, and the beauty of life, and the 
divine purpose in everything. He was, indeed, a 
thoroughly-impracticable, well-meaning, good-for- 
nothing, lovable old man. He would have pro- 
voked me terribly, I think, if I were his son ; but 
he did not seem to provoke Christina. She ap- 
peared to take it as quite a matter of course that 
her father should smoke his pipe, or botanise, 



"far above singing." 69 

while she toiled to get money and provide dinner, 
and make the two ends meet. He was always 
sweet, mild, and happy. He had heen blessed, or 
cursed, with that calm, light nature which can 
put away trouble or responsibility in a moment, 
and find enjoyment anywhere. He had lost wife 
and children . six children . all of whom he dearly 
loved ; but he lived on tranquil, and spoke of them 
as having been happily transferred to amaranthine 
bowers, where they had only to await his coming. 
What he had himself done to merit that sure 
translation to immortal bliss, I never could learn ; 
but it was clear that his mind was quite made up 
on that point. So, too, of his daughter. She 
reverenced in him, as pure and lofty religious 
feeling, that which I always regarded merely as 
the physical placidity of a temperament not sus- 
ceptible of any strong or keen emotion. An 
innocently-selfish, mildly-egotistic man, you could 
not help loving him, and I at least could not help 
sometimes despising him. While the stars shone, 
while the flowers bloomed, when the snow covered 
the ground and the frost made the brambles look 
like sprays and spars of crystal, he was happy, and 
could not be otherwise. He could forget hunger 



70 my enemy's daughter. 

in the contemplation of a flower ; all humanity in 
the polishing of a stone. He cared as little for 
active thought as for active pursuits ; and knew 
less of politics than an American infant generally 
does. The political agitations, struggles, suffer- 
ings, aspirations of his own countrymen, inspired 
him only with a tranquil scorn. He often asked, 
with utter contempt in his tone, what it mattered 
who owned the Rhine, so long as men could see 
its waters shining as brightly as ever in the sun, 
and darkening as before in the shadows of the 
everlasting hills. 

"German unity!" he would say scornfully, 
" Germany has unity. Has she not Goethe and 
Novalis and Jean Paul ; has she not Fichte ? 
Hapsburg owns not less Kant than Brandenburg ; 
Bavaria can sing the songs of Uhland and Arndt, 
as well as Suabia. Our unity is in our soul, and 
our language, and our worship of the beautiful 
and divine. The rest is nothing . no, nothing 
at all, or mere smoke and cloud veiling the glow 
of the heaven, as Faust himself has said." 

Mr. Braun never looked one moment beyond 
the present, and was angry in his mild way with 
anyone who did. He was displeased with Chris- 



"FAR ABOVE SINGING." 71 

tina for singing of nights in the Cave of Harmony, 
not because he had any objection to the place, or 
the company, or the kind of life to which it in- 
troduced her : not because it overtasked her, or 
threatened to wear out her voice, or endangered 
her in any way ; but because she had to leave him 
for some hours every evening, and he was lonely 
without her. So he was vexed with her, and 
chafed in his own small way, and was jealous, as 
if her leaving him was a wilful act of neglect, or in- 
difference to his happiness. He did not concern 
himself to think who would pay the rent if poor 
Christina had not always had spirit and sense 
enough to act for herself. A sort of philosopher, 
he was perhaps wise in his own conceit of life's 
theory and purpose ; but philosophers of that 
school ought never to have any children. I have 
often thought that when Morality blames Rousseau 
for having abandoned his children to a foundling- 
hospital, it blames him for one of the only wise 
things he ever did. Better to confide them to 
the care of any institution, managed by any sane 
and human creatures, than to keep them under 
his own melancholy and imbecile charge. 

I took lessons in German from Mr. Braun. 



72 my enemy's daughter. 

I really wanted to learn the language, partly for 
its own sake, and more because it was Christina's 
native tongue. But of course my chief reason 
was to have a plausible excuse for coming often 
to the house. After the lapse of a quarter I paid 
him some money. He took it passively, and laid 
it beside him. Christina coming in soon after 
found the money, made inquiry about it, and 
gave it back to me. I would have resisted, but 
she flushed so angrily that I pocketed it without 
further objection. 

" My father knows nothing about money," she 
said, "and never did. I arrange all that; it is 
good-enough task for women. He was made for 
something much better, and we always liked to 
spare him. I know he never meant to take any 
money from you; you have lost enough by us 
already." 

For she would insist upon regarding my with- 
drawal from the choir as a high, mighty, and 
chivalrous sacrifice. 

" You took this in mistake, father ?" she said, 
appealing to him; "you were not thinking; you 
took it, not observing ?" 

" Versteht sicli" he placidly replied, waving 



' ' FAR ABOVE SINGING . " 73 

away with his hand a cloud of smoke, and 
solemnly indifferent to the whole business. I 
said no more, and what future lessons I received 
were accepted without talk of payment. 

I do not know what was the special charm 
which made me so suddenly fall in love with 
Christina Braun. Falling in love is indeed the 
most exact description of what befell me. From 
a smooth level of calm indifference I literally fell 
into a glowing deep of love. Nor did this con- 
dition seem likely to change. It was impossible 
for me not to continue loving her. To begin 
with, she was intensely, exuberantly, and above all 
things, feminine. In every glance and movement 
she now seemed to my opened eyes to diffuse some 
vague sense of womanhood all around her. As 
one is conscious of the presence of flowers which 
he does not see, as one feels the air surcharged 
with electricity before the thunderstorm, so I 
always felt the influence, the sensuous influence 
if you will, of idealised womanhood when Chris- 
tina was near. I do not know whether this sort 
of feeling can be made intelligible in any words 
of mine, but I cannot better describe the sensa- 
tion of delight, refinement, and romantic love 



74 my enemy's daughter. 

which her mere presence awakened in my soul. 
As I look back now, all the purple light of youth, 
all the glamour of poetry, all the bewitching illu- 
sions of music, seem to glorify that time when 
first Christina's presence grew a familiar influence 
to me. 

There was an extraordinary quality of quiet 
energy in her which amazed me when I came to 
appreciate it. It was not the energy which fusses 
and bustles . to most young men a terribly dis- 
enchanting and disagreeable quality. It was an 
energy which made itself silently felt : a great 
self-sufficing quality. The early necessity of 
thinking and acting for two, the impossibility of 
consulting with one who was as useless for con- 
sultation as a baby, had doubtless forced this 
quality into regular action. Christina seemed to 
be of that class of women who can make some- 
thing almost out of nothing. For easy and 
prompt adornment of her graceful figure she had 
a positive genius. I have often wondered and 
admired to see what a splendid simulation of 
imposing concert-costume she could confer upon 
herself with a little white muslin and a few scraps 
of ribbon and roses ; and she could put on an old 



" FAR ABOVE SINGING." 75 

shawl in a style that Lady Hamilton might have 
envied. 

I grew into the habit of spending every dis- 
engaged hour . and nearly the whole of every 
Sunday . in the familiar little room over the 
watchmaker's and under the milliner's. We 
sang, we played, we read, we recited, we talked 
German, we had very, very humble and modest 
suppers : we were immensely sociable, uncon- 
strained, full of sentiment, full of laughter, and 
happy. Edward Lambert came sometimes and 
took lessons on the flute from Mr. Braun, for 
which I know he contrived delicately to make 
some return in one way or another. A patient, 
manly creature, he sometimes spent his whole 
evening at his flute-lesson, while Christina and I 
talked or sang duets on the nights when she was 
free. I knew that he loved her, dearly and dis- 
interestedly, without selfishness and without hope. 
I knew that she regarded him as one might regard 
a fond and faithful Newfoundland dog. After a 
while he ceased to come very often, and when he 
did come he talked chiefly to Mr. Braun. 

These were pleasant times, and free. They 
gave a sort of mild foretaste or breath of the Bohe- 



76 my enemy's daughter. 

mian life which awaited some of us. Whatever of 
intellectual culture I have ever had, I owe its de- 
velopment to these days and evenings, to that mild 
old man, to that girl. I learned to read French and 
Italian and German, and to speak these languages 
fluently enough, if not always very gracefully and 
grammatically. Years and years after, a French- 
woman told me I spoke French like a German 
and not like an Englishman. A more happy, 
harmless life no youth could well have spent. 

"Was I very much grieved when Ned Lambert 
left our little circle and went away to London? 
This happened when the kind of life, blended of 
Arcadia and Bohemia, which I have been de- 
scribing, had lasted nearly a year. Well, I parted 
from the good fellow with a pang ; but I must as- 
suredly have felt relieved when he went away. He 
was an ambitious young fellow enough ; and his 
ambition was to become something like an artist. 
Therefore he made up his mind to be an organ - 
builder; and a chance opened for him through 
some friends in London, of which he willingly 
availed himself. I happened just to come in to 
Mr. Braun's on the day when Lambert was taking 
his final leave. He was holding in his hand a 



"far above singing." 77 

little purse, a parting keepsake from Christina, 
and twisting it awkwardly between his fingers. 

" When shall we three meet again ?" I began, 
endeavouring to say something pleasant. 

"We three? . we four!" interjected Mr. 
Braun. "lam not to be left out of the prospect. 
I hope to be at the next meeting too." 

" It must be in London, then," murmured 
poor Ned disconsolately. " I sha'n't come back 
here ever again . ever again." 

The last time I saw Lambert . not long since 
. he told me that through all the intervening 
years he never did return to the old town, and 
never would. 

"In London, then," said I; "for London we 
are all bound. We are not going to stop in this 
old place all our lives, while Ned Lambert becomes 
a great man, and makes a fortune in London." 

" I'm not likely to come to much," said Lam- 
bert ; " and I don't want to make a fortune . now." 

I saw tears sparkle in Christina's eyes. 

"Good-bye, Edward," she said; "but not for 
ever ! no, not for ever. You have been kinder 
and better than a brother to me for ever so long ; 
and I shall never, never forget you." 



78 my enemy's daughter. 

She put her arm over his shoulder, drew him 
down towards her, and kissed him twice. Then 
she turned and went abruptly into her own room. 
Ned Lambert tossed his hand in the air as a kind 
of silent parting salute to us, and in a moment 
we heard his rapid steps descending the stairs. 

"He is a good lad, Edward Lambert," said 
Mr. Braun ; "a kind, true-hearted boy. He does 
remind me of some of our German youth, with 
his large grave face, and his strong hands, and 
his soft heart. He is fond of Christina ; and he 
did ask her to marry him . ach, Gott, yes ! and 
last night again. But she could not love him in 
that way, Emanuel. She could not love him to 
marry him, as you know." And the kind old man 
looked at me with beaming, gentle eyes. 

Yes ; I did know it by this time. I must have 
been stupidly undeserving of any woman's regard 
if I had not felt before now that Christina Braun 
loved me. 



CHAPTER V. 

DEATH IN ARCADIA. 

None of us liked the singing-saloon. Not that 
there was anything bad about it except its name ; 
that, in a small country-town, was quite enough. 
In our town it did not much matter whether a 
man, woman, or institution was really bad or 
good. The sole question was whether he, she, 
or it had a bad name. So it had long been our 
object that Christina should abandon the music- 
hall, and try to live by teaching singing and the 
piano. At last we resolved that a day-school 
should be opened. Yes; Mr. and Miss Braun's 
school . French, German, and music. We adver- 
tised in the local paper . rather a stretch of bold- 
ness on our part in those quiet days . and I 
brought in a copy of the paper that same evening, 
over which we gazed and laughed a good deal. 
Young ladies and gentlemen were to be taught; 



80 my enemy's daughter. 

and of course perfectly-original plans were to be 
adopted in the teaching of everything. A great 
brass-plate was got and engraved with the legend, 
" Mr. and Miss Braun's School." I crossed the 
street furtively to look at it, and report as to the 
effect ; and the thing was so far accomplished. 

Not many pupils came at first. The story of 
Christina's nightly performances had of course got 
abroad, and made mammas feel shy of such an in- 
structress. Gradually, however, a few were got 
together, all from the humbler ranks of our middle 
plateau; these brought more; and the terms being 
moderate, and a good deal taught for the money, 
things began to look a little more prosperous. 

Still, this was clearly not the kind of field 
which Christina's ambition would have sought. 
We had often indulged and talked over wild hopes 
that at some distant period we might sing to- 
gether, prima donna and primo tenore, upon some 
great stage, with half a metropolis for our au- 
dience. "I saw Kubini," Mr. Braun would some- 
times repeat, "in Italy, when he was your age . 
ja ivohl, I knew him too, . and he had not a finer 
voice. No ; that had he not." I report this 
eulogy of my voice without a blush. The tri- 



DEATH IN ARCADIA. 81 

bunal which is proverbially wiser than Voltaire 
has since decided, very conclusively, that rny voice 
is not quite equal to Rubini's. But at the time 
the praise was spoken it had some effect upon me 
other than to make me smile. 

In fact it had become gradually understood 
that the musical and other fortunes of Christina 
and myself were to be associated in life and for 
life, whenever fate and favour should allow us to 
begin the struggle together. We were to make 
a great name in Florence, in Paris, in London. 
I need not say that we did not pause to consider 
whether any difficulties were likely to arise in the 
way of a pair who began by getting married as a 
preliminary to seeking their fortune. As to our 
solitary counsellor, he would have seen no objec- 
tion whatever to any scheme which seemed grace- 
ful, disinterested, and somewhat romantic ; and 
even if the scheme had none of these recom- 
mendations, he would have become reconciled to 
it or anything else in a quarter of an hour. So 
far, then, the common obstructions to the course 
of true love did not, in our case, rise to disturb 
the smoothness of the current. There were only 
three persons in the world to be consulted, or who 

VOL. I. G 



82 my enemy's daughter. 

cared a straw about the matter, and they were 
quite in harmony on the subject. 

At least we were quite in harmony so far as 
the love and the main wish of two lives were con- 
cerned. But the feelings of Christina and myself 
did not always flow in the same channel. She 
was a true-born artist ; I never was, except in the 
merely technical sense, an artist at all. She would 
have given up a fortune for a lyric success ; if I 
were assured of an easy income, I should no more 
have thought of becoming a professional singer 
than of becoming an amateur fireman. Moreover, 
all her plans and projects now were for splendid 
success under my leadership. Like all women 
who have any imagination, she saw her lover as 
a hero destined to triumph on every field he chose 
to enter. She always arranged the plan of the 
future as if we could not fail. I looked forward 
with a secret dread of failure to every undertaking 
in which I was likely to bear a part. For all that 
is talked of man's idle self-conceit, I think an 
ignoble distrust of our own capabilities is one of 
the commonest of masculine weaknesses. In my 
case, indeed, my distrust was well justified in one 
sense ; but it helped, more than anything else, to 



DEATH IN ARCADIA. 83 

spoil some part of my life. Christina really knew 
what she could do ; and she was only waiting for 
the time to do it. She was quite happy, cooking 
her father's sausage, and lighting his pipe; but 
all the time she knew herself an embryo prima 
donna, and regarded the musical world as only 
waiting for her. There were times when I felt 
something like a pang of pity for her inexperience, 
and her confident, sanguine nature. I ought ra- 
ther to have pitied my own inferior courage, miser- 
ably-inferior endowments, inferior organisation al- 
together. Knowing what she became . knowing 
what, under brighter auspices, she might have 
become . it now seems to me the very blindness 
of affection which made her dream for a moment 
of placing herself and her career under the guid- 
ance and guardianship of one so miserably un- 
worthy. 

I often wondered how, with her ideas and her 
hopes, she could have endured singing in a vul- 
gar provincial music-hall. I told her as much. 

"I would sing anywhere," she said, "rather 
than be in debt. Father could do nothing, and 
I must use every power I have, or he must starve. 
I would have sung my songs in the streets rather 



84 my enemy's daughter. 

than see him troubled to get bread. So little 
makes him happy, that it would be a shame if he 
were to want anything ; and then he is old, and 
he remains not long, perhaps ;" and tears stood 
in her eyes. "I sang in a concert-saloon in Co- 
logne, a room near the theatre ; I wonder if it's 
there now ? I could find it in a moment, if I 
were there ; we will go there one day and look at 
the outside of it; but only the outside, for I 
hated the place itself. Yes, I sang there when 
I was a little one, . yes, only ten years old." 
"But you were not born in Cologne ?" 
" No, no ; much farther away from this . across 
the Vistula." (She mentioned an old historic 
Prussian town.) "We only came to Cologne 
when we were coming to England ; and we only 
came to England to go to America. But father 
has not the art of getting forward in anything ; 
and so we remained a whole year in Cologne on 
our way to England, and now we have been many 
years in England on our way to America ; and I 
don't suppose we shall ever get there, unless ue 
go there some day to visit your brother, Emanuel." 
" But we shall visit your birthplace some day, 
shall we not, dearest ?" 



DEATH IN ARCADIA. 85 

" I don't know, Emanuel ; I don't like to 
think of it. I was not happy there . 0, not 
happy at all, but very miserable ; and I do 
not want ever to see the place any more. It 
is like a discord, or a broken string, or a harsh 
note, or something of that kind, coming into 
some beautiful delicious piece of music, when I 
turn from now to then. It was all so dull, and 
without colour, and sad and harsh. My father 
and brother never could agree." (I should men- 
tion that I was aware of one of Mr. Braun's sons 
being still alive.) "Louis was very harsh to 
father, and not forbearing. I don't remember 
what it was all about ; but I can guess now that 
Louis thought . well, I suppose he thought my 
father had not been very prudent or persevering ; 
but I know he was harsh, and he scolded, and his 
wife scolded. She was very cold and hard and 
religious, and she always scolded me. One day, 
I remember, she told me I had too great an appe- 
tite, and ate too much for a little beggar-girl ; and 
I cried half the night through, and then got up 
and tried to steal away, to drown myself from one 
of the old bridges. But an old night-watchman 
found me, . I remember him so well; he had a 



86 my enemy's daughter. 

horn and a spear of some kind, . and lie brought 
me back ; and she beat me, and I so hated her ! 
At last father said he would go away, and I was 
delighted. I did not care where we went . any- 
where, so that we went away. Louis indeed was 
not bad, for he gave us money to go ; and she 
was not bad either. I think she must have been 
a good woman, but hard ; and then she had chil- 
dren of her own, and we were mere dependents. 
So I came to sing in Cologne, Emanuel, and then 
here ; and so ends my long, long story." 

During the whole of the story, which she told 
in a dreamy kind of tone, her eyes and lips had 
marked its incidents with the symphony of deep 
expression. She lived the old life quite over 
again, as she thus ran it through for me. I was 
glad when the story was done, so painful was the 
emotion it had evidently caused her. 

"How happy for me, dearest Christina, that 
you did not go to America ! I only wish I had 
known you sooner, and were rich for your sake, 
and you should never have sung in a wretched 
saloon." 

"I sang very badly in the place here lately; 
but I think it was because the people there knew 



DEATH IN ARCADIA. 87 

nothing about singing, and there was no use in 
trying to sing well." 

"You sang only too well for me; you bewil- 
dered me. I never heard such singing before . 
indeed, I never heard any singing before, in the 
true sense." 

"Ah, I always sang my best when you were 
there. I saw you the very first night, and sang 
for you. I loved you even then, Emanuel, though 
I thought you came with no good will to me. 
Was I not angry and rude ? Ach ! I think I loved 
you always, before even that night, . yes from the 
very first." 

"And will always, to the very last?" I whis- 
pered. 

"Always, . 0, always, . if you remain still 
what you are, what I believe you to be. And if 
not, then . " 

"Then, dearest?" 

" Then all my light will go out, Emanuel, and 
I shall be miserable for ever. 0, if I ever think 
you do not love me beyond everything in this 
world, then I shall hate you . no, I don't believe 
I ever could hate you ; but I shall be wretched, 
and perhaps make both of us unhappy for our 



88 my enemy's daughter. 

lives. But I think that you will never change ; 
I knew from the very first that you would some 
time come to love me ; and now I know that you 
will love me always. Ah, how bright life is now !" 

Her eyes sparkled in tears. We were alone 
at this time in the little old room. She seated 
herself at the piano and sang one of her German 
hymns with even more than her wonted passion 
of pathos. I sat listening in the deepening twi- 
light of the calm summer evening, happy . trail - 
scendently rapturous and happy. 

Those were bright days. I have lingered long 
over them here, although they sounded but as the 
overture of my life, and really formed no part of 
the drama itself. I have lingered over them, be- 
cause they were so happy and because they were 
so brief. 

How long might we have gone on thus peace- 
fully and happily, content with merely playing the 
prelude of real existence ? When should we have 
married, and begun the business of our life-drama 
in good earnest ? These are speculations which 
I used to be fond of going over and over in my 
mind, but which I can hardly expect anybody else 
to follow with interest. I dismiss them here from 



DEATH IN ARCADIA. 89 

my pages ; but the words I have written may re- 
main, for they will serve to indicate thus early 
that the drama was never played out as we had 
prearranged it. 

The first discordant note which Fate struck in 
was the death of Christina's father. The mild old 
man passed suddenly but very quietly out of life. 
One evening he complained of having a headache 
and cold feet. When I came that night a doctor 
was with him. I remained all night. Whatever 
malady had seized my poor old friend kept a firm 
hold. Towards morning he talked a good deal, 
now in English, now in French, now in German, 
intelligibly but not coherently, of his early home, 
his wanderings, his lost wife (whom now he saw 
in Christina), his family one by one, his flowers. 
He murmured stray scraps of German poems : 
" Ueber alien Gipfeln ist Buh" . those exquisite, 
mournful, consoling lines which came from Goethe's 
soul and hung late upon his dying lips ; and he 
whispered now that he was going to learn all the 
secrets of the Creation ; and he repeated faintly 
two lines from Uhland : 

" Da sind die Tage lang geiiug, 
Da sind die Niichte mild." 



90 my enemy's daughter. 

Towards the end he brightened up into clearer 
consciousness, and called Christina by her name. 
I remember with a peculiar pang how he touched 
Christina's hand and then mine, smiled upon us 
in the old gentle way, full of trust and serenity, 
and so died. He looked only a little paler and 
milder in death than in life. 

After this came a long sad interval, sweetened, 
I must own, to me by the consciousness that my 
presence and my love must be still more needful 
to Christina than before. 



CHAPTER VI. 

CHRISTINA AND I. 

The same little room, unchanged save for the ab- 
sence of one of its old inmates, whose flute, pipe, 
and books stood untouched in their familiar former 
places. Christina and I were alone. We had 
been talking long and earnestly. She arose and 
went to the window, and looked silently and 
thoughtfully into the soft summer night- air. The 
breath of an exquisite day still haunted somehow 
the very pavement of the street below, and seemed 
to soften the hum and the tread of the people who 
passed under our window. The stars were faint 
in the violet sky, from which the light of day had 
not yet wholly faded. 

Christina remained for a while motionless and 
silent, one hand keeping back her hair, the other 
arm resting on the side of the open window. This 
was one of those evenings at the close of summer 
when the dusk seems to descend suddenly like a 



92 my enemy's daughter. 

veil ; and as I looked admiringly and lovingly on 
her face, turned in profile to me and gazing west- 
ward, the roseate light which shone on it suddenly 
went out, and her cheek seemed pale and melan- 
choly. As the room appeared to darken, she looked 
away from where the light in the west had been, 
and turned towards me smiling, with a sweet, sad 
expression, which I see even now. 

" Emanuel," she said, "you have made me 
happy . happy, although we have lost my poor 
father. I never before knew what it was to feel 
even an hour's happiness. My life was always 
cold and hard, and I did not hope for much better 
on earth. Now I believe in happiness, for I be- 
lieve in love. Do you know that I tried all I could 
to love poor Edward Lambert ; he was so fond of 
me, and so good : but I could not. I did my best: 
I wished and prayed to love him, and I could not. 
I do not know what would have happened to me 
but for you. I know I never could have stayed 
with my brother in that place, which would be 
strange to me now. I think I should have had to 
find out the old bridge where I was going to drown 
myself before, and complete the work this time. 
What would have become of me if Iliad gone there?" 



CHRISTINA AND I. 93 

" What would have hecome of me . ? " I asked, 
with something of reproach at least in my voice. 

"I don't know. I thought perhaps you would 
have been as happy without me, . but stop, don't 
scold me . indeed I don't think so now. If I suc- 
ceeded in the world . " 

" And didn't fling yourself from the bridge." 

"And didn't fling myself from the bridge . 
don't laugh at me, that was quite a possibility too 
. if I didn't drown myself, but lived and suc- 
ceeded, and made a great noise in the world, and 
got money, then you should have heard of me, for 
I would have come to you. If not, then you should 
never have heard or known anything more of me. 
I think that is what I meant to do, if I clearly 
meant to do anything. But you have changed all 
that, Emanuel, and it only remains . " 

"It only remains to arrange our plans and t<> 
be happy." 

" We will think of our plans to-morrow, 
when we are a little more calm and composed. 
All this has come on us rather suddenly, and I 
scarcely slept last night, Emanuel, with thinking 
of you, and how soon I must leave you. Then, 
even when I fell asleep at last towards morning, I 



94 my enemy's daughter. 

had such a horrid dream ; I dreamt that you your- 
self, with your own lips, told me calmly I had 
hetter go . that we had better separate ; and I 
awoke in misery. But that, thank Heaven ! has 
not come true, and I feel that we are acting the 
wisest part. Life is not long enough for separa- 
tion, is it, dearest ? and I know my Emanuel will 
not suffer loss in the end by his sacrifice. I see 
the future all bright before us . as bright as the 
sky was just now . that is, before the evening's 
red had faded and the darkness come up." 

Sacrifice ! My sacrifice apparently was that I 
consented to be loved as a man does not expect 
to be loved a second time in this world. 

Let me explain the source and meaning of the 
conversation I have just described. 

The death of Christina's father ought, in ac- 
cordance with ordinary usage and respect for pub- 
lic opinion, to have somewhat changed the manner 
of our intercourse ; but it did not . I still spent 
every evening with Christina as before. I sat 
beside her while she made her mourning-dress ; 
I was beside her in the deepest of her affliction, 
and in its gradual subsidence. When the funeral 
had been long over, and the clergyman and one 



CHRISTINA AND I. 95 

or two other friends who came out of mere kind- 
ness had ceased to visit her, I came regularly 
every evening, and sat for hours with her just as 
before. I can say literally that all the time I did 
not give to business or to sleep I gave to her. I 
always left her with reluctance, though the sepa- 
ration was but for a few hours. I always hastened 
eagerly to her, although only a few hours had 
passed since our last meeting. "VVe walked to- 
gether of evenings on the hills and by the sea, 
and watched the line of light that streamed from 
the west until it seemed to fade into the waves 
and the night and the stars came up. I learned 
from her to know each constellation that lights 
our northern horizon. Her father had taught her, 
like himself, to live among the stars and love 
them. I loved to hear her talk as much as to hear 
her sing . ay, "far above singing." My whole na- 
ture was quickened and purified by hers ; it was the 
old, old story of Cymon and Iphigenia over again. 
Of course it must have been dreadfully im- 
proper, not to say dangerous, thus to spend long 
evenings after evenings together and alone. But 
we never thought it so, and indeed never thought 
about the matter at all. I know that nothing 



96 my enemy's daughter. 

could have been purer than our love, more inno- 
cent than our intercourse. I do not recommend 
that sort of thing as a rule . I see all the danger 
of it ; I see that the two very best people in the 
world . and we, good lack, were not even the 
second-best . might have found reason to repent 
such heedless self-confidence. But it is certain 
that we trod the furnace unscathed . nay, that 
we did not even know we were girt with fire from 
which ordinary eyes would say there was no es- 
caping. I do not well know what preserved us; 
perhaps our very unconsciousness of danger, per- 
haps poetry, perhaps music, perhaps sentiment- 
ality, perhaps that generous subtle fire of youthful 
love which has so little of the animal oil in its 
composition. I can only say that, when we were 
driven out of our terrestrial paradise, we had at 
least no cause to blush, or hang our heads, or 
cover ourselves, because of shame. 

Of course, however, this was not the view of 
the matter taken by our neighbours. It was not 
likely that in such a miserable little town, en- 
slaved by the judgment of Mrs. Grundy, conduct 
like ours could escape gossip and criticism. The 
people living in the same house with Christina 



CHRISTINA AND I. 97 

knew of our meetings ; pupils of Christina's called 
occasionally in the evening and found us together ; 
many good-natured persons began to talk about 
us, of whom, I can say in all sincerity, we had 
never conversed. This kind of talk must at last 
reach Christina's ears ; and it did. 

One evening when I came as usual I was told 
that she was not at home ; and I was much sur- 
prised, knowing how few acquaintances she had, 
and how little she cared to visit any of them. 
The next evening the same thing occurred. The 
next day I wrote her a letter asking, somewhat 
warmly, for an explanation. I received a reply 
full of love and tenderness, begging of me not 
to come that evening, but promising to write 
again. I did not grow jealous, or suspicious, or 
angry. I knew that Christina's heart lay open 
to me ; but I became alarmed, expectant of some 
evil news ; restless, sad. I think I had from the 
beginning a foreboding that something disagree- 
able would reach us from her brother. Imme- 
diately on poor Mr. Braun's death Christina had 
written to her brother, acquainting him with the 
event, describing exactly and frankly her own posi- 
tion and prospects, and asking simply for any 

VOL. I. H 



UO MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 

advice he could give. For weeks no answer came; 
but we were not much surprised. In those days 
railways did not traverse East Prussia and connect 
Ostend with St. Petersburg. 

At last I received a little note from Christina, 
written in apparent haste, and asking me to see 
her that evening. I went at the earliest possible 
moment. It was the evening with which this 
chapter opens. 

I hurried upstairs, and found her door open. 
I went in, and saw her alone, kneeling on the 
floor, and engaged in packing up some clothes, 
books, and music. She looked up, and there was 
so sad an expression in her face, that I positively 
started. 

''Christina, my dearest," I said, kneeling on 
the ground beside her, "what on earth has hap- 
pened ? Why do you look so sad . and why would 
you not see me before ?" 

"I am going away, Emanuel," she replied, in 
a very faltering voice. 

" Going away ! Going where ? Away from 
me ? No, that I know you are not." 

"Ah, yes; it is quite true. I am going to 
Reichsberg . I must go !" 



CHRISTINA AND I. 99 

" Never ! you shall not !" 

" I must, indeed. See, Emanuel, here is my 
brother's letter. Eead what he writes." 

I took the letter and tried to read it. It was 
in German, written in a dreadful character, which 
danced before my eyes maddeningly. After some 
impatient bungling efforts, I thrust it into her hand. 

"Read it, Christina," I said; "and let me 
know the meaning of all this, for Heaven's sake !" 

She read me the letter. It was long, well- 
meaning, cold but not unkindly, intensely moral, 
pious, and philistinish. It expressed well-regu- 
lated regret for the death of Mr. Braun, but it 
made it a duty to allude rather pointedly to his 
faults and his weaknesses. It showed how these 
faults and weaknesses had now left the daughter 
whom he, the father, so professed to love, home- 
less and unprovided with any means, at scarcely 
nineteen years of age, in a far-off foreign country. 
It expressed a hope that Mr. Braun had found 
in dying that spiritual comfort and faith which 
he ostentatiously rejected during his lifetime. 

All this I listened to somewhat impatiently 
as Christina put into half-intelligible English its 
long sentences. But the point of the story lay 



100 my enemy's daughter. 

in the concluding passages, and these soon se- 
cured my whole attention. Louis Braun disap- 
proved and deplored the kind of life his sister 
had led as a singer, utterly demurred to her idea 
of ultimately going on the stage, and enjoined, 
nay insisted on her immediately leaving England 
and placing herself under his protection. He 
enclosed some abominable Prussian notes for the 
purpose of assisting her to undertake the journey, 
which he recommended her to make by way of 
steamer or sailing-vessel from London or Hull to 
Dantzic. 

" It's kind of Louis," Christina stammered 
out when she had read to the end. "You see, 
Emanuel, he has a good heart, and means for 
the best. I can do nothing else. I must go; 
and I will help him in his business, and attend 
to his shop. But I will go on the stage and sing 
yet one day, for all that." 

" You shall not go to him !" I exclaimed. 
" You shall be the servant of no brother, and 
attend to no shop. What right has your brother 
to control you ? What has he ever done for you, 
that he should attempt to order you about in that 
way ? What account of your movements have 



CHRISTINA AND I. 101 

you to render to him ? Leave it to rne ; Til write 
to him." 

" Louis knows not one word of English ; and, 
dear Emanuel, I don't think your German would 
be quite certain to explain itself clearly to him." 

"Now, I know you don't think of going," I 
said, warmly clasping her; "you never could 
smile in that way if you thought of leaving me. 
"Write yourself, then, and tell your brother that 
he may go . I mean that when you really needed 
his protection he did not offer it, and that now 
you don't want it, and will have none of it. No, 
don't write that . of course you would not . but 
write and tell him you will not and cannot go." 

" But what can we do, Emanuel?" she asked, 
looking up at me with her large eyes, now all 
sadness and seriousness. " My brother's letter 
is not all ; but my pupils . I did not like to tell 
you before . are all dropping away. Yes, it is 
quite true ; soon, I fear, I shall have none. The 
people here talk so much ; and now they talk of 
us, who never did them any harm. Yesterday 
a lady who had always been my good friend took 
away her three girls. After the holidays, some 
always do not come back; and this time I shall 



102 my enemy's daughtek. 

have very, very few. I met Miss Griffin a week 
ago, and she spoke very strangely and coldly to 
me. I do not care about my brother much . 
I hardly know him at all; but I see that I had 
better go to him, and even for your sake I must 
go ; and perhaps . 0, perhaps, my own dear 
Emanuel . we may meet once again." 

" Once again ! We will never part . never ! 
Why cannot we at once put a stop to the talk 
of all these people? Why cannot we be mar- 
ried now . to-morrow? We do not want much 
to make us happy. Listen, Christina . hear what 
a salary I have ; in a place like this we might 
live on it for ever ;" and I whispered its amount 
. about as much as a fast young Londoner might 
spend in gloves and cigars. 

Christina made no answer. Was she over- 
whelmed by the largeness of my means, or ren- 
dered aghast by their smallness ? 

" We shall be the happiest people in the 
world," I urged. "You can give music-lessons, 
if you like ; or we will give concerts together. 
Why, the singers at that concert in the Assem- 
bly Rooms last night were good-for-nothing hum- 
bugs, I have been told; and yet people paid to 



CHRISTINA AND I. 103 

hear them just because they came from London. 
I am sure no one of them had a voice anything 
like yours. We only want to get known. We 
can't give musical entertainments together now, 
that's quite clear ; hut Mr. and Mrs. Emanuel 
Temple Banks would sound famously, nicht wahr?" 
said I, endeavouring to become jocular. " Or 
suppose I come out as a blind singer, like Yult, 
in the story . Eichter's story . your poor father 
read to us so patiently when we were not listening 
to half of it ? Suppose I be a blind singer, and 
you my wife or sister, sustaining and guiding 
me ? I think it would draw splendidly." 

" Nonsense, Emanuel ; you must not talk 
such nonsense," said Christina, smiling never- 
theless, though perhaps a watery smile. " We 
cannot be married yet, it would be too rash ; 
and what would people say ?" 

"What should we care? Let them say what 
they please. It doesn't appear that the people 
who concern themselves about us say such very 
nattering things already that we need court their 
good opinion. Let them speak well or ill of us 
. there is a world elsewhere," I exclaimed, in 
splendid Coriolanus fashion. 



104 my enemy's daughter. 

"There is, there is indeed, Emanuel!" she 
said, springing up and with brightening eves ; 
" there is a world elsewhere, thank Heaven ! 
which is not like this narrow and miserable little 
place. 0, who would live here and stagnate, when 
there are places where life has a chance of success !" 

I saw that she was yielding, and I pressed my 
advantage. I clasped her in my arms, and vowed 
I would not release her until she had pledged 
herself never to leave me. 

"How could I refuse any longer?'' she said 
at last. " You have prevailed, my own ; ah, I 
am afraid I was only too willing that you should 
prevail. If you are not unwilling to sacrifice 
yourself for a poor singing girl, what can she- 
do but accept the sacrifice when she loves you so 
dearly as I do ?" 

It was then that she gently withdrew from me 
for a moment, and went to the window, as we saw 
her at the opening of this chapter. "Dost thou 
look at the stars, my star ?" 

We spoke but little of our plans and prospects- 
that night ; we were too happy for talk. Strange 
thing in mortal life, we knew we were happy ! It 
is not retrospect alone which throws for me a 



CHRISTINA AND I. 105 

golden glory round that unforgotten evening; I 
knew at the hour that a golden atmosphere floated 
round us hoth. 

Christina had utterly flung away the early 
doubt and despondency of the evening, and re- 
turned to the old joyous self-confidence. She 
looked at the future with the brightest eyes. 

" Xo chance of our failing, Emanuel," she 
said ecstatically. 

" And even if we do fail, my dearest," I re- 
plied, "what then? We shall be none the less 
happy. I do not care one rush for any success 
in life while we can live for each other and be 
happy. We only value life itself that we may 
love each other and be happy." 

She smiled a triumphant smile. "Have no 
fear," she said ; " we shall have love and happi- 
ness and success too. I know we shall ; I see 
the future as clear as to-day. Now, dearest, you 
must go. I shall see you to-morrow night, shall 
I not ?" 

Needless to give my answer . rather, I should 
say, to describe it. As I was leaving, my eye 
fell upon the trunk which she had been packing 
when I came in. 



106 my enemy's daughter. 

" You may undo your work of packing now, 
Uebchen," I said smilingly. 

"Nay, is it worth while?" she asked, smiling 
with a significance I did not understand. "Re- 
member the world elsewhere." 

Need I say how we parted '? Need I tell how 
often I walked backward and forward under her 
window that night ? Need I say that I felt the 
happiest and the proudest of human creatures? 
Need I say how I lay awake, and tossed half 
the night through, recalling every word, every 
glance, every kiss : how I shaped out plan after 
plan for our future path of life ; how I felt all 
the passion and the ecstasy, without any of the 
doubts and feverish fears and torturing pangs, of 
love ? 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE PATHS DIVIDE. 

I have already said that the one tiling which 
gave me any uneasiness as to the future was 
Christina's passionate desire to go on the stage. 
This had not, indeed, been a discordant note in 
our harmony ; hut it was one I always endea- 
voured not to touch. I kept the question as 
much as I could out of sight ; I compromised 
with it, made myself believe it would arrange 
itself somehow. In fact, I was afraid of it, hut 
still kept hoping it would come to nothing ; for 
the more and more I loved Christina, the more 
and more I wished to keep her wholly to my- 
self, the more jealous I grew of any art, 
any profession, which could divide her thoughts 
with me and my love. I could have lived in a 
desert island with her for ever . yes, I still think 
I could . and never wearied of her, or longed for 
other companionship. Doubtless to most persons 



108 my enemy's daughter. 

such a profession will seem merely the conscious 
or unconscious exaggeration of sentiment ; doubt- 
less in their case it would be so. I am speaking 
of myself . of my own heart, and of what I know. 
I could have lived with her . we two alone . a 
long life through, and known no weariness or 
change if she knew none. The first strong emo- 
tion of all my life was love for her ; and the more 
I grew to love her, the more jealous I became of 
the art which she so loved. 

I should have been glad to compromise for a 
life of music-teaching and singing at concerts 
and oratorios, and such milder and safer paths 
of the lyric art. Indeed, I had myself had sev- 
eral engagements at local performances of the 
kind, and was, as I have mentioned already, be- 
coming a sort of small, very small, celebrity. I 
was saving a little money to begin married life 
withal, and was very economical and careful, my 
whole heart being set on one object; neverthe- 
less, the general impression of respectable and 
good people in our circle still was that I was 
simply going to the devil. 

Now the attorney in whose office I daily 
worked was a very respectable man. He was a 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 109 

pious man, and sang very loud in church. He 
was also a very pompous man. He had a very 
respectable, pious, and pompous wife. He con- 
sorted with the rector ; he sometimes dined with 
the local lord ; and at the annual flower-show 
his wife was always taken notice of and politely 
spoken to by an evangelical countess, and by the 
wives of the county members. 

The very morning after I had made my pact 
with Christina, I was summoned to my employer's 
room almost immediately on his reaching the 
office. When I came into the presence of Mr. 
Bollington . that was his name . I saw, by the 
very way in which he settled his neck into his 
collar, that something was up. I may say that I 
never liked Mr. Bollington ; his manner somehow 
seemed always to convey to me the idea that he 
regarded a salaried clerk as simply a poor devil. 

"0, ah, Mr. Banks," he began. " Yes ; I 
want to speak to you. Close the door. Thank 
you ; that'll do. Mr. Banks, I hear you are 
getting very much into the way of singing at 
nights at concerts and oratorios, and all that 
kind of thing. Now, that is not quite a legal 
sort of thing, nor quite respectable in our lino 



110 my enemy's daughter. 

of business ; and I am rather afraid it will tell 
against us, } r ou know. I am very particular, Mr. 
Banks, as you know. Law is rather a particular 
sort of business. People say law is jealous, and 
won't have any rival, don't they? I think some 
poet or novelist, or somebody, says something of 
the kind. I don't think it will do, Mr. Banks ; 
I don't indeed. Law is drier and duller than 
music ; but I think you'll find it better in the 
long-run." 

I was a good deal embarrassed by this address. 
I had no respect for Mr. Bollington ; I knew him 
to be merely a stupid, respectable old ass ; but 
respectability has somehow an awful sort of halo 
of divine right yet lingering about it, and it im- 
presses the Bohemian more than he cares to ac- 
knowledge. I, an embryo Bohemian, had always 
to make a little mental struggle to assert myself 
against this respectable member of society. Now, 
however, there were other reasons to embarrass 
me; he seemed actually inspired with a purpose 
to destroy all my projects. 

I stammered out something about being fond 
of music, and not seeing any harm in such devo- 
tion. 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. Ill 

"Pardon rne ; I have not said there was any 
harm. A taste for music is very respectable : and 
I am the last man in the world likely to find fault 
with an inclination which some of the most re- 
spectable persons I know, even in my profession, 
cultivate, . in a manner which, in fact, adds to 
their respectability, I may say. But that is in 
an amateur way, Mr. Banks ; in an amateur way. 
It is quite different when one comes to be a pro- 
fessional performer ; and I hear, Mr. Banks, that 
you have been going quite into the professional 
line of late. Now, you have not consulted me on 
the subject, or ascertained whether I considered 
such an occupation quite consistent with your po- 
sition here ; and I have therefore found it neces- 
sary to send for you, and . in fact, to open the 
subject myself." 

" I really didn't suppose," I said, " that you 
could have any objection to my improving my 
income by any means . any honourable means, of 
course . which did not interfere with my character 
or my business here. I have not been inattentive 
to the office." 

"Pardon me; I have made no charge of the 
kind." 



112 my enemy's daughter. 

" I do not see why one may not have different 
occupations at different hours of the day." 

"In a general way there may be no objection. 
Many occupations admit of such combination ; 
but we are now speaking of a particular case. 
This firm, Mr. Banks, has a character for strict 
attention to business, and business of a peculiar 
and exclusively respectable kind. I don't say 
that in a certain kind of low criminal business, 
for example, there is necessarily any reason why 
a solicitor should object to his clerk singing at 
concerts after office-hours. I think it quite pos- 
sible that such singing and a certain kind of 
criminal business might combine very well. But 
ours is not a business of that class, Mr. Banks. 
Our clients are of quite a different order of life, 
and they have strong and very proper views on 
the all-importance of respectability." 

"But really, Mr. Bollington" . I had now 
quite reasserted myself; stupidity had washed 
all the imposing gilt off respectability, and I 
could have laughed at or sworn at it . "really, 
Mr. Bollington, I don't quite see that I am bound 
to give up everything to such views." 

" Not bound at all, Mr. Banks ; certainly not 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 113 

bound. You are not an articled clerk, and are 
quite free to act as you please. Let the conver- 
sation close for the present. Be so good as to 
think the matter over. I am sure you understand 
my determination. You can therefore decide for 
yourself, and let me know, and we can recur to 
the subject, if necessary, say the day after to- 
morrow. And now, Mr. Banks, about the papers 
in the case of Davys and Pontypool, if you please." 

This was of course an ultimatum. A greater 
contretemps could hardly have occurred. All my 
plans for the present were based on that very 
combination of music and law which Mr. Boiling- 
ton declared to be only possible, if at all, in the 
case of a very low sort of criminal business. This 
was a sharp and sudden blow to me ; and I had 
the whole day to bear it before I could pour out 
my bad news and my feelings to Christina. 

Grimly enough I went to her lodgings that 
evening. I thought the very sky looked gray 
above me ; and Christina's gladsome confident 
eyes were a sort of new pang and reproach to 
me. 

" Emanuel, I am so delighted to hear it !" 
was the reply with which she broke out when, 

VOL. I. I 



114 my enemy's daughter. 

with a sad face, I had got through niy dismal 
news. " I am delighted from my heart to hear 
it ! Why should you stay in so miserable a place, 
and be paid a few wretched shillings a-week, you 
who are better than them all; you with your voice 
. and your talents . for you know I never would 
care for mere voice. No ; you are rid of it all 
now, and are free. Now you will have to throw 
your soul into the art you are fitted for, my dear 
Emanuel. Ill news, dear ! This is the best and 
brightest of news to Christina. I always feared 
that you would be content to work and wait here, 
and I have had enough of working and waiting. 
You are so easily contented . 0, far too easily 
contented ; but only because you are modest of 
your talents, and do not know what you deserve 
and what you can be, as I do. No, no; my 
Emanuel will be no more a slave, but an artist. 
Tell him so, and be free." 

There was something pitiful to me in hearing 
the enthusiastic girl run on in this wild way. 

" Alas, Christina," I said, "it is not so easy 
to make a great way in the world as you think, . 
you girls, with your vivid imagination and your 
confidence. You see me with eyes which will 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 115 

guide nobody else. Think how difficult it is to 
get on in this place." 

"In this place! Yes; but who would think 
of this place ? Leave it, my Emanuel ! London 
and Paris . these are the places for us. Why 
delay here at all ? why not go to London at once, 
and together? why, dearest Emanuel, why?" 
Her impatience rose to something like wildness. 
" Because, my love," I said, looking as wise 
and as cheerful as I could contrive to do, "be- 
cause in London people who have neither money 
nor friends may have to starve." 

"But we have some money. I have saved 
some ; a little . and not so very little. See !" 

And she showed me in triumph a few poor 
sovereigns heaped up in a drawer, where anybody 
who chanced to enter her room might have found, 
and, if so inclined, stolen them. I could hardly 
keep back my tears . I was only a boy, after all ; 
and there was something unspeakably pitiful and 
touching in the pride and confidence built upon 
the few poor golden coins. 

" My dearest, your money and mine would not 
keep us long in London. People must endeavour 
to make a beginning where they have friends." 



116 my enemy's daughter. 

" Then you are content to give up your career; 
give up your chance of becoming a great artist . 
as I know you would be ?" 

"No, not give up, my own Christina, but just 
wait only a little for a better chance. Listen, you 
wild girl; we must give up something . " 

"But listen, Emanuel. I have set my very 
soul on being a great singer, and on your being 
one too. You may think me a mad creature ; but 
I know that in this I am wiser than you. Don't 
stop on the way, and don't be afraid. I am not 
afraid ; why should you . a man ?" 

"You are not afraid," I said, taking both her 
hands, and trying to pet her into calmness, "be- 
cause you are a generous, imaginative, darling 
girl, who, once you love a man, think the world 
must see him as you do, and that he must turn 
out something great. I know more of the world, 
and of myself, than you do. I only ask that we 
should be patient for the sake of each other. I 
cannot do anything which might make you un- 
happy. You may be ready to sacrifice yourself; 
but don't ask me to sacrifice you." 

"Listen, Emanuel," she said, disengaging her 
hands from mine, and then laying one arm on my 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 117 

shoulder and looking earnestly, imploringly at me 
(I see her deep dark eyes and eager trembling lips 
^ven now this moment) ; "do not talk of waiting 
and of patience, and of living a life of dull, stupid 
plodding in this hateful place. Only last evening 
you appealed to me . and persuaded me ; let me 
now persuade you. Do you think me bold to speak 
in this way ? Yes, I am bold now, because I love 
you so, because you are all in the world to me, 
.and I tremble to think of our separation." 

"Separation? Who speaks of separation? 
What could separate us ?" 

" You do not know ; I do not know ; anything, 
any delay . a night's reflection may change our 
fortunes, may change our hearts ! I tremble to 
hear you talk as if you only wished to cling to this 
place for ever." 

" And I tremble to hear you speak as if am- 
bition, and not love, were your impulse, Christina ! 
Yes, I could be happy with you here, even here, 
for ever !" 

"But let us not talk of that. I could not see 
you condemned to an ignoble, stupid life here ; I 
love you far too deeply. Your ambition is mine ; 
your success would be mine. Emanuel, love 



118 my enemy's daughter. 

me and my ambition too, or you cannot love me, 
you cannot understand me at all !" 

" If the choice were between your love and your 
ambition," I said sullenly, "I know which would 
win." 

" You can't divide them; they are one and the 
same. They are as my heart and my soul. O 
Emanuel, you know I love you. I have no one on 
earth whom I care for but you." 

"And yet if it were a choice between giving 
up your chance of a career, your dream of a career" 
. I was now bitterly jealous of her ambition, and 
spoke in almost savage tones . "you would throw 
me away without a thought. Do you call that 
love?" 

"No," she replied vehemently, and turning 
from me, " I do not. But I loved an ambitious 
man, a brave man, an artist, and not a slave." 

Had she struck me in the face, I could not 
have felt the blow more heavily. A surprised, 
passionate, injured cry was breaking from my lips. 
I repressed it with all the force of energy I could 
call up ; but I turned away, and, sitting on the 
nearest chair, covered my face with my hands. 

I do not know how many minutes or seconds I 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 119 

liad sat thus. It seemed to me a long interval of 
bewildered pain and bitterness. I felt at last a 
band laid on mine, and a sweet piteous voice mur- 
mured "Emanuel!" I allowed the hand that 
covered my face to be drawn away ; and then I saw 
that Christina was kneeling at my feet, and look- 
ing up at me with eyes full of tears. 

"0 forgive me!" she exclaimed; "my dear, 
dear Emanuel, forgive me ; I did not know what I 
was saying." 

"You have cruelly misinterpreted me, Chris- 
tina." 

"I have indeed; and that is the second time 
in our lives I have done so. But I will do so no 
more. How could I use such cruel, shameful, false 
words to you ! But I was disappointed ; 0, so 
bitterly disappointed ; and I was mad." 

"Dearest Christina, you know . if you do not, 
at least Heaven knows . that I only think of your 
happiness, that I only shrink from exposing you 
to utter poverty." 

" But what else have I suffered from my birth ? 
I am well used to poverty. Ah, if you did but 
know all ! I prefer any poverty, even alone, to 
going to my brother. Why should I fear it with 



120 my enemy's daughter. 

you ? But I will not talk in that way any more ; 
I was foolish and wild ; and you were right not to 
heed my folly. You are calm and have sense, and 
you know the world." 

"You are a true woman, a true heroine," I 
said, my bitterness wholly melted away by her 
sweetness and submission, "and you would rather 
have the courage which springs without counting 
the consequences than that which calculates and 
waits. So would I, perhaps, if the consequences 
only affected myself alone ; but a man who has the 
happiness of the woman he loves placed in his 
hands must not plunge headlong with her and 
himself too. No, my dearest, the courage which 
endures is often the best. We can wait for our 
career." 

"We must wait indeed, Emmanuel; and per- 
haps a long time. You must have thought me a 
wild, romantic fool. I am sorry now, for I see 
that you are right." 

"Then I have convinced you?" I asked joy- 
ously, proud of my pitiful and jealous prudence, 
as if it were anything but faint-heartedness, sus- 
picion, and folly. 

"You have convinced me," she said, in a low, 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 121 

sad voice. " Let us not speak of it now any 
more, Emanuel; at least for to-night. I will 
sing you something." 

She sat clown to her piano and sang, and I 
listened until the dusk deepened into night. We 
parted with affection ; hut there was a sadness in 
her manner which I might have thought ominous. 
As I stood a moment below her window, I heard 
her still faintly singing, and knew that she was 
not sitting, hut moving through the room. I 
walked slowly away, often looking hack ; suddenly 
I heard her window raised, and, turning round, I 
could see, in the deep purple of a late summer 
night, the outline of her head and neck dark 
against the sky. I thought she beckoned to me, 
and I hurried back. 

" Only to say good-bye," she said in a whisper; 
and she seemed strangely fluttered and excited. 
"I only wanted to say good-bye once more, dear- 
est ; just good-bye." 

As she leaned from the window a rose she was 
wearing in her breast fell at my feet. I took it up 
and put it to my lips. Some coming footsteps 
were heard, and she whispered in a very faint, 
very sad tone the word "Ade." Then she quickly 



122 



HY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



closed the window and drew the curtain, and I 
could see her no more. 

Her voice lingered in my ears as I went slowly 
home, and was in my dreams all night. I longed 
for the next night, that I might listen to it 
again. 

So the next day dragged heavily through, and 
I was impatient of it, of myself, of everything, 
feverishly anxious to meet her again ; haunted 
fretfully hy a fear that I had made myself look 
mean in her eyes ; hy a doubt whether, after all, 
my wisdom had not been folly ; by a vague fore- 
boding of disunion between us. I made many 
mistakes and blunders that da}*; and Mr. Bol- 
lington more than once put up his double eye- 
glass and looked at me with cold significant 
scrutiny. 

At last the hour came for leaving the office. I 
was at the door, rejoiced to be free in the evening 
sunlight; when a small boy, whom I knew well, 
came up and handed me a letter. The urchin was 
the youngest son of the poor watchmaker who had 
the shop over which Christina lived, and he was 
often bribed with buns, apples, and halfpence to 
act as letter-carrier between us. So I knew at 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 123- 

once what he came for, and I snatched at his 
letter. 

" 0, hut stop," said the young varlet ; " is the 
office closed for the day ?" 

" Yes, Tom ; what of that ?" 

"And you are home for the day?" 

"Yes, yes. Why do you ask questions, you 
little imp ?" 

"Because she told me I wasn't to give it to 
you until you were coming away. I've had it in 
my pocket ever so long." 

So he gave me the letter, and darted down the 
street, alternately whooping and whistling. 

I opened it and read : 

"My Well-beloved, Farewell ! I have thought 
and thought, and I see we must not marry yet. 
0, forgive me, Emanuel, and he not so very sorry 
or lonely. I think we must not meet for a long 
time. I am gone away, and you must not think 
of following me or seeking me ; for the Heaven 
has told me that now I could only he an encum- 
brance to you, and that if we were married now, 
you would be sorry one day. I go away that I 
may some time be able to help you. If ever I 



124 my enemy's daughter. 

can, then we shall meet again, for I will find you 
and come to you. If not, then far better we meet 
no -more. Either way it will he better, and you 
will thank me some time, and say Christina had 
right. I love you still; all the same as ever. 
Still love me : farewell, and think of me often, as 
I shall never, never forget you. 

" Christina." 

This was all. The letter was written in the 
quaint half-German character and the constrained 
foreign style which I knew so well. I turned down 
a dark lane out of the sunny street ; the ground 
seemed to heave under my feet, and black spots 
danced before my eyes in the sunlight. I was not 
far from the sea . my old, old confidant; and I 
hurried to it as if my lost love were to be found 
by its margin. Staggering, slipping, with dazed 
eyes and choking throat and bursting heart, I 
reached the strand, and flung myself down, and 
read the letter again and again and again. And 
then I laid my head upon the ring of a rusty an- 
chor, and I broke into a boyish passion and tem- 
pest of tears. She had made her choice . and left 
me ! Of the beautiful happy life that had grown 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 125 

up around us, and that seemed destined to live 
with our lives, there was nothing left me but my 
memory, my grief, my agony . a few letters, and 
the flower that last night had fallen from her 
breast. 

From that time I never saw her face for ten 
long years. 

Did I make any effort to recover her ? Did I 
not ? All I could learn at her lodgings was simply 
that she had gone by the London coach, and that 
she had said she was going to her brother's. I 
hurried up to London by the very next coach . 
with what result I need hardly say. Utterly a 
stranger in the metropolis, my search there was 
quite thrown away. I could only learn at the- 
coach-office that such a girl had actually travelled 
to tow r n the day before, and that was all anybody 
knew of her. I wasted days in hunting about the 
docks for Dantzic or Ivonigsberg ships or steamers. 
I found nothing of her. Then I bethought me 
that she might have gone to Hull, and I too went 
to Hull ; of course utterly too late to have stopped 
her even had she gone there. I had made up my 
mind to follow her, when it occurred to me that 
perhaps, after all, she had relented and written ta 



126 my enemy's daughter. 

me some word of comfort and guidance, and I 
hurried back to my native town. No letter awaited 
me, and I resolved at least to try the last chance 
and follow her to her brother's. I remembered 
the name of the street in which her brother lived, 
and it could not be difficult to find the house. 
Besides, I was now seized with a detestation of 
our town and all that belonged to it; and it 
seemed to me that I must leave it or go mad. 
The thought of living there without her, of toiling 
there uncheered and unloved, of spending drear 
evenings alone where I had been so happy, of 
looking up at the window where she could no 
longer be seen ; all this was simply intolerable to 
me. I had never entered my old employer's door 
from the evening when I received Christina's let- 
ter. What Mr. Bollington thought of me, or 
whether he thought about me at all, I cared no- 
thing. I sent no explanation or word of any kind. 
I had some little money saved; I sold some few 
poor things, and got a little more money; and I 
took a passage in a Baltic vessel which was to put 
in at Dantzic. One fair sweet autumn evening I 
looked back on the strand where I had read Chris- 
tina's letter, and watched the white houses of the 



THE PATHS DIVIDE. 127 

old town of my childhood, and the hill whereon 
was my mother's grave, until all sank out of sight, 
and with them closed the first bright chapter of 
my life. 

The weather changed, and we had a rough, 
slow, miserable passage. Our wretched heavy old 
tub was beaten about the North Sea and the Baltic 
so long that it seemed to me as if life had been 
actually changed into a perpetual tossing on broken 
wintry waters. At last we reached Dantzie, and I 
made my way to Christina's native town, . a town 
of canals and islands, and numberless bridges, and 
steep, narrow, darkling streets, with whole popula- 
tions living in each house. I found Christina's 
people at last. They received me at first coldly, 
and even harshly, regarding me as her evil genius ; 
but having at length come to understand that she 
had renounced me, they lapsed into pity and were 
kind. But they knew nothing about her . abso- 
lutely nothing. She had not come there ; she had 
not written any reply to their last letter. My 
coming first told them that she had left her old 
home. My journey had been utterly fruitless and 
futile. 

I took a passage again for England. Sick at 



128 my enemy's daughter. 

heart, and weak in frame, with only two or three 
sovereigns left, I landed one wet, foggy evening 
near the Tower of London. As I stepped ashore 
I said to myself, "Here, then, in London will I 
stay. I accept battle here. I will succeed here or 
fail. I will live here, if I can ; if not, I do not 
much care how or how soon I am to die here. 
Here I shall meet Christina again, or nowhere." 



CHAPTER VIII. 

FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 

So I kept my word, and drudged for years in the 
solitude and darkness of London poverty and 
struggle. I gave myself up to the teaching of 
music and to concert-singing, when I could get a 
decent engagement, or indeed any engagement at 
all. Understand that mine was for a long time a 
hard struggle. I lived in a garret . I was familiar 
with hunger. The details of the first few years 
may be spared. Stories of struggles in London 
by rising young men have all a sort of family re- 
semblance ; indeed, they are as much alike as 
Lely's court beauties ; and if they sometimes dif- 
fer in catastrophe . one adventurous career ending 
in Westminster Abbey, and another in the Lam- 
beth Workhouse . so one court beauty may have 
died in the purple, and another in the lazarhouse. 
I do not care to weary the reader with a minute 
account of my struggles for a living ; I only ask 
VOL. i. k 



130 my enemy's daughter. 

him to understand that they were real and hard ; 
that for a time they regularly included actual 
want ; that they often meant destitution ; that 
hunger was a common condition ; that once or 
twice I thought it likely enough my fate must be 
to die of starvation. Let us pass over all this, 
and come to a time when I began to have a cer- 
tain income, however small; when I had a few 
substantial engagements as a teacher of singing 
and music, and was beginning to think of strug- 
gling my way to Italy in the hope of returning 
thence a qualified candidate for a place on the 
lyric stage. For on this I had set my heart. 
Pride, disappointment, baffled love, all conspired 
to make this seem the necessary task of my life. 
To prove myself . even were it only to myself . 
not a failure, not a coward, was a resolution within 
me strong and tenacious as revenge. It was, in- 
deed, my revenge. 

I will not say that the memory of Christina 
had not somewhat softened, faded into a gentler 
recollection, during all this time. But its impres- 
sion was always with me, giving sadness or cour- 
age, hope or despondency, as my chances and my 
mood would have it; always, most certainly, ex- 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 131 

alting and purifying the mournful monotony of 
my drudging life by the memory of something 
beautiful, tender, and distant. For years of my 
life I was in the habit daily of going up and down 
the river in the boats, and I became an intense 
admirer of St. Paul's. I admire that building . 
forgive me if the confession show stupidity and 
want of taste . more than Pantheon or Colosseum, 
than Westminster Abbey or Notre Dame, or Co- 
logne or Antwerp Cathedral, or St. Peter's or St. 
Sophia's. To look up at it from Blackfriars-bridge 
on a winter evening, when a cold heaven and a 
few whitening clouds are behind, and the dome 
seems a mere flat shape against the sky, a mere 
form and outline, delighted me. To see it spark- 
ling in the rosy colour of a summer morning, with 
light and shade succeeding each other on its spires 
and its rounded sides, or rising out of the masses 
of sunset cloud-heaps like a glimpse of some glo- 
rious heaven-city, was a sight still more exquisite. 
Even when the November fog is around it, and its 
outlines can only be seen at broken and vague in- 
tervals, it is a delight to think that behind that 
curtain of vapour lie rich spires and domes which 
one breath of wind might reveal in all their beauty. 



132 my enemy's daughtee. 

In whatever season or hour, it seems to me to ro- 
manticise and to sanctify the hideous commonplace 
stretch of roofs and chimneys, and wharves and 
the leaden Lethean river, on which it looks. So 
was the memory of Christina, and the presence of 
my love and even of my disappointment, in my 
hard and commonplace life. 

Sometimes I have deliberately come to one of 
the bridges in the early morning, and stood in one 
of the recesses and watched the different phases of 
beauty the glorious dome would assume in the 
glowing light and the changing clouds, until per- 
haps at last the whole air filled with brightness, 
and every cloud vanished, and the dome and cross 
were alone in the blue heaven. But these were 
rare enjoyments. Generally I caught glimpses of 
my favourite building as I made my way among 
the bustling crowds on the bridges or on Ludgate- 
hill, or as I passed beneath in one of the penny 
steamers. So, too, of my memory of Christina. 
Sometimes I had an hour or a whole evening to 
give to my boyish love, and I brought her back 
before my mind and my eyes until she stood as 
clear and as lifelike before me as when we lived in 
Arcadia together. But these, too, were rare de- 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 135 

lights. In ordinary life I only caught mental 
glimpses of her as I fought my way through vul- 
gar difficulties, and obtained some mean and com- 
monplace advantages. But the influence was there 
always. I am a believer in beauty and nature and 
love, and all the rest of it. With a memory like 
mine, a faint hope, a strong purpose like mine, 
life could never become wholly vulgar or contemp- 
tible. " So long," says the great prose-poet whom 
Christina's father used to read to us in the old 
nights, "as the sun keeps but the slenderest rim 
of its disc uneclipsed, the world is not given up to 
darkness." 

All this time, be it understood, my ordinary 
way of life was very prosaic, poor, and mean. I 
was now . say seven years or so after my coming 
to London . only just lifting my head above mere 
poverty. I was utterly obscure. I was living in 
a low and swampy district on the Surrey bank of 
the Thames, in the Putney direction. I lodged 
there with a poor, respectable, and ladylike old 
person, whose appearance attracted me when I 
happened to come that way hunting for cheap and 
airy apartments. The neighbouring population 
consisted chiefly of brick-makers and market-gar- 



134 my enemy's daughter. 

deners. A park having been promised, a few rows 
of cheap stuccoed houses were built, and chris- 
tened Albert -terraces, Garibaldi - villas, Alnia- 
places, and such other appropriate and attractive 
names as the whirligig of time chanced to bring- 
within the easy intellectual range of speculating 
builders. The roads were damp and undrained, 
and the whole place looked specially cheerless. 
The inhabitants of the terraces, villas, and places 
in no case belonged to the indigenous population, 
but were of a half-genteel, half-pauper, and wholly 
nomad class, like ourselves. Many people tried 
letting lodgings or opening schools there, and 
failed. One or two persons having privately the 
care of insane patients, and probably rather anx- 
ious to keep them insane, brought them to bide in 
this dismal swamp. A few government civil offi- 
cers . Customs, Inland Eevenue, &c. . who had 
not risen in their departments, came and settled 
there. A forlorn water-colour painter, a hopeless 
photographer, were among our neighbours ; in 
fact, any kind of people, who, dreadfully poor, yet 
would not wholly abandon the appearance of gen- 
tility, drifted thither naturally. So long as the 
villas and cottages were kept in decent repair, 



FEOM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 135 

they looked pleasant enough, and indeed rather 
fine and imposing. A semi-detached villa with a 
vast row of steps, and urns at either side, some- 
what awed the visitor -at first ; but the urns were 
full of dry mud and dead leaves and spiders ; the 
drawing-room was uncarpeted and hardly fur- 
nished ; a dirty slatternly servant, or a little girl 
with a torn frock and curl-papers, opened the 
door ; grass and weeds grew upon the sides of the 
parapets ; the only traffic consisted of great coal- 
wagons going to and from the neighbouring rail- 
way-stations. The lanes were blocked up with 
perpetual mud ; the frog looked in at the kitchen 
window; the maggot and the worm made them- 
selves free of the back-parlour. Here and there 
small rows of shops had been begun, and suddenly 
stopped, and no one ever seemed to have any idea 
of completing them. My landlady's daughter 
called the whole settlement " a refuge for the des- 
titute." It was decaying, but not venerable ; it 
was new, but not fresh ; it had all the disadvan- 
tages of newness, and all the defects of age. I 
heard a lady near whom I happened to sit one 
evening in a river-steamer describe it to a com- 
panion, when its swampy flats came in sight, as 



136 my enemy's daughter. 

" a deathy place." The phrase was picturesque, 
effective, and very appropriate. It did look a 
deathy place ; but it had the advantages . to me 
supreme . of being very cheap, and of having easy 
access to the river, and therefore to town. In this 
refuge for the destitute, then, began my march to 
wealth ; in this deathy place opened my struggle 
for life. 

My landlady and her daughter were poor . 
dreadfully poor. I had seen enough of poverty in 
my own town, and indeed in my own surround- 
ings, but somehow it was not poverty like that of 
Mrs. Lyndon and her daughter Lilla. Provincial 
poverty is hardly ever indeed quite the same as 
London poverty . there is all the difference that 
exists between a thatched hovel and a Drury-lane 
garret. But that was not the difference here ; 
Mrs. Lyndon was always clean, neat, and well- 
dressed ; and she always seemed to be able to get 
mutton-chops for her daughter's dinner. The 
daughter always dressed like a girl accustomed to 
wear good clothes, and therefore not afraid to be 
occasionally shabby. She never looked worse than 
like a lady in dishabille. There was none of the 
artful neatness, the mournful nervous precision 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 137 

of conscious poverty about her. "What on earth 
did they live on, that mother and daughter? I 
had been with them now for a long time ; I was 
constantly being consulted by mother and daugh- 
ter about their pecuniary affairs. I sometimes 
counted over the amount which I knew the lodgers 
to pay, and it still left a pound or two of the 
house-rent unaccounted for, and the rates and 
taxes altogether unapproached. Every other day 
some tax-collector called and left a paper. These 
documents used to lie in little dusty, sooty piles 
on the chinmeypiece ; I do not know that Mrs. 
Lyndon ever thought about attempting to pay off 
any of them. I scarcely ever came in at the door 
without seeing some collector arguing and threat- 
ening in vain. I think the dwellers in these 
neighbourhoods used to allow debts of this and 
other kinds to run up until they reached an in- 
surmountable pile, and then they removed at night 
to another locality. They were up to all manner 
of dodges. Sometimes the house was taken in 
the daughter's name ; and this fact enabled the 
mother, who was always at home, to waive the 
responsibility away from herself and stave-off the 
collectors a little longer. They seemed ashamed 



138 my enemy's daughtek. 

of nothing. Lilla would entertain me sometimes 
through a whole afternoon's walk with narratives 
of the straits to which they had been driven, and 
the success with which they had come through 
them. You could not contemplate poverty of this 
sort without an impression that in its meanness 
and its cynicism it bordered on vice, and yet its 
endurance, its frankness, its cheerful determina- 
tion were dashed with a flavour of a kind of virtue. 
You must pity people so hard-up, and you must 
also feel a certain contempt for them ; and yet in 
my case I could not help liking them, trusting in 
them, and feeling something resembling affection 
for them. They were in every sense so kind- 
hearted, in one sense at least so true; and then 
we were all so hard-up together, that mere neces- 
sity and propinquity made us companionable, as 
people may be who are forced to pass the night 
beneath the same tree in Hyde-park, or under the 
same dry arch of the Adelphi. 

A girl like Lilla Lyndon was, to my provincial 
mind, a perfectly wonderful phenomenon. She 
was extremely pretty, with dark skin, and crisp 
wavy dark hair, and bright, laughing, twinkling 
eyes, and a smile the most confident, sweet, and 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 139 

winning one could well be gladdened by. She had 
plenty of talk, and she talked in a voice just a 
little sharp, but with a charming accent; and in 
whatever poverty and privation, she had something 
like the manners of a lady. But these were not 
the peculiarities which most struck me. I was 
principally surprised by her inexhaustible know- 
ledge of practical life. How old was she? Hardly 
twenty, I should think, at the time I am now 
telling of, and yet she seemed to know London, 
its ways, its people, its life, its tricks and dodges, 
high and low, to the very heart. No royal road 
was that which had led to such learning ! Many 
a hard struggle must have been battled through 
before such sad practical experience of the world's 
warfare could be got into that pretty little curly 
head. 

Lilla always dressed with an appearance of 
fashion. If a new style of bonnet came in, I 
sometimes found her at night working away at 
her own old bonnet, and next day it was converted 
into a very deceptive imitation of the reigning 
mode. She reconstructed her dresses as often as 
the British Board of Admiralty reconstruct their 
war-ships. When crinoline came in, she was in 



140 my enemy's daughter. 

the front of the fashion, with petticoats wide 
enough for a duchess. She was always doing 
some mending work to stockings and slippers. 
She was absolutely without hypocrisy or deceit 
of any kind ; even the pardonable feminine de- 
ception which keeps ready to hand a piece of 
crochet-work or bead- ornamentation to be pro- 
duced the moment a tap at the door announces 
a visitor, while the real piece of work, the pair of 
stays or flannel petticoat in process of repair, is 
hastily thrust under the sofa-cushion. Whatever 
Lilla Lyndon was doing when you came in, that 
she kept on doing as unconcernedly as before. 
You found her darning a stocking, perhaps, and 
she continued the work . sometimes, it may be, 
calling your special attention to the frayed and 
tattered condition of the article. You found her 
in curl-papers, and she volunteered the admission 
that she was too lazy to take them out when get- 
ting up that morning, or that she wanted her hair 
to be in particularly good curl that evening . 
perhaps because her uncle was going to take her 
somewhere. She was ashamed of nothing that 
she did. Let me do prompt justice to a Clevel- 
and pretty girl, and say, to prevent my readers 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 141 

from misjudging her, that she never did anything 
to be ashamed of, except talk-over creditors, and 
go in debt when she had no prospect of paying. 
She was honest in every way except as regarded 
creditors ; and you could as easily have convinced 
a cat that it is dishonourable to steal cream as 
induced Lilla Lyndon at this period of her life to 
believe that the laws of morality have anything to 
do with the relations between debtor and creditor. 
Lilla's uncle was for some time a mysterious 
and mythical personage to me. The very first 
day I became acquainted with mother and daugh- 
ter I heard of the uncle, who was a member of 
Parliament, and had an estate in Leicestershire, 
and who would not do much for them now, but 
they hoped would do something some day for 
Lilla. They did not boast of him by any means 
in the manner of ordinary poor people dragging- 
in a story of a rich relation, but simply referred 
to him as their one sole possible resource and 
holdfast in utter emergencies. Gradually I came 
to hear of the various arts and expedients by which 
Lilla contrived from time to time to coax or wring 
a few pounds out of him. Mrs. Lyndon never 
ventured to go near him. There was a sort of 



142 my enemy's daughter. 

treaty, I fancy, that she was never to intrude on 
him. I could gather from them that he could 
never forgive her for having heen virtuous, and 
having thus rendered it necessary for his brother, 
when he fell in love with her, a poor girl, to marry 
her. He was now more angry with her than ever 
because she was poor and lonely, old and shabby. 
No doubt many of her shifts and schemes and 
pressing appeals for money often made the rela- 
tionship seem a very discreditable thing. The 
mother and daughter had not known him very 
long. Lilla's childhood had been passed in Hea- 
ven knows what poverty and meanness, her mother 
never daring to apply to the wealthy and offended 
relative. Lilla herself told me, with some pride 
and much laughter, how she, being driven to utter 
desperation one day, determined upon hunting 
down her uncle, and how she found him out in 
his great house in Mayfair, and faced the pow- 
dered servants, and insisted upon seeing him ; 
how she waited outside the hall -door for two 
mortal hours, very cold, very hungry, but reso- 
lute, and prepared for the encounter by being 
dressed in whatever finery she had got; how at 
last she saw him, and was rather gruffly received ; 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 143 

how she began to cry, thinking that the proper 
way to soften a cruel uncle, but was soon unde- 
ceived by the cruel uncle telling her sternly that 
he hated crying women, whereupon she desisted 
from weeping, the more readily because she had 
not the least inclination to cry; and how at last 
she compelled him to admit the relationship, and 
came away with a permission to call again and a 
ten-pound note. This present she changed at the 
nearest shop, and treated herself forthwith to a 
pair of gloves, a new bonnet, a fowl to be brought 
home for dinner, and a hansom cab to her own 
door. 

Since then she had never lost sight of him. 
He must either have begun to accept her exist- 
ence and her visits as a kind of dispensation not 
to be any longer resisted, or she must have really 
succeeded, with her pretty face, genteel figure, 
and coaxing ways, in making him fond of her. 
He was a widower, and had daughters of his own ; 
but they would never see Lilla, who for her own 
part was only too happy to escape seeing them ; 
and all her visits therefore were paid in the ab- 
sence of these inflexible ladies. Mr. Lyndon 
seemed to me, by Lilla's own admission, to have 



144 my enemy's daughter. 

done a good deal for her. He had obtained for 
her situations as governess in various families in 
London, in Cheltenham, in Edinburgh, in Bath, 
in Scarborough ; but she always quitted her place 
somewhat abruptly, and came back to her mother 
revelling and rejoicing in her freedom, which she 
celebrated by laying out part of the balance of her 
salary in a fowl, or oysters, or a lobster, or some- 
thing nice for supper. Terrible trouble had she 
each time to make her explanations and excuses 
to her uncle, and cozen him into forgiving her. 
From various hints and stray words, I conjectured 
that she did not get on well with the ladies of any 
family ; and I fancy she had the evil fate, either 
by intention or innocent inadvertence, to attract 
a good deal too much of the notice of the hus- 
bands, brothers, sons, friends, and male visitors 
generally, of the houses into which she was suc- 
cessively introduced. 

I oftened marvelled that, in a place like Lon- 
don, so quick and clever a girl as Lilla could find 
no way of converting her energy and ingenuity 
into money. But practical capacity of this kind 
she seemed not to have, or not to care about 
exerting. I began to find, too, that the counsels 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 145 

of her mother did not much tend to make her 
industrious to any purpose. 

"My Lilly is a good girl," poor Mrs. Lyndon 
would say to me ; "a good girl, Mr. Banks, al- 
though I say it. She ought to be a lady; and 
perhaps she will be one day. If I were dead and 
out of the way, I think, perhaps, they would make 
her a lady. She isn't fit to lead this kind of life ; 
she's too delicate and too refined; anybody can 
see that. She can't eat the kind of dinners I have 
to set before her sometimes, poor child." 

Lilla was immensely fond of the pastrycook's 
shop, and had a taste for lobster-salad as finely 
developed as ever I saw. There was something 
unspeakably touching in the manner and tone of 
the old woman when she spoke of this bouncing 
London lass, and the sincerity with which she 
evidently regarded her as too delicate and fragile 
for the coarse world around. 

" She isn't strong like me," the emaciated old 
creature would say, the tears blinking in her sad 
and faded eyes. " I was a farmer's daughter, Mr. 
Banks, passing half my days in the fields and the 
open air, not like a poor peaky Londoner. I was 
a fine, stout, rosy girl at Lilly's age; and long 

VOL. I. l 



146 my enemy's daughter. 

before that I could cook and bake and brew, and 
put my band to every tiling about the farm. Once 
we bad a great harvest-home dinner, and I cooked 
a beautiful fawn for the day; and 0, bless you, 
the praise I got for it ! My father called me up 
to the table, and the farmers all drank my health, 
and told me I'd make such a splendid farmer's 
wife. I was that proud, I can tell you; and I 
didn't expect then to be living in London a poor 
old woman. But my poor Lilly was brought up 
in town, and I never had much to give her, dear 
child; and she can't be expected to look strong 
and well as country girls do." 

Mrs. Lyndon was not a widow. That piece 
of information had been volunteered to me by 
Lilla. Lilla told me her father had deserted them, 
and gone abroad somewhere, and had not since 
been heard of. 

Sometimes when I came home late at night I 
used to find my way down to the kitchen, where 
the embers of the fire were generally burning, and 
where I could smoke a pipe with a clear conscience, 
having no curtains to fumigate and no one to ren- 
der uncomfortable. One night, as I was going 
down, I was surprised to see a light below. Think- 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 147 

ing the gas had been left burning by mistake, I 
went down ; and when just on the last stair, I saw 
that Mrs. Lyndon was still up. She was seated 
with her back to me, and leant over the table. 
Was she asleep ? I stooped forward to see. No ; 
she was awake, and bent over something which 
she was moving between her hands. Old stories 
of misers in the depth of lonely night counting 
their secret stores of gold, came whimsically 
enough to my mind. She had no gold, however; 
only a decayed old pack of blackened cards spread 
before her. I softly withdrew ; I had seen enough ; 
I had fathomed all the poor, sad little mystery 
with one involuntary glance. I too was of Ar- 
cadia ; I too had come up from the country, where 
superstitions are still a faith, and omens and divi- 
nations defy Hamlet's philosophy. I knew at once 
that Mrs. Lyndon was trying some feeble, sad 
sibylline work. Poor old creature, with her early 
and childish country superstitions still clinging 
round her, she was sorting the cards, to discover 
in them some tidings of the husband who had 
deserted her . some hint as to the fortunes of the 
daughter whom she was breaking her heart to 
bring up as a lady. 



148 my enemy's daughter. 

Late that night I heard a hansom cab drive 
up to the door. I was reading something in my 
own room, and I looked out of the window. Some- 
one got out of the cab and handed Lilla to the 
door- step. She was in opera costume . wherever 
on earth she had got it . and she looked indeed 
very attractive, and apparently very joyous, as she 
tripped up the steps. It was an elderly gentleman 
who accompanied her. I could see his iron-gray 
hair and rather red face. Lilla opened the door 
with her latch-key, while he got into the cab and 
drove off. I could hear him giving directions to 
the cabman in a peculiarly strident voice. Lilla 
crept very softly downstairs, where I suppose her 
mother was still sitting up for her. 

Next morning I chanced to meet my young 
friend. "0, Mr. Banks," she broke out, "I have 
such a headache." 

" You were dissipating last night," I answered. 
" That is what comes of late hours." 

" How do you know? Did you see me come 
in?" 

" Yes, that I did." 

" I am so glad ? Did I look well ?" 

" Charming." 



FROM ARCADIA TO BOHEMIA. 149 

" Did I really? Yes ; my uncle took me to the 
Opera, and gave me the dress and cloak to go in 
. was not that kind of him ? . and it was so de- 
lightful !" 

" The music ? What opera was it ?" 

" 0, Ficlelio. But I didn't care about the 
music ; at least, I mean I didn't care so much 
about it. I was so happy, and delighted with 
everything, and especially myself. I was a lady 
for a whole night ! And we were in the stalls . 
I love the stalls ! I never was there before . and 
we had supper afterwards ! And we drove home 
in a hansom. Now I have a headache ; but I don't 
mind, for it's such a long time since I had a new 
dress ; and I was so happy." 

I could not help thinking of the poor old 
mother in the damp kitchen, spelling over her 
pack of cards. 

Indeed I could never look at that poor old 
woman without wondering for what unknown pur- 
pose she was ever sent upon earth, in what in- 
scrutable way Heaven would compensate her in 
some world hereafter for her joyless drudgery 
here. Not merely was she not happy herself, but 
with the kindliest heart, the most unselfish 



150 my enemy's daughter. 

nature in the world, she did not seem to have 
the power of making anyone else happy. What 
hopeless misfortune had crushed her into beg- 
garly inertness so young, I did not know ; but 
so long, at least, as Lilla's memory seemed to go 
back, the lives of the pair had been one uninter- 
mittent, humiliating, demoralising battle with 
poverty. Poverty and drudgery appeared to have 
crushed quite out of Mrs. Lyndon all the feeling 
of religion which everywhere but in London seems 
to cling to the old and the unfortunate. The 
butcher and baker left her no time to think of 
heaven. Her one thought was for her daughter : 
to get the pretty girl enough to eat, to cook tender 
chops for her, to have little dainties for her break- 
fast and her supper, to keep her in clothes, to 
guard her against consumption, to dream of her 
one day becoming a lady. 

As for the daughter, she was simply a kind- 
hearted, bright, clever little heathen, not surely 
incapable of conversion and training if any high- 
minded creature could but take her in hand. Just 
now no Fayaway, no naked girl of South- Sea 
islands, could be a more thorough pagan than 
my graceful and pretty friend Lilla Lyndon. 



CHAPTEK IX. 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 



Meanwhile I am free to own that I liked the 
company of my pretty pagan ; indeed, it bright- 
ened life very much to me. When I was most 
lonely and unfriended, these people had been 
strangely kind to me, and our common poverty 
and struggles made us . I was almost about to 
say unnaturally . certainly unusually familiar and 
friendly. Of course no young man of my age 
could ever be wholly indifferent to the company 
of a pretty and attractive girl ; and I really grew 
quite fond of Lilla. I was not in the least in 
love with her, nor did she, I feel assured, ever 
think of me in the light of a possible lover ; but 
we were very friendly and familiar, and indeed, 
in a sort of quiet confident way, attached to each 
other. A happy Bohemian independence of pub- 
lic opinion emancipated our movements. She 



152 my enemy's daughter. 

and I generally walked out together on Sundays 
in the desolate suburbs, or across the swamp 
which was undergoing slow conversion into a 
park. Sometimes, as I came home in the even- 
ing, after giving some music-lessons . or, for 
that matter, tuning a piano . I met her going 
towards town, and I turned back and walked 
with her. Much amazed I used to be at first 
by her close knowledge of the shortest way to 
get everywhere, and of every shop where the 
best things to eat or wear or drink were to be 
had at the lowest possible prices. 

Our talk was generally lively enough ; but 
there were days when I became so saddened by 
my memories and my dull prospects that I 
really could not brighten ; and then Lilla, in 
order to encourage me, told me all kinds of 
stories of her own occasional trials and dis- 
tresses, as well as of people she had known, 
who, having been reduced to the very depths of 
despair, fell in with some lucky fortune, and 
were raised at once to high position and afflu- 
ence. Most of those stories, to be sure, were 
told of young women reduced to serve in shops, 
whom some men of enormous wealth fell in love 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 153 

with and married; so that I could scarcely de- 
rive much encouragement from their application 
to my own personal condition. But it was easy 
to see with what a horizon fortune had hounded 
poor Lilla's earthly amhition. She had no genius 
for any work that did not directly conduce to 
personal adornment, and she had a very strong 
desire for wealth and ease. 

" My only chance," she said frankly one 
day, "is to marry somehody who has money. 
I am sick of this place and this life. If I mar- 
ried a rich greengrocer even, I should be far, 
far happier than I am. I should have a home 
for my mother, and a cart to drive about in on 
Sundays, when the greengrocer did not want it 
for his business ; and then mother and I would 
leave him at home on the Sundays to smoke in 
the back-kitchen, while we went out for a drive; 
and we could call for you and take you with us. 
I must marry somebody with money." 

" Suppose, in the mean time, somebody with- 
out money comes in the way, and you fall in 
love with him ?" 

" Love ? Nonsense. Love is a luxury be- 
yond my means, sir. Besides, do you know, 



154: my enemy's daughter. 

I think debts and poverty make some of us 
cold-hearted or no-hearted, and we are not capa- 
ble of falling in love. Seriously, I don't think 
I could be." 

" Then I hope no friend of mine will fall in 
love with you." 

"I am sure I hope not . unless he has 
money. I don't believe I have such a thing as 
a heart." 

"You ought to have told me all this before, 
Lilla. How do you know what agony you may 
be inflicting on my heart ?" 

I thought she would have laughed at this, 
but she looked at me quite gravely, and even 
sympathetically. 

"Ah, no," she said quietly; "you are safe 
enough . from me at least ; I can see that." 

" Why, Miss Lyndon ? Pray tell me." 

"Don't ask me; but don't think me a fool. 
Have I not eyes? Can't I see that your heart 
is gone long ago in some disastrous way or 
other, and that you can't recover it; and don't 
you think I am sorry for you ? Yes ; as much 
as if you were my brother." 

"Ah, Lilla, you have far more heart than 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 155 

you would have me think. Not your eyes saw, 
but your heart." 

And we neither spoke any more on that sub- 
ject. But I knew that under my pretty pagan's 
plump bosom there beat a heart which the love 
of lobster-salad, and the hopes of a rich husband, 
and all the duty of dodging duns, could not 
rob of its genial blood-warmth. 

Lilla had, like most London girls of her class 
and temperament, a passion for the theatre. She 
knew the ways of every theatre, and something 
about the private lives of all the actors and ac- 
tresses, and who was married to whom, and who 
were not married at all, and who was in debt, 
and who made ever so much money in the year, 
and spent it or hoarded it, as the case might be. 
She pointed you out a small cigar- shop, and told 
you it was kept by the father of Miss Yashner, 
the great tragic actress ; she called your atten- 
tion to a small coal-and-potato store, and told 
you it was there Mr. Wagstaife, the great man- 
ager, began his career; she glanced at a beery, 
snuffy little man in the street, and whispered 
that he was the husband of the dashing Violet 
Schonbein, who played the male parts in the 



156 

burlesques and pantomimes, and whose figure 
was the admiration of London. Her interest 
did not lie so much in the stately opera-houses, 
or even the theatres where legitimate tragedy 
yet feebly protested its legitimacy and divine 
right, as in the small pleasant houses where 
comedians and piquant actresses could always 
fill the benches. She knew where the best seats 
were, and how to make use of an order to most 
advantage ; and, indeed, seemed hardly ever to 
have gone to a theatre except in the company of 
somebody armed with such a missive. She had 
been to parties of all kinds . to Kew, to Eich- 
mond, to Vauxhall (yes, I think there was a 
Vauxhall then), to Greenwich, to Dulwich, to 
Kosherville. She appeared to have an intimate 
knowledge of all the places where supper was to 
be most comfortably and cheaply had in the 
neighbourhood of each theatre. She had been 
to the Derby ; and she never missed seeing the 
Queen going to open Parliament, or even the 
Lord Mayor's Show. She knew all about the 
great people of London . the Duchess of Suther- 
land, Lady Palmerston, and the like; and, by 
some strange process of information, she often 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 157 

used to get to know beforehand when grand balls 
were given in the neighbourhood of Belgrave- 
square or Park-lane, and she loved to go and 
watch at the doors to see the ladies pass in. 
Her uncle, she told me, had often promised to 
take her to the Ladies' Gallery of the House of 
Commons to hear a debate ; but as yet he had 
not carried out his promise. He took her to the 
National Gallery and the Eoyal Academy's Exhi- 
bition ; but she did not much care about these 
places of entertainment, and could not tell the 
name of any picture or painter afterwards. Mr. 
Lyndon, M.P., clearly wanted to impress her 
with the necessity of some sort of mental cul- 
ture, for he sent her a new piano and a heap 
of books, and made her promise to learn. She 
might have mastered most studies quickly enough 
had she but shown the same aptitude for them 
which she had for picking-up the private his- 
tories of actresses and great ladies, for turning 
and trimming old dresses, for reviving decayed 
bonnets, and for stimulating flat porter, by the 
application of soda, into a ghastly likeness of 
bottled stout. 

I thought her naturally so clever, and indeed 



158 my enemy's daughter. 

I felt such a warm interest in her, that I set to 
work to teach her something. The piano she 
played very badly, and that I could teach her ; 
singing I was likewise qualified to instruct her 
in ; and French I spoke fluently enough. These, 
then, I offered, and in fact was determined, to 
teach her ; and she was very glad to learn, and, 
when she was in humour for it, very quick and 
docile. What she went about teaching in the 
families where she had tried to be governess, I 
never could guess. Just now I was glad she 
knew so little, and that there were some things 
I could teach her. I had nothing to do half my 
time ; I was lonely and unfriended ; these people 
had been kind to me, as indeed kindness was a 
part of their nature, and I felt so grateful that I 
was only too glad to have any chance of showing 
my gratitude. So I became Lilla's music-master 
and French teacher when I could and when she 
would; and Mrs. Lyndon was delighted. The 
good woman trusted me entirely. She had so 
often told me what her dreams and hopes for her 
daughter were, that she knew so poor a caitiff as 
myself would never be mean enough to play Mar- 
plot by making love to Lilla. We were all poor 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 159 

together, and Mrs. Lyndon felt that hawks would 
not pick hawks' eyes out. 

Little or nothing in this story turns upon my 
pupil-teaching of Lilla. In a direct sense, no- 
thing came of it. I mention it here only to ex- 
plain the fact that Lilla and her mother got to 
think themselves deeply indebted to me, and that 
Lilla in particular was determined to make me 
some return. 

One evening I was walking rather listlessly 
along Sloane-street, feigning to myself that I had 
business in town, when I met Lilla returning 
homeward. She was all flushed and beaming, 
evidently under the influence of some piece of 
splendid good news. 

"I have such news for you!" she said. "I 
have been to my uncle's, and I have talked to him 
about you." 

"About me?" 

" Yes. I always wanted to speak to him 
about you, and I made up my mind to go up 
specially to-day and do it. I told him all about 
you . how you were living in our house, and how 
kind you had always been to mamma and me . 
which I'm sure we don't forget . whenever we 



160 my enemy's daughter. 

needed it ; and Heaven knows we always do need 
it, for we never yet were able to pay anything at 
the right time." 

" Well, well, pass over all that, and come back 
to Mr. Lyndon." 

"Yes, I told him all about you, and how you 
were better than a colony of sons to mamma, and 
a whole schoolful of brothers to me, and how you 
teach me this and that . everything, in fact. I 
can tell you your ears ought to have tingled, for 
such praise as I gave you mortal man never yet 
deserved. I told him what a singer you were . 
ever so much better than Mario, I said ; at which 
I promise you he smiled very grimly, and grum- 
bled out that he had heard of too many singers 
who were ever so much better than Mario. But 
I told him that you were, and no mistake. And 
then I said you wanted to get on the stage, only 
that you had no friends ; at which he smiled again, 
and said a man who could sing better than Mario 
didn't much stand in need of friends." 
"Well, but, Lilla, I don't quite see." 
"Don't you? No, I daresay you don't; but 
I just do. Why, did I never tell you that my 
uncle knows all the great swells about the thea- 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 161 

tres ? yes. He once had a share in a theatre 
with a tremendous swell, Lord Loreine, and he 
adores operas and singers, and he gives dinners 
at Greenwich to prima donnas. He is constantly 
behind the scenes everywhere . odd places for hirn 
to go to, I have often told him . and every great 
singer who comes out he always meets. Who is 
Reichstein ? Is it a man or a woman ?" 

"Keichstein is a woman." 

" Who is she ?" 

" A singer . a great success in Paris, I'm told. 
I don't know much about her . hardly anything, 
in fact. But she is new in Paris, and I believe a 
success." 

" Well, he has been to Paris . indeed, he only 
came home last night . and he is in such a state 
about Reichstein, who is to come out in London 
and make a wonderful success. I was ashamed 
to confess that I never heard of Reichstein before, 
and didn't know, in fact, whether it was a man or 
a woman ; and besides, I told him I wanted to 
talk about you, and not about Reichstein." 

"What did he say?" 

"He laughed and said, 'Reichstein could do 
more for your friend' (my friend, you understand) 

VOL. I. M 



162 MY enemy's daughter. 

' than I could. ' In fact, he was in such a delight- 
ful good-humour, that I might have said anything 
to him to-day. You are to come and see him. 
yes, you are ; you'll find him very friendly." 

" But, indeed, Lilla. " 

" No, no ; I can't hear any modest pleadings. 
You are to come ; I am to bring you. You may 
be sure he'll like you ; and, do you know, I really 
begin to think your fortune is made. Perhaps 
you may sing as primo tenore with what's-her- 
name, Eeichstein, some time. And I shall go to 
hear you, and fling a bouquet to you . mind, not 
to her . so be sure you keep it for yourself; and 
then you must redeem your promise, and take me 
to the Derby." 

"Hear me swear ! You shall accompany me 
to the Derby. We'll have a carriage and, at least, 
four horses the very first Derby-day after I have 
sung as primo tenore with Mcllle. Reichstein." 

"Well, you may laugh now; but I promise 
you I'll make you keep your word. Far more un- 
likely things have happened. But now tell me 
when you are coming to see my uncle." 

I had not the remotest idea of presenting my- 
self or being presented to Lilla's uncle. All I 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 163 

had heard of him pictured him to me as a cold, 
purse-proud, selfish, sensuous man . not, indeed, 
incapable of doing a generous thing for a poor 
dependent, but quite incapable of feeling any 
respect for poverty of any kind. His photograph, 
which Lilla often showed me, quite confirmed my 
notions of him. Egotism and pride were traced 
in every line of the face . of the straight square 
forehead, of the broad jaw . even the unmistakable 
sensuousness of the full lips and the wide mouth 
did not soften the general hardness of the expres- 
sion. I cannot tell why, but I always detested 
the man. Patronage of any kind I must have 
hated ; but to be patronised by this rich man was 
utterly out of the question. 

Yet I could not but feel grateful for the kindly 
manner in which poor Lilla had endeavoured to 
serve me. This was surely disinterestedness on 
her part. She so often had to solicit favours of 
her uncle upon her own account, that one might 
have imagined a shrewd and worldly girl would be 
very careful indeed not to weaken any influence 
she might have, not to discount any future con- 
cessions, by asking his good offices for another. 
Therefore, while I attached not the slightest im- 



164 my enemy's daughter. 

portance to the promised influence, and would not 
have availed myself of it were it really to make 
my fortune in an hour, I took good care, the 
reader may well believe, to let Lilla see that I was 
not ungrateful. Nor did I dash her little pride 
and triumph by telling her that I would not go 
to see her uncle. But I temporised ; and fortune 
gave me a ready way of doing it. I had been for 
some little time in negotiation about an engage- 
ment to join a company who were to give concerts 
in some of the provincial cities and towns; and 
this very day I had accepted the terms, and duly 
signed the conditions. I had therefore to leave 
town at once, and should probably be away for two 
or three months at the least. 

This therefore gave me a satisfactory plea for 
postponing my visit to Mr. Lyndon. 

Lilla was a little cast down ; but as she knew 
I had long been anxious to secure this very engage- 
ment . my first of any note . she brightened up 
immediately, and gave me her warm congratula- 
tions. 

"When I get back, Lilla, you shall make my 
fortune." 

" How glad I shall be ! Do you know that I 



LILLA WOULD SERVE ME. 165 

really hope you may not quite take the provinces 
by storm, and so find the way made clear to you, 
without my having anything to do with it ? I do, 
indeed. I want so much to be the means of doing- 
some good for you." 

" You need not fear, Lilla. Fortune will be in 
no hurry to interfere with your kindly purpose." 

"But stop. I have actually done something 
for you already. I have given you a name." 

"Indeed! How is that?" 

" Well, of course you can't call yourself Banks 
when you go on the stage. Banks would never 
do ; there couldn't be a great Banks. Then you 
always say you never would consent to take any 
ridiculous Italian name." 

"Never." 

" Well, I have given you a delightful name, 
which is all your own, by the simplest process in 
the world. Temple Banks is absolutely ridicul- 
ous ; people would always keep calling you Temple 
Bar. Now don't be angry." 

" Indeed I am not." 

" You got quite flushed when I laughed at 
your name, though ; but no matter. Leave out 
the Banks altogether, and there you are . Emanuel 



166 my enemy's daughter. 

Temple ! What can be prettier and softer ? All 
liquids, positively. Well, I have made you Eman- 
uel Temple, and nothing else. I spoke of you to 
my uncle as Emanuel Temple. He has written 
down your name in his memorandum-book as 
Emanuel Temple. I have launched you as 
Emanuel Temple, and Emanuel Temple you shall 
remain." 

Nobody much likes any chaff about his name. 
I did not at first quite relish my young friend's 
remarks, but I soon saw there was some sense in 
them. I had indeed, for many reasons, deter- 
mined on changing my name in some way, and 
this slight alteration would do as well as any 
other. So I went through the provinces as 
Emanuel Temple, and I have never since been 
publicly known by any other name. 



CHAPTER X. 

I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 

Some few weeks of professional wandering among 
chilling audiences in country towns, meeting with 
tolerable success in most places, brought me to 
Dover, and the first glimpse of the sea I had 
enjoyed for years. I felt boyish again at the sight 
of my old confidant ; and the shining track of the 
moon across the water seemed to mark out a 
bright path back to the delightful dreamland, the 
far-off, fading Island of the Blest, with its " light 
of ineffable faces," whither my boyhood and my 
first love were banished, the one seemingly as 
much lost to me as the other. Not for years had 
I thought so bitterly, so passionately, of Christina 
as during my short stay in Dover by the sea. 
And yet she seemed to me almost like a creature 
in a dream . like some beautiful spirit -love, which 
had descended upon me while I lay in ecstatic 
delirium, and faded with my waking. I can al- 



168 my enemy's daughter. 

most believe the stories of men who have fallen 
madly in love with the daughters of dreams, and 
pined and sickened away their lives in longing 
after the unreal, and were glad to die, that they 
might be relieved of the vain tormenting wish. 

I pass, however, from recalling these purely 
personal and egotistical recollections to the subject 
which I meant to speak of when I recurred to my 
visit to Dover. An accidental meeting there threw 
me in the way of making an odd acquaintanceship, 
which had no little influence afterwards on one 
part at least of my fortunes, and those of two dis- 
tinct and divided sets of persons, whose histories 
make indirectly a chapter of mine. 

One evening, after I had sung at a concert 
and been somewhat applauded, I went to have 
my customary stroll by the sea. I turned into 
a cigar- shop in one of the steep, stony, narrow 
little streets, chiefly made up of oyster-shops and 
public-houses, which alone are astir in Dover after 
nightfall. I asked for a cigar, hardly observing 
that somebody else was being served with some- 
thing by the young woman who stood behind the 
counter. 

" Glad he's come in !" said a full mellow male 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 169 

voice; "very glad. He '11 decide ; lie looks a sort 
of person who ought to know." 

It did not occur to me that this could well have 
any reference to myself, and so I asked again for 
a cigar. I noticed then that the girl was flushed 
in the face, and was biting her lips, half amused 
and half angry. 

" Shall I refer it to him ?" said the male voice 
again. 

"I really don't care," replied the girl, "whom 
you refer it to; I've told you the price and the 
quality, that's all." 

I looked round, and saw that there was seated 
on a chair at my left a short, stout, well-preserved 
elderly personage, with black, beady, twinkling 
eyes, shining white teeth, a rubicund complexion, 
and a black wig. His opened lips had a full, sensu- 
ous expression, and there was a dash of something 
in his whole face which vaguely spoke of cruelty, 
or marked eccentricity, or something else that is 
out of the commonplace character of the every-day 
Briton. There was an odd, indefinable mixture 
about his appearance and manner of the broken- 
down gentleman and the artist. I should say 
that he was probably a naturalised Bohemian, . 



170 my enemy's daughter. 

one not born among the gipsies, but who perhaps 
had strayed into their encampments in early life, 
or got changed at nurse. His uncommon appear- 
ance and queer ways struck me at once. I ob- 
served that his hands were small, fat, and beauti- 
fully white. 

" Then we refer the case to arbitration," com- 
placently remarked this personage ; and, still re- 
maining in his chair, he touched his hat very 
graciously to me, and with a wave of his hand 
invited my attention. "We have had a dispute, 
sir, I and this young lady . her name is Fanny ; I 
address her by her name because we are old 
acquaintances ; I have been here twice, I think . 
touching the quality of these cigars. She declares 
them to be prime Havanas, and has the conscience 
to ask eightpence each. I represent them to be 
rather inferior Veveys, and suggest one penny 
each, or seven for sixpence. On these terms I 
am willing to treat for one shilling's worth. I 
tell her frankly it is no use trying to deceive 
me. I have been to Havana, and I have only just 
come back from Switzerland ; and I remark to her 
that I rather think I saw the light at least a year 
or two before she did, and that, generally speak- 



I HAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 171 

ing, I have not knocked about the world for 
nothing. She refuses to admit the force of these 
arguments. Fortunately you have come in just in 
time to arbitrate. You seem to me a man who 
ought to know tobacco from dock-leaves and brown 
paper. Come, then, how say you . Havana or 
Vevey?" 

"I am afraid I must decline to arbitrate. I 
have not been to Havana." 

" But you are not a Dover man ? You don't 
belong to this confounded dirty, disgraceful little 
place? Don't tell me." 

" No, I am not a Dover man." 

" Of course not ; I knew it. . You see, Fanny, 
it's no use trying to deceive me. Take example, 
sweet girl." 

The sweet girl only tossed her head and looked 
remarkably sour. 

" If you're not going to 'ave the cigars," she 
said, "I just wish you'd put them down, and not 
bother." 

" Fanny, you rush to conclusions with the 
impetuosity of your sex. It must be something, 
I fancy, in the nature of petticoats that makes the 
wearers of them so quick in their conclusions. 



172 my enemy's daughter. 

No. Fanny. I shall not put the cigars down, be- 
cause I do mean to ' 'ave them/ as you express 
it. with the delicious disregard of aspirates pe- 
culiar to our common country. I mean to * 'ave 
them' and to pay for them, fair being, even at 
your own price : but I am anxious to convince 
you that, though you may extort my money . " 

''Extort, indeed! I don't care. I'm sure, if 
you 'ave them or don't 'ave them." 

" ' 'Ave them or don't 'ave them.' Innocent 
accents ! As I was observing when I was inter- 
rupted . pray don't go, sir. one moment . I want 
to convince you that you cannot cheat me. or con- 
found my sense of justice. You may fret me, 
but you cannot play upon me. I am only for 
justice. All my life through I have stood up for 
justice, and I never could get it. The whole 
world and his wife were against me, may God 
curse them all! . Look here, sir!" And he 
jumped off his seat, and came close up to me, 
throwing his hat hack off his forehead as he did so, 
and much disarranging his wig meantime. " Have 
you ever been conspired against, and hated?" 

"No, I think not: I don't know at least; 
and pardon me if I say I don't much care." 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 173 

" And do you think I care ? Not I. They 
have done their best for years, and I have stood 
out against them, and defied them, and bade them 
go to the devil; and just because they wouldn't 
go, and wanted me very particularly not to go 
either, I did my utmost to go there as fast as 
possible." 

" Which I do believe you're going," muttered 
the girl, with a glance at me. 

" I am a victim, sir, to my sense of justice, 
and my determination not to be conquered. I 
left England when they wanted me to stay here ; 
I come back now because I know they want me 
away. I'll spoil their game. There are people 
would rather see all the Beelzebubs and Molochs 
and Asmodeuses, and the rest of them, than me. 
Therefore I come. ' Confound their politics ; 
frustrate their knavish tricks !' Good-evening, 
sir. Or, stay, are you walking my way, and will 
you permit me to walk a little with you ?" 

I was about to decline very firmly the proffered 
companionship, but a supplicating look from poor 
Fanny seemed to beg of me to take him out of her 
way, wheresoever he might then desire to go. So 
I was pleased to be able to oblige the perplexed 



174 my enemy's daughter. 

lass, who seemed half talked to death already ; 
and it really did not much matter to me whether 
I endured my new acquaintance's company for a 
few minutes longer or got rid of him at once. So 
I expressed myself as quite delighted to have the 
pleasure of his company, and I was thanked by 
a glance of gratitude from under Fanny's eyelids. 
" Good-night, then, Fanny. Farewell, a long 
farewell, my Fanny ; perchance I may revisit thee 
no more. I take these six . Havanas we'll call 
them . at your own valuation. This gentleman 
and I are too much pressed for time to enter on 
the business of an arbitration now ; and besides, 
I don't think I could trust him . for he is young, 
Fanny, and inexperienced . to arbitrate between 
me and so pretty a girl as yourself. Between 
man and man is easy arbitration, Fanny ; but be- 
tween man and woman is trying work. Six cigars 
at eightpence each : six times eight, forty-eight . 
four shillings. The roof does not fall in, Fanny ! 
I perceive that the Powers above have no inten- 
tion of interfering to punish or prevent fraud; 
and I have only to pay. There are the four 
shillings. Farewell, Fanny ; repent, and re- 
member me ! . Now, then, sir, at your service." 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 175 

I followed my whimsical acquaintance. I ob- 
served that all his clothes were of foreign cut and 
fashion, and looked rather decaying. Indeed, he 
might have been taken for a shabby old French- 
man who had once been in good society, but for 
his voice and accent. These were unmistakably 
English. His voice was peculiarly sweet, full, 
and mellow, and its natural intonation when he 
dropped the manner of roystering buffoonery, 
which seemed to me purposely put on, was de- 
cidedly that of an educated English gentleman. 

" That's a pretty little devil," remarked my 
friend as we emerged from a dark street suddenly 
into the moonlight of the quay. 

" The girl in the shop ?" 

"As if you didn't know at once whom I 
meant ! Of course the girl in the shop . I dare- 
say you'll be found dropping in upon her again." 

" Not likely at all." 

" Lord, Lord, how this world is given to 
lying ! Don't be offended, sir ; I have only been 
quoting Jack Falstaff." 

" I know, and I am not offended." 

" Thanks ; I begin to think you are rather a 
good sort of fellow in your way, and I only offend 



176 my enemy's daughter. 

people I don't like. But you know very well, 
you sly rogue, you'll be looking in on little Fanny 
again. I saw telegraphic glances passing between 
you." 

" I don't care one rush ever to see her again, 
and I don't mean to." 

" How odd ! They tell me young fellows in 
England are greatly changed since my time. 
Apparently so. When I was your age, I should 
have liked to see such a girl more than once. 
Even now, I can assure you, I am a martyr, a 
positive martyr, to my general affection for the 
petticoat. But look there ! God ! how can a man 
talk of petticoats, and such fribbles and frou- 
frou, when he has a sight like that before 
him?" 

He pointed to the sea. We had reached a part 
of the road from which you looked, on the one 
hand, at the grand old castle and the white cliffs ; 
on the other, out across the waves, whereon the 
soft moonlight of late summer seemed floating. 
The muffled, gentle thunder of the waters rolling 
languidly and heavily on the strand was in our 
ears ; the scent of the salt sea in our nostrils ; 
the summer air all around us ; the moon and the 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 177 

sea before our eyes. It was indeed a scene to re- 
fine even vulgarity, to solemnise frivolity. 

My friend took off his hat, and stood gazing on 
the sea. Presently I heard him murmur in his 
deep soft tones: "For I have loved, Lord, 
the beauty of thy house, and the place where thine 
honour dwelleth." He presently turned to me : 
' ' Do you think it will avail a man hereafter to 
plead that he has loved the beauty of His house ?" 

" Surely, surely; at least I hope so. 

" Then you are an artist." This was said in 
the tone of one who has suddenly made a gratify- 
ing discovery. 

"Well, a sort of artist ; at least not wholly 
without some kind of artistic taste." 

"You believe in beauty, don't you? Now, 
don't give me any vague commonplace answer . I 
hate cant and parroting of any kind. If you don't 
believe in it, or if you don't quite know what I 
mean when I ask you the question, then say you 
don't, and let there be an end of it. A man may 
be a devilish good fellow although he has no more 
soul for beauty than that rock yonder ; and let me 
tell you a man may be a devilish bad fellow, and 
guilty of pretty well every sin that ever came in 

VOL. I. n 



178 my enemy's daughter. 

his way, although he is open at every pore to the 
contagion of beauty wherever it shows itself, in a 
wave or a moonbeam or a woman's bosom. The 
thing is, do you believe in beauty ? Because, if 
not, we had better walk on, and talk about oysters 
and cigars." 

I never was fluent with confessions of faith on 
the spur of the moment ; and I was not quite clear 
about the perfect sanity of my companion. How- 
ever, I answered quite truly that I thought I might 
describe myself as, in his sense, a believer in 
beauty. 

" Good . we are companions. Now, then, let 
us look at that scene for a little, and, like a good 
fellow, don't keep talking all the while." (I had 
not uttered six sentences thus far during our walk.) 
" Such a sight must be enjoyed in silence. It is 
holy; yes, damn me, but it is." 

After this pious affirmation he relapsed into 
silence . only, however, for a few minutes. 

"I have been an artist," he said; " at least I 
tried to paint pictures. I think they were very 
good, but they didn't come to anything. In 
fact, with me nothing comes to anything. I was 
brought up to be a gentleman, and that didn't 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 179 

prosper much with me. I've heen a ballad-singer 
. fact ! give you my word on it. I've sung in 
London squares, outside the windows of houses 
where I've many a time dined ; and they've sent 
out the confounded flunkey to tell me to move on. 
True, every word of it !" And he burst into a loud 
peal of laughter, which waked the echoes of the 
cliffs, and sounded like a startling hideous pro- 
fanity of the stillness and the scene. 

"The singing did not prosper ?" I asked calmly, 
not out of any particular curiosity, but to inter- 
pose any question which might check his disso- 
nant mirth. 

"Not it! Nothing, I have told you already, 
ever does prosper with me ; and yet they can't get 
rid of me, I can tell you." 

"They?" 

"Yes, they. What is it to you who they are, 
or what their accursed names are ? " 

" I assure you I don't want to know at all." 

"They? I'll tell you who they are. The phari- 
sees, the publicans, the respectable hypocrites, 
the cold, confounded, bloodless, sinless devils. 
Look here, and answer me truly . did you ever do 
a virtuous action ?" 



180 my enemy's daughter. 

"Keally, that depends . " 

"No, it doesn't ; it depends on nothing. Did 
you ever do anything that was really virtuous and 
self-denying, that you would much rather not have 
done, but did because virtuous people asked you 
to do it ? Anything of that sort have you ever 
done ?" 

"Well, if you press me for an answer, I must 
say I don't believe I ever did." 

" Of course you never did. Well, I did once ! 
You'll not catch me doing such a thing again, I 
can tell you ; it played the devil with me. I've 
done . and I had done before that . about every 
foolish and bad thing a man could do ; but I might 
have been forgiven everything except the one sacri- 
fice to virtue. And it was such a sacrifice ! If 
you only knew ! No matter. Are you leaving 
Dover soon ?" 

" In a day or two." 

" Going over, no doubt?" 

He nodded in the direction where the French 
coast lay, now of course wholly lost to sight. 

"No. I am going to visit a few towns here in 
the south." 

"And then?" 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 181 

" Then to London." 

"Where you live?" 

"Where I live." 

" Good. I am going to live there too . unless 
I happen to starve there . for a while. I have a 
few coins left. I should think a week of very rigid 
economy would play them out, and Heaven knows 
into what company of thieves I may fall mean- 
time." 

Something prompted me to say with more em- 
phasis than if the words were merely formal, " I 
hope we may meet in London." 

He laughed a short laugh. 

"Well," he said, " I hope so too ; hut if, as 
the final result of our meeting, you are particu- 
larly glad of the acquaintance, I think you'll be 
about the first that ever had occasion to express 
such a sentiment. And yet I love mankind ; and 
I really don't try to do harm to anybody, except 
to some very, very near and dear relatives. I 
suppose London stands where it did, and is much 
the same as usual ?" 

" Just as it was so long as I can remember 
it." 

" I thought so. All the young men wise, and 



182 are enemy's daughter. 

all the young women virtuous. All the marriages 
made in heaven, and all husbands devoted to their 
wives. All brothers of course living together in 
love and harmony. A blessed place ! Naturally 
just the place for me : so I am going there. I 
have not been there for years ; but I am glad to 
hear that its beatific condition remains still un- 
altered." 

He snapped his fingers, and turned abruptly 
away from me. Just as I thought I had got rid 
of him, however, he wheeled round and came 
sharply up to me again. 

"Do you know anybody in London?" he 
asked. 

" Very few people. In your sense I should 
perhaps say nobody." 

" Any members of parliament, for example ?" 

"Not one." 

" Ah, that's a pity ! Some of them are such 
noble fellows; I know some of them. I know 
one in particular, and I am very fond of him. 
His name is Tommy Goodboy. An odd name, 
isn't it ? But it's his name. Don't look in Dod 
when you get home for Tommy Goodboy, Esq. 
M.P., because he doesn't give his real name when 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 183 

he goes to the House of Commons. But he's 
Tommy Goodboy. You remember the story of 
Tommy and Harry? Harry didn't care; and so 
a roaring lion came and ate him up. That was 
convenient for the good people, the respectable 
and well-behaved people. The deuce of the thing 
would have been if Harry didn't get eaten, but 
came back all alive, and kept tormenting Tommy 
out of his wretched, pitiful existence, disgracing 
him, crouching at his door like Lazarus, and 
offending the guests whom Tommy invited to 
dinner. . By the way, I take it for granted you 
are hard up ?" 

" Well, I certainly am not Dives. No beggar 
would care to wait at my door." 

"No, I thought not. You dress well enough; 
but there is something unmistakable about the 
cut of the man who is hard up. ' Poor devil' is 
written in every line of you; and yet I should 
say you are a sort of fellow who will burst out 
of all that and get on. Unlike me in that re- 
spect ; I am a poor devil, and I never shall get 
on. Good-night. I daresay we shall meet again 
somewhere. I am going back to the town. I 
know a very pleasant place where oysters are 



184 my enemy's daughter. 

eaten, and brandy is drunk, and songs are sung ; 
and I am a sort of king of the feast there. They 
are all low scoundrels, and I'm a kind of lord and 
patron among them. I don't suppose it's any use 
asking you to come." 

" Thanks, no; not the slightest." 

"No, you don't seem just the sort of person 
to enliven a convivial gathering. I know what's 
the matter with you. Don't be cast down, man ; 
you and she will meet again yet." 

His idle words did, I suppose, make me give 
a slight start ; for he laughed his chuckling roll- 
ing laugh, and said : 

" So I have touched you ! I thought as much. 
Confound it, man ! you're as fortunate as one of 
Virgil's rustics, if you only knew your own good 
luck. The best thing that can happen to you is 
never to see her again ; and to keep up your 
poetry, and romance, and despair, and all the 
rest of the nonsense. Take my word for it, if 
you have the misfortune to marry her, you'll soon 
find the poetry and the romance sponged out, and 
you'll be glad to join me at the oysters and the 
brandy ! Despairing lover, I envy you from my 
soul ! By God, I do ! I would give the crown of 



I MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE. 185 

England, if I had it, to be young like you, and 
to be disappointed in love. It's glorious ! Con- 
found it, you've made me so envious that I'll 
leave you with a parting malediction. May the 
devil inspire her to marry you !" 

He burst into his laugh again, and trotted 
away at last townwards. I was glad to get rid 
of him ; indeed, for the last few minutes of the 
conversation, I was plagued by a strong desire to 
kick him . a performance hardly practicable, see- 
ing that he was old enough to be my father, and 
only half my size. Yet it was strange with what 
interest I had been studying his face, his voice, 
his gestures, all the time that he was speaking. 
I felt perfectly satisfied that I had never seen him 
before, and yet there was something tormentingly, 
tantalisingly familiar to me in his features. It 
was some shadowy, quick - darting resemblance 
which every now and then seemed just on the 
point of revealing itself, but always vanished at 
the most critical moment. As one tortures him- 
self in trying to recall a name which is every 
instant on the tip of the tongue and yet will not 
come out, so I perplexed myself in vain endea- 
vours to read the riddle of his face and voice. 



186 my enemy's daughter. 

Strangely too, it seemed to remind me, as well 
as I could understand my own sensations, not of 
one, but of two faces I had somewhere seen. The 
upper part of the face, the bright twinkling eyes, 
the straight short nose, the cheekbones just a 
little high, the white forehead, . these were fea- 
tures which reminded me of something that 
brought with it genial and kindly associations ; 
while the sensuous lips and cruel jaw recalled 
something which was harsh and displeasing to 
remember. I racked my brain again and again ; 
and indeed I think that I dreamed of the creature 
half through the night, and thought I saw him 
turning before my eyes into the successive re- 
semblances of nearly every man I knew. But I 
awoke in the morning with the riddle still unex- 
plained, and at last I resolutely put it aside 
altogether. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

MY NEW FRIEND IN A NEW CHARACTER. 

That night we gave another concert ; it was 
well attended, and successful. When I came on 
to take part in a duet with some woman, I na- 
turally looked round the hall, and to my mingled 
amusement and vexation I saw my friend of the 
previous night seated in the reserved part of the 
hall, and listening with his head a little to one 
side, and all the manner of a professed connois- 
seur. He beat time gently with his fingers ; he 
nodded his head and smiled a sweet approving 
smile when some passage was specially well ex- 
ecuted ; his brows contracted and he shook his 
head in indignant remonstrance at anything out 
of time or tune. To do him justice, he really 
did seem to know something about the music, 
which hardly anybody else among the audience 
did. Therefore he took quite a leading part in 
the reserved seats, looked blandly but command- 



188 



ingly around, and intimated with eye or ges- 
ture where applause might properly be awarded; 
frowned fiercely down any untimely burst coming 
in at a wrong place ; shrugged his shoulders and 
shuddered when a breath of wholly unmerited ap- 
proval floated past him ; cried bravo to a singer, 
brava to a songstress, bravi when more than one 
performer conquered his approval ; expressed in 
audible tones his final verdict on each perform- 
ance ; and, in short, conducted himself quite as 
one whose judgment artists and audience had 
alike agreed to recognise. Whether he remem- 
bered me or not, I could not guess, for his face 
gave no token of recognition. But when I came 
on, I observed that he took, with an air of 
gracious friendliness, the programme from the 
lap of a lady who sat next him, and raising a 
double-eyeglass which he wore, looked down the 
bill apparently to discover my name. He was 
very patronising in his treatment of me; only 
shrugged his shoulders once or twice, and several 
times tapped his palms together and cried "bra- 
vo!" Indeed, I think he encouraged, at all events 
he permitted, an encore of one of my ballads. He 
showed to most advantage, however, during the 



MY NEW FRIEND IN A NEW CHARACTER. 189 

second part of the concert, which was made up of 
selections from an oratorio. Impressed strongly 
by his manner, and apparently anxious to do 
some act of homage to so accomplished a critic, 
the lady next him offered to allow him to read 
from the score of the oratorio she had with her. 
His manner of surprised, amused, pitying, con- 
descending rejection of the proffered kindness was 
sublime. The shrug of the shoulders, the raising 
of the eyebrows, the graceful, lordly waving of the 
disclaiming hand, the bend of the head, the be- 
nign, superior smile, all said as plainly as words 
could have spoken it : "My dear madame, do you 
really suppose there is one note, one half-note of 
this music that is not familiar to me as the letters 
of the alphabet? A thousand thanks for your 
well-meant offer ; but pardon me if I say that it 
really does amuse me." 

When I was leaving the hall at the end of 
the performance I caught another glimpse of my 
friend. He was making himself painfully atten- 
tive to two ladies, perhaps those who had sat next 
to him, by insisting on opening their carriage- 
door for them, handing them in, arranging their 
skirts, and otherwise playing the gallant, much to 



190 my enemy's daughtek. 

their apparent vexation. He then shut the car- 
riage-door, took off his hat and bowed profoundly, 
and in a loud tone gave the coachman his order 
for "home." I watched him for a while with 
considerable amusement. He then stood on the 
pavement and scrutinised the crowd coming out. 
A lady and gentleman came out, talking together 
in French. The sound struck my friend's ears ; 
he at once approached them, took off his hat, 
made a bow, and addressed them in a voluble 
stream of French, accompanying his words with 
such gestures and shrugs and elevation of eye- 
brows, that he seemed to have transformed him- 
self into a very Frenchman all in a moment. I 
do not know whether he was really passing him- 
self off as a Frenchman, but the persons he 
addressed stopped and conversed with him for a 
moment or two, then seemed to be puzzled by 
him, then evidently became anxious to shake him 
off, finally nodded a good-humoured, peremptory 
adieu, and literally broke away from him. Where- 
upon my friend first stamped on the pavement, 
muttered something about canaille, then swore a 
round Saxon oath or two, then burst into a loud 
laugh, and went laughing and stamping down the 



MY NEW FRIEND IN A NEW CHARACTER. 191 

street. I passed him quite closely. He did not 
observe me ; at least lie took no notice whatever 
of me. He was talking to himself. 

"The society of the just declines to have me 
this night," I heard him say. "I have given it 
the chance, once, twice. The stuck-up Britoness 
scorns my attentions, confound her ! I wish she 
was Boadicea, and I one of the Koman conquerors, 
furnished with a good birchen rod. Neither will 
the frog-eating, fantastic fribble of France invite 
me to sup with himself and his wife. Afraid to 
run such a risk with her, no doubt. I don't won- 
der. I can't sit at good men's feasts to-night. 
No help for it. There are worse things than bad 
men's feasts, that's one comfort." 

I did not care to give him the chance of fas- 
tening on me, whether he chose to regard me as 
of the good or of the bad ; so I hurried away, and 
so far I escaped. 

I walked and smoked a good deal by the sea- 
side that night, and enjoyed the solitude and the 
beauty of the place. In a very few days I was to 
return to London, after an absence that had now 
spread over some months . my first absence, even 
for a week, since I had come to live in the great 



192 my enemy's daughter. 

city. I thought of Lilla and her good-natured 
undertaking to make my fortune through her 
uncle's influence, and wondered how I should be 
able to get rid of the offer without wounding her, 
or seeming ungrateful for her kindness. If I 
could only spread out my provincial engagement 
for even a fortnight or three weeks longer, the 
season would be over by the time I had returned 
to town, and Mr. Lyndon would probably have be- 
taken himself to Ems, or Baden, or Florence, and 
the difficulty would be obviated for another season 
at least. 

I could not think of such things without medi- 
tating rather sadly over my own dreary life and 
blank future, and then falling into the old, old 
track of thought about my lost Christina, who 
had so literally disappeared out of my life. 
Strange, that in wandering about London I had 
never met even Ned Lambert, our quondam bass- 
singer; who might perhaps have told me some- 
thing of her . whose face would at least have re- 
called more vividly the associations of the dear, 
fading days of long ago. Poor Ned Lambert ! 
he must have suffered much. But, good heavens, 
what could his sufferings have been to mine ! He 



MY NEW FRIEND IN A NEW CHARACTER. 193 

at least was not first raised up to happiness, and 
then flung down to despair; while I . heaven, 
how happy I was once ! 

Of late I found myself growing quite moody 
and moping. I began to think I was getting 
prematurely old, and to look out of mornings for 
gray hairs . at eight-and-twenty ! 

I turned away from the seashore, and walked 
homeward through the town. Passing through 
one of the streets, I heard noise, clamour, shout- 
ing, cursing, stamping . apparently going on in 
a low public-house, the light from whose windows 
was the only bright spot along that side of the 
street. As I came up to the place, its swing- 
doors were suddenly flung open, and the "row" 
streamed out upon the pavement. It assumed 
the form of a little crowd of men hustling and 
rushing round some central figures. There were 
shouts of " Give it him !" " Let 'im 'ave it !" 
"No!" "Shame!" "Don't hit him!" "Knock 
him down!" "Damnation Frenchman!" "Dirty 
foreigner!" "Call the police!" and so forth. I 
could see that the fat, bare-headed landlord, and 
the almost equally fat barman, were wildly en- 
deavouring to restore order, or keep the whole 

VOL. I. 



194 my enemy's daughter. 

company out, while the barmaid stood at the 
door and vainly screamed for the " Perlice !" 

I do not feel much interest in "rows," and 
would gladly have passed on, but the " row" 
broke around me, so to speak, split into waves 
upon the sudden and unexpected opposition of 
my advancing form, and I found myself some- 
how in the very midst of it. Then I saw that 
the central figures were a big, stout, lubberly- 
looking cavalry soldier, and a small man, who 
was clinging to the hero's neck. In the latter 
figure I at once recognised my fantastic friend 
of the black wig. He was jabbering away in a 
jargon of French and broken English, and was 
clinging to his antagonist like a savage little 
bulldog. Just as I was rushing in to endeavour 
to get him away, the big soldier succeeded in 
shaking himself free from my friend's grip, and 
then took the little man bodily off his feet, and 
flung him on the pavement, amid a yelling chorus 
of cheers and laughter, broken by a few cries of 
"Shame!" 

"For shame, you cowardly ruffian!" I ex- 
claimed, utterly ignorant as I was of the merits 
of the quarrel. "Don't you see he is an old 



MY NEW FRIEND IN A NEW CHARACTER. 195 

man ! Fight your match, you blackguard, if you 
want to fight f" 

I fully expected to have had to accept a prac- 
tical challenge on my own account, and stood 
therefore quite ready, the first moment the sol- 
dier made an attack on me, to hit hard and home. 
He was a floundering, awkward sort of fellow. I 
was stout and sinewy at that time, and had some 
little science. I did not despair of finishing-orY 
the battle in a w r ell-employed minute or so. 

But to do the honest warrior justice, he seemed 
rather ashamed of his part in the transaction. 

"Who wants to fight him?" he asked in a 
growling tone, and with a sheepish expression. 
" He ain't that old, neither ; but I didn't want to 
have anything to do with the dirty little Frenchy. 
'Twas all his work. Why didn't he let me alone? 
Why did he keep badgerin' of me, and worryin' 
of me, and insultin' of me and my red coat, all 
the evening ?" 

There was a chorus of approbation, and the 
barman cried " Hear, hear !" 

Meanwhile my little friend jumped to his feet 
again, and began to dance around us on the pave- 
ment without hat or wig, presenting so outrage- 



196 my enemy's daughter. 

ously ridiculous a spectacle, that I could not 
wonder at the roar of laughter with which he was 
greeted. I kept between him and the soldier as 
well as I could, and I at last seized him fast 
round the arms, while he, endeavouring to break 
away and get at his antagonist, dragged and 
whirled me round on the pavement in a manner 
the most grotesque and ludicrous. 

"Let him come!" roared the absurd little 
beast, in his ridiculous jabber. " Cochon d?un 
Anglais ! God dam John Bull ! Poltroon of 
militaire ! I am not so old, moi, but I can 
teach ce gros militaire his own hoxe. Coward 
English ! English dam ! Fight you all round ! 
Sacre-e-e-e /" 

The absurdity and whimsicality of the whole 
scene, and of this ridiculous little being's nonsen- 
sical part in it, were altogether too much for me, 
and I too joined in the burst of laughter. 

" Come, come," I said at last, shaking my old 
friend rather roughly by the collar, "don't make 
a fool of yourself any more. You have had 
enough of this for one night. Come away with 
me." 

" Will ze gros militaire make apology ?" 



MY NEW FRIEND IX A NEW CHARACTER. 197 

A renewed burst of laughter followed this, in 
which the gros mUitaire himself joined. 

"Do take him away, like a good gentleman," 
said the landlord to me. "I do think he's the 
most worriting little creature as ever I saw. He's 
been insulting everyone in my bar to-night. He 
kissed my barmaid, and he wanted to kiss my 
wife ; and he's been so down upon that there sol- 
dier as flesh and blood wouldn't stand it, telling 
him the English soldiers were all cowards, and 
that the French were coming over to thrash us 
all and carry off our wives. And I tried to get 
rid of him quietly, and he wouldn't go, and I 
tried to keep order; but you know it's hard for 
Englishmen to stand being insulted by a d . d 
little Frenchman ; and the soldier didn't hit him 
at all, but only wanted just to put him out of 
the place." 

"Well, take all these people in again, and I'll 
get him out of this. . Xo, you sha'n't." This last 
assurance was given to my impetuous friend, who 
was plunging and struggling so, that it sometimes 
took all the vigour of my eight-and-twenty years 
to keep him back, and indeed I sometimes felt 
tempted to let him rush on and get smothered or 



198 my enemy's daughter. 

set-upon by the cavalry-man. The crowd, how- 
ever, seeing that the fun was probably over, began 
to straggle back laughing into the public-house ; 
the barman and the barmaid had returned to their 
duties ; the soldier was only too glad to get out of 
the whole business ; and I was nearly master of 
the situation. 

" Here's his hat," said the landlord. 

" And here's his wig !" exclaimed a bystander, 
with a burst of laughter. 

The soldier haying by this time disappeared 
behind the swing-doors of the public-house, his 
antagonist allowed himself to be quietly coiffe ; 
and having shrugged his shoulders several times, 
and exclaimed that the chasseur acknowledged 
himself vaincu, he made a low bow to the few 
remaining spectators, thanked ccs braves Anglais 
for the fair-play of the boxe, and, leaning on my 
arm affectionately, consented to be led away. The 
disgust I felt at the whole business no words can 
express. But that I looked at his withered face, 
and saw the deepening ruts of Time's track so 
plainly in it, I should have regretted that I had 
not left the soldier and himself to settle the busi- 
ness between them. 



MY NEW FRIEND IX A NEW CHARACTER. 199 

When we had got a few paces from the scene 
of conflict, my companion burst into a long peal 
of rolling laughter. 

" That was capital," he chuckled. " Did you 
ever see such fun ? I suppose I may drop the 
Frenchman now, and return to my allegiance as a 
native-born subject of happy and glorious, long to 
reign over us, Victoria, Queen of Great Britain 
and Ireland." 

" What on earth led you to carry on all that 
absurd buffoonery ?" 

" If I know, may I be condemned to the eter- 
nal society of British respectability ! Give you 
my word, my clear young friend . whose name I 
have not yet the honour of knowing . I can no 
more tell you why I chose to assume the man- 
ners, prejudices, and lingo of Albion's hereditary 
enemy than I could solve the mystery of man's 
hereafter. What then ? We are all creatures of 
impulse. I have been especially so from the date 
of my first misfortune . of course, I mean my 
birth. I looked into that atrocious den there with 
no object whatever. I might have come harm- 
lessly away in five minutes, when the evil desti- 
nies would have it that my wandering eyes fell 



200 

upon that hapless soldier. He was the centre of 
an admiring bumpkin or costermonger group ; he 
was telling, I think, his adventures . atrocious 
lies, of course, every one . in China, or the Khy- 
ber Pass, or Syria, or some other place ; and he 
was evidently immensely proud of being a British 
soldier. May I perish if I could resist the temp- 
tation to make him and the rest of them uncom- 
fortable ! The one thing I hate in life is smug 
and sleek respectability and self-conceit, in any 
sphere whatever. In that moment I became a 
Frenchman . positively for the time being I was a 
Frenchman. I soon disturbed the harmony of 
the festive hour. I confuted my red-coat with 
impromptu facts and impossible geography. I 
bewildered him so far that before long he couldn't 
have told whether he did or did not take part in 
the battle of Plassy, and whether Marshal Ney did 
not lick the English there. I contradicted and 
chaffed him, every word he said; I kissed the 
barmaid because he seemed spoony about her ; I 
winked ostentatiously at the landlord's wife, until 
mine host grew purple with jealousy and fear . I 
really believe I kissed her too ; and finally . " 
" Finally, they kicked you out." 



MY NEW FRIEND IX A NEW CHARACTER. 201 

" No, they didn't. The soldier tried to put 
me out, and couldn't, and then the whole of them 
fell on me somehow ; and I have no doubt they 
would all have wreaked their base vengeance on 
me but that you came gallantly up to the rescue. 
I owe you something for that. So much the worse 
for you. The people I owe anything to are sel- 
dom any the better for it. Yet I like you ; I did 
from the first. You look so confoundedly out of 
sorts." 

" Thank you." 

"Yes, you do. I hate success and respect- 
ability. I hate virtue, and domestic happiness, 
and the proprieties, and all that revolting stuff. 
I detest children and wives, and people who pa- 
rade their chubby, insolent happiness. Stand 
there . just there . in the moonlight a little, and 
let me look at you." 

I complied with his wish. He planted me as 
a painter might his model, fell back to a proper 
distance, and steadily surveyed me with his pierc- 
ing, glittering, small black eyes. 

" Yes, that will do," he said reflectively. 
"Nothing about you to offend me. You don't 
seem to me to have tasted much success in life, 



202 my enemy's daughter. 

or to be particularly happy. You, I should say, 
are at odds with the world, and likely to be for a 
time at least, and then, perhaps, you may come 
out all right ; and if you do, I don't want to see 
any more of you from that time forth. Did you 
ever hear of Swift and his sceva indignatio, which 
could only leave him with his life ?" 

" Yes, I Have heard of Swift, and know all 
about his sceva indignatio." 

" Well, I think that's my curse. I writhe 
under it, and I live to make others writhe. That 
one resemblance . you need not tell me it is the 
only one . I bear to Jonathan Swift. How the 
devil, though, do you know it is the only one ?" 

" I didn't say I knew anything about it. You 
may be twice as great a man as Swift for aught 
I know to the contrary." 

' ' Of course I may . to be sure I may. Then 
why did you sneer when I spoke of a resemblance 
between Swift and myself?" 

"I didn't sneer. I smiled at the notion." 

"Don't smile any more until you know what 
you are smiling at. However, I don't mind being- 
frank and humble for once, and confessing that 
in the matter of genius I am decidedly inferior 



MY NEW FRIEND IX A NEW CHARACTER. 203 

to Swift. Also that the world has never recog- 
nised me as it did him. But one thing is cer- 
tain : Swift never locked up in his heart a greater 
treasure of hate than I do. How old are you ?" 

" Twenty-eight, I think, or thereabouts." 

"Don't you find the world a devilish place?" 

" How devilish ?" 

"Full of devils. Here, there, and everywhere 
. devils all around us. If I were inclined to be 
an atheist . which, thank God, I never, never was 
. I should be forced to believe in God, because 
I see so much of the devil. Don't you think with 
me ?" 

" yes, quite so ; no doubt. In fact, I am 
rather in a hurry now, and can't stay to discuss 
theology." 

"Another sneer! This time an inexcusable 
one, for it is a sneer against religion. Young 
man, whatever you do, be religious always." 

I was turning away, utterly disgusted at the 
hideous profanation of his language. He saw dis- 
gust painted on my features, and he seized me 
by the arm : 

"Stay; don't go yet. Don't . you shan't. 
You think me a hypocrite ?" 



204 my enemy's daughter. 

"I do ; and I am sickened by such talk. Let 
me go, and good-night." 

"No; just listen to me. I am not a hypo- 
crite; no, by God! He hears me, and He knows! 
If I had been, I must have succeeded in life, 
and been respectable, and had carriages and fine 
horses, and sat in Parliament as Tommy Good- 
boy. But I could not ; I would go my own way 
. to the devil if need be . and yet loving religion 
all the time. What else is my hope and my con- 
solation ? Do I not read in the Psalms of David 
how he curses his enemies ? . and these words 
teach me how to curse mine. Do I not read how 
Dives at last went down to hell . " 

"For shame, for shame! You are growing 
old, and should read the Holy Scriptures to some 
other purpose, or not at all. Let us say no more 
of it . and good-night." 

" Good-night, then . and go to the devil ! I 
say, shall we meet in London ?" 

"I hope not." 

"Then I hope we shall; and I am sure we 
shall ; I see it in the future that we are to be 
thrown together a good deal somehow." 

Confound it ! this very thought was at the 



MY NEW FRIEND IN A NEW CHARACTER. 205 

moment pressing painfully on my own mind. 
Just as I still kept thinking his face not unfa- 
miliar to me, and wondering where I could have 
seen one like it before, so I began now to be 
weighed down with a hideous foreboding that 
this creature and I were likely to be brought 
together in some close and disagreeable way here- 
after. The very nourishing of this thought drew 
with it a hesitation which unconsciously checked 
my abrupt breaking away from my companion. 
Involuntarily, irresistibly, I once more set myself 
to scan and study his features, in the vague hope 
of reading there some clue to my forebodings. 

"I see you don't like the prospect," he re- 
marked with a chuckle ; " but you need not much 
fear : you have no money, I know. Lucky for 
you, for I must get money somehow ; and I am 
such a hand at billiards and cards ! But I can't 
wait for these slow and steady acquisitions when 
I get to London. I must have something to open 
the campaign with. Gave to Goodboy ! Good- 
bye to you for the present ; we'll meet again. 
Just now take your face hence. Thanks for de- 
fending me so valiantly. Next time that, in the 
capacity of a discharged caporal, I am engaged in 



206 my enemy's daughter. 

vindicating the honour of France against some 
gigantic beef-eating Briton, I'll endeavour to have 
you close at hand." 

At last he went away; and I could hear him 
trolling Partant pour la Syrie in a wonderfully 
sweet and mellow voice as he disappeared from 
my sight. 

Much relieved by our separation, I went briskly 
home ; sincerely, though somehow not very hope- 
fully, praying that London might prove kind 
enough to hold us two without bringing us to- 
gether. 



CHAPTER XII. 

GREETING AND FAREWELL. 

The season was Riding when I returned to Lon- 
don. Even in our dull and barbarous district 
people were beginning to make ghastly affecta- 
tion of going out of town ; while in the streets 
which society and civilisation claimed for their 
own the windows were darkening one after an- 
other, much as the coloured lamps of an old- 
fashioned illumination, before the universal reign 
of gas had set in, used to fade and die towards 
morning. 

Lilla had a rapid summary of news for me. 
" Nothing much" had occurred, as she phrased 
it; her uncle had not yet left town; he had had 
a quarrel with his daughters, and she had an 
idea that it was all about the Opera and Made- 
moiselle Reichstein. O, hadn't I heard ? Made- 
moiselle Reichstein had made such a success ! 
0, yes . splendid ! But she had broken off her 



208 my enemy's daughter. 

engagement rather suddenly, and she wanted to 
go to the other opera-house, and there was quite 
a turmoil about it; and Lilla believed there was 
going to be a lawsuit. But, however that might 
be, Mr. Lyndon was quite infatuated about her; 
and people would keep saying that he wanted to 
marry her ; and his daughters were in such a 
way about it, and there was a row in the build- 
ing, Lilla believed. She was quite delighted at 
the prospect of a " row" continuing and grow- 
ing to be something serious, for she utterly de- 
tested Mr. Lyndon's daughters ; and she was 
going to be introduced to Mademoiselle Reich- 
stein. 

"But if your uncle marries, Lilla, that will 
be rather a bad thing for you ?" 

" Yes ; but I don't believe it will come to any- 
thing. I should think a woman so young, and 
with such a career before her, isn't going to marry 
a man who has daughters quite as old as herself 
and once and a half as tall. If I were she, I 
know that nothing on earth should induce me to 
do such a thing. 0, how I envy her ! How 
happy some people are ! What success they have, 
and gifts, and beauty ! And what a miserable 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 200 

life a girl like me is doomed to lead ! Here in 
this wretched old den ! I wonder how one can 
live through it. I never cross the bridge but I 
think how sad and dreary my life is, and how 
much I should like to drown myself, if I had the 
courage. She must be as happy as a queen. I 
envy her, and I admire her too." 

" Have you seen her ?" 

' 'No; her portrait only; and it was a wretched 
portrait too . a thing in a music-shop, with some 
rubbishy piece of music appended : but it made 
her beautiful and queenly, and sad too, I thought. 
But I am to see her. Is it possible you did not 
hear of her success down in the country ?" 

" yes, of course I did. But I am tired of 
all the singers who are everyone in turn to sur- 
pass Jenny Lind and Grisi, and who disappear 
in a season." 

"But the town is ringing with her." 

" Yes, so it was with Mademoiselle Johanna 
"Wagner ; so it was with no end of women. Where 
are they all now?" 

" Well, I don't know; but I have quite made 
up my mind that this one shall succeed and have 
a splendid career, and come to know me and be 

vol. i. p 



210 my enemy's daughter. 

very fond of me, and take me behind the scenes, 
and have me in her box ; and please don't destroy 
my delicious dream. I have not many pleasant 
dreams here, I can tell you. I never saw success 
in a living form face to face before ; and pray 
don't convince me that I am not really to see it 
now. If you have come back cynical and out of 
humour, pray go away again on your travels; 
although we were precious lonely without you, I 
can tell you that." 

" Were you lonety without me ?" 

" yes, very. Mamma thought you would 
never come back." 

" And you, Lilla?" 

" Yes ; I too was very lonely." 

" And you were glad when I came back ?" 

"Glad? Yes, surely. You don't suppose I 
was not glad ?" 

The frank look of kindly affectionate surprise 
with which Lilla spoke these words had a warm- 
ing, almost a thrilling influence on me. I think 
I had begun of late to form a kind of vague idea 
that Lilla might easily be induced to fall in love 
with me. I certainly did not love her, and I 
saw nothing in her manner towards me which 



GREETING AND . FAREWELL. 211 

spoke of love. But we were so much thrown to- 
gether, we were hoth so lonely, that I sometimes 
began to ask myself whether it would not he pos- 
sible for me to descend from my pinnacle of 
sublime isolation, and lift her towards my heart. 

I look back now upon myself and upon my 
ways at that time with the feeling which I sup- 
pose most people entertain towards their youth, 
curiously blended of regret and admiration and 
contempt. What a vain creature I was, and yet 
how stupidly timid and diffident ! What a fool 
I was, and how convinced of my own wisdom ! 
How miserable I was, and how happy ! What 
an admiration I had for my own merits, and yet 
what a rapturous and servile gratitude I felt to any 
woman who seemed to cast a favouring eye upon 
me ! I kept thinking complacently whether I 
really could accept Lilla's love, without asking 
myself whether any consideration on earth could 
induce her to accept me as a lover; and yet all 
the time I was filled with a sense of humiliating 
gratefulness to the girl for having condescended to 
be friendly and kindly to me. Of course I thought 
to myself, if I could make up my mind to come 
down from my clouds and try to love her, I must 



212 my enemy's daughter. 

tell her openly, tragically, that I was a blighted 
being, that I had hardly any heart left to give, 
and so forth. Even then I had a faint doubt 
whether this would not be a little too much in 
the style of Dickens's Mr. Moddle, with whom I 
knew Lilla to be well acquainted; and what a 
pretty thing it would be, if she were only to burst 
out laughing at my lachrymose avowal ! 

Yet the moment was tempting ; the situation 
became critical. Lilla had her levities and her 
faults, that was plain enough ; only a lover's eye 
could be blind to them, and I was not a lover. 
But they could surely be ameliorated, eradicated 
gently by patience and superior wisdom . mine, 
par excmple. Who did not once believe himself 
capable of reforming anyone on whom he chose to 
try his hand ? I am slow to believe in my own or 
anybody else's reforming capabilities now; but I 
suppose I then thought that, if I but condescended 
to attempt the task, I could remove all the weak- 
nesses and defects from poor Lilla's nature, and 
replace them by some splendid grafts of earnest- 
ness and lofty purpose. 

However this may be, Lilla's friendly admis- 
sion that she was lonely in my absence had sent 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 213 

a strange, sweet vibration through me. When 
this conversation occurred, we were crossing St. 
James' s-park. Thus far our roads lay together, 
and when there was a possibility of such com- 
panionship, we always took advantage of it. It 
was a beautiful evening, and the light of the 
setting sun threw a poetical glory over even the 
arid gravel and stunted trees of the park. It was 
a dangerous time and hour to walk with a pretty 
woman, and hear her tell you that she had been 
lonely in your absence. 

I glanced at Lilla. Her eyes were downcast 

. only, I now believe, because the level rays of 

# 
the evening sun threatened them . and there was 

a faint crimson on her cheeks. She was silent. 

I felt my soul dissolving in sentiment. 

"Then you were really glad of my return, 
Lilla, and you thought of me in my absence ?" 

She looked up quickly, smilingly, perhaps just 
a little surprised. 

" Thought of you ? yes, always ! How 
could I help thinking of you ?" 

What I might have poured out in another 
second I am glad to say that I can never know. 
It would undoubtedly have been some idiotcy to 



214 MY enemy's daughter. 

be bitterly regretted by myself afterwards ; and, as 
I now know, not likely to have caused her any 
particular delight then, even if she had not 
laughed at it. But she suddenly stopped in her 
sentence, and caught me by the arm, and a 
carriage drove past us from behind. Two ladies 
were in it, and a gentleman, whose iron-gray hair 
and purpling complexion I knew at a glance. I 
only saw the bonnets of the ladies. Lilla bowed 
to her uncle, and I saw her cheek redden. 

"It's my uncle," she said ; " and I know . I 
am sure . one of the ladies with him is Mdlle. 
Keichstein. I didn't even get a glimpse of her, 
did you ?" 

" No ; I only saw bonnets." 

" 0, I wish I had seen her ! I am sure it's 
she; I am so sorry! And he saw us. I don't 
care a bit ; in fact, I am delighted, because now it 
will remind him of you ; and I didn't like to speak 
too much about you, or too often, because . " 

And Lilla really blushed for the second time 
that day. 

But the blushing was useless now: the spell 
was broken; my sublime self-devotion vanished. 
Lilla's voice, and her evident first sensation of 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 215 

something like doubt or shame at being seen in 
my companionship, and her raptures about Mdlle. 
Reichstein, were enough. How full of kindness 
for me her whole heart was, I could not but see ; 
and I loved her in one way for that and other 
things ; but the glamour of the moment was gone, 
and I left her when our ways divided at Pall Mall 
a free man, still faithful to my one memory and 
one love. 

Two or three days passed away before an even- 
ing and an event came which I can never forget. 
I had been in town all day, and came home rather 
tired just after the last rays of a stormy sunset 
had sunk below the horizon of the low-lying 
region where we lived. My room, as I entered it, 
was in dusk ; but I could see as I came in a letter 
for me standing on the chimney-piece. I went 
over apathetically and took it in my hand ; but the 
sight of the inscription sent a fierce shock through 
me, and my head throbbed with a wild pain, born 
of surprise and sudden emotion. I knew that 
writing well. I put the letter down for a moment, 
just that my heart might beat less wildly, and my 
nerves become steady. Then I opened it, and 
read : 



216 my enemy's daughter. 

" Emanuel, . I liaYe seen you again, and you 
did not know it. I was near you. After so many 
years, it was strange. I am glad we did not meet 
to speak. I only write this word to wish you may 
be happy always. Nothing is left but . greeting, 
and farewell. 

" Christina." 

I put the letter down and leaned on the chim- 
ney-piece. I was for a while incapable of think- 
ing. I was literally stricken to the heart. "We 
had been close to each other, and I had not seen 
her ! If the foolery of our modern days could haYe 
truth behind it, and a living man could really, by 
help of some spiritualistic incantations, be reached 
by the Yoice and affected by the presence of some 
loved being from another world, he might feel 
somewhat as I felt then, but without my bitter- 
ness. No voice reaching out of the shadow of the 
world that lies outside nature could have affected 
me with a more agonising sense of unavailable 
nearness and hopeless distance. Near to me . 
close to me . her very writing lying on my table . 
and no clue or trace by which a word of mine 
might reach her ! If I could but see her once . 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 217 

but speak half-a-dozen words . but tell her of my 
strong love ! Was it not cruel thus to torture 
me with such a message ? Why not leave me to- 
my lonely struggle ? I was comparatively happy ; 
I was almost contented ; I had not forgotten her, 
but she had become to me as the dead are, and I 
had no hope. Bitterly did I now recall my first 
knowledge of her departure, my first sense of her 
loss, my first agony of uncertainty and torment. 
Now all woke up again with keener pain, with a 
deeper sense of tantalised and thwarted love. 

Perhaps she too, like myself, is unhappy, is 
struggling alone, and has sent out these few words 
for the poor sake of reaching a friendly ear by 
some means, as parting voyagers call a greeting to 
distant friends upon the fading shore, although no 
answer can reach them. Are we both, then, strug- 
gling unaided in this vast London ? Has one city 
held us all these years, and I never knew it ? Is 
she poor like me, and hopeless ? Or is she mar- 
ried and happy; and having seen me at last by 
chance, did she but look up for a moment and 
think of the boy whom years ago she loved, and, 
impelled by meaningless impulse, send him a 
word of greeting and farewell ? Have I lost her 



218 my enemy's daughter. 

utterly and for ever; or will some other message, 
more distinct than this, reach me yet, and guide 
me to her? 

This thought for a while lighted up a hope, a 
sickly, flickering hope, within me. Perhaps, as 
she lives, is near me, has seen me, has sent me a 
message, her mere words do not mean what she 
feels, and I shall hear from her soon again, and 
we shall meet. I was somewhat weak of late from 
over-exertion. I think I must have been weak 
indeed, in mind as well as in body, when such a 
hope could inspire me for a moment. Well I 
knew that even when Christina loved me most, 
she loved success yet more ; and what temptation 
could my future offer to such a spirit? I looked 
from the window, and the drear evening gloom 
made the flat and swampy places around, the 
mouldering houses, the blighted trees, look grayer 
and ghostlier than ever. Heavy rain was now 
beginning to fall, and the sky was all cloud and 
gloom. Nothing on earth could look more dreary 
to me than the prospect out of doors, except, 
indeed, the personal prospect which my soul fore- 
shadowed. Sad and heavy, like that mournful 
scene below . brightened by no ray of light, 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 219 

cheered by no pleasant sound . all dim, and 
misty, and gray. If I could find Christina, 
should I offer her a share of this one room, look- 
ing out on that swamp, and get her to canvass for 
pupils, who might learn music from her at six- 
pence a lesson, among the dirty children and the 
unfinished streets all around ? I pictured her, as 
I saw so many women in the neighbourhood, strug- 
gling for mere life, with children crying round her, 
and cramping her very efforts to get them bread, 
that they might eat of it and live. Why, there 
is a peculiar expression graven on the faces of a 
certain class of women in London, which cuts the 
very heart to look at. And why should I expect 
better fortune for a woman doomed to be wife of 
mine ? London garrets swarm with men infinitely 
better and more worthy of success than I, and yet 
on whom no gleam of fortune ever falls. 

Once, it is true, I had more courage and more 
hope. But London struggle has something in it 
demoralising. No contrast in life can bo more 
chilling and crushing than that of ideal London 
with actual London in such a case as mine. To 
ideal London we look in our ardour as the youth 
does to the battle, which he pictures as all thrill- 



220 my enemy's daughter. 

ing with the generous glory of strife, the rush of 
the exhilarating charge, the clangour of the bugle, 
the roar of the cannon, the cheers of the victor,, 
the honour and the wreath, or the noble, soldier- 
like, dramatic death. Actual London is the slow, 
cold camping on the wet earth, the swamp, malaria, 
the ignoble hunger and thirst, the dull lying in 
the trenches, the mean physical exhaustion, the 
unrecognised, unrecorded disappearance. What 
has become of the poor, raw, boyish recruit who 
sank exhausted in the mud of the night march, or 
was trampled to death in the retreat, or came back 
with a broken constitution from the hospital, to 
drag out a few obscure and miserable years at 
home ? 

I seemed to myself to be like the most ig- 
noble and the most unhappy of them. Should 
I wish Christina to share such fortunes . to be- 
come entangled in such a career? 

Or if she were prosperous, could I beg of her 
prosperity, and be warmed meekly in the sun of 
her success ? 

This last idea was so hateful to me, that I 
strode passionately up and down the room to 
banish it, and felt inclined to invoke curses on 



GREETING AND . FAREWELL. 221 

myself for the meanness which even allowed it to 
have an instant's possession of my mind. 

All, no ! She is lost, lost for ever ! Whether 
she lives in light or in gloom, she is lost alike to 
me ! I could not brighten the gloom. I will 
never stoop to be illumined . a pitiful, poor, 
human planet . by the light. I take her farewell 
literally . and farewell ! 

A tap at the door broke in upon my lonely 
thoughts. The disturbance was grateful to me ; 
any intruder would have been welcome at such a 
time. It was not an intruder, however, who 
sought to be admitted, but Lilla Lyndon. Her 
looks showed her to be brimful of some intelli- 
gence. She was dressed as if she had only just 
come in, and her cheeks and curls were sparkling 
with rain-drops. 

"Do you know where I have been?" she be- 
gan. " But you need not try to guess, for you 
never could succeed. I have been to see Made- 
moiselle Reichstein with my uncle." 

"Indeed ! Do you like her ?" 

"Yes, immensely. She is delightful, I think, 
and so good, and very handsome. You don't 
seem at all interested in her. Wait a bit, I have 



222 my enemy's daughter. 

something to tell you which will interest you, 

cold-hearted philosopher as you are. But stop . 

are you not well ?" 

"Yes, Lilla, quite well." 

"You don't look like it, then. I'll send 

mamma to talk to you presently. Perhaps I 

have something to tell you which will help you 

to get better." 

"I am not ill, indeed, Lilla." 

"Well, let me get on with my news. My 

uncle came with me ; but after a while he left 
me with Mademoiselle Eeichstein, and I remained 
for more than an hour, and she sang to me de- 
lightfully; and she was so kind and good, and 
seemed to take such an interest in me, you can't 
think; only I put it down in my own mind to 
the account of the interest she takes in my revered 
uncle, who, if he's not very young, at least has 
plenty of money. However, she took such an 
interest in me, that, when we were alone, I came 
to the point which I had at heart all through . 
and I spoke to her about you. Ah ! now you 
begin at last to think it worth while listening to 
what I say." 

Yes, I must own that even while she spoke a 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 223 

strange boding thrill passed through me, and I 
held my breath in a kind of agony. 

"I can tell you I spoke highly of you, and 
told her how fond mamma was of you, and I too. 
I do wonder what you would have thought if you 
only knew what I allowed her to think in order to 
persuade her to take an interest in you." 

" What did you allow her to think?" 

"I declare you are quite hoarse, Emanuel. 
You are in for a bad cold." 

"No, no, Lilla; do pray go on." 

"Well, I had rather you guessed at my pious 
fraud. I didn't exactly say the false word, but I 
am afraid I gave it out somehow. She asked me 
a question about you, and about my interest in 
you, and I allowed her to think . 0, there, I am 
quite ashamed of myself; and I suppose a girl 
better brought up than I would not have done 
such a thing for all the world. But I have not 
been brought up well, and I never could stick at 
trifles to serve a friend . and in fact, Mr. Temple, 
I think I allowed Mdlle. Eeichstein to believe that 
you and I were engaged, and only waited to be 
married until you had made your way a little. 
There's the whole truth out; and all I can say 



224 my enemy's daughter. 

in my own defence is, that if I had not as much 
esteem for you and confidence in you, Emanuel 
Temple, as if you were my own brother, I would 
never, never, bad as I am, have been guilty of any- 
thing so unblushing and unwomanly. There now, 
how dreadfully miserable you look ! I really don't 
see that you need be so utterly humiliated and 
ashamed . I daresay Mdlle. Keichstein did not 
think any the worse of you, whatever she may 
have thought of me." 

I was hardly conscious of any meaning in these 
latest words of hers. I was not thinking of hu- 
miliation, or of what she had said on my behalf. 
One thought, one conjecture, was swelling up 
within me so as to flood and drown every other 
feeling. 

"I feel greatly obliged to you, Lilla, greatly 
obliged," was all I could say. 

"And you look it too." 

" But Mdlle. Keichstein ?" 

"Well, Mdlle. Keichstein was most kind and 
amiable. She sat quite silent and thoughtful for 
a while, perhaps considering how best she could 
lend a helping hand. It must be a far more diffi- 
cult matter than I thought, for she put her hand 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 225 

over her eyes, and remained thinking quite a time. 
Then she kissed me, and wished me all happiness. 
I felt like a shamefaced and convicted liar. Yes, 
she wished happiness to me . to me, the most 
unhappy, discontented, lonely, hopeless creature 
under the sun ! . and then she sat down and wrote 
a letter to Princeps . the great Princeps himself, 
the manager of the Italian Opera . and I saw that 
she tore up two or three copies before she was 
satisfied with the writing (I believe half these 
prima donnas can't spell) ; and then she read it 
to me. It was all about you, and making it a 
personal favour to help you . very strongly put, 
I can tell you. I offered to post it as I came 
along, in order to be quite sure that it went ; for 
she said Princeps was not in London now, and it 
would be impossible for you to see him for some 
weeks; and she asked me . but this I really ought 
not to tell you." 

" Tell me all, Lilla. all, all !" 

"Good gracious, how hoarse you are! Well, 
she is so kind and thoughtful that she begged me 
not to tell you anything about the whole affair. 
People don't always like, she said, to think that 
they are being helped along, and it would be better 

VOL. I. Q 



226 my enemy's daughter. 

if you supposed that you were being sought out . 
for you will be sought out . for your own merit 
only. Was not that considerate and delicate ? 
But I know you have no such nonsense about 
you, and I want you to know how kind she is, 
and so I have told you, though I promised I 
wouldn't . the second fib to-day on your account, 
Mr. Emanuel Temple. 0, that reminds me that 
I must have let drop your full name somehow, for 
she seemed quite to know it." 

0, God in heaven ! I stood up and clenched 
my hands. 

"And now I think that's all; except that she 
gave me her picture, and I think her so beautiful ! 
0, how I do wish she would marry my uncle ! 
Why, what is the matter with you ?" 

" Show me the picture, Lilla." 

She sought in her pocket, then in the bosom 
of her dress. I stood trembling with excitement, 
keen pains again darting through my forehead, the 
square of light made by the window rising and 
falling before my eyes. 

" Surely I can't have lost it ? No, here it is. 
Is she not beautiful ? Such a mass of hair, and 
all her own too." 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 227 

I took the picture from her. It was one of the 
old-fashioned daguerreotypes now as completely 
gone out of the world as Miss La Creevy's enamel- 
led miniatures. When I first seized it and gazed 
upon it, the light so fell as to hlot it out com- 
pletely, and my impatient eyes only looked upon a 
blank space. Forcing down my emotion, I brought 
it to the window, held it in the proper light, and 
then . 

"Lilly, my dear; Lilly, my own," broke in, 
thank Heaven ! the plaintive tones of Mrs. Lyndon. 
"Yes, mamma; what's up?" 
" My child, you musn't stay in your wet things. 
Come down, dear; I want you." 

" 0, what does it matter ! Yes, I am coming. 
. Keep the picture for the present, Emanuel, and 
fall in love with it if you can. I would, I know, if 
I were a man. I'll send up for it presently." 

Thank God she was gone ! I could not have 
endured her presence much longer without betray- 
ing my feelings by a wild explosion. Yes ; it was 
as I expected . the face in the daguerreotype was 
the face of Christina Braun. Her dream, then, 
had come true. She had done her part. She was 
successful. 



228 my enemy's daughter. 

Ah, God ! I hardly needed to look at the poor 
little daguerreotype, or to struggle against the 
growing dusk for a clear sight of that face. By 
some force of ineffable conviction, the moment 
Lilla came into the room and spoke of Mdlle. 
Reichstein, I guessed the truth, of which I had 
never dreamed before. Often as she had talked to 
me of Mdlle. Reichstein, the notion had never be- 
fore occurred to my mind that the successful prima 
donna could be my lost Christina. But the letter 
. the few lines I had myself received that night . 
brought her back into my mind as a living reality 
again, and I knew the whole truth before my eyes 
or ears had any evidence of it. 

Yes, I am unable to account for it, but I knew 
it to be the fact that the moment Lilla entered the 
room and named the name of Mdlle. Reichstein, 
it came on me with the convincing force of a reve- 
lation that she and Christina Braun were one, and 
that I had lost Christina for ever. 

She was successful. Did I not know that she 
would be some time ? And yet it came on me 
now with a surprise which was like agony. Like 
agony ? Nay, it was agony ; for it severed us 
more, far more, than death could do. She was 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 229 

lost, lost to Hie. The one hope which had lighted 
my lonely life so long had utterly gone out. When, 
years ago, I used to hold her to my heart and talk 
to her of her future success, I always spoke of it 
as conjoined with my own, as the crown of a com- 
mon happiness. In how many hours of love and 
hope, in how many happy walks under the summer 
stars, in how many silent dreams, had we pictured 
that triumph for her and for me ! We were to 
make our way together through life, to become 
successful and famous, and then to come back and 
amaze the little town, which we magniloquently 
declared did not know us. Or, if we did not suc- 
ceed . for I at least had my moments of distrust 
and doubt . I always looked forward to our strug- 
gling and perhaps suffering together, still happy 
because together. Even our sudden and strange 
separation I had sometimes regarded as a glorious 
self-sacrifice, to be crowned and rewarded some 
day. Many a night had I returned sick of heart 
and weary of foot to my London lodging, and, 
musing over the hours of happiness, love, and hope 
I had once enjoyed, been cheered and brightened 
by the thought that perhaps my struggles here 
were working in unseen cooperation with her to- 



230 my enemy's daughtek. 

wards the same end. There was still at least a 
link of companionship, and a hope that it might 
draw us together one day. As my eyes were fixed 
upon the pale, far-off star of my hope, it was some 
consolation and joy to think that wherever she 
might be, her eyes and her soul were turned to- 
wards it too. 

And now, behold, one half at least of our most 
ardent prayer has been fulfilled. She has won all 
we dreamed of and hoped for. Why do I not re- 
joice ? I was to have been the first to hail her 
triumph, and now I greet it with agony and shame ; 
as if her success were my defeat and humiliation. 
And it is so. I feel that no poverty, no failure, no 
temporary isolation under the pressure of misfor- 
tune could raise such barriers between her and me 
as this fatal granting of one half our prayer. Poor 
people may become less poor, or they may grow 
familiar with poverty and learn to endure it, or 
they may conquer its pain by the strength of love 
and hope. But this revelation of her success has 
sounded the last of love and hope for me. Why, 
all these years that I have been picturing her heart 
as turning eternally towards mine, and panting for 
reunion, she has been simply making her way in 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 231 

the world ! She has run over some of the most 
thrilling chords of human experience, she has won 
every height to which she aspired ; while I have 
been removing from one town to another, my 
greatest triumph to exchange a garret for a small 
back-parlour. I feel crushed down by grief and 
shame. She must despise me. She has actually 
patronised me ! The great singer has granted, at 
the humble petition of a poor girl, a letter of in- 
troduction, to help a struggling and obscure poor 
devil to an engagement in a chorus. I had ima- 
gined many a renewal of our former days, many a 
first greeting after our long separation, many a 
meeting under all conceivable circumstances of joy 
and of sorrow ; but I had thought of nothing like 
this. I had forgotten to picture myself as a broken- 
down beggar petitioning for help ; and her as a 
triumphant and splendid prima donna granting 
me the favour at the solicitude of a wealthy and 
elderly lover. 

Why, it seems but last week that she wrote 
those letters I keep in my trunk, full of such 
love, and tenderness, and admiration . admiration 
for me ! and now I am her debtor for a letter of 
introduction, obtained through the importunity of 



232 my enemy's daughtek. 

Lilla Lyndon and the influence of her rich uncle, 
in order that, if I am well conducted, I may re- 
ceive perhaps an engagement in the chorus of the 
Italian Opera ! I wonder she did not send me a 
small present of money ! But perhaps if I obtain 
a place as chorus- singer through her influence, 
and conduct myself properly, and never appear to 
recognise her, she may assist me in some other 
way too. She may, for example, give Lilla the 
making of some of her fine stage-dresses, or even 
the place of her own dressing-room attendant; 
and if Lilla and I get married, the great prima 
donna may kindly become godmother to one of 
our children ! Ah, but if the prima donna should 
marry Lilla's rich uncle, then indeed something 
better could doubtless be done for Lilla than to 
marry her to a wretch like me ! In the bitter- 
ness of my heart it seemed as if my love for 
Christina had turned into hate. 

I was only aroused from the depth of bitter 
thought into which I had plunged by my own 
voice . by the sound of a deep, involuntary, irre- 
pressible groan, wrung from me by agony of love, 
disappointment, shame, hate. In the silent, dark- 
ling room the groan sounded hollow and ghostly, 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 233 

as in a vault of death. It aroused me as a dreamer 
is sometimes awakened by the sound of his own 
babble or laughter. 

I started up with the resolve to do something. 
Yes, there was something I could and would do . 
I would see her face to face. I would go to her, 
speak to her, ask of her how she dared to insult 
me with her patronage. I meant no appeal to 
the love of the old days; no poor and pitiful plaint, 
no ghastly effort to recall the dead past from the 
grave. No ; we are parted for ever ; and I accept 
my doom, and make no complaint. Only she 
shall know that I want no patronage, and will 
stoop to accept none. Let her spare me that. 
For the sake even of the old days which she has 
forgotten, for the sake of the love which I would 
not now have her renew if I could . no, by Hea- 
ven ! . let her spare me that ! Let me but see 
her, speak to her, vindicate to her face my pride 
and my independence ; and perhaps . perhaps I 
then can better bear with life. 

Filled with this thought, I went downstairs 
and tapped at the door of Mrs. Lyndon's room, 
endeavouring meanwhile to still the fierce beat- 
ings of my heart, and to keep some control over 



234 my enemy's daughter. 

my voice and manner. Lilla's voice called to me 
to come in. I had hoped to find her mother 
there, thinking I could get on better in ordinary 
conversation if there were three of us at it, than 
in mere tete-a-tete with my quick and sharp-eyed 
Lilla. But I could hear Mrs. Lyndon at work at 
some cookery-business below in the kitchen, and 
Lilla was alone. Must I confess the truth? I 
almost hated the poor girl for her well-meant, 
kindly, luckless interference on my behalf. 

When I entered, Lilla was apparently in a 
condition of great comfort and happiness. She 
was lying, or rather huddled up, on a little sofa, 
which was drawn over to the table, on which a 
lamp threw a soft and pleasant light, and she was 
reading a novel. Lilla loved novel-reading. She 
had a great shawl gathered cosily around her, 
covering her from neck to feet . indeed, I think 
her feet must have been coiled up under her, 
sultana fashion, for greater comfort ; for the 
night, though in summer, had turned a little 
chilly, and Lilla had been out in the rain on my 
behalf. In fact, the poor girl had probably taken 
off her wet dress, and had wrapped herself in a 
shawl as an easy substitute. I know she always 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 235 

liked to get the room to herself when she had 
a novel to read, for her mother was a dreadfully 
irritating person at such a time, full as she always 
was of anxious questions and perplexing recom- 
mendations. So Lilla was evidently very happy ; 
and as she looked up at me with her beaming 
eyes, and her pretty head peeping above the great 
enveloping shawl, in which the whole of her figure 
was lost, she must have been very charming to 
any eyes but mine. In my bitter, diseased, dis- 
tracted state of mind, it irritated me to see her 
looking so cosy, and pretty, and happy. I felt 
much as an angry man feels when, striding moodily 
to his fire, he stumbles over the sleek, contented, 
purring cat that lies basking on the hearthrug. 

" Have you brought me my picture ?" asked 
my happy Lilla. 

There was an intense odour of savoury frying 
below, which I grieve to think must have con- 
duced a good deal to the happiness of this good 
girl's mind. Her harmless and comfortable little 
sensuousness was regaled and propitiated on the 
odour from below, like the goodwill of the old 
gods on the steam of the fat sacrifice. 

" Yes, I have brought it." 



236 my enemy's daughter. 

"Isn't it lovely?" 

" Very." 

" How chillingly you say that ! Men have no 
taste ; and I am sure it is all nonsense to say that 
we don't admire pretty women more than you do. 
I am quite in love with that face and hair ; and 
you don't seem to care a straw about it." 

" Well, I think, I believe I should like to keep 
it a little longer, just to study it, Lilla, and under- 
stand it a little, if you don't object, and will leave 
it to me only for to-night." 

Had I been asking Lilla to elope with me, or 
to steal her uncle's purse for me, I could not have 
preferred the request in more awkward and stam- 
mering accents. My pretty one gathered herself 
into something like a more upright posture on 
the sofa, and looked at me with all the inquisi- 
tive, penetrating brightness of her eyes. 

" yes, surely. I am very glad you want to 
look at it a little more, for I should be so pleased 
if you came to admire it as I do. But I don't 
understand you to-night, somehow . you don't 
seem like yourself." 

" All the better if I seem like somebody else . 
anybody else, Lilla." 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 237 

" Nonsense ! Tell me one thing, and speak 
truly, and without any evasion or chaff . are you 
at all sick ? Because, if you are, I really must set 
mamma at you ; but if not . I mean if there's any- 
thing wrong that isn't sickness, or catching cold 
or that sort of thing . mamma would be only a 
bore and a plague to you, and you had better be 
let alone. Tell me frankly, do you wish to be let 
alone ?" 

" Indeed, Lilla, I am perfectly well." 
" Then you want to be let alone ?" 
"I see you have been reading. What's the 
novel ?" 

" 0, a charming thing . so beautiful and po- 
etic ; only it is so sad . The Improvisatore ; do 
you know it ? by Hans Christian Andersen, the 
Danish novelist. I have just been reading such a 
touching passage. The hero was in love with an 
actress, you know, a beautiful creature, and they 
got separated somehow . through a mistake en- 
tirely . and he never saw her for years and years 
after ; and when at last he came to see her again 
(on the stage) for the first time since their separa- 
tion, she was quite withered and old, and her 
beauty was all gone. It is such a touching chap- 



238 my enemy's daughter. 

ter. All her youth was gone, and her good looks, 
and she was old." 

"Even beautiful actresses, Lilla, must get 
old." 

" But why were they separated ? It is too 
sad ; I don't like stories that are so sad." 

" Yet you read it, and think it charming." 

" Yes, I can't help being delighted with it. 
But it is too melancholy. I can't bear to think 
of their long, long separation, and of her being old 
and withered when at last they met. I suppose 
such things do happen?" 

"I suppose they do. I think I have heard of 
separations, or read of them perhaps." 

Again Lilla looked curiously at me, and she 
put down the book. 

" Speaking of beautiful actresses, Lilla," I 
said, with a supreme effort to be light and care- 
less, " does your beautiful friend, Mademoiselle 
Keichstein, live far from here ; and did you walk 
home through all the rain ?" 

" Yes. It was rather a distance ; but I didn't 
mind in the least." 

" Did you tell me where it was ? I quite for- 
get." 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 239 

" In Jermyn-street, just opposite an hotel . I 
don't know the number . a very nice place. Some 
elderly person lives with her . a companion or 
friend, or something of the kind." 

Mrs. Lyndon just then came up, and pressed 
me to stay with them and have supper ; but I told 
them I had to go into town again ; I had forgotten 
to see somebody with whom I had an appointment, 
and must try to find him now, late though it was. 

I got out of the house somehow. It was now 
a streaming wet night, and I tramped long enough 
before I could find an omnibus going my way. 
When I got at last to the Haymarket, it was half- 
past ten o'clock, and I was very wet. An appro- 
priate hour, a pleasant condition, in which to pre- 
sent myself as a visitor at the door of a lady's 
boudoir ! I felt a grim and bitter satisfaction in 
the thought of my forlorn and wretched appear- 
ance. I almost wished that I were in rags, that I 
might be the more savagely in contrast with her 
condition . that I might stand in utter wretched- 
ness before her, and fierce in my desolate inde- 
pendence, fling back her patronage and her written 
vows of love. I longed to stand before her and 
say, " Look at this ruined and hopeless wretch. 



240 



this ragged beggar ! This was your lover ! There 
are your written vows of love for him, and thus he 
flings them back to you, with the offer of your 
queenly patronage. Pauper though he may be, 
you shall not dare to befriend him. Let the beg- 
gar die. He shall not, at least, be fed with the 
crumbs that fall from your table !" 

I found the house without difficulty. A waiter 
standing at the door of Cox's Hotel told me at 
once where Mdlle. Keichstein the singer lodged. 
The drawing-room windows were all dark. In my 
savage mood I felt bitterly disappointed at the 
prospect of not seeing her after all. I knocked at 
the door. 

Mdlle. Keichstein had gone, the servant told 
me. 

Gone where ? 

She didn't quite know ; somewhere abroad : to 
Paris, she thought. She went that evening by the 
night-mail. 

Could she inquire, and find out for me ? 

She went into the house, but came back to say 
she really could not get to know. Mdlle. Reich- 
stein had gone certainly to the Continent with her 
maid and the other lady ; to Paris first, probably ; 



GREETING AND FAREWELL. 241 

but the lady of the house thought she was very 
likely going somewhere farther away. 
Would she return here soon ? 

no, certainly not. Not before next season. 
That was all. I could find out nothing else. 

1 turned away from the door with a sickening 
sense of disappointment and hopelessness. Ah, 
only the Power above could tell . I surely could 
not . how much of a secret, passionate longing to 
see her again, for any purpose, on any terms, was 
mingled with my fierce resolve to confront her, 
and to fling her back her agonising proffer of 
service. 

I turned into the glaring, chattering, hell- 
lighted Haymarket . a stricken, hopeless wretch. 
Despite the rain, that still came down pretty 
heavily, this Babel of harlotry was all alive and 
aflame with its beastly gaiety. 

I strode my way along with head down and 
reckless demeanour, careless whom I jostled. 
Blindly I struck up against somebody, who first 
drew back and swore at me, and then, seizing me 
by my arm, exclaimed : 

" My heroic preserver ! would you overturn 
rudely the friend who longed to meet you ? What, 

vol. i. R 



242 my enemy's daughter. 

not know me ? How bears himself ce gros mili- 
taire ?" 

Of course I knew him. It was my confounded 
friend of Dover. 

" I told you we should meet again," he said; 
"I don't know that it's quite a fortunate thing 
for you ; but we are all in the hands of the des- 
tinies. You see Heaven would bring us to toge- 
ther." 

" The devil rather, I should think," was my 
grumbled answer. 

"Let it be the devil, dear young friend, if 
you have faith only in him. It cheers me to find 
that you believe even in the devil; youth is so 
unbelieving nowadays. But you are cynical to- 
night, which means, I daresay, that she is faith- 
less or out of humour. Bear up, and let us be 
merry. Look here : you are wet, so am I ; you 
are out of sorts, so am I. Let us spend a jovial 
hour together, and mingle our tears." 

I could have welcomed just then the society of 
Satan. He not appearing, I suffered my other 
friend to put his arm in mine and lead me away. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

goodboy's brother. 

I awoke next morning with a fierce headache, 
a deep sense of moral debasement, and a still 
deeper sense of savage satisfaction in my own 
degradation. I contemplated a sort of moral 
suicide. It seemed like an act of vengeance on 
her who had loved me and now cast me away, thus 
to crush and ruin the nature of the being to whom 
she once turned in love. 

I am not fond of oral confessions or moral self- 
exposures, and therefore I hasten to say that my 
abasement . this my first abasement . would have 
been in the eyes of any ordinary Haymarket 
habitue a very small affair indeed. I drank too 
much that night . and for the first time . that 
was all. As the next day wore on, and I grew 
better accustomed to the quite new sense of shame, 
I frankly told Lilla Lyndon of my excess of the 
previous night, and she did not seem to think a 



244 my enemy's daughter. 

great deal about the matter. I was, on the whole, 
rather disappointed that she took it so com- 
posedly. Moral suicide, after all, seemed a com- 
monplace process. 

Yet Lilla looked grave and frowned warningly 
at me when she saw me going out again about the 
same hour that night. 

" Once and away," she observed, "mayn't be 
very bad ; but take care, Emanuel, or we shall 
all be sorry." 

I was going into the Haymarket, where I had 
pledged myself to meet my friend again. A queer 
sort of fascination drew me towards him ; and 
some words he had let drop the previous night . 
words I now remembered but faintly . had keenly 
quickened my interest in him. When we parted, 
I promised to meet him in the colonnade of the 
Opera-house at nine o'clock; and at nine I was 
there. Very soon after, he made his appearance, 
and I noted at once that the appearance he made 
was considerably changed : he was all new, from 
hat to boots, and his gloves were of dainty 
lavender. 

" Surprised at the change, my dear young 
friend ?" he observed complacently. " Don't be 



goodboy's brother. 245 

ashamed to confess that you have been looking at 
me with eyes of wonder and admiration. I am 
not susceptible of offence ; and the homage of the 
ingenuous can never displease the serene soul. 
I was very shabby-looking yesterday, and now I 
am not so. I do not blush to confess that the 
change is not wholly owing to my own merit or 
industry." 

" You told me you were a great hand at bil- 
liards, and indeed I saw some evidence of your 
skill last night." 

" So you did. I think I rather astonished 
you and the others too. But it isn't that. You 
see me in the sunshine of a prosperity the source 
of which you could never guess. Indeed, it upsets 
the creed of half a lifetime with me. I should 
never have believed it, were I not a living proof 
of the fact. Listen, youth ; and, if prematurely 
given over, as you doubtless are, to cynicism, 
learn now a new and refreshing lesson of life. I 
am a living evidence of a woman's gratitude." 

" Glad to hear it." 

" But you don't seem sufficiently startled. 
Did you ever find a woman true and grateful ?" 

" No, by God !" 



246 my enemy's daughter. 

" Aha, there you are with your bears ! 1 
thought as much. There was good earnest in 
that vow. Will you come with me to my lodg- 
ings ? Yes, I have lodgings near at hand ; that's 
part of the mystery. Come with me. I long to 
be a host once more, especially to one who, like 
myself, so evidently belongs to the brotherhood of 
poor devils." 

We walked along Jermyn-street. When we 
passed the house where she so lately lived, my 
eyes turned unconsciously towards it and fixed 
themselves on it. He too was looking that way : 
it was on the other side of the street. He noticed 
my gaze. 

" How odd !" he observed; " you are looking 
at No. 15 . I am looking at No. 15. It can't 
have the same story for you and for me. Did 
you catch a sight of some pretty Mary-Jane in 
smart cap and ribbons ? Frivolous youth !" 

Frivolous youth made no answer, and indeed 
remained silent until we had reached Bury-street, 
and gone some way down it. 

My companion stopped at a door, took out 
a latch-key, opened the door with it, and waved 
to me with an air of gracious lordliness to enter. 



goodboy's brother. 247 

" My lodgings," he exclaimed; "second-floor 
front." 

The second -floor front was a small hand- 
somely-furnished sitting-room, with bedroom en 
suite. My friend lighted a lamp, and motioned 
me to an arm-chair. 

"I took these rooms at once to-day," he said, 
" on receiving the unexpected mark of gratitude 
of which I spoke to you. They are plain but 
commodious. The engravings on the wall are 
not remarkable as works of art. Let me see : 
' The Happy Days of Charles the First,' simple 
inanity. Her gracious Majesty on horseback in 
military habit. Well, well, let us be always loyal, 
however the court-painter may try us. ' Phoebe,' 
a young woman simpering over a fowl of some sort 
. dove, I presume . and apparently wearing only 
her chemise, which she has omitted to fasten 
round the neck : icliotcy ! No matter. There's a 
piano, you see, which is something. Do you love 
music ?" 

"Love it, no! No more, that is. Live by 
it." 

" Live by it, and not love it ! No, you can't ! 
Not even in this cursed day of quacks and shams 



248 my enemy's daughter. 

and successful Jack Puddings, can any man live 
by music who does not love it. I only wish the 
converse of the proposition held equally, and that 
everyone who loved it could live by it. Were 
that so, some people might have been more vir- 
tuous and independent, perhaps, than they are. 
Now, my young friend, whose name I have not 
even yet the honour of knowing, but shall presently, 
perhaps, ask to be favoured with . there is brandy, 
there is water, and yonder are cigars. I am going 
to sing a little, but smoke if you will ; it can't put 
my pipe out." 

He sat down to the piano, his queer little legs 
hardly touching the ground, and his long arms 
spreading over the instrument like the wings of 
some ungainly bird. One could hardly expect 
much sweet music from so ridiculous-looking a 
form, surmounted by a curly black wig ; but he 
played with no common skill and with quite un- 
common feeling and fervour. Presently he sang, 
in full, sweet, and solemn tones, the hymn, 
" Lord, remember David." Strangely pathetic, 
deep, and passionate sounded that mournful ap- 
peal as it issued from the lips of this singular 
and scoffing little creature. I own, too, that it 



249 

touched me quite as much as it puzzled me ; so 
profound seemed the sincerity with which the 
prayer and the plaint went up in that tender, 
thrilling voice. 

'.'Lord, remember David; teach him to know 
Thy ways !" Every word seemed to come from 
him with a pathetic, passionate earnestness, so 
deep that one could almost for the time imagine 
he heard the half-despairing utterance of some 
generous and noble nature crying out for strength 
to battle against temptation, and for light to see 
in the world's foul darkness. I dreaded the close 
of the hymn, so much did I shrink from the con- 
trast of levity or profanity with which I felt sure 
he would instantly follow it. But I was mistaken. 
He sat silent a moment or two when he had 
finished, and then jumped up from the piano and 
walked up and down the room. After a while I 
could hear him repeating to himself some of the 
words of the prayer in a low tone, as if it re- 
freshed him to dwell on them. 

" Now then," he said at last, " you who live 
on music, but, I think you said, don't care a curse 
about it, give us a musical blasphemy . I mean, 
of course, a song from unenthusiastic lips. Come 



250 my enemy's daughter. 

along ; make no apologies or pretexts. I daresay 
I have heard a hundred better singers before now, 
so you need not stand on ceremony." 

I sang something for him, accompanying my- 
self. He stood behind me the while, and now and 
then uttered a sort of growl of satisfaction, or 
grunt of discontent. 

" Ah, I thought so," he observed when I had 
done; " yes, I felt sure I could not be mistaken. 
It was you, then, I heard at the Dover concert, 
Mr. Emanuel Temple ! Well, Temple, I've heard 
a good many worse singers than you, and a few 
better. I think you ought to get on, though I do 
fancy somehow that you want soul. But I should 
say, with training and cultivation, and the advice 
of qualified critics . like myself, for example . 
you ought to make your way, Temple. I advise 
you to stick to it, Temple. I decline to offer you 
the blessing of an old man, Temple ; first, because 
I don't admit being old; and next, because I fear 
my blessing would be like that of the priest in the 
story, and worth considerably less than a farthing. 
But I have prophesied of singers before now, and 
prophesied correctly. I was hinting to you just 
now of that rare and strange thing, a woman's 



goodboy's brother. 251 

gratitude, and the romantic story is a story of a 
singer." 

The glance I had seen him give at the win- 
dows which were lately Christina's, and the words 
he let fall immediately after, had aroused my 
curiosity. But I thought I had observed enough 
of his perverse and eccentric little nature to know 
that the more readily I displayed my curiosity 
the less inclined would he be to gratify it ; so I 
affected an air of supreme cynicism, and coolly 
said : 

" Then you expect me to believe in woman's 
gratitude ? Thank you ; but I really can't oblige 
you so far, and I have no faith in romantic 
stories." 

" Nothing amuses me," he replied, " so much 
as the pert affectation of cynicism in brats of boys. 
You know very well, Temple, that if you left your 
real nature to itself, it would be rather credulous 
and soft than otherwise. Do you know now, that 
you struck me from the first as a good-natured 
and simple sort of fellow . an honest young 
spooney, in fact ; a lad that any smart girl might 
turn round her finger . a being doomed by nature 
to be married to a woman who will assume the 



252 my enemy's daughter. 

wearing of the breeches as her natural right ? 
That is quite my idea of you, Temple ; give you 
my word, as a candid friend and admirer." 

" Well, but without occupying ourselves in 
the discussion of my moral organisation, what of 
your romantic story, and your grateful woman ?" 

" You want to hear it, evidently." 

" Not very particularly ; but if you insist . " 

" Well, here it is. When I came to London 
the other day, and while yet casting about for the 
best way to torment my nearest relatives and raise 
some money, I devoted myself to fltiner a little on 
the side of Regent-street, thinking of the old days, 
Temple, when I too was a club lounger and a man 
about town, and so on. I happened to glance into 
a photographer's, and there I saw a photograph of 
a singer, the singer of the season, the woman the 
two Opera-houses have been squabbling about, you 
know." 

"Yes. Reichstein." 

" Reichstein, of course. In a moment I re- 
cognised her as an old friend, Temple." 

" Of yours ? She,. Mdlle. Reichstein. an old 
friend of yours !" 

" Why not ? What are you glowering at ? 



goodboy's brother. 253 

She's not an old friend of yours, I suppose ; and 
even if she is, you needn't look daggers at me. 
Did I say an old friend of mine ? Why, man, 
I discovered her, I invented her, I created her ! 
I crossed the Channel with her years ago, when 
she was a poor little thing going to Paris, and 
hoping to get on to Italy; and I took quite a 
paternal liking to her; quite paternal, Temple, 
I can assure you; and for the good reason that 
she wouldn't allow of any other sort of liking ; 
and I introduced her in Paris to an Italian fellow 
whom I knew; a fellow who was mad on two 
things . Music and Italian Eevolution ; and he 
quite took her up ; and I only saw her once after 
in Milan, where he was having her drilled for 
the Scala. That, too, is four or five years ago ; 
and to tell you the honest truth, Temple, 'I never 
thought of the little thing from that day to the 
day when I saw her portrait here in this den of 
thieves." 

" Did you go to see her ?" 

" Well, I did call ; but she didn't happen to 
he in ; and I was not very sorry perhaps ; for, 
as you can testify, my gifted vocalist, I was not 
quite in splendid trim about that time. But I 



254 my enemy's daughter. 

left a letter with a mild reminder of my early 
services and a warm congratulation upon her bril- 
liant success, to which it was gracefully hinted 
that my artistic insight had not a little con- 
tributed. Then there came an oblique, pathetic 
intimation that Fortune had not perhaps been 
quite so favourable to myself; and, in short, I 
am afraid it was conveyed more or less vaguely 
that gratitude and sympathy might not unreason- 
ably take the form of an early and liberal remit- 
tance." 

I had hard work to keep down my rising dis- 
gust and contempt. 

" And the remittance came ?" I said, to say 
something, as I saw he was looking towards me, 
with his head on one side and his little beady 
black eyes twinkling inquiringly. 

" Yes, the remittance came, and it was liberal; 
so liberal in fact that I have put off for the pre- 
sent opening the campaign I am prepared to 
undertake. So you perceive, Temple, that there 
are women who can be grateful ; perhaps I should 
rather say that there are men so happily endowed 
as to be capable of exciting the sentiment of 
gratitude in woman's breast. Between ourselves, 



goodboy's brother. 255 

the service I rendered was not very great ; for I 
had actually at the time a sort of general and 
roving commission from my friend the Italian 
revolutionary to look out for fine fresh voices 
wherever they could be picked up . he had a 
mania for establishing an artistic pare aux cerfs 
of young voices . only artistic and vocal, Temple, 
nothing more ; he was a very Bayard or Scipio 
in that way ; and I simply sent the girl to him, 
and thought no more about the matter. What 
of that ? It only makes the gratitude more touch- 
ing. It is a noble and a holy thing, you know, 
to call up such a feeling ; that sentiment in the 
woman's breast is cheaply bought by her at the 
money." 

" In fact, you place her under a fresh obli- 
gation ?" 

" Well, as you put it so, yes." 

"And found perhaps a claim hereafter for 
another remittance ?" 

" That is your sneer, I daresay. No, my 
scornful young friend, I think I shall be content 
with that much from that quarter. Let me tell 
you, however, to show how little I value your 
feeble-minded insinuation, that I am one of those 



256 my enemy's daughter. 

who are rather proud to be relieved by the soft 
and generous hand of woman. I think history 
records that John duke of Marlborough, and other 
great men, acknowledged a similar sentiment, or 
at least acted on it. Nature is all symbolic, 
Temple. Whence do we derive our earliest sus- 
tenance? From woman's generous bosom. Go 
to, then ; the meaning of Nature's beautiful par- 
able must be evident to all true and poetic hearts. 
Mine is essentially a poetic nature ; yours I per- 
ceive is not; you look at the bare rude fact of 
my pocketing the young woman's money, and do 
not see the delightful illustration of Nature's 
noblest and oldest purpose which it symbolises. 
What's the matter with you ?" 

" I have not been quite well lately ; but . " 
" Drink brandy, Temple ; drink again." 
" Do you know whether . whether this lady, 
Mdlle. Eeichstein, is married ?" 

" Not I. How should I know ; and what do 
I care ? Very likely she is ; they all get married, 
these people. The flag of matrimony is a very 
convenient emblem." 

I got up to go away ; his talk was hateful to 
me; and yet I clung to any feeble hope that I 



goodboy's brother. 257 

might extract some knowledge about her past life 
and her probable future. 

" Do you know where she is gone ?" 

"Russia, I believe; but I am not certain. 
Somebody told me that some rich Londoner, a 
member of parliament and patron of the drama 
. I don't know him, but, as Charles Lamb said, 
* d . him at a venture' . was always to be seen 
hanging after her, and making rather an idiot of 
himself." 

" Yes, I have heard of that," I interposed 
very incautiously; "and I know who it is . a 
Mr. Lyndon." 

"What did you say?" exclaimed the little 
creature, leaping from the chair in which he sat, 
and standing upright before me. " What name 
did you give ?" 

" Lyndon . a Mr. Lyndon, a member of the 
House !" 

"Earth and hell! Tommy Goodboy ! Tommy 
Goodboy himself ! Of all the hypocrites of this 
most hypocritical age, Tommy Goodboy is the 
greatest hypocrite. Among all the scoundrels in 
an age of scoundrelism, no scoundrel like Tommy 
Goodboy. Look at mc, Temple ! I am Good- 

vol. i. s 



258 my enemy's daughter. 

boy's victim : Goodboy stands in my shoes ; Good- 
boy wallows in my money ! He is the head of 
the family, the respectable citizen, the model man, 
the patron of every charity, the Maecenas of art ; 
and I am the ruffian, the outcast, the billiard- 
room hanger-on, the frightful example !" 

An idea at last began to dawn upon me as to 
the identity of my queer friend. Were these, 
then, the two faces I had seen vaguely and tan- 
talisingly shadowed in his ? Lilla's face and Mr. 
Lyndon's? Is this creature, this half- crazed 
sensualist, this selfish loafer, this wretch living 
on alms and extorted money, this combination of 
Hircius and Spungius, my poor, pretty, kindly 
Lilla's father ? 

He was now walking up and down the room, 
throwing his arms wildly about like a little mad- 
man. I went up to him as gently and kindly as 
I could. 

"You, then," I said, "are the elder brother 
of Mr. Lyndon ?" 

" Who the devil else do you think I am ? Do 
you suppose I am proud of being that cold-hearted, 
sneaking humbug's brother ? Yes ; I am his bro- 
ther . the brother whom he cheated out of house 



goodboy's brother. 259 

and home, out of his father's favour, out of his 
inheritance, out of everything that could make 
life worth having. Was I an idle, good-for- 
nothing scapegrace ? Of course I was. But 
what was he ? All that I did openly and reck- 
lessly, he did cunningly and underhand. How 
did he ruin me at last ? By betraying to my 
father the one good thing I ever did in all my 
life. It's as true as light, Temple. My father 
cut me off without a rap because I had been d . d 
fool enough to marry a pretty girl instead of se- 
ducing her. Whatever misfortune may happen 
to you in life, Temple, never do a virtuous action. 
Be warned in time by me. When I die, or hang 
myself, if there can by any means be raised money 
-enough to set up a tombstone over me, let my 
epitaph describe me as the man whom Respecta- 
bility and Virtue outlawed and robbed, because 
he had once in his life . only just once . failed to 
behave like a scoundrel." 

I was on the point of blurting out some hasty 
words which would have admitted my knowledge 
of Lyndon's wife and daughter. Fortunately, 
however, I restrained myself in time, and recol- 
lected how more than doubtful it was whether 



260 my enemy's daughter. 

they would be the better for any indiscretion which 
put such a creature on their track. Poor, poor 
Lilla ! with her good heart, her sweet kindly na- 
ture, her harmless vanities, and at least not un- 
natural hopes and aspirings, to think that this 
unfortunate and worthless wretch, whose chief or 
sole excuse seemed to be his half-crazed eccen- 
tricity, should be her father ! I always fancied 
that the poor girl cherished in her secret heart 
some fond romantic hope that the lost mysterious 
father might one day reappear, redeemed, peni- 
tent, and splendid, to claim his daughter and lead 
her into the sphere which she thought her right- 
ful place. I know that she always regarded her 
father as some brilliant aristocrat, who had stepped 
down from his high rank for love of her poor 
mother . some Egmont or Leicester, to whom 
Mrs. Lyndon was the Clara or Amy Robsart ; and 
he filled her imagination even in his fall rather 
as an archangel ruined than as any commonplace 
sinner. I know . she often hinted as much to 
me . that she secretly yearned for him, and waited 
for him to come some day and redeem her from 
poverty and meanness, and the society of petty 
cares and small intelligences; and to bring her 



goodboy's brother. 261 

io a sphere where there should be bright sur- 
roundings, and ease and luxury, and a life with 
many tints in it, and vivid conversation, and books 
worth reading, and men who could pay graceful 
homage and whom one could marry, and women 
well-dressed and vivacious and lovely. Often I 
had thought to myself, in my odd moods of whim- 
sical melancholy, that Lilla's phantom father and 
my phantom Christina beguiled and befooled us 
both alike, and to as little purpose ; and I won- 
dered whether, if Lilla could know my story and 
dreams as well as I knew and guessed hers, she 
would not look on me with the same kind of won- 
dering pity wherewith I regarded her. And now, 
behold, another bond of companionship and union ! 
Lilla had found for me my lost love : lo, I have 
found her lost father ! See, Lilla, there he is . 
that broken-down, ridiculous reprobate yonder, 
that billiard-room loafer, that ruined rattlepate 
wretch in the black wig, who is stamping up and 
down the room, blaspheming as he goes ! 

"Mr. Lyndon!" 

"My dear young friend, a thousand pardons! 
You recall me to myself, and remind me that I 
am not playing the host to perfection. I am, I 



262 my enemy's daughter. 

fear, a little egotistic sometimes ; but what "would 
you have of a man who has had to contend against 
the world and his wife . his own wife, Temple; 
not the world's, mind . for so many years ? Ad- 
versity, Temple, is the parent of egotism. Pardon 
my distraction." 

"I was not thinking of that; I was going to 
ask a question." 

"Propound. I reserve to myself the right of" 
not answering, should the answer tend to crimi- 
nate me. In a moral point of view, Temple, it 
would not be easy for me to give any answer re- 
lating to my own personal history which would 
not tend a little that way. But go on, youth of 
the gloomy brow." 

"Only this. What about your wife? You 
said you were married." 

" Did I admit so much ? My old weakness . 
too much confidence and candour. No matter.. 
You ask me what about my wife ? Give you my 
word, Temple, I don't know; I don't really. I 
have been away so long, knocking about the plains 
of windy Troy, that I positively don't know where 
to find my Penelope now that I have come back." 

< c Should you like to?" 



goodboy's brother. 263 

" dear, no . not in the least. I couldn't 
think of it; she's doubtless very happy, and I 
should grieve to disturb her : or perhaps she 
is not very happy, and then the sight of her 
would disturb me. No, Temple ; a man of re- 
fined taste shrinks from unidealising . if you will 
allow me to use such a word . from unidealising 
the poetic perfectness of married life by too much 
of vulgar intercourse with its prosy details." 

" Still, as she is your wife . " 

" Just so ; there it is, you see. If she were 
not, then it would be quite a different thing : but 
she is my wife, and I know it to my cost. I 
paid a heavy debt for the sweet privilege of call- 
ing her so, and I am not ardent for any more 
of her mild society. You look horrified, I per- 
ceive. Frankly, I don't care." 

" She may be poor and lonely . " 

" My good fellow, am not I poor and lonely ? 
Could anyone be poorer than I was the other day, 
and shall be soon again, no doubt ? Am I not 
lonely, or worse than lonery, in having no com- 
panionship but that of a silly and moping young 
moralist like you ? Do you think adding two 
poor people together produces wealth ? Put to- 



264 my enemy's daughtek. 

gether cipher and cipher, and see how much 
better off you are for the result. Besides, have 
I not told you I know nothing, absolutely nothing, 
of her whereabouts ?" 
" But suppose . " 

"I don't want to suppose: I decline to sup- 
pose. I tell you, Temple, I can't live on pap; 
some men can, I believe ; I can't. Food for babes 
does not nourish me. I lived on it long enough, 
and you see the result. If there is anything in 
life I utterly detest, it is puling, meek, mawkish 
goodness. I rage at it ; it sets me mad. I long 
to tear and tatter it." 

"But your child . your daughter?" 
"Did I tell you I had a daughter? Keally, 
you find me in a strangely - confiding mood to- 
night. Well, I have a daughter; at least, I 
know I had, and I believe I still have. What 
then ?" 

" Only one might have thought . " 
"Yes, one might, no doubt. One might have 
thought that the father's heart would melt ; that 
he would burst into sobs, and exclaim, in broken 
accents, ' My angel chee-ild !' . that he would 
weep on the neck of the good person who had 



goodboy's brother. 265 

appealed to his paternal feelings, and become a 
respectable member of society. In the domestic 
melodrama, Temple, from which I perceive al- 
ready your principal ideas of life are drawn . 
what's the price of the gallery-seats in the Vic- 
toria? . that sort of thing does, I believe, fa- 
miliarly occur. But this, Temple, is real life ; 
and we are not on the stage of the Victoria. I 
make no doubt my daughter's a very well-brought- 
up and proper young woman, who would look with 
horror on such a reprobate as I am ; and I cannot 
say that the voice of Nature shrieks very power- 
fully or plaintively in my ears. No, Temple, it 
won't do." 

" Then have you really no care for anything?" 
"Yes!" he answered in vehement and fierce 
tones . I had long been expecting an outburst of 
passion . ' ' for money and for freedom ! For money 
to spend, and for freedom to spend it in ! Give 
me these . and I will have them, wherever I get 
them . and I can enjoy everything that life gives 
for enjoyment, from moonbeams and music up to 
absinthe and madness. But I will have money, 
and I will be free ! I will, I will ! I don't care 
who or what comes between me and my way of 



266 my enemy's daughter. 

life ; I sweep it out of my road and go on. Don't 
talk to rne of nature and domestic affections, and 
drivel of that kind ; I don't want them . I've had 
enough of them to last my time. Hate is much 
more in my line than love. I came to London 
for the double purpose of screwing money out of 
my thrice-accursed brother, and disgracing myself 
and him at the same time ; and I will do it too ! 
I would have done it before now, had not that fool 
of a woman sent me this money, which I mean to 
enjoy before I go to work. Pleasure first, busi- 
ness afterwards with me. Go to the devil with 
your talk about my wife and my chee-ild ! What 
is it to you ? Are you sent as an emissary here 
from Tommy Goodboy ? If you are, go back to 
him and tell him what my answer is : tell him 
I'll make his respectability blush yet, if I cannot 
make his heart of pumice-stone feel." 

" I never spoke a word to Mr. Lyndon in my 
life." 

" Then perhaps you are an emissary from my 
wife. If you are, go back and tell her the best 
thing she can do is to leave me to myself." 

" Listen to me, Mr. Lyndon, and don't waste 
on me all these rhapsodies and ravings. Keep 



goodboy's brother. 267 

them for somebody on whom they might produce 
some desirable effect. I assure you they move me 
only to sincere pity and contempt. I never knew 
until twenty minutes ago who you were, and I 
never cared. I spoke to you on no one's behalf, at 
no one's suggestion. I spoke to you only because 
I thought it hardly possible you could be wholly 
degraded below the feelings of average manhood. 
I find I was mistaken. That is enough. I leave 
you, and only hope we may not meet any more." 

He threw himself into a chair, leaned back, 
and burst into a peal of mellow laughter. If I 
know anything of reality as distinguished from 
acting . and I ought . this was no affectation or 
sham, but genuine, honest, hearty, irrepressible 
laughter. He rolled about in his chair, and 
stamped his feet, and shook his shoulders like 
a pigmy Sam Johnson in a fit of unconquerable 
mirth. 

[ stood up, angry, and ashamed of being angry 
. thinking what a great deal I would give, if I 
had it, to feel myself at liberty to kick him ; and 
all the time considering whether I could in any 
possible way serve poor Lilla's interests by keep- 
ing on good terms with him. 



268 my enemy's daughter. 

" I protest, Temple," he said at last, when he 
was able to speak from very laughing, "you do 
delight me. As good as a play? Man, you're 
worth a whole season of broad comedy ! To look 
at the expression of your face that time, to watch 
your gesture, to hear the earnest eloquence of your 
language, was the finest treat any man with a 
rich sense of humour could possibly have. You 
are the most delightful of young men . " 

"And you are the most scandalous of old 
reprobates." 

" Coarse, Temple, coarse, and not half so fer- 
vent as your graver style. But I see you are 
waxing wroth at being laughed at. Well, I dare- 
say no one likes being laughed at, and of course 
the more ridiculous he is, the less he likes being 
treated as such : and I really don't want to offend 
you ; so let us consider the subject as dropped. 
Take a little more brandy ? No ? What, you are 
not going ? Positively offended ! Well, of all the 
idiots it has ever been my fortune to meet, you 
are the most conspicuous. Get out ! Go to all 
the devils ! Confound you, I am a gentleman, 
and not a Christy's Minstrel like you ! Insult a 
gentleman ! By Jove, what's the world coming to !" 



goodboy's brother. 2G9 

All these concluding sentences were rattled at 
my ears as I was descending the stairs. Until I 
had fairly quitted the house I could hear him 
swearing and objurgating. Then, as I passed 
under the window, I found that he was having 
recourse to the piano to cool his wrath. I paused 
a moment out of curiosity. He was singing, to 
his own accompaniment, "I know that my Re- 
deemer liveth." 

I hurried away. The words, the sweet, pa- 
thetic, devotional tones, sounded in my ears like 
hideous blasphemy. 

I walked slowly home, my mind occupied with 
the uncomfortable discovery I had made, and much 
perplexed to know whether there was anything I 
could or ought to say or do with regard to it. It 
clearly seemed that I had no right to inflict use- 
less torture on Mrs. Lyndon or Lilla by tell- 
ing them anything about my knowledge of this 
wretched man. From what he had over and over 
again told me, it was certain that he had come to 
London for the purpose of shaming his brother 
into supplying him with new funds, and it was 
evident that there was no extravagant escapade or 
exposure of which the little wretch would not be 



270 my enemy's daughter. 

capable. On the whole, then, it seemed to me 
that the best thing I could do would be to see Mr. 
Lyndon at once, and put him on his guard. Mr. 
Lyndon too might, like a sensible man of the 
world, feel inclined to buy-off his disreputable 
brother even for Lilla's sake . to settle on him 
some pension on condition of his living out of 
England or out of Europe ; and, disagreeable as 
the task would be, I would willingly undertake the 
work of negotiation and arrangement in order to 
ward-off vexation and shame from these two poor 
women, who had been so kind to me. Yes, that 
was the best thing to do, and there was no time to 
be lost, as Mr. Lyndon would be leaving town im- 
mediately. My mind was made up. Little as I 
cared to obtrude myself on Lilla's uncle, I deter- 
mined to see him, in this cause, next day. 



END OF VOL. I. 
MY ENEMY'S DAUGHTER, 



CHAPTER I. 

AX ODD INTERVIEAY AND AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 

Are there any poor people who never felt an im- 
press of something like awe and timidity at their 
first direct contact with wealth ? I have heard 
and read of noble, independent beings, serene in 
the unsurpassed and conscious dignity of mere 
manhood, who, in whatever poverty, never felt the 
faintest flutter of envy, awe, or humiliation when 
they stood for the first time in the presence of a 
great man's flunkys, and asked to see the great 
man himself. Are there such persons ? I don't 
say I disbelieve in their existence, but I should 
like to hear, on the authority of someone more 
skilled than I to penetrate the secrets of human 

VOL. II. B 



consciousness, that there really are beings of that 
kind before I quite believe in them. My own im- 
pression is, that civilised man or woman of hum- 
ble class hardly ever yet knocked for the first time 
at the door of a great West-end mansion, without 
a beating of the heart, a mingling of awe and 
humiliation. It is very mean and shabby and 
unworthy, and so are most of our instinctive im- 
pulses, which at last we school down, or are 
schooled and mastered by. Deep, deep down in 
our civilised nature is rooted the abject homage to 
wealth. I almost think it begins with the wear- 
ing of clothes. I doubt whether the very next 
stage of civilisation after nakedness does not wit- 
ness the internal growth of that servile sentiment. 
I think we keep singing our " A man's a man for 
a' that," and our '^Vilain et tres-vilain,'' in order 
to drown the feeling or exorcise it, as they play 
martial airs to keep up the manhood of the raw 
recruit. Of course we get over it sometimes ; at 
least, thank Heaven, we do not all succumb to it 
wholly. I am not much of a sneak myself, and I 
never yet sought the patronage of a man of rank, 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 6 

or put myself in his way to get his nod, or bragged 
to my acquaintance that I had met him, . and I 
know that I am no whit more independent than 
many of my neighbours, . but I have felt the poor 
man's sentiment of awe for wealth ; I have done 
to wealth the involuntary homage of being afraid, 
and hearing my heart beat, as I stood in its 
august, unfamiliar presence. Many of my friends 
are people connected somehow with the world of 
art, and who have made their way upwards from 
nothing. Some of them have fine West -end 
houses now, of their own, and carriages, and 
awful footmen in livery ; but I think, if I were 
talking confidentially with each of them in turn 
over a cigar and a glass of brandy-and-water, he 
would frankly admit that one of the most trying 
moments of his life . one of the moments when he 
found it hardest to keep up his dignity of inde- 
pendent and equal manhood . was just the first 
time when, having knocked at some great man's 
door, he waited for the opening of it and the 
presence of the flunky. 

Now I stood this Sunday morning at the door 



4 MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 

of Mr. Lyndon, M.P., and I realised these sensa- 
tions. I had come to ask no favour . to seek no 
patronage . to bespeak no recognition . to pave 
the way for no acquaintanceship. If anything, I 
was coming out of my regular beat of life rather to 
confer a favour than to solicit one ; and yet I did 
feel that ignoble, nervous tremor which the unac- 
customed presence of wealth inspires in the poor 
man, and which is the base image, the false 
coin, the bastard brother of the soul's involuntary 
homage to beauty and greatness. I knocked at 
the door, and as I waited for its opening, I felt so 
nervous that I grew positively ashamed of myself, 
and took my courage in two hands, as the French 
phrase goes, and remembered about a man being 
a man for a' that. 

Mr. Lyndon, M.P., lived in a fine house in 
Connaught-place, looking straight into Hyde- 
park. One had to go up high steps to get to 
the door, which lent additional majesty and dread 
to the business. It was, as I have said, a Sun- 
day; and as I came hither I had passed crowds of 
people streaming out of the doors of fashionable 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 5 

churches, and seen splendidly-dressed women, all 
velvets and satins and feathers, assisted into their 
carriages by footmen who carried gilded prayer- 
books ; and I wondered whether Mr. Lyndon had 
been to church, and if so whether he would have 
come back from his worship by the time I reached 
his house, and whether it was a dreadful heathen- 
ish sort of thing, a kind of outrage upon Church 
and State, to ask to see such a man at all on Sun- 
day. To go to church, too, seemed, in presence 
of the splendid crowds, so necessary and becoming 
a part of respectability, that I felt like a social 
outlaw because I had not been there, and was not 
much in the habit of going there. My sensations 
were not the pangs of an awakened conscience, but 
the kind of feeling which goes through a man 
who, unshaved and with muddy boots, uncon- 
sciously intrudes into the midst of a well-dressed 
and elegant company. 

When I found out Mr. Lyndon's house, I won- 
dered much why such a man, especially if he was 
in the habit of going to church, could not do 
something kind and substantial fur his niece and 



6 

his brother's wife, whose chief crime, poor thing, 
appeared to have been her inconvenient virtue ; 
and why he would not at least take them out of 
poverty and debt and the perpetual presence of 
temptation. This I was thinking when the door 
opened, and I stood in the presence of the great 
man's servant. 

Well, it was not so dreadful after all. I really 
don't think I minded it in the least after the first 
sound of my voice. Mr. Lyndon at home ? 

Yes, Mr. Lyndon is at home. The servant 
seemed to say by his look of cold inquiry, " Wliat 
then, young man ? Admitting that Mr. Lyndon 
is at home, which it can't be worth while conceal- 
ing from you, how can the fact in any way concern 
youV 

I mildly asked if I could see him. 

The man . who was civil enough, by the way 
. merely asked if I had an appointment ; Mr. 
Lyndon did not usually see people unless by 
appointment. The pampered menial of a bloated 
aristocracy clearly assumed at the first glance that 
I was not a visitor, or friend of the family. 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 7 

I added : 

** Will you take in my card, and say I wish to 
speak a few words to Mr. Lyndon very particularly? 
I think he will see me." 

Presently the servant came back and told me 
that if I would wait a few minutes Mr. Lyndon 
would see me. I was shown into a large, cold, 
handsome room, with the blinds down, and a con- 
servatory at one side. A group of marble figures, 
nearly life-size, stood in front of the conservatory. 
They were the familiar Graces, and they were 
covered over with a shroud of very thick muslin ; 
so thick, indeed, that the covering seemed put on 
less as a protection against dust and discolora- 
tion than as a veil to hide the nakedness of the 
classic women during the severely proper hours of 
Sunday service. I did not give much attention, 
however, to these marble forms ; for my eyes were 
caught by an exquisitely-framed photograph of 
large size, which stood, conspicuous, on the chim- 
ney-piece. It was the likeness of Christina . once 
my Christina, when she was poor and obscure, 
and we were both happy. 



8 MY enemy's daughter. 

"Please to walk this way, sir; Mr. Lyndon 
will see you." 

I followed the servant across an echoing hall 
and into a library. At a desk in the centre, with 
letters and papers all about him, with Blue-books 
piled on the floor near his arm-chair, and on his 
other side a waste-paper basket overflowing with 
pamphlets, sat Mr. Lyndon, his eyes still fixed on 
some document he was reading. 

He was a formal, rather handsome, close-shaven 
man, wearing the high stand-up collars which now 
are almost as rare as pigtails. His thick hair was 
iron-gray ; his complexion was fast purpling ; his 
eyes, when he favoured me by looking up, were 
much lighter than those of his brother or of Lilla 
. they were a cold, steely gray. I marked the 
rigid expression of his chin and jaw . it might 
have been cruelty, or it might have been stern 
virtue, according as you please to construe it ; 
even in history and in action it is not always easy 
to distinguish the one from the other. Li Mr. 
Lyndon's case, I could not but think that the full 
sensuous lips helped a little to make the decision. 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 9 

This, then, was Tommy Goodboy. I am 
bound to say that from the very first I took a dis- 
like to Tommy Goodboy. 

Mr. Lyndon left me for some seconds plante la 
without looking at me or speaking. I was, in 
fact, about to open the conversation, when he 
suddenly looked up with an air first of irritation, 
then of vacancy ; then he looked down at my card, 
which was lying before him on his desk, and at 
last he spoke : 

" 0, Mr. Temple ! Yes, I recollect now. My 
niece did speak to me about you, and I promised 
her that if I could do anything . but I am sure I 
don't know. Why did you not come sooner . 
some time in the season, Mr. Temple ? This is 
no time ; and everybody is out of town ; and I am 
leaving town myself to-morrow ; and, in fact, I 
am very busy to-day, and hardly counted on being 
disturbed. I don't usually see anybody on Sun- 
days ; but as you have come . and I certainly did 
promise my niece to see you . " 

"Excuse me, Mr. Lyndon. I have not come 
to remind you of your promise, or to ask any 



10 MY enemy's daughter. 

favour of you ; indeed, I would accept none even 
if it were offered, althougli I feel deeply obliged to 
Miss Lyndon." 

" To Miss Lyndon ?" 

" To your niece. Yes." 

''0, to be sure . Lilla Lyndon, my niece. 
Well?" 

" I don't mean to make any demand on your 
kindness, so far as I am concerned. I hope to be 
able to work my own way." 

He merely bent bis bead, as a sort of formal 
acknowledgment. 

" I have not come on any business of my own." 

" Sent by my niece, I suppose?" 

"No, Mr. Lyndon. She does not know any- 
thing about my coming here." 

He looked down at his papers, and glanced 
at his watch. The actions were significant ; they 
said very plainly, "If you have anything to say, 
say it at once, and go." 

" I daresay you consider my visit an intru- 
sion." 

" Not at all. At least, that quite depends . " 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 11 

" I have come about a matter which concerns 
you, or, at least, which I thought might possibly 
concern you." 

He looked at me with cold surprise. 

" I met lately, more than once in Dover, and 
here in London, a person whom I believe to be a 
member of your family . your brother, in fact." 

He did start a little and wince as I gave him 
this piece of news. 

" I was not aware that he had returned from 
abroad. Are you quite sure?" 

" Quite sure ; at least, he told me so. Indeed, 
I might have guessed the fact even without his 
telling me." 

"Well, sir, if you formed any acquaintanceship 
with the person you speak of . and I gather from 
your manner that you did . it would be super- 
fluous to tell you that he is not a person whose 
return to England could give any pleasure to me 
or to any member of his family. That fact it 
would be idle for me to attempt to disguise. I 
did not know that he had returned to England, or 
expect his return, or desire to see him. You 



12 MY enemy's daughter. 

know, therefore, that you are the bearer of unwel- 
come news. The question I would ask is, why 
you have gratuitously taken on yourself the task 
of making the announcement. I suppose I need 
hardly say that if you are the bearer of any mess- 
age, or request, or anything of that sort from the 
person you speak of, you could not possibly pre- 
sent yourself with worse credentials." 

" I have no message or request, and I would 
not make myself the bearer of any. I assure you, 
Mr. Lyndon, I am no friend of your brother's. 
No member of his family . no, not his nearest re- 
lation . could feel less inclined for his society than 
1 am. It is just because I think him so objection- 
able, and so offensive, and so reckless, that I have 
come here to-day." 

''Welir 

"Your brother told me over and over again, 
before I knew his name, that he had come to Eng- 
land resolved to expose, and disgrace, and extort 
money from someone. I afterwards learned . in- 
deed, he told me . that you are the person against 
whom this is to be directed." 



AX INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 13 

''He means to make some disgraceful exhibi- 
tion of himself, to raise some scandal, in the hope 
of terrifying or shaming me into buying him of ?" 

''He does." 

"He is quite capable of that, or of anything 
else outrageous and . and, in fact, infamous." 

" I have no doubt he is. He impressed me as 
being all but insane with hatred and recklessness." 

" Ah ! but he is not insane. It would be well 
for his family if he were. He is perfectly sane. 
"Well, have you, then, come for the purpose of 
warning me ?" 

"No. Frankly, I tell you that I have not; at 
least, not on your own account." 

"Listen to me, Mr. a . a . Temple. If you 
should see that person again, you may tell him 
that he can do his worst. I shall not buy him off 
. no, not by the outlay of a sixpence. It's very 
kind, no doubt, of you to take the trouble to come 
here, and all that ; and of course you will under- 
stand me as expressing my sense of the obligation." 

" Pray don't speak of that. I have not come 
out of any consideration for which you, Mr. Lyn- 



14 MY enemy's daughtek. 

don, personally have any reason to feel obliged. 
But." 

My speech was cut short by the entrance of 
the servant, who handed a card to his master. 
Mr. Lyndon looked at it, and said with emphasis : 
** Certainly. Let him wait ; I shall be disengaged 
in less than one minute." 

There was no mistaking this. I must come to 
the point, and make good use of my time. 

" Mr. Lyndon, I have come quite of my own 
accord, and perhaps very foolishly, to ask you 
whether you would not do something in this un- 
pleasant business for the sake of your niece. It is 
such a pity that a girl so young, and so poor, and 
. and . " I blurted out . " so pretty, should be 
liable to be tormented and disgraced by a man of 
that kind. Could you not make terms with him, 
and buy him off, for her sake and for her mother's ? 
They have had so much unhappiness.and poverty; 
and it's such a pity for poor Lilla." 

" Mr. Temple, you appear to be so intimately 
acquainted with the personal history of some mem- 
bers of my family, that I don't suppose I add 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 15 

anything to your stock of knowledge when I say 
that I have ah-eady done a good deal for my 
niece." 

''Yes, I am quite aware of it. She has told 
me so often." 

" And that she has no claim on me ?" 

" No claim but close relationship." 

" That she has no claim on me except what I 
feel inclined to recognise. Now, I have no objec- 
tion to Lilla herself ; indeed, quite the contrary . 
I like her. But I am not going to be made the 
victim of all her relations. On that I am quite 
determined." 

*'If you could even take her away . to the 
country somewhere ?" 

"I am so little in the habit, Mr. Temple, of 
discussing my family affairs, even with members 
of my own family, that I really cannot fall into the 
way of talking them over with strangers. Will you 
allow me again to thank you for the trouble you 
have taken in coming so much out of your way." 

" You, Mr. Lyndon, I have once more to say, 
are in no way indebted to me. I came only because 



16 MY enemy's daughter. 

I feel an interest in your sister-in-law and your 
niece. I fear I have done them little good by my 
interference." 

''You have done them, sir, neither good nor 
harm." 

He touched the bell that stood upon his table. 

I hastened out of the room, without even going 
through the form of a parting salutation, which, 
indeed, would have been thrown away upon him, 
as he had already busied himself in his papers 
with a resolute manner, as if to announce to me 
that he would not look up again until I had re- 
lieved him of my unwelcome presence. 

I was in no pleasant mood as I crossed Hyde- 
park. Especially was I out of humour with my- 
self, even more than I was Avitli Mr. Lyndon ; and 
as before I had seen him I felt an unreasoning dis- 
like to him, and as now that I had seen him and 
spoken with him I felt a deep detestation for him, 
it follows that I felt somewhat bitterly towards 
myself. I knew that I had made a fool of myself ; 
that I had brought humiliation on myself; and 
that all this had been done to no purpose, or to an 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 17 

ill purpose. It takes a very brave and loyal nature 
to enable a man to be content with the knowledge 
that he has made a fool of himself, even when 
thereby he has benefited somebody ; but it is gall 
and wormwood indeed to know that one has made 
a fool of himself, and at the same time frustrated 
instead of serving the object he wished to accom- 
plish. 

So I went, scowling and sullen, across the 
Park, mentally girding at myself and at the loun- 
gers and idlers I met in my way. I don't know 
why, when a man is in a vexed and sulky hum- 
our, he immediately begins to despise his fellow- 
creatures whom he may happen to meet, and to 
set them down as frivolous and worthless idlers, 
gilded butterflies, and so forth. I know that I 
visited, mentally, the pride and insolence of Mr . 
Lyndon on every creature, man and woman, who 
passed me. Madame Roland in her maiden days, 
when snubbed by the aristocracy of her province, 
was not consumed by a fiercer flame of democratic 
passion than I felt that Sunday after I had been 
a victim to the insolence of the rich member of 

VOL. II. c 



18 MY enemy's daughtee. 

parliament. I daresay if the people I scowled at 
in Hyde-park could only have known what was 
passing within my breast, many of them would 
have felt highly flattered and delighted. For the 
aristocrats Madame Koland detested were aristo- 
crats. My aristocrats and pampered minions and 
gilded butterflies were in nine out of ten instances 
people very much of my own class of life, who had 
come out on the Sunday to see the riders and the 
carriages in the Row. 

As I approached the Row a haughty aristocrat 
passed me rather closely. He was walking, like 
myself. It was like his insolence and the arro- 
gance of his class ! It was his affectation of in- 
difference to saddle or carriage- cushion. He was 
a tall and, as well as I could see in a passing 
scowl, a handsome aristocrat. I flung upon him 
a glance of scorn. He eyed me rather curiously ; 
he even turned back and looked steadily after me 
when he had passed. I too turned, and glared de- 
fiantly at him. He was, as I said, tall . fully six 
feet high, I should say, with square, broad shoul- 
ders; he was dark-haired, and had a magnificent 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 19 

beard of curly, silky black. He was very well 
dressed . indeed, far too handsomely dressed for 
an aristocrat on a Sunday. He was not burling 
back glances of scorn at me, but was scrutinising 
me with a grave, earnest curiosity. He advanced 
a step, then fell back. I too advanced, a sudden 
light of recognition flashing on me. Then we 
approached each other rapidly and at once. 

*^ Ned Lambert !" I exclaimed. 

" Mr. Banks !" said my aristocrat. It was my 
old friend, the basso-carpenter. 

Now that I came to study his appearance, he 
was not changed as to features or expression. He 
had grown much handsomer . he always was a 
good-looking fellow, remarkable for his fine eyes 
and his beard, but now he was strikingly hand- 
some. He was splendidly built . stately as a 
guardsman, supple as a gymnast. He had still 
the grave, modest, genial expression which was so 
attractive about him in the old days. He was only 
too well dressed ; for as one came to look at him 
attentively, there was something about him which 
seemed a little out of keeping with the clothes. 



20 MY enemy's daughter. 

Perhaps if I had not known of his origin and his 
bringing-up, I might never have noticed this ; as 
it was, I thought I could detect the outlines and 
the movements of the young workman under the 
broadcloth, the shiny hat, the fawn-coloured trou- 
sers, the lavender-kid gloves. 

We were very cordial in a moment. Eeally it 
was kind of him to walk with me just there and 
then ; I was so very carelessly, not to say shabbily, 
dressed. My old friend did not seem to care. 

'' You have been in London long, Mr. Banks ?" 
asked Lambert. 

I told him how many years. 
*' So long, and we never met all that time ! 
I've been away a good deal ; but still it is odd that 
we should both have been knocking about London 
so much and never met." 

He soon told me all about himself. He was 
an organ-builder, and was holding a very good 
position in a great house. He had himself in- 
vented and introduced some improvements into 
the construction of the instrument ; and though 
these were not important enough to bring him 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 21 

fame or money, yet they gave him consideration 
with his employers and their patrons; and he 
looked forward to an ultimate, perhaps not a very 
distant, partnership. He had been sent to many 
foreign cities to represent his principal, and super- 
intend the building and putting up, the repairing 
and improving, of organs. He had been to the 
United States ; he had been in St. Petersburg, and 
Moscow, and Stockholm ; he was quite familiar 
with Eome, and Paris, and Madrid. He had lived 
ever so many lives, while I had been vegetating 
by the Lethean wharf of the Thames's stodgy 
banks. I felt myself very small indeed as he 
talked to me. For me, my story was told in two 
words : Me void. 

There was one subject we both seemed to 
avoid, yet surely we both were anxious to ap- 
proach it. We sometimes beat about it ; in this 
way, for example : 

*' You have been in London all lately . for the 
most part, I mean, Mr. Banks?" 

" For the most part, yes. No, though ; I was 
in the provinces a good deal all the summer." 



22 MY enemy's daughter. 

*' But you were in town some part of the sea- 
son . of the opera season ?" 

"Some part of it; not lately. I only came 
back to town a few days ago." 

He wanted to know if I knew all about Chris- 
tina. But I shrank back as yet. It came on in 
another way. He insisted that I must go and 
dine with him. He lived out St. John's-wood way. 

" Are you married, Lambert ?" 

"No." He spoke very slowly. " No, Mr. 
Banks, I am not married, and I am not likely to 
be. I don't see what I want marrying. And 
you . perhaps you are married ?" 

"No; I may take up your own words . I am 
not married, Ned Lambert, and I am not likely 
to be. I don't see what I want marrying. And 
you know the reason why." 

" Ah !" He breathed hard, looked at me with 
a stolen glance of kindness, curiosity, and pity ; 
but he said no more. 

" Have you seen her, Lambert ?" I broke out 
at last, and I drew him aside under a clump of 
trees. " Have you seen her ?" 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 23 

I did not name lier name . what need to pro- 
nounce it ? 

*' Yes ; yes, I've seen her." 

"Lately?" 

" Lately, and hefore, and always, I may say ; 
at least, often." 

"You have been seeing* her . you have been 
meeting her all this time ?" 

" Yes ; of and on, that is. When I could, 
and where I could." 

Almost a cry of agony and anger escaped from 
my lips. All this time, all these years, while I 
had been groping in the desolation of solitude 
and darkness, he had known of her whereabouts, 
had watched her, and spoken with her, and been 
familiar with her ! And faithfully served her, no 
doubt ! I suppose the fierce light of jealousy and 
anger flamed in my eyes, for he at once said, 
gently and firmly : 

" For what I think you mean, Mr. Banks, it 
was little good to me to see her and speak to her. 
I tell you honestly, and like a man, I did my very 
best to make her love me; and I couldn't succeed. 



24 MY enemy's daughter. 

I tell you too, I was mean enough to try to serve 
her and help her when she wanted help, and to 
hope to work on her gratitude in that waj^ ; and 
it was of no use. She told me so at last ; and 
then I tried to make up my mind as a man to be 
her friend, and no more ; and I have been trying, 
and I think I've been succeeding even ; and I 
fancy I'm growing better, and able to bear it, and 
to think of her only as a friend. Now I'll not 
deny that this meeting with you, and bringing 
back the old times, and talking of her with you, 
may have thrown me back a little. But I'll get 
up again, please God, and get over it. I'm de- 
termined to get over it, and to be satisfied and 
happy to be her friend. So you need not feel 
anything like anger at me. I have done you no 
harm, and myself no good." 

Need I deny that a glow of wild and futile de- 
light passed through me ? It passed soon away ; 
Lambert's ill- success was but little gain to me. 

" You say you have always been seeing her ; 
where, for instance?" 

"In London, here, first of all; and in Paris, 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 25 

and in Milan, and in Eussia. And Paris again, 
when she made her great success there. And 
here, the other day, when she came out and car- 
ried all before her. I was there. I hoped to be 
able to throw her her first bouquet ; but, good 
Lord, there was such a shower of bouquets that 
mine must have been lost among them !" 

*' One word, Lambert. Did she never . did 
she never speak . of me ?" 

'^ Not much ; very little indeed. I didn't ask 
her any questions. I didn't know how you came 
to be separated, and I don't know now; and I 
don't ask you, either, anything about it. I tell 
you, however, that I thought badly of you at 
first ; but afterwards I thought I must have done 
you wrong." 

"Why, Lambert, why?" 

" Because, from some words she once let fall, 
I thought she had made up her mind not to let 
anything stand between her and success on the 
stage ; and I thought . although she never hinted 
such a thing in the least . I thought . well, I 
don't quite like to say it." 



26 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Speak it out, man ! Nothing that can be 
said by any human creature can hurt me more." 

" Well, I thought she had thrown you over." 

*' So she did, Lambert. She threw me over, 
as you say . she left me suddenly. I never knew 
why ; and I have never seen her since. I ought 
to hate her and curse her, and I cannot." 

**No, no, you ought not to hate her. I don't 
understand her . I never quite could; but if I 
know anything about her, and if she ever loved 
anyone, I think she loved you." 

" Did she not speak of me lately . when last 
she was here ?" 

" Yes, she did ; that was, indeed, almost the 
only time. I went to see her up in Jermyn-street 
just the day before she left, and she asked me if 
I knew that you were living in London ; and of 
course I didn't know ; how could I ? London is 
the grave of provincial friendships." 

'' Well, and she." 

" She told me you were living in London, and 
that she believed you were very happy." 

*'And did she so calmly, so readily believe 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 27 

that I was happy? Did she cast me from her 
mind without a word of regret ?" 

*'No, not without a word of regret; at least, 
I ought not to say regret, perhaps, for she said 
she was glad that you were happy." 

" God !" 

"And she said I might perhaps meet you after 
she was gone, and if I did, to give you her re- 
memhrances and her good wishes." 

" That was all ?" 

" That was all . all she said, at least. I know 
what I thought at the time." 

*' Tell me what you thought. Don't spare me, 
Lambert ; tell me anything . all." 

*' Then I'll tell you what I thought. I saw 
how pale she grew, and heard how her voice qui- 
vered, and I envied you ; for I thought, ' For all 
that's come and gone, whatever is the reason of 
the separation, she thinks of him and loves him 
still.' " 

** No, Lambert, you are mistaken ; you do not 
understand her. No, she never loved me . never. 
She never cared a rush for me compared with her 



28 

ambition. She despises me now because I have 
come to nothing so far. She pities me, I daresay, 
and would fling me an alms if she might ; but she 
rejoices that she had the good sense and the good 
fortune to free herself from me." 

Lambert shook his head. 

" I don't quite understand her," he said ; '' but 
somehow I think I understand her better than you 
do. I know well enough how ambitious she is, 
and fond of admiration and applause and success, 
and all that; and how proud she is of having 
pushed her way up and up, from being a poor 
little girl unknown to be the star that she is. I 
don't think she would let anything stand in the 
way of her success much. But you know as well 
as I that human nature sounds more than one 
stop ; and hers has many. And I think there is 
much love in her heart too, as I know there is 
much friendship ; and I don't believe she has ever 
forgotten you or ceased to love you. There, it 
costs me something, I can tell you, to speak these 
words, and I shall have to smoke away very fiercely 
for half the night to get over this ; but I think it's 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 29 

true. I don't know that it's any good telling you, 
either ; for, mind, I don't say that it could come 
to anything now, even if you were to meet her." 

*' No, it could come to nothing. Don't think 
me an idle braggart or a fool, Lambert, or that I 
am talking after the fashion of the fox and the 
grapes ; but if she stood there and held out her 
hand to me, and . and . offered to marry me, I 
would turn away from her and leave her. I would, 
though I love her now as much as ever . ay, far 
more than ever." 

Lambert again shook his head, and smiled . 
a melancholy smile. 

"No, you wouldn't," he said. "If she stood 
at the other side of that pathway, and held out 
her hand and beckoned you to come, you'd come 
if all the promises and vows and vengeances, and 
saints and angels and devils, held you back. I 
know that /would, and couldn't help myself; and 
I know that you would too." 

" It will never be tried, Lambert." 

' ' No, it will never be tried. She has gone 
away for a good long time ; she told me that no 



30 MY enemy's daughtek. 

matter what offers she might get, she would not 
come to London next season. She was thinking 
of going to the States and South America; they 
are very greedy of new singers now in Brazil. And 
before she comes back, we don't know what may 
have happened." 

" She will probably marry." 

" Perhaps. And you may have recovered, and 
may be married too." 

" No ; whatever may be possible, that is not. 
A word or two more, Lambert. Did you know of 
anyone who seemed likely to marry her ?" 

"Likely, no; would have liked to marry, yes. 
No doubt the number of candidates will begin to 
increase considerably now." 

" Ay, I daresay it will. Did you know any 
Italian, any musical man, who took her up, and 
helped to bring her out, and who was fond of her ?" 

" I didn't know him ; but she often told me of 
him. It was he to whom she owes much of her 
success ; so she says, at least ; but I don't think 
much of that, for her voice and her talents would 
have won their way some time or other. But I 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 31 

believe he made the way very smooth for her in 
the beginning, and quite took her under his care, 
and was better to her than many brothers or 
fathers could have been. She always speaks of 
him with great regard ; in fact, with a sort of 
devotion." 

"Was he . is he, think you, in love with her?" 

" I suppose so," said Lambert slowly, and 
speaking rather ruefully. " Why not he as well 
as you and I, and all the rest of us ?" 

" Do you think that she . " 

" No, I don't. I know what you were going 
to ask, and I really don't. I am sure she is very 
much attached to him, you know, and all that; 
and I don't say that if she were to marry for any- 
thing but love, she might not marry him out of 
pure gratitude. But when I spoke to her once 
about him, she was a little angry at first, and said 
I ought to know better; and then she softened 
and smiled, and went on to say that in any case 
his heart had two great loves already . music and 
Italian revolution, and there was no place left in 
it for any woman." 



32 MY enemy's daughtek. 

" He is older than she is?" 

*'Yes; I should say ten or a dozen years at 
least. But that's nothing, you know ; he is not 
old enough to he her father." 

Lambert had a painfully direct and honest 
way of extinguishing any hope which he might 
perchance have lighted. I winced under his last 
few simple and practical w^ords. Another point I 
was anxious to be informed upon. 

" Tell me, Lambert, do you know anybody 
named Lyndon, who knows her ?" 

" Lyndon, the member for Laceham, the man 
who lives over in Connaught-place there ? Yes, 
of course I know him ; that is, I know all about 
him. In fact, I know him in the way of my 
own business, and I have heard of him through 
her." 

*' I don't mean him, though I am interested 
in knowing something about him too. I mean 
another Lyndon, who knows her, and says he 
helped her forward at the beginning." 

(Christina's name had never once been men- 
tioned in our conversation. We only spoke oilier.) 



AN rN'TP:RYIEW AND A MEETING. 33 

Lambert shook liis head. 

" Xo, I don't know any other Lyndon but the 
one ; and I don't Hke him. He is a purse-proud, 
.self-conceited, egotistic, unscrupulous man. He 
has all the proud airs of a born swell, though his 
father, I hear, made his money in the pork trade 
at the time of the French war." 

''But he was, and is, very friendly to herV 

''Yes, he was and is. I don't like his friend- 
ship . I suppose it is because I don"t like him ; 
but I hate to hear of his being near her." 

" Well, that is not the man I mean. The 
Ljmdon I speak of helped in some way, or says 
he did, to introduce her first to the Italian you 
have told me of; and he wrote to her lately, oi- 
says he did, for some money, and she sent it." 

"0, that fellow 7 Yes, there is such a fellow : 
I believe he did, quite in a chance sort of way, 
meet her long ago, and he was a sort of musical 
jackal whom the Italian employed to discover fresh 
and promising voices for him ; and in that way he 
introduced them. Yes, he did write her a beg- 
ging-letter lately, and she sent him money . with 

VOL. II. D 



34 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



a liberal hand, I daresay. He is an unfortunate 
scoundrel, I believe. But his name is not Lyn- 
don." 

''He told me it was; and I believe, in that 
one instance, lie spoke tlie truth." 

'' Perhaps so. But it certainly is not the name 
he went by . that she knew him by. He is a sort 
of fellow who probably has a whole stock of names, 
a perfect assortment to choose from." 

We said no more on the subject then. I 
walked with Lambert to St. John's-wood, where 
he lived. A beggar would have been interesting 
to me just now if he came from my old home, and 
was in any way associated with my old life ; and 
Ned Lambert I had always liked since the time 
of our memorable battle on the strand, that dark 
night when, falling and fainting, I awoke with my 
head in Christina's lap. We were, somehow, ro^\- 
ing in the same boat too, and were no longer 
rivals. Life seemed brighter for me now that I 
had met him. Since I came to London, seven or 
eight years ago, I had never spoken with or even 
seen anyone who came from the old home. That 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 35 

whole passage of mj' life seemed gone and dead. 
A great sea had risen up and swallowed the green, 
delicious island under whose palm-trees I had sat 
happy and idle so long. It was a strange delight 
now, on this hard gray shore, to meet at length 
with one who, like me, was once a tenant of the 
lost home. I felt that I must he Lambert's 
friend. 

His manner seemed to return the feeling. He 
was always rather a diffident sort of fellow, slow of 
speech, and he had not much changed in that re- 
spect. Indeed, I noticed one peculiarity about 
him which rather added to his natural diffidence 
and slowness of speech. He was conscious of his 
want of early education, at least in manner and 
speech, and he was always on the watch to correct 
any error of tongue, or to prevent himself from 
making any. Therefore he pronounced every word 
slowly and cautiously, somewhat after the manner 
of a foreigner feeling his way into our language ; 
and he lingered with a slight emphasis over words 
which an uneducated man would he likely to pro- 
nounce incorrectly, as if in order to leave no doubt 



3b MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 

that lie was pronouncing tliem correctly. Some- 
times he went a little wrong in an aspirate or an 
"r," and I ohserved that when he did so he always 
went hack deliberately over the word and said it 
correctly, as one brings a horse up to a fence again 
and makes him go clean over it when he has failed 
in jumping it properly the first time. He was 
always fond of reading and thinking; when a 
mere young carpenter his stock of book-knowledge 
seemed wonderfully out of proportion with his 
class and his manner. Now he had added to 
this, and doubtless to new stores of reading ga- 
thered since, all the vast and varied experiences 
accumulated during travel through many countries 
by a keen, observant eye, and a robust, intelligent 
mind. I could see easily enough through his 
simple, modest pride in his own advancement and 
experiences. I could see clearly that, in his quiet, 
manly w^ay, he was resolved on being a gentleman 
in appearance and manner, as he surely was in 
mind, and that he was training himself for the 
task. There was so much about him that was 
strong and self-reliant, that this little trait of 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 37 

weakness or vanity was a softening, childlike pecu- 
liarity which made one like the man all the hetter. 
Some thought of this kind made me fancy that 
it would rather please Lambert if I were to make 
a slight allusion to his improved position and 
changed appearance, and I took occasion to re- 
mark on the fact of my not having recognised him 
at once when we met. 

"Do you know, Lambert, that I was rather 
in a cynical and fiercely-democratic mood when I 
passed you, and I positively scowled at you, be- 
lieving you to be a bloated aristocrat ?" 

''iSTo; did you, though?" he replied, blushing 
over his dark face like a great girl. 

" Positively I did. Did you not see my scowl?" 
" Yes ; I did notice somebody looking rather 
sharply and oddly at me. That first attracted my 
attention. Then I looked, and I recognised you 
at once. But you did not seem to know me, or to 
be inclined to recognise me." 

"How could I recognise you at once? You 
have grown such a swell." 

"Have I really? Did I really look at all like 



38 MY enemy's daughter. 

. well, like what people call a gentleman ? You 
may laugh at me if you like ; but I should very 
much wish you to tell me the truth." 

"As I have told you, I scowled at you as you 
passed, out of my detestation for born aristocrats." 

" Poor born aristocrats !" said Lambert, smil- 
ing, " their privileges of birth don't seem of much 
use when fellows like me could be mistaken, even 
for a moment, for one of them. Do you know 
that I am silly enough to be gratified when you 
tell me of the mistake, although I know very well 
that the second glance showed you what an error 
it was? But I don't think it's any shame for a 
man to try to educate himself in manner, and I 
am always trying it. It was a dreadful task at 
first. When I got to know a few people, and be- 
came noticed a little as a man who had some new 
notions about organ-building and all that, and one 
or two really great musicians were very kind and 
friendly to me, it used to be a dreadful trial to 
have to observe how people came into a room, and 
sat and talked, and used their knives and forks at 
dinner, and drank the right wine out of the right 



AN IXTEPtVIEW AXD A MEETING. 39 

glass, and all the rest of it. Tlie first time I went 
to an evening party in a white tie and a dress-coat 
was an agony, I can tell you. And then to have 
to watch one's /i's and r's all the time did so in- 
tensify the misery. For a long time I acquired a 
positive reputation for sententiousness because I 
used to plan out little remarks and replies which 
should say as much as possible in the fewest 
words, and should have none of the dangerous 
words in them. I am getting better now, I think. 
But to this hour I am afraid of that cursed letter h; 
and wdien I find that I must encounter it, T fall back 
and have a look at it mentally first, so as to bo 
quite sure that I know what to do with it. Do 
you know that I feel infinitely more happy and at 
my ease talldng French on the Continent, or with 
foreigners here, than speaking English with Eng- 
lishmen? Because, you know, a wrong accent, 
or even a slip of grammar, isn't anything with an 
Englishman speaking French, but it does so stamp 
an Englishman talking English. And I am so 
conscious of my own defects." 

'^Far too conscious, Lambert; never mind 



40 MY enemy's daughter. 

your defects. It may comfort you to hear tliat I 
know a man, a literary man and a scholar, too . to 
be sure, he is an Irishman . who says that he 
never yet met or heard an Englishman who did 
not, some time or other, go wrong with his h, or 
sound an r where the cynical letter had no busi- 
ness to come." 

"Ah, but there are degrees. There's an almost 
imperceptible lapse made once in a twelvemonth, 
and there's a blunder that would be always coming 
out if one didn't keep close watch over it. No ; 
you don't know what it is never to have been at 
school, never to have been taught when young how 
to pronounce a word, or enter a room, or properly 
handle a knife and fork. Teaching oneself Latin, 
or even Greek, is comparatively easy . I've done 
something that way; but studying the wa^-s of 
polite society alone out of a printed book of eti- 
quette is cruel work;" and Lambert laughed. 
genially. 

''Then you shall teach it all to me, Lambert,, 
now that you have mastered the art, for I fear I 
never could grapple with it alone." 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 41 

''No; you don't want it. With you it's quite 
different, for you have been at school, and you have 
always been mixing with people. You have no idea 
how different is the case of a fellow who goes into 
anything like society for the first time, and finds 
himself new to the very clothes he wears, not to 
speak of the ways of the people he meets. I won- 
der a man ever has the perseverance to go through 
with it. Many a time I thought it really was not 
worth the labour and trouble. But I suppose it's 
something like cigar-smoking . it's sickening at 
first, and it takes a long practice before one can 
get quite used to it and enjoy it ; but at last one 
suddenly finds he can't do without it." 

Talking this way, we reached pleasant St. 
John's-wood, and the house in which Lambert 
lived. It was a pretty, fantastic little house, one 
of a terrace which stood upon the sort of almost 
imperceptible rise that in the suburbs of London 
men call a hill. Lambert had the first-floor of 
the house, and enjoyed a very pretty view over the 
outskirts of London ; the windows being so placed 
as not to overlook the vast cluster of streets and 



.42 MY enemy's daughter. 

spires and domes, fog- surmounted, wliicli lay be- 
low. Looking from the room, one might at times 
catch faint, hazy glimpses of something like the 
country. Flowers in profusion grew on the patches 
of garden in front and hack of the house ; trailing 
plants fell from eaves to basement. It was alto- 
gether a very pleasant, gracious, and tempting 
place, and I thought Lambert might well feel glad 
to return to such a nest every evening from the 
town. 

The rooms were neatly furnished ; for the most 
part, of course, the regular furniture . chimney- 
glass, ornaments, pictures . of suburban lodgings 
in London. But there was a small organ, hardly 
bigger than a piano, of my friend's own design 
and construction, with some of his special and 
newest improvements ; and there were some clever 
specimens of wood-carving, which he made a fre- 
quent recreation, he told me ; and there were 
books of his own . books on carving, on music, on 
science, Greek Lexicons and class-books; and 
there was a photograph over the chimney-piece 
which caught my eye the moment I went into the 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 43 

room : it was that of Christina. Lambert took a 
book . a sort of scrap-book, apparently . out of a 
drawer of his writing-desk, and, turning hastily 
over its leaves, called my attention to it. 

" Critiques oilier,'' he said ; "I used to watch 
for them in the papers, and cut them out and paste 
them in." 

Yes ; there were criticisms of her performances 
from the Monlteur, and the Dehats, and the Inde- 
])cndancc Beige, and the National- Ze'itung of 
Berlin, and the Ost-Deiitsche Post of Vienna, the 
Pitngolo of Milan, the Osservatore of Rome, the 
Opinione of Turin, the Courrier liusse, the Times, 
the Moiling Chronicle (there icas a 2Iorning 
Chronicle then), the Morning Post, and I know 
not what other papers. I glanced over them. 
Often, indeed, the letters danced and flickered be- 
fore my eyes. I read them with amazement, with 
pride, with delight . tdi, and with selfish shame 
and pain as well ! They differed as to minor 
points of criticism . some extolling as a special 
charm what others deprecated as the one sole 
defect : some declarina' that the voice was in- 



44 MY enemy's daughter. 

comparable, but the singer had yet much to learn ; 
others insisting that the skill of the musician con- 
quered some vocal defects ; others, again, leaning 
more on the acting than on the singing. But all 
rang to the one grand chime . success. In Berlin 
the students of the universit}- had a serenade by 
torchlight in honour of their gifted countrywoman ; 
in enthusiastic and music -mad St. Petersburg the 
singer was presented, on the occasion of her last 
performance, with a coronet of gold and a diamond 
brooch. So on. It was simply success. Chris- 
tina had succeeded. 

I put the book away, and sat thinking and 
silent for a few moments. The whole thing was 
unreal to me ; I was as one who dreams. Only 
the other day it seemed when she called to me a 
farewell from her window, and the flower she had 
worn in her bosom fell on the pavement at my 
feet. 

I rose and went to the chimney-piece, and 
looked calmly at her portrait. She had de- 
veloped, but not much changed. The photo- 
graph made her look a little older, perhaps, 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 45 

than I could liave expected ; but most plioto- 
graphs have that sort of effect. She was cer- 
tainly very beautiful, and of a beauty which was 
in no sense commonplace. In a portrait-gallery 
filled with the pictures of handsome women . 
most of them even of handsomer women . one 
must, I thought, be attracted at once by that 
striking face, with its fleece of fair hair and its 
eyes so large and dark, and the singular softness 
and sweetness . almost a sensuous sweetness . of 
the expression on the lips and the outlines of 
cheek and chin, contrasting as strangely as did 
the hue of the hair and eyes with the energy and 
decision which the forehead and brows expressed. 
I looked at it long and silently, compressing 
my lips the while, and crushing, with such force 
of self-control as I could command, all rising 
emotion down into obedience. But I might have 
allowed my feelings their full sway without fear 
of observation, for Lambert had quietly left the 
room the moment he saw me approach the photo- 
graph. He did not return for some minutes. I 
conjectured that he would not return, in fact, 



46 MY enemy's daughter. 

until I had given some audible intimation tliat I 
needed no longer to be alone. I sat down and 
played a few random cbords on liis organ. He 
presently came in, looking animated and clieerful, 
and told me lie must apologise for having left me, 
but that he had been compelled to have a long 
and profound consultation with his landlady on 
the subject of dinner. Dinner came at last, and 
we drank some wine, and became very talkative 
and cordial and friendly. By a sort of silent 
agreement we avoided all reference to past times, 
and said no more of her. 

After dinner we opened the windows, lighted 
cigars, and smoked. Lambert told me, with the 
innocent, boyish pride which was rather an at- 
tractive part of his character, that he was the 
only lodger ever allowed to smoke in that sacred 
room; that the landlady, a most respectable old 
lady, positively insisted that he must have his 
cigar there whenever he pleased ; and that, when- 
ever he was leaving the place for good, he meant 
to present her with a set of entirely new curtains. 
*'It wouldn't be any use my giving them be- 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 47 

fore," he added; '' T should only spoil them, 
and she would benefit nothing by the transac- 
tion." 

The evening was calm and sultry, as 'we sat 
quietly smoking. Presently I saw Lambert get 
up and grasp the collar of his coat with one hand, 
while he looked inquiringly at me. 

''Would you mind," he asked, ''if I were 
to . " and he stop^^ed. 

" Mind what ?" I asked in my turn, not having 
the least idea of what he meant. 

"Well, just to pull-off my coat, you know. 
It's very hot this evening, and the fact is I haven't 
got rid of all the old ways yet. It does seem so 
pleasant still to sit of a Sunday evening in one's 
shirt-sleeves. I am gradually breaking myself of 
the fashion ; but just now I begin to feel so very 
comfortable that, if you really didn't mind and 
wouldn't be at all offended . I have a dressing- 
gown, you know, and rather a handsome one ; but 
still it isn't quite the same thing, just yet." 

I could not help laughing ; but he was quite 
grave and earnest. 



48 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Sit in your sliirt-sleeves, by all means, Lam- 
bert, if it makes you comfortable," I said. "My 
poor father was a boat-builder, as you know, in 
his best days, and he always used to like to sit in 
his shirt-sleeves of a Sunday evening ; but 1 think 
my mother discouraged and finally abolished the 
practice in him, and she never allowed me even to 
attempt it. Therefore I have an enjoyment the 
less, you see, and I rather envy you your ad- 
ditional comfort." 

So Lambert pulled-off his coat, and lay with 
his lithe, long, manly figure back in his arm-chair, 
and chatted with additional freedom and fluency 
all the evening. 

The night passed pleasantly, and it was time 
for me to go. Ned insisted on walking part of the 
way with me, and did in fact walk nearly all the 
way. We made arrangements, of course, to meet 
again, and meet often. He inquired gently and 
cautiously into my prospects, and hinted in the 
most delicate manner that he might perhaps be 
able to give me some advice, or to make me ac- 
quainted with somebody whose advice would be 



AN INTERVIEW AND A MEETING. 49 

better than his. I opened to him freely whatever 
l^lans, prospects, and hopes I had. 

'' One thing," I said, '' I am resolved on, Lam- 
bert. I will make a way and a place for myself, 
and in opera. I will be a prlmo tenore one day ; I 
will sing wdth her, and she shall acknowledge that 
I have something in me ; or I will find a way of 
dying, if it has to be by a plunge from Waterloo - 
bridge." 

We shook hands and separated. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 

My parting words to Lambert expressed not too 
strongly a resolution which had grown up in my 
mind. I was resolved to slave, and strive, and 
wear myself out, if need be, in order to qualify 
myself for success in opera, that I might once 
sing with her, perhaps on equal terms. All other 
objects in life seemed to be as nothing compared 
with that, . thus to triumph, thus to prove myself 
not unworthy of the opinion she once held of me, 
. and then come what might ! 

Strangely enough, this determination was not 
inspired by any hope that we might fulfil the other 
part of our early dreams, and be married. I do 
not think such a hope ever entered into my am- 
bition and my resolve. She did not love me ; it 
was only too evident that she could not really 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 51 

liave loved me at any time as I would liave been 
loved ; and even were it probable or possible that 
the far-off date of my success could find her still 
unmarried, I was too proud to think of courting- 
the love of one who had flung me thus away, and 
left me to my loneliness and my misery. No, 
passionate as was my futile love for her, it was 
not that which now influenced me to my deter- 
mination and my hopes. It was the absorbing 
desire to prove myself not unworthy, not all a 
failure. To wring that compensation from Fate 
was now my one sole object in life. 

And if I should fail ? 

Well, I was no idiot, and I thought of that. 
The most passionate aspiration cannot conquer 
success, nor is it evidence of capacity for success, 
unless when it comes as a mere instinct of na- 
ture, like the desire of the water-fowl for the pool, 
of the young eagle for the flight. I therefore 
laid little stress on my own mere aspirations, know- 
ing well how greatly they were stimulated by my 
love and my wounded pride. So I contemplated 
coolly the possibility, the chance, of utter failure. 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF ILUWb<i. 



52 MY enemy's daughter. 

and I resolved upon my course. Once let it be 
certain, . let it be beyond all doubt . and I felt 
convinced I could judge my own cause impartially 
and rightly . that I was a failure, and I would 
withdraw instantly and for ever from these coun- 
tries, change my name, bury myself in some re- 
mote western region of America, and live there, 
a hewer of wood and drawer of water, till my life 
should come to an end. 

I have said thus much in explanation of the 
resolute energy with which I now went to work 
at musical training, and at saving-up money with 
which to go to Italy and improve myself, and 
begin a career there which I hoped might wake 
an echo in England. My friend Lambert entered 
quietly, earnestly into all my plans, calmly as- 
suming my perseverance and my success as a 
matter of course ; and he lent me valuable assist- 
ance by advice and suggestion. Lilla, too, was 
in our full confidence, and was quite delighted 
with the project, frequently reminding me of the 
magnificent day at the Derby she was to have the 
first season of my London success. Weeks and 



THE HEAVY FATHER' S MISTAKE. 53 

months went on, and I began at last to see Italy 
in the near foreground of my hopes. 

Before I proceed to sum-up in a few lines one 
tolerably long chapter of my lite . a chapter as 
quiet and uneventful to tell of as it was to me 
momentous . I must relate two incidents. 

I went very often to see Xed Lambert ; he 
very often came to see me. He made himself 
very friendly and familiar with Lilla and her 
mother. He would sit for hours listening to the 
poor old woman telling him of her trials and her 
disappointments, her feats of cooking, her new 
and incomparable methods of applying sauce and 
preserving peaches, Lilla's sicknesses and Lilla's 
charms. I don't believe there was an ailment 
Lilla had had, from her first " thrush" to her 
latest toothache, of which Edward Lambert did 
not hear many times, and seemingly with pro- 
foundest interest, the full details. Lilla herself 
used to grow dreadfully impatient under these nar- 
ratives, and I observed, not without curiosity and 
interest, that she was far less enduring now than 
she used to be when I was the spellbound victim. 



54 MY enemy's daughtee. 

Often, therefore . indeed, whenever I could . 
I intercepted Mrs. Lyndon, flung myself in lier 
path, and engaged her in colloquial hattle, in 
order that Lamhert might he saved, and that he 
might, if he liked, have all the time with Lilla 
to himself. I thought his eyes rested sometimes 
fixedly and tenderly on her when he was not near 
her, with an expression as if he would gladly he 
heside her ; and I was quite willing to give him 
the full opportunity, so far as I could hring it 
about. Soon, too, I began to observe that Mrs. 
Lyndon watched with somewhat uneasy glances 
^vhen these twain talked too closely and too long 
together, and that the pleasure of expatiating to 
an unresisting, patient listener like myself lost 
some of its charm under such circumstances. 
These were symptoms, omens perhaps, not to be 
overlooked. 

One fine starry night of winter, when the 
hardened snow gleamed glassy on the ground, 
and the lighted clock of Chelsea Hospital showed 
brightly through the clear and rarefied air, I 
walked part of the way home wdth Lambert from 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 55 

our quarter by the Thames. He was unusually 
silent for a while, then suddenly said : 

*' I say, Temple" (he had got into the way 
now of calling me Temple, and not Banks), "what 
a very pretty girl your friend Miss Lyndon is !" 
"Very pretty, and very clever, and very good." 
"Yes; she seems a sort of girl that could 
understand a fellow, and help him to think, and 
bring him out. Do you know, I talked to her 
just now of some new ideas I have got . good 
ideas, I think ; in my own line, of course . and 
she listened to me all the time, and quite under- 
stood it all and cared about it. I know she did, 
by the questions she asked. Never mind the 
answers a girl gives. I don't ; they're no test. 
Some girls will know by the mere expression of 
your face, if they haven't even been listening to 
a word, what kind of answers they ought to give. 
But the questions . if they venture upon ques- 
tions, that's the real test. You can't mistake, if 
you have a question asked. You know at once 
just how far she has gone with you, and how far 
she is able to go. Well, sir, that girl asked mc 



56 MY enemy's daughtek. 

one or two questions that showed she had got 
rather ahead of me. She did indeed. I'm rather 
a slow fellow, and she seemed to make a short- 
cut . to cut-off the angle, you know, and get to 
the end directly. It must he very pleasant," he 
added, with a sort of half-sigh, " to have a woman 
for a friend . for a friend . who can understand 
one in that ready sort of way." 

Was the inconsolable becoming consoled ? 

*^It must be very pleasant, Lambert," I ans- 
w^ered in deep earnestness. "It is a pleasure 
some of us must go without, and go darkling 
through life for want of it." 

" She does not seem very happy there, I 
think," he remarked, with a nod of his head in 
the direction we had left. 

" No. They are, as you know, very poor." 

" Yes. If ever I marry, it shall be some poor 
girl, who will have no fortune to throw in my 
face, but will owe all to me. I hate the idea of 
benefiting by one's wife. I'd like to make my way 
in the world myself, and bring her along with me ; 
and you know I have not been doing badly so far." 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 57 

''Lilla and her mother have both been very 
kind and good to me. I only wish I had any 
way of proving my friendship and gratitude." 

" Is there not a ready and suitable way?" 

" Is there ? If there is, I don't know it." 

" Marry Lilla." He brought out the words 
very slowly. 

"My dear fellow, you don't know what you 
are talking about." 

*' Yes, I do ; I quite understand why you can- 
not think of such a thing." 

"No, you don't; at least, you only know part 
of the reason. If I had never met another woman, 
I should not wish to marry Lilla Lyndon. I am 
very fond of her, Lambert, and have good reason 
to be; but not in that way. My feeling in the 
matter, however, is not much to the purpose. 
Something a good deal more to the point is, that 
Lilla Lyndon would not marry me." 

" Do you think not ? Now I have often 
thought." 

"Because you don't know. To begin with, 
my prospects arc all too cloudy, and 1 am far 



58 MY enemy's daughter. 

too poor. Lilla Lyndon does not pretend to be 
a heroine, and I don't believe slie could be happy 
in poverty. She must marry somebody who can 
make her mother and herself comfortable, or more 
than merely comfortable ; and I don't blame her 
for it." 

" Yet I don't think . I am sure I am right 
. that she would marry for money. I think there 
is something better in her." 

*' And so do I of late. I don't believe now 
that she would marry for money; but I don't 
think she would go into married povert}- . love 
in a garret, and that kind of thing. And I say 
again I don't blame her. Some people can do 
it, and others can't. Let us all try to understand 
ourselves and our capacities. One person can 
stand the night-air without catching cold, and 
another cannot ; but there are some who run 
the risk which they might have avoided, and do 
catch cold, and are moping and cross about it 
for weeks after. Others know they cannot stand 
it, and take care not to try ; and they are wise. 
Now, I suppose there are plenty of girls who 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 59 

liave just courage enough to take the plunge, 
hut not courage enough to hear the consequences 
without regret and lamentation. I think Lilla 
Lyndon knows that she has had enough of poverty 
in her domestic life, and she has sense enough to 
caution her against risking any more of it. She 
is not fit for the kind of life she leads, and I 
think it has gone near to spoiling her. A very 
little of a better sort of existence would soon lift 
her quite out of the contamination of this." 

"So it would," said Lambert eagerly. He 
had been listening with rather a depressed air 
to my exordium against poverty. 

" The fact is, Lambert, they talk dreadful rub- 
bish about the blessings of poverty. It is all very 
well for preachers and philosophers to try to gam- 
mon people into making the best of a bad lot; 
but there is a sort of poverty which does nothing 
but degrade. All Lilla Lyndon wants, to be just 
as good a girl as ever lived, is a certain income, 
and ease, and no debts." 

Lambert brightened, I thought, under these 
words. The fact is, 1 began to perceive that I 



60 MY enemy's daughter. 

had been producing, unconsciously, quite a wrong 
impression. Wlien I was lecturing on the evils 
of poverty, I only meant to show him how cer- 
tain little levities and defects had probably arisen 
in Lilla's character, and thus to encourage him 
to pay court to her, if he felt so inclined. To 
me he appeared quite a rising and prosperous 
man, and every word I used as an argument 
against Lilla's marrying into poverty was meant 
as a reason why she ought to marry him. I was 
fast turning match-maker out of interest in both 
my friends. But Lambert at first thought I was 
arguing against the prudence of anybody thinking 
of such a girl as Lilla unless he was a man of 
fortune, and his countenance, transparently expres- 
sive, became clouded. It cleared again as he said : 

*' Then you don't think she would care about 
a man only if he was a swell, and had plenty of 
money, and a house in the West-end, like her 
uncle, and all that ?" 

"No; I think she is too sensible and spirited 
a girl to throw away a chance of real happiness 
for dreams." 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 61 

*'You see, Temple, it's this way with me. I 
suppose a man can't always liye alone. At least, 
I think now he can't ; I used to fancy it would 
be my fate, and that it was the only thing T could 
endure under . in fact, under the circumstances, 
you know. Now, somehow, I don't think so, 
since I've seen that girl's bright face, and heard 
her pleasant laugh. And I think there's some- 
thing in her too . I know it. I don't think I've 
fallen in love with her ; perhaps I've passed the 
age for that sort of thing, and I've knocked about 
a good deal, and I'm not far off thirty years old. 
But I do like to be near her, and to hear her talk, 
and I think she could brighten a man's life very 
much. Then I'm getting on very well . for a 
fellow like me, that is, who came up from no- 
thing ; and if things don't take a wonderfully 
bad turn, I don't see why I shouldn't soon be able 
to keep my wife quite like a lady . and Lilla Lyn- 
don would look like a lady too, and take the shine 
out of some of the West-enders, I can tell you." 

" My dear fellow, I wish you good luck "and 
God-speed with all my heart." 



.62 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Yes, that's all very fine, but we mustn't go 
too fast; I haven't the faintest reason to know 
that she would listen to a word of the kind." 

". Nor I ; but I don't know any reason why she 
shouldn't." 

" Don't you know any reason ?" 

'' Not I. How should I ?" 

" Unless that, perhaps . she knows you a long 
time, you see, and you have been a good deal to- 
gether, almost like brother and sister." 

"Exactly, Ned ; there it is . we are very much 
like brother and sister, and never could or would 
be like anything else. Lilla Lyndon has not a 
friend on earth who thinks more of her than 1 
do, and I'm sure I have no friend more warm and 
true than she . no friend, indeed, half so warm 
and true. And that is all; and if Lilla should 
marry you, old fellow, which I sincerely hope, she 
and I will be just the same fast friends as ever, 
please God." 

We parted without many more words . with- 
out any more words,' indeed, upon this subject. 
But it seemed clear enough to me how things 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 63 

would tend. Of Lilla's feelings on the subject 
I could guess nothing as yet; but I thought it 
would not be difficult soon to know all; and 
meanwhile I could see no reason why she should 
not love this handsome, manly, simple, success- 
ful fellow. 

As for him, I envied him, because he could 
love and hope. The whole thing gave me sincere 
pleasure, and yet a queer, selfish shade of sadness 
fell on me, too, as I walked home alone. I could 
not help thinking somewhat grimly, that my con- 
dition resembled a little that of a man on board 
a disabled and sinking ship, who sees the last of 
his friends safely received in the boat which has 
no room left for him. 

That was one of the incidents I had to relate 
before leaping over a few chapters of my life, be- 
cause it serves to foreshadow and explain what 
happened during the interval. Another incident, 
seemingly unconnected with this, must be told 
about the same time, as it tended towards the 
same end. 

One day I had made an appointment with Ned 



64 MY enemy's daughter. 

Lambert in town. We were to meet at half-past 
four o'clock, and we had fixed on Palace-yard as 
a convenient rendezvous. It was a fine frosty 
evening in late February, and the cheery sun- 
l)eams were falling lovingly on the Abbey and on 
the gilded pinnacles of the Clock-Tower. Palace- 
yard was full of bustle and life; carriages and 
cabs were driving up every moment and deposit- 
ing members, to make way for whom policemen 
kept scurrying here and there, and driving back 
the ever-encroaching rows of people who flanked 
the entrance to the great old Hall. I was some- 
what too soon for my appointment, and I knew 
that Lambert would make his appearance pre- 
cisely as the clock chimed the half-hour . not a 
minute sooner, not a minute later. So T too fell 
into the crowd, and occupied myself in watching 
the senators as they rode or drove up, and think- 
ing what a very fine thing it must be to be one of 
a body of personages so high and mighty that 
crowds gathered to see you go to your work, and 
that, even though you only came up in a hansom 
cab, a policeman rushed to clear the way, that 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 65 

your august feet might tread an unimpeded pave- 
ment. Presently, however, my eyes rested on a 
figure in the little rank of spectators just before 
my own, the sight of which was quite enough to 
make me fall hack precipitately. 

It was Lyndon . the wrong Lyndon, the pro- 
digal son, the outlaw. He was dressed with what 
I cannot help calling studied and artistic poverty. 
His hat was rusty in hue ; his coat was all thread- 
bare, and in one or two places actually torn ; but 
both were brushed with elaborate care. He had 
black gloves on, which were gone in the fingers ; 
his trousers were strapped down carefully. Look- 
ing at him from a purely dramatic point of view, 
I should say his appearance expressed Honest 
Poverty in the person of a Heavy Father. 

The moment I saw him I was convinced some- 
thing was "up;" and I drew back to avoid being 
seen by his peering black eyes. I could observe, 
however, that he kept always glancing up towards 
the Parliament -street end of Palace-yard. 

Presently a carriage drove up, in which I saw 

VOL II. F 



66 MY enemy's daughter. 

a face I knew. It was an open carriage, frosty 
though the day was. Mr. Lyndon . the Lyndon 
in possession, the Tommy Goodboy . sat in it, 
with a pale, handsome, slender young woman, 
whom I assumed to be one of his daughters. 
The carriage stopped at the entrance to West- 
minster Hall. 

" Now," I thought to myself, " we are in for 
a pretty scene." 

I saw the other Lyndon move forward. Sud- 
denly he drew back, as the strident voice of the 
M.P. was heard saying, 

" You wait there, Lilla; I'll just take my seat 
and come back." 

The member got down and strode into the 
Hall, and the carriage began to withdraw to the 
other side of the yard. 

I almost thought of profiting by the interval 
to seize the confounded Heavy Father, expostu- 
late with_jhim, and even drag him away, when I 
saw him break from the crowd, plunge at the 
carriage,''and cling to its side. 

"Lilla!" he exclaimed in tones so loud that 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 67 

even those wlio were farther off than I from the 
carriage must have heard the words distinctly . 
" Lilla, my daughter, my beloved daughter ! do 
you not know your father . your outcast, wronged 
father ? Have they, then, taught you to hate, 
hate, hate me, my sweet child ? . Get away, don't 
attempt to interfere. What business is it of 
yours, confound you !" 

These last words were addressed to the first 
policeman who rushed forward and attempted to 
drag him away. 

The young lady in the carriage sat pale and 
apparently bewildered, but without showing any 
wild affright. She was a handsome girl, with a 
colourless Madonna face, large deep violet eyes, 
and dark-brown hair. 

" Come, none of this !" expostulated the po- 
liceman. " You come away quietly, or I shall 
have to lock you up." 

" Stand back, minion ! Blue-coated minion, 
away ! That lady is my daughter. May not a 
father speak with his own child? I appeal to 
my fellow countrymen, my fellow Englishmen 



68 

here around. They will not allow me to be thus 
ill-used." 

"Bravo, old cove!" was the remark of one 
fellow Englishman. 

" Go it, Wiggy !" bawled out another sympa- 
thiser. 

The general crowd laughed. 

The girl in the carriage looked paler than 
before, but she fixed pitying eyes on poor battling 
Lyndon. 

"Don't hurt him," she called to the police- 
man in clear, firm tones. " The poor man is 
mad !" 

"I am not mad!" screamed Lyndon. "This 
hair . " and he put his hand to his head, but 
stopped. 

I do believe he was about to say, "This 
hair I tear is mine !" but, recollecting that he 
only wore a wig, he checked himself in time, 
and shouted, " I am not mad ! That lady is my 
daughter." 

"No, she ain't," expostulated the policeman. 
" I know that lady well enough. Come away 



69 

now, that's a good fellow, and don't make any 
more row. Come away. Where do you live? 
where are your friends ?" 

''There ! my daughter is my only friend. Let 
me go ! Let me know if she casts me off. . 
Lilla! Are you not Lilla?" 

" My name is Lilla," said the young lady, 
looking pityingly at him; ''but I do not know 
you. . I am sure," she said to the policeman, 
"the poor man is mad. Pray take him away, 
but deal gently with him; and let me know, 
please, if you can, something about him. Send 
someone to me, . to Miss Lilla Lyndon, Con- 
naught-place. Has he no friends? Does no- 
body know him ?" 

An impulse I could not resist dragged me into 
the business. I pushed my way through the 
crowd; I took off my hat to the young lady, 
whose sweet, calm face had attracted me from 
the first. 

" I know him, Miss Lyndon," I said ; " and 
if he will come with me, I shall be happy to take 
charge of him." 



70 MY enemy's daughter. 

*'He is mad, is he not?" she asked, bend- 
ing forward and lowering her tone. 

" In one sense he is indeed mad." 

" Can I do anything for him ? Is he an ob- 
ject of charity ? Has he no friends ?" 

"He has, I believe, no friends . none what- 
ever." 

" You are not, then, a friend of his ?" 

" Indeed, no ; but I know some members of 
his family, and should like to take charge of him 
for their sake." 

By this time, however, Lyndon had quite re- 
covered himself. His mistake was clear to him 
now. The name of Lilla had misled him. He 
really had thought, no doubt, that the Lilla Lyn- 
don before him must be his own daughter. He 
twisted himself from the hands of the policeman, 
and coming up to the carriage, took off his hat 
and made a low bow. 

" I have to ask the lady's pardon," he said, 
*' her very humble pardon. I am not mad; I 
am as sane as any senator over the way, but I 
have made a mistake . not so great a mistake, 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 71 

perhaps, as it may seem just now. I am but 
mad north-north-west, although in this instance, 
and with the wind southerly, too, I have failed 
to know a hawk from a hernshaw. I have made 
a mistake, and I apologise for it. What more 
can a gentleman do ? I am a gentleman. Miss 
Lilla Lyndon, although I confess that just at pre- 
sent I may not perhaps quite look like one ; but 
you shall know the fact one day. Meanwhile, 
allow me again to apologise and to withdraw. 
Enough has been done for fame to-day. My com- 
pliments to your dear father. I decline the escort 
of the police-force, and I repudiate the friend- 
ship of Mr. Emanuel Temple. I want no one to 
take care of me but Providence." 

He again made a low bow, addressed to Miss 
Lyndon, honoured me with a contemptuous glance, 
pushed his way through the grinning and won- 
dering crowd up to a grinning and wondering 
driver of a hansom cab, mounted lightly into the 
cab, and was rattled away. 

I was backing -out of the dispersing crowd 
too, when Miss Lyndon again leaned from her 



72 MY enemy's daughter. 

carriage, and said very earnestly, "May I ask, 
sir, if you can tell me anything about that strange 
man ?" 

*' Nothing, Miss Lyndon ; nothing that you 
could care to hear." 

*' But there is something. Pray what is his 
name ? 0, here is papa, at last." 

Mr. Lyndon, M.P., came rapidly up, looking 
red and angry. I took advantage of his coming 
to escape from an embarrassing question, by bow- 
ing to the lady and walking away. 

I looked calmly in Mr. Lyndon's face, but 
sought and made no sign of recognition. I could 
see that his daughter began at once eagerly talk- 
ing with him, and that she glanced towards me. 
I could see too that he looked irritated and ex- 
cited. And I had the comfort of thinking that he 
would probably set me down as an accomplice and 
actor in his brother's pleasant little performance. " 

The whole scene, though it seemed long, had 
not occupied five minutes, and the little bubble 
of excitement it had created in Palace -yard soon 
collapsed and wholly melted away. 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 73 

Mr. Lyndon and his daughter drove off; and 
by the time Ned Lambert came up to his ap2:)oint- 
ment, there was no evidence of anything unusual 
having happened. 

I did not tell him anything about it, although 
I should have been glad enough of a little of his 
advice ; but I preferred to think the matter calmly 
over before I took anybody, even him, into my 
confidence. 

Late that night I was going home alone, having 
parted with Lambert. I was walking slowly along 
Piccadilly, when an arm was suddenly thrust into 
mine, a burst of mellow laughter pealed in my ear, 
and I found that the detested Lyndon was walking 
beside me. 

" Temple," he broke out, *' I forgive you. To- 
day I repudiated you, because I thought you 
wanted to disavow my acquaintance, you shabby 
dog, in order that you might stand well in the 
eyes of my pretty niece. But I am delighted to 
meet you now, for I do so want to talk the matter 
over ; and you are, I give you my word, my sole 
confidant." 



74 MY enemy's daughter. 

I came to a dead stand. 

" Pray tell me," I asked as sternly as I could, 
" which is your way ?" 

" Just so, in order that you may go the other 
way. I know all about that. Temple ; and, as I 
have had occasion to remark to you before, you 
sometimes adopt a sort of conventional coarseness 
only fit for the most inferior transpontine drama. 
Don't try that on, Temple. Qualify for the Adel- 
phi, at the lowest, if you will practise stage-talk in 
private life. Be genial, man, be sociable ! Look 
at me. Above all, try to be a gentleman. Don't 
you know that I rather like you ?" 

" Yes ; but then I don't like you." 

" Coarsely candid. I don't mind. Come, let 
us move on a little. I am going your way, wher- 
ever that is. Don't try to thwart me ; I have a 
motive in it. I'll follow you, if I cannot have the 
pleasure of your friendly companionship." 

It occurred to me at once that he had now 
perhaps resolved on changing his tactics, and 
persecuting his wife and child; and that he 
hoped, by finding out where I lived, to come upon 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 75 

their track. So I straightway resolved to baffle 
him. Like Morgiana observing the stranger in 
the Arabian tale, I at once leaped to the conclu- 
sion that, whatever he might have in view, it 
would be for the interest of society to thwart him. 
So I permitted his companionship, and walked on, 
resolved to lead him a pretty dance if he hoped to 
find out my whereabouts. 

" That was a funny mistake of mine to-day," 
he chuckled; ''but very natural. I don't know 
that any harm is done, after all. It's not a bad 
way of opening the campaign, and giving Tommy 
Goodboy a sort of notion of what he has got to ex- 
pect. What a happy evening he must have spent ! 
What a string of lies he must have told that fine 
girl, my niece ! Isn't she a fine girl. Temple ? I 
feel quite proud of her. I foresee that she will 
prove immensely useful. Goodboy will have to 
come to terms, or woe upon his life ! By the way, 
Temple, do you know anything of astronomy ?" 

''Nothing." 

" Ah ! What a pity ! Then that magnificent 
sky over our heads is, I suppose, all a blank to 



76 MY enemy's daughter. 

you ! Just a pavement or floor inverted ! I 
daresay the floundering Venuses and Cupids on 
the Hampton-Court ceiling would interest you a 
good deal more than that field of sublime constel- 
lations. Well, I tell you frankly, I wouldn't be 
that sort of fellow. Temple, for anything you 
could give me. No, I wouldn't indeed ; I have 
always noticed, though, that you professional 
singing-fellows are generally very stupid. The 
spiritual nature doesn't seem to get developed at 
all. Wonder how that is ? The women don't 
appear to me to be so bad." 

" Are you walking so much out of your way to 
philosophise on professional singers ?" 

"Acute youth, no, I am not. The fact is, Mr. 
Temple . for I want to get back to a game of bil- 
liards . I have begun to think a good deal of what 
you were saying, only too eloquently, the other 
day. It didn't impress me then, as, I am bound 
to say, it ought to have done. I was in a frivolous 
and cynical mood ; unfortunately, I sometimes am 
so. I mean the evening that you appealed to me 
so very touchingly about my wife and child. You 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 77 

shot an arrow into the air, Temple, and, although 
at the moment unheeded, it came down and found 
its mark . a father's heart. I do now long to see 
my child. I thought I had found her to-day; 
alas ! the voice of Nature guided me wrong, or at 
least not quite right. Temple, conduct me to my 
child ! You know where she is. Lead me to her." 

" This sort of stuff," I replied very calmly and 
deliberately, "does not impose upon me. I sup- 
pose you want to make your daughter the victim 
of some such disgraceful exposure as that to which 
you tried to subject your niece to-day. That you 
shall certainly never do by any help or hint of 
mine. Let that be enough. Were you to parade 
the streets all night by my side . to my disgust . 
were you to dog my footsteps for a month, you 
should learn nothing of your daughter from 
me." 

" Temple, an awful thought flashes on me ! I 
beseech of you to answer me ! Heavens, it can't 
be ! and yet . tell me, is my daughter married . 
and to yoiiJ" 

" She is not ;" and I broke fiercely away. 



78 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Thank Heaven for tliat !" was his fervent and 
pious exclamation. 

I hurried away. He looked after me for awhile, 
hesitating ; then, apparently giving up the idea of 
forcing any more of his company on me just then, 
he hroke into a loud laugh, sang out " Good-night, 
Signor Pantaloon !" and went chuckling and 
stamping back in the direction of his favourite 
Haymarket. 

It was a hideous nuisance to me to have the 
existence of this dreadful little creature hung as 
a sort of mysterious burden round my neck. A. 
secret with which I had nothing to do, which I 
wanted neither to keep nor to disclose, was thrust 
on me, and seemed to lay a sort of critical and 
embarrassing responsibility on me. Sometimes 
I thought of taking Mrs. Lyndon aside and 
telling her the whole matter, and so putting 
her on her guard; again, I turned over in my 
mind the propriety of trusting to Lilla's natural 
good sense and courage, and making her the 
confidante. But so long as there was any chance 
or possibility of his not finding them out and dis- 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 79 

turbing or disgracing them, I shrank from adding 
this fresh and superfluous burden of vexation to 
their hard lives. It was clear that any chance 
that Lilla . my Lilla . might have from the pa- 
tronage or bounty of her uncle would be utterly 
gone, if once her life became mixed up with that 
of her unfortunate father. I very much mistook 
the character of Mr. Lyndon, M.P., if that gentle- 
man would not cast-off his niece as though she 
were a plague-infected garment, once it became 
apparent that recognising her would be encourag- 
ing his outlaw brother. Thus far, at least, the 
crusade of the latter seemed directed only against 
the inhabitants of the fine house in Connaught- 
place. And although I had no doubt that he 
would in the end, if needful, kick with equal foot 
at the door of the Chelsea lodging-house, yet, 
until he showed some signs of beginning to at- 
tack, it seemed only raising a needless alarm to 
put my friends on their guard. 

Positively, I entertained ideas of writing to, or 
waiting on, or throwing myself in the way of, Miss 
Lyndon . the other Lilla Lyndon . and telling her 



80 MY enemy's daughter. 

wiio the madman was, and appealing to her pity 
and kindliness to prevail upon her father to pen- 
sion him quietly off, and thus huy his perpetual 
absence and silence. I fear that pure good-nature 
towards my friends did not wholly inspire this 
notion. I own that I should have dearly liked a 
few words of conversation with that sweet, clear 
voice ; to have looked in those pure, pitying eyes 
again. Was this, then, one of the proud, cold, 
puritanical spinsters my Lilla had so often de- 
scribed to me ? She had clearly never seen this 
one, at least ; and, unless the latter was a very 
accomplished actress indeed, she could never have 
heard of any other Lilla Lyndon than herself. 
For when the little scoundrel claimed her as his 
daughter because her name was Lilla, her face ex- 
hibited only surprise and pity; she showed not 
the faintest gleam of any comprehension of his 
meaning or his mistake. 

I could not forget her eyes and her voice. I 
even walked by Connaught-place several times, 
hoping to see her, but not confessing to myself 
that I did so hope. So I temporised and post- 



THE HEAVY FATHER'S MISTAKE. 81 

poned, and kept my secret, and did nothing more. 
But I held still to my first impulse, and wished 
for a chance of trusting to the girl's pure and 
sympathetic face, and breaking through ceremony 
and conventionality by appealing to her and tell- 
ing her all. 



VOL. II. G 



CHAPTEK III. 

AGAIN AT LAST ! 

This is not a story of the struggles of a poor 
artist and adventurer, though so much of my life 
was indeed just such a story. But lives like mine 
have been told so often before, that I could add 
little new by dwelling on the professional and 
adventurous part of my existence, even if I had 
the art to tell such things as other men have 
told them. Therefore I frankly intimated to my 
readers long ago that I do not mean to enter into 
the details of my struggles, my disappointments, 
my privations, my temporary success. Of all 
these I shall only say, like the fair dame pressed 
to explain the duties of the cicisheo, *' I beseech 
you to suppose them." In brief, the professional 
story of my life is this : I struggled long and 
wearily. At last I succeeded, for a time. Then 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 83 

I lost the best of my voice, and I faded back into 
quiet obscurity, not without comfort. For what 
Carlyle calls four-and-twenty resplendent months, 
I was a brilliant success in the popular sense. I 
know myself, and I know that I never was or 
could be a great singer. I never was in the high 
sense an artist. I never had a genius for music, 
or for anything ; but I had my run of success . I 
had my day. It was a short one, and it is over ; 
and I don't regret it. *' I cease to live," says the 
poet's Egmont ; " but I have lived !" 

In my days of swift success I came to know a 
great many authors, sculptors, painters, critics, 
artists of every class, who had all more or less 
succeeded in life ; and I found that the actor or 
the singer has some splendid chances which are 
denied to any other adventurer after popular 
favour. Worst off of all his brethren I rate the 
literary adventurer, although Thackeray, with the 
complacency of recognised and triumphant genius, 
pointed out the immense advantage the author 
enjoys in requiring neither patronage nor capital, 
but only a few sheets of paper and a steel pen. 



84 MY enemy's daughter. 

Where is his arena, his tribute ? He has written 
his grand tragedy. Very good. Who is going to 
play it ? . nay, what manager is going to read it ? 
He has finished every chapter of his novel ; and 
then begins the dreariest part of his business. I 
remember literary friends of mine used to say, 
when sometimes the author of Vanity Fair showed 
his grand white head among us, that he had had 
toil enough to persuade the public to read what he 
had written, that he had hawked about his great 
book long enough before any publisher could be 
induced to run the risk of printing it. The 
difficulty was to get any publisher to read it. 
Change Vanity Fair into a picture or a statue, 
and it would at least have found a place in an 
exhibition, where a crowd, coming for the sole 
purpose of looking at pictures and statues, would 
have seen it, and some eye would surely have 
found out its worth. To read through thousands 
on thousands of scrawled ms. pages in the hope of 
sometime coming on a literary treasure is a weari- 
some diving process which only stubborn souls 
long endure ; but to hunt through an art-exhibi- 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 85 

tion is a pleasant and easy work. I rate the 
chances of the painter or the sculptor, then, rather 
above those of the literary man. But while it is 
true that not everyone can get a chance of ex- 
hibiting his picture in any gallery, it is also true 
that even in the gallery it may pass unnoticed of 
the crowd, who only run to look at the pictures of 
men with names, or pictures they have been fore- 
warned to look at. Suppose, however, that every- 
one going into the gallery were compelled to look 
at every picture in turn . were compelled at least 
to stand before it, and look at that or nothing 
for a certain number of minutes, would not the 
obscure artist's chances be immensely increased 
in value ? But this is precisely the condition of 
the actor or the singer. Once, at the very least, 
in his three or five acts he is in absolute posses- 
sion of the audience. No one may speak or sing 
but he. It is his chance. If he can speak or sing 
in any way worth listening to, there is his oppor- 
tunity of doing it. I have known scores of men in 
other professions who only wanted just one such 
chance to crown their ambition, or, at all events, 



86 MY enemy's daughter. 

to crush it, and who never got the chance, but 
went along through life disappointed and embit- 
tered, girding at the successful, snarling at 
popular favour, wailing against destiny, and al- 
ways convinced that if the world could but have 
seen or heard them, it would have fallen in 
homage at their feet. The public, indeed, will 
not go fishing for talent, like pearl-divers. It is 
enough to ask that they shall recognise it when 
set before them. " Genius," says Miirger, " is 
the sun; all the world sees it. Talent is the 
diamond in the mine ; it is prized when dis- 
covered." This was my chance. I got an oppor- 
tunity of holding up my poor little artistic dia- 
mond. The opening came; I had the stage 
all to myself for a few moments, and I really 
had been gifted by Nature with a voice which 
then, at least, could hardly have failed to make 
an impression. It made its impression, and I 
succeeded. 

This was in Italy. I came home to England, 
after an absence comparatively very short, a suc- 
cess. My way began to be clear before me. I 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 87 

began to have friends, admirers, rivals, detractors, 
satellites, partisans, and enemies. I grew familiar 
with my own name in print ; I became accustomed 
to the receipt of anonymous letters . some full of 
praise, not a few full of love, a great many breath- 
ing contempt and detestation. I began to judge 
of journals and critics only according to their way 
of dealing with myself. 

I must say that hardly any kind of life seems 
to be more corrupting to independent and gener- 
ous manhood than that which depends upon the 
public admiration. It is hardly a whit better 
than that which hangs upon a prince's favour. 
The miserable jealousies, the paltry rivalries and 
spites, the mean, imperious triumph over some- 
body else's failure or humiliation, the pitiful 
exultation over one's own passing success, the 
womanish anxiety to know what is said of one, 
the childlike succession of exaltation and of 
depression, the absorbing vanity, the sickening 
love of praise, and the nauseous capacity for 
swallowing it . all these seem to be as strictly the 
disease and danger of artistic life as yellow fever 



88 MY enemy's daughter. 

is of the West Indies, or dysentery of the East. 
I have indeed known strong natures hoth in men 
and women which could defy the contagion, and 
retain their healthy and self-reliant simplicity to 
the last. I have seen, even in stage -life, virgins 
Avho could tread those hideous hot ploughshares of 
vanity and jealousy, and come out unscathed. I 
have known men who to the last kept the white- 
ness of their souls, and never felt a pang of mean 
joy over another's failure, or of unmanly pride or 
unmanly grief at success or failure of their own. 
But such natures are indeed the rarest of phe- 
nomena, and only make the general character of 
the race show more repulsively. You can't help 
it ; I mean, we common natures cannot help it. 
Some of us go in resolving that we will not be 
like the others, that we will not lay down our 
manhood and our courage and our generosity, and 
succumb to the poisonous atmosphere of praise, 
and rivalry, and jealousy. But we soon grow 
like the rest ; we rage at a disparaging word ; we 
swell with pride over the most outrageous praise ; 
our bosoms burst with gall when some new rival 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 89 . 

is spoken of too favourably or applauded too loudly ; 
we rejoice with a base and coward joy, wbicli our 
lying lips dare not confess, when someone whom 
openly we call a friend makes a failure and falls 
down. Our nature becomes positively sexless ; 
and man detests woman if she outshines him, just 
as rival beauties of a fribble season may hate each 
other. I protest I did not, until I came in for 
some little artistic success, ever believe it possible 
I could hate . or, indeed, that any man could hate 
. an attractive and pretty woman who had never 
either slighted or betrayed him. I soon learned 
that the wretched creature who lives on the favour 
of the public can get to envy and detest any being 
that stands between him and the sun of his ex- 
istence. 

From my soul I detest the whole thing. I 
distinctly saw my moral nature becoming contami- 
nated by it, and I despised myself even for the mo- 
mentary pang of pride and envy which I honestly 
did my best to crush and conquer. I sometimes 
thought to myself, " The time must soon come, if 
one of us does not die meanwhile, when I shall 



90 MY enemy's daughter. 

meet Christina. Shall I find her even as one of 
these? Shall I find that her heart swells with 
pitiful pride and rankles with paltry spleen ; that 
she hates her rivals ; that she can swallow any 
amount of praise, and gladden in it ; that she can 
cry when some critic disparages her or praises 
someone else ?" 

I could not helieve it; ^^et I could not but 
fear; I could not but sometimes wish that I had 
been less fortunate in my personal ambition, and 
that I were still far removed in obscurity out of 
her possible path. 

I heard of her often. She was soon to return 
to England, where her sudden departure and long 
absence, after so sudden a success, lent new attrac- 
tion to her. People said she was married. I had 
heard the statement almost with composure. She 
had become like a dream to me. When I saw 
her last I was little more than a boy; I stood now 
on the latest verge of my youth : a whole working 
lifetime lay between. I believed that I had so far 
disciplined my nature and subordinated early and 
disappointed passion, that I could meet her now 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 91 

again with unmoyecl politeness, and even on our 
first meeting look calmly in her face, touch her 
hand without tremor, and congratulate her be- 
comingly upon her great success. 

Yes, they said she was married ; and it was 
certain that she now described herself as Madame 
Keichstein, not Mademoiselle Keichstein. Indeed, 
some maintained that she was not only a wife, but 
actually a widow\ But they said all manner of 
things about her. Her husband was an entrejjve- 
neur ; he was an Australian adventurer ; he was a 
rich Yankee speculator ; he was a scion of a noble 
Austrian family, who never would look at him 
after his mesalliance; whoever he was, he had 
deserted her : no, it v.as she who had run away 
from him while they were living at Nice, and 
actually in their hone^TQOon ; he used to beat her ; 
she once tried to stab him : at all events, he was 
dead now. Nay, there was not a word of truth in 
all that ; the real fact was, that she never was 
married at all; the young nobleman killed him- 
self for love of her, and left her all his property ; 
and so forth, and so forth. These and countless 



92 MY enemy's daughter. 

other stories . equally incoherent, extravagant, and 
contradictory . passed from mouth to mouth among 
the people I met who talked about Christina 
Reichstein. 

I found Ned Lambert, when I returned to 
England, quite established as the household friend 
of the Lyndons. He used to come and dine with 
them almost every Sunday, having made a definite 
arrangement to that effect with Mrs. Lyndon, who 
was ready enough and rejoiced to eke out her 
housekeeping by such a mode of contribution, 
and who had indeed quite a genius for cookery. 
Lambert liked the change immensely. He said 
he was fond of a good dinner on Sunday, and that 
when he dined alone at his own lodgings, he never 
ventured to ask his landlady for anything beyond 
the cold corpse of a fowl cooked on the Saturday. 
But it was not his relish for a savoury little din- 
ner which brought him all the way to our dreary 
district ; and I saw a marked change, both in him 
and in Lilla, when I once more joined the little 
circle. Lilla was more thoughtful, more melan- 
choly, less pleasure -loving than before; he, on 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 93 

the other hand, was generally brighter and more 
animated, unless when he was studying manners 
and deportment, which indeed he almost always 
was. Many a time I saw him furtively glance 
under his ejes at Lilla, as if to learn from her ex- 
pression whether he had accomplished a triumph 
or committed a solecism of etiquette. I could 
not resist the temptation to make an inquiry 
once in Lilla's presence about his Sunday-evening 
relief from coat-sleeves ; whereat he loked so dis- 
tressed and confused that Lilla insisted on having 
the whole story, . and had it accordingly, and 
laughed very much ; and Lambert at last gave 
way, and likewise laughed; and we all laughed 
a good deal longer than the story deserved. I 
was glad to have made Lilla laugh at anyone's 
expense ; for, poor girl, she laughed less now than 
of old days, and her face looked pale and anxious. 
I soon found out the reason. 

Between Lambert and myself we had boxes, 
stalls, and so forth for some theatre almost at 
will. One night we went . Lilla, her mother, 
Lambert, and myself; Lambert would not stir 



94 MY enemy's daughter. 

"without Mrs. Lyndon . to see a new performer 
as Claude Melnotte. He, the new Claude Mel- 
notte, was the idol of one of the colonies, and 
was a statuesque, handsome, deep-voiced, ener- 
getic, wooden -headed sort of actor. I thought 
the whole thing dreadfully tiresome, and Lamhert 
thought so too ; hut Lilla was quite melted hy it, 
and streamed with tears. A year before I know 
that she would have laughed at the business, or 
yawned over it. I saw Lambert's eyes resting on 
her with profound admiration and sympathy ; and 
he looked up and caught my eye, and gave me 
a glance, partly whimsical, partly sentimental, 
partly bashful and apologetic, which would have 
made quite a picture in itself. She had her 
depths of sensibility, then, this poor girl, whose 
bloom the hard coarse grit of London life had so 
nearly rubbed away. Never did she shed tears at 
a theatre when I was her companion, or care for 
any performance which was supposed to demand 
tear-shedding as its tribute. 

I spoke of the change to Lambert himself that 
night. 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 95 

"It's true," lie replied slowly and senten- 
tiously; ''I have often thought that the best 
test you could have of a woman's intelligence 
and of her sympathies would be to w^atch her 
demeanour at a theatre. Hear her comments, 
and observe how she looks ; and the fellow who 
does not know her then is an idiot, who never 
could know anything of her. You can't imagine, 
Temple, how I hate some women I see at a play : 
they look so cold and stolid and severely proper 
and self-contained, that I should like to have 
them expelled from the presence of art altogether. 
I wonder how you will feel at the sight of such 
people when you come on our stage, before our 
unimpassioned creatures here. It is not like 
Italy, Temple . at least, I fancy so ; and indeed 
I have heard it from . 0, from many who have 
felt it." 

*' From Madame Keichstein, for example ?" 

I was determined not to shrink from that 
name, or allow him to suppose that I faltered 
at it. 

"Yes, from her in especial. She was dread 



96 i\iY enemy's daughter. 

fully cliilled here in London, although they gave 
her quite unusual honours." 

'' She would be. Her enthusiasm and her 
really lyric nature would naturally chafe against 
our British composure." 

He glanced at me inquiringly, as if he meant 
to ask whether this calmness was real or put on. 
If I had been asked then, I could have answered 
in all sincerity that I believed it real. I know 
now that it was but an effort of self-discipline. 

*'We had a sort of scene at a theatre one 
night," he said, rapidly changing the subject; 
" I mean Lilla . Miss Lyndon . and I." 

" Indeed ! What happened ?" 

" Some fellow . mad, I think . seized her by 
the arm, just as I was handing her into a cab . 
her mother was already in . and jabbered some 
insane nonsense at her. I pushed him away, and 
the wretched creature flew at me like a wild-cat, 
and there was quite a disturbance." 

" Who was he ? What was he like ?" 

" 0, quite an outre, mad-looking creature, 
small and old, with a black wig. I could have 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 97 

crushed liim ; but, of course, I wasn't going to 
hit a poor Httle old bloke . old man, I mean ; and 
so I only dragged him away, and asked a police- 
man to take charge of him. But he was near 
raising a perfect mob about us, shrieking out that 
I was carrying off his long-lost daughter, and I 
don't know what other rubbish ; and he cut my 
lip, so that I was a pretty sight, I can tell you." 

" What became of Lilla ?" 

" She comported herself most bravely; neither 
screamed nor fainted. I got rid of my lunatic as 
soon as I could." 

*' Did Mrs. Lyndon see him ?" 

*'No, she didn't. It so happened that she 
never got a glimpse of him ; and I was very 
glad. She is a nervous woman, and would have 
been greatly frightened by the sight of so extra- 
ordinary a creature. Of course I made nothing 
of it, and I never heard any more about it." 

'' You never found out anything about him ?" 

"Never; and I never tried to." 

I said no more on the subject ; I needed no 
further explanation. 

VOL. II. H 



98 MY enemy's daughtek. 

Some days after this, a few of us . Lambert, 
myself, and one or two rising actors and littera- 
teurs . gave a little fete to some of our friends 
at Kichmond. It was very early in the season. 
We dined, of course, at the Star and Garter. 
Lilla Lyndon was of the company. We were 
all very pleasant. I was as happy as a bright 
sun, delicious air, and joyous company could 
make any man ; and I, at least, never could be 
insensible to the mere joy of living, of barely 
living, under such sun and in such air. I was 
a sort of rising star too, in a very small way, and 
might have flirted and been flattered a good deal ; 
and did on this occasion accept my opportunities. 
I walked through the gardens, after dinner, with 
a pretty, vivacious girl leaning on my arm ; a girl 
who had just made a brilliant success in light 
comedy, and promised indeed to be another 
Abington or Nisbett, until she married, poor 
thing, and died in her first confinement. Her 
people lived not far from Norwood; and a short 
time since, walking out from the Crystal Palace 
all ringing with music, I strayed into a church- 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 99 

yard, and came upon a tombstone bearing the 
name of my poor young friend. This Kichmond 
day, however, of which I speak, was darkened by 
no shadow from the future, and we were all very 
bright and happy. 

*' Look there!" said my companion suddenly, 
and with a joyous laugh. " See how people make 
love off the stage." 

She directed my attention to two figures in a 
shady little alley of shrubs and trees, not far from 
us. They were Lambert and Lilla Lyndon. She 
was leaning on his arm ; her eyes were downcast, 
her cheeks were crimson, her step was slow. He 
bent his tall figure over her ; he was pleading 
earnestly, passionately . that anyone could see . 
into her ear. It had come, then, just as I thought 
it would. He loved her ; and now he was telling 
her so ; and I could not doubt what her answer 
would be. 

Queer pangs shot through me. I was rejoiced 
at the prospect of the happiness of both my 
friends. I thought with delight that Lilla would 
no longer be poor ; that she would have a true 



ICO MY enemy's daughter. 

liome to shelter her, a manly heart to lean on ; 
that he would have a life made warm hy love ; 
and I longed to congratulate them both, and tell 
them how sincerely I gladdened in their love and 
their happiness. And yet the sight brought with 
it too a keen sense of isolation and loneliness. I 
had felt for Lilla just that warm and tender friend- 
ship which is to love " as the moonlight to the 
sunlight." She had been a friend to me when 
friends were most precious and most rare. She 
had cared for me when I was sick, confided in 
me always ; begged for me, unasked and almost 
unthanked, of one who probably despised her 
and me only all the more for it. And now I was 
about to lose her; the only woman from whom 
I could expect a greeting that was more than 
formal, a glance that was at once friendly and 
sincere. I don't say that this made me sad. I 
know I was sincerely glad that things were to 
be so ; but it made me thoughtful. I was moody 
enough to wish to be alone for a little ; and un- 
gallant enough to get gradually rid of my fair and 
joyous companion. I felt a twinge of remorse at 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 101 

the recollection when I came the other day upon 
the stone which bore the record of her name, her 
birth, her marriage, her death, and the inconsol- 
able gi'ief of her afflicted husband . who is now 
alive and merry with his third wife. 

I was glad to be alone. I stretched myself on 
the grass. The evening was glowingly, gloriously 
hot. I heard the voices of singers not far away, 
and the notes of a piano. I saw nothing but the 
unflecked sky of blue above my head, and the 
slender spiral vapour of my cigar. "Was I happy ? 
Was I miserable ? Happy or miserable, those 
moments were ecstatic. Are not the sensations 
produced by extreme heat and extreme cold so 
much alike that the African brought for the first 
time into contact with snow fancies it has burnt 
him ? I think there are pangs of delight and of 
pain . where the soul is the medium, not the 
nerves . which are not easily to be distinguished 
from each other. 

I started at an approaching step. Lilla was 
close beside me ; she looked pale, and much dis- 
tressed. I jumped to my feet. 



102 MY enemy's daughtee. 

"I have been looking for you everywhere," 
she said ; "I want you to take me home." 

" Home so soon ? Are you going home al- 
ready?" 

" Yes. I should like to, very much ; if you 
don't mind leaving so early. Or I will wait 
longer, as long as you like, if you will promise 
to leave a little before the rest, and to come with 
me." 

" Certainly, Lilla, when you please. But 
where is Lambert ?" 

*'Mr. Lambert? I don't know; at least, I 
saw him not long since." 

" Will Lambert not wish to see you home ?" 

"If you can't or won't come with me, Ema- 
nuel," she said petulantly, " if you must wait on 
somebody else, of course I must not worry you 
about me." 

" Why, Lilla, my dear girl, you know very 
well I will go with you when you please. But I 
only thought . " 

" Dear Emanuel, please don't think any- 
thing; at least, at present. Only do oblige me 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 103 

this once; I am so tired, and I want to get 
away." 

"We will go tins instant." 

"Thank you; that is kind. And I should 
like to get quietly out, quite unnoticed, if you 
please." 

" This way, then." 

" I gave her my arm, and I felt her arm 
tremble on mine ; and could feel that her bosom 
beat heavily as she leaned on me. Violet circles 
were round her eyes; and every time she spoke 
it seemed as if she must break into tears. 

There were several hansoms at the door, in 
which some of our company had come. I meant 
to take one of them, and convey Lilla home in it. 
Young ladies don't usually go in hansoms, I be- 
lieve, with young men ; that is, where Kespect- 
ability reigns. We had no such etiquette in our 
free and gladsome world. One of Lilla's special 
delights was, or used to be, a hansom. 

But the gardens were full of company. There 
were many parties there as well as ours. Lilla 
and I, threading our way outward, were always 



104 MY enemy's daughtee. 

coining on some brilliant group. It was signifi- 
cant of my poor young friend's state of mind, that 
she did not even cast a scrutinising glance at the 
dresses of the ladies. We hardly spoke at all. 

I brought her into a narrow side-path between 
flowers and plants. We were nearly out now. 
Towards us there came a group of four or five 
ladies and gentlemen, straggling along as the 
width of the path allowed them. One voice struck 
on my ear, and I knew its sharp and strident tone. 
I knew it to be the voice of Lilla's uncle. Emi- 
nently disagreeable I thought such a meeting 
would be in a place so narrow that recognition 
could not be avoided. It was now too late to 
go back, so we drew up to let the group stream 

Lilla saw her uncle. She coloured, and was a 
little confused. He did not seem particularly de- 
lighted at the meeting. 

"Why, Lilla, you here?" He gave her his 
hand rather coldly. 

I had been standing silent and stiff, looking 
at nothing and feeling highly uncomfortable. 



AGAIN' AT LAST ! 105 

^'Yes, uncle; but I am going away now. I 
have asked this gentleman . don't you know Mr. 
Temple, uncle ? . to take me home." 

"Indeed! Yes. . How do you do, Mr. Tem- 
ple ?" 

I made a formal acknowledgment of his en- 
forced salutation, and in doing so I became con- 
scious that the light of two deep, dark, soft eyes 
was turned full on me. I became conscious of it 
. I can use no other phrase . for up to this mo- 
ment I had positively seen none of the group but 
Mr. Lyndon alone, and had never looked at the 
lady who was by his side, and who stopped when 
he did. But I felt that the light of those eyes 
was on me, and an electrical thrill ran through 
me, with which the blood rushed heavily and 
fiercely to my head, and the pulses of my heart 
seemed to stand still, and the grass for a moment 
flickered with changing colours, and the sinking 
sun appeared to reel in the sky. 

And looking up, I saw that Christina Reich- 
stein stood before me. 

Not my Lisette ! Not my Christina ! Beau- 



106 MY enemy's daughter. 

tiful, stately, in the full glow of developed loveli- 
ness . no longer a girl ; nay, now that the wester- 
ing sunbeams fell upon her face, I saw that there 
was something even of the melancholy beauty of a 
sunset in her own features and expression. Far 
more beautiful, far more stately, far more attrac- 
tive, than when I knew her, but not with the 
fresh and passionate youth which was her exqui- 
site charm long ago. Long ago ! A whole life 
seemed to lie between that time and this. I 
thought there was something sad, something even 
of a prematurely wasted look about those glorious 
eyes. Youth, and early love, and early struggle 
lay buried in those lustrous hollows. They were 
as mirrors to me, in which I saw my own dead 
youth and disappointed love. I turned towards 
her, and our eyes met and rested upon each other 
in an instant of unspeakable emotion never to be 
forgotten in this world. 

Christina recovered her composure in a mo- 
ment. 

*'We are fortunate, Mr. Lyndon," she said, 
in her clear musical voice, with the old dash of 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 107 

foreign accent still perceptible in it, . "we are for- 
tunate in not having left so soon as I wished ; for 
we meet . at least, I do . two unexpected friends. 
Your niece I know already, though she seems to 
have quite forgotten me ; and in this gentleman I 
meet a very old friend." 

She gave her hand first to Lilla, and then to 
me. Not the lightest, faintest pressure of her 
glove indicated to me that I was anything to her 
but an old acquaintance. 

"Indeed," said Mr. Lyndon drily, "I did not 
know that you were acquainted with this . ah, this 
gentleman, Mr. Temple, before." 

" Did you not ? yes ; we were old acquaint- 
ances ever so many years ago. . How long ago, Mr. 
Temple ?" 

" Several centuries ago at least, Madame Reich- 
stein." 

"Yes, indeed; it must be many, many cen- 
turies ago," she said, slightly shrugging her 
shoulders. 

" A good way of evading any confession of the 
number of years," remarked Mr. Lyndon, with a 



108 MY enemy's daughter. 

short dry laugh. . '' If you are going home, Lilla, 
I think you had better come with us." 

"Thank you, uncle. If you can take me, I 
shall be very glad; and then Mr. Temple need 
not be dragged away to take care of me." 

"No; we need not trouble Mr. Temple to leave 
so early. Come, Lilla." 

"Good-night, Emanuel," said Lilla, holding 
out her hand to me. " I am so much obliged to 
you for offering to come with me ; and so glad 
that I have not to take you away." 

" Then I think I shall not go just yet," said 
Madame Eeichstein. " I will go in Mrs. Levi- 
son's carriage; she is not leaving for a few mi- 
nutes. I have not had the pleasure of seeing Mr. 
Temple for so many years that I cannot leave him 
now, at least until I have exchanged a few words 
with him, and told him how and when he may see 
me again. . Will you give me your arm, Mr. Tem- 
ple ?" 

I offered her my arm without a word. Lilla 
looked at us both with wondering eyes. This was 
all the wildest of mystery to her. She forgot for 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 109 

a moment apparently even the trouble that was 
oppressing her, in the surprise of seeing this un- 
expected acquaintanceship reveal itself. 

" Eemember you promised to accept a seat in 
my carriage," said Lyndon. " We are in no haste; 
we can wait as long as you please." 

" But I don't like the idea of anybody waiting 
for me. No, Mr. Lyndon ; pray excuse me this 
once. Your niece, too, looks quite tired and ill, 
and I think the sooner you take her out of this 
the better." 

Lyndon scowled and contracted his brow, and 
looked at Lilla as if he could have found it in his 
heart to say something rather sharp of her illness, 
and her presence, and her existence altogether. 

" 0, Lilla'svery well," he snarled. . ''Are you 
not ?" 

" Quite well, uncle. . I am quite well, indeed, 
dear Madame Keichstein." 

" You don't look so, child. No, you must go 
home, dear ; you will come and see me, will you 
not? I have scolded your uncle before now for 
not bringing you to me. Good-night, dear." She 



110 MY enemy's daughter. 

kissed Lilla quite affectionately. . '' Good-night, 
Mr. Lyndon, and thank you very much." 

" Good-night. But you will be at Mrs. Le- 
vison's to-night, will you not ?" 

" Eeally, I had quite forgotten. yes, cer- 
tainly . at least, I think so. Au revoir, then." 

Mr. Lyndon saluted me very slightly and 
formally, and I saw him cast an appealing, dis- 
appointed, impatient glance at Christina. It was 
vain, however. She bowed graciously, smiled 
sweetly, and then turned and led me away. 

All this time I was like one paralysed of 
speech. Not even that fiercest stimulus a man's 
power of self-control can receive, the conscious- 
ness that he is making himself ridiculous, could 
spur me to the mastery of my feelings and the 
faculty of unmeaning talk. Lately, when it had 
become apparently certain that I must some time, 
and that soon, meet Christina, I had rehearsed 
over and over again the manner in which I should 
demean myself. Sometimes it was to be a dig- 
nified and haughty coldness, sometimes an air 
of polite, genial, easy indifi*erence. But the one 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! Ill 

way in which I was never on any account to 
greet her for the first time was just that which 
I now found myself driven into . confusion, em- 
barrassment, constraint, and awkward silence. 

My throat was dry, my lips were parched ; the 
trail of her rustling dress along ihe walk was the 
only sound that seemed to reach my ears ; the 
fragrance of perfumes came faintly from around 
her ; her hand rested on my arm. I did not ven- 
ture to look at her, lest I should meet her eyes, 
and, stricken by them, give out my soul in some 
wild outbreak of love or anger. 

" Emanuel !" 

The word came up low, sweet, and thrilling to 
my ears. It pierced my heart. It seemed as if 
between that word and the " Acle T' 1 had heard 
her call from the window years and years ago there 
was only an utter void. 

" Emanuel !" 

" Madame . Madame Reichstein.'" 

"No; not that name, Emanuel. Call me by 
the name you always gave me . long ago. That 
at least is mine still." 



112 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Christina !" 

" Yes. I am still Christina. You must not 
think harshly of me, Emanuel." 

" I do not. Heaven knows I do not." 

" You cannot judge me, and you must not 
attempt to do so. I know by your manner now 
that you think I have injured you." 

" Think you have injured me ! Think ! I 
look back on so many years of a life worse ten 
times than any death, and you wonder whether 
I think you have injured me !" 

*' Emanuel, if we begin reproaching, I too 
have something to reproach. If we begin talking 
of years of suffering, do you think life has been 
all a pleasure and a joy to me ? If you were dis- 
appointed, was not I ? If you were deceived, was 
not I?" 

" By me, Christina ? Never. I . I . loved 
you, you only, and with all my soul . " 

" Hush, hush, my friend, no more of that. 
No, not one word. All that is dead and gone 
long ago. Let it sleep. Why should we begin 
raking up the past, and reproaching each other, 



AGAIN AT LAST ! 113 

and making each other miserable ? I did not 
wish or mean to do so. I wished that we should 
meet like old friends long Separated, who are 
friends in heart still. I have heard of your suc- 
cess, Emanuel, and I congratulate you. I heard 
of it but now in Italy, where, look you, you have 
friends. Greater success too you will have yet. 
I was not surprised ; I always knew it. And me 
. look at me. Well, I have not failed." 

"No. You have indeed succeeded. You, 
Christina, have realised your highest dreams ; 
you have all you ever longed or prayed for." 

" And you envy me, perhaps ? And look 
coldly at me ? And wonder why I have suc- 
ceeded so much better than others ? And will 
join with my enemies in finding defects, and 
blaming the prejudiced public which overrates ? 
No ; I do not think you would do that. That 
would not be like you." 

" Christina, that you could even suggest it 
shows that you do not know me. But, indeed, 
you never did." 

''Did I not? But we will not talk of that. 

VOL. II. I 



114 MY enemy's daughter. 

Well, then, I have succeeded; and you are just 
on the verge of full success. They tell me we are 
to sing together soOn." 
" So they tell me." 

" Yes, I believe so ; I suppose it will be. In 
fact, I will have it so, although Mr. Lyndon does 
not seem much to like it." 

" What right of judgment has he ?" 
" Well, you know the right he has" . and she 
shrugged her shoulders . " the right of the man 
with the money who stands quietly in the shadow 
behind the manager whose name is on the bill. 
That right he has. But to me it matters little ; 

I have my own way, or " 

"Mr. Lyndon is a close friend of yours ?" 
" I suppose so. I have a great many close 
friends, and I hope I value them all exactly as 
they deserve. You look coldly and strangely at 
me, Emanuel," she said, suddenly changing her 
tone of flippancy and cynicism, for the old friendly 
pathetic voice, " and you seem as if you too would 
judge me only by words, and ways, and externals. 
If you will, I tell you franldy beforehand that you 



AGAIN . AT LAST ! 115 

will judge me harshly . as, perhaps, others do . 
and you will judge me wrongly, and I shall be 
disappointed. Do not ; 0, do not ! We shall 
have to see each other much in the future, and 
I should like dearly to have one friend and bro- 
ther." 

Voices were close behind us ; and I heard 
Madame Keichstein's name mentioned as if she 
were sought for. 

" This way, Emanuel, please ; I see my friends, 
and I must go with them. Is it not all like a 
dream that we have met again? Thank you, 
Mr. Temple ; you will come and see me ? . ^Now, 
dear Mrs. Levison. . Good-night, Mr. Temple." 

She gave me her hand, and said in a lower 
tone, " Good-night, Emanuel;" and left me. 

I sauntered vacuously back into the garden. 
My brain was all in a whirl. I put between my 
lips the cigar long since extinguished, and was 
for a while unconscious that it did not burn. A 
sense of disappointment mingled with all the con- 
fused feelings that came up in my mind. The 
Christina I had found was not like the Christina 



116 MY enemy's daughter. 

I had lost. Something of sharpness, of worldli- 
ness, of flippancy, seemed in her, which jarred 
and grated on me ; and yet now and then some 
word or tone brought hack all the old memories, 
the ideal Christina, the strong love. I tried to 
remember and dwell on only the one delicious, 
pathetic sound which came from her lips when 
she spoke my name, and to put aside all associa- 
tion of her with the common world . with Lyn- 
don's coarse and purse-proud ways, with the kind 
of society in which Lyndon strove to be a dictator, 
with the paltry spites of cliques and the mean 
jealousies of rivals. I tried to do this ; I did my 
best to succeed; but the sense of disappoint- 
ment outlived my efforts. 



CHAPTER IV, 



A BPtEAKING-UP. 



I DID not want to meet Lambert or any of my 
friends any more that night ; I had no motive for 
wishing to he home early; I had no motive, in- 
deed, for wishing to do anything, except to get 
away from just the place where I was : so I lighted 
a cigar and took to the road. I walked from Rich- 
mond, choosing all the byeways and circuitous 
complicated " short-cuts" that could well be found, 
80 that by the time I arrived in town I was pretty 
well tired. I looked into a theatre, and found it 
very dull; I dropped into a small and modest 
club of artists and journalists and young authors, 
of which I had lately become a member, and 
listened to some of the ordinary gabble in the 
smoking-room, about this man's piece and that 
man's novel, and this other's overdone " business" 



118 MY enemy's daughter. 

in the comic part, and somebody else's anger at 
the malignity of the critics, who don't see the 
merit of his wife's novel, and all the rest of the 
kind of thing which one hears in such a place. 
It was weary, or I was weary, and I hardly talked 
to anybody. 

At last it grew late, and I went home. I 
had resolved to stay out long enough to be certain 
that I should find nobody stirring ; I was disap- 
pointed, however. There were lights in the little 
parlour; I let myself in with my latchkey, and 
would have gone upstairs, if I could, without 
seeing anybody. As I passed the parlour-door, 
however, Lilla's voice called me ; I went in, and 
found her looking very pale and weary and sad. 
She was still in the dress she had worn that day 
at Kichmond. 

" Not in bed yet, Lilla ?" 

"Not yet; I have been waiting up partly to 
see you. Mamma is up too. I am going away 
to-morrow, Emanuel." 

" Going away ! Going where ?" 

" I am going to Paris. I am going to have 



A BREAKING-UP. 119 

a hand in a school there . in a kind of partnership 
with a person I know, a very clever sort of woman, 
a Miss Whitelocke, who took quite a liking to me, 
and has a very good opinion of my capacity . no 
great proof of her cleverness is that, certainly." 

" But this is very sudden ; you never spoke a 
word to me of this hefore." 

"No. Because nothing was certain, and I 
hadn't made up my mind ; and we hoth have our 
secrets, Mr. Temple, have we not? You always 
spoke of me as your sister, Emanuel; hut you 
seem to have kept something from me which you 
would not have kept from your sister, and you 
allowed me once to exliibit myself in a very ridi- 
culous light." 

" Lilla, my dear girl, indeed there was nothing 
to tell. I did not know myself who she was ; who 
Madame." 

" I don't want to know your secrets, Emanuel, 
and don't look put out about it, for I am not at 
all angry, and I think you showed only your good 
sense in not trusting so silly a creature as I have 
always proved myself to be." 



120 MY exe:\iy's paitghtkr. 

'"."Tiu'loocl, indeed, Lilla, you don't understand 
nio : you cau'i understand why I eould not be as 
frank with vou as I oouhl have wished to he." 

.'Ph^ise let us not talk any more of that just 
now, I am i^'oing" away. Vhuanm^ : I must go 
from this pku'o. I must try to do something for 
my mother, and make a home for her. 0. she 
has need o( every help, and she has no one hut 
me . no one. Everyone despises her . and us 
both . and \ don't wonder." 

.. Yonr uncle. Lilla : does he know?" 

"IMy nnole ? Yes. he does. He scolded me 
to-day. and . and told me we were a disgrace to 
him : and so we are. And do you know what he 
otYered. Emanuel? He olVered to take me into 
his house and keep me like a lady . like one of 
his own danghters. he said . if I would leave my 
mother, and promise not to see her any more, 
except once a month, or something of that kind. 
My poor dear, loving, foolish old mother! She 
has made a slave of herself all her life for me ; 
and little return I ever gave her." 

'. ^Vllat did vou tell him'?" 



A EliEAKING-UP. 121 

'' Well, I toM liim A\-liat ho vrill rememljer. 
I flashed out upon him, and told him just what 
I felt ; not a word did I spare. I told him I 
scorned his money and his kindness, and that, 
please God, I would stand by my mother while 
she lived ; and I am afraid 1 added that perhaps 
some day one of his own daughters might he 
invited to leave lam, and might give a different 
answer from mine. He was quite white with 
anger. I didn't care . I don't care. I am glad 
I spoke out ; it did me good : perhaps it will do 
him good."' 

'.'Lilla, I always thought you had a fine nohlc 
nature ; now I know it." 

"Xohle nature I nonsense. I am not going 
to desert my poor mother . now especially . that's 
all. But I waited up to tell you all this ; and I 
want you not to say anything to her about the 
condition my uncle offered, for I haven't told her 
that; she would worry me to death, poor soul, 
about sacrificing myself, and stuff. And I want 
you to back me up ; to say that eveiwthing I do 
is right and wise, and for the best, and all that. 



122 MY enemy's daughter. 

You will do this, Emanuel, like a kind, dear 
fellow, will you not ? And don't speak of any- 
thing else, anything you may know or guess, or 
that . 0, you must understand me ; but just tell 
her you think I am doing the most sensible thing 
possible in going to Paris." 

"But, Lilla, tell me . do let me ask you . 
why are you doing this ? Do confide in me. 
You may do so ; I know all." 

" All ?" she said, flushing up. 

"Yes, my dear, all. I know, for instance, 
what happened to-day. I knew it was coming. 
Now, why can you not stay and make Ned Lam- 
bert . that true-hearted, manly, clever fellow . as 
happy as he asks to be ?" 

"Emanuel, you have said you know all. If 
so, you know my reason. I cannot bring dis- 
graceful vexation on Edward Lambert; and to 
marry me just now would bring disgrace on any 
man. 0, I am so unhappy, so wretched; and I 
have been crying all the evening. I have been 
silly and deceived all my life through, and filled 
up with foolish and false notions and expecta- 



A BREAKING-UP. 123 

tions; and at last I know the whole truth. It 
is enough to crush anyone." And the poor girl 
burst into tears. 

" Have you told Lambert your reason," I 
asked ; " the reason of your leaving London ?" 

" I have not, I have not ; and I am ashamed 
to say that I have still idle pride enough left in 
me to conceal the truth from him." 

"But really, Lilla, I must ask you . is the 
thing so bad as all this? Are you not far too 
sensitive ? You can't suppose Ned Lambert could 
be affected for a moment in his feelings towards 
you by the fact that . " I stopped, rather embar- 
rassed. What was I to say of her father ? This, 
of course, was the obstacle and the disgrace of 
which she had spoken. 

"No, Emanuel, I don't. Ah, I know him too 
well; and for that very reason I will not allow 
him to be victimised." 

"But would you not let him judge for himself?" 

" No, Emanuel, no, no. Don't speak of it to 
me, pray don't. And 0, I beseech of you, I im- 
plore of you, don't tell him ! Don't let us seem 



124 MY enemy's daughter. 

disgraceful in his eyes. Listen : I have not been 
brought up well, Emanuel; I need not tell you 
that. I have not been made to care much for 
truth and religion, and anything of that sort; 
and I am not religious, or particularly good : 
but somehow I never did see this so plainly as 
of late, when I came to contrast myself with 
others . and with him. I don't think I should 
have been fit for Edward Lambert at my very 
best. I don't think poor mother and myself are 
much the sort of people to make a very delight- 
ful home for so good and noble a man. But 
this last thing I have come to know has decided 
me. Emanuel, have you seen my father ?" 

" I have. I have known him for some time." 

" And known who he was?" 

''Yes, Lilla." 

" Yes. And you kept it to yourself, because 
you did not wish to shame me ?" 

''No, Lilla; because I did not wish to pain 
you when there seemed no need of it, or no good 
likely to come of your knowing it. It does not 
shame you ; it cannot." 



A BREAKING-UP. 125 

" Not in your eyes, perhaps, for you know us ; 
and you know it is no fault of ours . at least, of 
mine. Not in your eyes." 

''Nor, surely, in liisJ" 

*' no, no ; I know that. But it would bring 
on him endless vexation and humiliation ; and I 
should be a scandal to him, even though he did 
not say it, or think it; and I cannot bring him 
or myself to such a pass. I could bring him 
nothing but disgrace, and that I won't bring him ; 
I think too highly of him. I feel that I am doing 
right ; and I think it is the first time in my life 
I ever resolved upon doing anything just because 
it was right. I have been silly and frivolous 
enough ; but I have my feelings, Emanuel, and 
my sense of honour, and my pride, like other 
people." 

" Lilla, my own," called her mother's voice 
from below, "it is late, my dear, and you ought 
to be in bed." 

" Yes, mother, I daresay I ought ; and accord- 
ingly I am not." 

Lilla was going to make . nay, actually had 



126 MY enemy's daughter. 

made, and in very spirited fashion too . a great 
sacrifice for her mother, but she could not keep 
from occasionally snubbing her. Good Mrs. Lyn- 
don was sometimes a trying personage to a quick, 
impatient young woman ; indeed, she was one of 
those good people who seem made to be snubbed. 
She came up herself presently, looking very 
shaky and flustered. 

"We're going away; we're all breaking-up, 
Emanuel," she said, looking inquiringly at me. 
"Lilla's going in the morning." 
" I know, Mrs. Lyndon." 
"It seems sudden, don't it? And we were 
just getting all to rights here, after such trouble 
and difficulty and work. But Lilla thinks it's for 
the best." 

" Yes, mamma ; we've argued the point already 
quite enough, I think." 

" She won't give in to her uncle, Emanuel ; 
although you know that he's been so good to 
her." 

" Stufl", mamma ! Now do stop, there's a good 



A BREAKIXG-UP. 127 

"And you've heard something else, Emanuel? 
. ^Have you told him, Lilly ?" 

" yes, mamma . yes." 

** She's refused him, although he is so good 
and kind, and so fond of her. Of course he is not 
what I should have liked, and what I should once 
have thought only right and proper for Lilla to 
have. She ought to be a lady, and of course Mr. 
Lambert isn't the sort of person one had a right 
to expect. dear, there was a time when, if any- 
one had told me that a person in his position 
would have thought of asking my Lilla to marry 
him, I shouldn't have thought he could be in his 
senses . I shouldn't indeed ! But you know, after 
all, people must yield to their circumstances ; and 
what I say is, I never knew a better or more worthy 
young man . and doing so well too. I do think 
it's a pity ; but Lilla's so wilful." 

"I suppose I was always wilful, mamma, 
wasn't I ?" 

"Yes, my own, that you were; and such a 
troublesome girl, many a time." 



128 MY enemy's daughter. 

"Yet you were always fond of me, you dear 
old woman." 

" Fond of you, my love ? Ah, fond is no 
name for it !" 

''Well, then, you will continue to be fond of 
me still, though I am more wilful now than ever. 
Besides, if I was always so, it isn't much use 
trying to be anything else now. ' What's bred 
in the bone,' mother ; and all the rest of it." 

Lilla was doing her best to carry it lightly, 
saucily off. The effort was not very successful. 

"Have you advised at all with Mr. Temple, 
Lilly?" And the mother threw an appealing 
glance at me. 

"I have, mamma." And the daughter threw 
an appealing glance at me. 

" Yes, Mrs. Lyndon, I have talked with Lilla. 
I did at first speak to her as you have done ; that 
is, to something like the same effect. I did think 
she might have married poor Ned Lambert at once, 
instead of postponing it. But I must say that she 
has spoken to me in a way which shows me that 
she has clear and strong reasons, and a feeling 



A BREAKIXG-UP. 129 

that we must not try to counteract. You must let 
her have her way, Mrs. Lyndon. I think we may 
trust her that she is guided right ; and I hope and 
believe I shall see her and you, and Ned Lambert 
too, happy, quite happy, before long." 

*'If it please God," said Mrs. Lyndon with a 
half- querulous sigh, Avhicli seemed to say that one 
couldn't always rely upon Providence to do exactly 
the sort of thing one wanted. 

^'You don't mean to see him again, Lilla ?" 1 
said, turning back as 1 was about to leave them for 
the night ; " not in the morning, l)efore you go ?" 
*' no, Emanuel ; it would do no good. 1 
don't want him to know until after I am gone. 
You will give him this little packet, please, from 
me ; it's only a poor little keepsake ; and you 
may tell him, if vou like, how sorry I was for go- 
ing; and you will put it in the best light you can, 
and make him see that it can't be helped. And 
you may tell him, if you like, of my gratitude to 
him, and . and . of my unchanging love." 

She fairly l)roke down at last into sol;s, and 
signed for me to leave her. 

VOL. II. K 



130 MY enemy's daughter. 

I left lier with deep regret, and svmpatlij, and 
pity. I confess it seemed to me that she was 
making a needless and quixotic sacrifice ; but from 
her point of view what she Avas doing was clearly 
right, and I could not but admire the quiet, reso- 
lute spirit with which she had chosen her way and 
walked whither it led her. I felt in this regard a 
thorough admiration for her. A sort of pariah 
myself, I always feel a special and natural pride 
in any brave good deed done by one of my caste. 
It is the business and the inheritance of the Brah- 
mins to be brave and good, and to think no little 
of their own bravery and goodness ; and they do 
not want the admiration of such as I am. But 
when the courage and virtue are shown by one of 
those from whom we do not expect anything of the 
kind, then I am inclined to wave my cap and 
cheer. We hear of all sorts of self-sacrifice in 
books, and even in real life ; some of it of a very 
stony, implacable, and self-tormenting kind, which 
I at least cannot find it in my heart either to love 
or pity, but only shudder at, and pray to be kept 
for ever out of the presence of its silent icy rebuke 



A BREAKING-UP. 131 

and self-assertion. Self-sacrifice is indeed the 
model and pet virtue of the age ; and some of us 
are always inclined to rehel against models and 
23ets. Moreover, it is almost always exhibited by 
somebody from w^hom it is naturally to be expected 
. the noblesse of whose virtue, personal and in- 
herited, obliges its owner to such deeds of devo- 
tion ; it is done under the impulse of lofty religious 
inspirings, it is preached up by good and author- 
ised preachers, it is sanctified with holy texts, it 
is illumined and encouraged by hopes of everlast- 
ing reward and the eternal society of harps and 
seraphs. My poor little London pagan had no such 
stimulants and encouragements. Her sacrifice 
was not made as a slave performs a duty, or as a 
courtier denies himself now that he may have the 
greater thanks hereafter. It w^as altogether the 
impulse of native honour and nobleness and love . 
above all, love. It thought of no reward, here or be- 
yond ; it was all sacrifice. It was foolish, perhaps, 
in one sense ; but there are some of us in whose 
eyes even Virtue looks most attractive when she 
is a little irregular and unorthodox in her ways. 



CHAPTEK V. 

'* THOU HAST IT, ALL !" 

So our dreams liad come true at last ; our wildest 
hopes had heen realised. We had hoth succeeded. 
Christina and I sang together during the remain- 
der of that season at the hest house. She was 
the great success and idol of the hour ; T was, in 
my own way, a success too . greater than I had 
ever expected to he. Just think of the changes 
time had worked for me with unthought-of liher- 
ality. Only a little while ago I was poor . horri- 
hly, hitterly poor ; a man to whom the fare of a 
hansom was an expense to he avoided and fought 
against. Now I had, for a hachelor, plenty of 
money, and spent sovereigns heedlessly where 
even two years ago I dared not lay out shillings. 
Now I had a name that was known pretty well 
everyy\diere . that is, where people talk about sing- 



*' THOU HAST IT, ALL I 133 

ing. Now I was ouce more restored to the society 
of Christina. We sang together; our naraes were 
constantly and of necessity coupled. I saw her 
almost every night. We were apj^lauded together; 
I led her hefore the curtain at every recall; I 
gathered up her bouquets for her. On the stage 
I was always associated with her ; oif the stage T 
could see her when I pleased. We were now in 
very reality swimming together, and side by side 
. the success we used to dream of and rave about 
years ago. 

Was ever mortal so blessed of the gods as I ? 

Let me answer in a sentence. My life was 
unhappy, and I was sinking every day in my own 
estimation deeper and deeper ; I was becoming 
demoralised. 

I have already said that during my long 
separation from Christina her memory was my 
preservation from anything mean or low or de- 
grading. How did it happen that association 
with her now seemed to produce just the oppo- 
site effect ? 

To begin with, I could not any longer under- 



134 MY enemy's daughter. 

Btand either her or myself. She was no longer 
my Lisette. All the freshness of her nature 
appeared to have been washed away. Her soul 
seemed somehow to have contracted; the brand 
of the world w as on her. The bloom was off her 
cheek, and, as I believed, off her heart. Yet she 
fascinated me as she did others ; and I clung to 
her, and walked in her shadow, and was unhappy 
without her, and unhappy and disappointed with 
her. 

Except when on the stage. There, and only 
there, I saw my Christina. I have avoided, and 
shall avoid, a cold and lengthened description of 
her as a singer and an actress. But she delighted 
me, and, I could have almost said, she surprised me. 
Her voice was as it had always been, more remark- 
able perhaps for its clear, bright, vibrating strength 
than for the softer and sweeter tones ; but the 
great charm about her was the perfect unity and 
Jiarmony of her acting and her singing. She did 
not quite belong to that grand and classical line of 
{fingers which seems for the present to have closed 
with Grisi ; neither had she anything in common 



'* THOU HAST IT, ALL !'' 135 

with the school of the prett}^ musical hummiug- 
top, the warbling butterfly, which is just now our 
pet ideal. Her voice and her style expressed ro- 
mantic, not classic, passion and love and tragedy. 
She was always a Avoman ; never a goddess. But 
her whole soul was infused into what she sang. 
She was to the grand classic singers what A'ictor 
Hugo is to Eacine. Into mere piquancy and 
prettiness she never degenerated. 

I admired her ^i-eatlv, whollv. In evervthinir 

O 4. -" 4/ I O 

she did there was the unmistakalde presence of 
genius. But when I strove to criticise her calmly, 
putting myself into the position, as well as I could, 
of the average public, and asked myself, *' AVill 
lier fame last'?" I was forced to reply, " I do not 
think so." 

In the first place, she was not careful of her 
voice. She exerted its powers with a generous 
carelessness, a splendid indiscretion. Each time 
she appeared on tlie stage she seemed to havt; 
said to herself, '' This night I A\ill do my very 
best, no matter A\hat my state of health (jr 
strength : let to-morrow care for itself." 



136 MY enemy's daughter. 

But, again, I doubted for the permanence of 
lier noble, natural, thrilling style in its hold on 
public favour. It was not the lofty, the goddess- 
like, the terrible, which made other great singers 
irresistible in their j^ower ; and it had nothing ta 
do with the saucy fascinations and joyous little 
nightingale trillings which set vulgar audiences,, 
no matter how high their social rank, into ecsta- 
sies. There was neither terror nor trick about it- 
It was difficult for me to criticise even thus 
hr, for I hung upon her voice and her successes 
like the most devoted lover. The first time we 
sang together I was almost indifferent about my 
own success, so completely was I wrapped up in 
hers. 

On the stage, then, she was all I could have- 
expected, the very danger which I feared for her 
coming only from the truth and integrity of her 
artistic genius. But the moment she ceased to- 
be a lyric queen and became Christina Eeich- 
stein . I could hardly now call her, even to my- 
self, Christina Braun . she disappointed me while 
she most fascinated me. I had to go away from 



" THOU HAST IT, ALL I 137 

her in order to bring tlie true Christina back into 
my mind. 

She coquetted with anj-bod}^ everyl^ody, who 
paid her homage . with, for a long time, one ex- 
ception, myself. Of course I hung on to her like 
an idiot ; I did indeed still passionately love her ; 
])ut it was a long time before one glance of en- 
couragement invited me on. Understand that 
this in itself was often to me a flattering and a 
maddening incitement. She seemed, I sometimes 
thought, to hold me apart from all the rest . 
seemed to say, ^'I may flirt with others and play 
with them, but not with you, We stand on dif- 
ferent ground. We must he lovers . or nothing." 
I now believe Christina acted in this from a high 
deliberate motive ; I do believe she thought the 
memory of our past too sacred to be profaned 
by any contact with the commonplace and frivo- 
lous flirtations in which it was sometimes her 
humour to indulge. Then I thought, according 
to my mood, that she was resolved to repel me 
utterly, or resolved to make me her slave ; and I 
sometimes adored and sometimes hated her. 



1.38 MY enemy's daughter. 

Perhaps I might have takeu heart of grace 
and broken loose altogether from her, and stood 
up and been free, hut for the expression with 
which I sometimes . only sometimes . caught her 
eye resting on mine. Old, sweet, sad memories 
seemed to shine in it, and to bring our hearts 
together for the moment once again. This hap- 
pened more often when we were on the stage than 
at any other time. Always the moment my eye 
thus met hers she turned away, and her expres- 
sion and manner changed ; and when next I met 
her she was sure to be colder than ever to me, 
and perhaps to be more ostentatiously friendly 
than ever to somebody else whom I especially 
disliked. There were many whom I disliked on 
her account, believing one week that she surely 
cared about them, and finding out the week after 
that she held them in the most absolute and 
supreme indifference. 

Thus, then, the season mooned away. Thus 
it came about that, though I had succeeded, was 
the tenor of the season, and at the best house ; 
eang with Christina Reichstein, helped towards 



" THOU HAST IT, ALL I 139 

her success, and shared it ; saw her frequently off 
the stage, . she received her friends at her lodg- 
ings in Jermyn-street on Sunday evenings, and 
one or two off afternoons in the week, . was a 
constant visitor, and perhaps ought to be very 
happy . I was distracted, disappointed, and miser- 
able. 

Wliat, on earth, was the reason why I so 
hated to see Christina acting and singing with 
anybody but myself '? What was it to me ? 
Nevertheless I always felt keenly annoyed when 
the chances of the situation flung her literally 
into the arms of some stout basso, who probably 
felt no emotion whatever except anxiety about his 
own part, and its effect on the audience. She 
acted with such genuine and artistic effect, that 
I sometimes became ridiculously annoyed. She 
clasped her operatic fathers and lovers with a 
clasp apparently as fervent and impassioned as if 
they were genuine fathers or lovers, or only lay 
and feelingless figures. She never thought of 
them at the moment, as I knew well who had to 
embrace her publicly a dozen times a-week per- 



140 MY enemy's daughter. 

liaps, and knew liow utterly absorbed in ber lyri- 
cal art, and bow absolutely indifferent to me, slie 
was all tbe time. 

It would be idle to deny tbat stories of ber 
past life were wbispered about wbicb it was tor- 
ture to bear, even tbougli I knew tbat tbere was 
no word of trutb in tbem. I once got into a silly 
row witb a fellow wbo named tbe very year in 
Avbicb be knew, be said, tbat sbe was living au 
cinqnu'ine in a bouse in tbe Quartier Latin, witb 
a young artist wliom sbe afterwards tbrew over, 
and wbo accordingly took to absintbe, and finally 
to tbe Montmartrc Cemetery. Tbe story-teller 
fixed upon tbe very year before Cbristina's fatber 
died, and wben sbe was living peacefully and 
working bard, poor girl, in our quiet old town by 
tbe sea . before sbe bad set foot on Paris pave- 
ment. I liardly ever indeed beard any story, 
good or bad, told about ber wbicb my own per- 
sonal and certain knowledge did not enable me 
to contradict. One reason for tins was, tbat so- 
far as ber recent years . ber years of growing 
celebrity . were concerned, nobody bad a word to 



!" 141 

say against her. Her life had left no opening for 
suspicion, or even for calumny. But a beautiful 
and attractive woman in that line of life, who has 
cruelly sinned by her sudden and signal success, 
must have done wrong some time or other, you 
know ; and as there is nothing to be said against 
her during the years which were passed under our 
own observation and those of our associates, the 
inference is obvious . the error must have been 
committed in the obscurer years before we came 
to know anything of her. Therefore three out of 
every four of the stories whispered about her re- 
ferred to those dear old early days when her life 
surely was one of the calmest and purest that 
even a German girl could live. 

There was apparently some mystery about her 
marriage. That she had been married appeared 
to be certain : most people said she was a widow. 
Ned Lambert did not know ; he said he always 
took it for granted that she had married the 
Italian who had had her educated and In'ought 
out, and that he had died, or they had separated 
somehow. This was the only scrap of mystery 



142 MY enemy's daughter. 

. if it was mystery . about her; and she lived 
an open, frank, and fearless life, absolutely like 
one who had nothing to conceal. A steady, 
elderly German woman always lived with her; a 
w^oman of some intelligence and education, with 
a great eye for artistic make-up, and a good 
business memory, . a sort of compound of poor 
relation, paid companion, and lady's maid. 

Christina never talked to anybody of her past 
life, or indeed much of herself at all. She had 
a great many friends, and was free, friendly, and 
joyous with most of them. 

I made slight allusions several times to the 
old town of her early life and mine ; but she did 
not seem inclined to go back to any such memo- 
ries, although she showed not the slightest em- 
barrassment on the subject. Once, at last, when 
I had again made allusion to it, she seated her- 
self at the piano and sang, as her only answer . 
I believe to an air of her own composition . a 
little ill-humoured ballad by a German poetess, 
whose name I now forget, expressing entire dis- 
regard and contempt for all the associations of 



143 

the poetess's native town and early days, except 
for the memory of an old tree which pleasantly 
shaded her childhood. I ceased after that to say 
any word which might remind her of that past 
from which she had evidently made up her mind 
to be wholly severed. 

What I detested most was to see her haunted 
by the presence of Mr. Lyndon, M.P. He was 
always in attendance on her ; and I hated him. 
He ignored my existence when he could; I avoided 
meeting him when I could. There was some- 
thing about his manner to me which was always 
strangel}' irritating; all the more so because there 
was nothing in it on which a man could reason- 
ably found any cause of offence. His bearing 
ever seemed to say, '' You are not a person to 
be received by me as an equal. I know what 
you were, and that is what I always choose 
to think you. Others may regard you as a suc- 
cessful artist, and so, being like myself professed 
patrons of art, may admit you to their intimacy. 
I don't choose to see your success, or to care 
about it. You may be tolerated by Madame 



144 MY enemy's daughter. 

Reiclistein ; that is no reason why you should 
be tolerated by me. I may make myself a slave 
to her openly and ostentatiously ; that is no 
reason why I should be so condescending to //o/^." 
I am afraid there was something mean in my 
dislike of him ; my detestation of his cold arro- 
gance, his insolent money-pride, his bearing even 
among those of our artist-circle whom he specially 
favoured. His very homage to Christina I thought 
had something offensive in its ostentation. It 
always seemed to say, " Behold what so great 
and grand a personage as 1 can do for beauty 
and art. I can come down from my serene re- 
spectability and be the cavalier in service of a 
singing- woman . ' ' 

Christina, however, did not seem to regard 
his attentions in that light. She encouraged him, 
flattered him, trifled with him, coquetted with 
him ; sometimes had long and serious talks with 
him in the corners of crowded rooms. He took 
her to the Ladies' Gallery to hear the del)ates 
on nights when there was no opera. He hardly 
ever spoke himself, or intended to do so ; but 



145 

he was a steadfast Whig party-man ; and people 
said ministers thought a great deal of him, and 
that he might have been in office if he liked. 
He was often on the platform . sometimes in the 
chair . at Bible-society meetings and missionary 
meetings; and he was dead against opening places 
of amusement . or even the British Museum . 
on Sundays. He had his vices, but they were 
very quiet and decorous. His looks and his ways 
with women . the women I usually saw him with 
. had a cold, consuming sensuousness which I 
thought detestable. He had been married twice, 
and now had long been a widower ; and he had 
the repute of being the very best of fathers, 
especially devoted to his youngest daughter, who 
never thwarted him, as her rigidly religious sisters 
did, on the score of his operas and his singers 
and his liking for the ballet. I never could quite 
understand how a man could be greatly devoted 
to his daughter, and wholly unscrupulous as re- 
garded her sex in general. But it seemed Mr. 
Lyndon was so. People admired him for the 
former peculiarity, and thought none the worse 

VOL. II. L 



146 MY enemy's daughter. 

of him for the latter. He was commonly set down 
as an excellent man, of great ability and influ- 
ence ; and most persons paid court to him ac- 
cordingly. 

He was, I discovered, a great patron of Ee- 
volution. Kefugees from disturbed continental 
countries were constantly seeking him out and 
being taken up and patronised by him. Chris- 
tina too seemed always interested in that sort of 
thing ; and they evidently used to have semi- 
official conferences about it. Observing this, I 
of course began to detest and despise all conti- 
nental refugees ; to regard them as humbugs, 
like Mr. Lyndon, and to think oppressed nation- 
alities nuisances and shams. I could not believe 
that Christina really cared much about such busi- 
ness ; and for Mr. Lyndon I set it down at once 
that he had no other interest in it but that it 
ministered to his own consequence and import- 
ance. In fact, he was a patron, and only kind 
or even civil to those who approached him as 
such, . except of course women, who, when they 
were good - looking, carried claims of their own 



" THOU HAST IT, ALl!'' 147 

about with them which commaucled them to Mr. 
Lyndon's attention. Moreover, he seemed to 
take a sort of pleasure in watching the smallness 
of human nature even in those he paid court to ; 
and he laughed a short and sharp laugh over any 
small humiliation to which his closest favourite 
might happen to he put. 

Thus the man presented himself to my ob- 
servation. I never knew anything worse of him 
than just what I have told or indicated; but I 
strongly disliked him ; and as, thank Heaven, I 
never approached him as one approaches a patron, 
or recognised his right of patronage, he never 
Mas anything better than coldly civil to me . and 
not even that when he could with decency avoid 
it. If afterwards I may have pained or injured 
the man, not quite without malice, I may at 
least explain why it was that from the first and 
to the last I detested and despised him. 

Christina sometimes gave suppers at her 
rooms (please to remember that I am describing 
the ways of ten or a dozen years ago), and I 
used to meet some of her sister-singers there, 



148 MY enemy's daughter. 

and one or two militaiy men, and a few of the 
leading critics, whom no actor or singer is ever 
indifferent about conciliating. I was generally 
found at these gatherings, chiefly because, al- 
though I hated to be there, I could not help 
myself, and had not the spirit to stay away. 
They seemed to me entirely frivolous, hollow, 
heartless. Christina herself appeared to have 
sunk quite down to the level of her surround- 
ings. The conversation was for the most part 
mere gabble and gossip and satire. Everyone 
paid court to the ruling artists who happened 
to be present by sneering at their absent rivals. 
Hostile critics were denounced and no doubt 
calumniated. Stories were told of the presents 
made by such a tenor to such a critic to explain 
the tremendous puffs with which this or that 
journal, defying all audiences and musical science 
and common sense, flamed in the forehead of 
the morning sky. Counter - insinuations were 
made about the diamond-rings, and other temp- 
tations yet more bewitching, with which this or 
that soprano or contralto had vainly sought to 



" THOU HAST IT, ALL!" 149 

coiTTipt the impregnable honour of another critic 
who happened to be one of the company. 

The literary gentlemen did not appear to have 
much more esjmt de corps than the singers. If 
the latter babbled all manner of hissing stories 
against their rivals, the former listened com- 
placently and even assentingly to the keenest 
insinuations against the honour and the trust- 
worthiness of brother critics. The critics seemed 
to have an enormous estimate of their own power ; 
and not an unreasonable estimate, judging from 
the court paid to them by those who ought to Ije 
best able to appreciate their influence. No one 
seemed to think much about the public at all. It 
was quite a matter between the artists and the 
critics. If these approved of and wrote up those, 
the thing seemed to be done. 

From my own point of view it did not thus 
appear to me. I had always relied on the audi- 
ence rather than on the critics, and indeed had 
been somewhat ignored by the latter. I owe 
them no ill-will on that account. Frankly, they 
were right. Even then I had arrived at a very 



150 MY enemy's daughter. 

fair estimate of my own merits. 1 knew that I 
liacl a voice and nothing else. My soul was not 
in the art ; and I felt satisfied that some time or 
other this must be found out by the public. I 
was quite aware that I had not one ray of the 
inspiration which lighted the soul and the eyes 
of Christina Reichstein in some of her great 
parts. I knew that I w^as little better than a 
musical automaton ; but I was a success with 
the audiences for all that. The opera-house and 
the concert-room filled for me ; and had my voice 
only endured I must have made a fortune. The 
critics could not do much to serve me ; and they 
seemed rather too puzzled by my success to go 
boldly in for attacking me. 

One evening I remember in particular. Some 
dozen or so supped at Christina's rooms. It so 
happened that this night she took hardly any 
notice of me, certainly distinguished me in no 
way from the most commonplace of her ordinary 
visitors. Mr. Lyndon sat at her right hand, and 
paid her devoted and undisguised attention, which 
she took with a quiet assent that half-maddened 



" THOU HAST IT, ALl!" 151 

me. On lier left sat a distinguished critic and 
litterateur J wlio liad written successful plays and 
successful novels, published capital translations 
of various foreign works, edited scientific volumes, 
compiled biographies, and even varied the more 
laborious occupations of his life by appearing oc- 
casionally as an amateur actor. He had an as- 
tonishing power of conversation ; he could talk 
with marvellous fluency and vivacity on all sub- 
jects, and almost in all European languages. To 
this gentleman Christina always intimated that 
she owed a great deal. He had been, it would 
appear, one of the first to note and to welcome 
her success. He was too, as I afterwards heard 
from her many a time, one of the few who under- 
stood that she was something more than a mere 
singer. Indeed, the criticisms he had published 
about her did show a deep and genuine apprecia- 
tion of all those qualities of her voice, her lyrical 
style, her dramatic power, which were most truly 
great and peculiar. There was nothing in him 
which was not apparently sincere and manly. It 
did not even then surprise me that he had mani- 



152 MY enemy's daughter. 

fested no particular admiration for my genius and 
merits. He had taken my success, such as it was, 
quietly, and as one whom nothing on the part of 
the public could astonish ; and he had said no- 
thing ill-natured, or satirical, or even distinctly 
depreciatory of me, only said just as little of me 
as might be . habitually recorded the fact that I 
won applause, and so let me go my way. 

Ordinarily I should have felt little of anger 
towards anybody who, like myself, did not think 
me a great singer. But this particular night I 
felt altogether out of humour with myself, and 
naturally therefore inclined to be put easily out 
of humour with everybody else. I was beginning 
of late (for reasons to be more fully explained 
presently) to doubt myself, to suspect that I was 
capable of playing a mean and ignoble part, to 
look on myself as capable of servile love and 
low-minded rancour. I was beginning to be 
ashamed of my slavish hanging after Christina's 
skirts, and to feel abashed and perplexed by 
other weaknesses too. I thought I saw myself 
sinking, and that others must see it as well. So 



'* THOU HAST IT, ALL!" 153 

I came prepared, despising myself, to resent any 
slight from another. 

I soon hecame exasperated when I saw that 
to the critic I have spoken of, Madame Keichstein 
ostentatiously paid special attention this night. 
She flirted with him in the most fearless and de- 
termined manner ; it appeared to me, with some 
definite purpose : whether for the discomfiture of 
myself or Mr. Lyndon I could not determine. 
The critic, who had flirted douhtless with all the 
prima donnas of the previous ten years, entered 
very vivaciously into the game, and of course 
took it in precisely the spirit in which it was 
started. But I chose to he deeply offended ; and 
the more deeply I felt, the more deeply I drank 
for comfort and desperation. I paid extravagant 
attention to a little Frenchwoman (a new singer) 
heside me, who was herself drinking champagne 
with amazing zest. I either saw, or thought I 
saw, some smiles passing around at hoth of us, 
and especially it seemed to me that a look of 
surprise and contempt came up on the face of 
Christina's pet critic. Impelled by Heaven knows 



154 MY enemy's daughter. 

what idiotic notion, I jumped on my feet and pro- 
ceeded to address the astonished little company. 
I complained that I had heen insulted ; I poured 
out some frantic nonsense, especially composed 
of denunciations of critics and literary men. I 
saw Mr. Lyndon raise his double-eyeglass, survey 
me coolly for a moment, and then drop his glass 
and resume his conversation with his neighbour 
as if nothing I could do ought to be surprising 
or worth any particular notice. Looks of anger, 
contempt, pity, or disgust were on every face, and 
one I could see even then wore an expression of 
such surprise and shame and sorrow, that it 
might almost have brought me back to my 
senses. 

I believe I displaced the mirth, broke the 
good meeting. But I really am not quite cer- 
tain how the matter ended, except that I was 
assisted to a cab by a brother artist and the 
very critic I had been so absurdly denouncing. 
And I have a pretty clear idea, as shame flashed 
a gleam of consciousness over me, that I heard 
the former say to the latter, "Never saw him 



" THOU HAST IT, ALL. 155 

like this before, I'm sure ; can't think what 
came over him. He is a very good fellow gene- 
rally, I can assure you.'* 

And the critic replied: "Yes; I have no 
doubt he is a good fellow, and he has an un- 
commonly fine voice ; but what a confounded 
fool he must be !" 



CHAPTER VI. 

SWEAKING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 

Bitterly and severely did I echo next morning 
the opinion of my friend the critic. What a con- 
founded fool I had made of myself ! was the first 
thought present to my mind. How she must 
have despised me ! How steadily I had been 
sinking of late ! This proof, the most grotesque 
and ridiculous humiliation I had ever been put 
to, was perhaps not the sharpest proof of a low- 
ered nature which pricked my conscience. 

For I had yet a conscience and a sense of 
honour. I have read somewhere a story of a 
prince to whom a loving fairy gave a magical ring, 
which was to be his guide and guard through 
life. Whenever he did wrong, the ring was to 
prick his finger . sharply, in proportion to the 
magnitude of his fault. He erred and erred ; was 



SWEAEING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 157 

pricked and pricked. At last lie could not stand 
the thing any longer ; and so he angrily plucked 
the ring off his finger and flung it away. For a 
while he was perfectly happy, and could do as he 
liked unpricked of conscience. But of course I 
need not say that he went to the bad utterly . 
unless, perhaps, the fairy came in and somehow 
redeemed him in the end. Now I had not thrown 
away my ring, and I felt its sharp pressure very 
keenly even if I had not conscience and spirit 
enough to do right and thus avoid its censure. 

Two things, at all events, I must do. I must 
make a humble apology to Christina, and another 
to Mr. Levison, the critic. The latter gave me 
no troubling thought ; I knew he would receive it 
like a gentleman, and, indeed, that he was not 
likely in any case to feel much about the matter. 
But to meet Madame Reichstein and talk of my 
shame to her was something quite different . 
something I dreaded. Perhaps I dreaded it none 
the less because I saw how altered were our rela- 
tions now ; and I expected from her none of that 
tender, forgiving interest with which women who 



158 MY enemy's daughter. 

care for us as lovers, or brothers, or friends, are 
only too happy to anticipate our penitence and 
cover our humiliation. 

It had to be done, however; and with an 
aching head and dogged heart I set about doing 
it. I lived now, since the Lyndon s had left Lon- 
don, in the same house with Edward Lambert. 
We had taken lodgings together in Brompton ; 
and though our hours and ways differed so much 
that I sometimes did not meet him for whole 
days together, we were still friendly as ever, with 
only one or two subjects on which we suspended, 
rather than withheld, reciprocal confidence. All 
this I shall presently come to ; for the moment I 
pass it by. 

This particular morning I was glad not to see 
him; I did not want to talk to anybody. I 
dressed myself as carefully and well as I could ; 
but it seemed, as I nervously and often scruti- 
nised my appearance, that I could not get a cer- 
tain dissipated and rowdy look out of my eyes 
and hair. All that tubbing, and sponging, 
and brushes, and pomade, and perfumery could 



SWEARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 159 

do was done energetically; but I still thought 
the rowdy look remained, like the blood-spots on 
Lady Macbeth's hands or Bluebeard's key. My 
soul sickened at the thought of breakfast. I re- 
jected eggs and toast and kidneys, and would not 
look at the Times. When something like a rea- 
sonable hour had approached, I started on my 
.errand, and walked to Jermyn-street. 

When I stood at the door, this soft and sunny 
noon, I could not but think of the drear and 
dripping night when, prouder of soul and purer 
of heart than now, I stood at this same door and 
nought Christina in vain. Since then I had many 
times crossed the threshold, but never sought to 
speak with her alone and face to face. If we were 
to speak together now, in a room alone, it would 
be for the first time since the night when she 
called a farewell to me, and the rose dropped from 
her bosom. 

I sent up my card, was invited to come up, 
and I found her alone. 

The room was small, elegant, with nothing 
even in the graceful carelessness of its appearance 



160 MY enemy's daughter. 

to remind one of the profession. Everything was 
quiet, unpretentious, and even homely - looking. 
Christina had been playing on the piano and sing- 
ing in a low tone as I came ; and when I entered 
the room she had just turned round and was ris- 
ing to meet me. She was dressed in a morning- 
robe of purple cashmere, or some such material, 
with a white rose in her bosom. The colour of 
the dress made her bright complexion, luxuriant 
fair hair, and deep dark eyes look even more 
striking and dazzling than they were wont to do, 
and her hair now fell around her as unconfined 
and careless as when it used to rouse the spinster- 
like anger of good Miss Griffin in the choir long 
ago. Pdsing from the piano she threw back her 
hair with one hand and mth an impatient toss of 
the head, and then held out her other hand to me. 
She scarcely looked up, and our eyes did not meet. 

"You see," she said with a smile, ''how en- 
tirely without ceremony I receive you. My hair is 
in terrible disarray; but if you will make such 
early morning calls, what can one do ?" 

" I ought to apologise to you for coming, and 



S^^'EARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 161 

I would do SO if I had not so mucli more serious 
an apology to make. I am ashamed of myself, 
Madame Eeichstein, and of the world ; and, most 
of all, of yoiiy 

" "Wliat an alarming preface ! ^Vhat have you 
done ?" 

"It is useless kindness, Madame Eeichstein, 
to profess ignorance. You know only too well 
what I have done to shame myself, and what I 
have come to apologise for. Don't, Christina . 
don't force me to think you have really lost 
all interest in me by telling me that you were not 
angry with me, or ashamed of me, for what hap- 
pened last night." 

I had till now been standing, and Christina 
had not left her music-stool. AMiile I was speak 
ing, she rose, and came towards me. 

" Emanuel," she said gravely, " I am glad to 
hear you speak in this way. I am glad indeed ; 
and I will not go on in the tone I tried to take. I 
loas angry with you for . for what happened last 
night. I was angry, and deeply pained, and 
ashamed . on your account. I could not recognise 

VOL. II. M 



162 MY enemy's daughter. 

you last night ; but I am glad to believe you could 
not recognise yourself, and my mind is much 
relieved. I have thought of it ever since; but 
now, if you bid me, I will think of it no more. 
You are not changed, Emanuel? Not really 
changed, I mean ? You have not allowed the 
world to corrupt you ? There was a word or two 
which used to be favourite with you once . about 
keeping the whiteness of the soul. You have 
kept the whiteness of your soul, nicht ivalir V 

She spoke with a friendly confiding tenderness 
and frankness, as unlike her ordinary manner 
now as my drunken display of the previous night 
could be to my penitent sadness of this morning. 

" I hope I have not changed wholly, Christina. 
I hope so. But times have changed, and most 
people round me ; and I sometimes think and fear 
that I have been allowing myself to sink into 
something of which once I should have been 
ashamed." 

She laid her hand gently on mine. 

** Emanuel, I too fear it. I have watched you 
closely . from friendship, believe me ; and I do 



SWEARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 163 

fear that you are allowing yourself to . well, not 
to improve." 

" Can you wonder at it ?" I interrupted her in 
bitter tone. "What have I to care for? Why 
should I care for myself ? If I have changed, have 
not you changed? Are you the same that you 
were ? Do I not see that you can fling yourself 
into a frivolous and foolish life ?" 

*' Do you want answers to all these questions, 
Emanuel?" 

*' No, I don't ; I have no right to ask them. I 
have nothing to do with your way of living, or 
your friends, or the people you allow to hang 
after you, or the reports that other people spread 
about . I want no answer, Christina ; but when 
you reproach me with having changed, and sunk, 
and all that, I can only . " 

" Tell me to look at myself, Emanuel, and 
bring my moral lessons to bear there, you were 
going to say." 

*' No, I was not going to say that, although . 
But I was not going to say it, indeed. I was only 
going to say that I never set up for anything, for 



164 MY enemy's daughter. 

great moral purpose, or nobleness, or virtue, or 
any of that sort of thing. I take my colour . 
most men do . from the hues of those around 
them. You, Christina, were my dream for long, 
long years ; and you know it. Well, I am awake ; 
and I can't pretend to be dreaming any more. We 
are all poor creatures, I suppose ; and I accept 
the situation, and don't set up to be any better 
than my neighbours. I am heartily ashamed of 
what I said and did last night, and I apologise 
profoundly for it. I offended you, and insulted 
your guests, and made a beast and a brute of my- 
self; and it is very kind of you to receive me at all 
after such a scandal. But for the rest I have not 
much to say. I have not improved of late ; and 
that's all." 

I could not keep back the bitterness of my soul ; 
it found relief, and I was not sorry. Christina 
did not wince, however ; no, not in the least. 

*' Emanuel, zwischen uns se'i Walirhclt. You 
remember the old scene in li)liigenia ? Between 
us be the truth ! You think I have greatly changed, 
and for the worse ?" 



SWEARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 165 

I made no answer. 

'' Come, speak out," she said impatiently. 
"You think I have become worldly and frivolous 
and cunning, don't you ?" 

" Sometimes I do, Christina." 

" I asked you when we met for the first time 
. I mean the first time since long ago . not to 
judge me merely from the outside. I don't show 
to advantage . and I don't always want to ; but I 
don't wish to lose your good opinion wholly, 
Emanuel ; the more as you seem to make my 
falling-off a sort of excuse for your own. Come," 
she said, and she sat in a chair and pointed me to 
another . '' come and tell me my faults. Be a 
friend, and speak out. I have spoken frankly to 

JOU." 

" To-day, just for this moment, you have." 
" To-morrow, perhaps, I shall be cold and 

vcareless and frivolous ; very likely I shall seem so. 

You, I might have thought, could judge a little 

better than by mere seemings. "Well, will you tell 

me my faults ?" 

** No ; and I have not been speaking of faults ; 



166 MY enemy's daughter. 

only of the change that seems to have come over 

you." 

"Then I will speak for you. You think I 
have no heart and no memory, and no care for 
anything but flattery and excitement ?" 

" I have lately thought so." 

"Then you are wrong, Emanuel; indeed, in- 
deed you are. I have a sort of part to play, and 
I must play it. I do not deny that I love praise 
and excitement; but I could have loved other 
things better; and I still am no more in heart 
what you commonly see me than I am Amina or 
Leonora." 

" Why do you keep that old man hanging after 
you ?" 

" I might reply by another question, and say, 
What right have you to ask ? I might evade the 
question for a moment, as most women would, I 
think, and innocently ask. What old man ? But 
I suppose of course you mean Mr. Lyndon. Well, 
Mr. Lyndon has long been an intimate friend of 
mine, and . " 

"And is likely soon to be more, people say." 



SWEAKING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 167 

" Do they ? How kind people are ! What do 
they say ?" 

** Well, five out of every six say you will marry 
him." 

She smiled. 

** Indeed ! And the sixth . who I suppose has 
reason to know hotter . what does he say on the 
subject ?" 

" Even he, I think, knows no particular reason 
to the contrary." 

" Do you know no reason to the contrary ?" 

*'None whatever." 

*'Then you know nothing of my life for the 
past few years ?" 

"Nothing. Except, of course, what all the 
world knows." 

She sighed audibly. 

"I am glad of it," she said; "you shall know 
it all some time . ^before long, perhaps, but not 
now. For a while, Emanuel, take me on trust; I 
am better than I seem. Listen, and I will speak 
to you as I never meant to speak to you again. 
Your good opinion is dear to me. Your friend- 



168 MY enemy's daughtek. 

ship I would have, if I could. Once, Emanuel, I 
loved you better than all things on earth, except 
. see how frank I am ! . except success." 

I could not repress a groan ; and I rose from 
my chair and turned partly away. 

" But I always dreamed of that success with 
you. And you loved me ; but not so deeply and 
wholly . no, don't speak; if I am stayed now I 
shall never be able to continue . not so deeply as 
I would have had. We went our ways, hoping to 
meet again before it should be too late. We did 
not so meet; it was too late. When I wrote to 
you in London, Emanuel, it was too late." 

"No, no, Christina; no, by Heaven! It was 
the idlest chance, the purest delusion, the error of 
of a kindly, well-meaning friend that made you 
think." 

"All that I have since learned, or guessed. 
But I did not and could not know it then; and 
you kept yourself hidden away until I hated you 
and myself for the unwomanly advance I had 
made, and the silence that followed it." 

" I never knew, I never dreamed, that Mdlle. 



S\VEARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 169 

Reiclisteiii was Cliristina Braun ; and I was poor 
and obscure and hopeless, a beggar mtliout a 
name." 

" Well, it is vain talking ; let all tliat be laid 
aside. It is now too late, and Providence lias 
kindly ordered it for tlie best. I liave only 
brought back all this that I may say one thing 
for myself. I have chosen another part in life, 
and I mean to play it faithfully and loyally to the 
end. Therefore, Emanuel, I have kept back from 
you, and received you not even as a friend. If we 
were friends, you might come to know in time why 
I do things which appear to you now strange. I 
cannot have you think badly of me. Your word, 
Emanuel ; can we be friends ?" 

She held her hand out frankly, and her eyes 
met mine. 

" You do not speak. Will you be my friend ? 
Your w^ord, and I shall expect that, once pledged, 
it shall be as your oath. Will you be my 
friend?" 

I could not answer for a moment ; I could not 
answer unconditionally at all. For half a life I 



170 MY enemy's daughter. 

had loved her; lately I had almost hated her. 
How could I in a moment promise to subside into 
pure and enduring friendship ? I saw that in her 
eyes there came a look of anxiety and pity and 
pathos. She leaned now on the chimneypiece 
and looked steadfastly at me. 

" Christina," I answered at last, and in tones 
that only struggled to be calm and clear, "I will 
do my best; I will indeed. That is my pro- 
mise." 

She held her hand out again, and I raised it 
and touched it with my lips. I noticed that it 
was the left hand, and I saw the plain hoop of 
gold on the third finger. 

Her eyes too fell upon it; and she coloured 
and looked embarrassed. She glanced at me 
doubtingly, inquiringly, as one who considers 
whether the time has not come to make some 
confession. 

I wish I had allowed her or encouraged 
her to speak; but I did not. I had little doubt 
that there was some painful story . I would 
not call it secret . connected with her past life; 



SWEARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 171 

either tliat she had lost by death a husband whom 
she loved, or had been separated from one who 
was not worthy of her. In either case I shrank 
with keen sensitiveness from provoking a confi- 
dence which must be painful. Despite my pledge 
of friendship just made, I could not speak to 
Christina of her husband. I rose to take my 
leave. 

" We understand each other, Emanuel, again, 
do we not ?" she asked hesitatingly. 

'* Better at least than before, Christina." 

"And you will not, I hope and pra}^, throw 
away your time and your prospects on . on folly 
and people unworthy of you." 

" Some kind friend, Christina, has evidently 
been telling good-natured tales of me." 

*' No ; but I have heard, and I have even my- 
self observed, things that grieved me." 

"Well, Christina, I mean to reform. I hope 
to become a model member of society ; almost, 
perhaps, like your friend Mr. Lyndon." 

"You talk lightly and bitterly. It pains me 
to hear you." 



172 MY enemy's daughter. 

"Forgive me; I will not talk lightly or 
bitterly if I can. I do mean to improve. I am 
not nearly so bad, Christina, as some of my 
friends or yours appear to think. But I am 
ashamed of myself; and I will try to take up 
again the broken threads of my life. I confess 
that I find life sometimes rather bitter and barren ; 
and I don't well know what particular gain one 
has from living and struggling at all." 

*' Nor I, Emanuel, sometimes. But we still 
live, my dear ; and we must do our best to make 
life worth having. Do you think life is more of a 
restraint and a disappointment to you than to me ? 
Do you think you have less to hope for or more to 
strive against in every way than I have ? Are you 
the only one who has to crush-down warm and 
dear feelings ? Ah, no, Emanuel ! There are 
others who are more tried, and have less chance 
of escaping. Hush ! . don't speak ; did you hear 
nothing ?" 

She went to the window and looked out. It 
opened casement-fashion, and I saw that she was 
about to throw it open and apparently to step out 



SWEARING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 173 

on the little balcony in front ; but slie cliecked 
herself, and after a mere glance into the street, 
drew cautiously back. Her face was very pale 
when she turned to me, and her eyes shone with a 
lustre the more striking. 

I was about to speak, but she raised her hand 
to enjoin silence. I remained silent, and without 
moving. The street outside was singularly quiet. 
It seemed as if sleeping in the hot glare of the 
sun. From where I stood I could see through the 
window only a part of the far side of the street. 
There was no life stirring there ; not even a 
hurdygurdy was heard. For the few seconds we 
remained silent not a cab rattled down the street. 
In the room nothing was heard but the ticking of 
the little gilt clock on the chimnej^^iece. When, 
as we stood and looked at each other, a piano- 
string suddenly snapped, the clang came so loud 
and sharp on the ear that Christina positively 
started. 

Then, in the silence which followed, I heard . 
just what I had heard before in fact, as Christina 
broke off our conversation . three bars of what 



174 MY enemy's daughter. 

seemed to be an operatic air, but wbicb was cer- 
tainly unfamiliar to me, whistled in the street 
below. The whistle was of a somewhat peculiar 
kind, shrill and sibilating; and the whistler 
stopped suddenly short at one particular note each 
time ; almost as a bird does which is trying to 
learn some air from its master, and cannot get 
over some difficult turn, and so stops and begins 
again. I marked all this now because my ears 
and senses were on the stretch for something ; 
otherwise I should never have paid any attention 
to it, or perhaps even been aware of the sound at 
all. It was, however, the only sound to be heard ; 
and it was clear that Christina Avas listening to it 
with all her ears. 

Her face, from paleness, had grown to a deep 
flush of excitement, and her lips quivered visibly. 
When the whistling had the second time reached 
the same note, she sighed audibly, as with pro- 
found resignation or profound relief, one could 
not tell which. 

** Has anything happened ?" I asked. 

*' yes ; something has happened. Some- 



SWEAEING ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP. 175 

thing very unexpected. I must ask you to leave 
me, Emanuel." 

*' Two words only. Nothing bad ?" 

*' No ; something good, very good. I did not 
expect it yet. I ought to be deeply thankful ; I 
am thankful. Good-morning, Emanuel. Please 
don't ask me any more ; and don't stay." 

She was all trembling, and quite eager and 
excited. 

I obeyed her and put no further questions, 
but hurried from the room. Just as I was 
leaving, her German companion or follower came 
in, looking excited too, but seemingly in a wholly 
joyous sense. She came like one who brings 
good news. 

When I reached the street, I could see nobody 
on either side of it who seemed likely to have 
been the mysterious whistler. A man was wheel- 
ing a barrowful of fruit, wrapped in blue papers, 
along towards the St. James's-street end. A 
policeman was tramping the other w^ay. A girl, 
with a roll of music in her hand, and petticoats 
high kilted, passed close to me. Other human 



176 MY enemy's daughter. 

beings near at hand I could not see. It did not 
seem likely that any one of those I had seen could 
have had the faculty of startling Christina by 
whistling the fag-end of a tune. 



CHAPTER VII. 

AN EXPLANATION. 

The conversation I had just had with Christina 
will help still further to explain a little of my 
past life. It was certain that I had degenerated 
since the renewal of our acquaintanceship. Life 
has to he got through somehow after the heaviest 
disappointment; and not often in real existence 
can we raise a Rolandseck over the wasted scene 
of frustrated love and ruined hope, and go and he 
pious and patient there. It was only after I had 
met Christina again that the full hitterness of the 
thought came to me that I had no longer any- 
thing to live for. While we were separated there 
was always an ohjoct, if not a hope. Now there 
seemed neither. I confess that I sank a little 
way into a sort of unmeaning joyless dissipation, 
for which I had naturally no taste, and into which 
VOL. II. N 



178 MY enemy's daughter. 

I could not by any possibility throw my soul. 
The champagne of the night and the headache of 
the morning just a little distracted me, and no 
more. Ned Lambert sometimes shook his honest 
head and tried a gentle laconic remonstrance ; 
with the usual effect. I have no doubt he spoke 
to Christina on the subject, and urged her to 
bring her influence to bear. Perhaps to this I 
owed the pledge of friendship we had just made. 

Anyhow, the pledge of friendship did not pro- 
cure me much more of Christina's society, or 
apparently of her confidence. There was perhaps 
a warmer pressure of the hand when we met ; and 
there was occasionally a deeper shade of interest 
and anxiety in her eyes as they rested on me for a 
moment. Sometimes I fear I only set this down 
to her dread on the score of my degenerating 
habits ; and I felt rather inclined to resent than 
to feel grateful for it. 

No explanation had come or suggested itself 
regarding her sudden emotion on the day when 
our ceremonial of friendship - vowing was so 
strangely interrupted. 



AN EXPLANATION. 179 

Mr. Lyndon of course often came to the Opera. 
One night, just about this time, I observed him 
enter the stalls rather late. He came in along 
with a tall, thin, dark-bearded, remarkable -looking 
man . a man with a high forehead, sloping rather 
back and seamed with premature wrinkles ; a man 
with a face which would have been stern and 
sharp in its expression but for a certain soft and 
melancholy sweetness in his liquid luminous eyes. 
There was something about this man's appearance 
which attracted me in an instant; and I could not 
help thinking it attracted Christina too, for I ob- 
served that from time to time she glanced under 
her eyes in the direction where he and Lyndon 
sat ; and she was too much of a true artist ever to 
think under ordinary conditions of sending her 
eyes roaming about the house in search of admi- 
ration. If you could have got a boxful of em- 
perors, Christina Reichstein would have scorned 
to sing at them. So I had some reason for silent 
surprise when I observed that she did now and 
then glance quietly in the direction where this 
man was sitting with his friend. He was, I per- 



180 MY enemy's daughter. 

ceived, usually very marked and emphatic in his 
applause. 

Mr. Lyndon and this man escorted Christina 
to her little brougham after the opera. Needless 
to say that I did not feel much inclined to obtrude 
myself on such company. Christina saw me, and 
called a friendly good-night, with two or three 
words added in German, which bade me see her 
as early as possible next day. Mr. Lyndon and I 
exchanged, as usual, a very cold salute. 

As I turned away I met a brother artist, whom 
I saw exchanging a salute a little more friendly 
with the dark and pale-faced stranger. 

*' Who's our friend?" I asked, nodding in the 
direction of the stranger, who had gone with Mr. 
Lyndon to the carriage of the latter. I threw an 
immense amount of scorn into my voice ; why, I 
don't know. He to whom I spoke was a French- 
man. 

'' But I have forgot his name. He is an Italian, 
. indeed, that goes without saying, . and he is 
going to be a lion of your salons here for a season, 
I am told. He is a patriot ; he is an escaped . " 



AN EXPLANATION. 181 

"Convict?" 

"Convict . yes; that is, Austrian convict, or 
at least, Austrian prisoner." 

" I tliouglit lie had a look of Toulon about 
him." 

"Nothing of the sort. You are not sympa- 
tJiiquc; nor I indeed, no more. He has escaped 
somehow from Spielberg, or death, or something, 
and he is going to agitate your country to take up 
arms for the independence of Italy. And she will ! 
yes ; England will spend all her moneys, and 
her powders and shots, and her cottons, just for a 
dream." 

"But this person?" 

"Well, that is all I know. He is a very dis- 
tinguished man . quite celebrated." 
"Whose name you have forgotten." 
"Yes, and of whom I never heard before." 
" How did you come to know him ?" 
" Madame Reichstein did me the honour to 
present me." 

" How does sJie know him ?" 

" 0, for that, my dear, you must not ask 



182 MY enemy's daughter. 

me. Perhaps your Lyndon has taken him in 
charge." 

"Ah, very hkely; he patronises illustrious 
foreigners a good deal." 

"But rather when they are in jupons than in 
pantaloons, is it not ? Where are you going ?" 

" Home, I think." 

" Kidiculous . at this hour ? Come and have 
a game of hilliards." 

" Thanks. not to-night." 

" Come at least and smoke a pipe." 

"No; I can't to-night." 

Indeed my pipe was quite put out for that 
evening. I cannot tell how it was that I came to 
associate the man I had seen in the stalls with 
the scene in Christina's room the other day ; hut 
I did so associate him in my mind at once. When, 
as she was leaving the theatre, she asked me to 
come and see her next day, . asked me in pressing- 
tones, and in German (we hardly ever spoke German 
to each other now), . I felt in some strange way 
my conjecture was confirmed. I went home moodily, 
expecting something painful, I hardly knew what. 



AN EXPLANATION. 183 

Christina received me very graciously wlien I 
Tisited her next morning . very graciously and 
sweetly. There was a pathetic, anxious sort of 
kindness about her manner which was not usual 
with her of late. She was embarrassed too, and 
her thoughts seemed dwelling on anything rather 
than the subject we first talked of. For a few 
minutes there was indeed an awkward pause every 
now and then in the conversation we carried on, 
as if each was expecting the other to put some 
question or begin some explanation. 

We spoke a few words about Ned Lambert and 
his love, and his separation from Lilla Lyndon, of 
which Christina appeared to know a good deal. I 
made some allusion to the one great cause of 
Lilla's resolution to leave London, and found that 
Christina seemed to understand or have guessed it. 

"That, too, I know," she said. "You speak 
of the wretched man, Stephen Lyndon?" 

" I do." 

" I did not know his real name or his real 
nature until lately." (Here she paused.) " But 
I don't want to speak of him just now. I have 



184 iMY enemy's daughter. 

sent for you for another purpose, Emanuel." An- 
other pause . and then she said : "I am going 
to introduce you to-day to a man whose friend I 
want you to be ; for my sake first, and then for 
his own. I wish you and him to be friends, and 
I wish that you should know our secrets. You 
saw me speak to a tall and dark-haired Italian 
last night ?" 

"I did." 

*' He will come here to-day. He is my hus- 
band." 

Christina dropped her eyes as she spoke the 
words, and I was glad that no gaze was on me ; 
for, despite all that had come and gone, this was 
a heavy shock. Spoken suddenly, firmly, the 
words seemed to go through me like a rifle-bullet 
or the thrust of a sword. 

Then she looked up again, and a faint sweet 
smile came over her face, and our eyes met 
frankly ; and she held out her hand to me across 
the table, as if in obedience to some involuntary 
and kindly impulse. 

I pressed it silently. Thus we sealed our new 



AN EXPLANATION. 185 

friendship, and the dream of my boyhood was 
really over. 

After a moment's pause she said : " My hus- 
band is an Italian, as you see. His name is Carlo 
Farini Salaris. He had a title and orders and 
honours ; but he dropped them all because he 
was disappointed in Charles Albert, and in others 
too. He had two passions in his life . music and 
his country. Chance brought him to know me 
when I was a poor girl, . an adventuress, many 
people would have called me, . a beggar almost. 
He liked my voice ; he had faith in me ; he had 
me educated ; he brought me out. All that I am 
he made me. All that I could do for him in re- 
turn I have done, I am doing." 

*' I knew that . that you had been married, 
Christina. I did not know that your husband 
was living." 

*' Nor must you know it now. Understand 
me, it is a secret only known to you, and perhaps 
one or two others. He has only lately escaped 
from an Austrian prison, where he was sent for 
the part he took in Lombard plots and revolu- 



186 MY enemy's daughtek. 

tions. He lias escaped only, I fear, to take part 
in other plots. Think how happy the life of his 
wife must be ! I can help him, however, in many 
ways while I am not known to be his wife. I 
have carried the fiery cross for him from the Alps 
to the Straits of Messina, when not even Austrian 
or Neapolitan police suspected the German so- 
prano of being an emissary of the revolution. Ah, 
it would be a long and weary tale to tell ; it is a 
sad memory ! In this way I hold my life at his 
disposal, and my happiness. I will plot for him, 
scheme for him ; smile while I know that he is 
in danger, flirt when every moment I think to 
hear news of his death. This is the only way in 
which I can repay him : I owe him all." 

" Surely you have given him something that 
might repay anything he has done for you ?" 

*' I have given him all I could, Emanuel; and 
he was generous enough to have confidence in 
me, and to believe that I would have given him 
more if I could. Listen, and I will speak to you 
with a frankness which others might misunder- 
stand, but you will not. I will speak to you as if 



AN EXPLANATION. 187 

I were a ghost come back from the grave, to whom 
the world could no longer have reality, and who 
had nothing more to do with human hopes, and 
loves, and misunderstandings, and all the rest of 
it. Even before I had made a success of any kind, 
he would have married me, and I would not. You 
know the reason why. I succeeded through him 
altogether. He pressed me again and again . ten- 
derly, delicately, like a man with a noble nature. 
I was coming to England. For the first time 
since I had left it, you understand. He guessed 
why I was coming, and I told him all." 
" All ? All of the past, or." 
*^ I spoke to him as freely as some of his own 
countrywomen do to their confessor. I told him 
that I loved you . yes, I am not ashamed to say 
it now, and I was not then . and that my dearest 
hope was to find you. And he said, with his 
melancholy smile, ' Go to England ; but if you 
do not find him, or have any cause to change your 
purpose, then promise me that you will come back 
to me.' I went to England, and j^ou know the 
rest . Fate was against us." 



188 MY enemy's daughter. 

"Fate was cruelly against mc !'' I said, start- 
ing up; *^Fate was against me I And you too, 
Christina ! You threw me away at a word ; you 
had done so before. Don't tell me of love . you 
never loved me ; you were too glad to escape from 
me ; you had your ambition and your career, and 
you followed your destiny. Well, I don't blame 
you, and I am not surprised. Peace be between 
us for the future, and let us be friends if you 
will; only do not torture me to no purpose by 
trying to persuade me that that might have been 
which never could have been. Well, forgive me 
for interrupting you . " 

' ' You have not interrupted me ; the story is 
all over. It was not very long to tell." 

" no ; let me finish it. You saw me ; and 
I was poor and obscure ; and you found no diffi- 
culty in taking the chance word of a good-natured, 
thoughtless girl as decisive of my fate ; and you 
hurried back, and married your friend and patron, 
who had influence and power. You were grateful 
to him . quite right ; and he exacted his recom- 
pense for what he had done, and you gave him 



AN EXPLANATION. 189 

yourself as his reward. Well, I offer you my con- 
gratulations, and to him too. I am late in the 
expression of my good wishes, but you must re- 
member how well you kept the secret of your hap- 
piness, and that I thought you were a widow, not 
a wife." 

I saw Christina's cheek flush, and her eyes 
first sparlde and then fill with tears ; but I was 
not in a mood to be stayed. Everything seemed 
to have conspired to make me savage, and some 
infernal spirit within appeared to drive me on, 
adding word to word. 
" Emanuel !" 

" Yes ; I thought you were a widow. So, I 
suppose, did your other friend and patron, Mr. 
Lyndon. Tie surely is not in your secrets ? Or, 
is he supposed to be your husband's friend, ap- 
pointed to console you, and give you courage in 
his absence and his dangers ?" 

" I have at least had no reason, as yet, to 
repent of any confidence I may have placed in 
him, as I have now to repent of the confidence 
I placed in you. Emanuel, I know you will be 



190 MY enemy's daughter. 

ashamed of your bitterness and your cruelty, and 
I forgive you beforehand. I know you have rea- 
son to complain. I owe you something, too ; let 
me pay a part of my obligation by bearing pa- 
tiently any insult you may choose to offer. You 
do not know how cruel you are. I have striven 
to be a devoted and loyal wife to my husband, 
as a brave German woman ought to be ; and I 
have suffered much ; and if I have had my am- 
bition, it has not been fed for nothing, or bought 
without heavy penalty ; and of the old days 
nothing remains ; and now you insult and scorn 
me. It is much ; but I bear it for the sake of 
old memories." 

She had been seated on a sofa. She now 
stood up and leaned against the chimneypiece, 
and tossed her bright mass of hair back over 
her shoulders with the old familiar impatient 
action of one whom the weight of it oppressed 
in a moment of excitement. She looked so like 
the Christina of old that my anger melted away, 
and I bitterly repented my hasty words. 

''1 am always asking you to forgive me, 



AN EXPLANATION. 191 

Christina ; I must ask you now again, sincerely 
and liumbly, for jDardon. I was very bitter, and 
rude, and brutal, and I knew how unjust I was even 
at the time. But I only ask you to make some 
allowance for me. You know how I loved you. 0, 
I am speaking now only of the past, and I might 
say it if your husband stood there ! I loved you 
deeply. No woman can be loved so twice in a life." 

*'l know it, Emanuel, and I do forgive you, 
freely and fully, your harsh words. You too 
must make allowance for me. My life is an 
anxious one in many ways. So far, it has been 
a failure ; and yet the best has passed. When 
I look at you, Emanuel, and make you my own 
mirror, I see that I too am no longer young. 
Wliat a handsome fair-haired boy you were when 
I first saw you ! How many years ago ?" 

" Twelve years ago." 

*^ How old are you now ? You may tell me, 
I shall not betray confidence." 

" I don't know . thirty-two or three." 

'' Ach Gott!.so old! And I am. but that 
does not concern you to know. Yes, youth is 



192 MY enemy's daughter. 

gone for both of us. I am talking wildly to-day, 
am I not? Yes, I can't help it; but I don't 
often get into these moods. Youth is gone." 

She turned to the mirror over the chimney- 
piece, and still keeping back her hair, gazed 
intently into her own face. Truth to speak, 
with all its lustrous beauty, there were faint, 
faint marks under the eyes, w4iich hinted mourn- 
fully of Time's premature footprints. 

*' I was handsome, Emanuel, when a girl . 
was I not ?" 

She spoke without turning to me. 

*'You were beautiful; but surely you must 
know that you are still" . I was going to say, 
"that you are still beautiful;" but the expres- 
sion of her face was so entirely abstracted and 
distraite, that the compliment, if it could be 
called one, died upon my lips. 

" Yes," she went on, almost as one who talks 
in a dream, '' I was very handsome, and very, very 
ambitious. I thought I was born for something 
great . born, perhaps, to conquer the world. 
You could not know how ambitious I was, and 



AN EXPLANATION. 193 

how my heart was set on success; and nothing 
has come of it after all." 

''Nothing! and you the most successful of 
the day ?" 

"Yes, the most successful of the day; but 
who will be the most successful of to-morrow ? 
I shall sing perhaps another season or two, and 
then be forgotten. I know well enough that I 
am not like Giulia Grisi. There is a singer to 
be remembered. I shall be extinguished when 
I cease to sing. My success will die with the 
echo of my voice. I have often thought that 
I am like the man in my much-loved Schiller's 
play, who says he staked his happiness and his 
heaven on being a hero, and in the end no hero 
was there, only a failure." 

She leaned now on the chimneypiece, and 
still contemplated her own face. I daresay an 
ordinary looker-on would have thought there was 
something theatric and self-conscious in her atti- 
tudes and her ways. I did not think there was. 
From her childhood almost . she was little more 
than a child when first I knew her . there was 

VOL. II. 



tliat rare and striking harmony of mind and body 
in lier which made every word find unconsciously 
its natural expression in some gesture or attitude. 
This was not surely, one would have thought, a 
German attribute. Still less was it a faculty any- 
one can get up, or even cultivate. It came by 
nature. It made her a successful actress ; it 
made her seem natural on the stage, because 
every action expressed so easily and gracefully 
the emotion which suggested it; it made her 
seem theatric off the stage, because so few peo- 
ple either will or can allow their moods to find 
any outward expression beyond that of voice and 
complexion. 

She suddenly turned to me, and going back 
to the earlier part of our conversation, she said, 

" You think I kept all this purposely a secret 
from you?" 

I knew of course she meant her marriage and 
its story. 

" I did think so, Christina." 

" Well, perhaps it was partly a secret . at 
least, until I could learn what sort of person time 



AN EXPLANATION. 195 

and change had made you. Perhaps you did not 
at first show yourself in a manner which greatly 
invited confidence. Perhaps I fancied that you 
already knew nearly all the truth. Perhaps I may 
have thought . " and she stopped and sighed, and 
then smiled a strange, nervous, painful smile I 
did not like to see. Then she made a quick 
gesture with both hands as if she flung the sub- 
ject from her, and came back to her seat. Looking 
at her watch, she said, 

" My husband will be here soon. You know 
now why I was so much confused and embarrassed 
the last day you were here ?" 

" Yes ; that was his signal I heard ?" 

" It was. He always whistles those few bars 
. first once, then again with the slight variation ; 
and I know he is coming. That is, you under- 
stand, when I have not seen him for some time . 
when his coming is unexpected ; and it may be 
necessary to make some preparation to get rid of 
inconvenient visitors . " 

''Like me?" 

" Like you that last day, before he knew ycu 



196 MY enemy's daughtek. 

or had given me leave to trust you. 0, I am 
thoroughly disciplined and obedient to him, be- 
lieve me. I have heard that whistle in many 
places . in places where I knew that a mistake 
or a delay, or a precipitate motion on my part, 
might involve his discovery and his death. I did 
not expect to hear it so soon, although I knew 
that the plan for his escape out of the Lombard 
prison was in good hands and progressing well. 
I have not a genius for conspiracy, Emanuel, and 
they don't trust me much with details ; even he 
does not. I wait and watch and keep the secrets, 
and do faithfully as I am told. And I have de- 
nationalised myself for his sake, and forgotten my 
country ; indeed, had I not forgotten it long ago ? 
and I have learned to hope that the German sol- 
diers may one day be chased across the Alps. My 
husband is a man to inspire anyone with his own 
hopes and his own will, as you are sure to discover 
before long." 

A card was put into Christina's hand, and 
she directed that the visitor should be shown 
up. 



AN EXPLANATION. 197 

''It is /ic," she whispered to me when the 
servant had left the roora. ''Here, just now, he 
is only on my ordinary visiting-list. He is to me 
an Italian patriot who honours me with his ac- 
quaintance . no more." 

In a moment Signor Salaris entered. 

I do not know whether he had expected to 
find her alone, but in the mere flash of time from 
his announcement to his reaching Christina, I 
saw three distinct changes of expression in his 
face. His wife stood at one side of the chimney- 
piece, nearly opposite the door ; I had fallen back 
to one of the windows looldng into Jermyn-street. 
As he came in, I could see him, but he, naturally 
looking directly before him, did not see me. He 
crossed the threshold, therefore, with the formal 
bow of an ordinary visitor, and the corresponding 
expression. Apparently then, as he only saw 
his wife, he assumed that she was alone, and his 
pale face lighted up with a warm and bright 
expression, and he seemed for the instant, the 
second, like one rejoicing to throw off a weary 
disguise. And then he saw me; and with a 



198 MY enemy's daughter. 

change quick as the motion of light itself, his 
countenance subsided into the genial, courteous 
expression of one who presents himself to a 
friend. Probably no unprepared eye could have 
noted these changes. I saw them clearly, and 
they were significant of a character and a life. 

Christina reassured him with a smile and a 
few words. 

" My dear Carlo, here we are all friends, and 
you are my husband, not my visitor." 

" Then this gentleman," he said, turning to 
me and speaking in excellent English, though a 
little slow and with a deep Italian accent, "this 
is Mr. Temple ? I might have known him, in- 
deed. . I have seen and heard you more than 
once, Mr. Temple, but I did not at first recognise 
you. I offer you my hand ; I am, if you will 
allow me, your friend." 

I gave him my hand, and we exchanged a 
cordial grasp. I think both our faces flushed. 
I felt mine grow hot. I know that across his 
pale cheek something faintly approaching to a 
crimson tinge came flashing, and a strange sud- 



AN EXPLANATION. 199 

den spasm passed over it. Can we be friends? 
Here is the man who has robbed me of Chris- 
tina ; can I be his friend, sincerely, truly ? 

I think so ; at least I will try. I like the ex- 
pression of his face ; I like his soft dark liquid 
eyes, with an expression at once wild and gentle 
and beseeching in them, like the eyes of a gazelle ; 
I like the contrast they present to the rigid, deep- 
thinking, inflexible expression of the brow and 
the lips and the chin. I feel sure this man 
has an unconquerable will, and a pure tender 
heart. He is artist and conspirator in one. He 
ought to have lived centuries ago, and been a 
minstrel and a patriot at once. Or he ought to 
have lived half a century back or thereabouts, and 
been a Girondist and led the chorus of the Mar- 
seillaise on the day when he and his brothers went 
out to die. 

Yes, I liked the man at once ; and as I looked 
from his face to Christina's and noted her ex- 
pression, I liked him all the better, for I felt an 
indescribable pang of sympathy and pity for him. 
His liquid loving eye looked melancholy when 



200 MY enemy's daughtee. 

it turned on her, and liers sank beneath his 
glance. 

We talked like friends. He told me of his 
escape from prison in a pleasant simple kind of 
way, very agreeable, and even fascinating, to hear. 
There was a quiet modesty about all he said re- 
lating to himself that won upon one immensely. 
We talked of music and art, on which he was 
almost eloquent. When for a moment the con- 
versation lapsed into what may be called gene- 
ralities and conventional talk, he subsided into 
silence, and his mind evidently withdrew itself 
altogether into its own habitual thoughts. 

I noted that Christina's eye always quietly 
followed his expressions of feature ; I noted that 
the moment he lapsed into silence she changed 
the conversation, appealed directly to him with 
some question or other, and drew him forward 
again. I think I read their story. 

^' She has given herself to him," I thought, 
" and she esteems him, and fears for him ; and 
she would love him if she could. But she can- 
not, and she knows it ; and neither is happy. I 



AN EXPLANATION. 201 

read in his face higli aim, and courage, and abso- 
lute self-devotion, and brooding perseverance . and 
failure. Whatever his hopes, they are doomed to 
fail." 

Heavy and blank was the first feeling of 
disappointment with which I left Christina's 
house that day, knowing as a certainty and for 
the first time that she had a living, loving hus- 
band. But was I only disappointed . was the 
disappointment utter and without shade? Was 
there not some vague perception of a sense of 
relief? Month after month, year after year, I 
had worn myself out with almost unendurable 
agony of longing and disappointment, hopes and 
sickening pangs of despair ; and now at last the 
doubt and the conflict of feeling were over, and 
I was released from the struggle. Now the tor- 
ment of hope was quelled; now the worst was 
known; now the bitterness of death was past. 
Many a man sleeps, says the gaoler in Scott's 
romance, the night before he is executed, but no 
man the night before he is tried. 

Yes, I felt a sense of relief. I should torture 



202 MY enemy's daughter. 

myself with doubt and hope no more. I should 
walk up and down my room of nights tiying to 
squeeze hope out of every word she had uttered, 
every glance I had caught . as shipwrecked sail- 
ors becalmed on a burning southern sea strive to 
squeeze moisture out of rags . no more. I should 
rehearse what I could say when next we met, or 
lament that I had not said this and that when 
last we met, no more. I should now be able to 
drudge through my life unvexed because hope- 
less. 

A resolve, too, came up at once with a 
great new pang of relief. I had become a singer 
and taken to the lyric stage to please her, to win 
her, to prove to her that I could succeed; now 
I would give it up. I would cease to sham an 
artist's part, for which I really had no true taste 
or soul. I would go to some other country, to 
America, and see my brother. How fraternal 
we all grow, how we think of far-off brothers 
and sisters and mothers, when some woman has 
thrown us over ! We are all like the gamester 
in the famous classic comedy of France, who 



AN EXPLANATION. 203 

only remembers lier to whom he owes his duty 
when the luck of the night has gone against him. 
I might have lived long enough content with very 
rare and passing scraps of news from my brother, 
but now a sudden and surprising tenderness 
sprang up in my heart, and I wondered how I 
had existed so long without seeing him ; and I 
quite resolved to go out to the States, and per- 
haps, with such money as I could get together, 
join him in some new Western settlement, and 
be a farmer. I thought of my own stout and 
sinewy arms and rather athletic frame, and came 
to the conclusion that, after all, digging, or fell- 
ing trees, or hunting, was the sort of thing for 
which Nature had clearly intended me. 

In a word, I was used up, and wanted a new 
and freshening life. I envied my Italian friend 
his schemes and his aspirations, and thought I 
should dearly like to have an oppressed nation- 
ality to plot for, and if needs were, die for ; and 
I really wished I could, even through his influence, 
get up within myself a sort of bastard philo- 
Italianism, and fling myseK into the cause of 



204 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



Italy as so many Englishmen were beginning 
to do even then, and as Byron and Stanhope, 
and Hastings and Finlay, and so many others, 
had done for Greece. But I was never much 
of a politician ; and I was so sick of the stage 
that I recoiled from the notion of converting my 
individual life into a new piece of acting. I had 
long come to think, and I do still think it 
seriously and profoundly, that nothing in life . 
no, nothing whatever . is so enviable as the ca- 
pacity to merge one's individuality and very 
existence wholly in some great cause, and to 
heed no personal sacrifice which is offered in its 
name. 

I don't much care whether the cause be 
political, or artistic, or scientific, or what not ; 
let there but be a cause to which the individual 
is subjected, in which he freely loses himself, 
and I hold that man happy, if man can ever be 
happy at all. Never had it been my fortunate 
fate to have found such an object. My own pro- 
fession never gave it to me. Therefore I ac- 
counted existence so far a failure. I had tried 



AN EXPLANATION. 205 

many modes of activity and amusement, and dis- 
traction and enjoyment, and they had done no- 
thing for me, because I had never gone deeply 
enough into any path of life, or thought, or 
work; I had never had a cause to live for, and 
I might as well not have lived at all. If I have 
any faith left in me, it is that faith in a cause, 
as the soul, the grace, the beauty, the purpose 
of life. 

I will seek then, I said to myself, a new 
activity. I will steep life in freshness, and re- 
colour it in the dyes of new sensations. Ich zvill 
mein Glilck prohiren . marschiren / 



CHAPTEE VIII. 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 



Yes ; I began to think seriously of going to the 
United States, making my way out westward, 
buying land, and turning farmer. Vague and 
delightful visions of the forest scenery of the 
New "World filled me ; visions of woods where 
tints, which in our European region we know of 
only in manufactured colours, mingle and con- 
trast in the living glory of the autumnal foliage. 
Dreams of the rolling prairie, and the deep wine- 
coloured brooklet, and the rushing river, were 
in my mind and before my senses. It seemed 
to me that nothing but the fresh bosom of the 
young mother-Nature of the West could revive 
my exhausted and flagging temperament. I was 
fast growing more and more weary of life as I 
found it and as I made it. Heat and crowd, and 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 207 

midniglit suppers, or lonely midnight grumblings 
and reflections, perpetual excitement, fatigue, 
overwork, too much wine, and the almost inces- 
sant cigar, . these began to take effect just as I 
might reasonably have expected. I found that 
my voice already was beginning to show signs of 
suffering. Nobody else noticed it yet ; but I 
could not be deceived. I consulted a medical 
man, who recommended rest and country air; 
and I thought of acting on his advice soon . some 
time, perhaps, when the season was over, or next 
year, or whenever convenient. 

Meanwhile I went on as before ; I mixed a 
great deal with joyous company of all kinds. A 
positive necessity for distraction of some sort 
seemed to have seized hold of me, and it even 
appeared as if distraction relieved my mind and 
improved my physical condition. The resolve to 
give up the stage and go to America, supplied a 
delightful excuse and temptation. It would be 
clearly a waste of power, an unnecessary vexation, 
to put myself under heaxj restraint just now, 
when so short a time was to brin^r about a total 



208 MY eneiiy's daughtee. 

change of life and habits. The fresh manly life 
of the New World would soon restore me to that 
physical strength and brightness of temperament 
which I used to enjoy. No use, then, in begin- 
ning any reform before I undertake the enterprise 
which shall change scene and habits and life al- 
together. 

I sometimes even thought of the expediency 
of marrying and ranging myself; taking a com- 
panion with me to America to be a backwoods- 
man's wife. But I always ended by dismissing 
the idea as one that brought up a sensation of 
repulsiveness with it. To begin with, I knew 
nobody whom I would or could marry. Most of 
the women I knew were singers or actresses ; 
and I saw most of them too closely to be likely 
to fall in love with any, even if a deeper and 
earlier feeling did not absorb my heart. There 
was one to whom at times I did feel myself 
slightly attracted; she was the little French- 
woman with whom I had had a sort of flirtation 
on the evening when I otherwise made a fool of 
myself at Christina's apartments. She did not 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 209 

discourage my attentions whenever they were 
offered, and I did sometimes pay court to her. 
She was young, and very pretty. She was not 
witty or intellectual, or gifted with any conversa- 
tional power beyond what mere animal vivacity 
and flow of talk may give. I do not know why 
on earth I cared for her company, except that 
she was easy of access and full of life, and her 
society served to distract me, just as smoking or 
drinking might. 

My new friend, who called herself Mdlle. Fi- 
nola, and was the daughter, I came to know, of a 
fat couple who sold slippers in one of the pass- 
ages of the Palais Royal, was a girl with a very 
agreeable light French sort of soprano voice, and 
pleasing vivacious ways, and an inordinate amount 
of self-conceit. She was not by any means a bad 
little person, and would rather, all things being 
equal, do a kindly thing than not. She was, 1 
have no doubt, practically, or as Heine would say, 
anatomically, virtuous ; but she had no particular 
prejudice in favour of virtue, and probably never 
troubled herself much by thinking on the subject. 

VOL. II. P 



210 MY enemy's daughter. 

Her ideas of life consisted of flattery, singing, 
lyrical successes, complimentary critiques in news- 
papers, jewels, crinoline (crinoline was rather a 
new fashion then), pleasant little dinners and 
suppers, carriages, and a fair prospect of a bril- 
liant match. She had no more true lyrical 
genius than an Italian-boy's monkey; but she 
sometimes captivated audiences, and set them 
applauding with a genuine enthusiasm which 
Pasta might have failed to arouse. She had a 
quick arch way of glinting with her eyes, which 
conveyed to some people an idea of immense 
latent humour and espieglerie, that, I can ans- 
wer for it, had no existence in my little friend's 
mental constitution. She turned her bright 
beaming orbs in flashing rapidity from stalls to 
boxes in a manner which irresistibly kept atten- 
tion alive. Who could withdraw his interest for 
a moment from the stage when he could not tell 
but that the very next moment those glittering 
laughing brown eyes might roguishly seek out 
his own ? She had apparently the faculty of 
eye-flirting with every man in a whole theatre 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 211 

in turn. Then she shrugged her very full, 
white, and bare shoulders with such a piquancy, 
and had such quick graceful gestures, and so 
fluttered her pretty plumage, that it was quite 
a pleasant sight to see. Of course, all this told 
with much more decided effect in the Italiens, or 
some such house, than in one of our great temples 
of opera : but even in our vast house it had its 
effect upon the limited section from whom the 
rest of the audience, and the town generally, 
took their time. 

Not, however, to be merely inqiiante and viva- 
cious, Mdlle. Finola had a way of throwing a 
momentaiy gleam of tender softness into her 
eyes, and looking pensively before her, as if con- 
sciousness had withdrawn itself wholly from the 
audience, and buried itself in the depths of some 
sweet inner sadness; and she so trilled out a 
prolonged, plaintive, and dreamy note, that peo- 
ple sometimes declared her pathetic power quite 
equal to her humour and vivacity. When ordinary 
observers note any little effect produced with ease, 
they are apt to believe that the performer has 



212 MY enemy's daughter. 

a capacity for doing something infinitely greater, 
if he or she would only try, and did but care 
to succeed. A sad mistake generally; for on 
the stage and in real life we almost invariably 
do all we can and the best we can; and that 
which you see is the display of our whole stock 
of capability. But audiences could not readily 
believe that the one little bit of effective show had 
exhausted Mdlle. Finola's whole resources. The 
result was that in her own parts, Eosinas, Figlias 
del Keggimento, and so on, she was greatly ad- 
mired, and her little tricks of instinctive coquetry 
and vivacity were accepted by many as the de- 
liberate and triumphant efforts of graceful art, 
if not indeed the stray sparks which indicated 
the existence of a latent fire of true lyrical 
genius. 

Now this little personage was beginning to be 
very popular about the time when Christina's 
husband came to London. She had not indeed 
come as yet into any sort of antagonism or rivalry 
with Madame Keichstein, and they never sang 
together; but Finola's nights were usually very 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 213 

successful, and she was even rallying a sort of 
party round her both in audiences and critics. 
Perhaps Christina's passionate enthusiastic style 
had begun to be too much for some of her hearers. 
True art is a sad strain upon the intellects of 
many of us ; and little Finola was a great relief. 
She was Offenbach after Meyerbeer; and a good 
many occupants of opera-stalls to-day know what 
that means, and can appreciate the charming 
relaxation to wearied inanity which it implies. 
And though not as yet anything of a rival to 
Christina, Finola was beginning to be talked 
about a good deal. I don't think Christina at 
this time cared in the least, or grudged the little 
thing any sprays of laurel that might fall to her. 
But she always affected to think me an admirer 
of Finola, one of Finola's party, and indeed, more 
than that, one of Finola's lovers; and at last, 
out of pure spleen at being so set down, I acted 
intentionally as if I were one of that silly throng ; 
and as Mdlle. Finola liked flirting with anyone, 
she showed herself willing enough to flirt with 
me. 



214 MY enemy's daughter. 

I have spoken of all tliis for the purpose of 
showing how matters stood as regarded Christina 
and myself just about the time when her hus- 
band made his appearance so unexpectedly in 
London. We . Christina and I . were on strange, 
cold, almost unfriendly terms, so far as all outer 
appearances went. My soul was still filled with 
love for her, wildly dashed sometimes with a 
bitterness not much unlike hate. She, on her 
side, seemed to me to be leading the life almost 
of a frivolous, careless, heartless coquette ; I was 
drifting away from all my old moorings of stead- 
fastness and perseverance and patience, and be- 
coming an idler with the idle ; I drank midnight, 
and thought midnight, as the phrase has it. 
With the sudden appearance of the Italian exile 
came a change in all our relationships ; chance, 
utter chance, conspired with his own character 
and purpose, and the place he held in Christina's 
life, to make his presence the source of change 
and event to all of us. 

In a very short time after his coming, Signor 
Salaris became the recognised lion of the London 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 215 

season. He had, in the impresario's sense of 
the word, quite a wonderful success. He de- 
livered lectures on his imprisonment and his 
escape, which crowded Willis's Rooms, and filled 
King-street with coronetted carriages. He pleaded 
the cause of his country ; he called upon Eng- 
land to regard the independence of Italy as 
Europe's most pressing and vital question ; and 
countesses clapped their kid-gloved hands and 
waved their perfumed handkerchiefs. He dined 
now with a Cabinet minister, and now with the 
leader of the Opposition. He spent great part 
of his time at Mr. Lyndon's. He was intrigued 
for and battled for, as the attraction of evening- 
parties. He bore it all patiently, as one who 
does a work of drudgery with a good object ; but 
he smiled sadly and shook his head when one 
congratulated him privately on his success. I 
once told him he ought to be a proud man. He 
said he felt profoundly discouraged. A great 
illusion, he calmly said, was gone. England, he 
now knew, would do nothing for his country. 
He had come to plead for protection and help. 



216 MY enemy's daughter. 

He found himself the hero of a carnival scene, 
pelted with flowers and sugar-plums. 

I am not a politician, and this is not a po- 
litical story. I introduce the subject of Salaris 
and his success, because at this time in one way, 
as later in another, it affected my own life. 

I went one evening to hear my new friend 
tell his story and make his appeal in Willis's 
Eooms. I went alone; the room was crowded; 
Mr. Lyndon M.P. presided. There were present 
what Ned Lambert would have called "no end of 
swells." Salaris was speaking when I got in. He 
was really not, in the rhetorical sense, an eloquent 
man. He had nothing of Kossuth about him, 
nor had his style anything of the poetic grandilo- 
quence of Mazzini. He talked in a simple, severe, 
unpretending sort of way, with hardly any ges- 
ticulation. The sincerity of his purpose, the 
clear straightforwardness of his language, the 
sweetness of his expression, made the great 
charm which, added of course to the romantic 
nature of his recent escape, delighted the West- 
end. He was a novelty in the way of exiles. 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 217 

He positively seemed, I lieard a lady near me 
remark, quite like an English gentleman. In 
fact, the Thaddeus of Warsaw personage was 
played out; and the West-end now thrilled with 
a new sensation, to see an escaped and exiled 
patriot who looked like an ordinary gentleman, 
and spoke as composedly as a financial member 
of Parliament. 

I looked round the room, expecting to see 
Christina there. I was not disappointed. She 
was seated two or three rows of seats away from 
me, and she looked very handsome, but melan- 
choly, and a little fatigued. She was apparently 
not listening much more attentively than I was. 
She saw me, and nodded a salutation, and whis- 
pered something to a lady at her side. The 
lady, who seemed to have been listening very 
closely to the speaker, looked up, and glanced 
towards me. She was very young . about nine- 
teen, perhaps . with a delicate, clearly-shaped, 
youthful Madonna face, and eyes that had a 
tender violet light in them. They were eyes 
that did not flash or glitter or sparkle. They 



218 MY enemy's daughtee. 

rested on you with a quiet luminous depth, like 
the light a planet seems to give. Her face had 
a thoughtful, sweet, almost sad expression until 
the violet light arising in the eyes suffused the 
whole countenance with its genial radiancy. It 
was a face not to be forgotten, once you had 
seen it ; and I had not forgotten it, for I had 
seen it before, and had many a time wished to 
see it again. It was the face of Mr. Lyndon's 
youngest daughter ; the girl to whom I had spoken 
in Palace-yard when wild Stephen Lyndon made 
his absurd mistake. 

Did you ever, on an evening of reckless revelry, 
amid an atmosphere steaming with heat and lights 
and the fumes of wine, in a room ringing with 
laughter and frivolity, suddenly open a window, 
and looking out, catch a glimpse of the blue sum- 
mer heaven and the pure light of the stars? If 
so, you will understand how I felt when I looked 
up from the increasing degeneracy of my life, with 
its foolish excitements and its barren spasmodic 
passion, and saw the face of Lilla Lyndon. 

I glanced many times to where she sat, and I 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 219 

forgot the cause of Italy's independence. Once, 
only once, she looked towards me. 

There was a slight movement on the platform ; 
a letter was handed to Mr. Lyndon. That gen- 
tleman said a word to the lecturer, who at once 
stopped, bowed, and drew back ; and Mr. Lyndon, 
rising, came to the front and apologised for hav- 
ing to leave the chair. He was obliged to go 
down to the House immediately. His distin- 
guished friend the Dean of some place or other, 
whose remarkable work recently published had 
proved how well he understood the Italian ques- 
tion and how thoroughly he sympathised with 
the cause of Italy, had kindly consented to take 
the chair. There was a murmur of genteel ap- 
plause for Mr. Lyndon, another for the Dean, as 
the latter gracefully threw himself into the va- 
cated chair ; and then Mr. Lj^ndon disappeared 
from the platform, the lecture went on, and the 
audience settled itself to listen as before. 

Once and only once did Salaris make any at- 
tempt at eloquence; and even that was but the 
eloquence of passionate conviction. It was at the 



220 MY enemy's daughtee. 

close, where lie proclaimed, rather than merely 
predicted, to his hearers that, let who would be 
friend or foe, the day of Italy's independence was 
sure and near. " Only yesterday," he said, "an 
English lady . I see her now in this room . gave 
me as an omen of good a translation of a noble 
poem by a great living poet, a German, which 
bids my country be of good cheer and expect her 
deliverance. Will you listen to a few lines ? The 
German poet reminds my country of the story of 
Penelope : how she was fair, and persecuted for 
her beauty, and how the reckless strangers re- 
velled in her hall : 



Twenty years the purple tissue span slie weeping on her 

throne ; 
Twenty years in bitter sorrow nurtured her beloved son ; 
Twenty years remained she faithful to her husband and her 

name . 
Weeping, hoping, sending seekers . lo, and her Ulysses came ! 

Woe to the audacious wooers when they heard the avenger's 

tread, 
And the bitter death-charged arrows from his clanging bow 

were sped ; 
With the red blood of the strangers hall and pavement drip 

ping lay, 
And a fearful feast of vengeance then was held at Ithaca. 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 221 

Knowest thou that song, Italia ? Listen, and in patience wait, 

Even although the swarm of strangers throng through thy 
ancestral gate ; 

Eear thy sons to fearless manhood, though with many a burn- 
ing tear ; 

Wait and hope ; thy hour is coming ; thy Ulysses too is near." 

To tlie closing lines he gave all the dignity, the 
thrilling force, the strength of pathos and of hope, 
which the words deserved, and which his pene- 
trating voice, his noble earnestness, his expres- 
sion, now animated, could lend. *^It is," he 
added slowly, " the poetry, the hope, the encour- 
agement of a German ! Quod minime reris ! The 
sympathy and the hope are the more welcome, the 
more delightful. I accept the omen for my coun- 
try, and I say to her : 
' Wait and hope ; thy hour is coming ; thy Ulysses too is near.' " 

He remained for a moment motionless and 
silent, and the audience did not Imow whether 
he had finished or not; then his hand dropped 
upon the desk dear him, and he bowed to the as 
semblage, and drew back from the front of the 
platform. There was quite a cordial and enthu- 
siastic demonstration of applause ; and then began 



222 MY enemy's daughter. 

the rustling of silks, and calling of carriages, and 
the babble of talk with acquaintances, and the 
crowding on the stairs. 

The moment the movement of departure began 
Madame Keichstein invited me by a look to come 
to her. She and Miss Lyndon had withdrawn 
into a corner a little out of the stream of the de- 
parting crowd. I made my way through groups 
of people and over trailing skirts to where they 
stood. 

''How did you like it?" were Christina's first 
words ; and then, without waiting for an answer, 
she said, "I wish to introduce you to Miss Lyn- 
don . Miss Lilla Lyndon." 

Before the ceremony of introduction was well 
through, two or three acquaintances closed round 
Madame Keichstein, and Miss Lyndon and I were 
left for the moment together. 

"Am I wrong, Mr. Temple," she said, ''in 
thinking that we have met and spoken together 
before?" 

" No, Miss Lyndon, you are quite right." 

" That day in Palace-yard, when that poor man 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 223 

came up and stopped the carriage and called me 
by my name ?" 

" That was the day. You have a good me- 
mory." 

'^ It made a painful impression on me, that 
scene and that poor man. I thought I could not 
have been mistaken, Mr. Temple, in you, when 
I saw you a few nights ago for the first time since 
that day. May I congratulate you now on your 
success . on the name you have won since I first 
saw you ? It always gave me pleasure to believe 
that it was you with whom I had spoken that day, 
for you were kind to that strange poor creature." 

This was a subject that somewhat embarrassed 
me ; I turned to something else. 

" The lines that Signer Salaris recited were 
translated by you. Miss Lyndon, I venture to 
think?" 

" They were. Did you like them ?" 

''I thought them noble in spirit, and I hope 
prophetic; and they sounded to me . I have not 
seen the original . like a pure and exquisite trans- 
lation." 



224 MY enemy's daughtek. 

*'I am very glad; they are Geibel's. They 
seemed to me prophetic, and so I showed them 
to Signor Salaris. He is a noble creature, and I 
hope whatever he engages in may succeed; but 
I don't understand much of Italian affairs." 

" Nor I, indeed, Miss Lyndon." 

*' Not you ? And yet you ought to be at least 
a sort of stepson of Italy." 

" I only know mj stepmother's voice. Her 
interests she keeps for her own children." 

" We are going, Emanuel," said Christina, 
who was leaning on the arm of some gentleman. 

I offered Miss Lyndon my arm, and she leaned 
on it : I felt the pressure of her light touch, and 
I was thrilled by it. 

" Do you know, Mr. Temple," she said, as we 
descended the stairs, ^'I have never ceased to 
think that there was some mystery about that 
man in Palace-yard which I ought to know, and 
that you could explain it. How did he come to 
know my name, and why did his face seem so 
strange and yet so familiar to me ? Will you tell 
me?" 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 225 

*' Pray, Miss Lyndon, don't ask me ; I cannot 
tell you anything about him . at least not now; 
not without thinking over it. The secret, if it 
be one, may not be mine to tell." 

'' Then there is something ?" 

" There is." 

"And he had some reason for knowing me 
and calling me by my name ?" 

" Pray don't ask any more. He had." 

''I knew it," she said; and an unconscious 
vibration passed from her arm to mine. 

" Some time, Miss Lyndon, you may know 
all ; and it may be in your power to do good by 
the knowledge to people who are unhappy, and 
who don't deserve to be so." 

She looked into my face, with surprise and 
deep interest in her clear pensive eyes. 

Christina was already at the door of her little 
brougham waiting for us. I handed Miss Lyn- 
don in. Christina gave me her hand without a 
word, and I saw a strange expression in her face, 
as if something had both perplexed and irritated 
her. I could not understand it. 

VOL. II. Q 



226 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



Miss Lyndon held out her delicate little hand 
with a frank and friendly expression. I touched 
it, and the light pressure lingered long with me. 
As I left the place, I felt like one on whom the 
first breath of some purifying and sacred influ- 
ence has fallen. The presence of this girl had 
strangely affected me when first I saw her, and 
I had never forgotten the sensation. Now it 
filled me almost wholly. It was indescribable; 
at least, I cannot describe it any better than by 
saying that while the presence of Christina seemed 
to allure me with the rich incense of flowers, that 
of Lilla Lyndon made me thoughtful and full of 
pure regret and humility, like the light of the 
stars. 

In most stories of ghosts and demons and war- 
locks, is it not sufficient to speak of the odious 
and supernatural creature in order to evoke his 
presence ? Apparently some spell of the same 
kind haunted me this night. Miss Lyndon and 
I had spoken of the man who accosted her in 
Palace-yard ; I had never seen him since my re- 
turn from Italy. I had hardly got a dozen paces 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 227 

from the door of Willis's Rooms when I came 
straight on him. 

Keeping the same side as you walk from 
Willis's Rooms towards St. James's-sqnare, you 
may see as you look across the street a row of 
white and stuccoed houses on the other side, one 
of which has a fame attached to it. When I 
nearly fell over Stephen Lyndon, he was stand- 
ing on the edge of the footpath, looking up at 
that particular house. He did not seem a day 
older than when I sa^v him last. He wore the 
hlack wig as before, and was rather better dressed 
than I had seen him on some former occasions, 
though not up to the mark of one memorable 
occasion when he came out resplendent. It 
seemed to me, too, that there was a little more 
of quietness and caution about him than was his 
wont in earlier times. 

I did not know then that he was there waiting 
for me. So I felt vexed when I nearly ran up 
against him, and recognised him in the clear 
moonlight of a beautiful night, and saw that he 



228 MY enemy's daughter. 

had recognised me, and there was no escape 
without at least a parley. 

" Good - evening, Temple," he said in the 
coolest and easiest kind of way, as if we had 
met only the night hefore . last ; and he quietly 
laid his hand on my arm and stayed my going 
farther. '' I have heen contemplating that house 
over there; the first of the row. I have been 
meditating. Temple. An exile lived there once, 
my child of song . an illustrious exile. Where is 
he now. Temple ? Only on a throne, my swan. 
There are exiles and exiles. Temple. Our patrio- 
tic and banished friend Salaris will hardly, I 
think, come to so brilliant a place. The throne 
for one conspirator, and the prison or very likely 
the block for another. Crowns for the crowns 
that have brains under them; blocks for the 
blockheads. He is a gifted and touching block- 
head, that friend of ours, Mr. Temple. I like 
him ; but I was always a child of sentiment. I 
saw you in Willis's Rooms." 

" Were you there?" 

"I was there; yes. He and I, you know, 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 229 

are old friends. I saw Goodboy on the platform, 
and he saw me. I think he winced a little, hut 
it was a lost fear. I have given up my notion 
of doing anything with him in the way of street- 
scenes." 

"I am very glad to hear it. I do hope you 
have turned decent and honourable and manly. 
Mr. Lyndon, there are many reasons why I wish 
you well." 

" Thanks ; I daresay. I really believe you, 
Temple ; and I think you are a good sort of fellow 
in your way. Yes, I am quite a reformed man. 
In fact. Temple, he was too much for me that 
way." 

^' What way?" 

"You never heard, then ?" 

"I have not heard anything about you for a 
longtime." 

" True ; you were away in Italian myrtle - 
bowers, and that sort of delightful thing. Well, 
I opened fire regularly on Goodboy ; waylaid him 
at his door; pursued him to the House, to the 
Club, to the Opera. What do you think he did ? 



230 MY enesiy's daughter. 

He coolly took the bull by the horns. He gave 
me in charge to a policeman ; he followed up the 
charge at the police-court; he delivered his ver- 
sion of the business with a dignified mock humi- 
lity which quite touched and charmed * the worthy 
magistrate.' He recounted all the things he had 
done for me, and all our venerable father had 
done; and it was a magnificent scene, quite. 
And do you know, Temple, while the whole thing 
was a hideous lie from beginning to end, there 
was not a word in it which was not literally true ? 
It put me in an unpleasant light; that I must 
frankly confess. Well, there was nothing for me 
but to find bail . which of course I couldn't do . 
or be sent to prison, or pledge my honour to 
molest him no more . in that way. Temple, I 
was defeated. I had fought Respectability, and 
was overthrown ! At least, I had the sense to 
know that I was beaten, and I surrendered and 
promised." 

" I am very glad to hear it." 

" Are you? So, I daresay, is Goodboy. But 
wait for the end. Do you ever read the Greek 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 231 

dramatists, Temple ? I suppose not. Well, there 
is some good advice given by one of them about 
counting no man successful until you have seen 
the game all out. You just wait. If I detested 
Goodboy before, do you think I like him any 
better now ? Do you know, the cunning old boy 
managed so well, that not a line of the business 
got into the papers ; so that I had not even the 
satisfaction of bringing open scandal on him. I 
\\Tote letter after letter to the papers ; need I say 
that no editor did me the favour of putting the 
tale of the wrongs I had suffered into print ? Well, 
there's enough of that. I have had rather a hard 
life of it since. Give you my word, I don't think 
anything could have kept me up but my deep reli- 
gious feeling and my determination to be revenged 
upon my enemies. I thought it well to retire 
from the metropolis for a little. I broke loose 
from my base, and marched right into the heart 
of the country . Liverpool, Manchester, and that 
sort of place. Coarse, cloddish, without soul, 
without humour, and, let me tell you, by no 
means green or awkward with the cards and the 



232 MY enemy's daughter. 

billiards. Ah, onon Dieu ! it was hard and dull. 
No matter, I live ! Providentially preserved, I 
still live ! I return to town at last, led doubtless 
by my star. I find two of my old acquaintances 
established as lions of the season. You are one ; 
my Carbonaro of Willis's Kooms is the other. 
Good Heaven, it ought to teach the vainest of us 
a lesson in modesty, when such people can be 
successful." 

We were now walking round St. James's- 
square. We might have been mistaken for two 
dear and intimate friends. Lyndon was leaning 
affectionately on my arm, even when he was 
propounding lessons of humility drawn from the 
incomprehensible fact that such a personage as I 
had succeeded. 

I thought of him then as I had thought of 
him always since our first meeting . as a hopeless 
old reprobate, whose inner nature no power on 
earth could touch, and whose utterly selfish and 
heartless levity could only be explained or excused 
by the theory that something not unlike insanity 
was mingled with his blood. Yet I now walked 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 233 

witli him, listened to him, allowed him to lean ou 
me, felt even a positive interest in his welfare. 

Why? Was it for the sake of Ned Lambert 
and his love, and my sincere friendship for them 
both ? 

In sad sober truth, it was not. 

It was because the thoughtful \iolet eyes of 
Lilla Lyndon the younger had looked into mine 
with kindly interest while she spoke of this man. 
The thought of her transfigured him in my mind. 
Nay, this miserable Avretch was a sort of link be- 
tween us. His very misery might be the cause of 
our meeting again. 

And at this time I had no more thought of 
loving Lilla Lyndon than I had of falling in love 
with a saint or a star. I still believed that my 
life was to be for ever shadowed and frustrated by 
hopeless unfading passion for Christina Keichstein. 

I listened, then, to Lyndon's talk, and even 
encouraged him, and assured him I would save 
him if I could. 

*' Now that," he said, '' is the very thing I am 
coming at. I really do think, Temple, that you 



234 MY enemy's daughter. 

are a sincere sort of person ; and that you mean 
what you say. My daughter has disappeared 
somewhere ; I cannot find out where : and I don't 
suppose, you know, that it much matters, because 
I daresay the girl is hard up, and drudging and 
toihng, and that sort of thing, and of course she 
couldn't do anything for me. I should think 
Goodboy turned her adrift; he's quite mean 
enough for it. Well, you see, it's no use my 
looking her up. Do you know, I am so sensitive, 
and epicurean, and chivalrous in all my ways, 
that I can't bear to see women who are drudging 
and poor and overworked. It isn't the poetic idea 
of womanhood, is it ? AVomen don't look as if 
they ought to be seen then. They get pale and 
washed-out -looking, and the plump outlines go, 
and their hands look dirty and needle-marked, 
and all the rest of it. No ; I really prefer, as a 
father, not to see my daughter just now. You 
follow me. Temple ?" 

^'I do," was my grim reply. Even the colour 
of those violet eyes was fading from my mind as 
he talked in this way. 



EXILE AND OUTCAST. 235 

" You appreciate what I mean '?"' 

" Quite," I replied more grimly. 

" Now, on the other hand, look at my niece. 
Aha, have I touched you '?" I suppose I started. 
*' There is a lovely girl, charming to look at; a 
little pale, you will say ; hut so very interesting, 
and T^ith such an expression of goodness. Now, 
Temple, don't you think she could he hrought to 
do something for me '? Don't you think, at least, 
she ought to he allowed to know of my existence ? 
I know it's kept a secret from her. I know she is 
ignorant of the tender tie that hinds her to me. 
Now, Temple, my hoy, here is your opportunity ! 
You know her ; you are in your own way a kind 
of success, and I daresay would pass off easily 
upon her . she's evidently very green and innocent 
. as quite a distinguished and delightful sort of 
person. I saw you handing her to the carriage 
to-day ; you did the thing quite in good style ; I 
daresay she wouldn't notice any difference. Now, 
your motive cannot he suspected. Mine, I con- 
fess, is open to misinterpretation ! Temple, do a 
henevolent deed. Here is an outcast uncle pant- 



236 MY enemy's daughter. 

ing for love and redemption, and very, very hard 
up. There is a lovely niece, with her little hosom 
overflowing with family affection and benevolence 
and romantic nonsense of all kinds, and with un- 
limited influence over papa's purse. Temple, need 
I say more ? You have a heart, and quite a pre- 
sentable appearance. Bring us together, and look 
for your reward Above." 

I managed to escape at last, without making a 
promise of any kind ; but he squeezed my hand 
warmly, accepted a trifling loan, and went away 
humming a hopeful tune. 



CHAPTER IX. 

RIVALRY. 

Our season was drawing fast to a close . tlie first 
season durinoj which Christina and I had suner 
together . the season of fruition ! I had some 
continental engagements during the winter; she 
intended to take absolute rest, for she had been 
apparently in uncertain and even delicate health 
for some time back, and her voice had occasion- 
ally failed her. Just at the close of the season, 
she brought on herself, by want of caution, rather 
a severe attack of chest or throat complaint, as 
shall be presently told. 

Her husband had left London, disappointed 
but not dispirited. He was in Paris, striving to 
teach diplomatists and statesmen there the neces- 
sity of doing just what was afterwards done ; that 



238 MY enemy's daughter. 

is to say, boldly and in tlie field taking up the 
cause of Italy against Austria. As yet his efforts 
did not promise much success, and of England 
he had no longer any hope. 

On the very day after the Willis's-Eooms lec- 
ture at which I was present, Christina was at- 
tacked by a sort of nervous weakness and cold, 
and her place was vacant for a week. Mdlle. 
Finola made her hay while the sun shone, and 
came out prominently. Crowded houses and ani- 
mated audiences greeted her, and she began to 
walk the stage with an air of conquering rivalry 
in the very rustle of her petticoats. Critiques 
were written, proclaiming her the mistress of a 
new style, the leader of a new lyrical school. 
She took all the praises with a quiet nonclialancc , 
as if they were nothing but the homage properly 
due to genius. To crown the whole, she under- 
took some of Christina's own favourite parts, and 
produced a curious half-pathetic half-comic me- 
lange, which it was not possible to think uninter- 
esting, kept people's eyes and ears quite open, 
puzzled many intelligent and appreciative lis- 



RIVALRY. 239 

teners, and was hailed with positive enthusiasm 
by the general public. 

I had to sing with Mdlle. Finola in most of 
her parts ; and at first I put on a kind of high- 
art indifference towards the whole affair. Indeed, 
I did not care to sing with any woman but Chris- 
tina, and I looked upon little Finola as a mere 
musical stop-gap. But her triumph fairly startled 
me ; and the evident dissatisfaction of some of 
the audience at my own careless performance, to- 
gether with some sharp reprimands from the fair 
singer herself, piqued and roused me at last into 
animation. I determined to enter into the spirit 
of the thing, and play my part in the admirable 
fooling. I sang and acted my very best, re- 
proached my white -robed Amina (whose stage 
night-dress was a masterpiece of elaborate milli- 
nery such as no princess ever went to bed in) 
with all the tones of despair and jealous madness ; 
clasped my plump and tightly-laced Leonora, and 
sighed out to the uttermost my passionate fare- 
well. I was graciously permitted by my conquer- 
ing heroine to share the honours of her triumph ; 



240 MY enemy's daughter. 

I led her forth ; I seized as many of her bouquets 
as two hands could grasp; I held back the cur- 
tain that she might squeeze her ample skirts 
through . she wore crinoline even when Amina in 
the bedroom . I attended her to her brougham, 
and was admitted to a gracious degree of her 
patronage and favour. 

" I don't think the world misses Madame 
Keichstein so much," she remarked to me one 
evening. 

" I don't think it does," I added, with a bitter 
conviction that it was only too true. 

"You see," she went on complacently, and 
with a quite judicial calmness and self-satisfac- 
tion; *' it wearies soon, that grand lyricism of 
the old school. The world will have vivacity and 
esjirit. One must suit the public ; but one must 
have tact to do it. For me, I never admired 
Madame Eeichstein ; and I know she always de- 
tested me." 

"Indeed you do her wrong; I have always 
heard her speak very well of you." 

"Possible; but that was before she thought I 



BIVALRY. 241 

could be a rival. One does not like a rival, espe- 
cially when one is not very young. She will soon 
be quite passee, I think. How old is she ?'* 

"I really don't know," I replied rather coldly. 

** Truly? I thought you knew her whole his- 
tory. She cannot be much less than forty." 

*' yes, certainly, very much less than forty ; 
not more than thirty, perhaps." 

"Then you do know something of her? I 
always heard that you did. Yes, I heard that you 
were in love with her ever so long ago . before I 
was born, perhaps . and that she married some- 
body else, who was killed, or died, or ran away; 
and lately I heard that you had arranged your old 
quarrel, and were going to marry her ; but I did 
not believe that." 

This was all hideously annoying ; and nothing 
but the sense I had of the absurdity which would 
attach to a dispute with such a girl, who, after 
all, talked no worse than most women will do of 
rivals, prevented me from giving some sort of dis- 
tinct expression to my feelings. 

Mdlle. Finola read my face and laughed. 

VOL. II. R 



242 MY enemy's daughter. 

^^ Allans r she said, "you are angry with 
me because I mock myself of your old love. 
I believe she is more jealous of me now than 
ever." 

" Come, now, mademoiselle, don't be foolish. 
You are not ill-natured, I know, and you ought 
not to talk spiteful nonsense of that sort." 

" Perhaps. But when a woman has carried a 
high head over one for a long time, it is a grand 
provocation to be spiteful. Without doubt, she 
has said as much or more of me since these last 
few days : but I will say not one word more if you 
are hurt ; and don't quarrel with me, for I meant 
no harm ; and if I had known it would touch you, 
I never would have said a word against her . clii 
moins in your presence." 

That night we were singing together in the 
Trovatore, which used to be such a favourite then ; 
and the audience were even more than usually 
delighted with the astonishing little Leonora. 
After one of her thrilling passages (which reminded 
me of a canary-bird in love), the beautiful Leonora 
passing me quickly said, with a beam of self-satis- 



RIVALRY. 243 

faction twinkling in her bright eyes, ''She is in 
the house." 

I had no need to ask whom she meant. I 
saw Christina in a box. She was very pale, and 
looked worse than I should have expected. 

I called to see her next day, and ventured to 
reproach her for coming out at night so soon ; but 
she made no answer on that subject. 

"You sang very well last night," she said; 
"with more soul than you generally throw into 
your parts." 

"Did I really? I was afraid I was getting 
through in a blank and careless kind of way. 
What did you think of Leonora?" 

I asked the question with some doubt, un- 
willing to ask it, but not seeing how to avoid it. 
I expected some sarcastic or contemptuous ans- 
wer, or some transparent affectation of admira- 
tion. 

"I was both surprised and pleased with her," 
Christina answered with perfect composure and 
apparent earnestness. " There is something 
quite now and fresh about her style, which makes 



244 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



her very interesting. I never thought she had so 
much originality. She quite inspired you.'" 

" Did she ? I am glad to he inspired hy any- 
body, or in any way." 

" You don't sing so well with me. Why?" 

"Perhaps because I strive to do my best 
too anxiously. Besides, your genius rebukes me, 
Christina ; that is the truth. You are too true 
an artist for me ; I don't care about little Finola." 

" People say you do, in another sense." 

" Do you believe them ?" 

" No, Emanuel, not I. . AVhat do you think of 
Mr. Lyndon's daughter?" 

She looked at me fixedly while she put this 
utterly inappropriate question. 

" She is a beautiful girl, and I should think 
she must have a beautiful nature. How came such 
a father to have such a daughter ?" 

" You dislike Mr. Lyndon, and cannot judge 
of him. Now I don't dislike Lilla." 

" No ; why should you ?" 

" Some women one could dislike, others one 
could not. I could not dislike your little friend 



KIVALRY. 245 

Finola ; I should as soon think of disliking a 
clever linnet. No matter; let us pass all that. 
You must sing your very best with me on Mon- 
day." 

** Next Monday ? You surely don't mean to 
sing next Monday?" 

*' Indeed I do." 

" Is that not rashness ?" 

'* Very likely. I mean to do it, though." 

" Pray, Christina, don't attempt it. Do let 
me advise you . " 

'' My dear friend, I never take advice. My 
voice is quite restored, and I mean to sing on 
Monday. Do you think I am going to allow the 
season to close with your little friend in full pos- 
session ?" 

" You don't fear rivalry. Your place is always 
yours to resume when you will." 

** Still, you don't know what woman's vanity 
is, if you think I could he content to endure a six 
months' exile from London with the knowledge 
that I had left your fascinating friend in possession 
of the field. No ; I must win a battle before I 



246 MY enemy's daughteb. 

go. Besides, I want to sing witli you again ; I 
want to be certain whether you cannot sing as 
well with me as with her." 

While we were speaking, there was heard a 
trampling of horses in the street below ; and in a 
moment a card was brought to Christina. When 
she looked at it, she glanced at me suddenly, and 
with a sort of flush in her face, as if I were some- 
how concerned in the matter. 

" No, I can't see her," she said to her German 
companion. "Yet, stay; it's very kind of her. 
Yes ; show her into the other room, Meta." 

I rose to go. 

"One moment, Emanuel; oblige me by re- 
maining one moment. I wish it particularly." 

I remained ; standing up, however. 

Presently I heard the rustle of skirts up the 
stairs and in the next room. 

" Now, Emanuel," said Christina with an odd 
and embarrassed kind of half- smile, " you are free 
to go. No; you need not advise or remonstrate; 
it would be useless. I mean to resume my place 



KIVALRY. 247 

on Monda}^ and dethrone your little friend, or 
perish in the attempt." 

She laughed a somewhat forced and flickering 
laugh, and I left. 

Wlio was her mysterious visitor, whom I was 
not to pass on the stairs even ; for that was clearly 
the reason why Christina had detained me "? Well, 
there could not be much mystery on the part of 
the visitor. As I came into Jermyn-street I saw 
a mounted groom leading a lady's horse up and 
down before the door. I knew the man's face 
perfectly well ; he was one of Mr. Lyndon's ser- 
vants. The visitor was evidently Lilla Lyndon. 



CHAPTER X. 



A DEFEAT. 



Christina carried out lier resolve, and sang the 
following Monda}' night in one of the parts to 
which Mademoiselle Finola had given a new read- 
ing. When she came on the stage she looked 
weak, I thought, and nervous. I could not see 
her without deej) and genuine emotion. I could 
not hut think of our early acquaintance and our 
early love ; of the promises we had made to each 
other of a happiness never given us to enjoy; of 
the bright assurance of success wdiich always sus- 
tained her, and of the success she had won, and 
the slender joy it seemed to have brought her. I 
felt the keenest sense of delight when I heard the 
enthusiastic welcome she received from the house, 
and saw her eyes sparkle with triumph ; and yet 



A DEFEAT. . 249 

I could not help pitying her, because she loved so 
much a triumph like that. 

She sang exquisitely in the first act, . not, 
indeed, with all her wonted strength, as my quick 
and watchful ear soon discovered, but with all the 
soul of feeling and the perfection of articulation 
which belonged specially to her. Her rival's per- 
formance must have seemed, in the mind of any 
cultivated listener, a poor and tricky piece of arti- 
ficiality when compared with her pure, noble, 
lyrical style. I saw her in the interval after the 
first act, and she was full of triumph. 

" Come," she said, " I have not been so rash, 
after all ; I have not failed, you see. I know you 
are glad of it, even though people do rank you on 
the side of your pretty Mademoiselle Finola." 

* ' Nobody can sing as you can ; and for the 
rest, you are only laughing at me." 

*' Perhaps so. Indeed, I feel in exuberant 
spirits to-night ; partly, of course, because I have 
got back my voice, and am about to recover my 
place, but still more because I have had good 
news." 



250 MY enemy's daughter. 

^' Indeed ! when ?" I knew by her expression 
that she was alluding to her husband. 

" To-day. Everything is going well. He 
hopes to be able presently to take a little rest 
at Vichy; and I am going there." 

"But what is going well? for I know no- 
thing." 

" Ach! nor I much more. But he has some 
enterprise in preparation, and it is going well, 
and he is hopeful. One may rely upon him, for 
he is not sanguine or extravagant ; he is not a 
dreamer, though many people think him so. It 
was quite miserable to me to have to lie on a sofa 
all day long up there in Jermyn-street, with no- 
thing to do but torture my brains and my heart 
thinking something had befallen him. But things 
look brighter now. I am very well now . don't 
you think so ?" 

"I would rather not see you here to-night. 
I doubt whether you are strong enough even 
yet." 

" Strong enough ! Quite. I could not be 
better. You don't think my voice was weak ?" 



A DEFEAT. 251 

" No ; but even now you seem nervous, and 
look pale." 

" Only because I am full of hope and triumpb." 

Our conversation was cut short just then, and 
I was a inimo uomo once more. 

I was glad when the opera was finished. It 
was a weary and a painful business to me, and to 
more than me. Christina's triumph was not long- 
lived. A vague sense of languor and of weakness 
began to diffuse itself through the house during 
the second act. It became very plain that Chris- 
tina had tried her strength too soon, and was not 
equal to the task she had so rashly set herself. 
It was not that she decidedly failed, but that she 
did not keep up her success. The music of the 
part became an effort to her. She grew more and 
more dispirited. In my anxiety that her wish 
for a triumph should be gratified, I would have 
welcomed even some sudden expression of dis- 
satisfaction from the house, because that would 
probably have fired her into energy. Of course 
nothing of the kind was heard. The house was 
thoroughly sympathetic and respectful. I knew 



252 MY enemy's daughter. 

liow bitter to her would be even that sympathetic 
respectfuhiess ; for it was the softened shadow of 
failure where she had expected to be illumined by 
the full blaze of success. 

*' She's not herself at all to-night," said some- 
body to me during a momentary meeting. " She 
ought not to have sung." 

" She ought not indeed," I said very blankly. 

" I thought she was going to make a splendid 
thing of it at first ; but it is quite plain that she 
is not equal to it. I am very sorry she made the 
attempt, for it will be a sort of triumph to little 
Finola and her clique. Have you seen her to- 
night ? There she is, yonder in that box, seem- 
ingly enjoying the whole affair . the little musical 
humbug." 

I could not help smiling at the vigorous truth- 
fulness with which he analysed the character of 
Mademoiselle. 

'' People have been telling me," he went on, 
' ' that you were going over to her party. No 
truth in that, I should think ?" 

*' Not one solitary word of truth in it." 



A DEFEAT. 253 

" No ; I hardly thought you could mistake 
that musical-snuff-hox sort of thing for singing, 
and those winks and shrugs for acting. I am 
very sorry for Keichstein, hut it's only just a 
moment's disappointment. Let her keep quiet 
and recover her strength, and she'll extinguish 
little robin redbreast yonder." 

The extinguishing, however, was not destined 
to take place that night. Christina's voice failed 
her more and more. The performance dragged 
through lifelessly and sadly. She could not 
sing. 

When all was over, I found her far more calm 
and self-controlled than I had expected. 

" I have made a complete failure of it," she 
said. 

" It was too soon for you to attempt singing ; 
that was all. There was no question of failure." 

" I ought to have taken your advice from the 
first ; but I was so confident of success. I sup- 
pose everyone perceived that I was not able to get 
through with it ?" 

" Everyone knew of course that you had not 



254 

been well, and no one expected to find tliat you 
had fully recovered your voice so soon." 

'' I savv- your friend, Mademoiselle Finola. No 
doubt she thinks the victory is hers now . and 
indeed it is. Is it not, Emanuel ?" 

*^You have only been defeated by yourself, 
because you would not do j^ourself justice." 

" I ought to have taken your advice in the 
matter, for it must have been disinterested. If 
what people say be true, you ought to be glad that 
I persisted in singing, and failed accordingly." 

I bit my lips, and felt hurt and vexed by allu- 
sions, of which I could not affect to misunder- 
stand the meaning. This was no time, however, 
to take offence at any word of Christina's. 

" You have not seen her since ?" she pro- 
ceeded, with a determined and vexing purpose. 
" Why don't you go to her and congratulate her 
on her triumph ?" 

" I had better," I could not help answering, 
''go to her or to anyone who will be less un- 
generous and will understand me better than you 
do, Christina." 



A DEFEAT. 255 

" But don't go, please, just vet. I do wrong 
to speak in that way, Emanuel, for I don't believe 
one word they say about your being leagued against 
me with her . I could not believe it. But I cannot 
help being vexed and spiteful after such a failure, 
and under her very eyes. Are you not sorry to see 
me so weak and vain ?" 

''I am, Christina; I do think such ways un- 
worthy of you. What rivalry can there be be- 
tween you and that little creature ? Let her en- 
joy her triumph, if she thinks it one. You know 
what it means, and what it is worth, and how long 
it is likely to last. It's a shame, Christina ; you 
have other things to think of besides her and her 
clique and their trumpery gossip." 

"I have indeed; and I deserve to be re- 
minded of it. You were always like an honest 
doctor, Emanuel . a doctor who does not mind 
giving his patient a little extra pain, if he can 
do any good by it. But you must forgive a little 
vexation to one who comes out for a great victory, 
and goes home defeated. You will come and sup 
with us ? We were to have had a celebration of 



25Q MY enemy's daughter. 

my triumph ; now it sliall be a feast of condo- 
lence. Come ; and I promise not to say another 
AYord about Finola." 

" Say anything you like about her, mcinet- 
7cegen ; but don't sink yourself even for a moment 
to her level." 

^' Well, will you come ? I thought of dis- 
missing my guests ; but I will not do so if you 
will come." 

" Let me refuse. Do not have guests. You 
are not fit for midnight, and talk, and excitement. 
Send them away." 

" Ah, but I am sadly in want of a flash of 
excitement now. Do come, Emanuel; there are 
only to be a few. Mr. Lyndon . " 

"No, Christina; forgive me, if I say point- 
blank, I don't want to meet that man, and least 
of all in your company. I dislike him, and I wish 
I could get you to do the same." 

*' Thanks. Our feelings are not likely to run 
quite in the same channel as regards the Lyndon 
family, I fancy. Meanwhile Mr. Lyndon is my 



A DEFEAT. 257 

friend and my husband's. Then you will not 
come ? Good-night." 

" You are offended with me ?" 

*' A little, and justly ; but I quite forgive you; 
only let us say no more about it. And so good- 
night." 

This conversation took place before we were 
out of the opera-house. I left her, and went my 
way alone. 

Walking homewards an hour after, I passed 
through Jermyn-street. Coming near Christina's 
lodgings, I could not help thinking over the 
strange mixture of levity and feeling, of egotism 
and generosity, of ambition and frivolity, which 
was in that singular nature; ambition so great 
and jealousies so small; success discoloured by 
such petty bitternesses ; great hopes made mean 
by such little pleasures and excitements. I 
wished she had sought solitude, not society, that 
night. I could not bear to think of her making 
one at a small revelry, and accepting, and perhaps 
enjoying, the attentions of Mr. Lyndon. Not 
my Lisette ! 

VOL. II. S 



258 

I might have spared myself some of these 
reflections. When I came in sight of her win- 
dows, there were no signs of reveh-y of any 
sort ; all was quiet and dark. She had evi- 
dently got rid of her guests, and gone home to 
solitude. 

*' I don't understand this woman j'et," I 
thought. *' For good or ill, I don't understand 
her. I wonder if I ever shall. Are any women 
ever to be understood at all ?" 

Christina sang no more that season, of 
which indeed hut few nights remained. She 
had attempted too much and too soon, and had 
to hear the penalty . hitter to her . of enforced 
rest. 

I did not see her any more that year. I 
called many times, but she could not or would 
not see me. After a few weeks she went to 
Vichy, and thence to Nice. I had several pro- 
vincial and some German engagements, and our 
paths divided altogether for many months. 

So closed our first season . for her in dis- 
appointment ; for me in disappointment of more 



A DEFEAT. 259 

than one kind. One thing was clear; Christina 
and I were far more widely separated now than 
when she was struggling in Italy, and I strug- 
gling in London, and neither knew of the other's 
whereabouts. 

Let me dispose, once for all, of Mademoiselle 
Finola, who is of no further importance in this 
stoiy, and need not appear in it any more. She 
had troops of admirers and many adorers; and 
among the latter she soon found an eligible hus- 
band. He was a man of large property and with 
a foreign title. She renounced the stage right 
joyously, and betook herself to an existence of 
balls and receptions, in which her soul found 
higher delight and more fitting sphere than it 
could have discovered in any triumph of musical 
art. Her name has been forgotten among singers 
long ago ; and she is not sorry. She carried oft* 
at the very outset the only prize she cared about ; 
and she looked back ever after on her artistic 
career as one remembers the weary progress of 
a journey which has led him to the warmth and 
light of a happy home. She lived principally 



260 

in London, not much caring to go back to Paris 
while the shoe-shop still stood in the Palais- 
Koyal arcade. I met her several times after her 
marriage, and she was very friendly and gracious 
for awhile, until chance and change gradually 
brought us less and less within each other's 
sight, and at last extinguished even recognition. 
The first season, then, in which Christina and 
I sang together had come and gone ; and this was 
what it brought. I knew no end of people now, 
and I doubt if London held a lonelier man. I 
felt as if I were running to seed; and I longed 
for a new life . a new start in life. It came ; 
but not in the way I had planned or expected. 
The unforeseen, as usual, came to pass. 



CHAPTEK XI. 
Christina's intervention, 



Another season opens, finding everything witli 
me much the same, to all outward appearance, 
as the season before. I have not yet carried 
out my idea of going to America ; and just at 
the present moment the idea is rather in the 
background. I have been in London since be- 
fore Christmas, and the spring is now well ad- 
vanced. I am still lodging under the same roof 
with Ned Lambert, though we sometimes don't 
meet for weeks together. I hear rather pro- 
mising accounts of the poor Lyndons in Paris. 
I have not seen Christina, or heard from her all 
the winter; but I know that she has been to 
Nice, and that Mr. Lyndon, M.P., has been 
there, without his daughters; and I know what 
the English colony there said and thought, and. 



262 MY enemy's daughter. 

while I believe it to be false as bell, I am mad- 
dened by such whispers. I know the common 
talk here is that Christina is to marry Lyndon ; 
and I wish her husband would abandon his con- 
spiracies, and own his wife, and live with her in 
the face of day. I have heard something from 
him too ; and news of him. There has been an 
abortive insurrection in Lombardy, and a few poor 
fellows have been bayoneted and shot, and some 
people blame Salaris for it, and say that he was 
there ; and others condemn Mazzini, and say that 
he was not there. 

Christina's engagement here, beginning rather 
late this year, is near at hand, and she must 
soon be in town. I have heard that her voice is 
quite restored, but that her general health is still 
weak. 

One morning I receive a letter addressed to 
me in her handwriting. I see it with something 
like a start. The time has been my whole senses 
would have stirred at the sight of that writing; 
and even still I cannot look at it unmoved. I 
believe there are some early feelings one never 



Christina's intervention. 263 

gets over . never. I shall never conquer my 
detestation of the smell of certain medicines. 
The faintest breath of them horrifies me, as if 
I were again a child about to have a dose forced 
down my throat. I shall never lose a sense of 
delight called up by the smell of tar ; because it 
brings back all the old memories of the sea and 
the strand and the boats. I shall never see a 
scrap of Christina Braun's handwriting without 
emotion. There are no particular mysteries to 
be treasured up to the end of this story, and I 
may say at once that I love another woman now 
better than I ever loved the idol of my boyhood. 
But I can look at her writing in a letter without 
anything of a thrill, while a line of Christina 
Braun's hand would even still produce at the 
first glance a sort of electric shock. 
Christina's letter was short. 

" Jermyn-street. 

" My dear Emanuel, . Greeting ! I have re- 
turned to town, as you will see, and I want to 
speak to you frankly, earnestly, as a friend. Do 
you believe me a true friend, above meanness, 



264 MY enemy's daughter. 

and wishing you well ? If so, forget any little 

coldness or ill-liumour I may have shown last 

year, when I was trouhled so much mentally and 

physically, and come to me at once. If you do 

not thus believe in me, then tear up this letter, 

and don't come. 

" Christina." 

I went to Jermyn-street immediately. Chris- 
tina's German companion received me at first ; 
and in a few minutes Christina herself entered. 
She was looking rather pale, hut very handsome, 
and bright-eyed, and splendid. 

''I am glad you have come," she said; "it is 
friendly of you. I wished to speak to you a 
little." And she glanced at the other woman, 
who was still in the room. 

" First of yourself, Madame Reichstein. You 
are recovered . really recovered and strong, I 
hope." 

" yes, I think so. I was not very well all 
the winter; and many things made me uneasy 
and distressed." 

She looked at me with such an expression 



Christina's ixTEPtYEXTiox. 265 

that I knew slie referred to lier husband. In- 
deed, I believe her German companion was quite 
in her confidence on this point. 

" But I am better now . much better ; quite 
restored, I think. And Finola is married, and 
has a title, and is happy ! And Ned Lambert 
is not married, and is not happy! I saw poor 
Ked the other day in Paris ; dear good Ned ! 
He is not happy . and he is uneasy about some 
of his friends." 

Here Christina lifted her eyes and let them 
rest full on me, as if she would read my very 
heart. I don't think I met the gaze quite boldly. 

"Did you meet many friends in Nice?" I 
asked, not knowing anything else to say. 

" Some ; not many. Mr. Lyndon was there 
part of the time." 

'' So I heard." 

I now looked fixedly at Christina in my turn. 
She did not wince. 

"I believe," she said quite carelessly, *' some 
people say Mr. Lyndon and I are to be married. 
.What do you think of that story, Meta ?" 



266 MY enemy's daughter. 

Meta smiled a dry smile. 

" Herr Lyndon is eiu hlsclien alt . a little old," 
was lier only remark ; and in a moment or two, 
to my great relief, she left tlie room, and I pre- 
pared to hear what Christina had to say. 

When Meta was present, Christina had heen 
sitting on a music-stool, while I sat quite away 
on a chair near the window. When we were left 
alone, she rose and stood near the fireplace, where, 
bright spring day though it was, there were blaz- 
ing embers, and she motioned to me to come near. 

I came and stood close beside her. 

"I have asked you to come," she said, "to 
speak of you, not of me." 

I suppose that was a note of defiance in reply 
to my look when we spoke of Mr. Lyndon. 

There was nothing indeed I wished to say or 
to hear said on the subject of Mr. Lyndon and his 
attentions, or the talk they created. I merely 
bowed my head in token of assent. 

Then Christina, throwing back her hair with 
one hand, and looking fixedly at me for an instant 
or two, said : 



Christina's ixTEPaxNTiox. 267 

"Now, Emanuel, I have something earnest to 
say to you. Just a word or two of question and 
of warning. You will take both question and 
warning in a friendly spirit, will you not ?" 

I think I now knew what was coming, although 
the reader does not. I fear I flushed a little ; 
hut I answered calmly, 

'' Surely, Christina, I could not receive any 
word from you hut as a friend." 

"I thank you for the confidence. Now for 
the word, Emanuel. What about Lilla Lyndon ?" 

' ' About Lilla Lyndon ! Which Lilla Lyndon ? 
There are two." 

Christina shook her head. 

" Not worthy of you, Emanuel. Evasion to 
no purpose. Tell me to mind my own affairs, and 
leave you to yours, and I will do so. But if you 
allow me to be your friend, and admit confidence, 
ilon't evade. I have always confided in 3'ou." 

" I don't think you have." 

" So far as I could just now. I have told you 
there are certain things I cannot quite explain 
even yet, but that they shall be explained. I have 



268 MY enemy's daughter. 

never evacled your questions. I once rather* an- 
ticipated tliem . put them for you and gave the 
answers, so far as any question might be given. 
Now, have you not been evading my question? 
Did you not understand it? Did I not see in 
your face that you understood it ?" 

"Well, Christina, I suppose I did. It is no 
use trying to evade so keen a questioner; and I 
wish I had answered you directly at once, and not 
given an appearance of mystery where there is 
none, and no need of any. Come, put any ques- 
tion you will . only don't expect that anything 
mysterious or romantic or interesting is likely to 
come in the way of answer." 

" Well, then, again : what about Lilla Lyn- 
don ?" 

" I can only say, so far as I know, nothing. 
To Lilla Lyndon I am nothing. To me she is 
a sweet, calm, pure-hearted creature, who seems 
to come out of dreamland, or poetry, or some old 
chronicle of saints . and that is all." 
" How long have you known her?" 
" Comparatively speaking, a short time. The 



Christina's intervention. 269 

first time I ever saw lier, and spoke to lier, was 
before I went to Italy, and I then saw lier hardly 
five minutes. Last season I saw her with you, 
as you will remember. Since I came back, I . I 
did meet her again." 

" That is, you threw j^ourself in her way ?" 
''I did; but not for any purpose of my own. 
I threw myself in her way because I thought I saw 
through her a means of helping and serving two 
dear friends . you know them both . Ned Lambert 
and Lilla, the other Lilla, Lyndon. Most truly 
can I say I did not selfishly do this ; but I did it, 
and this was how our acquaintance began." 
'' All that I knew." 
*' Then that is all." 

" No, not nearly all. You have met her 
lately?" 

"I have." 
*' And often?" 
*'Yes, often." 

*'In plain words, you have met this girl regu- 
larly, by appointment with her, in Kensington- 
gardens ?" 



270 MY enemy's daughter. 

*'No, Christina, that is not so. Whoever told 
you that part of the story, told you what was not 
true, what was flatly false ; and if it were a man, 
I should like to have a chance of saying as much 
to him. One word of this kind never passed be- 
tween us. We never met by appointment. I am 
not so mean as to think of such a thiner ; and if 
I had suggested it, I must have been answered 
just as I deserved." 

'' Well, I hear all tliis with pleasure . with 
some pleasure, at least. But you have met se- 
veral times, quite by accident, as she walked in 
Kensington-gardens. She has stopped and spoken 
to you at the railings as she rode in the Row." 

" She has ; and to many others too." 

*'Yes; the recognised friends of her family; 
her father's friends." 

I felt myself flushing with anger. I wish I 
could have felt myself clear enough of conscience 
to reply. 

" Come, Emanuel, again let me quote Zwischen 
uns sei Wahrhclt. You have deliberately put your- 
self in the way of meeting Miss Lyndon?" 



Christina's intera'entiox. 271 

"I have." 

" And you liave met her so often and so re- 
gularly, that you can nearly always count upon 
meeting her on certain days in the same place. 
This is true ?" 
" It is true." 

*' And she is . well, not to he hard upon your 
years, which would seem painfully like heing hard 
on my own . she is at least fourteen or fifteen 
years younger than you . is, in fact, considerably 
under age ?" 
" She is." 

"And you think you are acting honourably 
in this ?" 

"I do not!" I exclaimed, so suddenly and 
sharply that Christina drew back a little, and 
glanced uneasily at the door, as if fearful lest 
we should have been overheard. "I do not, 
Christina! I count it dishonourable. frankly 
dishonourable. I have been ashamed of myself 
long enough for doing it. When a poor boy in 
a small seaport, I would not have done so. But 
I have changed, and life has been dull and lonely 



272 MY enemy's daughter. 

to me, and I did like to meet that sweet pure 
girl, who seemed to me something so unlike the 
common world, that her very presence brightened 
life to me. And I am afraid I liked it none the 
less because I detested that cold-blooded, sensu- 
ous, selfish old hypocrite, her father." 

"Hush, hush, Emanuel, you don't know Mr. 
Lyndon . you and he seem, I can't tell how, to 
have a sort of instinctive aversion to each 
other." 

" No ; I don't suppose he even honours me 
with his aversion . and I don't care." 

"Then let him pass; come to his daughter. 
I think I am satisfied, Emanuel. I think, as you 
look this thing so fearlessly in the face and don't 
spare yourself, you need no farther appeal . no 
appeal from me; still, I meant to give you a 
warning. Let me give it before you leave ; we 
shall not often have such confidential conversa- 
tions. Emanuel, do jou love this girl ?" 

I turned away, and walked to the window. 
Christina came to me, and laid her hand upon 
my shoulder. 



Christina's intervention. 273 

" Speak frankly to me . as to your friend or 
your sister. Do you love her ?" 

" Can you ask such a question ?" 

" yes. Gone is gone, my friend, and dead 
is dead. I don't expect that the past could live 
for ever in your heart, and I should be sorry if 
it did. Let us remember nothing but so much 
as may give us a right to trust in each other. 
You do, then, love her?" 

Christina's voice trembled a little as she 
spoke. 

*' Christina, I have not thought of lo\ing her; 
not in that sense. Not as I loved 3'OU . not as 
I." 

" Then why do you meet her ?" 

"Because I was lonely, and at odds with 
everything, and her voice sounded sweetly in my 
ears, and her eyes looked kindly on me ; and she 
was a mild delightful influence, and I was selfish 
enough to think of nothing else." 

" Then my warning may be of use. Listen, 
Emanuel. If you loved this girl passionately, 
and hoped to marry her, you might possibly gain 

VOL. II. T 



274 MY enemy's daughter. 

your wish; for I believe there is nothing her 
father would not in the end consent to for her 
sake. But I don't believe you could be happy 
with her, or she with you. She is a sweet loving- 
child, with a child's feelings. She has, I think, 
no strength of character, no enduring, absorbing- 
affection. Either she must lead a life with you 
to which she would be utterly unused . you know 
that she has never breathed our atmosphere of 
Bohemia . or you must live a kind of pensioner 
on her father, maintained as the husband whom 
his wilful and foolish daughter would marry, and 
who therefore must be taken into the family 
circle. You wince under this. Is it not true ?" 

" But there never was the faintest idea of 
anything of the kind. Never. Good heavens ! 
one may speak to a young lady without . " 

*'Yes, one may; but when one meets the 
young lady very often clandestinely . " 

*' Clandestinely!" 

*'What other word can you find for it? 
Clandestinely, and nothing else. When one 
does this, he must contemplate something, or 



Christina's intervention. 275 

he must have no brains and heart at all; and 
you have both. Emanuel, I would, at almost 
any risk, save you from an entanglement that 
could only end, I am sure, in unhappiness. I 
speak to you, therefore, with an openness which 
perhaps wise people and good people would 
think does me little credit. Lilla Lyndon loves 
you!" 

I am afraid the first emotion created in me 
by this declaration was a pang of fierce and wild 
delight. It was followed quickly, as by a rush 
of cold air on a burning forehead, by a chilling 
sense of hopelessness and pain and shame. 
"It cannot be so, Christina; it is not so." 
" It is so ; I know it. Do you think I would 
talk of the poor girl so, if I did not know what 
I was saying? It is so. I have seen her lately; 
I know her well; I have talked with her many 
times ; she has come and seen me here in this 
room ; and a thousand things, a thousand words, 
have betrayed her poor little secret to me. Per- 
haps she does not know it herself. I don't sup- 
pose she has ever indulged much in examination 



276 MY enemy's daughter. 

of her own heart. "What of that ? I have eyes, 
and can see. If she were sinking into a con- 
sumption, she might not know it ; but I should 
know it, or you. There is nothing much to 
wonder at in the matter, Emanuel. The poor 
girl has hardly ever met any men but elderly 
members of parliament, and heavy capitalists, 
and bishops. I know Mr. Lyndon too well to 
suppose he would allow any poor and handsome 
young curate ever to come near his daughter. 
Wolilaiif! Your whole life is to her something 
interesting, strange, romantic. What is there 
to wonder at ? I daresay if she had met a dove- 
eyed young clergyman in good time, the thing 
never would have happened. Mr. Lyndon is 
like the man in ^sop who shut up his son in 
a tower lest he should be killed by the lion ; 
and, behold, the picture of a lion on the wall 
brought his death." 

Christina spoke with flashing eyes, and with 
all the dramatic energy she always had shown 
since her girlhood, whenever she felt any inter- 
est in what she was saying. A stranger might 



277 

have thought she was acting even now ; but I 
knew she was not. 

" Why do YOU tell me this . even if it be 
true ?" 

"Because I think I am speaking to a man of 
honour and spirit, and that the best appeal to you 
I can make is by the full frank truth." 

""WTiat would you have me do . supposing all 
this to be true ?" 

*' Give up this girl . leave her . never see her 
again ! Leave her before it be too late. She will 
forget you, Emanuel, believe me ; she will forget 
you, if only you leave her in time ; and she will 
marry somebody her father likes, and she will be 
a good obedient girl, and very happy, and her days 
will be long in the land, as the story-books put it, 
or the religious books, or what you will. And you 
will forget her ; you say even now you do not 
actually love her. She will cry a little, perhaps ; 
but all girls ciy for something, and I really don't 
think it much matters for what." 

"Christina, I don't like your tone . I don't 
like your way of speaking." 



278 MY eneiviy's daughtee. 

She laughed . a low, slight, scornful laugh. 

"Not romantic and tender and sentimental 
enough, perhaps? But look what your romance 
and tenderness come to. You are teaching this 
girl to deceive her father . yes, you are ; . yet you 
don't know that you love her, and you have no 
object whatever in meeting her ! Tarare ! You 
are not a boy, Emanuel, to act so any longer." 

I bit my lips. I felt vexed and ashamed, and 
only too conscious that I deserved all she said or 
could say. 

"Well, Christina, I must try to deserve your 
better opinion, and to act with more judgment 
and manliness. I make no promise, and I must 
act for myself in my own way ; but I hope you 
shall have no further cause to feel ashamed for me." 

"That is like yourself. your old self; I am 
sure you will do right after all. I would not talk 
to you in this way, if I thought you loved this 
girl; I would rather say, Fl'ng every thought 
away but that of loving her and holding her 
against the world. But you do not, and I think 
she will be cured at last of her love for you." 



Christina's ixter\^ntion. 279 

I rose to close the conversation. 

''I will do my best, Christina. Existence, I 
suppose, is always to be a bore and a weariness 
and a renunciation to me. Well, I accept the 
situation ; it will come to an end some time." 

" 0, pray, don't speak so." 

"Yes; I am weary of ever}i:hing. I am sick 
of this wretched profession . or art, or whatever 
you choose to call it . for which I have no heart 
and no genius, and in which I know I can never 
come to anything worth living for. I am tired of 
the people one meets, and the follies one commits, 
and the weary restraints one has to put on if he 
would not commit follies, and worse. What is 
one's motive in living ? I don't know." 

" Still we live, my dear ; and we can but make 
the best of it. I at least will not see you sink 
away, Emanuel, into any folly or fatality without 
saying a word to interpose. Perhaps you think 
I have no right to preach or to advise ?" 

I waved my hand to repudiate this idea. 

** But we made a pledge of friendship, Eman- 
uel, when we entered on . that new chapter of 



280 MY enemy's daughter. 

our lives ; and I have kept it in my heart as sa- 
credly as I could, though we have not often met. 
And I do not . indeed, I do not . think this you 
have done could come to any happiness for you or 
for her. Perhaps I don't understand the little 
girl quite, you will say," and she smiled slightly ; 
"hut if I am wrong, the thing will come to pass 
none the less hecause I ask you to he open and 
manly, and yet careful. You ask me what is the 
use of living, and how one is to hear with life ? 
My good friend, others have hitter hurdens too 
to hear, and hitter had temptations to resist ; and 
I could tell you how they learn to do it, only I 
dare not yet ; you would smile at me, or think 
me hypocritical, and I could not hear either. 
But one time I will tell you . that, and other 
things too, which now perhaps you do not know 
or guess. No, don't ask for explanation ; I have 
said enough, and too much. Now, good-hye !" 

END OF VOL. II. 
MY ENEMIY'S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER I.  

IN KEXSINGTOX-GARDEXS. 

^The conversation with Christina, which left me 
a little mystified in the end, has at least cleared 
up something of my story since the Lyndon s, 
mother and daughter, left London. Perhaps it 
has told so much that I might now go straight 
on with the rest as it occurred, and without turn- 
ing hack to review or explain anything. But it 
would possibly be well to give a few lines to a 
candid recapitulation of what had taken place, 
and to a chapter of my life which I always look 
back on with a mixture of pride and of shame. 

VOL. III. B 



2 MY eneiviy's daughter. 

When poor Ned Lambert was left by Lilla 
Lyndon, he and I spoke but a very few words over 
the matter : few, but enough. He was a silent fel- 
low by nature, and a man to crush down what he 
felt. He knew how thoroughly I sympathised with 
him ; and a grip of the hand from such a man or 
to such a man is incomparably more eloquent than 
words. His nature was quiet, patient, confiding ; 
he knew that Lilla loved him, he knew that there 
was some reason why he must at least submit to 
wait ; and he submitted, and asked no questions. 
He did not maunder, or mope, or idly repine at 
fate or anything else, but only seemed to throw n,^. 
fiercer energy into everything he did, to the very 
smoking of a cigar ; and he used to sit up half 
the night devising new improvements in the con- 
struction of organs. He told me he went to see 
Christina sometimes, but never when anybody 
was likely to be there. He " dropped her a line," 
he said, when he felt anxious to say a word to her, 
and she always set apart a time to suit him at the 
earliest moment. Like most silent men, he was, 
I am sure, ready to be very effusive and confiden- 



IN IvENSINGTON-GAEDENS. 6 

tial with any woman he trusted in ; and I have no 
doubt that he told Christina every word of his dis- 
appointment and his love, and talked to her as he 
would not . indeed, as he could not . have talked 
to any man alive. 

Meanwhile his occupations took him a good 
deal out of town. I don't know whether Lilla 
Lyndon wrote to him : she wrote to me some- 
times, and gave me good news of her prosperous 
and promising occupation in Paris. Of course I 
told her all about Ned Lambert, and hardly any- 
thing else, when I replied. After a while she 
began to tell me that she had received the sweet- 
est, kindest letters from her cousin Lilla, whom 
she had never seen, but who had suddenly opened- 
up a correspondence with her. Lilla the elder . 
Ned's Lilla . was greatly amazed and delighted at 
this, and could not understand it at all. I felt 
like one who is conscious of having done some- 
thing delightfully good, and is proud of having it 
known only to himself. After a while I began to 
take a somewhat modified and less flattering view 
of my own position in the transaction. 



4 MY ENEMY S DAUGHTEE. 

For all had happened as I told Christina. I 
had acted on the idea of making Lilla the younger 
the angelic, celestial mediatrix in the whole of the 
painful business. I felt sure that her influence 
over her father would have power enough to induce 
him, for the sake of the other Lilla, to buy off or 
pension off in some way his wretched brother . 
send him to America or Australia, or an3rwhere 
out of the way. Many times I passed her door to 
no purpose. One day at last I saw her as her 
groom was holding her horse's head and she was 
about to mount. Perhaps if she had not seen me 
then, and cordially recognised me, I might not 
have ventured to speak to her; but she did see 
me, and gave me a frank and friendly recogni- 
tion ; and then I went up and presented myself 
to her, and told her without hesitation that I 
came of my own counsel, unasked by anybody, 
unknown to anybody, to plead for her good offices 
on behalf of her cousin, the other Lilla. What- 
ever of secrecy might afterwards have grown up, 
this at least was done openly, at her father's door, 
under the eyes if not within the hearing of her 



IN KENSINGTON- GARDENS. 5 

groom, in the face of day. She received me with 
that innocent, genial, sympathetic trustingness 
which nothing hut purity and nobleness of heart 
ever can give. 

I confess that as I spoke to her that time, and 
saw her pure calm eyes turned to me, and heard 
her sympathetic, tender, girlish voice, I thought 
that between her and me lay a distance as broad 
as between two creatures of different worlds. It 
no more occurred to me as possible that such a 
woman could turn one thought towards me, than 
that one of the Madonnas of marble in an Italian 
chapel could have come down from her pedestal in 
the sacred stillness of the evening, and, like Diana, 
kissed some mortal worshipper. 

She had only known before that she had a 
cousin whom her father w^ould not suffer her to 
see ; of her uncle she had known nothing. She 
spoke to her father, and pleaded hard; and all 
she obtained was permission to wTite to the 
other Lilla Lyndon. From Lilla the elder she 
doubtless received encomiums of my honour and 
integrity and brotherly affection, and so forth, 



which led her to confide frankly in me. She 
did not despair at all of winning over her father ; 
and hut for the too frequent presence of her hard 
and puritanical step- sisters . she was the daugh- 
ter, the only child, of Mr. Lyndon's second 
marriage . she might much sooner have pre- 
vailed. I learned from her that she had actually 
found out and tried to redeem, and petted and 
largely bribed, the wretched old scoundrel, her 
uncle; and that she really did contrive, by her 
influence, and still more by her money, to keep 
him from making any more scandal. How I 
sickened at the idea of her meeting the odious 
old hypocrite ! and yet I did not dare to hint at 
what I thought of him. She had, with all her 
sweetness, a sort of resolute sanctified wilful- 
ness about her; and nothing on earth, except 
perhaps her father's absolute command, could 
have kept her from trying to do good to her out- 
cast uncle. Meanwhile the only good of keeping 
him temporarily decent was that it made her 
father feel convinced his brother would not dare 
to annoy him any more, and therefore more than 



IN KENSINGTON-GAKDENS. / 

ever determined not to yield to any entreaty 
on his behalf. 

What I confessed to Christina explains all 
the rest. We met by chance frequently. I found 
it was Lilla's habit to walk almost every day in 
Kensington-gardens for half an hour or so. It 
was only, so to speak, crossing the street from her 
own house ; and her maid was generally with 
her. We spoke together : she had always some- 
thing to say to me about the progress of her 
endeavours on behalf of her cousin. She did 
sometimes come alone. I did observe the hour 
and day of her coming, and I did always contrive 
to be there. To speak to her did always seem 
to sweeten and purify life for me. I did at last 
begin to think I was acting a mean and shameful 
part, although no word had ever passed between 
us which her mother, were she living, might not 
have heard. I did begin to feel ashamed of thus 
meeting a girl whose father would not, if he could, 
acknowledge my existence; and, what was worse 
still, I did feel conscious of a hideous, degrading 
sense of gratified malignity in the knowledge of 



8 

the fact. This it was which most distinctly told 
me of my own growing degradation. 

All I had told Christina was true. I did not 
venture to think with love of Lilla Lyndon. My 
God, I never thought of loving her. She seemed 
far too pure and good, too unworldly and child- 
like in her goodness, to be loved by a half out- 
worn Bohemian like me. She was not of my 
ways at all. When I saw her, I only breathed 
a purer air for a moment, and then went back 
to my smoke and gaslight and Bohemia again. 
But Christina spoke unwisely; she counted on 
a romantic heroism greater than mine, when she 
told me that such a girl was capable of loving 
me. Truly, I resolved that I must cease to see 
her; but then I also made up my mind that I 
must see her once more, and that I must part 
from her in such a way that at least she should 
not despise me. Suppose what Christina said 
to be true . and I hardly yet believed it . the 
worst of the evil was partly done, and it could 
do little more harm, no more harm, to take 
leave of Lilla Lyndon in such a way as should 



IN KENSINGTON -GARDENS. 9 

at least allow her to retain a raemory of me 
which should not be wholly one of contempt. 

I did not once think it possible that any- 
thing but separation could come of our strange 
acquaintanceship. Let me do myself justice. 
So much there was equivocal and weak, and 
ungenerous and mean, in this chapter of my 
history, that I must protect the reputation of 
what little honourable feeling I always retained. 
Had I loved Lilla with all the passion of a 
youth's first love, I don't think I should have 
attempted to induce her to marry me : it would 
have seemed cruelly unfair to her. There ap- 
peared to be some truth in what Christina said. 
Lilla probably did not and could not know her 
own mind. Any feeling she might entertain for 
me was doubtless but the strange, sudden, 
ephemeral sentiment of a girl . the foolish ro- 
mantic tenderness a young woman just beyond 
the schoolgirl's age sometimes feels towards her 
music-master or her riding-master. It will die, 
and be buried and forgotten in a season : to treat 
it as a reality would be a treachery and a cruelty. 



10 MY enemy's daughter. 

The more we hear from the women of mature 
years who confide in us, the more do we know 
that almost every girl of quick fancy and tender- 
ness has had her budding bosom filled for a while 
with some such whimsical afi'ection, which fades 
before the realities of life and of love, and is only 
remembered, if at all, with an easy, half-mirthful 
memory. To Lilla Lyndon, I thought to myself, 
I shall soon be such a memory, and no more. If 
I remain in London, or return to it, I shall hear 
of her being married to someone who brings her 
a fortune and a position ; and I shall read of her 
parties in the season, and perhaps some day see 
in the papers that she has presented her daughter 
at Court; and we may meet sometimes, or she 
will come to hear me sing, and she will be 
friendly and kind, and not ashamed of the fading 
memory of these days. I am surely the most 
unfortunate of beings where any word of love is 
in question : I seem to be able only to learn 
what the thing is, or may be, in order to have 
it taken away from me. I must really make 
up my mind to be a stern old bachelor, and 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 11 

have done Tvdtli all thoughts of what is clearly 
not for me. Yesterday I was a boy too young 
to marry ; now I am getting rather elderly for 
such ideas. Let me close the chapter altoge- 
ther; let me see Lilla Lyndon once, only once, 
and bid her a kind good-bye, and relieve my 
soul by confessing that I have done wrong, and 
beg of her still to think of the other Lilla ; and 
then I ^ill go and tell Christina what I have 
done, and she will at least approve; and so the 
drudgery of life will just go on as before. 

I had walked, thus thinking, along Picca- 
dilly, which was glaring and garish in the sun, 
and by Apsley House (where, when first I came 
to London, one might yet see " the Duke " 
getting into his queerly- shaped cab), into Hyde- 
park, and so to Kensington-gardens. When I 
reached the shade of. the noble old trees of 
Kensington, I walked slowly, and lingered and 
looked anxiously around. I came within sight 
of the little round basin which lies, so pretty a 
lakelet, in the bosom of the open, which the 
trees fringe all round, and whence the glades 



12 MY enemy's daughteb. 

and vistas stretch out. London has nothing so 
exquisite as just that spot. With the old red 
palace near at hand, and no other building in 
sight, one may ignore the great metropolis al- 
together, and fancy himself in a park of Anne's 
days, embedded deep in the heart of some 
secluded country landscape. A slight breeze 
to-day ruffled the surface of the little pond, 
over which the water-fowl were skimming, and 
the shadows of birds fell broken on it as they 
flew overhead ; and a light cloud could now and 
then be seen reflected in it. The whole scene 
was gracious, gentle, tender, with a faint air 
of melancholy about it, which was but a new 
grace. 

On one of the seats which look upon the 
little basin I saw Lilla Lyndon sitting. She 
had a book in her hand, but she was not read- 
ing. She looked up from the water as I ap- 
proached, and greeted me with a frank, bright 
smile. She was a very handsome girl, with 
her youthful Madonna contour of face, her pale 
clear complexion and violet eyes, and dark-brown 



IN KENSIXGTON-GARDENS. 13 

hair parted smoothly, as was then the fashion, 
on either brow. As her brilliant red lips parted 
and showed her white small teeth, a gleam of 
vivacity for the first time lighted the face, of 
which the habitual expression was a tender 
calmness, almost a melancholy beauty, like that 
of the sunlight on the water beneath her. 

"I am glad you have come," she said, after 
she had given me her hand, ^'for I came here 
much earlier than usual to-day, and it is lonely, 
and I have felt rather weary. I have just been 
wondering . perhaps you can help me to under- 
stand it . why inanimate nature is all so melan- 
choly, and why the least throb of life seems to 
be joyous. I have been looking at that pool, 
and the light and the leaves, and they all seem 
sad ; and a water-fowl just plunges into the pond, 
and floats and dives, and the sadness seems to 
vanish in a moment." 

''I fear I am not poet enough to understand 
it." 

" But you ought to be a poet . in soul, at least. 
A singer must be a poet, I think, or how can he 



14 MY enemy's daughter. 

sing ? You have made me feel poetic many 
times." 

" So I daresay has a hai-p or a violin. I have 
as much music in my soul as the fiddle." 

'* 0, but that is nonsense. There is some- 
thing I read lately that reminds me of a word or 
two I once heard from you about music. I have 
been reading that novel of Pdchter's you told me 
to get . the Flegeljahre. Well, the poet-brother 
praises the flutist-brother's exquisite performance; 
but unfortunately he gives as his reason for 
admiration that the music brought up all the 
most tender and delightful associations to his 
memory. I should have thought that the highest 
praise : should not you ?" 

I shook my head. 

" No ? Well, so too says Vult the flute-player. 
He is quite disappointed, and shakes his head, 
and says : ' I see, then, that you did not under- 
stand or appreciate the music at all.' So it is with 
me. When I most delight in music, it is because 
it brings up something which is not in the music 
itself." 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 15 

" And I too, Miss Lyndon ; and therefore I 
know I am not a true musician." 

" Then who is ?" 

" Well, Madame Reichstein is, and many 
others." 

" Yes ; papa always says Madame Eeichstein 
is. I delight in Madame Reichstein myself, both 
on the stage and off; more even when off, I 
think." 

''You have met her lately?" 

''Yes, several times. I make papa take me 
to see her. I never knew a great singer before . 
a woman I mean. I think her very charming. Is 
she what people call a lady?" 

" Not what Belgravia calls a lady, certainly. 
Her father was a German toymaker." 

"You are angry with me for my question," 
said Lilla, opening her violet eyes widely, and 
looking at me with quite a pathetic expression, 
" and you think me a fool ; but do you know the 
reason I asked the question? I had a reason." 

" I don't know the reason, Miss Lyndon." 

" Just this, then : somebody . a woman to 



16 MY enemy's daughter. 

whom I talked of Madame Keiclistein . chose 
to speak rather contemptuously of her, and said 
she was not a lady. I asked rather sharply, why 
not ? and she answered that she was not a lady of 
rank off the stage, like Madame Sontag and some- 
body else, I don't know whom ; and that she is 
not received in society. So much the worse for 
society, I thought." 

" I suppose society has its laws everjrwhere. 
I don't suppose Madame Keiclistein cares. I am 
sure she is not ashamed of having been born 
poor, any more than I am. Miss Lyndon. My 
father was a boat-builder, my mother sewed gloves ; 
my genealogy goes no farther back. I don't 
suppose I ever had a grandfather." 

" You speak coldly, or angrily, as if you 
thought I cared about people's grandfathers," said 
Lilla gently; ''I wish I had not said anything 
about Madame Eeichstein, whom I think I admire 
as highly as anybody can. You cannot suppose 
I really care whether her father was a poor man or 
a rich man?" 

"Frankly, Miss Lyndon, I doubt whether. 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 17 

people ever get quite over these feelings. Perhaps 
it is better not. I am always angry with any of 
my own class who try to get out of it ; and I think 
them rightly treated when they are reminded of 
their social inferiority." 

I suppose I was speaking in a tone of some 
bitterness. Lilla's remark, innocent as it was, 
had jarred sharply on me, and seemed to point 
the painful moral of the course into which I had 
been drifting. Even this child had eyes to see 
that she and I had come from a different class, 
and belonged to a different world. I had been 
standing beside the seat on which she sat. She 
looked up quickly as I spoke ; then rose and stood 
near me, and with the gentlest action in the 
world, laid her small hand on my arm. 

" I see that I have offended you," she said, 
" by my thoughtless talk. But trust me, that if 
I thought less highly of Madame Reichstein, and 
. and of you, I should never have spoken in such 
a way. I did not suppose it possible you could 
have taken my w^ords as you have done. It 
humilitates me even more than you. Pray, pray 

VOL. III. c 



18 

don't misunderstand me ; I have no friend I value 
like you." 

Her voice was a little tremulous in its plain- 
tiveness, and the kindliness of her expression was 
irresistible. Even wounded pride could not stand 
out against it. 

" Your friendship, Miss Lyndon, is one of the 
dearest things I have on earth . almost, indeed, 
the only thing that is dear to me. Let me pre- 
serve it. Were you going home? and may I 
walk just a little way with you ?" 

" Yes, I was going home ; and I shall be glad 
of your companionship yet a little." 

"With all our "clandestine" meetings, we had 
never walked together before. Our sin against 
propriety had been limited to just the occasional 
meetings, the exchange of a few words, and the 
partings. Now I did not offer her my arm ; we 
walked side by side down one of the glades which 
stretches nearly parallel with the road. A little 
girl, poorly dressed, darted across our path, 
then suddenly stopped, and looking shyly at 
me, dropped a curtsey to my companion, and 



IN KENSINGTON- GARDENS. 19 

was going on, when Lilla, addressing her as 
" Lizzy," brought her to a stand. She talked 
to the child about her father, who had a sore 
arm, and was out of work ; and her mother, 
and her brother, and so on ; and I heard her say 
she was going to see them that day; and she took 
out a little purse, and gave the girl something. 

" One of my children," she said in explana- 
tion; "I have a school; a very little one. I have 
asked Madame Reichstein to come and see it, and 
she will sing for the girls. I owe a great deal to 
these children. They give me occupation ; I 
should not know what to do with my existence 
but for them, our house is so very dull. I sup- 
pose a home without a mother always is. Papa is 
so busy with Parliament and politics, and so much 
out." 

A moment's silence followed. Then I took 
heart of grace and said, 

"Just now. Miss Lyndon, you were kind 
enough to say you thought of me as a friend; 
and I asked you to let me deserve your friend- 
ship." 



20 

" Have you not deserved it ? Did you not 
teach me how I might perhaps serve and help 
those who have claims on me ? Have I not 
heard how true and steady a friend you were to 
my cousin and her mother, and her poor father ? 
Have I not seen all this? Mr. Temple, I don't 
know why papa is so resolute in refusing to meet 
or help my uncle. I suppose he has good reason ; 
but I myself believe only in mercy and kindness, 
and . and love. I don't think our religion teaches 
us anything else ; and at least I don't believe in 
human justice when it only punishes. I must 
try to bring my people together ; and I hope to 
succeed. If I do, will not that be a great 
thing? And how could it have been done but 
for you ?" 

" If it can be done, it would have been done 
without me. But I am only too glad to hear you 
speak so kindly and hopefully. I am a believer 
in your religion of pity and mercy and love . or 
in none. But I have to deserve your friendship 
otherwise than in this easy and pleasant way. 
Miss Lyndon, I have no right to be with you 



IN KENSINGTON-GAKDENS. 21 

here to-day. I have no right to walk hy your 
side. I have no right to come, as I have come, 
for the sole purpose of meeting you. All this is 
wrong in me, and wrong towards you. You are 
much younger than I am, and your kindness 
and friendship make you only too thoughtful for 
others . not for yourself. I must not see you 
any more, in this way . and I could not help 
telling you . and good-hye." 

She looked up at me with a sudden startled, 
pained expression, and then her eyes fell, and 
over her clear pale face there came a faint, faint 
flush. 

"Not to meet any more?" she said at last. 
" Then I have done wrong in being here '?" 

"Not you . 0, not you. But I, Miss Lyn- 
don, I have done wrong ; I came here, day after 
day, to meet you." 

" Yes ; I knew it . I expected you ; I wished 
you to come." 

" But I am not your father's friend . he would 
not approve of my meeting you." 

"Who is to blame, Mr. Temple, but your- 



22 

self? Have I not many times asked you to let 
me bring papa and you to be friends? Have I 
not often told you, I felt convinced that if 
lie only knew you, he would appreciate you as 
I do ?" 

"You have often said so; but you cannot 
know bow men of the world think . " 

" But I do know papa ; and I know that there 
are few things I could ask him which he would 
not grant. One of the things I have deter- 
mined on is, that he shall know you, and 
appreciate you, and like you. I will tell him 
this very day. Why should you not come to our 
house, and be of our friends, and brighten our 
home a little for us, instead of some of the dull 
and pompous and uncharitable and unloving peo- 
ple who come to us? Mr. Temple, if you think 
there is anything lowering to you in the way 
our acquaintanceship has been carried on so far, 
let me bear the blame of it, and there shall be 
no more cause for blame. I will tell papa this 
very day . I will tell him all." 



IN KEXSIXGTON-GAEDEXS. 23 

" That I have met 3^011, and walked with 
you ?" 

"Yes, every word. Why not? I will tell 
him the whole truth; and he will believe me. 
I will tell him we met here because I wished 
to meet you, and you were too proud to come 
to our house. And I will tell him that you 
must come often." 

" And teach you to sing, perhaps ?" I 
could not help asking with a rather melancholy 
smile. 

" Yes ; why not ? that is, if you w^ould ; only 
I suppose you are again too proud, and will be 
offended if I even mention such a thing. I 
should think it delightful." 

"Miss Lyndon, every word you say only 
shows me, more and more, with what nobleness 
and innocence . I must say it . you have acted, 
and how unworthy of such goodness and such 
companionship I am. Do follow out your right 
impulse; do speak to your father thus frankly, 
and abide by what he says." 

"I will; and I will tell him you told me to 



24 MY enemy's daughter. 

do so. You will find you do not understand him 
as well as I do. Only you must promise you 
will come to our house when he asks you." 

"I might safely promise on such a condi- 
tion, and the result be just the same, but I 
will not. I must at last be open and frank 
with you, who are so candid and sincere with 
me. No, Miss Lyndon, I can never enter your 
house as a sort of tolerated inferior, even if 
your father did become as good-natured as you 
expect." 

^'Inferior! You pain me and humiliate me. 
Have I acted as if I thought you an inferior? 
Am I, then, in your judgment, capable of giv- 
ing my w^arm friendship and my confidence to 
an inferior ? For shame, Mr. Temple ! Have 
more faith in yourself and your art, and the 
beautiful life it gives. Have more faith in 
me." 

"I have more faith in you than in anything 
under heaven. But I know what your father 
would think of me. I know what he would say, 
and with only too much appearance of justice. 



IN KENSINGTON- GARDENS. 25 

I cannot, even for you, bear this, and bear it too 
to no purpose. Speak to him, if you will, but I 
could never meet you under his roof except on 
conditions which I could never bear, or with an 
object which is hopeless and impossible. No, 
Lilla . no, Miss Lyndon . " 

"You may call me Lilla; I wish to be called 
so." 

" No, Lilla ; I have come up from the lowest 
life, but I have some sense of honour, and some 
pride. I have done wrong thus far . I never saw 
it so clearly as now; but it shall be done no more. 
I have your interest and your happiness now far 
too deeply at heart to think in the least of any 
pain it may give me . or even you . to do right. 
To meet any more would be hopeless for me, and 
useless generosity on your part." 

" Then our friendship comes to an end? I am 
sorry. I wished that we might be always friends 
. I felt life less weary." 

*' Our friendship surely shall not come to an 
end. It shall live always, I hope." 

"But I don't understand why this should be 



26 MY enemy's daughtee. 

so . why you should haughtily refuse our friend- 
ship." 

"You don't understand it now, Lilla; but you 
will one day, and you will feel glad . " 

" I am very unhappy." 

There was a calm, clear sincerity in the way 
she spoke these words which was infinitely touch- 
ing. Was it not likewise infinitely tempting? 
Let those who, like me, yet young, have been cast 
away prematurely from love, and have long felt 
compelled to believe that supreme human joy cut 
off from them for ever . let them suddenly be 
placed face to face with a beautiful, pure, and 
tender girl, and see the expression I saw trem- 
bling on her lips and sparkling in tears on her 
eyelids, and say if it was nothing to stand firmly 
back, and leave her, as I did. When for my sins 
I am arraigned hereafter, as good people tell us 
we shall be, before some high celestial bar, I hope 
I shall be able to plead that one effort as a sacri- 
fice in mitigation of the heavenly judgment. 

"I am very unhappy," she said. "And now 
that you have spoken thus, you have made me 



IN KENSINGTON GARDENS. 27 

think for the first time that I have been doing- 
wrong. I hoped to have brought all my people 
together, and healed the quarrels and dislikes 
which are so sad and sinful in a family; and I 
hoped to have made papa and you know each 
other, and love each other . and he could appre- 
ciate you . and to have made much happiness; 
and now I only feel ashamed, as if I had been 
doing something secret and wrong ; and you tell 
me we must not be friends any more. I have had 
no friends before ; the people we know are formal 
and hard, and only care for politics and money; 
and I don't care for their society, and I cannot 
school my feelings into their way. But what is 
right, Mr. Temple, we must do ; and I think only 
the more of your goodness, and am all the more 
sorry, because you have told me what I ought to 
do. Good-bye !" 

She spoke this in a tremulous voice that 
vibrated musically and sadly in my ears, as in- 
deed it vibrates there now. There was a look 
of profound regret and profound resignation on 
her face, which to my eyes, unaccustomed to 



28 MY enemy's daughter. 

see men and women obey aught but their mere 
impulses, good or bad, seemed saintlike, heaven- 
like. Even then I think I only felt the more 
deeply how little such a nature could in the end 
have blended with mine ; how imperative and 
sacred was the duty which divided us in time. 
I could have wished that death awaited me in 
five minutes; but I did not flinch. I did not 
say one tender word, which might have recklessly 
unsealed the fountains of emotion in that sweet 
and loving nature. 

"Good-bye, Mr. Temple." She put her 
hand in mine. I pressed it reverently, rather 
than warmly. 

" Good-bye, Miss Lyndon." 

There was a pause ; neither spoke ; and then 
we separated. 

I turned and gazed after her. Her tall, light, 
slender figure looked exquisitely graceful as she 
passed under the shadow of the trees, and over 
the soft green turf. I see her still as I look 
back in memory; I see her figure passing un- 
der the trees. I see the whole scene ; the grass, 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 29 

the foliage, the sunlight, the graceful, tender, 
true-hearted girl, who would have loved me. 

Her handkerchief had fallen, and lay on the 
grass. I took up the dainty little morsel of 
snowy cambric, and saw her initials in the cor- 
ner. I thrust it into my breast : I would keep 
it for ever ! To what purpose ? It is not mine ; 
what have I to do with relics and memorials of 
Lilla Lyndon? I ran after her with it. She 
turned round quickly, when she heard the foot- 
steps behind her. 

" Your handkerchief, Lilla . you dropped it ; 
that is all. Good-bye." 

She smiled a faint acknowledgment ; but 
though her veil was down, I could see that her 
eyes were swimming in tears. She did not 
speak a word; and I turned and went my way, 
not looking back any more, for I knew that the 
angel who had perchance been a moment under 
my tent had departed from it. 

I went back to the side of the little basin, 
and sat for a while in the chair where she had 
sat; and I leaned my chin upon my hand, and 



30 MY eneliy's daughter. 

looked vacuously at the rippling water. I have 
obeyed you, Christina, I thought; I have made 
this sacrifice. Heaven knows how little of it was 
made for Heaven ! Would you ever, under any 
circumstances, have loved me as she might have 
done ? And now all is at an end ; I have lost 
her ! What remains ? 

I believe old-fashioned theologians used to 
say that man had always an angel on one side 
of him, and a devil on the other. My angel, 
as I have said, had left me; but I suddenly 
found that I was favoured with the other com- 
panionship. 

I heard footsteps near me. I did not look 
up ; what did it matter to me who came or went 
in Kensington-gardens now ? But a mellow, roll- 
ing chuckle, to which my cars had lately been 
happily a stranger, made me start. 

*'I11 met by sunlight, proud Temple," said 
the voice I knew only too well. And Stephen 
Lyndon the outcast . Lyndon of the wig . came 
stamping and rolling up. I think I have already 
said that his gait often reminded me of a dwarf 



IN KEXSINGTOX-GAEDENS. 31 

Samuel Johnson. He had a habit, too, of rolling 
his jocular sayings about on his lips, which made 
the odd resemblance still odder. It was some 
time since I had seen him, although I knew of 
late that he too used to AA'alk in Kensington-gar- 
dens. He was neatly and cjuietlv dressed now, 
and, in fact, looked rather as if he were going in 
for calm respectability. His wig was less curly, 
his hat was not set so jantily on the side of his 
head, and he was not smoking a cigar: he wore 
black-cotton or thread gloves : he had a bundle of 
seals pendent from his old-fashioned fob. Vir- 
tuous mediocrity, clearly ; heavy uncle, of limited 
means, reconciled with Providence, 

I looked at him thus curiously because I had 
come to know that one must always study his 
"get-up" a little, in order to understand his 
mood of mind or purpose. Taking all things 
together, I came to the conclusion that he had 
watched and waited for me deliberately, and that 
he had something to say. I did not seek to avoid 
him, or get rid of him. T^'hy should I ? Lilla 
Lyndon held him good enough to speak to her; 



32 MY enemy's daughter. 

how should I think myself lowered by his com- 
panionship ? I resolved even to do my best to be 
courteous and civil to him. 

"How do you do, Mr. Lyndon? "We have 
not met for some time." 

*' No, Temple . a pity too ; such congenial 
spirits, and now, I may almost say, companions 
in a common enterprise. We have not met 
lately; but I have seen you . I have seen you 
when you didn't think it, wild youth. You're 
looking well, Temple, as far as flesh and worldly 
evidences go ; you are growing stout, I think, and 
your get-up is rather different from what it was 
when I first had the honour of meeting you . let 
us say half a century ago. Ah, Fortune has been 
kind to you. You are no longer the wretched poor 
devil you used to be. I have heard of your suc- 
cess, Temple, with a sort of pride, not unmingled 
with surprise, let me say ; for, between ourselves, 
I never thought there was much in you except 
voice. I told Madame Keichstein so the other 
day." 

'' Indeed ! You have seen Madame Reichstein ?" 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 33 

"I did myself tlie pleasure of calling on her; 
we are old friends. She does not forget old friends, 
or turn up lier nose at tliem, as certain smaller 
people do, to whom we will not allude more par- 
ticularly. Now, she is a great success : there is 
genius, if you want it, not mere lungs. Yes, I 
disparaged you. Temple, to her ; I said I thought 
there was nothing in you. You are not offended?" 

^'Not in the least." 

"I thought you wouldn't. Between old friends, 
you know; and I never concealed from you my 
honest opinion. You see, Temple, I am an artist 
in soul. I know real musical genius when I find 
it . rather ! Yes, I told her so." 

*'Well?" 

"Well, she didn't seem to like it. She con- 
veyed to me . delicately, of course, for she is quite 
a lady in manner, that let me tell you . she con- 
veyed to me that she thought me an impertinent 
old idiot. Of course I didn't mind. She is pre- 
judiced in your favour ; anybody can see that with 
half an eye. May I sit beside you a moment ?" 

"Certainly; but I am going immediately." 

VOL. III. D 



34 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



" I have a word or two to say first ; if you like, 
I'll walk your way. Eatlier not ? Well, then, let 
us just sit here for a few moments. After all. Tem- 
ple, what lovely spots there are in London ! Wliat 
could he a more charming hit of woodland than 
this ? it might make a painter of anyhody. To 
know London, Temple, is, if I may paraphrase 
a famous saying, of which I daresay you never 
heard, a liberal education. Where in the Bois de 
Boulogne, or the Thiergarten, or the Prater, is 
there so delicious and so natural a glimpse as 
that?'* 

He pointed with his cane down the glade into 
which Lilla Lyndon had just disappeared. 

*'I saw you studying that vista just now. 
Temple. Evidently you have an artist's eye, 
although I confess I never suspected you of any- 
thing of the kind before ; but you looked down 
that vista as only an artist or a lover could." 

**I like Kensington-gardens very much. But 
you were saying, I think, that there was something 
particular you wished to speak of." 

*'To be sure, so I was; I approached you for 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 35 

tlie purpose. But I am such a lover of natural 
beauty, that it makes me forget everything, 
especially business. Do you knovr, Temple, I 
don't believe a man can be really religious who 
does not appreciate the beauty of that sunbeam on 
the water, and that shadow on the grass. I don't 
think such a man ought to expect to go to heaven. 
Do you ?" 

''I don't think some of us ought to expect to 
go to heaven in any case. But you had some- 
thing special to say?" 

'.'Hard and practical as ever! Ah, Temple, I 
fear there is in you very little of the true artist 
nature. AVell, it makes my present business the 
more easy; I might perhaps find it hard to open 
it gracefully to a poet. To the business, then. 
The fact is. Temple" . and here he suddenly 
abandoned the tone of rodomontade blended with 
banter which was so common with him, and as- 
sumed a cool, dry, matter-of-fact way . "the fact 
is, I see the whole game; I have seen it all along." 

"Indeed! May I ask what game . whose 
f]:ame ?" 



36 MY enemy's daughter. 

"No nonsense, Temple; it won't do with me; I 
am quite up to the whole thing. We have been 
rowing in the same boat this some time, although, 
if you will pardon me for applying such a dreadful 
old joke, not perhaps with the same sculls. She is 
a charming girl, Temple, and we're both very fond 
of her, in a different sort of way ; and she will 
have a good fortune of her own, even in the 
lamentable event of her displeasing her respect- 
able and virtuous father, and so causing him to 
leave all his money to her step -sisters. Her 
mother took good care of her in that way. Ah, 
Temple, ingenuous youth, what a sharp fellow you 
are !" 

I got up to go away, disgusted beyond en- 

 
durance. 

"Look here, Mr. Temple; I want to talk to 

you fairly and like a mar Do drop your ranti- 

pole high-tragedy airs for once. You have been 

meeting my charming and innocent little niece 

here day after day; so have I. It goes to my 

heart sometimes to take the good little girl's 

money; but I do take it. She doesn't want it, 



IN KENSINGTON- GAr.DENS. 37 

you know . and ice do. Now your game is just 
the same, only bigger and completer : you mean 
to marry the girl, and have her fortune." 

"It is utterly and ridiculously false; and 
were not anger thrown away on such a creature 
as you . " 

" You would say something dreadful, no doubt. 
Don't ; anger is thrown away on me. Glad you 
have the good sense to see that. This is the 
point, then. I don't object to your marrying my 
niece ; you have my consent . on conditions. I 
detest Goodboy so, that, only for the sake of the 
dear creature herself, I would fall on my knees 
and thank Heaven if she married a pork-butcher's 
boy or a chimneysweep, just to spite him, and 
wring his gutta-percha heart : I would, by the 
Almighty! Now then. Temple, to business. If 
you promise to make it worth my while, I'll help 
you in this. You shall have my help and coun- 
tenance . what you will. I want a modest in- 
come, made safe to me and beyond any con- 
founded creature's control. Are you prepared to 
enter into terms ? Look here, Temple. Beauty, 



38 MY enemy's daughter. 

virtue, and plenty of money, with a venerable 
uncle's blessing ! all at your command. It is 
simply a question of liow much you are disposed 
to stand for my cooperation. If I am not for you, 
Temple, I am against you. Make terms with me, 
or I go over to the enemy; and Goodboy shall 
know all." 

'' NoY\', Mr. Lyndon, I have listened to you, 
I think, with great patience and self-control. 
Pray listen to me. It is not, I suppose, any 
longer your fault that you cannot understand what 
good intentions and honour and honesty mean ; 
so I shall not waste any words to that purpose on 
you." 

" That's a good fellow. I do detest virtuous 
indignation in men; especially when combined 
with eloquence." 

*'I shall only say, you don't understand me. 
Go and do your best; do anything you please. 
Say anything you can to pain and grieve that one 
sweet and noble nature which has stooped to you 
and done you kindness. Her you may grieve, but 
you cannot injure. Play the spy, the liar, the 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 39 

calumniator, the swindler, as you like ; but don't 
talk of terms or rogue's bargains with me. I 
would not buy your silence at the cost of a six- 
pence. I would not accept any conditions of yours 
to save my life . and hers." 

" That is your answer ?" 

" That is my answer." 

"Now look here, Temple, my good fellow; 
another man might be offended, but I don't mind 
any of your nonsense. Just don't be in a hurry 
. don't be a fool. Really, Temple, I want to 
settle-down in life, and live quietly and pleasantly. 
I begin to tire of racketing about, and living on 
chance, and billiards, and soft-headed spoons, and 
all that. I am getting, you see, a little into years, 
though people tell me I'm looking wonderfully 
well yet. Can't we manage this thing nicely? 
You want that charming girl . why not, old boy ? 
. and of course her money. I want just a neat 
little annual sum . a little pension, just to keep 
me from being a trouble to my friends, and so 
forth. I'll undertake, on very reasonable con- 
ditions, not to trouble even Goodboy . whom may 



40 MY enemy's daughter. 

a truly rigliteous Providence confound ! . and in 
fact to take myself off to Nice, or some pleasant 
sunny place . I love warm climates . and never 
come back any more. Now do, like a good fellow, 
just think of that. Do you know . don't laugh at 
me ! . I positively would rather please that dear 
girl than not ; and if my turning respectable on a 
decent pension, and taking myself off, would do it, 
I really am open to terms. I don't mean to say 
that I am prepared to make any downright sacri- 
fice for my niece . of course, between men of the 
world, that sort of thing is nonsense ; but I would 
rather serve her than not. I should like to live 
quietly at Nice ; and upon my word, if my wife 
would only oblige me and show her conjugal de- 
votion by departing to that world where all vir- 
tuous persons ought to wish to go, I don't know 
but that I should entertain the idea of marrying 
some nice little girl myself. There are nice little 
girls, sir, let me tell you, who would not be en- 
tirely averse to such a notion. Now think of all 
this. Temple. Think of me ! Think of what a 
thing it is to do a good action, and to play your 



IN KENSINGTON-GARDENS. 41 

own game and torment your enemies at tlie same 
time." 

He spoke in quite a solemn and pathetic tone. 

"I have given you my answer. Let me pass. 
I don't want to speak more harshly, or to lose my 
temper." 

*' Confound it !" he exclaimed, with a puzzled 
air, *' I can't understand this at all. By Jove ! 
the fellow must be privately married to her al- 
ready, or he never w^ould talk in this cock-a-hoop 
and lofty kind of way. There is an alarming air 
of security and confidence about him. . Now, 
Temple, fair is fair, you know. I always thought 
you too honourable for that sort of thing. Do 
speak out like a man, and tell me what is your 
game. Imitate my candour, and speak out." 

I pushed past him ; he caught me by both 
arms, and looked earnestly, scrutinisingly into my 
face. I could not get away from him without an 
exertion of positive violence. His grip was won- 
derfully strong; and there were some groups of 
people scattered here and there sufficiently near 
to make me feel anxious to avoid any scene. I 



42 MY enemy's daughter. 

stood there and allowed liim to study my face. 
It was rather a ludicrous business. "With his 
twinkling beady black eyes he peered up into my 
face, standing on his toes meanwhile, and his head 
still hardly touching my chin. His sensuous ex- 
pressive lips were working unceasingly with eager- 
ness and curiosity ; and in his whole expression, 
attitude, manner, eyes, there was a strange blend- 
ing of the cunning of a detective and the wildness 
of a lunatic. Far back in the depths of those 
keen twinkling eyes there was surely, one might 
think, the reflection of a madman's cell. The 
first impression, as I looked at him, was a mere 
sense of the ridiculous, and I could hardly repress 
a laugh ; the next was a sense of the horrible, and 
I found it not easy to keep down a shudder. It 
would not be pleasant to wake some night and 
find such a grip on one's arms, and see such eyes 
peering into one's face. 

When he had scrutinised me apparently to 
his satisfaction, his countenance underwent a sud- 
den and complete change of expression. Curio- 
sity and eagerness had now given way to mere 



IN KEXSIXGTOX-GAKDENS. 43 

contempt. He literally flung himself off from 
me. 

*'Pali!" he exclaimed, ''the idiot has done 
nothing of the sort. His enemy's daughter is 
safe enough so far as he is concerned. He walks 
in Kensington-gardens 2^our des prunes^ 

He put his hat a little more jantily than hefore 
on the side of his head, nodded an ironical fare- 
well, and I saw him a moment after opening up 
a conversation with a smart nursemaid who was 
in charge of two obstinate children. 

I went my way, not rejoicing, Heaven knov>'s, 
hut at least relieved. 



CHAPTER II. 



LILLA GONE. 



I HAVE never greatly troubled myself to study 
human character. I have especially rather avoided 
studying my own. I do not know much about 
the springs of human action. I am neither a 
moral philosopher nor a psychologist, therefore 
I cannot pretend to explain the manner in which 
the separation I have described in the last chap- 
ter affected my character and my ways. But I 
know how it did actually affect me, and I record 
the fact. With the parting from Lilla Lyndon 
there fell away from me all inclination for the 
kind of indolent distraction in which last year 
I had been seeking consolation only too often. I 
despised and detested it all; I shook it com- 
pletely off me in a moment. I knew myself re- 
deemed from it, and I knew that the whole 



LILLA GONE. 45 

change was made in me, a man of maturing 
years, by the sad smile of a girl. 

I knew a man once wlio told me, in one of 
those rare bursts of confidence in which generous 
and reserved men sometimes indulge, how he 
had lived for ten long years of the most trying 
part of existence, defiant of temptation, on the 
memory of a kiss. He was not a sentimental 
or a weakly man ; he did not pretend to be what 
pious people call a good man. I never knew 
whether he believed in any particular theologi- 
cal dogmas. He was a man of strong, passionate 
emotions; a man to go widely astray under cer- 
tain circumstances : a man who had gone astray. 
A good, pure woman loved him and trusted him ; 
he had no money, and he went away to the United 
States to look for some, that they might be mar- 
ried. When he was going, she herself, sponta- 
neously and for the first time, put her arms 
round his neck and kissed him. He did not 
make any formal resolve that his lips, like those 
of Coriolanus, should virgin it till he should re- 
turn and give back that kiss again, for he was 



46 MY enemy's daughter. 

not one of your deliberately good and Spartan 
men at all. But he told me that he never knew 
temptation in the mean time which could for a 
moment efface the memory of that kiss. He 
lived on the memory, pure as a King Arthur, 
for ten years : and then he came back, and they 
were married. 

Perhaps such things are not so uncommon 
as we think ; only that few men will venture to 
confess purity. At all events, I believe it to 
have been true in this case. I could understand 
it the better, knowing what impression the part- 
ing from Lilla Lyndon made on me. I think 
I could have carried a kiss from her unstained 
into the darkness of the grave. 

I avoided Christina, and indeed everybody, as 
much as I could. I observed that Mr. Lyndon 
was growing more and more attentive to her ; 
and this fact alone, were there no other reason, 
would have kept me from her. 

Her husband suddenly reappeared in town. 
During his stay of last season he and I had 
taken a strong liking for each other; and now 



LILLA GONE. 47 

that lie returned lie came to see me at once. I 
happened to be out when he called ; and as his 
card bore no address, I resolved to go to Jermyn- 
street, see Christina, if she should ha^^pen to be 
alone, and learn where he was to be found. 
When I got to her house, however, I heard 
that she had visitors; and knowing who one of 
them was, for I saw his carriage at the door, 
I would not be of the number. So I turned 
away. 

This was only three or four days after the 
meeting and parting described in the last chap- 
ter. I left the door of Christina's lodgings to 
avoid one Lyndon, in order to meet another. It 
Avas with a sense of detestation that I suddenly 
found myself confronted on the Jermyn - street 
pavement by my odious Stephen Lyndon. AMiat 
on earth . what out of the lower world . brought 
him there ? As I turned my eyes away from 
Christina's house I nearly ran against him or 
over him. 

''I have been signalling you," he said, "from 
across the street ; but either you couldn't or 



48 MY enemy's daughter. 

wouldn't see. Only a word or two now. I 
slia'n't detain you. Our society now isn't plea- 
sant to each other. But I want to know whether 
you have reconsidered what we spoke of the other 
day in Kensington-gardens ?" 

"No, I haven't. There's nothing to recon- 
sider . let me pass !" 

"Isn't there? Perhaps! I have news for 
you. Goodboy is on the scent; and he has or- 
dered her off." 

" What do you mean ?" 

" Thought I could arouse your attention ! He 
has taken her or sent her away out of London. 
Carried her away from me as well as from you ! 
I didn't count on that. 'Twas I gave him the 
hint . I told you I would; but I never expected 
that he would do what he has done . absolutely 
prohibit the poor little thing from holding any 
communication with me . with me, her uncle, 
who loves her! Yes, by Jupiter Ammon, I do 
love her ! Forty thousand Goodboys could not, 
with all their quantity of love, make up my sum ! 
It's all your fault, with your confounded scruples 



LILLA GONE. 49 

and nonsense. If you had listened to reason, 
you and I could have managed this splendidly. 
Now she is gone from both of us." 

"How do you know?" I inquired, ashamed 
of myself for asking the question. 

"She wrote me a line, poor little innocent, 
the last, she says ; and enclosed me a trifle. It's 
the spirit of the gift one values. Temple, not the 
paltry amount ; and she hopes all may yet be 
reconciled; and she will never fail to work for 
that sacred end . and that kind of thing, you 
know. By Jove, Temple, what a little angel in 
petticoats she is ! I have no doubt she'll be a 
ministering angel, old boy, when you and I lie 
howling; though I, God knows, was made for 
goodness and religion, and am a man more sinned 
against than sinning." 

" Well, what do you want of me ?" 

" Simply to ask, are you going to stand 
this ?" 

" Stand what ?" 

*' That fellow packing away that sweet, loving 
girl to some abominable hole in the country." 

VOL. III. E 



50 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



"I suppose Mr. Lyndon lias a riglit to the 
care of his daughter. Some fathers do care 
for their children. I have no claim on Miss 
Lyndon." 

'* Then I tell you what, if you're going to 
stand it, I'm not. I'll spoil them all ; and that's 
why I'm here. Temple, I wish you no harm . 
I don't indeed : in fact, I rather respect you ; and 
I think in my anger yesterday I did you injury 
to no purpose, and myself too. On the whole, 
I like your chivalric nonsense; there is a far-off 
flavour of j^outh and poetry, and that sort of rot 
about it, which refreshes me like a scent of the 
distant sea. If I had a son. Temple, I think I 
shouldn't be very sorry if he acted as you did ; 
for, by the good God, that girl would run away 
v>'ith you to-morrow if you asked her ! Well, 
then, I don't want to injure yoa ; but I'll crush 
them !" 

'' Whom do you mean ?" 

"My hated Eteocles Lyndon, or Polynices 
Lyndon, whichever you please ; and the woman 
he is following, and my old friend and colleague, 



LILLA GONE. 51 

the Carbonaro yonder. I'm on the track of 
something, Temple ; and trust me, I'll run it 
down. They are making use of Goodboy : he 
fancies he is making use of them. I know what 
it's all about. Vive la Pu'puhllque soclale et 
dcmocratique. Viva Mazzuii ! Piff, paff!" 

He nodded his head, jerked, and gesticulated 
vehemently, like a Neapolitan going mad. 

" I don't understand 3'ou at all." 

'' Daresay you don't ! Be innocent of the 

knowledge, dearest chuck ; keep yourself out of 

their schemes. Temple, and then I sha'n't have 

to harm you. I am in the swim already, I 

promise you. Good-bye. You don't understand 

how Goodboy came to be an Italian conspirator, 

then, don't you ? Hum, ha ! Did you ever read 

Churchill ?. 

' By my life, 
This Davies hath a mighty pretty wife !' " 

He winked his beady old eyes, then again 
indulged in a variety of gesticulations admirably 
imitated from the Italian, made a pantomimic 
gesture expressive of the rapid and frequent use 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY Of ;ll..,jjo 



52 MY enemy's daughter. 

of the stiletto, exploded into his old familiar 
rolling chuckle, raised his hat to me, and turned 
away. 

Looking back a moment after, I saw him 
standing on the steps of Cox's hotel engaged 
in conversation with a waiter, and smoking a 
cigar with as lordly an air as if the whole house 
and the street too belonged to him. 

I thought little of his hints and threats : he 
was always vowing and menacing, and nothing 
ever came of it ; an unconquerable levity and 
fickleness always seemed to interpose happily 
between him and any serious deed of harm to 
others ; nor did I see what possible danger could 
come on Christina and her husband through his 
influence. So little belief had I in anything he 
said, that I did not even place unreserved faith 
in his story about Lilla Lyndon, although that. 
Heaven knows, looked likely enough ; at least, 
I earnestly hoped it might not prove true. If I 
had been the means of creating a discord between 
that girl and her father, I had surely reason to 
blame and hate myself. I will find out if it be 



LILLA GONE. 53 

true, and if it be, I will at least do practical 
penance in this way : I will go to Mr. Lyndon, 
and liumble myself before bim . him whom I 
detest . and speak to him as one man of honour 
speaks to another, and pledge him my earnest, 
solemn word that I will never see his daughter 
again ; and tell him that I am resolved on leaving 
this country, not to return. This must satisfy 
him : he shall be satisfied, if any pledge, if any 
humiliation of mine can do it. I will not be 
the cause of estrangement between him and his 
daughter; I will not have that great sin upon 
my soul. If I have done wrong, I can at least 
endeavour to undo it, and to do penance for it. 

I will do it this moment. I hailed a hansom, 
and drove to Connaught-place. 

*' Is Miss Lilla Lyndon in town ?" I asked of 
the footman who opened the door. 

" Miss Lilla have left town," was the answer. 

" To-day ?" 

" To-day, sir." 

The man's expression was, I thought, conclu- 
sive. 



54 MY enemy's daughtek. 

'' Is Mr. Lyndon at home ?" 

*'Mr. Lyndon is at home, sir; hut he have 
give instructions he is engaged particular." 

'' Will you give him that card, and say I have 
the strongest reasons for wishing to speak to him 
for five minutes ? Say I would not disturh him,, 
hut that I have the strongest reasons." 

The man asked me to step into the hall while 
he took the card to his master. As the reader 
will rememher, I had heen in this house once 
hefore, and I knew that Mr. Lyndon's study was 
only divided hy the wall from where I stood. 

In a moment I heard Mr. Lyndon say in a 
loud strident tone, as of one who determines that 
his words shall he heard hy those whom they 
concern, 

*' I decline to see Mr. Temple !" 

The man came out and gave me the message,. 
looking rather reluctant and ahashed, I am hound 
to say in justice to him. 

Still I was resolved that no mere humiliation 
should deter me from acting as I felt myself 
hound in honour and conscience to do. I clenched 



LILLA GONE. 55 

my fingers, bit my lips, cruslied clown my emo- 
tions, and made a new attempt. 

" Will you be good enough to say to Mr. 
Lyndon that a yery graye misunderstanding may 
be wholly ayoided if he will see me for fiye 
minutes ?" 

The man went in,, and I heard again, in the 
same tone, the same words : 

*^ I decline to see Mr. Temple I" 

" I told you," said the seryant when he came 
out . and he spoke in a half-remonstrating, half- 
deprecating kind of way . ''I told you he was 
particularly engaged. He always is particularly 
engaged, and can't see no one at this hour, just 
before he goes to the 'Ouse." 

The man made this obseryation in the purest 
good -nature. He wished to soften the snub to 
me, and to put it on the mere ground of his 
master's intense occupation. I caught at the 
suggestion, howeyer. I took out my purse, and 
slipped a soyereign into his hand, rather glad of 
any w^ay to testify my appreciation of his good- 
nature while buying one more seryice of him. 



56 MY enemy's daughter. 

" I am sorry to have disturbed Mr. Lyndon," 
I said; *'and I ought to have known that he is 
busy just now. Will you, however, kindly go 
back again, and say that if he will name any 
time and place . the House or Brooks's (of which 
I knew he was a member), or anywhere, I shall 
be only too glad to wait on him, and say half- 
a-dozen words which it is very important he 
should hear." 

I don't know whether the man could have 
delivered this long message ; but I think he 
was saved the trouble. The moment he opened 
Mr. Lyndon's door I heard the words, 

" I decline to see Mr. Temple now or at 
any other time, anywhere. I decline to hold 
any kind of communication with him. I am 
busy; do not disturb me any more. Give that 
message distinctly, and say there is none 
other." 

And this was the end of my resolve to humble 
myself, and try to do good ! I came away with a 
burning face and a raging heart. All that anger 
and hate and sense of wounded pride could stir 



LILLA GONE. 57 

up to embitter human nature was working within 
me just then. No wonder men sold their souls 
in the old days, when there were powerful bid- 
ders for them from the infernal v/orld . no won- 
der they sold their souls for revenge on some 
enemy. 

I crossed into the Park, and was walking 
slowly under the trees. Presently I heard a 
quick step following mine, and the rustle of a 
dress came near me, and an emphatic little 
cough appealed to my attention. I might not 
have heeded, but a woman's voice at last 
said, and apparently very much out of breath, 
too : 

'' 0, if you please, Mr. Temple, sir !" 
I turned round, and saw a pretty, flushed 
little face near me . the face of a well-dressed 
young woman, who had lady's-maid printed in 
every lineament of her countenance and mo- 
tion of her limbs. I did not recognise her at 
first. 

"Don't you remember me, sir? I am Miss 
Lilla's maid. Which master was very angry. 



58 MY enemy's daughter. 

sir : and Miss Lilla took=on a great deal ; and 
slie has gone with Miss Lyndon (our eldest 
daughter, sir) to the country for a while ; and 
master's going down soon. Miss Lilla cried a 
deal, sir ; and master was very cross ; and I came 
in for my share of it too. I saw you in the hall, 
sir, and thought I'd just chance it, and run across 
to tell you ; for I'm not allowed to go with her, 
sir. I wouldn't stand being talked to by Miss 
Dora Jane, and I've give warning ; and I've 
brought you her address, sir, written on paper, 
which I thought you'd like to 'ave." 

81ie put a paper into my hand, and nodded 
knowingly and hurried away. I was taking out 
my purse to offer her something, but she would 
not wait. I do believe she had run her risk out 
of the uttermost good-nature and pure sympathy 
with what she regarded as a touching love-affair 
broken in upon by a cruel parent. 

I carried the piece of paper mechanically in 
my hand a long way, until I had, in fact, got into 
Kensington -gardens, and reached the margin of 
the pond. I did not open and look at it then. 



LILLA GONE. 59 

AMiat right had I to know anything of the move- 
ments of Mr. Lyndon's daughter ? I was not 
even her lover, as the good-natured girl who had 
left me evidently imagined. Why should I ex- 
pose myself to the temptation of renewing an 
acquaintance which, for her sake and for the 
sake of honour and honesty, ought never to he 
reopened ? The very bitterness of the anger and 
resentment I felt towards her father gave hut 
another reason why I should not trust myself 
with any chance of revenging my own wounded 
pride by meanly tampering with his daughter's 
love. 

"No," I said to myself firmly, "1 will not 
run this risk ; I will not thus tempt myself and 
j)eril her happiness. I have resolved to save her 
from the futile vexation my acquaintance might 
bring on her ; and I will not allow myself even 
the chance of breaking my resolve. In God's 
name, then . " 

Without reading what was written on the 
paper, without even looking at the handwriting 
. I did not dare to trust myself . I tore the thing 



60 



into a hundred minute fragments, and flung them 
on the face of the pool. The little waves tossed 
them, the little breezes played with them, some 
greedy wild-fowl gohbled-up a few of them. I 
left the scraps that still floated to sink or de- 
compose ; . no eye could read their secret. 



CHAPTER III. 



THE CONSPERATOR. 



Salapjs and I gradually became close friends. 
Habitually we were both silent men, and there 
is no sociability like the free companionship of 
silent men. We often sat for hours together in 
my lodgings or in his, and smoked our cigars, 
and hardly exchanged, perhaps, in the course of 
the evening, a dozen sentences. Neither felt any 
need to talk unless when he had something to 
say ; and therefore we much enjoyed each other's 
society. Ned Lambert was sometimes with us, 
and when with us, did not add much to our 
loquacity; for he had grown silent and moody 
enough, poor fellow, of late, his soul brooding 
over one purpose and one love. 

Thus, therefore, we sometimes sat of an idle 
evening : three men smoking, and mostly silent ; 



62 MY enemy's daughter. 

the Italian brooding over liis new political schemes ; 
Edward Lambert brooding over his love-affair, 
which was so tormenting in its incomplete, not 
hopeful, yet not quite hopeless, condition; I 
looking on at both, and liking both, and pitying 
them, and wishing I could help them, and in my 
heart acting as their confidant, but not speaking 
much aloud of the secrets of either. Ned Lam- 
bert and I had hardly ever spoken of his love- 
affair since his Lilla's departure. The promise 
she had exacted from me not to speak to him of 
her father, made me anxious to avoid approaching 
the subject at all ; and my own disastrous failure 
in attempting to set things to rights made me 
feel ashamed of the topic. Moreover, I had a 
clear conviction that the thing must come right 
in the end, and I looked on the separation of 
Ned and his love only as a mere probation, dur- 
ing which he must practise self-restraint and 
save money. So, if I sometimes pitied him, I 
often envied him as well. 

But the case of Salaris was quite different. 
He was a man given up . so at least I thought . 



THE CONSPIRATOR. 63 

to a hopeless object. I looked on liim as one 
destined to drag out a lingering life, hoping 
against hope, feeding upon air, wasting so much 
that might be noble and useful upon the empti- 
est of all chimeras. His face was seamed with 
the deep lines of failure ; you saw the ruin of 
plans and plots written on it as clearly as men 
crossing the desert can see the bones of dead 
camels in the sand. His life, past and present, 
seemed to lie before me openly as a panorama ; 
the conspiracies discovered before they had been 
half-matured, the sworn confederates who de- 
spatched their daily reports to the police, the 
inane and empty projects, the hopeful and de- 
spairing journeys to and from London and Paris, 
with the eye of the Government quietly fixed 
upon the supposed iiicorjiilto all the while; the 
tacit encouragement and half-spoken promises of 
diplomatists, which would turn out to be reeds 
to lean on, or spears to pierce, when the moment 
came; the over-impetuous friends, the cold friends, 
the false friends ; the courage and self-devotion 
and soldierly manly qualities all flung away, the 



64 MY enemy's daughter. 

ruined life, the hollow cheeks, the prematurely 
gray hair, the hroken heart. 

Sometimes I thought, this man possesses all 
that I should once have asked to make me tran- 
quil and happy. Had I heen Christina's husband, 
I think I could have lived for her, and with her. 
He loves her only too deeply, he trusts in her 
wholly ; why can he not be happy with her, and 
leave his feverish and idle schemes ? Is it wholly 
because he has a lofty, absorbing sense of duty ? 
or is it not, in part at least, because she does not 
love him, and he knows it, and can only make 
life endurable by the presence of continual ex- 
citement ? I think so. I think he thirsts for a 
love she cannot give, and he drinks political ex- 
citement as the thirsty seaman on the raft, when 
he can get no pure water, drinks from the salt 
waves, well knowing what must come of it . and 
goes mad. 

I think Christina's ambition has gone far to 
destroy . at all events, to mar . three lives : her 
own, her husband's, and mine. Some day I will 
surely tell her so. Now I systematically avoided 



THE CONSPIRATOE. 65 

her, and she ayoidecl me. The more I saw of 
her husband, the less I saw of her. It so hap- 
pened that even on the stage just now we did 
not so often meet, for I had had the evil fortune 
about this time to contract a pretty severe cold 
and hoarseness, and my medical man bade me 
take rest and change of air. He recommended 
me to go to the south . Hastings or Brighton, 
or some such place. I detested these places ; 
and it so happened that my Italian friend one 
night expressed a strong desire to see the Eng- 
lish Lake country. I too had never seen it, and 
we agreed to go together. My physician had 
told me some southern place was the only spot 
I could go to under the circumstances ; I knew, 
however, that all my voice and I wanted was 
rest, and rest was to be found deliciously in the 
shadow of the mountains. So we left town at a 
moment's notice, and travelled to Bowness, Sala- 
ris and I ; and we had some quiet days on the 
Lakes. 

One glorious day we were at Grasmere. We 
had been paddled across the lake to the moun- 

VOL. III. ~ p 



66 MY enemy's daughter. 

tain, Louglirigg I think, on the shore opposite 
the road from Amhleside. We had scramhled 
our way to a path called the Terrace-walk, which 
runs winding like an order -ribhon around the 
broad chest of the mountain. We flung our- 
selves on the ground, and looked silently at the 
scene below. The lake lay quite at our feet, a 
sapphire bedded in the emerald of the hills. The 
sun was already sinking, and his beams shot 
across our path. It was a glowing day : heat 
lay upon everything. The water slept in the 
sun, and scarcely stirred a ripple; the grasses 
under our feet were motionless in the light. 
Tiny insects, which even in June were generally 
to be found nestling away from the cold air, crept 
out of their lurking-places to-day, and basked in 
the sunbeams. Two or three girls were sitting 
far below us, with their white feet plashing in 
the stream which ran into the lake. A boat, with 
a solitary oarsman, moved slowly across the sur- 
face of the pool, the rower merely keeping on his 
motion by a stroke of his paddles at intervals. 
Distant peaks and ranges of hills revealed them- 



THE CONSPIRATOE. 67 

selves for tlie first time in the lucent sky ; far-off 
waters gleamed among the mountains like sword- 
blades shining in the sun ; the white pebbles on 
the strand seemed to suck in with delight the 
ripples which softly plashed upon them. A white 
cottage, with the sunlight on it, blazed like a pale 
meteor across the valley. Except the occasional 
voice of distant sheep, or the faint lapping of 
the water on the beach, or the twitter of the 
birds, or the laughter of the girls below, no sound 
disturbed the quiet of the scene. 

We had been some moments without speak- 
ing. A bird suddenly rose above our heads 
with a shrill cry, and sailed away over Helm 
Crag. The sharp cry broke the spell of silence 
which had held us. 

"This reminds me of northern Italy," said 
Salaris, in his low, musical voice, with some- 
thing always of a thrill in it. "I have been 
thinking of it this some time. The skies are 
as clear as over Como or Garda : it makes me 
melancholy. Nature is always melancholy, I 
think." 



68 MY enemy's daughter. 

" I suppose it is ; except to a painter, whose 
study it is, or to somebody who never thinks 
about it at all. I think sunlight is, on the 
whole, rather a sad thing to look at." 

*' So it is. So is music, to hear; so is any 
music at least that is worth hearing." 

'* Music is a passion of yours, Salaris, is it 
not ?" 

** It is not ; it used to be. It only betrayed 
me, and I have cast it off." 

*' Betrayed you?" 

** Disappointed me . deceived me. It is all 
illusion ; jou cannot reach it. It is to the soul, 
in life, what the mirage is to the unfortunate 
wretch in the desert. I wish I had never known 
one note of music from another." 

"And you an Italian !" 

" The more reason. The arts have been the 
Circes of Italy. There is no music where there 
is political freedom, and where manly energy 
finds room. What music has England? what 
music has America ? No ; it is Italy, Ger- 
many . these are the places where people lie 



THE CONSPIRATOR. 69 

down and make songs. Italy is a slave tinkling 
her guitar to make merry her master's friends. 
No; I love not music any more; it has be- 
trayed me . as well as my country." 

There was a profound bitterness, as well as 
pathos, in the tones of his voice as he spoke 
thus. No one follows a mere abstraction, an 
impersonal idea, with such emphasis. I glanced 
at Salaris, and I thought I could read his 
heart. 

I was anxious to lead him away to other 
thoughts ; so I said : 

"But you have still hopes for Italy's inde- 
pendence ?" 

" Hopes ? have I hopes of another world ? I 
believe in the future of Italy just as I believe 
in God : when I despair of the one, I shall dis- 
believe in the other." 

"Well, I don't pretend to understand the 
question as an Italian might, or to look at it 
from an Italian point of view ; but the pro- 
spect does not seem to me a hopeful one. Your 
Italians are not agreed upon anything among 



70 MY enemy's daughter. 

themselves; they don't know what they would 
have ; they have made up their minds to no- 
thing." 

"My good friend, when did a people on the 
eve of revolution know what they would have? 
Did all your English people know what they 
would have when they rose against Charles I. ? 
Did the Americans all agree beforehand upon 
the object of their revolt against England ? Did 
the Dutch make up their minds about what was 
to come before they attempted to expel the 
Spaniards ? It is only the very few who lead 
the rest by whom any plan of action can be 
arranged; and even they, if they are wise, do 
not always try to know much beforehand. You 
are never master of the situation and the cir- 
cumstances if you have planned all rigidly in 
advance. Kevolutions are not to be set out be- 
forehand, like pieces at the theatre. Let the 
thing once be set going, and leave the issue 
to Providence." 

''Providence, they say, always sides with the 
strong." 



THE CONSPIEATOR. 71 

"And we are strong, if we only would use 
our strength. Italians are kept down in great 
part by what you in England call a sham. Just 
now she has indeed one solid obstacle in her 
path; but that once removed, her course ought 
to be clear." 

"Well, I wish you every success, and I only 
wish I could bear a hand in your struggle. I 
might well do so ; I have nothing to lose." 

He looked at me intently. 

" Nothing to lose in life ?" he asked. 

"Nothing." 

" Not hope . not success . not love ?" 

" I have no hope ; and . and I have got into 
a wrong groove." 

"No way out of it ?" 

"No way . except over the precipice and 
down." 

"I should like to enlist you in our cause, 
and I should have no scruple; but I have pro- 
mised not to bring you with me in this." 

" Promised whom ?" 

He set his teeth hard upon his cigar, and 



72 MY enemy's daughter. 

sent out two or three puffs so fierce and sharp, 
that the smoke went straight from his lips hori- 
zontal as the path of a bullet, until the little 
breeze got power and dispersed it. 

" I have promised my wife," he said. 

He fell into a moment's silence. Then I re- 
sumed : 

" You have some allies in England, though?" 

The reader will remember that this was a 
year or two before Solferino, and when Italy had 
as yet few earnest British believers. To most 
of us honest Englishmen, despite Venice and 
Manin, Rome and Garibaldi, " Italian " still 
meant cowardly, treacherous, dagger-using, lazy, 
dirty, fawi ing, begging, lying, vacillating, popish, 
and slavish. 

*'Yes, we have some friends; not many." 

''Mr. Lyndon is one?" 

My companion smiled. 

" Yes, he is one ; and a generous friend." 

" Does lie know of any of your plans ?" 

" Some, if not all. There is something now 
in prospect of which he does not know." 



THE COXSPIEATOE. 78 

" One question more let me ask you. Do you 
know his brother?" 

" I know the man you mean, and I know 
now that he is Lyndon's brother. I only knew 
it lately; but the man himself is well known to 
me. We were friends long ago, and served each 
other." 

" You don't trust him V 

"Why not?" 

"Because he is a treacherous, selfish scoun- 
drel." 

" What words of energy ! No ; I don't think 
he is. He is unfortunate and heedless, and has 
had a stormy youth ; but treacherous I do not 
think he is." 

"But you do not meet him; you have not 
trusted him with anything . lately, I mean ?" 

"I have lately employed his services a little; 
but you may rely that in no case should he have 
much of my confidence. He can be made useful, 
but he has not a head to be trusted. He can 
talk to Frenchmen like a Frenchman ; to Italians, 
like an Italian ; to Englishmen, like an English- 



74 

man. He can be made useful in a way, and in 
that way I use him, not farther. He is now in 
Paris. He came to me a few days ago, and 
showed me that he knew something . not much . 
of some projects. He offered his services, and 
told me he was poor. I once did Hke the man ; 
and I have some old memories that are strong, 
that are superstitions with me. I accepted his 
services." 

*' Salaris, beware of that man ! He will be- 
tray you." 

" The Englishman suspects," said my com- 
panion faintly smiling; " and the Italian does 
not ! What a reverse of conditions ! But have 
no fear ; we trust our agents with knowledge only 
in their capacity of keeping it. He can do no- 
thing. If I were to intrust you, I should put 
something in your power." 

" Then do so. Let me be in the business, 
whatever it is. I have good nerves, and a pretty 
strong frame. I can use either rifle or sword. 
I can speak Italian ; and I think I know, without 
teaching, how to die." 



THE CONSPIEATOE. 75 

He shook liis head. 

"It would not do . yet. There are things 
only an Italian may do, even for Italy . things 
an Englishman must not share or even know 
of. I told you there is an obstacle to be removed 
first ; that out of the way, the drama will begin. 
Then, if jou icill play a part, I grasp your hand. 
After all, you are at least Italy's foster-son. You 
are an artist and singer. You have sucked at 
Italy's bosom. You should give out a little blood 
in return for so much milk." 

" Only try me, when the time comes. But 
the obstacle you spoke of . is it one that can be 
removed ?" 

"Ay, it can be, and it shall be." 

" Before long ?" 

"Before many days, perhaps; before many 
weeks, so surely as I fling this stone into the 
lake below." 

He flung a shining pebble far from the hill- 
side. No breath of air stirred as I looked some- 
what languidly to see the stone shoot into the 
lake. But the brightness of the atmosphere had 



76 MY enemy's daughter. 

deceived liim, and he thought the task easier 
than it was. The stone fell far short, and rattled 
into a cleft of the hill. Some wild birds rose 
screaming from their nests, and swept across 
the sky. 

Salaris looked surprised, and even discon- 
certed, at the issue of the test he had offered. 

"Come," I said, "were I a believer in au- 
guries, I should endeavour to persuade you not 
to go on with your present undertaking, whatever 
it may be. The Powers are clearly against you. 
The stone did not reach the lake. Did you ob- 
serve at which side the birds rose ?" 

'' Ahsit omen r' replied my companion with 
restored cheerfulness, and his usual smile of 
mingled melancholy and sweetness. 

We sat still longer on the grass, thinking 
and smoking. My friend seldom indeed ceased 
to smoke under any circumstances ; and the cigar 
had long been my nepenthe, my balm of hurt 
mind, my sovereign grace. Disappointments, 
vexations, humiliations, reverses, seemed to float 
away for the moment on the vapour : to go up 



THE CONSPIEATOR. 77 

like the prayers of the pious on the steam of the 
sacrifice. 

The sun meanwhile was near, very near his 
setting ; the place seemed more lovely than ever. 
More lonely and more lovely; the solitary boat 
had long since been moored under the shadow 
of Helm Crag; and the girls had plashed in the 
water until they were tired, and then dried their 
feet and put on their stockings and shoes, and 
went their merry way, wholly unconscious that 
far above their heads two pair of eyes watched, 
or might have watched, their doings. They too 
had gone away long since, and left my friend 
and myself apparently quite alone. Salaris lay 
flat on the turf, after a while, and seemed to have 
fallen asleep. 

The skies were already purpling ; and shadows 
were falling over the lake. It seemed to me 
vaguely as if the sound of the distant waterfalls 
grew louder and deeper in the evening air. In 
the growing twilight the scene began to lose its 
realities in my eyes, and to become transfigured 
into something more familiar, long unseen. I 



78 MY enemy's daughtek. 

seemed to see again beneath me the bright bay 
of my childhood, with the headlands clasping like 
arms around it, and the gentle hills on whose 
sides I so often lay of evenings like this, and 
looked idly, as now, on the noble waters beneath. 
It was easy enough and pleasant enough to fancy, 
with half-shut eyes, that the scene I looked on 
was still the same. Yonder was the wood sloping 
down to the sea ; the paths of it, as I well knew, 
thick with fallen leaves at all seasons, thick at 
some seasons with pine-cones and chestnuts ; and 
there is the churchyard where my mother lies; 
and there is the path Avhere Christina and I used 
to walk together. The sun goes down : he is 
gone ; and the sunset-gun will be fired from the 
frigate in the bay. 

And just at that moment a sharp, thrilling, 
peculiar whistle,- seeming at first like the long 
scream of some mountain-bird, rang through the 
evening air, and broke up my reverie. 

My companion started to his feet, wide awake, 
and looked wildly around him. Far off, on the 
side of another hill, we saw the figure of a man. 



THE CONSPIRATOR. 79 

He was coming towards us ; and lie whistled 
again as before. 

Salaris put one finger between his lips, and 
sent back a whistle so like that we had heard, 
that, but for its nearness and loudness, it might 
have seemed an echo. 

"It is someone you know?" I asked, not a 
little bewildered. 

*'Yes," he replied, "someone I know; but 
I had not expected him now and here." 

He hurried to meet the figure, which was 
now in the hollow just beneath. I followed at 
some little distance, allowing my friend to come 
well up with his visitor, and exchange words with 
him unheard. The man, as well I could see 
him in the growing twilight, was an Italian, 
but of a different mould from Salaris. He was 
low, stout, with a thick black beard cut close 
round his face, so that his chin and jaws looked 
as if they were set in it ; and he had a roving, 
restless, hungry, red-black eye, which rested sus- 
piciously on me while I approached, like the eye 
of a fierce dog when, as he is devouring his food. 



80 

he sees a stranger coming, and is not quite easy 
as to the stranger's intentions. 

He had given Salaris a letter ; and the latter, 
having read it carefully, spoke a little in a low 
tone with the messenger. Then Salaris called 
to me in a loud and cheerful voice : 

" Our friend has had a rare search for me," 
he said. ''He left London this morning, and 
is here now ! He brings me some news which 
obliges me to return at once to town. There 
is no train to-night, unluckily, from here; but, 
by travelling on in a carriage all to-night, we shall 
get to Lancaster in time for the first train in 
the morning. I am sorry to break-up our charm- 
ing little sojourn; but there is reason." 

*' No unpleasant news, I hope ?" 

"Unpleasant?" He paused a moment, and 
seemed to weigh the word, and sighed. "No, 
not unpleasant ; untimely, perhaps." 

"Nothing rash; no madness, Salaris! Don't 
risk your life in idle attempts." 

"My life has no value to me except for these 
things; and an Italian exile's life is always a 



THE CONSPIRATOE. 81 

conspiracy. But don't be alarmed ; caution shall 
be used in everything : we have to economise life, 
I can tell you." 

" Can I lend a hand ?" 

**No, no; it is not time," he said with a 
smile, '^to fight for Italy in the open field just 
yet. When it is, we enrol you. One thing you 
can do for me. I can only rush through Lon- 
don." Here he put his arm in mine, and drew 
me a little away, out of hearing of his companion. 
"When you return to town, see my wife alone, 
and tell her I have had to leave England hur- 
riedly, and that she will not have tidings of me 
for some days. You need not cut short your 
stay here : she will not expect to hear from me 
for the time we were to be here. Needless to 
say, I never write to her through the post. Do 
you not write, but see her . see her alone." 

He pressed my hand. 

His companion had a carriage waiting on 
the road at the nearest point of access to the 
mountain. Salaris got in, and lit a fresh cigar. 
I did not accompany them; their way was not 

VOL. III. a 



82 MY enemy's daughter. 

mine, and my companionship would doubtless 
have been embarrassing. I intruded no more 
inquiries or advice; indeed, I had no basis on 
which to rest inquiry or advice. I knew that 
Italian plots of various kinds had been going 
on for years ; that emissaries were constantly 
travelling backwards and forwards between Lon- 
don and the Continent, with, so far as public 
observation was concerned, no apparent result 
whatever. I was therefore not much alarmed 
for Salaris. I felt rather, indeed, an unspeak- 
able sense of pity for the enthusiast who was 
leaving me, and whom, as I did not then know, 
I was never to see again. He looked calm enough 
now, and cheerful ; not at all like a conspirator, 
at least of the theatrical kind, with whom I was 
most familiar. 

''Adieu," I called. "Beware of bringing on 
your head the ^liathema of Pio Nono." 

He smiled cheerily, waved me a friendly fare- 
well, and the carriage bore him away. 



CHAPTER IV. 



*'ah, beak in mind that garden was enchanted!' 



Despite Salaris's liint that I need not cut short 
my stay among the Lakes, I determined to re- 
turn to town at once. Somehow I felt that I 
could not remain mooning among these moun- 
tains to no purpose and alone. Of course I 
pretended to myself to be very sorry to have 
to leave Nature so soon, and insisted that an 
immediate return to town was simply a hard 
necessity not to be avoided; but in my soul I 
was glad to escape from a tete-a-tete with Na- 
ture. I dreaded her twilights and her long lonely 
shadows, as children dread the hour, of dusk, when 
ghosts are supposed to lurk in all dim closets 
and dark corners. To some of us, too. Nature 
is not a quick consoler. She wants sympathy 
terribly. She is so beautiful and calm and good. 



84 MY enemy's daughter. 

tliat we poor sinners cannot hope to toucli her 
heart at all. The exquisite beauty of the scenes 
around me just now, the purple shadows, the 
pure outlines, all seemed to form a sort of an- 
gelic society into which I had no business to 
enter, . where, at all events, I had no right to 
remain. So, instead of lounging late among the 
mountains, I resolved to go straightway back to 
Bowness and the hotel, and to leave for London 
in the morning. 

This was apparently a mere instinct, an un- 
reasoning, foolish, utterly unpoetic feeling; yet 
I have good cause to be thankful for my prosaic 
and timorous desertion of Nature ; for the whole 
current of my life from that day might have 
been changed, an existence the most blank and 
hopeless might have been allotted to me, but 
for the sudden impulse which bade me leave 
the mountains and the tarns at once. 

I turned, then, and set out to walk home. 
I even endeavoured not to look much or often 
at the beauty of the scenes which surrounded 
me and which I was leaving. Sometimes, in- 



deed, at a bend or sudden elevation of the path 
I was following, the resistless glory of lake and 
wood and mountain, steeped all in the rising 
purple of evening, would arrest my attention for 
a moment, like a sudden burst of light flashing 
on the eyes of one who has been groping and 
plodding a steady way in the darkness. But I 
was out of sympathy somehow with the scene. 
It was not like the sight of my rough and pas- 
sionate old playfellow the Sea, which, even in 
its softest and calmest moods, has nothing of 
the angelic and the heavenly about it, but is 
tossed, and fitful, and reckless, and ready for 
rude evil work, like any of ourselves, and never 
abashes or rebukes us by a cold, pure, change- 
less beauty. After all our raptures about her, 
how few of us can long endure the society of 
Nature! When anything has gone wrong with 
us, we are ready enough to run back to her; 
very much indeed as a young debauchee of pre- 
maturely broken health is seized with a longing 
to be once more nursed and watched by the 
tenderness of the mother whom he has left be- 



86 MY enemy's daughter. 

hind so long, and hardly thought of in the mid- 
night hour of his revelry. Yes, when one is 
sick at heart; when his splendid soap-bubble 
has burst; when he has been rejected by the 
girl he would marry; when his play has been 
damned, his great part been hissed by the audi- 
ence and gibed at by the critics ; when he believes 
he has ruined his constitution, and thinks him- 
self under sentence of death, . then he begins to 
find out that Nature never did betray the heart 
that loved her, and he crawls to her knees per- 
haps, and fancies himself becoming very pure 
and devoted in her refined companionship, and 
he admires himself and her with a mournful 
complacency. But he soon grows tired of her 
silent beauty and her undemonstrative sympathy ; 
her face of loveliness and her heart of stone. 
He wearies very soon in any case, and goes 
away ; while, only let the world, the flesh, or 
the devil, or all three combined, give him an- 
other chance, and then see what follows ! Open 
to him any new and promising project in place 
of that which has collapsed ; give him reason to 



believe that in his case, too, the nineteen nay- 
says of the maiden make one grant; let him 
feel returning strength and energy once again ; 
tempt him with an opening for a new play or 
a new part, . and observe how readily he re- 
nounces the charms of Nature, and rushes to 
the vehement interests and excitements of life 
once more. Delicious was the retreat which Gil 
Bias made for himself at Lirias, and calmly 
philosophical was the farewell to Spes et Fortuna 
which he inscribed over its portals. But the 
story does not end there. Yet another chapter, 
and we learn how promptly he quitted it for the 
treacherous court, and ran into the embraces of 
Spes et Fortuna once more. 

Indeed, after a thorough drenching in the 
life of cities people do not seem to me fit for 
Nature's placid and pure companionship. We 
ought to be like the animal, of which people say 
that if once its fur has been soiled by contact 
with common clay, it goes back to its home no 
more. Nature avenges herself somehow, and will 
no longer put up with us. We have grown so, 



88 MY enemy's daughter. 

that we cannot do without the city life; we miss 
its very discomforts, as Albrecht Diirer, in the 
pathetic German story, missed even the ill- 
humours of his wife, and was glad to get home 
to her again. 

So I resolved to quit Nature, and get back 
to Art. 

It is but a short walk from Grasmere to 
Ambleside, and thence I meant to go in one of 
the steamers to Bowness, where our head-quarters 
were at one of the two or three big hotels which 
looked out upon Windermere. I walked rather 
fast, and got over a good deal of the ground 
without stopping even to look round. As I drew 
near to Ambleside the road became studded with 
handsome villas and charming cottages. The 
gates of one villa stood invitingly open ; the back 
of the house, which was in the midst of a con- 
siderable patch of lawn and shrubbery, was turned 
to me ; its front looked on the lake. I could 
not see the water as I glanced in, but only the 
hills which I knew were lying on the other side. 
The hills were now of a deep dark purple, their 



outlines cut out sharp as steel against tlie violet 
of the sky, and over the shoulder of one of them 
rose in soft and melancholy beauty the silver 
disc of the Shepherd's Star. 

I stopped before the gate and looked in, struck 
beyond resistance by the quiet witchery of the 
evening and the scene ; and seized with a curious 
longing to get a glimpse of the lake, which if 
brought to view would complete the charm of 
the whole picture. So, as the gate stood hos- 
pitably open, and I knew that people are not 
very rigid towards strangers in the Lake-land, I 
ventured in a few paces, and took the path which 
led to the left of the house, assuming that that 
would in a moment bring me to see the water. 
All at once I "was aware" of a figure a few 
yards in front of me. 

It was that of a slender young woman, who 
stood with her back to me, leaning one arm on 
the bough of a little tree, and holding a straw 
hat in her hand. From the position of her head, 
I saw that she was looking at the sky; and the 
evening light, the scene, the grace of her figure, 



90 MY enemy's daughter. 

the sort of pensiveness expressed in lier attitude, 
threw a poetic and melancholy charm around her. 
I felt as if I could almost see 

" The looks commercing with the skies, 
The rapt soul sitting in the eyes." 

I could not help gazing for a moment; hut 
I would have gone back, if possible, unobserved, 
as I had entered, only that, just at that instant, 
somebody came out of the house . somebody 
whom I could not see . and I heard a woman's 
voice call, 

^'MissLilla!" 

I started at the name. 

The girl who stood before me neither looked 
round nor answered; but a quiver of impatience 
went through her figure, and her shoulders moved 
with a slight shrug of vexation. Looking now 
more closely at her, I could not doubt her iden- 
tity. Chance, or fate, or providence, or what 
you will, had brought me, utterly ignorant and 
blind as I was, to the very spot where Lilla 
Lyndon stood, and which I had deliberately re- 



'^ THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED." 91 

fused to know of, when the chance was placed 
within my power. 

Even then I would have gone away unseen if 
I could, if I had had time. But the voice again 
called . this time in a sort of supplicating tone, 
such as one employs towards a wayward child, 

''MissLilla!" 

This time Lilla looked round; she did not 
see me at the first glance. The light, such as it 
was, just between the death of day and the birth 
of night, fell on her face. With its pale light 
against the growing shadow, that face looked like 
the evening star itself, which shone above it ; the 
face was now more than ever that of a young 
Madonna. Delicately formed, with clear out- 
lines, a smooth white forehead, small straight 
nose, cheeks that now looked quite colourless, 
dark eyebrows, and beneath them sad clear violet 
eyes, Lilla Lyndon's face was turned to me ; and 
I could not move, even if I would. 

Still she had not seen me ; and she turned 
towards the spot where the person who called her 
must have been standing, and whom she evi- 



92 MY enemy's daughter. 

dently could see, althougli I could not; and I 
heard lier say, 

"I am here, Anne! What is it?" 

" Miss Dora Jane, Miss Lilla, hopes you will 
come in now. It gets cold, she says ; and she 
hopes you have your hat on." 

** I am coming, Anne, in a few minutes ; and 
it is not cold. I am coming, quite soon, tell 
Miss Dora Jane." 

Miss Dora Jane's messenger vanished, I sup- 
pose; and then Lilla turning round, as if to 
resume her old position, looked directly where 
I was standing, and saw me. 

First she seemed only startled and surprised, 
and she made a step forward, as if to see who 
was the intruder. Then a sudden change came 
over her face and lighted in her eyes; and she 
put one hand to her breast, and held the other 
towards me; and then I sprang forward, only 
just in time to catch her as she was falling . 
for she fainted. 

She was a light burden, although rather a 
tall girl. I could have carried her, if need were, 



" THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED." 93 

like a cliilcl ; but I only held her in my arms, and 
drew her to a garden-seat which stood near, and 
placed her there reclining; and was bewildered, 
not knowing whether to go to the house and ask 
for help, or carry her there in my arms, or stay 
with her and let no one know. 

Lilla remained only a moment unconscious. 
She opened her eyes and looked at me, first 
with an expression of wonder and alarm, and 
then with a glowing smile of child-like confi- 
dence and gladness. She passed her hand across 
her forehead and said : 

" Mr. Temple, how much ashamed of my- 
self I feel! does anyone know?" 

''No one." 

" Thank Heaven for that ! I should hear 
such remonstrances and advice. I do not know 
why I became so weak in a moment. Was I 
long so?" 

" Only an instant." 

"Ah! What can have made me so? I think 
you frightened me. First I did not know who it 
was ; then for a moment I almost thought it 



94 MY enemy's daughter. 

must be a ghost . this is a land of ghosts, you 
know. Why did you not speak? Why did you 
come in so strange a way? You quite alarmed 
me." 

"You are better now, Miss Lyndon, are you 
not? You look quite pale still." 

" 0, I am quite well now . quite well. See, I 
can walk quite strongly. That was only the non- 
sense of a moment." 

She stood up, and walked a few paces firmly 
enough, although she still was evidently a good 
deal agitated. 

" Shall I go to the house and send someone?" 
I asked. 

"0, please no; I don't want anyone; they 
would only bore me. But now tell me, why did 
you come in that strange way, and alarm 
me?" 

"I came in only by chance, Miss Lyndon; I 
did not even know that you were here. I walked 
in a few paces . I don't know why . and then I 
saw you, and had not time to go away." 

*' You did not come here, then, to see me?" 



" THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED." 95 

" No, Miss Lyndon ; I did not even know tliat 
you were in this part of the country." 

"You did not know it; and your coming to 
this part of the country, and into this very place, 
was the effect of chance . pure chance?" 

" Chance . pure chance." 

"How strange!" she said meditatively. "Such 
things would seem impossible. And yet . I must 
believe you." 

" You may believe me." 

" If I had gone into the house five minutes 
before, you would not have seen me ?" 

"No, LiUa." 

"I have never heard of anything so strange 
as that," she said again, rather as if speaking 
to herself than to me ; " they would never believe 
it . never." 

"They. who?" 

" My step-sister and the rest. They never 
will believe it; but I cannot help them, and I 
don't care. Let them say what they will." 

" There is nothing to say, Lilla. I have seen 
you merely by chance and for a moment. I am 



96 MY enemy's daughtee. 

going away again. I leave tliis place by the 
first train to-morrow." 

" That, too, they will not believe. I do not 
like unbelieving people ; they suspect deceit, and 
so they create it everywhere. Deceit becomes 
encouraged where nothing else would be regarded 
as possible. This chance meeting, Mr. Temple, 
will be a reproach and a suspicion for long 
enough." 

*' I am very, very sorry, Miss Lyndon, and I 
wish I had not come." 

" So do I. But it is done. Will you go 
now ?" 

" Yes, Lilla." 

She gave me her hand ; it trembled in mine ; 
and I thought there were tears in her eyes. In 
answer to a sort of plaintive inquiry which spoke 
in them, I said, 

" You wish me to go, Lilla . do you not?" 

"I do . yes. I must wish you to go; but 
not in a cold and angry way ; not as if you were 
offended with me. Not as if you thought that 
I, of my own accord, wanted you to go away." 



" THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED." 97 

*^ no, Miss Lyndon." 

"^Miyclo you sometimes call me Lilla, and 
sometimes Miss Lyndon?" 

" I don't know. I will call yoii Lilla always, 
if you wish." 

*' I do wish it. I wish that we should be 
friends, and speak to each other so." 

" I never thought, Lilla, that you "wdshed me 
away ; I know you are always too kind and friendly. 
But I know too . I should have known even if 
you had not told me . that this chance meeting 
might expose you to reproaches which you don't 
deserve, nor I ; and so I understand that you wish 
me away for that reason, and that you are in the 
right." 

*' Tell me, Mr. Temple, frankly, . and forgive 
me beforehand for any pain it may cause, but 
tell me truly, and all, whether it causes pain or 
not to you or to me . why does papa not like you ?" 

"Indeed, Lilla, I cannot tell you; I do not 
know." 

" But you must have some kind of idea ; you 
must guess." 

VOL. III. H 



98 MY enemy's daughter. 

" I think it is because lie knows that only 
the other day I was poor and humble. Not 
romantically poor, Lilla, but downright and 
wretchedly poor. Now he knows that I come 
from the poor, that all my friends were poor. 
I myself am not a man he cares to know; and 
I am by far the richest and the grandest personage 
of my whole race. I think he disliked me always 
for that reason. Is that frank ?" 

*' It is. But I must go on. Now pray for- 
give me, and don't, O don't, speak as if you 
were speaking to one who had herself any such 
ignoble feelings. You have told me that Madame 
Reichstein too was once poor, that her family and 
her people were poor ?" 

*'Yes. Poor and humble . as my own. No 
words could be stronger." 

" Yet papa always admires her, and delights 
in her company ?" 

" She is a woman ; and beautiful and attrac- 
tive ; and . I think . " 

'* Yes, yes. Now go on, pray; don't stop." 

*' I think your father admires her." 



" THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED." 99 

"And I too," slie said, looking at me with 
a flash of fire which I had not expected to see in 
her Madonna eves, "I think so too, and Dora 
Jane is a fool not to see it ! I know it. He 
admires her, he adores her; he would give her 
mamma's place if he could, and F must have no 
friend unless such as he pleases to give me ! But 
I have a little of his own spirit, and I cannot 
150 be schooled any longer. I will not stay here 
any more. I hate the place . at least, not the 
place, but the way in which I am kept here. Mr. 
Temple, I am a prisoner here, and I can bear 
it no longer." 

" Lilla, your father means it all for your 
welfare ; even T, whom he does not like, must 
admit that. He has a right to guard you. You 
are young, and . don't be angry with me . beauti- 
ful and sweet and trustful, and you have no 
mother." 

" 0, I feel that bitterly, more and more every 
day. If I had a mother, I could lay my head 
upon her breast and tell her all ; and she would 
understand me, and forgive me when there was 



100 

anything to be forgiven, and not scold me in 
hard biting words. Mr. Temple, I have never 
until lately known what distrust was. I have 
believed everyone. Lately I have been distrusted, 
and it has taught me to look at others with eyes 
of doubt : and I begin to find some of my idols 
are of clay. Look, they are broken some of them ! 
I understand now why girls in other countries 
go into convents, and live there and die there." 

^' You will outlive all this, Lilla, and be happy, 
and wonder that you ever could have had these 
sad and gloomy thoughts." 

*^ Never, never! Nothing can give back the 
faith and confidence which are gone." 

*'New faith and confidence will grow up, and 
other ties will draw around you. Listen, Lilla, 
dear Lilla ! I am so much older than you, that I 
may talk to you as wisely and boldly as I think 
right. Do you trust me ?" 

"Indeed I do." 

Her eyes looked a trustingness into mine 
which to win was worth having lived for. 

" Then be advised by me. Be reconciled to 



*' THAT GAKDEX WAS ENCHANTED." 101 

your father. He may seem harsh now, and harsh- 
ness is strange to you, and comes with the greater 
pain. But he thinks only of your good; it is his 
way of showing his love. Don't think of the fear 
you had . that ahout Madame Reichstein, I mean. 
Mr. Lyndon admires her . all lovers of music and 
genius do : but the rest is nothing ; and what you 
feared is, I know, an impossibility. Be reconciled 
to your father ; write to him frankly and lovingly, 
and tell him so. Tell him that you accept his 
conditions." 

She hung her head a moment, and without 
looking up asked, 

"Do you know the conditions ?" 

"I do; I think I do; at least I guess them, 
dear. I may speak out openly to you, may I not, 
though you are only a girl, and I am a man not 
over young? His conditions are, that you pro- 
mise never to see me any more ?" 

In the faintest syllables she assented. 

" Be advised by him, my dear. I would pro- 
mise and pledge for you if I could." 

*' Do you advise me so ?" 



102 

*'I do, Lilla; I do indeed. For your own 
sake I advise it. Do not become estranged from 
your father for my sake . I mean on my account ; 
I am not Avortliy of such a sacrifice ; I am not 
worthy, Lilla dear, of you." 

O God, if I were ! If I could now but feel 
myself worthy of that child's pure and generous 
heart ! If I could offer her a fresh, pure affection 
like her own ! If I could but believe it in my 
power to make her hap2:)y ! Never, never again 
will such a gift be within my reach ! No man 
can hope for such a moment twice in his life- 
time. 

*' You see I speak to you with a freedom and 
frankness which might offend you, if you were not 
so sweet and trusting and noble as you are. I 
will not affect to misunderstand you, Lilla ; and 
you will understand me. I am not worthy of 
you; you would be thrown away on me and on 
my life." 

^' Your life has always seemed to me beautiful 
and poetical, and free from all the meanness and 
roughness of the common world." 



*' THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED." 103 

*^From the outside it seems so, Lilla. It is 
very hard and commonplace and mean and bitter 
within. I do not like it ; and I am leaving it. I 
am leaving it to steep myself in the fresh life of 
the New World, and to lose myself there. You 
will become reconciled with your father, who loves 
you dearly, and you will forget all this, and be 
married some day, and be happy." 

*' 0, how can you say such things ! 0, how 
can you ! You are very, very cruel !" 

She sat down on the gnarled oaken seat that 
stood near, and covered her pale face with her 
white slender hands. Her whole figure shook and 
heaved with emotion, and tears came tricMing 
through her fingers. 

Must I own that, up to this moment, I had 
always thought there was probably some truth in 
what Christina Eeichstein had said, and that any 
feeling Lilla Lyndon might have had towards me 
was in part only a child's romantic sentiment 
towards a man who lived in a world strange to 
her, and which doubtless showed itself in her 
unskilled and innocent eyes all poetry, wonder, and 



104 MY enemy's daughter. 

beauty? I was not prepared for the deep velie- 
ment burst of emotion and grief I now beheld. 
I was not even prepared to find that the sen- 
timent, whatever it might be, had survived a 
short separation and silence. I was not prepared 
for love. 

Could I doubt that I saw it now offered to 
me ? Could I refuse it ? . I who had wasted half 
a life in vain ! 

I could not; I would not. I sat by Lilla's 
side, and put my arm round her slender waist, 
and drew her to me. I would have done the same, 
though her father stood by. She endeavoured 
to draw herself away, but I held her while I spoke, 
and her hands yet covered her face. 

" Since this is so, dearest Lilla, why should I 
try, even for your sake, to be wise and self-deny- 
ing in vain ? Since this is so, I do believe that 
Heaven has sent me here to see you, and to save 
you from a life which is too cold and hard for you. 
If I can make you happy, I will, and I will at least 
give my life to the attempt. I accept humbly 
and thankfully what Heaven gives me. Will you 



" THAT GARDEN WAS ENCHANTED. iUO 

love me, Lilla, and have me for your liusband ? I 
will love you always." 

I heard no answer, and wanted to hear none. 
But she allowed me to draw her closely to me 
now, though her tears still fell as before. And 
then I raised her face from her hands, and kissed 
her. 

*' Miss Lilla!" 

The woman's voice again was heard at a little 
distance. She was evidently seeking for Lilla 
where Lilla had been before. We had gradually 
straggled to a distance from that place, to quite a 
different part of the shrubbery. 

"I must go," said Lilla; "they are looking 
for me again." 

She now looked up for the first time for some 
moments, and her eyes met mine. They were full 
of tears, through which at last a smile struggled. 

''You must go, dearest. Your eyes I fear, 
are telltales." 

** They will tell nothing more," she said, with 
a brighter gleam, ''than they have often told 
lately." 



106 MY enemy's daughter. 

" And I did not know of it !" 

^'MissLilla! MissLilla!" 

" Good-bye, dearest," I again said. " Secrecy 
for tliis once ; only this once. We will act in the 
open face of day soon. I will write to your father 
to-morrow." 

*' To my father?" 

She spoke tremulously, and looked almost 
aifrighted. 

" Yes, Lilla. To whom else ?" 

^' But if." 

" We will talk of the ' ifs' hereafter. Just 
now, I think of no doubts. You shall hear from 
me, Lilla, soon, very soon. Good-bye." 

Again I kissed her. There was a flower in 
her bosom, and she took it silently out and gave 
it to me. Then she went quickly towards the 
house. She looked back a moment, and I saw 
her pale face once more . a star in the darkness. 
It set . she was gone. 

I came into the road, and paced up and down 
there for a long time, trying to think, to arrange 
my ideas, to plan for our future. It looked diffi- 



" THAT GAP.DEN WAS ENCHANTED." 107 

cult and complicated enougli, but assuredly' my 
heart did not misgive me ; even on her account I 
could fear nothing. I could only think, " She 
loves me. I am sent to devote my life to 
her." 

The flower she took from her bosom was a 
rose. Something like a shudder went through 
me as I looked upon it. An evil omen ! AVhen 
last a rose taken from a woman's breast was my 
possession, what was the story it predicted ? Sepa- 
ration, disappointment, two, three lives thwarted 
and frustrated. And now again the symbol ! 
Childish unmeaning folly to think of such things. 
But I could have wished that Lilla's flower were 
not a rose. 



CHAPTEK V. 



LILLA S FLIGHT. 



I DO not know how long I remained on the 
road outside Lilla's gate that night. I only 
know that it was dark, like midnight, hefore I 
thought of returning to Bowness. I have no 
way of expressing how I felt. My happiness was 
an unspeakable, an almost unbelievable ecstasy. 
I felt happy . and humbled, deeply humbled. 
To know that that pure noble heart had given 
itself up to me was indeed something to fill me 
with a sense of my own miserable demerits. I 
could have knelt on the bare roadside, and pro- 
strated myself and prayed of Heaven to help me 
that I might be less unworthy. 

Yesterday I should have wished to do some 
good or great thing, which might win me a place 
of regard in her memory, and redeem my barren 



lilla's flight. lOU 

life, and then die. To-day my veins are filled 
with the ecstasy and glory of living for her. 

I was resolved even more than ever to go to 
town at once. I would not make any eiFort to 
see Lilla again. I should be wholly unworthy 
of her if I did so. There shall be nothinof more 
that has the least appearance of secrecy. I will 
ask her openly of her father ; and should he 
refuse, as I know he will, we will marry in 
defiance of him. Come the worst, it is not 
long before she will be of age to decide for her- 
self. And he . even he . shall learn that I have 
not been influenced by any hope or wish to get 
his accursed money. No coin of his shall benefit 
me or mine. 

After a sleepless, restless, happy night, I 
started by the first train from Windermere. I 
strained and twisted out of the window of the 
carriage until we had quite lost sight of the 
lake, in the futile hope of getting a glimpse 
somehow of the villa and the little demesne 
where I had found Lilla. I could not see the 
place, or, indeed, anything near it. At last, 



110 MY enemy's daughter. 

I am ashamed to say, jdelding to utter fatigue, 
I fell fast asleep, and slept in the carriage for 
hours. 

It is a long journey from Lake-land to Lon- 
don. It was far into evening when I got to town, 
and I went almost at once to Jermyn-street to 
see Christina. I was disappointed, however, in 
my desire to see her alone, for she had several 
visitors with her when I called. 

She looked surprised and even startled when 
I presented myself; hut she compelled herself 
to receive me with external composure. 

^'1 never expected to see you so soon," she 
said. *'You must have grown tired of Nature 
even more quickly than I predicted." 

"No," I replied, "I did not get tired of 
Nature ; or, at least, that was not my reason 
for returning to town. But my companion" (I 
did not mention his name) ''had to desert me, 
and I didn't care to stay among the mountains 
alone." 

And I looked significantly at Christina. 

*' Afraid of being left to bleat alone, like 



lilla's flight. Ill 

Wordsworth's lamb on the mountain side, the 
plaintive spirit of the solitude/' interjected a 
young literary man present, who doubtless wanted 
to seem clever. 

"Indeed? You were left alone ? Then your 
fellow-traveller got tired of Nature first and left 
you?" asked Madame Eeichsteiu, looking with 
anxious eyes. 

"No, not that either; but some sudden call 
found him out even there among the mountains 
. he is such a dreadful fellow for sudden engage- 
ments . and he had to hurry away. He could 
not fix any time for his return, and so I followed 
his flight." 

All this was said on both sides in the coolest 
and easiest tone . in that tone of semi-badinage 
which people generally adopt on nearly all sub- 
jects when indifferent ears are open to hear. But 
I knew that Christina was anxious and uneasy, 
and I only waited to get an opportunity of ex- 
changing a quiet word or two with her to tell 
her all. 

The opportunity was soon made. 8he drew 



112 MY enemy's daughter. 

herself away to a little table covered witli books 
that stood in a corner, as if she were looking 
for something. I came to her side. She had 
just said in an eager undertone, '' What is it, 
Emanuel?" and glanced up under her eyelashes 
to see that no one was too near, when I saw a 
change come over her face ; and Mr. Lyndon, 
M.P., who had just then entered the room, ap- 
proached her. 

His eyebrows contracted when he saw me. 
She instantly left me, and hurried to meet him. 
He led her to a sofa with an air of lordly defer- 
ence, which had something of a sultan's patro- 
nage about it ; and they presently began to con- 
verse so earnestly that they seemed to forget all 
around them. 

I was resolved to wait no longer. If Chris- 
tina had already forgotten all about her husband, 
and her anxiety regarding his disappearance, any- 
thing that I had to tell her could well afford to 
remain untold until some more convenient oppor- 
tunity. I was quietly withdrawing, when, just 
as I passed near the sofa where Christina sat, 



LILLA S FLIGHT. 



113 



an artist I knew, who happened to be one of the 
company, asked, 

'' Did you leave Windermere only this morn- 
ing. Temple ?" 

Fire flashed under Mr. Lyndon's heavy eye- 
brows, and he almost started . he almost seemed 
as if about to break in upon our conversation. 
I noted the expression and manner, and I un- 
derstood the meaning. The whilom pauper at 
Dives' gate was the dreaded lover of Dives' 
daughter. 

I confess that I felt some respect for the self- 
constraint which enabled Mr. Lyndon to com- 
mand his feelings in an instant, and to behave 
as if he had never heard my friend's innocent 
-question. In a moment Lyndon and Christina 
w^ere conversing as before ; and I left them to 
converse. I had always hated to see this man 
near Christina, and I was pained not less than 
ever to see him there now. So I left the place, 
where he seemed determined to stay. 

But I could not hate the man any more. 
There was a time, and that not long ago, when 

VOL. III. I 



114 MY enemy's daughter. 

I thought it would have given me pleasure to 
humiliate and mortify him. I had no such feel- 
ing now. I made every allowance and excuse 
for him : I desired sincerely to be as considerate 
as possible towards him. I would have given 
much to be able to convince him of the integrity 
and the disinterestedness of my love for his 
daughter. I almost think I could have been in- 
duced, under proper encouragement, to beg his 
paternal blessing. In truth, my love for Lilla 
and my happiness in her love swallowed up all 
mean hates, and spites, and ignoble feelings of 
v/hatever kind within me. I was in fact almost 
in love with the world. The nearest approach 
to anger I felt towards any human creature was 
towards Christina Braun. Her reception of Lyn- 
don, her eager welcome of him, her absorbed 
attention to his talk, seemed to me to bespeak 
a lamentable levity at a time when some crisis, 
which she appeared to think serious, was im- 
pending over her husband. 

I walked home thinking over these things, 
angry with Christina, and sorry for her ; and 



lilla's flight. 115 

sometimes, indeed, full of deep, deep pity for 
lier. It was ten o'clock when I reached home ; 
and I opened one of my windows upon the blue 
twilight of early summer, and sat without a lamp 
and smoked a cigar, and began to see my way. 
I must write at once, this night, this moment, 
to Mr. Lyndon. I must anticipate any inquir}' 
or discovery by him. He must know at once 
that no secrecy of any kind is intended. From 
this moment it is certain that no power of man 
shall prevent me from making Lilla Lyndon my 
wife ; and he shall know the full truth. No idle 
feeling of pride or mortified self-love shall re- 
strain me from making every effort to avert dis- 
cord and disunion. Nothing shall prevent my 
acting towards Lilla Lyndon's father as her love 
deserves that I should act. He could no longer 
offend me. I had lost the right to complain. 

I lighted my lamp and wrote a letter. It was 
to him, and ran thus : 

"Sir, . Not long since I endeavoured to see 
you, and I was not successful. My object then 



116 MY enemy's daughtek. 

was to pledge you my word as a man of honour 
that I would never place myself again in the 
way of meeting Miss Lilla Lyndon, or willingly 
be the cause of any disunion, however slight 
and passing, between her and you. I was not 
favoured with an interview. You believed me 
guilty of conduct you had reason to resent. I 
do not deny it, or defend myself. The promise, 
however, which I could not make to you, I made 
to myself, and I would have kept it. 

" Chance . I am superstitious enough to think 
it Providence . ordered otherwise. I have just 
seen Miss Lyndon in Westmoreland. I declare 
that I had not the slightest idea that she was in 
that part of England. I declare too that I de- 
liberately refused to know where she was, when 
I might (without knowledge or consent of hers) 
have learned it. Our meeting was as much a 
surprise to her as to me. This, however, I need 
not tell you. You know that she is incapable of 
deceit. 

"I write now to ask you, as Lilla Lyndon's 
father, for your permission to me to become a 



lilla's flight. 117 

suitor for her hand. I will not affect to doubt 
that this proposal will displease you. I say 
sincerely, I am not surprised that you should have 
wished another husband for your daughter. But 
I say too that I am worthy of her thus far . that 
she has honoured me frankly wdth her affection. 
For myself, I have but lately learned to the full 
how deep and devoted is my love for her. I stand 
amazed, and indeed humbled, by the thought of 
her affection for me . humbled because I have 
nothing to give in return. 

" You are doubtless a rich man ; your fa- 
vourite daughter would in the ordinary course 
bring a fortune to her husband. Not so in my 
case. If Lilla Lyndon honours me with her love, 
and you give your consent, I receive her, and her 
alone. I will not consent to receive one penny' s- 
worth of pecuniary advantage. Even you shall 
at least have no reason to suspect me of a mer- 
cenary motive. I can myself maintain my wife 
at least in comfort, though not in splendour; 
and I think Lilla Lyndon does not care for 
splendour. 



118 MY enemy's daughter. 

"I wait your reply; and add nothing else. 
Nothing that I could say could honestly put my 
appeal in any better light to you. It should 
never have been made, did it only concern my 
own happiness. I make it believing that it also 
concerns the happiness of her whom I am sure 
you love. 

'' I have the honour to be 

" Your obedient servant, 

"Emanuel Temple. 

" George Stamford Lyndon, Esq., M.P." 

i had hardly finished this letter when I heard 
the rattle of wheels in the street, and presently 
my landlady herself came up and told me, with 
rather a significant twinkle in her eye, that a lady 
wished to speak to me very particular. 

"Where is she?" 

"I have shown her into the drawing-room. 
She said it didn't matter about her name, but she 
must see you." 

I hastened to the drawing-room, and found 
Christina Keichstein standing there. Her veil 



lilla's flight. 119 

was down, but I could see througli it tliat her 
face was very pale, and that her eyes sparkled. 

" ^Yhere is my husband, Emanuel ?" she said, 
without any introductory word. 

^'1 cannot tell you, Christina. I have told 
you nearly all that I know. He left me, and 
bade me tell you that you should hear from him 
soon." 

" Where did he leave you "? Where was he 
going ? Who came for him ? When did he say 
he would return ?" 

** Christina, I am not deeply in his confi- 
dence. He did not tell me where he was going, 
nor did I ask any such question. He did say 
there was nothing to be alarmed at . imme- 
diately." 

" Who came for him . Benoni ?" 

I described the emissary. 

"Yes: Benoni. I thought so . I feared so; 
I hate that man." 

''Is he not true?" 

''True ? yes, too true. True to his wretched 
plots and plans. But there can be nothing to 



120 MY enemy's daughter. 

alarm me," she went on, reassuring herself. " I 
have not heard a sjdlahle of anything. Is it not 
very hot ?" 

I opened the window near her. She threw 
back her veil. She looked pale as a ghost. 

*'No; there can be nothing of any moment,'* 
she said, looking at me anxiously for confirma- 
tion of her hopes. " I believe is still in 

town, and has not heard of anything ?" 

And she named an Italian name known of 
all men ; a name identified with revolutionary 
movement for more than a quarter of a cen- 
tury. 

*'I can satisfy you as to his being in town,, 
Christina. I passed him at Knightsbridge as I 
came along, not an hour ago. He was walking, 
very quietly and slowly . quite unconcernedly, to 
all appearance." 

*' Then there can be nothing. It must be 
only some one of those ordinary journeyings." 

''But don't people say," I asked malignantly, 
"that the Chief prefers stirring-up rebellions 
mth the long arm of the lever . that he gene- 



lilla's flight. 121 

rally directs an Italian insurrection from a safe 
stand-point here in London ?" 

"People do say it, I believe," slie replied 
coldly, "who know nothing of him, and have no 
sympathy with his cause, or perhaps with any- 
thing that is noble and high. You ought not 
to say it." 

I felt a little ashamed and penitent. 

"I am sure," I said, after a short pause, "that 
I heard Benoni, if it was he, speak to Salaris 
about the necessity of being in Paris at once." 

"In Paris? 0, come, this is the only im- 
portant word you have let fall yet. In Paris ? 
If you had only mentioned that before, I should 
have felt greatly relieved. It is nothing definite, 
then ? It is only some organising ajBfair : to 
seek for aid, or advice, or friends, or some- 
thing." 

"Yes. I don't see how they can well fight 
for Italian liberty in Paris. Indeed, Madame 
Reichstein, I don't believe there is much cause 
for alarm. Perhaps the battle won't come off just 
yet : threatened governments live long." 



122 MY enemy's daughter. 

^^ You are in a sneering humour, Emanuel, 
and I don't like to meet people in sucli humour ; 
hut I am a good deal relieved hy what you tell 
me. And now, hefore I go, let me scold you for 
having left me this evening so hastily. Why did 
you not wait, and tell me all you knew ?" 

'' In fact, I had nothing to tell ; and you had 
other people with you." 

" They all left veiy soon. You might have 
waited a little; I have no one to confide in hut 
you." 

*'Noone?" 

**No one, now that my hushand is away. I 
don't know why you look at me with such an 
expression ; I think you ought to explain what 
you mean." 

" Christina, I don't ask explanations, or offer 
any. I have nothing to explain." 

" Yes, you have something," she replied with 
energy. '' You have to explain your manner to 
me . your suspicious manner, and your looks, 
which seem to insinuate something that I do not 
understand . that I will not understand." 



lilla's flight. .123 

"Ay, will not nuclerstand !" I said with 
emphasis. 

" Will not understand, then, if 3'ou like to 
have it so. What have I done, that you, my 
oldest friend, look on me so coldly ? Have I 
not now enough to distract and torment me 
without tliat / There is nothing I am ashamed 
of, although there is much I am sorry for. You 
are changed towards me ; why . why ?" 

" Christina, I don't like your way of life ; I 
tell you that frankly . indeed you know it already. 
I don't like to see that man Lyndon hanging 
about you in the way he does . now too, when, 
for aught you and I can tell, your husband 
may be in some serious danger. I don't like 
to hear your name coupled with his in a ^vay 
that . well, in the way that pepole do couple 
it." 

Christina blushed, or flushed rather. 

" My husband knows of Mr. Lyndon's visits. 
What right has anyone else to . " 

'' No right, Christina. I claim no right. 
You insisted on knowing why I seemed surprised. 



124 MY enemy's daughter. 

or cold, or something of that kind ; I have told 
you the reason." 

" I didn't mean yon, Emanuel ; I meant the 
idle people whose bahble and malignant trash you 
repeat : people who babble malignant trash about 
yourself, let me tell you, as well as about me. 
How do you know w4iat things are being said of you 
and of me ? How do you know what vile gossip 
may have reached my husband's ear . which he 
scorns to believe ? Who can tell w^hat people 
might say, if they knew, for example, that I have 
come in this way to visit you at night alone ?" 

There was much of her old winning way about 
this, which, coming as it did now, brought a 
vague subtle sense of deceit to my mind. 

" Come, Emanuel, dear old friend, have faith 
in me. Let there be one at least who thinks well 
of me . one here I mean . for my husband thinks 
well of me, better, far better than I could ever 
deserve of him. If you knew him well, and knew 
how he trusts me, you would not, and could not, 
believe me capable of deceiving him. He knows 
that Mr. Lyndon visits me; and he knows why. 



lilla's flight. 125 

It is his doing altogether ; that is all I can tell 
you now ; but you shall know more before long. 
He is all confidence and trust. My dear friend, 
you and I are very good people in our way, but 
we are not like him." 

She spoke now with a dash of sarcasm in her 
tone and with a quivering lip. 

*' Christina, I do believe I have done you 
wrong." 

She sprang up and caught my hand in a wild 
way. 

" Yes, I do fully believe I have been suspect- 
ing you wrongfully. I don't pretend to account 
for what I have certainly observed . " 

She smiled half maliciously. 

"Although perhaps even now a conjecture 
does start up in my mind which seems to explain 
it . but I will not ask you for any explanation . " 

'* No, Emanuel. Believe me without asking 
for any explanation now." 

" And I do. I am sorry for having wronged 
you ; and I am more sorry still for the circum- 
stances that have entangled you in what I cannot 



126 MY enemy's daughter. 

help thinking a sort of humiliation ; and which 
vvill end, I fear, in the wreck of your happiness." 

'' My happiness is wrecked, Emanuel ! It 
went down long, long ago. I would give all to be 
young again, to begin again. The old imme- 
morial vain regret ! To be young again, Emanuel 
. to have the chance of beginning again, and 
doing something better ! I sold my soul, and I 
have got a heap of fairy gold in exchange ; and it 
has turned into withered old leaves." 

My heart was deeply moved by the state of 
almost abject despair into which she had worked 
herself. I endeavoured to say something in the 
way of commonplace reassurance ; but she cut 
me short impetuously, petulantly. 

" Don't, Emanuel ; I want no condolence. I 
daresay everything is for the best, and all right, 
and all that : that sort of stuff never made anyone 
feel any the happier. If I were to ask you, Don't 
I look pale, and wretched, and ugly, at this very 
moment ? you would say something complimen- 
tary, I daresay. It would not reassure me. I 
have had compliments enough in my day, and 



lilla's flight. 127 

tliey have done me mncli good ! I liave cried my 
eyes quite red, and my cheeks quite pale : mock 
tears on the stage, and real tears at home, make 
sad work of one's heauty, Emanuel. Yon find 
the world well enough, no douht ; you were 
always a patient contented kind of being, and did 
not trouble yourself about anything, as women do. 
Besides, you have special reason for haj)piness 
now. You have seen Lilla Lyndon." 

" How do you know ?" 

"I heard, only an hour since, that she was 
in the Lake country ; and I knew by your air 
of brightness and triumph, and . 0, something 
wholly unspeakable . that you had seen the little 
girl." 

"Yes, I have seen her." 

"And you will persevere, then; and you will 
not be warned; and you will take this child 
away from her father and her family ? 0, don't 
protest and look angry; she will go if you ask 
her ; and you think you can break all the bonds 
of association thus, and yet find the woman you 
tear away from friends and family and habits 



128 MY enemy's daughter. 

liappy in the end ? You know nothing of 
women, Emanuel ; you never did. She will 
plunge into any gulf with you now; she will 
awake with a shiver some day, and turn a pale 
face of silent reproach on 3^ou. I don't think 
the poor girl would scold." 

" You are a prophet of evil omen, Chris- 
tina." 

''A screech-owl, am I not?" 

" But I am not dismayed." 

** You believe in this girl's firmness and 
.constancy, and knowledge of her own mind ?" 

^'1 do, as fully as I believe in Heaven; far 
more fully, very likely. I know Lilla Lyndon ; 
I don't know Heaven." 

"You think the bonds of love will prove 
stronger with her than the bonds of habit ?" 

"I do." 

Christina shrugged her shoulders ; but re- 
turned to the charge. 

" She lives now in Connaught-place ?" 

" She does." 

*' And you propose to live . ?" 



lilla's flight. 129 

" In a small house in Brompton or Kensing- 
ton, say." 

" She has carriages and horses, grooms and 
maids without stint ?" 

''Yes; and it will try my resources, pro- 
bably, to keep a miniature brougham, a couple 
of maids, and a boy in buttons. Conmi, Chris- 
tina. All that I know, and have thought of." 

''And she will sit at home of nights and do 
crochet, while you sing at the Opera with some 
Finola ?" 

"No, Christina. I mean to give up the 
Opera . I am sick of it. Anything I can do is 
better done in the concert-room. I will at all 
.events try to make her happy, if she will have 
me." 

" Happy . after she has quarrelled with her 
father, and been discarded by him '?" 

" She will not quarrel with her father." 

"Emanuel, you are out of your senses." 

"No, Christina. I am coming to my senses 
...at last!" 

VOL. III. K 



130 MY enemy's daughter. 

I do not know why I made this reply. T 
suppose I was merely carried away by antago- 
nism and her last words. She flushed as if she 
had been smitten on the cheek, and her bosom 
heaved up and down like little waves, and she 
indulged in her familiar action of throwing back 
the hair from her brow and shoulder. She 
turned away for a moment ; and then laying her 
hand gently on my arm, she said in a softened 
tone : 

*'You do not think I wish you not to be 
happy ?" 

" 0, no, Christina." 

''0, do not, do not ! I wish you to be happy, 
most sincerely. I only feared and doubted; but 
all that is nonsense. Indeed, I long to see you 
happy. I shall feel when I see it, that my ex- 
piation is out, and my penance removed. I only 
feared that perhaps you did not know her, or she 
you. I suppose a woman always feels jealous of 
another who . I don't know really what I am say- 
ing ! Emanuel, remember I was the first who 
told you Lilla Lyndon loved you ! My dear, 



lilla's flight. 131 

I read it in the cliikVs eyes before she knew it 
herself. But you . you do love her . now ?" 

''Yes, Christina, I do. I know her now, 
and I love her." 

"Then I hope and pray that you may be 
happy, and that the future may recompense for 
any waste of the past. I will pray for you, 
Emanuel, and for her. Do you know I am a 
Catholic now ?" 

"AKoman Catholic?" 

"A Roman Catholic, if you will," she said, 
with a faint smile. "Yes, I have been so for 
some time. ^Iiat would my brother and his 
pious Lutheran wife in Konigsberg . you re- 
member them, Emanuel? . say, if they knew? 
Yes, I sought peace ; and I trust I have found 
it. You do not know . no man could know . 
how empty and blank my life has been. I have 
none of the true joys of life, and I shall never 
have. Other women, whatever their disappoint- 
ments, have some comfort to cheer them, to look 
forward to, when they cease to be young; but 
I ! . Ah ! a man can't know." 



132 MY enemy's daughter. 

Yet I did know. I knew what she thought 
of, at least. What woman will not mourn over 
the quiver that is empty of arrows ? 

"Come," she said, "I must go. It is al- 
most midnight ; and this is a mad escapade : 
I am w^asting my own time and yours." 

As she rose to go, her eyes glanced at the 
looking-glass, which, in the true style of a 
Brompton lodging, adorned my chimney-piece. 

"Emanuel," she asked quite seriously, "have 
I not greatly changed for the worse ? But you 
won't tell me. And then . don't say anj^thing 
. so changed since I used to watch for you in 
the window every evening, long ago ! Ah, those 
w^ere pleasant days ! I too shall soon leave the 
stage. I must in any case. I am resolved to 
go in my full prime of voice. We will go and 
live somewhere quietly in Switzerland, I think, 
if my poor Salaris can he persuaded to give up 
his dreams, and if he comes safely out of this 
present husiness. I don't well know what I 
shall do without the excitement of applause. It 
is a fearful thing for a woman who has nothing 



lilla's flight. 133 

but excitement to live on. But I made my bed, 
and must lie on it." 

" Cliristina, my dearest, earliest friend, it 
grieves my heart to see you so unhappy. Is there 
nothing that can be done? Do confide in me. 
Is there nothing?" 

"Nothing, 0, nothing," she answered with a 
sad wan smile. "I have now, thank Heaven, 
a true and warm religion to fill my heart. Then, 
Emanuel, you forgive me all ?" 

" Dear Christina, what is there to forgive ?" 

"Yes, yes, there is. I left you for the sake 
of my own career and my own ambition. I went 
forth on my fool's errand and left you, and it was 
long before you recovered wholly, and . and ceased 
to think about me." 

"It was indeed." 

"But you are nov/ free again, and happy and 
hopeful ; and all the past is sponged out, and I 
am forgiven ?" 

"0, surely, surely; if you will have it that I 
have any cause or right . " 

" There, that will do. And we are friends ?" 



134 MY enemy's daughter. 

"Friends, Christina, for ever." 

She leaned towards me, and kissed me on the 
forehead. 

"We may not meet again," she said, "except 
before many eyes ; and besides," she added, with 
a wild sweet smile, " it is no ^vl.ong now." 

With that kiss of peace she left me ; . that 
was the funeral ceremony of a long, long, vain 
love now dead. 

I went down with her to her brougham. Her 
German "familiar" w^as waiting for her, and they 
drove away. 

She was, then, a Roman Catholic. I after- 
wards learned that she had been formally so only 
a few months. I was not sorry for it. I was of 
no particular creed, and could never animate my 
mind, though in my blank and lonely years I often 
tried, into any warm interest in the differences of 
denominations, and the narrow theological ques- 
tions on the solution of which so many good people 
are content to rest their hopes of heaven. I could 
never believe in the power of any faith to mono- 
polise the right of granting passports into heaven. 



lilla's flight. 135 

Many people, I often tliouglit, seem to liken hea- 
ven practically to that famous cave in the Arabian 
Nights, the doors of which opened at the utter- 
ance of a few cabalistic words, equally powerful 
in their operation whether he who pronounced 
them understood w^hat he was saying, or compre- 
hended no syllable of its meaning. But I was 
glad, somehow, to think of Christina kneeling at 
a Koman-Catholic altar. She seemed the kind of 
being destined specially to be a Roman Catholic. 
Born to be sustained after every spring of im- 
pulse, passionate, warm-hearted, and yet in some 
sense egotistical and subjective ; strong and bold 
in impulse, yet feeble in purpose, and especially 
lacking that steadfast, stony patience, which, in- 
deed, is almost exclusively a man's quality, . that 
proud, inexorable patience which, even in great 
natures, as Macaulay truly says, is often mistaken 
for the patience of stupidity ; hers was a nature 
thoroughly suited to lean for support on the arm 
of a faith rich in consolations for every mood, in ap- 
pliances to soothe every impatience and strengthen 
every weakness. I could easily understand how 



136 MY enemy's daughter. 

that heart, so passionate and loving, yet so fitful 
and ambitions, warmed towards a faith among the 
very ceremonials of whose ministry are sympathy 
and confidence and ready pardon. She, the dis- 
appointed wife, the childless mother, the ambi- 
tious artist who had won success and found it 
barren, what was left for her but such ready and 
sensuous consolations as are found in the religion 
of Eome ? 

At last I had begun to understand Christina 
Braun. I have written to little purpose if the 
reader does not already understand her. She was 
not the kind of being I had once imagined. Hers 
was not the clear, strong, self-reliant, self-con- 
tained soul I had once believed it. How, indeed, 
I now asked myself, could I ever have thought 
so ? Did not a word, a mood, a chance decide 
almost every successive chapter of her life ? Was 
not strength of sudden impulse shining in those 
dark and glittering eyes? was not instability of 
purpose shown in those fair, soft, tremulous out- 
lines ? Vivacity of emotion was indicated in the 
sensitive lips, weakness of purpose in that rounded 



lilla's flight. 137 

cheek and cliin. All those years she had heen 
looking for happiness in many paths, and had 
not found it, hecause she gave up too soon each 
place of search and sought anew. She had always 
been seeking an ohject in our darkling life, but 
had never gazed long or steadfastly enough 
through the darkness in order that the way and 
the end might become clear to her. It was na- 
tural that she should take to the stage-life and to 
music . music, that most bewitching of delusions, 
that intoxication of the soul, in which a nature 
like hers would find all that the Oriental finds in 
his Jiaschez. She had sold her soul to the unreal : 
they who do so soon find themselves but shadow- 
less ghosts among the real. 

Easy to understand how Christina Braun could 
believe herself accomplishing a high destiny when 
first enraptured by the success of a career where 
the honours follow so quicldy on the victory that 
they are in fact its very echo. No success in life 
is so intoxicating as that of a great inima donna. 
Think of the patient author labouring for years 
at some work on which he stakes his fame and 



138 MY enemy's daughter. 

his happiness, and the fame never perhaps in his 
lifetime spreads heyond the appreciation of a few 
reviews and the admiration of one or two coteries. 
Think of the inventor wasting away his hrains to 
make perfect some great scheme, which another 
man at the other end of the country may be all 
the while forestalling, or which may in the end 
only bring money to the capitalist who buys it, 
and whose name it is destined to bear. Think 
of the gray old soldier, whose terribly-earned 
honours only come in time to decorate his corpse. 
And then think of the successful singer adorned 
with the gifts of emperors, and greeted in turn 
with the plaudits of every civilised capital. Who 
in St. Petersburg cares for the great English 
savant ? What London audience thrills at the 
entrance of the Italian poet ? But the great singer 
goes from state to state, and is the idol and de- 
light of every people she visits, and the fame 
which precedes and follows her is like the lan- 
guage of the music she interprets . cosmopolitan 
and universal. 

But when all this has been tasted, and the 



lilla's flight. 139 

cleliglit exhales, what remains for the sated and 
sickened heart? The joy of the Art itself? 
Yes, if one has loved the art only, and for the 
art's sake ; hut what remains for one whose 
joy was only in the intoxication of the false 
emotions and the meretricious successes which 
the art can be made the instrument to pro- 
cure ? What earthly reality can sustain and 
nourish the nature which has lived in the delu- 
sion of music and the delusion of fame ? I 
know of nothing. I thought it hut natural that, 
awakened from those delusions, Christina should 
seek repose in that most fascinating and suLlime 
of all delusions, which exhales from the perfumed 
incense of the Church of Eome. 

Thus I remained for some time, thinking 
over Christina and the change that had come 
upon her. For a long time, even before I knew 
it, the witchery of her influence over me had 
been fading. Her nature seemed to have been 
lowered somehow, and unidealised. Sometimes, 
indeed, the old influence awoke again, and her 
fascination, her ardour, her generous impulses 



140 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTER. 



quite conquered me : but if I liad been given 
to self-analysis, I might have found that her 
influence over me was most powerful when I 
was not near her. When lately I still believed 
that I loved her, it was the memory of my own 
youth and hers that I truly loved. I believe that 
a man who has been badly wounded in a limb 
and sufl'ers great agony, and at last has the 
limb amputated, is long haunted by the echo of 
the pain, which he now cannot really feel any 
more. And so it was with my feelings towards 
Christina Braun of late. They were the echo 
of a passionate love and a bitter agony. 

I thought of her so sadly that, for the time, 
I almost forgot myself and what I had to do, 
and the letter that lay written on my desk. 

I sealed my letter, and went with it myself 
to the post. Next evening I received the fol- 
lowing answer : 

" Connaught-place. 

" Sir, . I do not stop to express any surprise 
at the nature of the proposal contained in your 
letter. I give it the reply which you a2:)pear 



lilla's flight. 141 

to anticipate. I utterly decline to give my con- 
sent to your becoming a suitor to Miss Lilla 
Lyndon. I do not believe tliat such a course 
could possibly conduce to my daughter's happi- 
ness, of which I still consider myself the most 
competent judge, and of which, at all events, I 
am the natural and legal guardian. 

" You are good enough to say that you 
would accept my daughter without any fortune. 
This offer probably seems to you magnanimous 
and romantic. It might possibly impress my 
daughter in the same way. She is still, as you 
know, very young. You will allow me, however, 
as a man of the world, to remark that such an 
offer, while very easily made, could in no case 
be followed by any result. Were I willing to 
accept your proposal to marry Miss Lilla Lyndon, 
you will, of course, perceive that common regard 
for her interest and her happiness would compel 
me to take care that she was provided with such 
means as I could contri1)ute towards maintaining 
her in the station to which she has been ac- 
customed. 



142 MY enemy's daughter. 

''You will perhaps, for the future, see the 
propriety of withholding attentions which are 
in every way unwelcome, and of refraining from 
making proposals which can only meet with 
emphatic rejection. 

*' I have the honour to remain, sir, 
''Your ohedient servant, 

" George Stamford Lyndon. 

*' Emanuel Temple, Esq." 

I had expected nothing better, I was not 
surprised. I could not be angry. Having Lilla's 
love, I could afford to bear the cold rebuffs of 
Lilla's father. I was not discouraged. It would 
not in any case be long until Lilla came of 
age and could do as she pleased ; and if her 
love for me could stand the test of that delay 
. as I now fully believed it could . no power on 
earth should prevent me from making her my 
wife. 

I wrote to Lilla, telling her what I had done, 
and the purport of her father's answer, but 
softening, as far as I could, the tone and tern- 



lilla's flight. 143 

per of it. I wrote full of love and confidence ; 
bade her wait but a little, and all would be 
well ; pledged bcr my earnest, unalterable affec- 
tion, and my full faith in hers. In the conviction 
of her love I seemed to myself to move in an 
atmosphere of purple and rose-colour. 

Days and days passed away, and I received 
no answer. I grew restless, but hardly uneasy. 
She doubtless found it difficult to write ; perhaps 
she was not willing even to pen a few clandestine 
lines, but preferred nobly and patiently to wait. 
I did not for a moment doubt of her love, or fear 
lest she might have repented, or drawn back, 
or been talked into acquiescence with her father's 
wishes. 

Suddenly I heard a rumour which startled 
me, and which gradually deepened into certainty. 

Lilla Lyndon had been brought by her father 
from Westmoreland to his country-seat in Leices- 
tershire. The very first day of her removal there 
she left his house ; she came to London by the 
train, and thence disappeared, no one could tell 
hither. 



144 MY enemy's daughtek. 

I had a stormy interview with Mr. Lyndon, 
who came, excited and furious, to my lodgings. 
I could tell him nothing; and I am bound to 
say he came rather to denounce me as the 
original cause of the disunion in his family than 
out of any suspicion that Lilla's flight had been 
.concerted between her and me. He knew his 
daughter too well to suspect anything of the 
kind. 

He could only suppose that she had fled 
to take refuge in the bosom of some wild and 
romantic school-friend, who would regard the 
whole thing as a delightful chapter of romance 
in real life. He had gone or written or sent to 
everyone he could think of, and he was waiting 
in agony of expectancy to hear of her arrival 
somewhere. 

Characteristically, he never thought of yield- 
ing to her love. 

" I cannot be civil to you, sir," he said as he 
left me. "There was happiness in my house until, 
in a cursed hour, you saw my foolish daughter, 
I will take good care when she comes back that 



lilla's flight. 145 

you never see her again until slie lias recovered 
her senses." 

'' You have driven your daughter from your 
house," I answered, "and you know it in your 
heart. You can never change my feelings or 
hers." 

" Then you still mean to pursue this foolish 
romantic girl . this . this child, sir ?" he asked 
with a scowl. 

" Until Lilla Lyndon herself asks me to 
release her from such engagement as vre have 
made," I said, " I shall never change." 

Characteristically, too, he never thought of 
his poor relations in Paris. He had ransacked 
his brain not to omit one of the families and 
friends Lilla might have sought refuge with ; 
but they were all West-end people with country- 
houses. His suspicions principally turned to 
two old schoolfellows of Lilla' s lately married ; 
one in Scotland, one in Florence. Nay, he even 
thought of the maid who had lost her place for 
being too faithful to Lilla, and ho had had her 
hunted up to no purpose. It was quite possible, 

VOL. III. L 



146 MY enemy's daughter. 

lie tliouglit, that a romantic and headstrong 
3^oung lady might take refuge in the family of 
a favourite servant. That would be like some- 
thing in a novel, and, after all, would not be 
quite unladylike ; the lady and the servant would 
still hold their relative places. It never occurred 
to him as possible that his daughter could con- 
descend to fly for shelter and expose her family 
quarrels to a pair of poor relations who now 
taught a school and had lately let lodgings. 



CHAPTER VI. 



A YEAR S TRIAL. 



I HAD thought of the poor relations very soon. 
Nothing seemed to me more probable than that 
Lilla, having resolved to leave her father's house, 
would go to the lately-found relatives to whom 
she had been kind, and who had known me, 
rather than to any of the friends of her 
father. 

I was hardly surprised when, the very day 
after I had seen Mr. Lyndon, I received a letter 
addressed in a woman's hand which I knew . the 
hand of Lilla, the elder Lilla, Lyndon. This was 
what it contained : 

*^ !My dear old Emanuel, . Do you know 
whom we have got with us, sheltered here . a 
little dear white pigeon . not at all trembling 



148 

or weak thougli, but full of pluck? My cousin 
Lilla. She is the sweetest girl I ever knew, 
and so fresh and green that I feel like her 
mother. 

"Now yoii know why she is here. My uncle 
worried her to death with his pompous old non- 
sense. But you know that, after all, she must 
go back to him or come to some terms ; and 
perhaps her plucky conduct this time may con- 
vince him that she is not a silly little child. I 
can tell you she has a spirit which rather amazed 
me. 

" Well, I have written to her father ; of 
course, I must, you know. Mamma would have 
it so, and indeed I knew it must be done. But 
this goes to you by the same post. I made up 
my mind not to give the flinty-hearted parent 
any advantage that he is not entitled to ; and if 
I were you, and you are really the true and firm 
Emanuel I knew, then I think you had better 
. I have confused this sentence, but no matter . 
come over here and have it out with him. She 
is worth making a fight for; and if I were a man,. 



A year's trial. 149 

and such a girl were good euongli to bestow a 
thought on me, I should like to see the father, 
mother, or grandmother that could get her away 
from me. 

'' I have written this in nonsensical style, but 
you won't mind. I am heart and soul with her 
and you. 

^' Always your friend, dear Emanuel, 

" LiLLA Lyndon." - 

Of course I crossed the Channel at once. 
There was, I found, a steamer for Dieppe from 
Newhaven leaving rather earlier than the Dover 
mail-boat. I chose it for two reasons ; first, 
there was the less delay, and it was something 
to be on the move ; next, there was the less 
chance of my finding myself a fellow-passenger 
of Mr. Lyndon. 

AMien I got into Paris, it was not yet seven 
o'clock in the morning. I went to one of the 
hotels in the Kue de Eivoli, bathed and dressed, 
and went through some attempt at breakfast, and 
then started to walk through the Champs Elysees 



150 MY enemy's daughtee. 

and by the Elysee Palace to that part of the 
Faubourg St. Honore where the Lyndons lived. 
I calculated that I should reach it by nine o'clock, 
which seemed as early as I could possibly venture 
to present myself. 

It was Sunday morning, and already the place 
was flooded with holiday-makers. 

Somewhere by one of the great ministerial 
offices near the Eue Royale, I felt a hand laid 
firmly on my arm, and looking round, I saw the 
black peering eyes of my hated acquaintance, 
Stephen Lyndon, fixed on me. He was dressed 
quite in French fashion, and looked thoroughly 
like a Frenchman. 

What an interruption ! what a delay ! 

At first I began to think that he really had 
gone mad ; for he talked loudly in French to me, 
rejoiced to see me in town, asked when I had 
come back from Russia, and other such nonsense, 
meanwhile keeping his arm firmly in mine, and 
walking by my side with his head as high in air 
as he could manage to raise it. At last, when 
we got to a quiet spot in the Champs Elysees 



A year's trial. 151 

under a clump of trees, where by some cliance 
there then was a deserted space around us, he 
dropped his jabber and began : 

" So you are in this business too, you most 
deluded Temple ! Go back again, if you haYO 
an ounce of brains in your head ! Look here, 
Temple ; I told you lately I had come rather to 
like you, that is, not absolutely to detest you. 
Now I give you the greatest possible proof of my 
friendship. I doubt if Damon would have done 
as much for Pythias . I do, on my soul ! Leave 
Paris by the next train ; and laugh at the fools 
who brought you here. They won't echo the 
laugh, I promise 3'ou." 

" I don't know what you mean; and I am in 
no humour for foolery." 

" Are you not ? To see you here, one would 
not think so. But the affectation of innocence 
is lost on me. Temple. Man, I know all about 
it ; I know who are here ; I know Goodboy is 
coming; I know they are duping him too, and 
not giving the old idiot the faintest notion of 
what they are at ! But here he is, thank God ! 



152 MY enemy's daughter. 

The dies tree lias come, Temple ; and I shall 
give a few of my enemies something. But of all 
men else, I had avoided thee, Temple ! How on 
earth they got you into this, or what possible use 
they thought they could make of you, I can't for 
the life of me imagine. But get back. Vadc 
retro 1 Take my advice. I had always a genius 
for advising others. Leave Paris. Don't be found 
here to-night. A nod is as good as a wink, you 
know ! Adieu ; and remember, if you are con- 
cerned hereafter in writing my biography, that 
once in my life I did a good turn when I had 
positively nothing to gain by it !" 

He withdrew his hand from my arm, became a 
Frenchman again, saluted me in Parisian style, and 
turned back in the direction whence he had come. 

Another time I daresay I should have dis- 
cerned quickly enough a gleam of meaning in his 
words. But now I was so glad to find I had 
really got rid of him without loss of time, and 
that he evidently knew nothing of what had 
brought me to Paris, that no other impression 
whatever was left upon my mind. 



A year's trial. 1;j3 

Not far from tlie Palace of tlie Elysee, in a 
little avenue running at riglit angles with tlie 
street of the Faubourg St. Honore, Avas the olJ- 
fashionecl house, Yrith a small court, in which 
the lady who had entered into a sort of com- 
bination with Lilla Lyndon the elder kept her 
modest school for the education of French and 
English demoiselles. A carriage was at the door 
when I came up, and I assumed that Mr. Lyndon 
had forestalled me. 

Yes, Mademoiselle Lyndon was at home, the 
concierge told me; and the bell for mademoiselle's 
apartment was rung. 

In a moment my old friend came running 
down, looldng very plump and healthy, her dark 
eyes sparkling with excitement. 

" 0, you dear old Emanuel !" exclaimed this 
impetuous young lady, and she kissed me twice 
before I had time to speak. " You are just in 
time ! Haven't you been creating a pretty dis- 
turbance in a well-regulated family ! Come on ; 
no time to be lost." 

She led me upstairs ; then into a small dark 



154 MY enemy's daughter. 

room with floor gleaming in wax; tlien opened 
a pair of folding-doors w4iicli divided us from a 
larger room ; led me into tins, and announced, 
''Mr. Temple." 

This room was brighter than the other, and 
had windows opening upon a little garden where 
there were vines. A sofa was near the window, 
and there Lilla Lyndon . my Lilla . was seated, 
looking pale and distressed, but very beautiful, 
and calm and resolute. 

She was dressed in some dark colour, very 
plainly; she always dressed plainly, and looked 
for that very reason all the more remarkable in 
her beauty. The most careless glance must have 
seen that her face was of exquisite shape ; that 
her complexion was singularly pure, transparent, 
colourless. Her habitual expression of something 
akin to melancholy gave the greater charm to the 
sudden flashes of bright happiness which were 
called up with ease by any gladsome thought or 
word, and which lighted her face like that of a 
joyous child. This moment, as I saw her first, 
she looked wholly sad. One of her hands held 



A year's tpjal. 155 

a vine-leaf, wliich she had plucked from the stems 
that trailed in through the open window. 

I saw in an instant her face pass through 
its most sudden and heautiful change. When I 
looked on her first, her eyes were downcast, and 
she was, as I have said, all melancholy and pale. 
Her eyes flashed light on me when my name was 
spoken, and something like a colour came into 
her cheek. 

On a chair close to the sofa sat her father. 
He had had her other hand in his ; he dropped 
it suddenly and sharply when I came in and 
wheeled round to confront me, and his face flushed 
a deeper tint, and his teeth clicked together at 
the sight of me. 

Standing at a little distance, and looking 
wretchedly alarmed and uncomfortable, was my 
old landlady, Mrs. Lyndon. I am bound to say 
that her expression of countenance seemed to 
ask if I didn't think things were bad enough 
already, without thus coming to complicate them. 

A mirror was over the chimney-piece straight 
before me, and in it I could see the face of the 



156 iMY enemy's daughter. 

elder Lilla, who had introduced me. She looked 
quite delighted and triumphant. Her very curls 
spoke saucy triumph. 

'' Lilla," said her uncle, in his harsh cold 
voice, '^ this is not fair ; I did not expect this." 

" Lilla, my dear ! Good gracious," mur- 
mured Mrs. Lyndon. 

Meanwhile I crossed the room, and approached 
my Lilla. Her father made a gesture as if he 
would interpose, hut controlled himself. Lilla 
gave me her hand without speaking. I kissed 
it. Her eyes met mine fearlessly, and they told 
me of a generous confiding love, for one glance 
of which a man might he glad to die. When 
she gave her hand to me, she dropped the vine- 
leaf she had plucked. I took up the leaf and 
kept it. 

All this, of course, occupied not an instant 
of time. 

Then Mr. Lyndon addressed me. 

*'Mr. Temple, I certainly did not expect to 
see you here to-day. I do not see what right 
you had to come ; . no, pray excuse me for one 



A year's TELIL. 157 

moment. A man in my position might naturally 
and properly decline to see you, or permit your 
interference in any way, where you certainly have 
in fact no . well, no . ah . locus standi. But I 
have a great objection to scenes of all sorts in 
private life, and we are not now rehearsing Lucia 
(lb Lammevmoor ; therefore, to save argument and 
scenes, and all that, I consent to admit you for 
the time to this agreeable family conference. 
Well, then, Mr. Temple, I have come to take 
home my daughter. I suppose I have a right 
to do so. Have you, who honour me by show- 
ing such an interest in my affairs, any objection 
to urge ?" 

All this was said, of course, in a tone of 
cold grating sarcasm, intended to offend, and 
yet to stop short of being directly offensive. I 
was certainly not in the least likely to heed his 
tone or manner. Why should I ? Had not Lilla's 
silent face told me enough ? 

"Yes, Mr. Ljaidon, I have an objection to 
urge." 

''Ha, indeed! I propose to take home my 



158 MY enemy's daughter. 

daughter, who is a minor ; and yoii, who are an 
entire stranger, have an objection to urge. Hum, 
the objection ?" 

" That I am not certain whether Miss Lyndon 
is satisfied to go." 

*'I am not satisfied to go," Lilla said. 

These were the first words she had spoken. 
They were pronounced in a low, sweet, melancholy 
tone. Mr. Lyndon frowned and bit his lip. An 
explosion would evidently have relieved him im- 
mensely; but he seemed to have made up his 
mind not to explode. 

*'Why not, Lilla?" he asked. ''You used 
to love your home." 

"I never loved my home much, papa; but I 
loved 3^ou very much, and I do still, and I always 
will, if you will let me. But I have been very 
miserable lately, and I do not wish to go back 
on the conditions you have spoken of. I don't 
think we could be happy together. I know I 
could not be happy." 

"What childish folly! Why can we not live 
as happily as before ?" 



A year's trial. 159 

'' papa," she said, with a faint crimson now 
even on her forehead, and tears in her eyes, " I 
have told you aheady; I have told you many 
times; and here to-day, even before my aunt 
and my cousin. I will tell you again, if you 
like. I am not ashamed, no, not in the least; 
hut you might spare me. You know the rea- 
son." 

'' In other words, Mr. Temple, my daughter 
admits that you have enticed her into a clan- 
destine engagement." 

"I do not, papa ; I could not admit any- 
thing of the kind, for it would not be true. 
There is no clandestine engagement. Mr. Tem- 
ple has never enticed me into anything. He 
has held back from me, he has avoided me, 
like a man of honour, like a gentleman. But 
you ask me to promise never to see him again. 
I will not promise that ; I cannot promise it." 

^^ He offered to promise as much the other 
day," Mr. Lyndon said. ''He offered it, for his 
part." 

"I did, Mr. Lyndon, because I was willing 



IGO MY enemy's daughter. 

to make an}' sacrifice whatever of my own feel- 
ings for Miss Lyndon's sake. I would have 
done anything, promised anything, and kept my 
promise, that you and she might not be brought 
into disunion through me. But I did not then 
know . 0, forgive me, Lilla, if I speak too plainly 
. I did not then feel sure that your daughter's 
feelings towards me were as deep and lasting as 
I now believe they are. Providence threw us to- 
gether, and I learned my own happiness. I will 
not give it up for any consideration upon earth. 
Miss Lyndon honours me with her affection ; 
that gives me a claim and a right beyond 
anything any other living being can have. No 
power under heaven shall induce me to resign 
it." 

Mr. Lyndon's eyes flashed fire. I must say 
that all this time he was a marvel of self-con- 
trol and of good-breeding . good-breeding covering 
a bitter anger. 

"Mr. Temple, I believe you consider that you 
owe me some ill-will for having slighted you once 
or twice. If that is so, even vou must admit that 



A yeae's trial. 161 

you see me in a position of sufficient humiliation, 
brought about by your means, to atone for all 
wrongs. Now let me speak plainly to you, and 
let this extraordinary conference, which I certainly 
never invited, have some practical conclusion. You 
come here, I assume, to offer yourself as a hus- 
band for my daughter ?" 

I bowed my head. 

*' Then, so far as I am concerned, I absolutely, 
and for the second . I hope the last . time, refuse 
my consent. If my daughter chooses you, she 
loses me." 

"0, uncle, for shame !" broke in the elder 
LiUa. 

"Lilla my dear! Lilla, my own child!" re- 
monstrated her mother. 

" Stuff, mamma ! it is a shame." 

Mr. Lyndon looked at her silently for a mo- 
ment. I am compelled to say that his niece in 
no way flinched. He turned away, giving her up 
apparently as hopeless, and went on : 

"Now that is my decision; and I distinctly 
say it is not to be altered. Of course I cannot 

VOL. III. M 



162 in enemy's DAUaHTER. 

control my daugliter's actions after slie comes of 
age ; and in real life the days of coercing young 
women and locking them up in towers have passed 
away. My daughter must choose. I don't know 
whether Mr. Temple considers it the best way of 
proving his chivalrous affection for my daughter 
to induce her to separate herself from her family, 
and give up her father and her place in so- 
ciety." 

"Papa, I have told you that Mr. Temple 
never did endeavour to induce me. I endeavoured 
to induce him. He kept back because he was 
only too considerate for me. Please don't pain 
me uselessly by speaking in such a manner of 
him : it pains me ; and indeed, indeed it is use- 
less ; it cannot change me." 

'^My daughter thinks more of Mr. Temple's 
feelings than she does of her father's." 

"No, papa. Mr. Temple has never said a 
word of you which was unkind. It is ungenerous 
of you to speak so of him. You know he will 
not resent it, or defend himself." 

Lyndon looked at his daughter with eyes of 



163 

positive wonder. Such demonstrations on lier 
part were perfectly new to him. I thought there 
was, with all his anger, a certain expression of 
admiration in his face. He leaned his chin upon 
his hands, and his hands upon the head of his 
cane, and looked at her quietly, contemplatively. 

"Lilla, my dear," he said, after a moment's 
pause, "you are a generous child. Before you 
decide, you ought at least to know all. You are 
not, I believe, the first of our family whom Mr. 
Temple has honoured with his affection : you 
are not even the first Lilla Lyndon." 

Lilla turned her eyes on me with an expres- 
sion which only seemed to say, '^ This is a mis- 
take, is it not ?" I think my looks replied. 

"I believe Mr. Temple was once engaged to 
my niece yonder ?" 

"Never, uncle; never in his life," calmly 
replied Lilla the elder. " Mr. Temple never 
spoke a word of love to me, nor I to him. He 
was no more engaged to me than to mamma." 

" Lilly dear !" interposed her mother, 
shocked at the apparent levity of the comparison. 



164 MY enemy's daughter. 

*' But you gave me to understand . you did 
yourself . " said Lyndon, wheeling round and 
sternly confronting his niece. 

^'A pious fraud, uncle," replied the young 
lady, quite unabashed. '' And not so much of 
a fraud either, for it was rather implied than 
expressed." 

"A deceit, then, was practised on me . for 
what purpose ?" 

"A sort of deceit; but Mr. Temple had no- 
thing to do with it ; never heard of it until it 
was done, and then was horribly ashamed and 
amazed. I had no reason to be flattered, I can 
tell you; and I was very sorry for it, because 
the purpose . a stupid idea of mine, uncle, to 
get your interest and influence . wholly failed. 
I had my shame for my pains, that's all." 

"Perhaps it was also by some delusion or 
deception of the kind that I have been led to 
believe Mr. Temple was engaged to another lady 
at one time . a lady whom I know . a lady, in 
fact, who belongs to his own profession." Mr. 
Lyndon was now growing very intense in his 



165 

manner, and he kept his lips closely together. 
" I don't care to mention the lady's name ; but 
Mr. Temple will hardly say he does not know 
whom I mean." 

" I know perfectly well, Mr. Lyndon." 

" I believe I am not wrong in saying that 
you endeavoured to induce that lady to marry 
you ?" 

" You are not wrong." 

A flush of triumph came into Mr. Lyndon's 
face, and he looked eagerly round at his daughter. 
She had been listening with an expression of 
quiet, confident, half-smiling contempt to all this 
cross-examination, and when the final question 
came she glanced up towards me as before. 
When I gave my answ^er the colour rushed to 
her cheeks, and a hurt and startled expression 
came over her. She half-rose from the sofa, and 
an exclamation of surprise and pain broke from 
her. 

"Hahetr' observed Mr. Lyndon in a quiet 
undertone. 

Lilla the elder raised her eyebrows in wonder. 



166 MY enemy's daughter. 

"You are not wrong, Mr. Lyndon," I said 
quite calmly ; . and then I turned to liis daughter. 
" Listen, Lilla ; you have a right to a full ex- 
planation, and there is nothing for me to be 
ashamed of, or for you to condemn. If there 
was, I should not now be here. Lilla, some 
dozen years ago, when I was hardly more than 
a boy, I loved the woman your father speaks of. 
She was then a poor girl; I loved her dearly; 
we thought to have been married; but we were 
both poor, and she looked for some brighter 
career than I could give her; and I don't blame 
her. She left me, and for ten years I never 
even saw her. I loved her passionately all that 
time ; I wasted the remainder of my youth and 
much of my manhood in fruitless love for her. 
When at last we met again she was married. 
I think, or I then thought, that I loved her 
still . at least I loved her memory. I saw you, 
Lilla . and I came to know, not all at once, but 
gradually and surely, that I loved her no more. 
I loved you. That is the whole story, as true 
as light. Twelve years ago, when you were a 



A yeae's trial. 167 

little child, I loved that woman. She is still 
my dear friend, and always, please God, shall 
be. I love you now better than all the world . 
better than memory, or youth, or hope, or, I 
believe, than Heaven !" 

Tears were in Lilla's eyes. She made no 
answer, but quietly, confidently put her small 
white tender hand in mine, and with the lightest, 
faintest, dearest pressure of faith and affection 
told me I was believed and loved. Mr. Lyndon's 
shot had wholly missed ; in fact his piece had 
burst, and wounded him with the splinters. He 
soon recovered himself, however, and he never 
failed to remember that he was a gentleman. 

'^ Well," he said, ** I am sm-e there is no- 
thing to Mr. Temple's discredit in what he has 
told us. He has no reason apparently to com- 
plain of my having brought out this explanation. 
He will of course understand my natural anxiety 
to see that, if my daughter chooses to make 
what I consider an utterly unsuitable marriage, 
it is at least with somebody whose protestations 
of affection are likely to be sincere. I think, 



168 MY enemy's daughter. 

however, we have had quite enough of discus- 
sion now, and had hotter hring this very singular 
conference to an end. I have made up my mind, 
and have mentioned my decision. From that I 
shall not depart. If my daughter chooses you, 
Mr. Temple, she has done with me. That heing 
so, I ask you, sir, what you propose to do ?" 

" First, to speak for a few minutes with Miss 
Lyndon alone." 

" That you shall not, by God!" exclaimed Mr. 
Lyndon, losing for the first time his self-control 
and the hard iciness of his manner. "Never, 
while she is under any control of mine. Too 
much of that already; hut for that, we never 
should have been brought to this outrageous state 
of things. No, sir, if you have anything to say 
to my daughter, it must be said in her father's 
presence, or not at all. She is still my daugh- 
ter." 

" Then in your presence, Mr. Lyndon, if you 
please. I desire to take no advantage even of 
you ; you shall hear every word." 

He frowned and assented. Lilla the elder 



169 

and her mother quietly left the room and closed 
the folding - doors behind them. Mr. Lyndon 
stood up; his daughter remained seated on the 
sofa, pale still, with tears in her eyes, but un- 
dismayed. 

"Now, sir," Mr. Lyndon said harshly, "say 
what you will ; and to the point, please." 

He took out his watch and glanced at it. 

I sat beside Lilla, and took her hand. He 
chafed, and looked for an instant as if he would 
have interfered; but he again controlled himself, 
and shrugged his shoulders as one who would 
say, " Better let this fooling have its way ; it 
must finish soon." 

"Lilla my dearest, . Lilla my love," I said, 
"you have heard your father's decision; he says 
he will not change." 

She looked up with a faint sad smile, and said 
in a low firm voice : 

"Nor I, unless you bid me." 

"That I never, never will; but I will not 
allow you to sacrifice yourself for me . for it will 
be a sacrifice, Lilla . without full and long con- 



170 MY enemy's daughter. 

sideration. You are very young, dearest; you 
are only twenty years old . to me almost a child 
. you do not perhaps even yet know what you are 
doing. Your father loves you, even now when 
he seems most angry with you. Let us think of 
him too ; go back with your father, my love." 

She started, and so did he. 

" 0, don't think I ask you to give me up ; I 
am not capable of such a sacrifice. But I do ask 
you, Lilla, to wait ; to go home with your father, 
to be his daughter again until you are of age and 
can rightfully decide for yourself. Live with 
him, and do not even see me in the meantime, 
if he exacts that condition. Dear Lilla, it will 
be a bitter condition to me to fulfil, if he de- 
mands it; but I will fulfil it, and you will be 
guided by me, and fulfil it too. And then when 
that time is out, I will come to you openly, and 
under your father's eyes, if he will, and ask you 
to be my wife ; and if you are still of the same 
mind as now, I will accept your sacrifice without 
scruple, and recognise no right under heaven to 
interpose between you and me. Let us do this, 



A yeak's teial. 171 

my dearest, and I shall then have no fear that 
I have taken advantage of the tenderness of a 
young heart, and beguiled you into a sacrifice." 

Lilla's hand clung to mine all the closer. 
Her father said : 

" Mr. Temple, I cannot help saying that your 
proposal seems that of a man of honour, and . 
and, in fact, of a . of a . gentleman. I do not 
attempt to induce my daughter to accept it; I 
fear my influence now would be of little avail. 
It is only fair to you to say that there is not the 
slightest chance of my views with regard to your 
proposal undergoing any change in the meantime. 
But I promise you that no pressure shall be 
brought to bear upon Lilla, either by me or my 
other daughters, to distress her in any way. 
The subject shall, if she wishes, never be alluded 
to. I would ask you, perhaps, in the interval, 
occasionally to honour me with your company at 
my house ; yet, all things considered . " 

" Spare yourself any such consideration, Mr. 
Lyndon ; I could not accept your invitation." 

Then I turned to Lilla and pleaded my argu- 



172 MY enemy's daughter. 

ments against myself, against my own heart, once 
more. Heaven knows what it cost me to plead 
for that year of separation and silence. Heaven 
knows the agony of the pang that occasionally 
shot through me as I thought of the possibility 
that a year of severance might change the heart 
of even a girl so loving and noble as Lilla, who, 
after all, was yet in the light sunshine of her 
twentieth summer. But I ordered my soul and 
hers to bear it. Believing that for her sake . 
for her, who was so young and trustful and inno- 
cent . it was but right and just, I stamped my 
selfish emotions under my feet, and pleaded for 
my own sentence of banishment. 

Mr. Lyndon meanwhile looked on with a 
queer, puzzled, half- humorous expression. I 
believe in his heart he thought for a while that 
I was trying a mere coup de thedtre, making a 
grand display of self-sacrifice, in the hope that 
he might start up, as the father in a well-con- 
structed domestic drama would naturally be ex- 
pected to do, declare that he was not to be con- 
quered in generosity, and place his daughter's 



A year's tpjal. 173 

hand in mine. He was, as I have already men- 
tioned, a quiet, interested, admiring student of the 
selfishnesses and frauds of human nature. He 
studied them and delighted in them as a natu- 
ralist does in watching the habits of some kind of 
insect ; and he believed he had discovered the 
secret spring of all the impulses of man and 
woman. I had reason to know that the very 
women at whose skirts he ostentatiously hung, 
and on whom he spent his money, he thus 
studied as if they were rabbits or bees, and 
smiled to himself whenever he found, or thought 
he found, some new little meanness. He there- 
fore listened with an expression of whimsical 
interest while I pleaded with Lilla, and the 
corner of his mouth played with a quiet humour, 
as if he smiled in anticipation over the certain 
failure of this my melodramatic artifice. I saw 
the look, I understood it, and I despised him. 

"Now then, Lilla," he said at last, ''your 
decision, my dear ?" 

'' 1 know it already," I said. 

" I will go with papa," Lilla murmured. 



174 MY enemy's DAUaHTER. 

Mr. Lyndon smiled a triumpliant smile. 

"And I will do as you tell me, Emanuel, 
because I believe in you, and because you ask 
me in the name of your own feelings and your 
own sense of honour. You shall be satisfied 
that I have not acted like a child. Let us wait ; 
it will not be very long, and then w^e can have 
nothing to repent. You will not change, Eman- 
uel." 

" No, by heaven . not I !" 

" And for me . if you doubt me . 0, wait and 
see. You have talked of a sacrifice. This is 
the sacrifice, and I agree to it for your sake. . 
Papa, you have not understood Mr. Temple, ilf 
he were to ask me this moment . yes, this mo- 
ment . I w^ould leave all on earth to go to him 
and be his wife, and be happy, or suffer, or die 
with him. He asks me to wait ; and I do so 
for his sake, and because he asks me, and I too 
wish to show and prove to all the world that 
he is what I know him to be. . For a year, then, 
Emanuel, good-bye. Let us not see each other 
any more until that time, that long time, is out. 



A yeae's trial. 175 

Then come to me. You will find me unchanged 
. or dead. . Papa, you lose your daughter either 
way." 

She was rising with a proud firm air. But 
her soul was stronger than her frame, and she 
pressed her hand to her forehead, gave a deep- 
drawn sigh, and fainted. I caught her and held 
her in my arms. Her father made a step for- 
wards ; but I peremptorily signed to him to keep 
back. I would, if needs were, at that moment 
have held him back with one arm, while I sustained 
her with the other. Then, after one long, sad, 
delightful, maddening moment, during which I 
kissed her lips, her cheek, her forehead, her eyes, 
I laid her softly on the pillow of the sofa, whereon 
she had been about to fall when I caught her ; 
and I said to Mr. Lyndon : " She will revive 
in a moment : and she will go with you, sir. Be 
kind to her." 

** Damn it, sir," he said angrily; "I know 
how to take care of my own daughter. She 
always loved me and obeyed me until now." 

So I left the father and the daughter. 



176 MY enemy's daughter. 

I glanced back as I passed through the folding- 
doors, and saw that he was bending tenderly over 
her, and touching her hair with hands that 
trembled and looked hot ; and I do believe that 
I saw a tear fall from his eyes. The cynical 
student of human nature had found out a new 
weakness . in himself! Make him laugh at 
that ! 



CHAPTER YII. 

DANGER-SIGNALS. 

An hour after, I was walking alone through one 
of the alleys of the Champs Elysees. 

I had waited hut a few moments with Mrs. 
Lyndon and her daughter, long enough to hear 
that things were going rather prosperously with 
them; that Mrs. Lyndon hated Paris and the 
Parisian way of cutting steaks and chops and 
joints ; that they had sometimes seen Ned Lam- 
bert, "as a friend," Lilla said; and that he"" was 
still constant, patient, hopeful. I was glad to learn 
that Lilla knew nothing of her father's where- 
abouts, . her father, whom I had seen that morn- 
ing within a quarter of a mile of her house ! and 
I put in many words for Ned Lambert, and 
against her resolution of delay. She shook her 
head sadly, but decisively. 

VOL. III. N 



178 

" You have to wait," she said ; '' why not we ? 
If a woman is worth having, Emanuel, she is 
worth waiting for. I will never marry, never, 
while that wretched man lives, or until I know 
that he is reclaimed, and decent enough, at all 
events, not to bring open shame on my husband. 
If Edward Lambert is like me, he will wait. If 
not, Emanuel, then would it not be better we 
never became anything more to each other ?" 

" Ned will wait, never fear." 

" yes, Ned will wait," . and a tear flashed 
up in her bright eye. " There never was a heart 
more true and tender than his . dear old Ned, 
dear old Ned !" 

My poor friend's own heart had greatly ex- 
panded since I first saw her. She was a sadder 
and a more loving woman now than I had ever 
known her. My pretty pagan was becoming 
thoroughly christianised. The soul was entering 
the body of the hardly-entreated, world-seared 
Undine of the Thames. 

Thinking over this, even amid the bewildering 
pressure of my own thoughts, I walked slowly 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 179 

through the Champs Elysees. I was to leave 
Paris that night ; to travel again by Dieppe, lest 
I should obtrude myself on Mr. Lyndon; and I 
had yet some weary hours to while away. 

Despite my parting from Lilla ; despite the 
year of probation, fraught with such various 
possibilities, that lay before me, . the pervading 
sensation of my soul was made up of pride and 
happiness. I had something to love, I had some- 
thing to live for . I was loved. Out of the 
dulness and arid darkness of my commonplace 
purposeless existence a light of heaven had come 
down to me. I had no longer any doubt of the 
depth of Lilla Lyndon's affection. I believed 
without shadow of distrust in the immortal 
strength of her love, and I seemed as if hence- 
forth I walked with a pillar of light to guide 
my way. Wait for a year ! . why, I had waited 
for ten years and more, in vain, and I would have 
accounted it no sacrifice, if the time had but 
accomplished the object. If the younger love for 
Christina had been more feverish and burning, 
it never had had the deep sweet abiding faith I 



180 

felt in tlie soul and the affection of Lilla Lyndon. 
The first glance she ever turned on me was like 
a ray of sacred moonlight to one who has lain 
down wearied in a sandy desert. In her I found 
the woman who is all truth and simplicity ; who 
has character, hut no self. How such a being 
ever came to love me, I never could understand . 
I cannot now understand ; but it always seemed 
to me that her love was a consecration which 
pledged me to all good and generous impulses, 
and bade selfishness, and evil passion, and dis- 
trust, be gone for ever. A year . only a year ! 
and the deep faith and sanctity and heavenly 
guardianship of her love the while. A year . and, 
after all, I am yet young ! it shall be a year of 
earnest work and improvement, and preparation 
for the future, which now at last looks so clear 
and bright. 

Prose in life always mingles with our poetry. 
I was already turning over practical plans for our 
future ; plans into which questions of income 
largely entered. I had a year to work in, and 
during that interval I hoped to make a little 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 181 

money, and then to give up the stage. In every 
way the concert - room suited me better and 
pleased me better; and I thought I could thus 
lead a far quieter and happier life with Lilla. 

Thinking over these things, I sauntered 
through the Champs Elysees, where now it be- 
came hardly possible to find a quiet spot. The 
Sunday-enjoying people were all out; the men 
with their wives, and mothers, and little chil- 
dren, the husbands generally attending more to 
the children than the wives did ; the ouvrier and 
his amie ; the voitures de remise full of pleasant 
parties going off to the Bois . although the Bois 
of the year I speak of was very different indeed 
from that of 1869 ;. the soldiers lounging and 
smoking ; the queer riders looking so very much 
as if they had hired their horses for the first 
time that very day, and did not well Imow what 
to do with them. 

I sat at a table of one of the open cafes and 
looked at the scene. I was thirsty, and ordered 
some wine; drank it, and smoked a cigar, and 
fell thinking. 



182 

A man passed by once or twice, and sur- 
veyed me curiously. At last he came and took 
a seat at a table near me, and still eyed me at- 
tentively. I knew lie was looking at me, even 
when I did not see him ; so I looked up at last, 
and studied his features. Yes, I must know 
him ; I had certainly seen him before some- 
where. 

But where ? 

He was evidently an Italian or a Spaniard 
. an Italian more likely. He was low and 
stout, with a thick black beard cut closely 
round his face, and he had a strange restless, 
suspicious, burning, wolf-like eye, unpleasant 
to see, although the general expression of his 
face was otherwise honest and manly enough. 

Yes, I know that man ; at least I have seen 
him before : that is not a man to quarrel with ; 
that is a man to do anything. For a certain 
class of conspirator, now . 

Ah ! there it is ! that is the man ! The en- 
voy who found Salaris in Westmoreland and 
took him away ! 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 183 

Then there came a very rush of half-for- 
gotten things to my mind. My own concerns 
had made me forget them. The words which 
Stephen Lyndon had spoken to me this morn- 
ing ; his wild vague talk of something going on 
which he meant to disclose; his advice to me 
to leave Paris this very night ! And Salaris is 
in Paris ; and this man, who brought him, hap- 
pens to be at my very elbow. And Lyndon 
had been intrusted with some of their secrets ! 

In a moment the reality of the whole situa- 
tion seemed to reveal itself to me. Whatever 
the plot Salaris had now in hand, Stephen Lyn- 
don had betrayed it to the French Government, 
and its eyes were on the conspirators ! 

Even in that moment I was much puzzled 
to think what the mysterious plan for the re- 
demption of Italian liberty could be which was 
to open its first scene in Paris. Everybody 
knew, however . even I did, who took but little 
interest in politics, home or foreign . that the 
French Government, or at least its chief, was 
willing enough just then to play into the hands 



184 MY enemy's daughter. 

of tlie legitimate and despotic Italian rulers . 
the Bourbons, and Parmas, and Modenas, and 
the Pope ; and the arrest of Salaris and the dis- 
covery of anything like a genuine plot might 
probably mean his instant surrender to Pope or 
Austrian or Austria's vassal. Sentence of death 
had been recorded against him in some of the 
Italian States; and he had but lately effected a 
desperate and romantic escape from a Lombard 
prison. The surrender of such a man now to 
any of his old enemies would probably mean a 
short shrift and a sharp axe. 

This man near me is trustworthy ? He must 
be. He seemed to be fully in the confidence of 
Salaris, and Christina spoke of him as a man of 
undoubted truth. 

He was still eyeing me curiously. I ad- 
dressed him in Italian and in a low tone. 

*' I think I have had the honour of meeting 
you before, signer ?" 

He nodded his head and smiled. 

'' In England . a few days ago ?" 

*' Up among the mountains ; yes." 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 185 

** You know I am a friend of Signor Salaris ?" 

" Yes, signor." 

"He has told you so?" 

" Often." 

A more laconic person one could not easily 
meet ; and he indulged in not the slightest 
gesticulation. 

" You will trust me." 

He nodded, and glanced round to see that 
the gargon was not too near. 

" Does anyone here speak Italian ?" I asked, 
thinking that he dreaded being overheard and 
understood. 

*' I think not, signor. But they may know 
that we are speaking Italian . and even that . " 
he finished the sentence with another glance round 
and a slight shrug. 

" Perhaps English would do better. Do you 
speak English ?" 

" yes, some." 

" You understand it ?" 

" Much well." 

" Then," I said, speaking slowly that he might 



186 MY enemy's daughtee. 

follow my meaning, "1 have reason to fear that 
you and our friend the signer are betrayed." 

He started and frowned ; then after a moment 
of silence said, 

" Impossible." 

"It is possible ; it is true. I have seen and 
spoken to the man who betrayed you. He told 
me he had done it, or meant to do it. Take 
care ! I do not know what your plans are, or 
what you are doing in Paris ; but I tell you that 
I fully believe everything either is now known 
to the police here, or will be known before 
night." 

He looked grim and set his teeth, and a low 
red fire burned in his eye. I began to tell 
him exactly what I knew ; but I had so often to 
repeat what I said, and he had such difficulty 
in following me, despite his professed mastery 
of English, that I discarded his objection to 
Italian, and told him my story in his own lan- 
guage. I told him that a man whom I knew to 
be partly in Salaris's confidence, and who was 
now in Paris, had warned me to leave the city 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 187 

before night, and hinted, or more than hinted, 
that he had given information to the government 
which would lead to arrests. And I gave him 
my own view of the character of the man who 
had told me this, and my belief that in this 
at least he was quite capable of keeping his 
word. 

" This man's name, signer?" 

I hesitated. Ought I to betray even the 
wretch who was betraying others? There was 
a savage gleam in my companion's eyes which 
boded ill to a traditore. After all, the TVTetched 
Stephen Lyndon had had some thrill of good- 
nature in him towards me, and had endeavoured 
to save me from what he supposed to be a great 
danger. No, I could not give up his name ; and 
I told the Italian so. 

" I ask you," he said quietly, " because all 
would depend upon that. He may tell all he 
knows, and yet tell nothing." 

" But he clearly told me that he would betray 
Salaris." 

" Possible. The signer does not quite under- 



188 MY enemy's daughtek. 

stand. It may be that lie is set on to betray 
something, that is truly nothing, in order to turn 
away attention from the real business. I do not 
know." 

''Do you know where Salaris is?" 
"Not where he is now. I hope to see him 
in Paris to-night." 

" Can you not find him out and tell him ?" 
"Yes, I can do that; it is my duty to do it 
at once. He will know what to do. Could the 
signor remember the exact words told to him by 
this person who warned him ? That would be of 
great importance to know." 

I tried to repeat, as well as I could, the exact 
words Lyndon had used. But the attempt was a 
failure ; I had only a vague recollection. 

" Perhaps the person did not quite understand 
all he was saying? Perhaps he conveyed more 
than he meant . or less? The signor speaks 
Italian well . 0, very well indeed ; but I can dis- 
cover that sometimes he uses a word with not 
quite the meaning, or more than the meaning he 
would express. Now this is of great moment. 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 189 

The person who spoke to you may have impressed 
on you too much or too little." 

"No, no, there was nothing of the kind. He 
was not talking Italian, but English . his own 
tongue and mine." 

The Italian's eyes flamed again. He had laid 
a trap for me, and I had blundered right into it. 

*' Thanks, signer," he said, rising from his 
chair. "I have now what I would know. I 
thought so ! I know who is the man who spoke 
in his own tongue, English, to the signer. The 
signer evidently always suspected him ? So did 
I . always. Adieu, signer. The news is ill-news 
that the signer brings ; but it is not perhaps yet 
too late." 

He saluted me gravely, and walked quickly 
down the Champs Elysees towards the Place de 
la Concorde, leaving me much bewildered with 
doubt as to whether I had done Salaris any good 
after all; whether Lyndon was not a vain old 
madman, who bragged of a capacity to do harm 
which he did not possess ; and whether I had not 
handed the wretch over to a vengeance which it 



190 MY enemy's daughter. 

was not in his power to deserve. If I could only 
see Salaris and speak with him! I sprang up, 
and ran as fast as I could after the Italian, in the 
hope of overtaking him and inducing him to con- 
fide to me something of my friend's whereabouts ; 
but before I could make much way through groups 
of holiday-makers and children he had quite dis- 
appeared. I spent a horrible hour or two of it in 
the odious position of one who just knows that 
something evil or dangerous is going forward, and 
fancies he only wants a little light, a little open- 
ing, to be able to prevent it, and is groping here 
and there to no effect, while he feels that every 
moment lost brings the dreaded thing nearer. I 
could do literally nothing, and yet I was so near 
to being able to do something ! 

I had engaged to sing the following night in 
London with Christina ; otherwise I would gladly 
have remained in Paris, in the faint futile ghost 
of a hope of meeting Salaris, and being perhaps 
able to prevail on him to leave France at once and 
draw out of whatever enterprise he had engaged 
in. Time ran on, while I thought and debated 



DANGER-SIGNALS. 191 

with myself, and fretted and fumed in this idle 
way; and at last it came to this, that I must 
either go at once, or make up my mind to break 
my engagement, telegraph that I could not leave 
Paris, and stay. 

I adopted the resource of many a puzzled and 
idle man, and invited the Fates and Chances to 
settle the question for me. 

A bird was swaying on the branch of a chest- 
nut just in front of me. He was about to take 
flight. 

" Come," I said to myself, " if the bird flies 
to the right, I will leave Paris ; if he flies to the 
left, I will remain." 

He shot from the swinging bough, and flew 
in the direction of the Arch of Triumph on my 
right. 

I got up instantly, walked to the Place de la 
Concord, hailed a voiture, and was presently on 
my way to the terminus of the railway to Kouen 
and Dieppe. I crossed the Channel that night, not 
without a feeling that I was like a man running 
away from the camp the night before a battle. 



CHAPTER Vni. 

Christina's last triumph. 

This had not been, on the whole, a brilliant 
season with Christina. She opened magnifi- 
cently : her voice perfect, her physical powers 
apparently quite restored. A week had hardly 
passed when a change came, and she was at- 
tacked at once by hoarseness and nervous weak- 
ness. Then she took a few nights' rest, and 
apparently recovered; then she sang for a night 
or two more, and fell back again. More than 
once, when she was announced for some one of 
her great parts, she had to give up at the last 
moment, and little printed notifications laid in 
every box and stall told disappointed audiences 
that this singer or that had undertaken to act as 
substitute for Madame Reichstein. The West-end 
public is at once undemonstrative and exacting, 



193 

and Madame Eeiclistein was openly and gene- 
rally accused of being wilful, capricious, and ill- 
tempered. Stories were repeated of the manner 
in which she had taken oflfence at this or that 
imaginary slight, and peremptorily told the 
manager, at the last moment, that she positively 
would not sing. She began to be quietly regarded 
as one on whom reliance could not be placed ; 
whom success had spoilt ; who was ungrateful to 
her best patrons and admirers. This sort of thing 
even found its way into newspapers ; and a comic 
journal had some pleasantries about the amaze- 
ment of an audience when Madame Eeich stein, 
who had been announced, did actually sing . and 
suchlike stuff. 

All this pained and vexed Christina, and of 
course only helped to make her more nervous 
and less able to command her physical resources. 
She was simply the most conscientious artist I 
have ever known. She was absolutely without 
the petty caprices and whims which spoil so many 
singers, men as well as women. But she was not 
only too conscientious as an artist to evade her 

VOL. III. 



194 MY enemy's daughter. 

duties ; she delighted in them ; they were her 
happiness . lately perhaps her only happiness. 
To me my operatic parts were mere drudgery; 
mechanical, mercenary toil, to which I went re- 
lucantly, from which I escaped with a sense of 
relief. To her they were excitement, exhilaration, 
delight. She breathed freely on the stage, as in 
some congenial and delicious atmosphere. Her 
inability to sing never disappointed even the most 
sympathetic audience so much as it disappointed 
herself. She told me often that she had passed 
many of those evenings of disappointment in un- 
ceasing uncontrollable tears. It was therefore a 
bitter addition to her trouble to be suspected of 
petulant and unworthy caprice, because of a 
physical weakness which grieved her to the 
heart. 

Thus far then, the season had been fitful 
and disappointing. At last Christina was per- 
suaded to take a few weeks of absolute rest ; to 
nurse her voice, and give it a fair chance to re- 
cover its power. She felt convinced, at the end 
of the interval, that her strength was quite re- 



cheistina's last triumph. 195 

stored, for the time at least, and she made up 
her mind to regain her place before the glory 
of the season waned. A new opera had for some 
time been heralded from Vienna and Paris, as 
full of splendid music and grand dramatic effects. 
The bringing-out of this opera in London had 
been delayed hitherto only in order that Christina 
might have the first part in it : and the press 
and the public were beginning to grumble a 
little over the delay. It was now announced at 
last, with Christina for its heroine . it had been 
rehearsed and postponed again and again . and 
it was waited for with an almost unparalleled 
expectation and excitement. I had the tenor 
part, which I too had rehearsed ever so many 
times ; and the first performance was fixed for 
the night after that on which I left Paris. My 
non-appearance would therefore have been a de- 
plorable disturbance ; but, as I have said, I 
appealed to the oracle ; and I reached London 
in good time, none the worse for my hasty 
flight to Paris. 

The great hour came, and with it came 



196 

Christina, resolved to reconquer her place at any 
risk or sacrifice. 

You would not have thought Christina Eeich- 
stein had heen recently sunk in nervous debility, 
had you seen her as she came on the stage that 
memorable evening. She had, in one sense, her 
position to retrieve, and she felt it. I knew the 
moment I saw her that she came to conquer; 
and she did conquer. Hers was in every way 
that sympathetic sensitive nature to which any 
excitement lends momentary strength and the 
capacity for the time to prevail. The conscious- 
ness that she had to succeed was to her success 
itself. Not in her brightest days . the days of 
her too brief prime . did she ever, I believe, 
sing as she sang that night. If in earlier years 
her voice wanted anything, it wanted occasionally 
B. certain shading-away and tenderness of tone. 
Perhaps her condition of mind, perhaps even her 
recent illness, helped now to supply this want. 
I know that the want existed no longer. She 
looked queenly in form as she moved across the 
stage; and beautiful in the face, which recent 



197 

illness had softened into a paler tenderness than 
commonly belonged to it. What is there in the 
superstition of aristocracy which even still lurks, 
like the belief in ghosts, in the instincts of most 
people ? Why, this daughter of a German toy- 
maker looked every inch a queen. A queen ? I 
have seen many queens, and not one of them 
ever looked so queenly as she did that night. 
Her voice thrilled the theatre; and her noble- 
lyrical style, inspired of the soul, free from every 
trick and artifice of the stage, uplifted, one might 
think, every heart to its own regions on its own 
soaring melody. 

I felt a thorough pride in her triumph : all 
the more so because I hoped I had in some way 
helped towards it. Lately, too, my heart was 
beginning to be filled with affection and pity 
for her, and sorrovv^ for her. Love that had 
died had sent its pale ghost of pure and pitying 
friendship to haunt her and watch over her. 

I clasped her hand in delight and congratu- 
lation at the close of the first act, and she re- 
turned the pressure with no less warmth. 



198 MY enemy's daughter. 

" See," said slie, " how exuberant I am in 
my delight ; I have cut my hand !" 

She drew-off her glove and held up one hand, 
and I saw tiny drops of blood trickling down her 
white fingers. 

" It was my ring that did it : it cut through 
glove and all. Salaris's ring . look at his minia- 
ture." She touched a spring, and a tiny locket, 
set among brilliants in the ring, flew open, and 
showed me a little miniature of the grave, melan- 
choly, manly face of her husband. 

" Salaris reproves me," she continued, faintly 
smiling, " for forgetting him in a poor stage- 
triumph. But he would not blame me, if he 
knew all, Emanuel. I have made up my mind to 
devote myself to him for the rest of my life. The 
curtain falls for me with this season. I will sing 
no more. I have vowed a vow, Emanuel, and I 
will keep it. If Heaven brings him safe out of his 
present enterprise, I will devote myself to him, 
and be for the rest of my life what I have not yet 
truly been . his wife." 

Her face flushed as she spoke, and her eyes fell. 



Christina's last triumph. 199 

"You have not received any message from 
him ?" I asked, not caring to encourage her to 
dwell upon this proffered one-sided bargain with 
the powers above. 

"Not yet; but I think I may rely upon re- 
ceiving some news from him in some way to- 
night. You shall know what I hear as soon 
as it reaches me." 

She did not know how lately I had been to 
Paris : I had no motive or heart to tell her. 

We separated just then. I need not tell of 
the progi'ess of the second act. Enough to say, 
that Christina made it a promenade of triumph, a 
conqueror's procession for her. 

And then the news of Salaris came at last. I 
had hardly quitted her when many mouths told 
me of it. It had been made publicly known in 
the House of Commons, and had been flashed to 
the Opera, the theatres, and the clubs. It had 
throbbed along the telegraph wires only too 
quicldy; and it was, for all its haste, but too 
true. Yes, we heard not from Christina's hus- 
band, but of him, that fatal night. The new 



200 MY enemy's daughter. 

grand project for the liberty of Italy liad exploded 
in the bombs of an assassin ; and the great 
obstacle which was to be removed from the way 
of the young liberty was standing in the way still ! 
In a word, an insane and monstrous attempt had 
been made that very night in Paris . an attempt 
at what was believed to be the slaying of a despot; 
and it had only ended in the slaughter of some 
half-dozen people, the very worst of whom, in 
patriotic eyes, were but poor police-officials, the 
humble menials of despotism, who would have 
served liberty just as faithfully as they served 
tyranny if they had but the chance. And Salaris's 
name was named as that of the soul and leader of 
the conspiracy. 

The curtain was already up for the last act, 
and I had no time to find out whether the news 
had reached Christina, or to endeavour to prevent 
it from reaching her. Indeed, my time was come. 
I was already expected on the stage, and I was 
almost out of breath and out of capacity for my 
part when I came on. She was there before me. 
She had yet heard nothing. Her eyes only ex- 



Christina's last triumph. 201 

pressed surprise and good-humoured rebuke at 
the awkwardness of the position in which my 
momentary delay had nearly placed her. I gasped 
and choked in endeavouring to sing. She looked 
more surprised, and even a little petulant. I 
endeavoured to do better, and succeeded toler- 
ably. The scene got through somehow ; but 
I fear that if I helped the i:)rima donna in the 
other scenes, I was rather a damaging influ- 
ence in this. 

She did not appear in the next scene ; I did. 
Then came the last. 

She returned ; and I saw at the first glance 
that all was known. What a gaze that was which 
met mine ! Her face was rigid and livid ; her 
eyes were lit with a low pale fire, such as one 
might imagine gleaming from the eyes of the 
dead restored for a moment to life. I scarcely 
understood how anyone could look at her, and 
not shudder ; I cannot still understand how any- 
one could look at her, and fail to see that some 
terrible agony burned in those glittering eyes. I 
had to take her hand ; it was cold as death ; it 



202 MY enemy's daughteb. 

gave back not the faintest return to the pres- 
sure with which I endeavoured to assure her of 
sympathy, and to offer some poor encourage- 
ment. 

The house applauded her all the more for the 
deep and genuine tragedy that was written in her 
face. 

'' How devilish well Keichstein makes up !" 
I distinctly heard a swell say in one of the stage- 
boxes. "How does she make herself look so 
ghastly all in a moment ?" 

It was some piece of lyric agony, some cata- 
strophe of separation and broken hearts and love 
and death ; no matter what. Those who saw her, 
all but myself, accepted her pallid cheeks and 
spectral gleaming eyes as the very triumph of 
theatrical art. At first her voice choked and 
trembled; then sounded hollow, ghostly, heart- 
rending. 0, but it suited the part she had to 
play, and the house first listened in a deep awe- 
stricken silence, and then broke into a murmur 
of awakening applause. 

She had determined to go through with the 



cheistina's last triumph. 203 

task. Whether her husband was dead or living, 
escaped or a prisoner, really guilty or not guilty, 
she could not know; but a feeling of desperate 
loyalty to him and his secrets and their secret 
relationship constrained her to give, if possible, 
no sign which might reveal anything that per- 
haps he, if living still, would have concealed. 
She told me afterwards that in all the agony of 
horror and doubt, one thought came up clearly 
in her mind . that if her husband were yet alive, 
it might perhaps be somehow in her power to 
help him to escape, if only she could still keep 
their relationship a secret. She told me too, that 
from the first moment she felt convinced that he 
had been dra^\Ti innocently and as an instrument 
into that plot ; and whatever might be his illu- 
sions or his plans, he had never been knowingly 
a party to an assassination. 

I confess I did not think so. The words he 
had let fall about the obstacle to be removed now 
came back to my mind with fearful force; the 
words, and the manner and tone which accom- 
panied them. I remembered, too, that he told 



204 MY enemy's daughter. 

me there were things no man but an Italian might 
be asked to do for Italy. 

What I did wonder at, was the nature of the 
projected tyrannicide ; the reckless, indiscrimi- 
nate, cowardly slaughter of the innocent, in the 
wild hope of including the guilty among them. 
I could, after what I had heard, believe in Salaris 
planning and trying to execute a deed of tyran- 
nicide after the high Roman fashion ; I could 
think of him as a Brutus ; I found it hard indeed 
to believe in him as a Fieschi. 

Christina went on with her task. Many, 
many have indeed come forward to the foot-lights 
as she did, and bending down with hands clasped 
upon a bursting heart, have warbled their notes 
of lyric joy, or love, or grief, while agony of true 
human sorrow was helping to produce the con- 
vulsive throbs which the audience wondered and 
delighted to hear. Men and women have acted 
their parts through, desperately, to the end ; have 
stifled physical agony, and struggled with the 
convulsions which they knew to be the beatings 
of death at their door, and made life triumph, at 



cheistina's last TPJu:\rpH. 205 

least until the fall of the curtain. All this, one 
might say, is but commonplace and elementary in 
the story of the stage. But how few have ever 
had a torture such as hers to conceal ! To hear 
such tidings but by half, and to crush down 
anxiety and the passion of fear, and to make them 
serve to work along the mechanical passion and 
pain of the drama, like agonised captives com- 
pelled to row the galley of the conqueror, or to 
chant the celebration of his triumph ! Was she 
singing, or only crying aloud in the anguish 
which could not be repressed? I hardly knew: 
but I know that such a rapturous audience I 
never beheld ; such a triumph I never assisted 
in. Even then a sense came strangely over my 
mind of the marvellous grotesquerie, the farouche 
humour of the whole scene, as I glanced around 
and saw that vast house filled with people who 
applauded to the repeating echo what they be- 
lieved to be the triumph of stage simulation, what 
I believed to be the very death-cry of the broken 
heart. At one moment . it belonged to the situa- 
tion . her head dropped upon my shoulder, and 



206 MY enemy's daughter. 

tears, the most genuine that ever fell on a stage, 
trickled on my tragedy- trappings. And I yelled, 
as best I might, my lyric farewell; and the au- 
dience applauded, as enthusiastically as a fashion- 
able audience ever could applaud ; and she clung 
around me with such passionate force that I could 
hardly tear myself away, while her voice soared 
and shook and trembled in the air as if music 
itself were uttering its farewell to life. I did just 
for one moment release myself, that the need of 
the scene might be satisfied, and I stood for an 
instant out of the sight of the spectators until 
the curtain came down amid new bursts of ap- 
plause, and I sprang forward .'just in time to 
catch her in my arms, as she fell in a faint. 



CHAPTEK IX. 



THE OLD SONG. 



In a clay or two it became known about town 
and was mentioned in most of the papers, that 
Madame Keichstein had exerted herself too much 
after her recent illness, had overtasked her 
strength and fallen ill again, and was ordered 
by her medical men to take absolute repose for 
some time. 

Indeed, she was for many days very, very unwell. 
She was brought down to almost utter prostra- 
tion, with frequent faintings and blood-spitting ; 
and lay sometimes in a comatose condition for 
hours and hours, during which absolutely nothing 
could be done for her. I did not see her during 
all this time, but I called many times each day ; 
and I saw her medical men, and they told me 
frankly that her life trembled on a mere chance 



208 MY enemy's daughter. 

. that the probabilities seemed to be that she 
would die. I did not know then, but I came to 
know after, that she had long suffered from a 
serious chronic complaint, which over-exertion or 
excitement of any kind was sure to aggravate and 
might render fatal. 

Yet she did not die. She grew better. 
During the worst two or three days she had 
been almost wholly unconscious . happily un- 
conscious, perhaps. Before she had gained men- 
tal and bodily strength enough to understand 
all that had passed, there was news which it 
was good for her to hear. 

Gradually the full story of what had happened 
in Paris came in upon us. First as concerned 
us was the fact that Christina's husband had 
not been taken ; had not been actually seen at 
all on the spot when the conspiracy exploded, 
of which he was named as the foremost leader. 
Those who had been arrested were to be im- 
mediately tried, and it was known that rewards 
were held out for the capture of several others 
. highest reward of all for the capture of Salaris. 



THE OLD SONG. 209 

I was glad to believe that my warning had, 
after all, been the means probably of saving my 
friend's life. I was glad to find that most peo- 
ple in London who had known anything of the 
Italian cordially and at once acquitted him of 
any complicity whatever in the attempt at assas- 
sination. Some were indignant at the bare idea 
of such a thing ; declared Salaris a man of 
honour wholly above such a suspicion ; and 
asserted that the dragging of his name into the 
business was a paltry scheme of the French 
Government to discredit and defame an honour- 
able and gallant enemy. Many went so far as 
to say that the whole thing was a " plant " from 
beginning to end; that the alleged conspirators 
were the hirelings of mouchards ; that the deaths 
which had taken place were mere accident, the 
result of an unforeseen bungle ; that nobody 
would be executed; that Cayenne or Toulon and 
forced labour would mean in the case of the 
convicted persons a quiet well-pensioned retire- 
ment into obscurity ; and that the plot had been 
got up only to bring discredit on the Kevolution, 

VOL. III. p 



210 ]MY enemy's daughter. 

and to justify the Frencli Government in the 
eyes of Europe for any severity of repression 
it might afterwards find it convenient to adopt. 
Salaris had heen a favourite in London ; he had 
been admired by the West-end, and had always 
demeaned himself like a brave man and a modest 
gentleman ; the account of his former escape 
from prison had been the sensation of a season, 
disconcerting even the African travellers and the 
new poets; there was nothing whatever about 
him of the melo-dramatic conspirator or the 
Leicester-square refugee ; and in some quite un- 
usual way patriotism and respectability seemed 
to blend in his person. So that London gene- 
rally curled the lip of quiet contempt at the 
story of my friend's complicity in the great 
assassination. 

One incident connected with the wdiole busi- 
ness seemed to have come miraculously to con- 
firm this view. Had the French police really 
desired to convince England that there was 
sham in the afi*air, they could not have done 
anything better than just what they did. For 



THE OLD SOXG. 211 

the very night of the catastrophe, and before 
the dead and wounded had yet been well re- 
moved from the scene, they hastened to the 
Hotel Bristol in the Place Vendome, and arrested 
M. George Stamford Lyndon, English deputy of 
Parliament, as an accomplice in a plot to assas- 
sinate the chief of the French Government. 

London received the news first with a cry of 
indignation, next with a burst of laughter, and 
then again with a cry of indignation. Before 
many days had elapsed Mr. Lyndon himself 
appeared in person on the floor of the House 
of Commons, and told his own story : the 
story of his arrest, and of his release. I read 
his speech ; and I must say it was moderate, 
straightforward, and gentlemanlike. He told the 
House that he scorned even to pledge his word as 
an English gentleman that he had never had any 
part in, or known anything of any plot to murder. 
And the House applauded the manful scorn and 
energy of his tone, when he said, " I pass by that 
now and for ever." The House cheered again. 
But he franldy owned that he had been a sym- 



212 

patliiser -v^itli Italian schemes for independence ; 
that he had given somewhat largely to the cause ; 
and that he had done his best to assist men who 
here in England were endeavouring to promote a 
rising against the Austrians in Lombardy and 
Venetia. He had endeavoured to do, he said, 
for Italian independence, what members of her 
Majesty's present Government had done not so 
many years back for Greek independence ; and 
this he was not ashamed of doing, and would 
always continue to do. Naturally, therefore, he 
had been in correspondence mth many Italian 
exiles, among the rest with some who were now 
accused of being accomplices in the assassination 
plot. This doubtless explained his arrest. He 
had no complaint to make of the French authori- 
ties. He had given them precisely the same 
explanation he now gave the House ; and had 
only added that he was ready at any time what- 
ever to take his trial in Paris, if the French 
Government thought proper to make any charge 
against him of conspiracy with murderers. His 
explanation had been courteously received, and 



THE OLD SONG. 213 

he was at ouce declared at liberty. He had no 
complaint to make. He had, on the contrary, 
every allowance to make for the excitement of 
the French authorities at such a time; and, so 
far as he was concerned, he thought the whole 
subject deserved no further discussion. 

Many people expected that something else was 
coming. Everybody knew of the close intimacy 
between Lyndon and Salaris. Everyone, there- 
fore, expected to hear from Lyndon an emphatic 
declaration of his confidence in his friend's inno- 
cence, and an indignant repudiation of the charge 
made against him. Everyone was disappointed: 
Mr. Lyndon never mentioned Salaris' s name ; 
and only repudiated the charge of conspiracy to 
assassinate when it applied to himself. 

" Cautious old humbug, that Lyndon is," a 
journalist of some note remarked to me that night 
at a club which I frequented. " I've just been to 
the .House, and heard his explanation. Of course 
it was all right; and the House cheered him 
immensely. But would you believe it, he never 
said one syllable on behalf of poor Salaris ? He 



214 MY enemy's daughter. 

knows perfectly well that Salaris is as incapable 
of any share in that rascally business as he him- 
self, or as you or I ; and yet he never said a word 
on his behalf. The fact is, he thinks this busi- 
ness makes Italian patriotism of all kinds seem 
rather disreputable in our British eyes, and he 
would not utter a word which might appear to 
make him responsible for the character of any 
individual Italian." 

My friend expressed, I think, the common 
feeling. I did not blame Lyndon ; and although 
of course I never openly dissented from the gene- 
ral belief in Salaris's innocence, I could not in 
my heart acquit him. The whole thing was a 
wonder and a mystery to me. First, that Salaris 
could for any purpose become a party to such a 
plot ; next, that having promoted it, and in some 
inconceivable way reconciled his own soul and 
conscience, and sense of honour and humanity, 
to it, he should have held back from taking a 
personal part in it; lastly, that having directed 
the playing of the game, he should have shrunk 
from the paying of the forfeit. 



THE OLD SONG. 215 

But this, too, came to be explained at last. 
By safe means a letter came to Christina's hand, 
on which no eyes but hers and mine ever glanced, 
and which contained much that, for the present 
at least, perhaps for ever, must remain a secret. 
What especially concerned us was that it ex- 
plained Salaris's own part in the transaction. 
He had left Paris not after, but before, the 
deed; he had gone in despair and disgust; he 
had planned and urged, and volunteered for, a 
deed of what he called and believed to be na- 
tional vengeance and personal sacrifice, quite, as 
indeed I had believed, after the high Roman 
fashion. He offered himself, or himself and the 
man Benoni, to lead the way, to attempt the 
deed personally; others, if he failed, to follow 
the example. Not to do or die was his pur- 
pose, but to do and die. But he could not ani- 
mate those who were his associates with this 
high, desperate resolve. They were for taking 
into consideration the element of personal safety; 
to do the deed, and if possible escape. There- 
fore they planned a wild, indiscriminate slaughter, 



216 MY enemy's daughter. 

in which the oue enemy might perish, and the 
murderers might escape. All this seemed to 
Salaris as frivolous as it was hideous. It made 
a murder what he thought a sacrifice. To him 
the one essential condition distinguishing the 
tyrannicide from the assassin w^as that the former 
must devote his own life to secure the death of 
the tyrant, and of the tyrant alone. He did his 
best to persuade them to abandon their project, 
over which indeed he sickened, and he still 
thought to carry out his own. But my warn- 
ing reached him, and he opened his eyes and 
saw that he was watched. He left Paris in time, 
postponing, not abandoning, his design ; and the 
night after he had left the city came the cata- 
strophe, as much of a surprise and a horror to 
him as to Europe in general. He would have 
been a Brutus, a Scsevola, and behold, he saw 
his name branded as that of a Faux. 

He was, then, guilty of the intent to kill a 
crowned and sceptred man. Would such a deed 
have been wholly, utterly guilty and base ? I 
do not stop to inquire into that moral question ; 



THE OLD SONG. 217 

I never was much of a moral philosopher; I 
know Salaris was not a base and evil man, and 
I know what we are all taught at school to think 
of Brutus. But there are anachronisms of deed 
which it is, ipso facto, something like a crime 
to commit; and just such a crime had Salaris 
planned. I know from his letter that he was 
glad now he had not done the deed ; I feel sure 
his intended victim would have been safe, alone 
and unarmed, in his presence for ever after. 
There are things which we never fully under- 
stand till we see them caricatured; I think 
Salaris understood at last the true nature of 
his projected piece of antique devotion when he 
saw it caricatured in outlines of blood. 

But he declared his firm conviction, a con- 
viction never to be shaken, that the catastrophe 
itself had been encouraged, fostered, and actually 
brought to a head by the agents of the French 
Government. They had done it, he said, to 
bring disgrace and odium on the Italian patriots, 
and to prevent other attempts more direct and 
desperate from being made. This he insisted 



218 MY enemy's daughter. 

on, and lie supported liis belief by evidences 
which I cannot report. He added his conviction 
that one man, an Englishman, had been a prime 
mover in the plot on behalf of the agents of the 
police. 

To all this I attached not too much import- 
ance. It looked wildly improbable; yet what 
could be more improbable than those passages 
of the story which had actually happened? I 
neither believed nor disbelieved; I was glad he 
had escaped and had no part in the bloody busi- 
ness, and had at the very worst only planned and 
dreamed to be a tyrannicide, not an indiscri- 
minate slayer. 

At one time, he said, his feelings of horror 
at the deed were such, that he determined to give 
himself up to the French Government, and, pro- 
claiming boldly what he had really planned to 
do, insist upon being tried, that it might be 
made clear he had no part in what was actually 
done. But his friends . he had some knot of 
friends everywhere . ^reasoned him out of this 
scheme of foolish chivalry. They convinced him 



THE OLD SONG. 219 

that if he surrendered himself, the French Go- 
vernment would most assuredly contrive to con- 
vict him of the very crime he detested, all the 
more because he detested it; and then came to 
his hand the evidences, such as they were, which 
satisfied him and those around him that the most 
hideous part of the business was the outcome 
of a police plot. He had resolved then at last 
to leave the scenes of so many unavailing and 
abortive struggles for ever, or, if not for ever, 
until some auspicious hour should arrive when 
a brave, true-hearted man could make some sa- 
crifice for his country with hope and without 
shame. 

I visited Christina every day while she was 
recovering, and sometimes sat with her alone for 
a few minutes. She recovered slowly, but very 
steadily, from the influence of over-excitement, 
mental and physical, and began to resume her 
brightness both of look and manner. She lay 
upon a sofa, still weak indeed; but with some- 
thing of the reaction which follows naturally any 
better modification of evil news stimulating her. 



220 



MY ENEMY S DAUGHTEE. 



she was clieerful and almost joyous. Her manner 
too had lost much of the constraint which used 
to disfigure it, and cause it to seem affected of 
late. She seemed now to me more like the old 
Christina than she had been since we both were 
much younger. 

One of the days when I came to see her, I 
found her reading a letter, and looking flushed 
and excited over it. 

"Look at this letter, Emanuel," she said; 
" and tell me whether I ought to laugh or cry. 
Stay, you could not understand it without some 
explanation. It is from our dear friend, Mr. 
Lyndon. Now listen, and then you shall read 
it. When I heard that dreadful story from Paris, 
one of my first thoughts was that I had uncon- 
sciously entangled Mm in the business; and 
that he would believe I had purposely deceived 
him. This rested heavily on my mind; and as 
soon as I could hold a pen, I wrote him a letter, 
assuring him that I was as innocent and ignorant 
an agent in the matter as himself; and I asked 
him to come and see me. He might have come, 



THE OLD SONG. 221 

might he not, for the kindness of old recollec- 
tions? To-day, at last, he sends me his reply. 
There it is; read it. No . don't hesitate; I 
want you to read . I ask you to read it." 

I took the letter in my hand. There was 
not much to read ; it was this : 

" Connaught-place. 

" Dear Madame, . I regret that I am unahle 
to do myself the honour of visiting you. I can- 
not think, however, that much good could come 
of an interview, or that any very satisfactory 
explanations could be exchanged. It is clear 
that I was grossly deceived, and that my own 
credulity was much to blame. I do not much 
care to inquire into the relative share which we 
all had in the delusion. You are, no doubt, 
innocent of any knowledge of the detestable plot 
which I was made the means of helping and 
promoting; but there were deceptions practised 
on me of another kind, and of which I presume 
you do not feel ashamed. I am, however, ashamed 
of having been so deceived. I am conscious of 



222 MY enemy's daughter. 

having rendered myself ridiculous, and I deserve 
to be laughed at. But I prefer being laughed at 
behind my back rather than to my face ; and 
therefore I take with a good grace the lesson I 
have received, and have the honour to remain 

'' Your obedient servant, 

*' George Stamford Lyndon." 

I read the letter through, then turned back 
to the first sentence, and read it again. 

" Your judgment, Emanuel ? Am I to laugh 
or cry ?" 

"It is an insult, that is certain ; and it is 
characteristic; but I cannot help asking, is it 
quite undeserved ?" 

''No, not undeserved; and therefore all the 
harder to be borne. I suppose I did allow this 
vain and selfish old man to flirt with me, or to 
think he was flirting with me. I did not dislike 
him; indeed, his companionship sometimes pleased 
me. I was embittered with life in many ways, 
and I found his sharp cynicism congenial. I 
flattered him and paid court to him, and I allowed 



THE OLD SONG. 223 

liim to flatter me and pay court to me. I did 
it to win the man over to our cause . at least, 
to my husband's cause . and to make him use- 
ful to projects about which, Heaven knows, I 
knew little, and cared just as little. I did not 
see through him at the first. He even paid me 
attentions which, if my husband had but known . 
well, I am ashamed of the whole thing now, 
and I was many times ashamed and annoyed 
when I saw your eyes fixed on me ; and I often 
feared that you would think far, far worse of me 
than I deserved, and despise me. Yet you might 
have trusted me, even without explanation." 

^'Beati sunt,'' I could not help murmuring, 
in some bitterness, " qui non viderunt." 

" Still you think harshly of me?" 

*' I am sorry you ever descended to any 
deceit, Christina. I am sorry you ever stooped 
for any purpose to flatter the vanity of that 
selfish and sensuous old man. It was a degra- 
dation ; it lowered you ; and I could forgive no- 
thing that made you seem unworthy." 

''It was meant, at least," she said in an 



224 

appealing, plaintive tone, "as a sort of expiation 
to my husband . I tliouglit I might in some 
way help him in his plans, and by a little 
harmless deception bring him a useful ally. I 
am ashamed of it now ; but I hardly thought of 
it then ; and, indeed, I thought he saw through 
me at last, as I did through him, and that neither 
took the other au serieux. Yet you, Emanuel," 
she added suddenly and bitterly, " have no reason 
to be sorry; if I deceived him, I think I un- 
deceived you." 

I made no answer. "\Yhat she said was true. 
It was when I watched her manner with Mr. 
Lyndon that I first began to doubt the strength 
of my love for her. The very day I first saw her 
with him at Eichmond something told me that 
she was . as I wrote it then . not my Lisette any 
more. 

Her eyes were fixed on mine, and I did not 
look up to meet them. She knew what thoughts 
were passing through my mind. She took Lyn- 
don's letter, and tore it in pieces. 

" That is gone, and with it go the memories," 



THE OLD SONG. 225 

she said. "You must forget tliis, Emanuel, and 
you must remember me only as I was before I 
had ever learned to practise any deceit. There 
was such a time ! Think of me only as I was 
then ; and tell Lilla Lyndon of what I was then. 
Thank Heaven ! my deceits never went far. Do 
you know how I think of myself often ? As one 
of the people we read of in the old stories of my 
country, who sold their souls to the demon, but 
contrived by the help of some saint or pious monk 
to cheat him in the end. Well, I sold my soul 
to ambition and vanity ; but by the help of penit- 
ence and faith, I hope I have redeemed it at the 
last. Stay ; don't say anything more ; I am go- 
ing to sing something for you. Yes, I am quite 
well and strong, and I mean to sing for jou some- 
thing that shall be a memory." 

It was growing to evening, the twilight was 
deepening. 

" No melancholy song," she said. "We must 
not be melancholy to-night, for we have reason 
to be happy. Yo2i surely have, and I too, for 
my dear, noble-hearted Salaris has escaped from 

VOL. III. Q 



226 MY enemy's daughter. 

a great clanger and a great wrong ; and lie is not 
the only one," I heard her murmur to herself as 
she sat down to the piano ; '' not the only one . 
not the only one." 

She took out a faded old piece of music, rattled 
some lively notes, and broke into a vivacious song. 
What was the song the great i^rima donna chose 
to sing for me ? What but the very song I had 
heard her sing in the old seaport concert-room 
long ago, when she sang me into the poetic mad- 
ness of first love ! I listened with feelings no 
words could speak. The whole scene was around 
me, and I saw through the haze and smoke of 
years, and confused memories, and bewildering 
associations, clearly as then through a more ma- 
terial and vulgar smoke -film, the bright -eyed 
young singer again. 

"Do you remember it?" she asked. "Yes, 
I know you do ; and I give it to you now to bear 
with you as a lasting memory of me. I sang it 
to you in the old concert-room, 0, so long ago! 
Yes, I sang it to you . for I saw you, Emanuel, 
from the first. I knew well you were there. I 



THE OLD SONG. 227 

saw your fair Lair and boyish face clearly among 
all the coarse stupid faces I so hated to see. 
And I saw too how enraptured you were; and 
I was proud and delighted. There ! I close the 
book. I will never sing that song again !" 

And she shut the book with a clang, and 
stood up. 

This was, I may say, our last parting. I 
have always endeavoured to remember her only 
as she bade me. I think of her as she was when 
first I knew her. The long-extinguished fire of 
love has left no blackened waste behind it. I 
remember her always with tender friendship. I 
remember her as one remembers some early scene 
of youth, which, however it may change in reality, 
remains in the mind unalterably beautiful, quite 
immortal, through age and sorrow and the changes 
of all things else, and time and decay, and up to 
the very threshold of death. 



CHAPTEK X. 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 



A FEW days or weeks passed away. Cliristina 
had gone ; faded, so to speak, out of our lives. 
She was living for the present in Lugano with 
her hushand. The excitement of the Paris crime 
had been almost forgotten in London. The season 
was over, the opera-houses were closed, everything 
looked dead. Edward Lambert and I were in 
town together, two moody, silent, sympathetic, 
laconic friends; each, as before, knowing some- 
thing more of the other than he cared to talk of 
even to that other. 

We were going home one night together, and 
our way lay through the Haymarket. We turned 
into a cigar-shop to get a cigar, and Lambert was 
talking of a game of billiards. As we stood upon 
the threshold doubtful, a man passed slowly down 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 229 

the street towards the Pall-mall end. I caught 
a glimpse of his face under the flash of a lamp, 
and I knew him at once for the Italian Benoni. 
He did not, or would not, recognise me, although 
I could not help thinking I had done him a good 
turn once ; so I came to the conclusion that, 
under the circumstances, he did not want to be 
recognised. Although I was just on the point of 
calling Lambert's attention to him, I checked my- 
self, and refrained. 

We did have a game of billiards, and then 
were leaving. As we passed through the cigar- 
shop a voice hailed me. 

*' Doth not a meeting like this make amends ! 
I say. Temple ! Hallo there !" 

And briskly leaping off a chair, up rushed old 
Stephen Lyndon, and held out both his hands. 
He was handsomely dressed, and wore elegant 
lavender gloves, and I think a new wig. But his 
face looked puckered and seamed and care-worn. 
I did not take his hand, and indeed I would have 
walked away and left him, but that Lambert 
stopped, somewhat bewildered. 



230 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Introduce me, Temple," j^roceeded the un- 
abaslied Lyndon. "I do think I must have had 
the pleasure of meeting your friend before ; the 
very remarkable contour of his face is familiar 
to me. Introduce me, Temple ; but don't mind 
names. Call me for the moment Mr. Badboy ; yo^i 
understand the allusion. I don't care for much 
naming of names here just now ; j^our des raisons.'" 

" I think your name and yourself ought to be 
alike detestable," I began. 

" Dear boy, wherefore ? I have done the State 
some service . not this State, but the other yon- 
der; and they know it. I have defeated the 
machinations of conspirators and murderers. I 
feel proud of it. Temple, I swear to you that on 
a certain day I saved France. Let us repair to 
yonder fane, and give thanks over champagne. 
Some States know how to reward their benefac- 
tors, Temple. I have gold, sir, red gold. Come, 
I long to know your friend ; present me." 

Ned Lambert was puzzled. Politeness, good- 
nature, distrust, surprise, were battling within 
him. He had almost begun " Happy to have the 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 231 

honour, I'm sure," when I stopped him with a 
vehement gesture. 

Then Xed said : 

"I know I have seen this gentleman . this 
person before. Yes, I remember ! He's a mad- 
man. Temple ! 'Twas he that attacked me and . 
and Lilla, you recollect, one night at the theatre. 
Yes ; he's mad !" 

" Xo, Lambert, not mad ; I am sorry to say 
not mad, not quite mad, at least. Look at him, 
Ned ; he asks me to introduce him. I do so. 
That man, that disgrace to the name of English- 
man, is a scoundrel and a profligate ; a wretch 
who left his vrife and daughter to starve, if they 
would ; he has lately made himself a rascally spy 
for the French Government, and tried to sell, and, 
according to his own boast, did sell with profit, 
the lives of brave and foolish men. Look at him, 
Lambert, and know him if you will." 

" Yes, look at me, Lambert," broke in Lyn- 
don, " and know me . for I know you now . as 
all that our polite friend has said ; and one thing 
more : I am Lilla Lyndon's father, Lambert ; 



232 MY enemy's daughter. 

and I presume I am one day to have the honour 
of being your father-in-law. Let us embrace." 

"Is this true?" asked Lambert, turning with 
pale face to me. 

''It is true, Ned ; that wretched creature is 
Lilla's father. Now you know all." 

'' Poor, poor Lilla ! She knew of this ; and 
therefore she doomed herself to live alone." 

" She did." 

" Now, look here, fellow !" said Lyndon, cock- 
ing his hat more fiercely than before on the side 
of his head, and trying to look tall ; " there is 
no use in talking over family affairs thus pub- 
licly. But I tell you this : I don't care . I'm not 
going to be kept out of the family councils any 
longer. I know all about my daughter now, and 
my wife too; and I'm open either to hate them 
or to love them. Whoever marries my daughter 
has to deal with me. I am not hard to deal with; 
but I must be conciliated, courted, paid off, if 
necessary. In one word, Lambert, are you pre- 
pared to treat ? Are you ready to go into coun- 
cil ?" 



A STROKE OF EETRIBUTION. 233 

" No," I said, answering for him, . " No, Ned, 
not a word with him. Better Lilla bore any per- 
secution, or waited any time." 

'' This from you, Temple ! I thought I had 
even your gratitude, at least." 

" Yes ; I believe you did really try to do me 
a good turn ; and though I had no need of it, 
and was not in the danger you supposed, I am 
not ungrateful for it, and I will try to serve you 
yet. If you want money . " 

" My good Temple ! If I want money ? All 
my life has been a perpetual want of money. Just 
now I do happen to be pretty flush; but, good 
God ! I know myself . I ought to . and I shall be 
as hard-up as ever in a few w^eeks. Besides, I 
begin to feel at last the want of a peaceful do- 
mestic life. I think I have pretty well exhausted 
all the stormy joys, and I am now very anxious 
to retire into the placid bosom of family comfort. 
I think I may venture to say to my future son- 
in-law, if he will allow me the honour so to call 
him, that in me he sees a reclaimed man : at 
least, he sees in me a man who wants to be re- 



234 MY enemy's daughter. 

claimed. The one grand emotion at the bottom 
of my nature, Lambert, is religion. Our friend 
Temple will quite bear me out in that, Keligion, 
sir ! I confess that my life of late years, and the 
persistent ill-treatment I have experienced from 
the world and my nearest relatives, has rather 
disturbed the religious element. But there it 
is still. Now I know that family affection can 
purify and restore it ; therefore let us go in for 
family affection. I am to be reclaimed. Eh, hien, 
reclaim me !" 

He then threw^ back his coat from his breast, 
and stood with displayed shirt-front, as if moral 
reclamation were to be effected by the agency of 
a stethoscope. 

Lambert looked at me inquiringly, as if to 
ask, " Is this genuine ?" 

I looked at him with an expression which 
said, " Decidedly not." 

" Come, Mr. Lyndon," I said, '^ my friend 
does not know you as well as I do; you want 
something ; put it into plain words . what is 
it?" 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 235 

The little man smote his breast theatrically, 
and said, 

" A home." 

" Anything else ?" 

"A daughter." 

"Mr. Lyndon," I now said rather seriously, 
"there is such a thing in the world as being 
too late. And I tell you plainly, I am afraid 
you are too late." 

" But look here. Temple ; I want to be re- 
claimed ; I do, by God ! And I think God wants 
me to be reclaimed too. I don't think He hates 
me wholly, for I have always loved the beauty of 
His house, and I have loved to sing to Him. I 
think He could have loved me, if things had just 
gone a little better with me. Do try me, Temple 
. and Lambert. I know . well, come, at least I 
think I am sincere now, I do really. I've always 
been repenting, of course : and I don't wonder 
that you are a little suspicious ; but, by the Lord, 
I think I'm sincere this time ! Don't turn away 
from me, lads ; now, don't ! Come to my daugh- 
ter, Lambert, and take me with you; I'll fall at 



236 MY enemy's daughtek. 

her knees, I'm d . d if I don't ! Look here, these 
are tears." 

So they were ; there were tears unmistakahly 
running down his wrinkled old face, out of his 
Winking hlack eyes. I had so long heen accus- 
tomed to his private theatrical displays, and his 
easy gusts of emotion, that I was not perhaps 
much moved. Lamhert was touched, quite touched. 
He held out his hand to the wretched old crea- 
ture, who seized it, pressed it to his lips, and 
bluhhered over it. 

My God ! if in that supreme moment a touch 
of true compunction did visit the heart of that 
unfortunate man, may it not have been too late ! 
May it not have been too late ! 

Lyndon lifted up his head, and exclaimed, 
'' Then I am saved ? I shall see my daughter ?" 

"You shall," said poor Ned Lambert, and 
wrung again the old man's hand. 

Now I had been anxious to bring this scene 
to a close. Perhaps my distrust of Lyndon was 
such that I disliked to see Ned Lambert touched 
by him. Besides, it was hardly the place for a 



A STROKE OF EETRIBUTIOX. 237 

scene. We liad moYecl a few paces up the Hay- 
market, and now stood just one pace down Jer- 
myn-street, and in tlie shadow; I had, by working 
our group gently along, got us thus far at least 
out of the glitter and glare of the Haymarket. 
Still, there were people constantly passing us, 
and looking with some surprise at us and our 
gestures. Just now, somebod}- who had been 
standing in a doorway came out, and apparently 
attracted by curiosity, drew nearer and nearer to 
us. The person approached somewhat behind 
me, and I could only see that somebody was 
drawing near and listening. Now nothing can 
exceed the easy vacuous impudence with which 
street-idlers in London coolly walk up close to a 
group of people, and there stand, and stare, and 
listen. I am myself peculiarly nervous and sen- 
sitive about this sort of thing ; and the vicinity 
of this vulgar and curious eavesdropper made me 
specially uncomfortable. I was just about to turn 
and ask the fellow rather angrily what he wanted 
there, when Lyndon called to me in a tone half- 
triumphant, half-tearful : 



238 MY enemy's daughter. 

" Not too late, Temple ! recall your words, 
my friend ! No, not too late, after all !" 

At that moment the listener, whose shadow 
was just behind me, pushed or lurched forward, 
and dashed against Lyndon. So far as there 
was time for thought, I thought it was the lurch 
of a drunken man. But at the same instant, I 
heard two sudden peculiar sounds following each 
other instantaneously : two sounds in each of 
which there was something like a thump and 
something like a rattle. Lyndon gave a wild 
shriek, first flung up his arms, and then col- 
lapsed like a man stricken with cholera ; rolled 
on his legs for a second, and then fell all in a 
heap on the pavement. And in the same in- 
stant of time the man who had rushed on Lyn- 
don cried out the word '^ Traditore !'' flashed 
round on me the fierce wolf-like eyes of Benoni 
the Italian, and then fled fast as a wild cat down 
the silent darknesses of Jermyn-street. 

''Look to him. Temple," shouted Lambert; 
*' I'll be after that fellow." And he rushed away, 
his long legs making tremendous speed. 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 239 

In a moment a group of people, chiefly wo- 
men from the Haymarket, had gathered round ; 
then a couple of policemen came up ; and one 
went off like mad down Jermyn-street after Ned 
and the assassin. We lifted up Lyndon, and 
brought him into a public-house which stands, 
or stood, at the Haymarket corner of the street. 
There we laid him on a bench. He was bleed- 
ing fearfully from two wounds, one in the breast, 
one just under the ear. A surgeon was sent for 
from across the street, and came up in a moment. 
While he was opening Lyndon's clothes, Lyndon 
recovered a little from the swoon into which he 
had fallen, and looked up. His eyes fell on me 
at once. 

''You are a prophet, Temple," he murmured. 
"It is too late, you see. . No use, doctor ! Not 
so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church-door ; 
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. . Temple, your friends 
of the revolution have done for me. Tell my 
daughter I'm sorry, and my wife, and your little 
Lilla." 

Ned Lambert had by this time quietly rejoined 



240 MY enemy's daughtek. 

the group, and stood with flushed face silently 
looking on. Lyndon saw him, and smiled. 

" Good fellow, Lambert," he said; '^kind lad 
. I like you. I ought to say, ' Bless you, Lam- 
bert !' in the regular old style ; but I can't get 
up to do it with the proper action. I am dying, 
Egypt, dying ! I hope God will forgive me. I 
think He might forgive me if He forgives Good- 
boy; and Goodboy is so respectable, there can't 
be any doubt about /ii??i." 

I asked the surgeon in a low tone whether 
poor Lyndon had not better be kept quiet ; he 
was talking away all this time incessantly, ex- 
cept when an occasional pang or gasp stopped 
his utterance for a moment. The surgeon only 
shook his head, and signified with a gesture that 
it did not matter noiv. I asked whether he had 
not better be removed to some hospital, or some- 
where of the kind. The reply was a quiet gesture 
to the same effect, . no use thinking of that 
no2V. 

Meanwhile, Lyndon lay nearly motionless on 
the seat where we had laid him, his head and 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 241 

shoulders propped by cushions taken from the 
benches around. His wig had fallen back from 
his head; and what with the bald forehead, the 
round, plump, beardless face, and the twinkling 
restless eyes, there was a queer, pathetic, gro- 
tesque look of infancy about him which the inces- 
sant and scarcely-intelligible babble he kept up 
served to keep in countenance. The strange 
sardonic expression, now suggestive of roguery, 
and now almost of madness, which his face used 
to wear habitually, had quite faded away, and I 
seemed to see now a striking resemblance to his 
daughter . that resemblance vague glimpses of 
which used so to perplex and tantalise me in the 
early days of our acquaintance. 

Ned Lambert looked pityingly on. 

" No hope ?" he asked of the surgeon in a 
whisper. 

" None whatever," was the whispered reply. 
"It is a question of minutes. There is nothing 
to be done." 

The idle and amazed lookers-on had now been 
got rid of. Nobody was in the room but the sur- 

VOL. III. R 



242 MY enemy's daughter. 

geon, the landlord, a couple of women . barmaids, 
I suppose . two policemen, Ned Lambert, and I. 
Drawing Ned aside, I learned from liim what bad 
come of bis pursuit. He said be was gaining 
upon tbe fugitive, wben somebody . wbetber by- 
design or accident be could not tell . suddenly 
ran from a doorway, rusbed against Ned, and in 
tbe collision flung bim beavily on tbe pavement. 
Wben be got on bis feet tbere was nobody near. 
Tbe man wbo bad flung bim down disappeared, 
be tbougbt, up a court to tbe left. He could 
easily bave caugbt bim if be bad followed, but 
be still ran on, hoping to get some sight of tbe 
assassin . a hopeless attempt. Neither sight nor 
sound assisted. He was turning back from the 
idle quest, when he met the policeman coming to 
his assistance. 

Meanwhile Lyndon babbled on. I bave read 
that during tbe insanity of George HI. nothing 
was so dreadful to those of his family wbo were 
near him as bis never-ceasing unmeaning talk. I 
can quite understand it. Lyndon's unbroken flow 
of words was terrible to bear. 



A STROKE OF RETRIBUTION. 243 

At last he gave a sliarp groan, almost a cry, 
and stopped for a moment in his speech. Then 
he said in a clearer and more coherent manner, 
although with gradually-failing voice : 

" Temple, my Minstrel Boy, I have heen 
turning the matter over, and I think there is 
hope; I do, on my soul. There was a deal in 
me, only it didn't somehow come to a focus. I 
was very near being a good painter; I was very 
near being a great musician. Don't deceive your- 
self, Temple ; you never will sing as I could have 
done once, my boy. And I might have been a 
religious man ; and I might have been a good 
man. Of course I wasn't anything. But where 
there's so much valuable raw material I don't 
believe God means it always to lie idle. No, 
no ; He doesn't make blunders, or waste good 
stuff in that sort of way. He'll find use for me, 
though I couldn't find any use for myself. Con- 
found it all ! I'm better than a rat or a black- 
beetle. I know that my Redeemer liveth. I am 
sorry you seem rather wanting in the religious 
element, Temple; but I daresay something can 



244 MY enemy's daughteb. 

be done, even for you. . Ah, not fair, George 
Stamford ; not fair, brother George ; 'twas you 
did it, not I ; always making me your scapegoat. 
Well, I did one right thing in life, d . n me ! . 
God, forgive me, I mean. Not too late. Temple, 
after all !. God !" 

Lyndon gasped heavily. His head fell for- 
ward plump on his breast. 

*' 0, he's dead !" said one of the barmaids, 
with a little scream. 

So he was. 



CHAPTER XI. 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 



There is very little of n story iu all this. Great 
heroic events and sufferings, which would natu- 
rally consolidate themselves into five acts with a 
grand denouement, are the lot of the favoured very 
few. My ordinary life kept on much the same 
after the departure of Christina, the murder of 
Lyndon, and the marriage, which took place 
within a few months, of my dear friends Ned 
Lambert and his Lilla Lyndon. They live in a 
pretty elegant house in Brompton. I left that 
neighbourhood, and took lodgings near Bedford- 
square. It was there that I began the writing 
of this story, in the Bloomsbury region which 
the opening chapter describes, on the wet and 
wild evening, when, lonely, I sat down to tell my 
tale to him and her who would hear. 



246 MY enemy's daughter. 

Nothing came of Lyndon's murder. The as- 
sassin was not found, nor was any trace of him 
discovered. What I knew I knew, and kept to 
myself. 

I gave up the stage at once, and not too soon. 
I have often hinted that my voice began to give 
distinct signs of failure ; and of late it w^as quite 
clear to me that it would not much longer bear 
the heroic strain of opera. So I anticipated de- 
feat, and surrendered. "Happy the man," says 
the author oi Pendennis, ''w^ho quits the field in 
time, and yields his broken sword to Fate the 
Conqueror with a resigned and cheerful heart." 
My heart w^as resigned and cheerful, indeed, but 
not from any heroic or magnanimous qualities, 
to which I have not pretended, but because it 
never had been in the battle at all, and it was 
now absorbed in quite other and far better hopes 
than those which at the outset led me to the fight. 
I retired, had a farewell benefit, was banqueted by 
some of my friends, made a speech, was kindly 
and even tenderly noticed by the newspapers, and 
then subsided into music-teaching and concert- 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 247 

singing. I quitted wild Bohemia, and became 
thoroughly respectable and commonplace. No- 
thing could be more quiet, monotonous, hum- 
drum, lonely, than the kind of existence into 
which I gradually sank. Many a man makes a 
desperate run up the hill, full of energy and re- 
solve, but suddenly meeting midway with some 
check, struggles a moment or two, grumbles a 
while, and then very quietly turns round and 
saunters down again. So it w^as with me ; but 
neither the early run up, nor the later descent, 
was wholly merit or wholly fault of mine. I 
mounted in the hope of overtaking Christina 
Eeichsteiu ; I paused and came down because I 
believed that thereby I should make myself 
worthier . at least, less unworthy . to be the hus- 
band of Lilla Lyndon. 

I had to wait our self-appointed period of pro- 
bation for her, and I waited, silent, patient, ab- 
sorbed in the thought of her. We never inter- 
changed letter, or word, or missive, or greeting 
of any kind. During the whole time I never saw 
her ; for a long time I never heard of her, except 



248 MY enemy's daughtek. 

once, when taking up the Morning Post, I saw 
that Mr. Lyndon, M.P., and the Misses Lyndon, 
had arrived at the Hotel Bristol, Paris, on their 
way home from Italy. I make no douht that Mr. 
Lyndon took his daughter everywhere he could, 
and into all manner of distractions, in the hope 
of inducing her to love someone else and to forget 
me. I did not fear. Lilla Lyndon had contrived, 
unconsciously I am sure, to impress me with a 
sense of pure unalterahle constancy which I could 
not doubt. She had her father's qualities in fact, 
turned from bad into good, and sanctified by her 
purity of soul, and glorified by her noble warmth 
of heart. No, I could not doubt Jier. 

Other doubts indeed I had ; and they gave me 
many a pang. They were doubts of my own 
worthiness . not merely of my moral worth, for 
I do believe that the presence and the influence 
of such a woman must have stirred Barabbas to 
some love of goodness, but doubts of my fitness 
in what I may call the sesthetic or artistic Avay to 
sustain Lilla Lyndon's ideal. I could not and 
did not disguise from myself that her love for 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 249 

me bad its source in pure romauce : tlie passion 
of a generous girl-nature, weary of monotonous 
and colourless formality and respectability, for 
some nature on wbicb tbe rays of a more romantic 
and bigbly-tinted existence fell ever so ligbtly. I 
know tbat wbat witb our secret love and my late 
attempt not to steal ber from ber spbere, Lilla 
had begun to look upon me as an exalted beroic 
kind of being. I looked into myself, and turned 
away witb a pang of sbame to tbink bow unlike 
all tbis was tbe reality : of dread lest sbe too 
sbould sometime discover it and be disappointed. 
Would it be better, I sometimes gloomily tbougbt, 
tbat tbe passages in our lives, now interrupted, 
sbould end tbus ; simple, sad, memorable, not to 
be renewed, not to be forgotten ? Often, as I 
found myself giving way to ill-bumour and pet- 
tisbness and littleness of any kind; as I felt 
tempted to snarl at friends wbo bad passed bigb 
up tbe beanstalk of success and got to tbe 
castle and fairy-regions at tbe top, wbile I re- 
mained idly on tbe dull ground below ; as I re- 
cognised in myself tbe prickings of envy and tbe 



250 MY enemy's daughter. 

pangs of disappointed ambition; as I detected 
myself in being too lazy to change a lodging, too 
cowardly to give a landlady warning, too procrasti- 
nating to succeed in doing some solid service to a 
friend, I could not help thinking that perhaps it 
would be a happy thing, after all, for her, if Lilla 
Lyndon and I were never to meet again. 

This was my pain and punishment some- 
times. But for this I should have had, even 
in waiting for her thus in silence and separation, 
the Hght of an unchanging hope and happiness 
around me. 

Once I went back and revisited my old birth- 
place town. Yery little was changed there. It 
is exasperating when you think you have lived 
through at least half-a-dozen lives to come back 
to the place you left so long ago, and find every- 
thing precisely as it was when you, unheeded, 
turned your boyish back upon it. I spent the 
better part of a whole day loitering on the strand 
where I did battle with Ned Lambert, and watch- 
ing the roll of the surf, and flinging lazy pebbles 
in. I climbed the hill-side, and looked long upon 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 251 

the glorious scene below. Once I made an ex- 
cursion in a fisherman's boat round the bay ; and 
from the light summer-day clouds and soft blue 
hazy sky came suddenly heavy mist and gale (I 
knew them well of old) ; and quickly a squall 
arose and a storm thundered in our ears and 
tattered our sails before we could reef them, and 
drove us off shore, blinding and baffling us with 
its spray. I declare that I felt a rush of life 
and energy such as I had not known for long, 
and which was positive delight. I showed a 
proficiency, too, in the management of the sheet 
which was intrusted to me, and a familiarity ^ith 
the character of the sea there, which quite amazed 
the fisherman and his boy. I was enraptured with 
the storm. I was a boy again, and I shouted 
some frantic improvisation of exulting energy to 
answer the defiance of the roaring waves. Our 
boom was torn away, and we had literally no- 
thing for it but to run before the wind, whither 
the wind would. I lighted a cigar, and strove to 
keep it burning. I could sometimes, when the 
.wind lifted the mist, and the spray was less 



252 MY enemy's daughter. 

blinding, catch glimpses of a distant sliore, and 
a steep hill, and white houses scattered over it ; 
and I thought I could find no more appropriate 
place to die . where I did begin, there now I end 
. and that were I to go down there, I should 
always live a pure and glorified life in the sacred 
memory of Lilla Lyndon. But I was reserved . 
I trust to make her happy ; and I was landed at 
night, the storm having abated, near a lowly 
public -house on a little peninsula far down the 
coast, wet and draggled, cold and dispirited, the 
energy and excitement quite washed out of me, 
and with the prospect of at least a fortnight's 
enforced relief from singing, owing to the magni- 
ficent hoarseness I felt setting in. 

And I went to see poor old Miss Griffin, the 
organist under whose sway Christina and I used 
to sing, and whom I hope the reader has not quite 
forgotten. Miss Griffin did not look very much 
older, or neater, or primmer, than she used to 
do twenty years syne. She still played upon 
the very same organ . Ned Lambert's improve- 
ments had made no way here . and she had loud- 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 253 

voiced demure girls singing round her on the 
Sunday, and practising under her direction in 
the evenings of the week, and taking a quiet tea 
with her now and then ; sometimes being scolded 
by her, and no doubt sometimes paying her off 
with smart feminine gibes when her neat, well- 
made-up back was turned. Everything around 
Miss Griffin seemed so much the same as before, 
so little affected by years, that I positively looked 
round for Miss Griffin's mamma and the parrot, 
and I should not have been surprised if both 
had appeared in their familiar places. But Time 
is not to be quite disarmed . and the mamma and 
the parrot were gone. 

Miss Griffin was very friendly, quaint, and 
affectionate. 

" And so you became a great singer," she 
said, "after all? To say the truth, I never ex- 
pected it of you. I always thought you were 
too idle and careless. Of course you often met 
Christina Braun ?" 

"Yes, Miss Griffin; very often." 

" She was a pupil of mine once, and sang in 



254 MY enemy's daughter. 

my choir. 0, but I forgot . of course you recol- 
lect her here." 

" Perfectly Avell, indeed." 

" Yes, yes ; to be sure. Many a time you 
sang with her in this very room. No, though 
. not this room, the old lodgings. You see, I 
have been migratory since you were here." 

She had changed her lodgings once in twenty 
years. 

" Did Christina ever speak of me, Mr. Banks?" 
Miss Griffin took up my name of course in the 
old and original way. 

" Very often. Miss Griffin ; and very kindly." 

*' Yes, I am sure she would. She was a good- 
hearted creature, only I used to fear that she was 
too fond of display, and that she would come to 
no good. And she became a great singer too ?" 

'' She became a great singer indeed. That is 
quite certain, Miss Griffin." 

"Yes, a gentleman here, son of Mr. Thirl- 
w^all, our clergyman . you recollect? . was up in 
London once, and he told me he heard Christina 
at the Opera, and that the house was crowded, 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 255 

and the Queen was tliere. He did not speak of 
you; but this was before you came out, I sup- 
pose. And she has made a great fortune, and 
retired from the stage ?" 

''I believe so, Miss Griffin; at least, she has 
retired from the stage." 

" Already ! Dear, dear ! Only the other day 
she was a little girl here . 0, quite a little girl. 
And you were a boy ; and now . " 

"And now I am a 'grizzled, grim old fogey,' 
you were going to say. Miss Griffin ?" 

"Nonsense ! Indeed I was going to say no- 
thing of the kind ; for if you were to be thought 
old, I don't know what could be said of me. And 
you are not married yet ? I wonder you didn't 
marry Christina. I remember now that I thought 
at one time you were sweet upon her; but cer- 
tainly you were too young then." 

After a while I asked Miss Griffin to play 
something in memory of olden acquaintance. She 
did so very kindly and readily, playing, indeed, 
with some skill, and even, on a little pressure, 
sang a quaint old song wdth which, some twenty 



256 MY enemy's daughter. 

years back, I used to be perhaps rather more 
familiar than I much cared to be. It sounded 
in my ear now enriched by such kindly, soften- 
ing, saddening associations, that it seemed almost 
like an evening hymn. 

Then she insisted on my singing something 
for her out of one of the operas in which, as she 
was pleased to put it, I had made my greatest 
success. I asked her to choose for herself, and 
she selected, of all others, something from the 
very opera in which I sang with Christina for the 
last time. I sang it as well as I could with the 
hoarseness of my boating-excursion growing on 
me ; and a dark-eyed, pale-cheeked girl, too timid 
to open her lips, accompanied me. What a dreary 
business it was to me ! It was the very ghost of 
a song. 

This done, I prepared to leave. 

"I suppose I shall never see you again," said 
Miss Griffin. *' Though I think whenever you 
get married you ought to bring your wife to see 
me. You ought to be married now. Don't let it 
get too late. Well, well, how odd it is ! The 



THE OLD PLACE AGAIN. 257 

other day only, it seems to me, I tliouglit you 
-quite too young to marry ; and now I am urging 
you not to let it grow too late." 

''Just the way in life. Miss Griffin. One 
.day we are too young, and we resolve to wait a 
little and tliink the matter over ; and we think a 
little too long, and heliold we wake up and we 
are too old." 

'' Ah, that is just the way with mc. I thought 
of going to live in London once, when I heard 
that everybody from this place was doing so well 
there, . even poor Edward Lambert, who wasn't 
clever or brilliant at all, you know, quite making 
a fortune, I'm told, . but I put off going from 
time to time, and now I am too old." 

''You must be very lonely here, Miss Griffin." 

"I used to be very lonely at first, after my 
dear mamma died; but I have grown used to it 
now. I have the church to attend to, and my 
choir, and the pupils. 1 suppose everybody is 
lonely in one way or another, more or less, ex- 
cept, of course, great people who mix in the 

VOL. III. s 



258 MY enemy's daughter. 

fashionable world of London, like Christina Braun 
and you." 

Yes ; except such as Christina and I. Other 
people are lonely, but we who have free souls, it 
touches us not. 

I took a friendly leave of good old Miss Grif- 
fin, never, in all probability, to see her again. 



CHAPTER XII. 

''bright as the breaking east." 

The year was over ; that strange, dreamy, soli- 
tary, silent year of my life was gone at last. I 
was free to seek out Lilla Lyndon and ask her 
to be my wife. T had been filled with hope 
and confidence all through the time, and only 
longing that the day should come when I could 
realise my hopes. Now that the time had come, 
I was tormented with doubts, distrusts, despon- 
dency. I had not, indeed, to agonise me the 
sudden fear of Wordsworth's lover lest the be- 
loved should be dead. People of Mr. Lyndon's 
wealth and position live in a glass house in 
London : anybody with the slightest interest in 
the matter can follow them in all their move- 
ments . in their going from town to country, 
from London to the Continent, in their dinner- 



260 MY eneiviy's daughter. 

parties and balls. Nothing remarkable could 
have happened to Lilla without my hearing of 
it through half-a-dozen channels. Of late I 
hardly ever visited Ned Lambert and his wife 
without hearing that the latter had just received 
some kind letter, or message, or perhaps even 
a visit from Lilla. I had several times heard 
rumours that Lilla was to be married to this or 
that desirable aristocratic or wealthy personage, 
and these rumours did not alarm me. Nothing, 
in fact, had occurred to give me fear, and Lilla 
had impressed me gradually, indescribably, with 
a faith in her constancy which was the nearest 
approach to religious devotion I had ever had. 
Yet the time had come to prove her, and I was 
filled with distrust and despondency. 

So far as I could analyse the feehng, it arose 
from the old deep sense of my own unworthiness. 
What had I to give her for her love? What 
had I done that I should be called living into 
heaven ? I who had always been buffeted through 
life without time or chance to develop whatever 
elements of good might be in me; I who had 



" BRIGHT AS THE BREAKING EAST." 261 

never troubled myself about religion or morals 
in any high and spiritual sense, but merely gone 
my way whither Fate and the hour would . what 
had I done to deserve the love of such a wo- 
man ? What could I give her for it ? What 
warrant had I that I should always be able to 
hold it ? 

I think, to be happy, a man ought to be 
supremely selfish or sublimely good. He ought 
to have either a dominating will or a dominating 
conscience. I envy people who look out for the 
right, and, seeing it, go straight along that path, 
without hesitation or after-thought, whether it 
lead to happiness or torment, to shame or splen- 
dour, because it is the right. I have sometimes, 
in lower moods, envied those who follow, un- 
thinking and reckless, their dominant ^\'ill . who 
do the thing that pleases them, who are unjust 
and fear not. But those who arc not selfish 
enough to think only of self, who arc not sub- 
lime enough to ignore self altogether, they have 
often a trying time ; and I am one of them. If 
I could now have thought only of myself, I should 



262 MY enemy's daughter. 

have been liappy. Perhaps if I could have 
thought only of Lilla, I should have been happy 
too, and with a far purer happiness. But I could 
not forget my own life, my own follies, faults, 
weaknesses, roughnesses, sins; and I thought if, 
since I saw her last, she had reconsidered her 
resolve, if she had seen someone who was in 
every way more w^orthy of her than I, and had 
found that she could love him better . every 
friend she has on earth must approve her change 
of mood, and I . even I . could not condemn her. 
And though I did not fear that this would be the 
end, my very faith in her but deepened and im- 
bittered my sense of hopeless inferiority. 

One resolve I made : the Christian reader will 
of course condemn it, and regard me as abhorred 
because of it ; the practical, cynical reader will 
smile at the idea, and think I never meant what 
I said. It is the truth, however. If anything 
whatever should have occurred to break the en- 
gagement between Lilla Lyndon and me, I was 
determined not to live any longer. I would not 
confront any more of a futile good-for-nothing, 



^' BRIGHT AS THE BREAKING EAST." 263 

ignoble existence witliout love and witliout liope. 
If tliis glorious, delicious prospect which Heaven 
had so suddenly and strangely held out to me 
of a regenerated and exalted life, with love in it, 
and a purpose in it . if that prospect should be as 
suddenly and as strangely withdrawn, I would 
accept the decree as a sentence of dismissal ; I 
would take it as a declaration that I had no 
farther hope or business in life, and I would 
get out of life accordingly. On this . I declare 
it now in all calmness, and looking back from 
a distance of years . I was resolved ; and the re- 
solve sustained me. Come the w^orst, there was 
something to fall back upon . there was a means 
of escape. I believed that Heaven would not 
judge my decision too sternly, and at least I 
was resolved to trust my soul rather to heaven 
than to earth. Anything in preference to any 
more of the meaningless, barren, good-for-no- 
thing, loveless, homeless, hopeless life I had 
been leading for now some fifteen years. One 
way or another, let that at least end. 

Grim resolve for a lover going to meet his 



2G4 MY enemy's daughter. 

love; but, grim as it was, it strengtliened, con- 
soled, and animated me. 

Lilla is of age to-day. She is her own mis- 
tress. She can accept me or reject me of her own 
free will, and no one can say her nay. I will go 
to-day . this very day . and know all. I will not 
write to her, I will not go to her house. But 
though I have never seen her since our parting in 
Paris, never heard from her ; although we have 
never interchanged the briefest message or greet- 
ing, I know that if she is still of the same resolve 
as she was, she will walk in Kensington-gardens 
this day. I know that if she does not come there, 
all is over. The same impulse which brings me 
there would bring her, if her object were the same 
as mine. 

I dressed with immense and exhausting care 
that day, and looked in the glass nearly as often 
as if I were a girl going to her first ball. But 
the result did not strike me as satisfactory; and 
at last I gave up the attempt at self-adornment 
and improvement in a kind of despair. 

The day was not bright. For summer-time^ 



*' BRIGHT AS THE BREAKING EAST. 'Abb 

it was singularly dark and gray. No sun slione, 
the air was dense, the sky all hung with heavy 
clouds, the leaves rustling and blowing as if 
autumn had already set in. If one were to take 
his omen from the heavens and the atmosphere, 
this were a day to look for disaster. This is just 
the gray sombre sky under which I should expect 
to hear some heavy news. 

Kensington-gardens looked strange and gloomy 
to me. The trees moaned slightly in the light 
wind that seemed to anticipate October. The 
birds flew low; the round pond, or pool, when 1 
came near it, had a leaden-hued surface, which 
even the ripples fanned by the wind did not 
brighten. Leaves detached untimely from the 
neighbouring trees and plants came rustling and 
rushing down the glades. There rose up and 
lingered in my mind a verse from a strange, sweet, 
melancholy song of Uhland's : 

" Ich reit' am finstern Garten liin, 
Die diirren Bilume saiisen drin, 

Die welken Blatter fallen. 
Hier pfiegt' ich in der Bosenzeit 
Wann alles sich der Liebe weiht, 

Mit meinem Lieb zu wallen." 



HQQ MY enemy's daughter. 

No one was near tlie pond when I readied it, 
with the mournful cadence of this ballad in my 
ears and in my soul. As I stood by the margin 
of the pool, there was literally no human being in 
sight. Not a nursery-maid, not a child even, 
could be seen. Down this glade or that, wher- 
ever I looked, was no form moving. One might 
have been far away in the country, in the heart 
of some lonely old park of Queen Anne's time, 
when the last owner was dead, and the young 
heir was abroad, and the mansion-house was 
deserted. 

I stood for a while pursuing this sort of 
thought, and vaguely trifling with my own emo- 
tions, as if I were half-occupied in turning over 
the leaves of a book, endeavouring to while away 
time, and to keep down anxiety. It seemed to 
me at last as if I stood in utter isolation, quite 
alone. A sort of sea seemed to have risen up and 
swallowed all my old friends and old associations, 
and left me planted there. In this moment all 
the past seemed to wear an aspect of unreality to 
me. Did I read it all, or find it in the music of 



"' BEIGHT AS THE BREAKIXG EAST.'' 267 

some of the operas iu wliicli I saug ; or dream it 
out as a poem or a story to be written by me 
some time '? Did a real living Lilla Lyndon ever 
tell me of a real living love . or is she but the 
phantom of a woman, who would have loved me 
had she been a creature of life ? 

In one moment, in one flash, my melan- 
choly meditations were gone . my question was 
answered. Life came into the silent glade at 
my left. I saw a woman's figure at the far end 
of the glade, and though no eye could distinguish 
features at such a distance, I knew who came with 
light and rapid step towards me. I knew the 
figure, the walk of Lilla Lyndon. 1 did not rush 
to meet her . no, not yet. I stood and abandoned 
myself to the unspeakable delight of seeing her 
come to me. I think I broke into a deep sigh 
of profound relief and passionate joy. She came 
nearer and nearer. Thank Heaven for the rare 
chance that has made these gardens so solitary 
to-day ! She came so near that now I could see 
every feature of her face, so near that now she 
saw me ; and then I sprang to meet her. A light 



268 MY enemy's daughter. 

blush, or flush, came over her face, tinting it 
all with a delicate momentary rose-colour, which 
deepened almost to the hue of the damask rose, 
to the hue of her own lips as I kissed them. 1 
cannot describe her as I saw her, and I have no 
faith in word-descriptions. The light of her face 
was to me as the light of a star. Other descrip- 
tion I have none to give. 

^' I knew 3-0U would come !" she said. 

" My love ! Lilla !" were the only words I 
could find in answer. 

Then we walked, silent, to the edge of the 
pond, and sat on one of the seats there ; and I 
took her hand in mine. 

''I have sad news," said Lilla, looking up 
to me with eyes that now floated in tears. 

I started. In the selfishness of my love I 
only thought of some sad news that threatened it. 

*' Poor papa is very, very ill. He has had 
some cruel attacks of gout lately ; and . and he's 
very bad now indeed. I have only stolen out a 
moment to see you, because I knew you would 
be here. I must not stay with you, but he knows 



" BEIGHT AS THE BREAKING EAST." 269 

I came to see you ; and lie only said lie lioped 
I would not leave him for long just now. 0, 
lie spoke so kindly ! Under all liis manner he 
lias a noble heart. 1 told you that some day he 
would appreciate you, and you him ; and I only 
hope and pray it is not too late." 

I loved her but the more for her tender gen- 
erous illusion. To me it seemed even in that 
hour an illusion. I had outlived the faith in the 
miraculous redemption of selfishness. 1 could not 
believe in Mr. Lyndon's noble heart ; l)ut I be- 
lieved all the more in his daughter. 

"You must return, my love," I said. "I 
will not keep you now . though I hope your aftec- 
tion magnifies the seriousness of the danger. But 
I will not keep you here . enough that I have seen 
you to-day." 

" I came because I knew you would l)e here. 
I came to tell you . " she hesitated. 

" You came to tell me that you have not 
changed . that I may love you . that you will be 
my wife ?" 

"I came to tell 3'ou all that," she said, with 



270 MY enemy's daughter. 

a, briglit gleam of light shining for a moment 
in her eyes and on her face, ''if you came to 
ask me." 



Some months after this I received one da}^ a 
letter from Switzerland. It was dated from Lu- 
gano, and this was what it contained : 

"My dear Emanuel, . I have just seen Ned 
Lambert and his wife, and they have brought me 
news, not unexpected, from England . the news 
of your approaching marriage. I hear of it with 
gladness, and with tears that are glad too, but 
still tears. 0, how I wish you happiness, and to 
her who loves you, and whom you love ! I shall 
tell her some day that it was I who first disco- 
vered her secret, before you did, and told you of 
it. I send her a little gift, a necklace, w^hich she 
will wear for my sake, and a gift from my hus- 
band. 

"I was shocked and startled indeed to read of 
Mr. Lyndon's death. He had many qualities that 
were good ; and I, for one, think of him now only 
with kindness, and pray for him. 



'' BRIGHT AS THE BREAKING EAST." 271 

''My Imsband sends liis greetings and con- 
gratulations. He hopes for great things in the 
spring, and bids me tell you the opening of 1859 
will be an era. He is, you see, as full of hope 
and faith as ever. 

"And now, dear old friend, friend from youth, 
almost from childhood, addio ! I shall hold you 
and 3'our wife always in my heart and in my love, 
and I am to both a true soul-sister, 

" Christina." 



THE END. 
