FRANCES. 



CHAPTER I. 

BY THE AVON. 

** Sweet day, so cool, so calm, so bright, 
The bridal of the earth and sky, 
The dew shall weep thy fall to-night, 
For thou must die.'' 

TF, on a beautiful green lawn, by the side 
-*- of a soft clear river, you came suddenly 
upon proof of a violent struggle, probably 
ending in death . the grass trodden into 
mud, fragments of a black velvet coat upon 
the ground, marks of blood here and there, 
a gold watch, with half a chain, smashed at 

VOL. I. B 



2 FRANCES. 

the foot of a tree, a letter or two lying 
about, the broken barrel of a pistol with 
some hair upon it, the idea at once flashing 
on your mind would be Murder. ^ 

This was the idea which flashed with ter- 
rible suddenness on the mind of a beautiful 
girl who on a fair September morning 
walked down to the river flowing through 
her brother's land. On just such a scene 
came Frances Carey, who loved a walk be- 
fore breakfast in the September mornings, 
when the air is cool and the shadows are 
long. This morning she had been a little 
later than usual, for while she dressed she 
had been lost in thought. She had been 
much annoyed the night before: and the 
last scene of the evening comes back with 
the morning hours. When her eye caught 
the time from her watch on the dressing- 
table, she determined to have a run before 
Walter's punctual appetite required her 



w ^ 



BY THE AVON. 3 

presence. Shaking off her annoyance, she 
tripped out upon the lawn, looking as fresh 
as dew-sprinkled Dawn herself. How calm 
and bright and pure and sweet the air I It 
was indeed " the bridal of the earth and 
sky." Could there be any evil in so beauti- 
ful a world ? Her dogs barked round her : 
the knowing old tame jackdaw, who came 
to the window for bits of bread at breakfast- 
time, croaked his welcome, with his cunning 
head all on one side ; her pigeons fluttered 
down to greet her, knowing the time of 
peas and hemp was come. She had just a 
minute to run down to her favourite spot by 
the river, and pay the Avon her morning 
visit. There she stood appalled. She did 
not faint, having a fine reserve of strength : 
but she shuddered when she saw that the 
fragments of black velvet were like those 
which Stephen Heath wore the night before, 

when he supped at her brother's house ; and 

b2 



4 FRANCES. 

she shuddered still more when she saw the 
shattered watch at the foot of a great ash- 
tree. 

It was Stephen's watch, which he had 
looked at the night before in her presence* 
And Stephen Heath and Hugh Roland had 
fiercely quarrelled at Carey Farm late last 
night. And now murder had been done. 

She stood for some time in the midst of 
this horror, scarcely knowing what to think^ 
or whether she thought at all. Could Hugh 
te a murderer ? Impossible. Yet Stephen 
might have provoked him to sudden vio- 
lence : for all the parish knew that Stephen 
could sneer and that Hugh could .strike. 
And they were so angry the night be- 
fore. 

Poor Frances ! Her brain throbbed with 
intense pain. These two men quarrelled 
about her only : and she would be glad to 
see neither of them ever again^ though she 



BY THE AVON. 5 

admitted to herself a slight, very slight, 
preference of one over the other. 

She stood as if turned to stone. She 
might have fainted or fallen in a fit but for 
the voice of her brother Walter cheerily 
crying, 

"Now, Frances ! Where are you, water- 
sprite ? Eggs and bacon and coffee ! Come 
along, you little lover of sentiment." 

" Walter /" she shrieked, in a tone like 
that of Ireland's banshee. 

He ran headlong down to the point 
whence her voice issued. He put his strong 
brotherly arm around her waist, and she 
gave way at once, and burst into a flood of 
tears that relieved her brain. Walter 
Carey's first thought had been for his sister : 
when he looked at the scene that had caused 
her terrible fear, he was no less troubled 
than she. He, like his sister, recognised 
relics of Stephen Heath. 



6 FRANCES. 

Both Stephen Heath and Hugh Roland 
were, coyly, in country fashion, wooing 
Frances Carey. Her brother Walter pre- 
ferred Heath: it is rather thought that 
Frances preferred Roland. Hence the 
conclusions formed in the minds of the 
brother and sister, though they loved each 
other intensely, were likely in some degree 
to differ. 

Walter Carey took his sister home, and 
made her go to bed, with an old servant 
attending. She was delirious for awhile . . . 
and no wonder, poor child ! Walter, also^ 
felt rather dazed ; but he rode over himself, 
saying no word to anyone else, to the police- 
station at Chessington, and gave the requisite 
information. Then he returned to look 
after his sister. 



C( 



CHAPTER n. 

THE AVOKSIDE MURDER. 

Strange that bad deeds are often done where quietnde 
Has brooded like the halcyon o'er the hyaline : 
That lawns to lovers dear are trod by murderers !'' 

The Comedy of Dreams. 



A VONSIDE is commonly the quietest of 
-^^ villages, and was suddenly dragged 
into a dreadful publicity by the murder of 
Stephen Heath. It is a lovely tranquil 
corner of the world, where tragedies ought 
never to occur. Most of the land belongs to 
Walter Carey, whose father, a distinguished 
London surgeon, unequalled for cutting 

. 

from the human frame all deformities, 



8 FRANCES. 

retired early to a rustic life, bought land, 
and turned farmer. He left his land to his 
son Walter, with a charge upon it for Fran- 
ces ; and Walter, who has determined never 
to marry, wishes only that Frances would 
determine likewise, so that they might live 
happily together, old bachelor and old maid. 
Walter likes hunting, shooting, fishing ; he 
likes reading, having had a good Oxford 
education ; he likes to smoke over Horace 
and a glass of strong home-brewed ale. 
He naturally rather dislikes his sister's two 
lovers. 

Stephen Heath is . or was . the son of 
one Captain Heath (the Honourable Cap- 
tain Heath, I think), who took a house in 
Avonside some years ago. The house in 
question was a cottage, but has, by succes* 
sive additions, developed into a villa. The 
Captain is a little man of sixty, who does 
not look quite forty ; he knows all the arts 



THE AVONSIDBS MURDER. 9 

of the world, he can make his sixty years 
into forty, and his three hundred a year as 
good as a thousand. He is infinitely bored 
at Avonside, but he dare not live in the 
neighbourhood of any large town for fear 
of his son, who, though the most plausible 
of young gentlemen in polite society, and 
greatly approved by the Rector of Avon- 
side, is unfortunately a bad arithmetician, 
and for that .reason cannot always balance 
with strict accuracy income and expenditure. 
Heath pooh-poohs his son, and dismisses 
the younger generation with a contemptuous 
wave of the hand ; swears at the innovations 
of Whig statesmen just as he swears at his 
wine-merchant for sending in a bill. But 
Captain Heath is a good Tory an4 a good 
churchman, and goes regularly to church, 
and never swears on Sundays. 

Hugh Roland, who has that most unfor- 
tunate possession for a young man, a small 



10 FRANCES. 

independence, lives with his aunt, in a house 
that lies higher up the Avon . a snug old- 
fashioned comfortable house, that has been 
in the Hutchison family for centuries, and, 
strongly built at first, shows no symptoms 
of decay. The old lady, Miss Hutchison, 
his mother's sister, is very fond of her 
nephew, but can't understand him. She is 
a Puritan ; he is a Pythagorean. She likes 
perfect regularity; he likes perfect irregu- 
larity. She wisely wants him to adopt a 
career; he unwisely wants some sublime 
career to adopt him. He has already run 
into small eccentricities. He goes away 
now and then with a party of gipsies . he 
tells his aunt he is off for a walk, and she 



needn't keep dinner for him . . . and he 
returns after a few weeks, having walked to 
the other end of England. He tries to 
blow up the place with his chemical experi- 
ments, and it is generally thought he is 



THE AYONSIDE MUBDSB. 11 

finding the philosopher's stone. This makes 
the vulgar of Avonside respectful to him : 
the man who is finding out the way to make 
gold deserves worship. Is it not the high- 
est object to which man can attain ? 

I should like to be able to describe 
Frances Carey. While Walter was away at 
a public school and Oxford, her father 
delighted to teach her at home. So she 
knows a lot of things other girls don't know^ 
and is ignorant of an infinite number of 
things absolutely requisite for the com- 
pletion of a young lady's education. She 
knows her Shakespeare; she can read 
Chaucer; she can enjoy the Odyssey and 
the odes of Horace. But I fear she would 
break down in any competitive examina- 
tion ; and the public opinion of Avonside 
declares her an ignoramus. She can play 
neither croquet nor the guitar; but she 
can doctor all the poor people intelligently. 



12 FRANGBS. 

Frances Carey had a long dreamless 
sleep after her terrible adventure, and 
awoke with no distinct recollection of what 
had occurred, but with a weight upon her 
spirit. The old servant and housekeeper, 
Rachel Gray, had taken her in charge, and 
was by her bedside awaiting her awakening. 
Rachel was bom in the family . ^her mother 
had been Mr. Carey's housekeeper after his 
wife died, having previously been many 
years in his service. She was a servant of 
the antique mould, loving her young master 
and mistress. 

Frances sat up in her bed suddenly. The 
window opposite looked out on a mingled 
mass of green, for the lawn in front of the 
farmhouse was covered with trees of all 
kinds, and hedged in by lines of elm and 
lime. Never was Matthew Arnold's " bird- 
haunted English lawn " more perfectly veri- 
fied : starling quaintly pecked there im* 



THE AVONSIDB MUBDEB. 13 

paling wriggling worms, and the yellow- 
billed blackbird, followed by his spouse, 
hunted it on all but the sunniest days, and 
fought the thrush, more timorous, and water- 
wagtails crossed the green floor like ladies 
at a ball, and the troubadour redbreast 
fought and sang, and wrens fluttered shyly 
into the densest foliage, and in sharp Win- 
ters the grosbeak left his Norway pines, and 
brought up an English brood, and flew 
athwart the trees like a giant of the painted 
butterfly tribe. 

The cool green of the well-known win- 
dow unconsciously soothed the girl . she 
began to recall the past ; she remembered 
what had frightened her. She put out her 

hand to Rachel, who took it in both her 

« 

own, but said nothing. After awhile Frances 
said, 

^' He did not do it, Rachel . I am sure he 
did not." 



14 FRANCES. 

" He is very wild, miss, sometimes," said 
Rachel. "Don't you remember howhe thrash- 
ed that tinker for throwing a stone at one 
of his dogs ? And you know how he goes 
away sometimes, Miss Frances. Oh ! I think 
he's rather a defiable young gentleman. But 
I don't think he'd do a fellow-creature no 
harm, unless he was greatly provocated; 
and you know that Mr. Stephen Heath, I 
don't like him a bit,. he's main provoking; 
and you see, Mr. Hugh, he's got a ponderious 
fist." 

*'He never murdered Stephen Heath," 
said Frances, in a quiet voice, " whatever 
provocation he may have received. I know 
them both. He would hold Mr. Heath with 
one hand, and make him kneel to him. No ; 
there is something mysterious in the affair. 
I will have a warm bath, and dress, Rachel." 

The old servant, well accustomed to her 
mistress's resolute way, at once obeyed 



THE AVONSIDE MUBDEB. 15 

orders. Frances Carey was downstairs soon 
after noon, putting household matters into 
their regular groove. That her brother had 
ridden right away to Chessington she had 
learnt from Rachel. She had luncheon 
ready for him on his return, with an inspec- 
tor of police as his companion, and quite 
surprised Walter by her complete recovery 
from so severe a horror, 

" You seem quite yourself again, Frances," 
he said, when they had a moment together, 
while the inspector devoted himself to bread 
and cheese, and homebrewed ale. 

" yes, dear Walter* I am well, after 
a quiet sleep. It was shocking at first. But 
now you will make these policemen do their 
work properly, won't you? I* don't quite 
believe in policemen." 

"I suppose they know their business," 
fiaid Walter. " I will do my best. Hallo, 
who is knocking down the front door ?" 



14 FRANCES. 

" He is very wild, miss, sometimes," said 
Rachel. "Don't you remember howhe thrash- 
ed that tinker for throwing a stone at one 
of his dogs ? And you know how he goes 
away sometimes, Miss Frances. Oh ! I think 
he's rather a defiable young gentleman. But 
I don't think he'd do a fellow-creature no 
harm, unless he was greatly provocated; 
and you know that Mr. Stephen Heath, I 
don't like him a bit,. he's main provoking; 
and you see, Mr. Hugh, he's got a ponderious 
fist." 

*'He never murdered Stephen Heath," 
said Frances, in a quiet voice, " whatever 
provocation he may have received. I know 
them both. He would hold Mr. Heath with 
one hand, and make him kneel to him. No; 
there is something mysterious in the affair. 
I will have a warm bath, and dress, Rachel." 

The old servant, well accustomed to her 
mistress's resolute way, at once obeyed 



THE AVONSIDE MURDEE, 17 

Hugh Eoland rested his strong right hand 
on a corner of Carey's stout oak table, which 
quivered beneath him. He looked some- 
what wildly at the three persons present. 

" Is he dead ?" he exclaimed, " Did I 
kill him ? No, I could not have killed him 
with such an easy touch as that." 

" He is my dear son's murderer, by God !" 
cried Captain Heath, in a rage, and he rush- 
ed forward and caught the young fellow by 
the collar. Hugh made no resistance, but 
sank into a chair, saying, 

" No, Captain Heath. It is quite impos- 
sible. The slight blow I gave your son 
could not have killed him." 

"Call the police," said the old soldier. 
" Take him in hand. He is the murderer 1" 

At this moment Miss Hutchison entered, 
her usually calm countenance clouded with 
unutterable pain. She came to the chair 
in which Hugh Roland sat, with the Captain 

VOL. I. c 



18 FRANCES. 

keeping vicious guard over him, and bent 
over her nephew, and kissed his brow, say- 
ing, 

"You are no murderer, I am sure, 

Hugh." 

"No, Miss Hutchison, I am sure he is 
not !" cried Frances. 

But Hugh said nothing. He gave a great 
sigh. Captain Heath eyed him as a dog 
eyes a cat, resolved to keep him well in 
sight. He need not have been so resolute ; 
Hugh Roland would not have stirred an 
inch ; there was that on his brain which 
kept him quiet. 

" He never did it, dear Miss Hutchison," 
said Frances. "He could not have done 
such a thing." 

The police, who are above or below sen- 
timent, took him away to Chessington. 



19 



CHAPTER III. 



ELLE ET LUI. 



<( 



No man is helpless if one woman pray for him«^^ 



^' "VTO," thought Frances to herself, when 
.^^ all this was over . ^when Hugh was 
<X)nveyed away in custody . ^when she had 
gone off early to bed, with for companion 
a terrible headache . that headache which 
threshes the brain with a flail, which pounds 
it with pestle in mortar, which hammers it 
on anvil . " no, Hugh never did it. There 
is something strange. 0, I wish my poor 
head would not whirl and whirl ! I wish I 
could think ! Poor dear Hugh wants some- 

c2 



20 FRANCES. 

body to think for him. He may have 
knocked Stephen down, for Stephen is a 
provoking fellow, but he never tore his coat 
to atoms, or smashed his watch." 

Our little Frances, as is not seldom the 
way with women, found she loved Hugh a 
little bit, now he was in sore trouble and 
disgrace ; and she got out of bed and knelt 
down and prayed for him, burying her face 
in the bed-clothes ; and her prayer was : 

**0 dear Father in heaven, make the 
truth be known soon, and save Hugh from 
too long a trouble! For Christ's sake. 
Amen." 

Over and over again she said this simple 
prayer, and then she got into the fragrant 
linen sheets, and fell fast asleep, and slept 
without a dream. 

The novel which deals with human life 
on all sides has a right to deal with the 
power of prayer. Everything in the pres* 



SLLB XT LUI. 21 

ent day is to be scientific, and some imbe- 
cile person proposed to test the efficacy of 
prayer by praying for the patients in one 
ward of a hospital, and leaving another 
ward unprayed-for, and comparing resulte. 
This blockhead looked on prayer as a me- 
chanical matter, whereas it is the soul's cry 
to God in moments of imminent peril, it is 
the soul's converse with God in times of 
tranquil happiness. No true prayer was 
ever unanswered; no man ever asked for 
bread and received a stone. ^ 

Meanwhile, Hugh Roland is in the lock- 
up at Chessington, which means, however, 
that he is in the parlour of the superintend- 
ent of police, who doesn't believe in his 
criminality, though things look serious, and 
whose buxom wife is quite angry that such 
a nice young gentleman should be " took 
up." If Hugh could have eaten a moun- 
tain of muffins that night, and drunken an 



22 FRANCES. 

eighteen-gallon cask of tea, the superin- 
tendent and his spouse would have been 
delighted. But he could not. Appetite 
had left him. He had a dreadful doubt in 
his mind, which appalled him. 

The superintendent made him snug 
enough, locking him into a little clean bed- 
room with its window barred. On his 
dressing-table he found a kindly gift . a pint 
tankard with a cover . and it contained good 
ale. It was thoughtful. 
^ "Anyway," soliloquised Hugh, "this 
policeman does not think me a murderer. 
Who would show such kindness to a mur- 
derer? No, I can't have murdered him." 

He emptied the tankard and jumped into 
bed, pray erless ; but did not Frances pray 
for him ? He was asleep in five minutes. 
He did not dream of the gibbet ; a great 
trouble, like very hard work, is often, by 
nature's motherly kindness, followed by 



BLLB ET LUI. 23 

sound sweet sleep that knows no dreams. 
When Hugh awoke in the morning he 
could not guess where he was. The room 
was comfortable enough, but he missed the 
sweet Avonside air, and his kind puritan 
aunt's dainty devices in bed-room cosiness. 
And then the remembrance of yesterday 
came, and for a moment stunned him. 
When he was calm enough to think, he went 
over and over again the events of the pre- 
vious day, so far as he could recollect them. 
He had been with Frances Carey, the beau- 
tiful girl whom he loved better than life- 
He had met at Carey Farm his rival, the 
murdered man, a fellow whom he utterly 
despised. Heath had insulted him in Fran- 
ces Carey's preipnce ; he had left her with a 
sense of burning shame that he should have 
used strong language in her gentle presence 
. the presence of a girl whose atmosphere 
of peace was as the fragrance of a flower. 



24 FBANCES. 

Afterwards there had been a fierce quarrel, 
as he and Heath went homeward ; there 
had been a straggle ; he scarce remembered 
what had happened, so thoroughly was his 
always restless brain upset by this swift 
movement of events. One thought haunt- 
ed him with such strong stay, that there 
seemed no room for any other . Am I a 
murderer ? 

And yet another thought came upon him 
at intervals, as his mind grew more tranquil 
. arose before him a beautiful vision : a tall 
agile brown-haired girl with averted eyes. 
Ah, but how well he knew their colour I . a 
lustrous variable blue. What was Frances 
doing now? Was she thinking of him? 
Did she believe him a murderer ? More mo- 
mentous to him than his own future fate 
seemed Frances Carey's judgment upon him. 
To be found guilty by the law seemed to 



ELLE BT LUI. 25 

him a trifle light as morning gossamer ; to 
be held guilty by Frances were worse 
than all the hells of Dante's dream. 



26 



CHAPTER IV. 

DURING HER MAJESTY'S PLEASURE. 

*^ Which is less tolerable, death, or death in life? 
There are who have no fear of worlds invisible, 
Who would delight in death if death gives liberty ?*' 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

CHESSINGTON Petty Sessions. Pres- 
ent, Sir Clifford Coyle, Baronet ; the 
Rev. Jephson Thring; Lovel Ward, Esquire, 
M.P. The Baronet is a young gentleman, 
who would much rather not be J.P., but 
has been worried into it by his relations and 
advisers, who deem it a duty of his position. 
The clergyman is Rector of Chessington, 
and knows more Hebrew and less human 



DIJBING HER MAJESTT's FLEASUBE. 27 

nature than any other man in the county. 
Lovel Ward is master of hounds, hunts five 
days a week, gives good dinners, and is the 
Tory member for a three-cornered county. 
Before this triumvirate our hapless friend 
Hugh Roland was brought. 

Never had been seen so crowded a court 
in Chessington. In that peaceful part of 
England murders are rare. The report of so 
atrocious a case had brought together the 
population for miles round. They were in 
a state of intense excitement, and yelled at 
Roland as he was taken to the court-house, 
and would have finished him without trial 
but for the strong guard of constables. He, 
poor fellow, walked in a dream. When he 
stood before the magistrates, he seemed 
hardly to know who they were. He thought 
of Frances, wondering what she thought of 
him ; he thought of his past life as some- 
thing that had gone away from him for ever ; 



US FRANCES. 

he did not even recognize angry Captain 
Heath, who wildly gesticulated, and gave 
the magistrates an immense deal of trou- 
ble. 

The evidence was taken. Walter Carey 
bore witness to a quarrel at his house ; 
thought both young men were admirers of 
his sister Frances, but did not think his sis- 
ter encouraged either. The police deposed 
to the shreds of a velvet coat (identified as 
Stephen Heath's), to letters addressed 
Stephen Heath, Esquire (chiefly " bills de- 
livered "), to the broken pistol barrel with 
hair on it (which Captain Heath swore was 
his son's hair), to the crushed gold watch, 
which bore Stephen Heath's monogram. 

"At what time did that watch stop, 
policeman ?" asked the Rector. 

"There wasn't no hands left, your wor- 
ship," was the reply. 

The Baronet and the Rector, after asking 



DURING HER MAJBSTY's PLEASURE. 29* 

a few more questions, were quite disposed 
to commit the prisoner, but Mr. Lovel Ward^ 
M.F.H., was a wiser man, and after ex- 
changing a word witht he magistrates' clerk, 
remarked that however strong the circum- 
stantial evidence might be, it was absurd to 
commit a man for trial without any corporal 
evidence that there had been a murder. 
Where was the corpus delicti ? The disap- 
pointed audience began to think that Hugh 
Roland would escape, and were at once as in- 
tensely disgusted as the vulgar lovers of cruelty 
always are when balked of their prey. But 
this was not to be his fortune. Suddenly the 
door opened, and the indignant constabulary 
were powerless to prevent the hurried en- 
trance of a huge red-headed lout, well 
known to them as the rascalliest poacher of 
the neighbourhood, who yelled out excit- 
edly, 

'' I've vound him ! I've a-vound poor 



30 FRANCES. 

Muster Heath ! He was drownded down by 
Stanks Farm." 

There was a general excitement. This 
chuckle-headed poacher was half imbecile, 
and had the craft which accompanies imbe- 
cility. There was not a policeman or a 
gamekeeper in the neighbourhood whom he 
had not foiled in some way or other. Im- 
beciles of his class are closely allied to wild 
animals, in the acute development of their 
instincts ; Johnny Hen wood could catch a 
hare on her form, a hawk in its nest, a trout 
in the shallow. He was followed always by 
a lean sly lurcher, black and white, that 
seemed to understand every word his master 
spoke . ay, and every wink he gave. That 
dog, whose name was Sam, would sneak into 
henroosts at early morn and bring Johnny all 
the eggs he could find. Sam was as clever 
as he was ugly. He never lost a rabbit or 
a leveret. Old Vosper, the Chessington 



DURIIIG HER majesty's PLEASUBE. 31 

butcher, who was as respectable and as 
stout as the big Devon oxen he loved to 
kill, declared that Sam stole his mutton- 
chops, snatching one up when his back was 
turned, and carrying it round the corner to 
Johnny Henwood, who cautiously waited 
for his dinner. There is reason to believe 
in the truth of this story, seeing that Johnny 
was often known to toast a chop or a kid- 
ney at the tap-room fire of the least reput- 
able publichouse in Chessington, and that 
the landlord . a man of the Claimant's build 
. would sometimes share his meat, and sup- 
ply him with beer to wash it down. 

The magistrates directed the superin- 
tendent of police to see what the disturb- 
ance meant. It was found that Johnny 
Henwood had seen a body in the stank (a 
piece of water between two locks, which 
seems to take its name from its odour), just 
by Stanks Farm. The police were ordered 



32 FRANCES. 

to investigate : the multitude of course fol- 
lowed. Sir Clifford and Mr. Ward walked 
up and down before the court-house, smok- 
ing ; while the Rev. Jephson Thring took a 
small volume from his pocket, and buried 
himself in abstruse study. He was scarcely 
aroused by the shouting of the excited 
crowd, who returned in convoy of the 
corpus delicti. He did, however, awaken to 
consciousness when a dripping corpse was 
brought into the court. But Hugh Roland 
did not seem to notice the arrival. To 
everybody this seemed a clear proof of his 
guilt. 

The body had evidently been battered by 
rapid descent through the water: scarcely 
any clothing was left, and the features were 
not distinguishable. Yet Captain Heath, 
when he saw it from the river-bank, at once 
declared it was his son's corpse, and was 
with difficulty prevented from leaping into 



DURING HER MAJESTY's PLEASURE. 33 

the stream- to take it out His excitement 
was painful ; the magistrates pitied him too 
much to restrain him, while the whole 
crowd echoed his outcry for vengeance on 
Hugh Roland, the murderer. 

Hugh Roland was fully committed for 
trial. Bail was not accepted. It mattered 
little to him . his intensely excitable temper 
had settled down into a dreamy dulness, 
only enlightened at rare intervals by beauti- 
ful memories of the past, by wild hopes for 
the future. The Assizes were held at the 
county town within a few weeks. The time 
intervening, spent in the county gaol, was to 
Hugh Roland an everlasting blank. At 
first he had gone over and over the past, 
conjuring up the last glimpse of Frances 
Carey's soft blue eyes, his last grasp of her 
hand, his last thought ere he left Carey 
Farm, that he should like to touch with his 
own those beautiful lips ; conjuring up also 

VOL. L D 



34 PRANCES. 

Stephen Heath's look . the look of a fiend . 
as he fell before him by the river-side. 
But soon he sank into absolute apathy . not 
an idea remained to him. The impression 
made upon the warders of the prison was 
that he was a lunatic. And when the 
supreme day arrived, and he stood in the 
dock before the Lord Chief Justice of Eng- 
land, he was in so utterly perplexed a con- 
dition that to both judge and jury he seemed 
devoid of sanity. 

Poor Hugh Roland was defended by Mr, 
Quinkle, Q.C. That gentleman is thought to 
be the cleverest dealer with a difficult case 
that ever wore silk gown. His first glance 
at his brief showed him that it was vain to 
fight against the evidence. The police and 
the public had made up their minds that 
Hugh Roland had murdered Stephen Heath, 
and of course the jury would follow suit. 
Captain Heath identified his son's body. 



DUBING HER MAJESTY's PLEASURE. 35 

From the prisoner himself nothing intelligible 
could be obtained. Mr. Quinkle rested his 
whole case on the theory that Hugh Roland 
had always been noted for an eccentricity 
that verged on lunacy, and the jury, accept- 
ing this theory, acquitted him ; and the Lord 
Chief Justice ordered that he should be 
kept in confinement during Her Majesty's 
pleasure. 

Thus passes, from the pleasant sunshine on 
the green fields, into the society of maniacs, 
our poor friend Hugh Roland. 

Captain Heath erected, over the body 
found by Johnny Henwood, a monument of 
white marble, in the churchyard of Avon- 
side. As time passed on, only the one or 
two people who knew Hugh Roland too 
well to think it possible he should be a 
murderer, made^any question as to the truth 
of the inscription on that white marble slab. 
Captain Heath's strong belief had its in- 

d2 



36 FRANCES. 

fluence on almost everybody, except Miss 
Hutchison and Frances Carey, and the 
verdict of society accorded with the tomb- 
stone : 

Here lies 

STEPHEN HEATH, 

Murdered, 

Etc., etc. 



CHAPTER V. 

FRANCES. 

My feeble muse, that fain her best won*d 
Write at oommand of Frances Weeitwood, 
But feels her wits not in their best mood, 
Fell lately on some idle fancies, 
As she*s much given to romances, 
About this self -same style of Frances ; 
Which seems to be a name in common 
Attributed to man or woman. 
She thence contrived this flattering moral, 
With which she hopes no soul will quarrel. 
That She who this twin title decks, 
Combines what's good in either sex ; 
Unites . how very rare the case is ! . 
Masculine sense to female graces ; 
And quitting not her proper rank. 
Is both in one . Fanny and Frank I 

Charles Lamb. 

.\-\7ALTER CAREY firmly believed that 
Roland was a murderer, and did by 



w 



38 FRAKCES. 

no means believe that he was mad. " The 
fellow is feigning madness," was his thought 
all through. He was too kind to say this to 
his sister, whom he loved in his lazy half- 
selfish way; and being, like his favourite 
writer, Epicuri de grege porous^ he felt rather 
pleased than otherwise that his sister's two 
lovers were out of the way . one in an 
asylum, the other washed into the Severn 
Sea. It was a good riddance, in his estima- 
tion. Now Frances would not be gallivant- 
ing about, and thinking of marrying ; and 
what in the world should he do without 
her ? As Walter Carey smoked his evening 
pipe over his evening " twist, ** he felt per- 
fectly satisfied. 

Nothing is more curious in the history of 
generation than the way in which sex some- 
times divides families. In the higher gentes 
children are few, and intellectual power is 
equally divided. In the lower, children 



are many, and there is no intellectual power 
at all. There is an intermediate rank, 
wherein we find the sons clever and the 
daughters stupid, or the sons stupid and the 
daughters clever. I do not of course refer 
to the mere social standing of the moment, 
but to the imperishable divisions of race. 
When Lavengro met Isopel Berners in the 
dingle, she told him that the only three 
noble names in the county were to be found 
in the workhouse of Long Melford. Great 
races of men too often decay because they 
are not prolific. It is perhaps the middle 
class of men who achieve most material 
success and common comforts Expect not 
from them high heroic deeds ; these belong 
to the higher blood ; but they will build 
colossal fortunes on foundations shifty as the 
quicksand. 

Walter Carey was an easy egotist, kind 
when kindness cost nothing, but with a very 



40 

definite idea of self as oentre of the moral 
aud physical universe. He farmed his estate 
deverly, rode well to hounds, enjoyed a 
good dinner, and was a welcome guest at 
all the neighbouring houses. A certain 
tadt complacency q^une over him when he 
found that both Frances's troublesome 
wooers were comfortably out of the way. 
His tobacco had a rader flavour, apparently 
. ^his ale a richer aroma of the hop. his 
Horace a gayer meaning. As he sat in the 
oak-wainscoted parlour, at breakfast there 
was a pleased expression on his wind- 
freshened face ; he ate his creamy eggs and 
crisp rashers with better appetite than ever ; 
and, when he rode over his farms and 
looked s&er his men, he burst now and then 
into a soliloquy, to the effect that now he 
should have a quiet life, and Frances would 
settle down and not be sentimental. Now 
Frances was anything but sentimental. 



FRANCES. 41 

It is notable that when, in our complex 
language, there are home and foreign words 
apparently synonymous, the home word is 
the stronger and sincerer. Brotherly sounds 
more real than fraternal : a gkost might 
frighten you, when you would smile at a 
spirit : happiness differs from felicity as good 
ale from the Chancellor's claret : while the 
noisy orators who plead for a Eepublic are 
certainly no friends to the Commonwealth. 

There is the same difference between 
feeling and sentiment Now Frances Carey, 
though full of feeling, had not a particle of 
what is recognised as sentiment. Having, 
thanks to her father, read classic literature, 
she had no taste for morbid and unhealthy 
fiction. Indeed she seldom looked for any 
mental sustenance from books beyond the 
limits of the copious yet well-chosen library 
which Mr. Carey had left behind him ; and 
probably the "Sentimental Journey" was 



42 FRANCES. 

the most sentimental book on those shelves. 
Frances Carey at this time was twenty- 
five, being about two years younger than 
her brother. Hers were the finer qualities 
which he utterly lacked. She was unself- 
ish ; she was imaginative ; she had much 
courage and self-control. Walter's innate 
selfishness Frances did not perceive ; she 
had always glorified him, and made him a 
hero, seeing him with eyes of sisterly love. 
They had much in common. delight in the 
country, and in all living creatures, and in 
classical poetry. I. trust none of my fair 
readers will quarrel with Frances for hav- 
ing gained from her father the power of 
reading the great classic authors. If more 
girls were fortunate enough to obtain simi- 
lar tuition, there would be fewer empty 
and resourceless lives. There is nothing 
impossible in such learning ; there is much 
that is delightful. In the days when the 



FRANCES. 43 

literature of England was in its glowing climax 
. ^when the Avon of Stratford became for 
all time a river more famous than Nile or 
Ganges, than Simois or Eurotas, than Tiber 
or Rhine . ladies were not ashamed of clas- 
sical accomplishment. Queen Elizabeth and 
Lady Jane Grey (also for a brief moment 
Queen of England) were imbued with this 
higher culture. Why should not a lady 
" unsphere the spirit of Plato," or wander 
through the realm which belongs to broad- 
browed Homer? Mrs. ^Browning, the 
greatest female writer the world has ever 
known, construed her Greek with a kind 
and able tutor in a voice 

" Somewliat low for at9 and 0^9.*' 

Let any young lady who thinks there is no 
pleasure, but rather something harsh and 
crabbed, in such study, glance at a transla- 
tion of the first book of Horace's odes, by 
Mary Carmichael, published by Nimmo of 



44 FRANCES. 

Edinburgh. Here is the Venusian's " advice 
to a lady " : . 

'^ Leuconoe, shut the book of Fate, 
And tempt its leaves no more ; 
Our better wisdom is to wait, 

Whatever be in store : 
As many days as Grod shall give 
Both you and I are sure to live. 

"Winter and Summer will run on 

Longer than you and I ; 
Ajid when our years are come and gone, 

The sea will not be dry ; 
To death at last we all must bow, 
We need not ask the when or how. 

^' Be wise, the dregs are in the cup, 

But do not shake the wine ; 
Be happy while it sparkles up. 

And hope is yours and mine ; 
For as we speak, life fleets away ; 
To-morrow is not . ^live to-day." 

Those pleasant album verses by Charles 
Lamb which I have placed at the head of 
this chapter, show much of the character of 
Frances Carey. She had masculine intelli- 



FRANCES. 45 

gence and courage, feminine sweetness arid 
sympathy. Her equal was not in all the 
arts which ladies can so easily practise in 
the country ; she was unrivalled in garden- 
ing, distilling sweet waters and homely 
wines, superintending the manufacture of 
pickles and preserves, for which ample ma- 
terials existed in the kitchen-gardens of 
Carey Farm. Sir Clifford Coyle, who had 
wonderful gardens of his own, used to ride 
slowly past the gates of Carey Farm ; he 
said . it was to look at flowers that were far 
better than he could grow. Some of his 
friends declared he wanted a glimpse of 
Miss Carey ; if so, he seldom got one, as 
Frances had rather a contempt for this 
young baronet. It was hardly deserved ; 
he was only just of age, with his head a 
little turned by having unexpectedly come 
into the estate through the death of his 
uncle ; but he was just the sort of young 



46 FRANCES. 

English gentleman that mellows into a 
strong sound man. 

However, Frances Carey did not like 
him, and this will I say for her, that she 
had a fine vein of obstinacy. She main- 
tained the thesis that dislike at first sight 
is always well-grounded (even as love at 
first sight), and relied so thoroughly on her 
instinct in this matter that no subsequent 
occurrences could alter her fixed opinion of 
anyone whom she deemed worthy of any 
opinion at all. 

Women have subtler instinct than men, 
since they cultivate instinct more and reason 
less. There is an essential difference be- 
tween reason and instinct ; the former links 
man to the Divinity, the latter to the crea- 
tures below him. Men who lead wild lives 
develop instinct wondrously; take the 
Red Indians, as described by the master- 
hand of Cooper, the Scott of America. 



FRANCES. 47 

How they could follow an enemy's trail, or 
strike a bee line through unpathed woods to 
the point they sought ! Instinct is dormant 
with those who are obliged to use their rea- 
son perpetually ; but women, who are not 
fettered by that strong necessity, often di- 
vine the characters of others . ay, and even 
conjecture future events . with surprising 
certainty. So I will not say that Frances 
was unjustified in her resolute adherence to 
her first judgments. When her two lovers 
had so disastrously disappeared, Frances 
showed no outward sign of trouble, even to 
her brother. Indeed there was no promi- 
nent reason why she should. Her feeling 
for Stephen Heath had been slight aver- 
sion; she intuitively discovered something 
not quite true in his character. All Avon* 
side believed in him, except perhaps his 
father ; but Frances was dubious. He was 
polite, he was plausible, he could talk non- 



48 FRANCES. 

sense, he could play the flute ; but Frances 
thought she despised a young fellow who 
played the flute so wonderfully. He could 
not bowl at cricket or row on Avon like 
Hugh Roland . that was quite clear. 

Poor Hugh Roland! Rambling by the 
side of the river, which winds for near a mile 
through the grounds of Carey Farm, she 
questioned her heart about him. She had 
never made up her mind that she liked him 
so very much ; she did like him . yes . who 
could help liking such a fine manly fellow, 
with such astonishing ideas? And now, that 
he was in such sad trouble, was she to 
blame for pitying him? Standing in the 
slant sunshine, under a slender-shafted droop- 
ing birch that was turning purple and brown, 
and looking pensively at the river that 
flowed softly below her, she tried to realize 
the interior of a lunatic asylum . tried to 
imagine how Hugh Roland endured his 



FBANCB8. 49 

imprisonment. Perhaps her sweet wishes 
for his welfare were winged, and brought 
the poor fellow solace in his loneliness. 

Then she tried, with that keen intellect of 
hers, to reason out the case as between Hugh 
and Stephen. That Hugh was a deliberate 
murderer she knew to be impossible. That 
he should have actually killed Stephen in a 
struggle seemed to her improbable, for he 
was much stronger than the other, and he 
had that forbearance which is almost always 
the result of conscious strength. She looked 
into " soft-flowing Avon " as if to search for 
an oracle, but the " silver stream " gave no 
reply. It was a dire enigma. Could some 
one else have murdered Stephen Heath? 
Was he murdered ? She could not guess ; 
but of one thing Frances Carey felt as certain 
as of the sky above her and the trout-haunted 
river at her feet . Hugh Roland was no 
murderer. 

VOL. I. K 



50 FRANCES. 

" He a murderer !" she whispered to her- 
self under the wind-whispering beech. 
"Why, his great changeable eyes used. to 
fill with tears wheh any creature suffered 
pain. Truth comes to light at last, they 
say; but suppose Hugh should grow old 
and grey, and sicken and perhaps die, 
before the truth came for him." Franpes 
found herself drawing so melancholy a pic- 
ture of the future that she drew herself up 
with a strong effort of will, and was glad to 
hear a skylark sing, and to see an iris -tinted 
kingfisher zigzag across the stream. 

At this moment her two little dogs barked 
sharply. Looking round, she saw an elderly 
gentleman approaching her. He was of 
middle height, with very broad shoulders, 
a ruddy face, and eyes that seemed much 
too keen for their windows of spectacles ; 
he wore a broad-brimmed hat, blue coat, 
knee-breeches, and carried a stout oak sap- 



FRANCES. 51 

ling. As he came up he took off his hat 
with much courtesy, and explained that he 
wished to see the scene of the recent 
murder. 

"I fear I am trespassing, madam," he 
said, in a courtly fashion. "This part of 
the country is new to me. I am Gabriel 
Shirley, F.R.G.S. and F.S.A. I am a 
wanderer. Whenever I hear of anything 
curious I go at once to see it. I always 
walk. A horse appears an awkward animal 
to ascend; and railways never go to the 
place I want to go to. You have no rail- 
way here, I suppose, madam ?" 
" Our nearest station is six miles." 
" Thrice happy vicinage !" he exclaimed, 
^'between which and the abode of the foul 
fiend six miles of actual space extend. It is 
as delightful to be far away from the roar 
and rattle of railways as . may I say ? . to 

b3 



52 FRANCES. 

encounter in these sweet solitudes a lovely 
damsel like yourself." 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley was so old, so earnest^ 
80 courteous, that Frances could not be 
offended at the quaint compliment. 

" I can show you the scene of the sup- 
posed murder quite easily," she said, and 
led the way to the tranquil spot where she 
had been first to find the ghastly relics of 
the struggle. 

Quiet enough was it now. The trampled 
grass had grown again beneath the sombre 
shadowing trees ; the amorous Avon softly 
wooed the bank . . . 

'^ Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge 
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage." 

** A lovely corner ! . a soft, silvan angle 
that smiles upon one, as Horace might say 
. ^too quiet, too fair, for murder to be 
wrought. Alas! only too truly says the 
illustrious poet : 



.<*HM*^IIM««f«« 



FRANCES. 58 

On each fair lawn, by eyery cdlyer flood, 

Grod sheds soft dew, mankind shed tears and blood.* 

We are a most unaccountable race, my dear 
madam,' as you will discover when you 
have lost the divine illusions of youth. 
But do not lose them too soon, I implore. 
do not brush the bloom from the butterfly's 
wing too early." 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley then proceeded to 
examine the place with great care, and 
made a few notes on some ivory tablets, 
and then abruptly said to Frances, who had 
been watching him with amazement and 
curiosity : 

" Madam, I am infinitely thankful ! Well 
has it been said by the illustrious poet : 

* FayouFB are sweet when granted free as air ; 
But always sweetest from a lady fair.' 

I must now wish you good evening ; but I 
shall ever preserve a delicious recollection 
of these lovely grounds, the placid purling 



54 FRANCES. 

stream, and, above all, of your fair self, the 
divinity of the place." 

Will it be believed that, in the. face of all 
this flattery, Frances had presence of mind 
enough to ask him up to the house to have 
luncheon? She had; and Mr. Gabriel 
Shirley accepted the invitation; and they 
sat down to cold salt beef^ with pickled 
shalots and home-brewed ale, in the oak 
parlour. Mr. Gabriel Shirley did thorough 
justice to the fare on which he reverently 
pronounced ^^ Benedictus benedicat T ere he 
began. Frances regarded him with inquisi- 
tive interest ; he seemed to her a new 
variety of the human species. His talk was 
a marvellous mosaic ; he told curious stories 
of his own adventures; he had walked 
through most of the Old World, and was 
thinking of trying that New World which is 
said to be the older of the twain. 

Pity there was nobody to sketch beautiful 



FHANGES. 55 

Frances in her oak parlour, with wistaria 
and clematis forcing their way in through 
the windows, and scent of mignonette and 
heliotrope on the air, attempting to fathom 
this keen-eyed broad-shouldered blue-coat- 
ed old gentleman, who talked of the great 
wall of China as if it were close at hand, 
who began his anecdotage with " When I 
was in Erzeroum the other day !" or, " An 
acquaintance I met in Moscow!" or, **The 
King of Siam wanted me to teach him Eng- 
lish, and offered me a white elephant ; but 
I had no time, and did not know what to 
do with the creature !" 

At length Mr. Gabriel Shirley rose to go. 
Frances had hoped Walter would come in, 
but he did not. The old gentleman said, as 
he took leave, 

"Madam, my most profound thanks. 
There are those who have entertained angels 
unaware, but I have had the happier des- 



5. 

tiny of being unaware entertained by an 
angeL Aa the illnstrioiis poet writes : 

'This day will dweD for erer on my mmd, 
Sinee beaotj slmsja leaves £ur thon^ta bduBd."* 

When he waa gone Frances tried to make 
something like an analysis of his character, 
for h» own satisfaction. That instinct <^ 
hera, whereof already meition has been 
made, induced her to like him from the vary 
first ; but she had never, in the quiet village 
of Avonside, where her heretofore unevoit- 
ful life had almost entirely been passed, met 
with anyone who at all resembled him. He 
might have stepped out of his frame in an 
old picture-gallery. Frances wondered what 
her father would have thought of him . her 
fiitther, to whose judgment-H:>r rather to her 
idea of what his judgment would be . ^fee 
was wont to i^peal in all cases of perplexity . 
He had so completely moulded her thoughts 
that she often seemed to imagine him pres* 



FKANCBS. 57 

ent when she needed spiritual help. In 
the library, when she was reading alone 
some book that she had read with him, she 
would unconsciously look up, meaning to 
ask him a question. I doubt if ever she 
opened that book-room door without a feel- 
ing as if she might see her father in his 
wonted chair, with a folio open before him, 
and a look of placid delight in his eyes. 
Eight happy years of her girlhood had been 
passed in companionship with her father at 
Carey Farm ; it seemed to her an Elysian 
time. The morning rides to look after the 
. men; the quiet afternoons in the library, 

often varied by a . row on Avon, when she 
took the sculls, and her father sat in the 
stern with a book, now reading some noble 
passage, now talking as it seemed to her 
no one else ever talked ; the evenings when, 
over his glass of old port, he would wander 
into discursive philosophy, which she only 



58 FRANCES. 

half understood, which she admired SiS one 
admires the vague similitudes of terrene 
things that are built up in the clouds of sun- 
light. Ah, how often Frances sighed that 
these quiet enjoyments had passed away for 
ever. Never more the game of chess on the 
Summer lawn, with bird and butterfly flitting 
through the foliage, with dragon-flies from 
Avon darting on wings of gauze. What fan 
it was when her father, who could not part 
from his book, made some oversight, and 
Frances snatched a victory ! 

To be thus educated by such a father was 
no trivial gain to Frances Carey ; but, like 
all things on this planet, it had its draw- 
back. It made the girl too fastidious. She 
did not recognize among the young men 
whom she knew the mixture of refinement 
and resolve, of culture and courtesy, which 
had characterized Mr. Carey. To be a very 



FRANCES. 59 

great surgeon requires rare faculties of mind 
and body, and of this rank was Mr. Carey. 
Indeed, his early retirement left a manifest 
blank in the profession, for there was at the 
moment no young aspirant of real genius. 
A successor came in time. 

There was nothing morbid in the feeling 
of Frances toward her father, now four 
years dead. She felt as if his spirit was 
often near her, giving wise counsel and 
happiness. She pictured him loitering in 
his favourite walk, or standing with his arms 
folded by the river-side, listening to Avon's 
mysterious murmur as it glided under heavy 
branches. Always she felt conscious of his 
presence. She sometimes seemed to feel his 
last evening kiss. To her brother Walter 
she said no word of such fancies ; he would 
have laughed at her nonsense. He had 
never understood his father, and had been 



60 FRANCES. 

rather afraid of him. If he had known the 
imaginings of his sister's mind, he would 
have deemed her mad. This she felt, and 
never sought his sympathy. 



61 



CHAPTER VL 

AVONSIDH 80CIBTT. 
*^ There are no snakes in Iceland." 

fTlHERE are certainly no girls in Avon- 
-.- side, labourers' daughters excepted. 
Frances Carey is quite alone. Now that 
the only two young men in the place are 
gone for ever, she has nobody in the village 
of her own class save Mrs. Hutchison and 
Captain Heath. Both of these are old 
friends, both have become changed to her 
since Stephen's disappearance, but in quite 
diverse ways. 
The Captain, in old days, used to be quite 



62 FRANCES. 

gallant . he would chaff her about her 
sweethearts, and send her fruit from his 
gardens . he was a famous gardener . and 
often found her a nosegay. He knew that his 
son was fond of her; he did not object, 
knowing she would have a very good in- 
come. 

" The girl isn't formed," he used to say to 
Stephen. "She doesn't know the world; 
but she's pretty and clever, and might soon 
be taught everything. You may do a great 
deal worse." 

"She is very charming, sir," said the 
plausible Stephen ; " but that fellow Roland 
is always after her . and I think she fancies 
him a little." 

"Roland!" returned the Captain, with 
half a yawn and half a sneer. " If you are 
cut out by a hulking lout like that, you are 
no son of mine, Stephen. Roland 1" 

The expression of contempt which Cap- 



AVONSIDB SOCIETY. 63 

tain Heath put into his ejaculations of this 
kind cannot be described. He quite be- 
lieved in the superiority of himself to his 
son ; but then he deemed it his son's duty 
to be far superior to the ordinary young 
fellows of the day. And on the whole he 
was not dissatisfied with him, though he felt 
intensely disgusted at the idea of his dread- 
ing Hugh Roland's rivalry. 

But Captain Heath, now that he had 
lost his son, was altogether a different man. 
He would not speak to any of his neigh- 
bours. Frances was amazed, the first time 
they met after Hugh Roland's trial . she 
was about to speak to him, but he looked at 
her with a glassy stare, as if he had never 
seen her before in his life ; and she, being 
unacquainted with the usages of fashion, 
went home, and told her brother, in much 
perturbation of spirit. 

"0, the old boy served me in just 



64 FRANCES. 

the same way," laughed Walter. " I sup- 
pose he thought we were in a conspiracy 
to get rid of Stephen. It doesn't matter.*' 

" I daresay he will come round in time,'* 
said Frances. " I am very sorry for him . 
who can help being sorry for a man who 
has lost his only child in such a dreadful 
way?'' 

"As to his coming round," replied her 
brother, " I doubt it. He is just as obsti- 
nate as you are, Frances, when you have 
made up your mind on any point." 

" Thank you, Master Walter," she would 
reply, laughing. " I seem obstinate to you, 
no doubt, but it is only because you change 
your mind every minute. When I have 
made up my mind, I stick to my decision." 

Captain Heath went to London a great 
deal at this time. His son's loss was a 
heavier blow to him than he could have 
dreamt it to be; he became restless, and 



AVONSIDB SOCIETY. 65 

sought for relief in society. He went to his 
old club, ^played whist, icartS^ hazard, got 
bitten by the gaining fury which had trou- 
bled him in his youth. His re-appearance on 
the scene amused his old cronies, who all 
thought he was dead till his son's murder 
got into the papers. And then they all 
asked each other whether that really could 
be old Dick Heath. When he re*visited the 
glimpses of the gas in St. James's Street, he 
was made welcome enough. He began to 
consider whether he would not give up the 
country altogether, and take rooms in a 
cozy corner of [Mayfair and return to his 
old habits. There was nobody but himself 
now, he thought bitterly ; he might just as 
well enjoy the remainder of his life. 

One thing which made him incline this 
way was that he had a wonderful run of luck. 
He played and betted, and almost invariably 
won. He began superstitiously to believe in 

VOL. I. F 



66 FRANCES. 

the influence of some preternatural power 
that brought him good fortune. The dice 
and cards seemed his slaves ; the horses he 
backed always won. He found himself 
quite a millionaire in a short time, and 
pouredso much moneyinto Drummond's that 
the bankers, who had regarded him as rather 
a shady customer, began to think he had 
come into a fortune. 

The Captain would have given up his 
villa at Avonside but for one incident : he 
fell in love . if one may apply that homely 
old phrase to what really happened to him. 
As a fact, he was fascinated by a theatrical 
siren, who called herself Miss Ethel Clinton, 
and who played dashing parts in male cos- 
tume at thd Bagatelle Theatre. The lessee 
of this theatre was a young Liberal member 
of Parliament, scion of a brewing and bank- 
ing firm, who had more money than brains, 
and wasted it on theatres, newspapers, and 



AVONSIDB SOCIBTT. 67 

racehorses. Young Mr. Lavington met 
Captain Heath at his club ; they grew ra^ 
ther intimate; by-and-by the old boy 
would accompany his young friend behind 
the scenes at the Bagatelle* There was 
much champagne in the green-room, thirstily 
imbibed by ladies in various stages of un* 
dress. The queen of these fairies was Ethel 
Clinton, who had finer legs and greater im«* 
pudence than any of them. Old Heath, 
flattering himself into the belief that he waa 
a young man after all, went the pace with 
Lavington and his friends. And so liberal 
were his entertainments at Greenwich and 
Richmond and elsewhere, that the charming 
Miss Clinton decided that he must be im- 
mensely rich, and resolved to take posses- 
sion of him altogether. So very eager were 
her delicate attentions, that the old gentle- 
man positively took flight from London and 
came home to Avonside. There he sat 

f2 



68 FBAHCES. 

down to consider what he should next do. 
He was in a dilemma. London seemed 
likely to be too fast for him ; Avonade was 
certainly too slow. In that difficulty let us 
for the present, leave him, and turn to Miss 
Hutchison. 

That excellent but rigid old lady grew 
friendlier with Frances than she had ever 
been before. In her tender heart she loved 
that eccentric nephew of hers, whom she had 
never been able to understand. It was weU 
that such contrasts should exist in families 
. ^they always, indeed, do exist in families 
where the intellectual power is strong, and 
sometimes arises to genius. The stronger 
the sap of the tree of humanity, the more 
various its products. 

Frances Carey felt great pleasure in 
causing Miss Hutchison to thaw a Kttle. 
Eager to be friendly, our Frances eould not 
understand people who shut themselves up 



AVONSIDB SOCIETY. .9 

in a shell, like a snail or a tortoise. This 
was no fancy of hers. She would rather rise 
skyward like the lark through the radiant 
clouds of morning, and rain music downward 
on the world. Her perfectly sincere kind- 
ness was irresistible. For a long while Miss 
Hutchison strove to resist it, being of opin* 
ion that Frances was little better than one 
of the wicked, and that her company ought 
to be avoided. But Frances in due time 
conquered this strange prejudice; and, 
though they were never closely intimate, 
they became very friendly. And, when 
Stephen Heath was gone, Heaven knows 
whither, Frances Carey's kind feelings melt- 
ed the old lady's outer snow, and she be^ 
came quite affectionate and sociable. The 
old lady and the girl were bound together 
by one strong feeling common to them both 
. the belief that Hugh was innocent. Far 
more certain of it were they than poor Hugh 



70 I-RANGES. 

himself who indeed at this time was scarce- 
ly certain of his own existence. Call him 
not weak, my brother ; imagine for yourself 
what it is to be suddenly accused and con- 
victed of murder, and thrust among murder- 
ous lunatics. Miss Hutchison, resolutely be- 
lieving in her sister's son, was grateful to 
Frances for having a like belief ; and so they 
became fast friends in due time. 

It was perhaps just as well for Frances. 
She, though taught by a very wise and 
thoughtful father, had lost that loving tutor 
years too soon. Her brother Walter was 
well enough in his way, but by no means 
capable of giving Frances efficient guidance. 
She had therefore to think life out for her- 
self ; and intercourse with a person like Miss 
Hutchison, whose ideas on all matters seem* 
ed entirely different from her own, but who 
was evidently true and earnest and good, 
caused her to examine the basis of her own 



AVONSIDE SOCIETY. 71 

theory of life, and to look with tolerance on 
the theories of other people. 

" A theory of life !" exclaims my fair young 
reader. " Why, who has any need for such a 
thing ? Life itself is enough for me. I live« 
and laugh, and some time I shall love, I sup* 
pose. I can do very well without a theory 
of life." 

Can you, child ? Already have you 
formed your theory ; to live, and laugh, and 
if possible love. Heartily I hope you may 
carry it through. But there are those whom 
such a theory will not fit. There are those 
who desire to suffer. There are those who 
desire to weep. There are those who desire 
to hate. 

And, alas, the theory of life changes with 
age. Are you twenty or thirty, reader? 
Imagine yourself at forty, fifty, sixty. 
These are small ages to a growing brain ; 
Titian painted nobly within a few steps of 



72 

the oentuiy. But will yon, g^l or boy of 
twenty, recognize yonr old self twenty years 
hence? ^11 the same gay spirit dwell 
with you ? I hope so ; bnt it is only to be 
obtained by a pnre life, and a courageous 
contempt for all things base and mean. This 
^en, youth with its vigour may pass un- 
consciously into age with its wisdom. 
Strength at twenty may be power at eighty. 
In the * comfortable old house inhabited 
by Miss Hutchison, Frances is a frequent 
visitor. Gradually the two ladies grow to 
understand each other. Frances, whom 
her father had taught to be rather a Bohe- 
mian, grew to comprehend the saintly Puri- 
tanism of poor Hugh Roland's aunt. Ordi- 
nary human beings have so many more 
points of agreement than of difference, that 
to dwell on the points of difference js to 
produce caricature. The ancient maiden 
lady was a Puritan ; the younger maid was 



AVONSIDK SOCIETY. 78 

imbued with her father's refinement, cal- 
ture, tolerance ; but both were women, full 
of love, pity, candour, hope. 

On the quaint gravelled terrace in front 
of the Hollies . a name aptly given to Miss 
Hutchison's house by reason of an immense 
array of that unrivalled evergreen. the old 
lady and Frances used often to pass a quiet 
hour. They had one thought in common. 
Both felt kindlier towards unfortunate Hugh 
Roland since the misadventure which had 
put to his career so sad an ending. Miss 
Hutchison forgave him all his eccentricities 
and irregularities: if she could have wel- 
comed him home how gladly would she 
have done it t Then as to Frances : she had 
no forward love-fancies, and had hardly 
cared to ask herself how she felt towards 
him when she could see him every day. 
She liked him a little, she thought: she 
thought very little about him. But now 



74 ^FRANCES. 

that he was shut sadly from the world, pay- 
ing the penalty of a crime which she could 
not believe he had committed, Frances 
began to question herself about him . began 
to think that she really loved him ... a 
little. She did not confess this to Miss 
Hutchison. 

Perhaps the old lady guessed at it. There 
is a curious insight into the science of love 
on the part of your venerable maiden lady, 
who might be supposed to know nothing 
about it. Ah, but she has had her time ; she 
was sought by many a wooer; she has 
known what it is to hear the broken utter- 
ance of a loving voice. Why is she un- 
wedded, then? Who shall say? Perhaps 
she was too good for any who sought her. 
Be that as it may, she is a wise instructress 
of young girls, if only they will deign to 
listen to her. Unluckily every new genera- 
tion, male and female, believes itself in ad- 



AVONSIDB SOCIETT. 75 

vance of its progenitors. How hard it seems 
to master the great truth that humanity is 
unchangeable I 



76 



CHAPTER VII. 



HUGH ROLAND. 



'* The mystery of madnesa may be stodied here.** 

TJUGH ROLAND graduaUy freed him- 
-.. .- self from the numbness of brain 
which his great misfortune had brought on 
him. The regular arrangements of the vast 
asylum were favourable to mental quietude. 
Skilful medical supervision was directed to 
the prisoners, and such as were capable of 
employment and inclined to work were 
occupied in the work that seemed to suit 
them best. Now Hugh had never done 
any real straightforward work in his life. 



HUGH BOLAND. 77 

He had always, in mind and body, been a 
desultory man. There wasn't a swifler 
runner, a better cricketer, a shrewder 
wrestler on the country side ; and his men- 
tal acquirements, though utterly irregular, 
were by no means to be despised. I will 
not say he was quite as good a classic as the 
lady whom he loved, but he was certainly a 
better mathematician . ^indeed, if he had 
been taken in good time by a clever coach, 
he might have been a senior vrrangler. 
This, however, was not written in his 
destiny. 

When he had grown accustomed to the 
rules and habits of his new dwelling-^place, 
he began to think carefully over the past 
The future he dismissed. In this world he 
had no future*-K)nly death could release 
him from his dreary monotonous imprison- 
ment. As his mind cleared, the pain of this 
thought grew less tolerable* He brooded 



78 FRANCES. 

over it until his loss of freedom threatened 
to drive him as mad as he was supposed to 
be. 

But then a happy change of idea caused 
him, as I have said, to dismiss the future, 
and to trace back the incidents of the past. 
The thought that he might have been a 
murderer troubled him terribly. As, how- 
ever, he went back through all that occurred 
on the night of the quarrel, he thoroughly 
cleared himself. Stephen Heath had used 
insulting language; he, having much supe- 
rior strength, had swung him out of his way, 
and gone quietly home in the moonlight 
without him. He remembered all about it 
now. Whoever had committed the crime, 
he was innocent. When this belief came 
clearly upon him, he looked upon the long 
monotonous future with less sadness. Some-* 
times, indeed, there was a flash of inspira^ 
tion, which seemed to tell him that he had 



HUGH BOLAND. 79 

not lost freedom for ever . that he should 
be proven innocent in time. The idea 
cheered his heart, enabling him to endure 
the dreary days . all equally alike, all alike 
dreary. 

The vision of Frances Carey came to him 
at intervals, sometimes bringing pleasure 
and sometimes pain. He conjured up the 
riverside lawn, the beautiful girl among her 
flowers and birds, the easy tranquil free- 
dom of her life. He had never told her 
that he loved her. It was as well ; yet she 
must have seen it. When was he in her 
company without following her every move- 
ment with eager eyes ? Ah, she must have 
known well what he had not yet dared to 
say. 

What would she have said if he had 
asked her, before that unhappy night ? He 
could not guess. He cursed his want of 
promptitude and courage. If he had asked 



80 . FRANCES. 

her, if those lovely lips had said yes^ then 
they might have been wandering happily 
together by the Avon, talking of the fair 
future. For Frances how he would have 
worked I What a happy home they would 
have had I He pictured every trivial luxury 
of such a home of love ; he tortured himself 
perpetually; his dreary existence was 
nothing to the mental hell which he created 
for himself. 

Often the great asylum had visitors. To 
be regarded with curious interest as an 
unusual specimen of the murderous maniac 
by fashionable ladies and gentlemen, who 
walked through the place as they would 
through a menagerie, was not at all pleasant. 
The inmates, who were questionless mad, 
seemed not wholly to like it; and Hugh 
Roland, who by this time had firmly grasped 
the fact of his own sanity, detested being 
made a show of, pointed at by a dainty 



HUGH BOLAND, 81 

parasol in a light-gloved little hand, as the 
celebrated Avbnside murderer. He took, 
however, a great fancy to one visitor who 
passed through the wards, and was treated 
with much deference, and who asked a few 
questions about him specially. This was an 
old-fashioned elderly gentleman, in quaint 
attire, whose keen eyes had looked upon 
the spot where the dire deed was done, with 
Frances Carey as his guide. Though Hugh 
knew not of this, there was something in the 
old gentleman's pleasant ruddy face that 
cheered him at first sight; 

"He seems sane enough, to an inex- 
perienced eye," said Gabriel Shirley to the 
officer who attended him. It was in a whis- 
per that Hugh could hear. " I looked at 
the spot where the murder was committed a 

month or two ago . it is a green lawn, too 

« 

beautiful for murder . ^and the young lady 
who showed it me did not seem at all as- 

VOL. I. G 



82 c FRANCES. 

sured that the actual truth on the subject 
had been made manifest. As the illustrious 
poet remarks, 

^ Although mysterious are the ways of crime, 
One thing is sure. truth will be known in time.'" 

" He has seen Frances," thought Hugh, 
as the blue coat passed from his sight. " He 
says truth will be known in time. I accept 
the omen. Who can he be?" 

Hugh, quiet and docile, and showing no 
signs of being troublesome, obtained kindly 
treatment from the officials. He had made 
up his mind to the inevitable, and tried as 
far aff possible to reduce his fancies and 
wishes to a state of Nirwana. 

No occupation was found for him at first, 
but when the Spring came, and the Superin- 
tendent suggested that he should work in 
the gardens at intervals, Hugh rejoiced at 
the idea, for he was fond of gardening, and, 
indeed, was skilful in the art. He had a 



HUGH BOLAND. 83 

natural faculty for pruning fruit-trees and 
budding roses, for bringing melons and. 
cucumbers to perfection. The idea of doing 
his favourite work in the open air was to 
him perfectly delightful. 

The gardens are large. Of course there 
is a strong force of warders in them when 
the lunatics are at work. Only well-be- 
haved patients were employed. Men more 
troublesome, who required out-door iBxer- 
dse, were sent into the fields under the care 
of warders. Hugh was soon regarded as 
harmless and safe, and the keepers took 
little notice of him, while the head- 
gardener, who saw that he was skilful, gave 
him delicate work to do, and was well 
satisfied with the way in which he did it. 
So Hugh spent his time almost entirely in 
the gardens; for the modern humane method 
of dealing with lunatics is to give them such 
employment as it is found affords them the 

o2 



84 I'BAKCSS. 

greatest pleasure. The head-gardener, a 
kind-hearted Scotchman, named Mactavish^ 
with the Christian name of Alexander, took 
readily to Hugh, recognizing in him an 
efficient helper. 

^^ If that lad had been a gardener/' he 
would say to his wife, as he smoked his 
evening pipe over a glass of whiskey-toddy, 
" he'd never have been a murderer. The 
blithe air of heaven, and the sweet smell of 
earth, would have kept his brain clear. 
Why, he's cured now ; he's not so mad as 
Dr. O'Brien.'* 

O'Brien was one of the resident physicians, 
a humorous Irishman, who was Mactavish's 
aversion. The gardener could not under- 
stand a joke ; the doctor, out of his profes- 
sion, could imderstand nothing else. A man 
of that soart is really of value in a great in- 
stitution where everything is carried on with 
necessary monotony; he prevents stagna- 



HUGH BOLAND. 85 

tion, and keeps society alive. No men have 
greater need to cultivate the sense of humour 
than those who have to deal with the sadder 
phases of life. Hence is it that great phy- 
sicians are usually great wits, and that there 
is a play of facetiae to light up the heavy 
atmosphere of courts of justice. But Mac- 
tavish took the wofld very seriously, and 
could not understand the jokes and laughter 
of the light-hearted doctor. 

^^Well, Sandy," said his wife, a little 
woman with a sharp tongue, " you're always 
down on the doctor, but he's the cleverest 
we have here, as well as the merriest. It 
cheers one up to hear his voice. If the lad 
is as sane as Dr. O'Brien, it's my opinion he 
ought to be hanged for that murder." 

Mactavish, who knew it was vain to argue 
with his wife, retired from the contest, and 
consoled himself with his pipe. 

There was a tall haggard grey-haired 



86 FRANCES. 

man who worked in the gardens . worked 
well too, having been a gardener in his 
youth. He had shot his sweetheart thirty 
years ago. This man took a great fancy to 
Hugh Roland, and contrived to get work as 
near him as possible ; and they used to have 
little bits of talk at intervals, mostly on 
vegetables and fruit and flowers. He loved 
his art, this man, and it had humanized him : 
but he pined for freedom always. He had 
a morbid idea of escape. For years he had 
pondered over a way : but he had stayed so 
long within prison-walls that he dreaded the 
great world outside. To revisit the glimpses 
of the moon seemed to him a dreadful busi- 
ness. So he wanted a companion ; but as 
yet he had seen no one whose face tempted 
him to yield up his confidence. Now in 
Hugh Roland he believed he saw a faithful 
comrade of the right sort ; and he resolved 
to try him. 



HUGH ROLAND. 87 

It was a long time before he took the 

* 

first step. They worked together in adja- 
cent beds, exchanging occasional short sen- 
tences, mostly as to the weather, the soil, 
the growth of things: they furnished an 
example of Matthew Arnold's fine saying, 

** We mortal millions live alone," 

for while the elder gardener's heart was 
filled with an intense passion for liberty, 
while he had before him always a dream o{ 
open spaces, long lanes between woodland, 
winding rivers, and no high walk and iron 
doors . Hugh Roland's vision was of Frances, 
on the lawn by Avon, with her dogs scamper- 
ing and her pigeons fluttering, and her gay 
lips uttering some lively song. Was she 
just as gay now? Did the clear voice climb 
the invisible steps of air as nimbly? He 
hoped so. Yet he would have her think of 
him a little . not quite enough to bring 
moisture into the serene blue eyes. 



tS EKANCES. 

To those who suffer, there is perhaps no 
oocupation <80 full of solace as gardening. It 
is work in which you are brought strangely 
dose to the hand of God. Every flower 
that opens, every shower that falls, is a 
miracle of His, As "the Spring came 
slowly up that way," the yearly movement 
of the world took the bitterness out of Hugh 
Roland's soul. After all, what had he to 
complain of? Loss of freedom? What 
would freedom be without Frances ? and he 
was by no means sure that Frances loved 
him. Indeed, as he called back, with the 
unerring memory of love, the incidents of 
their intercourse, he failed to detect any- 
thing but kindly friendship. Still he had 
just a gleam of hope that, if she could see 
Him after all his suffering, that friendship 
would ripen into love. 

Life at the Asylum was just tolerable to 
Hugh Roland while he was at work in the 



HUGH SOIiAND. S9 

gardens; and he realized the truth that 
hard work is the best of all cures for trouble. 
When he was obliged to be indoors, he was 
anything but content. The Asylum has two 
dasses of inhabitants, utterly unfit to associ- 
ate with each other : there are those for 
whom it was originally designed . persons 
who have committed homicide under the 
influence of mania : but with these are min- 
gled members of the dangerous and desper- 
ate classes, burglars and thieves from their 

birth, men whose fathers and grandfathers 

« 

were criminal by vocation. Such men, 
going mad in ordinary gaols, are sent to the 
Asylum, where there is not room enough 
altogether to separate them from inmates of 
the other class. Some of these are mere 
wild beasts, who tear with their finger-nails 
the floors and walls of their cells, and who 
are always longing to commit acts of vio- 
lence. Others are cunning and crafty, and 



90 FRANCES. 

quite capable of combining for any evil pur- 
pose. Madness does not divest these men 
of their natural instinct to commit crime : 
they educate each other as thoroughly as 
the saner thieves in the common gaols. 
They have no motive for good conduct: 
for, if their sanity is found to return, they 
are of course sent away to endure the re- 
mainder of their sentence. The wards in 
which the worst of these men are confined 
are like fragments of Pandaemonium. 

Room, however, was found for Hugh Ro- 
land in a ward where none of the convict 
class were admitted. Here he had ample 
liberty, and various forms of amusement, but 
his society was not at all pleasant. He, like 
most of the public, had an impression that 
many criminals, really sane, had been able to 
escape punishment by pretending insanity ; 
but his experience within the Asylum de- 
stroyed this fancy. He did not meet a single 



HUGH ROLAND. 91 

person who approached sanity. Most of the 
men by whom he was surrounded were 
murderers. One, a gentleman of the medi- 
cal profession, had rushed from his house 
into the street, and shot a harmless passer* 
by, under the delusion that he had just been 
in his bedroom attempting to drug him. 
This patient passed his time in the produc- 
tion of water-colour drawings, and could 
talk sensibly enough about the art that en- 
grossed him ; but his mania was permanent, 
and he still imagined himself pursued by 
conspirators, and if the subject were men- 
tioned he became fiercely eloquent at once. 
Hugh remarked that many of his fellow- 
prisoners took up some pursuit and followed 
it persistently, though not always intelligent- 
ly. One would study mathematics from the 
biggest book on the subject he could find^ 
and dash down wholly unmeaning figures 
on paper, and fancy he was solving problems. 



92 TRANCKS. 

Another seemed always to be writing long 
and learned essays, which he carefully lock- 
ed into his desk ; but if you had ezaminod 
them, you would have found it hard to select 
a sentence with any meaning. The most 
successful workers seemed to be those 
who tried some mechanical imitative art; 
there were some expert hands at modelling 
statuettes, and even knitting, netting, and 
crochet occupied some of the men. Hugh . 
Roland cared for none of these things. His 
only satisfactory time was in the garden; 
when not occupied there, he was apt to sink 
into a state of almost torpidity. 

There were abundant forms of amusement. 
Hugh could smoke, but his palate rejected 
tobacco. He could read ; there were numer- 
ous books, instructive and amusing : at inter* 
vals the worthy chaplain went to town, and 
sent home a huge parcel of second-hand 
books from Mudie's. But Hugh had not 



HUGH BOLAND. 93 . 

the power to concentrate his mind on sub- 
jects that require thought, while, if he 
opened a novel, he only thought what poor 
weak pallid stuff it seemed in comparison 
with his own romance, and how very much 
less earnest was the hero than himself, and 
what a wax-doll the heroine seemed as he 
remembered Frances. No; he could not 
read. He tried billiards, but as none of his 
opponents bad the faintest idea of a cannon, 
and as they insisted on counting as much as 
they pleased whatever might happen when 
they struck the balls, he did not find the 
game interesting. So he came at last to 
loitering in the corridor, and listening to the 
innumerable canaries that inhabited their 
own small prisons, yet did not fret for free- 
dom, and sank into a state]]of mental lassi- 
tude. 

There were two persons who kept him 
from lapsing into absolute apathy. One was 



.94 PRANCES. 

the chaplain, whose kind and intelligent sym- 
pathy gave hiin great solace. After a while 
he became a regular attendant at the daily 
service. In this he had few companions ; 
but on Sundays, when the select congrega- 
tion of patients was re-inforced by the wives 
and families of the warders, he seemed to get 
a passing glimpse of the outer world. 

Perhaps his chief refreshment was an 
occasional talk with the superintendent . a 
man of vigour, promptitude, and decision, 
with a cheery humour that was infectious. 
The doctor was in the habit of encourag- 
ing his patients, when he made his rounds, 
to talk of things that specially interested 
them ; and he was so good a listener that a 
chat with him was regarded by the more in- 
telligent inmates as a great treat. Hugh 
Roland noticed that men who never cared 
to say a word to anyone else would become 
fluent when the doctor addressed them. He 



HUGH ROLAND. 95 

found also that in the same circumstances he 
also became talkative, and was drawn on to 
give an account of some of his various wan- 
derings through England, in days when his 
feet were free to go wheresoever they 
listed. 

Did the doctor and the chaplain really 
think him mad ? Hugh Roland was wont 
to ask himself. Knowing that he was not, 
he could not quite understand how any one 
else should conceive that he was. Probably 
the chaplain never thought of questioning 
the point, but certainly the superintendent 
did not suspect him of sanity. His experi- 
ence had shown him that lunatic cunning 
oftens runs in the direction of concealing 
lunacy ; that the real germ of madness may 
lie so deep as rarely to make any sign on 
the surface. Hugh Roland's quietude and 
good conduct did not cause the doctor to 
think him sane ; he assumed that he mur- 



96 FRANCES. 

dered Heath in a paroxysm of rage caused 
by severe provocation. Such a paroxysm 
might not recur for the remainder of his 
life . . . but then it might. He considered 
the case to be difficult and doubtful ; but he 
assuredly would not have pronounced his 
patient free from mania. 

Doubtless the modem way of treating 
madness is often curative ; but to be compel- 
led to reside among lunatics, and to be treat- 
ed as one, might well drive a sane man out 
of his mind. Indeed, but for the chapel and 
the garden, I think . Hugh Roland would 
probably have sunk into a state of imbecile 
apathy. Real lunatics, especially of the 
male sex, isolate themselves; they brood 
over their own troubles, or concentrate 
themselves on their pursuits, to which they 
attach immeasurable importance. It wearied 
Hugh Roland to see each man in his cor- 
ner, one painting, another scribbling, 



HUGH ROLAKD. 97 

another using the needles, another studying 
Greek with lack-lustre eyes, but all complete- 
ly absorbed in themselves. He was glad 
when he could escape to the garden, and 
tire himself out with spade and hoe. 

Hugh rather liked the very rare occasions 
when ladies visited the male wards of the 
Asylum. He was reminded of Frances. 
They seldom spoke to him; they were 
naturally more interested in the patients who 
were painting or modelling or playing on 
violins of their own make, or causing tame 
birds to roost on little ever-greens in pots, 
or practising Roman Catholic hymns on the 
key-bugle. Hugh was uninteresting ; he did 
none of these things. But he watched these 
angel-visitants, when they came, revering all 
ladies for the sake of the one lady whom he 
loved ; and he scrutinized their dresses and 
bonnets and gloves as he had never been 
accustomed to do, wondering whether 

VOL. I. H 



98 PRANCES. 

Frances was dressed in any such fashions . 
whether that was the way she wore her 
hair. 

Still his healthiest time was in the garden, 
hard at work, resting on his spade some- 
times to listen to a skylark or watch a 
flight of rooks, or to gaze at the wild hills 
southward, ridge beyond ridge, that seemed 
to give the mind a sense of illimitable free- 
dom. He had roamed through all thai 
region ; he could often catch a glimpse of a 
hill-summit which he had climbed one sunny 
day, and had been surprised to behold the 
sea. 

One day the old gardener made up his 
mind, and took an opportunity of saying to 
Hugh, in a hurried whisper . 

" Can you do the deaf and dumb alpha- 
bet ?" 

" Yes," quoth Hugh. 

" On one hand ?' 



HUGH ROLAND. 99 

" Yes.'' 

*' Good," said the man ; and for the pres- 
ent said no more. 

A day or two passed. One morning 
Hugh noticed that his comrade's fingers were 
gesticulating, and with much difficulty made 
out what they said. The difficulty arose 
from the fact that the old gardener had 
special notions of spelling. 

" Do you see that door ?" said the fingers. 

It was a green door in the wall, down in 
the great southern garden, and when it was 
open, Hugh Roland could see leagues of 
wild landscape. The view was familiar to 
him from the windows above. It was a 
tantalizing vision of that land of freedom 
from which he was for ever excluded. 

" We can run away, then, threw that," said 
again the oldjgardener's fingers. " I no wear 
thay kepe the kee/' 

Hugh Roland, wonderstruck by this pro- 

h2 



100 FRANCES. 

posal, made some sort of incoherent answer. 

" Ow bad u spel !" was the old man's 
rejoinder. 

Several of these digital conversations 
occurred day after day ; and at last Hugh 
grew to think all day, and dream all nighty 
of possible freedom. The fancy haunted 
him, and would not let him go. He did not 
consider what he should do if he escaped in 
a penniless state : he only thought that per- 
haps he might again see Frances Carey. 



101 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ESCAPE. 

" If you would do a deed, 
Wait till the moment comes . ^then take your spring, 
Heedless of every danger ; as the falcon 
Sleeps in the air until he sees his quarry, 
Then stoops.*' 

A DAY came. The chief gardener was 
-^^ away. The [May morning w^s hot. 

m 

The warders were drowsy. The little green 
door stood temptingly ajar. You could see 
beyond it long stretches of grass. 

"Kum at wunsti" telegraphed the old 
gardener, sliding towards the door. Hugh 
followed, as if he were magnetized. They 
passed through. No one had seen them 



102 FRANCES. 

yet. Off they went, under the shadow of the 
lofty wall. 

Alack ! turning a corner, they ran right 
into the arms of a stalwart warder. But 
the old gardener, mad with the thought of 
freedom, had the strength of ten men. He 
sprang suddenly on the sturdy officer, and 
hurled him to the ground. The man was 
stunned by the fall, and before he could 
recover himself, his assailant and Hugh were 
out of sight. Hugh was the fastest runner 
in his native vicinage, but this marvellous 
old man kept pace with him. Away they 
went, through a wild wide country, not 
thinking fov a moment to what point of the 
compass they tended. Hugh Roland, strong 
of wind and limb, had hard work to keep 
up with the old man, who flew along as if 
endowed with preternatural speed and en- 
durance. They met no one, for they kept 
far from all roads. Hugh felt like Faust in 



ESCAPE. 103 

the company of Mephistopheles, and found 
himself shouting aloud : 

" We ride apace 
Upon steeds of Thrace, 
Through time and space. 

'' In woodland lair, 
Our fleet feet scare 
The fox and hare. 

" O glory and glee ! 
Over land, over sea. 
We are free, we are free !" 

" Right, lad I'^ shouted the mad old gar- 
dener, two yards away. "That's the song 
to sing. Roar away !" 

I suppose there is a time in the lives of 
most men when, like Faust, they have met 
Mephistopheles, " the only genuine devil of 
these modern times," as Carlyle calls him . 
the mocking sneering scientific fiend . the 
very essence of Negation and Denial. At 
this moment he seems to have a famous 
innings : he turns tables and teaches Darwin- 



104 FRANCES. 

ism. Chaos is come again, if we may believe 
his Fiendship : there is no God, no cosmos, 
no light. Mephistopheles, the Hater of 
Light, will assail every man in his time; 
happy he who can laugh to scorn the logical 
demon, pointing to the glorious sun, a lamp 
lighted and maintained from days immeasur- 
able by the simple thought of Him in whom 
is no darkness at all. -Mephistopheles hath 
many disguises to-day; you meet him in 
pulpit, in lecture-hall, in erudite journal ; 
lie is the Modern Teacher. God cannot 
be your father, since it is unphilosophical to 
suppose there is a God. Your souls cannot 
be immortal, since what you fondly fancy is 
a soul is merely an accidental property of 
matter. You are only casual developments 
from lower types, and very likely something 
higher may be developed from you. Thus 
wisely speaketh Professor Mephistopheles. 
Twilight fell ... a misty starless twilight. 



ESCAPE. 105 

The old gardener had been gaining con- 
siderably on Hugh, getting at last so far 
ahead that his shouts grew fainter on the 
wind. Hugh, indeed, was beginning to flag. 
Hours had passed since he ate or drank. 
His mad comrade, drunk with delight of 
freedom, felt neither hunger nor thirst nor 
weariness. On he went shouting wildly. 
But Hugh was beaten at last. Blindly and 
slowly feeling his way, he came to a wicket- 
gate, leading, he thought, through some cot- 
tage-garden. He fumbled with the latch. 
When he had opened the gate he walked 
unsteadily up the gravel path, with some 
vague idea of imploring shelter and succour. 
But he had not strength to do it. He reach- 
ed the porch, sank down on its hospitable 
seat, and fell at once into a deep sleep that 
was half faintness. 

Meanwhile the old gardener rushed for- 
ward wildly, forgetting his companion. He 



106 FBAKCES. 

broke through hedges, waded streams, forced 
his way forward without a thought. His 
strong clothing was torn to tatters, his skin 
lacerated ; he was a mass of blood and bruises. 
He felt no pain. 

Suddenly he paused in his mad career* 
He was crossing a bridge over a dark deep 
slow weedy stream. What made him stop ? 
The clouds had been moving before a late- 
risen wind, and all at once the silver moon, 
the Lady of Light, swam clear into the serene 
blue. It was the full moon. 

It was under a full moon, thirty years be- 
fore, this old man had slain his sweetheart. 

Wildly yet steadfastly he stared at that 
marvellous orb, whose influence on the 
human race is a truth beyond the compre- 
hension of the mathematical astronomer. 
Then he turned to the parapet of the bridge, 
and saw the reflex image broken by the 
water that moved slowly through a tortuous 



ESCAPE. 107 

tangle of weed, and shuddered. Suddenly 
he cried, in a piercing voice, that startled 
cottagers in their beds for a mile round, 

" Jane ! my Jane ! I see you ! I am 
coming !" 

He sprang over the parapet, and sank 
into the weedy water as if it were a bed of 
welcome rest. Very quietly the old mad- 
man drowned, and his body was not dis- 
covered for months. 

When Hugh Roland awoke the sun was- 
shining, the birds were singing, and a young 
girl of about sixteen, evidently a natty little- 
country servant, was watching him with 
amazed eyes. He got up and stretched him- 
self, and looked round. He felt terribly 
weak, and had to steady himself by one of 
the fir-poles that supported the rustic portico. 
It was a one-storied cottage, with a lawn in 
front through which trickled a stream, and 
a gate opening on a wide stretch of common^ 



108 FBANCK6. 

ivith abundant trees upon it. This he saw ; 
then he sat down again, in sheer weakness, 
:and looked helplessly at the maiden, 

"O, if you please, sir," she said, "if you 
want to see master, he'll be in to breakfast 
isoon." 

" I am very hungry," quoth Hugh, in a 
weak voice. 

The girl ran off on the instant, and in a 
few moments returned with a bowl of milk 
and a huge lump of bread and butter. Hugh 
was famished. He ate greedily, and soon felt 
like a giant refreshed. 

" I hope you're better, sir," said the little 
maid. 

"Indeed I am," he answered. "You 
are very kind, and I have nothing to offer 
you but thanks." 

" 0, here comes master 1" she exclaimed ; 
and Hugh, looking towards the gate, saw 
enter, accompanied by a stately shaggy deer- 



ESCAPE. 109^ 

hound, that broad-shouldered ruddy-faced 
keen-eyed old gentleman whom he had seen 
in the Asylum. His right hand carried a 
spud, his left was full of wild-flowers. The 
deerhound stalked up to Hugh Roland, and 
gave a sniff of welcome ; the girl curtseyed 
to her master, basin in hand. Mr. Gabriel 
Shirley looked amused. 

" Go and get breakfast, Hetty," he said. 
" So, sir, you have scaled the walls of that 
prison. I ofttimes think I am like the god 
Heimdall, that sentinel hated by the giants, 
whose eyesight pierces a hundred leagues, 
and who can hear the grass grow. I felt 
assured that we should meet, when I saw the 
beautiful lady you loved on the margin of the 
beautiful river. I knew you would get 
free and come to me when I beheld you in 
^ that menagerie of maniacs. As the illustri- 
ous poet says, 

* From heart to heart the waves of wonder roll ; 
That man is blind who sees not with the soul.' 



110 FRANCES. 

Come; has my hand -maiden refreshed 
you ? If so, enter ; undress and take repose. 
I will show you the way." 

Hugh Roland had not strength to thank 
his kind entertainer. He obeyed; Mr. 
Shirley showed him a quiet bed-room, with 
a white uncurtained bed, and left him. Hugh 
could only just stammer out, 

" God bless you, sir !" 



Ill 



CHAPTER IX. 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 



ASTROLOGOS* . Hark, the guard's horn I The smoking team 
comes merrily 
Down the last hill, and wakes the wondering villagers. 
I liked the mail. 

Alouette. . ^If rails would only fail, Fapa, 

Twould be delightful ; no more horrid railway trains. 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

CAPTAIN HEATH was at this time in a 
highly excited state. He had lost his 
son, who was a perpetual drain upon him ; 
but he had unexpectedly gained a large sum 
of money. Moreover, his stay in London 
had awakened his old fancies, and as he 
looked on his green lawn, he thought how 



C5> 



112 FRANCES. 

much pleasanter was the green cloth of the 
card-table; and as he heard the skylark sing, 
he vowed it was a miserable jingle compared 
with the charming chansons of Ethel Clinton 
after dinner at Richmond. Mr. Lavington, 
M.P., who saw his friend's unsettled state, 
determined to take advantage of it ; he had 
a great scheme for forming a company to 
purchase a large tract of wild land in Ire- 
land, which was reported to be full of min- 
erals. The land was Lavington's own, a 
valueless heritage from a relation, but he did 
not intend everybody to know that. He in- 
tended Captain Heath to be a director, and 
to put all his money into it ; and at this time 
there was much correspondence passing be- 
tween the two. Heath was wont, before he 
breakfasted, to walk down to the garden- 
gate, and meet the tardy postman. 

This he did one fine May morning, and 
received a goodly budget, which he shoved 



# 

LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 113 

into the side-pocket of his coat, reading them 
one by one as he smoked his cigar and saun- 
tered up and down in front of his house. 
There was one from Lavington . a hasty 
scrawl, in the fiery impetuous hand of a 
young fellow who looked on the world as 
his oyster. Thus it ran : 

" Reform Club. Monday. 

" Dear Heath, 

" I am coming your way in a 
day or two. Have set up a new team, and 
want to give them a good spin. May bring 
a friend, perhaps. 

"By the way, have you seen that the 
fellow who murdered your son has escaped? 
" Have some bread and cheese and rad- 
ishes ready . not forgetting beer. 

"Yours, 
" Wyldote Lavington." 

The Captain crunched this letter in his 

VOL. I. I 



114 ulances. 

hand with something like a corse, and then 
unfolded his Times to see the statement 
verified. There was no doubt of it A 
quiet paragraph related the escape of two 
criminal lunatics, both murderers . John 
Fowler and Hugh Eoland. They had 
knocked down a warder, and run away . 
that was all. Whether any attempt was 
being made to recapture them did not at all 
appear. Indeed the paragraph ran so easily 
that an uninformed reader might think 
murderous maniacs were rather encouraged 
to run away. 

The Captain went in to breakfast, grum- 
bling over one thing and another in his volu- 
minous correspondence . grumbling espe- 
dally about HugVs escape and Lavington's 
threatened visit. Boyd, his man-servant, his 
factotum indeed, a cunning useful Scotch- 
Irishman, always knew fuU well when the 
Captain's news had displeased him, always 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 115 

silently chuckled when his master swore. 

The cofifee received the first ebullition of 
wrath : it was too weak, it was burnt, it was 
cold. Then he soliloquized, sometimes 
aloud, as thus : 

"They've let that young scoundrel go. 
Everything mismanaged with a set of Radi- 
cals in power. Two murderers let loose to 
do just as they like ! Why, they'll be mur- 
dering everybody, right and left/' 

A change of subject. Eggs overdone. 

" One minute and a half, you blockhead ! 
I have told you a dozen times. If that 
stupid girl can't look at the clock, do it 
yourself. Nothing is more indigestible than 
a hard-boiled egg." 

Mr. Boyd seemed rather amused than 
frightened by his irascible master. 

" Confound Laving ton ! " exclaims the 
Captain next. " What does he want here 
with his four-in-hand ? I wonder whom he 

I 2 



116 FBANCES. 

» X 

means to bring P Bread and cheese and 
radishes 1 He'll be wanting all the de- 
licacies of the season. He won't get 
them/' 

Having breakfasted and grumbled, Cap- 
tain Heath turned out to stroll through the 
little village: a very compact village is 
Avonside, with no straggling streets. Close 
to the churchyard gate is the old-fashioned 
little inn, the " King's Arms ;" and then you 
cross the road to Chessington; and then 
there is a saddler's shop, a butcher's shop, 
and an ironmonger's. This is one side of 
the street ; on the other is a barber's, and 
a rather prosperous-looking grocer's and 
draper's, well-supported by the country 
farmers. A couple of good houses complete 
this side : one the Rectory, the other the 
residence of a retired captain in the mercan- 
tile marine, who misanthropically nurses his 
gout, and declines to associate with any- 



LAVINGTON ABRIVES. .117 

body. Bach of these housea has a row of 
pollarded limes in front of it. 

Captain Heath entered this heart of the 
village by the churchyard path, and on the 
pavement by the saddler's shop he encoun- 
tered Walter Carey. He did not like 
Carey, nor Carey him : two selfish people 
never like each other. Besides, Heath 
always disliked people better off than him- 
self . and Carey came into that category. 
However, they were always on the friend- 
liest terms, apparently : and Heath would 
have been very glad for his son to marry 
Frances. 

'*Seen the Titnes^ Carey?" said the Cap- 
tain, as they met. 

" No : any news ?" 

" That fellow Roland has escaped. Look, 
here's the paper. I call it a confounded 
shame to let a man off for a murder because 
he's a lunatic, and then to let him escape as 



118 FRANCES. 

easily as possible. Two men have got away, 
you see. We shall have them killing de- 
fenceless women and children on the roads 
soon." 

" I had no idea," said Walter, when he 
had read the paragraph, "that an escape 
could be managed so easily. It seems very 
strange." 

" Strange I It's a burning shame, Carey. 
They ought to hold a court-martial on the 
Governor. I call the whole thing atro- 
cious! Fancy meeting those two men in 
their mad state ! I shouldn't like it !" 

When the news reached Frances, she 
hurried away as soon as possible to talk it 
over with Miss Hutchison. The old lady 
was immensely excited. 

"What mil he do, dear?" she asked. 
" Poor Hugh ! To think of his having got 
away! But then he has no money, you 
know; and Fm sure he hasn't the least 



LA VINGTON ABBIVES. 119 

idea of making any, even if he dared be seen 
anywhere. I shall be in such a terrible 
state till I hear something more." 

*' I think," said Frances, " that, if Hugh 
has had courage and energy enough to 
escape, he will be able to take car6 of him- 
self afterwards. Really, dear Miss Hutchi- 
son, I am very pleased about it. The real 
murderer will be found out some time or 
other, and then Hugh can come back, and I 
shall be very glad to see him." 

'* You will see him before that," said the 
old lady, in an excited whisper. " He will 
come here to see you, be sure. All the 
Rolands are like that : they must see their 
sweethearts." 

.' I am no sweetheart of his," said Frances, 
to whom the idea, half-pleasant, half-alarm- 
ing, of a stealthy visit from Hugh Roland 
had not occurred before. 

"He loves you," said Miss Hutchison; 



120 rBANCES. 

**You know that. And he will come to 
you very soon, I am sure. Frances, take 
charge of something to give the poor dear 
boy from me." 

She got from a quaint corner cupboard a 
comfortable little canvas bag full of gold, 
and she wrote on a bit of paper, which she 
put into it " From Aunt Margaret. Work 
hard, and pray to God." 

" You will take this, dear, won't you r 
she said. 

" Yes," replied Frances : " but he is much 
more likely to come and see you." 

*' 0, no, no, you know better," said the 
old lady. " He mitst come to you. I hope 
he will come soon." 

" If he is coming, I hope he will," said 
Frances to herself, walking homeward laden 
with gold. "Now I shall be thinking of 
Hugh, and expecting to see him all day and 
all night." 



I LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 121 

Frances Carey was right about herself. 
She soon wished Miss Hutchison had not 
put the idea of Hugh's return into her head. 
She talked about the matter to her old 
friend Rachel. 

"Do you really think he may come, 
Bachel ?" she said. 

" Well, miss, he's a stark lad, and if he 
got over them hugeous walls, I should think 
he'd go anywhere. I'm sure I hope he'll 
come when there's a chance to give him 
some good honest beef and ale, for I sup- 
pose he's been half-starved." 

"0, no, Rachel. They are very well 
treated in those places." 

" I'm bound to believe you, miss ; but I 
don't hold they get as good salt beef as I 
cures, or as good ale as old Tom Nagle 
brews ; so when he does make his appear- 
ance. Miss Frances, please tell me, and we'll 
give him as good a cold collection as any 



122 FRANCES. 

they had at those archway meetings yoa 
used to go to at Chessington." 

From this time Frances, a young lady of 
well-balanced mind, who feared not the 
petulant bull, or the ebrious agriculturist of 
bucolic life, felt herself growing nervous. 
She could not turn a corner without expect- 
ing to c«i(ne upon Hugh Roland. She car- 
ried Miss Hutchison's heavy little bag always 
about with her, to the great detriment of 
the pocket of her dresses. She dreamt of 
him. dreams the most grotesque and discon- 
nected. One night she saw him as clearly 
as ever she had seen him by day, only he 
had Stephen Heath's head on his shoulders 
instead of his own. As day after day passed, 
Frances heartily wished that he would come 
at once, if he meant coming at all. 

Of course she and Walter frequently 
talked over the escape of Hugh Roland, and 
it led to a kind of cool feeling between the 



LAVINGTON ABBIVBS. 123 

brother and sister. Walter would speak of 
Hugh as an unquestionable murderer, and 
predict that he would do something villainous. 

"We'll fasten our doors and windows 
well," he would say : " that maniac will try 
to break in and murder you or me, or both 
of us. It is a confounded shame they let 
such dangerous fellows escape !" 

Frances, who had never quite made up 
her mind as to her feeling toward Hugh, 
was in the habit of listening without reply 
to her brother's sneers ; but on this occasion 
she could not endure it, and said, 

"Walter, you are too hard on Hugh 
Roland. If he killed Stephen, I am sure he 
was dreadfully provoked." 

" If 1" said Walter, contemptuously. 

"You are unfair," she replied. "You 
never liked the poor fellow, and so you 
believe the worst of him." 

" You like him enough for us both," he 



124 FRAI7CES. 

said. "I never was quite satisfied with 
Roland; He frittered his time away. With 
the money he had, he should have gone to 
work in the world, and made himself a 
position, instead of lounging about Avonside, 
and dangling after you. Harm always come 
of such doings." 

" Stephen Heath was as bad," she said, 
feeling all the while that Hugh had a very 
poor defender. 

"Heath was dependent on his father, 
who wished him to remain at home. Roland 
was quite independent, and might have made 
himself a good position with a little energy 
and industry. If he had done that, I 
should have had some respect for him." 

Frances, made a poor fight, for she would 
not confess to her brother what as yet she 
had not confessed to herself. So he had his 
own way, and plagued his sister terribly 
with persistent predictions of some dire 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 125^ 

deed which the escaped lunafic was sure ta 
do. Had he known that all this harassing 
only caused Frances to think more about 
Hugh Roland than she otherwise would, it 
might have caused him to leave the theme 
alone. Between Miss Hutchison's heavy 
canvas bag and Walter's unpleasant remarks^ 
Frances had scarcely a waking moment 
without thought of Hugh. Perhaps she 
dreamed of him as well. 

The worry of all this, and the hourly ex- 
pectation of seeing Hugh Roland, made her 
very nervous. She fancied confinement 
must have changed him. She imagined him 
coming suddenly upon her, a, scarcely recog- 
nizable phantom of his former self. Her 
only cure for this mental irritation was to 
go out into the gardens, and seek her father s 
favourite walks, and try to think what he 
would have said, i^hat he would have done. 
It gave her some solace to refer to him her 



126 FRANCES. 

difficulties, though the reference was but a 
caprice of the imagination. Numa's Egeria 
was no more; yet the poetic King learnt 
deep lore in her mystic grotto. 

Captain Heath's second trouble . Laving- 
ton's threatened visit . came at the most 
awkward time possible. The bells were ring- 
ing for church. The little barber, who, I 
forgot to say, kept the post-office, had just 
shaved his last Sunday-morning customer. 
The folk were trooping up to the church- 
yard gate. Here and there might be seen 
gossiping groups of people who always 
came early to church, in order to have a 
pleasant chat with their neighbours. That 
splendidly-dressed lady is Mrs. Hall, the 
grocer's wife ; her husband looks small by 
her side ; very proud is he of the gorgeous 
silks and feathers with which he is able to 
decorate his magnificent mate. There goes 
Mr. Hebert^ the rector, a quiet old bachelor, 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. J 27 

who is said to like whist and port wine, who 
is known to preach short sensible sermons, 
and do all charity to those needing it : he 
shakes hands with Miss Hutchison : people 
often say the parson and she would be a 
good comfortable match . ^kind-hearted both 
of them, and good to the poor ; but I sup- 
pose the notion never entered either head. 

Captain Heath, close-buttoned, carrying 
his umbrella like a sword, looking every 
inch a formidable champion of the Chjurch 
Militant, has just passed the closed doors of 
the saddler's shop, and is about to cross the 
Chessington road. A few yards behind 
come Walter Carey and his sister . Walter, 
the picture of an English yeoman, broad- 
shouldered and ruddy-faced, while Frances 
has a touch of unusual refinement in style, 
a mixture of humour and melancholy in her 
countenance, which would have prepared a 
Lavater for a character of no common type. 



128 FRANCES. 

There was no Lavater in Avonside to 
scrutinize her beautiful calm face, and guess 
the secrets of the soul that swayed its ex- 
pressions. 

Just as Captain Heath was about to cross, 
the sharp blast of a horn rung through the 
air, and a dashing four-in-hand . three roans 
and a grey. came sharp round the Ches- 
sington Road comer, and pulled up in front 
of the *' Bang's Arms." A couple of grooms 
were down at the horses' heads that mo- 
ment. A slight young man in a white coat, 
who sat behind, gave such a dissonant blast 
on the horn that the very church windows 
rattled. The driver, dressed in a bright 
blue ooat) with fresh floweYs in his button- 
hole, and wearing a blue veil on his white 
hat, threw down the reins, descended, and 
helped to descend a lady in charming travel- 
ling attire, who was on the box with him. 

The scene was curious. The church-going 



liAVINGTON ABBIVBS. 129 

people all stood to see what was happening. 
A small mob gathered at the door of the 
barber's shop; another small mob on the 
pavement by the " King's Arms." A four- 
horse coach had not been seen in Avonside 
since the railway was opened. 

Captain Heath, a man not readily frighten- 
ed, would at this moment gladly have run 
away. He knew too well that this was Wyld- 
ote Lavington, M.P., and that the elegant 
lady on the box was Miss Ethel Clinton, of 
the Bagatelle Theatre. He did not want to 
see either of them just now; but he was 
obliged to move on, and he could not avoid 
walking into the enemy's camp. 

" Ha, Heath 1 " said Lavington, " you're 
in the very nick of time. See, Miss Clinton 
has condescended to come down and see 
you . isn't it jolly of her? This is my 
cousin, Dick Wyldote. You ought to know 

VOL. I. K 



130 FRANCES. 



him I He's got an infallible martingale . 
breaks the bank everywhere." 

AH this was said quite loudly to our un- 
fortunate Captain, while decorous people 
passed along to church, and among them 
Walter and Frances. 

" What curious people came on that coach, 
Walter," she said, when they were beyond 
earshot. *' Do you think they are friends 
of Captain Heath's ?" 

Walter laughed. 

" I daresay the old boy knows some odd 
people," he said. "I wonder whether 
they'll let him come to church." 

The bells had ceased. The organ was 
uttering its voice. The congregation had 
settled down, calmed by the stately music, 
and the dim religious light; but I fear a 
good many of them were allowing their 
fancy to wander to Wyldote Lavington's 
four-in-hand. Captain Heath was not seen 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES, 131 

in his high square pew, just opposite the 
pulpit. 

No ; Heath was in the quiet little par- 
lour of the " King's Arms," in company with 
his friends ; and Ethel Clinton was drinking 
champagne (Lavington never travelled with- 
out champagne), and singing fragments of 
song, slightly different from the holy hymn 
which arose in the church hard by. She 
had a gay yet mellow mezzo-soprano voice, 
and store of wild ballads, which Dick Wyld- 
ote turned into English from the German 
for her. Dick has three accomplishments 
. he can learn any language, play any in- 
strument, and win at any game on the cards. 
She was carolling one of Dick's latest ca- 
prices : . 

^^ Tes, we were laughing together, 
Having our own sweet will, 
All in the sanny weather. 
Where the castle stands on the hill. 



k2 



132 FRANCES. 

^* Above the hilltops pinj. 

Dark with the fir and larch, 
There was just a cloudlet tiny, 
Set in the skj's blue arch. 

" He kissed me close, and I trembled, 
With a shudder of sad despair . 
For I felt, though he well dissembled, 
He had kissed other lips elsewhere. 

"He said, *I am true, true, true, lore- 
Sweet blossom of amorous jouth ! 
I have never loved save you, love, 
And the core of my heart is truth.' 

^' Ere his wicked words were ended, 
That cloud grew black overhead, 
And it burst, and the fiame descended, 
And struck the liar dead." 

" What a charming end to a love-story T 
said Lavington. *' Don't you think so, 
Heath ?" 

" Give me some grapes," said Miss Clinton^ 
"Singing makes me hoarse. So we kept 
you from going to church, Captain Heath* 
I am so sorry. When I am married I mean 
to set a good example in that. I consider 
it most important." 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 188 

"When you're married, Ethel, you'll be 
devilish respectable," said Dick Wyldote. 

" Won't she ?" quoth Lavington. " Whajt 
did you think of my team, Heath ?" 

" They look an admirable match," said th6 
Captain. 

" We'll take them out this afternoon, if 
you've nothing better to do," said Laving- 
ton. '^ I used to know this country years 
ago, and I thought of staying here a few 
days, and exploring it. The landlord says 
he can put us up, if we don't mind rough- 
ing it ; and Dick declares he'll sleep in a 
hayloft." 

"There's nothing like your good sweet 
hay to sleep happily upon," quoth Dick. 
" Then you see the stars through the open 
door, and you've good company in the shape 
of an owl or a rat now and then." 

Captain Heath felt relieved, for he feared 
that Lavington meant to turn his villa upside 



134 FRANCES. 

down* Ready enough for dissipation abroad^ 
the Captain liked regularity at home. Lav* 
ington had read his character with perfect 
accuracy ; and, as his design was to remain 
in the Avonside neighbourhood for a week 
or so, he decided to stay at the inn. 

When the morning service was over, 
Heath and Lavington were walking up and 
down the pavement, talking and smoking. 
Walter Carey came out alone. The Captain 
took the opportunity of introducing him to 
Lavington, and they chatted for some time. 

" My friend Lavington will be here for a 
few days," said Heath. " Will you come to 
my house some day and dine ? We haven't 
made any arrangements yet, but I know you 
don't stand upon etiquette." 

**0, come and dine with me first, Mr. 
Carey . here, this evening, at the King's 
Arms. Don't say no ; seven sharp. I want 
to show you that one may have as good a 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 1 35 

dinner at a country inn like this as at a Lon- 
don club. You will come ?" 

" I will," said Carey, " though I fear you 
will be disappointed in your dinner. Til 
come, to witness your disgust." 

It was the custom of the substantial yeo- 
manry who abound in that fertile Mesopo* 
tamia which lies between Avon and Severn, to 
dine at midday ; but the Careys, who had 
inherited the habits of their father, were not 
so uncivilized. Sunday was an exception ; 
on that day one was the dinner hour, so that 
all the servants might go to afternoon church 
. a regular institution in the neighbourhood. 
When Walter and Frances met at this meal, 
he told her he was going to dine with these 
new-comers. Captain Heath's friends. 

" Why, Walter," she said, " what an odd 
thing to do on a Sunday! Couldn't you 
have asked them here some day ? Fancy 
dining at that poky little inn with people 
you don't know I" 



136 FBANGBS. 

"Oh, Heath knows them well enough. 
As to asking them here, I shouldn't care to 
do that. They are not exactly the sort of 
people I should care to introduce to you." 

"Then I am sure they are not fit for you 
to know," rejoined Frances. '^ I never can 
understand a gentleman caring to associate 
with people whom he would not introduce 
to his wife or his sisters." 

" 0," quoth Walter, in an off-hand way, 
^*a woman decides such things without 
thinking. A man must see all sorts of peo* 
pie on business." 

" Business on Sunday !" laughed Frances. 
"And that four-in-hand looked so very 
.much like business I I suppose that gen- 
tleman who blows the horn so musically 
wanted to inform the village that he had 
something to sell." 

** People like Mr. Lavington,who is a mem- 
ber of Parliament," said Walter, who felt he 



LAVINGTON ARRIVES. 187 

was in a dilemma, ^' cannot always keep at 
home on Sundays." The Captain, to maintain 
his own respectability, which seemed likely 
to receive sore damage from this incident, 
had taken care to let Walter know his friend 
was the celebrated member for Scatter- 
borough ; and now Walter played the M.P. 
as a trump card, though too conscious that 
he had already stigmatized the whole party 
as disreputable. 

"Ah, well," said Frances, unwilling to 
push her victory too far, " I hope you will 
get a good dinner. I shall walk over to the 
Hollies, and have a cup of tea with Miss 
Hutchison. She will be quite glad of a 
visitor." « 

** Glad to talk about that fellow Roland," 
said Walter, who was by this time thorough- 
ly cross. " I wish you joy of your subject." 

He got up and went off to smoke. 

"Poor old Walter!" thought Frances. 



138 FRANCES. 

** I don't half like his knowing these people. 
I am not rigidly Sabbatarian ; but a member 
of Parliament who comes driving four-in- 
hand, with a young person in brilliant 
attire on the box, and a horrid horn blow- 
ing, into a quiet village, when the church 
bells are ringing, can't be much of a gentle- 
man." 



139 



CHAPTER X. 

AT THE DOLPHIN. 

AfTTROLOOOS. '* Would thatlliyedintliegreat age of alchemj, 
When to make gold from dross was natore^a 

poetry; 
This is the age of guineas and of guinea-pigs.** 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

TN the village of Avonside there had been 
^ no events of importance for many gen- 
erations. The place had its immemorial 
tradition ; it was confidently stated that in the 
days of Alfred the Great there was a college 
there, and that a famous Irish teacher, 
Dubshlaine, brought thousands of students, 
not from England only, but also from the 
chief realms of Europe. At intervals the 



140 FRANCES. 

ploughmen on the West Hams found strange 
fragments of carven stone ; and' there had 
been remarkable coins dug up here and 
there; and occasionally rings and fibulas 
had found their way from the Avonside 
cornfields to the Chessington Museum. The 
little place had its history; the same maybe 
said of an immense number of English 
villages. Indeed the experienced antiquary 
knows that every inch of English ground 
deserves to be searched, since there is not 
an inch of English ground untraversed by 
race after race. The mysterious magnificent 
aborigines who built Stonehenge and Ave- 
bury ; the Welsh ; the Romans ; the Scots ; 
the Saxons, Jutes, Angles ; the Danes ; the 
Normans, last of all, so far as written history 
guides us. But of later years England has 
become the centre of the world ; London, 
that market-magnet, which draws to itself 
all the most active forms of life, which 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 141 

attracts genius, ambition, avarice, rascality, 
is the city of cities. 

Avonside is now awakening from the 
repose of ages. It has had a murder . ay, 
and the murderer has escaped. This gives it 
a position in decided advance of the average 
hamlet. And now it has a mysterious four-in 
hand, with a member of Parliament as 
driver, and a general air of wild extravagance 
and lavish expenditure. Lavington and 
his party were a delight to the villagers. 
They could not understand them a bit. 
Jacob Jones, who kept the King's Arms, 
and was much honoured by the Avonsida 
folk because he weighed twenty stone, mid. 
that Mr. Lavington was a real gentleman. 
This became his definition in the village. 
for villages usually follow the example of 
the landlord of the chief inn, who can 
always dispense patronage in the form of 
two pennyworth of fourpenny ale. Laving- 



142 FRANCES. 

on, M.P., was honoured by the Avonside 
people because he received honour from 
Jacob Jones, in whom they implicitly 
believed. 

The talk at the barber's shop grew curi* 
ously significant. The little barber, who 
was also postmaster, was supposed to have 
sources of knowledge entirely his own, and 
did his best to justify this belief. So he 
invented a regular network of romance 
as to the sojourners at the King's Arms, and 
all his clients believed him, and looked with 
an emotion akin to terror on Wyldote 
Lavingston M.P., and his companions. 

Terror, however, was not the emotion 
which Miss Ethel Clinton wished to inspire. 
She had come down to this quiet village, as 
she would herself have said, for a lark. 
She wanted to see that poor dear old 
Captain Heath again. She could make 
Lavington. do anything; she had last 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 143 

season made him waste thousands on a spec- 
tacle play at one of the large theatres, just 
that she might show her superb limbs to 
larger audiences than the Bagatelle would 
hold. The money was gone, and Lavington 
did not grumble. Why should he ? What 
is the use of making money by thousands 
unless you have spirit enough to throw it 
away by thousands also ? This was Laving- 
ton's own feeling. It gave him as much 
delight to lose twenty thousand pounds as 
to make it. His brain was always vividlj^ 
awake to methods of getting money fast, to 
methods of throwing it away fast. He was 
director of no end of companies for extract- 
ing gold from the best-promising sources, 
even as the Laputan philosopher extracted 
sunshine from cucumbers. Even if these 
companies came to grief, Mr. Lavington 
seemed somehow to profit ; and as his daring 
genius came to be known, people would not 



144 FBANCS8. 

touch anything new unless they saw in the 
list of directors : 

"Wyldote Lavington, Esq., M.P., F.R.G.S., Ac, 
. . . Prince's Gate, and Lavington Manor, Bucks." 

He had come down to Avonside on this 
occasion to draw into his latest speculation 
Captain Heath, and any friend of Captain 
Heath's that seemed worth trying. Miss 
Ethel Clinton had similar ideas. She was 
getting somewhat tired of her rdU as an 
actress in leg parts. She found in LaviDg- 
ton ^^ a generous patron of the drama :" but 
she was quite aware that he knew her 
thoroughly, and was not likely to fall a vic- 
tim to her fascinations. Now Ethel began 
to think it was quite time for her to marry 
and settle : for, though she looked eighteen 
on the stage, and not much more than five- 
and-twenty off, she knew her actual years 
only too well. She felt strongly disposed 
towards Captain Heath, as a well-preserved 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 143 

old aristocrat, who would make a most 
respectable husband : but^ when she knew 
Walter Carey, she began to doubt whether 
he would not suit her best of the two. So 
she played one against the other with mar- 
vellous skill : and each laughed at the other^ii 
presumption : and there was quite a little 
comedy in progress, at which Lavington and 
his cousin Dick Wyldote laughed oon- 
sumedly. 

Frances was amazed and grieved to find 
her brother attracted and absorbed by these 
people, whom he described as unfit company 
for her. During the week that Lavington 
spent at Avonside, she saw very little of 
Walter* He was always with his new ac- 
quaintances. They did not come near 
Carey Farm, but she caught occasional 
glimpses of them driving about the neighs 
bourhood. Frances herself drove a low 
pony-carriage, with an indefatigable little 

VOL. L L 



146 FRANCES. 

£xmoor in it: and one day, as she was 
going to Chessington for a little shopping, 
she was overtaken by Lavington's drag . 
Ethel Clinton radiant beside the driver, in a 
marvellous costume of scarlet and amber. 
The equipage flashed by like a meteor, but 
she could see her brother in the second seat, 
leaning forward to speak to this brilliant 
creature. It made her shudder. She had 
an instinctive feeling that the woman she 
saw could only do her brother harm. She 
could not carry out her scheme with any 
pleasure. She felt as if her brother were 
lost to her : as if she were left alone. When 
the drag was out of sight, she turned her 
pony's head homeward, and gave up shop- 
ping for that day, at any rate. 

Walter Carey, who knew his Horace, 
might have learnt therefrom to defy this 
temptress. He might have asked again the 
question-. 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 147 

** Lydia, die, per omnes 

Te Deos oro, Sybarin cur properes amando 
Perdere?" 

He was neglecting his oxen and his wheat- 
fields, his gardens and plantations, for this 
languishing London Lydia, who seemed to 
care quite as much for Captain Heath as for 
him. Alas, against feminine . fascination 
warning from poet and philosopher comes 
alike in vain. We must all burn our own 
fingers. 

The day came for Lavington to return to 
town. It was celebrated by a farewell din- 
ner at the Royal Hotel, Chessington. It 
was a delightful moonlight night, and 
Lavington meant to start about midnight, 
on his way to London . resting a few 
hours at a famous roadside inn, the 
Dolphin, where he had engaged rooms. 
The dinner party consisted only of Miss 
Clinton, Lavington, his cousin. Heath, and 
Carey. They kept it up late, and grew 

l2 



148 FRANCES. 

full of fun towards the end. . Ethel Clinton, 
dark as midnight as to hair, eyebrows, eyes, 
eyelashes, was white all over with muslin 
and lace and pearls. Her olive cheeks were 
flushed with excitement. She was full of 
life. 

A groom came in to say the drag was at 
the door. 

" All right," quoth Lavington. " Keep the 
horses warm. Waiter, another bowl of 
punch." 

" ni make this one," said Dick Wyldote* 
"Green tea, waiter . lots of cinnamon*. 
guava jelly . ^look alive !" and away he went 
to see that his orders were obeyed. 

" I say. Heath," said Lavington, " you and 
Carey had better come on to the Dolphin 
with us. It's only twenty miles . and a 
lovely night . and there are always plenty 
of bedsw What do you say ?" 

" Oh, do say yes, both of yoU)" said the 



AT THB DOLPHIN. 149 

Clinton, with a skilfully impartial smile, 
which each took to himself. " That will be 
charming. You must not refuse ; I won't 
hear of it." 

" ril go," said Walter, who was in a very 
joyous state, '^ It's a lovely night. What 
do you say, Captain Heath ?" 

Of course the Captain was not to be beaten, 
so that was settled ; and just at the right 
moment came in Dick Wyldote's bowl of 
punch, &agrant and fervent. As he ladled 
it forth with an antique silver spoon, he sang, 

<. This is the fluid 

To keep you alive, 
Made by the Druid 

From elements five. 

<^ Water the placid, 

Sugar and spice. 
Spirit and acid 

Make the drink nice. 

'< Punch has like woman 

Elements five ; 
She too keeps human 
Creatures alive. 



150 FBANCES. 

^'Beauty's own daaghter. 
Only too nice . 
Calm as clear water, 
Fragrant as spice« 

" Sugar's no sweeter, 

Lemon's less keen. 
Spirit to beat her 

Was never yet seen." 

" Stop your doggerel, Dick," said Ethel^ 
" and serve the punch out in a more sensible 
way. You hoot like an owl, and spill the 
good liquor while you're about it." 

The dinner came to an end. The bill was 
paid. Lavington was steady as a rock when 
he mounted the box, though he carried a 
considerable quantity of wine and punch. 
Miss Clinton could not be persuaded to 
travel inside ; no, her maid might do that, 
and sleep all the way if she liked ; she meant 
to see the scenery by moonlight, and enjoy 
the drive. So she was comfortably wrapped 
up, and took her place by Lavington; 
and Heath and Carey, an old fool and a 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 151 

young fool, took their places behind them, 
jealous of each other; and Dick Wyldote 
blew his horn ; and off they dashed over the 
petrified kidneys with which Chessington is 
paved. 

The chill night air sobered the travellers 
somewhat. It made Ethel Clinton sleepy ; 
so Walter Carey, who was immediately be- 
hind her, had the delightful duty of leaning 
forward to support her, with his arm around 
her waist. He got very cramped and chilly, 
but he consoled himself with the thought 
of his supreme felicity. We must not be too 
hard on this young man. He had never 
seen much of London ; Miss Clinton was to 
him a new variety of the human race ; he 
thought her the Arabian phoenix of her sex. 
He will be disenchanted in good time, but 
just now let us pity him, and not laugh at 
him. Who was your first love, gentle 
reader ? A milkmaid, a lady's maid, a young 



152 raANOBS. 

person at the pastrycook's ? Whoever has 
any imagination finds beauty somewhere, 
even though no one else can see it ; and the 
great gift of imagination, though it too often 
tortures and sometimes maddens its posses- 
sors, is worth all other gifts of God. 

Lavington had no imagination that night, 
or indeed at any other time. It was just as 
well. He concentrated himself on his horses, 
and contrived to .race through the twenty 
miles in about a hundred minutes. Every 
body was glad when the ligths of the Dol- 
phin were visible, as they pulled up at the 
end of a long incline. The place look- 
ed cheerful. Lavington's arrangements had 
ensured perfect preparation. Walter Carey, 
cramped and cold, was glad to spring to 
the ground, and lifted down Ethel Clin- 
ton before she was half awake. The Captain, 
stiffer-jointed, descended with more difficul- 
ty. Dick Wyldote blew a ghostly note or 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 153 

two from his horn. It was pleasant to get 
into a comfortable room with a blazing fire, 
and ample refreshment on the table, 

" dear," said Ethel, kneeling on the 
hearthrug, and warming her white fingers, 
'^ isn't this nice ? I hope it's not a dream," 

It was no dream, but dreams soon follow- 
ed it; for everybody was tired with the 
night drive, and even Dick Wyldote had 
not energy enough to llreak out into his 
usual ebullitions of nonsense. What a treat 
it is to thoroughly rest after a long drive or 
ride ! I wonder which of the present com- 
pany slept most tranquilly? The palm 
probably lies between Ethel Clinton and 
Lavington, neither of whom had an iota 
of conscience. 

Walter Carey, at any rate, could not sleep. 
He had a cosy old oak<panelled bed-room, 
with a splendid wood fire, which threw a 
pleasant light on two or three pictures, so 



154 , FRANCES. 

ancient that their subjects were scarce dis- 
cernible. So tired was Walter that he threw 
off his clothes hastily, and jumped into bed 
with a full expectation of being asleep in 
two minutes ; but the first plunge between 
the sheets seemed to awaken him thoroughly, 
and he lay watching the changeful firelight 
as it flickered on carved black oak and mys- 
terious canvas, Walter Carey was not quite 
at ease. Selfish al he was, he had a real 
liking for his sister ; he had also a respect 
for her pure and stable character ; and even 
here, alone, with the echo of recent revelry 
in his brain, he had an uneasy dissatisfied 
feeling. This Miss Clinton, radiant in ap- 
parel and gay in manner, was very fascinat- 
ing, but she was of quite a different species 
from Frances. This he saw clearly enough. 
The Clinton was a painted butterfly, a chat- 
tering parroquet; his mind's eye pictured 
his sister in the Carey Farm gardens, pos- 



AT THE DOLPHIN, 155 

sessed by a serene gaiety, delighting in song 
of bird and colour of flower, yet able ta 
converse on the choicest subjects wisely and 
well. Vera incessu patuit Dea. There was 
no mistaking the true lady in the society of 
Frances Carey. Her brother felt that he 
did her wrong by his intercourse, harmless 
though it might seem, with Lavington's 
sparkling Bohemienne. 

Unable to sleep, Walter Carey tumbled 
out of bed, lighted a cigar, threw logs upon 
the fire, and thought over his position. He 
had been unexpectedly betrayed into a new 
phase of life, wholly unnatural to him ; he 
began to think that he was making a mistake 
to leave, even for so short a time, his land, 
his cattle, his hearth, his Horace, his sister. 
He did not feel any remorse, exactly ; it 
was rather a selfish reaction. He began to 
consider whether he was not happier in his 
old regular method of life than when run- 



156 FBAKCJS8. 

ning after a black-haired Siren, and driving 
about with a fast M.P. It would be hard 
to conceive a life that could yield more solid 
satisfaction than Carey^s. A comfortable 
estate, healthy occupation, a charming com- 
panion in his sister. He ought to have been 
the last man to run off at a tangent. As 
he sat smoking and meditating through a 
sleepless night, this idea impressed itself on 
him. . 

Still wide awake was he when the dawn 
gradually broke, filling the east with moun- 
tains of miraculous colour, which were re- 
flected in the west. A myriad of birds 
broke into song as the first level sunshafts 
came from the horizon. Walter Carey 
sprang up, dipped his head in icy water, 
dressed rapidly. Then he went down to the 
stables, where he was well known, ordered 
out a horse, and rode rapidly homewards, 
leaving neither note nor message for Laving- 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 157 

ton or Heath. He did not keep to the road, 
but went straight across country, whereby 
he saved a matter of four miles, riding into 
the yard of Carey Farm at about his udual 
breakfast-hour* 

Walter Carey was now and then kept 
away all night at distant fair or market; 
and, as there were men-servants in the 
house, Frances was not alarmed by his un- 
expected absence. But on this occasion 
there was neither fair nor market; more- 
over, a rumour reached her through Rachel 
that he had gone away with Mr. Lavington. 
This rumour was brought in after midnight 
by a waggoner who slept in the house, and 
who came in late through Avonside village, 
after delivering a load some miles ^way. 
As his four sturdy horses went with jingling 
bell down the street, he had caught sight 
of Mr. Lavmgton's coach, with bright-burn- 
ing lamps, and his master with his foot on 



158 FRANCES. 

the axle of the near wheel. He came chilly, 
and hungry, and thirsty into the farm kitch- 
en, and told what he had seen, in a state 
of perplexed wonder ; and Rachel, who was 
hurrying the serving-folk to bed, caught his 
story with quick ears. 

When the waggoner had finished a vast 
hunch of bread and cheese, and a foaming 
quart of beer, he stumbled up the creaking 
back-stairs. Then Rachel went to her 
mistress, who was sitting by the dying 
embers of a wood fire, and trying to read the 
Tempest She could not. The volume lay 
idly in her lap, and her dark blue eyes 
looked intently into the depths of the fire, 
which now and then threw up a sudden jet, 
bringing out the golden tinge that lay 
hidden in the rich brown hair. She sat in 
an old-fashioned crimson elbow-chair : her 
shapely head, whose curves showed gentle- 
ness and strength, rested upon her hand. 



AT THE DOLPHIN, 159 

Her thoughts were drawn far away from 
Prosperous haunted isle by a stronger magi- 
cian than Prospero . her own imagination. 
She thought of her isolated position. While 
her father lived she had always a friend to 
whom she could tell what seemed the sil- 
liest troubles : but Walter had never had the 
slightest touch of that feminine sympathy. 
All men of the highest manliness have also 
some womanliness. Frances thought rather 
reproachfully of the way in which she had 
treated Hugh Roland : that he loved her, 
she knew, though he had never ventured to 
say it : she knew indeed that with a look 
from her . ^which the cruel creature never 
gave . love's words would have leaped to 
his lips. Such cruelty recoils. She would 
gladly now have grasped his loyal hand, 
have met the gaze of his earnest eyes. 
Rachel came up from the kitchen, having 

heard the waggoner's last creaking upon the 
stairs. 



160 FRANCES. 

" It's no use waiting up, miss," she said. 
"Mr. Walter's gone off on a drive, so Tom 
Tull says, with them new-fangled folk that 
drives four horses. I wonder at him, but 
gentlefolk have strange ways." 

Frances was very quiet while she heard 
this. Watching only too anxiously her bro- 
ther's sudden vagary, she was also anxious 
not to betray her watchfulness even to 
Rachel. I suspect the loyal old servant 
saw through her young mistress, yet pfe- 
tended not to see. 

" I shall sit up a little longer, Rachel," 
said Miss Carey. " Your master will soon 
be back." 

" I hope so, miss. But I don't half like 
those people. The servants say strange 
things about them. They seem to drink 
and smoke and play cards all night. And 
as to that young woman, why, I believe 
sh6's no better than she should be." 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 161 

*^Few of US are/' said Frances. 

*| 0, you may say that, miss, but I know 
better. Your poor dear father, he used 
beautiful language ; and I'm sure if I ever 
talk properer than some people, it's because 
I used to listen to him ; and he said of a 
young woman that dressed dreadful fine, 
that she was Mary Trishus. Now Tm sure 
this creature belongs to the Trishus family, 
though her name perhaps ain't Mary." 

Frances was compelled to laugh. That 
Ethel Clinton was meritricious, she had no 
doubt, but she did not at first recognise 
Rachel's way of putting it. She said : 

"We need not trouble ourselves about 
her, Rachel. I dare say we shall never see 
or hear of her again." 

" I don't know, miss. Them cattle ain't 
so easy to get rid of. They're like the cata- 
wampuses you see about harvest time . they 
fly quite pretty in the air, but, my 

VOL. L M 



162 FRANCES. 

gracious, don't they sting ! You smart and 
itch for a month after." 

The comparison of this radiant young 
companion of the M.P. to a " catawampus/' 
rather amused Frances. Rachel resumed : 

" Those sort of people are mischievious. 
They're just like wapses, that sting you for 
something to do. They prove to me, miss, 
that men are very inferior to us women." 

"How is that, Rachel?" 

"Why, they take in the very cleverest 
men ; and there isn't one among them that 
ever took in a woman. They might as well 
try to put salt on a bird's tail. I know I 
was never took in with any of the young 
hussies myself. I know them when I see 
them. As poor dear master used to say, 
I'm a woman of great perspirasity." 

" You seem to have studied the subject^ 
Rachel." 

" I don't hold with too much study, Miss 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 163 

Frances, but I keeps my eyes open ; and if 
you learn nothing through observasations 
from sixteen to sixty, why, then, the sooner 
you shuts up the better. And if that dressed- 
out young woman is so uncommon fascinar 
tious to Mr. Walter, why didn't he take you 
on his arm with proper ceremonius to call 
upon her ?" 

"I do not care to meet strangers," replied 
Frances, " and, besides, you know, Rachel, 
my brother may know many people to whom 
he would not like to introduce me." 

" Ay," said Rachel, with a sniff of con- 
tempt : " they think because they are men 
they are privilegious to break all the Com- 
mandments except them that it's no trouble 
to keep. Please God," she added piously, 
"that he won't be making Mrs. Walter 
Carey of that painted doll." 

*'No, Rachel, he'll never do that." 

" Well, miss, if you ask me has he made 

m2 



164 FRANCES. 

propositions to her, I can say with truth not 
to my knowledge : but when a man begins 
to be foolish he never knows where to stop.^ 

" I thought it was Captain Heath she was 
trying to captivate," said Frances. 

" They do say that the Captain is won- 
derful took up with her. The servants at 
Heathfield have been telling our servants 
that the Captain spends a longer time than 
ever a-brushing and a-polishing up of a 
morning, and that his man Mr. Boyd has a 
pretty time of it. And the young woman 
have been over to look at the house, and 
told the Captain he should build a wing to 
it, as the rooms are small. She gave the 
servants a fine lot of money, and the old 
cook, who should have knowed better, re- 
marked that she must be a real lady. 
*Ladyr says I to her. *Why, even that 
fine name she has I don't believe is her 
own.' For you know, miss, they always 



ii dii .. .. >^r~^m^p^H^ip-««^^ 



AT THE POLFHm. 165 

chooses fine names. I'm thankful I've got a 
good honest name, which ain't likely to 
tempt any of them. But there, miss, I've 
no right to be poUutiating your young ears 
with such things." 

*' Perhaps she is really going to marry the 
Captain," said Frances, who was amused 
with Rachel's chatter. 

"Lord, miss, I shall pity the Captain if he 
do many her I I consider him a most con- 
temptuous old man, but I would not wish 
him married to that person." 

" Well, she would not be a very pleasant 
addition to Avonside society, Rachel: but 
no doubt the Captain will think of marrying 
again, now that he is alone." 

"Ah, miss, do you know I sometimes 
think Mr. Stephen might not be dead, after 
all." 

" What makes you think so?" said Fran- 
ces, suddenly interested. 



166 FRANCES. 

" I don't quite know, miss, but I have a 
presentation about it. You see, they never 
got at the truth ; that mightn't have been his 
body. Mr. Roland never would say nothing 
about it, and I think there's some mystery 
in it. Poor young gentleman, he must have 
been terrible unhappy amongst those roar- 
ing lunacious people. I'm so glad he's got 
away. I wonder where he is ! But I dare 
say we shall see him some day, and it will 
all come right,^' said the old servant, seeing 
that her young mistress looked sad. 

*'Now I don't think we need wait any 
longer," said Frances ; " we had better make 
the most of a short night. 0, by the way, 
will you mend my dress in the morning be- 
fore I put it on ? There are a few stitches 
wanting at the pocket." 

"Why, miss, your pockets are always 
torn now. I have been mending one to- 
day. One would think you carried a bag 
of gold in your pocket." 



AT THE DOLPHIN. 16f 

" Ah I" thought Frances, " she little sus- 
pects that I do. She is a good old creature, 
and will be useful in any emergency." 

It was a long time before Frances could 
sleep. She kept wondering what reason 
Rachel had for thinking Stephen Heath was 
not dead. The thought had often occurred 
to her, but she could see no reason for 
Stephen's keeping out of the way. She had 
heard it whispered about that he was a good 
deal in debt, but she did not think that a 
suflScient reason for his going away, and she 
thought he could not be wicked enough, if 
he were alive, to allow Hugh to be accused 
of murder. And then she wondered why 
Walter hadn't come home : and found her- 
self comparing Walter with his father, and 
thinking he never would be so noble a^man* 
Then she compared him with Hugh. " But 
why do I always come back to Hugh ?" she 
said to herself, and tried once more to sleep. 



168 TOAKCBB. 

When the party at the Dolphin came 
down to breakfast, somewhere about twelve 
o'clock, Walter Carey's abrupt defection was 
of course discovered. Lavington was amazed, 
having hoped to attract him to London, and 
bleed him. Your country gentleman is so 
easily intoxicated by the rapid way in which 
Londoners make money. The Clinton was 
disgusted, having decided that he was per- 
haps more manageable than Captain Heath, 
and at least as eligible. Heath himself was 
very angry : called Carey's behaviour un- 
gentjemanly ; swore he would cut him 
dead I 

" Never mind," said Lavington. " We'll 
have our fun without caring for that miser- 
able milksop. I never thought much of 
him: she's a mere country boor. You'll 
come on to town with us, won't you, 
Heath?" 

" Of course he will," said Miss Clinton, 



AT THE POLPHIN. 169 

who had taken a flower from a vase, and 
was fastening it into the Captain's coat. '' I 
would never forgive him else." 

The Captain succumbed, sent to Avon- 
side for a portmanteau, went townward with 
Lavington and his feminine friend. A very 
short time saw him established in rooms in 
Jermyn Street, where also Lavington and 
Dick Wyldote were living. As to Ethel 
Clinton, she is princess of a Fulham villa, on 
whose lofty garden walls grow peaches to 
perfect ripeness. 

As Walter Carey rode into his precinct, 
he looked up toward his sister's window. 
She stood there watching him, and gave him 
a loving sisterly smile. She had just 
"wantoned in the luxury of splash," and 
looked as fresh as a rosebud after dfw, or 
a anowflake this instant fallen. As Walter 
caught his sister s eye, hq felt thankful for 
his last impulse. 



170 



CHAPTER XL 

GABRIEL SHIBLEY's COTTAGE. 

''Let rogues be fixed who have no habitation : 
A gentleman may wander." 

A FTER a long sleep, sorely needed, Hugh 
-^^ Roland arose refreshed, and dressed 
himself, and came out into the passage. 
The front door was open, and Mr. Shirley 
was pacing up and down the gravel, his 
hands clasped behind him, meditative. He 
turned quickly when he heard Hugh's step. 
"3a, my young friend, you have had 
refreshing slumber. I know you have, for 
once or twice I looked upon you, and your 
sleep was not that of a murderer. Yet I 



GABBIEL SHIRUEY's COTTAGE. l71 

suppose it must be on my part contempt of 
court to say this, seeing that you have been 
labelled murderer and maniac by a jury. 
As the illustrious poet hath it : 

' After the well-f ee'd counsel's sound and fury, 
I hail the wisdom of an unpaid jury.' 

No, you must be guilty, but that need not 
prevent your wearing another suit of clothes. 
My man, Mark Chapman, the father of the 
little maid that spreads my table, is about 
your size, and he has just purchased a new 
and splendid suit of apparel, in which he 
intends to array himself on Sunday. But I 
have impounded them for you, and he must 
revisit his tailor. Of their material I only 
know that the trousers are corduroy, which 
I believe never wears out. As the illustri- 
ous poet says : 

* Cloth for the hind's hind part's so mean a thing, 
Why is it dedicated to the king V " 

Hugh Roland was willingly obedient to 



172 WBASCRB. 

Gabriel Shirley's behest. He felt that he 
had found a friend. It was indeed for him 
a most fortunate thing that he had reached 
this quiet haven, otherwise I know not what 
mischance might have happened to him. 
When he accepted his comrade's offer to 
escape, he had no definite idea of the 
future; and he would assuredly have run 
right into the arms of the police, and been 
taken back to the Asylum, with closer super- 
intendence thereafter. 

Clad iu Mark Chapman's " requisitioned" 
habiliments, Hugh might have passed mus- 
ter as a keeper of unusual intelligence. Mr, 
Shirley did not at first encourage him to talk 
of his affairs ; on the contrary, he talked of 
his own. He took his guest over his little 
demesne. The quaint one-storied cottage 
stood, in about three acres of ground, pali- 
saded off from a wide common. There was 
* 

no other habitation in sight, and the common 



GABRIEL Shirley's cottage. 17S 

itself seemed boundless on every hand. Mr. 
Shirley's ground was admirably cultivated, 
and not an inch ran to waste. He showed 
Hugh his asparagus and strawberry beds, his 
poultry and pigeons, his cleanly pigstyes, 
with pardonable pride. Hugh, a lover of 
country work, and specially of gardening, 
was delighted. 

" It is all Mark's doing," said Mr. Shirley. 
"He likes it. I am seldom here above three 
months in the year, and Mark has it all his 
own way. Look at that game-cock'. isn't 
he a beauty ?" 

Gabriel Shirley desired to get Hugh quite 
at ease, and his brain in a state of equipoise, 
before talking of either his past or his future, 
so he would not hear of a word on personal 
matters that first day. 

" Time enough, my young friend. Dis- 
miss your cares, and your brain will grow 
clear and steady. Do you like my cottage ?" 



1 74 FRANCES. 

'' I do, indeed !" 

" I built it on this common by permission 
of the lord of the manor, whose acquaint* 
ance I made on Mount Athos. We were 
both hunting for manuscripts in the monas- 
teries. He was lost to his family at that 
time . his father thought him dead ; but he 
came back and married, and settled down 
quietly. I wanted a lonely spot to come to, 
when tired of wandering ; so he gave me 
this, for which I pay a yearly quit-rent of a 
game capon and two pullets. What I like 
here is the apparent want of limit. I know 
where I should find myself if I walked a 
mile or two north or south, east or west ; 
but as I cannot see the wood southward, or 
the river to the east which receives this 
noisy brook, I practise self-delusion, and 
imagine scenes of romance beyond. A poet, 
who would probably have been the greatest 
in the world, if sanity had been among his 
gifts, says well ; 



GABRIEL Shirley's cottage. 175 

* I love all waste 
And solitary places ; where we taste 
The pleasure of believing what we see 
Is boundlesSy as we wish our souls to be.' 

I contrive to gratify this feeling even on an 
English common." 

They had passed out on the common by 
this time. The clear stream, green with its 
watercress, that came through Mr. Shirley's 
garden, delayed in pools of crystal. Two 
very fine jackasses, one grey and the other 
brown, were browsing on the turf, and came 
up to the old gentleman in a friendly 
famiUar manner. He scratched their shaggy 
poles, and smoothed the mystic crosses on 
their backs. 

"What fine animals!" quoth Hugh, who 
was beginning to forget his own troubles in 
his entertainer's eccentricities . which was 
exactly what the kind old gentleman de- 
sired. 

" I admire the horse," said Mr. Shirley, 



176 FBANCaBS. 

" but I love the ass. He is such a wise and 
friendly creature. They understand him in 
Asia better than we do in Europe. Which 
of the quadrupeds do you consider the most 
intelligent?" 

" Either the dog or the horse, I should 
have said." 

" It lies between these four . dog, horse, 
ass, elephant. I consider the ass first, ele- 
phant second, dog third." 

"I should not have thought it," said 
Hugh. "Why is the donkey the type of 
stupidity ?" 

" Lucm a non^ perhaps. The donkey in 
England has fallen into bad hands, and be- 
come the victim of human stupidity. As the 
illustrious poet says : 

' God Inade the world for man to loQe : and man 
Is boimd to finiflh that which Grod began.' 

You don't read modern philosophy, I sup- 
pose, Mr. Roland ?" 



GABBiBL Shirley's cottage. 177 

" What little I have read seemed either 
silly or unintelligible : so I gave it up, under 
the impression that it needed a keener in- 
tellect than mine. I read one day in a book 
by a famous writer that the human eye is so 
badly made that if it had been done by a 
common optician it would have been sent 
back with severe censure. When I found a 
philosophical gentleman criticizing God in 
that way, I shut the book, being very cer- 
tain he was much too clever for me to 
follow." 

The old gentleman laughed. 

"I think you were right. When the 
fluent professor uses this argument, he for- 
gets that it is capable of other applications. 
May not the Omnipotent Artificer have 
worked too carelessly elsewhere . perhaps 
have given the fluent professor a brain not 
quite as well made as brains ought to be ?" 

As they were talking^ the maid, who 

vot. !. N 



178 FRANCES. 

had earned Hugh's gratitude by her prompt 
kindness that morning, came tripping to the 
garden-gate and gave a call. Instantly the 
grey donkey came to her, walked after her 
to the rear of the cottage, and shortly re- 
appeared, harnessed to a light cart. The 
girl drove away across the common. 

" That's a useful child," said the old gen- 
tleman. " Her name is Carolina : her father 
calls her Carry : so I always call her Fetch 
. ^she has so much fetching and carrying to 
do. She is gone now to get us some din- 
ner. I want some stewed eels, and they 
are generally to be got at any of the river- 
side villages. Our rivers are famed for 
them : there are none fit to eat in the Nile 
or the Amazon." 

" You seem to have travelled very much," 
said Hugh Roland. 

" I have walked through half the world. 
I come of a wandering family. My ances- 



GABBiEL Shirley's cottage. 17& 

tor, Antony Shirley, first brought coffee to 
England from Aleppo. I could tell you 
as wild stories as Munchausen, and some of 
them truer than his. As the illustrious poet 
sayeth : 

' TravelleTB' true tales too often may be told, 
Bnt fresh-inyented stories grow not old.' " 

Some days passed before Mr. Shirley gave 
Hugh any encouragement to speak of his 
own affairs : and, when he did, it was with a , 
warning to think calmly. 

" Recall the events of that night,'' he said. 
^* Think over them carefully. You were 
excited ; but the excitement is past now, and 
if you search your memory you will be able 
to realize what occurred. It is impossible 
that you could have killed a man nearly as 
strong as yourself, after a hideous struggle, 
and that every trace of it should perish 
from your memory. Wherefore I say go 
out on the common, and sit under a tree, 

N 2 



180 FRANCES. 

and think over for yourself the events of 
that night. I don't want this for my own 
satisfaction. I want you to thoroughly rea- 
lize all that happened. If you can manage 
a continuous narrative of your adventures, 
it may some day be of vast service, in case of 
any further inquiry into the night's events." 

This excellent counsel Hugh Roland 
followed, and in time found it possible to 
account for the whole of his time between 
Carey Farm and the Hollies. He went over 
the incidents of the night with Mr. Shirley, 
who carefully cross-examined him, and 
who felt quite certain that his first impres- 
sion of Hugh's innocence was correct. 

" Yours is a case," he said, " in which, 
there is no appeal to the law. You must 
believe that God acts wisely and lovingly in 
giving you this trouble to bear. You must 
wait patiently for the truth to be revealed. 
Can you be patient ?" 



GABRIEL Shirley's cottage. ISl 

" It would be easier if my grief were soK* 
tary." 

^^ Is it no solace to think that you have a 
friend who is sorry for you ? Who is he ? 
Can you not communicate with him safely ? 
Surely he will not betray you." 

The crafty old gentlemian knew full well 
that Frances was the friend to whom Hugh 
referred ; and Hugh soon told him all about 
it, with a fine frantic frenzy. 

" O if I could but see her for an instant, 
in the dear old garden where we have met 
so many a time ! Don't you think I might 
see her, Mr. Shirley? I could be happy 
after that, and settle down to some sort of 
work . ^for of course I must do some work, 
if I can only get any to do, without being 
found out." 

"Leave that question for the present," 
said Gabriel Shirley. ** Remember, I know 
your lady-love. We have conversed. I 



182 JBANGES. 

admire her beauty, her calm, her courtesy. 
Now what say you? Stall I leave you 
here for a day or two, and make a pilgrim- 
age to the shrine of your fair saint, and pre- 
pare her to see you ?" 

" 0," cried Hugh, so suddenly that the 
donkey stopped grazing, and looked at him 
with mild surprise, " that will indeed be 
kind. How fortunate I have been to meet 
you ! I begin to hope." 

" Always hope, my young friend. Hope 
is the motive power of existence. As the 
illustrious poet hath it : 

' Hope m the fire that the Forethinker stole ; 
Hope is the breath of man^s immortal soul.' 

I will set out to-morrow, and see the lady. 
She will jreceive me with that lovely cour- 
tesy which belongs to one who is born a 
queen. You, meanwhile, remain here ; ram- 
ble over the common; tranquilly collect 
your thoughts. In your case it is above all 



GABRIEL SHIKLEY's COTTAGE. 183 

things requisite to be wholly cool and 
calm." 

" I will try," said Hugh. " It is very 
hard sometimes." 

"Nothing that is easy is worth doing. 
Every man has his labours of Hercules to 
perform. Do not think yours is the worst 
of all troubles." 

" I will not," said Hugh " having found so 
kind a friend. Yet it is hard to think of 
myself in base hiding, for no fault of my 
own." 

" Do not be sure there is no fault of your 
own. Examine that matter. Cause and 
eflFect are not always so closely allied that 
you can at once discover their connexion. 
Perhaps, being conscious that you loved this 
lady, you were too slow to ask her." 

" She is too good for me," cried Hugh, in 
lover-like enthusiasm, " or for anybody in 
the world." 



184 FRANCES. 

"Ah,** said Mr. Shirley, meditatively, 
** what are the words of the illustrious poet ? 

*' She melts all hearts, though made of flint or gianite ; 
She was intended for a better planet.' " 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley, when he started on 
an expedition, had the habit of going off 
very early in the morning. Hugh Roland 
proposed to walk a few miles with him ; so, 
just before sunrise, having eaten a hearty 
country breakfast, they started together over 
the dewy grass. The stars were gradually 
fading. A fiery lance sprang from the utter 
East, discomfiting the bank of grey and 
gloomy cloud. Other weapons from the 
armoury of light flashed through the sky ; 
and the morning dtar perished into cloudless 
blue ; and the mist withered away from the 
full-foliaged trees. There was an oratorio 
of birds. The lark sprang skyward with his 
delicious solo ; while the robins chanted in 
every bush, and merle and mavis broke into 



GABRIEL Shirley's cottage. 185 

mellow song amid the dimmer copses, and 
deep in the woodland the quoist cooed melo- 
diously. For when they came to the edge of 
the common, a fringe of ancient beech-wood 
lay below; and through those beeches, 
giants of immemorial growth, they followed 
a downward, winding path, till they reached 
a quiet sedgy pool, on the further side 
whereof was a solitary cottage . the first 
human habitation they had seen. Its in- 
habitants were astir, for a thin blue smoke 
rose straight into the windless air from its 
chimney. As they reached the edge of the 
pool, a frightened flotilla of moorfowl dived 
beneath the brown water. 

** Here let us part,'* said Gabriel Shirley, 
planting his staff sturdily on the ground, and 
standing still for a moment. '^Go bacl^to 
my little cottage and wait. Curb all im- 
patience, and trust me to do the best I can 
for you." 



186 FRANCES. 

" I trust you entirely," said Hugh. " I 
know you are a true friend. I am too grate- 
ful to try to thank you." 

* 

" Thanks are needless," said Shirley, with 
a humorous smile. " What I am doing is 
for my own pleasure. I am in love with 
Miss Frances Carey's beautiful face and 
soft sweet voice . . . and I go to Avonside 
only to see how lovely she will look when 
she hears glad tidings. As the illustrious 
poet hath it : 

* News from her love her happy heart will stir, 
So that she almost loves the messenger/ 

Go back, Hugh . ^ponder what I have said.'^ 
They parted. The stalwart old man 
tramped along the edge of the pool, never 
looking back, and was soon lost to sight. 
Hugh Roland slowly reascended the path 
through the beech-wood, carpeted with 
leaves of many Autumns. When he emerg- 
ed from that remnant of ancient forest, and 



GABBIEL SHIBIiEY's COTTAGE. 187 

was on the table-land of the common, he felt 
as if he were back again in a realm that be- 
longed to Gabriel Shirley only. There is a 
time in the life of a man when his character 
crystallizes. The chemist mixes acid and 
alkali, and sets them in a shallow saaeer. 
After awhile, with what seems miraculous 
suddenness, crystals shoot in all directions, 
all of one shape, all of one colour. So with 
the spirit of man. It is formless and aque- 
ous, till some shaping power descends upon 
it. Hugh Roland, born to a moderate com- 
petency, had never cared for a career. His 
love for Frances would have ripened his 
character in time; but his sudden terrible 
misfortune, and his acquaintance with Mr. 
Gabriel Shirley, hastened the process. He 
began to think seriously on the problem of 
life ; he decided that a man could never be 
happy except by the full exercise of his 
faculties. 



188 FRANCES. 

*'God is happy," he thought, ** because 
He keeps the universe moving, I will try 
to keep my small share of the universe mov- 
ing also."' 

As Hugh Roland approached the cottage 
which was now his home, he saw two forms 
crossing the common. To see any creature 
pass in that neighbourhood was most un- 
usual. He was long-sighted; he clearly 
perceived, though at a considerable distance, 
that these two persons were not in the at- 
tire of the common Englishman. It sud- 
denly .flashed on him that they were police- 
men. They were going straight towards 
Mr. Shirley's cottage. Hugh, feeling a dire 
dread that they were in search of him, threw 
himself down into a wild growth of coppice, 
with just one ash-tree in the midst of it, and 
awaited events, keeping watch through a 
natural loophole. The two men entered 
Mr. Shirley's cottage. He saw them walk 



GABRIEL SfllRLBY'S COTTAGE. 189 

up to the door, which Carry opened. He 
tried to imagine what they were saying to 
her . what she replied. Very dose he lay 
amid the bracken, when he saw them turn 
away from the cottage and walk towards his 
hiding-place, as straight as if they knew he 
was there. But they passed, undiscerning, 
and he heard a few words of their talk, 

" They're nowhere in this direction," said 
one of them ; *' they have got abroad, I 
expect." 

"Of course they have. They're too cun- 
ning to stay about here. I don't believe 
either of them was mad ; they pretend it, to 
get off. Why, you've only to murder some- 
body, or sham mad, to be provided for all 
your life. It's as good as a little fortune." 

" I shouldn't much care to be provided 
for in that way. What a pity that queer old 
gentleman wasn't at home! We should 
have got a glass of good ale." 



190 FRANCES. 

^'He doesn't trust that little maid with 
the key of the beer, I guess.'' 

Something of this sort reached Hugh 
Roland in his hidingplace, and made him 
particularly thankful when the two police- 
men passed out of sight into the great beech- 
wood. He did not move for full ten minutes 
after they had disappeared. The feeling 
that comes upon a man who, though con- 
sciously innocent, is by error convicted of 
crime, is not easily endurable. He is out- 
cast and outlaw. Every man's hand is 
against him. In many cases an innocent man 
is driven wild by such a situation, and does 
something which compromises him for ever. 
That Hugh Roland took matters easily was 
due to two people . . . Frances Carey and 
Gabriel Shirley. Left to himself, he would 
never have been able to bear his great 
trouble so calmly. But he had perpetually 
before him the vision of Frances, whose 



GABBiEL Shirley's cottage. 191 

tranquil spiritual beauty came more strong- 
ly upon him in her absence. It is often so 
with the true lover. In his lady's presence 
he is too eager and passionate to discern or 
analyze all the small separable delights 
which blend into one perfect beauty, like 
the rainbow's seven immortal colours into 
the white light of life. 

Now Hugh Roland thought of Frances as 
the lady of ladies; he' remembered, now 
that he dared not look upon her eyes, the 
marvellous language they had. Perhaps she 
was not such a wonder, after all, as poor 
Hugh fancied her ; but the fact stands that 
he did deem her a wonder of women, that 
he thought of her in all his thinking hours, 
that his idea of Frances elevated him above 
his ordinary self, and made him feel heroically 
resolved to bear his troubles nobly. There 
were times when he looked rebelliously at 
the mischance he was compelled to endure. 



192 FRANCES. 

He railed at the unfair Fates, who had dealt 
him so heavy a blow as the permanent de- 
struction of his liberty. But there were 
other days . sunshiny days of soft south 
wind . ^when he felt the goodness of God 
through his trouble and trial. God is very 
dose to the worst of his creatures in the 
worst of his troubles. Hugh Roland became 
in time thankful for his suffering; he re- 
membered his past self . buoyant, defiant, 
reckless ; he saw that the penance he was en- 
during was better far for him than freedom 
and pleasure. When a man recognizes the 
kindness of God's punishments, and begins to 
ask why they are inflicted, there is good 
hope of him. 

Let us leave Hugh in his solitude, thinking 
over hk strange situation, and follow Mr. 
Gabriel Shirley. He was j ust in his humour. 
To him life was always a drama, and he was 
the chief spectator . chief acto.r he never de- 



GABRIEL SHIBLEY's COTTAGE. 193 

sired to be. He liked to see comedy or 
tragedy gradually evolve itself. On the 
present occasion it seemed to him that a 
very curious tragi-comedy was in course of 
development. He had fully decided that 
Hugh Roland was no murderer, but he saw 
with perfect clearness the utter impossibility 
of proving this, and he wanted to extricate 
Hugh from his trouble* He heartily pitied 
the boy. Trouble of this sort, which to a 
man of forty seems almost ludicrous, is a 
very heavy trial to the youngster just enter- 
ing the world. Gabriel Shirley, feeling this 
deep pity for Roland, determined to do his 
best for him. So he tramped a good many 
miles in sunshine and shade, till he again 
reached Avonside. To him solitary walking 
had no weariness. A wide experience of 
men and books supplied him with inex- 
haustible themes for thought; and, more- 
over, he was an attentive spectator of 

VOL. J. 



194 FRANCES. 

" The admirable drama of small things," 

enacted in every hedge-row, every water- 
pool . in the caprices of wind-driven sun- 
stained clouds. He held to the full the 
opinion of Coleridge that . 

'.^ In nature there is nothing melancholy.** 

At the same time he was always ready to 
hold converse with anyone whom he met on 
his wanderings ; was indeed as genial and 
companionable as the immortal author of 
Bamabae Itinerarium himself; often found 
wit and wisdom in queer corners. He was 
wont to say, in the words of his favourite 
gnomic bard : 

*^ The sweetest nut will have the roughest hnsk : 
The primest boar will have the toughest tusk." 

Between the common on which stood Mr. 
Shirley's cottage and our pleasant village of 
Avonside there was about two days' tramp. 
The famous old pedestrian went on valiantly, 
through highway and byway, field-path and 
wood-path, asking his way sometimes, but 



GABRIEL Shirley's cottage. 195 

relying chiefly on his pocket-map and the 
little compass that hang at his watch-chain. 
At a country inn or two he took refresh- 
ment, and, not being a Good Templar, or 
a descendant of Rechab, disdained not a 
glass of ale . and was fortunate in that he 
was traversing a country where ale is home- 
brewed. Nor did he disdain a lift : the old 
gentleman looked quite at home on the edge 
of a waggon with four well-harnessed horses, 
that trotted gaily homeward after delivering 
a load of wheat, tossing their handsome 
heads to the music of their merry bells, 
while the waggoner, in olive-green smock- 
frock, told our friend all he knew about the 
neighbourhood, and was exceeding eloquent 
of his master and his master's daughter. 
The master was General Sir Charles Wrav, 
who had retired from service to live on his 
estate, and kept the home-farm in his hands 
for amusement. 

o2 



196 VBANCES. 

" The best master about here/' says the 
enthusiastic waggoner. '' Good to man and 
beast, he is. Look at them beasties : why, 
they are as well cared for as if they were 
Christians. But he's a melancholy man, the 
General: he's never been happy since his 
wife died, and that was when Miss Cecilia 
was born : and they say Miss Cecilia is so 
like her mother he can hardly bear to look 
at her." 

"We torture ourselves," said Gabriel 
Shirley, rather as a soliloquy. "As the 
illustrious poet hath it : 

' Man for himself makes many weary hours, 
Doubling the dire doom of the fateful Powers.* *' 

" Your honour talks very fine," quoth the 
waggoner, " and I think if the General could 
hear you it would do him good. Won't you 
go in and look at the house? Strangers 
are always welcome to go over the chief 
rooms, and there are some rare curosities." 



GABRIEL SHIRLEY'S COTTAGE. 197 

As the waggoner made this suggestion, 
they reached the great farm-gates, and Mr, 
Shirley dismounted. 

"There's a lodge only just round the 
corner," said the man, "if your honour 
would like to go in." 

It was Gabriel Shirley's practice never to 
waste an opportunity. He had heard of 
General Sir Charles Wray, and also of 
Monckton Manor ; and he was curious about 
both the man and the place. So he followed 
the stalwart waggoner's advice, passed the 
lodge, and walked along a wide gravel path 
which bounded a level green lawn to the 
front door of the house, a stately Elizabethan 
place, with wings at right angles to the 
front, and a lofty clock-tower right in the 
centre. The great door stood open, and 
servants were in waiting : and when Mr. 
Shirley said that he had been told he might 
see the house, he was taken through the 



198 FRANCES. 

rooms with complete courtesy. There was 
much worth seemg, but to describe what an 
English gentleman's house contains is to go 
over well-known ground : Grabriel Shirley- 
found his greatest pleasure in the library, 
which contained a splendid collection of 
rare books and ancient illuminated manu- 
scripts. 

In the library he saw its owner, a tall 
erect white-haired man, dressed entirely in 
black velvet, wearing knee-breeches, and 
black silk stockings, and shoes with buckles 
of diamond, and pacing up and down with 
an abstracted look, as if his thoughts were 
in that land which is very far off. His long 
thin white right hand clutched something 
imaginary now and then : was it his sword ? 
. and was he dreaming of battles fought 
long ago, when he, a prince of swordsmen, 
had cut his way through the dark scowling 
faces of England's foes ? So magnetic was 



GABBiEL Shirley's cottage, 199 

this sorrow-stricken kind-hearted old sol- 
dier that Gabriel Shiriey could not take his 
gaze from him. The illuminated page be- 
neath his eye, where some monk, many a 
year ago, had drawn a sad Madonna amid 
birds and flowers, faded into nonentity be- 
side this living poem of grief. 

Gabriel Shirley, a man daring yet gen- 
tle, made a sudden resolve to speak to Sir 
Charles Wray. So, rising, he approached 
him, and said : 

" I have to thank you. General Sir Charles 
Wray, for the unusual courtesy which per- 
mits a stranger to inspect your priceless and 
peerless collections. I have received intense 
pleasure from my visit. I pray you to par- 
don me, but, as the illustrious poet has it, 

^ Imperfect utterance is our saddest taint, 
And, when our hearts grow full, our lips grow faint."* 

Sir Charles Wray, awakening slowly 
from his reverie as this stately speech fell 



> 
I 



200 FRANCES. 

upon his ear . slowly, as smoke-wreaths 
ascend in a calm atmosphere . turned his 
eye upon the speaker. Then he said : 

*'Mr,X3abriel Shkley, I think?" 

** That is my name," said Shirley ; '^ but I 
am surprised that you should know me." 

" Ah," replied Sir Charles, " life is full of 
coincidences. You travelled in Asia Minor 
with Count Cassius Grimani. He took your 
photograph in the Troad. He gave me a 
copy. Yours is a face not easily forgotten. 
I have the picture now." 

" I am honoured," said Gabriel Shirley, 
with a smile. "As the illustrious poet 
hath it : 

' Portraits are flatteries : ah, why portray 
The ancient gentleman whose hair is gray f ' " 

*^ You must stay and dine with me, Mr. 
Shirley," said the General. '^Will you 
sleep here, and see the place in the morn- 
ing? I am quite alone. My daughter is 



\ 

\ 



GABRIEL SHIBLST's COTTAGE. 201 

spending the day with the Vicar, who was 
her tutor, and taught her lots of things 
young ladies seldom know." 

" I shall be happy to accept your invita- 
tion to dine, Sir Charles," said Mr. Shirley ; 
^^but I am on a mission which demands 
promptitude, and I want to sleep at Monck* 
ton St. Mary to-night." 

'^ I can send you on," said Sir Charles* 
^^ It is only five miles." 

" With your permission I will walk," said 
Mr. Shirley. "I like walking at night; 
and there is a moon. Sleep comes to me 
more gratefully when I have walked a few 
easy miles. The evening air, when the 
sky is 

^ Clothed in the beauty of a million stars,' 

seems to tranquillize the spirit." 

*' I know nothing that will tranquillize the 
spirit when burdened with a great grief. 
People tell me I ought not to grieve for the 



202 FBAKCES. 

< 

loss of a young wife twenty years ago, and 
I doubt not it is a most foolish thing, but I 
cannot help it." 

" It is not wise," said Gabriel. " There 
is no death : there is only change. I have 
heard . pardon me if I speak too freely . 
that your lovely daughter's likeness to her 
mother troubles you. It should rather be 
a solace, as showing the immortal power of 
her mother's spirit. As the illustrious poet 
hath it : 

* What we call life is twilight : when 'tis done, 
A door is opened, and we see the sun.' " 

The result of this conversation was that 
the General and Gabriel Shirley dined to- 
gether pleasantly, and talked together care- 
fully. Shirley, a student of character, did 
his best to arouse his companion from his 
curious lethargy ; and he so far succeeded 
that, when they sat down to walnuts and 
port, the General grew more cheerful. 



GABBIEL SHIBLBY's COTTAGE. 20S 

" Seinel in anno ridet ApoUOj' said Shir- 
ley. " It has been amplified : 

^ Once in the year Apollo laughs, they say : 
His sunlight smiles upon us every day.' 



9 ft 



" There are clouds sometimes, Mr. Shir- 
ley," said Sir Charles. 

" Clouds here, it may be, but always sun- 
shine somewhere in the world. Our doubts^ 
and fears and troubles are based on the 
narrow limit of surrounding things. You 
cannot see that other world in which the 
lady whom you have lost is dwelling; if 
you could, the sight would calm your per- 
turbed spirit at once. Have you never 
stood on a storm-smitten hill, and seen the 
fairest sunshine leagues away? I have. 
Think of the royal brightness of the immea« 
surable universe ; do not brood over the 
shadow that rests on a single narrow spot.'^ 

" You are a cheery companion, Mr. Shir- 
ley," said the General. '^ Our friend Count 



204 FRANCES. 

Oassius said that of you, and I endorse it. 
I should like you to see the portrait of the 
lady whom I lost^ and whom I have mourn- 
ed, perhaps unwisely." , 

It was in a room to itself, lighted special- 
ly for the picture's sake. A young creature 
with sparkling hazel eyes under long lashes, 
and waves of light-brown hair, dressed in a 
riding-habit,' just about to mount a sturdy 
Exmoor pony. Her gauntleted hand was 
on the saddle; her eyes looked lovingly 
round toward some one unseen in the pic- 
ture. The consummate artist had made 
that look only too loving . only too pathetic 
. ^for it retarded the lapse of time, and 
made the grief of twenty years ago seem as 
if it were yesterday's. 

*' It is beautiful," said Gabriel Shirley . 
**too beautiful to cause sadness. As the 
illustrious poet has it : 

< That sparkling eye was never meant for death ; 
Those lips will always draw immortal breath.' " 



GABBIEL SHIBLBT's COTTAGE. 205 

Sir Charles sighed profoundly, and then 
smiled. 

" Mr. Shirley," he said, " you have cheered 
me more than I have b6en cheered since 
my darling died; You will come and see 
me again . come and stay." 

" I will come with pleasure, Sir Charles, 
if I have time. I designed to visit Patagonia 
this Summer, but something has occurred 
which appears likely to keep me in Eng- 
land ; so I think I may promise to come, if 
you will receive me at short notice." 

" With pleasure," said the General. " An^ 
now, if you must go on to Monckton Saint 
Mary^ let me order out a dog-cart. It would 
take you over there in twenty minutes or 
so. 

" Thanks, Sir Charles ; but look at the 
moon. As the illustrious poet hath it : 

^ See how Latona's daughter walks on high . 
Chaste queen of loye, bnght ladj of the aky* " 



206 FRANCES. 

So Gabriel Shirley tramped off towards 
the Bear Inn at Monckton Saint Mary, 
where he meant to sleep ; and not ten min- 
utes had he been on the road, when clouds 
came up rapidly, and the lady of the sky 
disappeared, and he had to feel his way 
with his staff; and he became aware of tor- 
tuous lane- windings, and of brooks invisibly 
babbling close to his ear, so that he felt 
some dread of walking into the water. Pres- 
ently he dimly saw that the road had two 
branches, and at this undecided moment he 
fortunately heard footsteps through the 
noise of the running water. A lantern ap- 
proached ; two female forms were visible ; 
he emerged from the darkness into the lan- 
tern's circle of light, and asked the way to 
Monckton Saint Mary. A charming girl, 
with hazel eyes and light-brown hair, was 
revealed by the flickering light. She told 
him, with a smile, which was his .road. Had 



GABRIEL SHIRLEY*? COTTAGE. 207 

he not known beforehand of the likeness, 
he would have thought Cecilia Wray the 
phantom of the portrait. 



208 



CHAPTER XIL 



AN INTBBVIBW. 



<^ Weariness ends, adventure oft begins, 
Passing wide gates of ancient cosy inns." 

LP. 

11 TONCKTON SAINT MARY is a small 
^^^ market-town. Its church has a mass- 
ive square tower, with a niche high up in 
its western wall, wherein stands an ancient 
statue of the Virgin ; and right on the top of 
the tower grows a yew-tree, sprung from a 
seed long years ago, and now growing so 
large that the Rural Dean and the Rector 
have gravely decided that it must be cut 
down, or will ruin the tower. Around the 



AN INTEBVTEW. 209 

church and churchyard is an open green, 
known as the Palace Lawn ; tradition says 
that there once stood at Monckton the 
palace of a Saxon King, but no recent an- 
tiquary has been keen-eyed enough to find 
any traces of the edifice. Still in the mid- 
dle of the lawn there is a deep spring-fed 
pool full of water-lilies, known as the King's 
Bath ; and so everybody at Monckton religi- 
ously believes that some Edgar or Ethelred 
took his matutinal dip there centuries ago. 
I have found many old pools named in simi- 
lar ways, in the course of my wanderings ; 
hence I judge that our old English princes 
loved country retreats and abundant water. 
At the Bear, which stands on the very verge 
of the Palace Lawn, Gabriel Shirley found 
the simple entertainment he required ; found 
also a buxom landlady, whose tongue wag- 
ged freely, and who chronicled all the gos- 
sip of the place. Spring had come slowly 

VOL. I. P 



\ 

I 



210 FRANCES. 

hitherto; our wayfarer therefore was not 
loth to sit by the fire in the bar, and listen 
to his hostess's yarns, while he sipped his 
whiskey and took snuffi The landlady's 
stories and the drowsy murmur of a kettle 
on the fire made him feel comfortably som- 
nolent. Indeed at last he fell fast asleep 
while the old lady was in one of her most 
scandalous narratives, and dropt into a quaint 
dream, in which figured Sir Charles Wray 
and Cecilia, Hugh Roland and Frances Carey, 
all mixed up in an inextricable labyrinth of 
impossible adventures. When at last he 
awoke, a little puzzled as to where he was, 
the landlady's voice was still to be heard, 
nor was there cessation of the kettle's under- 
song. But now he decided on retiring, and 
a " neat-handed Phillis " lighted him to his 
chamber. 

After one of those wholesome country 
breakfasts that you only get beyond the 



AN INTERVIEW. 21 L 

reach of railways . crisp bacon and fresh 
eggs and cream, and the greenest of cress or 
lettuce . ^Mr. Shirley started stoutly on his 
forward way, and reached Avonside soon 
after noon. He went into the King's Arms, 
and refreshed himself on bread and cheese 
and ale. He decided to rest awhile before 
he went in search of Frances, whom he cal- 
<5ulated on finding somewhere in the river- 
girdled lawn of Carey Farm, taking an after- 
noon stroll. He did not wish to excite her 
brother's curiosity by calling at the house, if 
it could be avoided. So, having refreshed 
himself, he stood at the parlour window and 
looked at the dull market-place. No crea- 
ture moved, except a dissipated cock and 
some mournful hens that were dejectedly 
pecking at nothing particular ; except, more- 
over, the fluttering pigeons of the inn, and 
some clerical jackdaws that haunted the 
church tower. The little barber was asleep 

p2 



212 FRANCES. 

in his doorway ; and the young drapers and 
grocers at Hall's were either catching flies or 
reading the Family Herald. The sole move- 
ment for a long time was when a gentleman's 
servant rode up to the saddler's to get some 
harness-mending done . which resulted in 
saddler and groom coming on together to the 
King's Arms, and drinking beer. Gabriel 
Shirley drew a diamond from his finger (his 
only foppery) and wrote on the inn*win- 
dow: 

" Salt food, hot trayel, often kindle thirst ; 
Of its proYokers idleness is worst." 

After this effort he naturally rang for ano- 
ther tankard. 

People do not wear diamond rings in 
these days for the sake of writing epigrams 
on inn-windows ; nor indeed are there left 
many inn-windows that would tempt the 
epigrammatic abacist. We often hear the 
custom laughed at, but there is something to 



AN INTBBVIBW. 21S 

be said ia its favour. The old-fashioned 
<X)untry inn had a homely poetry. Painters 
of manners, from Ben Jonson to Charles 
Dickens, have made it a favourite theme. 
No man would dream of using his diamond 
on the plate glass of a company's very grand 
hotel ; but the dim green glass of the case- 
ments in a smoky inn-parlour seemed the 
very place on which to record the quality 
of the landlord's wine or the landlady's 
beauty. Foolish things were written, doubt- 
less ; but I fear that is true of other kinds of 
literary work ; and it is certain that wise and 
witty things were also written. If there 
were any indefatigable archaeologist who 
would make a collection of "inn-window 
poetry," I apprehend that it would be un- 
common pleasant reading. 

At last Gabriel Shirley started on his 
errand, and found his way . as once before 
. into the quiet walks of Carey Farm. His 



214 FBANCES. 

calculation was accurate. As he turned a 
corner, under a white-rinded birch, whose 
drooping boughs were like dishevelled hair^ 
Frances's dogs barked at him, and Frances 
herself came with a recognising smile along 
the path. 

"I am again a trespasser," said Mn 
Shirley. "I trust you will forgive me, 
since I come with a motive that I hope to 
justify. You will believe that I do not in- 
trude on you without reason, but I might 
not be able to explain this to Mr. Carey." 

''My brother is away from home for a 
few days," she said, " so you would not have 
had to make any explanation to him. But 
I hope after coming here once, you have 
no need to apologize for coming again. I 
am only sorry Walter is not here to welcome 

you." 

"As I come on what I suppose I may 
call business, I do not wholly regret Mr. 



AN INTEBVIBW* 215 

Carey's absence. May I come at once to 
the point? The young man who was 
accused of murder, aud who escaped from 
the Asylum . you feel a slight interest in 
him, I believe ?" 

^'He was a familiar acquaintance," said 
Frances. " I cannot believe him guilty. I 
fear his escape is a false step." 

"I think not. God guided him to my 
cottage, where I deem him safe for a 
time. Of course, as he cannot return to 
Avonside, he will have to work ; and 
the difficulty will be to find him some 
employment in which he is likely to escape 
detection ; but that does not press. He can 
eat his bread and cheese with me till I see 
a way for him." 

" 0," said Frances, eagerly drawing the 
heavy bag from her pocket, " I have some 
money for him here from his aunt, Miss 
Hutchison. Please take it." 



216 TRAJSICBS. 

" It is too heavy for an old man like me, 
my dear ; let the stalwart young fellow come 
and fetch it himself." 

** no, he must not come here ; he 
would be found out instantly. Do keep 
him from coming here !" 

'* I might as easily keep Vesuvius from an 
eruption, or the rain from falling. He says 
he can do nothing till he has seen you." 

" Me r 

'*Yes, you. I suppose he is in love, 
though I don't pretend to understand such 
things. As the illustrious poet said, in a 
slightly cynical mood : 

' Tis vain to heed the maddened lover's screech : 
Girl is like girl, as peach is like to peach.' 

But I suppose my fugitive thinks Miss 
Carey very different from all other women." 
" I should think it must be his aunt he 
wants to see," said Frances, " and you have 
made a mistake. I am sure she will be 



AN INTEfiVIEW. 21T 

delighted. She lives at a place called The 
Hollies." 

" I see what it is, Miss Carey," said Gab- 
riel Shirley, " the youngster has never done 
anything more than hoh loving, and you are 
determined not to encourage him. Quite 
right, too. Why didn't he speak in time, 
and not run off and become a criminal luna- 
tic ? As the illustrious poet hath it : 

*. Whateyer stiff defence the maiden guards, 
Why, kiss her first and ask her afterwards.' ** 

" Poor Hugh did not act on that princi- 
ple," said Frances with a laugh. ** It's no 
use fencing, Mr. Shirley ; I think Hugh Ro- 
land a fine fellow . quite certain not to be a 
murderer ; but I am not at all sure he is the 
man 1 would marry. I find in him what I 
find in most young men now : if they can 
enjoy themselves, they don't care to find 
good hard work to do. I hate to see fine 
young fellows with plenty of brain and 



218 FBAKCES. 

muscle wasting their time on billiards and 
shooting. never thinking of anything else. 
Hugh wants to be taught the meaning of 
life." 

" He is learning, Miss Carey. He has not 
been in a mad-house for nothing. I judge 
him wiser and stronger than he was. At 
any rate, this I may say : he loves you very 
heartily. He pines to see you before he 
takes to some new form of life. He may 
never see you again, perhaps . or it may be 
quite otherwise, and the sky may clear above 
him, and you may see him so often as to 
grow tired of him. As the illustrious poet 
hath it : 

' This have I seen amid the faults of life^ 
The kindest husband tires the wisest wife/ ** 

** Don't talk about husband and wife^ 
please," said Frances, who was a little cross, 
yet could not help laughing. "What do 
you want me to do ?" 



AN INTERVIEW. 21& 

" Hugh wants to see you. He will come 
here any day you like to appoint. I will 
be with him, and see that he is safe. I am 
not at all afraid. If a fugitive is concealed 
on scientific principles, he will never be 
caught. As the illustrious poet says : 

' Hide nothing high in air or underground ; 
Just put it where it seems it must be found/ ** 

Frances was silent for awhile. She stood 
under a great ash tree . it might almost 
have been the ash Yggdrasil, under whose 
boughs of ambrosial arch the gods hold 
counsel, while the demon-dragon Nidhogg 
gnaws its roots, and the three Noms who 

rule Past, Present, and Future, spin the in- 
terminable web of human destiny beneath 
its stately columnar stem. She made dia- 
grams on the gravel with her parasol. 
Gabriel Shirley, seeing her thoughtful 
downcast eyes beneath her wide garden hat, 
admired her quietude of character. 



220 

^ If that boy gets her," he said to himself, 
^ shell make a man of him." 

" I will see Hu^/ she said after a while. 
'^ The sooner the better, I think. Walter 
win be home on Saturday, I know. Bnt I 
am terribly inhospitable, Mr. Shirley, and 
yon have been so very kind. Do oome np 
and have a glass of wine or a cap of tea.** 

"Tea, with pleasure,** said Gabriel Shir- 
ley. " I am an inveterate lover of good 
tea." 

So that refreshing beverage was served in 
Frances Casey^s favourite oak parlour, and 
she and her guest chatted pleasantly. No 
word was said of Hugh Roland till Mr. 
Shirley rose to go. 

" I think I know. Miss Carey, what I may 
tell Hugh," he said. " It is, that you will 
see him as a friend simply. If he has any- 
thing to say to you that is more or less 
than friendly, that is a matter between you 
and him." 



AN INTfiBAIEW. 221 

*^ What do you mean by ^ more or less ' ?" 
she asked. 

" The illustrious poet shall answer," said 
Shirley. 

" ' Less than a friend "will a fierce foe discoyer ; 
More than a friend can only be a loyer.' ** 

" Ah, then I know what to expect," said 
Frances. "I don't think he will be less 
than a friend." 

"You shall see him the day after to- 
morrow, and judge," said Mr. Shirley. " I 
should like to clear the boy's fair fame, and 
to find that he was worthy of you." 

Which saying, he kissed Frances's ex- 
tended hand in courtly fashion, and left her 
with tears in her eyes. 



CHAPTER XOL 

OLD MAID ASD YOUNG. 

If joath Ins benn^, htmatj aho age 
PooBeBWB, when we calmly torn the page : 
A ladj kyreable, who lore has nuBBdl, 
1b like a loa^iiid hj Iioi noon nnViwBwl . 
Cool shadowB all ha pmity^ prolaDg, 
And her faint fragnuioe laala till eYenaong. 

LP. 

** /^ Miss Hutchison, I. have seen him !'* 
^^' cried Frances, as she entered the 
drawing-room at The Hollies, causing the 
old lad/s abominably cacophonous pet par- 
rot to shriek hideously. 

" Whom, dear ?" said the old lady, start- 
ing up and turning her knitting for a week. 
*' Not my poor dear Hugh ?" 



OLD MAID AND YOUNG. 223 

" No : but a nice old gentleman Hugh is 
staying with . a Mr. Shirley. He is going 
to bring Hugh over to see us the day after 
to-morrow." 

"Isn't it dreadfully dangerous?" asked 
Miss Hutchison. 

"0 no, he is disguised in some won- 
derful way, so that perhaps neither of us 
would know him." 

" And who is Mr. Shirley ? . and how 
came poor Hugh to be with him ?" 

" He is the dearest old^ gentleman, whom 
I once met accidentally in our grounds, and 
I liked him directly I saw him. And isn't 
it lucky that Hugh happened to go to him 
for shelter ?" 

" Ah, my dear, I recognise the hand of 
Providence in it : He would not allow my 
dear innocent boy to be too severely punish- 
ed. But are you quite certain that this old 
gentleman is to be trusted ?" 



224 FBANCSS. 

" You should only see him, and I am sure 
you would believe in him," said Frances. 

Her faith in the old gentleman was per- 
feet . more especially as he believed Hugh 
to be innocent ; and she was quite ready to 
credit him with the power to resist the 
united efforts of all the Asylum warders and 
the police. Old Miss Hutchison's heart 
gladdened at the thought that Hugh would 
soon be in possession of the bag of gold ; 
but as Hugh could not know that for weeks 
Frances had been weighted with this gift, 
his visit to Avonside was evidently to seek 
an interview with Frances. 

" And how shall you manage it ?" said 
Miss Hutchison. 

" They will meet me in the garden in the 
afternoon about five o'clock, near the little 
arbour." 

"My dear girl, I pray that it may be 
safe . ^it would be such a terrible thing if 



OLD MAID AND YOUNG. 225 

they found Hugh. Are you quite certaiu 
you can trust the servants ?" 

" None of them will know anything about 
it, except Rachel ; and you know that I can 
trust her. She will bring some refresh- 
ments to the arbour, which will be nothing 
unusual, as I often take meals there, and 
she will say that the ^ funny old gentle- 
man,' as she calls him, has come to see me 
again. You may be certain that if Hugh 
is safe with anybody, he is with Mr. Shirley, 
My only regret is that you cannot at present 
see him yourself, I know it will be better 
that you should not, as it might create sus- 
picion ; and no doubt the police are watch- 
ing this neighbourhood, and especially your 
house. I never see a strange-looking man 
in the village, but I fancy he must be a 
detective." 

Miss Hutchison sat silent for some time, 
fumbling with her knitting, and trying to 

VOL. L Q 



226 FRANCES. 

pick up the dropped stitdies, but her hands 
trembled so much that her work was only 
in a more hopeless state of confusion. She 
longed to see " her dear boy/' but she knew 
it would not be safe. She was almost 
vexed that it was Frances he must see, and 
not herself, before he commenced his hard 
life. And yet she thought what a brave 
girl Frances was, and how her clear brain 
seemed to find a way to meet all difficulties. 
She felt that it was upon Frances she must 
rely to be Hugh's best firiend, and she 
thought how fortunate he was to have such 
a friend. At last she said, in a broken 
voice, 

"No, my dear, I must not see him at 
present. I must be thankful that he can 
see you: it will give him strength and 
courage to face his troubles. But how is he 
to live ? He is not accustomed to work ; 
and it will be so difficult for him to 



OLD MAID AND YOUNG. 227 

get work without the fear of being dis- 
covered." 

"I am certain he will fight his way. 
through all diflSculties," said Frances. 

She had thought so much on this subject 
since she knew of Hugh's escape, and she 
felt sure that for her sake he would over- 
come everything ; and now that he was in 
Mr. Shirley's hands, she was satisfied. 

" I think, my dear," said Miss Hutchison, 
" that, by being economical, I could make 
up a little annual sum for the poor boy, if 
your friend Mr. Shirley could manage to 
have it conveyed to him." 

" I know that you are ready to make 
anv sacrifice for him, but I am sure it is 
not necessary. I will ask Mr. Shirley to 
tell us if Hugh is ever in want of money, 
ancJ then you can help him." 

"Yes, I would make any sacrifice for 
him. In the old days I have often felt put 

q2 



328 FRAHCES. 

out when he made my room so mitidy. He 
would not wipe his feet, and would upset 
diairs and stools, and rumple diair-oovers. 
I wish he were here to do it now. He 
might bring the gravel all over the carpet^ 
knock over the stook, and do just as he 
liked ! Ah ! I am afraid he will never 
make this room untidy again. But we must 
trust in God, and hope for the best. God 
has been very good in raising up such a 
friend as Mr. Shirley for him. Do you 
know why he takes so much interest in 
him ? I don't think he could have met him 
before." 

" No, but he firmly believes in his inno- 
cence, and says that in time the truth must 

* 

come out, but it may not be for many years ; 
and as there is no proof as to the real mur- 
derer, if Stephen Heath really is dead '^ 

" Really dead !" interrupted Miss Hutchi- 
son . "has there ever been a doubt upon 



SSI 



OLD MAID AND YOWSQ. 22^ 

that point ? Were not his watch and chain 
and his letters found, and part of his coat, 
and blood, and all sorts of things ?" 

"Yes, but was that his body?" saidFrances. 
^* You know what a shrewd old woman 
Rachel is, and she has told me that it is 
generally believed in the village that Ste- 
phen Heath is alive. If he is, he must have 
been urged by a strong motive to disappear 
as he has done. I believe the village ru- 
mours are true, that he was in money diffi- 
culties, and was obliged to fly." 

" And you think the watch, and all the 
other things found by the river, were put 
there by Stephen himself, to make people 
believe he was murdered ? What a wicked 
bad man he must be ! Yes, I see it all now ; 
and being jealous of my poor Hugh, he 
hoped suspicions would fall on him. It is 
hard that my poor boy's life should be 
blighted by such a villain." 



230 FRANCES. 

Miss Hutchison, in her indignation, would 
have liked to defy the law, to assert boldly 
and publicly that Stephen was alive, and to 
restore Hugh to his place in society, without 
heeding the fact that an enlightened British 
jury had found him guilty. 

" And yet we can but wait,'! said Frances. 
The woman with life before her, and a 
strong capacity for hope, forgot that, when 
old people wait, it is for death. 

"Yes, child, you can wait. Twenty 
years may pass, and leave you handsome 
and blooming still. I shall have gone to 
sleep long before ; and now that it is too 
late, I feel that I never made enough of my 
boy." 

The poor old lady quite broke down at 
last, and in trying to cheer her up, Frances 
forgot her own troubles for a time. Then 
the ladies had a cosy cup of tea together, 
and Miss Hutchison gradually recovered, 



OLD MAID AND YOUNG. 231 

and was able to discuss quietly with Frances 
the chances of the future ; but it was agreed 
between them that nothing could be done 
until they knew what Mr. Shirley had to 
propose. 

'*It is fortunate that Walter is away," 
said Frances. " I do not like hiding any- 
thing from him, and yet I feel that he has 
no sympathy with Hugh. I have tried to 
look as cheerful as usual, and not let him 
see how troubled I am ; but I am sure that 
he does see it, for he says some very sharp 
things occasionally. And he is always 
fancying that Hugh will be coming to see 
me, and if he sees any stranger about, he 
says it is Hugh in disguise. I know he 
would not be so hard upon him, if he were 
not so much taken up with Captain Heath 
and his friends. He has quite altered to 
me lately, and I know it is all through that 
horrible old Captain Heath." 



232 TRAVcn. 

About ten o'clock Rachel came to escort 
her yoang mistress home. Miss Hutchison 
made her come into the drawing-room, and 
gave her a glass of wine while Frances went 
upstairs to put on her hat. The old servant, 
talkative always, warmed into unusual free- 
dom under the influence of Miss Hutchison's 
port ; and quite bewildered the simple old 
lady by her odd use of certain long, and not 
always applicable, words, which she had 
picked up chiefly from her old master. 

" Miss Frances tells me," Miss Hutchison 
said, " that you know she is to see my un- 
fortunate nephew to-morrow. I cannot help 
feeling a little nervous about it, but I sup- 
pose it is safe enough." 

" You don't think Mr. Hugh would hurt 
his sweetheart, do you, ma'am ?" Rachel 
asked, with a humorous twinkle in her 
bright old eyes. " Of course, instead of let- 
ting him see her we ought to call in the law 



OLD MAID AND YOUNG. 233 

and police and give him up ! I wish I could 
give them that convinced him of murder a 
piece of my mind. It would not do for a 
respectable woman like me, Miss Hutchison, 
to be incited for contempt of court, which is 
a state of things my old master has explain- 
ed to me . ^he never thought it a trouble to 
enliven ignorance . but I do say that I have 
no opinion of the judge and juries who shut 
up Mr. Hugh for a madman." 

^^ It is a most miserable and unfortunate 
affair altogether," said Miss Hutchison sigh- 
ing. 

" Very misfortunate, ma'am," said Rachel, 
as if she were correcting Miss Hutchison, 
'* but then no good ever comes of two cooks 
in a kitchen, or of two young gentlemen 
philandressing . as my poor master would 
say . after one young lady ; it stands to rea- 
son that she can't like both, leastways Miss* 
Frances could not ; she's a regular goddess 



234 FRANCES. 

Diana, she is, begging your pardon, Miss 
Hutchison, for mentioning a heathen dig- 
nity." 

*'Then you think Mr. Heath admired 
Miss Frances too ?" 

" It was the talk of the village, ma'am, 
for which he was to blame ; but his admira- 
tion was quite of an interior sort. He was 
the kind of man to hang up likenesses of 
them ballot girls in his room ; women with 
paper frills for petticoats (which it stands to 
reason wouldn't bear much wear), and to say 
to other young men who came to smoke and 
drink with him, that he knew a finer girl 
than any of them . Frances Carey at the 
Farm. I had it all from Mr. Boyd, the Cap- 
tain's own man, who have heard the talk go 
on, and shameful it were too ; as my poor 
master used to say we ought to cultivate 
reticence (which I did think when I was a 
girl were a thing I could grow in the kitchen 



OLD MAID AND YOUNG. 235 

garden and asked for the seed many times), 
especially before servants, which is by nature 
our interiors, and quite right too." 

" I never liked Stephen Heath," said Miss 
Hutchison, " and I wish my poor boy had 
never been intimate with him. Well, child,'' 
as Frances at that moment appeared, ^^I 
have had a talk with Rachel, and she does 
not think there is any danger. I shall be 
very anxious to see you when it is all over^ 
and I am sure I can trust you to be kind to 
the poor fellow." 

She kissed the girl heartily as she said 
good-night ; perhaps she guessed that Hugh 
would be the next to touch those rosy lips. 



236 



CHAPTER XIV. 

CASTLES nr THE AIB. 

My castle was a gay retreat 
In Air, that somewhat gosiy shire, 

A cheraVs model ooantry seat . 
Goold model chemb sach require. 

Nor twinge nor tax existence tortured ; 

The cherubs even spared my orchard. 

Frederick Locver. 

Tiif R. GABRIEL SHIRLEY, satisfied with 
.^.^ what he had done, made his way 
homeward. The weather was fine, the way 
was pleasant, his spirits were high. There 
was nothing he enjoyed so much as bringing 
enjoyment to other people. He fancied he 
had done something to lead Sir Charles 
Wray to a healthier mood of mind, and he 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 237 

felt certain that he was about to confer some 
amount of happiness on both Hugh Bolaud 
and Frances Carey. A sanguine temper had 
carried this generous adventurous old gen- 
tleman through many successful schemes for 
the good of others ; and as he tramped along 
he blew imaginative bubbles, every whit as 
radiant and iridescent as those which chil- 
dren blow in Summer air. The fugitive 
Hugh was to have his honour restored, and 
to find a career, and to make Frances happy. 
The General was to look at life pleasantly, 
and take more interest in his pretty Cecilia. 
As to Cecilia . . . Gabriel Shirley was 
walking through the great beech-wood on a 
yellow carpet of last year's leaves, softer than 

any Turkey or Axminster . . . why, Cecilia 

___ ' 

must marry. Whom? A brilliant idea 

occurred to him. Why not Count Cassius 

Grimani ? Count Cassius had been tempted 

many a time, 'twas true; he had been a 



238 FRANCES. 

wanderer all over the world, and was con- 
sidered a consummate judge of the infinitely, 
numerous forms of female beauty. He was 
rather a seraph, to use the phraseology of a 
certain novelist. Still, he was now in the 
very prime of life, and must surely be grow- 
ing weary of his wanderings. 

" 0, he is tha very man," thought Shirley, 
and threw his trusty staff into the air at the 
happy idea. "Count Cassius must come 
back and marry Cecilia. I wonder where 
he is?" 

A very natural theme for wonder. From 
his boyhood, having no family ties, and 
abundant money, he had been seeing the 
world. He was familiar with imperial 
courts, and with gold-diggers' cabins. He 
and Gabriel Shirley, both bitten by the 
oestrus of adventure, had met in many lands, 
and gone through some rough business to- 
gether. Shirley had pleasant reminiscences 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 239 

of the tall agile gallant young Florentine, 
who used to cap his quotations with long 
screeds from Dante and Ariosto, and whose 
handsome brown-bearded face, with keen 
dark eyes under arched eyebrows, might * 
very well fascinate a woman. What a shot 
he was ! What a rider ! What a swords- 
man ! What a singer ! What a sketcher ! 
What a linguist ! Gabriel Shirley could not 
exhaust the string of his friend's perfections; 
and, indeed, Count Cassius was an Admirable 
Crichton of modern times, a man who, 
without genius, so far as I know, had what 
is more serviceable, if not so delicious, a 
perfectly versatile talent. Genius compre- 
hends; talent understands. Genius does 
one thing to absolute perfection ; supreme 
talent does all things well. If a military 
genius like Napoleon could have as lieuten- 
ant a man of consummate talent like Marl- 
borough, he would never fail. What a pity 



240 FRANCES. 

Milton could not have been secretary to 
Shakespeare instead of to Cromwell ! Some- 
times both faculties exist in the same man . 
very rarely, however; the only great example 
I recollect is Caesar. 

As Gabriel Shirley emerged from the 
beechwood, and passed on to the open com- 
mon, he saw Hugh Roland in the distance, 
coming from his cottage, doubtless looking 
for him eagerly. 

" Now," said he to himself, "I shall have 
to satiate the insatiable. I must tell this 
young lover how his mistress looked, what 
she said, what she thought, or what I thought 
she thought. I must answer the same 
question five times over. Shall I silence 
him with fiction . tell him she is to marry 
next week ? It would drive him mad, and 
he would have to go back to the Asylum. 
No, I must even take pity on him, and 
endure his endless questioning." 



CASTLES IN THE AIB. 241 

But in truth it was not so tiresome as he 
expected ; for Hugh, though eager to hear 
all that his friend could tell him about 
Frances, had, while pondering over his 
troubles in solitude, decided that he must 
let his love for her riemain in abeyance until 
a happier time. He had no right, he 
thought, to cloud her clear spirit with his 
shame and grief. Suffering from a remedi- 
less mistake of the law, he could but wait 
and hope. It would be cowardly and cruel 
to draw Frances Carey into his own ruin. 
Thus thinking, he did not show the eager- 
ness Mr. Shirley expected ; and the old gen- 
tleman grew all the more pleasantly commu- 
nicative, as he had not an importunate 
questioner to baffle. 

'* She is as beautiful and gentle as ever," 
he said to Hugh. "She knows you are 
innocent, and prays that your innocence 
may be fully proved. She is a noble girL 

VOL. I. R 



242 FRANCES. 

As the fllustrioas poet hath it : 

* Her bright keen eye can shame the sons of wrong : 
Her free fair Toice can make the soldier strong.* 

That lady, O Roland, should console you 
for even the sad trouble whose end it is im- 
possible to see: be like the hero whose 
name you bear, the mighty nephew of 
Charlemagne, who fell at Roncesvalles. 
She is as perfect a woman as Aldabella, I 
will maintain with this quarter-staff. But I 
am talking of people who lived, if they 
lived at all, a thousand years ago ; and I 
am forgetting my own hunger and thirst. 
Where is Carry? As the illustrious poet 
hath it : 

< When with long toil the forces seem to fail. 
The cure is juicy steak and nut-brown ale.' 

Carry bustled about ; Mr. Shirley washed 
in Lavengro's fashion at the pump in the 
courtyard, and in a very short time he sat 
down to a refreshing meal, joined by Hugh, 



CASTLiSS IN THE AIB. 243 

whose appetite was not so good as it ought 
to have been. 

*' Please, sir," said Carry, presently, "there 
were two policemen here while you were 
away. They said they were after two men 
that had run away from somewhere. I said 
I didn't know any men except father, 
and he never ran away from anybody. 
They asked me if there was nobody else 
about, and I said there was no men, I was 
sure : there was a gentleman a-staying with 
master, but he was out, and master was out. 
And what do you think they said, sir ?" 

*. What, Carry r 

"Why, one says to the other, * The girl's 
a hidiot.' I don't know what a hidiot is, 
but I don't believe I'm one, and so I told 
him. And then they went away." 

" I saw those fellows," said Hugh, when 
Carry had left the room, "and was very 
glad they didn't find me at home. I hid in 

b2 



244 FRANCES. 

a bit of copse, and heard them say as they 
passed it was no use searching in this direc- 
tion. I was in a terrible funk, I can tell 
you." 

^^They seem to have been the htdiots^'^ 
said Mr. Shirley, " if an idiot means a person 
so full of his own ideas that he can accept 
none from any one else. I think little 
Fetch was too clever for them. But now 
to talk of matter more important. We 
must start hence early to-morrow, to get to 
Avonside in good time next day. Walter 
Carey is not at home. You must meet 
Frances in the gardens. Nobody will know 
you in that amazing wig. Dressed as you 
are now, you can pass for a servant of 
mine : try to make your walk a slovenly 
slouch when we happen to meet anybody. 
It will be quite safe : keep up your spirits, 
and don't dishearten Miss Carey by looking 
melancholy." 



CASTLES IN THE AIB« 24^ 

" I doubt whether I ought to see her, or 
to think about her at all in my miserable 
condition." 

" Don't talk nonsense, or 111 send for thp 
police. You have abundant reward for all 
your trouble in the love of that true-hearted 
girl. You have no right to be a coward 
when she is so brave." 

** How do you know that she loves me ?*' 
said Roland. 

"0, I shall give you up. Doesn't she 
wish to see you ? What more do you ask ? 
Men are getting degenerate, as Helen's old 
nurse said of Theseus. You have a great 
trouble to bear, and a beautiful lady who 
willingly helps you to beat it, and you hesi- 
tate ! Pshaw ! We start at sunrise to« 
morrow. Be resolute. I do not mean to 
let you off. When you have once again 
looked into Miss Carey's bright blue eyes, 
you will know no further fear." 



246 - FRANCES. 

With intent of early journeying, they 
went early to bed. Hugh Roland, before 
he tried to sleep, knelt down and tried t& 
pray. It is a wonderful and beautiful in- 
stinct which induces us, when in dire dis- 
tress, to ask God for help. Much have we 
heard of the absurdity of prayer ; the 
modern philosopher, as much bewildered 
as one of Milton's philosophic devils, wants 
to know whether the prayer of a mere man 
can induce the Diety to alter his course. 
This materialist man of science cannot see 
that even prayer has its place in God's great 
design, and that the supreme cry of a hu- 
man spirit to its Almighty, and all-loving 
Father may be a stronger force than a tele- 
-graphic message. The dull scientists who 
would divide a hospital, and pray for one 
section, and leave the other unprayed for, 
and see which gets well first, are incapable 
of knowing . or even of guessing . what 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 247 

prayer means. It is the child's cry to his 
Father. No man ever prayed heartily 
without a loving answer . not always what 
he asked, for the Father knows best what 
the child needs. Prayer is the spirit's best 
refreshment; it is the highest conceivable 
form of poetry ; it is converse with God. 
May I never know a man who never prays 
or a woman who never weeps. Prayer is 
the spirit's sunlight : tears its tender dew. 

Any way, Hugh Roland, having prayed, 
felt courage given him, felt certainty of bet- 
ter times, slept tranquilly. There seemed 
a magic music in his ears all through that 
night. It ran into vague words : 

" You have prayed to God and He gives you peace^ 
As the stars come, as the stars go ; 
And the storm in your ^eart shall surely cease, 
For the tides ebb as the tides flow. 

" Arise, arise^ for your lady's eyes ! 

She will kiss you . she will kiss true. 
As the mist of night from the meadow flies 
The lark soars in the lark's blue/' 



248 nuKCSs. 

A quaint tone rang in his ears when 
Fetch roused him, and it seemed as if a 
myriad such ballad-rhymes were wedded to 
it 



249 



CHAPTER XV. 

I<BANOBS AKD HUGH. 

^' Je suis, je suis le cri de joie 
Qai sort des pr^s a leur reveil ; 
Et c'est moi que la terre envoie 
Ofirir un salut an soleiL" 

YlCTOB DE LaPSADE. 

A MERRY morning came, a delicious 
sunrise, dew-spherules and j^bird-war- 
ble everywhere. After a hasty breakfast, 
off started Gabriel Shirley and Hugh Ro- 
land on their tramp. A curiously contrast- 
ed couple : Mr. Shirley in his invariable blue 
coat and knee-breeches of andent fashion ; 
while, in fustian jacket and corduroys, with 
a coarse straw hat on a rough wig of hemp- 



250 FRANCES. 

coloured hair, Hugh Roland looked a very 
fine specimen of the English labourer. He 
went off in higher spirits than he had felt 
for many a day. It was not merely the 
infection of his comrade's sanguine temper ; 
it was chiefly thiB reply of God to the strong 
prayer of his heart. The world seemed 
happy to him. The lark's song rang through 
his brain like a bugle-call to the battle of 
life ; the wide-branching oak-tree, spreading 
its immemorial foliage to receive the deli- 
cious dew, taught him a lesson of calm. 

*' This is pleasant," said Gabriel Shirley* 
" Some people trouble us with the miseries 
of human life, but I like its felicities." 

"One cannot always have its felicities,'^ 
said Hugh. 

" Not always in the form we choose ; but 
they are sometimes to be found in the very 
depths of our miseries. Look at your own 
case. On the one hand law has declared 



FRANCES AND HUGH. 251 

you a criminal lunatic ; on the other, God, 
and your own conscience, and your secret 
heart, and your friend, declare that you are 
no such thing. Is not the balance in your 
favour, ray friend ?" 

" Yes," quoth Hugh. " But I cannot al- 
ways feel this. Sometimes all my happier 
ideas are crushed and benumbed by the 
thought of the great injustice I have to en- 
dure." 

"I have tried to prove to you that it may 
not be injustice. What is the use? Don't 
listen to ray logic . ^listen to the song of tha 
birds. Don't trouble about the future . en- 
joy the immediate moment." 

Gabriel Shirley on this occasion chose a 
shorter cut to Avonside, avoiding Monckton 
Saint Mary, and traversing quiet meadows 
and lonely lanes. They took their noontide 
meal by a clear spring, that rose beneath an 
enormous lime-tree. An arch of grey stone 



252 FBANGBS. 

protected the crystal water. There was no 
human habitation in sight. The air was 
very calm ; only a few white clouds sailed 
through the sky. 

"Forget the future and the past/' said 
Shirley, as a cold fowl and a home-made 
loaf, and a flask; of whiskey emerged from 
his wallet. " Here is pure water wherewith 
to temper the ardent spirit." 

Hugh, not at all loth to do something in 
the way of lunch, set to work at once. That 
fowl was picked to the bone, and voted the 
prince of fowls, while the cool water of the 
way-side well was declared to mix perfectly 
with Irish whiskey. 

"This is enjoyment," said Shirley, leaning 
back on the green turf, and looking into the 
sky, as if he would fain fathom its depths. 
" Many divisions of mankind, have been sug- 
gested, Mr. Roland, but, in my judgment, 
there are only two classes . those who enjoy 



FRANCES AND HUGH. 253 

life, and those who succeed in life. The 
two faculties are not often reconcileable. 
To succeed in life you must think of what you 
have, and of what you wish to get. To en- 
joy life you must think of what you are, and 
of what you aspire to be. Enjoyment is 
more difficult than success ; it is an art . ^suc- 
cess is a trade." 

" Have we a right to enjoy life ?" asked 
Hugh. 

** Have we a right to reject the enjoyment 
offered by life ? The problem which lies at 
the basis of human existence is simple 
enough. Why is there error, sin, crime ? it 
is asked. Might not the omnipotent Creator 
have made a perfect world? Of course; 
but it would have been a machine. Making 
man in His own image, He gave him the 
faculty of choice. Not being omniscient, 
not being able to forecast the innumerable 
possibilities of result from any action, 



254 FRAKCES. 

man ofiten blunders frightfully. Bnt he is 
independent^ he i5 responsible, he is lord of 
himself. God accepts him as a peer. He is 
free. The strength and weakness of the sons 
of men are alike shown in their freedom. 
The wise man enjoys . for there is not a 
movement of the world devoid of the ele- 
ments of enjoyment. But come, while I 
talk metaphysics we lose time. A lady, I 
know, never reads an essay if she sees the 
words a priori in it. She is right. Let us 
go forward, regardless of a priori considera- 
tions." 

They slept at a wayside inn that night and 
reached Carey Farm early on the following 
afternoon. Mr. Shirley, anxious to avoid 
unnecessary risks, took field paths which 
led them outside the village. 

There was a wicket-gate from the woods 
without to the quieter part of the Carey 
Farm gardens : by this they entered (ah, how 



FRANCES AND HUGH. 255 

well Hugh knew it), and ^passed along a 
path lined with Portugal laurel. Presently, 
in the distance, Frances Carey was to be. 
seen. She was sitting on a rustic seat ; she 
had taken off her hat, which dangled by a 
ribbon in her hand ; her eyes were fixed as 
if looking at the river, but in truth her gaze 
went further. Modern metaphysicians have, 
to conceal their own unfathomable igno- 
rance, invented a great word, which they 
always Lyttonianly print with a capital 
letter . the Unknowable. Frances was in the 
realm of the Unknowable. She was won- 
dering what her life would be. The feeling 
came upon her that there was change immi- 
nent. Who (with any imagination) has 
not known it ? As, before the heavy drip 
of the rain that pioneers thunder, there is in 
the air a warning that touches the nerves of 
men, so the movements of mankind are felt 
before they occur. There is presentiment. 



256 FRANCES. 

ay, and there is prophecy. Shall I call a 
man blind becaose he sees what I cannot 
see? 

^' What a picture she was !" thought Hugh 
Roland ; and his heart trembled as he saw 
her, in deep reverie, unconscious. Could he 
have known? She was thinking of him. 
Under her eyelids there were unshed tears, 
like those in crown imperial bells. 

As if by instinct and consent, Shirley and 
Roland trod quietly, keeping much to the 
soft grass. They were close on Frances 
before she knew them. She rose: the 
arched foliage above, the silver Avon below, 
seemed as if meant to show off her sweet 
and simple beauty. 

Awakened from reverie, few people are 
quite self-possessed. And Frances had her 
diflSculty. She had in Hugh's absence 
probed her heart, and discovered that she 
liked him much better than she thought ; 



PBANGBS AND HUGH. 257 

and, besides, she liked him (what woman 
wouldn't ?) all the more for his troubles ; 
and she did not wish to let him know all 
this. 

What did she do ? Stepped forward and 
welcomed the old-fashioned ubiquitous gen- 
tleman in blue coat and knee-breeches. Hid 
companion amazed her. However wise a 
woman may be, she likes a man's hair to 
curl, and his trowsers to shoV the shape of 
his legs. Hugh's hempen locks were as 
stiff as a halter, and his well-shapen hip and 
calf were hidden in loose-fitting bags of 
corduroy. Frances was quite shocked. She 
looked at him as if she did not know him. 
She knew it was cruel : but where was the 
woman with a lover who did not like to be 
cruel to him now and then ? 

Hugh Roland, however, did not perceive 
this. He was possessed overweightedly 
with strong feelings of his own. It was 

VOL. I. S 



258 FRANCES. 

enough for him to be in his lady's presence : 
it tranquillized him to behold those eyes of 
familiar beauty, always calm and thoughtful. 
They shed peace upon him so fully that 
he forgot his great trouble, forgot his awk- 
ward appearance. Had he been alone with 
her, he would assuredly have told his love 
in brief and ardent words : but Mr. Shirley's 
presence prevented this indiscretion. 

That gentleman, however, was not dis- 
posed to be in the way. 

" My young friend will not object. Miss 
<Jarey, to your smiling at his wonderful 
costume," he said, " if you will tell him he 
he is welcome. With your permission, I 
will take a short solitcjry stroll in your charm^ 
ing pleasaunce, and leave him to tell you his 
adventures. I have heard them all before. 
As the illustrious poet hath it : 

< Nothing is di^earier than a twice-told tale, 
But there's one story that is never stale.' " 



FRANCES AND HUGH. 259 

Murmuring thus, the old gentleman, no 
whit wearied by his long walk, loitered 
along a pleasant garden-path, talking to him* 
self, as was often his wont. I think he was 
quoting something from that illustrious poet 
whose works he appears to have had by 
heart. When he was beyond the first 
leafy angle, Frances said : 

" Oh, Mr. Roland, I am so glad to see 
you, and so sorry for your trouble. And 
yet, you know, I can't help smiling at your 
strange dress. You look so very odd, I 
should never have known you." 

" I am glad for two reasons, Miss Carey ; 
if I am so well disguised, I am pretty safe . 
and I know you would not laugh at me un- 
less you believed me innocent." 

. '* Why, who could doubt that ?" she ask- 
ed. " The idea of your being a murderer." 

" I doubted it myself for a time," he re- 
plied. "I recollected giving him a push 

S3 



260 FRANCES. 

that night, when he said something insolent ; 
and when the accasation was made against 
me, I was so bewildered that I oonld re- 
member nothing accurately. I grew more 
calm in the Asylnm, where I did garden- 
work, and was comparatively content ; but 
I longed for freedom, and was driven half 
wild again by the opportunity of getting it." 

*^ What became of the man who escaped 
with you ? Was he mad ?" 

*^He was quite mad. Although an old 
man his madness made him stronger thaa 
I. I could not keep up with him, and 
have never heard of him since that day." 

" And what do you think of doing now ?" 

"I don't know yet. Of course I must 
work, and it is difficult to know how this 
can be managed in England ; but I trust to 
Mr. Shirley, who is as wise as he is kind. 
How fortunate I was to take refuge with 
him!'* 



FRANCES AKD HUGH, 261 

" I am afraid you will have to go abxead," 
said Frances. 

"No; I could not bear that, for two 
reasons. I want to be on the spot, in case 
that either Heath is alive or it is found out 
who murdered him. I believe he is living.** 

" I hope he is," said Miss Carey. " And 
pray what is your other reason ?" 

" May I tell you ? It is that I dread the 
thought of being separated from you by the 
sea. I have no right to say a word ; you 
must have seen that I worshipped you long 
ago; and now, that I have so great a sorrow . 
now, that I am an outcast, and dare not face 
any one who knows me . I feel more deeply 
than ever my unworthiness of you. But I 
have learnt something from ray trouble, and 
that is that I have been foolishly wasting my 
life hitherto ; I hope now to be of some use 
in the world, and if my innocence should be 
proved . as I firmly believe it will . my 



262 FRANCES. 

greatest delight will be to know that it 
gives you some satLsfaction." 

Frances did not reply for a minute or so. 
Her face was towards the river, and seemed 
to be gazing into its swift clear waters. 
She was wondering what best to say. The 
situation was a dilemma. What would her 
brother say, if he were aware of this inter- 
view? She believed that she was doing 
right, but she hated all secresy and conceal- 
ment. Hers was naturally a clear brain, but 
she could not at once see her way through the 
labyrinth. So she thought it best to speak 
simple truth . as far as maiden might speak 
it without self-betrayal. 

" Mr. Roland," said she, " I quite under- 
stand you. What my feelings are toward 
you I hardly know ; I have not asked my- 
self ; but you may be sure I do not hate 
you. Of course I know you are innocent of 
murder. As to what you say about having 



FRANCES AND HUGH. 26S 

wasted your life, I do not see that you need 
trouble yourself; having a good income, you 
had no need to hurry yourself in choosing 
a career. You see I am trying to regard 
the question coolly and temperately. At 
this moment you have to seek safety and 
occupation ; you must not think of making 
love, or any other amusement. You must 
wait for all that." 

"Ahl" he said, sadly, "7 can wait . all 
my life long if need be. But I dare not 
ask any one to wait for me . or even to think 
of me." 

There was unendurable sadness in the 
tone of his voice. Frances felt a divine 
pity for him . a pity that warmed into life 
the unconscious love in her heart. She was 
talking gravely and coldly, to avoid any- 
thing serious; but she would gladly have 
thrown herself into his arms and wept for 
his sorrows, like Coleridge's Genevieve 



S64 FBAKCK8» 

^* beside the ruined tower/' She longed to 
give herself to him, and take the worser half 
of his trouble. But she controlled herself, 
and said, 

" Don't think of waiting. think of work. 
You will be free and happy in good time, 
and will smile at your past troubles. Of 
course I know all that you mean, and I 
thank you, and that is all I ought to say. I 
am in no hurry to marry, though the little 
chits of sixteen say I am an old woman. 
Marrying and giving in marriage are not the 
only things worth living for." 

Thus quietly she talked, with a fire burn- 
ing at her heart that made her lips as 
tremulous as red rose*petals when the south 
wind stirs at noon. It was agony to her to 
calm herself, but she saw the necessity. 
Hugh Roland looked gloomy, and answered 
nothing. Then she said, 

*'Let us be true friends now, whatever 



PRANCES AND HUGH. 265 

happens. Can we not contrive to find ^ome 
means of writing to each other ? It would 
be easy, with the help of Mr. Shirley and 
your aunt. 0, and now I am forgetting dear 
Miss Hutchison, though I have a weighty 
naemorandum of her in my pocket. Look 
here," 
The canvas bag of sovereigns was pro* 

duced. 

" The dear old lady is not brave enough 
to see you, Hugh " (how he liked to hear 
her use his Christian name 1) " but she wants 
you to take this money, in case you put Mr. 
Shirley to any expense. You can easily 
repay her some day, you know* You must 
take it, or she will be quite miserable. And 
now about letters. You write to me, under 
cover to your aunt, and ask Mr. Shirley 
to address it. Then you can tell me where 
to write to you, according to circum* 
stances." 



266 FRANCES. 

" And you wiH write to me ?*^ lie said, in 
quite a cheerful tone. 

'^ Of course I wilL It is important that 
you should know what occurs here. Heath 
may be heard of, or his murderer, if he was 
murdered. Then write to me and tell me 
all about yourself Let me be your friend. 
Think of nothing else just now. Trust me 
as if I were a man. I will not disappoint 
you.'' 

" I am sure you will not,'* he said, and 
seemed as if he would have kissed her, but 
restrained himself. She knew what was in 
his mind as well as if she could see the inner 
machinery of his souL She knew that to 
pass a certain limit would be to bring in all 
the maddening waves of love; so she courage- 
ously maintained her external coolness* 
There is snow on the summit of Vesuvius 
an hour before it breaks into inextinguish- 
able flame. 



FBANCES AND HUGH. 267 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley's steps approached. 
The old gentleman came leisurely along, 
with a satisfied smile. 

" We have had our talk, Mr. Shirley, "^ 
said Frances, going to meet him. " I want 
to arrange a correspondence, with your help 
and Miss Hutchison's, so that Mr. Roland 
may know anything that happens here, and 
that his friends may know what he is^ 
doing." 

" That will be quite easy," said Mr. Shir- 
ley. " Even the country postmistress will 
not find anything to chatter about in letters^ 
addressed to me." 

Then said Frances, 

"Now, please, down in a little arbout 
here I have put a basket of refreshment. 
Rachel helped me. She can always be 
trusted. I am sure you must both be ter- 
ribly tired and hungry. I meant to have 
asked you at first, but wanting to talk 



268 FRANCES. 

to Hagh put it all out of my head/' 
Tlie arbour, quaintly situate down a zig- 
zag path dose to the river, was admirably 
arranged for a quiet chat. On the fixed 
table of wooden mosaic Frances put a white 
cloth, and some eold roast beef, and whole- 
some home-brewed ale. Mr. Shirley cut 
the sirloin in a masterly manner ; and Hugh 
showed that his trouble had not destroyed 
his appetite, while Frances stood in the 
doorway with the evening light upon her, 
and a look as if the beauty of sunset and 
stream had bl^ided with her own natural 
beauty. Mr. Shirley looked at her with 
the healthy delight of the man who loves 
beauty for its own sweet sake. 

Presently Frances, struck by a sudden 
thought, lefl them for a short space. When 
she returned, the sky was growing gray, and 
Mr. Shirley announced the necessity of 
starting on their journey. A few miles off, 



FRANCES AND HUGH. 269 

in a small out-of-the-way village, he thought 
they might safely pass the night 

As they went together toward the wids:et 
gate, Mr. Shirley tramped energetically 
forward, while Frances and Hugh percepti- 
bly lingered. As they passed along, she 
whispered : 

" There is a little letter for you here. It 
is only m^nt to dieer you up, if you are 
very sad. Promise me, Hugh, that you 
will not open it for a long long time . not 
indeed till you feel very unhappy. And the 
very day you open it you are to write and 
tell me." 

Hugh kissed the packet, and promised. 
Then he said, in a low trembling voice : 
" Frances, will you kiss me . . . once ?" 
They ding lip to lip for an instant. It 
was a pure yet passionate kiss. Then, 
moving faster to overtake Mr, Shirley, they 
reached the gate. Hugh went forth to try 



270 

a new and strange life, a life of secresy and 
danger. Frances went back to the solitade 
of her own room^ to think over what die 
had done that day. 

When Hugh went to bed in the little 
wayside inn that night he looked at the out- 
side of his priceless letter. On the seal were 
the letters " F. C." with the motto. 
*^ Le temps passcy mais TamitiS reste.** 



271 



CHAPTER XVL 

THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 

" Fancy poor Peter Schlemihl driven penniless, 
Eager to work . ^bat where to get a character? 
How can a man without a shadow get a phice?** 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

fTlHE travellers did not start very early ou 
-*- their homeward walk, so it was late 
in the evening when they reached that 
cottage on the moor which to Hugh Roland 
seemed just now the happiest corner of the 
world. This was no treason to his lady-love, 
seeing that Avonside was the scene of a 
hideous murder which people thought he 
had done. Much as the companionship of 
Mr. Shirley had done to calm him, he still 



272 FBA17CES. 

reverted to his misfortunes; the frightful 
dream of possible murder . the scene in the 
Assize Court, when he could scarcely 
identify any figure among the multitude 
except the stem-browed keen-eyed firm- 
lipped Judge, who looked more like a 
granite torso than a man . the long months 
of apathy in the Asylum, cheered only by 
congenial garden- walk . last of all the wild 
escape, when he and his mad comrade seemed 
hounded on by fiends . all these would course 
through his brain in hours of reverie, in 
hours of sleep. The one incident to which 
he turned with relief was his awakening in 
the porch of the solitary cottage on the 
common, when he obtained both solace and 
repose. He could not help being troubled 
by a vague fear when he was out of sight of 
this hospitable corner. 

Gabriel Shirley's next idea was to find 
employment for his troublesome client. 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREEB. 273 

Hugh Roland had made up his mind to 
work and wait: what he chiefly desired 
was some occupation involving change of 
scene and plenty to do. 

" We must get you a place as a railway- 
guard," said Mr. Shirley, when they dis- 
cussed it. He scarcely spoke seriously, 
thinking it an idea Roland would not enter- 
tain. But it suited Hugh exactly. 

" Yes," he said, with more spirit than 
usual : " that is the very thing for me. Can 
it be got, do you think ? Am I fit for it ?" 

" Impetuous youth !" said Shirley. " 1 
have certain friends who are railway direc- 
tors, of whom I could easily ask so slight a 
favour. As for your fitness, I doubt whether 
at present you are fit for anything. But the 
duties of a railway-guard arej I apprehend, 
easy to learn ; and if you really think the 
situation would do for you, I will at once 
make inquiries." 

VOL. I. T 



274 FRANCES. 

"I am sure of it," said Hugh. "Per- 
petual change of ah* and scene, fresh faces at 
every station, and a continual sense of 
responsibility, would do me all the good in 
the world. You see, Mr. Shirley, I am 
quite aware that I ought not to trouble my- 
self, since I am far more fortunate than 
could well be anticipated ; but the mechan- 
ism of my brain has been shaken, so that 
my will cannot always control it. When I 
am quite myself, I am perhaps too hopeful 
of happy days to come : but there are 
moments when my mind works round and 
round the same point, and I cannot stop its 
movement by any effort. Hence I think 
that work which I could not shirk for an 
instant would be the very thing for me : so 
if you can in any way make a railway-guard 
of me, I shall be thankful." 

Mr. Shirley, after thinking the matter 
over, was of the same opinion, and at once 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREEB. 275 

it occurred to him that Sir Charles Wray, 
with whom he had become intimate on so 
very short an acquaintance, would have in- 
fluence with the board of the Great Southern 
Railway. Though not a director, hating all 
such business, he was a very large share- 
holder, having had an early belief in the 
line, and invested in it with a special desire 
to make it serviceable to the neighbourhood 
wherever his estates lay. A word from him 
at head-quarters would place Hugh in the 
seat that he coveted . a guard's van. So 
Gabriel the indefatigable left Hugh at home, 
with strict orders to eat and drink and for- 
get his cares. 

" Go and help Mark in the garden, my 
lad : come in hungry and athirst, and make 
Fetch bring you steaks or chops and ale. 
Tire yourself out : eat, drink, smoke, sleep : 
you won't dream if you work hard. As the 

illustrious poet says : 

t2 



276 FRANCES. 

^Dreams fly the bed of him who tills ihe soil. 
And perfect rest sacceeds to thorough toiL' 

I shall expect to find you as lively as a lark 
when I return to-morrow or the next day. 
I want to see you healthy, and nothing but 
hard work will do it.** 

" If what you say is true," said Roland^ 
" when I exert myself I defy all evil. After 
all, men have had far worse things to bear 
than L Frances and my aunt and you be- 
lieve me innocent : and I sometimes think I 
ought to be thankful for my misfortane, 
since it has brought me to know one so 
kind and brave as you are, Mr. Shirley." 

" You pay me a very high tribute, my 
young friend, when you call me kind and 
brave. Those two words can only be ap- 
plied to a man who loves all things good, 
and who fears nothing evil. I think I was 
born without much fear, thanks to a broad 
chest, where heart and lungs have ample 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREBB. 277 

room : and I know I was born with plenty 
of loye, seeing that I have never known the 
meaning of hatred. You cannot go through 
life without involuntary feelings of repul- 
sion, based, I imagine, on an instinct which 
makes yoir equally turn from a loathsome 
reptile, a lying demagogue, a scoundrel 
emperor. But I don't hate even such poor 
creatures as these : let them wriggle 
through the low life God gave them with 
some inscrutable design. As the illustrious 
poet hath it : 

* To evil end the hideouB reptfle crawls, 
Even when he dwells in stately royal halls.' 

Now be kind and brave yourself : kind to 
your lady and your aunt and me, who are 
all anxious to see you free from your 
trouble ; and brave to meet the world, as 
becomes a man who suffers an undeserved 
wrong. Come, I am going to get a knap- 
sack : walk with me to the edge of the 
common." 



278 FRANCES. 

Just as the road dips to the great beech- 
wood, the friends parted. Hugh went back 
more cheerily than usual, for he had a hope 
of work that would relieve his fretted brain^ 
so he strode quickly across the turf, and 
went straight to Mark Chapman, to see if 
he could help him. He came at the right 
moment. Mark was cutting up some ash- 
trunks for future fuel . ^work that requires 
the use of saw and beetle . work at which 
two men can do a great deal more than 
twice as much as one. Hugh Roland set to^ 
with both will and skill, having cut up 
many a tree in his time ; and Mark respect- 
ed him, as one stalwart labourer respects 
another; and when little Fetch, with her 
simple childish look, ran down with a can 
of sound home-brewed ale, both men were 
glad to sit on logs, and wipe the sweat from 
their brows, and strengthen themselves with 
the mighty malt of England. Fetch, in a 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREEB. 279 

pink frock, her hands clasped behind her, 
looked on in sheer simple admiration, as 
they drank their ale in Titan-Teuton fashion* 
There were larks wild with joy in the upper 
air, and a soft breeze came cool from the 
south, and Hugh Roland felt to perfection 
the luxury of rest after toil. 

"It's a fine weapon is the axe, mas er,'^ 
said Mark Chapman, all at once. And then 
he lifted up his voice and sang a country lay 
of the Sword and the Axe. 

^^ The Zwoord, it cutteth poor mortals down, 
Yor any lubber that wears a crown. 
I do not valley the Zwoord one bit, 
And they as uses it has no wit. 

^^ But the zwin^g Axe in the merry greenwood 
Does our Winter vires a power o' good : 
And I zays, may the timber never vaU, 
And I drinks to the Axe in the Zquire's old ale.'' 

" A capital song," said Hugh, laughing : 
work and refreshment and homely comrade- 
ship awoke within him a healthy spirit. 



280 ITRAKCES. 

Try it, any of you dyspeptic morbid folk, 
who are afflicted with too much gold, too 
many ideas, who have Tennyson, Swinburne, 
Darwin, Tyndall, Vojrsey, Colenso, Odger, 
Gladstone, on the brain. Go and find an 
English peasant of the right sort : a few are 
left, thank God, though we are trying to 
exterminate them: work with him, talk 
with him, feed with him. If pragmatic 
magazines and bewildering conversazioni 
have not quite destroyed your intellect, you 
will acknowledge that for once you have 
seen a man. Homer would have liked him 
better than any professor of them all. 

Leaving Hugh to get all he could out of 
Gabriel Shirle/s " handy man " . a man 
worthy of his master, who indeed had a* 
faculty for finding out the characters of men 
. ^let us follow Mr. Shirley. He took the 
most direct way to Monckton Manor ; but, 
when he arrived there, its master was not 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 281 

at home. He had gone for a ride with his 
daughter. The servants, trained to courte- 
sy to strangers, were specially courteous to 
Mr, Shirley, whom they recognised; he 
chose to await the general's arrival in the 
library, and was soon buried in a book. He 
had not read many pages when Sir Charles 
entered, with his daughter in her riding 
habit, flushed by exercise ; and she at once 
said ... 

*' 0, papa, this is the gentleman I saw in 
the dark that night . ^when I was so startled, 
you know." 

" I am sorry I startled you, Miss Wray," 
said the courtly Gabriel. " You did not 
startle me. So lovely a face beaming 
through the darkness was a vision of 
delight. If I had been forty years younger 
I should have dreamt about you. Sir 
Charles," went on the garrulous Gabriel, 
" I have taken you at your word ; I want 



282 FRANCES. 

you to give me some dinner and a bed. 
You know the saying of the illustrious poet : 

« You ask some wayfarer to pass your door : 
He comes ; lie stays ; lie proves himself a bore.' " 

"You are welcome,*' said the General, 
" and the longer you stay the better pleased 
I am. What say you, Cecilia ?" 

"0, "I like to be flattered, papa, and 
this gentleman seems to know the way. So 
ril say no more, but run away and get 
decent." 

As the charming child tripped off, holding 
up her habit, Sir Charles looked fondly 
after her. Then he turned to his guest : 

" Mr. Shirley," he said, " I have found 
the value of a word spoken in season. What 
you said to me the other day made me 
think* Yours were wise words. To grieve 
as I have grieved was an insult to God, 
while it made me most miserable, and did 
harm to my daughter. She could never 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 283 

imagine why I was so cold to her. I have 
told her." 

" Ah, you were right," said Shirley. 

" Yes. 1 did not tell her you were my 
benefactor, because I should like to do that 
when you are present. But I told her that 
her great likeness to her mother often made 
me miserable, so that perhaps I was not as 
kind to her as I wished to be ; and she said, 
' Dear papa, you are always kind . . . but I 
should think you would like me to remind 
you of mamma in heaven.' And since that 
time my melancholy feeling has passed, 
for I see the justice of your argument, and 
believe that I shall meet again my late 
espoused saint." 

" Common sense has some work to do in 
the world," said Gabriel Shirley. " I am the 
mouse that has gnawed through the net 
which confined the lion. Now shall I ask 
you a favour in return : * Ask, and it shall 



284 FRANC3BS. 

be given, ' has been my motto through 
life/' 

^^I give, before it is asked," said the 
Greneral, " if it is within my power." 

^' I want to get a young fellow as a guard 
on the Great Southern Railway. He is a 
gentleman, but under a cloud just now, from 
no fault of his own ; and I am desirous to 
find him active employment, for his health's 
safe. You will understand that he is per- 
fectly free from blame ; he has done nothing 
criminal, or even immoral ; he has got into a 
labyrinth of awkward circumstances, from 
which with patience he will be triumphantly 
extricated. I did not even know him till he 
came to me by chance in his trouble." 

^' Enthusiastic Quixote," said Sir Charles, 
" I will be your Sancho. Though not Go- 
vernor of Barataria myself, I know that 
potentate. The boy shall be a guard at 
once; if, from unfitness, or from being in 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 285 

love, he causes many railway accidents, 
yours be the blame." 

"Thanks," replied Gabriel Shirley. "The 
boy is in love, as he ought to be. The girl 
is in love with him. They will be married 
some day, I am certain ; but it cannot be 
until that cloud I mentioned is cleared 
away." 

" If it never passes ?" 

"It will . I have no fear. But if you 
care to know the story, I will tell it you 
all by-and-by, when your little girl is in 
bed." 

" Little girl indeed !" cried a musical 
voice close to him. He looked up, and saw 
Cecilia in some fair light dress. She had 
entered silently. " So I am to be sent to 
bed while you tell Papa stories, Mr. Shir- 
ley ! No, indeed ; I like stories, and I hope 
yours are good ones. And I beg to say 
that I am mistress of the house till Papa 



286 FRANCES. 

marries again, and don't mean to be sent to 
bed by anj'body." 

" She is too much for you, Shirley," said 
the General, laughing. 

" What says the illustrious poet ? . 

* A lovely lady, wayward wit revealing, 
May conquer me at once . I like the feeling.' " 

" So I may stay up, Mr. Shirley ?" said 
the laughing girl. " How kind of you to 
tolerate such a baby ! I won't be very 
troublesome, especially if you will tell me 
this mysterious story." 

"I think I might venture, if you can 
keep a secret." 

" Keep a secret I Of course I can, if it's 
my own; it's absurd to ask me to keep 
other people's. Why can't they keep them 
for themselves ?" 

" Some secrets are so serious. Miss Wray 
(may you never be troubled with such!), 
that they are too heavy a burden for one 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 287 

person to bear, and he is only too fortunate 
if there's some one willing to lighten his 
trouble by sharing it. Now, I am doing 
this for a young friend of mine, whose posi- 
tion is a very strange one, and I am quite 
willing to tell you his story, if it will not 
sadden you too much." 

" 0," said Cecilia, " I was only in fun, 
Mr. Shirley. I am quite willing to go to 
bed, and let you teU Papa about this unfor- 
tunate gentleman. Still, you know, I don't 
object to a romantic tale, told as charmingly 
as you can tell it ; and as to being saddened, 
I think I should like it. Life is almost too 
happy." 

The General looked at his fair child with 
apprehensive glance. He feared for the 
continuance of that intense happiness. He 
knew that the souls sensitive to happiness 
are just as . sensitive to misery. Now that 
his mood toward his daughter had changed, 



388 FBAKCBS. 

he watched her with almost motherly ten- 
derness, fearing he knew not what. His 
life had grown happier as he pondered 
Shirley's argument, but his anxious tem- 
perament found exerdse in another way, 
and now he was in perpetual dread lest 
Cecilia should not be always quite happy. 

It was a baseless dread, for Cecilia was 
embodied enjoyment. Her walk was a 
dance, and her speech was song. Every- 
thing in the world seemed to gladden her. 
The pretty face flushed at the song of a 
blackbird or the beauty of a rose ; the hazel 
eyes brightened at the sight of a sunrisa 
Gabriel Shirley never forgot his first glimpse 
of her in the light of her handmaid's lan- 
tern. She came out of the darkness a lovely 
apparition, and smiled upon him with the 
half-frightened air of a timorous little wren 
that has come too near humanity. She 
might have been a nymph bom of the twi- 



THE CHOICE OF A CABEER. 289 

light . a daughter of gloaming and glamour. 
Always about her was something aerial ; her 
life was joy. 

That evening, after a dinner which had 
been brightened by pleasant talk, the 
General and his daughter and guest sat to- 
gether in the library. On a round table 
stood an antique Etruscan lamp, and a flask 
of Venice glass, ruby-starred, holding a 
ruddy liquid, and small flowered glasses 
thereby. At a piano in a niche among the 
books Cecilia was sitting striking a few 
melodious notes at intervals, and sometimes 
murmuring a snatch of song. The General, 
a lover of music, had in his travels collected 
the airs of many wild races, with the words 
when obtainable. Cecilia had skimmed the 
cream of these, and woven them into fan^* 
tasy and caprice of her own. She was sing- 
ing now : 

VOL. I. u 



290 VBA9CES. 

* * Hi^ say the worid is Toy sad 

From the son's hot noon to Hic roond fofl moan : 

WliOe there's in it a Isas and a lad 

SoROw's a thing wiE perish soon. 

*' I say Ihe worid is a irorid of joy. 

With Ihe sweet biids' tone in Ihe summer swoon. 
Make not ol life a broken toy^ 

Beauty's a tiung wiE perish soon." 

"Cecilia," said her father; and the fair 
child came to him caressingly at once. " It 
was Mr. Shirley, my darling, who by a few 
wise words not long ago showed me I was 
making you and myself mihappy. Mourn- 
ing for your dear mother, I was neglecting 

you.'' 

" Don't say it^ Papa T 

" Well, I will not : still you must thank 
Mr. Gabriel Shirley for awakening me from 
a melancholy and almost morose mood, by 
a simple statement of truth. I am very 
grateful to him, Cecilia : are not you ?" 

The beautiful girl crossed to Gabriel 
Shirley's chair, and kissed him. The old 



THE CHOICE OP A CAREER. 29J 

^ gentleman compared himself silently to 
Tennyson's "Talking Oak," when Olivia 
kissed its too-sensitive rind. And he said, 
as Cecilia, having freely given her kiss of 
thanks, stood looking shyly at him : 

" I'm a hundred times repaid, Sir Charles. 
Why should a chance word give me your 
friendship and your daughter's gratitude? 
I have already had infinite reward in the 
thought that you were cheered by what I 
said. Now, Miss Wray, may I tell you 
this wonderful secret ? . ^unless you would 
prefer to go to bed. As the illustrious poet 
sayeth : 

*' A lesson sends the liveliest girl to sleep : 
Tell her a tale, and wide awake she^U keep.' ^ 

"I should like to hear, if I may," said 
Cecilia, seating herself on a stool at her 
father's feet. ** I will keep as many secrets 
as ever you like." 

" Cecilia is like the famous female free- 

u2 



292 TRANCES. 

mason in the old story," said Sir Charles. 
" She must be initiated now, whatsoever it 
costs her." 

"Then I will address myself to Miss 
Cecilia," said Shirley. " Imagine, my dear 
young lady, a man just entering life sud- 
denly accused of a murder he had not done, 
with evidence against him strong enough to 
satisfy a jury. Imagine him found guilty, 
though quite innocent, and spared from 
hanging because he is thought to be a 
maniac, though he is perfectly sane. Ima» 
gine his escaping from confinement among 
lunatics, and coming by chance to me, who 
had never seen him before or heard of him* 
Imagine my taking him in, and feeling as 
anxious about him as if he were my own son^ 
and asking your father to find him a situa* 
tion. Don't you think I am a deal madder 
than he is?", 

" That is the skeleton of your story, is it ?" 
said the General. 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 298 

" All that need be told. The details are 
trivial. The boy . boy I call him, but I 
suppose he is seven or eight and twenty . 
could no more murder a man than you or 
I. He is the victim of circumstance and 
conspiracy. And 0, my dear Miss Wray, 
you should see how his sweetheart believes 
in him. He had never said a word to her 
before that time : but I suppose he and she 
knew their own minds. The eyes have 
their language, I am told." 

" Yours look very knowing sometimes, Mr.. 
Shirley," said Cecilia. " But Tm sure if she 
had cared a bit about him before. ^though 
he and she might scarcely have known it . 
she would have found it out the instant he 
was in any trouble." 

" These female children learn the whole 
art of love without the help of Ovid," said, 
Sir Charles Wray. "This little Cecilia, 
whose acquaintance with young gentlemen 



294 FRANCES. 

18 circumscribed, lectures quite learnedly 
on the science of erotics. It seems, Mr. 
Shirley, that there are two reasons for 
making your friend a railway-guard : one, 
that he is either a madman or a murderer ; 
and the other, that a charming girl is in 
love with him. Such arguments are irre- 
sistible." 

"If this were your serious reply, Sir 
Charles, I should bring evidence to show 
that the poor fellow is the victim of a series 
of mistakes. As for that part of your irony 
that is based on a charming girl's being in 
love with him, I hold my position very 
strong there. Nothing is keener than the 
instinct of a good girl. If the evidence 
against him had been far stronger, I should 
have believed him innocent on the ground 
of her belief She could not love a man 
who could be a murderer." 

*' I should like to know that lady," said 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER, 295 

Cecilia. " Papa, you will do what you can 
for Mr. Shirley's friend, will you not ?" 

" I would do anything Mr, Shirley asked 
without a moment's thought," said the Gene- 
ral. "This unlucky fellow shall have his 
guard's van on the Great Southern ; and I 
hope the whirligig of time will free him 
from it, and bring him here to dine with us 
and chat over his half-forgotten troubles. 
It is a most miserable position for a man ; 
but if he keeps calm, and awaits events, 
it may result in a happy life in due time." 

" That is what I tell him," said Shirley. 
"He is a fine fellow . daring, clever, lazy, 
untrained. Up to this time he has been just 
wasting his life, and I've a fancy this trou- 
ble may make a man of him. It often does. 
As the illustrious poet hath it : 

' J07 18 timers pander, Fleasnre is time's thief : 
But time's two conquerors are Toil and Grief.' 

So I want to give him a chance. Sir Charles^ 
and I rely on your help." 



296 FRANCES. 

** It is accorded/' said the General. " I 
am curious to know the upshot of this little 
intrigue of ours. You must keep me well 
informed about it. Couldn't you bring your 
man over here before he joins ? He'll have 
precious little time after/' 

" He shall come," said Shirley. " He will 
be delighted and frightened." 

Cecilia was at her piano singing : 

'< Gk)od night ! The world is still : 

No echo from the hill : 
Without a sound the stars pass through the silent sky. 

The sweet leaves are not stirred 

Bj chirp of wakeful bird 

Or by late lover's word : 
Amid a drowsy world alone awake am I. 

Ah, lady, sleeping sound 

,While the great world goes round ! 
To be a vision of yours I would be glad to die. 
. Goodnight! Good-bye!" 

This was the last song. Gabriel Shirley 
had to start early the next morning, wishing 
to leave Hugh Roland not too long alone. 
But before he lefb Monckton Manor he saw 



THE CHOICE OF A CAREER. 297 

Cecilia again . looking in the early morning 
just like a flower that was born in the night. 
She came down to give him breakfast. She 
had a rose on her cheeks and a rose at her 
breast. She walked with him down to the 
front gate, and gave him a look of real 
thankfulness as they parted . and the stal- 
wart old wayfarer went ojff homewards. She 
could not say what she wanted to say, but 
her look was enough. It told him that she 
knew what he had done for her father and 
herself. 



298 



CHAPTER XVIL 

QUOT HOMINES. 

'^ Was that your lover ?** quoth Ralph the Earl 

To his sister b; the sea ; 
>i Why, a poor lame carl from a sinking boat 

He surely seemed to me." 

^^ Ah, wait a while," quoth the lady then, 

" Till you see him when wild winds rise ; 

*^ There was never a lover worth one true kiss 
That came not in disguise." 

The Last Viking. 

T)EHOLD Miss Hutchison in her favourite 
-*-^ diamond-casemented parlour at the 
Hollies, with a tea-service in antique china 
set on an old-fashioned polygonal japanned 
table. With gold-rimmed spectacles to aid 
the somewhat faded eyes of the climacteric 



QUOT HOMINES. 299 

year, she reads, or thinks she reads, an in- 
herited folio, the production of her great- 
grandfather, the Venerable Archdeacon 
Hutchison, entitled "The Church of England 
older than the Church of Rome." This 
treatise, in the fine large type and black ink 
unknown to these degenerate days, was dear 
to the old lady's heart ; many times had she 
read it from beginning to end, without any 
clear idea of its meaning, but with the delight- 
ful feeling that it was perfectly orthodox^ 
and was written by her grandfather the 
Archdeacon. Had it been in Latin, I think 
she would have read it quite as pertinacious- 
ly, and with even more enjoyment. 

Frances is coming to tea, and to report her 
interview with Hugh. The old lady was a 
trifle timorous. She had lived so quiet a 
life that this sudden trouble shattered her 
nerves. She thought with horror of Hugh's 
being called first a murderer, and then a 



200 wnxscES. 

madman. He had been a troublesome boy 
always ; would put his dirty boots on her 
sofa, and liked beer better than ginger-wine, 
and Shakespeare and Byron (profane authors) 
better than the lucubrations of the Venera- 
ble Archdeacon. Still, with all his irregu- 
larities, how kind he was ! There was al- 
ways a rough gentleness about him, which 
the old lady recognized. 

Frances came in presently . fresh as a lark, 
and just as gay. Her gaiety was not as- 
sumed, though there were times when she 
deemed it right to appear merrier than she 
really felt, for the dear old lady's sake. It 
was not so now. She was satisfied with the 
position of affairs. She believed Hugh Ro- 
land would prosper and clear himself. She 
had full confidence in Mr. Shirley. When 
she entered Miss Hutchison's quiet parlour, 
shaded by the hollies that lined the lawn 
outside, she freshened the atmosphere as if 



QUOT HOMINES. 301 

she had been a cluster of fragrant hawthorn 
blossom. She had almost too vivid a vitali- 
ty for old Miss Hutchison, withering away 
in her quiet rooms while Frances grew 
robust and strong in the gardens and mea* 
dows of Carey Farm. 

Frances was a girl who made up her 
mind promptly, and stuck staunchly to her 
decision. It may here be observed that 
youthful readers of works of imagination are 
a little apt to judge the characters introduc- 
ed from their own special point of view* 
The young lady who is sentimental is quite 
shocked by the proceedings of a heroine who 
has no sentiment at all, but a great deal of 
true feeling. 

" 0, I could not have done thatl" she ex^ 
claims, and at once sets it down as unnatural, 
forgetting that the novelist's duty is to study 
character in all its varieties, and that she is 
not the only . ^nor perhaps even the most 



302 . FRANCES. 

interesting . variety of female character. 
Then the youthful critic, who is a prominent 
personage in modern journalism, since a man 
of letters of any real power will not waste 
his time on mere criticism, judges also from 
his own stand-point, "assumes the God," 
and is charmingly severe on men of far 
higher mental stature than himself. If he 
finds anything he cannot understand he sets 
it down as folly. It seems rather a pity 
that criticism should fall into the hands 
of boys who have not learnt to write, or 
of superannuated persons who have tried 
to learn, and failed. I, who write this, 
have no quarrel with my critics, who have 
seldom ill-treated me, except from malignity 
or misapprehension . two mental diseases 
which are incurable. But I think the read- 
ing public would be thankful for a new 
critical journal of absolute impartiality. It 
should notice no book that was not worth 



QUOT HOMINES. 303 

reading. Hence, of course, there would be 
no employment on it for the slashing writers 
who delight to cut up a book, especially if 
the author is a friend or a rival : hence also 
this journal would be a complete index and 
guide to the best literature of the day. 

Satire has its value, doubtless, and I read 
Juvenal with delight; but that delight is 
increased by the satisfaction I feel that I do 
not live in such times as those of Juvenal. 
Satire, after all, is only the phosphoric 
gleam born of putrid matter. The true 
way to improve the people is not by laugh- 
ing at vice and folly, but by setting a high 
ideal before them. The articles we see in 
certain journals, accusing English girls of 
immodesty, English matrons of inebriety, 
describing women of bad character, touch- 
ing, in fact, on that outer verge of evil 
which we all know to exist, do harm to 
weak-minded readers, and do no good ex- 



304 FBAKCES. 

cept to the journals themselves. A well- 
known weekly paper divides itself into 
three heads : it is political, social, literary. 
It does its work brilliantly, yet badly. 
Would not the public welcome a paper of 
the same class, similarly divided in its ar- 
rangement, but with political articles entire- 
ly free from party, and with sodal essays 
that never glanced at the worst aspects of 
society, but always suggested higher develop- 
ments, and with literary views that left 
worthless work to deserved oblivion, and 
introduced to the public the books they 
might wisely read ? Such a journal would 
suit me: I believe it would suit London 
and England. The habit of looking at the 
worst side of everything is not naturally 
English. 

The odour of pekoe souchong from thin 
china cups of a quaint fimr.de4ys pattern, 
struggled with the smell of honeysuckle. 



QUOT HOMINES. 305 

Miss Hutchison had laid the Archdeacon 
aside, with her spectacles marking a won- 
drously difficult passage about Augustine of 
Canterbury, and served her young friend 
with tea and the thinnest possible brown 
bread and butter, and awaited her talk. 
Frances soon began. 

*'Hugh will be quite safe, Miss Hutchi- 
son. Mr. Shirley has takeq. care of him ; 
and he is getting on capitally. I had some 
difficulty in making him take your money ; 
and he is quite sure he won't want any 
more; and I think the same. He went 
away in high spirits." 

" Poor boy 1" sighed Mrs. Hutchison. 
" It is very hard upon him. I wonder when 
this terrible trial will be over. And I hoped 
to see him comfortably married, and per- 
haps be godmother to his first baby. 
dear I With what he had, and with what I 
can leave him, he would have been able to 

VOL. T. X 



306 FRANCES. 

live a happy country life. It does seem 
hard/' 

" It is hard," said Frances. " But I be- 
lieve most religiously that all will come 
right in time." 

"And I shall be dead," replied Miss 
Hutchison. " I shall never live to see my 
poor boy righted. Frances, my dear, let me 
tell you what I haye done . I have made a 
will, and left all I have in the world to you, 
and you must give it to him if he can ever 
take it. Will you? You will say yes, I 
know." 

Frances did not take long to decide. She 
thought to herself, 

" I believe in Hugh. I have made up my 
mind we love each other. I suppose he 
could not have a better trustee." 

Still, in replying to Miss Hutchison, she 
could not help saying : 

" If you make me your heiress, some one 



QUOT HOMINES. 307 

.ls6 will want to marry me. What then, 
dear Miss Hutchison ?" 

**I am not afraid, " quoth the clear-sighted 
old lady. Nor was there any need, for 
Frances, having decided, firsts that she could 
love Hugh, and, secondly^ that she did love 
Hugh, had come to the conclusion, as a 
necessary thirdly^ that she would be true to 
him whatever might happen. 

" I must run away early this afternoon, 
Miss Hutchison," she said. " Walter is 
coming home, and I want to be there to 
receive him." 

" Where has he been so long T asked the 
old lady. 

^'0, to several fairs and markets . and to 
London on business. I don't know where 
exactly. ** 

"I hope he has not been too intimate 
with that wild set of people Captain Heath 
picked up with . members of Parliament and 

x2 



308 FRANCES. 

flashy young women . ^all driving four horses 
I don't know where. It s a terrible place, 
that London, and I do hope your brother 
has kept out of temptation. Young men 
are so weak.'' 

Frances thought that young women are 
not always strong, but she did not venture 
to say so. She took leave presently, and 
was home at Carey Farm before Walter's 
arrival. 

When he did arrive, she was not satisfied 
with him. He seemed different from his 
usual self. Sometimes he was buoyant, 
sometimes morose. That first evening he 
went off to bed early, on the plea of fatigue, 
without giving his sister much information 
as to where he had been or what he had 
been doing. The next morning he went 
off over the farm, and then wandered into 
the village, and Frances saw nothing of him 
till dinner, when he did not seem in at all 



QUOT HOMINES. 809 

an amiable humour. He was, in fact, very 
taciturn indeed, except when he grumbled 
at the soup being too peppery, or the 
steak overdone. Frances drew her own 
conclusions. 

It was their custom, after dinner, to sit 
and chat over the wine. Frances liked just 
one glass of port : Walter could easily dis- 
pose of the rest of the bottle . ^not too much 
for a man who has been actively exercised 
in the open air all day. It was usually the 
pleasantest moment with this brother and 

sister : Walter was at his best after dinner, 
» 

and Frances realized in him her esoteric 
dream of what he ought to be. A sister 
thinks more of her brother before she has 
a lover than afterwards. 

Walter Carey was silent, I may say glum, 
for some time : then he suddenly said . 
" You have had visitors, I hear, Frances." 
" Visitors I" she replied. " That old gen- 



^H 122 


^' V 




. ^TBin 


^H the 




^^1 
^^H 


te.««llii»i 


^^1 




^^H 


^B pcti 


Bl*«^a|°^' 


^^H buc 


..-i- 


^H She 


h-ii*^!.,.! 


^^M 


.^.(ffca, 


^H 


...iKH*-? 


^^^1 abo 


. tBl<^IM| 


^^H the 


«^ ^H 


^^^H 


r«>Bi^H 


^^H nee 


^»&^H 


^^^B as < 


»li ^i^^l 


^H li!" 


"'^^l 


^^^^ ins 


IM<**''4^| 


[ Fr 


i»«fiiM^| 


^^H|I|^M 


,.,w.kii^^B 


^H J 


^H 


^H J 


^1 


^lA 





. 


1 i'Hiw ^^^^^h 


1 


I'f 


QUOI HOMINES. 309 ^^M 






I ' 


umour. He was, in fact, very ^^M 
ed, except when he grumbled ^^M 




jt 


I 11 


> being too peppery, or the ^^M 




' 1 


. J ^'me. Frances drew her own ^^M 






I eir custom, after diaiier, to sit ^^M 






1 T the wine. Frances liked just ^^H 




I port : Walter could easily dis- ^^H 




.'est of the bottle . not too much ^^H 




ho has been actively exercised ^^H 


t 


air all day. It was usually the ^^H 


m 


moment with this brother and ^^H 


. 


ter was at his best after dinner, ^^H 


^ 


es realized in him her esoteric ^^^| 


1 


what he ought to be. A sister ^^H 


1 


.e of her brother before she has ^^H 


1 


m afterwards. ^^H 


M 


Carey was sileiif I may say glum, ^^H 


. 


diiie : then Ui '"said . ^^^| 


n 


liavc had visif' ^^s." ^^^^^^M 


u 


org she ^^^^^^^1 



312 FRANGBS. 

quite sure, dear Walter, that, if you are 
intimate with the sort of people who dis- 
grace our quiet village, you will surely 
suffer for it. All that was seea and heard 
of them was decisive against them. How 
-can you endure such miserable wretches ?" 
" O, you gurls tremble at trifles," said her 

brother. 

"I tremble at nothing," she answered. 
^' These people disgust me. I cannot under- 
stand how it is they do not disgust you. 
Fancy, after associating Avith ladies, feeling 
any interest in a fast young woman like the 
-one who appeared in Avonside the other 
day ! No . ^I don't understand it, Walter." 

"Well, I don't understand you," he re- 
plied. " You talk all this nonsense about 
some mere acquaintances of mine, just to 
make me forget about your strange visitor 
. ^that's my belief." 

" Walter," she said, in a clear sharp tone, 



QUOT HOMINES. 3 1 & 

" I will not bear this. I have told you that 
I have seen Hugh Roland ; what more do 
you want ? I will see him again when and 
where I please, if it can be done without 
danger to him. What I have said in refer- 
ence to yourself, was merely prompted by a 
fear that you were getting among people 
who would do you harm. You must judge 
for yourself whether I am right." 

" Women are always right in their own 
opinion," said Walter Carey, and walked off 
to his own room rather abruptly. 

Frances felt unhappy after this passage of 
arms with her brother ; but she resolved to 
defend Hugh Roland to the very last . . . 
and she kept her resolve. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
FRANCES. 



CHAPTER L 

JEBMYK STBEET. 

^ ^^ Ambubaiarum collegia, phannacopolae, 
Mendici, mimaey balatrones . . . " 

T N Jermyn Street I think it is possible to 
-^ purchase everything necessary for a 
bachelor, or a man who lives as a bachelor, 
except, perhaps, good cigars. It is a re- 
sourceful street, much haunted by men who 
like to be near the palaces and clubs and 
theatres. It has quiet comfortable rooms^ 
in houses kept by retired butlers and cooks, 
and Captain Heath had got a remarkably 

VOL. n. B 



2 FRANCES. 

pleasant suite, and Mrs. Shergold, his land- 
lady, gave hirn capital breakfasts, and very 
nice dinners indeed on the rare occasions 
when he dined at home. The Captain was 
.growing young again ; London was to him 
.z, fons juventutis. The ball was at his foot. 
He won at cards amazingly ; he put money 
into Wyldote Lavington's speculations, and 
it miraculously multiplied ; he enjoyed the 
entrance to that gilded Bohemia, where 
speculation and dissipation go hand in 
hand ; he believed himself a boy once more, 
for Dick Wyldote declared him a wit, and 
Ethel Clinton -said he was the handsomest, 
most fashionable man in London. Nor, in- 
deed, had Captain Heath's rustication ren* 
dered him incapable of playing a brilliant 
part in society. He had a well-set figure, 
which Buckmaster delighted to dress; he 
had at least a reflex of the quiet wit and 
courteous manner of the past generation. 



JERMTN STBEET. 3 

Wyldote Lavington, M.P., who was rather 
" loud " himself, found Captain Heath quite 
a valuable aid. His style was good. It is 
sad to think that good style is seldom found 
in these times. The young gentlemen of 
the present day are completely effaced by 
the few men left among us who preserve 
their youth, though coeval with the cen- 
tury. 

Mr. Wyldote Lavington, M.P. for Bri- 
borough, was at this time on the very sum- 
mit of the wave of life. The Prime Minis- 
ter petted him. His Irish Land Company 
was a success in the City. It was quoted 
at a premium, and everybody was eager 
for shares. And then there was his the- 
atre . the Bagatelle. Do you know it? 
A vestibule of the lightest columns, thin 
and lofty like the stems of a fir-forest, with 
a Moorish roof above, and walls of mirror, 
and huge fragrant plants in every possible 

b2 






4 FRANCES. 

niche, and ample space for the ladies ta 
move like a flock of radiant birds of most 
changeable plumage. Within, perfection o£ 
colour and light; boxes like boudoirs, a^ 
pit like a drawing-room ; an orchestra hid* 
den amid fern and flower and fountain ; a 
brilliant company, playing comedy made^ 
expressly for them ; centre of all . . . Ethel 
Clinton. 

An apparition ! See her to-night. There 
is Captain Heath in a stage-box with Dick 
Wyldote; Lavington is behind the scenes. 
What is this first piece? A three-act 
comedy . ^it*s title, JVo, Odd tide, but these 
are days in which odditv takes. 

First act ; Ethel as a seirant-girl, clean- 
ing steps in an elegant attitude; carrying 
breakfast to a langmd young gentleman, 
lodger in the house which she serves. She 
is lovely, of course ; fresh from the country, 
innocent as a burd> and fragrant as bloom 



JERMYN STREET. 5 

of hawthorn. The villain of a lodger makes 
dishonourable proposals ; she magnanimously 
answers, No. 

Second act : Scoundrel lodger has got 
her out of her wretched situation* She has 
to take in washing and mangling and iron- 
ing. She sings at her work. Her voice is 
that of Adelina Patti sublimed by essence 
of nightingale. Generous manager of opera 
hears her lovely song as he passes the lane 
where she is turning a mangle, and offers 
her a hundred pounds a night at once. She 
answers, Yes. 

Third act : She is Queen of Song in the 
chief city of the world. Enthusiastic youth 
bribe her jille de chambre to give them her 
old slippers, from which to drink her health 
in champagne. The bouquets thrown to 
her from stage-boxes have more diamonds 
and rubies in them than lilies and roses. 
The Poet of the Period writes her a wicked- 



6 FRANCES. 

ly amorous ode. The Prince of the Period 
offers her a splendid settlement. The Ian* 
guid lodger of the first act comes forward 
to maintain that he was her first lover. 
She, throwing herself into the arms of a 
stalwart peasant from her native village, 
refuses Prince and Poet and languid lodger, 
with a triumphant and vindictive No. 

" I call that a deuced good little play/' 
said Dick Wyldote to Captain Heath on the 
Saturday of the first representation, when 
the stalls of the Bagatelle were filled with 
theatrical critics. ** What do you think ?" 

Miss Clinton, at the moment, was almost 
smothered in bouquets. 

" It was capital !" said the Captain. 
" How well she acts all through ! The 
thing suits her to perfection." 

" So I think. It took me a whole day to 
write, and an immense lot of soda and 
brandy. But I think it will run." 



JERMYN STREET. 7 

**You wrote it!" said the Captain. 
"Why, it is as good as Shakespeare or 
Sheridan !" 

"Glad you think so. I don't, I also 
wrote the burlesque that's to follow. If my 
verses are bad, at least you'll see some legs 
that are good. Listen to the prologue. 

The burlesque is on the story of Ulysses, if 

« 

you ever heard of that old swell." 

At this moment the curtain rose again, 
revealing a troop of pretty girls in airy cos* 
tume, with the Clinton as their leader, and 
some Offenbach music burst from the or- 
chestra, and there came a wild dance to a 
wild song of this sort : 

" Far away in the isles of Greece 
Every girl had her own caprice, 
Life was joyous and love was true : 
Ah ! it is not so with you ! 

<< Soft was the breath of the southern breeze, 
Soft the dip of the sapphire seas, 
Lips were loving and oaths were true , . . 
Ah ! it is not so with you ! 



8 FRANCES. 

** Love into merry music burst, 
Happy kisses quenched love's keen thirst ; 
Hearts by love were pierced right through, 
Ah I it is not so with you !" 

This poetic prologue introduced Miss 
Ethel Clinton as Paris . . . the title of the 
burlesque being The Paris of Paris. She 
was dressed as a French aristocrat in the 
days of the Grand Monarque . . . silk, vel- 
vet, lace, colours softly matched . a costume 
that well showed the shapely leg. The 
«tory of the burlesque had, I think, been 
stolen by Dick Wyldote from Paul F^vah 
In it the heroine, being of unusual mental 
power and physical strength, appears some- 
times in male and sometimes in female 
attire, is received at Court under both dis- 
guises, and carries out many wild adven- 
tures, both as a man and as a woman. A 
mere burlesque : but it gave Miss Clinton 
admirable opportunities of showing off her 
voice, her figure, her legs. What more 



JERMYN STREET. 9 

could she want ? Wyldote Lavington, M.P. 
for Briborough, kept the Bagatelle Theatre 
open, that Ethel Clinton might have her 
fling. It cost him something : but then he 
had his Irish Land Company. When one 
collapsed, it seemed more than probable the 
other would collapse also. But the Irish 
Land Company prospered wonderfully, 
there being a firm belief on the Stock 
Exchange that the culture of the shamrock 
and the shillelagh-tree would be most suc- 
cessful ; and so Wyldote Lavington enjoyed 
the time, and made a stir in the London 
world, and floated like a bubble of foam on 
the surface of life. These bubbles are 
always rising to the surface of the London 
ocean. Soon they dissolve into air. A 
history of these metropolis-follies would be 
both readable and worth reading. 
* The Clinton had orders to captivate Cap- 
tain Heath : she obeyed orders, taking him 



10 TBANCBS. 

out to dinner or supper and making him 
pay, and in other ways fascinating him. 
Still she was hardly doing as much as Mr. 
Lavington desired. Truth to say, Ethel 
Clinton, though very weak in one point 
(the most unforgiveable of all for a woman), 
was not altogether bad. To put the matter 
in the clearest way, if not an honest woman 
physically, she wished to be an honest 
woman morally. Moreover, she had a 
strong imagination, a true love of art ; and 
these are qualities which prevent any one 
who possesses them from sinking very low. 
Also, she had curiously keen insight into 
character ; she regarded Lavington as a mere 
sham ; she thought his cousin Wyldote 
worth a dozen of him. And when she had 
so fascinated poor dear old Captain Heath 
that she could drive him with a thread, 
she resolved never to ask him a question or 
to use her influence in any degree. This 



JEBIOTN STBEET. 11 

girl was a world better than the people who 
surrounded hqr. 

It often occurs that an imaginative girl 
with a loving temperment is misled by some 
plausible scoundrel older than herself and 
of a far lower type. You cannot see much 
of the world without noticing such cases. 
The only remedy lies in giving girls a wider 
education than at present they receive ; but 
just now education is in a painfully unde- 
veloped stage, and seems likely to remain 
so till all the members of school-boards are 
consigned to lunatic asylums. 

Captain Heath, rather enjoying his reju- 
venescence, and fancying (poor old boy !) 
that Ethel Clinton loved him for his own 
sake, which (his false hair and teeth con- 
sidered) seems hardly probable, was sudden* 
ly the victim of another annoyance. BQa 
man, Boyd, brought him in a card one 
morning just after breakfast with this in- 



12 XHANCES. 

scription : 

Mr. B. C. Boss. 

*' Boss I'* said the Captain; **who is the 
man ? What does he want ?" 

It had been a late night, and Captain 
Heath was hardly himself yet, and did not 
want to be bothered. 

" Find out what the fellow wants, Boyd,'* 
he said. "Don't let him in unless he's got 
some business." 

Thus saying, the Captain reverted to the 
breakfast over which he was lingering, and 
tried to eat some devilled chicken by the 
aid of brandy and seltzer. 

Boyd, on his return, looked rather mys- 
terious. 

" He's a queer gent, sir," said he, " and 
his eyes look different ways ; but he says 
he wants to tell you something very import- 
ant about poor Mr. Stephen. He says he 
won't keep you ten minutes." 



JERMYN STREET. 15 

Boyd pressed the matter eloquently^ 
having had his palm crossed by a silver 
coin ; so Captain Heath at last said with a 
sigh, 

" Well, I suppose I must see the fellow. 
Show him in." 

Boss entered : an unmistakeable Hebrew, 
with a glassy stare in two disconnected eyes,, 
and with richly-anointed black hair. There 
was a huge gold chain on his satin waist- 
coat, and his dirty short fingers carried a 
whole pawnbroker's shopful of rings. A 
tall shambling sort of man was this Boss . 
viilture-like and noisome. Captain Heath, 
whose linen was faultless, and whose gene* 
ral get-up was that of the military veteran, 
shuddered at this greasy mixture of gold 
and grime. The Captain was trim and 
neat to the very last hair of his whiskers ; 
he could not tolerate a speck of dust on his 
coat or of mud on his boot. Hence this 



14 FRANCES. 

visitor of his by no means pleased him, and 
he assumed his iciest air. 

Mr. Boss, however, was not a man to be 
put down by a cool reception. He made 
himself thoroughly at home. There was a 
mixture of patronage and freedom about the 
fellow which to Captain Heath was perfectly 
abominable. 

" To what do I owe the honour of a visit 
from you?'' asked Heath, deliberately, not 
interrupting his breakfast. ** It is rather an 
xmusual hour for a stranger to call.** 

" I have taken the liberty to call,*' said 
Mr. Boss, " to ask if you could give me the 
address of your son, Mr. Stephen Heath.'* 

The Captain was amazed. 

" I have no son," he said. " If that is the 
whole of your business, perhaps you will re- 
tire. I am astonished at your coming to ask 
xne an impertinent question.'* 

*' Mr. Stephen Heath owes me seven thou- 
sand pounds," said Boss. 



JERMYN STREET. 15 

" Upon my word," said the Captain, ris* 
ing from his chair, " you are a very impudent 
fellow. My son is dead ; he was of age years 
ago ; I am not responsible for his dealings 
with a rascally Jew bill-discounter. Leave 
the room at once, or my man shall kick you 
downstairs." 

He touched a hand-bell as he spoke, and 
Boyd entered. The little wiry Ulster man 
looked quite capable of fulfilling Captain 
Heath's threat. 

" Your soil is not dead," said the Jew ex- 
citedly. " This is a plot between you and 
him. I have your name to some of his bills. 
I mean to have my money." 

"Boyd, turn that scoundrel out," said 
the Captain, " and never admit him again." 

The Irishman opened the door, caught in- 
dignant Boss by the arm, and swung him out 
with great celerity. Captain Heath could hear 
a slight scuffle outside, and an intermix- 



1 6 FBANCES. 

ture of Irish and Israelite execrations. He 
laughed to himself, but he was not well 
pleased with what had occurred. What did 
this rascal mean by saying that Stephen was 
not dead? What did he mean by declaring 
that he had bills with his name on them ? 
Could Stephen have committed forgery? 
He could not believe it. He knew that he 
was in difficulty ; and he was sufficiently ac- 
quainted with the methods of the money-len- 
der to be aware that hundreds are readily 
expanded into thousands. In odia hoininum 
incurrunt foeneratores ; but little care they 
about that, so long as they finger the gold* 
Indeed there can be no doubt that Shake- 
speare's conception of Shylock is absolutely 
true to nature, and that 

^' Mammon, the least erected spirit that fell 
From Heaven," 

causes his worshippers to delight in the 
hatred and contempt which their vile busi- 
ness brings upon them. 



JERMTN STREET. 17 

Captain Heath was not destined to hear 
the last of Boss for some time. There came 
to him an application from Messrs Eeane 
and Worrall, solicitors^ stating that certain 
acceptances bearing his signature, to the ex- 
tent of £7103 7s. 6c/., held by Messrs Boss 
and Company, which bad been negotiated by 
his son, must be met at once, or immediate 
proceedings would be taken. This looked 
serious ; the Captain was puzzled ; to pay 
any such sum of money would seriously em- 
barrass him, especially as he had been in- 
vesting his surplus cash in the Bagatelle 
Theatre and the Irish Land Company, and 
living lavishly among his London acquaint- 
ances. He read this ominous letter over and 
over again, and paced up and down his room^ 
and vainly tried to come to a decision. 

"I never put my name to paper in my 
life," he said to himself; '* but if I resist this 
extortion, and the scoundrel takes me into 

VOL. II. c 



18 FRANCES. 

court, I shall have to make out that Stephen 

m 

forged my name, and then perhaps they 
wouldn't believe me. It's not pleasant, any 
way I look at it. They must have some 
bills, I suppose, but I can't believe poor 
Stephen would commit forgery." 

The matter worried the Captain to such 
an extent that his friends perceived it, and 
he was induced to take Lavington and 
Wyldote into council. 

" Boss, eh ?" said Dick Wyldote, laugh- 
ing. " He is the most unmitigated old vil- 
lain in this by-no-means-too-virtuous metro- 
polis. He's an awkward customer. Heath." 

"See Flood about it," said Lavington. 
" If any man can pull you through, he is the 
man. He manages everything for me, you 
know, and I have never foimd him fail 
where success was possible. If you have no 
other engagement, we'll drive to his office at 
once." 



JERMTN STREET. 19 

Lavington had his mail-phaeton at the 
door. Captain Heath accepted the oflfer. 
Dick Wyldote went off alone in a hansom 
to the Bagatelle Theatre, where there was a 
rehearsal, and it was quite necessary for 
somebody to be in waiting on the fair Ethel 
Clinton, who had her fancies and caprices . 
and whose temper was as micertain as a 
tenor's throat, or as a Summer day on Win- 
dermere. Wyldote managed her better than 
anybody, having a capital way of uniting 
irony with flattery. 

Mr. Flood was to be found in the City 
... in an old paved court, entered by a 
narrow alley from one of the noisiest 
thoroughfares. Two houses only were in 
this courtyard : one an old-fashioned City 
tavern, cheerful even at noon with gaslights 
behind windows never cleaned, for no sun- 
shine could reach this court, above which 
rose the tower of a church casting perpetual 

c2 



20 FRANCES. 

shadow. This same tavem, yclept the 
Salutation^ was not crowded with merchants^ 
clerks for hasty luncheons: no, it was a 
place for the head of the firm himself, for 
its steaks were the juiciest, its oysters the 
freshest, its port the oldest in the City. It» 
rooms were lofty and oak-panelled, with 
fall-length portraits of long-forgotten civic 
dignitaries. The Salutation and Mr. Flood's 
offices had once been a single house, the 
mansion of some great merchant of old, 
when merchants dwelt in .princely fashion in 
the heart of the city where they carried on 
their trade. In such a house Sir Richard. 
Whittington may have entertained the Hera 
of A^court. Of such a house we have 
note in John Evelyn's Diary (26 September^ 
1672) . "I carried with me to dinner my 
Lord H. Howard (now to be made Earl of 
Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England) to 
Sir Robert Clayton's, now Sherijff of Lon- 



JERlfYN STREET. 2 1 

^on, at bis new house, where we had a 
great feast ; it is built indeed for a great 
magistrate, at excessive cost. The cedar 
dining-room is painted with the history of 
the Giants' Wai:, incomparably done by Mr. 
Streeter." 

As a result of dividing the andent edifice, 
Mn Flood had no apartments on the 
ground-floon His clients climbed a stately 
stone stair, and saw before them a whole 
corridor lined with doors, on which were 
inscriptions understood by the initiated only. 
The first was marked ClerKs Roomy and con- 
tained two grimy young men Ofa high stools^ 
who had to copy documents and answer 
questions. K you walked along the corri- 
dor you would see 

" Mr. Manisty : 
PrivaiCj* 
or 

" Mr. Norton : 
Privatej* 



22 FBANCES. 

and a dozen others : but Mr. Flood's name 
appeared nowhere. He was only accessible 
through a series of well -guarded ante- 
chambers, each of which contained a more 
jealously esoteric derk than the one before 
it. 

These barriers, difficult to the multitude, 
were easily passed by Mr. Lavington and 
Captain Heath, and after seeing so many 
venerable officials, in the stiflfest of seats, the 
Captain was rather surprised to find Mr. 
Flood's private room very like a lady's bou- 
doir, and the lawyer himself a man of thirty- 
five, with curly hair and a King of Italy 
moustache, dressed in a bright blue coat, 
and with diamonds of the first water in his 
linen. Mr. Flood was a lawyer by inspira- 
tion, and a lover of horse-racing by prefer- 
ence. He had an instinct which enabled 
him to make his way through the most per- 
plexed of legal labyrinths. This faculty had 



JEBMTN STREET. 23 

made him quite the Napoleon of London 
lawyers : and he possessed also another 
Napoleonic quality . he was unerring in the 
choice of his subordinates. 

He received Lavington with easy courtesy, 
was perfectly polite to Captain Heath, order- 
ed some champagne and biscuits, and began 
to talk of the Derby betting and the Baga- 
telle Theatre. He knew pretty well what 
that establishment cost Lavington ; indeed, 
he knew more of the Member for Bri- 
borough's general affairs than that gentleman 
himself. He was, of course, solicitor to 
that famous Irish Land Company. I sup- 
pose he knew more financial secrets than 
most men of his profession, that being his 
specialty. The business of which he was 
the head had been started by his great- 
grandfather, and had gradually increased, 
through the next two generations, in a quiet 
way; but when he came into it as his 



24 IBAKCES. 

father's assistant, he perfectly astounded that 
old gentleman by his daring schemes of ex- 
tension. Indeed, he astonished him out of 
the business, and into a comfortable country 
house in Essex. 

To Mr. Flood Lavington briefly explained 
Captain Heath's position, and told him of 
the proceedings threatened by Boss. 

** You believe your son to be dead ?" said 
the lawyer to Captain Heath. 

" I am sure of it. I identified his body. 
He is buried in Avonside churchyard. The 
murderer has been tried, and sent to an 
asylum, from which he has since escaped." 

" You know nothing of these bills ?" 

"Nothing. I do not believe my son 
would have committed forgery." 

"Under pressure men often do things 
that no one would have expected of them. 

« 

He was in debt, you know. Boss's people 
would worry him to death. Everybody 



JEBllITN 8TBEET. 25 

knows what it is to get into their clutches. 
I am not going to insult you, Captain Heath, 
by suggesting that your son did commit 
forgery. I only wish you to understand 
that it is a contingency we must not leave 
out of our calculations. On the other hand, 
some one else may have committed a forgery, 
trusting that you would pay, for your son's 
sake. Of course it would be a great nuisance 
to you if they should force you into court, 
and compel you to accuse your son by im- 
plication of forgery." 

" It would be intolerable," said Captain 
Heath. 

" I will see Keane and Worrall, and give 
you a report after the interview. They are 
respectable people . the Bedford Row style 
of lawyer^. I wonder they will act for 
Boss." 

" So you classify your lawyers according 
to where they live," said Lavington. 



26 FRANCES. 

" Don't you do the same with Members of 
Parliament and stockbrokers? An attor- 
ney who has offices in King's Bench Walk 
is rather different from those you find in 
Basinghall Street. Verulam Buildings does 
quite a distinct business from Gresham 
House." 

When Lavington and Captain Heath went 
away, the lawyer made an entry of his con- 
versation with them in his private diary, 
writing in cypher. This was a regular habit 
of his, and he found it serviceable. He 
would never receive another visitor until he 
had jotted down what had occurred between 
himself and the one just departed. 

A day or two later he met Mr. Keane by 
appointment. Keane, an old-fashioned prac- 
titioner of the steady class (who only had 
Boss as a client because he never liked to 
decline anybody's money), regarded Flood 
with a mixture of envy and contempt. 



JERMYN STREET. 27 

Keane lived at St. John's Wood ; Flood had 
built himself a pleasant house in the Surrey 
hills, and on fine days drove tandem to and 
fro. Keane had a matronly wife, and a 
large family of most unmarriageable daugh- 
ters. Flood was a gay bachelor, with a few 
fie-fie stories floating through club atmo- 
sphere about him. Keane's idea of a holiday 
was Margate or Ramsgate; Flood's white 
hat was always to be seen at Doncaster and 
Newmarket, Epsom and Ascot. He had 
noble clients, whom he pulled through all 
manner of difficulties, and who were de- 
lighted to see him at their country houses, 
and on board their yachts. He dropped the 
lawyer when he left the office, went in for 
hunting, shooting, billiards, amateur acting, 
anything you please. As the Marquis of 
Warminster once remarked, in his languid 
way, when Mr. Flood was the life of the 
coterie . .. 



26 FKAKCSS% 

'* Fellows that ain't gentlemen are much 
greater fools than fellows that are. I call 
it decidedly providential/' 

" I suppose," said Eeane, deliberately, 
^*that ydur client is willing to pay this 
money in a reasonable time. I have urged 
my client, under the lamentable circumstances 
of his son's death, not to be harsh in his 
terms." 

"You have the bills, I presume," said 
Flood. 

" No ; they are in my client's hands." 

*' They ought to be in yours. Is the man 
afraid to show them ? I don't know how so 
highly respectable a firm could accept this 
Mr. Boss as a client ; but you, knowing 
what sort of a person he is, will not be sur- 
prised to hear that we doubt if any such 
bills exist, and that if they do exist we are 
prepared to prove them forgeries, and to 
have a warrant out against Boss at once. 



JERMYN STREET, 29 

Before he makes any further attempt to 
extort money by false pretences from Cap- 
tain Heath, he had better calculate the cost 
to himself." 

" Really, Mr. Flood," said Keane, "this is 
very harsh language, and I am surprised 
that you should permit yourself to insinuate 
such charges against Mr. Boss." 

" Do you call that insinuation ? Let Boss 
come into court, and see where he'll find 
himself. Fancy this notorious usurer taking 
the advantage of a poor young fellow's 
violent death to extort money from his 
father by forged bills! It is atrocious. I 
absolve you from all complicity, Mr. Keane ; 
but a respectable firm like yours should be 
careful of its clients. I wouldn't serve a 
writ for Boss, though I'd serve one on him 
with perfect pleasure." 

Flood departed, lea/ving Eeane with his 
hair on end. 



30 



CHAPTER 11. 

GABRIEL Shirley's soliloquy, 

" Diem nnmera peiore lapillo." 

'' \17HAT next ?" said Gabriel Shirley, as 
'^ '^ in the soft Summer morning, leaning 
over his garden-gate, and looking at the 
dew on the long stretch of grass, and listen- 
ing to the rooks that cawed musically as 
they started on their da/s enterprise, he 
received from the rarely-arriving letter- 
carrier a letter with the postmark Fiorenze. 
"What next?" He turned it over and 
over ; it took him some time to decide on 
breaking the seal. He hated reading 



GABRIEL SHIBLET's SOLILOQUY. 31 

letters ; he hated writing them ; he was an 
impromptu man, who liked to talk and 
listen, to do his business in the world face to 
face with either friend or enemy. An 
aphorism of Bacon's in his Essays^ to the 
effect that it is wise to transact important 
affairs through a third person, he stigma- 
tized as cowardly. " The three best negoti- 
ators on record," he would say, "were 
Ulysses, Caesar, and Churchill ; and they did 
their business by word of mouth. You can 
tell by the light in a man's eye and by the 
movement of his lip whether he says what 
is true. I hate letters." 

However, he had a long one to read from 
Count Cassius Grimani, and it conveyed the 
Count's intention to come to England and 
endeavour to forget a terrible grief, and it 
told (at far greater length than it will here 
be told) a sad story of his young cousin 
Lucia. Count Cassius was eloquent of his 



32 FRANCES. 

grief, and Gabriel Shiriey (whose motto was 
Nihil humani a me alienum puto) felt his 
friend's trouble more deeply than most men 
would* But his was the temperament in 
which melancholy and mirth come together ; 
and when he had finished the Count's letter 
he positively could not help laughing. He 
swung his gate open, and walked up and 
down the common, laughing gaily. 

" Pleasant," he thought, " As if I had 
not enough on my hands. I am just get- 
ting Sir Charles Wray into a sensible state 
. just caring Roland of his lunacy, and try- 
ing to make him a model railway-guard . 
and now this Count Cassius, who used to be 
as light-hearted as a grasshopper or a Frendi 
statesman, is coming over to mourn for a 
dead cousin that I never heard of, and ex- 
pects me to mourn with him. No : I dis- 
tinctly decline to mourn. The accidental 
death of a girl is sad, but why should it 



GABRIEL Shirley's soliloquy. 33 

sadden the universe ? When a bishop died 
by a fall from his horse the other day, an- 
other Bishop said that he passed from the 
Summer afternoon on the Surrey turf to 
the home of the angels. I should have 
said, to the heart of God. 

" Count Cassius is coming . that is clean 
He says he shall pass through Paris. That 
frolic city ought not to detain a gentleman 
overflowing with grief; but strange things 
happen. I should not be altogether amazed 
if he were to find Paris very magnetic. 
These enthusiastic excitable young fellows 
are as changeful as the wind. 

"He must go and stay at Monckton 
Manor, clearly. No room for him here, 
even if his Countship could condescend to 
my Bohemian hut. No, he must go and 
renew his acquaintance with the old Gene- 
ral, and I don't see why the deuce he 
should not fall in love with Cecilia. She's 

TOL. n. D 



34 FRANCES. 

a pretty little rogue. She is not a fine 
thoughtful woman, like Frances Carey, who 
will be happy by-and-by with her lunatic, I 
hope. But she is a lovely capricious crea- 
ture, who would suit that sentimental 
poetic vivacious Florentine perfectly. He'll 
smother her in sweetmeats and sonnets. 
" As the illustrious poet hath it : 

' When bothers come, they come in a battalion ; 
I've got two English plagues, and one Italian.' '' 



35 



CHAPTER III. 

COUNT CASSIUS. 

^' O Italy, thou too delicious Italy ! 
Ijady of lands ! enslaved by many tyrannies, 
Yet with a living spirit that defies them all, 
Bom of thy stimulant ecstatic atmosphere, 
And orient hills, and lakes of utter hyaline, , 
And of the mighty poets that have clung to thee, 
Since thy sweet Sirens called in vain the Ithacan.'' 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

A RUINOUS villa stands high above a 
-^-^ quiet little Italian hamlet that runs 
along the margin of a peninsula entering a 
lake not so large as Rydal. The villa is 
built irregularly, to suit the shelving nature 
of the ground ; its rooms within and terraces 
without seem as if they had been thrown 

d2 



36 FRANCES, 

together hap-hazard. The wilful gardens 
that surround it are a tangle of beauty ; 
statues, fountains, olive and fig-trees, come 
when least expected. You might lose your- 
self a dozen times, indoors or out. Two 
or three tiny islets, with foliage fretting 
the water, add beauty to the lake ; a few 
small sailing-boats are on its surface. The 
scene seems more like a picture than life* 
Everything is the perfection of calm. Care, 
that rides behind the horseman, that dogs 
the reveller, that haunts the sleepless pil- 
low, must surely leave that lovely lake 
alone. Surely no trouble can climb that 
airy hill, and vex the inhabitant of those 
old quaint chambers. 

Let us inquire. Leaning on a balustrade, 
and gazing far across the lake to the hills 
beyond, a misty sierra, there is a tall dark 
man, in the prime of life, whose languor 
seems to denote intense melancholy. His 



COUNT CASSIUS, 37 

eyes, naturally keen and alert, are clouded 
with uncertain thoughts. He has not 
moved for an hour ; now he rises, paces the 
terrace, thinks aloud. 

" A year ago, nearly," says Count Cassius 
Orimani to himself, " and I am no nearer 
forgetfulness. Little Lucia I What a saucy 
beauty she was, and yet so simple. She is 
happy : for me, I dare not dream of what 
happiness means. 

"Now here I have a letter from that 
eccentric Gabriel, wondering why I do not 
come to England, of which I have seen so 
little. Perhaps London would wake me 
from this lethargy: it is the gtrongest 
electric machine in the world. How the 
blood tingles in that London, where men 
seem stronger, and women more like god- 
desses than anywhere else in the world . 
3^et where. Faugh ! there are devils enough, 
man and woman and child I A city ! 



38 FRANCES. 

. why, it is a world, a microcosm ! Shall I 
go there, and try the pulse of life where it 
beats fastest ? It is worth a thought. 

" Strange old England ! strange people, 
that seem to care only for parish politics 
and shopkeeping, and yet produce great 
poets and painters and soldiers ! I cannot 
sound the character of that race. They are 
made up of all things contrary. I think of 
Byron. How came that soul of fire, that 
wonder of the world, from the bosom of a 
nation that loves money and lives by cheat- 
ing ? It is a mystery ! Those English that 
talk of poets do not know Byron. They 
are mad about one man who is unintelli- 
gible, one who is sweetly musical, one who 
is very nasty indeed : they cannot under- 
stand the strength like their river Thames^ 
the swiftness like one of their express 
trains, the courage like an English soldier's. 
Now, why is it that we Italians . ay, and 



COUNT CASSIUS. 39 

the stolid Germans . more wonderful still, 
that the shallow French . love Byron better 
than his own people ? He used to say he 
wished he could write his poetry in Italian ; 
but if ever I write again, I will try English, 
and Byron shall be my master. 

" I am talking nonsense to forget grief. 
What shall I say to this amiable eccentric's 
letter? He tells me he has met Sir Charles 
Wray, who wondered where I was; and 
that he wondered too ; and that he thought 
he would write to me at Florence. The 
letter is only a month late." 

The Count soliloquized a good deal 
longer, but shall not be reported at any 
greater length just now. It is necessary to 
narrate what had brought this brilliant wan- 
derer to a melancholy state. Returning, 
two or three years before, from the East to 
his native city, he found a distant relation, 
Alessandro Grimani, dying slowly. He was 



40 FRANCES. 

the only other member of the family of 
which the Count was the head : they had 
been sufferers from early deaths for a long 
period, though the motto of the house is 

Ad annos Nestoris. 
Alessandro was about forty : he left behind 
him a daughter, Lucia, at that time twelve. 
She had an income sufficient to live upon 
quietly ; but Count Cassius, taking charge of 
her as chief of the Grimani, determined that 
she should be opulently endowed when she 
married. 

Then a charming idea magnetized him. 
He had wandered enough, seen enough of 
cities, and seas, and mountains, of men and 
women: he would quietly settle down in 
one of his country villas, and educate 
Cugina Lucia. She was full of intelligence 
and daring : he would make her a worthy 
ficion of the Grimani. 

Educating this little Lucia at the Villa del 



I German,, 



39 



*-:* 



"^ niv maater. 
' "*°a Qonaeosp t^. c 
'"'VtoAS. *'«« grief. 

' ""«e to ., ^ _.'' "' 'ioogit 

'"" shall ,«'. * ^^ de^ 

length jfc, 3^ .^'*^'=* « ,^ 
. what h*i 



*^ r three j,,,^^^"*^ 



42 FKASCX&. 



English^ whUe they sasg toge;her, while he 
showed her how to pat on cuitis the mar- 
Telloos ooloors of Ital v s skv and water and 
feliage, wh3e also they sailed on the lake 
or took long rides into the oountry around. 
It was a delidons idvUic life. Loda 
thought it would last for ever . she did not 
look before or after, having diildhoods 
ffimple faith (when childhood has not been 
doctored on the horrors) in the eternity of 
happiness. 

Count Cassius, unluckily, was always 
thinking that the joyous time must come to 
an end, and wondering what that end would 
be* Suppose he found Luda a fit husband, 
then the rest of his life would be utter 
melancholy . ^if not misery. Suppose he 
married her himself . and after marriage she 
found that she had not learnt the meaning 
of love! Either result seemed terrible to 
Count Cassius. 



COUNT CASSIUS. 4S 

Destiny has strange surprises. Some- 
times, when the sky of life is cloudless, a 
sudden misfortune prostrates us. Sometimes 
the man who is in such trouble he knows 
not which way to turn, is as suddenly visited 
by full sunshine. Sometimes, unhappily, 
when trivial troubles surround a man, a 
worse trouble than any comes upon him un- 
expectedly. Thus it was with Cassius Gri- 
mani. He had made troubles for himself 
in connexion with the Cugina : why could 
he not have inhaled with delight the fresh 
spiritual fragrance of this charming bud of 
maiden-blush, and left the inevitable years 
to settle the future for them ? If he had 
seen Lucia in love with some man worthy of 
her, his chivalrous nature would have re- 
joiced to make her happy. If an uncon- 
scious love for himself had grown up in her 
breast, then he might wait with no over- 
tried patience for the moment of conscious- 



44 TKASCSS. 

nesB. Thus with luiiiBelf reasoned Count 
Cassias Grimani; bat he ooald not core 
himself. What a poem might those years 
have been ! 

Destiny cat the Goidian knot. It was the 
calmest of Snmmer afternoons. The stew- 
ard of an estate of the Coonfs had oome 
to see him on something rather important^ 
and the business took some time. Lada and 
he were to have gone upon the lake ; tired of 
waiting, she said^ 

^^ I shall go and have a little sail by my- 
self, Cassias/' 

And away she ran down the steep gar- 
den-path to where the boats were kept. 

She had a tiny nutshell with a kerchief 
sail, in which she often went on the lake. 
Count Cassius had left his man of business 
for a moment, and waved his hand to her 
as the skiff moved away under a very slug- 
gish wind. Then he sat down to leasehold 



COUNT CASSIUS. 45 

questions, which always bothered him, and 
in which stewards and tenants amiably 
agreed to cheat him. While bent over 
some villanously inextricable document, 
which the steward made more bewildering by 
an explanation half cunning and half stupid^ 
there was a clap of thunder. He sprang 
to the window. A squall had come up 
rapidly. The mane of the thunder-lion was 
lurid in the east. The lake was lashed by 
rain. So dark was it on the lake's surface 
that you could not see a boat. 

The Count rushed down to the little quay, 
where all the village was peering into the 
sudden darkness. Everybody talked, scream- 
ed, gesticulated. Count Cassius, unable to 
bear suspense, sprang into a boat and rowed 
out through the storm. He impelled the 
boat with the energy of despair. He 
rowed, without knowing why, to an islet 
where often Luda and he had landed and 



46 FRASCBS. 

loitered. As he reached it, the squall 
passed^ the doads dissolved, the son again 
asserted his sapreme power. 

Too late. On the shore of that islet, 
where so many gay hours had passed, lay 
poor little Lucia, dead. The strong wave 
had thrown up boat and all. Cas^us Gri- 
mani put the child in his boat and rowed 
ashore faster than oars had ever carried 
man before, and hurriedly tried all methods 
of revival at the nearest cottage, while men 
and women stood sobbing around him. He 
knew all was vain : he had known it from 
the first moment when, under golden sun- 
light, he saw Lucia's face, with that soft calm 
upon it which Azrael always brings to the 
innocent soul. 

Lucia was buried among the Grimani at 
Florence . ^the last fair flower of that strong 
race whose boast of Nestor's years the ironic 
Fates had falsified. Cassius Grimani grew 



COUNT CASSIUS. 47 

weary of life after this terrible blow; he 
thought of his own folly and self-torture ; 
he felt that he ought to have said, " That 
girl is mine : I will never leave her !" He 
thought that with him she must have been 
safe, however fierce the storm. He could 
not help blaming himsel f. That steward who 
had occupied him on the fatal day he dis- 
missed with a liberal pension, so that he 
never might see his face again. 

Does not some morbid poet exclaim, 

'' O last regret, regret can die " ? 

To those who believe in a future life, God 
kindly gives hope in the place of sorrow as 
the years pass on. If grief were intermina- 
ble, the human race would be always weep- 
ing and never working : and it is a strong 
collateral proof of that immortality of the 
soul which real men believe and poetasters 
doubt and philosophers deny, that God does 
not permit sorrow to be permanent. The 



13 



. . . 



scnption : 



"Bossr 
man ? Wi 
It had I 
Heath was 
want to be 
"Find or 
he said. *' 
some busint 
Thus sav: 
breakfast o. 
tried to ea: 
aid of bran. 
Boyd, on 
terious. 

*' He's a 

liis eyes loc 
he wants to 
aat about j 
won't keep 



X - Zi 



,-. it 



-IT.'-' 11 









zi jrew 



COUNT CASsa-s. 



47 



fcf life after this terrible blow; he 

[ of his own folly and self-torture ; 
that he ouglit to have ?aid, "That 
be ; I will never leave lier !" He 
that with him she must have been 
wever fierce the storm. He could 

jpblammgtinisclf. That steward who 
aipied him on the fatal day he dis- 
; with a liberal ^R-nsion, s.t that ho 

i inigU Bee hig face again. 

|es not some morbid poet c.volaim, 

JiosowhokeliiiKimfoiure life, God 
' g-^'hoptiailepi^ .! sorrow a« 
boars paMoiL Bpief wer., i.,enoiia- 
I*»^''.«'«i«41b..ai.vay!weer 
H°''«**!:»di:.,a«r«t«f 

r"'l''.'*»«i.:,or.,i-.yof<h« 

^btandplib«n^j___ . '.,^^_^^ 



I 



48 FRANCES. 

man who has lost wife or child or parent or 
friend conquers his grief in time : and that 
time varies according to two faculties of the 
man . ^his power of love and his power of 
faith. If you believe that man is immortal, 
then every step forward is a step towards 
meeting those whom we have loved . not 
our lost kindred and friends only . but 
others whom we have never seen. 

Count Cassius Grimani had been almost a 
year brooding over his loss. When he 
looked back he execrated his own fretful 
folly in turning what should have been a 
happy time into vexation and self-torment : 
and he wasted midnight oil on a poem, to 
be called Luda^ written in English . a diffi- 
cult thing for an Italian. Of that poem I 
give a very brief extract : 

^' Lucia ! From light they named her at her birth ; 
And like the light her beams were softly slender. 
And like the light she gladdened all the earth, 
And like the light her toach was true and tender, 



COUNT CASSINS. 49 

And like the light she brought both health and mirth. 
Ah, why to darkness did the stern storm send her 
Amid the deep gloom of that dread dire day T 
Since when my light of life has passed away." 

Again : 

^^ A sweet red rosebud did an Angel bring, 
Saying, ' O Cassius, turn it to a flower 
For thee or for another. I take wing.' 

O, it was sweet and ruddy that same hour. 
Yet grew each day a fragrant fairy thing, 

Bright in the sunshine, pensive in the shower. 
^ Mine or another's ?' I asked^ with faltering breath. 
Alas, another's . ^whose sad name was Death !" 

Count Cassius was in this state when the 
letter from Mr. Shirley reached him, causing 
him to think. After a life of wide travel 
and gay adventure, his quietude at the Villa 
del Lago with his cousin would have given 
him complete refreshment, had he not fallen 
into Hamlet's hesitating mood. After Lucia's 
death he brooded over his grief till life grew 
inconceivably dreary; he clung to the old 
villa, though the lake and island below were 
hateful to his gaze ; he was kept there by a 

VOL. n. B 



50 FRANCES. 

morbid magnetism. He felt his own un- 
wisdom, and when Mr. Shirley's letter reach- 
ed him it decided his course. 

" I will leave this," he thought. " I will 
go to the Duomo at Florence, and kneel at 
little Lucia's tomb. Ah! that she could 
arise before me, only for a moment, a spirit 
of light in the cathedral's shade. And then 
perhaps I will go to that mad dull England 
. that nation of maniacs and money-grub- 
bers 1" 



pASSINS. 49 

Jight both health and mirth. 
i! the stern storm send her 
Uiat dread dire dayf 
a passed away." 



n Angel brings, 
n it to a flover 
T take iving,' 

IL.-^p^ . "It fai.-j thing, 

^*'-- ...n.'ivi' in the Bhower. 

*^^*=^^- . .'."^^.'il' faltering breath. 

% , :^^T_ _ 1 "-me was Death 1" 

x^^_. __ ' "I this statewhen the 

^-a*^ , '" i'^^^icliediim, causing 

i^, ^ ^' ^''.^ of wide travel 

.atei^_^ * ^muic at the Villa 

^^Ji .''^ '^"''^ have given 

iste*^*" - '^^^a'^ie-not fallen 

"iti.^"" "i'"*^- After Lucia's 

*tfe^.^*^ '^c^Mg to the old 

£3iee. -- ^s^aod below were 

art*"- * ^it there b/ « 



52 * FRANCES. 

it just as gay as wide-streeted Ilion probably 
was when the Greeks had carried off their 
slaves and spoil, and the Trojans left behind 
took to enjoying themselves in those parts 
of their city that the enemy had left un- 
burnt. 

Count Cassius, who had not been in Paris 
for some years, took up his quarters at the 
H6tel C^sar. That superb hotel had sur- 
vived the last invasion and the last dynasty. 
It was full to the brim of Russians and 
Americans, who had come to see how much 
was left of Paris. The Count had not any 
Parisian experience, or he would have chosen 
a quieter place ; but, though rather amazed 
by some of the people he encountered, he 
did not regret having plunged by accident 
into this chaos of queer visitors. After his 
long retirement he was glad of society, 
whatever form it assumed ; and, never hav- 
ing seen any Americans, their peculiarities 



TROY TOWN. 53 

excited his inquisitiveness. There was one 
party that attracted his curiosity, and with 
them, while trying to forget his trouble in 
the brightest and saddest of cities, he formed 
a kind of intimacy. The chief personage 
was a lean sallow man, who ate much and 
talked much (always through his nose), and 
who was known as Major Washington F. 
Butts. He walked through the world in a dic- 
tatorial style, and surveyed cities and their 
inhabitants with a previously-arranged no- 
tion of what they might have been if he had 
created the population, and taught them how 
to build. His mental pockets were cram- 
med with new ideas. His sister. Miss 
Aspasia X. Butts, was known as the wisest 
woman in Boston ; she always wore a long 
limp green dress, without any dress-im- 
prover, and matched it with a pair of green 
spectacles. She was very strong-minded, 
so strong, indeed, that her brain was almost 



54 FRANCES. 

absolute alcohol ; and she was head of a 
society in America, perfectly secret, intended 
in due time to vindicate and establish the 
superiority of the female over the male sex. 
It is called the Free Matrons. Its theory 
is that women are in all respects nobler than 
men ; and it has a very astute and subtle 
policy whereby this in time is to be proved 
and established. Although Miss Aspasia 
X. Butts is a Free Matron, and high in office 
among the Free Matrons, her brother, the 
Major, has not the least idea thereof. 

With Major Butts and his sister were two 
other persons, both rather remarkable. One 
was a girl of nineteen or twenty, rather low 
in stature, broad in the shoulders, round in 
the face, and with but little expression. 
There was indeed about her a general ap- 
pearance of shapelessness. You would say 
that if denuded she would not very closely 
resemble "the statue that enchants the 



TBOY TOWN. 56 

world. " External signs are not always 
trustworthy : a nugget of gold may be hid- 
den in very ordinary clay. Miss Susanetta 
W. Butts was greater than she seemed, as 
Wordsworth might say ; she had intercourse 
with the spiritual and transcendental world ; 
she was simply the most accomplished me- 
dium in the United States. She was now 
travelling with her uncle and aunt, with 
intent to exhibit her precious gifts when an 
opportunity occurred. 

The fourth member of this party was a 
light-haired stalwart young fellow, of a 
strong type not frequent in America. His 
companions, the Butts, treated him with 
marked deference. The Visitors Book re- 
vealed him to be the Honourable Hercules 
Lyon. Major Washington F. Butts, who 
was dictatorial to everybody else, bowed 
before Mr. Lyon, and told all whom he met 
in strict confidence, that the Honourable 



56 FRANCES. 

Hercules Lyon could pile dollars against any 
two men in New York or Petersburg. 
London he deemed unworthy of mention in 
this category of wealth. 

This odd party, who attracted the atten- 
tion of Count Oassius Grimani, had one 
leading idea in common, which will be dis- 
covered in due time, but had also their 
special and separate notions. Major Wash- 
ington F. Butts had a new opera for Lon- 
don, a new morning paper, a new motive 
power to supersede steam, and a hundred 
other brilliant inventions. Miss Aspasia X. 
Butts was going to call an early meeting of 
the Free Matrons of England. Miss Susan- 
etta W. Butts was going at once to two 
persons . the Lord Chamberlain and Mr. 
Longman : of one to ask an introduction to 
Her Majesty at the next Drawing-room ; of 
the other to ask a huge price for a book on 
Spiritualism, with every one of its state- 



TROY TOWN, 57 

ments proved, and with full explanation of 
what maladies Miss Butts could cure, and 

« 

what she would charge for curing. Ah, if 
these Mesmer dreams were true I Fancy 
believing that you mayhave a body as pellucid 
as glass, and the clairvoyant doctress can look 
right through you, and tell your ailments 
and their cures As to the Honourable 
Hercules Lyon, his leading idea professedly 
was to find a handsome girl of high rank 
in England and marry her. 

" I wish to teach these islanders," he said 
confidentially to Count Cassius, "that we 
are as good as they are at least. My income 
is larger than that of any English Duke, and 
I consider myself quite as good as any Duke. 
I don't see why I am to be ranked lower 
than a man of that sort because our great 
Republic has wisely decided that titles are 
babyish. If I am the first of my family 
instead of the last, what does it matter ?" 



58 FBANCES. 

Count Cassius Grimani justified our friend 
Gabriel Shirley's prophetic suggestion, and 
forgot his trouble in great measure amid the 
effervescence of Paris, Paris, taken in com- 
pany with these amazing Americans, was 
quite enjoyable. There was, as indeed 
there always is, some strange political busi- 
ness in progress : the lively people were 
trying to decide whether their next ruler 
should be Emperor or King or President : 
whoever came forward first and established 
himself at those well-roasted tile-works, the 
Tuileries, would certainly have first innings, 
and might play a winning game if he knew 
how to block the fast round-hand bowling 
of the proletarian. 

History is imbedded in words ; they are 
more trustworthy and vivid than coins. 
The proletarian . the prolific man, the man 
of offspring . ^was the trouble of the Roman 
Empire, and is our trouble now. The poorer 



TROr TOWN. 59 

a man is, the more children he begets ; the 
more children he begets, the poorer he 
grows- If the State were to take posses- 
sion of all children whose parents could not 
educate them, the problem might be solved. 
This, and not the Malthus-Mill-Martineau 
method, is the true way out of our difficulty* 
The human race cannot multiply too fast, if 
they are taught humanity from the first. 
The laws of what we are accustomed by 
strange misnomer to call political economy 
and civilization tend simply to brutalize- 
In a nation rightly ruled every child born 
into the world will receive the physical and 
mental culture requisite to make it a useful 
man or woman. The people who yell for 
free this and free that . free land, labour^ 
churches, schools, and I know not what . 
miss the main point. Let life be free . let 
no child starve, in mind or body. The 
poor little wretch who freezes to death on 



^0 FRANCES. 

its mother's milkless breast might, if saved, 
turn out a Shakespeare, or even rise to the 
loftier level of Gladstone, the perfect and 
peerless. 

Count Cassius Grimani found himself per- 
force enlivened and amused by the rather 
.capricious proceedings of these four Ameri- 
cans. Miss Susanetta Butts tried to take 
.complete possession of him. She might 
perchance have succeeded better if her 
ispiritual charms had not been associated 
with physical defects that made the taste- 
ful Florentine shudder. He had heard of 
spiritualist theories ; his mind worked in an 
ideal groove, so that he was quite ready to 
accept as at least imaginable what your 
commonplace materialist would set down as 
«heer nonsense ; and I opine that, if Miss 
Susanetta Butts, instead of being of the 
stumpy columnar order of architecture, had 
been more slender-shafted and efflorescent 



TBOr TOWN. 61 

and ethereal, he would have followed her 
lead into Spirit-land with much readiness. 
As it was, this American young person was 
astute enough to make him believe many 
things which were baseless. She picked up 
some hints of his past career from various 
sources, and, surprising him with these, told 
him strange adventures that he would have 
in England. Count Cassius, credulous and 
superstitious, drank in a good deal of her 
nonsense. 

These Americans enjoyed their Paris^ 
Major Washington Butts, reserving serious 
business for London, threw himself head- 
long into the amusements of the brilliant 
dty. With him went the Honourable Her- 
cules Lyon, who talked to the Major always 
as if he were an inferior animal, and who 
treated the two female members of the 
Butts family in a tyrannic way. Count 
Cassius, who, when his attention was aroused,. 



62 FRANCES. 

was a rather keen and dose observer, noted 
that, whereas Mr. Lyon treated Major Butts 
with apparent disdain, the Major seemed to 
have some sort of control over him. Lyon 
would consult the Major as to dinners and 
theatres, apparently in an off-hand way, 
but still as if he wanted guidance. And 
the Major certainly was his " guide, philo- 
sopher, and friend," very seldom leaving 
him alone, except when with the ladies. 

Miss Susanetta Butts seemed quite happy 
to be Mr. Hercules Lyon's servant He suf- 
fered a good deal from morning headache, 

. 

a thing not marvellous when it is considered 
that he loved to quench a scarce satiable 
thirst long after midnight. Then she would 
summon her magnetism, lean over him as 
he lay on a sofa, breathe on him, look into 
his eyes, and thus drive off the cephalalgia, 
and give him an appetite for breakfast. 
Count Cassius used to think that if Miss 



TROY TOWN. 63 

Susanetta had been a pretty girl, with eyes 
of light and breath like rose-odour, this 
mode of treatment would have been very 
pleasant ; but he could not understand it 
where the eyes were fishy, and where, if 
the breath was fragrant, it greatly belied 
the ugly lips it had to pass. Yet, to the 
astonishment of Count Grimani, this Susan- 
etta Butts had an immense influence over 
the Honourable Hercules Lyon. He 
seemed to relish her uncouth endearments 
and awkward agaceries. This Mr. Lyon 
was lazy, evidently, and liked to be waited 
on. Susanetta, in waiting on him, made 
herself so necessary to him that in time he 
became her slave. Count Cassius observed 
that he never made an appointment without 
consulting her. 

Paris, at this time, was very joyous, as 
France had just gone through a great afflic- 
tion. The griefs of the country justify 



64 FRANCES. 

the delights of the capital. Nothing could 
be more brilliant, nothing more various 
and versatile, than this charred and humili- 
ated city. To Count Cassius Grimani, 
though he had not much faith in Italian 
regeneration, Paris was a sickening sight. 
It made him melancholy. Count Cassius 
had long ago given up all idea of such an 
Italy as a wise Italian longs to see ; for 
with the Pope on one hand, and Mazzini 
and Garibaldi on the other, how can 
the great conception of an imperial Italy 
be realized? How are Pius IX. and 
King Victor to be reconciled? There 
is an Italy, I think, in the far future : 
but not till the Papacy perishes and Gari- 
baldian blockheads are extinct. Somewhat 
in this way thought Count Cassius Grimani. 
But if Italy saddened him, France sickened 
him : and it gave him some satisfaction 
to remember that, while France has pro- 



TEOY TOWN, 65 

duced no great man of the highest class, 
Italy has had poets and painters of the very 
noblest. 

"What a chasm," thought the Count, 
" between Dante and Voltaire 1 And we 
gave them their great conqueror ! . ^for the 
Buonaparti were Florentine citizens." 

It chanced to the Count to travel to 
Dover with the American party from the 
Hotel Cesar. It also chanced to him to go 
to the same hotel in London . the Colossus 
. ^for they got to town late, and there was 
no room at the Charing Cross, and Major 
Washington Butts had engaged rooms at, 
the Colossus, where Americans of the Upper 
Ten do chiefly congregate. When they 
reached that huge caravanserai. Count Gri- 
mani was glad he had been guided by the 
London experiences of his American friends. 
Late though they were, a comfortable supper 
was obtainable; and the Count, who had 

VOL. n. F 



_ir- 



ni;; 






.^ : .'.' 



"^ » > X 



, > > . r 







67 



u 



CHAPTER V. 

OK THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 

The qnietcsi of men mist be a tixvdler : 
Left him eat hadiMrh, dwell ^nid fuicieBTiaianaij, 
Kever stir forth beyond his diuwaj domicile, 
Yet shaD he taswA . since this planet canieB him 
Away throngh mwtfse, whether he hkes orKkcs it not^ 
A thooBand miles a minute at the Toy least.** 

Tke Comedy of Drtams. 



fTIHE Great Southern Railway is, as every- 
-.- body knows, the main line firom 
London to the oommenaal seaport of South- 
pool. Between the metropolis and that 
famous dty the £sist trains take five hours ; 
and the railway-goard, (jeorge Brown, who 
through Sir Charles Wray's influence got an 
early appbintment on the Great Southern^ 

f2 



68 FRANCES. 

had to leave Southpool with his train at six 
in the morning, reaching London about 
eleven, and to start again with the down 
train at two, whereby the Southpool 
millionaire could get home in time for his 
late dinner. After that George Brown's 
time was his own till the next morning ; and 
he had found quiet lodgings with another 
guard, whose wife was a kind homely sort 
of body, and made him very comfortable* 
The occupation of a railway-guard is one 
frequently sought by men whom untoward 
accident has displaced from far higher 
positions; and I can assure imaginative 
young ladies who travel by rail that they 
may often encounter as servants of the 
railway persons whose names are to be 
found in Debrett and Lodge and Burke. 
Hence there is nothing unusual in the arrival 
of a new guard who has evidently been at 
sometimeagentleman; audit has become quite 



ON THE GBEAT SOUTHEBNt 69 

the fashion among men of this class on the 
great railways to ask no questions and to 
treat one another with courtesy. To George 
Brown's mates it was very clear that the 
said George Brown had not always been 
obliged to do this sort of work ; but they 
made no inquiries, and treated him as one 
of their own order. 

Always quick and ready, and at this time 
anxious to find in action some relief from 
his trouble, George Brown did his work 
admirably, kept his engine-driver punctual, 
made no mistakes at the stations, and 
was intensely polite to ladies. His day's 
work was not unpleasant. He got to the 
Southpool terminus soon after five, having 
previously laid in a stock of thick bread and 
butter. When the train started in the 
bright clear morning he always felt a 
pleasant sensation ; he sorted parcels and 
letters, and gave himself up to reverie 



70 . FRANCES. 

between his stoppages^ A railway-guard 
with poetic tendencies might give us some 
valuable work in those intervals of leisure. 
Isolation suits the creative intellect, and 
what isolation can be more complete than 
that of a railway-guard in a compartment all 
to himself? 

Twice daily George Brown had a pleasure 
which perhaps he estimated too highly. At 
about nine in the morning and at about four 
in the afternoon his train went swiftly 
through Chessington . a station not of 
sufficient importance for an express to stop. 
Just before the station -on the London side 
there was a lovely wooded valley, through 
which the river Avon came downward under 
beech coppice that ran close to the water ; 
and there was one point in that scene he 
knew full well . a single knoll among the 
woods with a group of trees on its summit . 
where many a time he had stood and looked 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 71 

down upon the pleasant village of Avonside. 
He knew that if he were now upon that 
spot, he could see Carey Farm among its 
quiet gardens, and the old house of the 
Hutchisons surrounded by its glittering 
evergreens. He imagined a lovely lady of 
calm mien walking on the lawns which 
divided Carey Farm from the river; he 
pictured her as he had seen her so often; 
he hoped she was thinking of him. Twice a 
day he had this pleasant vision, as the light 
viaduct built by Brunei spanned the swift 
waters of the stream. Twice a day he felt 
like Tantalus of old, with ripe fruits wooing 
his lips, yet just beyond his reach . with the 
sweet water of love gleaming just withia 
sight, yet too far away to slake his thir st. 

While this daily double glimpse of the 
place he knew so well gave him a painful 
delight, there was in his movement to and 
fi:o over about four hundred miles of road, 



72 FRANCES. 

with the bustle ot many stations and the 
sight of many people, a healthy mental 
stimulus. He found himself speculating on 
the characters and occupations of the travel- 
lers whom he saw each day. Every plat- 
form had its own little drama. Wherever 
the train stopped there was something new 
and fresh. Aristocratic bridegroom and 
bride on their mellilune trip with superb 
accompaniments : rustic sweethearts meeting 
or parting : schoolboys starting for their 
holidays: the All England Eleven going 
down to play a match with twenty-two of 
Southpool : men of business looking as if the 
world's prosperity depended on their being 
in the City by a certain hour. Southpool 
is a marvellous place for all manner of 
amusing and instructive gatherings : archae- 
ologists picnic there, and pass their judgment 
on the antiquity of the port wine and the 
Minster ; Social Science comes now and then^ 



ON THE GBEAT SOUTHERN. 73 

with a strong detachment of skimpy yet 
sagacious females ; there is a yearly archery 
meeting, which attracts young people of the 
same sex, though you would hardly think of 
the same species, since they do wear supple- 
ments and they do not wear spectacles. The 
Southpool folk welcome everybody ; the 
Mayor invites everybody to dinner, whether 
they are statistical or musical, theological or 
theatrical ; the Mayoress always gives a ball 
to any band of illustrious strangers. Souths 
pool, washed by the sea, and living by the 
endless flux and eflBiux of humanity, is cos- 
mopolitan. The citizen of Southpool is a 
citizen of the world. 

It was fortunate for George Brown that he 
was on the high-road between London and 
this restless town, since never a day passed 
without his seeing something to interest his 
brain. T do not think it harmed him that 
twice a day he might strain his eyes to the 



74 FRANCES. 

tree-crowned hill above Avonside, and ima- 
gine himself on its summit, looking down on 
Carey Farm, and picture the oak on whose 
bark he had once cut the letters " H. R.'^ 
. . . " F. C." The inveterate growth of the 
bark was erasing them, doubtless : time had 
turned him from a careless boy into a very 
methodical railway-guard, and had long ago 
broken the blade of the clasp-knife where- 
with he had cut the old oak's gnarled rind. 
When he scored those initials he was in the 
long and listless stage of boyhood, with no 
severe tutor to thrash common-sense and 
Greek aorists into him, and the lady whom 
he adored wore short frocks and frilled 
trowsers, and was passionately fond, not of 
Mr. Tennyson's poetry, but of cocoa-nut rock. 
And now . . . He was afi outlaw : she was 
the very queen of the world. When he 
thus reflected he was fain to fall back on 
Gabriel Shirley's last quotation from " the 



ON THE .GREAT SOUTHERN. 75* 

illustrious poet" : 

*' Whate'er thy trouble, keep thy God in sight : 
After long darkness conies the sun's sweet light." 

Passing a hill three miles away in a rapid 
train, the quickest and most attentive eye 
cannot always define what it sees. But 
George Brown once or twice fancied, on 
clear days, that there might perhaps be 
some human form upon the hill . a hill not 
much frequented by the Avonside people, 
though accessible enough, and with a noble 
view in manv directions from the summit. 
But love of beauty in landscape is a thing to 
be learnt, like the love of moral and intel- 
lectual beauty : and it is noticeable that if a 
hill in the country has a fine view from the 
top, and a public-house where bad ale is^ 
sold at the foot, many more people keep to 
the road than ascend the hill. Hence, 
when our railway-guard saw . or thought he 
saw . a flitting figure on the old knoll, the 



76 FRANCES. 

fanc^, the hope oocorred to him that it 
would be Frances. When they were girl 
and boy- together, they had rambled all 
through the golden afternoon over that 
special hill, and along the terraces of beech 
that radiated from it, and scarcely ever met 
any one* That time came back to him 
more clearly in his reveries on the road 
than it had for years before ; somehow, he 
discerned the past form of Frances Carey, 
gay and girlish in her thoughtless time, and 
traced her development into a noble 
woman, whom he regarded as without an 
equal. It was strange how, in his daily 
travel alone, pleasant hours that he had 
long forgotten came back to him, and 
he seemed almost more vividly intimate with 
his girl-playmate of a dozen years before 
than with the Frances Carey of to-day. 
Everybody, 

'< Cuius octaYum trepidavit aetas 
Claudere lustrum," 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 7T 

must have seen merry girls at the threshold 
of life, fairy creatures that seemed meant for 
joy, and wondered years later to see 
them transformed into stiff old maids or 
stately matrons, with a fine sense of the value 
of a good income, a well-situated house^ 
handsome furniture. There is something . 
it is often hard to say what . ^between girl- 
hood and womanhood, that too often spoils 
them. Sometimes it may be school life^ 
which for girls I abhor ; sometimes perchance 
the influence of serious parents or uncles 
or aunts, who think that children ought not 
to be encouraged in frivolity, but should 
learn to take an orthodox and financial view 
of life as early as possible. Whatever the 
cause, there is unhappily no doubt as to 
the effect; the white rosebud of twelve 
startles Darwin and all his disciples by be- 
coming a red cabbage fit for strong pickling 
vinegar at twenty-four 



78 FRANCES. 

Now our railway.guard, George Brown 
(who was thoroughly in love, it must be ad- 
mitted), could call up a vision of little Frances 
when she rambled and romped with him, a 
happy hoyden, a short-frocked fairy, on the 
Avonside hills ; and could see, as he persuad- 
ed himself, how every beauty which she then 
possessed had ripened into a rarer beauty. 
Was it a delusion ? If so, let every lover so 
delude himself. But I think it was not ; I 
think Frances had become what she was by 
harmonious growth. Mathematicians are of 
opinion that in days to come the equation to 
the curve of a bird's egg will lead to the 
algebraic equivalent of the bird's musical 
note ; that the shape of a leaf may be made 
to predict the colour of the flower. This 
may or may not be ; I think it will ; but 
George Brown was quite certain the girl- 
Frances and the lady-Frances were one and 
the same, a complete harmonious growth. 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 79 

The guards of that important establish- 
ment, the Great Southern Railway, are what 
Dr. Johnson called clubbable men. If you 
are shut in a moving box ten hours a day, 
you want a little society at other times. 
George Brown'scolleagues had a guards' club, 
not to be confounded with that which has 
bow windows in Pall Mall, and a river-side 
branch at Maidenhead. This club, from the 
necessities of its members, had three branches; 
one being at London, one at Southpool, and 
one about half-way between, at Sandgate, 
where there are refreshment-rooms on a 
grand scale, and branch lines, and a general 
concentration and divarication of traffic. 
George Brown, having to spend solitary 
nights at Southpool, and not caring to seek 
for amusement in a commonplace way, was 
rather glad of such a resource as the 
guards' club, where you could see the news- 
papers, and drink coffee if you preferred it 



80 FRANCES. 

to ale, and have a game of chess or draughts. 
It was held at the Eummer Tavern; the 
landlord of the Rummer had himself been 
a Great Southern guard, and curious rumours 
existed as to what he had been before. 
Years ago he had married the daughter 
of the previous landlord of the Rummer ; 
when that old gentleman died, Peter Gray 
(the only name by which he was known) 
gave up his guardship and carried on the 
business. 

Names not actually ancestral or baptismal 
were frequent among the guards, and the 
joke against Gray was that he took the 
name because it represented his prevalent 
colour. His hair, eyebrows, eyelashes, 
beard, were all grey, and he dressed in a 
grey suit, all the same colour. Peter was a 
tallish man, thin and bony ; Polly, his wife, 
was about half his age, and as plutnp as a 
partridge. 



\ 



ON THE GREAT SOUTnERN. 81 

When George Brown joined, first the 
line, and then the club, Peter and Polly 
held counsel over him. 

" He's a fine young fellow," says Peter. 
" ril teach him to play chess.*' 

" He's in love," says Polly. " I'll find 
out all about it, and see if I can't console 
him." 

" Don't you go and console these good- 
looking fellows too much, Polly," says Gray. 
"It's dangerous." 

Polly took so strong a liking to our friend 
Brown that she got her husband to induce 
him to lodge at the Rummer, where he 
had cheerfulness, cleanliness, and comfort. 
Peter and he became great cronies ; Peter 
taught him chess, and Brown retaliated, 
like Deschapelles on Le Bourdonnais, by 
beating him three games out of four. Mean- 
while Polly, who had a keen scent for a 
love romance, and a strong sympathy with 

VOL. n. Gt 



82 FRANCES. 

anyone in trouble, got out of Brown more 
than he intended to tell of his past life. 
One evening, when he had fancied he saw 
vaguely the lady of his love on the hill 
above Avonside, he told Polly enough to 
make her jump at a happy idea. She ran 
out of the room in search of Peter, whom 
finding, she said, 

" Where's that glass thing Captain Lang- 
horne left here when he went to sea last ? 
I want to lend it to Brown." 

The "glass thing" was a fine field-glass, 
good at twelve miles, DoUond's make. 

« 

Polly brought it to George Brown, and 
said, 

" Let me lend you this. It will tell you 
whether it is your sweetheart you see, or 
somebody else, or perhaps a cloud." 

I do not think she ever had read the 
story of Ixion. 

Can you not imagine that George Brown 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 83 

accepted friendly Polly's offer with great 
alacrity!? I believe he gave her a kiss of 
thanks ; for Polly Gray was rather fond of 
expressing her liking by this old-fashioned 
form of greeting, and Peter was wont to 
say philosophically, 

" If my Polly kisses a fellow, I know he's 
a good sort." 

This was in the morning. George Brown 
was out at sunrise the next morning, testing 
Captain Langhorne's field-glass. He was 
amazed at its power. He focussed it as 
well as he could guess for the Avonside 
knoll that morning. Poor fellow ! . did he 
really think Frances would be getting her 
boots wet, and forgetting her breakfast, at 
that unseasonable hour ? He saw the trees, 
and a few scattered sheep ... no female 
form. He laughed at his own folly, yet he 
tried again in the afternoon, and twice every 
day for a week. He saw nothing. Frances, 

g2 



84 ntAKCss. 

in fadj had been suffering from a severe 
cold, and wisely detennined not to dimb a 
spongy bill jnst to see firom its summit a 
train pass, in which her lover might perhaps 
be travelling. 

Wait long enough, and what you want 
will come. Early one bright morning the 
field-glass focassed a nimble-ankled girl. 
She had pulled up her petticoats to avoid 
the dew, and was hurrying up to the oak- 
tree to catch a glimpse of the train as it 
flung out its white steam like a banner in 
crossing the Avon valley. 

As she stood there under the old oak, 
the glass caught her so well, that he looked 
right into her clear blue eyes. Little 
thought Frances how clearly she was seen, 
or she might not have looked so loving. 
George Brown, delighted as he was to see 
her thus, himself unseen, felt as if he had 
intruded on her privacy without permission ; 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 85 

felt a little as though he had seen her by 
accident in airier costume than is usual for 
a lady in public. There was a look on her 
face whose meaning he could not help know- 
ing. She was watching for him. It made 
him happy, yet it made him miserable. 
The delight he felt in the belief that she 
loved him, was destroyed by the better 
feeling that such a love could only be a 
burden to her life. He had dropped out of 
the world, and had lost all right to. love 
and to be loved, and the thoroughness of 
his love for Frances served to embitter it the 
more. 

It seems a pity that we are not born wise 
enough to see that affliction and adversity 
are designed to develop our characters, and 
in the end to give us greater happiness; 
but perhaps if we were born with that 
amount of wisdom, we should not need 
affliction and adversity. Many views of 



86 FKANCES. 

life lie between optimism and pessimism, be- 
tween spiritualism and materialism. (Words 
are now so much corrupted by those who 
use them ignorantly, and by those who use 
them feloniously, that it becomes necessary 
to remark that by spiritualism I do not mean 
the medium hoax, any more than by liberaU 
ism do I mean the Gladstone hoax.) There 
can, of course, be but one true view of life : 
and probably every man who thinks at all 
thinks that he has attained that view. As 
life and the Creator of life are infinite, while 
man is finite, we may conclude that no two 
men are likely to regard the question in the 
same way, if they think for themselves. 
Unluckily, one man thinks, and a mob of 
men accept his thoughts as their own. How- 
ever, there are situations which compel a 
man to think for himself: and in such a 
situation was George Brown at this time. 
He asked himself why he was subjected to 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 87 

SO strange a destiny, and why Frances 
should be troubled also. What had he 
done that he had lost his place in life, and 

« 

had to exist in constant dread of discovery, 
and with a dull blank monotonous life be- 
fore him ? "Man is born to trouble as the 
sparks fly upward " : this comparison of a 
moral with a physical law in a poem believed 
by many good judges to be the most ancient 
in existence, should lead us to inquire why 
we cannot utilize the inevitable trouble as 
we utilize the upward-flying sparks. The 
sparks fly upwards : in so doing they gener- 
ate heat, cook dinners, warm rooms, drive 
steam-engines. Has not trouble its utility ? 
Would the race of men do anything but for 
the troubles which beset them ? It is odd 
that writers of philosophic romance have 
usually made their perfect human beings 
very stupid indeed, as may be noted in 
Lord Lytton's Coming Race. Is there a 



88 FRANCES. 

warp in humanity which renders absolute 
health impossible ? The problem is perhaps 
beyond solution : but assuredly there are 
men who can extract light from darkness, as 
the keenest electric flash comes from the 
blackest cloud . men who know the signifi- 
cance of that great saying, 

" Sweet are the uses of adyersitj." 

Yes, they are sweet; but it takes some 
time to learn the fact. Easy the teaching of 
the prosperous hours. Most men can enjoy 
health and wealth, sunshine and love, gaiety 
and grandeur. Yet the reverse of all these 
may be enjoyable, when they develop the 
higher qualities of the man who endures 
them. To conquer physical and mental 
pain demands a high and rare effort . but it 
can be done. 

Hugh Roland, qUols George Brown, had 
never pondered over metaphysical questions. 
Endowed with health of body and of mind. 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHEBN. 89 

be had been content with the tranquil life 
to which he was bom. He liked occasional 
adventure, but he had no ambition. He 
liked his pleasant hours with Frances, but 
not until he felt he had lost her did he 
understand he loved her. He wanted the 
teaching of adversity to bring out what good 
there was in him . and now he had got it 
with a vengeance ! 

How would his hard fate affect him ? But 
for meeting that most absolute angel of good 
cheer, yclept Gabriel Shirley, he would, I 
fear, have sunk into a permanently morose 
state. You cannot be in the company of a 
man like Shirley without feeling something 
of the effect of a sunlit sky and a fair south 
wind. Even Shirley, however, could not 
have saved Hugh Roland from sinking under 
his trial, but for his faith in Frances, but for 
the goodness of Frances. These braced him 
to endure ; though often the thought of the 



90 FRANCES. 

loving girl's true kindness to him made him 
think it both wicked and cruel to rely upon 
her love. This life of earth is full of di- 
lemmas . this was his. He could not live 
without the love of Frances, yet he ought 
not to have her love. 

When he had caught a glimpse of her in 
the focus of that field-glass, he wrote her a 
letter which he sent open to Mr. Shirley, 
and which Mr. Shirley sent open to Miss 
Hutchison, and which neither the old gen- 
tleman nor the old lady read. Frances 
read it, down by Avon, in the memorable 
arbour, and the lapsing river seemed to 
bring it a sweet sad accompaniment. Thus 
he had written : 

" Lady, whom I would love, if I had a 
right to love, pardon me if anything in my 
letter offends you. To have been tried for 
murder, adjudged a lunatic . to have escaped 



ON THE GREAT SOXrtTHERN. 91 

and become a railway-guard . are things 
enough to bewilder a poor fellow like me. 
I seem to have fallen too far below you 
ever to think of you again. In this new 
life of mine, now that I am George Brown^ 
railway-guard, with the letters G.S.R. work- 
ed on the collar of my coat, I feel in quite 
another world. Can you imagine what it is^ 
to be a machine, and the servant of a ma- 
chine, to travel two hundred miles from six 
to eleven, and the same two hundred back 
from two to seven ? This for me, who have- 
always had a free and careless life. 

" I think of days long ago, when you and 
I rambled about the Avonside hills and 
woods, when we rowed upon the Avont 
Who could have guessed that such horrible 
things would happen to me ? We used to 
think the world would be all sunshine and 
flowers and kindness. What a mistake ! 

" I saw you to-day, Frances . saw you so 



92 FRANCBS* 

close that it seemed I might have kissed 
jou. I was looking through a field-glass. 
You were under the old oak on Ashley Hill, 
where we have been together a thousand 
times. You looked gay and happy, and 
yet as if you were a little bit sorry for me. 
I have thought of nothing else since ; think- 
ing of it, I write to you. Yet, while writing, 
I think I ought not. 

" For why should I trouble you with my 
troubles ? I ought to ask you to forget me, 
though I never can forget you. I ought to 
look the other way when my everlasting 
train passes near the green hill where we 
played together when we were children. I 
ought to return that glass to the person who 
lent it me. I ought to subside quietly into 
a railway-guard, without a name, and forget 
my past life, and be content to have no 
future. Indeed, I suppose I ought to go 
back to the lunatic asylum. Yet there are 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 93 

* * 

moments when I think otherwise, and be- 
lieve the truth will be known, in God's good 
time, and believe the moment will come 
when I may ask Frances Carey Whether she 

» 

loves me. Ah! I wish it were this very 
moment. " Hugh." 

This was the letter Frances read by the 
Avon, and kissed when she had read it, and 
made up her mind that the poor boy must 
be cheered and consoled by a loving answer. 
She felt a kind of inward blush at the 
thought of his having caught her with his 
field-glass at a moment when she knew she 
must have looked as if she loved him. 
Well, it was no use to conceal matters : she 
would write to him freely. She did. 

*^Dbar Hugh, . / hve you^ and mean to 
be your wife some day. There. After 
that don't be miserable any more. Keep in 
the mood of what you say last : believe that 



.94 FRANCES. 

the truth will be known and you will be 
free. I am not afraid : I should not have 
gone to the top of Ashley Hill just to catch 
a glimpse df your train if I had not believed 
that all will be right in time. 

"Shall I go again, or will you return 
your glass to the owner ? Well, I shall go, 
Mr. George Brown ; and I shall be under 
the old oak, where my little terrier. Jack, 
found such lots of truffles; and you had 
better not look that way. Do you under- 
stand ? 

"Take your trouble easily, dear Hugh. 
It can't last always. You will laugh at it 
by-and-by, when you and I are living to- 
gether quietly. Come, sir, how many girls 
would write like that? But I have decided 
that I love you, and I believe that you love 
me, and I look forward with certainty to 
the day when we shall talk over these 
things by our own fireside, and wonder why 
we were both so miserable. Yes, hoih^ 



ON THE GREAT SOUTHERN. 95 

Hugh ; for I am miserable when you are. 

" I should not tell you all this. or even 

an atom of it . if you weren't in trouble. 

When you are no longer George Brown, 

but come to ask me to be Mrs. Hugh 

Eoland, you will find me as capricious and 

skittish as possible. I shall love you all the 

same, but I shan't say so. You'll have to 

make love all over again. 

*^ Frances." 

This letter went into the hands of Miss 
Hutchison, who put it in another envelop 
with a bank-note and a kindly materterine 
message, and then passed it on to Mr. 
Gabriel Shirley, who, before enclosing it in 
another envelop, addressed, 

" George Brown, 

Hallway Guard, 

Rummer Ijm, 

Southpool," 

endorsed it with an I. P. quotation : 

** Your sweetheart's words will teach you how to live : 
God gives you love : He has no more to give." 



96 



CHAPTER VI. 



AMEBICA IN LONDON. 



'^ Betwixt New York and York the chasm is great ; 
But 'greater still between New York and London/* 

TTTHEN Gabriel Shirley heard from 
^ ^ Count Cassius Grimani that he was 
at the Colossus Hotel with a group of 
Americans, he made, as I have said, instant 
reply. It was to the effect that he would 
come to meet him there. Mr. Shirley had 
not been in London for some time. He 
found that famous city too exciting. In 
days gone by, he had known it when it was 
far more brilliant than it possibly can be 
again : for the essence of a brilliant life is 



AMERICA IN LONDOX. 97 

proximity, and London is as difficult a 
country as Norway since the institution of 
metropolitan railways. Mr. Gabriel Shirley 
thought a few days in London might be a 
pleasant change. So he ran up to the city 
of cities, and took a cab to the Colossus, 

« 

and was deferentially received there, though 
he differed widely from their ordinary 
guests. Great the difference between long 
and lank Major Washington F. Butts, 
whose legs looked like bed-posts in loose 

« 

trowsers, and wide-shouldered Shirley, 
whose well-curved calves filled honest 
leather gaiters. 

But the Colossus received the stalwart 
Englishman with gratitude, and he found 
Count Cassius Grimani in the library . . . for 
'that hotel is civilized, and has a library, 
and the Count was reading one of Mr. 
Cotton's latest books. Also, Major Wash- 
ington was in the library, extended over 

VOL. n. H 



98 FRANCES. 

several chairs, drowsily reading a paper. 
A clasp of the hand between Shirley and 
the Count sufficed to mark renewal of friend- 
ship and sympathy with trouble. Scarcely 
enough is known of the hand, as a real 
factor in the human whole. The theories 
of Desbarolles and D'Arpegny are very 
well in their way, but study the hand as it 
works . study it as it reflects the work of 
the brain. See the hand of a great speaker 
when he dashes his ideas like lightning into 
his audience. See (if you can get the chance) 
the hand of a great writer guiding the pen 
along the clear white page in parallel lines, 
and changing the very form of the manu- 
script as the idea changes. Touch the hand 
of man or woman : feel how palm and finger 
meet your own ; if you cannot therefrom 
decide on their character, you have no cha- 
racter yourself. And the friendly grasp 
. ^like Gabriel Shirley's . the grasp that is 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 99 

worth all the excitable gestures of foreiga 
friendliness. The hand cannot be a hypo- 
crite. 

Count Cassius did not expect so rapid a 
response from his old comrade. He was de- 
lighted, but rather embarrassed, by the 
Americans ; and of course he was compelled 
at once to introduce his friend to Major 
Washington F. Butts, who slowly withdrew 
his telegraph poles in trowsers from the 
chairs they occupied, and rose in Yankee 
dignity to welcome the Englishman. 

Count Cassius rather shuddered, but Gab- 
riel Shirley was amused. He liked 
studying new phases of character. He was 
quite pleased to find that the Count was 
already engaged to dine with the Ameri- 
can party that evening. He wanted to see 
some fun. He was not disappointed. 

They were a party of six : two of the 
superior and four of the inferior sex. A 

h2 



100 FRANCES. 

very good dinner was served, and the wine 
was excellent. The Major was just as lean 
and lank at dinner as at any other time ; and 
his sister, Miss Aspasia, was just as green as 

« 

to eyes and spectacles and dress. It was 
a distressing dreary green . a sick green . 
from head to foot. But the Major and his 
sister had foils. There was the Honourable 
Hercules Lyon, the perfect type of the trans- 
atlantic plutocrat, with a look of vanity 
mingled with fear, that seems natural to men 
of Mammon. The vanit)^ comes from their 
decorations being worth more than them- 
selves; their fear comes from their utter 
dependence on what they have, and not 
what they are. What are they ? Cheque- 
books with arms and legs. Another foil 
was, of course. Count Cassius: the calm 
Florentine noble, whose nobility would have 
been manifest to the dullest blockhead 
under any conditions. Best foil of all was 



.»"» "K^W^ MV^ir~^^ Xa ~^- 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 101 

Susanetta W. The spiritualist had array- 
ed herself for conquest. or, at least, for 
astonishment. She was in a haze of light 
blue, gauze, muslin . I know not what. Her 
shoulders were visible very low down in- 
deed . even to the alley of armpit ; and they 
were not interesting. She showed a good 
deal of herself, producing the impression 
that she exhibited more flesh than beauty. 
Even female flesh is not beautiful unless 
beautified by the indwelling spirit. 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley was really much 
amused. Count Cassius, who had no such 
sense of humour as the Englishman . for 
Ariosto and Pulci, you see, never reached 
the level of Shakespeare and Ben Jonson . 
was rather bored than otherwise. But Mr. 
Gabriel Shirley, who carefully said nothing 
except as stimulus to talk, enjoyed the thing 
to the utmost. Everybody had his own idea, 
but of course the ladies came first to the front. 



102 FRANCES. 

" What is your opinion of the position of 
woman in the world?" said Miss Aspasia 
X. Butts to Gabriel Shirley. " We are trying 
various experiments in America. . It is of 
course admitted by all philosophers and 
psychologists that women are superior to 
man, and the sole question is how they 
should establish their superiority." 

"They are infinitely superior to men in 
love and unselfishness," said Shirley, " and 
they show it every hour. I really think there 
is no particular problem to solve in that 
direction." 

" O, you quite misunderstand me, '' 
said the green-apparelled green-spectacled, 
female. "Women ought to govern the 
world : they will in time, I am certain. 
Women are stronger and purer than men. 
Men produce war and crime : these things 
ought to be stopped. The world will never 
go right until women are supreme. It has 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 103 

been tried among us in America, and I have 
come to Europe to help in carrying to its 
summit the august idea." 

At this poiijt Miss Aspasia, whose elo- 
quence carried her away, began inadvertent- 
ly to tread on the limits of secresy, as re- 
gards the Free Matrons. Was it the cham- 
pagne? 

" I go to a meeting this evening," she 
proceeded, " where I hope to see the dignity 
of woman thoroughly established. The 
society of Free Matrons decide to forbid 
marriage, unless the man submits to the 
woman in everything. When he subjects 
his brute strength to her intellect, there is 
some chance for him. Marriage makes the 
husband a slave : that is our maxim. He is 
to take a preliminary oath to obey his wife 
in all things. If he breaks this oath he is to 
be tried by a jury of the Free Matrons, and 
punished as may be deemed fit. We have 



104 FRANCES. 

an important meeting on the subject to-night, 
and I am going to address, at St. James's 
Hall, an immense audience of the Free 
Matrons of England." 

"The theory which you enunciate, dear 
aunt," said Miss SusanettaW. Butts, "is not 
without its value. But if, instead of going 
to St. James's Hall to address the Free 
Matrons, you would go to St. George's Hall, 
where I have convened a meeting of the 
Free Maidens, I incline to think it would be 
wiser on your part." 

Aunt Aspasia rose and left the room, 
exclaiming, 

'' Those girls /" 

Niece Susanetta shortly followed, and 
made a magnificent speech at St. George's 
Hall. 

"We're always trying experiments in 
America," said Major Washington F. Butts, 
when the two ladies had departed. " Now 



AMEBICA IN LONDON, 105 

I look on Aspasia and Susanetta as dreadful 
failures. They haven't got enough woman 
in them. Aspasia's all front hair, and 
Susanetta's all back hair." 

After this, the Major, relieved of his 
womankind, lighted a vast cigar. He pur- 
sued the female topic presently : it clearly 
was on his mind. 

" Do you know," he said, " what is our 
American diflSculty? It's the women. 
They've got new ideas in our new atmo- 
sphere. Your Mr. Dixon seemed to go into 
queer corners, where they were trying their 
experiments : but he did not quite see what 
it means. I've got an idea of my own," 
said the Major : " it's copyright, so don't 
you mention it. I think that in your bless- 
ed Old World the men are in the ascend- 
ant, but in the New World the women. 
When the two hemispheres coalesce, men 
and women will be entirely equal." 



106 i'SAKCES. 

"Ah!" said Gabriel Shirley, who had 
been listening with immense patience, but 
could be patient no longer, " what says the 
illustrious poet ? 

* When the fair frail fond sex have sway o'er men, 
Kisses will cost a lot<. but not till then.' 

I think I must go to America, to see some 
of these experiments of yours." 

'' Well, I don't know," said the Major, 
" Our young women are a darned plague, 
that's true. We've tried lots of ideas. 
Down in Maine they made a law that when 
a girl got to be fifteen she should be mis- 
tress of the house for two years, or till her 
younger sister got to be fifteen, and invite 
whom she liked, and send her mother to bed 
when she had a party. Then she was to 
go back to school and learn something. 
They fancy that works. A girl gets a year 
or two of fun just when she's flighty, and 
then she begins to learn something after. I 



AMEBICA IN LONDON, 107 

don't think mnch of the idea myself^ but 
they believe in it down in Maine." 

Count Cassius did not leave the hotel that 
night; he paired off with the Honourable 
Hercules Lyon for billiards. Major Wash- 
ington Butts went to look on, and was ac- 
companied by Gabriel Shirley: but pres- 
ently an idea occurred to our friend, and 
he got a hansom and entered St. James'a 
Hall. A silver coin sufficed to place him in 
a gallery overlooking the assemblage. Lo^ 
Miss Aspasia X. Butts was on the platform, 
her green eyes glaring through green 
spectacles. How limp she looked, yet 
what energy seemed to vibrate through that 
limpness ! She was exclaiming : 

" The world is at a standstill for want of 
its women. The Congress of America, the 
Parliament of England, are equally incapable 
of action. We, the Free Matrons . the 
Mothers, to use Goethe's grand phrase . 



108 FRAKCBS. 

design to recover the irrevocable material 
right. The Mother, who is the natural 
organizer of the household, is also the natu- 
ral organizer of the world. She must rule. 
The royalty of womanhood must be acknow- 
ledged in maternal supremacy. The hero, 
the poet, the orator, have their functions 
in life : but they are only children of. 
the mighty Mother. Man*s fiercest ener- 
gies are valueless if woman does not guide 
them." 

This, and much more than this, heard 
Oabriel Shirley with intense delight at St. 
James's Hall ; and then he drove off to St. 
George's Hall, and Was so fortunate as to 
find Miss Susanetta W. Butts in eloquent 
rage. Her way of dealing with the great 
question of the day was entirely different ; 
her type of human perfection was the Free 
Maiden. She admitted the fact, proved by 
all history and literature, that woman sur- 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 10^ 

passes man in all the nobler faculties, but 
she decidedly declined to admit that old 
women were wiser than young ones. The 
key to civilization was simple and short . . . 
Girls. Let girls have their way, and the 
world would soon rise to a higher level. 
The race could not be prolonged without 
the existence of the inferior sex ; the su- 
perior sex should have their choice as to 
the inferior, and, if they found they had 
made a mistake, should have full freedom 
to make another choice. 

"A lady is a queen, and a man is a 
slave," said Miss Susanetta. *'The time is 
coming when we shall rule the world. 
Enrol yourselves, my beloved sisters, among 
the Free Maidens . the greatest e;xisting 
social power . strong enough to abolish an 
empire." 

" After which, oysters and stout/' quoth 
Gabriel Shirley, who had no great fear of 



110 FRANCES. 

either Free Matrons or Free Maidens, and 
who believed that women could never be 
stronger than men until they could be taught 
to hit straight . . . which is simply impos- 
sible. 

Returning to the Colossus, he found that 
Oount Cassius had slightly astonished his 
American antagonist at billiards, and that 
his idea of oysters and stout was willingly 
seconded. He said nothing of his visits to 
St; James's and St, George's Halls. Almost 
coincident cabs brought Aspasia the Free 
Matron and Susanetta the Free Maiden to 
the wide doorway of the Colossus Hotel : a 
contrast, these two famous females . the 
aunt dry and angular, the niece plump and 
gushing. Aspasia went in for mathematics^ 
and Susanetta for poetry, but on this occa- 
sion were willing to join the gentlemen at 
supper, for oratory is hungry and thirsty 
work, and it is an American creed that sup- 



AMERICA IN LONDON. Ill 

per does not injure the digestion. So a 
nice little meal was served with the celerity 
of accomplished waiters, and the two ladies 
were soon so thoroughly refreshed and re- 
invigorated that they longed to fight their 
battles over again . which was precisely 
what Mr. Gabriel Shirley anticipated and 
desired. 

" Well," said the Major, who had taken 
his full share of the champagne, " so you've 
had your meetings. Pity they couldn't be 
in the same room, so that you could fight it 
out for the public amusement." 

" Aunt Aspasia and I," said Miss Susan- 
etta, " have both the same aspiration, though 
we slightly differ as to the best method of 
attaining it. We both wish to teach the 
male sex their absolute and permanent in- 
feriority, and this we are rapidly doing. 
Although I am quite unaware of what was 
done at St. James's Hall this evening, I am 



112 FRANCES. 

certain that it was something that will for- 
ward our great cause." 

*^ You are right, Susanetta," said the elder 
lady, willingly accepting her niece as an 
ally in presence of their common enemy. 
"We have formed a committee of the Free 
Matrons of England, and passed a series of 
resolutions, the most important of which 
pledges all ladies who enter the society to 
act in concert for the subjugation of their 
husbands. If any husband is refractory, 
a meeting of the committee will be called, 
and proper measures taken to bring him to 
reason." 

'*! see no reason, dear aunt Aspasia," 
said Miss Susanetta W. Butts, *' why our 
two associations should not act in concert. 
Our committee propose, in the first instance, 
to deal with unmarried men, and to compel 
them to marry the right person at the right 
time. The lady is to make her choice, and 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 113 

the man is to marry her if the committee 
decide that he is worthy of her." 

'' Well," said Major Washington F. Butts, 
" I guess you'll find, if you carry out these 
two darned societies, that the men will all 
go abroad, and pick up niggers. It's clean 
contrairy to nature that a creechur that 
wears petticoats should domineer over inde- 
pendence in pants. Yew kaiint do it, no- 
how you fix it." 

'' Naturam expellas f urca^ tamen usque recurret, 
Et mala perrumpet f urtim fastidia victrix," 

said Count Cassius, laughing: and Major 
Washington F. Butts laughed also, for he 
thought it was modern, not ancient, Italian, 
and that he ought to understand it. 

** Ah, " said Gabriel Shirley, in a half- 
whisper to his friend, " that has been para- 
phrased by an illustrious poet : 

' The laws of Nature there's no force to stop ; 
Women may shriek, but men will keep the top.' 

VOL. n. I 



114 FRANCES. 

** An alliance between our societies," said 
Miss Aspasia X. Butts, who seemed to grow 
more green as she assimilated lobster-salad 
and absorbed champagne, " is, I think, an ex- 
cellent idea. Might we not arrange a con- 
sulting committee ? That we could materi- 
ally help one another is clear ; and if we cast 
aside all prejudices and jealousies, this will 
be easy enough. I really think so good a 
suggestion ought not to be allowed to lie 
fallow. Let us mention it in our committee 
meeting to-morrow morning, and see if we 
cannot effect something practical." 

*'With all deference to you, ladies, I 
think," quoth Gabriel Shirley, " you ought 
to reverse the order of proceeding. The 
Free Matrons should keep the boys in order, 
and the Free Maidens should take charge of 
the married men. Anus puerum amat^ senex 
puelluUam^ according to an old adage. If I 
am to be brought under strict discipline in 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 115 

«ny old age, I think the younger my govern- 
ess, the better I shall like it." 

*' All men are wretches I" said Miss Aspa- 
sia sententiously ; whereon Mr. Gabriel 
Shirley at once filled her glass with cham- 
pagne. 

"Well," said the Honourable Hercules 
Lyon, who had been eating a silent and 
sulky supper, and washing it down with too 
much effervescent sugar, '* I don't know 
what the women are going to do to the 
men, but I wish they'd make up their minds 
pretty soon, and chatter about it less, for 
all this talking about nothing brings on one 
of my headaches." 

" Let me cure it," said Susanetta, prompt- 
ly rising from her chair. Whereupon he 
threw his long form lazily on a sofa, and 
she, leaning over him, made mysterious 
mesmeric passes, which seemed to soothe 
him. Gabriel Shirley, aesthetic and eclectic, 

i2 



116 FRANCES. 

thought to himself that far rather would he 
endure cephalalgia than be under the op- 
pressive influence of this low-dressed and 
humid young woman. 

** Your Free Maidens are very free in- 
deed," he said quietly to the Major. 

" Very," replied that military gentleman,^ 
with laconic wisdom. 

When the green-apparelled and green- 
eyed Aspasia had retired, when the Major 
had found his way to the lift, Count Cassius 
and Gabriel Shirley walked away together, 
leaving the Honourable Hercules Lyon un- 
der the mesmeric influence of Miss Susanetta 
W. Butts. 

"Americans are curious people, my 
friend," said Count Cassius, as he stopped in 
the great hall to light a cigar and drink a 
glass of iced seltzer. " Their ladies are very 
hard in what they say about gentlemen, but 
their actions seem to belie them. That stout 



AMERICA IN LONDON. 117 

Miss Susanetta, with her shrill voice, and 
her hand of the tractatrixj is a strange 
creature." 

"Mr. Lyon seems to like her," said Shir- 
ley, " and so I suppose it is all right. I 
don't care for Americans myself, men or 
women. There are good fellows among 
them, you know, Washington Irving and 
Emerson to wit, but the ruck want educating. 
When their women take to the platform they 
are abominable." 

" They are even worse when they take to 
the sofa," said Count Cassius, " like that fat 
square girl who magnetized the languid 
young man." 

" She is platform and sofa both," said 
Shirley. " As the illustrious poet hath it : . 

' She makes a speech that sends us all to school. 
And then comes home to mesmerize a fool/" 



118 



CHAPTER Vn. 

A HEBO OF BOKANCB. 

. 

**Li ifacse degeneiste dajB, with wit at leio, 
Bring me nmtmalw to mould a hesto . . . 
Six feet at least of Comiah ddna da j. 
Twenty dgaiB and one amour a daj, 
Daik e^eB that look the Unshing nuddoi thioogfa, 
Plenty of monej and no wctk to do." 

"fTlHE HONOURABLE HERCULES 
A LYON/' said Major Washington F. 
Butts, in a kind of confidential whisper to 
Mr. Gabriel Shirley, " is a very remarkable 
man/* 

This observation was made in the inner 
quadrangle of the Colossus, a cloistered 
square, with lawn and fountain, where Mr. 



A HEBO OF ROMANCE. 119 

Shirley and the Major met next morning at 
a |)retty early hour. The architect of the 
Colossus (like the architect of the Reform 
Club) might have obtained more rooms by 
omitting this pleasant rus in urbe. When I 
lounge in the central hall of the great Liberal 
Club, I always regard it as the most liberal 
thing about it, especially as they are liberal 
enough to set up a portrait of dear old 
Palmerston the Tort, who must wonder to 
find himself near a bust of that rugged Irish 
peasant turned politician, Daniel O'Connell. 
And so it was liberal of whosoever designed 
the Colossus to have an airy central square, 
where grass and ferns and a splashing foun- 
tain give a sense of coolness and quietude. 

Gabriel Shirley was always an early riser. 
He came down into this quadrangle to feel 
the fresh air before breakfasting. He was 
rather surprised, as he loitered along the 
cloister, to meet Major Washington F.Butta. 



120 TRANCES. 

The Major, however, had been catching 
.worms all his life, which perchance ac- 
counted for his being an early bird. A 
very wary and astute old specimen of 
American ornithology he seemed, as he met 
Gabriel Shirley. After a slight interchange 
of opinion in regard to that inexhaustibly 
variable topic, London weather, the Major 
made the remark already recorded. 

*' Indeed," said Mr. Shirley, who had not 
been greatly impressed by the Honourable 
Hercules. "What is he remarkable for?" 

"His character, his career, his colossal 
fortune," said the Major, talking fast enough 
to make Albert Smith or Charles Mathews 
envious. " He w " . . . . here the Major 
hissed out his sentence . ... ^^ the most re- 
knarkable young man in the Yewnited 
Staaytes," 

The Major never spared his vowels when 
he was in earnest. 



A HERO OF ROMANCE. 121 

" Ah," said Mr. Shirley, " that is a strong 
fitatement, for Mr. Tapper's * thirty noble 
nations' must have legions of remarkable 
young men . . . and I think I may add, of 
remarkable young women also. I haven't 
been in the States for some few years ; but 
I came to the conclusion that I liked the 
girls better in Baltimore than in Boston, and 
the boys better in Massachusetts than in 
New York." 

*'You won't find another such young man 
as the Honourable Hercules Lyon anywhere 
in the Republic," said the Major. " He's u- 
nique. He comes of an old English family, 
and can prove himself heir to a dukedom, 
but he disdains the trouble. He has an un- 
limited income and a splendid endowment 
of eloquence. He is very pious and a great 
favourite with the ladies. I often think the 
future of that remarkable young man will 
supersede Julius Csesar and George Francis 



122 KKASCES. 

Train. And what do you think, ar, is the 
lofty and noble idea whidi has brought him 
to England?'' 

As the fluent Major paused for a reply, 
Mr. Shirley suggested that it might be to 
see the country. 

"No, ar,** he said, with solemn gravity. 
" He comes with a nobler aim. He wishes 
to marry an English lady as rich and as 
splendidly endowed as himself, and by so 
doing to cement a perpetual alliance 
between the two countries." 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley, a humourist both by 
nature and habit, received this absurdity 
with the gravest of faces. He could laugh 
internally. It is an art absolutely necessary 
to those who would study humanity. Men 
and women are only natural when they im- 
agine themselves free from analysis; they 
are just as shy in their way as creatures that 
haunt the water and the air. If you can 



A HEBO OF BOMANCE. 123- 

watch a thrush or a wren, a trout or a min- 
now, unseen yourself, you raay get some in* 
sight into its character. It is quite the same 
with mankind. Could you (a daring dream) 
catch a pretty girl before her mirror, looking^ 
with an inquiring gaze into her own un- 
fathomed eyes, you might learn as much 
about her as you do of a starling probing^ 
your lawn for worms, or of a pike lying 
motionless with his head up stream, waiting 
for prey. 

"Ah," said Mr. Shirley in reply, "it is 
very enterprising, that idea of your friend's ;: 
but if he is such a superior young man, can 
he expect to find a lady in England equal 
to him in everything ? You see, there is a 
prejudice, which, of course, you will con- 
sider weak and antiquated, against allowing^ 
Princesses of the Blood Royal to marry com- 
moners." 

" I don't quite know what you mean by 



124 FRANCES. 

'Commoners," said the Major. " The Hon- 
ourable Hercules Lyon is one of the most 
uncommon young men I ever knew, and I 
-don't think he'd take up with one of your 
<5ueen Victoria's girls. But he's got intro- 
ductions through our Ambassador ; and he's 
^ot what's a much better introduction . 
plenty of dollars ; and I calculate there'll be 
lots of Duchesses and Countesses trying to 
-catch him for their daughters very soon." 

'' I hope you will take care of him under 
«uch diflSculties," said Mr. Shirley. " It is 
.quite terrible to think what might be his 
fate if all the pretty girls of the aristocracy 
should fall in love with him." 

Thus saying, Mr. Shirley walked towards 
the breakfast-room, just in time to meet 
<]!ount Cassius. He had arranged with the 
Count to go to Southpool by the two o'clock 
train that afternoon. 

The great seaside town was in festival ; 



A HEBO OF ROMANCE. 125^ 

there was a regatta with various accompani- 
ments.such, for example, as a meeting of 
the Southpool Madrigal Society, and light 
comedy by the Southpool amateurs. Sir 
Charles Wray had arranged to take his 
daughter to Southpool on this occasion^ 
being a great lover of that old-fashioned 
Elizabethan blending of simple music with 
quaint sweet words, which the Southpool 
madrigal-singers have been famed for giving 
in perfection. His love of music had made 
him call his daughter Cecilia ; and the name 
suited her, for you could see " the music 
breathing from her face," as Byron delight- 
fully sings. 

Mr. Shirley and Count Cassius got into a 
quiet corner of the great breakfast-room, de- 
signing to evade the Americans as far as 
possible. But Major Washington F. Butts 
settled his party at a very near table ; and 
Aspasia looked greener, and Susanetta flab* 



126 FBAKCES. 

bier, and Hercules langoider than ever. 
They breakfasted mainly on sausages and 
broiled ham, with muffins, and much coffee 
and tea ; they were unfeignedly amazed at 
the conduct of their neighbours, for Mr. 
Gabriel Shirley's meal was some cold sirloin 
from the sideboard, which he cut himself, 
and a tankard of Bass, while Count Gri- 
mani took a bunch of grapes and a pint of 
<;laret. So romantic a personage as Hercu- 
les Lyon, heir to a dukedom and the most 
remarkable young man in the States, ought 
perhaps to have eaten a more elegant break- 
fast ; but it appeared to Mr. Shirley that 
when he saw the sausages his languor at 
once vanished. Romance takes various 
forms, according to the country in which it 
is born. 

Major Washington F. Butts could not 
leave our friends alone, and they were glad, 
when breakfast was ended, to escape from 



A HERO OF ROMANCE. 127 

him by leaving the hotel for a stroll before 
they started for Southpool. But the in^ 
veterate questioner had, meanwhile, managed 
to get out of them where they were going, 
and as they hastened away he was saying . 

" Well, really, as I am desirous to see all 
that is remarkable in the old country, and 
this seems a most remarkable public cele- 
bration at Southpool, I think I shall go too." 

" Confound the fellow ! " said Gabriel 
Shirley, laughing, as they turned the street 
corner, " he and his two scarecrows and the 
most remarkable young man in America will 
all be at Southpool. I hope we shall get 
out of their way." 

But the Major had by this time returned to 
the Hero of Romance, who roused from his 
languor and went with him into the cloister 

" Lyon," he said, " we must go down to 
Southpool to-day, to their regatta week. 
That old Englishman and the Count are 



12S 

going. I don*t want to lose si^ht of them ; 
they may g^e us a good chance of carrying 
out our scheme." 

'' All light,** said the Honourable Hercules, 
with quite a lively air, in strong contrast 
with his previous languor. '^It is a good 
idea. They evidently know lots of people 
of the right sort, but we must be careful 
whom they introduce us to. You won t 
take the women, of course/' 

**I dont know," said Butts. "I was 
thinking they might get up a woman's 
rights meeting on such an occasion, and 
draw a lot of money. It is so popular now, 
you see." 

"Never do, Butts, never do. English 
people run after such nonsense, but they 
would never admit anybody connected with 
it into society. They'll pay a guinea to hear 
a great singer, but they wouldn't invite him 
to dinner. No ; I have been thinking over 



A HERO OF ROMANCE. 129 

this matter, Butts, and we must suppress 
Aspasia and Susanetta. It won't do for them 
to be screaming their nonsense in public, if 
you and I are to get into decent society. 
Leave them behind, and give them strict or- 
ders not to get into mischief" 

The languid American had become quite 
lively as this question was discussed between 
him and his friend. Anyone who, like Count 
Cassius Grimani, had noticed him in general 
company, would not have believed him the 
same man. As a fact, that languid manner 
was a mask worn on purpose. The result 
of this conversation was that Aspasia and 
Susanetta, much to their chagrin, were left 
behind at the Colossus, with the strictest 
orders to keep quiet, and by no means ap- 
pear in public ; also that the Major and his 
friend turned up at the Great Southern Ter- 
minus in time for the two o'clock train, and 
by the very luck of Ahrimanes were put 

VOL. 11. K 



130 FRANCES. 

into the same carriage with Shirley and the 
Count. For it was a crowded train, and 
the Americans were late, and nobody saw 
who was in the carriage till it was well out 
of the station. Gabriel Shirley indeed was 
for some reason or other talking almost con- 
fidentially with the guard . a tall young fel- 
low that would have been good-looking if 
his hair had not looked like a wisp of tow. 
It was rather curious that he wore a field- 
glass strapped over his shoulder. But he 
looked like a man who knew his business, 
and meant to do it well. 

Off goes the train, Mr. Shirley being about 
the last man to take his seat. There was 
quite a look of dismay in his eyes when he 
found the two Americans were in the car- 
riage. The other two passengers were ladies 
with a vast number of small packages, which 
they counted over and over again at inter- 
vals all the way to Southpool. They say 



A HEBO OF ROMANCE. 131 

the massive stones at Stonebenge cannot be 
counted twice alike ; I wonder whether the 
same law applies to the articles of a lady's 
luggage. They seem to multiply at the be- 
ginning of a journey, and to mysteriously 
vanish towards the end of it.. 

" Ah, Count Grimani," said the Major, as 
they went out of the station, " it is quite 
pleasant to be with old acquaintances on a 
trip like this. My friend, the Honourable 
Hercules Lyon, and I are most desirous to 
understand England as far as possible ; and, 
hearing the Regatta week at Southpool. was 
very remarkable indeed, we decided to go 
and enjoy it. I suppose it will reward us 
for our trouble?" 

** O, it is very interesting," said Mr. Shir- 
ley. " But have you left the ladies behind ? 
They would surely have enjoyed it. Be- 
sides the Regatta, there are concerts and 

k2 



132 FRANCES. 

balls and amateur theatricals and all kinds 
of youthful festivities." 

"I do not think either of them cares 
much for youthful festivities," said Lyon, 
with a suppressed sneer. " They are going 
to stay in London and deliver lectures . . . 
to each other, I hope." 

" You do not seem to profit as much as 
might be anticipated from the superior wis- 
dom of the ladies of America," said Shirley. 
" I am surprised at this. If such pearls of 
wisdom were scattered before our inferior 
sex here in England, I think we should be 
very grateful. As an illustrious poet has said : 

' He who neglects his lessons is a fool, 
When pretty women take to keeping school.' " 

'* Fm sorry to say it isn't the pretty wo- 
men who do it in our country," said the 
Honourable Hercules Lyon. ^' If they did, 
I should be a willing pupil : but they have 
better occupation." 



A HERO OF ROMANCE. 133 

" So they have in most countries," said the 
Major. 

" Well, I don't quite follow you in this 
argument," said Count Cassius deliberately. 
^' Women who preach are not women who 
teach. You may see a beautiful woman 
the glance of whose eye will teach you more 
than can be learnt from the garrulity of a 
hundred female lecturers." 

The rapid train took the travellers 
through pleasant characteristic English 
scenery. Many mansions, in their seques- 
tered deer-parks . many villages, lazy in the 
afternoon sunshine . wide meadows with 
labourers at work. cottages smothered in 
orchards . canals with slow barges crawling 
along . a great cathedral, making the city 
in which it stood look small . through such 
scenery familiar to us all, the train wound 
like a noisy serpent with a trailing white 
crest of steam. 



134 FRANCES. 

The guard with the field-glass knew one 
spot of the scenery which he preferred to all 
others . ^a hill with trees upon it, often 
haunted by an Oread, light-footed and with 
pitying eyes. Did he see his Oread this 
day ? Did she wave her pretty hand as the 
train flew past? This is George Brown's 
secret. 

Southpool comes at last . a great town on 
a wide estuary . ^the city shining with gas- 
lamps innumerable, though as yet it is scarce 
twilight . ^the river gleaming beneath in- 
numerable keels. As they crossed the long 
bridge that a famous engineer has thrown 
across the river, Mr. Shirley said to Count 
Cassiua : 

" This city is a fine example of English 
life. Its chief men are merchants : but if we 
meet any of them . and I know a few inti- 
mately . ^you will think them like the Venice 
merchants of old times. So much money 



A HERO OF ROMANCE. 135 

do their princely firms receive that their in- 
comes seem limitless. They do not think 
twice as to anything they expend, either in 
luxury or charity. Their edifices, public 
and private, are superb : they have not, and 
may never have, the artistic taste of Venice 
and Florence : but they desire it, and may 
perhaps attain it in time." 

"You quicken my curiosity to see this 
city," said Count Cassius : " it seems to com- 
bine your England's iron with the gold of 
my Italy. If such municipalities arise in 
England, you will become a greater nation 
than I have dreamed of, much as I admire 
your greatness." 

" We are going," said Mr. Shirley, " to 
the Mayor's, if you do not object. His name 
is Cornish ; he owns a merchant navy. He 
entertains some friends this week : and I, 
being an old schoolfellow, always come if I 
am in England." 



136 FRANCES. 

" It would be most charming,'' said the 
Count. 

Then Major Washington F. Butts took 
occasion to say how much obliged he should 
be for an introduction to the Mayor, so that 
he and his friend might, during their brief 
visit to Southpool, have an opportunity of 
seeing its many important institutions. 

" The Mayor," said Shirley, amiably, " is 
always happy to be of use to visitors, and 
especially so, of course, to Americans. He 
will do anything he can, I know ; and I shall 
be glad to mention your names to him." 

The train was in the station. Gabriel 
Shirley and the Count got out first, and 
went off to the Mayor's ; Major Butts came 
next, and then the Honourable Hercules, 
who somehow slipped as he came on the 
platform, and would have fallen, but that 
Brown, the guard, who was passing, caught 
him just in time. 



A HEBO OF ROMANCE. 137 

" Thank you, my man," said Lyon, and 
gave him a shilling. 

The guard looked at him rather curiously, 
touched his hat, and went on his way. 



138 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 

^^ Let us reyivily manicipalities : 

The good old towns, where men were not ashamed of trade^ 
Nor let trade deaden life or love or strength in them, 
But fought and conquered in the war of liberty, 
And built cathedrals that remain to dwarf our work, 
And used keen sword, sweet lyre, the justest balances . 
Towns such as these the Monarch should resuscitate." 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

TTTHO is the Monarch? The Monarch 
^ ^ of Southpool is Tom Cornish, Mayor 
now for the fifth time, who has completely 
made that city what it now is. He is the 
third of a line of great shipowners, and is 
acknowledged as the first man in Southpool. 
He is about Mr. Shirley's age, and in some 



THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 139* 

respects not unlike him, but more florid and 
stately, less agile and sunburnt. He is a 
man of one idea, which naturally he deems 
the greatest idea of the day, and which he 
is carrying out with some success. He holds 
that th e vice of the time is centralization . All 
great work is to be done in London, and all 
Government to be in the hands of the Prime- 
Minister. To this he objects. 

" I am a Southpool man," he is wont to 

» 

say, " and I am proud of the old town. I 
am not going to live in London, and be pre- 
sented at Court, and get laughed at by the 
cream of the cream. I am Tom Cornish, 
shipowner, of Southpool, and I think I have 
as good work to do as any Duke that owns^ 
his millions of acres. Isn't one of my 
steamers a bit of Old England . ^English tim- 
ber and iron and hemp, driven by English 
coal, manned by English men ? I want ta 
keep Southpool moving. We've spent some- 



140 FRANCES. 

thing to make the parish church worthy of 
being a cathedral; and if I don't see a 
Bishop of Southpooly I hope my son will." 

Mr. Cornish's love for his town had grown 
infectiooSy and had bom great fruit. The 
Southpool Town-Council do not quarrel 
over trifles, do not let their Town-Clerk 
rule them, do not waste money in litigationi, 
<^r in wild schemes of sewer-making. The 
best men in the town have come forward 
for the council, and have formed a muni- 
cipal aristocracy, whereby the poorer rate- 
payers gain great advantage : for if there be 
a noble scheme suggested which lies beyond 
the legal province of the municipality, these 
merchant princes pay for it themselves. 
They do not miss their thousands : the town 
is improved, and they profit by that im- 
provement : its trade grows apace, its peo- 
ple are more content, its unity becomes 
visible. There is no Southpool man who 



THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 141 

does not feel kinship with all other South* 
pool men ; who does not look upon his town 
as his own. 

Tom Cornish himself had built the new 
Mansion House, to which Mr. Shirley and 
the Count were driven, to commemorate 
his third Mayoralty. This set the aldermen 
and councillors at work, and by the arrival 
of his fourth Mayoralty they had opened a 
new Town Hall, on a splendid scale, the 
glory of the town after Saint Mary's Min- 
ster. Well, Tom Cornish wouldn't be 
beaten, so he set the best artists of the day 
to paint portraits of Southpool worthies to 
adorn this hall. 

Southpool Mansion House seemed to 
Count Cassius Grimani the most comfort- 
able and hospitable house he ever had seen. 
It was a great night, of course ; they got in 
just an hour before dinner, which was to be 
a banquet ; but all their wants were antid- 



142 FRANCES. 

pated, and both the Mayor and Mayoress 
found time to give them evident welcome 
of the heart. They found a suite of rooms 
ready for them, so that they might remain 
in their private parlour, if disinclined for 
the public apartments. Count Cassius was 
clelighted with this magnificent politeness. 

" This is a great city," he said to Gabriel 
Shirley. " We could not have been more 
nobly treated by Pericles or Maecenas." 

The dinner was a banquet There were 
"Celebrities of all kinds. There were a mul- 
titude of lovely women. Gabriel Shirley 
was not easily dazzled, but it was some 
time before he got any idea of individuals 
across the white wide damask through in- 
numerable flowers, and he was suddenly 
surprised in a half reverie by catching a 
bright hazel eye, and seeing almost opposite 
him, under the blaze of lamps, the brown- 
haired maiden who had once been revealed. 



THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 143 

to him by a lantern's flickering light in a 
lane near Monckton Saint Mary. He was 
delighted. He knew that she was to come 
for the Regatta week, but had not expected 
to see her at this first dinner. Two places 
farther on he saw Sir Charles, and they 
took wine in silent recognition, being too 
far apart to speak ; indeed, it was impossi- 
ble to say a word to pretty Cecilia till din- 
ner was over; but meanwhile her merry 
eyes caught his often enough, and the Count 
and he had their whispered words about 
her. She did not fail to note the melan- 
choly dark-eyed Italian, whom she had 
never seen before, and she built up a ro- 
mance about him, as well as she could, in 
the intervals between hot-house peaches 
and flirtation. 

The ladies rise, and shake out their 
plumage like a flock of lovely birds, and 
sweep away in radiant procession to the 



144 FRANCES. 

Mayor's withdrawing-rooms. The move- 
ment of seats preparatory to the final glass 
of port enables the Count to place himself 
by Sir Charles Wray, while Mr. Shirley 
gets close to his old schoolfellow, the Mayor. 
Count Cassius, who could be imaginative 
even at a dinner-party, had fondly fancied 
that Miss Wray resembled his lost Lucia ; 
and though I suspect it was only a dream, 
he longed to hear her speak, to learn if also 
there was any likeness of voice. Mean- 
while, he had to talk to his old friend Sir 
Charles, who was quite glad to meet again 
his fellow-traveller, and who asked him 
many questions, which he kept unanswered 
by clever fencing. Count Cassius had re- 
solved to say nothing of his great grief. 

It was not until the next morning that 
Count Cassius Grimani had an opportunity 
of saying much to Cecilia, for the rooms 
were too crowded for conversation. But 



THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 145 

the following day gave him ample chance ; 
and he was well prepared to take advantage 
of it, having dreamt all night of this 
young English girl who seemed so like his 
Lucia. Now the programme of the day was 
simple ; first the Mayor was to take a few 
friends to see the beautified Minster and the 
new Town Hall . then they were to lunch 
on board his gilded barge, and look at the 
Regatta if they liked . last, they were to 
attend (after dinner need I say ?) the first 
concert of the Madrigal Society. 

These arrangements were successfully 
managed. When the party was formed, 
Count Ca^ius dexterously made himself the 
lady's protector, and she seemed nothing 
loth. He was her father's old friend ; why 
should Cecilia object? There was some- 
thing romantic about this patrician of 
Florence, which well might fascinate the 
simple English girl ; and he, having fixed 

VOL. n, L 



W>t 



146 FRANCES. 

upon his mind the idea that she resembled 
Lucia, treated her with a courtly tenderness 
beyond even his own natural chivalry. 
. The organist played voluntaries on the 
great organ in the Town Hall while the 
party walked around it. A small party, but 
increased beyond the first arrangement, by 
Major Washington F. Butts and the 
Honourable Hercules Lyon, who had not 
failed to make an early onslaught upon the 
Mayor, and whom Tom Cornish treated at 
once with unhesitating and unsuspecting 
hospitality, Mr. Shirley was much amused, 
and quoted to his old schoolfellow a distich 
from the illustrious poet : 

<< Where'er Americans may choose to roam, 
Thej very wisely make themselves at home.'* 

These two gentlemen realized the couplet, 
for they kept to the Mayor's party the whole 
of the Regatta week. 

Under the lofty raftered roof of the Town 



THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 147 

Hall the small group stood, while low 
music loitered amid the lofty spaces, and 
looked at the portraits. There was one in the 
place of honour, nobly painted ; scarcely 
<;ould even Titian have planted more keen- 
ness in those calm introspective eyes under 
bushy brows, or given those lips a finer 
curve of power and persuasion, or touched 
with truer tint of undercurrent blood that 
wrinkled skin, or put more visible soul into 
the long white fingers of a hand that seemed 
half made to rule the world, half to feel for 
the infinite. 

GabriJBl Shirley started when he saw it. 

" What a glorious picture of the doctor, 
Cornish !" he exclaimed. " How have you 
managed it ?" 

His friend explained to him that it had 
been based, by the greatest living portrait- 
painter, on a miniature upon ivory, done 
many years before by a first-rate hand. 

l2 



148 FRANCES. 

" It is life," said Shirley. " It is old Lech^ 
mere himself." 

" Yes," replied Cornish, and then, turning 
to Sir Charles Wray, he went on : " Dr. 
Lechmere was only the master of Southpool 
Grammar School ; but he made the town 
what it is. Shirley and I were his pupils at 
the same time ; and we know, and there are 
hundreds of others who know, that he gave 
his boys the noblest idea of life." 

" Ay," rejoined Shirley, laughing, " and 
the grandest thrashing if we did not adhere 
to his idea of life. I am glad you have got 
his portrait here; he certainly did more 
for Southpool than any man in its whole 
history." 

"To judge from the portrait, the doctor 
would have made a good soldier," said 
Sir Charles Wray. 

"It is curious. Sir Charles," said the 
Mayor, " that he was most eager to be a 



THE MAYOR OF SOUTHPOOL. 149 

soldier in his boyhood, but his mother im- 
plored him not to join the Army, and he 
gave way. His father had been killed in 
battle when quite a young man. He might 
have been a great general, and conquered a 
few enemies of England ; but I am heartily 
thankful he did not. . He made me what I 
am ; but that's a trifle . he made Southpool 
what it is." 

" He must have been a truly remarkable 
man," said Major Washington F. Butts. 



150 



CHAPTER IX. 

REGATTA HOUBS. 

^* O vagae white saUs that flutter far 
Upon the summer sea ! 
Twixt dawn and gloam, 'twixt wave and star, 
The wild winds drive you fair and free ; 
Loveliest of fairy forms that are, 
Creatures of life to me." 

rpHE Regatta, artistically enjoyed, is a 
-.- choice enjoyment. It is a picnic on 
the water. There is a delicious mixture of 
repose and excitement . of the passionate 
and the picturesque. Look at the Mayor of 
Southpool's barge, moored on the river 
estuary, beneath a marvellous railway-bridge, 
swung high enough for Her Majesty's tallest 



REGATTA HOURS, 151 

masts to pass under it. Very calm is the 
river: you can see the medusae, strange 
gelatinous creatures, making their way up 
stream in search of cooler waters. In the 
barge's stern sit a gay party, whose atten- 
tion is divided between the yachts and row- 
ing-boats, the tree-shaded river-margin, the 
abundant luncheon . . . and themselves. 
And perhaps they themselves are at least 
as well worth regard as any other elements 
of the scene. Man is the soul of the earth ; 
and man in perfection is as much more 
beautiful than the world around him as the 
soul of man is more beautiful than his body. 
Among the visitors on board the Mayor of 
SouthpooFs boat there are specimens of 
humanity that would delight a great portrait- 
painter. How a Titian, a Rembrandt, a 
Vandyck, a Millais, would rejoice to paint 
those two old school-fellows, old cronies, 
worthy pupils of Dr. Lechmere, Tom Corn- 



152 FRANCES. 

ish and Gabriel Shirley . so like in all the 
essential, so unlike in all the adventitious, 
characteristics of man . one the owner of a 
mighty merchant navy and the first man in 
a great city . and the other a humourist by 
nature, a wanderer by the destiny which 
comes from character. And the subtle 
pencil of a great artist would have been 
attracted by the dark thoughtful face of 
Count Cassius Grimani . melancholy, yet 
full of poetic energy. The Count, who had 
never seen anything of this kind before, and 
was as thorough an Anglomaniac as M. 
Philar^te Chasles himself, was tr3dng to 
understand everything . the yacht-race, the 
Mayor, the railway-bridge, the Americans, 
the ladies . . . especially Miss Cecilia Wray. 
She, in a blue serge jacket and a yachting- 
hat, with just enough fret-work of lace and 
streamer to show that she was not a yachts- 
woman in grim earnest, looked provokingly 



REGATTA HOURS. 153 

pretty. As to the General, any painter 
would have been inspired and perplexed by 
his grand countenance. 

The afternoon passed pleasantly. It was 
noticeable that Count Cassius talked so 
much to the Mayor that the latter some- 
times scarcely did his hospitable duty to the 
utmost . an odd thing for Tom Cornish. It 
was odd, too, as Cecilia Wray was there, 
looking as bright as foam of wave, and end- 
lessly reminding the Count of Lucia. Re- 
member that a man's hobbies are stronger 
than even his passions ; that he will revert to 
turning box- wood trifles with a lathe when he 
ought to be heart-broken by the desertion of 
a mistress. Now Count Cassius, a true lover 
of his country, had always believed that the 
Italian municipal republics of the Middle 
Ages, based, of course, on the great Greek 
model, gave the perfection of government . 
a community not too large to be friendly 



154 FBAHCBS. 

and homely was ruled by men who knew 
those whom they had to rule. But the 
Count was also a great lover of England, 
an almost passionate student of English 
poetry and history, and it seemed to him 
that the English borough just failed to be- 
come what the Italian city had been in its 
flower . that Manchester or Canterbury 
might isolate for itself as lofty a life as Ven- 
ice ^or Florence of old. When, therefore, 
he saw Southpool, a town in which town- 
life was the great idea ; when he met Tom 
Cornish, who threw himself into this idea 
with intense enthusiasm ; when he learnt that 
the whole movement began in the brain of a 
great schoolmaster, Dr. Lechmere . he be- 
came strangely interested. After a long 
confabulation, which had caused the Mayor 
to neglect his guests and the Count his flir- 
tation, the latter said : 

. 

" I shall come and stay at Southpool for 



REGATTA HOURS. 155 

a time, Mr. Cornish. I shall either live at 
an hotel or hire a furnished house, and 
watch the working of your institutions." 

The Mayor encouraged the idea. It amus- 
ed him to think of the ordinary Town-Coun- 
cillor's dismay when he found his doings 
scrutinized by a patrician of Florence. When 
he laughed over the matter with Mr. Gab- 
riel Shirley, that gentleman quoted the 
illustrious poet : 

''Town- Councillors hold strangers in abhorrence, 
And worst of all, a fellow fresh from Florence." 

However, as the time passed, Tom Cornish 
and Count Cassius were obliged to give up 
their colloquy, especially as the former had 
both official and social duties to fulfil. When 
the Count had finished his confabulation, he 
went to look for Miss Cecilia Wray. He 
was punished for his neglect. The General 
and Gabriel Shirley were pacing the deck^ 
and the Honourable Hercules Lyon was com- 



156 vniLSCRS. 

pletely absorbing Miss Wray. He had got 
an introduction somehow or other. These 
<d fresco amusements are sad places for sud- 
den introductions . and he had been telling 
her such marvellous stories of American life 
that she was quite fascinated. There was^ 
a touch of the anaconda in this man ; he 
could fascinate a girl greatly against her 
will. There was about him something 
Cecilia did not relish ; it left an unplea- 
sant savour on her intellectual palate ; yet 
she was compelled to listen to his pleasant 
talk. He talked of the grand simple life in 
America ; of the wide prairies, where wild 
herds of bu£falo wander through a myriad 
leagues of grass tall enough to bury 
them ; of the mighty rivers, the giant trees, 
the far-descending cataracts, till Cecilia, a 
simple child, daughter of an aristocrat but 
bred in a small English village, began to 
look on America as a kind of Fairyland. 



REGATTA HOURS. 157 

Mr. Lyon went on eloquently and subtly y 
described his own country-house in Con- 
necticut, with a whole village of people de- 
pendent on him ; sketched (from his own 
imagination wholly) a free and joyous life 
such as never perhaps has been lived on 
earth. The Honourable Hercules had a touch 
of the poet in him, and changed his Ameri- 
can estate (wheresoever situate) into some- 
thing too ridiculously like the Garden of 
Eden to satisfy anybody save a poetic girl. 
Cecilia listened credulously and began to 
think that there was a certain charm about 
the Honourable Hercules Lyon. 

All through the golden afternoon there 
were comers to the Mayor's barge, the centre 
of Southpool hospitality. A group of three 
came off in a boat, and climbed the com- 
panion-lad(Jer . a young and handsome girl, 
a stalwart young farmer, an elderly gentle- 
man of military air. As they came on deck 



158 FRANCES. 

the attention of everybody was centred on 
Harry Waring's cutter-yacht, the Secret^ 
which was coming so sharp round the stern 
of the committee boat that it seemed likely 

to run into it. But Harry was too clever a 

# 

steersman for that to happen. 

"I wonder which is the Mayor," said the 
old soldier above mentioned. " We must 
report ourselves, having come on board 
without leave." 

As the old boy's rather strident voice was 
heard, the Honourable Hercules Lyon paus- 
ed abruptly in his pleasant imaginative con- 
versation with Miss Cecilia Wray, Her 
bright hazel eyes had a touch of astonish- 
ment in them, as he suddenly rose from be- 
side her, without a word, hailed a boat that 
lay to leeward, and went on shore. It . 
struck her at once that all Americans were 
rather mad, and that it was useless to be 
surprised at their vagaries. She left her 



REGATTA HOURS. 159 

place and joined her father and Mr. Shirley, 
who were still walking up and down. 
Gabriel had not been unobservant of her 
conversation with the Honourable Hercules, 
and wickedly quoted a stave of the illus- 
trious poet : . 

" A charming lady must be very sage, 
When, tired of youth, she comes to talk to age/' 

Just at this moment he became aware of 
Miss Frances Carey whom he knew, with 
two male companions whom he did not 
know, though he guessed one was her 
brother. The other was Captain Heath. 
He and Carey had been growing very inti- 
mate of late, and had gone about to various 
places; and as Southpool Regatta, which 
grew more famous every year, was a great 
place for ladies, Walter had persuaded 
Frances to come. She was loth. Yet she 
thought some happy chance might bring her 
to meet a certain railway-guard ; so she was 



160 FRANCES. 

induced to come . and here she was on the 
deck of the Mayor's barge, the handsomest 
woman within a hundred miles. That would 
certainly have been George Brown's opinion. 
He may have exaggerated . we know what 
lovers are ; but Frances Carey had a true 
heart and a loving temper, a high courage 
and a gentle manner, and you could not 
look into her clear eyes, or touch her deli- 
cate soft hand, without discovering these 
things. 

The Mayor welcomed the new arrivals, 
and Gabriel Shirley's humorous mouth 
formed for Frances Carey a smile of un- 
recognizing recognition, which made her 
grateful for the old gentleman's tact. They 
soon got into conversation ; and while Cap- 
tain Heath and Walter Carey listened to 
the wise sayings of the Mayor, Frances and 
Mr. Shirley said a word or two of a certain 
railway-guard. 



HEGATTA HOURS. 161 

" Is he very tired and impatient, do you 
think ?" she whispered, 

" no. It does him good. He wanted 
an education, and now he is getting it. And 
he passes close to you twice a day, which 
ought to be happiness enough for the young 
dog." 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley had heard nothing of 
the field-glass. Perchance he would have 
deemed it wrong. Yet I think not, for the 
next thing he said was : 

*' Are you going to the Madrigal meeting 
to-night ?" 

" yes : it was the chief thing that in- 
duced me to come to South pool." 

" Well, I must make him come, too." 

" 0, it would not be safe," she said. 

" Leave that to me," replied Gabriel Shir- 
ley, in that staunch style which gives surety 
of success. 

Just at this moment a gun was fired, to mark 

VOL. n. M 



162 FRANCES. 

the winning of a race. This is the sort of 
thing that intermpts and ponctnates conver- 
sation: it was now coincident with the 
arrival of another visitor to the Mayor . a 
tall, very tall, broad-shonldered man, dressed 
with remarkable care for a man of his size, 
and looking as if he had compressed himself 
into imnsed respectability. He found a card 
in his pocket, extricated it, marched up to 
the Mayor, looked down upon him about 
twelve inches, and delivered the authenticat- 
ing parallelogram with a smile of intense 
benevolence. 

At this point Major Washington F. Butts 
went over the side of the barge, and took 
the first train he could catch to London. 

Who was this new-comer ? The mystery 
is slight. He was Julian Orchard, poet and 
mathematician, who had recently accepted 
the appointment of U. S. Consul to South- 
pool. He thought he should like to know 



REGATTA HOURS. 163 

England, and this was a cheap way of doing 
it. So the great author left the young 
<;ountry for the old, and this was his first 
official appearance. 

"We meet on the water, Mr. Mayor,'* 
he said ; " like the Shannon and the Chesa- 
peake.^^ 

" Yes," said Tom Cornish, " and I will 
carry out the comparison, and carry you 
prisoner to my house to dinner ; and after 
that, to hear madrigals sung." 

**Do the melodious birds of Southpool 
sing madrigals ?" said the Consul. " If so, I 
surrender." 



m2 



164 



CHAPTER X. 

MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 

." Shallow riyers, to whose falls 
Melodious birds sing madrigals." 

JULIAN ORCHARD was an Englishman 
^ of the third generation. His great- 
grandfather had gone over to Kentucky 
from Warminster in Wiltshire. The Orchards 
had flourished in this strong new soil ; had 
become men of fame, one way and another ; 
had developed some clever youth, some 
pretty girls. Julian was a younger son of a 
youngei; son ; and when he got into his teens 
the whole Orchard familv had to hold a meet- 
ing to decide what was to be done with him. 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 165 

He taught himself everything he wanted to 
know, grew taller than anybody else in the 
neighbourhood, and asserted absolute inde- 
pendence. He was a kind of republic in 
himself. The family council could do no- 
thing with him, so his family asked him what 
he really meant to do. He said he should 
teach school one year, start a newspaper the 
second, and go to Congress the third. He 
carried out this programme almost to the let- 
ter. He was master of one of the mixed 
village schools of America before he was 
seventeen, with scholars of both sexes older 
than himself, whom he managed to keep in 
order. He next turned up as the editor of 
the Greeribank Gracdius^ where he distin- 
guished himself by cudgelling to a jelly a 
scoundrel who threatened him with a revol- 
ver. Afterwards he became a member 
of Congress, and was rather sorry for it. 
Meanwhile he was not idle otherwise. 



166 FRANCES. 

Julian Orchard was a curious mixture of ac- 
tor and dreamer and thinker. In neither of 
these three lines of life could he attain supre- 
macy. He could not be a Caesar or a Shake- 
speare or a Plato. There was a complete- 
ness in his character which shut out the pos- 
sibility of high excellence. He did nothing 
to absolute perfection, but he did most 
things well. In literature, his chief success 
was that reflective penetrative suggestive 
essay which is especially an American pro- 
duct. He seemed to see right through a 
man's character, and to reveal depths of 
meaning in him which even the man himself 
would not suspect. If he saw an old house, 
some instinct taught himits history; the leaves 
of an oak whispered to him what the lovers 
were like who had stood under its shade ; 
when he saw a river he saw also the reflex- 
ion on its waters of boys and girls that had 
wasted kisses there. It was Julian Orchard's 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 167 

creed that spiritual things leave indelible im- 
press on things material ; the soul of a man, 
he maintained, not only gave colour to his 
eyes, form to his lips and fingers, wrinkles to 
his brow . but also affected the house in 
which he lived, the dogs and horses depend- 
ent on him, the trees and flowers which he 
grew. 

" There is only one force on this planet,'* 
he was wont to say . " the soul of man, 
which is a fragment of the soul of God. That 
moves the world. I can believe that my 
America rose from the sea, with all 
its giant trees, its glorious rivers, its snowy 
mountain peaks, its untameable Indians, to 
satisfy the longing spirit of Columbus. I can 
believe that the planet Neptune came into 
the verge of our system because two young 
astronomers in France and England were 
longing for such a sphere." 

It was odd that he should be sent as 



168 FRANCES. 

Consul to Southpool, but the Americans do 
odd things. Besides, they are the most ver- 
satile of all people in the world, and the most 
readv to maintain that one vocation is as 
good as another, if honestly fulfilled. A 
general will retire from the command of 
armies to keep a school : a pulpit orator 
tired of popularity will turn photographer : 
a politician who has only just been beaten 
in a contest for the Presidency will start an 
hotel. They are a pliant flexible adaptable 
race, our kin across the water : and if John 
Bull is rather puzzled by the doings of this 
lusty young son of his, he will not be the 
first elderly gentleman who has been in 
that predicament. 

The Southpool Madrigal Society hold 
their meeting in the Victoria Rooms. There, 
amid the party surrounding the Mayor, 
were the new Consul, and General Sir 
Charles Wray with his daughter, and Frances 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 169 

Carey, and Count Cassius Grimani : Mr. 
Shirley, of course. Captain Heath and 
Walter Carey were absent : on board the 
Mayor's barge our astute friend Gabriel had 
held conversation with them, had found, as 
he anticipated, that they cared nothing for 
madrigals, and had so deftly arranged mat- 
ters that they were left free to go whither 
they liked, while Frances joined Mr. Cor- 
nish's party, and found charming society in 
Cecilia. 

Very grateful was Frances to her quaint 
old friend for this arrangement. Her bro- 
ther and Captain Heath were quite as well 
pleased as she ; they disappeared from the 
Mayor's barge very soon after, and went oflf 
to amuse themselves. The fact is that Cap- 
tain Heath and Walter Carey were doing 
each other injury. Heath, the well-worn 
man of the world, wanted to go as fast as 
young Carey, while that inexperienced yeo- 



170 FRANCES. 

man desired to show that he knew as much 
as Heath. They injured one another : and, 
since their intimacy had grown so great, 
Frances had not half her previous pleasure 
in her brother. He was always at Heath- 
field ; often going with the Captain to Lon- 
don; diflferent altogether from his former 
self. Frances began to feel very lonely* 
She had Hugh Roland to think of, and I 
doubt not built up an image of him far 
superior to the man himself ; but how long 
would it be before he could come into the 
world again, a free man, with no charge 
against him ? How long ? 

Frances Carey had enjoyed her afternoon 
hours on the river. She did not understand 
the Regattsl a bit, and didn't a bit want to. 
She had become quite intimate with Cecilia : 
it was love at first sight between the two 
girls : the grave humour of the one quite 
chimed in with the merry wit of the other. 



.^^ 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 171 

They were friends at once. Indeed I am 
not at all sure that our little Cecilia, only 
too ready to trust the first loyal and loving 
creature of her own sex that she met, did 
not confess a certain sort of . well, admira- 
tion . ^for Count Cassius Grimani. When 
young girls do fall in love with each other 
it is with remarkable rapidity. 

The Victoria Rooms are a blaze of light. 
There is a brilliant assembly. The Mayor's 
party is striking and distinguished : for, be- 
side some tremendous patricians of the 
county, whom, with wives and daughters, he 
always entertained, the Southpool public 
could see the new Consul's lofty stooping 
form, and that unmistakeable aristocrat^ 
Count Cassius, and the old General, white- 
haired and a thought melancholy, and 
sturdy Gabriel Shirley, as daring and de- 
cisive as any of those Wiston ancestors of 
his. Frances, who had enjoyed the cool of 



172 FRANCES. 

the river, enjoyed now the brilliant room 
and £ur company and sweet surge of 
melody ; she thought all the while that per- 
haps presently she should see Hugh Roland 
for a moment ; she did not guess that all 
the admirers of beauty in the room were 
dedded she was the loveliest girl they had 
ever seen, and wondering who in the world 
she could be. Yet it was so. 
A madrigal was in progress : 

" Lady fair ! 
Is a dagger sheathed in that dark hair T 

Keen as thine eyes 
That look so soft, so gay, bo wise. 

Is there placed 

Near that chaste 

Snow-sweet waist 
Aught to check too amorous haste T 

If so, 

I will go, 
Unless thy sweet mouth treats me so 

As to say, 

Not to-day, 
Nor to-morrow . O, no, no V* 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 17^ 

Those old madrigalists and sonneteers of 
the Tudor times had a unique simple way 
of dealing with love-fancies that I somehow 
prefer to the modern method. I think that 
though perchance they seemed less fiercely 
passionate than some writers of the present 
moment, they hid truer earnest under that 
easy gaiety. I cannot believe that a gen- 
tleman is capable of love who throws all 
his power into the animal part of it. That 
which is god-like in man and woman is the 
basis, is the essence, of true love. 

Another madrigal, the words by a gay 
Caroline cavalier : . 

^ Carolus a Garolo ! 
Aj, we have had our trouble and woe. 

After the fight 

Let each knight 
Straight to his darling mistress go. 

" She will say, * Your trophies show ! 
Ere you kiss me, let me know. 
Have you slain 
Roundheads twain 
For Carolus a Carolof ** 



174 FRASCES. 

It Will not be supposed by the dullest of 
my readers . and O, how devoutly I hope 
that I shall never have a doll reader, even 
amongst the critics ! (though that, on reflex- 
ion, is asking too much from the Destinies) 
. ^that Frances had quite forgotten in the 
mu^c of these madrigals the probable pres- 
ence of a certain rsul way-guard. Foil well 
knew she that Gabriel Shirley would not 
deceive her. She saw him at last . in the 
arena . ^in a suit of tweed, with a head of 
hair like unravelled hemp, looking, she 
thought, too dangerously like a gentleman 
in disguise. He did not seem to think so. 
There was an expression of gay and daring 
independence on his face that delighted yet 
terrified her. They magnetized each other, 
these twain. 

Now, between the two parts of the Ma- 
drigal Society's quaintly delicious entertain- 
ment, there is a half-hour for rest and re- 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 175 

freshment, when the brilliant company- 
gather in a gay saloon, and the singers (all 
amateurs, observe) get compliments from 
their friends, and there is a pleasant inter- 
val of lotos. Count Cassius Grimani coolly 
walked off with Cecilia, as if she were his 
absolute property : she was so like Lucia, 
don't you see? Mr. Gabriel Shirley took 
charge of Frances, but didn't escort her 
to the saloon. This wary old gentleman 
had beforehand secured the services of 
some cloak-room attendant, and Frances 
was led through a narrow passage into a 
cosy little room, where a fire was burning, 
and fragrant tea was on the table. A sub- 
servient female curtseved and retired. A 
gentleman in a tweed suit was led forward 
from heaven knows where by Mr. Gabriel 
Shirley, who said to Miss Carey, 

'* Will you give Mr. Brown a cup of tea? 
I shall be back in about ten minutes." 



176 FRANCES. 

Frances, looking at Hugh Roland rather 
shyly at first, could hardly understand the 
expression of his face. There was no melan- 
choly in it, no pain. Had he grown reck- 
less ? She could not believe it of him, yet 
there was something to provoke the fear in 
his first remark . 

*' What an amusing old angel he is I" 
He went on more calmly after a pause : 
" That glorious man has saved my life, 
Frances. But for him I should have gone 
mad in reality. Now I am happy : at least, 
I shall be, when once you have said Yes to 
a question I shall ask you soon." 

Frances looked at him with a clear strong 
gaze. Her beautiful blue eyes seemed to 
become stars that moment . as radiant as 
Arcturus or Aldebaran. Hugh felt as if 
their keen light pierced the very centre of 
his brain. 

She put her soft slender-fingered hand in 



MADBIGAL MOMENTS. 177 

his as they stood there by the fire. His 
had grown hard with guard's work, but it 
was a fine flexible hand still. She said, 

" Hugh, I know what you mean." She 
smiled gaily. "I have got a yes some- 
where about me, quite ready when you can 
fairly ask for it." 

"That will not be long," he said, and 
took her in his arms and kissed her with 
that faithful kiss which is apart from all 
others. 

This pleasant ceremony was barely over 
when Mr. Gabriel Shirley opened the door. 

" I declare, Miss Carey," he said, " you 
have not given the poor young man a cup 
of tea. And there is no time now, for the 
second part is just beginning." 

Which it was, with a wickedly suggestive 
madrigal, based, apparently, on a nursery- 
rhyme : 

VOL. n. K 



178 FRANCES. 

^^ Little Miss Homer 
Went to a comer. 

Was she alone? O no ! O no ! 
Nanghty Miss Homer. 
On^t we to scorn her ? 

Onght we to call her very so-so f* 

It was an awkward verse to come filling the 
room at the moment of Frances Carey's 
return. Her guardian, Gabriel Shirley, 
was quite equal to the event. When he had 
got her back to her place he whispered a 
couplet from the illustrious poet : 

" The lovely lady and the loving yoath 
Admit that music sometime tells the tmth." 

. Frances settled down to her madrigals by 
Cecilia's side ; but her beautiful blue eyes 
were fixed almost all the time on a certain 
good-looking fellow in a tweed suit in the 
arena below. I fear that both the Consul 
and the Count found Frances rather dull 
this evening. 
The next day was devoted to cricket. 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 179 

Southpool defied the first eleven of England^ 
and the three Graces went in for three 
figures each. Poor George Brown could 
have no share in this entertainment; he 
was whirling away towards London at ex- 
press speed, leaving his lady-love behind, 
having no hope of a momentary vision of 
beauty through his field-glass as he passed 
Chessington. George Brown was some- 
what disgusted ; but for all that he was in 
high spirits, for he had fastened on an idea 
. -a wrong one, maybe, but an idea not- 
withstanding. And it might be cursorily 
remarked that a man with only one idea must 
find his way to his desire in time, if to that 
idea he is true. The man who seldom 
attains what he desires is the man of many 
ideas. 

Frances Carey was on the cricket-ground 
in Southpool Park with the Mayor's party : 

with that party also were the General and 

N 2 



180 FRANCES. 

his daughter, and the new Consul, and 
Gabriel Shirley. Walter Carey and Cap- 
tain Heath came on the ground and went 
away again : the Honourable Hercules Lyon 
hovered around the place, but did not come 
anywhere near the central tent, where the 
Mayor of Southpool nobly entertained all 
comers. 

Of all athletic games, surely cricket is the 
most charming. It gives so many chances to 
the ^player. To be a victorious bat, a man 
of three figures, is of course the most magni- 
ficent thing, but I would rather be a deadly 
bowler. It is no trivial matter to be able 
to field well. Perhaps the rarest figure on 
the ground is a perfect wicket-keeper ; that 
post demands a quick eye and a strong nerve 
in these days of express bowling. One ex- 
tremely pleasant thing about cricket is that 
nine out of the eleven who are in have leis- 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. 181 

ure for cool drinks and flirtation. More- 
over, the hotter the weather the more en- 
joyable is cricket, which needs a level lawn 
and a burning san for perfection. 

Frances and Oedlia, who were becoming 
great allies, and neither of whom had seen 
the noble game of cricket played to perfec- 
tion before, were much delighted with the 
scene to-day. But of all the party the 
most delighted was the Mayor and the Con- 
sul, Count Cassius and Mr. Shirley. The 
Consul, I suppose, would never have ac- 
cepted this post but that he wanted to know 
England. This feeling comes strongly on 
the educated English American, who has 
not been lowered by interfusion of foreiga 
blood. He is going to his ancestral home 
again. Julian Orchard had seen the romantic 
beauties of America . ^seen the long chain of 
inland seas, the great river hurling itself into 
an abyss, the forest of vast trees that seem 



182 

coeval with creatioii ; but he had a vision in 
his brain of London with its narrow Thames, 
of Oxford's gothic glory, of Shakespeare's 
Stratford river, and Byron's Newstead lake. 
And he wanted to see his own race unmixed. 
In a land of Honourables and Colonels he 
wanted to recognise Princes and Earls. A 
profound student of literature, the world of 
Shakespeare and Ben Jonson, the world of 
Swift and Pope and Arbuthnot, the world of 
Thackeray and Dickens, seemed to him more 
real than the sodety around him. He, bom 
at the " hub of the universe," had educated 
himself into an Englishman. 

He looked with eyes unfatiguable on this 
cricket-field, with all its circumstances. 
. Few scenes are more charming than an 
English cricket match. The Consul, thrown 
so suddenly from his ocean steamer into the 
midst of Southpool's festival week that he 
felt rather like an aerolite, was delighted 



MADRIGAL MOMENTS. l83 

with the mixture of hard work with intense 
indolence. In the centre of the green en- 
closure there is a strife of giants. Look . as 
that agile clean-limbed man in white flannel 
runs forward and delivers his ball with a tre- 
mendous swing of the right arm, how every 
eye of the eleven fellows follows it to the 
wicket. A half second . the sharp touch of 
the willow sends it far away, and the bats- 
men are running furiously, and a/(?wr goes up 
at the telegraph post. And all this while 
the man who is to go in next is lying idly on 
the grass with a cool flagon beside him, or 
talking nonsense to some pretty girl. 

"I am glad," said the Consul, "that 
cricket is growing among us in America, 
though I fear we shall never play it with 
such easy fervour as you play it in England. 
Heavens ! what a catch !" 

The ball had been struck high in air, and 
long-field had almost flown into air to meet 



184 FRANCES. 

it, catching it as it came down like a thunder- 
bolt with his left hand only, and " skying " 
it at once with triumphant delight. 

The ball went from hand to hand ; up 
flew the telegraph . 73 ; a young gentleman 
in white flannel took a parting draught of 
his claret-cup, said a parting word to a lady, 
and walked off with his bat to the wicket. 

" It must be very hot work," said Count 
Cassius Grimani, rather languidly. ^'It is 
picturesque to look at, but I am too much a 
lotos lover to perspire fiercely without good 
cause." 

The worthy Mayor laughed. 

" Shirley," he said, " can you play cricket 
still? If so^ join us. I have an idea, 
ril have a special match . the Mayor's 
Eleven against eleven colts. I won't have a 
man under fifty, and they shan't have a boy 
over twenty. What do you say ?" 



MABBIGAL MOMENTS. 185 

" I say it will be great fun, and that the 
boys will beat us." 

" But do you really mean that you would 
play this hot game ?" asked Count Cassius, 
with an air of amazement. 

*' Mean it 1" exclaims the Mayor, in a lively 
manner . " mean it 1 Of course I do. We'll 
talk to the secretary of the club at once. 
Can't do that, though, he's wicket-keeping. 
Never mind : we'll do it. Consul, you'll 
play, won't you ?" 

" For a man to play in your match, Mr. 
Mayor, he must confess himself above fifty 
or under twenty. Which do you consider 
me to be ?" 

"The one in wisdom and the other in 
courage," said Gabriel Shirley. "0, we 
must have this match, Cornish. What say 
the ladies?" 

" I think I must make Papa play," said 
Cecilia. " WiU you, Papa ?" 



1 86 FRANCES. 

" Yes," said the General, " with pleasure, 
if the Mayor thinks I am worthy to be en- 
listed among his colts." 

.* Admirable !" said Tom Cornish. " We 
have already four of our eleven. I must 
make up the rest out of the Town-Council. 
I wish I could persuade the Bishop and 
Dean to play." 

" Why not ? It is orthodox," said Gabriel 
Shirley. " I think a few elderly ecclesiasti- 
cal dignitaries in knee-breeches and gaiters 
would make a pleasant feature of the field. 
As the illustrious poet hath it : 

^ Since chess its bishops, billiards canons claims, 
Why should not cricket have some cleric names V ** 

"Why should not ladies play cricket, 
Mr. Shirley?" said Frances. " It would 'be 
a nice romp/' 

" Cricket," said the Consul, " is too seri- 
ous a game for ladies, Miss Carey. It re- 
quires too much genius, if I may say so with* 



MADBIGAL MOMENTS. 187 

out offending you. Grace is as great a man 
as Dante or Napoleon, in his way. Cricket 
demands sustained power. I cannot play 
myself, and so shall be a very useless 
member of the Mayor^s eleven, if he insists 
on enlisting me; and if I cannot get my 
certificate of birth from America in tipe to 
prevent it. But I have watched the play 
of an English eleven in America, and I 
came to the conclusion that there is no 
exercise in the worid which tends so strong- 
ly to develop both individual power and the 
power of combined action. Look at that 
baU'' . . . 

He pointed |;o the scene of action as he 
spoke . . . 

" It flies from the bowler's hand faster 
than I can speak ; and before I can finish 
my words will be in some other man's hand. 
Meanwhile every eye follows it, every hand 
is waiting for it, the whole eleven is acting 



188 FBANCE& 

as one great machine against the men who 
are in, yet every man among them has a 
distinct duty. The way in which cricket 
has grown into such a game as it is, I can<* 
not fairly fancy : it is as unima^able as the 
growth of chess/' 

^^ You play chess, I am sure/' said Gabriel 
Shirley* ^^Let us have a game, if time 
serves/' 

" With all my heart," replied the Consul. 



189 



CHAPTER XL 

OLD FOGIES AGAINST COLTS. 

^* Broil Btm 1 Ice claret ! Let my lady be 
Upon the ground I Cricket's the game far me." 

LP. 

rpHE Mayor's cricket-match was arranged, 
-*- of course ; was indeed the most popu- 
lar event of the Southpool week. Although 
on the one side there were portly gentle- 
men whose cricketing years were far back 
in the past, while on the other a gay troop 
of athletic boys, the flower of young South- 
pool, were enlisted, it is a fact that the 
Mayor's Eleven won. This was chiefly due 
to the General and our friend Mr. Gabriel 



190 FRANCES. 

Shirley. Sir Charles Wray had not thought 
it necessary to tell the Mayor that he had 
been Captain of the Eleven at Eton long 
ago : but he found when he faced the 
bowler that his eye was as true and his hand 
as quick as ever : the same physical capacity 
which had made him a splendid batsman in 
his youth had afterwards placed him among 
the very first swordsmen in Her Majesty's 
Army. The Old Fogies, as the Mayor's 
Eleven were irreverently called, went in 
first : and the Mayor himself made only 
three runs, when he was caught out. He 
went oflf with a humorous laugh, much 
cheered by everybody. Then Sir Charles 
went to the wicket, facing Mr. Shirley, who 
played a very cautious game. These colts 
on the other side had some amazingly fast 
round-hand bowlers. The very first ball 
delivered was enough for Sir Charles : eye 
end hand, he discovered, were as good as 



OLD FOGIES AGAINST COLTS. 191 

ever . the ball went right away to the limits 
of the ground, and four runs were scored. 
So it went on. These young bowlers could 
not touch the wickets of the Etonian vete- 
ran. Mr. Shirley, cautious as he was, went 
out for thirteen : but the General defended 
his stumps as he would have defended a 
fortress, and carried his bat out with a score 
of a hundred and seven. There was a won- 
derful storm of cheers. Southpool saw vic- 
tory on the side of its Mayor, and rejoiced 
accordingly. Sir Charles was the hero of 
the hour, and felt as proud as if he had 
won a battle. 

" Papa !" cried merry Cecilia, her hazel 
eyes tear-bright with glee, " why, you have 
beaten everybody I What fun !" 

" I feel as if I were at Eton again," said 
Sir Charles to the Mayor. 

" Ah, I had a prevision of it," said Tom 
Cornish. *^ And my old friend Shirley has 



192 FBAKCES. 

already been quoting his illustrious poet, 

* The youthful colts may easily be beaten 
If 70a can get a player fresh from Eton.' " 

" Not SO fresh," said the General : " but, 
by Jove ! I do feel younger than I did yes- 
terday/' 

"You look younger, Papa," said Cecilia. 
"You ought to play cricket every day, I 
declare." 

" The boy ought not to die in any man," 
said the Consul, who, by the way, had made 
a duck's egg . " youth should be an inalien- 
able possession. No man need grow old." 

" That is a curious doctrine," said Count 
Cassius. " I wish I could believe it." 

" What we call decay is merely the ripen- 
ing process," said the Consul. " You grant 
that the soul is immortal, I assume ?" 

" Very few people seem to think so now- 
a-days," said the Mayor; "but it is my 
belief, notwithstanding," 



OLD FOGIES AGAINST COLTS. 193 

" It is the belief of every man who has a 
soul," said Mr. Orchard. " Now the body 
is only the soul's tenement. The soul wears 
it out, as a sword wears its sheath : but to a 
soul that is immortal what does that mat- 
ter ? What is age to the owner of eternity ? 
We shall all be children together in the 
next world, never fear," 

"How delightful!" said Frances Carey. 
" But is it credible ? Can we hope for any- 
thing so charming ? I always fancy that, if 
one has once grown old, there is no possi- 
bility of forgetting it, and feeling young 
again." 

*' Don't grow old more than you can help, 
Miss Carey," said the Consul. *' But there 
is a fountain of youth somewhere away in 
the far forests. Ariosto knew it ; so do !. 
0, we shall be all babies again. Do you 
know I am writing an essay, to be called 
Nurseries in Heaven ?" 

VOL. IL O 



194 FRANCES. 

** Are you going to honour us by bring- 
ing out a book in England ?'* asked the 
Mayor. 

"I am, Mr. Mayor. And what I have 
seen in Southpool has given me a few new 
topics. So, if I have your permission, I 
should like to dedicate the book to you." 

" You are too good, " said Tom Cornish. 
**My homely name is hardly worthy of 
your page. But I accept with delight ; and 
I'll tell your publisher to send me a thousand 
copies of the book. I think I must have 
nine hundred and ninety-nine friends who 
will like to see my name joined to work of 
yours." 

"No man from America," rejoined the 
Consul, " could be set down as I have been 
in this thoroughly English town of South- 
pool, where self-government is so capitally 
carried out, and not feel great delight. It 
is my first visit to England. And I fancied I 



OLD FOGIES AGAINST COLTS. 195 

knew England from books, and from the 
acxjounts given me by travelling Englishmen. 
But I have already decided that I have yet 
to learn England; and I have taken my 
first real lesson in so pleasant a way that I 
«hall never forget it. I have not been here 
a week, yet already I look on Southpool as 
my second home." 

^'America and England shake hands in 
friendly fashion," said Gabriel Shirley, " on 
an occasion like this. Ours is the governing 
race of the world, and 'tis pity we should 
ever misunderstand one another. There 
ought never to be quarrel between men who 
speak the language of Shakespeare." 

" Have you really got an essay on Nur- 
series in Heaven^ Mr. Orchard ?" said Cecilia 
Wray. 

" I really have, and a very bad one ; and 
ril read it you, if you like to listen." 

" 0, I should so like it 1" she exclaimed, 

o2 



196 FRANCES. 

and Frances said likewise; and an agree- 
ment was made that there should be an 
evening at the Mayor's for chess and essays. 

Walter Carey had apparent business in 
Southpool which occupied him so much that 
Frances was quite independent. She had 
rather a wondering fidgetiness about this 
mysterious business of his, but her delight 
in the quaint pleasant erudite society into 
which she was unexpectedly thrown, made 
her forget her misgivings. 

"Essays and chess," she said to Miss 
Wray, " won't that be nice ?" 

" Too delicious," said Cecilia. " But, see, 
the other side are going in, and I declare 
Mr. Shirley is going to bowl." 

This was true. The stout stalwart old 
Englishman stood with the ball in his hand ; 
he weighed it well ; his fingers caught the 
seam ; he knew just where he could put it, 
and with what spin, upon that level turf. 



OLD FOGIES AGAINST COLTS. 197 

There stood at the wicket, waiting to knock 
that ball to Jericho, a fine tall fellow of 
eighteen, Pryse by name, a cricket hope of 
Southpool. 

Mr, Gabriel Shirley delivered his ball. 
How slow it looked ! How strangely cer- 
tain its movement towards the middle wicket! 
Mr. Pryse was remarkably glad that he 
could block that ball. 

The fast young cricketers of Southpool 
found they could not score against Mr. Shir^ 
ley's bowling. They knocked the Mayor's 
balls about beautifully. But what are you 
to do against a ball that comes creeping 
along as stealthily and slowly as a snake, 
and with the same fatal certainty P Hit at 
it ? Try ! It will go into somebody's hands, 
as safe as possible. You can't send it career- 
ing comet-like beyond reach of the field. 

You can only just knock it away, and 
there must be bad fielding if you 'do that 



198 FRANCES. 

very often. Gabriel Shirley's slow bowling 
was so destructive that the whole eleven 
went out for fifty-three, and were sent in 
again, ignominiously. 

And the Old Fogies won. The Mayor 
had done many things to be proud of in his 
numerous mayoralties, but perhaps he was 
prouder of this cricket-match than of any- 
thing else. He is certainly very proud of 
a silver statuette of himself, bat in hand, 
which the Southpool Cricket Club gave him? 
in commemoration of his victory. 



199 



CHAPTER XII. 

CHESS AND ESSAYS. 

" O pleasant game that I have played 
In winter when the snow fell fast, 
In summer when through beech-wood glade 
The feet of fairies passed ! 

'' I like a fair antagonist, 

Who fights you with a smile serene, 
Bends thoughtful brow o'er ivory wrist, 
And mates you with a queen*'* 

TT was the very, very last evening of the 
-*- Southpool Week. The hospitable 
Mayor had stretched out that week a day 
or two, in noble defiance of old Chronos 
and the almanack-makers, and was now 
winding it up with a pleasant evening-party, 
which followed a very choice dinner. He 



200 FRANCES. 

had caught two very fine lions in Julian 
Orchard and Sir Charles Wray, and he was 
in no hurry to get rid of them. But this 
was positively the last night, and its enjoy- 
ment was prolonged to the utmost. 

The scene is the Mayor's parlour, an oak- 
panelled room of noble dimensions, with 
portraits of famous Southpool worthies let 
into the walls. The conjpany is brilliants 
The Bishop of the diocese is there, a short 
stout prelate, with unrivalled knowledge of 
Greek; the Dean^ a tall handsome man, 
with unrivalled knowledge of female human 
nature. The county of Southshire and the 
town of Southpool have contributed their 
choicest beauties. The party has grown out 
of a mere suggestion that there might be an 
evening for chess and essays ; but Southpool 
was so full that it grew beyond this idea, 
and though there are chess-tables at one 
end of the spacious room, it is abundantly 



CHESS AND ESSAYS. 201 

clear that no one means to play ; and though 
the Consul is among the guests, anyone can 
see that he has not the remotest idea of 
reading an essay. 

All our especial party are present, except 
Captain Heath and Walter Carey, who have 
had to go to London on important business. 
What in the world, thought Frances, was 
all this business, in which her brother and 
the Captain were now so much engaged ? 
Though by nature unsuspicious, it seemed 
strange to her, but the gaieties of Southpool 
kept her from brooding on it. Moreover, 
her acquaintance with Cecilia was ripening 
into that girl-friendship which, on one side, 
if not always on both, is just like a love- 
aflEair; and through Cecilia's influence Sir 
Charles so strongly pressed her to spend a 
short time at Monckton Manor that she 
could not easily decline. Her brother Wal- 
ter, who usually seemed unable to do with- 



202 FBANCES. 

out her for a day, being one of those men 
that like a woman in constant attendance, 
appeared this time almost too willing she 
should accept the General's invitation. 

Sir Charles had also secured Count Cas- 
sius and Mr. Shirley as guests, and he would 
gladly have taken in the Mayor and the 
Consul as well, but they had important 
duties to perform. 

"You see," said Mr. Orchard, with a 
curious smile, " the great American Repubhc 
has sent me over here to do something or 
other that I don't at all understand ; but I 
am in hopes my Vice-Consul can do it with- 
out my help, and if so. Sir Charles, you will 
soon see me at Monckton Manor. It is one 
of my most enthusiastic dreams to see life 
in an English country house. I want to 
know England all through. Suppose now, 
when you died, you went to some other 
world, and forgot all about this homely old 



CHESS AND ESSAYS. 203 

earth, with its cricketers and pretty girls 
and mayors . some superior planet perhaps, 
where there is no such thing as sex, and it 
would be undignified to knock a sphere of 
leather about . ^wouldn't you feel rather 
pleased with a chance of going back to this 
colony, and refreshing your memory ? It's 
something like that I feel about England. 
I know you're an old worn-out lot of people 
that can't write or fight, or even drink like 
our folk: I know that right well, for 
haven't I read it very strongly put in the 
Herald and the Tr^ne by the prophets 
Bennett and Gresley? And yet I'm fool 
enough to think it will do me good to come 
to this little island, where there's no river 
big enough for an alligator nor a mountain 
for a grisly, and just to look at the old town 
where Shakespeare was born, and at the 
farm where my father's grandmother was a 
baby. And I am rewarded already : for I 



204 FRANCES. 

have seen the Mayor of a great English 
town, and I have been lucky enough to get 
acquainted with an English country gentle- 
man, and with two charming English ladies. 
So I shall come and see you, Sir Charles, 
when I've got my Vice-Consul's mechanism 
into full working order." 

^^ Is that the essay you promised us, Mr. 
Orchard ?" asked Frances, with a smile. 

"Ah," he said, "you English ladies don't 
worship the gift of the gab as our American 
girls do. It's any man's fortune in the 
States if he can get on a platform and talk 
nonsense for an hour. There are some of 
us that don't care for this. The country's 
large, you see : there's room to get beyond 
hearing of these platform-fools with a ten- 
thousand donkey-power of bray. Why, you 
can go up a big river and lose yourself in a 
vast forest, and catch fish in a lake that 
hasn't been fished since God filled that 



CHESS AND ESSAYS. 205 

great basin with the purest water in the 
world. Then you may be happy for a bit. 
The happiest man I ever knew lost himself. 
He was a junior partner in a big house in 
Wall Street, and he went out west for a 
holiday. He got into the woods among the 
Indians. He married a brown savage girl. 
He lived a regular Indian life. I met him 
by chance, when I was travelling : he knew 
me at once, though I didn't know him, for 
he was burnt into bronze, and he did not 
wear the black broadcloth and well-cut 
pants that he had on in days when he dealt 
in stocks. But he knew me ; and we had 
a long talk ; and he gave me such a delight- 
ful account of his perfect existence that 
I have been sorry ever since I did not at 
once throw over what we call civilization 
and go and live where God made big trees 
to live under and big rivers to travel on. 
I'm not sure I won't do it yet." 



206 FRANCES. 

"Try England first/' said Gabriel Shirley^ 
^' As the illustrious poet remarks : 

' The simple savage joins the bestial throng, 
Swift like the stag, and like the tiger strong : 
The man of loftier nature spurns the sod, 
And strives to follow in the steps of Gkxl.' " 

*'You have a remarkable memory, Shir- 
ley," said the Mayor. " You used to have 
at school, I recollect. Weren't you flogged 
once for remembering a couplet in Pope 
that old Lechmere did not remember ?" 

"Wise men forget their youthful flog- 
gings," said Gabriel Shirley, " even as wise 
women forget the flirtations of girlhood. 
If dear old Lechmere did not know his 
Pope, what right had he to punish me for 
his own ignorance ?" 

It must not be forgotten that the Honoura- 
ble Hercules Lyon was at the Mayor's party, 
but unaccompanied by Major Washington 
F. Butts. Mr. Lyon was not there very 
long, but he was lucky enough to get a quiet 



CHESS AND ESSAYS. 207 

dual conversation with Cecilia, who fancied 
she saw in him something superior to ordi- 
nary men. He not only talked to her in his 
magnetizing way : he also gave her a little 
note, which he asked her to read when 
alone. She consented; this handsome 
fluent American fascinated her; she was 
like some brilliant bird or dainty squirrel 
attracted by the deadly coral snake. 

As Walter Carey had gone to London, ithad 
been arranged that Frances should stay with 
Cecilia at the Washington Hotel that night. 
It was but three minutes' walk through two 
short streets from the Mansion House, so 
there were no carriages or cabs, but they 
trotted off gaily in the moonlight. Sir 
Charles was in front with Count Cassius, 
who was at the same hotel. Passing a 
corner, in the shadow of a great church- 
tower, the girls had to stop for a moment 
while a carriage went round, and Frances 



208 FRANCES. 

felt a warm strong hand grasp hers for a 
swift instant, leaving behind it something 
which she held very tight, be sore. She 
knew who grasped her hand though she 
dared not look. 

It was very late when they passed up* 
stairs through the brilliant entry of the 
Washington. So full was the hotel this 
Regatta-time that Frances and Cecilia had 
to sleep together. And each had a note to 
read, which might be (so each thought, but 
especially little Cecilia) most tremendously 
important. What could be. done? Frances 
thought of Hugh Roland ; Cecilia of Hercu- 
les Lyon. Both were eager, but no chance 
occurred for either to leave the other, and 
so these mystic missives remained unread. 

It was a curious thing that, though both 
these girls were very fatigued, neither felt 
sleep to be possible. They lay side by side, 
perfectly still, each unwilling to confess 



CHESS AND ESSAYS. 209 

herself awake to the other. They had, as I 
have said, contracted a kind of attachment 
. . . that odd sort of girlish love which has 
been subjected to diagnosis by many doc- 
tors of the mind. It is a kind of prelimi- 
nary malady. Boys at school have the same 
sort of fancy. The instinct of sex is blindly 
astir. It is right enough : the older boy or 
girl can often give the younger good counsel. 

Now Frances and Cecilia would have had 
a lot of pleasant chat and chaff but for 
those two notes which they were unable to 
read. I wonder at Frances. Her romance 
might have been safely confided to her 
loving loyal little friend: and she knew 
there was not a word Hugh Roland would 
write which she need be ashamed for the 
world to read. But she was too shy to 
bring out this scrap of paper in Cecilia's 
presence. Of course Cecilia had better 
reason for her secrecy, since Hercules Lyon 

VOL. n. p ' 



210 FRANCES. 

was a stranger, with whom she had no right 
to correspond. 

Well, this is the picture at the Washington 
Hotel. Two pretty heads on two white 
pillows, and under each pillow an unread 
note. Frances and Cecilia wide awake, yet 
both pretending to be soundly asleep. Thus 
must I leave them till morning. 



211 



CHAPTER XIII. 

AT MONCKTON MANOR. 

See the red tower that rises strong and steadfast there, 

Holding a dial that tells its tale unceasingly I 

Look at the festal halls, the airy terraces, 

The great oaks that have grasped the soil for centuries, 

The cedars calm as if they grew on Lebanon, 

The lawns as green as laurels in a thunder-shower. 

The bright symmetric flower-plots I Lordly mastiff stalks 

Over the turf ; white pigeons fill the summer air. 

A scene more happy than the chief of palaces. 

No prince dwells there ; only an English gentleman. 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

"\TOUTH must have its sleep. Frances 
-*- and Cecilia did not lie all night awake. 
No : after a disturbed attempt to doze they 
both dropped off soundly enough, and lost 
themselves in that mystic Land of Nod 

p2 



212 FRANCES. 

where nothing exists as things exist on 
earth. Both carried into Dreamland the 
consciousness of a crisp scrap of paper under 
their pillows, whereon were written words 
of immense importance, as yet unread. 
Those scraps of paper haunted them in 
dreams. Frances found herself whirling in 
an express train with Hugh Roland, over a 
mighty viaduct that crossed the ocean: 
Cecilia was in some marvellous palace with 
her American adorer, who was transfigured 
into a prince, or something of the sort. 
Both girls awoke with a headache: each 
had her hand beneath her pillow, clutching 
a little note. 

. The first thought of each was to read her 
treasure : and I need not say that the oppor- 
tunities were found long before they went 
down to breakfast. Cecilia read : 

"Dear Miss Wray, 

" I ought not to write to you 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 218 

perhaps, but I must ask you to forgive me, 
as I see no other course. I am here on an 
important secret mission from the President 
of the United States, and must keep as much 
as I can out of society until it is accomplished. 
But for the attraction of the loveliest lady I 
.ver saw, I should not be visiting the Mayor 
. of Southpool to-night. I ought not to go, 
for the American Consul will be there, and 
he must by no means guess my mission. 

'' But I shall see you : and that will make 
me happy for a brief time. When shall I 
see you again ? Do you ever wander into 
the beautiful woods near your father's resi- 
dence ? My diplomatic duties render it im- 
possible that I should make myself known 
to Sir Charles Wray at present : but when 
they are executed, I shall be able to come 
forward boldly, and ask you and your father 
two questions that are life and death to me. 
**If only I could see you for a few 



214 FRAKGES. 

minutes I If only you woold write me a 
little note at the Adelphi Hotel, Southpool^ 
and say I could see you in the woods by 
Caradoc's Cairn, how happy it would make 
me ! You see I know the place : I could 
not live without knowing the place where 
Cecilia dwells. 

'^ Ah, I am afraid I ask too much. No : 
do not write to me, most beautiful lady. 
Whatever happens, I am your loving 
slave, 

" Hbbculbs Lyon." 

It must be admitted that this honourable 
American had concocted an epistle not un- 
likely to intoxicate the brain of our little 
friend with the hazel eyes. She was a pure 
true child : but her father's self-isolation had 
left her very much alone : and she was 
smitten by the plausible adoration of this 
handsome yellow-haired American. Wheth- 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. . 215 

er she should answer his letter at all she 
could not decide : her young breast fluttered 
like a fluttering bird : instinct taught her 
she ought not to reply, while the eager im- 
petus of girlhood dragged her the other way. 

She should have gone straight to her 
father with that letter, having made the 
mistake of receiving it from Lyon. An 
English home, where there is thorough love 
and trust, is a perfect life: but there are 
too many in which there is suspicion on one 
side and fear on the other. Sir Charles 
Wray's was a case out of the common ; his 
grief had estranged him from his daughter. 
Had she placed Lyon's letter in his hand, 
the General would have well known what 
to do. 

She did not. She had to defer her deci- 
sion, and prepare for breakfast. 

The letter read by Frances Carey was far 
briefer : 



216 FRANCES. 

" Deabest, 

^' I am be^nning to hope. I must 
not tell you why, lest I prove too sanguine. 
Say nothing, even to our good and dear 
friend Gabriel Shirley. But there seems a 
glimpse of light in the dark sky, and I 
verily believe it will not be long before I 
can stand up in the presence of your friends, 
and ask you to be my wife. I love you too 
much, dearest Frances, to mislead you : I 
feel as near certainty as can be. 

" You are going to Sir Charles Wray's, I 
am told. But I shall look at the dear old 
hill every time my train passes. And some 
fair Summer morning I shall see there the 
most beautiful of all women. 

" Hugh Roland." 



Well, T think our Frances faithfully kissed 
this letter when she read it : I know she 
wondered, very, very much, what could be 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 217 

this break of suDshine that seemed suddenly 
to have come through upon Hugh Roland's 
life. 

The two girls had each her secret, but 
they got on together very well. Cecilia, a 
mere child, looked up to Frances ; thought 
her quite old, I dare say, yet could not help 
seeing that she was full of youthful life. 
As they grew more intimate, there arose 
between them a cordial confidence: they 
were not like sisters, for sisters never seem 
to take so much trouble to understand eacli 
other as strangers do when they become 
real friends. It is the same with brothers. 
Kinship has a kind of antagonism in it. 
This rebel humanity of ours does not take 
kindly to compulsory bonds. The girl 
whose sister is her best friend is a black 
swan among girls. 

Sir Charles Wray's party left Southpool 
at about eleven, and reached Monckton 



21 S FRANCES. 

Manor soon after one. No one could help 
being delighted with that fine old place, 
with its serene gardens and stately terraces 
and noble rooms . above all, with its unique 
library. The General and Mr. Shirley were 
rapidly becoming very close friends : they 
were men of an entirely different type, but 
each possessed a high courage and a strong 
love of truth. Count Cassius Grimani, 
whose melancholy was not altogether dis- 
pelled, sought the aid of Frances and Cecilia 
to dispel it. The Summer days passed very 
pleasantly, while Sir Charles and Mr. Shirley 
had their long colloquies in library and pic- 
ture-gallery . while the Count and the two 
girls had their half-flirtations in lawn and 
garden. 

When Frances and her young comrade 
were wandering alone in the grounds, they 
had gay confidential conversations as to all 
they had seen in Southpool . its yachts and 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 211> 

its madrigals^ its brilliant streets and busy 
people. Frances, who had a keen insight 
into character, was a caricaturist in conver- 
sation, and hit off a person's peculiarities 
with the same sort of humorous exaggeration 
which gave life to the pencils of H. B. and 
of " Ape." It is something like the faculty 
which made Mirabeau such a master of 
nicknames : as when he called Lafayette a 
Grandison-Cromwell, seeing that the Mar- 
quis might have played the part of a Crom- 
well for France had he not been as shy to- 
seize the sovereign power as Sir Charles was 
to take possession of that ripest of all pears^ 
among the ladies of fiction, Miss Harriet 
Byron. It would hardly be fair to betray 
all the personalities of these two laughing 
girls, as they tripped along the wide gravel- 
walks walled by glossy Portugal laurels 
alive with starlings and thrushes, or wander- 
ed further into the open woodlands, to where 



^20 FRANCES. 

a solitary lake was surrounded by tall trees, 
the immemorial abode of herons. But a 
scrap of their colloquy may be quoted. 

" What a dear old man the Mayor is T' 
said Cecilia. 

**He is just like a chief magistrate 
of one of the old Greek cities, whom Papa 
used to describe to me," said Frances, *' only 
with a stronger homelier English way, as if 
some Athenian archon's soul had been put 
into a solid English body, fed on beef and 
ale." 

" What odd things you do say !" laughed 
.Cecilia. " What is an archon, dear?" 

" Greek for a Mayor. But, Cecilia, that . 
young American with the pompous manner 
and the hair the colour of a sunflower. 
What do you say to him ?" 

*'I don't know," said Cecilia, with a 
slight hesitation, and not altogether with- 
out a blush, which Frances detected at once. 



i 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 221 

"Don't you? I do," she said, almost 
sharply. " Everything about him is a mis- 
fit. His stylish dress doesn't fit him, his air of 
being somebody very important doesn't fit 
him in the least, and I am sure that yellow 
hair doesn't fit him, for it is one colour at the 
ends and another at the roots. I did not 
know before that American gentlemen dyed 
their hair. I thought that practice was left 
to the weaker sex everywhere." 

It may be supposed that this conversation 
rather disenchanted Cecilia, who had sent 
no reply to the Honourable Hercules Lyon's 
letter. After she had read it a dozen times 
it seemed to her there was something false 
about it. Her father's daughter ought not 
to make secret assignations, that was clear. 
The healthy society of Frances, and her un- 
concealed contempt for the American, did 
her a world of good ; and then she could 
not fail to be somewhat influenced by Count 
Cassius. 



222 FRANCES. 

That melancholy Italian gentleman began 
to be a puzzle to himself. He did not feel 
half as unhappy as he ought to feel for the 
loss of little lovely Lucia. He was half in 
love with both these two English girls. 

"That Frances Carey," he soliloquized, 
" is such a creature as I never knew before. 
She has all the fearlessness of the bravest of 
men, and all the tenderness of the most 
loving of women. She has a strong intellect, 
a poetic imagination, unequalled beauty of 
form. Yet I don't know that I should dare 
to marry her. 

" Now, whom ought that girl to marry, 
I wonder? It must be some one stronger 
than herself, or some one weaker. To find 
the first would perhaps be rather hard, but 
if such a man could be found they would be 
a grand couple. I suppose she would like 
to obey; good women mostly do. If she 
doesn't find her master, she will have to be 



. AT MONCKTON MANOR. 223 

somebody's mistress ; and she could be a fine 
guide and protectress for some man with a 
poetic intelligence, but without knowledge 
of the world. She is a wonderful woman. 
It there are many such in England, it 
accounts for the greatness of the English. 

"As for Cecilia Wray, she is an embodied 
caprice. She is like a bird of paradise, flash- 
ing through the sunny world with a variable 
radiance. If I could ever love any more, 
Cecilia is the .girl. Yet, with all her exhi- 
larant gaiety, that pretty child has something 
on her mind. I see it darken her brown 
eyes sometimes, and make her set pearly 
teeth into rosy lips. I wonder what can it 
be? I should like to set Frances to inquire, 
but she would ask me what business it was 
of mine." 

Thus soliloquized Count Cassius Grimani ; 
but he did more than soliloquize. When he 
could forget his Lucia, victim of the hungry 



224 FRANCES. . 

sea, he made remarkable progress with little 
Cecilia. She began to doubt whether this 
Florentine noble was not of a higher type 
than the mysterious plausible American. A 
sweet musician was Cecilia, with a lovely 
pure soprano voice that a nightingale might 
envy; and Count Cassius, who played on 
many instruments, found herein a spiritual 
introduction. In the music-room at Monck- 
ton there was a fine organ, which the Count 
played admirably ; but he was .just as good 
at the violin or the bugle. And he set 
music and words together for Cecilia to sing. 
You would hardly have thought English was 
not his native language, when he gave 
Cecilia words such as these : 

" gay in the dewy morning 
It is to hear birds sing ! 
The lark mounts high in the pale blue sky, 

The robin's brave notes ring. 
They flutter and float, swift wing, sweet note, 

As the dim night creeps away ; 
From the bough to the grass they merrily pass 
At break of day. 



AT MONCKTON MAKOB. 225 

*^ O gay in the dewy morning 
To hear a lady say. 
27ie lark sings love in the air above ; 

ShaU we make love this day f 
O flatter and flirt, soft kiss, small hurt ! 

To the code of knighthood cling ! 

When in summer ye woo, be loyal, be true, 

To Love, our King." 

If these attempts at lyrical rhyme are found 
miintelligible, it must be remembered that 
Count Cassius Grimani was an ambitious 
young gentleman. He, an Italian, desired 
to write English verse, and was (consciously 
or otherwise) making indolent elegant 
love to a most exquisite English girl. 
She, this little Cecilia, did not seem dis- 
pleased; the vision of the yellow-haired 
American seldom troubled her; only she 
carefully avoided the Cairn of Caradoc. 

Now Frances Carey and Gabriel Shirley 
each noted with some interest the frequent 
converse of Count Cassius and Cecilia, in 
music-room and garden. It seemed as if 

VOL. IL Q 



226 

the Count preferred Miss Wray's company 
to most people's. They grew confidential 
about it at last Between Grabriel Shirley 
and Frances Carey there was already so 
strong a personal confidence that no wonder 
it easily extended itself to the affairs of 
others. Frances could not help feeling great 
interest in both Cedlia and the Count ; so, 
when one morning she had wandered out 
on the terrace, while those two were busy 
with music at a window just in sight, it came 
natural enough for Mr. Shirley to join her 
and talk about them. The dark tall Italian 
and the gay hazel-eyed English girl made a 
pretty picture at that wide window, hung 
round with bright blue blossoms of a giant 
creeper. Any artist would gladly have 
portrayed them, and would have made a 
charming picture, if able to divine the real 
significance of the changes that passed across 
their mobile faces. Such changes are like 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 227 

the changes in a cloud-sprinkled sky, when 

the wind is alive in the upper regions of the 

air ; before you guess the meaning of one 

another has come. In Cecilia's blithe face 

it might be possible perhaps to detect a 

slight unconscious tenderness toward her 

companion ; while I think there was now and 

then a trace of shame and regret at having 

so far listened to an utter stranger that he 

should have dared to write a letter to her. This 

feeling was sometimes so strong that it made 

her quite unhappy, and she was often on 

the point of telling Frances all her trouble, 

and asking the advice of one whom she had 

begun to think very wise indeed. For the 

Count, this girl's beauty and liveliness made 

him often forget his grief for Lucia; but 

suddenly the memory would return, darken* 

ing his deep eyes with a strange remorse. 

" Ah," said Mr. Shirley, as he and Frances 

stood near a stone balustrade whence abun- 

q2 . 



228 FRANCES. 

dant creepers trailed down to the garden be- 
low, ^' the Count and Miss Cedlia make quite 
a handsome couple. As the illustrious poet 
hath it : 

^ The7 tlunk of loye amid tfadr song and wit, 
Althou^ majhap tfaej never talk of it.'" 

" Why, Mr. Shirley," she said laughing^ 
** you talk just like a troubadour. I fancy 
that handsome Count Cassius sings of love 
very often, if he does not mention it. But 
how profoundly melancholy he often looks !'* 

" He has reason,'' said Mr. Shirley ; and 
there, amid the beautiful morning, while 
they could hear Cecilia singing delightedly, 
he briefly told the sad story of Luda Gri- 
mani. 

" How very sad 1" exclaimed Frances, 

with tears in her eyes. "No wonder he 

looks so unhappy at times ! Do you think 

he will ever become less sorrowful ?" 

* '* I see no reason against it. Mortal grief 



frmmmm'^^r^^mmm^mmm^gmm 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 229 

was not designed to endure for ever. He 
has a natural tendency to dwell on his 
troubles, being a kind of intellectual Syba- 
rite, whose luxury would be spoilt by the 
very lightest of crumpled rose-leaves. He 
is a disciple of Byron in some respects". 

" I did not think Byron had any disciples 
left," she said. "The poetry that every- 
body seems now to prefer is very diiferent 
from Byron's." 

"Byron's spirit will always be strong 
among Englishmen," he replied, " even at 
times when his poetry is unpopular. It is 
the passion for adventure and change, the 
dissatisfaction with a monotonous and sordid 
life, which Byron represents. There is no 
living poet who can be taken as typifying 
any great passion or fine faculty of the Eng- 
lish race. There are men who have a 
permanent influence, even though their very 
names should perish : Chaucer and Shake- 



230 FRANCES^ 

speare are high in this class. I deny not 
that there may be great poets without this 
power . men whose manhood and poetry 
seem distinct things. Well, their poetry 
will live no doubt ; but they will be very 
shadowy figures a century hence ; whereas 
Byron will stand out like a giant before the 
minds of men so long as the English people 
exist . so long, I may say, as the human 
race exists." 

"I understand," said Frances, "you 
can't think of the poet without thinking 
of the man, in his case. It is quite true." 

"As to our friend, the Count," quoth 
Mr. Shirley, " I had great hopes from his 
visit to England, and I have still greater 
now that he has seen Miss "Wray. I think 
they would suit each other well. She is a 
charming poetic creature, full of mirth and 
music : just the very theme for his active 
imagination to play upon. He is no foreign 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 231 

adventurer, but the chief of a famous Italian 
house, with immense wealth accumulated 
from time immemorial. Life would go 
gaily enough with them, unless there should 
come some unexpected trouble." 

Frances meditated. She had a match* 
making instinct. 

"It seems the very thing," said she, 
playing with a flower in an absent way. 
" But would Sir Charles like her marrying 
a foreigner ?" 

"Count Cassius seems only half a for* 
eigner. He writes and speaks English 
better than half the members of both 
Houses of Parliament. England, and es- 
pecially London, has a magnetic attraction 
for him. And Sir Charles is immensely 
fond of him. I think you may exert your 
match-making talents if you like." 

She laughed. 

"Shall I tell her about poor little 



232 FBANCES. 

Lucia? Pity is akin to love, you know." 

"Tell her by all means," said Mr. 
Shirley. 

The. music from the open window ceased. 
Count Gassius and Sir Charles came out on 
the terrace a few minutes later. They joined 
the other two. 

" We were thinking of a walk to Cara- 
doc's Cairn, Miss Carey," said Sir Charles. 
" It is only a mile, through charming woods ; 
but Cecilia, capricious little witch ! declares 
she is too tired to go. Will you try to 
persuade her that it is all nonsense, Miss 
Carey?" 

*^0, yes !" said Frances, and went at once 
in search. 

"What is Caradoc's Cairn?" asked Ga- 
briel Shirley. 

" It is a quaint old tumulus up in my woods 
that greatly puzzles the antiquaries, who 
are always prowling about with note- books 



AT MONGKTON MANOR. 233 

and disturbing the game. I daresay we 

shall find tWo or three to-day." 

" Is there any traditional connexion with 

Caradoc or Caractacus ? He was buried at 

Rome, was he not ?" 

"Faith/' said Sir Charles, laughing, ''I 

know nothing about it. If we catch an anti- 
quary, we'll ask him." 

Just then came Frances to say Cecilia 
had a slight headache, and really could not 

go- 

" these girls ! Grimani, you have given 

her a headache with all that music. You 

will come, of course, Miss Carey ?" 

'* No, I will stay and take care of her. 
J can go any day." 

So the three gentlemen went alone. 

When Frances had found Cecilia in her 
dainty boudoir, she saw there was some- 
thing wrong. The child looked frightened. 
JFrances told her what Sir Charles had said, 



234 

but Cecilia, sittiiig on an ottoman, pressed 
her hands to her eyes, and cried, quite ex- 
dtedly. 

^' O, don't ask me, Frances ! O, I cooldn't 
go to that dreadful place !*" 

" But why not, dear ? Tell me why.'' 

" 0, please go and tell Papa Fm ill, or 
anything. Now won't you, that's a dar- 
ling?" 

Frances obeyed, saying to herself as she 
went along, 

'* What does this mean ? Surely Cecilia 
cannot have any silly secret. I must make 
her tell me when I go back." 

Miss Carey had a secret of her own, but 
then she considered herself quite old enough 
for such a troublesome possession. And 
she had an instinct of protection and guid- 
ance which made her resolve to take Cecilia 
in hand, and to find out what was the mat- 
ter with her. It was hard work, for Cecilia 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 235 

naturally felt ashamed of having concealed 
the letter from Sir Charles . ashamed, in- 
deed, of having taken the letter from this 
adventurer. She was quite disgusted with 
her own silliness. Now there are girls who, 
having no respect for truth, and possessing 
a lively invention, would unblushingly baffle 
the most adroit questioner in a case like 
this. Such a young person would have told 
Frances some dire and doleful legend of 
Caradoc's Cairn with such perfect simpli- 
dty as to command belief. The atmosphere 
of ladies' seminaries is often favourable to 
the development of this undesirable talent, 
which is seldom, if ever, possessed by girls 
who grow like flowers in a happy home, 
where perfect love casteth out fear. 

So, after some hesitation, Cecilia told her 
friend about the letter, and showed her the 
insolent document. 

Frances flushed with indignation. 



236 FRANCES. 

" This is American audacity T* she said. 
" Why, Cecilia, how could you take a letter 
from that abominable man? You must 
«how it to your father, of course." 

** 0, I couldn't . I couldn't ! Don't make 
me, Frances. I have had it so long now, 
you know." 

" You ought not to keep anything secret 
from your father," was the reply. 

" Well," retorted Cecilia, mutinously, 
^' you have secrets, Tm sure, that you don't 
tell your brother Walter, fond as you are of 
him." 

Frances was amused at this home-thrust, 
knowing that she had one secret she 
wouldn't have Walter know on any ac» 
oount; but she only said, "I am a good 
many j^ears older than you, Cecilia, and 
so ought to be able to judge for myself 
in a case of the kind ; . but if my father 
were living, I should certainly show him at * 



AT MONCKTON MANOB. 237 

once any such letter as this of Mr. Lyon's,'* 
As Frances said this, she gave the offend- 
ing document a look of scorn . . . and 
while thus regarding it, there flashed on 
her mind the idea that the handwriting was 
in some way known to her. It was neither 
good nor bad . the ordinary mediocre style 
of these days of steel pens and inferior ink 
and paper . ^the kind of writing that comes 
by almost every post, puzzling you to think 
which of your commonplace correspondents 
has been inspired to write to you. O for 
the days of good goose-quills, of pen-blades 
made by cutlers as skilful as any in Damas- 
cus or Toledo, of paper thick and greaseless, 
of ink as black as the blackest eye in wo- 
man, and as fluent as the fleetest tongue ! 
Blades good as ever I can get from Weiss ; 
but where are the other materials which 
made handwriting an art, and saved author* 
ship from being perennial torture ? 



238 FRANCES. 

** Your father and you understood each 
other, Frances, from all you have told me 
about him. Now Papa is very kind . . . but 
till quite lately he used to think me in the 
way, I am sure . . . and I think it was some- 
thing Mr. Shirley said that made him differ- 
ent." 

At which point Cecilia began to cry. She 
ought to have done it before, as a point of 
art, tears being the strongest weapon in a 
woman's armoury. But Cecilia, a creature 
of mirth, one of Lady Nature's pet birds, all 
music and colour and movement, was of 
no weeping mood. Frances was vanquished, 
and soothed and caressed her, and made 
the proposal that Mr. Shirley should be 
consulted. 

Somehow this did not alarm her half so 
much. Gabriel Shirley seemed to win 
everybody's confidence. Cecilia was relieved, 
and soon grew bright again, and her fair 



AT MONCKTON MANOR. 239 

face flushed like the breast of a November 
robin when Frances began to talk of Count 
Cassius. Then Frances told her the story 
of Lucia ; and it may be imagined that be- 
tween her way of telling it and Mr. Shirley's 
there was a difference ; and this time Cecilia 
cried again, exclaiming, "0, 1 am sure he will 
never be happy any more," with a pathos 
which made Frances quite understand that 
if he was unhappy she would be unhappy 
also. 

At this point voices and laughter were 
heard on the terrace, and Count Cassius was 
laughing so heartily with his two friends 
that it seemed a droll chorus to Cecilia's 
pathetic cry. The cause of this laughter 
was explained when the ladies joined them, 

"We saw an antiquary, Miss Carey," 
said Sir Charles. " I prophesied we should. 
As we were at the top of the Cairn he was 
half-way up. Suddenly he saw us, stood 



240 FRANCES. 

Still an instant, then ran back as hard as he 
could. I called to him to stop, for there is 
an awkward bit of bog just where he was 
running, but he dashed on and went right 
into it up to his knees. He did not wait 
for us to help him, but struggled to the 
other side, and in doing so lost his hat, 
which is in the middle of the bog now." 

"Did you notice," asked Mr. Shirley, 
**what a bright yellow his hair was . and 
plenty of it, too ? Most of the antiquaries I 
know are venerably bald." 

Frances looked at Cecilia, who did not 
return the look, being apparently absorbed 
in the beauty of a rose. 

" This complicates Miss Cecilia's romance," 
thought Frances. 

*' My sight is not so good as yours, Shir- 
ley," said Sir Charles. '* I did not catch the 
colour of his hair, but I thought it rather the 
act of a poacher than an antiquary to sacri- 



AT MONCKTON MANOB. 241 

fice his hat for the sake of escaping." 

^' He may have been a timid antiquary, 

who mistook us for banditti," said the Count. 

"You have banditti m England, have you 

not r 

" Why,'' said Mr. Shirley, " I can quote 
my favourite poet on that point : . 

' This isle's prolific, yet it seems a pity, 
Police and authors are the sole banditti."* 



VOL. n. R 



242 



CHAPTER XIV. 

HONOUB AMONG THIEVES. 

'^ Ideas grow V th* East and travel Westward : 
Sharp notions grow V th' West and travel Eastward.'* 

fTlHE Honourable Hercules Lyon was the 
-*- quasi-antiquary whom Sir Charles and 
his friends had frightened from the Cairn of 
Caradoc. Men who have a kind of mag- 
netizing power over women are generally 
capable of strong infatuation themselves. 
The one almost always comes from the 
other. Business loudly called this yellow- 
haired American to London : his ally, Major 
Washington F. Butts, was telegraphing for 
him two or three times a day. Schemes of 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 243 

the utmost importance were matured in 
town, but he obstinately remained at South- 
pool, hoping for a reply to his letter to 
Cecilia. At last, moved thereto by so angry 
a letter from Butts that he saw he could 
-disregard his appeals no longer without 
causing a quarrel that would be dangerous 
to both, he telegraphed that he was on his 
way to London, and started, breaking his 
journey at the point nearest to Monckton 
Manor. He held a wild belief that, if he 
could see Cecilia, and subject her again to his 
magic influence, he should have power to 
win her : and he wanted to win her, for her 
money and herself. To most people it 
would have seemed simple insanity to wan- 
der into a wild part of the woods of Monck- 
ton Manor with the forlorn hope of meet- 
ing its mistress ; but Lyon, a man of curious 
mould, had desires so strong that he ima- 
gined they would conquer events. If he 

b2 



244 FBANCES. 

longed for a thing, he fancied he was sure to 
get it. Facts, of course, very often falsified 
this wild theory of his ; yet he clung to it as 
the Pope clings to his infallibility, and Doc* 
tor Gumming to his repeatedly adjourned 
millennium. So he made his way from the 
station by lane and path to Caradoc's Cairn, 
half-certain to see her there, or thereabouts, 
wholly certain that, seeing her, he could 
make her obey his will. 

The ludicrous end of this adventure is 
known.- Poor Hercules Lyon, very muddy 
as to the legs, and without a hat, made his 
way back to the little village near the sta- 
tion. At the public-house he got dried and 
cleaned in a rough way, and bought at the 
general shop a rough cap in which to pursue 
his journey. His luggage had been sent on, 
or he might have made himself comfortable 
and presentable. Only slow trains stopped 
at this station, so he had an hour to wait, 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 245 

with no entertainment save rancid pork and 
fourpenny ale. He was in a lovely humour 
as he travelled to London, and execrated 
poor harmless Cecilia in very strong terms. 
That humour was not much improved when, ^ 
arriving at the Colossus, the first figure he 
saw was Major Washington F. Butts in the 
doorway, smoking a giant cigar, and evident- 
ly awaiting his arrival. 

" Hallo, Lyon I" he said, in no very friend- 
ly tone. '* Glad to see you at last. What 
has happened that you look so queer ?" 

" Don't bother now, Butts. I'm going to 
dress, and want my dinner horribly. See, 
it's seven o'clock. Let's have dinner in a 
private room, as quick as possible. I'll be 
down in ten minutes." 

Lyon's disappointment and rage had not 
prevented his meditating on his interview 
with Butts : and he resolved to carry mat- 
ters with a high hand, and to lie with a fine 



246 FRANCES. 

fulness of invention. When he came down 
in full evening dress, with diamonds spark- 
ling on his linen and his fingers, he was 
quite magnificent enough to take in all 
ordinary observers. Some men are easily 
extinguished by dress and diamonds : and 
the Honourable Hercules Lyon knew well 
how to do that sort of thing. 

They had an elegant little dinner in a 
room to themselves ; and during dinner 
they talked little, and of matters indifferent. 
When the meal was over, Major Butts said 
to the retiring waiter : 

" Waiter, I'm going to lock this door, as 
my friend and I have some important ac- 
counts to settle. If anybody inquires for 
me, I shall be at the Bagatelle Theatre in an 
hour." 

The two men took a gulp of wine and 
lighted cigars. The Major began : 

"It's fine for you, Lyon, to talk about 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 247 

ordering dinner. The General has been 
sending in the bill every morning regular, 
and I wasn't at all certain he'd let me have 
a dinner if I ordered it." 

It may hardly be necessary to explain 
that the manager of the Colossus was a 
General. 

"Damned nonsense keeping those two 
women at an expensive hotel," said Lyon^ 
sulkily. " You might have sent them into 
lodgings." 

" If by those two women," drawled out 
the Major, "you mean my talented* lady- 
relatives, Miss Aspasia X. Butts and Miss 
Susanetta W. Butts, I beg to tell you they 
have a great deal more than paid their ex- 
penses . and you haven't made a cent. Miss 
Aspasia's Society of Free Matrons has offices 
in Pall Mall, and she draws four hundred 
dollars a month as secretary, and lots of 
work she has to do for it. Punishing bad 



248 FBANCE8. 

husbands is hard work in this immoral 
country . there are such a crowd of them. 
Miss Susanetta only gets three hundred 
dollars for her society of Free Maidens ; but 
then she has more fun ; and, besides, she 
has a fee on every marriage she makes." 

Though Butts was intensely angry with 
Lyon, he could not suppress his natural dry 
humour. 

" I am glad they have done so well/' said 
Lyon. 

"It's very lucky indeed, since you've 
done nothing. Now look here, Lyon . 
you've been fooling away your time down 
to Soathpool, that's clear. When you came 
to me in New York in a difficulty, I helped 
you all I could, and we both thought we 
could do a trade in Europe. You said you 
could easily pick up one of these English 
gals with millions of dollars, if you went 
about like a gentleman, and I should share 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVBS. 249 

the plunder. You said you knew lots of 
men with capital that would buy my Arizona 
gold bonds. Now you haven't sold me a 
bond, you know, though Fve sold a lot ; and 
where's the gal, I ask you, and where's the 
plunder? You know that I dressed you 
and showed you how to dye your hair ; you 
know that dress-coat came from my tailor ; 
you know youVe drunk gallons of cham- 
pagne at my expense. Why, diamonds 
don't cost nothing, even when they're made 
of paste. Now I ask you, Lyon, fairly, and 
not wishing to quarrel without good cause, 
what have you got to show for all this ?" 

" Have you done ?" said Lyon, who had 
been listening with a haughty sneer. 

" 0, yes. Go on." 

** Well, you will soon have some of the 
plunder, as you elegantly call it, for I am 
going to marry Sir Charles Wray's daughter, 
whom I met at Southpool, and her father 



250 FRANCES. 

will pay down a hundred thousand pounds 
sterling . not dollars, you know . on the 
wedding day. So, you see, I have not 
been quite idle. I only got my final answer 
from the old gentleman to-day. Then I was 
absurd enough to refuse his carriage to the 
station, because I fancied a walk to think 
over matters ; and I took a short cut, and 
lost my hat in a bog, and lost my train, and 
got nothing fit to eat, and came on here 
damned savage." 

"When is the marriage to be?" asked 
Butts. 

This fellow, Lyon, lied with such an ap- 
pearance of truth that even the suspicious 
and incredulous Major was deluded. 

" Not for nearly a year, Fm afraid. You 
see she's what they call quite a child in this 
country, though she's just eighteen, and 
marriageable enough, I should think." 

"That's awkward," said the Major. 



HONOUR AMONG THISV£S. 251 

"You'll want money to keep on. If I 
thought now you were sure to be honourable^ 
I'd like to make a big sale of them Arizonas, 
and leave the country, giving you a good 
share to go on with." 

"0, I'll be honourable," said Lyon. 
" You shall have twenty thousand : will 
that do ?" 

The Major puffed his cigar, and thought 
awhile. 

"Very fair," he said. "You can just 
give me a memorandum when the time 
comes. Now let's think of something else. 
We must sell bonds, and you'll have to find 
some buyers. But I think I've got a few^ 
only you must help. There's a Member of . 
Parliament called Lavington : he keeps a 
mistress, and a theatre for her to act in i 
he's got a lot of speculations on hand : he 
looks promising. I want your help, for I 
can't get round those fellows in the fine 



252 FRANCES. 

.style you do. Then there's a friend of 
Lavington's^ Captain Heath, a man who's 
always playing cards, and has such tre- 
mendous luck that he don't know what to 
-do with the money he wins. I mean to 
make him buy . only you'd better argue the 
subject with him. You know all about it : 
gold mines known to the Indians for cen- 
turies, which accounts for their gold nose- 
rings. Turn that into your poetic style, and 
my bonds will fly." 

Lyon merely puffed his dgar. 

^' Ah, there's another man of that set, a 
neighbour of Heath's, Carey by name, a 
landowner. He's out of town just now. 
I've hopes of him. But come, we'll drive 
down to the Bagatelle : old Heath's sure to 
be there, just to give him an appetite for 
hazard . ^besides, I believe he's mad about 
the Clinton giri, for he's always giving her 
-diamonds. Then you'll see Lavington," 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 253- 

" What sort of a fellow is Lavington ?" 
said Lyon. 

" He's worthy to have been born in the 
Empire City/' said the other, sententiously. 
" But let's go into the bar and have a 
champagne and brandy before we drive 
down : perhaps that suspicious old General 
will stop sending in his bill when he sees 
you and your diamonds. It's provoking to 
think how often a man has to miss a thou- 
sand pounds because he's short of fifty." 

The bar of the Colossus is a superb estab- 
lishment, be sure, and its attendant njrmphs 
are two tall and elegant young persons in 
dashing attire, who, if the colour of the hair 
is a guide, might very well be the Honour- 
able Hercules Lyon's sisters. There is a 
snug inner room for those who like to take 
their refreshment sitting : and here they 
found the General, a white-haired ruddy- 
complexioned man, who received them with 



254 FRANCES. 

a sort of condescending conrtesy, and affably 
joined them in their rather intoxicating beve- 
rage. He evidently believed that there 
were few greater men in the world than the 
manager of the Colossus Hotel. 

" So, Mr. Lyon, you have been staying a 
time at Sonthpool, I hear. Now what do 
you think of Southpool ? What would they 
think of it in the States ?^ 

" 0, it's very well for an English town," 
said Lyon, " but it's a long way behind the 
age. 

"Your judgment is right, sir," said the 
General. " It is very well for an English 
town. And what enjoyment had you there, 
Mr. Lyon, if I may ask ?" 

For the General's conversation wanted few 
stops except the note of interrogation ; and 
he liked to know everybody's business as 
much as possible. 

''Excuse me, General," he said, " there is 
a lady in the case." 



HONOUB AMONG THIEVES. 255 

" A lady in the case I Ho, ho ! Then we 
must drink her health.'' 

And the General ordered more of this mad 
mixture, which sent Lj^on to his hansom in 
anything but a fit condition for finance. 
The lean Major was cool enough ; American 
bars had steadied his nerves. 

Business was in full swing at the Bagatelle 
when they reached that pretty little theatre, 
andmade their way to Mr. Lavington's private 
box, where they found nobody but Dick 
Wyldote, who was watching with a critical 
eye the progress of a burlesque of the new 
school, whose author had taken the title and 
spoilt the story of a real poet's work, excru- 
ciating those who knew the original by the 
dreary blankness of his blank verse. Wyl- 
dote had objected to this lame production ; 
but Lavington overruled him, for its 
" author " was very popular with the town 
just then, and it was thought advisable that 



256 FRANCES. 

the Bagatelle should sometimes pay its 
expenses. 

"Ah, Major, how are you?** said 
Wyldote. 

" Well, thanks. Let me introduce you to 
the Honourable Hercules Lyon, from New 
York. Lyon ; Mr. Wyldote." 

" Over on financial business, I suppose, Mr. 
Lyon ?" said Dick. " You Americans 
always seem to be dealing in millions. It 
makes a man envious who has to live on his 
wits and his tailor." 

Wyldote's description of himself was not 
inaccurate. He was of good family, and 
got a good education somehow, but he had 
never had any money, or taken to any pro- 
fession. He was a gay easy thoughtless 
fellow, who could write a farce and play in 
it, or a song and sing it, who always dressed 
to perfection, was always in good society of 
the faster sort, and never seemed to have a 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES, 257 

care or a headache. Since Lavington had 
taken to a whirl of business, pleasure, and 
politics, Dick had been his jidus Achates^ 
helping him with his theatre and his stud, 
sprinkling epigrams over the drafts of his 
few speeches in the House and to his con- 
stituents, but never interfering with his 
financial schemes. Dick scorned money ; to 
show his scorn, he spent any that he got 
hold of as fast as possible. However, I 
suspect Dick had insight enough to discern 
between true and false appearances of 
wealth ; and I incline to believe that he did 
not at once accept the Honourable Hercules 
Lyon as the great capitalist he tried to 
appear. 

" Where is Lavington this evening ?" ask- 
ed the Major. 

" 0, he's been busy all day with that con- 
founded Irish Company of his. Two of the 
directors are over here, and there's been a 

VOL. n. s 



258 FRANCES. 

meeting, and now they're in the thick of a 
financial dinner, poor devils ! It will be a 
wet night, I expect.** 

" Nothing the matter, I suppose ?*' said 
the Major quietly. He knew that, if a bog 
had burst in upon Lavington's Irish land, 
there would be no demand in that quarter 
for his Arizona gold bonds. 

"If there were, I shouldn't know it/* said 
Wyldote unconcernedly. " But Lavington 
looked jolly enough when he looked in here 
for a minute. He said: * We're going to 
dine at nine, and I dare say we shall keep it 
up till those fellows have to start to Euston 
in time for the morning express. So don't 
expect to see me or Heath again till to-mor- 
row ?' And it won't be too early to-morrow, 
I fancy. The Captain and Lavington are 
hardened sinners, but it's no joke to drink 
all night against two Irishmen." 

The two Americans, having nothmg better 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVBS. 259 

to do, lounged about the theatre, and fas- 
tened themselves on Dick Wyldote. That 
easy-going gentleman did not like them, 
but felt bound to be civil, as Butts had 
business relations with Lavington, and 
showed his civility by introducing them to 
minor actresses, whose chief peculiarity 
seemed to be that they had a curious thirst 
for champagne. Lyon, whose day's work 
had tired him, and who had taken an un- 
necessary amount of refreshment at the 
Colossus, in an hour or so was glad to 
return home, under care of the wary Major, 
who never seemed to lose his head. When 
Lyon went beyond his proper limit, he 
grew heavy and stupid, with a fancy to 
think himself sleepily in love with any female 
he met. He was easily manageable, and 
reached the hotel before midnight ; in the 
ladies' drawing-room were those two leaders 
of advanced opinion, Aspasia and Susanetta. 

82 



260 FRANCES. 

Both welcomed him back, and the secretary 
of the Free Maidens, declaring she was sure 
he had a headache, insisted on mesmerizing 
him. Meanwhile the Major was, in a low 
voice, delighting Miss Aspasia with the news 
of Lyon's approaching marriage. 

"Don't say a word to Susanetta,'* said 
Butts. ** I believe she is half in love with 
him herself." 

" She's shamefully silly about him," said 
the elder lady, " but I let her alone." 

What had brought the Irish Directors of 
Lavington's Company so suddenly to Lon- 
don is a matter of moment ; certainly they 
made use of their brief visit to enjoy them- 
selves. The board-room of the Company, 
in a palatial building in Cornhill, had been 
specially arranged by Lavington for giving 
his City dinners. He kept a cA^/ on the 
premises, and spared no expense. It was a 
question whether his City dinners in Corn- 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 261 

hilly or his social and political dinners at 
Prince's Gate, or his very quiet dinners at a 
certain villa at Fulham, were the best . all 
three being different in style. 

The party in the great board-room this 
evening were only four ; but as each had 
about two footmen in attendance, the room 
did not seem too large. It was full of 
light; the table was a perfect marvel of 
gold plate, Salviati's many-coloured glass, 
and .the choicest hot-house flowers. Mr. 
Redmond Barry and Mr. Patrick Molloy, 
who had never before sat down to such a 
boardroom dinner, were fascinated by the 
genius of a man who could by magic turn 
Irish bog into so superb a banquet. 

When dinner and dessert was over, and 
port and claret were on the table, the wine 
moved freely ; but Captain Heath, who had 
no idea of wasting the best hours of the 
night on the decanter, took occasion, when 



262 FRANCES. 

the conversation grew rather dull, to pro- 
pose a game of whist. The Irish gentle- 
men were quite ready, so cards were brought, 
and the Captain, with MoUoy for a partner, 
sat down against Lavington and Barry at 
guinea points and five on the rub. How 
long they played need not be here de- 
scribed, nor how much port they drank; 
Captain Heath's remarkable luck never de- 
serted him, and, whatever the change of 
partners, he was almost always the winner. 

*' You ought to be unlucky in love, Cap- 
tain," said Barry. 

" Ah, but he isn't," s^id Lavington, '* as 
is only too well known." 

" Well, it's like the ring of Polycrates,'' 
said Molloy, as the ace of a suit in which he 
did not hold another card fell to a small 
trump of Heath's ; but as he was the only 
man in the party given to classical allusions, 
there was no reply. 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 26$ 

By-and-by both the Irish gentlemen, who 
had lost more money and drunk more port 
than was good for them, proposed whiskey- 
punch and unlimited loo. Dawn was break- 
ing over London by now. The city wore 
(as Wordsworth has it) the beauty of the 
morning as a garment. The smokeless air 
was clear. But the divine spectacle outside 
was a blank to the four card-players, in 
their close-curtained gas-lighted room* 
Whiskey-punch and unlimited loo at sun- 
rise seemed to Lavington a most apt frolic, 
so he ordered the punch at once, and they 
walked up and down the room to stretch 
their cramped joints while it was preparing. 

It came, in a royal china bowl, under 
which the stalwart footman staggered, while 
the fragrant odour of the grand Kelt spirit 
swam through the atmosphere. Mulberry- 
stained Venice goblets and gold apostle- 
spoons were fit vehicles to carry such a 



364 

liquid to the hmnan month . the liquid itself 
bang a fit preparatiTe for unlimited loo. 
To that fastest of games the fonr sat down 
at onoe : and the pool, which began with a 
sovereign from each player, ran up to fif)y 
in a few rounds. When, if the pool is not 
taken, every player puts in as much as there 
is in the pool, the principle of geometrical 
progression is beautifully exemplified, to the 
benefit of the one who wins at last. 

Luck did not desert the Captain. By the 
time their game was over . ^and it consumed 
a second bowl of punch . ^he had accumu- 
lated quite a roll of bank-notes, and more 
sovereigns than he could comfortably carry. 
He was quite tired of winning when a foot- 
man entered with the announcement : 

"The carriage is at the door, gentle- 
men.** 

So Mr. Redmond Barry and Mr. Patrick 
MoUoy started in Lavington's carriage for 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 265 

Euston, and by the time they reached Holy- 
head, were probably awake enough to reflect 
that they had paid rather dearly for the 
best dinner they had ever eaten. 

" What miraculous luck you have, Heath !'* 
said Lavington. 

" Yes," said the Captain. " It makes me 
superstitious. A man so lucky in one thing 
must have bad luck in others . ^and I've had 
bad enough in my time, God knows. But 
this is no time or place for sentiment," he 
went on, stoutly. "I'll take whatever 
comes." 

" If nothing worse comes than came to- 
night, you might find men as courageous as 
yourself," said Lavington. 

Heath laughed. 

"I'm off to Jermyn Street, if there's a 
hansom about. One may as well sleep a 
little." 

"Nonsense: sleep here. I'm going to. 



266 FRANCES. 

There are lots of rooms ready. You'll look 
like a ghost in the daylight." 

** I can't do without my man Boyd/' said 
the Captain. 

" 0, one of the men here can fetch him 
in a hansom, with anything he thinks you'll 
want. You can trust him for that, of 

course." 

Thus it was arranged. Lavington had a 
luxurious suite of bed-rooms in the place : 
and, thanks to asphalte paving and their 
height above the street, they were wonder- 
fully quiet. Heath fastened his door, threw 
on the table a bundle of notes and a heap 
of gold, and was in bed with the alacrity of 
an old soldier. Although an exemplary 
churchman at Avonside, there is no record 
that he said any prayer. 

The Captain did not awake till about 
noon, and then without a headache. The 
Honourable Hercules Lyon, whom we left 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 267 

a few miles off 'on his way to bed, awoke 
about the hour when the city party broke- 
up . awoke, to sleep no more. The great- 
grandfather of all headaches sat on his un- 
happy brow. Although he did not sleep, 
he now and then had a momentary doze,- 
and dreamt that his head was an oak log, 
which men were splitting with beetle and 
wedge. He tossed and turned, tumbled 
and grumbled, prayed and swore. He 
shrunk from every ray of light. 

And yet, I suppose, not many years before 
he had been wont to wake with head cool 
and clear, and to find the sunshine pleasant 
to his refreshed eyes. What fools men are 
to throw away the great gift of health ! 
What fools fathers are not to teach their 
sons that health (of soul and body) is richer 
than wealth, wiser than knowledge, pleas- 
anter than pleasure, more glorious than 
fame ! He who has health has all. 



268 FRANCES. 

Major Washington F. Butts, as dry as a 
stick of cinnamon, and much the same colour, 
was always in fine form in the morning : 
and he quite expected that his young Tele- 
machus Would be in a sad state that day. 
*So, at about ten o'clock, having completed 
his own toilet, and taken one of those strange 
alcoholic mixtures which Americans seem to 
require at very brief intervals, Mentor 
sought his pupil. 

Lyon was sulky and savage. There was 
no getting anything from him but a grunt 
or an oath. The Major wasted no time on 
him, but went straight down stairs to the 
ladies' coffee-room, and just caught Aspasia 
and Susanetta as they were going off to their 
respective avocations. 

" Look here, Susanetta," he said, " I want 
jou here. You can't go to your darned 
office this morning. That young fool Lyoa 
is as flat as a flounder ; and there's important 



HONOUB AMONG THIEVES. 26^ 

business for him to do ; and he must be got 
up somehow. So see to it." 

The Major's word was law with the ladies 
of his party : Susanetta obeyed, while he 
went off to the smoking-room, and soothed 
his mind with the elegant writing found in 
the New York Herald. What steps she took 
to arouse Mr. Lyon to a sense of his duty I 
know not; perhaps mesmerism had some* 
thing to do with it : any way he appeisured in 
the course of an hour looking almost his 
original self . and indeed in one respect 
superior to his original self, for his hair was 
a brighter yellow than usual, and did not 
seem dark at the roots. 

After a frugal breakfast of dry toast and 
brandy and soda, he started with the Major 
for Captain Heath's in Jermyn Street, whei:e 
Lavington was usually found in the fore- 
noon. They were greeted with the an- 
nouncement that the Captain had not slept 



^70 FRANCES. 

^t home, and had sent for his man and his 
things, and they supposed he was going to 
be away some time. The Major was savage, 
being in a particular hurry to sell Arizonas. 

Have you ever remarked that when you 
want anything (but especially money) a lot 
of little awkward annoying incidents occur 
to prevent your getting it . . . incidents so 
ingeniously arranged by your Evil Genius 
that if not annoyed you would most surely 
be amused ? 

It was probably about this same time that 
Heath awoke, wondered an instant where 
the deuce he was, promptly recovered him- 
self, like a soldier from ease to oMention^ 
-drew his bolt, rang his bell, and beheld 
Boyd enter. 

" Letters and telegrams, sir," says Boyd, 
salutingly ; " linen, toilet necessaries, change 
of clothes, and cetera." 

" Put the letters on the table. Take care 



HONOUR AMONG THIEVES. 271 

of the money. You may have a sovereign 
for yourself, you rascal." 

'*Many thanks, your honour, specially 
for the compliment. Cold bath as usual ?" 

"Yes. There's one close by. I know 
the way to it. Have you brought my 
gown ? Good. I shan't want you. Take 
care of the things." 

The old soldier came back ruddy and re- 
freshed from his icy splash. He made, with 
Boyd's assistance, his customary careful toilet. 
There was no trace of whiskey-punch and 
unlimited loo in his countenance. When he 
was ready he said to Boyd : 

" Take that gold down into the office and 
ask the clerk to give you notes for it." 

This done, he took up his letters and 
telegrams. Now that he was connected with 
a cat's cradle of companies, telegrams were 
familiar nuisances. But it so chanced that 
the very first he opened caused him to 



272 

start It was this : 

** Supenmendent of PoUeej Avcnsidey to Capfam 
Heathy Jermyn Sireet^ London. 

^* Heathfield was burnt to the ground at 
four this afternoon. Cause not known. 
Await your presence or orders.** 

In less than an hour, after a few words 
with Lavington and a cup of coffee, the 
Captain was in the train for Avonside. 
Boyd went also. 



4> t* 



273 



CHAPTER XV. 

DISCOVERY. 

*^ We fancy we hare secrets of our own. 
Hare we ? Is not the hidden perilous thing, 
WMch but to think of makes us shudder or blush, 
Known to frail friend or dangerous adversary ? 
There is no secret in the world worth keeping ! 
There is no secret any man can keep 
If the world wants to know it." 

T)ETWEEN Hugh Roland and bis faithful 
-.-^ Frances there was of course no 
regular correspondence; but she bad let 
him know, through Gabriel Shirley, of her 
prolonged stay at Monckton Manor, giving 
him a lively account of the place and the 
people, with intent to cheer him in bis mo- 

VOL. n. T 



274 PRANCES. 

notorious oscillation between London and 
Southpool. 

"Write the poor fellow a good long 
letter, Miss Carey," said the kindly Gabriel. 
*' He will read it over and over again in his 
guard's van. As the illustrious poet hath 
it: 

' A letter solaces the lover, when 
He sees his lady's eyes behind her pen.' " 

" So you think he will see ray eyes in my 
handwriting, do you, Mr. Shiriey? I wish 
I could travel with him once in the guard's 
van. I suppose it would be against the 
rules of the Company ?" 

" 0, and of social ethics, my dear," said 
Mr. Shirley, with grave irony. "As the 
illustrious poet hath it : 

^ SolvA cum sola, loving lad and lass . . . 
Fools think some wicked deed must come to pass.' " 

" And are we to defer to the opinion of 
fools ?" asked Frances, indignantly. 



DISCOVERY. 275 

"They are the majority, my dear; and 
the majority must be respected. I would 
have another arrangement if I could, and 
should like to see the opinion of the higher 
intellects prevail, but this is effete Toryism. 
All men are equal . ; . a theorem which re- 
duces the strength of the human chain to 
that of its weakest link." 

"Don't you talk rather cynically, Mr. 
Shirley ?" 

" Cynical means dog-like . . . and I am 
dog-like in my faithfulness to my master . 
God. So faithful am I that I believe He 
has reasons of infinite wisdom for permitting 
the triumphant fraud and folly, the horrible 
misery and crime, which defile a most 
beautiful world, inhabited by a race with 
infinite faculties. What the English nation 
might be, if the lust for money had not 
caught fast hold of it, I dare hardly dream. 
It would be a maddening sight . this pres- 

t2 



276 FRANCES. 

ent condition of England . ^if I were not 
certain that God has good reason for allow- 
ing it.^ 

This conversation occurred one day when 
Mr. Shirley had told Frances that he could 
forward a letter to Hugh : and that good 
long letter was written, and cheered the 
isolated guard in his daily double journey . 
cheer much needed now that he could no 
longer see her figure on that green hill near 
Avonside. Came a time when, if she could 
have appeared upon the hill, it would have 
been useless : for the illness of a guard 
caused his temporary transfer to another 
train, which left Southpool at midnight, 
and stopped at more stations than the 
express. It stopped at Chessington. George 
Brown, guard, saw one or two old acquaint- 
ances get in and out ; but, had he been easy 
to recognize, the flickering lights of the 
station would have rendered recognition 



"^.W"*-". ''^^'.»^"^^^. .'^^^^i^l* 



DISCOVBBY. 277 

almost impossible in the very dead of night. 
George Brown, guard, found great con- 
solation in Frances's pleasant letter ; and it 
cheered him much during a period of intense 
impatience. Careful inquiries, which he had 
made in Southpool, so satisfied him of the 
importance of the trail he thought he had 
found, that he asked from the authorities 
leave of absence on account of important 
business, and received it with great readi- 
ness on account of his good conduct But 
just then occurred the transfer to the up 
train at twelve, and his leave was deferred 
for a week. All this time he was in a very 
eager state, afraid of losing his scent ; but 
he was too honourable to break his en- 
gagement with the Company. Much in- 
formation he had collected from his fellow- 
servants : railway people often know more 
of travellers than travellers think. It ap- 
peared to Hugh Roland that he should find 



278 FRANCES. 

the man he wanted with very little diffi- 
culty. 

This was his last journey before he took 
his leave of absence, and he started from 
Southpool at midnight in a mood for adven- 
ture, having with him a bag which contained 
a blue pilot suit, his design being to change, 
and leave his railway uniform behind at a 
coffee-house near the terminus, much fre- 
quented by railway people. 

" Only six hours," he thought, as the train 
moved slowly from the Southpool platform, 
" and I shall be free to follow this scoun- 
drel." 

And then he read Frances's letter over 
again, just to calm his impatience. It did 
not. It quickened his impatience to see 
her. Well, he had seen her afar off . . . but 
near . to touch her cool hand . to look in 
her fearless eyes, whose light was strong and 
true. The memory of those calm dear 



DISCOVERY. 279 

eyes gave him courage. It was not so very 
long to wait. If he was right in his con- 
jecture, as verily he believed, how delightful 
it would be to go back and receive the wel- 
come of Avonside, of his aunt, of Frances I 
He was building this castle in the air as the 
train stopped at Chessington Station. 

"A fire over Avonside way," said the 
station-master, as he delivered his papers. 

All the people on the platform had their 
faces reddened by a glare that rose and fell 
in the southern sky. Hugh Roland, with a 
feeling of curiosity as to where the fire might 
be, went off to attend to his train. 

The train had moved . his hand "was on 
the door to spring into the carriage . when 
another man ran along the platform, and 
sprang in before him. There was nothing 
to do but follow and shut the door. The 
flickering light required time before they 
could see each other. 



280 FRANCES. 

^^ Beg pardon, guardy** said the stranger, 
breathlessly, in a voice Hugh Roland knew 
full well. ^'Against rules, I know, but a 
friend's house has just been burnt down, and 
Vm going to London to tell him. If I'd 
stopped to open a carriage door I should 
never have got in." 

It was Walter Carey, and no other. 

**A11 right, sir," said George Brown, 
guard. "You are heartily welcome, I'lfi 
sure." 

" Thank you," said Carey, and settled him- 
self as well as he could in a hard comer, 
cushioned by parcels of a knobby descrip- 
tion, and fell asleep. Hugh was half-inclin- 
ed, at each station, to wake him and get him 
into a first-class carriage ; but he consider- 
ately let him sleep on. 

W];iich was a mistake. When the day 
broke strongly, Walter Carey opened his 
eyes. He had on him the chilliness of the 



DISCOVERY. 281 

sleeping traveller. The guard had a whiskey- 
flask in his pocket . a very necessary pre- 
caution in perpetual railway travel . and he 
passed it over courteously to Carey, who 
drank and was refreshed. 

It was an awkward position for Hugh 
Eoland. Carey was disposed to be talkative, 
but Hugh was as taciturn as possible, fearing 
his voice might be recognized. Nearer and 
nearer London came the train. It would 
soon be over. 

Not so. Walter Carey, when he was 
thoroughly awake, imagined that something 
in this railway-guard's figure and movement 
was familiar to him. Suddenly he felt cer- 
tain. Hugh Rolabd, when cogitating, had 
a habit of tapping the palm of his left hand 
with the first two fingers of his right. 
George Brown, the guard, did likewise. 
Carey suddenly said, 

" Guard, you are Hugh Roland . a mur- 



282 FRANCES. 

derer and a sham lunatic. I shall call the 
police when I reach London. I am not 
afraid of you." 

And, to do him justice, Walter feared no 
man, sane or mad. 

"Yes," said Hugh, very quietly, *^I am 
Hugh Roland. I am neither a murderer 
nor a sham lunatic. I believe Stephen 
Heath to be alive." 

" You may say what you like ; it is nothing 
to me. The law has declared you a mur- 
derer and a lunatic, and you must deliver 
yourself up at the station. I shall not lose 
sight of you." 

" If I were either a murderer or a lunatic, 
Carey, your life would* be worth little. 
I am stronger than you, and could throw 
you out of this carriage without much diflGl- 
culty. But I am quite willing to meet the 
police at the end of the journey, and then 
you can do what you please. Meanwhile, 



DISCOVERY. 28S 

we had better say nothing more, as I have 
the train to attend to, and must not make 
any mistakes." 

"He is a cool villain," thought Carey, 
but he said nothing. 

There was silence between the two men. 
Walter Carey, though puzzled by Roland's 
quiet demeanour, fully believed that he had 
killed Stephen Heath, and that he had 
cleverly pretended to be mad. Hence he 
had the utmost contempt for him, and felt 
that it was his duty to give him over to the 
police. Hugh Roland would hardly have 
cared for this inopportune accident, and 
would have faced the police willingly enough, 
if he had not been, as he believed, so close 
to the solution of the mystery that oppressed 
him. He pondered over the matter as the 
train ran rapidly into London, and at last a 
daring move occurred to him. 

When the train slackened speed at the 



284 FRAKGES. 

platform where tickets are taken, about half 
a mile from the terminus, he said to Walter 
Carey : 

" You haven't a ticket, I suppose. Fare 
fjx>m Chessington is one twelve. Better give 
it me, and 111 take it to the office. I've 
got to take in some parcels. After that 
business is over between us, you can act 
the part of a detective as soon as you like." 

"I do my duty," said Walter Carey, 
handing over the money. 

George Brown, guard, took his parcels. 
Carey watched him, determined not to lose 
sight of him. It was a long train, and the 
monotonous cry of TicketSy please I went on 
for a long time. Carey was just going to 
jump out on the platform, and look after 
his man, when he saw Boland running 
along the platform, as guards are apt to run 
when a train is about to starL He was 
satisfied, and went back to his seat among 



DISCOVERY. 285- 

the remaining packages. Just as the train 
moved, the door slammed, but George 
Brown, guard, did not enter. Carey came 
to the door in time to see that respectable 
official touching his hat to him. 

The matter was simple enough. George 
Brown had leave from that morning, and 
was in a hurry to get away: the other 
guard could take the train into the terminus. 
Brown was popular : all his fellow-servants 
were glad to do anything for him. It was 
arranged in ten minutes. 

" There's a gent in my van, Jim," he said 
to the other guard, ^'that seems to me a 
little cracked. He rushed in at Chessington 
just as the train was oflF, and I thought he'd 
have broke his neck. He said he was 
running away from a house afire, and going 
to Broadmoor Asylum for murderers." 

" Perhaps he's one of them that got away 
the other day." 



286 

"Maybe," said George Brown. "But 
he s paid one twelve, fiist-dass fare, which I 
gave in." 

Walter Carey reached the terminus in a 
very disgusted state, and immediately in- 
quired for the superintendent. He came; 
a man of middle age and middle height, 
with a quick dark eye, prompt and intelligent. 
He had been many years the chief authority 
on that platform ; had been arbiter of many 
curious questions; had seen such strange 
things happen that nothing would have sur- 
prised him. 

" The guard of this train, who left it at 
the ticket-place, is a convicted murderer," 
said Carey. 

"Who is that?" said the Superintendent 
to the other guard, who stood close by. 

" George Brown, sir. He took his leave 
to-day. He came to us from the day ex- 
press, when Nicol was invalided.*' 



DISCOVERY. 287 

"What can it matter what the villaia 
called himself?" said Carey, hastily. " I tell 
you he is Hugh Roland, the man who com- 
mitted the Avonside murder, and got off as 
a lunatic, and escaped from Broadmoor. I 
have known him all his life. Can't you 
telegraph to the ticket-station ? It will be 
too late, I fear : he has got away before 
this. It must be done," he went on ear- 
nestly, seeing that the Superintendent hesi- 
tated: "you will be responsible for the 
escape of a murderer else." 

" I will telegraph for him," said the 
Superintendent ; " but his leave was deferred 
for a week, and I know he was in a hurry 
to get away on some important business." 

The telegram was instantly sent ; a reply 
came that Brown had changed his clothes 
at the station, and gone away in a han- 
som. 

" I thought so," said Carey, furiously. 



288 FRANCBS. 

'^ I was a fool to let him go. What is best 
to be done ?* 

The Superintendent had not quite made 
up his mind about Carey. Jim, the other 
guard, had found an opportunity of telling 
him Cteorge Brown's last words. This gen- 
tleman might be a little cracked. At any 
rate the Superintendent had other duties to 
do, and wanted to get rid of him. 

" George Brown is the steadiest man on 
the line/' he said. '^ I rather think he has 
been in the army ; at any rate he was high- 
ly recommended by General Sir Charles 
Wray. I venture to think it is a case of 
mistaken identity.** 

"Why, man, he acknowledged he was 
Roland, and promised to give himself up 
quietly to the police when he got here. 
Well, there's nothing more to be done ; take 
my card ; if ever you see him again . which 
you won't . let me know." 



DISCOVERY 289 

Walter Carey drove straight to Scotland 
Yard, forgetting all about Captain Heath 
in his earnestness and vexation. He left 
the Superintendent in a state of doubt as to 
his sanity. 

When Hugh Roland went back to the 
station, he decided to change his clothes 
there. If he went off in a hurry it would 
look suspicious ; and it was highly improba- 
ble that Carey would get the authorities to 
telegraph for him in time to stop him. He 
judged rightly ; he had wished his comrades 
good-bye and driven off ten minutes before 
the telegram arrived. He ordered the cab- 
man to take him to London Bridge, his pri- 
mary idea being to get as far from the 
railway and the telegraph as he could. 

As the cab drove eastward, he very seri- 
ously pondered this new complication. He 
was now pursued as well as pursuer. If he 

could succeed in his quest he might defy 
VOL. n. u 



290 FRANCBS. 

Carey ; but he knew Carey's pertinacity, and 
felt sure that he would use every means to 
find him. Either to escape pursuit, or to find 
the man he wanted, would have been a 
difficult thing ; but to do both seemed almost 
impossible. But Hugh Roland thought of 
Frances ; felt for that sealed letter of hers (a 
precious talisman I) in the pocket of his pilot 
coat; and found faith, and took courage. 
He was well supplied with money, not hav- 
ing touched Miss Hutchison's generous gift. 
With caution he thought he might succeed. 
Dismissing his cab at London Bridge, he 
went on board a river-steamer. His chief 
idea was to disconnect himself from the 
railway as much as might be. His 
second was refreshment ; for he had taken 
nothing since he left Southpool, and excite- 
meat makes a man hungry. So seeing a com- 
fortable sort of hotel facing the river not far 
from the Temple pier, he landed there, bag 



DISCOVERY. 291 

in hand. In his blue pilot coat he might 
either have been a working man of the best 
class taking his holiday, or a gentleman 
roughing it ; and Hugh looked so much like 
the latter that I do not suppose he would 
have surprised the waiters at a Bond Street 
hotel. 

At any rate, he was very well received 
here ; and he verily thought that he had 
never tasted a steak so juicy or such gener- 
ous stout. He was in a room with wide 
windows looking toward the river; noisy 
steamers and lazy barges crowded the 
stream. The perpetual movement upon 
shining Thames had a sleep-giving effect 
upon him. It was a little later than the 
time at which it would be part of his routine 
to take a few hours' rest ; so it was very 
natural he should fall asleep in his chair. 

When he awoke, it was noon. He was 
still alone. He called for paper, pen, and 

u2 



292 FRANCES. 

ink, resolving to write a letter to Mr. Shir- 
ley, whom he imagined to be still at Monck- 
ton Manor . as indeed he was. It was a 
long letter, giving a careful and accurate ac- 
count of all his adventures. After refresh- 
ment and rest, his brain was lucid. He 
explained his suspicion, and the grounds on 
which he based it ; told his encounter with 
Walter Carey, and how he had escaped; 
and, having communicated all necessary in- 
formation, entreated Mr. Shirley to send 
him advice how to act. He gave his ad- 
dress at the hotel by the Thames, having 
ascertained that he could have a room there. 
But, as he thought it quite possible that 
placards offering a reward for the appre- 
hension of 

" Hugh Roland, alias Geobge Brown," 
might already be on the walls of London, 
he asked Gabriel Shirley to address him as 
Mr. Graham. 



DISCOVERY. 293 

Having finished this elaborate letter, Mr. 
Graham went out to post it. He thought 
he would wander about London, and try to 
pick up the clue to his mystery. He had, 
as we know, in those pleasant Avonside 
days which seemed to him years ago, been 
apt to perplex Miss Hutchison by occasional 
absence from. home in search of adventure. 
In those times he had not left London un- 
explored ; and he was well acquainted with 
that city in all its phases. He had not, 
sought the haunts of dissipation : they had 
no charm for a mind which, thoroughly ec- 
centric, was not morbid. The man who is 
capable of a great love is not capable of 
small intrigues. I cannot say how early 
in Hugh Roland's youth the beauty, spiritual 
and bodily, of Frances Carey, had been mir- 
rored in his mind like a star in the sea ; but 
it certainly was early enough to prevent him. 
from being the victim of vulgar temptations. 



\ 



: wrz: X '-zszer :.> 5Ir. Shir, 
lirziri ;: re scZji Monck- 
jzilf^i hf -wts. li WIS a 

-Ls nnjr .»« ^361. He 
- JL.-1, El £.; . :'::r3s on 

^-TT^-i~^r i_ usrsssry in- 









DISCOVllRY. 295^ 

perhaps he had come to the conclusion . a 
conclusion generally accurate . ^that the best 
way to hide oneself is not to appear to hide. 
At any rate, our friend with the triplex- 
nomen went westward, posted his letter 
somewhere near Somerset House, walked 
dej&antly up into Bow Street, and read the 
affixes at the police-office. No mention of 
Hugh Roland yet, at any rate. 

Before he left he had inquired of the 
waiter what hotels American visitors to 
London chiefly frequented, but could not 
obtain the information. Whom should he- 
ask? It occurred to him that a railway 
station would be a good place to inquire ^ 
80 he went into Charing Cross, and asked 
a dvil official, who, howevier, seemed as 
ignorant as the waiter. 

But a gentleman standing close at hand 
happened to hear the question, and politely^ 
mentioned four. 



296 FRANCES. 

"Two are just at this point," he said. 
^^The others are at some distance, and in 
different directions. The cabmen all know 
them. If you are looking for American 
friends, you will generally find their names 
in a book in the lobby, even if they have 
only called at the house." 

Hugh Roland would have been less at 
.ease with his courteous informant if he had 
known he was Inspector Ubique, of the 
Detective Police. It would, however, have 
given him intense satisfaction could he have 
known it afterwards . for he would have 
felt that the keenest eyes in London had 
not found him out. 

He went to all four hotels in succession : 
at the last, which also was the largest, he 
found the name he wanted . . . but not the 
man. 

" Seldom in at this time, sir. Very fast 
gentleman. Dines here sometimes. Til 



DISCOVERY. 297 

ask if he has ordered dinner for to-day/^ 

The answer was negative. 

"Then he won't be home till morning, 
sir. He seldom is." 

"What time. in the morning can I see 
bim ?" 

" It's all uncertain, sir. Very fast gen- 
tleman. Doesn't get down till hours later 
than this sometimes. I should say, sir, he 
was getting rid of his liver as fast as any 
gentleman in London." 

Hugh Roland determined to be at the 
Colossus about ten, and gave the brisk little 
waiter a retaining fee, instructing him to 
make the business he had come upon in- 
tensely important. He had nothing more 
to do that day : so, giving himself no trouble 
about Walter Carey and the police, he 
roamed about London, taking in its won- 
drous wave of humanity in fragmentary pic- 
tures, as was his wont. Full of impatience, 



^98 FRAlirCBS. 

it was very necessary that he should wait : 
so he did the best he could to dissipate his 
anxiety by walking all over London, east, 
west, north, south. He was pretty well 
tired when he walked into the Albion to 
dine. Yet his brain seemed sleepless : and, 
when a good meal had refreshed him 
physically, he thought he would tire himself 
out with that most wearisome of all things 
imaginable, the modern theatre. By what 
is called accident, he chose the Bagatelle. 
He was amused. There was much gaiety, 
brilliancy, extravagance. As a certain poet 
{not Mr. Shirley's) hath it : 

*^ There were girls that by gaslight looked pretty, 
And legs that with padding looked fine, 
And skirts that just reached to the knee, 
And jokes that passed over the line.*' 

This sort of thing is visible nightly in the 
city for which Shakespeare wrote. 

Towards the end of the last piece, Ro- 



DISCOVERY. 299 

land's eye was caught by a party in a stage- 
box, ju^t going to move. There were a 
lady and three gentlemen. The lady had 
risen, and his enemy of the morning, Walter 
Carey, was adjusting her opera- cloak. She 
was a fine creature, with little purity in her 
beauty. Another of the gentlemen was the 
man whom he longed to meet. What an 
opportunity ! Now he would confront both 
these men at once 1 

He did not calculate the difficulty of get- 
ting out of a crowded pit. By the time he 
reached the theatre door the party had 
driven away. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
FRANCES 



CHAPTER I. 

THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 

'^ October comes, with its delaying moon, 
And silyer mists entangled in the trees, 
And sunset on the seas, 
And the young throstle's tune. 

*^ It smites the undistinguishable green 
Into a myriad bright or tender hues ; 
It sprinkles diamond dews 
From silent skies serene.'* 

Julian Orchard. 

OCTOBER fell with unusual beauty upon 
England this year. There were few 
rains ; there was no east wind. The juices 
of the various leaves were not deprived of 
power by early frosts, but did their work 

VOL. m. B 



2 FRANCES. 

slowly, SO that the changes of colour were 
beautiful in their gradations. No leaf fell. 
The year had a calm old age, like that of 
some tranquil poet, whose life has been 
free from fever. The swallows stayed later 
about the eaves of Monckton Manor, linger- 
ing as if loth to leave their English haunts 
for wild travel across the sea eastward. 
The party at Sir Charles Wray's enjoyed 
the time immensely, and Cecilia induced 
Frances to remain much longer than was at 
first intended. Frances would have gone 
before if her brother had seemed to want 
her, but he appeared from his letters to be 
much in London, and very busy, and not to 
want her at all. Still, she felt that Carev 
Farm wanted her, and a day had been fixed 
for her leaving. 

Frances had a long talk to Mr. Shirley 
after her conversation with Cecilia. The 
old gentleman was fond of solitary medita- 



I 



ES. 



BI. 

ONTKSSOR. 

. delftTi)^ moon, 
gled i» the trea, 
IlieBeas, 
/^hroeUe'B time. 
Ipiidiable green 
^tender hnea; 
inonddevB 
ieeBBrNie>" 

JOLIAS OllOB«0. 

. unusual beauty up«l 
*ar. There were ft^f 
ast -wind. The ;MM* 
.were notdep' ^ 
ij but did tbdr'ri 







4 FRANCES. 

phatically. " However, this man seems to 
have fascinated Cecilia, and when we were 
at the Mayor's the last night, she was fool- 
ish enough to take a letter that he offered 
her. Here it is." 

Mr. Shirley read it through, and laughed. 

" The insolent rascal ! So that was what 
brought him to the Cairn the other day, 
and not antiquities at all ? I hope he en- 
joyed getting into the bog. Of course she 
has not answered the fellow ?" 

*^ dear, no. She is very much ashamed 
now of having taken the letter ; besides, I 
think she is getting to like Count Grimani. 
But when she told me all this, I said she 
ought to tell her father, and she dreaded 
doing it so much that I let her off on con- 
dition that I might ask your advice." 

" Sir Charles would not be at all angry 
with her ; he regards her as a mere child, 
and quite expects her to do foolish things. 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 5 

Still there is no need to trouble him with 
it. This American will hardly come here 
again ; if he does, the servants must duck 
him in a muddy pond, or toss him in a 
blanket, like Sancho Panza." 

"I should like to see it done," quoth 
Frances, with emphasis. " But now I have 
another letter to show you." 

She handed him Hugh Roland's. 

" You have disobeyed orders, Miss Carey," 
said Gabriel. 

" I have not vowed to obey yet ; besides, 
I am told that vow, when made, is some- 
times broken." 

" Obey is an unfashionable word in these 
days. So our friend really thinks he has 
found a clue ? Well, I hope he is right." 

" Ah, so do I," said Frances. " But I 
think I also have found a clue, and I think 
it is the same. I believe that American 
who is persecuting Cecilia to be Stephen 
Heath in disguise." 



6 FRANCES. 

Gabriel Shirley stood still, and looked ia 
her face, as if to judge thereby whether she 
really was serious. 

" Stephen Hedth !" he said. " What make& 
you think so ?" 

"The handwriting of this letter. He 
used to send me dreadfully sentimental 
verse, which he afterwards got the Chessing- 
ton Mecury to print . . . verses to F. with six 
stars after it, in which I was compared to 
everything you can imagine that I'm not a 
bit like. Now, although there has been 
an attempt to disguise the writing, I feel 
sure it is the same. Besides, he dyes his 
hair ; why should he do that ?' 

" Are you sure he dyes his hair?" 

" Quite. You don't think nature would 
be so cruel as to give anybody hair of that 
dreadful colour. You can see a darker 
colour at the roots, when he has not dyed it 
lately. Cecilia and I both noticed it. 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 7 

And now that I think how he would have 
looked with dark hair, I feel sure he was 
that wretch Heath." 

" And you fancy Hugh also recognised him 
at Southpool ?" 

"That is the only thing I can think. 
Now what is to be done, Mr. Shirley? 
You see I come to you with my own troubles^ ' 
and little Cecilia's too. If I could be sure 
of a confessor like you, I should not object 
to confessing all my sins." 

" Ha ! do you know what the illustrious 
poet says ? . . 

< When simple maidens' souls have evil tenants, 
The kindest heart inflicts the keenest penance.' 

But I must think over this matter about the 
American ; and, as our party is just going to 
break up, I will go to London in a day or 
two and try to trace him. It will be easy 
enough ; American travellers are soon found 



S FRANCES. 

in London. Then we'll bring him and our 
railway-guard face to face." 

" thank you, Mr. Shirley ; you always 
are so very kind. It is a shame to give you 
so much trouble." 

" I like trouble," he answered. " Trouble 
is an essential element in human happiness. 
Why does a young lord with a hundred 
thousand a year throw away his money on 
horses and dice and worse things ? Because 
he can never be thoroughly happy until he 
gets into trouble. Now as I was born with- 
out trouble of my own . for I have neither 
loves nor debts nor aches . I am obliged to 
bear part of the troubles of other people." 

Frances laughed at this paradox. 

" And Cecilia ?" she said. " What is her 
penance to be ?" 

"Why to fall deeper in love every 
hour with Count Cassius. Can there be 
anything severer." 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 9 

"Nothing, except your irony. But will 
Count Grimani ever be able to forget his 
lost Lucia." 

"I don't think he will," said Shirley, 
gravely. 

" then how can Cecilia marry him ?" 
cried Frances. 

" You see, my dear Miss Carey, Grimani 
is a poet. He made a pet and a pupil of his 
little cousin ; but I don't believe he had any 
passion for her, or would have married her 
if she had lived. Having lost her, he thinks 
otherwise. Your poet cannot do without 
a grief, real or imaginary ; and this imagin- 
ary grief will be an immense resource to our 
friend when he is consumedly bored by 
having his way too much. As the illustrious 
poet hath it : 

* Even the bee grows tired of honeycomb, 

And for a change brings something better home.' 

Count Cassius will have a vision of Lucia to 



10 FRANCES. 

sadden him a little, when that beautiful 
creature of mirth has gladdened him only 
too much. So let Cecilia accept her 
penance . and tell her what I say." 

Thus ended for the time Miss Carey's con- 
ference with her father confessor. They 
walked to the house ; when they reached it, 
Mr. Shirley found his letter from Hugh 
Roland . found also that the American 
Consul at Southpool had arrived, and was 
having luncheon in the library with Sir 
Charles Wray. He was going to London, 
and found he could spend one night at 
Monckton Manor on his way. Everyone 
was glad to see him. 

"You expect to enjoy London, I am 
sure," said Sir Charles. 

** I do indeed. It is the supreme expres- 
sion of the English race. All our virtues 
and vices are to be seen there in the intens- 
est form. I expect much of London . . . not 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 11 

merely from its great men of all classes, from^ 
its brilliant society, from its marvellous 
financial power, but also from its pauperism 
and crime. The shadows of life are as well 
worth study as its lights." 

" Not a pleasant study," said Mr. Shirley. 

"That is as you view it. If God per- 
mittted sin, it 'was that man might study it,, 
in order to conquer it. There is an essay 
in my book . . . essayists are always egoists,, 
so pardon me . . . called Ahrimanes : it is 
an attempt to analyse and account for that 
evil principle which all religions and super- 
stitions endow with a personality. Now if 
Ahrimanes or Satan be a person, it is obvious 
that he possesses one of the essential attri- 
butes of Deity . . . namely. Omnipresence 
He is with everyone of us. Hence I argue 
that what we call the evil principle is really 
the testing power exercised by the Divinity. 
As poet or maker, He created the world ^ 



12 FRANCES. 

as critic, He tries every minute portion of 
His own work. That is my theory." 

" It seems to disestablish a great power," 
.said Sir Charles Wray. 

"Ay, and the Manichaeans will have 
nobody to worship," observed Count Cassius. 
" You American thinkers have a noble au- 
dacity to attack such a time-honoured per- 
sonage as the Devil himself." 

"We are rather wanting in reverence," 
said the Consul, gravely. 

Before Frances went to dress for dinner, 
Mr. Shirley had found time to read Hugh's 
letter : he handed it to her, having pencilled 
«pon it : 

" I shall go to London with the Consul 
to-morrow. He may be useful. Of course 
jou have no message ?" 

No message! Had she not? How ra- 
pidly a woman's love grows towards her 
lover when he is in any trouble ! Though 



THE FATHER COl^ESSOR. 1^ 

there was a remarkably pleasant evening 
before Frances . . .just the sort of even- 
ing she enjoyed, with four men of high 
intelligence and most various character to 
hold converse . . . yet she longed to have it 
all over, so that she might sit down and 
pour out her soul on paper to Hugh. 

However, she found time to tell Cecilia 
her penance . whereat that young lady 
blushed and laughed. And, although she 
was thinking all the while of Hugh Roland, 
she talked so well at dinner, and after, that 
the Consul thought her character worth 
studying, and decided that, if American 
women have the most eccentricity, English 
women have the most originality." 

"What a grand cricket-match that was 
at Southpool, Mr. Shirley !" said the Consjil, 
when they were in the drawing-room. 
"Only Englishmen can play cricket. I 
judge nations by the out-door, and indi- 



14 FBANQES. 

Tiduals by the indoor, games they prefer. 

"How as to the latter?" asked Sir 
Oharles. 

"Well," said the Consul, "do you like 
chess or whist best ? " 

"I have seldom played either, but I 
should say . chess." 

" So I should have thought : and from it 
I infer that you would consider the destiny 
of a man to be moulded by his character. 
There are two classes of men : those who 
are content to yield to circumstances, and 
who play whist : those who aim to control 
^rcumstances, and Vho play chess." 

" Then what sort of people are those who 
play b^zique ?" asked Mr. Shirley. 

"B^zique! I don't know it." 

" Well, I know little of it, except that I 
have seen it played, and that it seemed 
intolerably monotonous, but with some 
absurdly large chances. It is the fashion of 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 15 

the moment, I am told. I dare say either 
of these young ladies could describe it to 

you." 

" I never played anything in my life," 
said Cecilia, "except beggar-my-neighbour 
. and that I have forgotten." 

" B^zique," said Frances, " seems to have 
been invented to suit the mingled monotony 
and excitement of the present day. It is 
played with two packs of cards ; the score 
is a thousand; trick after trick may be 
played, and the players remain pretty equal, 
when suddenly five hundred are counted for 
double b^zique, or two hundred and fifty 
for a sequence. There is scarcely any skill 
in it; the players plod on, waiting for a 
stroke of good luck. I should think it 
must have been invented on the Stock 
Exchange." 

" It certainly looks rather like gambling," 
said the General. 



] 6 FRANCES. 

" Miss Carey's description of b^zique may 
be fitted into your theory I should think, 
Mr. Orchard," said Shirley. " The lover of 
the game is the veriest slave of chance ; he 
speculates for double b^zique as the stock- 
broker speculates for a rise ; he reflects .the 
gambling passion of the age. I understand 
now why a game which appears to me in- 
tensely stupid is quite the fashion. It suits 
the temper of the time." 

"I am greatly obliged to you, Miss 
Carey," said the Consul, " for your original 
contribution to a pet theory of mine. In 
our own country we have among the go-a- 
head classes games in which chance pre- 
dominates over skill in the absurdest way, 
such as euchre and poker. Whist is at a 
discount among us . . . too slow by far." 

"I claim for Italy more invention and 
variety . I will say more poetry . in connex- 
ion with cards than any other country can 
show/' said the Count. 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 17 

"Your everlasting three court cards . 
king, queen, knave . seem to me very dull. 
Has anyone here heard anything of the game 
of tarots ? Has anyone seen a pack of tarot 
cards? I have a treatise on the game in 
my library at Florence, and several packs of 
tarots . ^painted, mind you, by great painters 
of the time, so that every card is a pic- 
ture. I knew the game when I was a boy, 
but have forgotten it in my travels ; so far 
as I recollect, there are seventy-eight cards 
in the pack, and seven court cards in each 
suit. I know it is a game full of marvellous 
combinations. We have several others just 
as full of variety, and the choice old packs 
are all miniatures beautifully painted. I 
shall investigate the subject when I return 
to Florence ; and if I can find a complete 
pack of tarots, Mr. Orchard, I will send you 
one." 

" Many thanks, Count Grimani. I had 
VOL. rri. G 



18 FRANCES. 

never before heard of these wonderful 
Italian games. When there is so much in- 
vention, and the painter's art is called in to 
render the game sumptuous and superb, it 
passes out of the category of our common- 
place whist and piquet and ombre. I shall 
look with contempt in future on our ugly 
kings and queens and knaves, and have a 
vision of your brilliant procession of seven 
court cards, each painted by a master's 
brush. This is the very poetry of play." 

" What would they say to it at the Port- 
land or the Arlington," said Sir Charles, 
" where short whist has become a science ?" 
" Ha !" quoth Gabriel Shirley, " they would 
laugh at us all finely for listening to Count 
Cassius. But I would rather play such poet- 
ic games as the Count describes than sit 
down to whist for money merely, with all 
Clay's dodges at my fingers' ends." 

The evening did not end without song. 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 19 

Julian Orchard's poems have reached Eng- 
land ; Count Cassius had set one or two of 
them to music . so that Miss Wray, when 
asked to sing, was able to surprise the Ameri- 
.can poet with a canzonet of his own. 

'* O touch that rosebud ! it will bloom. 

My lady fair ! 
A passionate red in dim green gloom, 
A joy, a splendour, a perfume 

That sleeps in air. 

" You touched my heart ; it gave a thrill 

Just like a rose 
That opens at a lady's will ; 
Its bloom is always yours until 

You bid it close." 

"You give me," said the Consul, "the 
<;hoicest flattery in the world. I find my 
poor verses set to delicious music, and sung 
by lovely lips. I shall begin to think that 
the perfection of courtesy is to be found in 
England, and in no other country." 

That evening, when the mirthful and 
musical Cecilia had long been fast asleep, 

c2 



20 FRANCES. 

our faithful heroine sat down to write to 
Hugh. It was strange, she thought, their 
relation to each other. She had liked Hugh 
very well, but had been quite unconscious of 
any love for him before he suffered his great 
disaster ; now, though she had seen so little 
of hira since, she felt as if she had loved him 
all her life. There must have been some 
germ of love before ; she must have loved 
him a little without knowing it. Any way, 
she knew it well enough now; and she 
wrote him such a long and loving epistle 
that if Ovid had seen it he would have 
turned it at once into exquisite elegiacs. It 
was very near daybreak when Frances seal- 
ed her packet, and then, going to bed, fell 
rapidly into a dreamless sleep. 

But she was up early, nevertheless, and 
was out upon the terrace before the sun had 
evaporated their millions of dew-spherules 
from the slender silvery threads of gossamer 



THE FATHER CONFESSOB. 21 

that covered the lawns, and found that Mr, 
Shirley was out before her, walking up and 
down briskly, and delightedly drinking the 
fresh morning air. 

" Here is my message, Mr. Shirley," she 
said, with a gay smile, putting into his hand 
a packet big enough to contain an essay on 
woman's rights for the Weekly Amazon. " I 
hope it will not inconvenience you." 

" I would carry it, were it twice the size," 
said Mr. Shirley. " You are going back to 
Avonside soon, I believe. I should like to 
know where you are, in case of wanting to 
communicate in a hurry." 

" I go to Carey Farm the day after to- 
morrow, and am not at all likely to leave 
home again. This is far the longest outing 
I have had since Papa died." 

After breakfast a carriage came round, 
and the Consul and Mr. Shirley started for 
the rail. They caught an express train and 



22 FRANCES. 

had ^ carriage to themselves. On the wajr 
the conversation naturally turned on the 
party they had left behind at Monckton 
Manor. 

"Already," said the Consul, "I think I 
see one remarkable difference between Eng- 
lish and Americans. You aim to be uni- 
form, yet are original : we try to be 
original, yet are only eccentric. Some of 
my countrywomen do the most astonishing 
things in their desire to be original ; yet, if 
we look at them closely, disregarding all their 
external oddities of behaviour, they appear 
very commonplace people indeed." 

Gabriel Shirley, remembering his brief 
glimpse of the ladies known as Butts, com- 
pletely concurred, and mentioned to the 
Consul the vagaries of Aspasia and Susan- 
etta. 

"Butts!" said the Consul laughing . "those 
people in London I They are a regular set 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 23 

of swindlers ! Well, compare Aspasia and 
Susanetta with the two charming girls we 
have just left. They both have real cha- 
racter. I suppose they are both in love^ 
Mr. Shirley ?" 

" Why that supposition ? . ^unless, indeed, 
you hold with the illustrious poet : 

^ Amelia yowb she loves not. Foolish elf I 
Too thoroughly enamoured of herself V ". 

" No, mine is no general theory. I argue 
from observation. When Cecilia sang my 
little song more melodiously than the saint 
her namesake could have done it, it was 
easy to see her rosebud of a heart had open- 
ed to that handsome melancholy Italian. 
Will he transplant that flower to his palace 
in the City of Flowers ?" 

" It seems not unlikely," said Mr. Shir- 
ley. " You appear to observe women very 
closely." 

" There is no choicer study. Your cynical 



24 FRANCBS. 

poet who wrote : 

* Most women have no character at all,* 

showed simply his own incapacity for dis- 
cerning the subtle shades of character. If 
a man were to tell you that most flowers 
have no fragrance at all, you would distrust 
his sense of smell, even though he tried to 
prove his keenness of nostril by detecting 
the diflference between asafetida and liquid 
ammonia." 

" 0, I quite agree with you. Now, give 
give me the result of your observation with 
regard to Miss Carey." 

" I fancy she has a romance. In the 
midst of our briskest talk I noted a far-away 
look in her eyes, as if she was dreaming of 
some one elsewhere." 

" You are a wizard, Orchard," said Shir- 
ley. " Yes, she has a romance, which I'll 
disclose to you confidentially in few words. 
There were two young fellows who used to 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 25 

visit at her brother's house, both of whom 
were, to some extent, attracted by her. 
One disappeared, under conditions that 
made murder seem probable, and a body 
was found in the river, which his father 
identified. The other, who, to repeat your 
distinction, was rather original than eccen- 
tric, was accused, and convicted of the mur- 
der, but was considered mad, and sent to 
an asylum. He escaped. He is now a guard 
on this very railway." 

" Not guard of this train, I hope ?" 

" No, he is away on leave. Now, before 
I go farther, tell me what you know of the 
Butts family." 

" Why, what in the world has that to do 
with your story ?" asked the Consul. 

" I will tell you in good time. Let me 
have an account of the Buttses." 

'* They are notorious swindlers, that is all 
The man, who calls himself a major, is one 



26 FRANCES. 

of the most adroit and successful scoundrels 
that even New York has produced. The 
women, under their appearance of absurd 
eccentricity, have a tine capacity for villany : 
one of them . I don't know whether it is the 
old one or the young one . is reputed to be 
the best forger out." 

" A nice family," said Mr. Shirley. " You 
don't think a respectable American gentle- 
man would be likely to travel in their com- 
pany?" 

" I emphatically do not." 

" Well, they have as companion a young 
man who wears very yellow hair, and a 
vast amount of showy jewelry. He is 
known as the Honourable Hercules Lyon. 
Can you recollect any such person? He 
gives himself the airs of a millionaire." 

" We have plenty of Honourables about, 
but there isn't much real yellow hair in our 
country. Our favourite colours in hair are 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 27 

shiny black or dingy drab. No : I cannot 
make anything of this Lyon. But now, 
what is the reason of this catechism ?" 

"I return to Miss Carey," said Gabriel 
Shirley. *' She believes not, neither do I, 
that Hugh Roland . our railway-guard, you 
know . murdered his rival, whose name is 
Heath. We believe that Heath absconded, 
being deeply in debt, purposely leaving such 
traces as would make people believe Ro- 
land had murdered him. Of course we 
can't account for the body, but the identifi- 
cation did not satisfy everybody. And both 
Miss Carey and Roland, acting independ- 
ently, came suddenly to believe that this 
honourable gentleman with Major Butts is 
really Stephen Heath in disguise, come over 
here to play some nefarious game. Your 
description of Butts makes this seem pos- 
sible." 

" I thought that child had a romance,'' 



28 FRANCES. 

said the Consul. "What a charming im- 
broglio ! How do matters advance ?" 

" Roland, having got leave of absence 
from the railway, is in town looking for 
this man Lyon. When they meet the ques- 
tion will be soon settled. I am going to 
see Roland to-day, and hope to hear that he 
has had some success." 

"Will you dine with me at Morley's 
afterwards, and report progress? I begin 
to feel extreme interest in this curious 
romance." 

" I am glad you do, for your knowledge 
of the Butts family may perhaps help me a 
little. I should like to make London too 
hot for them." 

" People of that sort," said the Consul, 
" whether English in America or Americans 
in England, do an immense amount of harm. 
They prejudice the citizens of each country 



THE FATHER CONFESSOR. 2^ 

against each other. I wish such fellowa 
could be kept at home." 

When the train reached London, Gabriel 
Shirley drove straight to the hotel from 
which Roland dated, and inquired for " Mr. 
Graham." The waiter told him that Mr. 
Graham was staying there, and had left his 
luggage in his room, but had not been at 
home for two nights. 

"The strangest thing is, sir," said the 
waiter, " that he ordered dinner on Thurs- 
day to be ready at five, as he was going to 
the theatre, and he went out about four, 
and we haven't seen him since." 

Gabriel Shirley began to fear that Hugh 
Roland had been recognized and fallen into 
the hands of the police, especially as he 
found on inquiry that Lyon was still at the 
Colossus : and he went to Morley's to meet 
the Consul in rather a disgusted mood. 
There was nothing to be done but wait. 



30 FRANCES. 

Julian Orchard heartily sympathized with 
him, and did his utmost to console him by a 
nice little dinner, with choice wine and 
recondite talk. 



31 



CHAPTER 11. 

FRANCES AT HOME. 
" True to the kindred pointa of heaven and home." 

rpHE pleasures of home have been sung 
-*- and said so many a time that there is 
nothing to add on the subject. " Home is 
home, be it ever so homely ! " saith the 
quaint old adage ; and, to a certain extent, 
we may say that the homelier it is the better. 
I have known the dweller in a superb palace 
select for himself some small sanctum, which 
he kept as the very heart of home. 

Frances Carey, though glad to get home 
after her pleasant rambles, had reasons for 



32 FRANCES. 

dissatisfaction. Walter had written to tell 
her that unexpected business kept him in 
London (the fact being that he was fiercely 
resolved to hunt down Hugh Roland), and 
further, that Heathside having been burnt 
down, he had offered his friend. Captain 
Heath, rooms at Carey Farm, and hoped 
she would do her best to make him com- 
fortable. Now Frances had no special affec- 
tion for Captain Heath. The stiff old vete- 
ran had a haughty manner, which she re- 
sented ; he seemed to think himself a great 
deal superior to anyone else in Avonside* 
What were these mere yeomen and farmers 
in comparison with an officer in Her 
Majesty's Army ? The Captain had a high 
and mighty manner, yrith which he sought 
to extinguish those who had never served 
the Crown, or seen the world. Frances 
found that it had become more developed 
since his recent London campaign. Indeed, 



FRANCES AT HOME. 33 

what with winning money at cards, and be- 
coming director of several companies, and 
being flattered and fooled by a wicked little 
witch of an actress, Captain Heath had 
rather lost his head. 

When Frances walked across the lawn, 
and was heartily received by Rachel, and 
found a fire burning (for the afternoon was 
damp), and fragrance of tea in the oak 
parlour, her first feeling was delight to be at 
home again. She forgot her visitor, as she 
sat in her accustomed chair, while Rachel 
poured tea into a delicate cup of china, and 
tempted her appetite with home-made brown 
bread, and butter just fresh from the churn. 
But she was soon destined to be reminded 
of it. 

** There'll be a good dinner for you at 
seven, miss, if cook and the Captain's man 
don't spoil it between them. Cook's that 
indignatious, I'm comprehensive she'll give 

VOL. in. D 



34 FRANCES. 

warning. For that Boyd is dreadful inter- 
ferious, and tells her she does everything as 
wrong as can be." 

" What, is Boyd here too ?" said Frances, 
surprised. 

" yes, miss. He's the Captain's teetotum. 
Now, this morning, hearing you was to be 
home to dinner, the Captain brought in a 
turbot and some oysters and two pheasants, 
and said that was to help out the dinner. 
It was very kind of him; but cook and Boyd 
have been in a squabblation ever since, and 
if there's anything fit to eat on the table, 
it's my belief it'll have cooked itself." 

As Rachel seemed unable to suppress her 
feelings, Frances went off to her room to 
dress, and get a little quiet. She felt cer- 
tain, beforehand, that Captain Heath would 
patronize her, and be condescendingly kind, 
and courteous, with an air of superiority. 
Had her brother been at home she need not 



FRANCES AT HOME. 35 

have had much intercourse with hira, but 
now that the whole duty of entertaining him 
would fall on her, she felt as if it would be 
unendurable. 

And when dinner-time came, and he took 
her in ceremoniously, and she found herself 
with only a soup-tureen placed like an earth- 
work betwen her and her military besieger, 
«he could not help feeling that the situation 
was rather ridiculous. Captain Heath, wiry, 
bolt upright, iron-grey, in an irreproachable 
dress suit, with Boyd in a white tie behind 
his chair, was a picture at which Frances 
wanted to laugh, but dared not. 

" I hope you had a pleasant visit, Miss 
.Carey," says the Captain, presently. " You 
have been at Southpool, I believe ?" 

" Yes, for a short time," replied Frances. 
^' It is a very gay town, if I may judge from 
the week I was there." 

" I know very little of it," said Captain 



36 FRANCES. 

Heath. " The only town I care about is 
London. You would like London, if you 
knew it well, Miss Carey. Boyd, sherry to 
Miss Carey/' 

"I think I prefer the country to any 
city," she said. 

" Ah, you are young, and have no expe- 
rience of life. The country is all very well 
for children. But we tire of it as we get 
wiser. I should not like to return to pap 
after drinking such claret as my friend 
Walter has in his cellar." 

" The wretch I Drinking dear papa's best 
claret, no doubt !" she thought. 

" I am almost glad Heathfield is burnt 
down," he continued. " I shall not rebuild 
it. When I have settled my affairs, I think 
of living in London altogether." 

Frances heartily wished these affairs 
speedily settled . a feeling that was en- 
hanced when, before passing the claret-jug^ 



FRANCES AT HOME. 37 

he suggested that probably she did not care 
about claret : young ladies seldom did. 

"I am an exception," said Frances. 
" Papa taught me to like claret, and used to 
say I was as good a judge as himself." 

So the Captain had not a whole bottle of 
that choice Lafitte to himself that day : but 
Frances would not have grudged him a 
second bottle if it would have kept him in 
the dining-room, so that she might follow 
her own devices in the oak parlour. This, 
however, was not to be: Captain Heath 
soon rose from the table and came in search 
of coffee and amusement. His lonely even- 
ings at Carey Farm had bored him terribly : 
he thought they might perhaps be less slow 
if this little girl would exert herself to amuse 
him. As he sat comfortably in his chair, 
dowly sipping that claret which Frances 
deemed it sacrilege for him to drink, he 
speculated on her capabilities. That a girl 



38 FRANCES. 

should be able to talk sensibly on any sub- 
ject did not occur to Captain Heath, who all 
his life long had considered himself a 
superior member of the superior sex. Of 
course she could sing and play : girls could 
all sing and play, just as all gnats buzz and 
all sheep baa : but music was not at all in 
the Captains line, except indeed one of 
Ethel Clinton's breakdowns. Perhaps she 
could play cards : hardly likely though that 
she would know any game more scientific 
than cribbage : besides, what good was there 
in playing cards for nothing ? The Captain 
feared that on the whole this young woman 
would not be very much use in the way of 
amusement. 

Frances took the Captain's advent as 
patiently as she could. She gave him a 
better cup of coffee than he had tasted pre- 
viously at Carey Farm, for when she was at 
home the servants knew that they must 



FRANCES AT HOME. 39 

make the water boil. Few things are less 
accountable in reference to servants than 
their reluctance to boil water. The Captain 
enjoyed his coffee, and said so ; and by-and- 
by, after a little preliminary conversation, 
he asked Frances if there was any game she 
would like to play. 

*'I used to play chess with papa," she 
said, " but it is a long time since I have had 
a game." 

*' 0, chess is very dull," said the Captain, 
who did not know the moves. "I was 
thinking of cards. Can you play piquet or 
^cart6?" 

" I don't know piquet at all," she said, 
*'but I can play ^carte a little, I think. 
Would you like a game ? I thought gentle- 
men did not care to play except for money ?" 

"Well, that does add excitement to a 
game," said the Captain. " But there are 
some games so interesting that they scarcely 



i 



40 FRANCES. 

need the stimulus, and I think ^cart6 is one.** 
" I will try to find a pack of cards," said 
Frances. 

They were found, and the game began. 
Captain Heath found it quite stimulant 
enough, without guinea points and ten on 
the game. To his intense surprise he was 
easily beaten. The king senmed to have 
fallen in love with Frances, and to be always 
on her side. Luck at cards is said to signify 
unlucky love : poor Frances ! Luck at cards 
may be regarded in two ways . . . the 
mathematical and the poetical. The doctrine 
of Probability teaches us to expect phe- 
nomena in all things similar to what is 
called a *' run of luck" in cards. Stand in 
Fleet Street and watch the cabs, omnibuses, 
and other vehicles ; they are a continuous 
row, impossible to pass, for many minutes ; 
then for perhaps as many minutes they pass 
at slow intervals, and the street is almost 



FRANCES AT HOME. 41 

clear. It is the same in all human events 
controlled by chance. The thorough card- 
player calculates on the run of luck, as do 
gamblers on all the roulette-tables and all 
the exchanges of the world. Eouge gagne : 
back rouge. Irish Land shares are going 
down : buy when they sink pretty low, for 
they are sure to rise again. This is the 
way speculators reason. 

As to the poetical side of the question, 
hear Shakespeare, the infallible. The sooth- 
sayer says to Antony concerning Octavius : 

<< If tbou dost play with him at any game, 
Thou'rt sure to lose : he's of that natural luck 
He beats thee 'gainst the odds.". 

Mark Antony reluctantly admits this to him- 
self: 

'' The very dice obey him : 
And in our sports my better cunning faints 
Under his chance ; if we draw lots, he speeds : 
His cocks do win the battle still of mine, 
When it is all to nought ; and his quails ever 
Beat mine^ in-cooped at odds." 



42 FRANCES. 

As a fact, there are men whose luck sur- 
passes that of other men. The most, suc- 
cessful speculators have discovered this. 
"Never employ a man," said old Roths- 
child to his sons, " who has been unlucky 
for himself; he will be unlucky for you." 
Rothschild was perhaps right ; although he 
did not calculate on that turn of luck which 
infallibly comes, sooner or later. Dickens, 
with the intuition of genius, and without 
reasoning about it at all, hit the true philo- 
sophy when he made the "dirty and de- 
lightful Micawber" succeed at the Anti- 
podes. I have known a precisely parallel 
case. 

Frances beat Captain Heath game after 
game. 

" What wonderful luck you have !" he 
exclaimed, with a touch of chagrin. " I 
used to think myself lucky at cards, and 
have often won a thousand pounds in the 



FRANCES AT HOME, 45 

time we have passed this evening ; but your 
good fortune is really wonderful." 

It was, assuredly. But Frances had an 
advantage over Captain Heath which he 
failed to detect. Ecart^ is the one game 
on the cards in which physiognomy is of 
value. You look, not only at your own 
hand, but also at your adversary's counten- 
ance, before you decide whether to propose, 
whether to accept or decline a proposal. 
Now, as Captain Heath was eager to win, 
and greatly disgusted at being beaten by a 
girl, his hand was always clearly legible in 
his countenance; whereas Frances really 
cared nothing about it, so that there was 
nothing to be learnt by looking at her. 

"There is no playing against you. Miss 
Carey," said the Captain, after half-a-dozen 
games. " You are wonderfully fortunate.'^ 

" The worst players usually get the best 
hands, I am told," she said. 



44 FRANCES. 

Captain Heath very soon went off to his 
room, disgusted with himself for having 
been beaten at ^cart^ by a girl. Gamblers 
are always superstitious ; he began to fear 
that his luck had deserted him, and as it 
brought him a very fair income, he did not 
relish the idea. 

" I'll run up to town to-morrow," he said 
to himself, " and see how things go. There'll 
be some play at the Chandos. Hang itl 
Fancy losing a dozen games in succession to 
a country girl ! . I, who am the best player 
in England I It's damnable !" 

So strong was the Captain's feeling on 
the subject that he threw his boot-jack at 
Boyd, who caught it deftly, and said, 

"Thank you, sir." 

"I go to town to-morrow, Boyd," said 
the Captain. "Ten train up. You must 
come. No need for luggage ; there's all I 



FRANCES AT HOME. 45 

want in Jermyn Street. I can only stay- 
one night," 

" All right, sir," said Boyd. 

When Frances was left alone she felt a 
little melancholy. She had enjoyed her 
visits to Southpool and Monckton Manor; 
she had delighted in the new friends she had 
made, all people of a class very different 
from the rather common-place population of 
Avonside ; and if she had returned to Carey 
Farm undisturbed and solitary, she would 
have lost herself in happy reverie, and 
conjured up pictures of the Count and 
Cecilia at Monckton Manor, of Mr. Shirley 
wandering in search of Hugh. And then 

she would have had as much time as ever 
she liked to wonder what Hugh was doing, 
and to draw pictures of him in the future, 
free from all his troubles, ready to enjoy 
tranquil happiness. But Captain Heath, 
with his dry conventional ideas, and his 



46 FRANCES. 

patronizing airs, drove her pleasant dreams 
so far away, they looked like migratory 
birds fading into the sunset sky. She could 
not recover the broken thread of happy 
thought. 

However, as she sat alone in her chair, 
gazing into the changeable depths of a sea- 
coal fire that had reached its latter end, 
she found solace in what Rachel had to tell 
her. 

"Well, miss," said that outspoken domes- 
tic, " I hope you like playing cards with the 
Captain. He's been swearing at you, Boyd 
says, like a good un . . . that's what Boyd 
«ays, I should say a bad un rather. His 
words and phrases were that execrations I 
couldn't repeat them. And now he's going 
off in a huff to London to-morrow morning 
. and Boyd with him . and I'm sure I wish 
they'd both stay in the great Necropolis, as 
I saw it called in print." 



FRANCES AT HOME. 47 

Frances felt just like a schoolgirl with a 
promise of a holiday. She brightened up, 

** I suppose the Captain won't stay long, 
Rachel ?" she said. 

" Only one night, miss. However, please 
God, there might be a railway incident, an 
they might have compound fractions in some 
of them funnels." 

"Rachel, how can you talk so?" said 
Frances, laughing. ^* Captain Heath is not 
very amusing, but I don't want him to have 
his bones broken in a railway accident." 

"Well, miss," said Rachel, calmly, "if 
them railway collusions could be trusted 
only to make away with the ill-convenient 
people, I think they ought to be encouraged. 
Them dissectors, or whatever they are, when 
they want to smash a train, ought to ad- 
vertise for passengers . people ^that are very 
much in everybody's way. They needn't 
take return tickets !" 



48 FRANCES. 

Next morning at breakfast, the Captain 
told Miss Carey he was going to town till 
the following day. Could he do anything 
for her ? 

** Shall you see Walter, Captain Heath ?" 
she asked. 

" Most certainly. Can I say anything to 
him for you ?" 

" Only that I shall be glad to see him at 
home again. It is rather dull here without 
him, and of course the business of the farm 
does not go on as well. Could you not 
persuade him to come back with you ?" 

*' I will try," said Heath. " But the fact 
is. Miss Carey, he said he had some business 
on hand that could not be left for a moment, 
and he must stay till it was over. I don't 
know what it is, but he was evidently very 
much in earnest. Perhaps he will have 
finished his business when I see him to- 
day." 



FBANCES AT HOME. 49 

** I hope he may," said Frances. ^' You 
had better bring him back, for your own 
sake, Captain Heath, for I am sure you will 
soon find the evenings dull and slow, with 
no amusement except playing 6carte with a 
bad player." 

When Heath was gone, Frances had time 
to wander over her demesne, and talk to 
her animals, and hold counsel with the 
garden. The flower-beds at Carey Farm 
were very beautiful, though they could not 
compare with the superb array of colour at 
Monckton Manor. The slow Autumn, as 
yet untouched by frost, had spared the 
tenderest flowers ; there was scent of helio- 
trope everywhere, and the Gloire de Dijon 
rose defied Autumn to destroy its beauty. 
Frances had her gardens, her pigeons and 
poultry, her horses and dogs to talk to ; then 
she had to hear a long lecture from Rachel, 
about things that ought to have been done 

VOL. in. ^ 



50 FRANCES. 

long ago . about the making of quince naar- 
malade, medlar jelly, and other autumnal 
confections. It was a long and busy morn- 
ing, this first of her return home ; but it was 
over at last, and she ate a bit of Captain 
Heath's cold pheasant, and started off to the 
Hollies to see Miss Hutchison. 

All this time she feared the dear old lady 
had been very lonely. She almost reproach- 
ed herself for going off on her pleasant ex- 
peditions to Southpool and Sir Charles 
Wray's. She knew what Miss Hutchison 
felt about this scapegrace nephew of hers ; 
and, now that there appeared a gleam of 
hope, she set off gaily towards the Hollies, 
wishing to make the old lady feel more 
cheerful. A pleasant fire burnt in the 
parlour at the Hollies, and Miss Hutchi- 
son sat beside it knitting, when Frances 
entered. Very glad was the old lady to 
see her friend again. 



« 



FRANCES AT HOME. 51 

" You look quite blooming after your 
holiday, Frances/' she said. " Have you 
enjoyed it ? You must tell me all your ad- 
ventures. Only think of Heathfield being 
burnt down, and poor Captain Heath ob- 
liged to stay at your house ! How do you 
like him as a visitor, my dear ? What a 
pity your brother is not at home to enter- 
tain him !" 

" Yes, I miss Walter very much, but I 
hope he will soon return. Captain Heath 
will see him in London to-day, and perhaps 
they will come back together. I dorft think 
Captain Heath cares much for the company 
of a girl like me ; however, I managed to 
amuse him last night by playing cards with 
him." 

" A girl like you indeed ! '* said Miss 
Hutchison, angry at her favourite's self-de- 
preciation, "Why, you are as clever as 
half-a-dozen of him. I hope you beat him 



52 FRANCES. 

at cards ; I'm sure he wouldn't like it.'* 
"Well, I did beat him," said Frances 
with a laugh, " and he did not seem to like 
it." 

Miss Hutchison had old-fashioned notions 
of country hospitality, and was rude enough 
to offer refreshment to the friends who 
called upon her, whatever the hour. Mo- 
dern politeness has wisely put an end to this 
old custom, which, in my youth, I used to 
think a pleasant one. But I retract my 
opinion, being convinced, that eating and 
drinking are vulgar things, to be discourag- 
ed, as much as possible ; and that with the 
present high prices, the man who would 
offer his friend a glass of wine and a biscuit 
is a prodigal, whose name will probably ap- 
pear in the Gazette. But as Miss Hutchison 
belonged to the last generation, perhaps she 
may be forgiven for her solecism in causing 
white cream cheese and delicate crisp bis- 



FRANCES At HOME. 53 

cuits and decanters of white wine and red 
to be placed on the table for Frances' en- 
tertainment. That young lady, knowing 
what would happen, had retarded her reve- 
lations concerning Hugh till the refection 
appeared, thinking that perhaps Miss Hutchi- 
son would need a glass of wine if suddenly 
excited. 

And now she led the conversation to 
Hugh Roland . ^in the first place, by quoting 
some of Rachel's ludicrous remarks about 
his occupation. Rachel had scarcely ever 
travelled by rail, and when she did, was 
quite uncertain about how. she came to her 
journey's end. To her these wildly-rushing 
trains were a terror and a mystery ; and the 
accidents she heard people talk of alarmed 
her more ; and when she heard that Mr. 
Hugh had turned railway-guard she was 
quite bewildered. 

" La I miss," she said, " do you mean to 



54 FRANCES. 

say Mr. Hugh whirls about in those scream- 
ing things all day long ? I hope it isn't him 
that smashes those poor creatures every day 
or so ? I call it downright wicked to travel 
without the horses that God meant to draw 
carriages. If I had to go to London, I'd 
tramp on my own honest legs rather than go 
hissing and screaming over the country, and 
perhaps coming back with no legs at all." 

Miss Hutchison, amused at Rachel's oddi* 
ties, seemed in such good spirits that Fran* 
ces ventured to say : 

" I saw your nephew at Southpool, Miss 
Hutchison." 

'* Saw him ! 0, how did he look ? Is 
he very tired of being on the railway ?" 

" He did not seem so ; and he was looking 
very well, and was not at all melancholy. 
But he is not on the railway just at present. 
He has got a short holiday." 

** Why does he do it ?" said Miss Hutchi- 



FRANCES AT HOME. 55 

son. " He was always so rash. He will 
get into danger, I am sure. I know he 
will betaken back to that dreadful Asylum/*^ 

** Don't be alarmed, dear Miss Hutchison. 
He is doing all for the best, I assure you* 
I believe he will be able to come home ta 
you very soon. We have reason to be 
almost sure that Stephen Heath is now 
in England, alive : and Hugh is now look- 
ing for him. He knows where to find him^ 
and I am expecting to hear good news by 
every post." 

The old lady was so taken by surprise 
that the glass of port which Frances admin- 
istered was very necessary. But she could 
not believe in the possibility of such good 
fortune. 

"You young people are so sanguine, 
Frances. You have had no experience of 
the sad disappointments of life. I have had 
too much. You never heard, I dare say^ 



S6 FRANCES. 

that when I was about your age I was 
engaged to be married to Hugh's father's 
brother. My sister and I were to marry 
the two brothers the same day. Just a 
week before the time fixed, when they were 
riding over to see us, Arthur was thrown 
from his horse and fatally injured. He 
died within half an hour: there was 
not time to bring the clergyman, or I would 
have married him on his death-bed : but 1 
always look upon myself as his wife. And 
poor Hugh is so like Arthur . much more 
like him, in look and in character, than his 
own father. I have always been afraid for 
him . . . always." 

" I believe you will see him very soon, 
dear Miss Hutchison, healthy and safe and 
free from all trouble. What a wretch that 
Stephen Heath must be I" 

"I never liked him . never. He was 
always so very polite, and yet seemed to 



FRANCES AT HOME. 57 

laugh at you. When he was as civil as you 
please I could see that he was saying to 
himself . * What a bore that old woman is !' 
0, 1 can see through those plausible young 
people, Frances, though I am obliged to 
wear spectacles." 

*'He did not seem at all sincere," said 
Frances. "I am afraid he is engaged in 
some wicked business or other now, else 
why should he be going about disguised, 
and under a false name ? What a trouble 
it will be to his father !" 

" I don't think very much better of Cap- 
tain Heath than of Stephen," said the old 
lady. *' There are queer stories about his 
doings in London. It's not going to church 
twice on Sunday with a big prayer-book 
that makes a man : and the people who 
came down with four horses, and kept him 
away from service one Sunday morning, 
were neither church-folk nor Christians, I 



58 FRANCES. 

should fancy. Those people would have 
been set in the stocks for Sabbath-breaking 
in my grandfather's time, and the woman 
would have been drummed out of the parish 
after a night in the lock-up. No : I've had 
no opinion of the Captain since that Sun- 
day." 

There was a vein of puritanism in Miss 
Hutchison's character . a family inheritance. 
Her grandfather, a county magistrate in 
Warwickshire, had in his time been famous 
for dealing with all rogues and vagabonds 
with a high hand. 

Frances said no word of her brother's 
discovery of Hugh Roland, knowing that 
this would terribly alarm Miss Hutchison. 
After a little more chat, she left the old 
lady in a cheerful and almost hopeful 
frame of mind, and passed a busy day at 
Carey Farm, putting in order, with Rachel's 
indefatigable aid, the thousand little things 



FBANCES AT HOME. 5^ 

that go wrong in the best-ordered establish- 
ment when its mistress is away. 

Frances had a quiet evening before her, 
without ^cart^, without Captain Heath'a 
improving conversation. She would dine 
quietly on the surplus of yesterday's ban- 
quet : what could be nicer than cold pheas- 
ant ? She would read some favourite book 
by the fire in the oak parlour, and then go 
quietly to bed, some time between ten and 
eleven. Such was her plan for the evening : 
what a pity our plans are ever disturbed ! 

At any rate, a portion of the programme 
was fulfilled. Frances had her soup and 
cold bird, and her cup of tea and favourite 
volume by the fire, and read very little in- 
deed, but fell into a reverie. This was an 
exciting moment in her romance. She 
longed for morning, which ought to bring 
news from Gabriel Shirley. She had but 
little fear of the ultimate result, feeling cer- 



.0 FRANCES. 

tain of the identity of Lyon with Stephen 
Heath, and confident that if Hugh failed to 
unmask him, Mr. Shirley would succeed. 
Still, knowing her brother s obstinate per- 
severance, she could not dismiss the appre- 
hension that Hugh himself might be over- 
taken before he had carried out his design-. 
and that would be such a grievous disap- 
pointment. 

In the midst of her reverie Rachel en- 
tered. Frances, sitting in a comfortable 
lounging-chair, in a dress of violet silk with 
much white lace at bosom and wrist, her 
book lying on her lap, her eyes fixed dream- 
ily on the fire, which flickered on the dark 
oak panels, was a very pretty picture . . . 
deserving perhaps a more aesthetic observer 
than kind old Rachel. When Rachel en- 
tered, she looked up lazily : but there was 
an expression, a perplexed and frightened 
expression, in the old servant's face, which 



FRANCES AT HOME. 61 

awoke her from her musings, and made her 
exclaim, 

" Why, Rachel, what's the matter ?" 

** It's Mr. Hugh, miss. He's outside. He 
came and tapped at my window. I'm not 
soon frightened, so I opened it : and then I 
saw him, looking tired, but uncommon well : 
and he whispered . . . Rachel^ 1 want to shep 
in one of your hay'dofts to-night. So I 
thought, miss, your pigeon-loft would be the 
place, because you keep the key, and he'd 
be quite safe." 

" But what is his reason for coming 
here ?" she asked, in amazement, full of fear 
that something dreadful had happened. 

" He didn't tell me^ miss : I daresay he'll 
tell you when he sees you. Had I better 
put him up in your loft ? There's plenty of 
straw." 

Now this particular loft was the upper 
storey of an outhouse, the lower part of 



^2 FRANCES. 

.which was used for storing grain. The loft 
was approached by steps from the outside, 
and was divided into two compartments, the 
inner of which Frances had given up to a 
favourite breed of tumbler pigeons, that 
were both picturesque in aerial gyration and 
plump on the breakfast-table. Their section 
of the loft was cut out of the whole in such 
a way that there was a narrow recess be- 
hind it, where trusses of straw generally 
lay : and in the outer part Frances used to 
keep her out-door nick-nacks, her own 
special garden-tools, her bulbs and seeds, a 
hundred things which she would trust to no 
one else. The place was her private work- 
shop, so that Rachel had thought of the 
likeliest corner possible for perfect conceal- 
ment. 

But this sudden appeal puzzled Frances, 
and alarmed her. "What could have hap- 
pened that Hugh should come late at night 




FRANCES AT HOME. 63 

to seek refuge at Carey Farm ? She ima- 
gined all manner of horrors. She sat irreso- 
lute. Eachel said: 

" Give me the key, miss : I'll take care of 
him. He says you're not on any account to 
come out, for fear of the servants. He's 
waiting quiet in the shrubbery, and Til take 
a lantern, and show him where the straw is, 
and give him some bread and beef and 
beer." 

"Thank you, Rachel," said Frances, hand- 
ing her the key. " I am so anxious about 
Mr. Roland that I did not know what to 
do : but your plan is a good one. The loft 
is warm, and I know you will try to make 
him comfortable. Tell him I shall come to 
see him at five to-morrow morning : if any 
of the men are about they will not be sur- 
prised, as I am often in the grounds very 
early." 

Rachel went off promptly, and Frances 



64 FRANCES. 

thought over the affair. This had come so 
suddenly that it set her brain in a whirl : 
and she was very thankful for the assistance 
of her trusty and courageous handmaiden. 
When she saw Hugh she would know why 
he had come to Carey Farm : but to see him 
to-night would be unwise, and she must 
wait till morning for satisfaction. There 
was something very strange about it : what 

could have happened? She formed all 
manner of impossible conjectures while 
waiting for Rachel's return. 

'^ There's the key, miss," says Rachel, when 
she came back. " It's not much use, I sup- 
pose, for, if Mr. Hugh could get through 
stone walls a yard thick, our loft won't hold 
him. He sent you his love, miss : and he 
sat down on the straw, while I held the 
lantern, and ate a lot of bread and beef and 
drank some of the old ale (Master Walter's 
ale, miss), and enjoyed it. Then he lay 



FRANCES AT HOME. 65 

down on the straw between the two par- 
titions as snug as a bug in a rug, and said, 
* Tell Miss Carey I shall be listening for her 
footstep long before five o'clock.' " 

" Nobody saw you, Rachel, I hope ?" 

" La, miss, they were gone to bed in the 
kitchen before I came in the first time. It's 
nigh on twelve o'clock." 

Frances did not sleep that night so well 
as she had anticipated and intended. Hugh 
Roland was on her mind ; sleeping on straw 
in her own special loft; she his warder, 
holding the key of his prison. She had one 
of those perturbed nights which are fre- 
quent with possessors of the imaginative 
faculty . a chequered night, with snatches 
of sleep and waking intervals. Awake, she 
speculated vainly: asleep, «he dreamt ab- 
surdly. She was not greatly refreshed when 
morning came. 

But, whatever night may have been, the 

VOL. in. F 



66 FRANCES. 

air of dawn was always a delicious stimulant 
to Frances Carey. She descended into the 
dim garden and met the cool fresh air. 
The stars were slowly fading into the grey 
blue : slight touches of light in the eastern 
sky seemed like torches held by the stable- 
men who harness the steeds of Helios. The 
Autumn flowers that frost had spared wel- 
comed her with a pleasant perfume. 

Frances climbed the steps of the loft, un- 
locked the door, and walked (it was dusk 
of the morning) right into Hugh Roland's 
arms. Let us give them two minutes for a 
happy embrace. Then Frances locked the 
loft door, sat on a bench which she used 
when doing her amateur carpentry, and 
said, 

*' Well, Mr, Roland, why are you here ?" 

She had some diflSculty in enunciating 

these few words with her perfect accuracy, 

for he had squeezed her with what a maiden 



PRANCES AT HOME. 67 

of more delicate mould might deem cruel 
tightness. But Frances, who came of a 
strong line, and had lived out of doors, did 
not faint easily. 

"It is too bad of you to call me Mr. 
Roland ?" he said, " for you know I don't 
want to call you Miss Carey. Why am I 
here ? No doubt Shirley has told you all 
that I have been doing." 

" 0, yes, I read your letter." 

" Well, I saw your brother and Heath (I 
am quite certain Lyon is Heath) at the 
Bagatelle Theatre, and tried to get at them, 
but could not, for the crowd. Walter is 
very quick : he must have seen me too, for 
as I was walking home by the quietest 
streets I could find, not wishing to be dis- 
covered, I noticed that I was followed. 
There was somebody behind me, moving at 
my own pace. It flashed on my mind there 
was a detective on my track. I was in a 

F 2 



68 FRANCES. 

square . I think it was Golden Square . and 
there seemed nobody about : so I suddenly 
turned on the man, who was a couple of 
yards behind me on the pavement, and 
caught him by the collar, and said, * What 
the devil do you mean by following me ?* 
He was a strong fellow : he cried out : 
* Hugh Roland, alias George Brown, I arrest 

you in Her Majesty's ' but before he 

could get any further, I lifted him over the 
iron railings close by, and dropped him into 
the area, and ran as hard as I could, till I 
saw a hansom . I hailed it, and drove to 
Highgate, and a tremendous fare the fellow 
charged me. Then I started to walk to 
Avonside, my idea being to see you, and 
wait for news from Shirley. I got along 
very well, for I had a lift of nearly thirty 
miles on a break belonging to a Duke . ^I 
quite forget which. If he is as clever a 
fellow as the man who looks after his stables, 



FRANCES AT HOME. 69 

he must make a figure in Parliament. That 
is all, my dear Frances, so far as I can recol- 
lect : I thought that as they were on ray 
track I had better get out of the way : and 
I knew no place from which I could safely 
communicate with our good friend Shirley, 
unless you would take me in." 

" What am I to do with you ?" asked 
Frances^ laughing. "Do you propose to 
live ill this loft till you have cleared your 
own character and ruined mine ? What 
will the censorious world say if I keep a 
young gentleman under lock and key in a 
pigeonJoft? If you have made up your 
mind to remain here, I shall hand you over 
to Rachel, and, if her character is compro- 
mised, you, of course, will have to marry 
her." 

"Thank you," said Hugh Roland, "but I 
have always the choice of returning to the 
Asylum. Now, dear Frances, let us be seri- 



70 FRANCES. 

ous. I want to stay here ; I shall sleep 
better on straw than ever I slept on fea- 
thers, when I remember how near you are 
to me. Write to Shirley, whose letters^ 
always reach him at the Travellers' Club^ 
Pall Mall, and tell him what I have done^ 
and where I am, and entreat him not tO' 
lose sight of the Honourable Hercules Lyon. 
If I can be brought face to face with that 
mean scoundrel, I will expose him at once. 
But, if I were caught and sent back to the 
Asylum, Heath would probably take the 
opportunity of getting out of the way alto- 
gether, and I should never be able to come 
forward, clear of all accusation or suspicion^ 
and resume my place in the world, and ask 
you the question which I want to ask. So^ 
if you will let me, I will lie on the straw in 
this dim loft of yours . . . and do you write 
to Shirley all I have told you." 

"How terribly dull you will find it!'^ 
said Frances. 



FRANCES AT HOME. 71 

"O, no," said Hugh Roland. "This is 
your workshop : my being hidden round 
this corner will not prevent your coming up 
to look after your little affairs. I shall 
hear you sing as you choose your hyacinth 
bulbs for next year ; and remembering how 
those brown bulbs change into lovely spikes 
of fragrant flower, I shall hope for the same 
good luck for you and me. We shall have 
our bloom in time ; just now we are a 
couple of bulbs." 

"But you will get no exercise," said 
Frances. " It will make you ill." 

" I have thought of that," said Hugh. 
" Let me have the key of the door at night, 
then ril take a good run when all the 
world is gone to bed. Will that do ? In 
the morning I will unlock the door early." 

They chatted for a long time, and talked 
a world of nonsense. At last Frances had 
to go in to breakfast, and confessed that she 
was very hungry. 



72 FBANGBS. 

"I shall imagine you, with your fresh 
eggs and crisp bacon and well-made coffee. 
I wonder if Rachel will give me any break- 
fast? She mustn't come forward and back- 
ward too often," he said. 

"Good-bye," said Frances. "FU tell 
Rachel what you say. I shall be looking 
over my' hyacinth bulbs in the course of the 
morning." 

Away she went, locking Hugh into the 
loft. He watched her easy tread toward 
the house,, and wondered for the millionth 
time how any other woman could be thought 
beautiful. 

She found awaiting her a telegram from 
her brother, 

" Dinner at eight. Heath and Lavington 
and two American gentlemen. Let every- 
thing be first-rate." 



73 



CHAPTER III. 

THE ADVENTURERS. 
** Conturbabantur NoYeboricopolitani." 

TTTHY were two American gentlemen 
* ^ going down to Avonside in this 
sudden and unanticipated fashion ? To an- 
swer this question we must listen to the 
eanfidential talk of the Honourable Her- 
cules Lyon and Major Washington F. Butts. 
It occurred in the former gentleman's bed- 
chamber at the Colossus ; the time was 
eleven in the morning, and this republican 
aristocrat had not yet prepared himself for 



74 FRANCES. 

appearing in society. The previous night 
had been one of dissipation : Hercules Lyon, 
with dimmed eyes, flushed face, aching head, 
had been vainly trying to recover himself in 
the usual way, as was shown by a half-empty 
bottle of brandy on his table, and several 
empty bottles of soda on the floor. He was 
just in the mood to succumb to a hostile 
attack. 

The Major was quite prepared to attack 
him. Things were going badly with the 
Confederacy. The Honourable Hercules 
did nothing : though he declared that he 
was to marry the heiress, he gave no 
proof of it ; and he showed a ridiculous re- 
luctance to open negotiations with Captain 
Heath, some of whose surplus money the 
Major wanted to handle. Lyon seemed to 
shun the Captain, and was not half as fami- 
liar with Walter Carey as the Major wanted 
him to be. The redoubtable Butts was 



THE ADVENTURERS. 75 

angry. He was also alarmed on another 
score. 

Now, when Heath ran up to town for a 
night, he naturally went to the Bagatelle^ 
and there he met Lavington and Carey and 
the two Americans. In the course of con- 
versation the Captain delivered to Carey 
his sister's message, whereon the latter 
said : 

" O, I'll go down with 5^ou to-morrow. I 
want a few days at home. Suppose you 
were to come with us, Lavington. Mine's a 
quaint homely old place, but there are 
plenty of beds at any rate, and my old gov- 
ernor left some pretty fair wine." 

" By Jove I he did," said Heath. " I 
never tasted better claret." 

It naturally occurred that the invitation 
was extended to the two Americans, who ac- 
cepted it. Hence the telegram. 

The night need not be described. It was 



76 FRANCES. 

arranged that they should all meet at the 
terminus. Major Washington F. Butts had 
begun to suspect his younger ally of slipperi- 
ness, so he resolved to look after him care- 
fully. He thought a little business might 
be done down at Avonside, when Carey and 
Heath and Lavingtou were unsuspiciously 
easy after dinner. And he relied on Lyon's 
aid for a species of plausible fiction which he 
could not manage himself So he entered 
his room, with the advertisement sheet of 
the Times in his hand, and found him in the 
condition already described. Moreover, 
Lyon was in a mood half sulky and half 
savage, and began by swearing that he 
would not go down to Avonside. What 
was the use ? They could do business with 
Carey and Heath in town any day. He 

wasn't going to waste time in a dull country 
village. 

" None of your shirking, Lyon," said the 



THE ADVENTURERS. 77 

Major. " I've spent a lot of money on you, 
and you've got to do your share of the con- 
tract. YouVe done nothing yet. Where's 
that girl you were going to marry ? We 
don't hear much about her, it seems to me." 

*' I want to go down and see her," said 
Lyon. " She is expecting me, and wonders 
I don't come. Hadn't I better take the op- 
portunity of going there while you are at 
Carey's place ?" 

" No ; I want you at Carey's, and it is all 
in the way. You can go there after. But 
I must see if I can't draw some of these fel- 
lows, for things are growing serious. Look 
here." 

He handed Lyon the advertisement sheet 
of the TimeSj pointing with his finger to a 
particular announcement in the second col- 
umn, which ran thus : 

" One Hundred Pounds Reward, 

*' This reward will be given to any one 



78 FRANCES. 

who can famish information that will lead 
to the apprehension of a tall thin elderly 
woman, in a respectable dress, who is 
issuing forged notes of the Bank of Eng- 
land. The public are warned against these 
notes, which are remarkably good forgeries. 
Apply to Messrs. Hurst and Waldingham, 
South Square, Gray's Inn." 

" What does this mean ?" said Lyon, 
turning pale. 

" It means that we had better get out of 
England as fast as we can ; and we can't do 
it without better money than Susanetta's 
notes . though they're the best of the sort 
ever done." 

Yes, it was an undeniable fact that the 
eloquent Susanetta, the chief light of the 
Free Maidens, was an adroit and dexterous 
forger, and carried on her business at the 
office? of that important association which 
she founded. There, with singular skill, 



THE ADVENTURERS. 79 

she produced bank-notes so admirably 
manufactured that even the Bank itself was 
occasionally puzzled. A very large number 
of them got into circulation. It is sad to 
think that Miss Aspasia, the great leader of 
the Free Matrons, was in the habit of pass- 
ing these notes. She would go into a shop, 
purchase a pair of gloves, a bottle of scent, 
or some such trifle, tender a forged note in 
payment, and receive the change. So often 
had this been done that the limit seemed to 
have been reached: London tradesmen 
thought twice before changing Bank of 
England notes for strangers : and the pecu- 
liar personal appearance of Miss Aspasia 
was known to the police. 

"What is to be done?" said Lyon, in a 
terrified whisper. "I knew those forged 
notes would get us into trouble." 

"You could not have lived without 
them," said the Major, coolly. " Don't be a 



80 FRANCES. 

coward. I have sent the women off to 
Brighton this morning, till further orders. 
You will come to Avonside with the rest of 
us, and there we'll see what can be done. 
If I can get money down for some of my 
gold bonds, we'll vamoos at once, and find 
our way to some place out of the regular 
track till this affair is blown over. If I can't, 
we must make ourselves scarce for a time 
at any rate." 

" What about the women, then?" said the 
Honourable Hercules Lyon. 

"We can leave them to their own de- 
vices : they're both pretty 'cute, and they've 
got some good money, as well as bogus 
notes. Don't trouble about them; we've 
our own skins to save. Now I suppose 
you'll come on, without any nonsense." 

Lyon sulkily assented. He was frighten- 
ed. Some of Susanetta's forged notes had 
passed through his hands, and he knew the 



THE ADVENTURERS. 81 

facility with which sins against finance are 
traced in London, The state of affairs ap- 
palled him ; he knew not what to do ; he 
surrendered himself entirely to the guidance 
of the older and tougher villain, Major 
Washington F. Butts. He had no desire to 
go to Avonside, but it seemed better than 
remaining in London. The excesses of the 
previous night had left him with a depres- 
sion which no amount of stimulant seemed 
able to remove : and Major Washington F, 
Butts, who took everything with complete 
calmness, could not help regarding with 
some contempt a young fellow so easily 
knocked over, 

" You're a disgrace to your sex, Lyon," 
said the Major. " Why the devil don't you 
burst into a flood of tears, like a girl in a 
sentimental story ? If you can't wake up, 
and be of some use, I shall just go quietly 

VOL. in. G 



62 FRANCES. 

off without you, and leave you to your 
own fate." 

This threat frightened the Honourable 
Hercules Lyon into subservience to the 
Major's will : and he prepared for his jour- 
ney to Avonside in a reluctant spiritless way. 
In the midst of their conversation there was 
a tap at the door, and a waiter handed in a 
card with the name of Mr. Gabriel Shirley 
upon it, and said the gentleman would be 
glad to speak to Mr. Lyon for a few minutes. 

'*Tell him," said the Major, promptly, 
*' that Mr. Lyon is not well this morning, 
and ask if he can either send up a message or 
call again in the afternoon." 

'^ It is that man who dined here with the 
Italian," said Butts, when the waiter was 
gone. 

" yes : and he was at Southpool after- 
wards with Sir Charles Wray's party." 

"What business can he have with you?" 




THE ADVENTURERS. 83 

"None that I can imagine. At any rate, 
you gave the right message. It is dangerous 
to see anybody just now." 

Poor Lyon was in a thorough state of 
terror. His Mephistopheles, the Major, 
made him do just what he pleased : the very 
last thing he would have chosen he was now 
about to do . namely, to go to Avonside in 
the company of Captain Heath and Walter 
CJarey. He had a strong aversion both from 
Avonside and his fellow-travellers. Could 
he have had his way he would have walked 
on board a foreign steamer at London 
Bridge, and put the sea between himself 
and England . ^between himself and all those 
forged notes which Miss Aspasia had sown 
broadcast amid the shops of London. But 
he was obliged to get into his first-class 
.carriage and join in the humour of the party, 
so far as might be. All the party showed 
exuberant hilarity, and perhaps the gayest 

g2 



84 PRANCES. 

of all was Major Washington F. Butts, who 
had an immense number of forged notes on 
his mind, and rather a heavy bundle of them 
in his pocket. He was full of absurd 
American anecdote, and made dry remarks, 
and seemed not in the least troubled by the 
thought that at any station a policeman 
might clap his hand on his shoulder. Major 
Washington F. Butts had passed through 
worse perils; he had been lynched by a 
Vigilance Committee, and just escaped 
hanging ; he had been cowhided by a lady . 
ladies always do that sort of thing thorough- 
ly in America ; he looked on anything that 
could happen to him in England as tame 
when compared with his previous experi- 
ences. 

Walter Carey too seemed in high spirits, 
though he was excessively annoyed that 
Hugh Roland had not yet been secured. 
The detectives he employed told him a lot 



THE ADVENTURERS. 85 

of plausible stories; according to their 
account, poor Hugh could not escape them ; 
but Carey was impatient, and grew very 
weary of all this delay. He had made up 
Lis mind that he would find Roland, and 
felt sure that his determined perseverance 
would succeed. With this feeling, he re- 
gretted that he had been induced to leave 
London for even a day. 

Perhaps the most brilliant member of the 
party was Lavington, who rattled away in a 
superb style, and kept everybody so lively 
that they reached Chessington station before 
they fanded themselves half way. Had he 
not good reason to be merry? He had 
heard that very morning that he would pro- 
bably lose his seat at the next election, as an 
influential Tory was coming forward ; that 
Mr. MoUoy, one of the Directors of the Irish 
Land Company, had gone abroad for a holi- 
day, taking with him all the available 



i 



86 PRANCES. 

balance; that the Bagatelle could not be 
kept open another week without ten thou- 
sand pounds ; and that Miss Ethel Clinton 
had accepted proposals of a certain sort fromr 
that eloquent and erotic gentleman, Mr. 
Serjeant Bellasys. Lavington, having had 
all this interesting information, whistled a 
" Begone, dull Care !" as he got into his 
brougham to drive to the railway. 

As to Captain Heath, he was more sin- 
cerely happy than any one else, for a brilliant 
idea had occurred to him. It concerned 
Frances Carey. The more he thought of 
her, the more it struck him that she was a 
girl of the right sort What a capital dinner 
she gave him ! How well she talked ! How 
admirably she played cards ! She wasn't a 
moro ohitj that ought to be in short frocks ; 
sho wus a sensible woman, who wouldn't 
Cftiv for bi^ysj but would see the value of a 
nmn of the world, in the prime of life, like 



THE ADVENTURERS. 87 

himself. Why shouldn't he marry her? 
They would suit each other perfectly, he 
could see. The Captain grew sanguine about 
it ; and when they were driving over from: 
Chessingfcon, was picturing to himself quite 
an affectionate reception from Frances. 
Surely the idea that had struck him must 
have struck her. Captain Heath, did not, 
to do him justice, belong to the class of 
elderly gentlemen described by Homer . . . 

&v ovpaX fih/ dinfifipKwTaL, OvjMf; ik fievoLva . . . 

he was above all things a roan of the world ; 
and he looked on marriage as an arrange- 
ment. What occurred to him in refer- 
ence to Frances was that she seemed a 
woman of the world. Though only twenty- 
five, she might have been ten years older, so 
far as mental maturity is concerned. Her 
father had taught her so much. He, a Lon- 
don surgeon of the first force, had a thorough 
knowledge of men, women, and books. Had 



88 FBANCES. 

his son Walter been of his own temperament, 
he would have made him a great man ; but 
Mr. Carey was a keen judge of character, 
and saw clearly that Walter was not de- 
signed to be scholar or statesman, but that 
his happiest destiny would be that of a 
country gentleman. Mr. Carey's judgment 
of his children forrj^ed a rare exception to 
that well-known rule ... a prophet is un- 
honoured among his own kin, and in his 
own house ; a rule recently expanded with 
his usual felicity by Mr. Disraeli in his inau- 
gural speech as Lord Rector of Glasgow 
University. He told the students, in his 
advice to them as to forming an early and 
accurate estimate of their own characters, 
that 

" Perception of character is always a rare gift, but 
around the domestic hearth it h ahnost unknown. 
Every one is acquainted with the erroneous estimates 
of their offspring which have been made even by iUus- 
trious parents. The silent, but perhaps pensive, boy 




THE ADVENTURERS. 89 

is looked upon as a dullard, while the flippancy of 
youth in a commonplace character is interpreted into a 
dangerous yivacity which may in time astonish, per- 
haps even alarm, the worid." 

Mr. Carey had clearer insight; he saw 
in Walter a strong resolute well-balanced 
mind, content with stout and serviceable 
work ; he saw in Frances a touch of some- 
thing higher, a subtlety of thought, a ca- 
pacity to enjoy the choicest work of the 
highest mind, and to draw deep delight from 
the inexhaustible beauty of nature. So 
Walter was his companion over Carey Farm, 
when the talk was of bullocks and wheat, 
while Frances was his companion in the 
library, in a boat on Avon, in long Summer 
walks over green meadows and through 
silent shadowy woods. And so she had 
grown into a companionable creature, hon 
camaradej a quiet humour mingled with her 
tender gravity. 

.' Quite a shame," thought Captain Heath, 



i 



90 FRANCES. 

" that such a fine girl should throw herself 
away on a boy. She would suit me perfectly 
. and I suppose shell have some money," 

Mr. Gabriel Shirley, who had made an 
attempt to see Hercules Lyon and failed, 
came again to the Colossus in the afternoon, 
only to learn that he and the Major had 
left town for a few days. Determined not 
to lose the scent, he asked to see the manager. 
"The General" appeared ... a portly gen- 
tleman, who had seen service in the Con- 
federate War, and had since edited a news- 
paper, directed a railway, and been Principal 
of a Ladies' College . . . but who seemed 
quite in his element at the Colossus. He 
showed Mr. Shirley to his private room, and 
asked what he could do for him with a 
rough and ready politeness. 

*' Can you give me any information in 
reference to an American gentleman who 
is staying here . the Honourable Hercules 



THE ADVENTURERS. 91 

Lyon ? I don't want any betrayal of confi-^ 
dence." 

The General, a humorous man in hi& 
way, saw that Mr. Shirley was humorous 
also. There is a freemasonry among humour- 
ists, which beats all the signs of the masonic 
craft. Mr. Shirley saw, by a twinkle in the 
General's eye, a movement of his lip, that 
he did not think very much of Hercules 
Lyon. 

"The Honourable Hercules Lyon," he 
said, " may be a very big man. His friends 
say he is. I don't know. Major Washing- 
ton F. Butts says he is ; and people in New 
York say the Major is the most truthful man 
they know, because he is so quick with his 
revolver." 

" Then you can't give me any definite in- 
formation about Mr. Lyon ?" 

" Not a bit. I never heard of him before. 
Butts I have heard of, and not much to his 



I 



92 FRANCES. 

credit. The States turn out a few ad- 
venturers, you know ; and when they want 
to make a fuss in the world they naturally 
go to the biggest hotels. We can't refuse 
them, unless we know something decided 
against them. Butts is shady, that I know, and 
so are the two women ; and, as birds of a 
feather flock together, I shouldn't much care 
to endorse a bill of Lyon's." 

" I am very much obliged to you," said 
Oabriel Shirley. *^ I want to see this Mr. 
Lyon, but I hear he has just gone into the 
country. If he should return, or if he 
should send his address, would you kindly 
telegraph to me ? It is really a matter of 
importance." 

"I'll telegraph with pleasure," said the 
General. " They won't be long away ; they 
have too much business to do in London. 
And now that our business is over, come to 
the bar and take a drink." 



THE ADVENTURERS. 9S 

This Mr, Shirley declined ; and, having 
left his address with the General, he went 
again to Hugh Roland's Hotel. 

Finding no news of him there, he left a 
note for hira, and walked slowly away in a 
disappointed mood. Certainly it was very 
provoking that an imbroglio so easy to set- 
tle should continue simply because two or 
three people could not be brought together. 
And he began to be afraid about Hugh 
Roland. Cautious inquiries which he made 
at Scotland Yard, where he knew some of 
the chief functionaries, satisfied him that 
Hugh had not fallen into the hands of the 
police; and this made him only the more 
anxious, since he feared that something 
worse might have happened. If Hugh, in 
his eagerness, had got into any difficulty 
with persons of the dangerous class, the 
result could not be foreseen. It would be 
far better for him to be taken by the police, 



\ 



^4 FRANCES. 

seeing that his liberation could not be far 
distant . unless both he and Frances were 
mistaken about Lyon, which seemed almost 
impossible. 

It cannot be denied that Mr. Shirley was 
in a very fidgety state. He had so tho- 
roughly made up his mind that, if Roland 
and Lyon were brought together, the whole 
affair would be cleared up at once, that it 
annoyed him excessively when neither of 
them could be found. However, he was 
more patient than most men. He saw that 
nothing could be done at the moment. He 
resolved to wait another day : so, having 
eaten an old-fashioned wholesome dinner at 
the Cock, he went to see Charles Mathews ; 
and the perfect acting of that inimitable 
comedian refreshed his mind, and caused 
him to forget his annoyances. 

" A good play," Mr. Shirley was wont to 
remark, " is the most perfect refreshment to 



THE ADVENTURERS. 95 

the brain. I prefer it even to fine music. 
An opera stimulates me too much ; the airs 
haunt me, sleeping and awake ; the lyric 
frenzy is fatal to tranquillity. But I like a 
comedy . poetic or genteel . , . As you like 
it, or Used up . . . something not too ab- 
sorbing, not too laughable. Good tragedy 
tires the nerves with passion: good farce 
wearies one with laughter ; but the enjoy- 
ment obtained from comedy is of a quieter 
kind, and does not fatigue you any more 
than looking at a beautiful woman or a 
lovely landscape." 

Acting on this theory, Gabriel Shirley 
spent his evening in the pleasant company 
of Charles Mathews, and went to bed direct- 
ly after the theatre and slept soundly. He 
awoke in better spirits, with a pleasant 
presentiment of good fortune . which-, how- 
ever, was not to happen until next day.. 



96 



CHAPTER IV. 



IDYLLIC HOURS. 



'VOne time there is, one only time, 

'Twixt birth and death, from sorrow free, 
"And that, O lady of my rhyme ! 

I passed with thee." 

COUNT CASSIUS GRIMANI, who, in 
his early days, had been the most 
restless of men, wandering heaven knows 
whither in quest of heaven knows what, had 
begun to enjoy the flavour of serene repose. 
The atmosphere of Monckton Manor was 
favourable to this. Sir Charles was a 
dreamer amid books and pictures: Cecilia 
was a dreamer amid birds and flowers, 




IDYLLIC HOURS. 97 

music and song. Cecilia ^was half a bird 
herself, and half a flower. Her pretty girl- 
face, its hazel eyes touched with specks of 
light, its coraline mouth meant solely for 
kisses and song, was just like a fair [fresh 
flower. She spoke in music. She sang 
deliciously, without effort. Her notes were 
pure silver, easy and sweet. 

"The first voice of Italy ever born in 
England," said Count Cassius. 

He had found his . fate. There are girls 
who seem very simple children indeed, and 
who go to the end of their lives with no- 
thing to distinguish them from others except 
this beautiful simplicity . unless they meet 
with the very man who is qualified to de- 
velop and mature the soul that lies dor- 
mant within them. Cecilia was one of 
these. If she had not met Count Cassius 
she would never have grown to the full 
beautv of her womanhood : no other man in 

VOL. in. H 



98 PRANCES. 

the world could have had the same influ- 
ence. Her sensitive and fluent nature was " 
shown by the effect which Hercules Lyon 
produced upon her mind : but his fascina- 
tion had a kind of terror in it, and she felt 
in his presence something like a bird on 
which a serpent has fixed its evil eye. 
Again, she felt the influence of Frances, 
which tranquillized her : to a girl of this 
type, the companionship of a stronger and 
calmer character is an immeasurable advan- 
tage. Cecilia was a spiritual creature, whose 
moral and intellectual faculties were subordi- 
nate to the pure and beautiful soul. Hence 
Frances, whose conscience was vigorous and 
whose intellect was clear, was the very 
friend she required. They became intimate 
by instinct. Cecilia needed Frances, and 
Frances knew that she was needed. 

What Count Cassius Grimani first saw in 
Cecilia was her unique and simple beauty 



Idyllic hours. 99 

. ^the beauty of an unawakening spirit . the 
beauty of a lovely flower. What next he 
perceived was the music that seemed to ex- 
hale from her, like fragrance from a flower. 
It was not merely that her slender white 
fingers were at home on the piano's keys, or 
that she sang like a bird because she 
couldn't help it ; but her speech had a natu- 
ral melody, her movement a natural rhythm. 
Her laugh was like the ripple of water ; 
she danced over the lawn like the mota- 
cilia. 

These things attracted Count Cassius, 
poet, and therefore student of the sex. He 
had seen no one like her. His lost Lucia 
was simple: but there was a fiery touch 
in her character, a resolute self-will. And 
though, like most Italian girls, she was 
musical, and sang with a clear throat, she 
was not embodied music . music enshrined 
in a beautiful human form like Cecilia. 

h2 



100 FRANCES. 

Song was Cecilia's natural language ; when 
the Count heard her speak, he felt it con- 
ceivable that there is somewhere an orb 
which has no language except music. 

They became, as we have seen, tutor and 
pupil. They sang and played together all 
through the golden October hours. Sir 
Charles was glad to see his daughter amused 
so innocently : perhaps he sometimes won- 
dered that the Count did not get tired of his 
occupation: but a man of absent mind, 
buried in his own fancies, is apt to take 
little note of what other people do. That 
Cecilia could fall in love, or imagine herself 
of a marriageable age, was a notion that 
could not occur to him ; but had it done so, 
he would have felt quite satisfied. No one 
who had once seen Count Cassius could 
doubt that he was a gentleman in the 
highest sense ; worthy, therefore, to be 



> 



ID-XXLIC HOURS. 101 

trusted with that most precious of all mortal 
possessions, a lady's love. 

It gradually dawned upon Count Cassius 
that Cecilia was something more than a 
musical child ; that under his influence she 
was growing into spiritual womanhood, as 
the bud becomes the rose when touched by 
sunshine. The thought delighted him. He 
felt as some prae-Homeric Greek may have 
felt, standing on an island and gazing on a 
foam-crested wave . the sapphire lymph 
snow-tipped, and rose-flushed by the dawn 
. when lo it was a wave no longer, but a 
white wonder of female beauty . . . the 
Foam-Goddess herself, with all the future 
passion of the world in her deep luminous 
eyes. Their constant discourse was music : 
but music grew to have its meaning; and 
there was no tone of voice and instrument 
which did not soon become significant be- 
tween Cassius and Cecilia. 



102 FRANCES. 

He made song for her. He made melody 
for her. Here is a duet between Orlando 
and Rosalind : Cecilia had read no Shake- 
speare, but the Count told her the story of 
As you like ity using often the poet's very 
words : 

*' Orlando. 
I went into the forest far, 
Where the sun is like a star 

The mighty branches hide it so : 
I met a saucy boy who played 
At love as if he were a maid. 

You were not there, O no ! O no ! 

'* Rosalind. 
Strange creatures, I have heard folks tell. 
Haunt the lonely forest dell. 

And through the shuddering copses go ; 
But did we meet there, I and you ? 
But did I say what was not true ? 

I'm not a saucy boy, I know." 

" A very saucy girl, I think," said Cecilia, 
when she had sung her song. " You have 
told me many stories of Shakespeare, Cas- 
sius "... yes, it had come to dropping the 



IDYLLIC HOURS. lOS 

Count ..." how often he makes girls dress 
like men ! I can't fancy doing that. What 
was his reason ? There is Rosalind in the 
forest ; and the one that professed to be a 
lawyer ; and another in that Verona story . 
O, and another in that delightful play where 
the steward fancies his mistress in love with 
hira. Of course Shakespeare knows, since 
you say he is the wisest of men ; but I don't 
think anything would induce me to dress up 
in that way." 

" You would look as if you had run away 
from an infant school," said Count Grimani. 
" That sort of disguise was a favourite inci- 
dent in our Italian romances, from which 
Shakespeare took most of his comedies ; and 
besides, it was an easy way of showing that 
some women have as much courage and 
common sense as men." 

" I am very glad I haven't," said Cecilia. 
" I have heard girls say they were sorry not 



104 PRANCES. 

to be men: I can't understand it. If I 
weren't a girl, I should like to be a bird or 
a flower : but a man . . . no !" 

" Do you dislike us so much F' asked the 
Count. 

" No : I like you so much," was the simple 
answer. " But if I were one of you I should 
not like you. Besides, don't you see, Casr 
sius," she said, with wise gravity, laying 
down the law with her dimpled forefinger, 
" it is just as if a diamond ring wanted to be 
a sword . as if water wanted to be fire . as 
if a lily wanted to be an oak ? I wouldn't 
be anything but what I am for all the 
world . indeed I know I couldn't." 

Count Cassius thought that this mere child 
spoke very wisely. There are women in 
these days who would like to act as if they 
were men : and there are also men who do 
act very much as if they were women : and 
I hold that both classes are people without 



IDYLLIC HOURS. 105 

spiritual sex. Now Cecilia Wray was an 
absolute woman, and rejoiced therein. 

On these happy afternoons Cassius and 
Cecilia talked much in song. Here is the 
Count in a humorous mood : 

** O I have wandered north and south, 

And paid full many a visit, 
And never saw a pretty mouth 

But that I longed to kiss it." 
The ladies heard this boaster's lay, 
And tamed their scornful heads away. 

"01 have wandered north and south, 

And traversed forests lonely, 
In quest of one ripe rosy mouth. 

Mine at first sight, mine only." 
A lady saw his bright eyes shine, 
And said, " 'Tis mine . . . and he is mine." 

Cassius never made love to Cecilia . ^nor 
indeed Cecilia to Cassius. But they talked 
about love, philosophically; and, as we 
have seen, they sang about love. And per- 
haps they both understood, without word 
uttered, that there was true love between 



106 FRANCES. 

them. Straight flies the bee to the flower s 
heart in search of honey. To Count Cas- 
sius it seemed that to talk of love to Cecilia 
was mere surplusage. Some day he would 
take her in his arms and kiss her ; he had 
never kissed her yet. She was not to be 
touched too roughly, to be wooed too 
abruptly. Besides, every day of her life 
she seemed to grow more beautifully toward 
womanhood : and he was too delighted in 
watching this wonderful change to say a 
word or give a look that might startle her 
into the semblance of Horace's Chloe 
hinnuleo similis. 

Happy days these, for the poetic Italian : 
happy days also for Cecilia. Whenever he 
talked of going, Sir Charles pressed him to 
stay, and he needed no eloquence to per- 
suade him thereto. Indeed he felt as if it 
would be diflSicult to tear himself away . . . 
when the time should come, as the time 



IDYLLIC HOURS. lOT 

must. At least . . . well : to Cecilia no 
word at all, but a kiss, and to Sir Charles a 
very few words indeed, and then they twa 
would never part again. But he was in no- 
hurry. This little Cecilia . this delicious 
young rosebud slowly opening and exhaling 
its fragrance under the sunshine of love . 
was so sweet a sight. He paused before 
touching the delicate bloom on those fair 
petals. Let us justify him by one other song 
that he sang : 

" O why do I delay ? 
Why does the wind delay to strike the sea, 
Making innumerable sails fly free 

Upon their homeward way ? 

" O why do I delay ? 
Why does the nightingale delay its nest. 
Singing in boughs just crimsoned by the west. 

Till sunset skies turn gray ? 

''O why do I delay? 
Why does the sun delay his golden light, 
Though the mysterious hours of happier night 

Succeed the happy day ?" 



108 FRANCES. 

Of nights, after dinner, Cecilia was wont 
. having perchance sung a song or two . to 
kiss Papa and go to bed early. She liked 
going to bed early. She had no desire to 
assert precocious womanhood. She was a 
-child yet, and was content to be a child. 
And when she was gone, the General and 
the Count used to get into pleasant conver- 
sation, often lasting till late into the night. 
Between them there was very much in com- 
mon. Both were lovers of art and of books. 
Both, in their way, were lovers of adven- 
ture. The General had seen service and 
done daring deeds at desperate moments : 
Count Cassius had in his wide travel run 
risks quite equal to any that occur in war. 
They exchanged fragments of experience, 
and got on capitally together. Long past 
midnight it commonly was when they 
separated: and then Count Cassius would 
sit down and write a song for Cecilia before 



IDYLLIC HOURS. lO^* 

he went to bed. His was a restless spirit, 
despising sleep. His slumber was seldom 
profound, though always brief. Coleridge's 
stigma on a man who dreamed no dreams- 
. ^that therefore he could have no poetry in 
him . was wholly inapplicable to Count 
Grimani, who was a regular wayfarer in 
Dreamland. It was indeed his faith that 
dreams are divine : that faith he found in 
the most ancient books of all nations, in the 
Hiad as in Genesis. 

" We abdicate some of our chief faculties,'^ 
he was wont to say, " by listening to the 
voice of pure reason only. Reason is but 
one of the many spiritual powers which in 
combination make what we call the mind of 
man. There is conscience ; there is imagin- 
ation ; there is instinct. The pure reasoner 
silences his conscience, ignores imagination, 
loses instinct altogether. Our various facul- 
ties should be harmoniously developed. 



ilO PRANCES. 

What is sleep ? It is merely a pause of rest 
for the material part of man. The immortal 
spirit cannot sleep. It remains calm in its 
retreat, like the halcyon on the tranquil 
ocean. This is the very time when, un- 
diverted by outer things, with all the senses 
shut, and all the delicate apparatus of 
thought at perfect rest, the spirit can receive 
and retain a message from the Divinity." 

Cecilia was wont to listen wonderingly to 
these ontological lectures of the Count's, just 
as a few years before she had listened, with 
eyes wide open, to the marvellous stories of 
ghosts, goblins, and giants which her old 
nurse was never tired of relating. 

" But, Cassius," she urged, " when old 
Betty told me a tale of a giant that came 
out of the sea one Sunday morning, and put 
the parish-church with all the congregation 
into his pocket as a toy for his little daugh- 
ter, I used to dream about that. I used to 




IDYLLIC HOURS. Ill 

fancy I was in the big square pew in the 
gallery, with Papa leaning back and not 
hearing a word of the sermon, and the par- 
son prosing away in the same tone and say- 
ing the same things oyer again every Sun- 
day : and then all at once came a shake like 
an earthquake, and the church grew dark 
(in the giant's pocket, you know), and sud- 
denly it was set upright on a table in the 
giant's daughter's nursery, in an immense 
palace under the sea. And the wretch's 
hand came in at the church-door, as big as 
an elephant . and of course she took me out 
of my pew, though I screamed and fought 
. and I saw her great mouth like a red 
cavern, with teeth like tombstones . and 
just as I thought she would swallow me I 
awoke. That is the sort of dream I used to 
have . . . and I did not like it." 

Count Cassius laughed. 

*'That is not a true dream. Your old 



1 12 FRANCES. 

nurse had frightened you, and you had 
eaten too much supper." 

*' 0, Cassius I As if I ever did such a 
thing ! There was only one thing I ever 
cared for at supper-time, and that was a 
baked potato with plenty of butter in it. I 
am sure that is not unwholesome." 

"I should be very sorry to try it," he 
said. "The potato is not a tuber that I 
admire : and I wonder people who eat it 
every day can have any poetry left in them. 
It was not generall}^ known in Shakespeare's 
time, or he could not have painted Rosa- 
lind." 

" What nonsense !" she cried. " As if 
what people eat and drink had anything to 
do with their brains." 

" The Esquimaux, who live on the fat of 
whales, have never produced an Ariosto. 
That required grapes and melons and sun- 
shine." 



IDYLLIC HOURS. 113 

.' Sunshine !" she cried, clapping her 
hands : " now that is the end of it all. 
"Where the sun can ripen grapes it can ripen 
poets." 

"Then you give up Shakespeare and 
Milton r he said. 

" No : for di<i not you tell me they had 
both been in Italy ? I only know what you 
tell me about them. I never could read : it 
is tiresome. I don't think one's eyes were 
made to pore over printed books. I like 
to look at the sky and the grass and the 
water ; if I am to know any poetry, some- 
body must say or sing it to me. What a 
pity wandering troubadours don't come round 
now, as you say they used to do, and bring 
a new poem every time. Instead of this, 
there is that dreary TimeSj wliich everybody 
thinks it necessary to read right through, 
from beginning to end. And as if that was 
not enough, there are some dreadful people 

VOL. in. I 



114 FRANCES. 

who insist on telling you what is in it . all 
about kings and emperors one knows no- 
thing about, or railway accidents, or people 
who break all the Commandments, or, worst 
of all, somebody called Gladstone, who ap- 
pears to be always doing such wicked things 
that I wonder he has not been hanged long 
ago. If one gets nothing better than all 
that by reading newspapers, I am sure I 
would much rather never see one." 

" I am quite of your opinion," said Count 
Cassius : and he thought, moreover, what a 
delight it would be to take Cecilia to one 
of his Italian villas, and forbid all letters 
and journals, and forget the world. 



115 



CHAPTER V. 

HYACINTH BULBS. 

^^ Immortal gardens of the island King, 
Set in bright aether of the Odyssey, 
With bloom and fruitage on the self-same tree, 
Scaturient fountains always murmuring 

Through odorous cyclamen and hyacinth, 
While roses flush around the marble palace-plinth." 

TTTALTER CAREY'S telegram startled 
^ ^ Frances. It was so unlike her bro- 
ther's usual practice to fill the house with 
guests at so short a notice ; but certainly 
Walter was greatly changed since his ac- 
quaintance with Lavington had taken him 
so much to London^ But this was a trifle ; 

i2 



116 FRANCES. 

the resources of Carey Farm were consider- 
able, and there were good tradesmen at 
Chessington. What startled her most was 
the mention of two American gentlemen. 
It took her breath away. They could scarce- 
ly be anyone except Hercules Lyon and his 
strange companion. And Hugh Roland was 
here to meet and expose this man, and thus 
recover his place in society. It was a de- 
lightful thought. She could scarcely con- 
tain herself while she gave Rachel the 
necessary directions about dinner and bed. 

" It's very ill-considerate of Mr. Walter 
to give you all this trouble so sudden, Miss 
Frances. But the men are poor creatures ; 
they expect to get fish out of the well, and 
think pheasants grow on apple-trees. I 
hope you found Mr. Roland comfortable, 
Miss," she added, in a whisper. 

" yes. He says you mustn't feed him 
too often, for fear of suspicion. Now you 



HYACINTH BULBS. 117 

will see to the dinner, Rachel, won't you ? 
I have a great deal to do." 

Frances took her garden-gloves and 
basket, and walked in her usual way to her 
workshop. She would have done the very 
same thing if Hugh had not been there, for 
she was just on the point of planting hya- 
cinths and tulips and crocuses, and her 
fresh bulbs had arrived within a day or two. 

She felt it odd that she could not do with 

« 

ease to-day what she would have done 
without a thought yesterday, just because 
she was conscious of Hugh in hiding there. 
However, she tripped up the steps, and un- 
locked the door, and was in her lover's 
presence. When the door closed behind 
her, they could not see each other very 
well. The loft had two windows, a sky- 
light and a small casement looking over the 
farmyard ; and as they were never cleaned, 



118 FBANCES. 

the light struggled through them with diffi- 
culty. 

" So you are come to arrange your 
bulbs/' said Hugh, springing from his couch 
of straw to welcome her. "I hope they 
will take a very long time." 

" 0, indeed they won't. Now don't be 
troublesome, Hugh ; I have something tre- 
mendously important to tell you. Walter 
has just telegraphed to say that he is going 
to bring four people down to dinner . 
Lavington, Captain Heath, and two Ameri- 
can gentlemen. Those American gentlemen 
must be Lyon and his friend." 

" I see it ! I see it !" cried Hugh. " This 
is glorious. What time do they come? I 
must be there to meet them. How lucky I 
came down !" 

" Don't be so excited, Hugh. You really 
must not rush out upon them first thing. 
Mr. Shirley ought to be here : I am quite 



HYACINTH BULBS. 119 

sure he would say so if we could ask him. 
Besides, suppose this man should not be 
Heath after all." 

" Not ! I know he is. I can't wait for 
Shirley. He will be a year coming. He is 
a good old boy, but terribly slow." 

" You must wait, Hugh. I shall quarrel 
with you if you don't consent. You say 
you know it is Heath : but how is it his 
father does not recognise him ?" 

" Perhaps he does," said Hugh. 

" Well, my brother, then. He is sharp, 
you know. He found you out easily enough. 
How can this man contrive to deceive him ?" 

" My dearest Frances, I don't know," said 
Hugh, impatiently. " I only know he is 
the scoundrel who did his best to get me 
hanged, just that he might get out of the 
country and escape paying his debts. He is 
as bad as a murderer. He shall not escape 
me now." 



120 FRANCES. 

" Hugh, Hugh, don't be so fierce. If this 
had never happened, we might never have 
known how much we love each other. 
Come, be a good boy, and do the first thing 
I have ever asked you. Mr. Shirley will be 
sure to come down the moment he gets my 
letter." 

"Well, I suppose you must have your 
way," said Hugh Roland, with great re- 
luctance. "But think, Frances, what it is 
to have my mortal enemy within reach, and 
not to be allowed to go near him. It's too 
much for flesh and blood : my fist tingles to 
be at him." 

" You'll do nothing of the kind, sir," said 
Frances. "You'll wait for Mr. Shirley. 
Come, I will go and write the letter at 
once, and then I'll return to my bulbs." 

When she was gone, Hugh Roland wildly 
walked up and down the loft, cursing his 
fate that he could not get at his enemy. 



HYACINTH BULBS. 121 

Frances meanwhile, in her own private 
room, was writing to Mr. Shirley. This was 
her letter : . 

" Dear Mr. Shirley, 

" I have such news to tell you, 
Hugh Roland is here, hidden in a loft : he 
came last night, for the detectives nearly 
caught him [in London. And this morning 
I have a telegram from my brother, that he 
is coming home to dinner, with Captain 
Heath, Mr. Lavington, and two Americans. 
These must be Lyon and that other man, I 
suppose : but if Lyon is Heath, as Hugh 
thinks, and as I think from his writing, 
would he dare to travel with the Captain 
and Walter ? You know how soon Walter 
found out Hugh. Dear Cecilia has that 
wicked letter Lyon wrote to her: I am 
going to ask her for it, in case it should be 
of any use. 



122 FRANCES. 

"Do, do come down at once. Hugh is so 
wild that he wants to fly at Lyon the 
moment he enters the house. I have such 
hard work to quiet him : but he has pro- 
mised to wait till you come : and I think he 
will keep his promise if you come very soon. 

" F. C." 

Having written this letter, and a note to 
Cecilia, and gone through various parts of 
the establishment to see that the prepara- 
tions for her visitors were in fair progress, 
Frances thought she might go on sorting 
her bulbs. Never I think did any lady find 
hyacinths so intractable. Some mischievous 
imps seem to have affected the bulbs : they 
would not be sorted. Perhaps the presence 
of Hugh Roland had something to do 
with it. 

" How I always admired your hyacinths, 

Frances ! Such lovely circles of colour on 



HYACINTH BULBS. 123^ 

the lawn ; and when the south wind blew I 
could smell them half a mile off as I came 
across the valley. Will they be as beautiful 
next Spring, I wonder? We shall look at 
them together then, and remember thia 
morning in the loft." 

*'How do you know we shall look at 
them together ?" she asked. " You seem to 
see a long way forward. There may be an 

. 

ocean between us by that time." 

'' An ocean of love," he said. " To that 
I have no objection, for it can be packed 
into a space as small as a lady's heart." 

Thus they blew bubbles gaily, and awaits 
ed events. Frances was nervous ; she could 
not help dwelling on the possibility that 
their toil might be in vain . that after all 
Stephen Heath might not be identical with 
Hercules Lyon. In this case Hugh would 
be in worse plight then ever. The idea of 
his being tried again for his life, which in 



124 FRANCES. 

her ignorance of law she thought might 
iave to happen, made her quite miserable. 
But Roland cheered her ; Roland was as gay 
-and joyous at the thought of coming to a 
triumphant end of his trouble, as if he had 
been Roland, pefer of Charlemagne, going 
forth to put the heathen to flight. 

Alas, October afternoons grow dark . so 
.dark the fairest eyes cannot tell a hyacinth 
from a crocus. Juliet had to leave Romeo 
in his straw, and dress for dinner, and be 
.civil to his arch-enemy, Tybalt with the 
jellow hair. So they parted. And by the 
time our Frances had seen that all was as it 
should be ; that beds were well aired . be 
sure she put Lyon in the least comfortable 
room ; that cook had made a good sauce for 
<5rantley Berkeley's pintails; that Rachel, 
who was always butler (and given to be 
economical) had put enough wine in readi- 
ness ; there was not much more than twenty 



HYACINTH BULBS. 125^ 

minutes to dress for dinner. Walter had a 
selfish pride in his sister, as being to some 
extent his property, and a handsome credit- 
able possession ; and she knew that when he 
telegraphed . Let everything he first-rate . he 
thought of her as well as of the dinner and 
wine. 

So she dressed, putting on some of her 
choicest " war-paint," and arranging autumn- 
al berries and ruddy leaves in her abundant 
brown hair. And she had hardly got 
downstairs when she heard wheels on the 
gravel, and the party arrived. Rachel acted 
as groom of the chambers, and they all 
went off to dress, Walter Carey whisper- 
ing to his sister : 

"You look quite charming, Frances. 
Everybody will be in love with you." 

The notion had got into Walter Carey's 
head that Lavington would make a good 
husband for Frances. Wyldote Lavington, 



J 



126 FRANCES. 

M.P., with a house in Prince's Gate, and 
^n estate in Bucks, with a theatre, a yacht, 
ti racing stud, a newspaper, and many other 
possessions, seemed a great man to Walter 
Carey ; it did not occur to him that there was 
anything hollow in all this. He thought his 
sister Frances, with all her style and clever- 
ness, would make a capital wife for this 
brilliant man about town. 

At dinner Frances had Hercules Lyon on 
her left, and Captain Heath on her right ; 
next to the Captain was Major Washington 
F. Butts, next Lyon was Lavington. . It was 
a gay dinner, well served and merrily eaten. 
Lavington was quite the most charming of 
conversers, having an easy brilliancy only 
attainable by inborn wit, well cultivated by 
social usage. Captain Heath was chivalrous- 
ly polite to Frances, so that her opinion of him 
had been greatly raised by the time dinner 
was over. 



HYACINTH BULBS. 127 

Whenever she had a chance, Frances look- 
ed carefully at Hercules Lyon. That distin- 
guished gentleman talked very little, and 
seemed to eat with a very poor appetite, but 
she noticed that he drank a great deal. Was 
he Stephen Heath ? She could not decide. 
There was a general likeness ; but there were 
differences. The yellow hair gave the whole 
face so different an aspect that she wondered 
how Hugh Roland could seem so certain. 
Then the voice differed . it was rough, raspy, 
choked in the throat; whereas Stephen 
Heath had a voice that sounded musical in 
all its intonations . one of those fine natural 
voices that make their possessors Archbishops 
and Lord Chief Justices. This puzzled 
Frances more than anything. She did not 
of course know anything of the advance of 
science in the United States, and was un- 
aware that gargles have been invented to 
alter the voice just as washes change the 



. 



128 FRANCES. 

colour of the hair. There seems no limit 
to the inventive power of the Great Republic. 
The patentee of the Gargarismus Ghriosus 
maintains that the commonest female voice 
can, by constant doses, be raised to the tim- 
bre of a Lind or a Patti. Unfortunately all 
that is advertised concerning patent medicines 
is not invariably accurate. 

"You have a charming place here," said 
Lavington to Carey. " I like these snug 
old-fashioned houses. To my intense dis- 
gust, my un9le, from whom I inherit my 
place in Bucks, pulled down a dear old- 
fashioned place, with plenty of ghosts and no 
draughts, that I remember when I was a 
boy, and built a modern mansion. It is so 
fine as to be mentioned in Murray's hand- 
book, but I don't care if I never see it again. 
There is a windy picture-gallery full of hide- 
ous Paul Potters and Ostades and Tenierses ; 
but there isn't a cosy bedroom in the house, 



HYACINTH BULBS. 129 

or a parlour where you can enjoy a game of 
whist or a bowl of punch. Now this place 
of yours, Carey, so far as I have seen it, 
seems quite in the old style ; massive walls, 
and snug panelled rooms, and no sacrifice of 
comfort to show. I suppose it is an old 
family house." 

"Yes," said Walter Carey, "but not of 
our family. My father bought it from the 
administrators of estates belonging to people 
called Kenyon ; the family terminated in the 
person of an old maid, and the property was 
cut up small among a number of collateral 
relations. There are a few old books and 
pictures here that belonged to the Kenyons ; 
my sister can show them to you whenever 
you like ; she knows more of such things 
than I do." 

" I will ask you presently, Miss Carey/* 
said Lavington to Frances, who, though 
Captain Heath was unusually voluble, caught 

VOL. in. K 



130 FRANCES. 

fragments of other conversation. " I am 
rather curious about the Kenyon family, for 
my mother was a Kenyon." 

"There may be no relationship," said 
.Captain Heath. " Kenyon is not an unusual 
name. I remember the Miss Kenyon who 
was last of the race here . a tall thin gaunt 
old lady, who wore a dress much too short 
for her, and was followed about by a tame 
raven, like Barnaby Rudge. The people 
About her thought that bird was a demon. 
He certainly had a great gift of conversation. 
When I was a boy, I threw a stone at him 
once ; and he croaked out . ' Boy, revere 
your elders.' After that, I asked Miss 
Kenyon, who was always very kind to me, 
how old he was ; and she said her father 
had bought him when he was quite a young 
man. Now her father was eighty when he 
died . and at his death Miss Kenyon, who 
was the youngest of the family and outlived 



HYACINTH BULBS. 181 

them all, was certainly not of age. So, if 
the tradition is correct, that raven was an 
ancient bird." 

" What became of him ?" asked Frances. 

^^That is the oddest part of it. He was 
never seen after his mistress's death. The 
villagers, to whom Miss Kenyon had always 
been generous, declared with characteristic 
gratitude that he was a devil, and had car- 
ried her soul away. The raven vanished : 
that is certain." 

*' Ravens are very curious birds," said 
Major Washington F. Butts, in a voice not 
altogether unlike a raven's croak. *^ Old 
Judge Loughed of our town had a bird that 
belonged to his grandmother, and his grand- 
mother said she had a certificate saying he 
was a hundred years old when she bought 
him, which was about the time she cut her 
wisdom-teeth. She left him to the Judge, 
who was her favourite grandson, and luckily 

k2 



i 



132 FRANCES. 

ehe left hiin a lot of better property than 
that, but there was a hundred dollars a 
year charged on the estate for the raven. 
Well, the Judge married four times, and 
people used to call him Bluebeard, and cer- 
tainly his first three had a hard time of it. 
But his fourth, who had a little money and 
a good deal of voice, used to make the 
Judge wish he hadn't been quite so matri- 
monial. She used to talk him down worse 
than he ever talked down any poor criminal^ 
and the old raven used to put his knowing 
head on one side and say, ' He's not so 
good a judge as he was.' They say she 
watched her opportunity, and twisted that 
raven's neck . ^but for the credit of human 
nature I hope it's not true." 

" American ravens are always cleverer 
than English ones," said Lavington ; " and 
I am not sure the superiority is confined to 
ravens. Everything is on a grand scale 



HYACINTH BULBS. 133 

with you, Major, from the rivers and moun- 
tains to the numerous devices of humanity. 
I suppose New York will be bigger than 
London some day." 

" Yes," said Captain Heath, " and San 
Francisco than New York. That's the city 
of the future . the city that will connect Asia 
with America." 

^* I don't know about that," said Walter 
Carey. *' So far as I can see, the Americans 
have not yet got many new ideas. How if 
the old ideas should prove the strongest, 
after all ? I remember my father used to 
predict a great revolution when China and 
Japan opened out upon the world. The 
Chinese are not a great race, but look at 
their numbers." 

"They're a poor lot," said the Major, 
" but there are a good many of them, and 
they're uncommon cunning. Any Chinaman 
I ever saw would take in a Jew. There's 



134 PRANCES. 

nothing they can't do, if they're shown the 
way, and they steal beautifully. They've 
slow consciences and quick fingers." 

"A fine race," said Lavington. '^We 
should appreciate them in the City. What 
a pity they don't find their way to London 
faster ! Our people have exhausted all the 
best European methods of swindling and 
forgery ; you might bring out a good ori- 
ginal Chinese rascality with a joint-stock 
company, limited. Really, we want some- 
thing fresh in the way of swindling. The 
Stock Exchange is slow/' 

" You are jesting, of course," said Major 
Washington F. Butts ; " but really, Laving- 
ton, I don't think we ought to jest on so 
serious a subject. In all cities there are 
black sheep, but in a city like London sound 
finance is the rule, I am sure." 

" 0, of course," said Walter Carey. " But 



HYACINTH BULBS. 13*5 

I don't see why we should talk finance . da 
you, Lyon ?" 

The Honourable Hercules had been verjr 
quiet, and Carey thought he would wake 
him up. 

" Certainly not," he said. " In the pres- 
ence of a lady, the subject should by no- 
means be mentioned. After all, money ia 
merely a means to an end, and people who 
are always trying to get a great deal of it 
become its slaves." 

" By Jove ! Lyon," said Lavington, " you 
are more philosophical than I ever knew 
you. It is the bright, fresh atmosphere of 
Carey Farm that does it, and the happy 
influence of Miss Carey. If you remained a 
couple of years in England, it is my belief 
you would get two uncommonly good 
things." 

'' What are they ?" asked Carey. " What 
do you think our friend wants ?" 



136 FRANCES. 

" Common sense and a good wife. They 
say neither of those two plants will grow in 
the States," said Lavington. 

"I don't see how you are to get one 
without the other," said Captain Heath. " It 
appears to me there is very little common 
tsense among men* If I want true wisdom, 
I go to a lady for it," h^ went on, with a 
half-bow to Frances* " What do you think, 
Mr. Lyon?" 

" My experience of ladies is very small," 
said that gentleman. "If they are not a 
great deal wiser than men are, they are very 
foolish creatures indeed." 

" You are a cynic," said the Captain. 

" Can these two people," thought Frances, 
*' be father and son ? It is absurd. Hugh 
must be mistaken. If that man were Stephen, 
his father mitst find him out." 

As she thought thus, she happened to 
look at little Boyd, who stood behind his 



HYACINTH BULBS. 137 

master's chair : and on Boyd's countenance 
there was an expression which made Frances 
fancy he was not altogether unintelligent as 
to the course of events. It appeared to her 
that the Irishman was a little puzzled by 
something or other. A similar expression 
of countenance she noticed with Rachel, 
who was in and out of the room at inter- 
vals. Rachel was not accustomed to wait 
at table : but this was a break into the quiet 
habits of Carey Farm, and she deemed it 
her duty to look after the parlour-maid, 
who was not a remarkably clever young 
person. Frances felt quite certain that 
Rachel and Boyd were exchanging signifi- 
cant looks. She wondered whether it meant 
what she hoped it meant. 

Suddenly the Honourable Hercules Lyon 
said, in that harsh grating voice of his 
which differed from Stephen Heath's so 
widely : 



138 FRANCES. 

"Lavington, your idea about coramon 
sense and a good wife is all very well, but 
they don't mix any more than oil and 
water. Now, suppose you were married. 
You'd want your good wife to believe you 
were out on important business when you 
were flirting with actresses at the Bagatelle,. 
or losing hundreds to Heath at ^cart^. If 
she was your model good wife she'd believe 
it ; but then she wouldn't show much com- 
mon sense." 

" Ha," said Lavington, *' I see what you 
want in a wife . prettiness and money, and 
as little brain as possible. It is a very good 
investment. I am sorry to say that most of 
our pretty girls in London have neither 
money nor brains. Now here am I, a. well- 
preserved bachelor, with a very few grey 
hairs in my whiskers, and a place in the 
country, and a theatre in the West-end, and 
an office in the City, and nobody makes 



HYACINTH BULBS. 13^ 

any proposals. Am I not wasted on an 
Tinappreciative generation of ladies ?" 

" You had better advertise in the MatrU 
monidl News^ Lavington," said Walter Carey^ 
"if things are growing so very serious. 
For my part, if I wanted a wife, I should 
not wait for a lady to ask me." 

^'Yet that," remarked Captain Heathy 
"seems quite the fashion in these times. 
It is always Leap Year. The old chivalrous 
way of addressing women is gone out of 
fashion. A good-looking fellow with an in- 
dependent income considers it the woman's 
duty to make love to him . . . and they da 
that duty most religiously." 

" Not all of them, I hope. Captain Heath," 
said Frances. 

" Not all, certainly. Miss Carey," he re- 
plied. "There are some ladies among us 
still, and I hope a few gentlemen. But with 
the majority the game of matrimony is like 



140 PRANCES. 

a game of cards. Who leads wins, if the 
players are equal: and the ladies like to 
lead." 

"Heath drags in his favourite game 
whenever there's a chance," said Lavington. 
^* However, it's quite true that there's rather 
a free-and-easy way of dealing with what 
used to be thought serious business in times 
gone by» I suppose it does not matter: 
husbands and wives are much what they 
have been since the days of Adam and Eve." 

*'The Divorce Court is a recent inven- 
tion," said Carey. 

At this point Frances rose, and Captain 
Heath opened the door for her. 

"We don't get claret like yours every 
day, Carey," said Lavington, luxuriously 
inhaling the bouquet of a goblet of Lafitte, 
whose very colour was to the gourmet an 
immediate index of its worth. " Since the 
cheap clarets came in, what a frightful 



HYACINTH BULBS. 141 

amount of poison the Great British public 
has drunk ! When I go to people's houses 
now-a-days, I get such vile wash that nothing 
but my native courtesy prevents my asking 
them to let me have a glass of their serv- 
ants' table-beer." 

** If one could only be sure of malt and 
hops, ale is the thing for Englishmen," said 
Walter. " I brew my own : when you are 
tired of the claret, I'll ring for a tankard. 
I've some ten years old." 

"To-morrow, my friend, to-morrow. 
With such ale would I begin the day : with 
such claret would I end it." 

"Good policy," said Captain Heath. 
" And now, I think, Mr. Carey, I will leave 
you youths to your wine, and ask Miss 
Carey to give me a cup of coffee. We shall 
meet again." 

The Captain went to the drawing-room, 
slightly surprising Frances by entering alone 



142 FRANCES. 

She had Rachel with her, and their conver- 
sation had been rather exciting. Rachel 
had been watching for her to leave the 
.dining-room, and joined her at once, laden, 
evidently, with momentous intelligence. 
When Rachel had clutched a great idea, 
that homely face of hers became poetic in 
its expression. It was a most garrulous 
countenance. Frances knew at once the 
character of anything Rachel had to say. 
On this occasion she was as thoroughly in 
earnest as the man who ** drew King Pri- 
am's curtain at the dead of night." 

"Why, Rachel, what's the matter?" 
asked Frances, when she entered the room. 
" You look bewildered." 

"Well, miss, and so I am. Though 
naturally magnanimous, there are things 
which require more extermination than I 
possess. Have you looked much, Miss 
Frances, at that gentleman with the carroty 




HYACINTH BULBS. 143 

hair, that calls himself Lyon . ^Liar, I think 
it ought to be." 

" 0, yes," said Frances, " I've looked at 
him. How could I help it, when he sat 
next me at dinner? He is an American 
gentleman : what have you to say about 

him r 

" 1 he's an American gentleman, is he ?" 
said Rachel. " I shouldn't have thought it. 
Begging your pardonj Miss Frances, I don't 
believe he's either an American or a gentle- 
man." 

*'What is he, then?" said Frances, very 
calmly, not wishing her servitress to discern 
her interest in the matter. 

" He's an Englishman and a villain, Miss 
Frances . that's what he is! I wouldn't 
believe it at first ; couldn't think he'd have 
the mendacity to sit where he did, and talk 
like he did. And I believe I should have 
thought I must be wrong if it hadn't been 



\ 



144 FRANCES. 

for Boyd: he's an infidel Irishman, you 
know, Miss Frances, but he's as sharp as a 
shilling razor. Boyd came to me in the 
passage, and whispered . . . 

*' * Who's that opposite the Captain ?' 

"Says I, 'An American gentleman, Lyon 
by name.' 

" * Not he,' says Boyd. * That's master's 
son Stephen : and how he can sit opposite 
to his own boy and not see, it is a miracle to 
me.' 

*' * A pack of nonsense !' said I ; but I 
knew it was true all the time ; and that's the 
mean wretch that has given Mr. Roland . 
dear young gentleman ! . all this trouble* 
0, I could tear his ugly carroted hair out 
by the roots, the wretch ! Now what's to 
be done. Miss Frances ?" 

"I have known this for some tii!ne, 
Rachel," said Frances ; " but I am very glad 
you have found it out, because it makes me 



HYACINTH BUIiBS. 145 

moye certain. I hope to-morrow to expose 
Stephen Heath, but I am waiting for Mr. 
Shirley. If you and Boyd agree with me, 
we must be right" 

"There isn't a doubt about it, Miss Fran- 
ces. Now I tell you what I shall do : I 
mean to keep a watch on that fellow, and 
see he doesn't run away. He's mean. If 
he thinks he's found out, he'll try to get 
away directly. He shan't do it." 

The conversation between Frances and 
Rachel was interrupted by the arrival of 
Captain Heath, who came into the room 
with quite an air of conquest, which Miss 
Carey did not notice. Rachel retreated. 
The Captain said, in quite a chivalrous 
way: 

" I hope I have not interrupted impor- 
tant business. These boys like to prolong 
their claret, and talk politics, or some such 
nonsense ; I am old enough to prefer a cup 

VOL. m. !. 



146 FRANCES. 

of coffee, and some conversation with a 
charming lady. I trust you will not think 
me very much in the way." 

**I am very glad to see you, Captain 
Heath," said Frances. " It is pleasant to find 
one gentleman who will not leave a lady in 
loneliness. You shall be rewarded with the 
best cup of Mocha that can be made, fresh 
roasted and fresh ground ; and, if you think 
it not altogether wrong, a drop of old co- 
gnac will improve it." 

To Captain Heath it occurred that Fran- 
ces was exactly the right sort of woman. 
He accepted coffee and cognac with alac- 
rity. It was promptly served, and elicited 
the Captain's serene approval. They talked 
in easy fashion. 

" You are the best ^cart^ player I ever 
met," said Captain Heath. " I had no idea 
a lady could play cards so well." 

**We play cards better than we play 
chess/' she said. '* Women have more luck 



HYACINTH BULBS. 147 

than men, and guess more cleverly. In a 
game like chess, which is sheer skill, a wo- 
man can no more reach the highest point 
than she can in mathematics." 

'' You seem to have thought a good deal 
on such matters." 

" Yes," she replied. " Women can think, 
if they can do nothing else. And there are 
«ome things in which we beat you men al- 
together. It is unfortunate that men and 
women seldom trust each other ; if they did 
«o thoroughly, the world would be altered. 
People talk of political and religious and 
social reforms : they will do no good ; what 
we want is a sexual reform." 

*' I fear you go beyond me. Miss Carey," 
said Captain Heath. " I belong to an earlier 
generation, and am not all scientific. So, 
though I admire a lady when I see one, I 
do not understand what you mean by sex- 
ual reform." 

l2 



148 FRANCES. 

*' It is simple enough," she said. " Men 
ought to know that women are in some 
things better that they, and women ought 
to know the same of men. But this is a dull 
metaphysical consideration. Let us be per- 
sonal. "What do you think, Captain Heath, 
of that young American gentleman with 
yellow hair who sat opposite you ?" 

"I don't know what to think of him," 
replied Captain Heath. " He is a strange 
specimen : but so, indeed, are most of the 
Americans who come to England, I hope 
you are not interested in him, Miss Heath, 
for I confess I don't like him." 

'* 0, I care nothing about him," she re- 
plied, thinking all the while how strange it 
w^ that Captain Heath, not recognizing his 
son, should feel an instinct of disgust towards 
him. 

"I should scarcely imagine it possible 
that you did," said fhe Captain. *'The 



HYACINTH BULBS. 149 

young Englishmen of these days are too 
often bad style ; they live too fast, and don't 
understand how to behave to ladies ; but the 
young Americans seem perfectly abomin- 
able. When I was as young as these fel* 
lows, society was quite another thing. Ah, 
those were great days." 

" You are in the prime of life still, Cap- 
tain Heath," said Frances, pleasantly. " I 
don't care much for boys myself. They 
think themselves very clever, and are gene- 
rally very dull." 

^'It is too true. Miss Carey: but the 
young ladies of the present day are not all 
so sensible and wise as you. It is delightful 
to meet a lady who has such just ideas of 
life, and such settled principles. You make 
me wish I could throw away ten years or 
so. The man whom you deign to accept 
will be truly fortunate." 

"Really, Captain Heath," said Frances, 



150 FRANCES. 

with something very like a blush, " you pay 
me too great a compliment. There are 
plenty of girls much wiser and nicer than I 
am. Papa taught me many things that girls 
don't often learn : but after all I have always 
lived a country life, and so nobody has any 
right to expect me to be more than a country 
girl. They would think me a very rough 
sort of creature in a London drawing-room.'* 

" You would adorn the drawing-room of 
Royalty, Miss Carey. I never pay compli- 
ments : I never flatter : I hope you won't 
be angry with me for telling you the simple 
truth about yourself." 

" Angry ? d^ar, no ! The simple 
truth is that I am exactly like any other 
girl who has lived in a village all her life. 
How long the gentlemen are over their 
wme 1 

"Does that mean that you are getting 
tired of me?" asked Captain Heath. "I 



HYACINTH BULBS. 151 

fear I am very tiresome to a lively young lady 
like you." 

'' 0, Captain Heath, how can you say so ? 
Ah, they are moving now. I hear the dogs 
barking, and voices in the garden. I sup- 
pose the moonlight has tempted them out." 

" I wish they would stay in the moon- 
light," said the Captain. " When they come 
in, my pleasant talk with you will be at an 
end. Confound all boys, I say." 

" He is a very delightful elderly gentle- 
man," thought Frances. 



152 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE SCENE OF THE MURDER. 

Alouette. . ^Father, you surely never knew a murderer. 

ASTROLOGOS. . ^My child, most of our dearest friends are 

murderers : 
They murder time and life and wit and oddity, 
They murder God in Sabbaths hideous wearisome. 
They murder poetry by making prose of it. 
They murder love in fashionable marriages, 
They murder beauty through the odious milliners. 
They murder truth in the atrocious newspapers. 
My Alouette, your pretty pure lips flatter me. 
Can I name one friend who is not a murderer? 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

WHEN Captain Heath had followed 
Miss Carey to the drawing-room, 
the gentlemen who were left behind made 
the claret-jug pass rapidly. There was a 
little mild jocosity about the Captain. 



THE SCENE OF THE MURDER. 153 

" The old boy hath a great admiration for 
your sister, Carey," said Lavington. " He 
shows excellent judgment, but Miss Carey 
was not meant to be thrown away on an 
elderly gentleman. It is an impertinence, 
Walter, to talk of your sister : but forgive 
me for saying she is the most perfect woman 
I ever saw." 

It was a curious symptom of Walter 
Carey's inferior nature that he had a jealous 
feeling when anyone spoke well of Frances. 
Always had he been jealous of her. His 
father had made her more his friend. 
Everybody saw something in her which 
Walter, for the life of him, could not see. 
Kin are not always wise enough to be kind. 
The position of a man whose sister is intel- 
lectually his superior, and thus of necessity 
unintelligible to him, is rather difficult. I 
am quite aware that the male sex is apt to 
regard the female sex as intensely inferior ; 



154 FRA.NCES. 

but I look upon the great Feminine Revolt 
as a thing to be encouraged. Let the Battle 
of Sex be fought out. Both men and wo- 
men want to be taught their position in life ; 
both men and women must learn the great 
truth that one without the other is abso- 
lutely incomplete. 

" Well," said Walter Carey, " I dare say 
you are right, Lavington ; but I really can- 
not understand your fancy for a pretty girl. 
I have renounced these follies of one's 
youth . ^I mean to remain a bachelor." 

"It is only too likely that I also shall 
remain a bachelor," said Lavington. " Cir- 
cumstance is too strong for a man when he 
has been making a fool of himself all his 
life. But I tell you what it is, Carey, you 
may laugh, if you like, for we are all too 
apt to laugh when we ought to think . but 
when I come into the presence of a lady 
like your sister, I cannot help thinking what 



THE SCENE OF THE MURDER. 155^ 

fools we all are. The beauty of life . the- 
poetry of life . ^belongs to woman." 

" You are quite ready to marry, I should 
think," said Major Washington F. Butts. 
" There are lots of women who would be^ 
delighted to accept you at once." 

"I shouldn't care for such acceptances. 
Major ; they might be dishonourable," said 
Lavington. "I see now the meaning of 
the ancient fable about throwing pearls- 
before swine." 

" Which way do you read the fable ?'^ 
asked Carey. 

" No matter," replied Lavington. " I 
know a pearl when I see one, even if I 
have not courage to pick it up. I begin to- 
think that in the modern rapid movement 
. of life we make great mistakes. You, Carey,, 
for instance . why the devil should yoib 
come to London and waste your time with, 
fools of both sexes . ^fools who are also- 



1 56 FRANCES. 

knaves? Here you have a delightful 
place, a charming companion in Miss Carey, 
^ fine library.what can you want more ? 
You never go to London for a day without 
coming back with an unpleasant taste in 
your mouth." 

"Major," said Carey to Butts, " do you 
observe how well Lavington can preach 
when he tries ? When he is tired of Par- 
liament and the Bagatelle, we shall hear 
him in the pulpit." 

" He will make a sensation," replied the 
Major. " He will disestablish the devil. 
By the waj", Mr. Carey, talking of the devil, 
wasn't it here you had a murder about a 
year ago, and wasn't it Heath's son that 
was murdered, and didn't the murderer 
escape or something? That'j? the sort of 
thing that makes a man believe there micst 
be a devil." 

But Major Washington F. Butts had per- 



THE SCENE OF THE MURDER. 157 

sonal reasons for that belief which he did 
not mention. 

" The murder took place in my grounds," 
said Carey, " and the murderer, who escaped 
from the Asylum, has been at large, but, I 
expect, is already captured . indeed, it was 
I who found him, disguised as a railway- 
guard, when I jumped into the van in a 
hurry to tell Heath of his house being burnt. 
It was that kept me in town, but the police 
are on his track now. Would you like to 
go and see the place ? - It will cool us after 
the wine : there is beautiful moonlight." 

"Admirable idea 1" said the Major. " I 
should like to see the place exceedingly. 
Come along, Lyon." 

" Hardly worth while," said that gentle- 
man, in a languid croak. " If you want to 
see the scene of a murder, commit one 
yourself, like a gentleman." 

" 0, nonsense I Come along. It is a 



158 FRANCES. 

Oovely night, just the brilliant moonlight for 
a tragedy." 

"Ay," said Lavington. "There, Major, 
you speak well and poetically. Give me 
moonlight for tragedy or comedy . to fight 
a rival or to kiss a lady. Moonlight ! 
Why, it's the very essence of adventure. 
By moonlight the serenaders sing and the 
rapier flashes. By all means let us sally 
forth and see this scene of murder by moon- 
light." 

They went. The dogs barked as the 
dining-room windows were thrown open: 
then it was that Frances heard them. 
Down to that lovely lawn, where Frances 
one fair morning had been horror-stricken 
by what seemed undoubted traces of mur- 
der, the party went. Walter Carey consti- 
tuted himself showman for the occasion. 

" Heath," he said, " was not a bad fellow, 
though perhaps rather a cad. The other 



THE SCENE OF THE MURDER. 159 

man, Roland, was rather cracked, I fancy, 
but I did not think he would commit a 
murder. That he did there's no doubt. 
He and Heath had been quarreling: he's 
an awfully strong fellow : and when I saw 
Heath's watch smashed to fragments just 
here, and patches of his coat trodden into 
the grass, and his letters, and a broken 
pistol with hair on it, I knew what must 
have happened." 

Major Wasliington F. Butts, who had 
been listening with interest to this little 
lecture, was at the same time observant ; 
and he noticed that, while Carey was talk- 
ing, there was on the countenance of the 
Honourable Hercules Lyon a curious affright- 
ed expression. The Major, like most Ameri- 
cans, had a faculty for jumping to conclu- 
sions : he did so on this occasion. 

It was past midnight. Hugh Roland had 
emerged from his lair in the loft, and was 



160 FBANCES. 

roaming, as wildly as Bisclaveret, when he 
heard the familiar pleasant sound of dogs 
barking. A dog's voice m agnetizes. * ' Love 
me, love my dog," says a cynical old adage. 
Friend, if thou hast a dog, and lovest him 
thyself, thou probably art worth loving. 
Hugh Roland of course concluded that 
some one had come out of Carey Farm for 
an after-dinner stroll. He hoped it might 
be Frances, whose independent mode of 
action he knew full well. He followed the 
sound, in the shade of the great trees, and 
saw Carey and Lavington and the two 
Americans passing down to the river-side. 
He placed himself in the deepest depth of 
shadow and watched them, and listened to 
their talk. 

" So this is the place," said Major Wash- 
ington F. Butts. " It is a lovely corner for 
a murder : nobody would be likely to inter- 
rupt the gentleman engaged in the business. 



THE SCENE OF THE MURDER. 161 

Whoever selected it was a real artist, and 
would be appreciated in New York, where 
art of all kinds is properly estimated. We 
don't hang our murderers, you know, Mr. 
Carey, if they do things in a unique way : 
they get a few months in prison, where 
they are supplied with dinners from Del- 
monico's and interviewed by newspaper edit- 
ors, and then they get out and marry some- 
body with money and run for Congress I" 

" It strikes me," said Carey, " that we 
are nearly as bad. A fellow gets let off by 
shamming illness, and has a comfortableT 
lazy life at the public expense in an Asylum, 
and, if he manages to escape, nobody takes 
the trouble to look after him. It's a con- 
founded shame ! I have very strong opin- 
ions on the matter : and I tell you what it 
is, Lavington, you ought to question the 
Home Secretary about it when Parliament 
meets." 

VOL. m. M 



162 FRANCES. 

" I will," said Lavington. " I can impale 
our dull friend . you know the Home Secre- 
tary is always the dullest fellow in the min- 
istry . on the horns of a dilemma. Either 
this murderer of yours is mad or sane ; if 
«ane, he ought never to have been sent to 
the Asylum ; if mad, he never ought to have 
got out of it." 

"Yes," said Carey, "that's the right way 
to put it. It seriously is no joke that a man 
should be loose who, whether mad or sane, 
is at any rate capable of homicide . probably 
of other crimes. I have no feeling about 
this man ; he was an acquaintance of mine . 
I may say a friend : but human life is sacred, 
and I can forgive no man who violates it." 

Little thought Walter Carey that the man 
of whom he thus spoke was close at hand . 
within hearing, almost within reach of him. 
There stood Hugh Roland, leaning against 
the trunk of a great oak tree, amply conceal- 



THE SCENE OP THE MURDER. 163 

ed by its heavy branches, hidden by a dark- 
ness more intense for the radiant moonlight 
flooding that fatal glade to the river. He 
felt now so confident of an end to his trou- 
ble that he did not wince at any word of 
Walter's. He was glad . to hear Walter 
Carey speak in such a way as to show it was 
the crime he detested, not the criminal. He 
wished to feel friendly toward his sweet- 
heart's brother. Had he not promised 
Frances to wait, he would have come out 
into the light of the full moon, and taken 
Hercules Lyon by the collar, and cried . . . 

*' Scoundrel, you are Stephen Heath. 
Confess, this instant." 

But a promise to Frances was as sacred as 
the Vow of the Peacock : he curbed his fierce 
impetuosity of temper, and quietly listened. 
He heard but little more. The Major and 
Lyon were muttering something apart. Lav- 
ington and Carey lighted cigars, and strolled 

m2 



164 FRANCES. 

slowly back towards the house. In a few 
moments he heard the front door close be- 
hind them, and he was alone. 

" It will soon be over now," he thought. 
'* When I was a prisoner, and saw no chance 
of escape, I thought I was very badly treat- 
ed. Yes ; I sometimes felt rebellious against 
God. Now I am thankful for all this. I 
am stronger for having suffered, and my 
beautiful Frances has given me her love. I 
have no wish in the world, except that poor 
Heath may not get into too much trouble 
about me." 

When a man begins to pity his enemy, he 
is recovering his moral health. 

Our party went to the drawing-room for 
coffee, and Captain Heath's tete-h-tSte was 
over. Frances had just been telling him 
she had heard in the village he was engaged 
to the famous actress. Miss Clinton. Heath, 
though proud of being young enough to take 



THE SCENE OP THE MURDER. 165 

a pretty actress to Richmond, and lucky 
enough to be able to give her jewelry and 
bouquets, had certainly not dreamt of mar- 
rying the fair and flighty Ethel. No ; 
Frances would have been far more in his 
way. His talent and her tact would make 
a fine partnership. He really began to feel 
quite earnest about it, and wished more 
than ever that they would remain out in the 
moonlight, those wanderers. 

They had their coffee and tea. Lavington 
excited the Captain's jealousy by pertinacious 
attention to Frances. He lounged in a low 
chair close to her, and made commonplace 
remarks in a low tone, with an air of mys- 
tery. He talked a little London. Why 
did she not make her brother bring her to 
town ? The country was very pleasant in 
fine weather, but she ought not to vegetate 
in it entirely. 

" The country in October is far pleasanter 



166 7BANCES. 

than London," said Frances. " I like these 
changes of colour in the trees better than 
the frippery in shop-windows. I would 
rather hear a robin sing than the best opera- 
tic performer you can name. I look upon 
Londoii as the best place to buy things with 
your own money ; but in the country God 
gives you things you cannot buy." 

" You talk quite poetically, Miss Carey,'' 
said Lavington, coffee cup in hand. " Now^ 
do you know ? I am not joking, though I 
fear you'll think so, I adore poetry . though 
I've been forced to live upon prose all my 
life. Circumstance is too strong for some 
people. I am losing I don't know how 
many thousands a year by a theatre, and O 
how thankful I should be if somebody would 
burn it down! Now I get a little real 
poetry in talking to you ; and I shall go 
back to London refreshed . ^but at the same 
time disgusted because I see no chauce of 



THE SCENE OP THE MURDER. 167 

living a simple life like yours. Ah me, how 
true are the words of Burke ... * What 
shadows we are, and what shadows we 
pursue r Will you not sing me a song^ 
Miss Carey, to calm my perturbed spirit?" 

"Do you wish it, really?" 

" I do indeed. A touch of music will do 
us all good. Don't refuse." 

Frances did not. She rose and went to 
the piano, with Lavington and Captain 
Heath in close attendance. She sang : 

" Shadows we are. Our triumph and our trouble 
Pass like a dream, and we are passing too. 
Life is a fancy, glory is a bubble ; 

Shadows we are, and shadows we pursue. 

<' Sunlight has shadow, cool for those that wander ; 
Moonlight has shadow, safe for those that woo ; 
Ah, on what vanities our life we squander I 
Shadows we are, and shadows we pursue. 

" Yet, while ambition in despair is dying. 

Yet, while strong noon slopes slowly to the night, 
Love's diamond lamp will set the phamtoms flying. 
Love scorns all shadows, being perfect light.*' 



168 PBANCES. 

Soon after this song was over Frances 
retired, and the gentlemen adjourned to 
whiskey punch and whist. Captain Heath 
had his customary luck, and it seemed com- 
municable to his partner ; he and Lavington 
played against Carey and the Major, and 
the latter handed over a ponderous roll of 
crisp bank-notes to Lavington when the 
time of settlement came. I wish Lavington 
joy of those notes. Carey paid Captain 
Heath with a cheque. 



169 



CHAPTER VII. 

A LOVER IN A LOFT. 
" Vel duo vel nemo." 

THEY went to their whist, these four. 
Not Hercules Lyon ; he went to bed in 
a sulk. For Major Washington F. Butts 
had found opportunity to make him under- 
stand he had discovered who he was, and 
what game he was playing, whence he was 
more than ever in his power. Butts was 
within an ace of being murdered during 
that interview, though he little suspected it. 
Lyon was growing wild. Lyon would have 
killed that Mephistopheles of his with infinite 
delight. 



170 FRANCES. 

Frances went upstairs, and was joined in 
her room by Rachel. The loyal old 
servant was in a state of intense excitement^ 
and her words expanded to more syllables 
than ever. 

" What will you do, Miss Frances?" she 
said. " Of course you can see it's that dia- 
bominable young Heath. You'll take care 
he doesn't run the country, won't you ? 
He's slipperier than any eel." 

" He is, Rachel," said Frances, ** but we 
will take care he doesn't get away. It is 
most important, for Mr. Roland's sake. Do 
you think we can slip out while they are 
playing cards? I want just to tell him 
we are all quite certain. He will be so 
glad." 

**They won't know anything about it, 
miss. We can get out quite easy." 

Rachel was right. Under the cold bright 
moonlight Frances found her way to the 



A LOVER IN A LOFT. 1 71 

loft. Hugh was sitting placidly on the out- 
side step, smoking a cigar and studying 
astronomy. When he saw Frances he sprang^ 
forward and said : 

" You are kind. You have come to tell 
me you are satisfied that Lyon is Heath, I 
know. Am I right ?" 

"Yes, indeed. I feel quite sure. So* 
does Rachel." 

" They have been down looking at the- 
place where he is supposed to have been 
murdered," said Hugh. " I was close by 
them under that oak to the left. Some of 
them made jokes about it. Poor Stephea 
was as white as a sheet of paper, lips and 
all . whiter than the moonlight itself. I am 
beginning to pity him, my dear Frances. I 
really cannot help it. What a miserable 
creature he must feel, in that disguise, with 
that atrocious American, obliged to play a 
part in the presence of yourself, and your 



172 FRANCES. 

l)rother, and his own father. Poor wretch ! 
I keep thinking what will happen to him 
when the time of exposure comes. We 
were friends, you know, in a way, Frances, 
though he always thought me a fool, and I 
always knew he was one. I should like to 
let him off easily. When I was under the 
oak to-night, and Lavington was making his 
silly jokes, I thought what fun it would be to 
walk straight out, and collar Heath, and say, 
* T am Hugh Roland. You are Steplien Heath.^ 
I did not, because I had promised you, and 
I pitied him. I hope Mr. Shirley, when he 
.comes, will be able to suggest some way of 
^settling the affair without punishing Heath 
very much." 

" Punishment of some sort might do him 
good," said Frances. ^* Take your own case, 
Hugh. Haven't your troubles been of use 
to you ?" 

"By Jove, my darling, I should think 



A LOVER IN A LOKT. 173^ 

they have. Why, Tm twice the man I waa 
before they made me out a murderer and a 
madman. I've learnt to beat trouble. Fm 
afraid of nothing now, thanks to my own 
strength and your love. I had not the re- 
motest idea of my own natural power till all 
this happened. Now, whatever occurred ta 
me, I should be patient and hopeful. What 
seemed hideous misery has turned out the 
best of good fortune. Dear old Shirley ha& 
helped me. You have loved me. I have 
found out that there is work to be done in 
the world, and that I can do some of it* 
Though I am in hiding at this moment^ 
Frances, and shall have to sleep on straw, 
I swear there is not a happier man any- 
where under the rays of this lovely moon* 
I look forward to a happy future. You 
and I . . . well, it is too late to-night to 
build castles ... I shall dream of some 



174 FRANCES. 

-charming ch&teaux on my wisp of straw. 
Won't you dream too ?" 

Frances laughed. 

"0 yes," she said, "I will dream ... if 
I can. But I suppose to-morrow will bring 
reality, and an end of all this trouble.'' 

"The trouble is over, darling," said 
Hugh, pressing her hand, and looking into 
lier lovely eyes. " We love each other : is 
not that enough ?" 

" Quite enough," she said : " but I am so 
impatient for to-morrow, and for all this 
trouble and mystery to be over. Dear me ! 
I wonder what Walter will say." 

" / wonder what poor Captain Heath will 
Bay ?" replied Hugh Roland . " and I also 
wonder what poetical quotation dear old 
Shirley will find that is adequate to the 



occasion." 



"It will puzzle that illustrious poet of 
his," answered Frances, laughing. "And 



A LOVER IN A LOFT. 175 

now, Hugh, I must run away, or I may be 
missed. Good night: don't do anything 
rash.'' 

" No, I won't . unless it is rash to dream 
of you." 

A vision of her beautiful face in the 
moonlight haunted Hugh Roland on his 
straw all through that night. He slept but 
little ; he was approaching too nearly the 
time of his final triumph; yet the long 
hours were pleasant. A turret-clock on the 
stables of Carey Farm kept him acquainted 
with the lapse of time. He enjoyed its 
gradual passage, while the man who had 
caused his trouble might have cried with 
Faustus : 

" Gurrite, currite lente, noctis equi." 



176 



CHAPTER VIII. 

MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 

Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep ! 
The river gHdeth at his own sweet wiU. 

Wordsworth. 

QOMEWHERE about the time that 
^^ Frances and Hugh were holding this 
brief confabulation, three persons were out 
in the moonlight in a very different scene. 
They were standing on the Thames Em- 
bankment, looking at the silent stream. 
The moon was very bright, and made the 
edifices on the river banks look beautiful, 
silvering the sombre railway-bridges, making 



MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 177 

every wharf a mystery, turning the tall shot- 
towers into pillars of wonder, and glorifying 
the amorphous mass of Barry's Parliament- 

« 

ary palace. Three persons, for whom a 
brougham stood waiting : Sir Charles Wray, 
his lovely little daughter, and Count Cassius 
Grimani. 

How came they there ? Simply enough. 
There was a great book-sale at Sotheby's. 
A bibliomaniac banker had died, and his 
family at once sent his library for sale. It 
contained some unique books, which Sir 
Charles Wray coveted, so he resolved to go 
to London to buy. By a curious coinci- 
dence. Count Cassius had just heard from 
Italy that a marvellous violinist, Roderigo 
Vanni, had reached London, and was about 
to give to a select audience, at the residence 
in Park Lane of a ducal amateur, an example 
of his powers. Books drew the General to 
town, and music the Count ; and so Cecilia 

VOL. in. N 



178 FRANCES. 

had a brief dose of London, which she en- 
joyed intensely. 

Sir Charles stayed at the Clarendon. 
The book-sale was a serious business, and 
resulted in his writing rather a heavy cheque 
on Drummond's. Signor Vanni's perform- 
ance was in the evening, and was an amaz- 
ing success. Count Cassius and Cecilia were 
in ecstasies. The music given was all his 
own. In some string quartettes he had 
accomplished players of viola, violoncello, 
and double bass; but his own improvised 
solos were the most remarkable part of the 
entertainment. With Vanni the violin was 
a living creature. It rejoiced, it sang, it 
wailed, it wept, it made love, it execrated. 
There was passion in the strings . passion 
all but articulate. The "Songs without 
Words " of Mendelssohn may be interpreted 
in many ways to many hearers, but Vanni's 
wordless music had meaning unmistakeable. 



MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 179 

It was too much for Cecilia. The amazing 
melodies seemed to pierce her like a thia 
blade of steel. Before the performance was 
half over, she said to her father, 

"This is very beautiful, but I cannot bear 
it. Let me go, please." 

So they left, and tranquillized Cecilia's 
nerves by a moonlight drive through Lon- 
don. The homely beauty and massive 
power of the world's chief capital come out 
beneath the moon. Gradually the streets 
grow quiet: the crowds from theatre and 
music-hall pour forth and sup ; the lights of 
oyster-houses are extinguished ; the cabs 
are few and far between. Town goes to 
bed earlier now than when I knew it first ; 
we are growing moral and moderate ; still 
Pleasure is wide awake in clubs and draw- 
ing-rooms, and business is sleepless in a host 
of newspaper offices. Early enough too, there 
are those who wake. Billingsgate is alive 

N 2 



180 FRANCES. 

with the harvest of the sea ere the sun has 
long risen; multitudinous waggons, laden 
with the kindly fruits of the earth, crowd 
every avenue of Covent Garden before the 
editors of the morning papers have got into 
their first doze. The sleeplessness of a 
mighty city seems to me its most fascinating 
characteristic. Traverse London at what 
hour you will, never need you lack com- 
pany. 

These three stood silent, looking at the 
Thames, that glided with unconscious power» 
and mirrored the full moon. Sir Charles 
was the first to speak. 

"I wonder whether our great king, 
Alfred, stood here a thousand years ago, 
and had a vision of what his little town 
would become ? How difficult it is to bring 
back the past 1 London was a village then, 
and the Danes who besieged it were a hand- 
ful of half-barbarians, and yet it is quite 



MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 181 

clear that the statesman and soldier and 
poet Alfred gave. England its present great- 
ness. Nothing can be judged by mere mag- 
nitude. Xerxes could not do with a million 
men what Caesar could do with his tenth 
legion." 

"If it were possible to live in several 
great eras of the world, and to re- 
member and compare one's experiences, 
how delightful that would be ! I believe in 
metempsychosis. But the memory perishes, 
being a material faculty. What we want is 
a new method of memory. Instead of 
writing our records on the tablets of the 
brain, we ought to find some means of in- 
corporating them with the finer fibre of the 
soul. Then we might carry into another 
state anything worth reminiscence." 

Thus spake Count Cassius. Cecilia ex- 
claimed : 

" What a pity a river has no memory ! 



182 FRANCES. 

What a delightful story Thames could tell 
lis if it were gifted with speech ! Only 
think, Papa, this river knew Shakespeare, 
your favourite poet, and the Count's." 

" Not yours ?" said Sir Charles. 

" 0, I know nothing about him, Papa^ 
Count Cassius is my favourite poet." 

" Thank you," he said. " I shall go on 
rhyming after that encouragement. But if 
Thames has no memory, it has a fine crea- 
tive power, for nobody can deny that 
Thames created London. It is the greatest 
river in the world, having built the greatest 
city." 

"Ilissus and Tiber would quarrel with 
you on that point," said Sir Charles. 
" Seine would certainly brag of its Paris, 
and it is possible that Spree might be even 
more remonstrative. Then think of the 
indignant LifFey." 

" Papa, if you are going to talk geography, 



MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 185 

I shall rebel. I never could understand it- 
I had a dreadful governess once, Count Cas- 
sius, who made me draw maps; and, O 
dear ! you should have seen them when they 
were drawn ! . they used to look like bipf 
cobwebs, and the towns in them like spiders 
with more legs than usual." 

They drove back to the Clarendon, and 
Sir Charles and Cecilia went to bed : not 
Count Cassius, who was singularly sleepless. 
Partly it was this great London through 
which he had wandered ; partly it was the 
witchcraft of Vanni's brain-harassing melo- 
dies . . . melodies strangely stimulant 
through their daring newness ; partly it was 
Cecilia. He went out into the infinite street- 
labyrinth of London, wandering without 
definite purpose. 

" This is London," he thought, " the great 
work of the English race. There has never 
been such another city. The noblest life 



t 



184 PRANCES. 

and the vilest are close together here. It 
is a terrible friendly monster. The first 
Londoner you meet may knock you down 
and take your purse or invite you to dinner. 
How well Byron knew it ! 

' Damn your eyes ! your money or your life !' 

Byron was just like London; brutal, yet 
gentle; coarse, yet full of lovely poetry; 
selfish, yet generous. Yes: I take it that 
Shakespeare was like England, and Byron 
like London. Other rivers besides this im- 
perial and imperious stream traversed the 
large meadows and wide woodlands of 
Shakespeare's romance : country as well as 
city he understood, and the wood of Arden 
was dearer to him than Jack Falstaff's 
tavern. 

" Yes ; and here one sees where England 
is really so strong. Though its fierce politics 
and vast commerce make huge cities, yet 
the country is greater than these cities. 



MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 185 

There is the proprietor of the greatest 
newspaper in the world, a property worth 
one of our dukedoms, choosing to call him- 
self a quiet country gentleman. These 
English are like Antaeus ; they get strength 
from their mother Earth. London itself 
rushes into the country. It epibraces the 
country in its parks and squares." 

Thus did Count Cassius soliloquize. Then 
he thought of Roderigo Vanni's melodies, 
which murdered sleep. Then he thought of 
Cecilia. The hazel eyes, the lovely voice, 
the sweet rose-bud mouth were before him. 

''Ay, I have met my fate. She is the 
perfectest piece of imperfection God ever 
moulded. She might have been with 
Boccaccio's fair brigade, the sweetest freshest 
merriest of them all. She must be mine. 
She is mine. She is pure melody and vivid 
life. She is like a lark lost in the blue; 
like a rivulet that laughs as it breaks over 



186 FRANCES. 

the stones and hurries away to have some 
fun in the forest ; like a nymph who dull 
folk would say had no soul, simply because 
she is all soul, and that fragile slender body 
of hers is only the diaphanous apparel of a 
beautiful spirit." 

I believe Count Cassius Grimani was 
gesticulating and talking slowly in this mo- 
nologue of his. He was certainly unaware 
that the sun had risen. He was also un- 
aware of a stalwart policeman, against whom 
he ran with rather strong impact, and who 
very courteously begged his pardon for 
being nearly knocked down. Aroused here- 
by from his deep reverie, he treated that 
gentleman in blue with that argent courtesy 
which he had heard such gentlemen liked, 
and awoke to a delicious fresh fragrance of 
fruit and flowers and other vegetables. He 
was at the corner of Covent Garden. 

To him the sight was strange. He had 



#'. 



MOONLIGHT IN LONDON. 187 

eaten celery, and seen celery growing in his 
gardens; but when he became aware of 
waggon after waggon of that vegetable, 
piled nearly as high as the houses, he began 
to imagine the insatiable appetite of that 
Monster, London. Other arrivals perplexed 
him and amazed him in the same way*. 
Was this a nightmare? Where could be 
the immeasurable gardens that supplied 
these myriads of parsnips and turnips and 
cabbages? There could not be room for 
them in England, with all its cities and fac- 
tories and railways ; so at least it seemed to- 
Count Cassius. He wandered through all 
parts of the famous market with astonished 
gaze : and he wondered, as most men won- 
der who take the trouble to think, why the 
ducal proprietor of the greatest flower and 
fruit and vegetable market in the world 
does not make it what it ought to be. 
Covent Garden would not be too large if it 



188 FRANCES. 

-stretched from the Strand to Long Acre 
4ind from Wellington Street to Exeter Street. 
Who would miss Exeter Hall ? 



189 



CHAPTER IX. 

AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 

Life's highway has a million curious travellers ; 
The pure bride elbowed by the wretched courtesan ; 
The poet by a statesman or a pickpocket ; 
The gentle man by fellows self-styled gentlemen. 

The Comedy of Dreams, . 

fTlHE railways have shaken up England 
-*. marvellously. Everybody travels. 
Everybody meets every other body that he 
knows. It is impossible that it should be 
otherwise, seeing the vast movement which 
facility and cheapness have caused. The 
fundamental maxim of all sane political 
economists . ^that swpply creates demand . has 
been admirably proved by our railway 



190 FRANCES. 

system. Travel, either a costly luxury or 
an unpleasant necessity within my own re- 
<3ollection, has become an easy usage of life. 
All the world is on the wing. It is quite an 
.exception to be on the platform of a London 
terminus, and not to meet somebody you 
know. I am sure I do not remember when 
I did it last. 

Any way, some people who knew each 
other met on the platform of the Great 
Southern Railway's terminus this day. Ga- 
briel Shirley, having read Frances Carey's 
letter, resolved to start for Avonside at once, 
but he first called on the Southpool Consul, 
who was so interested in the affair that he 
promised to go down with him,. if possible. 
The curious course of events had for him a 
double interest, consular and literary. When 
Mr. Shirley reached the station, rather be- 
fore his time, he wandered from one part 
of it to another with that chronic curiosity 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 191 

of his. A railway station is always full of 
interest. The very placards on its walls, 
where the largest newspaper in the world 
jostles the newspaper with the largest circu- 
lation, and where cheap claret comes too 
suggestively near Dr. Katerfelto's Liver Pills, 
are in themselves a literature. The refresh- 
ment-rooms might usually furnish a fine 
field for any analytical chemist who cared 
to trace ether in sherry and Liebig in soup. 
But the people who travel are an unfailing 
and perpetual source of delight. Theirs is 
infinite variety. Here is the accomplished 
traveller, who is always on the road, and 
whose mere look causes the railway guard 
to show him the most comfortable corner of 
the newest carriage. Contrast him with the 
nervous fidgety traveller, who generally 
gets into the wrong class, often gets out at 
the wrong station, and invariably loses some 
of his luggage. And how mingled are 



192 FRANCES. 

those who travel for pleasure merely with 
travellers on regular business, and with 
travellers whom some sudden trouble has 
dragged from home ! 

Gabriel Shirley had been pursuing his 
studies for ten minutes when the tall form 
of Julian Orchard became visible. He 
walked with the same dreamy isolation along 
a railway platform as if he had been in a 
Californian valley of tree-giants. 

" I am glad you are able to come," said 
Shirley. "They are pleasant people at 
Avonside, apart from this bit of adventure 
and romance. You want, I know, to see 
many phases of English life. As the illus- 
trious poet hath it : 

^ What exile would not gladlj cross the foam, 
For one warm evening in an English home?'" 

" That poet of yours is right," said Orchard. 
"I am glad to be back in the land my 
grandfather left in a huff, because he quar- 



) 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 193« 

relied with his master. He was a plumber 
and glazier, like his father and grandfather 
before him ; and if he hadn't been of an 
irritable temper, I should probably be 
mending windows and cistern-pipes in the 
good town of Warminster at this moment 
I daresay I should have been just as happy. 
Now I've seen a new wof Id, and formed some 
new wishes; but I don't know that I have 
formed any new ideas. We get bigger aspi- 
rations in America, just because Hudson is 
bigger than Thames, and Superior than 
Windermere, but I don't think any of us . 
not even Emerson . has found a new idea 

yet." 

"People talk about your poets . Walt 
Whitman and Joachim Miller." 

"Men who shriek . quite out of tune.. 
But there are some acquaintances of ours, 
surely. That beautiful face I could never 
forget, having seen it once.'' 

VOL. m. o 



194 IlEtANCES. 

It was Cecilia's. 

Julian Orchard had the gift of reverie. 
Men are like mirrors : they ^annot all reflect 
equally. The best mirror in the world 
made from mercury behind glass reflects 
about two-thirds of the quality of any object 
placed before it. Therefore, lady fair, add 
just one half more to the beauty you see in 
your looking-glass (supposing it to be a 
really good one), and you may obtam some 
faint idea of your own sweet self. Now 
the opinion one man or one woman forms 
of another man or another woman is, in 
some respects, analogous to the reflexion of 
the looking-glass. Some of us are very 
bad mirrors indeed : we cannot see half the 
beauty and goodness of other people. 
Some of us are cracked mirrors, distorting 
beauty into ugliness through the warps in 
our own fibre. Some of us are adequate ; 
appreciate ; reflect man and woman at their 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 195 

best. Still other human mirrors are there 
which reveal to men and women elements 
of character whose existence they never 
would have guessed. Such was Shake- 
speare: such, in his way, was Julian Or- 
chard. He knew more of the human crea- 
tures he saw than they, for the most part, 
contrived to see themselves. Look at a 
photograph through a magnifier, and you 
will find in it something which the naked 
eye cannot discover. In the same way the 
observer of human character might discover 
in most men points by themselves untracea- 
ble. 

Thus was it with Julian Orchard. Sur- 
face critics who read his books accused them 
of containing creatures unseen in the hea- 
vens above, or in the earth beneath, or in 
the waters under the earth. They com- 
plained bitterly, dolorously, with occasional 

ferocity of epithet that would have been an 

o2 



196 FRANCES. 

oath save for the fact that they were gentle- 
men writing for gentlemen, that this man Or- 
chard introduced into the nineteenth cen- 
tury common-place life characters that could 
no more live there than a goshawk in 
a canary's cage. 

" I see no such people," quoth the pur. 
blind critic. '* When did any man meet a 
troubadour in the Strand ? A perfect lady, 
who has never opened a book or learnt an 
alphabet, yet who knows her Shakespeare 
and her Wordsworth, is quite impossible in 
these days of South Kensington and School 
Boards. Mr. Orchard should really try to 
decribe people who exist." 

This poor dear critic should not be 
abused : let us pity him. His misfortune is 
it, and by no means his fault, that he can- 
not see what Julian Orchard sees. Try 
Lim by the five senses. Can he see the 
wonderful green of a sunset sky under fringe 




AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 197 

of orange? Can he feel the difference 
between velvet and velveteen? Can he 
hear the difference between a blackbird and 
a thrush? Can he smell the difference 
between a white violet and a blue ? Can 
he taste the difference between the water 
from a well and the water from a brook ? 
If not . and if there are those who can . 
what right has this fellow to revile Julian 
Orchard for seeing more in life than he can 
see ? And yet this really is the basis of 
half our hostile criticism. A writer takes 
an original line; because it is original, he 
has to work it out unguided ; he often goes 
wrong. The critic can see well enough 
that he is going wrong, but cannot get at 
the idea which is driving him, and which 
will bring him right at last. 

Now the group of three whom Orchard 
and Shirley met could not be regarded as 
commonplace by the crassest observer. In 



198 FRANCES. 

Sir Charles Wray met the lover of books 
and the teacher of war. Hereditary habit 
had made a soldier of him, and absolute 
fearlessness had made him a successful com- 
mander; but he regarded war with the 
necessary contempt of a calm intellect. He 
had wasted his youth on military training, 
else might he have done nobler work. Thus 
he felt ; and he satisfied himself with the 
delight of studying what other men had 
done. In him could Julian Orchard per- 
ceive a spirit not unlike Sir Philip Sidney's. 
But ordinary people who met him on that 
platform would not at once compare him 
with the man who wrote of 

" our sweet enemy, France/' 

any more than they would see in Cecilia the 
very soul of music, a human bird, a creature so 
Psyche-like that the pen's lightest touch 
seems to take the bloom from her. And as 
for that dark flushed grave vivid indifferent 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 19^ 

Count Cassius Grimani, who would deem 
him to be a Boccaccio-Byron ? Yet thus did 
Julian Orchard think of these three. 

There were greetings of surprise. Neither 
expected to meet the other. Sir Charles 
briefly told what had brought them to town 
. . . music and books. 

" Yes," said Cecilia to Jjilian Orchard^ 
" those are Papa's fancies and mine." 

"But surely you like books," said 
Orchard. 

" I like yours," she replied, " for j^Count 
Cassius found music in them for me." 

" Ah," said the Consul to Shirley, " how 
delightful is a compliment from lovely lips !" 

" You agree with the illustrious poet, I 
presume : 

^ The critics call me clever ; I say no. 
I will assent when ladies call me so.' 

But, Sir Charles," said our old friend, turn- 
ing to the General, *' are you going to 



200 FRANCES. 

Monckton Manor now ? I mean, mmt you 
go? I ask because we have a curious 
adventure in front of us ; Hugh Roland, who 
was falsely accused of murder and madness, 
is in hiding at Carey Farm ; the man whom 
he is supposed to have murdered is there 
also, disguised as an American, that rascal 
who called himself the Honourable Her- 
cules Lyon. I have been summoned by 
Miss Carey, whom I greatly admire for her 
clear intellect and high courage, and who 
will marry Roland by-and-by I hope, to 
assist at the explosion that must ensue. 
Now, Sir Charles, if you are not obliged to 
be at Monckton Manor to-day, I think you 
would find the last scene of this odd drama 
very interesting ; and I think also of Miss 
Carey, who will be rather tried at the final 
moment, and who would be glad of Miss 
Wray's companionship." 

" Do you really think this child could be 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 201 

of any use to a strong-minded lady like Miss 
Carey ?" asked Sir Charles, smiling. 

" Of infinite use, " said Orchard, ere 
Gabriel Shirley could reply. "Why, Sir 
Charles, if I were dying in agony, and held 
your daughter's hand in mine, and looked 
into her eyes, I should know that God was 
close by, and I should see him soon. 
YouVe known Miss Cecilia all her life, and 
you haven't taken the trouble to inquire 
whether she's dififerent from other folk's 
daughters; but the first time I saw her 
I knew the difference. Humanity is not cut 
all out of the same block. Sir Charles, or by 
the same sculptor. I know the poetic lady 
when I see her, and I have seen only two in 
England yet." 

You should have seen Cecilia blush during 
this incoherent rhapsody ! A blush on such 
a face puts the rarest of sunsets, the delicat- 
est of roses, the supreme painter, to utter 



202 FRANCES. 

shame as an effect of colour. And just 
watch eye and lip at such a moment. There 
is a light in the one, a curve of the other, 
which are beyond any meagre words. How 
is it? 

'< Blosh, darling, blnsb !" Bnt she said, " Why t 
A blosh means pain or sorrow or fear." 

He said, ^' Not here. 

^' You see a blosh on the sonset sky ; 
In the rose's heart a blosh 700 see : 

Sweet, blosh for me. 

*^ There's a blosh in the west for the resting son : 
There's a blosh in the rose for sammer*s kiss : 

O yield me this ! 

*^ Give me one faint blosh for the joy I have won : 
Give me one blosh for thy loveliness." 

She mormored, ^^ Yes.** 

Madrigals ought to go out of fashion ; they 
do not fit into any accurate system of politi- 
cal economy. 

Both Sir Charles and Count Cassius were 
so interested in the approaching climax of 
Hugh Roland s romance that it was decided 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 203^ 

to stop at Chessington station, and the tele- 
graph was employed to secure accommoda- 
tion. They had a pleasant journey, these- 
five. The bright October sunlight irradiated 
mile after mile of golden woodland and 
green meadow and shining stream. They 
talked of many things . commencing, natu- 
rally, with the adventure of the moment. 

" Mr. Roland ought to write his experi- 
ence when all this is over," said Count 
Cassius. "I rather envy him. I should 
like to have been a lunatic and a railway-- 
guard. But nobody has ever taken the^ 
trouble to accuse me of murder." 

" Rather a risk, though," said Sir Charles. 
"How very easily he might have been 
hanged! I should like to know whether 
the jury were all so stupid they thought him 
mad, or whether some clever fellow among 
them had the instinct that he was innocent^ 
and purposely suggested his insanity." 



204 FBAKCES. 

" The English jury/' remarked Mr. Shir- 
ley, '^is often wrong and often obstinate, 
i)ut it is an admirable machine for getting at 
that plain common-sense which is our best 
practical guide. When they do make a mis- 
take, it is usually of so ludicrous a charac- 
ter that it serves as a warning to subsequent 
juries. The most conspicuous failures are 
in actions for breach of promise of marriage : 
for jurymen are generally fathers of families, 
^nd give indignant damages, because they 
think how they should like to punish a man 
who jilted their own daughters." 

**That form of action is barbarous," said 
Orchard ; " but the moment marriage pass- 
.ed from the hands of the Church, it ceased 
to be a sacrament and became a contract, 
whence, of course, an oflfence against its 
law can only be punished commercially. 
There are three views of marriage . the 
.ecclesiastic, the commercial, and the poetic : 



AT THE EAILWAY TERMINUS. 205- 

the second of these is the only one of which 
law takes account in these degenerate days^ 
But the poetic marriage will always exist 
for those to whom it is possible." 

''You are a heathen, Orchard," said 
Gabriel Shirley. "As the illustrious poet 
hath it : 

*He sees Apollo on the hills of dawn. 
For him flushed Hebe trips across the lawn, 
And when the rainbow spans the world, he knows 
'Tis but the bright path where swift Iris goes.' ** 

" Well, I am a heathen ; and I laugh ta 
scorn your illustrious poet ; and I ask you, 
was not Wordsworth a heathen, who longed 
to be 

* A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn V 

I am catholic, friend Gabriel : all ages are 
mine, all teachers, all creeds, all heroes, all 
women, all gods. Because I behold the 
serene form of Him who taught wondroua 
wisdom on the Mount of Olives, am I to be 
deaf to the sayings of Gautama Buddha, to 



.206 FRANCES. 

the golden words of Plato? Because the 
virgin-mother who watched with sad solici- 
tude the path of her wondrous son from the 
-cradle to the cross is so tender a picture, am 
I to be blind to the surpassing wisdom of 
Athene the wise and chaste and invincible, 
springing in panoply from the brain of Zeus 
.the guiding haunting conquering Wisdom 
of the World? Rome cheered the play- 
wright slave who said, 

* Homo sum ; nihil humani a me alienum puto ; 

I go farther and say, 

'Deus sum; nihil divini a me alienum puto/ " 

**A magnificent assumption," said Count 
Cassius ; " it lifts us to a higher horizon. It 
is like climbing a lofty mountain to be nearer 
God and to see more of the world." 

" Yes," quoth Gabriel Shirley, " and man's 
happiness depends on his horizon. The 
higher we rise the wider the circle, the 
nearer the absolute light. Your modern 



AT THE RAILWAY TERMINUS. 207 

blunderers . negative men who call them- 
selves positivists, lovers of humbug who take 
the name of spiritualists . dig deep holes, 
and descend into them to narrow their hori- 
zon. They are moles, earth-worms, newts ; 
they cannot learn a lesson from the eagle 
and the lark." 



208 



CHAPTER X. 



THE CRISIS. 

ASTROLOOOS. . ^No good was ever done by any criminal. 
"No yillany succeeds. Caesars, Iscariots, 
Buonapartes, always bring dark doom upon their heads. 
The law is constant, 

Baphael. . ^I have known some rascals live 
Grolden delicious lives unkicked. 

ASTROLOGOS. . ^Ah, wait a while. 
More worlds there are than one, my lord. They know it 
now. 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

TjlRANCES, knowing well that Gabriel 
-^ Shirley would not fail her, snatched 
an early visit to the loft in the morning, and 
preached patience to her prisoner. that 
loft I It was her favourite workshop for 



THE CRISIS. 209 

years. There she had kept the material for 
her flower-beds ; there she had distilled 
sweet waters from rosemary and mint, from 
violet and rose. She had a delicate manipu- 
lation of finger, an innate chemistry, which 
made her a perfect mistress of such arts . . . 
arts which her father had taught her, sup- 
plying her with the most skilfully made in- 
struments. It was to her a pleasant reminder 
of his teaching when she set alight the bright 
brass furnace of her miniature still, and 
caught drop on drop of some perfume or 
cordial as they dript slowly from the worm, 
Mr. Carey had been a spiritualist . by which 
I do not mean a ghost seer. He saw in all 
the movement of the world the will of the 
Deity. There was no book he read with 
Frances, no flower he grew, no problem of 
mathematics of chemistry he tried with her, 
in which were forgotten the Alpha and 
Omega of life. In his time the Negativists 

VOL. m. B 



210 PRANCES. 

who call their creed Positivism were ia an 
infantile state : Caliban was a baby. But if 
they had been of greater importance, Mr. 
Carey would not have brought a refutation 
of their nonsense into the development of 
his daughter's mind. He caught what he 
deemed to be truth . what, indeed, he knew 
to be truth. He left falsehood alone. Why 
should the fair mirror of his daughter s mind 
reflect for even a moment the lies of fools ? 
The man who teaches a child that certain 
untruths have been uttered, and then tries to 
prove them untrue, is like the stupid old 
nurse who frightens children with ogres 
and bogies. Why should a young creature, 
fresh from God's hand, be told that there 
are persons who deny there is a God ? Why 
should a being, fitly moulded of Spirit and 
soul, of flesh and blood, be assured that it 
is the fashion to regard the monkey as his 
great-grandfather? Why should sham 



THE CRISIS, 211 

science be allowed to confront the immutable 
truth of God, who made these children of 
men in His own image? 

Frances had received no such teaching. 
Mr. Carej^'s library contained no books of the 
School of Mud. On his shelves he would have 
placed neither Baudelaire nor Swinburne, nei- 
ther Darwin nor Mill. He held to the School 
of Light. Plato was there, and Aristotle 
also, friends and foes, but neither negative : 
Homer and Shakespeare were there. In 
the course of his London practice, Franceses 
father had often shown the power of finding 
medicine for a mind diseased; and this 
power is obtainable only from intercourse 
with the purest minds of the race . the High 
Priests of God. 

Into this loft, sacred to many memories, 
Frances found that love had crept. She 
was ashamed. Perhaps she thought Hugh 
Koland something greater than he was ; 

p2 



212 FRANCES. 

perhaps she had a touch of Julian Orchard's 
faculty, and could discover more in him 
than he could realize for himself. The 
latter being the case, I take it she will be a 
perfect wife : for should not a wife be an 
angel, touching with a wand the undevelop- 
ed creature she has wedded, and teaching 
him what latent power he has ? 

Between Frances and Hugh the conver* 
sation was brief, but not unsatisfactory. 
Frances had to run away to prepare break- 
fast for her brother's illustrious visitors : for 
was not the Honourable Hercules Lyon 
among them, an American of the very up- 
perest five hundred ? So, as I have said, 
th«ir dialogue was short . . . and I think it 
was almost inarticulate. Lovers have won- 
drous ways of saying everything. 

Mr. Lyon came down to breakfast at ten 
. the Major had probably used some per- 
suasion. Mr. Lyon was surly and ungra- 



THE CRISIS. 213 

cious, and ate his cold grouse as if he had a 
quarrel with it. Major Washington F. Butts 
wore a sinister smile. Lavington and Heath 
looked a little tired, and did not seem at all 
amused by their correspondence, wKich was 
voluminous. Perhaps a specimen of the 
M.P.'s will suflSce : 

'^ Bagatelle. Thursday. 

*^ Money, my boy . mone5\ Aaron Wolf 
has let me have a monkey for a month. 
You know the blood-sucker's terms. The 



Clinton is in a rage. 



" D. W." 



Lavington curled his moustache ; silently 
execrated the Jew and the lady ; plunged 
into an omelet, made under Rachel's inspec- 
tion from the freshest of eggs. 

" By Jove I Carey," he said, " this is the 
most delicious omelet I ever tasted! It 
would give me an appetite if I were going 



214 FBANCES. 

to be hanged. As to your coffee, Miss 
Carey, I call it nectar. What is your 
secret ?'' 

" Buy Mocha/^ said Frances ; " grind it 
yourself; be sure the water boils. But 
never boil the coffee. You see, Mr. Lav- 
ington, the simplest things are the most 
difficult to ordinary minds. There is not 
one in a hundred who knows when a kettle 
is boiling, though everybody knows how far 
it is from the earth to the moon, and what 
is Prince Bismarck's policj^, and what will 
be the Conservative majority at the next 
election. Knowing those things does not 
give you good coffee." 

" We certainly learn a great number of 
unnecessary things," said Lavington. " Wo 
are slaves of fashion. I remember when at 
school I learnt Euclid and the Catechism 
and the History of England and several 
other things of that sort, and I have arrived 



THE CRISIS. 215 

at mature age without making use of any of 
them. Indeed I don't know one from the 
other, and my duty to my neighbour may 
be an isosceles triangle, for aught I know." 

The morning was one of those soft sunny 
autumnal days full of languor, when even 
the robins seem too lazy to sing, when there 
is no wind to lift the haze, when the clouds 
sleep. Breakfast lingered; then they 
lounged out on the lawn and smoked, while 
Boyd at intervals brought soda and brandy 
to the thirstier souls. Frances, who had 
housekeeping affairs to manage, was looking 
through the window at them for a moment 
while she waited for Rachel. Eager for 
Shirley to come, and the climax to arrive, 
Frances yet could not help studying these 
people among whom her brother had so. 
strangely fallen. She half guessed their 
fast factitious gambling life in London ; she 
saw their torpid ebrious life in their country 



21 6 FRANCES. 

holiday ; connecting the two, and drawing 
conclusions guided by an intuition which 
made up for absence of experience, she was 
heartily sorry her brother Walter was mixed 
up with such people. But the exposure 
was at hand ; when it came she felt sure that 
Walter would be his old self again. 

Did she take sufficiently into considera- 
tion the feelings of a man with not the 
clearest conceivable intellect, not the most 
fluent and flexible of tempers ? The wise 
man is the man who can be convinced ; the 
wiser man is the man who convinces him- 
self. Frances, if she had thought about it, 
would have remembered that Walter had 
a fine strong obstinacy about him ; but her 
enthusiastic expectation of Heath's exposure 
made her forgetful of it ; she was herself re- 
joicing in the thought that truth would be 
made manifest, and she fondly fancied every- 
one else would rejoice likewise. Such are 



THE CRISIS. 217 

the dreams of sanguine youth. Truth does 
win in time, though always tardily, and 
often too late to delight the noble soul who 
first told the truth. I mean in this world ; 
God lets no man lose. No worthy work 
can be fruitless to the worker. The fashion- 
able scribbler who coins annual thousands 
must pity poor Mr. Milton whose over- 
estimated Epic brought him less than enough 
to pay for a Richmond dinner. Where is 
Milton now, my friend ? What power has 
God intrusted to that lofty spirit ? 

Frances was very pretty, standing by the 
window seat in a reverie, longing for 
Gabriel Shirley, waiting for Rachel. Open 
lace sleeves fell back over one warm round 
arm, which she had raised to rest on the 
window ; and her eyes were dreamily fixed, 
as if she beheld a vision of ^' the land which 
is very far off." Had Hugh Roland been 
able to see her from his prison among the 



\ 



218 FRANCES. 

bulbs, he would have been delighted, for he 
would have felt quite sure she was dreaming 
of him. Was she ? 

To her came Rachel presently ; too soon, 
perhaps. Rachel had a grievance. 

'^ That Boyd, l^Iiss," she began abruptly, 
as was usual with her, " is getting very pro- 
vocations and dictorial. He pretends that 
nobody knows anything about wines and 
spirits except him and Captain Heath ; and 
Master Walter is so careless it's no use talk- 
ing to him. And it's a sin and a shame to 
give your poor dear Papa's dear wine, Miss 
Frances, to them Londoners that go to public, 
houses and drink beer crammed full of 
Cockle's Index." 

It has been suggested that perchance 
Rachel meant cocculus indicus. She was the 
most honest and careful of servants ; she wor- 
shipped, in her quaint homely way, the master 
whose phrases she distorted : and it seemed 



THE CRISIS. 21^ 

to her almost sacrilege that these outsiders 
should be drinking wines which her master 
had liked. 

"Never mind, Eachel," said Frances, 
dreamily. " We shall get rid of them all 
soon. A botttle or two of wine doesn't 
matter. Mr. Shirley will be here in an 
hour or two. Come, I'm ready to arrange 
about luncheon." 

" Well, miss," said Eachel, *' of course you 
know best ; but that isn't the sort of people 
I should care to supply with the best of 
victuals." 

Frances laughed, 

" Perhaps some of them will lose their 
appetite, Rachel, before the day is over. 
Don't begrudge them something to eat." 

" I do, though," said Rachel, so energeti- 
cally shaking her head that the white head- 
dress which crowned it looked dangerously 
like falling. '^ Master Walter 's got hold of 



220 FRANCES. 

a bad lot, and the sooner they go the better. 
As to Captain Heath . ^why, Miss, I think 
he's possessed, or he'd know his own son, 
though he had put his head in yellow 
ochre." 

Patience. Who felt the need of it most ? 
. Frances, amid her unwelcome guests, 
.compelled to talk gaily and to entertain 
pleasantly . or Hugh, alone in his loft, with 
nothing to occupy him? Hugh ought to 
have been more patient than Frances : but 
I doubt it. He knew that the man who 
had tried for his own selfish ends to wreck 
his life was within his reach ; he longed to 
spring upon him. Inaction is very weari- 
some. He was quite sure of his darling, and 
pretty sure of his enemy ; but meanwhile he 
was a prisoner in a loft, with no companions 
but a few spiders, who would very much 
have preferred his being somewhere else. He 
liad not long to wait. Ay, but somehow 



THE CRISIS. 221 

every minute seemed an hour, as he remain- 
ed there in the dark, fettered by his pro* 
raise to Frances, and not knowing in the least 
what was going on outside. Nothing is so 
trying to a man of strong will as this com- 
pression. Action is glory, even when action 
is failure. But to wait, while others act, is 
intolerable. I am disposed to think that 
Frances had less to bear than Hugh at this 
time. 

There was luncheon : after luncheon there 
was more indolent wandering about the 
grounds. Lavington was glad to forget the 
Bagatelle at this moment ; he left it to his 
cousin Dick with infinite satisfaction. The 
theatre, alas ! could not run away : but Miss 
Ethel Clinton might, and he heartily wished 
she would, Lavington was beginning to 
think that he had better try some new line, 
and to wonder whether America or Austra^ 
lia might suit him. Theatre and lupanar 



222 FRANCES. 

fascinate for a time, but when they begin to 
tire, how tiresome they are ! Butts and Lyon 
{since Lyon I may as well call him yet) 
had surly interviews in corners; the two 
men were not happy in their minds, evi- 
dently. Captain Heath, whenever he had 
an opportunity, got up an old-fashioned 
flirtation with Frances. He was hard hit, 
you could see. He began to think that it 
was time he sowed his wild oats and settled 
down for the second time in life. There is 
nothing so lively as the rejuvenescence of 
an elderly gentleman. Captain Heath felt 
a boy again in the presence of Frances. He 
did his utmost to impress on her his exu- 
berant youthfulness. If he failed, it was 
perhaps because she had in her mind's eye 
an impatient young fellow in a loft. 

Afternoon came at last. Frances had 
been expecting all day, though she did not 
quite know what to expect. Her main and 



THE CRISIS. 223 

prevalent motive was dear old wide-should- 
ered blue-coated staff-wieldiug Gabriel 
Shirley, opening the garden-gate like a Deus 
ex mackina, and settling matters promptly, 
Not thus did the Destinies decide. When 
our traveller from London reached the 
chief Chessington hotel, they found they 
could have a waggonette and four horses . 
whereupon the American Consul slightly 
astonished everybody by remarking that he 
was a member of the New York Four-in- 
Hand Club, and would handle the ribbons 
with pleasure. A man who says he can 
drive four-in-hand becomes an autocrat at 
once. It was the very last thing any of the 
party expected from Julian Orchard. To 
begin with, he looked a great deal too tall 
to be perched on a box seat ; and then no- 
body ever heard of American four-in-hand; 
and finally, and most exstinctively, he had 
written books. Now the book-writing and 



224 FRANCES. 

the team-driving faculties so seldom co-exist 
in the same being that everybody will share 
the surprise of Sir Charles Wray and 
Gabriel Shirley at the Consul's cool assump- 
tion of the ribbons. As to Count Cassius, 
he was never astonished at anything that 
happened in England, and he was very much 
engaged with Cecilia. So Sir Charles and 
Gabriel Shirley talked to each other . quaint 
talk of books and antiquities . on one side 
the waggonette; and Count Cassius and 
Cecilia chattered music and scenery, with a 
gay unconscious careless enjoyment, as if no 
living creature heard them, on the other; and 
Julian Orchard proved his skill as a whip by 
making four screws do six miles in twenty- 
five minutes, and as a student of human 
nature by getting a great deal of information 
from the groom by his side, whose stupidity 
was in Chessington proverbial. If there 
was a drop of juice in an orange, Orchard^s 



THE CBISIS. 223 

strong grip would get it out. This groom 
was what they call in the west country 
"hgjf saved." Brought up in a stable, foaled 
one might almost say, for he was found de- 
serted amid the hoofs of the horses, the poor 
fellow had really more intimate intercourse 
with the equine than with the human race. 
What intellect he had ran into this special 
groove. He could understand the neigh of 
a horse better than the command of his 
master. The fiercest stallion would whinny 
at his approach, and court his notice ; the 
wildest mare, stung by the Summer oestrus, 
would run to him at a call, and follow him 
quietly to be harnessed. He had been 
found, a baby, in the stables of the Griffin at 
Witheridge ; and the landlady of that inn, a 
kind-hearted widow, decided that he might 
live on the premises, prompted thereto by 
the ostler's wife, who was childless, yet 
loved children* He was called Timothy 

VOL. m. Q 



226 FRANCES. 

GriflSn ; for the ostler's name was Timothy, 
and the sign of the inn was Griffin, He could 
never be taught anything ; to this day, being 
probably about fifty, he cannot read; but 
he could groom a horse and ride a horse 
when he was an imp half a dozen years old. 
Always he has slept in loft and stable, this 
Tim Griffin. 

" I've seen a four-post bedstead, sir," he 
said to Julian Orchard, as they whirled 
along the road to Avonside, . "that off- 
leader's got a fly on her flank . ah! thai 
won't bite again . but I like to lie on whole- 
some straw among the four legs of a 
horse. You needn't be afraid of thieves. 
And horses are so kind! There was an 
Irish horse, a famous hunter, called Conne- 
mara, that we had for ever so long while 
his master was away ill. I used to sleep in 
his loose-box : and one sharp Winter I had 
the rheumatics so bad it nearly killed me : 



THE CRISIS. 227 

and Connemara used to lie down in his box 
and as good as tell me to come to him, and 
Fd lie on his warm side and lose my pain, 
and he would not move all night . ^though 
other times he was a most restless horse, 
and a regular crib biter. But he liked me, 
you see, sir . and he knew I was ill. Poor 
old horse ! He broke his leg in a water- 
jump, and had to be shot. He was one of 
the best friends I ever had." 

By what means did the American Consul 
get this half-saved equerry to talk as freely 
as Rousseau ever talked ? Simply by that 
power of sympathy which is the magnetism 
of the mind. No man (hypocrites especial- 
ly excepted) could feel the grasp of Or- 
chard's hand, could meet the glance of his 
clear, friendly eyes, and not feel that with 
him there need be no secrets. The an- 
cient question of Confession is agitating the 
Church while I write : and doubtless there 

q2 



228 FRANCES, 

will be a fierce fight about it ere long. I 
am not going to meddle with polemics. 
This is a world in which prudent men care- 
fully conceal their strongest opinions* 
Enough to say that Julian Orchard was 
born to be a Father Confessor . which can- 
not be the case with all the priesthoods of 
all the Faiths. If he met a country girl in 
a silvan walk, she would tell him all about 
her sweetheart in ten minutes, though she 
dared not mention him to her mother. 
This son of the stables talked as feeely as if 
he had known him all his life. It was just 
the same in higher life. Ministers of State 
and diplomatists could not help being can- 
did with Orchard. The President had 
marked him down for a high diplomatic 
mission the next time the Great Common- 
wealth should have momentous business on 
hand. 

^' Orchard is a perfect Ambassador I" said 



THE CRISIS. 229 

<jrant. " He cannot tell a lie himself : and 
if anybody is to tell him a lie and not be 
found out, you must drag Satan from Hell 
to do it." 

But we are at the gates of Carey Farm. 
The Consul drives in beneath the elms. 
Walter Carey and his guests, who have 
been eating lotos with a bad appetite, wake 
up at the new arrival. The tall American, 
perched high on the box, pulls up his horses 
and looks rather appalling: Tim GriflSn 
slides to the ground, and opens the door, 
Sir Charles Wray descends, quiet and cool, 
and shakes hands with Walter Carey. 

" My daughter and I happened to be in 
your neighbourhood, Mr. Carey," he said, 
" and she would not go away without see- 
ing your sister. So here we are for half aa 
hour, that the girls may talk. I am not 
sure whether you have met my friends, 
Count Grimani and Mr. Shirley, before. 



230 FRANCES. 

We were so merry at Southpool in the 
Regatta week that I almost forgiat who 
made acquaintance with whom. But you 
recollect Mr. Orchard, probably, the Ameri- 
can Consul there, who is a famous author ? 
He has driven us over from Chessington." 

Frances had been eagerly watching for 
an arrival, but had not expected an invasion. 
She and Cecilia greeted each other in the 
friendliest way: but before that greeting 
she had caught courage from a glance of 
Gabriel Shirley's eye. The two ladies 
vanished together, as is the way with ladies : 
and when Gabriel Shirley looked round, he 
noted that Major Washington F. Butts 
seemed very much as if he would like to 
vanish too. The consular eye was fixed on 
him, and he clearly did not like it. 

"Ah," thought Shirley, "the illustrious 
poet was right : 



THE CRISIS. 231 

* This world of ours is but a world of dreams : 
Even that Yankee is not what he seems.' " 

Which was true enough, for Butts seemed^ 
or tried to seem, a man of capital . and had 
not a farthing in the world. 

While Walter Carey gathers his party 
together into the dining-room, and offers 
them the good hospitality of Carey Farm, 
we will follow the ladies upstairs. See 
them, in Frances's pwn room, whose two 
pleasant windows, fringed with wistaria, look 
across the lawn to the river. 

Cecilia, that creature of mirth and melody, 
finds something motherly in Frances. They 
look at each other, needing no words. But 
Cecilia must speak. 

"He loves me so, Frances. He is so 
noble. I am sure we shall be happy. But 
O how selfish I am, to talk about myself at 
the very first." 

"Why not, my darling?" said Frances. 



232 FRANCES. 

And there was mucli more confidence be- 
tween them, Frances being all the while 
a little doubtful whether her beautiful young 
Cecilia had quite enough in her to hold 
firmly the restless poetic Italian, Frances 
could not catch the fascination of Cecilia . . . 
the music that was not heard in her voice 
only, but seemed to pervade every move- 
ment. Cecilia was incarnate melody. She 
had no hard clear intellect, no knowledge, 
not an atom of common sense ; she had not 
an idea about money or dinner or politics 
or religion ; she was all rainbow and butter- 
fly .. . Iris and Psyche. The very bride 
for Count Cassius. 

Frances and Cecilia, coming down, found 
a hasty luncheon, and everybody bu^y at 
it. The party had become rather pleasant 
already. . Sir Charles Wray and Lavington 
found that they had a hundred common ac- 
quaintances: Captain Heath and Shirley 



THE CRISIS. 233 

joined in the conversation: matters went 
on so pleasantly that Butts and Lyon began 
to hope there was no terror in this sudden 
invasion. Hence ensued a general talk : 
and the Honourable Hercules Lyon, having 
once decided that he was in no danger, 
broke out fluently. We, who know who he 
is, and what he has done, may wonder at 
the audacity which he has shown in meeting 
those who ought to know him best. But 
perils of all kinds become trivial to the man 
who encounters them often : Lyon had got 
through so many diflSculties that he began 
to think he was perfectly safe. Never was 
man so easy to be found out. What amazed 
him was that, while his father had not the 
slightest suspicion, he could see that Frances 
had eyes keen enough to penetrate his 
rather vulgar disguise. Of this all along an 
uneasy suspicion had haunted him. Oddly 
enough, now that the crisis was approaching, 



234 FRANCES. 

he was thrown off his guard; he did not 
connect this sudden visit of Sir Charles 
Wray and his friends with anything personal 
to himself; so he talked away behind his 
American mask, acting a part, and acting it 
very well. A painful part to the actor. 
The deliberate hypocrite is the most un- 
pleasant of human beings, and always makes 
me shudder. But hypocrites, like the rest 
of the reptile tribe, must be of some use in 
the world, or they would never have ex- 
isted. 

When this scratch luncheon was over, 
everybody went out : and Frances, who as 
yet had not an opportunity of talking to 
Gabriel Shirley, did all she could to secure 
a few quiet words with him. As she had 
no lady-ally (Cecilia being hors de combaty 
and entirely monopolized by Count Cassius), 
her difficulty was so to break up the party 
that she could have a slight colloquy with 



THE CRISIS. 235' 

Gabriel. This gave her some trouble, but 
was effected at last. 

"Ah," he said, in a low tone, as they 
diverged from the others a few yards, " sa 
our martyred railway-guard is close at 
hand ! " 

" Yes. Please tell me what is best to do. 
I know it will be all right . but you don't 
know how anxious I am !" 

"Don't I?" replied Shirley. "I was a 
child myself once. I was never beloved by 
a railway-guard, you know ^" 

" Now don't be provoking. I know you 
would not joke about it if you had any fear 
as to what will happen : but the excitement 
has made me dreadfully nervous, and I hate 
anything concealed : and I do hope it will 
be all over to-day." 

" Of course it will," said Gabriel Shirley. 
" My dear Miss Carey, you ought to be the 
last to feel nervous. The time has come to 



236 FRANCES. 

settle everything, and to expose this scoun- 
drel Heath. The only thing to be done 
now is to bring our young friend forward. 
Tell me where to find him." 

Frances explained, and easily made 
Gabriel Shirley understand where Hugh 
Roland was lying in ambush. 

" I will unearth him," he said. " Go and 
talk to the others, and keep them together. 
They won't miss me till I return." 

Frances, obeying, went forward, and 
joined Captain Heath and Lavington. 
Shirley's broad shoulders disappeared among 
the trees. 



237 



CHAPTER XL 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 

Kaphael. . ^Horner wrote nonsense, making gods and 
goddesses 
Encounter mortals both in bed and battlefield. 
These are child^s fables. 

ASTROLOGOS. . Noble Prince, talk warily : 

How many senses have you? 

Raphael. . Five. 

AsTROLOGOS. . I have seven senses. 

One gives me power to see things never visible 
To you. This moment I beheld bright Iris pass 
Over that arch of rainbow that is glittering 
From hill to hDl. I have seen brawny Herakles 
Foiling an army. Trust me, your five senses, sir, 
Are not the high completion of humanity. 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

GUIDED by the directions of Frances^ 
and by his own typologic intuitions^ 



238 FRANCES. 

.Gabriel Shirley found the workshop ia 
which she had hidden her prisoner. He 
was much amused at the situation. Alwa5"s 
sanguine, from the moment he found Hugh 
Roland in his cottage, he had believed that 
lis troubles would be conquered : but his 
being brought suddenly face to face with 
the man he was supposed to have murdered 
was a dramatic incident hardly to be fore- 
seen. Shirley thought over it with great 
glee as he crossed the farm-yard towards 
Hugh Roland's loft. Nobody was near. 
He ascended the steps, and tried the latch. 
Hugh, who had scrutinized his visitor 
through a hole in the wood, at once un- 
locked the door and let him in. He closed 
the door after him : there they stood in the 
dim light, amid Frances Carey's innumerable 
arrangements of chemistry and horticulture 
4ind carpentry. 

" Ah, my friend," said Shirley, cheerily, 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 239 

*^ SO the fifth act of our drama has arrived. 
Tragedy or comedy . which will it be? 
You, at least, will have good reason to be 
satisfied, after all your troubles. You have 
been patient, and Miss Carey has been 
faithful, and now you will both have your 
reward.'^ 

"I have not been very patient," said 
Hugh, *' but I have managed to wait, and 
now I suppose my time is come. What am 
I to do?" 

He spoke with a repressed eagerness, 
which Mr. Shirley well understood. Would 
3"0U have a man quite serenely patient 
under such a grievance as Hugh Roland's ? 
Patience is preached in the oldest poem 
extant, but modern thought does not find a 
quite satisfactory ideal in the Man of Uz. 
Impatience is a great power ; it has extin- 
guished many tyrannies; it is the bitter 
enemy of injustice. When I see a man 



240 FRANCES. 

earnestly asserting his rights, at the risk of 
being set down as a turbulent troublesome 
fellow, I cannot help sympathizing with 
him. It is too much the way of the world 
to side with established power. " Possession 
is nine points of the law," says some old 
adage, and it exemplifies the feelings of the 
torpid majority. The general public ac- 
quiesced in the theory that Hugh Roland 
was a criminal lunatic : Hugh knew that he 
wasn't, but he might very well have been 
in a minority of one on the question. 

" We have quite a party here," said Ga- 
briel Shirley. " Carey's guests you have 
heard of, I think. I have just come with 
Sir Charles Wray and his daughter, and an 
Italian gentleman, and the American Con- 
sul at Southpool, who may be of use, as he 
knows the swindling people who came over 
with Heath. I just tell you this to prepare 
you for seeing a lot of people. Now is 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 241 

your time ; we shall find them all walking 
in the grounds." 

Hugh said no word. The two set off 
together, passed quickly through farmyard 
and barton, came upon the loiterers close 
by the river. Yes, they were grouped on 
that green glade, with the silver stream 
flowing below, where, little more than a 
year ago, Frances had been affrighted by 
what seemed the traces of a horrible mur- 
der. She could laugh at the reminiscence 
now. She and Cecilia were grouped with 
Count Cassius and the tall American Con- 
sul, who was poetically discoursing on the 
difference between the world's two conti- 
nents. Carey and Heath were in conversa- 
tion; so were Lavington and Butts; the 
Honourable Hercules Lyon stood moodily 
alone, smoking a cigar, and looking at the 
river. 

" You call America the New World," the 

VOL. m. R 



242 FRANCES. 

GoDSol was saying. '^Agassiz has shown 
tliat it is older than Asia, which is the oldest 
part of your continent. (Jo into the Yose- 
mite valley, and look at the big trees ; you 
haven't had time to grow such trees in 
Asia ; and as to Europe, why, it only began 
to be colonized a little before Homer's time. 
There are vast unexplored tracts in South 
and Central America, where great nations 
existed before Troy, before Thebes, before 
Babylon. When your Royal Geographical 
Society is tired of Africa, let it send some 
pioneers up our untraversed rivers." 

Thus flowed the Consul's talk as Gabriel 
Shirley and Hugh Roland came down the 
grassy slope. Frances saw them first . no 
wonder : every moment seemed to her at 
least a month. How glad she felt to see 
her prisoner released at last, and coming 
bravely among them by Gabriel Shirley's 
side I There was a humorous twitch about 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 243 

Shirley's mouth as they passed close to 
Captain Heath and Carey, both of whom 
turned to look at Roland, both of whom 
recognised Jiim instantly. 
Waltjer sprang forward. 
" Roland !" he exclaimed. 
He would have collared him, but Mr- 
Shirley interposed his sturdy frame, and 
said, 

" Don't be hasty. He is my prisoner." 
" He is a murderer," said Captain Heath, 
fiercely. ''He killed my boy. He ought 
to be hanged. Are you a policeman, sir ?" 

By this time everyone present was inte- 
rested in the scene. Stephen Heath, who 
had been sulkily smoking nearer the river 
margin, was the last to recognize his ancient 
rival. When he did, he remained immov- 
able, and went on with his cigar. He did 
not think his disguise had been penetrated. 
He had deceived his father and Carey, and 

e2 



244 FRANCES. 

thought that no one else was likely to fathom 
his disguise. He did not particularly like- 
the idea of meeting Hugh Roland, and he 
could not understand how Hugh dare ven- 
ture to be seen ; but he assumed an air of 
stolid indifference, and looked on as if he 
were an uninterested spectator. Not so 
Major Washington F. Butts, who felt sure 
something dangerous was about to happen. 

Hugh Roland as yet had not spoken. He 
advanced toward Frances. 

** Miss Carey," he said, " I am not a mur- 
derer, or I would not venture into your 
presence." Then, turning to Captain Heath, 
he went on : " Your son is alive, sir. He 
is here. You have been long in his com- 
pany. I forgive you for thinking me a 
murderer, but I do not forgive him for 
trying to bring on me a murderer's doom. 
There is Stephen Heath /" 

He pointed to the scoundrel; then, care- 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 245 

lessly turning away, he looked to Frances 
for a rewarding glance of loving sympathy, 
and received it. As to Count Cassius, he 
caught Hugh's hand in both his own, ex- 
claiming, 

" This is glorious 1 It is a poem !" 
" Write a poem on the theme, Count," 
said the Consul. *' Miss Carey will make a 
perfect heroine/' 

When Roland uttered his last words, 
both Captain Heath and Carey recognized 
Stephen Heath at once. All along they had 
had the undefined feeling that he was like 
somebody they knew; identified, he was 
unmistakeable, and they wondered he could 
have deceived them for a moment. The 
poor old soldier was thunderstruck; far 
rather would he have had his son honour- 
ably dead than alive in this disgraceful dis- 
guise. He walked towards him, but his 
powers failed. Gabriel Shirley, who had 



246 FBANCES. 

been narrowly watching him, caught him 
by the arm, saying. 

" Come, Captain Heath, this is too much 
for you. Come in with me and rest." 

He took him away. It was well he did. 
Meanwhile Walter Carey came up to Hugh 
Roland with outstretched hand, saying, 

*' Forgive me, Hugh. I was wrong, and 
I am sorry for it. Let us be friends." 

"Always," said Roland, with a friendly 
grip, and with a glance at Frances. 

" 0, my sister will not object," said Walter^ 
maliciously. 

At this moment Boyd came up, and told 
Walter some one wanted to speak to him. 
He found that it was the superintendent of 
police from Chessington, who, with a Lon- 
don detective, had come in search of Major 
Washington F. Butts and the Honourable 
Hercules Lyon for uttering forged bank- 
notes. 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 247 

" I don't like disturbing your party, Mr. 
Carey," said the Superintendent, '' but these 
two Americans we must have, and so I hope 
you'll say I did my duty as easy as I could. 
This is Inspector Lynx, from Scotland Yard." 

"Ah, Mr. Lynx," said Walter. "Of 
course you remember our famous murder 
last year ?" 

"0 yes, sir. Mr. Roland killed Mr. 
Heath : found a lunatic : since escaped. 
We have it all down." 

"Listen," said Walter, with serious em- 
phasis. " Roland did not kill Heath. Heath 
is now alive, and is the man 5^ou have to 
arrest as Hercules Lyon. His father has 
just recognized him." 

" By Jove, sir," said Lynx, " that's about 
as surprising a thing as ever I heard in my 
life . and I've heard one or two. Well, sir, 
I'm much obliged to you : now may I go 
and take my men ?" 



248 FBANCKS. 

Walter had been talking to the two 
policemen in a kind of woodland recess. 
He showed them how to go through the 
trees to the point they wanted to reach, and 
then hurried round to Frances and Cecilia. 

"Frances, I want to speak to you," he 
said. " Come with us, Miss Wray." 

He gave Count Cassius a look which the 
Count understood, and they all went to- 
gether. But Hugh Roland instinctively 
stayed behind. Besides him only Sir Charles 
and the Consul and Lavhigton remained to 
see these two stalwart gentlemen in blue 
take possession of the Major and his com- 
rade. Lynx touched Major Butts on the 
shoulder: the Superintendent approached 
Stephen Heath with even greater politeness. 

" What does this mean ?" said Sir Charles 
Wray? 

" Bank-note forgeries, sir," said the Super- 
intendent. "Very well-known Americans. 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 249 

It's all right. I spoke to Mr. Carey first, 
and he took the ladies away." 

"I know that fellow Butts to be a 
swindler, Sir Charles," said the Consul, " so 
we may guess the other man is." 

At this moment " the other man " dis- 
tinguished himself. His sulky mood had 
changed into one of ferocity. He turned on 
the Superintendent, who, though a big man, 
was somewhat flabby, with a mad sudden- 
ness, hurled him on the ground, and made 
a spring into the river, which at that point 
was deep and rapid. It turns a comer, 
narrowing suddenly within a border of 
rock. Stephen Heath sprang into the worst 
part. It was sharp work for the best of 
swimmers. 

*'He can't swim a stroke," said Hugh 
Roland, and threw off his coat and shoes 
and jumped in after him. But Heath had 
been sucked into the whirling water, and 



250 FRANCES. 

was carried far beyond Hugh Roland's 
reach. So he had not the delight of saving 
his enemy from death : and Inspector Lynx 
was obliged to be satisfied with one prisoner 
only. Stephen Heath's corpse was carried 
miles down the river, and was not brought 
ashore for some days. It looked very un- 
like that other which had been recognised 
. and buried as his, and which probably was 
the mortal coil of some vagrant weary of 
life. 

But Captain Heath knew nothing of this : 
the sudden shock had paralysed him, and it 
was indeed a long time before he thorough- 
ly recovered himself, if indeed he ever did 
so. And Frances and Cecilia escaped all 
knowledge of it for awhile : but Frances in 
time learnt what had happened, and pitied 
the poor foolish fellow, and thought little 
more about it. She was glad she had not 
seem him spring into the stream ; glad that 



DEUS EX MACHINA. 251 

she had not seen bim dead ; glad that Hugh 
Roland had gallantly tried to save him. 
Hugh that day had reappeared in some of 
Walter's clothes, but they fitted him fairly, 
and Frances was too occupied to notice it. 

When Captain Heath recovered himself^ 
he entirely forgot his son's existence. It 
was the only point on which memory 
deserted him. He could recollect just as 
well as ever what cards had been played at 
whist. But Stephen had vanished from his 
memory as completely as a schoolboy's last 
sum is sponged from his slate. It was lucky 
for him. His faithful servant, Boyd, looked 
after him. The Captain gave up his idea 
of Frances, apparently; nor was he agaia 
extremely attentive to the lady who had 
appropriated the name of Clinton. He did 
not rebuild Heathfield: he resided mncli 
abroad, choosing places famons for play 
and breaking the bank now and then with 



252 FRANCES. 

great eclat. We may drop the poor old 
gentleman at this point : Avonside saw him 
no more. But there remains a tradition 
among the new generation that nobody ever 
came so punctually to church, or said the 
responses so emphatically. He is a figure 
of the past in that quiet village. So well- 
brushed a hat, so severe a countenance, so 
<;areful an utterer of liturgic responses, will 
not be seen in Avonside Church again. 

Sir Charles Wray took the command that 
afternoon, and kept matters quiet. 

" Miss Carey and my daughter," he said, 
when the ladies were out of the way, 
*' must know nothing of what has happened. 
Butts and the other man are gone . that is 
all. I don't want Cecilia troubled with 
horrors : and I think your sister, Mr. Carey, 
has had so much to suffer that she need not 
now be subjected to any more worry. She 
will know in time. She will also know that 



DEUS EX MACHIKA. 25$ 

Mr. Roland chivalrously tried to save the 
scoundrel." 

" The less she knows about it the better, 
Sir Charles," said Hugh Roland. " I jumped 
into the water without thinking, I am 
afraid : if I had thought, I should not have 
considered him worth jumping after." 

" Ah," quoth Shirley, " as the illustrious 
poet hath it : 

* The man most have smaU brain and plenteous breath. 
Who'd save a rival from a watery death.' ** 



254 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE TALK OP AVONSIDB. 

" Do some dire deed in the least of England's villages, 
And all the capitals in the world shall ring with it.^ 

/TIHIS was a second sensation for Avon- 
-'- side, greater even than the first I had 
to record : the village talked about it as no 
village ever talked before. And so the 
news travelled ; and of course the London 
papers had definite intelligence about it. 
Really the "special correspondent" is a 
remarkable product of the age. How is it 
that a lunatic cannot escape from an asylum, 
or an irritable gentleman murder his mother- 
in-law, without the cognizance of three or 



THE TALK OF AVONSIDE. 255 

four special correspondents? They stoop 
down on the spot, as surely as vultures on a 
carcase. Go, dear reader, if you are of an 
experimental turn of mind, into the loneliest 
part of Dartmoor : take with you the only 
woman you ever loved : kill her. A special 
correspondent will meet you in ten minutes, 
and politely extract from you all you know 
about yourself. This will be in the morn- 
ing papers before you are in the hands of 
the police. 

Avonside effervesced with excitement. 
The little barber, who invented romantic 
additions to the story, had to cut every- 
body's hair for a week, and got no customers 
in that line for six months after. There 
was a general feeling of satisfaction in the 
village. Nobody much liked Stephen Heath : 
everybody did like Hugh Roland. Oddly 
enough, the people who liked Hugh best, 
had rather a contempt for him. He gave 



256 FRANCES. 

them the idea of being able to do much 
more than he ever did. He used to be on 
friendly terms with the cottagers ; to come 
and talk to them as if he were their equal ; 
to help them in a friendly way, as if he were 
one of themselves, no idea of patronage or 
condescension entering his healthy brain. 
But the shrewd cottagers . and your Eng- 
lish peasant hath a famous amount of shrewd- 
ness . used to be of opinion that Mr. Hugh 
might be doing something better. 

"It's very kind of him," said Dame 
Raggett, when he had talked to her for half 
an hour (or rather listened to her abuse of 

* 

the patson and the relieving officer) and left 

a piece of silver behind him . ''it's very 

kind of him, but it's a pity he does nothing 

for himself." 
* 

As a fact, Hugh Roland had done nothing 
for himself, except to fall in love with 
Frances . a most wise act. That Frances 




THE TALK OF AVONSIDE. 257 

was popular in Avonside may well be sup- 
posed ; her customary wisdom deserted her 
when she had to deal with the poor, and 
she gave too freely to satisfy the political 
economists. Hugh also was popular . . . 
doubly so wheu the village public talked of 
him as Miss Frances's sweetheart. How the 
village guesses at all these things ! There 
must be some universal intuition which en- 
ables the merest boors to discover when the 
social atmosphere far above them is erotic. 
They seem sometimes to know all about it 
before the principals themselves have made 
up their minds. I can understand a man's 
valet knowing he is in love before he knows 
it himself, and possibly a lady's-maid can 
fathom the secrets of her mistress's brain 
as she arranges her back hair. The cosmeta 
is clairvoyante. But somehow or other the 
dullest country folk seem able to look 
through brick walls when there, is any 
VOL. in. s 



258 FRANCES. 

love-making in progress within. What is 
the secret of this ? Love enlightens lovers, 
well I know ; but does love also enlighten 
the crowd of bystanders ? Has it an elec- 
tric power outside its actual working ? Not 
unlikely. You may feel electricity in the 
air without being personally struck by light- 
ning. 

Avonside's verdict on Stephen Heath was 
certainly "Served him right." Avonside 
pitied Captain Heath, whose regular at- 
tendance at church, with a well-brushed 
hat, an unimpeachable silk umbrella, and 
the latest edition of the Prayer-book, had 
given him a character which remote ru- 
mours of his London irregularities could 
not injure. The Captain was as much 
missed in Avonside as Lockhart's immortal 
Captain Paton in Edinburgh. He left a 
blank in the place, which nobody else could 
fill up. 



THE TALK OF AVONSIDB. 259 

On the afternoon of the catastrophe, the 
visitors at Carey Farm quickly dispersed. 
Sir Charles and his friends had some light 
refreshment ; then he and his daughter and 
the Count started for Monckton Manor, the 
Consul being their fellow-traveller, as he 
was returning to Southpool. Lavington 
went rather gloomily to London, where his 
cousin had no good news to cheer him. 
But Gabriel Shirley remained behind, at the 
special request of Walter and Hugh, who 
felt that at this moment his advice would 
be of use to them. Walter so strongly re- 
proached himself with having believed 
Hugh to be a murderer that he had. a 
passionate eagerness to make up for his 
blunder in every way. He was only too 
willing to give him his sister. He would 
have given him half his property, if he had 
needed and would have taken it. Walter 
had an obstinate character, intractable and 

s2 



260 PRANCES. 

inflexible ; but if the conviction that he was 
wrong could be forced upon him, he felt a 
remorseful anxiety to make amends. On 
this occasion, having tracked Hugh Roland 
as a murderer, having been utterly de- 
ceived by Heath, having acted unfairly, if 
not unkindly, to his sister, he was very 
angry with himself. 

A strange mixture of pleasure and pain 
there was just now at Carey Farm. Poor 
Captain Heath was in bed, a doctor in at- 
tendance, and his faithful servitor Boyd 
looking carefully after him. Rachel did 
not neglect him ; her kind old heart was 
always drawn to anyone in trouble or pain. 

" ril help that Irishman to look after the 
Captain, Miss Rachel," she said. " He's in 
what your father used to call a comb-dose 
state, and must be watched till he gets back 
his conscience. You go and talk to Mr. 
Hugh, miss ; he hasn't had much pleasure 



THE TALK OP AVONSmB. 261 

lately. And go and see Miss Hutchison at 
once : she'll be so delighted." 

So, when the Consul had started for 
Chessington with Sir Charles and the rest, 
Frances and Walter and Hugh and Mr. 
Shirley crossed the fields to the Hollies. It 
was a lovely afternoon. Miss Carey's dogs 
were riotous in the grass. She, almost 
happy, walked by Hugh Roland's side : they 
talked little : they were together . . . which 
was enough. The air was cool and crisp 
and clear : already a touch of sunset light 
was in the west . as if the torches were 
being lighted in the halls of Apollo to greet 
him after his long drive around the world. 

How did Frances feel, this Autumn after- 
noon, with all the trouble over, and her lover 
by her side ? She had as yet been unable to 
analyse her feelings. She walked silently 
by Hugh Roland's side, thinking. Now that 
he was freed from his tribulations, she began 



262 FRANCES. 

to wonder a little whether she had been 
loving him alone, or him and his troubles 
also . whether, now that Hugh Roland was 
no longer a convicted murderer, he had 
quite the same power over her. Love has 
its endless casuistry. If Hugh had been 
hanged, Frances would have remained 
single and worn mourning for the remain- 
der of her life : but now that he was free, 
now that the Home Secretary would be 
compelled to indulge in that ponderous jest 
called " the Queen's pardon," she hardly felt 
him quite so dear ... at least she feared 
not. Had she added something in her 
imagination to the real Hugh? She was 
perplexed to say. She walked along in 
maiden meditation, but not fancy-free. 

As for Hugh, he was in the land of tri- 
umph. He had no idea that the beautiful 
girl by his side had any such doubts in her 
brain. He had dived deep in a sea of 



THE TALK OF AVOlfSIDE. 263 

trouble, and had emerged again into the 
atmosphere of life and love. He built deli- 
cious castles in the air ; he did not need to 
hear his lady's voice ; she stepped beside 
him . that was quite enough. 

The same sun shone upon these twain : 
they saw the same grass, the same trees. 
Gabriel Shirley and Walter, following them 
along the fragrant meadow-track, thought of 
them as two lovers, one in heart and mind. 
Yet they were at this time distinctly separate. 
As Frances at intervals turned a slight 
glance on Roland's face, which seemed tri- 
umphantly content, she sadly reproached 
herself. 

"Do I really love him?" she thought. 
" Was it only his grief and his wicked treat- 
ment that made me think I loved him? 
Have I been faithful all this long while, now 
to be faithless? dear me 1 I wish he was 
back in his loft again, and I could keep him 



264 FRANCES. 

under lock and key till I made up my 
mind." 

I wonder what Hugh Roland would have 
said, if he could have known what Frances 
thought. Luckily for him, he believed she 
was just as happy as himself. He saw 
everything, that afternoon,, through 

'* The light that never was, on sea or land." 

He trod the earth as if he trod the air. He 
wanted from his lady no sweet words, sweet 
as the whisper of the nightingale : her per- 
fect presence was enough for him. He is 
not the only man, by any means, who has 
walked through field and wood with the 
lady he loved without the remotest idea of 
what was in her mind. 

Meanwhile Gabriel Shirley was studying 
Walter Carey, of whom as yet he had a 
slight outside opinion ; and it occurred to the 
old humourist that Walter was a man who 
could be much better than he was. This 



THE TALK OF AVONSIDB. 265 

perhaps may be said of most men ; but what 
Shirley perceived in Walter was that he did 
not fix an ideal for himself. When a man has 
reached maturity he should test his faculties ; 
decide how much he can do ; decide to do 
it. To examine yourself from the bystand- 
er's point of view will generally humiliate 
you; to examine yourself from your own 
point of view, knowing what no one save 
God and yourself can know of your weak- 
nesses, is a sterner test of character. Dig a 
mine into your own soul, my friend : you 
will find plentiful mud ; j^ou may find dia- 
monds in that mud. 

Through the divine autumnal afternoon 
our party of four approached the Hollies, 
and passed under a well-cut wall of ever- 
greens to Miss Hutchison's door. The old 
lady, sitting in her red parlour, with some 
knitting about, and a wise gray parrot blink- 
ing in its brass cage, looked a picture of 



266 FRANCES. 

tranquillity ; but she was repressing herself, 
for rumours about her nephew had reached 
her, and when she saw him she rose from 
her chair, caught him by both hands, and 
cried with a tremulous voice, 

" Thank God, Hugh, for all his mercies!" 
And then a sudden accession of strength 
came to her, and she stood upright, and said, 
with a voice marvellously clear, 

" My boy has been proved innocent. I 
always knew it. I am quite happy now. 

Frances, you will marry him now, will you 
not?" 

The old lady, in her strong delight, forgot 
altogether that her well-beloved Frances 
might not like such a question asked her so 
publicly. Hugh Roland saw a troubled ex- 
pression on Frances's face, and led his aunt 
back to her seat, and said, 

" Frances and I will settle all that in time, 
dear aunt," 




THE TALK OF AVONSmE. 267 

He had no doubts, but he did not wish 
Frances to be troubled. 

"Ah," said Miss Hutchison, in a low 
clear audible tone, as if soliloquizing, " I 
have thought over this, many days, many 
nights. I sit in this corner, Hugh, and look 
down the meadow . . . and how many and 
many a time I have seen somebody pass, 
and thought *Is it Hugh coming up the 
foot path?' And at night, lying awake^ 
hour upon hour, I have thought I heard 
your step on the gravel. I know your 
step, Hugh my boy, as well as if I was your 
sweetheart. You are the last of us, Hugh ; 
I want you to be a good man . and a great 
man, if you can. To make a man good and 
great there is nothing but the love of a good 
woman ; and the boy has yours, Frances, has^ 
he not ?" 

Frances, who had tears in her eyes as the 
dear old lady grew so eloquent, looked 



268 FRANCES. 

round at Hugh. She saw in his countenance 
a painful longing for a word from her. His 
look moved her deeply. There was in it 
something of the look of a highly intelligent 
<3og that does not quite understand what his 
master wants, and is intensely anxious to un- 
derstand it. Frances was more finely strung 
than Hugh; had a nature which, though 
^strong, was curiously sensitive ; could bear a 
great trouble more admirably than some 
trifle of the nerves. And now she was 
indeed bearing a terrible trouble ; for she 
<;ould not determine whether she ought to 
have been so faithful to Hugh ; and she 
<5ould not decide whether he was capable of 
being her master. Hugh had no more idea 
of the thoughts that traversed her brain than 
the wayfarer has of the telegraphic messages 
that flash through the roadside wires. But 
when he heard Miss Hutchison's plaintive 
and pathetic discourse he rose to the occa- 
sion, and said : 



THE TALK OF AVONSIDE. 269* 

"Aunt, you have always been kind to 
me . too kind, perhaps. Now I am come 
back to take care of you, if you will let me. 
Frances will tell me what she thinks about 
other things, when we are alone together. 
There is no hurry." 

There is no hurry. I think Frances con- 
sidered this rather a cool speech of Mr^ 
Roland's. Did it pique her a little ? 

Quoth Gabriel Shirley : 

*'The illustrious poet hath something on 
this theme .... 

' Love that is languid wants a spice of fun ; 
Love in a hurry may be overdone/ 

I think, Miss Hutchison, that our young 
friends will very soon settle their affairs if 
no one interferes with them. They are 
children, you know : you and I, who are 
wise old people, can aftord to smile at the 
troubles they make for themselves. We all 
make troubles for ourselves, you know, 



270 FRANCES. 

and we begin making them so very early. 
Indeed, it may be said that the chief busi- 
ness of age is curing oneself of the mala- 
dies one caught and encouraged in youth." 

" Frances, we are dismissed," said Hugh. 
** Let us stroll out upon the lawn while our 
wise elders discuss the extreme improbabili- 
ty of our ever being as wise as they." 

Frances, laughing, followed him out into 
the pleasant gardens of the Hollies. Gabriel 
Shirley, when they were gone, said to Miss 
Hutchison : 

" Your nephew has had a trial, but I 
think it will be good for him. I hope Miss 
Carey and he will make up their minds to 
marry, and to marry soon. He is younger 
than she is . . ." 

" no," interrupted the old lady. 

" I mean, not in actual years," said Gabri- 
el Shirley, "but in mind. Hugh is a boy 
still : Miss Carey is quite a matured woman, 



THE TALK OF AVONSIDB. 271 

though with all the fresh bloom of youth 
about her." 

" I fear she is too good for him"' sighed 
the old lady. 

" Not at all. Roland is a fine fellow, as 
his career proves. Look at what he has 
had to endure, Miss Hutchison. To be 
accused of murder; treated as a maniac; 
hunted down by the police ; obliged to live 
in disguise and do porter's work ! He 
comes out of it well. Lucky for him, I 
think, that his growth has been slow, and 
that he has kept his boyishness : else per- 
haps he could not have endured all this. 
And now Miss Frances, who is well-de- 
veloped, can take him as a pupil." 

^* Frances Carey is my dear friend, Mr. 
Shirley," said Miss Hutchison : '' and she is 
a woman of a thousand; and if I could see 
her married to Hugh I could die happy." 

" Much better to live happy. Miss Hutchi- 



272 FRANCES. 

son," says the old gentleman. "No need 
for you to die, that I can see. The young 
people will get on all the better for your 
kind and wise advice : and why should not 
you enjoy for a long while the happiness of 
seeing them happy ? Although Miss Carey 
is a wonderfully wise little woman for her 
years, she will be none the worse for your 
advice and guidance. To m)^ mind, the 
present generation moves too fast : I would 
not let them come of age till thirty, if I could 
help it. Your nephew and Miss Carey are 
marriageable in the eye of the law : but the 
eye of the law is apt to suffer from strabis- 
mus." 

Miss Hutchison did not wholly follow 
this quaint old gentleman ; but, where he 
grew unintelligible, she got the kind of 
satisfaction which some ancient lady is said 
to have derived from Whitefield's way of 
uttering the word Mesopotamia. And she 



THE TALK OP AVONSIDE. 273 

liked his courtly style and stately quota- 
tions; and she fancied she remembered 
many of the latter in her favourite poet, 
William Cowper; and these two had a 
pleasant old- fashioned parlour- window talk 
while Frances and Hugh were talking in 
quite another way under the lime avenue. 
The leaves, though yellow, abounded still ; 
the robin rang out his familiar lilt ; now and 
then a startled blackbird chuckled. There 
was mistletoe high up in those lime-branches, 
if Hugh had needed a material excuse for 
kissing his lady's lips. 

"Hugh," said Frances, first to speak, 
'^ there is no hurry. You said so. Have 
we both made up our minds ? Had we not 
better wait a little ?" 

A perfect picture of beauty she looked, 
as the slant sunlight came on her through 
the leaf canopy, while a blush flitted over 
her cheek as she put this query. Tall, quiet, 

VOL. nL T 



274 FRANCES. 

grave, yet with a curve of humour on her 
upper lip, and a faint rose-blush upon her 
cheek that told its own tale ... to Hugh 
Roland. 

He simply put his arm round her waist 
and kissed her. Having performed this 
feat, he said, 

*' Frances, my darling, my mind has 
always been made up, and I don't mean to 
let you alter yours. You belong to me, and 
I mean to have you. I know what it is ; 
jou don't think I am man enough for you." 

" Hugh I" 

" You don't. I have always behaved like 
a boy. I never thought much till I began 
to think of you. That made a man of me. 
Then came my sudden troubles : I could not 
have got through them, except for the 
thought of you. They have made me feel 
older. I think I am almost worthy of you, 
Frances. If not now, I will be." 



THE TALK OP AVONSIDE. 275 

Frances Carey saw well that he was in 
earnest . more in earnest perhaps than she 
ever had been. She admired his boyish re- 
solve. She had ere now built her quiet 
castles in the air, with Hugh as cotenant ; 
thought what a docile husband he would 
he, and how ,she could manage him, and 
make a fine fellow of him. That was her 
theory, and it is the theory of many a 
handsome and able woman ; but it seldom 
gets properly worked out. The fine fellows 
don't get made ; or if they do, they make 
slaves of the women who want to manage 
them. 

It began to dawn on Frances that perhaps 
she had better take Hugh with all his faults 
of immaturity, and leave him to grow into 
manhood without too active management. 
Her eyes seemed to say so, with a soft scin- 
tilla of love in their divine depths. Hugh 

t2 



276 FRANCES. 

knew the token, and kissed her on the eye 
lids. 

That evening, when Hugh Roland sought 
Gabriel Shirley's room for a quiet talk, after 
a pleasant time with his lady-love and her 
now most courteous brother, the old gentle- 
man said : 

" I think 5^ou will find in Miss Carey what 
I consider a most perfect wife. A true wife 
has three functions to fulfil. She is your 
mother, teaching you many things, punishing 
you when you deserve it, nursing you in all 
your troubles. She is your daughter, learn- 
ing from you, obeying you, receiving help 
and comfort from you. She is your very 
self, sharing your glory and grief, your tri- 
umph and trouble . . . being in fact not a 
part of you, but your inborn inseparable 
self. The miserable failures of married life 
are caused by men and women who cannot 
understand these things." 



THE TALK OF AVONSIDi;. 277 

" Are they so hard to undersfaad ?" asked 
Hugh Roland. 

'^ Yes," replied Gabriel Shirley, " thanks to 
the invincible conceit of people who want 
the universe made their own way. God 
made it admirably, to my mind; and he 
ordained marriage as the noblest out-come 
of the race. Ask me what I think the finest 
thing to be seen and I say : Man and Wife. 
Carry out my theory, Hugh. Be your own 
wife's father ; teach her all you know ; treat 
her with paternal kindness and discipline. 
But be also your wife's son : accept thankfully 
her teaching and guidance. And above all,, 
become one with her : give and take : learn 
to regard her as yourself, and yourself as 
her. That is marriage. It makes two one. It 
makes man woman and woman man ... or 
rather makes of the twain that which is 
sexless and perfect. Man and wife, true 
man and wife, are one: if one dies, the 



278 FBANCES. 

other is dead also. Their union is too inti- 
mate to admit of division. Tiieir spirits will 
mingle elsewhere, but the survivor on this 
planet is a mere lay-figure or residuum. 

Thus lectured Gabriel Shirley. 

" You surely must have been a married 

man," quoth Hugh, " to know so much about 

it. You talk as one who has learned by 

> . 

experience." 

" I was not fortunate enough to learn by 

experience," said Mr. Shirley. '^ When you 

were a child unborn death brought me my 

great grief. Time has mellowed that grief, 

and I know that I shall overtake my darling 

up the lovely path of the Mountain of Light. 

She will loiter for me, Hugh. I only fear 

she will think I keep her too long waiting. 

As the illustrious poet hath it : 

* I hear her whisper, through the realms of pain, 
Come home, dear Gabriel, and be young again.' *' 

" I perceive the illustrious poet was think- 



THE TALK OP AVONSIDE. 27^ 

ing of you specially when he wrote that 
couplet," said Roland, mischievously. " And 
I deny your theory altogether; for you,, 
though a solitary survivor, are not a lay* 
figure or residuum by any means. Mine is 
no wide or long experience, but I certainly 
know no one with so strong a character as 
yours." 

"I like flattery, I admit, even from a 
boy," replied Gabriel Shirley, with a humor- 
ous twinkle in his eye. In the lime-alley, 
where the sunlight slanted through yellow- 
ing leaves, the old gentleman seemed 
thoroughly at home . as well suited to 
English silvan garden as faun to Greek 
forest, or naiad to Greek stream. "Yes, 
Hugh, I like your flattery, and you may 
regard me as a strong character if you like 
. . . but you don't know what I might have 
been. When I lost for this planet the beau- 
tiful soul that awaits me elsewhere, I gave 



280 FRANCES. 

up all idea of being a worker. I became a 
bystander. As a bystander I have watched 
the drama of life : I have sometimes 
indeed so far interfered as to become a 
prompter. What I can do for myself is a 
question for, the future . postponed until I 
rejoin my other self. Meanwhile I watch 
tragedy and comedy. I see you play the 
hero and Miss Carey the heroine. When I 
played the prompter's part, I hope it wa& 
rightly done." 

Hugh Roland was thoughtfully silent 
Awhile. 

" I must think over what you have said, 
Mr. Shirley. Your belief that, having lost 
the lady you loved, you could not do your 
work in the world ... for so I understand 
you . . ." 

" Rightly," said Shirley. 

" That belief makes me regard in a new 
way the relation between man and woman. 



THE TALK OF AVONSmE. 281 

I cannot conceive you . what shall I say ? . 
greater . . . better . . . well, more influential 
than you are. Yet you think you would 
have had a higher career if . . /' 

" Think! I know it. Take yourself into 
counsel. You have stuff in you ; but Fran- 
ces Carey will make you ten times the man 
you are. You won't know yourself in a 
dozen years." 



282 



CHAPTER Xm. 

SPRING AND LOVE. 

" Gras amet qui nunqu'amayit, 
Qui qu^amavit eras amet/' 

A T Moncktoa Manor in the month of 
-^^ May there was a delightful gathering. 
Spring was early. The birds had forestalled 
Saint Valentine. Anacreon's swallows had 
forgotten Memphis. It was one of those 
happy years when Demeter, the immortal 
earth-mother, seems to renew her youth ; 
when she is lavish of sunlight and flower-bloom ; 
and when Aphrodite is born again from 
the ocean and Dionysus sets out to conquer 
a new Asia and woo another Ariadne. There 



SPRING AND LOVE. 283- 

are sullen hidebound years, when Spring is 
all east wind and black frost, when songbirds 
starve and maidens wither and the blood of 
the world seems stagnant. In such years 
let no man marry. They are sterile, sombre, 
severe. At such a time Nature may give us 
a Stuart Mill, but never a Byron . a Darwin, 
but by no chance a Shakespeare. When 
the sweet South is master of winds, and 
banks are white with violets, and the cuckoo- 
sings all day, and the nightingales spoil 
your sleep, and every brook has its wooing 
naiad and every tree its haunting hamadryad 
. . . then marry. 

It was a marrying year when two wed- 
dings were fixed for celebration at Monck- 
ton Manor. Of course a large party assem- 
bled : of course there were the inevitable 
bridesmaids and young gentlemen unattach- 
ed : but all our friends were there . not 
forgetting Tom Cornish, who was for the^ 



284 FRANCES. 

fourth time Mayor of the great town of 
Southpool, and who distinguished himself 
by the style of his wedding presents. 

It is the day before the double wedding. 
Whom do we see on lawn and woodland 
path ? There are Frances and Cecilia . the 
one calm as Artemis, and the other gay as 
Psyche . wandering together down hidden 
paths to the lake that is haunted by wild- 
fowl. Gabriel Shirley has started for a brisk 
walk with Hugh Roland. Count Cassius 
saunters up and down an avenue with Julian 
Orchard : the Italian gesticulates, while the 
American smokes. What other members of 
the party are doing concerns us not : no 
need to overhear a learned colloquy in the 
library between Sir Charles Wray and Tom 
Oornish. 

Odd is it? . . . no, not odd in the least 
. . . that the two girls, bird-like creatures, a 
thrush and a wren together . that quaint 



SPRING AND LOVE. 285^ 

dogmatic Gabriel Shirley and impetuous 
Hugh . that the imaginative Consul and the 
equally imaginative Count . ^were all talking 
on the same theme. Odd? Assuredly not 
. . . for the theme was marriage . . . with 
its consequences. And these colloquies were 
to some extent prophetic. 

Shirley and Roland walked up to the 
summit of Caradoc's Cairn, heretofore famous 
in this true story. There is a grand view 
from it . miles of woodland and meadow . 
hamlets brown and dim-discovered spires . 
the towers of a city far westward, that city 
by the sea where Tom Cornish reigns. 

" Ha ! " said Gabriel Shirley, when his 
stout lungs began to work again after the 
steep climb, "this is enjoyable. This re- 
freshes. Oxygen is better than alcohol . 
toil than rest. I am reminded of the 
illustrious poet : 

.Mount bravely some steep hill where fresh winds blowp 
See your life mapped upon the plain below.'" 



^86 FRANCES. 

'*I wish I could see my life mapped 
there," quoth Hugh. "I have won the 
noblest woman in the world, and my fear is 
to be unworthy of her." 

" A most unworthy fear, unless you are 
at once prepared to resign her. Your life 
lies below you, as if on a map. There is 
English country, with its estates and farms : 
you are an Englishman, loving country life : 
you will have ample money between you, 
and the lady who is to be your wife is, of 
all women I ever knew, best fitted to be 
the mistress of a homely English household. 
Buy land : be a yeoman : see to your own 
business : grow the finest beef and mutton 
and corn. I do not mistake Miss Carey : 
around your homestead will grow up a 
village of happy labour. Nor do I mistake 
you : you will be a famous farmer . yet you 
will have many friends who will fill your 
house with intellectual enjoyment. Frances 



SPRING AND LOVE. 287 

Carey, my dear Hugh, is doubly admirable : 
with a mind capable of the highest and 
purest literature, she has the tenderest 
sympathy with human effort and human 
trouble. She can teach you to know 
Shakespeare, yet can be a friend to the old 
illiterate peasant. She wants a career: 
make it for her : you have the power. 
Buy English soil, and give friendly work to 
poor English folk." 

"I think you are right about us,'' said 
Hugh Roland. *'I take your advice, if 
Frances consents." 

"No fear about that," quoth the old 
gentleman. " She was made for a lady, of 
the land." 

They descended Caradoc's Cairn in si- 
lence, Hugh Roland pondering over his 
adviser's wise sayings. Meanwhile, other 
converse went on elsewhere. The tall 
American had smoked much before he 



288 FRANCES. 

spoke. When he broke silence they were 
under a great oak tree, looking across a park 
in which stood other noble trees of the 
same kind. Also there were many standard 
thorns, white with blossom, almost paining 
the air with scent : and amid their branches 
Julian Orchard noted masses of clustering 
green that evidently did not belong to the 
trees. 

" Come, and let us examine this," he said 
to Count Cassius. 

The Count did not quite comprehend, 
but he willingly followed. They stood 
beneath a fine hawthorn, and drank in its 
fragrance, and delighted in its show of 
bloom. 

"The mistletoe!" said the Consul. 
"The mystic plant of the mystic race that 
dwelt in this land before the Pyramids 
were built. Then it grew on the oak : 
now it grows on the thorn. If the history 



\ 



SPRING AKD LOVE. 289 

of that parasite could be written, it would 
solve half the problems of race." 

'' It is the white-berried thing that is held 
to justify kisses, I believe," observed the 
Count. " I have never understood why a 
kiss requires anything to justify it, except 
sweet lips, but you English have a strange 
logic." 

" I am glad to hear you use that phrase 
. ^you English," replied the Consul. *' We 
are English, such of us as are anything. 
Why not bring your bride to see America ? 
It is an older continent than Asia, Africa, 
and Europe." 

"Older?" 

" Yes. Agassiz, who died a few months 
ago, proved that it must have had inhabit- 
ants long before Asia. We have trees 
larger than any grown in your hemisphere : 
we have ruins older. Will you come ? I 
shall only be in England a year or two, 

VOL. m. u 



290 FBAKCES. 

and by that time you and your lovely 
young Countess might like to find fresh 
poetry in altogether new scenes. Your 
Italian lakes are beautiful, but you should 
traverse our inland seas." 

" The Mediterranean is the finest inland 
sea in the world," said Count Cassius 
Grimani. 

I left Frances and Cecilia far away from 
all the rest. Both had in their hearts the 
deep dream of the coming day . . . the day 
that must change them utterly, giving them 
a knowledge now vaguely guessed at. There 
are many views of marriage, but only one 
that is true. Money, rank, influence, all 
sorts of contemptible absurdities are named 
in the connexion ; true marriage is the 
connexion of the two halves of a severed 
soul. 

The girls sat down on a log, and watched 
the moor-fowl dipping in the water. They 



SPRING AND LOVE. 291 

were as lovely a couple as artist ever de- 
sired to paint. The grave beauty of Frances, 
-calm and soft and pure, was in charming 
-contrast with Cecilia's butterfly gaiety. You 
would expect musical philosophy from the 
lips of one, lively music from the other's 
lips . . . loving wisdom in the eyes of 
Frances, and laughing love in Cecilia's. 
for a pencil to sketch them in their light 
May apparel under a great tree by the pool 
of the wild-fowl ! 

"To-morrow," said Cecilia, in a voice like 
a musical cry. " Only think !" 

" 0, I have been thinking, my dear child, 
and I suppose I shall go on thinking till 
to-morrow comes . . . and then I shall shut 
my eyes, like somebody shooting the rapids 
on an American river, and hope to find 
myself all right when they open again." 

" Do you think it so very dreadful ?" 
asked the younger and livelier child. " I 

u2 



292 PRANCES. 

do not. You know I give myself to Cas- 
sius, and I only feel like a flower on a tree. 
I have nothing more to say. I belong to 
Cassius : I shall sing for him, kiss him, do 
whatever he likes . do it whether he likes 
it or not." 

'^ That sounds like Irish, Cecilia. I can- 
not look at the matter quite in the same 
way. Of course I belong to Hugh, but 
then Hugh will want a lot of advice, and 
will expect me to give it, and I feel . ^yes^ 
Cecilia, I do really sometimes feel as if I 
were going into a kind of commercial part- 
nership . I hate the thought of that." 

" Say N'o to-morrow," replies fearless 
Cecilia. " Frances, you are wiser than I in 
most things, but you are more foolish in 
this. Take my advice, and do as I do. 
Your Hugh is a strong man, isn't he, and 
honourable, and clever ?" 

" Yes." 



SPRING AND LOVE. 293 

"Then trust him . give yourself up to 
him. Don't think for half a second about 
advising or helping him. Think of him 
only. By-and-by you can advise him as 
much as he likes. Why, I, though I'm a 
little fool, shall have to advise Cassius when 
he is writing songs . . . and I suppose he'll 
write more than ever when he's married." 

" If you are a little fool, you are a very 
wise little fool," said Frances. ''You are 
right : I have been wrong. I am so glad 
we came down here to have a talk toge- 
ther." 

The western sun cast gold upon them as 
they kissed each other beside the mere. 



294 



i( 



CHAPTER XIV. 



THE SUMMER OF LIFE. 



Ay, there are men with whom life's summer lasts.** 



TT was a glorious summer day when a 
-.- merry party came to pic-nic on that 
common above the beech-forest where stands 
the cottage built by Gabriel Shirley . Hugh 
Roland's refuge when he fled from the Asy- 
lum. The air was ringing with music of 
larks ; the grass was very green. Mr. Shir- 
ley's gamecocks were crowing wildly. The 
brown jackass and the grey were both roll- 
ing on their backs, with all their legs in the 
air, too happy to think of eating. Mark 
Chapman was in his very best clothes . a 



THE SUMMER OF LIFE. 295< 

suit given him by Hugh in return for those 
that had been " requisitioned " for his ser- 
vice. Carry Chapman . otherwise " Fetch " 
. was as fresh as a wild rose in her dressy 
pink muslin. Mr. Gabriel Shirley, strong- 
and prompt as ever, stood at his gate, look- 
ing for the new-comers. He had been too- 
long in England, he thought, so his frienda 
had arranged a farewell pic-nic before he 
started, heaven knows where. 

Bad travelling for a four-in-hand over the 
road- way of that rarely-trodden heath, but 
the American Consul was equal to the oc- 
casion. He had a lady on the seat beside 
him . . . Frances Roland. Sir Charles had 
come, and the Count and Countess Grimani^ 
and of course Walter Carey and Hugh^ 
The Mayor of Southpool, at the very last 
moment, was obliged to give up the idea^ 
Miss Hutchison was hard pressed to come^ 
but feared the fatigue. 



296 FRANCES. 

Mr. Shirley's cottage, with all its quaint 
arrangements, was fitly admired, while the 
servants unpacked the provisions. Eating 
and drinking are not poetic proceedings, 
but when done with discomfort on the grass 
of a common, they are less prosaic than 
in an ordinary dining-room. Our friends 
had driven far, and acquired healthy appe- 
tites. The south wind freshened them. 
Gabriel Shirley's gamecocks crowed. Gabriel 
Shirley's jackasses brayed. 

*' Where do you travel next, Mr. Shirley ?" 
asked Sir Charles. " I am told your rest- 
less spirit takes you away somewhere." 

" I am uncertain. I may not decide till 
the moment I start. I want another jour- 
ney, another romance." 

" A man may travel far without leaving his 
room," said Julian Orchard. '^ Now if only 
the Countess Grimani would sing us here 
that song we had a few nights ago." 



THE SUMMER OF LIFE. 297 

" Do you expect me to sing beneath the 
skylarks, Mr. Orchard?" said Cecilia. 
"Birds can laugh, you know. I had a 
jackdaw that quite humiliated me by laugh- 
ing at me." 

"O, give us the song, Cecilia," said 
Frances. 

She sang : 

" There is travel deep in woods, 
And travel high in air, 
And travel over wide green seas, 
And amid the cities fair. 

" You may follow the wandering swallow. 
Or the passionate nightingale, 
Dip for pearls with the diver. 
Into the sunset sail. 

" But more than yield the wide seas, 
More than the air above, 
A man may find in his own heart 
And the heart of his own true love.** 

"A very compendious art of travel," said 
Mr. Gabriel Shirley. " Since I have had 
the honour of knowing the two newly-mar- 



^98 FRANCES. 

ried ladies present, I have thought that 
every woman's heart is an unexplored con- 
tinent. But it seems to me, if I may say it in 
these ladies' presence, that women are double- 
natured ; that in the finer temperaments 
there is often an outer segment quite differ- 
ent from that which lies within. It is very 
impertinent of me, I fear. Count Cassius, but 
I cannot help saying that beneath the gay 
whimsical musical nature of the Countess 
Orimani there is a marvellous amount of 
intuitive wisdom." 

" O, you are saying what is exactly true, 
Mr. Shirley," said Frances impetuously. 
^' Cecilia is a great deal wiser than I am. 
She has taught me what I should never have 
guessed." 

*' Ah," said Gabriel Shirley, gravely, 
^' then the illustrious poet was right : 

' A man may have some genius now and then : 
Woman is genius, thus transcending men.' " 



THE SUMMER OF LIFE. 299 

" Shirley," said Roland laughing, " if you 
mean really to travel, let it be in search of 
a wife. That is what you want, any one 
can see." 

The dews were falling when the horses 
were put in. Mr. Gabriel Shirley, soon 
after sunrise the next morning, took staff 
and knapsack, and left the cottage on his 
travel . ^in search of what? Perhaps he 
murmured this couplet from " the illustri- 
ous poet " : 

" For other fields, for other trees, I yearn ; 
What shall I find ? A longing to return.*' 



THE END. 
